==PAGE:1==
Optimisation and Test of Hydraulic
Accumulator With Foam.
Olivier Dujoux Olsen
M.Sc.Eng. Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
Kongens Lyngby 2017
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Substantial thermal losses are involved with the energy storage process of hydraulic ac-
cumulators when the storage time is long. In hydraulic pitch control systems, this can
be an issue. In such a system it is essential to provide suﬃcient power to perform a safe
emergency stop, after a long energy storage period.
Experimental research has shown that ﬁlling the gas chamber of the accumulator with an
elastomeric foam, can improve the accumulator eﬃciency by minimising thermal losses. In
this work, the eﬀect of the foam is studied in depth in order to ﬁnd the best implementation
method for optimising the eﬃciency of a hydraulic accumulator.
Experimental data, from tests with three diﬀerent sizes of accumulators, are presented.
And the improvements of using either open celled polyether or polyester polyurethane
foams are compared. The best results are obtained with a polyether polyurethan foam,
for short working cycles, where the energy eﬃciency is increased from 67−90% to 92−95%.
In addition, the foam was found to improve the expansion energy output, when the eﬀects
of both compression and holding period are eliminated. In turn proving the potential of
using foam in systems with long energy storage periods, such as the hydraulic pitch control
system of a wind turbine.
To explore the possibility of predicting the performance of a foam ﬁlled accumulator.
A one dimensional thermal time constant model is presented.
This model proved to
accurately predict the pressure development of the accumulator gas chamber through a
working cycle.
Finally a CFD model is made using the multiphysics software COMSOL. This model is
partly validated with experimental data, but is less accurate due to an underestimation
of heat losses. Therefore, this model is mainly used to study the eﬀect of using foam in
an ideal case.
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
Master Thesis
Optimisation and Test of Hydraulic Accumulator With Foam.
Olivier Dujoux Olsen (s100196)
Supervisor
Casper Schousboe Andreasen, Associate Professor at the Mechanical Engineering
Department of the Technical University of Denmark
Advisors
Peter Windfeld Rasmussen, R&D Engineer at Fritz Schur Energy
Victor Irizar, Test Engineer at Fritz Schur Energy
DTU Mekanik
Department of Mechanical Engineering Technical University of Denmark
Nils Koppels Alle, Building 404
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
Tel: +45 4525 2525
info@mek.dtu.dk
==PAGE:6==
==PAGE:7==
Preface
This master’s thesis was prepared at the Department of Mechanical Engineering at the
Techni-cal University of Denmark in fulﬁlment of the requirements for acquiring a M.Sc.Eng.
degree in Engineering Design and Applied Mechanics.
The project was realised in the period between the 1st of August 2016 and the 23rd of
April 2017 in collaboration with Fritz Schur Energy, and under supervision of Associate
Professor, Casper Schousboe Andreasen. The project was credited 30 ECTS points.
I would like to thank my main supervisor Casper Schousboe Andreasen, ﬁrst of all for his
academical support and guidance in every area of the project. And on a personal level,
I would like to express my gratitude to Casper for being very understanding and helpful
throughout the project period.
A sincere thank to Peter Windfeld Rasmussen, who has been a great help in the exper-
imental research, both for preparing test setups and for discussions of results. Also a
thanks to Peter for making me feel welcome at Fritz Schur Energy.
Lastly, I would like to thank Victor Irizar for his big help in the experimental work and
his advises on the development of the CFD model. And a special thank to Victor for
being willing to discuss anything anytime.
Kongens Lyngby, April 23, 2017
Olivier Dujoux Olsen (s100196)
==PAGE:8==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Project Scope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Literature Review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
System Description
5
2.1
Pitch Control System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Piston Type Accumulator
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Foam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3
Theoretical Background
8
3.1
Bulk Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.2
Advanced Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4
Foam Properties
19
4.1
Polymeric Foam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.2
Structural Parameters
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.3
Bulk Foam Properties
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.4
Flexible Polyurethane Foams . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5
Thermal Time Constant Model
23
5.1
Background Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5.2
Validation of Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
6
COMSOL Multiphysics Model
30
6.1
Model Description
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
6.2
Convergence Study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
6.3
Validation of Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
7
Experimental Setup
44
7.1
Accumulator Test Rig 1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
7.2
Accumulator Test Rig 2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
==PAGE:9==
7.3
Tests of Foam Behaviour . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
7.4
Foams Used in Testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
8
Initial Testing with 0.64 L Accumulator
52
8.1
Approach
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
8.2
Thermal Time Constant . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
8.3
Eﬃciency
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
8.4
Foam Behaviour . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
8.5
Changing Foam Composition
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
9
Testing with 6 L Accumulator
66
9.1
Foam Selection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
9.2
Case: Pitch Control Accumulators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
9.3
Durability Tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
9.4
Validation With 20 L Accumulator
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
10 Application at FSE
82
10.1 Implementation of Foam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
10.2 Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
84
11 Conclusion
Appendix
i
11.1 Calculations and Derivations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
i
11.2 Foam Properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
11.3 Foam Speciﬁcations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
11.4 Experimental Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
vii
11.5 Numerical Simulation with COMSOL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ix
11.6 0.64 L Accumulator Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . xiii
11.7 Case: Pitch Control Accumulators Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . xxii
11.8 Foam Eﬀect on Expansion Alone. (Worst Case Scenario) . . . . . . . . . . xxii
==PAGE:10==
Chapter 1
Introduction
1.1
Background
Due to the global environmental concerns, the renewable energy sector has been the
fastest growing energy source in the last decade, and the wind turbine industry has seen
unprecedented growth since 2014. Following the great expansion of the industry, much
research has been done to constantly improve the technologies of wind turbines in pursuit
of more reliable and eﬃcient systems. As the systems have become more complex, it
has also become more important to guarantee that they are left undamaged in critical
situations. Since system failures are costly both in terms of energy production loss and
system repairments.
The pitch control system of a wind turbine plays an essential role regarding both eﬃciency
and reliability. The continuous adjustment of the blade angle is an important part of
assuring the highest possible power output without overloading the turbine. And equally
important in the case of an emergency shutdown, pitching of the blades into a feathered
position, makes sure that the turbine can be safely stopped and relieved from any high
loads by the wind.
Hydraulic pitch control and emergency stop systems are often used because of their accu-
racy and high speed response when powerful pitch movements are required during pitch
control, and because of their short stopping times at emergency shutdown. Both these
situations requires large amounts of power which is usually provided by hydraulic accu-
mulators. The use of accumulators in the hydraulic systems of wind turbines is generally
implemented in one of two ways. Either; one set of accumulators are used to provide extra
power for the pitch control, while another set provides the power for emergency stops, or;
the same set of accumulators are used for both pitch control and emergency stops. In both
cases the accumulators alone have to be capable of providing suﬃcient power to feather
the blades and eﬀectively bring the wind turbine to a safe stop. To guarantee suﬃcient
power the system often includes several large accumulators per each blade, resulting in
unwanted high masses in the turbine hub.
In both said systems the reliability of the wind turbine is heavily dependant on the perfor-
mance of the accumulators. Substantial thermal losses are associated with the principle of
storing energy in a hydraulic accumulator. The energy is stored in a compressed gas, by
charging oil into the accumulator, compressing the conﬁned gas and raising the tempera-
ture of the gas in the process. During the following holding period, where the pressurised
oil and gas is kept in the accumulator, the compression heated gas is cooled down by heat
transfer to the accumulator walls and surroundings. In turn, the pressure is reduced and
when the extra power stored in the accumulator is needed the oil is discharged at a lower
1
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
2
pressure, and the resulting output energy is lower than the input energy.
The holding period, of the pitch control and emergency stop systems, is the time between
emergency stops. So the temperature relaxation time is mostly long enough to reach
an equilibrium with the surroundings and consequently the minimum pressure possible.
This is a problem because the torque when turning the blades is proportional to the
pressure of the accumulators. In addition the dynamics induced on the gas by the piston
movement during compression and expansion has proven to generate high convective
heat losses, which further reduces the pressure during discharge, and ultimately poses
particular problems with respect to suﬃcient power at the end of an emergency stop
pitch movement.
The high thermal losses can be reduced by ﬁlling the accumulator gas chamber with an
open cell elastomeric foam. The large surface area of such a foam, in combination with a
higher heat capacity compared to the gas, makes the foam act as a heat sink for the gas.
As a result the temperature increase during compression is reduced and the relaxation
time, commonly referred to as the thermal time constant, of the accumulator is increased.
And ﬁnally the temperature drop is reduced during expansion of the gas due to both the
heat sink mechanism and because the porous structure of the foam reduces convection
losses by dampening the gas ﬂow.
Ideally if the foam ﬁlled accumulator improves the eﬃciency suﬃciently, the accumulator
can be downsized, while still producing the same output energy, thus reducing both costs
and the weight in the wind turbine nacelle.
1.2
Project Scope
The scope of this project is to investigate the eﬀect of ﬁlling a piston type accumulator
with an elastomeric foam, and to ﬁnd a method of implementing the foam that increases
the thermal eﬃciency of the accumulator as much as possible. In addition the possibility of
predicting the performance of a foam ﬁlled accumulator numerically is studied as well. The
research is done in collaboration with Fritz Schur Energy (FSE), a company that develops
and produces hydraulic systems for wind turbines. Therefore, special attention is given to
the investigation of the foams potential of improving an accumulator that operates on the
terms of a pitch control system. In this part of the research the improvements of energy
density, minimum pressure during expansion, and output energy are all considered. A
foam should be found that is able to improve at least one of these parameters, and
continue to do so for several thousand compression expansion cycles without degrading
over time.
The objective of this project is to ﬁnd out if this is possible, and if so, how the implemen-
tation of the foam can be used to optimise the pitch control systems that are produced
at Fritz Schur Energy.
1.3
Literature Review
The gas-charged closed bladder type accumulator was invented in 1938 and patented ﬁve
years later by Mercier [1943]. The accumulator was initially used on propeller aircrafts,
2
==PAGE:12==
3
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
as a means of hydraulic pitch control, to feather the propellers under engine failure. Six
months later Ashton [1948] ﬁled an application for a patent on the piston type accumula-
tor, which he designed to be less susceptible to damage at sudden pressure changes, or at
high pressure diﬀerences between the gas and the liquid chamber. The patent was pub-
licised in 1948. The main conﬁguration of the piston type accumulator has not changed
since the ﬁrst patent. However, several approaches to increase the eﬃciency of the accu-
mulator, have been suggested throughout the years. Otis [1973b] emphasizes the great
thermal losses linked to the irreversible compression and expansion processes of hydraulic
accumulators, and to the cooling when the two processes are separated by a holding pe-
riod of perceptible length. The magnitude of the loss depends on the cooling rate of the
system, the compression and expansion rates, and the holding time. Otis reveals that
insulating the accumulator has little eﬀect, as the tank walls has ample heat capacity
for the heat to diﬀuse into the walls only. Instead he proposes a solution consisting of
ﬁlling the gas chamber with an open cell elastic foam, claiming: ”The intimate thermal
contanct between the gas and the foam, along with the large heat capacity of the foam,
greatly reduces the temperature rise of the gas making the process more nearly isother-
mal.”, [Otis, 1973b, p. 198]. He further increases the heat capacity by coating the foam
with carbowax with a low melting point, exploiting the heat of fusion. A solution that
is based on a patent from 1871, by J. S. Baldwin, who uses condensible gases in com-
bination with wire-gauzes of large heat capacity and surface area to pursue isothermal
working processes. (Baldwin’s patent could not be found in the patent databases.)
Other principles of related nature prior to Otis’s concepts are only found in patents. Rux
[1955] uses coated rubber sheets as pressure absorbers in hydraulic systems and Bauman
[1961] introduces the use of elastomeric foam instead of a gas (air) in intermediate pressure
storage tanks, such as surge tanks. However, from the same conference proceedings as
Otis’s article, M. P. Sherman [1973] suggests a similar approach with a diﬀerent solution
to improve the energy storage capacity of hydraulic accumulators. Based on the fact
that the isobaric process is the most eﬃcient, he makes it clear that: ”Any modiﬁcation
which decreases the change in gas pressure with volume change will improve eﬃciency”,
[M. P. Sherman, 1973, p. 203]. He proposes the use of ﬁne metallic strands of copper,
connected to the inner surface of the accumulator as a heat sink. In contradiction to the
insulating eﬀect of the foam, the copper bands has a high heat conductivity, leading to
a high heat capacity when bonded to the accumulator walls. Sherman claims to obtain
nearly isothermal compression and expansion, reaching an improvement of 15%-40% with
his numerical calculations.
Adding to the concept of using foam, Pourmovahed et al. [1988] perform an in depth
experimental analysis of a foam ﬁlled accumulator, investigating the eﬀects of compres-
sion/expansion rate, holding time, precharge pressure, and foam mass. He ﬁnds that, only
ﬁlling half of the gas chamber with foam, does not have suﬃcient eﬀect, and that foam
does not improve eﬃciency with zero holding time and fast compression/expansion rate.
On the other hand, completely ﬁlling the gas chamber with polyester-urethane foam re-
duces the thermal loss from 40% to 1%, in the best case, while friction loss increases from
2-3% to 4%. The eﬃciency of the foam ﬁlled accumulator at around 95% is practically
independent of precharge pressure, holding time, and rate of compression and expansion,
which in turn makes it easier to model. Pourmovahed assigns the improvement to the
3
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
4
nearly isothermal processes and the fact that the porous nature of the foam abates natural
convection. In conclusion he asserts that the reduced temperature oscillations, increases
the life time of especially composite accumulators.
Pourmovahed [1990] further contributes with testing of the foams durability, where he per-
forms 36,000 compression-hold-expansion cycles on the foam, testing for chemical break-
down and compression set.
Pourmovahed encounters no problems with the hydraulic
system, and his results show no signiﬁcant chemical breakdown in the foam, when work-
ing below 100°C. Nonetheless, he ﬁnds a decrease in eﬃciency from 84% to 81%, after the
foam is used, which he purely attributes a 25% compression set, that was measured in the
foam after the 36,000 cycles. The only study, found in the literature, to use the thermal
time constant model for a foam ﬁlled accumulator, is the study by Pourmovahed et al.
[1992]. With a slightly modiﬁed model, he analyses a kinetic energy recovery system for
an auto mobile and compares the calculations to measured data. In conclusion, he claims
that the analytical model is valid indeed.
More recently Stroganov and Sheshin [2011] present an attempt to improve the foam
ﬁlled accumulator by ﬁxing the foam to the piston. Their studies show that the highest
degradation is found in the foam adjacent to the piston and the accumulator top, where
the elasticity of the foam can not follow the quick oscillations of the piston. To reduce
the degradation, he suggests inserting a foam with lower permeability in the top and
the bottom of the gas chamber, to increase the acceleration of the adjacent foam layers.
Another design is presented based on the ﬁndings by Stroganov and Sheshin [2009], where
they compare the heat insulation (foam) and the heat regeneration (metal) approaches,
ﬁrst introduced by Otis [1973b] and M. P. Sherman [1973] respectively. Stroganov presents
the idea of using heat regenerative metal springs instead of foam, claiming that, besides
avoiding degradation, the heat springs are more eﬃcient as well. Both the foam ﬁlled and
the heat spring accumulator are now patented, Stroganov [2010]; Stroganov and Sheshin
[2010].
Similarly, Juhala et al. [2011] ﬁnd a signiﬁcant improvement by using a simple metal heat
regenerator, that only takes up part of the gas chamber. In addition they use a multi-
physics software, combining heat transfer and ﬂuid dynamics, to model the accumulator
with a heat regenerator and compare with experimental results. Except from a faster
temperature rise and a lower ﬁnal pressure in the compression process, the model shows
to be accurate. The deviations are explained by a slow temperature sensor and the fact
that they are using the ideal gas law as equation of state.
Based on a thermal time constant model developed by Otis [1973a], Hansen and Ras-
mussen [2013] shows that combining the thermal time constant approximation by Rotth¨auser
[1993] and the Soave-Redlich-Kwong equation of state, is the most eﬃcient in simulation
of piston type accumulators. However, they also ﬁnd a diﬀerence in measured versus
calculated pressure and suggest that a better thermodynamic model, including the heat
balance of the accumulator wall, should be established. Motivated by this, V. Irizar [2015]
develops a more advanced model using computational ﬂuid dynamics to further study the
thermodynamic processes of a piston type accumulator. He concludes that heat losses to
the accumulator walls is the main reason for thermal losses, which was also concluded
by Otis [1973b]. He suggests that an investigation of ways to improve the thermal time
constant of the gas should be carried out, which serves as motivation for this study.
4
==PAGE:14==
Chapter 2
System Description
In this chapter a short introduction is given to the pitch control and emergency stop
systems, as well as the piston type accumulator and the elastomeric foam that is used in
the experimental work.
2.1
Pitch Control System
Within the scope of this project the important part of the hydraulic pitch control system
is the accumulators. Their application in the system can be seen in the hydraulic diagram
in ﬁgure 2.1b. Normally a bank of 2 to 6, 20-25 liter, accumulators are installed to deliver
the pressurised oil to either one or two large actuators that are connected to the turbine
blade at a given torque arm length. The actuator, also referred to as the pitch cylinder,
usually has a diameter of 200 mm and a length of approximately 1,500 mm. In total there
is three such systems, one per blade, as seen in the graphic illustration in ﬁgure 2.1a.
(a) Pitch Control.
WIND
ACTUATOR
PRESSURE
TANK
Hydraulic Pitch
(b) Principle diagram of pitch control system.
Figure 2.1: Graphic illustration and principle diagram of the pitch control system.
During an emergency stop the blades of the wind turbines are feathered, which means that
they are rotated until a minimum surface area faces the wind, and no torque is exerted
on the wind turbine. As the accumulators should be able to provide suﬃcient power to
feather the blades from any position, the emergency stop process is decisive in selecting
the right size of the accumulators. Feathering the blades often requires large rotations
and thus a large stroke of the actuator. In order to deliver enough oil, the expansion ratio
of the accumulators are often high, making the pressure drop to a minimum. At the same
time the torque arm decreases when the wing is rotated closer to the feathered position.
Which means, that apart form the discharge power output, the available volume of oil
for a required stroke length of the actuator, and the minimum pressure at the end of the
expansion will be the limiting factors in designing the right accumulator.
5
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 2. SYSTEM DESCRIPTION
6
The system, which will be referred to as the emergency stop system, is similar to the
pitch control system, but where separate accumulators are used for the pitch control and
emergency stop respectively. The biggest diﬀerence is that the accumulators in the pitch
control system operate with continuous small compression-expansion cycles, whereas the
emergency stop accumulators are unused between emergency stops.
2.2
Piston Type Accumulator
A graphical illustration of the piston type accumulator that is investigated in this project,
is shown in ﬁgure 2.2. A normal working cycle of an accumulator is shown as a pressure
volume diagram in ﬁgure 2.3. It consists of a compression process (1-2), where oil is
pumped into the accumulator while compressing the gas, a holding period (2-3) where
the pressurised gas and oil is retained in the accumulator, and an expansion process (3-4)
where the oil is discharged from the accumulator by expanding the gas. pV-diagrams
are a great way of depicting the performance of the accumulator, as the area under the
curves corresponds to the energy required or produced by the process. From this ﬁgure
it is clearly seen that the average gas pressure during expansion is lower than during
compression, and the diﬀerence is due to the pressure loss during the holding time (2-3).
As shown in the ﬁgure, this means that the area inside the pV diagram corresponds to
the thermal loss during the cycle.
The working cycle of the accumulators used in the pitch control system, will not resemble
the one shown in ﬁgure 2.3, because of the small compressions and expansions during pitch
control. In addition, these accumulators are recompressed every time the pressure drops
below a ﬁve bar margin of the target pressure. For the accumulators in the emergency
stop systems, the working cycle is also diﬀerent, in that they are compressed several times
until the pressure stays within a margin of the target pressure. Apart from that, the cycle
of the emergency stop accumulators is the same as the illustrated one.
An unﬁlled accumulator will generally be referred to as a conventional accumulator. Three
diﬀerent accumulators, are used for the investigation in this project. A small 0.64 L, a
medium sized 6 L, and a large 20 L accumulator.
Gas Side
Oil Side
Gas Flange
Piston
Cylinder
Oil Flange
Oil Port
Pressure
Volume
1
2
3
4
Area = Thermal Loss
Figure 2.2: Piston type accumulator. Figure source:
V. Irizar [2015]
Figure 2.3: pV diagram of accu-
mulator working cycle.
6
==PAGE:16==
7
CHAPTER 2. SYSTEM DESCRIPTION
2.3
Foam
Filling the accumulator with foam, means that an elastomeric foam is ﬁtted into the gas
side of the accumulator, so that the gas ﬁlls up the open cell structure of the foam.
Everything else is left unchanged from the conventional accumulator. One polyester foam
with a density of 30 kg/m3, and two polyether foams with densities of 50 kg/m3 and
55 kg/m3 are used in this project. Throughout this report these will be referred to as
foam 1, foam 2, and foam 3 respectively. The full speciﬁcation of the foams can be seen
in table 7.2 in section 7.4.
7
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 3
Theoretical Background
Two diﬀerent methods of simulating the hydraulic accumulator have been used throughout
this project; the thermal time constant model, and a ﬁnite element model using COMSOL
multiphysics. The physics of both models are based on the ﬁrst law of thermodynamics
using the principle of conservation of energy. Nevertheless, they will be presented sepa-
rately, because the accumulator is analysed as a lumped mass gas chamber in the thermal
time constant model, whereas the COMSOL model analysis is element based and takes
the behaviour of diﬀerent domains of the accumulator into account.
3.1
Bulk Analysis
The energy balance equation used to describe the accumulator in the thermal time con-
stant model, is deducted from the ﬁrst law of thermodynamics, based on a thermal analysis
of the accumulator gas chamber as a lumped mass, and using the Soave Redlich-Kwong
equation of state.
3.1.1
Accumulator Gas Chamber
The thermodynamic processes of the gas in a conventional accumulator without foam,
can be described by the energy balance of an enclosed gas based on the ﬁrst law of
thermodynamics:
dU = δQ −δW
(3.1)
This is the general formulation of the law in diﬀerential form for an irreversible process
of a closed system. In words the equation can be described as:

Change of
internal energy
in the gas

=

Change in heat
added from the
surroundings

−

Change of
work done
by the gas

Looking at the rate of change in internal energy, the law is written:
dU
dt = δQ
dt −δW
dt
(3.2)
The rate of change of internal energy per unit mass, dU
dt , for a real gas is dependent on
the state changes of the gas, i.e. changes in both temperature and volume. The relation
8
==PAGE:18==
9
CHAPTER 3. THEORETICAL BACKGROUND
is given by
dU
dt = CV,g
dT
dt +

T
 ∂p
∂T

V
−p
 dV
dt
(3.3)
where CV,g is the heat capacity of the gas at constant volume and T, p, and V is the
temperature, pressure, and volume of the gas, respectively.
Assuming that the heat transfers from the gas to the accumulator walls is only due to
convection, the rate of heat added from the surroundings to the system,
δQ
dt , can be
estimated by the surface integral of the heat ﬂux between the gas and the walls:
δQ
dt = (Tw −T)
Z
As
h dAs
(3.4)
where h is the heat transfer coeﬃcient, Tw is the wall temperature, and As is the surface
area between the walls and the enclosed gas. The rate of work done by the gas on the
surroundings is deﬁned as
δW
dt = pdV
dt
(3.5)
By inserting equations (3.3), (3.4), and (3.5) into equation (3.2) the work term cancels
out with the last term of equation (3.3) and the energy balance becomes
CV,g
dT
dt +

T
 ∂p
∂T

V
 dV
dt = (Tw −T)
Z
As
h dA
(3.6)
Equation (3.6) fully describes the thermodynamic energy balance of the enclosed gas. To
solve the partial derivative of the pressure, however, an equation of state relating the
gas pressure to the temperature, is needed. Several equations of state (EOS) would be
adequate in describing the properties of the nitrogen in the accumulator. In previous
studies the Benedict-Webb-Rubin equation (BWR) seems to be the most popular choice,
Otis and Pourmovahed [1985]; Pourmovahed and Otis [1986]; Pourmovahed et al. [1992];
Tavares [2011]. However, the Soave Redlich Kwong equation (SRK) is chosen here, be-
cause of the studies by Hansen and Rasmussen [2013], who found that the SRK equation
is superior to the BWR equation in terms of eﬃciency, while producing a similar accuracy
in predicting the temperature and pressure. The SRK equation relates the state variables
by the equation:
p = Rs T
v −b −
a(T)
v(v + b)
(3.7)
where Rs is the speciﬁc gas constant and v is the speciﬁc volume.
The constant, b,
represents the volume of the molecules, and can be calculated by the critical conditions
of the gas:
b = 0.08664Rs Tc
pc
(3.8)
9
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 3. THEORETICAL BACKGROUND
10
where Tc and pc are the critical temperature and pressure, respectively. The function,
a(T), is a correcting term, that takes into account the attractive potential of the molecules.
It is given by:
a(T) = 0.457235 R2 T 2
c
pc
"
1 + κ
 
1 −
 T
Tc
 1
2!#2
(3.9)
κ = 0.480 + 1.574 ω −0.176 ω2
(3.10)
where ω is the acentric factor of the gas.
The eﬀect of the correcting terms is best shown by the compressibility factor graph in
ﬁgure 3.1. The compressibility factor describes how the real gas deviates from the ideal
under compression, in this case by the use of the SRK equation. For the more realistic
case where both temperature and pressure varies with the volume, the deviation from the
ideal gas is seen in the pressure build-up under compression. This is shown in ﬁgure 3.2
for a gas at ambient temperature and an initial pressure of 100 bar that is compressed to
half of its original volume.
0
100
200
300
400
Pressure [bar]
1
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
p V
n RT [−]
Ideal Gas
250 K
300 K
350 K
5
6
7
8
9
10
Volume [L]
100
150
200
250
300
350
Pressure [bar]
SRK
Ideal Gas
Figure 3.1: Compressibility factor of Ni-
trogen at 250 K, 300 K, and 350 K., with
the Soave Redlich-Kwong equation of state.
Figure 3.2: P-V diagram of the compres-
sion of Nitrogen with initial temperature
T0 = 20 ◦C and a compression ratio, cr = 2.
Figure 3.1 shows the compressibility for 3 isotherms as a function of pressure. Both for
high and low temperatures, there is a clear deviation, but at 300 K the real gas follows the
ideal gas closely up until around 50 bar. Hereafter, the deviation becomes more distinct
and especially at high pressures, above 200 bar, the eﬀect is large. The same trend is seen
in ﬁgure 3.2, where the deviation is even larger because the temperature rise contributes
to further developing the pressure.
3.1.2
Foam Filled Accumulator Gas Chamber
When modelling the foam ﬁlled accumulator gas chamber, the starting point from equation
(3.1) is unchanged and the energy balance in equation (3.6) is only slightly modiﬁed. The
internal energy and the work done by the system are unchanged from before. Only the
10
==PAGE:20==
11
CHAPTER 3. THEORETICAL BACKGROUND
term consisting of the heat added to the system from the surroundings changes, because
now the gas is not only loosing heat to the accumulator walls, but to the foam as well.
The heat energy balance, including foam, is shown schematically in ﬁgure 3.3.
Figure 3.3: Graphical illustration of heat balance in foam. Figure source: Pourmovahed
et al. [1992].
The heat capacity of the foam is high compared to that of the nitrogen. However, due
to the thin cell walls, the low bulk density, and the large surface area of the foam, it is
assumed that both gas and foam will have the same uniform temperature at all times.
Hence only the heating of the foam itself is taken into account, and the term δQ
dt is modiﬁed
to
δQ
dt = (Tw −T)
Z
As
h dAs −Cp,f
dT
dt
(3.11)
where Cp,f is the heat capacity of the foam. Ultimately the energy balance of the foam
ﬁlled gas chamber becomes
CV,g
dT
dt +

T
 ∂p
∂T

V
 dV
dt = (Tw −T)
Z
As
h dAs −Cp,f
dT
dt
(3.12)
The additional mechanical energy of the foam is neglected, as it is very small compared to
the thermodynamic energy of an accumulator. An example of calculating the mechanical
energy stored in an elastomeric foam is shown in section 6.1.2.
3.2
Advanced Analysis
One of the objectives of this project is to investigate how the various foam properties in-
ﬂuence the thermal eﬃciency of the accumulator. This means that both the heat transfer
and the gas ﬂow have to be analysed, which in turn requires a more advanced analysis
of the accumulator.
For this, a model is made with the COMSOL multiphysics soft-
ware. The model is a two dimensional axial symmetric model, using the non-isothermal
11
==PAGE:21==
CHAPTER 3. THEORETICAL BACKGROUND
12
multiphysics coupling, to couple the heat transfer problem with ﬂuid dynamics by solv-
ing the partial diﬀerential equations of both physics simultaneously. The equations used
to model the accumulator gas chamber is the heat equation for ﬂuids in porous media
and the Stokes-Brinkman equations for creeping ﬂow in a porous medium. These in-
clude compressibility of the ﬂuid and non-isothermal ﬂow characteristics, using combined
heat convection, conduction, and pressure work of the ﬂuid and porous medium. The
non-isothermal ﬂow model, takes into account the variation of ﬂuid properties with tem-
perature change, which means the ﬂuid density, heat capacity, and viscosity, changes as
the gas is compressed. In addition the heat dissipation of the gas into the accumulator
walls and piston, is modelled with the heat equation for heat transfer in solids.
3.2.1
Heat Equation
The equation governing all heat transfer problems in COMSOL is based on the ﬁrst law
of thermodynamics. The general form of the heat transfer equation is given by:
ρ Cp
∂T
∂t + ρ Cpu · ∇T + ∇· q = Q
(3.13)
The ﬁrst term on the left hand side of the equation is the internal energy rate, where ρ is
the material density, Cp is the speciﬁc heat capacity of the material at constant pressure,
T is the temperature, and t is the time. The second term is the convective heat transfer,
where u is the velocity vector and ∇T is the temperature gradient. The third term is
the heat by conduction, where the nabla operator, ∇·, denotes the divergence of the
conductive heat ﬂux vector ﬁeld q. The software uses Fourier’s law of heat conduction,
which states that the conductive heat ﬂux, q, is proportional to the temperature gradient
by the relation:
q = −k∇T
(3.14)
where k is the thermal conductivity of the material. In this case k is a scalar for every
material, as they are all isotropic. On the right hand side, Q contains all heat sources or
sinks.
3.2.2
Heat Transfer in Solids
The heat transfer in all solid parts of the accumulator is modelled, using the following
simpliﬁed version of the general heat transfer equation:
ρ Cp
∂T
∂t + ∇· (−k∇T) = 0
(3.15)
This version is greatly simpliﬁed because the heat capacity, Cp, and thermal conductivity,
k, of the solids are assumed to be constant, as the temperature change of the solids is
minimal.
12
==PAGE:22==
13
CHAPTER 3. THEORETICAL BACKGROUND
3.2.3
Heat Transfer in Porous Media
The heat distribution in the foam ﬁlled gas chamber is modelled by the following version
of equation (3.13), for heat transfer in porous media:
(ρ Cp)eff
∂T
∂t + ρg Cp,gu · ∇T + ∇· (−keff∇T) = Q + Qp + Qvd
(3.16)
The temperature, T, in this equation is a common temperature for the gas and the solid,
based on the assumption that, temperature wise, the gas and solid matrix are always in
equilibrium. In some cases this proved to be a bold assumption, but in turn it simpliﬁes
the simulation, as seen in section 6.1.2. The other properties in the convection term, ρg
and Cp,g denote the density and the speciﬁc heat capacity at constant pressure of the gas
alone, where the velocity ﬁeld, u, describes the velocity ﬁeld of the gas within the porous
matrix.
For the internal energy and the heat conduction, the thermodynamic properties of both
solid and gas, contribute to an overall heat capacity and conductivity, called the eﬀective
properties of the porous medium. These are deﬁned by an averaging model, taking both
material properties into account.
(ρ Cp)eff is the eﬀective volumetric heat capacity of the solid and gas given by:
(ρ Cp)eff = θ ρs Cp,s + (1 −θ) ρg Cp,g
(3.17)
where θ is the volume fraction of the solid, given by the ratio of solid material volume to
the total volume of the cellular structure, see section 3.2.7. ρs is the density, and Cp,s is
the heat capacity of the solid. The eﬀective heat conductivity is deﬁned as:
keff = θ ks + (1 −θ) kg
(3.18)
where kg and ks are the thermal conductivity of solid and gas respectively.
On the right hand side Qvd represents viscous dissipation, which in this case is ignored
due to the low viscosity of nitrogen, see section 6.1.2 for justiﬁcation. Qp is the pressure-
volume work exerted by the gas on its surroundings, given by:
Qp = αp T
∂p
∂t + u · ∇p

(3.19)
where p is the gas pressure and αp is the coeﬃcient of thermal expansion, deﬁned as:
αp = −1
ρ
 ∂ρ
∂T

p
(3.20)
The pressure work is responsible for the heating of the gas under adiabatic compression,
and also includes some thermoacoustic eﬀects [COMSOL, 2012, p. 712]. An adiabatic
process in an ideal gas obeys the relation:
pV γ = Constant
(3.21)
13
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 3. THEORETICAL BACKGROUND
14
where V is the volume of the gas and γ is the ratio of speciﬁc heats at constant pressure
and constant volume:
γ = Cp
CV
(3.22)
where the standard value of γ for a diatomic gas, such as Nitrogen is 1.4. Knowing this
value and the speciﬁc gas constant for Nitrogen is enough to evaluate the speciﬁc heat
capacity at constant pressure, when the gas is described by the ideal gas law. The speciﬁc
heats are related to the speciﬁc gas constant Rs by:
Cp −CV = Rs
(3.23)
The velocity vector, u, in the pressure work term is the same velocity ﬁeld of the gas as
in the convection term. The velocity ﬁeld is simulated by the ﬂuid ﬂow in porous medium
interface, thereby coupling the heat transfer and the ﬂuid dynamics, see section 3.2.5.
3.2.4
Heat Transfer Across Boundaries
The internal interfaces of the ﬂuid and solid domains are all modelled by prescribing the
temperature ﬁeld to be continuous and smooth across the boundary. This assumption
implies that the following conditions are met:
−n · qdst = n · qsrc
(3.24)
Tdst = Tsrc
(3.25)
where n is the normal vector of the boundary and q is the conductive heat ﬂux vector
as described in equation (3.14).
The subscripts src and dst are short for source and
destination. So the conditions are saying that the normal heat ﬂux out of a domain is
equal to the normal heatﬂux into its adjacent domains, while the temperatures of the
continuous domain boundaries are equal.
The outer boundaries are modelled by convective heat ﬂux to the surroundings described
as:
−n · q = q0
(3.26)
where the convective heat ﬂux is expressed by Newtons law of cooling:
q0 = h(Text −T)
(3.27)
where Text is the temperature of the external surface, and h is the convective heat transfer
coeﬃcient.
Finally a constant temperature boundary condition is prescribed on the oil side of the
piston, separating the gas from the oil, inside the cylinder. This boundary condition is
simply imposed to the relation:
T = T0
(3.28)
where T0 is a prescribed temperature on the boundary. This assumption simpliﬁes the
system, as it evades the need of modelling the oil side of the accumulator, which was
found by V. Irizar [2015] to have negligible eﬀect on the heat loss through the piston.
14
==PAGE:24==
15
CHAPTER 3. THEORETICAL BACKGROUND
3.2.5
Fluid Flow in Porous Media
The thermal characterization of the system is coupled with a ﬂuid ﬂow formulation to
simulate a ﬂow where the ﬂuid properties depend on temperature changes. In general,
ﬂow in porous media is governed by a combination of the continuity equation and the mo-
mentum equation. For a non-isothermal ﬂow in porous media, the COMSOL Multiphysics
software uses a combination of these two equations commonly known as the Brinkman
equations:
∂
∂t (ϕ ρ) + ∇· (ρu) = 0
(3.29)
ρ
ϕ
∂u
∂t + (u · ∇) u
ϕ

= −∇p + ∇·
 1
ϕτ

−κ−1µu + F
(3.30)
Equation (3.29) is the continuity equation of mass conservation with and extra factor
taking the porous medium into account.
This is seen in the ﬁrst term, which is the
change rate in mass density of the gas, where ϕ is the porosity of the porous medium.
The porosity is, in opposition to the volume fraction, the fraction of total volume of the
medium occupied by void space, in this case the gas, see section 3.2.7. The second term
is the mass ﬂux, where ∇· is the divergence of the velocity ﬁeld, u. It should be noted
that this is the velocity vector that is used as input to the heat equation for heat transfer
in porous media (3.16), ensuring the coupling between the two physics.
The contribution of Brinkman is formulated in equation (3.30), which is a momentum
equation for a non-isothermal compressible ﬂow in porous media. On the left hand side
is the inertial term consisting of the acceleration of the ﬂuid and the non linear drag
that arises from inertial eﬀects. In this case the inertial forces are assumed to be small
compared to the viscous forces, and the higher order term, (u · ∇)u, is neglected. The
validity of this assumption is tested in section 6.1.2 by estimating the Reynolds number
of the ﬂow.
The ﬁrst term on the right hand side of equation (3.30) is the forces acting on the ﬂow
due to the pressure gradient, ∇p. Like the velocity vector the pressure gradient couples
the heat transfer to the ﬂuid ﬂow, as it is obtained from the pressure work equation,
(3.19). F includes body forces, such as gravity and the centrifugal force, which are both
neglected as they would have minimal eﬀect on the ﬁnal result, see in section 6.1.2. The
last two terms are both viscous terms. (−κ−1µu) is the conventional Darcy term, that
takes into account the resistance force on the ﬂow from the solid matrix, where κ is the
permeability of the porous medium and µ is the dynamic viscosity of the ﬂuid. ∇·
  1
ϕτ

is the shear stress divergence, which uses the viscous stress tensor τ given by:
τ = 2µS −2
3µ (∇· u) I
(3.31)
where S =
1
2
 ∇u + (∇u)T 
is the strain rate tensor, ∇· u is the rate of expansion
of the ﬂow, and I is the identity tensor. The ﬁrst term of the viscous stress tensor is
the deviatoric stress, which causes distortion of the body, and the second is the mean
15
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 3. THEORETICAL BACKGROUND
16
volumetric stress, which is an isotropic stress responsible for deformation such as dilation.
These viscous stresses cause change in momentum due to the diﬀerence in velocity of one
point in the ﬂuid relative to the average velocity of the surrounding ﬂuid. For a Newtonian
ﬂuid this can be interpreted as a diﬀusion of momentum due to viscosity, similar to heat
conduction. Thus the equation reduces to a diﬀusion equation, extended by the Darcy
term, known as the Stokes-Brinkman equation:
ρ
ϕ
∂u
∂t = −∇p + ∇·
 1
ϕ

µ

∇u + (∇u)T
−2
3µ (∇· u) I

−κ−1µu
(3.32)
Brinkman’s equation is often regarded as an extension to Darcy’s Law, which is a mislead-
ing conclusion as Brinkman formulated a self-consistent relation between the permeability
and the porosity of the medium, which is valid only when the porosity is suﬃciently large,
namely when ϕ > 0.6. The porosity eﬀects, that are called the eﬀective viscosity, denoted
µ⋆, which are often used in the diﬀusion term. Brinkman used the same viscosity in both
viscous terms, however, experiments have shown better results, when using an eﬀective
viscosity that depends on the porosity in the diﬀusion term Nield and Bejan [2013]. In
this case it is simply obtained by dividing the term with the porosity, deﬁning the eﬀective
viscosity as µ⋆= µ
ϕ.
3.2.6
Boundary Conditions
The ﬂuid ﬂow is imposed to the no slip boundary condition at every wall inside the
accumulator. This boundary condition prescribes:
u = 0
(3.33)
saying that the ﬂuid at the walls does not move. The moving wall that represents the
accumulator piston, has the same boundary condition, but the wall itself moves at a
speciﬁed velocity. This means that the ﬂuid at the boundary layer moves with the wall,
with a velocity of:
u = uw
(3.34)
where uw is the velocity of the wall with prescribed values in the radial and the axial
direction of:
uw =
"
0
V0
#
(3.35)
3.2.7
Foam Properties Under Compression
The properties of the porous medium are an important factor in both the heat equation
and the Brinkman equations, consequently the compression of the foam and the result-
ing change in properties should be taken into consideration. All the properties, such as
density, heat capacity, and thermal conductivity, are deﬁned for the solid material com-
prising the porous matrix and the ﬂuid within the voids. This means that the properties
of the bulk foam, is a function of the compression, that depends entirely on the speciﬁed
material properties of solid and ﬂuid, and on the volume fraction of the foam.
16
==PAGE:26==
17
CHAPTER 3. THEORETICAL BACKGROUND
The volume fraction of a porous medium is the fraction of the solid material volume, to
the volume of the bulk porous medium. It is equal to the relative density and described
as:
θ = Vs
V ⋆= ρ⋆
ρs
(3.36)
where Vs and ρs is the volume and density of the solid material, and V ⋆and ρ⋆is the
bulk volume and density. A more common term when describing a porous medium, is the
porosity, which is the percentage opposite of the relative density, deﬁned as the fraction
of void space over the total volume of the porous medium:
ϕ = 1 −ρ⋆
ρs
= 1 −θ
(3.37)
The porosity, or in this case the volume fraction, can be related to the permeability, κ,
by the expression:
κ = r2
h
k0
(1 −θ)3
(3.38)
where rh is the hydraulic radius of the cellular structure, which is the volume divided by
the surface area of the cell. Assuming the cell shape is close to a sphere, the hydraulic
radius is equal to three times the cell radius. The constant k0 is a unitless shape factor
between two and three, Brace [1977].
As the foam is compressed, the void spaces collapses and the volume fraction increases.
Under the assumption that the foam is isotropic, the volume fraction, as a function of
strain under uniaxial compression, is given by Dawson et al. [2006]:
θ = θ0
1
(1 −ε)(1 + νε)2
(3.39)
where θ0 is the volume fraction of the uncompressed foam, ν is the Poisson’s ratio of the
foam, and ε is the strain, which is taken negative in compression. According to Dawson
et al. [2006] the Poisson’s ratio can be neglected for compressive strains over εel = 0.075.
Because at this strain, referred to as the elastic buckling strain, the cells of an open-cell
foam buckles and collapses instead of expanding elastically in the transversal direction.
In this analysis even a small positive Poisson’s ratio, would not have any eﬀect, as the
lateral strain is constrained by the cylinder walls. In reality, the cells don’t reach the elastic
buckling strain at the same time. They rather start in layers, forming bands of collapsed
cells, while the rest of the foam is still in the elastic region. Dawson et al. [2006] present
an expression to calculate the fraction of the elastic and the buckling regimes within the
foam, and a permeability relation for each region. For this analysis, however, the size of
the collapsing cells are assumed to be the same for all strains less than εd = 0.6, which
means the porosity is uniform throughout the foam. Under this assumption and neglecting
the Poisson’s eﬀect, by substituting equation (3.38) into (3.39), the permeability under
17
==PAGE:27==
CHAPTER 3. THEORETICAL BACKGROUND
18
compression is given by:
κ = r2
h
k0

1 −θ0
1
(1 −ε)
3
(3.40)
where A is a constant related to the shape factor k0, which in the special case of a sphere
is given by A =
3.375
k0 . Dawson et al. [2006] and Hilyard and Collier [1987] all found,
that for strains above εd = 0.6 the collapsed cells will begin to densify further, revoking
any relation between cell size and strain, hence invalidating equation (3.40). This is not
a problem, however, as no simulation is done with a compression ratio higher than 2.5,
corresponding to strain of 0.6.
18
==PAGE:28==
Chapter 4
Foam Properties
In order to select and design the right foam ﬁlling, it is important to understand the
properties of the foam and the sought eﬀects and possible drawbacks of implementing
foam in a hydraulic accumulator. In this chapter, the most important foam properties are
explained, and the best suited foam for this application is presented. However, the ﬁnal
selection and design of the foam requires more practical insight, and will be done based
on the results from testing in chapter 8 and 9.
4.1
Polymeric Foam
In general, the properties of polymeric foams depend on two diﬀerent sets of parameters.
The ﬁrst set, is the structural parameters that describe the geometry of the cellular
structure. The second set, is the intrinsic parameters of the solid material making up the
foam structure, including both mechanical and thermodynamic properties.
Structural Parameters
Intrinsic Parameters
Open and closed cells
Density
Porosity
Young’s Modulus
Cell size and shape
Heat capacity
Permeability
Conductivity
Glass transition temperature
Heat resistance
Some foam properties are exclusively dependant on one or the other set of parameters,
but most of the time, the two sets together dictate the ﬁnal properties of the bulk foam.
In the following sections, only the most important of these properties are described, while
a description of the remaining ones can be seen in appendix 11.3.
4.2
Structural Parameters
Cell morphology is undoubted fundamental for the properties of the cellular solid itself,
but as a foam contains cells in many sizes and shapes, these are treated in a statistical
manner, with more focus on the macroscopic properties of the foam.
19
==PAGE:29==
CHAPTER 4. FOAM PROPERTIES
20
4.2.1
Open Cell & Closed Cell
In an open cell foam, the cells are composed mostly by struts of solid material, leaving an
interconnection of the voids in adjoining cells. Whereas in the closed cell foam, the solid
material forms membranes between the struts, closing oﬀthe cell faces and isolating every
cell. The two structures are illustrated in ﬁgure 4.1. Only an open cell foam is permeable
by gas or liquids. Therefore, it is the only type that can be used in the accumulator, since
the idea is to compress the foam with the gas ﬁlling up the cells, in such a way that the
largest possible surface area is in contact with the gas at all times.
(a) Open Cell Foam.
(b) Closed Cell Foam.
Figure 4.1: The distinction between open and closed cell polyurethane foam. With
1 mm line for scale.
4.2.2
Porosity
The porosity is an essential characteristic, because it dictates the intrinsic parameters of
the foam, such that a foam with low porosity will have almost the same properties as the
solid structure. Whereas the properties of a highly porous foam will be more inﬂuenced
by the gas ﬁlling the voids in the foam.
It is diﬃcult to determine whether the porosity of the foam should be high or low. Ther-
modynamically; with the same foam structure, a low porosity would result in the largest
possible contact surface between the cellular structure and the ﬁlling gas, increasing the
heat transfer between the two and resulting in a more eﬀective heat sink/regenerator. On
the other hand, it would also take up more volume inside the accumulator, consequently
decreasing the volume of the working gas and the ﬁnal power output.
4.3
Bulk Foam Properties
4.3.1
Elasticity & Resilience
When a foam is compressed, the energy is absorbed by three collapse mechanisms; elastic
buckling, plastic yielding, and brittle fracturing of the cell structure. Both of the latters
will permanently deform or damage the foam, whereas cells that buckle elastically will
fully return to their original shape upon unloading. This suggests that the elastic modulus
should be low and the yield strength should be high.
20
==PAGE:30==
21
CHAPTER 4. FOAM PROPERTIES
More generally, from a thermodynamic point of view, the resilience of the foam should
be high. The resilience is the ability to absorb energy under elastic compression, and to
release the energy when it is unloaded. Foams with high resilience are desired, as they
will recover faster to their original shape after compression, leaving no open spaces behind
the piston. Large open spaces inside the gas chamber are undesirable, as they would lead
to higher convection in the open areas and to a smaller overall contact surface between
the foam and the gas. Elastomeric foams with high porosity will normally have a very
low elastic moduli.
4.3.2
Density & Heat capacity
For the foam to be the best possible heat sink/regenerator, the heat capacity of the bulk
foam should be high. This could be obtained by having a lot of solid material, but that
would be conﬂicting with the aim of keeping the porosity high, in order not to take up
too much volume in the gas chamber. Therefore, the best way to increase heat capacity
is to ﬁnd a material with the highest possible intrinsic heat capacity and density.
4.3.3
Conductivity
The thermal conductivity of the bulk foam has four contributions: conduction through
the solid, ks; conduction through the gas, kg; convection within the cells, kc; and radiation
through the cell walls and across the cell voids, kr, Gibson and Ashby [1988].
A high heat capacity alone does not make the foam a good heat sink. Both the compression
and especially the expansion process are completed over a short period of time, which
means that the heat transfer rate from the gas to the foam has to be large as well.
This is achieved with a high heat transfer coeﬃcient and a high heat conductivity of the
solid material. A high heat conductivity will eliminate temperature gradients inside the
material, making the center of the solid reach the gas temperature faster. As already
mentioned, a combination of high porosity and a thin cell structure will be beneﬁcial
in this situation, as it will ensure a large surface area and short distances for the heat
to travel. Ideally, an inﬁnitely large heat capacity and conductivity combined with a
high heat transfer coeﬃcient, would make the foam into a thermal reservoir, keeping the
temperature constant throughout the compression and expansion process.
4.3.4
Compression set
The compression set, also called permanent set, is the permanent deformation of the foam
after a compression, due to plastic yielding and brittle crushing of the cells. Permanent
deformation most often occurs after large compression strains, but even for smaller strains
in the elastic region, it can deform plastically, when held for a longer time, due to the
creep mechanism. The deﬁnition of compression set is analogous to that of engineering
strain:
Cs = L0 −L
L0
(4.1)
where L0 is the original length of the foam and L is the length after compression. This
percentage should be as low as possible, for the same reason that was given for the
21
==PAGE:31==
CHAPTER 4. FOAM PROPERTIES
22
resilience. A high compression set, will leave more permanent open spaces inside the gas
chamber. Compression set is generally smaller for low porosity foams.
4.4
Flexible Polyurethane Foams
For the accumulator, the immediate perception would be to use a ﬂexible polyurethane
(PU) foam, similar to the foams that are used for cushioning in mattresses and furnitures.
These are known for their ﬂexibility and their excellent resistance to abrasion.
4.4.1
Polyether or Polyester
Despite the great varieties of polyol mixtures, ﬂexible PU foams are generally based on
either polyethers or polyesters.
Both of them have properties that ﬁt this application very well, but it is diﬃcult to say
which would be the best. The obvious choice would be to use the same foam that has
been used in previous studies, such as Pourmovahed et al. [1988] and Pourmovahed et al.
[1988], which is a PU foam on polyester basis. But on the other hand, the polyether have
some advantages over the polyester type.
Polyether polyols are the predominant type used in ﬂexible PU foams. Their densities are
in the range of about 15 −64 kg/m3 for the bulk foam, which is slightly higher than what
can be achieved with a polyester. The polyester has a more invariable foam structure
and can produce smaller cell sizes. This gives it a higher tensile strength, which makes it
more resistant to abrasion, tearing and cuts. Under compressive strain, however, it also
means that cells compress in a more uniform way, that increases the Poisson’s ratio, which
is undesired as it increases the change of the foam getting stuck. In addition polyesters
have a higher tendency to deform permanently, which makes them suitable for shock
absorption, whereas the polyethers are better at storing the absorbed energy, giving them
the wanted bounce back eﬀect.
Polyethers are more resistant to cold temperatures, since they have the lowest glass tran-
sition temperatures, which can be as low as −70 ◦C. On the other hand, polyesters can
withstand high temperature longer, but both foams are stable under about 120 ◦C, and
start decomposing slowly at temperatures between 200 ◦C and 250 ◦C. Lastly, they are
both common foams that are easy to come by.
It was not possible to ﬁnd any speciﬁc information on conductivity and heat capacity.
However, as mentioned these properties are highly dependant on the solid material and the
porosity of the foam, and for a solid polyurethane, the heat capacity is usually estimated
to be around 1800 J/kgK and the conductivity around 0.25 J/kgK for both polyethers and
polyesters.
22
==PAGE:32==
Chapter 5
Thermal Time Constant Model
Accurate numerical models of conventional accumulators are often used to assist in ﬁnding
the minimum sized accumulator that can deliver a required power output. In this chapter
the thermal time constant model is introduced, and a way of extending this model to
predict the behaviour of a foam ﬁlled accumulators is presented.
The thermal time constant (TTC) model is used to predict the thermodynamic behaviour
of hydraulic accumulators, using a single heat transfer time constant, τ, that speciﬁes each
accumulator. The model was developed by Otis [1973a] as an improvement to earlier mod-
els, where the gas was assumed to behave as an ideal gas following either an isothermal,
adiabatic or polytropic process. These were commonly used for sizing accumulators, but
lacked eﬃciency due to the polytropic exponent, that varies between diﬀerent work cy-
cles and even throughout one cycle, depending on compression and expansion rate. The
thermal time constant model abandons the polytropic approach completely. Instead it
uses the conservation of energy to incorporate heat losses to the model, and formulates a
thermal time constant that only depends on precharge pressure, initial volume, compres-
sion ratio, and accumulator dimensions. This model has been used in preceding studies
at FSE by Hansen and Rasmussen [2013] and V. Irizar [2015], to develop a method of
predicting accumulator behaviour with high accuracy.
5.1
Background Theory
5.1.1
Model
The thermal time constant model is based on the conservation of energy for the charge gas,
which is described by the energy balance equation (3.6). To simplify the analysis the heat
transfer coeﬃcient, is assumed to have one average value for the entire boundary surface,
and the wall temperature is assumed constant and equal to the ambient temperature, Ta,
on the outside of the accumulator. These assumptions eliminate the surface integral in
(3.6), making the heat transfer proportional to the temperature diﬀerence across the wall
and the wall area. The simpliﬁed energy balance becomes:
CV,g
dT
dt +

T
 ∂p
∂T

V
 dV
dt = (Ta −T) h Aw
(5.1)
By isolating the rate of temperature change and changing all extrinsic properties to in-
23
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 5. THERMAL TIME CONSTANT MODEL
24
trinsic properties, the equation is reduced to:
dT
dt =
h Aw
mg cV,g
(Ta −T) −T
cV,g
 ∂p
∂T

v
dv
dt
(5.2)
where cV,g is the speciﬁc heat capacity at constant volume, v is the speciﬁc volume, and
mg is the mass of the gas. Now introducing the thermal time constant:
τ ≡mg cV,g
h Aw
(5.3)
and substituting it into equation (5.2) the thermal time constant model becomes:
dT
dt = Ta −T
τ
−T
cV,g
 ∂p
∂T

v
dv
dt
(5.4)
When used in combination with the SRK equation (3.7), the thermal time constant model
can be used to estimate the development of pressure and temperature during any ther-
modynamic process in the accumulator. The procedure is to take the partial derivative
of the pressure with respect to temperature, of the SRK equation and insert it into the
energy balance (5.4). The partial derivative of SRK equation (3.7) is given by:
 ∂p
∂T

v
=
R
v −b + 0.457235 R2 T 2
c
pc


κ

1 + κ

1 −
q
T
Tc

v (v −b)
q
T
Tc


(5.5)
This allows to evaluate the temperature change based on small perturbations of the vol-
ume. The temperature change can then be reinserted into the SRK equation to calculate
the corresponding pressure change. In this way the thermodynamic state of the gas can
be known throughout any work cycle.
5.1.2
Thermal Time Constant, τ
The thermal time constant is an exponential decay constant of the charge gas temperature,
which means that the drop in temperature after a step change in gas volume will decrease
proportionally to its own current value. It can be measured as the time required for the
gas pressure or temperature to drop by a factor of e = 2.72 or 63.2% relative to the ﬁnal
equilibrium. This is shown graphically by the illustration of τ in ﬁgure 5.1, and it can
be shown mathematically by solving equation (5.2) for a constant volume. The energy
balance for a constant volume is:
dT
dt =
h Aw
mg cV,g
(Ta −T)
(5.6)
By integration the solution to this equation is:
Ta −T0
Ta −T = exp

t h Aw
mg cV,g

= exp
 t
τ

(5.7)
24
==PAGE:34==
25
CHAPTER 5. THERMAL TIME CONSTANT MODEL
where the thermal time constant, τ, is regarded as a constant in the integration, and
Ta−T0 is the temperature diﬀerence between the gas and the surroundings at t = 0. Since
pressure is proportional to temperature at constant volume, the same decay constant will
apply to the pressure after a quick volume change.
i Final Equilibrium Pressure 
T = Thermal Time Constant 
I 
TIME 
Figure 5.1: Thermal time constant, shown by the pressure decay of a constant volume
after a rapid compression. Figure source: Pourmovahed and Otis [1986].
Although τ is treated as a constant, it is not actually constant during the thermodynamic
processes in the accumulator. Looking at the deﬁnition of τ, it is clear that it can not be
a constant, since both the convective heat transfer coeﬃcient, h and the wall area, Aw will
change during compression and expansion. However, previous studies, including Hansen
and Rasmussen [2013] and V. Irizar [2015], have shown that the model ﬁts experimental
data quite well by using a constant value of τ throughout a work cycle.
As mentioned, the thermal time constant can be measured from experimental data, but in
order to avoid the cumbersome nature of doing experiments, Rotth¨auser [1993] worked out
a numerical correlation of τ for piston type accumulators, which has shown to be in good
agreement with experimental results. The correlation is based on the initial temperature
in T0 [K], pressure, p0 [bar], and V0 [m3] of the charge gas. It is shown in equation (5.8)
below.
τ = 293 K
T0
 0.3p(V0,293 K)V 0.22
0
+ 86.2 V 0.494
0

(5.8)
5.1.3
Model With Foam
The energy balance including foam, equation (3.12), is rewritten and simpliﬁed completely
analogous to the model without foam. Once more assuming an average heat transfer
coeﬃcient, h, and constant wall temperature, Tw, equal to the surrounding temperature,
25
==PAGE:35==
CHAPTER 5. THERMAL TIME CONSTANT MODEL
26
the simpliﬁed model can be written as:
CV,g
dT
dt +

T
 ∂p
∂T

V
 dV
dt = (Tw −T) h Aw −Cp,f
dT
dt
(5.9)
After introducing the thermal time constant as deﬁned in (5.3) once again and rearranging
the terms, the equation is isolated for the temperature change rate and the modiﬁed
thermodynamic model is obtained.
dT
dt =
Ta −T
τ

1 + mf cp,f
mg cV,g
 −
T
cV,g

1 + mf cp,f
mg cV,g

 ∂p
∂T

v
dv
dt
(5.10)
Here τ alone does not represent the thermal time constant of the system. In this model
the whole denominator of the ﬁrst term in the right hand expression is the decay constant,
similarly to the derivation of τ. This can be shown by solving the equation at constant
volume. The new thermal time constant is deﬁned as:
τf ≡τ

1 + mf cp,f
mg cV,g

(5.11)
From this it seen that mass and heat capacity of the foam increases τf, and a foam mass
or heat capacity approximating zero will make τf approach τ.
5.2
Validation of Model
Several studies have shown that the thermal time constant is able to accurately predict
the pressure development of a conventional accumulators, Otis [1973a], Pourmovahed and
Otis [1986], and Hansen and Rasmussen [2013]. Here the accuracy of the thermal time
constant model with foam is investigated by comparing the pressure curves obtained with
the model to those found in the experiments.
With the empirical correlation by Rotth¨auser [1993] in equation (5.8) a preliminary value
of τ is estimated, which is then used to ﬁnd the thermal time constant with the foam,
τf, with equation 5.10. Two of the best results obtained with the TTC model are shown
in ﬁgure 5.2 for two diﬀerent foams. In both cases the maximum pressure predicted by
the model is 2.5 bar lower than the experimental value, corresponding to a deviation of
only 1.7%. Similarly, the minimum pressure is 5% higher than the measured value. τf is
underestimated with both foams, resulting in a maximum error of 8% at the end of the
holding period with foam 2, and a 7% lower pressure with foam 1.
26
==PAGE:36==
27
CHAPTER 5. THERMAL TIME CONSTANT MODEL
0
20
40
60
80
100
time [s]
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
Pressure [bar]
Experimental
SRK-model
(a) Foam 1
0
20
40
60
80
100
time [s]
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
Pressure [bar]
Experimental
SRK-model
(b) Foam 2
Figure 5.2:
Comparing results of the thermal time constant model to experimental
results, for test with the 0.64 L accumulator and the test parameters: p0 = 50 bar,
cr = 2.5, vp = 100 mm/s.
Figure 5.3 shows two of the most inaccurate simulations by the TTC model. Again the
result is more or less the same with both foams, and the predicted value of τf is too low.
In this case the biggest deviation are found at the maximum pressure, which deviates by
5% and 4% for foam 1 and 2 respectively, or approximately 5 bar.
In general the correlation by Rotth¨auser [1993] in combination with equation 5.10 under-
estimates the value of τ, but the the percentage deviation from experimental data does
not exceed 10% in any case. In comparison V. Irizar [2015] found discrepancies up to 16%
when using Rotthauser’s correlation for the accumulator model with gas only.
0
20
40
60
80
100
time [s]
90
100
110
120
130
140
Pressure [bar]
Experimental
SRK-model
(a) Foam 1
0
20
40
60
80
100
time [s]
90
100
110
120
130
140
Pressure [bar]
Experimental
SRK-model
(b) Foam 2
Figure 5.3:
Comparing results of the thermal time constant model to experimental
results, for test with the 0.64 L accumulator and the test parameters: p0 = 100 bar,
cr = 1.25, vp = 50 mm/s.
5.2.1
Optimised τf
The underestimation of the thermal time constant suggests that a better ﬁt can be
achieved if the right τf is found. To ﬁnd the optimal τf, a global optimsation method is
27
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER 5. THERMAL TIME CONSTANT MODEL
28
used to minimise the error, ε, between the pressure found with the thermal time constant
model and the experimental data, where the objective function is:
min
1≤τf≤400
ε = (pexp −pTTC(τf))2
(5.12)
The pressure curves of the best and the worst ﬁt examples with the optimised τf are
shown in ﬁgure 5.4 for foam 2. For the best case in ﬁgure 5.4a τf is increased from 48
to 61 seconds, reducing the deviation from the experimental data to under 1%. In the
other case, τf is increased from 37 to 77 seconds, which seems to be the correct value
based on the parallel pressure decays seen in ﬁgure 5.4b. However, the deviation is now
4% during the entire holding, which might be because the foam mass is too low, which
means less energy is needed to heat the system. Due to the short holding time compared
to the values of τf, an inaccurate value will be less inﬂuential. Terefore, it was possible
to get accurate results with the same value of τf, for every test cycle with corresponding
preload pressures.
0
20
40
60
80
100
time [s]
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
Pressure [bar]
Experimental
SRK-model
Optimized τ
(a) p0 = 50 bar, cr = 2.5, vp = 100 mm/s
0
20
40
60
80
100
time [s]
90
100
110
120
130
140
Pressure [bar]
Experimental
SRK-model
Optimized τ
(b) p0 = 100 bar, cr = 1.25, vp = 50 mm/s
Figure 5.4: Comparing results of the thermal time constant model with and without an
optimised τ to experimental results, for tests on the 0.64 L accumulator with foam 2.
The model is tested with the 6 L accumulator as well, using two diﬀerent runs with foam
3 as examples. The results from these are presented in ﬁgure 5.5. In both cases, once
more it is found that Rotthauser’s correlation over-predicts the heat losses. But as for
the 0.64 L accumulator it is possible to ﬁnd a value of τf for which the model accurately
predicts the pressure development. Both examples has a maximum discrepancy of 4%,
which is seen at the end of the expansion.
28
==PAGE:38==
29
CHAPTER 5. THERMAL TIME CONSTANT MODEL
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
time [s]
100
150
200
250
300
Pressure [bar]
Experimental
SRK-model
Optimized τ
(a) Test parameters: p0 = 140 bar, tc = 90 s
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
time [s]
100
150
200
250
300
Pressure [bar]
Experimental
SRK-model
Optimized τ
(b) Test parameters: p0 = 120 bar, tc = 60 s
Figure 5.5: Comparing results of the thermal time constant model with and without an
optimised τ to experimental results, for the 6 L accumulator with foam 3.
Conclusively with the right τf, very accurate pressures can be predicted with the thermal
time constant model of the foam ﬁlled accumulator. In most cases the model is more pre-
cise than the conventional accumulator model, and it is easier to ﬁnd one value of τf that
ﬁts the entire cycle. This is explained by the dampening eﬀect of the foam, as the forced
convection during compression and expansion, as well as the natural convection during
the holding period, is more or less eliminated. Instead the heat transfer is dominated by
diﬀusion and conduction, resulting in a more constant heat transfer process.
29
==PAGE:39==
Chapter 6
COMSOL Multiphysics Model
A CFD model is made using COMSOL Multiphysics to investigate how the foam eﬀects
the gas ﬂow and heat transfer inside the cylinder. In this chapter, the numerical model
of the accumulator and its premisses are described, and a validation of the model is
conducted.
6.1
Model Description
A model is made of each of the three accumulators, with each of the three diﬀerent foams,
that are used in the experiments. The models consist of three main physics: heat transfer
in ﬂuids, creeping ﬂow of compressible ﬂuid (Stokes-Brinkman), and a moving mesh.
The dependent variables of interest in this study is the pressure and velocity ﬁeld of the
gas/foam chamber, and the temperature development of the whole accumulator. Each of
the models are the same with the dimensions being the only thing that diﬀers from one
to the other.
6.1.1
Geometry and Dimensions
Because the accumulator is a perfect symmetric cylinder, it can be represented by a 2D
axisymmetric model, which signiﬁcantly reduces computational time and makes it easier
to build the geometry. The accumulator is modelled by simple shapes leaving out minor
details, as shown for the 6 L model in ﬁgure 6.1.
Bottom
End
Piston
Cylinder Wall
Gas/Foam
Figure 6.1: 2D axisymmetric geometry of the 6L accumulator, used for simulation in
COMSOL.
The model consists of four individual domains, which are the simpliﬁed geometries of the
cylinder, the bottom end, the piston, and the combined gas-foam domain. The oil side is
not modelled in this simulation.
The dimensions of both the 6L and the 20L accumulator model are shown in table 6.1.
30
==PAGE:40==
31
CHAPTER 6. COMSOL MULTIPHYSICS MODEL
Table 6.1: Dimensions of the 6L and the 20L accumulator model.
Parameter
6L/20L Model
Unit
Description
Hp
46.25
[ mm]
Piston Height
He
70
[ mm]
Flanges Height
Lc
575/1484
[ mm]
Cylinder Length
Di
140
[ mm]
Cylinder Inner Diameter
Do
160
[ mm]
Cylinder Outer Diameter
6.1.2
Assumptions
The simulation model relies on a number of assumptions, that are made to either simplify
modelling or reduce computation time, while attempting not to deviate decisively from
reality. The main assumptions are explained and justiﬁed in the following.
Simpliﬁed geometry
The simple geometries, of both the cylinder wall and the bottom end, represent the real
parts quite well. Only small features, such as threads and sealing slots, are disregarded,
since these can complicate computation without inﬂuencing the result much. The piston
deviates more from its real geometry, which resembles a cup. The lost volume of the cup
walls, is accounted for by making the piston correspondingly thicker, as shown in ﬁgure
6.2.
(a) Actual Geometry.
(b) Modelled Geometry.
Figure 6.2: Comparison of actual and modelled piston geometry, where the volumes of
the shaded areas are equal.
Creeping ﬂow in porous domain
In the case of a highly viscous ﬂuid, small ﬂow length-scales, or low velocities, the ﬂuid
ﬂows with some diﬃculty, showing no signiﬁcant eﬀects of inertia. This kind of ﬂow is said
to be creeping. The gas in the foam ﬁlled accumulator is highly viscous, but both the ﬂow
scale and velocity is very low, and the ﬂow is therefore assumed to be creeping. However,
since there is no absolute meaning to these measures, the validity of this assumption,
is determined by the Reynolds number. The Stokes-Brinkman equation, (3.30), that is
31
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER 6. COMSOL MULTIPHYSICS MODEL
32
used to simulate the creeping ﬂow in porous medium, is valid under the condition that
the Reynolds number is small, Re << 1. Evaluating the Reynolds number of the ﬂow
inside the gas chamber is challenging, because the gas ﬂow velocity relative to the foam
is unknown and is beyond the detail of the simulation. One could simply assume that the
foam will move with the same velocity as the gas, which would result in Re = 0. Instead,
it is approximated by using the cell Reynolds number option in COMSOL, that calculates
the Reynolds number for each mesh element, using the element size as the ﬂow length
scale. The cell Reynolds number is then multiplied by the ratio of the mesh cell size to the
actual foam cell size. The Reynolds number found with this method, is shown in ﬁgure
6.3, for the radical case of maximum expansion speed, that is used in experiments, and
using the uncompressed cell size.
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
Time t [s]
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
Reynolds Number Re [−]
Re Avarage
Re Maximum
Figure 6.3: Reynolds number during a 50 mm/s compression of the 6 L accumulator
with foam 2.
A Reynolds number of one is the limit of the validity of Stokes equation. So as seen in
ﬁgure 6.3, the average Reynolds number reaches values that are just too high to rightly
assume creeping ﬂow. Nevertheless, because of the ambiguous nature of the estimation
method, and since this is the radical case with highest expected Reynolds numbers, the
best way to determine weather creeping ﬂow can be assumed or not, is by comparing
simulation results of creeping ﬂow to ordinary laminar ﬂow.
The simulated pressure
development for both cases, is plotted in ﬁgure 6.4.
32
==PAGE:42==
33
CHAPTER 6. COMSOL MULTIPHYSICS MODEL
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Time t [s]
100
120
140
160
180
200
220
240
260
280
Gas Pressure pg [bar]
Laminar Flow
Creeping Flow
Figure 6.4: Pressure curves from numerical simulation, comparing laminar ﬂow to creep-
ing ﬂow models.
The curve of the laminar model stops at around 260 s, because it failed to converge during
the expansion, but until this point the pressures of the two models are inseparable, as
seen in ﬁgure 6.4. Assuming creeping ﬂow reduces computational time with up to 50%,
while introducing an error of less 0.1%, which justiﬁes the assumption.
Foam resilience is neglected
The mechanical energy that is stored in the foam under compression is neglected, because
it is small compared to the energy stored in the gas. To backup this assumption, a purely
mechanical compression test, measuring stress and strain, was used to estimate the foam
resilience. The setup of this test is described in section 7.3.2, and the stress-strain curve
of foam 2 obtained from the test is shown in ﬁgure 6.5.
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Nominal Strain ε [−]
0
5
10
15
20
Compressive Stress σ [kN/m2]
Figure 6.5: Compressive stress-strain curve for foam 2, showing the area under the curve
that corresponds to the resilience with cr = 2.5.
33
==PAGE:43==
CHAPTER 6. COMSOL MULTIPHYSICS MODEL
34
The marked area under the curve corresponds to the resilience of the foam at a compression
ratio of 2.5, which is the maximum compression used in experiments. The resilience is
denoted by Ur and given in [J/m3]. The estimated resilience of foam 2 and the total
energy stored in the foam of each of the three accumulators are shown in table 6.2. It
is found that for all three cases, the stored energy is smaller than the total accumulator
output by three orders of magnitude. E.g. the output energy of the 6 L accumulator is
in the region of 30 kJ.
Table 6.2: The resilience of foam 2, and the energy stored in the foam of the three
accumulators at cr = 2.5.
Foam 2
Energy
Unit
Description
Ur
1613
[J/m3]
Resilience
U0.64L
1.03
[J]
Energy stored in foam of small accumulator
U6L
9.65
[J]
Energy stored in foam of 6L accumulator
U20L
32.91
[J]
Energy stored in foam of 20L accumulator
Omitting the oil side
The oil side of the accumulator is omitted from the simulation, because the heat capacity of
the piston is so high that the oil temperature has little eﬀect on the overall heat transfer
through the piston. This was found by V. Irizar [2015] and it corresponds well to the
comment, regarding the little eﬀect of insulating the accumulator, made by [Otis, 1973b,
p.198]: ”It is not that energy is lost to the surroundings, but to the tank walls which
normally possess ample heat capacity,”. Instead, the piston surface on the oil side has a
prescribe boundary temperature of T = T0, where T0 is simply set to the temperature of
the surroundings. Clearly this assumption simpliﬁes the model a lot.
Ideal gas
In this model, the gas is assumed to follow the ideal gas law, simply because the use of
a real gas equation causes convergence problems. The error that follows this assumption
depends on the individual study. It varies with temperature and pressure, which means
that it is especially inﬂuenced by the compression ratio. An example of the deviation
between using an ideal and a real gas equation in a bulk analysis, was shown for in
ﬁgure 3.2. However, because this study is mainly to compare the eﬀect of diﬀerent foam
parameters for the same working cycles, the error on the compared results will be the
same, and can be disregarded.
Only convective heat transfer with surroundings
The heat transfer from the outer surface of the accumulator to the surroundings is mod-
elled as natural convection only, by equation (3.27). For the same reason as mentioned
above, the air ﬂow is not modelled. Instead, the surrounding air at the surface simply
has a prescribed constant temperature, that is measured during experimental tests. Fur-
thermore, this means that the temperature at the surface never gets high enough for heat
34
==PAGE:44==
35
CHAPTER 6. COMSOL MULTIPHYSICS MODEL
radiation to have any eﬀect.
For most heat transfer problems including convection, the most delicate part is to de-
termine the heat transfer coeﬃcient, as it depends on both surface geometry and the
thermodynamic properties and motion of the ﬂuid. In this case a value is estimated,
using a built in COMSOL function, based on the dimension and geometry of the accu-
mulator, and assuming external natural convection on a perfect cylinder. It is estimated
to around 2 W/m2 K for all three accumulators.
No heat generation due to viscous dissipation
The viscous stresses induced by the gas ﬂow through the porous medium can cause addi-
tional heat generation, especially for a viscous ﬂuid where shear stresses are high. In this
model, however, the gas viscosity is low, and any heat generation due to this phenomenon
is completely negligible compared to the heat generation caused by the pressure changes.
This is shown graphically in ﬁgure 6.6, where the energy due to the diﬀerent sources are
compared.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Time [s]
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
Energy [MW/m3]
Pressure Work
Viscous Dissipation
Figure 6.6: Example of heat due to pressure work and viscous dissipation, for the 6L
accumulator compressing from p0 = 100 bar to pmax = 250 bar.
Ideal Foam
The model assumes that the foam perfectly ﬁlls the entire gas chamber at all times,
leaving no gaps or open voids. In addition both the volume fraction and the permeability
of the foam are assumed to be uniform throughout the foam during the compression -
expansion process. This means that no densiﬁed regions will arise within the foam, and
that everywhere within the foam, the solid matrix will exert the same resistance to the
ﬂow. Furthermore, the volume fraction is assumed to be a function of the compression,
given by equation (3.39). The volume fraction as a function of compression is shown in
ﬁgure 6.7a, from ε = 0 to the limit of validity at ε = 0.6. The permeability is compression
35
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 6. COMSOL MULTIPHYSICS MODEL
36
dependant as well, and follows equation (3.40), where the constant, A, is set to 1.35 for
all simulations. The permeability of foam 1 and foam 2, will follow the curves shown in
ﬁgure 6.7b.
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
Strain, ε [−]
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
Volume Fraction, θ [−]
Foam 1
Foam 2
(a) Volume fraction of foam 1 and 2.
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
Strain, ε [−]
2
4
6
8
Permeability, θ [m2]
×10-8
Foam 1
Foam 2
(b) Permeability of foam 1 and 2.
Figure 6.7: Simulated compression dependant foam parameters as a function of strain,
shown from ε = 0 to the limit of the function validity at ε = 0.6.
.
No Gravity
Gravity is neglected, as it is assumed that the porous structure of the foam dampens the
gas dynamics enough to immobilise convection and eliminate big temperature diﬀerences.
Local Thermal Equilibrium Between Gas and Foam
The heat transfer in porous media module of COMSOL, that is described in section 3.2.3,
is based on the assumption that the ﬂuid and solid temperature of the porous structure is
equal at all times. Although the cell walls are thin, this proved to be a bold assumption,
which is further discussed in the validation of the model.
6.1.3
Input Parameters
The primary input parameters of the model is the initial state conditions of the gas
chamber. The initial volume of the gas is calculated from the dimensions in table 6.1 and
the volume fraction of the foam. Whereas initial pressure and temperature is given as
direct inputs, based on actual values from experiments.
The rest of the model input parameters are foam speciﬁcations. These are either measured
on the foam, taken from the foam data sheet, or found in the literature as usual values
for polyurethane. Input parameters of the foam for the 6L and 20L model are shown in
table 6.3.
36
==PAGE:46==
37
CHAPTER 6. COMSOL MULTIPHYSICS MODEL
Table 6.3: Input foam properties for the 6L and the 20L accumulator model.
Property
6L/20L Model
Unit
Description
Cpsolid
1800
[ J/kg K]
Heat Capacity of Solid Polyurethane
Ksolid
0.25
[ W/m K]
Thermal Conductivity of Solid Polyurethane
ρsolid
1200
[ kg/m3]
Density of Solid Polyurethane
ρ0,1
32.2
[ kg/m3]
Density of Uncompressed Foam 1
ρ0,2
48
[ kg/m3]
Density of Uncompressed Foam 2
ρ0,3
54.4
[ kg/m3]
Density of Uncompressed Foam 3
θ1
0.0271
[ −]
Volume Fraction of Uncompressed Foam 1
θ2
0.0417
[ −]
Volume Fraction of Uncompressed Foam 2
θ3
0.0471
[ −]
Volume Fraction of Uncompressed Foam 3
Dcell1
210
[ µm]
Average Cell Diameter Foam 1
Dcell2
285
[ µm]
Average Cell Diameter Foam 2
Dcell3
350
[ µm]
Average Cell Diameter Foam 3
The foam conductivity and volumetric heat capacity are calculated by equation (3.17)
and (3.18) in section 3.2, based on given input values of the solid density, heat capacity,
and thermal conductivity, in combination with the volume fraction. This means that the
thermal conductivity and volumetric heat capacity will follow a curve similar to the one
shown in ﬁgure 6.7a.
The ﬁnal input parameter is the piston speed, which is taken from experiments. The time
and prescribed piston speed alone controls the movement of the piston in the model. In
general the piston speed will follow a curve similar to the one shown in ﬁgure 6.8
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Time t [s]
-30
-20
-10
0
10
Piston Velocity, vp [mm/s]
Figure 6.8: Example of piston velocity input for COMSOL model.
6.1.4
Solver
A fully coupled time dependant solver is used for the transient simulation. This is the
preferred solver for highly coupled problems, with strong interaction between the physics,
37
==PAGE:47==
CHAPTER 6. COMSOL MULTIPHYSICS MODEL
38
because it considers all of the couplings at the same time. There are four dependent
variables in the study; pressure, temperature, velocity, and material coordinates. The
solver is initial value based, where all initial values of the dependent variables are given as
input parameters from experimental measurements. The solver uses the Newton-Raphson
iteration method, with a total tolerance of 1e −4 and a relative tolerance of 1e −12 on
all the variables. The backward diﬀerentiation formulas (BDF) method is used for time
stepping, with no constraints on the step size and a maximum time discretisation of order
of two.
6.1.5
Mesh
Every domain in the model is meshed by free triangular mesh elements. The mesh is
generated with a built in physics controlled meshing tool in COMSOL that creates the
mesh, based on the physics that are used in the diﬀerent domains. This means that the
mesh is ﬁner in the gas chamber domain than in the solid domains, as seen in ﬁgure 6.9,
and that the mesh is reﬁned in regions with steep gradients as well. The eﬀect of the
latter is seen around the internal boundaries of the model, which can be seen in the close
up of the piston and the top of the gas chamber, shown in ﬁgure 6.10.
Figure 6.9: Full model mesh, showing the ﬁner mesh in the gas chamber domain.
Figure 6.10: Mesh in the top region, showing the reﬁned mesh in areas around internal
boundaries.
6.2
Convergence Study
Since a ﬁnite element model is only a mathematical model of the physical problem, there
will always be an error in the simulated result compared to reality. Reﬁning the mesh
of the FEM model, usually reduces the error, but at the expense of computational time.
38
==PAGE:48==
39
CHAPTER 6. COMSOL MULTIPHYSICS MODEL
Therefore, a mesh convergence study is carried out to ﬁnd the optimal mesh size, where
the size of the mesh elements does not inﬂuence the result signiﬁcantly while the com-
putational time is kept at a minimum. The gas pressure is uniform in the gas chamber,
and is therefore chosen as the measure of convergence. The pressure and the time of the
simulation is plotted, as a function of mesh size, in ﬁgure 6.11.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Mesh Elements n · 103
222
224
226
228
230
232
234
Pressure p [bar]
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
Time t [s]
Figure 6.11:
Convergence curve of the 6L accumulator model, with: p0 = 120 bar,
t0 = 22 ◦C, and cr = 1.5
The pressure converges towards a pressure of 234 bar, while the time increases proportion-
ally to the number of mesh elements. For this study a mesh of 10,796 elements is chosen,
because, as can be seen in ﬁgure 6.11, the obtained pressure with this mesh deviates with
less than 0.5% from the ﬁnest mesh that is tested while the computation is more than 10
times faster.
6.3
Validation of Model
To validate the model, results from simulation are compared to experimental results with
the 6 L accumulator. In ﬁgure 6.12, the pressure curves of the described numerical model
is compared to a test run on the 6 L accumulator with foam 1 and 2.
39
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER 6. COMSOL MULTIPHYSICS MODEL
40
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
time [s]
100
150
200
250
300
Pressure [bar]
Experimental Data
COMSOL Model
(a) Foam 2.
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
time [s]
100
150
200
250
300
Pressure [bar]
Experimental Data
COMSOL Model
(b) Foam 1.
Figure 6.12: Results with 6 L accumulator. Test parameters: p0 = 120 bar, cr = 1.6,
and vcomp = 5 mm/s, and vexp = 22 mm/s
The pressures at the end of compression are approximately 10% lower, which is expectable
when using the ideal gas model. But after this point the pressure decay is minimal, and
the diﬀerence between the results obtained with the two foams is insigniﬁcant. This is a
result of an underestimation of the heat losses by the model, which could be explained
by the assumptions of creeping ﬂow and local thermal equilibrium (LTE) in the porous
structure. Assuming LTE means that the heat transfer from gas to foam is inﬁnitely fast,
resulting in a common high heat capacity of the porous mixture. In addition the creeping
ﬂow immobilises convection, and in turn the combination makes the gas and foam mixture
behave more like a solid with a low thermal conductivity. This represents the sought ideal
case of using foam in an accumulator, which is, as seen in ﬁgure 6.12a, not achievable in
experiments. Therefore, since the assumption of creeping ﬂow has already been tested,
the LTE assumption is reconsidered.
6.3.1
Local Thermal Non Equilibrium
Implementing non local thermal equilibrium (NLTE) poses a couple of problems. As there
is now two temperature ﬁelds, the number of degrees of freedom to be solved numerically
is doubled. Roughly doubling the computation time. More importantly an essential part
of the NLTE approach is to ﬁnd the right interstitial heat transfer coeﬃcient between
solid and ﬂuid, h. The software uses a correlation presented by Nield and Bejan [2013]:
h = hsf asf
(6.1)
where asf = 6(1 −ϕ)dc is the speciﬁc surface area, ϕ is the porosity, and hsf is the
convective interstitial heat transfer coeﬃcient:
1
hsf
=
dc
Nu kg
+ dc
β ks
(6.2)
where dc is the foam cell diameter, Nu is the Nusselt number, kg and ks are the thermal
conductivities, and β = 10 for a spherical cell shape. However the model could not obtain
a value of the heat transfer coeﬃcient during compression. So the heat transfer that is
40
==PAGE:50==
41
CHAPTER 6. COMSOL MULTIPHYSICS MODEL
used, is a linear interpolation between the value of the uncompressed foam and the fully
compressed foam. The consequence of assuming LTE is shown by comparing the average
temperature of the gas and the foam, as seen in ﬁgure 6.13.
0
10
20
30
40
Time t [s]
20
30
40
50
60
70
Gas Temperature Tg [K]
Equilibrium
Gas
Foam
(a) Slow compression.
0
5
10
15
20
Time t [s]
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Gas Temperature Tg [K]
Equilibrium
Gas
Foam
(b) Rapid compression.
Figure 6.13: Comparison of local equilibrium and local non equilibrium heating of foam
and gas. Results with 6 L accumulator and a compression ratio of 1.6.
These result show that the LTE assumption is slightly incorrect. For the slow compres-
sion, which is similar to the compression rate in ﬁgure 6.12, equilibrium is reached after 5
seconds and the maximum temperature diﬀerence from equilibrium is 3 3 ◦C. The pressure
curve obtained with this approach is plotted in ﬁgure 6.14, showing that the tempera-
ture diﬀerence does not account for the large deviation of the pressure. For the rapid
compression, the equilibrium is reached after nine seconds with a maximum temperature
deviation of 15 ◦C. So according to these results, using the NLTE approach is necessary
for quick compression, but does not explain the lack of heat loss when the compression is
slow.
41
==PAGE:51==
CHAPTER 6. COMSOL MULTIPHYSICS MODEL
42
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
time [s]
100
150
200
250
300
Pressure [bar]
Experimental Data
COMSOL Model
Figure 6.14: Local thermal non equilibrium model with foam 2 in 6 L accumulator.
Test parameters: p0 = 120 bar, cr = 1.63, and vcomp = 5 mm/s, and vexp = 22 mm/s
Overall the maximum discrepancy of the predicted gas pressure is only 8% compared to the
experiment, which on the macroscopic level is close. However, due to the underestimation
of heat losses and the minimal diﬀerence between the foams, it is diﬃcult to use this
model to help ﬁnd the right foam in the optimisation process.
It should be noted that a perfect ﬁt of the pressure curve could be obtained by manually
prescribing a convective heat transfer coeﬃcient of hsf = 3 W/m2K, which is one order of
magnitude lower than the one found with equation 6.1. But this resulted in unreasonable
high temperatures that could not be justiﬁed. Pressure curves generated with this value,
can be seen in appendix 11.5.
6.3.2
Ideal Foam
Based on the validation above, the best explanation for the minimal heat loss, is that the
foam is modelled as an ideal porous medium, that perfectly ﬁlls the entire gas chamber
at all times, thus preventing any kind of convection. As mentioned, the outcome is that
the gas chamber behaves as a solid material, with the low combined conductivity of the
polyurethane and still nitrogen. This results in minimal temperature changes within the
gas domain, which are only governed by conduction, as seen in ﬁgure 6.15.
42
==PAGE:52==
43
CHAPTER 6. COMSOL MULTIPHYSICS MODEL
(a) 1 second.
(b) 110 seconds.
(c) 220 seconds.
Figure 6.15: Gas temperatures during the holding period, at given times after the end
of the compression.
In reality the foam will bend and buckle, which will leave open gaps at the wall boundary,
and eventually lead to some convective heat losses. To model such a behaviour would
require an entire additional model of the foam deformation alone, which in many cases
would be excessive. Instead, the possibility of modelling the gas chamber with a layer of
open space between the foam and the cylinder wall, could be investigated.
Within the limitation of this model, the eﬀect of the foam can still be studied. In as
much as this is the optimal outcome of using foam. However, for the same reason, it is
diﬃcult to compare the eﬀect of diﬀerent foams and implementation methods. Therefore,
the actual potential of using the foam, and the possibilities of implementation are further
studied, mainly based on experimental data. Some of the results obtained with the model
are shown in in appendix 11.5.
43
==PAGE:53==
Chapter 7
Experimental Setup
Two diﬀerent test systems have been used to experimentally investigate the potential
beneﬁts of a foam ﬁlled hydraulic piston accumulator. In this chapter the setup of these
systems is explained and the diﬀerent types of foam that have been tested. All the tests
that have been carried out can be categorised in 3 overall types of experiments, with the
main objective of testing;
1. The Thermodynamic Eﬀect of the Foam
2. The Durability of the Foam
3. The Mechanical Behaviour of the Foam
The experiments are conducted in two diﬀerent test rigs that are presented in the fol-
lowing, using three diﬀerent sizes of accumulators and three diﬀerent types of foam. The
accumulators are listed in table 7.1 below and the foams are in presented in 7.2 in section
7.4.
Table 7.1: Dimensions of the accumulators used in experiments.
Accumulator
Inside diameter
Length
Volume
L/Di Ratio
p0 [bar]
Di [mm]
L [mm]
V [L]
L/Di [−]
0.64 L Accumulator
50
326
0.64
6.5
6 L Accumulator
140
390
6
2.8
20.4 L Accumulator
140
1325
20.4
9.5
7.1
Accumulator Test Rig 1
Test rig 1 was used to test the short term eﬀect on accumulator eﬃciency when using
foam and to compare the performance of the diﬀerent foams. By short term it is meant
that a single independent cycle was tested using a new foam that had only gone through
a couple of compression-expansion cycles. This setup was used with both the small 0.64 L
and the 6L accumulators.
A simple overview, of the experimental setup of test rig 1, is shown in ﬁgure 7.1. The
entire pumping system is left out of the overview, which only shows the essential parts
for control and measurements of the accumulator.
44
==PAGE:54==
45
CHAPTER 7. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Pressure
Tank
(6)
Oil
(5)
Gas/Foam
Figure 7.1: Overview of the experimental setup for accumulator control and measure-
ments in test rig 1.
The setup is comprised of a piston type accumulator (1) in horizontal direction. Where a
pressure transducer is mounted directly on each end of the accumulator, one for measuring
gas pressure (2), and the other for oil pressure (3). Measuring both pressures allows to
calculate the friction losses in the accumulator, and the actual net energy output. To
calculate the oil ﬂow in and out of the accumulator, the piston position was measured
with a Novotechnik linear potentiometer (4), which was connected to the piston (5) with
a rod through the end on the oil side of the accumulator. This method of measuring the
piston position is very precise, but a fair amount of oil spill is inevitable. The ﬂow is
controlled with a 4/3 Parker DF Plus proportional directional control valve (6). One port
is plugged, which means it operates as a 3/3 valve, with the 3 options of; pressurising the
accumulator, fully closing the ports, and unloading to tank. A cut out hydraulic diagram
with only the accumulator and the valve is shown in ﬁgure 7.2.
T
P
B
A
Figure 7.2: Cut out of the hydraulic circuit including proportional directional control
valve and the accumulator.
The analog input/output signals from the sensors and to the valve are wired via a USB
2517 port hub controller to a PC, where the software DASYlab is used for both real
time monitoring, control, and data acquisition. A simple proportional control system is
used to control the oil ﬂow by means of the piston position or the gas pressure. This
works by comparing the signal of the piston position or the gas pressure to a target value
45
==PAGE:55==
CHAPTER 7. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
46
from a given input ﬁle, the ﬂow of the proportional valve is then adjusted proportionally
to the signal error. Reference input ﬁles are generated in MATLAB, prescribing either
the position or pressure reference, based on a compression ratio or a maximum pressure
target.
In this way the working cycle can be prescribed with precise values of either
maximum pressure or compression ratio, with a given compression rate, holding period,
and expansion rate.
The ﬂow is provided by the hydraulic system, shown in ﬁgure 11.11a, including a tank,
two 7.5 kW pumps, and four accumulators. The system is limited to deliver a maximum
oil pressure of to 250 bar. Figure 7.3b and 7.3c shows the 6 L and the 0.64 L accumulators
used in this test rig.
(a) Pumping station.
(b) 6 L accumulator setup.
Picture source:
Hansen and Rasmussen [2013].
(c) 0.64 L accumulator, disconnected from the system.
Figure 7.3: Pictures of the experimental setup.
46
==PAGE:56==
47
CHAPTER 7. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
7.2
Accumulator Test Rig 2
The second test rig was primarily used for testing the durability of the foam, in the 6 L
accumulator. The foams durability covers two aspects; the foams ability to withstand
several thousand compression-expansion cycles without deteriorating, and the eﬀect of
the foam on accumulator eﬃciency after several thousand cycles. Ultimately this test rig
was also used to test the accumulator eﬃciency with foam on a 20.4 L accumulator. An
overview of the components for measurement and control is shown in ﬁgure 7.4
(1)
(2)
(3)
Oil
Pressure
Tank
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
Gas/Foam
Figure 7.4: Overview of the experimental setup for accumulator control and measure-
ments in test rig 2.
The accumulator (1) with pressure sensors (2) and (3) on the gas an oil side respectively,
is similar to test rig 1.
The diﬀerence is the use of control valves (4) and (5) and a
ﬂowmeter (6). The ﬂowmeter replaces the potentiometer of rig 1, which means that the
ﬂow is now measured directly, and the volume and piston position is calculated based on
the ﬂow measurement. DASYlab is used for monitoring and data acquisition, whereas
control is done with a programmable logic controler (PLC) system called Millenium 3.
The control is entirely based on the measured pressure, using the 2 valves. Initially the
2/2 proportional directional control valve (4) is kept closed, while the similar valve (5) is
fully open. To start the compression process, valve (5) is closed, and the oil is pumped
into the accumulator until a prescribed target pressure is reached and valve (5) reopens.
In the meantime the check valve (7) makes sure the oil does not ﬂow back in the wrong
direction. After a deﬁned holding period valve (4) opens to start the expansion process,
which continues until the accumulator is empty, and the process can start over.
A pumping system with one 7.5 kW pump, that can provide a ﬂow of up to 16 L/min, is
used is used to pump the oil. For the durability tests an extra pump is used to cool the
oil by pumping it through a cooling system. Pictures of this system is shown in ﬁgure 7.5
and the entire hydraulic circuit can be seen in appendix 11.4.
47
==PAGE:57==
CHAPTER 7. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
48
(a) 6 L accumulator.
(b) 20 L accumulator.
Figure 7.5: Pictures of test rig 2, with the 6 L and the 20 L accumulator installed.
7.3
Tests of Foam Behaviour
A few simple test setups were used to test the behaviour of the foam, namely the com-
pression set and the compressive stress strain of the foam.
7.3.1
Compression Set Tests
Two setups were used to test the compression set of the foam, one for the short term
compression set inside the cylinder, and one for the long term actual compression set of
the foam.
By the short term set inside the cylinder it is meant the false compression set of the
foam as it gets stuck between the cylinder walls and does not follow the piston during
the expansion. The idea was to see this eﬀect by setting up test rig 1 with a transparent
acrylic cylinder, but the hoop stress proved to be to high, and the tube expanded under
pressure before the piston was moved. Instead a purely mechanical test was done, with
the same setup, but by manually moving the piston to compression ratios marked on the
tube. The acrylic cylinder with foam is shown in ﬁgure 7.6.
48
==PAGE:58==
49
CHAPTER 7. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
Figure 7.6: Acrylic cylinder with foam in the setup of the small accumulator.
For the long term compression set, the foam is compressed inside a tube between two
plates, and held at a constant compression ratio for a given time. The compression set is
then measured right after the test and again 24 hours later.
7.3.2
Compressive Stress-Strain
The setup used to make a rough estimate of the compressive stress-strain curve of the
foam, consists of the acrylic cylinder with a weight put up against the opening at the gas
side. By manually moving the piston and compressing the foam against the weight, the
force exerted by the foam was measured for a range of corresponding strains.
7.4
Foams Used in Testing
The foams that have been tested are all polyurethanes, one polyester type and two
polyether types. The polyester is an 80 pores per inch foam (PPI 80) with a bulk density
of 30 kg/m2, and the polyethers are both high resilience foams (HR) with densities of
50 kg/m2 and 55 kg/m2. The most relevant foam properties of the three foams can be
seen in table 7.2.
Table 7.2: Bulk properties of the 3 polyurethane foams used for experiments. Polyester
PPI 80, Polyether HR50, and Polyether HR 55
Property
Foam 1
Foam 2
Foam 3
Unit
Type
PPI 80
HR 50
HR 55
[ −]
Density
30
48
56
[ kg/m3]
Porosity
0.975
0.960
0.953
[ −]
Cell Diameter
210
285
350
[ µm]
Tensile Strength
250
73
-
[ kPa]
Elongation at break
250
92
-
[ %]
Max working Temperature
120
120
120
[ ◦C]
Min working Temperature
-30
-30
-30
[ ◦C]
49
==PAGE:59==
CHAPTER 7. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
50
Even though all foams has a speciﬁed maximum working temperature at 120[ ◦C], they
should be able to withstand temperatures of up to 200[ ◦C] at which point they start
to decompose slowly, Alfredo Campo [2008]. Density, porosity, and cell diameter are all
measured properties for the actual foams that have been used in experiments, whereas
the remaining properties are given speciﬁcations for the foam type. Except from foam 1,
the average cell diameter is measured using pictures from a microscope, and veriﬁed with
common values found in the literature, such as Dawson et al. [2006]. Full data sheets of
foam 1 and 2 can be seen in appendix 11.3, a data sheet was not obtainable for foam 3.
7.4.1
Foam Compositions
The three foams in table 7.2 are used in the variety of compositions presented below.
Normal
In its normal shape, the foam is a cylinder in one piece, dimensioned after the inside
dimensions of the accumulators, but slightly longer than the length of the gas chamber.
This composition is referred to as just: ”foam #”, and it is the basis for the rest of the
compositions.
Fixed
The ﬁxed foam is the normal shaped foam attached to the piston by the mechanism shown
in ﬁgure 7.7.
Figure 7.7: Foam ﬁxation system.
Compressed
The foam composition is referred to as compressed foam, when more than one piece of
the normal foam is used and the foam has to be pre compressed inside the accumulator,
in order to increase density.
50
==PAGE:60==
51
CHAPTER 7. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
Granulate
The granulate is a piece of the normal foam that is cut to small pieces, which means the
density and the total amount is the same as the normal foam it is cut from.
Nylon
In a few cases nylon is used to envelope the foam, which can be any of the listed compo-
sitions, with the additional nylon sock around it.
51
==PAGE:61==
Chapter 8
Initial Testing with 0.64 L Accumula-
tor
Initially, the principle and potential of using foam in a hydraulic piston accumulator, are
tested on the small 0.64 L accumulator, in test rig 1, which is described in section 7.1.
The main objective of the initial tests, is to test, if and how much, the eﬃciency of the
accumulator can be increased by ﬁlling the gas chamber with an elastomeric foam. And
subsequently to ﬁnd the best performing foam and foam composition.
The small accumulator is convenient for testing and comparing the diﬀerent foams, be-
cause it only needs a small amount of gas and is easily assembled and disassembled,
making it ideal for doing a large amount of tests in short time. The small size, however,
is also the downside of using this accumulator, as it makes it diﬃcult to compare the ﬁnal
results to the large size accumulators, that are used in the pitch control system of a wind
turbine.
8.1
Approach
To analyse how the foam ﬁlled accumulator performs compared to the unﬁlled one for
diﬀerent work cycles, the initial tests are run with two diﬀerent types of foam, for the
range of parameter settings that are listed in table 8.1. After the performance tests, a few
simple mechanical compression tests are carried out to analyse the behaviour of the foam
under compression and during expansion. Based on the initial results, the composition
of the foam is changed to test how an alternative foam ﬁlling performs, compared to the
normal cylindrical unﬁxed foam.
Table 8.1: Test parameters for testing on the 0.64 L accumulator. The piston velocity
is the same for both compression and expansion.
Preload Pressure
Piston Velocity
Compression Ratio
p0 [bar]
vp [mm/s]
cr [−]
50
50
1.5
100
2.0
2.5
100
50
1.25
100
1.50
1.65
The parameter settings in table 8.1 consist of two preload pressures, two piston speeds,
52
==PAGE:62==
53
CHAPTER 8. INITIAL TESTING WITH 0.64 L ACCUMULATOR
and three compression ratios, which gives a total of 12 tests, that are done for each of
the six diﬀerent foam compositions listed in table 8.2. Every test is carried out using a
position reference as input for the proportional control, with 30 s holding period between
charge and discharge.
Table 8.2: Foam compositions tested on the 0.64 L accumulator.
Filling
Composition
Bulk Density
Diameter [mm]
Length [mm]
[kg/m3]
No Foam
Gas only
-
-
Foam 1
Normal
30
5
350
Compressed/Fixed
50
5
580
Foam 2
Normal
50
5
350
Fixed
50
5
350
Granulate
50
-
-
It should be noted that the given density is the density of the foam at 350 mm. The
actual density is slightly increased when the foam is ﬁtted to the accumulator chamber
which is only 326.5 mm.
8.2
Thermal Time Constant
The use of PPI 80 polyester (foam 1) and HR 50 polyether foam (foam 2) generally
showed positive results. The pressure and temperature curves of the work cycles, that
are the most and the least eﬀected by the foam ﬁlling, eﬃciency wise, are plotted in
ﬁgure 8.1 and 8.2 respectively. These curves give a quick overview of how the normal
shaped foams aﬀect the thermal time constant (τ) of the accumulator. Similar graphs are
shown for the remaining runs in appendix 11.6.1. It should be noted, that the pressure
is measured during the experiments, while the temperature is calculated, based on the
measured pressure, with the bulk thermal time constant model, described in section 5.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Time t [s]
0
50
100
150
200
Gas Pressure pg [bar]
Foam 1
Foam 2
No Foam
(a) Pressure
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Time, t [s]
-50
0
50
100
150
200
Temperature, T [◦C]
Foam 1
Foam 2
No Foam
(b) Temperature
Figure 8.1: 0.64 L accumulator pressure and temperature curves, for the run that is
most eﬀected by the foam, with T0 = 22 ◦C, p0 = 50 bar, cr = 2.5, vp = 100 mm/s.
53
==PAGE:63==
CHAPTER 8. INITIAL TESTING WITH 0.64 L ACCUMULATOR
54
In the most eﬀective case where the preload pressure is low, while the compression ratio
is high, both foams have a remarkable eﬀect on the temperature and pressure build up,
as seen in ﬁgure 8.1a and 8.1b. The maximum temperature is almost reduced to the
half from 156 ◦C without foam, to 84 ◦C with foam 1, and 80 ◦C with foam 2. And the
maximum pressure is reduced from 181 bar to 153 bar and 152 bar with foam 1 and 2
respectively. The reduced maximum temperature, means that less heat can be lost, thus
reducing the pressure drop during the holding period and increasing τ. The ﬂat curves
during the holding indicate a high τ of the accumulator, which in this case is increased
from 7 s without foam, to 46 s with foam 1, and 134 s with foam 2.
In the least aﬀected case shown in ﬁgure 8.2, the preload pressure is high while the
compression ratio is small, and the piston speed is slow. This means that the overall
pressure and temperature diﬀerences are lower, resulting in a more subtle improvement
of τ, which is now increased from 9 s without foam, to 34 s with foam 1, and to 74 s with
foam 2.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Time t [s]
80
90
100
110
120
130
140
Gas Pressure pg [bar]
Foam 1
Foam 2
No Foam
(a) Pressure
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Time, t [s]
-10
0
10
20
30
40
50
Temperature, T [◦C]
Foam 1
Foam 2
No Foam
(b) Temperature
Figure 8.2: 0.64 L accumulator pressure and temperature curves, from the run that is
least eﬀected by the foam, with T0 = 18 ◦C, p0 = 100 bar, cr = 1.25, vp = 50 mm/s.
In both cases the thermal time constant is increased, and in both cases the highest increase
is obtained with foam 2. This is explained by the greater heat capacity, which is one of
the main factors causing the improvements when using the foam. Since the heat capacity
and density of the solid polyurethane is more or less the same for both foams, the heat
capacity of foam 2 is larger, because the higher bulk density.
When ﬁlling the gas chamber with foam, the eﬀective volumetric heat capacity of the gas
and foam combination is higher, compared to that of the gas alone. Because of the higher
heat capacity, the foam works as a heat sink, which in turn reduces the temperature
increase and thereby the pressure build up. Another positive eﬀect of the foam is that
gas ﬂow is restricted due to the resistance of the porous structure. This will dampen the
dynamics that are induced on the gas by the piston movement and further reduce the
high temperatures that are seen in the accumulator without foam. As mentioned, a lower
maximum temperature means that less heat can be lost, and ultimately that the thermal
eﬃciency is increased. In addition the restricted ﬂow will reduce the convective heat loss
to the cylinder walls. These eﬀects are seen in ﬁgure 8.1 and 8.2, where the large spikes
54
==PAGE:64==
55
CHAPTER 8. INITIAL TESTING WITH 0.64 L ACCUMULATOR
at the end of the compression and expansion strokes are greatly reduced.
However, despite the greater heat capacity of foam 2, only a small diﬀerence in temper-
ature between the two foams, is observed during the compression and expansion. This is
because foam 2 occupies a greater volume in the gas chamber, thus increasing the actual
compression ratio of the gas alone, which increases pressure build up. This is a downside
of the the greater volume that comes with the higher heat capacity of foam 2, but at the
same time the greater heat capacity reduces the temperature just enough to reach the
same pressure as the less dens foam 1. The issue of the foams occupation of gas volume
will be discussed further in section 9.1.3.
In addition to reducing the maximum temperature and pressure, the higher heat capacity
also means that more of the heat will be retained inside the gas chamber during the holding
period, which further reduces the pressure loss. The eﬀect of the greater heat capacity
of foam 2 is more visible during the holding period, as the decay of the temperature and
pressure is slower, proving that τ is higher. This is seen in both ﬁgures 8.1 and 8.2.
The thermal time constant of every test run is presented in table 8.3. As in both illustrated
cases the thermal time constant with foam is increased for every run. Without foam, τ
changes only a couple of seconds, ranging from 9 s for low compression ratios to 7 s for
high compression ratios. The same trend of decreasing τ for increasing compression ratio
is seen with the foam, but the diﬀerence is much larger and more than doubled in some
cases. Some of this can be explained by the imprecise measurement of the thermal time
constant, explained in the following. But the main reason is that less heat has to be
transferred from the gas to the foam, when the compression ratio is low. This keeps the
foam temperature closer to the gas temperature, thus eliminating the heat transfer, from
the gas to the foam, that takes place after the compression. The diﬀerence is seen on the
more rounded curves of the two foams in ﬁgure 8.2.
Table 8.3: Thermal time constant of the 0.64 L accumulator for all test runs with no
foam, foam 1, and foam 2.
Thermal time constant, τ [s]
p0 = 50 bar
p0 = 100 bar
Filling
Piston Speed
cr = 1.5
cr = 2.0
cr = 2.5
cr = 1.25
cr = 1.5
cr = 1.65
No Foam
50 mm/s
9
7
8
9
8
9
100 mm/s
9
8
7
8
7
7
Foam 1
50 mm/s
87
42
42
34
24
21
100 mm/s
55
47
46
49
22
17
Foam 2
50 mm/s
247
279
188
74
49
58
100 mm/s
235
236
136
82
82
48
In some cases the thermal time constant seems to be limited and imprecise as a means of
comparison when using foam. It can be imprecise, because it is diﬃcult to obtain a good
estimate, when the time constant is large compared to the holding periods after compres-
sion and expansion, as the estimation will be based on an extrapolation of the limited
amount of measured data. Especially for a slowly decaying curve, a correct extrapolation
is less likely, and even a small error in the extrapolation, can have a large eﬀect on the
ﬁnal result. An example of a failed extrapolation is shown in ﬁgure 8.3. In this case the
time constant is estimated by manually measuring on the plot. Moreover, from the values
55
==PAGE:65==
CHAPTER 8. INITIAL TESTING WITH 0.64 L ACCUMULATOR
56
presented in table 8.3 it is obvious that the biggest improvement is achieved with foam 2,
but it is unclear how big the improvement is energy wise. The largest increase in thermal
time constant, is achieved at the low compression ratios, but this is not where the largest
increase in eﬃciency is found. This is further analysed in the following section.
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Time, t [s]
-50
0
50
100
Temperature, T [◦C]
Foam 1
Foam 2
No Foam
Data Points
Figure 8.3: Extrapolation for ﬁnding τ, showing the failed extrapolation of the results
with foam 2.
8.3
Eﬃciency
To analyse the energy eﬃciency of the accumulator, including the amount of thermal
and frictional loss, the energy input and output is calculated using both the gas and
oil pressure. The overall eﬃciency is shown as a function of compression ratio at both
compression/expansion velocities in ﬁgure 8.4. Again the best improvement is seen for
foam 2, with eﬃciencies ranging from 92% to 97%.
56
==PAGE:66==
57
CHAPTER 8. INITIAL TESTING WITH 0.64 L ACCUMULATOR
1.5
2
2.5
Compression ratio cr [−]
65
70
75
80
85
90
95
100
Eﬃciency η [%]
Foam 1, v=50
Foam 1, v=100
Foam 2, v=50
Foam 2, v=100
No Foam, v=50
No Foam, v=100
(a) T0 = 22 ◦C, p0 = 50 bar
1.25
1.3
1.35
1.4
1.45
1.5
1.55
1.6
1.65
Compression ratio cr [−]
75
80
85
90
95
100
Eﬃciency η [%]
Foam 1, v=50
Foam 1, v=100
Foam 2, v=50
Foam 2, v=100
No Foam, v=50
No Foam, v=100
(b) T0 = 18 ◦C, p0 = 100 bar
Figure 8.4: Eﬃciency as a function of compression ratio at both compression/expansion
speeds, for no foam, foam 1, and foam 2.
The compression ratio has a big eﬀect on the eﬃciency. The plot in ﬁgure 8.4 shows, that
the biggest improvement of the eﬃciency is achieved at the highest compression ratios.
The eﬃciency of the foam ﬁlled accumulator shows no dependency on preload pressure,
whereas the conventional accumulator has a higher eﬃciency at the higher preload pres-
sure.
Generally the best eﬀect of the foam is obtained for the work cycles with the largest
diﬀerence between the minimum and maximum temperature, for which the eﬃciency of
the conventional accumulator is lowest. As a result the overall eﬃciency with the foam is
brought closer to a constant level for all work cycles, as seen in ﬁgure 8.4.
The piston velocity’s inﬂuence on the eﬃciency, is too small to be measured for the small
0.64 L accumulator, even though the temperature change rate is slightly higher with
higher piston speeds. For the larger accumulators the dynamic eﬀect will be larger, and
the piston speed will have a bigger inﬂuence on the overall eﬃciency. This is further
explained in section 9.1.
8.3.1
Thermal loss
Since the main energy loss is the heat loss, the eﬀect of the foam is best shown and
explained with the pressure-volume (pV) diagrams, that are shown in ﬁgure 8.5a and
8.5b for the most and least eﬀected runs respectively. The pV diagrams demonstrates
graphically how the thermal losses, with and without foam, compares to each other and
to the ideal case of isothermal compression. pV diagrams of the remaining runs can be
seen in appendix 11.6.2.
The main reason for the trend seen in ﬁgure 8.4, is that the high compression ratio
generate higher temperatures and pressure during compression. This is seen in the pV
diagram in ﬁgure 8.5a, by the exponential increase of the pressure during compression.
In contradiction, when the compression ratio is small, the slope of the pV diagram during
these processes, is close to being linear and closer to the isotherm, as seen in ﬁgure 8.5b.
After a large compression, the high temperature leads to greater heat losses during the
57
==PAGE:67==
CHAPTER 8. INITIAL TESTING WITH 0.64 L ACCUMULATOR
58
holding period, which increases the pressure drop and in turn decreases the potential
energy of the accumulator. This is represented by the vertical lines at the end of the
compression process in the pV diagram. In addition to the big pressure drop at this
point, a longer expansion makes the gas reach even lower temperatures and pressure at
the end of the stroke. Ultimately this means, that the expansion work is done at much
lower pressure than the compression work, resulting in the lowest possible energy eﬃciency
and therefore the biggest improvement potential.
The foam reduces the heat loss by three mechanisms in three steps:
– Compression: The foam works as a heat sink and dampens convection - reducing
temperature increase.
– Holding period: The foam acts as a heat regenerator and dampens natural convec-
tion - reducing temperature loss.
– Expansion: The foam acts as a heat sink and dampens convection - reducing tem-
perature decrease.
Since the foam works as a heat sink it is most eﬀective when the temperature increase
of the gas is high, namely for high compression ratios.
A bigger step change of gas
temperature, will cause a bigger temperature diﬀerence between the gas and the foam,
which increases the heat transfer from gas to foam and thereby improves the eﬀect of the
foam. The regenerator eﬀect is seen during the holding period, when the gas temperature
drops below that of the foam, and the heat transfer changes direction.
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
Volume, V [L]
0
50
100
150
200
Pressure, p [bar]
Foam 1
Foam 2
No Foam
Isothermal
(a) T0 = 22 ◦C, p0 = 50 bar, cr = 2.5, vp =
100 mm/s
0.52
0.54
0.56
0.58
0.6
0.62
0.64
0.66
Gas Volume V [L]
80
90
100
110
120
130
140
Gas Pressure pg [bar]
Foam 1
Foam 2
No Foam
Isothermal
(b) T0 = 18 ◦C, p0 = 100 bar, cr = 1.25, vp =
50 mm/s
Figure 8.5: Pressure-volume diagrams for the most (a) and least (b) eﬀected runs in
tests of 0.64 L accumulator with no foam, foam 1, and foam 2.
Including isothermal
compression curve for comparison.
The eﬀect of the foam is clearly seen by the reduction of the area inside the pV diagrams.
And as seen with the thermal time constant, the best overall eﬀect is achieved with foam
2, namely the HR 50 polyether foam. In the most eﬀective case shown in ﬁgure 8.5a, the
heat loss of the accumulator is reduced with 23.8 percentage points from 30.8% without
foam, to only 7.0% with foam 2. And in the least eﬀective case, shown in ﬁgure 8.5b, it
is reduced by 8.4 percentage points, from 10.5% without foam to 2.1% with foam 2. The
thermal loss of all runs are shown in table 8.4.
58
==PAGE:68==
59
CHAPTER 8. INITIAL TESTING WITH 0.64 L ACCUMULATOR
Table 8.4: Thermal loss, lth, of all test runs for the 0.64 L accumulator with no foam,
foam 1, and foam 2.
Thermal loss, lth [%]
p0 = 50 bar
p0 = 100 bar
Filling
Piston Speed
cr = 1.5
cr = 2.0
cr = 2.5
cr = 1.25
cr = 1.5
cr = 1.65
No Foam
50 mm/s
12.1
25.0
30.8
10.5
17.8
21.5
100 mm/s
14.1
24.6
32.2
10.1
17.5
21.8
Foam 1
50 mm/s
6.3
11.1
14.6
4.3
8.5
11.3
100 mm/s
5.8
10.4
13.7
4.4
8.6
12.0
Foam 2
50 mm/s
2.6
5.0
7.0
2.1
5.5
7.0
100 mm/s
2.2
4.6
7.5
3.1
4.8
6.9
Although the best improvement by using the foam is achieved when the unﬁlled accumu-
lator has the greatest heat loss, the best overall eﬃciency is, not surprisingly seen for the
low compression ratio cycles, both with and without the foam.
8.3.2
Frictional Loss
The frictional loss is usually very small compared to the thermal loss, and is not expected
to have a big inﬂuence on the eﬃciency of the accumulator with the diﬀerent foams. On
the other hand, Pourmovahed et al. [1988] found that the foam in some cases doubled
the percentage of frictional loss, compared to the same accumulator without foam. The
friction losses obtained from testing are presented in table 8.5. The results are normalized
with the measured compression ratio, to make them more comparable.
Table 8.5: Frictional loss, lf, of all test runs for the 0.64 L accumulator with no foam,
foam 1, and foam 2. Normalized with compression ratio.
Normalized Friction loss, lth [%/cr]
p0 = 50 bar
p0 = 100 bar
Filling
Piston Speed
cr = 1.5
cr = 2.0
cr = 2.5
cr = 1.25
cr = 1.5
cr = 1.65
No Foam
50 mm/s
0.69
0.44
0.33
0.22
0.21
0.16
100 mm/s
0.64
0.41
0.33
0.18
0.16
0.17
Foam 1
50 mm/s
0.60
0.37
0.29
0.34
0.31
0.20
100 mm/s
0.58
0.38
0.24
0.29
0.22
0.18
Foam 2
50 mm/s
0.58
0.33
0.18
0.33
0.27
0.18
100 mm/s
0.57
0.34
0.23
0.33
0.21
0.17
For the tests with the high preload pressure, the frictional loss with the foam is increased
as expected, but at the low preload pressure, both foams seem to reduce the frictional
loss. There is no good physical explanation for this, however, the reduction is so small
that this is most certainly due to imprecision in the measurements rather than an actual
eﬀect of the foam.
8.4
Foam Behaviour
A few experiments were conducted, to ﬁnd out more about the behaviour of the foam
during compression and expansion. These tests were either done in test rig 1 described in
59
==PAGE:69==
CHAPTER 8. INITIAL TESTING WITH 0.64 L ACCUMULATOR
60
section 7.1, or as manual tests with an acrylic glass cylinder, as described in section 7.3.
It was noted that both foams did not ﬁll the entire gas chamber, when the accumulator
was disassembled, after the range of tests shown in table 8.1. Therefore the length of
the foam was measured right after the tests, before taking it out of the cylinder, to ﬁnd
out how big a part of the chamber there was left unﬁlled. Afterwards, the permanent
compression set was measured, after taking the foam out of the cylinder. This is of special
interest when the foam is ﬁxed to the cylinder, as a permanent compression set would
make the foam leave a gap in the opposite end of the cylinder, when it is pulled by the
piston. In the end ﬁxing the foam in both ends could be a necessity.
The same measurements where then repeated for a longer holding period of 30 minutes, to
see the more long term eﬀect on the compression set. And lastly a maximum compression
test was carried out, where the foam was compressed as close to its solid volume as
possible, in order to compare the tear strength of the foams. But also to test whether
it is possible to empty the accumulator of air, before ﬁlling it with nitrogen, without
destroying the foam. Since that is the normal procedure for a conventional accumulator.
Results from these measurements are shown in table 8.6.
Table 8.6: Compression set of foam 1 and 2 after initial testing.
Compression Ratio
Length of Gap
Void Space Volume Fraction
Compression set
Test
cr
Lvs [mm]
Vvs [−]
cs [%]
Foam 1
After tests
2.5
110
0.33
14
30 min test
2.5
115
0.34
20
Max cr test
34
235
0.78
31
Foam 2
After tests
2.5
80
0.25
3
30 min test
2.5
90
0.28
4
Max cr test
25
180
0.55
14
These results prove that even a relatively short holding period of 30 minutes does increase
the compression set of the foam a little. Furthermore, it shows that both foams leave large
volumes of void space after the expansion, and specially foam 1 has a large compression
set as well. This is unwanted as it means that none of these normal foam compositions
are able to exploit the full potential of neither the heat transfer from gas to foam, nor the
convection immobilisation that is obtained by entrapping all the gas in the foam cells.
Only foam 2 was damaged by the maximum compression test, where the end of the foam
was extruded into the dead volume of the piston by the high forces. The destroyed foam is
shown in the picture in ﬁgure 8.7. Foam 1 did not deteriorate, due to its higher toughness.
The only visible consequence on foam 1 was a residue of the foam buckling that is caused
at high compressions. The permanent eﬀect on the foam shape is shown in ﬁgure 8.6,
while ﬁgure 8.9 shows the buckling of foam 1 at the highest compression ratio of three.
In comparison foam 2 did not buckle, even at compressions higher than three.
60
==PAGE:70==
61
CHAPTER 8. INITIAL TESTING WITH 0.64 L ACCUMULATOR
Figure 8.6:
Residue from buckling of foam 1
after maximum compression.
Figure 8.7: Deterioration of foam
2 after maximum compression.
As the previous test only represents the highest tested compressions, a manual compres-
sion test was done for all the tested compression ratios, with the acrylic cylinder. The
picture in ﬁgure 8.8 shows the acrylic cylinder, with an example of the gap left open after
compressing foam 2 to a compression ratio of 1.5.
Figure 8.8: Unﬁlled volume after
compression of foam 2.
Figure 8.9: Buckling of foam 1.
The results of this test are shown in ﬁgure 8.10 for both foam 1 and 2, and also for the
granulate of foam 2 and the compressed foam 1 that are presented in the following. In
the end another piece of foam 2, with a diameter of only 48 mm, was tested in the acrylic
cylinder as well. To see if a reduction in the diameter could reduce the size of the gap left
behind the piston.
61
==PAGE:71==
CHAPTER 8. INITIAL TESTING WITH 0.64 L ACCUMULATOR
62
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
2.2
2.4
2.6
2.8
3
Compression ratio, cr [−]
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
0.45
Void Space Volume Fraction, Vvs [−]
Foam 1
Foam 2
Foam 1 Fix
(ρ=50)
Foam 2
Granulate
Foam 2
D=48
Figure 8.10: Fraction of void space left after expansion as a function of compression
ratio for foam 1, foam 2, foam 1 compressed/ﬁxed, foam 2 granulate, and foam 2 with a
reduced diameter.
The only foam that does not get stuck in the cylinder, is the foam with the reduced
diameter. Unfortunately, this foam was not tested in the small accumulator. But for
later tests on the larger accumulator, all foams have a smaller diameter than the internal
diameter of the cylinder. Comparing only foam 1 and 2, foam 2 leaves the least amount
of space unﬁlled after the expansion, due to the higher resilience, giving it one more
advantage over foam 1.
On the other hand foam 1 showed better durability because
of its higher toughness. Conclusively, the ideal case would be to have a foam with the
density and resilience of the HR 50 polyether combined with the toughness of the PPI 80
polyester.
8.5
Changing Foam Composition
Based on the initial ﬁndings with foam 1 and 2, the foam composition was changed,
in an attempt to get even better results than what is obtained with foam 2. The rest
of the foam compositions listed in table 8.2 are all tested and compared to the normal
foam 2. Out of these, ﬁxing foam 2 to the piston with the system described in section
7.4.1 is the most obvious modiﬁcation, in order to solve the problem of not exploiting
the full gas volume. Whereas the granulate of foam 2 is tested, to see if a simpler and
cheaper way of using the foam, can be just as eﬀective. Even though it very easily gets
stuck in the accumulator under compression, leaving a void space that potentially could
decrease the eﬃciency. Finally, the compressed PPI 80 polyester is precompressed inside
the accumulator to reach the same density as the HR 50 polyether, in an attempt to
combine the advantages of both foams. And as seen in ﬁgure 8.10, even with the extra
amount of foam, it does not follow the piston all the way back during the expansion.
Therefore, the compressed foam 1 is ﬁxed to the piston as well.
Figure 8.11 and 8.12 show the gas pressure development and the pV diagrams, for the
modiﬁed compositions, of the same two test cycles that were shown with no foam, foam
1, and foam 2.
62
==PAGE:72==
63
CHAPTER 8. INITIAL TESTING WITH 0.64 L ACCUMULATOR
0
20
40
60
80
Time t [s]
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
Gas Pressure pg [bar]
Foam 2 Fix
Granulate
Foam 1 Fix
(ρ=50)
(a) T0 = 21 ◦C, p0 = 50 bar, cr = 2.5, vp =
100 mm/s
0
20
40
60
80
Time t [s]
90
100
110
120
130
140
Gas Pressure pg [bar]
Foam 2 Fix
Granulate
Foam 1 Fix
(ρ=50)
(b) T0 = 21 ◦C, p0 = 100 bar, cr = 1.25, vp =
50 mm/s
Figure 8.11: Gas pressure curves for the most (a) and least (b) eﬀected runs in tests of
0.64 L accumulator comparing foam 2 ﬁxed to foam 2 granulate and foam 1 compressed/-
ﬁxed 1.
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
Volume, V [L]
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
Pressure, p [bar]
Foam 2 Fix
Granulate
Foam 1 Fix
(ρ=50)
(a) T0 = 21 ◦C, p0 = 50 bar, cr = 2.5, vp =
100 mm/s
0.5
0.55
0.6
0.65
0.7
Volume, V [L]
90
100
110
120
130
140
Pressure, p [bar]
Foam 2 Fix
Granulate
Foam 1 Fix
(ρ=50)
(b) T0 = 21 ◦C, p0 = 100 bar, cr = 1.25, vp =
50 mm/s
Figure 8.12: Gas pV diagrams for the most (a) and least (b) eﬀected runs in tests of
0.64 L accumulator comparing foam 2 ﬁxed to foam 2 granulate and foam 1 compressed/-
ﬁxed.
The pressure curves are nice and ﬂat and the pV diagrams have small areas compared to
the earlier results without foam, showing that the thermal time constant is increased and
the heat loss is reduced for all three modiﬁcations. The ﬁxed foam 2 is slightly better
than the other two in both cases. And ideally it should be compared to foam 2 as well,
but because both of them perform very similar, they would be almost indistinguishable
in the ﬁgures. Instead, the eﬃciencies, thermal losses, and frictional losses are compared
in table 8.7, 8.8, and 8.9 respectively.
63
==PAGE:73==
CHAPTER 8. INITIAL TESTING WITH 0.64 L ACCUMULATOR
64
Table 8.7: Overall eﬃciency, η, of all test runs for the 0.64 L accumulator comparing
foam 2 to foam 2 ﬁxed, foam 2 granulate, and foam 1 compressed/ﬁxed.
Eﬃciency, η [%]
p0 = 50 bar
p0 = 100 bar
Filling
Piston Speed
cr = 1.5
cr = 2.0
cr = 2.5
cr = 1.25
cr = 1.5
cr = 1.65
Foam 2
50 mm/s
97.5⋆
94.1⋆
92.7⋆
96.5⋆
94.3⋆
92.6⋆
100 mm/s
96.5⋆
94.9⋆
92.9⋆
96.5
94.7⋆
91.9⋆
Foam 2
50 mm/s
95.3
93.1
92.1
96.3
92.1
91.9
Fixed
100 mm/s
95.2
93.1
91.8
96.7⋆
93.5
91.7
Foam 2
50 mm/s
94.9
91.9
90.6
94.5
90.1
88.9
Granulate
100 mm/s
93.8
91.6
89.7
94.9
91.0
89.5
Foam 1
50 mm/s
94.6
92.7
90.8
95.3
92.9
91.0
ρ50/Fixed
100 mm/s
95.5
92.3
89.7
95.7
94.5
90.3
A ⋆denotes the best result for a given test cycle.
The normal unﬁxed foam 2 still has the highest eﬃciency in every test run expect one,
and because the lowest thermal loss is very equal between foam 2 and the ﬁxed foam 2,
the reason for this is found in the frictional loss. The result suggests that the additional
frictional loss of pulling the foam back during expansion, is greater than what is gained
thermally by ﬁlling the void space behind the piston. In contradiction, increasing the
amount of foam 1 and ﬁxing it to the piston clearly has improved the thermal eﬃciency,
bringing it closer to the performance of foam 2. However, even with the same density as
foam 2, the eﬃciency is not increased as much, which could be because of its tendency
to buckle under compression, as the buckling leaves open voids along the cylinder walls,
causing more cooling by convection.
The damaging eﬀect of leaving a large amount of void space behind the piston, is seen
when using the foam 2 granulate. This composition proves to have the lowest eﬃciency in
all the test runs, even though the foam mass is the same as for the other compositions of
foam 2. Based on these results it might seem redundant to use the ﬁxed foam 2, when the
unﬁxed performs better. But the result could be diﬀerent in the long run when the foam
is compressed many times and the holding period is longer. Therefore, both methods are
still tested when moving on to larger accumulator.
Table 8.8: Thermal loss, η, of all test runs for the 0.64 L accumulator comparing foam
2 to foam 2 ﬁxed, foam 2 granulate, and foam 1 compressed/ﬁxed.
Thermal loss, lth [%]
p0 = 50 bar
p0 = 100 bar
Filling
Piston Speed
cr = 1.5
cr = 2.0
cr = 2.5
cr = 1.25
cr = 1.5
cr = 1.65
Foam 2
50 mm/s
2.6⋆
5.0
7.0
2.1
5.5⋆
7.0⋆
100 mm/s
2.2⋆
4.6⋆
7.5
3.1
4.8
6.9⋆
Foam 2
50 mm/s
2.7
4.7⋆
6.2⋆
2.4⋆
6.9
7.5
Fixed
100 mm/s
2.5
5.0
6.7⋆
2.4⋆
5.8
7.6
Foam 2
50 mm/s
4.3
7.7
9.1
5.2
9.6
10.6
Granulate
100 mm/s
5.7
7.9
9.9
4.7
8.5
10.2
Foam 1
50 mm/s
3.6
5.7
8.0
3.3
6.0
8.1
ρ50/Fixed
100 mm/s
3.0
6.4
9.1
3.3
4.4⋆
9.0
A ⋆denotes the best result for a given test cycle.
64
==PAGE:74==
65
CHAPTER 8. INITIAL TESTING WITH 0.64 L ACCUMULATOR
Table 8.9: Frictional loss, lf, of all test runs for the 0.64 L accumulator comparing foam
2 to foam 2 ﬁxed, foam 2 granulate, and foam 1 compressed/ﬁxed.
Frictional loss, lf [%]
p0 = 50 bar
p0 = 100 bar
Filling
Piston Speed
cr = 1.5
cr = 2.0
cr = 2.5
cr = 1.25
cr = 1.5
cr = 1.65
Foam 2
50 mm/s
0.7
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.2
0.2
100 mm/s
0.6
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.2
0.2
Foam 2
50 mm/s
1.5
1.0
0.7
1.0
0.6
0.4
Fixed
100 mm/s
1.4
0.9
0.6
0.7
0.5
0.2
Foam 2
50 mm/s
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.2
0.2
0.5
Granulate
100 mm/s
0.3
0.3
0.2
0.3
0.3
0.4
Foam 1
50 mm/s
1.2
0.8
0.5
1.1
0.7
0.3
ρ50/Fixed
100 mm/s
0.9
0.6
0.5
0.8
0.5
0.6
65
==PAGE:75==
Chapter 9
Testing with 6 L Accumulator
In this chapter the eﬀect of the foam is further investigated, and the experimental results
with the larger accumulators of 6 L and 20 L are presented and analysed.
With the discharge energy in focus, the search of the foam with the best properties for
increasing the eﬃciency of the accumulator is continued in the ﬁrst test. The following
tests are designed to be more comparable to the actual application of accumulators in the
pitch control/emergency stop systems at Fritz Schur Energy. The purpose of these tests
is to look for possibilities of either downsizing or improving the system.
Furthermore, the durability of the foam is tested, to see how the foam performs after
a total of 2510 compression-expansion cycles.
Finally, a few tests were done on the
20 L accumulator. These are mainly used to verify that the improvements on the 6 L
accumulator can be achieved on a larger accumulator as well.
The total of tests presented in this chapter consists of a:
1. Foam Selection Test.
2. Case Study of Pitch control system.
3. Validation tests with 20 L accumulator.
4. Foam durability tests.
In all experiments the foam that is used is either one ore several of the foam compositions
listed in table 9.1. Note that the bulk density of the foam compositions is the speciﬁcation
from the supplier. The eﬀective density of the foam inside the gas chamber will be slightly
diﬀerent, as the foam cylinders are 45 mm longer than the gas chamber. Also the diameter
is given as a range, because the manufacturing process makes the foam conical. Every
foam, except the ﬁxed, has a diameter that is minimum 2 mm smaller than the inside of
the cylinder, to prevent them from getting stuck.
Table 9.1: Foam compositions tested on the 6 L accumulator.
Filling
Composition
Bulk Density
Diameter [mm]
Length [mm]
[kg/m3]
No Foam
Gas only
-
-
-
Foam 1
Fixed
30
130-138
400
Foam 2
Normal
50
130-138
400
Foam 2
Fixed
50
130-138
400
Foam 3
Normal
55
133-138
400
Fixed
55
133-140
400
66
==PAGE:76==
67
CHAPTER 9. TESTING WITH 6 L ACCUMULATOR
9.1
Foam Selection
These tests are primarily used to measure the performance of the foams relative to each
other, in order to ﬁnd the best one. The tests are carried out in test rig 1, which is
described in section 7.1, on the 6 L accumulator. All foam compositions listed in table
9.1 are tested, expect the ﬁxed foam 2.
9.1.1
Approach
To focus more on the eﬀect during expansion, slow compressions and relatively long
holding times are used. And in contrast to the initial tests, with the small accumulator,
all work cycles are based on a position reference input, with a maximum pressure as
the target, instead of a given compression ratio. The pressure target of the input ﬁle
is 250 bar, with a combined compression and holding period of 250 seconds. Preload
pressure, compression time, and expansion velocity are varied in the range listed in table
9.2. And except for foam 2, every run was done twice, adding up to 12 runs at each preload
pressure for each ﬁlling. The expansion velocities of 22 mm/s and 27 mm/s corresponds to
a discharge ﬂow of 20 L/min and 25 L/min, which is common ﬂow rates of an emergency
stop system.
Table 9.2: Parameters used for foam testing on the 6 L accumulator.
Preload Pressure
Expansion Velocity
Compression Time
p0 [bar]
vexp [mm/s]
tc [s]
120
22
30, 60, 90
27
30, 60, 90
140
22
30, 60, 90
27
30, 60, 90
For some of the tests, there were too much noise during the long compressions to estimate
accurate overall eﬃciencies. Instead, the foams are compared on their eﬀect during the
discharge only, which is, after all, the essential process for an emergency stop accumulator.
The most important results when looking at the discharge, is the volume of discharged
oil, the overall expansion energy, and the minimum force or minimum pressure.
9.1.2
Results
The results are found to be similar to what was found with the small accumulator. In every
test run, all the foams increased the thermal time constant of the accumulator, reduced
the pressure and temperature drop during expansion, and increased the discharge energy.
The smallest increase was found with foam 1, whereas foam 2 and foam 3 are almost
inseparable. This same trend was seen in all the test runs, why only one test is used as an
example here, namely the run with a preload pressure of 120 bar and a compression time
of 90 seconds. The pressure and temperature curves of this run are shown in ﬁgure 9.2
and 9.1, and the pV diagrams in ﬁgure 9.3. The most important results for the analysis
are presented in table 9.3, and all other results can be seen in the tables in appendix
11.6.3.
67
==PAGE:77==
CHAPTER 9. TESTING WITH 6 L ACCUMULATOR
68
Table 9.3: Results for 6 L accumulator with no foam and foam 3 ﬁxed at 120 bar preload
pressure.
Filling
Comp. Ratio
Oil Volume
Discharge Energy
Pressure drop
Min pressure
Energy Density
cr [−]
Voil [L]
Eout [kJ]
δp [bar]
pmin [bar]
E⋆[kJ/L]
No Foam
1.73
2.54
34.3
137
91
13.5
Foam 1 Fixed
1.67
2.40
34.9
126
101
14.5
Foam 2
1.67
2.40
36.1
128
106
15.0
Foam 3
1.65
2.36
35.7
125
107
15.1
Foam 3 Fixed
1.64
2.33
35.4
122
108
15.2
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
time [s]
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
220
240
260
Pressure [bar]
No Foam
Foam 1 Fixed
Foam 2
Foam 3
Foam 3 Fixed
Figure 9.1: Pressure curves of diﬀerent foam compositions tested in the 6 L accumulator.
p0 = 120 bar, tc = 90 s, T0 = 20.6 −22 ◦C.
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Time t [s]
-40
-20
0
20
40
60
80
Gas Temperature Tg [K]
No Foam
Foam 1 Fixed
Foam 2
Foam 3
Foam 3 Fixed
Figure 9.2: Temperature curves of diﬀerent foam compositions tested in the 6 L accu-
mulator. p0 = 120 bar, tc = 90 s, T0 = 20.6 −22 ◦C.
68
==PAGE:78==
69
CHAPTER 9. TESTING WITH 6 L ACCUMULATOR
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
Volume [L]
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
220
240
260
Pressure [bar]
No Foam
Foam 1 Fixed
Foam 2
Foam 3
Foam 3 Fixed
Figure 9.3: pV diagrams of diﬀerent foam compositions tested in the 6 L accumulator.
p0 = 120 bar, tc = 90 s, T0 = 20.6 −22 ◦C.
9.1.3
Analysis
Based on the pressure reduction seen in the initial test, a higher compression ratio would
be expected with the foam, when maximum pressure is the limiting factor. However, when
compression is slow, the process is already close to being isothermal with the unﬁlled
accumulator, making the heat reducing eﬀects of the foam redundant. Instead, when
the foam is not able to reduce the temperature build up, a negative eﬀect is seen, as
the extra volume occupied by the foam reduces the volume of the gas, hence reducing
the accumulators potential of storing energy. This is seen in the pV diagrams in ﬁgure
9.3, where the pressure increase with the foams are faster, and in the end reaches the
maximum pressure at a lower compression ratio. Additionally the deviating compression
curve without foam shows that the gas is loosing more heat to the surroundings during
compression. With the foam the heat is retained inside the gas chamber due to the higher
heat capacity and the reduced natural convection, thus resulting in higher temperatures,
as seen in ﬁgure 9.2. This means that, as in this case, the available oil volume is reduced
with the foam, even when the compression is not slow enough to be isothermal.
On
the other hand, the extra heat capacity and the dynamic damping eﬀect of the foam,
also reduces the pressure drop during expansion, which means that the energy density is
increased, and more of the stored energy is exploited during discharge.
Since the heat capacity of the diﬀerent polyurethane foams can only be increased by
reducing the porosity, ﬁnding the right porosity is a trade oﬀbetween the occupied volume
of the foam and the bulk density (heat capacity). Or in terms of energy; between the
available oil volume and energy density.
In this test it is found that the discharge energy is increased with all the foams despite
the reduction of the compression ratio. The biggest improvement in terms of energy is
found with foam 2, but this does not necessarily mean that foam 2 is the best solution
for optimisation.
69
==PAGE:79==
CHAPTER 9. TESTING WITH 6 L ACCUMULATOR
70
Comparing only foam 2 and foam 3, perfectly exempliﬁes the said trade oﬀ, as the greater
output energy of foam 2 is a result of higher compression ratio due to the lower density,
but not a better thermal eﬃciency. The smaller temperature and pressure drop found with
foam 3, suggests that the thermal eﬃciency of foam 3 is better, and the energy density
of the discharge is higher. But these values would decrease if the compression ratio was
increased. E.g. the preload pressure with foam 3 can be reduced until the minimum
pressure corresponds to that of foam 2, which will increase both the compression ratio
and the output energy.
9.1.4
Foam Optimisation Potential
In an attempt to compare the potential for optimisation of each for, the discharge energy,
the energy density, and the minimum pressure at the end of the expansion are plotted
for all test runs in ﬁgure in ﬁgure 9.4, where the energy density is measured in kJ/L
discharged oil.
No Foam
Foam 1 Fixed
Foam 2
Foam 3
Foam 3 Fixed
28
30
32
34
36
38
Discharge Energy [kJ]
No Foam
Foam 1 Fixed
Foam 2
Foam 3
Foam 3 Fixed
13
14
15
16
17
Energy Density [kJ/L]
No Foam
Foam 1 Fixed
Foam 2
Foam 3
Foam 3 Fixed
90
100
110
120
130
Minimum Pressure [bar]
120 bar
140 bar
Figure 9.4: Output energy, energy density, and minimum pressure of diﬀerent foam
compositions tested in the 6 L accumulator.
Between foam 1 and 2, foam 2 is found to produce both the highest discharge energy
and energy density. But between foam 2 and 3, the highest average discharge energy is
found for foam 2, whereas foam 3 has a higher energy density. A similar diﬀerence is
observed between the normal and the ﬁxed foam 3. The aluminium disc used for ﬁxation
further reduces the volume, but the better thermal eﬀect obtained by eliminating the void
space behind the piston increases the pressure. Based on this test it is unclear whether
the discharge energy of foam 3 can be increased beyond that of foam 2. The diﬀerence
will most likely be insigniﬁcant, but seemingly the optimal foam density is somewhere in
between the two. It is clear, however, that the foam can improve the discharge energy
compared to the accumulator with gas only.
The possibilities of optimising the emergency stop system at FSE are listed below, with
the conventional accumulator as the reference case:
1. Except the introduction of foam, the accumulators is left unchanged, thus reducing
the available oil volume, but increasing the pressure of the system. This can be used
70
==PAGE:80==
71
CHAPTER 9. TESTING WITH 6 L ACCUMULATOR
to reduce the diameter of the pitch cylinder, saving both weight and money.
2. The preload pressure is reduced until the minimum pressure is equal that of to the
reference case. This can be used to increase both output energy and the available
oil volume, increasing the power of the system and the safety factor. Ultimately the
amount of accumulators in the system, could be reduced if both these factors are
increased suﬃciently.
3. The preload pressure is reduced until the same oil volume is available, increasing the
output energy and the minimum pressure. This can be used to improve the power
of the system, or to reduce the weight of the system by downsizing the diameter of
the pitch cylinder according to the gained power.
4. The preload pressure and accumulator size is reduced until either the output energy,
or the minimum pressure is equal to the reference case. This will result in the same
power and the same ﬂow, with a lighter accumulator.
Despite the irrelevant diﬀerence between foam 2 and 3, mainly foam 3 is used for the
following tests, because it was easier to acquire.
9.2
Case: Pitch Control Accumulators
For the accumulators in the wind turbine emergency stop systems, the compression is
very slow and done in more steps, thus bringing it closer to an isothermal compression.
Additionally the holding period in the real system, is the time between emergency stops,
which is often long enough to eliminate the heat regenerative eﬀect during this period. In
other words, the most relevant eﬀect of the foam, in the emergency stop systems, is the
eﬀect during the expansion process.
In the pitch control system, the same accumulators are used for both pitch control and
emergency stops, so a full work cycle consists of both processes. During the pitch control,
the accumulators are working with small compressions and expansions close to the maxi-
mum pressure. At some point, whenever an emergency stop is needed, a longer expansion
process begins and continues until the blades are feathered. The primary requirement
for the accumulators during an emergency stop, is to deliver suﬃcient power, in terms
of pressure and oil volume, to rotate the blade to the feathered position. Secondly, the
pressure at the end of the stroke, should be high enough to keep the blade locked in that
position.
9.2.1
Approach
The tests in this experiment are made to resemble the emergency stop discharge of pitch
control accumulators. This makes them diﬀerent from the other tests, as they do not have
the same pressure relaxation during the holding period. In the actual system the gas is
recompressed if the pressure falls below ±5 bar of a given target pressure. However, to
simplify things in this test, the gas is compressed to the target pressure and kept at that
level until the expansion. In this way every test has exactly the same pressure before
the expansion. In addition, the constant small compressions of the actual system, means
that the system does not reach the same kind of equilibrium, and the holding period is
71
==PAGE:81==
CHAPTER 9. TESTING WITH 6 L ACCUMULATOR
72
less critical. In contrast to the other tests, the input ﬁle prescribes the pressure, with a
maximum target pressure of 250 bar, a compression time of 40 seconds, and a holding
period of 220 seconds. 60 test runs are made covering the range of parameters listed in
table 9.4.
Table 9.4: Test parameters for 6 L accumulator, pressure reference tests.
Filling
Maximum Pressure
Preload pressure
Expansion speed
pmax [bar]
po [bar]
vexp [mm/s]
Gas Only
250
100
10, 20, 30, 40, 50
140
10, 20, 30, 45, 60
Foam 3 Fixed
250
100
10, 20, 30, 40, 50
120
10, 20, 30, 45, 60
140
10, 20, 30, 45, 60
The idea of this test is to investigate the eﬀect of expansion speed and compare the dis-
charge energy of the accumulator with and without foam, in order to seek the possibilities
of downsizing the pitch control system.
9.2.2
Assumption
As mentioned, every test run will have the same pressure before the expansion. But since
the holding time is only 220 seconds, the temperature of the foam ﬁlled accumulator will
be higher instead, as shown in ﬁgure 9.5. However, had the holding time been long enough
for the temperature to drop, the gas would have been compressed further to remain at
250 bar and compression ratio would be increased instead. Therefore, energy wise, it
is assumed that these tests can be used to estimate the improvements of the discharge
process with the foam.
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Time t [s]
-40
-20
0
20
40
60
Gas Temperature Tg [K]
No Foam
Foam 3 Fixed
Figure 9.5: Temperature diﬀerence of the conventional and foam ﬁlled accumulator.
p0 = 140 bar, T0 = 22 ◦C
In addition, there might be some temperature diﬀerence from the small compressions with
72
==PAGE:82==
73
CHAPTER 9. TESTING WITH 6 L ACCUMULATOR
and without foam, and since these compressions are often within a frequency of 0.33 Hz,
the higher time constant with the foam will be of some advantage. This eﬀect is not
tested, but could be a part of future work within this research.
9.2.3
Results
The expansion part of the pressure curves for the tests with preload pressure, p0 = 100 bar,
are shown in ﬁgure 9.6, and the results are presented in tables 9.5 and 9.6. As expected a
large pressure drop below preload pressure is seen for the unﬁlled accumulator, in ﬁgure
9.6a. In contrast, the minimum pressure with the foam in ﬁgure 9.6b is nearly constant
and slightly higher than what is found with the slowest expansion velocity without foam.
This means that even with the slowest expansion speed, the energy density is increased
with the foam. Similar results were seen with p0 = 140 bar. These are presented in table
9.6, and the pressure curves and pV diagrams of these can be seen in appendix 11.7.
260
270
280
290
300
time [s]
50
100
150
200
250
Pressure [bar]
10 mm/s
20 mm/s
30 mm/s
40 mm/s
50 mm/s
(a) No foam
260
270
280
290
300
time [s]
50
100
150
200
250
Pressure [bar]
10 mm/s
20 mm/s
30 mm/s
40 mm/s
50 mm/s
(b) Foam 3
Figure 9.6: Pressure curves comparing the eﬀect of expansion velocity, with no foam
and foam 3 ﬁxed. Test parameters: T0 = 21◦C-21.6◦C p0 = 100 bar and pmax = 250 bar.
Comparing the results in table 9.5 and 9.6, the highest increase of output energy is seen
for the tests with a preload pressure of 100 bar. Where the energy density is increased
so much that a higher energy output is achieved even with a smaller compression ratio.
At a preload pressure of 140 bar, the energy density is increased just enough to leave
the output energy unchanged. This is because of the higher eﬃciency of the conventional
accumulator at higher preload pressure.
Especially in this case, where the maximum
pressure is the same, it is clear that a higher preload pressure will reduce compression
ratio and eventually reduce both thermal and frictional losses.
73
==PAGE:83==
CHAPTER 9. TESTING WITH 6 L ACCUMULATOR
74
Table 9.5: Results for 6 L accumulator with no foam and foam 3 ﬁxed. Test parameters:
T0 = 21◦C-21.6◦C p0 = 100 bar and pmax = 250 bar.
Filling
Expansion rate
Compression Ratio
Oil Volume
Minimum pressure
Discharge Energy
vexp [mm/s]
cr [−]
Vo [L]
pmin [bar]
Eout [kJ]
No Foam
10
2.11
3.15
85.4
41.0
20
2.08
3.12
78.8
39.7
30
2.09
3.12
74.7
39.1
40
2.11
3.15
71.4
38.7
50
2.10
3.14
70.4
38.5
Foam 3
Fixed
10
1.98
2.96
89.6
41.6
20
1.98
2.96
89.1
41.6
30
1.97
2.95
88.8
41.5
43
1.98
2.97
87.8
41.3
50
1.98
2.97
88.1
41.4
Table 9.6: Results for 6 L accumulator with no foam and foam 3 ﬁxed. Test parameters:
T0 = 22.4◦C-23.5◦C p0 = 140 bar and pmax = 250 bar.
Filling
Expansion rate
Compression Ratio
Oil Volume
Minimum pressure
Discharge Energy
vexp [mm/s]
cr [−]
Vo [L]
pmin [bar]
Eout [kJ]
No Foam
10
1.62
2.30
114
36.6
20
1.62
2.30
108
36.0
30
1.63
2.32
106
35.7
45
1.63
2.30
104
35.7
60
1.63
2.30
104
35.5
Foam 3
Fixed
10
1.55
2.13
123
36.0
20
1.56
2.14
122
36.0
30
1.56
2.15
121
36.0
45
1.56
2.14
121
35.9
60
1.56
2.14
121
35.9
9.2.4
Expansion Rate
In contrast to the tests with the 0.64 L accumulator, the pressure drop of the 6 L ac-
cumulator without foam, is found to be highly dependent on the piston velocity during
expansion, varying with up to 10 bar. With the foam, on the other hand, the minimum
pressure varies with only 2 bar, proving the foams ability to dampen the gas ﬂow and
mitigate the issue of high convection losses. This also means the biggest improvement
is obtained at the highest piston velocities, where the dynamic eﬀect of a conventional
accumulator will be largest.
A small improvement is seen, even for the slowest piston speeds under 10 mm/s, with
a preload pressure of 100 bar. In this case, a higher heat capacity and conductivity of
the foam will be the important factors. Conclusively, taking only the ﬂow into account,
the foam ﬁlled accumulator provides more freedom of changing the system. Ideally, the
amount of accumulators in a system could be reduced, when using the foam, if the power
is raised accordingly.
74
==PAGE:84==
75
CHAPTER 9. TESTING WITH 6 L ACCUMULATOR
9.2.5
Loss of Volume
The loss of volume explained in section 9.1.3 is easily seen in the pV diagrams in ﬁgure
9.7.
At the end of the compression process the compression ratio of the foam ﬁlled
and the conventional accumulator is roughly the same. But when the gas is compressed
continuously to maintain the same pressure, the volume of the unﬁlled gas chamber is
compressed further, thus increasing the area under the pV curve and the potential energy
stored in the accumulator.
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
Volume [L]
50
100
150
200
250
Pressure [bar]
10 mm/s
20 mm/s
30 mm/s
40 mm/s
50 mm/s
(a) No foam
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
Volume [L]
50
100
150
200
250
Pressure [bar]
10 mm/s
20 mm/s
30 mm/s
40 mm/s
50 mm/s
(b) Foam 3
Figure 9.7: Pressure curves comparing the eﬀect of expansion velocity, with no foam
and foam 3 ﬁxed. Test parameters: T0 = 21◦C-21.6◦C p0 = 100 bar and pmax = 250 bar.
For the case shown in ﬁgure 9.7b, the thermal loss during the expansion is reduced enough
for the foam ﬁlled accumulator to exploit more of the decreased potential energy, compared
to the conventional accumulator. On the other hand, as seen from the results in table 9.6,
with a preload pressure of 140 bar, foam 3 is right at the limit, where the potential energy
lost by reducing the gas volume is equal to the reduction of thermal losses. However, the
increase of the minimum pressure and the energy density means that there is a potential
for optimisation if preload pressure is lowered.
9.2.6
Optimisation
Using the test with a 20 mm/s expansion and a preload pressure of 140 bar. The results
from table 9.6 can be used to exemplify the ﬁrst optimisation option listed in section 9.1.4.
Assuming that the minimum pressure is the most critical factor during an emergency
stop, i.e. that there will be suﬃcient power at the maximum loads during expansion if
the minimum pressure is high enough at the end. With the increase of minimum pressure
from 108 bar without foam to 122 bar with foam, a common pitch cylinder diameter of
200 mm can be reduced to 190 mm, while still providing the same force. With the reduced
diameter the stroke of the pitch cylinder will be 75 mm with 2.14 L available oil, while it
will be 73 mm with 2.3 L oil and a diameter of 200 mm. Corresponding to a 3% increase
with foam. This improvement can not be achieved with a lower discharge rate, but for
any higher rate it will be the same or bigger.
With the same test results of the unﬁlled accumulator as the reference case. It is tested
75
==PAGE:85==
CHAPTER 9. TESTING WITH 6 L ACCUMULATOR
76
how much the preload pressure of the accumulator with foam 3 can be lowered, without
reaching a lower minimum pressure, corresponding to the second optimisation option
listed in section 9.1.4.
The limit was found to be at 120 bar. The pV diagrams of this test compared to the
reference tests are shown in ﬁgure 9.8, and the main results of the two runs are shown in
table 9.7.
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
Volume [L]
100
150
200
250
Pressure [bar]
No foam,
p0 = 140 bar
Foam 3 Fixed, p0 = 120 bar
Figure 9.8: pV diagrams of the conventional accumulator with a preload pressure of 140
bar compared to the foam ﬁlled accumulator with a preload pressure of 120 bar. Common
parameters for both tests: tc = 40 s, thold = 220
As seen on the graph, the ﬁnal compression ratio with the foam ﬁlled accumulator is now
higher than with the conventional, while reaching the same minimum pressure at the end
of the expansion stroke. As a result, the total amount of available oil is increased by 8.7%
and the net energy is increased by 8.3%.
Table 9.7: Results of test with the 6 L accumulator, for comparison of the conventional
accumulator with a preload of 140 bar and the foam ﬁlled with a preload pressure of 120
bar. T0 = 22.4-= 23.5, vp = 20 mm/s, pmax = 250 bar.
No Foam
Foam 3 Fixed
Improvement
Minimum pressure, pmin [bar]
108
108
0
Oil volume, Vo [L]
2.3
2.5
8.7 %
Discharge energy, Eout [kJ]
36
39
8.3 %
Assuming that the discharge energy would not fall below 36 kJ, instead of increasing the
oil volume, the accumulator volume could be reduced by the gained volume of 0.2 liters
corresponding to 3.3% of the total accumulator volume.
These results show that is possible to optimise the 6 L accumulator with a new foam. In
the following sections, the long term eﬀect of the foam is tested, and a couple of tests on
76
==PAGE:86==
77
CHAPTER 9. TESTING WITH 6 L ACCUMULATOR
the 20 L accumulator are done to assess whether the results on the 6 L accumulator are
comparable to those of a larger accumulator.
9.3
Durability Tests
One of the main concerns of implementing foam in the accumulators of the pitch control
system, is whether it can endure the 25 years lifetime of the accumulator itself without
deteriorating. Assuming there are two emergency stops every week, there will be 2,600
full compressions and expansions in 25 years. On top of this, for the pitch control accu-
mulators, presuming the turbine is operating 50% of the time and the frequency of the
small compression-expansion cycles is around 0.3 Hz, the foam will be compressed and
expanded at a high compression an additional 13 m. times. Apart from the deterioration
of the foam, the repeated compressions could cause a permanent compression set, and
consequently reduce the eﬃciency over time. Pourmovahed [1990] found a 25% compres-
sion set with a polyester foam after 36,000 cycles, which reduced the eﬃciency from 84%
go 81%.
9.3.1
Approach
To test the durability in terms of both eﬃciency and compression set two experiments are
done. A dynamic test with the 6 L accumulator in test rig 2, doing 2510 full compression-
expansion cycles over a time span of 24 hours. And a static long term compression test,
which is described in section 7.3.1, where the foam is compressed with a compression ratio
of 2 for 60 days.
Both foam 2 and foam 3 are tested, each of them ﬁxed to the piston and enveloped with
a nylon sock as a means of protection against abrasion.
The test parameters for the
dynamic test is:
Preload pressure
p0 = 102
[bar].
Maximum pressure
pmax = 250
[bar].
Compression piston speed
vcomp = 18
[mm/s]
Expansion piston speed
vexp = 22
[mm/s]
Holding time
thold = 10
[s]
Number of cycles
nc = 2510
[−]
9.3.2
Results
The pressure curves of 4 cycles in the beginning of the test are compared to 4 cycles at the
end of the test for foam 2 and 3 in ﬁgure 9.9 and 9.10 respectively. No signiﬁcant change
is observed with foam 2, and with foam 3 the only diﬀerence between the ﬁrst and the
last cycles, is the minimum pressure, which has increased due to the higher temperature
that has build during the test.
77
==PAGE:87==
CHAPTER 9. TESTING WITH 6 L ACCUMULATOR
78
460
480
500
520
540
560
580
600
time [s]
100
150
200
250
300
Pressure [bar]
Cycle 6-10
Cycle 2501-2504
Figure 9.9: Pressure curves from durability test of foam 2 in the 6 L accumulator.
460
480
500
520
540
560
580
time [s]
100
150
200
250
300
Pressure [bar]
Cycle 6-10
Cycle 2501-2504
Figure 9.10: Pressure curves from durability test of foam 3 in the 6 L accumulator.
To see if the eﬃciency of the foam is inﬂuenced by the high number of cycles, 10 cycles
are picked out at four diﬀerent times during the test, and the average performance from
these 10 cycles are calculated and compared. The results are shown in table 9.8 and 9.9.
It is found that the eﬃciency is unchanged for both foams. And in addition, these results
conﬁrm that despite the lower output energy, foam 3 is the better foam, when it comes
to discharge energy density. The signiﬁcance of many years wear is diﬃcult to asses, but
based on this test, eﬃciency wise, there is no indication of any long term problem with
ﬁlling the accumulator with foam.
The nylon sock seems to protect the sides of the foam well against abrasion, as no visible
degradation of the foam was observed. But in this case the shorter stroke of the 6 L
accumulator is an advantage, compared to the 20 L or 25 L accumulators in the pitch
control system. To get a better idea of the abrasive wear on the foam, a similar test
should be done on a larger accumulator. Also no chemical breakdown of the foam was
observed after the test. In this area the foam itself is a means of mitigation, because of
the eﬀect of reducing dynamics and in turn the high temperatures.
78
==PAGE:88==
79
CHAPTER 9. TESTING WITH 6 L ACCUMULATOR
Initiating oxidation was found on the gas side of the piston after the test. The gas chamber
can not contain more than 0.5wt% oxygen and 0.01wt% water according to regulations,
but this is not a problem when the preload pressure is 55 bar or more 1. However, the
foam might contain some water remnants, therefore it should be made sure that all water
is evaporated from the foam, before inserting it into the accumulator.
Table 9.8: Foam 2 ﬁxed: Average of the results from 10 runs at diﬀerent times during
the durability tests with the 6 L accumulator.
Foam 2 Fixed
Eﬃciency
Compression Ratio
Minimum pressure
Discharge Energy
Run
%
cr [−]
pmin [bar]
Eout [kJ]
1-10
92
1.93
96
39.3
850-860
92
1.94
98
39.2
1700-1710
92
1.94
97
39.4
2500-2510
92
1.95
97
39.4
Table 9.9: Foam 3 ﬁxed: Average of the results from 10 runs at diﬀerent times during
the durability tests with the 6 L accumulator.
Foam 3 Fixed
Eﬃciency
Compression Ratio
Minimum pressure
Discharge Energy
Run
%
cr [−]
pmin [bar]
Eout [kJ]
1-10
90
1.89
94
39.2
850-860
92
1.87
99
38.7
1700-1710
92
1.89
100
39.0
2500-2510
92
1.89
100
39.0
9.3.3
Compression Set
The compression set is the only observable impact on the foam. Both foams were deformed
to the shape showed in ﬁgure 9.11. The uneven deformation, indicates that the friction
retains the side of the foam. This causes the foam to not ﬁll up the whole chamber, which
eventually could reduce the eﬃciency. The explanation for this uneven deformation is
found in the compression set.
With foam 2, a compression set of 16% was observed in the most deformed side, right
after the test, but after 24 hours this was reduced to 5%. Similarly the compression set
of foam 3 was 13% right after the test and 11% after 24 hours. With both these values
the foam is no longer long enough to ﬁll the whole length of the gas chamber. This means
that the ﬁxing on the piston, pulls the compressed foam so that a gap appears in the
opposite end. And when the foam is recompressed it sticks to the wall in this end, while
the rest of the foam is pushed against it, thus deforming in an uneven manner. Despite
the fact that no decline in eﬃciency was seen, this suggests that to obtain the optimal
eﬀect, the foam should be ﬁxed in both ends, which agrees with the ﬁndings of Stroganov
and Sheshin [2011].
In contrast the deformation after the static compression test was negligible, with at com-
pression set of 0.3% and 0.1% for foam 2 and foam 3 respectively. These are small values,
1At lower preload pressures the gas and foam should be pre compressed before adding the nitrogen.
79
==PAGE:89==
CHAPTER 9. TESTING WITH 6 L ACCUMULATOR
80
compared to the 25% compression set found by Pourmovahed [1990], which could simply
be explained by the higher resilience of the polyether foam. But most likely is mainly
because their test were done with 36,000 cycles. Therefore, it would be interesting to
see the results of another durability test, simulating the pitch control work cycles, with
a great amount of small compression-expansion cycles combined with the full charge and
discharge processes.
Figure 9.11: Foam deformation after 2510 cycles.
9.4
Validation With 20 L Accumulator
To make a ﬁnal comparison with the actual pitch control system, a few tests were done
on the 20 L accumulator in test rig 2, to verify that the foam can produce similar results
on a large accumulator.
The issue of having to wait until temperature equilibrium is reached in the gas chamber, is
now even bigger. So as a solution, the expansion is started before equilibrium is reached,
in both the tests, but with the same pressure at the beginning of the expansion, as seen
on the pressure curves in ﬁgure 9.12.
Foam 2 is used as an alternative in this test, because foam 3 was unavailable in the
required quantities. However, because of the very similar results obtained with the two
foams, the results from this test are assumed to be comparable to those in table 9.5 with
foam 3. Three and a half pieces of 400 mm foam were used, all of them in a nylon sock,
and with the upper piece ﬁxed to the piston. For both the foam ﬁlled and the accumulator
with gas only, the preload pressure is 100 bar, the maximum pressure is 250 bar, and the
pressure at the beginning of the expansion is 237 bar. The discharge ﬂow rate is 33 L/min
without the foam and 35 L/min with the foam, or 36 mm/s and 38 mm/s respectively.
80
==PAGE:90==
81
CHAPTER 9. TESTING WITH 6 L ACCUMULATOR
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
time [s]
100
150
200
250
Pressure [bar]
No Foam
Foam 2 Fixed
Figure 9.12:
Pressure curves comparing the conventional and the foam ﬁlled 20 L
accumulators.
Primarily, the pressure curves in ﬁgure 9.12, prove that the foam is still eﬀective in the
20 L accumulator, as the time constant is increased. But in order to compare the eﬀect
during expansion alone, it does not make sense to compare either eﬀeciency or output
power. Instead, the pressure drop below preload pressure is compared. On this parameter
the only diﬀerence between the two tests, is that the the expansion stroke of the foam
ﬁlled accumulator is 20 mm longer, which means that the found improvements are minor
underestimations.
The pressure drop below the preload pressure is relatively small in both cases, because
of the high temperatures before the expansion. Nonetheless, the foam ﬁlled accumulator
increases the minimum pressure from 89 bar to 95 bar, corresponding to a reduction of
55% of the pressure drop below the preload pressure. With the 6 L accumulator and an
expansion piston speed of 40 mm/s, an increase in minimum pressure from 71.4 bar to
87.8 bar was found, as shown in table 9.5. In comparison this is a 57% reduction of the
pressure drop below preload pressure. Assuming that the percentage reduction of this
drop is the same at any temperature, this suggests that the eﬀect of the foam in the
two accumulators are comparable. In fact, the eﬀect might be more distinct in the 20 L
accumulator, taking the larger compression ratio with the foam into account.
The tendency of the foam to get stuck in the accumulator is assumed to be worse in the
20 L accumulator, as it has a larger length to diameter ratio than the other accumulators.
In addition to this, the dynamics of the gas in any unﬁlled areas will be greater due to
the larger volume, thus increasing heat losses. Therefore, it is of greater importance to
ﬁx the foam to the piston. This also means that if the gas ﬂow is dampened as much as
in the 6 L accumulator, bigger improvements might be achievable.
81
==PAGE:91==
Chapter 10
Application at FSE
In this chapter a short description of what can be expected by implementing the foam in
the pitch control accumulators is presented. And a suggestion to what the future work
should include is given.
10.1
Implementation of Foam
With the ﬁndings in this research, it has become clear that there is a potential for opti-
mising the pitch control system by ﬁlling the system accumulators with foam. In a large
wind turbine the pitch control system can have up to six 25 L accumulators installed per
each blade, which means that even the limited improvements can have an impact on both
reliability, weight, and costs.
A loss of compression ratio due to the slow compression rates and the foam’s occupation of
gas volume, limits the possibilities of improvement, as it reduces the oil volume delivered
during discharge. On the other hand, the foam’s ability to reduce the temperature drop
and increase the pressure during discharge, cause an increase in power, that opens up
for a range of optimisation possibilities.
Therefore, in order to optimise the system,
while staying within the requirements of suﬃcient power, in terms of both oil volume and
pressure, additional modiﬁcation has to be done to the system.
Based on the experimental results from this research and the assumption that at least the
same percentage improvements can be achieved with a 20 or 25 L accumulator, the found
improvements can be applied to the four methods of optimisations in the following ways.
1.
By keeping the accumulator size and preload pressure unchanged, a pitch cylinder diam-
eter of 200 mm can be reduced to 190 mm without reducing the applied force on the
pitch cylinder piston, while increasing the length of the actuator stroke by 3%. This will
increase the safety factor of the system in terms of available oil and reduce costs and
weight.
2.
Reducing the preload pressure such that the minimum pressure at the end of expansion
corresponds to that of a conventional accumulator. With this change the available oil
volume is increased by 8.7% and the total discharge energy by 8.3%, thus increasing the
reliability of the system in terms of both power and safety factor. Ideally this method
could be used to reduce the number of accumulators as well. However, even a reduction
of the accumulator dimensions would be of interest for the company.
3.
82
==PAGE:92==
83
CHAPTER 10. APPLICATION AT FSE
By reducing the preload pressure just enough to obtain a comparable compression ratio,
and thus the same amount of available oil during discharge. This will increase the power
of the system, due to the higher pressure obtained with the foam. This method has not
been tested.
4.
Reducing preload pressure and the accumulator dimensions, without losing oil volume or
reaching a lower minimum pressure. Assuming a linear relation with the increased oil
volume of option 2, the total volume of the accumulator can be reduced by 3.3%.
Generally, the improvements are modest, but the installation of foam in a hydraulic piston
accumulator comes with a low cost and little eﬀort. The simplest way of implementing
the foam ﬁlled accumulator is by method 2 or 3, as they only require changes of the
preload pressure. These implementations comes with low risk, since they can be used to
only improve performance without involving any downsizing. In turn making it easier to
guarantee a reliable system. However, this also means that no reduction of weight and
cost are achieved, thus making these improvements less attractive.
Any of option 1,2 and 3 can be used to reduce weight and costs, if the improvements are
big enough. As e.g. the pitch cylinder diameter normally comes in steps of 20 mm, this
does not seem to be the case. But nonetheless the potential has been shown, and with
the possibility that the dampening eﬀect is more inﬂuential in the larger accumulators,
the foam ﬁlled accumulator provides a good new starting point for designing an improved
system.
This research has been focused on reliable emergency stops and the expansion energy of
the accumulator. But economically the foam has an eﬀect during compression as well, as
the reduced temperature rise and the long thermal time constant will reduce the frequency
of recompressions, which in the end saves energy by reducing pumping power.
A high resilience polyether based polyurethane foam has proved to be best suited for
implementation in the hydraulic accumulator. The foam structure should be with the
highest ratio of open cells as possible. Under the conditions of slow compression and a
long holding period, the bulk density should be around 55 kg/m3, in order to have the
optimal thermal eﬀect without occupying too much gas volume.
To achieve the best
possible thermal eﬀect, the foam should ﬁll the entire volume of the gas chamber. As
a means of mitigating voids left behind the piston during expansion, the foam can be
attached to the piston by a simple construction.
The durability of the foam in terms of both eﬃciency and resistance to deterioration can
be guaranteed for ≤2, 510 full compression expansion cycles over a period of 24 hours in
a 6 L accumulator. But at least a 5 −10% compression set should be expected. With
regard to the deterioration, enveloping the foam with a nylon sock is believed to serve
well as protection against abrasion.
Finally, use of foam does not violate any regulations. As long as the preload pressure is
higher than 55 bar, there is no need to precompress the gas and foam in order to meet
regulations regarding maximum levels of oxygen and water.
83
==PAGE:93==
CHAPTER 10. APPLICATION AT FSE
84
10.2
Future Work
The applicability of the foam has been proved, but to make it more relevant for the
company, a deeper study on ﬁnantial and eﬃciency impact on the whole pitch system has
to be carried out”.
The optimisations above are based on a number of assumptions, which should be validated
by future work before any long term improvement can be guaranteed.
The future work should focus on testing the speciﬁc options for optimisation under more
realistic circumstances. This should include experiments on a large (20-25 L) accumulator
where the preload pressure of the foam ﬁlled accumulator is lowered just enough to com-
pensate for the lost volume caused by the foam. The compression process should resemble
the actual one of a pitch control system, and to simulate the continuous pitch control,
small compression-expansion cycles at high pressure and compression ratio, should be
included before fully expanding. From such a test, a more realistic temperature develop-
ment inside the gas chamber could be obtained, and the true eﬀect during the expansion
could be estimated.
Since it is diﬃcult to compare the foam behaviour in the 6 L and the 20 L accumulator,
and the consequences that comes with leaving unﬁlled voids within the gas chamber, a
test of this type should be done over longer periods of time with at least 10,000 short
compression-expansion cycles, to see the actual compression set in the foam caused by the
re compression at high compression ratios. And in this instance, a comparison between
not ﬁxing the foam, ﬁxing one end, and ﬁxing in both ends should be done to ﬁnally asses
if the gain in eﬃciency is worth the eﬀort of the more cumbersome implementation, when
dealing with a larger accumulator.
Finally, the eﬀect and behaviour of the foam should be tested at extreme temperatures,
since the wind turbine operates at temperature down to −30 ◦C and up to 50 ◦C. At these
temperatures both the minimum pressure and the available oil volume changes, and the
foam behaviour might be diﬀerent.
84
==PAGE:94==
Chapter 11
Conclusion
It has been shown experimentally, on three diﬀerent sizes of accumulators, that ﬁlling
the gas chamber with an open cell elastomeric foam reduces thermal losses and increases
overall eﬃciency of the accumulator. The thermal losses are reduced due to two main
eﬀects inside the gas chamber: The higher heat capacity of the foam, in combination with
the intimate contact between foam and gas, increases the eﬀective heat capacity. And the
porous structure of the foam dampens convection during both compression, expansion,
and the holding period.
Due to lower temperature diﬀerences, it was found that the foam ﬁlled accumulator is
easier to model numerically. A thermal time constant model was successfully made and
validated against experimental data. This model was able to accurately predict the perfor-
mance of a foam ﬁlled accumulator, using one value of τf for all tests with corresponding
preload pressures.
A CFD model was built and to some extent validated using pressure data from experi-
ments. The foam’s perfect ﬁlling of the gas chamber resulted in an overestimation of the
thermal eﬃciency of the accumulator, making it diﬃcult to generalise on obtained heat
losses. Therefore, to obtain better predictions of the heat transfer to the surroundings, it
is suggested that more work is done in modelling the foam behaviour and outer gas layer
at the cylinder wall. For this purpose, the model is a good starting point.
Experimentally, a polyether based polyurethane foam of 50 kg/m3, showed the best results
in initial testing. The accumulator eﬃciency with this foam varied within the interval of
92 −97%, for a compression-hold-expansion cycle, of overall 35 seconds. The eﬃciency
showed no dependency on either preload pressure or rate of compression and expansion.
In the same tests the conventional accumulator had an eﬃciency of 67 −90%. Overall,
the best improvement with the foam was obtained when the eﬃciency of the conventional
accumulator was lowest.
Finding the right foam porosity is a trade oﬀproblem between heat capacity and oc-
cupation of gas volume. When compression rates are slow and holding times are long,
the optimal was found to be between 50 −55 kg/m3. Despite the fact that the thermal
eﬀect during compression and holding time was eradicated, the foam was able to increase
expansion energy. Furthermore, a simple system for ﬁxing the foam to the piston was de-
signed. However, long term tests suggested that ﬁxing the foam in both ends is necessary
to achieve the optimal eﬀect of the foam. A similar system could be made for the oppo-
site end. No abrasive foam degradation or eﬃciency decline was observed after a total of
2,510 complete compression expansion cycles. In conclusion, the foam ﬁlled accumulator
did show potential for optimising an emergency stop system of a wind turbine, but the
implementation of foam is generally better suited for shorter compression-hold-expansion
cycles.
==PAGE:95==
Bibliography
Alfredo Campo, E. (2008). Selection of Polymeric Materials.
Ashton, B. (1948). Piston type accumulator. US Patent 2,440,065.
Bailey Jr., F. (1991). Flexible Polyurethane Foams. In Klempner, D. D. and Frisch, D.
K. C., editors, Cellular Structure and Properties of Foamed Polymers, chapter 4. Carl
Hanser Verlag.
Bauman, W. C. (1961).
Pressuring means for ﬂuid distributing systems.
US Patent
2,968,318.
Brace, W. (1977). Permeability from resistivity and pore shape. Journal of Geophysical
Research, 82(23).
Buﬀel, B., Desplentere, F., Bracke, K., and Verpoest, I. (2014). Modelling open cell-
foams based on the Weaire-Phelan unit cell with a minimal surface energy approach.
International Journal of Solids and Structures, 51(19-20):3461–3470.
COMSOL (2012). Comsol Multiphysics User’s Guide. 4.3 edition.
Dawson, M. A., Germaine, J. T., and Gibson, L. J. (2006). Permeability of open-cell foams
under compressive strain. International Journal of Solids and Structures, 44(16):5133–
5145.
Gibson, L. J. and Ashby, M. F. (1988). Cellular Solids, Structure & Properties. Pergamon
Press, 1st edition.
Hansen, H. and Rasmussen, P. (2013). Modeling Hydraulic Accumulators for use in Wind
Turbines. Ep.Liu.Se, (1):327–334.
Hilyard, N. and Collier, P. (1987). A structural model air ﬂow ﬂexible pur foams. Cellular
Polymers, 6(6):9.26.
Juhala, J., Kajaste, J., and Pietola, M. (2011). Improving Energy Eﬃciency of Hydraulic
Accumulator. Energy, pages 99–110.
Klempner, D., Frisch, K. C., Shutov, D. F. A., and Bailey Jr., F. (1991). Polymerix
Foams. Hanser Publishers.
M. P. Sherman, B. V. K. (1973). Improving The Energy Storage Capacity of Hydraulic
Accumulators. In 8th Intersociety Energy Conversion Engineering Conference PRO-
CEEDINGS, pages 202–207.
Mercier, J. (1943). Deformable or elastic accumulator. US Patent 2,317,395.
==PAGE:96==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Mills, N. (2007). Chapter 7 Micromechanics of open-cell foams. In Polymer Foams Hand-
book.
Nield, D. A. and Bejan, A. (2013). Convection in porous media.
Otis, D. R. (1973a). Predicting Performance Of Gas Charged Accumulators. In Proceeding
of The First National Fluid Power Systems & Controls Conference.
Otis, D. R. (1973b). Thermal Losses in Gas-Charged Hydraulic Accumulators. In 8th
Intersociety Energy Conversion Engineering Conference PROCEEDINGS, pages 198–
201.
Otis, D. R. and Pourmovahed, a. (1985). An Algorithm for Computing Nonﬂow Gas
Processes in Gas Springs and Hydropneumatic Accumulators.
Pourmovahed, A. (1990). Durability Testing of an Elastomeric Foam for Use in Hydraulic
Accumulators. Journal of Solar Energy Engineering, 112(August 1990):223–228.
Pourmovahed, A., Baum, S., Fronczak, F., and Beachley, N. (1988). Experimental evalu-
ation of hydraulic accumulator eﬃciency with and without elastomeric foam. Journal
of Propulsion and Power, 4(2):185–192.
Pourmovahed, A., Beachley, N. H., and Fronczak, F. J. (1992). Modeling of a Hydraulic
Energy Regeneration System: Part I —Analytical Treatment.
Journal of Dynamic
Systems, Measurement, and Control, 114(1):155–159.
Pourmovahed, A. and Otis, D. R. (1986).
An Experimental Thermal Time-Constant
Correlation for Hydraulic Accumulators. Journal of Dynamic Systems, Measurement,
and Control, 112(1):116.
Rotth¨auser, S. (1993). Verfahren zur Berechnung und Untersuchung hydropneumatischer
Speicher.
Rux, J. S. (1955). Shock absorber. US Patent 2,701,583.
Shutov, D. F. A. (1991).
Cellular Structure and Properties of Foamed Polymers.
In
Klempner, D. D. and Frisch, D. K. C., editors, Handbook of Polymeric Foams and
Foam Technology, chapter 3. Carl Hanser Verlag.
Stroganov, a. and Sheshin, L. (2009). Accumulator eﬃciency improvement: heat insula-
tion or heat regeneration? The 11th Scandinavian International Conference on Fluid
Power, SICFP’09, June 2-4, 2009, Link¨oping, Sweden, pages 48–51.
Stroganov, A. and Sheshin, L. (2010). Hydropneumatic accumulator with a compressible
regenerator. US Patent App. 12/330,693.
Stroganov, A. and Sheshin, L. (2011).
Improvement of Heat-Regenerative Hydraulic
accumulators. Ventil, 17(4):322–332.
Stroganov, A. A. (2010). Hydropneumatic accumulator with ﬂexible porous ﬁller. US
Patent App. 12/330,669.
==PAGE:97==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Tavares, F. T. (2011). Thermally Boosted Concept for Improved Energy Storage Capacity
of a Hydro - Pneumatic Accumulator.
V. Irizar (2015).
Advanced Modelling and Veriﬁcation of an Hydraulic Accumulator.
Technical Report August.
==PAGE:98==
Appendix
11.1
Calculations and Derivations
11.1.1
Thermal Time Constant
The solution to the diﬀerential equation:
dT
dt = h Aw
mg cv
(Ta −T)
(11.1)
with
τ = mg cv
h Aw
(11.2)
τ is substituted into the equation before rearranging and integrating on both sides
Z
1
Ta −T dT =
Z 1
τ dt
⇒
−ln (Ta −T) = t
τ + C1
The exponential is taken on both sides of the equation
1
Ta −T = exp
 t
τ + C1

⇒
1
Ta −T = exp
 t
τ

exp (C1)
By evaluating the equation at t = 0, it is seen that C1 = Ta −T0, where T0 is the gas
temperature at t = 0. Substituting this into the equation and rearranging the terms gives
the sought form of the solution,
Ta −T0
Ta −T = exp
 t
τ

(11.3)
proving that τ is equal to the time at which the temperature has dropped by a factor of
e = 2.72.
i
==PAGE:99==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
ii
11.2
Foam Properties
11.2.1
Open Cell & Closed Cell
If a closed cell foam was to be used, it would ﬁll up the space in the gas chamber like
a bundle of connected air balloons, making it impossible to ﬁll the accumulator with
nitrogen and to compress the foam suﬃciently without bursting the cell walls. However,
a closed cell foam will generally be more dens, because more material is needed to form
the cell walls. So in pursuit of a higher density, a foam with a mixture of open and closed
cells would be worth investigating. Such a foam will have a porosity around 0.7, which is
the transition limit between open and closed cell foams, Gibson and Ashby [1988]
11.2.2
Cell Size & Shape
Even though it is less important, cell size can have an inﬂuence on both mechanical and
thermodynamic properties. In general for small cell foams (Dcell < 0.2 −0.3 mm), when
the proportion of open to closed cells and the porosity is unchanged, an increase in cell
size will increase both thermal conductivity and compressive strength, [Shutov, 1991, p.
36].
A polymeric foam is complex and the cells will have many diﬀerent shapes. However, most
of them are dodecahedrons, or 12-hedrons, which has 12 faces, all shaped as pentagons,
see ﬁgure 11.1.
Figure 11.1: Foam cell shape consisting of mostly dodecahedrons. Figure source: Buﬀel
et al. [2014]
.
This shape tends to twist and collapse on itself under compression, leading to a small
Poisson’s ratio, Mills [2007].
The shape of the dodecahedron itself, will vary in the
diﬀerent directions of the foam, making the foam anisotropic.
This is because, when
a polymer is foamed, it is only constrained in 2 out of 3 directions, the unconstrained
one being the direction of foaming. The consequence is that the cells are elongated in
the direction of foaming, which ﬁnally gives the foam a higher compressive strength in
ii
==PAGE:100==
iii
BIBLIOGRAPHY
this direction compared to the other. Normally the properties of the foam is given for
the direction of foaming. From a thermodynamic perspective, the cell shape has a small
inﬂuence as well. For the same porosity and open to closed cell fraction, the thinnest
possible cell shape is wanted, such that the heat transfer rate from gas to the center of
the solid is as high as possible.
11.2.3
Permeability
The permeability is mentioned here, because it is directly related to the structural pa-
rameters. An increase in either porosity, the amount of open cells, or cell size will all
increase the permeability. Therefore the same trade oﬀ’s apply as for the porosity. In
addition, regarding heat transfer a high permeability is desired in order keep all of the
solid structure in contact with the gas. However, to immobilise heat convection as much
as possible the permeability should be low.
11.2.4
Glass transition temperature & heat resistance
The glass transition temperature, Tg, is the temperature that separates the rubbery state
of the foam to the glassy state. Under tension the foam will fail in brittle fashion at
temperatures below 0.8 Tg, Gibson and Ashby [1988]. This application of the foam requires
it to be ﬂexible even at temperatures down to −30 [◦C], so a foam with a very low glass
transition temperature is sought.
11.2.5
Abrasion resistivity
The foams resistance to abrasion should be as high as possible, so the foam does not
deteriorate inside the accumulator, which could potentially contaminate the oil of the
system. Furthermore the abrasion will most likely be worst on the boundaries that slides
against the inside walls of the cylinder, resulting in an open space around the foam and
increasing convection loss to the accumulator walls.
11.2.6
Poisson’s ratio
It is diﬃcult to generalise when it comes to the Poisson’s ratio of open cell foam. It varies
with both cell shape and compression strain, which means that the value of ν for an open
cell foam can span from −0.7 to 0.5, Gibson and Ashby [1988]. The Poisson’s ratio of
most ”normal” open celled foams, that have not been post processed, is approximately
zero. This makes them very suitable as a heat sink/regenerator in an accumulator, since
a positive ν could result in the foam getting stuck between the cylinder walls, and a
negative ν would leave open spaces around the foam.
11.2.7
Production of Flexible Polyurethane Foams
PU foam is made by enclosing an expanding gas under the polymerisation that forms
urethane linkages between polyols and polyisocyanates, Bailey Jr. [1991]. The chemical
process and the complex mixtures of the polyols allows to make a great variety of foams
iii
==PAGE:101==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
iv
ranging from closed cell rigid foams to ﬂexible open celled foams. Much of which is beyond
the scope of this project, but can be studied in e.g. Klempner et al. [1991].
The focus of this text is on two main aspects in the production of a ﬂexible PU foam
that are essential in forming the desired foam structure. During the expansion, the gas
is entrapped in small cells that either stay closed at the end of the polymerisation, or, as
for most ﬂexible PU foams, open to form a reticulated structure of struts and junctures.
This is an important factor in deciding the foam property, as discussed in section 11.2.1.
The other and most crucial element in foam production is the selection of polyol. The
number of reactive hydroxyl groups in the polyol control the amount of cross-linkages
between the polymer chains, which ultimately determines the ﬂexibility of the foam. A
too high amount of cross-links will result in a rigid foam, whereas the opposite will make
the polymer too elastic and impossible to foam up. To produce a ﬂexible foam the polyol
should be made from low functionality initiators with no more than 2 or 3 hydroxyl
functionalities. Also the physical characteristic of the foam is largely determined by the
choice of polyol, that forms the soft segments of the polyurethane.
iv
==PAGE:102==
v
BIBLIOGRAPHY
11.3
Foam Speciﬁcations
11.3.1
PPI 80
 
Technical specification
 
Discover a world that combines good solutions with the best designs
 
PPI 80 Black
Polyester, PPI, Foam (PU)
Properties
Value
Unit
Standard (Test method)
01-01-2008
Last Changed
Cellular structure
Open Celled
Colour
Antracit Gray - Black
Density
27-33
kg/m3
ISO 845
Hardness (CDH 40%)
2,5 - 4,5
kPa
ISO 3386
Porosity
75-90
PPI
REGI RPA-1007
Elongation
250
%
ISO 1798
Tensile strength
250
kPa
ISO 1798
Burning rate
<100
(mm/min)
FMVSS 302
UV Resistant
YES
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ 
Product specification:
Polyurethane foam (polyester based) with an entirely and regular cell structure.
PPI 80 (Regicell 80) is particularly suiteble for the fabrication of filter material, e.g. air filters.
Temperature (max):
Generally Polyurethane foam is stable until a temperature of around 120° C and decomposes at 200 - 220° C.
Delivery:
Blocks, Sheets, (Dimensions on request)
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ 
Storage: 
It is recommended  by app. 20 °C (long-term starage)
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ 
Mounting:
By about 20 °C - and on VERY clean surfaces (Be absolutely sure to remove all grease and oil on the surface). When the 
material is mounted upside down, it is recommendable to secure the application with bands or screws.
Miscellaneous:
Page 1 of 1
B6 AkustikA/S  |  Tranåsvej 5-7  |  9300 Sæby  |  +45 9989 1050
 |  fax: +45 9989 1060  |  www.b6akustik.dk 
The information provided in this data sheet is in good faith. No liability is, however, accepted for errors and omission and in no circumstances shall B6 Akustik 
be liable in damages for any loss or injury arising directly or as a consequence of the publication of this data sheet. 
v
==PAGE:103==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
vi
11.3.2
HR 50
Carpenter ApS
We bring comfort to your life.™
Type
HR52120/HR52030
WATERLILY®
30-11-2005
Fleksibelt Polyurethanskum (PUR) på polyetherbasis. 
Udskåret rumvægt
ISO 845
kg/m3
50,0
Stauchhärte
ISO 3386 
kPa, 40%
3,0
Indtrykshårdhed
ISO 2439, meth. B 
N, 40%
*
120
SAG faktor (support faktor)
ISO 2439 
IFD 65%/25%
*
2,8
Trækstyrke
ISO 1798 
kPa
*
73
Brudforlængelse
ISO 1798 
%
*
92
Rivestyrke
ISO 8067
N/cm
*
1,1
Blivende deformering
ISO 1856 
% (50%, 22h, 70°C)
*
4
Dynamisk udmatning
ISO 3385 
Hårdhedstab
%
*
15
Tykkelsestab
%
*
1
Brandhæmmet i henhold til 
California TB 117-2013 sec. 3
Pass
Efterlever
LGA Tüv Rheinland-test
Pass
Oeko-Tex Standard 100, product class I, certificate no. 1308026
Pass
Farve
Mørkeblå
Toleranceområde
Udskåret rumvægt
kg/m3
± 5%
Stauchhärte
kPa, 40%
± 15%
Resterende værdier mærket * = cirkaværdier 
Specielt for typen:
Ansvarlig
AT
Sidst opdateret
30-10-2014
DATABLAD
vi
==PAGE:104==
vii
BIBLIOGRAPHY
11.4
Experimental Setup
11.4.1
Hydraulic Diagram of Rig 2
5
IN
OUT
32
33
PU for foam test
PWR
NBS
29-11-2016
Name
Drawing no.:
A1
Approved:
Sign:
Drawing
scale:
Date:
Change
Index
Date
This document belongs to Fritz Schur Energy A/S, and may not be used, 
handed over or copied in any way without written permission given by Fritz 
Schur Energy A/S.
Fabriksparken 7, DK-2600 Glostrup
 +45 70 20 16 16
 +45 70 20 16 15
Fax:
Phone:
PU 1
30
27
31
b
43
M
M
35
P
39
36
38
40
41
47
49
50
52
53
54
4
M
M
28
P
34
P
37
48
51
29
18
b
42
EMP 21 SG
EMP 21 S 20
vii
==PAGE:105==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
viii
11.4.2
Accumulator Speciﬁcations
 
 
Hyd ro ll  Oy - PO Bo x 1 2 - FIN-62 10 1  L ap ua  -  Fi nl an d 
Te l . +3 58  (0 )20  7 6 57 900  - Fa x +3 58  (0 )20  7 65 7 90 1  - www.h yd ro l l.com 
1/3
          HPS10-350-140-0204 Piston accumulator 
 
 
 
 
Manufacturer product code 
 
 
HPS10-350-140-0204-M1620-G12-T1-X1 
Customer part number  
 
 
101896 
Capacity 
 
 
 
 
20,4 Litres 
L  x OD [mm] 
 
 
 
 
1484 x 160 mm 
ID [mm] 
 
 
 
 
140 mm 
Weight  
 
 
 
 
73,1 kg 
Max operating temperature  
 
 
-25 to +100 C 
Max operating pressure PS 
 
 
350 bar 
Test pressure PT 
 
 
 
501 bar 
Pre-charge pressure 
 
 
 
100bar 
Required Nitrogen purity 
 
 
Less than 0,5% of oxygen (by weight) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Moisture less than 0,2g/m³ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Purity CLASS 0 (according to ISO8573-1:2010) 
Fluid port 
 
 
 
 
G ½” ISO 1179-1, orifice 5mm 
Gas connection  
 
 
 
Hydroll gas valve M16 x 2 mm Std. with protective cap 
External surface protection & color code 
Class 3 corrosion protection with polyurethane paint, 
according ISO 12944-2, color RAL9017 
Seals 
 
SIMRIT Simko300 or similar 
 
 
Design approval  
According PED 
Pressure equipment category  
IV 
Conformity assessment module 
H/H1 
Design code
Basic: EN14359:2006 
Fatigue: EN13445-3:2009 
Fatigue Design values 
Δ1: 10 000 000 cycles @ 30bar 
Δ2: 1 000 000 cycles @ 62,5bar 
Δ3: 20 000 cycles @ 250bar 
Fabrication code 
EN14359:2006 
Inspection and test 
EN14359:2006 
Material tube 
PED/Acc to material appraisal 
Material end flanges 
PED/Acc to material appraisal 
 
 
 
20082605Jussi 
HPS11-350-140-0200
viii
==PAGE:106==
ix
BIBLIOGRAPHY
11.5
Numerical Simulation with COMSOL
11.5.1
Validation with a low interstitial heat transfer coeﬃcient.
Using an interstitial convective heat transfer coeﬃcient of 103 W/m3K.
These results
are more or less coincidental, as the good result of the pressure was obtained with a
correspondingly bad result of the temperature.
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
time [s]
100
150
200
250
300
Pressure [bar]
Experimental Data
COMSOL Mocel
(a) Foam 3, cr = 1.52, vcomp = 5 mm/s and
vexp = 22 mm/s
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
time [s]
100
150
200
250
300
Pressure [bar]
Experimental Data
COMSOL Mocel
(b) Foam 3, cr = 1.49, vcomp = 5 mm/s and
vexp = 22 mm/s
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
time [s]
100
150
200
250
300
Pressure [bar]
Experimental Data
COMSOL Mocel
(c) Foam 2, cr = 1.56, vcomp = 1.7 mm/s and
vexp = 22 mm/s
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
time [s]
100
150
200
250
300
Pressure [bar]
Experimental Data
COMSOL Mocel
(d) Foam 3, cr = 1.24, vcomp = 4.1 mm/s and
vexp = 27 mm/s
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
time [s]
100
150
200
250
300
Pressure [bar]
Experimental Data
COMSOL Mocel
(e) Foam 3, cr = 1.53, vcomp = 1.7 mm/s and
vexp = 22 mm/s
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
time [s]
100
150
200
250
300
Pressure [bar]
Experimental Data
COMSOL Mocel
(f) Foam 2, cr = 1.27, vcomp = 4.2 mm/s and
vexp = 27 mm/s
Figure 11.2: Model validation comparing experimental data with the the COMSOL
model pressure curves for diﬀerent test runs with foam 2 and 3.
ix
==PAGE:107==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
x
11.5.2
Energy and heat ﬂuxes
The numerical error in the model is seen on the convective heat loss for the piston. This
is most likely an issue of boundary layer conditions, that arise from the use of a moving
mesh. Because there is no convection and the thermal conductivity is low, this has little
eﬀect on the overall temperature loss, which is still very low. The same error is seen in
the ﬁgures of the temperature ﬁeld within the solids.
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
time [s]
-250
-200
-150
-100
-50
0
50
100
Energy Flux [W]
Bottom End
Piston
Cylinder Wall
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
time [s]
-150
-100
-50
0
50
100
Conductive Flux [W]
Bottom End
Piston
Cylinder Wall
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
time [s]
-8000
-6000
-4000
-2000
0
2000
Heat Flux [W]
Bottom End
Piston
Cylinder Wall
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
time [s]
-8000
-6000
-4000
-2000
0
2000
Convective Flux [W]
Bottom End
Piston
Cylinder Wall
50
100
150
200
250
time [s]
-100
-50
0
50
100
Heat Flux [W]
Bottom End
Piston
Cylinder Wall
Figure 11.3: 6 L accumulator with foam 2 and test parameters: p0 = 120 bar, cr = 1.63,
and vcomp = 5 mm/s, and vexp = 22 mm/s
x
==PAGE:108==
xi
BIBLIOGRAPHY
11.5.3
Velocity and Temperature Fields
(a) Time: 1 second
(Start compression)
(b) Time: 15 seconds
(c) Time: 30 seconds
(fully compressed)
(d) Time: 140 seconds
(e) Time: 250 seconds
(Start Expansion)
(f) Time: 254 seconds
(g) Time: 258 seconds
(Fully Expanded)
(h) Time: 259 seconds
(i) Time: 300 seconds
Figure 11.4: Temperature ﬁelds of solid domain in 6 L accumulator with foam 2 and
test parameters: p0 = 120 bar, cr = 1.63, and vcomp = 5 mm/s, and vexp = 22 mm/s.
(Temperature in Kelvin)
xi
==PAGE:109==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
xii
(a) Time: 1 second
(Start compression)
(b) Time: 15 seconds
(c) Time: 30 seconds
(fully compressed)
(d) Time: 140 seconds
(e) Time: 250 seconds
(Start Expansion)
(f) Time: 254 seconds
(g) Time: 258 seconds
(Fully Expanded)
(h) Time: 259 seconds
Figure 11.5: Velocity ﬁelds of gas in 6 L accumulator with foam 2 and test parameters:
p0 = 120 bar, cr = 1.63, and vcomp = 5 mm/s, and vexp = 22 mm/s. (Temperature in
Kelvin)
xii
==PAGE:110==
xiii
BIBLIOGRAPHY
11.6
0.64 L Accumulator Results
11.6.1
Pressure Curves
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Time t [s]
40
50
60
70
80
90
Gas Pressure pg [bar]
Foam 1
Foam 2
No Foam
(a) p0 = 50 bar, cr = 1.5, vp = 50 mm/s
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Time t [s]
40
50
60
70
80
90
Gas Pressure pg [bar]
Foam 1
Foam 2
No Foam
(b) p0 = 50 bar, cr = 1.5, vp = 100 mm/s
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Time t [s]
40
60
80
100
120
140
Gas Pressure pg [bar]
Foam 1
Foam 2
No Foam
(c) p0 = 50 bar, cr = 2, vp = 50 mm/s
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Time t [s]
40
60
80
100
120
140
Gas Pressure pg [bar]
Foam 1
Foam 2
No Foam
(d) p0 = 50 bar, cr = 2, vp = 100 mm/s
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Time t [s]
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
Gas Pressure pg [bar]
Foam 1
Foam 2
No Foam
(e) p0 = 50 bar, cr = 2.5, vp = 50 mm/s
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Time t [s]
0
50
100
150
200
Gas Pressure pg [bar]
Foam 1
Foam 2
No Foam
(f) p0 = 50 bar, cr = 2.5, vp = 100 mm/s
Figure 11.6: Pressure curves from tests of 0.64 L accumulator with no foam, foam 1,
and foam 2.
xiii
==PAGE:111==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
xiv
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Time t [s]
80
90
100
110
120
130
140
Gas Pressure pg [bar]
Foam 1
Foam 2
No Foam
(a) p0 = 100 bar, cr = 1.25, vp = 50 mm/s
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Time t [s]
80
90
100
110
120
130
140
Gas Pressure pg [bar]
Foam 1
Foam 2
No Foam
(b) p0 = 100 bar, cr = 1.25, vp = 100 mm/s
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Time t [s]
80
100
120
140
160
180
Gas Pressure pg [bar]
Foam 1
Foam 2
No Foam
(c) p0 = 100 bar, cr = 1.5, vp = 50 mm/s
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Time t [s]
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
Gas Pressure pg [bar]
Foam 1
Foam 2
No Foam
(d) p0 = 100 bar, cr = 1.5, vp = 100 mm/s
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Time t [s]
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
Gas Pressure pg [bar]
Foam 1
Foam 2
No Foam
(e) p0 = 100 bar, cr = 1.65, vp = 50 mm/s
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Time t [s]
50
100
150
200
250
Gas Pressure pg [bar]
Foam 1
Foam 2
No Foam
(f) p0 = 100 bar, cr = 1.65, vp = 100 mm/s
Figure 11.7: Pressure curves from tests of 0.64 L accumulator with no foam, foam 1,
and foam 2.
xiv
==PAGE:112==
xv
BIBLIOGRAPHY
0
20
40
60
80
Time t [s]
40
50
60
70
80
90
Gas Pressure pg [bar]
Foam 2 Fix
Granulate
Foam 1 Fix
(ρ=50)
(a) p0 = 50 bar, cr = 1.5, vp = 50 mm/s
0
20
40
60
80
Time t [s]
40
50
60
70
80
90
Gas Pressure pg [bar]
Foam 2 Fix
Granulate
Foam 1 Fix
(ρ=50)
(b) p0 = 50 bar, cr = 1.5, vp = 100 mm/s
0
20
40
60
80
Time t [s]
40
60
80
100
120
Gas Pressure pg [bar]
Foam 2 Fix
Granulate
Foam 1 Fix
(ρ=50)
(c) p0 = 50 bar, cr = 2, vp = 50 mm/s
0
20
40
60
80
Time t [s]
40
60
80
100
120
Gas Pressure pg [bar]
Foam 2 Fix
Granulate
Foam 1 Fix
(ρ=50)
(d) p0 = 50 bar, cr = 2, vp = 100 mm/s
0
20
40
60
80
Time t [s]
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
Gas Pressure pg [bar]
Foam 2 Fix
Granulate
Foam 1 Fix
(ρ=50)
(e) p0 = 50 bar, cr = 2.5, vp = 50 mm/s
0
20
40
60
80
Time t [s]
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
Gas Pressure pg [bar]
Foam 2 Fix
Granulate
Foam 1 Fix
(ρ=50)
(f) p0 = 50 bar, cr = 2.5, vp = 100 mm/s
Figure 11.8: Pressure curves from tests of 0.64 L accumulator with no foam, foam 1,
and foam 2.
xv
==PAGE:113==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
xvi
0
20
40
60
80
Time t [s]
90
100
110
120
130
140
Gas Pressure pg [bar]
Foam 2 Fix
Granulate
Foam 1 Fix
(ρ=50)
(a) p0 = 100 bar, cr = 1.25, vp = 50 mm/s
0
20
40
60
80
Time t [s]
90
100
110
120
130
140
Gas Pressure pg [bar]
Foam 2 Fix
Granulate
Foam 1 Fix
(ρ=50)
(b) p0 = 100 bar, cr = 1.25, vp = 100 mm/s
0
20
40
60
80
Time t [s]
80
100
120
140
160
180
Gas Pressure pg [bar]
Foam 2 Fix
Granulate
Foam 1 Fix
(ρ=50)
(c) p0 = 100 bar, cr = 1.5, vp = 50 mm/s
0
20
40
60
80
Time t [s]
80
100
120
140
160
180
Gas Pressure pg [bar]
Foam 2 Fix
Granulate
Foam 1 Fix
(ρ=50)
(d) p0 = 100 bar, cr = 1.5, vp = 100 mm/s
0
20
40
60
80
Time t [s]
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
220
Gas Pressure pg [bar]
Foam 2 Fix
Granulate
Foam 1 Fix
(ρ=50)
(e) p0 = 100 bar, cr = 1.65, vp = 50 mm/s
0
20
40
60
80
Time t [s]
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
220
Gas Pressure pg [bar]
Foam 2 Fix
Granulate
Foam 1 Fix
(ρ=50)
(f) p0 = 100 bar, cr = 1.65, vp = 100 mm/s
Figure 11.9: Pressure curves from tests of 0.64 L accumulator with no foam, foam 1,
and foam 2.
xvi
==PAGE:114==
xvii
BIBLIOGRAPHY
11.6.2
pV diagrams
0.4
0.45
0.5
0.55
0.6
0.65
0.7
Gas Volume V [L]
40
50
60
70
80
90
Gas Pressure pg [bar]
Foam 1
Foam 2
No Foam
(a) p0 = 50 bar, cr = 1.5, vp = 50 mm/s
0.4
0.45
0.5
0.55
0.6
0.65
0.7
Gas Volume V [L]
40
50
60
70
80
90
Gas Pressure pg [bar]
Foam 1
Foam 2
No Foam
(b) p0 = 50 bar, cr = 1.5, vp = 100 mm/s
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
Gas Volume V [L]
40
60
80
100
120
140
Gas Pressure pg [bar]
Foam 1
Foam 2
No Foam
(c) p0 = 50 bar, cr = 2, vp = 50 mm/s
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
Gas Volume V [L]
40
60
80
100
120
140
Gas Pressure pg [bar]
Foam 1
Foam 2
No Foam
(d) p0 = 50 bar, cr = 2, vp = 100 mm/s
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
Gas Volume V [L]
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
Gas Pressure pg [bar]
Foam 1
Foam 2
No Foam
(e) p0 = 50 bar, cr = 2.5, vp = 50 mm/s
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
Gas Volume V [L]
0
50
100
150
200
Gas Pressure pg [bar]
Foam 1
Foam 2
No Foam
(f) p0 = 50 bar, cr = 2.5, vp = 100 mm/s
Figure 11.10: Pressure-Volume diagrams from tests of 0.64 L accumulator with no foam,
foam 1, and foam 2.
xvii
==PAGE:115==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
xviii
0.52
0.54
0.56
0.58
0.6
0.62
0.64
0.66
Gas Volume V [L]
80
90
100
110
120
130
140
Gas Pressure pg [bar]
Foam 1
Foam 2
No Foam
(a) p0 = 100 bar, cr = 1.25, vp = 50 mm/s
0.52
0.54
0.56
0.58
0.6
0.62
0.64
0.66
Gas Volume V [L]
80
90
100
110
120
130
140
Gas Pressure pg [bar]
Foam 1
Foam 2
No Foam
(b) p0 = 100 bar, cr = 1.25, vp = 100 mm/s
0.4
0.45
0.5
0.55
0.6
0.65
0.7
Gas Volume V [L]
80
100
120
140
160
180
Gas Pressure pg [bar]
Foam 1
Foam 2
No Foam
(c) p0 = 100 bar, cr = 1.5, vp = 50 mm/s
0.4
0.45
0.5
0.55
0.6
0.65
0.7
Gas Volume V [L]
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
Gas Pressure pg [bar]
Foam 1
Foam 2
No Foam
(d) p0 = 100 bar, cr = 1.5, vp = 100 mm/s
0.35
0.4
0.45
0.5
0.55
0.6
0.65
0.7
Gas Volume V [L]
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
Gas Pressure pg [bar]
Foam 1
Foam 2
No Foam
(e) p0 = 100 bar, cr = 1.65, vp = 50 mm/s
0.35
0.4
0.45
0.5
0.55
0.6
0.65
0.7
Gas Volume V [L]
50
100
150
200
250
Gas Pressure pg [bar]
Foam 1
Foam 2
No Foam
(f) p0 = 100 bar, cr = 1.65, vp = 100 mm/s
Figure 11.11: Pressure-Volume diagrams from tests of 0.64 L accumulator with no foam,
foam 1, and foam 2.
xviii
==PAGE:116==
xix
BIBLIOGRAPHY
xix
==PAGE:117==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
xx
11.6.3
Foam Selection
Filling
Ref speed Expansion Speed
Stroke
Comp ratio Oil volume Energy Netto Friction Min Pressure Energy Density
mm/s
mm/s
mm
L
kJ
kJ/mm
bar
kJ/L
22.00
21.37
164.59
1.74
2.54
34.14
0.28
90.8
13.5
22.00
21.13
164.43
1.73
2.53
34.37
0.29
91.1
13.6
27.00
26.05
164.58
1.73
2.54
34.04
0.28
90.1
13.4
27.00
25.79
164.77
1.74
2.54
34.28
0.29
90.4
13.5
22.00
21.14
150.97
1.64
2.33
35.63
0.31
108.9
15.3
22.00
21.67
151.05
1.64
2.33
35.09
0.31
107.2
15.1
27.00
24.64
150.96
1.64
2.33
35.64
0.29
108.8
15.3
27.00
26.31
150.98
1.64
2.33
35.11
0.32
107.3
15.1
22.00
20.96
153.26
1.65
2.36
35.54
0.29
107.1
15.0
22.00
21.05
153.26
1.65
2.36
35.78
0.30
107.7
15.1
27.00
25.53
153.27
1.65
2.36
35.52
0.30
106.9
15.0
27.00
25.93
153.31
1.65
2.36
35.69
0.30
107.6
15.1
22.00
21.41
155.93
1.67
2.40
36.13
0.30
106.4
15.0
27.00
25.98
155.56
1.67
2.40
36.10
0.30
106.2
15.1
22.00
21.43
155.97
1.67
2.40
34.85
0.29
101.4
14.5
27.00
26.01
156.10
1.67
2.40
34.97
0.29
101.5
14.5
Filling
Ref speed Expansion Speed
Stroke
Comp ratio Oil volume Energy Netto Friction Min Pressure Energy Density
mm/s
mm/s
mm
L
kJ
kJ/mm
bar
kJ/L
22.00
21.19
159.22
1.70
2.46
33.18
0.29
92.3
13.5
22.00
21.35
159.79
1.70
2.46
33.16
0.29
92.5
13.5
27.00
26.06
159.46
1.70
2.46
33.13
0.29
91.5
13.5
27.00
26.01
159.48
1.70
2.46
33.12
0.29
91.5
13.5
22.00
20.57
149.93
1.63
2.31
35.29
0.30
108.8
15.3
22.00
20.69
150.94
1.64
2.33
34.81
0.31
107.4
15.0
27.00
25.96
150.06
1.63
2.31
35.24
0.31
108.9
15.2
27.00
26.68
149.99
1.63
2.31
34.75
0.30
107.2
15.0
22.00
21.24
152.29
1.65
2.35
35.19
0.29
107.1
15.0
22.00
21.26
152.16
1.64
2.35
35.38
0.30
107.6
15.1
27.00
26.36
152.24
1.65
2.35
35.26
0.28
106.9
15.0
27.00
25.27
152.69
1.65
2.36
35.30
0.30
107.5
15.0
22.00
21.34
154.01
1.66
2.37
35.47
0.30
106.4
15.0
27.00
25.81
153.17
1.65
2.37
35.46
0.30
106.6
15.0
22.00
21.16
155.09
1.66
2.39
34.50
0.29
101.4
14.4
27.00
25.73
155.11
1.66
2.39
34.71
0.30
101.8
14.5
Filling
Ref speed Expansion Speed
Stroke
Comp ratio Oil volume Energy Netto Friction Min pressure Energy Density
mm/s
mm/s
mm
L
kJ
kJ/mm
bar
kJ/L
22.00
21.68
150.57
1.63
2.32
31.22
0.28
94.1
13.4
22.00
20.93
150.47
1.63
2.32
31.16
0.29
94.3
13.4
27.00
25.81
150.51
1.63
2.32
31.09
0.29
93.9
13.4
27.00
25.71
150.42
1.63
2.32
31.08
0.29
93.6
13.4
22.00
21.64
148.00
1.62
2.28
34.69
0.29
109.1
15.2
22.00
21.39
148.38
1.62
2.29
34.21
0.29
107.6
14.9
27.00
25.79
147.98
1.62
2.28
34.58
0.30
109.1
15.2
27.00
24.72
147.97
1.62
2.28
34.16
0.31
107.6
15.0
22.00
21.19
150.25
1.63
2.32
34.55
0.30
107.2
14.9
22.00
21.22
150.29
1.63
2.32
34.70
0.30
107.7
15.0
27.00
25.50
150.21
1.63
2.32
34.47
0.30
107.1
14.9
27.00
25.86
151.52
1.64
2.34
34.64
0.30
107.5
14.8
22.00
21.71
148.33
1.63
2.33
34.71
0.29
106.4
14.9
27.00
25.87
150.67
1.63
2.32
34.54
0.30
106.7
14.9
22.00
21.63
153.01
1.65
2.36
33.73
0.28
101.8
14.3
27.00
25.73
152.04
1.64
2.34
33.86
0.28
102.0
14.5
P0 = 120
Unfixed HR 50
Fixed HR 55
Unfixed HR 55
Foam Tests 6L Accumulator
Fixed HR 55
Unfixed HR 55
No Foam
Fixed PPI 80
P0 = 120
P0 = 120
No Foam
Unfixed HR 50
Fixed PPI 80
No Foam
90 seconds Compression
60 seconds Compression
30 seconds Compression
Unfixed HR 50
Fixed HR 55
Fixed PPI 80
Unfixed HR 55
xx
==PAGE:118==
xxi
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Filling
Ref speed Expansion Speed
Stroke
Comp ratio Oil volume Energy Netto Friction Min Pressure Energy Density
mm/s
mm/s
mm
L
kJ
kJ/mm
bar
kJ/L
22.00
21.50
135.70
1.54
2.09
31.85
0.29
109.4
15.2
22.00
21.13
135.40
1.54
2.09
32.04
0.30
110.4
15.3
27.00
25.58
135.47
1.54
2.09
31.69
0.30
108.8
15.2
27.00
25.84
135.44
1.54
2.09
31.99
0.30
109.7
15.3
22.00
21.63
123.96
1.47
1.91
31.84
0.32
126.3
16.7
22.00
17.85
124.04
1.47
1.91
31.55
0.31
125.1
16.5
27.00
26.44
123.89
1.47
1.91
31.68
0.32
126.1
16.6
27.00
26.35
123.98
1.47
1.91
31.49
0.32
125.3
16.5
22.00
20.78
127.44
1.49
1.97
32.01
0.29
123.6
16.3
22.00
21.31
127.57
1.49
1.97
32.07
0.29
123.7
16.3
27.00
25.13
127.36
1.49
1.96
32.06
0.29
123.6
16.3
27.00
25.70
127.57
1.49
1.96
32.16
0.29
123.6
16.4
22.00
20.85
129.94
1.50
2.00
32.81
0.29
123.3
16.4
27.00
25.76
129.93
1.50
2.00
32.78
0.29
123.2
16.4
22.00
21.00
128.28
1.49
1.98
31.53
0.28
119.2
15.9
27.00
25.77
128.15
1.49
1.98
31.50
0.28
119.1
15.9
Filling
Ref speed Expansion Speed
Stroke
Comp ratio Oil volume Energy Netto Friction Min Pressure Energy Density
mm/s
mm/s
mm
L
kJ
kJ/mm
bar
kJ/L
22.00
21.29
131.54
1.51
2.03
30.50
0.30
111.0
15.0
22.00
21.20
130.32
1.51
2.01
30.81
0.28
111.6
15.3
27.00
25.81
130.34
1.51
2.01
30.35
0.30
110.2
15.1
27.00
25.69
130.26
1.50
2.01
30.64
0.30
111.3
15.3
22.00
21.70
124.00
1.47
1.91
31.86
0.32
126.1
16.7
22.00
21.38
123.95
1.47
1.91
31.52
0.31
125.1
16.5
27.00
26.75
124.02
1.47
1.91
31.68
0.30
126.1
16.6
27.00
26.32
123.92
1.47
1.91
31.47
0.32
125.3
16.5
22.00
21.32
126.64
1.48
1.95
31.75
0.29
123.7
16.3
22.00
21.15
126.50
1.48
1.95
31.97
0.31
124.3
16.4
27.00
25.24
126.40
1.48
1.95
31.74
0.29
123.7
16.3
27.00
25.65
126.50
1.48
1.95
31.67
0.30
123.8
16.3
22.00
21.35
128.00
1.49
1.97
32.20
0.29
123.6
16.3
27.00
25.71
128.41
1.50
1.99
32.15
0.30
123.5
16.2
22.00
20.61
126.14
1.48
1.94
30.97
0.28
119.5
15.9
27.00
20.95
126.09
1.48
1.94
31.05
0.28
120.0
16.0
22.00
25.96
126.13
1.48
1.94
30.85
0.27
119.4
15.9
27.00
25.82
126.19
1.48
1.95
31.00
0.28
120.0
15.9
Filling
Ref speed Expansion Speed
Stroke
Comp ratio Oil volume Energy Netto Friction Min pressure Energy Density
mm/s
mm/s
mm
L
kJ
kJ/mm
bar
kJ/L
22.00
21.14
121.37
1.45
1.87
28.12
0.30
113.0
15.0
22.00
20.85
121.29
1.45
1.87
28.51
0.27
113.9
15.2
27.00
25.82
121.71
1.46
1.88
28.11
0.30
112.7
15.0
27.00
25.98
121.28
1.45
1.87
28.39
0.30
113.5
15.2
22.00
26.46
122.55
1.46
1.89
31.04
0.30
126.3
16.4
22.00
20.93
121.97
1.46
1.88
30.90
0.30
125.5
16.4
27.00
26.51
121.94
1.46
1.88
31.01
0.30
126.3
16.5
27.00
26.44
121.96
1.46
1.88
30.87
0.32
125.5
16.4
22.00
20.77
123.48
1.47
1.90
30.83
0.29
124.1
16.2
22.00
21.20
123.45
1.47
1.90
30.85
0.30
124.3
16.2
27.00
25.46
123.42
1.47
1.90
30.87
0.29
124.1
16.2
27.00
25.33
123.40
1.47
1.90
30.86
0.31
124.3
16.2
22.00
21.00
126.99
1.49
1.96
31.83
0.29
123.5
16.3
27.00
25.10
130.26
1.51
2.02
31.51
0.31
123.8
15.6
22.00
20.83
124.27
1.47
1.92
30.32
0.28
119.8
15.8
27.00
21.35
124.25
1.47
1.91
30.46
0.28
120.5
15.9
22.00
25.80
124.18
1.47
1.91
30.21
0.28
119.7
15.8
27.00
25.76
124.18
1.47
1.91
30.45
0.29
120.3
15.9
P0 = 138
Unfixed HR 50
Fixed HR 55
Unfixed HR 55
Foam Tests 6L Accumulator
Fixed PPI 80
Unfixed HR 55
Fixed PPI 80
Fixed PPI 80
P0 = 138
No Foam
Fixed HR 55
P0 = 138
No Foam
Unfixed HR 50
No Foam
90 seconds Compression
60 seconds Compression
30 seconds Compression
Unfixed HR 50
Fixed HR 55
Unfixed HR 55
xxi
==PAGE:119==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
xxii
11.7
Case: Pitch Control Accumulators Results
260
270
280
290
300
time [s]
100
150
200
250
Pressure [bar]
10 mm/s
20 mm/s
30 mm/s
45 mm/s
60 mm/s
(a) Gas only, T0 = 23.5◦C
260
270
280
290
300
time [s]
100
150
200
250
Pressure [bar]
10 mm/s
20 mm/s
30 mm/s
45 mm/s
60 mm/s
(b) Foam 3 ﬁxed, T0 = 23.5◦C
Figure 11.12: Pressure curves comparing the eﬀect of expansion velocity, with gas only
and foam 3 ﬁxed with: p0 = 140 bar and pmax = 250 bar.
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
Volume [L]
100
150
200
250
Pressure [bar]
10 mm/s
20 mm/s
30 mm/s
45 mm/s
60 mm/s
(a) Gas only, T0 = 23.5◦C
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
Volume [L]
100
150
200
250
Pressure [bar]
10 mm/s
20 mm/s
30 mm/s
45 mm/s
60 mm/s
(b) Foam 3 ﬁxed, T0 = 23.5◦C
Figure 11.13: pV diagrams comparing the eﬀect of expansion velocity, with gas only
and foam 3 ﬁxed with: p0 = 140 bar and pmax = 250 bar.
11.8
Foam Eﬀect on Expansion Alone. (Worst Case
Scenario)
11.8.1
Approach
Testing the foams eﬀect during the expansion only requires a long enough holding period
for the gas pressure to reach ﬁnal equilibrium. As a consequence of the increased thermal
time constant, that would make every test last more than 30 minutes. This test is done,
to see the deviation of the results with the short holding period, compared to what would
have been found, if the relaxation time was long enough to reach total equilibrium. This
is only important when comparing the foam ﬁlled accumulator to the accumulator with
gas only.
Four diﬀerent tests were done. One without foam as the reference, and three with foam
3 ﬁxed to the piston. The holding period of the reference test and the shortest test with
xxii
==PAGE:120==
xxiii
BIBLIOGRAPHY
foam, was set to 220 seconds. The medium long test had a holding period of 420 seconds,
whereas the longest holding time is set to the time required for the pressure of the foam
ﬁlled accumulator to reach the pressure of the reference case at 220 seconds.
The common test parameters for all four tests are:
– Preload pressure p0 = 138 bar.
– Maximum pressure pmax = 250 bar.
– Compression ratio cr = 1.5
– Compression piston speed vcomp = 2.25 mm/s
– Compression time tc = 60 s
– Expansion piston speed vexp = 22 mm/s
To make everything as similar as possible, a compression rate is found, for which both
accumulators reach the same maximum pressure with a compression ratio of 1.5. It should
be noted that this is very slow, and would take up to 5 minutes in a 20 L accumulator. In
contrast the expansion rate corresponds to 20 L/min which is a common ﬂow rate during
an emergency stop.
11.8.2
Results
The full cycles of the 4 tests are shown in ﬁgure 11.14a, while ﬁgure 11.14b shows the
expansions only. When only the expansion is taken into account, the most relevant results
are the discharge energy, and the pressure during the expansion. The minimum pressure
at the end of the expansion is of special interest as this is where the force is at its lowest,
which often makes it a limiting factor. The results of the pressure and discharge energy
are presented in table 11.1.
No Foam
Foam 3 Short hold
Foam 3 Medium hold
Foam 3 Long hold
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
time [s]
100
150
200
250
Pressure [bar]
(a) Full Cycle
1235
1240
1245
1250
1255
time [s]
100
120
140
160
180
200
220
240
Pressure [bar]
(b) Expansion Only
Figure 11.14: Pressure curves of the 6 L accumulator with no foam and foam 3 ﬁxed.
Comparing the improvement with holding times of 220 s, 420 s, and 1200 s, (equilibrium).
It is found that the minimum pressure is increased with the foam even after reaching
equilibrium. First of all this proves, that the foam still has a positive eﬀect, when the
xxiii
==PAGE:121==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
xxiv
eﬀects during the compression and holding period are negated. In addition, when the
results with the 3 diﬀerent holding periods are compared. It is seen that the diﬀerence
between the pressures right before the expansion is balanced out and reduced to a 2 bars
deviation at the end of the expansion. In percentage the unwanted pressure drop below
preload pressure is reduced with 38% with a holding period of 220 seconds and 30% with
1200 seconds.
Table 11.1: Results for 6 L accumulator with no foam and foam 3 ﬁxed at 138 bar
preload pressure and diﬀerent holding times.
Filling
Holding time
Discharge Pressure
Pressure Drop
Minimum pressure
Discharge Energy
th [s]
pexp [bar]
δp [bar]
pmin [bar]
Eout [kJ]
No Foam
220
227.4
115.8
111.6
30.8
Foam 3
Fixed
220
231.4
109.8
121.6
32.7
420
229.5
109.0
120.5
32.3
1200
227.3
107.8
119.5
31.9
The higher pressures during the expansion, is seen by the reduced slope of the expansion
pressure in the pV diagram in ﬁgure 11.15. This means that the energy density is higher
when discharging the foam ﬁlled accumulator, and the total discharge energy is increased.
The increase is seen with all three holding periods, but because the pressure diﬀerence
before expansion is as much as 4 bar, a larger error is seen with the short holding period.
The energy is increased by 6.2% for the short holding and 3.6% when equilibrium is
reached.
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
Volume [L]
100
150
200
250
300
Pressure [bar]
No Foam
Foam 3 Short hold
Foam 3 Medium hold
Foam 3 Long hold
Figure 11.15: pV diagrams of the 6 L accumulator with no foam and foam 3 ﬁxed.
Comparing the improvement with holding times of 220 s, 420 s, and 1200 s, (equilibrium).
In conclusion a holding period of 220 seconds is enough to get an idea of the improvements,
even though the results will be optimistic compared to those obtained when equilibrium
is reached.
Comparing the total energy should be done with more caution than the
minimum pressure. Regarding the eﬀect of the foam, it should be noted that this is the
conservative case of high preload pressure, where the total pressure drop is small and the
eﬀect of the foam is at its minimum. Testing the expansion only, is a test of the worst
xxiv
==PAGE:122==
xxv
BIBLIOGRAPHY
case scenario regarding the eﬀect of the foam, and it is most relevant for the accumulators
that are used for emergency stop only.
xxv
