==PAGE:1==
 
1 
 
 
 
Technical University of Denmark 
 
 
Master Thesis 
 
 
15th March 2017 
 
 
 
 
USE OF DIGITAL TOOLS IN  
URBAN PLANNING  
 
Investigation of use of digital tools to advance sustainable urban planning 
 
 
 
 
Supervisors  
 
 
 
 
Author 
Per Sieverts Nielsen 
 
 
 
Kirstine Lyngsø-Dahl 
DTU Management Engineering 
 
 
S102921 
 
 
Susanne Balslev Nielsen 
 
 
 
DTU Management Engineering 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Alfred Heller 
DTU Civil Engineering 
 
==PAGE:2==
 
2 
==PAGE:3==
 
3 
TITLE PAGE 
 
 
 
 
Title:  
 
 
Use of digital tools in urban planning 
 
Subtitle: 
Investigation of use of digital tools to advance 
sustainable urban planning 
 
Author:  
 
 
Kirstine Lyngsø-Dahl 
 
Study number: 
 
S102921 
 
MSc Programme: 
Civil Engineering – Urban planning and construction 
management 
 
University:  
Technical University of Denmark 
 
Project time:  
 
22th August 2016 – 15th March 2017 
 
ECTS-point:  
 
35 ECTS-point 
 
Supervisors: 
 
Per Sieverts Nielsen (Head Supervisor) 
 
 
13th December 2016 – 15th March 2017 
 
Susanne Balslev Nielsen (Head Supervisor) 
22th August 2016 – 22th December 2016 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Alfred Heller (Co-supervisor) 
 
 
 
 
22th August 2016 – 15th March 2017 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:4==
 
4 
==PAGE:5==
 
5 
PREFACE 
 
This master thesis has the purpose to analyse and discuss the use of digital tools in urban 
planning. The thesis has been completed at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU). The 
thesis is the final assignment of the education; Master of Science in Civil Engineering with 
focus on urban planning and construction management.  
 
It has definitely been an interesting and educational experience to write this thesis but also 
at times a challenging journey. Special thanks to my advisor Per Sieverts Nielsen for 
professional discussion and guidance. Thank you to my co-advisor Alfred Heller to shed light 
on technical areas and thank you to my former advisor Susanne Balslev Nielsen.  
 
Thanks to DTU for a thorough and profound professional education and to set the frame for 
the process of personal growth both academically and socially. Thanks to University of 
Copenhagen South Campus for facilitating silence and a good study environment in your 
library, where all students are welcome and where I have spent most of my working hours 
with this master thesis.  
 
Thanks to my parents, who have always been there for me through my years of education. 
Nothing has ever been too small or too big to discuss. And a special thanks to my mom for 
proofreading of, all kinds of texts from essays in primary school and social science reports in 
upper secondary school to assignments at university about urban planning and sustainable 
urban development. I treasure your work highly.   
 
And thanks to my thesis partner Sara and my brother Lars for good and professional 
discussions and competent feedback through the whole process of this master thesis. 
Thanks to the members of our study group Sara, Christine, Nis and Henrik for a lot of 
support and good teamwork through all the years at DTU.  
 
Also a special thanks to you Søren – my endless optimist, who always stands by me.     
 
General thanks a lot to my family for support and encouragement – Hanne, Jesper, Lars, 
Martine, Søren and baby Agnes.  
 
Furthermore I send my appreciation to the 41 people in the Danish municipalities, who took 
time to help me and answered my survey – it means more to me than you know.  
 
And thank you for taking your time to be interviewed; Esben Obeling (Aalborg Municipality), 
Maria Thye Lynghøj (Rødovre Municipality), Andreas Hvidt (Dansk Byplanlaboratorium), Uffe 
Gross Nielsen and Jesper Rye Rasmussen (Niras). I truly appreciate your involvement and 
sharing of best practice knowledge.  
 
 
Kirstine Lyngsø-Dahl 
==PAGE:6==
 
6 
==PAGE:7==
 
7 
ABSTRACT 
 
The municipalities are facing a wide range of digital initiatives, which to a great extent are 
driven by digital strategies on the basis of a joint public sector digitisation strategy and joint 
municipal plan of action for 2016-2020. In this thesis the main focus will be on how the 
municipalities’ urban planners can utilise the digital potential to achieve a sustainable 
planning process and what role digitisation plays in sustainable urban planning today. In the 
public sector the digital development commenced in May 2001 when the report “Digital 
Administration” was launched. The release of the digital administration initiative has among 
many things led to growth in the use of electronic case management in the municipalities, 
regions and national. A study in autumn 2014 made by Dansk Byplanlaboratorium showed to 
what extent the utilisation of information technologies had reached by urban planners 
(Kønigsfeldt, 2014). The results of the survey indicated that there was an unexploited 
potential, as already developed digital programmes were not used to a conceivable extent. 
The investigation for this thesis is based on a mixed method research consisting of a 
quantitative survey and five qualitative interviews. 
 
As a result of the investigation it can be concluded that digitisation can advance sustainable 
urban planning. The digital tools, which should be carefully selected for each municipality, 
add sustainable aspects (13 factors illustrated in the sustainability model) to a planning 
process, which implies that the planning process achieves sustainability goals. If digital tools 
are not accessible, the process cannot be advanced, which causes a cessation of the 
digitisation. There are some challenges to be overcome before the digitisation can be 
initiated. 
The hurdles, which are important to understand, are: Time, finances, to some extent 
competences, conventional thinking and a generational change (younger employees taking 
over). When facing the hurdles it becomes clear where to “push forward”. One way to 
overcome the hurdles can be to measure the outlined focus areas in the guiding 
sustainability model with the 13 sustainable parameters to understand where to improve. 
Another way to overcome the hurdles in digitisation is to employ people passionate in 
working with digital tools. The digital skilled younger people, who have this interest in 
digitisation and have acquired skills through education, work in the municipalities and use 
the tools together with other employees. The generational change can only take place when 
passionate people are employed and not by only using the sustainable parameters. 
Many different factors have an impact on the work in an urban planning department. There 
is not one specific tool or way of doing it, which will help the municipalities to achieve a 
sustainable planning process. This is why a consistent strategy of implementation of tools is 
not to recommend. The digitisation will instead be implemented in steps matching the 
municipalities’ individual needs.   
==PAGE:8==
 
8 
TABLE OF CONTENT 
 
1 
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................... 13 
1.1   BACKGROUND ...................................................................................................... 13 
1.2   PROBLEM AREA .................................................................................................... 14 
1.3   PROBLEM STATEMENT .......................................................................................... 15 
1.4   DELIMITATION ...................................................................................................... 15 
1.5   VOCABULARY LIST ................................................................................................. 16 
1.6   REPORT STRUCTURE .............................................................................................. 16 
2 
METHOD ........................................................................................ 19 
2.1   MIXED METHOD RESEARCH AND METHOD TRIANGULATION ................................ 19 
2.2   RESEARCH TYPES .................................................................................................. 20 
2.2.1     The descriptive research type ............................................................. 20 
2.2.2     The understanding research type ....................................................... 20 
2.3   QUANTITATIVE METHOD ....................................................................................... 21 
2.4   QUALITATIVE METHOD ......................................................................................... 24 
2.5   LITERATURE REVIEW .............................................................................................. 27 
2.6   DESIGNING THE SUSTAINABILITY MODEL .............................................................. 28 
3 
THEORY .......................................................................................... 31 
3.1   DIGITAL DEVELOPMENT 1990 – 2017 .................................................................... 31 
3.2   URBAN PLANNING PROCESSES IN A DANISH MUNICIPALITY .................................. 34 
3.2.1     Local municipal plan ............................................................................. 34 
3.2.2     District plan ........................................................................................... 38 
3.2.3     Development plans and overall plan .................................................. 41 
3.3   SUSTAINABLE URBAN PLANNING IN DENMARK ...................................................... 41 
3.4   DIGITAL URBAN PLANNING ................................................................................... 43 
3.4.1     Different ways to organise an urban planning process ..................... 43 
3.4.2     Forwards and backwards visualisation ................................................ 44 
3.4.3     Two classes of modelling methods ..................................................... 44 
3.4.4     Level of Detail (LOD) ............................................................................ 45 
3.4.5     Parametric Urban Design ..................................................................... 46 
4 
RESULTS & ANALYSIS ........................................................................ 49 
4.1   QUANTITATIVE DATA ANALYSIS ............................................................................ 49 
4.2   QUALITATIVE DATA ANALYSIS – INTERVIEWS ......................................................... 57 
4.2.1     Summary of the qualitative data collection ........................................ 57 
4.2.2     Analysis of the qualitative data collection .......................................... 60 
4.3   QUALITATIVE DATA ANALYSIS – SUSTAINABILITY ................................................... 67 
5 
DISCUSSION .................................................................................... 73 
5.1   DISCUSSION OF THE RESULTS ................................................................................ 73 
5.1.1     Barriers and opportunities ................................................................... 73 
5.1.2     The right tools? ..................................................................................... 76 
==PAGE:9==
 
9 
5.1.3     Tools and strategies supporting a sustainable planning process .... 78 
5.2   CRITICAL REFLECTION ........................................................................................... 82 
5.3   FURTHER INVESTIGATION ...................................................................................... 84 
6 
CONCLUSION .................................................................................. 85 
7 
REFERENCES ................................................................................... 87 
8 
APPENDIX ....................................................................................... 93 
 
 
==PAGE:10==
 
10
FIGURES 
 
Figure 1 
Overlap of the three areas represents the problem... 
 
Page 14 
Figure 2 
Report Structure 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 17 
Figure 3 
Methods can be combined and used differently based on… 
Page 19 
Figure 4 
Interpretation process 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 21 
Figure 5 
Illustration of all 41 responses of the survey measured in…  
Page 23  
Figure 6 
Digital tools considered from three different angles  
 
Page 25 
Figure 7 
Searching results when using AND, OR and NOT 
 
 
Page 27 
Figure 8 
Process of the literature study, quantitative and qualitative… 
Page 28 
Figure 9   
Percentage of the population with access to Internet  
 
Page 31 
Figure 10 
Electronic devises at home   
 
 
 
 
Page 32 
Figure 11 
The blue line indicates the percentage in the public… 
 
Page 33 
Figure 12 
Fifteen years of developing readjustments in the public…  
Page 33 
Figure 13 
The local municipal plan in an interaction between vision…  
Page 35 
Figure 14 
Procedure for revision of the local municipal plan every…  
Page 36 
Figure 15 
The plan strategy is devised in the first part of the election… 
Page 37 
Figure 16 
Four overall phases in district planning 
 
 
 
Page 39   
Figure 17 
Phases in a district plan  
 
 
 
 
 
Page 39 
Figure 18 
Left: Perspective from the publicly available park area…  
 
Page 40 
Figure 19  
Development plan process   
 
 
 
 
Page 41 
Figure 20 
Example of level of details. From left to right is… 
 
 
Page 46  
Figure 21 
Hierarchy for urban design 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 47 
Figure 22 
Illustration of the division of the results section 
 
 
Page 49 
Figure 23 
Example of question 1 in the survey from response #1 and… 
Page 50 
Figure 24 
Example of question 2 in the survey from response #35…  
Page 51 
Figure 25 
Example of question 3 in the survey from response #7, #...  
Page 52 
Figure 26 
Result of question 4 in the survey. It is possible to…  
 
Page 52  
Figure 27 
Results of question 6 in the survey 
 
 
 
 
Page 53 
Figure 28 
Five statements the municipalities shall consider 
 
 
Page 54 
Figure 29 
Question 8+9+10 about finances, competences and time… 
Page 55 
Figure 30 
Illustration of the division of the presentation of qualitative data 
Page 60  
Figure 31 
SketchUp 3D model of Aalborg with shadings 
 
 
Page 61 
Figure 32 
Google Maps 3D map of Aalborg 
 
 
 
 
Page 61 
Figure 33  
Staircase for implementation of digital tools  
 
 
Page 81 
 
 
==PAGE:11==
 
11
TABLES 
 
Table 1 
Sustainability model version 2 
 
 
 
 
Page 29 
Table 2 
Level of detail A-G 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 45 
Table 3 
Sustainability model version 1 – digitisation strategies 
 
Page 67 
Table 4 
Sustainability model version 2 – digital tools  
 
 
Page 68 
Table 5 
Sustainable parameters, which have to help to overcome…  
Page 74  
 
==PAGE:12==
 
12
==PAGE:13==
 
13
1 
INTRODUCTION 
 
1.1   Background 
The Danish municipalities has through the past 15 years gone through a readjustment, which 
has led the municipalities to a more digital working process and digital way of handle and 
administrate cases. Since 2001 the digital cooperation commenced between the citizens and 
the public administration and today, a long list of solutions are now a natural part of the 
daily life (Digitaliseringsstyrelsen, 2016).  
   
The municipalities are facing a wide range of digital initiatives, which to a great extent are 
driven by digital strategies on the basis of a joint public sector digitisation strategy and joint 
municipal plan of action for 2016-2020. Both strategies are at the same time replacing and 
based on the former strategies for 2011-2015 (Kommunernes Landsforening, 2016). In spite 
of these digitisation strategies, a specific uniform strategy is not mentioned for digitisation 
in urban planning in the municipalities. With 98 municipalities in Denmark, this results in 98 
different ways to reach a digitisation strategy. Only one initiative regarding Smart City is 
included in each current strategy, unlike the earlier publications of the strategies. In the joint 
municipal plan of action initiative 3.3 includes the spread of Smart City. The efforts are e.g. 
about utilisation of technology and data in relation to urban functions or in relation to 
culture, business community and public participation. A lot of municipalities demand 
meanwhile more knowledge, competency development and interdisciplinary organisation to 
either continue or start the effort of Smart Cities. The municipalities demand also a closer 
cooperation to the other municipalities, to avoid they all have to invent the same idea 98 
times (KL, 2017).  
 
In May 2012 Kommunernes Landsforening attempted to measure digital maturity in 22 
municipalities by devising a report (KL & Devoteam, 2012). In the report they weight digital 
maturity on five parameters with appertaining subtopics. Likewise Dansk Byplanlaboratorium 
executed in autumn 2014 an investigation, which aimed to survey, how Danish urban 
planners utilise IT and apps in their work including public participation (Kønigsfeldt, 2014).   
 
Digital tools cover a wide palette of information technologies and programmes. It ranges 
from raw data in geographic information system (GIS) to simple 2D drawings through 
advanced multi-dimensional city models to a 100 % computer generated world, which can 
be seen through Virtual Reality glasses, to gain a completely realistic insight into how the 
next market or the next park in a small city in Denmark will look like.  
 
In Denmark there is not a single way for the Danish municipalities to implement these 
diverse digital technologies and especially not if the focus is on supporting sustainable 
internal processes and sustainability goals. The technologies are available, but different 
hurdles can be identified in the municipalities in relation to digitisation. Different needs in 
the municipalities can also affect the choice of tool, which makes an implementation occur in 
different ways.   
==PAGE:14==
 
14
1.2   Problem Area 
The digitisation of the municipalities is driven by digital strategies as the joint public sector 
digitisation strategy and the joint municipal plan of action for 2016-2020 and the digitisation 
of the society in general. Digitisation and use of digital tools are relatively new, and have 
developed over the past 27 years by the use of computers around 1990, mobile phones in 
1994 and Internet in 1996 (Therkelsen, Mølgaard, & Dahl, 2003).  
 
A study in autumn 2014 made by Dansk Byplanlaboratorium showed to what extent the 
utilisation of information technologies has reached by urban planners (Kønigsfeldt, 2014). 
The results of the survey indicate that there is an unexploited potential, as already 
developed digital programmes are not used to the extent they could be. In the unexploited 
potential a number of municipalities do not seem to be aware of or ready for the digital 
development as well as the digital opportunities.  
 
In this thesis the main focus is on how the municipalities’ urban planners can utilise the 
digital potential to achieve a sustainable planning process and sustainability goals. A 
decision making tool for digitisation of a sustainable urban planning can be relevant in 
relation to cope with the amount of digital tools. For this purpose a frame can be devised, 
where different aspects are assessed – within the three overall aspects of sustainability; 
environment, social and economy with appertaining sub parameters. The sustainability 
parameters have to be clarified. In order to understand what tools to implement it is 
necessary to understand the current digital scenario in the municipalities. 
 
The problem area can be viewed in figure 1, which illustrates the three different investigated 
areas and how they increase the purpose of this master thesis. The focus is the digitisation 
of a sustainable urban planning process in the municipalities where all three areas overlap.  
 
 
 
Figure 1 – The overlap of the three areas represents the problem area of this master thesis 
==PAGE:15==
 
15
Based on the introduction and problem area’s clarification the master thesis will take the 
following hypothesis as its starting point: 
 
o Use of digital tools in sustainable urban planning advances the urban planning 
process.  
 
1.3   Problem Statement  
The research questions are delineated with one main question and three sub questions, 
which will be used as a tool to substantiate and fulfil the main question.  
 
What role does digitisation play in sustainable urban planning today? 
 
- 
Does digitisation help the municipalities to achieve a sustainable planning process? 
 
- 
Do the municipalities have the right tools (digitisation tools) to achieve their 
sustainability goals? 
 
- 
What type of digitisation tools would actually help the municipalities in achieving a 
sustainable planning process? 
 
 
To answer the questions above, the thesis will:  
o Examine the current digital scenario in the Danish municipalities  
o Explain the digital development since 1990  
o Investigate the decision-making processes in municipal urban planning 
o Clarify the influence of sustainable parameters with use of digital tools and how 
digitisation strategies will influence 
o Identify the barriers and advantages for working digital viewed from three different 
perspectives; municipality, suppliers and self-governing institutions 
o Identify tools supporting the municipalities’ sustainability goals  
o Discuss which sustainable parameters the degree of working digital influences  
o Discuss the hurdles in implementing digitisation and how to overcome them 
 
1.4   Delimitation  
The problem statement of the thesis is of an extent that demands delimitation for the further 
work on different areas.  
 
- 
The survey has been delimitated to only ask the Danish municipalities’ urban planning 
departments.  
 
- 
The collection period of quantitative data has been carried out in November and 
December. 
 
==PAGE:16==
 
16
- 
A reminder has not been possible to process to the municipalities because the survey 
was only to be answered anonymously, which made it impossible to send a reminder. 
Furthermore the first e-mail was sent to the info e-mail address at the municipality 
office, which means the reminder e-mail should be sent to the info e-mail address again 
with the risk that a different received it. 
 
- 
The qualitative data collection analyses three different angles on the subject – first the 
municipality (receiver), secondly the consultant company (supplier) and thirdly the self-
governing institution (neutral observer). The data collection field could have been 
investigated broader, but was delimitated to these three angles.  
 
- 
The thesis focuses on, how the municipalities’ own urban planners can utilise the digital 
potential and does not consider how to work actively with developing citizens’ ability to 
use digital solutions.  
 
1.5   Vocabulary List 
In the theory section the processes in the Danish municipalities’ urban planning 
departments will be explained. The Danish words have been translated, but it was not 
possible to find a consistent translation for all the urban planning words used in “Planloven” 
(Retsinformation, 2015) etc. Therefore a vocabulary has been completed to clarify the 
meaning of the words and to avoid misunderstandings.   
 
Local municipal plan = kommuneplan 
District plan = lokalplan 
Plan strategy = planstrategi 
Administration = forvaltning 
Overall plans = helhedsplaner 
Development plans = udviklingsplaner 
Political approval = politisk godkendelse 
Joint municipal plan of action = fælleskommunal handlingsplan 
Joint public sector digitisation strategy = fællesoffentlige digitaliseringsstrategi 
 
Due to an error in the reference system, when referring to page numbers in the citation, 
page will be abbreviated as s. instead of p.  
 
1.6   Report Structure 
The thesis is structured as illustrated in figure 2 and divided into six chapters.  
- 
The first chapter introduces the background of the project, the problem area, 
research questions and the delimitations for this thesis. 
 
- 
The method for data collection in this thesis will be explained in chapter 2, with a 
thoroughly description of the two methods – the quantitative and the qualitative 
method.  
 
==PAGE:17==
 
17
- 
A literature study will result in the theory section in chapter 3, where relevant theory 
regarding the master thesis theme will be outlined. The theory will cover the 
planning process in a Danish municipality based on Danish references. To 
understand the urban planner’s work in a municipality sets the basis for in what areas 
digitisation may occur. Also will chapter 3 describe sustainable urban planning in 
Denmark based on planloven, environmental assessments and Agenda 21. Finally 
digital urban planning will be explained through mainly international papers in order 
to broaden the perspective of digital urban planning.  
 
- 
Chapter 4 will include the empirical data, a thoroughly exposition of the quantitative 
results and an analysis of the qualitative results. The chapter will be presented in 
three sections; quantitative results which outline the results from the survey, the first 
part of the qualitative results which outline the four interviews and the second part of 
the qualitative results, which describes an sustainability model made as a way to 
understand the digitisation in the Danish municipalities. These three parts will lead to 
a discussion in chapter 5. 
 
- 
In chapter 5 a discussion will take form based on the three sections of results in 
chapter 4. The discussion will be divided as the three sub questions in the problem 
statement.  
 
- 
At last the conclusion in chapter 6 will answer the problem statement and explain the 
findings in this master thesis.   
 
 
Figure 2 - Report structure 
==PAGE:18==
 
18
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:19==
 
19
2 
METHOD 
 
The method section will describe which methods are used to collect the empirical data for 
this master thesis. The empirical data is partly collected by a quantitative method consisting 
of a survey and partly by a qualitative method consisting of four interviews. The interviewees 
have three different backgrounds. The combination of two methods as in this master thesis 
is called mixed-method research (Saunders & al., 2009, s. 152) and can also be regarded as 
method triangulation (Saunders & al., 2009, s. 154). A description of mixed-method research 
and method triangulation will be explained in section 2.1. The quantitative and qualitative 
method can also be viewed respectively as the descriptive and the understanding research 
type, each with their set of quality criteria. To understand how to gain access to the 
municipalities and companies the checklist in box 6.8 in Saunders et al. (2009, s. 183) has 
been used.  
 
2.1   Mixed Method Research And Method Triangulation 
Method triangulation is one of four main types of triangulation, which cover investigator 
triangulation, theory triangulation, method triangulation and data triangulation (Denzin, 
2006). Method triangulation uses two or more independent sources of data or data 
collection methods to corroborate research findings within a study (Saunders & al., 2009, s. 
154). The combination of methods will often generate a very thorough analysis and secure a 
qualified insight in the examined field. The two different data collection techniques used in 
this thesis are interviews, which hold the qualitative method and a survey, which holds the 
quantitative method.  
The mixed method research is illustrated in figure 3 below and the model shows the 
different research choices, which can be used.  
 
Figure 3 - Methods can be combined and used differently based on the research choice 
Unique for the mixed-method research is that it uses both qualitative and quantitative 
methods for data collection but does not combine them, which means that quantitative data 
is analysed quantitatively and qualitative data is analysed qualitatively. This can be done 
==PAGE:20==
 
20
either parallel, at the same time or sequential, one after another (Saunders & al., 2009, s. 
152-153). It is not uncommon, that one of the data collection techniques can be dominant.  
 
2.2   Research Types 
To understand the different methods, which have been used to collect data, it is important 
to understand the research types, which form the basis for the investigation. The table in 
Appendix A shows a simplified explanation of which research types are the best for the 
individual study research (Launsø, Reiper, & Olsen, 2011). The model contains four research 
types, which comprises the descriptive, the explanatory, the understanding and the 
actionable research type.  
Based on the typical design parameters “survey” and “interviews”, which in the table are 
considered as “case study”, this thesis uses two research types; namely the descriptive 
research type and the understanding research type.  
 
2.2.1     The descriptive research type  
The descriptive research type can be regarded as taking its starting point in the quantitative 
method, which will be explained in section 2.3. The target groups are generally public 
authorities or professional organisations. The typical results for this research type are 
numbers, tables and diagrams.  
The descriptive research’s core question is »How are X distributed on Y?«, which e.g. can be 
asked »How are the municipalities distributed on working with 2D-models?«, »How are the 
municipalities distributed on working with public participation?« etc. Descriptive social 
research is historical grounded in the nation state’s statistic production, and the statistical 
information has strongly expanded during the past half decade. The typical design, which is 
used for the descriptive research type, is survey. The quality criteria are reliability, validity, 
accuracy and generalizability, as seen in the table in Appendix A (Launsø, Reiper, & Olsen, 
2011, s. 13-16). These quality criteria secure an objective research process, which is devised 
neutral. The data quality criteria will be further explained in section 2.3.  
The dominating perspective for the descriptive research type is the researcher’s perspective, 
which implies that it is the researcher, who formulates the problem statement and designs 
the data collection instrument, where the explored persons are providers/suppliers of data. 
The relation between the researcher and the explored persons are dominated by distance 
and the researchers are unusually in direct contact with the participants of the survey. The 
researcher has not necessarily experience in the investigated area and it is important for the 
researcher to be neutral (Launsø, Reiper, & Olsen, 2011, s. 13-16).  
 
2.2.2     The understanding research type  
The understanding research type focuses on interpretation and understanding of the 
phenomena, which already are interpretations. The researcher seeks to attain knowledge 
about an investigated phenomenon, which generally is based fully or partially on the 
perspective of the explored persons, which makes the explored persons subjectivity an 
important part of the material of data (Launsø, Reiper, & Olsen, 2011, s. 24).  
==PAGE:21==
 
21
The core question for the understanding research type is »What opinion does X (the 
informant) attribute to a certain phenomenon (Y) in what context (Z)?« and the answer will 
result in narrative, quotation, pictures and interpretation. The question could in this thesis 
be; “What opinion does the urban planner attribute to digital tools in an urban planning 
process in the municipality?”.  
 The starting point in the explored persons’ subjectivity includes, that the researcher has to 
be engaged to construe observations. The interpretation can be illustrated as a process, 
where the researcher creates a pre-understanding of the social phenomenon, which is 
investigated and is an on-going process of realisation, recreating and reconstruction. The 
interpretation process (Launsø, Reiper, & Olsen, 2011, s. 26) is illustrated in figure 4.  
 
 
 
 
Through dialogue in e.g. an interview the researcher will have to acquaint him or herself with 
the interviewed person’s pre-understanding. This leads to a dialogue, which afterwards 
results in an interpretation, which creates a new frame of reference that leads to a new 
interpretation. This process can then start over again in a loop, with a new pre-
understanding built on the new interpretation. The process can be seen as a circle or a 
spiral, but could also be regarded as the hermeneutic dialectic, when looking at the 
interaction between assumptions – pre-understanding – and conclusions. The important 
realisation is that knowledge does not exist without pre-requisites or other types of scientific 
results without pre-requisites (Kjørup, 1985, s. 75).      
As in the descriptive research type, the understanding research type does also have quality 
criteria. These are listed in Appendix A and are validity, totality, mirror and transferability 
(Launsø, Reiper, & Olsen, 2011, s. 30). The criteria will be described in section 2.4 about the 
qualitative method.  
 
2.3   Quantitative Method 
The quantitative method is based on any data collection technique or data analysis 
procedure, which can be designed as e.g. surveys and questionnaires (Saunders & al., 2009, 
s. 151), which generates or uses numerical data. The results will be devised as graphs, 
statistics, tables etc.   
The survey for this thesis is highly structured, which means that both questions and options 
are determined in advance (Launsø, Reiper, & Olsen, 2011, s. 111). Though, some of the 
questions in the survey have a field “other”, where an answer can be elaborated. What 
Figure 4 - Interpretation process 
==PAGE:22==
 
22
characterises a lower degree of structuring is that some or all of the questions have open 
response categories.  
The advantages of a high degree of structuring of the data collection method is a survey, 
which is standardised and entails the researcher to know exactly, what questions every 
person has been exposed to and what dimensions (variable values) the answers will fall 
within. Furthermore it is possible to ask a lot of people in a very short time by using surveys, 
opposite time-consuming interviews.  
The weaknesses of a high degree of structuring of the data collection method are a lack of 
flexibility and individualisation of the method. It is not possible to pursue certain issues or 
investigate an answer thoroughly and it is uncertain if some respondents in the survey 
understand the question as intentioned and as the rest of the respondents. Furthermore the 
method risks to impose the researcher’s perception of reality to the person answering the 
survey (Launsø, Reiper, & Olsen, 2011, s. 112-113).   
 
Data quality criteria 
The used research type for the quantitative method in this thesis is the descriptive research 
type, which quality criteria are reliability, validity, accuracy and generalisability, as seen in the 
table in Appendix A (Launsø, Reiper, & Olsen, 2011, s. 13-16). These quality criteria secure an 
objective research process devised neutral. It is important to have considered the data 
quality criteria to reach a reliable result of the data collection.  
The first quality criterion is reliability, which concerns a reliable result devised by the 
researcher as well as the data collection process is transparent. The researcher needs to be 
neutral and relate objectively to the survey. It is important not to influence the research 
object in the survey. If the collection of data is reliable, the investigated and described data 
made in this thesis, must be possible to carry out again in a neutral way by other 
researchers. This means if e.g. seven researchers investigate the same theme, they will all 
obtain the same result.  
The second quality criterion is validity. The criterion ensures that the area measured, also 
was the original area to be measured. 
The third quality criterion is accuracy, which is measured with the precision relevant for the 
given research project. The criterion is considering how accurate certain parameters should 
be measured.   
The fourth quality criterion is generalisability or statistically generalisability. The criterion 
considers if it is possible, based on the results, to generalise and describe the situation in 
e.g. the municipalities in Denmark. Generalisability is relevant when the response rate is 
lower than 100 %. If all 98 municipalities in this thesis’s survey had answered or another 
sample with a response rate on 100 %, the quality criterion would have been irrelevant, since 
all respondents in the survey has answered, which makes no need to generalise.  
 
Preparation of the data collection  
The survey for this thesis is devised with inspiration of a survey made by Dansk 
Byplanlaboratorium in autumn 2014. Four of the questions in the survey are the same as in 
the survey made by Dansk Byplanlaboratorium. The identical questions are not directly 
comparable, because the baseline for the two surveys is incomparable. The study from 2014 
==PAGE:23==
 
23
and the survey produced to this thesis are therefore considered two independent 
investigations. Furthermore the two first questions, which are “What digital tools do you use 
in your work with urban planning, and what competences do you have?” and “What 
programmes do you use in your work with urban planning, and what competences do you 
have?” are inspired by Dansk Byplanlaboratorium’s survey, when they ask “Do you use 
information technologies in your work with urban planning in general?”. The options in the 
survey 2014, were characterised by an approach of social medias and communication. The 
answers given in “other”-field were more technical, which the survey for this thesis chose to 
focus on.  Through the finding in the survey of Dansk Byplanlaboratorium, the options in the 
survey produced for this thesis were found through response from the survey of Dansk 
Byplanlaboratorium from 2014, research in articles and findings in offered programmes from 
consultants.  
 
The survey is produced in the programme Survey Monkey, which is a platform for designing 
surveys. Survey Monkey has extra features, which is helpful to make a professional survey. 
The extra features can be obtained by upgrading the user account.   
 
Survey recipients and formalities 
To make sure that the answers of the survey were representative the survey was sent to all 98 
municipalities in Denmark. All 98 e-mails was sent to the info e-mail in the municipality, and 
in the header of the e-mail an enquiry of being directed to the urban planning department 
was written as seen in the introductory mail in Appendix B. In the e-mail the municipalities 
were asked only to let one person answer the survey pr. municipality. The introductory mail 
in Appendix B describes the purpose of the survey, the intentions of the thesis and the 
qualifications for making the survey attained through the bachelor and master at DTU.  
The e-mail, including a link to the survey, was sent the 16th November 2016 and the 
municipalities got three weeks to answer the survey. The answers to the survey were 
collected the 8th December 2016. Answers from the survey, arriving after the 8th December 
2016, were also taken into account.  
 
Response 
The response time is illustrated with a peak in the first days after the e-mail was directed to 
the right person in the municipality, and then the curve is downward sloping as seen in 
figure 5.  
41 municipalities out of 98 responded to the survey, which gives a response rate of 42 %.  
 
Figure 5 - Illustration of all 41 responses of the survey measured in weeks (x-axis) and numbers of municipalities (y-
axis) 
==PAGE:24==
 
24
Pilot tests  
To ensure a survey, which targets exactly the right persons, five pilot tests were carried out 
before the real release of the survey.  
After the completion of the pilot tests, the survey was evaluated to improve questions and 
options. In Appendix C improvements for the survey are listed. The survey has been tested 
on five persons, who all contributed with relevant inputs. The responses from the pilot 
testers are in the table processed by a category of considerations and revision of the survey.  
 
2.4   Qualitative Method 
The qualitative method is used as a data collection technique or data analysis procedure 
consisting of interviews, case studies etc., which generates non-numerical data (Saunders & 
al., 2009, s. 151).  
The qualitative method can be regarded as having a low degree of structuring, which is used 
to cover and identify the interviewed person’s reality, as the person in question understands 
it by him-/herself. The benefits of a method, which has a low degree of structuring, seek to 
reflect people’s internal and external reality without in advance determining terms and 
understandings (Launsø, Reiper, & Olsen, 2011, s. 112-113). It is important in the qualitative 
method to respect the reality of the interviewee and observe his or her own definition of the 
view of the world.  
The low structuring is a more time consuming way to collect empirical knowledge especially 
when making interviews (Launsø, Reiper, & Olsen, 2011, s. 113). This can be a disadvantage 
for the qualitative method.    
 
Data collection 
The approach to collect qualitative data in this thesis is based on four interviews with three 
different approaches from the interviewed persons. The three approaches or backgrounds 
are as listed. 
 
• 
Municipality 
• 
Consultancy company 
• 
Self-governing institution 
 
The qualitative collected data in the municipalities consist of: 
- 
Interview with Rødovre Municipality 
- 
Telephone interview with Aalborg Municipality 
- 
Work shop about digital district plans in Copenhagen Municipality 
 
The qualitative collected data in the consultancy company consists of: 
- 
Group interview with two people in Niras 
 
The qualitative collected data in the self-governing institution consists of: 
- 
Interview with Dansk Byplanlaboratorium 
 
==PAGE:25==
 
25
The three backgrounds can be regarded as a triangle as illustrated in figure 6, where the 
consultancy companies are presumed to be the supplier of digital services and the 
municipalities are the receivers of service, while the self-governing institutions observe the 
exchange and tendencies about supply and demand. The self-governing institutions also 
facilitate discussions, events etc. to understand and represent a contemporary picture of the 
industry and the challenges and new technologies they are facing. 
  
 
 
A map of persons contacted to acquire empirical data by using a qualitative method can be 
seen in Appendix D. A person who has facilitated the contact is marked blue and the 
persons interviewed to the thesis are marked green. The persons, who did not answer are 
marked grey. The lack of response can be caused by busyness, forgetfulness, not willing to 
be interviewed, wrong person to contact about the field of interest or lack of time. The white 
boxes indicate events – which in the two cases were a hub and a workshop.  
The map of contacts shows the process the qualitative method can go through searching for 
informants willing to share knowledge and participate in interviews.  
 
Data quality criteria 
As in the quantitative method and the descriptive research approach the quality criteria 
were listed. The quality criteria for the understanding research approach are validity, totality, 
mirror and transferability (Launsø, Reiper, & Olsen, 2011, s. 30). It is important to consider 
how the thesis and data collection process can guarantee reliable results. To gain reliable 
results it is important to have considered the data quality criteria in collection of empirical 
knowledge.  
The first quality criterion is validity, which in the understanding research type describes how 
the explored person’s evaluation of the descriptive interpretation is involved. It may occur 
e.g. by the approval of the transcription of the interview by the interviewed person.   
The second quality criterion is totality. The interpretation of data in the thesis involves all 
interviewed persons’ view of the world, which is gathered in one overall interpretation. It is 
Figure 6 - Digital tools considered from three different angles 
==PAGE:26==
 
26
important in this criterion also to consider – each interview person has an opinion – but 
where does the opinion derives from? Opinions and views of the world can be adopted or 
influenced by different institutions e.g. from the municipality, which is a part of the society, 
educational institution, from a management perspective, working environment etc. This 
means that the individual opinion from the interview person has to remain in the context, in 
which the question is asked, and cannot be transmitted directly into other concluding 
correlations.   
The third quality criterion is mirror. The mirror can be regarded as a part of the criterion of 
validity, because the interview person must be able to recognise his or her opinions in the 
researcher’s descriptive interpretation.  
The fourth quality criterion is transferability, which is an assessment of results attained in one 
context. As in the municipalities in this thesis, the results can be transferred to related 
contexts e.g. state, region, municipalities in other comparable countries etc.   
 
Interview 
The qualitative method consists in this thesis of interviews, which are completed based on 
the seven phases: 
 
- 
Thematisation  
- 
Design 
- 
Interview 
- 
Transcription 
- 
Analysing 
- 
Verification 
- 
Reporting 
 
The seven phases secure a deliberated data collection process based on interviews. The first 
phase is thematisation, where the purpose of the thesis is identified and the theme for the 
area to be investigated. Second phase concerns the design of the investigation, where all 
seven phases are planned before the interviews are conducted. It is important to design the 
investigation to attain and secure the knowledge needed for the thesis. The interview is the 
third phase where the interviews are conducted. The interviews should be completed based 
on an interview guide and with at reflective approach to the knowledge, which is sought. 
The fourth phase is transcription of the interviews, which is a part of the preparation for the 
analysis. In the fifth phase the method of analysis is decided based on the purpose and 
results of the investigation, theme and character of the material of the interviews. The sixth 
phase is verification, where the validity, reliability and the generalisability of the interviews 
are determined, in the same way as the quality criteria is considered in the descriptive and 
understanding research type. Reliability means, how consistent the results are. Validity 
indicates if an investigation based on the basis and the outcome of the interviews is valid. 
And finally the seventh phase is reporting, which is the phase where the method and results 
of the investigation are communicated (Kvale & Brinkmann, 2015, s. 154-155).  
 
==PAGE:27==
 
27
2.5   Literature Review 
In order to be capable to search for proper literature for this thesis a course at DTU library 
was taken in the beginning of the master thesis period. The outcome and learning results 
from the course can be seen in Appendix E. The course held by a librarian introduced how 
to set up a search string for the literature study in order to find the most precise and useful 
literature for the subject of this master thesis.  
The course has also contributed to understand how to search most widely, most precisely 
and in specific selected academic databases. This new knowledge on how to use AND to 
narrow the search, OR to widen the search or use wild cards if a word can be spelled in 
different ways e.g. colo*r (Saunders & al., 2009, s. 84) are shown in figure 7. 
In a search string different search operators can be used; AND, OR and NOT.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
AND is used when both words have to be included in 
the search. 
 
 
 
OR is used when least one word has to give a result in 
the search.  
 
 
 
NOT is used to eliminate a certain word in the search  
 
 
 
At the course the different searching databases, which are relevant for the field of 
engineering science were explored by the librarian. The databases DTU Findit, Web of 
Science, Springerlink, Taylor and Francis Online and Scopus were introduced. Each 
database has a specific merit, which increases the possibility to achieve the needed 
information from different databases. DTU Findit contains over 180 million Danish and 
English articles, books and journals. Web of Science (Thomson Reuters) is a scientific 
database, which contains references from around 12.000 scientific journals. Web of Science 
can be used for searching for citations in a specific article. A result will appear in the written 
article of what references, which are used in the article (past) and what subsequently articles, 
which have cited the specific article (future). In Appendix E a citation map of the (Bainbridge, 
2007) source, can be seen. The article has 61 references and is cited 285 times after the 
publication.  
 
Figure 7 – Searching results when using AND, OR and NOT 
==PAGE:28==
 
28
2.6   Designing The Sustainability Model 
To evaluate the data collection and literature study figure 8 illustrates the flow and process 
of the data collection and literature study, which form the basis of the design of a 
sustainability model designed for this thesis in the results section 4.1.3. Figure 8 also 
illustrates how the results are structured, as seen in figure 2 in section 1.6. The three parts of 
results form the basis of the discussion of the entire theme for this master thesis.  
On the basis of literature studies and the quantitative and qualitative data collection the first 
version of the sustainability model was developed. After competent feedback and 
professional discussions with Esben Obeling, Aalborg Municipality, in the following interview 
supporting the aim of the model, a new sustainability model was designed with some 
adjustments. 
 
 
Figure 8 - Process of the literature study, quantitative and qualitative method, which form the basis for the 
sustainability model, which is revised after an interview about the sustainability model. 
The sustainability model in table 1 is created based on the process in figure 8. The model 
consists of three overall sustainability areas; environmental, social and economic, with 
appertaining parameters, which further specify the sustainability area. Different objects can 
be evaluated in the model e.g. strategies and tools, which is exemplified in the results, 
chapter 4.  
The scale goes from 1 to 5, where 1 indicates no focus or deficient coverage and 5 indicates 
a large focus on the parameter and an adequate coverage. The model does also show a 
definition of what a sustainable planning process is and define on what parameters the 
process can be measured on, to reach sustainability. The model shown in table 1 is the 
==PAGE:29==
 
29
second version and is devised as a way to clarify and help to observe sustainability in the 
urban planning process. The sustainability model is not an absolute tool. 
 
 
  
Studies and 
publications or 
digital tools 
Environmental 
Social 
Economic 
                                                                 Visions 
5  =  Adequate /  
        Large focus 
3  =  Medium 
1  =  Deficient /  
         No focus  
 
Environment goal 
Qualitative benefits 
Sharing data in public 
authorities 
Data security 
Public participation 
In-service training 
Competences (academic) 
Working environment 
Efficiency Improvements 
Process optimisation 
Reduce cost of purchasing 
IT-tools via cooperation 
Maintenance of tools 
Digital management 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 1 - Sustainability model version 2 
 
 
==PAGE:30==
 
30
==PAGE:31==
 
31
3 
THEORY 
 
The theory in this section will begin with a description of the digital development and 
outline the kick-start for the digital working method in the public sector. Furthermore the 
theory will expound how an urban planning process can be regarded and which processes it 
is built up by. This will include a description of how a local municipal plan is proceeded and 
what phases a district plan runs through in relation to political reading, publication and 
hearing. Sustainable urban planning in Denmark is described based on planloven, 
environmental assessments and Agenda 21, which all three form the foundation for the 
municipalities’ work with sustainability. Finally digital urban planning will be explained 
through papers, which define different planning processes, explain two modelling methods 
with appertaining classes, describe the stages in the level of details and at last describe how 
the working method ‘parametric design’ can be used and for what purpose.  
 
3.1   Digital Development 1990 – 2017  
A significant digital development has on several fronts taken place during the past 27 years 
in the municipalities and in society in general. The decisive factor in the digital development 
has been the spread of Internet and access to computers and thereafter the use of mobile 
phones. Programmes consisting of interactive models are being developed into interactive 
product presentations on the Internet, and with the increased access to broadband 
connections since 2003, it has become possible to handle continuously bigger data sets 
(Therkelsen, Mølgaard, & Dahl, 2003). 
An illustration in figure 9 indicates the percentage of the population in Denmark with access 
to the Internet. In 1990 around 15 % of the population had access to a computer, in 1994 
around 13 % got access to a mobile phone and in 1996 the Internet became a genuine 
opportunity.  
 
 
Figure 9 - Percentage of the Danish population with access to the Internet. Source: Danmarks Statistik. 
(Therkelsen, Mølgaard, & Dahl, 2003) 
==PAGE:32==
 
32
As seen in figure 9 the access to computers, mobile phones and Internet increased rapidly 
during 12 years from 1990 to 2002. 
 
 
Figure 10 - Electronic devices at home. Source: www.statistikbanken.dk/VARFORBR (Danmarks Statistik , 2016) 
To follow up on figure 9, figure 10 (Danmarks Statistik , 2016) illustrates the digital 
development from 2006 to 2016 in Denmark, which indicates that around 95 % of the 
population has access to computers and mobile phones at home. It is also important to look 
at the huge growth in smartphones and tablets during the five years from 2011 to 2016. With 
the increasing access to smartphones, tablets, computers and Internet the digital 
development embrace almost every person in Denmark.   
 
In the public sector the digital development commenced in May 2001, when Kommunernes 
Landsforening, Amtsrådsforeningen, Copenhagen Municipality Frederiksberg Municipality, 
IT- og Forskningsministeriet, Erhvervsministeriet Indenrigsministeriet, Økonomiministeriet 
and Finansministeriet launched the report called “Digital Administration” (Finansministeriet, 
2001).  Digital administration is an improved and more efficient solution in administrating 
problems through applications of information technology.   
 
The use of the concept “digital administration” can be distinguished between to different 
meanings: 
1. Digitisation of the administration with focus on use of information technology 
intended to internal efficiency improvements of working processes in the public 
authorities.  
2. Digital self-service, which concerns digital self-service solutions, which public 
authorities make available for the citizens, companies and other Internet users. 
(Project House, 2011) 
 
The release of the “digital administration” initiative has led to growth in the use of 
electronic case management in municipalities, regions and national. In the small 
municipalities especially, electronic case management gains currency. 94 % had obtained 
electronic case management in 2011. Figure 11 illustrates the development of electronic 
==PAGE:33==
 
33
case management (Danmarks Statistik, 2012) and minimum every other case is paperless as 
the red line indicates. 
 
 
Figure 11 - The blue line indicates the percentage in the Danish public sector working with electronic case 
management and the red line indicates the percentage of paperless case management 
The development of information technology throughout the 1990’ies is an essential term in 
the appearance of the network society, which in the years around the release of the “digital 
administration” report in 2001 gained currency. The information technology did not only 
revolutionise the communication in society in general but did also affect collaboration 
relations (Finansministeriet, 2001).   
 
 
 
While the “digital administration” report was released Copenhagen Municipality made a 
decision in the beginning of 2001 to establish a detailed 3D city model of Copenhagen 
Figure 12 – Fifteen years of developing readjustment in the Danish public sector from 2001-2016 
==PAGE:34==
 
34
Municipality. The actual occasion was a request from a number of underground cable 
owners and telephone companies, who wanted to acquire a vector based and 
comprehensive 3D wire model of Copenhagen Municipality (Jönsson & Jensen, 2004). The 
model was produced by BlomInfo A/S and covered approximately 100.000 buildings. The 
model was also made as a basis of planning and designing Copenhagen Municipality 
(Rasmussen, 2003).  
 
The further digital development in the public administration can be seen in figure 12 
(Digitaliseringsstyrelsen, 2016), which illustrates the most significant digital technologies 
developed and implemented to a “digital administration” over 15 years from 2001 to 2016.   
 
3.2   Urban Planning Processes In A Danish Municipality 
In order to understand the process of an urban planning project in a Danish municipality the 
following sections describe when each phase occurs, when decisions are made and when 
citizens and politicians are involved. To understand the urban planner’s work in a 
municipality sets the basis for in what areas digitisation can occur. Most of the urban 
planning in the municipalities consists of regulations and law based on Lov om Planlægning 
– planloven (Retsinformation, 2015), which can make the working structure a bit stringent.  
Urban planning is divided into four overall levels in Denmark: National plan, regional plan, 
local municipal plan and district plan (Københavns Kommune B, 2016). In this section the 
local municipal plan and district plan will be explained.  
 
3.2.1     Local municipal plan  
The content in the local municipal plan and the process for its approval are determined to 
be based on Lov om Planlægning – planloven (Retsinformation, 2015).  
Due to Danish legislation every municipality has to follow the local municipal plan 
(Københavns Kommune D, 2016).  
The local municipal plan covers a 12-year period and describes the overall goals and 
guidelines for the individual municipality’s development, both in urban and rural zones 
(Erhvervsstyrelsen, 2016). The overall structure’s strategic and long-term considerations in 
the local municipal plan can however be extended further than the 12-year period 
(Miljøministeriet A, 2008). The local municipal plan is reviewed every fourth year following 
the municipal election period. The municipal council will shortly after the election publish a 
strategy for the local municipal planning, before reviewing the local municipal plan 
(Erhvervsstyrelsen, 2016). 
 
Plan strategy 
The plan strategy has the purpose of carrying out a wide and long-term approach in the 
development of the environment in the municipality. This counts for the document per se – 
but also for the process, which is the way the plan strategy will be implemented and 
followed up. 
The plan strategy gives rise to dialogue and decisions about the municipality’s role and 
course. The municipal council decides on the basis of the plan strategy, how the local 
municipal plan should be edited. This means, that it will be decided, which changes in the 
==PAGE:35==
 
35
local municipal plan, the municipal council intend to undertake as an alteration to the 
existing plan.  
The alteration may cover changes of the themes or areas, which are relevant at the certain 
time. The remainder of the municipal plan will be adopted together with the new consistent 
amendments for the new four-year period as written in the section about the “Four-year 
Planning Wheel”.    
 
The plan strategy has to include:  
1. Information about the planning, which is implemented after the latest revision of the 
local municipal plan  
2. The municipal council’s evaluation and strategy of the development.  
3. A decision about either,  
a. The local municipal plan has to be revised in full – a complete revision of the 
whole local municipal plan, or  
b. Carry out a revision of the local municipal plan’s regulations for special 
themes or geographic areas in the municipality (Miljøministeriet A, 2008).  
 
 
Figure 13 – The local municipal plan is an interaction between vision, economy and planning (Hørsholm 
Kommune, 2016) 
The strategy is followed up by the actual revision of the local municipal plan, which will 
follow the plan strategy’s decision of revision. The plan strategy can furthermore be a good 
basis for dialogue across the different municipalities about inputs to the regional 
development plan and other planning issues (Miljøministeriet A, 2008). 
 
The flow in figure 13, illustrates how each area has an influence on each other and shows 
how the plan strategy, the local municipal plan and the local plan are connected and how 
==PAGE:36==
 
36
they interact between vision, economy and planning. The yearly processes as seen in the 
box to the right in figure 13 affect the plan strategy, which influences the local municipal 
plan and district plan. These affect the theme plans, which also has an impact on the yearly 
processes.  
Four-year planning wheel 
Every fourth year, in connection with the election period, the local municipal plan is handed 
over to the newly elected municipal council and necessary revisions are decided as 
illustrated in figure 14. For a period of 12 years the local municipal plan determines the 
overall goals and guidelines for the individual municipality’s development (Københavns 
Kommune B, 2016).   
 
 
 
Figure 14 - Procedure for revision of the local municipal plan every fourth year. The local municipal plan is a part 
of a four-year "planning-wheel" along with the plan strategy, which is connected to the four-year election period 
(Hørsholm Kommune, 2016) (Dansk Byplanlaboratorium, 2013) 
In Dansk Byplanlaboratorium a description of the urban planning process at local municipal 
level has been elaborated in relation to which extend citizens and politicians are involved 
(Dansk Byplanlaboratorium, 2013). The process description is included in figure 14. The 
figure shows when the hearing phases appear and when the preparation of the plan strategy 
and the local municipal plan take place during the four-year period.  
 
A local municipal plan consists of a main structure with partly the overall goals for the 
development and the land use in the municipality and partly a frame part including scopes 
==PAGE:37==
 
37
for the district plan. For the local municipal plan a statement of the preconditions of the plan 
is included (Kalundborg Kommune, 2014). 
A local municipal plan consists of different elements:  
 
1. Main structure, which includes the city council’s objectives.  
2. Guidelines and general scopes, which are the requirements, the municipality will 
elaborate on.  
3. Scopes for the district planning, which explicate the requirements for a specific area 
for later district planning.  
4. Exposition, which describes the background for the local municipal plans’ 
preparation.  
5. Map material, which shows the precise locations 
(Syddjurs Kommune, 2016) 
 
The local municipal plan can either be fully or partly edited or be agreed upon with 
consistent amendments for the new four-year period. Figure 15, below shows the two 
different processes depending on the above-mentioned way to edit the local municipal plan 
(Naturstyrelsen, 2002).  
 
 
Figure 15 – The plan strategy is devised in the first part of the election period. The local municipal plan can be 
fully or partly edited or be decided with consistent amendments for a new four-year period as decided in the 
plan strategy (Naturstyrelsen, 2002). 
When fully or partly amendments are agreed upon it will appear in the plan strategy, this will 
further be promulgated along with a debate. The city council will consider the comments 
from the debate and prospective changes will be processed and adopted. The proposal for 
the approved revision of the local municipal plan will be devised and then published with an 
appertaining debate. Hereafter the final local municipal plan will be enacted for the coming 
four-year period.  
==PAGE:38==
 
38
If the local municipal plan has been adopted with consistent amendments for the new four-
year period the process is shorter and closed with a public announcement of the changes in 
the strategy and the municipality’s re-decision right after the city council has considered the 
comments and agreed upon possible changes.  
 
Digital local municipal plans 
The local municipal plans will in the future be an important part of the digital administration. 
Today, almost every municipality has a digital local municipal plan available on their web 
site. Digital local municipal plans provide a lot of new opportunities to present the plan, 
communicate with the citizens etc.  
To attain the biggest, mutual benefits of digital administration across the boarders of the 
municipalities, a national register, PlansystemDK, has been created in accordance with §54 
b. PlansystemDK has the purpose to carry existing and future plans, including local 
municipal plans (Miljøministeriet A, 2008). In Copenhagen municipality the local municipal 
plan has been devised digitally since 2011. (Cardador, 2016). 
 
3.2.2     District plan  
A district plan determines how the development will take place in a specific area, which may 
cover a bigger area and/or a specific building. The district plan is devised on the basis of the 
local municipal plan and encompass the use of the areas or buildings, which buildings 
should be preserved and a plan on action on how vacant areas are going to be developed 
(Københavns Kommune C, 2016). The following sections illustrate the phases of a district 
plan in terms of the time frame of the process before the enactment and involvement from 
politicians and the public.   
 
Phases in a district plan 
Copenhagen Municipality has outlined four overall phases, visualised in figure 16, for the 
process of a district plan from the start to the approval (Københavns Kommune A, 2016):  
 
1. Clarification 
2. Starting exposition 
3. District plan proposal  
4. Final district plan 
 
A district plan is the overall tool for the municipal council to get an impact on the 
development of the municipality. District plans have the aim to determine the use of 
different areas and how built-up areas, roads and recreational areas are going be shaped 
(Miljøministeriet B, 2009).  
 
A district plan outlines the development for a specific field. This field can either be a big 
area or a specific building. The district plan stipulates e.g. what the area and buildings will 
be used for, which buildings should be preserved and where new buildings are to be built. 
The terms of the district plan are legally binding (Københavns Kommune C, 2016).  
 
==PAGE:39==
 
39
Figure 16 – Four overall phases in district planning 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
An uncomplicated working process to establish a district plan takes about 8-10 months 
(Center for Byudvikling og Mobilitet, 2016) (Ikast-Brande Kommune, 2010). If unexpected 
incidents or more complicated conditions occur the district plan may take up to 10-12 
months before approval. As the main part of all district plan processes are established by 
Lov om Planlægning – Planloven (Retsinformation, 2015), there are no big differences in the 
time spent on the overall process compared to district plans, which are devised by 
consultants or by By- og Landskabsforvaltningen, because e.g. public hearings and political 
reading take a certain amount of time. Time schedules will always vary, because 
arrangements of political meetings etc. has to be taken into account (Aalborg Kommune, 
2016).  
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 17 - Phases in a district plan 
  
Figure 17, shows the district plan process, the time frame of each phase and the occurrences 
of action points in the different phases. The four phases described in figure 16, are broken 
down into 12 sub phases. The light blue arrows show the time for political reading. The first 
political reading takes place when the start-up of the district plan has been politically 
approved. The next political reading takes place at the time of the political approval of the 
district plan proposal right before the public hearing. The last political reading takes place 
when the politicians adopt the final district plan. The light green arrow indicates the public 
hearing, which takes 8 weeks. Subsequently the answers from the hearing will be taken into 
considerations and the final district plan can be approved – possibly with some 
amendments.  
==PAGE:40==
 
40
Visualisations 
District plans, which include significant buildings or facilities characterising the neighbouring 
area e.g. high buildings, have to include visualisations, which shows the influence on the 
surroundings. For district plans, which allow building within the coastal zone, furthermore 
have to include a description separately regarding the visual influence on the coast 
landscape.  
Visualisations are a legal requirement, which can be appealed to Natur- and 
Miljøklagenævnet, if they are missing. The district plan can in worst case be disallowed and 
has to be submitted again. A visualisation can be produced as a perspective drawing, 3D-
computermodel, as volume study, elevations or photomontage. As a main rule it is 
necessary to produce both visualisations at eye level (about 170 cm) without use of wide 
angle or television effect and from a bird’s eye view, which shows the totality.    
Visualisations always have to be confirmed by By- og Landskabsforvaltningen to secure 
agreement on the perspective and level of details. The result has to be reliable, and the 
municipality can in case of doubt demand documentation of the visualisations, if they give a 
correct image of the extent and placing of the project despite the form of the visualisation.  
Particularly circumstances, which can be difficult to describe in words, can with advantage 
often be supported with reference photos. Visualisations often provide the reader with a 
clearer picture of the construction opportunities of the district plan (Aalborg Kommune, 
2016). An example of visualisations in a district plan can be seen in district plan 
“Strandlodsvej, lokalplan nr. 449 med tillæg nr. 1” (Københavns Kommune E, 2016). Some of 
the visualisations from the district plan are illustrated in figure 18. 
 
 
Figure 18 – Left: Perspective from the publicly available park area. Right: Situation plan of area II and a 
sustainability diagram for the area developed by Copenhagen Municipality. Source: (Københavns Kommune E, 
2016) 
==PAGE:41==
 
41
3.2.3     Development plans and overall plan  
Development plans are used when an area has to be improved or needs an urban 
regeneration to lift the district to a higher level. The development plan for the exposed 
areas may include initiatives, which in correlation with a renewal of the future area will 
contribute to lift the area and create a better connection with the surrounding areas 
(Københavns Kommune, 2015).   
 
 
Figure 19 - Development plan process 
Figure 19 (Københavns Kommune , 2012) illustrates the overall three steps for creation of a 
development plan from analysis of the area to customised tools and solutions for the 
specific area to the implementation of the initiatives in the development plan.  
In every development plan specific problems and potentials are analysed in the individual, 
exposed urban area. The challenges in the residential area are analysed in relation to the 
surroundings and context.  
Based on analysis the development plan determines specific goals for the development of 
each certain area by a scheduled year e.g. 2025. Development plans often have a horizon of 
5-10 years (Københavns Kommune , 2010). 
Development plans provide a basis of qualified prioritisation of focus and efforts in the areas 
and results in an implementation and follow up on the progress of the development 
(Københavns Kommune , 2012).  
 
The overall plan is a plan on an overall level determining infrastructure, green structure, 
architecture, opportunities regarding expansion and use of large areas. The overall plan 
secures that the planned area will be considered as a whole and with connection to the 
surrounding areas – especially if the development of the area is in progress over a long 
period of time. 
If the overall plan changes in regulations for the local municipal plan considering use and 
coefficients of utilisation, an addendum will be devised. The overall plan will be further 
specified in one or more district plans, which makes new opportunities for construction or 
reconstructing of existing buildings.  
As the overall plan is filled with visions regarding infrastructure, green structure, architecture, 
opportunities regarding expansion and use for a large area etc. the process of drawing up 
the plan has a great extend of public participation (Gladsaxe Kommune, 2016). 
 
3.3   Sustainable Urban Planning In Denmark 
Many reports about sustainable urban planning focus on how to make the city sustainable in 
three main aspects; social, economic and environmental. Only a few do also focus on the 
preparation process to actually plan and design sustainable cities. Planloven, environmental 
assessments and Agenda 21 create the basis for the municipalities’ work with sustainability. 
==PAGE:42==
 
42
Prior to decisions, which may affect the environment significant, environmental assessments 
have to be completed. The frame for future construction work or land use determined by 
policies, programmes and plans are encompassed by law of environment assessment. 
Similar are certain types of construction projects encompassed by the Danish VVM-
regulations, which originates of EU’s VVM-directive and is carried out through planloven 
(Miljøministeriet, 2013).  
Agenda 21, the Rio Declaration on Environment and Development, and the Statement of 
principles for the Sustainable Management of Forests were adopted by more than 178 
Governments at the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development 
(UNCED) including Denmark held in Rio de Janerio, Brazil, 3 to 14 June 1992 
(Erhvervsstyrelsen, 2017) (Sustainable Development, 2017).  
 
The municipalities and the regions are according to Planloven obliged to devise strategies 
for a sustainable development (Local Agenda 21-strategies) every fourth year in the first half 
of the election period. The strategies have to encompass the municipal council’s political 
objectives for the future work for the following focus areas: 
 
1) Reduce environmental burden 
2) Advance a sustainable urban development and urban transformation 
3) Advance biological diversity 
4) Involve the population and the industry in the local Agenda 21-work 
5) Advance an interaction between the decisions regarding environmental, traffic-
related, occupational, social, health-related, educational, cultural and economical 
conditions (Erhvervsstyrelsen, 2017). 
 
In total 16 municipalities have composed a separate Local Agenda 21-strategy, while 72 
municipalities have incorporated it in the plan strategy (Miljøministeriet, 2014).  
 
The municipalities work on different levels with sustainability, however it is in the district 
plans, new projects are developed. That is why sustainability has to be incorporated as a 
development parameter in the district plan process and preferably at an early stage in the 
local municipal plan process (Miljøministeriet, 2013).    
 
District plans are a crucial instrument in the municipalities’ endeavours to advance 
sustainable urban planning. They can be used to determine, how different areas in the 
future should be utilised and how buildings, roads and recreational areas should be 
designed.  Given is though, that sustainability is already encompassed in the district 
municipal plan process, because the overall strategies are determined here.  
Naturstyrelsen conducted a study in 2013 among the municipalities in Denmark to 
understand, how the municipalities worked with sustainability, when they devised district 
plans. The study illustrated that 74 % of the municipalities did not have an actual method to 
assess sustainability, while eight municipalities – Copenhagen, Odense, Aalborg, Roskilde, 
Jammerbugt, Hillerød, Favrskov and Holbæk had devised models, which aimed to advance 
sustainability in district plans. The described approaches were very different, because they 
were adjusted to each municipality’s specific characteristics (Miljøministeriet, 2013).  
==PAGE:43==
 
43
3.4   Digital Urban Planning  
More and more people, either governors or academics, planners or architects, educators or 
trainees, natives or experts, are experiencing and practicing the image of realistic life 
through 3D virtual world platforms. The utilisation includes education, training, 
collaboration, scientific simulation, geographic information integration, and other specific 
practices (Quinn, 2008) (Bainbridge, 2007).  
In 2003 the use of virtual worlds and GIS for virtual city development and planning was 
regarded as a new approach for urban construction and simulation, which could facilitate 
e.g. decision making in choosing between various architectural planning options, simulating 
infrastructure, traffic engineering and ecological concepts and furnishing information to the 
media and the public at large (Bendinger & Jung, 2003).  
 
Digital tools support different stages of the creation of urban design. Visualisation is 
possibly the most important and powerful activity of all in the design process. The use of 
digital tools entail rapid and effective storage and retrieval of information, various kinds of 
visualization which can be pass on to surveys and analyses as well as design itself, and 
different strategies for communicating information and plans to various publics from design 
professionals to the affected community (Batty & et al., 2000).  
 
The urban planning process is a process decomposed into smaller processes. The overall 
urban planning process consists of three steps: Surveying, analysing, and planning. During 
the planning process, many kinds of analysis methods, such as qualitative analysis, 
quantitative analysis, and spatial modelling analysis, are used. The population, site 
conditions, natural ecological resources, urban infrastructure, public facilities and building 
environment, are all included in the analysis subjects, as well as other factors. Using the 
virtual reality technology, most of the analysis can be visualised and represented in a 3D 
model to make results easier to understand (Dang, Liang, & Chi, 2012).  
 
Furthermore the application of Virtual Reality technique in urban planning allows the urban 
planners, planning evaluation experts, public citizens, and urban managers, to discuss within 
a common Virtual Environment (Shen, Kawakami, & Kishimoto, 2003) (Shen & Kawakami, 
2010). 
 
3.4.1     Different ways to organise an urban planning process 
The process of digital urban planning and managing can be divided into different phases as 
seen in the district plan and the local municipal plan. Dang, Liang & Chi (2012) divide the 
process into the following four periods of time; planning information preparing, planning 
scheme compiling, planning result representing and urban planning managing.  
Furthermore the use of Virtual Reality applications in urban planning can be regarded as 
three main aspects according to the achievements.  
The first aspect focuses on the aid to urban planners in compiling the urban planning 
scheme during the planning and design stage – the two first periods planning information 
preparing and planning scheme compiling. Supported by the Virtual Reality technology 
urban planners are able to review and improve the planning or design scheme in the 
interactive 3D model.  
==PAGE:44==
 
44
The second aspect focuses on letting experts review the planning or design scheme by 
represent urban planning or urban design scheme through 3D Virtual Reality models with 
full performance. And also let the public participate in the planning and design process 
(Yang, Liu, & Chen, 2000), which is a part of the second and third period planning scheme 
compiling and planning result representing.  
The third aspect focuses on aiding urban managers in implementing the planning or design 
scheme in the urban construction process and to execute urban management duty based on 
the urban planning statute (Dang, Liang, & Chi, 2012), which supports the fourth period 
urban planning managing. 
 
3.4.2     Forwards and backwards visualisation 
Communicating ideas to clients, whether they’d be political decision-makers or the wider 
public, are key activities to succeed with the process.  
As visualisation takes place at any and every stage of the design process Batty et al. (2000) 
introduce some rudimentary classification. An important classification is to distinguish 
between forwards and backwards visualisation. Backwards visualisation is used to support 
experts and professionals in developing visual tools and imagery, while forwards 
visualisation supports a less informed group of people e.g. the public at large and more 
specific interest groups, with visualisations, easily understandable, produced for popular, 
rather than professional audiences, which emphasizes visual rather than functional attributes 
(Batty & et al., 2000).  
 
3.4.3     Two classes of modelling methods  
In this section two classes of modelling methods are introduced – one is the “programme 
modelling method”, which means to build the Virtual Reality model by means of Virtual 
Reality Modelling Language and the corresponding professional algorithm. The other is the 
“software modelling method” which means to build the Virtual Reality model by means of 
modelling software such as 3Ds Max and Multi-Gen Creator. The “software modelling 
method” is often adopted by Virtual Reality application engineers through interactive 
modelling approach (Dang, Liang, & Chi, 2012).  
 
To understand the “software modelling method”, the method can further be divided into 
three classes according to the type of software technique and the general technical process. 
The three classes are; visualization modelling method, attribute-modelling method and 
integration modelling method.  
Visualization modelling method is characterized by application of graphics-based modelling 
technique and software, such as AutoCAD, 3Ds Max, SketchUp etc. Essentially, the 
visualization modelling method constructs a Virtual Reality model by means of geometry 
elements, such as points, line, polygon surface and 3D objects.  
The Attribute modelling method is characterized by an application of attribute-based 
modelling techniques and software, such as a geographic information system like ArcGIS 
and MapGIS and an aerial photogrammetry system like VirtuoZo.  
The Integration modelling method is defined by an integrated application of graphics-based 
modelling technique and software, and attribute-based modelling technique and software 
==PAGE:45==
 
45
at the same time, such as AutoCAD, 3Ds Max, SketchUp, ArcGIS, MapGIS, ERDAS and 
VirtuoZo. The Integration modelling method overcomes the insufficiencies of the former two 
methods, and combines the advantages from both. However, this method contains more 
kinds of techniques and requires a good deal of technical skills to support (Dang, Liang, & 
Chi, 2012). 
 
3.4.4     Level of Detail (LOD)  
To understand how detailed an urban model should be in urban planning a description of 
the levels of detail for a digital model is devised. 
A digital model can be divided into different information or detail levels, depending on how 
detailed the model is. The level of detail in the model can vary in relation to what is required 
of the model. Normally through the process the degree of details will increase. The level of 
detail or information is also used in the construction industry, where the level of information 
will increase through the designing and construction process (BygBygg, 2011). The level of 
detail goes from level zero to six or defined by (Batty & et al., 2000) from level G to A, where 
level G is the roughest and level A is the most detailed. The more detailed the model is, the 
more information does the model contain.  
Batty et al. (2000) describe in the article a study, which has either undertaken or 
commissioned site surveys covering the whole City of London at various levels of detail, 
where the models have been categorized into decreasing levels (A-G). 
The level of details is explained in table 2 and the modelling concept is illustrated as an 
example in figure 20.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 2 - Level of Detail A-G 
London city has, in the study, been divided into city blocks by Ordnance Survey1. 1:1250 
building footprints heighted (using aerial photogrammetry) to provide a prismatic model 
corresponding to LOD G in their system. Incremental upgrading of the model has been 
undertaken on a project-by-project-basis with a significant number of sites now being held 
at LOD A and B (Batty & et al., 2000). 
                                                        
1 Ordnance Survey is Britain's mapping agency, where The UK government agency is responsible for the official, 
definitive topographic survey and mapping of Great Britain. 
Level of Detail - Description  
A 
Detailed architectural model including fenestrations 
B 
Detail equivalent to 1:100 measured building survey  
C 
Detailed elevations  
D 
Major details of building elevations  
E 
Accurate building volumes   
F 
Roofscape 
G 
Prismatic Block models – Coarse massing  
==PAGE:46==
 
46
 
 
 
Figure 20 - Example of level of details. From left to right is illustrated from footprint to a detailed architectural 
model including fenestrations. Source: Arisona, Zhong, Huang & Qin (2013) 
 
3.4.5     Parametric Urban Design 
Parametric urban design is a working method in programmes, which facilitates and supports 
a design, which is open for continuous changes in shape, height, length etc.  
Rather than making one-off designs which need to be redesigned from the ground up in 
case of changes, parametric design tools make it possible keep the design open while at the 
same time allowing a level of detailing, which is high enough to facilitate an understanding 
of the generic qualities of proposed designs (Steinø & Obeling, 2014).    
Parametric design is a design method that allows the designer to quickly evaluate design 
scenarios based on a combination of datasets and rules, in an iterative design process of 
defining and adjusting parameters and relations. Using a system, or tool, geometries in a 
computer model are updated instantly according to changes in data or design criteria, 
whether it is GIS data or stakeholder feedback (Burry, 2005).  
Parametric design has been used in various situations and industries, spanning from 
entertainment to urban planning (Watson, 2008), while parametric design applied in urban 
planning has the power and potential to be used as an outright simulation tool for urban 
development (Leach, 2009). 
Using parametric urban design, stakeholders can be presented to actual design scenarios 
even in early stages of the design process (Steinø & al., 2013). It is though, important to 
emphasize to the stakeholders, that it is the early stage of design, with a low degree of 
details.     
In a procedural logic, the following elements in figure 21 build a sequential hierarchy in the 
sense that each step is a precondition for the next step: 
 
==PAGE:47==
 
47
 
 
 
By traditional techniques, it would be very time-consuming to create mock-up 3D models of 
different design scenarios. With parametric design software this can be done in real time by 
adjusting parameters and rules. Thus, the designer is able to make design decisions on a 
better and more well informed basis (Steinø & Obeling, 2014). 
Figure 21 - Hierarchy for urban design 
==PAGE:48==
 
48
==PAGE:49==
 
49
4 
RESULTS & ANALYSIS 
 
The result section is divided into three parts as illustrated in figure 22. The first part consists 
of the results of the quantitative data, which is thoroughly examined with the statistical result 
and potential comments from the survey. The second part is the qualitative collected data 
based on four interviews and a workshop, which is first summarised and then grouped into 
relevant subjects to analyse and outline the different opinions. The third part presents and 
analyses the sustainability model with quotations from the qualitative interviews about 
sustainable use of digital tools in the internal working process in urban planning. The three 
parts of results will in the following section lead to a discussion, where all three parts will be 
discussed collectively.  
 
 
Figure 22 - Illustration of the division of the results section 
  
4.1   Quantitative Data Analysis 
This section will go through the results collected from the survey with a structure, where 
each question will be presented with an example of a response, potential comments and the 
statistical result for all 41 municipalities. The survey can be seen in Appendix F and in 
Appendix G an example of an extract from response #13 is illustrated.  
Question 5 regarding public participation from the survey will not be studied in the analysis. 
The question was asked in the survey in relation to Dansk Byplanlaboratorium’s study in 
2014, but the chosen focus in this thesis is about internal use of digital tools in the working 
process of urban planning.   
 
Question 1 
What digital tools do you use in your work with urban planning and what competences do 
you have in the following? 
 
The question is intended to investigate the digital scenario in the Danish municipalities by 
investigating what tools the urban planners use. If the municipality uses a specific tool, they 
were asked to categorise their skills inspired by Dreyfus & Dreyfus’ (1980) model “A five-
==PAGE:50==
 
50
stage model of the mental activities involved in directed skill acquisition”. The statistical 
answers for obtained skills can be seen in Appendix H for each tool. The tools are listed in 
alphabetic order and comments or additions were possible to write.  
 
Figure 23 illustrates an example of the response from #1. This is a typical scenario of the 
municipalities and the total response from all 41 municipalities indicates that 88 % use 2D 
maps and drawings, 44 % use 2D interactive maps, 40 % use 2½D models, 43 % use 3D 
urban models, 3 % use 4D models, 16 % use digital photogrammetry, 100 % use GIS and 5 % 
use laser scanning as seen in the column to the right.  
 
Supplementary comments in relation to tools, which are not on the list, are “population 
projections” and “statistically analyses” (#6), “plan platforms” (#12) and “visualisations” (# 
28).  
 
 
Figure 23 – Example of question 1 in the survey from response #1 and a total in the right column 
 
Question 2 
Which programmes do you use in your daily work of urban planning and what competences 
have you achieved?   
 
The question is intended to follow up on question 1. Programmes studied by literature, 
articles, a similar study and the interview with Rødovre Municipality, have led to the 
following list of programmes. It is important to quantify the municipalities’ use of 
programmes in order to find out what level the digitisation has reached by now for the 
further elaboration on the digitisation of the urban planning in the municipalities. The 
programmes are listed in alphabetic order with comments or additions written by the 
respondent. 
 
Figure 24 illustrates an example of a response from the survey answered by #35. The options 
for competences are novice, advanced beginner, competent, skilled and expert inspired by 
the model made by Dreyfus & Dreyfus (1980) as in question 1. The total response from all 41 
==PAGE:51==
 
51
municipalities can be seen in the column to the right. The most popular of the listed tools 
are Illustrator, Photoshop, Google Maps and Google Earth. The competences for each 
programme can be seen in Appendix H.  
 
Furthermore the following programmes were commented InDesign (41 %), MapInfo (Cowi) 
(27 %), Word (22 %), QGIS (17 %), ArcGIS (Esri) (10 %), ArcMap (Esri) (10 %), DKPlan (Niras) 
(10%), KortInfo (Niras) (10 %), Outlook (10 %), WebGIS (10 %), Umbraco (Niras) (7%), NetGIS 
(Orbicon Informatik) (7 %), Facebook (2 %), GeoMedia (2 %), LOIS Statistik (2 %), Planmodel 
(ArtoGIS) (2 %), SunCalc.org (2%) and Sbsys (2 %).  
 
Additionally some municipalities have hired consultants, who devise all their plans (#10 and 
#30). 
 
 
Figure 24 - Example of question 2 in the survey from response #35 and a total in the right column 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:52==
 
52
Figure 26 - Result of question 4 in the survey. It is possible to choose more than one answer. 
 
Question 3 
List the three most used programmes and describe where in the process they are used. 
 
In figure 25 three examples from question 3 are displayed. The tools/programmes have 
been ranked in order of the most used in the urban planner’s daily work, followed by a 
description of the process.  Each response indicates the individual working process in each 
municipality. 
 
Figure 25 - Example of question 3 in the survey from response #7, #8 and #31. The answers (tools/programmes) 
are prioritised followed by a description where in the process they are used. 
A total response or average from all 41 municipalities based on the different, qualitative 
answers has not possible to generate, as the description of different tools/programmes were 
too imprecise to calculate. Question 2 gives the best overview of the used programmes, 
which recur in the responses in question 3. The three responses in the example above are 
very average in relation to the other responses. These representative responses are also the 
best explained concerning the description of use in the process.  
 
Question 4 
Do your municipality develop new information technology tools? 
 
0
5
10
15
20
25
Yes to public 
participation
Yes to urban 
planning
Yes to other 
purposes 
(Health care, 
culture, 
education 
etc.)
No
I don't know
Numbers of municipalities 
(Possible to choose one or 
more options)
==PAGE:53==
 
53
The municipalities may choose one or more options in questions 4. It is possible that a 
municipality develops new information technology tools in one area. Subsequently they may 
be developing information technology tools in other areas as well. This means that one yes-
answer does not exclude another.  
 
In figure 26 is illustrated that more than 50 % of the municipalities answered no. One 
municipality answered yes to all three things (2 %), five municipalities answered yes to two of 
the categories (12 %) and seven municipalities answered yes to one of the categories (17 %). 
 
The developed information technology tools are e.g. TIP-arrangement, 3D city model and 
GIS data collection (#15), digital platforms for district plans, local municipal plans and sector 
plans (#24), Web-GIS as an internal tool, but in the long run also as an external tool serving 
as a communication tool towards the citizens (#36) and surveys and maps of buildings 
scheduled for demolition (#39).  
 
Question 6 
Do you have a strategy for the information technologies used in the different phases of a 
planning process?  
 
In this question the municipalities were asked if they have a strategy for using or 
implementing digital tools in their work, and in what phases the tools are used. Figure 27 
shows that 48 % of the municipalities have a strategy to a high degree or some degree in 
relation to which information technologies they use in the different phases in a planning 
process. 48 % of the municipalities have a strategy to a low degree or not at all. This divides 
the municipalities in two equal halves. Though, no one answered “to a very high degree”. 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
I don't know 
Not at all
To a low degree
To some degree
To a high degree
To a very high degree
Percent %
Figure 27 - Results of question 6 in the survey. 
==PAGE:54==
 
54
One comment to question 6 is about unwritten strategies.  
 
“We have a procedure for the process, but not a recorded strategy” #38 (Answered: “To 
a high degree”).  
 
The following four comments deal with the fact that not all situations are the same.  
 
“In the municipality there is neither a clear strategy for how digital media and platforms 
should be used concerning public participation, nor an overall strategy for how and when we 
involve the citizens. This is decided from case to case” #36 (both with regard to Q5 and Q6) 
(Answered: “Not at all”) 
 
 “No each case is different” #12 (Answered: “Not at all”) 
 
“We have some written in our process, but the way to involve the citizens depends to a 
great degree on the project. Not all tools make the same sense to utilise in all situations. That is 
why different types of involvement are utilised in situations, where they make a good result. 
Furthermore is it a legal requirement, when we devise district plans to use web site and 
PlansystemDK. In these situations there will always be used two types of involvement/information 
technologies as a minimum” #37 (Answered: To a high degree). 
 
“We use, what makes most sense in the given situation” #3 (Answered: “Not at all”) 
 
Question 7 
To which degree do you agree with the following statements about use of information 
technology in urban planning and public participation?  
 
 
 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Information 
technology can 
qualify urban 
planning
Information 
technology can 
qualify public 
participation
Information 
technology is 
difficult to use in 
urban planning
Information 
technology is 
difficult to use in 
public 
participation
Percent %
Strongly agree
Agree
Neither nor
Disagree
Strongly disagree
I don't know
Figure 28 - Five statements the municipalities shall consider 
==PAGE:55==
 
55
Figure 29 - Question 8+9+10 about finances, competences and time to implement new information 
technology in the municipalities 
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Do you have the necessary 
time to implement new 
information technology?
Do you have the necessary 
competences to implement 
new information technology?
Do you have the finances for 
new information technology?
Yes, to a very 
high degree
Yes, to a high 
degree
Yes, to some 
degree
No, not really
No, not at all
I don't know
In question 7, figure 28, the municipalities will answer five statements from strongly disagree 
to strongly agree.  
 
More than 90 % of the municipalities agree or strongly agree in the statements “information 
technology can qualify urban planning” and “information technology can qualify public 
participation”.   
 
Furthermore the municipalities find it more difficult to use information technology in public 
participation, than in connection with urban planning. Under 10 % agree in “information 
technology is difficult to use in urban planning”, but more than  25 % agree that 
“information technology is difficult to use in public participation” – none of the respondents 
strongly agree.  
 
Question 8+9+10  
Question 8, figure 29, investigates the municipalities’ opportunities of purchasing new 
information technology. The three factors are finances, competences and time. All three 
parameters have been encountered a couple of times through the project and in other 
studies (Kønigsfeldt, 2014).   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
None of the municipalities have answered, “Yes, to a very high degree” in any of the three 
questions.  
 
While 27 % have “to a high degree” or “to some degree” the finances for new information 
technology, 52 % answer no, not really or no not at all. 
 
==PAGE:56==
 
56
The question about competences is where most municipalities answer “yes, to a high 
degree” or “yes, to some degree”, namely 63 %. Around 32 % of the municipalities answer 
“no, not really” or “no, not at all”, if they have the necessary competences to implement 
new information technology. 
 
 In the question “Do you have the necessary time to implement new information 
technology?” only 3 % answer “yes, to a high degree”. In total 32 % answer yes either “to a 
high degree” or “to some degree”. 60 % says “no, not really” or “no, not at all”.  
 
Two comments are important in this question: 
 
“There are both practical and economic reasons for not perfectly using information 
technology. At the end of the day it is a political question, what they want, given that we have 
the competences. Involvement costs time in the planning and time is money/possible growth…”  
#1 
 
“Implementation of digital tools for urban planning has not been prioritised in the 
budget. There are though allocated money to strengthen public participation” #36  
 
==PAGE:57==
 
57
4.2   Qualitative Data Analysis – Interviews 
All interviews have been coded with different categories during the transcription. The 
categories are; barrier/challenges, potentials/opportunities, working process/tools, facts, 
levels, reflections/desires and examples. Each category has been given a colour. In 
Appendix I, J, K, L and M the transcriptions and colour indication (coding) can be found. A 
summary from the workshop in Copenhagen’s municipality can be seen in Appendix N. This 
section summarise the qualitative data based on interviews where each interview has been 
outlined in short sentences, based on the interviewee’s opinion and perception. The first 
two interviews are from municipalities, the third is data from the workshop in Copenhagen 
Municipality, the fourth is the interview with the consultancy company and the fifth is with 
the observer and facilitator Dansk Byplanlaboratorium. Secondly an outline of three essential 
themes, each grouped with distinct topics will be analysed based on the interviewees’ 
opinion of the subject.  
 
4.2.1     Summary of the qualitative data collection  
Summaries of the essence in the four interviews and workshop outlined in bullets.  
 
Interviews with the municipalities 
 
Maria Thye Lynghøj from Rødovre Municipality 
 
- 
Using videos of the city recorded from the air, foam models, AutoCAD, Illustrator, 
Google Maps, GIS, 2D interactive maps, Photoshop   
- 
Explaining the process of an local municipal plan and district plan with its decision 
making stages 
- 
Considering a potential in using digital tools in development areas and overall 
plans 
- 
Positive: It could be really great to have the whole municipality in 3D (foam) and 
digital. 
- 
Negative: It is expensive and there has to be a workable benefit – you do not use 
money on something, which is nice to have. In some way it has to be necessary or 
add something extra to the planning process and in a lot of district plans, it would 
be overkill to start (Edit: Using it)… Maybe it is three terrace houses and a grocery. 
It is sufficient with some visualisations and some plans visualising how the building 
is placed on the ground.   
 
 
Esben Obeling from Aalborg Municipality 
 
- 
Using Esri-package (CityEngine, GIS), SketchUp, Adobe-package (Photoshop, 
Illustrator), Word, Web interface, KortInfo (webGIS), Facebook   
- 
Using a 3D SketchUp model without terrain to create volume studies and shading 
diagrams  
- 
The 3D model is static with a relatively high level of details but rarely updated 
==PAGE:58==
 
58
- 
Wishes for a rough model with terrain and elevation  
- 
It would be smart, if it was possible to update the model via GIS data in-house. 
- 
If there is a more detailed project, then it is typically the private owner or the public 
owner, who has money for the project to visualise it more thoroughly. When they do 
that, it is not the municipality, which is responsible for that part. In these situations 
Aalborg Municipality requests them to deliver visualisations.  
- 
About which level digital tools can be utilised? It is probably on the level of district 
plans – mostly, where it is possible to create a 3D-visualisation of how the building 
plot or a building opportunity will appear and then make shading diagrams and 
volume studies. In some situations it could also be on the level of local municipal 
plans - and when devising informal plans and construction projects.   
- 
“When we [Edit: Aalborg Municipality] some day get a 3D model, which is also a 
part of our GIS, which definitely would be the ultimate way to store it (Edit: Data), 
then one could drag an area out and create a viewer of it, and then the public could 
turn the layers on and off by themselves, and view different parts of the plan.” 
 
 
Workshop in Copenhagen Municipality 
 
- 
There is a vision and a hope for standardisation, where data can be dragged in, in 
order to reduce time-consuming drudgery and make space for more complex 
cases.   
- 
Request from the management: It is important to digitise district plans, because 
Copenhagen is a growing city. As a result of that, a rise in the number of district 
plans can be seen, where the request is to start working more effectively with these 
district plans.   
The process for application/mapping of district plans is illustrated below: 
 
Application/mapping 
 
  
 
 Applications à  Project owner  à  60-75 % is approved  à    Data  
  
50-100 pr. year   
 
 
 
                          not digitised/ 
             standardised 
 
- 
Between 25-35 % of the district plans will never take effect.  
- 
Building projects are already handled digitally, which makes the urban planning 
department cast a sidelong glance at their processes, to investigate if anything 
could be imitated.   
 
Interview with consultancy company 
 
Jesper Rye Rasmussen and Uffe Gross Nielsen from Niras 
 
- 
Using/facilitating SketchUp, Cityplanner, MicroStation, KortInfo (Web-GIS/GIS), 3ds 
MAX (Also known as 3D studio max), DKPlan, Umbraco   
==PAGE:59==
 
59
- 
Observe if planners want to stick to the programmes they are familiar with; 
Photoshop, Illustrator and InDesign. 
- 
A lot of the planners, who are sitting out there, are not technical oriented and this is 
probably because of their former line of study. Also the teachers are neither 
oriented about the opportunities – nor have they kept up with the development.   
- 
The digital development is quietly in progress, but it could move faster. This is also 
about asking, at what stage are we? Where are we in the process? And what type of 
3D is relevant? 
- 
To keep the 3D model updated should not be a serious concern  
- 
The municipalities demand the most 1) KortInfo (GIS), 2) DKPlan 3) 3D-models 
- 
Digital tools should be combined to facilitate the working process 
- 
If one should move the urban planners from the Adobe-package, it would be 
optimal to teach them how to draw in GIS-programmes, because then there is an 
open palette for integrating the planners into other systems. We have to move them 
to digital plans, where they can work more in boxes. We have to move them to 
SketchUp and think more three-dimensional and teach them, that SketchUp is 
actually not just a presentation tool, it is also a working tool. 
 
Interview with self-governing institution 
 
Interview with Andreas Hvidt from Dansk Byplanlaboratorium 
 
- 
“Smart City, as one thinks, must be able to generate a lot of good information and 
be the shortcut to a better urban planning, but it is really difficult to see how it 
actually can be implemented in practice.” 
- 
“Then I think, in the survey, which is now suddenly two years old, it was my 
experience and I thought “Oops, they are NOT very upbeat and it could easily be 
much better”, but there are some work culture challenges, which makes it difficult 
for them… Well, if you should learn a new programme or another smart 
programme, then you have to sit down and have time to partly acquaint yourself 
with the programme, and partly implement it in your work. There are a lot of 
people, with a lot to do and they have actually not just the time and surplus energy 
to ALSO do that. And at the same time, the municipalities do not have a lot of 
money to pump into it.” 
- 
“The development goes slowly, but forward though. And all municipalities are 
interested and of course especially the biggest and strongest. There are different 
places (Edit: Municipalities), where they normally have this as a focus area.”  
- 
“The problem is, it does not help to say, now we make a damn smart digitisation 
development, because that does not form the development.”   
- 
“What would be smart in my opinion, in relation to public participation, is to involve 
the citizens earlier in the process, in the project development phase.”    
 
==PAGE:60==
 
60
4.2.2     Analysis of the qualitative data collection  
The analysis is structured based on different topics, which has been covered in the 
interviews. For each topic an introducing text is made followed by quotations from the 
interviewees. The topics are divided into three sections and listed in a sequence, with two to 
three topics in each section as illustrated in figure 30. Digital tools and the use of them are 
analysed in the first section. In the second section a more process-oriented management 
perspective of the topics is discussed to identify the opportunities and barriers. In the third 
section the topics will specify the prospects regarding future use of digital tools in the 
municipalities and also try to understand the hurdles, which have to be overcome to 
develop a supple process.  
 
 
  
Figure 30 - Illustration of the division of the presentation of qualitative data 
Topic 1: The following three topics clarify what the interviewees’ opinions and experiences 
are with the use of digital tools, how to use them and how to maintain them. 
 
Tools  
As illustrated in section 3.2 an urban planner’s work in the municipality is to a great extent 
characterised by devising all types of plans. The answers in the qualitative data collection 
resemble a lot of the answers given in figure 23 and 24 in section 4.1. The answers illustrate 
the current digitisation scenario in the municipalities, as a way to understand, how further 
initiatives can be developed. According to Esben Obeling from Aalborg municipality and 
Maria Thye Lynghøj from Rødovre municipality, Adobe-programmes are often used in 
combination with a GIS-extract, Google Maps or AutoCAD in relation to devise district plans 
and local municipal plans. 3D models are used to create volume studies and shading 
diagrams as illustrated in figure 31 (and figure 32, which illustrates the same model in 
Google Maps 3D view) and can also be used when developing an urban area. To illustrate 
what type of feeling or what type of space the area should hold, reference pictures are 
found. Word is used to write the plans, so it can be used as a legal document. Word is used 
to write the plans, in order to use it as a legal document. When asking the supplier Uffe 
Gross Nielsen what tools the municipalities use he answers in the below mentioned quote 
==PAGE:61==
 
61
and points out that it is about using the programmes intelligent, when combining the 
opportunities they hold.  
 
”It is a combination of a lot of things, when we talk digital (Edit: Tools), because GIS is 
implemented in all municipalities and it is a tool you have to use – it is substantial – all mapping 
material, is important to use – both legally and for making a lot of analyses. Digital plans will of 
course hold an obvious opportunity to develop things, as we see it and with the products we 
also have. (Edit: It) comes as a further analysis and dialogue tool. And it is probably in that order. 
Then you can say, besides (Edit: These mentioned tools), then we still have the Adobe-package, 
because there are so much they (Edit: The municipalities) create, which can not be contained in 
this, which is relevant on paper or to create a poster, if you are attending a public meeting…so 
you can say, you are not going to replace anything, you are just moving some working 
procedures. The VR comes of course on top of 3D” Uffe Gross Nielsen  
 
 
Figure 31 - SketchUp 3D model of Aalborg with shadings (May, 12 pm). Budolfi church and Aalborg town hall. 
 
Figure 32 - Google Maps 3D map of Aalborg. Budolfi church and Aalborg town hall. 
How much information in one model 
The thesis has through the process also investigated how much information models can 
contain and examined if great loads of information stored in one model, makes a greater 
==PAGE:62==
 
62
model for the urban planners to work with. Not all programmes contain the equal amount of 
information and it is important for the urban planners to realise what the need of information 
is for the different tasks. There is no need for advanced models with internal details as floors 
and internal stairways, because the urban planners are not going to enter the building. The 
external shell might be important, but the urban planners are only going to create the frame 
for the house with height, width and the area where it is placed. Also the margin of error can 
increase the more detailed the model is.  
 
”The more data we add on, a bigger margin of error may occur. And data have to be 
updated and this is also where we have to look at, what we want to use it (Edit: The data) for” 
Esben Obeling (Interview 1) 
 
The amount of stored data does also depend on the programme’s ability to contain and 
utilise it. SketchUp is best for simple sketches as implied in the name, where MicroStation 
can be used for big amount of data, to store basic data.  
 
Updating digital data  
One thing is to acquire new information technology, another thing is to maintain and keep 
the data in the programme updated. Concerns have been detected in the municipalities, 
both regarding keeping it updated in-house, but also the economy if suppliers should 
maintain the model. Digitisation will face difficulties in developing, if the digital data are not 
maintained. If the private owner has drawings of the building the municipality can get it and 
draw it in, but it requires devolution of responsibility to have the model/data updated.  
 
”We think it is smart, that we in house update it (Edit: The model) via our GIS data…we 
got all data in 2D after all…because of GIS, so it would be great, if it could be utilised in 3D also” 
Esben Obeling  (Interview no. 1) 
 
The municipalities express a concern in relation to maintain data in a 3D model. The 
suppliers maintain urban models by the use of photogrammetry. The concern from the 
municipality is therefore not seen as a heavy barrier in the supplier’s perspective, because it 
is a part of their expertise. The two different perspectives illustrate the digitisation 
development in respectively the municipalities and by the suppliers.  
  
”What you typically do, is that you create some changing appointments, which means 
here (Edit: In this area) is the city unchanged, and in these 500, 1000 or 1500 places there are 
maybe changes. And then you typically create them with this technology named 
photogrammetry […] Then you make a photogrammetric update of the urban model on the 
same basis as when it was produced […] It is basically not a concern, which can be real, I think. 
Of course it costs some money to maintain, and it is always a balance – what do you get out of 
it? But technological and in regard to price, it can not be a heavy barrier.” Jesper Rye Rasmussen 
 
Topic 2: The following three topics are about the digital tools seen from a management 
perspective. This includes how to use them in the working process, the thoughts of 
resources, which have to be allocated to implement digital tools, and lastly in what 
==PAGE:63==
 
63
perspective, especially the municipalities see the owner as a part of the digitisation and 
generating the models.  
 
Working process 
To understand at what stage in the urban planning process the digital tools have the best 
circumstances for being implemented, the plans in section 3.2 support the municipalities’ 
explanations. 
 
“It (Edit: Digital tools) is probably (Edit: Used) at the level of district plans, I think. But it 
could also in some occasions be at the level of local municipal plans… and then there could also 
be informal plans, where you could use it… but yes… you could also use it in construction 
projects, but it is mostly at the level of district plans, where you should be able to get a 3D-
visualisation on how a building plot or a building opportunity will look like and then make 
shading studies on it, and volume studies” Esben Obeling (Interview no. 1) 
 
Digital tools can also be used in a dynamic process, seen from a supplier’s point of view. A 
3D model can be used to form an area, which has to be developed. Instead of producing a 
2D map and writing about the different storeys on a building, which makes people get their 
own vision of the area, a 3D model can be produced as a visualisation tool, and also a 
developing tool when creating parametric design as exemplified in the example below and 
as described in theory section 3.4.5.  
 
Example of a 3D model, where parametric design is used 
  
“There is actually a church here, which has been preserved because of some frescos, they 
chose to display. That means, you can actually still see the church down here from this area, 
even though we place these two building volumes. What is very important to say is, that it is 
very important to keep this view, and it cannot be mistaken, because we want to add some 
extra square meters. […] Then I drag (Edit: In the programme) in this side of the building to 
check how close the building façade can come to the street, without covering the view to the 
church from our point of view from the street.  
So this is a way, I find extremely interesting, when you start working with these components.” 
Uffe Gross Nielsen 
 
Resources (Economy, time, competences) 
Both in the survey made by Dansk Byplanlaboratorium (Kønigsfeldt, 2014), in figure 29 
questions 8 + 9 + 10 in the quantitative data collection and in the interviews there is a clear 
tendency, which indicates that economy, time and to some extent competences are three 
very important factors when digitisation is discussed.   
 
In Aalborg Municipality the challenges are economical characterised just as 52 % of the 
responses in question 8. In Rødovre Municipality most of the employees have the 
competences to some extent, considered by Maria Thye Lynghøj, but resources and time 
are the challenges when implementing digitisation.     
 
==PAGE:64==
 
64
Also the self-governing institution, which observes the urban planning, sees the above-
mentioned hurdles when implementing digitisation in the municipalities. 
 
”There are a lot of people, who have a lot to do and they just don’t have time or energy 
also to do that. And at the same time do the municipalities not have like insanely much money to 
put into it […] I think, there are many, who would say that they don’t have the time for it. They 
are simply pressed in workload.” Andreas Hvidt  
 
The supplier sees the time spent on a digital model as an investment with a clear value 
based on the result but also sees an economic hurdle in another perspective, compared to 
the municipalities.   
 
”If you could make it (Edit: A SketchUp model) in an hour or two, then it would be okay, 
because then it was actually a better casework, because you got a reliable picture of, what we 
should assess. So, there is a clear value […] if we say 75.000 DKK on hosting our three modules in 
digital plans, then they (Edit: Municipalities) say ”Oh, that is really expensive” in the planning 
department. If you go up and talk to the IT-department, then they would clap their hands 
because they would have to operate for several millions of Danish kroner every year to make 
something similar. So they say, if you can get it for that price, then just accept it.” Uffe Gross 
Nielsen 
 
Topic 3: The final section’s three topics are about the future use of digital tools and the 
considerations about it. It will reflect the willingness on trying new things, the need for 
thoroughly tested products and different factors which have to be present to support or with 
influence on a digital working process – this could e.g. be a project portfolio – all things that 
can affect the choice of tool. Also the section will reflect on the questions about when a tool 
is digital and if some tools can be more digital than others?   
Furthermore this section will demonstrate and later discuss the phrase “need to have and 
nice to have”. Finally there will be a look at “the next step” and the future based on the 
interviewees’ opinions.    
 
Thoughts about a supporting digital working process 
The various opinions regarding the use of the Adobe-package and the Office-package have 
been common for all the interviews. The interviewed municipalities, like 80-90 % of the 
responds in the survey in question 2 use Photoshop and Illustrator. The use of the two 
packages is widespread in the municipalities, but the suppliers want to move the planners 
from the above-mentioned programmes to smarter digital tools.  
The self-governing institution does also see the Adobe-programmes as a more general 
thing.  
 
”AutoCAD or the Adobe-package are like a more general thing – we use some IT to 
create a front page etc. But like the more specific, digital urban plans, they have been digitised” 
Andreas Hvidt  
 
Another challenge, which is stated by Uffe Gross Nielsen, is the use of new digital tools’ 
vulnerability, when only a few people have the competences to use them. Almost every 
==PAGE:65==
 
65
urban planner has the competences for Adobe-programmes, which is why the tools survive. 
If one person quit, another one takes over. This is where the digitisation is exposed – if only 
one person is skilled and leaves the job, the model/installation cannot be used.  
 
”What is going to be the difficult part in the future, is to move the planners from the 
Adobe-packages to these digital tools, which have existed the past 10-15 years…? As I 
understand, they want to stay and stick to what they are familiar with, and that is Photoshop, 
Illustrator and it is InDesign […] Well, the Adobe-programmes survive, because everybody carry 
them in their baggage. So if one person quit, then another person just takes over.” Uffe Gross 
Nielsen  
 
Need to have and nice to have  
The essence in the phrase “need to have and nice to have” is a statement in many 
municipalities, because they know what they are able to create with their tools they are 
familiar with. Maria Thye Lynghøj illustrates the concern, based on a 3D model, which would 
be expensive to purchase compared to what the municipality would be able to get out of it. 
From her point of view, the model has to be necessary or add something extra to the plan 
process. From their perspective they cannot afford or justify something nice to have. When 
the digital tool is regarded nice to have, it is also regarded as “overkill” to use when 
devising district plans. Esben Obeling sees it from a more varied perspective.  
 
”Everything which can contribute for us to have a better tool e.g. 3D tool in planning, 
could in some way contribute to make the plan process easier, but it is difficult to say, because 
there is also the issue with nice to have and need to have” Esben Obeling (Interview no. 2)   
 
Uffe Gross Nielsen tries to emphasise the need to see the tools as working tools, more than 
presentation tools. The tools should be taught to use in an intelligent way, so the urban 
planners just do not see the digitisation as visualisation but as a digital way to create data.  
 
”What is difficult, is to move the planners from the Adobe-programmes, because they 
are married to these programmes. If you should move them, then you have to introduce them to 
programmes as GIS, in which it would be optimal to teach them to draw, because then you have 
an open palette to integrate them into any other systems. We have to move them to digital 
plans, where it will be a little bit more with boxes, we must admit. We have to move them to 
SketchUp and think more three-dimensional and teach them to say, this is actually not only a 
presentation tool, it is a working tool as well.” Uffe Gross Nielsen 
 
Future / next step 
The interviewees were asked how they predict the future and what potentials they see as a 
next step and with what speed. In Aalborg municipality they work with creating a new 
model, which can be generated based on their own digital GIS data. Andreas Hvidt from 
Dansk Byplanlaboratorium observes the digitisation developing in a slow pace. He further 
points out that all municipalities seem to be interested in the digitisation. In particular it is 
the biggest and strongest of them, as seen in the eight municipalities with a sustainability 
==PAGE:66==
 
66
tool for devising district plans in theory section 3.3. Uffe Gross Nielsen experiences the same 
pace as Andreas Hvidt. 
 
”The more young people who enter (Edit: Into this field), the more digital will we 
become. Also because there will be an increased focus on the digital working process in certain 
educations […] So it is nice and easy on its way, you can say, but we would not mind if it went 
faster” Uffe Gross Nielsen  
 
The suppliers suggest that the passionate employees, who have a passion and an urge for 
digitisation, have to pull the digitisation.  
 
”It is these passionate employees, which are out there, it is those ones we have to find. 
And they are there as usual, it is just a matter if they are allowed to shine, so we can discover 
them, when we are out there” Uffe Gross Nielsen 
 
Furthermore both Esben Obeling and Uffe Gross Nielsen see a generational change as 
necessary before the digitisation can be fully extended, with the young persons as a driving 
force. The young generation are born or raised with digital tools, which makes it a natural 
part to work with. The hurdle can only be overcome by time and with e.g. Esben Obeling or 
other skilled persons, who control the digitisation tools and share the output with the other 
urban planners.   
  
”It is probably also a little bit of a generational thing, because either you are in with 
quotation marks ”raised with 3D tools” or you are not. And I think, that hurdle is really tough. 
And I think that we for a period of time will have to deal with some, who just sits still and I can do 
it, and then it is just me, who makes it and the we use it together” Esben Obeling (Interview no. 
2) 
 
”And we do also believe that the last third (Edit: Of the municipalities) are difficult to convince. 
Because we also think there is a need for generational change. A lot of the municipalities, which 
are left, I think, a lot of them include some older people out there. And it has also something to 
say” Uffe Gross Nielsen   
 
==PAGE:67==
 
67
4.3   Qualitative Data Analysis – Sustainability  
In this section the sustainability model will be presented and comments based on interviews 
regarding sustainable digitisation will support the explanation. As seen in figure 7 the 
sustainability model has been revised by recommendations from Esben Obeling in Aalborg 
Municipality.   
 
Version 1 of the sustainability model as seen in table 3, is divided into three main groups – 
environmental, social and economic. Each group is further divided into four sub groups, as a 
tool to evaluate each parameter to clarify to what degree the published strategy, tool or 
process is sustainable. The parameters are as following: 
 
Environmental:  
 
 
Social: 
 
 
Economic: 
 
Data Security   
 
 
Working environment  
Digital management  
Sharing data in public authorities 
Competences (academic) 
Reduce cost via cooperation 
Qualitative benefits   
 
In-service training 
 
Process optimisation  
Environment goal  
 
 
Public participation 
 
Efficiency improvements 
 
Studies and 
publications 
Environmental 
Social 
Economic 
Visions 
5 = Adequate / Large 
focus 
3 = Medium 
1 = Deficient / No focus  
 
Environment goal 
Qualitative benefits 
Sharing data in public authorities 
Data security 
Public participation 
In-service training 
Competences (academic) 
Working environment 
Efficiency Improvements 
Process optimisation 
Reduce cost of purchasing IT-
tools via cooperation 
Digital management 
Joint public sector 
digitisation strategy 
2016-2020 
5 
4 
5 
5 
4 
1 
4 
1 
4 
4 
3 
1 
Joint public sector 
digitisation strategy 
2011-2015 
3 
3 
5 
2 
5 
1 
1 
1 
4 
3 
2 
2 
Joint municipal plan of 
action 2016-2020 
3 
3 
5 
5 
5 
1 
4 
4 
4 
4 
5 
2 
Dansk 
Byplanlaboratorium 
survey 2014 
2 
4 
n/a 
n/a 
5 
1 
3 
1 
2 
2 
1 
1 
KL’s modenheds 
rapport 2012 
1 
1 
1 
1 
3 
5 
5 
3 
5 
5 
2 
5 
Other initatives/reports 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 3 - Sustainability model version 1 
The sustainability model can also be used for evaluating digital tools, to clarify in what areas 
the tool has its forces and weaknesses as seen in table 4.  
==PAGE:68==
 
68
The sustainability model is in table 3 completed in relation to understand and score the 
present digitisation strategies and reports devised to clarify the digitisation in the public 
sector 
and 
the 
municipalities 
devised 
by 
Kommunernes 
Landsforening 
(2016), 
Digitaliseringsstyrelsen (2016), KL & Devoteam (2012) and Dansk Byplanlaboratorium 
(Kønigsfeldt, 2014). 
 
 
 
 
To understand the sustainable working process for some of the mentioned parameters in 
table 3 devised in version 1, the interviewees’ opinions of a sustainable process are listed in 
the comments below. These comments indicate the opportunities to stay in one programme 
for making the work process more efficient regarding the economical perspective in 
efficiency, improvements and cost savings. 
 
”There are not a lot of students who learn about the GIS-tool. About GIS, you extract 
some data from it, put it into Illustrator and then colour it to some fine plans, 2D-procedure, 
because that is what you do. If you stayed in the GIS-map and created the same, draw the exact 
same, it is the exact same methods you are using to make a filling colour, a thickness of line and 
Tools 
Environmental 
Social 
Economic 
                                                                              Visions 
5 = Adequate / 
Large focus / 
Difficult 
3 = Medium 
1 = Deficient / 
No focus / Easy 
 
Environment goal 
Qualitative benefits 
Sharing data in public authorities 
Data security 
Public participation 
In-service training 
Competences (academic) 
Working environment 
Efficiency Improvements 
Process optimisation 
Reduce cost of purchasing IT-
tools via cooperation 
Maintenance of data 
Digital management 
GIS for internal 
use 
4 
4 
4 
- 
1 
5 
4 
3 
4 
4 
- 
5 
- 
Web-GIS for 
external use 
4 
5 
2 
- 
5 
2 
1 
3 
1 
2 
- 
5 
- 
Digital Plans  
1 
2 
4 
- 
5 
3 
3 
2 
3 
2 
- 
5 
- 
2D 
1 
3 
1 
- 
2 
2 
2 
3 
1 
1 
- 
2 
- 
3D 
4 
5 
5 
- 
4 
3 
3 
5 
4 
3 
- 
5 
- 
4D 
4 
5 
4 
- 
1 
5 
5 
4 
5 
5 
- 
5 
- 
5D 
4 
5 
4 
- 
1 
5 
5 
4 
5 
5 
- 
5 
- 
6D 
5 
5 
4 
- 
1 
5 
5 
4 
5 
5 
- 
5 
- 
Virtual Reality 
4 
5 
1 
- 
5 
3 
3 
4 
4 
4 
- 
1 
- 
Table 4 - Sustainability model version 2 with tools 
==PAGE:69==
 
69
all that colour on […] Then you can make use of all the potentials in the digital” Uffe Gross 
Nielsen 
 
The above-mentioned data in GIS has, besides the advantage that the urban planner stays 
in the programme, also the advantage that the changes made in the GIS programme is 
stored in it.  
 
In the environmental perspective an environment screening takes its beginning as soon as 
any district plan has started its development, which implicates the parameters “environment 
goal”, “environmental qualitative benefits” and “process optimisation”, because the 
environmental screening runs parallel with the process of the district plan. 
 
”Then you are concurrently starting an environmental screening also. That goes for all 
(Edit: Plans), because all plan proposals have to be environmental screened to see if it is 
necessary also to make an environmental assessment. So it is just a process, which runs 
concurrently. So immediately when you start a district plan process, you also start an 
environmental screening […] it is both traffic-related, social, it is climatic, noise, urban area, 
architectonic, cultural. It is a whole palette of a lot of different factors, which you are screening. Is 
there something in this plan, which has a significant alteration on these conditions? And if you 
find that there is a significant change in one of these conditions, then there has to be made an 
environmental assessment” Maria Thye Lynghøj  
Professional discussion about sustainability and digital tools 
The following comments are related to the professional discussion with Esben Obeling 
about the sustainability model and the sustainable use of digital tools in the municipality. 
Aalborg Municipality is one of the eight municipalities, which has developed a sustainability 
tool for urban planning (Aalborg Kommune, 2017) (Miljøministeriet, 2013) as mentioned in 
theory section 3.3.  
 
Esben Obeling’s considerations about the use of the model both to assess strategies and to 
assess digital tools are: 
 
”It’s a little bit more like strategic plans, which different authorities have devised, but you 
assess them on the basis of these parameters and simply give them a score. If you could do that 
for the tools we have in the municipalities, 3D and like that? It could well be. To make a similar 
assessment of them, where you could ask ”does this tool meet the requests we have in relation 
to XX”, yes […] and you could also say, does it have to? It is not necessarily all tools, that should 
be able to do everything”  
 
In the last sentence Esben Obeling has an important consideration when evaluating the 
sustainability model. He is questioning if it is important that all tools have a top score in all 
parameters. This question is considered further in the discussion section in chapter 5.   
 
When Esben Obeling was asked if they had defined any sustainable goals, which they 
wanted to fulfil and if these digital tools could help the municipality to attain the goal or 
support it in some way, he answered: 
 
==PAGE:70==
 
70
“Yes, I guess they can. […] All tools that are helping to advance a plan process, will of 
course also contribute to advance a sustainable plan process or a process, that advance 
sustainability, if the tools, you know, can be used to something in the process”   
 
The statement is important and will be used in the discussion to find out if the hypothesis 
devised in section 1.2, is true. 
 
An example of how the parameter “reducing cost of purchasing IT-tools via cooperation” 
can improve a sustainable economy shows below. The example supports the importance of 
the parameter.  
  
Example – ”Reduce cost of purchasing IT-tools via cooperation” 
 
“Now I will give a specific example. We are getting a 3D model done and that model is 
created in cooperation with another administration, which has to use it in relation to 
something completely different. As they also have to use 3D – it is something with some 
people, who handle some transmission system and things like that – where they need the 
terrain and the buildings to use it in that connection. They also have some GIS-data, and then 
they thought we will use 3D for something else, but both parts actually need to use a 3D 
model. Then we can just as well buy a 3D model, which can be used by both parts, and then 
get more out of it.”  Esben Obeling. 
 
An input to a parameter on the sustainability model is based on a concern in Aalborg 
Kommune, also mentioned in section 4.2 under topic “Updating digital tools”. The problem 
concerns the maintenance of the digital programmes and the data within, which if it is not 
maintained, neither will be sustainable.  
 
”The biggest problems we got in relation to sustainability in relation to 3D tools are, that 
we made a 3D model many years ago, and it has worked fine for many years, but it is of course 
static, there are not added any new things, unless there is an employee, who draws […] But that 
is of course also an area, where it is not very sustainable in fact. Some times, when you get the 
tools developed, you could actually also consider, how do we keep these things updated?”  
 
Based on the above-mentioned consideration an extra parameter has been added under 
the aspect “economical”, which concerns maintenance of data. If the data is not updated, it 
will be a waste of money on the purchased programme, and it will also affect the 
sustainability on the other parameters. 
 
The parameter “In service-training” is a parameter, which will be retained in the 
sustainability model version 2, in spite of the following comment. The comment is however 
still very important in relation to understand what hurdle the municipalities and public 
authorities face when implementing digital tools.  
 
”I actually don’t know how much in-service training and further education will do […] you 
have a challenge, you can train people to use 3D, but if they only use it once a week or once a 
month, they will never be good at it, I think. Then it’s just the same, it is not an efficient way – in 
fact it is non-sustainable to use a lot of money on in-service training” Esben Obeling 
==PAGE:71==
 
71
The parameter is still in the model, because of the importance in in-service training. The 
comment also points in the direction of the earlier mentioned generational change and 
younger generation, in relation to maintain the acquired knowledge.  
  
Based on the professional discussion with Esben Obeling from Aalborg Kommune, the 
sustainability model has been expanded with one more parameter “Maintenance of tools” 
in economical sustainability, which leads to five parameters below that category. It is an 
important factor to include in the total sustainability score regarding economy, based on the 
fact that money spent on a static, “dead” model, will be obsoleted very quickly, because of 
the cities’ rapidly growth, which gives a non-sustainable economy. 
 
The edited model – version 2 – is illustrated in table 4.   
==PAGE:72==
 
72
==PAGE:73==
 
73
5 
DISCUSSION  
 
The discussion section will be divided into three parts. The first part will be presenting the 
discussion of the thesis. The discussion will debate opinions presented in the results in 
chapter 4 and answering the three sub questions stated in the problem statement. The 
second part of this chapter will include a critical reflection. The critical reflection will 
encompass reconsiderations about the content of the survey and be deliberated in relation 
to potential future changes. Furthermore the criteria of data quality will be considered and 
evaluated in accordance to have them fulfilled. The third part will briefly look at the future 
work, which could be made as an extension to the thesis. 
  
5.1   Discussion of the results 
The discussion is divided into three parts, which all aim to discuss relevant reflections for 
each sub question in the problem statement. In the first part the barriers are discussed in 
relation to implement digital tools and examine if the barriers only can be seen as a 
discouraging statement or if it is possible to make the barriers smaller by e.g. cooperation. 
The second part deliberates the themes, if the Office-package can be called a digital tool 
and considerations about the mental barrier in the adage “nice to have or need to have”. 
Furthermore the second part seeks to answer if the municipalities have the right tools – both 
from a municipal point of view and from the supplier’s point of view. The third part discusses 
if it is possible to predict what kind of digital tools would efficiently help the municipalities in 
achieving a sustainable planning process. Moreover the third part discusses when the use of 
a tool is sustainable and if a joint national strategy in urban planning would be able to 
enhance the aim of sustainability. All three sections are ended with a sub conclusion based 
on the sub questions stated in the problem statement.  
 
5.1.1     Barriers and opportunities  
In figure 29, finances, time and competences are illustrated in relation to understand if the 
three factors are accessible in implementing new information technology in the 
municipalities. An important discussion is, if the answers are discouraging based on only 27 
% who answer “yes, to a high degree” or “yes, to some degree” about finances or if it 
should be seen as an opening instead. 27 % of the municipalities may have the finances. 
When examining the time perspective 60 % answer “no, not really” or “no, not at all”. Again 
this result can be regarded as “a closed door” or maybe the urban planners are not aware of 
what these opportunities digital tools can create. If time is invested in implementation of 
digital tools it will most likely be returned based on an increased focus on the sustainable 
parameters such as optimised processes and efficient tools.  
It is also important to realise that there are some hurdles, which have to be overcome when 
implementing and using digital tools. In regard of time saved Esben Obeling exemplifies:  
 
”I can create a 3D model in half an hour, and one of my colleges who is able to navigate a 
little in a 3D model programme will spent several hours creating the same”  
==PAGE:74==
 
74
The aspect of time can be regarded in two ways. The above statement shows the aspect of 
time spent if talking about professional use of a digital tool and figure 29 shows time 
allocated to implement new technology and learn how to use it. 
 
Both Esben Obeling and Uffe Gross Nielsen also envisage a generational change among 
employees as a part of the challenge of the advancement of digitisation in the 
municipalities. The younger generation has been educated in new technology at the 
universities and institutions of higher education, which makes it easy for them to embrace 
digitisation. A way to overcome the hurdle of a generational change can be e.g. 
 
“I think, that we for a while will have it like […] I can do it (Edit: create a 3D model), and then 
it is just me who prepares it, and then we use it together” Esben Obeling (Interview no. 2)  
 
When Uffe Gross Nielsen worked in Skive Municipality, he experienced almost the same as 
Esben Obeling mentions, also illustrated in the example of parametric design page 63. 
When the urban planners are using the same 3D model, where one skilled person controls 
and manages the 3D model, the sustainability parameters “process optimisation” and 
“good working environment” are added.   
 
To map these above-mentioned hurdles in the sustainability model the following parameters 
have to be observed: The parameters for ‘Economic’ are “Digital management”, “Reduce 
costs of purchasing IT-tools via cooperation”, “Process optimisation” and “Efficiency 
improvements”. The parameter ‘Social’ is “Competences (academic)”. The parameter for 
‘Environmental’ is “Qualitative benefits”. These parameters are important to look at, when 
finding out what strategy or process to follow for overcoming the hurdles. The sustainable 
parameters, which clarify the hurdles to be handled, are pointed out in table 5.  
 
Studies and 
publications or 
digital tools 
Environmental 
Social 
Economic 
                                               Visions 
5  =  Adequate /  
        Large focus 
3  =  Medium 
1  =  Deficient /  
         No focus  
 
Environment goal 
Qualitative benefits 
Sharing data in public 
authorities 
Data security 
Public participation 
In-service training 
Competences (academic) 
Working environment 
Efficiency Improvements 
Process optimisation 
Reduce cost of purchasing 
IT-tools via cooperation 
Maintenance of tools 
Digital management 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 5 - Sustainable parameters, which have to help to overcome the hurdles 
Uffe Gross Nielsen also sees a clear opportunity to overcome the hurdles by encouraging 
passionate employees, who have a natural curiosity and urge to drive the digitisation 
development. It is important to find employees, who want to take on the hard work in 
==PAGE:75==
 
75
implementing digital tools, because if no one will, the municipalities will not move 
anywhere. Uffe Gross Nielsen says:  
 
“The difficult part in this will be to actually move them (Edit: The urban planners) to 
something new, you know change their working habits. We have struggled with that for many 
many years – it is something, that takes time.”  
 
In order to gain useful tools to assist the urban planners in a achieving a sustainable 
planning process, the digital tools must fulfil the parameters in table 5. The digital tools 
have the aim to secure the process being sustainable by supporting the development and 
implementation. In the second interview Esben Obeling was asked if these digital tools were 
able to aid the municipality in reaching or supporting the sustainability goals in some way, 
seen from an urban planner’s perspective in a municipality. 
 
“All tools, that help to advance a plan process, will after all also help to advance a 
sustainable plan process or a process, which advance sustainability, if the tool in some way can 
be used in the process.” 
 
In relation to which extend digital tools can facilitate and support a supple working process 
Uffe Gross Nielsen’s comment below supports Esben Obeling’s point above.  
 
“This is something we have to look for in these products – some of the things we 
standardise, in return they will attain a more supple working process.” 
 
The hypothesis for the thesis was: Use of digital tools in sustainable urban planning 
advances the urban planning process.  
 
The responses to the statement “Information technology can qualify urban planning” in 
question 7, clarify that 92 % either ‘strongly agree’ or ‘agree’. If Esben Obeling thinks, “All 
tools, that help to advance a plan process, will after all also help to advance a sustainable 
plan process” the hypothesis must be applicable. The urban planning process consists to a 
great extent of making plans as described in the theory, chapter 2, which means the urban 
planning process and plan process can be equate. If all tools help, digital tools must be 
implicit.  
 
The sustainable planning process is in the sustainability model viewed from an internal 
perspective, and the parameters in the sustainability model indicates primary the sustainable 
initiatives internal in the urban planning department. A planning process, which includes all 
parameters, achieves a sustainable working process. Other parameters could probably also 
be included as sustainable factors, since the sustainability model should be regarded as a 
guiding tool rather than an absolute tool.    
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:76==
 
76
Sub conclusion: Does digitisation help the urban planners to achieve a 
sustainable planning process? 
 
There are some challenges that have to be overcome before the digitisation can be 
initiated. Jesper Rye Rasmussen and Uffe Gross Nielsen are as suppliers, passionate 
proponents of implementing digital tools in the urban planning process. Esben Obeling 
does also see potential in 3D, digital plans and using GIS intelligently by staying in the 
programme instead of moving it to the Adobe-programmes. 92 % of the respondents 
from the survey either ‘strongly agree’ or ‘agree’ in the statement “Information 
technology can qualify urban planning”. When the tools appear in a sustainable 
connection as in the sustainability model, the tools do affect some parameters that can 
help along to achieve a sustainable planning process, when using the tools.  
The hurdles, which are important to understand, are: Time, finances, to some extent 
competences, conventional thinking and a generational change (younger employees 
taking over). When facing the hurdles it becomes clear where to “push forward” and that 
is where the sustainability model works as a tool. When measuring the outlined focus 
areas, the municipality knows where to start, which makes the model work as a guiding 
tool to obtain a more sustainable planning process. The conventional thinking must be 
overcome by realising the benefits from working digital by use of qualified tools, also 
some of the tools must be regarded as working tools, more than presentation tools.  
Another way to overcome the hurdles in digitisation is to employ people passionate in 
working with digital tools. These people with a natural interest in digital tools are the 
driving force in the digitisation in an urban planning department. The digital skilled young 
people, who have this interest in digitisation and acquired skills through education, work 
in the municipalities and use the tools together with other employees, who support a 
good working environment and facilitate a sustainable working process. The generational 
change can only take place when passionate people are employed and not by only using 
the sustainable parameters. 
 
5.1.2     The right tools? 
In the survey 22 % responded to the open answer field that they use Word and 10 % 
Outlook. The question is, if the Office-package can be regarded as a digital tool? The 
programme is computer-based, and since 22 % of the respondents answer Word in relation 
to digital programmes, it indicates, that they regard the Office-package as a digital tool. 
What does this comprehension tell us about digital development? According to figure 23, all 
municipalities are working with GIS in various forms and 88 % uses 2D maps and drawings. 
Less than 50 % uses 2D interactive maps, 2½D models and 3D models. The Office-package, 
Adobe-package and GIS could be regarded as a “basis” of working digital, which creates a 
foundation for further digital add-ons. Uffe Gross Nielsen does also reflect of the concept of 
working digital. 
 
”It (Edit: The pdf) is after all also digital. It is considered digital (Edit: In relation to how 
the local municipal plan should be uploaded), but in my opinion it is not that digital. I think, it is 
an interesting topic, you have got, because what the hell is ”digital digital”? Because there is 
definitely big disagreement about that.” 
==PAGE:77==
 
77
The use of the Adobe-programmes is also discussed particularly among the suppliers, 
because they want to move most of the working procedures to other digital platforms as 
e.g. GIS. The Adobe-programmes, like the Office-package, are seen as not real digital tools 
from the suppliers’ point of view, but the municipalities regard them as digital tools and use 
them as exemplified in question 3, figure 25. It can also be discussed if it is that important to 
move them? Probably it is, if the current “not-so-digital” tools outshine the use of ‘real’ 
digital tools. If the new digital tools are a built-on to the Adobe-programmes, which form a 
safe basis, and are used as the new way to handle a more supple and sustainable working 
process, it should not be a problem. Andreas Hvidt illustrates in the results in chapter 4 as: 
 
”AutoCAD or the Adobe-package is like a more general thing – we use some IT to create 
a front page etc. But more specific, like the digital urban plans, they are digitised” 
    
If the municipalities have just started using digital tools, do they consider the sustainable 
aspects in digitisation and the internal working process? Also one can wonder if the 
suppliers really are selling the digital product on its sustainable parameters? Many of the 
tools fulfil the sustainable parameters in the sustainability model in table 4, but do the 
suppliers include the products in that correlation? No answers have been found in the 
interview, and it has not been possible to get an answer about the sustainable conditions in 
relation to the offered digital products.  
 
The right tools can probably also differ from municipality to municipality on different factors 
as; location, size, progress etc. One tool can be right for the large municipality located 
nearby a metropolitan area and in constant progress and expanding in number of 
companies and population, yet another tool can be right for the smaller municipality e.g. 
located on an island or in areas with a low number of citizens, with only a small progress or 
even a decreasing number in the population. Or maybe the same tool can be used e.g. a 3D 
model, but the size of the model can vary and be used for different purposes in two very 
different municipalities. If a tool is implemented only for “digitisation” reasons e.g. contact 
to citizens through a digital tool, this way to communicate may seem more distancing. If the 
contact normally works well using e.g. public meetings, workshop etc. in the daily life 
because of the short distance between urban planner and citizen – then it would not be the 
right tool for a small municipality, which almost knows all its citizens. Response #9 has state it 
as: 
 
“We are a very small municipality, where the distance is short from citizens to planners 
and politicians, so for us, it seems distancing to use different systems to contact the citizens 
through”  
 
When asking Esben Obeling if he thinks they have the right tools, he answers:  
 
“Well, it is difficult to say. We’ve got the tools, we’ve got, you may say. So I think, it is a little 
bit difficult question, or in some way a little bit difficult to say, because after all we get the job 
done”  
  
==PAGE:78==
 
78
This quotation leads to the adage “need to have and nice to have” which also Maria Thye 
Lynghøj answered in relation to implementing digital 3D model. “Need to have or nice to 
have” is a locution which has been encountered a couple of times through the project and a 
concern that has to be taken serious. To make a conclusion on both Esben Obeling and 
Maria Thye Lynghøj’s opinions, the municipalities must consider, if they have the right tools 
– at any rate to get their job done as urban planners. On the other hand it may be 
considered if they have the right tools to do their job as sustainable urban planners? The 
statements voice that they have the tools they need, but nothing extra. The suppliers prefer 
the municipalities to become even more digital and buy their products step-by-step as 
illustrated in figure 33 and further explained in the next section.   
  
Sub conclusion: Do the municipalities have the right digitisation tools to 
achieve their sustainability goals? 
 
When asking the municipalities, if they have the right tools, they respond that they have 
the tools they need to get their work and tasks done by using them. Based on the 
interviews with the municipalities the answer to the question would be “yes, they do have 
the right tools” – but probably they do not in order to achieve the sustainability goals. 
Based on the sustainability model table 4, GIS and 2D, which are the municipalities’ 
primary working tools, they do not score high on all sustainability parameters and then the 
answer would be “no, they do not have the right tools” – to achieve the sustainability 
goals.  
Another focal point could also be if the Office-package and Adobe-programmes can be 
regarded as digitisation tools. In the municipalities’ the answer is yes, but viewed from a 
supplier and observer’s perspective the answer is no. The digitisation is far above that 
level.  
The “need to have and nice to have” locution must be revised, in order to reach the 
sustainability goals as an important part of the planning procedure. For the municipalities, 
which have sustainability as a focus, it works to a great extent with a focus in the district 
plan, but not in the preparation of the district plan. This makes the sustainability goals 
unclear in the municipalities.  
If the municipalities have to work with the right digitisation tools to achieve their 
sustainability goals, there is a need for focus on what tools are sustainable and can 
support the municipalities in developing sustainably goals in their urban planning.     
    
5.1.3     Tools and strategies supporting a sustainable planning process  
In the sustainability model in table 4 different tools have been scored on the sustainable 
parameters. This exemplifies how the sustainability model can be used to examine which 
sustainable parameters the digital tools can affect. The question is, if the best tool is the one 
scoring top point in all 13 parameters?  
 
“All tools do not need to hold all qualities […] This is what I sometimes think, it is also 
what we do with plans, you know this plan, there is not that much scenery in it, then it is not 
where we should put focus and pretend that there is, or create sustainability in relation to it, 
when it is not relevant in relation to the plan” Esben Obeling (Interview no. 2) 
==PAGE:79==
 
79
The statement points towards the fact that the tools do not need to score top points on all 
parameters and especially if there is no need for the specific parameter when solving the 
task. Furthermore a combination of tools, which cover most parameters, can be seen as 
beneficial.  
 
When is a tool sustainable, and the outcome isn’t? If a 3D model is not maintained in a tool, 
the tool can fulfil different sustainable parameters, but the model (data) will be out-dated 
and obsoleted. This makes the use of the tool and the model non-sustainable, partly 
because there have been used money on an “one-off event”, and partly because resources 
have been used to produce the model.  
  
One thing are tools supporting a sustainable planning process, another are the strategies 
behind as illustrated in table 3 and introduced in the background section 1.1.  
The publications as e.g. “joint public sector digitisation strategy” and “joint municipal plan 
of action” are both digital strategies that aim to put up guidelines for digitisation in the 
public sector. Each strategy highlight some fields that need to be in focus when developing 
digitisation, yet urban planning is not mentioned as a specific field. Smart Cities are though 
mentioned in the joint public sector digitisation strategy 2016-2020, which is a development 
since the joint public sector digitisation strategy 2011-2015. Smart City is part of focus area 
5, which is mentioned as sub area “5.2 Smart City Partnership”. 
 
“A joint public sector partnership for Smart Cities will advance the use of smart digital 
solutions and data in urban development and also support the occupational potential in Smart 
City-solutions. The partnership chooses 3-5 focus areas, where there will be accomplished a 
focused effort to advance the spreading of good Smart City solutions. This can e.g. be within 
green transition, intelligent traffic control or better utilisation of censor data.” 
 
Smart city is also mentioned in the joint municipal plan of action 2016-2020 as part of focus 
area 3, specified in sub area “3.3 Prevalence of Smart City”. 
 
“The initiative concerning Smart City will increase the use of technologies and data to 
create a more sustainable development, innovation and citizenship. The initiative will secure 
knowledge, competences and an interdisciplinary organisation to support even more 
municipalities to begin the work with Smart City or continue with existing initiatives. There will be 
established a joint municipal Smart City forum, which will serve as a place for municipalities, 
where knowledge and experiences with Smart City initiatives can be shared and exchanged. The 
initiative starts in 2017 with a time horizon of 2 years, whereupon it will be evaluated. The 
initiative is coordinated closely with the Smart City partnership with Erhvervsministeriet, Danske 
Regioner and KL, which is included in the joint public sector digitisation strategy for 2016-2020.”  
 
In the two initiatives the focus on Smart Cities appears clearly. The answers in question 1 and 
2 in the survey, figure 23 and 24 actually reflect the missing focus in the previous digitisation 
strategies, which means that question 1 and 2 might reflect an increased digitisation in 2019 
after having gained experience while working with the Smart City initiatives for two years.  
 
The Smart City initiatives are generating an increased use of technologies and data. Would a 
more consistent strategy increase the digitisation of urban planning in the municipalities? 
==PAGE:80==
 
80
Esben Obeling was asked if a consistent strategy for all municipalities in Denmark would be 
ideal, like a common guideline for all municipalities? He pointed out the different needs 
from one municipality to another as also mentioned in section 5.1.2.  
 
”All though there is a huge difference in what one needs and have to show or plan (Edit: 
Regarding if you are) in Aalborg or if you are in some small municipality […] We have Planloven, 
which dictates, what you are allowed to and able to do in a district plan […] It has of course been 
mentioned that it could be imagined, that there at a later time would be made some consistent 
table of content for district plans in Denmark. I am just not sure, that it would lead to increased 
consistency because then you would just begin to make all kinds of trickery to get your own 
things into the plans, where you would like to have them anyway […] So no, I don’t think offhand, 
this would help the municipalities.”   
 
Very big differences in the answers show in the questions about public participation (figure 
28). Some urban planners regard the tools as of big value, while others do not use the tools, 
because of the very short distance between the urban planner and the citizens – this is 
widespread in very small municipalities and on small islands in Denmark. A consistent 
national digitisation strategy concerning the urban planning area will probably not be the 
answer to increase of digitisation. As Esben Obeling mentions there are very big differences 
in the size of the municipalities, geography and needs in general, which cannot be covered 
by imposing some consistent shaped strategy on the urban planning departments.    
    
The required tools in each municipality depend on the individual municipality since each 
municipality has their own needs. From a sustainable perspective the tools plotted in the 
sustainability model in table 4 illustrate the different forces and weaknesses of each tool. On 
the basis of this analysis, the municipality may by now know which digital tools to choose 
and gain an impact on the sustainable planning process. If they want a tool that supports 
“qualitative benefits” and a “process optimisation”, they have to look at a tool, which score 
high in these two parameters. The preferences may differ in each municipality and from task 
to task. As Maria Thye Lynghøj says a 3D model will be overkill to use when just placing 
three small houses at the sites. This illustrates how important it is to meet the municipalities 
where they are. Even though the municipalities have different needs the same tools can still 
be implemented, but with adjustments as long as it fits the individual municipality. Jesper 
Rye Rasmussen mentions in the quotation below that the municipalities have to take the 
digitisation and implementation of digital tools in small steps. Figure 33 illustrates the 
respond from Niras, when asking what products they would recommend. 
 
”We do also say, that they should take it in small steps. They have to have a vision and 
understand how it is connected […] We do not go out a say, you have to buy it all at once. We 
will rather have them to implement it in some pace, where they can keep up with digitisation” 
Jesper Rye Rasmussen  
 
Figure 33 is illustrated as a staircase in steps with one tool at a time, which is also how 
Jesper Rye Rasmussen and Uffe Gross Nielsen explain it.  
 
 
 
==PAGE:81==
 
81
 
Figure 33 - Staircase for implementation of digital tools 
Uffe Gross Nielsen explains the steps of implementation of digital tools from a supplier’s 
perspective and in the quotation. Numbers have been inserted to make the steps clear.  
 
”(1) GIS is present in all municipalities and it has to be used, it is substantial, all mapping 
material […] both legally and for making a lot of analyses. (2) Digital plans will of course be an 
obvious opportunity to develop things as we see it. The products we already have, work as an 
additional analysis and dialogue tool. (3) Besides that, we still have the Adobe-package, because 
a lot of work is done here, e.g. it would be relevant to create a poster, if you are going to a pubic 
meeting. So one can say, nothing will be replaced, we just have to move some of the working 
procedures. (5) The VR goes on top of (4) 3D” 
 
Virtual Reality will be the next topic in 2017 according to Niras. Based on the survey it does 
not seem to be here already – and it does also lie right ahead of us according to Aalborg 
Kommune and Rødovre Kommune. In the building industry Virtual Reality already gains in on 
the market e.g. by use of Virtual Design and Construction (VDC), which was exemplified by 
Kristian Mouridsen from NCC, Appendix O. They use Virtual Reality for e.g. tender 
meetings. Also Kristian Emil Andreasen from Kanda, Appendix P, sees Virtual Reality in 
urban planning as very relevant, especially when more people meet and have to discuss 
adjustments, proposals and changes. Everybody can visually understand it and see the same 
place/building/map together.  
Though is Augmented Reality, which is the reality that can be viewed through an added 
computer based filter, not something, which is around the corner according to the answers 
in the survey, Niras or Kristian Mouridsen. There are still some technical issues, which need 
to be much better before it can become popular.    
 
Sub conclusion: What type of digitisation tool would really help the 
municipalities in achieving a sustainable planning process? 
 
Many different factors have an impact on the urban planning department. There is not 
one specific tool or one way of doing it, which will help the municipalities to achieve a 
sustainable planning process. This is why a consistent strategy is not to recommend.   
Smart digital tools can help the municipalities in achieving a sustainable planning process, 
and the tools plotted in the sustainability model reflect on which areas to support. It is not 
==PAGE:82==
 
82
important that all tools necessarily have to score top in all 13 parameters, but a gathering 
of tools working together might help the municipalities. In the joint public sector 
digitisation strategy 2016-2020 and the joint municipal plan of action 2016-2020 different 
areas focusing on implementation of digitisation are outlined. Urban planning is not 
directly mentioned, but both strategies have, unlike the previous strategies, a sub area 
regarding Smart City. These initiatives take their beginning in 2017 and may have an affect 
in the type of digital tools that are developed to achieve a sustainable planning process in 
the municipalities.  
The supplier and observer do not see the Office-package and the Adobe-programmes as 
digital tools, whereas most of the municipalities mention one or both in the answers in the 
survey. The supplier recommends an implementation of tools illustrated in figure 33. First 
of all the fundamental GIS, which is present in all municipalities and a tool for analysing 
and extracting maps and data.  What the urban planners have to learn in GIS is to stay in 
the tool, when making plans and not necessarily move to the Adobe-programmes. Next 
step is the digital plans as an additional analysis and dialogue tool.   
The digital tools for creating 3D-models – e.g. SketchUp have to be seen as a working 
tool more than a presentation tool. SketchUp can support a parametric design process, 
and quickly generate shapes, but without details, which is not necessary in the 
municipalities. At last they predict Virtual Reality, when 3D is settled. All four tools can be 
seen with scores in the sustainability model in table 4. Based on the sustainability model 
the 3D tool scores the highest in all rated parameters for sustainability. SketchUp is a tool 
where shapes can easily be formed and not very detailed. “Efficiency improvements” and 
the “process optimisation” all support a sustainable planning process.  
It is generally important that the municipalities understand the new programmes’ 
opportunities and learn to use them intelligent. This will improve the approach to 
implement new digitisation tools.  
 
5.2   Critical Reflection 
To understand how to improve the quantitative data collection, following considerations 
have been made.  
At the early stage of the thesis, when the survey was devised, the intention was to re-ask 
question 12, 13, 14 and 15 from Dansk Byplanlaboratorium’s survey in 2014. Initially it was 
the idea to use it as a way to calibrate the investigation or to see how much use of 
information technologies have been moving in two years. The intention was to compare the 
two studies. When the responses came in December, it was clear that the two surveys could 
not be compared – despite of identical questions in question 12, 13, 14 and 15.  
The calibration was not possible to initiate, since the baseline for the two investigations was 
not the same. The respondents from the two surveys had different points of reference in 
relation to the theme “digitisation” in respectively 2014 and 2016. The answers from 2014 
and 2016 could therefore not be compared. The question about finding an ensuing baseline 
to the responses was considered, but did not work – based on the difficulties in making a 
baseline for people’s understanding of digitisation in 2014 and in 2016.  
Furthermore “digital plans” should have been an option in question 1 regarding use of 
digital tools. No articles or previous studies illustrated digital plans as a tool – it was first in 
the interviews digital plans became evident as a tool used in planning.   
==PAGE:83==
 
83
  
The survey got valuable feedback from the municipalities through the response period, and 
the following was written for optimisation of the survey for potential future use: 
 
Comments on question 1 
“A municipality is a big organisation, and it would be too simplified to say that it is only a 
planning department, which creates urban planning/urban development. Other employees in 
the municipality can therefore easily make use of the above-mentioned tools for other related 
urban planning without necessarily involving us in our department. Furthermore it is not unusual 
that the owner creates maps and models etc. by themselves and the municipality only assists 
with exposition and requirements e.g. a district plan. This is more to put it into perspective. 
Additionally it sounds like an interesting elucidation :) “ #1 
 
Comments on question 8+9+10 
“We almost don’t make public participation, so many of the questions are a little bit 
difficult to relate to. You could maybe have asked if we use some of the mentioned technologies. 
One thing is what we think and consider, another is what we do in practice” #18 
 
“Your questions are to general in relation to what the individual task can be. All answers 
depends of the task, citizens and the politicians’ understanding of the problem” #11 (the person 
did not answer Q8+9+10) 
 
“I am a little bit uncertain, if I have to answer what we actually use or what we want to use 
in relation to the options in question 5” #36 
 
When reflecting critical also the data quality criteria, explained in chapter 2, have to be 
considered. The data quality criteria for the descriptive research type (quantitative) will be 
evaluated, followed by an evaluation of the data quality criteria for the understanding 
research type (qualitative).  
 
The descriptive research type:  
Reliability: The survey has been performed with a neutral approach, and all people working 
with urban planning has been considered able to answer the survey. The reliability criterion 
has therefore been met.  
Validity: The area measured was also the area that was supposed to be measured. Though, 
the thesis took a little different turn through the process, which is why it would have been 
convenient if the survey had also covered a focus on sustainability in this thesis.  
Accuracy: The survey is considered very precise, e.g. based on the questions about firstly the 
tools and secondly the programmes. The chosen parameters are also considered sufficient 
according to the intent to be measured.   
Generalisability: Generalisability is relevant since not all municipalities responded to the 
survey. If the response rate had been 100 %, the criterion would be of no relevance.  
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:84==
 
84
The understanding research type: 
Validity: All interviewees accepted a recording of the interview, which has resulted in 
transcriptions and coding of the interviews. The interviewees have not received 
transcriptions for approval, as it was considered too time consuming to ask for.  
Totality: All the interviewees’ backgrounds and opinions have been considered in relation to 
the interview. All quotations have remained in the context, and have not been transmitted 
directly into other concluding correlations.  
Mirror: The intention in the thesis has during the whole process been to maintain the 
interviewees’ interpretation. This means that they are able to recognise their own opinions in 
the researcher’s descriptive interpretation.   
Transferability: It is assessed that the results attained in this context, can be transferred to 
related contexts as e.g. state, region etc.   
 
5.3   Further Investigation  
The thesis leads to further investigation, which has not been examined in this thesis due to 
the delimitation of the topic. Six areas have been found relevant in continuation of the topic 
of this master thesis. 
 
- The initiative 3.3 in the joint municipal plan of action refers to a demand from the 
municipalities regarding a closer cooperation with other municipalities. Their concerns 
are to avoid that all 98 municipalities each will have to invent identical tools (KL, 2017). 
An investigation of the current degree of knowledge sharing between municipalities 
would therefore be relevant for further investigation as well as how to increase a closer 
cooperation. 
 
- If it is possible to process an optimisation in the preparation of the district plan and the 
municipal plans, how can the plan processes exactly be improved and in which 
areas/phases.  
 
- When implementing digitisation tools, how are digitisation tools implemented in an 
organisation? The topic will investigate how technology is strategically implemented 
both in municipalities and in private companies. 
 
- For further investigation it will be relevant to find a person who is able to collect the 
different aims (interests) in the municipality regarding digitisation.  
 
- Mapping of all digital tools, which can be utilised in urban planning with advantages 
and disadvantages  
 
- Devise a study of the digitisation in European countries in relation to urban planning in 
the public sector, to compare or obtain inspiration for use in the Danish public sector.  
==PAGE:85==
 
85
6 
CONCLUSION 
 
Through a qualitative and quantitative data collection, the thesis has reached insight in the 
digitisation of sustainable urban planning in the Danish municipalities. From the 
investigation four statements can be concluded. 
 
First, from the investigation it can be concluded that digitisation can advance sustainable 
urban planning. 41 out of 98 municipalities answered the quantitative survey about the 
utilisation of digital tools. 92 % of the respondents from the survey did either ‘strongly 
agree’ or ‘agree’ in the statement “Information technology can qualify urban planning”.  
The thesis has developed a sustainability model based on literature studies and a 
quantitative and qualitative data collection, which have led to 13 parameters defining 
sustainability distributed on the three overall sustainability aspects: Environment, social and 
economy. The digital tools add sustainable aspects to a planning process, which makes the 
planning process achieving sustainability goals. When the tools appear in a sustainable 
connection as in the sustainability model devised in the thesis, the tools do affect some 
parameters that can help along to achieve a sustainable planning process, when of course 
the tools are utilised. 
If the tools were absent, the process would not be advanced, which would cause a cessation 
or slowness of the digitisation.  
 
Second, there are some challenges that have to be overcome before the digitisation can be 
initiated. The identified hurdles, which are clarified through this thesis, are: Time, finances, 
to some extent competences, conventional thinking and a generational change (younger 
generation). When facing the hurdles it becomes clear where to “push forward” and where 
the sustainability model can work as a tool. 
When measuring the outlined sustainable focus areas, the municipality has gained the 
knowledge and the awareness of where to begin, which makes the sustainability model work 
as a guiding tool to obtain a more sustainable planning process.  
Another way to overcome the hurdles in digitisation is to employ people passionate in 
working with digital tools. The digital skilled younger people have this interest in digitisation 
and have acquired skills through education. They work in the municipalities and use the 
tools together with other employees. To utilise the potential, readiness for development has 
to be present in the concerned municipality. There has to be a project portfolio, which 
supports the work with digital tools, and in which the technology can be learned and 
implemented. This readiness has to be driven by the aforementioned passionate people.  
An increased digitisation does not take place by only using the sustainable parameters, it 
can also appear by a generational change. The generational change can only take place 
when passionate people, who find it naturally to embrace digitisation, are employed.  
 
Third, when asking the municipalities, if they have the right tools, they respond that they 
have the needed tools to get their work and tasks done. In relation to the perception of 
having the right tools, another focal point is the way the Office-package and Adobe-
programmes are regarded as digitisation tools. In the municipalities both packages are 
==PAGE:86==
 
86
viewed as a part of digital tools, but viewed from a supplier and observer’s perspective both 
packages are not digitisation tools - the digitisation is far above that level.  
The “need to have or nice to have” locution must be revised, in order to reach the 
sustainability goals as an important part of the planning procedure. For the municipalities, 
which have sustainability as a focus, it works to a great extent with a focus in the district plan, 
but not in the preparation of the district plan. This makes the sustainability goals unclear in 
the municipalities, when there is no sustainability focus on the whole process from start to 
finish in a planning process.  
 
Fourth, many different factors have an impact on the urban planning department. There is 
not one specific tool or one way, which alone can help the municipalities to achieve a 
sustainable planning process, also because of the different needs from one municipality to 
another. This is why a consistent national strategy of digitisation implementation for all 98 
municipalities is not to recommend.   
The supplier recommends an implementation of advanced digital tools step by step, 
however first and foremost the fundamental GIS, which is present in all municipalities. The 
urban planners have to learn to stay within the tool of GIS, when making plans and not move 
to the Adobe-programmes. Next step is to implement digital plans as an additional analysis 
and dialogue tool to the GIS tool. The digital tools used for creating 3D-models – e.g. 
SketchUp have to be seen as a working tool more than a presentation tool. At last the 
supplier predicts Virtual Reality, when 3D is settled, as the next tool in 2017. Each tool is 
evaluated in relation to the 13 parameters in the proposed sustainability mode, to clarify 
where each tool contribute to a sustainable planning process. It is furthermore generally 
important that the municipalities understand the opportunities of the new programmes and 
learn to use them intelligent. This will improve the approach to implement new digitisation 
tools and improve the sustainability goals. 
==PAGE:87==
 
87
7 
REFERENCES 
 
Aalborg Kommune. (2017). Bæredygtighed i byplanlægning. Retrieved February 25, 2017 
from http://www.aalborg.dk/om-kommunen/byplanlaegning/temaer-inden-for-
byplanlaegning/baeredygtighed-i-byplanlaegning 
 
Aalborg Kommune. (2016). Lokalplanvejledning til konsulenter og bygherrer 
(http://aalborgkommune.viewer.dkplan.niras.dk/media/1406302/Lokalplanvejledning-til-
konsulenter-og-bygherrer-web.pdf ed.). Aalborg: Aalborg Kommune. 
 
Arisona, S. M., Zhong, C., Huang, X., & Qin, R. (2013). Increasing detail of 3D models 
through combined photogrammetric and procedural modelling. Geo-spatial Information 
Science , 45-53. 
 
Bainbridge, W. (2007, July 27). The scientific research potential of virtual worlds . Science 317 
, 472-476. 
 
Batty, M., & et al. (2000). Visualising the City: Communicating Urban Design to Planners and 
Decision-makers. Centre for advanced spatial analysis, London. 
 
Bendinger, A., & Jung, I. (2003). Virtual City Models - New Approaches in Urban Simulation 
and City Planning using Virtual Reality Tools . Photogrammetric Week , 237-240. 
 
BIM EQUITY. (2016, April 8). Byen får en digital tvilling – P1s Harddisken om BIM. (BIM | 
LEAVE YOUR THOUGHTS) Retrieved October 2, 2016 from http://bimequity.dk/byen-faar-
digital-tvilling-p1s-harddisken-bim/  
 
Burry, M. (2005). Between Intuition and Process: Parametric Design and Rapid Prototyping, 
in: Koarevic . (D. Washington, Ed.) Architecture in the Digital Age: Design and 
Manufacturing . 
 
BygBygg. (2011, November 30). Informationsniveauer. Retrieved October 18, 2016 from 
Anvisninger i Danmark og Sverige: http://bygbygg.org/informationsniveauer 
 
Cardador, L. (2016, October 7). Københavns Kommune og digitalisering. (K. Lyngsø-Dahl, 
Interviewer) E-mail interview. København. 
 
Center for Byudvikling og Mobilitet. (2016). Lokalplanprocessen. (Aarhus Kommune) 
Retrieved October 15, 2016 from 
http://lokalplanerweb.aarhuskommune.dk/Lokalplanprocessen.aspx  
 
==PAGE:88==
 
88
Chen, B., Huang, F., & Fang, Y. (2011). Integrateing Virtuel Environment and GIS for 3D 
Virtuel City Development and Urban Planning. Peking University , Institute of Remote 
Sensing and Geographic Information System , Beijing. 
 
Dang, A., Liang, W., & Chi, W. (2012). Review of VR Application in Digital Urban Planning and 
Managing. In Z. Shen, Geospatial Techniques in Urban Planning (pp. 131-154). Kanazawa, 
Japan: Springer. 
 
Danmarks Statistik . (2016). IT-anvendelse i befolkningen. 
http://www.dst.dk/da/Statistik/Publikationer/VisPub?cid=20738. 
 
Danmarks Statistik. (2012, February 29). IT-anvendelse i den offentlige sektor. Retrieved 
January 27, 2017 from 
http://www.dst.dk/Site/Dst/Udgivelser/GetPubFile.aspx?id=17882&sid=itan 
 
Dansk Byplanlaboratorium. (2015). Digital by. Retrieved October 1, 2016 from 
http://www.byplanlab.dk/digital_by/38 
 
Dansk Byplanlaboratorium. (2013). Proces, hvornår og hvem? Retrieved October 5, 2016 
from http://www.byplanlab.dk/node/604 
 
Delaney, B. (2000, May/June). Visualization in Urban Planning: They Didn’t Build LA in a Day. 
IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications , 10-16. 
 
Denzin, N. (2006). Sociological Methods: A Sourcebook (5th Edition ed.). Aldine Transaction. 
 
Digitaliseringsstyrelsen. (2016, October 28). 15 års fælles digitaliseringsstrategier. Retrieved 
December 7, 2016 from http://www.digst.dk/Strategier/Strategi-2016-2020/15-aars-
digitaliseringsstrategi 
 
Digitaliseringsstyrelsen. (2016, October 28). Den fællesoffentlige digitaliseringsstrategi 2016-
2020. Retrieved February 25, 2017 from Digitaliseringsstyrelsen: 
http://www.digst.dk/Strategier/Strategi-2016-2020 
 
Dreyfus, S. E., & Dreyfus, H. L. (1980). A Five-Stage Model of the Mental Activities Involved in 
Directed Skill Acquisition. Berkeley. 
 
Erhvervsstyrelsen. (2016). Kommuneplanlægning. Retrieved October 24, 2016 from 
https://erhvervsstyrelsen.dk/kommuneplanlaegning 
 
Erhvervsstyrelsen. (2017). Lokal Agenda 21. Retrieved March 4, 2017 from 
https://erhvervsstyrelsen.dk/lokal-agenda-21 
 
Evand-Cowley, J., & Hollander, J. (2010). The New Generation of Public Participation: 
Internet-based Participation Tools. Planning Practice & Research , 25 (3), 397–408. 
 
==PAGE:89==
 
89
Finansministeriet. (2001, May). Digital forvaltning. Retrieved January 25, 2017 from 
http://www.modst.dk/~/media/Files/ØAV/Vejledninger/Arkiv%20materiale/Økonomistyrings
området/Digital_forvaltning%20pdf.ashx 
 
Gladsaxe Kommune. (2016). Helhedsplan. Retrieved January 30, 2017 from 
http://kommuneplan.gladsaxe.dk/dk/helhedsplan/helhedsplan.htm 
 
Hørsholm Kommune. (2016). Kommuneplanproces. Retrieved October 20, 2016 from 
http://kommuneplan.horsholm.dk/OmKommuneplanen/Kommuneplanproces  
 
Ikast-Brande Kommune. (2010, July). Lokalplanprocessen. (I.-B. K. Planafdelingen, Producer) 
Retrieved October 17, 2016 from http://www.ikast-
brande.dk/media/1316562/lokalplanproces_juli_2010.pdf 
 
Jönsson, G., & Jensen, N. P. (2004). 3D-bymodel over København - opbygning og 
anvendelse . Perspektiv (6), 27-34. 
 
Kalundborg Kommune. (2014, March 19). Kommuneplan. Retrieved October 21, 2016 from 
https://www.kalundborg.dk/Politik/Planer_og_politikker/Kommuneplan.aspx  
 
Københavns Kommune A. (2016). Lokalplaner trin for trin. Retrieved October 19, 2016 from 
http://www.kk.dk/artikel/lokalplaner-trin-trin 
 
Københavns Kommune . (2010, June). Politik for udsatte byområder. Retrieved January 30, 
2017 from https://www.kk.dk/sites/default/files/edoc/753538be-b8ad-4b71-b8b0-
12f64f77d1eb/aae910ba-32ce-49d4-9280-aa43cbbbaffc/Attachments/ef63d650-6f7b-4293-
9133-167892267a94.PDF 
 
Københavns Kommune . (2012). Politik for udsatte byområder. Retrieved January 30, 2017 
from http://kk.sites.itera.dk/apps/kk_pub2/pdf/871_2Oh6MqcOSn.pdf 
 
Københavns Kommune B. (2016). Byplanlægning. Retrieved October 17, 2016 from 
http://www.kk.dk/artikel/byplanlægning 
 
Københavns Kommune C. (2016). Lokalplaner i Købehavn. Retrieved october 20, 2016 from 
http://www.kk.dk/lokalplaner 
 
Københavns Kommune D. (2016). Kommuneplan. Retrieved October 13, 2016 from 
http://www.kk.dk/artikel/kommuneplan 
 
Københavns Kommune E. (2016). Strandlodsvej lokalplan nr. 449 med tillæg nr. 1.  
 
Københavns Kommune. (2015). Udviklingsplan - Det udsatte område Vesterbro/Kgs. 
Enghave. Retrieved January 30, 2017 from 
https://www.kk.dk/sites/default/files/edoc/c2b2239d-618f-4bd3-b850-
==PAGE:90==
 
90
36d8fbb01aa4/a0c283e2-20d6-4973-bf37-d3c109828155/Attachments/12869873-14148648-
1.PDF 
 
Kønigsfeldt, S. (2014, October). Undersøgelse om byplanlæggeres brug af IT. (Dansk 
Byplanlaboratorium) Retrieved September 25, 2016 from 
http://www.byplanlab.dk/Undersoegelse_om_byplanlaeggeres_brug_af_IT 
 
Kjørup, S. (1985). Forskning og samfund - en grundbog i vidensteori (2nd Edition ed.). 
Gyldendahl. 
 
KL. (2017). 3.3 Udbredelse af Smart City. Retrieved March 5, 2017 from Initiativets indhold: 
http://www.kl.dk/ImageVaultFiles/id_78104/cf_202/3-3.PDF 
 
KL, & Devoteam. (2012, May). Rapport om digital modenhed i 22 kommuner. From 
http://www.kl.dk/ImageVault/Images/id_55065/scope_0/ImageVaultHandler.aspx 
 
Kommunernes Landsforening. (2016). Den fælleskommunale digitaliseringsstrategi- og 
handlingsplan 2016-2020. Retrieved February 21, 2017 from http://www.kl.dk/Okonomi-og-
administration/Administration-og-digitalisering/Digitaliseringsstrategier1/Den-
falleskommunale-digitaliseringsstrategi1/ 
 
Kvale, S., & Brinkmann, S. (2015). Interview - det kvalitative forskningsinterview som 
håndværk (3rd Edition ed.). Hans Reitzels Forlag. 
 
Launsø, L., Reiper, O., & Olsen, L. (2011). Forskning om og med mennesker (6th Edition ed.). 
Nyt Nordisk Forlag Arnold Busck. 
 
Leach, N. (2009). The Limits of Urban Simulation: An Interview with Manuel DeLanda . 
Architectural Design , 79 (4), 50-55. 
 
Martinsen, B., & Norlyk , A. (2011). Tre kvalitative forskningstilgange . Sygeplejersken , 12, 
64-68. 
 
Miljøministeriet A. (2008, May). Vejledning om kommuneplanlægning. Retrieved October 15, 
2016 from http://naturstyrelsen.dk/media/nst/70500/Vejledning_kommuneplan08.pdf 
 
Miljøministeriet B. (2009). Vejledning om Lokalplanlægning - Indhold, tilvejebringelse og 
retsvirkning 
(https://erhvervsstyrelsen.dk/sites/default/files/Vejledning_om_lokalplanlaegning_HWU.pdf 
ed.). København: Miljøministeriet, By- og Landskabsstyrelsen. 
 
Miljøministeriet. (2014). Lokal Agenda 21 i kommunerne og regionerne 2010-2013. Retrieved 
March 4, 2017 from 
https://erhvervsstyrelsen.dk/sites/default/files/media/lokal_agenda_21_i_kommunerne_og_r
egionerne-2010-2013.pdf 
 
==PAGE:91==
 
91
Miljøministeriet. (2013). Redskaber til den bæredygtige by. Naturstyrelsen. 
 
Naturstyrelsen. (2002). Hvordan og hvornår kan kommuneplanen ændres? In Naturstyrelsen, 
Kommuneplanvejledning 
(http://naturstyrelsen.dk/media/nst/attachments/92343/kommuneplanvejledning2002kap4.p
df ed., Vol. Kap. 4, pp. 64-71). København: Naturstyrelsen. 
 
Neuman, W. (2005). Social Research Methods (6th Edition ed.). London: Pearson. 
 
Niras. (2016). 3D i planlægning. Retrieved October 17, 2016 from 
http://www.niras.dk/forretningsomraader/gis-geodata-og-automation/kortprodukter/3d-i-
planlaegning.aspx 
 
Odense Kommune. (2015). Planstrategi 2015 - Ny Odense: Fra stor dansk by til dansk storby. 
Retrieved October 26, 2016 from http://planstrategi2015.odense.dk/wp-
content/uploads/2015/01/PS2015_251115_.pdf 
 
Olsen, P. B. (2016). LinkedIn Profil - kompetencer. (LinkedIn) Retrieved October 19, 2016 
from https://www.linkedin.com/in/peter-bo-olsen-
9046254?authType=name&authToken=iKTR 
 
Pedersen, N. F., & Gertsen, A. T. (2015). BIM - KUA 2 & 3 
(http://bips.dk/files/3g_anne_guldhammer_-
_nicolai_pedersen_og_andreas_theis_gertsen_kua3.pdf ed.). København: BIPS. 
 
Project House. (2011). Project House. Retrieved January 25, 2017 from Digital Forvaltning: 
http://projecthouse.dk/danish/ydelser-service/digital-forvaltning/ 
 
Quinn, B. (2008). Immersive 3D simulator-based GIS: Sharing the 3D experience . Bay Area 
Automated Mapping Association Journal , 2 (2), 3-16. 
 
Rasmussen, J. R. (2003). 3D bymodeller – Produktionsmetoder og anvendelsesmuligheder . 
Perspektiv (3), 16-23. 
 
Retsinformation. (2015, November 23). Bekendtgørelse af lov om planlægning. 
(Retsinformation.dk) Retrieved October 18, 2016 from 
https://www.retsinformation.dk/forms/r0710.aspx?id=176182 
 
Saunders, M., & al., e. (2009). Research Methods for Business Students (5th Edition ed.). 
Pearson Education. 
 
Shen, Z., & Kawakami, M. (2010). An online visualization tool for Internet-based local 
townscape design . Computers, Environment and Urban Systems , 104-116. 
 
Shen, Z., Kawakami, M., & Kishimoto, K. (2003, May). Study on development of on-line 
coopera- tive planning and design system using VRML and JAVA – A case study on public 
==PAGE:92==
 
92
park planning and design. The 8th international conference on computers in urban planning 
and urban management (CUPUM) . 
 
Srinivasan, R. (2004). Reconstituting the urban through community - articulated digital 
environments . Harvard University . 
 
Steinø, N., & al., e. (2013). Using Parametrics to Facilitate Collaborative Urban Design: An 
Attempt to Overcome some Inherent Dilemmas Planum. The Journal of Urbanism , 26 (1), 
13. 
 
Steinø, N., & Obeling, E. (2014). Developing a Parametric Urban Design Tool: Some 
Structural Challenges and Possible Ways to Overcome Them. Architecturae et Artibus , 6 (1), 
51-57. 
 
Sugihara, K., & Shen, Z. (2012). Automatic Generation of Virtual 3D City Models for Urban 
Planning . In Z. Shen, Geospatial Techniques in Urban Planning (pp. 265-283). Kanazawa, 
Japan: Springer. 
 
Sustainable Development. (2017). Agenda 21. Retrieved March 12, 2017 from 
https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/outcomedocuments/agenda21 
 
Syddjurs Kommune. (2016). Hvad er en kommuneplan? Retrieved October 16, 2016 from 
http://kommuneplan.syddjurs.dk/dk/kommuneplan/om-kommuneplan-
2013/hvad_er_en_kommuneplan-/  
 
Therkelsen, J. B., Mølgaard, A., & Dahl, S. (2003). FraTræmodeller til Virtual Reality . DANSK 
VEJTIDSSKRIFT (12), 11-13. 
 
Watson, B. (2008). Procedural Urban Modeling in Practice . IEEE , 28 (3), 18-26. 
 
Yang, K., Liu, S., & Chen, D. (2000). Virtual Reality and City Planning . ACTA Simulata 
Systematica Sinica , 207–209, 225 . 
 
 
==PAGE:93==
 
93
8 
APPENDIX 
 
Appendix A –   Table of research types 
Appendix B  –   Presentation e-mail  
Appendix C –   Table of evaluation of pilot tests 
Appendix D  –   Map of contacts  
Appendix E  –   Course at DTU Library 
Appendix F  –   The survey  
Appendix G   –   Example of a response in the survey #13 
Appendix H  –   Statistically presentation of answers 
Appendix I  –   Transcription Aalborg Municipality no. 1 
Appendix J  –   Transcription Aalborg Municipality no. 2 
Appendix K  –   Transcription Rødovre Municipality 
Appendix L  –   Transcription Dansk Byplanlaboratorium 
Appendix M  –   Transcription Niras 
Appendix N –   Workshop at Copenhagen Municipality 
Appendix O –   Summary of event at DAC 
Appendix P  –   Summary of event at IDA 
 
 
