==PAGE:1==
 
Scamnology - Automated Housing Fraud Detection 
 
 
Master Thesis in Computer Science 
 
 
Specialty: Computer Security 
 
By Paulo Botelho 
 
 
Supervisors:  
 
Angelo Spognardi 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
May 2017 
 
==PAGE:2==
 
Abstract 
 
Housing scams are popular all over the world, people are being scammed constantly leaving a 
certain discomfort in this market. In a country such as Denmark the demand is huge and the 
supply is almost non existent giving scammers the opportunity to feed upon desperation of 
people for their personal gains. 
 
To a veteran of house searching a certain intuition is developed that allows to quickly spot 
scammers, people start to realize patterns in scamming and how to avoid them, such patterns 
can be documented and used to in various ways to prevent housing scamming altogether. The 
aim of the project is to design an automatic way of detecting a scam by using this patterns to 
give a certain evaluation that can help a person realize how dangerous a specific house 
advertisement is. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1 
==PAGE:3==
 
Dedication 
 
 
 
I would like to dedicate this master's thesis to my family who supported me unconditionally 
throughout my academic career and always encouraged me to keep going. 
Also, I would like to dedicate to all of my friends who helped me in every way on this great 
journey until its completion, as well as my girlfriend for supporting me and understanding how 
hard a writing of a thesis can be. 
And last but not least I would like to dedicate this work to one of my best friends Luis Miguel 
Alves Amaral who deceased due to colon cancer during the making of this thesis, thanks for 
being the best friend I could wish for. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
==PAGE:4==
 
 
 
 
Acknowledgements 
 
I would like to thank my friend Andrew Madsen for insight on the subject of the thesis and 
helping me view things from the correct angle as well as the right way to approach it. 
 
I would also like to thank Jørgen Villadsen of the Technical University of Denmark for giving 
some much needed and deeply appreciated support and advice, without him this thesis would 
have never be done. 
 
Finally, I must express I would like to express my very profound gratitude to thesis advisor 
Angelo Spognardi of the Technical University of Denmark for helping me over and over again 
whenever I find myself in trouble. He steered the thesis into something I loved to do and 
managed to make this whole process a lot less painful. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
==PAGE:5==
 
 
Table of contents 
 
Abstract
2 
Dedication
3 
Acknowledgements
4 
Chapter 1: Introduction
7 
Target Group
7 
Personal Motivation
7 
Structure of the report
8 
Chapter 2: Housing scam online
9 
Why scams?
9 
Phone scams
11 
Email scams
12 
Ponzi Schemes
12 
Fraudulent online transactions
13 
Scam Definition
14 
The Housing Scams
16 
Aim of the thesis
17 
Chapter 3: Related Literature
20 
1.Bayesian Belief Networks
20 
2.Decision Trees
22 
3.Threshold Based:
23 
4.Genetic algorithm solution:
24 
5.Layer Analysis:
26 
6.Adaptive Fraud Detection
27 
Chapter 4: Methodology
29 
1.Email verifier
30 
2.Address reliability
31 
3.Suspicious expressions
32 
4.Suspicious payment methods
33 
5.Identity theft attempt
34 
6.Price check
35 
7.Property pictures
36 
4 
==PAGE:6==
Possible Features
37 
1.Geolocation Analysis
37 
2.Landlord Check
38 
3.Domain Check
38 
Structure of the fraud detection system
39 
1.Threshold based structure
40 
Score Distribution
40 
2.Decision tree based structure
42 
Small Danger Signs
43 
Big Danger Signs
43 
Warnings
44 
Chapter 5: Implementation
45 
Data Gathering
45 
Fraud detection system implementation
47 
1.Email verifier / reliability
47 
2.Address reliability check
48 
3.Suspicious expressions
49 
4.Suspicious payment methods detection
51 
5.Identity theft attempt searcher
52 
6.Price checker
53 
7.Property pictures checker
55 
Chapter 6: Results
57 
1.Data Samples
57 
Chapter 7: Conclusion
59 
References
61 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
==PAGE:7==
 
 
 
Chapter 1: Introduction 
 
 
Target Group 
The target group of this project is people who never rented or purchased a house through 
internet sources and don't understand how easy is it to fall prey to a scam losing vast sums of 
money while getting nothing in return. 
A lot of people believe in good faith and have no understanding how scams work and will fall 
prey to them, with this work, the primary intention is to study some specific scams to prevent 
people from falling for them. 
In short, this thesis aim is to help every person that has no experience dealing with housing 
scammers to stop them from getting their money stolen. 
 
Personal Motivation 
In a weekend where I had no food at home, i went to the supermarket to buy groceries for the 
weekend, upon paying my groceries I found out that strangely my bank account was empty, 
following that, I assumed I was hacked and had no money for the rest of the weekend. 
Since the banks in my country don't do any transfers at the weekends, and I was living alone in 
the mountains of Serra Da Estrela plus the fact that all my friends and roommates were away for 
the weekend I spend the whole weekend without eating anything at all, at the time I was a 
student of IT and I decided that I would devote myself to fight every scamming and hacking 
possible for the rest of my days. 
Upon arriving at Denmark and starting a master's degree in computer security, I had to 
Find a house on my own, and I began to search for a place to live. While searching for a house i 
noticed that more than half of the posts I read were strange and suspicious, after joining a 
Facebook group is known as “Scammers in Copenhagen” I discovered that there is a lot of 
housing scams and worse: a lot of people falling for them. 
As an individual who helped people not to get scammed and helped scammed people, i decided 
that 
maybe there should be a way of preventing this from happening, so I engaged in this topic in 
particular to help and make the housing market a lot safer for consumers. 
 
6 
==PAGE:8==
Structure of the report 
 
The structure of the report is as follows: 
-​Chapter 2 Housing Scams Online​: in this section it will be described why is this subject 
relevant and why it should be discussed. 
-​Chapter 3 Related Literature​: here all the literature that this thesis was based on will be 
explored. 
-Chapter 4 Methodology: ​in this section the methods on how we deal with the subject are 
discussed. 
-Chapter 5  Implementation:​ Here all the implementation will be discussed, meaning, how we 
implemented the methods detailed in chapter 4. 
.​-Chapter 7 Conclusion: ​Conclusion and final thoughts 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
==PAGE:9==
Chapter 2: Housing scam online 
 
Why scams? 
 
 
Today's society has evolved to a point where we can contact anybody anywhere in a second, 
but being part of this huge networks we use to communicate comes with a price: it allows for the 
people who have malicious intent easier to contact you.  
 
So in our vast network of  communication we use in our daily lives it is certain that at some point 
everybody was targeted even if by something small such as the nigerian prince. 
 
The nigerian prince is an example of a scam where a person would contact you asking if he 
could transfer a huge sum of money in exchange for a small fee, the victim would pay this small 
fee expecting the sum of money and it would never come. 
 
Scams are a huge problem, in 2006 the FBI released a report  that stated that Americans lost 
1
$198.4 millions on internet scams, but it seems the problem is only getting worse  . Since 
2
october 2013, nearly 3000 have lost $14 million in result of a single type of phone scam.  
3
 
To have a better inside the government of Australia created a website called Scamwatch  where 
4
they show some interesting numbers: 
In 2015 australian consumers lost over $80 millions to scammers and there were around 
100000 reports on which nearly 10% of those reports resulted in financial loss. The problem is 
in the next year the numbers were nearly identical which indicate that there's hardly any solution 
having significant impact. 
 
 
 
1 "FBI — 2006 Internet Crime Report." 16 Mar. 2007, 
https://www.fbi.gov/news/stories/2007/march/ic3031607​. Accessed 22 Jan. 2017. 
2 "Connecteam | Create Internal Employee Apps, for Free." ​https://connecteam.com/​. Accessed 2 Feb. 
2017. 
3 "Phone Scams Continue to be Serious Threat, Remain on IRS “Dirty ...." 22 Jan. 2015, 
https://www.irs.gov/uac/newsroom/phone-scams-continue-to-be-serious-threat-and-remain-on-irs-dirty-do
zen-list-of-tax-scams-for-the-2015-filing-season​. Accessed 22 Jan. 2017. 
4 "Scamwatch." ​https://www.scamwatch.gov.au/​. Accessed 30 Mar. 2017. 
8 
==PAGE:10==
 
Figure 1: A relation between amount of money lost and reports done in 2016  
5
 
 
 
 Figure 2 :A relation between amount of money lost and reports done in 2016  
6
5 "Scam statistics | Scamwatch." ​https://www.scamwatch.gov.au/about-scamwatch/scam-statistics​. 
Accessed 20 Mar. 2017. 
6 "Scam statistics | Scamwatch." ​https://www.scamwatch.gov.au/about-scamwatch/scam-statistics​. 
Accessed 20 Mar. 2017. 
9 
==PAGE:11==
  
 But why are they such a huge problem? Cause THEY WORK. 
 
As long as any system has flaws that allow people with malicious intent to exploit them these 
episodes are going to keep growing. 
 
 
Although scam and fraud seem similar, it is possible to distinguish them: a fraud is when 
somebody creates a deception to steal wealth or information, a scam involves gaining the 
confidence of the victim to do so making so that the victim willingly falls for the fraud. 
 
Right now there are four big scams  at the moment: 
7
 
 
Phone scams 
 
 
A victim is contacted through his phone and tricked into giving away money. Scammers trick 
them by saying they are currently working for some big known corporation (such as Microsoft).  
In the example of Microsoft, scammers will claim that the victim's computer is infected with a 
virus and for a small annual fee they can remove it. 
Personally, since living in Denmark, it is normal to get at least one call every two months 
claiming they are from Microsoft or a Department of Cybersecurity. 
Another example would be the IRS scam in the US : Somebody calling claiming to be from the 
8
IRS saying you need to pay certain taxes or they will send you to court, this leaves the victim 
uncomfortable and to avoid any problem with the IRS they provide their bank account 
information. 
The problem with phone scams is that the phone carriers do not supply information on who is 
calling due to privacy issues, they are apps  that give some security, but they have to be 
9
regularly updated and not every user has a smartphone or use apps that provide such security. 
Despite government efforts to alert users of this, it is still a popular scam that probably won't 
fade away anytime soon. 
 
7 "4 of the World's Biggest and Most Successful Scams - The Cheat Sheet." 22 Feb. 2016, 
http://www.cheatsheet.com/personal-finance/4-of-the-worlds-biggest-and-most-successful-scams.html/?a
=viewall​. Accessed 25 Jan. 2017. 
8 "Sadly, IRS phone scams are very successful 'businesses' - CNBC.com." 18 Oct. 2016, 
http://www.cnbc.com/2016/10/18/sadly-irs-phone-scams-are-very-successful-businesses.html​. Accessed 
31 Mar. 2017. 
9 "This free app blocks IRS scam phone calls | Clark Howard." 11 Dec. 2016, 
http://clark.com/protect-your-identity/this-app-blocks-irs-scam-calls/​. Accessed 31 Mar. 2017. 
10 
==PAGE:12==
Email scams 
 
The case of the Nigerian prince again, if a user has access to an extensive email database it is 
easy just to send out a huge amount of emails and hope that at least 1 or 2 replies. 
There are several ways a scammer can get emails, for example, by creating a fake Facebook 
profile and adding as many people as possible it is possible to extract the private email from the 
victims who accepted the friend request using certain exploits. 
Recently a US company lost 100$ Million due to an email scam  , an malicious user used 
10
emails to impersonate a supplier and tricked company members into wiring money directly to 
one of his bank accounts.  
Fake emails are problematic due to how easy it is to impersonate; one can study the members 
of a particular company and impersonate one of the members to misguide a victim that trusts 
the person the malicious user impersonates.  
Plus it is also inexpensive, while phone scams can cost a small fee, emails are free, and one 
can create multiple accounts if he desires to do so. Another problem is the fact that multiple 
accounts can be created, so if one particular email is tagged or reported, one can just create 
another in a matter of minutes. 
 
 
Ponzi Schemes 
Created by Charles Ponzi in 1940,  it is an investment that promises return of big investments 
11
in return of new investors, inevitably collapsing after a while resulting in total loss of investment 
from the newer investors. 
One of the most famous types of scams worldwide was the Pyramid Scheme : 
12
The pyramid scheme requires a victim to pay to get access to it, upon getting access to it relies 
on the victim convincing other people to join and also pay for the access. To make profit one 
needs to be constantly convincing new people to join. Eventually, the number of people that can 
join ends leaving the first members with their profit from those who joined recently and the 
newcomers are stuck trying to get more people to recover their investment.  
The issue with ponzi schemes is that they are people who actually benefit from them, leaving 
other users a desire to participate,however the problem lies that just a small faction of the 
participants actually benefit leaving the rest with only losses. 
 
10 "Tech Companies Wired $100 Million to a Scammer | Fortune.com." 21 Mar. 2017, 
http://fortune.com/2017/03/21/tech-phishing-scam/​. Accessed 31 Mar. 2017. 
11 "Ponzi scheme - Wikipedia." ​https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ponzi_scheme​. Accessed 22 Jan. 2017. 
12 "SEC.gov | "Ponzi" Schemes." 9 Oct. 2013, ​https://www.sec.gov/answers/ponzi.htm​. Accessed 22 Jan. 
2017. 
11 
==PAGE:13==
Fraudulent online transactions 
Internet shopping has always been a bit tricky if you are dealing with a person directly, there are 
a lot of bad outcomes that come out of it such as: 
 -The item the person purchased is nothing like advertised.  
 -The online shop you made a purchase is fake and only exists to steal your credit card 
information 
-The person will insist you continue to discuss and close the deal through an alternative platform 
for a much lower price, leading to credit card information being stolen. 
These are important problems to solve, but at the same time almost impossible to fix for 
example anybody with programing knowledge can create a fake retail website to steal credit 
card information,plus,it can happen in any platform that allows conversation between users. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12 
==PAGE:14==
Scam Definition 
 
Scams can be defined as a confidence trick, an attempt to gain a person's trust exploiting a 
certain amount of characteristics such as honesty, naivety, lack of experience in a given subject, 
honesty among others. 
 
Publication[1] lists six steps as the six definite steps or stages of growth of a scam, although, he 
also states some of these might not be present: 
 
1.Foundation Work: 
 
This is the preparation phase where the scammer lures the person into some contact with a 
benefit in sight be it services money or other general interests. 
 
Example: 
-A house sold super cheap on a housing website. 
-A super cheap item on a reseller website. 
 
 
2.Approach​: 
 
The victim is contacted meaning the foundation worked at some point to be able for the 
scammer to engage the potential victim. 
 
Example: 
-Receiving phone message. 
-Receiving email from an unknown person. 
-Engaging conversation online or personally 
 
3.Build up: 
 
The victim gets some opportunity, and it is baited into thinking he is making the deal of his life 
and might profit a lot if he listens to the whole proposal. 
The main point is to cloud their rational judgment to make a rush decision. 
 
Example: 
-Promising a certain object for half the price. 
-Promising something rare in exchange for very low amounts of money 
-Promising an excellent house for a very cheap rent. 
 
 
13 
==PAGE:15==
4.Pay-off or Convincer: 
 
A demonstration that can make the victim believe that what he is getting is real, a way to 
convince the victim that it is making an undeniable right decision the malicious user gives a 
small “taste” of the goal of the scheme. 
 
Example: 
-Small amounts of money. 
-Gambling websites that give you some money to start playing. 
-Giving away for free some products 
 
5.The Hurrah: 
 
An event or crisis that the purpose is to make the victim rush his decision and act immediately, 
at this point either the scam fails or succeeds. The idea is by giving a small window of 
opportunity makes the victim anxious and pressured to make a wrong decision. 
 
 
Example: 
-A person is holding an object that is trying to sell you saying that he has to leave due to some 
event and either you purchase the object or let it go.  
-An offer that is about to expire within a couple of minutes and you will probably never see it 
again 
-A landlord is leaving today, and he can only show you the house and give you the keys if you 
pay him upfront before the meeting. 
 
 
6.The In-and-In: 
 
A third element arrives and tries to pick for himself the goal of the scheme to make the victim 
nervous, basically a co-scammer that will give a false sense of security to give the illusion that 
the decision is correct: 
 
-An apparent friend person who is also interested in a particular object and offers a larger 
amount for it than the victims. 
-False testimonies or rankings from other people for a specific service or object.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
14 
==PAGE:16==
The Housing Scams 
 
Housing scams are a small part of the large types of scams there is, although they are not as 
common as the other scams when they happen the results can be devastating. 
 
Typical scams involve small amounts of money; the problem with housing scams is that the 
victims end up paying two months of rent, using Denmark as an example it could be a value 
ranging from 400 to 800 euros. 
 
In the case of online housing scams they can be described using the same steps: 
 
1.​Foundation Work​: 
The advertisement of the house is the primary foundation work; the scammer will create an 
online profile of a person that would seem responsible and trustworthy, next he will make a nice 
clean text with carefully chosen pictures of the rental place and lure with an excellent location or 
price. 
 
2.​Approach​: 
The buyer engages in email conversation or other internet media; most scammers will try to 
carefully select media that they cannot be easily banned (like emails) or that have text 
constraints (such as not allowing outside links or specific words). 
 
3.​Build up​: 
Upon conversation, the scammer will say the apartment is available for purchase for the time 
the person requests for a super low price, also, he will try to showcase how good the apartment 
is for the low amount of money the person is paying. 
 
4.​The In-and-In​: 
Very rare in these cases, but, when it happens it takes place on social media and some people 
will say they are super interested so that the victim doesn't notice the mistakes and ignore the 
possible signs of being stolen while also giving him the feeling of competition. 
 
5.​The Hurrah​: 
The point where the seller creates pressure to make the victim send him any amount of money it 
can take a lot of forms and excuses: 
-The scammer says he/she is not in the country and needs some guarantee that you will be the 
one renting out due to a lot of competition and requests a “reservation fee.” 
-The tenant needs to pay before moving in and before seeing the apartment (the most common) 
-Saying there is already a person that will pay for it very soon and it is not possible to see the 
apartment but it needs to be paid now. 
 
15 
==PAGE:17==
 
Aim of the thesis 
 
Upon helping victims of housing scams, it was possible to observe a pattern in housing scams: 
suspicious payment methods, defensive posture when asking to view the apartment, suspicious 
requests, etc.. 
 
By looking at this patterns multiple times, an idea was created to share this experience in 
dissecting housing scams so that less experienced people would fall for them. 
This experience allowed the creation of a system that will provide a degree of risk for housing 
advertisements, by assigning this level of risk to housing ads, housing websites will have more 
options to protect their customers from malicious users. 
 
Unfortunately, no data was gathered due to reasons explored in the following chapters, for this 
reason, it is not possible to be certain that particular patterns lead to scams. We can, however, 
assign a degree of risk and then forward it to companies to make a decision based on it. 
 
To achieve this, we create a centralized service that uses features (designed based on 
experience) that give feedback on the advertisement.Such features include searching for 
suspicious payment methods, verify if the given is real, etc 
 
 
The goal will be for housing websites to send the details of the person such as email as well as 
the conversation exchanged between the individual and potential sellers, upon detecting an 
anomaly it would report back to the website that it found something dangerous as well as saving 
the information given for other references. 
 
By keeping the information of the scammer, it is possible to prevent him to re-use the 
information provided on other websites thus allowing these to be safe as well. 
 
16 
==PAGE:18==
 
Figure 3: sample scenario of the service. 
 
A sample scenario would be like the picture above: Upon receiving any information from the 
scammer, the data is sent to the server for analysis, if the server finds an anomaly it will inform 
the website of the persons malicious intent as well as saving the information for future 
reference. 
17 
==PAGE:19==
 
Figure 4: Another sample scenario of the service  
 
In this example scenario, as shown in picture X the scammer registered on website 1, website 1 
asks the server if the person is a scammer, after analyzing the data the server did not find 
anything suspicious, so it replies it is not a scammer. Although, when the scammer starts to 
interact with users the interaction is sent to the server and the server detects an anomaly 
reporting back that the person is a scammer and saving the data for future reference. 
Now the scammer goes to website 2 and tries to register, and the website asks the server if he 
is a scammer and the server has the report saved from website 1 and replies to site that the 
person is in fact, a scammer thus blocking the scammer. 
 
18 
==PAGE:20==
 
Chapter 3: Related Literature 
 
The main focus on the thesis is to detect scam (or fraud), for that we analyse the multiple fraud detection 
systems we can use to achieve this goal. 
 
Two fraud detection systems described by Bhowmik [2] can be used in a scenario like housing scams: 
Bayesian Network and Decision Trees 
1.Bayesian Belief Networks 
 
 
Figure 5: An example of Bayesian Belief Networks  
13
 
Bayesian Belief Networks is a probabilistic graph-based model, in this model it represents a set 
of random variables and their correspondent conditional dependencies, for example: 
In the picture above the rain has a probability of raining influences the activation of a sprinkler 
and of getting the grass wet. 
 
13 "Bayesian network - Wikiwand." ​http://www.wikiwand.com/en/Bayesian_network​. Accessed 22 Mar. 
2017. 
19 
==PAGE:21==
 
 
 
 
Figure 6: An example of Bayesian Belief Networks applied to housing scams 
 
It is possible to use a Bayesian belief network as shown in Figure 6:  
here we test if the address is reliable (if it exists or not) if the user is the owner of the property 
and if the email is blacklisted.  
A probability of a user being proprietary of the house influences the reliability of the given 
address, and both affect the Probability of being a scam. 
If an email is blacklisted its probability will be 100%, and so the scam chance will be 100% as 
well, although, even if a scam probability is 100%  this does not necessary imply that the email 
is blacklisted. 
 
 
In the case of housing scams since most of the variables we have will have probabilities of 
either 0 or 100%, for example, an email either is reported in a database, or it is not, and most of 
them don't have correlation towards each other it is not justifiable to use this method. 
 
20 
==PAGE:22==
 
2.Decision Trees 
 
A decision is a tool that uses a tree-like graph to map decisions and their outcomes, each node 
represents an action (example: make a big scan), and each branch represents the result of the 
action(example: the big scan node has two branches meaning it has two possible results).  
 
 
Figure 7: An example of an decision tree algorithm applied to housing scams  
 
Decision trees could be used on this project by  bundling up the various features into small 
scans and big scans, small scans being scans that are quick and not resource hungry and big 
scans being slow and resource hungry. 
By mapping the results of the features, one could map the resulting actions depending on their 
outcome arriving at a conclusion if the result is risky enough to be reported or ignored. 
Also, it would be possible to divide features based on how conclusive they are: since each 
feature returns a different degree of risk one could group the features that search for high-risk 
signs into a “high-risk” scan and low-risk signs into a “small risk” scan. 
 
Will be further discussed in methodology.  
 
21 
==PAGE:23==
3.Threshold Based: 
 
 
According to a patent  ​by John Gavan and 8 more authors,​ ​traditional fraud detection are 
14
based on establishing a threshold and monitor a service to detect if a certain threshold was 
reached or not, all of these have to be manually created and should have individual scores. 
 
 
 
Figure 8: An example of threshold 
 
The important part is the way we specify the features and their contribution to the threshold If 
feature detects signs of low risk it should contribute little to the threshold, although, if it detects 
signs of high risk would make a substantial contribution to the threshold. Generally upon 
reaching the threshold it should alarm the administrator and then would require human 
supervision to take appropriate action. 
The major problem is that these thresholds are patterns that are manually programmed, so if a 
intruder knows the pattern he should have an idea of how to avoid reaching the threshold. 
 
 
Will be further discussed in methodology.  
 
14 "Patent US7433855 - System and method for detecting and ... - Google." 7 Oct. 2008, 
https://www.google.com/patents/US7433855​. Accessed 22 Mar. 2017. 
22 
==PAGE:24==
4.Genetic algorithm solution: 
 
Another method mentioned in another patent  ​by Nandy is the genetic algorithm solution: 
15
By providing a list of known frauds of the same type, similarities between them will be extracted 
to create a set of rules for detection (example: all of them mention Western Union, a suspicious 
method of payment while renting properties). 
 
 
Figure 9:An example of detecting similarities to create a rule set. 
 
This set of rules will be used to process batched data and detect similarities between one of the 
rules and the provided data giving a match probability, if a batch of data has a probability 
associated with it will be transferred to results set. 
In the end, the results set is sorted by probability from highest to lowest, and the system takes 
actions depending on the results. 
 
 
 
15 "Patent US 8930268 - Online fraud prevention using genetic ... - Google." 6 Jan. 2015, 
http://www.google.com/patents/US8930268​. Accessed 2 Feb. 2017. 
23 
==PAGE:25==
 
 
 
Figure 10:Example of a genetic algorithm solution 
 
Due to having no data it is impossible to create the rule set that would allow the system to be 
built, besides it would be helpful to stop the scan after finding a definitive evidence instead of 
running all of the tests to reach the same conclusion. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
24 
==PAGE:26==
5.Layer Analysis: 
 
Another patent
show us a system we will call layer analysis​,​comprised of 4 different layers with 
16
different tasks each: 
 
 
Figure 11: An example of an layer analysis 
 
-Detection layer​: Uses a detection engine, for example, a threshold engine, to document and 
create a pattern of a malicious user, allowing it to detect new anomalies that only differ slightly 
from the recorded patterns and registering them for future analysis. This layer generates alarms 
that are sent to the analysis layer. 
-​Analysis layer​: Generates probability of fraud for each case that receives from the detection 
layer. 
-​Expert systems layer​: this layer activates the appropriate actions for each case depending on 
their probability presented by the analysis layer. 
-Presentation layer: ​presents to the user the alarms so that the user itself can take appropriate 
actions depending on the alarm. 
 
The expert system layer does not fit well in our case since the only appropriate solution in our 
case is to block the malicious user, also the probabilistic method does not fit due to most of the 
checks being yes or no,but, the presentation layer is an idea worth approaching and it will be 
used.  
16 "Patent US9390418 - System and method for detecting and ... - Google." 12 Jul. 2016, 
http://www.google.com/patents/US9390418​. Accessed 2 Feb. 2017. 
25 
==PAGE:27==
6.Adaptive Fraud Detection 
 
System administrators can detect fraud by defining specific patterns that create alarms, 
although, this process takes time and it requires a lot of experimenting as well as trial and error, 
plus, scammers change their techniques if they see that their current methods are not working. 
Due to this and the fact that the tactics used by scammers can frequently change not giving 
enough time to set up a system that can counter them, so, an adaptative system :​ is required 
17
so it can adapt to new frauds. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 12: A example of Adaptive Fraud Detection  
18
 
A system that solves this problem is presented to us by Fawcett, T., & Provost, F.[3]: 
By automatically designing user profiles using a series of data mining techniques,a profile of a 
general user is established and anything that deviates from the profile or shows signs of 
unusual behavior is tagged as suspicious. 
17 "Adaptive Fraud Detection." 
http://www.acc.ncku.edu.tw/chinese/faculty/shulc/courses/cas/articles/adaptive-fraud-detection.pdf​. 
Accessed 2 Feb. 2017. 
18 "Adaptive Fraud Detection." 
http://www.acc.ncku.edu.tw/chinese/faculty/shulc/courses/cas/articles/adaptive-fraud-detection.pdf​. 
Accessed 28 Mar. 2017. 
26 
==PAGE:28==
By constantly analyzing the new user inputs this system can automatically understand what 
profiles can generate high-confidence alarms thus if the frauds change the system will learn the 
type of fraud. 
 
For this a framework was build that upon data it creates a set of rules that will be used to build a 
monitor with a particular profile, this monitor will analyze the data to detect the frauds. 
 
Although this can be very effective it would need a considerable amount of data to work 
properly, plus, it will depend if the malicious user can circumvent or not the current defenses. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
27 
==PAGE:29==
Chapter 4: Methodology 
 
 
As described in Chapter 2, a scam can have 6 phases, and some of them can give an idea of 
how risky is it for the victim to proceed with the deal. 
 
One of the most critical phases is the Foundation Work, a step where a victim views an 
advertisement on a service and makes a decision whether to contact the seller or not. 
Other phases that are important is the Build Up and The Hurrah that will be bundled as the 
conversation exchanged between users. 
A housing website can send all this information to process, in return, the implemented service 
described in this section would return a degree of risk 
 
To provide a degree of risk, we must analyze information extracted from both the advertisement 
and the exchanged conversation. In particular, I decided to consider elements such as email 
address, the location of the property (if any), photos of the property (if any), the cost of the 
asset(if any), currency(if any), IP address(if provided) and the exchanged conversation. 
These elements will become the features that the built mechanisms will consider to provide the 
degree of risk. 
 
To achieve this, either decision trees or a threshold can be used. Both methods were chosen to 
be explored in detail. 
 
In this section, the features created to give a degree of risk are going to be described as well as 
the two systems that can use them. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
28 
==PAGE:30==
 
 
 
1.Email verifier  
 
Any user who wants to post an advertisement on a housing website normally has to provide a 
couple of parameters: personal email, address, photos and a price. 
The email of the advertiser can give some insight of his intentions since he can use the same 
email for another type of scams. According to numbers from the Australian government over 
30% of the scams are made by email , so it would made sense that one of the easiest way to 
19
counter their activities would be to check scammers databases for a specific email address. 
 
 
 
Figure 13: Details about reported scams and their delivery method  
20
 
By identifying the email it is possible to search for its mention in online databases of scammers 
such as  ​http://scammed.by/​ or a local list. If any match is found we can assign a high degree of 
risk to this user in specific. 
19 "Scam statistics | Scamwatch." ​https://www.scamwatch.gov.au/about-scamwatch/scam-statistics​. 
Accessed 23 Mar. 2017. 
20 "Scam statistics | Scamwatch." ​https://www.scamwatch.gov.au/about-scamwatch/scam-statistics​. 
Accessed 23 Mar. 2017. 
29 
==PAGE:31==
Even if is not a match and we conclude there's a high risk associated with a particular user. We 
can add the email to a local list to help several services to prevent further scamming from this 
user. 
 
2.Address reliability 
 
 
In a housing scam the scammer will give an address so that the person can have a notion of 
where the property is,however, sometimes they can also be sloppy and give a wrong address or 
do not mention an address at all. 
When searching for the address it is necessary to do some validation, a Google API can be 
used  to have some insurance that the address exists. 
21
Furthermore registering the addresses could be useful for an IP geolocation ​[4]. ​By using IP 
geolocation it is possible to have an idea of where the user is located. If the user is located in 
another country other than the address we found, it is feasible to increase the risk level of 
dealing with such user. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
21 "Google Maps Geolocation API - Google ...." 
https://developers.google.com/maps/documentation/geolocation/intro​. Accessed 27 Mar. 2017. 
30 
==PAGE:32==
 
 
3.Suspicious expressions  
 
Since scammers can not show you the property that is going to be sold or rent they need to give 
some type of excuse as why they can not meet personally or show the property, such excuses 
can include for example that they just relocated to another country. 
Since these are the biggest signs of being a scam, the malicious user will probably never use 
any of these excuses on the advertisement.So it would make sense to search for them in the 
conversation between users. 
Searching and identifying these excuses is crucial to identify a scammer since they are 
expressions that only somebody with malicious intent would say, a list would be: 
 
 
view the HOUSE from outside 
i am not in the country 
i relocated to COUNTRY 
i will send keys by mail 
i can not show you the HOUSE 
viewing the HOUSE is not possible 
viewing the HOUSE will not be possible 
can only send you the HOUSE pictures 
to make an external viewing 
you can view from Google map 
you can view from Google maps 
have the HOUSE keys here with 
 
Figure 14: A table of the possible excuses  
 
These excuses, however, can vary a little, for example on the first one “view the HOUSE from 
outside” the word HOUSE can be flat, apartment, property etc, and the word COUNTRY can be 
a country other than the property is located at. 
By identifying these expressions in the text one can conclude that the person has no intention to 
show the property before receiving any payment, therefore, it is highly possible that it is a scam. 
 
 
 
31 
==PAGE:33==
4.Suspicious payment methods  
 
After a user decides to rent a particular property, and both users agree on the renting process, 
an arrangement of how the payment is going to be processed has to be established. Here the 
malicious user will likely try to convince the victim to make the payment through a service that 
will not allow the victim to recover the payment once it has been done. 
According to multiple online sources , Wired Transfers are the preferred method of transferring 
22
money of scammers. Since it is rare to be able to recover money once it has been sent .The 
23
receiver essentially remains anonymous (these services require little to no identification), this 
type of service is perfect for a malicious user. 
Since it is the primary goal of the scammer to receive money from the victim it would make to 
prevent it from using such services. Even if it is a legit agreement if anything goes wrong it will 
be impossible to provide a proof of payment to the local authorities. 
 
 
Western Union 
MoneyGram 
PayPoint 
Lovia 
Azimo 
Dwolla 
TranferGo 
TransferWise 
 
Figure 15: A list of wire transfer services 
 
By searching the text and finding mentions of this service it is possible to conclude the person is 
asking to be paid through a service that can cause multiple problems to the victim. 
 
 
22 "Reclaim scams | Scamwatch." 
https://www.scamwatch.gov.au/types-of-scams/unexpected-money/reclaim-scams​. Accessed 23 Mar. 
2017. 
23 "How to get your money back after a scam - Which.co.uk." 
http://www.which.co.uk/consumer-rights/advice/how-to-get-your-money-back-after-a-scam​. Accessed 23 
Mar. 2017. 
32 
==PAGE:34==
5.Identity theft attempt 
 
After a user decides to rent a particular property, he or she has to communicate with the 
supposed property owner to settle the rent. During this process of communication, the malicious 
user might try to obtain personal identification from the victim possibly leading to identity theft. 
Identity theft is a big problem that exists for a long time.A report  from the US government 
24
estimates that 7% of persons age 16 or older had their identities stolen and numbers from the 
Australian Government  show us that there was over 10000 reports of identity theft in 2016 
25
leading to a loss of 1 million dollars.  
 
 
Figure 16: A graph describing a number of reports per scam category 
 
 
Asking for identification can be seen as a sign of danger. Even if a scammer fails to steal money 
from the victim he can still get the victim's personal identification resulting in identity theft. 
Finding mentions of “passport” or “ID” can allow us to at least warn the user that he should not 
hand over his personal identification over any digital means. 
 
24 "Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS) - Victims of Identity Theft, 2014." 9 Feb. 2016, 
https://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=5408​. Accessed 23 Mar. 2017. 
25 "Scam statistics | Scamwatch." ​https://www.scamwatch.gov.au/about-scamwatch/scam-statistics​. 
Accessed 23 Mar. 2017. 
33 
==PAGE:35==
 
6.Price check 
 
As mentioned before in scams there is a process called build up, where the scammer tries to 
convince the victim that it is making a good deal, in the case of housing scams it is generally a 
very cheap price compared to the rest of the house market, so it would make sense to have an 
average price per city and compare it to what the scammer is offering. 
 
For this feature in specific we are considering only rents and not purchases, since normally 
houses are purchased through a real estate and undergo a bigger process of assessment. 
 
Sometimes it is possible to find properties with a price tag below the market so it only should be 
considered as a warning but not as an definite proof that it is a scam. 
 
Also since scammers can impersonate people from countries they may have never visited they 
might not know that they have a different currency. So by checking if the currency they ask 
differs from the country´s currency can be interpreted as a sign of risk. 
 
By detecting the amount of rent requested it is possible to compare it to a predefined minimum 
per city alarming the user that the price is suspicious, also, detecting the currency of the price 
will allow to detect if the user has knowledge of the currency of the country. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
34 
==PAGE:36==
 
7.Property pictures 
 
A process of placing a property advertisement is made by providing several parameters: a 
description of the house, the address, pictures of the property, price, etc. A malicious user will 
have to find pictures of a property that he does not own; this pictures can just be copied from 
somewhere else to trick the buyer. 
Since they can be using images taken from the web, in general, it is possible to search the web 
for those images, by using specific services we can trace the origin of the picture and take 
further conclusions. 
By having a list of where the picture is present one can analyze the top-level domains [5] to 
detect if the image is present in a website whose domain represents another country than the 
country the property is located at. 
For example: let's imagine that one picture of a property in Denmark has been mentioned in 100 
websites, it is hard to believe that a private picture of a private property would be on 100 
different websites on the internet. Also if a top level domain of these same mentions is from 
another country we can assume it is being used on another country's website increasing the risk 
of dealing with this user in particular. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
35 
==PAGE:37==
Possible Features 
 
This section will describe implementations that can vary from country to country, or it will 
depend on the service that the scammer is using thus is not implemented but should be 
considered. 
Geolocation analysis was not implemented it needs a geolocation either by IP or by HTML5 
given by the housing websites. 
Landlord check needs an online database of property owners. Although these are available in 
some countries, not all countries have one. 
Domain check would require data to test its effectiveness, some samples to test other features 
were acquired, but none of the samples had any parameters to test this feature.  
  
 
1.Geolocation Analysis 
 
The whole purpose of the system is trying to figure out if a person is trying to sell a house in a 
specific place without owning the property.Having access to the physical location of the renter 
can be proven useful to make further conclusions. 
By using geolocation whenever a person posts an advertisement on a specific housing website, 
it is possible to map out its real location, and if the person's text states that he is currently in a 
different location, it is suspicious. 
 
The problem with this method is that it requires the housing websites to actively store the IP of 
each user and check up on real time since IPs change regularly. 
If a person clearly states that its current location is in a particular place, but the IP address says 
otherwise it is somewhat safe to assume the person is lying. 
  
There is a small chance that the person could be using a VPN[6]. VPNs mask the IP address of 
the user resulting in an incorrect geolocation scan, thus leading to false conclusions.This can 
cause some problem, however, using the HTML5 Geolocation API this problem is solved since it 
uses the browser information instead of IP . 
26
 
In conclusion: if the housing websites sends the location of the user using these methods, it is 
possible to search the text for mentions of relocating to a specific location and match it with its 
current location. If this is confirmed to be a lie, we can conclude something is suspicious about 
the user. 
26 "How can html5 geolocalisation bypass my vpn? - Security Stack ...." 23 Jul. 2016, 
https://security.stackexchange.com/questions/130790/how-can-html5-geolocalisation-bypass-my-vpn​. 
Accessed 1 Apr. 2017. 
36 
==PAGE:38==
 
 
 
2.Landlord Check 
Every address has a person registered to it, by looking up the name of the owner of a particular 
property can give us some insight whether the individual that is trying to rent the property does, 
in fact, own it. 
The problem with this method is that it will vary from country to country.For this feature to be 
implemented it would be necessary to have access to data from multiple countries. Some 
governments will probably never share this information on sharing due to privacy concerns. 
Some countries like Denmark have an online database that can be checked at any time. 
Although looking at other examples such as Portugal it doesn't, so this feature can only be 
implemented partially in countries that provide this data.Also, it would require an extensive time 
to bring it to fruition. 
 
 
3.Domain Check 
 
 
One of the schemes used by scammers is typosquatting ​[7] ​essentially a malicious user would 
purchase a domain name nearly identical to well known domains names be only replacing a 
single character. Upon doing this it would copy the whole original website to pretend it is the 
original.  
An case scenario for this one would be creating a domain like ​www.airbmb.com​ (pretending to 
be the famous service airbnb) copying airbnb design and then linking it to the victim. The victim 
upon entering its personal information would think it is using airbnb and would be delivering its 
data straight into the hands of the malicious user. 
Often companies take legal action against such websites and demand that they shut down  so 
27
it would natural to assume that they only last for a short period of time. 
So a feasible method to detect typosquatting would be to search for urls and use a Whois 
Lookup such as ​https://whois.domaintools.com/​.  
Upon retrieving the results one could check for the date of creation: if the date of creation is 
recent (by recent we will consider a 2 year lifespan) we have a slightly indication that something 
could be wrong with the url (Since companies constantly demand that occurrences like this are 
shut down). 
27 "Typosquatting - ICANNWiki." 16 Feb. 2012, ​https://icannwiki.org/Typosquatting​. Accessed 24 Mar. 
2017. 
37 
==PAGE:39==
Structure of the fraud detection system  
 
In this section, it will be described in detail two fraud detection system that was chosen for this 
project in particular. 
These systems will allow giving a degree of risk depending on the outcome of the individual 
features mentioned in the previous section of this chapter. 
In Decision trees, the features are all bundled together, even if one of the features returns the 
maximum degree of risk the algorithm will continue to test the rest of the features. Since some 
of the features can take some time until it is fully processed, it would make more sense to stop 
when the max degree of risk is reached. For this reason, Threshold was implemented. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
38 
==PAGE:40==
1.Threshold based structure 
 
On a Threshold based system, the system will take action upon achieving a particular threshold, 
each situation that is reached should give a score and depending on that score the system will 
take action: 
 
 
Figure 20: A Threshold example 
 
-​Green ​(0-40): No action required if it achieves the 40 Points mark. Although if an individual 
feature reports a warning it should still send to a presentation layer the warning.  
-​Yellow​ (40-80): The system should warn that the following ad is dangerous and should not be 
considered. It should display the individual warnings of the features as well an specific message 
mentioning there is a moderate amount of risk in proceeding. 
-​Red​ (80-100): The system should reply with the maximum amount of risk, and the person who 
posted the ad should be added to a suspicious list. The email used by it should be uploaded to 
a scammers list. 
Score Distribution 
 
 
Danger Signs 
Points 
Comments 
Address reliability check 
10 
Issue warning 1 
Identity theft attempt searcher 
20  
Issue warning 2 
39 
==PAGE:41==
Price checker 
10​ or ​20 
Issue warning 3 
Email Verifier 
60 
Issue warning 4 
Suspicious expressions detection 
80 
 
Suspicious payment methods detection 
80 
 
Property pictures checker 
20​ ​or​ ​60 
 
 
Figure 21: A list illustrating the various danger signs and a possible individual score. 
 
The individual score mentioned is a possible choice. Upon collecting more data it would 
possible to tune each score to ensure a more precise analysis. 
 
-Address reliability check: 
If no address is found, it should return ​10​ points and issue warning 1. 
-Identity theft attempt searcher: 
If it finds any attempt of identity theft, it should return ​20​ points and issue warning 2. 
-Price checker: 
Finding a different currency from the country the property is located should return ​10​ points, and 
if the price is found and it is lower than the expected should return ​10​ extra points. 
-Email verifier: 
If the email was found in a scammers database, it should add points and add ​60 ​points and 
issue warning 4 
-Suspicious expressions detection: 
For each suspicious expression found it should add ​80​ points terminating the process 
-Suspicious payment methods detection: 
If any mention of a wire transfer service is detected, it should add ​80​ points ending the process 
-Property pictures checker: 
If by searching the image on the internet ten mentions of the picture is found return ​20​, if more 
than ten mentions are found and their top-level domains differ from the country where the 
property is located we add  ​60​ points instead of 20 
 
All of these individual scores are based on how suspicious each of the conclusion of an 
individual feature. For example: finding mentions of ID can be common on all exchanged 
conversation between users thus having a minor score,but, finding mentions that the pictures 
were taken from a website is uncommon and can be considered more suspicious therefore, 
having a bigger score. 
40 
==PAGE:42==
 
 
2.Decision tree based structure 
  
A implementation of the system would be a decision tree based system plus a presentation 
layer; the idea would be to bundle the features into two groups: small danger signs and big 
danger signs. 
The small danger signs would be the features that report a low level of risk and fast to execute, 
while the big danger signs are resource-hungry but also report if there is a high level of risk. 
The system would start by detecting the small danger signs, and if it encountered any, it should 
send a warning to the presentation layer of why it is dangerous to proceed, however by facing 
more than three small danger signs it should just report that the user is a scammer and finish 
the examination. 
If 2 or less small danger signs are found it should continue and proceed to check for the big 
danger signs if it any of the big danger signs is reported it should conclude that the user is a 
scammer. 
 
  
 
 
Figure 17: An Example of a decision tree based structure 
41 
==PAGE:43==
 
Small Danger Signs 
 
 
Small Danger Signs 
Comments 
Address reliability check 
Issue Warning 1 
Identity theft attempt searcher 
Issue Warning 2 
Price checker 
  Issue Warning 3 
 
Figure 18: A list illustrating the small danger signs and their respecting warnings  
 
Big Danger Signs 
 
 
Big Danger Signs 
Email Verifier 
Suspicious expressions detection 
Suspicious payment methods detection 
Property pictures checker 
 
Figure 19: A list illustrating the small danger signs and their respecting warnings  
 
 
 
 
 
42 
==PAGE:44==
Warnings 
 
In this section we describe the warnings that features should report back in case anything 
suspicious is found; these warnings should be sent to the presentation layer allowing the 
housing websites to make a more informative decision. 
 
 
1 
No address was mentioned at all 
2 
In no circumstance should the landlord require your ID or Passport 
3 
The price is suspicious proceed with caution 
4 
Email of the user was found in a scammers database 
 
Figure 21: List of warnings used for both structures. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
43 
==PAGE:45==
 
Chapter 5: Implementation 
 
In this section the steps taken to implement are going to be explained in detail. 
 
Starting with the process of trying to gather data for analysis and then explaining how the 
individual features were implemented. 
 
Data Gathering 
Gathering data to test the algorithms was hard for several reasons: 
-Most websites don't have an automatic scammer detection, nor they have a list of scammers or 
scams that occurred on their platform. 
-If they do have a structure that can identify scammers, they will feel reluctant to outsource their 
data out of mistrust (since scammers can learn their methods and react to them). 
 
 
In order to obtain real scammer cases, we tried to get the feedback from the general public, so a 
website was created to achieve this purpose: www.housingscams.com  
 
 
The site was built with the goal of looking professional since it is necessary to gain the trust of 
the users to share their scamming experiences, to assure the professional look and feel it was 
made with a responsive framework to scale for various devices. 
 
It is possible to report a scam in different ways ranging from sending a picture to sending the full 
text. Also, measures were taken to secure the input by sanitizing the input from the user. 
 
 
 
 
44 
==PAGE:46==
 
 
Figure 22: An image of the website www.housingscams.com. 
 
The website was built and it is available at www.housingscams.com. Three pages from the 
website are worth mentioning: 
-Report Scams: Contains two methods of users reporting a scam, it can be either with a simple 
link, or the user can insert all text exchanged between him and the victim as well as upload 
pictures. 
-Tips on Avoiding Scams: A selection of many tips for the user to avoid getting scammed, most 
of them implemented on the thesis project. 
-Scam Analysis: A page that we will allow the user to input information to detect if its a scam or 
not it will serve as well for more data gathering. 
 
Despite being shared on social media and some users actively ask people to report the scams, 
after a course of a month, only a single scam was reported with only an image.  
Official administrators of popular social media groups with emphasis on accommodation also 
refused to endorse it since it is a touchy subject. 
One company, however, did have a proper scammer detection system but refused to share any 
data afraid that we would leak their methods of scam detection. 
 
 
 
 
 
45 
==PAGE:47==
 
Fraud detection system implementation 
 
 
In this section, we will describe the system that was built. Each element of this section is a 
feature that will take a specific input and return an output for the threshold system. 
Depending on the response by the individual methods, the system will attribute an individual 
score, and it will add it to a global threshold variable. 
If the global threshold variable reaches the limit of 100, the program will be terminated, and it 
will state that the maximum risk was achieved. If it did not reach the maximum, it would report 
the threshold level and its risk level. 
 
The system was created and can be found online at the following URL: 
https://github.com/Pyrathar/Housing-Scams-Thesis 
 
 
 
1.Email reliability 
 
Given an advertisement or a conversation between users, the aim is to find the personal emails 
address to check if they are mentioned in a database of scammers. 
 
To identify an email, a regular expression [8] was used, the method searches the provided text 
for any string that matches the following regular expression: 
  
  
 
[\w\.-]+@[\w\.-]+ 
 
This regular expression will allow us to send the email address to a website called scammed.by 
that has a database of scammers updated on a regular basis.  
By making an HTTP Request with the mail to this site we get the results in an HTML format, 
using Python´s HTML scraping ​[9] ​ we search the response to verify if the email was blacklisted. 
 
If a response was giving to the threshold system, the system will assume the email is blacklisted 
thus adding the appropriate score to the overall threshold score 
 
  
Note: An optional user input was created so that the user can confirm the email. 
46 
==PAGE:48==
 
 
2.Address reliability check 
 
The purpose of Address Finder is to find the address the scammer is pretending to own, 
although finding out the landlord automatically based on the address would be a tremendous 
help it requires the conditions to do so (and these solutions vary from country to country). 
 
Still, it is important to find the address since some scammers don't even mention it at all or often 
they make mistakes writing the address since they are not natives. 
 
So first to search and find the address the method will start by searching with the following 
regular expression: 
 
  
\A(.*?)\s+(\d+[a-zA-Z]{0,1}\s{0,1}[-]{1}\s{0,1}\d*[a-zA-Z]{0,1}|\d+[a-zA-Z-]{0,1}\d*[a-zA-Z]{0,1}) 
 
This regular expression is used to find mentions with the format “Street name and door number” 
 
In case it can not find an address , a Python package pypostal  will be used, pypostal is a 
28
parser/normalizer for street addresses.The aim of pypostal is to label the text with labels such 
as (“Road” and “Number”) 
Upon receiving the tagged text the method will try to locate the address by searching for a string 
with the label (“Road”) that is followed by another string with the label (“Number”) 
 
If either the regular expression search or pypostal returns an address, a final verification will be 
done using Google's Geocoding API by sending the address for verification, if there's response 
by Google we can confirm the address exists. 
 
Upon verifying the address exists it will return to the threshold system the address, if no address 
was found, the threshold system will add an individual value to the threshold score. 
 
 
 
3.Suspicious expressions 
 
28 "GitHub - openvenues/pypostal: Python bindings to libpostal for fast ...." 
https://github.com/openvenues/pypostal​. Accessed 29 Mar. 2017. 
47 
==PAGE:49==
In order for the threshold system to give an decision on the risk level it will search for a specific 
list of expressions listed in chapter 4, upon finding the expressions it will add score to the 
threshold based on the number of expressions found. 
A file with the name of lies.txt contains the list of expressions in this format: 
 
 
 
“Viewing the HOUSE will not be possible” 
“I will send keys by mail” 
“I relocated to COUNTRY” 
“You can view from Google Maps” 
 
Figure 23: An example of the list of expressions. 
 
Some of the expressions can not have many variations such as "I will send keys by mail" and 
can easily found within the conversation, matching this expression will allow us to conclude that 
the person is, in fact, a scammer. 
 
So we format the text by splitting five words in a sequence into an array and comparing those 
five words using a sequence matcher and a cosine function [10] if either of these return more 
than 0.80 the probability of the sentences being similar is high. 
 
 
But some of the expressions can have variations, for example, the word house can be replaced 
with flat or apartment thus creating slightly different sentences to match, to avoid this, the word 
in specific is replaced by all possible synonyms and then tried pairing. 
 
 
Figure 24: An example of create sentences with similar meaning 
 
48 
==PAGE:50==
In every expression that has a word in uppercase like HOME, the program will identify it as to be 
replaced with other words for it to match. 
 
Some of the words can have a few synonyms however there is also the variation of COUNTRY, 
in this case, we do the same but with a whole list of European countries. 
 
 
 
Figure 25: An example of create sentences with similar meaning. 
 
 
 
4.Suspicious payment methods detection 
 
The aim of this method is to find mentions of Wire Transfer Services so that the threshold can 
give a clearer degree of risk, for that, it is necessary to find mentions of this service in the 
conversation exchanged between users.  
To achieve this, we split words from the given conversation  two by two and match them with the 
names of Wire Transfer Services: 
 
 
49 
==PAGE:51==
 
Figure 26: An example of comparing text with names of wire transfer services  
 
Upon finding mentions of this services, the method will assume that the user is trying to 
convince the victim to use a wire transfer service. 
If a reference to these services is found, the method will reply to the threshold system that it 
found a mention of Wire Transfer so that the threshold system can add the appropriate score to 
the overall threshold score. 
 
 
 
 
 
5.Identity theft attempt searcher  
 
 
The aim of this method is to find any mention of attempts of identity theft and report it back to 
the threshold system. If these attempts exist, they are present in the conversation exchanged 
between users. 
By searching the exchanged conversation and matching all words with a list of words related to 
identification, it is possible to find mentions of requesting identification, a list like this would be: 
 
 
id 
50 
==PAGE:52==
ID 
passport 
Passport 
 
Figure 27: List of words related to identification. 
 
 
If any match is found it would suggest that the malicious user is trying to obtain identification to 
commit identity theft. Since a match was found the method will report to the system that it found 
a mention of what could be an attempt of identity theft. This mention will allow the threshold 
system to add an individual score to the overall Threshold score. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.Price checker 
 
Given an advertisement or a conversation between users, we expect to find a suspicious cost 
and a questionable currency and report them to the threshold system for individual scoring.  
 
The goal is to compare the price to a realistic, acceptable price range and check if the currency 
is correct according to the country the property is located at. 
 
The currency is valuable because scammers sometimes forget or don't know that certain 
countries have different currencies and will state their price in more global ones (such as Euros 
or Dollars). 
 
 
Currencies are generally written attached to a value or detached example: 5000dkk or  
5000 dkk. 
51 
==PAGE:53==
 
Figure 28:An example of the algorithm finding the currency and amount when both are attached. 
 
The above picture illustrates how to capture the currency with efficiency when it is attached to 
another word, by checking if a string contains the currency (dkk,eur etc..) and validating that the 
rest of the string is a number it is possible to have an effective detection. 
 
The other implementation on how to search for amounts and currencies is by searching for 
currencies and when found, verify if the string before the currency is a valid number. 
52 
==PAGE:54==
 
Figure 29:An example of the algorithm finding the currency and amount when both are 
separated. 
 
 
In the picture above a brief explanation is showed, finding a mention of “dkk” will trigger it to 
verify if the string before it is a valid integer or float if so, the currency and amount was correctly 
detected. 
By finding an incorrect currency, the method will report back to the threshold system that it 
found an inconsistency, this report will allow the threshold system to add an individual score to 
the overall threshold score. Also if a suspicious amount is found, it will also report back to the 
threshold system adding another individual score to the overall threshold score. 
 
 
 
53 
==PAGE:55==
7.Property pictures checker 
 
Given an advertisement, we expect to find some photos of the property that is being rented. 
Upon finding these pictures, the goal would be to use reverse image search to find if other 
websites contain these same pictures. 
 
 
Figure 30: An example of reverse image search using Google. 
 
Example: If a photo of a house is found on Houses.dk and by searching it we found out that it is 
also present in a website called housesforsale.fr we can conclude from the top-level domain (fr) 
that the advertisement is suspicious since the top-level domain is French. 
 
To do this, the Custom Search API was used, by asking specifically to find images matching the 
one we upload we can find where this image is present. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Google Searches are free until a certain limit, so, to trim down the amount of requests two 
different methods were made: 
 
54 
==PAGE:56==
-QuickSearch: Queries once and if it has ten results we can assume it is suspicious since the 
probability of somebody posting a house advertisement on ten different websites it is highly 
unlikely to happen. (Especially in markets where housing is in such big demand) 
-Search: instead of making only one query, it will find all possible mentions of the image and 
retrieve everything in a list. Then, it filters all the domains that are acceptable such as “.com” 
and “.dk”, if there's a website with a different top-level domain such as “fr” or “pt” it will conclude 
it as a scam 
 
If the method Quicksearch returns ten results, it will also report back to the threshold system 
adding an individual score to the overall threshold score. 
If the method Search returns any result, the threshold system will assume the picture was found 
on websites from different countries, and it will add an individual score to the overall threshold 
score. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 6: Results 
In this section, we will describe how the implementation was tested as well as its results and 
performance of each individual feature. 
 
55 
==PAGE:57==
1.Data Samples 
Although no big amount of data was given to make an appropriate testing, it was possible to 
collect three samples by personally interacting with scammers and storing the conversation 
between both users. 
 
In the project folder three text files can be found: 
 
 
Scam.txt 
Scam2.txt 
Scam3.txt 
Email present 
No 
No 
No 
Address is mentioned 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Suspicious Expressions 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Suspicious Payment Methods 
No 
Yes 
No 
Identity theft attempt 
Yes 
No 
No 
Wrong currency/Suspicious Amount 
No 
No 
Yes 
Property Pictures 
Yes 
Yes  
No 
 
Figure 30: A list detailing what was present in each scam that allowed for a test. 
 
These samples would provide a minimal verification to test the functionality of each feature, in 
the cases that it could not be verified such as email address,a small test sample was manually 
create just to verify if the feature was working as intended. 
 
 
 
 
 
2.Results 
 
Email Verifier: ​Although it was not possible to obtain any email from these samples, a test file 
with a reported email taken from the website scammed.by was created to test the feature. The 
feature reported with success that found a mention of this email address in their databases. 
 
56 
==PAGE:58==
Address reliability: ​scam one and two were successfully found, although scam three had an 
address and the feature failed to extract and verify the address. 
 
Suspicious Expressions:​ in all scams, multiple mentions of dubious expressions were found, 
the feature successfully mapped only the suspicious ones and reported to the threshold system. 
 
Suspicious payment methods: ​it was correctly found that the scam two had mentions of a 
particular wire transfer service (money gram)​. 
 
Price Check: ​Although the prices across all samples were within acceptable ranges, scam 
three used euros as currency as was successfully detected by the feature 
 
Property Pictures: ​None of the pictures offered enough evidence to reach a conclusion that the 
intentions were malicious. However, scam number three pictures were mentioned on a Danish 
website as being a scam. Unfortunately, the feature failed to conclude from the results given 
that there was suspicious behavior due to the way it was designed. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 7: Conclusion 
1.Analysis: 
 
The provided analysis of housing scams can provide a major idea of how they work giving 
insight on how one could capitalize on their flaws and prevent scammers from being successful. 
The experience in dealing with these type of scam allowed to accurate describe their way of 
operating thus providing a solid base to built a system to counter them. 
 
2.Design: 
 
57 
==PAGE:59==
A focus was made on explaining the possible fraud detection systems that could be created not 
having data. Also, other methods widely used were also described to give the reader an idea of 
how a system of this nature can be created when given the conditions to do so. 
It was also described why some standard solutions would not fit our solution due to the nature of 
the scams. 
 
 
3 Implementation: 
 
The implementation was created, but, lack enough evidence to fully test its usefulness, never 
the less, with minimal samples it was shown that it could fulfill some of its goals and could serve 
as a base for future work. 
With this base, it will be possible to showcase some of its features, making possible to try to 
convince housing companies to work with it thus turning it into a major worldwide collaboration 
project. 
 
4.Limitations of the research: 
 
It was possible to create a beta version that hopefully will serve as a foundation to built a 
full-fledged system that can have a significant impact on this matter; this beta can be used to 
test with real needing only small tweaks depending on the results to ensure a high-reliable 
system.  
 
Due to lack of data the final software was run on samples collected personally and achieved 
some satisfactory results, hopefully, the features that were described will make scamming 
harder for malicious users. 
 
The architecture of the system was also a limitation, due to lack of data, certain types of fraud 
detection could not be used. 
 
 
 
5.Further Research: 
 
With time and data, it will be possible to strengthen the reliability of this service, since there is 
interest from housing companies in this issue, it is possible that it becomes spread worldwide 
saving countless potential victims. 
 
Also,with more data, one could try other fraud detection systems and find more patterns that 
allow a more fail-proof system. 
 
The project will be shared online so that other people can contribute to it or make their in-house 
solution if they desire to do so. 
58 
==PAGE:60==
 
 
If in the future deviations of this type of scam are found, it would be advisable to use an 
Adaptive Fraud Detection, however, in the current state, it does not require such system. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
References 
 
 
[1]  Smith,EH (1922).​Confessions of a confidence man: A handbook for suckers​ . Scientific American 
Publishing Company. 
 
59 
==PAGE:61==
[2] Bhowmik, R. (2008). Data mining techniques in fraud detection. ​The Journal of Digital Forensics, 
Security and Law: JDFSL​, ​3​(2), 35. 
 
[3] ​Fawcett, T., & Provost, F. (1997). Adaptive fraud detection. ​Data mining and knowledge discovery​, 
1​(3), 291-316. 
 
[4] Katz-Bassett, E., John, J. P., Krishnamurthy, A., Wetherall, D., Anderson, T., & Chawathe, Y. (2006, 
October). Towards IP geolocation using delay and topology measurements. In ​Proceedings of the 6th 
ACM SIGCOMM conference on Internet measurement​ (pp. 71-84). ACM​. 
[5] ​Postel, Jon (March 1994). "Domain Name System Structure and Delegation". Request for Comments. 
Network Working Group. 
 
[6]Cameron, R., & Wyler, N. R. (2011). ​Juniper (r) Networks Secure Access SSL VPN Configuration 
Guide​. Syngress. 
[7] Szurdi, J., Kocso, B., Cseh, G., Spring, J., Felegyhazi, M., & Kanich, C. (2014, August). The Long" 
Taile" of Typosquatting Domain Names. In ​USENIX Security​ (pp. 191-206). 
 
[8] Friedl, J. E. (2002). ​Mastering regular expressions​. " O'Reilly Media, Inc.". 
 
[9]Mitchell, R. (2015). ​Web Scraping with Python: Collecting Data from the Modern Web​. " O'Reilly Media, 
Inc.". 
 
[10]Ye, J. (2011). Cosine similarity measures for intuitionistic fuzzy sets and their applications. 
Mathematical and Computer Modelling​, ​53​(1), 91-97. 
60 
