==PAGE:1==
#PMFUUF#BETCFSH+FOTFO
"QSJM
2VBOUJmDBUJPOPG.PEFMJOH&SSPSTJO$SPTT
CPSFIPMF(13'VMMXBWFGPSN*OWFSTJPO
UISPVHI*ODPSQPSBUJPOPG"NQMJUVEFBOE
5SBWFM5JNF.PEFMJOH&SSPSTBOE4PVSDF
1VMTF6ODFSUBJOUZ
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Full-waveform inversion of cross-hole GPR data requires an estimate of the source wavelet
in order to establish the forward simulation part of the inversion algorithm. The method
for determining the source wavelet builds upon the idea of deconvolution of observed wave-
form data given an impulse response estimate that is related to the electrical properties
of the subsurface. This source wavelet estimate is traditionally based on least-squares
estimates of the subsurface model obtained from ray-based inversion of travel time and
amplitude data extracted from the observed waveform data. The source wavelet estimate
based on least-squares subsurface estimates does not reﬂect the variability associated with
the posterior probability to the ray-based inversion. In this thesis, a Bayesian approach
to quantifying the uncertainty related to the source wavelet estimate is presented.
In order to obtain an appropriate estimate of the source wavelet uncertainty, the
forward modeling errors related to travel time and amplitude data is quantiﬁed and taken
into account in the ray-based inversion. A Gaussian probability distribution describing
the forward modeling errors is obtained, and it is demonstrated that correctly accounting
for the forward modeling error leads to a solution consistent with the subsurface.
The method proposed for quantifying the uncertainty of the full waveform forward
modeling that results from the source wavelet uncertainty is based on the ability to gener-
ate multiple realizations of the source wavelet that reﬂect the variability in the posterior
distribution to the ray-based inversion.
Finally, the estimated full waveform forward
modeling uncertainty is taken into account during Monte Carlo based full waveform in-
version of a synthetic data set.
It is demonstrated, that by correctly accounting for
the forward modeling uncertainty in the full waveform inversion makes it, for the ﬁrst
time, possible to sample the posterior distribution of a probabilistically formulated full
waveform inverse problem conditioned by data set with realistic data geometry.
The synthetic examples used in this thesis are all inspired by the geological environ-
ment found at the ﬁeld site at Arrenæs, Denmark.
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisor at KU, Knud Skou Cordua, for valuable feedback
and interesting academic discussions. I would like to thank my supervisor at DTU, Klaus
Mosegaard, for continuous support. A special thanks to Thomas Mejer Hansen for always
being willing to help with the SIPPI and mGstat toolboxes. Finally, I must express my
gratitude to my parents for being ever optimistic and supportive, and to my boyfriend
Jacob Bavnhøj for putting his computer at my disposal, for being ever encouraging and
for caring for my well-being.
==PAGE:4==
Contents
List of ﬁgures
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation and Aim
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2
Theory
9
2.1
FDTD Simulation of Waveform Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2
Inverse Problem Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.3
Ray-based Inversion of Travel Time and Amplitude Data . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.3.1
Travel time inversion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.3.2
Amplitude inversion (tomography) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.3.3
Accounting for imperfect forward modeling
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.4
Full Waveform Inversion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.4.1
Monte Carlo sampling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.4.2
Source wavelet estimation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.4.3
Accounting for forward modeling error from source wavelet realiza-
tion variability
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3
Prior Expectations and Simulation of Synthetic Data
25
3.1
Prior Realization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.1.1
Reference model setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.1.2
Prior realization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.2
Forward Modeling of Synthetic Waveform Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.2.1
Noise realization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.3
Picking of First-arrival Travel Time and First-cycle Amplitude Data
. . .
31
3.4
Assessment of Data Uncertainties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4
Quantiﬁcation of Forward Modeling Error
37
4.1
Forward Modeling Error in Ray-based Inversion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.2
Ray-based Inversion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.2.1
Inversion of ﬁrst-arrival travel time data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.2.2
Inversion of ﬁrst-cycle amplitude data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.2.3
Least-squares estimate of ε and σ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.3
Forward Modeling Error in Full Waveform Inversion
. . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.3.1
Source wavelet realizations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
4.3.2
From Source Wavelet Realizations to Full Waveform Forward Mod-
eling Errors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
4.4
Full-waveform Inversion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
ii
==PAGE:5==
iii
Contents
5
Accounting for Modeling Errors in Full-waveform Inversion
59
6
Discussion
67
6.1
Forward Modeling Errors in Ray-based Linear Inversion
. . . . . . . . . .
67
6.2
Ray-based Inversion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
6.3
Forward Modeling Error in Full Waveform Inversion
. . . . . . . . . . . .
70
6.4
Monte Carlo Based Full Waveform Inversion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
6.4.1
Full waveform inversion results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
7
Conclusions
75
References
77
==PAGE:6==
List of Figures
1.1
Sketch of cross borehole acquisition. The transmitting antenna generates
pulses of electromagnetic radiation that are recorded at multiple antenna
positions. Data obtained from all transmitter-receiver positions constitutes
a tomographic data set. Figure adapted from Reynolds (2011).
. . . . . .
2
1.2
Arrenæs ﬁeld site in Denmark.
Figures with courtesy of Cordua et al.
(2009a)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.1
Schematic illustration of the modeling error and the possibly uncertain
forward relation. (a) No modeling errors - the relation d = g(m) is exact.
The associated modeling error, (c), is a delta function, δ(d). (b) The for-
ward modeling, θ(d|m), in the case of an approximate stationary Gaussian
modeling error, seen in (d), Λ(d|m) = N(dT , CT ), obtained in the vicinity
of ρM(m) (dotted line). Yellow curve: maximum of θ(d|m) distribution.
Figure adapted from Hansen et al. (2014). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.1
Ray coverage for synthetic setup that imitates the experimental setup at
Arrenæs. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.2
Target distributions for expected parameter values. Left: dielectric per-
mittivity. ε, Right: conductivity, σ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.3
The realization from the prior model that is used for reference model for
ε and σ. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.4
Reference models for velocity and attenuation structure. . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.5
The reference model for dielectric permittivity and conductivity showed
with the antenna positions used in FDTD calculations of waveform data. .
30
3.6
Single sided frequency spectra of the pure waveform data from forward
simulation, of the band-limited noise and of the signal with band-limited
noise for one trace. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.7
One waveform data trace with the picked ﬁrst-arrival travel time and ﬁrst-
cycle amplitude.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.8
20 observed waveform data traces with the picked ﬁrst-arrival travel times
and ﬁrst-cycle amplitudes. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.9
Linear regression of corrected amplitude data as a function of ray path
length. The ﬁtted line intersects at −ln(A0).
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.1
Estimated bias for forward modeling errors for N=800 prior realizations.
Upper: Travel time, middle: Amplitude, lower: angle of the ray with
respect to horizontal. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
iv
==PAGE:7==
v
List of Figures
4.2
Covariance matrices for forward modeling errors estimated for N=800 prior
realizations. Left: Amplitude, Right: Travel time. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.3
Computed χ2 distributions related to the inferred distribution of modeling
errors and to actual samples from the computed modeling error.
Left:
Travel Time, Right: Amplitude. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.4
Reference models for velocity and attenuation structure. . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.5
Left: Least squares estimate for the velocity structure. Right: 5 realiza-
tions from the posterior distribution. The modeling error is accounted for
in the inversion. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.6
Left: Least squares estimate for the velocity structure. Right: 5 realiza-
tions from the posterior distribution. The modeling error is not accounted
for in the inversion. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.7
Left: Least squares estimate for the attenuation structure. Right: 5 real-
izations from the posterior distribution. The modeling error is accounted
for in the inversion. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.8
Left: Least squares estimate for the attenuation structure. Right: 5 re-
alizations from the posterior distribution. The modeling error is not ac-
counted for in the inversion. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.9
Least-squares estimates for ε and σ. Without modeling errors. . . . . . . .
47
4.10 Least-squares estimates for ε and σ. Modeling errors are accounted for. . .
48
4.11 Schematic illustration of code ﬂow in estimating source wavelets . . . . . .
50
4.12 Reduced ray coverage used in source wavelet estimation. . . . . . . . . . .
52
4.13 250 estimated source wavelets related to the 250 transmitter-receiver po-
sitions are obtained for each realization. The true wavelet is seen to be a
possible realization from the distribution of wavelets.
. . . . . . . . . . .
53
4.14 Left: Covariance matrix for noise model.
Right: Estimated covariance
matrix for data uncertainty from source wavelet estimation. . . . . . . . .
55
4.15 Estimated bias, dT , for data uncertainty from source wavelet estimation. .
55
4.16 χ2 distribution of the waveform diﬀerences,Ediﬀ, (left) and from the in-
ferred Gaussian distribution (right).
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
4.17 Estimated source wavelet, wlsq and reference wavelet, wtrue, used in FDTD
forward calculations in full waveform inversion. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
5.1
Log likelihood development as a function of iteration number.
. . . . . .
60
5.2
Correlation length as a function of the i’th posterior, i.e. "distance", from
the model that the correlation is calculated relative to. . . . . . . . . . . .
61
5.3
Reference models for ε and σ. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
5.4
6 independent realizations of ε from the posterior distribution to the full
waveform inversion. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
5.5
Mean (left) and variance (right) of 154 realizations of the posterior distri-
bution deﬁning the solution to the full waveform inverse problem. . . . . .
63
5.6
6 independent realizations of σ from the posterior distribution to the full
waveform inversion. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
5.7
Mean (left) and variance (right) of 154 realizations of the posterior distri-
bution deﬁning the solution to the full waveform inverse problem. . . . . .
65
==PAGE:8==
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
Cross-borehole ground penetrating radar (GPR) is a method widely used for characteri-
zation of shallow subsurface electrical properties. The crosshole GPR experiment consists
of a transmitting antenna that is lowered into one borehole and a receiving antenna placed
in an adjacent borehole (Cordua et al., 2012). The transmitting antenna generates pulses
of electromagnetic radiation that propagate through the subsurface and are recorded at
the receiving antenna. A tomographic data set can be obtained by ﬁxing the transmitting
antenna at one position in the borehole while the receiving antenna is moved between
multiple positions. The transmitting antenna is subsequently moved to a new location
and the recording process is repeated until an arbitrarily dense data set that suﬃciently
covers the inter-borehole region have been obtained (Cordua et al., 2012), see Figure 1.1.
The antennae used in crosshole GPR experiments are often assumed to be vertically
oriented dipole type antenna and the signal recorded by the receiving antenna is the
vertical component of the waveﬁeld (Holliger and Maurer, 2004). The central frequency
in the transmitted signal is typically in the order of 20 - 250 MHz, which yields dominating
wavelengths of 5 - 0.4 m in the subsurface (Ernst et al., 2007b; Klotzsche et al., 2010).
The distance between the boreholes are typically 5 - 20 m and the depth typically 5 - 100
m (e.g. Ernst et al., 2007a; Klotzsche et al., 2010; Keskinen et al., 2017).
The propagation of the waveﬁeld are governed by the electrical properties of the sub-
surface (Peterson, Jr., 2001). The applications of cross-hole ground penetrating radar are
numerous and span from delineation of structural properties to mapping of hydrological
1
==PAGE:10==
Chapter 1. Introduction
2
Figure 1.1: Sketch of cross borehole acquisition. The transmitting an-
tenna generates pulses of electromagnetic radiation that are recorded at
multiple antenna positions. Data obtained from all transmitter-receiver po-
sitions constitutes a tomographic data set. Figure adapted from Reynolds
(2011).
parameters. Lytle et al. (1979) and Moran and Greenﬁeld (1993) used cross-hole GPR
for mapping of tunnels and voids, Olsson et al. (1992) used cross-hole radar to detect
fracture zones in granite and Nielsen et al. (2010) used radar tomography to estimate
ﬁne-scale heterogeneity in chalk formations.
The electrical properties of the subsurface can be linked to hydrogeological param-
eters like salinity, water content and porosity through empirical equations (Archie, 1942;
Topp et al., 1980; Al Hagrey and Müller, 2000), hence crosshole GPR have been widely
applied in hydrogeophysical studies. Binley et al. (2002) and Looms et al. (2008) used
cross-hole GPR to monitor moisture content changes and ﬂow patterns in the unsatu-
rated zone, Klotzsche et al. (2010) used cross-hole GPR for aquifer characterization and
porosity estimation and Haarder et al. (2012) used cross-hole GPR for imaging tracer
migration arising from water injection.
For quantitative characterization of e.g. hydrological parameters, high resolution in
the estimated tomograms is necessary.
The waveﬁeld recorded at the receiving antenna consists of the direct transmitted
wave but also contains secondary events like forward scattered and refracted waves (Hol-
liger and Maurer, 2004; Klotzsche et al., 2010). Inversion of GPR data is traditionally
reduced to inversion of ﬁrst-arrival time time and ﬁrst-cycle amplitude data extracted
==PAGE:11==
3
from the recorded waveform data (Holliger et al., 2001; Giroux et al., 2007).
Tomo-
graphic inversion of travel time and amplitude data provides estimates of the velocity
and attenuation structure in the subsurface between the boreholes, respectively, which
subsequently can be employed to resolve the distribution of dielectric permittivity and
electrical conductivity (Zhou and Fullagar, 2001).
The area between the boreholes that predominantly inﬂuences the propagation of
the waveﬁeld is the ﬁrst Fresnel zone, (e.g. Spetzler and Snieder, 2004). The zone approx-
imates the shape of an ellipse that spans the area between the boreholes. The width of
the ﬁrst Fresnel zone, is given by (e.g. Williamson and Worthington, 1993),
√
λL, where
λ is the dominating frequency of the signal and L is the distance between the transmitter
and receiver. Tomographic inversion of travel time and amplitude data are often based on
ray-based schemes, where a high-frequency approximation is applied, in which the ﬁrst
Fresnel zone consequently collapses into a ray. Disregarding the full information available
in the waveform data results in relatively low-resolution ray-based tomograms, primarily
because only a fraction of the information from the waveform data is employed in the in-
version (Ernst et al., 2007a; van der Kruk, 2015). The resolution of ray-based tomograms
is in the order of the width of the ﬁrst Fresnel zone (Williamson and Worthington, 1993).
The ray-based scheme is not able to account for the reﬂected, refracted or scat-
tered components of the transmitted waveﬁeld (Holliger and Maurer, 2004), since this
information is not included in the ﬁrst-arrival travel time and ﬁrst-cycle amplitude data.
This means that the ray-assumption is violated, especially in inversion of amplitude data,
which have been shown to introduce artefacts in the attenuation tomograms, in particular
(Holliger and Maurer, 2004).
The ray-based approximation introduces uncertainties related to the forward rela-
tion. If the forward model is approximated or insuﬃciently described, errors are intro-
duced in the forward calculation of data and hence inﬂuence the solution to the inverse
problem.
Holliger and Maurer (2004) showed, that the lack of ability to account for
scattering and diﬀraction introduces artefacts in the attenuation tomograms obtained
from ray-based inversion of amplitude data. Cordua et al. (2008, 2009b) showed that
small-scale velocity ﬂuctuations near the antenna can contaminate velocity tomograms if
not accounted for. These type of errors are related to the incomplete description of the
model when using approximate forward models. Hansen et al. (2014) presented a method
which enables estimation of these type of forward modeling errors prior to the inversion.
Furthermore, they showed that if not accounted for, this forward modeling error will be
mapped in to the posterior probability distribution as artefacts.
The solution to the inverse problem is in a Bayesian framework formulated as a
probability distribution, which combines the a priori information with the information
==PAGE:12==
Chapter 1. Introduction
4
obtained by observations (Mosegaard and Tarantola, 1995; Tarantola, 2005). Realizations
from this posterior probability distribution can be used to characterize the solution to
the inverse problem, since all realizations from the posterior distribution represent the
statistics of the posterior probability distribution (Hansen et al., 2008). The solution
to the Bayesian inverse problem is hence not one model, but a range of models, which
contain variability consistent with the a priori information (Tarantola, 2005; Cordua et al.,
2009b). Crosshole tomography is an inverse problem that typically is under determined,
i.e. an inﬁnite number of possible subsurface realizations that ﬁt the data equally well.
The Bayesian formulation of the solution reﬂect the non-uniqueness as the solution to the
inverse problem is a range of (inﬁnitely many) realizations of the posterior probability
distribution (Hansen et al., 2008). Occasionally, ray-based tomograms are obtained from
deterministic least-squares inversion, where the solution is one model. The tomograms
are obtained from a least-squares inversion conditioned by data observations and some
regularization factor (Holliger et al., 2001). The least-squares-based estimate is the mean
of the posterior probability distribution, which provide a smooth model estimate that
lacks the relative high and low values (Cordua et al., 2009b), and may not be a very
realistic model of the subsurface, (Hansen et al., 2012). Deterministic ray-based estimates
are common (e.g. Ernst et al., 2007a; Klotzsche et al., 2010), but stochastic methods are
also used for ray-based inversion (e.g. Gloaguen et al., 2007; Nielsen et al., 2010; Haarder
et al., 2012).
In order to overcome the limitations of the ray-based approximation described above,
full waveform inversion algorithms have been developed. The full waveform approach
accurately describes the electromagnetic waveﬁeld propagation, and accounts for the in-
ﬂuence on waveform data from the Fresnel zone(s).
All available information in the
waveform data is taken into account during the inversion. Tarantola (1984, 1986) pre-
sented a full waveform inversion algorithm developed for inversion of seismic data. His
approach was based on a steepest descent optimization, where each iteration consisted of
a forward propagation in the current model, a back propagation of the residual waveforms
and a correlation between the forward and back propagated waveﬁelds. The calculated
correlation was used to determine the gradient of the optimization algorithm. Ernst et al.
(2007b) presented a 2D time-domain full waveform tomographic scheme for the inversion
of crosshole waveform data, where the inversion approach was adapted from the method
presented by Tarantola (1984). Ernst et al. (2007b,a) showed that the by including the
full waveform information in the inversion of crosshole data, the resolution was signiﬁ-
cantly improved compared to ray-based tomograms. The gradient-based (also referred
to as the adjoint method) algorithm presented by Ernst et al. (2007b) have been fur-
ther developed by Meles et al. (2010) to incorporate surface-to-borehole measurements,
in addition to crosshole measurements, and to simultaneously update the permittivity
==PAGE:13==
5
and conductivity parameter estimates. The gradient-based method is widely used for full
waveform inversion of crosshole GPR data (e.g. Klotzsche et al., 2010; Gueting et al.,
2017).
Uncertainty analysis of any solution to any problem is necessary and the gradient-
based full waveform inversion approach provides limited possibilities for uncertainty anal-
ysis of the obtained inverse estimate (Cordua et al., 2009a). Monte Carlo based inversion
methods provides means of uncertainty analysis of the estimated solution to the inverse
problem.
The Monte Carlo based full waveform inversion algorithm solves the inverse problem
based on a random process. The algorithm proposes a model and the Metropolis rule
(Mosegaard and Tarantola, 1995) decides, based on how the model ﬁts the data obser-
vations, if the proposed model is accepted as a realization of the posterior distribution
characterizing the solution to the inverse problem. The extended Metropolis sampler,
presented by Mosegaard and Tarantola (1995), can be used to sample realizations from
the posterior probability distribution. The extended Metropolis sampler is able to take
advantage of a priori information, which increases the computational eﬃciency of the sam-
pling algorithm (e.g. Hansen et al., 2012). The Bayesian approach to the inverse problem
will provide realizations from the a posteriori distribution, from which analysis of uncer-
tainty can be performed. In order to apply full waveform inversion algorithms, it must
be possible to perform calculations of the waveform data related to a given model. Ernst
et al. (2007b) presented a 2D time-domain full waveform inversion scheme, where calcu-
lations of waveform data were obtained through a ﬁnite-diﬀerence time-domain (FDTD)
solution to Maxwell’s equations.
An estimate of the source wavelet, used in FDTD forward calculations of waveform
data, is necessary for the full waveform inversion. The estimation of the source wavelet is
based on the deconvolution method (Ernst et al., 2007a). The source wavelet estimate is
traditionally based on the ray-based least squares tomograms for dielectric permittivity
and conductivity (Ernst et al., 2007a; Klotzsche et al., 2010). This source wavelet estimate
neglects the uncertainty related the variability in the posterior probability distribution
to the ray-based inversion. Cordua et al. (2012) discuss that the uncertainty related to
the source wavelet determined from the deconvolution method needs to be quantiﬁed or
a Bayesian formulation of the source pulse could be integrated in the inversion.
The Environment at Arrenæs
Numerous crosshole GPR investigations have been conducted on data from Arrenæs, in
Northern Sealand, Denmark, see Figure 1.2a. Waveform data have been investigated by
both ray-based inversion (e.g. Cordua et al., 2008, 2009a; Looms et al., 2010), and Monte
==PAGE:14==
Chapter 1. Introduction
6
(a) Location of the Arrenæs ﬁeld site.
GPR borehole
Tomographic profiles
4
3
2
1
~3.6 m
~3.6 m
GPR borehole
Tomographic profiles
4
3
2
1
GPR borehole
Tomographic profiles
4
3
2
1
~3.6 m
~3.6 m
~3.6 m
(b) Relative location of GPR bore-
holes.
Diagonal tomographic proﬁle
is ∼5 m.
Figure 1.2:
Arrenæs ﬁeld site in Denmark.
Figures with courtesy of
Cordua et al. (2009a)
Carlo based full waveform inversion strategies (Cordua et al., 2009a; Scholer et al., 2012).
The a priori information and antenna geometry in this synthetic study is chosen so it
resembles the environment and earlier studies at Arrenæs. The near-surface geological
conditions at the Arrenæs site are characterized by an ∼30 m layer of unsaturated allu-
vial sand sediments, with the groundwater table located at ∼20 - 30 m. The overlying
sediments consist primarily of successive layers of sands with varying fractions of silt and
clay (Looms et al., 2008; Scholer et al., 2012).
The anisotropy in the subsurface in area were investigated by Hansen et al. (2008).
Their investigations showed a layered subsurface with diﬀerent horizontal and vertical
correlation lengths. The most probable correlation length in the area was found to be
hmax = 8.5 for the horizontal and hmin = 2.4 for the vertical correlation length. The
boreholes that were intended for GPR studies are 12 m deep and placed 5 m apart,
so the widest obtainable cross section is approximately 5 m wide and 12 m deep, see
Figure 1.2b. Since the cross section between the boreholes is above the ground water
table, the studies in this area concerns the unsaturated zone. The data at Arrenæs were
acquired with 100 MHz antennae (see Looms et al., 2008, for details).
==PAGE:15==
7
1.1. Motivation and Aim
1.1
Motivation and Aim
The motivation for this study arises from the necessity for high-resolution tomographic
subsurface estimates in e.g. hydrogeological investigations of e.g. ﬂow patterns in glacial
deposits. Knowledge of these ﬂow patterns can, as an example, be used to create maps
of areas with high groundwater vulnerability, which provide the necessary knowledge to
exploit water resources in a sustainable manner.
The aim of this thesis is ﬁrst to quantify and incorporate a forward modeling error
that statistically accounts for the ray-based approximation employed in ray-based inver-
sion of travel time and amplitude data, and secondly to quantify the forward modeling
error that arises from the uncertainty related to the estimate of a source wavelet and to
test whether the incorporation of such a modeling error allows the Monte Carlo based full
waveform algorithm to obtain representative realizations from the posterior probability
distribution.
Approach
This study is a purely synthetic study. A reference model used as the true subsurface
is drawn as a prior realization of a prior model assumed to be representative for the
subsurface at the Arrenæs ﬁeld site. To obtain an "observed" data set of waveform data,
a FDTD algorithm (Ernst et al., 2007b) is used for calculation of a synthetic data set. A
realistic noise level is added to the waveform data to obtain an observed waveform data
set, and ﬁrst-arrival travel time and ﬁrst-cycle amplitude data are extracted from the
waveform data.
Tomographic estimates of the subsurface distributions of the radar phase velocity
and attenuation are obtained by inversion of travel time and amplitude data, respectively.
The data are inverted using a ray-based approach with straight-ray approximation, and
the solution to the inverse problem is hence obtained by linear inversion.
Prior to the inversion, the modeling error introduced from using a straight-ray ap-
proximation to the forward problem is quantiﬁed following the approach presented in
Hansen et al. (2014). A Gaussian probability distribution, characterized by a bias, dT ,
and a covariance, CT , describing the modeling error is obtained. A forward modeling
error distribution is inferred for both travel time and amplitude tomography. The esti-
mated forward modeling error is incorporated in the ray-based inversion of travel time
and amplitude data. The travel time and amplitude data are inverted with and with-
out accounting for the modeling error to demonstrate the importance of including the
modeling error, in particular in the amplitude inversion.
A method for estimating the forward modeling error that arises from the uncertainty
related to the source wavelet estimate required in the full waveform inversion is presented.
==PAGE:16==
Chapter 1. Introduction
8
This method utilizes the generality of the method presented in Hansen et al. (2014). The
key to the method presented is the ability to generate multiple realizations of the source
wavelet, that reﬂect the variability in the posterior distribution to the ray-based inversion
of travel time and amplitude. A Gaussian probability distribution, characterized by a
bias, dT , and a covariance, CT , describing the forward modeling error associated with
the source wavelet uncertainty is obtained.
This modeling error is incorporated in a Monte Carlo based full waveform inversion
and it is demonstrated that the Monte Carlo algorithm is able to obtain realizations from
the posterior probability distribution.
==PAGE:17==
2
Theory
2.1
FDTD Simulation of Waveform Data
To be able to perform full-waveform inversion of observed waveform data from ground
penetrating radar (GPR) cross-hole investigations, it is crucial to use a detailed forward
modeling program that accurately describes the vectorial electromagnetic waveﬁeld prop-
agation (van der Kruk, 2015).
Realistic forward modeling of waveﬁeld propagation in heterogeneous media can be
obtained using a ﬁnite-diﬀerence time-domain (FDTD) solution to Maxwell’s equations
in Cartesian coordinates, which was developed as a part of a full-waveform inversion
scheme presented by Ernst et al. (2007a,b). In a standard crosshole GPR experiment the
transmitter and receiver are dipole-type and commonly oriented in a near-vertical direc-
tion, which implies that the transmitted and received signal corresponds predominantly
to the vertical component of the electric ﬁeld (Holliger and Maurer, 2004). For this type
of conﬁguration, the electric ﬁeld component of interest is the vertical component, paral-
lel to the borehole axis, hence the transverse electric (TE) mode of Maxwell’s equations
are used (Ernst et al., 2007b). These equations are solved by using a grid-based ﬁnite-
diﬀerence approach that yields second order accuracy in both time and space (Ernst et al.,
2007a). The FDTD algorithm provides grid-based time-domain calculations of the EM
waveﬁeld propagation (Cordua et al., 2009a). The physical properties of the subsurface
that govern the propagation of the electromagnetic waveﬁeld are deﬁned in a grid cover-
9
==PAGE:18==
Chapter 2. Theory
10
ing the subsurface area of interest. A simulated electric ﬁeld is then emitted from selected
grid cells, representing the positions of transmitting antennae, and temporal and spatial
changes of the resulting electromagnetic ﬁeld is calculated throughout the deﬁned grid
using a time-dependent form of Maxwell’s equations (Cordua et al., 2009a). The edges of
the deﬁned model area are surrounded by a generalized perfectly matched layer (GPML),
which act as an absorbing boundary implemented to avoid artiﬁcial reﬂections from the
edges (Ernst et al., 2007a; Fang and Wu, 1996). FDTD calculations are applied in this
thesis to obtain a synthetic waveform data set and to perform the forward calculations
of waveform data in full-waveform inversion.
The propagation and attenuation of EM waves are governed by the conductivity, σ,
the dielectric constant, ε, and the magnetic permeability, µ, of the subsurface (e.g. Zhou
and Fullagar, 2001). The radar phase velocity, v, and attenuation, α, are related to the
distributions of the dielectric permittivity, ε, and the electric conductivity, σ, through
the equations (see e.g. Reynolds, 2011)
v(ε, σ) =
c
v
u
u
tεrµr
2
 r
1 +
 σ
ωε
2
+ 1
!
(2.1)
α(ε, σ) = ω
v
u
u
tεµ
2
 r
1 +
 σ
ωε
2
−1
!
(2.2)
where c is the speed of electromagnetic waves in free space, c = 299792458 m/s and
ω = 2πf is the angular frequency, where f is the signal frequency (Hz).
εr is the
relative dielectric permittivity given by ε/ε0, where ε0 is the free space permittivity
(ε0 = 1/(c2µ0) = 8.854 · 10−8 F/m). µr is the relative magnetic permeability given by
µ/µ0, where µ0 is the free space magnetic permeability (4π · 10−7). µr is assumed to
be approximately one for most geological materials (e.g. Davis and Annan, 1989) hence
µ ≈µ0.
The relations above, equation (2.1) and (2.2), can be rewritten to give the dielec-
tric permittivity and conductivity distributions in terms of the attenuation and velocity
distributions (Zhou and Fullagar, 2001).
σ = 2α
µv
(2.3)
ε = 1
µ
 1
v2 −
α
ω
2
≈
1
µ0v2 .
(2.4)
==PAGE:19==
11
2.2. Inverse Problem Theory
Since we are in the radar regime (20 - 250 MHz (e.g. Ernst et al., 2007a)), the expression
for the dielectric permittivity can be approximated by a high-frequency approximation
(Ernst et al., 2007b), equation (2.4).
It should be noted in equation (2.3), that the estimate for the conductivity distri-
bution depends on both the obtained distribution for attenuation and velocity, whereas
the distribution for the dielectric permittivity solely depends on the velocity distribution
in the high-frequency approximation.
2.2
Inverse Problem Theory
Consider a subsurface that can be described by a discrete set of model parameters, m, and
a given set of observed data, d, that are indirect observations of the model parameters.
The model parameters describe some physical properties of the subsurface, that inﬂuence
the data.
The physical relation between the model parameters and the data can be
expressed as the possibly nonlinear operator, g(·).
Hence, the forward problem that
relates the model parameters, m, to data, d, through the mapping operator, g(·), can be
expressed as:
d = g(m).
(2.5)
The associated inverse problem consists of using a given set of observed data, d, and a for-
ward model, g(·), to infer information about the model parameters, m, that characterize
the subsurface.
In a probabilistic Bayesian framework, the general solution to the inverse problem
is formulated as probability distribution, (e.g. Tarantola, 2005)
σM(m) = kρM(m)L(m)
(2.6)
where k is a normalization factor, ρM(m) is the a priori probability distribution describing
the prior information on the model parameters (obtained independently from the observed
data). The likelihood function, L(m), is a measure of the degree of ﬁt between data
predicted from the model, m and the observed data (Mosegaard and Tarantola, 1995),
and is given by (e.g. Tarantola, 2005)
L(m) =
Z
D
ρD(g(m))θ(d|m)
µD(d)
dd
(2.7)
where ρD(d) describes data measurement uncertainties, θ(d|m) is a probabilistic formu-
lation of the forward problem that describes the probability of a set of calculated data
given a model, m (Tarantola, 2005; Hansen et al., 2014). This probability distribution
==PAGE:20==
Chapter 2. Theory
12
is based on a probability distribution Λ(d|m) for the modeling error that describes the
uncertainty related to a forward modeled data set due to a possibly uncertain forward
relation d = g(m) (Hansen et al., 2014). A schematic illustration of θ(d|m) and Λ(d|m)
is shown in Figure 2.1.
Figure 2.1: Schematic illustration of the modeling error and the possibly
uncertain forward relation. (a) No modeling errors - the relation d = g(m)
is exact. The associated modeling error, (c), is a delta function, δ(d). (b)
The forward modeling, θ(d|m), in the case of an approximate stationary
Gaussian modeling error, seen in (d), Λ(d|m) = N(dT , CT ), obtained in
the vicinity of ρM(m) (dotted line). Yellow curve: maximum of θ(d|m)
distribution. Figure adapted from Hansen et al. (2014).
In the special case, where the forward relation is linear or can be approximated by
a linear relation, equation (2.5) can be expressed as
d = Gm
(2.8)
where G is a linear mapping operator. The inverse problem is considered linear, when
the mapping operator, G, is independent of the model, m.
If the inverse problem is linear, d = Gm, and the a priori information on both the
data uncertainties and the model parameters can be described by a Gaussian probability
distribution, the posterior probability distribution, σM(m), is also Gaussian (Tarantola,
2005).
==PAGE:21==
13
2.3. Ray-based Inversion of Travel Time and Amplitude Data
The solution to the inverse problem is the posterior probability distribution, that,
if Gaussian, can be fully described by the center of the distribution, the mean, ˜m and
model covariance matrix, ˜CM (e.g. Tarantola, 2005).
˜m = mprior + CMGT  GCMGT + CD
−1 (dobs −Gmprior)
(2.9)
˜CM = CM −CMGT  GCMGT + CD
−1 GCM
(2.10)
where the prior information on the model parameters characterizing the subsurface is
given by the a priori mean, mprior, and the model covariance matrix, CM. The observed
data are given by, dobs, and the associated data uncertainties are given by the covariance
matrix, CD.
If there are uncertainties associated with the forward relation, modeling errors are
introduced in the forward calculation and hence inﬂuence the solution to the inverse
problem. In the case of Gaussian modeling errors, see Figure 2.1 b) and d), that are
deﬁned by N(dT , CT ), the data covariance matrix is deﬁned by CD = Cd + CT , where
Cd deﬁnes the data measurement error covariance and CT the modeling error covariance.
The data uncertainty bias is deﬁned by dD = dd + dT , where dd describes a bias in the
measurement uncertainties that is often assumed to be zero and the bias, dT is the bias
of the modeling errors.
The mean of the Gaussian posterior distribution, ˜m, is equivalent to the least-
squares estimator and the posterior uncertainties are represented by ˜CM (Tarantola,
2005).
2.3
Ray-based Inversion of Travel Time and Amplitude Data
From a data set of observed waveform data, ﬁrst arrival travel time and ﬁrst cycle ampli-
tude data can be extracted. Inversion of travel time and amplitude data yield estimates
of the subsurface distribution of the radar phase velocity and attenuation, respectively.
2.3.1
Travel time inversion
When the waveﬁeld propagates between the transmitter and the receiver, the waveﬁeld
is inﬂuenced by the region deﬁned by the ﬁrst Fresnel zone. In ray-based methods the
frequency of the propagating wave is approximated to be inﬁnite, which collapses the
Fresnel zone into a ray.
The ray-path between two points, i.e.
a transmitter and a
receiver position, is the path that minimizes the travel time. This implies that rays tend
to "bend" around low velocity zones and "concentrate" in high-velocity zones (Giroux
et al., 2007). Hence the velocity variations in the subsurface cause bending ray-paths.
The aim of travel time inversion is to obtain an estimate of the velocity distribution
==PAGE:22==
Chapter 2. Theory
14
between the boreholes. The travel time is related to the velocity through the slowness, s,
s = 1/v, the reciprocal of the velocity, through the line integral along the ray path: (e.g
Giroux et al., 2007; Peterson, Jr., 2001)
t =
Z
ray
s(l)dl
(2.11)
The mapping operator, g(·), contains information on how long the i’th ray has
traveled though the j’th grid cell. For bending rays, the travel time inversion problem is
hence non-linear since the mapping operator is dependent on the model, m, describing
the subsurface velocity distribution.
A simple and fast approach is to assume straight ray-paths. This makes the ray-
paths independent of the subsurface velocity distribution, which consequently simpliﬁes
the inversion of travel time data to a linear problem. The linear mapping operator, G,
contains information on the ray paths in the grid cells and the row sum of G is the length
of the individual ray-paths (Cordua et al., 2009a).
li =
N
X
j=1
Gij
(2.12)
where li is the ray path length associated with the i’th travel time datum and N is the
total number of observed travel time data, i.e. number of rays. The larger the velocity
contrasts, the more will the ray-path of the approximated straight rays deviate from the
bending rays. In the straight-ray formulation, the solution to inversion of travel time
data can be described by equation (2.9) and (2.10).
2.3.2
Amplitude inversion (tomography)
The aim of amplitude data inversion is to obtain an estimate of the attenuation structure
between the boreholes.
The amplitude measured at the receiver Am is an exponential decay of the initial
signal amplitude, due to attenuation of the signal as it propagates between the source
and receiver. The measured amplitude must, however, be corrected for the radiation
patterns of the antennae, ΘTxΘRx, the geometric spreading of the wave and the antennae
gain eﬀect, A0. The measured amplitude of the electric waveﬁeld propagating in a 2D
homogeneous media (Holliger and Maurer, 2004), can be expressed as (e.g. Zhou and
Fullagar, 2001; Giroux et al., 2007):
Am = A0 exp

−
Z
α(l)dl
 ΘTxΘRx
√
l
(2.13)
==PAGE:23==
15
2.3. Ray-based Inversion of Travel Time and Amplitude Data
where ΘTx, ΘRx deﬁnes the angle dependent radiation patterns of the transmitter and
receiver antennae, respectively. α(l) is the attenuation along the ray path, l, the factor
√
l accounts for the geometrical spreading (Singh and Sinha, 2013), and A0 is a normal-
ization factor that depends on the combined eﬀects of transmitter and receiver gain and
antenna eﬃciency (Holliger et al., 2001). The expression in equation (2.13) is valid for
far-ﬁeld wave propagation. The far-ﬁeld assumption is satisﬁed when the distance from
the transmitter, R, meet the condition (Cordua et al., 2009a):
R >> λ
2π
where, λ, is the dominating frequency of the signal. In typical cross-borehole ground
penetrating radar measurement setups, this assumption is satisﬁed. The angle dependent
radiation eﬀects are approximated with ΘTx = ΘRx = cos(φ). Where φ is the ray angle
with horizontal (Holliger and Maurer, 2004).
Equation (2.13) can be linearized by taking the natural logarithm of both sides,
which yields:
Z
α(l)dl = ln(A0) + ln(ΘTxΘRx) −ln(Am
√
l) ⇒
(2.14)
τ =
Z
α(l)dl
(2.15)
where τ = ln(A0) + ln(ΘTxΘRx) −ln(Am
√
l).
(2.16)
This relates the corrected amplitude, the pseudo travel time, τ, to the attenuation, α in
the same form as the travel time is related to the slowness, see equation (2.11), which
implies that the method used to solve equation (2.11) are applicable for equation (2.15).
Since the ray paths are not aﬀected by the attenuation structure of the subsurface, the
inverse problem of amplitude inversion is linear, and the solution can be determined from
equation (2.9) and (2.10).
Prior to inversion of amplitude data, the measured amplitude data must be cor-
rected. The distances needed for geometric spreading correction sre obtained from the
linear operator, G from the linear travel time inversion, equation (2.12). The antennae
gain eﬀects, A0, is generally unknown, but is assumed to be constant for a given survey
(Holliger et al., 2001; Peterson, Jr., 2001; Zhou and Fullagar, 2001). A0 is estimated prior
to the inversion. The antennae gain eﬀect, A0, is determined from linear regression of
corrected amplitudes as a function of ray length. The ﬁtted line intercepts at −ln(A0)
(Zhou and Fullagar, 2001; Holliger et al., 2001).
==PAGE:24==
Chapter 2. Theory
16
2.3.3
Accounting for imperfect forward modeling
As outlined in Section 2.2, the forward relation can be described as a probability dis-
tribution, θ(d|m). This distribution is based on a probability distribution, Λ(d|m), the
modeling error, that describes the uncertainty related to a forward modeled data set, and
a possibly uncertain forward relation, d = g(m) (Hansen et al., 2014).
If an approximate forward relation is chosen, errors are introduced in the forward
problem, hence in the data calculations and consequently in the solution to the inverse
problem (Hansen et al., 2014). Accounting for the introduced modeling error leads to a
solution that corresponds to that of the best forward model, but the resolution will be
lower due to a higher total noise level.
Here, an approximate straight-ray forward relation is used for ray-based inversion of
travel time and amplitude data. This simpliﬁes the inverse problem to a linear problem
and is computationally eﬃcient. The best forward model, would be solving the non-linear
inverse problem using a Monte-Carlo based approach, and forward calculating the travel
time and amplitude data by a FDTD calculation of waveform data followed by picking
of travel time and amplitude data. Although the full waveform forward modeling is the
most precise method for forward calculation of data, it itself i associated with forward
modeling errors. The method is 2D isotropic and is second-order accurate in space and
time. One could choose a 3D anisotropic code for increased accuracy and higher order
ﬁnite-diﬀerence schemes for improved modeling accuracy. Hansen et al. (2014). These
modeling errors are not accounted for in this study.
If an error-free theoretical forward relation is assumed, which implies that modeling
uncertainties are negligible, the probability distribution θ(d|m), collapses into a delta
function (Tarantola, 2005; Hansen et al., 2014). For the best known forward relation
(calculation of full-waveform data followed by picking of travel time and amplitude data),
the relation is assumed to be known exactly:
θ(d|m)fw = δ(d −g(m))
For forward calculations using the straight-ray approximation, the forward relation is
linear and is in practice assumed to be known exactly, but since it is acknowledged that
modeling errors are associated with this assumption, modeling errors are accounted for,
and the probability distribution θ(d|m), for the forward relation is deﬁned by:
θ(d|m)sr = Λ(d −Gm)
If the modeling error is disregarded, the modeling error can introduce apparently
well-resolved features in the posterior probability distribution, that in reality are an eﬀect
==PAGE:25==
17
2.3. Ray-based Inversion of Travel Time and Amplitude Data
of mapping the modeling error into the posterior probability distribution (Hansen et al.,
2014). Existence of a bias in the modeling error may cause the location of the apparent
least-squares model to be displaced from the actual least-squares model (Hansen et al.,
2014; Lekić and Romanowicz, 2011).
If the distribution for the modeling error, Λ(d|m), can be described by a Gaussian
probability distribution, with mean dT and covariance CT , N(dT , CT ), measurement
uncertainties and modeling errors can be accounted for through addition of the covariance
models describing measurement uncertainties Cd and modeling errors CT (a schematic
illustration of Gaussian modeling errors is shown in Figure 2.1). In the case of Gaussian
measurement uncertainties, N(dd, Cd), and modeling errors, N(dT , CT ), the likelihood
function can be expressed as (Hansen et al., 2014):
L(m) = k exp

−1
2(g(m) −dobs −dD)TC−1
D (g(m) −dobs −dD)

(2.17)
where dD = dd + dT and CD = Cd + CT .
To quantify the modeling error, a sample from the probability distribution describing
the modeling error must be generated and subsequently a Gaussian distributed modeling
error can be inferred based on this sample.
A sample, M = [m′
1, m′
2, ..., m′
N], that represents a sample of N realizations from the
a priori probability distribution ρM(m). The best forward model is denoted, gbest, and
the approximate linear model is denoted, gapp. The corresponding data related to the best
forward model, Dbest = gbest(m), and the approximate forward model, Dapp = gapp(m),
is represented in the matrices, where each column in Dbest and Dapp contains the data
related to the i’th realization from the a priori probability distribution ρM(m): dex,i and
dapp,i. A sample, in the form of N realizations, from the unknown probability distribution
describing the modeling error, Λ(d|m), can be calculated as:
DΛ = Dbest −Dapp
Stationarity of Λ(d|m) around the a priori acceptable models is assumed, which implies
that the shape of the distribution, Λ(d|m), is the same for all values of m (Hansen et al.,
2014).
In the case of assumed Gaussian modeling errors, Λ(d|m) = N(dT , CT ), the mean
==PAGE:26==
Chapter 2. Theory
18
value (bias), dT , and the covariance matrix, CT , can be estimated from:
dTest =

d1
Test, d2
Test, ..., dN
Test

(2.18)
where
di
Test = 1
N
N
X
i=1
(Di,j
best −Di,j
app)
CTest = 1
N DdiﬀD′
diﬀ
(2.19)
where
Ddiﬀ= [DΛ −DTest]
and
DTest =

d′
Test, d′
Test, ..., d′
Test

.
The estimates of dTest and CTest approach the exact estimates of dT and CT as the
number of realizations from the prior distribution increase, hence the larger the sample,
M, from the prior distribution the better statistics about the modeling error can be
inferred (see Hansen et al., 2014).
Whether the estimated Gaussian distribution for the modeling error, N(dT , CT ),
is a good representation of the actual modeling error, Λ(d|m), depends on whether the
Gaussian assumption about the modeling errors is valid. The validity of the Gaussian as-
sumption is tested through the χ2 distribution (Hansen et al., 2014). The χ2 distribution
of the modeling errors is calculated from:
χ2
i = (dΛ,i −dTest)TCTest(dΛ,i −dTest)
(2.20)
N χ2 values are computed for the actual sample of the modeling errors DΛ = [dΛ,1, dΛ,2,
..., dΛ,N]. If DΛ can be considered as a sample from the inferred Gaussian distribution,
N(dT , CT ), a sample of N realizations from the Gaussian distribution will follow the
same distribution as the actual sample, DΛ.
The resulting solution to the inverse problem, the posterior probability distribution,
is an approximation to the solution of the full inverse problem that would be obtained
using the best forward model (calculation of full-waveform data followed by picking of
travel time and amplitude data).
The noise model used will have higher magnitudes than using the full forward model,
since the modeling uncertainties are added to the measurement uncertainties, dD =
dd + dT and CD = Cd + CT . Model parameters will hence be less resolved than if using
the exact forward model, but features that appear well resolved using the approximate
model will be consistent with the subsurface (if the noise model has been adequately
described).
==PAGE:27==
19
2.4. Full Waveform Inversion
2.4
Full Waveform Inversion
2.4.1
Monte Carlo sampling
As described in Section 2.2, equation (2.6), the solution to the inverse problem can, in a
Bayesian framework, be considered to be a probability density function.
σM(m) = kρM(m)L(m)
In the case that the forward relation can be linearized, as in the straight-ray ap-
proximation, the posterior distribution characterizing the solution can be can be obtained
analytically, see equation (2.9) and (2.10). In the case of a highly non-linear problem,
sampling may be the only way to characterize the a posteriori distribution, (Mosegaard,
2006).
For Monte-Carlo based methods, closed-form expressions for the prior and posterior
distributions are not required. But algorithms that can sample the a priori and a pos-
terior probability distributions are. The extended Metropolis algorithm (Mosegaard and
Tarantola, 1995) is used to sample the posterior probability density. In order to be able to
sample the posterior distribution, the extended Metropolis sampler requires an algorithm
that is able to sample the a priori probability density, ρM(m), and an algorithm that is
able to evaluate the likelihood function, L(m). Sampling of the prior is accomplished by
Sequential Gibbs sampling (Hansen et al., 2012), see Section 2.4.1.
The Metropolis algorithm iteratively samples the a posteriori probability distribu-
tion following the steps outlined below (see e.g. Cordua et al., 2012; Mosegaard and
Tarantola, 1995)
For each iteration a realization of the prior probability density, a current model,
mcurrent is perturbed into a new realization of the prior model, a proposed candidate
model, mproposed.
The waveform data associated with the proposed model, mproposed, is calculated
(FDTD forward simulation) in order to evaluate the likelihood, L(mproposed)
The move to the proposed model, mpropose, is accepted with the Metropolis accep-
tance probability, Pacc:
Pacc = min

1, L(mpropose)
L(mcurrent)

(2.21)
where L(mpropose)/L(mcurrent) is the ratio between the likelihood evaluated in the pro-
posed and current model, respectively (Hansen et al., 2012).
• If L(mpropose)/L(mcurrent) > 1 ⇒Pacc = 1 and mproposed is chosen as the current
model, mcurrent, for next iteration.
==PAGE:28==
Chapter 2. Theory
20
• If L(mpropose)/L(mcurrent) < 1, the acceptance probability, Pacc, is tested against a
random number.
– If rand ≤Pacc, mproposed is chosen as the current model, mcurrent, for next
iteration.
– If rand > Pacc, mcurrent is reused as the current model and the proposed model
is rejected.
The models accepted by the Metropolis algorithm is considered samples of the a posteriori
probability density. The iterative process described above are repeated until a suﬃcient
number of samples have been obtained.
The Metropolis-Hastings algorithm is a Markov Chain because the transition prob-
ability only depends on the current state, i.e. the process has no memory.
Since the proposed model, mproposed, is a realization of the prior in the vicinity
of the current model, mcurrent, following samples of the posterior distributions are not
independent (Tarantola, 2005). The "distance" between two independent samples of the
posterior is estimated on the basis of cross-correlation analysis subsequent to the full-
waveform inversion.
Prior sampling
The algorithm VISIM (Volume average Integration SIMulation) is used to generate sam-
ples of the a prior probability density through sequential simulation. For sampling of
non-Gaussian priors Hansen et al. (2012) presented an algorithm called Sequential Gibbs.
From a current realization of a prior model, mcurrent, a square subarea with the side
length deﬁned by the step size is randomly chosen and the model parameters within the
subarea are treated as unknown. The unknown model parameters are resimulated condi-
tional to the known model parameters in mcurrent using sequential simulation within the
subarea (Cordua et al., 2012). The resimulated parameters honors the prior probability
density and the new model with the resimulated parameters, mproposed, is a realization of
the a priori probability density. For further details on sequential simulation and Gibbs
sampling, see Hansen et al. (2012)
Likelihood evaluation
The likelihood function is a measure of how well the data associated with a given model
ﬁt the observed data.
The likelihood function reﬂects the form of the uncertainties, i.e. if the uncertainties
can be assumed to be Gaussian, the form of the likelihood function is also Gaussian. If the
uncertainties can be described by a Gaussian model, N(dD, CD), the likelihood function
takes the form below. The total likelihood for a given model can be computed from the
==PAGE:29==
21
2.4. Full Waveform Inversion
product of the likelihood for each transmitter-receiver position. Generalized from Cordua
et al. (2012) and Hansen et al. (2014).
L(m) = c
K
Y
k=1
exp

−1
2(g(m)k −dk
obs −dD))TC−1
D (g(m)k −dk
obs −dD)

(2.22)
where g(m)k and dk
obs are vectors that contain the simulated and observed waveform
data related to the k’th receiver/transmitter pair. K is the total number of traces and c
is a normalization constant. CD is the N x N data covariance matrix that describes the
data measurement uncertainties and the modeling error.
2.4.2
Source wavelet estimation
The source wavelet is a critical input to the full-waveform inversion. It is only possible
to match the measured waveform data, including any small variations, if an eﬀective
source wavelet estimate is obtained (Klotzsche et al., 2010). The estimation of the source
wavelet is based on the deconvolution method (Ernst et al., 2007a). The observed data
can be viewed as a convolution of the true source wavelet with the true impulse response
of the subsurface (e.g. Kearey et al., 2002).
Eobs = Mtrue ∗wtrue = ˆ
Mtrue ˆwtrue
Hence, the true source wavelet can, in principle, be obtained by deconvolving the radar
data with the true impulse response of the subsurface (Ernst et al., 2007a). The true im-
pulse response of the subsurface is not known, but can be estimated. Fourier transformed
quantities are indicated by "ˆ" .
First, an initial estimate of source wavelet, winit, is obtained. This estimate can be
an average of recorded waveform data from horizontal traces (e.g. Cordua et al., 2009a;
Klotzsche et al., 2010; Ernst et al., 2007a; Keskinen et al., 2017), but any wavelet with
comparable length and frequency content as expected to be found in the true source
pulse, can be used (Ernst et al., 2007a). A synthetic waveform data set, Esyn is then
computed on the basis of the ray-based inversion estimates of ε and σ by FDTD simulation
with the initial wavelet estimate winit as source wavelet. Then, the synthetic waveform
data set, Esyn, and the initial source wavelet estimate, winit, is transformed into the
frequency domain: ˆEsyn, ˆwinit. A frequency domain estimate of the impulse response of
the subsurface is computed by deconvolution of the initial wavelet estimate, ˆwinit, and
the synthetic dataset, ˆEsyn. In the frequency domain, the impulse response estimate,
==PAGE:30==
Chapter 2. Theory
22
ˆ
Mest, is obtained by dividing ˆEsyn with ˆwinit.
ˆ
Mest = ˆEsyn ( ˆwinit)−1
(2.23)
A better wavelet estimate, ˆwest can now be computed by deconvolution of the estimated
impulse response, ˆ
Mest, with the observed dataset, ˆEobs.
ˆwest =

ˆ
Mest
−1 ˆEobs
(2.24)
The time domain estimated source wavelet, west, is obtained by an inverse Fourier trans-
formation of the frequency domain source wavelet estimate: ˆwest
IFFT
−−−−→west. A wavelet
is estimated for each transmitter-receiver position.
A single wavelet estimate can be obtained by stacking all the wavelets related to the
individual transmitter-receiver positions, and this mean wavelet, wav, can then be used as
source wavelet in full-waveform inversion. The source wavelet is traditionally estimated
based on the least-squares ray-based tomograms for the dielectric permittivity, ε, and the
electric conductivity, σ. In this case the average wavelet is referred to as wlsq. However,
by ignoring the variability of wavelets associated with the individual transmitter-receiver
positions and the posterior variability of ray-based inversion results, information about
the wavelet is lost.
2.4.3
Accounting for forward modeling error from source wavelet real-
ization variability
Recall, that if modeling errors are present in the forward relation, the probabilistic for-
mulation of the forward relation that describes the probability of a set of calculated data,
d, given a model, m, are given by θ(d|m) = Λ(d −g(m)).
When a mean wavelet, wlsq, is used as source pulse input in the full-waveform inver-
sion, the forward model is approximated and the modeling errors are assumed negligible:
θapp(d|m) = δ(d −g(m))
(2.25)
However, variability in the source wavelet estimate arises from variability in the pos-
terior distribution characterizing the solution to the ray-based inversion and from the
variance around the mean wavelet estimate due to variations in the wavelets related to
the individual transmitter-receiver positions.
The most exact method is to retain this variability in the forward modeling. By
using all estimated wavelets from equation (2.24) and estimating the source wavelets based
on the realizations from the posterior distribution, σM(m), to the ray-based inversion,
the source wavelet used in the full waveform inversion is represented by a probability
==PAGE:31==
23
2.4. Full Waveform Inversion
distribution and the forward relation is hence a probability distribution:
θbest(d|m) = Λ(d −g(m))
(2.26)
If it is assumed that the data uncertainty that arises from the uncertainty related to
using an approximate forward gapp(m, wlsq) instead of the best possible forward based
on the full variability of wavelet gbest(m, w(σM(m))) can be described by a Gaussian
distribution, N(dT , CT ), this forward modeling error can be accounted for in the full-
waveform inversion in the same manner as outlined in Section 2.3.3.
Consider a sample, Mprior = [m′
1, m′
2, ..., m′
N], that represents a sample of N re-
alizations from the a priori probability distribution, ρM(m). In the i’th realization of
the prior probability distribution, a data set of travel time and amplitude data is calcu-
lated from full waveform forward modeling followed by picking travel time and amplitude
data. The travel time and amplitude data are inverted following the ray-based inversion
method described in Section 2.3, and the solution is the posterior probability distribu-
tion, N( ˜m, ˜C). A sample Mpost = [m′
1, m′
2, ..., m′
K] represents K realizations from the a
posteriori probability distribution from the ray-based inversion.
A waveform data set is calculated based on the k’th realization from the posterior
probability distribution that is the solution to the ray-based inversion of the data related
to the i’th realization of the prior model. The source wavelet is the wavelet uniquely
determined for the j’th transmitter-receiver position, estimated following the method
outlined in Section 2.4.2, equation (2.24). The waveform data trace calculated for the
j’th transmitter-receiver position is denoted: dijk
best = gbest(mi
prior, wj
est(mk
post)).
This
data set constitutes a realization from the forward distribution, θbest in equation (2.26).
A waveform data set is calculated based on the least-squares model obtained from
the ray-based inversion of the data related to the i’th realization of the prior model. The
source wavelet is the mean source wavelet, wav, estimated following the method outlined
in Section 2.4.2. The waveform data trace calculated for the j’th transmitter-receiver
position is denoted: dij
app = gapp(mi
prior, wj
av( ˜m)). The source wavelet is the same mean
wavelet, wav, for FDTD calculations in all transmitter-receiver positions.
The waveform data related to the best and approximate forward model are denoted
Ebest and Eapp, respectively. Each column in Ebest contains the calculated waveform
data for the j’th transmitter-receiver position in the k’th realization from the posterior
distribution from inversion of travel time and amplitude data related to the i’th realization
from the prior distribution, dijk
best = gbest(mi
prior, wj
est(mk
post)).
Each column in Eapp
contains the calculated waveform data for the j’th transmitter-receiver position in the
least-squares model from inversion of travel time and amplitude data related to the i’th
realization from the prior distribution, dij
app = gapp(mi
prior, wj
av( ˜m)).
==PAGE:32==
Chapter 2. Theory
24
A sample from the unknown probability density, Λ(d|m), that describes the mod-
eling error is available as
EΛ = Ebest −Eapp
(2.27)
A covariance matrix, CT , and bias, dT , for the data uncertainty related to uncertainty
in the source wavelet estimate can be estimated using the formulation presented in Sec-
tion 2.3.3
dTest =

d1
Test, d2
Test, ..., dN
Test

(2.28)
where
di
Test = 1
N
1
K
1
J
N
X
i=1
K
X
k=1
J
X
j=1
(Eikj
best −Eij
app)
CTest = 1
N EdiﬀE′
diﬀ
(2.29)
where
Ediﬀ= [EΛ −ETest]
and
ETest =

d′
Test, d′
Test, ..., d′
Test

.
Implementation
All code written during this work is written in Matlab. The SIPPI toolbox (Hansen
et al., 2013a,b) is widely used. The FDTD algorithm (Ernst et al., 2007b) is employed
through the Matlab interface developed by Cordua et al. (2009b). The FFTMA and
VISIM algorithms used for sampling of prior distributions are employed by using the
mGstat toolbox. The estimation of forward modeling errors are programmed in Matlab.
==PAGE:33==
3
Prior Expectations and Simulation of Synthetic
Data
In this section a reference model for the subsurface environment is deﬁned. The reference
model is a realization of the a priori probability density function, deﬁned on the basis of
the known conditions at Arrenæs. This reference model serves as the true subsurface for
the remainder of the report. A waveform data set of "observed" data, Eobs, is simulated
by FDTD simulation (see section 2.1) through the reference model. First-arrival travel
time and ﬁrst-cycle amplitude data are picked from the observed waveform data.
3.1
Prior Realization
3.1.1
Reference model setup
The reference models used for simulation of an observed waveform dataset are designed
to mimic the conditions at Arrenæs. The cross sections used for GPR investigations at
Arrenæs are 5 m wide and 12 m tall, hence the dimensions of the reference models are 5
by 12 m. The space between the boreholes are discretized in to a grid with cell sizes of
0.05 m and a model parameter is assigned to each of these cells. The antenna geometry is
also set up so it mimics the experimental acquisition setup at Arrenæs, with 1 m between
transmitter positions and 0.25 m between receiver positions. This antenna setup yields
25
==PAGE:34==
Chapter 3. Prior Expectations and Simulation of Synthetic Data
26
0
50
100
Distance (Cell no.)
-200
-150
-100
-50
0
Depth (Cell no.)
Figure 3.1: Ray coverage for synthetic setup that imitates the experi-
mental setup at Arrenæs.
24 transmitters and a total of 746 data traces. Ray coverage is seen in Figure 3.1. Radar
wave velocity at Arrenæs have in earlier studies been found to be in the order of 0.08 m/ns
- 0.15 m/ns (Looms et al., 2008; Cordua et al., 2008, 2009b). From electrical resistivity
tomography (ERT) studies, the electric conductivity, σ, have been found to be in the
order of 0.5 - 5 mS/m (Looms et al., 2008). Water content analysis of core samples from
borehole drilling have indicated radar wave velocities up to 17 m/ns.
3.1.2
Prior realization
To be able to obtain a reference model of the subsurface, that is consistent with the
subsurface environment at Arrenæs, it is necessary to statistically quantify the Arrenæs
environment. Quantiﬁcation is done through deﬁnition of a priori information on the
model parameters. The reference model is a realization of the a priori model, and the
reference model will hence represent the same statistics that is representative for Arrenæs.
Covariance based a priori probability distributions that mimic the environment at
Arrenæs are set up for the permittivity, ε, and conductivity, σ. The prior distributions
are deﬁned on the basis of target distributions for the parameter values for ε and σ.
==PAGE:35==
27
3.1. Prior Realization
The target distributions are deﬁned as bimodal distributions to reﬂect the lithology at
Arrenæs, which mainly consists of sand with varying fractions of clay. Each of the target
distributions are constructed from two Gaussian distributions: one representative for the
sand component and one representative for the clay content. The expected values are set
to εsand = 4.5 and σsand = 2.5 and εclay = 7.5 and σclay = 5.5. The mean values and
variance of the target distributions are set to accommodate extreme value observations
at Arrenæs in the distributions. The expected distributions for parameter values for ε
and σ represented by the target distributions are shown in Figure 3.2.
Figure 3.2:
Target distributions for expected parameter values.
Left:
dielectric permittivity. ε, Right: conductivity, σ
The global mean of the distributions is 4.89 ε/ε0 for dielectric permittivity, ε, and
2.88 mS/m for the electric conductivity, σ. The total variance of the target distribution,
v0 is 1.34 (ε/ε0)2 for ε and 1.34 (mS/m)2 for σ. Some surface roughness in the spatial
correlation is expected, hence a spherical covariance model is chosen (Hansen et al., 2008).
Inferring the covariance model is not trivial. Hansen et al. (2008) investigated observed
travel time data from cross-borehole GPR tomography at Arrenæs. The maximum like-
lihood correlation lengths for the environment were found to be hmax = 8.5 m for the
horizontal and hmin = 2.4 m for the vertical correlation The covariance model is deﬁned
with maximum horizontal correlation length hmax = 8.5 m and a perpendicular anisotropy
factor of hmin/hmax = 2.4/8.5 = 0.2824. Realizations from the covariance based a priori
model are generated using the "FFT Moving Average generator (FFTMA)", which draws
a sample from the multivariate Gaussian covariance model deﬁned by the mean and co-
variance model. A normal score transformation transforms the Gaussian sample into a
realization where the distribution of the parameter values, honor the target distributions
==PAGE:36==
Chapter 3. Prior Expectations and Simulation of Synthetic Data
28
for ε and σ. The spatial correlation between model parameter values in the grid are not
changed.
1
2
3
4
5
Distance [m]
2
4
6
8
10
12
Depth [m]
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
6.5
7
7.5
8
Relative dielectric permittivity [ǫ/ǫ0]
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
Electrical conductivity [mS/m]
Figure 3.3: The realization from the prior model that is used for reference
model for ε and σ.
A relation between the dielectric permittivity and the conductivity is estimated.
This is necessary since a random realization from the probability density function for ε
and σ, respectively, will not represent the same geological structures, even if the prior
covariance models have the same spatial correlation. This must be a consideration if
it is assumed that the geophysical properties (ε and σ) are somewhat coherent for a
given grid cell. In (Holliger and Maurer, 2004) this relation is constructed by scaling the
Gaussian distributed dielectric permittivity appropriately and subjecting it to a "normal-
to-lognormal" transformation. Ideally, a relation could be derived from coherent mea-
surements of permittivity, ε, and conductivity, σ, from core samples. Here, a realization
for ε is drawn from the prior model. This realization is transformed to a realization for σ
by assuming a linear relation: sig = eps −shift, and a conductivity ﬁeld with the same
spatial structure as the dielectric permittivity is obtained. The shift is estimated from
the diﬀerence in mean values of the target distributions. The linear relation between ε
and σ is consistent with the reference models presented in Cordua et al. (2009a), and this
==PAGE:37==
29
3.2. Forward Modeling of Synthetic Waveform Data
simple approach is assumed suﬃcient for this synthetic study. The realization from the
prior model, which is used as reference model for ε and σ is shown in Figure 3.3.
The reference model drawn from the a priori probability density function for ε and
σ is transformed in to reference models for the radar phase velocity and attenuation
structures according to equation (2.1) and (2.2). These reference models are used to
evaluate the ray-based inversion results in Section 4.2. The reference models for radar
phase velocity and attenuation are seen in Figure 3.4.
1
2
3
4
5
Distance [m]
2
4
6
8
10
12
Depth [m]
0.1
0.11
0.12
0.13
0.14
0.15
0.16
0.17
Velocity [m/ns]
1
2
3
4
5
Distance [m]
2
4
6
8
10
12
Depth [m]
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
Attenuation [1/m]
Figure 3.4: Reference models for velocity and attenuation structure.
3.2
Forward Modeling of Synthetic Waveform Data
Forward calculation of a synthetic waveform data set is performed using the FDTD
approximation of Maxwell’s equations. The FDTD algorithm presented in Ernst et al.
(2007b) is used, and the simulation is run in Cartesian coordinates. A Ricker wavelet
with a center frequency of 100 MHz is used as source pulse in the forward simulations.
This source pulse yields the same central frequency as emitted by the antenna used in the
experiments at Arrenæs (Cordua et al., 2008). The time for pulse onset, time zero ,t0,
is set to 20 ns. This source pulse is used for all forward simulations. All traces with an
==PAGE:38==
Chapter 3. Prior Expectations and Simulation of Synthetic Data
30
angle larger than 45°are discarded since it is often diﬃcult to pick ﬁrst arrival travel time
and amplitude data on high-angle traces due to waveform distortions, low signal-to-noise
ratio and increased attenuation (Peterson, Jr., 2001; Irving et al., 2007). The grid cell
size is 0.05 cm for the forward simulation of waveform data in the reference models for
ε and σ. This grid-cell size is suﬃcient to maintain stability of the FDTD algorithm.
The reference models for ε and σ used in the simulation of a synthetic waveform data
set are shown with the transmitter and receiver positions in Figure 3.5. The simulated
Dielectric permitivity (ǫ)
20
40
60
80
100
Width [cells]
50
100
150
200
Depth [cells] - (1 cell = 5.0cm)
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
6.5
7
7.5
ǫ [ǫ0]
Electric conductivity (σ)
20
40
60
80
100
Width [cells]
50
100
150
200
Depth [cells] - (1 cell = 5.0cm)
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
σ [mS/m]
Figure 3.5: The reference model for dielectric permittivity and conduc-
tivity showed with the antenna positions used in FDTD calculations of
waveform data.
waveform data is re-sampled to the sampling interval of the Arrenæs data, dt = 0.4 ns,
so the synthetic data resembles the ﬁeld data as close as possible.
3.2.1
Noise realization
In ﬁeld data studies, high- and low-frequency noise can ﬁltered out using low- and high-
pass ﬁltering. (see e.g. Klotzsche et al., 2010). Noise with the same frequency content
as the data, will hence remain in the observed data after ﬁltering. This noise is diﬃcult
to remove using bandpass ﬁltering, and the applied data processing methods should be
==PAGE:39==
31
3.3. Picking of First-arrival Travel Time and First-cycle Amplitude Data
robust to noise with this frequency distribution. To obtain a waveform data set with as
realistic properties as possible, noise with the same frequency distribution as the simulated
waveform data is added to the waveform data. White noise is generated and ﬁltered
through a bandpass ﬁlter to obtain the approximately same frequency distribution as the
waveform data. The ﬁlter is a Butterworth ﬁlter with lower and upper cut-oﬀfrequencies
at 1 and 200 MHz, respectively, and a center frequency of 100 MHz. Attenuation is 3
db at passband and 30 db at stopband. Sampling frequency is 1/dt, with the sampling
interval, dt = 0.4 ns, equal to the sample interval of the simulated waveform data.
After the noise is ﬁltered, the bandpass-limited noise is scaled so the root-mean-
square (RMS) of the noise is 1/26 the RMS of the waveform data. This signal-to-noise
ratio is chosen on the basis of the analysis in Cordua et al. (2009a). The ﬁltered noise is
added to the noise-free simulated waveform data, snoisy = spure + n, to obtain a wave-
form data set of "observed" data. The single-sided frequency spectra for the simulated
waveform data, the bandpass-limited noise that is added to the waveform data, and the
observed waveform data are seen in Figure 3.6. The spectra displayed are for one trace.
0
200
400
Frequency (MHz)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
|Y (f)|
×10−3
0
200
400
Frequency (MHz)
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
|Y (f)|
×10−5
0
200
400
Frequency (MHz)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
|Y (f)|
×10−3
Figure 3.6: Single sided frequency spectra of the pure waveform data
from forward simulation, of the band-limited noise and of the signal with
band-limited noise for one trace.
3.3
Picking of First-arrival Travel Time and First-cycle Am-
plitude Data
For the ray-based inversion of GPR data, ﬁrst arrival times and ﬁrst cycle maximum
amplitudes are inverted, hence he ﬁrst arrival time and the ﬁrst cycle maximum amplitude
==PAGE:40==
Chapter 3. Prior Expectations and Simulation of Synthetic Data
32
data must be extracted from the observed waveform data.
The picking procedure utilizes a correlation based approach where the correlation
coeﬃcients between the waveform data and a snip of a reference wavelet are calculated
trace-by-trace. The index of maximum correlation, is determined as the index for ﬁrst
arrival time. The picked indices are interpolated to ensure the possibility of the ﬁrst
arrival being between two indices. The calculated index is multiplied with the sampling
rate of the signal, dt = 0.4 ns, to obtain the time for the ﬁrst arrival. The procedure
is based on the method described in Molyneux and Schmitt (1999), and implemented as
a part of the SIPPI toolbox, (Hansen et al., 2013a,b). The picking procedure is robust
to the relatively low noise level present in the observed waveform dataset (SNR = 26).
The picked ﬁrst-arrival time does however depend on the choice of t0 for the reference
wavelet. When t0 have been carefully picked for the reference wavelet, the algorithm is
consistent in the picking of ﬁrst arrivals.
The ﬁrst cycle amplitude is picked as the ﬁrst peak above a given threshold, as shown
in Figure 3.7. The threshold is set to twice the signal-to-noise ratio for the given trace.
The amplitudes are picked at discrete points deﬁned by the sample interval, contrary
to the ﬁrst arrival times, where the picking procedure allows interpolation to get a ﬁrst
arrival time that lies between two sample points. The ﬁrst arrival time and ﬁrst cycle
amplitude picked for a single trace is seen in Figure 3.7.
50
100
150
200
it
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
Normalized Amplitude
Waveform data
First arrival
Amplitude
Threshold
Figure 3.7: One waveform data trace with the picked ﬁrst-arrival travel
time and ﬁrst-cycle amplitude.
Estimation of A0
The picked amplitude data are corrected for geometrical spreading 1/
√
l and angular
eﬀects, ΘTX, ΘRX according to Section 2.3.2, equation (2.13). After this correction, the
==PAGE:41==
33
3.3. Picking of First-arrival Travel Time and First-cycle Amplitude Data
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
220
it
74
76
78
80
82
84
86
88
90
92
Trace no.
Eobs
First cycle amplitude
First arrival
Figure 3.8: 20 observed waveform data traces with the picked ﬁrst-arrival
travel times and ﬁrst-cycle amplitudes.
==PAGE:42==
Chapter 3. Prior Expectations and Simulation of Synthetic Data
34
source strength, A0, is determined from linear regression of corrected amplitudes as a
function of ray length, equation (2.12). The ﬁtted line intercepts at −ln(A0), (Zhou and
Fullagar, 2001; Holliger et al., 2001), see Figure 3.9, and an estimate of A0 can hence
be obtained. When A0 has been determined, the amplitude data are corrected for the
antenna source strength and this corrected amplitude data, the pseudo-travel time data,
τ, are used in the inversion according to equation (2.15).
0
2
4
6
8
lray
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
Acorr
Corrected Amplitude
Figure 3.9: Linear regression of corrected amplitude data as a function
of ray path length. The ﬁtted line intersects at −ln(A0).
3.4
Assessment of Data Uncertainties
Cordua et al. (2008) show that the assumptions made about the data errors and their
correlation during the inversion are crucial for the quality of the resulting inverse estimate.
The data measurement uncertainties are described by a Gaussian model with mean dd and
covariance, Cd, which is incorporated in the inversion as prior information on the data.
The mean, dd, describes a bias in the measurement uncertainties and is assumed to be
zero. The measurement uncertainties are assumed uncorrelated both for the travel time
and amplitude data, hence the data uncertainty covariance matrix are deﬁned Cd = σ2I,
where σ is the standard deviation of the estimated uncertainty and I is the identity
matrix.
The correlation based picker of ﬁrst-arrival times have been tested on a noisy and
a noise-free data set. The diﬀerence in the picked ﬁrst arrival times vary in the order
of 0.001 ns. The uncertainty related to picking of travel times is hence assumed to be
low and is set to one sample interval of 0.4 ns, which is approximately 1% of the travel
time for the ﬁrst arrivals. It is assumed that picking uncertainties are the dominating
measurement uncertainties. No other measurement uncertainties will be accounted for in
this synthetic study.
For the amplitude data, the diﬀerence in the amplitude of the signal measured at
==PAGE:43==
35
3.4. Assessment of Data Uncertainties
± 1 sample interval before/after the picked amplitude is investigated. This is done for
all traces. For a travel time uncertainty of one sample interval, ±0.4 ns, the normalized
uncertainty of the amplitudes range from 0.006 - 0.032 with a mean value of 0.019, which
yields a mean error of approximately 5% relative to the picked amplitude value. This
average fractional error is transferred to the corrected amplitude, the pseudo travel time,
τ. The standard deviation on τ is consequently estimated to 0.04.
==PAGE:44==
==PAGE:45==
4
Quantiﬁcation of Forward Modeling Error
In this section, forward modeling errors related to the ray-based inversion and the source
wavelet uncertainty are estimated.
First, the modeling error associated with the ray-based inversion is estimated. In
800 realizations of the prior model, the travel time and amplitude data related to the i’th
prior realization are calculated from the linear approximate forward model and from the
most exact forward model (FDTD forward calculations followed by picking of travel time
and amplitude data). A sample from the probability distribution describing the modeling
error is obtained from the diﬀerence in the most exact and approximate data sets, and a
Gaussian probability distribution is subsequently inferred on the basis of this sample.
The inferred modeling error is included in the ray-based inversion of travel time
and amplitude data. The solution to the linear ray-based inversion of travel times and
amplitudes is the posterior Gaussian probability distribution for velocity and attenuation,
respectively.
Then, the modeling error related to the source wavelet uncertainty is quantiﬁed.
A realization is drawn from the prior model. A waveform data set related to this prior
realization is computed and travel time and amplitude data is extracted. The travel time
and amplitude data is inverted including the forward modeling error estimated in the
steps described above.
A mean source wavelet is estimated on the basis of the least-squares tomograms
obtained from the ray-based inversion, and a waveform data set is calculated from the
37
==PAGE:46==
Chapter 4. Quantiﬁcation of Forward Modeling Error
38
approximate forward model: FDTD forward calculation with the least-squares wavelet
based on the least-squares tomograms.
A realization is drawn from the posterior distribution to the ray-based inversion. A
source wavelet is estimated for each individual transmitter-receiver position on the basis
of this posterior realization, and a waveform data set is calculated from the best forward
model: FDTD forward calculation using the source wavelets estimated in the individual
transmitter-receiver position based on the posterior realization.
This process is iterated over 60 prior realizations each associated with 40 posterior
realizations. A sample from the probability distribution describing the modeling error
is obtained from the diﬀerence in the calculated waveform data obtained from the best
and approximate forward model, and a Gaussian probability distribution is subsequently
inferred on the basis of this sample.6
4.1
Forward Modeling Error in Ray-based Inversion
Before the travel time and amplitude data can be inverted using a ray-based inversion
approach, any modeling errors related to the approximation of forward problem must be
quantiﬁed.
The forward modeling error depends on the prior model estimated for the survey
area (Hansen et al., 2014), the speciﬁc choice of forward model and must be estimated
for the given antenna setup. Hansen et al. (2014) investigated the modeling error caused
by diﬀerent forward models and diﬀerent kinds of prior variability in the model space.
They found that the forward modeling error in a Gaussian reference model for the ve-
locity structures yield a mean error up to 0.6 ns. For Gaussian-type velocity reference
models, the forward model error is hence expected to be comparable to the measurement
uncertainty.
The forward model error arises due to the choice of approximating the forward
problem to a linear problem through the application of the straight-ray approximation.
It is assumed that the forward modeling error can be described by a Gaussian probability
density, with mean dT and covariance CT , N(dt, Ct), and is estimated according to the
theory outlined in section 2.3.3, equation (2.18) and (2.19). The forward modeling error
mean and covariance is in this study estimated for both the ﬁrst-arrival travel time and
ﬁrst-cycle amplitude inversion.
Since the modeling error is assumed to be Gaussian, it can easily be included in the
linear inversion as an additive factor: CD = Cd + CT and dD = dd + dT (Hansen et al.,
2014; Tarantola, 2005). These modiﬁed formulations for dD and CD are used in equation
(2.9) and (2.10). As shown in Hansen et al. (2014), the larger the sample of the modeling
errors, i.e. the more realizations N from the a priori probability distribution, the better
==PAGE:47==
39
4.1. Forward Modeling Error in Ray-based Inversion
statistics about the modeling error can be inferred. The mean, dT , and the covariance
matrix, CT , are here estimated for a sample of N=800 realizations of the modeling error.
The prior model used for generating the reference model, see Section 3.1.2, is used
for generating unconditional realizations of the prior model that are used for estimation
of the forward modeling error.
First, a realization of the prior model is generated for ε and σ that is transformed to
a model for the attenuation, α, and velocity, v, structures by application of equation (2.1)
and (2.2). The travel time and amplitude data related to the given realization are cal-
culated from the linear approximate forward model: dapp,tt = Gmv, dapp,A = Gmα.
Secondly, the data related to the exact forward model, dex,tt and dex,A, are computed
through FDTD simulation of waveform data, in the same manner as described in Sec-
tion 3.2, followed by picking of ﬁrst-arrival travel time and ﬁrst-cycle amplitude data
as described in Section 3.3. The amplitude data are subsequently corrected for geomet-
ric attenuation, angle dependent radiation patterns and antennae gain as described in
Section 3.3. This process is repeated N=800 times, i.e. for 800 statistically indepen-
dent realizations of the prior model. Each column in Dapp and Dex contains the data
dapp and dex related to the individual realizations of the prior model. A sample from
the probability distribution that describes the modeling error is computed from the dif-
ference in data between the data related to the exact and approximate forward model:
DΛ = Dex −Dapp. The mean, dT , and the covariance, CT , that deﬁnes the assumed
Gaussian probability distribution describing the forward modeling error are estimated
from equation (2.18) and (2.19). The estimated mean for travel time and amplitude data
are seen in Figure 4.1. The covariance matrices for travel time and amplitude data are
seen in Figure 4.2. The mean, dT , are vectors with the dimension 1 x 746, which means
that for each trace a bias is estimated. The covariance matrices have the dimensions 746
x 746.
From the oﬀ-diagonal elements of the covariance matrices in Figure 4.2, it is evident
that the modeling error, for both travel time and amplitude data, is strongly correlated.
The average bias for travel time data is -0.38 ns with prominent angular dependence. The
largest absolute bias, up to -0.8 ns, is found for horizontal rays. The picking uncertainty
was estimated to 0.4 ns. The average bias for amplitude data is -0.20, with the largest
absolute bias for high-angle rays. The amplitude data is unit-less, but for comparison, the
mean of the corrected amplitude, τ, is 0.85. The uncertainty on τ related to the picking of
ﬁrst-arrival times was estimated to 0.04. It is evident that the modeling error is signiﬁcant
compared to the measurement uncertainties and should be taken into account during the
ray-based inversion of travel time and amplitude data.
The probability distribution describing the modeling error is assumed Gaussian -
==PAGE:48==
Chapter 4. Quantiﬁcation of Forward Modeling Error
40
-1
-0.8
-0.6
-0.4
-0.2
dT [ns]
-0.3
-0.25
-0.2
-0.15
dT
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
Data no.
0
10
20
30
40
50
angle [deg.]
Figure 4.1: Estimated bias for forward modeling errors for N=800 prior
realizations. Upper: Travel time, middle: Amplitude, lower: angle of the
ray with respect to horizontal.
200
400
600
Data no.
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
Data no.
-0.1
-0.05
0
0.05
0.1
Covariance, CT
200
400
600
Data no.
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
Data no.
-0.15
-0.1
-0.05
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
Covariance, CT
Figure 4.2: Covariance matrices for forward modeling errors estimated
for N=800 prior realizations. Left: Amplitude, Right: Travel time.
==PAGE:49==
41
4.2. Ray-based Inversion
for both the travel time and amplitude data. The validity of the Gaussian assumption
is tested using equation (2.20). The χ2 distributions of the computed modeling errors,
DΛ, are evaluated and compared to the χ2 distributions of the inferred Gaussian model
describing the modeling errors, N(dT , CT ). The computed distributions from equation
equation (2.20) based on N=800 realizations from the inferred distribution is seen in
Figure 4.3. The χ2 distributions for the observed and inferred modeling errors are com-
parable, hence the Gaussian assumption is valid for both travel time and amplitude.
Figure 4.3: Computed χ2 distributions related to the inferred distribution
of modeling errors and to actual samples from the computed modeling error.
Left: Travel Time, Right: Amplitude.
4.2
Ray-based Inversion
A priori information must be provided according to equation (2.9) and (2.10), in the form
of a Gaussian probability distribution, N(m0, Cm). The a priori information applied in
the ray-based inversion is the same prior information used to generate the reference
models.
The reference models for the velocity and attenuation structure are seen in
Figure 4.4. The Gaussian data measurement uncertainties and the modeling errors are
incorporated in the inversion: CD = Cd + CT and dD = dd + dT . The travel time and
amplitude data are inverted using equation (2.9) and (2.10).
The inverse problem is also solved without the modeling error taken into account to
see the eﬀect of accounting for the forward modeling error.
==PAGE:50==
Chapter 4. Quantiﬁcation of Forward Modeling Error
42
1
2
3
4
5
Distance [m]
2
4
6
8
10
12
Depth [m]
0.1
0.11
0.12
0.13
0.14
0.15
0.16
0.17
Velocity [m/ns]
1
2
3
4
5
Distance [m]
2
4
6
8
10
12
Depth [m]
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
Attenuation [1/m]
Figure 4.4: Reference models for velocity and attenuation structure.
==PAGE:51==
43
4.2. Ray-based Inversion
The Gaussian posterior probability distribution described by N( ˜m, ˜
CM) is the solu-
tion to the inverse problem. The solution is an approximation to the full inverse problem
using the most exact forward model (travel time and amplitude data picked from FDTD
simulation of waveform data), which implies that the model parameters will be less re-
solved (Hansen et al., 2014), but accounting for the modeling error avoids mapping of
the modeling error into the posterior probability density as artefacts. It is expected that
features in the tomograms from the approximate model are consistent with subsurface
features, i.e. features in the reference models. Cell size is 0.05 m, which gives a 24000
dimensional Gaussian posterior distribution.
4.2.1
Inversion of ﬁrst-arrival travel time data
The ray-based velocity tomograms from inversion of travel time data, with the a priori
information described above and the data measurement uncertainty and forward modeling
error deﬁned in Section 3.4 and Section 4.1, are seen in Figure 4.5. This ﬁgure shows
the least-squares estimate, i.e. the mean of the posterior, and 5 realizations from the
posterior probability distribution. The mean of the posterior Gaussian distribution is
0.1355 m/ns and the mean variance of the model parameters is 1.3989 · 10−4 m2/(ns)2.
Results of travel time inversion while disregarding modeling errors and only includ-
ing uncorrelated data uncertainty, i.e. CD = Cd, are seen in Figure 4.6. This ﬁgure shows
the least-squares estimate and 5 realizations of the posterior distribution.
The tomo-
2
4
Width (m)
2
4
6
8
10
12
Depth (m)
2
4
Width (m)
2
4
Width (m)
2
4
Width (m)
2
4
Width (m)
2
4
Width (m)
0.1
0.11
0.12
0.13
0.14
0.15
0.16
0.17
Velocity [m/ns]
Figure 4.5: Left: Least squares estimate for the velocity structure. Right:
5 realizations from the posterior distribution. The modeling error is ac-
counted for in the inversion.
==PAGE:52==
Chapter 4. Quantiﬁcation of Forward Modeling Error
44
2
4
Width (m)
2
4
6
8
10
12
Depth (m)
2
4
Width (m)
2
4
Width (m)
2
4
Width (m)
2
4
Width (m)
2
4
Width (m)
0.1
0.11
0.12
0.13
0.14
0.15
0.16
0.17
Velocity [m/ns]
Figure 4.6: Left: Least squares estimate for the velocity structure. Right:
5 realizations from the posterior distribution. The modeling error is not
accounted for in the inversion.
grams with/without accounting for the modeling are quite similar. The parameter value
estimates are a more extreme without the modeling error covariance included, as expected
since the total noise when the modeling error is included is higher, and hence the param-
eter values when accounting for the modeling error are smoother (Hansen et al., 2014).
The mean of the posterior Gaussian distribution when disregarding the modeling error is
0.1354 m/ns and the mean variance of the model parameters is 1.3631 · 10−4 m2/(ns)2.
The mean variance of the model parameters is higher when the modeling error is ac-
counted for due to the increased noise level.
The high-velocity area between 2 and 4 meters is better resolved when the modeling
error is included, and the edges are more deﬁned. In general, the large scale features
from the reference model are recovered in the individual realizations, both with and
without the modeling error taken into account. No apparent artefacts are mapped into
the posterior distribution when disregarding the modeling error.
4.2.2
Inversion of ﬁrst-cycle amplitude data
After the measured amplitude have been corrected for geometric spreading, angular eﬀects
and the antenna source strength, the (corrected) amplitude data (i.e., the pseudo travel
time τ) are inverted.
The result of inversion of amplitude data, τ, cf. equation (2.15),(2.9),(2.10), includ-
ing the a priori information described above and the data measurement uncertainty and
forward modeling error deﬁned in Section 3.4 and Section 4.1, is seen in Figure 4.7. This
==PAGE:53==
45
4.2. Ray-based Inversion
ﬁgure shows the least-squares estimate and 5 realizations of the posterior distribution.
When accounting for the modeling error, the mean of the posterior Gaussian distri-
2
4
Width (m)
2
4
6
8
10
12
Depth (m)
2
4
Width (m)
2
4
Width (m)
2
4
Width (m)
2
4
Width (m)
2
4
Width (m)
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
Attenuation [1/m]
Figure 4.7: Left: Least squares estimate for the attenuation structure.
Right: 5 realizations from the posterior distribution. The modeling error
is accounted for in the inversion.
bution is 0.1913 1/m, and the mean variance of the model parameters is 0.0017 1/m2.
When disregarding the modeling error, the mean of the posterior Gaussian distribution is
0.1589 1/m, and the mean variance of the model parameters is 0.0009 1/m2. The mean
variance of the model parameters is higher when the modeling error is accounted for due
to the increased noise level.
There is a signiﬁcant diﬀerence in including the modeling error for the amplitude
inversion. In the inversion result without the modeling error, Figure 4.8, artefacts are
contaminating the inversion result.
Some features seam well resolved, as the low at-
tenuation areas in the center at 2 and 5 m depth, but when compared to the reference
model, Figure 3.4, it is evident that those features are well-resolved artefacts as this is a
high-attenuation area in the reference model. If the uncorrelated data noise model were
increased as in Cordua et al. (2009a), the eﬀects of the artefacts would be dampened,
but the parameter values would still reﬂect the artefacts in the posterior distribution,
due to the mapping of forward modeling error in to the posterior distribution, (Hansen
et al., 2014). When the estimated modeling error covariance matrix is included in the
inversion: CD = Cd + CT , the artefacts disappear. The prominent features in the refer-
ence model are not well resolved, but no false features are on the other hand erroneously
well-resolved and the large-scale structures in the least-squares estimate are consistent
==PAGE:54==
Chapter 4. Quantiﬁcation of Forward Modeling Error
46
2
4
Width (m)
2
4
6
8
10
12
Depth (m)
2
4
Width (m)
2
4
Width (m)
2
4
Width (m)
2
4
Width (m)
2
4
Width (m)
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
Attenuation [1/m]
Figure 4.8: Left: Least squares estimate for the attenuation structure.
Right: 5 realizations from the posterior distribution. The modeling error
is not accounted for in the inversion.
with the structures in the reference model. The features are smoothed out, but correctly
located. The amplitude in the parameter values is not recreated compared to the refer-
ence model, Figure 3.4, due to the lack of resolution in the parameters, and the model
parameter values for the attenuation are underestimated.
4.2.3
Least-squares estimate of ε and σ
When comparing the ray-based least-squares estimates with and without accounting for
forward modeling errors, it is evident that it is important to incorporate the correlated
errors in the inversion.
The least-squares estimate of velocity and attenuation structures are transformed to
least-squares estimates of ε and σ using the high-frequency relations, equation (2.3). The
least squares tomograms from the ray-based inversion of travel time and amplitude data
provide smooth and large scale structural features of the subsurface that are consistent
with the reference model. This is consistent with other results of ray-based inversion
of travel times from Arrenæs (Cordua et al., 2008, 2009b; Looms et al., 2008), and
in general (Ernst et al., 2007a; Klotzsche et al., 2010, 2013). Comparing the results of
amplitude inversion where the forward modeling error is accounted for to earlier attempts
of amplitude inversion (see e.g. Ernst et al., 2007a; Klotzsche et al., 2010, 2013), these
results show a signiﬁcant improvement of the least-squares estimate for the conductivity
==PAGE:55==
47
4.2. Ray-based Inversion
1
2
3
4
5
Distance [m]
2
4
6
8
10
12
Depth [m]
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
6.5
7
7.5
8
Relative dielectric permittivity [ǫ/ǫ0]
1
2
3
4
5
Distance [m]
2
4
6
8
10
12
Depth [m]
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
Electric conductivity [mS/m]
Figure 4.9: Least-squares estimates for ε and σ. Without modeling errors.
==PAGE:56==
Chapter 4. Quantiﬁcation of Forward Modeling Error
48
1
2
3
4
5
Distance [m]
2
4
6
8
10
12
Depth [m]
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
6.5
7
7.5
8
Relative dielectric permittivity [ǫ/ǫ0]
1
2
3
4
5
Distance [m]
2
4
6
8
10
12
Depth [m]
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
Electric conductivity [mS/m]
Figure 4.10: Least-squares estimates for ε and σ. Modeling errors are
accounted for.
tomogram.
4.3
Source Wavelet Estimation and Associated Full Wave-
form Forward Modeling Error
The results above demonstrate that the tomograms obtained from the ray-based inversion
approach have limited resolution, since only a fraction of the information in the waveform
data is used and since the level of noise is increased when the modeling error is accounted
for. Full waveform inversion approaches include the available information in the observed
waveform data and are able to account for scattering and diﬀraction eﬀects. A source
wavelet must be estimated prior to performing the full-waveform inversion in order to
perform FDTD forward calculations of waveform data.
Typically a source wavelet is estimated from the least-squares ε and σ tomograms
obtained from the ray-based inversion (Ernst et al., 2007a; Klotzsche et al., 2010; Keskinen
et al., 2017), and one mean source wavelet is estimated, equation (2.24). The source
wavelet is estimated from the method described in Section 2.4.2.
==PAGE:57==
49
4.3. Forward Modeling Error in Full Waveform Inversion
The simple least-squares approach does not account for the uncertainty related to
the source wavelet estimate. To each transmitter-receiver position a unique source wavelet
can be estimated. These wavelets will vary according to the ray angle and to the local
conditions in the subsurface. These variations in the wavelets will give rise to an uncer-
tainty related to the mean source wavelet estimate. Furthermore, the variability related
to the posterior probability distribution that characterizes the solution to the ray-based
inversion is neglected as the source wavelet estimate is based on the least-squares tomo-
grams for ε and σ. The inherent variability of the ray-based tomograms described by the
posterior probability distribution will also lead to an uncertainty related to the wavelets
estimated for the individual source-receiver positions.
The most correct forward model for full waveform inversion is a probability dis-
tribution that incorporates the source wavelet uncertainty. In practice, an approximate
forward relation is used, i.e. the estimated mean source wavelet based on the least-squares
tomograms of ε and σ, since the best possible forward can not be used in the inversion
procedure. The data uncertainty that arises from using the least-squares based wavelet
forward modeling is quantiﬁed and incorporated in the full waveform inversion.
The
modeling error is assumed to be Gaussian, N(dT , CT ).
In order to quantify the modeling error related to source wavelet uncertainty, a
sample of the distribution characterizing the modeling error must be generated, (Hansen
et al., 2014). In the following section it is outlined how a sample of the modeling error is
generated.
4.3.1
Source wavelet realizations
The sampling of the modeling error follows the theory outlined in Section 2.4.2 and
Section 2.4.3, and the procedure is outlined step-by-step below. A ﬂowchart outlining
the procedure is seen in Figure 4.11. The prior model is deﬁned as the same prior model
used to generate the original reference model, the true model for the subsurface structure,
see Section 3.1.2. The grid cell size is set to dx = 0.05 m.
1. The i’th realization is drawn from the prior model for ε and σ.
• An "observed" waveform data set, Eobs, is simulated by FDTD calculation in
the i’th prior realization. The "true" source wavelet, here a Ricker pulse with
a central frequency of 100 MHz, is assumed known. Noise is added, following
the procedure outlined in Section 3.2.1, and ﬁrst-arrival time and ﬁrst-cycle
amplitude data is picked (and corrected), following the procedure outlined in
Section 3.3. Data measurement uncertainties for travel time and amplitude
data are deﬁned as described in Section 3.4.
==PAGE:58==
Chapter 4. Quantiﬁcation of Forward Modeling Error
50
Draw i’th prior realization:
εref, σref. dx = 0.05
FDTD simulation in εref, σref
Eobs
reduce Eobs.
8 transmit-
ter positions
Ray-based inversion
Least-squares estimates: εlsq, σlsq.
Posterior realizations of ε, σ
FDTD simulation in k’th poste-
rior realization, source wavelet:
winit, 8 transmitter positions
Esyn
ˆ
Mest =
ˆEsyn ( ˆwinit)−1
ˆwest =

ˆ
Mest
−1 ˆE∗
obs
E∗
obs
west
FDTD simulation in k’th poste-
rior realization, source wavelet:
west. 8 transmitter positions
wfdata
FFT(Esyn), FFT(winit)
IFFT( ˆwest)
FFT(E∗
obs)
k = k + 1
i = i + 1
Figure 4.11:
Schematic illustration of code ﬂow in estimating source
wavelets
==PAGE:59==
51
4.3. Forward Modeling Error in Full Waveform Inversion
• The travel time data and corrected amplitude data are inverted using the ray-
based inversion method outlined in Section 4.2.1 and Section 4.2.2, respec-
tively. The solution to the ray-based inverse problem is a posterior probability
distributions for the velocity and attenuation estimate. The least-squares to-
mograms for the velocity and attenuation are transformed to least-squares
tomograms for the dielectric permittivity, ε, and conductivity, σ, by using the
relations in Equation (2.3).
• In the i’th prior realization, a mean source wavelet is estimated on the basis of
the least-squares ray-based tomograms for the dielectric permittivity, ε, and
the conductivity, σ.
• A waveform data set is calculated using the approximate forward relation.
The waveform data is calculated on the basis of the least-squares ray-based
tomograms for ε and σ and the mean source wavelet.
2. The k’th realization is drawn from the posterior distributions for the velocity and
attenuation and transformed to realizations for ε and σ, by using the relations in
Equation (2.3).
• The simulated observed waveform data set, Eobs, is reduced from 746 to 250
traces, E∗
obs, which corresponds to the waveform data from 8 transmitter po-
sitions. The waveform data recorded at closely spaced receiver positions con-
tain very dependent information, hence the reduction in the number of traces
reduces the computation time while retaining a high degree of independent in-
formation, i.e. still captures the variability. The ray coverage for the reduced
data set is seen in Figure 4.12.
• A synthetic waveform data set, Esyn, is calculated based on the k’th posterior
realization for ε and σ. The source wavelet used for the FDTD calculation
is the initial wavelet estimate, winit, see Section 2.4.2. Here a Black-Harris
wavelet with a central frequency of 100 MHz is used, which is the same central
frequency as found in the observed data, see Figure 3.6. The transmitter-
receiver positions correspond to the transmitter-receiver positions in the re-
duced observed waveform data set, E∗
obs.
• An estimated (frequency domain) impulse response is estimated from:
ˆ
Mest =
ˆEsyn( ˆwinit)−1. A source wavelet is estimated for each waveform data trace,
ˆwest =

ˆ
Mest
−1 ˆE∗
obs, which yields multiple wavelet estimations, one for each
individual transmitter-receiver position.
Waveform realizations in the k’th
realization from the posterior distribution is shown in Figure 4.13.
Notice
that the true wavelet is a realization of the distribution of estimated wavelets
for some realizations of the posterior.
==PAGE:60==
Chapter 4. Quantiﬁcation of Forward Modeling Error
52
• A waveform data set is subsequently calculated on the basis of the k’th pos-
terior realization. The calculated waveform data in one transmitter-receiver
position is simulated using the unique source wavelet estimated for the same
transmitter-receiver position in the previous step.
The procedure is iterated over N=60 prior realizations with K=40 realizations from the
posterior distribution of the ray-based inversion of the observed data simulated in the
individual prior realizations.
0
20
40
60
80
Distance (Cell no.)
-200
-180
-160
-140
-120
-100
-80
-60
-40
-20
0
Depth (Cell no.)
Figure 4.12: Reduced ray coverage used in source wavelet estimation.
The waveform data calculated from the individual wavelet estimates based on the
posterior realizations is stored in Ebest, with each column containing one waveform data
trace, dijk
best = gbest(mi
prior, wj
est(σM(mk
post))).
The waveform data calculated from the mean wavelet estimate based on the least-
squares ray-based tomograms are stored in Eapp, with each column containing one wave-
form data trace dij
app = gapp(mi
prior, wj
av( ˜m)).
A sample from the probability distribution describing the modeling error related to
==PAGE:61==
53
4.3. Forward Modeling Error in Full Waveform Inversion
50
100
150
200
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
Amplitude
k = 1
west
wlsq
wtrue
50
100
150
200
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
k = 12
west
wlsq
wtrue
50
100
150
200
it
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
Amplitude
k = 23
west
wlsq
wtrue
50
100
150
200
it
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
k = 34
west
wlsq
wtrue
Figure 4.13: 250 estimated source wavelets related to the 250 transmitter-
receiver positions are obtained for each realization. The true wavelet is seen
to be a possible realization from the distribution of wavelets.
==PAGE:62==
Chapter 4. Quantiﬁcation of Forward Modeling Error
54
the uncertainties in the source wavelet estimation is obtained from:
EΛ = Ebest −Eapp
This method provides unique waveform data that will reﬂect the variability of the source
wavelet estimates related to the posterior variability of the tomograms and variability
related to angle dependency.
4.3.2
From Source Wavelet Realizations to Full Waveform Forward
Modeling Errors
The covariance matrix, CT , and bias, dT , that represent the data uncertainty associated
with the source wavelet estimation, are calculated following the procedure outlined in
Section 2.4.3.
For all N realizations of the prior distribution, the waveform data generated using
the mean source wavelet are subtracted from the waveform data generated from the
multiple realizations of the source wavelet, to obtain the sample, EΛ. The bias, dT is
estimated according to equation (2.28) and subtracted from the sample, EΛ, to obtain
Ediﬀ, according to equation (2.29). The size of Ediﬀis the length of each trace x (number
of traces in each forward calculation (250) x number of realizations (40) x number of
reference models (60)). Each column in Ediﬀrepresents the waveform diﬀerence for one
source wavelet realization. The covariance matrix, CT , is computed from equation (2.29):
CT = 1
N EdiﬀE′
diﬀ
(4.1)
, where N is the total number of wavelet realizations in posterior realizations related to
prior realizations, N=600000. As seen in Figure 4.13 posterior realization k=23 and 34,
the source wavelet estimation introduces numerical noise which propagates to the calcu-
lated waveform data and hence the waveform diﬀerences in, Ediﬀ. This numerical noise
is nevertheless averaged out in the estimation of the covariance. The forward model er-
ror covariance matrix, CT , which accounts for the data uncertainty that arises from the
source wavelet estimation is shown in Figure 4.14 (right), and the bias, dT , is shown in
Figure 4.15.
The estimation of CT and dT relies on the assumption of Gaussian modeling errors.
The χ2 distribution of the sample of waveform diﬀerences EΛ and of realizations from
the inferred Gaussian distribution N(dT , CT ) assumed to describe the modeling error, is
shown in Figure 4.16. The χ2 distributions for the observed and inferred modeling errors
are moderately comparable, and the Gaussian assumption is assumed to be approximately
valid.
==PAGE:63==
55
4.3. Forward Modeling Error in Full Waveform Inversion
50
100
150
200
Data no.
50
100
150
200
Data no.
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
Covariance, Cd
×10−9
50
100
150
200
Data no.
50
100
150
200
Data no.
-2
-1.5
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
Covariance, CT
×10−6
Figure 4.14: Left: Covariance matrix for noise model. Right: Estimated
covariance matrix for data uncertainty from source wavelet estimation.
0
50
100
150
200
it
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
dT
×10−4
Figure 4.15: Estimated bias, dT , for data uncertainty from source wavelet
estimation.
==PAGE:64==
Chapter 4. Quantiﬁcation of Forward Modeling Error
56
Figure 4.16: χ2 distribution of the waveform diﬀerences,Ediﬀ, (left) and
from the inferred Gaussian distribution (right).
4.4
Full-waveform Inversion
The observed waveform data, calculated in Section 3.2, are used as conditional data in
the full waveform inversion. The waveform data were simulated in the original reference
model, Figure 3.3, and bandpass limited random noise was added to the simulated wave-
form data, Section 3.2.1, to form a realistic observed data set. The data measurement
uncertainty covariance matrix, Cd, contains the noise added to the waveform data in the
initial forward modeling. Cd is seen in Figure 4.14 (left). The modeling error covariance
matrix, CT , calculated above, is also included in the inversion. The a priori information
on the data is hence described in the combined covariance model: CD = Cd + CT . An
identity matrix with diagonal values of 10−14 is added to the combined covariance model
to ensure numerical stability in the inversion. From Figure 4.14 it is evident that the
variance of the modeling error is approximately 103 times larger than the variance of the
noise on the waveform data traces, which implies that this error is important to include
in the full-waveform inversion. The data covariance, CD, is assumed to be uncorrelated
between traces. The estimated modeling error bias, dT , seen in Figure 4.15, is included
in the full-waveform inversion cf. equation (2.17).
The source wavelet used in the full-waveform inversion is the mean source wavelet
estimated in the least-squares ray-based tomograms for ε and σ, Figure 4.10. The es-
timated source wavelet is seen in Figure 4.17.
The overall shape of the true wavelet
==PAGE:65==
57
4.4. Full-waveform Inversion
is recovered in the estimated source wavelet, but the amplitude is underestimated with
≈36% and the phase is shifted with ≈0.2 ns.
0
10
20
30
40
Time [ns]
-0.5
0
0.5
1
Amplitude
estimated, wlsq
reference, wtrue
Figure 4.17: Estimated source wavelet, wlsq and reference wavelet, wtrue,
used in FDTD forward calculations in full waveform inversion.
The starting models for the full waveform inversion is set to the original reference
model, Figure 3.3. These distributions for ε and σ are chosen since the purpose of this
study is to test the developed approach of including the source wavelet uncertainty. This
choice of starting models reduces the burn-in period.
The prior information on model parameters is based on the bimodal target distribu-
tions from ε and σ, Figure 3.2 and the covariance model deﬁned in Section 3.1.2. The a
priori model is sampled by the VISIM algorithm, (Hansen and Mosegaard, 2008). VISIM
uses sequential simulation to generate a realization of the prior where the distribution
of the model parameters follow the bimodal target distributions while the a priori mean
and covariance model is honored, (Hansen et al., 2013a).
The inversion cell size is set to dx = 0.05 m, which yields a 24000 dimensional
posterior distribution. The full waveform inverse problem is conditioned by the waveform
data set, calculated in Section 3.2, which consists of waveform data from 746 transmitter-
receiver positions.
The goal of the full-waveform inversion is to reach a point, where the algorithm
samples realizations from the posterior probability distribution. The algorithm starts
in some given current model, that is a realization of the a priori model. The current
realization is perturbed into a new realization of the prior model, by re-simulation of a
square of the model space. One of the prior models, ε or σ, is randomly selected and
perturbed at each iteration. The degree of re-simulation is controlled by the step length.
The step length is ﬁxed during the inversion and is set to 0.2 m for ε and to 0.3 m for
σ. The step length deﬁnes half a side length of the square that deﬁnes the re-simulated
==PAGE:66==
Chapter 4. Quantiﬁcation of Forward Modeling Error
58
area. Re-simulation is performed by sequential Gibbs sampling, see Section 2.4.1.
==PAGE:67==
5
Accounting for Modeling Errors in Full-waveform
Inversion
The results from the full waveform inversion are presented in this section. The Monte
Carlo based full waveform algorithm was terminated after 180000 iterations.
The development of the (logarithmic) likelihood curve as a function of iterations
is shown in Figure 5.1. The gradient of the log likelihood curve is largest in the ﬁrst
10000 iterations. The gradient begins to decrease as the number of iterations increases
and after approximately 30000 iterations, the curve starts to ﬂuctuate around a constant
level. The Monte Carlo algorithm is burned-in at this point, and it is assumed that the
algorithm produce representative samples from the a posteriori probability distribution
after this point (Cordua et al., 2012).
All accepted models are realizations from the
posterior probability distribution. The Monte algorithm randomly chose to perturb ε or
σ at each iteration. Considering only models accepted after the burn-in period of the
algorithm, 44298 models were accepted for the dielectric permittivity, ε, and 60465 models
were accepted for the electric conductivity, σ. This gives total acceptance probabilities
after burn-in of Pacc,ε = 24.6% and Pacc,σ = 33.6% for dielectric permittivity and electric
conductivity, respectively.
The accepted models are however expected to be correlated since the algorithm takes
small "jumps" from one model to the next. Consecutive realizations from the posterior
probability distribution are not statistically independent since any proposed model is a
59
==PAGE:68==
Chapter 5. Accounting for Modeling Errors in Full-waveform Inversion
60
50000
100000
150000
Iteration number
-14000
-13000
-12000
-11000
-10000
-9000
-8000
-7000
Likelihood, log(L)
0
20000
40000
60000
Iteration number
-9000
-8800
-8600
-8400
-8200
-8000
-7800
-7600
-7400
Likelihood, log(L)
Figure 5.1: Log likelihood development as a function of iteration number.
perturbation of the current model. The task is to determine what the suﬃcient number of
jumps are for one model to be independent of an other. To obtain statistically indepen-
dent realizations of the posterior distribution, an autocorrelation analysis is performed,
following the method in Cordua et al. (2012). The correlation coeﬃcient of the last ac-
cepted model to any other accepted models, that has been accepted after burn-in, are
calculated as a function of iteration, and is shown in Figure 5.2. The correlation length
between two independent realizations is determined as the iteration number at which the
curve of correlation coeﬃcients intercepts the average level of the correlation curve after
it has converged to a constant level (Cordua et al., 2012). It is estimated that statistical
independence is obtained after approximately 20000 iterations for ε and for σ. A total of
8 independent realizations are obtained from the 180000 iterations.
The reference models for ε and σ is shown in Figure 5.3. In the probabilistic for-
mulation, the solution to the inverse problem is a sample of multiple model realizations
drawn from the posterior probability distribution, cf Section 2.2. 6 independent realiza-
tions are drawn from the posterior probability distribution, and the model realizations
for the dielectric permittivity is shown in Figure 5.4. The large scale features seen in
the reference model, Figure 5.3, are recovered in all realizations. Small-scale ﬂuctuations
are present between the realizations. No small-scale features that are not present in the
reference model are present in the posterior realizations.
Features that appear on many realizations of the a posteriori probability distribution
are well resolved (Mosegaard, 1998). The large resemblance of the posterior realizations
==PAGE:69==
61
50
100
150
Iteration x1000
0.92
0.93
0.94
0.95
0.96
0.97
0.98
0.99
1
Correlation coeﬃcient
ε
50
100
150
Iteration x1000
0.8
0.85
0.9
0.95
1
Correlation coeﬃcient
σ
Figure 5.2:
Correlation length as a function of the i’th posterior, i.e.
"distance", from the model that the correlation is calculated relative to.
indicate high resolution of the model parameters. Features down to approximately 1 m
are well constrained by the full waveform data, and even smaller features down to approx-
imately 20 cm are vertically constrained by the full waveform data. The full waveform
tomographic estimates show high structural contrasts. From the good resolution in the
full waveform inverse estimates it is indicated that small-scale features are constrained
by the full-waveform data. The mean and variance of 154 realizations of dielectric per-
mittivity is shown in Figure 5.5. It should be noted that the mean is not a sample of
the posterior probability distribution, but rather the model estimate with least spatial
variability (Hansen et al., 2008). The mean model estimate is hence smooth compared
to the individual realizations from the posterior probability distribution. The variance
conﬁrms that the large scale structural features are well resolved. The uncertainty of
the spatial location of the features increase towards the edges and decrease further away
from the edges of the features. This result is consistent with Cordua et al. (2012) and
Yue et al. (2016).
6 independent realizations of the electric conductivity, σ, are shown in Figure 5.6.
Note that the color scale goes down to 0.5 mS/m to visualize the structures in the low
conductivity areas. The overall large scale features from the reference model, Figure 5.3,
are recovered in the realizations. However, the spatial structure of the features varies from
realization to realization and the spatial extent of the features is generally underestimated.
This indicates that the location of the large scale features are resolved to some degree,
but the spatial structure of the features is not. No small-scale features from the reference
==PAGE:70==
Chapter 5. Accounting for Modeling Errors in Full-waveform Inversion
62
1
2
3
4
5
Distance [m]
2
4
6
8
10
12
Depth [m]
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
6.5
7
7.5
8
Relative dielectric permittivity [ǫ/ǫ0]
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
Electrical conductivity [mS/m]
Figure 5.3: Reference models for ε and σ.
==PAGE:71==
63
2
4
Width (m)
2
4
6
8
10
12
Depth (m)
2
4
Width (m)
2
4
Width (m)
2
4
Width (m)
2
4
Width (m)
2
4
Width (m)
3
4
5
6
7
8
Dielectric permittivity [ε/ε0]
Figure 5.4: 6 independent realizations of ε from the posterior distribution
to the full waveform inversion.
1
2
3
4
5
Width [m]
2
4
6
8
10
12
Depth [m]
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
6.5
7
7.5
8
Mean dielectric permittivity [ε/ε0]
1
2
3
4
5
Width [m]
2
4
6
8
10
12
Depth [m]
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Variance [(ε/ε0)2]
Figure 5.5: Mean (left) and variance (right) of 154 realizations of the
posterior distribution deﬁning the solution to the full waveform inverse
problem.
==PAGE:72==
Chapter 5. Accounting for Modeling Errors in Full-waveform Inversion
64
2
4
Width (m)
2
4
6
8
10
12
Depth (m)
2
4
Width (m)
2
4
Width (m)
2
4
Width (m)
2
4
Width (m)
2
4
Width (m)
1
2
3
4
5
6
Electric conductivity [mS/m]
Figure 5.6: 6 independent realizations of σ from the posterior distribution
to the full waveform inversion.
model are present in the realizations. The full-waveform data cannot constrain small-
scale features in the electric conductivity subsurface distribution. The low conductivity
area around 8 m depth seem well resolved, but the structures in the area, as seen in the
reference model, Figure 5.3, are not resolved. It is, however, important to notice that
no obvious artefacts are mapped into the posterior probability distribution. The overall
value of the estimated electric conductivity tomograms is underestimated. As noted in
Section 4.4, the amplitude of the least-squares source wavelet used in the full waveform
inversion is underestimated, which causes underestimated parameter values for σ (Cordua
et al., 2009a).
The mean and variance of 154 realizations of electric conductivity is
shown in Figure 5.7. The mean model estimate is smooth compared to the individual
realizations from the posterior probability distributions in Figure 5.6. The overall large
scale structures are present in the mean model, but the spatial extent is underestimated.
The variance conﬁrms that the spatial structure of the high conductivity features are not
well constrained by the full waveform data. The uncertainty of the spatial location of the
features are low compared to the uncertainty of the spatial structure of the features, hence
the underestimation of the spatial extent of the features are not reﬂected in uncertainty
of the spatial location of the features. The variance of the low conductivity area around
8 m depth is very low, and the area are hence erroneously well-resolved.
==PAGE:73==
65
1
2
3
4
5
Width [m]
2
4
6
8
10
12
Depth [m]
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
Mean electric conductivity [mS/m]
1
2
3
4
5
Width [m]
2
4
6
8
10
12
Depth [m]
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Variance [(mS/m)2]
Figure 5.7: Mean (left) and variance (right) of 154 realizations of the
posterior distribution deﬁning the solution to the full waveform inverse
problem.
==PAGE:74==
==PAGE:75==
6
Discussion
The results obtained from ray-based and full waveform inversion and the methods for
accounting for forward modeling errors in both ray-based and full waveform inversion,
are discussed in this section.
6.1
Forward Modeling Errors in Ray-based Linear Inversion
The travel time and amplitude data were inverted using a linear ray-based inversion.
Forward modeling errors are introduced by using the straight-ray approximation to the
forward model. This forward modeling error was quantiﬁed for both travel time and
amplitude and included in the ray-based inversion.
The forward modeling error was accounted for though addition of the covariance
models describing the data measurement uncertainties and the modeling error.
This
approach requires that the probability distribution describing the modeling errors is a
Gaussian probability distribution. From the evaluation of the χ2 distributions for the
inferred Gaussian distribution and the observed modeling errors, respectively, it was con-
cluded, that the Gaussian assumption is valid, and that the modeling errors are suﬃciently
described from Gaussian statistics.
If the observed modeling errors are better described by another probability distribu-
tion, e.g. a Poisson or Laplace distribution, such a distribution should be used instead.
This complicates the evaluation of the likelihood function in equation (2.7) (Hansen et al.,
67
==PAGE:76==
Chapter 6. Discussion
68
2014).
The computation time for estimating the forward modeling error from N=800 re-
alizations of the prior model was approximately 8 hours. This extra computation time
associated with estimating the modeling error must be viable relative to the computation
time of the inversion itself. For comparison, the computation time for linear inversion
of travel time and amplitude data on the same machine was approximately 5 minutes.
As the estimation of the modeling error can be done overnight, it is viable for this given
prior model, antenna setup and the choice of forward model (i.e. the straight-ray ap-
proximation). Furthermore, as discussed in Hansen et al. (2014), since there is no way
of ensuring that the modeling error will not be mapped in to the solution, one should
estimate the forward model or not invert the data using the approximate forward model
at all.
Accounting for the modeling error does increase the total noise level in the inversion
which will give a solution with a lower resolution compared to using the best forward
model. A solution equal to the one obtained with the best forward model can hence not
be obtained with the approximate forward model Hansen et al. (2014).
The method used for estimating the modeling error related to the forward model in
ray-based inversion was presented in Hansen et al. (2014). As they discuss, the method is
general and can be used for any type of modeling error. The key to the method is to be
able to describe the source of the modeling error and compute the forward response with
and without the source of the modeling error, such that realizations of the modeling error
can be generated to obtain a sample from the distribution that describes the modeling
error.
6.2
Ray-based Inversion
Travel time inversion
The travel time data were inverted with and without accounting for the estimated forward
modeling error. It was shown that the large-scale features in the reference model are
resolved when the modeling error is taken in to account and when the modeling errors
are disregarded. The mean of the least-squares tomogram is closer to the mean of the
reference model when modeling error is taken into account. The variance is higher when
the modeling error is taken into account as consequence of the increased noise level
included in the inversion. The resolution is approximately the width of the ﬁrst Fresnel
zone, as expected (e.g. Williamson and Worthington, 1993). No apparent artefacts are
mapped into the posterior distribution when disregarding the modeling error. This may
be due to the estimated data measurement uncertainty of 0.4 ns, which may be suﬃciently
large reduce and conceal the eﬀect of disregarding the modeling error, see Hansen et al.
==PAGE:77==
69
6.2. Ray-based Inversion
(2014), or due to the relatively limited variability in the prior model.
Amplitude inversion
The amplitude data were corrected for the radiation patterns of the antennae, approx-
imated with ΘTx = ΘRx = cos(φ), the geometric attenuation of the wave,
√
l, and the
antennae gain eﬀect, A0. The corrected amplitude data were subsequently inverted with
and without taking the estimated modeling error into account. It was shown that arte-
facts are erroneously well-resolved when the modeling error is disregarded, and that the
large-scale structures in the reference model are recovered when the modeling error is
taken in to account.
The large eﬀect of including the modeling errors in ray-based inversion of amplitude
data might be due to the ray-based assumption itself. Holliger and Maurer (2004) showed
that the resulting tomograms from a ray-based inversion of ﬁrst-cycle amplitudes were
contaminated with artefacts resulting from the lack of ability to account for scattering and
diﬀraction eﬀects in a ray-based scheme and that this inability is likely to be the primary
source of artefacts in the corresponding attenuation tomograms. When taking the forward
modeling error into account, the statistics of the scattering eﬀects are approximately
described in the forward modeling error distribution, and it was hence possible to obtain
a tomographic estimate of the attenuation structure that are consistent with the reference
model. The resolution in the inversion result is however signiﬁcantly reduced when the
modeling error is taken into account due to the increased level of noise. This is consistent
with the results obtained for travel time inversion in Hansen et al. (2014). The large-
scale features resolved in the least-squares attenuation tomogram are smoothed out as
expected from a least-squares estimate (e.g. Cordua et al., 2008; Klotzsche et al., 2013)
The parameter values for the attenuation estimates are, however, generally underes-
timated. Amplitude tomography are less robust than travel time tomography due to the
many approximations applied in the pre-inversion data processing. The corrections for
the antennae gain eﬀect, A0, and the radiation patterns, ΘTx = ΘRx = cos(φ), are not
known and are approximated prior to the inversion (Giroux et al., 2007). Furthermore,
the correction for geometric attenuation is strictly only valid in a homogeneous medium
(Peterson, Jr., 2001). For a homogeneous medium, the plotted corrected amplitudes as
a function of ray length, Figure 3.9, would fall along a straight line. The heterogene-
ity of the subsurface (here represented by the reference model) introduces scatter in the
plotted amplitudes, which increases the uncertainty associated with the linear ﬁt and
consequently with the estimate of A0. A bad estimate of A0 will aﬀect the attenuation
estimates. One solution could be to include the variance related to the estimate of A0
in a Bayesian manner as a forward modeling error. This could improve the least-squares
attenuation tomogram but would decrease the resolution additionally.
==PAGE:78==
Chapter 6. Discussion
70
Least-squares estimates
The least-squares estimate of ε is inﬂuenced by the least-squares velocity estimate,
whereas the least-squares estimate for σ is inﬂuenced by both the attenuation and veloc-
ity estimates. Consequently, the σ estimate will be aﬀected by the underestimation of
the attenuation. Since the least-squares tomograms from the ray-based inversion forms
the basis for estimation of the source pulse in the full waveform inversion, it is important
to obtain as good least-squares tomograms as possible.
In the case of high velocity contrasts in the subsurface, the linear approximation of
the forward problem will deviate signiﬁcantly from the full forward problem due to a high
degree of refraction. This will increase the magnitude of the modeling error, which will
decrease the resolution due to an increased noise level. Better least-squares tomograms
could be obtained by using a bended-ray approximation instead of the straight-ray ap-
proximation applied in this study. The inverse problem becomes weakly non-linear and a
solution would then be obtained by an iterative approach, (see e.g. Cordua et al., 2009a).
6.3
Forward Modeling Error in Full Waveform Inversion
As discussed above is Section 6.1, the method applied for estimating modeling errors in
the ray-based inversion is general, and was applied to estimate the forward modeling error
associated with the use of an approximate source wavelet in full waveform inversion.
The estimation of the source wavelet uncertainty was quite time consuming. The
uncertainty estimate was obtained on the basis of 60 prior realizations each associated
with 40 posterior realizations, which generated 600000 realizations of the waveform diﬀer-
ence between the best and approximate forward. The computation time of this estimate
was approximately 80 hours. In Hansen et al. (2014), the accuracy of the estimate of
N(dT , CT ) increases with the number of realizations, and a suﬃciently accurate estimate
of the bias and covariance could possibly be obtained from fewer realizations of the mod-
eling error. It could be interesting to investigate whether an approximate estimate of the
probability distribution for the modeling error could be obtained in approximately 12-18
hours.
The estimation and incorporation of the forward modeling error associated with the
source wavelet estimation assumes that the modeling error can be suﬃciently described by
Gaussian statistics. From the evaluation of the χ2 distributions for the inferred Gaussian
distribution and the observed modeling errors, shown in Figure 4.16, it is seen that the
distributions are only somewhat comparable. This implies that the modeling error is not
suﬃciently described by Gaussian statistics. There are some features in the computed
modeling error, i.e. in the waveform diﬀerences, that are not resolved in the Gaussian
description. This modeling error will, according to Hansen et al. (2014), be mapped into
==PAGE:79==
71
6.4. Monte Carlo Based Full Waveform Inversion
the posterior probability distribution as artefacts.
The estimated bias and covariance describing the forward modeling error, Figure 4.14
and Figure 4.15, primarily concern uncertainty on the amplitude of the waveform data.
A phase shift between the waveform data calculated with the best and approximate for-
ward model will result in a diﬀerence in the waveform amplitude. The modeling error
related to uncertain determination of the phase shift of the source wavelet is hence not
explicitly contained in the estimated forward modeling error. The phase of the source
wavelet, Figure 4.17, is relatively well determined due to the good least-squares estimate
of the velocity distribution, whereas the amplitude is underdetermined due to the under-
estimation of the parameter values in the attenuation least-squares tomogram. Since the
forward modeling error takes the variability of the posterior distributions into account,
the well-resolved velocity distribution will contribute less to the forward modeling error
than the less-resolved attenuation distribution. The forward modeling error included in
the full waveform inversion will increase the total noise level in the inversion, and in-
crease the uncertainty on the waveform data amplitude, in particular. The resolution is
decreased when the noise level is increased, and since the phase shift of the source wavelet
is expected to aﬀect the full waveform estimates of ε and the amplitude diﬀerence is ex-
pected to mainly inﬂuence the σ estimates (Ernst et al., 2007a), the resolution of the σ
estimates will decrease the most.
6.4
Monte Carlo Based Full Waveform Inversion
In this study, the Monte Carlo based full-waveform algorithm developed in Cordua et al.
(2009a, 2012) has been applied. Full waveform inverse estimates of the dielectric per-
mittivity, ε, and electric conductivity, σ, structures have been obtained. The algorithm
was conditioned by the full dataset of 746 traces, and convergence of the algorithm was
obtained after approximately 30000 iterations. The forward modeling error related to the
uncertain source wavelet estimate was quantiﬁed and incorporated in the full waveform
inversion by addition of the Gaussian covariance models describing the data measurement
uncertainty and the forward modeling error arising from the uncertain source wavelet es-
timate. The incorporation of the source wavelet uncertainty increases the total level of
data uncertainties.
Cordua et al. (2012) showed that the Monte Carlo based full-waveform algorithm
was able to reach convergence after approximately 17000 iterations and hence obtain
representative realizations of the a posteriori probability density, when constraining the
algorithm by a waveform data set of 40 traces. Yue et al. (2016) applied the full-waveform
algorithm presented in Cordua et al. (2012) to a waveform data set of 116 traces, but
the algorithm was not able to reach a point where representative realizations from the
==PAGE:80==
Chapter 6. Discussion
72
posterior distribution were obtained, as the log likelihood curve did not reach a constant
level.
The Monte Carlo full-waveform algorithm tries to ﬁt the data within the data un-
certainties. If the data uncertainties are too small, the algorithm will not reach a point
where it samples from the posterior. The increased noise level in this study loosens the
constraints on the algorithm, and convergence is obtained despite the algorithm being
conditioned by a full-waveform data set of 746 traces.
The algorithm was started in the reference models for ε and σ to reduce the burn-in
time and allow for initial testing of the proposed method of incorporating the source
wavelet uncertainty.
The step length in the full waveform inversion is ﬁxed and chosen to be relatively
small, which yields relatively high acceptance probabilities. The total acceptance prob-
ability of getting some model accepted (ε or σ) is 58.2%. FDTD forward calculations
in 24 transmitter positions are computationally expensive, and a too large step length
would give a lower acceptance rate which would give many expensive forward calculations
that were performed without obtaining an accepted model. According to e.g. Mosegaard
(2006) the acceptance rate should lie between 25% and 50%, but since the underlying
probability distribution is unknown, the optimal acceptance rate is not known. The small
step length increases the tendency of the algorithm to explore the same area of the prob-
ability distribution. If the distribution is very complex, eg. non-coherent, with several
modes, a small step length will increase the risk of only exploring one mode. The choice
of a small step length ensures careful sampling of located high-probability areas, but some
region of signiﬁcant probability in the underlying posterior probability distribution, may
be completely missed (Tarantola, 2005). A larger step size would give a higher change
of taking a step suﬃciently long to "jump" from one mode to another. The algorithm
could be run with a large step-size in the burn-in period to shorten the burn-in period.
In this way, large scale structures are established in the burn-in period after which the
algorithm gradually establishes small-scale features (Cordua et al., 2012).
The most commonly applied full waveform algorithm is the adjoint-based method,
developed for GPR applications by Ernst et al. (2007a). A discussion of the pros and
cons of the Monte Carlo based and the adjoint-based full waveform inversion, is out of
the scope of this project. For a discussion of this subject, please refer to Cordua et al.
(2012).
6.4.1
Full waveform inversion results
The observed waveform data were inverted using the Monte Carlo based full waveform
inversion scheme. 8 independent realizations were obtained for ε and for σ, of which 6
independent realizations are shown in Figure 5.4 and Figure 5.6. The mean and variance
==PAGE:81==
73
6.4. Monte Carlo Based Full Waveform Inversion
of 154 realizations were calculated for ε and σ, and are shown in Figure 5.5 and Figure 5.7.
The tomographic estimates of ε and σ from the full waveform inversion have higher
resolution than the estimates obtained from the ray-based inversion, and the high-contrast
structures in the reference model are more accurately delineated in the full waveform
estimates.
In general, the features in all inversion estimates for ε and σ (both ray-based and
full waveform) are stretched in the horizontal direction due to the lower resolution in the
horizontal direction than in the vertical direction.
The full waveform estimates of ε exhibit very high resolution and small-scale fea-
tures that are not resolved in the ray-based inversion estimates for ε are resolved in the
full waveform inversion estimates. The amount of information included in the full wave-
form inversion is much higher than in the ray-based inversion, and since the estimated
source wavelet uncertainty mainly aﬀects the amplitude, ε is well constrained by the
full-waveform data.
The resolution of the inverse estimates of ε is signiﬁcantly higher than the estimates
for σ. This suggests that the dielectric permittivity is more constrained by the waveform
data than the electric conductivity, and as discussed in Section 6.3, the forward model
error included in the full waveform inversion, increases the total data uncertainty on σ
more than on ε, which consequently further reduces the resolution of the σ estimates.
The low-conductivity area in the σ estimates, Figure 5.6, seem well resolved and
the variance of the 154 realizations, Figure 5.7, are very low for this area, almost zero.
The structure of the area does not correspond to the structure in the reference model for
σ, which means that the area is erroneously well-resolved. As discussed in Section 6.3,
the Gaussian description of the forward modeling error may not be suﬃcient and this
erroneously well-resolved area may be a result of mapping the non-described part of the
modeling error into the posterior probability distribution. The full waveform estimates
of σ does, nevertheless, estimate the parameter values signiﬁcantly better than the ray-
based estimates, but the parameter values in the full waveform inversion estimates are still
underestimated. This underestimation does most likely arise from the underestimation
of the source wavelet amplitude, and even though the data uncertainty associated with
this source wavelet estimate is quantiﬁed and included in the full waveform inversion
(CD = Cd +CT ), this data uncertainty is apparently not suﬃcient for accounting for the
underestimated source wavelet amplitude.
This is a clear example of how information propagates through all steps leading
up to the full waveform inversion. The ray-based inversion estimates are inﬂuenced by
the (uncertain) estimation of A0, the approximation of the antennae radiation patterns
ΘTx, ΘRx and estimation of measurement uncertainties. The source wavelet used in the
full waveform inversion are based on the least-squares tomograms for ε and σ from the
==PAGE:82==
Chapter 6. Discussion
74
ray-based inversion, and the underestimation of parameter values for σ in the ray-based
estimates consequently gives underestimation of parameter values in the full waveform
inversion. This motivates further work on improving the ray-based tomograms, and as
discussed in Section 6.2, better least-squares tomograms could be obtained by using a
bended-ray approximation instead of the straight-ray approximation applied in this study,
which could result in better full waveform estimates for σ.
==PAGE:83==
7
Conclusions
In this thesis, I have quantiﬁed the forward modeling error related to using a straight-
ray approximation for inversion of travel time and amplitude data. The modeling error
has been described by a Gaussian probability distribution, and accounted for in the
linear inversion by addition of the covariance models describing the data measurement
uncertainties and forward modeling error. I have demonstrated that accounting for the
forward modeling error eliminates the presence of artefacts in the ray-based inversion
results for amplitude data, caused by scattering and diﬀraction eﬀects. The obtained
least-squares estimates from the ray-based inversion provide good resolution of large scale
features in the velocity distribution and somewhat lower resolution in the attenuation
distribution.
I have presented a novel approach for quantifying the forward modeling error re-
lated to the source wavelet estimate. The forward modeling error arises from using an
approximate source wavelet, estimated in the least-squares tomograms obtained from the
ray-based inversion, in the FDTD forward calculation of waveform data. The best forward
model is a probability distribution that reﬂects the source wavelet uncertainty caused by
the variability in the posterior probability distribution to the ray-based inversion. I have
obtained a probabilistic model of the modeling error in the form of an inferred Gaussian
probability distribution.
The modeling error has been incorporated in the Monte Carlo based full waveform
inversion, and it was demonstrated that accounting for the forward modeling error en-
75
==PAGE:84==
Chapter 7. Conclusions
76
abled sampling of the posterior probability distribution to the full waveform inversion,
conditioned by a full coverage waveform data set of 746 traces, comparable to the wave-
form data set obtained from GPR investigations at the Arrenæs site.
This opens up to the possibility of using a Monte Carlo based full waveform inversion
approach for inverting ﬁeld data from e.g. Arrenæs, if the method for source wavelet un-
certainty estimation can be successfully developed to be applicable for ﬁeld studies. The
computational demands associated with the source wavelet uncertainty estimation and
Monte Carlo based inversion strategies are, however, a challenge for future applications.
==PAGE:85==
References
Al Hagrey, S. A. and Müller, C. (2000). GPR study of pore water content and salinity
in sand. Geophysical Prospecting, 48(1):63–85.
Archie, G. E. (1942). The Electrical Resistivity Log as an Aid in Determining Some
Reservoir Characteristics. Transactions of the AIME, 146(01):54–62.
Binley, A., Cassiani, G., Middleton, R., and Winship, P. (2002). Vadose zone ﬂow model
parameterisation using cross-borehole radar and resistivity imaging. Journal of Hy-
drology, 267(3-4):147–159.
Cordua, K. S., Hansen, T. M., and Mosegaard, K. (2012). Monte Carlo full-waveform
inversion of crosshole GPR data using multiple-point geostatistical a priori information.
Geophysics, 77(2):H19–H31.
Cordua, K. S., Looms, M. C., and Nielsen, L. (2008). Accounting for Correlated Data
Errors during Inversion of Cross-Borehole Ground Penetrating Radar Data. Vadose
Zone Journal, 7(1):263.
Cordua, K. S., Nielsen, L., and Looms, M. C. (2009a). Inversion strategies for interpre-
tation of cross-borehole ground penetrating radar data - inspired by experiments from
Arrenæs. Master’s Thesis.
Cordua, K. S., Nielsen, L., Looms, M. C., Hansen, T. M., and Binley, A. (2009b). Quan-
tifying the inﬂuence of static-like errors in least-squares-based inversion and sequential
simulation of cross-borehole ground penetrating radar data. Journal of Applied Geo-
physics, 68(1):71–84.
Davis, J. L. and Annan, a. P. (1989). Ground-Penetrating Radar for High-Resolution
Mapping of Soil and Rock Stratigraphy. Geophysical Prospecting, 37(May 1988):531–
551.
Ernst, J. R., Green, A. G., Maurer, H., and Holliger, K. (2007a). Application of a new
2D time-domain full-waveform inversion scheme to crosshole radar data. Geophysics,
72(5):J53.
Ernst, J. R., Member, S., Maurer, H., Green, A. G., and Holliger, K. (2007b). Full-
Waveform Inversion of Crosshole Radar Data Based on 2-D Finite-Diﬀerence Time-
Domain Solutions of Maxwell’s Equations. Ieee Transactions on Geoscience and Remote
Sensing, 45(9):2807–2828.
77
==PAGE:86==
References
78
Fang, J. and Wu, Z. (1996). Generalized perfectly matched layer for the absorption of
propagating and evanescent waves in lossless and lossy media. IEEE Transactions on
Microwave Theory and Techniques, 44(12 PART 1):2216–2222.
Giroux, B., Gloaguen, E., and Chouteau, M. (2007). bh_tomo-a Matlab borehole geo-
radar 2D tomography package. Computers and Geosciences, 33(1):126–137.
Gloaguen, E., Marcotte, D., Giroux, B., Dubreuil-Boisclair, C., Chouteau, M., and
Aubertin, M. (2007). Stochastic borehole radar velocity and attenuation tomographies
using cokriging and cosimulation. Journal of Applied Geophysics, 62(2):141–157.
Gueting, N., Vienken, T., Klotzsche, A., van der Kruk, J., Vanderborght, J., Caers, J.,
Vereecken, H., and Englert, A. (2017). High resolution aquifer characterization using
crosshole GPR full-waveform tomography: Comparison with direct-push and tracer
test data. Water Resources Research, 53(1):49–72.
Haarder, E. B., Binley, A., Looms, M. C., Doetsch, J., Nielsen, L., and Jensen, K. H.
(2012). Comparing Plume Characteristics Inferred from Cross-Borehole Geophysical
Data. Vadose Zone Journal, 11(4):1–40.
Hansen, T., Cordua, K., Jacobsen, B., and Mosegaard, K. (2014). Accounting for im-
perfect forward modeling in geophysical inverse problems—Exempliﬁed for crosshole
tomography. Geophysics, 79(1):1–48.
Hansen, T. M., Cordua, K. S., Looms, M. C., and Mosegaard, K. (2013a).
SIPPI:
A Matlab toolbox for sampling the solution to inverse problems with complex prior
information: Part 1-Methodology. Computers and Geosciences, 52:470–480.
Hansen, T. M., Cordua, K. S., Looms, M. C., and Mosegaard, K. (2013b). SIPPI: A Mat-
lab toolbox for sampling the solution to inverse problems with complex prior informa-
tion: Part 2-Application to crosshole GPR tomography. Computers and Geosciences,
52:481–492.
Hansen, T. M., Cordua, K. S., and Mosegaard, K. (2012). Inverse problems with non-
trivial priors: Eﬃcient solution through sequential Gibbs sampling. Computational
Geosciences, 16(3):593–611.
Hansen, T. M., Looms, M. C., and Nielsen, L. (2008). Inferring the Subsurface Struc-
tural Covariance Model Using Cross-Borehole Ground Penetrating Radar Tomography.
Vadose Zone Journal, 7(1):249.
Hansen, T. M. and Mosegaard, K. (2008). VISIM: Sequential simulation for linear inverse
problems. Computers and Geosciences, 34(1):53–76.
Holliger, K. and Maurer, H. (2004). Eﬀects of stochastic heterogeneity on ray-based tomo-
graphic inversion of crosshole georadar amplitude data. Journal of Applied Geophysics,
56(3):177–193.
Holliger, K., Musil, M., and Maurer, H. R. (2001). Ray-based amplitude tomography
for crosshole georadar data: A numerical assessment. Journal of Applied Geophysics,
47(3-4):285–298.
==PAGE:87==
79
References
Irving, J. D., Knoll, M. D., and Knight, R. J. (2007). Improving crosshole radar velocity
tomograms: A new approach to incorporating high-angle traveltime data. Geophysics,
72(4):J31–J41.
Kearey, P., Brooks, M., and Hill, I. (2002). An Introduction to Geophysical Exploration.
Blackwell Science.
Keskinen, J., Klotzsche, A., Looms, M. C., Moreau, J., Kruk, J. V. D., Holliger, K.,
Stemmerik, L., and Nielsen, L. (2017). Full-Waveform Inversion of Crosshole GPR
Data: Implications for Porosity Estimation in Chalk. Journal of Applied Geophysics.
Klotzsche, A., Jan van der Kruk, Niklas Linde, Joseph Doetsch, and Harry Vereecken
(2013). 3-D characterization of high-permeability zones in a gravel aquifer using 2-D
crosshole GPR full-waveform inversion and waveguide detection. Geophysical Journal
International, 195(2):932–944.
Klotzsche, A., Kruk, J. V. D., Meles, G. A., Doetsch, J., Maurer, H., Linde, N., Van Der
Kruk, J., Meles, G. A., Doetsch, J., Maurer, H., and Linde, N. (2010). Full-waveform
inversion of cross-hole ground-penetrating radar data to characterize a gravel aquifer
close to the Thur River, Switzerland. Near Surface Geophysics, 8(6):635–649.
Lekić, V. and Romanowicz, B. (2011). Inferring upper-mantle structure by full waveform
tomography with the spectral element method.
Geophysical Journal International,
185(2):799–831.
Looms, M. C., Hansen, T. M., Cordua, K. S., Nielsen, L., Jensen, K. H., and Binley, A.
(2010). Geostatistical inference using crosshole ground-penetrating radar. Geophysics,
75(6):J29–J41.
Looms, M. C., Jensen, K. H., Binley, A., and Nielsen, L. (2008). Monitoring Unsaturated
Flow and Transport Using Cross-Borehole Geophysical Methods. Vadose Zone Journal,
7(1):227.
Lytle, R. J., Laine, E. F., Lager, D. L., and Davis, D. T. (1979). Cross-borehole electro-
magnetic probing to locate high-contrast anomalies. Geophysics, 44(10):1667–1676.
Meles, G. A., Van Der Kruk, J., Greenhalgh, S. A., Ernst, J. R., Maurer, H., and Green,
A. G. (2010). A new vector waveform inversion algorithm for simultaneous updating
of conductivity and permittivity parameters from combination crosshole/borehole-to-
surface GPR data. IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing, 48(9):3391–
3407.
Molyneux, J. B. and Schmitt, D. R. (1999). First-break timing: Arrival onset times by
direct correlation. Geophysics, 64(5):1492–1501.
Moran, M. and Greenﬁeld, R. (1993). Radar signature of a 2.5-D tunnel. Geophysics,
58(11):1573–1587.
Mosegaard, K. (1998). Resolution analysis of general inverse problems through inverse
Monte Carlo sampling. Inverse Problems, 14(3):405.
==PAGE:88==
References
80
Mosegaard, K. (2006). Monte Carlo Analysis of Inverse Problems. University of Copen-
hagen, Copenhagen.
Mosegaard, K. and Tarantola, A. (1995). Monte Carlo sampling of solutions to inverse
problems. Journal of Geophysical Research: Solid Earth, 100(B7):12431–12447.
Nielsen, L., Looms, M. C., Hansen, T. M., Cordua, K. S., and Stemmerik, L. (2010).
Estimation of Chalk Heterogeneity from Stochastic Modeling Conditioned by Crosshole
GPR Traveltimes and Log Data. Advances in Near-Surface Seismology and Ground-
penetrating Radar, 15(May 2010):379–396.
Olsson, O., Falk, L., Forslund, O., Lundmark, L., and Sandberg, E. (1992). Borehole radar
applied to the characterization of hydraulically conductive fracture zones in crystalline
rock. Geophysical Prospecting, 40(2):109–142.
Peterson, Jr., J. E. (2001). Pre-inversion Corrections and Analysis of Radar Tomographic
Data. Journal of Environmental and Engineering Geophysics, 6(1):1–18.
Reynolds, J. M. (2011).
An Introduction to Applied and Environmental Geophysics.
Wiley-Blackwell, 2nd edition.
Scholer, M., Irving, J., Looms, M. C., Nielsen, L., and Holliger, K. (2012). Bayesian
Markov-chain-Monte-Carlo inversion of time-lapse crosshole GPR data to characterize
the vadose zone at the Arrenaes site, Denmark. (Special Section: Model-data fusion in
the vadose zone.). Vadose Zone Journal, 11(4):153.
Singh, P. K. and Sinha, A. A. (2013). Rock fragmentation by blasting : Fragblast 10 :
proceedings of the 10th International Symposium on Rock Fragmentation by Blasting,
New Delhi, India, 26-29 November, 2012. CRC Press.
Spetzler, J. and Snieder, R. (2004). The Fresnel volume and transmitted waves. Geo-
physics, 69(3):653.
Tarantola, A. (1984). Inversion of seismic reﬂection data in the acoustic approximation.
Geophysics, 49(8):1259–1266.
Tarantola, A. (1986). A strategy for nonlinear elastic inversion of seismic reﬂection data.
Geophysics, 51(10):1893–1903.
Tarantola, A. (2005). Inverse problem theory and methods for model parameter estimation.
Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics.
Topp, G. C., Davis, J. L., and Annan, A. P. (1980). Electromagnetic Determination of
Soil Water Content:. Water Resources Research, 16(3):574–582.
van der Kruk, J. (2015). Tools and Techniques: Ground-Penetrating Radar. In Treatise
on Geophysics, pages 209–232. Elsevier, 2nd edition.
Williamson, P. R. and Worthington, M. H. (1993). Resolution limits in ray tomography
due to wave behaviout: Numerical experiments. Geophysics, 58(5):727–735.
==PAGE:89==
81
References
Yue, L., Yue, J., Liu, Z., Qi, X., and Coruda, K. S. (2016). Electromagnetic Full Waveform
Inversion based on Bayesian Markov-chain Monte-Carlo Method. Conference paper.
Zhou, B. and Fullagar, P. K. (2001). Delineation of sulphide ore-zones by borehole radar
tomography at Hellyer Mine, Australia. Journal of Applied Geophysics, 47(3-4):261–
269.
==PAGE:90==
==PAGE:91==

%564QBDF%BONBSLT5FLOJTLF6OJWFSTJUFU
&MFLUSPWFKCZHOJOH
,HT-ZOHCZ

XXXTQBDFEUVEL


