==PAGE:1==
Multilingual Search Engines
Nicolai Dahl, s113411
Christian Andersen, s113990
DTU Compute
Technical University of Denmark
June 2nd, 2017
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract (English)
This thesis deals with the objective of developing a multilingual search engine,
that incorporates data from multiple languages. It investigates how one can go
about creating a ﬂexible and dynamic code structure, that allows easy addition
of new languages as well as easy maintenance.
The thesis also describes how the solution has automated all processes from
gathering data to showing ﬁnal results on a website hosted with a cloud service.
Lastly, the thesis explains results and tests performed on each dataset to evaluate
the quality.
==PAGE:4==
Abstract (Danish)
Denne afhandling omhandler udviklingen af en multi sprogs søgemaskine der
inkluderer data fra adskillige sprog. Afhandlingen undersøger hvordan man kan
lave en ﬂeksibel og dynamisk kode struktur, der muliggør det at tilføje nye sprog,
samt at skulle udføre minimal vedligeholdelse.
Afhandlingen beskriver også hvordan løsningen har automatiseret alle processer
fra indsamling af data, til at vise de endelige resultater på en hjemmeside, der
er hosted af en cloud service. Til sidst forklarer afhandlingen de resultater og
tests der er udført på hvert datasæt, for at evaluere kvaliteten.
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at DTU Compute in fulﬁllment of the requirements
for acquiring a M.Sc. in Engineering, within Digital Media Engineering. The
project was completed in the period 02-01/2017 to 02-06/2017 and is rated at
30 ECTS points. The project has been supervised by Professor Ole Winther
and MSc Dan Tito Svenstrup.
The thesis deals with the issue of multilingual search engines, particularly the
search engine developed by the company FindZebra. The purpose is to develop
web crawlers for gathering data from diﬀerent sources pertaining to rare diseases,
in a chosen language.
All work has been divided equally in the group
Lyngby, 02-June-2017
Christian Andersen
Nicolai Dahl
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank our supervisor Ole Winther for setting up this project
and providing feedback. We would also like to thank our co-supervisors Dan
Svenstrup from DTU compute and Jonas Hansen from the company FindZebra,
for their continuous support and feedback during the project period.
Furthermore, both of us would like to express our gratitude towards the in-
terest shown in our project, and that FindZebra might use our work in their
production.
==PAGE:7==
List of Acronyms
API
Application Programming Interface
GUI
Graphical User Interface
PubMed
Publications of Medicine
OMIM
Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man
IDE
Integrated Development Environment
CUI
Concept Unique Identiﬁer
JSON
JavaScript Object Notation
SQL
Structured Query Language
URL
Uniform Resource Locator
MRR
Mean Reciprocal Rank
JSP
Java Servlet Pages
PaaS
Platform as a service
IaaS
Infrastructure as a service
HTML
Hypertext markup language
CSS
Cascading Style Sheets
JS
Javascript
DBMS
Database Management System
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract (English)
i
Abstract (Danish)
ii
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
iv
List of Acronyms
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Problem deﬁnition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Related work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.4
Outline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Project management
5
2.1
Project and code plan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.1
Milestones . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Source control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3
Architecture
8
3.1
Code structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.1.1
Folder structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.1.2
Modules and helpers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.1.3
Class diagrams . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4
Multilingual web crawling framework
13
4.1
Identifying potential sources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4.2
A fast and powerful scraping tool . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4.2.1
X-Path and selectors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.2.2
Item pipeline and multilingual support . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.3
Multiprocessing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.3.1
A multiprocessing python library . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.4
Logging system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.4.1
Crawling log
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.4.2
CUI retrieval log . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.4.3
SQL logs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
==PAGE:10==
CONTENTS
viii
5
Data storing
27
5.1
Database Management System
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.2
Database design
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5.2.1
Disease table . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.2.2
Translation table . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.2.3
Watson Question table . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.3
External data sources
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.4
Optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
6
Graphical user interface
33
6.1
Flask - python micro framework
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
6.1.1
Context Processors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
6.1.2
Partial views and master views . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
6.1.3
Progress bars and blocked content
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
7
Shared computer processing
38
7.1
Cloud Computing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
7.2
Platform as a service . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
7.2.1
Google App Engine
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
7.3
Infrastructure as a service . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
7.3.1
Google Compute Engine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
7.3.2
Bitnami . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
8
Index based search engine
42
8.1
Index based searching
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
8.2
Apache Solr . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
8.2.1
Web search query . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
9
Tests and results
47
9.1
Concept unique identiﬁer as a sorting metric
. . . . . . . . . . .
47
9.2
Search accuracy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
9.3
Performance optimizations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
10 Discussion
55
11 Conclusion
58
11.1 Future Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
A Appendix 1
60
A.1 Project Plan
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
A.2 Programming plan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
A.3 Folder Structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
A.4 Crawling Diagram
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
A.5 Uploading Diagram . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
A.6 Graphical user interface Diagram . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
==PAGE:11==
CONTENTS
ix
A.7 Data ﬂowchart for translation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
A.8 Data ﬂowchart for gathering data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
B Appendix 2
70
B.1
Website design and functionality
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
Bibliography
73
==PAGE:12==
Chapter 1
Introduction
This chapter will introduce the reader to the motivation behind the project,
as well as give an insight into how the project is deﬁned. Furthermore, it will
include related work from the industry and ﬁnally give an outline of the thesis.
1.1
Motivation
The annual growth of the internet appears to be around 100% [CO99], and is
followed by an increasing interest in learning how to use this growth of data
for something useful. In our case, the vast amount of informative knowledge
about diseases and their corresponding symptoms are spread around accessible
websites and databases. These valuable data sources are mostly administrated
by national health care systems and are therefore only searchable by people
familiar with the native language. The need for a search engine that supports
cross-language information is high. By that we mean data sharing among lan-
guages to help diagnose a patient or identify a disease. Furthermore, physicians
and even more so patients, prefer to work in their native language, and are also
demanding high accuracy on expected search results, which require a lot of data.
Currently FindZebra’s search engine only supports the English language and
we would like to rewrite the engine to be compatible with multiple languages
(Danish, French, German and English). The product should give the end-user
e.g.
a French person, the ability to search within the French database but
also coherently retrieve results from other supported languages. This way of
searching should give an increase in ﬁnding the correct disease, as well as be
able to search in ones native language.
1.2
Problem deﬁnition
The problem deﬁnition for this project has been developed by the company
FindZebra. As the title of the thesis describes, this project deals with multi-
lingual search engines, and as such the goal is to develop an application that
==PAGE:13==
1.3 Related work
2
supports multiple languages. This involves ﬁnding candidate languages which
has suﬃcient amount of available sources, that contain high quality medical in-
formation.
When sources have been identiﬁed, web crawlers must be developed to retrieve
information. The succeeding step involves creating an index based database us-
ing Apache Solr, which will work as the search engine for the FindZebra website.
The gathered data must be tested and validated with a series of test queries.
However, these queries exist only in English, and as such they have to be trans-
lated to the languages identiﬁed as candidates. A ﬁrst go is to use a translation
API to translate the queries.
Furthermore, the search engine should be able to utilize multiple languages, and
by extension give information in a selected supported language. Additionally,
there should be symptom and disease synonym resources built into the appli-
cation as there currently is for the English version. Finally, scripts and tools
should be created for making the process of gathering data as automated as
possible.
1.3
Related work
FindZebra has published an article where they are comparing an earlier version
of their own engine against Google, PubMed and OMIM [SJW15]. In this article
they look at the results their own engine is capable of, compared to the other
search engines. What is interesting is that the test results indicate that there is
a signiﬁcant improvement in ﬁnding a correct diagnosis compared to the other
engines. As we are trying to expand FindZebra’s database with more languages,
we strive to provide roughly the same accuracy for each language as FindZebra
had for their English sources. For a selected set of queries with a known diagnosis
they found that at recall@10 their engine provided an accuracy of 59% and at
recall@20 it was 64%. This was signiﬁcantly higher than the other engines, that
only managed to provide around 33% as the highest accuracy value.
A research done by Microsoft, has shown that web search data might help to
diagnose a serious illness early [PWH16]. In the article they found that they
were able to identify 5-15% of the cases, while having a very low false-positive
rate. This shows the potential of having an accurate online tool for diagnose, so
that diseases might be caught early. Our goal is to create a platform that will
be able to provide a plausible diagnosis based upon symptom queries, instead
of relying on search history dating back months.
There are other search engines that specializes in diseases like PubMed, however
==PAGE:14==
1.4 Outline
3
these sources work only in English, and as the research done by FindZebra
suggests, they have lower accuracy than what FindZebra is able to provide.
This evidence suggests that sources from other languages might be needed to
improve diagnose time and accuracy in areas where English is not the native
language.
1.4
Outline
Chapter 2 - Project Management. A chapter that gives an insight into
project planning including a project plan, code plan and source control setup.
Chapter 3 - Architecture. The chapter provides knowledge about the archi-
tecture of the multilingual search engine developed. Followed by key observa-
tions about both ideas and thoughts going into the data ﬂow.
Chapter 4 - Multilingual web crawling framework.
The multilingual
aspect of the application that is the research of this project, will be presented
in this chapter.
Some keywords of this chapter includes scraping, selectors,
multiprocessing and logging.
Chapter 5 - Database management system. This chapter describes key
elements of a database management system including the ﬁnal database setup
of our platform. Rounding the chapter oﬀwith a discussion of optimizations we
have made.
Chapter 6 - Graphical user interface. The interface of our program will
be presented in this chapter, with an introduction into the python microframe-
work “Flask” used as the backend of the GUI. Moreover, this chapter provides
information about context processors, partial views and JQuery plugins.
Chapter 7 - Shared computer processing. This chapter is intended as a
ﬁrst hands-on interaction with shared computer processing. More speciﬁcally,
it is about platform and infrastructure as a service within the Google Cloud.
Chapter 8 - Index based search engine. The technical details of the search
engine will be described in this chapter, going into index based data as well as
a description of how we use Apache Solr.
Chapter 9 - Tests and results of the framework will be presented and dis-
cussed in this chapter. That includes search accuracy, automation, sorting met-
rics and performance.
==PAGE:15==
1.4 Outline
4
Chapter 10 - Discussion. The contributions of this thesis becomes subject
to discussion. That is, this chapter will investigate the validity of the results as
well as discuss the challenges we have faced.
Chapter 11 - Conclusion. We round the project up with a conclusion and a
discussion of future ideas.
==PAGE:16==
Chapter 2
Project management
This chapter provides insight into the planning process that happened before
and during the project. It will outline how we structured tasks and dealt with
milestones. Furthermore, it will show how we worked with source control for
diﬀerent versions of our product.
2.1
Project and code plan
During the ﬁrst days of the project, we set out to create an overall plan that had
the purpose of estimating what we should do each week. This plan can be seen
in the Appendix under A.1. We decided to give each week a number from 1 to 4
representing how important it was to ﬁnish on time, where 1 is very important
and 4 is least important. This also worked as a reference for how much detail
needed to go into the work at the given period, meaning that some parts of the
project was less critical than other parts. An example would be the ﬁrst two
weeks, where we only had to setup the tools we needed and acquire knowledge
about FindZebra’s framework. The reason for having these as less critical, is
that we would gain knowledge during the process of development, and it is hard
to say when you have enough knowledge to mark the task as completed. During
the end of each week we would evaluate the progress, and readjust the plan if
we needed to reprioritize some of the work.
The project plan was only able to give a broad overview of what we needed to
do. This spawned the creation of a plan that contained all the programming
tasks that we needed to carry out. Part of our programming plan can be seen in
appendix A.2. To structure the work, we divided everything into categories e.g.
“French crawlers”. Under each category we created the tasks, gave each task an
assignee and ﬁnally gave a description and a progress, which were either: “In
progress”, “Testing Phase” or “Done”.
The continuous updating of the plan allowed us to have a great overview of
our programming progress, and opened the possibility of working in an agile
manner, because we would be able to reorganize the tasks depending on our
current situation.
==PAGE:17==
2.2 Source control
6
2.1.1
Milestones
Our project plan also served as a general guideline for our milestones throughout
the project. A milestone can be seen whenever our focus shifts. As an example,
week 5 and 6 was dedicated to creating the pipeline for data ﬂow, which marked
week 7 as a milestone, because the work from the previous weeks had to be
wrapped up and completed, to a degree where it would be functioning to a
satisfying level.
Milestones were of great importance to the project, as it marked crucial points
in the development and allowed us to push the project forward, and expand it
with additional content. Additionally, we used these milestones to evaluate our
current progress and see if we had the time to ﬁnish our tasks, or if we had to
reevaluate the project. Fortunately, we were able to keep up with the ambitious
milestones we had set.
2.2
Source control
Besides the need of having both a project and programming plan, we needed
a version- and source control program that would allow us to split and work
simultaneously on the same part of the project. Since we both had experience
with GitHub and it oﬀered exactly what we wanted, we decided to use that.
As ﬁgure 2.1 illustrates we had a master branch, that would serve as our
main branch until the platform was stable and working locally. A branch in
Github represents an environment in which you can work without aﬀecting other
branches or environments. In our case, we chose that our main branch should
be the master, and it should always be working, meaning that it should not
contain broken features. From the master branch we would create new branches
to work on a given feature, test and validate it and ﬁnally merge the feature
back into the master branch.
When the development ﬁnished in the local environment, we decided to host
it on a trial version of Google cloud. This meant that we needed to rewrite
connection strings within our locally functioning code. Therefore, we created a
branch from master with the purpose of working as a base branch for the cloud
development. From there, we could create other branches with speciﬁc cloud
changes.
In the end we have four branches that needs to be maintained, where only two of
==PAGE:18==
2.2 Source control
7
them are used for actual production. The master branch should be maintained
for local testing. The three branches that we have for the cloud are the main
cloud branch, which serves as a backup, and two other cloud branches, which
each handle diﬀerent parts of the application that is hosted in the cloud. This
will be explained in greater detail in chapter 7.
Figure 2.1: Illustration of branch structure
==PAGE:19==
Chapter 3
Architecture
The architecture of the project has been of great importance to us. We take
pride in have created a program where the source code is easy to navigate and
the data ﬂow makes sense.
This chapter will give insight into the thoughts
and reasons behind the choices we have made during the development of the
architecture.
3.1
Code structure
During the development of our application we have striven to make the pipeline
as dynamic and automated as possible. Not only does this make changes and
extensions easier to work with but it also eases up the work ﬂow for the end
user when crawling new data.
Since we made the code as automated as possible it was highly important to
maintain a speciﬁc structure of the code. We decided to diﬀerentiate our code
into three diﬀerent areas.
Figure 3.1: The code structure
It resembles the MVC architecture, which also involves the same principles[MVC].
The reason for choosing this model, is that we are able to separate each part of
==PAGE:20==
3.1 Code structure
9
the program into “blocks”. This have some advantages that will become evident
when we discuss some of the results that we have found.
We put great eﬀort into deﬁning the outputs of each layer. This allowed us to do
any work we desired to pave the way, to the ﬁnal output as eﬃcient as possible.
The work will not aﬀect the other layers as long as the deﬁnition of the ﬁnal
output is enforced. If you change the output deﬁnition of a layer you will aﬀect
the succeeding layer. If this happens continuously during development, it can
get tiresome to redevelop parts of a layer, so we kept output changes small.
3.1.1
Folder structure
The ﬁrst thing we did during the development was work out a structure of the
folders inside the IDE we used. In the beginning we did not yet have a complete
overview of the entire project, but we had an initial structure which looked like
this:
• Language(Folder)
– Spiders (Python script)
• Helpers (Folder)
– Translation_helper (Python script)
– UMLS_helper (Python script)
– DB_Helper (Python script)
• Dataﬁles (Folder)
– JSON ﬁles
– Other dataﬁles
• Disease_item (Scrapy object)
During development we reworked our folder structure for better management,
and an easier way of ﬁnding speciﬁc scripts, which was needed. A ﬁnal folder
structure can be seen in the appendix A.3.
As can be seen we have divided our scripts into folders which describe the func-
tionality, e.g. all scripts pertaining to crawling has been put into the folder
called “Crawling”. The “Spiders” folder is of particular interest, since this struc-
ture allow us to easily run web crawlers for an entire language separately, but
this will be described in more detail in section 4.3.1.
==PAGE:21==
3.1 Code structure
10
3.1.2
Modules and helpers
For our project we needed custom functions that could help us when gathering
data. In python a module is a ﬁle containing deﬁnitions and statements[Mod].
We have created an entire logging system for our program, that will be described
later, but this system has been created as a module. What we are able to do
with this, is import the module into a ﬁle, and then call functions from the
module. This saves us from having the same code in all ﬁles that need the same
functionality.
Figure 3.2: Illustration of a module
Besides the modules we have also created a ﬁle containing static variables
that may be used throughout the entire program.
The ﬁle is called Lan-
guage_Enum.py, and contains the following static variables and functions:
• URL’s for google and wiki translation
• API keys
• Connection string for databases
• Enums for our language abbreviations
• Dictionary containing month name to number for each supported language
• Function to transform a date containing the month as text to number
For security reasons the script containing vital information like connection strings
and API keys, should be kept oﬀversion control.
==PAGE:22==
3.1 Code structure
11
3.1.3
Class diagrams
We have created class diagrams for each of the sub-systems that we have. It
can mainly be broken into three parts:
• Data gathering
• Uploading data
• GUI for displaying data
It should be noted that we had some early ideas for the setup, which helped
guide us. These were written on a paper, which we have chosen not to show,
since they make little sense for the reader.
Instead we show the ﬁnal class
diagrams, which give a much more clear picture of the architecture.
The class diagram for our data gathering can be seen in the appendix A.4. It
is a rather large and complex diagram, and a lot of it will be explained in the
next chapter, because the system involves the framework which the chapter is
about. However, to give a brief overview, the diagram shows that everything
originates from the CrawlingController.py. In the method main, we check
if the database for the selected language exist and then we create the initial
directories for the logging ﬁles. After the initial setup, we start the selected
crawlers, and from there we run through our pipeline, and ﬁnally upload the
collected data to a MySQL database.
The next sub-system is uploading the data that was previously gathered to
our Apache Solr database. The diagram for that can be seen in appendix A.5.
Details about how we have conﬁgured our Solr database is explained in chapter
8. The Solr_uploader class is the main class that controls the uploading. It
connects to a disease table within a language database and retrieve all of its
data.
Each data item is then converted into a python dictionary while also fetching
its corresponding genes with the help of our Geneassociation_Helper class.
This class looks in another MySQL database, for genes associated with the
disease CUI. The associated genes are placed inside the dictionary described
above. Finally, the entire object is uploaded to the selected Solr language core.
The last part of our system is the graphical user interface. This system make
use of the two other sub-systems that was described before, as can be seen if
one look in appendix A.6.
From the diagram we can see that the class main creates the app, by calling
==PAGE:23==
3.1 Code structure
12
the create_app function in the script __init__.
This has the purpose
of creating an object called app, which contains all the nested functions of
the script.
The admin script is controlling all the administrative functions,
like initializing crawling or uploading, while __init__ has the functions for
searching through the Solr database.
==PAGE:24==
Chapter 4
Multilingual web crawling
framework
This chapter will go in depth with the framework Scrapy, that we have used to
gather data from websites. We start by giving an introduction to how we have
identiﬁed potential sources with medical information, followed by a description
of Scrapy, how it works and how we have used it. Additionally, we will go in
depth with the steps of the Scrapy pipeline, and how we have made it work for
multiple languages. Finally, there will be an explanation of how we increased
the speed of our program with multiprocessing and a section about our extensive
logging system.
4.1
Identifying potential sources
To identify a potential source, there are some considerations about the source
in question that one should have.
When a source is identiﬁed one should check where the material originates from.
If the source is from a forum, blog or any other medium that is not maintained
by medically trained individuals, one should generally avoid them. This can be
challenging when the sources have to be in multiple languages. It increases in
diﬃculty as the knowledge of the language decreases. The easiest way when
you have little knowledge about a language, is to try and identify if the author
of an article has medical training.
With this in mind we have managed to
ﬁlter out articles during our data gathering, if they were written by journalists
etc. Otherwise, one would have to hire translators to help identify sources, or
use Google translate. The use of Google translate can be a challenge for large
articles, since its accuracy might not be the best depending on the language in
question, and the formatting of the text[GTr]. In our case we had to rely mostly
on Google translate, since we are both inexperienced in many of the languages
we have chosen, and thus some sources should be double checked by people with
proﬁciency in the language.
The sources we have chosen are the following:
• Danish
==PAGE:25==
4.2 A fast and powerful scraping tool
14
– apoteket.dk. Maintained by the Danish pharmacy association
– min.medicin.dk. Maintained by doctors
– netdoktor.dk. Most articles are written by doctors
– sundhed.dk. Maintained by the government, regions and municipal-
ities
– sygevoksne/sygeboern.dk. Maintained by doctors
– wikipedia.dk. Was used as a source by Findzebra in English
• French
– doctissimo.fr. Founded by doctors
– informationhspitaliere.com. A website for medical professionals
– orpha.net. A source already used for the English database
– passeportsante.net. Content is reviewed by medical professionals
– santeweb.ch. Mixture of doctors and experts
– vulgaris-medical.com. Maintained by experts and bloggers
– wikipedia.fr. Was used as a source by Findzebra in English
• German
– apotheken.de. German website for pharmacies
– internisten-im-netz.de. Content reviewed by medical experts
– netdoktor.de. Content by doctors and medical journalists
– onmeda.de. Content written by medical journalists
– orpha.net. A source already used for the English database
– apotheken-umschau.de. Mixture of doctors and experts
– wikipedia.de. Was used as a source by Findzebra in English
The list is rather long, and we have tried to ﬁnd as many sources as possible.
In our system we already have two sources for Italian and Spanish, which is
Orphanet and Wikipedia.
4.2
A fast and powerful scraping tool
Scrapy is an open source framework for crawling websites and extracting data[Scr].
This makes the tool ideal for our purpose of gathering data from diﬀerent
==PAGE:26==
4.2 A fast and powerful scraping tool
15
sources.
When using Scrapy one has to create speciﬁc “Spiders” for each web page. This
is due to the vastly diﬀerent ways of building a website.
In the spider that one creates you need to deﬁne the URL to start at, as well as
other optional variables to control the spider.
class ApoteketdkSpider(scrapy.Spider):
name = "apoteketdk"
language = "Danish"
allowed_domains = ["apoteket.dk"]
letters = ’ABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZ’
start_urls =
[’http://www.apoteket.dk/Sygdomsleksikon.aspx?AlfabeticListFirstLetter=’
+ letter for letter in letters ]
Figure 4.1: Small sample of a Scrapy spider
Figure 4.1 is from the spider that we have created to crawl apoteket.dk. The
variable name deﬁnes the name of the spider, which is important for the logging
system as well as when initiating the spider. The variable language is used for
logging statistics. allowed_domains speciﬁes which domains are allowed to be
crawled, so we do not get redirected to other websites. There is also a variable
called start_urls, which is a list containing the URLs from which to start the
crawling. In the example we can start directly from a site containing the “table
of content”, which is deﬁned by the start letter of the diseases. Following this,
we create all the links for each letter available on the website.
The rest of the spider is speciﬁed speciﬁcally for that website, but the start is
identical across all spiders, since these are basic information it needs. One needs
to identify which parts of the website you want. For example if one knows that
you need to get URLs linking to articles, you have to create multiple methods
to handle each step. This means one method for handling the scraping of the
URL, which is then parsed on to the next method which handles the scraping
of the new URL. Depending on the website, you have to create x amount of
methods for getting the data you want.
In ﬁgure 4.2 we see the crawling steps of the same spider we showed earlier. The
speciﬁc website needed two methods for crawling the data. The ﬁrst method
parse, handles the scraping of the URLs deﬁned in the start_urls list and
parses the response of that to the next method called parse_disease. This
method extracts the data from the articles of the website. We will go into detail
about how we extract data in section 4.2.1.
One should also take note of the keyword yield. This is used by Scrapy because
==PAGE:27==
4.2 A fast and powerful scraping tool
16
it is a fast way of passing something on to a new method. Yield will create a
generator, which is an iterable that you can iterate once and is therefore very
memory eﬃcient.
def parse( self , response):
if (LogCrawling.CheckResponseStatus(self.name,response)):
disease_paths = response.xpath(’//select/option/@value’).extract()
for disease_path in disease_paths:
url = ’http://www.apoteket.dk’ + disease_path
yield scrapy.Request(url, callback=self.parse_disease)
def parse_disease(self , response):
if (LogCrawling.CheckResponseStatus(self.name,response)):
try:
last_edited =
response.xpath(’//div[@class="ArticleDate"]/text()’).extract() [0]. strip () [-13:]
editedDate = helper.month_to_num(self.language, last_edited)
datetime_object = datetime.strptime(editedDate, ’%d. %m.
%Y’).date()
except:
datetime_object = None
yield Disease_Item(
title =response.xpath(’//h1[@class="bordered"]/text()’).extract()[0]. strip () ,
content=’’.join(response.xpath(’//p |
//h3[@class="sectionheader"]’).extract()),
source=self.name,
source_url=response.url,
article_date=datetime_object
)
Figure 4.2: Larger sample of a Scrapy spider
We have already touched upon how we use Scrapy in our project, and that each
spider requires speciﬁc code to scrape the data we want. We have chosen to use
this framework because of the pipeline it provides (which is explained in detail
in section 4.2.2), and the ﬂexibility to expand this pipeline.
In ﬁgure 4.3 one can see how we start the crawlers. When we call Crawler-
Process, we are creating something called a twisted reactor. In the for loop we
ﬁnd all the selected crawlers, and then make a call to CrawlerProcess.crawl,
with the spider as an argument. When selecting the spiders, one can now see
the eﬀect of placing them within language folders, because then the loop only
has to look into the speciﬁed language directory.
Since Scrapy provides the ability to run multiple crawlers asynchronously, every
==PAGE:28==
4.2 A fast and powerful scraping tool
17
crawler will start running when we call CrawlerProcess.start.
When spiders are running asynchronously, it means that they can send new
requests before a current request is processed.
This allows for fast crawling
and that is ideal for us, because we are then able to crawl many sources in a
reasonably timed manner.
process = CrawlerProcess(get_project_settings())
crawler_list = []
crawler_count = 0
for ﬁlename in os. listdir ("Spiders/"+language.value):
if ﬁlename.endswith(".py") and ﬁlename in spiderDict[language.value]:
crawler_list .append(ﬁlename[:-3])
crawler_count += 1
process.crawl(ﬁlename [:-3])
process. start ()# the script will block here until the crawling is ﬁnished
Figure 4.3: How to start the crawlers
Additionally, we have created multiple processes for each language, which we
will explain in section 4.3, but it further increased the need to structure our
spiders accordingly.
4.2.1
X-Path and selectors
When scraping data from a website it is a necessity to be able to specify pre-
ciously what you want to scrape, such that you don’t get unwanted content
e.g. navigation bars or advertisement. For this purpose Scrapy comes with its
own built in mechanism called selectors that “select” the data. The way these
selectors decide what and where to scrape is by the help of XPath and/or CSS
selector expressions.
• XPath is a language for selecting nodes in Extensible Markup Language
(XML) documents but can also be used with the HyperText Markup Lan-
guage (HTML) ﬁles, since both of them work in a similar manner and are
both a markup language.
• CSS is the abbreviation of Cascading Style Sheets and are used for de-
scribing the presentation of a document written in a markup language.
==PAGE:29==
4.2 A fast and powerful scraping tool
18
For our project we used XPath in each of our crawlers to deﬁne exactly what
content we wanted from a speciﬁc website. A key thing when creating these
XPath strings is to look for similarities within the website. This will save a lot
of time as well as make it easier to create the selectors. In ﬁgure 4.4 one can
see an XPath string of one of our German sources that looks for a li element
within the HTML page. For each li elements it checks if it has a descendant
node containing the text string Krankheiten, and then ﬁnally returning all of
the href links of that nodes children list.
url_list = response.xpath(’//li[descendant::span[contains(text() ,
"Krankheiten")]]//li//a/@href’).extract()
Figure 4.4: XPath string to scrape URLs for diseases
As described above it is sometimes hard to make a perfect selector for all web
pages on a website, because you generally deﬁne a generic XPath string, that
are used for all web pages on the website. This will result in some of the scraped
diseases containing noise, which will be placed inside the database. If desired,
one can go manually into each web page and precisely deﬁne the exact content
to scrape. This is a tedious process and not recommended, since one normally
crawl thousands of web pages.
4.2.2
Item pipeline and multilingual support
In this section we will look at the Scrapy pipeline and how we have used it
within our implementation to modify and extract content.
As described Scrapy comes with a built-in functionality called an “Item pipeline”.
This pipeline serves the purpose of doing post processing on crawled data after
it has been gathered and saved to an item object (In our case the item object
is called Disease_Item) [Ite].
An item pipeline is normally divided into steps and these can be used for a va-
riety of jobs, but according to the documentation, typical uses involves: Cleans-
ing HTML data, validating data, checking for duplicates and storing items in a
database.
All steps in the pipeline must be a class that implements a method called
process_item, which is called inside every item pipeline component.
pro-
cess_item() must be implemented to return a dict with data or an equal item
object. Furthermore, these steps must be declared within a Scrapy settings ﬁle
==PAGE:30==
4.2 A fast and powerful scraping tool
19
that, among other, controls the order of execution and by that determines the
data ﬂow of an item object from one step to another.
ITEM_PIPELINES = {
’Crawling.pipelines.RetrieveCui’: 200,
’Crawling.pipelines.AddTimestampPipeline’: 300,
’Crawling.pipelines.CleanUpHTML’: 400,
’Crawling.pipelines.MySQLStorePipeline’: 500
}
Figure 4.5: Pipeline order of execution in the settings ﬁle
In ﬁgure 4.5, one can see that we have four steps in our pipeline. Behind each
step there is a number, where the smallest number deﬁnes the ﬁrst step.
As one can also see from ﬁgure 4.5, the pipeline is customizable, as we can add
other steps if we so desired, and change the order of execution by editing the
numbers.
Our ﬁrst step, is to retrieve a CUI, which involves translations and retrieval of
information from various databases. The next step is to add a time stamp, so
we know when we crawled the item. Succeeding that, is a step to clean HTML
code, and ﬁnally, we store the item in a database.
The code in ﬁgure 4.6 show the step in the pipeline we use to add a time stamp
of when we crawled the data. As one can see the class implements the method
process_item where we add the current time, and then we make use of a
logging system we have created to log any potential errors.
class AddTimestampPipeline(object):
"""Mark each item with the timestamp at which it was processed"""
def process_item(self, item,spider):
item[’retrieval_timestamp’] = datetime.datetime.now()
LogCrawling.MissingAttributes(item)
return item
Figure 4.6: Step in the pipeline
The small example in 4.6, was to show how one implements a simple step in the
pipeline. Now we will look further into the more complex steps we have created.
We will however, omit the step where we clean HTML data, as it is a temporary
implementation.
==PAGE:31==
4.2 A fast and powerful scraping tool
20
First we will take a look at how we ﬁnd a CUI. The very ﬁrst operation in ﬁnding
a CUI is translating the title of the gathered disease to English. This has to be
done, since we are only able to ﬁnd CUIs for diseases with an English title. The
ﬂowchart for translating a title can be seen in appendix A.7. We utilize Google’s
translation API and Wikipedia’s translation API to maximize the amount CUIs
we can ﬁnd. Furthermore, we check if a disease title contains parentheses, and
if it does, we check the word in the parentheses ﬁrst. In chapter 9 we will show
the results from utilizing this approach.
We have found that Orphanet has CUIs listed, so naturally we gather that if
possible. Due to this, we have to check if we have already gathered the CUI,
so we can return it directly if possible. However, since only one source has this
luxury, it is most likely not gathered, and instead we try to ﬁnd a CUI by using
the disease title together with our translation table, which returns a CUI or
None if the disease title is present in the table. This method resembles using a
cache, and speeds up the program.
If the title is not present we use Google translation API, to translate the title
to English. With the English translation we look into a database called UMLS
(described in chapter 5).
If there is a match here, we can stop looking any
further, and insert the translation and the CUI into our local database. If there
is no match, we move on and try to translate with Wikipedia. The same steps
are performed, with the exception that if we still do not ﬁnd a CUI, we assume
that it does not exist for this disease and accept it as None. We still insert the
empty CUI into our database, so we can avoid going through all the steps again,
should we encounter the same disease title from a diﬀerent source.
When we are looking for a CUI, we not only have a data ﬂow for translation,
but also for getting the CUI itself. Some diseases have multiple CUIs and we
have to select the correct one.
The ﬁrst thing we get is a list of all CUIs for a disease. With potentially more
than one CUI, we do another query to a table containing CUI and something
called a Semantic Type. We are only interested in one Semantic type, namely
“Disorders”, so we ﬁlter out any semantic type that is not a “Disorder”. If we
still have more than one CUI after our ﬁltering, we run a method that gives
each CUI a rank, which is retrieved from a table in the UMLS database, and
then take the one with the best rank. Lastly, there is the possibility that there
is no CUI, and in that case we just return None. The code can be found in the
ﬁle called UMLS_Helper.py.
When we have translated and potentially found a CUI for a disease, we have to
store it in our database, which is the last step in the pipeline. A ﬂowchart for this
can be seen in appendix A.8. When we have collected data from a website, we
==PAGE:32==
4.3 Multiprocessing
21
have an object containing the parts we have deﬁned, which can be seen in A.8 as
Disease_item. From there we have a series of checks to see if we already have
the item in the database. This check exists so we only update relevant ﬁelds of
the equivalent row in the database. We base these checks around article dates,
which some sources contain. If the item is not in the database we upload the
entire object. The best way to ﬁgure out if an item is in the database is to
compare source URL, since those are unique.
If the item exists, we perform some checks to ﬁnd out what we should update.
The ﬁrst part is to ﬁnd out if the item has an article date or not.
Not all
sources contain an article date, so if it does not exist, we upload a new retrieval
time stamp and the content. If there is an article date, we must see if they are
diﬀerent. If they are diﬀerent, we upload retrieval time stamp, the new article
date and the content. If the opposite is true, we only upload a new retrieval
time stamp.
Since our program is focused on working for multiple languages, we have taken
some steps to improve the pipeline to be ﬂexible enough to change the language
on the ﬂy. As explained by our class diagram earlier, the CrawlingController
is responsible for starting the entire crawling, which also includes the pipeline.
The CrawlingController is able to change a language variable in the pipeline,
which controls which language we are currently crawling. We pass the language
to classes and modules which needs the language identiﬁer for e.g. dictionaries
or when we have to connect to the correct database when storing a processed
item.
When we combine the CrawlingController with multiprocessing, we can crawl
many languages concurrently. This is explained in the following section.
4.3
Multiprocessing
A multiprocessing system is a system which has at least two processors. The
technique of using multiple central processing units (CPUs) are often used and
makes it possible to allocate work and could result in great enhancements of the
load balance. This is because each process has its own set of registers and main
memory and are therefore in its own environment.
This is diﬀerent from multi threading because a thread run in the same mem-
ory space and can be blocked by occupied memory while multi processing uses
processes and they have separate memory.
==PAGE:33==
4.3 Multiprocessing
22
4.3.1
A multiprocessing python library
With multiprocessing being able to increase the speed of our software we started
to work with a library called multiprocessing. It works by spawning processes us-
ing an API and oﬀer both local and remote concurrency, eﬀectively side-stepping
the Global Interpreter Lock by using subprocesses instead of threads.[MUL]
Furthermore, this library has the ability to run processes asynchronously, mean-
ing that each process is executed at the same time, making it able to successfully
subprocess our crawling software. Illustration of this can bee seen in ﬁgure 4.7.
Figure 4.7: Illustration of sub processing crawling
When using new processes for each of the selected languages, we use list com-
prehension together with an asynchronous function within the multiprocessing
library, for both initiating the work as well as keeping track of the progress of
the process. See ﬁgure 4.8.
crawlingUploadStatus = [pool.apply_async(
CrawlingController.main,
args=(Language_Enum.LanguageInProduction(language),
processDictCrawl))
for language in processDictCrawl.keys()]
Figure 4.8: Multi processing each crawling language
The progress is found by looping through the list, and for each element check
with a function from the multiprocessing library called ready(). It returns a
==PAGE:34==
4.4 Logging system
23
boolean, that tells if the process has completed. If one or all processes are done
working, we know the progress has changed.
This is a big advantage when we want to check if the process is done but what
if we want to check if a spider within the process is done?
As described, multiprocessing has a disadvantage of sharing information between
processes and one should normally avoid it, but as we wanted to ﬁnd a way to
display progression of individual spiders within the process, we needed to ﬁnd
a way. Luckily our multiprocessing library has an object called Manager that
helps with exactly this.
A manager object controls a server process which holds Python objects and
allows other processes to manipulate them using proxies [MUL]. This invokes
the possibility of sending information from a sub-process about ﬁnished crawlers,
to our controller in the main process.
4.4
Logging system
When writing crawlers it is hard to cover all web pages with the generic XPath
as we also described earlier. Therefore, we wanted a way to see what items
would not be crawled, and if they are missing any attributes. Additionally, it
would be nice to see what has actually been crawled along with some statistics
from the crawling process.
Scrapy itself, provides a continuous logging to the python console in real time. If
you have many crawlers, you do not want to waste time looking at a continuous
output, so we decided to create a system for logging errors, and logging statistics
from crawling.
Furthermore, we wanted to structure the logs in a manner where it would be
easy to get an idea of what happened. Following this logic, we have split the
logging into the following categories.
• Log of the crawling, containing missing attributes and web pages that
failed to respond
• A log containing statistics about CUI retrieval
• A log containing SQL errors
• A log with an overview of statistics from the entire crawling
==PAGE:35==
4.4 Logging system
24
4.4.1
Crawling log
The logs from the crawling is implemented in each spider. As ﬁgure 4.2 shows
there is an if-statement, making a call to LogCrawling.CheckResponseStatus,
where we check if the URL is responsive. If it is not responding, we log the URL,
and the name of the crawler. Furthermore, in the pipeline script as can be seen
in ﬁgure 4.6, we have a call to LogCrawling.MissingAttributes, where we
review the entire item, so we can see if any attributes are missing.
Figure 4.9: The logs created then crawling is ﬁnished
In ﬁgure 4.9 one can see the logs that are created when the crawling process
has ﬁnished.
The two logs that are created for the crawling are:
Crawl-
ing_Missingattributes and Crawling_Brokenurls. In the particular crawl-
ing process we have not encountered any broken URLs so that log is empty.
However, we have encountered some missing attributes as shown in ﬁgure 4.10
We have two articles from Wikipedia where we have failed to retrieve the content.
Whenever we save an error we use a nested dictionary where we have the outer
keys as the source that failed, and for each source we have a dictionary, where
the keys are the attributes that are missing, and the value is the source URL.
Figure 4.10: An example of a crawling log
==PAGE:36==
4.4 Logging system
25
4.4.2
CUI retrieval log
This log is created to show when both Google and Wikipedia fails to make a
translation of the disease, where they do not ﬁnd a CUI. The local database
containing translations and CUIs can also contain None for a particular disease.
These are not logged, since they would have been logged the ﬁrst time they were
crawled where either Google or Wikipedia failed to ﬁnd a CUI.
Figure 4.11: An example of a Retrieve CUI log
As can be seen in ﬁgure 4.11, we still categories items in their source. In this
particular case we have no sub categories, so we just show all the items that
failed, by a link to the disease, with both translations from Wikipedia and
Google.
4.4.3
SQL logs
These logs are all pertaining our SQL database in some manner. From ﬁgure
4.9, we have the following logs:
• Changed_Db_Log
– This log contains all changes made to the database.
• Insertion_Errors_log
– This log contains SQL errors that happened when trying to insert a
crawled item.
• Insert_To_Translation_Table
==PAGE:37==
4.4 Logging system
26
– This log contains SQL errors that happen when you try to insert a
translation
• Umls_Helper_Log
– This log contain SQL errors when using the UMLS helper class in
any way
Figure 4.12: An example of a SQL log
As one can see in ﬁgure 4.12 we get three SQL errors from the French source
Vulgaris. Our log shows what kind of error you have, so you can take appro-
priate action.
All SQL errors are caught with a try/except clause, where we call the logging
method in the except clause.
The Changed_Db_log contains the changes made to the database, which
means that we call a method every time we use the pipeline step of inserting
into the database, and therefore one can see what was changed during a crawling
process.
Figure 4.13: An example of an overview log
Figure 4.13 shows an example of the overview log. In the ﬁgure we show how
many items were collected from each source in a crawling round. But it contains
a lot of information as can be seen by the categories.
==PAGE:38==
Chapter 5
Data storing
This chapter kicks oﬀwith a general explanation on database systems and their
characteristics, as well as their diﬀerences. After talking about database systems
in general, this chapter will go deeper into how we have designed and stored data
into our database, and also what other data sources we have used to collect
data. Finally, there will be a section about optimizations within our platform
concerning the database developed.
5.1
Database Management System
A Database Management System (DBMS) is a way for end users to create,
read, update and delete data in a database. The DBMS essentially serves as an
interface between the database and the end users and/or application programs,
ensuring that data is consistently organized and remains easily accessible.
The DBMS manages three important things: the data, the database engine that
allows data to be accessed and the database schema, which deﬁnes the database’s
logical structure such as table properties and value deﬁnitions[DBM].
There are two diﬀerent kinds of DBMS, a relational and a non-relational model.
The relational model organizes data into one or more tables of columns and
rows with a unique key identifying each row, and it is within these tables that
relationships can be connected. This means that two tables can be related by
their interaction between each other.
Some of the most popular relational databases includes SQLite, MySQL, Post-
greSQL and MSSQL, where all of them are maintained and queried with the
same language called SQL (Structured Query Language).
A non-relational database, often referred to as NoSQL, is a database that does
not incorporate the table- and key model that the relational database does.
There are 4 main data structure types within the NoSQL DBMS: key/value,
wide column, document and graph databases[NoS]. We wont go further into
details on the NoSQL DBMS but rather talk about the MySQL DBMS that we
used within our platform.
==PAGE:39==
5.2 Database design
28
As described a MySQL database is relational and we made use of one for stor-
ing retrieved data from the crawlers in our pipeline. We had previous experi-
ence with MySQL and the current databases that Findzebra are using are also
MySQL, so it would be easier to setup an environment that could simulate their
system.
We also found a MySQL connection library for python such that we could access
either local or web databases easily.
5.2
Database design
In this section we will focus on the design choices we have made to make our
databases work for multiple languages.
If we focus on a single language, we need three tables. The main table con-
taining the collected data called Disease table, a table containing translations
called Translation table and ﬁnally a table containing translated test queries
called Watson Queries. The tables will be described in detail in the following
subsections. For now we will focus on how we designed the databases to be
working for multiple languages.
For this project we have decided to separate data based on their native language.
Each database is called the following: ﬁndzebraX where X is the abbreviation
for a language e.g. for Danish the database would be called ﬁndzebrada.
Every time we start crawling, the CrawlingController will make a call to a
module that will ﬁgure out if the database exists or not. This module takes a
language as an input to make sure we check the correct language. On can very
easily ﬁgure out if a database exists with the following SQL query:
"USE ﬁndzebra"+language
With this query we can use a try/except clause, where if we succeed we know
that the database exists, otherwise we know it does not, and then we have to
create it. Furthermore, we need to know if the table we have to edit exists, and
we use the same principle with a try/except, but now we simply use a “pass”
statement in the except clause, because we do not need to do anything if the
table exists.
Database tables are identical across all languages, so the only thing we essentially
have to change is the small abbreviation to connect to the correct database.
==PAGE:40==
5.2 Database design
29
5.2.1
Disease table
Our main table is called Disease table, and contains the data that we gather
from the web pages we crawl. In this table we have multiple ﬁelds that contain
diﬀerent data.
The data type for our ﬁrst ﬁeld is an int(11) named disease_id, and is the
primary key of the table. The ID is an auto incremented integer, so that each
disease has a unique identiﬁer, which is also used when we are uploading to
Apache Solr.
The next ﬁeld is called umls_concept_id, and is for the CUI of the dis-
ease. To minimize database overhead, we have made this ﬁeld a varchar(255),
which means that it can only contain 255 characters. The varchar keyword uses
variable storage space[VAR], which means we only use the storage of the actual
value plus 1 or 2 bytes, compared to the keyword char(x), which uses x amount
of storage space.
Next we have two ﬁelds that contain the title and the display text. The title
ﬁeld is self explanatory, but the display text ﬁeld contains the text that is to be
displayed on the website. Both of these ﬁelds are text ﬁelds, but the title is a
mediumtext and the display text is a longtext, where the only diﬀerence is
the amount of text you can store.
As we have described earlier we have data that contains, when you last crawled
an article, when you ﬁrst retrieved it and when the article was written. For
these we have created three ﬁelds in the database called last_crawled, re-
trieved_date and article_date. The ﬁrst two are of typedatetime, which
mean that they contain both a date and time. article_date is of type date,
since articles does not contain a speciﬁc time they were written, but only a date.
The ﬁnal three ﬁelds are called source_url, source and original_text, and
are mediumtext, varchar(255) and longtext respectively. The two ﬁrst ﬁelds
explain themselves but the original_text contains the raw html code that was
scraped from a website, which is also why the ﬁeld needs to be longtext.
5.2.2
Translation table
We have a table we use to store translations when scraping disease titles from
web pages. This table contains the following ﬁelds:
==PAGE:41==
5.2 Database design
30
• translation_id, which is our primary key (int(11))
• source_text, which is the title in the original language (varchar(1000))
• google_translted_text, which is the translated title from Google (var-
char(1000))
• wiki_translated_text, which is the translated title from Wikipedia (var-
char(1000))
• umls_concept_id, which is the CUI for the disease (varchar(255))
• source, which is where the disease originates from (varchar(255))
• error, which is an error we insert when we do not ﬁnd a translation (var-
char(1500))
This table works as a cache for us, so we do not unnecessarily make request
to Google translate or Wikipedia translate, which takes both more time and
potentially costs money. Furthermore, we store the CUI directly in this database
to save time, by not having to ﬁnd it again. The logging system will show how
many times a translation has been found in this table.
5.2.3
Watson Question table
Our ﬁnal table for a language contains test queries with a known answer. The
table has the following three ﬁelds:
• id, primary key (int(11))
• question, which is the test query (longtext)
• answer, which is the known answer to the test query (mediumtext)
These questions and answers are provided by FindZebra’s English database.
To get the data in the languages we support, we have created a script to run
each query and answer through Google translate. We rely on Google translate
making correct translations, and as has been described in chapter 4, it might
not always be accurate. One has to keep this in mind when running tests and
interpreting results, which we will discuss more in chapter 9.
==PAGE:42==
5.3 External data sources
31
5.3
External data sources
For our project we use some external data sources, to be able to ﬁnd CUI
and genes. For ﬁnding a CUI, FindZebra has setup a database called UMLS.
This database can be downloaded online from the U.S. National Library of
Medicine[UMS]. The UMLS database contain a lot of tables, but we only use
some of them for speciﬁc tasks.
For the initial query for ﬁnding a CUI we utilize the table called mrconso, which
contains a ﬁeld called STR, which is the disease name. Earlier we described the
steps for ﬁltering a CUI in case we get more than one. For the ﬁltering task we
utilize the tables mrsty and mrrank. In the table mrsty, we return the ﬁeld
STY, which deﬁnes what category the CUI is within. And from the mrrank,
we utilize the ﬁeld RANK, to get the rank of the CUI. We do not want to
repeat the steps for ﬁltering again, so one can read those earlier in the thesis.
The other data source we use externally is called disgenet. This data source
contains information about genes and which CUI it belongs to, along with a score
on each gene[DIS]. The FindZebra website contains genes pertaining diseases,
which we have incorporated into the other languages. This works cross language
because we use the CUI to identify genes.
Lastly, we have a database which we copied from FindZebra, and it contains
gene names, id, external references and synonyms. This is copied to support
the same features as the original FindZebra.
5.4
Optimization
When you setup a MySQL database, there are some performance properties that
are worth considering. The reasons for having these considerations are that you
are able to speed up query times.
In the conﬁguration ﬁle of the MySQL database there is a variable called inn-
odb_buﬀer_pool_size. According to the documentation this is responsible
for caching data and indexes in memory.
Being able to have more data in
memory, means that queries are faster, because memory is faster than ordinary
storage. For this reason we have increased the buﬀer size to 2 GB. If the server
you have contain a lot of ram you can allocate more memory, but one can also
overdo it. If the database is generally small, you might not need to allocate
several gigabytes.
==PAGE:43==
5.4 Optimization
32
One can achieve up to 100 time speed increase if you couple the increased
buﬀer size with innodb_ﬂush_log_at_trx_commit=0. According to the
documentation, value 0 means that the log buﬀer is only written to the log ﬁle
and then ﬂushed to disk approximately once per second. It does mean that you
might loose some data, in case of a failure. But the speed increase will make up
for that, since you will most likely scrape the lost data at some other point in
time again.
==PAGE:44==
Chapter 6
Graphical user interface
This chapter goes in detail with design and user interfaces used within our
platform, and how one can use an interface to extend functionality of a certain
function. It starts oﬀwith an introduction into a python micro framework called
Flask, following a description of what it is and how we used it. Afterwards, we
will discuss context processes, split views and a JavaScript library called JQuery,
which we use for progress bars.
6.1
Flask - python micro framework
Flask is a micro web framework written in Python and based on a toolkit called
Werkzeug and a template engine called Jinja2. It is called a micro framework
because it does not require any particular tools or libraries to function. It has
no built in database layer, admin system or any other third party libraries. One
can get these libraries in the form of Flask extension as if they were implemented
in Flask itself.
Initially, the reason for choosing Flask as our GUI, was the simplistic way of
setting up a single web page with some python code controlling requests and
back end logic. See ﬁgure 6.1.
from ﬂask import Flask
app = Flask(__name__)
@app.route("/")
def hello () :
return "Hello World!"
if __name__ == "__main__":
app.run()
Figure 6.1: Simple example of a Flask application
==PAGE:45==
6.1 Flask - python micro framework
34
In preproduction, we did not have any idea of how comprehensive we wanted
to make our website. FindZebra had made a search template using a JSP back
end, so we thought we would create a similar functionality. So the ﬁrst sketch
of our website would be as simple as these two steps:
• Search page with POST/GET functionality
• Result page with diseases and their corresponding genes
After extending our application with multiple languages and making the whole
pipeline as automated as possible, we thought it would be a great enhancement
for our website to include functions for accessing scripted crawlers, and be able
to instantiate them. Another great feature would be the possibility of uploading
supported languages from our MySQL database to our Solr cores, and ﬁnally
display created logs on the website. This resulted in a whole new perspective
of the web application, since we then needed to create an admin section, such
that not everyone could see and instantiate these actions. A ﬁgure of how the
functionality is split between the admin site and the normal user site can be
seen in ﬁgure 6.2.
Figure 6.2: Admin and normal user functionality
6.1.1
Context Processors
When developing the website we found that Flask came with powerful tools for
administrating variables in a Jinja2 view template. One of them being context
processors. Context processors run before the template is rendered and have
the ability to inject new values into the template context. A context processor
is a function that returns a dictionary. The keys and values of this dictionary
are then merged with the template context [FLA].
==PAGE:46==
6.1 Flask - python micro framework
35
This meant that we could format datetimes within the actual view. E.g. in
our template SearchList_Design.html we have the retrieved dates of dis-
eases. When writing the variable from the disease the dateformat would be
the generic database format, and we wanted a controllable format, so we could
write code like this:
<p><b>Retrieved:</b> {{ format_date(diseaseItem[’retrieved_date’]) }}</p>
Then we would have a context processor in our back end python code that would
translate the generic database date to a pretty date as below.
@app.context_processor
def disease_date():
def format_date(date):
newStr = datetime.strptime(date, "%Y-%m-%dT%H:%M:%SZ")
prettyDate = newStr.strftime("%d %B %Y, %H:%M:%S")
return u’{0}’.format(prettyDate)
return dict(format_date=format_date)
6.1.2
Partial views and master views
When developing the website we thought a lot on how we could make it as
user friendly as possible. This meant developing JQuery and Javascript based
toggles and sliders that would ﬁre when clicking on content, and show their
corresponding elements without reloading the entire page. (Screenshots of the
ﬁnal website can be seen in appendix B.1)
We also made use of Jinja2’s functionality of partial views, which is similar to
the ASP.NET’s partial views. One can import pieces of HTML parts into a
master page and by that make it more administrable and easier to change and
edit. Examples of these partial views are our Search_Genes_Content.html
and Search_Genes_Tabs.html. These partial views can be accessed with a
simple command from a Jinja2 template as seen below (the example illustrates
a partial view ﬁle within a folder called partial_search).
{% include ’partial_search/Search_Genes_Tabs.html’ %}
==PAGE:47==
6.1 Flask - python micro framework
36
6.1.3
Progress bars and blocked content
When initiating crawling or uploading via a website we needed to make sure that
there was not a bottleneck within our processes. We use multiprocessing to split
work and make sure that everyone else visiting the site would not be blocked
by a process already running (This is described in detail in section 4.3.1). We
could then use these processes to update variables when a crawler was done or a
language was uploaded to Solr, and then either refresh a template view or block
access to upload/crawling, depending on the ongoing process.
The way we refresh a template is by using JQuery’s getJSON() function that
loads JSON-encoded data from the server, using a GET request. Then we make
a function handler that can modulate the data as below.
function update_values() {
$SCRIPT_ROOT = {{ request.script_root|tojson|safe }};
$.getJSON($SCRIPT_ROOT+"/admin/solrupdate",
function(data) {
counts = doWork(data.update);
if (counts[0] === counts[1]) {
clearInterval (updating);
}
});
}
Here one can see that we ﬁnd the script root and access a function called sol-
rupdate within the admin controller. The function updates a dictionary. Then
we use the returned data of that function to doWork on HTML elements and
adjust them according to the JSON data retrieved. (See appendix B.1 on how
it looks when updating)
update_values needs to be called in an interval such that the webpage updates
data in real time. Javascript got a function called setInterval for calling a JS
function in interval. As one can see below, we call update_values every 5000
milliseconds.
var updating = "";
$(document).ready(function(){
updating = setInterval(update_values, 5000);
});
If a process is currently running crawlers, we block accessibility to the Solr
webpage and instead redirect them to a temporary waiting page, and vice versa
==PAGE:48==
6.1 Flask - python micro framework
37
with uploading to Solr. The way this works is in a similar manner of that with
the progress bars. When a request to enter a page is received, we check boolean
values within a dictionary that controls the progress of the processes, and based
on the values we redirect the URL accordingly.
==PAGE:49==
Chapter 7
Shared computer processing
In this chapter we will look at what cloud computing is, and how we take
advantage of it with the services that Google provide, such as their App- and
Compute engine. Additionally, we will look into how one can host an Apache
Solr server on Google cloud.
7.1
Cloud Computing
The term cloud computing describes the delivery of on-demand computing
resources[IBM].
Cloud computing is a collection of computers that one can
utilize for various tasks like data storage, hosting web sites, hosting applications
etc. The collection of computers are typically connected through a network, and
one can use parts of this collection.
The main technology that makes this work is virtualization, which means that
a physical computer can be split into several virtual computers. When the two
principles are combine, you have access to compute resources over the internet,
instead of relying on local machines to do the tasks you need.
There are several third party vendors that provide cloud computing, and one of
them is Google, which this chapter mainly focuses on. One of the advantages
of cloud computing is scalability, which means that one can scale the amount of
resources, to meet the current demand of a given application. This gives great
ﬂexibility and alleviates the need for having physical hardware on a location.
For our project we chose to use cloud computing, so that we would be able to
make an application that would be accessible from everywhere, and avoid the
trouble of having to maintain physical hardware, and worry about whether or
not there are enough resources available.
Depending on the platform that one choses to host an application, there might
be drawbacks, if the third party provider does not oﬀer full customization over
the platform. What we mean by this, is that if one needs to host a python
==PAGE:50==
7.2 Platform as a service
39
application, and the cloud computing provider has a speciﬁc environment for
these types of applications, one might not be able to make it work as intended.
Since Google provides several diﬀerent aspects of cloud computing, we have
been able to host every aspect of our platform in the cloud. This means that we
have hosted our website, MySQL database and our Apache Solr database using
Google’s services. The services used will be described in the following sections.
7.2
Platform as a service
Platform as a service (PaaS) is a category of cloud computing services, which
can be used to control and run applications, without the need of maintaining the
infrastructure associated with deploying an application. PaaS can be delivered
in two ways, as a public cloud service from a provider, where the consumer
controls software deployment, and the provider provides services to host the
consumer’s application, or as a private service[PAA].
7.2.1
Google App Engine
Google App Engine is oﬀered as a public cloud service PaaS with two diﬀerent
levels of environments, the standard environment or the ﬂexible environment.
For this project the signiﬁcant diﬀerence is that the standard environment only
includes Python 2, and the ﬂexible supports Python 3. This meant that the
ﬂexible environment was our choice.
The app engine also supports scaling of server power (CPU and RAM), appli-
cation versioning which can be used to setup diﬀerent environments e.g. test or
production versions, and also traﬃc splitting, which means that you can route
incoming requests to diﬀerent application versions.
For our app engine we have two versions and their two corresponding services.
An admin version/service and an client version/service.
For our website to
correctly work with these services, we included and deployed a dispath.yaml
ﬁle. This ﬁle instructs the server to route requests to the correct service.
Furthermore, we changed the app.yaml ﬁle such that the admin service could
only make use of one instance, whereas the client service would automatically
scale instances based on traﬃc. The reason for limiting the admin service to
one instance, is such that every time an administrator would log into the admin
==PAGE:51==
7.3 Infrastructure as a service
40
panel, they would access the same instance and by that see the same processes
currently running.
This results in not being able to instantiate crawling or
uploading if the process is already running (instances work in the same manner
as multiprocessing, see chapter 4.3).
7.3
Infrastructure as a service
Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS) is another category of cloud computing that
provides virtualized computing resources over the Internet. IaaS is delivered
such that a third-party provider hosts hardware, software, servers and/or stor-
age, and the consumer can then use these products as they please.
7.3.1
Google Compute Engine
Google compute engine is oﬀered as an IaaS, where one have the possibility
of scaling and working with high performance virtual machines. Within this
project we haven’t really worked a lot with the compute engine, since our third-
party provider Bitnami had an API to set up all hardware, software, servers
etc., such that we could access and use a server running Solr in the cloud. The
next section will introduce Bitnami.
7.3.2
Bitnami
Since the backbone of the search engine is Apache Solr, we needed a way to
host it in the cloud, so that it would be accessible at all times. We will go into
more detail about Apache Solr in chapter 8, but now we will explain how we
are hosting it.
Bitnami is a company that provides software that is conﬁgured for you out of
the box. Bitnami has a collaboration with Google, so they oﬀer a solution for
Apache Solr, hosted with Google’s cloud platform. They do oﬀer a conﬁguration
that works on any platform, so it will be very easy to migrate your Solr instance
to any other platform of your choice. We decided to keep everything within
Google’s environment, since they provide a very ﬂexible system with minimal
maintenance.
The conﬁguration from Bitnami was very basic, which meant that we could
==PAGE:52==
7.3 Infrastructure as a service
41
use it pretty much out of the box, and do our own conﬁgurations. However,
when using the Google cloud platform to host Apache Solr, one gets it installed
on a Linux system. While Linux makes sense for hosting, it took a long time
to conﬁgure Linux itself, to be able to create the conﬁguration that our Solr
needed. Google provides a Linux terminal to make any conﬁgurations that you
want.
The issue that we ran into was that by default, linux has restricted all rights
to edit folders. This is normally what you want, but since we require ﬂexible
expansion of our Solr solution, we had to open edit rights to the entire Solr
environment. This was so we could expand it fast and easy without using too
much time on giving temporary rights. One has to be careful when doing this in
production, since any potential hacker would be able to edit ﬁles in the folders
that are open for editing. In a production environment one should enforce that
giving temporary rights for expanding the solution is the way to go. Since we
already made the conﬁgurations for Solr in a local environment, we could use
the program Filezilla to upload folders and ﬁles.
The next chapter will go into more detail about how we have conﬁgured Apache
Solr to work with our needs.
==PAGE:53==
Chapter 8
Index based search engine
This chapter will look into the concept of index based searching and why it is
eﬀective. Furthermore, it will look into the speciﬁc solution that we use for this
project, namely Apache Solr. We will go in depth with how it works and how
we have conﬁgured it to work with multiple languages. Finally, we will give a
small example of how we process a query from our website.
8.1
Index based searching
When building a database with a lot of content, it would be slow to search every
single text, to ﬁnd what you need. If we have 10.000 documents each containing
several hundred pages, we do not want to sequentially scan every single word.
This is where an index comes in handy. One can think of an index of a book,
where you look up words in the index, and then ﬁnd the relevant pages. More
speciﬁcally this is called an inverted index.
When writing a query to a search engine which uses the principle above, it will
analyze the query and ﬁnd matches in the index.
Figure 8.1: Small example of an inverted index
If we take a look at ﬁgure 8.1, and think of an example for a query, like:
==PAGE:54==
8.2 Apache Solr
43
“Pain in leg”
The engine would look into the index and ﬁnd that document 4, 5 and 6 are a
possible match for this query. Many engines will have features, that will help
specify that it is most likely document 5 that we are looking for.
The use of this index greatly improves the speed of the search, compared to
sequential scanning of documents, which makes it very viable to be used for a
search engine, and especially a search engine for a website, where a user expects
that results are returned fast.
The Apache Solr search engine is built upon the principle of an inverted index,
which makes it a very viable choice for us. Furthermore, according to their own
website Solr is widely used in the industry[SOLa].
8.2
Apache Solr
For our project, we thought how we could make Solr work for several languages.
FindZebra’s current usage of Solr works nicely in production for their website,
so we started to look at how they have set it up, to ﬁnd inspiration. To know
how they set it up, we need to know how ﬁelds work in Solr. A ﬁeld in Solr is
where you store your data, and they can be diﬀerent data types, like text, ﬂoat,
date etc. It is important to identify what you want to upload, and what data
type it is.
We ﬁgured out that we needed to upload the following content to Solr:
• Disease_id, int
• Cui, string
• Title, text_general
• Content, text_general
• Retrieved_date, string
• Source, text_general
• Source_url, text_general
• Last_crawled, string
• Associated_genes, text_general
==PAGE:55==
8.2 Apache Solr
44
• Id (same as Disease_id), string
Notice that we have used three diﬀerent ﬁelds, namely int, string and text_general.
There are some diﬀerences between these ﬁelds. The int is very diﬀerent from
the other two, as they will contain numbers and not text. The other two ﬁelds
are more similar. A string ﬁeld is for small words, and they will not be tok-
enized or analyzed, whereas text_general is intended for longer text, and will
be tokenized and analyzed [SOLb]. For strings, one can only do direct matches,
but text_general does not have to be a direct match with a query.
All of these ﬁelds reside inside a ﬁle called schema.xml. In this schema it is also
speciﬁed what the properties for each ﬁeld are. For some of our ﬁelds it does
not make sense that you can search for it, but you still want it to be displayed
on the website. Solr provides the ability to do this, with the properties stored
and indexed. Stored should be used for all ﬁelds that are to be displayed,
otherwise you will not see the original text, but the machine processed text.
Indexed however, should only be set for values that you want to be searchable.
In this project we want to be able to search with general terms, which mean
that our index should contain the title, content and the associated_genes.
With these ﬁelds indexed, we can ﬁnd all documents most eﬀectively. The other
ﬁelds should just be stored for viewing on the web page.
The reason for indexing genes, is that the original version of FindZebra had
the possibility to search for a gene. We would like to keep this feature in the
multilingual version as well.
To make Solr work for multiple languages, we looked into the concept of a
core.
A core in Solr consist of a separate set of conﬁguration ﬁles, indexes
and logs. Normally, one would use this concept to diﬀerentiate documents that
needs diﬀerent schemes, but for our case it made sense to use it to separate the
languages into their own core, to have their own index. Having diﬀerentiated
schemes makes it possible to separate the searches, which is exactly what we
need.
Each core has been named with the abbreviation of a speciﬁc language. For
instance, the Danish core is called da, which leads to the URL of the core to
be:
http://localhost:8983/solr/da
In the example we are using a local host, but it works in a similar fashion for a
==PAGE:56==
8.2 Apache Solr
45
server hosted at a third party provider.
Having called each core by the language abbreviation, we are able to quickly
switch the core we are searching through, via the search module we have created.
The next section will explain how we have created our search module and how
we retrieve searches.
8.2.1
Web search query
Whenever you make a query on our website, we translate it to all supported
languages. We have a feature to detect a language, so if you have chosen detect,
we run it through a function that utilizes Google’s translate API to detect a
language. If you have prechosen a language, we just translate directly to the
remaining supported languages.
When we have translated every query we have a dictionary with the following
structure:
{"da": "kraeft", "de" : "krebs", "en" : "cancer", "fr" : "cancer"}
Figure 8.2: Example of a query
In ﬁgure 8.2 we can see that each language abbreviation is the key of the dic-
tionary. This is used connect to each of the cores, and the value is used as the
query for Solr.
In python there is a library called pysolr [PYS].
This library is a wrapper
for Apache Solr, and it allows us to connect to an instance of Solr as well as
make queries directly from python. To connect to a core, we loop through the
dictionary, and as explained we use the key as the connection for the core:
for key, value in queryDict.items():
solrInstance = pysolr.Solr(helper.SolrConnection.format(key), timeout=20)
records = solrInstance.search(value, rows = rows_limit)
Figure 8.3: Connecting and querying Solr
As ﬁgure 8.3 shows we create a Solr instance with the appropriate core, and then
make the query with the function search from pysolr. The variable records,
==PAGE:57==
8.2 Apache Solr
46
will contain a list of dictionaries that contain all the content returned from Solr.
Notice that there is a variable called rows_limit. This is to limit how many
results Solr should return, and we have chosen this to be 25. The reason for
choosing a limit, is that potentially Solr will return all documents in a ranked
order, but we assume that if the result is not within the ﬁrst 25, we do not have
relevant data for the query. Additionally, our module will collapse disease with
the same CUI or the same name. The output from Solr looks like the following
when we have processed it with our module
{ (’Danish’, ’da’) : OrderedDict(List of diseases), (’French’, ’ fr ’) :
OrderedDict(List of diseases), (’German’, ’de’) : OrderedDict(List of
diseases), (’English’, ’en’) : OrderedDict(List of diseases)}
Figure 8.4: Data output from Solr after processing
Furthermore, we create a gene view when we have found all diseases. The gene
view is created by having a list with all genes returned from a query separated
by language. This list contains duplicates, so we remove the duplicates, and
make sure to sort on which gene appeared most frequently. The next step is to
look into one of our databases, that contain synonyms and external references
for a gene, and put that into an ordered dictionary.
With the ordered dictionary we need to ﬁnd which diseases are associated with
a gene, so that we can display it in our gene view. The code for generating
the gene view can be found in SearchSolr.py, but the data output from the
function is the following:
{"Gene": {"extref" : external references , "Synonyms" : Synonyms, (’Danish’, ’da’)
: List with diseases , (’French’, ’ fr ’) : List with diseases , (’English’,
’en’) : List with diseases}}
Figure 8.5: Data output for gene view function
The end output of our search module is a list comprising of the diseases returned
from Solr, and the data for building the gene view.
==PAGE:58==
Chapter 9
Tests and results
During development we researched if sorting diseases based on the CUI would
improve recall. Additionally, we looked into the general performance of the data
we have scraped, with both recall and mean reciprocal rank. Finally, we also
looked at some performance optimizations that we have carried out.
9.1
Concept unique identiﬁer as a sorting metric
When developing the system to support multiple languages, we thought if we
could somehow cross reference diseases, we could improve the recall ratings.
Since some diseases get a CUI, you can identify the same diseases by that ID,
no matter which language you have. The idea was to see if the same disease
gets returned from multiple languages, it would be more likely to be the one
you are looking for.
Our way of doing this, is when you have gotten all diseases returned from Solr,
we have given them an initial score which we deﬁned as:
SolrAmount −n
SolrAmount
(9.1)
Where n is the index of the returned disease and SolrAmount is the total
amount returned from the Solr query. Imagine that we get 20 results from Solr,
and we are at the third returned disease, the score would look like this:
18
20
(9.2)
With the base score for each disease deﬁned, we send all data from each language
to a module, that we have created to boost the score, depending on how many
times a CUI repeats throughout the languages.
==PAGE:59==
9.1 Concept unique identiﬁer as a sorting metric
48
We take the CUI from each disease if it exists, and check it against the other
languages. If we ﬁnd matches, we put the language abbreviation into a new
dictionary with the following structure:
{"CUI" : ("da", "en"), ...}
Figure 9.1: CUI sorting dictionary
The structure above shows that a speciﬁc CUI was found both in the Danish
and the English data. What we can do with this new dictionary, is to ﬁnd each
CUI in the original data and update the score with the following equation:
len((”da”, ”en”))
len(AllSupportedLanguages) ∗2
(9.3)
If we look at the example above the numbers would be the following:
2
4 ∗2
(9.4)
Currently we have four supported languages, so AllSupportedLanguages
value is 4.
We use the multiplier at the end to boost the value. We did some testing to ﬁnd
a multiplier value, that seemed suitable, and found that 2 was around the sweet
spot, since going above 2 in the multiplier did not boost the ratings further.
If we combine the two examples, we would get a ﬁnal score:
18
20 + 2
4 ∗2
(9.5)
After having given all diseases a new score, we would sort them again using the
score as the sorting metric.
The next section will show the diﬀerence between Solr’s own ranking and our
CUI boosting.
==PAGE:60==
9.2 Search accuracy
49
9.2
Search accuracy
FindZebra has a database of test queries that is currently in English. To be
able to test the languages that we support, we have to translate each query and
the answer to the query. This was already brieﬂy touched upon in chapter 5,
but now we will show an example of why one should be mindful when looking
at the results:
men type 1 gets translated to maend type 1
men in this case is an abbreviation of Multiple endocrine neoplasia, which
Google translate has no chance to know, so it translates it to the Danish version
of a man. This obviously means something for the tests that we are about to
show, because we might miss queries that we actually have an answer for in the
dataset.
What we would like to test are the two following metrics:
• Recall @5 and @10 (Including both custom CUI sorting and Solr ranking)
• Mean Reciprocal Rank (MRR)
First we go through what each of the terms mean and what they can be used
for.
Recall
Recall is known as the fraction of relevant documents that are retrieved [REC].
What we can use this for, is to ﬁnd the amount of documents correctly retrieved
in top 5 or top 10.
recall =
DocumentsInTop(N)
AmountOfCorrectDocuments
(9.6)
Here N speciﬁes either 5 or 10, because that is what we are testing for.
The reason to use top 5 and top 10, is to evaluate how much data a user has to
go through before ﬁnding the correct answer. One can compare it to looking at
the second page of a Google search.
==PAGE:61==
9.2 Search accuracy
50
Mean Reciprocal Rank
The mean reciprocal rank is a statistic measure for evaluating output from a
query, ordered by probability of correctness [MRR].
MRR = 1
Q
|Q|
X
i=1
1
rank(i)
(9.7)
Here Q deﬁnes the amount of queries that we have an answer for, and rank(i),
is the position of the answer in the returned list.
Results
We have created a python script that will evaluate these tests, and it works by
fetching all test queries and answers for each language. The next step is to make
a query to Solr, and retrieve the data. For each test query, we check if we have
the correct answer.
It should be noted that we make use of a library to compare strings, and thus
we do not do 100% string matching. The reason for this is that direct string
matching is case sensitive, and because of that it will miss many matches. We
have set a value of 90% to be acceptable, and here is an example that showcase
why we have chosen that:
For Danish with a value below 90% we could get a match between ventrikulær
takykardi and Supraventrikulær takykardi, which are not the same disease.
If we increase the value to 90%, this match disappears, and we are left with
matches such as these:
Alfa1-antitrypsinmangel is matched with alfa-1-antitrypsin-mangel
Furthermore, when we get a match we add the position it was found at to a list,
and take the length of this list to ﬁnd out how many correct answers we have
for a language.
With this data, we are able to calculate both recall and MRR.
As can be seen in ﬁgure 9.2 the default ranking of Solr actually performs better
than the CUI sorting algorithm, that we have implemented. Besides having
worse performance that the default ranking, it also slows down the search, as
it has to perform more operations before the data can be returned. We have
decided to not use this feature on the website.
==PAGE:62==
9.2 Search accuracy
51
recall@5 with 25 results
With CUI Sorting
Recall Value :
{’da’: 0.7121, ’ fr ’ : 0.625, ’de’: 0.5641, ’en’: 0.7538}
Reciprocal Rank : {’da’: 0.5618, ’ fr ’ : 0.4948, ’de’: 0.4417, ’en’: 0.5258}
With Solr default Ranking
Recall Value :
{’da’: 0.7879, ’ fr ’ : 0.6964, ’de’: 0.6154, ’en’: 0.7436}
Reciprocal Rank : {’da’: 0.5359, ’ fr ’ : 0.4145, ’de’: 0.3995, ’en’: 0.5093}
recall@10 with 25 results
With CUI Sorting
Recall Value :
{’da’: 0.803, ’ fr ’ : 0.8393, ’de’: 0.6923, ’en’: 0.8308}
Reciprocal Rank : {’da’: 0.5618, ’ fr ’ : 0.4948, ’de’: 0.4417, ’en’: 0.5258}
With Solr default Ranking
Recall Value :
{’da’: 0.8788, ’ fr ’ : 0.8036, ’de’: 0.7436, ’en’: 0.8308}
Reciprocal Rank : {’da’: 0.5359, ’ fr ’ : 0.4145, ’de’: 0.3995, ’en’: 0.5093}
Figure 9.2: Test results
Furthermore, it should be noted that the test performed in ﬁgure 9.2 reﬂects
the results we get via our website, since we only return 25 results from Solr.
This means that we eﬀectively asks what the recall is within top 25. Normally,
one would search through all the data, to evaluate the total dataset.
In ﬁgure 9.3 one can see some test results on the total dataset, meaning we
return all possible results from Solr. The test has been run without collapsing
CUIs, which means that we might have X amount of duplicate diseases before
we hit the result. We have also run some tests where we collapse on the CUIs,
which means that we remove duplicated diseases.
Recall@5 with all results
Recall Value :
{’da’: 0.4602, ’ fr ’ : 0.241, ’de’: 0.203, ’en’: 0.4139}
Reciprocal Rank : {’da’: 0.316, ’ fr ’ : 0.1488, ’de’: 0.1321, ’en’: 0.2825}
Recall@10 with all results
Recall Value :
{’ fr ’ : 0.2771, ’de’: 0.2406, ’da’: 0.5133, ’en’: 0.534}
Reciprocal Rank : {’ fr ’ : 0.1488, ’de’: 0.1321, ’da’: 0.316, ’en’: 0.3273}
Figure 9.3: Test results with all results returned from Solr
In ﬁgure 9.4, we can see the results with CUI collapsing. As one can see they
have improved by a few percent, with the exception of the English result in
==PAGE:63==
9.3 Performance optimizations
52
Recall@5 with all results
Recall Value :
{’da’: 0.4952, ’ fr ’ : 0.2708, ’de’: 0.2143, ’en’: 0.4215}
Reciprocal Rank : {’da’: 0.3401, ’ fr ’ : 0.1653, ’de’: 0.1441, ’en’: 0.2923}
Recall@10 with all results
Recall Value :
{’da’: 0.5524, ’ fr ’ : 0.3125, ’de’: 0.2589, ’en’: 0.4709}
Reciprocal Rank : {’da’: 0.3401, ’ fr ’ : 0.1653, ’de’: 0.1441, ’en’: 0.2923}
Figure 9.4: Test results with all results returned from Solr and CUI collapsing
recall@10, that for some reason has dropped by roughly 5%. We recommend
that these tests should be performed again in the future.
We do have an idea as to why it is happening in the case of CUI collapsing.
We compare on the CUI directly, but we assume that if they have the same CUI
they also have the same title. The way we remove duplicate CUIs is to keep the
one with the lowest index, but if the answer to the test query only matches the
string of one of the removed diseases, we could get the results we are seeing.
9.3
Performance optimizations
CUI ﬁnding
One of the ﬁrst optimizations we found to be critical, was when we tried to ﬁnd
CUIs on a disease title. Numerous titles that we scraped contained parentheses
with either Latin or shorter disease titles, and we quickly came up with a solution
that would take advantage of this knowledge.
Initially, we check if a disease title has parentheses and if it does, we pass the
text within the parentheses to the ﬁnd CUI algorithm. If the algorithm ﬁnds a
CUI within the parentheses we save the CUI and move on in the pipeline. If no
CUI is found we test with the text outside of the parentheses. Finally, if neither
inside nor outside text ﬁnds a CUI we pass the total disease title.
We tested these extra procedures for ﬁnding a CUI with results from our apoteketdk
spider.
Before using parentheses check, the spider returned 143 null CUIs and 115
found CUIs.
==PAGE:64==
9.3 Performance optimizations
53
After using parentheses check, the spider returned 67 null CUIs and 191 found
CUIs.
Thats an improvement in ﬁnding a CUI of approximately 30.5%.
MySQL performance
During development of the application, we discovered that there are several op-
timizations, that one can do to speed up queries from MySQL. For instance, the
function to generate the gene view, was tested with several diﬀerent approaches,
as to how we fetch genes from the database.
When querying MySQL for each gene separately, we get a search performance
of 14-16 seconds.
We thought that it must be the overhead that happens when connecting to
the database, that made the search so slow.
We decided to generate a list,
containing all the genes we needed to ﬁnd in the database, and then use a query
to fetch them in one go.
query = ("SELECT * FROM ﬁndzebragenes.genes where name IN(’%s’)"
%"’,’".join(geneSet))
Figure 9.5: Gene query
In ﬁgure 9.5, we can see the query to load everything at once, where geneSet,
contains all the genes that needs to be displayed.
When using a pandas data frame to process the rest of the logic to generate the
gene view, it takes just under 2 seconds to make a search.
If we use a double for loop instead of a pandas data frame, we get a search time
of 0.14 seconds.
As can be seen from the test results we get a massive speed increase by gathering
all the data at once, and use a double for loop to evaluate the data.
In general it is a good idea to fetch as much data as possible from the MySQL
database at once, and then use python to evaluate it, instead of having many
queries, and having to deal with the overhead and slowdown that it introduces.
==PAGE:65==
9.3 Performance optimizations
54
Solr performance
Another thing we tested, was continuous yielding of data from the MySQL
database to Solr, so that the data could be updated in almost real time. We
measured the total upload time, and the memory consumption when doing con-
tinuous yielding and uploading everything at once.
One at a time:
Memory: Pycharm: 533.8 MB -> dropped to 477 MB
Java: 272.5 MB after time increased to 280 MB, dropped to 250 MB
python: Very low on task manager list
Time: 1520.198 seconds = 25 minutter
Everything at once:
Memory: Pycharm: 476.5 MB
Java: 238.3 MB
Python: 167.7 MB (increasing) 177 MB was the last seen.
Time: 350.36 = 5,83 min
Figure 9.6: Test results from uploading to Solr
As can be seen in ﬁgure 9.6, when uploading everything at once, it takes close
to 6 minutes to generate the dictionary with the data, and upload it to Solr,
compared to 25 minutes, when we yield items one at a time. The memory usage
is higher when uploading at once, but the speed increase makes up for that, so
we have decided to use more memory to gain almost 4 times increase in speed.
Multiprocessing optimization
Furthermore, we did some testing to ﬁnd out how eﬀective multiprocessing is
compared to either crawling or uploading sequentially.
We found that with
multiprocessing, the time required is only as long as the language that has the
most data.
An arbitrary example could be that the Danish data takes 30 minutes to crawl,
the German takes 1 hour and the French takes 1 hour and 30 minutes. With
multiprocessing the time to complete the crawling would be 1 hour and 30
minutes, while without multiprocessing it would be 3 hours.
==PAGE:66==
Chapter 10
Discussion
In this section we will discuss our results and ﬁndings.
Our idea about implementing an algorithm to sort diseases based on their CUI,
was tested and showed that it was a few percent worse than Solr’s own ranking
algorithm.
It is worth mentioning that compared to the English database where they have
a CUI for almost 95% of the diseases, we only have 57% for the Danish, 60%
for the German and 40% for the French data. This might aﬀect the sorting, as
we return many diseases without a CUI, and they will thus not get aﬀected by
the algorithm. If the amount of CUIs can be improved for the other databases,
it might be worth re-testing the method, to see if it improves the recall. To
increase the amount of CUIs one could look at the individual sources and see
what the distribution of found versus not found are, and maybe disregard the
source if the amount of CUIs are too low.
On the Google cloud platform we have an issue with multiprocessing, where we
are unable to access the data that controls whether or not processes are running.
This creates an issue, as one will be able to instantiate a new crawling process,
while one is already running. This results in an increased load on the server,
and that will slow down the web site. Additionally, it might result in corrupted
data, as each process will try to connect to the same database.
Furthermore, one would be able to upload to Solr at the same time, and we
want to avoid that, since it increases the risk of having corrupted data on the
website. This is due to the fact that we cannot know what we crawl until the
process has ﬁnished, and the logs have been reviewed.
There are multiple solutions that might be applicable here. First, the obvious
is to ﬁgure out why there is an issue with using Google cloud service, and
see if there is a ﬁx for it. We have identiﬁed that there is an issue with the
multiprocessing library and a module called Twisted which Scrapy uses.
It does however work locally, and since we have made crawling separate from
the rest of the system, it is possible to run that part locally without aﬀecting
==PAGE:67==
56
the website. We would have to create a GUI for that system, so that you just
run an executable ﬁle.
Also, we have not tested the application on an Amazon server, which is diﬀerent
from Google cloud, since you are more in charge of the server. On Google app
engine you get a platform to host your application, whereas on Amazon you
have to make all the conﬁgurations yourself.
Despite the disadvantage about crawling using the app engine, it is a very potent
platform to host the website on.
We have found that Google increases the
amount of instances of your application depending on the load. It is also possible
to conﬁgure it, but for the website where there are no variables that needs to
be shared across processes, the default scaling is very powerful in making the
website run fast. We would recommend running the website on Google cloud,
based on this feature, and the fact that you don’t have to do server maintenance.
For our test results, we have found that it is only the Danish dataset that is
able to match the recall value of the original English version. The German and
the French dataset, is only able to match it, when we run tests where we only
take the top 25 results (to mimic the website), but not when we run a test on
the total dataset. We believe it is because of the sources we have chosen. For
instance the French source Vulgaris has almost 81% null values for CUIs.
We are comparing the disease titles with the known answer to a query, so we are
relying on correct translations of title’s by Google translate. We have already
explained earlier that some translations are not correct, and we recommend that
the queries and answers are translated by professionals instead of relying on a
translation API (At least at the time of writing).
The application we have created is a tool that enables FindZebra to automate
most of the pipeline. We have created a code structure that allows easy addi-
tion of other languages, as well as new crawlers. Compared to how FindZebra
originally described their pipeline, we believe that this tool will help increase
productivity.
One could argue that you could make the entire pipeline automatic, all the way
from data gathering to uploading it to the Solr search engine. However, we
believe that it increases the potential of getting corrupted data on the website,
which is why we have created the logging system, so that the end user is able
to review the data before uploading it.
The interface we have created for the website, and the integrated administrative
system makes it very easy to both search for diseases, and control crawling and
uploading simultaneously with the rest of the website.
==PAGE:68==
57
Furthermore, on the website, we made it possible to switch query language by
switching it with a drop down menu placed next to the search ﬁeld, or leave the
query language as Detect Language and let the Google Translation API ﬁnd it.
This was done instead of having multiple versions of the website, where you
change the URL for each language, and then have a single language to search
for.
We believe that a solution which can search in multiple languages no matter of
the native user language and give numerous additional results, would be more
beneﬁcial than a single language search result. Among other, a proof of this
would be that a French person searches for a speciﬁc disease, but does not ﬁnd
the answer in the French database. Now the person would be stranded in the
single language version, but with our suggested solution he would be able to
look within the other supported languages to see if the answer was there (The
diseases should of course be translated to an understandable language).
Lastly, we have an implementation in the data crawling pipeline, where we are
able to get synonyms of diseases. It is a function that runs right before we
translate a disease to ﬁnd a CUI. A speciﬁc example for the Danish dataset, is
that if we crawl Hjernehindebetændelse, it will look in the ﬁle and see that
a synonym for this disease is Meningitis, and use that as the title instead. In
the end we use the original title in the database, but now it will get the correct
CUI.
The ﬁle of synonyms has to be manually maintained, but we believe that in the
long run it will be able to boost the CUI ratings of a language.
==PAGE:69==
Chapter 11
Conclusion
The work of this thesis was to create a brand new platform, that would renew the
current search engine used by FindZebra, by working with multiple languages.
For this endeavor we knew that planning the project in advance would be the
key to get a successful product. In chapter 2, we described the steps we took to
ensure maximum eﬃciency in our work ﬂow. Not only did this ensure a project
progression ahead of schedule, but it also opened up the possibility of extending
the project.
We also took great pride in writing the code as dynamic as possible, such that
it would be easily readable and editable, as well as allowing the structure of
the code and project to be expanded. The ﬁnal architecture of the program is
covered in chapter 3.
The problem description of the thesis has also been answered to complete ful-
ﬁllment. We covered how we identiﬁed the potential new languages, and what
you should be mindful of in chapter 4. With the sources identiﬁed, the chapter
describes how to create the crawlers to scrape data, with the library Scrapy, as
well as the power of the ﬂexible pipeline.
We have tested the new datasets with a set of test queries. All of this is covered
in chapter 9. Here we also investigate if we could improve the standard ranking
algorithm of Solr. Our results showed that the Danish dataset fared best against
the original English set, but the other two languages were further behind. We
also found that our own idea of improving the algorithm, did not results in any
improvement, especially when you look at the increased search times.
When expanding the website, we chose a solution that would allow the users
to search in whatever language they like, and we return the data that we have
gathered, in all languages available. This makes it so that FindZebra only have
to focus on gathering data in other languages.
In the end we have created a platform, that supports the possibility of generating
new versions of FindZebra with minimal eﬀort. As our main priority of the
project was to make all processes as automated as possible, we are pleased to
conclude that the ﬁnal product exceeds our expectations. Not only can we crawl
==PAGE:70==
11.1 Future Work
59
and insert data to a database automatically, we are also able to control our entire
platform from a website hosted in the cloud.
11.1
Future Work
For the future there are some aspects of the application that is worth looking
at.
In the pipeline there currently is a temporary implementation of HTML clean-
up. This step could be changed so that each article gets the same look on the
website, or one can make custom steps for each source that is scraped.
Furthermore, there are some data structures that is worth going over again. We
have created some nested dictionaries, that might not be as eﬃcient as they
could be. We are speciﬁcally thinking about our implementation of searching in
Solr from the website. Here it is worth reconsidering the way we construct and
structure the ﬁnal output.
Considering the issues there are with using Google Cloud and multiprocessing,
one could consider splitting the application, so that the data gathering happens
from a local machine, and the website is hosted in the cloud. The database
that contain the information that is scraped can also be hosted in the cloud,
it is only the application that has to be on a local machine. As written earlier
multiprocessing might work on an Amazon server, so that is also worth testing.
The optimal scenario though would be to ﬁnd a solution for Google Cloud.
The website we have created, could do with a redesign. However, FindZebra is
running another project that deals with website design, whereas we have only
worked with functionality. As a note, we have divided our program into layers,
so it should be relatively easy to put a new design on top of our software layer.
==PAGE:71==
Appendix A
Appendix 1
A.1
Project Plan
==PAGE:72==
A.2 Programming plan
61
A.2
Programming plan
==PAGE:73==
A.3 Folder Structure
62
A.3
Folder Structure
==PAGE:74==
A.4 Crawling Diagram
63
A.4
Crawling Diagram
==PAGE:75==
A.5 Uploading Diagram
64
A.5
Uploading Diagram
==PAGE:76==
A.5 Uploading Diagram
65
==PAGE:77==
A.6 Graphical user interface Diagram
66
A.6
Graphical user interface Diagram
==PAGE:78==
A.6 Graphical user interface Diagram
67
==PAGE:79==
A.7 Data ﬂowchart for translation
68
A.7
Data ﬂowchart for translation
==PAGE:80==
A.8 Data ﬂowchart for gathering data
69
A.8
Data ﬂowchart for gathering data
==PAGE:81==
Appendix B
Appendix 2
B.1
Website design and functionality
==PAGE:82==
B.1 Website design and functionality
71
==PAGE:83==
B.1 Website design and functionality
72
==PAGE:84==
Bibliography
[CO99]
K. G. Coﬀman and A. M. Odlyzko. The Size and Growth Rate of the
Internet. http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.
45.4570&rep=rep1&type=pdf, 1999.
[DBM]
DBMS.
http://searchsqlserver.techtarget.com/deﬁnition/
database-management-system.
[DIS]
Disgenet. http://www.disgenet.org/web/DisGeNET/menu.
[FLA]
Context Processors.
http://ﬂask.pocoo.org/docs/0.12/templating/
#context-processors.
[GTr]
Assessing the Accuracy of Google Translate to Allow Data Extraction
From Trials Published in Non-English Languages [Internet]. https:
//www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK121307/.
[IBM]
What is cloud computing. https://www.ibm.com/cloud-computing/
learn-more/what-is-cloud-computing/.
[Ite]
Item
Pipeline.
https://docs.scrapy.org/en/latest/topics/
item-pipeline.html.
[Mod]
Modules. https://docs.python.org/3.6/tutorial/modules.html.
[MRR]
Mean
reciprocal
rank.
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mean_
reciprocal_rank.
[MUL]
multiprocessing — Process-based parallelism. https://docs.python.
org/3.5/library/multiprocessing.html.
[MVC]
Basic MVC Architecture. https://www.tutorialspoint.com/struts_2/
basic_mvc_architecture.htm.
[NoS]
NoSQL
DBMS.
http://searchdatamanagement.techtarget.com/
feature/Key-considerations-for-determining-if-a-NoSQL-DBMS-meets-your-IT-needs.
[PAA]
Platform as a service. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Platform_as_
a_service.
[PWH16] John Paparrizos, Ryen W. White, and Eric Horvitz. Screening for
Pancreatic Adenocarcinoma Using Signals From Web Search Logs:
Feasibility Study and Results. http://ascopubs.org/doi/abs/10.1200/
JOP.2015.010504, 2016.
[PYS]
Pysolr. https://github.com/django-haystack/pysolr.
==PAGE:85==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
74
[REC]
Precision and recall. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Precision_and_
recall.
[Scr]
Scrapy Documentation. https://docs.scrapy.org/en/latest/.
[SJW15]
Dan Svenstrup, L Henrik Jørgensen, and Ole Winther.
Rare dis-
ease diagnosis:
A review of web search, social media and large-
scale data-mining approaches. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/
articles/PMC4590007/, 2015.
[SOLa]
Apache Solr. http://lucene.apache.org/solr/.
[SOLb]
Field Types Included with Solr. https://cwiki.apache.org/conﬂuence/
display/solr/Field+Types+Included+with+Solr.
[UMS]
Uniﬁed
Medical
Language
System.
https://www.nlm.nih.gov/
research/umls/.
[VAR]
12.4.1 The CHAR and VARCHAR Types. https://dev.mysql.com/
doc/refman/5.7/en/char.html.
