==PAGE:1==
Master Thesis
Thermal modulation of
transmembrane ion transport in
cancer cell electroporation
Bianka Zsuzsanna Juhász Lissau - s142929
Supervisors:
Niels Bent Larsen (DTU)
Karen Julie Gehl (Herlev Hospital)
Thomas Heimburg (Niels Bohr Institute, KU)
Technical University of Denmark
5th May 2017
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
This thesis has investigated the thermal modulation of calcium electroporation, which
is a newly proposed anti-cancer treatment currently in clinical trial.
It was hypothesised that biological membranes are more eﬃcient to penetrate during
their phase transition, which is characterised by the membrane transition temperature,
and thus thermal modulation of electroporation could be key for achieving eﬀective
intracellular cancer treatment.
Temperature controlling and monitoring experimental setup was developed and im-
plemented for in vitro calcium electroporation. A twin sample with an integrated
thermocouple wire ensured real-time feedback of the measurand sample temperature,
while a metal heating block was applied for temperature modulation. HT29 colon
cancer cell line was investigated and treated with only-calcium, only-electroporation,
and combined calcium electroporation respectively. Moreover, heat capacity proﬁle of
biological HT29 cell membrane has been measured, with the presence and absence of
calcium chloride, in order to identify the membrane transition temperature.
HT29 viability was found to be inﬂuenced by the factor of time between cell harvesting
and electroporation. The experimental methodology was, therefore, improved in order
to maintain a stable viability baseline throughout the temperature changes by dividing
the experiment into smaller portions.
It was found that in vitro calcium electroporation was highly eﬀective, and killed
on average 69% of the cancer cells, but was independent of temperature with a 5%
signiﬁcance level. Calcium itself showed no signiﬁcant temperature dependency but
killed in average 8% of the cells. The eﬀectiveness of electroporation itself indicated
a dependency on temperature. At lower temperatures such as 17 ◦C, none of the
cells got killed due to electroporation, however, close to body temperature cell death
reached even approximately 21%.
HT29 colon cancer cell membrane showed no signiﬁcant inﬂuence of calcium on the
transition phase and temperature. However, heat capacity was recorded to be gen-
erally slightly lower with the presence of calcium. Membrane transition temperature
was found to be around 23.5-24 ◦C, but it did not seem to reﬂect on the thermal
proﬁle of calcium electroporation.
Clinically, this result could indicate that tumor temperature is not beneﬁcial to be
controlled in the patient during treatment.
i
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
I hereby would like to express my deep appreciation and gratitude for all, who helped
me succeed with my master thesis project.
I would like to thank Niels Bent Larsen for being a full-hearted, highly knowledgeable
and approachable supervisor and professor, who willingly answered all my questions
and guided me during my entire project.
I thank Niels for educating me, giving
me feedback and encouraging me at all times. I thank him and DTU Nanotech for
providing me with facilities to use for writing my report.
I would also like to thank Karen Julie Gehl for being an opened, supportive and
encouraging supervisor as a chief physician with great knowledge, who trusted me
and my capabilities and provided me the opportunity to be part of such an exciting
and leading research project. I thank Julie for teaching me, answering my questions
and providing me with all the laboratory facilities in order to execute a successful
project. I also thank her for letting me be present and witness a clinical treatment
with electroporation, which will stay a memory for a lifetime.
I would like to thank for Thomas Heimburg for taking his time to provide me with a
great and deep explanation of his leading theories in membrane physics. I also thank
him for helping me with the execution of heat capacity measurements and letting me
use his well-equipped laboratory at Niels Bohr Institute.
I would also like to thank the best, the most supportive and loving husband, Nicolai
Juhász Lissau, who encouraged me, listened to all my thoughts and worries, and gave
me feedback through my entire project. I thank Nicolai for proofreading, grammar
checking and discussing my report with me through many many nights along with
pizza and red wine.
Finally, I would like to thank everyone at the Department of Oncology at Herlev
Hospital and at DTU Nanotech for their useful inputs and help, as well as, their good
company while working together.
iii
==PAGE:6==
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Abstract
i
Table of Contents
v
List of Figures
xii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Project Aim and Hypothesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Related Work
3
2.1
Calcium Electroporation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Clinical Trial of Calcium Electroporation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Opportunities and Reﬂection on Related Works . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
3
Theoretical Background
6
3.1
Function of Cells . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.2
Cell Membranes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.3
Lipid Ion Channels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.4
Eﬀect of Calcium on Lipid Ion Channels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.5
Thermodynamics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.6
Electroporation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
v
==PAGE:8==
4
Methods
16
4.1
Growing of Cells
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4.2
Cell Harvesting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.3
Setting of the Cell Concentration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.4
Preparing the Cells for Electroporation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.5
Electroporation with Thermal Modulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.6
Determination of Cell Viability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.7
Statistical Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.8
Membrane Collection for Heat Capacity Measurements . . . . . . . . .
24
4.9
Membrane Preparation for Determination of Heat Capacity
. . . . . .
24
4.10 Membrane Heat Capacity Measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5
Results
28
5.1
Temperature Control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5.2
Viability Control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.3
Thermal Proﬁle of HT29 Cell Viability After Calcium Electroporation
31
5.4
Investigation of HT29 Cell Viability After Treatment with Calcium Only 34
5.5
Investigation of HT29 Cell Viability After Treatment with Electropo-
ration Only . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.6
Summary of statistical results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.7
Heat Capacity Proﬁle of HT29 Cell Membranes . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
6
Discussion
41
6.1
Time Inﬂuence of In Vitro Calcium Electroporation . . . . . . . . . . .
41
6.2
Thermal Inﬂuence on Calcium Electroporation of Cancer Cells
. . . .
42
6.3
Cancer Cells and Electroporation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
6.4
Eﬀect of Calcium Itself on Cancer Cells
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
6.5
Eﬀect of Calcium on Membrane Transition Proﬁle . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
vi
==PAGE:9==
6.6
Membrane Heat Capacity Proﬁle vs. Thermal Proﬁle of Calcium elec-
troporation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
6.7
Future Considerations Regarding Improvements of the Thermal Mod-
ulation and Controlling Setup of In Vitro Electroporation
. . . . . . .
44
7
Conclusion
47
A Results of Untreated Baseline Experiments Performed in 2 Sections
vs. in 3 Sections
50
vii
==PAGE:10==
==PAGE:11==
List of Figures
3.1
Illustration of a human cell with its cell components and surrounded
with the plasma membrane. Modiﬁed from [1].
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.2
Schematic picture of lipid structural changes between gel and ﬂuid
phases.
As a result of melting transition, lipid membrane area be-
comes larger (green bar) and its thickness decreases (red bar). ∆H and
∆S are referring to the enthalpy and entropy changes between the two
phases, as well as, Tm is referring to the melting temperature of the
membrane, which separates the gel and ﬂuid phases. The top left and
top right illustrations are membrane cross sectional views, while the
lower left and lower right illustrations are top views of the membrane.
Modiﬁed from [2]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.3
Calorimetric proﬁle of lipid melting transition in case of DMPC syn-
thetic lipid membrane. The main transition between solid-ordered and
liquid-disordered phases is characterized by the membrane transition
temperature (Tm). In biological membranes, pretransition and ripple
phase cannot be detected [3]. From [2]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.4
Current ﬂow correlating ion movements in membranes containing pro-
teins (a) as well as in pure lipid membranes without proteins (b). Figure
(a) is recorded on acetylcholine receptor in frog muscle cells [4]. Figure
(b) is demonstrating current activity through synthetic DOPC:DPPC
membrane in 150 mM KCl at its melting transition at 19 ◦C [5]. The
ﬁgure source is [6]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.5
Current ﬂow experienced at the phase transition temperature regime.
Left side: Heat capacity proﬁle of synthetic DPPC lipid membrane
shows the membrane transition peak approximately at 41 ◦C. Right
side: Membrane current was found around the membrane transition
temperature, at 43 ◦C, however, no current was recorded at 50 ◦C and
35 ◦C. From [7] [6].
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
ix
==PAGE:12==
3.6
Calcium inhibits or induces lipid channel like events. Left side: Cur-
rent through bovine brain phosphatidylserine (Serva): cholesterol 2:1
(w/w) membranes in 200 mM cyclamate (pH 7.4) before and after addi-
tion of 8 mM CaCl2 to one side of the membrane. Calcium ions inhibit
the current ﬂow. From [8]. Right side: Current generation induced
by calcium ions in DPPC membranes (1,2-dipalmitoyl-Sn-glycero-3-
phosphate in a n-decane-chloroform-methanol mixture with the ratio
of 7:2:1 vol. with medium of 0.1 M LiCl, pH 4.6). Temperature was
constant at 64 ◦C, while the transition temperature of DPPC is 41 ◦C.
From [9].
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.7
Hypothesis of hydrophilic pore creation across the bilayer lipid mem-
brane after exposure of high electric pulse [10]. Black ovals represent
polar headgroups and twin wavy lines symbolize the lipid tails. (A)
Uncharged molecule entering the lipid membrane while in normal struc-
tural arrangement. (B) Compression of membrane results in creation
of a dimple. (C) Structural separation of the membrane forms a hy-
drophobic pore as a precursor to a following hydrophilic pore.
(D)
Hydrophilic pore formation across the membrane. (E) Pore formation
in presence of a membrane protein. (F) Hydrophilic pore is permeable
for long charged molecule and facilitates its transport. From [11] [10]. .
14
4.1
Growing of HT29 colon cancer cells.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.2
Heating and temperature controlling setup in pre-electroporation phase. 20
4.3
Experimental setups during in vitro HT29 cancer cells electroporation
showing the electrical pulse generator (A), the electroporation cuvette
holder (B), the oscilloscope (C), the thermometer (D) and the heating
block (E). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.4
Electroporation cuvette connects the HT29 cell suspension with the
electrical pulse generator.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.5
Schematic diagram about the implementation of thermal monitoring
during in vitro cancer cell electroporation. Twin cuvette has been in-
troduced, which is then connected to a thermometer though a small
diameter thermocouple wire. In order to illustrate that the twin cu-
vette is analogous with the cuvette containing the measurand sample
during electroporation, a replication of Figure 4.4b is shown on the
right side of the ﬁgure. Modiﬁed from [12]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.6
MTS Tetrazolium Assay is used to determine cell viability of HT29
samples. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.7
Collected frozen HT29 cells for membrane preparation in order to per-
form membrane heat capacity measurements.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.8
Process of HT29 membrane preparation for heat capacity measurements. 25
x
==PAGE:13==
4.9
Process of membrane heat capacity measurement.
. . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.1
Time dependency is represented in HT29 cell viability graphs of un-
treated and treated samples. Figures on the left have been recorded,
when the experiment has been started with the lowest temperature
point and progressed towards the highest one.
Figures on the right
have been recorded in the opposite temperature order, meaning that it
has been started with the highest temperature and progressed towards
the lowest one. The red plots represent the untreated samples, whereas,
the the blue plots stand for the calcium electroporated samples. . . . .
30
5.2
HT29 cell viability of untreated samples are representing a stable base-
line with an average of 19% cell death as a result of experimental cir-
cumstances. The red thicker curve shows the average viability based
on the six experiment without treatment, and it is presented with the
error bars corresponding to standard deviation of the six values. . . . .
31
5.3
HT29 cell viability after calcium electroporation. Viability is relative to
the untreated samples. The red thicker curve shows the average relative
viability based on the six experiments treated with both calcium and
electroporation. The error bars present the standard deviations among
the six independent experiment. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.4
HT29 cell viability after calcium electroporation treatment at ten dif-
ferent temperatures. The bars show the mean relative viability of the
six independent experiments, while the error bars present the standard
error of the mean.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.5
HT29 cell viability after calcium electroporation treatment at four dif-
ferent temperature points. The bars show the mean of the ten inde-
pendent experiments, while the error bars present the standard error
of the mean.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.6
HT29 cell viability after calcium electroporation treatment at four dif-
ferent temperatures. The diagram shows the median of the ten values
at each temperature point with a horizontal line. The range is also dis-
played with the vertical lines. Each of the dots in the ﬁgure represents
a measurement value. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.7
Comparison of HT29 cell viabilities after treatment 1) with calcium
only (top ﬁgure), and 2) with both calcium and electroporation (bottom
ﬁgure). Viability is relative to the untreated samples. In both graphs,
the red thicker curves show the average relative viability with error bars
(SD) based on the six independent experiments. The (bottom ﬁgure) is
the same graph shown in Figure 5.3, but with diﬀerent relative viability
scaling, which eases the comparison.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
xi
==PAGE:14==
5.8
Comparison of HT29 cell viabilities after treatment 1) with electropo-
ration only (top ﬁgure), and 2) with both calcium and electroporation
(bottom ﬁgure). Viability is relative to the untreated samples. In both
graphs, the red thicker curves show the average relative viability with
error bars (SD) based on the six independent experiments. The (bot-
tom ﬁgure) is the same graph shown in Figure 5.3, but with diﬀerent
relative viability scaling, which eases the comparison.
. . . . . . . . .
36
5.9
Heat capacity proﬁle of HT29 cell membranes with presence (continuous
line) and absence (dashed line) of 5 mM calcium chloride. Black lines
represent the results from the 3. scan, while red lines show the results
from the 4.
scan.
In scan 3, protein peaks are well-deﬁned in the
temperature region of 50 to 80 ◦C, while in scan 4, the protein peaks
mostly disappeared due to denaturation of proteins during the 3. scan.
39
5.10 Heat capacity proﬁle of HT29 cell membranes with presence (contin-
uous line) and absence (dashed line) of 5 mM calcium chloride. Blue
lines represent the HT29 membranes before the denaturation of the
membrane proteins, while red lines show the HT29 membranes after
the denaturation of the proteins.
Black lines are used to mark the
membrane transition peaks representing the membrane transition tem-
perature points (Tm). In both cases, the inﬂuence of calcium on the
membrane transition peaks is very small, thus calcium does not signif-
icantly shift the Tm membrane transition temperature.
. . . . . . . .
40
xii
==PAGE:15==
1. Introduction
1.1
Motivation
Fighting cancer is part of the biggest medical and scientiﬁc challenges worldwide.
According to Statistics Denmark, cancer was the most common reason of death in
2014 in Denmark [13]. Out of the total 51340 deaths, 15313 lives were lost due to
cancer. This loss is for instance 2.24 times higher than patients lost due to heart
diseases, and 11.84 times higher than from diabetes [13]. The four most common
types of cancer in Denmark are lung, breast, prostate and colorectal cancer [14]. The
American Cancer Society has estimated nearly 1.7 million new cancer cases for 2016
in the United States of America, which almost 0.6 million ends with death from [15].
These numbers call for an increased attention for developing new, more eﬀective and
less harmful cancer treatments.
Today, if a patient is diagnosed with a malignant tumor, a treatment plan is prepared
with the cooperation of a team of oncological doctors and medical physicists. The
most common used treatments include surgery, chemotherapy as well as radiation. In
some cases only one type of treatment is applied. However, most of the patients have
a combination of treatments such as surgery with chemotherapy and/or radiation.
Treatment planning depends on many factors such as the age of the patient, the loca-
tion of the tumor and the stage at the time of diagnosis. A cancer treatment statistic
from 2012 reports that colon and rectum cancer is typically treated by only surgery
in stage I and II in 82% of the cases. A combination of colectomy (surgical removal)
and chemotherapy (and/or radiation therapy) is applied in 71% of the patients in
stage III and 50% of stage IV [16]. Therefore, a well-planned and improved way of
chemotherapy is crucial in dealing especially with late-stage diagnosed patients.
Chemotherapy implies two main development ﬁelds as originating from its appellation:
’chemo’ and ’therapy’.
The name ’chemo’ refers to the usage of chemicals, therefore, it calls for researching
the right chemistry behind the scenes. Currently, a multitude of strong drugs are
available. A great challenge, however, is that patients can develop resistance towards
treatments with anticancer drugs [17]. This raises some questions for consideration.
Is a strong, unnatural drug the best way to go? Could there be a more natural way
of ﬁghting against cancer cells? Researchers at Herlev Hospital have proposed and
investigated a new idea of using high concentration calcium instead of the common
chemotherapy drugs. Calcium is a natural element, and the treatment is based on
1
==PAGE:16==
the natural human homeostatic and metabolic system, therefore, it is suspected to
cause fewer side eﬀects and faster recovery of the treated patients. Reaching supra-
physiological calcium concentration in the tumor cells causes their functional collapse,
thus death [18] [19]. Calcium is a secondary messenger involved in several cellular
processes including cell death (apoptosis and necrosis) [20] [21] [19].
The other part of successful chemotherapy is a well-chosen ’therapy’, thus, the method
to get the drug working eﬀectively. This can happen by ﬁnding the way where the
drug reaches the interior of cancerous target cells the most eﬃciently. The cells are
surrounded by their membranes, which act like a fence. In order to plan the best
way of getting through this barrier, we incline to exploit membrane physics. First
of all, we consider thermodynamic laws and theories related to membrane transition
phases. In addition, we intend to determine physiological membrane phase transition
temperature in biological cancer cell membranes. Besides that, we aim to investigate
the method of electroporation as an external force to open up the membrane and
make it more permeable for drugs. We introduce the hypothesis, whether these two
phenomena, membrane phase transition and electroporation, could be combined in
order to reach the best level of permeability, thus the most eﬃcient drug delivery into
the intracellular lumen.
1.2
Project Aim and Hypothesis
This thesis strives to examine connections and correlations between cell membrane
transition phases and the eﬀectiveness of electroporation in biological membranes.
The main aspect of the research is to focus on possible medical application such
as the development of a new eﬀective cancer treatment with the usage of calcium
as the drug. Therefore, we also aim to corroborate the eﬃciency of calcium as an
electrochemotherapeutic medication.
As a hypothesis, we suspect that biological membrane is easier to penetrate during
its phase transition, thus temperature can be a key for reaching eﬀective intracellular
cancer treatment. We target to examine applications of synthetic membrane physico-
chemical theories for biological membranes. We propose that calcium electroporation
is an eﬀective method for cancer treatment applications, and the best eﬃciency in
pore formation can be achieved by thermal modulations.
2
==PAGE:17==
2. Related Work
This chapter introduces the achievements and ﬁndings in the scientiﬁc ﬁeld of cal-
cium electroporation.
Firstly, preclinical results are presented both from in vitro
and in vivo investigations. Secondly, the result of the ﬁrst clinical trial is mentioned
with focus on the comparison between the response of calcium electroporation and
electrochemotherapy using bleomycin, where the latter is already clinically used as
anti-cancer treatment [22] [23].
2.1
Calcium Electroporation
The combination of transmembrane calcium ion transport and electroporation is a
fairly new ﬁeld. Increased intracellular calcium concentration due to electroporation
has been shown by Golzio et al. [24] and Hojman et al. [25]. Recently, this method
has been applied for anti-cancer treatment by a Danish research group [19]. Frandsen
et al. [19] investigated three diﬀerent cancerous cell lines, and showed that calcium
overload induces cancer cell death in vitro. They achieved a dramatic decrease in
cancer cell viability with the combined treatment of calcium and electroporation.
In the same study, they also showed the eﬀect of calcium electroporation in induced
tumors of mice in vivo. The volume of the tumors treated with calcium electroporation
signiﬁcantly decreased, while untreated and only-calcium treated tumors kept growing.
Electroporation alone showed moderate tumor growth.
In a following study, Frandsen et al. [26] used 3D spheroids as an in vivo-like model
of tumors to investigate the eﬀect of calcium electroporation on a broader range of
human tumor cell lines and on normal cells. The treatment indicated no eﬀect on the
size of the human ﬁbroblast spheroids compared to the untreated control, however,
largely reduced the size of the three diﬀerent types of human cancer cell spheroids. The
eﬀectiveness of calcium electroporation was at least as good as electrochemotherapy
using bleomycin. They concluded that calcium electroporation seemed to be more
eﬀective in inducing cell death in cancer cell spheroids than in normal ﬁbroblast
spheroid.
3
==PAGE:18==
2.2
Clinical Trial of Calcium Electroporation
Calcium electroporation is currently under clinical trial for cutaneous metastasis. The
ﬁrst clinical case report was recently published by Falk et al. [27]. They treated a pa-
tient with disseminated malignant melanoma (skin cancer). They reported remarkable
systemic response after treatment with both electrochemotherapy using bleomycin
and calcium electroporation.
During this trial, two new metastasis of the patient
was treated according to an experimental protocol, which compared calcium electro-
poration and electrochemotherapy using bleomycin. The two of the metastases were
treated separately with the two diﬀerent treatments. Both metastases had a complete
response veriﬁed by biopsies and resulted in a smooth skin with complete leveling of
the metastases.
2.3
Opportunities and Reﬂection on Related Works
Calcium electroporation is an interesting and expanding ﬁeld, with promising appli-
cation opportunities as an anti-cancer treatment. Primarily, this method can be a
well-used clinical treatment for cutaneous metastasis [27], when cancer cells grow in
the skin, but originate from a primary internal malignancy.
Our aim is to increase the eﬃciency of calcium electroporation against cancer cells. We
have to overcome the lack of knowledge in the exact mechanism behind the procedure
[28] in order to enable the control and ﬁne-tuning of the process. Frandsen et al. [19]
have investigated the amount of calcium in the buﬀer during electroporation, whether
it inﬂuences the treatment eﬃciency. They found that the result in cancer cell viability
was dose-dependent. In all three cell lines, the viability decreased signiﬁcantly starting
from 0.5 mM calcium concentration in the electroporation buﬀer up until 5 mM.
However, the eﬀect of temperature was not investigated, whether it inﬂuences the
eﬀectiveness of the treatment.
Temperature control during cancer cell electroporation has not been executed yet
either in vitro or in vivo. However, membrane structures and characteristics change
with temperature [29] [6]. Examining the temperature parameter could be one of the
ways to understand the underlying mechanism of the treatment better.
In this study, our aim is to investigate the thermal modulation of calcium electropora-
tion in order to increase the treatment eﬀectiveness against cancer cells. Our hypoth-
esis suspects that electroporation is more eﬃcient at the membrane phase transition
regime, which is characterised by the membrane transition temperature.
The basis of our hypothesis is explained in the theoretical background chapter, where
the cell membrane, lipid ion channels, thermodynamics and electroporation are intro-
duced. As no one before has controlled and monitored temperature during in vitro
electroporation, the Methods chapter explains the developed and established solution
for this purpose. It also describes the complex experimental procedure, which involves
dealing with unstable baseline viability. Moreover, the process of membrane heat ca-
pacity measurement is reported. In Results and Discussion, the experimentally found
4
==PAGE:19==
temperature characteristics are presented and discussed. Likewise, a comparison of
results from calcium electroporation and heat capacity measurements is shown.
5
==PAGE:20==
3. Theoretical Background
3.1
Function of Cells
Cells are the smallest functional units of all known living organisms including the
human body. These complex organisational structures are responsible for maintain-
ing numerous metabolisms, coordinating operational functions, carrying information,
supplying and storing energy and much more. The major functional components of
the human cells are the plasma membrane, the nucleus, and the cytoplasm with its
organelles, as it is also illustrated in Figure 3.1. [30]
The nucleus serves as a control center of the cell. It contains the hereditary information
in form of the DNA. The cytoplasm is situated in the cavity between the nucleus and
the cell membrane, and contains all the organelles. The function of each organelle is
impressively analogous to the body organs. For instance, mitochondria supply energy
to the cell, ribosomes synthesise proteins and other materials for the cell functions,
and lysosomes participate in digestion. In many respects, the cell membrane is one
of the most important units of the cell. It encloses this small functional factory and
protects the interior of the cell. On the other hand, it also provides communication
between the intra- and extracellular lumens, as well as, transfer of materials. [30]
3.2
Cell Membranes
When dealing with cancer, we would like to eﬃciently target and eliminate the can-
cerous tumor cells with the treatment. In case of chemotherapy, a real challenge is to
get through the border line of the cells, the plasma membrane.
The cell membrane acts as a semi-permeable dynamic structure between the intra-
cellular and extracellular environments of the cells. It only allows some molecules
and ions to pass through unhindered, and otherwise controls the transfer process with
specialised proteins [30]. It is composed of lipids, carbohydrates, and proteins and the
main structure is provided by a lipid bilayer. It consists primarily of phospholipids
along with glycolipids and cholesterol. Phospholipid and glycolipids are situated in
a way that their hydrophilic heads facing outward and the hydrophobic tails facing
inward towards the middle part of the membrane. The role of cholesterol is to stiﬀen
the membrane bilayer. Membrane proteins are embedded in the lipid bilayer. They
supply diﬀerent functions such as serving as receptors, transporting molecules or in-
6
==PAGE:21==
Figure 3.1: Illustration of a human cell with its cell components and surrounded with the
plasma membrane. Modiﬁed from [1].
volving in intracellular signaling. Complex carbohydrate chains can be attached to
some of the proteins or lipids, which are participating in cell-to-cell recognition and
adhesion. [30]
Biological lipid membranes exist in two diﬀerent phases. These phases are charac-
terized by the lateral arrangement of the phosphate-containing head groups and the
ordering of the apolar tails.
A well-ordered low temperature phase (or gel phase) exists below the membrane phase
transition temperature (Tm).
In this stage, the membrane is highly ordered and
displaying the lipid chains in a triangular crystalline arrangement [31]. The polar
heads are showing a lattice pattern, and the hydrocarbon chains are stretched and
ordered.
The liquid-disordered high temperature phase (or ﬂuid phase) demonstrates a loss
in the long-range orientational order. An increased system entropy is presented [2].
The diﬀerence in order is illustrated in Figure 3.2. Due to the structural changes,
the lipid membrane area becomes approximately 24% larger and its thickness turns
around 16% smaller compared to the gel phase [32].
The two diﬀerent membrane phases are reversible into each other and distinguished
by the membrane melting transition. A lipid melting transition proﬁle is seen in Fig-
ure 3.3. In this calorimetric graph, the lipid was DMPC, dimyristoyl phosphatidyl-
choline. It is important to note the diﬀerence when having biomolecules besides lipids.
When biomolecules such as proteins are present, pretransition and the intermediate
ripple phase cannot be detected [3]. Thus in biological membranes, this case is very
7
==PAGE:22==
Figure 3.2: Schematic picture of lipid structural changes between gel and ﬂuid phases. As a
result of melting transition, lipid membrane area becomes larger (green bar) and its thickness
decreases (red bar). ∆H and ∆S are referring to the enthalpy and entropy changes between the
two phases, as well as, Tm is referring to the melting temperature of the membrane, which
separates the gel and ﬂuid phases. The top left and top right illustrations are membrane
cross sectional views, while the lower left and lower right illustrations are top views of the
membrane. Modiﬁed from [2].
rare if it occurs. Therefore, we focus only on the main melting transition between the
two phases, which typically occurs in the range of 10 to 25 ◦C in biological membranes
[2].
3.3
Lipid Ion Channels
Generally, ion transportation is considered to happen through particular membrane
proteins called ion channels. Meanwhile, the lipid bilayer is assumed to behave as
an electrical insulator. For instance, the well-known Hodgkin-Huxley model considers
the membrane as a capacitor, where the current conductance can happen through ion
selective protein channels. [33]
On the other hand, it was found that synthetic lipid membranes at the range of lipid
melting transition are highly permeable to ions [5] [34] [35] [36], water [37] and small
molecules [5].
Firstly, Papahadjopoulos et al.
[34] showed that lipid membrane permeability for
sodium ions increased by the factor of a hundred at the lipid speciﬁc phase transitions.
Then three years later Sabra et al. [36] demonstrated that the membrane permeability
to Co2+ has signiﬁcantly grown in the region of phase transition.
More recently,
Blicher et al. [5] found that synthetic lipid membranes in phase transition regime
became more permeable for rhodamine 6G, a positively charged ﬂuorescent marker.
Ion movements through the membrane are causing current changes and can be traced
8
==PAGE:23==
Figure 3.3: Calorimetric proﬁle of lipid melting transition in case of DMPC synthetic lipid
membrane. The main transition between solid-ordered and liquid-disordered phases is charac-
terized by the membrane transition temperature (Tm). In biological membranes, pretransition
and ripple phase cannot be detected [3]. From [2].
with the method of patch-clamp. These currents are generally small and expected to
be happening through membrane integrated protein ion channels. Interestingly, they
have identiﬁed similar current changes in pure lipid membranes, too, which do not
contain any proteins [5]. In Figure 3.4, this similar current changes are demonstrated
by showing two patch-clamp recordings, one from a membrane containing proteins,
and one from a pure lipid membrane without proteins. This introduces the theory of
lipid ion channels, meaning that beside proteins, lipids can also form channels for ion
transport.
Likelihood of lipid channel formations was found to be maximum at the lipid phase
transition regime [38] [7] [5]. For instance, Antonov et al. [7] investigated synthetic
DPPC membranes and found quantized current ﬂow in the melting temperature
regime (around 41-45 ◦C [7]), as seen in Figure 3.5. The membrane showed inert
characteristics outside of this temperature region both at 50 ◦C and 35 ◦C, although,
current was detected at 43 ◦C [7]. Blicher et al. also demonstrated the same eﬀect
with synthetic DOPC:DPPC=75:25 mixture membrane (in 150 mM KCl, 40 mV),
which showed current events at its phase transition temperature, 17 ◦C, but nothing
at 30 ◦C [5].
9
==PAGE:24==
Figure 3.4: Current ﬂow correlating ion movements in membranes containing proteins (a) as
well as in pure lipid membranes without proteins (b). Figure (a) is recorded on acetylcholine
receptor in frog muscle cells [4]. Figure (b) is demonstrating current activity through synthetic
DOPC:DPPC membrane in 150 mM KCl at its melting transition at 19 ◦C [5]. The ﬁgure
source is [6].
Figure 3.5: Current ﬂow experienced at the phase transition temperature regime. Left side:
Heat capacity proﬁle of synthetic DPPC lipid membrane shows the membrane transition peak
approximately at 41 ◦C. Right side: Membrane current was found around the membrane
transition temperature, at 43 ◦C, however, no current was recorded at 50 ◦C and 35 ◦C. From
[7] [6].
10
==PAGE:25==
3.4
Eﬀect of Calcium on Lipid Ion Channels
Lipid ion channel like events were found to be inﬂuenced by Ca2+ concentration among
other factors such as pH and voltage [6].
As calcium has two positive charges, they most likely bind the phosphate groups of
negatively charged or neutral (dipolar) lipids. This eﬀect typically would also increase
the membrane melting temperature [6]. Therefore, calcium may inhibit or induce the
lipid ion channels depending on the state of the membrane.
Gögelein and Koepsell [8] found that single channel like events can be inhibited by
calcium ions. The membrane used for experiments was made of bovine brain phos-
phatidylserine (Serva) and cholesterol in the ratio of 2:1 (w/w). Their result is shown
in the left side of Figure 3.6. On the other hand, Antonov et al. [9] showed the
opposite eﬀect that calcium induced electric current through synthetic DPPC mem-
brane. The experiment was carried out at 64 ◦C, which is above the DPPC membrane
transition temperature. This result is presented in the right side of Figure 3.6. Al-
though, the conditions in these papers were not clearly deﬁned, these results lead to
the hypothesis that calcium would aﬀect the membrane transition temperature.
Figure 3.6:
Calcium inhibits or induces lipid channel like events.
Left side: Current
through bovine brain phosphatidylserine (Serva): cholesterol 2:1 (w/w) membranes in 200
mM cyclamate (pH 7.4) before and after addition of 8 mM CaCl2 to one side of the membrane.
Calcium ions inhibit the current ﬂow. From [8]. Right side: Current generation induced
by calcium ions in DPPC membranes (1,2-dipalmitoyl-Sn-glycero-3-phosphate in a n-decane-
chloroform-methanol mixture with the ratio of 7:2:1 vol. with medium of 0.1 M LiCl, pH
4.6). Temperature was constant at 64 ◦C, while the transition temperature of DPPC is 41
◦C. From [9].
3.5
Thermodynamics
In section 3.2, it has been introduced that we observe thermodynamical changes during
membrane phase transition. It can also explain, why formation of lipid channels are
most likely to occur at its phase transition temperature regime.
First of all, when changing from gel to liquid phase, the entropy of the lipid membrane
is changing based on the Boltzmann’s entropy formula [2]:
11
==PAGE:26==
∆S = k · ln µl
µg
(3.1)
, where ∆S is the change of entropy, k is the Boltzmann constant, µl is the proportion
of lipid membrane in ﬂuid phase, and µg is the proportion of lipid membrane in gel
phase.
Beside the entropy, as applying heat to the membrane, the energy, alias the enthalpy
of the system also varies. Gibbs free energy draws the connection between the entropy
and enthalpy change:
∆G = ∆H −T · ∆S
(3.2)
, where ∆G is the change in Gibbs free energy, ∆H is change of enthalpy, T is
temperature, and ∆S is change in entropy.
At lipid phase transition, the membrane has a point where the two phases are in
equilibrium and the change in Gibbs free energy is zero:
∆G = ∆H −Tm · ∆S = 0
(3.3)
, where Tm is the membrane transition temperature.
As a consequence, we can state that the membrane transition temperature is the
proportion of the enthalpy and entropy changes [2]:
Tm = ∆H
∆S
(3.4)
At the point of the membrane transition temperature, the two membrane phases
(liquid and gel) are in coexistence and in equal proportions [2]. While heating the
membrane, the proportion of the gel and liquid phases are changing. Each of this
stage, with diﬀerent amount of gel and liquid membrane phases, can be described
with an Hi enthalpy. The average value of any function H is then [2]:
< H >=
X
Pi · Hi
(3.5)
, where Pi is the probability and Hi is the enthalpy of each gel-liquid phase combina-
tion.
Equation 3.5 can further be expressed based on the Boltzmann distribution [2]:
< H >=
X
Pi · Hi =
P Hi · exp(−Hi
k·T )
P exp(−Hi
k·T )
(3.6)
, where k is the Boltzmann constant.
12
==PAGE:27==
When heating the membrane, it absorbs energy. At the membrane melting tempera-
ture, the energy absorption, thus the heat capacity of the system reaches the maxi-
mum. Heat capacity at constant pressure can be described as the derivative ratio of
the enthalpy and the temperature [2]:
cp = d < H >
dT
(3.7)
Transition temperature acts as a thermal equilibrium of the dynamic system. Around
this melting regime, ﬂuctuations between the liquid and solid phase has been recorded.
The ﬂuid and gel lipid areas are forming into domains and cooperative with each other.
As the domains are ﬂuctuating, the enthalpy of the system is changing as well. This
ﬂuctuations in the internal energy is proportional to the heat capacity [6]:
cp = < H2 > −< H >2
k · T 2
(3.8)
, where cp is the heat capacity, k is the Boltzmann constant, T is the temperature,
and < H2 > −< H >2 describes the mean square deviation of the enthalpy, alias the
ﬂuctuations in enthalpy.
Thus, the internal energy changes can be described with the mean square deviations
of the enthalpy.
The same relation can be projected to isothermal area compressibility [6]:
κT = < A2 > −< A >2
A · k · T
(3.9)
, where κT is the compressibility, k is the Boltzmann constant, T is the temperature,
and < A2 > −< A >2 describes the area ﬂuctuations. High area compressibility
implies ease in compressing the membrane.
Close to membrane transition, changes in the area and changes in enthalpy are pro-
portional functions of temperature [39]. Therefore, area compressibility is also pro-
portional to the heat capacity changes during membrane transition [39]. It entails
that the membranes are highly compressible in their melting regime. However, it is
to note, that this is mainly theory and based on experiments with synthetic bilayer
lipid membranes (BLMs), and not yet discovered whether they are correct in case of
biological membranes.
Membrane compressibility is a dominant parameter not only in the creation of lipid
ion channels, but also in the formation of pores during electroporation. This will be
introduced in section 3.6.
13
==PAGE:28==
3.6
Electroporation
Electroporation is the process of creating transient increase in cell membrane perme-
ability by exposing it to high electric ﬁeld strength.
In terms of electroporation, the bilayer lipid membrane can be considered as the inner,
non-polar region behaving like ﬂuid, and the outer polar headgroups demonstrating
strong interactions with each other and with the surrounding water phase. Thus, cell
permeability is molecular speciﬁc and depending on their ability to enter into and
diﬀuse through the hydrophobic central part. BLM is also acting like a dielectric in a
capacitor separating two conductive solutions [40]. When an external electric ﬁeld is
applied, the membrane gets polarised. When a certain threshold of trans-membrane
potential (U) is exceeded, the molecular order of the BLM structurally changes. It
leads to the formation of pores across the membrane, and simultaneously membrane
permeability then increases.
This trans-membrane potential can be calculated by the following equation [41]:
U = −1.5 · r · E · cosθ
(3.10)
where U is the trans-membrane voltage, r is the radius of the spherical cell, E is
the static electric ﬁeld, and θ is the angle between the static electric ﬁeld E and the
normal to the membrane site, where the trans-membrane potential U is measured.
As illustrated in Figure 3.7, membrane pore formation is proposed to begin with
an uncharged molecule entering the BLM [11] [42]. It results in a dimple, then a
hydrophobic pore creation, which acts as a precursor to the formation of a hydrophilic
pore across the membrane [11].
Figure 3.7: Hypothesis of hydrophilic pore creation across the bilayer lipid membrane after
exposure of high electric pulse [10]. Black ovals represent polar headgroups and twin wavy
lines symbolize the lipid tails. (A) Uncharged molecule entering the lipid membrane while
in normal structural arrangement. (B) Compression of membrane results in creation of a
dimple. (C) Structural separation of the membrane forms a hydrophobic pore as a precursor
to a following hydrophilic pore. (D) Hydrophilic pore formation across the membrane. (E)
Pore formation in presence of a membrane protein. (F) Hydrophilic pore is permeable for
long charged molecule and facilitates its transport. From [11] [10].
A pore can reseal if a short durational high electric pulse is applied [43]. This mem-
brane recovery happens on a timescale of seconds, while the pore formation is on the
14
==PAGE:29==
time scale of 10 nsec [28].
Thus, this phenomenon makes it possible to transport
charged molecules through the cell membrane. Pore resealing also depends on factors
such as temperature and membrane composition [44]. Molecular transport eﬃciency
was found to correlate with electric ﬁeld strength, pulse period and pulse shape, when
considering a reversible electroporation [45].
The method is increasingly applied at the ﬁelds of cell biology, genetics as well as in
medicine [46] [47] [48] [49] [27]. This wide range of applications all originate from the
advantage that electroporation results in an increased membrane permeability.
15
==PAGE:30==
4. Methods
This project was determined to investigate the thermal modulation of HT29 colon
cancer cells viability after calcium electroporation. Therefore, this chapter introduces
the methodology of two larger parts of the projects.
The primer focus falls on calcium electroporation, where new methods were established
both for cell preparation in prior to experiment and for thermal modulation during
experiment. The ﬁrst part of this chapter aims to introduce these methods including
the HT29 cell growing, harvesting, preparation for in vitro cancer cell electroporation.
It also describes the newly-established and implemented thermal modulation of in
vitro cell electroporation. Moreover, the method of statistical analysis of the gained
data is also presented.
Furthermore, the thermal properties of membranes have also been investigated by
measuring HT29 membrane heat capacity with and without the presence of calcium
chloride. The second part of this chapter focuses on the methods of cell collection,
preparation and execution procedure of membrane heat capacity measurements.
4.1
Growing of Cells
In order to execute in-vitro cancer drug delivery experiments, the HT29 colon cancer
cell line has been investigated. They have been grown in T175 ﬂasks with inbuilt
ﬁlter for airing. As cells environment, RPMI Medium 1640 (1x) + GlutaMAXTM-I
(Producer: gibco® by Life technologiesTM, Ref.: 61870-010)) was used and it has been
complementing with FBS Superior serum (Producer: Merck Millipore, Ref.: S 0615)
and Pen Strep (Penicillin Streptomycin, Producer: gibco® by Life technologiesTM,
Ref.: 15140-122). Considering the rates, 50 ml FBS and 10 ml PS (Pen Strep) have
been added to 500 ml of RPMI Medium. 25 ml media was added into each T175
ﬂask. The growth process of HT29 cells was facilitated with a Thermo ScientiﬁcTM
HeracellTM 150i CO2 incubator. In order to reach the best cell growth results and
create physiological circumstances, the incubator was at 37 ◦C and 5% CO2 settings.
The cell cultures have been passed and splitted into new ﬂasks in every 3-4 days in
order to optimise their growing. The growth process can be followed in Figure 4.1.
16
==PAGE:31==
(a) Day 0 - After passag-
ing.
(b) Day
2
-
During
growth.
(c) Day 4 - Before pas-
saging.
Figure 4.1: Growing of HT29 colon cancer cells.
4.2
Cell Harvesting
HT29 cells were harvested for experiment, when they were dense after three-four days
of growing. Cells are adherent to the bottom of the T175 ﬂasks. Firstly, the media
was removed from them, then they were washed with 10 ml of DPBS (1x) (Dulbecco’s
Phosphate Buﬀered Saline, Producer: gibco® by Life technologiesTM, Ref.: 14190-
094). To detach the cells, 2 ml of 0.05% Trypsin-EDTA (1x) (Producer: gibco® by Life
technologiesTM, Ref.: 25300-054) was used per ﬂasks. Trypsin is an enzyme applied
to cleave protein bondings, thus the cells can be resuspended into media and collected
for experiment. Application of PBS is necessary before trypsinization, as cell media
contains serum with protease inhibitor. In order to avoid the inhibition of Trypsin,
it is important to secure that media was properly removed by washing the cells with
PBS. The working temperature of Trypsin is 37 ◦C, therefore, after trypsinization
they were placed to incubation for approximately 5 minutes. Thereafter, cells were
checked in light microscope if they were properly detached and there were no clusters
formed.
Cells were collected into media. For this purpose, 8 ml media was suﬃcient to use in
each ﬂask. Cells were then collected into a 50 ml eppendorf tube, centrifuged (on 180
x g, for 3 mins), and resuspended in 10 ml cell media.
4.3
Setting of the Cell Concentration
For electroporation, the desired cell concentration is 5.5 x 106 cells/ml in a total
volume of 300 µl per electroporation cuvette. Beside the cells, 30 µl 50 mM CaCl2
or Hepes buﬀer are also added into the electroporation cuvettes. Thus, each cuvette
contains 270 µl of cell dilution and 30 µl of drug or Hepes buﬀer. In order to ensure
17
==PAGE:32==
the absence of calcium ions, as well as, to control the calcium concentration of the
investigated samples, Hepes buﬀer is used as solvent during electroporation. This
buﬀer does not contain calcium ions.
When calcium chloride is added to the sample, its concentration was chosen to be 5
mM in the cell solution. It is ﬁve times higher, than the normal physiological calcium
concentration in the plasma ﬂuid [50].
After harvesting, cell concentration was deﬁned with the help of a ChemoMetec
NucleoCounter®. In order to be in the measurement range of the device, the cell
suspension was 20 times diluted with PBS in prior of cell counting. After cell concen-
tration deﬁnition, the necessary dilution ratio was calculated and the proper amount
of cells were diluted with the required amount of Hepes buﬀer. Thus, the 5.5 x 106
cells/ml concentration was reached.
Hepes buﬀer is previously prepared, and used as an electroporation buﬀer for cells.
It is providing and maintaining the right physiological pH and ion concentrations,
although, does not containing calcium ions, which would interfere the experiment.
500 ml of Hepes buﬀer contains 5.0 ml Hepes Buﬀer 1M in 0.85% NaCl (Producer:
Lonza BioWhittaker®, Ref.: 2428), 1 mM (101.66 mg) MgCl2 * 6 H2O (Producer:
Merck, Ref.: 1.05833.0250), 250.02 mM (42.79 g) Sucrose for microbiology (Producer:
Merck, Ref.: 1.07651.1000), and 4 mM NaOH (2 ml from 1 M NaOH solution) in order
to adjust the pH to 7. It is then ﬁlled up to 500 ml with sterile water. If necessary,
pH is further adjusted with the help of NaOH.
After cells are in the right concentration, the sample is divided between the diﬀerent
temperature points and a control. 1200 µl is measured into each of the six 1.5 ml
volume eppendorf microcentrifuge tubes. Five of the tubes correspond with the ﬁve
diﬀerent temperature points, and one of them used as an overall baseline control
sample. One set of experiment (ten temperature points) was performed in two sessions
of ﬁve points. The reasons behind this will be discussed and certiﬁed in chapter 6.
4.4
Preparing the Cells for Electroporation
One temperature point is treated and investigated at a time. Meanwhile, the other
samples separated for the other temperature points are in incubation with opened
lids. It is to be precautious and to minimize natural death of the cells, so they are
kept at their temperaure optimum and at a 5% CO2 level.
When a temperature point is ready to be electroporated, the cells are ﬁrst centrifuged
in the 1.5 ml eppendorf tube on 180 x g for 3 mins. After centrifugation, the media is
removed and the cells are washed in 1000 µl of Hepes buﬀer solution. The sample is
then again centrifuged on 180 x g for 3 mins, the liquid supernatant is then removed
and cells are resuspended in 1200 µl Hepes buﬀer. This way it is veriﬁed that the
media with all the contained ions has been thoroughly removed, thus leftover ions
such as calcium ions will not interfere with the experiment.
18
==PAGE:33==
4.5
Electroporation with Thermal Modulation
Electroporation is executed in 4 mm gap electroporation cuvettes (Producer: Molec-
ular BioProducts, Ref.: 5540-11). When sample is washed into Hepes electroporation
buﬀer, it is then ready to be placed into the cuvettes. In each of the cuvettes, 270
µl of cell suspension is measured. At each temperature point, four electroporation
cuvettes are used, which comply with the four following cases:
1. Sample is treated with both calcium and electroporation.
2. Sample is treated with only calcium.
3. Sample is treated with only electroporation.
4. Sample is an untreated control for each temperature point.
As no one before has investigated and measured temperature during in vitro cell
electroporation, part of this project was to establish a temperature monitoring and
controlling setup for this purpose. The result can be seen in Figure 4.2. The cuvettes
are placed into a Grant QBD2 heating block, which is used to reach the desired
temperature level in the samples. Meanwhile, temperature is controlled with the help
of a thermocouple. For this purpose, a Type J thermocouple has been chosen, which
has been connected to an RS Pro Digital Thermometer. This type of temperature
monitoring with the thermocouple allowed the relative probe size to the volume of
the sample to be small. This way, the temperature of the surrounding solution has
been measured, and the thermal inﬂuence coming from the thermometer itself has
been minimized. As shown in Figure 4.2a, a 1.9 mm diameter hole was made through
a cuvette lid, which is then every time placed on top of the cuvette containing the
untreated control sample. The thermocouple wire reaches the sample though this hole
on top of the cuvette. The size of the hole facilitates the wire to be hold tight and
ﬁxed into the sample. To ensure the right temperature feedback, the thermocouple
is attached into the sample before its placement into the heating block, as well as,
the four samples are moved together. After attachment of the thermocouple, some
time was allowed for it to equilibrate to the temperature of the surrounding sample
solution. Thereafter, they are heated together. The heating block is only capable for
heating, not for cooling. Therefore, if the desired temperature value was lower than
room temperature (e.g. 17 ◦C), the metal part of the heating block was cooled by
placing it to the freezer for couple of minutes prior application.
All in all, temperature control has been achieved through usage of twin samples.
Thermocouple is ﬁxed into the untreated sample, which acts as a twin sample for the
treated ones. They are then always moved together. Therefore, the same temperature
changes though all the four samples are assumed, and the temperature is measured
in a twin sample. This process is also seen in Figure 4.2.
Calcium chloride is added to the relevant samples 5 minutes prior to electroporation.
Meanwhile, sample is heated to the desired temperature value. Temperature of the
samples are simultaneously measured with their moving including their transport
between the heating block and the electroporator. The exact temperature value at
19
==PAGE:34==
(a) Hole through the cu-
vette lid facilitates the
ﬁxation of the thermo-
couple
wire
into
the
sample area.
(b) Temperature
monitor-
ing of samples with the
help of a thermometer
joined thermocouple.
Figure 4.2: Heating and temperature controlling setup in pre-electroporation phase.
the time of electroporation is noted in each case. Thus the real temperature point
at the time of electroporation deviates in some extent from the aimed temperature
value. It results in a 0-4 ◦C ﬂuctuation around the aimed temperature value.
Figure 4.3: Experimental setups during in vitro HT29 cancer cells electroporation showing
the electrical pulse generator (A), the electroporation cuvette holder (B), the oscilloscope
(C), the thermometer (D) and the heating block (E).
The in vitro electroporation setup itself consists of an electrical pulse generator, an
electroporation cuvette holder compartment, and an oscilloscope. The setup can be
seen in Figure 4.3. As a pulse generator, a BTX® T 820 Electro Square Porator has
been operated in order to create square wave pulses in high voltage mode. The pulse
length was 99 µsec, and the charging voltage was set to 480 V. Considering that my
electrode distance is 4 mm, 480 V of charging voltage means that the applied voltage
20
==PAGE:35==
(a) Electroporation
cuvette
holder equipment with the
cuvette inside.
(b) Schematic diagram of the electroporation
cuvette holder equipment (blue) with the
cuvette inside.
The electroporation cu-
vette holder enables the cuvette to be in
contact with the pulse generator power
supply. Modiﬁed from [12].
Figure 4.4: Electroporation cuvette connects the HT29 cell suspension with the electrical
pulse generator.
to electrode distance is 1.2 kV/cm.
In addition to pulse duration and amplitude,
eﬃciency of molecular transport was further enhanced by choosing multiple pulsing,
which has been achieved by setting the number of pulses to 8. [51] The BTX® T 820
high voltage output signal was connected to a BTX® Enhancer 400 Graphic Pulse
Display external digital oscilloscope with the purpose of monitoring the signal and
gaining feedback. The electric pulse was then output into the electroporation cuvette
holder compartment, where the sample is placed in order to get electroporated. The
electroporation cuvette holder setup with the cuvette inside is shown in Figure 4.4a.
Moreover, a schematic drawing in Figure 4.4b presents how the HT29 cell suspension
is connected into the pulse generator through the electrode of the electroporation
cuvette and electrical contact provided by the cuvette holder compartment.
Thermal monitoring during electroporation has been implemented by the application
of a twin cuvette as it is illustrated in the diagram of Figure 4.5. There are two twin-
like cuvettes with the exact same content of HT29 cells in the same concentration and
in the same volume. The cells are electroporated in one of the cuvettes placed into
the cuvette holder compartment (on the right part of Figure 4.5). Meanwhile, its twin
cuvette has been moved together with it, and stands next to it. The lid of this twin
cuvette has the hole on the top, which facilitates its connection to a thermometer
through a small diameter Type J thermocouple (on the left part of Figure 4.5).
During electroporation, cells are displayed to a high voltage electrical shock. This
phenomena causes structural rearrangements of the cell membranes. Cells then need
rest after this impacts. Therefore, right after electroporation, samples are placed into
incubation for 20 minutes.
After incubation, cells are removed from the electroporation cuvette into a 10 ml
volume eppendorf tube containing 5 ml of HT29 cell media. While dealing with the
electroporation of the other samples, these cells are stored in the incubator.
21
==PAGE:36==
Figure 4.5: Schematic diagram about the implementation of thermal monitoring during in
vitro cancer cell electroporation. Twin cuvette has been introduced, which is then connected
to a thermometer though a small diameter thermocouple wire. In order to illustrate that
the twin cuvette is analogous with the cuvette containing the measurand sample during
electroporation, a replication of Figure 4.4b is shown on the right side of the ﬁgure. Modiﬁed
from [12].
As a ﬁnal process, cells are transferred to a transparent 96-wells plate. From each of
the 5 ml samples, 4 times 100 µl is placed to 4 of the wells. Thus for each cuvette
sample, 4 results are received and averaged during evaluation. Cells are then rested for
21-24 hours in incubation. As they are in the 96-wells plate during this resting time,
they have the possibility to attach to the bottom of the wells, regain their normal
metabolism and recover after treatment.
4.6
Determination of Cell Viability
In order to determine the cell survival ratio after treatment, cell viability is quantiﬁed
based on measured absorbance results from MTS Tetrazolium Assay. This concept
builds on the phenomenon that viable cells are reducing MTS tetrazolium compound
to generate colorful formazan products, which are soluble in cell culture medium [52].
Thus the color of the sample reﬂects on the amount of cells that has survived the
treatment. The darker the color gets, more of the cells survived.
MTS assay protocol is performed after 21-24 hours incubation of samples placed into
96-wells plate. 20 µl of PMS (phenazine methosulfate) containing MTS solution is
added to each of the wells (Producer: Promega, Product: CellTiter 96® AQueous Non-
Radioactive Cell Proliferation Assay, Ref.: G5430). Thereafter, samples are placed
back to incubation for 1-1.5 hours. After this time period, MTS reaches its eﬀect.
As a result, the color diﬀerence between treated and untreated samples can even be
detected visually. This is illustrated in Figure 4.6a. For quantiﬁcation, absorbance of
the samples is recorded at 493 nm and 590 nm with the help of a Bio-Tek® SynergyTM
HT Multi-Detection Microplate Reader as it can be seen in Figure 4.6b. The amount
of absorbance at 493 nm reﬂects the quantity of formazan product in the sample,
which is then directly proportional to the number of living HT29 cells in the sample
[53].
22
==PAGE:37==
(a) Color variation of HT29 samples
in 96-wells plate after MTS assay
protocol. The lighter the color is,
the less cells there are in the sam-
ple.
(b) Absorbance
measurement
for
color evaluation of MTS assay.
Figure 4.6: MTS Tetrazolium Assay is used to determine cell viability of HT29 samples.
After performing an MTS assay protocol, each sample well provided with two ab-
sorbance data recorded at the two diﬀerent wavelengths of 493 nm and 590 nm. The
absorbance at 493 nm is proportional with the amount of living cells. The absorbance
value measured at 590 nm reﬂects on a background noise from the cell culture media
and the tetrazolium without the cells [52]. Therefore, the absorbance value measured
at 590 nm is subtracted from the absorbance value at 493 nm.
Each of the sample has been placed into four of the wells, thus these four absorbance
values are averaged. This facilitates a more accurate value, and lowers possible errors
coming for instance from pipetting. Cell viability percentage is then calculated by
comparing of the treated samples to the untreated ones. This cell viability is called
the relative viability through this report.
Data was plotted and analysed in MATLAB, Microsoft® and GraphPad Prism7 soft-
wares.
4.7
Statistical Analysis
On the gained cell viability data, statistical analysis was performed with both Graph-
Pad Prism7 and Microsoft® Excel programs.
In all four cases introduced in section 4.5, n number of independent trials have been
completed. The diﬀerent temperature points corresponded to diﬀerent experimen-
tal groups. Thus, at each of these temperature groups, n number of independent
replications have been executed.
First of all, every statistical analysis was started by investigating the homogeneity
of variance in order to see whether the variance within each of the groups is equal.
Levene’s test has been used for veriﬁcation of homogeneous variances. It was impor-
tant to test in order to be able to run an ordinary ANOVA test on the data, as this
test assumes that the variances are equal across the groups. If these variances are
heterogeneous, it is advised to run a Welch’s ANOVA test instead.
23
==PAGE:38==
If variances were homogeneous, one-way ordinary ANOVA test was used to detect
diﬀerences between the cell viability means of the diﬀerent temperature groups. The
null hypothesis (H0) was deﬁned that all cell viability means are equal through the
experiment. Thus, if the null hypothesis cannot be rejected, it would mean that the
data does not provide suﬃcient evidence that the cell viability means are diﬀerent
from each other. The signiﬁcance level was chosen to be 5% (α = 0.05) in all cases.
4.8
Membrane Collection for Heat Capacity Measurements
In order to measure heat capacity of biological membranes, a large amount is needed
from them. Therefore, membranes were collected through approximately 3 months.
HT29 cells were grown for membrane collection with the same procedure as described
earlier in this report in section 4.1. Once cells were dense in the T175 ﬂasks, they
have been harvested with the same procedure described in section 4.2. However, after
centrifugation on 180 x g for 3 minutes, the supernatant is removed, and only the
pellet, the cells are saved. They are placed into a quick freezer and kept on -70 ◦C.
The collected frozen cells for membrane preparation are shown in Figure 4.7.
Figure 4.7:
Collected frozen HT29 cells for membrane preparation in order to perform
membrane heat capacity measurements.
4.9
Membrane Preparation for Determination of Heat Ca-
pacity
HT29 cells were collected and frozen in 50 ml Eppendorf tubes. The total amount
of collected cells were corresponding to approximately 80 T175 ﬂasks ﬁlled with cells,
which grown the whole bottom area of the ﬂasks.
First of all, cell pellets were thawed, and resuspended into 1 ml of lysis buﬀer (pH
7.4, Sucrose 250 mmol/l, Tris 10 mmol/l, Titriplex III 1 mmol/l, Producer: Region
Hovedstadens Apotek Herlev Hospital, RAP: 1278411) per Eppendorf tubes contain-
ing 3-4 T175 ﬂasks of cells. They were then transferred into 2 ml Eppendorf tubes. A
stainless steel bead with 5 mm of diameter (Producer: Qiagen, Mat. No.: 1026563)
was placed into each of these 2 ml tubes, which were intended to help the cell ho-
24
==PAGE:39==
mogenization process. Homogenization was then executed with the help of a Qiagen
TissueLyser, as it is also presented in Figure 4.8a. Cells in the 2 ml Eppendorf tubes
have been placed into the white plastic adapter sets of the TissueLyser, and have been
shaken for 2 minutes on 20 Hz while the tubes contained the stainless steel beads.
(a) Homogenization
of
thawed
and
resuspended
cell
samples.
(b) Cell nucleus, mito-
chondria and other
organs are removed
by multiple centrifu-
gation steps.
(c) Visible
pellet
of
membranes
gained
after
a
long
ﬁnal
centrifugation
with
high RPM.
Figure 4.8: Process of HT29 membrane preparation for heat capacity measurements.
Second of all, a three steps centrifugation process has been executed in order to
gain only the membranes out of the cells. The procedure was started with a mild
centrifugation of 300 x g for 10 mins at 4 ◦C with the aim of removing the nucleus.
The result after this centrifugation can be seen in Figure 4.8b. The pellet contains
the nucleus, therefore, only the supernatant is removed and saved into a new 2 ml
Eppendorf tube for further steps. Afterwards, the mitochondria and other inner cell
organs were removed by centrifugation on 3000 x g for 10 mins at 4 ◦C. As a result,
again only the supernatant containing the cell membranes was saved for further steps.
Lastly, a centrifugation with very high centrifugal force was performed in order to
gain the cell membranes. For this purpose, a Sigma 3K20 superspeed refrigerated
centrifuge was used. The supernatants from the precious centrifugation were shared
and equilibrated into 4 portions of the 4 centrifugation tubes belonging to the Sigma
3K20 device. Equilibration was achieved by adding 25 ml of Hepes buﬀer (see its
composition in section 4.3) into each of the four tubes, then weighting them, and
adjusting the weight by adding drops of extra Hepes buﬀer. The samples then have
been centrifuged on 42000 x g for 1.5 hour on 4 ◦C. As this high spinning results in
relevant amount of heat production, the device was pre-cooled to 4 ◦C before starting
the centrifugation. As a ﬁnal result, now the cell membranes were gained as pellets
on the bottom of the centrifugation tubes. This HT29 cell membrane pellet can be
seen in Figure 4.8c.
Finally, the gained cell membrane pellets were resuspended in as little Hepes buﬀer (see
its composition in section 4.3) as possible in order to keep the membrane concentration
of the solution high. In average, 300 µl of solvent per centrifugation bottle has been
used for resuspension. The membranes have been stored on ice in a white polystyrene
25
==PAGE:40==
thermo box until the next morning, when the membrane heat capacity measurements
have been executed.
4.10
Membrane Heat Capacity Measurements
Membrane heat capacity measurements have been executed in Niels Bohr Institute,
University of Copenhagen. The thermal proﬁle of HT29 colon cancer cell membranes
has been investigated in the following two scenarios:
1. With the presence of calcium chloride, and
2. Without the presence of calcium chloride.
In case of sample number 1., calcium chloride was added to the membranes approxi-
mately 5 minutes before starting the measurement, and in 5mM concentration, which
was the same concentration than in case of the electroporated samples. After calcium
addition, the sample was homogenized by vortexing.
The measurements has been executed with the setup shown in Figure 4.9a, which
has included inter alia a vacuum compartment, a calorimeter, a computer, and a
sample ﬁlling Hamilton syringe.
As calorimeter, a Malvern MicroCalTM VP-DSC
MicroCalorimeter has been used. The measurand sample was the HT29 colon cancer
cell membranes with or without containing 5 mM calcium chloride, and the reference
sample was Hepes buﬀer (see its composition in section 4.3). The same 5 mM CaCl2
concentration was used also during calcium electroporation.
In prior to calorimetric measurement, samples are degassed with the help of a Nuova
vacuum equipment for 10 mins, which is presented in Figure 4.9b. This procedure
helps avoiding air bubbles remaining in the samples, which would inﬂuence the quality
of the calorimetric results. Usage of a Hamilton syringe for ﬁlling the samples into
the calorimetric wells also helps the same goal to avoid the existence or formation
of air bubbles within the calorimetric sample holder compartment. When using the
Hamilton syringe to inject the sample into the well, syringe is pushed all the way to
the bottom of the well in a way that it is almost touching it. Sample then injected with
multiple smaller but powerful pushes, which tends to help against bubble formation
or to prevent air bubbles stuck into the well.
The calorimetric measurement setups were controlled with the VP Viewer2000 MicroCalTM
software. The scan parameters were set to measure heat capacity from 1 to 37 ◦C
with scan rate of 20 ◦C/hour and with a thermostat prescan of 15 mins. Experimental
parameters were set with number of scans to be 4, and with post cycle thermostat
to be 25 ◦C. Feedback mode was low, and scan edit mode was unique scans. This
measurement was repeated twice with the temperature interval from 1 to 37 ◦C, and
then twice repeated with the interval from 1 to 90 ◦C.
26
==PAGE:41==
(a) Membrane heat capacity measurement setup in-
cluding vacuum container (A), calorimeter (B),
sample ﬁlling Hamilton syringe (C) and com-
puter (D).
(b) Samples are degassed
by placing them into a
vacuum compartment
prior calorimetry.
Figure 4.9: Process of membrane heat capacity measurement.
27
==PAGE:42==
5. Results
In this project, the thermal modulation of transmembrane ion transport has been
investigated. We have examined, what eﬀect the diﬀerent temperature values have
on the success of calcium electroporation against cancer cells. In this new state-of-art
treatment, the goal is to increase the drug transport eﬃciency through the cancer cell
membranes by the application of a high electric ﬁeld strength. In our study, we aimed
to reach a higher calcium cell intake by modulation of the treatment temperature,
which could then correlate to a higher ratio of cell death. Viability has been detected
and calculated from absorbance based on MTS assay protocol.
First of all, the investigation has required a well-established experimental setup. In
order to able the analysis of the thermal eﬀects on this newly developing cancer
treatment, both viability and temperature parameters were necessary to be controlled.
Issues in maintaining a stable HT29 cell viability baseline have been diagnosed and
solved.
In the ﬁrst two sections, solutions and results for temperature and viability control are
introduced. Thereafter, the thermal proﬁle of HT29 cell viability after calcium elec-
troporation is shown, and analysed. Then, the eﬀects of treatments with only calcium
or only electroporation are presented. At the end, a summary of statistical results is
given based on the diﬀerent treatment combinations and the diﬀerent statistical tests.
Moreover, this project has also investigated the thermal properties of the HT29 mem-
brane through its transition proﬁle. Results of calorimetric measurements are pre-
sented with the presence and absence of calcium chloride, which allows to examine
the membrane heat capacity and phase transition proﬁle of HT29 colon cancer cell
membrane.
5.1
Temperature Control
Temperature control has been established through the application of a twin cuvette
and an integrated thermocouple wire with a small thermal mass. This way, the thermic
inﬂuence of the thermometer was minimized on the sample temperature. By installing
the thermocouple into a twin sample, sample temperature was followed even during
its transport between the heating block and the electroporator. Thus, it helped to
overcome on the approximately 1 meter distance, when sample traveled through room
temperature of 22 ±1 ◦C for about 2-3 seconds.
28
==PAGE:43==
This temperature monitoring solution also allowed to record the temperature value
at the time of electroporation, which happened approximately 3-5 seconds after the
sample has been removed from the heating equipment in the case of the calcium
electroporated samples. As a result, the aimed temperature values have been achieved
with a 0-4 ◦C ﬂuctuation in case of the calcium plus electroporation treated samples.
This ﬂuctuation was slightly more, 0-7 ◦C in case of the only electroporated samples.
It is due to the fact, that the samples were removed from the heating block at the
same time, however, the calcium-electroporated sample has been electroporated ﬁrst,
and right after the only-electroporated sample was then treated. Therefore, the only
electroporated sample was slightly longer at room temperature before electroporation,
than the calcium electroporated sample.
5.2
Viability Control
In regards to viability control, it has been found that viability is inﬂuenced by the time
between cell harvesting and electroporation. To conﬁrm this observation, the samples
were measured at the opposite temperature order as well. The result is presented
in Figure 5.1. The red plots represent the untreated samples. In the left graph, the
experiment was conducted from the lowest to the highest temperature order. Whereas,
in the right graph, the temperature order was the opposite, meaning that the highest
temperature was ﬁrst and the lowest one at last. These two red untreated graphs
express that the baseline is not stable, moreover, strongly inﬂuenced by the time
factor. Samples at the beginning of the experiment present higher viability compared
to samples ahead in the experimental time. Viability signiﬁcantly decreases during
experiment. This also aﬀects the viability of the treated samples as seen on the blue
plots of Figure 5.1.
In order to reﬂect on the featured time issue and establish a stable baseline for via-
bility, the experiment has been shortened in time by dividing it up into two smaller
sections with ﬁve temperature points in each section. With this improvement, time
past between cell harvesting and last electroporation was reduced under 2 hours. As
a result, a stable untreated baseline has been established at an average of 81% of cell
viability. This means that an average of 19% cell death has been observed due to ex-
perimental circumstances during the thermal investigation of HT29 cells. Figure 5.2
illustrates the improved baseline through six repeated experiments without treatment.
Five of them was performed in two sections, and one of them in three sections. The
average viability based on the untreated samples is plotted with a red thick curve and
provides the viability baseline of the experiment.
The viability means at the ten diﬀerent temperatures were tested in one-way ordinary
ANOVA, whether they are equal. Only in this case, the viability baseline can be
considered as stable.
First, homogeneity of standard deviations were investigated
with Levene’s test.
This showed that the variances among the absolute value of
residuals were equal with a 5% signiﬁcance level. The P value was calculated to be
0.16. This result indicated that one-way ordinary ANOVA is the right test to compare
the viability means. This test then showed no signiﬁcant diﬀerence between the mean
viabilities with a 5% signiﬁcance level. The P value was calculated to be 0.53.
29
==PAGE:44==
Figure 5.1: Time dependency is represented in HT29 cell viability graphs of untreated and
treated samples.
Figures on the left have been recorded, when the experiment has been
started with the lowest temperature point and progressed towards the highest one. Figures
on the right have been recorded in the opposite temperature order, meaning that it has
been started with the highest temperature and progressed towards the lowest one. The red
plots represent the untreated samples, whereas, the the blue plots stand for the calcium
electroporated samples.
Dividing the experimental set into smaller portions proved to be a good improvement
of the baseline compared to the red baseline curves shown in Figure 5.1. However, it
is still noisy with fairly large standard deviations varying between 6.4% and 20.2%,
and giving the average of 12.5% standard deviation across the diﬀerent temperature
points.
On the other hand, the ﬂuctuation of baseline does not seem to improve
further by grouping temperature points into three portions instead of two portions.
The relevant data and comparison of baseline experiments performed in 2 vs. in 3
sections can be seen in Appendix A. It allowed the conclusion that it is not necessary
to take every temperature point separately from new cell harvest, which would result
in a long and and even more time consuming experiment set over multiple days. It is
also to note that every cell batch can slightly display diﬀerent behaviour, which also
depends on how long ago the cells were passed. Therefore, an experiment through
30
==PAGE:45==
multiple days could include the risk of this phenomenon.
Figure 5.2: HT29 cell viability of untreated samples are representing a stable baseline with
an average of 19% cell death as a result of experimental circumstances. The red thicker curve
shows the average viability based on the six experiment without treatment, and it is presented
with the error bars corresponding to standard deviation of the six values.
5.3
Thermal Proﬁle of HT29 Cell Viability After Calcium
Electroporation
Thermal properties of calcium electroporation has been investigated after establishing
a fairly stable viability baseline and an appropriate temperature control method. Rel-
ative viability of the treatment has been calculated and displayed, through the entire
report, as the percentage of untreated control samples.
The individual results for ten temperature points are displayed in Figure 5.3 with six
independent replications. Initial observation shows high variability, as well as, poor
reproducibility of the data.
In order to analyze the data, the mean of six independent experiments are also illus-
trated on a bar diagram in Figure 5.4. The error bars stand for the standard error of
the mean among the six values at each temperature point.
The standard deviations, in Figure 5.3, seemed to be questionable if they were hetero-
geneous across the experiments at diﬀerent temperatures. This has been investigated
by performing a Levene’s test on the absolute value of residuals. This test showed that
the variances among the absolute value of residuals were the same with the signiﬁcance
level of 5%. Thus, standard deviations are homogeneous with 5% signiﬁcance level.
This indicated that one-way ordinary ANOVA is the right statistical test to perform,
which then showed no signiﬁcant diﬀerence between the means with 5% signiﬁcance
level (P < 0.05). The P value was calculated to be 0.821.
On the other hand, looking at the result of Figure 5.4, there may be a trend for lower
viability at 29 and 31 ◦C. Therefore, I have chosen the temperature points at 27,
31
==PAGE:46==
Figure 5.3: HT29 cell viability after calcium electroporation. Viability is relative to the
untreated samples. The red thicker curve shows the average relative viability based on the
six experiments treated with both calcium and electroporation. The error bars present the
standard deviations among the six independent experiment.
29, 31 and 33 ◦C as an interesting window, and I have executed more experiments
narrowed down to these four temperatures only.
Figure 5.4:
HT29 cell viability after calcium electroporation treatment at ten diﬀerent
temperatures. The bars show the mean relative viability of the six independent experiments,
while the error bars present the standard error of the mean.
In Figure 5.5, results are shown with 10 independent replicability at the four diﬀerent
temperature points. In regards to descriptive analysis, viability seems to be lowest
at 31 ◦C. However, the standard deviations between the experiments are still high
between 6.4% and 8.4%, which is still indicating a poor reproducibility.
The homogeneity of the standard deviations has been tested in order to see if one-way
32
==PAGE:47==
ANOVA is the right statistical analysis to apply for the data. It has been done by
executing a Levene’s test, which conﬁrmed that the variances among the absolute
values of residuals were the same with 5% signiﬁcance level. Therefore, it can be
concluded that the standard deviations in the experiment are homogeneous, which
fulﬁls the requirement of performing a one-way ordinary ANOVA test with trustful
outcomes.
There were no statistical signiﬁcant diﬀerence shown between the means with 5%
signiﬁcance level (P < 0.05) at one-way ordinary ANOVA. The P value was 0.0944.
Thus, data does not provide evidence to say that the cell viability means at the given
temperature points are diﬀerent from each other.
Figure 5.5: HT29 cell viability after calcium electroporation treatment at four diﬀerent
temperature points. The bars show the mean of the ten independent experiments, while the
error bars present the standard error of the mean.
As the number of independent trials are not very high, it is worth to consider the me-
dian of the diﬀerent temperature groups. It is displayed in Figure 5.6. As descriptive
analysis, we can observe that the median is lowest at 29 ◦C, whereas, in Figure 5.5 the
lowest mean seemed to be at 31 ◦C. However, we can also observe that the variability
is high, thus we cannot diﬀerentiate between the relative viabilities at the diﬀerent
temperature values.
33
==PAGE:48==
Figure 5.6: HT29 cell viability after calcium electroporation treatment at four diﬀerent
temperatures. The diagram shows the median of the ten values at each temperature point
with a horizontal line. The range is also displayed with the vertical lines. Each of the dots in
the ﬁgure represents a measurement value.
5.4
Investigation of HT29 Cell Viability After Treatment
with Calcium Only
In order to distinguish the diﬀerent eﬀects behind calcium electroporation, treatment
with calcium only and electroporation only have been investigated. In this section,
I will focus on introducing the eﬀects of calcium treatment on HT29 cell viability.
In the next section (section 5.5), the eﬀect of electroporation treatment itself will be
shown.
HT29 cell viability after treatment with only calcium can be seen in Figure 5.7 along
with another graph showing viability after calcium electroporation. Treatment with
only calcium results in an overall average of 92% relative cell viability.
This also
means that in overall average 8% of the HT29 colon cancer cells die due to treatment
with high extracellular calcium only.
Levene’s test has been performed on survival data after treatment with calcium only.
It showed homogeneity among the standard deviations at the ten diﬀerent temperature
points. Therefore, one-way ordinary ANOVA analysis had been carried out, which
showed that there is no signiﬁcant diﬀerence between the relative viability means at
each of the 10 temperature points with a 5% signiﬁcance level. Thus, we can say that
the diﬀerence between the points of the red curve in the top graph of Figure 5.7 is due
to chance, and not to temperature change.
34
==PAGE:49==
Figure 5.7: Comparison of HT29 cell viabilities after treatment 1) with calcium only (top
ﬁgure), and 2) with both calcium and electroporation (bottom ﬁgure). Viability is relative
to the untreated samples. In both graphs, the red thicker curves show the average relative
viability with error bars (SD) based on the six independent experiments. The (bottom ﬁgure)
is the same graph shown in Figure 5.3, but with diﬀerent relative viability scaling, which
eases the comparison.
5.5
Investigation of HT29 Cell Viability After Treatment
with Electroporation Only
The eﬀect of treatment with only electroporation has been investigated and the result
is shown in the top graph of Figure 5.8.
Statistical Levene’s test indicated that the standard deviations along the experiment
are homogeneous with 5% signiﬁcance level.
Therefore, relative viability data af-
ter treatment with electroporation only has been investigated with one-way ordinary
ANOVA. This test showed signiﬁcant diﬀerence between the means at the diﬀerent
temperature levels with 5% signiﬁcance level. P value was calculated to be 0.0218,
35
==PAGE:50==
which is lower than the chosen 0.05 signiﬁcance level.
As a result, a temperature dependence can be observed in the relative cell viability
after treatment with only electroporation. As temperature grows from 17 to 37 ◦C,
cell viability gradually decreases in average from 100% to 79%.
Figure 5.8: Comparison of HT29 cell viabilities after treatment 1) with electroporation
only (top ﬁgure), and 2) with both calcium and electroporation (bottom ﬁgure). Viability is
relative to the untreated samples. In both graphs, the red thicker curves show the average
relative viability with error bars (SD) based on the six independent experiments. The (bottom
ﬁgure) is the same graph shown in Figure 5.3, but with diﬀerent relative viability scaling,
which eases the comparison.
5.6
Summary of statistical results
In this project, three diﬀerent cases have been investigated, whether their cell viabil-
ities have any temperature dependence. The three cases were the following:
1. HT29 cells treated with calcium only.
36
==PAGE:51==
2. HT29 cells treated with electroporation only.
3. HT29 cells treated with both calcium and electroporation.
Table 5.1: Summary of statistical results with 5% signiﬁcance level.
Experiments
Levene’s test
One-way ordinary ANOVA
Ca Only (n = 6)
P value: 0.709
P value: 0.147
Sign. diﬀ.: No
Sign. diﬀ.: No
EP Only (n = 6)
P value: 0.136
P value: 0.0218
Sign. diﬀ.: No
Sign. diﬀ.: Yes
Ca + EP (n = 6)
P value: 0.768
P value: 0.821
Sign. diﬀ.: No
Sign. diﬀ.: No
Ca + EP (n = 10)
P value: 0.788
P value: 0.0944
Sign. diﬀ.: No
Sign. diﬀ.: No
Experimental data has been statistically analyzed. Levene’s test has been used to de-
ﬁne, whether the diﬀerent temperature points have equal variances. One-way ordinary
ANOVA has been used to test, whether the mean belonging to diﬀerent temperature
points are equal.
This test gives true results if the variances are not signiﬁcantly
diﬀerent. A summary of the statistical results is illustrated at Table 5.1.
In all cases, variances at the diﬀerent temperature groups were not signiﬁcantly dif-
ferent with 5% signiﬁcance level. Therefore, one-way ordinary ANOVA was applied
to test the diﬀerences among means.
Table 5.2:
Summary of result of the diﬀerent treatments.
Temperature dependency is
inferred from the result of the one-way ordinary ANOVA test with 5% signiﬁcance level.
Treatment
Temp. Dependency
Killed Cells
Ca Only
No
8%
EP Only
Yes
0-21%
Ca + EP
No
69%
Table 5.2 shows a summary of the results inferred from the statistical analysis in the
cases of the diﬀerent treatments.
HT29 cells treated with only calcium showed no signiﬁcant diﬀerence among the rel-
ative viability means with 5% signiﬁcance level, which indicates no temperature de-
pendence of cell viability. However, in average calcium treatment itself killed 8% of
the HT29 colon cancer cells.
On the other hand, same type of cells treated with only electroporation showed sig-
niﬁcant diﬀerence among the relative cell viability means with 5% signiﬁcance level.
This indicates that electroporation itself kills these cells with diﬀerent eﬀectiveness
at diﬀerent temperatures. At as low temperature as 17 ◦C, electroporation itself was
not eﬀective in killing cells according to the cell viability result, which turned to be
37
==PAGE:52==
around 100%. However, as temperature raised from 17 to 37 ◦C, the killing ratio was
growing as well, and reached the maximum of around 21% cell death.
These two treatments was then combined into calcium electroporation therapy. HT29
cells treated with both calcium and electroporation showed no signiﬁcant diﬀerence
among the relative viability means with 5% signiﬁcance level. According to this newly-
gained data, this result indicated no temperature dependence of cell viability in case
of calcium electroporated cells. Furthermore, in average this treatment resulted in
31% relative HT29 cell viability, which also means that in average 69% of the cancer
cells were killed due to this type of treatment.
5.7
Heat Capacity Proﬁle of HT29 Cell Membranes
Calorimetric measurements have been executed on HT29 colon cancer cell membranes
with presence and absence of calcium chloride in order to investigate the heat capacity
(cp) proﬁle of the membrane. As membrane solvent, Hepes buﬀer was used with the
composition described in section 4.3.
In both the sample with Ca2+ and the one without Ca2+, four measurement scans
have been recorded:
• 1. and 2. scan: 1-37 ◦C
• 3. and 4. scan: 1-90 ◦C
During the 3. scan, proteins were denatured due to high temperatures, therefore, in
the 4. scan, protein peaks mostly disappeared. The results of these two whole range
scans up to the protein unfolding temperatures can be seen in Figure 5.9.
When looking at the 3. scan (black curves) in Figure 5.9, it is an interesting ob-
servation that the protein peaks have been signiﬁcantly changed by the presence of
calcium. This could imply that the protein stability is inﬂuenced by the presence of
calcium ions, which might bind to some of the proteins. However, this observation
has not been further investigated during this project.
In Figure 5.10, the main membrane transition peaks are presented from the 2. and
the 4. scan. The 1. scan was discarded in order to avoid artifact coming from storing
the samples in the fridge for a while before the measurements. The 2. scan shows
the membrane transition peaks in the biological membranes, which are containing
the proteins as well. The 4. scan shows the membrane transition peaks in the same
membranes, but after the denaturation of the proteins.
The membrane transition temperature was between 23.5-24 ◦C at the 2. scan, and
between 17-18.5 ◦C at the 4.
scan, as seen in Figure 5.10.
This shows that the
inﬂuence of calcium was very small on these membrane transition peaks, in both cases.
Therefore, we can say that calcium does not signiﬁcantly change or shift the transition
temperature of the membrane. However, calcium slightly lowered the membrane heat
capacity in general.
38
==PAGE:53==
Figure 5.9: Heat capacity proﬁle of HT29 cell membranes with presence (continuous line)
and absence (dashed line) of 5 mM calcium chloride. Black lines represent the results from
the 3. scan, while red lines show the results from the 4. scan. In scan 3, protein peaks
are well-deﬁned in the temperature region of 50 to 80 ◦C, while in scan 4, the protein peaks
mostly disappeared due to denaturation of proteins during the 3. scan.
On the other hand, it is an interesting result that the membrane transition peaks,
shown in Figure 5.10, shift to lower temperatures at around 17-18.5 ◦C, and they
become more pronounced after the denaturation of the proteins. However, this eﬀect
has not been further investigated during this project. Moreover, its clinical relevance
is questionable, as we do not experience as high temperatures in the human body in
normal physiological circumstances, where the proteins would denature.
39
==PAGE:54==
Figure 5.10: Heat capacity proﬁle of HT29 cell membranes with presence (continuous line)
and absence (dashed line) of 5 mM calcium chloride. Blue lines represent the HT29 mem-
branes before the denaturation of the membrane proteins, while red lines show the HT29
membranes after the denaturation of the proteins. Black lines are used to mark the mem-
brane transition peaks representing the membrane transition temperature points (Tm). In
both cases, the inﬂuence of calcium on the membrane transition peaks is very small, thus
calcium does not signiﬁcantly shift the Tm membrane transition temperature.
40
==PAGE:55==
6. Discussion
The main focus of this thesis was to establish and investigate the thermal modulation
of in vitro calcium electroporation of cancer cells, which is currently progressing as a
new state-of-art cancer treatment.
A new method has been developed and introduced, that enables thermal control and
monitoring of in vitro calcium electroporation. Using this setup, thermal inﬂuence of
calcium electroporation was analysed.
This chapter will discuss if the gained experimental data support the thesis hypothesis
or not, and which precautions must be taken in interpreting the results presented in
chapter 5.
The obstacles, which were faced during establishing the experimental
setups, are also discussed.
Lastly, suggestions for further development as well as future practical and theoretical
impacts of our results are considered.
6.1
Time Inﬂuence of In Vitro Calcium Electroporation
When investigating cell viability, it is important that that results are only inﬂuenced
by the factor of treatment, but not the factor of time between cell harvesting and elec-
troporation. However, time dependency has been identiﬁed in the HT29 cell viability
during in vitro calcium electroporation. This eﬀect has been shown in Figure 5.1.
During cell harvesting, trypsin enzyme is applied to detach HT29 cells from the bottom
of the T175 ﬂasks, where their growing process is facilitated. After trypsinization,
cells are removed from their favoured condition, as they are no longer attached to the
growing ﬂasks. This circumstance increases the sensitivity of the cells, which may
result in the experienced time dependency.
Despite the fact that cells were kept in suﬃcient media and incubation at the favoured
37 ◦C and 5% CO2 during waiting for electroporation, experimental circumstances
still diﬀer from favoured conditions.
Therefore, it was necessary to introduce an
improvement. In order to minimise this time eﬀect, we divided the experiment into
smaller portions.
In each case, we kept the total length of the experiment under
two hours.
As a result of this improvement, we achieved a fairly stable baseline
viability, where mean viabilities at the diﬀerent temperature points were equal with
41
==PAGE:56==
a 5% signiﬁcance level.
For future reference, it is important to consider the eﬀect of time when planning in
vitro experiment with HT29 human colon cancer cells. Time turned to be a crucial
element of our experiment planning. Others has not reported on similar issues before.
Therefore, we suggest our improvement to be implemented for future experiments,
when facing unstable baseline viability during in vitro investigation of the HT29 cell
line. Our solution includes minimizing the time between cell harvesting and electro-
poration, thus dividing the experiment into smaller portions with shorter execution
time periods.
6.2
Thermal Inﬂuence on Calcium Electroporation of Can-
cer Cells
Due to thermal characteristics of membranes, the inﬂuence of temperature on calcium
electroporation treatment has been examined. Descriptive analysis of data made the
conjecture that treatment might be the best around 29-31 ◦C. However, statistical
analysis and further experiments have not shown that the treatment is dependent on
temperature. In the range of 17 ◦C to 37 ◦C, the experiments showed no signiﬁcant
diﬀerence in the eﬀectiveness of calcium electroporation between the ten investigated
temperature points, with a 5% signiﬁcance level.
In calcium electroporation, the electric ﬁeld strength is used to permeabilize the cell
membranes. Electropermeabilization and possibly the maintenance of a strong elec-
trical ﬁeld gradient promote the transport of calcium ions into the cancer cells. The
experiments conducted indicate a positive correlation between the amount of calcium
transported and the eﬀectiveness of the treatment. This observation also correlates
with the ﬁndings of Frandsen et al. [19], who concluded that calcium overloading in-
duces dose-dependent cell death in vitro. Although, the method of calcium transport
is unknown at this point, our experiments indicate that temperature changes have no
eﬀect on the eﬀectiveness of the treatment.
On the other hand, during the investigation of the thermal proﬁle of calcium electro-
poration, a high variability has been observed. As a result, it can shield if there is a
statistical diﬀerence in between the diﬀerent temperature points. The high variability
could hide some sort of thermal proﬁle. However, if this is the case, it still refers to a
relatively small diﬀerence in between the diﬀerent temperatures.
Clinically this result is highly relevant, as it indicates that temperature does not
signiﬁcantly inﬂuence the eﬀectiveness of calcium electroporation treatment against
cancerous tumour cells. Thus, it could indicate that it is not necessary to control the
tumor temperature during treatment of a patient.
For future experiments, we would recommend to investigate the thermal modulation
of calcium electroporation in other cell lines as well. This study has focused on HT29
colon cancer cells only.
In order to test the generality of the found temperature
independency, it is necessary to investigate other types of cancer cells, too.
42
==PAGE:57==
6.3
Cancer Cells and Electroporation
In case of HT29 cancer cells treated only with electroporation, it was detected that as
temperature was growing from 17 to 37 ◦C, cell viability decreased gradually. At lower
temperatures such as 17 ◦C, the cells did not die due to electroporation treatment.
However, it changed as the temperature was rising towards the normal human body
temperature. Here, approximately 21% of the cancer cells were killed as a consequence
of electroporation only.
Based on this, we can state that cancer cells were more sensitive and died more likely,
when they were closer to the normal human body temperature. This leads to the dis-
cussion whether the electroporation was the one, which was more eﬀective at creating
irreversible pores and permanent damage in the cells at these higher temperatures.
On the other hand, this phenomenon can also be in connection with a higher activity
of ion transport metabolism of the cells themselves, as the temperature was getting
closer to the normal body working circumstances.
All in all, this result shows that the treatment with electroporation only would be the
most eﬀective at around normal body temperature in humans.
6.4
Eﬀect of Calcium Itself on Cancer Cells
As a reference, calcium itself has been also investigated whether its high extracellular
volume shows any eﬀect on cancer cells.
In case of HT29 colon cancer cells, an average of 8% of the cancer cells were killed
due to treatment with high extracellular level of calcium chloride itself.
On the other hand, this type of treatment showed no signiﬁcant temperature depen-
dence with a 5% signiﬁcance level, meaning that the eﬀectiveness of the treatment
does not depend on the temperature of the tumor cells.
6.5
Eﬀect of Calcium on Membrane Transition Proﬁle
The addition of calcium chloride to biological HT29 cell membranes showed very small
inﬂuence on the membrane transition temperature.
Based on the calorimetric experiments presented in section 5.7, calcium does not sig-
niﬁcantly shift the transition temperature of the membrane into any of the directions.
It seems to contradict with previous hypotheses and theories, as calcium would in-
crease membrane transition temperature [6] [8] [9]. On the other hand, calcium was
observed to generally lower the heat capacity of the cancer cell membrane.
The result also supports that at this point, the interactions between calcium and cell
membranes are not fully resolved. In connection with this, another feature has been
43
==PAGE:58==
observed from our current results. It was found that calcium changes the protein
peaks at the membrane heat capacity proﬁle, which implies that calcium strongly
binds to some of the membrane proteins.
6.6
Membrane Heat Capacity Proﬁle vs. Thermal Proﬁle
of Calcium electroporation
The heat capacity proﬁle of HT29 cancer cell membranes implied that calcium does
not inﬂuence the thermal characteristic of the membrane, and does not signiﬁcantly
change its transition temperature.
Similarly, calcium electroporation does not show any signiﬁcant temperature charac-
teristics on HT29 cell viability. It rather demonstrates that the treatment eﬃciency
is independent of the factor of temperature, with a 5% signiﬁcance level.
These two aligning observations indicate that usage of calcium as electroporation
drug would not cause any changes in the membrane characteristics, which results
in temperature dependency. Therefore, temperature of the treatment seems to be a
negligible parameter in terms of clinical applications.
Initially, the hypothesis has been introduced that calcium electroporation would be
more eﬀective at around the membrane transition temperature. It based on the ac-
cepted theory, that isothermal area compressibility is proportional to the heat capacity
changes, thus the highest at the transition temperature, as well as, that lipid mem-
branes were found to be permeable close to their melting temperature [5] [6]. However,
our study has not conﬁrmed this. It rather indicated that there is not a diﬀerence in
treatment eﬀectiveness due to temperature, or if there is, it has to be very small.
6.7
Future Considerations Regarding Improvements of the
Thermal Modulation and Controlling Setup of In Vitro
Electroporation
In the beginning of this project, diﬀerent options have been considered for thermal
modulation and temperature controlling of electroporation, both before and during
the treatment. The argument perspective was mainly to evaluate the invested devel-
opment time in contrast with the gained value.
As a result of thorough investigation, it has been decided that temperature modulation
and control will be established by the application of a metal heating block and a
twin sample ﬁtted to a thermometer through a thermocouple wire. This setup was
successfully implemented, and it is demonstrated in a schematic diagram in Figure 4.5.
After executing this project, it is worth to consider whether it is necessary to further
improve the temperature controlling system during electroporation. It would be a
possibility for instance to construct an in-built thermometer or thermostat into the
44
==PAGE:59==
electroporation cuvette holder in order to establish a more precise thermal control
and modulation of in vitro calcium electroporation.
However, it would be a time
consuming solution with larger structural changes in the cuvette holder as well.
Based on our results, it is observed that temperature does not or just slightly inﬂu-
ence the relative HT29 colon cancer cell viability, alias the eﬀectiveness of the calcium
electroporation treatment. Therefore, from a clinical and medical point of view, it
does not seem to be recommendable or necessary to proceed with further setup im-
provements in regards to this application.
45
==PAGE:60==
==PAGE:61==
7. Conclusion
This project aimed to investigate the thermal modulation of calcium electroporation,
which is a proposed treatment for cancerous tumor cells currently in clinical trial.
Calcium is a newly suggested, cost eﬀective, easily accessible and naturally occurring
drug for electroporation. The goal, therefore, was to examine its eﬀect and thermal
inﬂuence on the treatment. Moreover, it was targeted to discover whether there was
a connection between membrane transition phase and electroporation eﬃciency.
A temperature controlling and monitoring experimental setup has been developed and
implemented for in vitro calcium electroporation. As a solution, twin sample with an
integrated thermocouple wire has been applied in order to ensure real-time feedback
of the sample temperature. Furthermore, a metal heating block has been used for
temperature modulation. Methodology has been developed and adjusted to maintain
a stable viability baseline throughout the temperature changes.
In vitro calcium electroporation showed no signiﬁcant temperature dependency with
a 5% signiﬁcance level. However, this treatment demonstrated to be highly eﬀective,
and killed in average 69% of the cancer cells. As a comparison, calcium itself showed no
signiﬁcant temperature dependency either, but killed in average only 8% of the cells.
By contrast, eﬃciency of electroporation itself implied to depend on temperature. At
lower temperatures such as 17 ◦C, none of the cells got killed due to electroporation,
however, close to body temperature cell death reached even approximately 21%.
In comparison, HT29 colon cancer cell membrane has implied no signiﬁcant inﬂuence
of calcium on the transition phase and temperature. However, generally heat capacity
was recorded to be slightly lower with the presence of calcium. The membrane tran-
sition temperature was found to be around 23.5-24 ◦C, but it did not seem to reﬂect
on the thermal proﬁle of calcium electroporation.
As a conclusion, this research has indicated no temperature dependency in the ef-
ﬁciency of calcium electroporation treatment, however, high variability could have
caused some smaller eﬀects to get shielded. Clinically, this result could indicate an
easier procedure, where tumor temperature is not necessary to be controlled in the
patient during treatment.
47
==PAGE:62==
==PAGE:63==
Glossary
∆H: enthalpy change
∆S: entropy change
a.u.: arbitrary unit
ANOVA: Analysis of variance
BLM: bilayer lipid membrane
cp: heat capacity
Ca: Calcium
DMPC: dimyristoyl phosphatidylcholine
DNA: Deoxyribonucleic acid
DOPC: dioleoyl phosphatidylcholine
DPPC: dipalmitoyl phosphatidylcholine
EP: Electroporation
Err.: error
MTS: (3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-5-(3-carboxymethoxyphenyl)-2-(4-sulfophenyl)-
-2H-tetrazolium)
n: number of independent trials
PBS: phosphate buﬀered saline
PMS: phenazine methosulfate
PS: Penicillin Streptomycin
Rel. Viability: Relative Viability (Here: % of untreated)
RPM: Revolutions per minute
SD: standard deviation
SEM: standard error of the mean
Tm: membrane phase transition temperature
49
==PAGE:64==
A. Results of Untreated Baseline Experiments Performed in
2 Sections vs. in 3 Sections
Temperature (◦C)
Experiment 1
Experiment 2
Experiment 3
Experiment 4
Experiment 5
Average Viability (%)
17
83
71
89
78
78
80
21
111
68
91
85
76
86
23
119
75
112
83
78
93
25
112
83
70
86
58
82
27
92
87
99
57
78
82
29
69
80
87
86
69
78
31
98
85
90
76
74
85
33
96
73
87
66
71
79
35
78
68
71
92
79
77
37
82
73
76
71
54
71
Table A.1: Viability data from experiments performed in 2 sections. In case of all experiments, the values are rounded and presented in viability %.
50
==PAGE:65==
Temperature (◦C)
Experiment
17
76
21
66
23
73
25
71
27
70
29
78
31
97
33
87
35
79
37
67
Table A.2: Viability data from the experiment performed in 3 sections. The experiment values are rounded and presented in viability %.
In 2 Sections
In 3 Sections
Average Viability (%)
81
76
Standard Diviation (%)
5.9
9.5
Table A.3: Data comparison of experiments performed in 2 vs. in 3 sections.
51
==PAGE:66==
==PAGE:67==
Bibliography
[1] C. VanPutte, J. Regan, and A. Russo. Seeley’s Essentials of Anatomy and Phys-
iology. McGraw-Hill Higher Education, 9th edition, 2009.
[2] T. Heimburg. Thermal Biophysics of Membranes. Wiley-VCH, 1st edition, 2007.
[3] T. Heimburg. A Model for the Lipid Pretransition: Coupling of Ripple Formation
with the Chain-Melting Transition. Biophysical Journal, 78(1):1154–1165, 2000.
[4] E. Neher and B. Sakmann. Single-channel currents recorded from membrane of
denervated frog muscle ﬁbres. Nature, 260(5554):799–802, 1976.
[5] A. Blicher, K. Wodzinska, M. Fidorra, M. Winterhalter, and T. Heimburg. The
temperature dependence of lipid membrane permeability, its quantized nature,
and the inﬂuence of anesthetics. Biophysical Journal, 96(11):4581–4591, 2009.
[6] T. Heimburg. Lipid ion channels. Biophysical Chemistry, 150:2–22, 2010.
[7] V. F. Antonov, A. A. Anosov, V. P. Norik, and E. Y. Smirnova. Soft perfora-
tion of planar bilayer lipid membranes of dipalmitoylphosphatidylcholine at the
temperature of the phase transition from the liquid crystalline to the gel state.
European Biophysics Journal, 34(2):155–162, 2005.
[8] H. Gögelein and H. Koepsell. Channels in planar bilayers made from commercially
available lipids. Pﬂügers Archiv, 401:433–434, 1984.
[9] V. F. Antonov, E. V. Shevchenko, E. T. Kozhomkulov, A. A. Molnar, and E. Y.
Smirnova. Capacitive and ionic currents in BLM from phosphatidic acid in Ca2+-
induced phase transition.
Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communica-
tions, 133(3):1098–1103, 1985.
[10] J. C. Weaver. Electroporation: a general phenomenon for manipulating cells and
tissues. Journal of Cellular Biochemistry, 51(4):426–435, 1993.
[11] C. Chen, C. W. Smye, M. P. Robinson, and J. A. Evans. Membrane electropo-
ration theories: a review. Medical and Biological Engineering and Computing,
44:5–14, 2006.
[12] Boundless.
Schematic
diagram
of
the
electroporation
cuvette.
https://www.boundless.com/microbiology/textbooks/boundless-microbiology-
textbook/microbial-genetics-7/cloning-techniques-84/putting-foreign-dna-into-
cells-462-5374/, Last accessed on 3rd May 2017.
53
==PAGE:68==
[13] Statistics Denmark.
Deaths.
http://www.dst.dk/en/Statistik/Publikationer/
gennemsnitsdanskeren, Last accessed on 1st December 2016.
[14] World
Health
Rankings.
Health
Proﬁle
Denmark.
http://www.worldlifeexpectancy.com/country-health-proﬁle/denmark,
Last
accessed on 3rd May 2017.
[15] American
Cancer
Society.
Cancer
Facts
and
Figures
2016.
https://www.cancer.org/content/dam/cancer-org/research/cancer-facts-
and-statistics/annual-cancer-facts-and-ﬁgures/2016/cancer-facts-and-ﬁgures-
2016.pdf, Last accessed on 3rd May 2017.
[16] R. Siegel, C. DeSantis, K. Virgo, K. Stein, A. Mariotto, T. Smith, D. Cooper,
T. Gansler, C. Lerro, S. Fedewa, C. Lin, C. Leach, R. S. Cannady, H. Cho,
S. Scoppa, M. Hachey, R. Kirch, A. Jemal, and E. Ward. Cancer treatment and
survivorship statistics, 2012. CA: A Cancer Journal for Clinicians, 62(4):220–
241, 2012.
[17] G. Housman, S. Byler, S. Heerboth, K. Lapinska, M. Longacre, N. Snyder, and
S. Sarkar. Drug Resistance in Cancer: An Overview. Cancers (Basel), 6(3):1769–
1792, 2014.
[18] J. L. Farber.
Minireview: The role of calcium in cell death.
Life Sciences,
29(13):1289–1295, 1981.
[19] S. K. Frandsen, H. Gissel, P. Hojman, T. Tramm, J. Eriksen, and J. Gehl. Di-
rect Therapeutic Applications of Calcium Electroporation to Eﬀectively Induce
Tumor Necrosis. Cancer Research, 72(6):1336–1341, mar 2012.
[20] T. Kristián and B. K. Siesjö. Calcium in ischemic cell death. Stroke, 29(3):705–
718, 1998.
[21] B. Zhivotovsky and S. Orrenius. Calcium and cell death mechanisms: a perspec-
tive from the cell death community. Cell Calcium, 50(3):211–221, 2011.
[22] L. M. Mir, J. Gehl, G. Sersa, C. G. Collins, J. R. Garbay, V. Billard, P. F. Geert-
sen, Z. Rudolf, G. C. O’Sullivan, and M. Marty. Standard operating procedures
of the electrochemotherapy: Instructions for the use of bleomycin or cisplatin
administered either systemically or locally and electric pulses delivered by the
Cliniporator (TM) by means of invasive or non-invasive electrodes. Human Gene
Therapy, 4:14–25, 2006.
[23] National Institute for Health and Care Excellence.
Electrochemotherapy
for
metastases
in
the
skin
from
tumours
of
non-skin
origin
(IPG446).
https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ipg446, Last accessed on 3rd May 2017.
[24] M. Golzio, B. Gabriel, F. Boissier, J. Deuwille, M. P. Rols, and J. Teissié. Calcium
and electropermeabilized cells. Journal de la Société de Biologie, 197(3):301–310,
2003.
[25] P. Hojman, I. Spanggaard, C. H. Olsen, J. Gehl, and H. Gissel. Calcium electro-
transfer for termination of transgene expression in muscle. Human Gene Therapy,
22(6):753–760, 2011.
54
==PAGE:69==
[26] S. K. Frandsen, L. Gibot, M. Madi, J. Gehl, and M. P. Rols. Calcium Electro-
poration: Evidence for Diﬀerential Eﬀects in Normal and Malignant Cell Lines,
Evaluated in a 3D Spheroid Model. PLOS ONE, 10(12):e0144028, dec 2015.
[27] H.
Falk,
S.
Lambaa,
H.
H.
Johannesen,
G.
Wooler,
A.
Venzo,
and
J. Gehl.
Electrochemotherapy and calcium electroporation inducing a sys-
temic
immune
response
with
local
and
distant
remission
of
tumors
in
a patient with malignant melanoma - a case report.
Acta Oncologica,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/0284186X.2017.1290274, 2017.
[28] J. Teissie, M. Golzio, and M. P. Rols. Mechanisms of cell membrane electroper-
meabilisation: a minireview of our present (lack of?) knowledge. Biochimica et
Biophysica Acta, 1724:270–280, 2005.
[29] P. J. Quinn. Eﬀects of temperature on cell membranes. Symposia of the Society
for Experimental Biology, 42:237–258, 1988.
[30] T. J. Nowak and A. G. Handford. Pathophysiology: concepts and applications for
health care professionals. McGraw-Hill Higher Education, 3rd edition, 2003.
[31] M. J. Janiak, D. M. Small, and G. G. Shipley. Temperature and Compositional
Dependence of the Structure of Hydrated Dimyristoyl Lecithin. The Journal of
Biological Chemistry, 254(13):6068–6078, 1979.
[32] T. Heimburg. Mechanical aspects of membrane thermodynamics. Estimation of
the mechanical properties of lipid membranes close to the chain melting transition
from calorimetry. Biochimica et Biophysica Acta, 1415(1):147–162, 1998.
[33] A. L. Hodgkin and A. F. Huxley. A quantitative description of membrane current
and its applicaiton to conduction and excitation in nerve. 117(4):500–544, 1952.
[34] D. Papahadjopoulos, K. Jacobson, S. Nir, and I. Isac.
Phase transitions in
phospholipid vesicles. Fluorescence polarization and permeability measurements
concerning the eﬀect of temperature and cholesterol.
BBA - Biomembranes,
311(3):330–348, 1973.
[35] J. F. Nagle and H. L. Scott. Lateral compressibility of lipid mono- and bilayers.
Theory of membrane permeability. BBA - Biomembranes, 513(2):236–243, 1978.
[36] M. C.Sabra, K. Jørgensen, and O. G. Mouritsen. Lindane suppresses the lipid-
bilayer permeability in the main transition region. Biochimica et Biophysica Acta
- Biomembranes, 1282(1):85–92, 1996.
[37] M. Jansen and A. Blume. A comparative study of diﬀusive and osmotic water
permeation across bilayers composed of phospholipids with diﬀerent head groups
and fatty acyl chains. Biophysical journal, 68(3):997–1008, 1995.
[38] V. F. Antonov, V. V. Petrov, A. A. Molnar, D. A. Predvoditelev, and A. S.
Ivanov. The appearance of single-ion channels in unmodiﬁed lipid bilayer mem-
branes at the phase transition temperature. Nature, 283(5747):585–586, 1980.
[39] T. Heimburg. Mechanical aspects of membrane thermodynamics. Estimation of
the mechanical properties of lipid membranes close to the chain melting transition
from calorimetry. Biochimica et Biophysica Acta, 1415:147–162, 1998.
55
==PAGE:70==
[40] H. T. Tien and A. Ottova. The bilayer lipid membrane (BLM) under electrical
ﬁelds. IEEE Transactions on Dielectrics and Electrical Insulation, 10:717–727,
2003.
[41] J. C. Weaver and Y. A. Chizmadzhev.
Theory of electroporation: a review.
Bioelectrochemistry Bioenergetics, 41(2):135–160, 1996.
[42] M. Tokman, J. H. Lee, Z. A. Levine, M. C. Ho, M. E. Colvin, and P. T. Vernier.
Electric ﬁeld-driven water dipoles: Nanoscale architecture of electroporation. Plos
One, 8(4):1769–1792, 2013.
[43] P. F. Baker and D. E. Knight. A high-voltage technique for gaining rapid access
to the interior of secretory cells. The Journal of Physiology, 284:30–31, 1978.
[44] J. C. Weaver. Electroporation of biological membranes from multicellular to nano
scales. IEEE Transactions on Dielectrics and Electrical Insulation, 10(5):754–768,
2003.
[45] T. Kotnik, L. M. Mir, K. Flisar, M. Puc, and I. D. Miklav. Cell membrane elec-
tropermeabilization by symmetrical bipolar rectangular pulses: part I. Increased
eﬃciency of permeabilization. Bioelectrochemistry, 54(1):83–89, 2001.
[46] E. Neumann, S. Kakorin, and K. Toensing.
Fundamentals of electroporative
delivery of drugs and genes. Bioelectrochem.Bioener., 48(1):3–16, 1999.
[47] A. Aksimentiev, J. B. Heng, G. Timp, and K. Schulten.
Microscopic kinet-
ics of DNA translocation through synthetic nanopores.
Biophysical Journal,
87(3):2086–2097, 2004.
[48] E. Phez, C. Faurie, M. Golzio, J. Teissié, and M. P. Rols. New insights in the
visualization of membrane permeabilization and DNA/membrane interaction of
cells submitted to electric pulses. Biochimica et Biophysica Acta, 1724(3):248–
254, 2005.
[49] A. Gothelf, L. M. Mir, and J. Gehl. Electrochemotherapy: results of cancer treat-
ment using enhanced delivery of bleomycin by electroporation. Cancer Treatment
Reviews, 29(5):371–87, 2003.
[50] Z. Dong, P. Saikumar, J. M. Weinberg, and M. A. Venkatachalam.
Calcium
in cell injury and death. Annual Review of Pathology: Mechanisms of Disease,
1:405–434, 2006.
[51] H. Potter and R. Heller. Transfection by Electroporation. Current Protocols in
Molecular Biology, 9(3), 2003 May.
[52] T.
L.
Riss,
R.
A.
Moravec,
A.
L.
Niles,
S.
Duellman,
H.
A.
Benink,
T.
J.
Worzella,
and
L.
Minor.
Cell
Viability
Assays.
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK144065/,
Last
accessed
on
3rd
May 2017.
[53] Promega.
Technical
Bulletin
-
CellTiter
96®
AQueous
Non-
Radioactive
Cell
Proliferation
Assay.
https://www.promega.com/-
/media/ﬁles/resources/protocols/technical-bulletins/0/celltiter-96-aqueous-
non-radioactive-cell-proliferation-systems-protocol.pdf,
Last accessed on 3rd
May 2017.
56
