==PAGE:1==
Personal Tracking and Analysis of
Subjectively Experienced Events
Using Smartphones and
Smartbuttons
Mircea Barba
Kongens Lyngby 2017
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
This project addresses the possibility of creating a mobile system for tracking in
situ and in momento observations, by means of a smartphone and smartbutton.
The system is also designed as a means of visualizing the data in order to obtain
in-depth information about the observations. Several experiments were done
in order to validate and evaluate the created prototype. The results of these
tests have shown that such a system is capable of creating valuable information
for people that are in need of tracking some speciﬁc symptoms. Furthermore
the proposed visualizations had good results in terms of intuitiveness. These
project, combined with the ﬁndings from related studies, can be considered as
a cornerstone for personal self-tracking.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at DTU Compute in fulﬁlment of the requirements for
acquiring an M.Sc. degree in Digital Media Engineering.
This thesis describes a system for tracking in situ and in momento observations
using smartphones and smartbuttons, and demonstrates its potential through
several experiments.
Lyngby, 02-June-2017
Mircea Barba
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisor Jakob Eg Larsen, for the constant guidance
and feedback given throughout the thesis.
I would like to thank my mother for always being supportive and for being the
person that inspired me to pursue computer science.
I also want to thank my dear friends Vlad-Cosmin Ozunu and Cezar-Costin
Pîrvu for the constant feedback and for participating in a longer experiment.
Lastly I would like to thank my family and friends, who helped me stay focused
in order to ﬁnish the project and who participated in my experiments while also
providing feedback, and a special thanks to all the participants who volunteered
to take part in the experiments and who oﬀered useful feedback.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
1
Introduction
1
2
Analysis
3
2.1
Motivation and Goal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Selected components . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2.1
IOS Environment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2.2
Bluetooth Button . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2.3
Data ownership . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3
Related Work
7
3.1
In situ and in momento observations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.2
Related Studies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.3
Related mobile applications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.4
Contribution from this project
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
4
Design
11
4.1
Early designs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4.2
Final design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4.2.1
iTrackIt View . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4.2.2
Events View
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4.2.3
Overview View . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.2.4
Map View . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.2.5
Events List View . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
==PAGE:10==
viii
CONTENTS
4.2.6
Single Event View . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.2.7
Category View . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.2.8
Settings View . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.3
Button clicking mechanism
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5
Implementation
25
5.1
A holistic view over the architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5.2
Data collection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5.3
Data visualization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.4
Framework drawbacks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5.5
Prototype testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
6
Evaluation of the application
29
6.1
Method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
6.1.1
Test 1 - Intuitiveness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
6.1.2
Test 2 – Medical personnel acceptance . . . . . . . . . . .
31
6.1.3
Test 3 – Application Usage
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
6.2
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
6.2.1
Test 1 - Intuitiveness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
6.2.2
Test 2 – Medical Personnel Acceptance . . . . . . . . . . .
39
6.2.3
Test 3 – Application Usage
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
7
Discussion and Future Work
43
7.1
Discussions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
7.2
Future Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
8
Conclusions
47
A First Design
49
B Application Navigation Wireframe
51
C Test 1 - Intuitiveness - Survey
53
D Test 2 - Medical personnel acceptance - Survey
57
E Test 3 - Application Usage - Survey
61
F Test 1 - Intuitiveness - Survey Answers
67
G Test 2 - Medical personnel acceptance - Survey Answers
73
H Test 3 - Application Usage - Survey Answers
77
I
Personal tracking through the interpretation of button clicking
habits - 2016
89
==PAGE:11==
CONTENTS
ix
Bibliography
97
==PAGE:12==
x
CONTENTS
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 1
Introduction
The technological advancements have enabled us to use the power of computer
science in all environments. The health industry has also beneﬁted from this
matter. This technological area is also known as e-health. This term has been
introduced in 1999 and it basically describes the technological tools that are
used in preventing, diagnosing, monitoring and treating patients. Lately, the
use of mobile application has enable easier access for information and also a more
ﬂexible method in order to get possible diagnosis or facilitate the treatment for
patients [Kro12]. These factors are the main reasons why mobile applications
have an increasing acceptance rate in the health industry [KST11].
The mobile phones oﬀer an enormous amount of free information that can be
used to determine the context of the patient. There are several applications that
oﬀer a complete history of the user movement, by using the time in correlation
with the location detected through the GPS (for example the Moves applica-
tion [mov]). In addition to this “activity diary”, there are many devices that
paired with the phone can oﬀer information about heart rate or other medical
benchmarks.
Unfortunately, there are some aspects that cannot be predicted by a system that
uses such devices and still need input from the users. These aspects are mainly
the subjective events that are experienced by the users. These phenomena vary
depending on the disease that is tracked, from allergy symptoms to PTSD caused
==PAGE:14==
2
Introduction
seizures and physical pain caused by diﬀerent illnesses.
These kind of events oﬀer important information, and keeping an accurate track
on them may lead to better treatments and a faster recovery period. This is
known as evidence-based practice, meaning that a history about the symptom’s
characteristics and the context in which it happened must be gathered and
documented[Spr07].
This project has the purpose of continuing the research on creating an evidence-
based system that uses a button as a method of input. A similar study was done
by Konstantinos Michail in order to help cancer patients keep track of their pain
level [Mic16]. From that study it can be concluded that a button can be used
as an input, but a concrete way of determining the pain levels, having it as
a sole input, isn’t a certainty. In a later study on “Personal tracking through
the interpretation of button clicking habits” [BL16] a slightly diﬀerent approach
was taken on the button as an input mechanism and had promising results
that showed a possibility of achieving 90% accuracy by oﬀering the user a more
strict button clicking behavior. This thesis project was done in order to create
a working prototype that uses the theoretical knowledge from previous studies,
by not only oﬀering a tracking method, but also a visualization tool that oﬀers
insight and depth into the tracking history of the user’s symptom.
This system is intended to be used by people who suﬀer from diﬀerent diseases
or illnesses in order to facilitate their treatment process and discussions with
doctors or other third party persons, by oﬀering an accurate tracking history
that may eventually help in reducing the overall treatment time or creating
better conditions for them.
The next chapter presents the ﬁrst analysis done in order to decide on the
path of this project. The third focuses on presenting some related work that
was used as a foundation for this project and also present a brief descriptions
of the contributions that it oﬀers in this matter.
The forth chapter focuses
on the design of the mobile application, from initial concept to selecting the
MVP for the working prototype.
The ﬁfth chapter presents the application
implementation details, while also acknowledging the problems encountered and
the tradeoﬀs of using open frameworks. The sixth chapter presents the testing
phase of the system and the seventh chapter is dedicated towards discussions,
future work and conclusions.
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 2
Analysis
This section is devoted to describing the underlying motivation for the project
and the end goal that is intended to be achieved. It also tackles the process
of deciding the selected components that were chosen for the completion of the
current developed system. Lastly it describes the data ownership matter.
2.1
Motivation and Goal
Nowadays mobile technology has become widely available and it has become
seemingly easier to get data passively by simply having a mobile phone con-
nected to the internet. This is very important because it provides an increas-
ingly larger context that can be accessed through applications at small cost.
There is a lot of information that can be gathered like this, from time and loca-
tion to activities, and with the development of smart watches, even heart rate
and ﬁtness exercises. Unfortunately this method can’t be applied when trying
to gather information that is unpredictable. The best example for these data
streams is disease symptoms. Usually tracking symptoms requires user input
in order to have valid data that can potentially create an accurate history of
the evolution of the disease. The so called traditional way is for the patients
to keep notes of the separate events and create personal trackers that could be
==PAGE:16==
4
Analysis
considered electronic or paper diaries. Eun Kyoung Chow is one of the persons
that took a closer look into these methods[CLL+14]. From the study it is easy
to understand that keeping track of a behavior without the appropriate tools or
motivation can actually be stressful and overwhelming for the person that has
to do it. Based on this ﬁnding, it is easy to conclude that a better system is
needed. One that can seemingly track a person’s symptom behavior, without
having a great impact on his or hers everyday activities.
The goal of this project is to make use of the context data that can be easily
obtained through mobile phones and combine it with speciﬁc data streams that
cannot be predicted without user input(Figure 2.1). The intersection of these
categories is what can lead up to interesting conclusions that have the potential
of creating in-depth understanding and even a better and faster treatment.
Figure 2.1: Left part shows examples of data sets that can be obtained directly
from the phone and the right part shows the ones that need user
input in order to be tracked. The intersection of these data sets
is the part that has the potential of being beneﬁcial for an user.
Although the use of an electronic diary is proven to be more reliable than the
classical pen and paper [HSS+02], patients seem to have a much easier time for
achieving the same goal by using mobile phones [BFS+13].
Based on this technological trend, this project has set the goal of creating a
portable system that not only tracks, but also displays the information by the use
of a mobile application. It is very important to keep the system as user-friendly
as possible and focus not only on the patients but also on the doctors that
might eventually look into the tracking history in order to adjust treatments.
It is important to note that this system has also in mind the easy adjustment
and understanding for doctors because studies show that new technology is not
easily embraced by them due to the stress and nature of their practices [VZS11].
In other words the main focus of this system is the visualization part, which has
to enable a simple yet powerful representation of the data set that is needed to
be tracked.
==PAGE:17==
2.2 Selected components
5
2.2
Selected components
The solution used in order to achieve the speciﬁed goals is composed of a mobile
application that stores and displays the tracking history and a Bluetooth button
that is used as an input mechanism in order to determine the moment of the
event and the severity of it.
The system created for this project is designed as a validation test. Based on
that premise, the following decisions where taken in order to achieve a functional
prototype:
1. Mobile Environment: IOS
2. Bluetooth button: Flic Button
2.2.1
IOS Environment
As it was previously mentioned, this project has the purpose of validating the
overall system. In order to make the development process easier, the desired
environment was IOS, because of several factors. The most important aspect is
the fact that IOS is compatible with a smaller number of devices, thus ensuring
a smoother visual development, because of the low number of screen dimensions.
Another important factor in this decision was the fact that 47% of the smart-
phone owners in Denmark own an iPhone (Study from June 2015 [den]). Given
these two reasons and the great amount of frameworks and documentations,
regarding IOS development, that can be easily accessible, IOS was preferred in
the detriment of Android.
2.2.2
Bluetooth Button
For the input method, a Bluetooth button was chosen. There are a number of
such gadgets that can be found (Orbit[orb], Satechi[sat], etc), but the device
that was used for the development of this system was the Flic Button[ﬂib],
because it has an open source API and a good documentation available online.
It is also relatively cheap for the versatility it oﬀers.
==PAGE:18==
6
Analysis
2.2.3
Data ownership
The application deals with sensitive personal data, so the ownership question
comes into mind. This is the reason why the data is stored locally on the phone
and not remotely.
Another way this project could have been done was to have the data stored
remotely and the doctors could have instant access to it. But for some cases the
problem of who owns the collected data could have emerged. For example when
it comes to treating PTSD, the data could have been considered as property
of the Ministry of Defense and not the person’s property. In order to surpass
this problem, the project took the path in which the data is stored in the user’s
phone, giving him total ownership over it and also giving him the right to show
it to whomever he or she desires.
==PAGE:19==
Chapter 3
Related Work
It is important to note that this project is the continuation of the study done in
2016 on “Personal tracking through the interpretation of button clicking habits”
[BL16]. This chapter has the purpose of presenting, in greater depth, the idea
and results of related works, in order to show the research that was done which
led to the development of the system. In order to have a holistic view on this
matter, this chapter has been divided in four major components. The ﬁrst one
presents an overview of the in situ and in momento techniques and the way they
are used in order to assess subjective phenomena. The second section focuses
on three related studies that focused on using a button as an input device in
order to obtain data for diﬀerent tracking categories. The third section presents
a few mobile application that are already available on the market and the last
section presents the contributions that this project brings to the related work.
3.1
In situ and in momento observations
The most problematic part of relying on a person to describe the frequency and
speciﬁcs of several events is the unlikelihood of obtaining accurate data. This
issue appears due to memory recall bias [Has05]. This complication may not
only generate false assessments of events obtained through the use of diaries,
==PAGE:20==
8
Related Work
questionnaires or therapy sessions, but it can also lead to completely missing
particular events that might be valuable for the holistic view of the treatment.
The traditional methods like ESM - experience sampling methods [RM83], EMA
- ecological momentary assessment [AS94], and AA - ambulatory assessment
[SB12] try to collect the information as close as possible to the time of the event.
Nowadays the advancements in the mobile devices industry (including smart-
watches and other smartwearables) have made it easier to obtain the desired data
from each individual in more seamless manner [SCD+16][AACM16][KAH16].
The use of a button as an input method can be considered an addition to the
devices that help make in situ and in momento observation. The button can
oﬀer, to some degree, the same information as a smartwatch, without having to
do the extra steps of unlocking the device and opening the desired application.
3.2
Related Studies
The ﬁrst important study that is related to this project is the one done by Kon-
stantinos Michail [Mic16]. His research was mostly applied for cancer patients.
The method of input was also a button and the study tried to correlate the
pain intensity with the duration of the button press. Unfortunately, the results
were not conclusive enough to say for a fact that an accurate correlation can be
observed. His project also involved the development of a visualization method.
The system developed for this project takes a slightly diﬀerent approach when
dealing with ﬁnding a correlation between the duration of the button press
and the intensity of the symptom. Instead of having a single button pressing,
this project uses two types of button pressing, by splitting the values into two
segments – one for mild intensity levels and the other one for high intensity levels
(the method is explained in greater depth in Chapter 4). When it comes to the
visualization, the method used in this project diﬀers from the one developed by
Konstantinos Michail.
The second important study was done by Jakob Eg Larsen et al.[LEC17]. The
study is orientated towards PTSD patients and demonstrates that such a sys-
tem has the potential of being used even in extreme situations (the patient was
able to focus on tracking the events although he could potentially experience
hyperarousal). Adding to this, the study also shows that this kind of tracking
combined with help from third party persons (doctors, physicians, etc.) became
decisive in identifying crucial details that had not emerged from the conversa-
tional assessment. This is an important study, because it conﬁrms the versatility
==PAGE:21==
3.3 Related mobile applications
9
and validity of using a button as an input device for tracking subjective phe-
nomena.
The ﬁnal study that is relevant for the project is the one done by myself and
Martin Rask Larsen[BL16]. This thesis project is a continuation of that work.
The previous study oﬀered some consistent results that demonstrated the pos-
sibility of creating a clicking behavior that can be correlated with symptom
intensity with a possible accuracy of 90%.
3.3
Related mobile applications
The idea of tracking events using a mobile phone is not something new. There
are several applications that oﬀer a solution into this matter, but as it can
be seen with the ones presented in this section, they usually require the user
to handle the actual phone device, open the application and input everything
manually.
One of this applications is Nomie[nom]. The most interested part of this solu-
tion is that it is able to stack symptoms together in order to see correlations
between them. This is an important factor that could be useful when it comes
to discovering trends into someone’s condition.
Another such application is Tap Log[tap]. Unfortunately it also relies on manual
input from the user and while it is free to download, in order to access all it’s
features and obtain new ones(from updates), the user has to constantly make
in-app purchases.
3.4
Contribution from this project
This project was created not only as a revalidation of the concept of using a
button as an input method for in situ and in momento observations, but it also
oﬀers a diﬀerent take on the clicking mechanism and the manner of displaying
the data. Also the developed prototype has the basic features required for it
to become an easy method of tracking symptoms, thus helping patients have a
better overview on their illness, while creating a user-friendly design that can
shorten the meetings with the doctors.
Another contribution of this system is the fact that it was created for a more
generic purpose. The system can be used in diﬀerent scenarios, while having
==PAGE:22==
10
Related Work
the same eﬃciency in gathering and representing the data. This application,
if proven to have potential, would eventually be developed into a ﬁnal product
that would be distributed free through the Apple AppStore.
==PAGE:23==
Chapter 4
Design
This chapter will present the evolution of the design and the ﬁnal features that
were integrated into the working prototype.
4.1
Early designs
After researching diﬀerent ways of representations[HB10] [JS86] [ST92] [SL91]
[ZT97] [SF09] [CM07] and ﬁnding diﬀerent ways for showing this kind of data,
a ﬁrst design emerged as a drawing.
It was important to use the provided
space (mainly a phone screen) eﬃciently in order to help patients to get in-
depth information regarding their symptom, but also provide an user friendly
representation that would be considered useful by specialists.
The ﬁrst design contained a main screen (welcoming screen) that had easy access
to category overview, the last tracked event and the notiﬁcations view. This ﬁrst
screen also had a menu bar at the bottom of the screen that oﬀered access to the
overview, the category manipulation, last event and settings view. This menu
bar would remain on screen through all the views present in the design.
The single event view would have basic information like the time, severity, notes
==PAGE:24==
12
Design
that could be added by the user, event state (original, edited, invalid) and a map
with a pin indicating the location where the event was created.
The category manipulation view was represented through a simple design that
displayed all the categories created by the user. The category that was currently
being tracked would have been colored in order to stand out from the rest. A
“+” button was presented in the top right corner and it’s function was to add
or remove a category.
The category overview part was represented through multiple views: Chart,
Calendar, Map. The Calendar view had several layers – Week, Month, Year –
and in each of them the events where represented as circles that had diﬀerent
radius depending on the number of events from that period. For example if the
user selected the week layer, The view would have shown the seven days of the
week and every day would have had a circle on top indicating the total number of
events for that type of day (if more events happened on Mondays than Tuesdays
it would mean that the circle corresponding to Mondays would have a bigger
radius than the one corresponding to Tuesdays and so on). The Chart view
was represented as a scattered chart, where each marking represented an event
from the respective day. Finally the Map view was represented with clusters
representing the number of events in a speciﬁc area.
The Notiﬁcation system was designed as a reminder for the user to take his pills
or to remember to schedule and go to doctor appointments.
Lastly, the Settings view oﬀered the user the possibility to add his or hers name,
connect to the Flic button and export the data to e-mail.
The initial design also considered the possibility of having predeﬁned notes for
easier interaction with the application.
The predeﬁned notes would be cre-
ated by analyzing previous notes added by the user. Another feature that was
thought of, was overlapping symptoms in all the overviews in order to determine
correlation between them.
For a visual representation of the ﬁrst design please refer to Appendix A.
The next step in the design phase was choosing the minimum viable product in
order to create a functioning prototype. The calendar view, notiﬁcation system,
predeﬁned notes and overlapping symptoms ideas were the features that were
put aside. This is because they oﬀered additional value, but were not crucial in
order to create a user friendly visualization that would enable the user to obtain
in-depth understanding of his or hers symptom.
The ﬁrst thing that was modiﬁed was the Charts view from category overview.
==PAGE:25==
4.2 Final design
13
It was moved separately and could be accessed from the menu bar. Next the
overview section was redesigned by using bar charts to express the total amount
of events for the speciﬁc time. Also a new overview method was added that
simply displayed a list of all the events. Another functionality was added in the
overview, by oﬀering the user the possibility to select the time period that is of
interest for him or her.
The rest of the design remained the same. In order to get a better grasp of the
design, a POP prototype[pop] was created through the Marvelapp[mar] website.
4.2
Final design
The ﬁnal design did not bring signiﬁcant changes in terms of features.
The
main diﬀerence is that instead of a menu bar at the bottom of the screen, a side
navigation menu (Figure 4.1) was preferred in order to save space so that the
visualizations could occupy a bigger percentage of the screen.
Figure 4.1: Slide navigation menu containing easy and fast access for the entire
application.
The design has 10 main views(iTrackIt, Events, Daily/Hourly Overview, Yearly
Overview, Summary Overview, Map, Events list, Single Event, Category and
Settings) and are going to be presented separately in order to have a better
==PAGE:26==
14
Design
representation of their functionalities and interaction method. For a complete
overview of the application navigation refer to the wireframe presented in Ap-
pendix B. It is important to mention that the representations presented in this
section are taken from the working prototype.
4.2.1
iTrackIt View
The iTrackit View (Figure 4.2) is the main view that appears when the user
opens the application. It oﬀers a greeting message and quick method of reaching
the last tracked event and the Category View. It also presents the amount of
time that has passed from the last event.
Figure 4.2: Main View of the iTrackIt application.
4.2.2
Events View
The Events View (Figure 4.3) is intended to oﬀer a detailed representation of
the event distribution during a period of time. First the user has to add the
start and end dates in order to access this visualization.
After this step, a
scatter chart is displayed where the X axis is represented by the hours of the
day and the left Y axis represents all the days between the selected time interval.
The right Y axis displays the total amount of events for the corresponding day.
==PAGE:27==
4.2 Final design
15
Events are represented through 4 colors: black represents an invalid event, blue
an edited event, purple an original event and gray a cluster of events. The user
can click on any marker in order to get a detailed view of the event or a list of
the events within a cluster.
Figure 4.3: Events View of the iTrackIt application.
According to Webner’s Law[Lin02] a perception of a stimuli is proportional with
the initial stimuli. In other words, if the initial stimuli (in this case the ﬁrst
presented part of the chart) has a big number of markers, the user won’t notice
a signiﬁcant change when viewing the next parts of the graph. In order for the
user to have an instant notice regarding the changes of the graph, the chart will
display a maximum of 7 days when it is loaded into view. After that the user
has to scroll through the graph in order to see the events for other days. This
will ensure an easier and faster assumption regarding the number of events that
are coming into view in comparison with the already exiting events.
Figure 4.4: Webner’s Law example[web]. Each value represents the number of
point from the respective images. On the left the diﬀerence can be
seen immediatly, but on the right it is hard to see the diﬀerence.
4.2.3
Overview View
The Overview View has three main components that oﬀer diﬀerent information
in order to aid the user discover patterns in the evolution of his or hers symptom.
The components are represented as pages, and the user can access them by
swiping left or right.
==PAGE:28==
16
Design
4.2.3.1
Daily/Hourly Overview
This component has a bar chart as the main part.
The user has to select
the start date, end date and a ﬂag that can be set to either daily or hourly.
Depending on this ﬂag the X axis of the graph is going to be represented by the
days of the week (Monday to Sunday) or by the hours of the day. A bar can be
split into two colors. The green part represents the total number of events on
that type of day/hour and the gray part represents the median value for that
type of day/hour (For example if the bar corresponding the X axis Monday has
two parts, the ﬁrst gray one marked with 2 and the second green part marked
with 15 it means that in the selected period of time, the total number of events
occurring on Mondays is 15 and the median number of events occurring on one
Monday is 2). If a median cannot be computed or is zero than the gray part
will not appear. A representation of this component can be observed in Figure
4.5.
Figure 4.5: Daily/Hourly Overview of the iTrackIt application.
4.2.3.2
Yearly Overview
This component oﬀers a radar view that has all the months of the year present in
the corners. A turquoise line together with numerical values indicate the number
of events in each month. The user needs to input the year that interests him or
==PAGE:29==
4.2 Final design
17
her. The default value for this component is the current year. A representation
of this component can be observed in Figure 4.6.
Figure 4.6: Yearly Overview of the iTrackIt application.
4.2.3.3
Summary Overview
This component oﬀers a pie chart that shows in the center the total number of
events and each slice shows the number of original, edited and invalid events.
It also displays the day with most events, the day and hour with most events
in an hour and the largest period of time between two distinct events. A repre-
sentation of this component can be observed in Figure 4.7.
==PAGE:30==
18
Design
Figure 4.7: Summary Overview of the iTrackIt application.
4.2.4
Map View
The Map View (Figure 4.8) is meant to oﬀer information regarding the locations
in which the events occur. The events are represented as clusters that change
size depending on the zoom level. The clusters are represented with circles that
contain the number of events in that area. The user can tap on them and get a
list of the events from that cluster. By default the map is set to a zoom level
in order to contain all the events from the category that is being tracked. The
user can adjust the time interval by inserting the start and end dates.
==PAGE:31==
4.2 Final design
19
Figure 4.8: Map View of the iTrackIt application.
4.2.5
Events List View
The Events List(Figure 4.9) oﬀers a simpliﬁed form of accessing the events, from
a selected period of time, chronologically. The user has to enter the start and
end dates and the application will display all the events it ﬁnds that match that
period. The user can interact with this view by tapping any event from the list,
in which case he is directed towards a Single Event View.
==PAGE:32==
20
Design
Figure 4.9: Events List View of the iTrackIt application.
4.2.6
Single Event View
The Single Event View(Figure 4.10) represents a detailed description of one
event. It displays the time of the event, the severity of the event by means
of a slider, a Notes section where the user can insert annotations, a small map
zoomed on the location of the event and a toggle button that is used for marking
the event as invalid. The event is consider original if the user doesn’t change any
of the event’s information, edited if the user adds notes or changes the severity
and invalid if the user toggles the invalid button (in which case the time changes
color from black to red). Another important design feature is represented by
a small blue circle that appears on the slider once the user changes the value.
This blue circle represents the original value detected by the application.
==PAGE:33==
4.2 Final design
21
There are several ways of accessing a detailed information regarding one event:
1. from iTrackIt View, by clicking on the last event information
2. from Events View, by clicking on a single event or by tapping a cluster
and then from the list that appears selecting one event
3. from Map View, by tapping single markers or by tapping a cluster and
then from the list that appears selecting one event
4. from Events List View, by tapping on one of displayed events
Figure 4.10: Single Event View of the iTrackIt application.
4.2.7
Category View
Category View The Category View(Figure 4.11) has the purpose of letting the
user create or remove a category(symptom) to be tracked. This view has two
states. The ﬁrst one is when the Edit button was not pressed. In this case
there will be a maximum of one category marked with green and any number
of categories marked with gray. The symptom marked with green is the current
one that is being tracked. The second state of this view appears when the Edit
button is pressed. In this case there is always only one gray "+" icon that can
be used to add a new category and any number of red categories that can be
==PAGE:34==
22
Design
tapped in order to be removed. The user can press the Done button to end the
editing the categories.
In order to transmit the message of a selected category the application only
uses the color green as it is associated with “On” or “Good”. For deleting a
category there was no “-“ symbol used, because the color red should be enough
to transmit the idea, it being usually associated with “Remove” or “Reject”[Col].
Figure 4.11: Variation of the Category View from the iTrackIt application.
==PAGE:35==
4.3 Button clicking mechanism
23
4.2.8
Settings View
The Settings View(Figure 4.12) has the purpose of conﬁguring the application.
It has a simple design with a ﬁeld in which the user can enter his or hers name,
a button that is used to connect the application to the Flic Button and an
export button placed in the top right corner. The export button has the default
Save/Export icon from IOS.
Figure 4.12: Settings View of the iTrackIt application.
4.3
Button clicking mechanism
The button clicking behavior chosen for the prototype was based on the research
paper that preceded this project[BL16].
In order to get a relative accurate symptom severity by using only a button, the
severity scale had to be split into two – low level severity and high level severity.
The application translates this scale into values from 1 to 5 and from 6 to 10.
In order to detect a low level severity event (1 to 5 actual value) the user has
to perform a simple click followed by a click and hold action. The holding time
period is not forced on the user, instead he or she has to keep the button pressed
for as long as they feel is appropriate(the longer the holding period, the closer
the detected value gets to 5). For high level severity the mechanism is similar
==PAGE:36==
24
Design
to the low level one. Instead of having one click followed by a click and hold
action, the user has to do a double click followed by a click and hold action.
In order to avoid the appearance of false positive symptom manifestations, the
application does not register simple clicks. For an event to be registered, at
least two consecutive clicks must be performed.
==PAGE:37==
Chapter 5
Implementation
This chapter focuses on presenting the development process and technologies
that where used in order to achieve a functional system that collects the data
and displays it in an user friendly manner. It is important to mention that the
implementation is going to be discussed on a higher abstraction level, without
going into the actual code, or describing the details through a pseudo-code.
This project focuses more on the study of this system, not the technical method
through which it may be achieved. It is understandable that there could be
diﬀerent ways of developing this kind of system and that the methods used here
may not be optimal.
5.1
A holistic view over the architecture
The mobile application iTrackIt was developed in the Xcode[xco] environment,
using the Swift[swi] programming language. In order to achieve a working pro-
totype within the time frame, several open source frameworks were used. It is
important to note that there are drawbacks when trying to mold a framework
to a speciﬁc need, but for the purpose of proof of concept, the frameworks used
were suﬃcient.
==PAGE:38==
26
Implementation
The main application was build around the SWReveal Framework[swr], which
oﬀers an easy way of implementing a slide menu in order to have simple access
to all the visualizations oﬀered by the application. The Flic Button comes with
a framework allowing any developer to connect to the button through the use of
their application[ﬂia]. In order to access that information into the iTrackIt ap-
plication, it has to implement the methods provided in the Flic framework[ﬂic].
In order to store the information, a sqlite3 database was used that kept infor-
mation regarding the severity (provided through the interpretation of the but-
ton clicks), time, location, notes, category(symptom that is being tracked) and
state(original, edited, invalid). For a faster database interaction the FMDB[fmd]
Framework was used. The visualization part was achieved through the use of the
Charts framework[cha] and the FBAnnotationClustering framework[fbc]. The
following subchapters oﬀer more insight on each framework and a more in-depth
explanation on the implementation.
Figure 5.1: Holistiv view of the architecture components.
5.2
Data collection
This section presents the lifecycle of an event, from it’s creation until the moment
it is removed.
The application remains idle in the background until the user starts performing
a clicking behavior. The duration of the clicks are being transferred from the
Flic application through the framework methods into the iTrackIt application.
The iTrackIt application veriﬁes if the clicks are in accordance with the preset
==PAGE:39==
5.3 Data visualization
27
method (at least two consecutive clicks) and then saves the timestamp, the
latitude, the longitude, the category being tracked and the detected severity
(according to the study this project is based on[BL16]). After this information
is obtain a new entry is added to the database. The user has multiple ways of
changing the state of the event. He or she is able to either modify the severity,
add or remove notes and mark it as invalid or valid (by default the event is
saved as valid). The user is not able to delete a single event, instead he or she
has to delete the entire category that the event is part of. This is in fact the
only way the user can erase information from the application (disregarding the
possibility of deleting the entire iTrackIt app).
The events can be exported by using the export button from the Settings View.
It creates a CSV ﬁle containing all the information regarding the events from the
selected category and the user can send it to anyone through e-mail, message,
etc. It is important to mention that in order for the application to work, the user
has to have the Flic application pre-installed and have the Bluetooth turned on
at all time.
5.3
Data visualization
The visualization is split into two main components. The graphical representa-
tions that mostly rely on the timestamp and the map representation that uses
the location information.
In order to create the graphical representations, the Charts framework was used.
It was preferred instead of others (for example SwiftCharts[sch]), because it
oﬀers multiple styles, built in touch recognition and a wide range of users and
documentation that can be easily accessed online.
For the map representation this project used the built-in MapKit instead of
Google Maps. This was done because it is much easier to integrate MapKit
than Google Maps and for the desired visualization, MapKit oﬀers enough in-
formation. In order to have the markers clustered, the FBAnnotationClustering
framework was used because it oﬀered an easy and straightforward way of in-
tegration and it oﬀered built-in icons for groups of pins and a mechanism of
showing the number of pins inside each cluster. A diﬀerent framework that was
taken into consideration was the CCHMapCluster[cch], but it didn’t oﬀer the
versatility and the documentation that FBAnnotationClustering has.
==PAGE:40==
28
Implementation
5.4
Framework drawbacks
In general using open source frameworks comes with some drawbacks. In this
project’s case, the drawbacks were mainly regarding the charts representations.
Although the framework oﬀers extensive personalization it still lacks some ele-
ments that would have been useful in this project. The main visual representa-
tion that couldn’t be achieved was the Events View (4.2.2). The main idea was
to mimic the behavior from the map view, meaning that events would cluster
and split apart depending on the zoom level of the chart. Unfortunately this
couldn’t be done and in order to achieve this, a visualization dedicated for this
matter would need to be created from scratch.
Another issue that was discovered through the extensive testing of the appli-
cation, was the fact that when there is a high number of events that need to
be presented in the Events View, the charts frameworks has some bugs that
compromise the view. In some cases the number associated with a cluster is
not displayed, some of the markers can’t be interacted with and at some zoom
levels a few of the markers disappear. These functional bugs don’t aﬀect the
purpose of the prototype, but are a strong indication that, at least for this view,
an implementation started from scratch would be necessary in order to surpass
the issues that come from the Charts framework.
Despite the issue mentioned above, the frameworks oﬀered a reliable and fast
way of implementing the desired visualizations, thus making the prototype func-
tional.
5.5
Prototype testing
An application development process is always going to be faced with bugs and
obstacles. In order to surpass these problems it is highly important to ensure
testing phases within the development process to guarantee a working product.
In the case of this project the testing method chosen was White-Box[Kha11]
testing, instead of using a classical Black-Box[Pat05] testing. The testing was
done as the project was developed, by creating test cases for each part of the
project and seeing if the results matched the expected results. If the results
were diﬀerent than the application would get ﬁxes, otherwise the development
would continue with diﬀerent modules.
==PAGE:41==
Chapter 6
Evaluation of the
application
This chapter presents the studies that where conducted in order to test the
feasibility of the application. In total there where three studies, two of them
focusing on the design and intuitiveness of the application and the third one
focusing on the utilization of the prototype and deciding if it can help the
participants in getting a deeper understanding of the tracked symptom. It is
important to note that the studies were done on a relative small scale and oﬀer
only a proof of concept conclusion. In order to accurately test the usefulness
and ﬂexibility of the application, larger studies should be conducted.
This chapter has two important sections(Method and Results) that oﬀer a deeper
understanding on the procedures used and the results that emerged from these
studies.
6.1
Method
In order to discover how the application would behave, three tests where con-
ducted. The ﬁrst one, tested the intuitiveness by measuring the needed times
==PAGE:42==
30
Evaluation of the application
for performing several tasks. After that, the participants were also asked to
respond to a survey to get subjective opinions regarding the application.
The second test was directed towards the medical sector, to be more precise it
had the purpose of ﬁguring out if doctors would ﬁnd the prototype useful useful.
It is important to note that this test was done with only ﬁve participants, four
of them actually being still in Medical University and the ﬁfth, a doctor with
over 30 years in the ﬁeld. This test was conducted only to have an initial idea
regarding the possibility of doctors being willing to use this kind of system as
an aid in treating patients. It is important to acknowledge the fact that a larger
study needs to be conducted in order to have more conﬁdent results.
The last test was conducted over a larger period of time (two to three weeks)
in order to observe if people suﬀering from a condition would ﬁnd this system
useful and would help them get a better grasp over their conditions.
6.1.1
Test 1 - Intuitiveness
6.1.1.1
Participants
A total of 25 participants volunteered to participate for this test. They were all
students with a technical background.
6.1.1.2
Apparatus
The participants used a mobile phone with the iTrackIt application pre-installed.
The person overseeing the test was equipped with a stopwatch. In addition, the
participants were supposed to write their answers in a Google Form[goo] on a
provided computer.
6.1.1.3
Procedure
The test took around 15-20 minutes to perform.
1. First an introduction of the application was done by the facilitator
2. A form was opened on the computer at the timing section
==PAGE:43==
6.1 Method
31
3. The mobile application was set to the main view (iTrackIt view) before
each task
4. The participant announced when he or she started the task and the facil-
itator would start the stopwatch
5. The participants ﬁnished the task and the time was registered by the
facilitator only upon receiving a correct answer
6. After the six tasks were ﬁnished the participants would continue with the
survey giving their subjective answers regarding the application
It is important to specify that the participants were told to move at their own
speed and that the times did not aﬀect them in any manner. Also the study
was done anonymously.
6.1.1.4
Design
The study was designed as a Performance-based experiment task. The idea was
to (a) perform the speciﬁed tasks, (b) get timed upon completion, (c) obtain
subjective information about the application and (d) correlate the times with
Newell’s Time Scale of Human Interaction[Mac13]. The test case focused on two
dependent variables. The ﬁrst one was the subjective opinion of the participants
and the second one was the task completion time. The independent value was
the formulation of the tasks, all participants received the same tasks.
The
chosen method was the Between-subjects method, where every participant had
to do their test individually. The test was designed in order to gain information
regarding the intuitiveness of the application. A copy of the form can be found
in Appendix C.
6.1.2
Test 2 – Medical personnel acceptance
6.1.2.1
Participants
A total of 5 participants volunteered to participate for this test. Four of them
are students from Medical University and one is a retired doctor with over 30
years of experience in the ﬁeld.
==PAGE:44==
32
Evaluation of the application
6.1.2.2
Apparatus
The participants were presented with a mobile phone with the iTrackIt applica-
tion pre-installed. They were also provided with a Google Form on a computer.
6.1.2.3
Procedure
The test took around 20 minutes to perform.
1. First an introduction of the application was done by the facilitator
2. Afterwards the participants were allowed to use the application and get
used to it’s features
3. A computer was provided with the form pre-loaded within a browser
It is important to notice that the participants were not constrained in any way
and were asked for honest opinions regarding the application.
6.1.2.4
Design
The study was design as a subjective survey. The idea was to (a) get subjective
opinions from doctors and (b) test if the application oﬀers the possibility of
being accepted in the ﬁeld. A copy of the form can be found in Appendix D.
6.1.3
Test 3 – Application Usage
6.1.3.1
Participants
A total of 4 participants volunteered to take part in this test. All of them had a
symptom that needed to be tracked.It is important to mention that one of the
participants had the events, that were previously gathered by him, imported
into the application.
==PAGE:45==
6.1 Method
33
6.1.3.2
Apparatus
The participants were oﬀered the application that had to be installed on their
personal phone. They also needed to have access to a Flic button, that was not
provided by the facilitator. Lastly the participants received a link to a survey
that needed to be completed until the end of the test
6.1.3.3
Procedure
The test took 2-3 weeks to perform.
1. First an introduction of the application was done by the facilitator
2. The participants were provided with the application to be installed on
their device
3. The participants had to install and pair the Flic button to the application
on their own.
4. The participants were given a deadline of three weeks to use the application
in order to get information regarding their symptom
5. The participants were oﬀered a survey to be completed until the deadline
It is important to note that the participants weren’t helped in understanding the
behavior of their symptom. All the conclusions were made by the participants
on their own. Also the users could continue to use the application after the end
of the test.
6.1.3.4
Design
The study was designed as a Knowledge-based experiment task. The idea was to
(a)install the system, (b)track a symptom by means of the system and (c)draw
conclusions regarding the symptom based on the representations from the ap-
plication.
The test focused on two dependent variables.
The ﬁrst one was
the accuracy of the users’ clicking behavior in correlation with the detection
mechanism of the application and the second one was the particularities of the
symptom that was being tracked.
The independent value was the detection
mechanism. The chosen method was the Between-subjects method, where ev-
ery participant had to track their own symptom. The test was design in order
==PAGE:46==
34
Evaluation of the application
to check the eﬀectiveness of the application on a day-to-day bases. A copy of
the form can be found in Appendix E.
6.2
Results
The purpose of these studies was to ﬁnd out if the proposed system has the
capability of becoming useful in better understanding and treating medical con-
ditions from both the patient and doctor’s perspective. It is important to em-
phasize the fact that the studies were done on a small number of participants.
This research was meant as a proof of concept and requires tests with a greater
number of participants in order to fully acknowledge the results, thus having a
bigger conﬁdent rate of application approval.
The most important outcome of this study is the fact that it got good acceptance
rates from most of the participating and that it was able to provide useful insight
for the users who actually tried the prototype. Another important aspect is the
apparent scalability of this system, several participants from the ﬁrst test came
up with good (some even inventive) other areas in which the application might
create value.
Although a full acknowledgement over the results is still hard to announce with
certainty, the positive results found in this study correlated with the results
found from the related works [Mic16][BL16][LEC17], indicate a high probability
of the possible success that this kind of system may obtain in helping patients
with their conditions.
6.2.1
Test 1 - Intuitiveness
This section focuses on two aspects, comparing the times recorded in order to do
diﬀerent tasks, with Newell’s Time Scale of Human Interaction, and obtaining
an overall approval rate regarding the application.
6.2.1.1
Cognitive Load
In order to assess the cognitive load needed to use the application, the times nec-
essary for completing diﬀerent tasks were compared with Newell’s Time Scale. It
represents a model that matches human actions with speciﬁc timeframes. There
==PAGE:47==
6.2 Results
35
are four bands: biological, cognitive, rational and social, each being divided into
3 layers as seen in Figure 6.1. Time (seconds) is represented on a logarithmic
scale.
Figure 6.1: Newell’s Time Scale of Human Interaction.[Mac13]
The test focused on 6 tasks:
1. How much time does it take for you to ﬁnd when does the pain usually
happen between 5 May and 11 May?
Figure 6.2: Results for the question: "How much time does it take for you to
ﬁnd when does the pain usually happen between 5 May and 11
May?". The X axis is represented in seconds.
==PAGE:48==
36
Evaluation of the application
2. How much time does it take for you to ﬁnd what week days have the
highest mean occurrence between 6 May and 22 May?
Figure 6.3: Results for the question: "How much time does it take for you to
ﬁnd what week days have the highest mean occurrence between 6
May and 22 May?". The X axis is represented in seconds.
3. How much time does it take for you to ﬁnd what week days have the most
occurrence overall between 6 May and 22 May?
Figure 6.4: Results for the question: "How much time does it take for you to
ﬁnd what week days have the most occurrence overall between 6
May and 22 May?". The X axis is represented in seconds.
==PAGE:49==
6.2 Results
37
4. How much time does it take for you to ﬁnd how many events where reg-
istered in total?
Figure 6.5: Results for the question: "How much time does it take for you to
ﬁnd how many events where registered in total?". The X axis is
represented in seconds.
5. How much time does it take for you to ﬁnd where do the events happen
most frequently?
Figure 6.6: Results for the question: "How much time does it take for you to
ﬁnd where do the events happen most frequently?". The X axis is
represented in seconds.
==PAGE:50==
38
Evaluation of the application
6. How much time does it take for you to ﬁnd the date and hour of the last
event?
Figure 6.7: Results for the question: "How much time does it take for you to
ﬁnd the date and hour of the last event?". The X axis is repre-
sented in seconds.
After analyzing the results and calculating the median value, we can observe that
for the ﬁrst three tasks the expected time of completion corresponds to the ﬁrst
layer of the Rational Band(ﬁrst question median – 29s, second question median
– 21s and third question median – 17s) and the last three tasks correspond to
the Unit Task level from the Cognitive Band(forth question median – 11s, ﬁfth
question median – 8s and sixth question median – 3s). These results show that
even for a person that has recently seen the application, the reaction times are
very good, meaning that the application has an underlying intuitiveness and
does not create too much cognitive load.
It is important to note that the participants were all students with a technical
background, but adding the factor of the learning curve, we can expect that a
regular user should perform in the same parameters after getting used with the
application.
6.2.1.2
Subjective Opinion
The study provided great results in terms of intuitiveness regarding each of the
views. All of them had a maxim grade from more than 50% of the participants.
The most intuitive views turned out to be the Single Event view, the Yearly
View, the Events View and the Map View. The least intuitive view was the
Daily/Hourly Overview with 2 of the participants (8%) marking it as not intu-
itive (score of 2 out of 5),. Despite this, the view still has a good percentage of
people that ﬁnd it intuitive.
==PAGE:51==
6.2 Results
39
The survey also asked the participants for other events that could be tracked
with this system. Responses ranged mostly from cigarettes and nervous tics, to
even a person saying he would use the system to track his relationship(mainly
the frequency of the disputes).
For more responses of the survey please refer to Appendix F.
6.2.2
Test 2 – Medical Personnel Acceptance
The most important result of this study was the fact that 100% of the partic-
ipants said that the application has the potential of being useful for patients
that need a history of their symptoms and also all of them said they would rec-
ommend the application to patients. This is very important, because, in order
for this system to have a greater impact, it also has to be accepted by medical
personnel.
Another important information was depicting which view was the most useful.
As it can be seen in Figure 6.8, 80% of the participants preferred the Events
view mostly because it felt easy to go through it day by day, event by event.
Figure 6.8: Results for the question: "Which representation do you think is
the most useful?".
The last result matched the expectations related to the study. When asked what
period of time would be required in order to get used to all of the application’s
features, the medical students all answered with one day, but the experienced
doctor answered with 2-3 weeks. This can be explained by the fact that the four
students are much more used with smartphones and mobile applications.
==PAGE:52==
40
Evaluation of the application
The study revealed that this system could possibly be accepted, used and recom-
mended by doctors, which is an important factor in determining if this applica-
tion can become useful. It is important to note that these results were deduced
from a small group, and a greater study has to be taken into consideration with
having more participants from diﬀerent age groups, test the application.
For more responses of the survey please refer to Appendix G
6.2.3
Test 3 – Application Usage
The most important part of this study was that 100% of the participants found
the application useful. Another good result is the fact that 3 of the participants
actually managed to get a better grasp over the application, it helping them
in pinpointing the conditions in which the symptom usually occurs. The forth
participant, while ﬁnding the application useful did not ﬁnd any in-depth in-
formation. He suggested that more context should be added in order to have
a better grasp over the symptom. It is also important to note that this user
didn’t use the Map view at it’s full potential.
Figure 6.9: Ranking distribution of the views. The X axis indicates the rank,
the Y axis the vies, and the values represent the number of par-
ticipants that ranked that view accordingly.
==PAGE:53==
6.2 Results
41
Another important result was the distribution regarding the rankings of each
view.
All the participants were asked to rank the views according to their
relevance.
As it can be seen in Figure 6.9, The most relevant views appear
to be the iTrackIt, Events, Daily/Hourly Overview and Map views. The least
relevant is the Events List, this is understandable because the view is meant
as a way to have access to all the events in a table format.The most important
part about this question is the fact that the answers were quite distributed,
meaning each person felt that diﬀerent views were relevant. This indicates that
the application oﬀers representations that can be useful for diﬀerent symptoms,
achieving it’s goal of being a versatile means of tracking.
For more responses of the survey please refer to Appendix H.
==PAGE:54==
42
Evaluation of the application
==PAGE:55==
Chapter 7
Discussion and Future Work
This chapter focuses on discussing the obtained results and explaining the next
steps that could be interesting to be researched in order to improve the created
system and oﬀer better support for people in need of a personal tracking method.
7.1
Discussions
This project had two main goals, the ﬁrst one was to create a working prototype
that addresses the idea of getting in situ and in momento observations using a
smart button as an input device, and the second one was to validate and ﬁgure
out the usefulness of such a system.
Fortunately through the use of several frameworks, the development process
time was shortened and a functional prototype was produced in order to test
it’s feasibility.
It terms of validating the system, it is important not to rush to conclusions. The
initial tests showed that this approach has good potential to ensure an easy way
of obtaining the in situ observations, but also an intuitive visualization mech-
anism that can be mapped on diﬀerent users with diﬀerent expectations. This
==PAGE:56==
44
Discussion and Future Work
being said, it is important to be aware that for a deﬁnitive conﬁrmation, larger
studies need to be conducted, with the addition of a more complex prototype.
The important aspect of this project is that it was received positively within a
small testing area. Another important factor is the fact that users who actively
tested the application for their condition managed to ﬁnd useful information
regarding their condition. This fact alone is enough to consider this project a
starting point into further researching the possibility of using a smart button as
an input device for in situ and in momento observations.
The feedback received throughout the studies oﬀered interesting starting points
for further development, from small changes that can improve the visualizations,
to more extensive additions that would create a more versatile system.
A very important feedback was the idea of removing the period selection method
(the user having to manually insert the start and end dates).
Instead, the
application would always have a weekly/monthly period representation and the
user could scroll through the dates by swiping, and change from weekly to
monthly by pinching. This is a very interesting idea that would make the system
more user-friendly. It is important to note that for the purpose of the MVP, this
wouldn’t have been important, but for a later development these two methods
should be compared through an experiment in order to decide which one would
be more relevant for users.
The Events view is the only one that created problems throughout the tests.
Unfortunately the framework had some issues that hindered the overall expe-
rience for users. The important part is that the participants were informed of
the desired functionality of the view and that although it had bugs, it could
still render useful information. This view is the one that needs the most work
on, because based on the received feedback it has potential of oﬀering good in-
sight.In order to beneﬁt the most out of it, changes need to be made to it, thus
assuring a better user experience.
7.2
Future Work
There are several small improvements that can be done in a relative short
amount of time that could improve the overall design. These suggestions came
from people participating in the diﬀerent surveys and giving their input on what
they could see as added value for the application.
These small improvements go from adding grid lines to the Events view chart to
adding more information in the summary overview or in the single event view.
==PAGE:57==
7.2 Future Work
45
Another small improvement would be to be able to import the CSV ﬁle created
through the export button into another phone running the iTrackIt application.
This functionality was not important for the MVP prototype, but it would create
value in a ﬁnal product by allowing the doctor to see the patient’s data without
having to physically meet with him.
This prototype can also evolve into a product by resolving the shortcomings
of the Charts framework and by adding more context data in addition to time
and location. These data streams can be weather conditions, heart rate, activ-
ities and any other factors (even diﬀerent symptoms tracked through the same
application, this would be done by introducing a method to stack symptoms
together in order to do an easier comparison. It’s prospect can be seen through
the Nomie Application) that might have an impact over symptoms, or even give
a better perspective over the diﬀerent conditions that can be tracked by using
this system.
Another important addition to this project would be the possibility of reﬁning
the data displayed in the visualizations. For example one could only be inter-
ested in events that have a high level severity or in events that are not edited.
All these advanced search options have the possibility of creating value and
could potentially help users get a better and faster treatment.
The last addition this system needs in order to be able to be used on a wide scale,
is the security of data. Currently the system uses a simple database collection
mechanism. For a released project, a database that uses encryption methods is
required to guaranty the safety and anonymity of the user’s data.
==PAGE:58==
46
Discussion and Future Work
==PAGE:59==
Chapter 8
Conclusions
This project can become a cornerstone for additional researches that tackle the
problem of creating an accurate event history in order to help patients manage
their conditions.
Based on the conducted studies in correlation with the previous ones, we can
assume that this approach has the potential of becoming a norm into symptom
tracking, especially with the current increased adoption of mobile technology
into the medical system.
This thesis focused on the issue of obtaining accurate in situ and in momento
observations by oﬀering a holistic view over how mobile technology can become
a solution in order to tackle this problem. It also describes several experiments
and their outcomes, and the design decisions made and developed in order to
solve the identiﬁed problem.
The prototype developed within this project oﬀered great results and has achieved
the goal of oﬀering a versatile product that has the potential of being used not
only in the health industry, but also in order to track personal information that
an user might ﬁnd interesting.
==PAGE:60==
48
Conclusions
==PAGE:61==
Appendix A
First Design
==PAGE:62==
50
First Design
==PAGE:63==
Appendix B
Application Navigation
Wireframe
==PAGE:64==
52
Application Navigation Wireframe
==PAGE:65==
Appendix C
Test 1 - Intuitiveness -
Survey
==PAGE:66==
54
Test 1 - Intuitiveness - Survey
==PAGE:67==
55
==PAGE:68==
56
Test 1 - Intuitiveness - Survey
==PAGE:69==
Appendix D
Test 2 - Medical personnel
acceptance - Survey
==PAGE:70==
58
Test 2 - Medical personnel acceptance - Survey
==PAGE:71==
59
==PAGE:72==
60
Test 2 - Medical personnel acceptance - Survey
==PAGE:73==
Appendix E
Test 3 - Application Usage
- Survey
==PAGE:74==
62
Test 3 - Application Usage - Survey
==PAGE:75==
63
==PAGE:76==
64
Test 3 - Application Usage - Survey
==PAGE:77==
65
==PAGE:78==
66
Test 3 - Application Usage - Survey
==PAGE:79==
Appendix F
Test 1 - Intuitiveness -
Survey Answers
==PAGE:80==
68
Test 1 - Intuitiveness - Survey Answers
==PAGE:81==
69
==PAGE:82==
70
Test 1 - Intuitiveness - Survey Answers
==PAGE:83==
71
==PAGE:84==
72
Test 1 - Intuitiveness - Survey Answers
==PAGE:85==
Appendix G
Test 2 - Medical personnel
acceptance - Survey
Answers
==PAGE:86==
74
Test 2 - Medical personnel acceptance - Survey Answers
==PAGE:87==
75
==PAGE:88==
76
Test 2 - Medical personnel acceptance - Survey Answers
==PAGE:89==
Appendix H
Test 3 - Application Usage
- Survey Answers
==PAGE:90==
78
Test 3 - Application Usage - Survey Answers
==PAGE:91==
79
==PAGE:92==
80
Test 3 - Application Usage - Survey Answers
==PAGE:93==
81
==PAGE:94==
82
Test 3 - Application Usage - Survey Answers
==PAGE:95==
83
==PAGE:96==
84
Test 3 - Application Usage - Survey Answers
==PAGE:97==
85
==PAGE:98==
86
Test 3 - Application Usage - Survey Answers
==PAGE:99==
87
==PAGE:100==
88
Test 3 - Application Usage - Survey Answers
==PAGE:101==
Appendix I
Personal tracking through
the interpretation of button
clicking habits - 2016
==PAGE:102==
90
Personal tracking through the interpretation of button clicking habits -
2016
==PAGE:103==
91
==PAGE:104==
92
Personal tracking through the interpretation of button clicking habits -
2016
==PAGE:105==
93
==PAGE:106==
94
Personal tracking through the interpretation of button clicking habits -
2016
==PAGE:107==
95
==PAGE:108==
96
Personal tracking through the interpretation of button clicking habits -
2016
==PAGE:109==
Bibliography
[AACM16] Exler A., Schankin A., Klebsattel C., and Beigl M. A wearable sys-
tem for mood assessment considering smartphone features and data
from mobile ECGs. In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM International
Joint Conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing, 2016.
[AS94]
Stone A. A. and Shiﬀman S.
Ecological momentary assessment
(EMA) in behavorial medicine.
Annals of Behavioral Medicine,
1994.
[BFS+13]
Jakob E Bardram, Mads Frost, Károly Szántó, Maria Faurholt-
Jepsen, Maj Vinberg, and Lars Vedel Kessing. Designing mobile
health technology for bipolar disorder: a ﬁeld trial of the monarca
system. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Fac-
tors in Computing Systems, 2013.
[BL16]
Mircea Barba and Martin Rask Larsen. Personal tracking through
the interpretation of button clicking habits. 2016.
[cch]
Cchmapcluster
framework.
https://github.com/choefele/
CCHMapClusterController. Accessed: 2017-05-20.
[cha]
Charts framework.
https://github.com/danielgindi/Charts.
Accessed: 2017-05-20.
[CLL+14]
Eun Kyoung Choe, Nicole B. Lee, Bongshin Lee, Wanda Pratt, and
Julie A Kientz. Understanding quantiﬁed-selfers’ practices in collect-
ing and exploring personal data. In Proceedings of the 32nd annual
ACM conference on Human factors in computing systems, 2014.
==PAGE:110==
98
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[CM07]
Nick Cawthon and Andrew Vande Moere. The eﬀect of aesthetic on
the usability of data visualization. 2007.
[Col]
Communicating color eﬃciently – red & green.
https://blog.
kissmetrics.com/communicating-color-efficiently/.
Ac-
cessed: 2017-05-20.
[den]
Denmark smartphone owners.
https://www.emarketer.com/
Article/Denmarks-Smartphone-Market-Nears-Saturation/
1012620. Accessed: 2017-05-20.
[fbc]
Fbcluster
framework.
https://github.com/infinum/
FBAnnotationClustering. Accessed: 2017-05-20.
[ﬂia]
Flic application. https://itunes.apple.com/dk/app/flic-app/
id977593793?mt=8. Accessed: 2017-05-30.
[ﬂib]
Flic button. https://flic.io. Accessed: 2017-05-20.
[ﬂic]
Flic
framework.
https://github.com/50ButtonsEach/
fliclib-ios. Accessed: 2017-05-20.
[fmd]
Fmdb framework.
https://github.com/ccgus/fmdb.
Accessed:
2017-05-20.
[goo]
Google forms. https://www.google.com/forms/about/. Accessed:
2017-05-20.
[Has05]
E Hassan. Recall Bias can be a Threat to Retrospective and Prospec-
tive Research Designs. The Internet Journal of Epidemiology, 2005.
[HB10]
Jeﬀrey Heer and Michael Bostock. Crowdsourcing Graphical Percep-
tion: Using Mechanical Turk to Assess Visualization Design. 2010.
[HSS+02]
Michael R Huﬀord, Arthur A Stone, Saul Shiﬀman, Joseph E
Schwartz, and Joan E Broderick. Paper vs. electronic diaries. 2002.
[JS86]
Kevin Jordan and Diane Schiano. Serial processing and the parallel-
lines illusion: Length contrast through relative spatial separation of
contours. 1986.
[KAH16]
Hänsel K., Alomainy A., and Haddadi H.
Large scale mood and
stress self-assessments on a smartwatch. In Proceedings of the 2016
ACM International Joint Conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous
Computing, 2016.
[Kha11]
Ehmer Khan. Diﬀerent Approaches to White Box Testing Technique
for Finding Errors. 2011.
==PAGE:111==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
99
[Kro12]
Alex Krouse. ipads, iphones, androids, and smartphones: Fda regu-
lation of mobile phone applications as medical devices. Ind. Health
L. Rev., 2012.
[KST11]
Misha Kay, Jonathan Santos, and Marina Takane. mhealth: New
horizons for health through mobile technologies. World Health Or-
ganization, 2011.
[LEC17]
Jakob Eg Larsen, Kasper Eskelund, and Thomas Blomseth Chris-
tiansen. Active Self-Tracking of Subjective Experience with a One-
Button Wearable: A Case Study in Military PTSD. In Proceedings
of the 2017 Symposium Computing and Mental Health at ACM CHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 2017.
[Lin02]
Stephen Link. Fechner, Gustav Theodor. 2002.
[Mac13]
I. Scott MacKenzie.
Human-Computer Interaction An Empirical
Research Perspective. Elsevier Inc., 2013.
[mar]
Marvelapp. https://marvelapp.com. Accessed: 2017-05-20.
[Mic16]
Konstantinos Michail. A Wearable System for Acquiring in-situ Ob-
servations. Thesis, 2016.
[mov]
Moves application. https://moves-app.com. Accessed: 2017-05-
20.
[nom]
Nomie application. https://nomie.io. Accessed: 2017-05-20.
[orb]
Orbit button. https://us.hbutler.co/en_us/orbit/. Accessed:
2017-05-20.
[Pat05]
Ron Patton. Software Testing (2nd edition). 2005.
[pop]
Pop prototype. https://marvelapp.com/1d91cji. Accessed: 2017-
05-20.
[RM83]
Larson R. and Csikszentmihalyi M.
The experience sampling
method. New Directions for Methodology of Social and Behavioral
Science. 1983.
[sat]
Satechi
button.
http://www.satechi.net/index.php/
satechi-bluetooth-button-series-home-button.
Accessed:
2017-05-20.
[SB12]
Conner T. S. and L. F. Barrett. Trends in ambulatory self-report:
the role of momentary experience in psychosomatic medicine. Psy-
chosomatic medicine, 2012.
==PAGE:112==
100
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[SCD+16]
Intille S., Haynes C., Maniar D., Ponnada A., and Manjourides
J. µEMA: Microinteraction-based ecological momentary assessment
(EMA) using a smartwatch. In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM Inter-
national Joint Conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing,
2016.
[sch]
Swiftcharts
framework.
https://github.com/i-schuetz/
SwiftCharts. Accessed: 2017-05-20.
[SF09]
Priti Shah and Eric Freedman. Bar and Line Graph Comprehension:
An Interaction of Top-Down and Bottom-Up Processes. 2009.
[SL91]
Ian Spence and Stephan Lewandowsky. Displaying proportions and
percentages. 1991.
[Spr07]
Bonnie Spring. Evidence-based practice in clinical psychology: What
it is, why it matters; what you need to know. 2007.
[ST92]
Diane Schiano and Barbara Tversky. Structure and strategy in en-
coding simpliﬁed graphs. 1992.
[swi]
Swift. https://swift.org. Accessed: 2017-05-20.
[swr]
Swreveal
framework.
https://github.com/John-Lluch/
SWRevealViewController. Accessed: 2017-05-20.
[tap]
Tap log application.
https://play.google.com/store/apps/
details?id=com.waterbear.taglog&hl=en.
Accessed:
2017-05-
20.
[VZS11]
Viswanath Venkatesh, Xiaojun Zhang, and Tracy A. Sykes. “Doc-
tors Do Too Little Technology”: A Longitudinal Field Study of an
Electronic Healthcare System Implementation. 2011.
[web]
Webner’s law example image. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Weber\T1\textendashFechner_law. Accessed: 2017-05-20.
[xco]
Xcode. https://developer.apple.com/xcode/. Accessed: 2017-
05-20.
[ZT97]
JeﬀZacks and Barbara Tversky. Bars and Lines: A Study of Graphic
Communication. 1997.
