==PAGE:1==
An interface for integration of
generated VHDL and C code on a
System-on-Chip radar back-end
Fabian Goerge
Kongens Lyngby 2017
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
Fraunhofer IPA
Department of Medical Engineering and Biotechnology
Nobelstr. 12,
70569 Stuttgart, Germany
https://www.ipa.fraunhofer.de/
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Prototyping on an FPGA requires skills in the design of digital systems and
skills in a hardware description language (HDL). A model based code generation
approach can be a high-level solution for easy, fast and eﬃcient development on
FPGAs without prior knowledge in either of them.
The integration of code generation is discussed on the basis of two radar back-
end Systems-On-a-Chip for a Single-Input and Single-Output (SISO) and a
Multiple-Input and Multiple-Output (MIMO) radar. Within that scope to in-
tegrate generated data processing algorithms the MIMO radar systems needed
to be designed ﬁrst. This thesis discusses the integration of generated code and
what needs to be done in order to integrate generated radar algorithms.
For the code generation the MathWorks based HDL-Coder and embedded coder
are presented. Based on an analysis of radar algorithms for linear frequency-
modulated continuous-wave radars the challenges for HDL Code generation are
discussed and example implementations are presented.
Generated code could be successfully integrated into the design of the SISO.
Extracts of radar algorithm using Simulink models that included Matlab Func-
tion blocks and Stateﬂow state charts could be proven to work in hardware. A
calibration algorithm was implemented but the model and HDL code did not
produce the same results and hence the veriﬁcation is missing.
The implementation of smaller components of radar data processing algorithms
could be achieved on the SISO. Further adaptation is needed for a complete
implementation. Challenges were the transfer of radar algorithms to an HDL
compatible design as well as the huge resources requirements of the algorithms.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at DTU Compute in fulﬁllment of the requirements
for acquiring an M.Sc. in Engineering. The thesis was written over the last
ﬁve month in collaboration with the Fraunhofer Institute for Manufacturing
Engineering and Automation (IPA) in Stuttgart.
The thesis deals with code generation and the integration of generated code
based on a radar back-end System-on-Chip based on a Xilinx Zynq. Therefore
the thesis consists of a description of the designs of two radar back-ends and
the integration of generated code. In the ﬁeld of code generation tools for HDL
and C Code generation are researched and the HDL and Embedded Coder are
described in detail.
Based on this diﬀerent high-level design constructs are
presented and their results shown and analyzed.
At the end, I would like to thank Jens Sparsø and Bernhard Kleiner for their
support and supervision.
Stuttgart, 01-June-2017
Fabian Goerge
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Problem Presentation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Project Plan
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Thesis Outline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Background and Related Work
5
2.1
The Basics of Radar . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.1
Doppler Eﬀect
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.1.2
Continuous-Wave Radar . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.1.3
Frequency-Modulated Continuous-Wave Radar . . . . . .
8
2.1.4
In-phase and Quadrature Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.1.5
Existing SoC Modules for Radar Signal Processing . . . .
10
2.2
Used Radars
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2.1
Research Project: FeuerWeRR
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2.2
SISO Radar Hardware . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.2.3
MIMO Radar Hardware . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.3
Introduction to Xilinx Zynq . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.3.1
AXI Basics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.3.2
Zynq Design on the SISO Radar
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.4
Code Generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.4.1
Existing HDL Generation Tools . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.4.2
Existing C Generation Tools
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
2.5
Co-Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
==PAGE:8==
vi
CONTENTS
3
MIMO Radar Back-end Design
27
3.1
MIMO Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.2
Updating the Input Sampling Design of the SISO . . . . . . . . .
29
3.3
ADC Related Design Modiﬁcations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.3.1
Analog Devices SPI
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.3.2
Power Savings
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
3.4
MIMO Design Update . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4
High-Level Code Generation for Radar Algorithms
39
4.1
Prototyping on a SoC with HDL and Embedded Coder . . . . . .
39
4.1.1
Applying the HDL Coder . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.1.2
Applying the Embedded Coder . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.2
Code Generation for Radar Algorithms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.2.1
FMCW Based Radar Algorithms . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.2.2
Data Rate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.2.3
Data Reduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
4.3
Co-Design for the Radar Hardware . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
5
Implementation
51
5.1
Code Generation Toolchain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
5.1.1
Integration of the VHDL Component into the SISO Design 54
5.1.2
Tcl Scripts
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
5.2
Analysis and Implementation of Radar Algorithms . . . . . . . .
56
5.2.1
HDL Compatible FFTs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
5.2.2
Converting not Supported Functions to HDL . . . . . . .
58
5.2.3
State Machines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
5.2.4
Utilizing BRAM
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
5.2.5
Proof of Concept for a CFAR Algorithm Implementation
64
5.3
Implementation of a Calibration Algorithm
. . . . . . . . . . . .
67
6
Results
71
6.1
Testing Approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
6.2
Results for the Calibration Algorithm
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
6.3
Limitation of Hardware Resources and Computation Speed
. . .
76
6.3.1
FFT Performance and Area . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
6.3.2
BRAM Size . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
7
Discussion and Reﬂection
79
7.1
MIMO Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
7.2
Toolchain and HDL Coder . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
7.3
Implementation of the Radar Algorithms . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
7.4
Resource and Computation Performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
8
Conclusion
85
==PAGE:9==
CONTENTS
vii
A Linux
87
A.1 Basics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
87
A.2 Device Drivers
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
88
A.3 Kernel and User Space . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
89
B Updating the MIMO IO Pins
91
C File Organization
95
D Setup and Installation of all Tools
99
E Programming the Flash on an FPGA Development Board
105
F Additional Figures
107
Bibliography
115
==PAGE:10==
viii
CONTENTS
==PAGE:11==
List of Abbreviations
ACP
Accelerator Coherency Port
ADC
Analog-to-Digital Converter
APU
Application Processing Unit
ASMD
Algorithmic State Machines with Datapath
AXI
Advanced eXtensible Interface
BRAM
Block RAM
CA
Cell averaging
CAN
Controller Area Network
CFAR
Constant False Alarm Rate
CORDIC
Coordinate Rotation Digital Computer
CSB
Chip Select Bar
CUT
Cell Under Test
CW
Continuous-Wave
DDR
Double Data Rate
DMA
Direct memory access
DSP
Digital Signal Processor
FFT
Fast Fourier Transformation
FIFO
First In First Out
FMCW
Frequency-Modulated Continuous-Wave
FPGA
Field Programmable Gate Array
FSBL
First Stage Boot Loader
FSM
Finite-state machine
GP
General Purpose
HDL
Hardware Description Language
HF
High Frequency
HP
High Performance
IMU
Inertial Measurement Unit
IP
Intellectual Property
==PAGE:12==
x
CONTENTS
IPA
Institute for Manufacturing Engineering and Automation
I/Q
In-phase and Quadrature
LFMCW
Linear FMCW
LSB
Least Signiﬁcant Bit
LUT
Look-Up Table
MBD
Model-Based Designs
MIMO
Multiple-Input and Multiple-Output
MISO
Master Input Slave Output
MOSI
Master Output Slave Input
MRCC
Multiple Region Clock Capable
MSB
Most Signiﬁcant Bit
MSPS
Mega Samples Per Second
OCM
On-Chip Memory
OS
Operating System
PL
Programmable Logic
PLL
Phase Locked Loop
PS
Processing System
Radar
RAdio Detection And Ranging
RAM
Random-Access Memory
ROM
Read Only Memory
SDK
Software Development Kit
SDRAM
Synchronous Dynamic Random-Access Memory
SISO
Single-Input and Single-Output
SoC
System-on-Chip
SoM
System-on-Module
SPI
Serial Peripheral Interface or Serial Port Interface
SRCC
Single Region Clock Capable
SSH
Secure Shell
TCP
Transmission Control Protocol
UART
Universal Asynchronous Receiver/Transmitter
UDP
User Datagram Protocol
UML
Uniﬁed Modeling Language
USB
Universal Serial Bus
VCO
Voltage Controlled Oscillator
VGA
Variable Gain Ampliﬁer
VHDL
Very High Speed Integrated Circuit HDL
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 1
Introduction
This chapter introduces the thesis by presenting the problem and giving an
overview of the used radar systems. Furthermore it mentions the main topics
which the project is related to. This chapter ends with an outline of the thesis.
1.1
Problem Presentation
The development of FPGA based solutions requires skills in the design of digital
systems and skills in using a hardware description language (HDL) such as
VHDL or Verilog. The traditional design relies on the hand written code which
can not only be time consuming to write but also be sensitive to errors. [1]
Besides requiring knowledge in the design of digital systems, designing on FPGA
also requires the ability to understand the lower level design tools (e.g. Vivado).
Tools operating at a higher level make it possible to generate HDL code using
a higher level language such as Matlab or a model based approach. Using these
high-level tools has the potential to fast, easier and more eﬃciently prototype
on FPGAs. These tools also open the development of algorithms for a wide
spectrum of developers. Within this thesis diﬀerent tools are analyzed and the
usage of the Matlab HDL and embedded C Coder are presented.
==PAGE:14==
2
Introduction
The usage of tools to generate HDL Code is analyzed and tested on the de-
velopment of a radar System-on-Chip (SoC) system for detecting humans and
changes in the environment. This SoC is currently in the development process
at the Fraunhofer IPA. The Fraunhofer IPA cooperates for this project with
the company Bosch, the Institute for Visualization and Interactive Systems,
Fraunhofer Institute for Applied Solid State Physics and the Institute of Signal
Processing and System Theory of the University of Stuttgart. The Fraunhofer
IPA is responsible for the development of the back-end of the radar sensor sys-
tem. The aim of the radar system is to detect small objects regardless of sight
with the help of a radar in the frequency range from 75 to 110 GHz.
The processing unit on the radar is a Xilinx Zynq SoC which consists both of
an FPGA and an ARM processor. In order to attain the ﬂexibility to use code
generation the existing hardware design must be extended with an interface,
which provides the capability to use all generated hardware subsystems and
organizes the communication with the hardware. The radar signal processing
algorithms (to detect the range and velocity of targets) can not only run on
the FPGA but also on the ARM. Hence the Co-Design technique is examined
in order to include the ARM in the signal processing. Another challenge is to
enable the user to integrate a variety of procedures and techniques to process
the radar signals correctly without limiting the eﬀectiveness of the system.
Within the scope of the research project two radar sensor systems for real-
time detection are being developed and researched. The project started with
the design and development of a single-input and single-output (SISO) radar
platform. At the same time the development of a multiple-input and multiple-
output (MIMO) radar platform started. This thesis covers also design changes
that were made to the SISO and contributions made to the MIMO design.
1.2
Project Plan
In a related master thesis the SISO system was successfully set up. The Zynq
includes an ARM processor on which an embedded Linux system runs. The
data from the radar is sampled into the FPGA and forwarded to a PC without
any radar data processing. The goal of the thesis is also to further develop the
MIMO radar system.
To get a better understanding of the scope of the project the following divides
the work in a theoretical and practical part: To start with, an initial training of
the Linux based development tools (Vivado, Xilinx SDK and PetaLinux) and the
code generation tools are required to understand their potentials. A literature
==PAGE:15==
1.3 Thesis Outline
3
research on the development of radar algorithms and on Frequency-Modulated
Continuous-Wave(FMCW) radar system helps to understand the challenges that
are to be faced for generating code for radar data processing. Furthermore the
theoretical part includes the development of the signal ﬂow diagram and the
design changes for the MIMO radar system. Based on which the circuit layout
and the embedded code can be developed. The theoretical part also covers data
reduction or preprocessing suggestions for a Radar FMCW implementation and
the documentation for the toolchain and algorithms.
The practical part covers the development of the radar hardware for the MIMO
system. Moreover is the practical part about the implementation of the radar
analysis algorithms (distance and Doppler measurements) in a high-level design
language such as Matlab or a model based approach.
Also applying of the
developed toolchain for the implementation of the radar analysis algorithms on
the Zynq of the SISO radar system is part of the practical work.
The expected project outcome of the thesis can also be separated into a tech-
nical and scientiﬁc part. On the technical sight the design is extended by a
software interface that integrates generated algorithms for the radar signal pro-
cessing. Thereby the SISO implementation of radar algorithms is evaluated on
the hardware and the MIMO design is simulated and tested on hardware using a
manipulated SISO board. The scientiﬁc part covers a presentation on the eﬀec-
tiveness of the integration of generated code. In doing so an analysis will show
whether the integration can deliver the required performance and whether this
code generation method can be used for radar signal processing prototyping.
1.3
Thesis Outline
In this thesis the designs of a SISO and a MIMO radar back-end and the integra-
tion of generated code are presented. At ﬁrst some information about radar, the
Xilinx Zynq, Code generation and Co-Design are presented. Then the design
contributions to the MIMO design are shown. The following highlights the con-
cept of how to simple prototype using high-level tools on an embedded system.
It thereby focuses on the HDL and Embedded Coder from MathWorks. Based
on the radar data processing computation diﬀerent high-level design constructs
are presented. Finally the results are shown and the performance is theoretically
analyzed. This thesis is structured as follows:
• chapter 2 provides a general background on the basics of radar, elaborates
on FMCW radars and explains the design of the radar. It is especially
==PAGE:16==
4
Introduction
focused on the Xilinx Zynq structure and on the design done by the prede-
cessor. This chapter also covers the research of diﬀerent code generation
tools and highlights the background of Co-Design.
• chapter 3 highlights the design choices of the MIMO back-end. Based on
an overview of the system are the design modiﬁcations related to the ADC
interfacing presented. Moreover covers this chapter a bug tracing report
on the SISO design, because it was initially not working correctly.
• chapter 4 explains how the HDL and embedded coder are supposed to be
used as high-level development tools. Furthermore this chapter explains
the radar algorithms and explains the used range-Doppler processing algo-
rithms. Moreover data rate and data reduction mechanisms are presented.
Also a Co-Design approach for the given system is discussed.
• chapter 5 starts with the description of the code generation toolchain that
was developed for the HDL prototyping purposes. It also highlights how
the generated VHDL components were integrated into the existing design.
The second part of this chapter presents the implementation of diﬀerent
constructs needed for the radar algorithms. The implementation chapter
ends with the presentation of a radar calibration algorithm.
• chapter 6 presents the testing approach, results and shows the performance
and hardware limitations.
• chapter 7 is a discussion and reﬂection of the design and the code genera-
tion.
• chapter 8 concludes this thesis.
• In Appendix A some additional background information on Linux are
added. Appendix B includes design modiﬁcations of the IO pins for the
MIMO design. Moreover in Appendix C the structure of the handed in
ﬁles is described. Appendix D explains the setup and installation of all
tools and Appendix E shows how to program the ﬂash of an FPGA de-
velopment board.
Appendix F shows additional ﬁgures that might be
interesting but are not relevant to understand the content of the thesis.
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 2
Background and Related
Work
This chapter provides the background knowledge and presents related work
relevant to this thesis and is divided into ﬁve parts. It starts by explaining
the basic concepts of radar technology and elaborates on frequency-modulated
continuous-wave radars which the hardware builds up on.
The second part
describes the related research project and describes the radars that are used in
the scope of this thesis. In the third part the Xilinx Zynq is described and the
work done by the predecessor. In the following section diﬀerent code generation
tools are presented. The ﬁfth part closes this chapter with a brief look at the
principles of Co-Design.
2.1
The Basics of Radar
Radar stands for RAdio Detection And Ranging. With that abbreviation the
main purpose of detecting an object and determining its range is already deﬁned.
The term range covers the distance, height, direction, velocity and angular po-
sition of a target. Depending on the application additional information can be
added as for example size or shape of the object. [2, Chapter 1]
==PAGE:18==
6
Background and Related Work
Radars are based on radio waves with frequencies that are usually in the range
of 1 GHz to 100 GHz. Radars use the reﬂection of electromagnetic waves from a
target in order to compute the target information. The reﬂected signal captured
by the receiving antenna and the frequency, amplitude, phase, polarisation as
well as the receiving time is evaluated for localization and mapping of a target.
[2, Chapter 1] Comparing the amplitude and polarisation from the sending to
the received signal reveals information about the size, structure and material
properties.
The diﬀerence in the phase determine the position and distance
measurement. Changes in the frequency indicate changes in the state of motion
of the object. [2, Chapter 2] The structure and size of the object can also be
concluded from the intensity of the reﬂected signal. Hence radars are commonly
used to determine the position, properties and state of motion of diﬀerent tar-
gets.
The quality of the measurement can be deﬁned in terms of operating
range, resolution and accuracy of measurement. [2, Chapter 1]
The energy of the signal is responsible for the reliability of the detection. The
spatial direction depends on the tracking system and antenna. The waveform of
the signal determines the accuracy and the resolution. The range of the signal
is connected to the delay of the echo signal. [3, Chapter 1]
Many diﬀerent radar techniques exist. A majority of radars are pulse radars.
A pulse radar measures the time for a pulse to reach the target and its echo to
return. The measured time can then be converted into a distance:
R = t
2 · c0
(2.1)
where R is the range, t the receiving time and c0 the speed of light. A pulse radar
can measure the distance and the direction of the target. A pulse radar switches
between transmitting and receiving. With changing the pulse repetition rate can
the radar either better detect short range or long range signals. [2, Chapter 1.1]
A diﬀerent approach is to instead transmit a stable frequency with a constant
amplitude continuously through the measurement. This is called a continuous
wave radar from which two types exist: unmodulated continuous-wave and mod-
ulated continuous-wave. It is more accurate to compare the returned frequency
with the outgoing frequency than measuring the pulse return.
[2, Chapter
7.1] The radar system used in this thesis uses frequency modulated continu-
ous wave transmission. Hence this section will focus on both continuous-wave
radar (subsection 2.1.2) and frequency-modulated continuous-wave radar (sub-
section 2.1.3).
The choice of frequency band depends on the operating requirements. Decision
factors could be for example signal range, desired resolution, size of the antenna
and others. The bigger the wavelength the worse the angular resolution but
==PAGE:19==
2.1 The Basics of Radar
7
the better the transparency. Transparency is the ability to let through electro-
magnetic waves. [2, Chapter 1.3] The radar system used in this application is a
W-band radar. The frequency in a W-band ranges from 75 to 110 GHz and the
corresponding wavelengths range from 2,7 to 4 mm. W-Band is being used for
millimeter-wave radar. Hence the W-band is ideal to detect small objects. [4]
With the term radar usually air-defence systems or marine radars are associated
but radar can also be used for indoor navigation ([5]) or health care applications
such as fall detection radar([6]).
2.1.1
Doppler Eﬀect
Essential for measuring range and velocity is knowledge about how the Doppler
eﬀect changes the waveforms. The Doppler eﬀect (also called Doppler shift) is
the change of the frequency (compression or stretching), due to relative motion
between sender and receiver.
The Doppler shift is deﬁned as the diﬀerence
between the source signal (f0) and the reﬂected signal (fR):
fD = fR −f0 = 2vr
λ
(2.2)
As it can be seen it can also be put into relation of the radial velocity (vr) and
wavelength (λ). Hence the speed of an object can be measured with the help of
the Doppler eﬀect. [3, Chapter 1]
2.1.2
Continuous-Wave Radar
A continuous-wave radar sends, as the name hints, a continuous signal. Thus the
received signal will be received while transmitting. To distinguish the transmit-
ted and received signal frequency dependent separation using the Doppler eﬀect
can be used. Another option would be to use modulation. An unmodulated
continuous-wave radar is incapable of measuring the targets distance, because
there is no timing mark. But it can measure speed using the Doppler-frequency.
[2, Chapter 7.1]
A sender sends high frequency radio waves in the direction of the antenna. If the
wave hits an obstacle will part of it be reﬂected (echo signal). The echo signal of
a moving object is shifted in comparison to the transmitted frequency, because
of the Doppler eﬀect. The target does not move directly towards the radar in
==PAGE:20==
8
Background and Related Work
most cases. Hence it needs to be distinguished between the radial velocity (vr)
and the target velocity (vt). They are in the relation:
vr = vz · cos(γ)
(2.3)
where γ is the angle between the target and radar. [2, Chapter 7.1]
The maximum transmission power is limited by the over coupling between sender
and receiver, because at some point weak echo signals will not be distinguishable
out of the signal mix (continuously outgoing signal and incoming echo). That is
why usually separate antennas are used: one for sending and one for receiving.
[3, Chapter 10]
2.1.3
Frequency-Modulated Continuous-Wave Radar
Frequency-modulated continuous-wave (FMCW) radars change their outgoing
frequency while measuring.
A common type are linear FMCW (LFMCW),
where a linear decreasing or increasing frequency is used.
As mentioned in
the previous section CW radars can not measure distance, because there is no
timing mark that enables the system to time the transmitted and received signal.
Transmitting a signal that decreases or increases in the frequency periodically
oﬀers a time reference and can then be used to measure the distance. When
receiving an echo signal the frequency will be delayed by ∆t. This can be seen
as a diﬀerence in phase when comparing the transmitted and received signal.
Hence the range can be calculated as shown in Equation 2.4 where c0 is the
speed of light (299.792.458 m
s ).
R = c0|∆t|
2
(2.4)
In case the reﬂected object is moving then the receiving signal includes besides
the diﬀerence frequency (∆f) a Doppler-frequency (fD). With the help of ∆f
can the radar compute the distance. With fD can the radar conclude the velocity
of the object.
FMCW radars include a voltage controlled oscillator (VCO), which generates an
outgoing frequency that depends on the control voltage. The modulated signal
form is usually generated using direct digital synthesis. FMCW are for example
used for distance sensors or altimeter frequency modulated radar and they diﬀer
in how the frequency is modulated.
==PAGE:21==
2.1 The Basics of Radar
9
The modulation pattern is selected depending on the measurement purpose.
Sawtooth modulations are for example used for maritime navigation radar,
where a large range is required and the inﬂuence of the Doppler-frequency is
not so important. A triangular modulation oﬀers easy separation of ∆f and fD.
A use of square-wave modulation would be advisable for close range scenarios
where an accurate distance measurement is required. [7]
Another form of modulation is fast chirp modulation or also know as chirp
sequence modulation. A chirp signal is a time-stretched frequency modulated
signal. Fast chirp modulation is based on sawtooth transmission that have a
steep slope. An example is shown in Figure 2.1. As it can be seen from the
ﬁgure a number of successive frequency ramps sweep through the bandwidth B.
One frequency ramp is also refereed to as a chirp. There is a constant repetition
of those chirps with the time T. A number of Fast Fourier Transformations
(FFTs) are required in order to compute the range and velocity information.
Increasing the number of chirps will improve the velocity resolution but at the
same time the measurement time increases as well. A big advantage of fast
chirp modulation is that range and velocity can be processed independently
which enables simultaneous processing. [8]
t
fT X
. . .
measurement time
T/2
B
T
Figure 2.1: Chirp Sequence based on [8]
In the project one radar measurement consists of 160 ramps (Ramp sequence
shown in Figure 2.1). The length of a ramp up phase is 100 µs, and after a
100 µs starts a new ramp. One measurement hence takes: 160 · 200µs = 32ms.
Thus the maximum possible frequency is 31,25 Hz. The initial goal for the radar
system was to achieve a frequency of 30 Hz.
==PAGE:22==
10
Background and Related Work
2.1.4
In-phase and Quadrature Data
A ﬁnal subsection covers I/Q Data which is a signal representation used for the
received radar data. The received echo signal is complex. Hence if there would
be just one analog-to-digital converter (ADC) then the real part of the complex
signal would be preserved but the complex part (phase information) would be
lost. As it was pointed out previously the phase information is essential for
measuring of the distance.
In order to take the imaginary part into consideration the phase of the trans-
mitted signal must be phase-shifted by 90 degrees. The demodulation of the
in-phase data (I-Data) will be achieved with the original phase of the transmit-
ted frequency. The demodulation with the 90 degree phase shifted signal results
in the quadrature-phase data (Q-Data). After that both analog signals can be
converted and the digital signals can then be processed. [9]
Figure 2.2: Converting the input signal based on [9]
2.1.5
Existing SoC Modules for Radar Signal Processing
The subsection looks at existing SoC Modules and their radar processing ap-
proach and capabilities. Three examples are shown here: XeThru, an Inﬁneon
and Texas Instruments SoC.
The XeThru development platform for a radar sensor module based on an At-
mel microcontroller can be programmed using Matlab, Python or C++. Their
products are based on ultra-high resolution impulse radar. The company oﬀers
both designs consisting of three diﬀerent sub components: a radar subsystem,
==PAGE:23==
2.2 Used Radars
11
antenna board and the microcontroller board and a design on a single board.
Their goal is to use the radar modules in smart home environments. Besides the
typical distance measures are their SoC also capable of seeing through objects
(walls, doors, ...), detecting motion and they can determine the presence of a
person. Furthermore they oﬀer diﬀerent projects running on the module as for
example respiration monitoring purposes. [10]
Inﬁneon developed a Radar-in-Package Sensor for the use in driver assistance
systems to recognize targets in a distance of up to 250 meters.
The radar
operates at a range of 77 GHz. The radar data is processed on a multicore
32-bit microcontroller and the information about the environment is supplied
to the attached system using the CAN bus. [11]
Texas Instruments AWR1642 is another Radar SoC solution in the 77 GHz
range.
The system uses the FMCW radar technology.
For the radar data
processing are two DSPs and a Dual-Core ARM microcontroller used. The SoC
oﬀers diﬀerent interfaces as Serial Peripheral Interface (SPI), CAN, UART and
others. [12]
2.2
Used Radars
As already brieﬂy mentioned in the introduction the Fraunhofer IPA is part
of the development of radar systems for detecting humans and changes in the
environment. The task of the Fraunhofer IPA is to develop the back-end of a
radar sensor system. The aim of the radar is to detect small objects regardless
of sight with the help of a radar in the frequency range from 75 to 110 GHz. The
research project is funded within the scope of the FeuerWeRR Project which
will be brieﬂy summarized in the following subsection. After that the developed
prototype is presented and the plans for a new radar development are described.
Furthermore the software and hardware developments on the Xilinx Zynq are
presented.
2.2.1
Research Project: FeuerWeRR
The Fraunhofer IPA cooperates for this project with the company Bosch, the
Institute for Visualization and Interactive Systems (VIS), Fraunhofer Institute
for Applied Solid State Physics (IAF) and the Institute of Signal Processing
and System Theory of the University of Stuttgart (ISS). All these parties work
within the scope of the FeuerWeRR Project (translation: image camera with
==PAGE:24==
12
Background and Related Work
enhanced reality using radar that is designed for use in ﬁre departments). The
project is funded by the German Federal Ministry of Education and Research.
The aim of the project is to combine a radar system with an infrared camera for
ﬁre ﬁghters. The purpose of the infrared camera is to give a general overview of
the surroundings when a smoke ﬁlled or dark environment does not allow that.
The radar completes the system by delivering measurements about the distance
to humans or obstacles, which the camera cannot supply. Besides delivering
reliable information the goal is also to develop a robust and light-weight system.
All high frequency (HF) related developments are done by the Fraunhofer IAF,
which includes the design of the HF-boards and design of the antenna. The
company Bosch has the goal to improve the navigation and sensor data fusion.
At the VIS all design decisions regarding the interactivity are taken into con-
sideration, as for example analyzing the advantages and design of handheld and
head mounted solutions. The ISS is in charge of the development of the radar
algorithms using fast chirp sequence modulation. At the Fraunhofer IPA the
back-end of the radar system is developed. The following subsections go into
more detail of the development from the Fraunhofer IPA perspective relevant
for this thesis.
2.2.2
SISO Radar Hardware
The Single Input Single Output (SISO) radar consists of three PCB boards: A
HF front-end board, and the back-end consisting of a digital controller board
and a System-on-Module (SoM) board from the company Enclustra called the
Mercury ZX5 1. Figure 2.3 shows a sketch of the design.
The purpose of the HF module is to transmit and receive the radio signal. The
signal is generated with a VCO and a Phase Locked Loop (PLL). Together with
the VCO the PLL generates the outgoing signal. There are a number of high
frequency components necessary for the processing of the analog signal that are
not shown in the ﬁgure. Of interest are the variable gain ampliﬁer (VGA) that
either dampen or amplify the I and Q signal, representing the measured radar
data.
The VGAs on the HF board as well as other HF components can be
conﬁgured by using SPI. As it can be seen the sending and receiving happens
on one board using one antenna.
The digital controller board was developed at the Fraunhofer IPA and is con-
nected to the HF board and the Mercury ZX5 board. The digital controller
board converts the analog radar data using an ADC and passes it on to the
1http://www.enclustra.com/en/products/system-on-chip-modules/mercury-zx5/
==PAGE:25==
2.2 Used Radars
13
Mercury ZX5 board, where it is processed. The board holds additionally dif-
ferent sensors, such as an inertial measurement unit (IMU), barometer. Those
sensors are also connected to the Mercury ZX5 board. Moreover is the con-
trol board responsible for power management and holds the periphery such as
Ethernet, UART and a micro SD-card slot.
The main component on the Mercury ZX5 board is the Xilinx’s Zynq 7030 SoC
consisting of an FPGA and a Dual-Core ARM processor. The SoM includes 1
GB of DDR3 SDRAM and some NAND and NOR Flash as additional memory
components. Furthermore provides the SoM the circuitry required to support
the physical layer of Ethernet and USB 2.0.
Figure 2.3: Simpliﬁed model of the SISO Hardware
==PAGE:26==
14
Background and Related Work
2.2.3
MIMO Radar Hardware
The Multiple Input Multiple Output (MIMO) radar was at the start of the
thesis in early development stages. In contrast to the SISO radar the design
of the MIMO radar is more complex, while the general structure of the boards
remains similar to the SISO concept.
Most changes can be seen on the HF-part, which is in this design split into
three boards. A PLL board and a sending (Tx) and receiving (Rx) board. In
contrast to the SISO the MIMO HF part generates two I and Q signals. Hence
the digital controller board needs the double amount of ADCs. Another change
in the design of the digital controller board is that each board gets assigned
an own voltage regulator for maximum decoupling. The Mercury ZX5 board
stayed the same, because the hardware is independent from the radar used.
In the MIMO approach sending and receiving is separated. Hence there is one
antenna for receiving and one for sending. This has the eﬀect that the maximum
range will decrease from 50 meters for SISO to 20 meters. For SISO the radiation
angle is narrow, which bundles the energy up. In contrast to that for MIMO a
wider distribution of the radar signal is required, because of the two antennas.
2.3
Introduction to Xilinx Zynq
As already mentioned the main component of the radar hardware is a Xilinx’s
Zynq SoC. This section ﬁrst describes the Zynq Architecture and focuses on the
AXI Bus. After that the existing Zynq design on the SISO radar is described.
The Zynq is split into two parts: a Processing System (PS) and a Programmable
Logic (PL). The PS is dual core ARM Cortex A9 dual core processor and has
a maximum frequency of 1 GHz. Furthermore consists the PS of a number of
peripherals and is capable of running full operating systems (e.g. Linux).
The PL is based on the Xilinx 7-series FPGA architecture. In contrary to the
ﬁx architecture of the PS is the PL completely ﬂexible. An AXI Bus system
connects the PL and PS while providing high bandwidth and low latency. A
greatly simpliﬁed overview is shown in Figure 2.4.
The two ARM cores are included in the Application Processing Unit (APU).
They each have a Floating Point Unit and Memory Management Unit as well as
an individual 32 kB big level 1 cache and a shared 512 kB larger level 2 cache.
==PAGE:27==
2.3 Introduction to Xilinx Zynq
15
Figure 2.4: Simpliﬁed Overview of the Zynq architecture
The APU also includes a 256 kB On-Chip Memory (OCM). A sketch of the APU
can also be seen in Figure 2.5. Besides the interfaces to the PL oﬀers the PS also
a vast amount of external interfaces such as SPI, I2C, Universal Asynchronous
Receiver Transmitter (UART), SD-Card, USB, Ethernet and standard General
Purpose Input/Output (GPIO).
On the PL the look-up tables (LUTs) can be used as one 6-input LUT (64-
bit) or as two 5-input LUTs (32-bit) with separate outputs. For storing data
both block RAM and distributed RAM can be used. Block RAM modules can
be implemented as First In First Out (FIFO) buﬀers, Random-Access Memory
(RAM) or Read Only Memory (ROM). One block RAM can store up to 36
kilo bit (kb) and can be used as one 36 kb RAM or as two 18 kb RAMs. It
is possible to achieve larger capacities by combining several block RAMs. An
alternative to block RAM is distributed RAM which is generated using the
LUTs logic. Distributed RAM requires a signiﬁcant amount of LUTs for storing
larger data sets and routing delays occur due to an increase in logic which has a
negative eﬀect on the timing performance. Hence only small memories should be
implemented with distributed RAM. DSP slices are specialist blocks optimized
for high-speed arithmetic operations. They usually consist of a pre- and post-
adder/subtractor and a multiplier. The inputs have a deﬁned wordlength but
can be extended using a combination of multiple DSP slices. The for this project
used Zynq 7030 PL oﬀers 78.600 LUTs and 157.200 Flip-Flops, 1060 kB of block
RAM and 400 DSP Slices. [13]
2.3.1
AXI Basics
The Advanced eXtensible Interface (AXI) was originally developed by ARM and
further developed by Xilinx. The basic idea is that all modules / Intellectual
Property (IP) cores communicate using the same interface. Xilinx pushed the
==PAGE:28==
16
Background and Related Work
AXI4 development into a direction to be an optimal interconnecting technology
for the use in FPGAs.
The general purpose of the AXI Bus is to connect the processor with the IP
cores. It needs to be made a distinction between three diﬀerent AXI protocols:
AXI4 for high performance memory-mapped links, AXI4-Lite for simpliﬁed links
(low throughput) and AXI4-Stream for high-speed streaming data. [14]
The interface between PS and PL is done via a set of point to point connections.
There are nine AXIs split into three diﬀerent ones:
• four 32-bit AXI General Purpose Port (GP)
• four 32/64-bit AXI High Performance Port (HP)
• one 64-bit AXI Accelerator Coherency Port (ACP)
The types of interface diﬀer in the data width, number of channels and in the
resulting data rate.
An interconnect manages traﬃc between attached AXI
interfaces. The purpose of an AXI Interconnect is also to map master device to
several slave devices. For HP and ACP the master has to be on the PL side.
GP can support masters on both sides. A visualization of the ports is shown in
Figure 2.5. [13]
Figure 2.5: Overview of the connection between PS and PL
==PAGE:29==
2.3 Introduction to Xilinx Zynq
17
When designing an own IP Core that is supposed to use the AXI interface
depending on the protocol diﬀerent signals need to be managed.
When for
example designing an AXI4-Stream interface then the following signals need to
be taken into consideration: TDATA, TVALID, TREADY and TLAST. TDATA
is the data that is supposed to be send while TVALID is high. The TREADY
signal indicates that the receiver is ready to receive data. The TLAST deﬁnes
the packet boundary, by indicating the end of a packet. An example is shown
in Figure 2.6. [14]
ACLK
TDATA
D0
D1
D3
D3
D4
D5
TVALID
TLAST
TREADY
Figure 2.6: AXI4-Stream example Waveform
2.3.2
Zynq Design on the SISO Radar
This subsection summarizes the main achievements done by [15], which are the
foundation for this project. The thesis done by the predecessor describes the
design of the embedded system which is based on the Zynq 7030 platform, that
consists of an ARM processor and an FPGA.
The author describes the design decisions of the embedded system including the
choice of operating system, kernel development as well as driver setup and the
design of the Zynq platform using Vivado. This subsection brieﬂy summarizes
his main points relevant for this project.
2.3.2.1
Operating System and Kernel
An operating system (OS) was favored over a bare metal environment, because
an OS is more stable, supports a variety of drivers by default and the possibility
to program the OS over the network. Linux was chosen as an operating system
since it can easily be adapted for embedded systems.
To build the Linux Kernel the PetaLinux SDK oﬀered by Xilinx was used. The
device tree can be generated with the help of a Vivado project. Furthermore
oﬀers the PetaLinux SDK possibilities to conﬁgure the kernel using a graphic
==PAGE:30==
18
Background and Related Work
interface and conﬁgure the root ﬁle system. The Enclustra ZX5 Board is not
supported by the tool. Hence changes in the device tree and First Stage Boot
Loader (FSBL) were required. [15, Chapter 5.1]
2.3.2.2
Zynq Design
The I and Q radar data is received over two parallel channels which have the
size of 14-bit. After sampling the data, its size was changed to 16-bit to simplify
the computation eﬀort on the ARM. The input frequency rate is 10 MHz. The
measurement data is stored in the 1 GB sized DDR SDRAM.
A simpliﬁcation of the block design can be seen in Figure 2.7. A VHDL IP Core
called the parallel sampler controls the sampling and transmitting of the input
signals. The AXI data is then connected to a FIFO provided by Xilinx. The
purpose of the FIFO is to synchronize the data stream to 100 MHz. The data is
passed on to a DMA which acts as a component to exchange the measurement
data between the FPGA and ARM. The input to the DMA is a stream interface
and the output is a AXI4 interface. Hence its purpose is to convert between
two bus systems.
So far stream oriented communication served its purpose,
because no addressing was required. But storing the data into the DDR memory
requires addressing. As it can be seen from the block design there are also some
interconnects required. The interconnects convert between AXI3 and AXI4 bus
interfaces and also provide multiplexing.
Figure 2.7: Simpliﬁed Vivado block design overview
The design of the parallel sampler IP Core is shown in Figure 2.8. It consists of
two generated components for the AXI Master and Slave interfaces. Which helps
creating an AXI 4 data stream interface. The parallel sampler logic controls
based on two Finite State Machines (FSM) the measurement and the data that
is supposed so be transmitted.
For the data exchange from PL to PS the AXI HP with master on the PL was
selected, because it satisﬁes the speed requirements and does not interfere with
==PAGE:31==
2.3 Introduction to Xilinx Zynq
19
Figure 2.8: Design of the Parallel Sampler based on [15, Figure 31]
the rest of the system. The AXI GP solution could only deliver data rates of 23-
28 MB/s and was for that reason excluded. The AXI ACP is directly connected
to the level 2 cache. This approach was excluded, because the amount of data
was bigger then the size of the cache which would result in mutual blocking of
the CPU and the ACP participant. [15, Chapter 5.3]
AXI HP required the use and setup of Direct Memory Access (DMA). The AXI
uses the memory interconnect and DDR memory controller.
The maximum
clock frequency the AXI HP can operate at is 250 MHz. The memory intercon-
nect and FIFOs can run at a frequency of 355 MHz and the maximum frequency
of the DDR memory controller is 533 MHz, which is half of the DDR memory
(1066 MHz). Only one AXI HP channel is used, to increase performance more
channels could be selected. [15, Chapter 5.3]
The connection between PC and the radar system is based on Ethernet. Based
on that for transmitting the measurement data was UDP used. This allows a
maximum of 65.500 data bytes per packet. Furthermore was SSH activated so
that projects can be deployed to the system using SSH. [15, Chapter 5.4]
2.3.2.3
Linux Drivers and Application
On the Zynq runs an embedded Linux that was build using the PetaLinux
Software Development Tool Kit (SDK). More information on Linux in general
can be found in Appendix A.
Linux works with a virtual address space, but the DMA needs physically con-
tiguous addresses.
A new DMA driver was developed, because the supplied
==PAGE:32==
20
Background and Related Work
Xilinx DMA driver did not work. With the help of a driver a DMA transfer can
be initiated and the ending of a measurement be awaited.
In the user space of the Linux exists a measurement application. This applica-
tion starts by initializing the UDP, DMA and the ADC sampler. After that the
DMA is set up to wait for incoming Data. A start signal starts the measurement.
While the measurement is running the previous data set is send to the PC using
UDP. Once the UDP transfer is ﬁnished and the DMA indicated saving, a new
set of a measurement cycle to the DDR memory starts the processes again. [15,
Chapter 5.5]
2.4
Code Generation
This section looks at both code generation tools for generating HDL code and
for C code. First a list of existing tools is presented. With code generation the
mechanism to create algorithms using a model or code at a higher abstraction
level is understood. In the ﬁeld of software engineering code generation is already
a method to enhance the code quality while also shortening the development
time. [16]
2.4.1
Existing HDL Generation Tools
There are many diﬀerent tools for generating HDL code. There are tools from
both the two leading FPGA manufacturers Xilinx and Intel FPGA as well as
independent companies. A summary is shown in Table 2.1 and the capabilities
of the tools are elaborated on in the following.
Xilinx oﬀers two diﬀerent tools for automatic code generation. The Xilinx High-
Level Synthesis (HLS) can convert functions written in C, C++, SystemC and
OpenCL kernel into VHDL or Verilog code. Special libraries provided by Xil-
inx allow optimal design. The generated code can then easily be exported for
example for the Vivado IP catalog, to use it as an IP block. Furthermore oﬀers
the co-simulation to create testbenches based on the testbench written in the
higher level language. [17]
The Xilinx Systems Generator for DSP is a high-level tool for creating eﬃciently,
highly parallel DSP algorithms using Simulink and Matlab. It claims to provide
developers inexperienced with FPGAs to quickly develop quality FPGA imple-
mentations.
Within the Simulink library there are a number of Xilinx DSP
==PAGE:33==
2.4 Code Generation
21
blocksets that can be used for the automatic code generation. The Xilinx DSP
blockset includes simple blocks such as adders and multipliers, but also more
complex blocks such as FFTs, ﬁlters or memory.
Not only Simulink models
are supported but also non-algorithmic Matlab blocks as for example a state
machine. Also co-simulation is supported. [18]
Code generated using any Xilinx tool can only be used for Xilinx Devices. Even
if the VHDL code would be hardware independent the end user licence agree-
ments 2 prohibit users to use the VHDL code or Bitstream for non-Xilinx De-
vices.
DSP Builder for Intel FPGAs is the pendant to the Xilinx Systems Generator
for DSP. It also uses Simulink to automatically generate HDL code. Besides
generating the HDL code the tool also oﬀers script based integration into the
Quartus Prime software and interaction with the ModelSim simulator. Depend-
ing on the clock frequency, target device and other constraints oﬀers the DSP
Builder diﬀerent optimizations such as for example pipelining to achieve timing
closure. [19]
Another Matlab and Simulink based approach is to use the HDL Coder, which
generates synthesizeable VHDL and Verilog code. Not only Matlab or Simulink
can be used to generate HDL code but also Stateﬂow Charts, which for example
enable the developer to easily create state machines. Furthermore oﬀers the
HDL Coder options to highlight the critical path and estimates the hardware
resource utilization. It also oﬀers a traceability between the generated code and
the Matlab coder or Simulink model. The HDL Coder includes the HDL Work-
ﬂow Advisor, which is a tool to set up several stages of the FPGA design process.
It can check the model for compatibility, automatically ﬁx some incompatible
constructs and oﬀer a variety of further setting and optimization conﬁgurations.
However ﬂoating point types are not supported. Everything for HDL Code gen-
eration needs to be converted to ﬁxed point. MathWorks provides a tool called
the Fixed-Point Converter to accelerate the conversion process. [20]
National Instruments supports the high-level FPGA design using NI LabVIEW
FPGA and NI Multisim. NI LabVIEW FPGA is an extension of the graphical
development environment LabVIEW that enables the design of FPGAs on spe-
cial National Instruments reconﬁgurable I/O (RIO) hardware. NI LabVIEW
provides a number of IP libraries as well as a simulator.
NI Multisim is a
software designed for the design of circuits with a build in SPICE simulation
environment.
It can also be used to generate VHDL code on the base of a
programmable logic device (PLD) schematic. The developer can build a digital
circuit based on available logic gates, adders, comparators, Flip-Flops and other
2goo.gl/YEo4np
==PAGE:34==
22
Background and Related Work
blocks and convert the resulting circuit into VHDL code. There is no option to
automatically create a testbench. [21]
A research based project called vMagic (VHDL Manipulation And Generation
Interface) oﬀers the manipulation of existing code and generation of new VHDL
code based on Java. It is a framework for implementing code generation. [22]
Another diﬀerent research based tool is the model driven approach to use the
Uniﬁed Modeling Language (UML) to generate VHDL code.
In a research
project it was shown that it is possible to automatically generate VHDL code
from UML models using an extension of a tool called GenERTiCA (Generation
of Embedded Real-Time Code based on Aspects). Using UML to generate soft-
ware is already supported by a number of commercial tools and their approach
oﬀers an extension to VHDL. [23]
Table 2.1: Summary of tools to generate HDL code
Tool
From
To
Platform
Xilinx HLS
C, C++, SystemC,
Verilog/VHDL
Xilinx
OpenCL Kernel
Xilinx System
Simulink, Matlab
Verilog/VHDL
Xilinx
Generator
Altera DSP Builder
Simulink
Verilog/VHDL
Intel FPGAs
HDL Coder
Simulink, Matlab
Verilog/VHDL
Independent
NI LabVIEW FPGA
LabVIEW
(VHDL)
Xilinx (NI)
NI Multisim
Multisim Digital
VHDL
Independent
Logic
vMagic
Java
VHDL
Independent
UML - GenERTiCA
UML
VHDL
Independent
2.4.2
Existing C Generation Tools
MathWorks also oﬀers diﬀerent products for generating C code. The Matlab
Coder can generate from Matlab standalone readable C and C++ code. The
Simulink Coder oﬀers to generate code from Simulink models, Matlab and State-
ﬂow charts. The Simulink Coder extends the Matlab Coder and can also gen-
erate Code for real-time applications. The Embedded Coder is an extension
of both the Matlab and Simulink Coder. It includes code generation features
important for embedded systems by oﬀering optimizations for memory usage,
speed and simplicity. [24]
Also National Instruments oﬀers generation of C code using the graphical pro-
gramming environment LabVIEW. The generated algorithms are portable to
==PAGE:35==
2.5 Co-Design
23
any desired processor. The C coder oﬀers a variety of options for the C code
generation. All the virtual instruments (VIs) are mapped into separate C ﬁles
and managed by an overall main. [25]
The Eclipse UML generator supports generating C code based on UML models.
It can convert class and state diagrams to C code. A successful code generation
can only be guaranteed when using a certain template.
[26] The modeling
software Enterprise Architect also oﬀers build in features to generate code from
UML models. Besides class and states diagrams are also sequence and activity
diagrams supported for code generation. [27]
There are vast amounts of other tools to generate C that can not all be covered
here. Some of the others that were brieﬂy researched were for example yakindu 3
(statechart to C), astah 4 (UML to C) or the Wolfram CCodeGenerator 5 (Wol-
fram language to C).
Table 2.2: Summary of Tools to generate C code
Tool
From
To
Embedded Coder
Simulink, Matlab
C/C++
NI LabVIEW C Generator
LabVIEW
C
Eclipse UML
UML (class & state diagrams)
C
Enterprise Architect
UML (class, state, sequence &
C/C++
activity diagrams)
(and others)
2.5
Co-Design
Tools like Simulink use models for the design process. Developing while using
those tools is also referred to as model-based design. Starting with a conceptual
phase the model becomes more and more detailed at each design iteration. This
subsection brieﬂy looks at the Co-Design for model-based designs (MBD).
The term Co-Design describes the simultaneous design of hardware and software
in one system. In [28] the intentions of Co-Design are deﬁned as coordination
and concurrency of the hardware and software development, correctness of not
only the individual subsystems but also the interactions and the complexity of
current systems.
3https://www.itemis.com/en/yakindu/state-machine/documentation/user-guide/
4http://astah.net/features/uml2c-plugin
5https://reference.wolfram.com/language/CCodeGenerator/tutorial/Overview.html
==PAGE:36==
24
Background and Related Work
The idea to Co-Design is not a new one and ﬁrst references to it were made in
the 1980s. [29] The history of Co-Design can be split according to [28] into three
generations: In the ﬁrst generation of Co-Design two diﬀerent approaches were
followed. One approach was to start with a hardware-only solution and migrate
as much as possible to software while still satisfying the constraints. The other
was the complementary to start with a software-only partition and shift tasks to
hardware in order to meet performance constraints. In both approaches it was
assumed a single threaded CPU and mutual exclusion of hardware and software.
[28]
In the second generation more complex SoC, multicores and multiprocessing
were taken into consideration. In that scope also co-simulation was introduced.
Co-simulation simulates the software in combination with an either virtual
model of the hardware or with a synthesized hardware design.
Furthermore
also the problem of interfacing between hardware and software was discussed,
since it can drastically eﬀect the performance of the system. [28]
The current developments of Co-Design are in the third generation where cross-
level design environments are introduced and time to market is shortened by
optimizing the development ﬂow. An active debate is going on between the
approach of MBD or language-based design and whether one single language
can be found suitable for both hardware and software. Moreover, the third gen-
eration brought the topic of Design Space Exploration (DSE) into Co-Design.
A separate design of hardware and software might cause non-functional proper-
ties to be not met or might be deﬁned to strictly resulting in a too costly over
designed implementation, which DSE is supposed to analyze. [28]
The Co-Design workﬂow starts with the design of an initial top-level model
that is based on the project requirements and constraints.
Once the initial
model satisﬁes the requirements it can be split into two partitions: one for
hardware and one for software. For the hardware partition HDL code needs to
be generated and for the software partition C code needs to be generated. The
ﬁnal step is to build and integrate the HDL and C code on the platform. This
process is summarized again in Figure 2.9. [30]
The design of the interface between hardware and software is critical for the
Co-Design. The partitioning into hardware and software tasks needs to be done
with great care. Swapping tasks between hardware and software can have the
eﬀect of a complete new structure for the interface between the two. [31]
Creating an interface between software and hardware highly depends on the
platform that is used. For this project the Zynq SoC is used. Hence the inter-
facing for the Co-Design only focuses on the connection between hardware and
software on that platform. Creating an own interface gives the developer the
==PAGE:37==
2.5 Co-Design
25
Figure 2.9: Co-Design workﬂow visualisation
option to precisely adapt the interface to the requirements. This can be seen as
one of the most important steps, because the communication between the PL
and PS often becomes a bottleneck that can restrict the hardware acceleration.
In section 2.3 the Zynq architecture and the connection between hardware and
software was already explained. The following shows a few examples of possible
setups.
In [32] diﬀerent interfacing solutions are discussed.
If the PS and PL both
participate in the data processing then the ACP and OCM are faster than HP.
In case the data processing is primarily done on the PL and the PS just uses the
ﬁnal result then AXI HP is always the fastest unless the data that is supposed
to be processed is smaller than the OCM or cache memory then OCM or ACP
is a better solution. [32]
Comparable results are presented in [33], which showed that selecting the GP
port is best for a small amount of data items (up to 64-bytes), such as control
signals. For a medium sized data set (128 to 2048 Byte) AXI ACP with cache
set to write-back mode gives the best results. Once the amount of data is further
increased (4 to 64 kB) data transfer through OCM with the cache set to write-
through mode appeared to be the fastest option. For transferring data greater
than the cache size to use external DDR memory is the fastest. [33]
==PAGE:38==
26
Background and Related Work
MathWorks Co-Design
MathWorks oﬀers a Co-Design workﬂow for the Zynq platform. After splitting
the design into a hardware and a software part can the Co-Design begin with the
help of the HDL Workﬂow Advisor. An example of how the design can be split is
shown in Figure 2.10. When set up correctly lets the HDL Workﬂow Advisor set
the platform interface to an AXI4-Lite, AXI4-Stream Master or AXI4-Stream
Slave. After generating the IP Core the HDL project then includes the speciﬁed
AXI interface.
The ARM processor can then control this generated IP core
by reading and writing to the AXI interface. Once the generation of the IP
Core is completed it is possible to generate a software interface model. For the
generation of the C code the embedded coder is used. Furthermore adds the tool
device drivers for the AXI driver blocks to the Linux kernel. This is also why
for the MathWorks based Co-Design to work a MathWorks customized version
of the Linux kernel must be used. [34]
Figure 2.10: Example Co-Design using Simulink
==PAGE:39==
Chapter 3
MIMO Radar Back-end
Design
In order to integrate generated data processing algorithms on the MIMO radar
hardware it needed to be designed ﬁrst. This chapter starts with a brief intro-
duction to the MIMO design in section 3.1. Initially it was necessary to update
the design of the parallel sampler on the SISO hardware sampling the ADC sig-
nals in order to further develop on this hardware. This is described in section 3.2.
Upgrading from the SISO to the MIMO involved revising the old SISO design.
This among others resulted in changes related to the FPGA IO pins selection,
which is since it is not so important for the rest of the thesis only mentioned in
Appendix B. Furthermore allowed the new design some re-factoring of how to
sample the ADC data into the FPGA which is discussed in section 3.3. More-
over included the revising also a look at the power consumption of the ADC and
possibilities to save power which is discussed in subsection 3.3.2. This chapter
closes with a summary of the creation of the MIMO design based on the newly
developed components.
==PAGE:40==
28
MIMO Radar Back-end Design
3.1
MIMO Overview
As already mentioned the hardware design of the Multiple Input Multiple Out-
put (MIMO) radar grew in complexity in comparison to the SISO radar. Fig-
ure 3.1 shows a simpliﬁed model of the MIMO hardware. As it can be seen the
hf-design is split into three parts instead of one. It can be seen that two sets of
I- and Q-Data are received by the digital controller board.
The responsibility of the Fraunhofer IPA is only the design of the digital con-
troller board. Hence only the modiﬁcations in that ﬁeld are discussed here. The
biggest change can be seen that not only one but two VGAs and two ADCs are
required, because of the double amount of data. There are some further changes
in the pin assignment to the Mercury ZX5 board and some setup changes for
the ADC which this chapter elaborates on.
Figure 3.1: Simpliﬁed model of the MIMO hardware
==PAGE:41==
3.2 Updating the Input Sampling Design of the SISO
29
3.2
Updating the Input Sampling Design of the
SISO
In the beginning the given design was not functioning correctly.
The DMA
transfer was initially not working for unknown reasons and this section brieﬂy
describes the problem that was found.
The software on the ARM does the following in an endless loop: It starts the
DMA transfer using a system call (IOCTL command). After that the parallel
sampler is started and following that the last measurement (160 x 4000-byte) are
send to the connected PC using UDP. Once this is done the software calls a DMA
wait function which waits for the DMA transfer to terminate (see Listing 3.1).
After the DMA driver releases the wait function, this process starts again with
a DMA transfer. The userDma_wait function shown in Listing 3.1 was waiting
indeﬁnitely. As it can be seen from the listing the function consists of a single
read function which supplies as arguments the ﬁle descriptor, DMA buﬀer and
its length.
Listing 3.1: DMA wait function in the radar application
1
static
int
fd ;
2
static
uint8_t ∗dmaBuffer ;
3
static
uint32_t dmaLength ;
4
// . . .
5
void userDma_wait ( void )
{
6
read ( fd ,
dmaBuffer ,
dmaLength ) ;
7
}
The DMA is set up as a character device driver. The read function calls the
DMA driver function ds_axidma_read (Listing 3.2 lines 1-6).
The function
calls the internal function dmaSynchS2MM where S2MM stands for Stream to
Memory. The function dmaSynchS2MM waits for the termination of a DMA
transfer. This function needed to be further investigated, because the DMA
transfer was not terminating. From the Listing 3.2 lines 8-13 it can be seen that
the function only terminates when the S2MM DMASR Status Register holds a
certain value.
Listing 3.2: AXI DMA Driver Code Snippet
1
static
ssize_t
ds_axidma_read ( struct
f i l e
∗f ,
char __user ∗buf ,
size_t
len ,
l o f f _ t
∗
o f f )
{
2
struct
ds_axidma_device ∗obj_dev ;
3
obj_dev = get_elem_from_list_by_inode ( f−>f_inode ) ;
4
dmaSynchS2MM( obj_dev ) ;
5
// . . .
6
}
7
// . . .
==PAGE:42==
30
MIMO Radar Back-end Design
8
static
int dmaSynchS2MM( struct
ds_axidma_device ∗obj_dev )
{
9
unsigned int
s2mm_status = ioread32 ( obj_dev−>virt_bus_addr
+ S2MM_DMASR) ;
10
while ( ! ( s2mm_status & 1<<12)
| |
! ( s2mm_status & 1<<1)) {
11
s2mm_status = ioread32 ( obj_dev−>virt_bus_addr +
S2MM_DMASR) ;
12
}
13
return
0;
14
}
In order to understand the meaning of that status register the AXI DMA IP
Product Guide [35, Chapter 2] was consulted.
The S2MM DMASR Status
Register indicates the status of the DMA Channel and the entries of the reg-
ister represent diﬀerent ﬂags as shown in Figure 3.2. Analyzing the code of
the dmaSynchS2MM function (line 10) it can be said that the while loop will
terminate once bit 12 and bit 1 are both set.
Figure 3.2: S2MM DMASR Register - Figure taken from [35, Chapter 2] (Fig-
ure 2-13)
Consulting Figure 3.2 and the Xilinx AXI DMA Product guide it can be said
that if bit 1 (Idle) is set it indicates that the current transfer is completed and
if bit 12 (IOC_Irq) is set it indicates that an interrupt event was produced on
completion.
Debugging the Linux Kernel driver using the printk function 1 showed that the
S2MM DMASR Status Register content was: 20.497 = 0101 0000 0001 0001.
Bit 0 indicates that the DMA channel halted. Bit 4 is the internal error ﬂag
which is set when any error occurs during Memory write or if incoming packets
are bigger than speciﬁed. Bit 14 set to 1 means that an interrupt on error was
detected. [35, Chapter 2] Hence it was concluded that the AXI protocol to ﬁll
the DMA with data was not followed correctly.
From the status quo of the previous developments and using further tests it
could be concluded that the TLAST signal was not always asserted on the last
data word when the transfer was completed. In case the TLAST is not asserted
1http://elinux.org/Debugging_by_printing
==PAGE:43==
3.3 ADC Related Design Modiﬁcations
31
at the exact time the DMAIntErr will be raised which would explain the current
problem.
After rewriting the VHDL code for the parallel sampling diﬀerent scenarios in
the testbench veriﬁed that the TLAST signal was always asserted on the last
sample to transmit. An example can be seen in Figure 3.3.
Figure 3.3: Waveform graph showing the assertion of TLAST
It can unfortunately not be guaranteed that this was the cause of the initial
error, because it might have also been a faulty description of the DDR3 RAM.
During the error ﬁnding process it was detected that a diﬀerent DDR3 RAM
was soldered onto the Enclustra Mercury ZX5 board, than speciﬁed in the doc-
umentation.
On the board present for testing a NT5CC256M16CP-DI from
Nanya and not a MT41K256M16-125 from Micron was used. This led to some
changes in the Vivado deﬁnition of the DDR memory related to the data sheet
of the Nanya DDR3 RAM. With rewriting the VHDL code and changing the
DDR3 RAM settings the DMA error could not be reproduced.
3.3
ADC Related Design Modiﬁcations
The design of the ADC connection in the SISO schematic was unconventional.
The AD9251 ADC outputs with every data channel also a corresponding clock,
with which the digital data can be processed. In the SISO design this clock
output was left unconnected. In order for the design to work the clock input for
the ADC was provided by the FPGA. Figure 3.4 visualizes a simpliﬁed design.
Because of the mapping of this clock output to a none-capable clock IO pin was
the jitter of that clock even worse. Besides a low quality clock signal, the design
==PAGE:44==
32
MIMO Radar Back-end Design
has the problem that the clock of the PLL used to create the ramps and the
FPGA clock are not aligned. Hence the sampling is not synchronized with the
transmitting of the radar signal.
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.4: SISO (a) and MIMO (b) interfacing with the ADC
The idea is to instead use a clock provided by the PLL. The clock frequency of
the PLL is 100 MHz. The ADC uses a sample-and-hold circuit for the sampling.
Meaning that the frequency of the clock enables the sampling rate, because at
that speed switches the clock the sample-and-hold latches to take a sample.
So a 100 MHz clock would result in a sampling rate of 100 mega samples per
second (MSPS). The maximum for the selected ADC to handle are 20 MSPS.
Hence a clock division is needed. One way would be to use an additional clock
divider component. Another option is to use the ADC build in clock division,
which allows to divide the clock by values between 1 and 8. Dividing the PLL
provided clock signal by 8 would result in 12,5 MHz which is equivalent to 12,5
MSPS which then results in 1250 samples per ramp. This clock divider can
only be conﬁgured using SPI. With the clock coming from a diﬀerent source
than the FPGA the ADC output clocks are essential for the data sampling. In
Figure 3.4 (b) the updated ADC interfacing can be seen.
The diﬀerent interface of the ADC required a new design of the data sampling
on the FPGA. Figure 3.5 shows that the ADC outputs converted data on the
falling clock edge with a delay of 9 clock cycles.
==PAGE:45==
3.3 ADC Related Design Modiﬁcations
33
Figure 3.5: Output Timing taken from [36, Figure 2]
To incorporate the changes the design shown in Figure 3.6 was created. The
14-bit wide data of each channel is connected to a register, which is clocked
using the ADC clock (e.g. DCOA). From the provided timing diagram it can
be seen that the data signal is stable on the rising edge of the clock. This is
why the register will consider new data on the rising edge of the clock. The
ADC clock is only needed for theses registers, that is why it is ﬁne to use Single
Region Clock Capable (SRCC) pins.
With that design there are diﬀerent clock domains. One slower one from the
ADC (e.g. 12,5 MHz) and a fast frequency from the data processing part (100
MHz). A FIFO is used to transfer data from one clock domain to another. The
ADC samples are stored in the FIFO with a speed of the ADC clock. The other
clock is used for reading from the FIFO. The frequency of the data processing
part is multiple times faster, hence a smaller buﬀer depth is ﬁne.
Figure 3.6: New design of the ADC data sampler
A small example project was set up to test the design idea. For the FIFO a Xilinx
IP core (FIFO Generator2) was used with a native setup and two independent
clocks using block RAM. A rather short depth of 32 entries was selected. But
this still gives the FIFO controller and the data processing algorithm more than
enough time to process the data.
2https://goo.gl/1t9wLU
==PAGE:46==
34
MIMO Radar Back-end Design
In Figure 3.7 a waveform graph can be seen that shows the waveform result of the
example design. The signal to start processing in this scenario is called RampUp
(for a ramp phase). Once this Signal is high the write enable (wr_en) on the
FIFO is asserted high and the data from the ADC_DataI Input is written to
the FIFO. It can be seen that after this the FIFO empty ﬂag goes low indicating
that the FIFO contains elements. This triggers in the simple FSM of the FIFO
controller design a read process which asserts the read enable signal (rd_en)
high and reads the resulting input value with a delay of one clock cycle. After
that one element was read from the FIFO it can be seen that the empty ﬂag is
raised again and the FIFO controller component waits again in the idle state for
more data. With that it could be concluded that the new ADC interface design
idea can be used for the MIMO design. The full design integration is discussed
in the end of the chapter in section 3.4.
Figure 3.7: Waveform Graph showing the interaction with the FIFO
3.3.1
Analog Devices SPI
For more advanced conﬁguration options of the ADC, such as setting up the
clock divider, SPI is required. It needs to be pointed out here that SPI stands
for the from Analog Devices created Serial Port Interface and not the so far
used Serial Peripheral Interface. The diﬀerence is that the Serial Port Interface
for AD9251 uses a 2-Wire Mode, meaning that only clock (SCLK) and data
(SDIO) are used. So the diﬀerence is one data line instead of a separate MISO
and MOSI line for the data. Another diﬀerence in the SPI is the voltage level
that is for the regular SPI in this project set to 3,3 V and Analog Devices SPI
needs 1,8 V in this conﬁguration.
Hence it was required to design an own interface for the Analog Devices SPI.
==PAGE:47==
3.3 ADC Related Design Modiﬁcations
35
Before going into detail of the design of this SPI controller, it will brieﬂy be
summarized what is important for interfacing Analog Devices ADCs using SPI.
In order to change conﬁguration settings the developer has to update a register
at a certain address. The requirement for the clock SCLK is a minimum speed
of 25 MHz. The data SDIO can be either an input or output depending on the
instruction. The Chip Select Bar (CSB) is the active low signal indicating to
process the SCLK and SDIO lines.
As it can be also seen from Figure 3.8 both the falling edge of CSB and the
rising edge of SCLK start a frame. The ﬁrst 16-bit are instruction bits and then
follows a number of multiple 8 data bits. The ﬁrst instruction bit indicates a
read request when high and when low a write request (R/W). The following bit
1 and 2 of the instruction indicate whether 1, 2, 3, 4 or more bytes are sent or
requested. The remaining 13-bit are used for the address of the registers. By
default the bit order is MSB-ﬁrst. [37]
Figure 3.8: MSB-First Instruction and Data [37, Figure 8]
There are two registers of interest. Register B is used for clock division. The
default entry is 0 which indicates a bypass (division by one). The divide ratio
is the register value plus one. Register 8 controls the ADC mode. When setting
bit 7 to 0 and having the PWDN pin asserted to low level and the power settings
are deﬁned using bit 2 to 0. Assigning “000” puts the ADC in normal operation
mode and “010” starts the standby mode. [37]
Based on this two ASMD Charts shown in Figure 3.9 were created to interface
the SPI and to send conﬁguration data. For interfacing with the ADC (shown
in (a)) just three states are required: idle, send and ﬁnish. The message to
send is created in the idle state based on the address and data. The interface
was simpliﬁed so that it will always only write commands with a ﬁxed length
of 1-byte, because that is suﬃcient for the desired conﬁgurations. The send
state sends all bits to the ADC starting with the MSB. After sending 24-bit
(3+13+8) the state machine goes back to idle as soon as the start to transmit
signal (startTransmit) has gone low.
To test this another second design was created shown in Figure 3.9 (b). The
ASMD Chart uses the created ADC interface to send a divide command and
standby and wake up commands for power saving purposes (which is discussed
==PAGE:48==
36
MIMO Radar Back-end Design
further in subsection 3.3.2). As it can be seen the division setup only happens
once in the beginning. After the sampling of one ramp is completed it is switched
to the standby mode and after transmitting the control signal a sleep mode is
entered. After a certain time has passed the ADC is restarted by sending a wake
up command.
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.9: ASMD Chart for interfacing (a) and testing (b) the Analog Devices
SPI
A simulation showed that the state machine works as desired. From the wave-
form graph shown in Figure 3.10 it can be seen that after the start command
of CSB going low and the rising edge of SCLK (marked with white circles) the
transfer starts. First is the R/W bit and the W1:W0 indicating the number of
data bytes which are zero indicating one byte of data. After that the Address
0x0B and the data 0x07 can be seen. This is equivalent to what can be seen
in Figure 3.8. Observing the results with an oscilloscope also revealed that the
setup and hold time requirements were met and that the structure of the signal
was also running on the hardware as desired (this is shown in the appendix in
Figure F.1 on page 108).
==PAGE:49==
3.3 ADC Related Design Modiﬁcations
37
Figure 3.10: Testing of the SPI interface showing the waveform graph
This example project was tested on a Zedboard 3 and an evaluation board of
the ADC 4. Unfortunately it was not possible to connect them directly, because
the available pins on the Zedboard only supplied voltage levels greater than 1,8
V, which the ADC could not handle. That is why a level translator from texas
instruments 5 was used to adjust the voltage levels.
3.3.2
Power Savings
The AD9251-20 is the ADC used on the digital control board and supplied with
1,8 V. According to the data sheet ([36]) results this in a power consumption of
approximately 80 mW when active and using the maximum sampling rate.
The ADC oﬀers diﬀerent modes to save power. The ADC only needs to process
data during the 100 µs long ramp up phase. There is a PDWN pin which will
power down the device when high.
As soon as the input is low the normal
operating mode begins again. In the power down mode uses the device only 2.2
mW. The wake up time to recover from the power down mode is approximately
350 µs long depending on the decoupling capacitors. Using the power down
option would not be applicable, because the wake up time is longer than the
ramp down phase.
The ADC also oﬀers a standby mode were the energy consumption is approx-
imately 37 mW. This is clearly a lot worse than the power down option but it
has the huge advantage that the wake up time is only 600 ns short. This would
enable to use the standby mode for this setup and wake up the device 600 ns
before the start of a new measurement. With that approximately 99,4% of the
ramp down phase would be in a low power mode. Hence this would result in a
power improvement of approximately 25 % for the ADC. The disadvantage of
3http://zedboard.org/
4https://goo.gl/cTqydS
5http://www.ti.com/tool/lsf010xevm-001
==PAGE:50==
38
MIMO Radar Back-end Design
using this mode is that it can only be enabled using SPI. But having it already
as a requirement for the clock division adding another command to it is simple.
3.4
MIMO Design Update
First the design that was shown and tested in section 3.3 was integrated into
the SISO based Vivado project. Therefor two IP cores where created. One IP
core holds the four registers used for each of the input channels (myReg). The
other IP core was created to manage reading from the FIFOs (FIFO controller).
Both IP Core blocks are shown in Figure 3.11.
Figure 3.11: New IP Cores for the MIMO Design
Some minor changes were required for the parallel sampler but no major re-
factoring was required. It was necessary to change the data length to 8 instead
of the former 4-byte. The integration process of the new components worked
unproblematically since they were already tested separately before.
It was possible to verify this design on the SISO hardware by simply duplicating
the signals I and Q and instead of using an external clock for the registers the
internal 10 MHz clock was selected to clock the input register. Hence with great
conﬁdence it can be said that this will also work on the MIMO design.
Also the interfacing of the ADC explained in subsection 3.3.1 was integrated
into the MIMO design. This could not been tested further, because the MIMO
hardware was not available and it was not possible to connect the necessary pins
on the SISO board using wire bonding.
==PAGE:51==
Chapter 4
High-Level Code Generation
for Radar Algorithms
This section starts with an introduction on how to use the HDL and Embedded
Coder for code generation and prototyping on a Zynq platform. After that the
radar algorithms are presented by ﬁrst giving an introduction to FMCW based
radar algorithms and then going into detail with the range-Doppler processing
algorithms that are the basis for the radar data processing. Furthermore the
data rate for the SISO and MIMO systems are presented and data reduction
mechanisms are discussed. This chapter closes with a presentation of Co-Design
for the given system by explaining how the hardware and software can work
together.
4.1
Prototyping on a SoC with HDL and Embed-
ded Coder
In subsection 2.4.1 diﬀerent high-level tools to generate HDL code were pre-
sented. Based on this a decision was made on which tool to choose. Matlab
and Simulink are a popular choice to solve problems in the ﬁeld of radar de-
velopment. That is why Xilinx HLS was excluded. LabVIEW is a comparable
==PAGE:52==
40
High-Level Code Generation for Radar Algorithms
environment to Simulink, but was excluded for code generation because their
tools only work with special NI hardware. The two research projects (vMagic
and the UML based VHDL development) were excluded, because the tool de-
velopment was still in the early stages and the UML or java based tools are
not very well suitable for radar algorithms. There are three diﬀerent Matlab
and Simulink based tools: the HDL Coder, Altera DSP Builder and the Xilinx
System Generator. The platform is based on a Xilinx Zynq, hence the Altera
tool can not be used.
Comparing the Matlab HDL Coder and Xilinx System Generator shows that
a huge advantage of the HDL Coder is the automatic conversion from ﬂoating
point to ﬁxed point numbers. Furthermore HDL Coder generates target inde-
pendent HDL code. A disadvantage is that the HDL Coder can not synthesize,
simulate and verify the HDL codes. Moreover is the HDL Coder another costly
tool. On the other side is the Xilinx System Generator part of the Xilinx design
suit and tailored for Xilinx FPGAs. A problem is that the ﬂoating-point con-
version of Matlab blocks is not supported. A research showed that it is possible
to set up a Simulink model in a way so that both the Xilinx System Genera-
tor blocks can be used in combination with native HDL compatible Simulink
blocks for the HDL Coder 1. It was decided to use the HDL Coder for the gen-
eration of VHDL code, because the ﬁxed point conversion is a desired feature
and if necessary Xilinx System Generator blocks can still be integrated into the
design.
Based on the decision to choose the HDL Coder from MathWorks, it was selected
to also use a MathWorks tool for the C code generation: the Embedded Coder.
This was for one reason the convenience of selecting a tool from the same vendor.
The other reason was that in that way one Matlab/Simulink model can be used
to describe both the C and HDL implementation. The following describes how
to use the HDL Coder and Embedded Coder for rapid prototyping on a SoC.
4.1.1
Applying the HDL Coder
The HDL Coder is a code generation tool that supports HDL code generation
from Matlab, Simulink models and Stateﬂow diagrams. Also supported is a com-
bination of a Simulink model that includes Matlab Function blocks and State-
ﬂow components. A basic introduction was already given in subsection 2.4.1
and this section summarizes how to use the HDL Coder. This section starts
with a description of how Simulink and Matlab models need to be prepared for
HDL conversion and based on this the actual code generation is described.
1https://goo.gl/NHMCo2
==PAGE:53==
4.1 Prototyping on a SoC with HDL and Embedded Coder
41
4.1.1.1
Preparing Simulink and Matlab Models
To generate code for a Simulink model all the blocks that are supposed to
be converted to HDL code need to be put in a subsystem. With the help of
“HDL Code →Check Subsystem Compatibility” can the developer gain a ﬁrst
impression of the hardware compatibility of the created block. Only a number
of Simulink blocks are supported for HDL conversion. The best is to design the
system only using the HDL Coder compatible blocks from the “hdllib”. When
generating code based on Matlab functions the problem usually is that they use
ﬂoating point instead of ﬁxed point numbers. The rest of this section focuses
on the ﬁxed point design.
Floating point designs can not be converted to HDL code. Hence a design needs
to use only ﬁxed point numbers. Fixed point numbers are deﬁned in Matlab as
follows: ﬁxdt(sign, word length, fraction length). The ﬁrst number determines
the sign (1=signed, 0=unsigned). The second part indicates the length of the
word and the last number sets the fraction length.
The following shows an
example of an 8-bit signed number with a fraction length of 3.
fixdt(1, 8, 3) →S
I
I
I
I
.
F
F
F
(4.1)
It is also possible to deﬁne a fraction length that is greater than the word length,
which implies that a number of zeros left of the MSB exist. For example this
8-bit number:
fixdt(0, 8, 9) →.
0
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
(4.2)
would allow ﬁxed point that could hold a maximum value of 2−1 −2−9 (approx.
0,498) and a maximum precision of 2−9 (approx. 0,002). Every time this number
would be processed implied bits would be taken into account without physically
being stored. Besides having a fraction greater than the length of the word it is
also possible to deﬁne a fraction length that is negative. In that case ones will
be implied right of the LSB. So the following 8-bit number
fixdt(0, 8, −1) →
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
1
.
(4.3)
would allow 29 −22 = 510 as a maximum and a precision of 2. To create a ﬁxed
point number the ﬁobject is used, where the ﬁrst entry is the number and the
rest is the sign, word length and fraction (e.g -3.5=ﬁ(-3.5,1,8,4)).
There are diﬀerent options to convert Matlab ﬂoating point code into a ﬁxed
point design.
There is option a) to manually convert the Matlab code into
ﬁxed point using ﬁobjects. This option is the most time consuming to perform
especially for bigger algorithms. If a Matlab block is integrated into a Simulink
function block option b) can be performed to use the Fixed-Point Tool. The
==PAGE:54==
42
High-Level Code Generation for Radar Algorithms
Fixed-Point Tool oﬀers based on the simulation of the model proposals for the
ﬂoating point variables. But the data types cannot be applied automatically.
The third option c) is to use the Fixed-Point Converter. In case the Matlab
code is in a Matlab Function block in a Simulink model then it needs to be
copied into a regular Matlab function and after the conversion copied back.
The Fixed-Point Converter can automatically convert ﬂoating point functions
into ﬁxed point values. Furthermore oﬀers the tool to replace function calls that
are incompatible for a ﬁxed point design.
The last option to use the Fixed-Point Converter was selected for this project,
because it is proven to be the most reliable, useful and fastest option.
The
crucial part about using the Fixed-Point Converter is about using a testbench
that covers the full range of possible input values. The Fixed-Point Converter
analyzes the Matlab function with the help of the testbench and proposes for
each value a ﬁxed point equivalent. With the help of the simulated minimum
and maximum values can the developer check if the test was suﬃcient. After the
data type validation and potential correction of types can the code be converted
to ﬁxed point and be tested.
4.1.1.2
HDL Code Generation
The fastest option to generate HDL Code of a Simulink system is by clicking
on “HDL Code →Generate HDL for Subsystem”. Which is the simplest option
without any conﬁguration.
A more sophisticated option is to use the HDL Workﬂow Advisor, which was
used for the HDL Code generation in this project. The Workﬂow Advisor can be
both started from a Matlab or a Simulink based implementation. The Workﬂow
Advisor starts with a setup menu for the target device, which is ﬁlled with the
values shown in Table 4.1.
Table 4.1: Workﬂow Advisor - Set Target Device
Setting
Option
Synthesis tool:
Xilinx Vivado
Family:
Zynq
Device:
xc7z030
Package:
sbg485
Speed:
-1
After that a number of subtasks have to be executed: to check global settings:
for algebraic loops, block compatibility and sample times. Once this second step
==PAGE:55==
4.1 Prototyping on a SoC with HDL and Embedded Coder
43
is completed, the actual HDL code generation can begin. It is advisable to select
the following report options in the basic settings (3.1.1. Set Basic Options):
• Generate traceability report
• Generate resource utilization report
• Generate high-level timing critical path report
• Generate optimization report
This gives the developer a better understanding of the generated HDL design.
Furthermore the HDL Code language can be selected in the basic settings. The
advanced options enable clock, reset and additional settings.
Reset can be
deﬁned as synchronous or asynchronous, active low or high and the port name
can be speciﬁed. For the clock the number of clock inputs can be deﬁned as
multiple clocks or a single cock and the clock edge set to the rising or falling edge.
The additional settings in the advanced options section cover various settings
(e.g. signal naming conventions). In the port settings can the input and output
data type be speciﬁed to be either of type std_logic_vector or signed/unsigned.
Not only HDL code but also a testbench based on the simulation can be gen-
erated. For this testbench also clock length, reset and tolerance values can be
conﬁgured. Moreover oﬀers the Workﬂow Advisor an estimation of the critical
path. That feature highlights the critical path within the Simulink model. This
can give the designer the option to use Unit Delay blocks as pipeline registers.
Besides the critical path the tool also oﬀers a traceability of the generated VHDL
code back to the model or Matlab code. With that feature a simple click on a
region in the HDL code highlights the corresponding part in the model.
4.1.2
Applying the Embedded Coder
Similar is the concept of how to generate C code for embedded Systems using
the embedded coder. As a target the embedded coder needs to be speciﬁed in
the code generation panel of the Model Conﬁguration Parameters. The system
is simulated by computing its states at certain steps which can be conﬁgured to
use ﬁxed steps or variable steps. Computing these steps is done by the “Solver”
who solves the model. For the embedded coder it is required to use a ﬁxed
step conﬁguration ( Simulation →Model Conﬁguration Parameters →solver).
Again the embedded coder faces similar problems that not every construct is
compatible for code generation.
==PAGE:56==
44
High-Level Code Generation for Radar Algorithms
The code can be simply build by selecting C/C++ Code →build this subsystem.
Similar to the HDL Code reports oﬀers the Embedded Coder options to trace
back the C code to the model. The Embedded Coder creates both the C ﬁles
and header ﬁles. The code is divided into an initialization part, a model step
function that is called at every timer interrupt and a model terminate part that
is called at the end of the model.
With the help of the static code metrics report RAM usage, lines of code and
other metrics can be reviewed. Based on that the Code Generation Advisor
can be used to further optimize the code (e.g. for RAM eﬃciency). Besides
optimizing the code the coding style can also be changed.
4.2
Code Generation for Radar Algorithms
The project is based on a FMCW radar. So the presentation of radar algorithms
only focuses on FMCW based algorithms. First the basic approach is brieﬂy
described and then the range-Doppler processing algorithm that is currently
used for the SISO system is presented.
4.2.1
FMCW Based Radar Algorithms
As mentioned in section 2.1 a FMCW based SISO radar can measure radial
distance, which is referred to as range in the following, and radial velocity.
Using only a single ramp can not reveal range and velocity. This can only be
achieved when processing several ramps.
One popular approach was to match a number of ramps and compare them.
The idea is that the Doppler eﬀects each ramp diﬀerently. The problem with
that approach is that the matching is computational intensive and that ghost
targets can occur. Nowadays range-Doppler processing is often used instead.
The ramps are send out so fast that the eﬀect of the Doppler can be ignored
and just the range can be calculated. The velocity will be gained by comparing
the phase over a number of ramps. Performing a two dimensional FFT delivers
a spectral matrix such as shown in Figure 4.1. The resulting graph is called a
range velocity graph. Peaks in the range velocity graph indicate a target. [38]
==PAGE:57==
4.2 Code Generation for Radar Algorithms
45
Pulses
Samples
2D
FFT
(a)
X
X
(b)
Figure 4.1: (a) shows an example data matrix with a number of samples and
pulse chirps and (b) shows a corresponding radar spectral matrix
(range-velocity plane)
4.2.1.1
Range-Doppler Processing Algorithms
The radar algorithms that are currently used for signal processing were devel-
oped at the Institute for Signal Processing and System Theory of the University
of Stuttgart. The following looks at those algorithms and describes the basic
approach.
In Figure 4.2 the steps are shown simpliﬁed. First the raw data is captured and
stored into a buﬀer the size of 1000 x 160 samples. As already mentioned in
subsection 2.1.4 the radar data is split in I and Q which represents a complex
number. So the matrix holds for each of the 160 pulses 1000 samples of complex
16-bit large numbers.
Figure 4.2: simpliﬁed range-Doppler processing algorithm overview
The ﬁrst data processing step is a calibration. Based on the results of a number
of measurements into empty space an average baseline was computed that is
subtracted from the raw data. The noise that is identiﬁed there is connected
to reﬂection from the antenna itself. Following this a computation analyses the
stored matrix in order to cut the dc noise. This could be done with the usage of
FFTs and inverse FFTs (IFFTs) or by computing an average calibration factor
that is based on the usage of a square root, inverse sine and an exponential
function. As it can be seen from the code extract in Listing 4.1 the averaging
of all samples is performed ﬁrst and then the square root, inverse sine and an
exponential function are used to compute the ﬁnal calibration value.
==PAGE:58==
46
High-Level Code Generation for Radar Algorithms
Listing 4.1: Given Matlab I Q calibration
1
d=rawData−b a s e l i n e ;
2
3
K1K2=mean(
( sum(d .∗d , 1 ) ) . / ( sum( abs (d+conj (d) ) .^2 ,1)
)
) ;
4
g=sqrt(1−4∗real (K1K2) ) ;
5
phi=asin(−2/g∗imag(K1K2) ) ;
6
7
K1=.5∗(1+g∗exp(−1 j ∗phi ) ) ;
8
K2=.5∗(1−g∗exp(+1 j ∗phi ) ) ;
9
K_inv=1/((abs (K1)^2+abs (K2) ) ^2)
∗[ conj (K1) −K2; −conj (K2) K1 ] ;
10
11
calData=K_inv (1 ,1) ∗d+K_inv (1 ,2) ∗conj (d) ;
After the calibration continues the signal processing with applying a window
function in range (for 1000x1 samples) and velocity (for 1x160 samples). This
is done as a preprocessing in the time domain for an improvement in the results
in the frequency domain. After the preparation of the radar data the two di-
mensional FFT in range and velocity direction can be performed. In the end a
constant false alarm rate (CFAR) algorithm is used to detect the targets against
a noisy background. This is needed, because there is still some noise that has
the same amplitude as the desired signal.
The problem that the CFAR algorithms solves can be well described by looking
at Figure 4.3 (a). The ﬁgure shows diﬀerent thresholds marked with a) to d)
and ﬁve targets pointed at with arrows. This is a typical image showing more
noise in close range. For a) the threshold would be too high, since it is missing
one target. On the other hand b) and c) would include a number of false alarms.
The problem with a constant threshold is that the FAR is much higher in close
range and the probability to detect something further away is worse than in
close range. A solution is a variable threshold as shown in d) which results in a
constant false alarm rate. [39]
Cell averaging (CA) is an approach suitable for HDL conversion. An example of
CA is shown in Figure 4.3 (b). As it can be seen left and right from the target
(signal peak) is a strong threshold value shown but at the target itself the values
are low. Left and right from the target includes the averaging the amplitude
of the target. Hence a higher value will be computed. At the target will the
amplitude of the target not be taking into consideration, thus the signiﬁcantly
smaller result. It can also be described as a contrast enhancement. [39]
==PAGE:59==
4.2 Code Generation for Radar Algorithms
47
(a) FAR
(b) CA-CFAR
Figure 4.3: (a) False Alarm Rate with diﬀerent threshold levels (Taken from
[39]) and (b) shows a CA-CFAR approach
4.2.2
Data Rate
Crucial for further developments and discussions is to understand the data rates.
To start with the following Table 4.2 shows a summary of the radar parameters
for the SISO design.
Table 4.2: SISO parameter summary
parameters
value
input data size
14-bit (16-bit aligned)
input channels
2
data rate per sample
16 −bit · 2 = 32 −bit
ADC sample rate
10 MSPS
ramp repetition rate (T)
200 µs
ramp up duration ( T
2 )
100 µs
ramps per measurement
160
Based on that the data rate per ramp can be calculated as followed:
data rate
ramp
=
data
sample · ramp duration · sample rate
(4.4)
data rate
ramp
= 32 −bit
sample · 100µs · 10 M sample
s
= 32.000 −bit = 4000 −byte
(4.5)
Which results for 160 ramps in 160 ∗4000 −byte = 640.000 −byte = 625 kB
in 32 ms (200µs · 160).
With that it can be concluded that a maximum of
==PAGE:60==
48
High-Level Code Generation for Radar Algorithms
approximately 19 MB/s ( 625kB
32ms ) have to be transferred between PL and PS
and further to the connected PC using Ethernet.
On the FPGA engaged into the data transfer are in the current setup the AXI
HP bus, Memory Interconnect and DDR Memory. According to the Mercury-
Zx5 user manual ([40]) the DDR3 Memory supports data rates of up to 1066
Mb/s (533 MHz).
For a Kintex 7 FPGA in the current setup is the clock
rate performance for the memory interconnect 355 MHz [41], which leads to a
maximum of 2840 MB/s when using 64-bit words. The AXI HP supports, when
used with a clock frequency of 150 MHz and 64-bit long words, a data write
rate of 1200 MB/s (including needed overhead e.g.
addressing) [42, 22.3.1].
Table 4.3 summarizes the maximum performance rates. From this it can be
concluded that the transferring of 19 MB/s from the PS to the PL is not an
issue.
Table 4.3: Maximum performance rates related to the Radar Zynq design
Bus
Data Write Rate
DDR3 Memory
1066 MB/s
Memory Interconnect
2840 MB/s
AXI HP
1200 MB/s
Gigabit Ethernet has a maximum throughput of 125 MB/s (=1000 MBits/s).
Hence 19 MB/s would require approx 15% of the Ethernet data rate, assuming
zero overhead.
UDP requires a smaller overhead of 8-bytes per packet than
TCP which needs 40-bytes per packet. But UDP is unreliable, because data
corruption during a transfer is possible. Using TCP and sending packets the size
of 4000-bytes would result in an overhead of approximately 200 kB/s ( 40∗160kB
32ms
).
This means that a TCP based transfer would require an increase of one percent
to 16% of the Ethernet data rate.
In perspective to Table 4.2 changes for the MIMO design the input channel
number from 2 to 4 and consequently the data rate per sample to 64-bit. Fur-
thermore is the ADC sample rate increased to 12,5 MSPS. From that it follows
a data rate per ramp of:
data rate
ramp
= 64 −bit
sample · 100µs · 12, 5 M sample
s
= 80.000 −bit = 10.000 −byte ≈10kB
(4.6)
Which has the consequence that the data rate per measurement increases to
approx. 1,5 MB. This results in a maximum data rate of approx. 48 MB/s.
Reﬂecting on the researched maximum ratings it can be said that a transfer of
==PAGE:61==
4.3 Co-Design for the Radar Hardware
49
the maximum possible 48 MB/s from PL to PS should also not be an issue and
that the Ethernet transfer is still under 40% of maximum throughput.
4.2.3
Data Reduction
Running the MIMO radar only one minute at the maximum frequency creates
a data set of raw data that is about 2,8 GB big.
This much data quickly
becomes more challenging to handle. Hence techniques to reduce the data rate
are interesting.
The 14-bit values are currently aligned to a 16-bit value to simplify the data han-
dling on the PC side. Only sending 14-bit sized data would result for the MIMO
in approx 42 MB/s 12,5% less than a 16 MB/s approach. On the PC always
seven 16-bit numbers could be captured and split into eight 14-bit numbers. It
is questionable whether the introduced overhead due to the more complex data
capturing on the PC will gain so much in speed.
The best data reduction would be to create a target list on the Zynq and pass
that on. This would of course require that the radar algorithms run on the
FPGA. One representation of a target list could be represented as a matrix of
1000 x 160 of 1-bit entries indicating a target with a one and no target with a
zero. This would result in a ﬁxed size of approx 20 kB per measurement which
would be about 600 kB/s. This kind of representation would hold a lot of zeros.
An even smaller representation would be to send only coordinates of list of
targets. To address 160.000 elements 18-bit are required. For a 1000 target
points this would result in data transfer of approx 2 kB per measurement, which
is equivalent to approx 70 kB/s. But in the worst case (assuming everything
would be a target) would this result in: 11 MB/s. The critical turning point
would be at more than 9000 target hits which would result in a higher data rate
than transmitting a matrix of targets.
4.3
Co-Design for the Radar Hardware
This section discusses the approach of hardware software Co-Design on the cur-
rent project. All the diﬀerent steps in the range-Doppler processing algorithms
shown in Figure 4.2 do not perform any data reduction. It might be possible to
change the precision but the amount of data will always be 1000 x 160 Samples.
Assuming a 16-bit data width this results as shown in subsection 4.2.2 in 625
==PAGE:62==
50
High-Level Code Generation for Radar Algorithms
kB per measurement for SISO and 1,5 MB per measurement for the MIMO.
With that data amount it only makes sense to process the data on the FPGA
ﬁrst and second on the ARM. This is because the data is ﬁrst received by the
FPGA. It would not make sense for the FPGA to send the data to the ARM
and let it perform a data processing step. To then receive the data again on the
FPGA to do further processing up to ﬁnally sending the processed data from
the ARM to the PC. An exchange of a dataset that size three times would be
ineﬃcient.
As mentioned in subsection 2.3.1 there are the three interfaces AXI GP, HP
and ACP. Based on the research ﬁndings presented in section 2.5 and on the
current setup described in subsection 2.3.2 does it only make sense to use AXI
HP. AXI GP is only suitable for a very small data exchange such as control
signals and ACP is not suitable because the L2 cache is with 512 kB smaller
than the amount of data.
The MathWorks based Co-Design approach could not be integrated, because of
the use of an own Linux kernel and not a MathWorks compatible one. Further-
more not a standard Xilinx DMA driver is used but a diﬀerent one. Additionally
from Matlab it is supported to generate diﬀerent AXI components. For instance
it is supported to use an AXI streaming interface. Which could be used instead
of the self generated AXI interfaces.
When analyzing the design space exploration it can be said that the critical
non-functional properties are both the limited hardware resources and the de-
sired measurement repetition rate of 30 Hz. Based on this should the system
be partitioned. The radar data processing on the FPGA can proﬁt from the
parallelization as for example the FFTs or CFAR algorithm. Moreover can the
FFT block in general perform better on an FPGA. For example a simple C
based FFT using the kiss FFT library needs approximately 63 µs for a 1024
entries [43]. Which is about 6 times slower than an HDL based FFT which sub-
section 5.2.1 will show. Hence the split between software and hardware should
be after the FFTs or even after the CFAR calculations so that the ARM only
does some ﬁnal data processing.
With the supported data rate and the current setup it can be said that the
Co-Design is applicable. To verify that the created design is working can Co-
Simulation help. MathWorks based Co-Simulation is a concept that supports
parallel simulation of the model in Simulink and the corresponding HDL code
using an HDL simulator (such as ModelSim) and then automatically comparing
the simulated outputs against one another. In that way it could be veriﬁed that
the HDL code matches the Simulink model or Matlab functions. Once the C
based implementation is veriﬁed as well can overall tests of the system ensure
that the integration is working.
==PAGE:63==
Chapter 5
Implementation
This section starts with a description of the code generation toolchain, by de-
scribing the general approach. It then goes into detail of how the VHDL compo-
nents were integrated into the existing design and how the automatic Tcl based
integration process works. The second section introduces Simulink and Matlab
constructs showing how the diﬀerent parts of the radar algorithms presented in
subsubsection 4.2.1.1 can be converted into an HDL compatible design. This
chapter closes with a presentation of the design and implementation of a cali-
bration algorithm.
5.1
Code Generation Toolchain
Based on a tryout of diﬀerent approaches seemed the most productive way to
generate HDL Code using a Simulink model. This model can also include Matlab
Function blocks and Stateﬂow state charts. This approach has the advantage
that the already for HDL code designed blocks can be used from Simulink and
supplemented with state charts and individual Matlab blocks. The following
describes the step and tools that are required to get from a model to a running
system.
==PAGE:64==
52
Implementation
To start with a Simulink model needs to be created.
When using Simulink
blocks only blocks from the “hdllib” should be used. The model part that is
supposed to be converted into HDL Code needs to be in a subsystem. In case
that Matlab Function blocks are needed the advisable approach is to ﬁrst create
and test them separately. One reason is that it is simpler to verify but the
main reason is that the ﬁxed point conversion works best from Matlab. After
creating the Matlab function according to its speciﬁcation a testbench should
be created to test this. It is crucial that this testbench covers diﬀerent input
ranges and especially the maximum cases. To convert the ﬂoating point design
the Fixed-Point Converter is used. The Fixed-Point Converter proposes ﬁxed-
point numbers for each variable based on the testbench and converts the design
accordingly. It is advisable to use another testbench to check that the resulting
values are within the desired range. The created ﬁxed point converted Matlab
code can then be integrated into the Simulink design.
It is important to test the model before continuing. A good way to automate
these tests is to use “to workspace” blocks. The blocks can also be put in a
subsystem with an enable block, so that only values of interest are output.
Once the results are satisfactory the HDL conversion can begin. There are a
number of pitfalls that are listed here:
• enable signals (that go to enable block of a subsystem) must be of type
boolean
• charts must be initialized at the start
• when converting a ﬁxed point number to a shorter ﬁfraction length then
precision will be lost
• all signals that feed the HDL subsystem must run with the same sample
time (inf is not supported as a sample time)
• signal to workspace: use a 2D array as save format (instead of the default
settings) for simple data processing in Matlab
In case a design was previously integrated in the Vivado project then do the fol-
lowing. Open the project of the parallel sampler IP core in Vivado and run the
Tcl script to remove the generated design (source removeMatlabHDLFiles.tcl
-notrace). This will delete reference to the generated ﬁles and delete the previ-
ously generated VHDL ﬁles.
For HDL code conversion use the HDL Workﬂow Advisor and perform the set-
tings as described in subsubsection 4.1.1.2.
Make sure to select a resource
==PAGE:65==
5.1 Code Generation Toolchain
53
utilization report to already verify that the model designed uses the desired
hardware.
After the code generation ﬁnished successfully integrate the code into the Vivado
design. This can be done automatically using the Tcl script (source integrateM-
atlabHDLFiles.tcl -notrace). Once the integration completed run synthesis to
conﬁrm that the integration worked.
This is also a good chance to already
check the hardware utilization report and to estimate whether the overall de-
sign will ﬁt. After the message that the “Synthesis [is] successfully completed”
it is necessary to repackage the IP. Therefore open “Package IP” and in the “File
Groups” tab click “Merge changes from File Groups wizard”. After that select
the “Review and Package” tab and click “Re-Package IP”.
Now in Vivado open the radar project (hf-radar-prj1.xpr) and close the IP
project. Open the block design and upgrade the IP core. After that run syn-
thesis and implementation and generate the Bitstream. Note that this will take
30 to 40 minutes depending on the complexity of the generated design.
Once the Bitstream is created execute the “compile_and_package.sh” script
(located at: work/Masterarbeit/scripts/petalinux/). Before running the script
make sure that the correct path is selected for the bit ﬁle (BITFILE_PATH).
Following that insert the SD-card into the PC and run the ”bootﬁles-copy-to-
sd_rf.sh”. A requirement for the script to work is an SD-card that has two
partitions one for the boot ﬁles and another for the root ﬁle system.
The radar application can be started using the Xilinx SDK (which can be
launched in Vivado by clicking: File →Launch SDK. In the SDK click un-
der the play button on linux_radar_appl. Therefor the computer needs to be
attached to the Zynq over Ethernet. It should be possible to ping the radar
using: 192.168.1.66. In some unlikely events is the SSBL not able to boot auto-
matically. In that case it is necessary to connect to the Zynq over UART (Serial,
baud rate: 115200) and type:
U−Boot−PetaLinux> boot
Alternatively the application can also be started over UART. The login name
is: root and the password is: root. After that the radar application lies in the
home directory and can be started using:
root@fraunhofer−rader:~#
./ linux_radar_appl . e l f
Conﬁguration options can be displayed by appending -h and -d shows default
values.
==PAGE:66==
54
Implementation
When using the Matlab based GUI to receive, process and display the radar data
under windows then the ﬁrewall needs to be deactivated. On a Linux machine
this works without any modiﬁcations.
5.1.1
Integration of the VHDL Component into the SISO
Design
As mentioned in subsection 2.3.2 the parallel sampler IP core is responsible for
controlling the environment and passing the data on to the connected compo-
nents. It was decided to integrate the generated algorithms in that IP core.
Therefor the design that was shown in Figure 2.8 was adapted to the one shown
in Figure 5.1. The ADC outputs the data in oﬀset binary mode but the Mat-
lab generated blocks expect the data in a two’s complement representation. To
convert from binary oﬀset mode to two’s complement the MSB needs to be in-
verted. Even though the conversion is that simply a separate component was
created, so that in case a diﬀerent data representation is desired an exchange
can be done easily.
The generated HDL code was integrated within the parallel sampling logic block.
The generated code needs an enable signal to know when to process the data.
In the SISO design this enable single is asserted high after the measurement was
started and the ADC setup delay past.
Figure 5.1: Change of the design of the Parallel Sampler shown in Figure 2.8
for integrating generated HDL code
==PAGE:67==
5.1 Code Generation Toolchain
55
There are techniques to integrate existing HDL code into the Simulink model
using a black box interface.
But for this project the black box approach is
not suitable, because there is no additional data processing HDL code that is
supposed to be integrated into the design.
For the integration to work the
interface needs to be clearly deﬁned. It was decided to create a subsystem with
a deﬁned number of inputs and outputs. If the integration is supposed to work
then the subsystem has to have three inputs: DataIn_I, DataIn_Q and enable
and two outputs: DataOut_I and DataOut_Q.
This is indeed not very ﬂexible. Every change in the in- or output ports to the
subsystem requires a redesign of the VHDL code. Even if only the number of
bit change a redesign is required. Currently the inputs are deﬁned to be 14-bit
and the outputs are 16-bit long. An additional issue is that when creating a
very simple design then the HDL Coder might design it in a way to just use
combinational logic without a clock. Hence the top level component will not
include a clock and the integration will fail without any design adaption. There
would be no diﬀerence when using the HDL Coder to create an IP core instead.
Every time the inputs and outputs are changed a redesign of the integration is
needed.
5.1.2
Tcl Scripts
Tcl scripts are a supported and actively used script language for Xilinx FPGA
tools, such as Vivado. The created Tcl scripts are a simpliﬁcation so that the
integration process works smoothly.
There is one script for including the generated ﬁles.
This script executes a
bash script to remove the old generated ﬁles, to copy the generated ones and
to list the location of the generated ﬁles. The bash script copies all VHDL ﬁles
from the Matlab directory into the IP repository directory. A special folder:
matlabGenerated was created to distinguish among regular ﬁles and generated
ones. This point is crucial, because Vivado requires that all ﬁles are relative
to the IP root directory. Before copying the bash script removes all old ﬁles
that might have been there from further code generation sessions. This is also
important, because the implementation run will fail, if components are in that
directory that are not used. After the bash script ﬁnished executing, the Tcl
script adds all the listed ﬁles into the project.
The counterpart to that script is the remove Tcl script. This script goes through
a list oﬀall integrated ﬁles and removes every ﬁle from the project that is located
in the directory for generated code. After the execution of this script the code
is not synthesizeable, because the signal processing component is missing.
==PAGE:68==
56
Implementation
5.2
Analysis and Implementation of Radar Algo-
rithms
This section describes the implementation of the radar algorithms described in
subsubsection 4.2.1.1. As already mentioned not all Matlab and Simulink con-
structs are supported for HDL conversion. An analysis initial of the algorithms
revealed that a number of function calls: such as ﬀt(), asin(), exp() are not
supported. It also showed that it is not possible to use the load() function to
load stored signals. This section explains how the radar algorithms can still be
implemented.
In the design of digital systems utilize certain HDL constructs special hardware
like register, block RAM, mealy or moore state machine and more. A designer
of digital systems will hence always be able to estimate the hardware resources
and compare the estimations with the synthesis report as an option to review
his design. With using higher level tools rises the level of abstraction. This
section also looks at the hardware utilization of the created blocks.
5.2.1
HDL Compatible FFTs
In Matlab an FFT can be performed on a matrix by using the following:
f f t R e s=f f t ( radarData ) ;
In the radar data processing the data matrix is 1000 x 160 samples big. The
above performs the FFT on each column. Hence the following would be true:
f f t R e s ( : , 1 ) == f f t ( radarData ( : , 1 ) ) ;
This is important to understand when transferring this to a Simulink model.
An equivalent Simulink model is shown in Figure 5.2
Figure 5.2: Simulink usage of an FFT block
==PAGE:69==
5.2 Analysis and Implementation of Radar Algorithms
57
In order to convert an FFT into HDL code it can be done both on Matlab and
Simulink basis. In Matlab a set of predeﬁned HDL design pattern functions
can be found under: eml_hdl_design_patterns. There are also FFT functions
among them, but the problem is that they only support a maximum length of
32 samples. Theoretically it would be possible to adapt the design to achieve a
length of 1024 samples but it was decided to focus on a Simulink based solution
instead.
In Simulink using the “hdllib” two FFT blocks can be found: FFT HDL Opti-
mized and HDL Minimum Resource FFT. For the 2D FFT an FFT with a length
of 160 samples and one with the length of 1000 sample would be required. HDL
compatible FFTs have to have a length of a power of 2. Hence a 1024 FFT
block and a 256 FFT block would be needed. There would need to be some
state machine to ﬁll the not needed bits with zeros. Looking at the hardware
utilization summarized in Table 5.1 it can be seen that the minimum resource
FFT is only saving resources for FFT with a longer length. The minimum re-
source FFT requires a slightly diﬀerent interface than the hardware optimized
FFT. But its main disadvantage is that it is marked as obsolete by MathWorks,
so that it is not further investigated. That is why the rest of this section focuses
on the HDL Optimized FFT.
Table 5.1: FFT hardware utilization
FFT block
Length
LUTs
Flip-Flops
DSPs
BRAM
HDL Optimized
1024
4654(5,9%)
6734(4,3%)
12(3%)
4(1,5%)
HDL Optimized
256
446(0,6%)
901(0,6%)
3(0,8%)
0
HDL Min. Resrc.
1024
638(0,8%)
345(0,2%)
4(1%)
5(1,9%)
HDL Min. Resrc.
256
602(0,8%)
356(0,2%)
4(1%)
4(1,5%)
By default is the data output in bit-reversed order. The FFT can be conﬁgured
to output elements in linear order instead. Furthermore there is no need for
a buﬀer as it was shown in Figure 5.2.
The model shown in Figure 5.3 is
equivalent. One sample at a time will be send to the HDL FFT block and it
will send out a number of samples (deﬁned by the length) after some latency.
Latency is deﬁned here as the time between the ﬁrst valid input and the ﬁrst
valid output. The latency depends on diﬀerent factors such as the length and
output bit order. For a 1024 long FFT is the latency 1116 clock cycles when
outputting in bit-reversed order and 2107 when outputting in linear order. For
a 256 long FFT outputting in bit reversed order are 329 clock cycles latency
expected. For the radar processing a special order is not required since the data
can be stored in any order in a memory.
==PAGE:70==
58
Implementation
Figure 5.3: Simulink HDL Optimized FFT block
5.2.2
Converting not Supported Functions to HDL
Besides the FFT there are a number of other Matlab functions that are not
supported for HDL conversion. For the calibration as it could have been seen in
Listing 4.1 an inverse sine (asin) and an exponential (exp) function are needed.
Not supported functions can be implemented using a LUT based or a CORDIC
based approach. Which are both explained here.
5.2.2.1
LUT Based Replacement
Many diﬀerent look-up table based approaches exist. The one that is presented
in the following is a low-cost approach with nearest-neighbor linear interpolation.
The function that was picked for replacement is the inverse sine that is required
in the calibration process.
Creating the LUT is simple.
First a ﬁxed point
representation of a signed number, with 2 whole bits and 14 fraction bits was
picked based on the value range of [−π
2 , π
2 ]. The LUT was selected to hold 256
elements, which is small and eﬃcient but still accurate enough. The inverse sine
is symmetric hence only half of it from 0 to 1 was stored. In Listing 5.1 the
LUT creation is summarized.
Listing 5.1: Matlab asin LUT creation
1
numTypeVal = numerictype (0 ,16 ,15) ;
2
aSinDbl = ( asin ( linspace (0 ,1 ,256) ) ) ’ ;
3
FI_aSin_LUT = f i ( aSinDbl ,
numTypeVal) ;
Input values for the asin() can range from -1 to 1 but it was decided to only
hold half of the inverse sine, because of the symmetry. That is why negative
input values are converted to positive and a negative ﬂag is set. The values
==PAGE:71==
5.2 Analysis and Implementation of Radar Algorithms
59
are ﬁrst normalized using a word size dependent constant. The 8 MSBs of the
normalized input value are used to address the LUT. Two look-ups are done
getting a value above and below. The 8 LSBs are used for the interpolation. In
case that the value was negative the result is multiplied by -1.
A test using 10.000 entries showed the diﬀerences to a regular Matlab based
asin() computation. Figure 5.4 (a) shows a plot of the diﬀerences. The maximum
diﬀerence is at 0,0223 and the average at 0,0023. The peaks that can be seen
in the Figure are associated with calculations close to the edge of the range like
asin(-0,9999) or asin(0,9999).
Performing this approach by hand can be error prone and time intensive. A
LUT based replacement can also be handled using the Fixed-Point Converter.
(Fixed-Point Converter function replacement screen shot is shown in Figure F.5
on page 111) For comparison purposes was the tool based solution setup equally:
16-bit value representation and 256 points in the LUT. The maximum diﬀerence
is at 0,0494 and the average was 0,0004. Hence when comparing the tool based
solution with the own approximation it can be said that the tools values are in
average more precise but the maximum values are further of.
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.4: Inverse sine LUT diﬀerence to regular asin() own interpolation in
(a) and tool based solution in (b)
A third option is to use the coder.approximation to replace functions. For that
the function to be replaced needs to be isolated in a single ﬁle. The replacement
can be conﬁgured as followed:
1
>> replaceCfg = coder . approximation ( ’ Function ’ , ’ asineHDL ’ , ’
CandidateFunction ’ ,@asineHDL , . . .
2
’ NumberOfPoints ’ ,256 , ’ InputRange ’ ,[ −1 ,1] , ’
FunctionNamePrefix ’ , ’ asinReplace_ ’ ) ;
3
>> coder . approximate ( replaceCfg ) ;
==PAGE:72==
60
Implementation
This approach has the advantage that no testbench is required (as for the Fixed-
Point Converter). After running the coder.approximation not only the approx-
imate function is generated but also a testbench. The hardware resources are
for all the examples in the same range. The implementations need under 300
LUTs (<1%) and around 4 DSPs(1%).
5.2.2.2
CORDIC Based Replacement
CORDIC stands for Coordinate Rotation Digital Computer and is an algorithm
to eﬃciently calculate trigonometric functions based on only additions, subtrac-
tion, shifts and table look-up. One reason to favor a CORDIC implementation
over a LUT based approach is that it might not always be possible to use the
LUT based function replacement. Another might be hardware constraints. The
CORDIC for example does not require a multiplication.
There are a number of functions that can automatically approximate trigono-
metric functions like: cordiccos, cordicsin, cordiccexp. For the calibration the
input values for the exponential function were complex.
It was not possible
to generate a LUT based approach for this using the Fixed-Point Converter.
Hence a diﬀerent solution was required. The following deﬁnition can be made
for complex numbers:
eiθ = cos(θ) + i · sin(θ)
(5.1)
The approximation of the complex exponential function, cordiccexp, computes
exactly that. Running a precision check reveals that this function is very precise
as it can be seen from Figure 5.5. The test reveals a maximum deviation of
1, 3 · 10−15. While still being very cheap in hardware usage with 712 LUTs and
0 DSPs. As for the LUT approach it is also possible to design an own CORDIC
algorithm. But this was not followed since the results of the cordiccexp are
already more than satisfactory.
5.2.3
State Machines
The HDL Coder does not only support combinational circuits where the output
depends only on the current input. But also FSM where a number of states are
used to recall previous inputs and based on that compute an output.
FSM can be created using Matlab based switch case statements or using a chart
of the Stateﬂow environment. First the switch case approach is shown. The
state register is deﬁned using the “persistent” key word, which causes the value
to be kept in memory between function calls. In the switch case statements
==PAGE:73==
5.2 Analysis and Implementation of Radar Algorithms
61
Figure 5.5: Comparing the cordiccexp to the Matlab exp()
the diﬀerent actions within each state are described. An example is shown in
Listing 5.2. With the “isempty” is the state machine set into its initial state,
which is in this case zero.
A simple state machine was created having three states. Looking at the gen-
erated code it can be said that it is not very easy to follow. This is for one
reason, because instead of state names the numbers are used instead. The other
reason is that the code consists of 8 diﬀerent processes which is unconventional
and confusing for such a small FSM with three states. Nevertheless reveals the
Xilinx synthesis report that the corresponding FSM is used.
Listing 5.2: Matlab state machine example
1
p e r s i s t e n t
moore_state_reg ;
2
i f
isempty( moore_state_reg )
3
moore_state_reg = f i (0 ,
0 ,
2 ,
0) ;
4
end
5
6
S1_idle = 0;
7
S2_compute = 1;
. . .
8
9
switch
( moore_state_reg )
10
case
S1_idle
11
dataOut = 0;
12
i f
( s t a r t I n ==1)
13
moore_state_reg (1) = S2_compute ;
14
else
15
moore_state_reg (1) = S1_idle ;
16
end
17
case
S2_compute
. . .
18
end
==PAGE:74==
62
Implementation
A diﬀerent option to create FSMs is to use a Chart block that is available within
the Stateﬂow environment 1 and can be integrated into a Simulink model. An
example is shown in Figure 5.6 (a). In order to convert a chart into HDL code
it is necessary to conﬁgure it so that the chart is initialized at the start of the
simulation (instead of the ﬁrst occurrence). This can be done by going to Chart
→Properties →“Execute (enter) Chart at Initialization”.
Using the chart environment has two advantages. On the one hand the gener-
ated code is better readable, because it uses the typical conventions for creating
a state machine. This can be seen in Figure 5.6 (b) where a separate process is
handling the next state and registers (lines 52-63). Furthermore the actual state
names are used that were picked in the model. Additionally the model based
approach gives a better understanding. A disadvantage is that the Simulink
model runs slow when including a Chart block. All in all outweigh the advan-
tages of the Simulink based approach the Matlab switch case implementation
so if possible it is advisable to use the Chart block.
(a) Chart
(b) Generated FSM
Figure 5.6: Shows an example Chart implementation and an extract of the
corresponding code generation (some code was deleted for better
review and is indicated using: - -...)
1http://de.mathworks.com/help/stateflow/ref/chart.html
==PAGE:75==
5.2 Analysis and Implementation of Radar Algorithms
63
5.2.4
Utilizing BRAM
Looking at the radar processing algorithms it can be seen that it is required to
buﬀer the samples and intermediate results. The calibration for example requires
to store all 1000 x 160 data samples before it can calculate a calibration value.
Also for the 2D FFT it is required to store one measurement.
As it was shown in subsection 4.2.2 a data set consists of 1000 x 160 x 14-bit
x 2 or if increased to 16-bit values: 1000 x 160 x 16-bit x 2. Using registers
/ Flip-Flops as storage would require 5,12 million, which is a lot more than
the available 157.200. Hence a diﬀerent storage medium was required. Instead
of registers BRAM can be used as embedded memory on the FPGA. Another
option would be to use external memory. In this setup DDR3 SDRAM and
NAND or NOR ﬂash could be used (as it was seen in Figure 2.3). The problem
with using external memory is that the interface becomes more complex and it
is especially hard to conﬁgure using a higher level modeling tool.
Hence it was decided to use BRAM. Block RAM can be inferred in Simulink
using the Dual Port RAM, Dual Rate Dual Port RAM or Single Port RAM
which can be found in the “hdllib”. When using only a small number of bits to
store (e.g. address width = 4) then distributed RAM is automatically assigned
and for a bigger RAM size (e.g. address width = 18) block RAM is used. Which
is as desired as mentioned in section 2.3. A synthesis example was tried for a
Dual Port RAM with 18-bit wide addresses and 18-bit long data. This resulted
in about 54% of the BRAM or 144 of 265 block RAM Tiles. Which makes sense,
because 218 · 18 −bit = 576kB which are 54% of the available 1060 kB.
BRAM can also be inferred from Matlab using the “persistent” keyword. An
example is shown in Listing 5.3. The code that is shown there results in a BRAM
that uses 262.144 x 16-bit. Theoretically the amount of data would require only
312 kB of the BRAM. But the size of the BRAM depends on the number of
address bits that are required. To access 1000 x 160 entries an address width
of 218 = 262.144 is required. Which explains the Matlab resource estimation of
262.144 x 16-bit.
Listing 5.3: Matlab Buﬀer example
1
function y = buffer_1000_160 ( value , adr , wr)
2
p e r s i s t e n t u_d;
3
i f
isempty(u_d)
4
u_d = f i ( zeros (1000 ,160) ,1 ,16 ,0) ;
5
end
6
y = u_d( adr ) ;
7
i f
(wr == 1)
8
u_d( adr ) = f i ( value , 1 , 1 6 , 0 ) ;
9
end
==PAGE:76==
64
Implementation
When including this code into a Simulink model as a Matlab Function block
then the HDL block properties need to be adjusted so that persistent variables
are mapped to RAM. This can be achieved by right clicking on the Matlab
Function block and selecting: HDL-Code →HDL-Block Properties →MapPer-
sistenVarsToRAM →on (The dialog box is shown in the appendix on page 112
in Figure F.6). Otherwise the HDL Coder will design a system that uses only
Flip-Flops.
The buﬀer might be updated with new values of the same bit length but with a
diﬀerent fraction length. In Simulink it is not supported to store diﬀerent ﬁxed
point representations of the same length in the same memory space. In order to
support this the values stored in the buﬀer were the bit representative integer
values. This can be achieved in Matlab using the stored integer function used
as follows.
1
dataX = f i (2.75 ,1 ,16 ,10) ; %binary :
0000101100000000
2
intX = s t o r e d I n t e g e r ( dataX ) ; % = 2816
After reading from the buﬀer with the help of the fraction length the original
value can be restored. But this can not simply be achieved by doing:
1
origX = f i ( intX ,1 ,16 ,10) % = 31 ,9990
A diﬀerent approach is to be followed by for example creating a bit mask for
the fraction and integer part, combining it with the received integer value and
shifting it to the right. For the fraction the data size needs to be greater than
2 times the fraction length. For the example the code is a follows:
1
maskFrac = f i ((2^10 −1) ,1 ,16 ,0) ;
2
maskInt =
f i (( −2^10) ,1 ,16 ,0) ;
3
valueInt = b i t s h i f t ( bitand ( intX , maskInt ) ,−10) ;
4
valueFrac = b i t s h i f t ( f i ( bitand ( intX , maskFrac ) ,1 ,21 ,10) , −10) ;
5
r e s u l t = valueInt+valueFrac ;
6
origX = f i ( r e s u l t ,1 ,16 ,10) % = 2 ,75
5.2.5
Proof of Concept for a CFAR Algorithm Implemen-
tation
As already mentioned in subsubsection 4.2.1.1 the CFAR is used to detect a
target against noisy background and a cell averaging approach was described.
Even better for noise reduction is to use a median ﬁlter instead of the average.
The CFAR algorithm does the following. For each cell under test (CUT) the
median result of the surrounding window cells is computed and multiplied with
==PAGE:77==
5.2 Analysis and Implementation of Radar Algorithms
65
a threshold value n. The result is then compared to the CUT and based on the
outcome the target list gets an entry for a target or no target. This is visualized
in Figure 5.7.
Figure 5.7: CFAR principle Approach (targets are marked in red)
To calculate the median a sorting algorithm is required to sort the input values.
Matlab oﬀers a number of sorting algorithms. The problem is that most of them
are based on dynamic loops that can not be used for HDL code generation. That
is why a selection sort algorithm 2 provided by MathWorks was selected. With
the help of the sorting algorithm the median was simply computed by:
median = sortedV al( n
2 ) + sortedV al( n
2 + 1)
2
(5.2)
Following this is a comparison of the CUT to the computed median value, which
results in a 1 indicating a target hit or in a zero for no target. With the help of
the Fixed-Point Converter tool could this algorithm be converted into a ﬁxed
point design and integrated into Simulink.
The implementation for the CFAR combines diﬀerent techniques: It uses a
buﬀer, a state machine and the median ﬁlter. The implementation was done as
an example on a matrix the size of 100 x 16 to speed up computation times.
It was also decided to only receive 8 surrounding values (2 in each direction).
Both could be fairly easily adapted.
There are two state machines in the design: one is controlling the radar data
Buﬀer and the other is managing the CFAR computation, which are both shown
in Figure 5.8. The FSM for controlling the buﬀer (a) starts by inputting the
initial radar data into the buﬀer. It then waits for the CFAR algorithm to send
a read requests and based on that communicate with the buﬀer. The CFAR
control FSM (b) starts after receiving the start signal from the buﬀer control
2goo.gl/65GxTU
==PAGE:78==
66
Implementation
FSM indicating that all initial data is stored into the memory. It then starts
by sending the read request for the 9 ﬁrst samples. After which it takes the
from the median function block calculated value and stores it into a target list.
The resulting Stateﬂow chart that was created was included in the appendix for
completion in Figure F.7. The median function block constantly receives the
last 9 values from the memory and constantly computes the median and target
value. Hence not every output value that is output is valid. It is the CFAR
control FSM that is responsible for picking the result based on the state it is in.
(a) Buﬀer Control
(b) CFAR Control
Figure 5.8: CFAR FSMs for controlling the buﬀer and CFAR computation
Figure 5.9 shows the created HDL compatible Simulink model. The FSMs are
colored in yellow. Connected to them are the radar data buﬀer and the target
list buﬀer. Furthermore a Matlab Function block can be seen after the radar
data buﬀer to convert the stored integer value to corresponding ﬁxed point value.
The median block is in the lower right corner and receives as inputs the delayed
buﬀer outputs.
==PAGE:79==
5.3 Implementation of a Calibration Algorithm
67
Figure 5.9: HDL compatible CFAR Simulink model
5.3
Implementation of a Calibration Algorithm
This section shows the approach of a calibration algorithm. For that a Simulink
model was created that is based on the code shown in Listing 4.1.
For the subtraction of the baseline a LUT block is used. This LUT block can be
ﬁlled with a “Simulink.LookupTable object”. Such a LUT object can be created
as shown in the following:
>>LUT_BaseSignal_Q=Simulink . LookupTable ;
>>LUT_BaseSignal_Q . Table . Value=baseSignalQ ;
>>LUT_BaseSignal_Q . Breakpoints (1) . Value=f i ( [ 1 : 1 : 1 0 0 0 ] , 0 , 1 6 , 0 ) ;
>>LUT_BaseSignal_Q . StructTypeInfo .Name=’FI_LUT_BaseQ ’ ;
The baseSignalQ is a ﬁxed point 1000 entries long vector. This is a reduced
size to save LUTs. The original size of the baseline matrix was 1000x160 entries
big. The entries for each column are fairly similar and hence it was created an
average value over the 160 ramps. In Figure 5.10 the LUT block can be seen.
The LUT block is connected to a counter that causes the LUT block to output
the corresponding baseline value on every new input.
==PAGE:80==
68
Implementation
Figure 5.10: Simulink model showing the LUT block based subtraction
Instead of computing the average value as shown in Listing 4.1 line 3 after the
complete measurement has been stored this is done on the ﬂy. The computation
is constantly performed as shown in Figure 5.11. After 1000x160 samples have
been processed the ﬁnal average value is achieved by dividing the accumulated
sum 1 with sum 2.
Figure 5.11: Optimized Computation of K1K2 for HDL
Based on the K1K2 value the calibration value can be calculated.
For the
inverse sine the LUT approach as described in subsubsection 5.2.2.1 was used.
For computing the result to the complex exponential function the cordiccexp
(presented in subsubsection 5.2.2.2) was used as follows.
K1=.5∗(1+g∗cordiccexp (−1∗phi ) ) ;
The FSM for coordinating the calibration is simple and consists of only three
states as shown in Figure 5.12. The FSM leaves the idle state after the calibra-
tion value has been computed and a valid signal asserted high by the preceding
block. Then one by one each value is requested from the buﬀer and its new
==PAGE:81==
5.3 Implementation of a Calibration Algorithm
69
calibrated value is computed which is then written back to the buﬀer at the
same address.
Figure 5.12: FSM for coordinating the calibration
The FSM for the buﬀer controller is fairly similar to the one described in sub-
section 5.2.5 with the only diﬀerence that the calibrated data is written back to
memory. For that reason it is not elaborated further on that FSM here. The
appendix shows a screen shot of the complete design in Figure F.8 on page 114.
A big issue for the design and implementation of the calibration was the ﬁxed
point design. The Fixed-Point Converter can be a great help when converting
a design to ﬁxed point. But the problem is that as soon as the testbench is not
covering every possible extreme scenario then the ﬁxed point values might not
be correct. An example: Looking at the k1k2 value calculation (Figure 5.11) the
Fixed-Point Converter suggests a range from 0 to 1 based on the testbench that
was created. The testbench used random input data in the 14-bit range. The
k1k2 calculation can be calculated as follows, where the data matrix d holds
1000x160 integer values in the range between 8191 and -8192.
k1k2 =
P d.2
P 4 · re{d.}2
(5.3)
This can be converted in:
k1k2 =
P re{d.}2 + im{d.}2 ± 2 · re{d.} · im{d.}
P 4 · re{d.}2
(5.4)
Both the real part and the imaginary part are stored separately, but the ﬁxed
point dimensions are deﬁned for both values. The real part is the dominant one
which is clear when simplifying this to:
re{k1k2} ≈
P im{d.}2
P 4 · re{d.}2
(5.5)
==PAGE:82==
70
Implementation
Assuming that every entry of the input is at maximum for the imaginary part
(-8192) and that the real part is 1 then this results in a potential maximum
value of:
re{k1k2}max ≈(−8192j)2
4 · 1
≈−16, 7 · 106
(5.6)
This signed number would require 24-bit for the whole part. The Fixed-Point
Converter will also come to the same conclusion when a test provokes this by in-
putting for Q always -8192 and for the I value 1. This might be a highly unlikely
scenario for radar data but this example shows how complex and important the
testbench generation is in order to convert a design correctly.
The results of the calibration are shown in section 6.2. The calibration was done
using the Simulink environment so that charts could be used. But it would have
been possible to design this using only Matlab functions.
==PAGE:83==
Chapter 6
Results
In the beginning of this chapter the testing environment is explained and an
example test is showed. The following section examines the results of the cal-
ibration algorithm. The during the design and implementation phase detected
limitations regarding the hardware resources and the performance are presented
in section 6.3, by discussing the FFT block related issues and the usage of the
BRAM.
6.1
Testing Approach
For testing purposes another component was created in the parallel sampler
to handle the inputs (inputHandler). As it can be seen from Figure 6.1 this
component is basically a multiplexer that either passes to the parallel sampler
logic the incoming I/Q data or the captured data from a BRAM. With that
setup the data processing on the FPGA can always run with the same well
deﬁned input values.
The input handler includes the FSM shown in Figure 6.2. This FSM is used to
compute the address for the BRAM, which is basically just a simple counter.
To ensure BRAM utilization a Xilinx template was followed. The BRAM is
initialized with values read from a ﬁle (BRAMinitReversed.data). This ﬁle holds
==PAGE:84==
72
Results
Figure 6.1: Design adaptation of the parallel sampler shown in Figure 5.1 for
testing purposes.
a captured measurement. The BRAM has a width of 28-bit and holds 16.000
entries (≈55kB). So it only holds 10% of a whole measurement. As it can also
be seen from the FSM it will cycle through this constantly and start over again.
A whole measurement would have utilized to much BRAM. An analysis of the
utilization report shows for the input handler an increase of BRAM usage by
5% (14 block RAM tiles = 56kB). The amount of needed LUTs and Flip-Flops
are negligibly low.
With the help of a C++ based application the data from the Radar was then
captured on the PC. In the C++ program a UDP socket was setup to receive
the data. In an endless loop one measurement was always captured, converted
to the corresponding ﬁxed or ﬂoating point number and then stored in a ﬁle.
Once the user terminated the program this ﬁle could be copied to Matlab and
compared to the model output. With that technique it could be veriﬁed that
the smaller examples such as FSM, BRAM and FFTs work in hardware.
==PAGE:85==
6.1 Testing Approach
73
Figure 6.2: FSM for the input handler
To show an example the FFT results of a 1024 long FFT are shown in Figure 6.3.
For the test as the input signal a 50 Hz sine with an amplitude of 0.6 and a 120
Hz sine with an amplitude of 1 and some random noise was selected. The results
for the Matlab based solution use: ﬀt(x), the Simulink model uses the regular
FFT Block and the results shown in the third ﬁgure used the HDL optimized
FFT and shows the result received from the FPGA. As it can be seen they all
detect the sinus frequency at 50 and 120 Hz. A closer look at the diﬀerences
shows that the Matlab based FFT and the Simulink model using the regular
FFTs produces exactly the same results. As it can be seen from the FPGA HDL
results is that the peak for the 50 Hz frequency is a little more imprecise but
still within a close range and detectable among the noise.
Figure 6.3: Shows the FFT results in Matlab, Simulink and from the FPGA
using an HDL optimized FFT
==PAGE:86==
74
Results
6.2
Results for the Calibration Algorithm
The biggest problem with testing the calibrated radar were that the test ap-
proach shown in section 6.1 was not possible, because of the limited hardware
resources. As mentioned the parallel sampler uses around 5% (14 of 265) BRAM
tiles. The utilization report of only the calibration algorithm showed a hardware
utilization of:
LUTs
Flip-Flops
BRAM tiles
DSP blocks
28.345 (≈36%)
363 (<1%)
257 (≈97%)
293 (≈73%)
The high amount of DSP blocks results from the calculation Matlab Function
block to compute the calibration value.
The huge amount of DSP blocks is
one issue the other is that this design already uses too much BRAM. When
integrating this design into the parallel sampler the synthesis tool tries to make
up for the missing BRAM space with LUT based storage and ends up creating
a design that can not be ﬁt on the FPGA. Thus it was only possible to test
the design on the hardware with the test approach as shown in the previous
section with a smaller block RAM size. For that it was decided to only sample
16 Ramps which results in a storage size of 10% of the original size instead.
Running the smaller example revealed that for some input constellations wrong
calibrated values were computed. As mentioned in subsection 4.1.1 the HDL
Coder also oﬀers the possibility to generate a testbench. The resulting wave-
form graph is shown in Figure 6.4.
The generated testbench uses the same
input values as the Simulink model and then compares the resulting values
with the expected values. This can be seen in the upper half of the waveform
graph. As it can be seen the FPGA result for DataOutI_signed did not match
DataOutI_expected. The same mismatch can be seen for the Q signal.
Based on this the values in the lower half of the waveform graph were added
to further analyze the problem. The hexadecimal numbers that are shown rep-
resent two’s complement numbers. The calibration starts by requesting data
from the buﬀer. The ﬁrst values are -9,75 (hex: ﬀd9) and -115,75 (hex:fe31).
This can be veriﬁed by examining the signal values of in_dataI_signed and
in_dataQ_signed.
Because of the correct input values the calibration value
computation must be false.
The k1k2 average calibration values are for the
simulated input data expected to be:
−0, 0660 −0, 2126i (hex : 3ffffffef1891 + 3ffffffc99227 i)
(6.1)
This can also be veriﬁed as correct when looking at k1k2_re and k1k2_im in
the waveform graph. Based on this value the ﬁnal complex calibration value is
==PAGE:87==
6.2 Results for the Calibration Algorithm
75
Figure 6.4: Wavefrom graph showing the HDL Coder generated testbench
with added signals for better understanding the problem
computed. The result of that value is unfortunately incorrect on the FPGA.
The expected value that the model computes are:
kInv_11 = 0, 6042 + 0, 1259i (hex : 26abfcb3 + 080e8735 i)
kInv_12 = 0, 0121 + 0, 1259i (hex : 03173860 + 203a1cd4 i)
(6.2)
But the values the HDL logic computes are:
kInv_11 = 1, 9936 −0, 7359i (hex : 28a1f9ca + 2bf132b4 i)
kInv_12 = −0, 5 + 0, 2641i (hex : e3b7a930 + 5f8995a0 i)
(6.3)
It was not possible to further trace the reason for this error. The main reason
is that the generated code for this Matlab Function block uses mainly variables
(165 in total) which could not be added for the testbench. Diﬀerent modiﬁca-
tions to the model were explored, such as removing the own inverse sine LUT
based approach with a Fixed-Point Converter generated one but without any
success.
Nevertheless to get a synthesizeable design for the bigger implementation with
160 ramps the input handler was removed. With that change enough room was
left for the synthesize tool to implement the design. The synthesis report shows
the following for the complete system:
LUTs
Flip-Flops
BRAM tiles
DSP blocks
30.507 (≈40%)
3421 (≈2%)
259 (≈98%)
293 (≈73%)
Unfortunately is a another negative point here that the timing requirements can
not be met anymore with such a huge design.
==PAGE:88==
76
Results
6.3
Limitation of Hardware Resources and Com-
putation Speed
When designing digital systems there is always a trade oﬀbetween area, speed
and power consumption. There is no diﬀerence for this project. The FPGA has
limited resources and a timing requirement of 1,3 ms for radar signal processing
when a 30 Hz frequency is required. This section particular looks at the FFT
design and at the storage problem for the samples.
6.3.1
FFT Performance and Area
The radar data processing requires 160 FFTs with a length of 1024 samples and
a 1000 with a length of 256 samples. This would result in:
160 · 1116 clock cycles + 1000 · 329 clock cycles = 507.560 clock cycles
(6.4)
Under the assumption of a clock speed of 100 MHz, it would take about 5 ms
for sequential processing. With a maximum measurement rate of 30 Hz the
new radar data comes after approximately 1,3 ms. The latency for the other
data processing depends on the buﬀer read and write parallelization.
For a
calibration and CFAR algorithm the assumption is based on three operations
per sample: read, calculate and write back. Thus with one buﬀer it would take
for a 100 MHz design 4,8 ms to perform a calibration run and the same for a
CFAR calculation. This would result in 21,5 Hz.
The FFTs that are performed in range and velocity direction can each be paral-
lelized to increase the computation speed. Theoretically it would be possible to
run a 160 FFTs at the same time and then after that 1000 FFTs in parallel. But
as it can be concluded from Table 5.1 that would require over 1 million LUTs.
Since only 78.600 LUTs are available on the FPGA only a number of FFTs can
be executed in parallel. Executing the FFTs in parallel means also that reads
and writes to the buﬀer can be performed in parallel. Hence the buﬀers have to
split into smaller sub components as well.
Table 6.1 shows a variety of setups. It is based on the assumption that an FFT
block with a length of 1024 samples has a 1116 clock cycles latency and an FFT
with a length of 256 has a latency of 329. It is only shown here the LUT usage,
because it is the most demanding. The numbers were scaled up based on the
synthesis reports for using 1 block. Generating code for eight 1024 FFTs in
parallel veriﬁed that the approximations are reasonable. The FFTs are not the
only things running on hardware. Hence options 5 to 6 are impractical, because
they use way to many LUTs.
==PAGE:89==
6.3 Limitation of Hardware Resources and Computation Speed
77
Table 6.1: FFT latency (in clock cycles) and area approximation
Opt
FFT with length: 1024
FFT with length: 256
Total
No.
Latency
LUTs
No.
Latency
LUTs
Latency
LUTs
1
1
178.560
6%
1
329.000
1%
507.560
7%
2
2
89.280
12%
4
82.250
3%
171.530
15%
3
8
22.320
47%
15
21.933
9%
44.253
56%
4
10
17.856
60%
20
16.450
15%
34.306
75%
5
10
17.856
60%
40
8.225
22%
26.081
82%
6
12
14.880
71%
50
6.580
28%
21.460
99 %
Based on Table 6.1 Table 6.2 shows the delay estimations for each hardware
conﬁguration. The maximum frequency with a speed grade of -1 is according
to the data sheet 400 MHz. [44]. Performing tests on the current hardware
revealed a maximum frequency of 200 MHz using a simple example. Looking at
Table 6.2 it is clear that a 200 MHz or even 250 MHz would not be required.
Taking for example option 3 would result in a measurement period of 30 Hz
(under the assumption that the rest of the computation takes less than 1 ms).
There is always a trade of between area, speed and power. Hence when trying
to use 100 % of the resources on the FPGA the synthesis tool might be able to
map it all on the FPGA but at the same time too strict timing constraint will
fail as it can be seen for the implementation of the calibration algorithm.
Table 6.2: Delay estimation for all the FFTs
Opt
100 MHz
200 MHz
250 MHz
1
5 ms
2,5 ms
2 ms
2
1,7 ms
858 µs
686 µs
3
442 µs
221 µs
177 µs
4
343 µs
171 µs
137 µs
5
260 µs
130 µs
104 µs
6
215 µs
107,3 µs
86 µs
In order to further save resources partial reconﬁguration (PR) of the FPGA
at run-time could be a possible solution. In [45] the performance for PR was
analyzed using Xilinx PR and the internal conﬁguration access port (ICAP)
primitive. They showed that a BRAM based approach achieves the best per-
formance with a maximum reconﬁguration speed of 371,4 MB/s. A diﬀerent
approach presented is to use for the communication an integrated bus master
with burst transmission (MST). Considering that there is not enough BRAM
space the MST_HWICAP might be more applicable with an average reconﬁgu-
ration speed of 234,5 MB/s. [45] For eight HDL optimized FFTs the bit ﬁle was
6 MB big. Hence it would require approximately 25 ms for the reconﬁguration.
==PAGE:90==
78
Results
The actual size of the bit ﬁle might be smaller, but it still shows that partial
reconﬁguration would not be an option, because it would be too slow.
6.3.2
BRAM Size
Another challenge is the amount of data that is supposed to be processed by
the FPGA. In subsection 4.2.2 it was presented that per measurement each I-
and Q-signal leads to a 320.000-byte big dataset.
If only one Matlab based
buﬀer is used to hold one dataset then this results according to the HDL Coders
estimation in a 512 kB big BRAM. A synthesis showed that the synthesis tool
is optimizing this a little more so that 480 kB are used, which includes still
some overhead. When organizing the number of buﬀers diﬀerently less BRAM
can be utilized as Table 6.3 shows. The buﬀers should always hold multiple of
1000 samples (one ramp). As it can be seen not every buﬀer partitioning makes
sense from a memory saving perspective, e.g 8 buﬀers each holding 20 ramps
results in the same amount of unused memory. Having a memory controller
that controls 10 or more individual buﬀer components for each dataset might
add too much complexity. Hence it is also thinkable to divide the buﬀers into
an uneven number of buﬀers.
Table 6.3: block RAM Utilization
Buﬀer Setup
Address
Matlab
potentially
Xilinx
width
Utilization
unused
Utilization
1000x160 x1
218
512 kB
199,5 kB
480 kB
1000x80 x2
217
512 kB
199,5 kB
480 kB
1000x20 x8
215
512 kB
199,5 kB
480 kB
1000x16 x10
214
320 kB
7,5 kB
316 kB
1000x130 + 1000x30
217 & 215
320 kB
7,5 kB
316 kB
1000x30 x5 + 1000x10
215 & 214
352 kB
39,5 kB
330 kB
Nevertheless even a hardware utilization of about 320 kB per dataset only al-
lows to store at maximum three datasets in the 1060 kB of BRAM under the
assumption that the FFTs do not need any BRAM. As shown in Table 5.1 one
HDL optimized FFT block with a length of 1024 needs 4 BRAM tiles (16 kB).
Furthermore some BRAM might be required for the target list depending on
the algorithm. From that it can be concluded that no more than two datasets
should be stored in the BRAM. This already makes the signal processing on the
SISO design complex, because all blocks have to be able to work with the same
set of buﬀers instead of having several buﬀers for each processing step. Without
any data reduction it would be impossible to do signal processing for the MIMO
design, because there is simply not enough space to buﬀer four datasets.
==PAGE:91==
Chapter 7
Discussion and Reﬂection
This chapter is divided into four parts. A discussion and reﬂection is presented
on each of the main parts of the thesis. It starts with the MIMO design. After
that the Toolchain and the HDL Coder are discussed. The following section
discusses the implementation of the radar algorithms and the chapter closes
with reﬂecting on the resources and the computation performance.
7.1
MIMO Design
The initial error in the SISO design was not all bad. It was also a good op-
portunity to learn about the development environment, about the Linux OS,
and about kernel driver development and it helped in understanding the MIMO
development.
For the MIMO design the interface to the ADC was modiﬁed so that the clock
from the MIMO is used in combination with the converted data. With the help
of simulated based testing using testbenches and the modiﬁed SISO design it
was possible to test the new concept. The diﬀerence to the real MIMO design
is that the clock for the ADC was coming from the FPGA itself instead of the
ADC. The MIMO hardware was still in the development stages during the thesis.
Hence it was not possible to test the developed design on the MIMO hardware.
==PAGE:92==
80
Discussion and Reﬂection
Nevertheless due to the similarity of the designs and the only diﬀerence being
the clock source it can be concluded that the integration should also work on
the MIMO Design.
The design of the SPI interface was not testable on the SISO hardware, because
that requires new wires. But the extensive simulation and analysis of the sig-
nals on the oscilloscope revealed that the communication is according to the
speciﬁcation. Furthermore a measurement will have to show whether the power
saving mode of the ADCs has an actual eﬀect on the power consumption.
7.2
Toolchain and HDL Coder
As it was described in section 5.1 several steps are required in the process to
generate model based algorithms on the radar hardware. This is not only a
time intensive procedure but there is also the danger of ﬁnding errors late in
the process. It is hence advised to examine the Matlab based utilization already
after the code generation to estimate whether what has been generated is what
has been designed. It is also a good option to estimate whether the design will
ﬁt on the FPGA.
The HDL Coder is a very power full tool, with a vast amount of conﬁguration
options which also makes it complex.
There is a limited compatibility from
Simulink and Matlab blocks. Within the scope of the thesis the experience was
made that using the HDL Workﬂow Advisor from a Simulink Model works best
for code generation. Also comparing Simulink models to Matlab code it can be
said that there are more pre-deﬁned blocks available in Simulink. Everything
that can not be implemented in Simulink can still be extended with Matlab
Function blocks. Another very helpful feature are the by Stateﬂow provided
state charts which can be integrated to create mealy or moor FSM. This is a
helpful feature, because it visualizes the ﬂow of the state machine and hence the
design step can be shortened.
For Matlab functions the set of pre-deﬁned functions is very small. But the
biggest advantage of the Matlab based HDL generation is the Fixed-Point Con-
verter that works best using Matlab functions. The Fixed-Point Converter is a
powerful conversion tool that has proven to be a development time saving ap-
plication. But as mentioned it is crucial that the testbench is suﬃciently testing
the extreme cases.
It is claimed that the HDL Coder creates readable code that can be traced back
to the model. This is true for simple models. From examining the generated
==PAGE:93==
7.3 Implementation of the Radar Algorithms
81
code it seems that the generated code quality suﬀers when using more complex
models or larger data vectors at once inside a function.
As it could be seen from the example for the calibrated radar (section 6.2) it
is not always guaranteed that the generated code works as the model does.
Furthermore the generated code used a lot of variables. This might be ﬁne for
high-level designers as long as it works but once it does not work this becomes a
problem, because it becomes impossible to reproduce their meaning. Especially
when the variable names are called multiple versions of “temp”.
This is also one of the main reasons it is believed that MBD can not compete
with designing a digital system using a hardware description language. Moreover
makes the design of digital systems clearer what hardware is supposed to be used
for the design. Another thing is that some features that VHDL can oﬀer could
not be recreated using MBD. For instance oﬀers VHDL generate statements to
instantiate a number of components. For the examples where the Buﬀer was
split into many diﬀerent sub components there was no other way found than to
manually convert them.
7.3
Implementation of the Radar Algorithms
Generated code was successfully integrated into the SISO design. But the inte-
gration is not very ﬂexible. Every change in the interface of the HDL model to
the environment will require a re-design of the integration. Consequently can
this integration process only be used without touching the VHDL code and as
long as the deﬁned inputs and outputs of the model stay the same.
Sadly it was not possible to present a full implementation of radar algorithms
on FPGA or ARM. This is for one reason because of the complexity of the al-
gorithms. Transferring a model from Matlab to Simulink is especially diﬃcult
with no prior knowledge in either of them. The problem was that some con-
structs such as FFTs or state machines are better supported in Simulink than
in Matlab but all the available radar algorithms were written in Matlab.
With the developed testing approach it was possible to verify the correctness of
the smaller example. Because of the high BRAM utilization the test approach
for bigger implementations (e.g. the calibration algorithms) was not applicable.
Using a smaller example revealed that the generated code does not compute the
same computations. Unfortunately there was not enough time left to ﬁx this
problem. It was suspected that the error was caused by a false ﬁxed point con-
version, but it could not be explained why the model then still works correctly.
==PAGE:94==
82
Discussion and Reﬂection
7.4
Resource and Computation Performance
With the current FPGA the development of radar algorithms is not advisable in
that form. The main reason for that is that the FPGA has to few resources to
process a 1000 Samples over 160 ramps. There is not enough available BRAM
and the number of LUTs quickly become raw when using several FFT blocks.
Especially for the MIMO design data processing on the FPGA becomes impos-
sible, because of the higher data rate as discussed in subsection 4.2.2.
If generating algorithms is further desired and the general set up is not supposed
to be changed such as: sampling rate, sample time number of ramps and so on
then it is advisable to update to a bigger FPGA. Two diﬀerent FPGAs from
the Zynq series are shown in Table 7.1.
The most power full FPGA in the
Zynq series is the Z100 which would result in the biggest increase in resource
availability and would hence give the designer the most freedom.
Device Name
Z-7030
Z-7045
scale up
Z-7100
scale up
Part Number
XC7Z030
XC7Z045
to 7030
XC7Z100
to 7030
LUTs
78.600
218.600
x2,8
277.400
x3,5
Flip-Flops
157.200
437.200
x2,8
554.800
x3,5
BRAM
1.060 kB
2.180 kB
x2
3.020 kB
x2,9
(265)
(545)
(755)
DSPs
400
900
x2,3
2.020
x5
Table 7.1: Comparing Zynq-7000 series FPGAs (based on [13])
As an example this would enable to easily use four buﬀers for the 16-bit data
to speed up data processing and use 32x 1024 long FFTs and another 200x 256
long FFTs while still leaving a decent amount of space for other developments
and the rest of the system. This would require only approximately 72 µs with
a 100 MHz clock for the FFT computation, based on the latency estimations
from subsection 5.2.1. The following shows the approximated required resources
(based on Table 5.1):
LUTs
BRAM
DSP blocks
238.128
2048 kB + 128 kB
984
But also the 7Z045, for which also an Enclustra board exists (ZX1), would be an
improvement and deﬁnitely relax the BRAM storage problem. As an example
this would enable two buﬀers for the 16-bit data and still leave space to use 16x
1024 FFTs and 100x 256 FFTs. This would speed up the FFT computation
==PAGE:95==
7.4 Resource and Computation Performance
83
but still result in approximately 145 µs for a 100 MHz design. The required
hardware resources would be:
LUTs
BRAM
DSP blocks
119.064
1024 kB + 64 kB
492
As mentioned in subsection 2.2.1 the initial goal for the radar system was to
achieve a sample repetition frequency of the 160 ramps of 30 Hz. This looks at
the theoretical possible radar algorithms performance. For the time of calibra-
tion and CFAR calculation the same assumption as in section 6.3 is made that
each need 4,8 ms using for I and Q each one buﬀer. Based on Table 6.1 and
Table 6.2 the delay for the FFT computation was estimated.
Figure 7.1 compares three design options. The performance estimations that are
shown are based on a 100 MHz design. Option 1 is the simplest option where
each one buﬀer is used for I and Q and one FFT block for the 1024 long and 256
long FFT. This would result in 21,5 Hz. Option 2 uses 4 buﬀers each holding
a quarter of the data which would enable parallel reads and writes. Hence also
several FFTs could be performed as for instance shown here: two 1024 and four
256 long FFTs. This would result in an improvement to 27,7 Hz. Option 3
pushes it to the extreme by not only dividing the buﬀers into smaller pieces but
by also adding double the amount of buﬀers resulting in pipelined design where
new input data can be processed while the CFAR algorithm is still ﬁnishing
the computation. Option 3 would only ﬁt on an FPGA with more available
BRAM. This example shows not only the theoretical possible design but also
the advantages of a bigger FPGA.
Figure 7.1: Theoretical radar algorithms performance for a 100 MHz design
==PAGE:96==
84
Discussion and Reﬂection
==PAGE:97==
Chapter 8
Conclusion
In this thesis the techniques for code generation and integration into a radar
back-end SoC were researched. This chapter concludes on the MIMO Design
and the high-level FPGA prototyping in general as well as for the speciﬁc radar
algorithms.
The design contributions to a MIMO back-end were described. The development
was tested based on simulation and on a manipulated SISO design. Thus it is
expected to work on the MIMO. The developed SPI interfacing for the ADC
could also only be tested on a development board.
As presented the integration of generated code from a Simulink based model
into the SISO system works. The ﬂexibility of the integration is limited so that
changes in the interface to the environment will also require redesigning the
HDL code.
Within the scope of the thesis the best method for code generation was experi-
enced to be a Simulink model extended with Matlab Function blocks and state
charts. With that approach it is possible to exploit the most HDL compatible
features. Furthermore it was experienced that the Matlab based Fixed-Point
Converter is a time saving tool to integrate ﬂoating point based algorithms.
==PAGE:98==
86
Conclusion
Looking back another conclusion is also that model based design can not com-
pete with designing digital systems using a hardware description language. This
is for one reason believed, because the code generated is not always readable
and easily comprehensible. This becomes especially problematic when gener-
ated code and the model based solution do not compute the same results. It
is also not as powerful as VHDL in its designing capabilities. Moreover it was
experienced to be harder to utilize special hardware with a model based design.
No fully set of radar algorithms could be presented. This also had to do with
the fact that it was complex to convert existing Matlab based algorithms to
an HDL compatible design based on Simulink. Another problem was that not
enough resources especially BRAM were available on the FPGA. Furthermore
with the current FPGA there is not enough space for data processing on the
MIMO design, because of the increase in the amount of data and the sampling
rate.
A theoretical analysis of the computation speed of the algorithms showed that
30 Hz will be challenging to achieve with data processing on the FPGA. More
likely is a measurement repetition rate of approximately 27,7 Hz.
As future work the integration of the MIMO design on the MIMO hardware
is needed. The design needs to be tested on the real hardware in order to en-
sure that everything is working. For the code generation no working example
of a calibrated radar could be presented within the deadline. Given more time
further testing could reveal why the generated code was not equivalent to the
model development. Furthermore an implementation of a complete radar pro-
cessing algorithm on a bigger FPGA could be tested based on this thesis. The
Co-Design was only theoretically approached in this thesis and given additional
time this could also be tested with the help of the embedded coder. Moreover
techniques for data reduction were introduced. New ﬁndings in that ﬁeld could
also lead to more eﬃcient data processing. Additionally a signal to noise ra-
tio for the reduced data could provide a measure for the quality of the targets
found.
==PAGE:99==
Appendix A
Linux
The following introduces brieﬂy the Linux operating systems.
This chapter
starts by looking at the Linux basics by describing the boot sequence, the kernel
and the root ﬁle system. It then brieﬂy describes device drivers and the kernel
and user space relationship.
A.1
Basics
There are diﬀerent ways of deﬁning an operating system (OS). In this thesis
an OS is deﬁned as a system that consists of the following parts so that it
is functional for basic use: the boot loader, kernel, device drivers and system
and ﬁle utilities. The software components can be classiﬁed into four groups:
the boot loader, the kernel, the root ﬁle system and the applications.
The
boot loaders responsibility is to initialize the processor. Its task is to load the
kernel (that is in most embedded systems stored in a ﬂash memory) into the
RAM. After setting the instruction pointer accordingly, the kernel can start.
[46, Chapter 1]
First the Linux boot sequence stages are described. After powering on the Linux
system or after a reset executes the processor in a deﬁned location, which on
desktop systems would be the Basic Input / Output System (BIOS). After that
==PAGE:100==
88
Linux
is the ﬁrst stage boot loader (FSBL) loaded into RAM. The FSBL loads the
second stage boot loader (SSBL) into RAM and a boot option is selected and
the OS boots.
The kernel is software that supplies the fundamental services for the system.
It also manages the hardware and distributes the system resources (such as:
computing power, memory, network connectivity, ...). The kernel is in control
of creating and destroying processes (process management). Memory manage-
ments covers the process of building virtual address space for the processes and
creating a structured ﬁlesystem (on unstructured hardware). Most of the sys-
tem operation map to physical devices.
The device control is performed by
device drivers, which the kernel must have embedded for all peripheral. Also
the network needs to be managed. Asynchronous incoming packets have to be
collected, identiﬁed and dispatched by the kernel. Also the routing and address
resolution is part of the kernel’s task. [47, Chapter 1]
The root ﬁle system is a hierarchical collection of directories in a tree structure.
Linux has several ﬁle systems. All of those ﬁle systems are mounted relative
to the root ﬁle systems. In the boot processes the kernel mounts the root ﬁle
system. Once the root ﬁle system is loaded an application needs to start running
(on desktop: init). This application has to continue to run, otherwise the kernel
and with that the whole system stops running. [46, Chapter 1]
A.2
Device Drivers
Device drivers can be seen as a black box that hide how a device works and oﬀer
a set of standardized commands. A device driver can be seen as a software layer
between the application and the hardware. One distinguishes between three
types of drivers: character, block and network device drivers:
• A character device can be accessed as a stream of bytes (like a ﬁle). A
device driver usually implements system calls such as: open, close, read,
and write. A char device is accessed by means of ﬁlesystem nodes (e.g.
/dev/tty1).
• A device is a block device if it can host a ﬁle system. An example of a block
device would be a USB memory card reader. A block device is accessed
by ﬁle system nodes in the /dev directory. It is possible to transfer any
number of bytes and does not always have to be a block.
• A network device is responsible for sending and receiving data packets
instead of a stream of data. The network driver only deals with the packets
==PAGE:101==
A.3 Kernel and User Space
89
and not the individual connection. Instead of read and write the kernel
calls functions related to packet transmission. [47, Chapter 1]
A.3
Kernel and User Space
Terms that are also often used in correlation with Linux are kernel space and
user space.
The kernel space owns a protected memory space and has full
access to the hardware. In the kernel space the kernel is executed and runs in
kernel mode which is most privileged. User applications are executed in user
space. They are unable to perform some system functions and can not directly
access hardware. From the user space an application can communicate with the
kernel using system calls. The relationship is summarized in Figure A.1. The
description of the hardware can be included in a device tree. This will have the
advantage that the kernel would contain any board speciﬁc ﬁles and could be
compiled for diﬀerent hardware conﬁgurations. [48, Chapter 1]
Figure A.1: Overview of kernel and user space based on [48, Chapter 1]
As it was already brieﬂy mentioned Linux uses a virtual memory-management
system. For that a memory management unit (MMU) translates a virtual ad-
dress to a physical address.
When a program will be assigned to a deﬁned
address space, which is a subset of the total system’s memory. [46, Chapter 1]
==PAGE:102==
90
Linux
==PAGE:103==
Appendix B
Updating the MIMO IO
Pins
Converting an existing design to a new platform includes the revision of the
old design. This also included a look at the IO pins of the Zynq. There are
a number of new signals such as the extra ADC signals but also the redesign
allows some improvement. This section was moved to the Appendix, because it
is important for someone working with the MIMO system but not so important
for the ﬂow of the thesis.
In order to map inputs or outputs to the FPGA the meaning of the pin naming
needs to be understood. Furthermore the pin connection guidelines from En-
clustra need to be taken into consideration, because the signals are interfaced
using the Mercury Zx5.
The names already hint at the meaning of each pin. The naming for relevant
pins is quickly explained with an example: IO_L11P_T1_SRCC_13. A pin
designated for input output purposes starts with IO. The second part is used
for diﬀerential signals where a post ﬁx of P is for the positive signal and N for
the negative and the number is indicating the pair. The following part is the
reference to memory controller and must be connected accordingly if in use.
The last number indicates the IO Bank. A rule of thumb is that signals that
are responsible for similar signal processing should go into the same memory
bank. There are a number of special pins. One of them are Single Region Clock
==PAGE:104==
92
Updating the MIMO IO Pins
Capable (SRCC) and Multiple Region Clock Capable (MRCC) pins. They are
used to input or output a clock from the design with reduced skew and jitter.
Furthermore is each IO pin assigned a certain type of either high range (HR) or
high performance (HP). HR pins allow voltages from 1,2 V to 3,3 V and HP only
allow up to 1,8 V. [49] There are number of other pins which are not described
here, because they are irrelevant for this section.
A more detailed view of the signals connected to the Zynq is shown in Fig-
ure B.1. The following discussion explains the design decisions for connecting
those signals.
First the from the SISO existing connections were reviewed. All signals con-
nected to the PS MIO 16 to 53 inputs lie within the Bank 501 where the voltage
level is determined by VCCO_MIO1. Looking at the SISO schematic it can be
seen that UART(MIO 46, 47), SD Card(MIO 40-45) and Ethernet(MIO 16-27)
are connected to those pins. Hence it needs to be checked whether they can
all work with the same voltage level. The voltage level for Ethernet has to be
according to the Ethernet standard. For this setup Ethernet operates at 2,5
V. Hence also the UART and SD Card pins need to operate at 2,5 V which is
possible.
The regular SPI signals are connected to HR IO pins that support up to 3,3 V.
For the VGAs a voltage level of 5V is required. Hence a voltage level shifter
was added for the MIMO design. The SPI voltage level was selected to be 3,3
V, because that is also what the PLL board and Rx board expect. Hence the
Ethernet, SD card, UART and SPI pins were not changed in respect to the SISO
design.
A change was required for the external trigger signals, which have a voltage
level of 5 V. Hence a voltage level shifter was needed to reduce this to something
smaller a HR IO pin can handle. In this case 3,3V were selected. Considering
the Mercury Zx5 schematic and the connection guidelines it could be seen that
the I2C signals are pulled up to a 3,3V level. Also for this voltage level shifter
were needed to adjust the voltage level.
Besides adapting already existing SISO signals also new ones were required for
the MIMO design. There are 28 additional signals for the second I- and Q-data.
But there was also a decision made to connect the Analog Devices SPI bus to
the ADC (which is explained in section 3.3). The ADC runs at 1,8 V which
results in a requirement that also the Analog Devices SPI Bus has a voltage
level of 1,8 V thus both HP and HR IO pins could be used. The SCLK clock
signal was connected to a clock capable pin (IO_L14P_T2_SRCC_13) and the
related signals (data and chip selects) to standard IOs within that same memory
bank. Changes in the ADC interfacing (also explained in section 3.3) had the
==PAGE:105==
93
consequences that a sampling clock was need from the ADC as an input to the
Zynq. Dedicated clock I/O signals were selected for the clock inputs.
Figure B.1: Detailed model of the Output pins for the MIMO hardware
==PAGE:106==
94
Updating the MIMO IO Pins
==PAGE:107==
Appendix C
File Organization
This chapter explains the ﬁle hierarchy of the handed in ﬁles. The source code
is not public. It is included in a separate folder with the hand in.
03MIMO:
• AnalogDevicesSPI:
– AD_SPI.vhd: VHDL code interfacing with the SPI from analog
devices. Based on Figure 3.9 (a).
– controller.vhd: VHDL code using the SPI interface to send control
commands to the ADC. Based on Figure 3.9 (b).
– top.vhd: Top level component linking the SPI interface and the
controller.
– top_tb.vhd: Top level testbench for simulating the system.
– ADCTest.tar.gz: Compressed Vivado project of the test.
• DesignMIMO:
– ﬁfo_control.vhd: VHDL code reading from the FIFOs (as shown
in Figure 3.6).
– myReg.vhd: VHDL code describing four N bit long registers.
==PAGE:108==
96
File Organization
– system_tb: Testbench testing the registers and FIFO control (Re-
sult was shown in: Figure 3.7).
– Pins/IO_MIMO.xdc: constraints ﬁle describing the pins.
– Pins/MercuryZx5-FPGA_Pins: Spreadshet mapping the Mer-
cury Zx5 Pins to the PCB design and FPGA pins.
– Projects/ExampleProjectAdcInterfacing.tar.gz:
Compressed
Vivado project of an isolated ADC interfacing implementation.
– Projects/ﬁfoReadFSM_IP.tar.gz: IP Core project holding the
FIFO controller.
– Projects/reg4_IP.tar.gz: IP Core project holding the registers.
– Projects/MIMOVivado_onSISOHardware.tar.gz: Vivado
Project implementing the MIMO design on the SISO hardware.
05Implementation:
• 0_Integration:
– scripts: holds the scripts for integration (subsection 5.1.2).
∗integrateMatlabHDLFiles.tcl: integrates the generated ﬁles
with the help of the listGenFiles.sh shell script.
∗listGenFiles.sh: removes old generated ﬁles and copies and lists
the new ones.
∗removeMatlabHDLFiles.tcl: removes all generated ﬁles from
the project.
– vhdl:
∗oﬀsetBin2TwosComplementBin.vhd: convert oﬀset binary
to Two’s complement.
∗parallel_sampler_logic.vhd: integration of the generated
code into the parallel sampler logic.
– VivadoIntegration.tar.gz:
the complete project for integrating
generated code into the SISO project.
• 1_Matlab:
– HDL_Asin: holds the ﬁles described in subsubsection 5.2.2.1.
∗createLUT_data.m: creates the inverse sine LUT.
∗getValueFromLut.m: computes LUT based inverse sine value.
∗checkLUTPrecision.m: testbench creating the LUT and get-
ting values from the LUT and comparing them to the Matlab
based inverse sine.
==PAGE:109==
97
– HDL_StateMachine:
∗FSMexample.m: Using a Matlab based switch case statement
for generating an FSM.
∗FSM_tb.m: this is the testbench testing the above function.
∗codegen: This folder holds the ﬁxed point converted ﬁles gen-
erated by the Fixed-Point Converter.
– HDL_Median:
∗medianHDL.m: describes the median algorithm used for the
CFAR approach described in subsection 5.2.5.
∗medianHDL_tb.m: testbench for the median algorithm.
∗codegen: This folder holds the ﬁxed point converted ﬁles gen-
erated by the Fixed-Point Converter.
– HDL_Calibration:
∗inputCalibrationMean.m: this Matlab ﬁle describes the im-
plementation of the design shown in Figure 5.11 to compute the
calibration value based on all samples.
∗inputCalibrationMean_tb.m: this is the testbench testing
the above implementation.
∗inputCalibrationKInv.m: This value computes the ﬁnal cali-
bration value using inverse sine and cordicexp based on the K1K2
value computed by the above function.
∗inputCalibrationKInv_tb.m: this is the testbench testing
the above implementation.
∗codegen: This folder holds the ﬁxed point converted ﬁles gen-
erated by the Fixed-Point Converter.
• 2_Simulink:
– BuﬀerMatlabEx.slx: creates a number of Matlab Function blocks
that are buﬀers of diﬀerent size to test their functionality.
– BuﬀerSizeEx.slx: was a Simulink based project to experiment with
the diﬀerent sizes of the buﬀers. It has 5 Subsystems: 1000x160x1;
1000x160x10; 1000x20x8; 1000x130+1000x30; 1000x30x5+1000x1.
– BuﬀerDiﬀerentFixedPointEx.slx: experiments with one buﬀer
holding values of diﬀerent ﬁxed point representation.
– FFTregular.slx and FFTHDLOpt.slx: were used to compare the
FFT results of the diﬀerent blocks with one another.
– StateChartEx.slx: ﬁrst experiments with the use of state charts as
shown in Figure 5.6.
– StateChartExBuﬀer.slx: experiments with state charts for con-
trolling a buﬀer.
==PAGE:110==
98
File Organization
– ProjectCFAR:
∗hdl_signalProcessing.slx: Simulink project as shown in Fig-
ure 5.9.
∗checkMedian.m: Checks that the median result computed by
the model is correct.
– ProjectCalibration:
∗hdl_signalProcessing.slx: Simulink project as described in
section 5.3 and shown in Figure F.8.
∗checkBaseSignal.m: Checks the input after subtraction of the
base signal.
∗checkCalibration.m: This ﬁle computes the expected calibra-
tion values and checks them. It is divided into three parts. First
part checks the calibration K1K2 value that was computed by the
ﬁrst Matlab function block. Second the Kinv results are checked.
Lastly the values written to the buﬀer are checked.
• 3_GeneratedCode:
– FSM: includes the code generation of the Matlab based FSM (FS-
Mexample.m) and the state chart based (StateChartEx.slx) imple-
mentation.
– FFT: includes two FFT example one using one 1024 and one 256
long FFT and one using 6 1024 long FFts.
– Buﬀer: Holds to example implementations once using 10 Buﬀers and
the other 1 Buﬀer to store 1000x160 data samples.
– CFAR: Holds the generated code for the CFAR implementation.
– Calibration: Holds the generated code for the calibration algorithm.
06Results:
• HDL_Processing_tb.vhd generated testbench by HDL Coder for the
calibration.
• inputHandler.vhd: VHDL ﬁle describing the input multiplexing for the
system.
• hexToSigned.m: helper function to convert hex numbers representing
Two’s complement numbers to signed numbers.
• UDPInterface: folder holding all the UDP programs written to receive
the results from the radar.
==PAGE:111==
Appendix D
Setup and Installation of all
Tools
The following brieﬂy describes how to setup the virtual machine and all the
required tools in order to develop on the Fraunhofer Radar SISO or MIMO
platform.
1. Operating System
• The system is based on Ubuntu 14.04 running in a virtual machine
• Download Ubuntu 14.04 - 64-bit from
https://wiki.ubuntuusers.de/Downloads/Trusty_Tahr/
• Download Virtual Box:
https://www.virtualbox.org/wiki/Downloads
2. Virtual Box Settings:
• RAM: 12.000 MB
• Processor: 2
• Graphic memory: 128 MB
• Hard drive:
– Home (50 GB)
==PAGE:112==
100
Setup and Installation of all Tools
– SWAP (5 GB)
– Xilinx HDD (30 GB)
– Matlab HDD (20 GB)
– Note: SWAP and HOME can also be separated in Ubuntu
• Network: Activate Adapter 1 and 2 NAT
3. Ubuntu Default Installation
• Follow the Ubuntu default installation.
• In case the created hard drive were not formatted and mounted in the
installation process then this can be done following the guide here:
https://goo.gl/W3bn
4. Tool Downloads:
• Xilinx Vivado 2015.4: goo.gl/6Y7OJA
– Select: Vivado HLx 2015.4: Full Installer For Linux Single File
Download Image Including SDK
– Note: Download requires a login
• Xilinx PetaLinux SDK 2015.4: goo.gl/6kDprU
– Select: PetaLinux 2015.4 Installer
– Note: Download requires a login
• Matlab R2016b - Linux 64-Bit Version: https://goo.gl/t2Rl85
5. Installation
• Xilinx Vivado
– Unpack the installation folder
– Open ./xsetup from a terminal
– Click Next, Accept License Agreements and click next
– Select Edition to Install: Vivado HL WebPACK and click next
– Make sure to select “Software Development Kit” in the Design
Tool section
– Select the Xilinx partition as an installation folder (needs 14 GB)
– Click Install
– Copy license ﬁle “Xilinx.lic” to the virtual machine and select as
certiﬁcate based license
– Update Xilinx permissions:
cd ~
sudo chgrp −R fraunhofer . Xilinx
sudo chown −R fraunhofer . Xilinx
==PAGE:113==
101
– Enable starting Vivado from the terminal:
cd
gedit
. bashrc
I n s e r t :
#Xilinx
t o o l s
source /opt/ Xilinx /Vivado /2015.2/ se tt in gs 64 . sh
source /opt/ Xilinx /SDK/2015.2/ se tt in gs 64 . sh
– Restart to activate changes
– Start Vivado from the terminal with:
vivado &
• Xilinx PetaLinux
– sudo dpkg-reconﬁgure dash
∗Select <No>
– Execute the install PetaLinux script to install all required de-
pendencies and the PetaLinux SDK
∗Note: it will be installed to /opt/pkg
∗petalinux-v2015.4-ﬁnal-installer-dec.run has to be in the
download folder
– Also add PetaLinux to bashrc:
cd
gedit
. bashrc
#PetaLinux
source /opt/pkg/ petalinux −v2015.4−f i n a l /
s e t t i n g s . sh
– Restart to activate changes
– PetaLinux is ready to use
– NOTE: If the Xilinx Vivado licence ﬁles also cover the PetaLinux
usage another licence setup is not required.
• Matlab
– Unpack the downloaded folder
– Run sudo ./install
– Login with your Matlab account
– Select all Tools to install (make sure HDL Coder and Fixed Point
is one of them)
– Use the Ubuntu user name as login name (in this case it is:
fraunhofer).
==PAGE:114==
102
Setup and Installation of all Tools
6. Conﬁgure the Network
• In the Network section of VirtualBox for Adapter 2 choose: network
bridge and name: “Intel R⃝82574L Gigiabit Network Connection” (the
name might be diﬀerent, just make sure it’s the one connected to the
board)
• Execute ifconﬁg and ﬁgure out whether you want to modify eth0 or
eht1 (for me it was eth1)
• In Ubuntu under the network click on manage connections and edit
“Ethernet Connection 2”
• Switch to the tab: IPv4-Settings
– Method: Manuel
– Address: 192.168.1.6
– Netmask: 255.255.255.0
– Gateway: 0.0.0.0
– Save
• After a network restart a response should be received after a ping
192.168.1.66 (radar IP-Address)
• NOTE: Additional windows settings might been required in order for
this to work.
7. Project Setup
• Follow Toolchain description in [15, appendix C]
– For 7c it is: petalinux-create –t project –n fraunhofer-radar –
template zynq –force
– For 7d replace all data
– Before executing the bootﬁles copy to sd script make sure that
pax is installed (sudo apt-get install pax).
• TFTP Boot
– The steps are based on: https://goo.gl/NVeYWp
– TFTP Setup:
∗sudo apt-get install xinetd tftpd tftp
∗Create /etc/xinetd.d/tftp:
==PAGE:115==
103
s e r v i c e
t f t p
{
protocol
= udp
port
= 69
socket_type
= dgram
wait
= yes
user
= nobody
server
= / usr / sbin /in . tftpd
server_args
= / tftpboot
disable
= no
}
∗sudo mkdir /tftpboot
∗sudo chmod -R 777 /tftpboot
∗sudo chown -R nobody /tftpboot
∗sudo service xinetd restart
– Changes in uboot:
∗Interrupt the boot process to enter uboot:
setenv
s e r v e r i p
192.168.1.6
setenv
netboot " tftpboot ␣${ netstart }␣${
kernel_img}&&␣bootm"
setenv bootcmd
’ run netboot ’
∗Theoretically saveenv can save the changes but this is cur-
rently not possible
∗To save changes permanently change:
fraunhofer-radar/subsystems/linux/conﬁgs/u-boot/
platform-top.h and then add your command e.g.:
#define CONFIG_BOOTCOMMAND "run netboot "
8. Others
• Setting up a shared folder between Ubuntu and Windows in Virtual-
Box: https://goo.gl/yZeT8U
• Installation of cable drivers for Xilinx development boards (e.g. zed
board) under Ubuntu: https://goo.gl/VI2nxW
==PAGE:116==
104
Setup and Installation of all Tools
==PAGE:117==
Appendix E
Programming the Flash on
an FPGA Development
Board
The following brieﬂy describes how to program the ﬂash of the Zedboard. Which
might be useful when measurements have to be done in a diﬀerent lab.
Create Custom IP for VHDL logic only:
• Test the IP
• Then go to: tools →Create and package IP
• If it is not a AXI4 peripheral device just select package your current
project.
Create a Project for the Zynq:
• You need a Zynq component and some peripheral (system reset, AXI
interconnect, ...)
• Add the generated IP and wire everything
==PAGE:118==
106
Programming the Flash on an FPGA Development Board
For the following the pins have to be set as shown in Figure E.1.
Figure E.1: Zedboard initial jumper settings.
• Create a BSP
• Create a FSBL select (Zynq FSBL) in the menu
• Xilinx tools →Create a boot image:
– Select a path
– First add the boot loader elf ﬁle from the debug folder of the FSBL
– Second add the hardware bit ﬁle (dataﬁle)
– If needed add the elf ﬁle for the application
• Xilinx tools →Program Flash
– Hardware Platform hw_platform_0
– Image File: boot.bin from the path previously selected
– Flash Type: qspi_single
– Press program
Turn oﬀthe board and switch the jumpers to the following position shown in
Figure E.2. After that when the board boots will it start out of the ﬂash.
Figure E.2: Zedboard ﬂash start jumper settings.
==PAGE:119==
Appendix F
Additional Figures
Here some additional ﬁgures and screen shots that illustrate some of the work
done but which would have been to much in the corresponding sections.
==PAGE:120==
108
Additional Figures
Figure F.1: Testing of the SPI interface showing the oscilloscope output: CSB-
Green, SDIO-Red, SCLK-Blue
==PAGE:121==
109
Figure F.2: HDL Workﬂow Advisor Step 1.1: Setting the target device
==PAGE:122==
110
Additional Figures
Figure F.3: HDL Workﬂow Advisor Step 3.1.2: Showing Advanced Options
e.g. clock and reset related settings
==PAGE:123==
111
(a) Traceability
(b) Critical Path
Figure F.4: Workﬂow Advisor analysis options: a shows a traceability report
highlighting a from the VHDL code selected component and b
shows the critical path
Figure F.5: Fixed-Point Converter Tool: Replace a function by a LUT (shown
here for an asin() example)
==PAGE:124==
112
Additional Figures
Figure F.6: HDL-Block Properties: map persistent variables to RAM
==PAGE:125==
113
(a) Buﬀer Control
(b) CFAR Control
Figure F.7: FSM design using Stateﬂow based on Figure 5.8
==PAGE:126==
114
Additional Figures
Figure F.8: Simulink model of the calibrated radar design
==PAGE:127==
Bibliography
[1] E. Monmasson and M. N. Cirstea. FPGA design methodology for industrial
control systems – a review. IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics,
54(4):1824–1842, August 2007.
[2] H. Klausing and W. Holpp. Radar mit realer und synthetischer Apertur:
Konzeption und Realisierung. Oldenbourg, 2000.
[3] Nadav Levanon and Eli Mozeson. Radar Signals. Wiley-IEEE Press, 2004.
[4] Dr.-Ing. Axel Hülsmann. W-band radar modules for sensors, automation,
and security. Technical report, Fraunhofer IAF, April 2016.
[5] Mathias Klenner, Christian Zech, Axel Hülsmann, Jutta Kühn, Michael
Schlechtweg, Konstantin Hahmann, Bernhard Kleiner, Michael Ulrich, and
Oliver Ambacher.
A portable w-band radar system for enhancement of
infrared vision in ﬁre ﬁghting operations. Proc. SPIE, 9993:999307–999307–
9, 2016.
[6] L. Liu, M. Popescu, M. Skubic, M. Rantz, T. Yardibi, and P. Cuddihy. Au-
tomatic fall detection based on doppler radar motion signature. In 2011 5th
International Conference on Pervasive Computing Technologies for Health-
care (PervasiveHealth) and Workshops, pages 222–225, May 2011.
[7] Christian Wolﬀ.
Frequency-modulated continuous-wave radar (fmcw
radar). Website. http://www.radartutorial.eu/02.basics/Frequency%
20Modulated%20Continuous%20Wave%20Radar.en.html 13.01.2017.
[8] Markus Andres, Wolfgang Menzel, Hans Ludwig Bloecher, and Juergen
Dickmann. Detection of slow moving targets using automotive radar sen-
==PAGE:128==
116
BIBLIOGRAPHY
sors.
2012 the 7th German Microwave Conference, Gemic 2012, page
6185181, 2012.
[9] Christian Wolﬀ. In-phase & quadrature procedure. Website. http://www.
radartutorial.eu/10.processing/sp06.en.html 19.01.2016.
[10] Dag T. Wisland. Xethru technology. Website. https://www.xethru.com/
technology 23.05.2017.
[11] Inﬁneon.
Automotive
77
ghz
radar
system.
Website.
http:
//www.infineon.com/cms/en/applications/automotive/safety/
adas/automotive-radar/# 23.05.2017.
[12] Jasbir Singh, Brian Ginsburg, Sandeep Rao, and Karthik Ramasubrama-
nian. Awr1642 mmwave sensor - 76–81-ghz radar-on-chip for short-range
radar applications. Technical report, Texas Instruments, May 2017.
[13] Xilinx. Zynq-7000 all programmable soc overview. Technical report, Xilinx,
September 2016.
[14] Xilinx. Axi reference guide. Technical report, Xilinx, March 2011.
[15] Jonas Kurz. Entwicklung eines eingebetteten systems für einen radar-sensor
auf basis eines zynq bausteins.
Master’s thesis, Hochschule Pforzheim,
Germany, 2016.
[16] R. Lee.
Software Engineering Research, Management and Applications.
Studies in Computational Intelligence. Springer International Publishing,
2014.
[17] Xilinx. Introduction to fpga design with vivado high-level synthesis. Tech-
nical report, Xilinx, July 2013.
[18] Xilinx.
Vivado design suite user guide - model-based dsp design using
system generator. Technical report, Xilinx, September 2015.
[19] Intel Corporation. Dsp builder for intel fpgas (advanced blockset). Tech-
nical report, Intel Corporation, November 2016.
[20] MathWorks. Hdl coder - getting started guide. Technical report, Math-
Works, March 2017.
[21] National Instruments. Ni fpga. Website. http://www.ni.com/labview/
fpga/ 23.03.2017.
[22] Christopher Pohl, Carlos Paiz, and Mario Porrmann. vMAGIC - Auto-
matic Code Generation for VHDL. International Journal of Reconﬁgurable
Computing, Hindawi Publishing Corporation,, 2009(Article ID 205149):1–9,
2009.
==PAGE:129==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
117
[23] Tomás G. Moreira, Marco A. Wehrmeister, Carlos E. Pereira, Jean-François
Pétin, and Eric Levrat. Generating VHDL Source Code from UML Models
of Embedded Systems, pages 125–136. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin,
Heidelberg, 2010.
[24] MathWorks. Embedded coder - getting started guide. Technical report,
MathWorks, March 2017.
[25] National Instruments Corporation. Getting started with labview c genera-
tor. Technical report, National Instruments Corporation, July 2010.
[26] Eclipse.
Uml
generators
—
user
guide.
Website.
https:
//www.eclipse.org/umlgen/documentation/releases/1.0.0/org.
eclipse.umlgen.gen.c.doc/c-generator/user/user-guide.html
23.03.2017.
[27] Sparx
Systems.
Generate
source
code.
Website.
http:
//www.sparxsystems.com/enterprise_architect_user_guide/9.0/
software_engineering/generatesourcecode.html 23.03.2017.
[28] Juergen Teich. Hardware/software codesign: The past, the present, and
predicting the future.
Proceedings of the Ieee, 100(Special Centennial
Issue):1411–1430, 2012.
[29] C. U. Smith, G. A. Frank, and J. L. Cuardrado. An architecture design and
assessment system for software/hardware codesign. In 22nd ACM/IEEE
Design Automation Conference, pages 417–424, June 1985.
[30] S Schulz, J Rozenblit, M Mrva, and K Buchenrieder. Model-based codesign.
Computer, 31(8):60–+, 1998.
[31] WT Theerayod, PYK Cheung, and W Luk. Hardware/software codesign.
Ieee Signal Processing Magazine, 22(3):14–22, 2005.
[32] Mohammadsadegh Sadri, Christian Weis, Norbert Wehn, and Luca Benini.
Energy and performance exploration of accelerator coherency port using
xilinx zynq. In Proceedings of the 10th FPGAworld Conference, FPGAworld
’13, pages 5:1–5:8, New York, NY, USA, 2013. ACM.
[33] João Silva, Valery Sklyarov, and Iouliia Skliarova. Comparison of on-chip
communications in zynq-7000 all programmable systems-on-chip. Ieee Em-
bedded Systems Letters, 7(1):7029633, 31–34, 2015.
[34] MathWorks.
Programming xilinx zynq socs with matlab and simulink.
Technical report, MathWorks, 2015.
[35] Xilinx. Axi dma v7.1 - logicore ip product guide. Technical report, Xilinx,
October 2016.
==PAGE:130==
118
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[36] Analog Devices. AD9251, 10 2009. Rev. A.
[37] Analog Devices. Interfacing to high speed adcs via spi - an-877. Technical
report, Analog Devices, January 2017.
[38] Michael Ulrich. Range and velocity estimation with a 2-dimensional dft,
2015.
[39] Christian Wolﬀ.
Radar basics - false alarm rate.
Website.
http:
//www.radartutorial.eu/01.basics/False%20Alarm%20Rate.en.html
23.03.2017.
[40] Christoph Glattfelder. Mercury-zx5 - user manual. Technical report, en-
clustra FPGA solutions, September 2015.
[41] Xilinx. Axi interconnect v2.1 - logicore ip product guide. Technical report,
Xilinx, April 2017.
[42] Xilinx. Zynq-7000 all programmable soc - technical reference manual. Tech-
nical report, Xilinx, September 2016.
[43] Mark Borgerding. Kiss ﬀt - a mixed-radix fast fourier transform. Website.
https://sourceforge.net/projects/kissfft/ 08.05.2017.
[44] Xilinx. Kintex-7 fpgas data sheet. Technical report, Xilinx, November 2015.
[45] Ming Liu, Wolfgang Kuehn, Zhonghai Lu, and Axel Jantsch. Run-time
partial reconﬁguration speed investigation and architectural design space
exploration. 2009 International Conference on Field Programmable Logic
and Applications, pages 498–502, 2009.
[46] Gene Sally. Pro linux embedded systems. Apress, 2010.
[47] Jonathan. Corbet, Alessandro. Rubini, and Greg. Kroah-Hartman. Linux
Device Drivers, 3rd Edition. O’Reilly Media, 2005.
[48] Robert. Love. Linux Kernel Development Second Edition. Novell Press,
2005.
[49] Xilinx. Zynq-7000 all programmable soc packaging and pinout. Technical
report, Xilinx, March 2016.
