==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
An end-user language for defining
questionnaires and reports
Automatically collecting data for consultation hours
Jens Grønhøj Stigaard (s113412)
Kongens Lyngby 2017
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads
Building 324
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This master thesis was prepared at the department of Applied Mathematics and Com-
puter Science at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfilment of the requirements
for acquiring a Master of Science in Engineering degree in Computer Science. This
master thesis project is equivalent to 30 ECTS credits.
Kongens Lyngby, May 22, 2017
Jens Grønhøj Stigaard (s113412)
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisor Ekkart Kindler from DTU Compute for his advice
and guidance during the project. His advise has been priceless to me. Ekkart has
enlightened me with knowledge on many important subjects to complete the project.
I would also like to thank the partner on the project, specialist on rheumatology
Pierre Schydlowski, which has been a great support. Pierre has helped numerous
times during the process, which has been necessary for me to understand the targeted
industry and workflow. So thanks a lot to Pierre which have taking out time of his
schedule for helping me clearing my doubts out and also giving me his thoughts on
the project.
Finally I would like to thank my family for the endless support, not only with the
project, but in almost any context to support me. I would not have been able to com-
plete the studying without their support and unconditioned love, which has carried
me through the hard times.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface
i
Acknowledgements
iii
Contents
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Customer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.4
Report overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2
Analysis
9
2.1
User analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2
User stories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.3
Examples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.4
Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.5
Concepts
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
2.6
Risks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3
Related work
37
3.1
Open Data Kit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
3.2
Enketo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
3.3
Tools fitting analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
3.4
Conclusion on possible use of applications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4
Domain-Specific Language
43
==PAGE:8==
vi
Contents
4.1
Decision and analysis phase summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.2
Design phase
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5
Design
59
5.1
Three Layered Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
6
Realisation
65
6.1
Technologies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
6.2
Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
6.3
Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
7
Tests
85
7.1
Test environment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
7.2
Test application . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
7.3
Deployment setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
86
7.4
Browser test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
87
7.5
Automated tests
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
87
8
Evaluation
89
8.1
Patient page . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
89
8.2
Questionnaire scheme creation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
90
8.3
Report . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
90
9
Conclusion
91
9.1
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
91
9.2
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
92
9.3
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
93
A Example - Shoulder tests
95
B Example - General information
105
C Installation Guide
111
C.1 Installation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 111
C.2 Run the Application . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 113
Bibliography
115
==PAGE:9==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
The workflow of a doctor consist in high degree of consultation of patients.
The
consultation time includes entering of data of the patient in the digital health care
system. Doctors spill time of entering basic data of patients manually. The main
purpose of the doctor is to treat patients.
There is no reason that standardised questionnaires are entered by expensive and
highly specialised doctors on behalf of the patient. Letting a doctor be in charge of
this process spills a lot of time on entering data. The doctor could instead use time
more efficient by actually doing a professional examination of the patient.
A system could contain the questionnaires, and let the patients access the question-
naires. The questionnaires will each be on a specific subject. The patient are then
able to fill out only the questionnaires that touches the necessary areas for the patient.
The data which is submitted by the patient will then be stored and later recalled by
the doctor, right before consultation.
The questionnaires contains various types of data, and the questionnaires does often
requires complex semantics, e.g. are some questions only relevant in a scenario, based
on answers from previous questions in the questionnaire.
The doctors know which questions are conditional, but the doctors are not able to be
doing the programming of the system by themselves, e.g. in a programming language
like C# or Java. There is a semantic gap between expressing the questionnaires in
a natural language or by paper, and the same questionnaire must be expressed in a
computer program, since it requires a lot of data to express the wanted semantics,
and a lot of logic to interpret the data.
The development of this system does therefore require software engineering to imple-
ment a application that can handle these tasks.
==PAGE:10==
2
1 Introduction
1.1
Background
Data collection is possible through paper-based questionnaires, but this method has
many down-sides, to a more modern method, using a electronic based system. Data
can be collected and stored at a centralised database, and fetched anytime by authenti-
cated users. This approach has many advantages from the old-fashioned paper-based
form. Just the little space that is necessary for storing data electronically compared
to papers, that in reality takes up a lot physical space takes up, are an big advantage.
Of course one can argue that the physical copies are more safe, but it can both be
stolen when in physical form, as in electronic.
The digital form has more advantages to the paper based, since backing up data
is easier, for not just mentioning searching through records. Another practical ad-
vantage for digital recording is form validation, which in paper in practice requires
manual validation by an assistant. This process can be reduced to being handled by
the application, stating whether there are any missing fields to be filled, or even more
complex validation handling the request. This ability alone is an advantage to the
paper-based system, since every form must not be checked manually. This saves the
staff a lot of time, not being required to validate the data on the forms.
The only downside I can imagine is if the patient that fills out the form is in doubt of
how to answer a question. The patient is perhaps not able to fill out the needed form,
and must take a break in the process, saving a draft of the submission. The next step
for the patient is to contact the doctor to figure out how to fill out the question that
the patient finds tricky. This process does now seems complicated, and the doctor
spills some of his time on assisting the patient how to fill out the questionnaire.
Development of traditional software solutions on questionnaires are expensive, when
the requirements includes maintaining and continuous development.
Modelling questionnaires with multiple types of presenting questions and answers
requires a high degree of flexibility.
Finding the good balance between development cost and features to implement, will
provide a health care system with the needed features at low cost.
Developing a feature rich and flexible application that includes a responsive user inter-
face that can supports multiple device-types, and simultaneously are provided with
==PAGE:11==
1.2 Customer
3
data from a back end are not trivial. It requires complex implementation that contain
many components that work together, which all comes together as a final product.
This project will try to cover the challenges of developing a complete application that
serves the customers needs.
1.2
Customer
Pierre Schydlowsky is a specialist in rheumatology. Pierre owns a clinic where patients
book a time for consultation, and later comes for consultation. He has employed a
secretary and a assistant which helps in the daily work at the clinic. Pierre proposes
a method to gather information on the injuries of his patients, before they come visit
him. Pierre had therefore in cooperation with a IT company developed a system for
handling questionnaires and reports for his patients. The system is called MedOrtis,
and has existed for a couple of years now. A screen shot of the front page is seen in
Figure 1.1.
Figure 1.1: MedOrtis.dk - existing web application.
==PAGE:12==
4
1 Introduction
1.2.1
Existing application
Pierre has extensively used MedOrtis the last many years. The existing version of
MedOrtis has a lot of great features, including the abilities to create and update
questionnaires.
Patients are able to submit the questionnaires, but the existing system has some
downsides. The system has developed a web application, which is accessed by the
users via a web browser. The web application were developed in 2013, where use of
tablets and mobile devices were not as common as today. The system does therefore
not support mobile devices in a good way, since the interface does not adapt to the
small screen. MedOrtis does therefore lack of mobile-friendliness, since the application
is not useful when accessed via a mobile device.
With an targeted effort on making a mobile-friendly application, the system will be
modern and useful to the patients, and also the staff.
In MedOrtis, the patients have a personal account, which allows them to access the
system at any time. Furthermore, the staff can access the system on the administra-
tion side. Each staff member has their own account, and they may use their personal
credentials to access the system.
The staff members
The staff members are grouped into roles, where the associated role has specific
permissions that apply.
The application developed in this project will be named MedOrtis2, which also will
be used throughout the report. It is therefore easy to distinguish between the existing
system - MedOrtis, to the application developed in this project - MedOrtis2.
In the next section, precise objectives to the project are defined.
1.3
Objectives
Stating the objectives gives a understanding of the expected outcome of the project.
==PAGE:13==
1.3 Objectives
5
1.3.1
Why
The doctors are spending time on entering trivial data, and thereby moving away
from their expertise - consulting patients.
One could ask, why implement such a system. The answer is simply: The doctors are
interested in a smarter way to bring in reports from the patient with a better display.
People in general use smart phones more and more, and people increasingly use the
smart phone for more everyday-tasks year for year. The patients must therefore be
able to access MedOrtis from their smart phone, where submission of questionnaires
are possible from a mobile-friendly interface.
1.3.2
What
Today’s health care environment lack electronic processes that includes interaction
with the patients. The focus of this master thesis project is to design and implement
a state of the art application that can handle creating questionnaires and reports in a
flexible manner. This project includes Pierre Schydlowsky as a partner, enlightening
me with insight in the real world situation of the workflow of a doctor.
He has
described the workflow of his practice, and we have discussed several approaches to
improve the workflow by developing a custom made system for data collection. The
requirements and ideas to the application have been extracted from the conversations
with Pierre. The process relies on design and implementing a solution targeted this
case.
MedOrtis2 will allow doctors to create questionnaires. The created questionnaires
are available for the patients to answer.
Letting the patients involved in the system, is a crucial part. Without their pres-
ence, the system does not have any effect, since the patient are carrying some of the
responsibility to submit questionnaires, and thereby be prepared for consultation.
The objective is to provide the doctor an optimal way to create and alter questionnaire
schemes, and also review answered questionnaires presented effectively.
Another important objective is to give the patient the opportunity to fill out the
questionnaire in an optimal manner. The questionnaires will be informative and de-
scriptive, allowing the patients to be sure in the process of filling out the questionnaire.
==PAGE:14==
6
1 Introduction
The data from the questionnaires submitted by the patients, are used by the doctor to
review a report that states the answers from the patient. The data from the system is
used as a helping tool, and has the purpose for the doctor to use less questioning time
during the consultation. The data from the system is not used directly to conclude
any diagnosis, since examination and treatment are still performed by the doctor.
MedOrtis2 must be accessed by the patients and staff either through their smart
phone, tablet, laptop or desktop computer. The submission of a questionnaire must
be possible to view in the application on all these device-types, without any significant
difference in appearance. To give the patients the best experience with the system,
the interface of the application must be streamlined.
It may not have significant
differences depending on which device is used.
1.3.3
How
The art of software engineering involves a analysis of the domain which enables soft-
ware design of the desired features, which in the end results in a realisation. The
requirements and the domain will be analysed in cooperation with Pierre, which un-
derlies the project.
The result from the analysis includes concepts that supports
further process where domain specific language is developed with abstract and con-
crete syntax.
The system will be realised by implementing an application based on a web server
with a associated database. The application will be able to access through any web
browser. The database will a central part of the system. All data will be stored in
the database, except media files. Data is recalled whenever it is requested by the
application.
1.4
Report overview
The report follows the natural way regarding the software engineering process.
Chapter 2 - Analysis This chapter introduce the requirements and the domain
concepts. The chapter also discuss risks with the project. The approaches that
are taken to minimise the risks are concluding the chapter.
==PAGE:15==
1.4 Report overview
7
Chapter 3 - Related work Related work within the field of data collection are
discussed in this chapter. The possible use of existing data collection tools are
presented. The advantages and disadvantages to the different approaches are
analysed and weighted.
Chapter 4 - Domain Specific Language The developed DSL for the project is
introduced in this chapter. There are three important elements in the language:
The abstract syntax, which is presented in a meta-model. The concrete syn-
tax, which is describing how the concrete implementation will look like. The
semantics which describes the semantic properties of the components on the
implementation level.
Chapter 5 - Design This chapter introduces the design and architecture of the
whole system. The system contains interface components that is presented to
the user, and a interpreter that translates the raw data to useful resources in
the application.
Chapter 6 - Realisation This chapter highlights the implementation issues, and
discuss alternative solutions, weighing benefits and disadvantages. The appli-
cation architecture are explained, and the implemented components are sum-
marised. The most central components are described in detail.
Chapter 7 - Testing and deployment The implemented testing suite are explained
in this chapter, together with a description of the approach taken regarding de-
ployment of the system.
Chapter 8 - Evaluation This chapter evaluates the implemented system from the
perspective of an end-user. The customer evaluates on the implemented fea-
tures in comparison to the existing solution. A evaluation on concrete metrics
are also included, stating a direct improvement.
Chapter 9 - Conclusion The conclusion summarises the development of the ap-
plication, concludes the overall evaluation by the customer. The chapter also
states possible future improvements to the system, which could entirely com-
==PAGE:16==
8
1 Introduction
plete the system.
Appendix A Shoulder test example.
Appendix B General information example
Appendix C Installation guide for the MedOrtis2 Application is provided in this
appendix.
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 2
Analysis
This chapter covers the analysis of the system that is proposed by the customer.
Examples of questionnaires bases the analysis of extraction of concepts. moving on
to the requirements and specification of the system.
By reviewing examples of questionnaires on different areas, the completeness will
ensure that the necessary concepts can be extracted. The concepts will be extracted
on a proper level, not being too specific regarding e.g. the look of the user interface,
but yet indeed useful in the system, in the matter of designing the back end.
The concepts and requirements are later developed into the domain model, which
is explained and discussed in the Chapter 4. The chapter concludes covering risks
regarding the project, and a proposal of how to minimise the effects of the risks.
2.1
User analysis
Before exploring of the user stories, examples and requirements of the system, it is
appropriate to describe the users of the system. As stated in the introduction, the
system should be used by both patient and the staff.
There is a natural distinguishing between patients and the staff members in the system.
The system is a health care system, where the staff members are administrating the
questionnaires, and reviewing the reports from the data collected from the patients.
The patient should not be able to know anything about other patients in the system.
There is therefore a requirement for the system to limit that a patient cannot see the
data from other patients.
The patient is identified by either the email that they have used for registering, or
==PAGE:18==
10
2 Analysis
their unique person number - CPR number. The CPR number is the unique personal
ten digit number that is used in public systems to identify persons. It is necessary to
provide the CPR number to be registered in the system.
The staff members are not identified by a CPR number, and does not need to have
CPR number registered. There is therefore a clear difference in these two general
types of users in the system.
As described in Section 1.2, there are several staff
members in the clinic. The staff members have each a specific role in the company.
The same applies the existing systems, where the staff members are grouped into
roles. The associated role is determining which permissions are allowed for the staff
member to perform.
2.2
User stories
This section has the purpose of enabling the reader to understand how the system
will be used. The stories cover the most central features of the system. The stories
will be very short, nontechnical and should be very clear and easy to understand.
User stories are short, simple descriptions of a feature told from the perspective of
the person who desires the new capability, usually a user or customer of the system.
The user stories therefore are written in the language that the customer would use.
The user stories are numerated for later reference by the name US#[..], standing for
User Story #[..].
==PAGE:19==
2.3 Examples
11
US#1 As a doctor, I want to create a questionnaire scheme so that I save
time asking questions trivial to my patients during consultation.
US#2 As a patient, I want to be able to fill out a questionnaire on my
smart phone, so I can come to consultation prepared, and the doctor
can prepare for consultation.
US#3 As an assistant, I want to be able to fill out a questionnaire on behalf
of a patient so I can make sure the doctor has the necessary information.
US#4 As a secretary, when I am called by a new patient, I want to be able
to add a patient to the system and invite the patient to the appropriate
questionnaires, so that I can make sure that the patient can be a part
of the system, and fill out the needed questionnaires.
US#5 As a admin, I want to set the role permissions, so I can control who
has access to the different actions in the system.
These basic user stories provides the very base features for the system. This is however
far enough from being able to understand what the system should consist of on a
technical level. The next step is to provide some examples to the core functionality
of the system, to get a deeper understanding of the requirements for the system.
2.3
Examples
As stated in Section 1.2, Pierre Schydlowski has an existing system where question-
naires are prepared, and patients fill them out and are being reviewed by doctors
prior consultation. The questionnaires from the existing system have been used as an
inspiration and base, for this project. The examples here are not direct copies, but
instead more ideal questionnaires are provided as examples.
Pierre Schydlowsky is specialist in treatment of shoulder and elbow injuries, and
therefore will the examples be focused on topics regarding this. The examples express
==PAGE:20==
12
2 Analysis
a complete variety of questions desired in the wanted system.
First, the examples will be introduced, and the step after is to derive the concepts.
The concepts of the questionnaire are derived in Section 2.5, from the basis of the
analysis of the examples.
The examples basically cover the features the end-user will be presented. This both
includes showing a report from the staff members point of view, and filling out a
questionnaire from the patients point of view.
The first example is called Introductory example. It is a small example which were
directly projected from the existing system. A preview of the questionnaire in the ex-
isting system can be found in Figure 2.1. This allows easy comparing, both regarding
content and layout.
2.3.1
Introductory example
The Introductory example covers many elements, and the reader should therefore be
able to understand the basics functionality of the questionnaire scheme. The example
shows from the view of a patient, how the scheme is presented when it must be filled
out. The example contains only three questions, but yet it contains many details
and has some complexity, which will be discussed in the review of the example, in
Section 2.5.2.
Figure 2.2 shows the introductory example where the questions are answered, which
means that some fields are entered with some example data.
It is easy to see differences in the presentation of the questionnaire in the two figures,
Figure 2.1 and Figure 2.2, even if the questionnaire contains the same questions.
Especially the two last questions have significant difference in presentation.
The
existing system does not have a feature to list allergies in question 2. Instead, the
patient needs to enter all allergies by himself in a big text-box, with a specific syntax
desired.
This introduce a unnecessary scenario, where the patient must use time to understand
how to write the answer to follow the desired syntax. This is not ideal, and there is
therefore wanted a better presentation, which is shown for question 2, where instead
==PAGE:21==
2.3 Examples
13
Figure 2.1: Introductory example (Sample from questionnaire in the existing sys-
tem).
a predefined list is available, and further allergies can be entered additionally. Each
answer entry is thereby separated, and can used in a more flexible manner in the
application. An alternative solution could be to still have the big text-area, and then
manipulate the data to try to split up the provided answers, and try to format them
as desired, but this is not a trivial task, since there could be many possible delimiters.
Question 3 does also contain a big difference regarding representation. Question 3
acts in the same manner in the existing system as question 2, where a big text-box
allows the patient to enter the data. This approach is not ideal, and therefore, it is
proposed to change the approach to instead separate each answer in four fields. Each
==PAGE:22==
14
2 Analysis
Figure 2.2: Introductory example.
entered field with a specific format, e.g. date format, integer or text. This ensures
that there can be set up rules to each field, e.g. to ensure that fields are filled out
in a specific pattern, and no information is missing. The data is therefore entered
in a fixed format that easily can be interpreted in the system when persisted, and
manipulated as desired later, e.g. for reporting.
These improvements need to be implemented to complete the system, and it does of
course takes time to implement. The result is a system where it is ensured that the
data entered by the patients is provided to the system as desired to the staff members.
This optimises the workflow of the staff, since the task of interpreting the format of
the data is not necessary, since it it fixed from the rules implemented into the system.
2.3.2
Report
The report is a central part of the requirements.
An example of a report from the existing system is displayed in Figure 2.3. The
==PAGE:23==
2.4 Requirements
15
Figure 2.3: Example - Dense report (for doctors) from MedOrtis.
example is a preview of a report which is displayed how the ideally is represented for
the doctors. This configuration is important to the doctors, since they can easily get
a overview of the entered data. The doctors are only interesting in having the most
critical information shown. The report shows a configuration where the information
is represented dense, but this is not the only presentation scenario of a report. The
configuration to the secretary and assistants are different from the configuration for
doctors. Specifically there is more space between the answers and the page has more
structure, and looks more or less how a traditional question / answer scheme. Since
it is not as dense, the total height of the page is approximate doubled. This means
that reviewing all answers would take a bit more time. In the other hand, it is here
possible to get more information, since the description of the questions are displayed.
2.4
Requirements
Both functional and non-functional requirements for the system are addressed in the
following section. The requirements are conceived in collaboration with the customer.
This ensures that the features include the correct wanted functionality.
2.4.1
Functional requirements
The functional requirements are important to target and limit the features of the
system. The functional requirements are grouped into the staff member side, and the
==PAGE:24==
16
2 Analysis
Figure 2.4: Example - Report targeted assistants.
==PAGE:25==
2.4 Requirements
17
patient side. Each feature are given a unique name, enabling easy identifying of the
feature for later reference.
2.4.1.1
Staff side (Administration)
The staff members have access to the administration of the system. The following
section will explore the features exclusively for the staff members.
FR-SM-CQS - Creating questionnaire schemes
The concept questionnaire scheme
is a composition of questions. The questionnaire scheme are individually on a specific
topic, and the questions is within this topic.
The creation of questionnaire schemes is one of the most important features of the
system. A questionnaire scheme include all the needed data to present the question-
naire when it needs to be filled out. The questionnaire scheme must have a title and
a description, which allows the user to perceive the context of the questionnaire, and
when the questionnaire is relevant. The creator must also state whether the scheme
will be public to the patient as soon as the scheme is published, or whether it is
private until it is e.g. checked by another admin and then published. The creation of
a questionnaire scheme include setting up which questions must be answered in the
questionnaire.
The questions provided can be of various types, including single- and multiple-choice,
and also text field answers. Depending on the specific chosen type, there are options
which must be treated. When the question is a single- or multiple-choice question, the
options which must be presented to the user must be stated. If it is a multiple-choice
question, it is also possible to choose whether the user is allowed to phrase his own
custom answers to the question. E.g. when asked to list all allergies, and the list does
not contain all allergies, it is allowed to enter the additional ones.
Each individual question can also include media as for instance a image or a video.
The media is stored and presented to the user who fill outs the questionnaire. Single-
and multiple-choice questions allows sub questions, which will be triggered by a spe-
cific answer. The sub question has the same setup as a question. The question can
also be set up to be answered with a user-entered answer. The type of the answer
==PAGE:26==
18
2 Analysis
can be a text field, text area, integer, decimal, scale, or a composite type, giving the
opportunity to customise multiple fields which must all be entered.
The question as described now contains different elements, and the configuration now
decides how the question is presented in the questionnaire when being answered, and
also how it is presented in the report. The default setup is present when no specific
change is made. When creating the questionnaire scheme, it is possible to insert and
delete questions, and also move questions up and down, and switch the type of the
questions, all on the go.
Typical questions can be stored in a library, and be used as predefined questions which
easily can be inserted in a questionnaire. The question will then use the setting from
the predefined question, and re-entering the setting from an earlier stored question is
therefore not necessary.
When all necessary data is entered, the questionnaire scheme can be submitted. Vali-
dation of the entered information are done, and if there were no validation error, the
questionnaire scheme will be persisted to the database.
FR-SM-VQS - View list of filled out questionnaires
As administrators of the
system, the doctors and assistants can access and browse the submitted questionnaire
instances. A overall list of the submitted instances will be available, where the CPR
and name of the patient, and the submission-time is clearly stated. The list is ordered
by submission date, which means that the freshly submitted questionnaires are on the
top of the list. The presented list is a limited length, meaning that the length of the
page is not unnecessarily long, ensuring that a simple overview of the list keeps the
site user friendly. Each entry in the list is clickable, and will navigate to the report
of the questionnaire.
FR-SM-SQS - Search for filled out questionnaires on a specific date
The
search-bar also allows a date to be entered, which will then allow the staff to view all
submitted questionnaires on the given date.
FR-SM-SPA - Search for patient
Sometimes it is necessary for the doctor or as-
sistant to review an old submitted questionnaire by a patient. To navigate to this
==PAGE:27==
2.4 Requirements
19
questionnaire, the user can then type in the CPR number or full name of the patient,
and results of patients from the database will be presented.
Each entry in the list shows the name and CPR number of the patient, and also
details of when the latest submission of a questionnaire was done. The staff can then
navigate to the patients page by clicking on link at the entry.
FR-SM-VPP - View patient page
The patient page contains core data of the pa-
tient.
The patient page includes a list of the basic data from all submitted questionnaires.
Each entry in the list is clickable, and will navigate to the report of the submitted
questionnaire, as in the list described earlier.
Also the questionnaire schemes that is attached will be present at the page, stating
that the patient must kindly fill out these questionnaire schemes.
FR-SM-VQR - View questionnaire report
The submitted questionnaire can be
reviewed question for question by the patient that submitted it. The staff including
doctors and assistants can view a report of the submitted questionnaire.
The presentation of the report will be varied depending on the configuration. De-
pending on which user is showing the report, the presentation is different, due to the
difference in configuration for each of the roles.
The doctor is presented are very dense report, where the most important answers
are prioritised by the doctor to be presented. The patient will be shown a lot more
extended presentation with a better overview.
FR-SM-APQ - Attach a patient to a questionnaire
It is often the case that
the patient call the medical clinic and arranges a consultation.
The patient has
a specific reason for coming to consultation, and depending on the reason, one or
more questionnaire schemes needs to be answered by the patient on beforehand. The
assistant therefore attach the appropriate questionnaire schemes to the patient. The
patient will then receive a notification per email, and as soon as the patient logs
into the system he will be met with a message stating which questionnaires must be
submitted before the consultation.
==PAGE:28==
20
2 Analysis
FR-SM-RNP - Register a new patient
A patient that is not is yet in the system
must be registered by the staff. The staff enters the CPR number and email of the
patient, and creates an account for the patient. In the same process, an activation
email is sent to the patient, with information of how to finish the registration process.
If there already exists a user in the system with the same CPR number, the user will
not be registered, since the CPR number is a unique and personal number. The email
address cannot neither be used for two patient accounts, and it must therefore be a
unique email address.
FR-SM-CUR - Creating and updating roles
The users of the system must be
assigned to a role. The role of the user decides which parts of the system is available
to be accessed, which is defined in a permissions-policy. Furthermore the presentation
of questionnaires when both filled out and shown as a report is dependent on the role.
By default the system is setup with four roles: Admin, doctor, assistant. The users
that are patients has fixed permissions.
FR-SM-URP - View and update the permissions-policy for a role
The root
user can view the policy that is setup, viewing all the roles that are setup in the
system. The root user can change the policy on the go, enabling new permissions for
a role, or restricting the access for a specific action in the system.
Configuring presentation of questionnaire schemes and reports
Each role
have their own configuration of presenting questionnaire schemes and the reports. By
default all settings in the configuration are set to being presented to the user.
2.4.1.2
Patient side
FR-PS-FPR - Finish patient registration
The activation email for the the patient
contains a unique activation link which navigates to a registration page on the website,
where the patient must enter his name and personal password.
If all the fields seems valid, the user has ended the registration procedure, and is
logged in and begin using the system, filling questionnaires and review his the patient’s
profile.
==PAGE:29==
2.4 Requirements
21
FR-PS-LSQ - View list of questionnaire schemes
All published questionnaires
will be listed and presented with the link, title and the description. This enables
the patient to quickly browse which questionnaires there is available. In the view of
each entry in the list is also stated whether the questionnaire has been submitted
previously by the patient, which enables the user to recall whether it is necessary to
fill out the questionnaire again.
FR-PS-CQS - Filling out a questionnaire
The questionnaire can be filled out by
a patient, or by the staff filling out on behalf of a patient.
The configuration of
the questionnaire controls which components of the questionnaire and the containing
questions will be displayed. The patient that fills out the questionnaire will by default
being able to view all details from the questionnaire.
Details that is redundant to the doctor, e.g. a long description of a test, will be
emitted, and thereby enabling the doctor to fill out the questionnaire faster, which
optimise the workflow for the doctor.
If the user jumps ahead of a question that is required to be answered, the interface
will show with a red colour that the concerned question has not be answered yet.
When the user is finished entering answers to all questions, he submit the data and
if there were any errors, the user will be presented the questionnaire again, and with
the entered data, being able to edit the answers and then try to submit again.
The user is also able to save the entered information as a draft, which will not fully
submit the data, but save it in the system as a draft, which can be returned to later.
2.4.2
Non-functional requirements
The non-functional requirements for the system cover data security, user experience
and performance. The data security is important due to the fact that the system
involves sensitive personal data, and this topic is discussed in this section.
The
user experience for the application weighs heavy in the design of the system. The
staff members must be able to use the application in an efficient way. The patients
are visiting the system with a longer time between. This sets an requirement for
the application to have a simple layout which ensures that the patients do not get
==PAGE:30==
22
2 Analysis
frightened by using the system. Especially important is the responsive design, for
support for both mobile and desktop devices.
2.4.2.1
Protected, secured and sound data
Data security and protection is an important matter for danish health care systems.
The system must therefore handle the present security issues including encrypting
data and storing data securely without the opportunity to hackers being able to
access raw patient data. Data of registered patients will be stored on servers managed
locally, ensuring that no data can be extracted to any third party. The staff must,
as stated in the requirements, initiate the registration of a new patient. This process
needs time and precision from the staff, which is not ideal. An alternative solution
is to let the patient register by himself. This however opens the opportunity for a
malicious user to register new accounts with arbitrary CPR numbers. When patients
register their account, it could be the case that a user tries to register an account
with a CPR number that belongs to another person. There is an issue that is not
trivial regarding this, since there must be some further authentication, e.g via NemID
to make sure that the entered CPR number is actually the person registering. This
issue will however not be implemented in the system, but will be a low-priority feature
on the feature list, that will be possible to implement in the future as a step in the
registration process.
The application must be carefully store data in compliance with The Act on Pro-
cessing of Personal Data in Danish legislation. 1 MedOrtis2 is a health care system
involving sensitive personal information, the awareness of handling data must be in
mind.
HTTPS
A website is by default using the HTTP protocol, which does not encrypt
requests nor responses between the client and the server. The transmitted data can
be intercepted by a man-in-the-middle (MITM), e.g. a server handling traffic, and
read the raw data. In practice, this means that when a client wants to log in with his
personal user credentials, it is transmitted without encryption. When a staff member
is logged in, he is able to view the data of the patients. A MITM would be able to
1Datatilsynet | Visited May 10th 2017 | https://www.datatilsynet.dk/english/processing-
of-sensitive-personal-data-in-a-cloud-solution/
==PAGE:31==
2.4 Requirements
23
read all the data in the request. The sensitive personal data that is transmitted via
the web application.
MedOrtis2 involves sensitive personal data, hence the transmission of data must not
be intercepted by any man-in-the-middle. The use of SSL certificate enabling use of
the HTTPS protocol is appropriate. The use of HTTPS protocol ensures that the
payload data between client and server are transmitted on a secure channel. The
definition of ’secure’ in this case would mean that the payload is encrypted with a
AES-256, or similar type key. The AES-256 encryption method is that the last years
has been the go-to standard for practice use of encryption on web applications.
The protocol can only be used successfully by a client and server when the two parts
have negotiated on a encryption key. Furthermore the client must trust the server, and
that is where certificates come into play. The HTTPS protocol relies on trust between
the client and the server to the certification authority.
A certification authority
has the task of issuing SSL certificates to websites owners. The process of issuing
certificates involves that a certificate is bound to a specific domain and server. The
certificate does also have a limited lifetime, reaching for gradual, proactive evolution.
By limiting the validity time the authorities can gradually improve the encryption
standards if necessary, due to the fact that encryption keys must be stronger and
stronger over time.
In practice, the client browser must only accept establishments of HTTPS connections
on a valid SSL certificate. MedOrtis2 must therefore make sure that a valid SSL
certificate is obtained if the application will be put in production.
2.4.2.2
User friendly interface
The staff members will use the application often, and thereby
The creation of a questionnaire scheme (FR-SM-CQS) requires a lot of details to com-
pletely insert all necessary data for the questionnaire, and therefore, it is important
that the functionality on creating questionnaires are easy to navigate and still have
the wanted features.
The user interface must be very simple for the patients, since the patients in the
system does not use it every day. Therefore, it must be as simple and less-confusing
to use as possible. The important metrics is to minimise the amount of components
==PAGE:32==
24
2 Analysis
on the website, and at the same time ensure that all actions can be reached in very
few clicks.
Learnability enables the user to learn how to use the system, and also use it more
efficient. Learnability is an aspect that is weighted low. Learnability is not without
matter, since it is especially important for the staff members, which uses the system
extensively. Learnability is implemented by tips and hints, e.g. in the search-bar,
where a little tool-tip message will appear when hovering the search-bar, stating that
the search-bar can be reached and put in focus by pressing S on the keyboard, for
the ability to start typing right away.
2.4.2.3
Mobile-device support
The use case of creating questionnaire schemes is targeted doctors which will use their
desktop device to create the questionnaires, since there is many details that must be
entered precisely, and at the same time still establishing an overview of the entered
data.
On the other hand, when the patient wants to submit a questionnaire (FR-PS-CSQ),
he will most likely use a tablet or mobile device.
Therefore, the interface when
creating a questionnaire submission must therefore support mobile device.
2.4.2.4
Performance / speed
One very important factor in the system is performance. The doctor cannot wait
for the pages to load, or use an unnecessary amount of clicks, since his time is very
precious. The platform must therefore be very compact, and on the same time still
has a good performance.
2.5
Concepts
The concepts of the system will be derived in this section. The derivation will consist
of four parts. The first part defining the concept of the users of the system, the second
part the concepts regarding questionnaires, the third about questionnaire submissions,
and the last part on the questionnaire report.
==PAGE:33==
2.5 Concepts
25
2.5.1
Users
The first concepts to be derived in the users of the system, which is divided into two
separate concepts.
Patient
First of all, the patients of the system is a concept for itself. The patient
has a unique identifier by their CPR number. Furthermore, they contain data like
their name and email.
Staff member
A staff member can access the administrative part of the system.
The staff member is identified by a email. The staff member is also registered with a
name.
Role
Each staff member must be associated with a specific role. The role has a
unique name, that is appropriate.
Role permission
A role can have many permissions attached.
The permission
states that the role has access to a given part of the system, by a unique identifier.
2.5.2
Questionnaire
The concepts regarding questionnaire will be derived in this section. Each concept
will later be used in the domain model. Each concept is derived from the examples,
to prove that they have a role in the system.
The example from Figure 2.2 consists of a main title, two main questions, and one
sub question.
Questionnaire Scheme
The questionnaire scheme is the basic concept for the
system, containing questions, specific for this instance. Furthermore, the question-
naire scheme has attributes that helps identifying the questionnaire scheme.
The
questionnaire scheme is created by a person the staff, most likely the doctor. The
questionnaire scheme can be filled out by the patient, where the questions are visible
to the patient.
==PAGE:34==
26
2 Analysis
Questionnaire title
The questionnaire has a title, which is a headline of the ques-
tionnaire, which must be a appropriate for the questionnaire to be identified, both
for the staff and patients.
Question
The concept of a question is the encapsulation of the attributed that is
regarding the question. A question is therefore a entry containing various attributes,
which is about to be derived.
Question title
The first concept that is possible to be derived is the question title.
Each of the questions has the question itself as the first line, which is the title of the
question of some sort. The questionnaire title must be present at all questions.
Question description
The question title is followed by a short description. The
description is specific for the question, and has the purpose of describing the question
for the patient. This could e.g. contain information of what to exclude in the answer,
and what to emphasise when answering the question.
Question media
The question must also include some media that supports the
question, to enable the patient to e.g. understand how to perform a test. This is
derived from question 6-10 in the example of the shoulder tests in Appendix A.
Then comes the opportunity to answer the question, which is a central part of the
questionnaire. The questions have various ways to be answered, and there are some
core types that is extracted.
Looking at the introductory example in Figure 2.2, it is easy to see that there is a
clear difference in the semantic of the three questions.
Question 1 in Figure 2.2 can be answered by the patient by choosing one and only
one of the options from the list of possible answers that is provided to the question.
The options of the questions are predefined, and only these options are possible to
provide as answer. The question must be answered, and the questionnaire cannot be
finished without an answer to this question.
Question 2 in Figure 2.2 will be presented to the patient if and only if the answer
to Question 1 is the value “Yes”, thereby, the patient is able to answer Question 2,
which is a follow up question of Question 1, asking specifically which allergies the
==PAGE:35==
2.5 Concepts
27
patient suffers from. Question 2 can be answered with several allergies, and therefore
it is possible for the patient to choose multiple options from the list, and also is able
to add additional custom values as answers.
Question 3 in Figure 2.2 can be answered by entering zero, one or multiple custom
answers. Each answer of the answer consist of several parts, including entering dates,
and fields regarding cause and location of the hospital admission. It is not mandatory
for the patient to enter any of the answers, if it is not the case that the patient has
been hospitalised. The answer can thereby be left blank.
2.5.3
Basic characteristics extracted
The characteristics for each of the three questions in the introductory example are
indeed different from each other. First looking into what are similar for the questions.
All questions have the properties that a list of predefined answers is stated for each of
the questions. The characteristics extracted is not concepts yet, but the differences
are important to keep in mind for later conceptual design.
There is differences in the characteristics regarding how many answers must or shall be
provided to a question in the questionnaire. Question 1 in Figure 2.2 is a mandatory
question and must be answered by the patient with either “Yes”, “No” or “I don’t
know”.
Question 2 in Figure 2.2 is a follow up of Question 1. In the case that the answer from
Question 1 is Yes, Question 2 is displayed. Question 2 must also be answered, and
cannot be left without any answers, however, the patient is more free in answering
this question, since it is possible to choose one or more options from the list. It is
also allowed to enter custom values as answer for the question.
Question 3 is a question where different data will be entered from patient to patient,
because it is dependent on the personal hospital admission history. The question
does therefore requires the patient to enter specific data, including dates, location
and cause. It can be the case that the patient cannot enter any entry for the question,
and therefore, the question must be possible to be left unanswered.
Single choice
Characteristic: Select only one option. Look: bullet dots
==PAGE:36==
28
2 Analysis
Figure 2.5: Select one (Single choice).
When the options are listed with bullets, it means that only one of the options can be
chosen. This question can only be answered by the options from the list. It should
not be able to enter a custom answer, also it must be impossible to provide multiple
answer, but only one of the valid answers. This notation is also known from web
applications, where it is called radio buttons.
For simplicity and to avoid to be verbose, examples with presentation style using
bullet points are stated as the type Single Choice which has just been explored.
Mandatory question
Question 1 from the introductory example in Figure 2.2
is a single choice question, but it cannot be left unanswered, the concept of being
mandatory is therefore stated. If the mandatory concept is applied to the question,
it must be answered with one of the defined options.
Multiple choice
Characteristic: Select zero, one or more options. Look: Square
boxes
Figure 2.6:
Select zero, one or more options (Multiple choice).
When the options are listed with boxes, it means that it is optional which options is
selected, meaning that the answer is chosen. In short it can be described as “Select
zero, one or more options from list”. It is not required that any option is chosen,
==PAGE:37==
2.5 Concepts
29
thereby, the answer to the question is empty, or none, depending on the context.
This notation is also known from web applications, where it is called check boxes.
These two types of questions, single choice and multiple choice, have the thing in com-
mon, that both contains options that is defined on beforehand. These two question
variants are grouped under the name Choice question.
As for Single Choice, all further examples where check boxes appear, the explained
semantics apply for these examples.
Additional answers
As seen in the introductory example in Figure 2.2, question
3 is a multiple choice question with some predefined options. The question is asking
about known alligeries, and since it is a finite list of options, it could be the case
that the patient has a allergy that is not listed in as an option. The option “Andre”
(others) can be chosen. When “Andre” is chosen, additional answers can be entered,
with custom values. The option “Andre” (other) is not an answer in itself. The staff
member creating the questionnaire must explicitly state during the creation process if
additional answers to the question is allowed. By default, a multiple choice question
does not allow additional answers to be entered.
The patient is presented a text-field when “Andre” is chosen, where the custom answer
is entered. When it is entered, the patient are also able to provide more additional
answers by clicking on “+ Ny”, and a new text-field will appear. Figure 2.7 displays
the representation of the additional answers concept.
Figure 2.7: Multiple choice that allows additional answers.
Sub question
As described in the walk through of the introductory example, it is
explained that the middle question, question 2, is only relevant on the case that a
specific answer were chosen in question 1.
Question 2 is therefore dependent on question 1. It is possible to say that question 2
is a sub question of question 1, where the value “Ja” is the trigger.
==PAGE:38==
30
2 Analysis
Figure 2.8: Custom answer in questionnaire.
Custom answer
Question 3 from Figure 2.2 has the characteristics that allows
the patient to fill out custom answers. The answer must be entered by the patient,
without any pre-stated options.
Multiple custom answer
Question 3 from Figure 2.2 shows a “+ Ny”-button to
the right. This enables the patient to fill out multiple answers. In this example, it
is regarding earlier hospital admissions. It makes good sense to allow the patient to
enter multiple entries, since it could be the case that the patient has a history with
more than one entry. The “Multiple custom answer” concept supports this behaviour.
Single custom answer
In other cases, it is restricted to only allows one entry, as
e.g. seen in the first two questions in Appendix B. These two questions only needs a
single answer to the question.
Answer type
As seen in Figure 2.8, the custom answer must consist of one or
several fields, that can be filled out by the patient. Each field has a specific type.
Comparing Question 3 from Figure 2.2 to Question 1 from Appendix B, it shows they
both are questions where fields must be filled by the patient. There is however a
difference in number of fields, and with what data they are filled with.
Integer answer
Reviewing question 1 and question 2 from Appendix B show ques-
tions with a single field where the height of the patient must be filled in. This is
generalised to a concept called Integer answer.
Text area answer
Question 6.8.1 from the same appendix, Appendix B, shows
another variant of field, namely a text area, where a block of text can be entered.
This is especially for answers where a longer description must be entered.
==PAGE:39==
2.5 Concepts
31
Date answer type
The first two fields in Figure 2.8 are date fields, where a date
must be entered. This is its own type, since a date must be interpreted in the system
in another way than a normal text field.
Text field type
The third and forth field in the answer type in Figure 2.8 are fields
that must be entered with a regular string, where there is immediate no context. The
text field type can be used in many scenarios where there is no requirements to the
input on being a integer.
Composite answer type
As Figure 2.8 shows, four fields must be entered. This
question therefore has a more advanced setup, where the custom answer contains
multiple answer types, which as an entry encapsulates an answer. It is customisable
which fields is used for the composite. This derives the concept of composing an
answer type of multiple simple types, such as text area, text field, integer, and date.
It is required that the composite answer type must contain two fields or more. There
is no upper limit of the number of contained fields that the composite answer type
can have. In practice, it is not appropriate to have a composite with a lot of fields.
This is analysed from the fact that the application is targeted mobile-users, where the
screen size is small, and the number of components on the screen must be minimised.
Answer
The patient answers the questionnaire scheme in the application, and each
question must be answered. The concept of an answer therefore build bridge between
the questionnaire scheme, and the patient filling out the questionnaire scheme. Since
each question has specific way of being answered, an answer depends on a specific
question, where the semantics for question can be applied to the answer, for validation
and compliance purposes. If the answer does not know any details of the question or
have a relation, the answer is floating in the system and a lot of important options
are missed. This is due to the fact that each question has specific logic behind it,
that covers presentation and validation.
Questionnaire Submission
The questionnaire submission is a concept that is
derived from the fact that a patient can fill out a questionnaire scheme. It is seem as
the Introductory example in Figure 2.2 displays a how the patient are presented the
creation of a questionnaire submission.
==PAGE:40==
32
2 Analysis
The answers from the patient are related to the questionnaire submission. This means
that a patient can make two questionnaire submissions of the same questionnaire
scheme just after each other, with different answers to the two questionnaire submis-
sions. The questionnaire submission clearly separate the answers for each other, so
it is clear which answers are composed from each questionnaire submission.
Report
The report is a central part of the requirements, as stated in the Examples
section in Section 2.3.2.
A report contains data from a specific questionnaire submission.
The presentation of the report must be tailored for each specific staff member role.
This is reviewed in Figure 2.3 and Figure 2.4 where it is displayed that a clear different
in the presentation of the reports, even though that the data content is the same,
but the staff member is different. The system must therefore be flexible to handle
configuration of the report presentation of the questionnaire submission based on
roles.
The configuration of the report is not a part of the domain per se. It is in another
abstraction, a layer above the domain. The concepts of the report configuration are
therefore not included here, but found instead under DSL in Chapter 4.
2.6
Risks
Developing software includes various risks, which can complicate and slow down the
process of developing the features needed. This section discusses the most critical risks.
Many variables regarding the project play together, e.g. the chosen technologies, the
features that must be implemented. The risks must be handled through software
project management, and therefore several approaches are taken. The approaches
and actions have the task to help minimising the risks of complications. The The
section is concluded explaining the approaches taken.
==PAGE:41==
2.6 Risks
33
2.6.1
Critical risks
Product size The product size is an important factor in software development. The
size estimate is a hard discipline to master, due to the fact that projects varies
a lot in regard of technologies, and the competences in the development team.
It is natural that the number of lines of code grow for each feature, and the
work laid into writing these codes are not free.
Customer related risks Miscommunication between the customer and the soft-
ware development team is one of the most critical factors.
Due to the fact
that it is a project on Domain-specific languages, it is indeed a risk that there
will be misunderstandings. The misunderstandings can slow down the project,
which is extending the development time, and sends the cost up. The specifica-
tion of the requirements with customer for the project is a central part of the
communication with the customer. It is likely that the customer is non techni-
cal, and the communication is therefore important to build bridge between the
technical and the non-technical world.
Technology risks Use of new or unknown technologies is a risk that also stands out.
The risks of stalling the learning curve of a new technology is a risk that is not
inconsiderable.
2.6.2
Approaches taken
Each approach has a specific advantage, minimising the risk for a certain issue. In
this project, the following approaches have been used for managing the project.
Regular meetings Regular meetings ensures the process has direction that is tar-
geted the customers needs. The meetings contain a status update on the current
state in the project, a discussing on what’s to be made for the ongoing work.
Use of known technologies The use of already known technologies ensures the de-
veloper does not need to pass a steep learning curve of the technology. If an
unknown technology would be used in the project, education of the technology
==PAGE:42==
34
2 Analysis
is necessary. The first time with a new technology requires a lot of focus and
engagement, especially in projects where multiple technologies must be mixed,
and must be combined to a final product.
Comparison on related work This project should result in a state-of-the-art tool
for questionnaire and report. By comparing the use cases and requirements for
this project with already existing tools, it gives a option to look into taking
advantage of these.
Development of prototype A prototype for the project were presented halfway
into the project time. The prototype gave the the customer insight in the de-
velopment of the system, and an overview of which features to except. The
prototype were however not thrown away after it were finished.
Instead, it
were used to process and develop on, though with a lot of changes. It can be
discussed whether it would be more appropriate to throw away, and start on
scratch again, since the time it took to make the changes to make it fit the final
product is close to the same as the development time for the prototype.
Agile development model approach This project is very time-limited, and there-
fore, many compromises are made. One compromise were which process model
to choose, since there is no perfect model. The waterfall model is the most intu-
itive and straightforward development model, but it has several downsides, for
example the fact that the project cannot be used in any way before the project
is fully developed. The agile or time-boxing model, allowing the development
to use sprints, provides the developers to focus on each step of the development.
The agile model has some other downsides, including costs that is not kept to
the minimum. [8, p.51]
Towards building a prototype, the model used looked a lot like the waterfall
model, where all features needs to be finished to a big-bang delivery. After the
delivery, the model is more similar to the agile model.
==PAGE:43==
2.6 Risks
35
2.6.3
Conclusion on risks
The balance on proceeding in the development process and still ensure that the direc-
tion of the project are not easy to find. Many parts in the development needs to fit
each other to make the project be successful.
Especially important is the communication with the customer, and especially in the
start of the project.
The distance between the two parts must be brought close
together as fast as possible, to ensure that the domain is addressed correctly.
==PAGE:44==
36
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 3
Related work
The related work chapter contains comparison of state of the art tools in the area of
health care systems.
The chapter also include discussion of research on the field of data collection that are
interesting to this project.
3.1
Open Data Kit
Open Data Kit (ODK1) is a open-source suite of tools on managing mobile data-
collection.
ODK has the general purpose of enabling development of projects involving data-
collection.
This could for instance for a health care system.
Several papers and
articles have been researched and built upon ODK. [1, 12, 11]
The ODK suite includes ODK Aggregate, which throughout the report will be men-
tioned as Aggregate. Aggregate is basically the back end system that collects the form
data. Aggregate can be installed on any newer Linux or Windows based platform,
with only few dependencies.
ODK Aggregate is basically a web server which serves the purpose of exposing forms
to the users of the system, and also enabling administrators of the system to review
and export collected data.
ODK uses XForms as the type of form, and implement the functionality. XForm is
standard built on the XML format, and is designed to be the next generation of HTML
/ XHTML forms. 2 XForms is a form standard that extends the functionality of the
1OpenDataKit.org | Visited May 10th 2017 | http://opendatakit.org
2OpenRosa XForms | Visited May 10th 2017 | https://opendatakit.github.io/xforms-spec/
==PAGE:46==
38
3 Related work
form functionality that is native in browsers. The main difference from traditional
web forms to XForms is the Model-View-Controller approach, which is not found in
traditional web forms. This approach enables semantics for the form. For instance,
the model describing form data, constraints for the data in the form. XForms also
include the ability to attach stylesheet to the form to describe the form’s appearance.
XForms includes a wide range of question types, and all the simple answer types that
is stated in Section 2.5 are contained. Furthermore, single choice and multiple choice
are included, under the name select1 and select. 3 However when it comes to multiple
choice with additional answers, it is not supported out of the box. It will however be
possible to append with model logical in XForm. Comparing XForms to traditional
web forms, one downside sticks out, namely that XForms is not supported in any
widely used web browser.
ODK Collect is the Android app, allowing Android users to install the app on their
phones. ODK Collect must be set up to the address of the wanted ODK Aggregate
server. When connected, the app can fetch forms from the given server. ODK Collect
has implemented an interpreter for the XForms standard. The fetched forms can then
be filled out, and the data can be sent to the Aggregate server.
3.1.1
Applications of ODK
One interesting paper is Design of a Phone-Based Clinical Decision Support System
for Resource-Limited Settings which was made for Kenya, where HIV is very common
in the population, and the program provides care for 100.000 HIV-positive patients.
[1]
ODK was used in the project for providing forms that nurses could use to fill out
and deliver to the health care system. The nurses were equipped with Android smart
phones, with ODK Collect, enabling the nurses to fill out the appropriate forms for
the patients they were seeing.
The paper describes the proved advantages of using the system. The paper describes
that the system were used in Kenya, and the system had many good properties in
the resource-limited environment.
One important feature of the system were the
ability to fill out a form, and be able to save it, and then upload it to the server
3Wikibooks XForm | Visisted May 2nd 2017 | https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/XForms
==PAGE:47==
3.2 Enketo
39
whenever there is connectivity to the server. This minimises the waiting time, since
it would have been necessary to wait for the data to be sent if it were all used in a
web application. Coming from a workflow where the physical papers must be filled,
moved and archived, this new tool improved the workflow a lot.
3.2
Enketo
Enketo, or Enketo Smart Paper, is the name of an open-source web application that
uses a popular open-source form format. 4 Enketo was developed as a follow-up to
a 2009 Masters Dissertation at the University of Liverpool. After a year of initial
development, it was adopted by a lab at Columbia University and first launched
in 2012.
The launch kick started adoptions of the application by companies and
organisations across the world.
Enketo has been used all around the world for a wide range of uses from needs
assessments in humanitarian aid, to raising historical awareness, to clinical research,
to election monitoring.
In the study of [5] shows an application of Enketo named OpenClinica that in the
fashion that data collection is the central part. Study on Electronic Data Collec-
tion (EDC) by [6] concludes that projects like OpenClinica most likely use Entity-
Attribute-Value schema database, which enables optimal database storage of the in-
formation.
Enketo’s form engine is also available as a separate module and has been used to
build several mobile applications, such as OpenSRP and Medic Mobile. Enketo does
therefore have a lot of potential regarding the form engine, since it is proven that it
can be used in other applications.
3.2.1
Orbeon
Another potential solution is to use a XForms engine for the front end. There are
several tools available present, where most potential one by first sight is Orbeon,
which however is a commercial service. 5 Orbeon comes in two editions - Professional
4Enketo | Visited May 1st 2017 | https://enketo.org
5Orbeon.com, April 30th 2017, http://www.orbeon.com/
==PAGE:48==
40
3 Related work
Edition and Community Edition. The professional edition costs $ 1000 / year, and
provides a professional suite of tools.
On the other side there is the Community
Edition which is free and an open source tool. It includes the packages Form Builder,
Form Runner and Form processor. The packages implements XForms, and it seems
like it would fit the requirements for this project overall. Orbeon has many strong
advantages as stated in [3, 9] where it XForms is concluded as supported in a sound
manner.
3.3
Tools fitting analysis
It must be analysed whether it is possible to use the existing tools for MedOrtis2. The
analysis must try to cover the features existing, and how the tool can be adapted for
MedOrtis2. The advantages and disadvantages are weighed independently on each
tool. Finally it is concluded whether it is chosen to follow a path using one of the
tools for the project.
3.3.1
Open Data Kit
Open Data Kit has a lot of great features that help build a health care system as
concluded in [1]. It is therefore proposed whether Open Data Kit can be used as a
tool to implement the wanted features for MedOrtis2.
The requirements for MedOrtis2 are very different from the requirements stated in
[1], and it is therefore necessary to try to analyse whether the needs for MedOrtis2
somehow fit how the ODK tools can be applied.
ODK has the benefits that it is an already existing suite of tools with many features
regarding form creation and submission. Particularly, the engine of interpreting the
forms on ODK Collect, is a component that is an advantage, since development of a
similar engine is needed.
ODK supports many types of data to be collected, e.g. geo-locations using GPS data,
multimedia, and more, but this really does not come to use in MedOrtis2, since the
collected data primarily consist of predefined answers to questions, and text answers.
The needs of MedOrtis2 is more targeted presenting the scheme in a beautiful manner,
and the reporting must be flexible for the staff members.
==PAGE:49==
3.3 Tools fitting analysis
41
The disadvantages of using the ODK tool suite is that the only platform that is
implemented on the patient side for fetching and submitting forms is the Android
application. One of the most important non-functional requirements for MedOrtis2
is that it can be used on both iPhones, iPads, and also laptops and desktop computers.
When choosing ODK, further implementation for these platforms are necessary.
ODK Collect is connectivity independent in regard to submit a form, since it can be
locally saved until a connection is present. This is however not suitable in MedOrtis2,
since the submissions of the questionnaires must happen.
Since the ODK tools presently only allows submission of forms from the Android
platform, it does not fit the needs for this project, where patients from any device
must be able to access the system, and the development costs for this is indeed not
inconsiderable.
3.3.2
Enketo
All popular modern browsers are supported and recommended on all platforms ex-
cept on iOS. The fact that iOS is not supported is a significant downside, since the
application must work in all browsers. 6
3.3.3
Orbeon
Some of the strongest benefits mentioned in [9] is the wide amount of features imple-
mented, and the ability to supply custom features and logic to the forms. Orbeon has
one downside as present, namely the packages do not fully support responsive design,
meaning that it is not ensured whether mobile devices and tablets can access all func-
tionality correctly. The road-map for better responsive design does however seem
bright, since my own quick testing shows that most of the functionality is preserved
in a great manner on a mobile device. 7
6Enketo.org | Visited May 15th 2017 | https://enketo.org/faq
7Orbeon Form Runner responsive design | Visited April 30th 2017 | https://github.com/orbeon/
orbeon-forms/issues/1181
==PAGE:50==
42
3 Related work
3.4
Conclusion on possible use of applications
This leads to the final conclusion that the ODK tool suite requires very much cus-
tomisation and further development of MedOrtis2, which makes it difficult to see
this as an option. The customisation is not trivial, and requires deep insight in the
structure of ODK. Furthermore, development of the additional implementation for
the remaining platforms is not inconsiderable.
All the benefits from Enketo would come to good if it was not the fact that iOS is
not supported, which destroys the potential for Enketo.
The discovery of Orbeon where made late in the project, where the development of a
custom made application were already taken. Orbeon however has a lot of potential
in regard to the requirements for this particular project, and it is not impossible that
Orbeon had been the core of the system if the project should have been re-run.
==PAGE:51==
CHAPTER 4
Domain-Specific
Language
This chapter introduces Domain Specific Language (DSL). Languages in general are
used for communication between humans.
In computer science, languages are de-
signed for humans to instruct a machine to perform specific tasks based on the input
- the communication. Developing a DSL has the main purpose of build bridge be-
tween modelling and realisation. Developing a DSL that suits for the application
that support the domain specific requirements is not trivial. It requires knowledge
and expertise in the domain, and it also requires programming language skills. The
DSL is based on an implementation strategy. It is therefore often hard to develop a
good DSL, since many factors must be taken into account. The resources to build
a domain-specific application is limited, and it is a craft to do it effectively. It is
perhaps the case that the customer gradually want to extend the functionality of the
application. Keeping the development costs at a minimum, and at the same time try
to develop a application that covers the features in the domain is the big hurdle.
Development of a DSL is usually divided into four phases - decision, analysis, design
and implementation. The same approach is taken for the DSL development in this
project. The first two phases, the decision phase and the analysis phase, have already
been explored in the analysis chapter. The summary of these two phases will be
summarised in this chapter. The design phase is the main concern for this chapter,
which will be extensively discussed.
The last phase, the implementation phase is
covered under Realisation in Chapter 6.
==PAGE:52==
44
4 Domain-Specific Language
4.1
Decision and analysis phase summary
The decision of using a domain-specific language for MedOrtis2 is to shorten the end-
users time usage to operate and manage the system. The task is to simplify some
processes for the clients, which will be solves by designing a DSL that covers many
many features, but is compact and easy to use.
The decision of developing a DSL lies on the fact that the development process involves
the domain expert in the analysis phase.
The analysis phase explored the domain in an informal manner using examples and
natural language which covers the desired features and requirements. This approach
is not fine, mainly since the communication with the domain export is easier in natural
language.
The solved challenge in the DSL is the modelling of the domain such that as many
features are covered and the development time is minimised.
The DSL covers the modelling that is required to support Questionnaire Scheme
creation and persisting, Questionnaire Submission creation and persisting, and report
viewing.
The rest of the chapter covers the design phase of the DSL.
4.2
Design phase
A single DSL only solves a limited problem. The design phase has three parts overall.
The first part is the abstract syntax which encapsulates the meta-model. The middle
part is the concrete syntax which based on the abstract syntax presents in a concrete
manner. The last part is the semantics are describing how the language are captured
in the transformation rules or model interpreter. The design of the DSL follows a
domain-driven approach.
The design phase must address the challenge of deciding the approach to the DSL.
==PAGE:53==
4.2 Design phase
45
4.2.1
Addressed challenges and important decisions
A DSL can be designed from scratch or it can be easier to base it on an existing
language.
An small example of an external DSL for questionnaires are illustrated by nblumhardt.com.
1 The DSL are built on a custom grammar supporting answer data types and the
implementation involves parsing of the DSL. The goal in the example includes to map
the domain model to relational database tables, which is a case similar to the needs
in this project. The developed DSL in the example does however only implement
simple data types, natural, number, date and yes/no. The DSL is way simpler than
our case, and it does not include single choice, multiple and sub questions. The focus
on the article are on parsing, where it is proven that parsing with the a test-driven
approach is beneficial.
The approach of designing a external DSL is chosen.
Implementing an internal (or embedded) DSL does not makes much sense in this
project, due to the fact that the domain are data based, and not computational
based fitting into a specific language.
The external DSL uses a grammar from a known standard, which enables use of
standard parsing to host languages. The external DSL is independent on program-
ming languages. Since it is independent on programming languages, it is not bound
semantics, which means that the same semantics can be implemented in several pro-
gramming language supporting the same DSL. The implementation of both front end
interface and back end interface supporting the DSL are possible.
This however opens new challenges in regard to implementation. The implementation
must have interface to the DSL, that interprets the DSL. The implementation of a
interface to a DSL is called a solution workbench. The solution workbenches must act
as interpreters, which translates a meta-model to host language models, in which the
DSL can be interpreted to specific models in either a textual or a graphical concrete
syntax.
As seen in Figure 4.1 DSL development with interpretive systems consists of several
elements that all must be complete.
1Building an External DSL in C# | Seen May 10th 2017 | https://nblumhardt.com/2010/01/
building-an-external-dsl-in-c/
==PAGE:54==
46
4 Domain-Specific Language
An interpreter can have the task of persistency mapping, converting DSL data struc-
ture to models in the host language.
Figure 4.1: DSL development with interpretive systems, from [4].
This approach has sub challenges on the DSL, since several relationships in the meta-
model exists, there is no native way of supporting relationships in the concrete syntax.
This problem is analysed in [4] and is also known as soft references. It must therefore
be designed how the solution workbenches may handle the DSL interpretation of
references. For each host language used with the DSL, an interface to the DSL must
therefore be implemented an interpreter. One universal interpreter is not an option
if there are more than one host language used.
The decision of using a external DSL from a generic grammar does however have
downsides. The readability is very hard, meaning that raw DSL will be hard to read.
This downside does not weigh up for the advantages of using a generic grammar.
Standards like XML and JSON are supported by the most general programming
languages (GPL), e.g. C#, Java, PHP and JavaScript. This gives the advantages
that parsing is already handled.
The focus of the semantics in the DSL is to implement the interpreters and enrich
the application with features for the end-user language.
==PAGE:55==
4.2 Design phase
47
4.2.2
Abstract Syntax
The meta-model drives the design of the abstract syntax of the DSL. The meta-
model captures the domain concepts in an UML diagram displayed in Figure 4.2.
The diagram gives a overview of the domain, and at the same time enables some
common ground for communication between the developer and the domain experts.
Apart from the concepts explained earlier, the diagram includes a few new concepts.
These new concepts must of course be explained, which will be done in the next
section.
4.2.3
Report specific concepts
As stated in the concepts extraction in Section 2.5, the report specific components
have been saved for this chapter. The report concepts are included in Figure 4.2 and
the concepts and the approach will be explained and discussed in this section.
The existing system MedOrtis deals with the challenge of customising the report. The
approach for dealing with the problem in the existing system involves that a single
report template is provided to the questionnaire scheme. The report template is a
DSL where the doctor can enter a custom presentation of the report. The DSL is
very simple, and basically consist of text and the option to include answers to specific
answers. It is also possible to insert some basic control statements into the template,
e.g. a logical if statement to check equivalence of the value an answer to a static
value.
The template syntax in MedOrtis does not include specific templates in regard to
user roles. The report does not contain any semantic for responsive design, meaning
the user interface is exactly the same when visiting the application on a PC and a
smart phone.
This is far from ideal to the system requirements, since responsive design are one of
the major non-functional requirement.
The approach to the report presentation in MedOrtis2 must be more sophisticated
than in the existing system.
A simple alternative approach could be extension of the template concept, where a
specific template were defined for each role. This approach however has many down-
==PAGE:56==
48
4 Domain-Specific Language
sides. First of all, the process of defining just a report template are time consuming,
and the process needs to be repeated for each role. Furthermore, the perspective on
covering the requirement for responsive design is not met.
4.2.3.1
Report configuration solution
The system is designed with staff members grouped in specific roles. Each role has
a finite set of permissions in the system, allowing the staff members of the role to
perform the allowed permissions.
As stated in Section 2.3.2 on page Page 14, the report must be presented appropriate
to the staff member viewing the report.
This can be achieved by implementing a default report configuration for each of roles.
The configuration must state which components is disabled and which components is
enabled for the role.
This will allow each role to have their own configuration, which applies to all reports.
The approach can be extended for both enabling submission specific configurations
for roles, which is are more in-depth feature, and also, configurations on a user level
for the staff members. This means that the system could potentially include a feature
that let each staff member decide how the report presentation should be configured.
This however is not the case for this DSL, instead it is reduced to a default configu-
ration of the report depending on role.
This functionality is basically meta data to run the application, since the real data
of the system is the questionnaire scheme and submissions it self, and the report
configuration are a layer above, controlling the presentation of the report.
Figure 4.2 shows in the upper right side that the meta-model includes ReportCom-
ponent, RoleReportComponent and SpecificReportComponent, found in the Report-
Setup package in the figure.
The model of ReportComponent is simply a unique string. Each report component
entry must be present in the semantic model to be functional in the system, otherwise
it is redundant.
==PAGE:57==
4.2 Design phase
49
If the report component is active on a role, it is found in the RoleReportComponent
model, where a role is enabled a report component.
The SpecificReportComponent model is the intermediate between a specific question-
naire scheme, a role and a component.
The model marked with green background (AnswerType) in Figure 4.2 is deferring
to the parent model AnswerType which is a tree of types shown in the diagram for
answer type in Figure 4.3.
The meta-model for question conditions shown in Figure 4.4 are some of the more
advanced in the domain, since it require many components. This part of the system
has the lowest priority in the domain regarding implementation.
==PAGE:58==
50
4 Domain-Specific Language
QuestionnaireScheme
title : String
description : String
QuestionnaireSubmission
patient : Patient
Question
title : String
description : String
Answer
questionnaireSubmission
1
answer
1..*
AnswerType
AnswerOption
1
scheme
1..*
question
scheme
1
submission
0..*
SingleCustomAnswerQuestion
MultipleCustomAnswerQuestion
MultipleChoiceQuestion
MultipleChoiceAnswer
MultipleChoiceOrOtherAnswer
label : String
selectedOption
option
2..*
ChosenOption
selectedOption
0..*
AdditionalAnswer
value : String
0..*
fixedAnswers
0..*
additionalAnswer
SingleChoiceAnswer
answer
1
minimumNumberOfAnswers : Integer
isMandatory : Boolean
CustomAnswer
CustomAnswers
1..*
answer
question
answerType
SingleChoiceQuestion
question
PredefinedQuestion
publishedAt : DateTime
creator : StaffMember
StaffMember
name : String
email : String
password : String
creator
Patient
name : String
email : String
password : String
cprNumber : Integer (10)
creator
Role
name : String
role : Role
role
ReportComponent
name : String
+ age() : Integer
0..*
visisbleComponent
scheme
1
RoleReportComponent
role : Role
component : ReportComponent
1
role
components
0..1
1
component
role
0..1
SpecificReportComponent
role : Role
component : ReportComponent
scheme : QuestionnaireScheme
1
role
components
0..1
1
component
role
0..1
Permission
model : String
action : String
permission
0..*
0..*
role
QuestionnaireInvite
0..*
invite
scheme
1
0..*
invite
patient
1
patient : Patient
scheme : 
QuestionnaireScheme
QuestionMedium
question : Question
filePath : String
question
1
medium
0..*
+ getCprNumber() : String
allowAdditionalAnswers : Boolean
isMandatory : Boolean
Figure 4.2: The overall meta-model for the DSL. The meta-model for answer-type
(marked in green) is found in Figure 4.3.
==PAGE:59==
4.2 Design phase
51
TextAnswer
AnswerType
RangeAnswer
DateAnswer
IntegerAnswer
SimpleAnswerType
CompositeAnswerType
in : SimpleAnswerType
out : SimpleAnswerType
DateRange
in : Date
out : Date
ScaleAnswerType
answerField : SimpleAnswerType
scale : Scale
answerField
Scale
label : String
scale
parent
1
childAnswers
1..*
DecimalAnswer
Figure 4.3: The meta-model for answer types for custom answers.
==PAGE:60==
52
4 Domain-Specific Language
QuestionnaireScheme
title : String
description : String
Question
title : String
description : String
AnswerType
AnswerOption
1
scheme
1..*
question
EqualsExpression
condition
0..1
Atom
NestedExpression
SingleCustomAnswerQuestion
MultipleCustomAnswerQuestion
MultipleChoiceQuestion
label : String
selectedOption
option
2..*
ChosenOption
Condition
ExactAnswerOnQuestion
minimumNumberOfAnswers : Integer
isMandatory : Boolean
answerType
SingleChoiceQuestion
answer
PredefinedQuestion
FreeValue
value : String
atom
leftSide : ExpressionOrAtom
Operator
operator
operator : Operator
rightSide
1
leftSide : ExpressionOrAtom
Addition
Subtraction
rightSide : ExpressionOrAtom
atom : Atom
leftSide
Division
Multiplication
ExpressionOrAtom
leftSide
1
publishedAt : DateTime
creator : StaffMember
allowAdditionalAnswers : Boolean
isMandatory : Boolean
Figure 4.4: The meta-model for question conditions.
==PAGE:61==
4.2 Design phase
53
4.2.3.2
Instance diagram
The introductory example where introduced in Section 2.3. The introductory example
were a small example that covered many of the basic concepts. Now that the abstract
syntax is defined, it makes sense to visualise an example in the language. The instance
diagram of the introductory example found in Figure 4.5. As the figure shows, a tree
structure from the questionnaire scheme to the the questions are the structure. The
example contains both single and multiple choice questions, and is also involving a
sub question. The logic for the sub question are not present clearly from the instance
diagram. This sub question behaviour will be shortly described in the concrete syntax,
and further covered in the semantics of the DSL.
The introductory example will be designed in concrete syntax of the meta-model in
Section 4.2.4, which is direct usable in the system.
==PAGE:62==
54
4 Domain-Specific Language
IntroductoryExampleQuestionnaire : 
QuestionnaireScheme
title = "Introductory Example"
description = "This is the 
introductory example"
Question1 : 
SingleChoiceQuestion
title = "Do you suffer from any 
allergies"
description = ""
Option1 : AnswerOption
label = "Yes"
Option2 : AnswerOption
label = "No"
Option3 : AnswerOption
label = "I don't know - I haven't 
been tested"
Question2 : 
MultipleChoiceQuestion
title = "Which allergies do you 
suffer from?"
description = ""
Option1 : AnswerOption
label = "Penicillin"
Option2 : AnswerOption
label = "Ipren"
Question3 : 
MultipleChoiceQuestion
title = "Which examinations has 
been done in relation to the 
injury of your elbow?"
description = ""
Option1 : AnswerOption
label = "Blood tests"
Option2 : AnswerOption
label = "X-Ray scanning"
Option3 : AnswerOption
label = "MRI"
Option 4 : AnswerOption
label = "Ultrasound-scanning"
Condition : 
ExactAnswerOnQuestion
Figure 4.5: Instance diagram of Introductory example.
==PAGE:63==
4.2 Design phase
55
4.2.4
Concrete Syntax
The concrete syntax relies on the grammar of JSON. The language must have a
concrete syntax, which is explained in this section.
The concrete syntax of the DSL encapsulates a questionnaire scheme.
In JSON
the data of an object is wrapped within curly brackets, with the attributes keys
surrounded by quotation marks.
The attribute key and value are separated by a
colon, and every attribute pair in the object is separated by a comma. The syntax of
the value depends on the type of the attributed. If it is a string, it is surrounded by
quotation marks just like the attribute key. If the attribute value is a boolean type,
the value is just true or false. Similarly the same rule applies if it is a integer.
If a object is parsed, the same syntax applies as just addressed.
An array is defined by using square brackets, and entry inside are separated by comma.
The entries can be of any type.
The attributes for the models are stated in the concepts in Section 2.5.
4.2.4.1
Questionnaire scheme
The questionnaire scheme contains several required attributes. The title of the ques-
tionnaire scheme is the first attribute. The attribute title must be present, and cannot
be empty. The title must be a string. The same rules apply for the short description
and description. The attribute “is published” is not required, but if it is present, it
must be a boolean type.
Now the important part comes, since the questions is defined. The questions attribute
is an array which must contain at least one entry.
4.2.4.2
Question
The entries must be objects, and the object must contain the attributes title, descrip-
tion and question type. The three attributes must all be strings, and the description
is the only of the three attributes that can be empty.
The question type attribute must be either single_choice, multiple_choice,
single_custom_answer or multiple_custom_answer. If the attribute value is not
==PAGE:64==
56
4 Domain-Specific Language
equal to one of the four options, it is an invalid question entry.
Depending on the question type, several additional attributes can be attached to the
question object.
4.2.4.3
Single choice
The case that question type were single choice, then the additional attribute is_mandatory
is required. The attribute must be a boolean. If the single choice question is stated
as required, it means that a answer must be given by the patient when creating a
questionnaire submission. Furthermore, the attribute options of array type must
be present. The options must contain at least two entries, and the entries must be
strings, and the two entries must not have the same value.
4.2.4.4
Multiple choice
The case that question type were multiple choice, then options are also required in the
same manner as for single choice. Furthermore, the attribute allow_additional_answers
must be present, and by the type boolean. If the attribute allow additional answers
is set to true, it presents patients the opportunity to enter custom values additional
to the ones predefined in the multiple choice.
4.2.4.5
Single custom answer question
The single custom question requires the additional attribute is_mandatory in the
same manner as a single choice question. It also requires the attribute answer_type,
which as the name says, states the answer type of the single custom answer question.
The answer type attribute must be a string and be either text_area, text_field,
integer or decimal. If the value is not one of the options, the question is invalid.
4.2.4.6
Multiple custom answer question
The answer_type-attribute must also be present and valid to a multiple custom
answer question, and furthermore the attribute minimum_number_of_answers must
be present and be an integer. The integer must be zero or more.
==PAGE:65==
4.2 Design phase
57
The value states how many answers are required by the patient. Zero required answers
are the default.
4.2.4.7
Sub questions
Single and multiple choice has the opportunity to have sub questions. The attribute
sub_questions must be of array type, and contain entries being objects. The object
must contain two attributes: when_answered and question. The when_answered
attribute is a indirect reference to a option of the parent question with the same value
as when_answered. The when answered attribute is a trigger for the sub question. If
the value of when_answered does not match any defined options, it is an invalid sub
question. The question-attribute must naturally follow the syntax of the question
defined previously in Section 4.2.4.2.
This completes the description of the concrete syntax of the questionnaire scheme.
To give the reader a better feel for the concrete syntax, examples of the syntax are
presented in the next section.
4.2.4.8
Introductory example
The Introductory example from Section 2.3.1 can be transformed into data in concrete
syntax form. The Introductory example in concrete syntax is seen here:
1
{
2
"title": "Spørgeskema 1",
3
"short_description": "Dette er et simpelt spørgskema, så udfyld dette spørgeskema
forud for konsultation",
4
"description": "Dette er beskrivelsen til spørgeskemaet. Spørgeskemaet skal udfyldes
af alle som skal til konsultation hos Pierre...",
5
"is_published": true,
6
"questions": [
7
{
8
"title": "Allergier",
9
"description": "Har du nogle alliergier?",
10
"question_type": "single_choice",
11
"is_mandatory": true,
12
"options": [
13
"Ja",
14
"Nej",
15
"Ved ikke - er ikke blevet testet"
16
],
17
"sub_questions": [
18
{
==PAGE:66==
58
4 Domain-Specific Language
19
"when_answered": "Ja",
20
"question": {
21
"title": "Hvilke allergier har du?",
22
"description": "Markér alle allegier du har, og notér også yderligere",
23
"question_type": "multiple_choice",
24
"allow_custom_answers": true,
25
"options": [
26
"Penicillin",
27
"Ipren",
28
"Plaster",
29
"Sulfa"
30
]
31
}
32
}
33
]
34
}
35
]
36
}
.
Reviewing Section 2.3.1 it is a short example showing a questionnaire with only one
question in the main questionnaire scheme. The question is of type single choice,
containing three options. The question also has a sub question which is triggered
when answered Ja to the parent question.
The definition of the concrete syntax is now concluded. The next chapter is on Design
of the overall system around the DSL.
==PAGE:67==
CHAPTER 5
Design
This chapter introduces how the health-care system MedOrtis2 is designed. It covers
the design of the system that supports the features from the requirements in Sec-
tion 2.4. The following sections describe the overview of the system, the architecture
of the system, and the design of certain important components.
The application has the needs to be accessed from multiple clients, and also the need
of being easy accessible on the internet, and therefore, an web-application is very
suitable.
Web-applications can be implemented in many different ways, from a simple web
server that handles all requests, to huge infrastructure with many layers and interac-
tion between many server instances.
5.1
Three Layered Architecture
The application will use the extensively used approach three-layer architecture, which
is a software architecture pattern especially suited for web applications. The three-
layer architecture has layers: Presentation layer, Business layer and data layer. This
approach has many advantages, and one of the primary reasons why it makes a good
sense to use, is the distinguishing between the layers consist of a web-application,
which will run on a web server, communicating with a database.
It is important to understand the distinction between layers and tiers. Layers de-
scribe the logical groupings of the functionality and components in an application;
whereas tiers describe the physical distribution of the functionality and components
on separate servers, computers, networks, or remote locations. Although both layers
and tiers use the same set of names, tiers only imply a physical separation. It is quite
==PAGE:68==
60
5 Design
Figure 5.1: Three
layer
application.
http://www.telerik.com/support/kb/data-access/details/
developing-n-tier-applications.
common to locate more than one layer on the same physical machine (the same tier),
and this is also the case for this project, where all three layers are implemented on
the same machine.
You can think of the term tier as referring to physical distribution patterns such as
two-tier, three-tier, and n-tier. For simplicity in this project, the design regarding
tiers is very simple, the application will run on one machine, and the there is no need
for designing of n-tier architecture. The working on this project will only be on the
Presentation tier. The architectural layers are instead important in this project.
It is however up to discussion whether it would suit the application to rely on multiple
tiers. Especially with a growth in demand of access to the application. It is however
analysed that the amount of clients accessing the server will not exceed the amount
that a single server can handle. The application does not require heavy computation
power for any particular task. To name one of the most heavy tasks, could be the
task of creating a questionnaire scheme. This action is however not very common,
==PAGE:69==
5.1 Three Layered Architecture
61
since it is only done by the doctors, and the amount of questionnaire schemes in the
system is very limited. Loading of assets like uploaded images are one of the more
heavy tasks to the server, since the file size of images is very big, compared to simple
text responses. If the problem occur that the server is congested, an alternative and
temporary solution could to distribute the task of assets storage to a service provider
like Amazon Elastic File System1. This solution allows less stress to the server when
the same amount of requests come on, and now allows for more requests, and the
Amazon servers take the load of loading the images.
The architectural separation of the three layers are very important in the development
of the application. The data layer will handle the communication between the appli-
cation logic and the database. The business layer implements the core functionality
of the system, and encapsulates the relevant business logic.
The business layer has several responsibilities, including handling the business work-
flow, components and entities. The workflow basically controls how requests from the
client are handled in the application. The business entities encapsulate the business
logic and data necessary to represent real world elements. Business components are
in charge of additional tasks, such as data validation, data processing or transforming
of data that lies outside a entity, and therefore should be a component for it self.
The presentation layer are in charge of the User Interface (UI). The business layer
pushes the appropriate data to the presentation layer, and the presentation layer
is thereby able to display components that is visualised to the client. The task for
the presentation layer is to provide presentation logic and structure that helps the
application to be modular, and thereby easy to maintain. The presentation layer
implements the logic for the UI, and should not in any case be responsible for cal-
culating any domain logic, e.g. calculating a patients age, instead this responsibility
should rely on the business layer. 2
The use of a framework will bring in tools that helps following the guidelines of
the architecture. One fundamental rule of the architecture is that the client never
communicates directly to the data layer. The framework will include drivers and
services that handles the interconnection between the layers, ensuring that this rule
1Amazon Elastic File System: https://aws.amazon.com/efs/
2Martin
Fowler:
Separated
Presentation.
https://martinfowler.com/eaaDev/
SeparatedPresentation.html
==PAGE:70==
62
5 Design
is respected.
The architecture and detailed use of the framework is described in
Section 6.2 on Page 76.
5.1.1
Presentation layer
The presentation layer in the application is not simple and trivial, due to multiple
factors. The requirements for the application relies on a lot of flexibility to the front
end. The presentation layer must therefore be well structured and allowing for both
easy expansion and maintenance.
5.1.2
DSL interplay
Figure 5.2 displays the interplay by the external DSL and the back end application.
The DSL is interpreted by a service, to a model in the host language and passing the
model on to the business layer where it can be saved or manipulated as desired.
Data Access Layer
Business Layer
Service Layer
Interpreter
Model
Database
DSL
Figure 5.2: Architecture of application from DSL to database.
The interplay is more simple, since there is no communication with a database. In-
stead, the DSL is interpreted into models in the front end host language, where the
meta-model is wrapped in components that handles the semantic of the meta-model.
==PAGE:71==
5.1 Three Layered Architecture
63
5.1.2.1
Interpreter
For the DSL to be useful in the back end, the meta-model must be handled by an
interpreter. The interpreter processes the data by validating the input, and building
up Eloquent models from the given meta-model. When the data is processes, it can
be persisted to the database.
The interpreter basically consist of a engine reading the questionnaire scheme. Each
question is handled by question builder specifically on the question type. This means
that the questionnaire scheme builder delegates the task of processing a single choice
question to a single choice question builder.
Factory pattern used in both front- and back-end for the different types of available
question types and for answer types.
Each type of question has its own specific
attributes, and depending on the data provided, each question will be constructed
with the appropriate factory.
Basically this means that for each question type in the DSL, a corresponding question
type builder must be implemented. This is not ideal, since the extension of the DSL
would require another question type builder to be implemented. This downside is due
to the fact that the DSL is programming language independent.
The approach however has the advantages that it is possible to port the engine to
other languages.
For the front end, the same building approach is taken for the interpreter.
The task for the front end interpreter is very much the same, just in another language.
This opens up for the discussion whether it in any way is possible to only model the
interpreter once. This could be the case if the programming language for the front
and back end were the same.
The result on the front end are very different from the back end, since the semantics
in the front end is to wrap the meta-model and present an appropriate view to the
client.
==PAGE:72==
64
==PAGE:73==
CHAPTER 6
Realisation
The design of the system and specifically the design of the DSL is now completed.
The task is now to turn the designed system into reality.
This chapter describes the implementation of the system, and how it come to a
realisation. The first part gives an overview of the chosen technologies, and the pros
and cons of the picks.
Certain important implemented parts are being highlights in the chapter, explain-
ing the thoughts behind and the necessity of exactly why these were implemented.
Alternative solutions are also discussed in the chapter.
6.1
Technologies
I have decided to choose the framework Laravel as the main technology for this project.
Laravel is a framework in the web-programming language PHP. 1
The main reasons for picking Laravel that I am familiar with the framework from ear-
lier, and it builds on the philosophy of being a RESTful application 2 using JSON 3 for
default data parsing. Laravel includes many libraries that allows quickly scaffolding
and dynamic capabilities of development. The framework is built upon the Model-
view-controller (MVC) principle, which is the case for most modern web-application
frameworks. Laravel is also one of the most trending frameworks to use when devel-
oping web-applications.
1PHP: Hypertext Preprocessor | http://php.net
2Representational state transfer (REST) or RESTful
3JavaScript Object Notation
==PAGE:74==
66
6 Realisation
Another important key to this application is responsiveness regarding the clients of
the system. The clients must be able to access and use the application both on their
mobile device, and their desktop.
There are several CSS frameworks which support responsive design. The most popular
ones are Bootstrap, Foundation and Semantic UI. 4 All three frameworks support
responsive design, and seems like good choices for developing beautiful front end
applications.
Another option were to choose a new and innovative framework, which is still under
development.
The framework Bulma were discovered, which is a brand new CSS
framework with a simple and minimalistic style, it would fit the needs for MedOrtis2.
Therefore, Bulma were the option chosen for this project, which gave a lot of exper-
imenting, since Bulma is an innovative CSS framework building on the concept of
flexbox 5. Bulma includes basic components such as responsive designed grid, notifi-
cation boxes, buttons and more. The developers behind Bulma calls the framework
for a “mobile-first” framework. 6 Bulma however has its limitations, since there are
no JavaScript framework supporting the functionality like it is seen in e.g. Bootstrap,
where the CSS library and the JavaScript library works together, enabling features
such as image carousels, tool-tips and much more.
Vue.js is a trending JavaScript framework which the latest years has gained more and
more attention. It is the most trending JavaScript framework on StackOverflow as of
May 2017, as seen in Figure 6.1. 7
6.1.1
Background on PHP
PHP had gained a bad reputation the last many years for the sake of being building
blocks for many badly-written websites and web-applications. Laravel however uses
some of the advantages of PHP, and matures the way applications are developed with
PHP and Laravel.
4Sitepoint.com
|
Visited
May
17th
2017
|
https://www.sitepoint.com/5-most-popular-
frontend-frameworks-compared/
5Flexbox, introduced in CSS3. https://www.w3schools.com/css/css3_flexbox.asp
6Bulma.io
|
Visisted
March
1st
2017
|
http://bulma.io/documentation/overview/
responsiveness/
7StackOverflow Blog | Visited May 9th 2017 | https://stackoverflow.blog/2017/05/09/
introducing-stack-overflow-trends/
==PAGE:75==
6.1 Technologies
67
Figure 6.1: Trending JavaScript Frameworks 2017 analysed by StackOverflow.
Laravel is an expressive framework which enables developers to focus on implementing
applications where the development resources are not wasted on developing generic
programming structures. Instead, the developers can focus on programming the do-
main for the application.
PHP is a open source general-purpose scripting language designed for web applica-
tions. PHP is a scripting language and it is possible to quickly write scripts that
can be deployed to a web server in a matter of seconds. PHP is a great tool for
prototyping small web applications, due to the small amount of resources needed to
setup an application.
PHP has gained bad reputation on his behalf, since there can be a big difference in
the ecosystem of web applications using PHP. PHP is very similar to Java and C#
on many areas, however it has some important differences. First of all, you cannot
declare that a variable must be of a specific type in PHP, as it is possible in Java and
C#. A big part of the web development community is not using using PHP simply
because of the reputation or because they had a bad first-time experience with the
==PAGE:76==
68
6 Realisation
language.
The decision of choosing Laravel and PHP primarily lies on the features of Laravel,
where the Eloquent model engine is a argument for using the framework. The instal-
lation time of PHP and a Laravel project is very quick, and is also one of the reasons
why Laravel and PHP were chosen.
For the code, the coding convention PSR-2 is used. 8
6.1.2
Laravel
Since the foundation of PHP, many frameworks has been developed to try to fit the
need of the developers in their task of building web applications. Laravel is created
by Taylor Otwell in 2011, and he’s still in charge of maintaining the framework today.
[10]
6.1.2.1
MVC framework
Laravel built upon the concept of Model-View-Controller (MVC) pattern. Many mod-
ern web application frameworks use the MVC pattern which separates the application
logic into three interconnected parts in order to separate internal representations of
information from the ways that information is presented to the user.
Model is the central component of the architecture which handles the logic that
is specifically for the model.
An example of a model is a patient in our system,
and the patient model would only has knowledge on its attributes, relationships and
method. Laravel uses an ORM called Eloquent that has many advantages in regard
to the model. The model can thereby be used effectively by the controller which can
fetch model entries and pass the data to the view. Use of Eloquent is described in
Section 6.1.2.4.
The view component displays and outputs the appropriate data to the user. A view
is in traditional web applications displayed as a HTML page, which is also the case
for this particular system.
8PSR-2
https://github.com/php-fig/fig-standards/blob/master/accepted/PSR-2-coding-
style-guide.md
==PAGE:77==
6.1 Technologies
69
In Laravel, routing files are interpreting the request based on the request URL and
request type. If any defined route in the routing files matches the request, it picks up
the request and passes the request to the appropriate action in the controller.
The life cycle of the request is illustrated in Figure 6.2.
Figure 6.2: Request lifecycle. http://laravel-recipes.com/images/lifecycle.jpg.
The action in the controller accepts and handles incoming requests from the web
browser to the web server, and controls the flow of what to response to the given
request. The action interprets the request and responses appropriately depending on
the request.
The controller can have a lot of logic attached to both on the controller level, and
on the action level. Logic applied on controller level means that defined logic applies
for all actions that is invoked in the controller. Each action contains it’s own logic,
and will be executes when the action is hit. This can for instance be a authentication
guard, that ensures that the actions can only be accessed by authenticated users.
6.1.2.2
RESTful resources
Laravel’s core consist of HTTP routing and controllers which are controlling the flow
for incoming requests. Modern frameworks have adopted the RESTful concept, and
Laravel is no exception.
==PAGE:78==
70
6 Realisation
Laravel features REST broadly, since Laravel allows the developer to build web ser-
vices in the application to serve following the rules of REST. Laravel has implicit con-
structs and scaffolding that uses the standardisation of REST. It therefore requires
no setup time to provide a RESTful API in Laravel since the standard conventions
when defining resources in Laravel follow the concept of REST. Following the concept
of REST, the resources is named and accessed in a standardised and uniform conven-
tion, which enables developers to easily understand the API’s for the web services
built on other applications.
Laravel as default uses JSON9 for responses of an API resource. JSON is a alternative
to XML, and describes data or objects, as the name indicates. JSON however does
not have the same flexibility as XML, since it cannot contain any meta data, but only
pure data.
JSON has therefore very simple structure, which makes the concepts in JSON easy
to understand.
6.1.2.3
Service container and service providers
The core of Laravel also includes a service container, which handles dependency in-
jection. Laravel is also built upon the concept of Service Providers, which is a central
place of all Laravel application bootstrapping. Implemented application services, as
well as all of Laravel’s core services are bootstrapped via service providers, and is
interchangeable through the configuration of the application if needed.
6.1.2.4
Eloquent - ORM
Laravel includes the ActiveRecord-based implementation of an ORM 10 called Elo-
quent. [7] The task of Eloquent is to ensure expressive code primarily of models and
relationships between those. Eloquent hide the direct connection between the appli-
cation and the database, and push away the heavy task for the developer to write
database queries by hand.
Eloquent has many modelling patterns inbuilt, e.g. definition of relationships, API
attributes, query scopes, and more.
9JavaScript Object Notation
10Object Relational Mapping
==PAGE:79==
6.1 Technologies
71
Especially relationships are indeed handy for this project, since the interpreting the
DSL and building models in the system directly can use Eloquent models and associate
models with each other, just like it is represented in the domain-model. In practice
this allowed the domain models are mapped directly as Eloquent models with the
exact attributes as in the model.
6.1.2.5
Database drivers
Laravel has inbuilt drivers for the databases MySQL, PostgreSQL, SQLite and SQL
server, which in hand with Eloquent enables rapid development of an application that
communicates a database by one of these kinds.
For this project, SQLite are used, but it is also possible the other database server
types with just a few changes.
The SQLite database are simply a text file that is stored on the file system and
accessed by the application when needed.
6.1.2.6
Database migrations and seeds
Other vital features are database migrations and seeds, which enable rapid develop-
ment on local environments and also allows agile development. Database migrations
is created ad-hoc, and describes a change in the structure of the database. A chain
of migrations can be performed, which e.g. creates new tables in the database, and
change columns in existing tables.
A migration can also drop a column or a table, which means that the database can
be mutated with the evolution of the application. This works as a kind of version
control of the database.
The use of database migrations are great for continuous deployment, where the struc-
ture of the database change and extends over time.
For deployed systems, it is often the case that multiple servers are used. Two servers
are used in the same project.
One production server is deployed, and server two
is used for development and testing purposes. New migrations can be created and
pushed to the development server. The production server remains running as nothing
has happened. When the development has reached a point were it is tested at ready
==PAGE:80==
72
6 Realisation
for deployment, the code-base including the database migrations are pushed to the
production server. The production server has a list of the migration that are already
migrated in the system, and the server runs only the new ones, manipulating the
database structure, e.g. inserting new columns and tables to the database.
This automates the process of updating database structure in practice, which is a real
pain to manage for complex systems.
Database seeds is used as the name suggests: seeding the database, with data. The
data can be used in a local/test environment to setup the application with predefined
data, e.g. users and user roles. This allows rapid local development which speeds up
the development process drastically.
6.1.2.7
Authentication
Laravel provides authentication by default, meaning that authentication of users can
be handled out of the box in the application. The configuration enables tweaking of
the settings allowing a variety of additional settings in the authentication layer. The
authentication library in Laravel first of all provides easy setup of a standard, one
model authentication, which makes it possible for one model or guard to authenticate.
However, if multiple instances must be possible to has active at the same time, multi-
ple guards is required, which is also possible to set up with the included authentication
library in Laravel. This allows the application to have two or more types of authen-
tication, which can indeed be useful for example as in our case where both patients
and the staff must be able to access the same application, but the logic that handles
the the two types of users must differ.
6.1.2.8
Views using Blade
The MVC pattern includes View which has the purpose of containing the views that
the user of the system should be presented the application.
Laravel supports blade syntax out of the box, which is less verbose than normal PHP.
The blade syntax is a powerful templating engine that basically is a wrapper for
normal PHP code, meaning that an interpreter is compiling blade to PHP, which is
then executed.
==PAGE:81==
6.1 Technologies
73
The blade syntax enable the developers to write prettier code for the views, and at the
same time also ensure that the views is easy to manage. Blade does not restrict you
from using plain PHP code in your views, and all blade views are cached until they
are again changed, meaning Blade adds essentially zero overhead to your application.
The blade syntax includes markup for simple displaying data, control statements like
if-statements and for-loops, and also rendering of sub-views.
6.1.2.9
Validation
Simple validation of a form is simple to apply in Laravel. Laravel comes out of the box
with a validation library, which allows validation of requests by adding a parameter
in the controller method, that is type hinting a request class, that contains the rules
for the validation.
6.1.2.10
Testing
The Laravel framework is built with testing in mind, supporting PHPUnit11 out of the
box and the file phpunit.xml that contains setup for testing of your application. The
framework also ships with convenient helper methods that allow you to expressively
test your applications.
Unit tests are tests that focus on a very small, isolated portion of the code, e.g. in a
model, the tests for this is found under tests/Unit/. A unit test does in most cases
focus on a single method. Feature tests on the other hand may test a larger portion
of your code, including how several objects interact with each other or even a full
HTTP request to a JSON endpoint. These feature tests, also known as acceptance
tests, are found under tests/Feature/.
6.1.3
Vue.js front end framework
An important non-functional requirement of the system is to be a responsive in its
design and usable on both desktop PCs, tablets and on mobile devices.
One of
the initiatives were therefore to use a front end framework that were innovative on
this matter. Vue.js is a JavaScript framework on par with other popular JavaScript
11PHPUnit - Testing Framework for PHP - https://phpunit.de/
==PAGE:82==
74
6 Realisation
frameworks such as AngularJS and React. One of the advantages of Vue.js is that it
is simple to integrate into a project, since it require very little setup. It works great
together with the Laravel development environment.
Vue.js solves one of the non-trivial tasks of providing reactivity in the application
logic, especially for complex applications. The Vue.js instance that is instantiated
manipulates the HTML DOM 12, which means that it lays on top of the HTML code,
and provides functionality for dynamic actions in the application front end. This
means that whenever some data is touched, it is possible to react upon the event.
Vue.js is one of the fastest JavaScript frameworks present, and at the same time, the
framework itself does only use 16 KB space, so it does not impact the loading a whole
lot.
A very central concept in Vue.js is composable view components, which means that
the front end application is divided into components, which result in a well-structured
program. Separating the application into components gives structure, enabling the de-
velopers to have a better overview of the application, and it also allows encapsulation
which is a good practice in software engineering.
Each component can preferably be designed in its own file, but can also be inlined in
a main file if needed. A component consists of:
• <template> for the view
• <script> for logic
• <style> that allows stylesheet for the specific component
The logic of the component consists of several parts, including:
• Components - Registration of sub-components
• Data - what data variables array carried in the component
• Props - Required properties from the parent
• Computed - Computed properties from the props and data of the component
• Methods - Methods specific for the component
Since the component is encapsulated, it is somehow needed to be able to communicate
to other components, this is handled by the event system, enabling to emit events to
the parent component, which can then pick up on events. This is indeed a necessity for
developing and designing a well structured application. Vue.js is not used throughout
12Document Object Model
==PAGE:83==
6.1 Technologies
75
the whole application, but only for a few specific features. Vue.js has the advantage
of reactivity, and is especially good when content must be able to dynamically change.
Therefore, features like the creation of a questionnaire scheme, and the filling of a
questionnaire submission are being developed with use of the power of Vue.js.
The components in Vue.js that represents the questionnaire scheme has been devel-
opment following the principle of component design, meaning that the questionnaire
scheme is its own component. The questionnaire scheme component has a prop called
’model’, that is an instance of Questionnaire scheme. The prop is required for the
component, and the component cannot be instantiated without an instance of the
model.
This principle of passing the model as a prop to the components are using throughout
the components, and ensures that the correct type of data is passed to the component.
The questionnaire scheme component includes several sub components, where the
most important is the Question component. Each question is being wrapped in its
own question component, where the data is encapsulated.
The questions do not have knowledge of the presence of its neighbours, instead, only
the parent (the questionnaire scheme), can manipulate the questions, e.g. the order
of the questions.
6.1.4
Bulma - Responsive CSS framework
The web based application for this project has an important task of allowing both
desktop, tablet and mobile clients to use the interface seamlessly.
This is however not a trivial task to provide an all-in-one interface, or otherwise,
distinct interfaces for each of the device types.
The Bulma framework is a brand new CSS framework, which builds on the concept of
total responsiveness for the application, and is targeted a development process where
the developer only needs to define one single view, which will serve for all devices.
==PAGE:84==
76
6 Realisation
6.2
Architecture
The architecture of the application is described in this section, giving the reader an
insight of the structure of the application and how to navigate the code. This section
also provide details on the code process, which coding patterns has been used, and
the decisions taken during the development process.
6.2.1
Application structure
The structure of the application follows the default Laravel directory structure , con-
taining the following root directory structure:
app The app folder basically contains all application logic, including controllers,
models and services.
app/
bootstrap The bootstrap folder contains Laravel specific bootstrap code, which is
not really manipulated for this project, since there is no need for changes.
config The config directory contains the configuration files that is used for this
project. Most of the configuration variables refers to the environment file, where
it pulls the project-specific configuration variables.
database The database folder contains migrations, seeds and also sqlite files if this
kind of database is used and stored.
public The public folder contains public files, by public, means that it is possible to
access via the browser, e.g. the favicon, which most websites has nowadays.
resources The ressources folder contains the front end related files, including views
and assets.
../assets/js The Vue.js entries and related assets are stored here, and rendered
by the webpack engine to javascript files located under the public/js/ di-
rectory.
../assets/sass The stylesheets developed with SASS are located in this direc-
tory, and are also rendered by the webpack engine to pure CSS files located
under the public/css/ directory.
../lang Localisation files. These are only used in very restricted manner, since
the system are only developed for danish use.
../views Blade view files.
==PAGE:85==
6.2 Architecture
77
routes The routes folder contains the routes definition. For ease, the route files are
divided into departments making it easier to navigate, and understand. The
Laravel framework comes out of the box with four route-files, each with their
own specific purpose, where the most important one is the web.php file, which
will contain all the routes which are routes within the middleware Web, which
is normal requests through the browser.
storage The storage folder holds logs, cache and framework related caching.
tests The tests directory keep all the tests, which can be run before deployment, to
see that all tests passes.
vendor Last and not least is there the vendor directory, where the framework and
other third party libraries are stored. These can be updated by running com-
poser, which is the dependency manager for Laravel and PHP.
6.2.2
Database
The realised database structure does not match the meta-model on some point, the
reasons is addressed in this section.
The database scheme is found in Figure 6.3 showing all tables and their columns
in the database.
Important is the relationships between the models.
Comparing
the meta-model to the implemented database it is clear to see that there are major
differences.
Especially when looking at the question model.
In the implemented database in
Figure 6.3, it is seen that the question model has a direct relation to the questionnaire
scheme.
In the meta-model, the question model were an abstract model, so how can it be
the case that there is a question model here. The implemented database is based on
SQL, which is structured data that relies on strongly connected relationships by use
of foreign keys. The design of our system has a structure regarding questions that
can not be mapped directly to a SQL database.
The meta-model of the questionnaire scheme has four different types of questions
that all inherits the abstract model question. There is simply no way in a relational
database like SQL to define a single foreign key that can relate to multiple tables and
keeping the strong relationship.
==PAGE:86==
78
6 Realisation
answer_types
id INT(10)
type VARCHAR(191)
Indexes
answers
id INT(10)
questionnaire_submission_id INT(10)
question_id INT(10)
value TEXT
Indexes
choice_question_options
id INT(10)
value VARCHAR(191)
choice_question_id INT(10)
choice_question_type VARCHAR(191)
Indexes
custom_question_answer_types
id INT(10)
answer_type_id INT(10)
custom_question_id INT(10)
custom_question_type VARCHAR(191)
Indexes
migrations
id INT(10)
migration VARCHAR(191)
batch INT(11)
Indexes
multiple_choice_questions
id INT(10)
allow_custom_answers TINYINT(1)
Indexes
multiple_custom_answer_questions
id INT(10)
minimum_number_of_answers INT(11)
Indexes
password_resets
email VARCHAR(191)
token VARCHAR(191)
created_at TIMESTAMP
Indexes
patient_scheme_connections
id INT(10)
scheme_id INT(10)
patient_id INT(10)
staff_member_id INT(10)
Indexes
patients
id INT(10)
cpr_number CHAR(10)
name VARCHAR(191)
email VARCHAR(191)
password VARCHAR(191)
remember_token VARCHAR(100)
created_at TIMESTAMP
updated_at TIMESTAMP
Indexes
question_media
id INT(10)
question_id INT(10)
path VARCHAR(191)
Indexes
questionnaire_schemes
id INT(10)
title VARCHAR(191)
short_description VARCHAR(191)
description TEXT
creator_id INT(10)
published_at DATETIME
created_at TIMESTAMP
updated_at TIMESTAMP
deleted_at TIMESTAMP
Indexes
questionnaire_submissions
id INT(10)
questionnaire_scheme_id INT(10)
patient_id INT(10)
staff_member_id INT(10)
published_at DATETIME
created_at TIMESTAMP
updated_at TIMESTAMP
Indexes
questions
id INT(10)
questionnaire_scheme_id INT(10)
title VARCHAR(191)
description TEXT
question_id INT(11)
question_type VARCHAR(191)
parent_id INT(10)
Indexes
report_components
id INT(10)
component_name VARCHAR(191)
Indexes
report_default_visible_components
id INT(10)
role_id INT(10)
component_id INT(10)
Indexes
report_visible_components
id INT(10)
role_id INT(10)
scheme_id INT(10)
component_id INT(10)
Indexes
role_permissions
id INT(10)
role_id INT(10)
model VARCHAR(191)
action VARCHAR(191)
Indexes
roles
id INT(10)
role_name VARCHAR(191)
created_at TIMESTAMP
updated_at TIMESTAMP
Indexes
single_choice_questions
id INT(10)
is_mandatory TINYINT(1)
Indexes
single_custom_answer_questions
id INT(10)
is_mandatory TINYINT(1)
Indexes
staff_members
id INT(10)
name VARCHAR(191)
email VARCHAR(191)
password VARCHAR(191)
remember_token VARCHAR(100)
created_at TIMESTAMP
updated_at TIMESTAMP
role_id INT(10)
Indexes
sub_questions
id INT(10)
choice_question_option_id INT(10)
Indexes
Figure 6.3: Database model for MedOrtis2.
The solution in practice is use of polymorphic relations. This means that a question
model is implemented with the attributes that all questions have in common, in our
case, the title and the description.
The tables in the database for single choice, multiple choice, single custom answer
and multiple custom answer questions does not have any relations.
These tables
are necessary, because when a instance of the question type must be inserted, the
==PAGE:87==
6.2 Architecture
79
polymorphic relation delegates to the appropriate table.
The question model implements a weak relation, by having the two columns question_type
and question_id. These two columns enables the base model to refer to a specific
type with a specific id.
In practice, when a question must be persisted, both the base model question is
inserted, along with a entry of the specific type of the question. The base model
relates to the specific type, and the base model belongs to the questionnaire scheme,
and thereby, the relations are kept.
This approach however breaks the principle in relational databases on having strong
relations, but it solves the problem of polymorphism.
The method is used in other scenarios in the system, for instance the choice options.
The options for single choice and multiple choice has identical basic semantics, and
therefore, it is possible to use a single table for both entries for single choice options
and multiple choice options. Again polymorphism is used, this time on the options,
which has two different types of being inherited from - the single choice and multiple
choice question.
The same principle is also implemented on custom answer questions, which also is
found in two varieties - single custom answer question / multiple custom answer
question.
6.2.3
Authentication and security
Authentication are implemented in the system using the library included by Laravel.
The authentication are implemented using two guards. The guards are named patient
and staff. Each guard is used for authenticating a specific user provider. The reason
why two guards are implemented, is based on the requirement US#3, which covers
the feature of creating a questionnaire submission as an staff member on behalf of a
patient.
The design of an authentication model with multiple guards enables a user model on
each guard to be authenticated. In practice, this allows a staff member to be logged
in, and at the same time also be logged in as a patient.
==PAGE:88==
80
6 Realisation
6.2.4
Front end development
The developed front end consist of several dynamic components, which are all using
the same interpreter of the DSL.
The main implemented features on the front end are the questionnaire scheme form,
the questionnaire submission form, and the report view.
6.2.4.1
Questionnaire scheme
The questionnaire scheme form enables the creation of new questionnaire schemes.
When creation of a new questionnaire scheme is started the form instantiates a blank
questionnaire scheme model. During the creation, the model is updates on the go.
When the creator wants to submit the data and persist the scheme, the model is
interpreted into DSL and sent to the back end.
Here the back end interprets the request and tries to persist the questionnaire scheme
and responses accordingly.
The questionnaire scheme form has implemented view components that wraps the
models. This means that the question model is wrapper by a question component
that involves all the necessary semantic logic for the question. The components also
delegates to sub components depending on the model. For instance a questionnaire
scheme containing a question.
The questionnaire scheme are wrapped in its own
component, where a sub component for the question wraps it.
Thereby is the structure of the front end components corresponding to the meta-
model, but with the extra layer of semantics.
6.2.4.2
Questionnaire submission
The questionnaire submission is handled in the front end by wrapping components as
explained for questionnaire schemes.
The flow of questionnaire submissions are however different, since the front end must
interpret the data from the questionnaire scheme into a form that is able to be sub-
mitted by the patient.
==PAGE:89==
6.3 Implementation
81
The models also here have corresponding components that wraps the model. The
semantic of the different question types are the major logic in this area, where the
four different types has its individual semantic rules, and also specific on the data in
the model.
6.3
Implementation
This section covers the implementation specific topics for the project. The most cru-
cial decisions of the development have been reflected prior to the implementation
phase. This practically means that the implementation phase does not cover drasti-
cally decisions on the overall design. The focus of the section is instead to give a walk
through of the implementation. The purpose is to allow the reader to gain an insight
in the challenges that have been faced during the implementation phase.
6.3.1
Implementation road-map
The designed DSL were concluded in Chapter 4, however, all the branches in the DSL
has not been implemented, and this section covers a overview of the parts implemented
and the parts left out.
The model marked with a red background (PredefinedQuestion) in Figure 4.2 is not
implemented in the system.
The simple answer types are all implemented in the system. The composite answer
type and scale answer type were not implemented, but instead left out, and could be
put in high priority for future work.
The question conditions meta-model as seen in Figure 4.4 is designed on domain
level, but not implemented in the system. Instead, the concept of sub questions are
implemented. The implemented variant is described in the next section.
6.3.2
Sub questions
Sub questions is the implemented variant of conditional questions. The implemented
is a simplified form of conditional questions, since the logic and computation are much
simpler.
==PAGE:90==
82
6 Realisation
The simplification lies in the fact that the sub questions are nested on a choice question
(either single or multiple choice), containing a value, which is a corresponding value
of an answer to the parent question. In the original proposal of the condition engine,
the design were using recursive pattern with possible complex constellations.
The realised implementation supports the semantic of basic conditions, which is a
more simple and much less complex implementation. This is the case since the se-
mantics for the sub question in the questionnaire scheme can be computed on checking
the answers values on the parent question, and see if the sub question must be viewed.
6.3.3
DSL
The DSL is implemented using interpreters handling the input and builds host lan-
guage models from the inputted meta-model.
The design of the interpreters are
explained in Section 5.1.2.1 in Page 63.
In Figure 6.4 an example of practical use of the implemented DSL is shown. The
example contains a client user that requests to load the page for creating a specific
questionnaire submission. The application fetches data from the database, passes to
the interpreter, which converts the model to meta-model and passes it to the front
end. At the front end, it is interpreted to models that is usable in the front end,
displaying the questionnaire submission form.
==PAGE:91==
6.3 Implementation
83
Interpreter
Database
Interpreter
Pass models from database
Front end 
engine
Pass meta-models
Return models
Client
Load page
Application 
controller
Fetch data from database
Pass models
Pass meta-models
Response to client
Create questionnaire 
submission
Figure 6.4: DSL used in practice in MedOrtis2.
==PAGE:92==
84
==PAGE:93==
CHAPTER 7
Tests
The testing of the application are handled in multiple ways.
The different approaches are covered in this chapter, including the testing environ-
ment, automated tests covered by unit- and feature-tests, and browser-test of the
features where JavaScript is used extensively.
7.1
Test environment
A test environment were setup during the project. The test environment consist of a
Ubuntu server running Apache and PHP.
The server is accessible via the internet from any location.
7.2
Test application
The application can be accessed on the following URL: http://health-surveys.
compute.dtu.dk
To use most of the functionality in the system, it is required to be logged in. You can
log in as either a patient and/or a staff member.
Note: The staff member log-in page is distinct from the patients log-in page. A button
is placed in the footer of all pages navigating to the staff member log-in page. It is
also possible to reset the database here, if necessary.
==PAGE:94==
86
7 Tests
Table 7.1: Staff members entries in the test environment.
Email
Password
Name
Role
admin@example.com
12345678
Jens Stigaard
Admin
doctor@example.com
doctor1234
Pierre Schydlowski
Doctor
assistant@example.com
assist1234
Ekkart Kindler
Assistant
secretary@example.com
secret1234
Jane Doe
Secretary
Table 7.2: Patients instances in the test environment.
Email
Password
Name
patient1@example.com
1234qwer
John Doe
patient2@example.com
1234qwer
Jimmy Doe
patient3@example.com
1234qwer
Paul Doe
7.3
Deployment setup
To deploy the application to the server, the server are using Jenkins, a open-source
continuous integration tool. [2] In Jenkins, the application were setup, including test
automation and automatically building. 1
7.3.1
Git hook
The setup includes a listener for new pushes to a specific git repository. When new
pushes are made, Jenkins automatically pulls the new code base, and try to make a
new build of the project.
7.3.2
Build automation
The build process includes installing dependencies, running tests and rendering assets.
When a new build is running, Jenkins runs the automated tests of the application,
which ensures that the build is only deployed if the tests were successful.
1Martin
Fowler
on
Continuous
Delivery:
https://martinfowler.com/bliki/
ContinuousDelivery.html
==PAGE:95==
7.4 Browser test
87
7.4
Browser test
The application has been built with HTML, CSS and JavaScript which is front end
technologies that most support. The application were browser tested in the most
popular browsers: Google Chrome, Mozilla Firefox, Microsoft Edge, Apple Safari.
The browser tests were successful, since there were no sign of any unsupported fea-
tures.
The biggest concern regarding browser testing is with older browsers such as Internet
Explorer which lack of support of various features that is very common in all other
browsers. A quick conversation with Pierre about the problem revealed that his opin-
ion about browser support of older browsers did not matter, if the features including
responsive design were implemented.
7.5
Automated tests
Automated tests are an important part of a modern software application. Automated
tests
The project does not contain a complete set of tests for the whole application, instead,
the most vital part having tests covering the logic.
==PAGE:96==
88
==PAGE:97==
CHAPTER 8
Evaluation
This chapter includes two kinds of evaluation, to evaluate the result of the project
in a fair matter. The first part is a qualitative evaluation from the customer Pierre.
He has volunteered to lay out his thoughts on the application, covering the most
important factors in the system.
The other evaluation part is performed by a couple of test persons that have been
asked to use the system, and rate and comment the system.
The developed application are very difficult to evaluated without any thoughts going
on the already existing system, and therefore, the evaluation partly consist of a com-
parison, rating the systems on various parameters, to see which advantages the new
system has to the old.
The evaluation is walking through the features one by one. For each feature, Pierre
gives his thoughts on improvements, and what has not succeeded to improve, or got
worse. The statements in the evaluation below are all by Pierre.
8.1
Patient page
The application supports a patient page which is not present in the existing system.
The patient page shows previously submitted questionnaires, this is a feature that
many patients have been asking for the existing system. It is therefore a clear im-
provement. The history of submitted questionnaires by the patient must be cleared
after a period of time due to the rights on personal data.
Furthermore, there is improved on patient searching, where the list is foreseeable and
easy to use, and the search options are improved, since it is possible to search on both
name, CPR number and email address.
==PAGE:98==
90
8 Evaluation
Finally, the feature on attaching a patient to a questionnaire scheme (from US#4 and
FR-SM-APQ) will minimise the amount of errors, since the patients will now know
which questionnaire schemes to fill out.
8.2
Questionnaire scheme creation
The old system required much effort to define reports, which consumed unneces-
sary much time. The speed of the questionnaire scheme creation process (US#1 and
FR-SM-CQS) in MedOrtis2 is improved to the old, since the new system has automated
the process of defining reports.
The compromises of the flexibility for ordering answers in the report, and the logic
that is specifically defined for the report. In the old system it were difficult to find
errors in the template syntax, and by the fact that this problem is eliminated reduces
the wasted time when such challenges are faces.
Besides that, the developed interface are more compact and less clicks are necessary,
but it would take some time to be used to.
8.3
Report
The flexibility of the system has changed, and some compromises are made. First of
all, the density that is possible with the new system is great. The flexibility on the
ordering is gone, but the fact that the report can be viewed on a smart phone with
good user experience. The fact that the application can be displayed on smart phone
or tablet with good overview of the content is improving the experience a lot.
==PAGE:99==
CHAPTER 9
Conclusion
In this master thesis project the primary focus is to design and develop an application
supporting a end-user language for defining questionnaires and reports. The objec-
tives were to optimise the workflow for the doctors and the rest of the staff. Trying
to lowering the amount of time usage the doctors and the staff on reviewing reports
are one of the objectives. This has come to a realisation with a simple yet dynamic
front end, where the settings are able customise on the fly.
The objectives were met to a satisfying degree, since an improvement on user experi-
ence and automation on reporting were obtained.
It is hard to tell whether the term state of the art tool can be applied to the application,
but indeed the front end technology used, Vue.js has a lot of potential, and has many
great usages.
9.1
Summary
The discovery of existing tools showed that XForms are implemented in tools for
Android such as ODK Collect. However due to the fact that it is not supported in
any browsers, carried the decision of development of a brand new DSL.
The XForms tool suite Orbeon were discovered late in the project, which otherwise
were the best candidate for being used in this particular project.
The project has involved development that built bridge between back and front end
technologies for ensuring dynamic and responsiveness in the application. The devel-
opment included design of a external DSL, where development of interpreters for both
the front end and back end were included. The DSL were developed from a analysis on
the domain, extracting concepts, with the result of a abstract syntax. The abstract
==PAGE:100==
92
9 Conclusion
syntax of the language is formulated in a meta-model which is the core of system
and language design. For the external DSL designed a concrete syntax that were
independent of the modelling language where chosen, enabling multiple interpreters
to interpret the language. Both JavaScript and PHP interpreters were implemented.
The implemented interpreters are used to model the language in run-time, interpret-
ing meta-model instances and the semantics of the language. The semantics of the
DSL are the magical ingredient in the design, bringing dynamics to the application.
The project involves experimenting with dynamic end-user language that required a
lot of time to reach a level in the implementation where it made sense to use. The
implementation were therefore partially successful, since it is not covering all features
proposed in the analysis, but the core functionality of questionnaire schemes, ques-
tionnaire submission, single choice question, multiple choice, custom answer questions
and simple answer types were implemented.
On top of this, the central features for the reporting were implemented, allowing staff
member user roles to have specific configurations for reports. This enabled dense
reports for doctors, and foreseeable reports for the other roles.
From the evaluation in Chapter 8 it were stated on a objective level which differences
to implemented system has to the existing system. Evaluation by Pierre gave further
conclusions on his subjective, yet important view on the features of the system. He
concluded on the fact that the lack of heavy report configuration in the application
were one of the big advantages. Additional improvements were also presented, where
the workflow for new patients were improved a lot.
9.2
Discussion
The first big decision during the project were to turn down the option of using an
existing tool like Orbeon, ODK or Enketo. The main reason for this decision were the
fact that the customer had a wish for being available on all platforms out of the box,
which were possible to achieve with a web application. The project thereby had the
lack of a front end engine for handling questionnaire submissions, which were indeed
a decision that resulted in more programming. For the concrete syntax, XForms were
naturally turned down when it were decided that an existing tool should not be used.
==PAGE:101==
9.3 Future work
93
Due to the lack of browser support, XForms does not fit well in a web application.
Should an interpreter have been implemented manually for XForms, this alone could
have been a project.
The features of the application could have been more focused on implementing more
features specific on the questionnaire schemes.
The application would have been
lacking of basic navigation features, and it would have looked emaciated in that case.
My approach were initially to try get a overview of the existing tools to try to analyse
which fits the requirements of the system best, but I did not find a tool that fitted in
the first place.
If the discovery of Orbeon had happened earlier, the project perhaps had used this
tool in the development of the system. The use of an existing tool could enable the
development to be focused on the special features, instead of starting from scratch,
where all basic logic and components must be implemented.
On the risk management for this project, one approach to minimise the that perhaps
could have helped were feature prioritising, meaning that the customer must black
on white put a number on prioritising the order of feature implementation. This
approach is however perhaps not perfect, since it is the case sometimes in software
project that finishing of features comes in bursts.
9.3
Future work
As the project time has been around 5 month, the application does not contain all
features that were proposed in the start. The modelling for the conditions engine were
only touched on the surface, since it had low priority due to the fact that present
questionnaires did not include more advanced logic.
It were only proposed as an
option to look into if it were specially interesting to dig into.
The future work could also include implementing complete tests covering the appli-
cation both on back and front end.
Ideally the application had been tested by nontechnical persons or regular patients.
The testing would have resulted in feedback on the user experience and possible
improvements.
==PAGE:102==
94
==PAGE:103==
APPENDIX A
Example - Shoulder
tests
The example supports the understanding of the domain.
Next 3 pages: Example of the shoulder tests questionnaire. (Light blue background)
Following 6 pages: Screen dump of the “shoulder tests”-questionnaire from the exist-
ing website. (Grey background)
The questionnaire at the existing website can be found by visiting
http://www.medortis.dk →“Medorits Demo” →“Skulder tests - Standard”
==PAGE:104==
 
Skulder  tests 
Dette  spørgeskema  skal  udfyldes  hvis  du  har  problemer  med  din  skulder. 
Du  vil  behøve  hjælp  af  en  anden  person  til  at  udføre  nogle  af  disse  tests. 
 
 
Spørgsmål  1  ­  Den  undersøgte  arm  er 
⚪Højre  skulder 
⚪Venstre  skulder 
 
Spørgsmål  2  ­  Symmetri  af  skuldrene 
⚪Skuldrene  er  symmetriske 
⚪Der  er  asymmetri  af  skuldrene 
 
Spørgsmål  3  ­  Biceps  atrofi 
⚪Ingen  atrofi  af  bicepsbugen 
⚪Der  er  atrofi  af  bicepsbugen 
 
 
Spørgsmål  4  ­  Atrofi  af  mm.  infraspinatus  og  supraspinatus  
⚪Ingen  atrofi  af  mm.  supraspinatus  og  infraspinatus 
⚪Der  er  atrofi  af  m.  supraspinatus 
⚪Der  er  atrofi  af  m.  infraspinatus 
⚪Der  er  atrofi  af  mm.  supraspinatus  og  infraspinatus 
 
 
Spørgsmål  5  ­  Armen  kan  højst  aktivt  flektere 
Flexion  til  180  grader  er  normal 
⚪Fuldt  ud  (180  grader) 
⚪160  grader 
⚪135  grader 
⚪90  grader 
⚪60  grader 
⚪45  grader 
⚪Få  grader 
 
Spørgsmål  6  ­  Armen  kan  højst  passivt  flektere 
Flexion  til  180  grader  er  normal 
⚪Fuldt  ud  (180  grader) 
⚪160  grader 
⚪135  grader 
⚪90  grader 
⚪60  grader 
⚪45  grader 
⚪Få  grader 
 
==PAGE:105==
 
Spørgsmål  7  ­  Udadrotation 
Vælg  det  udsagn  der  passer  bedst. 
⚪Passiv  udadrotation:  lige  på  begge  sider 
⚪Passiv  udadrotation:  mindst  50%  mindre  end  på  modsatte 
side 
⚪Passiv  udadrotation:  indskrænket  med  mindre  end  50%  ift 
modsatte  side 
 
 
Spørgsmål  8  ­  Indadrotation  af  armen 
Vælg  det  udsagn  der  passer  bedst. 
⚪Indadrotation:  lige  på  begge  sider 
⚪Indadrotation:  indskrænket  ift  modsatte  side 
⚪Indadrotation:  irrelevant  pga  svær  indskrænkning 
 
 
 
Spørgsmål  9  ­  Neers  test 
The  test  can  be  either  positive  or  negative: 
⚪Negativ 
⚪Positiv 
 
Impingement,  Neer´s  test 
 
Undersøgeren  står  bagved  patienten  med  den  ene  hånd  på  scapula 
for  at  forhindre  dens  rotation.  Med  den  anden  hånd,  løftes  patientens 
arm  i  fuld  flexion. 
 
Testen  er  positiv  når  den  provokerer  en  udstrålende  smerte  fortil  eller  lateralt  på 
armen  som  udtryk  for  at  rotatorcuffen  rammer  acromion.  En  positiv  test  er  et  udtryk  for 
rotatorcuff  syndrom 
 
Spørgsmål  10  ­  Hawkins  test 
The  test  can  be  either  positive  or  negative: 
⚪Negativ 
⚪Positiv 
 
Impingement,  Hawkins´  test 
 
Med  et  solidt  greb  over  acromion  fikseres  scapula  med  den  ene 
hånd.  Med  den  anden  gribes  patientens  albue,  så  man 
både  kan  abducere  og  rotere  patientens  arm  samtidigt. 
Patientens  arm  abduceres  90  i  skapulas  plan,  hvorefter  den 
indadroteres. 
 
==PAGE:106==
 
Udstrålende  smerte  fortil  eller  lateralt  på  armen  er  et  udtryk  for  at  rotatorcuffen  og/eller 
bursa  subacromialis  rammer  det  coracoacromielle  loft. 
 
Spørgsmål  11  ­  Cross­over  test 
⚪Negativ 
⚪Positiv  ­  Smerter  på  bagsiden  af  skulderen 
⚪Positiv  ­  Smerter  omkring  AC­leddet 
 
Cross­over  test 
 
Med  den  ene  hånd  fikseres  claviclen  fortil.  Med  den  anden  hånd 
tages  fat  om  patientens  albue  og  armen  flekteres  til  90  gr.  og 
adduceres,  hvorved  acromio­claviculær  leddet  komprimeres. 
 
Testen  udløser  smerter  ved  skader,  synovit  eller  arthrose  i  acromio­claviculær  leddet 
 
 
Spørgsmål  12  ­  Aktiv  kompressionstest  (O´  Brien´s  test) 
⚪Negativ 
⚪Positiv  ­  Smerter  svarende  til  AC­leddet 
⚪Positiv  ­  Smerter  svarende  til  labrum 
⚪Inkonklusiv 
 
O’Briens  test  1  (vist  på  billedet) 
 
Patienten´s  arm  flekteres  op  til  90  gr.,  indadroteres  (lillefingeren 
peger  opad)  og  adduceres  ca.  20  gr.   Undersøgeren  presser 
armen  ned  mod  gulvet,  og  patienten  holder  igen.  
 
O´Brien´s  test  2 
 
Udføres  i  forlængelse  af  test  1.  Patientens  arm  supineres.  Undersøgeren  presser  armen 
ned  mod  gulvet.  Patienten  holder  igen. 
 
O´Briens  test  er  positiv  hvis  test  1  udløste  smerte  som  forsvandt  ved  test  2. 
 
Ved  labrum  skade  vil  der  udløses  dybe  smerter  inde  i  skulderen. 
Ved  synovit  i  acromio­claviculær  leddet  vil  testen  medføre  smerter  i  dette  led. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:107==
==PAGE:108==
==PAGE:109==
==PAGE:110==
==PAGE:111==
==PAGE:112==
==PAGE:113==
APPENDIX B
Example - General
information
Next 3 pages: Example of the general information questionnaire. (Light blue back-
ground)
Following 5 pages: Screen dump of the “general information”-questionnaire from the
existing website. (Grey background)
The questionnaire can be found by visiting
http://www.medortis.dk →“Medorits Demo” →“Generelle Oplysninger - Mini”
==PAGE:114==
 
Spørgeskema  1  ­  Generelle  patientoplysninger 
Udfyld  venligst  alle  spørgsmål  med  dine  personlige  oplysninger. 
 
Spørgsmål  1  ­  Hvor  høj  er  du? 
Indtast  højde: 
180 
cm 
 
Spørgsmål  2  ­  Hvad  er  din  kropsvægt? 
Indtast  vægt:  
75 
kg 
 
Spørgsmål  3  ­  Lider  du  af  nogle  allergier? 
⚫Ja 
⚪Nej 
⚪Vides  ikke  ­  jeg  er  ikke  blevet  testet 
 
Spørgsmål  3.1  ­  Hvilke  allergier  lider  du  af? 
⬜Penicillin 
⬜Ipren 
⬜Plaster 
⬜Andre 
 
 
  +  Ny 
 
Spørgsmål  4  ­  Tidligere  hospitalsindlæggelser 
Indtast  venligst  tidligere  hospitalindlæggelser  med  specifikke  datoer,  årsag  og  sted. 
Indskrivelses­
dato 
Udskrivelses­
dato 
Hospital 
Årsag 
 
 
10­10­2016  17­10­2016  Herlev  Hospital 
Årsag 
 
  +  Ny 
 
 
Spørgsmål  5  ­  Dispositioner  til  ledsygdomme 
Er  der  nogen  i  din  nære  familie  som  har  led­  eller  bindevæv  sygdomme? 
Den  nære  familie  inkluderer  bedsteforældre,  forældre  og  søskende. 
⚪Ingen  kendte 
⚫Ja  ­  Jeg  er  familiært  disponeret 
 
Spørgsmål  5.1  ­  Ledsygdomme  i  din  familie 
⬜  Leddegigt 
⬜  Slidgigt 
⬜  Psoriasisgigt 
⬜  Morbus  Bechterew 
 
==PAGE:115==
⬜  Urinsyregigt 
⬜  Fibromyalgi 
⬜  Hypermobilitet 
⬜  Knogleskørhed 
⬜  Andet 
 
 
  +  Ny 
 
 
Spørgsmål  6  ­  Øvrige  organsystemer 
Her  kan  du  oplyse  om  tilstande  som  du  har  men  som  ikke  er  det  aktuelle  problem.  Det 
bidrager  til  at  give  et  samlet  billede.  Tænk  på  om  du  har  problemer: 
­  med  hovepine,  migræne,  humøret  eller  psyken 
­  med  øjnene  (tendens  til  øjenbetændelse,  grøn  stær,  grå  stær  ?) 
­  med  hjertet  eller  lungerne 
­  med  maven,  eller  tarmfunktionen  eller  leveren 
­  med  nyrene,  vandladningen,  prostata  eller  underlivet 
­  med  huden  (psoriasis,  eczem,  andet  udslæt,  knuder  ?) 
­  med  stofskiftet,  sukkersyge,  utilsigtet  vægttab,  påfaldende  træthed 
⚪Ingen  klager 
⚪Har  andre  problemer  end  det  aktuelle  og/eller  problemer  med  andre  organer 
 
Spørgsmål  6.1  ­  Har  du  problemer  med  øjnene   
Almindelig  nærsynethed  eller  langsynethed  skal  ikke  tages  med. 
⚪Ingen  klager 
⚪Ja  ­  jeg  har  problemer 
 
Spørgsmål  6.1.1  ­  Hvilke  øjenproblemer  har  du? 
⬜  Tendens  til  øjenbetændelse 
⬜  Grå  stær 
⬜  Grøn  stær 
⬜  Svært  nedsat  syn 
⬜  Andet 
 
 
  +  Ny 
 
 
Spørgsmål  6.2  ­  Har  du  problemer  med  hovedpine/migræne/humøret/psyken? 
⚪Ingen  klager 
⚪Ja  ­  jeg  har  klager 
 
Spørgsmål  6.2.1  ­  Har  du  problemer  med  hjertet  og/eller  lungerne  ? 
⬜  Hovedpine 
⬜  Migræne 
⬜  Depression 
⬜  Angst 
⬜  Manio­depression 
 
==PAGE:116==
⬜  Borderline 
⬜  Andet 
 
 
+  Ny 
 
 
[…] 
 
 
Spørgsmål  6.8  ­  Har  du  andre  problemer  med  bevægeapparatet  end  dem  du  er 
henvist  for  ? 
⚪Ingen  klager 
⚪Ja  ­  jeg  har  problemer 
 
Spørgsmål  6.8.1  ­  Hvilke  øvrige  problemer  har  du  i  bevægeapparatet  ? 
 
 
 
Spørgsmål  7  ­  Medicin 
Skriv  navn  og  dosis  på  den  medicin  du  tager,  f.eks. 
 
Præparat 
Dosis 
Gange/døgn 
 
 
 
 
 
  
+  Ny  linje 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:117==
==PAGE:118==
110
==PAGE:119==
APPENDIX C
Installation Guide
This appendix guides the user through installing dependencies for the application and
how to run the application.
A test setup is accessible via the address http://health-surveys.compute.dtu.dk
as stated in Section 7.2 where also log-in credentials and further information can be
found.
If you just want to review the source code, it can be extracted and each file reviewed
in a normal text editor like Notepad, Notepad++, Sublime or similar.
C.1
Installation
The installation guide follows the reader to prepare the local machine to run the
MedOrtis2 application.
MedOrtis2 builds on Laravel and PHP, which requires some installation steps to be
able to launch the application. The basic requirements follow the server requirements
stated by Laravel. 1
The application can be used on Windows, Mac and Linux distributions, since Laravel
and PHP are built for supporting cross-platform applications.
C.1.1
Install PHP and enable extensions
Make sure that PHP is installed on your system.
PHP must be installed in ver-
sion >= 5.6.4. PHP version 7 is recommended. You can download PHP via http:
1Laravel:
Installation | May 20th 2017 | https://laravel.com/docs/master/installation#
installation
==PAGE:120==
112
C Installation Guide
//php.net/downloads.php. It is recommended that you add the PHP folder to your
system path, to enable the PHP binary to be used in the terminal from any directory.
2
Enable PHP extensions
For running Laravel, a few PHP extensions are required
to be active.
The extensions are:
• OpenSSL PHP Extension - php_openssl.dll
• PDO PHP Extension Extension - php_pdo.dll
• SQLite PHP Extension - php_pdo_sqlite.dll
• Mbstring PHP Extension - php_mbstring.dll
• Tokenizer PHP Extension (enabled by default)
• XML PHP Extension (enabled by default)
The extension management in PHP are setup in the php.ini file in the PHP directory.
Remove the prepending semicolon from the lines of the necessary extensions, e.g.
change ;extension=php_openssl.dll to extension=php_openssl.dll. 3
The SQLite PHP extension is not listed in the official Laravel installation guide,
but by the fact that MedOrtis2-application uses SQLite requires the extension to be
enabled, otherwise there is no database driver.
C.1.2
Composer
Composer is a dependency manager in PHP, which Laravel uses, and this project also
uses it. I have provided the source code without the source code of the dependencies,
which means that you need to fetch the sources of the dependencies. It is however
not a big task, when you have installed composer.
If you already have composer installed, you can proceed to the next step. Otherwise,
you can install composer quickly from https://getcomposer.org/download/.
2How to Add PHP to Your Windows Path Variable | May 20th 2017 | https://john-dugan.com/
add-php-windows-path-variable/
3How to enable PHP’s openssl extension | May 20th 2017 | http://stackoverflow.com/
questions/18064612/how-to-enable-phps-openssl-extension-to-install-composer
==PAGE:121==
C.2 Run the Application
113
If using Windows, it is recommended to add the directory to your PATH environment
variable, just as it is for PHP.
There is one last step is left to complete the setup, that is namely extracting the
source code.
C.1.3
Extract and prepare application source code
The source code for the application is found on the delivered flash drive under the
folder app.
The source code can alternatively be found and downloaded from http://stigaard.
info/download/application (for a limited time).
C.2
Run the Application
The system is now set up, and ready to run the application.
The first step is to make sure that the dependencies are fetched. Open a terminal
window, and enter the following command:
composer install
Next step is to ensure that the database are clear and ready to be used. Enter the
following command:
php artisan migrate:refresh --seed
This command refreshes the database, and runs the seeds which inserts mocked
database entries.
It is now time to run the application, in the terminal window, enter:
php artisan serve
The application now starts, running a web application on your local machine on port
8000. Browse the application through your browser at http://localhost:8000.
If you already have a service running on port 8000, you can append --port=XXXX to
the command, to use another port.
==PAGE:122==
114
C Installation Guide
The application is now launched.
By closing the terminal window running the web server, the web server will shut
down.
==PAGE:123==
Bibliography
[1]
Yaw Anokwa et al. “Design of a phone-based clinical decision support system for
resource-limited settings”. In: Proceedings of the Fifth International Conference
on Information and Communication Technologies and Development - ICTD ’12.
ACM Press, 2012. doi: 10.1145/2160673.2160676. url: https://doi.org/
10.1145%2F2160673.2160676.
[2]
Valentina Armenise. “Continuous Delivery with Jenkins: Jenkins Solutions to
Implement Continuous Delivery”. In: 2015 IEEE/ACM 3rd International Work-
shop on Release Engineering. IEEE, May 2015. doi: 10.1109/releng.2015.19.
url: https://doi.org/10.1109%2Freleng.2015.19.
[3]
John Bertot. ICEGOV 2016 : Montevideo, Uruguay : proceedings, 9th Interna-
tional Conference on Theory and Practice of Electronic Governance, 1-3 March
2016. New York New York: The Association for Computing Machinery, 2016.
isbn: 978-1-4503-3640-6.
[4]
Ruth Breu. Proceedings of the IASTED International Conference on Software
Engineering : February 17 - 19, 2009, Innsbruck, Austria. Anaheim, Calif. u.a:
ACTA Press, 2009. isbn: 9780889867857.
[5]
Camacho Rodriguez Juan Carlos, Stäubert Sebastian, and Löbe Matthias. “Au-
tomated Import of Clinical Data from HL7 Messages into OpenClinica and
tranSMART Using Mirth Connect”. In: Studies in Health Technology and In-
formatics 228.Exploring Complexity in Health: An Interdisciplinary Systems
Approach (2016), pages 317–321. issn: 0926-9630. doi: 10.3233/978-1-61499-
678-1-317. url: http://doi.org/10.3233/978-1-61499-678-1-317.
[6]
Abhishek Dixit and Richard J B Dobson. “CohortExplorer: A Generic Applica-
tion Programming Interface for Entity Attribute Value Database Schemas”. In:
==PAGE:124==
116
Bibliography
JMIR Medical Informatics 2.2 (December 2014), e32. doi: 10.2196/medinform.
3339. url: https://doi.org/10.2196/medinform.3339.
[7]
Martin Fowler. Patterns of enterprise application architecture. Boston: Addison-
Wesley, 2003. isbn: 978-0-321-12742-6.
[8]
Pankaj Jalote. An integrated approach to software engineering. New York: Springer,
2005. isbn: 978-0-387-28132-2.
[9]
Roxana Perazzo. “Implementation Process of Forms with Orbeon”. In: Proceed-
ings of the 9th International Conference on Theory and Practice of Electronic
Governance - ICEGOV ’15-16. ACM Press, 2016. doi: 10. 1145 / 2910019 .
2910069. url: https://doi.org/10.1145/2910019.2910069.
[10]
Chad Russell. PHP development tool essentials. Berkeley, CA New York, NY:
Apress,Distributed to the book trade worldwide by Springer, 2016. isbn: 978-1-
484-20683-6.
[11]
Radhika Tayal et al. “Open data kit-use of smartphone technology for survey-
ing”. In: 2015 International Conference on Advances in Computer Engineering
and Applications. IEEE, March 2015. doi: 10.1109/icacea.2015.7164749.
url: https://doi.org/10.1109/icacea.2015.7164749.
[12]
Daniel Tom-Aba et al. “Innovative Technological Approach to Ebola Virus Dis-
ease Outbreak Response in Nigeria Using the Open Data Kit and Form Hub
Technology”. In: PLOS ONE 10.6 (June 2015). Edited by Diane Medved Harper,
e0131000. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0131000. url: https://doi.org/10.
1371/journal.pone.0131000.
