==PAGE:1==
Master Thesis
Modeling of an Integrated Coal Gasifi cation with 
Solid Oxide Fuel Cells
Samuele Casaletto
May 2017
==PAGE:2==
Samuele Casaletto: Modeling of an Integrated Coal Gasiﬁcation with Solid
Oxide Fuel Cells | Master Thesis| Supervisor: Prof. Masoud Rokni
© Copyright May 2017
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Section of Thermal Energy
==PAGE:3==
Acknowledgments
I wish to explicitly thank:
• Prof. Masoud Rokni, my supervisor, for the patience and dedication
demonstrated is these months. I am glad we got to work together and I
am thankful for the opportunity received.
• My dear friend Victor Engdahl Skjødt-Andersen and all my other room-
mates for the beautiful moments spent together during my stay in
Denmark.
• Stefano Riva, trusted friend and colleague for the inspiring talks and all
the good memories.
• My family, for loving me and make all this possible.
iii
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Introduction
1
1
Basic Concepts
5
1.1
Gasiﬁcation process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.1.1
Shell gasiﬁcation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.2
Solid oxide fuel cells
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.2.1
SOFC operating temperature
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
1.2.2
SOFC materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
1.2.3
Fuel cell performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2
Design strategies
15
2.1
Fuel preparation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.1.1
Coal handling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.1.2
Gasiﬁcation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.1.3
Syngas conditioning and cleanup
. . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.1.4
Water gas shift and methanation
. . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.2
Power generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.3
Carbon capture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3
Plant Conﬁgurations
23
3.1
Pressurized SOFC-GT conﬁguration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.2
Atmospheric SOFC-ST conﬁguration . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.3
Pressurized SOFC-GT conﬁguration with methanation
. . . .
30
3.4
Pressurized SOFC-GT conﬁguration with carbon capture . . .
33
4
Methodology
37
4.1
Key components
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.1.1
Air separation unit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.1.2
Gasiﬁer
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.1.3
Desulphurization unit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.1.4
Solid oxide fuel cell . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
v
==PAGE:6==
vi
CONTENTS
4.1.5
CO2 compression and puriﬁcation unit . . . . . . . . .
45
4.2
Simulation assumptions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5
Simulation results
49
5.1
Power consumption . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
5.2
Power generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
5.2.1
Pressurized SOFC-GT conﬁguration
. . . . . . . . . .
55
5.2.2
Atmospheric SOFC-ST conﬁguration . . . . . . . . . .
55
5.2.3
Pressurized SOFC-ST conﬁguration with methanation
56
5.2.4
Pressurized SOFC-ST conﬁguration with carbon capture
57
5.3
Eﬃciency
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
6
Sensitivity analysis
61
6.1
Pressure ratio . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
6.2
SOFC fuel utilization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
6.3
SOFC operating temperature
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
7
Conclusions
71
Nomenclature
79
Bibliography
81
==PAGE:7==
Abstract
Clean coal technologies are suspected to play an important role in the future
of the world electricity generation. Among all, one of the most promising
application consists in integrating coal gasiﬁcation with solid oxide fuel cells.
This thesis discusses the use of the second generation IT-SOFCs, which work
around 780°C, in coal-based gasiﬁcation systems. Several cycle layouts are
investigated, all based on the Shell gasiﬁcation technology, producing synthetic
gas. Electricity generation from syngas is obtained in four diﬀerent plant
conﬁgurations, based on the integration of SOFCs with a gas turbine or a
combined cycle. Diﬀerences among the assessed cycles regard the cell operating
pressure, the bottoming cycle, the use of methanation and the inclusion of
carbon capture. Moreover, a sensitivity analysis is performed, analyzing plant
performances at diﬀerent SOFC operating conditions. Plant eﬃciencies up to
56% are achieved, showing considerable gains compared to the state-of-the-art
IGCCs. The best performances are achieved when the SOFCs work in hybrid
conﬁguration with a gas turbine and methanation of syngas is performed.
Conversely, the least eﬃciency (40%) is showed by atmospheric SOFCs coupled
with steam turbine. Despite the eﬃciency reduction of almost 9 percentage
points due to CO2 sequestration, conﬁgurations with carbon capture show
better performances compared to their reference technologies. Pressurization
turns out to be beneﬁcial both for the SOFC and the bottoming cycle. Fuel
utilization slightly aﬀects the overall plant eﬃciency while playing a key role in
the plant economy. Lower SOFCs operating temperatures, goal of the current
research on SOFCs, are demonstrated to be detrimental to plant performances.
Keywords Coal, Gasiﬁcation, Shell, SOFC, Methanation, Carbon Capture
vii
==PAGE:8==
==PAGE:9==
Introduction
In recent times the world energy scenario is changing considerably. Themat-
ics related to greenhouse gases emissions, renewable energy and high production
eﬃciency are becoming more and more important while conventional fossil
fuels are being addressed as the responsible of the climate change. Despite
this run towards the green technology generation, tons of carbon dioxide are
still produced by the combustion of oil, gas and coal.
Burning coal is probably the dirtiest way of producing electricity and, at
the same time, the cheapest. Since the cost of electricity has a key role in
deciding whether a power technology is successful or not, the future of coal is
almost clear. According to U.S. Energy Information Administration’s (IEA)
forecast shown in Fig.(1), world coal-ﬁred generation in 2040 will be 25%
higher compared to 2012[26]. This will happen despite the decline of the coal
share in the total energy mix and it will be due to the signiﬁcantly growth of
the world electricity demand. Hence, in spite of the common perception that
solar and wind will be the only power sources in the future, coal will still play
an important role, probably satisfying almost 30% of the total world electrical
requirements.
Moreover, governments are recently investing in research about the so called
clean coal technology with the purpose of mitigate the environmental impact
of producing energy from coal. Among these technologies, one of the most
eﬀective is the integrated gasiﬁcation combined cycle (IGCC) system. In a
IGCC plant, synthetic gas, obtained from coal gasiﬁcation, is burned in a gas
turbine and then used to rise steam for the bottoming heat recovery steam
cycle. As a result, higher eﬃciencies and lower emissions compared to the
traditional coal-ﬁred steam power plants are possible.
A way to further improve the power production from coal gasiﬁcation is the
employment of solid oxide fuel cells (SOFC). SOFCs are silent, low-emission
high-eﬃciency power generation devices based on the electrochemical oxidation
1
==PAGE:10==
2
Introduction
Figure 1: World net electricity generation by fuel,
2012–40 (trillion kilo-
watthours)[26].
of fuels. SOFCs can successfully operate with synthetic gas and are suitable
for working in hybrid conﬁguration with gas and steam turbines, thus oﬀering
very high conversion eﬃciency. In addition, since SOFCs work as a partial
oxidation reactors, the ﬂue gases are not diluted by nitrogen and therefore are
more suitable for carbon dioxide sequestration.
Although many studies had been already conducted on the integrated gasi-
ﬁcation with solid oxide fuel cells, most of them usually refers to the ﬁrst
generation of high temperatures SOFCs (800-1000°C) which is a technology
now outdated. Recently, manufactures are trying to develop IT-SOFCs, i.e.
SOFCs working at intermediate temperature (below 800°C). Accordingly, in the
present work, the potentiality of integrated gasiﬁcation fuel cell (IGFC)systems
is investigated, tying the analysis on the IT-SOFCs.
==PAGE:11==
Introduction
3
Objectives
The main objective of this thesis is to design, model and analyze diﬀerent
plant conﬁgurations integrating coal gasiﬁcation and solid oxide fuel cells.
The proposed cycle layouts are based on intermediate temperature SOFCs
operating at 780°C. Several bottoming cycles are proposed to optimize heat
recovery and maximize eﬃciency without including components far from the
present state of the art (such as membrane separators and hot gas cleanup).
Near zero-emission conﬁgurations are also investigated and the impact of the
carbon capture and storage process over the plant eﬃciency is discussed.
The various parts of the model aim to replicate commercially proven industrial
processes (like Shell gasiﬁcation and HICOM methanation) and are calibrated
using data from published references. Chemical reactions occurring in the
air separation, desulphurization and carbon capture units are not modeled
and data from the literature are used to calculate the energy consumption of
those devices. It should be highlighted that the SOFC economic feasibility in
this layout and size is still to be demonstrated. Dynamic simulations of the
assessed plants are also outside the scope of this work.
Outline
In the ﬁrst chapter an explanation of the basic concepts at the basis of this
work is developed. More in details, the reader is informed about the
fundamental gasiﬁcation methods and the use of SOFCs in the power
generation.
In the second chapter an overview of conceptual strategies for integrating
SOFCs in gasiﬁcation power cycles is presented. Accordingly, alternative
power production paths are discussed.
In the third chapter a detailed description of the diﬀerent plant conﬁgura-
tions developed by the author is given.
The fourth chapter presents the modeling approach followed by the author.
The reader is taught about the simulation tool and the simulation as-
sumptions. Furthermore, single components descriptions and validations
of the correspondent models against data from published references are
provided.
In the ﬁfth chapter the results of the simulations are presented.
==PAGE:12==
4
Introduction
In the sixth chapter a sensitivity analysis is developed. Plant performances
are studied at diﬀerent SOFCs temperature and pressure operating
conditions and by varying the fuel utilization.
In the seventh chapter general conclusions and recommendations for fur-
ther research are given.
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 1
Basic Concepts
The present work is based on two main technologies: coal gasiﬁcation and
power production from solid oxide fuel cells. The fundamentals of these two
processes are brieﬂy described in this chapter. Theory explanation of several
other concepts, such as power generation through gas turbine and heat recovery
steam cycle, touched upon in the development of the thesis is out of the scope
of this work. The interested reader is addressed to references [10].
1.1
Gasiﬁcation process
The coal gasiﬁcation process is the transformation of coal in synthetic gas,
by means of chemical reactions which transfer the heating value of the primary
fuel mainly to CO and H2. The main component of the gasiﬁcation island is
the gasiﬁer but several subcomponents come along, interacting with the power
cycle. An example of gasiﬁcation island is sketched in Fig.(1.1), where the
following subprocesses are highlighted:
• Fuel preparation. Coal is pulverized and dried or mixed with water
to create a slurry feed before entering the gasiﬁer.
• Air separation. Oxygen is produced in the air separation unit and fed
to the reactor as gasiﬁcation agent. Direct air gasiﬁcation is also possible
but not preferred since the product gas would have a lower heating value
while bigger plant sizes would be required.
• Syngas cooling and cleanup. The gasiﬁcation process produces raw
hot syngas rich of pollutant compounds, such as sulfur,ash,alkaline metals,
mercury and others. The remotion of these elements is fundamental for
the next power production and requires the syngas cooling to ambient
5
==PAGE:14==
6
Basic Concepts
Figure 1.1: Conceptual design of a gasiﬁcation island.
temperature to be eﬀective. Heat from the cooling process is recovered
for further energy production.
In general, the gasiﬁer is a reactor with three inlets (coal, oxygen or air
and water) and two outlets (raw syngas and ashes). Accordingly, the main
reactions occurring in the gasiﬁcation process are[10]: total (1.1)and partial(1.2)
combustion, gasiﬁcation (1.3), water gas shift (1.4), methanation (1.5) and
reforming (1.6).
C + 1
2O2 →CO
(1.1)
C + O2 →CO2
(1.2)
C + H2O →CO + H2
(1.3)
CO + H2O ↔CO2 + H2
(1.4)
C + 2H2 ↔CH4
(1.5)
CO + 3H2 ↔CH4 + H2O
(1.6)
Thanks to these reactions almost all the carbon in the coal is converted and a
mixture of CO, H2, CO2, CH4 and H2O is produced.
==PAGE:15==
1.1. Gasiﬁcation process
7
Gasiﬁer reactors are usually categorized in ﬁxed or moving bed, ﬂuidized
bed and entrained ﬂow units.
• In ﬁxed or moving bed gasiﬁers coal is introduced at the top and
moves counter-current to the product gas. At the reactor inlet volatile
coal compounds are released in the form liquid tar and leave the gasiﬁer
with the synthetic gas. The remaining char (devolatilized coal) is gasiﬁed
in the bed at the bottom of the reactor where it reacts with oxidant and
steam to produce syngas. The product gas leaves the reactor at around
450-550°C.
• The ﬂuidized bed gasiﬁer is a bed of coal and inerts ﬂuidized by steam
and oxidant. The operating temperature is between 800 and 1000°C.
Carbon conversion factors of these reactors are generally lower compared
with the other technologies due to carbon trapping in the ash bed.
• The entrained ﬂow gasiﬁers are similar to burners operating with lack
of oxygen. Pulverized coal and oxidant moves co-currently. The operating
temperature is very high (1500-1900°C) allowing fast kinetics and ash
melting which is then released as slag. Tars is completely destroyed and
the product gas is a mixture of CO, H2,CO2 and very little methane.
Entrained ﬂow gasiﬁer can work with any kind of feedstock and are the
most widely used.
In all the gasiﬁcation processes, and especially when entrained ﬂow reactors
are used, the heat recovery is an important contribution to the power cycle.
Heat recovered from the syngas cooling is estimated to be around 20% of the
energy input. The other energy ﬂuxes are: heat losses, slag and ashes release,
H2S removal and the heating value of the product gas which is the main output
of the gasiﬁcation process. Accordingly, the performances of a gasiﬁer are
usually measured by its cold gas eﬃciency (CGE), deﬁned by Eq.(1.7):
CDE = msyngas LHVsyngas
mcoal LHVcoal
(1.7)
where syngas heating value depends on CO and H2.
1.1.1
Shell gasiﬁcation
Among all the gasiﬁcation process, Shell gasiﬁcation technology is used in
this study and therefore its theory is discussed in this section. A schematic of
the process is presented in Fig.(1.2). Shell reactor is a dry-feed oxygen-blown
==PAGE:16==
8
Basic Concepts
Figure 1.2: Schematic of a typical Shell gasiﬁcation island[19].
entrained ﬂow gasiﬁer working at high temperature and pressure. Coal is dried
and pulverized before being fed to the gasiﬁer by means of N2-driven (or CO2-
driven) lock-hoppers. Oxygen produced in the air separation unit is the oxidant
medium and it is injected into the reactor along with steam. Operating pressure
is in the range of 2-4 MPa [16]. Gasiﬁcation occurs at temperature higher
than 1500°C[16] allowing ashes to melt and form slag which ﬂows down and
exit from the bottom of the vessel. The resulting slagging membrane creates a
protecting layer against the high temperatures. Gasiﬁcation temperature is
also controlled by a boiling water membrane wall which simultaneously rises
saturated steam, later used in the heat recovery section. Hot raw product
gas leaving the gasiﬁer is quenched with cold recirculated syngas. Due to
the cooling, slag droplets entrained in the raw syngas solidify and are later
removed in cyclones or ceramic ﬁlters. The quenched product gas is then
further cooled in the syngas cooler which rises high or medium pressure steam
for the power section. At the exit of the heat exchangers, after the ﬂy ash
removal, the product gas is partially recirculated, partially sent to the water
wash and acid gas removal system.
Fig.(1.3) shows a typical energy balance of a Shell gasiﬁcation process. The
product gas is mainly composed of H2 (25%-30%) and CO (60%-65%)[16].
Carbon conversion is close to 100%, cold gas eﬃciency reaches values up to
==PAGE:17==
1.2. Solid oxide fuel cells
9
Figure 1.3: Energy balance of a typical Shell gasiﬁcation process[19].
83% and another 15% can be recovered by the syngas cooler[19].
1.2
Solid oxide fuel cells
Solid oxide fuel cells (SOFCs) are energy conversion devices generating elec-
tricity through electrochemical oxidation of fuels. A single cell is conceptually
composed of anode and cathode electrodes and a solid oxide electrolyte. The
electrodes, constructed from porous materials, are electrically connected by
an external circuit while the electrolyte is dense [24]. A schematic of the cell
is shown in Fig.(1.4). Fuel is fed to the anode side while the oxidant, which
is typically air, ﬂows to the cathode. Molecular oxygen contained in the air
is reduced to oxygen ions when reacts with the free electrons in the cathode.
Due to the chemical potential diﬀerence across the cell, oxygen ions are then
driven through the electrolyte to the anode, where they react with the fuel.
Fuel oxidation releases electrons which are ﬁnally transported to the cathode
within the external electrical wiring generating electricity.
Accordingly, if the fuel only contains H2 and CO, oxidation at the anode
is described by reactions (1.8) and (1.9).
H2 + O2−→H2O + 2e−
(1.8)
CO + O2−→CO2 + 2e−
(1.9)
==PAGE:18==
10
Basic Concepts
Figure 1.4: Schematic of a solid oxide fuel cell[1].
While at the cathode, oxygen reduction is represented by reaction (1.10).
O2 + 4e−→O2−+ O2−
(1.10)
In addition to the anode, cathode and electrolyte, the two main other
components of a SOFC are the interconnect, which avoids the direct mixing of
fuel and oxidant and the sealant which allows to assemble cells in stacks and
increase the system voltage[24].
SOFCs key features are the very high conversion eﬃciency (higher than 80%
in heat and power co-generation mode[24]), silent operation and low pollutant
emissions. More in details, SOFCs result particularly indicated for CO2 se-
questration, since the anode exhausts are not diluted by nitrogen. In addition,
being the oxygen ions transportation based on solid state conduction[1] through
the solid electrolyte, many kinds of fuel can be used, making the SOFC a very
ﬂexible device.
1.2.1
SOFC operating temperature
Due to the low conductivity of the solid electrolyte[27], SOFCs work at high
temperatures (600-1000°C)[1], which provides both advantages and drawbacks.
High operating temperature allows internal reforming and water-gas-shift reac-
tions inside the anode, reducing or avoiding the fuel prepocessing duty[1]. This
makes SOFCs ideal for direct conversion of methane or synthetic gas produced
through gasiﬁcation. The reforming and water-gas-shift reactions are shown in
Eq.(1.6) and Eq.(1.4), respectively.
==PAGE:19==
1.2. Solid oxide fuel cells
11
Furthermore, due to the high temperature of the cell eﬄuents, further power
production is achievable operating the SOFCs in hybrid conﬁguration with gas
turbines and/or steam cycles, thus enhancing the overall conversion eﬃciency.
However, high temperature operation also implies some disadvantages, such
as longer startup times and higher thermal stresses[27]. Consequently, costly
construction materials, suitable for use in high temperature environments, are
needed, making the SOFCs a very expensive technology.
Manufactures are focusing on lowering the cell operating temperature in
the range 600-800°C. This would allow simpler designs, lower investment costs
and slower cell degradation[13]. On the other hands, some other problems
would arise, such as lower electrolyte ionic conductivity and electrode activity,
more severe degradation due to sulfur poisoning of Ni-based anodes and, in
general, lower performances[13]. Therefore, several eﬀorts must be made in
the material designing to overcome these limits. Currently used materials
are brieﬂy described in the next section while more information about recent
developments in SOFC materials, cells and stacks design can be found in [27]
and [13].
1.2.2
SOFC materials
Currently used SOFC materials are listed in Tab.(1.1), adapted from
Ref.[13].
Components Materials
Requirements
Electrolyte
Yttria stabilised Zirco-
nia
Oxygen
ion
conductivity;
mechanical
strength; gas tightness
Interconnect Pt, Mn-doped cobalt
chromite, doped lan-
thanum chromite
High electronic and thermal conductivity;
high mechanical strength
Anode
Pt, Ni-ZrO2 Cermet,
Ni-YSZ Cermet
High porosity; electronic conductivity large
triple phase boundary; sulfur tolerance
Cathode
Pt,
La1-xSrxMnO3,
La1-xSrxFeO3,
La1-
xSrxCo1-yFeyO3
High porosity; electronic conductivity; large
triple phase boundary; activity for oxygen
surface exchange
Table 1.1: SOFC materials[13].
==PAGE:20==
12
Basic Concepts
SOFCs developed at Risø National Laboratory and Topsoe Fuel Cell (TOFC)
which are the base of the simulation model developed by Bang-Møller and
Rokni[4] used in this work are planar anode-supported fuel cells. The anode is
made of Ni-YSZ (Nickel - Yttria stabilised Zirconia), the electrolyte of YSZ
and the cathode of LSM-YSZ (Lanthanum Strontium Manganite - YSZ)[7].
1.2.3
Fuel cell performance
The maximum electrical work obtainable from the electrochemical oxidation
of a fuel is represented by the change in Gibbs free energy ∆G, as stated by
Eq.(1.11).
∆G = ∆H −T∆S
(1.11)
where ∆H is the enthalpy change representing the available thermal energy,
T is the absolute temperature and ∆S is the entropy change related to the
ineﬃciency of the process.
Accordingly, the eﬃciency of the conversion process is deﬁned by Eq.(1.12)
ηideal = ∆G
∆H
(1.12)
However, the ideal eﬃciency can not be reached due to voltage ineﬃciency
which occurs during the cell operation. Consequently, the actual cell voltage
V is lower than the ideal potential E and a cell voltage eﬃciency is deﬁned
(1.13).
ηcell = V
E
(1.13)
The ideal potential corresponds to the open-circuit voltage and it can be
calculated by Eq.(1.14).
∆G = −n F E
(1.14)
where n the number of electrons which participate to the reaction and F is the
Faraday’s constant.
A more common formulation of Eq.(1.14) is the Nernst equation, shown
in Eq.(1.15).
E = E0 + RT
2F ln(K)
(1.15)
where E0 is the standard potential, R is the universal gas constant and K the
equilibrium constant of the reaction.
==PAGE:21==
1.2. Solid oxide fuel cells
13
Figure 1.5: Variation of cell voltage with current density for the cell operating at
high and low temperatures[13].
According to the deﬁnition, the Nernst equation allows to calculate the re-
versible potential at operating temperatures and pressures diﬀerent from the
standard conditions and highlights that higher ideal cell voltage are reached
at high pressure and low temperature.
The actual voltage is lower than the ideal voltage due to several losses which
occur when a current is drawn in the cell, as shown in Fig.(1.5). It is possible
to distinguish four main losses:
• Activation losses: related to the activation energy of the reactions,
these losses are caused by the slow kinetics on the surface of the electrodes
and are more pronounced at low current densities.
• Ohmic losses: represent electrodes and electrolyte resistance to elec-
trons and ions ﬂow, respectively. Voltage drop due to ohmic polarization
is proportional to current density.
==PAGE:22==
14
Basic Concepts
• Concentration losses: also known as gas transport losses, are related
to reactants consumption and consequent formation of a concentration
gradient in the electrodes. These losses arise at high current density due
to diﬀusion limitations.
• Fuel crossover: depends on the amount of fuel which migrates through
the electrolyte and reacts at the cathode without producing useful current.
It is relevant at low current density.
More detailed explanations of the voltage losses are given in Ref.[13].
The ideal and voltage eﬃciencies deﬁned above refers to the amount of fuel
which reacts in the cell. However, not all the injected fuel is oxidized and some
of it leave the cell without producing any useful work. This obviously lead to
a loss which is represented by the fuel utilization, deﬁned as the ratio between
the spent and the available fuel(1.16).
Uf = mfuel,in −mfuel,out
mfuel,in
(1.16)
Accordingly, to arrive at the net cell performance, the ideal and cell eﬃciency
must be multiplied by the fuel utilization.
Hence, the electrical power produced by the cell is expressed by Eq.(1.17).
Pel = Pfuel ηcell ηideal Uf
(1.17)
where Pfuel is the fuel input power.
==PAGE:23==
Chapter 2
Design strategies
In this chapter an overview of conceptual strategies for integrating SOFCs
in gasiﬁcation power cycles with CO2 capture is presented.
In Fig.(2.1),
adapted from Ref.[6], a blocks scheme shows all the possible paths for the
energy production. Although many cycle layouts are possible, they usually
follow three main steps:
1. Fuel preparation;
2. Power generation (SOFC and bottoming cycle);
3. Carbon capture.
2.1
Fuel preparation
In the fuel preparation phase, coal is converted in synthetic gas through
gasiﬁcation. Then raw syngas is then cooled and cleaned. In the cleaning
process removal of HCl, H2S, COS, ammonia and mercury is performed[1]. In
addition, coal treatment prior gasiﬁcation is accomplished.
2.1.1
Coal handling
Coal handling concerns coal treatments before gasiﬁcation. Although it
mainly depends on the type of gasiﬁer, this phase always involves coal size
reduction[12].
Moreover, in case of dry-feed gasiﬁers, coal drying is performed. Coal drying
techniques are classiﬁed in evaporative drying and non -evaporative dewatering
and drying[19]. In ﬁst case, a drying medium is needed. Hot air, ﬂue gases
or superheated steam can be used for this scope. However, direct drying
15
==PAGE:24==
16
Design strategies
Figure 2.1: Overview of conceptual strategies and alternatives for integrating a
solid oxide fuel cell in a fossil-fuel power cycle with CO2 capture
(adapted from Ref. [6]).
with hot air or ﬂue gases can lead to ﬁre and explosion due to spontaneous
combustion. Therefore, steam is usually preferred. Compared to evaporative
drying, non-evaporative drying is more eﬃcient, as it involves the removal of
water without phase change[19].
2.1.2
Gasiﬁcation
Gasiﬁcation occurs in ﬁxed or moving bed, ﬂuidized bed or entrained ﬂow
gasiﬁers. The last ones are the most widely used for coal gasiﬁcation. Among
major producers are Shell, GE, Siemens, and Prenﬂo. The main diﬀerences
between them regard the feeding system, the type of syngas cooler and oxidant
agent.
Modern gasiﬁers usually work at high pressure due to the downstream use of
the product gas and reactor compactness requirements. Pressurized operation
implies more complicated feeding systems compared to atmospheric pressure
reactors.
There are two main high-pressure feeding systems: the slurry-feed and the
dry-feed. In case of slurry-feed gasiﬁers, coal particles are mixed with water or
other solvents to form a slurry which can be pumped into the reactor. Con-
versely, in dry-feed systems, coal particles are driven into the gasiﬁer through
lock-hoppers working with inert gases, such as nitrogen or carbon dioxide.
Each system has advantages and drawbacks but, generally, dry-feed gasiﬁers
have higher cold gas eﬃciency (CGE). Slurry feeders lower eﬃciency is ex-
plained by the great amount of energy required by water vaporization used in
the slurry, which is apparently higher than the energy spent on compressing
==PAGE:25==
2.1. Fuel preparation
17
the inert gas of a lock-hopper. For this reason, dry-feed systems are preferred
in IGFC plants, whose target is high conversion eﬃciencies.
The oxidant agent can be air, oxygen and/or steam. Although oxygen produc-
tion is a highly energy-demanding process, oxygen-blown gasiﬁers are usually
preferred due to the higher cold gas eﬃciency compared to air-blown systems.
Moreover, since the product gas is not diluted by nitrogen, considerable plant
size reduction is achievable when oxygen is used.
2.1.3
Syngas conditioning and cleanup
Syngas leaves the gasiﬁer at very high temperature (1200°C-1400°C) and
needs to be cooled to lower temperatures, which depend on the downstream
application. Four main cooling strategies are currently adopted [10]:
1. Cooling with radiative and connective syngas coolers.
2. Total quench trough water injection.
3. Partial quench via water injection and convective syngas cooler.
4. High temperature quench trough cold syngas recirculation and convective
syngas cooler.
Coal-derived synthetic gas is characterized by a content of ﬂy-ash, particulate
matter and hydrogen sulﬁde such that its direct use is impossible. Tab.(2.1)
shows the typical composition of coal gasiﬁcation gas [16].
Particulate removal is performed in ﬁlters, cyclones and/or wet scrubbers.
Cyclones are usually employed upstream the syngas cooler, to remove bigger
particles and avoid the heat exchangers erosion and fouling. Scrubbers are
instead used downstream the syngas cooler allowing a better removal of solid
matter and other species such as NH3, HCN and alkali metals.
Sulfur content in the raw coal gasiﬁcation gas can be up to 1 vol.% or even
more, depending on the source and the gasiﬁcation process [16]. The major
sulfur compounds in raw coal syngas are hydrogen sulﬁde (H2S) and carbonyl
sulﬁde (COS). In order to meet the power plant environmental requirements,
turbine protection speciﬁcations and/or other requirements for diﬀerent end-
use applications, such as SOFCs, sulfur content needs to be decreased. In
particular, for SOFC application, the total sulfur content in the fuel gas needs
to be reduced to less than 60 ppbv [16].
==PAGE:26==
18
Design strategies
Gas
Concentration (vol%)
CO
30–60
H2
25–30
CO2
5–15
H2O
2–30
CH4
0–5
N2
0.5–4
Ar
0.2–1
H2
0.2–1
COS
0–0.1
HCN + NH3
0–0.3
HCl
50–400 ppmv
Table 2.1: Typical gasiﬁer gas composition [16].
The major techniques for acid gas removal, including H2S, COS, and CO2,
from the raw coal gasiﬁcation gas include[17]:
• absorption by chemical and/or physical solvents,
• adsorption by metals or metal oxides, and
• membrane separation.
Currently, the most widely used systems are the absorption solvents and,
among them, MDEA (methyl-diethanol amine), Selexol(di-methyl-ethers of
polyethylene glycol) and Rectisol (methanol) processes are preferred in the
chemical and energy industry[17]. The salient features of these solvents are
summarized in Tab.(2.2).
2.1.4
Water gas shift and methanation
Water gas shift (WGS) reactions (2.1) are used to increase the hydrogen
content of the syngas to prevent the risk of power losses or degradation eﬀects
due to carbon deposition on the fuel cell´s anode[1].
CO + H2O ↔CO2 + H2
(2.1)
Alternative solutions imply water injection or anode oﬀ-gases recirculation to
upgrade the steam-to-carbon ratio to levels which inhibit the carbon formation.
The WGS might or might not be the most cost-eﬀective option and therefore
its employment for this purpose mainly depends on economic considerations.
==PAGE:27==
2.1. Fuel preparation
19
Solvent
Quality of treated gas
Remarks
MDEA (Chemical)
H2S: 10–20 ppmv
Lowest capital cost; moderate operating tem-
perature; limited COS absorption.
Selexol (Physical)
H2S: <10 ppmv
Higher cost than MDEA but overall system
cost including sulfur recovery process and tail
gas treating could be more cost eﬀective.
Rectisol (Physical)
H2S: <0.1 ppmv
Highest cos; a minimum concentration of H2S
is required to maintain the catalyst activity;
high selectivityf or H2S over CO2; ability to
remove COS.
Table 2.2: Comparison among the mostly used absorption methods for acid gas
removal[17].
A unique WGS application concerns H2 generation and CO2 capture. Romano
et al.[23] proposed a cycle layout including WGS units where the produced H2
is burned with the cathode exhausts to increase the inlet turbine temperature
(TIT) and enhance the plant eﬃciency.
Furthermore, a methanation reactor might be used to upgrade the methane
content of the syngas and exploit the intrinsic cooling properties of the internal
reforming (2.2).
CH4 + H2O ↔CO + 3H2
(2.2)
Reforming of methane is an endothermic reaction, meaning that it might be
used to absorb the heat released by the fuel oxidation, thus reducing the cell
cooling needs along with the air mass ﬂow rate. High-performances plant
conﬁgurations have been proposed both with and without methanation. Hence,
whether the methanation is beneﬁcial or not mainly depends on trade-oﬀs
associated with the costs of the methanation units and the gains in plant
eﬃciency due to reduced cell cooling duty. Furthermore, several commercially
available methanation process exist, each with speciﬁc characteristics. For
instance, the TREMP methanation requires prior WGS and partial CO2
removal, whereas other process such as the HICOM does not require any
upstream syngas treatment but consumes relevant amounts of steam. Lanzini
et al.[14] analyzed both TREMP and HICOM methanation pointing out that
the HICOM process should be preferred when no further modiﬁcation in the
cycle layout is desired.
==PAGE:28==
20
Design strategies
2.2
Power generation
The power generation island is composed of SOFC stacks and bottoming
cycle. SOFCs produce most of the electricity through electrochemical oxidation
of fuel while the bottoming cycle essentially recovers the waste energy from the
cells. Accordingly, one of the main parameters that aﬀect the power generation
is the SOFC fuel utilization, i.e. the rate of fuel that is converted in the cells.
In general, it is preferable to have high value of fuel utilization and produce less
electricity from waste heat, due to the higher eﬃciency of SOFCs compared to
the bottoming cycle. However, very high fuel utilizations are detrimental to
SOFCs operation. As a result, 100% utilization is not feasible and 60-80% is
more usual[1]. Since the fuel is not 100% oxidized in the SOFCs, the unspent
fuel contained in the anode exhausts can be exploited in a bottoming cycle.
Design decisions about SOFC exhausts downstream application mainly concern
the SOFC operating pressure. Pressurized SOFCs can be found in hybrid
conﬁguration with gas turbines. This cycle layout has the highest theoretical
electric eﬃciency and the highest power density[1] but it is also considered
to be the most complex. Pressurized stacks imply higher partial pressure of
the reactants and therefore enhanced SOFC voltage and eﬃciency. Moreover,
when high pressure (20-30 bar) conﬁgurations are adopted, the hot compressed
fuel cell oﬀ-gases can be expanded in gas turbine before entering the heat
recovery steam generator, taking advantage of the beneﬁts deriving from the
high eﬃciency bottoming combined cycle.
Unfortunately, pressurized SOFCs are highly expensive and manufacturers
mainly produce SOFCs operating at atmospheric pressure. Waste heat from
atmospheric SOFCs can be employed in a heat recovery steam cycle, producing
less power than in a bottoming combined cycle but with gains in terms of
plant simplicity and economy.
2.3
Carbon capture
When carbon capture is included in the cycle layout, several additional
options are available. One alternative is the pre-anode capture, meaning that
CO2 is separated from the syngas before it reaches the power island. This
approach requires preliminary syngas treatment through a WGS reactor which
produces a stream of H2 and CO2. Carbon dioxide is then captured by means
of chemical or physical absorbents and a H2 rich gas is produced.
Alternative options include post-anode CO2 capture.
==PAGE:29==
2.3. Carbon capture
21
Among all, oxy-fuel combustion is one of the most promising, since it oﬀers the
advantage of exploiting the SOFCs unique feature of producing exhaust gases
not diluted by nitrogen. In this case, the oxidation is completed in high purity
oxygen and a stream of H2O and CO2 is produced, from which CO2 can be eas-
ily separated[6]. Despite the advantages derived by the simple carbon capture,
oxy-fuel combustion is highly energy-intensive, since pure O2 must be produced.
A second solution for post-anode carbon capture is to produce H2 and CO2
from the anode exhausts in a WGS unit. In this case, CO2 concentration in
the gas is high and its separation simpler. After CO2 capture via physical
absorption or low temperature CO2 condensation the H2 can be recycled to
the fuel cell or burned with the cathode exhausts.
The last option for post-anode CO2 sequestration is the physical or chemical
absorption after the anode exhausts combustion in cathode depleted air. This
solution is easily retroﬁttable since there are no eﬀects on the basic plant
without CO2 capture but low eﬃciency is expected due to the energy required
for solvent regeneration.
==PAGE:30==
==PAGE:31==
Chapter 3
Plant Conﬁgurations
Based on the overview of the conceptual strategies for integrating a SOFC
in a gasiﬁcation power cycle presented in the previous chapter, four cycle
layouts have been chosen for further analysis.
In all the conﬁgurations, the gasiﬁcation island is based on the Shell gasiﬁcation
process which produces syngas for the next power generation. The motivations
for selecting the Shell gasiﬁcation are the following[16]:
1. The capability of converting diﬀerent types of coal with a carbon conver-
sion higher than 98%.
2. The high cold gas eﬃciency due to the high concentration of CO and H2
in the synthetic gas.
3. The lower oxygen consumption and the higher eﬃciency compared to
the coal-water slurry feeding systems.
4. The longer lifetime of the cooling membrane compared to the bricks used
in other gasiﬁers.
5. The additional steam produced by the cooling the membrane wall, later
used for further electricity generation.
The ﬂow sheet of the gasiﬁcation island is sketched in Fig.(3.1).
Oxygen is produced in a standalone cryogenic air separation unit, which is
currently the only air separation technology able to produce eﬃciently the big
amount of oxygen required by the gasiﬁcation plants. Other options for the
oxygen production are the pressure swing adsorption (PSA) and ion transport
membrane (ITM) but their economic viability in the design and capacity
considered in this work is still to be demonstrated.
23
==PAGE:32==
24
Plant Conﬁgurations
Figure 3.1: Schematic of the gasiﬁcation island.
Coal is pulverized and dried before entering the gasiﬁer. Drying is performed
by an evaporative dryer and the cooling media is superheated steam. A steam
loop is designed to transfer heat from the product gas to the coal. The super-
heated steam dries the coal and the moisture from the coal leaves the dryer
together with it. Then, the excess steam, equal to the amount that evapo-
rates from the coal, is separated from the steam loop and used in the gasiﬁer
as gasiﬁcation agent. Coal is fed to the gasiﬁer through a N2-driven lock hopper.
Product gas leaving the gasiﬁer at more than 1200°C is quenched to 900°
C by means of cold syngas recirculation. Due to the quench, molten slag
entrained by the gas stream solidiﬁes and it is separated by a cyclone. Further
==PAGE:33==
Plant Conﬁgurations
25
product gas cooling is obtained in the next syngas cooler generating a 54-bar
stream of superheated steam. Steam bleedings from the syngas cooler are used
in the gasiﬁer and in the active cooling membrane wall.
Downstream the syngas cooler additional heat exchangers cool the product
gas to 200°C generating a stream of cold syngas which is partially recirculated
in the quench unit. The percentage of recirculated gas is around 50%. Heat
released in the cooling process is used in the drying steam loop and in the
clean syngas reheating process.
The rest of the product gas is sent to a scrubber where solids and solu-
ble contaminants are removed. Syngas exits the scrubber at about 130°C
and is expanded and cooled to the operating pressure and temperature of the
following desulphurization unit. As discussed in the previous chapter, several
cold syngas desulphurization processes had been developed. Although all the
described processes are capable of removing eﬃciently the hydrogen sulﬁde,
when downstream applications involve the use of SOFCs and only H2S must
be separated, Selexol is the most suitable solvent[18] and is therefore selected
in this study for the simulation of the desulphurization process. The sulfur
content of the puriﬁed syngas from the Selexol absorber can be lower than
5 ppmv but do not reach the desulphurization level required by the SOFC
(sulfur content<0.1 ppmv) and a guard bed using ZnO adsorbents is also
needed. Hydrogen sulﬁde adsorption by metal oxides is a proven technology
but not economically feasible at the high sulfur removal rates required by
coal-derived synthetic gas and therefore it can be used only as additional
cleaning technique[17].
Clean syngas exits the desulphurization unit at about ambient temperature
and needs to be heated up to 650°C before entering the power island. Heat for
syngas heating is supplied by the hot raw syngas cooling process. Two heat
exchanger had been designed to simulate the process. In addition, an anode
preheater is used to transfer heat from the hot anode exhausts to the fresh
syngas in order to reach the desired temperature. Cathode inlet air is also
preheated to 600°C by cathode exhausts in a high temperature heat exchanger.
An alternative to the high temperature heat exchangers for anode and cathode
stream preheating is syngas recirculation through ejectors. Compared to the
ejectors, high temperature heat exchangers are expensive but assure a more
stable operation and are therefore selected in this study.
Downstream the coal gasiﬁcation, product gas is converted to electricity in the
power island. This is done in four diﬀerent scenarios using:
==PAGE:34==
26
Plant Conﬁgurations
1. Pressurized SOFCs and a bottoming combined cycle.
2. Atmospheric SOFCs and a bottoming steam cycle.
3. Pressurized SOFCs and a bottoming combined cycle with methanation.
4. Pressurized SOFCs and a bottoming combined cycle with carbon capture.
Studying these four scenarios is expected to give an overview of the SOFC
performances in diﬀerent operating conditions and to evaluate the impact of
external processes, such as the CO2 removal.
Since the size of the major currently in operation IGGC power plants, which
are a reference technology for the IGFC systems, is in the range of 200-400
MWe[19], the size chosen in this study should be in that range too. In addition,
to make easier the comparison between the diﬀerent cycle layouts performances,
the same energy input should be set for all the plants. Accordingly, a ﬁxed
coal mass ﬂow rate of 30 kg/s is set for all the studied plants, while letting the
power output to change according to the performance of the considered layout.
Cycle layouts of the conceptual scenarios are presented in the following sections.
3.1
Pressurized SOFC-GT conﬁguration
The ﬂow sheet of the ﬁrst considered scenario is sketched in Fig.(3.2). It
is a fuel cell - gas turbine hybrid system where the gas turbine is bottoming
the fuel cell.
Product gas leaving the gasiﬁcation island is oxidized in a
pressurized intermediate temperature SOFC, working at 780°C. The operating
pressure depends on the upstream gasiﬁcation island and is about 33 bar.
Consequentially, air must be compressed and preheated before entering the
SOFC cathode. A cathode preheater heats the air up to 600°C by cooling
down the oﬀ-cathode gases. The air mass ﬂow rate is calculated based on the
cooling needs of the fuel cell. A fuel utilization of 80% is used in the fuel cell,
to avoid SOFC eﬃciency reduction. Unspent fuel is burned with the cathode
exhausts in a catalytic burner and expanded in the uncooled gas turbine. Flue
gases leaving the expander at around 236°C are further exploited in the heat
recovery steam cycle. A two-pressure levels cycle (54/4 bar) is designed to
optimize the power generation, where low pressure steam is raised in the heat
recovery steam generator (HRSG) while high pressure steam comes from the
syngas cooler. Steam cycle pressure is chosen to minimize the stack losses and
increase the power generated.
==PAGE:35==
3.2. Atmospheric SOFC-ST conﬁguration
27
Figure 3.2: Schematic of the pressurized SOFC-GT hybrid power plant.
3.2
Atmospheric SOFC-ST conﬁguration
The cycle layout of the second scenario, shown in Fig.(3.3), is based on
the integration of an ambient temperature SOFC with a steam turbine (ST)
bottoming cycle. Since the product gas leaves the gasiﬁcation island at high
pressure, a syngas expander is needed before the SOFC modules. Contrary
to the case of pressurized SOFCs, atmospheric air can be used in the fuel cell
and only a blower is needed to overcome the pressure losses occurring in the
heat exchangers ahead of the cell, resulting in a lower power consumption. On
the other hand, less power is produced due to the lack of the gas turbine.
Unspent fuel and cathode exhausts are burned in a catalytic burner and the
==PAGE:36==
28
Plant Conﬁgurations
Figure 3.3: Schematic of the atmospheric SOFC-ST power plant.
hot ﬂue gases are cooled in a heat recovery steam generator (HRSG). The
temperature of the gases at the inlet of the HRSG is higher than the previous
case since no expansion occurs after the burner and, therefore, higher pressures
can be used in the steam cycle. Flue gases enter the superheater at about
334°C and an optimal pressure of 8 bar has been found. A two-pressure levels
cycle (54/8 bar) is designed, with high pressure steam generated in the syngas
cooler.
Flue gases leave the HRSG at quite high temperature (around 174°C) and
they can be further exploited to preheat cathode air, which, not having been
compressed, is at ambient temperature.
The use of waste heat from the
bottoming cycle to the top cycle, studied as hybrid recuperating concept
==PAGE:37==
3.2. Atmospheric SOFC-ST conﬁguration
29
Figure 3.4: Schematic of the atmospheric SOFC-ST power plant with hybrid
recuperation.
in Ref.[21], enhances the plant eﬃciency and the beneﬁts resulting from its
utilization in this plant are discussed in chapter 5. It should be highlighted
that, in the previous case, this solution has not been considered because air
exited the compressor at about 548°C, a temperature much higher than the
stack temperature of the ﬂue gases.
The cycle layout of the SOFC-ST power plant with the hybrid recuperation is
sketched in Fig.(3.4).
==PAGE:38==
30
Plant Conﬁgurations
3.3
Pressurized SOFC-GT conﬁguration with
methanation
In the third scenario, a methanation reactor is introduced in the pressurized
SOFC-GT layout cycle (Fig.(3.5)).
Figure 3.5: Schematic of the pressurized SOFC-GT power plant with methanation.
Electrochemical oxidation of fuel and irreversibility of processes occurring
inside the cells lead to a signiﬁcant heat generation which must be removed to
keep the operating temperature at the designed value. In SOFCs operating
with methane-free syngas, the only means of cooling is the cathode air. Since
excess air for heat removal implies additional power consumptions due to com-
pression, it is detrimental to the cell performances. The presence of methane
in the fuel reduces the cooling duty because part of the waste heat is absorbed
==PAGE:39==
3.3. Pressurized SOFC-GT conﬁguration with methanation
31
by the endothermic reforming. At SOFCs high operating temperature, due
to the presence of a nickel-based catalyst, methane reacts with steam to yield
carbon monoxide and hydrogen. This reaction is highly endothermic, meaning
that heat is absorbed by the process. Therefore, methane reforming converts
the waste heat into chemical energy, thus lowering the excess of cooling air
and the related power consumption[14]. As a result, methane-rich gases allow
higher SOFC eﬃciency.
However, coal-derived synthetic gas usually contains very little amount of
methane. Thus, to take advantage of the beneﬁts deriving from the internal
reforming a methanator reactor must be used. The methanation reaction in-
volves carbon monoxide and hydrogen conversion into methane and steam and
it is, therefore, used to upgrade the methane content in the syngas. Moreover,
the process is highly exothermic and released heat can be used to preheat the
product gas before feeding it to the SOFCs, thus avoiding the use of the anode
preheater.
In the IGFC plant considered in this work, methanation is carried out in
an adiabatic reactor operating between 250 and 700°C and it is based on the
HICOM methanation concept. The key feature of the HICOM (High CO
Methanation) process is the possibility of operating without adjusting the
H2/CO ratio to 3.0. Accordingly, no WGS reactors are needed and product gas
from the acid gas removal unit can be directly methanated. However, steam
must be added to prevent carbon deposition on the catalyst surface. The
overall methanation process is split in a series of units and the temperature is
controlled by gas recirculation after the ﬁrst methanation stage. The reactor
output is a gas substantially composed of methane with little presence of
carbon dioxide[25].
The methanation process simulated in this work is sketched if Fig.(3.6). Prod-
uct gas from the gasiﬁcation island is diluted by the cold recycle gas to reach
a temperature of 250°C before entering the methanation unit. Since catalyst
sintering can take place at high temperatures, the percentage of recycle is cal-
culated to have a reactor outlet temperature of maximum 700°C. The amount
of injected steam is calculated to have an inlet steam/CO ratio of 1.5, below
which carbon deposition can occur. Only one methanation reactor is adopted,
resulting in a limited production of methane compared to the full HICOM
process used in the synthetic natural gas (SNG) plants.
The introduction of the methanation process involves several modiﬁcations to
the cycle layout of the basic SOFC-GT hybrid plant:
==PAGE:40==
32
Plant Conﬁgurations
Figure 3.6: Schematic of the methanation unit.
• The superheating section is removed from the syngas cooler which now
rises saturated steam while cooling the raw syngas.
• Steam exiting the syngas cooler is superheated in a separated heat
exchanger and heat is supplied by the cooling of the recycled syngas to
the methanator.
• Steam leaving the high-pressure turbine is reheated prior entering the
low pressure stage.
• The anode preheater is removed since syngas exits the methanator at
700°C and does not need further heating prior entering the SOFC.
Since the methanation process is highly-water demanding an alternative con-
ﬁguration is developed with the objective of reducing the water consumption.
The cycle layout of the plant is depicted in Fig.(3.7). The main idea is to
recycle the syngas after the conversion in the fuel cell, thus exploiting the high
steam content of the anode exhausts to reduce the share of external water.
Comparison between the two alternative IGFC plants with methanation are
presented in the next chapter.
==PAGE:41==
3.4. Pressurized SOFC-GT conﬁguration with carbon capture
33
Figure 3.7: Schematic of the pressurized SOFC-GT power plant with methanation
and post-anode gas recycle.
3.4
Pressurized SOFC-GT conﬁguration with
carbon capture
The ﬂow sheet of the fourth scenario is sketched in Fig.(3.8). It is a SOFC-
GT hybrid plant with carbon capture, aiming to produce electricity with high
conversion eﬃciency and near zero emissions.
The cycle layout is based on the oxy-fuel combustion of the unspent fuel
leaving the IT-SOFC. Oﬀ-anode gas is burned with a 95% pure oxygen ﬂow
coming from the ASU. This process produces a stream of H2O and CO2, from
which CO2 separation can be easily performed after water condensation. Since
pure oxygen rather than air is used in the combustion, nitrogen dilution is
avoided and a high temperature is reached at the burner outlet, in spite of the
==PAGE:42==
34
Plant Conﬁgurations
Figure 3.8: Schematic of the pressurized SOFC-GT power plant with carbon
capture.
low heating value of the anode oﬀ-gas. Therefore, the stream is diluted with
cold recycle ﬂue gas to lower its temperature to about 800°C before entering
the HRSG. The recovered heat is exploited in a two pressure levels (160/54
bar) steam cycle with reheating. Flue gases leaving the HRSG are partially
recirculated, partially sent to the CO2 compression and puriﬁcation unit (CPU).
The main processes for the carbon compression and puriﬁcation after oxy-fuel
combustion are:
1. Compression and dehydration;
2. Duble ﬂash;
3. Distillation.
==PAGE:43==
3.4. Pressurized SOFC-GT conﬁguration with carbon capture
35
Among all, the distillation process can produce 99.99% purity CO2 stream and
presents the most complex and expensive scheme. Conversely, the compression
and dehydration system is simpler and cheaper but its product CO2 purity
is only 77%. In between them is the double ﬂash unit which can produce
96% purity CO2 ﬂows[20]. Moreover, at high carbon dioxide purity rates
more energy is consumed per ton of CO2 captured and, consequently, lower
overall plant eﬃciencies are achieved. Finally, as the system complexity de-
creases, the carbon capture eﬃciency rises and, therefore less CO2 is vented
to the atmosphere[20]. Hence, it is clear that each system has advantages
and drawbacks and the choice mainly depends on the required CO2 purity for
downstream applications and/or regulations on the emissions of carbon dioxide.
In this study, the CO2CPU is modeled as a gas separator and its power
consumption is calculated using data from the literature. Nonetheless, ef-
forts have been made to closely represent the double ﬂash technology concept.
Accordingly, the CO2CPU speciﬁc consumption of 150 kWh per ton of CO2
captured, reported in Ref.([20]), is used. However, since the reference study
regards ﬂue gases at atmospheric pressure whereas in the present plant con-
ﬁguration they leave the HRSG at high pressure, the speciﬁc consumption is
adjusted to consider the energy saving due to the avoided compression.
Since the anode exhausts are burned with pure oxygen, the depleted air
from the cathode is directly expanded in a turbine after being partially cooled
in the cathode preheater. A certain amount of energy is still available after
the expansion and it is used to preheat high pressure water in the steam cycle.
The impact of the carbon capture over the plant eﬃciency is discussed in
the next chapter.
==PAGE:44==
==PAGE:45==
Chapter 4
Methodology
The thermodynamic model of the power cycles considered in this study
is made with DNA (Dynamic Network Analysis), a software developed since
several years at Mechanical Department of the Technical University of Denmark.
DNA is a component-based simulation tool and a component library is included
in the software to design the cycle. Among available equipment there are
turbo-machineries, burners and heat exchangers and new components can be
added by the users. The program is able to solve algebraic and diﬀerential
equation systems and can therefore be used to simulate both transient and
steady-state processes. In addition, the material and energy balances are
done automatically. DNA is based on FORTRAN, is open source and free.
Additional information can be found in [9].
4.1
Key components
In this section, descriptions of the key components and validations of the
correspondent models against data from published references are provided.
The main components are the gasiﬁer and the SOFC, while components such
as heat exchangers, dryers, pumps, compressors and expanders are considered
as secondary. The air separation unit (ASU), the desulphurizer and the CO2
compression and puriﬁcation unit (CPU) are also described, since being added
by the author to the DNA component library.
4.1.1
Air separation unit
The 95% purity oxygen ﬂow required for the gasiﬁcation process is pro-
duced by a standalone cryogenic air separation unit (ASU). Separated oxygen
is compressed up to the gasiﬁer working pressure before entering in the gasiﬁer.
37
==PAGE:46==
38
Methodology
Figure 4.1: Schematic of the air separation unit.
Nitrogen produced in the ASU is also compressed and partially used in the
lock hopper for the coal feeding.
In this study, ASU section is modeled as a gas separator. The component code
is developed starting from a previous version built by Rokni (Thermal energy
section, DTU, 2012). The air is separated in oxygen-rich gas and nitrogen-rich
gas, as shown in Fig.(4.1). The oxygen-rich gas contains a certain percentage
of oxygen decided by the user. The remainder percentage is nitrogen. The
nitrogen-rich gas contains the rest of the nitrogen and all the other compounds
present in air. Other input parameters are the speciﬁc electric consumption
per ton of separated oxygen and the pressure ratio.
Once the percentage of oxygen in the O2-rich gas (PRO) is set, the molar
fractions of the compounds in the outlet ﬂows are deﬁned and the mass ﬂow
rate of the O2-rich gas can be calculated by the following equation:
˙mO2−rich = xO2@air
MMair
˙mair(MMO2−rich + 1 −PRO
PRO
MMN2−rich)
(4.1)
Then the mass ﬂow rate of the N2-rich gas is found by the material balance:
˙mN2−rich = ˙mair −˙mO2−rich
(4.2)
The electrical energy consumption depends on the speciﬁc consumption (eO2,
==PAGE:47==
4.1. Key components
39
kWh
tonO2 ) of the ASU and on the amount of separated oxygen, according to
Eq.(4.4).
˙We = eO2 ˙mO2−rich
(4.3)
The speciﬁc consumption includes the energy expenditure due to the cooling
and compression of the ﬂows. The pressure at the outlet is equal for the two
streams and depends on the pressure ratio (PR) set by the user.
poutlet = PR pinlet
(4.4)
Finally, the energy balance calculates the amount of heat removed from
the system in order to have a temperature of the outlet ﬂows equal to the
temperature of the inlet. Assumption for ASU energy consumption had been
obtained from the information available in literature [2]. Accordingly, a speciﬁc
consumption of 400 kWh per ton of separated oxygen is set.
4.1.2
Gasiﬁer
The gasiﬁer used in this study is based on the model developed by Rokni
in [22]. It is a model of the Viking gasiﬁer, a two-stage gasiﬁer built and
demonstrated by the Biomass Gasiﬁcation Group at the Technical University
of Denmark [11].
According to this model, the product gas and ashes composition depends on
the composition of the inlet streams and on the gasiﬁer operating conditions.
The input parameters deﬁning the operating conditions are:
• Operating pressure
• Operating temperature
• Pressure loss
• Carbon Conversion factor
• Additional non-equilibrium methane
• Steam-to-fuel ratio
The carbon conversion factor controls the amount of unconverted hydrocarbons
which leave the gasiﬁers as ashes,together with the SiO2 contained in the inlet
==PAGE:48==
40
Methodology
Bituminous Illinois No. 6
Proximate analysis (wt.%)
Fixed carbon
47.05
Volatile matter
30.91
Moisture content
11.12
Ash content
10.91
Ultimate analysis (wt. %)
Ash
10.91
C
71.72
H
5.06
O
7.75
N
1.41
S
2.82
Cl
0.33
Total
100
Heating values (kJ Kg−1)
Higher heating value (HHV)
30506
Lower heating value (LHV)
29544
Table 4.1: Composition of Illinois No.6 coal [8].
coal. The additional non-equilibrium methane is deﬁned as the amount of addi-
tional methane in the product gas that does not originate from the equilibrium
calculations.The steam-to-fuel ratio controls the amount of injected steam
into the gasiﬁer. The product gas composition is calculated by applying the
Gibbs free energy minimization method, assuming that chemical equilibrium
is reached at outlet at the operating temperature and pressure of the gasiﬁer.
In this study, input parameters of the gasiﬁer model had been adjusted in order
to simulate the Shell gasiﬁcation process. The Shell gasiﬁer is an entrained-ﬂow,
dry-feed, oxygen-blown gasiﬁer operating at 1600°C and 44 bar. The gasiﬁer is
insulated with a membrane wall cooled by 54-bar boiling water. A schematic
of the gasiﬁer model is shown is Fig.(4.2).
To calibrate the gasiﬁcation process the developed model is compared with
analysis data from a report of U.S. National Energy Technology Laboratory
(NETL) [8]. Both test data from the NETL analysis and calculated data
from the gasiﬁer model are based on the Illinois No.6 coal feedstock given in
Tab.(4.1).
==PAGE:49==
4.1. Key components
41
Figure 4.2: Schematic of the Shell gasiﬁer.
Parameter
Operating pressure, bar
44
Operating temperature, °C
1850
Pressure loss, %
3
Carbon Conversion factor, %
99.5
Additional non-equilibrium methane, vol%
0.01
Steam-to-fuel ratio
0.173
Table 4.2: Input parameters gasiﬁer model.
To obtain the correct product gas composition the carbon conversion factor
of the gasiﬁer model is set equal to the corresponding values of the NETL
results while the steam-to-fuel ratio and the non-equilibrium methane are
varied until the content of CO and H2 in the product gas matches the reference
data. Operating conditions of the gasiﬁer after the calibration process are
summarized in Tab.(4.2).
As seen in Tab.(4.3) the product gas composition and the cold gas eﬃciency
(CGE) are similar to the NETL data, meaning that the model of the gasiﬁer
successfully represents the Shell gasiﬁcation process. However, it should be
highlighted that the heat transfer inside the gasiﬁer membrane wall is not
==PAGE:50==
42
Methodology
Reference [8]
This study
Molar composition, %
H2
30.06
29.42
N2
5.67
1.94
CO
57.97
58.62
CO2
1.43
2.54
H2O
2.52
6.38
H2S/others
2.29
1.00
CH4
0.06
0.10
Cold gas eﬃciency (CDE), %
79.5
80.00
Table 4.3: Comparison of raw syngas composition from the gasiﬁer model with
reference data [8].
simulated and data about the mass ﬂow rate of the cooling water/generated
steam are taken from the literature [15].
4.1.3
Desulphurization unit
Raw syngas leaving the gasiﬁer contains sulfur in the forms of hydrogen
sulﬁde and carbonyl sulﬁde which need to be removed before entering in the
SOFCs. The desulphurization unit used in this work is modeled as a gas
separator and is based on a previous version developed by Lorentzen (Lab. for
energetics, DTU, 1994).
A schematic of the desulphurization component model is sketched in Fig.(4.3).
Raw syngas is separated in H2S-free syngas and removed gas. The mass ﬂow
rate of the removed gas is calculated from the mass ﬂow rate of the raw syngas
and the molar fraction of the removed compound, as shown in Eq.(4.5).
˙mH2S = xH2S@raw −syngas
MMraw−syngas
MMH2S ˙mraw−syngas
(4.5)
Then the mass ﬂow rate of the clean product gas is found by the material
balance:
˙mclean−syngas = ˙mraw−syngas −˙mH2S
(4.6)
Electrical energy is consumed in the puriﬁcation process due to the cooling
required to reach the low temperatures at which the absorption of the hydrogen
sulﬁde occurs. In addition, auxiliary equipment such as pumps is used and its
==PAGE:51==
4.1. Key components
43
Figure 4.3: Schematic of the desulphurization unit.
power requirement must also be considered. Accordingly, a speciﬁc electrical
consumption (eH2S,
kWh
tonH2S )is deﬁned and total consumption is calculated based
on the amount of the removed hydrogen sulﬁde:
˙We = eH2S ˙mH2S
(4.7)
The pressure at the outlet is equal for the two streams and depends on the
pressure drop set by the user. Finally, the energy balance calculates the amount
of heat removed from the system. Utility consumption is derived from the
literature [18] and set equal to 21,126 MJ per kg of sulfur compound removed.
4.1.4
Solid oxide fuel cell
The SOFC component used in this study is based on the model developed
by Bang-Møller and Rokni in [4]. The model represents the second generation
SOFCs from Topsoe Fuel Cell A/S (TOFC) and Risø National Laboratory.
During the calibration process against published data by Christiansen et al.
[7], the developed model showed a maximum error relative to the experimental
data of 3%, resulting to be a reliable tool for the prediction of real SOFCs
performances. Additional information about the DNA SOFC component model
and its validation can be found in [3].
The model calculates the composition of the anode and cathode exhausts
and the electricity production based on the operating condition of the SOFC
and the properties of the inlet ﬂows.
The input parameters deﬁning the
operating conditions are:
==PAGE:52==
44
Methodology
Parameter
Utilizaiton factor, %
80
Operating temperature, °C
780
Pressure losses, %
5
Number of cells in one stack
75
Number of stacks
350000
Table 4.4: Input parameters SOFC componet model.
• Utilization factor
• Operating temperature
• Pressure losses
• Number of cells per stack
• Number of stacks
The utilization factor represents the ratio between the oxidized and the incom-
ing fuel and is set equal to 0.8 in this work. Since the developed model aims
to simulate intermediate temperature solid oxide fuel cells (IT-SOFCs) the
selected operating temperature is 780°C. Pressure losses are estimated based
on similar works (e.g. [23] and [14]) and account for about 5% of the inlet
pressures. The number of cells in each stack is set equal to 75 as in the devices
from TOFC[7]. Finally, the number of stacks is decided according to the
projected output power, knowing that each stack should provide about 1 kW.
Increasing the number of stacks enhances the plant performance while implying
higher investment costs and an optimal solution from the techno-economic
standpoint exists.
The input parameters used in this study are summarized in Tab.(4.4). In
addition to the input parameters, pressure and temperature of the inlet ﬂows
also aﬀect the operating conditions of the SOFC.
Anode exhausts composition is calculated by applying the Gibbs energy min-
imization method under the assumption of chemical equilibrium reached at
the outlet at the operating temperature and pressure of the fuel cell. Cathode
exhausts composition depends on the amount of consumed oxygen in the
oxidation process while the ﬂow rate is calculated based on the cooling needs
of the cell. Power generated depends on the incoming chemical energy and
SOFC eﬃciency.
==PAGE:53==
4.1. Key components
45
4.1.5
CO2 compression and puriﬁcation unit
Flue gases derived from the combustion of unspent fuel with cathode
exhausts contain a relevant amount of carbon dioxide which is vented to the
atmosphere after the heat recovery process. Plant emissions can be reduced by
burning the unspent fuel with pure oxygen instead, to obtain a ﬂue gas which
contains only steam and CO2 from which is relatively easy to separate carbon
dioxide after water condensation. To accomplish the CO2 separation from
the ﬂue gases a CO2 compression and puriﬁcation unit (CO2CPU) is needed.
In this work, such a component is modeled as a gas separator, following an
approach similar to the ASU and desulphurization unit. The schematic of the
component model is sketched if Fig.(4.4).
Figure 4.4: Schematic of the CO2CPU.
Flue gases are separated in CO2 and water. The amount of separated carbon
dioxide depends on the inlet mass ﬂow and molar composition. Accordingly,
the mass ﬂow rate of the outlet ﬂows are calculated by Eq.4.8) and Eq.(4.9).
˙mCO2 = xCO2@fluegas
MMfluegas
MMCO2 ˙mfluegas
(4.8)
˙mwater = ˙mfluegas −˙mCO2
(4.9)
The process is energy demanding and a speciﬁc consumption per unit mass of
captured CO2 is deﬁned to calculate the total energy consumption. Several
CO2 compression and puriﬁcation processes exist and speciﬁc consumption
depends on the selected process. In addition, according to the used process,
diﬀerent purities of the CO2 stream and diﬀerent capturing eﬃciencies are
==PAGE:54==
46
Methodology
possible. In this study, a speciﬁc consumption (eCO2,
kWh
tonCO2 ) of 142 kJ per
kg of separated CO2 is used, derived from Ref.[20] and representative of the
compression and dehydration process. Total energy consumption is therefore
calculated from Eq.(4.10).
˙We = eCO2 ˙mCO2
(4.10)
The DNA component used to model the CO2CPU is the same of the desul-
phurization unit, but with diﬀerent input parameters.
4.2
Simulation assumptions
Simulations have been performed under steady-state operating conditions.
Main assumptions used in this work are summarized in Tab.(4.5). The air
separation unit is modeled as a gas separator and its electrical consumption is
based on EIGA (European Industrial Gases Association) benchmark propos-
als[2]. Assumptions regarding the gasiﬁer are obtained from a NETL (National
Energy Technology Laboratory) report about IGCC based on Shell gasiﬁca-
tion[8]. Sulfur removal is performed by a gas separator and the process energy
consumption refers to absorption by means of Selexol solvent. Data about the
desulphurization unit speciﬁc consumption are obtained from [23]. General
assumptions about the gasiﬁcation island derive from the analysis of similar
works[14], [23], [8].
SOFCs are based on the model developed by Bang-Møller and Rokni[4] and
represent the second generation SOFCs from Topsoe Fuel Cell A/S (TOFC)
and Risø National Laboratory[7]. Anode and cathode ﬂows preheating is per-
formed by high temperature heat exchangers. Methanation occurs in adiabatic
reactor representing the HICOM process[14], [25].
Gas and steam cycle are designed assuming parameters representing the state-
of-the-art[23]. Steam pressure in the HRSG is the result of an optimization
process maximizing the cycle eﬃciency.
Carbon capture is modeled through a gas separator. Electricity consumed by
this component is set in order to simulate a CPU (compression and puriﬁcation
unit) based on double ﬂash producing a 96% purity CO2 stream[20].
Fuel input is set equal to 751.8 MW in all the assessed plants.
==PAGE:55==
4.2. Simulation assumptions
47
Gasiﬁer
Gasiﬁcation pressure, bar
44
Gasiﬁcation temperature, °C
1600
Carbon conversion, %
99.5
Steam-to-fuel ratio
0.173
Additional non-equilibrium methane, %
0.01
Pressure losses, %
3
Heat losses, %
0.7
ASU
Oxygen purity, % mol
95
Electric consumption, kWh/tO2
400
Syngas quench
Outlet syngas temperature, °C
900
Inlet syngas temperature, °C
200
Heat exchangers
Minimum temperature diﬀerence, °C
20
Heat losses, %
0.7
Pressure losses, %
2
Desulphurization unit
Solvent
Selexol
Temperature, °C
15
Pressure, bar
33
Electric consumption, kJ/kgH2S
21126
SOFC
Operating temperature, °C
780
Utilization factor, %
80
Pressure losses, %
5
Heat losses, %
2
Number of cells in one stack
75
Number of stacks
350000
Gas turbine
Combustor pressure loss, %
3
Compressor polytropic eﬃciency, %
92
Turbine polytropic eﬃciency, %
93.5
==PAGE:56==
48
Methodology
Electric generator eﬃciency, %
98
Heat recovery steam generator
Maximum steam temperature, °C
565
Minimum approach point DT, °C
20
Pinch point DT, °C
10
Pressure losses economizers, %
25
Pressure losses superheaters, %
8
Pressure losses gas side, %
3
Heat losses, %
0.7
Steam cycle
Condensing pressure, bar
0.048
Pump isentropic eﬃciency, %
0.85
Turbine isentropic eﬃciency, %
0.85
Electric generator eﬃciency, %
98
CO2CPU
System
Double ﬂash
Product CO2 purity, %
96
CO2 capture eﬃciency, %
92
Electrical consumption, kWh/tO2
150
Table 4.5: Main assumptions.
==PAGE:57==
Chapter 5
Simulation results
The outcome of the simulations is presented in Tab.(5.1). Power ﬂows,
eﬃciencies and relevant data are listed for each plant conﬁguration, which is
indicated as follow:
1 Pressurized SOFC-GT.
2a Atmospheric SOFC-ST.
2b Atmospheric SOFC-ST with hybrid recuperation.
3a Pressurized SOFC-GT with methanation.
3b Pressurized SOFC-GT with methanation and post-anode recirculation.
4 Pressurized SOFC-GT with carbon capture.
The gasiﬁcation island generates in all the assessed cases a syngas ﬂow rate
of 51.6 kg/s. However, in the methanation scenario, the amount of product
gas ﬂowing to SOFC anode is higher due to steam injection and syngas recir-
culation. Air ﬂow rate to the cathode side also changes among the diﬀerent
scenarios. The lowest value is reached when the product gas is methanated
and the cooling needs of the cells are partially fulﬁlled by the endothermic
reforming of methane.
In the hybrid SOFC-GT conﬁgurations (1,3a,3b) fuel cells work at high pressure
and a combined gas turbine heat recovery steam cycle is used as bottoming
cycle. The pressure ratio depend on the gasiﬁcation island and pressure drops
and it is around 30.
The turbine inlet temperature (TIT) is always below 910°C due to the huge
49
==PAGE:58==
50
Simulation results
1
2a
2b
3a
3b
4
Pressurized staks
Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Methanation
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
No
CO2 capture
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
SOFC pressure, bar
29,4
1,2
1,2
30,9
30,0
29,4
Syngas ﬂow (anode), kg/s
51,6
51,6
51,6
79,9
126,5
51,5
Air ﬂow (cathode), kg/s
930,1
1114,6
1112,7
447,9
693,8
866,6
GT pressure ratio
30,0
-
-
32,1
31,2
33,6
TIT, °C
811,8
-
-
910,5
815,1
731,3
TOT, °C
230
-
-
291,8
233,3
152,0
GT speciﬁc work, kJ/kg
141,7
15,2
13,7
321,7
184,9
31,5
T inlet HRSG, °C
230,0
330,0
394,0
291,8
233,3
800,0
Steam cycle pressures, bar
54/4
54/8
54/8
54/4
54/4
160/54
Steam mass ﬂow, kg/s
42,7
89,2
111,6
56,9
56,11
73,8
T stack, °C
147,5
161,3
90,0
143,6
147,7
124,0
Water consumption, kg/s
1,9
1,9
1,9
29,9
21,9
1,9
Electric power, MW
SOFC
295,5
245,0
245,4
275,5
262,4
297,3
Gas turbine
131,8
17,0
15,2
144,1
128,3
27,3
Steam turbine
39,0
70,4
94,4
51,2
54,1
100,1
Syngas expander
1,1
1,1
1,1
1,1
1,1
1,2
Air separation unit
-33,8
-33,8
-33,8
-34,2
-34,2
-48,1
Syngas recirculation
-0,6
-0,6
-0,6
-0,6
-0,6
-0,5
Methanator recirculation
0,0
0,0
0,0
-0,2
-0,8
0,0
Pumps
-0,2
-0,3
-0,3
-0,5
-0,4
-1,6
Steam blower
-0,4
-0,4
-0,4
-0,4
-0,4
-0,4
Sulfur removal
-18,9
-18,9
-18,9
-18,9
-18,9
-18,9
Carbon capture
0,0
0,0
0,0
0,00
0,0
-9,9
Fuel input
751,8
751,8
751,8
751,8
751,8
751,8
Gross power output
466,5
333,0
355,2
470,8
444,1
425,0
Net power output
413,7
280,0
302,2
417,3
390,6
346,5
Net LHV eﬃciency, %
55,03
37,25
40,2
55,5
52,0
46,1
Table 5.1: Performance of the proposed plants.
excess of air used in the burner and uncooled expanders can be used in all the
cases.As a result of high pressure ratio and limited TIT the speciﬁc work of
the gas turbine is low compared to the state of the art. Particularly low is
==PAGE:59==
Simulation results
51
in the case of carbon capture (31,5 kJ/kg) where cathode air is not burned
before the expansion.
Turbine outlet temperature (TOT) is also low, ranging between 230 and
290°C. Consequently, a maximum steam pressure of 4 bar is used in the heat
recovery steam cycle (HRSC) to avoid excessive stack losses. In the atmo-
spheric SOFC-ST conﬁgurations (2a,2b) the ﬂue gases temperature at the inlet
of the HRSG is higher (330-394°C) than the previous cases due to the absence
of the expander. Consequently, a steam pressure of 8 bar results to be the
optimum that maximizes the heat recovery and power production in the HRSC.
A really high HRSG inlet temperature (800°C) is reached in the carbon capture
scenario (4) because of the oxy-fuel combustion. Therefore, high temperature
and pressure (560°C, 160 bar) are obtained at the inlet of the steam turbine of
the bottoming cycle, allowing a more eﬃcient power generation.
Stack temperatures range between 144 and 148°C in the pressurized con-
ﬁgurations, values quite high considering that the ﬂue gases are clean and
could be cooled down to around 90°C. A third pressure level in the HRSG
might lead to this result but its economic feasibility is unsure. Flue gases are
vented at high temperature (160°C) also in the atmospheric scenario, unless
the hybrid recuperation is used. In the latter, temperatures as low as 90°C are
reached. When CO2 sequestration is involved, stack temperature depends on
the gas expander performances. In this case, expanded air is vented at around
124°C after being cooled in a water preheater.
In all the assessed plants water is consumed in the gasiﬁcation process. Steam
required by the gasiﬁcation is partially recovered from the fuel drying, partially
bleed from the evaporator. The latter is ﬁnally emitted at the plant stack and
needs to be replaced by makeup water. As a result, 1.92 kg/s of water are
required in each plant due to the gasiﬁcation. Water consumption increases in
the methanation case due to product gas dilution before entering the reactor.
The amount of steam injected into the product gas, i.e. the amount consumed
by the methanation process, is governed by the steam-to-CO ratio which should
be around 1.5 to avoid cocking. As a result 29.2 kg/s of water are consumed
by the plant. When post-anode recirculation is adopted, steam fraction in the
incoming gas to the methanator is higher and less steam needs to be injected.
Consequently, the water consumption is about 27% lower than the previous
case.
==PAGE:60==
52
Simulation results
5.1
Power consumption
Power balances are equal for the gasiﬁcation islands, with the only exception
of the cycle with the carbon capture where higher ASU electrical consumption
is observed due to production of oxygen consumed in the oxy-fuel combustion.
Among the energy-consuming processes, the oxygen separation is the most
important, accounting for 61-63% of the total power consumption, as shown
in Fig.(5.1).
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
No carbon capture
Carbon capture
Share of power consumption
Scenario
Carbon capture
Sulfur removal
Steam blower
Pumps
Methanator ricirculation
Syngas ricirculation
Air separation unit
Figure 5.1: Plant power consumption by process.
An impact of around 5 percentage points on the overall plant eﬃciency is
observed due to ASU. Nevertheless, oxygen-blown gasiﬁers are usually preferred
to air-blown units because they produce syngas of better quality. In addition,
when oxygen is used as oxidant medium, smaller mass ﬂow rates are needed to
generate the same energy output, with considerable advantages on the plant
size.
The second most relevant energy intensive process is the sulfur removal with a
share of 34% of the total consumption, corresponding to an eﬃciency reduction
of around 3 percentage points. Once again, the outcome of the carbon capture
case is diﬀerent, being the desulphurization process only responsible for 24% of
==PAGE:61==
5.2. Power generation
53
the total consumption, although the amount of consumed energy by the process
is the same of the other conﬁgurations. This is due to the presence of another
energy-consuming component, the CO2CPU, which accounts for 13% of the
total energy consumption. Therefore, in CO2 sequestration scenario, oxygen
production, sulfur removal and carbon capture imply an eﬃciency reduction
of respectively 6.4, 3 and 1.3 percentage points. As a result, the eﬃciency
penalty due to energy consumption units in the carbon capture scenario is 3.4
percentage points higher than the other cases.
In all the plants, the impact of blowers and pumps is quite small and only
represent 2% of the total.
5.2
Power generation
In all the cycle layouts the main source of electricity production is the
SOFC. The gross power production by source is sketched in Fig.(5.2).
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
1
2a
2b
3a
3b
4
% of gross power output
Plant configuration
Steam turbine
Gas turbine
SOFC
Figure 5.2: Gross power production by source.
SOFCs account for almost 60% of the total power production in the SOFC-
GT conﬁgurations (1, 3a, 3b - pointed areas) and for more than 70% in the
SOFC-ST plants (2a, 2b, 4). In the SOFC-GT scenarios, the second most
important power source is the gas turbine which produces around 30% of the
total power while energy production from the HRSC is complementary and
==PAGE:62==
54
Simulation results
only accounts for the remaining 10%. When methanation is adopted, electricity
generation from steam cycle is slightly higher due to the additional steam
produced by cooling the recycled methanated syngas. In the SOFC-ST layouts
the opposite trend is observed: power production from the steam turbine is
about 21-26% of the total while the gas turbine,expanding unburned syngas
before the SOFC, only generates small amounts of energy. A slightly higher
production is observed in the carbon capture case where cathode exhausts are
also expanded.
To better understand the power output composition the reader is addressed to
Fig.(5.3).
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
1
2a
2b
3a
3b
4
Gross power output [MW]
Plant configuration
Steam turbine
Gas turbine
SOFC
Figure 5.3: Gross power output.
It is important to highlight that the total power generation is higher in the
pressurized stacks conﬁgurations than in the atmospheric ones. This is due
to two reasons: higher electricity production in the fuel cells, whose eﬃciency
is enhanced at higher pressure; and better exploitation of the waste heat in
the combined cycle, whose performances are surely superior to the response
of a heat recovery steam cycle. While the latter outcome is a well known
result, the ﬁrst needs further investigations, which will be presented in the next
sensitivity analysis. For the moment, it is worth to note that SOFCs produce
20% more power in the SOFC-GT scenario (1) than the SOFC-ST case (2a,
==PAGE:63==
5.2. Power generation
55
2b) due to the higher cells working pressure while electricity generation from
the gas turbine is almost the double of the steam turbine, even though the
available energy after the fuel cells is lower.
5.2.1
Pressurized SOFC-GT conﬁguration
SOFC work in hybrid conﬁguration with a gas turbine producing 295,5
MW of electric power. It is the design that produces the most power from the
fuel cells. Unspent fuel burned with cathode exhausts and expanded in the
gas turbine also generates moderate power (132 MW), despite the quite low
speciﬁc work. This is due the huge amount of ﬂue gases produced by burning
the SOFC oﬀ-gases. Only the layout with methanation can guarantee better
results by producing about 144 MW with half of the ﬂue gas ﬂow rate of the
assessed case. Power generated in the steam turbine is low, since most of the
fuel input is exploited in the SOFCs and GT.
5.2.2
Atmospheric SOFC-ST conﬁguration
SOFCs working at atmospheric pressure oﬀer the simplest design among
the considered cases. The cells do not need to be enclosed in pressurized
vessels and waste heat is directly recovered in the HRSG avoiding the use of a
gas turbine. However, power generated is the lowest obtained in this set of
simulations. As already observed, pressure decrease is detrimental to SOFCs
operation. As a result, power generated by the cells diminishes when pressure
drops and turns out to be equal to 245 MW at atmospheric conditions. In
addition, gas turbine is replaced by a syngas expander which expands product
gas from the pressure level in the gasiﬁer island (about 30 bar) to SOFCs
operating pressure (1.2 bar). Both the speciﬁc work and the mass ﬂow rate
are lower than the SOFC-GT case and, consequently, only 17 MW of electric
power are produced. Despite the absence of the gas expander, the temperature
of the ﬂue gas entering the HRSG is not high (330°C) due to the huge excess
of air used in the combustion. Accordingly, steam maximum temperature
and pressure in the bottoming steam cycle is not incredibly high. Ultimately,
about 70.4 MW are produced from the waste heat recovery process. Therefore,
total power generated by equipments complementary to the SOFC, i.e. steam
turbine and syngas expander, is about 87 MW, a value which is nearly half of
the output from the bottoming combined cycle of the pressurized conﬁgurations.
When hybrid recuperation, i.e. preheating of the cathode air by means of
ﬂue gas leaving the HRSG, is considered, the plant presents better outcomes.
Heat recovered and reintroduced in the plant has beneﬁcial eﬀects both on the
==PAGE:64==
56
Simulation results
topping and bottoming cycle. More in detail, power output increases by 0.2%
in the SOFC and by 34% in the steam turbine. Therefore, only introducing a
heat exchanger, almost 24 MW of extra power are generated.
5.2.3
Pressurized SOFC-ST conﬁguration with metha-
nation
When product gas is methanated (3a, 3b), less power is produced in the
fuel cells compared to the non-methanated conﬁguration(1). This is due to the
lower heating value of the incoming syngas which is diluted by syngas recir-
culation and/or steam injection to avoid catalyst cocking in the methanator.
Moreover, syngas heating value reduction is more pronounced when syngas
recirculation is adopted because very high dilution is required to reach the
desired steam-to-carbon ratio. On the other hand, less water is consumed in
that case.
Although power production from SOFCs is reduced, total power output is
higher than the non-methanated conﬁguration (1) when only steam injection
is adopted(3a). This outcome is explained by several reasons. As earlier
mentioned, due to the internal methane reforming which absorbs part of the
heat generated by the oxidation process inside the cell, less air is required at
the cathode side to keep the temperature at the desired value. The primary
eﬀect of the cathode ﬂow reduction is the lower power consumption by the air
compressor. The secondary outcome is the higher TIT (from 812 to 916°C) due
to unspent fuel combustion with less excess of air, which leads to an increase
of the speciﬁc work. Therefore, despite the lower ﬂue gas ﬂow rate, the net
power produced by the gas turbine is higher (144.1 rather than 131.8 MW).
Furthermore, heat from the methanated syngas cooling process is used to rise
additional steam and to reheat the steam ﬂow after the expansion in the high
pressure turbine, thus improving the steam cycle eﬃciency and increasing the
power production(from 39 to 51.2 MW).
If post-anode syngas recirculation is used to increase the steam percentage in
the product gas to limit the steam injection during the methanation process,
the power output is reduced compared to the previous case. The explana-
tion of this outcome lies in the diﬀerent composition of the syngas after the
methanator, as shown in Tab.(5.2).
As earlier mentioned, syngas diluted with post-anode gas has a lower heating
value and its oxidation generates less power in the fuel cell (262MW rather
==PAGE:65==
5.2. Power generation
57
3a
3b
Post-anode recirculation
No
Yes
Steam injection
Yes
Yes
Compound, vol%
H2
17.42
14.97
N2
1.46
1.55
CO
8.58
8.89
CO2
27.62
33.41
H2O
34.83
34.95
CH4
10.09
6.23
Lower heating value, MJ/kg
6.34
4.41
Outlet ﬂow rate, kg/s
79.9
126.5
Table 5.2: Syngas composition after the methanation.
than 276MW), despite the higher product gas ﬂow rate fed to the stacks. In
addition, more air is needed at the cathode side with detrimental eﬀects on the
gas turbine eﬃciency. Consequently, the TIT is similar to the non-methanated
case and the net power production from the gas turbine is slightly lower. Once
again, steam reheating is adopted and additional steam is raised while cooling
the recirculated gas. However, in this case less power is generated in the
steam cycle compared to the previous case due to lower maximum temperature
reached in the HRSG. Therefore, from the power balance comes out that the
net power output is lower than the non-methanated case, meaning that the
use of post-anode recirculation is detrimental to the plant performances.
5.2.4
Pressurized SOFC-ST conﬁguration with carbon
capture
When carbon capture is considered (4), the oxidation agent used in the
burner is pure oxygen. Beyond the higher ASU energy consumption due
to extra oxygen production which has already been discussed, the oxy-fuel
combustion implies other eﬀects on the plant performances. Among them,
the most relevant is the impossibility to burn the cathode exhausts with the
unspent fuel and to exploit its energy potential in a gas turbine. Depleted air
leaving the fuel cell is therefore expanded without being previously burned
and limited power is produced. Compared to the case without carbon capture
(1) 79% less power is generated by the gas turbine. However, temperature
==PAGE:66==
58
Simulation results
at the outlet of the oxy-fuel burner is considerably higher, since combustion
occurs at nearly stoichiometric conditions and, consequently, more energy is
available for steam generation in the HRSG. Hence, high temperature and
pressure(560°C - 160 bar) is reached by the steam at outlet of the waste
heat recovery unit. In addition, steam reheating after the expansion in the
high pressure turbine is adopted. As a result, power generation of the steam
cycle is about 2.56 times higher than the reference case, reaching an abso-
lute value of more than 100MW. Despite the promising outcome of the steam
cycle, the total power output is lower than the scenario without carbon capture.
5.3
Eﬃciency
Plant performances are summarized in Fig.(5.4).
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
0,0
50,0
100,0
150,0
200,0
250,0
300,0
350,0
400,0
450,0
1
2a
2b
3a
3b
4
Net LHV efficiency [%]
Net power output [MW]
Plant configuration
Net power output
Net LHV efficiency
Figure 5.4: Plant performances.
Best performing plant is the hybrid SOFC-GT with methanation (3a) with
a net eﬃciency of 55.5%. Beyond the high power production, a very small
cathode ﬂow rate compared to the other designs is observed for nearly same
power output. This result leads to two main considerations. First, the size
of gas turbine and pipes is smaller, meaning that investment costs per unit
==PAGE:67==
5.3. Eﬃciency
59
power are lower. Second, an additional component is required, the methanator,
to achieve an eﬃciency gain of only 0.5 percentage points compared to the
case without methanation(1), whose eﬃciency is indeed 55%. Therefore, an
optimal solution exists and it depends on techno-economic considerations
rather then thermodynamics. Plant layout No.3b, by implementing post-anode
recirculation, also achieves good results: an eﬃciency penalty of 3 percentage
points compared to the scheme without recirculation (3a) is observed, while
water consumption is reduced by 27%. A relatively low eﬃciency is observed
in the SOFC-ST conﬁgurations: 40.2% and 37.25% for the case with and
without hybrid recuperation, respectively. Finally, it is observed that CO2
sequestration (4) has an impact on the overall plant eﬃciency of about 8.9
percentage points.
==PAGE:68==
==PAGE:69==
Chapter 6
Sensitivity analysis
Performances of the assessed plants strongly depend on the operating
conditions of the SOFCs, e.g. operating pressure and temperature and fuel
utilization factor. Therefore, a sensitivity analysis is conducted to better under-
stand how these parameters aﬀect the fuel cells operation and the bottoming
cycles.
6.1
Pressure ratio
SOFC operating pressure depends on the gasiﬁer island and it can be
controlled by means of a product gas expander placed before the cells. Syngas
can be fully or partially expanded, according to the desired SOFC pressure. If
it is not expanded till the atmospheric pressure then the remaining energy can
be exploited in the gas turbine after the temperature increase in the burner.
Splitting the expansion in two processes allows to control the fuel cell operating
pressure while exploiting the potential of the product gas leaving the gasiﬁer
island with limited losses.The layout of the plant used for the pressure ratio
sensitivity analysis is sketched in Fig.(6.1).
61
==PAGE:70==
62
Sensitivity analysis
Figure 6.1: Plant layout used in the pressure ratio sensitivity analysis.
In the sensitivity analysis, pressure is varied from 2 to 30 bar. The results
are summarized in Fig.(6.2). Both SOFC and GT produce more energy at
high pressures. Conversely, ST power output is higher at nearly atmospheric
conditions. However, since ST share in the total electricity generation is quite
low, total power output increases as the pressure rises.
Gas turbine power production depends on TIT and on pressure ratio. From
the analysis of GT real cycles it is known that GT performances are enhanced
at high TIT while they show a maximum based on the pressure ratio at
constant TIT [10]. However, in the present layout, TIT and pressure ratio
cannot be analyzed independently, since TIT varies with the SOFC operating
pressure and hence it is depended on the GT pressure ratio as well. At high
==PAGE:71==
6.1. Pressure ratio
63
20
70
120
170
220
270
320
02
07
12
17
22
27
Power output [MW]
SOFC operating pressure [bar]
GT
ST
SOFC
Figure 6.2: Power output at diﬀerent SOFC operating pressures.
cell operating pressure, syngas leaves the expander at high temperature and
less heat is transfered in the anode preheater. Consequently, anode exhaust
leaves the heat exchanger at higher temperature. Similarly, compressor outlet
temperature (COT) increases with the pressure ratio, less heat is transfered
in the cathode preheater and hotter air reaches the burner. As a result of
the higher anode and cathode exhaust temperatures, the temperature at the
burner outlet rises. Therefore, the higher the SOFC operating pressure, the
higher the TIT and the pressure ratio and the better the GT performances.
TIT values at diﬀerent SOFC operating pressures are plotted in Fig.(6.3).
The ﬁgure also shows turbine outlet temperature (TOT) trend against SOFC
operating pressure. As expected, TOT decreases as the pressure increases.
Accordingly, a lower temperature is reached by the steam in the HRSG with a
detrimental eﬀect on the eﬃciency of the steam cycle. Therefore, ST power
output trend depicted in Fig.(6.2) is explained by the TOT behavior.
Finally, it is observed that SOFC power output increases with the pressure due
to the higher eﬃciency of the electrochemical conversion. However, the relation
is not linear. As shown in Fig.(6.2), SOFC production increases sharply with
==PAGE:72==
64
Sensitivity analysis
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
5
10
15
20
25
30
Temperature [°C]
SOFC operating pressure [bar]
TIT
TOT
Figure 6.3: TIT and TOT at diﬀerent SOFC operating pressures.
pressures up to 5-10 bar while only a slight increase is observed above 10 bar.
6.2
SOFC fuel utilization
In a solid oxide fuel cell not all the incoming fuel can be oxidized since a
partial pressure diﬀerence between fuel and oﬀgas compounds across the cell is
needed in order to keep the unit working. The ratio between the oxidized and
incoming fuel deﬁnes the fuel utilization factor of the cell. Unspent fuel leaving
the cell represents an important energy loss from a cell eﬃciency standpoint
and, therefore, high value of fuel utilization are preferred. When a bottoming
cycle completes the power generation, the fuel cells could be run with a lower
fuel utilization factor since the unspent fuel is exploited by the waste heat
recovery section. However, in general most of the fuel input should be used
in the topping cycle since the bottoming cycle design is dependent on the
operating conditions of the main cycle and unlikely reaches its maximum
achievable eﬃciency.
In this analysis the reference SOFC utilization of 0.8 is varied in the range
==PAGE:73==
6.2. SOFC fuel utilization
65
between 0.4 and 0.9, for each plant conﬁguration. The main outcome of the
simulations regarding the SOFC-GT layout is presented in Fig.(6.4).
0
100
200
300
400
500
50
60
70
80
90
Power output [MW]
SOFC fuel utilization [%]
SOFC
GT
ST
Total
Figure 6.4: Power output at diﬀerent SOFC fuel utilization factors.
SOFC power output increases in the region of low fuel utilizations and sharply
drops at very high fuel utilizations, showing a maximum around the reference
value of 0.8. GT power generation has the opposite trend and it reaches its
minimum around 0.85. ST outcome is higher at low fuel utilizations and
smoothly decreases as the more fuel is oxidized in the cells. Explanations to
the obtained results are related to TIT and air mass ﬂow rate, whose trends
are showed in Fig.(6.5).
At low cell fuel utilizations, most of the fuel heating value is exploited in the
combustion and high temperatures are reached. In addition, low air ﬂow is
needed at the cathode side since, due to the small amount of fuel oxidized in the
cell, limited heat is generated and consequently the cooling duty is reduced. At
the same time, combustion occurs with lower excess air. As a result, GT speciﬁc
work increases with a positive eﬀect on the power output. As soon as the fuel
utilization factor increases the TIT drops as well as the power generation. On
the other hand, at higher SOFC fuel utilizations, more ﬂue gases are produced
==PAGE:74==
66
Sensitivity analysis
600
700
800
900
1000
1100
1200
1300
1400
300
500
700
900
1100
1300
1500
1700
1900
50
60
70
80
90
Turbine inlet temperature [°C]
Air mass flow rate [kg/s]
SOFC fuel utilization [%]
Mair
TIT
Figure 6.5: TIT and air mass ﬂow rate at diﬀerent SOFC fuel utilization factors.
due to the higher mass of air ﬂowing to the cathode side. Therefore, GT power
decreases until the TIT reduction is perfectly balanced by the growth of the
burnt gases mass ﬂow rate. Then, in the region of very high fuel utilization fac-
tors, despite TIT decline, power generated by the expansion of the ﬂue gas rises.
TIT reduction along with fuel utilizations growth also aﬀects the steam cycle.
This is due to TOT decline at constant pressure ratio along with TIT reduc-
tion. Accordingly, when TOT diminishes, lower maximum temperatures are
achievable at the inlet of the steam turbine and less power can be generated
from the waste heat.
As a result of all the discussed issues, total power output has a ﬂat max-
imum around 0.5-0.8 and sharply drops oﬀfor higher values. However, it
should be highlighted that for fuel utilization lower than the reference value,
the very high TIT requires the use of cooled gas turbine and thus implies
higher plant investment costs.
==PAGE:75==
6.3. SOFC operating temperature
67
6.3
SOFC operating temperature
Fuel cells simulated in this work belong to the second generation inter-
mediate temperature SOFCs, working around 800°C. Recently, the research
is trying to develop cells working at lower temperatures which would allow
to use cheaper materials with a considerable drop of the cell speciﬁc cost.
Therefore,a sensitivity analysis is conducted to study plant response at lower
SOFC operating temperature (OT). Accordingly, SOFC operating temperature
is varied from 780°C, which is the reference value, to temperatures as low as
720°C. Results about the SOFC-GT conﬁguration are presented in Fig.(6.6).
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
720
730
740
750
760
770
780
Plant efficiency [%]
Power output [MW]
SOFC operating temperature [°C]
GT
ST
SOFC
Efficiency
Figure 6.6: Power output at diﬀerent SOFC operating temperatures.
SOFC response to changes of the operating temperature is barely noticeable,
being the power output almost constant in the considered range. On the
other hand, GT power production decreases along with the SOFC operating
temperature reduction as well as ST power output. Once again, the reason
of this outcome is related to TIT and air mass ﬂow rates variation, shown in
Fig.(6.7).
According to simulation results, to obtain lower operating temperatures, more
air has to ﬂow to the cathode side to cool down the cell. As a result, more ﬂue
==PAGE:76==
68
Sensitivity analysis
800
900
1000
1100
1200
1300
1400
720
740
760
780
800
820
840
720
730
740
750
760
770
780
Air mass flow rate [kg/s]
Turbine inlet temperautre [°C]
SOFC operating temperature [°C]
TIT
Mair
Figure 6.7: TIT and air mass ﬂow rate at diﬀerent SOFC operating temperatures.
gases are produced in the next combustion. On the other hand, combustion
occurs with very high excess air while unburnt fuel and depleted air enter the
burner at lower temperature. Consequently, ﬂue gases temperature reached at
the end of the combustion process is low. The eﬀect of TIT reduction is more
important than the increase of the burnt gases ﬂow rate and, therefore, at low
SOFC operating temperatures limited power is generated by the gas turbine.
Furthermore, at low TIT, less power is produced in the heat recovery steam
cycle due to the lower temperature of the ﬂue gases at the HRSG inlet.
Conversely, at high SOFC operating temperature, less cooling air is need while
higher TIT are reached with positive eﬀects on the GT and ST cycles.
TIT reduction along with cells operating temperature reduction is almost
linear, showing a relatively high sensitivity to changes in SOFC operating
conditions. Indeed, when SOFC-OT is varied from 780 to 720°C, TIT drops
of about 100°C. Accordingly, overall plant eﬃciency sharply drops oﬀwhen
the OT is varied in the considered range, loosing around 5 percentage points
compared to the reference case.
Similar outcome is observed in the SOFC-ST scenario, as shown in Fig.(6.8).
==PAGE:77==
6.3. SOFC operating temperature
69
34
35
36
37
38
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
720
730
740
750
760
770
780
Plant efficiency [%]
Power output [MW]
SOFC operating temperature [°C]
GT
ST
SOFC
Efficiency
Figure 6.8: Power output at diﬀerent SOFC operating temperatures.
SOFC power output slightly rises at lower operating temperatures while GT
and ST performances are reduced. Overall plant eﬃciency decline is less pro-
nounced and only 2-3 percentage points are lost when OT reaches its minimum
value.
==PAGE:78==
==PAGE:79==
Chapter 7
Conclusions
Despite the increasing development of renewable energies, coal is estimated
to be an important source in the future of the world electricity generation.
However, conventional coal-ﬁred steam power plants emit several pollutants,
including carbon dioxide, which is recently addressed to be responsible of
the climate change. Accordingly, clean coal technologies are investigated to
mitigate the environmental impact of producing energy from coal. Among all,
one of the most promising consists in integrating coal gasiﬁcation with solid
oxide fuel cells.
This thesis discusses the application of the second generation IT-SOFCs,
which work around 780°C, in coal-based gasiﬁcation systems. Several cycle
layouts were investigated, all based on the Shell gasiﬁcation technology, pro-
ducing synthetic gas. Electricity generation from syngas were obtained in four
diﬀerent plant conﬁgurations, based on the integration of SOFCs with a gas
turbine or a combined cycle. Diﬀerences among the assessed cycles regarded
the cell operating pressure, the bottoming cycle, the use of methanation and
the inclusion of carbon capture. Moreover, a sensitivity analysis was performed,
analyzing plant performances at diﬀerent SOFC operating conditions.
Simulations results showed that, in all the assessed plants, major power con-
sumptions occurred in the gasiﬁcation island due to oxygen production and
sulfur removal. Moreover, when carbon capture was considered, higher energy
expenditures were observed due to additional oxygen separation for the oxy-fuel
combustion and CO2 sequestration.
In all the cycles, 60% or more of the power was produced by the SOFC,
due to the high fuel utilization. The reminder was generated by the gas turbine
and/or by the steam cycle according to considered layout. Furthermore, it was
71
==PAGE:80==
72
Conclusions
observed that the total power generation was higher in all the cases involv-
ing SOFC pressurized operation and GT bottoming cycle. Accordingly, high
eﬃciencies (52-55,5%) were achieved, showing a gain of almost 8 percentage
points compared to the state-of-the-art IGCCs.
Atmospheric SOFCs coupled with steam cycle tuned out to have the least
eﬃciency (40% in the best case, involving hybrid recuperation). Nonetheless,
they oﬀered the simplest design layout that would likely be the less expensive
among the considered cases.
Methanation resulted to be beneﬁcial for the plant performances, reducing
the auxiliary consumption due to cooling air compression. However, since
the considered methanation process involved steam injection, high water con-
sumption was observed. Moreover, it was seen that post-anode gas recycle
could partially reduce the humidiﬁcation duty, even though a lower eﬃciency
would be achieved by the plant (52% versus 55% of the pre-anode recycle case).
Actually, the eﬃciency gain due to the methanation was only 0.5 percentage
points. However, air mass ﬂow rate turned out to be nearly halved compared
to the non-methanation case, with clear beneﬁts on the plant size.
Carbon capture showed a relatively high impact on the plant performances,
mostly due to the low speciﬁc work of the cathode expander compared to
the gas turbine used in the conﬁgurations without CO2 sequestration. The
plant achieved 46.1% net electrical eﬃciency, almost 8.9% lower than the basic
case, but higher than the typical IGCC with carbon capture (40%). Moreover,
it should be noted that the water separated in the carbon compression and
puriﬁcation unit could be recycled, potentially avoiding any external water
consumption.
The sensitivity analysis regarded the SOFC operating pressure and temper-
ature, and the fuel utilization. It come out that pressurized operation was
beneﬁcial both for the SOFC and the GT while it slightly reduced the ST
performances. However, since ST share in total electricity generation was quite
low, it was observed that the total power output increased as the pressure rose.
Moreover, the increment resulted to be more pronounced at low pressures, up
to 5-10 bar, showing that further pressurization might not be worth from a
techno-economic standpoint.
It was noticed that while lowering the fuel utilization more and more power
was produced by the GT rather than by the SOFCs. Although the total power
output resulted to be almost constant, changes in the fuel utilization should
==PAGE:81==
Conclusions
73
lead to important considerations about the plant layout. More in details, it
was observed that when lowering the fuel utilization from the reference value
(80%) to lower values, the cathode air ﬂow decreased while the TIT increased.
For a fuel utilization of about 55%, TIT reached 1300°C, a value close to
the state-of-the-art of the gas turbines used in the IGCCs. Since SOFCs
are expected to be the most expensive component in the assessed plant, and
considering that the GT cost decreases when the speciﬁc work increases, the
author believes that lower fuel utilizations are beneﬁcial to the plant economy.
Finally, it was observed that SOFC operating temperature highly aﬀected the
TIT and consequently the bottoming cycle. More in details, TIT showed a
linearly dependence on the SOFC operating temperature, decreasing of almost
100°C when the SOFC operating temperature was reduced from its reference
value (780°C) to 720°C. This turned out to be detrimental to the plant eﬃ-
ciency which diminished of about 5 percentage points in the considered range.
Actually, manufactures are trying to obtain SOFC operating temperatures
even lower than the ones considered here. Accordingly, it seems that the
research on SOFC, while reducing the SOFC operating temperature to values
which would allow cheaper materials and easier operation, will lead to lower
plant performances. However, the reader shall be aware that this result should
not be taken as granted, since one of developers’ goals is lowering the SOFC
operating temperature while keeping high plant eﬃciency.
==PAGE:82==
==PAGE:83==
List of Figures
1
World net electricity generation by fuel, 2012–40 (trillion kilo-
watthours)[26].
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.1
Conceptual design of a gasiﬁcation island.
. . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.2
Schematic of a typical Shell gasiﬁcation island[19]. . . . . . . .
8
1.3
Energy balance of a typical Shell gasiﬁcation process[19]. . . .
9
1.4
Schematic of a solid oxide fuel cell[1]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
1.5
Variation of cell voltage with current density for the cell operat-
ing at high and low temperatures[13]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.1
Overview of conceptual strategies and alternatives for integrat-
ing a solid oxide fuel cell in a fossil-fuel power cycle with CO2
capture (adapted from Ref. [6]). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.1
Schematic of the gasiﬁcation island. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.2
Schematic of the pressurized SOFC-GT hybrid power plant.
.
27
3.3
Schematic of the atmospheric SOFC-ST power plant. . . . . .
28
3.4
Schematic of the atmospheric SOFC-ST power plant with hybrid
recuperation.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.5
Schematic of the pressurized SOFC-GT power plant with metha-
nation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.6
Schematic of the methanation unit. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.7
Schematic of the pressurized SOFC-GT power plant with metha-
nation and post-anode gas recycle.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.8
Schematic of the pressurized SOFC-GT power plant with carbon
capture. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.1
Schematic of the air separation unit.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.2
Schematic of the Shell gasiﬁer. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.3
Schematic of the desulphurization unit. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.4
Schematic of the CO2CPU.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5.1
Plant power consumption by process. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
75
==PAGE:84==
76
LIST OF FIGURES
5.2
Gross power production by source.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
5.3
Gross power output.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
5.4
Plant performances. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
6.1
Plant layout used in the pressure ratio sensitivity analysis. . .
62
6.2
Power output at diﬀerent SOFC operating pressures.
. . . . .
63
6.3
TIT and TOT at diﬀerent SOFC operating pressures. . . . . .
64
6.4
Power output at diﬀerent SOFC fuel utilization factors. . . . .
65
6.5
TIT and air mass ﬂow rate at diﬀerent SOFC fuel utilization
factors. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
6.6
Power output at diﬀerent SOFC operating temperatures. . . .
67
6.7
TIT and air mass ﬂow rate at diﬀerent SOFC operating tem-
peratures. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
6.8
Power output at diﬀerent SOFC operating temperatures. . . .
69
==PAGE:85==
List of Tables
1.1
SOFC materials[13].
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.1
Typical gasiﬁer gas composition [16]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.2
Comparison among the mostly used absorption methods for
acid gas removal[17]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.1
Composition of Illinois No.6 coal [8].
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.2
Input parameters gasiﬁer model. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.3
Comparison of raw syngas composition from the gasiﬁer model
with reference data [8]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.4
Input parameters SOFC componet model.
. . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.5
Main assumptions.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
5.1
Performance of the proposed plants. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
5.2
Syngas composition after the methanation. . . . . . . . . . . .
57
77
==PAGE:86==
==PAGE:87==
Nomenclature
Roman Symbols
CC
carbon conversion factor [-]
CGE
cold gas eﬃciency [-]
e
speciﬁc electric consumption [kWh ton−1]
E
reversible open circuit voltage [V]
F
Faraday’s constant [C mol−1]
G
Gibbs free energy [kJ kg−1]
H
enthalpy [kJ kg-1]
i
current density [mA cm−2]
K
chemical equilibrium constant [-]
m
mass ﬂow [kg s−1]
p
pressure [bar]
PR
pressure ratio [-]
R
universal gas constant [J K−1 mol−1]
T
temperature [K]
UF
Fuel utilization [-]
V
potential [V]
W
mechanical power [kW]
x
mass fraction [-]
Greek Symbols
∆
change
ηel
electrical eﬃciency [%]
ηideal
reversible eﬃciency [%]
Abbreviations
AGR
acid gas removal
ASU
air separation unit
CCS
carbon capture and storage
COT
compressor outlet temperature
DNA
Dynamic Network Analysis
79
==PAGE:88==
80
Nomenclature
DOE
(US) Department of Energy
GT
gas turbine
HICOM
high CO methanation
HRSC
heat recovery steam cycle
HRSG
heat recovery steam generator
HX
heat exchanger
IGCC
integrated gasiﬁcation combined cycle
IGFC
integrated gasiﬁcation fuel cell
LHV
lower heating value
NETL
National Energy Technology Laboratory
SOFC
solid oxide fuel cell
TIT
turbine inlet temperature
TOT
turbine outlet temperature
WGS
water gas shift
YSZ
Yttria-stabilized zirconia
==PAGE:89==
Bibliography
[1]
Thomas A Adams et al. “Energy conversion with solid oxide fuel cell
systems: A review of concepts and outlooks for the short-and long-term”.
In: Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research 52.9 (2012), pp. 3089–
3111 (cit. on pp. 10, 15, 18, 20).
[2]
European Industrial Gases Associantion. “Indirect CO2 emissions com-
pensation: Benchmark proposal for Air Separation Plants”. In: Position
Paper PP-33 (2010) (cit. on pp. 39, 46).
[3]
Christian Bang-Møller. “Design and Optimization of an Integrated
Biomass Gasiﬁcation and Solid Oxide Fuel Cell System”. In: (2010)
(cit. on p. 43).
[4]
Christian Bang-Møller and Masoud Rokni. “Thermodynamic perfor-
mance study of biomass gasiﬁcation, solid oxide fuel cell and micro gas
turbine hybrid systems”. In: Energy Conversion and Management 51.11
(2010), pp. 2330–2339 (cit. on pp. 12, 43, 46).
[5]
D.J.L. Brett et al. Intermediate temperature solid oxide fuel cells. Vol. 37.
8. 2008, pp. 1568–78. isbn: 9783662529348. doi: 10.1039/b612060c.
[6]
Stefano Campanari et al. “Predicting the ultimate potential of natural
gas SOFC power cycles with CO2 capture - Part A: Methodology and
reference cases”. In: Journal of Power Sources 324 (2016), pp. 598–614.
issn: 03787753. doi: 10.1016/j.jpowsour.2016.05.104 (cit. on pp. 15,
16, 21).
[7]
Niels Christiansen et al. “Solid Oxide Fuel Cell Development at Topsoe
Fuel Cell A/S and Riso National Laboratory”. In: ECS Transactions 7.1
(2007), pp. 31–38 (cit. on pp. 12, 43, 44, 46).
[8]
DOE/NETL. “Cost and Performance Baseline for Fossil Energy Plants
Volume 1b: Bituminous Coal (IGCC) to Electricity”. In: 1 (2015). doi:
DOE/NETL-2010/1397 (cit. on pp. 40, 42, 46).
81
==PAGE:90==
82
Bibliography
[9]
Brian Elmegaard and Niels Houbak. “DNA – A General Energy System
Simulation Tool”. In: Proceedings of SIMS 2005 (2005), pp. 43–52 (cit. on
p. 37).
[10]
Lozza Giovanni. Turbine a gas e cicli combinati. 2007. isbn: 9788874889341.
doi: 10.15651/978-88-748-8123-9 (cit. on pp. 5, 6, 17, 62).
[11]
Ulrik Henriksen et al. “The design, construction and operation of a 75
kW two-stage gasiﬁer”. In: Energy 31.10-11 (2006), pp. 1542–1553. issn:
03605442. doi: 10.1016/j.energy.2005.05.031 (cit. on p. 39).
[12]
Christopher Higman and Maarten Van Der Burgt. “Gasiﬁcation Pro-
cesses”. In: Gasiﬁcation (2008), pp. 85–170. issn: 00162361. doi: 10.
1016/B978-0-7506-8528-3.00005-5 (cit. on p. 15).
[13]
Gurbinder Kaur. Solid Oxide Fuel Cell Components. Springer, 2016 (cit.
on pp. 11, 13, 14).
[14]
A. Lanzini et al. “Energy and economic performance of novel inte-
grated gasiﬁer fuel cell (IGFC) cycles with carbon capture”. In: In-
ternational Journal of Greenhouse Gas Control 26 (2014), pp. 169–184.
issn: 17505836. doi: 10.1016/j.ijggc.2014.04.028 (cit. on pp. 19,
31, 44, 46).
[15]
Hyeon-Hui Lee et al. “Dynamic modeling of Shell entrained ﬂow gasiﬁer
in an integrated gasiﬁcation combined cycle process”. In: Applied Energy
131 (2014), pp. 425–440. doi: http://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.
2014.06.044 (cit. on p. 42).
[16]
Ke Liu, Chunshan Song, and Velu Subramani. Hydrogen and syngas
production and puriﬁcation technologies. John Wiley & Sons, 2009 (cit.
on pp. 8, 17, 18, 23).
[17]
P. Mondal, G. S. Dang, and M. O. Garg. “Syngas production through
gasiﬁcation and cleanup for downstream applications - Recent develop-
ments”. In: Fuel Processing Technology 92.8 (2011), pp. 1395–1410. issn:
03783820. doi: 10.1016/j.fuproc.2011.03.021 (cit. on pp. 18, 19,
25).
[18]
S.A. Newman. Acid and Sour Gas Treating Processes: Latest Data and
Methods for Designing and Operating Today’s Gas Treating Facilities.
Books on Demand, 1985. isbn: 9780608042039 (cit. on pp. 25, 43).
[19]
Sarma V. Pisupati and Vijayaragavan Krishnamoorthy. Utilization of coal
in IGCC systems. Elsevier Ltd, 2017, pp. 83–120. isbn: 9780081001677.
doi: 10.1016/B978-0-08-100167-7.00002-0 (cit. on pp. 8, 9, 15, 16,
26).
==PAGE:91==
Bibliography
83
[20]
Richard TJ Porter et al. “Cost and performance of some carbon capture
technology options for producing diﬀerent quality CO 2 product streams”.
In: International Journal of Greenhouse Gas Control 57 (2017), pp. 185–
195 (cit. on pp. 35, 46).
[21]
Masoud Rokni. “Thermodynamic analysis of an integrated solid oxide fuel
cell cycle with a rankine cycle”. In: Energy Conversion and Management
51.12 (2010), pp. 2724–2732. issn: 0196-8904. doi: http://doi.org/10.
1016/j.enconman.2010.06.008 (cit. on p. 29).
[22]
Masoud Rokni. “Thermodynamic investigation of an integrated gasiﬁca-
tion plant with solid oxide fuel cell and steam cycles”. In: Green 2.2-3
(2012), pp. 71–86. issn: 18698778. doi: 10.1515/green-2011-0022
(cit. on p. 39).
[23]
Matteo C. Romano, Vincenzo Spallina, and Stefano Campanari. “In-
tegrating IT-SOFC and gasiﬁcation combined cycle with methanation
reactor and hydrogen ﬁring for near zero-emission power generation from
coal”. In: Energy Procedia 4 (2011), pp. 1168–1175. issn: 18766102. doi:
10.1016/j.egypro.2011.01.170 (cit. on pp. 19, 44, 46).
[24]
Zongping Shao and Moses O Tadé. “Intermediate-Temperature Solid
Oxide Fuel Cells”. In: (2016) (cit. on pp. 9, 10).
[25]
M.V. Twigg. Catalyst Handbook. Manson Series. Manson Pub., 1996.
isbn: 9781874545361 (cit. on pp. 31, 46).
[26]
U.S. Energy Information Administration. International Energy Outlook
2016. Vol. 0484(2016). May 2016. 2016, pp. 1–2. isbn: 2025866135. doi:
www.eia.gov/forecasts/ieo/pdf/0484(2016).pdf (cit. on pp. 1, 2).
[27]
Harumi Yokokawa. “Overview of intermediate-temperature solid oxide
fuel cells”. In: Perovskite Oxide for Solid Oxide Fuel Cells. Springer,
2009, pp. 17–43 (cit. on pp. 10, 11).
