==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
 
Window integrated heat recovery for 
improvement of indoor climate in schools 
Master thesis: Anna Karina Hammelev Hansen, s103846 
 
Supervisor: Jørn Toftum 
ICIEE, DTU BYG 
Technical University of Denmark 
 
==PAGE:2==
 
 
 
 
2 
Preface 
 
This master’s thesis has been done in collaboration with DTU Department of International 
Centre for Environment and Energy and Lykkebo Skole where the study was conducted. It 
is written to achieve a master’s degree within Architectural Engineering in the field of 
indoor environment and energy conservation in buildings. 
 
I would like to thank Realdania and Cenerigia. Without them this study would not have 
been possible. 
 
I would like to thank my supervisor Jørn Toftum for supervising and always having an 
open door. His guiding has been a major help throughout the whole project. 
 
I would like to thank Lykkebo Skole for the collaboration and good spirits. Especially 
Jacob Grose has been an immense help in controlling the process of conducting 
questionnaires and d2 tests in both classrooms Ø21 and Ø22. 
 
A thanks should also be given to my follow master’s thesis students at the DTU office; 
Michelle kühl, Nanna Gudmandsen, Marie Rosenbeck, Anders Marstrand, and Jens 
Kristensen. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!! 
 
Anna Karina Hammelev Hansen, June 30th 2017 
 
==PAGE:3==
 
3 
Abstract 
 
Numerous studies have shown that a poor indoor environment has a negative effect on 
pupils’ well-being and performance. Especially poor indoor air quality has been found to 
affect pupils’ learning ability, performance, as well as well-being and health. 
 
The indoor environment in Danish primary schools do not meet the Danish standards and 
recommendations. Studies have shown that classrooms with mechanical ventilation or 
balanced ventilation decreased the CO2 concentration, but that the energy use has a 
profound impact on the chosen solution. 
 
This study investigates the impact of a retrofit solution on the indoor environment in a 
classroom, and how it affects the pupils’ perceptions and symptoms as well as their 
concentration performance. The retrofit solution is a window integrated heat recovery 
ventilation system in a classroom located in Lykkebo Skole in Valby, Copenhagen. Three 
other classrooms without a ventilation system were used as reference. An IDA ICE model 
has been made to estimate the energy use in the ventilated room. 
 
It was found that the CO2 concentration improved when the ventilation system was on 
compared to when it was off and compared to the reference classrooms. The ventilation 
system also improved the temperature, resulting in the temperature being more often in 
the recommenced range of DS/CEN CR 1752, DWEA and DCEE. The relative humidity 
was lower when the ventilation was on and in several instances the humidity was lower 
than the recommendations from DWEA and DCEE. Finally, it was found that the sound 
pressure level increased when the ventilation was on. 
The pupils’ perception of the indoor environment and their symptoms were investigated 
through questionnaires. The pupils felt colder with decreasing temperature. However, they 
did not feel warmer with increasing temperatures. The pupils perceived their surroundings 
as noisier with increasing sound pressure level. Some symptoms were more often 
observed when the ventilation was off compared to when it was on. High CO2 
concentration had a negative effect on the pupils’ tendency to have stuffy noses, 
increased the dryness of their skin and headaches. The pupils felt more tired with 
decreasing temperature and with increasing sound pressure level. 
 
The pupils’ concentration performance was measured using the d2-test. The students’ 
concentration performance was found to increase with increasing CO2 concentration. 
Reasons for this result may include the teacher-to-teacher variation and the validity of the 
d2 test as a measure of concentration. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:4==
 
 
 
 
4 
Table of Contents 
1!
Introduction 
1!
1.1!
Objective 
3!
1.2!
Project phases 
3!
2!
Background 
4!
2.1!
Exposures from the indoor environment in Danish schools 
7!
2.2!
Indoor environment quality and its impact on human comfort and health 
8!
2.2.1!
IAQ 
8!
2.2.2!
Thermal indoor environment 
9!
2.2.3!
Light 
10!
2.2.4!
Noise 
11!
2.3!
Effect of the indoor environment on pupils performance 
12!
2.3.1!
CO2 concentration 
12!
2.3.2!
Effect of ventilation on pupil performance 
12!
2.3.3!
Temperature condition 
13!
2.3.4!
Noise 
14!
2.3.5!
Light 
14!
2.4!
Ventilation principles 
16!
2.5!
Background of questionnaire for children 
19!
2.6!
Regulations and guidelines 
21!
2.6.1!
The Danish Building Regulations 
21!
2.6.2!
Recommendations in standards 
21!
2.6.3!
The Danish Working Environment Authority 
22!
2.6.4!
The Danish Center for Educational Environment 
22!
3!
Method 
23!
3.1!
Lykkebo skole 
24!
3.2!
Window integrated heat recovery ventilation system 
25!
3.3!
Measuring instrumentation 
27!
3.4!
Questionnaire and test 
29!
3.4.1!
Timeline for measurements 
30!
3.5!
Energy use 
31!
3.6!
Data processing 
33!
3.6.1!
Indoor environment 
33!
3.6.2!
Questionnaires 
34!
3.6.3!
Performance test 
34!
4!
Results 
37!
4.1!
Air quality in the classrooms 
38!
4.2!
Outdoor weather conditions during the measuring period 
39!
4.3!
Indoor air quality 
43!
4.4!
Thermal environment 
46!
4.4.1!
Temperature 
46!
4.4.2!
Relative humidity 
48!
4.5!
Difference in indoor environment in classroom Ø21 with and without ventilation 
running 
50!
4.6!
Association between sound pressure level, CO2 concentration, and temperature
 
52!
4.7!
Association between sound pressure level, CO2 concentration and air 
temperature 
53!
4.8!
Pupils’ symptoms and perceptions 
55!
==PAGE:5==
 
5 
4.8.1!
Perception of the indoor environment 
55!
4.8.2!
Perceived of health 
57!
4.9!
Pupils’ performance 
60!
4.9.1!
Pupils’ concentration performance 
60!
4.9.2!
Pupils’ error % 
62!
4.10!
Energy consumption for ventilation and space heating 
64!
5!
Discussion 
65!
5.1!
Interpreting results 
66!
5.1.1!
Indoor parameters 
66!
5.1.2!
Pupils’ perceptions and symptoms 
66!
5.1.3!
Pupils concentration performance 
67!
5.1.4!
Energy use 
67!
5.2!
Window integrated heat recovery system 
68!
5.3!
Field study 
68!
5.3.1!
Questionnaires 
69!
5.3.2!
Concentration performance d2 test 
69!
5.4!
Data processing 
70!
5.4.1!
Indoor environment 
70!
5.4.2!
Questionnaires and performance test 
70!
6!
Conclusion 
70!
7!
Literature 
73!
 
==PAGE:6==
==PAGE:7==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1 Introduction 
 
 
==PAGE:8==
 
 
 
Introduction 
2 
Several studies of the indoor environment in Danish primary schools have shown that the 
condition in the schools does not meet the Danish standards and recommendations (Bozkurt 
& Jakobsen, 2017 and Clausen & Toftum (2014), and Menå & Larsen, 2010). 
The most frequent challenge is insufficient ventilation leading to poor air quality. Poor indoor 
environment exposes children to higher risks compared to adults, as children are more 
sensitive because of their lower body weight, and the fact that they tend to breathe through 
their mouth, which does not filter the air as well as the nose (Bakó-Biró & Clements-Croome 
et al. 2012). Furthermore, studies have shown that a poor indoor environment is associated 
with negative consequences for the children's well-being and performance (Toftum et al. 
2015, Bakó-Biró & Clements-Croome et al. 2012, Wargocki & Wyon, 2013 and others). 
 
The Danish elementary school accommodates more than half a million pupils and is a 
workspace for about 50,000 teachers (Sundhedsstyrelsen, 2012). The elementary school is 
mandatory from 0th to 9th. grade, and since 2014 pupils are using up to 35 hours in the 
classrooms per week (www.folkeskolen.dk). The pupils therefore spend a significant part of 
their childhood inside classrooms while they are developing and learning. 
 
Since 1995, the Danish Building Begulations has required that ventilation has to maintain a 
healthy indoor climate through mechanical ventilation in new buildings, room design, or 
cross-ventilation (Sundhedsstyrelsen, 2012). This implies that it is mostly schools built before 
1995 that have indoor climate problems. 
 
The Danish Building Regulations state that the CO2 concentration in the classroom should 
not exceed 0.1%. Menå & Larsen (2010) carried out a study of 743 randomly chosen Danish 
schools and found that 56% of all the participating classrooms exceeded 1000 ppm, and 
66% of the schools had an average CO2 concentration above 1000 ppm during school days. 
The 
same 
study 
found 
that 
the 
older 
the 
school, 
the 
higher 
the 
CO2 
concentration. Santamouris et al. (2008) investigated 287 mechanically and 900 naturally 
ventilated classrooms and found that naturally ventilated classrooms had a higher median 
CO2 concentration (1410 ppm) than the mechanically ventilated classrooms (900 ppm). In 
Danish schools natural ventilation is most common. This often relies on manual window 
opening and cracks in the facade. The opening of the windows often depends on the 
temperature comfort of the occupants and not on the air quality. For this reason, windows are 
rarely opened in the heating season, where the outside temperature may be far below 20°C 
(Menå & Larsen, 2010). 
Today, only few new schools are being built in Denmark. Therefore the most effective way to 
improve the indoor climate in classrooms is to renovate the existing schools with new 
ventilation systems. These new systems have to be effective in terms of energy efficiency 
and providing an optimal indoor environment. According to Berg and Dam-Krogh (2015), 
renovation initiatives have, compared to 2005 – 2009 increased in the period from 2010 - 
2015. They surveyed 198 schools and found that 84 %, or 125 schools, had been renovated 
within the last 10 years. Of these 125 Schools, 18% had only renovated a few rooms, 46% 
an entire wing or building, and 35 % the entire school. Overall, they found that the most 
common renovation initiatives concerned the building envelope of which windows accounted 
for the largest share. The second-most common renovation was lighting, and the third-most 
was the ventilation system. 
==PAGE:9==
 
3 
 
This underlines the observation from Sundhedsstyrelsen (2012), that the indoor environment 
is usually not the first parameter in focus at renovations. The municipalities are mostly 
concerned with economics, and where they can save money in the long run. 
Sundhedsstyrelsen (2012) therefore recommends that planned energy renovations should 
include improvements of the indoor environment. 
1.1 Objective 
The objective of this thesis was to investigate the performance of a window-integrated heat 
recovery ventilation system in an elementary school. Four classrooms on Lykkebo Skole 
were studied. One classroom had a window integrated heat recovery ventilation system 
installed. The other three classrooms were included as reference. The indoor environment 
was investigated with focus on CO2, temperature, humidity, and sound pressure. 
 
The pupils’ perceptions were quantified by questionnaires, and their concentration 
performance was examined through tests. 
 
The energy performance of the window integrated heat recovery ventilation system was 
estimated using dynamic simulations. 
1.2 Project phases 
Figure 1.2.1. Project phases 
Figure 1.2.1 shows the different phases in the study. Previous studies including the effect of 
the indoor environment on pupils’ were conducted and make the basis for the preparation of 
the field study. As part of the preparation, questionnaires were developed to target children’s 
feelings and experience. The pupils’ had a pre-test and questionnaire before the field study 
started. The study was conducted in seven weeks including one week of holiday. Data was 
processed. After the data was analysed, the background and results were recapped and 
discussed leading to the final conclusion.  
 
 
 
==PAGE:10==
 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:11==
 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
2 Background 
 
 
==PAGE:12==
 
 
 
Background 
6 
The thermal environment is characterized by a number of parameters such as air 
temperature, operative temperature, radiant temperature, relative humidity, the speed of air 
and occupant related parameters like clothing and activity (Fanger, 1970). All these 
parameters determine the thermal sensation for each person, in this case the pupils and 
teachers. The thermal environment is influenced by different factors such as ventilation, 
heating and cooling systems, and user behaviour. 
 
The following sections will give an introduction to general aspects regarding indoor 
environment quality in relation to schools. 
 
Section 2.1  - 
provides a brief overlook of the conditions in Danish primary schools. 
 
Section 2.2  - 
introduces the parameters of the indoor environment and how they may  
affect comfort. 
 
Section 2.3  - 
describes the consequence of poor indoor environment on pupils’ 
performance. 
 
Section 2.4  -
  
provides an introduction to the different ventilation systems and their 
influence on the indoor climate and energy consumption. 
 
Section 2.5  - 
describes briefly the background of questionnaires used with children. 
 
Section 2.6  - describes the laws and recommendation related with the classroom 
environment. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:13==
 
7 
2.1 Exposures from the indoor environment in Danish schools 
In Denmark natural ventilation, hybrid ventilation, balanced ventilation and mechanical 
exhaust ventilation are all systems used in primary schools (Hviid et al., 2014). Different 
studies have through the years investigated classrooms using these different ventilation 
systems and how they affected the indoor environment. It was found that both manually and 
automatically naturally ventilated classrooms, had higher temperatures and more hours 
where the CO2 concentration was above 1000 ppm compared to other ventilation principles 
(Menå and Larsen, 2010 and Bozkurt and Jakobsen, 2017). Classrooms with balanced 
mechanical ventilation had lower temperatures and fewer hours where the CO2 concentration 
was above 1000 ppm than naturally ventilated classrooms (Menå and Larsen, 2010 and 
Bozkurt and Jakobsen, 2017). 
 
Bozkurt and Jakobsen (2017) investigated 68 regular and 42 specialized classrooms, all 
close to Copenhagen in both heating season and non-heating season. Their study found that 
high temperature occurred in both seasons, but temperatures were generally more often in 
the acceptable range in the heating season compared to the non-heating season. 
Classrooms facing south or southwest had an increased risk of temperatures above 30°C. 
The percentage of occupied time with CO2 concentrations below 1000 ppm was higher in the 
non-heating season compared to the heating season and the ventilation type and principle 
had a significant impact on the CO2 concentration. Humidity was not outside the 
recommended range for longer periods and therefore no significant risks with thermal 
comfort and mould growth, caused by air humidity were suspected. 
 
These studies show that there is a need for improvement of the indoor environment on 
Danish primary schools. It requires ventilation solutions, which consider the high CO2 
concentration loads and the temperature.  
 
==PAGE:14==
 
 
 
Background 
8 
2.2 Indoor environment quality and its impact on human comfort 
and health 
The classroom functions as a learning and workspace for the pupils and teachers. During the 
day they are exposed to several parameters that affect their comfort and health. Compared 
to adults, children are more fragile in relation to poor indoor environment quality as they have 
high body weight/surface area ratios, breathe more often, and have more physical contact 
with their surroundings (Bakó-Biró & Clements-Croome et al., 2012). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.2.1. Demonstrates the four parameters thermal environment, light, IAQ, and sound with affect the indoor 
environment quality. 
Figure 2.2.1 demonstrates the four main parameters that influence the indoor environment. 
These parameters indicate the indoor environmental quality and can be measured and 
compared in proportion to the demands. It should however be noted that not only is the 
indoor environment influenced by the physical and measurable parameters, but also by 
cleaning routines, maintenance, aesthetics, interior materials etc. These parameters have to 
be accounted for when designing and maintaining a good indoor environment. 
 
This section will deal with the indoor environment parameters and their impact on comfort 
and health. 
2.2.1 IAQ 
Both the indoor and outdoor environment can contribute to human exposure of air quality. 
==PAGE:15==
 
9 
The outdoor CO2 concentration is around 380 ppm (parts per million), while the typical 
interval for the indoor CO2 concentration is between 500 ppm to 2500 ppm (Toftum et al., 
2011). 
 
The CO2 concentration depends on the number of occupants, their size and activity, and the 
ventilation rate. Sedentary adults produce around 17 l CO2 per hour, while children in 
younger classes produce less. The typical experience is that the indoor concentration of CO2 
is not harmful in itself (Toftum et al., 2011). A study includeding 22 classrooms in five 
Norwegian schools found that at a high CO2 concentration (1500–4000 ppm compared with 
concentrations below 1500 ppm) significantly associated with increased risk of symptoms of 
headache, dizziness, heavy headed, tiredness, difficulties concentrating, and unpleasant 
odor (Myhrvold et al. 1996). 
 
Bakó-Biró et al. (2007) carried out a study with pupils and teachers who were exposed to 
unusually high CO2 concentrations in the range of 3000-5000 ppm and found loss of 
concentration and wellbeing as well as alteration in breathing and heart rate. 
 
Symptoms caused by poor indoor environment may include, for example mucous membrane 
irritation of the eyes, throat, and nose, skin irritation, and more general symptoms such as 
sense of heaviness in the head, fatigue and malaise. These symptoms may be coused by 
other factors, but in the case of a group experiencing the same symptoms in the same 
building may direct suspicion towards the indoor climate (Toftum et al., 2011). 
 
2.2.2 Thermal indoor environment 
The temperature of the air, operative air and radiant, air velocity and the relative humidity in 
the classroom influence the thermal comfort of the pupils and teachers. Even small vertical 
temperature differences in the occupied zone can affect wellbeing. For classrooms, the 
temperature is likely to increase significantly during the occupied time, due to the number of 
occupants and insufficient ventilation (Toftum et al., 2011). 
 
Perception of thermal comfort differs between individuals and is affected by behaviour 
adjustment, physiological acclimatization and psychological habituation or expectation 
(Frisancho, 1981). 
 
Physiological acclimatization can be through genetic adaptation, which is developed through 
generations of acclimation, which changes the setting of the physiological thermoregulation 
system over a period of days or weeks (Frisancho, 1981). Physiological acclimatization is not 
the most relevant factor in relation to adapt to conditions found in buildings (Brager at el., 
1998). Behaviour adjustment and expectation have a greater influence. This can be 
environmental adjustments and control of available factors such as opening of windows, use 
of shades, heating etc. and personal adjustments such as clothing, activity, posture, 
eating/drinking, hot or cold meal or moving to a different location (Chatonnet et al., 1965). 
 
==PAGE:16==
 
 
 
Background 
10 
Temperature has a high effect on humans’ comfort, health and mood (Toftum et al., 2011).  
Wargocki and Wyon (2007) carried out a field intervention experiment studying two 
classrooms. The classrooms were equipped with mechanical ventilation, and the indoor 
environment, the pupils’ comfort and their performance were examined. It was observed that 
the pupils reported significantly less headache at lower temperatures. Seppanen et al. (2016) 
found that high temperature along with high humidity had the impact that the pupils feelt 
lethargic. 
 
Draft depends on three factors: temperature, air velocity and turbulence intensity. Airflow has 
a higher risk to be perceived as draft when the air temperature is lower than 23°C becease of 
peoples sensitivity to temperature (Toftum et al., 2004). Mayer and Schwab (1988) carried 
out a study where the low turbulence draught effect on the head of 50 test subjects was 
found in a climate chamber. Both the air temperature and mean radiant temperature were 
maintained at 23°C and the air speed was conducted in 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4 and 0.45 m/s. It 
was observed that airflow directed from bottom to top caused more discomfort than airflow 
from the top down. Likewise, airflow directed from the back to front caused more discomfort 
than airflow from the front and back. 
 
Humans have difficulties with distinguishing the difference between discomfort from draft and 
radiation. Radiation can cause local discomfort from both cold and heat, and can occur as 
asymmetry radiation. Occupants can be affected if they stay near warm or cold surfaces for 
too long. This occurs frequently for occupants sitting near e.g. poorly insulated windows 
(Toftum et al., 2011). 
Fischer and Bayer (2003) studied classrooms with ventilation systems in humid areas in the 
USA. It was here observed that the absolute humidity level had a direct impact on human 
comfort as it influenced the perspiration evaporation rate, which regulates thermal sensation, 
body energy balance, and skin moisture level. As the dew point increased, the rate of 
evaporation from the skin’s surface decreased, as did the associated energy loss. It should 
be noted though that discomfort from high humidity is rare in moderate climates. 
It is found that contamination with mould is an increasing issue whit the relative humidity 
levels.  Mould is known to affect persons with diseases like allergy, asthma, and respiratory 
tract infection (Toftum et al., 2011). 
 
2.2.3 Light 
Artificial lighting and daylight are both integrated parameters of school environments and can 
affect mood, wellbeing, headaches, stress, and visual impression (Barkmann et al. 2012, & 
Bommel et al., 2004 and Sleegers et al. 2012). The light intensity and colour temperature of 
artificial light affect many physiological processes in our bodies and also the quality of our 
sleep (Barkmann et al. 2012 and Bommel et al.). Especially daylight has an important effect 
on health, immune system, energy, wellbeing, circadian rhythm, and the psychophysiological 
activity level. Daylight regulates important hormones through regular day and night rhythms 
where the light and dark varies. These hormones influence the health, wellbeing, stress, 
alertness and sleep. The effect varies from person to person, but studies have shown that 
==PAGE:17==
 
11 
the presence of daylight decreases stress complaint levels and have a positive effect on 
mood and vitality. (Barkmann et al. 2012. and Sleegers et al. 2012). 
 
Factors such as brightness, contrasts, reflection, illumination, colour temperature and glare 
affect the perception of the light. Studies have shown that increased illuminace increased 
vision and improved the ability to perceive optical information (Bommel et al., 2004). 
Barkmann et al. (2012) found that with a combination of cooler colour temperatures (17000 
K) and higher illuminace lead to increased concentration levels. At lower illuminance and 
warmer colour temperatures the communication and social behaviour seemed to improve. 
 
Glare can be caused by both direct and indirect glare and result in disability and discomfort. 
Disability glare affect the ability to see certain objects in a scene and affect the performance 
of a current activity. Discomfort glare causes discomfort without necessarily influencing the 
visual visibility or performance, but are known for causing headaches (Karlsen 2016). 
 
2.2.4 Noise 
Studies have found that noise may influence children’s health, stress, and speech perception 
and that background noise can prevent an individual’s ability to hear properly. In a school 
study it was found that 62% of pupils were annoyed by sounds during the lessons and that 
those sounds included laughing, chatting or sounds from chairs and tables or external noise, 
such as from other classrooms (Crandell & Smaldino 2000, Bistrup 2001 and Cohen et al. 
1986) 
 
A good acoustic quality in a classroom is critical, as communication through speaking and 
listening constitute a large part of the learning process. Noise can come from both external 
and internal sources. The quality of sound can be described as the quality of the sound 
intensity, frequency and the periodicity and duration. Normal talking sound pressure level is 
around 55 – 60 dB (A), while hearing protection should be used at sound pressure levels 
higher than 85 dB (A) (Nickel, 2016). 
 
Gao, Wargocki, & Wang, (2014) observed that noise from a mechanical ventilation system 
and automatically opened window with an exhaust fan, installed in classrooms were 
significantly more noisy than in other classrooms without these systems, in both non-heating 
and heating seasons. Operable windows are not noisy, but noise from the surroundings like 
street noise, playground etc., have to be included. 
 
 
==PAGE:18==
 
 
 
Background 
12 
2.3 Effect of the indoor environment on pupils’ performance 
Studies about the indoor environment’s effect on the pupils’ performance suggests a link 
between the air quality, thermal environment and pupils performance. 
 
“... indoor environmental quality in classrooms is an influential factor in the learning process 
and improving it should be given as much priority as improving teaching materials and 
methods.“  
 
 
 
 
 
(Wargocki & Wyon, 2013) 
 
2.3.1 CO2 concentration 
Satish and Mendell (2012) investigated the influence of CO2 concentration on decision-
making performance and cognitive function. The study had 600 ppm as a reference and 
exposed the human subjects to 1000 ppm and 2500 ppm. They used a computer based 
program called Strategic Management Simulation, which collected data on performance in 
decision making. They found that at 1000 ppm CO2 concentration had a significant 
diminishing effect on six of nine metrics of decision making performance, and at 2500 ppm 
the performance was significantly reduced in seven of nine metrics of performance. With this 
percentile rank, they concluded that some pupils had disadvantages in learning when 
exposed to high CO2 concentration. 
 
Twardella et al. (2012) carried out a crossover cluster-randomized study in 20 classrooms 
with pupils in third and fourth grade in classrooms with mechanical ventilation. The pupils’ 
concentration performance was assessed by the Brickenkamp and Bates and Lemay’s d2-
test. In this study low air quality, as indicated by increased CO2 level, could not be confirmed 
as causing reduction in short-term concentration performance. The cause of the missing 
improvement of the concentration performance was unclear, but Twardella et al suggest a 
possible explanation be that poor air quality does not impair short-term concentration (as 
measured by the d2-test), but only has effects in longer concentration efforts. 
 
Additionally, Twardella et al. (2012) found that while the students could maintain the 
concentration performance, they risked more errors. It was found that the high CO2 
concentration appeared to affect the processing accuracy negatively. The "total number of 
errors” increased significantly by 1.65 at a median CO2 level at 1045 ppm to a median CO2 
level at 2115 ppm. The mean total error had an increase of 10 %. 
 
Gaihre and Semple (2014) studied the impact of the CO2 concentration on pupils’ 
concentration and attendance at school in 60 naturally ventilated classrooms in a period of 
3 - 5 days. Here they found that the increase of 100 ppm in the time weighted average of the 
CO2 concentration was associated with a reduction in annual attendance of 0.2%, which was 
roughly converted to 1 half school day per year. 
2.3.2 Effect of ventilation on pupils’ performance 
==PAGE:19==
 
13 
Wargocki and Wyon (2010 and 2013) have studied the effect of increased outside air supply 
on pupils’ performance and found that by doubling the ventilation rate from a previous low 
rate, pupils’ concentration performance increased up to 8 % and 14 % in terms of speed. 
Wargocki and Wyon (2013) studied seven field intervention experiments, where 380 10- 12 
years old pupils participated. They found that by increasing the outdoor air supply rate from 
3.0 to 9.5 l/s per person, the speed at which the pupils performed two language-based and 
four numerical tasks improved significantly, and in one of the numerical tasks the % error 
was significantly reduced. 
 
Also, Bakó-Biró et al. 2007 studied 8 schools where they modified the fresh air supply from 
0.3-0.5 to 13- 16 L/s per person. This increased the pupils work rate by ~7% in addition 
(p<0.036) and subtraction (p<0.052). 
 
In line with that, Haverinen-Shaughnessy (2011) found that for each unit of 1 l/s per person 
the ventilation rate increased, the performance measured by successful pupils’ in a 
mathematics test increased by 2.9 % and equivalent in a reading test by 2.7 %. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.3.1. Correlation between fresh air supply and performance of routine exercises like text comprehension or addition. 
The figure shows the consequence of increasing outdoor air supply (Toftum et al., 2011) 
Aggregated for several studies Figure 2.3.1 shows the importance of outdoor air supply for the 
performance of schoolwork. Additionally, Wargocki and Wyon (2013) also found that an 
increase in ventilation rate was associated with lower absence rates and a decrease in the 
amounts of airborne particles in classrooms. 
2.3.3 Temperature condition 
A study by Wargocki and Wyon (2013) observed that when the air temperature was reduced 
from 25 to 20°C the pupils performance improved with 2 - 4% for every 1°C and additionally 
the pupils’ indicated that the air felt much fresher at lower temperatures. 
 
==PAGE:20==
 
 
 
Background 
14 
Studies have found that the performance decreased with temperatures above 23 to 24 °C 
and warmer temperatures were observed to reduce performance on language-based tasks 
with school age children (Wargocki & Wyon, 2013 and Seppanen et al., 2016). 
Wyon et al. (2010) stated that a 20% higher yield could be obtained, if the temperature could 
be kept between 20-21°C and that 27°C would decrease the pupils’ performance with 14–28 
% compared to 20°C. 
 
Additionally, Wargocki and Wyon (2013) stated that the seasonal changes can have an effect 
on the schoolwork performance. The pupils’ performance may decrease 30 % below what it 
could be all year around, due to conditions that varies seasonally with the outdoor climate. 
 
2.3.4 Noise 
Noise is one of the most frequently reported indoor environment quality factors causing daily 
inconvenience for the pupils. Noise distraction makes individuals lose their ability to capture 
attention when concentrating their attention on processing difficult speech tasks (Turunen et 
al. 2014 and Marchand & Nardi, 2014) 
 
Marchand & Nardi, (2014) carried out an experimental study on undergraduate pupils in a 
laboratory classroom. Here the pupils reported that the sound of the room was one of the 
factors that most negatively influenced their performance. It was found at higher sound 
pressure levels exposure, that pupils had more difficulties to perform in the reading test than 
in the listening test. In addition to CO2 concentration, the sound pressure level had a larger 
effect on the cognitive performance, in reading tasks. 
 
Sullivan et al. (2015) carried out a study where children with normal hearing between the 
ages of 8 and 10 years were administered working memory and comprehension tasks in 
quiet and in noisy conditions. A significant decrease in auditory working memory and 
comprehension tasks in noisier environments was found. The noise particularly affected the 
reasoning, details, understanding, and vocabulary subtests. 
 
2.3.5 Light 
Light is a necessity to perceive optical information. Studies have shown that lower levels of 
daylight are associated with decreased academic and cognitive performance (Bommel et al., 
2004, Barkmann et al., 2012 and Sleegers et al. 2012).  Sleegers et al. (2012) carried out 
three studies at two elementary schools and through simulation. It was found that lighting at 
500 lux compared to the standard recommended lighting of approx. 300 lux had a positive 
effect on reading, writing and math exercises. 
 
Barkmann et al. (2012) carried out a study with variable lighting at one elementary and two 
secondary schools. Standardized reading tests and the d2-test assessed the pupils’ 
performance. It was found that when the lighting was in “concentration” setting - bright and 
cold light (1060 lux, 5800 K) instead of “standard” setting based on the DIN 5035 standard 
==PAGE:21==
 
15 
(300 lux, 4000 K) - an average pupil made 20.8% fewer errors and increased the reading 
speed significantly, with 16.8 % more words. They also improved their reading 
comprehension. 
 
 
==PAGE:22==
 
 
 
Background 
16 
2.4 Ventilation principles 
When a ventilation system is installed as part of a school retrofit, several aspects have to be 
taken into account. Not only need the system to provide a good and healthy environment that 
optimises the indoor environment. It also has to be integrated in the original building with 
respect for the existing installations, space and architecture. Furthermore the budget for 
installation and maintenance play a major role for the whole project. 
2.4.1 
Natural ventilation 
Natural ventilation can appear as natural manual ventilation and natural 
automatic ventilation. Both have the advantage that operable windows 
are typically already integrated and only a sensor and an actuator is 
required if automatic ventilation is desired. 
 
Natural ventilation is provided by natural forces, which depend on 
temperature differences between the indoor and outdoor air, pressure 
differences across the windows and possible air valves and shafts. 
Additionally, manual natural ventilation depends on the occupants’ 
behaviour, in this case the pupils and teachers. It has been experienced 
that the opening of windows is highly dependent on the outdoor climate 
conditions, wind speed and direction, outdoor temperature, the location 
of the school if the surrounding is urban or rural, habits and the 
occupants’ knowledge about the indoor climate (Gao, Wargocki, & 
Wang, 2014, Wargocki & Da Silva, 2014). Wargocki and Da Silva (2014) 
carried out a study in a primary school north of Copenhagen. They found 
that in winter, windows were less frequently opened when the pupils and 
teachers were not aware of the CO2 level in the classroom. This 
indicates that the user behaviour towards improvement of the indoor air 
quality in naturally ventilated classrooms has to be incorporated in the 
normal school activities. This could be through schedules or other 
means. 
 
Automatic natural ventilation does not depend on the user behaviour to 
the same degree. It requires a sensor and a control system to open and 
can be regulated according to a timesheet or the indoor climate 
conditions as CO2 concentration or temperature. 
2.4.2 Mechanical exhaust ventilation 
Mechanical exhaust ventilation is based on an exhaust fan which 
removes the indoor air and supplied air through ventilation openings like 
windows, air valves in windows, shafts etc. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:23==
 
17 
2.4.3    Balanced mechanical 
Balanced mechanical ventilation has both supply and exhaust integrated 
in the system, which results in a balanced airflow. This ventilation 
system can be both centralized and decentralized. A mechanical 
ventilation system can provide a fixed airflow with constant air volume 
rate or variable air volume rate, and can be controlled by a time 
schedule or by the indoor climate condition such as temperature or CO2 
concentration. With balanced ventilation the air can be pre-heated before 
it enters the room, either with heat recovery or/and a heating coil in the 
system. This may reduce the risk of draught (DS/EN 15251). 
 
2.4.4 
Hybrid ventilation  
Hybrid ventilation combines the features from different mechanical 
ventilation types, for instance exhaust or balanced ventilation and natural 
ventilation. In the heating season the mechanical ventilation system is in 
operation and in the non-heating season only natural ventilation is 
applied. In a model study hybrid ventilation has a large reduction in 
energy use compared to the natural and mechanical ventilation system, 
however depending on the installed system (Steiger et al., 2012). 
 
2.4.5 Mechanical ventilation 
Within mechanical ventilation there are two main types of air distribution patterns: 
displacement and mixed. Ventilation with displacement air distribution supplies the fresh air 
directly to the occupied zone, where with mixing the fresh air is supplied outside the 
occupant zone, but mixed with the air in the occupied zone. 
 
With mixing, air is supplied with a high initial mean velocity and the established velocity 
gradients generate high turbulence aiming to promote good mixing and uniform temperature 
as well as uniform pollution distribution in the occupied zone. With displacement, air is 
supplied with a low velocity. This establishes a vertical temperature gradient that naturally 
occurs between the floor and ceiling so as to remove pollution from the occupied zone and 
avoiding draft (Dirk et al., 2013). Different factors, such as location, throw length, supply 
temperature and velocity, have to be considered when designing a ventilation system. In 
schools with mechanical ventilation, the mixed air distribution pattern is the most common 
ventilation method  (Hviid et al., 2014). 
 
2.4.6 Energy consumption 
The energy consumption influences the selection of a system (Sundhedsstyrelsen, 2012). 
The implemented system should improve the indoor environment and have energy efficiency. 
 
==PAGE:24==
 
 
 
Background 
18 
The various ventilation principles differ in terms of energy consumption. The highest 
contributor to energy use is through high air change. A study by Wargocki and Da Silva 
(2014) found that visual CO2 feedback, motivated users to increase the opening of the 
windows to improve the air quality. This resulted in increased heating energy use. 
Energy use related to mechanical ventilation is highly dependent on the efficiency of the 
fans, heat loss from air change, and the chosen control system. The fans have been found to 
be responsible for approx. 40 % of the total electricity consumption in HVAC systems (Dirk et 
al., 2013). Steiger et al. (2012) carried out a model study and found that there was a quite 
large reduction in energy use in classrooms with hybrid ventilation compared to the 
mechanical ventilation system. This shows that energy use can be reduced by choosing a 
ventilation principle that is adaptable to climate and usage. 
 
Heat recover reuses the heat from the exhaust air to heating the supply air. The efficiency of 
new heat exchangers lies between 80 and 95%, thus recovering most of the heat 
(www.nrl.co.nz). As a consequence, this reduces the need for additional heating and saves 
energy for heating. 
 
There are three different types of control systems; constant airflow CAV, variable airflow 
VAV, and demand controlled airflow DCV (www.exhausto.dk). These three control systems 
are controlled by a time schedule, switching on and off depending on the occupation or 
regulated after the demand in the room. It is estimated that for schools which use 50 to 60% 
of the designed air change and have an occupancy of 60 % of the school day, that a CAV 
system has twice as high energy consumption compared to VAV and DCV, where DCV has 
the lowest energy consumption (www.exhausto.dk). 
 
Toftum and Wargocki (2017) carried out an intervention study investigating the performance 
of four different retrofit solutions in three classrooms in a Danish elementary public school. 
The ventilation solutions were a decentralized mechanical ventilation system, an automatic 
natural ventilation system with assisting exhaust fan, an automatic natural ventilation system 
supported by heat recovery units. Based on hourly measurements of the energy use during 
two full calendar years, the usage of electricity and heating energy was found. The 
decentralized mechanical ventilation system had the highest average energy use followed by 
the system with automatic window opening assisted by an exhaust fan. In the classroom with 
automatic window opening and heat recovery units, heating energy was around 30% less 
than in the classroom with decentralized ventilation. It should be noted though that the 
decentralized mechanical ventilation and the automatic window opening assisted by an 
exhaust fan had the best performance compared to the indoor environment. 
==PAGE:25==
 
19 
2.5 Background of questionnaire for children 
Questionnaires for adults are normally expressed on subjective rating scales, where visual al 
analogue scales (VAS) are often used (Haddad & King, 2012). But the outcome of the 
questionnaire and result would not be the same when used on children. Borgers et al. (2000) 
found that children's ability to respond to survey questions depend on the development of 
their cognitive skills. Children at the age of 7 have reached a turning point in the 
development of their cognitive ability and can provide more stable answers from this age. 
 
The number of options on the scales may normally be up to seven and even up to nine and 
thirteen. According to Nicol (2008), “it is generally agreed that accuracy is not improved 
significantly by adding more points to the scale” in scale of seven to thirteen and in contrast 
to adults, offering children more response options decreases the reliability of the responses. 
Borger and Sikkel (2004), suggest that children should only respond to about four options per 
question. However Haddad and King (2012) found that children in the age of 11 -12 
understood well seven levels of warmth based primarily on the 7-point ASHRAE thermal 
sensation scale, where the points were illustrated with cartoons and verbal description. 
 
Briggs and Closs (1999) carried out a study on 417 orthopaedic patients, using the numeric 
visual analogue scale (VAS) and the verbal rating scales (VRS). 14.2 % did not complete the 
VAS, as where 0.5 % did not complete the VRS. The meaning of numeric labels may imply 
different meanings and therefore appear to be a complex task for children in relation to their 
cognitive skills (Haddad & King, 2012). It was found that stronger cognitive ability is required 
to convert a personal experience into a linear display (Haddad & King, 2012). Still the verbal 
labels have to be plain as children may have difficulties with interpreting ambiguous 
questions (Haddad & King, 2012). The Likert rating scale can easily be read off and hence, 
children have better opportunity to work with this scale. Younger children however, tend to 
state their feelings and emotions at the more extreme part of the scale (Chambers & 
Johnston, 2002). 
 
By targeting the options on the children’s feelings and experience through the use of pictures 
or illustrations, children identify the questions more easily, as they are more directed towards 
their cognitive skills. Ryan and Schwartz (1956) carried out a study where they observed that 
the use of cartoons increased the speed of the perception in comparison to graphics and 
illustrations (i.e. line drawing, shaded drawing, photograph). This may indicate that facial 
expressions through cartoon illustrations could be more appropriate for questions with more 
options. Another advantage of using cartoon illustrations is that they are understood without 
any translation. 
 
Second grade pupils are around 8 to 9 years old. In Denmark it is not unusual that 8 year-
olds have a mobile phone, which is often used to keep contact with family and friends 
through SMS (altomboern.dk). Additionally, iPads are an integrated tool in the classrooms at 
Lykkebo skole. In most mobile phones and in iPads emojis are an integrated part. Emojis are 
therefore a well-known language for the pupils and are not unusual for the pupils in this study 
se appendix B. 
==PAGE:26==
 
 
 
Background 
20 
Based on this background will there for this thesis be develop questionnaires for the pupils. 
The scale of the questionnaire will encompass a five points based on emojis.  The 
questionnaire will be described in detail in the methods section 3.4. 
 
==PAGE:27==
 
21 
2.6 Regulations and guidelines 
Different laws and recommendations have been established to ensure an appropriate indoor 
environment in Danish schools. These laws and recommendations will be briefly described in 
the following chapter. 
 
2.6.1 The Danish Building Regulations 
The Danish Building Regulations (BR15) prescribes the Danish building declaration and 
specifies the construction law’s requirements for both new buildings and renovation projects. 
The specification operates with the building construction and interior as well as safety, health 
and energy. 
 
The following section includes the relevant paragraphs from the Building Regulation 2015. 
 
• 
Classrooms in schools should include ventilation with supply, exhaust and heat 
recovery. The supply and exhaust in a normal classroom should be minimum 5 l/s per 
person and 0.35 l/s per. m2 floor area. (6.3.1.3 stk. 2) 
• 
The CO2 concentration may not exceed 0.1 pct. in longer periods. (6.3.1.3 stk. 2) 
(bygningsreglementet 6.3.1.3, 2016). 
• 
The reverberation time in classrooms must not exceed 0.6 seconds. ( 6.4.3.4) 
(bygningsreglementet acoustic requirements, 2016). 
• 
Sound from technical installations must not exceed 30 dB. ( 6.4.3.3). 
• 
Classrooms must have access to daylight and must be well illuminated. Windows 
must be performed, placed and possibly screened in such a way that sunlight passing 
through them does not result in overheating of the rooms, so as to avoid discomfort 
by direct solar radiation (6.5.2 stk.1) (bygningsreglementet 6.5.2, 2016). 
 
 
2.6.2 Recommendations in standards 
Standards are implemented on national, European and international levels to ensure 
guidelines that provide a high quality indoor environment in buildings. The Building 
Regulations refer to the recommendations in standards. 
 
DS/CEN CR 1752 - Ventilation for buildings, 2001 
• 
The 1752 DS/CEN CR requirement for the ventilation rate in category II is 4.2 l/s per 
m2. 
• 
Design values of the indoor operative temperature for classrooms in the winter period 
are 22°C ± 2°C and in the summer period 24.5°C ± 1.5°C (DS 1752, 2001). 
 
DS/EN 15251 - Indoor Environmental Criteria, 2007 
• 
For category II, the ventilation rate should be 3.5 l/s per m2 for occupancy and 0.7 l/s 
per m2 for low-polluted buildings. For both it is assumed that the floor area is 2 
m2/person. 
==PAGE:28==
 
 
 
Background 
22 
• 
The design values of the indoor operative temperature for classrooms with HVAC 
systems and category II is 20°C in the winter season and 26°C in the summer 
season. 
• 
In educational buildings the criteria for lighting in classrooms is to maintain an 
illuminance at 300 lx on the work area, 0.8 m above the floor area. It should be noted 
that classrooms for adults and lecture halls should maintain an illuminance at 500 lx 
on the work area. 
• 
The sound pressure level in the classroom should not exceed 35 dB (A) (DS 15251, 
2007). 
 
2.6.3 The Danish Working Environment Authority 
The Danish Working Environment Authority maintains the Working Environment Act. In 2001, 
guidelines were implemented for the indoor environment to ensure a healthy, safe and 
satisfying working environment for teachers in schools. 
 
• 
To avoid discomfort from draft the air velocity should be under 0.15 m/s in rooms that 
are occupied. 
• 
For rooms with occupants as the main sources of pollution, the CO2 concentration 
ought not to exceed 0.1 pct. If the CO2 concentration exceed 0.2 pct. in more than 
short periods of the day, the air change is insufficient. 
• 
Temperature should be between 20 to 22°C in e.g. schools. Under normal conditions 
where sedentary work is required, the temperature should not exceed 25°C and the 
temperature difference from foot to head should not exceed 4°C and the temperature 
increase through the day may not exceed 4°C, as this will lead to discomfort. 
• 
Relative humidity should be kept between 25 and 60 %. 
• 
To avoid hearing damages, the sound pressure level should not exceed 85 dB (A) 
during a working day (www.arbejdstilsynet). 
 
 
2.6.4 
The Danish Center for Educational Environment 
The Danish Center for Educational Environment (Dansk Center for Undervisningsmiljø, 
DCUM) is an independent, national information center working to ensure a good study 
environment in schools and daycares. 
 
• 
There is no recommended ventilation rate, but however they do recommend the use 
of ventilation systems with variable performance to adjust according to the pollutant 
load in classrooms. 
• 
Temperature in the classrooms may under normal conditions be kept around 20 to 
22°C and the temperature difference from foot to head should not exceed 3°C, as this 
will lead to discomfort. 
• 
The relative humidity (RH) should not be under 25 – 30%. as this may cause 
problems with dry air (www.dcum.dk, 2016). 
==PAGE:29==
 
23 
 
 
 
 
 
3 Method 
==PAGE:30==
 
 
 
Method 
24 
3.1 Lykkebo skole 
Lykkebo skole is a public school with around 430 pupils distributed on 27 classes on all class 
levels. The school is located in Valby, a part of Copenhagen. Indoor environment conditions 
were measured in four classrooms; three reference classrooms and one in which a window 
integrated heat recovery ventilation system was installed. All four classrooms were located in 
the northeast wing at the 1st level. The windows were oriented towards south except for one 
classroom with windows oriented towards east. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The classrooms were occupied by two 3rd and two 2rd grade classes. The classroom with the 
window integrated heat recovery ventilation system was occupied by one of the 2nd grade 
classes. Figure 3.1.2 shows the wing with the four classrooms where the measurements took 
place. The classrooms were designated: Ø21, Ø22, Ø24, and Ø25 with 22, 21, 20, and 15 
pupils in each. The classroom Ø21 had the ventilation system installed. 
 
Figure 3.1.2. Plan of the four classrooms. From left Ø21 with the window integrated heat recovery ventilation 
system, and the reference classrooms Ø22, Ø24, and Ø25. 
The floor area of classroom Ø21 was 49.50 m2 and the volume 166.50 m3. The walls and 
ceilings were plaster and the floors were in laminate. Radiators were located below the 
facade windows in all rooms. 
 
 
!"#
!""
!"$
!"%
Figure 3.1.1. Location of Lykkebo skole in relation to Copenhagen center.  
==PAGE:31==
 
25 
3.2 Window integrated heat recovery ventilation system 
The ventilation system was divided into two parts which both were integrated in the hallway 
windows where two LMV450 ventilators from ECOLINK were installed. Both units contained 
filters. Both of the ventilators connected to two exhaust and two supply devices.  
 
Figure 3.2.1 (left) show the ventilation system integrated in the window in the hallway and 
Figure 3.2.1 (right) shows the supply and exhaust in the classroom. For more pictures of the 
ventilation system in the classroom see appendix A. 
 
 
Figure 3.2.2 shows the concept of the ventilation system. The ventilator has an integrated 
heat exchanger that recovers up to 95%. Condensation was removed by a pipe connected to 
a sink in the classroom. For more specific information about the ventilation system see 
appendix I. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.2.1. The ventilation system integrated in the window in the hallway (left) and supply and exhaust in the 
classroom (right). 
==PAGE:32==
 
 
 
Method 
26 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The system had a maximum airflow of 756.8 m3/h (210.2 l/s) and a minimum airflow of 100 
m3/h (27.8 l/s and 4.42 l/s pr. m2). This complies with the Building Regulation 
recommendations, DS/EN 15251, and DS/CEN CR 1752. The system was controlled by the 
CO2 concentration and the flow rate increased linearly from the minimum at 450 ppm to the 
maximum at 1000 ppm. 
 
 
Figure 3.2.2. Conceptual drawing of the ventilation system.  
==PAGE:33==
 
27 
3.3 Measuring instrumentation 
The CO2 concentration, temperature and relative humidity were measured in the classroom 
with the installed window integrated heat recovery system classroom and the three reference 
classrooms. 
 
A suitcase was developed that contained a long-term stability Vaisala (GMW90R) transmitter 
with a HOBO 4-Channel Analog Data Logger model UX120-006M. Near the suitcase a 
Netatmo was also used to measure the sound pressure level in the classrooms. The HOBO 
data logger model U12-012 with built-in temperature and humidity sensors were placed in the 
exhaust ducks to measure the temperature of the air supplied to and removed from the 
classroom. 
 
 
Figure 3.3.2. Placement of the Hobo logger and Netatmo in the classrooms illustrated with green. 
 
 
Figure 3.3.3. Placement of the Hobo logger and Netatmo in the classrooms. From left Ø21, Ø22, Ø23, and Ø25. 
!"#
!""
!"$
!"%
Figure 3.3.1. From left HOBO 4-Channel Analog Data Logger (UX120-006M), Vaisala transmitter (GMW90R),
Netatmo, and HOBO Analog Data Logger (U12-012)  
==PAGE:34==
 
 
 
Method 
28 
The placement of the suitcase was between 1.5 to 2 m above the floor and around 0.5 m 
from corners, doors, windows, and occupants - to minimize the influence by such 
disturbances. Furthermore, it was not placed near the air supply. Netatmos were placed near 
the suitcases around 1.5 to 2 m above the floor in the classroom with the window integrated 
heat recovery system and in Ø22. Both the suitcases and Netatmos had a logging interval of 
5 minutes. The outdoor module was located 3 m above the ground on a pillar. It was placed 
below an overhang to be protected from direct sun and rain. Each weather sensor was 
connected to a 3G Wi-Fi router, so that the measurements were instantly accessible. The 
technical specifications for both instruments can be seen in Table 3.3.1. 
 
Table 3.3.1. Specifications for used equipment. 
 
CO2 
Temperature 
Humidity 
HOBO 4-Channel Analog 
Data 
Logger 
(UX120-
006M) Cable 4-20 mA 
 
 
 
Range 
0 ... 20.1 mA 
-20...+70°C 
0 % ... 95% 
Accuracy 
±0.001 mA ±0.2 % 
 
 
Vaisala 
transmitter 
(GMW90R): 
 
 
 
Range 
0 ... 5000 ppm 
-5 ... +55 ° C 
0 ... 95% RH 
Accuracy 
-5...+ 10°C ±(45ppm+3.8%) 
+10... +20°C ±(35 ppm+2.7%) 
+20... +30°C ±(30 ppm+2%) 
-5...+ 10°C ± 0.8°C 
+10... +20°C ± 0.6°C 
+20... +30°C ± 0.5°C 
-5 ... + 10°C: 
0 ... 60% RH ± 3.5% RH 
60 ... 80% RH ± 4.0%RH 
80 ... 95% RH ± 5.0%RH 
 
10 ... + 40°C: 
0 ... 60% RH ± 2.5% RH 
60 ... 80% RH ± 3.0%RH 
80 ... 95% RH ± 4.0% 
RH 
 
 
 
 
Netatmo: 
 
 
 
Indoor station: 
 
 
 
Operating rang 
0...5000 ppm 
0!+ 50°C 
0%...100% 
Accuracy 
± 50 ppm / ± 5% 
± 0.3°C 
± 3% 
Sound meter, dB 
Range 
35 dB (A) to 120 dB (A) 
 
 
HOBO 
Analog Data Logger 
(U12-012) 
Cable 4-20mA 
 
 
 
Range 
 
-20° to 70°C 
5% to 95% RH 
Accuracy 
 
± 0.4ºC at 25 ºC 
..10% ±5% 
10%... 90% RH ± 2.5% 
90%..  ±5% 
 
 
 
==PAGE:35==
 
29 
 
3.4 Questionnaire and d2-test 
On Thursdays in the four first periods and on Fridays in the two last periods, the pupils filled 
in questionnaires administrated by the teachers to rate the indoor environment and their 
health symptoms at the time of completing the questionnaire. On the Thursdays the 
questionnaires were assigned before the lunch break. By then, the pupils had occupied the 
classroom for three hours and on Fridays the questionnaires was assigned before the pupils 
left school, when they had occupied the classroom for two hours. Figure 3.4.1 shows two 
examples of the scales used to classify the perception and symptoms of the pupils. For 
analyses the scale was coded from left: 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5. The rest of the questionnaires can 
be observed in appendix B. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The questionnaire was based on knowledge of the symptoms that may occur when exposed 
to poor indoor environment. The following perceptions and symptoms were rated: how the 
week had been outside and at the school, and specific in the classroom: the thermal 
environment, classroom air quality, draft, the acoustic environment, illumination, ability to 
breathe, dryness of skin and throat, tired, headache, concentration level, willingness to learn, 
and general mood. 
 
Symptoms and perceptions were rated on cartoon analogy scales where the line was 
replaced by a set of ‘emojis’ to make it easier for the pupils to relate to the answers and 
indicate their response. Figure 3.4.1 show an example of the questionnaire scale used to 
obtain the perceptions of the pupils. The ’emojis’ are illustrating mood and feelings are used 
to support the questions. 
 
The d2 test was given to the pupils just before the questionnaire. The d2 test rates the pupils’ 
concentration performance.  
 
Figure 3.4.2 shows an example of the d2 test. The full test includes 14 lines each with 47 
characters that are repeated in different order. In total, the test contains 13 different 
characters generated of the letters, p and d, and different number and placement of marks. 
 
Figure 3.4.1 An example of a scale used to record the perceptions and symptoms of the pupils. For analysis, the 
scale was coded as follows: 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5. 
!
!
"#$%#&%'&(!
!
!
!
)*+$,'-%!
!
.*#&&+$!/#0!
'((+ !120!/#03!
!
.*#&&+$!/#0!
120!/#03!
1
2
3
4
5
1
2
3
4
5
==PAGE:36==
 
 
 
Method 
30 
Figure 3.4.2. An example of the d2 test used to rate the concentration performance of the pupils. Each test 
included 14 test lines each with 47 characters. 
The pupils should mark the d’s with two marks attached (hence the name d2), while the 
teacher timed 20 seconds for each line. The d2-test identified concentration in terms of both 
accuracy and speed for each pupil. Various outcome metrics can be derived from the d2-test. 
In this study focus was on the concentration performance (CP) and the error % (E%) made 
by the pupils. 
 
The CP was estimated as the number of correctly marked d2-symbols minus the number of 
erroneously marked symbols. This measure has been stated as the most reliable in relation 
to the concentration performance as it captures both accuracy and speed in the assessment 
of concentration. 
 
The E% is estimated as the error score multiplied by one hundred, divided by the total score. 
The error score is the sum of errors where failing to identify a correct d2 symbol plus the 
errors made by incorrectly marking symbols that are not d2 symbols. The total score sums all 
processed characters, both relevant characters, d2 and irrelevant, different than d2. 
3.4.1 Timeline for measurements 
Measurements ran from December 2016 after the renovation. 
The analysis of the association between indoor climate parameters, the pupils’ questionnaire 
and performance tests were based on measurements from 6th March 2017, from when the 
ventilation system alternated between regular operation and being shut off. 
 
 
 
Figure 3.4.3 shows a timeline of the study. The study was carried out in 7 weeks with a 
holiday break in between, from the 10th April to the 17th April. The operation was alternated 
between on and off mode each week. In the preparation phase two weeks before the field 
study was carried out, the classes had a pre-test and questionnaires for both the 
questionnaires and the d2-test, to learn and understand the process. 
Figure 3.4.3. Timeline over the field study and periods where the ventilation was turned on and off.  
==PAGE:37==
 
31 
3.5 Energy use 
The energy use in classroom Ø21 was investigated through IDA ICE (IDA Indoor Climate 
and Energy, version 4.7.1). The investigation was completed both with the window integrated 
ventilation system and without. The classroom was modelled as one room with zone. 
 
 
Figure 3.5.1. General information and simulated zone. 
Figure 3.5.2 shows the schedule for the occupancy in the classroom. It was made based on 
the school timetable and the observed CO2 concentration in the room. The school timetable 
and CO2 observations can be observed in appendix H and E. 
 
 
Figure 3.5.2. Schedule for occupancy in classroom Ø21. 
 
The classroom had a small operable window, which was manually used by the occupants 
when wanted. To incorporate the window opening in the energy use, a schedule was created 
based on the distribution of the CO2 concentrations during the day in the classroom. This can 
be observed in appendix F. Figure 3.5.3 shows the used window. 
 
!"#$"%&'
()*!
+)*!
,)*!
-..$
()/!
+)/!
,)/!
!"#$"%&'
0112).33456
712).33456
89"#:;
0112).33456
712).33456
<&49=#:;
0112).33456
712).33456
>?#$?=#:;
0112).33456
712).33456
<4?=#:;
0112).33456
712).33456
!.$#:;
==PAGE:38==
 
 
 
Method 
32 
 
Figure 3.5.3. Window schedule used for the simulation. 
 
The ventilation system was modelled with a heat exchanger, and inlet and outlet fans, which 
were controlled by the CO2 concentration. The heat exchanger’s efficiency was modelled at 
0.81, further set points is mentioned in section 3.2 and in appendix E. 
 
Energy consumption for classroom Ø21 has been conducted through four case studies. 
These are: 
 
- Case 1: No ventilation and no window opening 
- Case 2: No ventilation and window opening according to a schedule 
- Case 3: Ventilation on and no window opening 
- Case 4: Ventilation on and window opening according to a schedule. 
 
These four cases are chosen to simulate the energy use and CO2 concentration from case 1 
to case 4. Case 1 has the lowest energy use and highest CO2 concentration, while case 4 
has the highest energy use and the lowest CO2 concentration. Cases 2 and 4 models the 
actual cases in the classroom, where the ventilation system was on and off respectively. 
 
 
!"#$"%&'
()*!
+)*!
,)*!
-../)011234
5./)011234
6778#9:;
<00$
()=!
+)=!
,)=!
!"#$"%&'
==PAGE:39==
 
33 
3.6 Data processing 
The data can be divided into different categories: the indoor environment, pupils’ symptoms 
and perceptions, performance results from d2 test, and the simulated date of the indoor 
environment and energy use. In particular, the following question will be addressed: 
 
• 
Is there an association between sound pressure level, CO2 concentration and air 
temperature? 
• 
Is there an association between sound pressure level, CO2 concentration, air 
temperature and when the ventilation system was on? 
• 
Is there an association between the CO2 concentration and the pupils’ symptoms and 
perception? 
• 
Is there an association between the CO2 concentration and the pupils’ performance? 
 
The data from the Netatmo was downloaded as .xls files from the Netatmo website. Only 
sound pressure level was used in the analysis. The data from the Vaisala/Hobo and the 
Hobo State loggers were read with HOBOware Pro and exported in .xls format. 
 
Answers from questionnaires and the d2 test were manually converted, by typing them into a 
spreadsheet. The raw data was then analysed by simple summary statistics and plots. For 
statistic analyses JMP was used (SAS Institute, version 13). The first questionnaire and d2-
test were neglected as the pupils at this stage was still learning how to complete the d2-test 
and questionnaire. 
 
 
3.6.1 Indoor environment 
 
In the first part of the data processing the data was displayed, and the association between 
the control mode of the ventilation system and the indoor environment parameters, CO2 
concentration, sound pressure level and temperature were examined. The environmental 
parameters were evaluated based on standards recommendation and the Danish Building 
Regulation. 
 
Evaluation of the indoor environment was based only on data in the period when pupils were 
present in the classroom. This was clarified from the timetable handed out by the school. To 
cater for absence due to library visits, activity days/hours etc., data was sorted relative to the 
sound pressure level. By observations in the data the measured sound pressure level 
pressure at night varied 2 dB (A). The minimum sound pressure level plus 2 dB (A) was then 
set as indication for background noise from the surroundings. The same was conducted for 
classroom Ø22 with 4 dB (A). 
 
Data from Netatmo and HOBOlogger were not measured in the exact same time interval. 
Therefore, was the data rounded to the nearest five minutes. This created few gap which 
was replenish be the previously measurement. 
==PAGE:40==
 
 
 
Method 
34 
 
3.6.2 Questionnaires 
 
The data from the questionnaires can be divided into different categories: perception of 
indoor environment, perception of health, and perception of mood both outside and at the 
school. 
 
Associations between the indoor environment parameters, CO2 concentration, sound 
pressure level and temperature were analysed by simple plots and statistical analyses. The 
analyses were made as functions of CO2 concentration, sound pressure level, and 
temperature with the questionnaire output as the dependent variable. 
 
The questionnaires contained an ordinal scale for which multinomial logistic regression was 
used for statistical analyses. For multinomial logistic regression, the equation for probabilities 
of a given response at a given dosage, is given as: 
! ! !
!!!!!!!!
! ! !!!!!!!! 
Where 
! = Is the predictor function 
! = Is the intercept 
! = Is the regression coefficient 
! = Is the explanatory variable – for this study: CO2 concentration, sound pressure level, and temperature 
The probabilities were determined by assuming a multinomial distribution for ordinal scales. 5 
% was specified as significance level (Brockhoff et al. 2017). 
3.6.3 Performance test 
For each test and pupil the number of processed characters and errors including missed d2’s 
and wrongly marked characters were summarized. From these the concentration 
performance (CP) and error percentage (E%) were calculated. The performance 
concentration was associated with the indoor environment parameters, CO2 concentration, 
sound pressure level and temperature by plots and statistical analyses. The analyses were 
made as functions of CO2 concentration, and sound pressure level with the performance 
level as the dependent variable. 
 
For simple analyses of the association between the indoor environment and the pupils’ 
performance, simple linear regression was used. 
 
! ! ! ! ! ! !! ! !! 
==PAGE:41==
 
35 
Where: 
!= Is the response variable 
! = Is the intercept 
! = Is the regression coefficient 
! = Is the explanatory variable – for this study: CO2 concentration, sound pressure level, or temperature 
 
For multiple linear regressions, corrections of secondary inflicting factors were included. The 
model is given as: 
!! ! !! ! !! ! ! ! ! ! !! ! ! ! !! 
Where: 
!!= Is the response variable 
!! = Is the general offset 
!! = Is the regression coefficient 
!! = Is the regression coefficient 
! = Is the explanatory variable – for this study: CO2 concentration, sound pressure level, and temperature 
!! = Are the residuals 
 
For the generalised linear model, adjustment for the individual pupil was conducted by 
adding the pupil as a random effect. The model is given as: 
!!" ! !!! ! !!! ! ! ! !!!! ! !!! ! !! ! !!" 
Where: 
!!"!!= Is the predicted function, performance i, pupil j 
!!! = Is the general offset for performance i 
!!! = Is the offset associated with pupil j 
!!! = Is the general regression coefficient for performance i 
!!! = Is the regression coefficient associated with pupil j 
!!!!!!= Is the explanatory variable – for this study: CO2 concentration, sound pressure level, and temperature 
==PAGE:42==
 
 
 
Method 
36 
!!" = Residual for performance i, pipil j 
For simple linear regression, multiple linear regressions, and the generalised linear model, 
the probabilities were determined by assuming a Gaussian distribution for continuous scales. 
5 % was specified as significance level (Brockhoff et al. 2017). 
 
==PAGE:43==
 
37 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 Results 
 
 
 
==PAGE:44==
 
 
 
Results 
38 
In this chapter, the results and main observations from the study in four classrooms at 
Lykkebo Skole in the heating season will be presented. The main focus will be on classroom 
Ø21 to investigate the impact of a window integrated heat recovery ventilation system on the 
indoor environment, the pupils’ comfort and the pupils’ performance. Therefore, the results 
will mainly include data from classrooms Ø21 and Ø22, where Ø22 will be used as reference. 
 
The pupils’ symptoms and mood will only be presented when there were a significant 
association with the indoor environment parameters. However, all analyses, including the 
pupils’ perception of the indoor climate parameters, concentration, tiredness, and work 
inclination, are presented. 
 
Data of the temperature, air quality and humidity in classrooms Ø24 and Ø25 will be used for 
comparison with the results from Ø21 and Ø22. 
4.1 Air quality in the classrooms 
Figure 4.1.1 shows the CO2 concentration in the four classrooms. Figure 4.1.1 also shows 
the difference in the CO2 concentration in Ø21, between periods with the ventilation system 
was on and off. The figures are based on data measured in the period during lessons from 
March 6th to April 21st. Classroom Ø22 had the highest maximum CO2 concentration at 4652 
ppm, classroom Ø24 had a maximum CO2 concentration at 2748 ppm, classroom Ø25 a 
maximum CO2 concentration at 3530 ppm, classroom Ø21 with no ventilation on had a 
maximum CO2 concentration at 3465 ppm, and classroom Ø21 with ventilation on had the 
lowest maximum CO2 concentration at 1338 ppm. 
 
 
 
0 
1000 
2000 
3000 
4000 
5000 
Classroom Ø24 
Classroom Ø25 
CO2 concentration (ppm) 
Referance classrooms with no ventilation  
0 
1000 
2000 
3000 
4000 
5000 
Ø21 ventilation 
on 
Ø21 Ventilation 
off 
Ø22 
CO2 concentration (ppm) 
Classrooms with ventilation or no ventilation  
Figure 4.1.1. Boxplots of the distribution of the CO2 concentration in classroom Ø21 with and without 
ventilation, and classroom Ø22, Ø24 and Ø25 measured in occupied hours in six periods from March 6th to 
April 21st 2017. 
==PAGE:45==
 
39 
4.2 Outdoor weather conditions during the measuring period 
. 
 
Figure 4.2.1 shows the day-to-day variation of the outdoor temperature during the six 
measurement periods and in the Holiday (April 10th to 16th) in between. From the 16th to 17th 
there was a decrease in the outdoor temperature. Followed by an increase from the 17th to 
21th. 
 
Figure 4.2.1. Outdoor temperature measured during the six periods in the heating season in 2017 and the holiday 
in between from April 10th to April 17th 2017. 
-5 
0 
5 
10 
15 
20 
10/03/17 
09.11 
14/03/17 
14.02 
18/03/17 
18.58 
22/03/17 
23.55 
27/03/17 
05.50 
31/03/17 
10.15 
04/04/17 
15.12 
08/04/17 
20.09 
13/04/17 
01.11 
17/04/17 
06.08 
21/04/17 
10.50 
Outdoor temperature (°C ) 
Five periods and the holiday 
Period 2 
Period 3 
Period 4 
Period 5 
Holiday 
Period 6 
-5 
0 
5 
10 
15 
20 
10/03/17 
09.11 
14/03/17 
14.02 
18/03/17 
18.58 
22/03/17 
23.55 
27/03/17 
05.50 
31/03/17 
10.15 
04/04/17 
15.12 
08/04/17 
20.09 
13/04/17 
01.11 
17/04/17 
06.08 
21/04/17 
10.50 
Outdoor temperature (°C ) 
Five periods and the holiday 
Period 2 
Period 3 
Period 4 
Period 5 
Holiday 
Period 6 
==PAGE:46==
 
 
 
Results 
40 
Figure 4.2.2 shows the temperature of the air supply air classroom Ø21. The supply with long 
shaft had a minimum temperature at 15°C when the ventilation was on and 18°C when the 
ventilation was off. The temperature peaked during the day and decrease during the light. 
 
Figure 4.2.2. Supply air temperature from the long supply shaft from period two to six and with a holiday in 
between April 10th to April 17th 2017. Green: ventilation on. Grey: ventilation off. 
Figure 4.2.3 shows the supply temperature from the short inlet in classroom Ø21. The 
temperature decreased when the ventilation system was on. The minimum temperature was 
11°C with ventilation on and 15°C when the ventilation was off. 
 
On 
both 
Figure 4.2.2 and Figure 4.2.3 it can be observed that from March 17th to 21st the temperature 
increases both in the supply and outdoors. This indicates that the outdoor temperature had 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
09/03/17 
00.01 
13/03/17 
03.51 
17/03/17 
07.51 
21/03/17 
11.51 
25/03/17 
15.51 
29/03/17 
19.51 
02/04/17 
23.51 
07/04/17 
03.51 
11/04/17 
07.51 
15/04/17 
11.51 
19/04/17 
15.51 
Temperature (°C) 
Five periods and the holiday 
Ventilation on 
Ventilation off 
Period 2 
Period 3 
Period 4 
Period 5 
Holiday 
Period 6 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
09/03/17 
00.01 
13/03/17 
03.51 
17/03/17 
07.51 
21/03/17 
11.51 
25/03/17 
15.51 
29/03/17 
19.51 
02/04/17 
23.51 
07/04/17 
03.51 
11/04/17 
07.51 
15/04/17 
11.51 
19/04/17 
15.51 
Temperature (°C) 
Five periods and the holiday 
Ventilation on 
Ventilation off 
Period 2 
Period 3 
Period 4 
Period 5 
Holiday 
Period 6 
==PAGE:47==
 
41 
an effect on the supply air temperature. Even throgh, the inlet temterature does not increase 
as mush as the outdoor temperature, which indicates the exchangers effectivness. 
 
Figure 4.2.3. Supply temperature from the shaft from period two to six, and with a holiday in between April 10th to 
April 17th 2017. Green: ventilation on. Grey: ventilation off. 
Figure 4.2.4 shows the return air temperature from one of the outlets with short shaft. The 
temperature peaked during the day with a maximum at 25°C the 24/03/17 when the 
ventilation was turned off. The minimum temperature with ventilation on was 20°C, and with 
ventilation off it was 18°C. 
 
 
Figure 4.2.4. Return air temperature from the short exhaust shaft from period two to six and with a holiday in 
between 10 April to 17 April. Green: ventilation on. Grey: ventilation off. 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
09/03/17 
08.40 
13/03/17 
12.40 
17/03/17 
16.40 
21/03/17 
20.40 
26/03/17 
00.40 
30/03/17 
04.40 
03/04/17 
08.40 
07/04/17 
12.40 
11/04/17 
16.40 
15/04/17 
20.40 
20/04/17 
00.40 
Temperature (°C) 
Five periods and the holiday 
Ventilation on 
Ventilation off 
Period 2 
Period 3 
Period 4 
Period 5 
Holiday 
Period 6 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
09/03/17 
14.07 
13/03/17 
18.07 
17/03/17 
22.07 
22/03/17 
02.07 
26/03/17 
06.07 
30/03/17 
10.07 
03/04/17 
14.07 
07/04/17 
18.07 
11/04/17 
22.07 
16/04/17 
02.07 
20/04/17 
06.07 
Temperature (°C) 
Five periods and holiday 
Ventilation on 
Ventilation off 
Period 2 
Period 3 
Period 4 
Period 5 
Holiday 
Period 6 
==PAGE:48==
 
 
 
Results 
42 
Table 4.2.1 shows the maximum air change rate of the window-integrated heat recovery 
ventilation system and the infiltration in classroom Ø21 without ventilation and in room Ø22 
with no ventilation. 
 
Table 4.2.1. Air change rate measured in classroom Ø21 and Ø22 by tracer gas. 
 
Classroom Ø21 with 
maximum ventilation 
Classroom Ø21 with 
ventilation off 
Classroom Ø22 
Air change [h-1] 
4.73 
0.21 
0.23 
 
 
==PAGE:49==
 
43 
4.3 Indoor air quality 
Figure 4.3.1 shows the distribution of the CO2 concentration during the six periods when the 
ventilation was on and off in classroom Ø21. In periods 1, 3, and 5 when the ventilation was 
on, the peak CO2 concentration was drastically reduced compared to periods 2, 4, and 6 
when the ventilation was off. In the periods with ventilation on, the maximum CO2 
concentration was below 1500 ppm. Without the ventilation system running the maximum 
CO2 concentration ranged between 1500 ppm and 3500 ppm and decreased during the 
evening and night when the classrooms were unoccupied. 
 
==PAGE:50==
 
 
 
 
44 
 
 
 
 
 
0 
500 
1000 
1500 
2000 
2500 
3000 
3500 
06/03/17 
07.55 
07/03/17 
02.15 
07/03/17 
20.35 
08/03/17 
14.55 
09/03/17 
09.15 
CO2 concentration (ppm) 
Perioed 1 
CO2 concentratin in period 1 
0 
500 
1000 
1500 
2000 
2500 
3000 
3500 
10/03/17 
07.30 
13/03/17 
08.25 
14/03/17 
09.25 
15/03/17 
10.25 
16/03/17 
11.25 
CO2 concentration (ppm) 
Period 2 
CO2 concentration in period 2 
0 
500 
1000 
1500 
2000 
2500 
3000 
3500 
17/03/17 
06.40 
20/03/17 
07.40 
21/03/17 
08.40 
22/03/17 
09.40 
23/03/17 
10.40 
CO2 concentration (ppm) 
Period 3 
CO2 concentration in period 3 
0 
500 
1000 
1500 
2000 
2500 
3000 
3500 
24/03/17 
07.45 
27/03/17 
08.30 
28/03/17 
09.30 
29/03/17 
10.30 
30/03/17 
11.30 
CO2 concentration (ppm) 
Period 4 
CO2 concentration in period 4 
0 
500 
1000 
1500 
2000 
2500 
3000 
3500 
18/04/17 
07.55 
19/04/17 
08.55 
20/04/17 
09.55 
21/04/17 
10.55 
CO2 concentration 
Period 6 
CO2 concentration in period 6 
0 
500 
1000 
1500 
2000 
2500 
3000 
3500 
31/03/17 
07.15 
03/04/17 
12.20 
04/04/17 
17.30 
05/04/17 
22.40 
07/04/17 
03.50 
CO2 concentration 
Perioed 5 
CO2 concentration in period 5 
Figure 4.3.1. The profiles of the six periods’ CO2 concentration measured in classroom Ø21 in the non-heating 
season. Green: Ventilation on, Gray: Ventilation off. 
==PAGE:51==
 
45 
Figure 4.3.2 shows the CO2 concentration for the last four periods in classroom Ø22. The 
maximum CO2 concentration through the day was between 1500 ppm and 5000 ppm. The 
CO2 concentration increased fast in the morning and then decreased through the afternoon 
and night. In the period between 27/03/17 and 30/03/17 the CO2 concentration was only 
below 1000 ppm in short stages. 
 
 
0 
1000 
2000 
3000 
4000 
5000 
17/03/17 
00.00 
20/03/17 
02.40 
21/03/17 
05.20 
22/03/17 
08.00 
23/03/17 
10.40 
CO2 concentration (ppm) 
Period 3 
0 
1000 
2000 
3000 
4000 
5000 
24/03/17 
00.00 
27/03/17 
02.40 
28/03/17 
05.20 
29/03/17 
08.00 
30/03/17 
10.40 
CO2 concentration (ppm) 
Period 4 
0 
1000 
2000 
3000 
4000 
5000 
31/03/17 
00.00 
03/04/17 
02.40 
04/04/17 
05.20 
05/04/17 
08.00 
06/04/17 
10.40 
CO2 concentration (ppm) 
Period 5 
0 
1000 
2000 
3000 
4000 
5000 
18/04/17 
00.00 
19/04/17 
02.40 
20/04/17 
05.20 
21/04/17 
08.00 
CO2 concentration (ppm) 
Period 6 
Figure 4.3.2. The four last periods profiles of the CO2 concentration measured in classroom Ø22 in the non-heating 
season.  
==PAGE:52==
 
 
 
 
46 
4.4 Thermal environment 
The temperature and relatively humidity were measured in all classrooms. This section will 
briefly present the conditions in classrooms Ø24 and Ø25 and a more detailed presentation 
of the conditions in classrooms Ø21 and Ø22. 
 
4.4.1 Temperature 
Figure 4.4.1 shows the temperature distribution during the six periods when the ventilation 
was on and off in classroom Ø21. The temperature was less affected by the ventilation 
operation mode than the CO2 concentration and in general, the temperature was in the 
comfortable range between 20°C and 24°C. The temperature increased during the day and 
decreased in the evening, but not considerably compared to the outdoor temperature. The 
minimum temperature was 17°C and the maximum temperature was 25°C. Between 8 am 
and 4 pm the temperature only dropped below 18°C in period 1, with ventilation on. 
 
 
Figure 4.4.2 shows the temperature distribution during the six periods in classroom Ø22. 
Also here, the temperature increased during the day and decreased in the evening. In 
Figure 4.4.1. Temperature distribution as a function of the time of day, during the six periods in classroom Ø21. 
Results 
==PAGE:53==
 
47 
periods 2 and 5, the temperature was above 20 °C the whole time. Only in period 6, between 
8 am and 4 pm, was the temperature below 18°C. 
 
Figure 4.4.2. Temperature distribution as a function of the time of day, during the six periods in classroom Ø22. 
Figure 4.4.3 shows the temperature for classrooms Ø24 and Ø25. Classroom Ø24 had a 
mean temperature around 21°C with minimum around 14°C, and maximum around 26°C. 
Only Ø24 had temperatures above 26°C. Classroom Ø25 had a mean temperature at 19°C, 
a minimum around 11°C, and maximum just below 26°C. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
Classroom Ø24 
Classroom Ø25 
Temperature (°C ) 
Figure 4.4.3. Boxplots of the distribution of the temperature in classrooms Ø24 and Ø25 measured in six 
periods from Mach 6th to April 21th 2017. 
==PAGE:54==
 
 
 
 
48 
4.4.2 Relative humidity 
Figure 4.4.4 shows the distribution of the relative humidity in classroom Ø21. In the periods 
with ventilation off (grey), the peaks were higher than in the periods with ventilation on 
(green). The peaks occurred during the days when the classes were occupied. In the 
weekends and holidays the relative humidity was steadier and did not reach the same peaks. 
 
The Danish Working Environment Authority recommends that relative humidity should be 
between 25 and 60%. The minimum relative humidity was 20% which occurred at night 
between the 07/03/17 and 08/03/17, and in the afternoon on the 23/03/17. Both situations 
occurred in the periods when the ventilation was on. The maximum relative humidity was 
55% on 30/03/17 during a day with ventilation off. 
 
 
Figure 4.4.4. Relative humidity in the six periods and with a holiday in between from April 10th to April 17th 2017. 
Green: ventilation on. Grey: ventilation of. 
Figure 4.4.5 shows the distribution of relative humidity in classroom Ø22. Peaks occurred 
during the days when the classes were occupied. But in the weekends and holiday the 
relative humidity was steady. The minimum relative humidity was 24% and occurred in the 
afternoon on 23/03/17 and 24/03/17. The maximum observed relative humidity was 55% on 
20/03/17 during the day. 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
45 
50 
55 
60 
06/03/17 
07.55 
10/03/17 
20.15 
15/03/17 
08.35 
19/03/17 
20.55 
24/03/17 
09.15 
28/03/17 
21.35 
02/04/17 
09.55 
06/04/17 
22.15 
11/04/17 
10.35 
15/04/17 
22.55 
20/04/17 
11.15 
Relative humidity (%) 
The six periods and the holiday 
Ventilation on 
Ventilation off 
Period 1 
Period 2 
Period 3 
Period 4 
Period 5 
Holiday 
Period 6 
Results 
==PAGE:55==
 
49 
 
Figure 4.4.5. Relative humidity in the six periods and with a holiday in between from 10 April to 17 April. 
Figure 4.4.6 shows the relative humidity in classrooms Ø24 and Ø25. In classroom Ø24 the 
mean relative humidity was 35% and the maximum relative humidity was 56%, which is 
within the recommendation from the Danish Working Environment Authority. The minimum 
relative humidity was 16% and thus under the minimum recommendation. 
 
In classroom Ø25 the mean relative humidity was 40%. The maximum relative humidity was 
64% and the minimum relative humidity was 24%, which was outside the Danish Working 
Environment Authority recommendations. Classroom Ø25 was the only room with relative 
humidity higher then the recommended. 
 
 
 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
45 
50 
55 
60 
06/03/17 
00.00 
11/03/17 
22.35 
16/03/17 
10.55 
20/03/17 
23.15 
25/03/17 
11.35 
29/03/17 
23.55 
03/04/17 
12.15 
12/04/17 
01.35 
16/04/17 
13.55 
21/04/17 
02.15 
Raletive humidity (%) 
Six periods and the holiday 
Period 1 
Period 2 
Period 3 
Period 4 
Period 5 
Holiday 
Period 6 
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
60 
70 
Classroom Ø24 
Classroom Ø25 
Relative humidity (%) 
Figure 4.4.6. Boxplots of the distribution of the relative humidity in classrooms Ø24 and Ø25 measured in six 
periods from the Mach 6th to April 21th 2017. 
==PAGE:56==
 
 
 
 
50 
4.5 Difference in indoor environment in classroom Ø21 with and 
without ventilation running 
Figure 4.5.1 shows the cumulative distribution of CO2 in classroom Ø21, with ventilation on 
and off in the occupied hours. The CO2 concentration was higher than 1000 ppm for around 
17% of the time with ventilation on and 92% of the time with ventilation off. With ventilation 
on, the CO2 concentration never reached 1500 ppm but with ventilation off the CO2 
concentration was higher than 1500 ppm for around 65% of the time. This indicates that the 
ventilation system was highly efficient at removing the CO2 from the classroom. 
 
Figure 4.5.1. Cumulative distribution of the CO2 concentration of classroom Ø21 with ventilation on and off. 
Figure 4.5.2 shows the cumulative distribution of temperature in classroom Ø21 with and 
without ventilation on in the occupied hours. The temperature was generally higher when the 
ventilation was off compared to when the ventilation was on. Only around 4% of the time, the 
temperature was lower when the ventilation was off. This was at the minimum temperature 
from 17 to 19°C. When the ventilation was on, the temperature were lower than 20!°C for 
around 13% of the time and never reached 24! °C. When the ventilation was off the 
temperature was under 20°C for around 6% of the time and higher than 24°C for 10% of the 
time. 
 
0 
500 
1000 
1500 
2000 
2500 
3000 
3500 
0% 
10% 
20% 
30% 
40% 
50% 
60% 
70% 
80% 
90% 
100% 
CO2 concentration (ppm) 
Cumulative distribution (%) 
Cumulative distribution of the CO2 concentration in classroom Ø21 
Ventilation on 
Ventilation off 
Results 
==PAGE:57==
 
51 
 
Figure 4.5.2. Cumulative distribution of the temperature of classroom Ø21 with ventilation on and off. 
 
Figure 4.5.3 shows the cumulative distribution of sound pressure level in classroom Ø21 with 
and without ventilation. Except during 3% of the time, the sound pressure level was slightly 
higher when the ventilation was on than when it was off. 50% of the time the sound pressure 
level was above 64 dB (A) with ventilation off and above 67 dB (A) when the ventilation was 
on. 
 
 
Figure 4.5.3. Cumulative distribution of the Temperature of classroom Ø21 with ventilation on and off. 
 
 
16 
18 
20 
22 
24 
26 
0% 
10% 
20% 
30% 
40% 
50% 
60% 
70% 
80% 
90% 
100% 
Temperature (°C) 
Cumulative distribution (%) 
Cumulative distribution of the temperature in classroom Ø21 
Ventilation on 
Ventilation off 
30 
40 
50 
60 
70 
80 
90 
0% 
10% 
20% 
30% 
40% 
50% 
60% 
70% 
80% 
90% 
100% 
Sound pressure level (dB (A)) 
Cumulative distribution (%) 
Cumulative curve of sound pressure level per day for the hole period 
Ventilation on 
Ventilation off 
==PAGE:58==
 
 
 
 
52 
4.6 Association between sound pressure level CO2 concentration, 
and temperature 
Figure 4.6.1 shows how the sound pressure level was distributed compared to the CO2 
concentration throughout a day with ventilation on and a day with ventilation off. Although the 
CO2 concentration and sound pressure level generally increased and decreased in the same 
time periods due to occupancy the CO2 concentration did not seem to have a notable 
influence on the sound peaks. 
 
 
 
30 
35 
40 
45 
50 
55 
60 
65 
70 
75 
80 
400 
900 
1400 
1900 
2400 
2900 
3400 
30/03/17 
06.40 
30/03/17 
09.10 
30/03/17 
11.40 
30/03/17 
14.10 
Sound pressure level (dB (A)) 
CO2 concentration (ppm)  
CO2 concentration and sound pressure level 
Thuesday in period 4 
CO2 concentration 
Sound level 
30 
35 
40 
45 
50 
55 
60 
65 
70 
75 
80 
400 
600 
800 
1000 
1200 
1400 
09/03/17 
06.55 
09/03/17 
09.25 
09/03/17 
11.55 
09/03/17 
14.25 
Sound pressure level (dB (A)) 
CO2 concentration (ppm) 
CO2 concentration and sound pressure level 
Thuesday in period 1 
CO2 concentration 
Sound level 
Figure 4.6.1. CO2 concentration and sound pressure level during Tuesday the 09/03/17 with ventilation on (upper) 
and Tuesday the 30/30/17 with ventilation off (lower).  
Results 
==PAGE:59==
 
53 
4.7 Association between sound pressure level, CO2 concentration 
and air temperature 
Figure 4.7.1 shows the association between CO2 concentration and temperature in 
classroom Ø21. The CO2 concentration increased with the temperature. This indicated that 
the ventilation system removes heat as well as CO2. 
 
 
Figure 4.7.1. Association between the CO2 concentration and the temperature in classroom Ø21, during the six 
periods. 
Figure 4.7.2 shows the association between sound pressure level and CO2 concentration. 
There was shown no association between these parameters. This indicates that the pupils’ 
were not louder when the CO2 concentration increased. 
 
 
Figure 4.7.2. Association between the CO2 concentration and the sound pressure level in classroom Ø21, during 
the six periods. 
15 
17 
19 
21 
23 
25 
27 
350 
850 
1350 
1850 
2350 
2850 
3350 
3850 
Temperature (°C) 
CO2 concentration (ppm) 
15 
25 
35 
45 
55 
65 
75 
85 
95 
350 
850 
1350 
1850 
2350 
2850 
3350 
3850 
Sound pressure level (dB (A)) 
CO2 concentration (ppm) 
==PAGE:60==
 
 
 
 
54 
Figure 4.7.3 shows the association between the sound pressure level and the temperature. 
Also there was no association between the sound pressure level and the temperature. 
 
Figure 4.7.3. Association between the temperature and the sound pressure level in classroom Ø21, during the six 
periods. 
 
 
 
15 
25 
35 
45 
55 
65 
75 
85 
95 
16 
18 
20 
22 
24 
26 
Sound pressure level (dB (A)) 
Temperature (°C) 
Results 
==PAGE:61==
 
55 
 
4.8 Pupils’ symptoms and perceptions 
Questionnaires were conducted on 43 pupils in classrooms Ø21 and Ø22 during the 
measured periods. The results from these are associated with the temperature, CO2 
concentration and sound pressure level and presented through simple plots and statistical 
analyses. Table 4.8.1 presents a summary of the results from the questionnaires. It shows 
whether the temperature, CO2 concentration and sound pressure level have been found to 
influence the different symptoms and perceptions. If the three indoor parameters are 
statistically significant the p-level is stated. 
Table 4.8.1. Overview of the association between the questionnaires and temperature, CO2 concentration, and 
sound pressure level, including which question s are statistically significant and non-significant (ns). 
 
Question 
When   ! 
Temperature 
CO2 concentration 
Sound pressure level 
How were you this 
week 
How were you in 
school? 
- 
ns 
ns 
ns 
How were you 
outside school? 
!= were 
better 
p < 0.05 
ns 
ns 
How was the 
classroom this 
week? 
Was it too warm? 
- 
ns 
ns 
ns 
Was it too cold? 
!= colder 
p < 0.05 
ns 
ns 
Did you feel draft? 
- 
ns 
ns 
ns 
Was the air fresh? 
- 
ns 
ns 
ns 
Was there too 
much noise? 
! and  != too 
noise 
ns 
p = 0.0056 
p = 0.0018 
Was it too light? 
- 
ns 
ns 
ns 
Was it too dark? 
- 
ns 
ns 
ns 
How were you this 
week, while you 
were in the 
classroom? 
Stuffy nose? 
!= stuffy 
nose 
ns 
p = 0.0018 
ns 
Dry skin? 
!= dry skin 
ns 
p < 0.05 
ns 
Dry throat? 
- 
ns 
ns 
ns 
Tired eyes? 
!= tired eyes 
ns 
ns 
p < 0.01 
Tired? 
! and != tired 
p < 0.05 
ns 
p < 0.01 
Headache? 
!= headache 
ns 
p = 0.018 
ns 
Concentrate? 
- 
ns 
ns 
ns 
Inclination? 
- 
ns 
ns 
ns 
I felt good? 
!= felt good 
p = 0.0175 
ns 
ns 
4.8.1 Perception of the indoor environment 
First it is interesting to investigate if the pupils were able to sense the quality of the indoor 
environment itself. To find their sensitivity to their surroundings, the pupils’ perception of the 
three indoor parameters temperature, CO2 concentration and sound pressure level was 
observed. 
Figure 4.8.1 (left) shows that the pupils’ mean perception of warmth did not change with the 
temperature. Probably as a consequence of the temperature not exceeding 24°C. 
Figure 4.8.1 (right) shows that lower temperature appeared colder to the pupils. Based on 
multiple logistic regression analyses (p < 0.05; logistic regression), it can be observed that 
the temperature had a significant influence on the pupils’ perception of cold in the classroom. 
This may indicate that the pupils were more observant to colder conditions. 
==PAGE:62==
 
 
 
 
56 
Figure 4.8.2 (left) indicates that the pupils’ perception of the indoor air quality decreased with 
increasing CO2 concentration. However, based on multiple logistic regression analyses it 
was found that the effect was not significant (p < 0.1; logistics regression). This can either 
indicate that the pupils had an idea of the indoor air quality, but may not fully comprehend the 
term “indoor air quality” term or that they have adapted to the (sometimes poor) indoor air 
quality conditions. 
Figure 4.8.2 (right) shows that the pupils’ perception of noise in the classroom increased with 
the sound pressure level (p < 0.01; logistic regression). At the lowest sound pressure level 
on 46 dB (A) the mean perception was on step 2, which is one step worse than “not too 
noisy”. 
 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
500 
1000 
1500 
2000 
2500 
3000 
Pupils' perceptions of air quality in 
the classroom 
CO2 concentration (ppm) 
Bad 
air 
Fresh 
air 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
45 
50 
55 
60 
65 
70 
75 
Pupils' perceptions of noise in the 
classroom 
Sound pressure level (dB (A)) 
Too 
noisy 
Not 
too 
noisy 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
20 
21 
22 
23 
24 
Pupils' perceptions of warmth in the 
classroom 
Temperature (°C) 
Felt 
warm 
Felt 
normal 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
20 
21 
22 
23 
24 
Pipils' perceptions of cold in the 
classroom 
Temperature (°C) 
Felt 
cold 
Felt 
normal 
Figure 4.8.1. Pupils’ perceptions of the heat and cold in classrooms Ø21 and Ø22 compared to the mean 
temperature in the hour they responded to the questions. 
Figure 4.8.2 Pupils’ perceptions of air quality and noise in classrooms Ø21 and Ø22 compared to the mean CO2 
concentration and mean sound level in the hour they responded to the questions. 
Results 
==PAGE:63==
 
57 
4.8.2 Perceived symptoms 
Figure 4.8.4 (left) shows that the pupils perceived their skin as drier with increasing CO2 
concentration. Based on multiple logistic regression analyses, Figure 4.8.4 (right) shows that 
at the lowest CO2 concentration at 773 ppm, around 70% of the pupils perceived a normal 
skin. At the highest CO2 concentration at 2823 ppm, around 50% of the pupils perceived a 
normal skin (p < 0.05; logistic regression). The percentage of pupils with dry skin was low 
around 1 – 4 %. 
 
Figure 4.8.3 shows that the pupils perceived their nose as stuffier with increasing CO2 
concentration. Based on multiple logistic regression analyses, Figure 4.8.3 (right) shows that at 
the lowest mean CO2 concentration at 773 ppm, around 65% of the pupils had clear noses. 
At the highest CO2 concentration at 2823 ppm, only around 35% felt their nose to be clear (p 
< 0.01; logistic regression). This indicates that higher CO2 concentrations resulted in the 
students having stuffy noses more often. 
 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
500 
1000 
1500 
2000 
2500 
3000 
Pupils' degree of dry skin 
CO2 concentration (ppm) 
!"##
#"$%
#"%#
#"&%
#"##
'()*+*,-,./
!###
!%##
&###
&%##
01&223)4354.(+.,)42677892
:)(8+-
;<,4
=(/2;<,4
%
>
?
&
!
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
500 
1000 
1500 
2000 
2500 
3000 
Pulpils' perception of stuf nose 
CO2 concentration (ppm) 
Figure 4.8.4. Pupils’ degree of dry skin in classrooms Ø21 and Ø22 compared to the mean CO2 concentration, in the 
hour they responded to the question. Mean responses (left) and the probability of response (right). 
Figure 4.8.3. Pupils’ degree of stuffy nose in classrooms Ø21 and Ø22 compared to the mean CO2 concentration in the 
hour they responded to the question. Mean responses (left) and the probability of response (right). 
 
!"##
#"$%
#"%#
#"&%
#"##
'()*+*,-,./
01&223)4354.(+.,)42677892
0-5+(
4):5
;.<==/
4):5
%
>
?
&
!
!###
!%##
&###
&%##
==PAGE:64==
 
 
 
 
58 
Figure 4.8.5 (left) shows that the pupils’ perceived headache increased with the CO2 
concentration. Based on multiple logistic regression analyses, Figure 4.8.5 (right) shows that 
at the lowest CO2 concentration at 773 ppm, around 53% of the pupils had no headache. 
The pupils’ perceived headache increased with increasing CO2 concentration and, at 2823 
ppm around 68% complained of headache (p < 0.01; logistic regression). This indicates that 
the CO2 concentration negatively affected the pupils’ perception of headache. 
 
 
Figure 4.8.6 (left) shows that the pupils’ perception of tiredness decreased as the 
temperature increased. Figure 4.8.6 (right) shows that at the lowest mean temperature at 
around 21°C, 27% of the pupils did not feel tired, while at 24°C, 52% felt tired (p < 0.05; 
logistic regression). 10 to 25% of the pupils perceived themselves as tired across all 
temperatures. 
 
 
Figure 4.8.7 (left) shows that the pupils’ perception of tiredness increased with the sound 
pressure level. It can be observed that the pupils’ perception moves from step 1 to step 3 in 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
500 
1000 
1500 
2000 
2500 
3000 
Pupils' perception of headache 
CO2 concentration (ppm) 
!"##
#"$%
#"%#
#"&%
#"##
'()*+*,-,./
!###
!%##
&###
&%##
01&223)4354.(+.,)42677892
:)
;5+<+3;5
=5+<+3;5
%
>
?
&
!
!"#$%$&'&()
*+,-+"%(."+/0/12
3455
5467
5475
5487
5455
9#(
(&"+:
*&"+:
7
;
<
8
3
83
88
8<
8;
Figure 4.8.5. Pupils’ degree of headache in the classrooms Ø21 and Ø22 compared to the mean CO2 concentration in 
the hour they responded to the question. Mean responses (left) and the probability of response (right). 
Figure 4.8.6. Pupils’ degree of tiredness in the classroom Ø21 and Ø22 compared to the mean temperature in the hour 
they responded to the question. Tendency of the mean responses (left) and the probability of response (right) 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
20,0 
21,0 
22,0 
23,0 
24,0 
Pupils' perception of tiredness 
Temperature (°C) 
Results 
==PAGE:65==
 
59 
the scale when the sound pressure increases from 46 dB (A) to 70 dB (A). Based on multiple 
logistic regression analyses, Figure 4.8.7 (right) shows that at the lowest sound pressure 
level at 46 dB (A) around 60% of the pupils did not feel tired. At 70 dB (A) only 33% of the 
pupils did not feel tired (p < 0.01; logistics regression). 
 
 
Sound pressure level has additionally shown to have a significant effect (p < 0.01; logistics 
regression) on the pupils’ perception of tired eyes. This indicated that the pupils’ perception 
of different factors of tiredness increases concurrently with the sound pressure level. 
 
The pupils’ mood was shown to be affected by the temperature. At decreasing temperatures 
the pupils were in better mood when outside the school and at increasing temperatures the 
pupils felt better in general. 
 
None of the indoor environment factors appeared to have a significant effect on the pupils’ 
perception of their concentration nor their work inclination. This may indicate that either the 
pupils did not change their work inclination in general or they were not able to tell whether 
they were inclined to work or not. 
 
 
 
 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
46 48 50 52 54 56 58 60 62 64 66 68 70 
Pupils' perception of tiredness 
Sound pressure level (dB (A)) 
Figure 4.8.7. Pupils’ degree of tiredness in classroom Ø21 and Ø22 compared to the mean sound level in the 
hour they responded to the question. Mean responses (left) and the probability of response (right) 
!"##
#"$%
#"%#
#"&%
#"##
'( ') %# %& %' %( %) (# (& (' (( () $#
*+,-.-/0/12
3,45678+9::4+9709;907<6=7<>??
@,1
1/+96
A/+96
%
'
B
&
!
==PAGE:66==
 
 
 
 
60 
4.9 Pupils’ performance 
4.9.1 Pupils’ concentration performance 
Figure 4.9.1 (left) shows the mean progress of the d2 test over time for the pupils in 
classroom Ø21. Figure 4.9.1 (right) shows the mean progress of the d2 test over time for the 
pupils in classroom Ø22. For both classes the mean concentration performance in period 1 
was lower than in the other periods (Ø21: p < 0.0001 and Ø22: p < 0.005). This may indicate 
that the pupils were still learning to do this type of test and may have been more affected by 
that, than the CO2 concentration. Classroom Ø22 had a significance change in period 2 (p < 
0.0001). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
bb 
To eliminate the effect caused by the pupils’ learning, the two first periods were removed in 
the rest of the analyses of the concentration performance. 
 
Figure 4.9.2 shows the mean concentration performance for classroom Ø21, both with 
ventilation on and off, and classroom Ø22. The concentration performance was in general 
higher in class Ø21 than class Ø22. It should be noted that class Ø21 had a higher 
concentration performance when the ventilation was off. As class Ø21 had been ventilated 
for approx. three month before the field study, this may indicate that the ventilation can have 
a positive effect on the long-term concentration performance. However, after adjusting for the 
individual pupils, no significant difference (p < 0.06; generalised linear regression) is found 
between pupils’ mean concentration performance and whether the ventilation was on or off. 
 
300 
320 
340 
360 
380 
400 
420 
440 
460 
480 
500 
Period 
1 
Period 
2 
Period 
3 
Period 
4 
Period 
5 
Period 
6  
d2 test concentration performance 
Periods where the test was carried out 
Figure 4.9.1. Association between mean d2-test concentration performance and the periods the test was carried 
out. Left: Test from classroom Ø21. Right: Test from classroom Ø22 where green: ventilation on and grey:
ventilation off or no ventilation. 
300 
320 
340 
360 
380 
400 
420 
440 
460 
480 
500 
Period 
1 
Period 
2 
Period 
3 
Period 
4 
Period 
5 
Period 
6  
d2 test concentration performance 
Periods where the test was carried out 
Results 
==PAGE:67==
 
61 
 
Figure 4.9.2. Distribution of mean d2-test concentration performance for the pupils in classroom Ø21 ventilation 
on and of, and Ø22 respectively, in proportion to when the ventilation is on. 
Figure 4.9.3 shows that the pupils’ concentration performance increases with the CO2 
concentration. The association between the performance and CO2 concentration was a linear 
distribution and showed to be significant (p < 0.01; generalised linear regression). This 
indicates that an increasing CO2 concentration had a positive effect on the pupils’ 
performance. In this model, several other factors such as the temperature and sound 
pressure level are not accounted for. However, when making a new statistical model, which 
includes these two factors, increasing CO2 concentration still showed to be statistically 
significant (p < 0.05). 
300 
320 
340 
360 
380 
400 
420 
440 
460 
Ø21 ventilation on 
Ø21 ventilaiton off 
Ø22 
d2 test concentration performance 
Mean of the different periods 
==PAGE:68==
 
 
 
 
62 
4.9.2 Pupils’ error percentage 
Figure 4.9.4 shows the mean d2 test error percentage for both Ø21 (left) and Ø22 (right) in 
the periods the test was carried out. Figure 4.9.4 (left) shows the highest error percentage at 
6.94% in period 2 and lowest at 4.97% in period 5. Figure 4.9.4 (right) shows the highest 
error % at 4.93% in period 5 where the ventilation was off and lowest at 6.66% in period 6 
where the ventilation was on. In general the error percentage was lower for classroom Ø21 
than Ø22. 
 
 
Figure 4.9.5 shows that the CO2 concentration has no effect on the pupils’ error percentage 
(p< 0.9; generalised linear regression). This implies that the CO2 concentration had no 
impact on the pupils’ errors. 
Figure 4.9.3. Association between the mean d2 test performance and the mean CO2 concentration  
0 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
Period 1 Period 2 Period 3 Period 4 Period 5 Period 6  
d2 test error % 
Periods where the test are carried out 
Figure 4.9.4 Association between mean d2 test error percentage and the periods the test was carried out. Left: 
Test from classroom Ø21. Right: Test from classroom Ø22 where green: ventilation on and grey: ventilation off or
no ventilation. 
220 
270 
320 
370 
420 
470 
520 
570 
620 
670 
700 
1200 
1700 
2200 
2700 
d2 test concentration performance 
CO2 concentration (ppm) 
0 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
Period 1 Period 2 Period 3 Period 4 Period 5 Period 6  
d2 test error % 
Periods where the test are carried out 
Results 
==PAGE:69==
 
63 
 
 
0 
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
700 
1200 
1700 
2200 
2700 
d2 test error percentiles 
CO2 concentration (ppm) 
Figure 4.9.5. Association between the d2 test error percentage and the mean CO2 concentration. 
==PAGE:70==
 
 
 
 
64 
4.10 Energy consumption for ventilation and space heating 
Energy consumption for classroom Ø21 had been conducted through four case studies in 
IDA ICE. The four cases can be observed in section 3.5. 
 
Figure 4.10.1 shows that the energy used for heating increased when the windows opened 
according to a schedule for both the cases with and without ventilation. The lowest energy 
use was in Case 1 at 6.6 kWh/m2/y. The highest was for Case 4 at 35.9 kWh/m2/y. The 
HVAC AUX use of energy had a small increase when the windows were not opened at 1.1 
kWh/m2/y. 
The energy use for heating was equal for Case 2 with only window opening after schedule 
and Case 3 only ventilation on. 
 
 
Figure 4.10.1 Simulated energy use for heating and ventilation in classroom Ø21. 
Table 4.10.1 shows the maximum CO2 concentration through a day for the four cases. The 
highest CO2 concentration at 12729 ppm occurred in Case 1 when the windows remained 
closed all the time. In Case 2 where the windows were opened according to a schedule, the 
max CO2 concentration was 4136 ppm. For both cases with ventilation, the CO2 
concentration stayed below 1000 ppm and only a minimal difference can be observed. This 
indicates that the there are no need for opening the windows to improve the indoor air quality 
when the ventilation was on. 
 
Table 4.10.1 Max CO2 concentration for the four case studies. 
 
Case 1 
Case 2 
Case 3 
Case 4 
Max 
CO2 
concentration 
(ppm) 
12729 
4136 
877 
862 
 
 
0 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
Case 1 
Case 2 
Case 3 
Case 4 
kWh/m2/y 
District heating use  
HVAC AUX use 
Results 
==PAGE:71==
 
65 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 Discussion 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:72==
 
 
 
Discussion 
66 
The purpose of this study was to evaluate the performance of a window integrated ventilation 
system with heat recovery at a school during the heating season. The performance was 
evaluated in regards to the classroom air quality and thermal environment, the pupils’ 
perception of the indoor environment and their performance.  
 
The performance of the ventilation system was evaluated through six periods where the 
system alternated between being off or set to automatic mode (on). The pupils’ perception 
and performance were evaluated in two classrooms, one with the window integrated 
ventilation system, Ø21, and one where ventilation could be achieved only by manual 
opening of windows, Ø22. The system energy use was evaluated through simulations.!
5.1 Interpreting results 
5.1.1 Indoor parameters 
The window integrated ventilation system had a large effect on the classroom air quality. In 
the periods when the ventilation system was on, the CO2 concentration was below the 
recommendations from the Danish Building Regulations and Danish Working Environment 
Authority (DWEA) (bygningsreglementet 6.3.1.3, 2016 and www.arbejdstilsynet, 2008). 
When the ventilation was off in Ø21, the maximum CO2 concentration was 3465 ppm and for 
65% of the time the CO2 concentration was above the recommendations. This shows that the 
recommendations could only be met when the ventilation system was on. Classrooms Ø22, 
Ø24 and Ø25 did not meet the recommendations from the Danish Building Regulations and 
DWEA (bygningsreglementet 6.3.1.3, 2016 and www.arbejdstilsynet, 2008). This supports 
that there in general is the need for fan assisted ventilation to improve the indoor air quality in 
the classrooms. 
 
With the ventilation system on, the temperature was generally lower than when it was off. 
Also, it was more often in the recommenced range of DS/CEN CR 1752, DWEA and Danish 
Center for Educational Environment (DCEE) than with ventilation off (DS 1752, 2001 and 
www.arbejdstilsynet, 2008 and www.dcum.dk, 2016). With the ventilation system on, the 
temperature was below 20°C for 13% of the time when the room was occupied and above 
22°C for 40% of the time. With ventilation off, the temperature was below 20°C for 6% of the 
time during occupancy and above 22°C for 72% of the time. This shows that even though the 
ventilation system had heat recovery, the temperature decreased some degrees, but stayed 
in the recommended range for a higher amount of time. This was supported by the 
association between the temperature and the CO2 concentration. Classrooms Ø22, Ø24, and 
Ø25 all had temperatures outside the recommended range as specified in DS/CEN CR 1752, 
DWEA and DCEE (DS 1752, 2001 and www.arbejdstilsynet, 2008 and www.dcum.dk, 2016). 
 
In classroom Ø21 the relative humidity was lower in the period with ventilation on than when 
it was off. During four days when the system was on the relative humidity was even lower 
than the 25% recommended by DWEA and DCEE (www.arbejdstilsynet, 2008 and 
www.dcum.dk, 2016). This only occurred during one day when the ventilation was off. Both 
with ventilation on and off, the relative humidity were never higher than the 60% 
recommended by DWEA (www.arbejdstilsynet, 2008). This indicates that the outdoor air 
supplied by the ventilation system contributed to reducing the relative humidity. 
==PAGE:73==
 
67 
 
The sound pressure level in classroom Ø21 was higher when the ventilation was on than 
when it was off. At no time, both with ventilation on and off, was the sound pressure level 
lower than the 35 dB (A) the DS/EN 15251 standard recommends (DS 15251, 2007). 
However, the sound pressure level was always under 85 dB (A) where hearing protection is 
recommended by DWEA (www.arbejdstilsynet, 2008). 
 
The CO2 concentration and the temperature did not have a direct impact on the sound 
pressure level. However, the sound pressure level increased when the ventilation was on. 
This may indicate that the ventilation system itself negatively affected the sound pressure 
level in the classroom. 
5.1.2 Pupils’ perceptions and symptoms 
The pupils were able to perceive when the room was cold, but they were not able to perceive 
warmth. This may indicate that they were more bothered when the room was too cold than 
when it was too warm. But it is most likely due to the room never being too warm. The 
temperature was always below 24°C, which is below the recommendation from DS/CEN CR 
1752 and the maximum recommended temperature from DWEA. On the contrary, the 
temperature was below 22°C twice during completion of the questionnaires, which is below 
the recommendation from DS/CEN CR 1752, DWEA, and DCEE (DS 1752, 2001 and 
www.arbejdstilsynet, 2008 and www.dcum.dk, 2016) 
 
Increasing CO2 concentration affected the pupils’ perception of stuffy nose, dry skin, and 
headache. These symptoms have been associated with too high CO2 concentration also in 
other studies (Myhrald et al., 1996 and Toftum et al., 2011). These studies indicated that too 
high CO2 concentration can lead to higher prevalence of SBS symptoms in school 
classrooms. 
 
Decreasing temperature had a negative impact on the pupils’ perception of how they felt 
outside school, how they felt in general, and their tiredness. Mood has earlier been 
associated with the temperature (Toftum et al., 2011). 
 
Increasing sound pressure level was found to make the pupils feel more tired and have more 
tired eyes. Tiredness has not been associated with noise before. However, other studies 
have found that noise influences children’s heath, ability to hear, speech perception, and 
stress level (Crandell & Smaldino, 2000, Bistrup, 2001 and Cohen et al., 1986). 
5.1.3 Pupils concentration performance 
The results showed that the concentration performance actually increased with the CO2 
concentration. Also, there was no significant association between the concentration 
performance and whether the ventilation was on or off. This was a surprising result, as it was 
expected that the students would perform equally well or slightly worse with increasing CO2 
==PAGE:74==
 
 
 
Discussion 
68 
concentration. Twardella et al. (2012) used the d2-test as well and found no association 
between the concentration performance and the CO2 concentration. The unexpected result in 
the present work is most likely caused by other factors than the CO2 concentration. 
 
A reason could be, that parameters like light had an unexpected impact on the concentration 
performance test. Lighting is not taken into account in the performance test. Another reason 
could be the teacher-to-teacher variation, which was not taken into account in the model. The 
effect of the teacher could have an impact on the concentration performance tests, as they 
were an active part of the tests. They had to take time, and also make sure to hand out the 
tests with the bottom side up before start. It is estimated that it is more likely that the above 
factors (or other factors) may have dominated the outcome of the concentration performance 
tests. 
 
Another completely different reason could be that the d2 test might not always be the best 
way to measure how well the pupils are able to concentrate. In Twardella et al. (2012) it is 
emphasized that unexpected results could be caused by uncertainty in the d2 test. Twardella 
et al. (2012) suggest that the poor air quality does not impact the short-term concentration, 
and that the effect only appears after longer concentration efforts. Studies based on math 
tests and reading tests have shown a significant association between the concentration 
performance and the ventilation rate and CO2 concentration (Satish & Medell, 2012 and 
Gaihre & Semple, 2014 and Wargocki & Wyon (2010 and 2013) and Bakó-Biró et al, 2007 
and Haverinen-Shaughnessy, 2011). 
5.1.4 Energy use 
Through IDA ICE simulations it was found that case 4, with window opening and ventilation 
system on, had the lowest CO2 concentration at 862 ppm, but also the highest energy use at 
39.9 kWh/m2/y. Without the ventilation system (cases 1 and 2) the energy use was highly 
reduced to 6.6 kWh/m2/y and 18.3 kWh/m2/y, but as a result the CO2 concentration increased 
drastically to 12729 ppm and 4136 ppm from 877 ppm and 862 ppm respectively, in cases 3 
and 4. The CO2 concentration for both cases with ventilation on (cases 3 and 4) indicates 
that there is no need for window opening in these situations. 
 
Window opening did not affect the CO2 concentration when the ventilation system was 
running. And it may indicate that the opening of windows in classroom Ø21 was caused more 
by habits than the need to improve the indoor climate (Gao, Wargocki & Wang, 2014). 
5.2 Window integrated heat recovery system 
The ventilation system has mixing air distribution. How well it distributes and mixes the air 
depends on several factors: The room layout and size, placement of the devices, amount of 
air and the flow pattern from inlet and outlet devices. The throw length should be designed so 
the air velocity in the occupied zone does not exceed 0.15-0.20 m/s, and the throw length 
should not exceed the distance to the walls as it would then create a cold jet streaming down 
the wall and into the occupied zone (Danvak, 2000). The supply diffusers for this system are 
placed relatively close to the wall, which could cause discomfort for the pupils and teachers. 
==PAGE:75==
 
69 
However, the throw length was not determined, so it is unknown if the throw length limit is 
violated. 
 
The placement of the supply in relation to the exhaust diffusers is important to avoid short 
circuit of the ventilation air. This ventilation system is well designed in regard to avoiding 
short circuit as described in chapter 3.2. 
5.3 Field study 
The pupils had one pre-test before the field study phase began. This was shown not to be 
enough to eliminate learning effects when taking the d2-test, as it was found that the pupils 
were still learning during the two first periods. Prior to starting the study, the pupils should 
possibly have had more pre-tests to minimize their learning progress in the results. However, 
additional pre-tests may have compromised their willingness to take the test during the actual 
study period. 
 
The teachers were instructed on how the d2 test and questionnaires should be presented. 
They were not to inform the pupils why the questionnaires and d2 tests were conducted, as 
this could influence the answers and their performance. Likewise, the pupils were not 
allowed to look at each other’s answers or communicate while the questionnaires and d2 test 
were carried out. As the questionnaires and d2 test progress was supervised by the 
teachers, but the results analysed by the undersigned, mistakes and irregularities regarding 
the test procedures may have been overlooked. 
5.3.1 Questionnaires 
An ordinal scale with five steps was used for all the questions to ensure sufficient resolution 
without confusing the pupils by having too many response options. When answering the 
questions, the pupils in general used the entire scale. However, a considerable number of 
the pupils mainly used only the first two options. This could be caused by various reasons. 
First, it could indicate that the children in general were pleased with the indoor environment 
and felt good, or that they accepted the conditions after occupying the room for a longer time. 
Second, it could mean that a five-step scale was too many steps for the pupils to manage 
and understand. Third, the questionnaires were filled out just before recess. This could result 
in the pupils not fully focusing on the questionnaires, as they just wanted to finish their 
questionnaire and go to recess. 
 
Emoji illustrations were used on the five-step scale to explain feelings and conditions. After 
the pre-test, the teachers were asked to report if the pupils had had difficulties of 
understanding the scale and illustrations, however this seemed not to have been the case. 
This indicates either that the pupils had no problems in understanding the illustrations or that 
the teachers simply forgot to report on any issues they encountered. 
 
5.3.2 Concentration performance d2 test 
==PAGE:76==
 
 
 
Discussion 
70 
The pupils’ learning curve for the d2-test was not as fast as expected. Correction where 
made by weighting the performance indicators with the d2-test carried out in period 1. The 
pupils where shown to need one pre-test and two actual tests to incorporate the d2-test 
technique. One solution could be to provide the pupils with more pre-tests. This would have 
given them sufficient experience before the field study started. A second solution would be to 
give the pupils a test based on elements that they are familiar with, like math or spelling. 
5.4 Data processing 
5.4.1 Indoor environment 
Data from the HOBOlogger was used to analyse the temperature, relative humidity, and air 
quality. In several time periods the HOBOlogger had gaps in the measurements of the indoor 
parameters. In these time periods data from Netatmo was used in classrooms Ø21 and Ø22. 
Measure gaps in classrooms Ø24 and Ø25 were not compensated as only HOBOloggers 
were installed. This may indicate that the results did not give the full overview of the indoor 
environment in classrooms Ø24 and Ø25, but only a minimal different in the results from 
classrooms Ø21 and Ø22. 
 
Data in the periods when pupils were present was clarified from the timetable handed out by 
the school. To cater for absence due to library visits, activity days/hours etc. the data was 
sorted relative to the sound pressure level. By observations in the data the measured sound 
pressure level varied at night with 2 dB (A). The minimum sound pressure level plus 2 dB (A) 
was then set as indication for background noise the surroundings. The same was conducted 
for classroom Ø22 with 4 dB (A). With this sorting method, a few data points where the pupils 
were not present could by mistake have been included and vice versa. 
5.4.2 Questionnaires and performance test 
The data was converted by manually typing the answers from the questionnaires and 
performance test. As this was a manual process it is possible that a few mistakes could have 
occurred. However, it is assumed that these were too few to influence the overall findings of 
the study. 
 
Analyses of the results from the questionnaires and performance tests were based on 
statistical analyses completed in JPM (SAS Institute, version 13). The analyses were made 
on a simple level due to lack of previous experience with statistical modelling. 
5.4.3 Dynamic simulation   
IDA ICE was used for a dynamic simulation of the energy use of the ventilation system and 
heating. Assumptions in the model and schedule of occupation and window opening were 
completed to simulate the representative conditions. However, these assumption and 
schedules most likely diverge from the real condition in the classroom, as humans’ diversity 
inflicts these parameters. 
==PAGE:77==
 
71 
 
 
 
6 Conclusion 
 
 
 
==PAGE:78==
 
 
 
Conclusion 
72 
The purpose of the present work was to evaluate the performance of a window integrated 
ventilation system with heat recovery on a school in the heating season. The performance 
was evaluated in regards to the classroom air quality and the pupils’ perceptions, symptoms 
and performance.  
An IDA ICE model was made to estimate the energy use of four different cases. It was found 
that with the use of window integrated ventilation system the energy use increased. 
However, this case had the lowest CO2 concentration. 
The CO2 concentration was improved in the classroom with the window integrated ventilation 
system when the ventilation was on, compared to when it was off and compared to the 
reference classrooms. The ventilation system also improved the temperature, resulting in the 
temperature being more often in the recommenced range of DS/CEN CR 1752, DWEA and 
DCEE. The relative humidity was lower when the ventilation was on and in several instances 
the humidity was lower than the recommendations from DWEA and DCEE. Finally, it was 
found that the sound pressure level increased when the ventilation was on. 
Some symptoms were observed more often when the ventilation was off compared to when it 
was on. High CO2 concentration had a negative effect on the pupils’ tendency to have stuffy 
noses, increased the dryness of their skin and headaches. Decreasing temperature had a 
negative impact on the pupils’ perception of how they felt outside school and their tiredness. 
Finally, the pupils felt more tired with increasing sound pressure level. 
 
The students’ concentration performance surprisingly increased with increasing CO2 
concentration. Reasons for this result may include the teacher-to-teacher variation and the 
validity of the d2 test as a measure of concentration. 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:79==
 
73 
7 Literature 
(Bakó-Biró & Clements-Croome et al., 
2012) 
Bakó-Biró, Z., Clements-Croome, D. J., Kochhar, N., Awbi, H. B., 
& Williams, M. J. (2012). Ventilation rates in schools and pupils’ 
performance. 
Building 
and 
Environment, 
48, 
215–223. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.buildenv.2011.08.018 
Barkmann et al. 2012 
Barkmann, Claus. Wessolowski, Nino. Schulte-Markwort, Michael. 
Applicability and efficacy of variable light in schools. Physiology & 
Behavior 105 (2012) 621-627. 
(Berg & Dam-Krogh, 2015) 
Berg, P., Dam-Krogh, P., E., (2015) Danish primary school 
buildings. Technical University of Denmark. Lyngby. 
(Bistrup, 2001) 
 
Health effects of noise on children and perception of the risk of 
noise 
(Borgers et al., 2000) 
Borgers, N., de Leeuw, E. and Hox, J. (2000) 'Children as 
respondents in survey research: Cognitive development and 
response quality 1', Bulletin de Méthodologie Sociologique, 
66(1), 60-75. 
(Borgers & Sikkel, 2004) 
Borgers, N., Sikkel, D. and Hox, J. (2004) 'Response effects in 
surveys on children and adolescents: the effect of number of 
response options, negative wording, and neutral midpoint', Quality 
& Quantity, 38(1), 17-33. 
(Bozkurt & Jakobsen, 2017) 
Bozkurt, I., & Jakobsen, A., (2017). Master’s Thesis Seasonal 
Variations Of The Indoor Environment In Danish Classrooms, 
Technical University of Denmark. Lyngby. 
(Briggs & Closs, 1999) 
Briggs, M. and Closs, J. S. (1999) 'A descriptive study of the use of 
visual analogue scales and verbal rating scales for the 
assessment of postoperative pain in orthopedic patients', Journal 
of pain and symptom management, 18(6), 438-446. 
(Carmichae at el., 2011) 
Carmichae, K. and co (March 2011). Overheating and health. 
HEALTH PROTECTION AGENCY. 
(Chambers & Johnston, 2002) 
Chambers, C. T. and Johnston, C. (2002) 'Developmental 
Differences in children's use of rating scales', Journal of 
Pediatric Psychology, 27(1), 27-36. 
(Chatonnet et al., 1965) 
J. Chatonnet, M. Cabanac, Int. J. Biometeorol. 9 (2) (1965) 183-
193 
(Clausen et al., 2014) 
 
Geo Clausen og Jørn Toftum, DTU Byg Birgitte Andersen, DTU 
Systembiologi Laura Ørsted-Jordy, Danish Science Factory 
.’Masse Eksperiment 2014 Indeklima i klasselokaler – resultater’. 
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet og Danish Science Factory 
(Cohen et al., 1986) 
COHEN S, EVANS GW, STOKOLS D, KRANTZ DS. Behavior, 
health, and environmental stress. New York: Plenum, 1986. 
==PAGE:80==
 
 
 
Literature 
74 
(Dirk et al., 2013) 
Dirk, M., Kandzia, C., Kosonen, R., Melikov, A. K., & Nielsen, P. V. 
(2013). Mixing Ventilation distribution design. 
(Fanger, 1970) 
Thermal comfort 
(Faustman at el., 2017) 
 
Faustman, E. M., Silbernagel, S. M., Fenske, R. A., Burbacher, T. 
M., & Ponce, R. A. (2017). Mechanisms Underlying Children â"TM s 
Susceptibility to Environmental Toxicants Author ( s ): Elaine M . 
Faustman , Susan M . Silbernagel , Richard A . Fenske , Thomas 
M . Burbacher and Rafael A . Ponce Source#: Environmental 
Health Perspectives , Vol . 108 , Supplement 1#: Reviews in 
Environmental Health , 2000 ( Mar ., 2000 ), pp . 13-21 
(Frisancho, 1981) 
A.R. Frisancho, Human Adaption, Univ. of Michigan Press,1981. 
(Fischer and Bayer, 2003) 
Fischer, JC. Bayer, CW. (2003) ‘Failing grade for most schools - 
Report card on humidity control’ Ashrae Journal — 2003, Volume 
45, Issue 5 
(Gaihre & Semple, 2014) 
Gaihre, S., Semple, S., Miller, J., Fielding, S., & Turner, S. (2014). 
Classroom carbon dioxide concentration, school attendance, and 
educational attainment. The Journal of School Health, 84(9), 569–
74. https://doi.org/10.1111/josh.12183 
(Gail at el., 1998) 
I, G. S. B., & Dear, R. J. De. (1998). Thermal adaptation in the 
built environment#: a literature review. Energy and Buildings, 27, 
83–96. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0378-7788(97)00053-4 
(Gao, Wargocki, & Wang, 2014) 
Gao, J., Wargocki, P., & Wang, Y. (2014). Ventilation system type, 
classroom environmental quality and pupils’ perceptions and 
symptoms. 
Building 
and 
Environment, 
75, 
46–57. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.buildenv.2014.01.015 
(Haddad & King, 2012) 
Haddad, S. and King, S. (2012). Questionnaire Design to 
Determine Children ’ s Thermal Sensation , Preference and 
Acceptability in the Classroom. PLEA2012, 1-6. 
(Haverinen-Shaughnessy et al., 2011) 
 
Haverinen-Shaughnessy, 
U., 
Moschandreas, 
D. 
J., 
& 
Shaughnessy, R. J. (2011). Association between substandard 
classroom ventilation rates and pupils’ academic achievement. 
Indoor 
Air, 
21(2), 
121–31. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1600-
0668.2010.00686.x 
(Hviid et al., 2014) 
Hviid, Christian A. Wargocki, Pawel. Mortensen, Jacques D. 
Lindgreen, Troels S. Holst, Marlene K.(2014). Velfungerende 
løsninger 
til 
ventilationssystemer 
i 
skoleklasser. 
Alectia, 
Energistyrelsen, February. 
(Marchand & Nardi, 
2014) 
Marchand, G. C., Nardi, N. M., Reynolds, D., & 
Pamoukov, S. (2014). The impact of the 
classroom 
built 
environment 
on 
student 
perceptions 
and 
learning. 
Journal 
of 
Environmental 
Psychology, 
40, 
187–197. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvp.2014.06.009 
(Mayer & Schwab , 1988) 
Mayer, E. Schwab R. (1988). direction of low turbulent air flow and 
thermal comfort. Healthy Buildings 88, Vol 2 — 1988, pp. 577-582 
==PAGE:81==
 
75 
(Menå & Larsen, 2010) 
Menå, H., & Larsen, E. (2010). Indoor environment in schools. 
International Centre for Indoor Environment and Energy, Technical 
University of Denmark. Lyngby. 
(Myhrvold et al., 1996) 
Myhrvold, A.N., Olsen, E. and Lauridsen, O. (1996) Indoor 
environment in schools - pupils health and performance in regard 
to CO2 concentrations. Proceedings of Indoor Air ’96: The 7th 
International Conference on Indoor Air Quality and Climate, 
Nagoya, Japan, July, 1996, Vol. 4, 369–374. 
(Nickel, 2016) 
Nickel Jürgen. Slideshows from course: 11221 ventilation and 
Climatic Systems, at DTU. 2016. 
(Nicol, 2008) 
Nicol, F. (2008) 'A hand book of adaptive thermal comfort 
towards a dynamic model' 
(Nielsen, 2015) 
Nielsen, T. R. Notes and slideshows from course: 11142 Daylight 
and Lighting, at DTU. 2015. 
(Ryan and Schwartz, 1956) 
Ryan, T. A. and Schwartz, C. B. (1956) 'Speed of perception 
as a function of mode of representation', The American journal of 
psychology, 69(1), 60-69. 
(Seppanen et al., 2016) 
 
Seppanen, O., Fisk, W.J., Lei, Q.H., 2016. Effect of temperature 
on task performance in of fice environment. Lawrence Berkeley 
National Laboratory. Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory: 
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory 
(Santamouris et al., 2008) 
 
Santamouris, M., Synnefa,  a., Asssimakopoulos, M., Livada, I., 
Pavlou, K., Papaglastra, M., ! Assimakopoulos, V. (2008). 
Experimental investigation of the air flow and indoor carbon 
dioxide concentration in classrooms with intermittent natural 
ventilation. 
Energy 
and 
Buildings, 
40(10), 
1833–1843. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enbuild.2008.04.002 
(Satish & Mendell, 2012) 
Satish, U., Mendell, M. J., Shekhar, K., Hotchi, T., & Sullivan, D. 
(2012). Is CO2 an Indoor Pollutant? Direct Effects of Low-to-
Moderate CO2 Concentrations on Human Decision-Making 
Performance. Environmental Health Perspectives, (12), 1671–
1677. 
Retrieved 
from 
http://ehp.niehs.nih.gov/wp-
content/uploads/2012/11/ehp.1104789.pdf 
(Sundhedsstyrelsen, 2012) 
Sundhedsstyrelsen. (2012). Forebyggelsespakke indeklima i 
skoler. 
(Steiger et al., 2012) 
Steiger S, Roth J, Ostergaard. L. Hybrid ventilation- the ventilation 
concept in the future school buildings?. In: The AIVC-TIGHVENT 
conference, 2012; 2012. pp. 204e8. 
(Toftum et al., 2015) 
 
Toftum, J., Kjeldsen, B. U., Wargocki, P., Menå, H. R., Hansen, E. 
M. N., & Clausen, G. (2015). Association between classroom 
ventilation mode and learning outcome in Danish schools. Building 
and 
Environment, 
92, 
494–503. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.buildenv.2015.05.017 
(Toftum et al., 2011) 
Toftum, Jørn. Wargocki, Pawel. Clausen, Geo. Indeklima i skoler - 
Status og konsekvenser, FOA. Center for Indeklima og Energi. 
==PAGE:82==
 
 
 
Literature 
76 
Institut for byggeri og anlæg. Danmarks Tekniske Universitet. 
(2011) 
(Twardella et al., 2012) 
 
Twardella, D., Matzen, W., Lahrz, T., Burghardt, R., Spegel, H., 
Hendrowarsito, L., ! Fromme, H. (2012). Effect of classroom air 
quality on pupils’ concentration: results of a cluster-randomized 
cross-over experimental study. Indoor Air, 22(5), 378–87. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1600-0668.2012.00774.x 
(Wargocki & Wyon, 2006) 
Wargocki, P. and Wyon, D.P. (2006) ”Effects of HVAC on Student 
Performance”, ASHRAE Journal, October, 22-28. 
(Wargocki & Da Silva, 2014) 
Wargocki, P., & Da Silva, N. A. F. (2014). Use of visual CO2 
feedback as a retrofit solution for improving classroom air quality. 
Indoor Air, 105–114. https://doi.org/10.1111/ina.12119 
(Wargocki & Wyon, 2013) 
Wargocki, P., & Wyon, D. P. (2013). Providing better thermal and 
air quality conditions in school classrooms would be cost-effective. 
Building 
and 
Environment, 
59, 
581–589. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.buildenv.2012.10.007 
(Wargocki & Wyon, 2007) 
Wargocki, P. & Wyon, D.P., 2007. The Effects of Outdoor Air 
Supply Rate and Supply Air Filter Condition in Classrooms on the 
Performance of Schoolwork by Children. HVAC&R Research. 
(Danvak, 2000) 
Danvak, Varme- og klimateknik (2000). 1 udgave. Danvak ApS, 
Ole B. Stampe  
(DS 1751, 2001) 
Dansk Standard. (2001). DS 1752-2001: Ventilation i bygninger – 
Projekteringskriterier for indeklimaet Ventilation for buildings – 
Design criteria for the indoor environment. 147. 
(DS 15251, 2007) 
Dansk Standard. (2007). DS 15251-2007: Input-parametre til 
indeklimaet 
ved 
design 
og 
bestemmelse 
af 
bygningers 
energimæssige ydeevne vedrørende indendørs luftkvalitet, termisk 
miljø, belysning og akustik. 52. 
(altomboern.dk) 
Alt om børn - fra netdoktoren 
http://altomboern.dk/artikel/8-aar-og-mobiltelefon-er-det-tidligt 
(Accessed 20-01-2017) 
(www.arbejdstilsynet.dk, 2008) 
Arbejdstilsynet, 
January 
2008. 
Indeklima. 
http://arbejdstilsynet.dk/da/regler/at-vejledninger/i/a-1-2-indeklima 
(Accessed 12-01-2017) 
(bygningsreglementet 6.3.1.3, 2016) 
Bygningsreglementet. 
6.3.1.3 
Andre 
bygninger 
end 
beboelsesbygninger. 
http://bygningsreglementet.dk/br15_01_id146/0/42#?cludoquery=
Ombygning%20eller%20renovering%2C%20skol&cludopage=1&cl
udorefpt=6.3.1.3%20Andre%20bygninger%20end%20beboelsesb
ygninger&cludorefurl=http%3A%2F%2Fbygningsreglementet.dk%
2Fbr15_01_id146%2F0%2F42 
(Accessed 12-01-2017) 
(bygningsreglementet 
acoustic 
Vejledning om lydbestemmelser I bygningsrelementet 2015 
==PAGE:83==
 
77 
requirements, 2016) 
(akustisk 
indeklima) 
august 
2016. 
http://bygningsreglementet.dk/file/618301/Akustiskindeklima.pdf 
(Accessed 12-01-2017) 
(bygningsreglementet 6.5.2, 2016) 
Dagslys 2016 http://bygningsreglementet.dk/br15_01_id102/0/42 
(www.dcum.dk, 2016) 
DCUM. Indeklima Guiden. 
http://dcum.dk/media/1180/indeklimaguide2016web.pdf 
(Accessed 12-01-2017) 
(www.exhausto.dk) 
Exhausto. 
Styringsprincipper. 
https://www.exhausto.dk/projektering/Learning%20-
%20Skoleventilation/Design%20af%20system/Control%20princip?q=vav 
(Accessed 03-03-2017) 
(www.folkeskolen.dk) 
Folkeskolen. FOLKESKOLEREFORM. 
http://www.folkeskolen.dk/531162/ny-folkeskolereform-virker-fra-
august-2014 
(Accessed 25-01-2017) 
(www.nrl.co.nz) 
Negawatt. Genuine Heat Recovery Ventilation 
http://www.nrl.co.nz/ventilation.aspx 
(Accessed 03-03-2017) 
 
 
 
 
 
!
==PAGE:84==
Appendix A 
 
 
Pictures of the equipment: 
  
 
 
Pictures of the shafts, inlet and outlet: 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:85==
 
Pictures of the two LMV450 ventilators: 
 
==PAGE:86==
Appendix B 
 
Questionnaires 
The two page of the questionnaires.  
 
 
 
.ODVVHBBBBBBBBBB1DYQBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBB
(UGXGUHQJHOOHUSLJH"6 WULQJRPGHWGXHU

'5(1*3,*(

6YDUSnVS¡UJVPnOHQHYHGDWV WWHNU\GVRYHUVPLOH\
+DUGXKDIWHQJRGXJHLVNROHQ"



)DQWDVWLVN






(OHQGLJW

+DUGXKDIWHQJRGXJHXGHQIRUVNROHQ"1nUGXKDYGHIUL



)DQWDVWLVN






(OHQGLJW

+YRUGDQYDUNODVVHY UHOVHWLGHQQHXJH"


.ODVVHQYDU
LNNHIRUYDUP





.ODVVHQYDU
IRUYDUP

.ODVVHQYDU
LNNHIRUNROG





.ODVVHQYDU
IRUNROG



-HJI¡OWHLNNH
WU N





-HJI¡OWHWU N

/XIWHQYDU
IULVN





/XIWHQYDU
GnUOLJ
'HUYDULNNH
IRUPHJHWODUP
LNODVVHQ





'HUYDUDOWIRU
PHJHWODUPL
NODVVHQ
'HUYDULNNH
IRUPHJHWO\VL
NODVVHQ



'HUYDUDOWIRU
PHJHWO\VL
NODVVHQ
==PAGE:87==
 
Mails correspondence 
Error! Reference source not found. shows a mails correspondence with the 
teachers at lykkebo skole, about the pupils’ use of telephones and understanding of 
emojis . 
'HUYDULNNH
IRUP¡UNWL
NODVVHQ





'HUYDUDOWIRU
P¡UNWL
NODVVHQ
+YRUGDQ+DYGHGXGHWLGHQQHXJHPHQVGXYDULVNROH"

-HJNXQQH
nQGHIULW







1 VHQYDU
VWRSSHW

0LQKXG
KDYGHGHW
JRGW








0LQKXGI¡OWHV
PHJHWW¡U

0LQKDOV
KDYGHGHW
JRGW






0LQKDOVYDU
W¡U

0LQH¡MQH
KDYGHGHW
JRGW






0LQH¡MQH
I¡OWHVWU WWH

-HJYDUVOHW
LNNHWU W





-HJI¡OWHPLJ
PHJHWWU W

-HJKDYGH
LNNHRQGWL
KRYHG






-HJKDYGH
RQGWLKRYHG

'HWYDUOHWDW
NRQFHQWUHUH
VLJ






'HWYDUVY UW
DWNRQFHQWUHUH
VLJ

-HJYLOOHJHUQH
DUEHMGH






-HJJDGLNNH
DUEHMGH

-HJKDYGHGHW
JRGW






-HJKDYGHGHW
LNNHJRGW
==PAGE:88==
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:89==
 
Appendix C 
 
D2-tests that was used on the pupils’. The same lines was used in all test, but in 
different order.  
 
 
 
"#
"$
"%
""
"&
'
(
"
%
$
#
)
*
+
!"#$%
&'()*%
%
%
+,'--.*%
==PAGE:90==
 
Appendix D 
 
The following test was given to the teachers to inform about the questionnaires and 
2D-test conduction:  
 
1. Information til deltagende lærere 
 
Vi er et forskerhold fra Danmarks Tekniske Universitet (DTU), der gennemfører et 
forskningsprojekt om klasseværelsers indeklima på Lykkebo Skole i ugerne xx-yy (det viste uddrag 
af kalenderen viser mere nøjagtigt, hvornår studiet gennemføres). Projektet undersøger, hvordan 
forskellige ventilationsformer påvirker indeklimaet i klasseværelset og elevernes opmærksomhed, 
ydeevne og velvære. I vores tidligere studier i kontorer med voksne og børn i skoler fandt vi, at et 
dårligt indeklima påvirker både præstationen af kontorarbejde og forskellige skoleopgaver.  
 
I ugerne xx-yy ændrer vi systematisk på indeklimaet i jeres klasseværelser. I lægger måske mærke 
til en ændring i luftkvalitet, temperatur eller lignende. Forsøg venligst ikke at gætte, hvilke forhold, 
der er blevet ændret, da dette kan medføre en fejlkilde i form af, hvordan du forventer, eleverne vil 
opføre sig. Som en del af undersøgelsen vil vi venligst bede dig om at udlevere opgaver og 
spørgeskemaer til klasserne. 
 
I vedlagte mappe findes information om de opgaver og spørgeskemaer, der bedes udleveret til 
klasserne. Mappen indeholder eksempler på opgaver, instruktion i deres anvendelse og forslag til, 
hvornår de forskellige opgaver kan udføres i ugens løb. På den måde har du mulighed for at 
tilrettelægge din undervisning bedst muligt. I nogle mapper findes der også spørgeskemaer. I 
spørgeskemaerne kan eleverne indikere deres oplevelser af indeklimaet. Mapperne indeholder også 
logbøger, som kan anvendes til at anføre information om usædvanlige begivenheder i løbet af 
undersøgelsen samt om afviklingen af opgaverne. 
 
I løbet af eksperimenterne vil eleverne nok blive præsenteret for andre opgaver end de er vant til. 
Hvis de spørger, så svar gerne, ’at der skal afprøves noget øvelsesmateriale, som skolen evt. vil 
benytte sig af i fremtiden’. For ikke at gøre eleverne unødvendigt nervøse beder vi venligst om, at 
du ikke bruger ordet test, men i stedet øvelse eller opgave. Nævn venligst ikke DTU. Eleverne vil 
først møde projektgruppen fra DTU, når undersøgelserne er færdige. Fortæl heller ikke noget om 
forsøg eller undersøgelser. Det er også vigtigt at undgå at oplyse, at der er blevet foretaget 
ændringer af indeklimaet i klasseværelserne.  
 
Vi beder dig venligst om at udlevere opgaverne til klassen i løbet af hver uge i forsøgsperioden, 
dvs. fra uge xx til yy (det vedlagte skema viser hvornår i løbet af ugen vi foreslår, at opgaverne 
udleveres til eleverne).  Vi foreslår, at opgaverne første gang præsenteres i uge xx med instruktion, 
så eleverne kan øve sig, således at de vil være bedre forberedt i uge xx+1, når eksperimenterne går i 
gang.  
 
Vi vil levere nye opgaver hver uge mens undersøgelsen pågår. På skolens kontor vil vi hver mandag 
morgen stille kasser med alt materialet. Kasserne vil være tydeligt mærket med klasse, fag og 
lærernavn. Yderligere vil kassen også indeholde spørgeskemaer. Vedlagte skemaer viser, hvornår 
opgaverne bedst udleveres til eleverne.  
 
Kasserne vil også indeholde en logbog, hvor du bedes indikere, hvornår de enkelte opgaver blev 
løst og hvor lang tid det tog at gøre det. Desuden bedes du notere usædvanlige begivenheder og 
gerne et par ord om elevernes adfærd i løbet af ugen (f.eks. har de været mere trætte eller støjende 
end sædvanligt). Udfyldte opgaver og spørgeskemaer returneres i de samme kasser til skolens 
kontor, hvor vi vil hente dem og aflevere et nyt sæt hver mandag. Du skal ikke rette opgaverne - det 
sørger projektgruppen for. 
==PAGE:91==
 
Mere instruktion om den praktiske håndtering af opgaverne findes på de efterfølgende sider. Vi 
håber at eksemplerne vil give dig den information, du har brug for, for at kunne udføre øvelserne 
bedst muligt. Har du spørgsmål eller er der noget du er i tvivl om, må du hellere end gerne kontakte 
os, så vi kan få det ordnet hurtigst muligt. Vores kontaktdata er anført nedenfor. 
 
 
Med venlig hilsen, 
 
Jørn Toftum, DTU, mobil 2628 2452, email: jt@byg.dtu.dk 
 
Studerende Anna Hansen, DTU, email: s103846@student.dtu.dk 
 
Studerende Nikoline Walther, DTU, s143952@student.dtu.dk 
!
!
2. d2 
I denne opgave skal eleverne finde og overstrege d-bogstaver med to mærker: et mærke under og et 
over, to mærker over eller to mærker under som vist nedenfor. d-bogstaverne med to mærker kaldes 
for d2-bogstaver.  d2-bogstaverne findes blandt de øvrige bogstaver som kaldes distraherende 
bogstaver. Blandt de distraherende bogstaver findes bogstavet p med et eller to mærker og 
bogstavet d med et, tre eller fire mærker. 
 
Bogstaverne præsenteres i 14 rækker og hver række indeholder 47 bogstaver. Opgaven løses ved at 
tage én række ad gangen. Der er kun 20 sekunder til at finde d2-bogstaverne i hver række.  
Når du uddeler opgaverne, så skal det gøres med bagsiden opad. Dette sikrer at ingen af eleverne 
starter før de andre. Bed eleverne om at skrive deres navn og dato på bagsiden og vente med at 
vende papiret til du siger, at de må starte. 
Eleverne skal starte med række 1. Efter 20 sekunder siger du stop og beder eleverne fortsætte med 
næste linje. De skal starte med det samme med næste linje efter at de har hørt stop. Igen efter 20 
sekunder siger du stop og de skal begynde at finde d2-bogstaverne i næste linje osv. Opgaven 
stopper når de har nået at lave den sidste linje.  
Det er vigtigt at eleverne forstår proceduren. Derfor bør de have en grundlæggende instruktion 
efterfulgt af en øvelse. Du finder instruktionen og et øvelsesark på næstfølgende sider.  
==PAGE:92==
 
3. Spørgeskema (VA-skala) 
Eleverne skal udfylde arket med smileys for at indikere deres oplevelse af indeklimaet i klassen (om 
det var for støjende, for varmt, om det lugtede osv.) og deres velbefindende (om de havde godt, om 
de gad at arbejde, om de havde hovedpine, osv.).  
For at eleverne skal vide, hvordan de skal bære sig af med at udfylde arket, skal de først 
introduceres til skalaerne. Du kan for eksempel gøre følgende for, at eleverne kan lære at bruge 
skalaerne korrekt: Tegn f.eks. 4 skalaerne på tavlen som vist nedenfor.  
 
Elsker  is 
Hader is 
 
Elsker  heste 
Hader heste 
!
Morgenfrisk 
Træt og sløv 
 
              Kan lide vejret (nu)  
Kan ikke lide vejret (nu)  
!
Forklar, at skalaerne kan anvendes til at vise hvad man mener, ved at markere, hvor på skalaen 
man befinder sig mellem de to endepunkterne. Lad f.eks. en elev komme op og markere selv. 
Forklar, at forskellige mennesker har forskellige opfattelser af, hvordan det er og, at der ikke 
findes en ”rigtig” opfattelse af, hvordan de har det - det er et spørgsmål om, hvordan man selv 
har det.  Temperatur og lys kan måles med et termometer og en lysmåler, men skalaerne 
anvendes for at få styr på, hvordan folk opfatter en given situation.  
Fortsæt med at forklare, at der faktisk findes sager som man ikke kan måle med et instrument, 
f.eks. hvor meget man synes om is, om man kan lide heste eller om man er frisk eller træt. Lad 
eleverne markere disse skalaer. Hjælp venligst med til, at de markerer skalaerne klart og tydeligt 
med tværgående, lodrette streger.  
Uddel arket med skalaerne og sig til eleverne at de skal skrive deres navn i toppen og derefter 
markere alle skalaerne. Eleverne må ikke diskutere eller tale med hinanden mens de 
udfylder skalaerne. Bare giv dem god tid til at markere skalaerne. 
 
==PAGE:93==
Appendix E 
 
The classroom was equipped with IPads for each pupils and a computer and 
projector for the teacher. The energy use for this equipment was assumed as 25 
devices at 15 W 
!
 
!
It was assumed that the light was on when the classroom was occupied. In the 
classroom was 6 units installed. It was assumed that 50 W was input for each unit.  
!
 
 
The activity level for the pupils’ was found: 
Girls: 130cm, 27 kg  
Boys: 132cm, 29 kg 
Average: 131cm, 28 kg (Vækstkurver.dk/, median for 8 years olds) 
 
Du Bois formula: 
BSA=0.007184 ! W0.425!!!H0.725 = 1.015m2 
 
In IDA ICE 1 met corresponds to 58.2 W per m2 body surface, which is the amount 
one sitting, inactive person is assumed to emit and 1.8 m2 has been selected to the 
body, corresponding to an average adult. As an average child has a 1.015m2 the met 
is calculated to: 
1.8 m2 / 1.015m2 = 0.56 ! 0.6 
 
Has the ventilation system is controlled by CO2 and not temperature, is 0.8 met 
assumed.  
!
==PAGE:94==
 
The air rate for the supply and exhaust was needed in L/s pr. m2 for this simulation 
the maximum air changes from the tracer gas experiment was used.  
4.73h-1 x 160m3 = 756.8m3/h 
756.8m3/h / 3.6 = 210.2 l/s 
210.2l/s / 47.58m2 = 4.42 l/s pr. m2 
The minimum airflow was set to. 
100m3/h / 3.6 = 27.8l/s 
27.7l/s /47.58m2 = 0.58 l/s pr. m2 
 
Ventilations systems energy use, for the different steps: 
450 ppm 20% min = 60 watt total 
1000 ppm 70% =240 watt total 
100% = 340 watt total 
heatR 0.81 
 
The air handling unit was had a schedule for the fan and heat exchanger, these was  
Controlled by the CO2 concentration in the zone. The heater and cooler are set to 0, 
as this turn them off.  
 
 
 
==PAGE:95==
It was assumed that the radiators were efficient for heating in the classroom. 
Therefore, was an Ideal heater used.   
!
 
Figure 0.A. Ideal heater.!
Maximum air rates and energy use,, can be observed on Error! Reference source 
not found.. 
!
 
==PAGE:96==
 
Appendix F 
 
!
 
Figure 0.A!shows the window schedules effect on the CO2 distribution in the IDA ICE 
model and the in the classroom, when the ventilation was respectively off and on. 
The CO2 concentration in the IDA ICE model was general higher than in the 
classroom when the ventilation was off, but when the ventilation was on the CO2 
concentration was general lower. This indicates that the window opening schedule 
lies between the two opening habit. !
!
 
!
 
Figure 0.A. CO2 distribution in the IDA ICE model (left) and the CO2 distribution in the classroom (right). 
On the upper graphs the ventilation is off and on the lower graphs the ventilation is on. !
!
!
!
!
!
IDA ICE: ventilation off 
The classroom: ventilation off 
IDA ICE: ventilation on 
The classroom: ventilation on 
==PAGE:97==
!
!
!
!
Appendix G 
 
 
Output from JMP (example) 
 
Ordinal Logistic Fit for Stoppet næse 
 
Logistic Plot 
 
Whole Model Test 
 
Model 
 -LogLikelihood DF 
ChiSquare 
Prob>ChiSq 
Difference 4,77877 
1 
9,557549 
0,0020* 
Full 
286,64791 
 
 
 
Reduced 
291,42668 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RSquare (U) 
0,0164 
AICc 
585,663 
BIC 
606,079 
Observations (or Sum Wgts) 236 
 
 
Lack Of Fit 
 
Source 
DF 
 -LogLikelihood ChiSquare 
Lack Of Fit 54 
18,86865 
37,73729 
Saturated 
55 
267,77926 
Prob>ChiS
q 
Fitted 
1 
286,64791 
0,9546 
 
==PAGE:98==
Parameter Estimates 
 
Term 
Estimate 
Std Error 
ChiSquare 
Prob>ChiSq 
Intercept[0] 
 -3,8658654 0,7623766 
25,71 
<,0001* 
Intercept[1] 
1,10369189 0,3402545 
10,52 
0,0012* 
Intercept[2] 
2,26543342 0,3658944 
38,33 
<,0001* 
Intercept[3] 
3,64707755 0,4288374 
72,33 
<,0001* 
Intercept[4] 
4,87209042 0,5693072 
73,24 
<,0001* 
Mean CO2 under test  -0,0006242 0,0002004 
9,70 
0,0018* 
 
Effect Likelihood Ratio Tests 
 
Source 
Nparm 
DF 
L-R 
ChiSquare 
Prob>ChiSq 
Mean CO2 under test 1 
1 
9,55754874 
0,0020* 
 
 
Response D2 KY 
Actual by Predicted Plot 
 
 
Residual by Predicted Plot 
 
Studentized Residuals 
==PAGE:99==
 
REML Studentized Residuals 
Parameter Estimates 
 
Term 
Estimate 
Std Error 
DFDen 
t Ratio 
Prob>|t| 
Intercept 
427,44361 
14,7776 
44,84 
28,93 
<,0001* 
Ventilation (on =1, off =0)[0] 
11,439926 
6,033059 
119,5 
1,90 
0,0603 
 
 
REML Variance Component Estimates 
 
Random 
Effect 
Var Ratio 
Var 
Component 
Std Error 
95% Lower 
95% Upper 
Wald p-
Value 
Pct of Total 
Elev 
2,8135473 
8173,8357 
1982,02 
4289,1478 
12058,524 
<,0001* 
73,778 
Residual 
 
2905,1709 
392,56303 
2266,6724 
3858,8846 
 
26,222 
Total 
 
11079,007 
1995,6851 
8012,5059 
16326,119 
 
100,000 
 
  -2 LogLikelihood =  
1753,4224693 
Note: Total is the sum of the positive variance components. 
Total including negative estimates =  
11079,007 
 
 
 
 
Prediction Profiler 
 
 
 
==PAGE:100==
Appendix H 
 
 
Time table for Ø21; U2 and Ø22 V2 
 
 
 
==PAGE:101==
Appendix I  
Information from ECOVENT: 
Filter: 
 
 
"#$%&'()*+'#,-*.+*!!
!
(-./.0123!4567021!23!85870931!:;<1!21!:20=:>./12-62!
85:2/.0123?!@567021!A2:1B3!;/!15!CD0.-6232!E=53!62-!
2-2!.-62E50623!2-!/.012337002!426!32-1!/.0123!5<!62-!
;-62-!CD0.-623!.-62E50623!621!A37<12!/.0123?!)420024!
62!15!CD0.-6232!23!623!80;C2321!21!:1531!;-1;0!370023!
:54!-B3!/.012321!/F32:!E23!.<2--24!6;--23!21!
85:2/.0123?!,70023-2!23!45-12321!8B!>7<0202G23!:B!623!
:.>32:!2-!/3.>1.5-:/3.!/324/F3.-<!;/!/.0123426.21?!
!
*.0123:D:12421!:.>32!0.<20262:!;1!13D>/;0621!5=23!
/.012321!23!621!:;442!.!E202!621:!02=21.6?!!
!
H21!8;12-123262!/.0123:D:124!/.-62:!.!=23:.5-23!/53!
.-6:91-.-<!8B!>;-;0:D:124!.!2>:.:1232-62!;-09<!5<!
:54!21!.-12<32321!45670!.!"C5=2-1!=2-1.0;1.5-:I
;<<32<;123?!
!
/01!2!23!A232<-21!/53!.-6AD<-.-<!8B!=2-1.0;1.5-:!
>;-;02-?!
!
@26!"#$+)&J!KLKL!<.=2:!623!5<:B!470.<E26!/53!
5=23=B<-.-<!5<!/G23-A21G2-.-<!/3;!C2-13;01!:126!=.;!
#5487123M#'NM';A021!20023!:4;31!OE5-2?!
34-*4%*.+*+$5#6%*#7
P002!1D823!=2-1.0;1.5-:I!
;-09<!E=53!623!F-:>2:!
:23=.C2/3.2!/.0132:>./1!
8*-*(,%
QLIKL!B3:!02=21.6!
;/E9-<.<!;/!63./1!/53E506!
".9:*#,4;7!
)-6:9112:!8B!>;-;0!
:D:12421!!
0,.(*#!(<=*#
O5:2/.0123!426!QR!85:23?
N1;-6;36!/.0123426.2!23!
@S?!N54!581.5-!>;-!
;-632!/.0123>0;::2!=90<2:!
>9=9:,(*(
@;>:.474!RLL!4TME!
!
3'(,-(!?,.(*#9#*9.
QUR!4K 85:2/.0123
>949.(,.+.&(4,4;
K!:1D>!VQKS&!
>949.%,5*4+,$4*#!
N54!;0123-;1.=!1.0!VQKS!
:176:2!>;-!623!=90<2:!
VQRL!20023!VKLL!44!
@4*#;,?$#)#&;!
N1;-6ADW!L!X!
H3./1W!KX!
A#,?(!$5'$+(4,4;*#
N;4021!B30.<1!20!/53A37<!
23!C;?!LULLR!>XME!
UFB 2 SET OVENFRA
Brugt filter
med motor drev
Rent filter
Ruller monteret
med kuglelejer
!
/&0#%'&-%#.!1234356!
7893:;93<79!00!
!
=>,-0+,&$!
".?$',?.#,!
@AB,!
;!$B!
!
"A,C#D'$E+''#!
FG:H!
GE+D#,?(#!$+I&%#,!
J+EKL!',ME(E+D#!
!
N-.'?%&%B''(A%D&%B!
<O@!/P!1!Q(,&-%RH3!<:9@6!
/.&K0-,-.!
<O@!/PS=P!
!
T+3L!-(,+B#%!#**#$,!1U<6!
<!V!
N&E,#.0A%BD#!2S0<!
77!0!S!HW!0<!
!
T+3L!E>*,0A%BD#!
799!0:SC!
N&E,#.$E+''#!
X,+%D+.D!T8!
!
X,+%DI?!#**#$,*-.I.>B!
9!V!
N&E,#.,?(#!
G-'#*&E,#.!
!
YE*-.I.>B!1U:6!
9Z997!$VCSM.!
[\FNF2"Y]!
N&E,#.D#(-,!0#D!+>,-^
0+,&'$!*&E,#.*.#0*_.&%B
!
!
GT!<L8!*&E,#.!
/-II#E,!FQ\!*&E,#.!
!
!
X#.K&)#!
GE>B!+%D!GE+?!0-D>E!
!
!
Q0B&K#E'#',#0(#.+,>.!
^<9S`O9!9P!
!
!
a-00>%&$+,&-%!
Q(,&-%R!TQ/4[X!
!
!
==PAGE:102==
 
LMV450: 
!
!
!
"#$%&'($)(*+,)'-&!
.#&(/.&'%!
!
"!#$%&'%('!!
)!*+,-./0(!
1(2&3.4,%'.(!
#$5(+&6.&!.(!78'.,$!+!9!6(2&3.4,%'.(:!;%-(+<=#.(>+?.=-(@6.(!
"!
A(@6.(!,B3!
C&3<.3!'.(!+<<.!D@,+6/.'!47(!-(@6.(3$5(+&6!<%&!-.$E.&+&638%&.,.$3!
$%3$.4@&<$+7&.(!,B3.3F!G.(!3<%,!+&'$%3$.3!.&!<7'.!47(!%$!,B3.!78!47(!
-(@6.(3$5(+&6F!
"!
#7DD.(=>+&$.(!'(+4$!
H@,+6/.'!47(!+&'3$+,,+&6!%4!37DD.(!76!>+&$.('(+4$!
)!
;.(+.8.(+7'.!
H@,+6/.'!47(!+&'3$+,,+&6!%4!'(+4$347(D!+!4.(+.8.(+7'.(!4(%!?.&$(%,$!3$.'!
)!
ID/2$$.!
J&&@,,.(.(!4+,$.(>%6$3+6&%,!>.'!%<$+>!.D/2$$.!!
)!
K@4$<>%,+$.$!
*+,>%,6!%4!,@4$<>%,+$.$!.&/.'!!L!MH!NFO!P!
)!
QRS;SK*IT!
H@,+6/.'!47(!+&'3$+,,+&6!%4!D%U!$(5<4%,'!7>.(!@'.,@4$4+,$.(!76!
4(%,@4$4+,$.(F!RB(!$(5<4%,'.$!7>.(3$+6.(!'.&!+&'3$+,,.'.!>2('+!387,.3!
'.(!%@$7D%$+3<!.$!&5$!3$5<<.!873.4+,$.(!4(.DF!
H@,+6/.'!47(!+&'3$+,,+&6!%4!387,.$+'F!
V+3&+&6!%4!%<$@.,$!$(5<4%,'!47(!-.66.!4+,$(.F!
V+3&+&6!%4!47(>.&$.$!(.3$.(.&'.!$+'!+&'.&!D7'@,.(!3<%,!3<+4$.3!
J,%(D!>.'!$7D!4+,$.(387,.!
)!
MH!NFO!8%($+<.,4+,$.(!
H.'!QRS;SK*IT!.(!'.(!37D!.&!78$+7&W!D@,+6/.'!47(!4(%!4+,$(.(+&6!%4!
'.!3DB!MH!NFO!8%($+<,.(!+!@'.,@4$.&W!3B!'.&!,@4$!37D!$+,40(.3!,7<%,.$!
+<<.!+&'./7,'.(!'.!3@&'/.'33<%'.,+6.!8%($+<,.(!4(%!'+.3.,!<0(.$0E.(F!
)!
R@,3$+,,+&6!
H@,+6/.'!47(!%$!>.&'.!$+,-%6.!$+,!4%-(+<3+&'3$+,,+&6.(!
!
H%&@.,!$.3$!
1+>.(!D@,+6/.'!47(!D%&@.,!$.3$!%4!.&/.'.&3!4@&<$+7&.(!+!
3.(>+?.D7'.!
!
J,%(D!
H@,+6/.'!47(!>+'.(.6+>.,3.!%4!%,%(D.(!$+,!?.&$(%,$!3$.'!
)!
X7DD@&+<%$+7&!
IYZKSRKX!N[N[!<7DD@&+<.(.(!37D!3$%&'%('!D.'!H7'-@3!
Y*#)%&,26!37D!-.&5$$.(!'.&&.!<7DD@&+<%$+7&347(DW!<%&!,.$!
$+,3,@$$.3!$+,!3$5(+&6.&F!
I?7>.&$3!3$5(+&6.(!/%(!B-.&!H7'-@3!<7DD@&+<%$+7&!/>+,<.$!-.$5'.(!
%$!'.$!-B'.!.(!D@,+6$!%$!7>.(>B6.!.&/.'.(&.!>+%!?.&$(%,$!8,%?.(.$!
353$.D=?7D8@$.(W!76!763B!D@,+6$!%$!+&'3$+,,.!'(+4$.&!8B!3%DD.!>+3!
37D!>+%!-.$E.&+&638%&.,.$F!
"!
G%$%,76&+&6!
H.'!I?7>.&$!\#A!N[!?.&$(%,!$+,3,@$$.$!.(!'.$!D@,+6$!%$!,%6(.!
/+3$7(+<<.&!4(%!78!$+,!N]^!.&/.'.(!8B!?.&$(%,$!3$.'F!
!
!
!
==PAGE:103==
 
___________________________________________________________________________________ 
EcoVent Aps 
Ret til ændringer forbeholdes 
1 af 2 
/09 
Beskrivelse 
LMV450 er et kompakt ventilationsanlæg med 
modstrømsvarmeveksler beregnet til ventilation af boliger. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Med anlægget følger RC1 fjernbetjening der kan installeres 
et valgfrit sted i boligen. 
Fjernbetjeningen benyttes i det daglige til at indstille og 
aflæse alle temperaturer samt andre driftsindstillinger. 
Anvendelse 
Den flade konstruktion gør den velegnet til opsætning 
indenfor klimaskærmen. 
Lav byggehøjde sikrer at den nemt kan monteres under 
nedsænket loft i etagebyggerier. 
Anlægget anvendes til ventilation af boliger med et 
boligareal fra 120-230 m2, og hvor størst mulig 
varmegenvinding ønskes. 
Bygningsreglementet foreskriver et luftskifte på ! gang i 
timen. 
Opbygning 
LMV450 indeholder ventilatorer for udsugning af brugt luft 
fra boligen og indblæsning af frisk luft til boligen. 
Anlægget kan både anvendes som højre og venstre model 
ved at bytte om på lågerne på front og bagside.  
Den indbyggede modstrømsvarmeveksler sikrer genvinding 
af energien i udsugningsluften med helt op til 95 %. 
Filtre i friskluftindtaget og udsugningen sikrer at luften er 
renset for snavs og partikler så, modstrømsvarme-
veksleren og kanalsystemerne ikke tilsmudses med nedsat 
virkning til følge. 
Som ekstra udstyr kan fås EU7 filtre, der er virksomme 
imod allergi fra pollen og lignende. 
 
Ventilations kapacitet 
Diagrammet viser luftmængder ved forskellige ventilator 
hastigheder i forhold til kanaltrykket. 
Desuden max. kanaltryk ved SEL = 800 og 1000 j/m3. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Varme genvinding 
Af diagrammet fremgår hvilken temperatur-virkningsgrad 
der kan forventes under forskellige driftsforhold. 
Virkningsgraden øges når udsugningsluften har en høj 
relativ fugtighed. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Effektbehov 
Diagrammet viser ventilationstabet, ved forskellige 
luftmængder og forskellige udetemperaturer, ved 90 % 
genvinding. 
 
 
Temperatur virkningsgrad
70
75
80
85
90
95
100
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
Flow [m3/h]
Virkningsgrad [%]
Uden kondensation
Med kondensation
Ventilationstab ved 90% genvinding
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
Ude temperatur [C°]
Effekt [W]
100 m3/h
200 m3/h
300 m3/h
Ventilations kapacitet
0
100
200
300
400
500
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
Flow [m3/h]
Ekstern tryk [pa]
90%
70%
50%
30%
800 j/m3
1000 j/m3
==PAGE:104==
 
 
___________________________________________________________________________________ 
EcoVent Aps 
Ret til ændringer forbeholdes 
2 af 2 
Lydniveau 
Lyddata er opgivet ved kanalmodtryk på 75 pa. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Tekniske data 
Spænding 
230V 50Hz N + PE 10A 
Effekt 
170W 
Ventilatorer type 
EC lavenergi type 
0,75A 83W 
3200 RPM 
Styring 
IKM type MC1 
230V 50Hz 
Fjernbetjening 
IKM type RC1 
4-leder forbindelse 
4 x 0,25 AWG ledning 
Mål 
 
Dimensioner 
Kabinet i galvaniseret stål med 30 mm isolering 
Kanaltilslutning 
4 stk. ø160 med gummirings 
tætning 
Filtre 
2 stk. EU5 planfiltre 
Kondensafløb 
15mm afløbsstuds 
Dimensioner 
Bredde  
= 1400 mm 
Højde  
= 322 mm 
Dybde  
= 468 mm 
Vægt 
47 kg 
Tilbehør 
El-varmeelement 
EKV160 
230V 50Hz 1 fase 
600W eller 1500w 
Vand varmeflade 
AKV160 2000W 
excl. frostsikring 
Planfilter 
EU7 planfilter 
Hygrostat 
 
Display 
Grafisk display RC2 med MODbus 
tilslutning 
 
Luftmængde
Frekvens
Indblæs
Udsug Indblæs
Udsug Indblæs
Udsug
Hz
125
41
44
44
47
46
49
250
45
48
47
50
49
51
500
44
47
47
50
49
52
1000
41
43
44
48
47
50
2000
39
41
42
45
46
50
4000
35
37
39
41
43
46
8000
33
34
37
39
41
43
Total LwA
46
49
49
51
51
55
300 m3/h
100m3/h
200m3/h
Lw dB
Lw dB
Lw dB
