==PAGE:1==
T H E S I S
A design approach to rethinking the assessment of water provision systems
The case of the Bidi Bidi refugee settlement in Northern Uganda
Master Design & Innovation
Student 
Iskandar Tange
Technical University 
of Denmark
Supervisor
Yutaka Yoshinaka
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
1
I
Project title:  
Project type:        
Field of study:        
University:   
                         
Project period:   
      
Author:         
Academic supervisor:   
 
In cooperation with
Iskandar Tange
PROJECT INFORMATION
A design approach to rethinking the assessment of 
water provision systems
The case of  the Bidi Bidi refugee settlement in Northern Uganda
 
Master Thesis (30 ECTS) 
Design and Innovation
Technical University of Denmark
                    
31-01-2017 till 30-06-2017
 
Iskandar Tange        
Master Student 
s146921
 
Yutaka Yoshinaka    
Associate Professor
DTU Management Engineering
 
DTU Environmental Engineering
The Danish Refugee Council
Grundfos
==PAGE:4==
2
==PAGE:5==
3
Figure 1 - Overview of the organisational structure of the project
Figure 2 - Areas that DRC is active in
Figure 3 - Project timeline of the thesis with the important events
Figure 4 - Map of the flux of refugees from South Sudan to neighbouring countries
Figure 5 - Map of the Bidibidi Refugee Settlement and corresponding zones
Figure 6 - Map of actors in the humanitarian system
Figure 7 - Photos of the 5 different types of systems that are visited during the field trip
Figure 8 - Indicators for measuring the effectiveness of supplying the refugees with water
Figure 9 - Structure of the shared project and which parts are included in this thesis
Figure 10 - The building blocks of the thesis
Figure 11 - A bottom-up overview of the approach of the thesis including the problem statements
Figure 12 - The classical design process (on the left) and co-designing process (on the right)
Figure 13 - Different levels of knowledge are accessed by different methods
Figure 14 - Overview of the open and deep questions, and the topics for the focus group discussions
Figure 15 - Overview of the set-up of the workshop
Figure 16 - Percentages of use per type of pump
Figure 17 - Gender percentage of the sample group
Figure 18 - Age of the sample group
Figure 19 - Programme of the workshop how it was executed
Figure 20 - The four layers of the analysis in Chapter 8. Going in depth
Figure 21 - General user journey of the refugees when collecting water
Figure 22 - User journey that consist of two paths visiting the handpump and another water system
Figure 23 - Priorities of the refugees as a result from the card sort exercise
Figure 24 - Map of stakeholders that are known to be present in the Bidi Bidi refugee settlement
Figure 25 - Map of key propositions between the stakeholders
Figure 26 - Communication chain in the event that a water pump breaks down
Figure 27 - Heterogeneous parameters for the assessment
Figure 28 - Box Plot of the amount of water per person per day in litres and the minimum standard
Figure 29 - Reasons for insufficient amount of water of all pumps
Figure 30 - Travel distance from the house / shelter to the water pump
Figure 31 - Travel time from the house / shelter to the water pump
Figure 32 - Time spent waiting at the water pump
Figure 33 - The quality of the water per type of pump
Figure 34 - The moment of collection and use of water
Figure 35 - Current and desired usage of water
Figure 36 - Needs to become more self reliant / independent
Figure 37 - Summary of the key findings with regards to the water provision system
Figure 38 - Service evaluation framework by service design
Figure 39 - The expanded framework for evaluation by design
Figure 40 - The process of design squiggle supplemented with the framework’s levels
II
LIST OF FIGURES
==PAGE:6==
4
==PAGE:7==
5
III
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
CRS
DRC
DTU
ECHO
ECOSOC
IOM
MSF
NGO
NRC
OCHA
OECD
OPM
UN
UNICEF
UNHCR
WASH
Catholic Relief Services
Danish Refugee Council
Denmarks Technical University
Civil Protection and Humanitarian Aid Operations
The Economic and Social Council of the UN
International Organisation for Migration
Medecins Sans Frontieres
Non Governmental Organisation
Norwegian Refugee Council
UN Office for Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development 
Office of the Prime Minister
United Nations
United Nations Children’s Fund
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
Water Sanitation and Hygiene
==PAGE:8==
6
==PAGE:9==
7
This thesis forms the completion of 
the master Design & Innovation of the 
Department of Management Engineering 
at the Technical University of Denmark.
The humanitarian system faces grave 
challenges as a record number of people 
are displaced from conflict zones all over 
the world. Therefore, it is looking for ways 
to improve the delivery of aid.
The objective of this research is to 
investigate how a design approach can be 
used to assess and evaluate water provision 
systems in the context of the Bidi Bidi 
refugee settlement in Northern Uganda. 
The result of this work is a framework 
that entails a variety of design and research 
tools that are used at different levels - or 
stages - of the assessment. The framework 
gives a clear direction on how to conduct 
the evaluation of a system following a 
design approach. This work concludes 
with bringing the findings into a wider 
perspective - i.e. another context, area and 
sector. 
The purpose of the first part of this 
work is to analyse the complex nature 
of the humanitarian aid sector and the 
context of the case study: the Bidi Bidi 
refugee settlement. The literature review 
outlines and discusses today’s innovations, 
perspectives and explications of the 
humanitarian aid sector - showing that it 
is striving for a more effective aid delivery. 
The second part deals with the selection and 
the methodology of the design tools that 
are used to conduct the assessment. This 
is supplemented with the findings from 
bringing them into practice during a 2 week 
field trip to the settlement - underlining 
that the tools are an effective method of 
generating contextual knowledge and data 
on the user and system.
In the third part, the generated insights 
are synthesized to help define the 
heterogeneous parameters. These are 
indicators related to both technical as social 
aspects. They are used for the assessment 
of the socio-technical system, which is an 
iterative process. Therefore, a conclusion 
on the best water provision system can not 
be drawn unquestionably. However, the 
results of the research are in favor of the 
solar-powered system. 
Lastly, the thesis introduces the framework 
and the three levels of executing an 
assessment that incorporates the design 
tools from this research. Concluding that 
the framework is an effective method to 
assess and evaluate a system with a design 
approach - and it could also be used in a 
wider perspective than the humanitarian 
sector. 
IV
ABSTRACT
==PAGE:10==
8
==PAGE:11==
9
I consider myself lucky to have the 
support of amazing people throughout the 
(challenging) journey of this thesis. Here I 
would like to thank everyone who helped 
me during this work. 
First of all, I would like to thank my 
caring supervisor Yutaka Yoshinaka for 
the great guidance and unlimited support 
throughout the ups and downs of this 
project. Thank you very much for all the 
valuable advice and ideas that assisted me!
Thank you Susanna, Martin and Marie 
for the always fruitful meetings and 
active involvement. Benjamin, thank you 
very much for always thinking along, 
but moreover, for all the unforgettable 
moments (and photos) during the field 
trip. ‘Hey muzungu, how are you.’
I’m also extremely grateful to DRC and 
Grundfos who made it possible for me to 
conduct the research in Uganda. I would 
like to gratitude those of DRC Denmark 
and DRC Uganda for their support: 
Anders, Justyna, Severine and Peter. A very 
special thank you goes out to John Paul 
for assisting and joining me throughout 
every single part of the journey in Uganda, 
showing that it is a good time to be alive. 
I would also like to thank the 16 
enumerators and the translator Edward, 
a true caring man, for their help and 
welcoming attitude during the research in 
the Bidi Bidi settlement. And I would like 
to wish them all the best of the world.
Steven, Adrian, Dare, Papa and Abang, 
thank you for your contributions and 
ideas for this work. Love and kisses to 
all my sweet friends in Copenhagen, the 
Party Hamsters, Nicklas, Marte, Yorrick, 
Ole, Adrian, and the Bubble Mafia, for all 
the good vibes, moments and vinyl tunes 
besides my study - always making me truly 
feel at home in this city. 
Thank you Paz, Julia and Bert for sharing, 
and listening to, the study challenges while 
filling up the coffee stamp card(s) in the 
Black Diamond. And of course, a big 
shout out to all my dearest friends in The 
Netherlands - Puinhoop -, who even from 
a distance, gave me a positive spirit from 
the start, to the end. 
And last but certainly not least, I would like 
to thank my ever loving parents for always 
being there for me, and for supporting me 
unconditionally during my study time in 
Delft and in Copenhagen. 
Tusand tak!
V
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
==PAGE:12==
10
TABLE OF CONTENTS
I. 
Project information .................................................................................1
II. 
List of ﬁgures .........................................................................................3
III. 
List of abbreviations ...............................................................................5
IV. 
Abstract .................................................................................................7
V. 
Acknowledgements ...............................................................................9
1. 
Introduction ..........................................................................................13
1.1. Personal motivation 
15
1.2. The Business-Humanitarian Partnership Lab 
15
1.3. The shared project 
17
2. 
Framing the thesis ................................................................................19
2.1. Scope of the project 
19
2.2. Project timeline 
19
2.3. Learning objectives 
20
2.4. Problem statements 
21
3. 
Understanding .....................................................................................23
3.1. The humanitarian crisis 
23
3.2. The context of the refugee settlement 
25
3.3. The humanitarian system 
27
3.4. The water provision system 
29
3.5. The current way of working 
34
3.6. The challenge 
35
4. 
Setting a direction ................................................................................37
4.1. Structure 
37
4.2. Approach 
41
5. 
Literature review ...................................................................................43
5.1. Humanitarian aid 
43
5.2. Towards a better water provision system  
48
5.3. Stakeholder analysis in literature 
49
6. 
Theory and methodology .....................................................................51
6.1. Design theories and methods 
51
6.2. Interviews and dialogues 
54
6.3. Fieldwork 
55
6.4. Focus group discussion 
57
6.5. The workshop 
59
6.6. The questionnaire 
63
==PAGE:13==
11
11
7. 
Bringing into practice on site ................................................................69
7.1. Interviews and dialogues 
69
7.2. Fieldwork 
71
7.3. Focus group discussion 
73
7.4. The workshop 
75
8. 
Going in depth .....................................................................................79
8.1. The user journey 
79
8.2. The refugee 
85
8.3. The humanitarian system in Bidi Bidi  
87
8.4. The heterogeneous parameters 
91
8.5. Identifying challenges and opportunities 
95
8.6. The state of the water provision system 
103
9. 
Zooming out ......................................................................................105
9.1. Introducing a framework for evaluation 
105
9.2. Expanding the framework 
107
9.3. Conducting an evaluation  
111
10. What could be said ............................................................................113
10.1. Discussion 
113
10.2. Conclusion 
120
10.3. Recommendations and future work 
123
11. References .........................................................................................125
12. Appendix ...........................................................................................131
12.1. Take-outs business-humanitarian partnership lab meeting 
132
12.2. Milestone presentation 
133
12.3. User journey pre-ﬁeld trip 
135
12.4. Terms of reference for the Field trip 
136
12.5. Schedule of the ﬁeld trip 
140
12.6. Questionnaire 
142
12.7. Semi-structured interview questions 
145
12.8. WASH sector coordination meeting minutes 
149
12.9. Joint presentation after ﬁeld trip 
153
==PAGE:14==
12
Photo of  the green and widespread plains in Uganda.
Source: own photo
Image 01 - 
==PAGE:15==
1
13
13
INTRODUCTION
The renewed conflict and violence in South 
Sudan has led to one of today’s biggest 
humanitarian crisis - with 1.84 million 
people fleeing to neighbouring countries. 
(UNHCR, 2017) Almost a million of these 
refugees found a safe haven in Uganda, 
which is praised for it’s open minded 
stance on accommodating those in need.
In the West Nile region, close to the 
border with South Sudan, lays the Bidi Bidi 
refugee settlement. It accommodates more 
than 270.000 refugees (Biryabarema, 2016), 
making this the largest refugee settlement 
in the world. This settlement shows the 
unique policy of Uganda that focusses 
on the long term: people get a plot of 
land, basic life needs, free education 
and healthcare. (Hattem, 2017). They are 
allowed to integrate in the community. 
But the long term accommodation of 
all those people, puts pressure on the 
humanitarian aid system and the provision 
of water. (Patton, 2016). While it is an 
emergency situation, the organisations also 
need to include sustainable water systems 
for the long term. The Danish Refugee 
Council (DRC), a Non-Governmental 
Organisation, is one of those organisations 
providing 
humanitarian 
aid 
in 
the 
settlement. They formed a partnership 
with 
Grundfos, 
a 
leading 
Danish 
pump manufacturer. The partnership 
commissioned a study with DTU to assess 
whether the reliable solar pumps are a 
better way of providing water than the 
traditional systems - e.g. hand pumps and 
water trucking. 
The water provision system is considered 
to be a socio-technical system, where there 
is an interaction between actors such as 
humans, the technical systems and the 
organisations. Indicating that there is an 
interplay between technical and social 
factors - which both need to be considered 
when designing or assessing a system. 
Therefore not only the technical aspects of 
the system needs to be taken into account, 
but the human perspective and social 
aspects are of importance too. Design 
often focuses on investigating the user, the 
use and the context, by using a variety of 
tools and methods. (Brown, 2008). These 
tools and methods are often part of 
contextual work. This research study draws 
on both the social aspects as the technical 
aspects to design or improve a product or 
service. Design is not only about producing 
artifacts, systems and work organisations, 
it is also about generating practical and 
tacit knowledge. (Spinuzzi, 2005).
This poses the research question for the 
work of this thesis:
In what way can design tools be used to assess and 
evaluate water provision systems in the Bidi Bidi 
refugee settlement in Northern Uganda?
The thesis first explains the organisation 
of the above mentioned partnership 
between DRC and Grundfos, and the 
study that it has commissioned to DTU. 
This is followed by defining the scope of 
the thesis. Furthermore, the context and 
background of the humanitarian system 
are explored by a literature study to get 
a better understanding of the context. 
Design theories such as human centered 
design, service design, participatory design 
==PAGE:16==
14
Overview of  the organisational structure of  The Business-Humanitarian Partnership 
Lab and the shared project.
Source: own illustration
Figure 1 - 
The Business-Humanitarian Partnership Lab
Grundfos
Danish Refugee 
Council
DTU
Project: comparison of water provision system in refugee settlements 
in Bidoibidi, Yumbe District, Northern Uganda 
Environment
Lead and project owner: Martin and Susanna
Management
Lead: Yutaka
Thesis Iskandar
Management
Thesis Benjamin
Environment
DTU
Responsible: Marie
==PAGE:17==
15
15
This thesis forms the completion of 
the master Design & Innovation at the 
Department of Management Engineering 
of the Technical University of Denmark 
(DTU).
The topic of this thesis really supports the 
curiosity of me as a researcher and designer. 
I’m very much interested in serving a good 
cause, the working principles of NGO’s, 
the complexity that they face and their area 
of practice. 
But moreover, I enjoy working on 
challenges where design and management 
The starting point of this research is 
the case that has been supplied by The 
Business-Humanitarian Partnership Lab, 
a collaboration between Grundfos, the 
Danish Refugee Council (DRC) and the 
meets, using my experience of facilitating 
workshops to gather new insights. 
During the work of this thesis my passion 
and work as a photographer is used to 
document and narrate the story with 
photos - adding visual context for the 
reader to the topics that are covered. The 
photographic material is - and should be 
- used in a respectful manner. Therefore, 
the subjects are always informed about the 
purpose of the photo and documentation. 
I hope the reader of this thesis enjoys 
going through the work as much as I did.
Technical University of Denmark (DTU). 
An overview of the organisational structure 
is featured in figure 1, which demonstrates 
the organisational complexity for the work 
of the thesis. 
1.1. PERSONAL MOTIVATION
1.2. THE BUSINESS-HUMANITARIAN PARTNERSHIP LAB
and co-design are included in the literature 
study. From this, appropriate design and 
research tools are selected to conduct the 
assessment - selected on how they can 
evaluate the relevant parameters. The latter 
are defined as heterogeneous parameters, 
as they relate to a broad range of aspects 
- e.g. technical and social. They are based 
on insights prior to, and during the course 
of, a two week field trip to the Bidi Bidi 
refugee settlement. 
The design and research tools are brought 
into practice and are validated during the 
field trip. This delivered both findings on 
the heterogeneous parameters, as insights 
on the execution of the methodology. 
These findings are used to conduct an 
evaluation of the water provision system 
by going through four layers: the use, the 
user, the system and the organisation. This 
is done to find an answer to what the best 
way of providing water is. Subsequently, 
these findings will be synthesized for the 
purpose of solving the research questions.
Lastly, the insights from conducting the 
assessment are employed to introduce a 
framework. The framework Evaluation by 
design for public services (Maffei, Villari and 
Foglieni, 2013) is used as a basis.
Based upon the design tools and findings 
from this thesis, a new framework is 
constructed. it suggest on how to use 
design as an approach to evaluate the 
water provision system in the Bidi Bidi 
refugee settlement in Northern Uganda. 
Hence, the outcome of the thesis is both 
the framework and the assessment of 
the water provision system. The thesis is 
concluded with a discussion, conclusion 
and recommendations. 
==PAGE:18==
16
Areas that DRC is active in with WASH.
Source: DRC (2017)
Figure 2 - 
The goal of the partnership is to think up 
and co-create innovative, more efficient 
and 
sustainable 
business-humanitarian 
water related solutions for displaced 
populations of the world. It is in line 
with the UN goals that plea for more 
‘partnerships between governments, the 
private sector and civil society’. (United 
Nations Sustainable Development, 2017. United 
Nations The general Assembly, 2015). 
The partnership will commission a study 
to investigate whether applying highly 
efficient and long lasting systems for 
water provision will improve the living 
conditions for refugees in the West Nile 
region of Uganda. While, also informing 
the wider debate on the effect of the solar 
driven systems. 
This study will be done as shared project 
between DRC and DTU for a runtime 
of one year, with Grundfos funding the 
research. The project runs under the 
name ‘Comparison of  water provision systems 
in refugee settlements in Bidibidi, Yumbe District, 
Northern Uganda’. The initial idea is to do a 
comparative study between the traditional 
systems which are short-term and ‘cheap’, 
and the more technically advanced solar-
driven solutions - like those provided by 
Grundfos. This will be discussed further in 
Chapter 1.3. The shared project. 
The Danish Refugee Council 
‘The Danish Refugee Council (DRC) is a 
humanitarian, non-governmental, non-
profit organisation founded in 1956. 
They work in more than 30 countries 
throughout the world. DRC fulfil their 
mandate by providing direct assistance to 
conflict-affected populations – refugees, 
internally displaced people (IDPs) and 
host communities in the conflict areas of 
the world.’ (DRC, 2017).
Figure 2 shows that water, sanitation and 
hygiene (WASH) only represents a small 
area of DRC’s activities. For the Bidi Bidi 
refugee settlement however,  WASH is one 
of the main tasks of this versatile NGO. 
DRC is an important partner for this 
thesis, especially during the field trip to the 
refugee settlement in Northern Uganda. 
However, as figure 1 demonstrates, the 
thesis is a standalone research with strong 
direct connections to the shared project. 
Therefore, this work should not be seen 
solely as work for DRC or the Business-
Humanitarian Partnership Lab. 
Grundfos
‘Grundfos is a global leader in advanced 
pump solutions and a trendsetter in 
water technology. We contribute to global 
==PAGE:19==
17
17
sustainability by pioneering technologies 
that improve quality of life for people and 
care for the planet.’ (Grundfos, 2017)
With a great focus on sustainability and 
social responsibility, Grundfos is one 
of the three partners in the partnership 
lab. Although the company is funding 
the shared project with both financial 
and material means, they are not actively 
involved in running the project.
The role of Grundfos with regards to the 
thesis has been small, and downsized even 
more during the course of the research for 
two reasons. Due to administrative delays 
between the partners, the envisioned solar 
pump was not supplied on time to be 
of any relevance for this work. Also, the 
presence of other Grundfos pumps in 
the settlement was either unknown or not 
communicated, lowering the relevance of 
the company in the framing of the field 
trip.
The Technical University of  Denmark
The request of Grundfos for a quality 
scientific research is honored by DRC by 
subcontracting the Technical University 
of Denmark (DTU) for the comparative 
study. As the original project facilitator, 
DTU Skylab enters the partnership as a 
representative of DTU with Marie Louise 
Møllebæk Pollman Larsen as project leader 
and main responsible. 
DTU has been part since the start of 
this project - when two trial trips were 
conducted to Jordan and Uganda in 2016 
- eventually choosing the latter for the 
comparative study of the shared project.
The DTU is represented with two 
departments in the project ‘Comparison of  
water provision systems in refugee settlements in 
Bidibidi, Yumbe District, Northern Uganda.’ 
The 
department 
of 
Environmental 
Engineering takes the project lead, 
providing expertise on water, environment 
and sustainability. It is represented by 
Martin Rygaard, an associate professor, 
and Susanna Andreasi Bassi, a research 
assistant, who is the project lead. Their 
department is supported by Benjamin 
Holm who is writing a thesis for the master 
Water Resource Management with Martin 
Rygaard as supervisor. 
The lead from the department of 
Management 
Engineering 
is 
Yutaka 
Yoshinaka, supervising this thesis - which is 
part of the master Design and Innovation. 
Figure 1 exposes that the thesis is not part 
of the project, but is strongly connected to 
it through the department of Management 
Engineering, and to a lesser extent through 
Environmental Engineering. The opposite 
goes for Benjamin’s thesis. The two 
theses benefit from each other through 
communication and knowledge and data 
exchange - especially during the field trip 
of two weeks. 
One can say that both theses are 
piggybacking on the project - using the 
project as an input to carry out a research. 
Nonetheless, it is important to note that 
this does not necessarily mean that both 
researches are not relevant for the shared 
project. 
To conclude, both this and the previous 
chapter display the complexity of the 
whole project organisation as is visualised 
in figure 1. It rendered the project 
management of this thesis a big task. 
Extensive communication and knowledge 
sharing between stakeholders resulted in 
numerous meetings and - more importantly 
- adjustments to the framing of the thesis. 
This will be demonstrated in later chapters. 
1.3. THE SHARED PROJECT
==PAGE:20==
18
Project timeline of  the thesis with the important events
Source: own illustration
Figure 3 - 
Literature study
Analysis
Concepting
Preparation
Field trip
Synthesizing
Writing
Finalizing
Preparation
Round up
Defining
Pre-phase
-2
2
0
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
Thesis kick-off
Meeting Yutaka
Pre-phase meeting
With shared project 
Meeting for project proposal
With DRC and DTU through Skype
Interview
With Max Foundation
Meeting and mapping
With Yutaka and Ioannis mapping of the 
Business Humanitarian Partnership Lab meeting
Milestone presentation
For the shared project
Presentation
And stakeholder mapping
For DRC in Copenhagen
Meeting thesis writing
With other students Yutaka
Presentation prebrief field trip
Together with Benjamin
For the shared project
Departure
24th of April
Return
8th of May
Presentation debrief field trip
Together with Benjamin
For DRC and Grundfos
Meeting debrief field trip
Together with Benjamin and DRC Kampala office
Through Skype
Presentation preliminairy findings
Together with Benjamin
For shared project 
Presentation thesis results
Preliminairy results and findings
For shared project and Ioannis
Deadline thesis hand in
Hand in on Friday the 23rd of June
Final presentation thesis 
Presentation on Friday the 30rd of June
Summary with key findings
Condenced version of thesis
For DRC and other stakeholders
Meeting
Sune, Nana and Ioannis
For field study insights
==PAGE:21==
19
19
2
FRAMING THE THESIS
In this chapter the framing of the thesis 
is explained by starting with the scope 
of the project - addressing the work that 
needs to be conducted to deliver a result. 
This is followed by the timeline of the 
thesis, which narrows the framing to the 
timeframe of 20 weeks. In the consecutive 
The research of this thesis investigates in 
what way a design approach can be used in 
assessing the water provision system in the 
Bidi Bidi refugee settlement. This includes 
the use of design and research tools for the 
contextual research. This is brought into 
the wider perspective of using the design 
approach for an assessment. 
Technical and social data is generated 
during a field trip to the settlement by 
studying the system in the social context. 
In figure 3 the timeline of the thesis is 
shown with on the left the phases of 
the project. It includes all the important 
meetings and presentations of the thesis. 
Most of the weekly meetings with the 
supervisor and the biweekly meetings 
with the shared project are not included 
section the learning objectives for this 
thesis are formulated. This chapter is 
concluded with the introduction of the 
main and sub problem statements, which 
sets out the angle of investigation for this 
thesis.  
This will be used to understand the social 
impact and to compare the different 
systems. The goal is to take on a holistic 
approach to the assessment. However, a 
business analysis is outside the scope of 
this research.
The Danish Refugee Council and the 
shared project, as described in Chapter 1.3. 
The shared project, will both be inside the 
scope of this research. 
unless they were of special nature - i.e. 
presentation, mapping exercise or with 
more stakeholders attending.
In the Appendix the slides and minutes of 
the important meetings and presentations 
can be found. 
2.1. SCOPE OF THE PROJECT
2.2. PROJECT TIMELINE
==PAGE:22==
20
The following learning objectives state what I want to learn and accomplish during the 
work of this thesis. At the end, I as a researcher, will be able to:
- 
Identify key issues of a case and frame a research accordingly
- 
Gather and critically discuss relevant literature to support the project
- 
Describe and select appropriate design and research tools, both quantitative as 
qualitative
- 
Actively engage stakeholders to gain qualitative insights for the purpose of a 
analysis
- 
Employ the design and research tools in the framing of a field trip to generate 
insights
- 
Run and plan a smooth project management and critically reflect upon the 
performance
- 
Evaluate and discuss the premises and design of selected methods, their execution, 
and findings and limitations
- 
Deliver and communicate insights, solutions and concepts in a structured and 
understandable manner 
- 
Synthesize and discuss results and insights to draw conclusions in a wider debate
- 
Argue for the method and approach of the project within the framing of 
humanitarian aid
- 
Propose recommendations on the project and future work, both inside as outside 
the framing of the humanitarian system
The learning objectives of a MSc Eng programme from DTU state that a graduate:
- 
can identify and reflect on technical scientific issues and understand the interaction 
between the various components that make up an issue
- 
can, on the basis of a clear academic profile, apply elements of current research at 
international level to develop ideas and solve problems
- 
masters technical scientific methodologies, theories and tools, and has the capacity 
to take a holistic view of and delimit a complex, open issue, see it in a broader 
academic and societal perspective and, on this basis, propose a variety of possible 
actions
- 
can, via analysis and modelling, develop relevant models, systems and processes 
for solving technological problems
- 
can communicate and mediate research-based knowledge both orally and in writing
- 
is familiar with and can seek out leading international research within his/her 
specialist area.
- 
can work independently and reflect on own learning, academic development and 
specialization
- 
masters technical problem-solving at a high level through project work, and has the 
capacity to work with and manage all phases of a project – including preparation 
of timetables, design, solution and documentation
2.3. LEARNING OBJECTIVES
==PAGE:23==
21
21
In this section the problem statements will be introduced. They will function as a 
common theme throughout the thesis. While working, they have been subject to revisions 
and adjustments according to new insights, arisen opportunities and the curiosity of 
the writer. The goal is to provide an answer to the following problem statements at the 
conclusion of this work. 
Main problem statement: 
In what way can design tools be used to assess and evaluate water provision systems in the 
Bidi Bidi refugee settlement in Northern Uganda?
=> Main research focus
Sub problem statements: 
What are the relevant heterogeneous parameters to assess a water provision system?
=> Defining
  
What design and research tools are suitable to evaluate the parameters?
=> Concepting
What is the ‘best’ way of providing water in the Bidi Bidi refugee settlement in Northern 
Uganda?
=> Testing
The main problem statement is seen as the main focus of this research which uses the 
Business-Humanitarian Partnership Lab as a case study. The sub problem statements are 
very much related to the case study. They basically resemble three steps: defining the 
relevant parameters, concepting the design and research tools, and testing them during 
the field trip.
2.4. PROBLEM STATEMENTS
==PAGE:24==
22
Map of  the flux of  refugees from South Sudan to neighbouring countries. 
Source: UNHCR (2017)
Figure 4 - 
==PAGE:25==
23
23
3
UNDERSTANDING
In this chapter, the context of the work 
of this thesis is clarified by covering a 
variety of topics. First the background 
of the humanitarian crisis is explained, 
followed by the context of the Bidi Bidi 
refugee settlement. This is supplemented 
with images for a visual understanding. 
Furthermore, the water provision system 
that is present in the settlement, is 
described. The analysis of the current 
way of working leads to introducing the 
challenges of this thesis. 
Due to a renewed conflict and the rise 
of increasing violence in South Sudan, 
1.84 million refugees are displaced to 
neighbouring countries in search of safety 
as is shown in figure 4. (UNHCR, 2017). 
More than 2 million people are internally 
displaced from the total of the 12.3 million 
inhabitants in South Sudan, which is one 
of the youngest countries in the world - 
gaining independence on the 9th of July 
2011. (UNHCR, 2017. The World Bank, 
2017. Al Jazeera, 2017. CIA: The World 
Factbook, 2017)
People from more than 60 different ethnic 
groups live here - with the Dinka’s and 
Nuer being the largest. Even though these 
two groups are closely related with regards 
to the culture and language, they also have 
a long history of conflict. The first civil 
war started as a political conflict between 
the president Salva Kiir, a Dinka, and the 
former vice-president and now opposition 
leader Riek Machar, a Nuer. While in 2015 
the situation seemed to be stabilizing 
with the signing of a peace agreement, 
events escalated and Machar called an 
offensive against Kiir in late 2016 leading 
to a renewal of the country’s civil war and 
corresponding violence.  
(BBC News, 2014. Butty, 2016. Blanchard, 
2016. Foltyn, 2015)
Now, this fighting between the rebels 
and the government troops has increased 
drastically. It includes ethnic murders and 
cleansing between the different groups 
without any sort of accountability from 
both sides. All together, this is the cause 
for one of the largest humanitarian crises 
of today and the displacement of millions 
with no outlook on a quick solution of the 
conflict - leading to enormous challenges 
in accommodating and supplying these 
refugees with the basic life needs like 
shelter, food and water.
(Human Rights Watch, 2017).
3.1. THE HUMANITARIAN CRISIS
==PAGE:26==
24
Photo of  a temporary shelter for the refugees made of  wood and canvas
Source: own photo
Image 2 - 
Photo of  more permanent houses and shelters for the refugees made of  clay, wood and hay.
Source: own photo
Image 3 - 
==PAGE:27==
25
25
Many of the refugees find their way into 
Uganda, which is currently hosting more 
than 850.000 refugees - this is projected 
to pass the million by the end of 2017. 
The safe country has a very open minded, 
compassionate and unique refugee policy. 
Refugees have a lot of rights as they are 
allowed to work, travel and integrate in 
the community. ‘Families get a 30-metre 
by 30-metre plot of land to build a home, 
plus additional space for farming.’ (Hattem, 
2017). This indicates the long term focus 
of Uganda, explaining the notion of 
‘settlement’ as it is more permanent than 
‘camp’.
In most villages the farming is still in an 
early phase not using the full potential 
of the land yet. But, the large amount of 
refugees puts pressure on the resources 
and the system, and there are signs that 
the current hospitality might change as it is 
considered untenable. (Patton, 2016). Also, 
how can the organisations cope with the 
sudden extremely large demand for clean 
water when there is no water provision 
system in place yet?
The refugees are hosted in so called 
refugee settlements in the Northern and 
Western parts of Uganda. 40 km from 
the border with South Sudan lays the 
largest settlement in the world: Bidi Bidi. 
It is located in the district of Yumbe, the 
West-Nile region, in Northern Uganda 
and provides a place for living for 270.000 
refugees within an area of 250 square km. 
(Biryabarema, 2016). This is the focus of the 
research.
Within the settlement the refugees are split 
into different zones, 5 in total, with number 
1 being the oldest and 5 the youngest as 
shown in figure 5. Each zone consists of 
numerous villages that are appointed by 
humanitarian aid organisations - such as 
Medecins Sans Frontieres (MSF), Catholic 
Relief Services (CRS) and the Danish 
Refugee Council -  and are quite spread out 
- different than a cramped maze of tents 
that most people know from images in the 
news. In between these villages, the local 
community lives. They are allowed to trade 
with the refugees, use the water provision 
systems, go to the sanitation facilities, 
enroll in the schools and visit the available 
health care clinics. In that way, locals 
also benefit from the humanitarian relief 
present in the area - also making them 
more welcoming towards the refugees. ‘... 
government guidelines state that around 
30% of refugee assistance should benefit 
host communities.’ (Patton, 2016)
‘Scattered throughout the settlement are 
markets where refugees sell vegetables, 
packaged food and clothing. Entrepreneurs 
have set up small shops to fix motorcycles 
and build furniture. Schools, playgrounds 
and medical centres set up by aid groups 
cater to thousands of people.’ (Hattem, 
2017) The refugees bring in new small 
business, and the locals see them as new 
customers. This builds a small economy 
and livelihood possibilities for many. 
Most of the new refugees live in - more 
or less - improvised tents made by 
themselves, of which an example is shown 
in image 2 . These are made of wooden 
beams gathered from the surroundings, 
together constructed into a frame which 
is covered with canvas supplied by 
the humanitarian aid organisations. In 
the older zones where the situation is 
settling, more permanent and durable 
constructions are built from clay, wood 
and hay - as is shown in image 3 . These 
are also made of wooden frames but this 
time combined with clay and a roof made 
of dried straw.
3.2. THE CONTEXT OF THE REFUGEE SETTLEMENT
==PAGE:28==
26
Map of  the Bidibidi Refugee Settlement and corresponding zones drawn with data 
from MSF
Source: own design after MSF data
Figure 5 - 
==PAGE:29==
27
27
According to Devictor and Do (2016), the commonly quoted cruel statistic: ‘The 
average length of time that refugees spend in camps is 17 years.’ is not completely true. 
‘The “17 year” statistic comes from a 2004 internal UNHCR report, and it was 
accompanied by many caveats which have been lost along the way.’ A new calculation 
shows that depending on the conflict that made the refugees flee, the average 
displacement time varies between the 10 and 15 years since the 1990s - the mean 
currently stands at 10.3 years. However, the median duration of exile stands at 4 years, 
i.e. half of the refugees worldwide have spent 4 years or less in exile. But, this is also 
due to recent events from the last four years that has put a lot of people on the move - 
Syria, South Sudan, Afghanistan, Ukraine, The Central African Republic and Pakistan. 
The enduring conflict and the statistic 
that the average displacement time of a 
refugee is 10.3 years, shifts the focus of 
the humanitarian organisations and the 
Ugandan government towards a more 
sustainable and resilient approach - where 
permanent and durable are put above 
temporary. (Devictor and Do, 2016). The 
naming of the refugees in the context of 
this research is also in line with the above. 
Most stakeholders agreed on not calling 
the people in need of help refugees, but 
beneficiaries. This is a more polite and 
respectful way of naming the people that 
certainly have not chosen to become a 
refugee. However, for the writing of this 
thesis the term refugee is used. 
In this chapter the humanitarian system will 
be explained in a broad way in order to give 
the reader of this thesis an understanding 
of the holistic system. 
Firstly, for 
the continuity of 
this 
work, a definition of the international 
humanitarian system needs to be given. 
Different organisations and institutions all 
define it in their way, but for this work the 
following has been chosen:
The network of  interconnected institutional and 
operational entities through which humanitarian 
assistance is provided when local and national 
resources are insufficient to meet the needs of  a 
population in crisis (Stoddard et al, 2013).
How such a network of interconnected 
institutional and operational entities is 
structured, is shown in figure 6. This map 
is supplied by The Global Humanitarian 
Assistance and shows that there are many 
actors involved in ‘... financing, coordinating, 
delivering and reporting on the response to 
humanitarian crises, inside and outside the 
official system of  UN agencies and international 
government donors.’ (The Global Humanitarian 
Assistance, 2013). In 2014 there were 
roughly 4,480 organisations active in 
providing humanitarian assistance. Most 
of these aid organisations, national and 
international, provide development aid 
as well as emergency humanitarian relief. 
(Stoddard et al., 2015). This demands 
for a high flexibility and adaptability of 
the organisations - which is a defining 
characteristic of the humanitarian sector.
The main groups of the humanitarian 
system are clearly shown in figure 6: 
private donors, military, governments, 
international Red Cross & Red Crescent 
Movement, 
NGOs, 
UN 
and 
the 
community. Each group contains multiple 
actors. DRC is situated in the group of 
NGOs under the international NGOs 
together with for example Medicines Sans 
3.3. THE HUMANITARIAN SYSTEM
==PAGE:30==
28
Map of  actors in the humanitarian system. 
Source: The Global Humanitarian Assistance (2013)
Figure 6 - 
==PAGE:31==
29
29
Frontieres, the Norwegian Refugee Council 
and the Catholic Relief Services - which 
are all present in Bidi Bidi. Between the 
actors of the different groups there is a lot 
of communication and finance exchange, 
although that is not clearly shown with 
lines in the map.
There are three types of funding and 
financing mechanisms: pooled, channeled 
and direct. 
A decision can be made to combine the 
contributions to one of the pooled funds in 
order to make a faster and more adequate 
response possible. This is managed and 
administered by the UN system. 
The funds can also be channeled through 
the UN system, the NGOs or the 
International Red Cross and Red Crescent 
Movement. The UN mostly uses NGOs 
to deliver humanitarian assistance in the 
form of subcontracting. Direct funding 
is when donors chose to implement their 
funds themselves - e.g. through their 
own military forces, civil defence and/or 
through technical assistance. 
(The Global Humanitarian Assistance, 2013).
In this section the water provision systems 
will be discussed that are currently used 
in the Bidi Bidi refugee settlement. This 
will be introduced with an explanation of 
the process of the installation. Most of 
the information is based on knowledge 
acquired during the field trip and from 
literature.
Some fractions of information are 
retrieved from the trip report of Ibanez 
and Ndegwa (2017), who did a research into 
the possibility to solarize water schemes 
in refugee settlements in Uganda and 
to raise awareness among implementers 
just before the field trip of this research. 
In the Bidi Bidi refugee settlement there 
are 5 types of systems present, supplying 
water to the 270.000 refugees. These 
systems are shown in figure 7 and will be 
described in the following part. 
The hand water pump
This is the most common type of water 
pump in the refugee settlement and also 
in different contexts like in rural villages 
in developing countries. The pump is 
operated by hand by moving the long lever 
up and down on which water flows out at a 
fairly decent rate. The biggest advantage of 
this solution is the low price. Also the ease 
of repair and maintenance are important 
benefits. The water pump can be installed 
in a short time after the borehole is drilled. 
The solar pump
This type of pump is exactly what the name 
suggests: solar panels supplying electricity 
to power a pump. It is dimensioned 
according to the yield of the borehole by 
adjusting the size of the pump and the 
amount of solar panels needed for the 
power. The site is fenced with a guard to 
prevent theft of the expensive equipment 
and solar panels. The investment is high, 
but the pumps are reliable, have low 
3.4. THE WATER PROVISION SYSTEM
==PAGE:32==
30
Photos of  the 5 different types of  systems that are visited during the field trip
Source: own photo’s
Figure 7 - 
Hand pump
Solar pump
Diesel generator
Water trucking
Surface water treatment plant
==PAGE:33==
31
31
maintenance costs and could have a high 
output - depending on the yield. 
The diesel powered generator and 
surface or well pump
Diesel powered pumping can either be 
done by a generator supplying electricity 
to a submersible pump, or with a surface 
pump (when the water level is high). 
The pumps can be operational in a short 
timespan, don’t need much installments 
(step 5) and can have a high output. 
Although the investments are lower 
than alternative solutions, the operation 
and maintenance costs are high and the 
reliability leaves room for improvement. 
Water trucking
This option is a solution for distributing 
water from high yielding boreholes to 
area’s that have no other water supply. This 
method is quick in the response supplying 
water in the early stages of the emergency. 
However, the operation costs are extremely 
high making this only a temporary solution 
that the partners want to get rid of by 
installing more water pumps. 
Surface water treatment plant
The last option is a surface water treatment 
plant which cleans surface water - from a 
lake, river or sea - by letting it run through 
different filtration steps. The water is 
transported and distributed by water 
trucking (high operation costs) or by pipes 
(high investment costs). The scalability of 
the plant is high as is the output. But since 
there is not always surface water present 
at the place where water is needed, this 
system has its operating limitations. 
Furthermore, there is also another option 
that is present in the Bidi Bidi refugee 
settlement which needs to be mentioned. 
This is a hybrid solution which combines 
the power supply from the solar panels 
with the power of a diesel generator. In 
the settlement a submersible pump of 
Grundfos is commonly used (Ibanez and 
Ndegwa, 2017), which is electric powered 
- making the described hybrid possible 
where a generator takes over if there is no 
solar power. 
To conclude, it is important to note that 
the water supplied by automated (solar 
and diesel) systems and water trucking is 
first stored in big tanks. From here, it is 
distributed to tap stands, sometimes close 
sometimes far from the tank, like in the 
image on the front cover of this thesis. In 
order to make sure that the water will not 
be contaminated during the transport of 
the water trucking and the storage in the 
tanks, it will be chlorinated by staff of the 
responsible NGO or subcontractor. This 
is not the case for the hand pump.
==PAGE:34==
32
Photo of  a tapstand supplied by water trucking where the water is stored in a tank, 
on the right, before being distributed through the taps.
Source: own photo
Image 4 - 
==PAGE:35==
33
Photo of  a busy hand pump where people queue by placing their jerry can in the line.  
Source: own photo
Image 5 - 
==PAGE:36==
34
Indicators for measuring effectiveness of  supplying the refugees with water
Source: retrieved from the minutes of  WASH sector coordination meeting
Figure 8 - 
The responsible organisations in the 
refugee settlement have developed certain 
methods, frameworks and guidelines for 
the NGOs to follow. These are created 
to make sure that minimum requirements 
are met which ensure the basic life needs 
for the refugees. Because most of these 
methods and frameworks are documents 
for internal use only, they are not included 
in this research. As researcher I  had no 
clearance for these documents.
But, the handbook that describes the leading 
guidelines is the Humanitarian Charter 
and Minimum Standards in Humanitarian 
Response by The Sphere Project (2011). NGOs 
and foundations use this handbook as a 
standard which is not only stated by the 
Sphere Project itself, but is also noted 
during meetings with stakeholders. DRC 
uses this handbook too, hence it should be 
part of this work in order to be in line with 
the industry’s standards. 
The handbook guides the way of working 
by providing four things: ‘minimum 
standards, key actions, key indicators, 
and guidance notes’. A more detailed 
description of these will be given in 
Chapter 8.4. The heterogeneous parameters. 
The minimum standards are of qualitative 
nature 
and 
are 
supplemented 
with 
measurable key indicators. The key actions 
and guidance notes are formulated quite 
open, leaving a lot of room for the NGOs 
to execute it according to their own way 
of working. 
However, the way of working is very much 
numerical driven. I noticed this during 
one of the WASH (water, sanitation and 
hygiene) sector coordination meetings - of 
which the minutes are attached in Chapter 
12.8. WASH sector coordination meeting minutes 
in the Appendix. It shows the responsible 
organisation per zone, what has been said, 
the main concerns and key action points, 
but more importantly: what data is being 
shared. 
From this data it can be derived what 
indicators the organisations take into 
account when supplying the refugees 
with water as part of WASH . I have 
categorized these indicators in figure 8. 
During the meeting it is noted that the 
WASH officers of the organisations are 
very much focussed meeting the minimum 
standards in numbers - hence, serving the 
minimum amount of people and supplying 
the correct quantity of water. 
The questions rises whether this is a holistic 
approach to the water provision system. 
Do the indicators below cover every 
aspect of the system? What about other 
factors that focus more on the human 
side when implementing a system - i.e. 
walking distance, queueing time, physical 
labour and ease of transport? It seems 
that the current way of working is very 
much numerical driven - i.e. a quantitative 
approach
3.5. THE CURRENT WAY OF WORKING
==PAGE:37==
35
35
The previous chapter suggests that the 
current way of working puts the system at 
the center. It is more focussed on meeting 
the minimum requirements, than being 
‘truly humanitarian’. This is because the 
indicators do not completely cover the 
user aspects of the design. And if the 
design is not user-centered, it could lead 
to ill-thought out designs. (Abras, Maloney-
Krichmar and Preece, 2004). 
Therefore, a design approach will be taken 
to assess the water provision system in the 
Bidi Bidi refugee settlement in Northern 
Uganda. For this, two major steps need 
to be taken. Firstly, the heterogeneous 
parameters need to be defined. Secondly, 
the suitable design and research tools need 
to be selected in order to evaluate the 
parameters. 
This poses one of the main challenges 
for this research as, in contrast with the 
above, the two steps are not consecutive. 
Moreover, the process of the two is iterative 
since the one is needed for the other. To 
illustrate: to define the parameters, design 
and research methods need to be used. 
In order to evaluate the parameters, new 
design and research methods need to 
be selected. This is an ongoing iterative 
process, which of course is not unique - a 
design cycle is an iterative process. (Brown, 
2008). (Boeijen and Daalhuizen, 2010).
However, the limitations and constraints of 
this research contribute to the magnitude 
of the challenge. The timeframe of 
the field trip puts limits on how much 
defining, concepting and testing (See chapter 2.4. 
Problem statements), could be conducted in 
the two weeks. While during the entire 
research extensive fieldwork have been 
executed, the availability of information 
about the unknown context has been 
scarce. Additionally, the access to relevant 
stakeholders with contextual knowledge 
has been difficult outside the framing of 
the field trip. Hence, making this research, 
within this scope, contingent on the field 
trip. 
To a lesser extent than the above, the 
complexity of the project organisation 
has formed a challenge on the work of 
the thesis too. While the work of every 
research or design project involves project 
management, this work met challenges due 
to the amount of stakeholders involved. 
On it’s turn, this led to difficulties in 
acquiring information - because of 
complications with communication and 
knowledge sharing - and difficulties 
on setting a direction based on the 
information. Furthermore, there have also 
been challenges on very practical affairs - 
like organising the field trip.
On a final note, with keeping the positive 
spirit of a designer, none of the above 
challenges have been insurmountable 
during the work of the thesis.
3.6. THE CHALLENGE
==PAGE:38==
36
People travelling by foot alongside the road to get supplies and water. Often from far away 
and carrying it on their head.
Source: own photo
Figure 6 - 
==PAGE:39==
37
37
4
SETTING A DIRECTION
In this chapter the structure of both 
the shared project, as the thesis will 
be addressed. This is followed by the 
explanation of the approach of this thesis. 
The latter includes the relation to the case 
study and the problem statements. 
As described in the Chapter 1.3. The shared 
project the thesis is related to the shared 
project, which runs for 1 year. In order to 
fully understand the structure of the thesis, 
one must also know how it is related to the 
shared project. 
The shared project
In figure 9 the structure of the full project 
is shown. This pyramid shape consist of 
multiple building blocks that together will 
form the content of the full project. On 
the vertical axis the blocks are divided in 3 
levels that build on top of each other. The 
structure is designed by the project group 
to communicate and organise the work and 
are not mutually exclusive nor collectively 
exhaustive. Meaning that boundaries are 
not strict and topics could be part of 
multiple building blocks 
Level 0 is the foundation of the research. 
It is composed of data collection from 
sources such as literature and informants, 
but also from quantitative and qualitative 
research during the field study. 
Level 1 is the analysis of the data and 
comparison of technologies. Either a table, 
a framework or a deliverable of another 
kind, will use the data to offer insights on 
the pros and cons of each solution. 
Level 2 is the scenario comparison. Here the 
focus will be on configuring the products 
of level 1 to the different scenarios that 
can be, for example, dependent on time 
(5 or 10 years) or on the business model 
(product or service sale). 
Since the runtime of the project will be 
longer than the duration of the theses, an 
appropriate framing is needed in order to 
be able to deliver a useful outcome. The 
focus of the thesis is indicated in figure 9 
in blue. There is overlaps in certain blocks 
with the thesis of Benjamin, for example in 
the block of technical data collection. This 
means that there is an exchange of data 
and collaboration on methods between the 
two theses. 
Also, this says something about the 
organization between the two departments. 
The focus of the Department of 
Environmental Engineering will be on the 
left, while Management Engineering will 
focus on the right half. 
4.1. STRUCTURE
==PAGE:40==
38
The building blocks of  the thesis where the asterix indicate they are also part of  the 
shared project.
Source: own illustration
Figure 10 - 
Structure of  the shared project and which parts are included in this thesis.
Source: illustration made by the shared project
Figure 9 - 
LCC of 
Scenarios
Sensitivity & 
uncertainty
Social 
impacts
Business 
options
LCC of 
technologies
Sensitivity & 
uncertainty
Social 
impacts
Stakeholder 
analysis
Business 
exploration
Financial data
Social data
Technical data 
Level 2
Level 1
Level 0
Focus of thesis
Framework
Social impacts*
Heterogenous parameters
Design and research tools
Social data*
Stakeholder* 
analysis 
Technical data*
Literature study
==PAGE:41==
39
39
The thesis
Now that the structure of the entire 
project is clarified, it is time to explain the 
structure of the thesis. This is done on the 
basis of the building blocks that the thesis 
consist of, shown in figure 9.
As noted in Chapter 1.4. The shared project, 
the thesis will not solely be serving the 
entire project, but uses it as a starting point 
and case to write a thesis. The latter is 
driven by the curiosity and the interest of 
myself as a researcher and designer. 
Of course, this does not mean the thesis 
cannot serve the shared project, but just 
that this will not be the main objective. 
Likewise, the thesis is slightly differently 
structured than the shared project. Two of 
the three bottom parts - social impacts and 
stakeholder analysis - can be recognized 
from figure 10. But in this chapter, they 
are supplemented by an extra block 
‘Framework’, which is shown in blue. 
The framework is the place where the 
design and research tools that can deliver 
both the social and the technical data will 
meet - making sure the water provision 
system can be assessed and compared from 
a socio-technical perspective. The goal is 
to prototype a framework that will fit into 
the current ways of working. The social-
impacts-block focusses on understanding 
the social dynamics that come at play and 
what impact the system has on the user 
and the use. 
 
The stakeholder analysis is taking stock 
of most of the stakeholders that are 
involved. It takes a closer look at the actors 
involved in the complex system, and how 
the relations are. A connection to power 
and influence is drawn  Again it needs 
to be pointed out that the blocks are not 
to be seen as independent but rather as 
complementary to each other. The blocks 
overlap, as some of the content belongs 
to more than one of them. Furthermore 
there is a lot of horizontal exchange of 
data and findings, additionally blurring the 
boundaries.
==PAGE:42==
40
A bottom-up overview of  the approach of  the thesis including the problem statements 
on the right. 
Source: own illustration
Figure 11 - 
Design and research tools
Case study
Social impacts
Technical data
Stakeholder 
analysis
Field trip
Literature study
What’s the ’best’ way of providing water in the Bidi 
Bidi refugee settlement in Northern Uganda?
What are the relevant heterogeneous parameters 
to assess a water provision system?
What design and research tools are suitable to 
evaluate the heterogeneous parameters?
In what way can design tools be used to assess 
and evaluate water provision systems in the Bidi 
Bidi refugee settlement in Northern Uganda?
Framework
Social data
Heterogeneous parameters
==PAGE:43==
41
41
In this chapter the approach of the thesis 
is discussed in more detail. This will be 
done following the structure of the thesis 
and the problem statements that are posed 
earlier which is presented in figure 11.
First, the main problem statement should 
be considered as guiding throughout the 
thesis. The goal is to deliver a framework 
that can be used to assess a water provision 
system. The thesis will also be a reflection 
of the methodology, theory and tools used 
throughout. 
The start of the work is selecting a wide 
variety of appropriate design and research 
tools that can be used to collect data 
about the use, the user, the system and 
the organisation, in order to evaluate 
the relevant heterogeneous parameters. 
These are the indicators that will be used 
for the assessment. A preliminary list of 
heterogeneous parameters is made on 
the basis of literature research and online 
material such as videos and photos. 
The tools are of both qualitative as 
quantitative nature, chosen on the basis 
of the insights that they can deliver, the 
working principle and ease of use. Also, 
the limitations of the work of this thesis 
are considered in the selection of the tools. 
For example: cultural probes is a tool useful 
when designing in - and for - developing 
countries, but limitations of the duration 
of the thesis hinders the usage of  this tool.
The tools are tested on the case study 
during the field trip and deliver a preferably 
two sided result: On the one hand data 
will feed as input into the thesis while 
on the other hand, the tools are tested as 
they are used in order to find out whether 
they actually are appropriate tools for the 
assessment of the water provision system 
in the Bidi Bidi refugee settlement. 
In the end, the findings will be employed 
to configure a framework that solves the 
main problem statement.
4.2. APPROACH
==PAGE:44==
42
A portrait of  local Ugandan farmers in the Yumbe region in Northern Uganda
Source: own photo
Image 7 - 
==PAGE:45==
43
43
LITERATURE REVIEW
5
The goal of this literature study is to get a 
better understanding of the humanitarian 
aid - e.g. today’s innovations, perspectives 
and explications. This serves the purpose 
of better comprehending the innovations 
in water systems and the organisation 
behind the water provision system in the 
Bidi Bidi refugee settlement. Furthermore, 
the literature that is present on the 
water systems is studied and explained 
in more detail. Lastly, the importance 
of a stakeholder analysis is addressed. 
Again, this focusses on the organisational 
understanding. 
‘The humanitarian system (Chapter 3.3. The 
humanitarian system) faces grave challenges, 
as record numbers of people are displaced 
for longer periods by natural disasters and 
escalating conflicts.’ according to Alexander 
Betts and Louise Bloom (2014). They state 
that ‘to contend with these growing, 
and changing, demands, organizations 
are increasingly exploring the idea of 
“humanitarian innovation”, which draws 
upon concepts from the private sector 
to adapt and improve the humanitarian 
system.’ (Betts and Bloom, 2014: p5)
Additionally, the idea of innovation itself 
has gained particular salience among 
humanitarians in recent years, as agencies 
have established new business units and 
initiatives with the aim of developing new 
ideas for programming and operational 
improvements. (Scott, 2014). This raised 
a question for me as a researcher: could 
a design approach become part of the 
humanitarian innovation?
This section will explore the literature 
that argues and discusses the notion of 
5.1. HUMANITARIAN AID
more innovation in humanitarian aid - 
by first defining innovation, followed by 
describing the current major innovations 
and concludes with the unique challenges 
that humanitarian aid faces. 
Defining innovation
According to Betts and Bloom (2014), 
humanitarians refer with the term innovation 
to ‘the role of technology, products and 
processes from other sectors, new forms 
of partnership, and the use of the ideas 
and coping capabilities of crisis-affected 
people.’ This means that humanitarian 
innovation is mostly focussed on input 
from other sectors, collaboration through 
partnerships, enabling and including the 
crisis-affected people. I conclude that the 
partnership between DRC and Grundfos, 
as is discussed in Chapter 1.3. The Business-
Humanitarian Partnership Lab, is in line 
with this definition as it is a new form of 
partnership and a main role of technology 
from another sector. 
Many different definitions of the term 
==PAGE:46==
44
Example of UNICEF innovation labs. (UNICEF, 2017)
To cope with an ever changing world where changes are fast and solutions need to 
be adapted quickly, UNICEF embedded innovation into the organisation. With an 
office of innovation, an innovation unit in Copenhagen and a network of innovation 
labs around the world, UNICEF hopes to bring together the private sector, academia, 
and the public sector to develop solutions for key social issues, and to ensure they are 
always watching for new ideas in unexpected places.
innovation can be found in literature 
(Jensen and Webster, 2009). The OECD 
(Organisation for Economic Cooperation 
and Development) defines four types of 
innovation: product, process, marketing 
and organisational innovation. Although 
there is no shared broad consensus on the 
exact formulation for the definition of 
innovation, a research of Edison, bin Ali and 
Torkar (2013) on 41 articles and interviews 
about innovation results in a definition that 
gives a comprehensive coverage of the 
identified aspects of innovation:
‘An innovation is the implementation of  a new 
or significantly improved product (goods or 
service), or process, a new marketing method, or 
a new organisational method in business practices, 
workplace organisation or external relations.’ 
(Edison, bin Ali and Torkar, 2013) 
The goal of the paper of Betts and Bloom 
(2014) is to ‘develop a common language 
and framework as a basis for dialogue, 
debate and collaboration’ as the writers 
identified a mis- and overuse of the 
term innovation within the framing of the 
humanitarian system. A danger to this 
is that a mis- and overuse of innovation 
could lead to it becoming a buzzword or 
trend that lacks any meaningful content. 
They define the term innovation as the 
following: 
‘A means of  adaptation and improvement through 
finding and scaling solutions to problems, in the 
form of  products, processes or wider business 
models.’ (Betts and Bloom, 2014).
While there are slight differences between 
the first and second definition of innovation, 
the last will be used as guiding in this thesis 
because the second definition is meant 
to provide the common definition in the 
humanitarian system. 
Innovations in the humanitarian aid 
system
Right now there are many examples 
of innovations being conducted in the 
humanitarian aid system indicating that 
also this sector, is going towards a more 
innovative culture. This is not only coming 
from inside the sector, but can be cross-
industry - i.e. from another sector. Here 
the private sector is using their knowledge, 
capabilities and technology to develop 
solutions for people in need. 
This underlines the statement that Stoddard 
et al. (2015) makes about the Humanitarian 
Aid System: ‘The concept of  innovation itself, as 
an organisational aspiration and area of  activity, 
has taken root in the humanitarian system.’
Still, some authors and researchers have 
identified different areas for improvement. 
For example the Max Foundation, who 
focusses on the cost effectiveness of 
implementing water systems in Bangladesh 
(Le Pool, 2017). Based on findings and 
insights from different sources, the 
following categorization of innovation in 
the humanitarian aid is defined. 
Operational organisation
There has always been voices of critique 
towards the operational organisation of 
the humanitarian aid system, both in the 
past, as now. Literature indicates that a 
common complaint is the complexity of 
the organisation of the humanitarian aid 
and how it is delivered and planned. (Aly, 
2016). This could lead to an inefficient and 
expensive system. A common argument 
is that the complexity of the system leads 
to higher costs due to overhead. Also, it 
could contribute to inefficiencies due to 
==PAGE:47==
45
45
Example of IKEA. (Frearson, 2016)
A good example of a company using their expertise for the people in need is IKEA 
when their Foundation launched its flat-pack emergency shelter in 2013. Their Better 
Shelter offers an alternative to the more than 65 million tents currently used to 
house refugees. ‘An obvious benefit was the expertise offered by IKEA engineers, on 
everything from materials and suppliers to packaging and logistics. They even advised 
on recreating IKEA’s famous instruction manuals.’ 
the numerous links between policy makers 
and receivers of the aid.  
As is shown in Chapter 3.3. The humanitarian 
system, there are many actors, including 
organisations and humans, involved in 
providing humanitarian relief during an 
emergency. And during such an event, the 
chain of command is too long to be able to 
respond adequately. ‘Bilateral donors deal 
with the UNHCR or WFP, who in turn 
work with international NGOs such as 
Oxfam and Save the Children, who are the 
main organisers on the ground in conflict 
areas. They in turn employ local NGOS 
and these groups work with community 
organisations who in turn work with the 
people.’ (Munslow and Brown, 1999: p216). 
Such a long chain of command could lead 
to difficulties with the communication and 
data sharing. This has a major negative 
effect on the agility of the system and thus 
the response rate during an emergency. 
After the analysis of the current state of 
the system (Chapter 3.3. The humanitarian 
system) it can be determined that the type 
of stakeholders has not changed compared 
to the article of Munslow and Brown (1999). 
Still, there are some developments in the 
operational and institutional aspects of 
the humanitarian system aimed at creating 
a shared response and planning model. 
(Stoddard et al., 2014). These are measures 
that are designed to streamline the (shared) 
operations between the different actors 
and to coordinate the response between the 
multiple actors in the chain of command. 
In this way, an attempt is made to increase 
the effectiveness without removing ‘chains’ 
in the system. 
Also, donors made drastic changes to 
their own systems and processes, as part 
of wider organisational processes. This 
resulted in: ‘staffing reductions, changes 
to quality control processes, a shift 
towards more active and comprehensive 
risk management, and stronger links with 
either foreign policy or development and 
stabilisation colleagues, or both.’ (Scott, 
2014). Still, it could be stated that this does 
not include a real change in the operation 
of 
the 
humanitarian 
organisations. 
Because the amount of ‘links’ in the 
system remains the same. This means that 
every decision still needs to go through a 
numerous amount of organisations which 
contributes to inefficiency.
A New Business Model 
The last years, the operating environment 
for humanitarian assistance has changed, 
while the structure of the humanitarian 
system remained essentially closed and 
unchanged. In order to be functioning 
adequately as a help relief organisation, 
changes need to be made. 
These changes can be found in the 
operational organisation as is described 
earlier, but also in the business models. 
The business models need to change 
and evolve if they are to remain fit for 
purpose and to reach a more effective 
response. Humanitarian actors and donors 
are looking to innovation as a vehicle to 
introduce changes to the way business is 
being done. (Scott, 2014. Betts and Bloom, 
2014). But could innovation be a real 
game changer in the complexity of the 
established 
humanitarian 
system? 
It 
could be argued that innovations, that are 
more focussed on practical solutions, will 
not change the business models of the 
organisations. 
==PAGE:48==
46
One of the problems seems to be that in 
the current business model, the affected 
communities are not at the heart of the 
humanitarian action, while they should. 
Now, it remains a largely foreign-driven 
endeavour which excludes the affected 
communities and is therefore out of touch 
with the cultures and societies it strives 
for. The local people have no power in the 
current system where decision making and 
funding flows around them (Aly, 2016). 
This indicates that they are the subjects 
of the process, and not the participant. 
This means that there is little feedback, as 
the local people are not partaking in the 
decisions. 
A proposal is to focus more on localised 
aid - empowering local people for the 
decision making - as Charter for Change 
(2017) demonstrates. This is an initiative to 
make an effort in localising humanitarian 
aid and is signed by multiple NGOs. Even 
though the core of the idea is strong, 
some pitfalls are also foreseen. There 
is a danger in providing direct financial 
support to National Non-Governmental 
Organisations (NNGOs), hiring local 
people and building local partnerships. 
Because these actions could risk a 
misalignment in capabilities and ineffective 
support. It could be imagined that this is 
especially the case during new crises in 
locations where the organisational lines 
are not in place yet - like for example the 
recent and complex crisis in Syria.
In the complex system of humanitarian 
aid, there can’t be one specific business 
model that fits every situation. There is no 
one size fits all as the above displays. It is 
important to note that the idea of business 
model innovations challenges and changes 
the landscape of oligarchs that have been 
there for a long time and that continued 
criticism will improve the lives of many. 
As Stoddard et al. (2015) demonstrates, even 
though the humanitarian system has been 
considered as broken, one could say that 
there are many efforts being made for a fix 
and also to improve the effectiveness even 
more. (Scott, 2014). 
Technological Development
Where technological innovations are 
changing the private sector in a rapid 
pace, the same goes for the humanitarian 
sector which is also benefitting from 
the 
developments. 
Technological 
developments have a huge potential to 
strengthen 
the 
emergency 
response. 
(Betts and Bloom, 2014). And while most 
technology is developed for the developed 
world, the developing countries and 
people in need can benefit greatly from the 
progresses that is being made. They skip 
steps in the evolution. A good example 
is the economical viability of solar panels 
that makes the investment in expensive 
electricity 
infrastructure 
obsolete. 
(Marshall, 2013). 
Information 
and 
communication 
technology have been the most notable 
innovations in the humanitarian sector. 
(Vinck, 2013) Mobile telephony and 
internet, for example, have seriously taken 
off in the developing countries making 
not only communication easier, but also 
integrating mobile surveys to monitor the 
quality of the aid response and mobile 
payment systems. The last can be used for 
small credits during emergencies or micro 
loans. (OCHA, 2013). 
Also the gathering and sharing of data and 
information using big data innovations, 
from the private sector, are making the 
collaboration 
between 
the 
different 
organisations easier and more effective. 
(Meier, 2013). But, the danger here lies in the 
overload of information and the correct 
use / interpretation of it. Where private 
companies struggle with the notion of big 
data - and what to do with it - this could 
also happen to the humanitarian system. 
Especially because these organisations 
have a ‘lack of  international data standards’. 
(Stoddard et al., 2015: p101).
The 
unique 
challenges 
of  
the 
humanitarian sector
In the paper of Betts and Bloom (2014) 
the unique challenges of humanitarian 
==PAGE:49==
47
47
innovation are highlighted. The market of 
the humanitarian system is called closed 
and the structure ‘differs from that of 
many other goods and services.’ This 
has to do with that on the demand side, 
‘goods are thought of as global public 
goods’, while on the supply side, ‘there is 
the assumption that humanitarian goods 
can only come from a closed and tightly 
regulated group of suppliers.’ 
In the public market, the reason for 
‘adaptation and improvement’, as stated in 
the definition, is being more efficient 
or effective than your competitor. The 
competition is always catching up and 
threatening to take away your customers, 
who might choose to buy the better, 
cheaper or newer product. Hence, it can 
be stated that ‘big companies that fail to 
innovate risk extinction’ (Wall, 2014). 
Customers in the humanitarian sector 
are limited by their circumstances to 
choose alternative goods.  ‘The system 
lacks a mechanism for feedback from 
affected people directly to donors and 
humanitarian agencies. Rather than being 
guided by such feedback, the ‘success’ of 
humanitarian actors is mainly measured by 
their fulfillment of donor requirements, 
further reducing the pressure to adapt or 
innovate’ (Betts and Bloom, 2014). 
This difference in market forces has 
a negative impact on the amount of 
innovation 
within 
the 
humanitarian 
sector. It is suggested by Betts and Bloom 
(2014) that there lays an opportunity for 
an alternative model where performance 
and value are the drivers. This opportunity 
is also addressed in the report from the 
Humanitarian Innovation Ecosystem Research 
Project (2015) where recommendations are 
given on how to strengthen and improve 
the humanitarian innovation ecosystem so 
it can make the best possible contribution 
to overall humanitarian effectiveness. 
Also, when taking a top down approach 
on the system, it can be seen that there 
are some market forces in place as part 
of a procurement process. Here a NGO 
writes a tender and bids for funding or a 
mandate given by the donors. But this has 
it’s limits as decisions are not only based on 
measurable factors, but as in most political 
systems, this also has to do with track 
records and relations hence leaving less 
room for objective market forces. Thus 
making it harder for new challengers to 
enter the market. 
It could also be stated that there is risk 
involved with bringing in new actors or 
challengers like ‘exacerbating conflict, local 
power dynamics or cultural sensitivities’. 
(Betts and Bloom, 2014). A good user and 
context understanding, by using design 
tools for example, could help to avoid 
some of these issues. This is in line with 
how donors and agencies work. They 
tend to have an aversion to risk as the 
consequences of failure in humanitarian 
efforts are high. While in contrast, private 
businesses are encouraged to adapt a ‘fail 
fast’ approach to innovation, investing 
in a range of ideas with the assurance 
that many failures will also bring the best 
solutions in the long run (Babineaux and 
Krumboltz 2014). In design this is referred 
to as iterative learning by failure. 
The need to stimulate innovation and 
partnership 
collaboration 
has 
now 
also been recognized by the UN as 
an opportunity. In the 17 sustainable 
development goals, developed by the UN 
on the 21st of October 2015 in New York, 
the two topics find their way in two goals. 
(United Nations Sustainable Development, 
2017. United Nations The general Assembly, 
2015)
Goal 9: Build resilient infrastructure, 
promote sustainable industrialization 
and foster innovation. 
Goal 17: Revitalize the global partnership 
for sustainable development
 
But the question is whether this will 
be enough to make the humanitarian 
approach more effective. The structure 
of the current sub-contracting system - or 
chain of command - with policy makers, 
==PAGE:50==
48
NGOs, local NGOs and subcontractors 
leads to immense overhead costs. Bariber 
(2015) states that only 0.2 percent of the 
total money spent finds it is way to the 
local NGO’s. This is in stark contrast with 
the desire of localising the humanitarian 
aid as is described earlier. 
It can be concluded that there are many 
challenges in the humanitarian sector. 
But there are even more opportunities 
that can be used to improve the lives of 
millions, like the fast moving technological 
development in the third world. ‘While 
only 4 per cent of households in Sub-
Saharan Africa have internet connections, 
for example, cell phone penetration is at 
75 per cent in Africa as in 2012, and is 
expected to reach 97 per cent by 2017’ 
(Clasen, 2009). 
The puzzle is how to effectively take 
advantage of this fact. There are definitely 
lessons that the NGO’s can learn from 
the fast moving public market where 
innovations thrive and an entrepreneurial 
mindset is present. Will initiatives like the 
Mara 
Foundation, 
(Mara-foundation.org. 
2017), an organisation focussed on helping 
Armstrong and Nakafeero (2017) are offering 
a summary of experiences from Water 
Mission who has designed, constructed and 
supported 10 solar pumping systems for 
potable water supply in refugee settings in 
Northern and Western Uganda. The study 
takes technical, financial, institutional, 
operational and social considerations into 
account. 
The paper indicates that solar pumping 
systems are more cost effective than 
alternative mechanized pumping systems 
and relates to some other researches, 
which also corresponds to the findings of 
(Ibanez and Ndegwa, 2017). Even though 
that aspect is important, the article also 
supports the angle of the research for this 
thesis as it emphasizes the importance of 
the social implications of such a system - 
and hints that there is still much room for 
investigation left. (Armstrong and Nakafeero, 
entrepreneurs from the third world, be the 
solution to the ever growing crisis? 
To conclude, innovations are currently 
more adapted by - than developed for the 
humanitarian sector. This has to do with the 
procurement of goods and products which 
is a indispensable part of the humanitarian 
relief system. (Hoxtell, Norz and Teicke, 
2015). Humanitarian organisations are 
unable to produce the goods and services 
themselves, so they procure them from 
the private sector, and implement them 
during a response. The feedback from the 
customers - in this case the people in need 
- is to indirect in this system which could 
impose wrong decisions, bad designs or 
misaligned innovations. Even though this 
means redefining the organisations and 
ways of working, IKEA and UNICEF 
show examples of the right direction 
forward. If the humanitarian sector truly 
believes in bringing innovation into the 
system, they should put more effort in 
direct engagements of the private sector 
with the field, working closer together 
on solutions or in-house development of 
services and products.
2017). In Chapter 8.4. The heterogeneous 
parameter, where the indicators to assess the 
system are selected, a further look will be 
taken into these social implications. 
Additional to the above, the financial 
contribution for the water system by 
the refugees is also explored. Although 
the idea might lead to some resistance, 
the writers gained the insight that this 
contribution generated ownership and self-
reliance among the population of refugees 
in settlements in Northern and Western 
Uganda. While not further explained in the 
article, it could be reasoned that ownership 
will advange a couple of benefits like, for 
example, an improved maintenance, a 
better pump management and an increased 
reliability. One of the assumptions of the 
research of this thesis is that ownership 
and self-reliance can also be achieved by 
other means than a financial contribution.
5.2. TOWARDS A BETTER WATER PROVISION SYSTEM 
==PAGE:51==
49
49
This section briefly introduces the notion 
of a stakeholder analysis, and why it is 
relevant for this work. 
According to Elliot and Deasley (2007), 
systems are designed to satisfy stakeholder 
needs and to deliver a certain capability 
which is called a requirement. These 
requirements determine how the system 
will impact its environment but also how 
the environment will impact the system. 
Thus, the requirement is a statement that 
the describes ‘what the system will do’ and 
not ‘how the system will do it’. In order for 
the requirements to successfully match the 
stakeholders needs, a good stakeholders 
understanding is required.
As part of understanding the holistic 
system, it is necessary to map and analyse 
the stakeholders, which also includes 
identifying their needs and wishes. Bryson 
(2004) argues for this by referring to a 
number of authors, that ‘stakeholders analyses 
are key to identifying problems that can and should 
be solved - particularly in situations where no one 
is wholly in charge, but many are involved, affected 
or have some partial responsibility to act.’ (Bryson, 
2004. p46). 
As has been shown in Chapter 3.3. The 
humanitarian system, the long chain of 
command in the humanitarian system 
shows that the power is distributed 
among a great number of stakeholders. A 
stakeholder analyses can be very helpful 
in identifying problems especially when 
many stakeholders are involved. For 
this research, the assumption is that a 
stakeholder analysis will be a good method 
to help assess a solution. Bryson (2004) 
describes a variety of tools and methods 
to do the analysis which are - like most 
(design) tools - meant for better describing 
and understanding the world.
Analysing the stakeholders and their needs 
will lead to a better definition of the 
requirements of the system - thus aiming 
for a ‘better’ solutions. But ‘better’ is 
placed in quotes here, because, in the end, 
no system is an optimum for all parties - 
trade-offs must balance their conflicting 
demands. (Elliot and Deasley, 2007). 
As described in Chapter 5.1. Humanitarian 
aid, the proposal of Charter for Change 
(2017) is a call for more localized aid 
- e.g. including locals in the decision 
and 
execution 
process. 
Armstrong 
and Nakafeero (2017. p5) describe a 
case where the refugees were not only 
consulted, but completely empowered to 
make decisions ‘at each and every step 
of safe water service development and 
delivery’ leading to an improved water 
service. Furthermore, this also led to social 
benefits and opportunities like women 
equality, something that is valued by more 
help relief organizations (interview S. le 
Poole, 2017). Morelli (2011) suggest in her 
article - about the learnings from 3 design 
challenges - that essential knowledge 
critical for the development of highly 
contextualized solutions can be captured 
by directly handing the responsibility for 
development to the user. This perception 
originated from the designers’ way of 
thinking - e.g. principles of user centered 
design by starting a product development 
from the user perspective as described in 
Chapter 6.1. Design theories and methods. 
Hence it could be stated that empowerment, 
which is a form of localized aid, is a 
very effective method for improving the 
development of a solution. Also, the notion 
of empowerment works foremost because 
it draws on the needs and knowledge of the 
user. This empowerment - collaborative 
design or co-creation - are just one of the 
methods for achieving the goal of a fitting 
solution for the refugees. More methods 
and tools suitable for this - taken from a 
designer’s arsenal - will be explored during 
the research. ‘Designers have developed skills 
and capabilities to interpret users’ cultures, needs, 
and behaviors and translate them into industrial 
offering.’ (Morelli, 2011. p95). 
5.3. STAKEHOLDER ANALYSIS IN LITERATURE
==PAGE:52==
50
Childeren in the refugee settlement for who collecting water is a daily task.
Source: own photo
Image 8 - 
==PAGE:53==
51
51
THEORY AND 
METHODOLOGY
6
In this chapter the theory and methodology 
is addressed. The theory part moves some 
perspectives on design forward, which is 
not meant as a literature study, but as a 
brief introduction and explanation of the 
notions. They include the areas that have 
been investigated during the search of 
suitable design and research tools for the 
purpose of evaluating the parameters. 
‘Design with the user’ is the first principle 
for innovation in technology enabled 
development programs stated by UNICEF 
(2017). This principle has been endorsed 
by a numerous amount of organisations 
which hints that co-design is being adopted 
in the humanitarian aid sector. Could this 
also indicate that the notion of design 
thinking - i.e. thinking as a designer - is 
accepted?
To 
understand 
what 
these 
design 
philosophies and perspectives are about, 
a brief introduction to different areas will 
be given in this chapter. Their importance 
and relevance with regards to the work of 
this thesis will be clarified in the following 
sections - and will be used during further 
reading of this work.
‘Design thinking is a human-centered approach to innovation that draws from the 
designer’s toolkit to integrate the needs of people, the possibilities of technology, and 
the requirements for business success.’ Tim Brown (IDEO, 2017)
The study of the theory and the attempt to 
connect this with the problem statements, 
led to the composition of the methodology 
part. Here, the methodology of the work 
and the tools is further explained - and 
for what purpose they are used during the 
thesis. This also includes the methodology 
of the fieldwork. 
The importance of  bringing in (human 
centered) design
‘Human-centered design is all about talking 
with people about their challenges, ambitions 
and constraints.’ (IDEO.org, 2015. p39). It is 
considered to be a broad philosophy that 
includes a variety of methods where the 
user is placed in the center. 
A design perspective is useful for the 
purpose of this research because it 
looks past the system of technical 
specifications and takes stock of the users 
and corresponding social impacts. In this, 
designers play an important role as they 
have developed skills and capabilities 
to interpret users’ cultures, needs and 
behaviors and are able to translate them 
into industrial offering. (Verganti, 2003). 
6.1. DESIGN THEORIES AND METHODS
==PAGE:54==
52
Spinuzzi (2005) underlines the value 
of interpreting users’ cultures, needs 
and behaviors, and states that design 
is not only about producing artifacts, 
systems and work organisations, but 
also about generating practical and tacit 
knowledge. Exactly this knowledge is key 
in understanding a system from a social 
and holistic perspective. Subsequently to 
these statements, the assumption of this 
research is that design can thus be used 
for an assessment of an artifact, system or 
service. 
However, design thinking - i.e. thinking 
as a designer - has not been adopted in 
every sector or industry yet as Brown (2008) 
explicates in his article. He notices that 
there is a misunderstanding of what design 
thinking includes and that the value of a 
designer within the bigger system of the 
organization is underappreciated - which 
is especially the case for less innovation 
driven industries.
But according to Brown (2008), design 
thinking is applicable to a wide range of 
organisations. And the review of the 
humanitarian system as written in Chapter 
5.1. Humanitarian aid shows that the 
perspective towards innovation is shifting - 
thus creating chances for embracing design 
thinking in the humanitarian aid sector. 
Service design
Service design ‘attempts to develop the entire 
system that provides a service to a user.’ (Boeijen 
and Daalhuizen, 2010. p33). This notion is 
of relevance for the work of this thesis 
where a service - i.e. water provision - is 
provided to a user - i.e. the refugee. 
However, as with most design ideas and 
theories, there is no one clear cut definition. 
The same goes for the emerging discipline 
of service design. (Saco and Goncalves, 
2010). Or as Stickdorn and Schneider (2016. 
p22) note:‘if  you would ask ten people what 
service design is, you would end up with eleven 
different answers – at least.’ This could be 
seen as a weakness, but also as a strength 
as the framing of the definition is open for 
adjustments - maintaining relevance during 
a longer period of time.
Without going into detail of the exact 
definition of area of service design, this 
section will draw on what is understood of 
it with regards to this thesis. Service design 
could be seen as a wider domain as Saco 
and Goncalves (2010) argue that it attempts 
to ‘join the worlds of  business, design, change 
management, and the service economy for a multi-
sided approach to the introduction and sustainability 
of  services.’ (Saco and Goncalves, 2010). Which 
indicated that it is a multidisciplinary and 
multi purpose approach to designing and 
sustaining services. 
For the work of this thesis, the example 
that 31 Volts service design (2008) sketches 
will be cited: ‘when you have two coffee shops 
right next to each other, and each sells the exact 
same coffee at the exact same price, service design is 
what makes you walk into one and not the other’. 
Here, it is not only about the branding 
or the marketing that lures the customer 
to one specific coffee place, but it is also 
about understanding the customer - and 
using this to design and improve a service. 
Central to the design of this service is the 
user experience (Boeijen and Daalhuizen, 
2010) - and the process mapping as was 
introduced by Shostack (1984). The latter 
could function to further investigate the 
process of supplying water to a refugee 
because it maps the interactions between 
the user and the system during the service 
delivery. 
For understanding the user within the field 
of user experience, numerous methods have 
been developed by both design companies 
as academic institutions of which a great 
deal are covered and documented in the 
work of Roberta Tassi (Tassi, 2017). As 
service design is multidisciplinary, the same 
goes for the tools which have been taken 
and adjusted from a variety of domains 
==PAGE:55==
53
53
Classical roles of  users, researchers, and designers in the design process (on the left) 
and how they are merging in the co-designing process (on the right).
Source: Sanders and Stappers (2008)
Figure 12 - 
like human centered design, quality management, 
organisational design and user experience design. 
The 
notion 
of 
a 
multidisciplinary 
orientation combined with the fact that 
the tools are meant to sustain a service 
by understanding the interaction between 
the user and the service, they could 
be employed for the purpose of an 
assessment. Therefore, taking stock of 
these methods and tools has been part of 
the work of this thesis. They functioned 
as inspiration during the analysis of the 
insights and to communicate the findings 
in an understandable manner as is shown 
in Chapter 8. Going in depth.
Participatory design and co-design
Participatory design can be characterized 
as research because it attempts to examine 
the tacit, invisible aspects of human 
activity 
through 
design 
partnerships 
with participants, in which researchers-
designers and participants cooperatively 
design artifacts, workflow and work 
environments. (Spinuzzi, 2005). 
Moreover, Clement (1994) states that 
participatory designers see themselves as 
facilitators, empowering the users to make 
their own decisions. Iivari (2004) argues 
that this view ‘distinguishes participatory 
design from related approaches such as user-
centered design, where the emphasis is on doing 
design work on behalf  of  the user’ - i.e. the 
user as subject (Sanders and Stappers, 2008). 
Whereas participatory design is conducting 
the work with the user through a design 
partnership - drawing on ideas like co-
design and co-creation. (Spinuzzi, 2005). 
Which could be formulated as seeing ‘the 
user as a partner’. (Sanders and Stappers, 
2008). This perspective is employed to 
improve the design of a service or artifact. 
Because if users participate in the design 
process, it will better fit their needs. In 
Chapter 5.1. Humanitarian aid it is stated that 
the humanitarian system currently sees the 
user as a subject. Therefore, it is assumed 
that participatory design is more or less 
absent in the humanitarian system. Can the 
delivery of aid benefit from participatory 
design?
While there are different takes on how 
co-design and closely related terms are 
defined, the process is best explained 
visually by figure 12. This shows how 
the user has become part of the design 
process, contributing and collaborating 
with the researcher and designer - sharing 
knowledge and insights as an ‘expert of  their 
experiences’. (Sleeswijk Visser, 2009). The goal 
is to attain a deeper user understanding to 
which, in the end, the quality of the design 
of the artifact, service or organisation will 
benefit. Another benefit of the inclusion 
of the user in the design process is a higher 
user involvement and sense of ownership 
often resulting in a higher user satisfaction. 
(Abras, Maloney-Krichmar and Preece, 2004). 
==PAGE:56==
54
Different levels of  knowledge are accessed by different methods.
Source: after Sleeswijk Visser, 2009
Figure 13 - 
In co-design, the researcher and designer 
(may be the same person) collaborate 
on the tools for ideation. Where the role 
of the researcher has become more of a 
facilitator, the role of the designer could be 
best described as a person who is bringing 
design thinking to the table - giving form to 
ideas. (Stappers and Sanders, 2008). (Sleeswijk 
‘Human-centered design is about getting to 
the people you’re designing for and hearing 
from them in their own words.’ (IDEO.
org, 2015. p39) In order to unlock insights 
from people for this research, meetings 
and interviews have been included in the 
planning of the thesis. 
The interviews are performed in a semi-
structured manner (Robson and McCartan, 
2016), allowing new ideas to be brought 
up, or interesting subject to be explored, 
while following a prepared interview guide. 
(Boeijen and Daalhuizen, 2010). A topic guide 
has also been present before and during 
dialogues, making sure that the relevant 
issues were covered. As preparation, 
this has been done for a broad range of 
stakeholders to cope with the uncertainty 
of the accessibility of the stakeholders 
during the field trip. The topic guides are 
included in Chapter 12.7. Semi-structured 
interview questions.
Visser et al. 2005). This is a challenging 
role in the contextual perspective of the 
settlement. In order to design appropriate 
tools, a thorough understanding of the 
user is needed - their behavior, knowledge, 
abilities and capabilities. Therefore, the 
workshop during the field trip will be 
approached with this in mind.
Depending on the location of the 
interviewee, the interviews were conducted 
both face-to-face, or through Skype/
phone. Notes have been taken during 
the execution, and summaries with key-
learnings were made after. 
Lastly, in order to access the deep 
knowledge of people (see figure 13), 
interviews have been used alongside other 
methods on which will be elaborated 
in the next chapters. However, which 
layer of understanding will be reached, 
is both dependent on the capabilities 
and experience of the designer, as of 
the openness of the subject. Therefore, 
the model as provided by Sleeswijk Visser 
(2009) is not strict, but guiding.
Personal communications
A big part of the data gathering are the 
(in)formal dialogues and meetings with 
6.2. INTERVIEWS AND DIALOGUES
==PAGE:57==
55
55
6.3. FIELDWORK
different stakeholders. While not referred 
to exact statements in the work of this 
thesis, they have played an important part 
into understanding the complex nature of 
the humanitarian system - hence, tackling 
the challenge posed by this thesis. 
Personal communications of relevance 
have been with: 
DRC - Copenhagen, Kampala and WASH 
officers
A major part of the research for this thesis 
has been the fieldwork. It consisted of 
activities that has been conducted with 
stakeholders in both Copenhagen, as 
locally during the field trip - both being a 
different framing of the fieldwork for the 
thesis. 
One of the main activities within the 
framing of the fieldwork in Copenhagen 
has been the meetings and sessions with 
a variety of stakeholders and informants. 
Formal interviews, informal dialogues and 
mapping exercises were the methods used 
during these meetings and sessions. Also, 
unplanned casual talks were conducted 
during 
coincidental 
encounters 
with 
people with experience from the field. 
Field trip
During week 13 and week 14 of the thesis 
a field trip is conducted to Kampala and 
the Bidi Bidi refugee settlement. This trip 
is arranged in close collaboration with 
DRC and has been conducted together 
with Benjamin, as master student from 
DTU’s Environmental Engineering. This 
section introduces the methodology within 
the framing of the field work that has been 
executed locally.
The goals and objective for the trip were 
extensively discussed and communicated 
beforehand to draw on the expertise and 
DTU - employees and students with 
experience in the field
On 
02-03-2017 
a 
semi 
structured 
interview has been conducted with the 
co-founder of the Max Foundation, S. 
le Poole in The Netherlands. This gave 
insights and background information 
about the implementation of WASH in the 
developing world and the way of working.
experience of the local DRC staff. These 
were captured in a pre brief document 
called the terms of reference which can 
be found in the appendix in Chapter 12.4. 
Terms of  reference of  the field trip.
The field trip served the following goals:
- 
Understanding the context, the user, 
the use of water, the system and 
organisation.
- 
Gathering insights by bringing the 
design and research tools in practice
- 
Collecting data, documents and 
information
- 
Conducting 
quantitative 
and 
qualitative research
In order to achieve the above goals, the 
following means are used that will be 
explained further in the next chapters.
- 
(In)Formal dialogues
- 
Observations 
- 
Meetings
- 
Interviews
- 
Focus group discussions
- 
Workshops
- 
Questionnaires
Most of the means were planned in a pre-
designed schedule which can be found in 
the appendix in Chapter 12.5. Schedule of  
the field trip. As is described in Chapter 3.6. 
The challenge, one of the challenges is the 
iterative nature of the creation and use of 
insights but also the availability of certain 
==PAGE:58==
56
stakeholders. Therefore alternative plans 
have been made with regards to the means 
- enough materials were prepared and 
brought to adapt for unplanned actions. 
However, some of the above goals and 
means were an ongoing activity like the 
observations, the data collection and 
the (in)formal dialogues with different 
stakeholders - whether this was after a 
formal meeting or informal e.g. having 
dinner. One of the big advantages of the 
field trip has been the immediate contact 
with the people that possess the right 
knowledge or can access the desired data, 
making the time spent very effective. 
Performing observations is key in getting 
an understanding of the unknown 
context, the user and the interactions of 
people between the technical and social 
environment. 
(Boeijen 
and 
Daalhuizen, 
2010). Since the context of a refugee 
settlement is unfamiliar to me, the 
researcher, the importance of conducting 
observations is evident. For doing this, 
basically two approaches exist. One, where 
the researcher tries to be as invisible as 
possible for minimizing the disturbance 
to the situation. Another method, could 
be to follow and observe the user, where 
it is possible to ask questions along the 
way. (Møllebaek Larsen and Flensborg, 2011). 
This could be a way of obtaining deeper 
insights - understanding both what people 
do as what they feel, which is presented in 
figure 13 of the previous chapter. (Sleeswijk 
Visser, 2009). After consultation with the 
local DRC officers in the settlement, is has 
been decided to go for a more casual and 
less planned approach. Observing while 
visiting the boreholes and as continuous 
practice throughout the field trip - which 
IDEO calls immersion (IDEO.org, 2015). 
Photography and taking notes have 
been used as methods of documenting 
the insights. The first is a good way of 
capturing the exact situation - without the 
layer of interpretation. IDEO draws on 
the importance of recording precisely what 
you see and hear as ‘it’s easy to interpret 
what’s in front of you before you’ve fully 
understood it…’ (IDEO.org, 2015. p52). 
Meaning that later knowledge might be 
important in interpreting what is being 
said or done. Although, it can be foreseen 
that there are risks involved. Because only 
focussing on recording literal quotes might 
take away the focus of the researcher in 
asking questions to clarify. Sometimes 
an 
articulated 
wrong 
interpretation 
could cause the subject to explain more 
- contributing to a better understanding. 
Lastly, it could also be said that it’s hard 
to interpret a quote or situation outside of 
the actual context. Therefore, with this in 
mind, the approach for this research will 
be a balance between exactly recording and 
interpreting what is said and done.
The company of Benjamin during the 
field trip has been an important factor 
which should be briefly addressed. Even 
though his research had a different focus, 
see Chapter 4.1. Structure, his presence has 
been very much complementary to this 
research while a variety of activities were 
executed - meetings, interviews, focus 
groups discussions and the workshop. 
During this, the joint effort of two 
researchers, whether observing or asking 
questions, has led to more insights and a 
better understanding. Additional to this, 
the ability to brainstorm, talk and evaluate 
while on the field trip, has been of great 
value to the work of this thesis.
During the whole field trip there has been 
company of DRC staff and most often a 
translator when in the refugee settlement. 
Most youth was able to speak English, but 
that did not count for the men and to a 
lesser extent for the women. The role 
of the translator is very important, as he 
not only directly translates, but also has a 
interpretive function. 
==PAGE:59==
57
57
‘Measurement: Household surveys, observation and community discussion groups 
are more effective methods of collecting data on water use and consumption than the 
measurement of water pumped into the pipeline network or the operation of hand 
pumps.‘ (The Sphere Project, 2011. p98)
A focus group discussion with a target 
group can help to understand the issues 
concerning the service. (Boeijen and 
Daalhuizen, 2010). During the field trip, 
focus group discussions have been carried 
The water committees are formed at the 
request of the managing NGO to manage 
the pumping/tap site. They are the focal 
point of the community and the link 
between the NGOs and the users, which 
makes their take on the system valuable 
as they understand both views. The 
committees are a mix of both men and 
women which gives the chance to speak to 
both genders. 
They have the responsibility for the 
following tasks:
- 
Maintenance and cleaning of hand 
water pumps
- 
Control and management of tap site
- 
Hygiene promotion and education on 
water use
- 
Coordination of queues and numbers 
on jerry cans
- 
Administering 
problems 
and 
reporting issues
In total 2 focus group discussion have 
6.4. FOCUS GROUP DISCUSSION
out with the water committees to get a 
better understanding of their working 
principles, the challenges they face 
and concerns they have with the water 
provision solutions. 
been conducted with 10 committee 
members per session. These members are 
not all from the same committee, which 
will stimulate the input of the discussion 
as they might have different challenges, 
issues or insights. Not all the participants 
are able to speak English, so the role of the 
translator is important during the session. 
Benjamin and I are leading the discussion 
and asking questions in a semi-structured 
manner. (Robson and McCartan, 2016).The 
questions are divided in the following 
topics as is shown below in figure 14. The 
questions are split into two categories: 
Open, meant for opening the topic, and 
Deep, meant for digging deeper into the 
topic. (IDEO.org, 2015). 
The order of questioning is not fixed from 
top to bottom. When interesting topics or 
comments rise, the discussion is open to 
dig deeper into that if it is relevant for the 
scope of the research. 
==PAGE:60==
58
Overview of  the open and deep questions, and the topics for the focus group discussions. 
Source: own design
Figure 14 - 
Open
Deep
What is the purpose of the group?
What do you do? What are your tasks?
What are your responsibilities as a group?
With how many are you? Only woman or mixed?
How much do you cover? (ie. one borehole or a small village)
How is it formed?
Was it a request? Or a own initiative?
Did you get any help forming the group?
Do the pumps break down often?
What are the reasons for breaking down?
Is it easy to repair?
Does the repair takes long?
What are your resources?
Are you supplied with tools and parts?
Do you have a contact with DRC?
Do you collect any money from the users?
Do you get any budget or reward for doing this?
What are the main challenges and issues?
Can you describe some of the main challenges that your group 
fases?
What are the main issues related to the water provision 
system?
What is the limiting factor?
What is the water currently used for?
What would you like to use the water for?
How much water would you need for this?
Do you have any recommendations and 
suggestions?
What do you need to improve the response of the committee?
How can DRC support you in this?
==PAGE:61==
59
59
Overview of  the set-up of  the workshop
Source: own design
Figure 15 - 
Halfway during the field trip a workshop 
is organised with the users to help identify 
challenges and opportunities. The methods 
used during this workshop, help to make 
tacit and deep knowledge surface (Sleeswijk 
Visser, 2009), in order to understand what 
people know, feel and dream (see figure 14). 
By taking away boundaries it will also serve 
as a powerful communication and research 
tool. (Spinuzzi, 2005).
In this chapter the methodology of the 
workshop is introduced and the two major 
parts of the session are explained: the user 
journey mapping and card sort exercise. 
In general the workshop serves the 
following goals:
- 
Stimulating the thought process
- 
Provoking discussion
- 
Communicating ideas
- 
Gathering qualitative insights 
6.5. THE WORKSHOP
Underneath a table is shown of the set-up 
of the workshop and what materials have 
been used. The materials are designed in 
a visual way which helps to overcome the 
language barrier between the facilitators 
and the participants. A variety of elements 
exist to achieve visual communication: 
from photos to simple illustrations. The 
tools for this workshop consist of two 
parts: the cards are equipped with photos 
as a medium and the worksheet has a 
simple illustration and timeline.
The design of the set-up (see figure 15) of 
the workshop has been done prior to the 
field trip in cooperation with DRC. During 
the fieldtrip, slight adjustments have been 
made to cope with newly gained insights. 
Lastly, it should be noted that the emphasis 
of the outcome should not be on the 
products that are produced during the 
workshop - but moreover on the qualitative 
insights gained during the discussions. The 
tools and methods are more a vehicle to 
stimulate the thought process, provoke 
discussion and to help communicate ideas. 
Also, it should be taken into account that, 
despite the fact that the focus groups 
are carefully selected by DRC, the three 
groups could never represent the opinion 
and experience of each and every single 
refugee present in the settlement. 
User journey mapping
The first part of the session is about 
mapping the user journey to gain a better 
understanding of the steps that the 
refugees go through when collecting water. 
The current local practice, challenges and 
opportunities will surface. (Møllebaek Larsen 
and Flensborg, 2011). 
Also, the experience of the refugees with 
regards to this journey will come to light 
during the related discussions. Here, the 
starting point will not be the complex 
Set-up workshop
Persons
12 participants per session
2 facilitators
1 translator
Time
1,5 hours per group in total
0,5 hour for the user journey 
0,5 hour for card sort  
0,5 hour discussion 
Materials card sort
Cards with images
Blank cards
Pens and markers
Post-its
Materials user journey
Worksheet with a timeline
Cards with images of activities
Blank cards
Pens and markers
Post-its
==PAGE:62==
60
Photo of  one of  the results of  the user journey mapping exercise
Source: own photo
Image 9 - 
Photo of  the 10 priorities of  a group during the card sort exercise.
Source: own photo
Image 10 - 
==PAGE:63==
61
61
technological artifact, but understanding 
how it is part of people’s everyday life - 
like with the example of a meal service for 
elderly people as given by Morelli (2011).
The idea of this exercise is to map the daily 
activities in an interactive session between 
the participant and the facilitator with the 
help of two types of materials - a worksheet 
and cards, supplemented with post-its and 
markers for notes and drawings. 
A worksheet with a printed timeline 
suggests the participants that the steps of 
collecting water need to be arranged in a 
chronological manner. There is enough 
room on the sheet to map all the steps 
and to place comments on post-its. An 
icon with a pencil that draws, hints that the 
worksheet is meant to be drawn on with 
the supplied pencils.
Cards are supplied with images of activities 
and items from a context that is familiar 
to the refugee. Even when the topic of 
a photo seems to be very obvious, it can 
always be misinterpreted.  There could be 
many reasons for this like for example the 
differences between people’s knowledge, 
background, 
experiences, 
personality 
or even imagination. Because of this 
room for misinterpretation, every card 
is supplemented with a written word of 
the topic that is intended. The translator 
translates the words when needed, so the 
participants understand what is meant with 
it. Also, in the same format there are blank 
cards which can be used by the participants 
to add a step that is not originally included.
All preparations for this are done prior 
to the field trip. The final goal is to create 
a visual overview of the journey and the 
experience as seen from the view of the 
user. (Mind-Lab, 2017). This is done after 
the return from the field.
Card sort
The second part of the session is the card 
sort exercise which will help to understand 
what is most important for the participants. 
The card sort is an easy and simple exercise 
that can help gain a lot of insights into 
what matters most to the people where the 
design is meant for - in this case a water 
provision solution. It’s a quick and easy way 
to spark conversation about the priorities 
in people’s lives. (IDEO.org, 2015). 
The idea of the method is to let people 
prioritize a set of cards each with a word 
or a single image on it. By forcing people 
to rank them in order of preference, 
‘participants will start a mental evaluation process 
to both address what “value” in general means 
and how different solutions or alternatives are 
rated on a scale that is predefined or defined by 
the participants themselves.’ (Møllebaek Larsen 
and Flensborg, 2011. p76). Again, it’s not the 
final ranking that counts as a product, but 
the qualitative insights obtained during the 
deeper conversations. 
There are different methods of conducting 
a card sort exercise and, like with most 
design methods, there is not ‘one-way’ 
of doing it. As the possibilities for 
preparing the materials during the field 
trip are limited, most of the work has been 
done in Copenhagen. The preparations 
of the exercise consisted of two steps: 
prototyping and testing. 
The materials are printed images of items, 
products or situations from a context 
that is familiar to the refugee pasted on 
cardboard each supplied with a word. 
These cards are in the same style as the 
cards from the user journey mapping 
exercise and are shown in image 9. 
Gathering the images from a relevant 
context is intensive work and requires 
room for maneuverability and adaptability 
- similar images were created so the best 
suitable set could be selected during the 
fieldtrip based on new insights - in the 
end, only half of the cards designed 
were used in the final deck. Also blank 
cards are included so topics could later be 
added - which has been the case for the 
topic ‘tools’. The cards are tested in a trial 
run of the exercise with Benjamin during 
the field trip.
==PAGE:64==
62
Photo of  a questionnaire. The full version can be found in the appendix. 
Source: own photo
Figure 12 - 
Training of  the enumerators for the execution of  the questionnaire.
Source: own photo
Image 11 - 
==PAGE:65==
63
63
The 
questionnaire 
is 
developed 
in 
collaboration with DRC during the field 
trip. The survey was conducted with 
the help of 16 trained enumerators. The 
goal of the questionnaire is to collect 
quantifiable data on different topics 
that are relevant for the research such 
as: demographic information, water-use 
and purposes, user understanding and 
livelihood opportunities. This survey is 
the first to be conducted in Zone 1 of 
the Bidibidi settlement on this scale. For 
that reason the raw and analysed data is 
also relevant for DRC and other partners 
active in the same area. Therefore this 
is also shared with them. The complete 
questionnaire can be found as an appendix 
in Chapter 12.6. The questionnaire.
Sample group
In order to calculate the sample size for 
the survey, a simplified formula of Yamane 
(Yamane, 1967. p886) will be used: 
6.6. THE QUESTIONNAIRE
For this, a 95% confidence interval is taken 
and a margin of error of 0,5%. The level 
of precision is taken as +/- 5%, which is 
quite accurate. 
This is to account for unexpected errors 
and mistakes during the execution of the 
survey.
Here, n is the sample size, N the population 
and e is the level of precision. In total, 
there are approximately 51.000 refugees 
in zone 1. When this data is applied to 
this formula that results in the following 
sample size: 
Sample size: n = 397
For the survey the number of households is 
chosen on 400 which makes 25 households 
per enumerator. By choosing this amount it 
is considered as sufficient to say something 
significant with the delivered data about 
the target population.
In total, the 400 households correspond 
to 2896 people. This amount is a lot larger 
than the required sample size, but as only 
one survey per household is conducted, 
2896 can’t be considered as the actual 
sample size.
==PAGE:66==
64
Household visits to test the questionnaire and to talk to the refugees
Source: own photo
Image 13 - 
The 16 enumerators that executed the survey among 400 households
Source: own photo
Image 14 - 
==PAGE:67==
65
65
Set-up
As part of the development and 
preparation of the questionnaire, three 
household visits have been conducted to 
test and adjust the questions. This resulted 
in new phrasing of questions as well as the 
addition and removal of questions based 
on new insights. 16 enumerators were 
chosen to conduct each 25 surveys among 
households in zone 1 each in different 
villages. These enumerators all had 
experience with executing a survey before 
and were familiar with the format. 
To ensure a good understanding of 
the questions and an agreement on the 
translation in Arabic, two training sessions 
have been organised. During the first 
session, an introduction to the project was 
given so the enumerators understand the 
goal. 
With the whole group a walk through of 
the entire survey have been carried out, 
step by step and question by question. 
On the next day, this process is repeated, 
but now with translating each question 
to Arabic and agreeing on the specific 
sentence for the translation. 
In that way, the chance on translation 
errors that could influence the accuracy 
of the outcomes, was minimized. For 
example: ‘income’ shouldn’t be translated 
as ‘money’. Or ‘how far do you walk?’ 
shouldn’t be translated as ‘how long do 
you walk?’. This is vital in order to gather 
correct and useful data for the research.
Format and topics
The questionnaire consists of three topics 
that can basically be divided in: 
1. 
Demographic information
2. 
The water provision system
3. 
Livelihood opportunities
For each question multiple answers can 
be given unless otherwise stated. The 
questions start with easy topics to open up 
the survey and are concluded with more 
difficult ones. Questions that can inflict 
more negativity like ‘do you have enough 
water’ are moved a bit further down the 
questionnaire so they won’t influence the 
preliminary ones. 
One of the limitations to the survey is 
asking the refugees about measurements 
like time or distance - as for most people it 
is hard to be precise. During the households 
visits, the travel time and distance to the 
water pumps was asked to the refugees 
and subsequently it was measured by 
walking the same journey. This led to the 
conclusion that the perceptions and actual 
time / distance varied quite substantial 
which suggests that the collected data 
about measurements should be used with 
caution. 
The refugees are allowed to answer 
the question ‘how far do you walk to the 
water source?’ in distance and/or in time 
depending on their preference for the unit. 
When asking the amount of water used, 
the answer is given in number of types 
of the jerry cans - which the enumerator 
needs to confirm. 
==PAGE:68==
66
Hand pump
Tap stand (solar and diesel)
Tap stand (truck)
Surface water
42%
32%
26%
0%
Percentages of  use per type of  pump
Source: own data
Figure 16 - 
==PAGE:69==
67
67
Data analysis
The results of the questionnaires are 
documented and saved digitally in an 
Excel file in which basic calculations and 
analysis methods are done. These include 
data filtering, calculating the amount of 
water per person, calculating correlations 
between pump and malfunctions, and 
identifying the complaints per type of 
pump. 
The sample group used the following 
pumps as is shown in figure 16 - only one 
household of the 400 in total used surface 
water. Therefore this water source will be 
neglected in Chapter 8.5. Identifying challenges 
and opportunities.
Demographic data of  sample group
In this section the demographic data of 
the sample group is shown. 
Total number of households: 400
Total amount of people: 2884
Of which: 1554 female and 1341 male
This is shown in figure 17 by percentage. 
The age of the sample group is also 
identified and divided in three parts: 0-18 
years, 19-59 years and 60+ and is shown in 
figure 18. The data shows that the age of 
the people questioned, thus the refugees 
in Bidibidi, is relatively young - especially 
when compared to a developed country 
like Denmark where the age group 0-18 
is 21,5% of the total population. (Statbank 
Denmark, 2017).
A young refugee population has certain 
implications 
on 
the 
services 
that 
humanitarian aid organisations supply. It 
demands for more youth related services 
like schools and leisure activities as sports 
and games. But, it could as well have an 
effect on the healthcare system since 
young people need vaccinations for certain 
youth deceases.
Gender percentage of  the sample group
Source: own data
Figure 17 - 
Age of  the sample group
Source: own data
Figure 18- 
==PAGE:70==
68
Visiting a diesel powered pump and performing informal dialogues with the operators.
Source: own photo
Image 15 - 
==PAGE:71==
69
69
7
BRINGING INTO 
PRACTICE ON SITE
This chapter addresses how the earlier 
described methodology has been brought 
into practice and what could be learned 
from doing this. The key insights from 
applying them are discussed and the 
process is briefly evaluated. 
As is stated in Chapter 6. Theory and 
methodology the interviews and dialogues are 
conducted both in- as outside the framing 
of the field trip. 
Bringing the semi-structured method of 
interviewing into practice has been very 
useful during the formal interviews. The 
topic guide proved to be valuable during 
the leading of the focus group discussions 
- as it gave direction to the remaining 
topics under the limitations of time. 
Most individual interviews and dialogues 
have been of informal nature which 
certainly improved the natural dialogue 
between the interviewee and interviewer. 
In addition, the interviewee talks more 
freely about a topic, leading to the exposure 
of deeper knowledge. However, during 
the execution of the fieldwork it has been 
noticed that a pitfall could be the deviation 
on topics that might not be relevant for the 
research. 
All of the methods have been applied 
during the field trip, except the interviews 
and dialogues - which has been an on 
going activity throughout the work of the 
thesis. The subchapters are supplied with 
photographic material for the context and 
understanding of the methodology. 
Obviously, this works two ways, as 
unexpected topics could also make new 
unforeseen insights rise.
As is described in IDEO.org (2015) the 
preferred method of taking notes is 
directly transcribing what is being said 
- thus literally and without the attempt 
to interpret what the person might have 
meant. 
This proved to be challenging with 
the translator as the link between the 
interviewee and interviewer. Although 
he was instructed to focus on literal 
translations, it has been unavoidable that 
some dialogues were translated with his 
interpretation. This should be taken as 
a sidenote for the completeness of this 
research. 
7.1. INTERVIEWS AND DIALOGUES
==PAGE:72==
70
Visiting the homes of  the refugees as part of  immersion. 
Source: own photo
Image 16 - 
==PAGE:73==
71
71
The fieldwork outside the framing of 
the field trip, has been the foundation 
on which the actual field trip is later 
built. Engagement with stakeholders and 
informants in the form of interviews and 
informal dialogues helped to both shape 
the materials and methods, as to get some 
preliminary insights into the context and 
user - e.g. meeting the fellow students Sune 
and Nana, who have been on a field trip 
to India.
While an effort has been made to do 
extensive fieldwork prior to the field trip, 
the immersion in the context has been of 
big value for the work of this thesis - as 
it not only deliverd insights, but also has 
been the opportunity to test the design and 
research tools in service of an evaluation. 
The full schedule of the field trip (Chapter 
12.5. Schedule of  the field trip) included a 
lot of meetings for which preparations 
have been made in the form of topics 
that needed to be covered, and questions 
that needed to be posed. Besides the 
organised meetings, the informal dialogues 
formed a very useful method of collecting 
insights - e.g. casual conversations with 
WASH officers during borehole visits as is 
captured in image 15.
DRC supported the research throughout 
the whole field trip and a WASH officer 
has always been present. He has been of 
much help understanding the use, the 
system and the way of working. 
Unfortunately, not all knowledge about the 
complete organisation of the humanitarian 
aid in Bidi Bidi was present - e.g. power 
structures, value chain, finance flows. 
Therefore a holistic stakeholder analysis is 
left for future work. 
Prior to the field trip, it has been suggested 
by the main local contact of DRC that 
it is hard to attain insights on the use of 
the water by conducting the method of 
‘follow and observe’ (Møllebaek Larsen and 
Flensborg, 2011. p68) - the refugees behave 
differently in the presence of researchers. 
This has been confirmed during the field 
trip: people stopped their activities in the 
presence of me as a researcher. 
It could be stated that in this particular 
context it is hard to ‘act as a fly on the wall’ 
as is suggested by Boeijen and Daalhuizen 
(2010. p45). However, an arrangement 
with the refugees could have been made 
to join them on their journey, but for this 
research it has been decided not to do this. 
It is thought that the desired insights could 
be acquired through other means. 
7.2. FIELDWORK
==PAGE:74==
72
The context and set up of  the focus group discussion with the translator in the middle.
Source: own photo
Figure 17 - 
==PAGE:75==
73
73
A total of 2 focus group discussions have 
been conducted with two mixed groups 
of the water committees. This section 
will address some of the key insights on 
hosting the focus group discussion and 
lessons learned. 
 
Firstly, the focus group discussions have 
proved to give a quick understanding of 
the water committees’ working principles, 
their concerns and challenges they face 
as is suggested by IDEO.org (2015). The 
execution of the focus group discussions 
delivered a lot of valuable insights of 
which parts are used in Chapter 8. Going 
in depth. 
 
Secondly, the members of the water 
committees have been very cooperative 
and considered during the sessions. Which 
is in accordance with the fact that they 
work on a voluntary basis, without any 
reward - demonstrating their willingness to 
contribute to the whole. 
 
While the group dynamic can help to 
stimulate discussion, it can also have 
negative implications as is noticed during 
the sessions. Some participants are more 
outspoken than others - leading to unequal 
contribution 
during 
the 
discussion. 
During the sessions, the facilitators were 
supported by the translator in making sure 
that everyone has been heard. 
 
The necessity for the translator to translate 
everything that has been said made the 
progress during the discussions slow. 
Due to the corresponding time limits, the 
choice have been made to divide the topics 
over the two sessions, so every aspects was 
covered. Doing this means that there is a 
risk involved that not every topic can be 
generalized - as Boeijen and Daalhuizen 
(2010) suggest to conduct at least three 
sessions with the same topics. Still, while 
taking stock of this, key insights from the 
sessions will be used for further work. 
7.3. FOCUS GROUP DISCUSSION
==PAGE:76==
74
The mapping of  the user journey during the workshop with the women demonstrating the active 
engagement of  the participants.
Source: own photo
Image 19 - 
The start of  the session with the youth, where English was spoken.
Source: own photo
Image 18 - 
==PAGE:77==
75
75
In this chapter the execution of the 
workshop is explained. Also, the lessons 
learned from carrying out the methodology 
as is described in Chapter 6.5. The workshop, 
will be clarified. Furthermore, a short 
description of what went well and what 
went wrong is given on the two parts of the 
session. The programme of the workshop 
is shown in figure 19. 
First, a major finding of facilitating 
the workshop for the refugees in the 
given context is that the participants are 
extremely enthusiastic and cooperative 
during the sessions. As is noted during the 
focus group discussions, this is, on the one 
hand, due to their willingness to contribute 
in improving their own situation - they like 
to be enabled. On the other hand, because 
somebody is (finally) listening to them as 
is noted that this is the first time they have 
been summoned for a meeting like this. 
DRC indicates that emergency situation 
of the camp hasn’t allowed to do this kind 
of activities yet, but will be done if the 
situation stabilizes.
However the reason, they have been 
surprisingly eager to use the materials 
that were supplied and to participate in 
the organised session. Bringing some 
drinks, snacks and stroopwafels (from The 
Netherlands) is highly recommended. 
Furthermore, it is learned that preliminary 
knowledge is key in carrying out a 
workshop that is very much context 
related. The idea to plan the workshop 
halfway the field trip turned out to be a 
good choice. A preliminary understanding 
of the refugee situation, the settlement and 
the systems was indeed needed to be able 
to adjust the materials, and to ask the right 
questions in order to get the best out of 
every session. Most of this understanding 
was not present with the facilitators prior 
to the trip. 
For the execution of the workshop the 
total of three sessions were organised: one 
with the youth, one with the women and 
another one with the men. Respectively 
each with 12, 13 and 11 participants. Even 
though the materials were designed in a 
visual way, a translator has been present 
during each session to help communicate 
- which has been especially necessary for 
the session with the women. This will be 
further explained in Chapter 8.2. The refugee. 
The consequence of a translator was 
that the dialogues went slow and that the 
facilitators were not always able to react 
witty or direct to what has been said. 
In order to make the refugees feel 
comfortable, the workshop has been held 
at a place that was familiar to the refugees: 
in a DRC tent at the reception as image 17 
and image 18  show. This ‘neutral ground’ is 
suitable for organising group sessions as is 
suggested by IDEO.org (2015, p42).
User journey mapping
The idea of mapping the user journey 
of collecting water was very clear for 
participants - no further explanation was 
needed. It could be stated that it’s very 
intuitive to map all the steps of a task, 
especially when cards with options are 
supplied.
This exercise has been done together 
with the entire group, which led to a lot 
of discussions between the participants as 
the journey for each individual is slightly 
different. Since they have been asked to 
deliver one product, they are forced to 
discuss steps, activities and other matters 
- which is of big value for the facilitators. 
Furthermore, the cards that are not used 
can give qualitative insights too and can be 
used as a basis for a dialogue. The unused 
card ‘surface water’ let to a dialogue which 
7.4. THE WORKSHOP
==PAGE:78==
76
The card sort exercise with the women. 
Source: own photo
Image 20 - 
Discussion between the men during the card sort exercise. 
Source: own design
Image 21 - 
==PAGE:79==
77
77
deliverd the insight that the participants are 
very much aware of the health risks related 
to the use of this water for consumption. 
The presence of the cards ‘wheelbarrow’ 
and ‘bicycle’ let to the insight that these 
items are desired - and that transporting 
water is a pressing issue. 
Letting one of the participants present the 
map is a good way to check if the opinions 
of the group are aligned - which was 
most often not the case, leading to more 
discussion. Obviously, these discussions 
are of value. 
During observations and dialogues of the 
first two sessions it is noticed that the tasks 
in the households in the refugee settlements 
are strictly divided. The women, the youth 
and children are responsible for gathering 
the water, while the men have different 
task like supporting the household with an 
income. 
Since they don’t collect any water, they 
have no first hand understanding of the 
user journey for collecting water. Their 
understanding is based on second hand 
information and not on own experience. 
Therefore the user journey exercise will be 
skipped during the session of the men to 
make more time for the second part of the 
workshop.
Card sort
For this part of the workshop, the 
participants have been divided into three 
groups - each supplied with a similar deck 
of 30 cards.
The participants are asked to pick 5 cards 
from the deck that they think are the most 
important to them - arranging them in 
order of importance. Here, they need to 
be reminded that there is no wrong or right 
answer, else this could lead to dishonest 
choices. The choices have been presented 
to the other groups so all the participants 
were able to ask questions or get inspiration 
from the explanations. 
The second round of drawing 5 cards 
displayed choices that are less related to 
primary needs and more to desires - e.g. 
‘mobile phone’ and ‘sports’ in stead of 
‘school’ and ‘water’. After presenting the 
choices and a moment of questions, the 
participants have been asked whether 
they want to change their choice based on 
new insights. This realized the interesting 
finding that 3 out of the 9 groups changed 
the order and/or changed their choices. 
This demonstrates that the participants 
of the workshop gain new insights from 
each other. They learn from the reasoning 
of others and it could broaden their 
perspective on topics. In a wider view, 
the workshop with these two exercise 
can also be used as part of educating the 
participants on topics - whether they are 
normally discussed or not. 
Furthermore, cart sort, as part of 
participatory design, can also be used to 
help manage expectations about a service 
or 
product. 
(Abras, 
Maloney-Krichmar 
and Preece, 2004). For example the lesser 
functioning of the solar powered pumps 
during cloudy weather.
Lastly, the products of the card sort 
exercise will not be displayed here, but will 
find their way into this work in the form of 
qualitative insights in i.e. Chapter 8. Going 
in depth.
Programme workshop
Introduction
5min
30min
30min
30min
Introducing the translator, the facilitators 
and the purpose of the research
User journey mapping 
- Mapping the journey using the materials
- Presenting and room for questions
Open ﬂoor
Time for questions, discussion and 
recommendations
Card sort
- Pick the first 5 priorities
- Present to the groups 
- Pick the next 5 priorities
- Present to the groups
- Opportunity to adjust choice
Programme of  the workshop how it was executed
Source: own design
Figure 19 - 
==PAGE:80==
78
The four layers of  the analysis in Chapter 8. Going in depth
Source: own illustration
Figure 20 - 
Use
Investigating the use of water
Understanding the user
Taking a closer look at the system
Mapping the stakeholders
User
System
Organisation
==PAGE:81==
79
79
In the previous chapter the methodology 
from bringing the design and research 
tools into practice is addressed. This 
chapter uses the qualitative and quantitative 
insights gained from those tools for further 
analysis of the socio-technical system. The 
first three subchapters uses these insights 
to investigate each of the four layers as 
displayed in figure 22. 
The user journey is part of understanding 
the use, the user and the interaction with 
the water provision system as is described 
in Chapter 6. Theory and Methodology. They 
are based on insights gained during the 
fieldtrip - from observations and the 
user journey mapping exercise during the 
workshops. 
Three user journeys has been made during 
this research. As part of a preliminary 
research and user understanding, a user 
journey is made as is shown in Chapter 12.3 
User journey pre-field trip in the Appendix. 
The analysis has been made prior to the 
field trip - thus based on literature review, 
insights from photographic and film 
evidence (e.g. Youtube) and reasoning of 
the researcher. 
The two new user journeys are shown in 
figure 21 and figure 22 with a description 
of the major steps that the refugee goes 
through. One of the differences is the 
8
GOING IN DEPTH
In the next section, these findings are 
synthesized to define the heterogeneous 
parameters. The latter is evaluated by the 
quantifiable data from the questionnaire 
in Chapter 8.5. Identifying challenges and 
opportunities. This is concluded with a 
(visual) summary of the key findings in 
Chapter 8.6. The state of  the water provision 
system.
method of transport which is solely 
by foot using jerry cans - bicycles and 
wheelbarrows are not commonly used in 
Bidi Bidi. Furthermore, the use of water 
for constructing building material like 
bricks and the other water systems are 
added to the illustration. 
A major finding is that one of the journeys 
consists of two paths: one to the hand 
waterpump and the other to a tapstand - 
which is either solar or diesel powered, or 
supplied by a water truck. This differs from 
the original assumption prior to the field 
trip: the refugee only goes to one type of 
pump dependent on which is the closest 
to the household. The chlorine, which is 
present in the tap stands as is explained in 
Chapter 3.4. The water provision system, causes 
some refugees to use this water for other 
uses than drinking. Due to health concerns 
they use the unchlorinated water from the 
handpumps for drinking. 
8.1. THE USER JOURNEY
==PAGE:82==
80
House / Shelter
This is the place where the water is 
needed every single day, but which is 
not always near a pump. Therefore 
collecting water is the main daily task for 
many - even during illness or pregnancy.
Journey to pump
Most of the refugees travel a long way to 
the pump and do this from the early 
moning. They often travel together with 
others in a group from their village. 
Water use
At home the refugees use the water for a 
variety of purposes: drinking, cooking, 
washing, cleaning and producing bricks - 
seldomly also for farming. Depending on 
the distance to the pump, laundry is done 
at home or at the pump. 
Journey home
The way back home is tough because 
the refugees have to carry the heavy 
jerry cans filled with water. 
General user journey of  the refugees when collecting water
Source: own illustration 
Figure 21 - 
==PAGE:83==
81
Handpump, solar, diesel 
generator and watertrucking
The water is collected at handpumps or the 
tapstands supplied by solar, diesel 
generators or water trucking. Using the 
handpump is physically demanding and 
the refugee often have to queue. The 
tapstands have the risk of running dry. 
Drinking and socializing
After the heavy work of filling up the jerry 
cans, the refugees drink some water and 
take a short rest. The gathering of many 
people at the pump is also an opportunity 
for socializing. 
Women and children
Mainly women and children are given the 
task of collecting water for the household 
while the men have other responsibilities.
Carrying the water
The refugees mostly use jerry cans to 
carry the water - but sometimes also 
pots, pans or empty bottles
==PAGE:84==
82
Carrying the water
The refugees mostly use jerry cans to 
carry the water - but sometimes also 
pots, pans or empty bottles
The hand waterpump
When arriving at the waterpump the 
refugee has to queue in order to get 
water. Using the hand waterpump is 
physical demanding - especially in 
the warm climate. 
Drinking and socializing
After the heavy work of filling up the 
jerry cans, the refugees drink some 
water and take a short rest. 
The gathering of many people at the 
pump is also an opportunity for 
socializing. 
Journey home
The way back home is tough because 
the refugees have to carry the heavy 
jerry cans filled with water. 
User journey that consist of  two paths visiting the handpump and another water system
Source: own illustration
Figure 22 - 
==PAGE:85==
83
Water use
At home the refugees use the water for a 
variety of purposes: drinking, cooking, 
washing, laundry and producing bricks - 
seldomly also for farming
Women and children
Mainly women and children are given the 
task of collecting water for the household 
while the men have other responsibilities.
Cleaning and laundry
Depending on the distance to the 
pump, the refugees chose to do the 
laundry there or at home. Cleaning 
hands and some personal hygeine is 
also done at the pump.
House / Shelter
This is the place where the water is 
needed every single day, but which is not 
always near a pump. Therefore collecting 
water is the main daily task for many - 
even during illness or pregnancy.
Journey to pump
Most of the refugees travel a long way to 
the pump and do this from the early 
moning. They often travel together with 
others in a group from their village. 
Solar, diesel generator 
and watertrucking
The largest amount of water for 
household use is collected at the 
tapstands supplied by solar and 
diesel generators or water trucking. 
They have the risk of running dry. 
==PAGE:86==
84
Priorities of  the refugees as a result from the card sort exercise
Source: own data and illustration
Figure 23 - 
Primary priority
Secondary priority
Tertiary priority
Solar energy
Water
Food
Toilets
Market
Farming
House
Wheel barrow
Clothes
Cooking
Kitchen tools
Wood
Animals
Football
Mobile phone
Healthcare
Education
Money
==PAGE:87==
85
85
A main part of this research is to get a 
better understanding of the user and the 
social impact that the system might have. 
This chapter uses the qualitative insights 
that are gained during the focus group 
discussions, workshops and informal 
dialogues with the refugees. These insights 
are used to shape the heterogeneous 
parameters related to the water provision 
system.
The experience from conducting the 
workshops, focus group discussions and 
informal dialogues with the refugees proof 
that these are effective methods of better 
understanding the users. They gave the 
following insights of the user: desires and 
aspirations, concerns, knowledge, needs, 
experiences and activities.
The priorities of the refugees are displayed 
in figure 23. They are divided over three 
different levels of priorities. This is based 
on the analysis of the results of the card 
sort exercises during the workshops. 
The 
deeper 
conversations 
and 
the 
arguments behind the choices is what 
really counts. They tell more about the 
true priorities in the lives of the refugees. 
(IDEO.org, 2015). From this a couple of 
key learnings can be summed. First, every 
refugee prioritises water as they state that 
‘water is life’. Solar energy is considered as 
the method for providing water. It is also 
noted that the refugees see education as 
the way for a better future. 
Their true desire is being self reliant in 
the future. They like to be less dependent 
on the humanitarian organisations. This is 
resembled in the second level of priorities. 
Here, farming is seen as a way to provide 
food for the family, but also as a source of 
income. The market is needed not only to 
buy food, but also to sell food and other 
products. The third level of priorities 
shows a more diverse range of desires 
which consist of practical products that 
improve their lives. For example: games 
and sport is a desire of the youth, while the 
women are more in need of kitchen tools. 
It is concluded that analysis of the user 
- the refugee - shows that they are very 
much busy with the future. They want to 
become self reliant and self sustaining. 
Therefore they argue for the following 
priorities related to the water provision 
system: solar energy, farming, animals, 
food and a market. These priorities are 
ways of achieving their desire. This insight 
will be used for defining the heterogeneous 
parameters in Chapter 8.4. The heterogeneous 
parameters. 
8.2. THE REFUGEE
==PAGE:88==
86
Map of  stakeholders that are known to be present in the Bidi Bidi refugee settlement
Source: own data and illustration
Figure 24 - 
AID RECIPIENT
LOCALS
SUPPORT
RED CROSS 
MOVEMENT
NGO
UNITED NATIONS
PRIVATE SECTOR
OTHERS
DONORS
GOVERNMENT
DRC
Local NGO
ECHO
Truckdrivers
Oxfam
Danish 
Government
Red Cross
Local Red Cross
NRC
MSF
CRS
Stakeholders of thesis
Category of stakeholders
Water 
committees
Yumbe district
OPM
Police
Military
DTU
IOM
Grundfos
OCHA
UNICEF
UNHCR
Children
Women
Men
People
Merchants
Farmers
Local suppliers
==PAGE:89==
87
87
This chapter is about understanding 
the system and the organisation of the 
humanitarian aid in the Bidi Bidi refugee 
settlement. The analysis is based on 
insights obtained during the fieldwork 
and the literature study. Limitations to 
the accessibility of the stakeholders and 
informants during this research has had an 
effect on the level of detail of this chapter. 
The stakeholder analysis should therefore 
be seen as a first concept where further 
work is needed for an holistic analysis of 
the complex system. Furthermore, the 
major challenge of the organisation with 
relation to the system, that has been found, 
will be addressed in the second section. 
Overview of  the system
The first step in understanding the 
complex system that is present in the 
Bidi Bidi refugee settlement is by creating 
an overview of the system with all the 
stakeholders. This is based on insights 
from the literature and the field work. The 
result of this overview is shown in figure 
24.
The overview shows the numerous 
stakeholders that are present in the studied 
context. The grey bubbles are the categories 
of the stakeholders, using the names as is 
given by The Global Humanitarian Assistance 
(2013). In blue, the stakeholders for this 
thesis are shown, meaning they have been 
of significant importance for the research. 
The relations in the wider perspective of 
humanitarian aid are not completed for 
every stakeholder due to limitations of this 
research. 
However, based on the available resources 
and insights, a new map is created showing 
the mutual relations between the different 
stakeholders and groups within a smaller 
framing.  For this, the water provision 
system is chosen as the framing, creating 
a map with all stakeholders involved in the 
supply of water to the refugees. This map 
is based on the actor map as is described 
by Morelli and Tollestrup (2006) and is shown 
in figure 25.
The lines between the stakeholders 
and groups are supplemented with 
key propositions between two actors 
- naturally, only if insights on specific 
relation could be attained. Therefore, this 
overview shows, to a certain extent, what 
the system is delivering and if it is meeting 
the needs of the different stakeholders. A 
misalignment between the two could mean 
that the system is not performing as it 
should and / or that the requirements do 
not match the needs.
Challenges and opportunities
From analysing the humanitarian system 
in the Bidi Bidi refugee settlement, the 
major challenge and opportunity will be 
addressed in this chapter. 
One of the major challenges is the sharing 
of knowledge and data between the 
numerous stakeholders - which is often a 
difficulty for complex systems. A major 
cause for this is the broad and diverse 
nature of the stakeholders involved in 
supplying humanitarian aid. ‘Many groups of  
actors in the system will never cross paths – never 
meet or discuss what they are doing, how they are 
working, or why they are there, let alone share 
their criteria for success.’ (Scott, 2014). This is 
also the case in the context of the Bidi Bidi 
refugee settlement, much information and 
knowledge is not shared. 
An attempt to improve this is the creation 
of a sharing platform in the form of 
the weekly WASH sector coordination 
meetings with the WASH officers. (Chapter 
8.3. THE HUMANITARIAN SYSTEM IN BIDI BIDI 
==PAGE:90==
88
Support
Support
Info
Info
Info
Info
Info
Info
Mandate / Finance
Mandate /
 Finance
Execution
Execution
Execution
Execution
Aid
Aid
Beneﬁciaries
DRC
Local NGO
Donors
Other NGOs in 
WASH sector 
meeting
Water 
committees
UN
Government
!
!
!
Info
Info
Info
Response
Beneﬁciaries
Red Cross
DRC
Other NGOs in 
WASH sector 
meeting
Water 
committees
Map of  key propositions between the stakeholders
Source: own data and illustration
Figure 25 - 
Communication chain in the event that a water pump breaks down.
Source: own data and illustration
Figure 26 - 
==PAGE:91==
89
89
3.5. The current way of  working). But here, 
the partners are somewhat reluctant to 
share knowledge and show openness 
about work related issues. This could 
be caused by the island culture that exist 
in the system. The differences in scopes, 
priorities, capabilities and ideas on the 
way of working creates a gap between 
the partners. This is strengthened by the 
competitive nature of the humanitarian 
aid system - NGO’s bid for finance and 
mandates to the donors and UN. Meaning 
that in this sharing platform, NGO’s 
need to share information and knowledge 
with their partners, who are actually their 
competitors. This has implications on the 
amount of sharing that is done. Also, it 
lowers the openness about the work and 
corresponding lessons learned, as this can 
be harmfull for the reputation and track 
record.
While this seems to be mainly an 
organisational challenge, it does have 
a direct effect on the user. The lack of 
sharing does not improve the quality of the 
work that a system delivers - the refugee 
would benefit from a closer collaboration. 
An example is given in figure 26 where 
the communication chain between actors 
is shown in the situation of a broken 
water pump. Here, it is not clear for the 
refugee or the water committee which 
organisations is in charge of the pump, 
so the Red Cross is contacted. Either 
they know who is responsible, or they do 
not - as projects are often handed over 
between partners. In the latter situation, 
the WASH sector coordination meeting is 
used to find the responsible organisations 
who will, in their turn, execute the repair. 
It has been noted that it can take up to one 
week before the repair is initiated after the 
notification - which is a major problem for 
the affected people. 
The stakeholder analysis shows that 
there are lines present between the many 
stakeholders, but there are opportunities to 
shorten these lines - e.g. by strengthening 
the communication channels, creating 
sharing platforms and minimising the 
island culture. In that way, the response can 
be made quicker. This is underlined by Scott 
(2014) who calls for more interoperability 
between stakeholders in the humanitarian 
system so work will be more coherent, 
efficient and effective.
==PAGE:92==
90
Portrait of  a man who is very lucky to have a wheel barrow to transport the water.
Source: own photo
Image 22 - 
==PAGE:93==
91
91
The Sphere Project is a voluntary initiative that brings a wide range of humanitarian 
agencies together around a common aim - to improve the quality of humanitarian 
assistance and the accountability of humanitarian actors to their constituents, donors and 
affected populations. The Sphere Handbook, Humanitarian Charter and Minimum Standards in 
Humanitarian Response, is one of  the most widely known and internationally recognized sets of  common 
principles and universal minimum standards in life-saving areas of  humanitarian response. (The Sphere 
Project, 2017).
They are combined with the parameters 
that can be found in the handbook written 
by the Sphere Project which functions as 
the guideline for minimum standards in 
the humanitarian help relief as is described 
in Chapter 3.5. The current way of  working.
According to the Sphere handbook (The 
Sphere Project, 2011: p97) the parameters 
and minimum standards related to the 
water supply in a refugee context can be 
split into three subjects:
- 
Access and water quantity
- 
Water quality
- 
Water facilities
Per subject there are key actions, key 
indicators and guidance notes given. The 
key indicators function as ‘signals’ to show 
whether a standard has been attained or 
not. 
They provide a way of measuring the 
results of interventions of the help relief 
organisations. The guidance notes are 
points that need to be considered when 
the minimum standards are applied. ‘They 
provide guidance on tackling practical difficulties, 
benchmarks or advice on priority issues. They may 
also include critical issues relating to the standards, 
actions or indicators, and describe dilemmas, 
controversies or gaps in current knowledge.’ (The 
Sphere Project, 2011. p80). 
While primarily the key indicators will be 
used to feed into the composition of the 
parameters, the guidance notes functions 
as resourceful information for both the 
preparation of the field trip, as well as 
during the continuous work on the project.
The heterogeneous parameters are the 
indicators that are used for the assessment 
and that cover the use, the user and the 
system. They are based on the literature 
and insights from the qualitative methods. 
In this chapter they are defined answering 
the following sub-problem statement:
What are the relevant heterogeneous parameters to 
assess a water provision system?
It should be noted that the definition of 
the parameters has been an ongoing and 
iterative process during the work of this 
thesis as is described in Chapter 3.6. The 
challenge. 
Defining the parameters
In this sections the parameters related to 
water supply will be defined. An answer to 
the following question is found: 
What are the (relevant) heterogeneous parameters?
The parameters are based on the insights 
that are gathered during the field trip 
from 
the 
focus 
group 
discussions, 
the workshops, as results from the 
questionnaires and during (in)formal 
dialogues with stakeholders as is described 
earlier in Chapter 6. Theory and methodology.
8.4. THE HETEROGENEOUS PARAMETERS
==PAGE:94==
92
Access and water quantity
- 
Amount of water
- 
Maximum distance
- 
Queueing time
Water quality
- 
Quality at the point of delivery 
- 
Household level water treatment
- 
Chemical or radiological sources
- 
Use of protected water source
- 
No water-borne related diseases
Water facilities
- 
Two clear water collecting containers
- 
Safe means (for storage)
- 
One washing basis
- 
Contamination free water
Selection of the relevant parameters will 
be done on the basis of whether these 
will be influenced by a new type of water 
provision system or not. In this case, the 
solar water pump. For example: household 
level water treatment will not be influenced 
by the solar system if constructed on the 
same borehole. The same goes for the key 
indicators under the subject water facilities. 
They stay the same if a hand water pump 
is replaced by a solar pump, or when a new 
borehole and pump are installed in the 
same existing context. 
Also, the selection will depend on the 
scope of this research and capabilities as a 
researcher. Monitoring and measuring the 
water quality related to diseases is an area 
that is regarded as outside of the scope - 
and will therefore be removed from this 
selection. 
However, the presence of chemicals, 
chlorine in particular, seems to be a major 
concern for the refugees and it influences 
which water system will be used as is 
shown in Chapter 8.1. User journey.
With the insights attained during the field 
trip, the list of parameters as retrieved 
from the Sphere handbook is extended as 
is displayed in Figure 27.
First of all, demographic data is added as 
a new category of parameters to the 
list. Information on this is important 
processing the other data - e.g. number of 
people is needed to calculate the amount 
of water per person per day. A further 
specification could be useful for future 
work, so gender and age are also relevant 
parameters. 
Collecting time is added to the list as this will 
give a good indication of how long the 
entire process of collecting water will take, 
including the travel and queueing time. 
While a new system could reduce the latter, 
it is important to know what this queueing 
time is compared to the travel time. If 
the travel time is significantly larger, than 
a reconsideration of for example the 
location of the new borehole should be 
made. 
To get a complete understanding of how 
long the refugee spends on the collection 
of water, the travel time is also added as a 
parameter to the list. Experience learns 
that the refugees don’t have a good sense 
of units, whether it is time, distance or 
volume. So if data is required on how 
far the refugee lives from a borehole, 
the answer could be given in time or 
distance, dependent on what he or she 
is comfortable with. Furthermore, travel 
==PAGE:95==
93
93
time is a more adequate way of describing 
the distance as the amount could be 
influenced by external factors that are 
unique for a certain context. For example: 
the accessibility of the terrain, easy or 
difficult, influences the time but not the 
distance. The difficulty, however, lays in 
the measurement of the travel time. 
To investigate the effect that the water 
system has on who collects the water in 
the household, the notion work division is 
added. Also, safety plays a role on whether 
a certain pump or borehole location will 
be used. 
Heterogeneous parameters
Access and water quantity
Amount of water
Travel distance
Travel time
Queueing time
Collecting time
Work division
Safety
Water quality
Quality at the point of delivery 
Chemicals
Other
Livelihood opportunities
Woman status
Refugee identity 
Water facilities
Water collection moment
Water use moment
Water transport and storage
Ease of transportation
Ease of operation
Reliability
Heterogeneous parameters for the assessment
Source: own design
Figure 27 - 
Two parameters that could influence which 
borehole is used are the ease of  transportation 
and the ease of  operation, hence, also added 
to the list. A very important parameter is 
the reliability of a water facility. Logically, 
this parameter has a lot of side effects and 
is influenced by the type of system. 
Finally there is a new subject other added 
to the list which is supplemented with the 
parameters livelihood opportunities, women 
status and identity. 
Livelihood development is an important 
task of the NGOs as it focusses on making 
the refugees self reliant. As is mentioned 
earlier, this is especially the case in Uganda 
where the emphasis lays on creating 
livelihood opportunities and building a 
small economy in the refugee settlements - 
for example by handing the refugees a plot 
of land for farming. Where women are the 
main responsibles for collecting water, it 
can be stated that they are, in the first place, 
affected mostly by the type of solution for 
water provision. A closer look will be taken 
into how the women’s status is influenced. 
The last parameter refugee identity is one that 
is difficult to measure, but is an important 
‘soft’ parameter. It is about how much the 
refugee identifies her / himself with the 
notion of being a refugee - i.e. being reliant 
on the help relief organisations to sustain 
a living. 
Note that this list is not all inclusive and 
that there are more parameters that can be 
taken into account. But due to limitations 
of means for research and the scope of 
this thesis, a considered selection has been 
made.
==PAGE:96==
94
Box Plot of  the amount of  water per person per day in litres and the minimum standard
Source: own data
Figure 28 - 
Reasons for insufficient amount of  water of  all pumps
Source: own data
Figure 29 - 
==PAGE:97==
95
95
In this chapter the insights from the 
qualitative design tools are combined 
with the quantitative findings of the 
questionnaire as is described in Chapter 
6. Theory and methodology. This is done to 
measure the assumptions about the use, 
the user and the system - and to find an 
answer to:  
What is the ‘best’ way of  providing water in 
refugee settlements in Uganda?
The heterogeneous parameters function 
as the structure of this chapter. Most 
parameters will be backed with the findings 
to identify the challenges and opportunities 
of the water provision system.
Access and water quantity
The first and most important aspect of 
the water provisions system is whether the 
access and the quantity is sufficient. 
During the focus group discussions and 
workshops it came forward that the 
amount of  water supplied to the refugees 
is not enough - the reasons why were 
varying. Only a few indicate that they 
were supplied with enough water. These 
sessions gave a good insight that the water 
quantity remained a challenge, but further 
quantifiable data was needed. 
The data of the questionnaires clearly 
shows that a lot of households currently 
don’t have enough water. 103 households 
indicated that they did have enough 
water while the remaining 297 said they 
don’t have enough water - i.e. 3 out of 4 
households does not have enough water. 
But the perception of having enough 
water is different than whether the 
minimum standards are being met. The 
Sphere Project (2011. p97) prescribed that the 
minimum standard is 15 l a day for water 
use for drinking, cooking and personal 
hygiene. The analysis of the data from the 
questionnaire shows that 218 households 
are meeting these predescribed standard 
with an average use of 17,8 l per person per 
day. But this data is influenced by outliers, 
both very high as low amounts. These 
could be caused by wrong estimations, as 
is described in Chapter 6.6 The questionnaire, 
or by mistakes during the survey. A more 
accurate representation of the water use 
per person per day is given in figure 28 in 
the form of a box plot made with filtered 
data following a statistical analysis. The 
figure shows that more than half of the 
questioned people are supplied with more 
than 10 l per person per day and a median 
of 16 l in the current situation. In the 
desired situation the refugees indicate that 
they would like to use significantly more 
water than the minimum standard for 
other uses, as will be addressed later in this 
chapter.
During the workshops it came forward that 
some households use the handpump for 
drinking water in combination with another 
pump for other uses of water because of 
the presence of chlorine - as is described in 
Chapter 8.1. The user journey. This qualitative 
insight is tested with a quantitative analysis 
in the form of the questionnaire which 
shows that only 56 households - 14% of 
the total - indicate that they use another 
pump in combination with the handpump. 
A further explanation on the potential 
reasons for the misalignment between the 
two methods will be given in Chapter 10.1. 
Discussion.
As for the reason for not using enough 
water, the refugees say to have numerous 
reasons - this is shown in figure 29 which 
8.5. IDENTIFYING CHALLENGES AND OPPORTUNITIES
==PAGE:98==
96
Travel distance from the 
house / shelter to the water 
pump
Source: own data
Figure 30 - 
Travel time from the house / 
shelter to the water pump
Source: own data
Figure 31 - 
Time spent waiting at the 
water pump
Source: own data
Figure 32 - 
The quality of  the water per type of  pump
Source: own data
Figure 33 - 
==PAGE:99==
97
97
combines the results of all the pumps. It 
shows that there are 4 major reasons for 
not having enough water:
- 
Containers: we don’t have enough 
containers to either store or carry the 
water.
- 
Queue: the waiting line is too long.
- 
Quantity: there is not enough water at 
my water pump.
- 
Distance: the water source is too far. 
It is interesting to note that apparently 
the biggest reason for not having enough 
water are the containers to store and carry 
the water - which is not related to the type 
of water pump. The significance per type 
of pump is calculated following a p-value 
test (Dekking et al., 2005). This shows 
that only three reasons for ‘not collecting 
enough water’ are dependent on the type 
of pump as is described below. 
For the reasons quantity and pumping labour 
the handpump is respectively lower and 
higher than the tapstand (truck). This is 
logical since the borehole is not likely to 
run dry when it is outfitted with a hand 
waterpump - the pumping output is 
often not big enough to empty the water 
reservoir. Naturally, difficulties to pump 
the water are only relevant for a hand water 
pump. 
The transport labour for the tapstand is 
significantly higher than the truck supplied 
tapstand or hand pump. The cause for this 
is not very clear but a presumption can be 
made: tap stands are generally further away, 
since solar and diesel powered pumps 
are installed at boreholes with a bigger 
yield. Hand water pumps are installed 
at boreholes with a smaller yield that are 
mostly easier to find thus on average closer 
to the village. The tapstand (truck) does 
not need a borehole but only a tank to 
store it’s water - thus situated in the village 
centres which makes it easy to transport 
the water.
Making sure that all the refugees are living 
close to a water provision system remains 
a challenge. The Sphere Project (2011. p97) 
states that the minimum standard should 
be within 500m, but this criteria of travel 
distance and time is not met for each 
individual as figure 30 shows. Only 60% 
of the refugees live within 500 m or 15 
minutes of the water pump.
During the workshops and focus group 
discussions, the queueing time was stated 
to be a major problem. The data of the 
questionnaire supports this insight as figure 
29 shows that 1 out of 4 experiences it as 
a problem. The perceived queueing time, 
as figure 32 demonstrates, are significantly 
longer than the Sphere standard of half 
an hour. Possibly this could be a reason 
why people are using less water than they 
should. 
The impression that the children and 
women are doing most of the water 
collection is true. The survey shows that 
the work division is as follows: 
Men: 6%
Women 68% 
Children 26%
Safety at the water pump is not considered 
as a concern taken from both the qualitative 
as quantitative  data.
Water quality
The water quality at the point of  
delivery does not seem to be a major 
concern for the refugees in collecting not 
enough water as is shown in figure 29. A 
further analysis of the exact specification 
from the data of the questionnaire is 
shown in figure 32 indicates that chlorine 
is a major concern for both the tapstand 
supplied by trucking, as for the tapstand 
supplied by the solar pump. This confirms 
the qualitative findings from the workshop 
and focus group discussion. This could 
have implications on the acceptability 
of the solar pump, as the refugees are 
concerned for their health.
==PAGE:100==
98
The moment of  collection and use of  water
Source: own data
Figure 34 - 
==PAGE:101==
99
99
Water facilities
The morning is the moment that most 
water is collected and used as figure 
34 shows. Because of the coolth of the 
morning the collection and activities 
related to the use are less exhausting. The 
refugees also indicate that being early at 
the water pump is necessary as the supply 
can run out. However, this peak demand 
during the morning puts a lot of stress on 
the systems, especially the solar pumps as 
they can only pump during day. Hence, 
meaning that water has to be stored 
overnight. This can be challenging when 
the water is used up during the afternoon 
and evening - leading to long queues in the 
morning. 
The biggest problem is clearly related to 
jerry cans for water storage and transport 
as 38% of the reasons is indicated as ‘we 
don’t have enough containers to either store or 
carry the water’. Surprisingly, this problem 
was not pushed forward during the focus 
group discussions and workshops. A cause 
why this did not come forward could be 
that the refugees did not connect this 
problem to the water pump - which was 
the topic of the sessions.
The 
ease 
of  
operation 
and 
transportation is a parameter that is 
identified as important to the refugees and 
is found to be a challenge based on the 
data. 10% of the hand pump users indicate 
that it is too hard to operate the pump - 
people also like to walk further if that 
implies not having to use the hand pump.
The reliability of the water systems is low 
based on the perceptions of the refugees 
during the focus group discussions and 
workshops. Handpumps are said to break 
down all the time and the water truck 
drivers are told to be unreliable. There is 
no data on this topic, so the claims can’t 
be confirmed or rejected. However, the 
qualitative data indicate that this is an 
interesting area to further explore.
Other 
As is described in Chapter 8.4. The 
heterogeneous 
parameters, 
livelihood 
opportunities are important as this is 
focussed on making the refugees self-
reliant resulting as one of the main tasks 
of the NGOs.
The basic livelihood opportunities that 
water supplies are: drinking, cooking, 
cleaning, personal hygiene, washing clothes. 
Farming, both growing crops as breeding 
animals, and producing construction 
materials are part of sustainable livelihood 
development - these activities enable the 
people to become more self sustaining.  
The insights in the above mentioned uses 
of water are gained by qualitative research 
and are also part of the questionnaire to 
understand the current and desired usage 
of the water. Figure 34 is a plot of the data 
gathered from the questions ‘What do you 
use the water for?’ and ‘if  you had more water, 
what would you use it for?’, to which multiple 
answers could be given. 
Each vertical bar shows what the 
percentage is of the households that 
currently and desires to use the water for a 
certain purpose. Here, we see a large share 
of the basic livelihood opportunities and 
a small share of the sustainable livelihood 
opportunities for both the current as the 
desired state. 
As is described in Chapter 8.2 The refugee, it 
is indicated that the refugees have deeper 
desires of which some are related to 
sustainable livelihood development. They 
stated that more water would enable them 
to become less reliant on the humanitarian 
aid organisations - that they can use it for 
farming and laying bricks. Also, they stated 
that more water would mean there is time 
for other activities like school or running 
the household. 
==PAGE:102==
100
Needs to become more self  reliant / independent
Source: own data
Figure 36 - 
Current and desired usage of  water
Source: own data
Figure 35 - 
==PAGE:103==
101
101
To test whether this also counts for 
the 
larger 
refugee 
population, 
the 
following questions were included in the 
questionnaire:
- 
If you had more water, what would 
you use it for?
- 
What is your main source of income 
for the household?
- 
What was your main source of 
income before becoming a refugee?
- 
What would you need to become 
more self reliant / independent?
The assumptions made after the qualitative 
research are not completely in accordance 
to the data required from the quantitative 
research. If a look is taken at figure 34, 
where the desired uses of water are 
displayed, it shows that the activities related 
to sustainable livelihood development take 
only a small share of the total: cumulative 
20%. 
But to the first question ‘if  you had more 
water, what would you use it for?’ it was possible 
to pick multiple answers - in total 1800 
answers were given. This could suggest 
that the refugees are currently not fulfilled 
at all as they indicate that they not only 
need water for secondary (e.g. farming) but 
also primary needs (e.g. drinking, cooking, 
personal hygiene). 
Figure 36 shows what the refugees indicate 
they need to become more self-reliant and 
independent. Here, water, as a basic need, 
scores very high. It is interesting to notice 
that education, more land for farming and 
better access to trading are getting a lot of 
votes. Again, this underlines the insights 
from the workshops and focus groups 
discussions. Water is the key in making 
the refugees self reliant and to develop 
sustainable 
livelihood 
opportunities. 
Therefore, a sustainable water provision 
system that meet the needs of the refugees 
is a necessity.
==PAGE:104==
102
Summary of  the key findings with regards to the water provision system
Source: own illustration after own data
Figure 37 - 
SOLAR AND DIESEL PUMP
WATER TRUCKING
HAND PUMP
GENERAL CHALLENGES
Running dry
Long queues
Chlorination
Truck does not come
Unreliable
Not enough jerry cans for 
storage and transport
Not enough water: 45% does 
not meet the minimum standard
The water pumps are to far
40% lives further than 500m
More than 50% spends more 
than 60 min queueing
Hard to pump
Distance to pump
Empty in the morning
Water is currently primarily 
needed for basic livelihood
==PAGE:105==
103
103
8.6. The state of the water provision 
system
In this chapter the key findings on the 
water provision system are presented in 
the illustration in figure 37. They are taken 
from the user’s perspective and it clarifies 
the challenges per system. Some of these 
are more related to the type of system 
than others. Furthermore, the general 
challenges are also included. 
This is a summarized version of the 
previous chapter and it tries to answer the 
question:
What is the ‘best’ way of  providing water in 
refugee settlements in Uganda?
The figure shows that the answer to that 
question is not immediate clear. However, 
the findings are not in favor of the hand 
pump - the unreliability and physical 
labor are major issues. On the other hand, 
chlorination is a challenge for only the 
water trucking and the solar pumps. 
But more general, the water provision 
system in the settlement is not fulfilling 
the demand of water for basic livelihood. 
There are not enough water points, they 
are often to far away and the queues are 
too long. Furthermore, there are not 
enough jerry cans to either transport or 
store the water.
This has as a big social impact on the 
refugees’ lives as collecting water is big 
task. Therefore, less time remains to spend 
on sustainable livelihood opportunities 
- e.g. labour, farming or small business. 
Also, because the children have a big share 
in collecting the water, they are deprived 
from following education.
Lastly, it should be noted that the analysis 
of the economical perspective is not 
included as part of this work. But the 
analysis of Ibanez and Ndegwa (2017), which 
is focussed on that perspective, shows that 
water trucking is not economically viable 
and they plead for the solar pumps. 
8.6. THE STATE OF THE WATER PROVISION SYSTEM
==PAGE:106==
104
Service evaluation framework by service design
Source: Maffei, Villari and Foglieni (2013)
Figure 38 - 
==PAGE:107==
105
105
ZOOMING OUT
9
After a detailed analysis in the previous 
chapter, this part will bring the research 
back to the surface again. This will 
be performed by zooming out on the 
work that has been done so far, and by 
introducing a new evaluation framework 
that tries to find an answer to the problem 
statement:
In what way can design tools be used to assess and 
evaluate water provisions systems in the Bidi Bidi 
refugee settlement in Northern Uganda?
The framework of Maffei, Villari and 
Foglieni (2013) will be expanded with 
the insights from this research. Design 
tools have been selected to conduct an 
assessment on which is elaborated in 
Chapter 6.1. Design theories and methods. The 
relevant parameters to assess the water 
provision system in the Bidi Bidi refugee 
settlement are defined in Chapter 8.4. The 
parameters. The methods have been put to 
the test during the fieldtrip. Here, the best 
way in providing water in the Bidi Bidi 
refugee settlements in Northern Uganda 
is investigated. This led to findings as an 
output of the methods, and to the insights 
in the use of these methods - which is 
explicated in Chapter 8.5. Identifying challenges 
and opportunities. 
To conclude, a description will be given 
on how to use the framework in the last 
chapter. 
The basis for a framework could be the 
model that is introduced by Maffei, Villari 
and Foglieni (2013) in the article Evaluation by 
design for public services and which is shown 
in figure 38.
Maffei, Villari and Foglieni (2013) argue that 
there is a need to introduce and develop 
approaches and tools for public service 
evaluation. The purpose of evaluation 
is to understand good or bad activities, 
projects, products and services. Using this 
knowledge to improve them. The article 
proposes an approach based on qualitative 
and quantitative measurements throughout 
the whole service design process to 
evaluate the service.
The hypothesis is that evaluations need 
to be done through three levels: strategic, 
development and execution. It has four 
focus points: enabling conditions (the 
resources needed to operate the program), 
the inputs (the design activities), the 
outputs (the service delivery results) 
and the impact (related to the long term 
perspective). 
‘The idea is to shift the service evaluation focus from 
functional characteristics, technical components, 
flow of  processes and relationships, to the 
potential impact (social, economic, organizational, 
9.1. INTRODUCING A FRAMEWORK FOR EVALUATION
==PAGE:108==
106
The expanded framework for evaluation by design
Source: after Maffei, Villari and Foglieni (2013) with own findings
Figure 39 - 
Observations
Interviews
Focus group 
discussions
Questionnaire
Interviews
Observations
Focus group 
discussions
User journey
Card sort
Interviews
Stakeholder
maps
Analysis of 
way of working
==PAGE:109==
107
107
educational) that services can have on individuals, 
communities and organizations, offering new 
patterns of  behaviour and interaction.’ (Maffei, 
Villari and Foglieni, 2013. p44)
This is in line with the aim of the research 
within the shared project, where the focus 
is not only on technical and financial data, 
but also on the social impact that the 
system has on the user - a socio-technical 
assessment.
Since there is much overlap with this 
thesis and findings as taken from the 
article Maffei, Villari and Foglieni (2013), the 
framework will be used as a basis in which 
the findings of this thesis will be brought. 
In this section the tools that have been 
used in the attempt to solve the main 
problem statement, will be arranged in the 
framework that has been introduced in the 
previous chapter. 
There are parallels between the article of 
Maffei, Villari and Foglieni (2013) and this 
research. One of the similarities is the use 
of indicators. They have the same function 
as the heterogeneous parameters from this 
thesis. Another parallel is the use of the 
design at different stages of the evaluation. 
The use of them in this research coincides 
with the suggestions made in the article. 
The article describes three different levels 
on which evaluation needs to be conducted. 
Parts of this research can also be found 
in this three levels, varying between 
quantitative and qualitative methods. 
Each level of the evaluation will first be 
explained in relation to this research - and 
supplemented with the examples that are 
given by Maffei, Villari and Foglieni (2013). 
Than, the design and research tools used 
during this thesis are categorized within 
each level, as shown in figure 39. Followed 
by arguments for the choice. Here, it 
should be noted that division of the design 
and research tools is not strict. They 
could be used in other levels as well. The 
categorization in this thesis is based on 
findings of this research. 
Strategic level
This first level is focussed on defining 
indicators that will be used during the 
execution of the evaluation. It is also 
meant to understand the context in which 
the service will be developed, prior to 
conducting the evaluation. Furthermore, 
this is the level during which the resources 
that are needed for the service are defined. 
Those are called the enabling conditions.
The enabling conditions should include 
both material, as human resources - i.e. 
capabilities of the stakeholders. The 
indicators that are related to the enabling 
conditions, can be defined by techniques 
from market and management studies. In 
addition, qualitative analysis like surveys, 
focus groups and interviews could be used 
to construct the indicators.
Design and research tools
1. 
Observations
2. 
Focus group discussions
3. 
Analysis of current way of working
Ad 1. Performing observations is key in 
getting an understanding of the unknown 
context, the user and the interaction of 
people between the technical and social 
environment. (Boeijen and Daalhuizen, 2010). 
It tells something about what people 
do and how they use an item or product 
(Sleeswijk Visser, 2009). They hand the 
researcher observable knowledge. Even 
though this knowledge is most often not 
deep, it can help to define indicators at an 
9.2. EXPANDING THE FRAMEWORK
==PAGE:110==
108
early stage in the evaluation process. These 
qualitative insights are most valuable at the 
beginning, thus observations should be 
part of the strategic level. For the work of 
this thesis, this method has been of great 
value as a proper understanding of the 
context of the Bidi Bidi refugee settlement 
was not possible through other means - 
e.g. literature review, interviews or studying 
photographic evidence. This has been 
concluded by the differences between 
the insights prior and after the fieldtrip. 
Therefore it could be stated that a field 
trip to an unknown and badly documented 
context is necessary in understanding it - 
as this enables the researcher to perform 
observations. Which can be combined 
with other methods that capture insights 
of the context. 
Ad 2. The focus group discussions have 
proved to be a powerful tool to quickly 
understand the water committee’s working 
principles, concerns and challenges. IDEO.
org (2015) stated that this method might 
not give you the same deep understanding 
as an individual interview But it can give 
a compelling look at how a larger set of 
people operates. In this case, the same job 
that the participants shared, made sure that 
the discussion was triggered. This resulted 
in a lot of insights during each session. 
These have been used to define the 
enabling conditions during this research 
making focus group discussions a suitable 
method in the strategic level. 
Furthermore, The Sphere Project (2011) 
suggests that observations and focus 
group discussions can be used as a tool 
for collecting data on water use and 
consumption. This indicates that both 
tools could also be used in the execution 
level - as it measures the indicators related 
to the outputs. 
Ad 3. The current way of working needs 
to be analysed in order to understand the 
indicators and enabling conditions that 
are used at the moment of assessment. 
This can be the starting point to see what 
aspects are covered and, more importantly, 
what aspects are lacking. Also, it shows 
what the stakeholders value and how they 
measure the performance. This will give 
direction on which tools to use for the 
further assessment of a system. Because 
the analysis of the current way of working 
is not a tool and not a method, it should 
be seen as the instruction for the designer 
and researcher to conduct one in this level. 
Development level
This level is focussed on monitoring the 
design process and producing indicators 
that relate to the organisations capacity to 
design and develop a service. Indicators 
relate to the user understanding, the 
centrality of the user in the process and 
the interaction between user, organization 
and system. These can be found by using 
service design tools like stakeholder maps, 
service prototypes, cultural probes and 
customer journey mapping. 
1. 
Stakeholder maps
2. 
User journey
3. 
Card sort
Ad 1. As is suggested by Maffei, Villari 
and Foglieni (2013) both mapping the 
stakeholders 
as 
mapping 
the 
user 
journey can be used in this level. The 
stakeholder analysis can provide a good 
understanding of the interaction between 
user, organisation and system as is shown 
in Chapter 8.3. The humanitarian system in 
Bidi Bidi. During this research, it exposed 
challenges that are very much related to the 
communication between the stakeholders, 
which included the organisations. 
Ad 2. The user journey can be used to get 
a better understanding of the use, the user 
and the interaction between the user and 
the system. (Chapter 8.1. The user journey). 
This can deliver indicators that measure, 
for example, how well the service meets 
the needs of the users, or how the people 
==PAGE:111==
109
109
are using the service. During this research, 
the user journey gave input in defining the 
heterogeneous parameters - i.e. indicators. 
The transport and storage of water, has 
not been a parameter in the current way 
of working, while it is found to be an 
important factor for the refugees. 
Ad 3. The understanding of people’s 
needs and priorities is needed to define 
the indicators that assess a service. The 
card sort exercise is a good way to achieve 
this. (IDEO.org, 2015). (Møllebaek Larsen 
and Flensborg, 2011). The heterogeneous 
parameters have been expanded with 
findings from this method - e.g. the 
parameter of livelihood opportunities. 
While this indicator has been important 
for DRC, it is confirmed by the workshop 
that the refugees value this too. This 
method suits well in the development, but 
it could also be used in the execution level 
to test the service - e.g. sorting cards with 
different elements of the service. 
Execution level  
The execution level includes the evaluation 
of the service delivery and the ex-post 
evaluation. Here, the indicators are related 
to both the outputs as the impacts of the 
system. The output is the direct result 
of the design activity and coincide with 
the user’s perception of the service. The 
impact of the service has implications 
at different levels and in a long-term 
perspective - i.e. the impact of the system 
over a longer time period. Quantitative 
indicators 
come 
from 
management 
methods like Cost Benefit Analysis, while 
qualitative indicators instead could be 
created by customer satisfaction surveys or 
the Bottom-line-Experiences method. 
1. 
Questionnaire
Ad 1. The questionnaire has been used 
as a quantitative analysis to measure the 
output of the service. The heterogeneous 
parameters 
have 
been 
investigated 
by conducting the questionnaire as is 
described in Chapter 6.6. The questionnaire. 
The analysis of this data attempts to 
answer the question: how can a service 
be best delivered? Or stated as one of 
the problem statements: what is the ‘best’ 
way of providing water in the Bidi Bidi 
refugee settlement in Northern Uganda? 
The questionnaire as a method certainly 
could be used in the executive level as 
this research demonstrates in Chapter 8.5. 
Identifying challenges and opportunities. With 
the 
questionnaire 
the 
heterogeneous 
parameters are measured. This quantitative 
data is combined with the qualitative 
insights from the tools at the other levels 
to form a conclusion. 
Maffei, Villari and Foglieni (2013) suggest 
that conducting interviews should be part 
of the strategic level. However, during this 
research the interviews have been used at 
multiple levels. During the focus group 
discussions it has been used to understand 
the use of water and the context. Thus 
it fits in the strategic level. Interviewing 
people from DRC is a way of investigating 
the centrality of the user in the service, 
thus relating to the development level. 
Lastly, interviews can also be used to 
get a qualitative insight in the outputs 
and the impact of the service. Though 
most organisations prefer quantifiable 
measurements, the interview could be 
used before performing another iteration. 
A couple of interviews could be a good 
method of gathering insights, especially 
in the context of a refugee settlement. 
However, a limitation is that a detailed 
interview is time consuming.  
==PAGE:112==
110
Strategic 
level
Uncertainty / patterns / insights
Clarity / Focus
Development 
level
Executive 
level
Assessment 
completed
The process of  design squiggle supplemented with the framework’s levels
Source: after Newman (2017)
Figure 40 - 
==PAGE:113==
111
111
An evaluation has been conducted by this 
research in the attempt to find an answer 
to the problem statement: what is the ‘best’ 
way of providing water in the Bidi Bidi 
refugee settlement in Northern Uganda? 
In doing this, a selection of design and 
research tools have been used. These are 
now included in the extended framework 
which is described in the previous chapter. 
In order to conduct an evaluation, the 
extended framework can be used. However, 
the approach is iterative - outputs of early 
activities can become inputs for later 
processes. (Maffei, Villari and Foglieni, 2013). 
The process of conducting an evaluation by 
design has a lot in common with the actual 
design cycle. As stated earlier, a design 
cycle is an iterative process. (Brown, 2008). 
During every iteration the design improves 
a bit and comes one step closer towards 
the final product. This is illustrated in figure 
40 which shows the design process: the 
chaos at the beginning stabilizes towards a 
calm ending. 
This also goes for the execution of the 
framework where the chaotic beginning 
will make place for the systematic ending. 
At that stage, the indicators are defined 
and measured to evaluate the service. 
Due to the time limitations of this thesis, 
the evaluation of the water provision 
system has not been completed (yet). It 
could be said that the evaluation is still 
at the turbulent beginning of the total 
process. The three levels of the framework 
are added to the figure to illustrate this. 
I note that a model is a often a simplified 
version of the complex reality. This goes 
for the design squiggle (figure 40), but also 
for the framework in figure 39. They both 
illustrate and simplify the process, but the 
actual process is often more complicated. 
For the process of this research, it is 
mainly caused by the complexity of the 
user, the context and the organisation that 
are involved in the water provision system. 
But, also because a big part of the work 
has been the concepting of the framework: 
figuring out which design tools are suitable 
for the evaluation. 
Furthermore, the framework is not finished 
yet and the use of more design tools 
should be included. In that way, the next 
model will become more versatile - and 
useful for a broader range of situations, 
areas and sectors. 
9.3. CONDUCTING AN EVALUATION 
==PAGE:114==
112
The Danish Refugee Council organise football tournaments for the refugees as part of  sport and 
leisure activities.
Source: own photo
Image 23 - 
==PAGE:115==
113
113
10
WHAT COULD BE SAID
This chapter critically discusses the results 
and findings of this thesis related to 
theories and literature. First this is done 
within the framing of the case study - i.e. 
the assessment of the water provision 
systems in the Bidi Bidi refugee settlement. 
Furthermore, the discussion of this thesis 
is also brought into a wider perspective - 
i.e. can this approach also be used in other 
contexts and sectors? 
This is followed by a conclusion on 
the work and results of this thesis, 
including the answer to the main problem 
statement. The chapter is concluded with 
recommendations and future work based 
on the obtained insights of this thesis.  
This chapter includes the discussion of this 
research which is related to the literature 
that has been studied. It starts with 
repeating the relevance of this work in the 
broader perspective of the humanitarian 
system. This is followed by answering the 
main research question of this thesis:
In what way can design tools be used to assess and 
evaluate water provision systems in the Bidi Bidi 
refugee settlement in Northern Uganda?
Limitations for the work of this thesis 
and suggestions on future work are 
discussed throughout this section. They 
are supplemented with constraints for 
the use of the proposed framework. The 
results of assessing the water provision 
system in the Bidi Bidi refugee settlement 
are interpreted.
Furthermore, 
the 
contents 
of 
the 
framework are addressed. First, the results 
of the heterogeneous parameters are 
clarified followed by a discussion about the 
limitations posed by the work of this thesis. 
Lastly, the selection of the design tools is 
dealt with. They are evaluated on the use 
and results. This section is concluded with 
future work and the effectiveness of using 
the design approach. 
A design approach in the humanitarian 
system
Organisations in the humanitarian system 
(Chapter 3.3. The humanitarian system) 
are looking for ways to improve their 
operations and effectiveness to meet the 
increased demand due to natural disasters 
and escalating conflicts. (Betts and Bloom, 
10.1. DISCUSSION
==PAGE:116==
114
2014). Can a design approach be used to 
increase this effectiveness? The work of 
this thesis builds on the idea that this is 
possible. 
This thesis considers the design approach 
as design thinking - i.e. thinking as a 
designer. Drawing on different areas of 
design like service design, participatory 
design, co-design and and human centered 
design. These areas have not settled on 
a strict definition, which some would 
consider as a weakness. But now they are 
open for adjustments and refinements 
by adding ideas and tools - maintaining 
relevance during a longer period of time. 
Therefore I consider this as a strength. 
The above mentioned theories have at least 
one thing in common: the user is put at 
the center of the design of the service or 
system, leading to a result that corresponds 
better with the user’s needs and desires. 
Hence, a more effective delivery of 
humanitarian aid is achieved. Thus the 
design approach in the work of this 
thesis also takes on this user’s perspective. 
Furthermore, 
the 
humanitarian 
organisations draw on concepts from the 
private sector for innovation (Betts and 
Bloom, 2014). In this sector the notion of 
design thinking has taken ground already 
(Brown, 2008), which is especially the 
case with innovation driven companies. 
However, the concepts that are adapted 
are mostly products and services. This 
does not include the design thinking that 
is needed to drive innovation within the 
humanitarian system. Therefore, I suggest 
that the humanitarian system adopts the 
way of working and thinking from the 
innovative companies in the private sector.
However, a limitation to this remains that 
the local people have no power in the 
current system where decision making and 
funding flows around them (Aly, 2016). 
This means that the feedback from the 
users to the humanitarian system is minimal 
- they have no saying in choosing the right 
product that fits their needs. Therefore, 
the humanitarian organisations receive 
minimal feedback on the aid that they 
deliver and whether it fits the needs. This 
has a negative impact on the innovation - i.e. 
the improvement of products and services 
to better fit the user’s needs. However, as 
stated earlier, a design approach focuses 
on the user’s perspective. Therefore, this 
thesis concludes that a design approach to 
assessing a system delivers feedback that 
can be used to create better fitting systems 
and services. Consequently, stimulating 
the improvement of the products - thus 
stimulating innovation.
Lastly, the literature shows that a major 
cause of the ineffectiveness of the 
humanitarian system is the complexity 
of the organisation. (Scott, 2014). Does 
this complexity pose limitations for the 
integration of the design approach as 
put forward in this thesis? Based on 
findings of this thesis, I argue that this 
could become a challenge. A share of 
the indicators currently used are standard 
across 
organisations. 
Therefore 
the 
new user-focussed indicators should be 
accepted in more organisations in order 
to be become standard - and meaningful 
when conducting an assessment. 
A framework to assess the water 
provision system
The starting point of this thesis was to 
assess whether the solar pumps are a 
better way of providing water than the 
traditional hand-driven systems. During 
the work of the thesis this evolved towards 
investigating how to do an assessment with 
a design approach. 
The analysis of this work shows that the 
current focus of the NGO’s is mostly on 
the technical aspect - while social aspects 
are important too when assessing a socio-
technical system. (Chapter 3.5. Current way 
of  working). The result of this thesis is a 
framework that can be used to address 
==PAGE:117==
115
115
these aspects - i.e. understanding the use, 
the user and the context. This answers the 
main problem statement:
In what way can design tools be used to assess and 
evaluate water provision systems in the Bidi Bidi 
refugee settlement in Northern Uganda?
It is concluded that the framework, which 
is presented in figure 39, is useful to assess 
and evaluate the water provision system in 
the given context. This structure includes 
design tools that are suitable for that 
purpose. They are of both qualitative and 
quantitative nature, and provide insights 
on four levels: the use, the user, the system 
and the organisation - which is elaborated 
on in Chapter 8. Going in depth. This 
ensures an holistic approach, including 
both the technical and the social aspects. 
The framework is adaptable, and can be 
expanded with new appropriate tools. It 
gives direction for the process of executing 
an assessment. 
The design tools are included based on 
insights and findings from this research. 
They correspond with the work of Maffei, 
Villari and Foglieni (2013), who introduced 
the 
framework 
for 
public 
service 
evaluation. Most of their suggestions on 
the categorization of the tools are in line 
with that of this work. 
However, I found that interviews can 
be used across different levels, which 
marks a difference to their suggestions. 
This could be caused by the difference 
in framing between this thesis and the 
work of Maffei, Villari and Foglieni (2013). 
They use the evaluation by design in the 
framing of public services. The Sphere 
Project (2011) suggests that observations 
and focus group discussions can be used 
for the evaluation, thus the executive level. 
But they use another framing too. This 
indicates that the categorization of the 
tools is not set in stone and depends on the 
particular assessment that is conducted. 
The tools can become part of other levels 
as different methodologies are followed.
This thesis underlines the statement of 
Maffei, Villari and Foglieni (2013) about the 
framework: ‘it needs to be further explored 
to suit different situations and organisational 
structures, to better define tools and indicators and 
to adapt its applications to public services or other 
service sectors’.
The work and the results of this thesis 
are another step towards expanding the 
framework. However, these results are 
from a specific case. Therefore, more tools 
need to be added in further research to 
make it applicable for a broader range of 
situations and areas. 
The iterative process of  the framework
The framework is a structure and overview, 
and not a clear systematic instruction in 
conducting an assessment. It is not a linear 
process, but iterative, meaning that outputs 
of early activities can become inputs for 
later processes. (Maffei, Villari and Foglieni, 
2013). 
This also makes defining the heterogeneous 
parameters and selecting the design tools 
an iterative processes. Therefore, the 
actual use of the framework is not very 
straightforward, which has implications on 
the ease of its use. 
Last but not least, working on this thesis 
was an iterative process, too. While 
designing the framework, it also needed 
to be tested to gain insights on the use. 
Consequently, the latter is needed for the 
design, hence, rendering a design cycle. 
This has been a major challenge for the 
work of this thesis as it was subdue to the 
short timeframe of the field trip.
The best way of  providing water
The above has certain implications for this 
work which is subdue to various limitations. 
The timeframe of this thesis and the field 
trip have both had influence on the amount 
of iterations. Not enough of these could 
==PAGE:118==
116
be conducted to attain the needed insights 
to complete the assessment. Therefore, a 
truly fulfilling answer to the following sub-
problem statement has not been found yet:
What is the ‘best’ way of  providing water in the 
Bidi Bidi refugee settlement in Northern Uganda?
However, the findings are in favor of the 
solar pump and not the hand pump.The 
unreliability of and physical labor caused 
by the latter are major issues. (Chapter 8.6. 
The state of  the water provision system). Water 
trucking is not economically viable on 
the long run. Furthermore, the refugees 
indicate that it also does not supply 
enough water and lacks reliability. They 
actually prefer the solar pumps over the 
hand pumps. However, it becomes evident 
that chlorination poses a threat to the 
acceptability of the solar pumps. Some use 
two types of pumps in order not to drink 
chlorinated water (Chapter 8.1. The user 
journey). Without investigating or solving 
the issue of chlorine, the solar system could 
risk failure. Therefore, adding to the work 
of Ibanez and Ndegwa (2017), who (only) 
recommend implementing solar-powered 
water pumps I suggest that education and 
information on the matter of chlorination 
can alleviate the health concerns of the 
refugees. Focussing only on the technical 
and economical aspect could lead to 
overlooking certain challenges. 
The same goes for the assessment which 
has been conducted during this thesis. It 
is very much user focussed and therefore 
risks overlooking certain challenges. A 
stakeholder analysis of the organisation 
has been conducted with possible means, 
but the accessibility of the stakeholders 
and relevant documents posed a limitation 
for the analysis. Therefore, more work 
is needed on this layer in order to 
investigate what the best system is, from 
the organisation’s perspective. (Chapter 
8.3. The humanitarian system in Bidi Bidi). 
Also, I expect this will expose unforeseen 
challenges when implementing the system. 
Or as Elliot and Deasley (2007) argue: the 
analysis will lead to a better definition of 
the requirements of the system.
A limitation of conducting the assessment 
is the poor performance of the overall 
system as is elaborated in Chapter 8.5. 
Identifying challenges and opportunities. In 
general, there is not enough water, not 
enough water points, they are often too 
far away and the queues are too long. 
Furthermore, there are not enough jerry 
cans to either transport or store the 
water. This has a major social impact on 
the lives of the women and children, that 
respectively take a 68% and 26% share 
in collecting the water. They spend most 
of their time at providing water for the 
household. Some children are therefore 
not able to participate in school.
This makes the quantifiable evaluation 
of the different water systems difficult 
for some heterogeneous parameters. 
The refugees do not think of sustainable 
livelihood 
opportunities 
during 
the 
questionnaire, as they are very much 
focussed on meeting their basic needs. 
This discards the hypothesis that the 
people value the sustainable livelihood 
opportunities. However, this contradicts 
with the findings of the workshops, which 
show the opposite. (Chapter 8.2. The refugee). 
Because the workshop accesses deeper 
knowledge and desires (Sleeswijk Visser, 
2009), while the questionnaire covers 
the matter more superficially, I state that 
the refugees do desire farming, breeding 
animals and other forms of sustainable 
livelihood opportunities. This provides an 
argument to invest in the solar-powered 
water pumps, because such a system is able 
to supply a higher quantity for less physical 
labour and in shorter time. This is backed by 
the findings that the refugees desire more 
water (Chapter 8.5. Identifying challenges and 
opportunities) than the minimum standard 
that The Sphere project (2011) prescribes.
==PAGE:119==
117
117
The use of  the framework
As is stated earlier, the expanded 
evaluation framework (see figure 39) can be 
used for conducting the assessment of a 
water provision system in the context of 
the Bidi Bidi refugee settlement. However, 
the question rises whether it can also be 
used outside this specific context and in 
different sectors? 
I am confident that the framework can 
also be used in other contexts and sectors, 
because of its general nature. First, it 
gives structure on each of the four levels 
that need to be covered. Secondly, it 
gives direction about the iterative process 
and the indicators. Thirdly, it suggests 
suitable tools for each level to conduct the 
assessment. And lastly, it is adaptable and 
versatile so more tools can be included in 
the process to conclude the assessment. 
However, not everyone is able to use the 
framework. There are limitations as to 
who can conduct an assessment through a 
design approach. In order to use the design 
tools, a person needs to have specific skills 
in order to get the right insights. These skills 
can be generalized as design thinking which 
is ‘... a human-centered approach to innovation 
that draws from the designer’s toolkit to integrate 
the needs of  people, the possibilities of  technology, 
and the requirements for business success.’ 
(IDEO, 2017). However, the founder of 
IDEO, Brown (2008), indicates that people 
outside professional design have a natural 
aptitude for design thinking. Therefore, 
people from different disciplines can 
bring valuable knowledge into the creative 
process (Postma & Stappers,2006). This 
means that also employees of DRC, or 
other stakeholders and users, can add value 
in the process. 
Also, some tools are easier to use than 
others. Designing and facilitating the 
workshop may be harder than conducting 
the questionnaire. The workshop is seen 
as part of co-design: Designing with the 
user. In this case the refugees are enabled 
to design their user journey by being 
provided with materials, and because they 
are ‘experts of  their experiences’. (Sleeswijk 
Visser, 2009). Design thinking is needed to 
design the workshop, facilitate the session 
and to structure the process. (Sanders and 
Stappers, 2008). Hence, the professional 
and 
educated 
designer 
designs 
the 
workshop and provides the tools, while 
the refugees and other stakeholders do 
design work according to their expertise. 
Therefore I can confidently say that the 
employees of the Danish Refugee Council 
will be able to use the framework, if people 
capable of design thinking are present in 
the organisation and have the possibility to 
support them. 
The heterogeneous parameters
The analysis in Chapter 3.5. The current 
way of  working, shows that the current 
way of working is very much numerically 
driven. Not the user, but the system is 
placed at the center of the design. This 
is disadvantageous, because  non-user-
centered design could lead to ill-thought 
out designs. (Abras, Maloney-Krichmar and 
Preece, 2004). Ergo, the right indicators - 
i.e. user-focussed - are needed to assess 
the system. This leads to the sub-problem 
statement:
What are the relevant heterogeneous parameters to 
assess a water provision system?
The 
heterogeneous 
parameters 
that 
this research employs, include the user’s 
perspective which is attained through the 
design tools. They are less numerically 
driven than the current indicators and 
more focussed on the user - i.e. they are 
‘soft’. They are defined in Chapter 8.4. 
The heterogeneous parameters and they are 
analysed in Chapter 8.5. Identifying challenges 
and opportunities. For example livelihood 
opportunities and ease of transportation 
are measured through the use of the 
questionnaire. But the ‘soft’ side bears 
implications for the measurement in the 
==PAGE:120==
118
executive level of the framework. This is 
demonstrated by the parameters ‘woman 
status’ and ‘refugee identity’, which are hard 
to measure from data of the questionnaire. 
Therefore, a way to value them, of any sort, 
is necessary for a comparison of systems. 
Hence, more investigation into this needs 
to be concluded in order to be able to 
assess a system on their ‘soft’ parameters. 
Information about the current way of 
working was not available prior to the field 
trip. This posed limitations to the work 
of the thesis, as it has been hard to define 
the parameters. Consequently, this meant 
that the preparation of the design tools 
was difficult. The workshop is therefore 
part of the development level, defining the 
parameters that will be used to conduct the 
assessment. Ideally, at least two visits to 
the settlement are needed to conduct the 
assessment. No indicators related to the 
organisational performance are included 
in the work of this thesis. However, the 
stakeholder analysis, as is shown in Chapter 
8.3. The humanitarian system in Bidi Bidi, can 
be the starting point in defining some of 
them. 
The design and research tools
Selecting the appropriate design and 
research tools is part of concepting. It 
gives an answer to the following problem 
statement:
What design and research tools are suitable to 
evaluate the parameters?
The selection of tools is shown in figure 39. 
Their use is further discussed in Chapter 6. 
Theory and methodology and the insights from 
the use are elaborated in Chapter 7. Bringing 
into practice on site. 
This thesis concludes that some tools are 
more effective than others in collecting 
insights. Furthermore, there are risks 
involved. 
During 
the 
focus 
group 
discussions and workshops, the refugees 
influence each other. On the one hand, 
this stimulates the conversation (IDEO.
org, 2015). On the other hand, they adopt 
ideas of others, making it their own. These 
dynamics impose the risk that a small 
problem can be amplified to something 
big, giving the designer or researcher faulty 
insights. I suspect that this happened to the 
issue of the concern against the chlorination 
of the water. During the discussions 
and workshops, this has been the major 
concern for the refugees. The quantitative 
analysis confirms the concern for only one 
out of five people. This underlines that the 
different tools can yield data which can be 
perceived vastly different - and could led 
to biased conclusions - when only a single 
one is used. Vice versa,it demonstrates 
the strength of the interaction between the 
different tools, which I highlight in this 
thesis.
I agree with Boeijen and Daalhuizen (2010), 
who recommend  conducting three 
focus group discussions to generalize 
the insights. I noticed that it is hard to 
form a generalized insight from only two 
focus group discussions - only two due 
to the limitations of time. The latter also 
had influence on the workshop: Deeper 
conversations need more time, as IDEO.
org (2015) recommends. The translations 
for every dialogue are in fact very time 
consuming. 
The 
findings 
from 
the 
qualitative 
and quantitative tools do not always 
correspond as is addressed in Chapter 
8.5. Identifying challenges and opportunities. 
However, they do complement each other 
as they expose new areas of investigation. 
This is demonstrated by the double looped 
user journey as is elaborated on in Chapter 
8.1. The user journey and illustrated in figure 
21 and figure 22. Here, the qualitative 
insight is gained through the workshop 
showing that some refugees use more than 
one type of pump. This insight is tested by 
doing a further analysis of the quantitative 
data, showing that it is a factor of some 
significance: 14% of the people use at 
==PAGE:121==
119
119
least two pumps. Investigating whether 
this is related to the chlorination and what 
implications it has remains for future work 
on the assessment. 
This thesis also underlines the fact that the 
qualitative tools are not all inclusive. Earlier 
I stated that the challenge of insufficient 
jerry cans is a problem. However, this was 
not raised as a problem during the two user 
journey mapping exercises. This shows 
again, that the interaction and combination 
of the design tools is extremely important 
for thorough research and a powerful 
evaluation of the water provision systems.
The findings from the workshop indicate 
that the refugees have difficulties with 
measurements in volume and time. This 
leads to the conclusion that the data 
from the questionnaire can be inaccurate, 
because here, the refugees are answering 
the questions about how much time they 
spend pumping water and the volume 
they acquire on the basis of their own 
perception. The latter can be faulty, as 
the workshop-findings suggest. This is 
the case for the desired quantity of water: 
many outliers were far from realistic 
values - some of them assumed 200 liters 
per person per day. Although it could be 
argued that this is a true desire, this thesis 
treats it as an outlier as it is unrealistic. 
One hypothesis is that it could be a 
mistake of the enumerators, but further 
analysis of the data rejects this because 
most enumerators register outliers. I 
recommend to investigate alternative ways 
of measuring quantities, distances and 
time. This conflicts with what The Sphere 
Project (2011) recommends: Use household 
surveys to measure water use. 
Bryson (2004) argues that conducting a 
stakeholder analysis is key for identifying 
problems. During the work of this thesis, 
the stakeholder analyses are used to get 
a better understanding of the complex 
system in Bidi Bidi. To a bigger extent, 
they are ways to visualize the organisation 
in the form of an actor map, as Morelli 
and Tollestrup (2006) demonstrate. They 
show the main challenge of the system: 
knowledge and data sharing. However, this 
research just skims the surface of the whole 
stakeholder analysis. The system is very 
complex as Stoddard et al. (2015) indicate. 
This poses limits to the completeness of 
the current analysis. Especially because 
the right information is hard to find. I 
suggest to do mapping exercises with the 
stakeholders present in the settlement to 
get a better understanding. Consequently, I 
expect that more tacit challenges will then 
rise. 
==PAGE:122==
120
This thesis brings a design approach 
forward to assess and evaluate water 
provision systems in the Bidi Bidi refugee 
settlement in Northern Uganda. Such 
an approach includes the users and the 
corresponding social impact by looking 
past the system of technical specifications. 
This thesis investigates how to shape such 
a design approach by posing and answering 
the following question:
In what way can design tools be used to assess and 
evaluate water provision systems in the Bidi Bidi 
refugee settlement in Northern Uganda?
The new framework, shown in figure 39, 
gives a clear direction in how to conduct 
the assessment with a design approach. 
It entails design and research tools. 
Therefore, the framework is a good way 
of including the user’s perspective and 
relations to the system. It is based on the 
framework of evaluation by design for public 
services as presented by Maffei, Villari and 
Foglieni (2013). It is clear as it shows that 
the process, consists of three steps or 
design levels: strategic (ex-ante evaluation), 
development (process evaluation) and 
executive (ex-post evaluation). 
The work of this thesis shows that the 
design tools generate useful contextual 
knowledge and data. This helps to evaluate 
the systems by defining the indicators on 
which it is assessed. These indicators are 
related to various aspects of the system 
- e.g. technical and social and are named 
as heterogeneous parameters in the 
work of this thesis. This study indicates 
that the current way of working of the 
humanitarian organisations is numerical 
driven. It should however be user focussed, 
putting users at the center of the design 
instead of the technical system. Therefore, 
defining the heterogeneous parameters 
covering the user aspects is a necessity. 
During the course of this thesis, the tools 
have been tested within the framing of a 
field trip to the settlement. The field trip 
served the purpose of investigating what 
the best way of providing water could be. 
Consequently, this led to a categorization 
of the tools: Observations and focus group 
discussion are part of both the strategic and 
executive level, as they deliver a contextual 
understanding 
and 
define 
the 
first 
heterogeneous parameters. Stakeholder 
maps, the user journey and card sort are 
useful in the development level, because 
they relate to the user understanding, the 
centrality of the user in the process and the 
interaction between user, organization and 
system. The questionnaire is categorized 
10.2. CONCLUSION
==PAGE:123==
121
121
in the executive level, since it measures 
the output of the service delivery and the 
impact of the system in relation to the 
user. Last but not least, interviews can be 
used throughout the process as it generates 
important insights and data at every level 
of the assessment. 
The use of the framework is iterative. 
Outputs of early activities can become 
inputs for later processes. Also, more tools 
can be added that are needed to complete 
the assessment. Limitations of the work of 
this thesis affect the amount of iterations 
that are conducted. Therefore, a conclusion 
on the best water provision system can not 
be drawn unquestionably. However, the 
results of this thesis are in favor of the 
solar-powered system. The evaluated social 
impact is positive compared to the other 
systems - the hand pump and water trucks. 
But this is solely a partial conclusion. 
Therefore, this thesis recommends a 
continuation of the assessment with this 
framework to find a truly fulfilling answer. 
The framework can also be used in other 
contexts than the Bidi Bidi settlement, 
and in other areas than the humanitarian 
aid sector. This conclusion is made due to 
the approach of the framework: First, it 
gives structure on each of the four levels 
that need to be covered. Secondly, it gives 
direction about the iterative process and 
the heterogeneous parameters. Thirdly, 
makes suggestions on suitable tools for 
each level to conduct the assessment. And 
lastly, it is adaptable and versatile so more 
tools can be included in the process to 
finalize the assessment. However, the use 
of the design tools require design thinking, 
following a designer’s’ rationale. Therefore, 
this limits - to some extend - the use of the 
framework to people who possess these 
skills. Support from professional designers 
for laypersons - for example employees of 
humanitarian NGOs - is recommended. 
Future work includes a further exploration 
of the use, the applicable fields and design 
tools more broadly.
Concluding, the framework is a powerful 
approach to assess and evaluate a system 
from a user’s perspective. This example 
of a design approach brings the human 
aspect into the current way of working 
in the humanitarian system. Subsequently, 
it can lead to a more effective delivery 
of humanitarian aid in a time where this 
system faces grave challenges as a record 
number of people are displaced from 
conflict zones all over the world.
==PAGE:124==
122
==PAGE:125==
123
123
In this chapter the key recommendations 
and future work in relation to the thesis is 
addressed. These will cover those related 
to both the framework as the results of the 
case study. 
A main recommendation is to continue 
with the investigation of this framework 
- e.g. expanding it with new tools and 
heterogeneous parameters to make it 
applicable for a broader range of situations 
and areas. I suggest this is done from both 
an academic as a practical perspective - i.e. 
substantiating it with theories, but also 
bringing it into practice. I expect that more 
design tools taken from service design can 
be used in the strategic and development 
level. For in the executive level, design 
evaluation tools from for example the 
discipline interaction design can be used to 
assess the interaction between the user and 
the system. I expect that tools and theories 
from co-design could be used throughout the 
entire process.
Furthermore, I suggest that future work 
includes the study to the adaptability of 
the framework as a design approach to 
conducting an assessment in various areas 
and sectors. Who is able to use it? Does it 
fit in the current way of working of the 
organisations? Le Pool (2017) suggest that 
in order to make sure that an approach 
is adopted by the humanitarian sector, it 
should fit in their current way of working. 
Therefore, related to the framing of 
the case study, this approach should be 
tested with the Danish Refugee Council 
(DRC) and brought into practice with its 
employees on site.
The organisational side and economical 
benefits are underexposed in the framing 
of this thesis. 
I suggest that the continuation of the 
assessment of the water provision systems 
in Bidi Bidi includes a feasibility study, a 
more comprehensive stakeholder analysis 
and a cost benefit analysis.
To conclude, I like to bring some practical 
suggestions forward with regards to the 
water provision systems in Bidi Bidi. 
Further investigation what the concerns 
about chlorination for implications have 
for the acceptability of the solar pumps. 
This thesis within the framing of the case 
study concludes that the notion of jerry 
cans is a big opportunity for improvement. 
Meaning that the journey should be a 
main part of the further assessment. I 
also recommend to investigate alternative 
ways of measuring quantities, distances 
and time. This is based on insights about 
the refugees. Lastly, DRC should consider 
enabling the refugees and water committees 
to report defects of the water provision 
systems. This lowers the response time and 
elevates the effectiveness. I suggest simple 
solutions like for example: A sticker with 
the organisations contact details on the 
water pumps. Or, making sure that calls to 
DRC are free of charge as it also goes for 
emergency numbers. 
10.3. RECOMMENDATIONS AND FUTURE WORK
==PAGE:126==
124
==PAGE:127==
125
125
31 volts service design (2008). One line of Service Design by Marc Fonteijn. Retrieved 10 
August 2010, from http://www.31v.nl/ 2008/03/one-line-of-service-design/
 
Abras, C., Maloney-Krichmar, D. and Preece, J. (2004). User-Centred Design. Encyclopedia 
of Human-Computer Interaction. Bainbridge, W.
 
Al Jazeera. (2017). UN: Refugees from South Sudan cross 1.5 million mark. [online] 
Available at: http://www.aljazeera.com/news/2017/02/number-refugees-south-sudan-
crosses-15m-170210101935179.html.
 
Aly, H. (2016). The humanitarian system: ‘A mammoth machinery losing track of what 
it is for’. [online] The Guardian. Available at: https://www.theguardian.com/global-
development-professionals-network/2016/may/22/humanitarian-aid-system-power-
concentrated-hands-of-few-losing-track  [Accessed 20 May 2017].
 
Armstrong, A. and Nakafeero, R. (2017). Utilising solar water pumping for development-
oriented relief in refugee settings in Uganda. 39th WEDC International Conference, 
Kumasi, Ghana, 2016. [online] Available at: https://watermission.org/wp-content/
uploads/2015/10/Armstrong-2500.pdf.
 
Babineaux, R. and Krumboltz, J. (2014). Fail fast, fail often: how losing can help you win. 
1st ed. Tarcher.
 
Barber, R. (2015). Humanitarian aid in 2015: great challenges but greater opportunities. 
[online] Devpolicy Blog from the Development Policy Centre. 
 
BBC News. (2014). South Sudan: What is the fighting about? - BBC News. [online] 
Available at: http://www.bbc.com/news/world-africa-25427965.
 
Betts, A. and Bloom, L. (2014). Humanitarian innovation: the state of the art. 1st ed. New 
York: United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA).
 
Biryabarema, E. (2016). Hatred spills beyond South Sudan along with refugees. [online] 
Reuters. Available at: http://www.reuters.com/article/us-southsudan-uganda-refugees-
idUSKBN1441QU.
 
Blanchard, L. (2016). Conflict in South Sudan and the Challenges Ahead. Congressional 
Research Service.
Boeijen, A. and Daalhuizen, J. (2010). Delft Design Guide. 1st ed. Delft: TU Delft.
 
11
REFERENCES
==PAGE:128==
126
Brown, T. (2008). Design Thinking. Harvard Business Review, June 2008, pp.82-92.
 
Bryson, J. (2004). What to do when Stakeholders matter. Public Management Review, 
[online] 6(1), pp.21-53. 
 
Butty, J. (2016). South Sudan’s Riek Machar Calls for Armed Struggle. [online] VOA. 
Available 
at: 
http://www.voanews.com/a/south-sudan-riek-machar-calls-for-armes-
struggle/3525045.html.
 
Charter for Change. (2017). Charter for Change. [online] Available at: https://
charter4change.org/ [Accessed 20 May 2017].
 
Charny, J. (2011). Traditional humanitarian aid is vital. [online] The Guardian. Available 
at: https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/poverty-matters/2011/apr/13/
traditional-humanitarian-aid-vital. 
 
CIA: The World Factbook. (2017). South Sudan. [online] Available at: https://www.cia.
gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/geos/od.html [Accessed 19 May 2017].
 
Clement, A. 1994. Computing at work: Empowering action by “low-level” users. 
Communications of the ACM 37 (1): 52-63.
 
Dekking, F., Kraaikamp, C., Lopuhaa, H. and Meester, L. (2005). A modern introduction 
to probability and statistics. 1st ed. London: Springer.
 
Devictor, X. and Do, Q. (2016). How many years do refugees stay in exile?. 
[online] The World Bank. Available at: http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/
en/549261472764700982/pdf/WPS7810.pdf [Accessed May 2017].
 
DRC. (2017). Danish Refugee Council. [online] Available at: https://drc.ngo/about-drc 
[Accessed Feb. 2017].
 
Edison, H., bin Ali, N. and Torkar, R. (2013). Towards innovation measurement in the 
software industry. Journal of Systems and Software, 86(5), pp.1390-1407.
 
Elliott, C. and Deasley, P. (2007). Creating systems that work. 1st ed. London: Royal 
Academy of Engineering.
 
Foltyn, S. (2015). Horrific attacks prompt South Sudan’s communities to take arms. [online] 
The Guardian. Available at: https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/
dec/07/south-sudan-horrific-attacks-prompt-communities-take-arms.
 
Frearson, A. (2016). IKEA Foundation CEO says adapting refugee shelter is “like 
Lego”. [online] Dezeen. Available at: https://www.dezeen.com/2016/10/24/interview-
ikea-foundation-ceo-per-heggenes-better-shelter-refugee-temporary-architecture-
modular/?li_source=base&li_medium=bottom_block_1. [Accessed Apr. 2017].
 
Grundfos. (2017). Grundfos: get to know us. [online] Available at: http://www.grundfos.
com/about-us.html [Accessed Mar. 2017].
 
Hattem, J. (2017). Uganda’s sprawling haven for 270,000 of South Sudan’s refugees. [online] 
The Guardian. Available at: https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2017/
jan/24/uganda-sprawling-haven-for-270000-of-south-sudans-refugees.
==PAGE:129==
127
127
 
Hearn, R. (2016). How the disunity among UN agencies is failing Syria. [online] Aljazeera.
com. 
Available 
at: 
http://www.aljazeera.com/indepth/opinion/2016/07/disunity-
agencies-failing-syria-160705073104363.html.
 
Hoxtell, W., Norz, M. and Teicke, K. (2015). Business Engagement in Humanitarian 
Response and Disaster Risk Management. ECHO. 
 
Human Rights Watch. (2017). South Sudan events in 2016. [online] Available at: https://
www.hrw.org/world-report/2017/country-chapters/south-sudan [Accessed 19 May 
2017].
 
Humanitarian Innovation Ecosystem Research Project, (2015). Strengthening the 
Humanitarian Innovation Ecosystem. Brighton: University of Brighton.
 
Humanitarian Outcomes, (2015). Global database of humanitarian organisations. London: 
Humanitarian Outcomes. [online] Available at: www.alnap.org/resource/20772.aspx 
 
Ibanez, A. and Ndegwa, A. (2017). Visit report to refugee settlements in Northern 
Uganda. The Global Solar and Water Initiative.
 
IDEO.org (2015). The Field Guide to Human-Centered Design. 1st ed. San Francisco, 
CA: IDEO.org.
 
IDEO. (2017). Design Thinking. [online] Available at: https://www.ideou.com/pages/
design-thinking [Accessed Jun. 2017].
 
Iivari, N. 2004. Enculturation of user involvement in software development organizations: 
An interpretive case study in the product development context. In Proceedings of the 
third Nordic conference on Human-computer interaction, pp. 287-296. New York, NY: 
ACM Press.
 
Jensen, P.H., Webster, E. (2009). Another look at the relationship between innovation
proxies. Australian Economic Papers 48 (3), 252–269
 
Maffei, S., Villari, B. and Foglieni, F. (2013). Embedding design capacity in public 
organisations: Evaluation by design for public service. Swedish Design Research Journal. 
 
Mara-foundation.org. (2017). About Mara Foundation. [online] Available at: http://www.
mara-foundation.org/index.php/about-us [Accessed Apr. 2017]. 
 
Marshall, J. (2013). Solar Energy Solutions for the Developing World. [online] Ensia. 
Available 
at: 
https://ensia.com/features/solar-energy-solutions-for-the-developing-
world/ [Accessed Jun. 2017].
 
Meier, P. (2013). AIDR: artificial intelligence for disaster response. iRevolutions. 1 
October. [online] Available at: www.alnap.org/resource/20794.aspx
 
Mind-Lab. (2017). Method Guide. [online] Available at: http://metoder.mind-lab.dk/en/
method-guide.pdf [Accessed Apr. 2017].
 
Morelli, N. and Tollestrup, C. (2006). New representation techniques for designing in a 
systematic perspective. Engineering and product design education conference.
 
==PAGE:130==
128
Morelli, N. (2011). Active, Local, Connected: Strategic and Methodological Insights in 
Three Cases. Design Issues.
 
Møllebaek Larsen, M. and Flensborg, A. (2011). Market Creation Toolbox. 1st ed. 
Copenhagen: BOP Learning Lab. 
 
Munslow, B. and Brown, C. (1999). Complex emergencies: the institutional impasse. Third 
World Quarterly, Vol. 20 No. 1, pp. 207-21. [online] Available at: https://www.jstor.org/
stable/3993191?seq=3#page_scan_tab_contents
 
Newman, D. (2017). The Design Squiggle. [online] Cargocollective.com. Available at: 
http://cargocollective.com/central/The-Design-Squiggle [Accessed Jun. 2017].
 
OECD. (2005). Oslo Manual: Guidelines for Collecting and Interpreting Innovation Data. 
3rd ed. Paris: OECD.
 
OCHA (2013). Humanitarianism in the Network Age. [online] UNOCHA. Available at: 
http://www.unocha.org/publication/policy-briefs-studies/humanitarianism-network-
age.
 
OCHA (2017). Who We Are. [online] Available at: http://www.unocha.org/about-us/
who-we-are [Accessed Apr. 2017]
 
Patton, A. (2016). Is Uganda the best place to be a refugee?. [online] The Guardian. 
Available 
at: 
https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-
network/2016/aug/20/is-uganda-the-best-place-to-be-a-refugee.
 
Robson, C. and McCartan, K. (2016). Real world research. 1st ed. Chichester: Wiley.
 
Saco, R. and Goncalves, A. (2010). Service Design: An Appraisal. Design Management 
Review, 19(1), pp.10-19.
 
Sanders, E. and Stappers, P. (2008). Co-creation and the new landscapes of design. 
CoDesign, 4(1), pp.5-18.
 
Scott, R. (2014). Imagining More Effective Humanitarian Aid: A Donor Perspective. 
OECD Development Co-operation Directorate. 
Shostack, G. (1984). Designing Services That Deliver. Harvard Business Review, 
1(January).
 
Sleeswijk Visser, F., Stappers, P.J., van der Lugt, R., Sanders, E.B.-N. (2005) Contextmapping: 
Experiences from Practice. CoDesign, 1(2), 119-149.
 
Sleeswijk Visser, F. (2009). Bringing the everyday life of people into design. 1st ed. Delft: 
TU Delft.
 
Spinuzzi, C. (2005). The methodology of participatory design. Technical Communication, 
52.
 
Statbank Denmark. (2017). Data and Statistics. [online] Available at: https://www.
statbank.dk/statbank5a/SelectTable/Omrade0.asp?PLanguage=1 [Accessed May 2017].
 
Stickdorn, M. and Schneider, J. (2016). This is service design thinking. Amsterdam: BIS.
 
==PAGE:131==
129
129
Stoddard, A., Harmer, A., Haver, K., Taylor, G. and Harvey, P. (2015). The State Of The 
Humanitarian System Report 2015. 
 
Tassi, R. (2017). Service Design Tools. [online] Servicedesigntools.org. Available at: 
http://www.servicedesigntools.org/about [Accessed Apr. 2017].
 
The Global Humanitarian Assistance. (2013). Who’s who in humanitarian financing. 
[online] 
Available 
at: 
http://www.globalhumanitarianassistance.org/wp-content/
uploads/2012/05/gha-data-guides-whos-who-020113.pdf  [Accessed May 2017].
 
The Global Humanitarian Assistance. (2017). Map of the humanitarian landscape. [online] 
Available at: http://www.globalhumanitarianassistance.org/tools/guides/humanitarian-
aid-network [Accessed May 2017].
 
The Sphere Project (2011). Humanitarian Charter and Minimum Standards in 
Humanitarian Response. 3rd ed. Rugby: Practical Action Publishing.
 
The Sphere Project. (2017). About the Sphere Project. [online] Available at: http://www.
sphereproject.org/about/ [Accessed May 2017].
 
The World Bank. (2017). Data on South Sudan. [online] Available at: http://data.
worldbank.org/country/south-sudan?view=chart [Accessed May 2017].
 
UNHCR (2017). Data on South Sudan Situation. [online] South Sudan Situation. Available 
at: http://data.unhcr.org/SouthSudan/regional.php [Accessed May 2017].
 
UNICEF. (2008). Promotion of household water treatment and safe storage in UNICEF 
WASH programmes. 
 
UNICEF. (2017). About UNICEF Innovation. [online] Available at: https://www.unicef.
org/innovation/ [Accessed May 2017].
 
United Nations Sustainable Development. (2017). Sustainable development goals. [online] 
Available 
at: 
http://www.un.org/sustainabledevelopment/sustainable-development-
goals/ [Accessed Apr. 2017]
 
United Nations The general Assembly. (2015). Transforming our world: the 2030 
Agenda for Sustainable Development. New York [online] Available at https://
sustainabledevelopment.un.org/post2015/transformingourworld [Accessed 10 Apr. 
2017]
 
Verganti, R. (2003). Design as brokering of languages: Innovation strategies in Italian 
firms. Design Management Journal (Former Series), 14(3), pp.34-42.
 
Vinck, P. (2013). World Disasters Report 2013: Focus on technology and the future 
of humanitarian action. [online] Available at: http://www.ifrc.org/PageFiles/134658/
WDR%202013%20complete.pdf. 
 
Wall, M., for BBC News. (2014). Innovate or die: The stark message for big business. 
[online] Available at: http://www.bbc.com/news/business-28865268.
 
Yamane, T. (1967). Statistics: An Introductory Analysis. 1st ed. New York [etc.]: Harper 
& Row.
==PAGE:132==
130
==PAGE:133==
131
131
12
APPENDIX
12.1. Take-outs business-humanitarian partnership lab meeting
12.2. Milestone presentation
12.3. User journey pre-field trip
12.4. Terms of reference for the Field trip
12.5. Schedule of the field trip
12.6. Questionnaire
12.7. Semi-structured interview questions
12.8. WASH sector coordination meeting minutes
12.9. Joint presentation after field trip
==PAGE:134==
132
12.1. TAKE-OUTS BUSINESS-HUMANITARIAN PARTNERSHIP LAB MEETING
Take-outs and learnings from the business-humanitarian partnership lab meeting that I was 
not allowed to attend. The take-outs are a combination of the second hand information 
received from my supervisor.
Yutaka 
Ioannis 
Iskandar
Mapping of the meeting 
with DRC, Grundfos and 
the DTU
Copenhagen 
7th of February 2017
1
Hoofdtekst - niveau één 
Hoofdtekst - niveau twee 
Hoofdtekst - niveau drie 
Hoofdtekst - niveau vier 
Hoofdtekst - niveau vijf
Titeltekst
2
Expectations 
While DRC is very cautious about the willingness of Grundfos, it’s soon clear that this 
was unnecessary.  
Mis alignments 
Not only between Grundfos and DRC, but also within the two organisations. Whether 
the contextual focus is interesting or it is only the hard data that is needed. Within the 
people of DRC there is a short debate about what is more important: the users or the 
quality of the water at the tap.  
DRC and Grunfos as data resource 
Both parties say to posses all the relevant data. So the present data should not be 
neglected. 
Aligning expectations
3
Customer understanding 
Grundfos states that key stakeholders keep buying pumps from others. The reason is 
not clarified, might be a lack of understanding of the customer behaviour.  
Timeframe of the project 
What can be accomplished in one year? The technology and choices will change if a 
transition from temporary to permanent is made. This leads to the topic of producing 
economical value for Grundfos.  
Business modelling 
An existing solution from Grundfos is the Acutap; an implemented pump solution in 
slums. Here, the payment is solely symbolic and not covering the real costs. Even 
though, taking the long term into account, business modelling is a interesting topic. 
Timeframe and topics
4
Life cycle analysis and sustainability 
The definition and meaning of this varies between persons and departments within 
Grundfos. A definition from the DTU can help alignment.  
Sharing knowledge 
The Uganda case can deliver tools to better help sharing knowledge within and 
between organisations.  
Site selection and deployment 
Local companies do a bidding on the deployment. The life cycle of the pumps is 
dependent on the use and maintenance. The trustworthiness of the installers is an 
important factor. Furthermore, the value of the repair costs has a different meaning to 
the locals. 
Outcomes from the working groups
5
- Why is the solution only focussed as being B2B instead of B2C? The design and 
solutions are for the people in need, hence the customers.  
- DRC states that the refugee settlements are a ’controlled environment’. What’s the 
meaning of this? 
- There seems to be some unclarity about how the Grundfos pumps work. Do they 
have multiple dispencers? Why is 1 Grundfos pump as effective as 5 pumps? How and 
what should be compared? The current situation are the water trucks.  
- What are the effects on all the stakeholders in the process? For example the truck 
drivers of the water trucks 
- What happens when the pumps are to effective? Understand the value that water has 
for the local people and the children (who even play in it). DRC has parts of the 
knowledge on this. 
Remaining questions
6
==PAGE:135==
133
133
12.2. MILESTONE PRESENTATION
This are the slides from the milestone presentation on the 15th of March. It shows 
the initial research questions and set-up of the thesis. The concept of the framework, 
including the tools, are also demonstrated. 
Thesis content,  
outline and structure
Iskandar Tange 
15th of March 2017
1
As a reminder
The case question 
How can DRC asses and compare different water solutions in Uganda?
2
Passing along a designers perspective: 
What framework or toolbox will enable DRC to independently assess and compare 
technological solutions in the future? 
What is the ‘best’ way of providing water in refugee settlements in Uganda?
What a designers perspective adds: 
-
Design thinking is brought into the project  
-
A user centred approach is followed 
-
Heterogeneous aspects will be taking into account 
-
Understanding of the complex and holistic socio-technical system
2
The research questions
3
Finding answers to the following: 
How can DRC asses and compare different water solutions in Uganda? 
What framework or toolbox will enable DRC to independently assess and compare 
technological solutions in the future? 
What is the ‘best’ way of providing water in refugee settlements in Uganda?
Concepting
Testing
Main research
3
Set up of the research
4
Framework / toolbox 
Develop a framework / toolbox that enables DRC to asses and compare a water provision 
system from a socio-technical perspective
Social impacts 
Understanding the social 
dynamics that come at play 
Stakeholder analysis 
Taking stock of all the 
relevant stakeholders 
involved in the project
Business exploration 
Including the business and 
economical aspects in the 
study
The research is split in the following four parts. The three bottom parts will support 
the design of the framework / toolbox. 
4
Guiding questions
Supporting theories
Set up of the research
5
Social impacts 
Understanding the social 
dynamics that come at play 
Stakeholder analysis 
Taking stock of all the 
relevant stakeholders 
involved in the project
Business exploration 
Including the business and 
economical aspects in the 
study
For the structure, every block is split into two parts: guiding questions to help direct 
the research and supporting theories to help find answers to the first. 
Feedback and suggestions
5
Framework / toolbox
Guiding questions: 
How can DRC asses and compare different water solutions in Uganda? 
What framework or toolbox will enable DRC to independently assess and compare technological 
solutions in the future? 
What is the ‘best’ way of providing water in refugee settlements in Uganda? 
Supporting theories: 
6
Design games
Arenas of 
development
6
==PAGE:136==
134
Social impacts
Guiding questions: 
What is the value of water in heterogeneous aspects? 
What will be the social impact of the system? 
What are the (relevant) social parameters? 
Supporting theories: 
7
Design for the 
BOP
Context 
mapping
Domestication 
theory
Valuation 
studies
User journey
7
Stakeholder analysis
Guiding questions: 
Who are the stakeholders involved? 
What are the needs and power of these stakeholders? 
How do they influence and affect each other? 
When are they involved in the proces? 
Supporting theories: 
8
Interviews
Stakeholder 
mapping
Personas
Storyboard
User 
observations
Questionnaires
8
Business exploration
Guiding questions: 
How is the current business model designed? 
Do different solutions ask for different models? 
How can the current business model be (re-) designed? 
Supporting theories: 
9
Road map
Business 
model canvas
9
When zoomed out
10
?
Theories will help to 
answer the guiding 
questions
Subparts will feed into 
the top part; the 
toolbox / framework
Concepting and 
ideation of the methods 
for the top part
Tools / framework will 
be tested and evaluated 
with stakeholders
This slide shows the steps that are going to be taken. Important to note: these are not in 
chronological order and will be done at different stages in the process. 
10
Process of the research
The image shows design principles plotted on a visualisation of the design process. 
This shows that the different theories of the sub parts, will come in at different stages 
in the process. Also, the field study will use methods in varying stages of the process. 
11
11
Example of a 
supporting theory
12
==PAGE:137==
135
135
User journey | how it works
A theory that helps to gain insight into all the stages a user goes through while experiencing the 
use of a product or service.  
Every step of the journey will be mapped against the mood state of a user on a 5 point scale: 
very satisfied vs. very unsatisfied.
13
13
User journey | The peak-end rule
Research shows that there are two moments that determine our experience: 
-
The highest peak 
-
The last step 
14
Does this tell us something about the value 
that the different solutions create?
14
12.3. USER JOURNEY PRE-FIELD TRIP
Prior to the field trip the following user journey has been made based on literature review, 
photographic and film evidence (e.g. Youtube) and reasoning of the researcher. 
Journey to pump
Most of the refugees travel a long way to 
the pump. They often use means like 
bicycles and wheel barrows to help carry 
the water and travel together with others.
The hand waterpump
When arriving at the waterpump, the refugee 
has to queue up in order to get water. Using 
the hand waterpump takes a lot of effort and 
physical labour - especially in the warm 
climate. 
House / Shelter
This is the place where the water is needed 
every single day, but which is not always near 
a pump. Therefor collecting water is the main 
daily task for many.
Drinking and socializing
After the heavy work of filling up the jerry 
cans, the refugees drink some water and take 
a short rest. The gathering of many people at 
the pump is also an opportunity for 
socializing. 
Journey home
The way back home is tough because the 
refugees have to carry the heavy jerry 
cans filled with water. 
Water use
At home the refugees use the 
water for a variety of purposes: 
drinking, cooking, washing and 
laundry.
Women and children
Mainly women and children are 
given the task of collecting water for 
the household while the men have 
other responsibilities.
==PAGE:138==
136
12.4. TERMS OF REFERENCE FOR THE FIELD TRIP
This section includes the terms of reference that has been written prior to the field trip. 
It describes the purpose of the field trip, the methodology and the goals of the field 
trip. It is meant for DRC in Copenhagen and Kampala and has been used as a center of 
discussion for planning and arranging the trip. 
_________________________________________________________________________ 
  
Terms of Reference 
Field trip to Uganda and the Bidibidi settlement to be 
conducted by the DTU partners in the Business- 
Humanitarian Partnership lab  
  
  
DTU Staff 
Benjamin Holm, MA Student - Water resources engineering 
Iskandar Tange, MA Student - Design and innovation 
  
Background of visit 
In a joint effort between The Danish Refugee Council (DRC), and Grundfos, collaborating in the 
Business- Humanitarian Partnership Lab, a comparative study has been commissioned with 
Technical University of Denmark (DTU).  
 
This study aims to close the gap between the need for innovation and partnerships 
in the humanitarian sector, and the background documentation required to assess 
the new solutions and business models. The case will be to test and document whether solar-driven, 
highly efficient and long-lasting systems for water provision will improve the lives and opportunities for 
refugees in settlements in Northern Uganda, while increasing the value for money in the humanitarian 
relief budgets of NGOs working within these settlements. 
 
Purpose of visit 
The purpose of the visit is to collect data, do observations, document tacit knowledge and get a better 
understanding of the needs and concerns of the users, the refugee context and the best/standard 
practices applied in WASH related solutions. 
This data and insights will be gathered by doing observations, conducting interviews, elaborate 
conversations and using a set of proprietary tools to help surface tacit knowledge.  
The data (financial, technical, social, etc.) will be used for the purpose of both the Theses as well as 
the the bigger Bidibidi study.  
 
Data and insights to be obtained: 
-
Financial data (cost of implementing and running water supply) 
-
Cost of borehole, pump, storage, distribution, maintenance, support, planning etc. 
-
Technical data (Local conditions, water demand, required storage/distribution...) 
-
Water levels, water use per cap, what is the water used for, existing water supply 
system, sustainability concerns (mass balance), water quality, maps/gis of 
elevation/soil type/landuse etc. 
-
Social insights  
-
Value of water, use experiences, livelihood opportunities, work division, consumption 
patterns and habits, personal identity 
-
Organisational information  
-
Ways of working, organisational / power structures, stakeholder overview, business 
model 
-
General information  
==PAGE:139==
137
137
-
Current status, number of refugees, flux ... 
 
Stakeholders: 
In order to maintain a holistic approach towards the water supply systems, data and insight collection 
should be done with a broad selection of stakeholders. Here a variety of factors are taken into account 
like responsibilities and needs, but also the position in the process. The following stakeholders are 
intended for data and insight collection: 
 
-
In Kampala 
-
UNHCR and UNICEF 
-
Governmental institutions 
-
DRC staff (Severine, Lilu, Paul, others) 
-
In Arua / Adjumani / Bidibidi  
-
Users 
-
Office of the prime minister (OPM) 
-
Local NGO’s 
-
Host community 
-
DRC officers 
-
Support and technical staff 
  
Scope of work and methodology 
 
Observations: 
The observations will be conducted around the point of water distribution and during the user journey, 
where the refugee not only collects, but also brings the water back and forth to the household.  
 
Follow and observe: 
To understand the ways of working of the DRC and WASH officers they will be joined during their 
routine work. By following and observing, and informally talking, a better understanding is built.  
 
Interviews: 
During conversations, with different stakeholders, design methods like ranking / card sort or a 
mapping exercise will be used to document information as well as to open up dialogues. This method 
forces an opinion or a decision about the priority of a topic.  
 
Workshop: 
A workshop will be held with the users to help identify challenges and opportunities. This method will 
make tacit and deep knowledge surface, but will also help as a powerful tool for communicating and 
taking down boundaries.  
 
Data: 
The cost data​ will be collected through the managing NGOs and donors. Access to the budgets is vital 
to ensure the real costs are used in the calculations. The data will be used to conduct a life cycle cost 
analysis of water supply systems (hand pumps, generator powered and solar powered pumps). 
 
Technical data​ will be collected through experts in the WASH area, observations on site and access 
to data used in the planning and managing of the refugee settlement including population numbers, 
maps and data on existing water supply system etc. This will be used to set up scenarios based on 
different water supply systems. Scenarios are developed to assess the technical feasibility of using 
solar pumps vs more traditional means of water supply.  
 
==PAGE:140==
138
Visual documentation​ in the form of photographs and videos supplemented with written notes.  
 
Deliverables from the workshops​, like worksheets and notebooks, will form a basis for processing 
insights for further documenting and reporting. 
  
 
Expected outputs 
Clarification of the actual cost of implementing and running different water supply systems (hand 
pumps, generator powered pumps and solar pumps) in a refugee setting. Access to the budgets 
including an option to clarify any questions. This is used to set up a Life cycle cost analysis to 
compare different systems, and calculate the actual cost of delivering water ($/m^3).  
 
Collecting all available data regarding the population, mapping, water use, existing water supply 
system and available water resources (used to assess sustainability of water abstraction), pump 
characteristics and expected lifetime, required maintenance etc. This could be excel sheets, maps, 
GIS data, raw data sheets etc. Used to set up realistic scenarios of water supply systems with and 
without solar pumps to assess the feasibility of solar pumps in refugee settings. 
 
Documentation of tacit knowledge regarding normal practices when planning, implementing and 
running WASH related systems in a refugee setting. 
 
Understand the user experience, priorities and concerns related to collecting and using water. 
 
A deeper understanding of the social impacts and the social dynamics that come at play around the 
water solutions by identifying the (relevant) social parameters using (design) tools. Also, the value of 
these parameters will be determined, not necessarily in economic terms, but using methods to 
measure and asses in a non-quantifiable way.  
 
An overview of the stakeholders in the complex system and their needs, connections responsibilities 
and power. This will help to better comprehend the system and decision making process.  
 
Testing existing hypotheses: 
1) More convenient access to water (no queue, short collection time, short distance etc.) results in a 
higher water use, and water being used for other purposes that may add value in the refugee setting 
(production, recreational uses etc.)  
2) While solar pumps may be more expensive as a capital expenditure, the low maintenance and self 
sustainability outweighs these costs. 
3) Provided that the documentation and background information is in order, solar pumping system is a 
feasible solution for water supply in refugee settings, and fall within the expectations of the donor 
community. Understanding the full life cycle cost and technical benefits and limitations of solar 
powered system will increase the willingness of donors and the international community to consider 
these systems as viable. 
 
  
Suggested timeframe 
Start: 26-04 2017 
End: 8-05 2017 
  
 
 
 
==PAGE:141==
139
139
Table of preliminary activities 
Below a table with preliminary activities is features. This is not a full and complete programme, but 
what we expect to do as a minimum while on the field trip. It is therefore still subjected to change.  
 
Recommendations on additional activities that add value to the field trip are welcome. Also, due to our 
limited knowledge of the context and situation, we would like to receive advice or suggestions on the 
scope and location.  
 
Room is left in the programme to pursue new opportunities or have spare time for unexpected 
challenges and of course, for any additions to the programme from your side.  
 
Scope 
Activity 
Location 
Stakeholders 
Maximum of 3 
days while in 
Kampala 
Stakeholder 
meetings 
Kampala 
UNHCR and UNICEF 
Governmental agencies 
DRC staff (Severine, Lilu, others) 
1-3 days 
Stakeholder 
meetings 
Close to or in the 
Bidibidi settlement / 
accommodation  
District authorities 
Local NGO’s  
Sub-contracters 
1 day 
Workshop 
At a closed room / 
location without many 
disturbances 
In the morning: committees 
In the afternoon: the users / focus 
group 
5 to 15 
households 
Household visits 
for interviews / 
dialogues 
At the 
households/Bidbidi 
settlement 
Users 
½ day 
Follow & observe  
Bidibidi settlement 
DRC / WASH officers 
2 days / hand 
pump / 
generator 
powered / 
solar powered 
Observations and 
dialogues 
At the borehole and 
waterpump 
Users  
Committees 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:142==
140
12.5. SCHEDULE OF THE FIELD TRIP
The schedule of the field trip as it was executed. There are some adjustments compared 
to the original planned schedule due to unforeseen circumstances. 
 
DAY 
ACTIVITY 
DATE 
LOCATION 
REMARKS 
1 
Arrival and brief in 
Kampala 
25/4/2017 
Afternoon 
Kampala 
 
 
Tour of Office 
Kampala 
25/4/2017 
Afternoon 
Kampala 
Introduction to the office, the staff and Severine 
2 
Meeting with Solar 
Experts 
26/4/2017 
Morning 
Kampala 
Attending a joint follow-up meeting between solar 
and wash experts of different organisations. 
 
Brief and discussion 
with Kampala Team 
26/4/2017 
Afternoon 
Kampala 
Walking through the trip, the schedule and 
arrangements with the Kampala team  
3 
Travel to Field- 
Yumbe and meeting 
with Arua office 
27/4/2017 
All day 
Kampala / 
Arua 
 
4. 
WASH Sector 
Coordination 
meeting 
28/4/2017 
Morning 
Bidibidi 
settlement 
/ Koboko 
Attending the weekly coordination meeting of the 
WASH experts from the present  organisations in 
the refugee settlement. 
 
Visit to different 
types of  boreholes 
and pumps in the 
settlement 
28/4/2017 
Afternoon 
Bidibidi 
settlement 
/ Koboko 
Visit to boreholes with different types of pumps 
(solar, water trucking, generator and hand) to 
observe and understand the technology and 
context. Also a visit to a surface treatment plant is 
made.  
5 
Focus group 
discussions with the 
water committees 
29/4/2017 
Morning 
Bidibidi 
settlement 
/ Koboko 
Two water committees are gathered to join the 
focus group discussions that are split in two 
sessions. 
 
HH visits and test 
questionnaire  
29/4/2017 
Afternoon 
Bidibidi 
settlement 
/ Koboko 
A couple of households visits are conducted to 
observe and understand the context and user, and 
to field test the questionnaire.  
6 
Preparations and 
adjustments for 
second week 
30/4/2017 
All day 
Koboko 
Last preparations for the focus group discussions 
with the beneficiaries and adjustments to the 
questionnaires.  
7 
Focus group 
discussions with the 
beneficiaries 
1/5/2017 
Morning 
Bidibidi 
settlement 
/ Koboko 
Three groups (men, women and youth) are 
identified and gathered to attend the focus group 
discussion. Each consist of approximately 12 
persons. Design tools are used during the sessions. 
==PAGE:143==
141
141
 
Pre-brief and 
meeting of 
Enumerators 
1/5/2017 
Afternoon 
Bidibidi 
settlement 
/ Koboko 
Pre-brief and meeting with the enumerators to 
explain the goal and purpose of the project and 
data collection.  
8 
Training of 
Enumerators 
2/5/2017 
Morning 
Bidibidi 
settlement 
/ Koboko 
Training of the enumerators by walking through 
every questions and translation in order to ensure 
the best possible execution. 
 
Data collection 
starts 
2/5/2017 
Afternoon 
Bidibidi 
settlement 
/ Koboko 
The enumerators will start with the data collection 
among 400 households 
9 
Visit to MSF office 
and to borehole site  
3/5/2017 
Morning 
Bidibidi 
settlement 
/ Koboko 
A visit to the Medicine Sans Frontieres office for 
meeting and data collection. Followed by a visit to 
site where a borehole test is commenced. 
 
Collection of 
questionnaires and 
evaluation with 
Enumerators 
3/5/2017 
Afternoon 
Bidibidi 
settlement 
/ Koboko 
Collection of the filled in questionnaires and 
evaluation with the enumerators for the purpose 
of reflection and learning.  
10 
Visit settlement  and 
boreholes for final 
information / data  
4/5/2017 
All day 
Bidibidi 
settlement 
/ Koboko 
Last visit to the settlement and boreholes for 
some final information and remarks.  
11 
WASH Sector 
Coordination 
meeting 
5/5/2017 
Morning 
Bidibidi 
settlement 
/ Koboko  
Attending the weekly coordination meeting of the 
WASH experts from the present  organisations in 
the refugee settlement and update on fieldtrip.  
 
Travel to Arua 
5/5/2017 
Afternoon 
Koboko / 
Arua 
 
12 
Travel to Kampala 
6/5/2017 
All day 
Kampala 
 
13 
Rest/tour/visit 
Kampala 
7/5/2017 
All day 
Kampala 
Free day for leisure / tour in Kampala 
14 
Round-up and 
debrief of fieldtrip 
8/5/2017 
Morning 
Kampala 
At the DRC country office 
 
Departure for 
Denmark 
8/5/2017 
Afternoon 
Kampala 
 
  
==PAGE:144==
142
Rapid WASH/Livelihood Assesment, May 2017 
 
1. Introduce your NAME, REASON for the ASSESMENT and mention that the beneficiary should be honest and there is 
NO MONETERY/INCENTIVE/REGISTRATION benefit from the discussion/session.  
2. Ask for PERMISSSION to continue with the questions 
3. DO NOT make any promises/commitments, simply mention that you are just collecting data 
4. Only mention the options if it is stated in the question, or if no answer is given 
5. You can always check off more options if nothing else is stated in the question 
6. Thank the beneficiary after finishing the questionare. 
Interviewer / team no : 
 
Location 
Zone___________ Village___________ Block___________ 
Headed House 
Hold                   
Male/Female/Child 
Total people 
in 
household 
Total 
0-18 yrs 
19-59 yrs 
60 + yrs 
M 
F 
M 
F 
M 
F 
M 
F 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
N° 
Question and Filter 
Answers 
1.  
Who collects the water 
Man    o            Woman    o            Children    o          
2.  
Where do you get your water?  
o Tapstand tank (trucking)         
o Tapstand     
o Handpump      
o Surface water (pond or river)     
3.  
How many jerrycans do you collect per day?  
(Fill in number of jerrycans used to collect water) 
 
Can I see the type of jerrycans that you use? 
 
        
< 5 l ________________ 
 
10 l ________________ 
 
20 l ________________  
 
>20 l _______________ 
 
4.  
How far do you walk to the water source? 
 
Answer provided in meters: 
o Less than 500 ms  
o Between 500m and 1km  
o More than 1km  
 
Answer provided in minutes: 
o Less than 15 mintues  
o Between 15 and 45 minutes  
o More than 45 minutes  
5.  
How much time do you spent waiting at the water 
point? 
o Less than 5 mintues  
o Between 5 and 30 minutes  
o Between 30 and 60 minutes  
o More than 60 minutes  
6.  
When do you need the most water? 
(Only check one option) 
 
 
o Morning      
o Afternoon     
o Evening      
o Night             
7.  
When do you collect the water? 
(Only check one option) 
o Morning      
o Afternoon     
o Evening      
o Night             
12.6. QUESTIONNAIRE
==PAGE:145==
143
143
3.  
How is the uality of the water? 
o ood      
o Bad. it smells     
o Bad. it tastes like chlorine      
o Bad. it looks dirt- 
 
o Bad: _____________________________  (fill in)     
4.  
What do you use the water for? 
o rinking      
o Cooking     
o Cleaning (household)     
o ersonal h-giene 
o Washing cloth      
o Farming (growing crops)    
o Farming (reeding animals)      
o Construction materials (ricks. cla-1) 
 
o ther uses: ________________________ (fill in) 
10.  
o you hae enough water 
o es 
o No 
 
11.  
If the answer is no# Why don%t you hae enough 
water? 
o There is not enough water at m- water source 
o It is too difficult to pump the water 
o It is too hard to carr- the water 
o We don2t have enough containers to either store 
or carr- water 
o The water is not good (taste. smell. &ualit-) 
o The water source is too far 
o The waiting time is too long 
o We don2t feel safe going to the water point 
 
o ther:______________________________(fill 
in) 
12.  
If you had more water" what would you use it for? 
o rinking      
o Cooking     
o Cleaning (household)     
o ersonal h-giene 
o Washing cloth      
o Farming (growing crops)    
o Farming (reeding animals)      
o Construction materials (ricks. cla-1) 
 
o ther uses: ________________________ (fill in) 
13.  
How much water do you need? 
(Fill in number of jerrycans the user needs) 
        
< 5 l ________________ 
 
10 l ________________ 
 
20 l ________________  
 
>20 l _______________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:146==
144
 
LIELIH 
14.  
What is your main source of income for the 
household? 
o Selling food/animals 
o Selling products/items 
o astoral 
o Brewing and selling alcohol 
o Irregular laour for Ns 
o Irregular laour to communit- (e0g0 farming for 
others. washing cloth. construction1) 
o egular emplo-ment 
o None 
15.  
What was your main source of income before 
becoming a refugee? 
o Selling food 
o Selling products/items 
o astoral 
o Irregular laour (e0g0 farming for others. washing 
cloth. construction1) 
o egular emplo-ment 
o None 
16.  
What do you need to become 
selfreliant&independent? 
o More water      
o egular emplo-ment 
o More land for farming/animals 
o Better access to trading/market 
o Education/training 
o Electricit- 
o Better housing 
 
o ther: _____________________________(fill in) 
 
==PAGE:147==
145
145
12.7. SEMI-STRUCTURED INTERVIEW QUESTIONS
This sections includes the semi-structured interview questions as they have been prepared 
prior to the field trip for a variety of stakeholders. Some of which, were not accessible in 
the end. The content has been adjusted during the field trip based on new insights. 
 
Donors: Unicef and UNHCR 
Towards the end of the field trip, a visit to the donors will be done to interview high level 
stakeholders and to get a better understanding of the humanitarian aid system.  
 
 
Open 
Deep 
Can you walk us through the structure 
humanitarian aid system in Northern Uganda? 
Who are the stakeholders involved? 
How is the power structured? 
How does the coordination between the different 
stakeholders (partners and government) works? 
Could you walk us through how the funding of 
the humanitarian response works? 
How effective is the spending of the donor money 
they receive? 
How are the different area’s of relief aid distributed 
and prioritized? (education, wash, health care) 
How is the funding distributed? 
How is the mandate / responsibilities 
distributed among the NGO’s? 
How are the mandates defined? 
How do you select the most suitable NGO’s for a 
mandate? 
How does the procedure works? 
What steps are taken in the decision making 
process?  
Are there specific guidelines, besides SPHERE, to 
do this? 
Who makes these guidelines? 
What kind of criteria do these guidelines use? 
How to prioritize / assess a solution? 
What are the criteria you use to assess different 
proposals? And do they have weighing factors or 
are they solely minimum standards? 
How to evaluate different aspects? 
What kind of tools are used for assessment? Do you 
use life cycle cost analysis for this? 
 
What are examples of (un)successful private 
sector engagement in humanitarian aid? 
Are these examples of ‘of the shelf’ solutions, or 
specifically designed for the user / context? 
What were the boundaries that these had? 
What were the lessons learned from these 
examples? 
How did these examples cope with comparing and 
assessing solutions? 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:148==
146
 
Governmental institutions 
Ministry of water and district authorities 
Office of the Prime Minister  
 
Open  
Deep 
What is your role in the refugee setting? 
Who do you represent? 
How are you involved in the refugee context?  
Where do you interfere in the situation? 
How do you do this?  
What is the policy on refugees in Uganda? 
Do you have data available on the water 
resource and use? 
How do you get the data? Who does this 
research? 
Is this data also available for us? 
What is your time perspective on the refugee 
context in Northern Uganda? 
How do you expect the situation is in 10 years? 
How do you want the situation to be? 
Are you focussed on long term or short term 
solutions? Any examples on this matter? 
Do you know examples of innovation in the 
humanitarian aid? 
Do you contribute to innovation? And in what 
way? 
How much is being supported by you? 
What is the policy with regards to innovation in 
the humanitarian aid? 
 
DRC Staff 
Open  
Deep 
What is your role / mandate in the Bidibidi 
refugee settlement? 
 
How is the work and responsibilities distributed 
among the NGO’s? And sub contractors? 
Which parts of the work and responsibilities are 
outsourced to (local) sub contractors? And 
which are executed by DRC? 
Is this always arranged in that way? 
How does the procedure for choosing sub 
contractors work? What criteria do you use for 
the selection / tender process? 
Where do you get these from and how to 
prioritize? 
Possibly do priority mapping 
What timeframe do you work under (long term / 
emergency / short term) 
What affects the timeframe (influx or budgets?) 
How do you plan for long term scenarios? 
For example: how would you plan to implement 
large scale systems for the long term? (ie. Solar 
system) 
Could changing the business model help to 
improve the work for the longer term? (ie. 
==PAGE:149==
147
147
 
service contract vs. fixed asset) 
What is data is available, and how do you 
collect it? 
Who collects the data? 
What type of data is there? And what is 
missing? 
What type of data would you like to have? And 
why? 
Access to budgets / Database. Who is the 
contact person or organisation? 
 
Users from household visit 
Collect coordinates of every household that we visit and interview. 
Also collect the coordinate of the water pump that the household uses.  
Ask if we are allowed to take a photo of how they store and transport the water. Notice 
things with regards to hygiene solutions (a lit / tap) or  
 
Open  
Deep 
After our introduction: do you collect water for 
your family? 
 
How big is your household? And how many 
people use the water that you collect? 
How do you collect the water? 
And do you walk to the water pump?  
Do you bring one jerry can?  
How long does it take? What takes long / short? 
How many times? How long does it last?  
If not: who does? Or: why not? 
Do you think you have enough water at home? 
 
Would you collect water if the collecting of water 
was easier, would you then do it? 
 
 
 
Users at the borehole with hand water pump 
Focussed on the organisation around the borehole and the use of the water pump. 
Here (unexpected) observations and insights will be gathered.  
 
Open  
Deep 
For the user collecting water: are you collecting 
this water for your family? 
 
How big is your household? And how many 
people use the water that you collect? 
How do you collect the water? 
And do you walk to the water pump?  
Do you bring one jerry can?  
How long does it take? What takes long / short? 
How many times? How long does it last?  
Is there always water? 
==PAGE:150==
148
 
If not: when is there no water? 
For the user pumping: are you pumping water 
only for yourself? 
How long do you pump? 
Do you take shifts? 
Why are you pumping for yourself? 
 
Users at the borehole with generator / automatic water pump 
Ask questions to figure out if they have used different solutions and what their opinion is 
about them.  
 
Open  
Deep 
For the user collecting water: are you collecting 
this water for your family? 
 
How big is your household? And how many 
people use the water that you collect? 
How do you collect the water? 
And do you walk to the water pump?  
Do you bring one jerry can?  
How long does it take? What takes long / short? 
How many times? How long does it last?  
Is there always water? 
If not: when is there no water? 
For the user pumping: are you pumping water 
only for yourself? 
How long do you pump? 
Do you take shifts? 
Why are you pumping for yourself? 
 
Borehole groups 
Open  
Deep 
What is the purpose of the group? 
What do you do? What are your tasks? 
What are your responsibilities as a group? 
With how many are you? Only woman or 
mixed? 
How much do you cover? (ie. one borehole or a 
small village) 
How is it formed? 
Was it a request? Or a own initiative? 
Did you get any help forming the group? 
Do the pumps break down often? 
What are the reasons for breaking down? 
Is it easy to repair? 
Does the repair takes long? 
What are your resources? 
Are you supplied with tools and parts? 
Do you have a contact with DRC? 
Do you collect any money from the users? 
Do you get any budget or reward for doing this? 
 
==PAGE:151==
149
149
 
Page 1 of 4 
 
 
 
Agenda 
1. Silent prayer moment and introduction 
2. Update from zonal leaders; 
3. Update on water motorization, piped network ongoing and commitments; 
4. Follow-up bloody diarrhoea action points and last WASH coordination meeting. 
5. Communication 
6. AOB 
 
Details 
Action 
 points 
Action 
who/when 
2.Update from Partners (Zonal leaders) on WASH  
 
Zone 1:  
 
Water 
 
Number of HHs: 11450;  average water production per day: 
1018,5 m3; Water coverage: 18.19 l/p/d; Number of Hand 
pump point: 42;  Total number of water point: 98; Persons / 
Water point: 584;  
 
Sanitation: 
 
Number of usable com latrines: 72; Number of person/usable 
com toilets: 485; Number of usable PSN latrines: 210; Number 
of usable family toilets: 3707;  
Crude HH coverage: 38.1% 
Number of HP: 98 
. 
 
 
 
 
1. Inside painting of the water 
trucks. 
 
For any inside painting of the water 
trucks, the driver should inform 
NRC and OXFAM for advice on 
which paint should be used to avoid 
the water contamination. 
 
 
 
2. Loss of treated water at the 
distribution points. 
 
To monitor the leakage of the taps 
at the distribution points and inform 
the partner in charge of the 
reparation; 
To improve the quality of taps; 
To involve the trucks’ drivers, so 
that they could report on any 
 
 
 
 
NRC 
OXFAM 
 
On regular basis 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NRC 
OXFAM 
Zonal Chair persons 
 
 
 
 
WASH COORDINATION MINUTES NOTE  OF 28/04/2017 
Location 
UNHCR Bidibidi Office 
Date 
Friday 28/04/2017 
Time 
10:00 - 12:00 
Members 
UNHCR, CRS, OXFAM, NRC,   DRC, SP, WMU, MSF, WHH, Malteser, Marian Brothers – Africa 
Directo, OPM, ACF, URCS, PI, PWJ, MB, ADRA, Here is Life, GRC, DTU. 
12.8. WASH SECTOR COORDINATION MEETING MINUTES
Every week a WASH sector coordination meeting is organised between the different 
organisations in order to share challenges, concerns and data, and to align work by 
communicating. During the field trip two of those meetings have been attended from 
which the minutes of the first, on the 28th of April, are featured below. It shows what is 
being said, but also what data is shared between organisation.
==PAGE:152==
150
 
Page  of 4 
Zone 2 & 4:   
 
Zone 2: 
 
Water production: 
No of HHs 11043; Water from trucking: 334000L; Water from 
Hand Pumps: 134,400 L; Water from tap stands: 302,000 L; 
TOTAL Volume supplied: 770,400L; Water coverage: 13.9 
L/P/D. 
 
Water sources: 
No of tanks in use 21; No of Hand pump point 14; No of tap 
stand: 12; Total No of water point: 47; Persons / Water point: 
1175. 
 
Sanitation: 
No of usable com toilets 220; No of person per usable 
communal toilets: 208; No of usable family toilets: 2605; No 
per usable family toilet: 5; Crude HH coverage: 23.5%; HP: 
143. 
 
Zone 4: 
 
Water production: 
No of HHs 10088; Water from trucking: 485,000L; Water from 
Hand Pumps: 124,800 L; Water from tap stands: 70,000 L; 
TOTAL Volume supplied: 679,800L; Water coverage: 13.4 
L/P/D. 
 
Water sources: 
No of tanks in use: 23; No of Hand pump point: 13; No of tap 
stands: 12; Total No of water point: 48; Persons / Water point: 
1050. 
 
Sanitation: 
No of usable com toilets: 1340; No of person per usable 
communal toilets: 36; No of usable family toilets: 647; No per 
usable family toilet: 5; Crude HH coverage: 6.4%; HP: 88.  
 
Zone 3:  
 
Number of HHs: 11200;  average water production per day: 
1227 m3; Water coverage: 22 l/p/d; Number of Hand pump 
point: 26;  Total number of water point: 63; Persons / Water 
point: 888;  
 
Sanitation: 
 
Number of usable com toilets: 1245; Number of person/usable 
com toilets: 35; Number of usable family toilets: 2362;  
Crude HH coverage: 25% 
Number of HP: 145. 
 
Zone 5:  
 
Water: 
 
Number of HHs: 10, 000;  average water production per day: 
834.6 m3; Water coverage: 16.7 l/p/d; Number of Hand pump 
point: 16;   Total number of water point: 49; Persons / Water 
point: 1020; 
leakage. 
 
 
 
 
 
3. WASH assessment in the 
schools 
 
To conduct the WASH assessment 
in the schools in order to determine 
the needs and gaps in WASH 
packages provided in the schools. 
The priority is given for the Zone III 
where many complains are and 
where the average of the drinking 
water is high: 22 l/p/d. 
 
 
 
 
4. Hand over between DRC and 
CRS of the WASH activities in 
Zone V. 
 
To track the handing over of the 
Hygiene promotors from the DRC 
to CRS according to the dispatched 
list. 
Advice was given that: it could be 
better to have a joint meeting 
between DRC, CRS and Red Cross 
to recruit the HP according to the 
location where they are working; 
not on the basis of a simple list. 
 
 
5. Water points area distribution. 
 
To provide to the Partners the 
updated list of the water points 
distribution including the location of 
the high yield boreholes. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
UNHCR  
All partners 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
UNHCR 
OPM, IFRC 
ARC, SP 
DRC, NRC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
UNHCR 
Water District 
Officer 
==PAGE:153==
151
151
 
Page  of 4 
 
Sanitation: 
 
Number of usable communal latrines:  77; 	e of usable 
family latrines: 2713; Crude HH coverage: 59.3%; HP: 64. 
 
3. Follow up of exit water trucking 
strategy plan 
 
 
The water trucking exit plan shall be 
preceded in all zones.  
 
To continue with the motorisation of high 
yield boreholes. 
 
58 water trucks are on ground 
 
 
 
 
 
 
All Partners who has a 
budget for the 
motorisation. 
 
 
 
 
4. Key action points from last 
coordination meeting 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Water motorisation & piped networks 
 
 
Zone I:  
 
5 Motorised systems: 3 fully functional, 1 semi functional 
and 1 in installation. 
 
 
 
 
WMU  
 
 
Zone II: 
 
1 Motorised system: Layout submitted 
1 Motorised system: Currently not working; a new pump 
testing is planned next week. 
 
 
 
OXFAM  
MSF 
 
Zone III: 
 
1 Motorised system: started working on 27 May 2017 
2 Motorised system: Layout to be submitted 
1 Motorised system: The contractor is ready and is 
bringing the materials 
1 Motorised system: Semi functional 
1 Motorised system: Layout and contractor are ready but 
still waiting for funds. 
2 Motorised systems: Pump testing ongoing and will 
finish next week 
 
Malteser 
WHH 
 
OXFAM 
NRC 
PWJ 
 
Malteser 
Zone IV & Annexe: 
 
1 Motorised system: in installation 
1 Motorised system: Layout to be submitted 
1 Motorised system: Semi functional  
 
 
Malteser 
WHH 
NRC 
 
 
Zone V:  
 
1 Motorised system: The contractor is ready and is 
bringing the materials 
1 Motorised system: Layout submitted, waiting for full 
installation (ongoing construction of the tanks tower) in 
Yangani 
1 Borehole to be motorised if the yield is high. 
 
 
OXFAM 
 
Malteser 
 
 
Malteser 
==PAGE:154==
152
 
Page 4 of 4 
Commitments 
1. Funds are available for drilling 2 boreholes with 
target of the Zone 4. 
 
2. Funds are available for the motorisation of 2 
high yield boreholes in 2017. But only one is 
currently approved. 
 
3. Funds received and ready to use for drilling 10 
boreholes. The planning is to fill the gaps in any 
Zone. The project will start on 01/05/2017. 
 
ACF 
 
 
SP 
 
 
Plan International 
AOB: 
1. MSF is requesting for security reason, the improvement of the access and the compound of the water point in 
Zone 2 to allow the safe water trucking. AIRD will assist them on this issue; 
2. MSF is handing over all their activities to OXFAM by 31/05/2017. It is noted that in Zone 4 Annexe, PSN latrines 
will be left out. 
3. MSF reported that 3 trucks from Red Cross were supplied raw water from Nile in the Invepi settlements (Note that: 
the deep investigation is needed because the reporter didn’t witness on this supply and no person contact on this 
issue was given. The reason to report on this is purely a health concern). 
4. The WASH meeting hosted 2 Researchers from Denmark’s Technical University (DTU) which is collaborating with 
the DRC. The team is ahead of the Grundfos team who is arriving next week. The purpose of their mission is to 
address technical and innovative options for water supply technologies. 
List of attendance: 
1. Apollinaire Niyonzima 
UNHCR 
2. Krischan Makowka 
GRC 
3. Kasereka Edison  
SP 
4. Almudena de las Heras 
MB 
5. Kim Comer 
 
MSF 
6. John Joshua 
 
ACF 
7. Bukenya Paddy  
ADRA 
8. Agotre Peter 
 
DRC 
9. John Paul Mugo  
DRC 
10. Omara William 
 
WHH 
11. Ariku Richard 
 
PI 
12. Chesang Jonah  
CRS 
13. Benjamin Holm  
DTU 
14. Iskandar Tange  
DTU 
15. Okello Stephen  
Malteser 
16. Obbo Michael Okoth 
NRC 
17. Megumi Yamamoto 
PWJ 
 
==PAGE:155==
153
153
12.9. JOINT PRESENTATION AFTER FIELD TRIP
This is the hand-out of the debrief field trip presentation on the 15th of May for the 
shared project group. It served the purpose of summarizing and explaining the work that 
has been carried out. 
Rethinking water provision systems 
in refugee settlements in Bidibidi, 
Northern Uganda  
Debrief field trip 
Benjamin Holm & Iskandar Tange 
15th of May 2017 
Copenhagen 
1
Main activities
2
• Global solar & water initiative 
• WASH Sector Coordination Meeting 
• Visiting boreholes and water pumps 
• Focus group discussions with water committees 
• Questionnaire 
• Focus group discussion with beneficiaries 
And ongoing during the whole trip: 
• Informal meetings with stakeholders 
• Data collection 
2
Overview of the trip
3
The field trip took place in the following places: 5 days in Kampala, 2 in Arua and 7 in Koboko 
which is 1,5 hours drive from the Bidibidi refugee settlement. 
Uganda map
Bidibidi settlement
3
Global solar & water initiative
4
Set up to provide support for the implementation of solar power in refugee and development 
settings. IOM (International Organization for Migration) is lead, and ECHO is funding. 
The aim of the initiative: 
• Provide tools and support 
• Facilitate coordination 
• Investment in research 
• Build local capacity 
• Spread awareness 
• Mobilize existing resources 
Key learnings: Solar powered pumps are already the go-to solution in many refugee settings. 
Proven to have a break even point with generator systems of 1-4 years.  
4
WASH Sector Coordination Meeting
5
Weekly coordination meeting between the WASH experts of the different organizations. 
Between the 15 and 20 members are present to make sure that activities are aligned and issues 
are shared.  
Key learnings: 
• Knowledge and data sharing difficulties 
• Projects are handed over between partners 
• Water is still a problem and too many people per pump 
• Hygiene is a pressing issue 
• Transition from water trucking to motorized pumps at high yield boreholes 
5
Visiting boreholes and water pumps
6
Visits to a variety of water points and water pumps to get a better understanding of the system, 
the context and use. This was also a great opportunity to talk to the operators and the DRC 
Wash officers on the go.  
Type of systems that were included: 
Hand pump
Solar pump
Diesel generator
Surface water  
treatment plant
Water trucking
6
==PAGE:156==
154
Focus group discussion with  
water committees
7
Water committees are formed at the request of the managing NGO to manage the pumping/tap 
site. They are the focal point of the community and the link between the NGOs and the users. 
Key learning: They are willing and able to put time and effort into the maintenance of the 
systems, but require more training and equipment. The issue of possible over-chlorination comes 
up a lot, however this may be the result of limited understanding. 
7
Questionnaire | Introduction
8
The questionnaire was developed in collaboration with DRC, and the survey was conducted with 
the help of 16 enumerators. 
Number of households: 400 
Number of people included: 2896 
The survey is performed in zone 1, and the number of households are based on a 95% 
confidence interval. 
8
Questionnaire | Preparation
9
A part of the development/preparation of the questionnaire, three household visits were 
conducted to test and adjust the questions. This resulted in new phrasing of questions as well as 
the addition and removal of questions. 
A training session was conducted with the enumerators, to ensure a good understanding of the 
questions and agreement on the translation to arabic. 
9
Questionnaire | Results
10
A questionnaire was used to gather quantitative data on the use of water in the settlement. 
Results are still to be analysed. 
10
Focus group 
discussion with users
11
Focus group discussion with three groups: youth, 
women and men, respectively with 12, 13 and 11 
persons. The goal is to get a better user 
understanding and to identify challenges and 
opportunities with the use of design tools which 
helps tacit and deep knowledge surface.  
Key learnings 
• The water supply is not sufficient (empty 
boreholes and water tanks) 
• Main concerns about the level of chlorine in the 
water supply.  
• Desire to use the water for other purposes like 
farming when supplied with enough
11
Greetings from Uganda
12
12
==PAGE:157==
155
155
==PAGE:158==
156
==PAGE:159==
==PAGE:160==
