==PAGE:1==
Master’s Thesis:
Development of a holistic framework for supply
chain responsiveness
Submission date June 6, 2017
Student:
Supervisor:
Fabrizio Ferraresi
Zaza Nadja Lee Herbert-Hansen
s150905
==PAGE:2==
Supply Chain Responsiveness Framework
Executive Summary
Supply chain responsiveness is a topic of current interest. To date, globalization,
and expansion are transforming supply chains. These trends are changing the rule
of the game in the market and are creating new issues that need to be managed.
Moreover, customer attitudes are also changing due to the evolution of the market.
Today companies aiming at gaining competitive advantage must rethink the way
they are running, both internally and externally in their network. Supply chains
must enhance their responsiveness ability to deal with disruptions and market
changes, thus to ensure customer timing satisfaction, no matter which events
occur in their environment.
The paper is, therefore, analyzing supply chain responsiveness seeking to answer
to the following research questions: "Which capabilities should a company de-
velop, adjust and integrate to be responsive in a dynamic environment?" and
"How should a company exploit its resources to be responsive in a dynamic
environment?"
The paper develops the analysis over supply chain responsiveness investigating
the literature related to the topic. This being done by extracting every related
element with the aim of creating a holistic view of the subject. It proposes a frame-
work where all the items have been categorized. The factors that bring towards or
hinder responsiveness are so divided depending on their effect on it. Elements
without whose actions or presence the responsive goal would be unattainable
are categorized as Enablers. Those which foster and supports responsiveness are
classiﬁed as Drivers. While the factors inﬂuencing the degree of responsiveness
are labeled as Triggers.
Furthermore, the article discloses the interrelations existing between elements.
Linkages binding factors to each other are revealed by literature review and added
to the framework. Thus, the dynamic analysis performed allows a complete
overview of the topic. This analysis highlights how the categorized factors interact
with each other.
The paper introduces a ﬁrst framework exposing the interrelation according to
the literature. It then goes further evaluating other possible dynamisms. A second
framework showing additional linkages that bind SCR elements is proposed so
to improve the whole interconnection. It ensures that all factors are considered:
the cumulative effect of enablers, drivers, and triggers interacting with each other
brings a comprehensive overview of SCR. Through the use of the framework,
companies should understand how to rethink their operation and resources to
reach the responsive goal.
1
==PAGE:3==
Supply Chain Responsiveness Framework
Contents
Article
3
1
Introduction
5
2
Methodology
7
3
Supply chain responsiveness’ variants
11
4
SCR Factors
13
1
Enablers
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
1.1
Demand Anticipation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
1.2
Information System
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
1.3
Manufacturing Flexibility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2
Drivers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.1
Supply Chain Integration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.2
Human Factor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.3
Network - strategic alliance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.4
Advanced Manufacturing Technology (AMT)
. . . . . . . .
19
3
Triggers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.1
Supply Chain Complexity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.2
Supply Chain Strategy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.3
Supply Chain Innovation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.4
Product characteristic
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.5
Product variety . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.6
Postponement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5
Discussion
22
1
Dynamic Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
2
Framework limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
6
Practical implications
28
7
Theoretical implication
30
1
Additional linkages . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
8
Conclusion
32
References
34
2
==PAGE:4==
Supply Chain Responsiveness Framework
Article
This article has been formatted according to the requirements of the International
Journal of Logistics Management.
3
==PAGE:5==
Development of a holistic framework for
supply chain responsiveness
Fabrizio Ferraresi
Department of Management Engineering, Technical University of Denmark
June 6, 2017
Abstract
Purpose — The purpose of this paper is to develop a holistic view of supply chain
responsiveness (SCR), based on a structured literature review.
Design/methodology/approach — A structured literature review is carried out in
order to identify all factors related to supply chain responsiveness, using a combination
of the research-based view and dynamic capabilities approach as the overall framework
wherein to view SCR. Furthermore, a dynamic analysis of the identiﬁed factors is
carried out to deﬁne the interrelation between them.
Findings — This study shows how the responsiveness concept has been characterized
in three different manners by the current body of literature. It then reveals twelve
factors which has been related to supply chain responsiveness. These factors are
divided into three categories; enablers, drivers, and triggers.
Research implications — This paper extend the current knowledge about SCR by
creating a comprehensive study of the topic, resulting in 1) an identiﬁcation and
categorization of inﬂuencing factors and 2) creation of a framework companies can
use to ﬁnd their most advantageous level of SCR.
Practical implications — This paper introduces a framework companies can use
to evaluate their current level of SCR, and details the steps a company needs to take
in order to apply it.
Originality/value — Literature shows a lack of a holistic view on SCR. This paper
aims at developing a detailed overview of the topic including every related factor and
their interrelation, and presents a framework for practitioners wherein to view their
own level of SCR.
Keywords Supply chain responsiveness; Literature Review; Dynamic Analysis
Paper type Research paper
4
==PAGE:6==
Supply Chain Responsiveness Framework
1.
Introduction
Supply chains are becoming increasingly global, mainly due to outsourcing (Kim
et al., 2013b) and a continuously expanding market (Hum and Parlar, 2013). Com-
petition has shifted from being between ﬁrms to being between supply chains; to
succeed a company needs to consider not only its own corporate strategy but also
its supply chain strategy (Kim and Ruby, 2010; Qrunﬂeh and Tarafdar, 2013).
However, history has showed disruptions are increasing in both impact and fre-
quency. Supply chain - designed to perform efﬁciently and effectively in a stable
environment - must be reorganized to handle such unexpected external events.
Companies must therefore consider supply chain disruption as a potential event
(Wagner, 2008). They are forced to mature capabilities and undertake strategies to
tackle these uncertainties (Mandal and Rao Korasiga, 2015). Companies need to
manage this alteration in their business in order to achieve competitive advantages
and survive in today’s fast-changing world. Being able to proactively face these
environmental uncertainties would allow supply chains to responde positively to
these changes or even anticipate them (Mandal, 2015).
Accordingly, in order to gain market share companies must seek ways to address
both alterations in their environment and customers’ changing attitudes. This
means they have to be responsive. This consideration applicable to every type
of company, yet it is most relevant for the fast evolving industries (FEIs). These
businesses are characterised by a high degree of innovation, broad product diver-
sity and increasingly mature customers (Sabet et al., 2016). As a consequence, in
FEIs the responsive capability is required to handle their product variety together
with their mature customer’s changing attitudes. The Fast Moving Customer
Goods (FMCG) segment falls within this category and plays a signiﬁcant role in
the responsiveness object (Nehzati et al., 2014).
In this paper, the concept of supply chain responsiveness (SCR) has been analysed
according to the following deﬁnition "Responsiveness is the ability to respond purpose-
fully and within an appropriate timescale to customer demand or shifts in the marketplace,
to bring about or maintain competitive advantage" (Holweg, 2005b). Supply chain
responsiveness is, therefore, one of the main tools a company has in order to
stay in the market and reach the competitive edge needed to succeed against
competitors. Gunasekaran et al. (2008) in their analysis of responsive supply chain
highlight several factors that are essential for the success of this supply chain
type. They can be grouped by their respective scopes: the importance of clear
and fast communication (i.e. timely information sharing, reducing lead times for
information ﬂows), the importance of fast production (i.e. reducing lead times
for material ﬂows, shortening the total cycle time and ﬂexible capacity), and the
importance of the different nodes of the supply chain to act in cohesion (i.e. coor-
5
==PAGE:7==
Supply Chain Responsiveness Framework
dinating the workﬂow at different tiers of the network, integrating information
about operations, reducing redundant roles and good decision support system).
Moreover, the whole shift in the supply chain environment described is bringing
a high degree of complexity. A large part of this complexity is represented by
the interconnection between ﬁrms that characterize supply chains, combined
with the high level of risk and uncertainties. International supply chains rely on
different actors to be able to deliver ﬁnish goods (Kim et al., 2013b). Therefore,
the network is a crucial element when aiming to reach the right level of ﬂexibility
and responsiveness to compete in the market (Nehzati et al., 2015). This increased
complexity is deeply altering supply chains, and it is making them more exposed
to changes and disruptions (Mandal et al., 2010).
Supply chain responsiveness literature is increasing and mainly conceptual. It
shows numerous relatively limited research studies which are usually supported
by case studies. The majority of papers shows a situation in a speciﬁc industry
(Catalan and Kotzab, 2003; Droge et al., 2004) or country (Bahrin et al., 2016;
Handﬁeld and Bechtel, 2002; Moyano-Fuentes et al., 2016; Qrunﬂeh and Tarafdar,
2013; Sukati et al., 2012) and tries to give general advice or solution based on
them. On the other hand, literature having broader scopes theoretically address
elements lying behind the SCR concept. The current body of literature lacks a
complete overview of factors that enable trigger and drive companies towards
responsiveness.
This paper addresses this research gap by developing a comprehensive analysis
of a company’s capabilities and assets related to supply chain responsiveness
(see for example Holweg (2005a) for an illustration of the need for research of
this type) thus to develop a comprehensive understanding of the topic. It further
aims to take companies’ networks and industry into consideration, in order to
give guidance on what to do in order to reach the most advantageous level of
responsiveness for a given company.
Consequently, this work aims at answering the following research questions (RQ):
RQ1: "Which capabilities should a company develop, adjust and integrate to be re-
sponsive in a dynamic environment?"
RQ2: "How should a company exploit its resources to be responsive in a dynamic envi-
ronment?"
The paper aims at developing a holistic (i.e. comprehensive, complete) framework
describing what factor inﬂuence the development of a responsive supply chain
and how these are related to each other. This can be used by companies to deter-
mine what steps they can undertake to increase their level of responsiveness - if
6
==PAGE:8==
Supply Chain Responsiveness Framework
relevant for them to do so.
This paper is structured as follows. Section 2 presents the methodology used to
develop this work, followed by a discussion of the current research in this area.
Section 4 depicts the different characterizations of supply chain responsiveness
that literature has made. The four subsequent sections detail each factor related
to SCR, dividing them into categories. Section 9 illustrates the SCR framework,
followed by a detailed description for companies of the steps for using the frame-
work. Finally, areas for further research in this area are detailed, followed by a
conclusion.
2.
Methodology
The analysis of the supply chain responsiveness carried out in this paper follows
the approach depicted in Figure 1. The research approach shows the structure
of the process undertaken from the identiﬁcation of the problem to the solution
proposal. The starting point - discussed in the introduction - depicts the current
situation of supply chains and supply chain trends. The problem is then exhibited,
and a proposal on how to tackle it is developed. Eventually the four-phase process
ends with the contribution that this paper gives to the subject.
The literature review conducted for the development of this paper followed the
guidelines depicted by Rowley and Slack (2004). It can be split into two stages:
the literature research and the analysis of what was found. The determination
of the source material has been done in different steps. Firstly, an identiﬁcation
of the relevant documents (i.e. journal articles, reports, books, and dissertations)
has been made by a research done using DTU Findit, the library database of
the Technical University of Denmark (DTU). Followed by the same research in
scientiﬁc databases (ResearchGate and Scopus were used). Different was the the
nature of the keywords used for the research. At the beginning literature related
solely to "supply chain responsiveness" were selected.
Secondly, following the so-called pearl growing citation method, more literature
were collected: after an evaluation of the relevance of the articles found, the
following steps were taken: (1) going backward and checking what papers these
articles referred to, brought more materials to be analysed and (2) going forwards
by reviewing articles previously identiﬁed. This, allowed a conspicuous amount
of relevant literature to be identiﬁed (Rowley and Slack, 2004).
Lastly, all discovered documents were reviewed to determine their relevance in
relation to the research aim of this paper. Literature was deemed if: the examina-
tion of frameworks having responsiveness either as a driver for the achievement
of something broader or as the chase element; and the development of the supply
7
==PAGE:9==
Supply Chain Responsiveness Framework
Figure 1: Research Approach
8
==PAGE:10==
Supply Chain Responsiveness Framework
Step I
Step II
Research Topics
SCR
SCR Application and Related Topic
Search Terms
"Supply chain responsiveness"
OR "Customer responsiveness"
OR "Responsive supply chain"
E.g. "Postponement", Modularization"
OR
e.g. "Supply Chain integration",
"Information System"
AND "Responsiveness"
Scientiﬁc Database
Research Gate,
DTU Findit, Scopus
Research Gate, DTU Findit
Exclusion Criteria
How in depth the concept of
supply chain responsiveness
is presented
How in depth the concept of supply
chain responsiveness is related
Detail Analysis
Literature review based analysis,
Survey/Data based analysis,
Proposed Framework
Survey/Data based analysis,
Proposed Framework
Skimmed Articles
95
89
Relevant Articles
82
40
Final Articles
60
31
Table 1: Search results
chain responsiveness concept through literature or industry’s surveys.
In parallel with the research around the SCR topic, papers which investigate topics
that could be considered applications of SCR (e.i. postponement, modularization)
and documents regarding factors already shown to be related to SCR have also
been researched. This parallel action was done to expand the literature base with
relevant papers as well as to seek new elements that could bring responsiveness.
Table 1 shows the results of the literature identiﬁcation process.
The ﬁrst research round yielded 95 documents of different nature, even though
the majority were journal articles. An analysis of their content was conducted
lowering the amount to 82 publications. The ﬁnal deep examination was done
on 60 journal articles. In the second round more than half of the publications
were excluded from the analysis (i.e. 89 researched document and only 40 were
relevant). An analysis of these 40 documents showed several had only a very
loose connection to SCR. Eventually, 31 publications were selected for in-depth
analysis, here again, mostly articles.
From a theoretical point of view, the study uses a combination of the resource-
based view (RBV) and dynamic capabilities theory to analyse the current body
of literature on SCR. The RBV argues that companies’ competitive advantages
can be attained by properly deploying its resources and capabilities, which are
valuable, often rare, not substitutable and difﬁcult to imitate (Barney, 1991; Barney
9
==PAGE:11==
Supply Chain Responsiveness Framework
et al., 2001). This theory was subsequently advanced through the development
of dynamic capabilities. According to this theory, a company must reconﬁgure,
built, develop and integrate its internal and external resources and competencies
to match its dynamic environment (Teece et al., 1997).
The extent to which a company can compete in the market in term of respon-
siveness relies upon its ability to suitably deploy its resources and capabilities
according to the situation. Having the right resources in place would allow the
company to positively tackle uncertainties in the marketplace. Furthermore, pos-
sessing and developing the appropriate capabilities would ease a quick reaction
to unexpected events, thus allowing companies to promptly respond to them.
Tangible assets - like technologies and facilitators - and intangible capabilities -
like IT infrastructures and relationships with actors - are essential when a com-
pany aims at enabling a responsive supply chain (Roh et al., 2014). Supply chain
responsiveness can, therefore, be seen as both results of company’s resources
and dynamic capabilities. This is why assets are essential to undertake the right
decision in this context. While, on other hand, dynamic capabilities are required
to facilitate the reconﬁguration of resources when needed, the alteration of current
processes (Zollo and Winter, 2002) is needed to proﬁt from environmental threats
(Dyer and Singh, 1998; Teece, 2007).
As stated above, environmental uncertainties need to be positively managed;
thus dynamic capabilities are essential when aiming at responsiveness to create
competitive advantage. Moreover, since the concept of responsiveness refers to
companies’ reaction to external changes and events, it can be conceptualized
as a dynamic capabilities itself (Kim et al., 2013a). Despite this, the elements
lying behind how companies react are also related to tangible assets like human
resources and partners. It is, therefore, essential to utilize a mixture between the
two theories to analyse the whole supply chain responsiveness concept (Mandal
et al., 2010). Accordingly, this paper argues that supply chain responsiveness is a
capability that enables organization to sustain a competitive advantage.
Companies possess resources which can be hardly replicable and adaptable to
other businesses. When these are exploited in a way that provides a marketplace
advantage, they increase companies competitive position. These resources should
be carefully developed: ﬁrms should leverage core resources and foster capabili-
ties that competitors ﬁnd hard to imitate (Kearns and Lederer, 2003).
The last analysis performed in relation to the SCR concept is to study to which
extent the identiﬁed resources and capabilities related to SCR are interconnected.
Their linkages will be examined through a dynamic analysis aiming to reveal the
interrelationships found through the literature review. These interconnections will
identify links which either foster or inhibit responsiveness in the supply chain.
10
==PAGE:12==
Supply Chain Responsiveness Framework
The dynamic analysis aims to reveal the causal links that connect couples of factors.
It consists in pinpointing the dynamics that occur in the SCR system (Forrester,
2007). Dynamic hypotheses are raised and highlighted as connections. A dynamic
hypothesis explains the dynamics as endogenous (e.i. arising from within) conse-
quences of a factor. The outcome of the dynamic analysis will be the development
of a framework showing the key factors and their dynamics. Dynamic hypotheses
are used to analyze the behavior of a system. These are dynamic as they reveal
the dynamism underlying SCR. Further, it is about hypothesizing as the analysis
unveils links that can be subjected to revision, as a real-world application of the
model can alter what projected by literature. Consequently, the dynamic analysis
reports the dynamics of the systems through the interaction of the represented
factors. The casual diagram notation is used to describe framework’s dynamics.
It consists of variables (factors) connected by arrows indicating the casual con-
nections among them (Sterman, 2000). The dynamic analysis, therefore, allows
a deeper understanding of the topic showing the overall situation and not just
what elements are acting towards the responsiveness goal. The analysis of how
these factors interact with each other provides a new point of view for ﬁrms to
understand and alter its resources and capabilities to better meet their objectives.
3.
Supply chain responsiveness’ variants
The complex concept of supply chain responsiveness has been studied and broken
down into components in order to explain it better. Current literature does not
provide a unique characterization of SCR. However, the analysed body of litera-
ture highlights three different classiﬁcations of responsiveness.
Thatte et al. (2013) and Sukati et al. (2012) used the three primary elements
of the supply chain - operation, logistic, and supplier network - to point out the
different types of responsiveness.
Operations system responsiveness
Operations system responsiveness refers to the manufacturing ability - of a sup-
plier or manufacturer - to tackle variations in customer demand. It encompasses
the actions of quickly reconﬁguring operations and assets of the system to cope
with these changes. The demand can vary in terms of product volume or type:
production can be asked to modify production levels for a speciﬁc product or
shift rapidly from manufacturing one product to another. Accordingly, the respon-
siveness of an operations system can be seen as the manufacturing capability of
both rapidly responding to sudden events and quickly accommodating unusual
customer demand.
11
==PAGE:13==
Supply Chain Responsiveness Framework
Logistics process responsiveness
Logistics process responsiveness refers to the ability to address demand changes
through company’s storage systems, distribution, and transportation. It includes
the activities of packaging, warehousing and freight. The focus is on the com-
pany’s responsiveness aptitude to satisfy customers’ changing needs and disrup-
tion in the environment through logistic ﬂexibility. This can be done by arranging
warehouse size, managing an extended products range, modifying transportation
types or even packing at the least possible moment to satisfy the latest demand
change.
Supplier network responsiveness
Supplier network responsiveness refers to the ability of a company to positively
react to changes in its network. Partnering up - both downstream and upstream -
with responsive actors brings responsiveness to the whole chain. The extent to
which a company can behave in a responsive way strongly rely on the responsive
capabilities of its suppliers and their manufacturing systems. Therefore, SCR it is
also a matter of supplier selection. The supplier network is an essential source
of ﬂexibility. It supports the value chain when unexpected events and changes
occur, thereby increasing its responsive capability. Supply network responsiveness,
consequently, extends the two previous responsiveness types to all supply chain
actors in order to generate SCR (Sukati et al., 2012; Thatte et al., 2013).
Literature shows a second classiﬁcation where supply chain responsiveness is
divided into product, process and volume responsiveness (Gunasekaran et al.,
2007; Holweg, 2005b) (see Figure 2). Product factors relies on product’s char-
acteristics in terms of standardization of its components and points to product
customization. Product variety as it is perceived both internally and externally
inﬂuences supply chain responsiveness. Process factors rely on manufacturing
ﬂexibility abilities to tackle uncertainties. Finally, volume factor taclkes variability
in demand. Customers’ attitude can quickly change nature and size, in response
companies need to adjust the output of their system and its delivery (Yusuf et al.,
2003).
The last characterization of SCR presents four ﬂexibility types which allow re-
sponsiveness (see Figure 2): product, mix, volume and delivery (Gunasekaran
et al., 2007; Nehzati et al., 2015; Rajesh, 2015; Reichhart et al., 2008). Product
ﬂexibility refers to the ability of the manufacturing processes to change an existing
product or introduce a new one. Mix responsiveness plays a role in the ability of
a manufacturing system to alter the mix of products delivered within the existing
range. Volume dimension describes to what extent the supply chain is able to alter
12
==PAGE:14==
Supply Chain Responsiveness Framework
Figure 2: SCR classiﬁcation relations
its output. Lastly, delivery responsiveness describes the ability to alter delivery
arrangements in response to external stimulus.
In this paper the ﬁrst characterization of SCR, e.g. responsiveness as the com-
bination of operation, logistic process, and delivery dimensions, is used. This
is because, in relation to the scope of this paper, the ﬁrst classiﬁcation gives
the most comprehensive representation of the SCR concept. Figure 2 represents
the different classiﬁcations and how their elements overlap: it shows how the
ﬁrst characterization covers the whole SCR, while the others presents repeated
elements. Aiming at developing a holistic framework, all of these typologies
presented above need to be included.
4.
SCR Factors
The literature review revealed several factors related to supply chain respon-
siveness. These have been divided into three categories: enablers, drivers, and
triggers.
Enablers are factors which existence and action is a necessary but not sufﬁcient
condition for a company to positively and rapidly react to unexpected events or
changes. They are elements that enable a supply chain to be responsive; with-
13
==PAGE:15==
Supply Chain Responsiveness Framework
out these, a supply chain would struggle to chase responsiveness (see Table 2).
Drivers are factors which allow supply chains to become responsive more easily,
they support SCR accomplishment (see Table 3).Lastly, Triggers represent those
elements and actions with the ability to foster or hinder responsiveness depending
on their characteristic and level. It is not the presence or absence of a trigger that
allows supply chain responsiveness but it is the entities’ characteristic and scope
that ease them in being responsive (see Table 4). The following tables detail the
identiﬁed enablers, drivers, and triggers related to supply chain responsiveness
and are detailed in the following sub-sections.
SCR related factors
Deﬁnition
SCR Impact
References
Demand Anticipation
The extent to which customer
demand can be accurately fore-
casted
+
(Gunasekaran et al., 2007; Holweg, 2005a; Minnich and Maier, 2006; Rajesh,
2015)
Information System
IT infrastructure that creates
linkage throughout the supply
chain, allowing and fostering in-
formation sharing
+
(Backhouse et al., 2016; Cai et al., 2016; Catalan and Kotzab, 2003; Ghosh
et al., 2014; Gunasekaran et al., 2007; Gunasekaran et al., 2008; Hoffman
and Mehra, 2000; Kim and Ruby, 2010; Lau and Lee, 2000; Lin et al., 2002;
Mandal et al., 2010; McMichael et al., 2000; Ngai et al., 2011; Rajesh, 2015;
Roh et al., 2014; Sinha et al., 2015; Stank et al., 1996; Thatte et al., 2013; Wu
et al., 2006)
Manufacturing Flexibility
Manufacturing ability to react
to internal issues or demand
changes.
+
(Backhouse et al., 2016; Duclos et al., 2003; Gunasekaran et al., 2007; Holweg,
2005a; Kim et al., 2013b; McMichael et al., 2000; Nehzati et al., 2014; Nehzati
et al., 2015; Ngai et al., 2011; Reichhart et al., 2006; Squire et al., 2009; White,
1998)
Table 2: SCR Enablers
SCR related factors
Deﬁnition
SCR Impact
References
AMT
Manufacturing advanced pro-
cesses that allow ﬂexibility in the
chain
+
(Kim et al., 2013b; Kumar and Motwani, 1995; Moyano-Fuentes et al., 2016;
Roh et al., 2014)
Human Factor
Human resource characteristics
and attitude: managers’ compe-
tencies and skillset of workers
+
(Backhouse et al., 2016; McGinnis and Vallopra, 1999; McMichael et al., 2000;
Ngai et al., 2011)
Network - strategic alliance
Strength and cohesion of the re-
lationship between actors in the
chain
+
(Bahrin et al., 2016; Cai et al., 2016; Christopher, 2000; Fynes et al., 2004;
Gunasekaran et al., 2008; Handﬁeld and Bechtel, 2002; Hoffman and Mehra,
2000; Kim and Ruby, 2010; Li et al., 2006; Mandal et al., 2010; McMichael
et al., 2000; Nehzati et al., 2015; Qrunﬂeh and Tarafdar, 2013; Rajesh, 2015;
Roh et al., 2014; Sinha et al., 2015; Squire et al., 2009; Thatte et al., 2013)
Supply Chain Integration
Level of organization alignment
- both internal and external - be-
tween roles and processes
+
(Backhouse et al., 2016; Boon-itt and Yew Wong, 2011; Burcu Balcik et al.,
2015; Catalan and Kotzab, 2003; Danese et al., 2013; Droge et al., 2004; Ghosh
et al., 2014; Gunasekaran et al., 2007; Gunasekaran et al., 2008; Moyano-
Fuentes et al., 2016; Nehzati et al., 2014; Ngai et al., 2011; Sabet et al., 2016;
Sinha et al., 2015; Stank et al., 1996; Sukati et al., 2012)
Table 3: SCR Drivers
14
==PAGE:16==
Supply Chain Responsiveness Framework
SCR related factors
Deﬁnition
SCR Impact
References
Postponement
Action of postponing manufac-
turing processes thus to wait for
the actual demand
+
(Backhouse et al., 2016; Bahrin et al., 2016; Boone et al., 2007; Gunasekaran
et al., 2007; Nehzati et al., 2014; Qrunﬂeh and Tarafdar, 2013)
Product Characteristics
A product can be categorized in
three types. Innovative and hy-
brid products call for a respon-
sive SC more than the other
+
(Fisher, 1997; Roh et al., 2014; Sabet et al., 2016; Wang et al., 2004; Wong
et al., 2006)
Product Variety
The dimension of the product
range a supply chain deal with
-
(Gunasekaran et al., 2007; Holweg, 2005a; Holweg, 2005b; Nehzati et al.,
2014; Randall et al., 2003; Seth and Panigrahi, 2015)
SC Complexity
Dimension and extension of the
chain
-
(Backhouse et al., 2016; Bozarth et al., 2009; Hobday, 1998)
SC Innovation
SC ability to proactively respond
to changes by developing new
product and manufacturing pro-
cesses
+
(Mandal, 2015; Mandal and Rao Korasiga, 2015)
Supply Chain Strategy
Three are the strategies a pro-
duction system can follow. SCR
relies on the strategy the SC is
adopting.
+
(Bahrin et al., 2016; Fisher, 1997; Gunasekaran and Yusuf, 2002; Li et al.,
2009; Lo and M.Power, 2010; Mason-Jones et al., 2000; Naylor et al., 1999;
Qrunﬂeh and Tarafdar, 2013; Rajesh, 2015; Sabet et al., 2016)
Table 4: SCR Triggers
4.1. Enablers
4.1.1. Demand Anticipation
The ﬁrm’s ability to anticipate and track future demand is a clear enabler for
supply chain responsiveness (Rajesh, 2015). A characterization of products which
demand can be more easily forecasted should be done in this context. Thus to
allow the ﬁrm to focus capabilities and resources to tackle unexpected demand of
other products (Gunasekaran et al., 2007).
4.1.2. Information System
The sharing of information between supply chain’s nodes is essential to reach
responsiveness (Stank et al., 1996). The action of building a responsive supply
chain network will allow companies to keep constantly update the supply chain’s
actors with exchange of data. A high degree of visibility is therefore required.
Information interchanges between suppliers and business partners would lead
to a quick and easy access to business data and processes. Communication im-
provement through the use of shared information platform would ease material
ﬂow traceability and eventually result in a reduction of response time to external
requirement (Li et al., 2006).
A information system (IS) should possess both compatibility and interactivity;
these are essential elements to cope with growing complexity of companies and
market(Lau and Lee, 2000). To be effective an IS must be able to coordinate and
monitor the data interchange and avoid any source of misunderstandings. It
should be developed so to overcome any barriers (e.g. cultural, communication
and cross-functional obstacles) (Gunasekaran et al., 2008). In this context Martin
and Grbac (2003) highlight how cross-functional information sharing can ease the
15
==PAGE:17==
Supply Chain Responsiveness Framework
communication between both functional areas of the ﬁrm and suppliers.
It is, therefore, the implementation of an information system that allows the
supply chain network to perform efﬁciently and extend its scope, doing so by
developing an infrastructure able to ease the data exchange between chain’s actors
(Lau and Lee, 2000).
E-Procurement
The development of a complete and extense information system can lead to
greater responsive result if further exploited. Among the e-business technologies,
e-procurement appears to affect supply chain responsiveness positively. The use
of an established IT infrastructure among the nodes of the supply chain brings
cost and time savings to ﬁrms. Using e-procurement supply chains would be able
to purchase material more easily using the IS, enhancing the usual procurement
activities and increasing both control and visibility of the process (Gunasekaran
et al., 2008; Kim et al., 2013b).
Training
The human resources must develop speciﬁc abilities in order to interact with
the information system. The global environment, where existing companies are
playing in, can represent an obstacle for employees to fully understand their
company’s environment. Special education and training are required to allow the
resource to use the system and communicate with other departments properly
(Gunasekaran et al., 2008).
4.1.3. Manufacturing Flexibility
Manufacturing ﬂexibility refers to the ability to adjust assets and operations in
reaction to disruptions in the market. It concerns the capability of changing
equipment, processes, products and people (Duclos et al., 2003).
Manufacturing ﬂexibility from an internal point of view refers to the ability to
react to unforeseen internal events (e.g. machine breakdowns). External ﬂexibility,
on the other hand, calls for responsiveness to customer requirements: it is the
ability that allows a supply chain to act over product characteristic, volume, and
delivery (Holweg, 2005a; Nehzati et al., 2014).
Manufacturing ﬂexibility can intervene over capacity as the ability of the manu-
facturing system to either alter the production level or change type of product.
It allows the manufacturing of different products’ combination. Manufacturing
Flexibility can also intervene over inventory as the ability to transfer material
(from raw material to ﬁnished goods) when requires from the production. Thus
to cover potential availability mismatches in the supply chain. Manufacturing
16
==PAGE:18==
Supply Chain Responsiveness Framework
ﬂexibility in an operational context is related to the different products which
production can take place in different sites with low or zero transition cost. Lastly,
this ﬂexibility activies can intervene over distribution with the degree a ﬁrm
can satisfy changing customer needs altering products’ delivery. Doing so by
exploiting its network’s distribution capabilities. (Nehzati et al., 2015)
4.2. Drivers
4.2.1. Supply Chain Integration
One of the major solutions that literature highlights to master a responsive supply
chain is reaching a high and common degree of integration between all the nodes
involved. Supply chain integration (SCI) calls for intra-organizational linkages and
coordination: the information ﬂow encompasses every actor in the supply chain.
Integrated supply chians can respond better to changes in customer demand, as
well as are able to react quickly to external uncertainties and changes. A company
with an grat integration in its supply chain possesses the organizational links and
overall coordination necessary to be highly responsive (Sabath, 1995).
The concept of integration in the supply chain encompass company’s processes
running both internally and externally, which involved supplier and customers
(Moyano-Fuentes et al., 2016).
Internal Integration
The level of internal integration reﬂects the extent to which an organization
arranges its strategy, activities, and practices in order to allow processes collab-
oration and synchronization. Doing so to fulﬁll customer’ needs and establish
an efﬁcient interaction with suppliers. The ability to streamline communication
abilities and workﬂows facilitates collaboration between both employees and
departments (Moyano-Fuentes et al., 2016; Stank et al., 2011).
External Integration
External integration refers to the need of integrating companies over all the lev-
els of the supply chain. Suppliers integration lead to an enhancement of their
performance and capabilities (Droge et al., 2004). A high degree of alignment
and integration between all the nodes of the supply chain is required to reach
responsiveness (Moyano-Fuentes et al., 2016).
4.2.2. Human Factor
SCR asks for a proactive identiﬁcation of future treats and resources commitment
due to changes. Prerequisites of these actions is the presence of both a suitable
17
==PAGE:19==
Supply Chain Responsiveness Framework
management board and a skilled workforce (Backhouse et al., 2016).
Management competence
Responsiveness relies on management ability to respond to changes. A company
has to alter its resources when an unexpected event occurs in its environment,
thus to reallocate them to better tackle it (Ngai et al., 2011). This decision is made
by managers who should identify which focus put in the reaction to the change.
Therefore, a right management support is essential to deal with disruptions posi-
tively (Backhouse et al., 2016).
SCR requires proactive identiﬁcation of future treats and resources commitment
due to changes. The top management plays a crucial role in the direction the
company undertakes in foresee future events and alter its resources scheduling
(McMichael et al., 2000).
Workforce
A workforce in posses of the right training and education about how to tackle dis-
ruption is a useful resource for the company to seek responsiveness. Multi-skilled
employees enable responsive manufacturing (Backhouse et al., 2016).
4.2.3. Network - strategic alliance
The highly competitive environment companies are facing ask for cooperation
between the actors in the supply chains. Alliances between supply chain partners
lead to higher responsiveness. On the one hand reaching a high level of collabo-
ration allows chain’s entities to strengthen their ties promoting communication,
motivation and information exchange (Squire et al., 2009). On the other, it allows
to increase the awareness of their roles and objectives in the supply chain, thus to
act toward a common goal rather than individual ﬁrms running apart.
The development of strategic alliances allows companies to obtain services they
need to faster respond to market disruption (e.g. partnering with a delivery
company enhance the product delivery time). It provides a high degree of coor-
dination and cooperation which are vital elements in the responsiveness context
(Gunasekaran et al., 2008). The development of a network conﬁguration gener-
ates an aggregation of resources and capabilities able to improve the ability to
positively face customers’ requirements. A network conﬁguration allows greater
ﬂexibility compare to the performance of a single ﬁrm. Therefore, it is crucial for
a supply chain to exploit the beneﬁts coming from ﬁrms’ aggregation, thus to
straighten its responsiveness and ﬂexibility needed in turbulent market conditions
(Nehzati et al., 2015).
18
==PAGE:20==
Supply Chain Responsiveness Framework
Trust
The concept of trust refers to the motivation behind actions undertake by supply
chian’s actors. A supply chain entity acting trustfully will both perform in a way
to bring positive outcomes for the whole chain and never undertake actions that
would damage it. High level of trust leads to better communication and trans-
parency in the network (Mandal et al., 2010). It acts improving the coordination in
the network. Consequently, it helps the responsiveness ability of a supply chain
(Rajesh, 2015).
4.2.4. Advanced Manufacturing Technology (AMT)
Advanced Manufacturing Technology (AMT) has been shown as having a direct
link to supply chain responsiveness. It gives to the production the ability to be
ﬂexible and to increase the productivity if required. These technologies can be
grouped into three different types according to the functions or activities per-
formed: design, manufacturing, and planning. Design AMT enables a reduction
in product’s design cycle times (e.g. CAD). AMT for manufacturing is a set of
technologies that allow scale economies optimizing the production processes.
Lastly, administrative or planning AMT refers to technologies that bring towards
interconnected supply chain enabling better communication (Moyano-Fuentes
et al., 2016). Therefore, AMT reinforces ﬁrms market response by allowing com-
panies to yield both a higher variety of goods and greater volumes (Kim et al.,
2013b).
4.3. Triggers
4.3.1. Supply Chain Complexity
The number of entities that play in the network affect its degree of responsiveness.
Having a large number of ﬁrms involved in the whole manufacturing process (e.g.
suppliers, retailers, etc.) can hinder the coordination between the nodes of the
supply chain (Hobday, 1998). Furthermore, company’s international expansion
raises new issues to deal with (Backhouse et al., 2016). Different languages,
cultures, standards and regulations, along with import/export laws and increasing
geographical distances, are all factors that bring complexity to the supply chain
(Bozarth et al., 2009; Milgate, 2001).
4.3.2. Supply Chain Strategy
The highly competitive and fast changing business environment leaves no space
for companies having little focus on competition. An essential prerequisite to
19
==PAGE:21==
Supply Chain Responsiveness Framework
survive is to ﬁnd the right strategy. A company willing to gain competitive edge
must undertake a severe strategy to compete in the market (Gunasekaran and
Yusuf, 2002).
One of the ﬁrst characterization of the supply chain - which reveals lean and agile
supply chains - was done linking them to the elements they put the focus on
(Fisher, 1997). A lean supply chain is characterized by a focus on quality, time and
cost reduction through the elimination of all non-value adding activities, having a
ﬁxed demand. On the other hand, an agile supply chain puts focus on process
lead-time reduction and fast customer response thus to handle a volatile demand
(Lee, 2004; Naylor et al., 1999). Fisher’s model has been conceived so that the two
typologies are mutually exclusive: ﬁrms need to choose over either being more
efﬁcient (lean) or more responsive to market changes (agile).
It has been shown how in real life several companies do not act following only
one way. Firms sometimes run towards both leanness and agility. This can be
explained by the fact that beneﬁts coming after this two strategies are not unrelated
and incompatible (Lo and M.Power, 2010). This relation brings subsequent studies
considering a new hybrid strategy called after leagile. Along the whole supply
chain there would be operations calling for one of the two strategies; therefore,
having a total supply chain perspective is essential (Naylor et al., 1999). The
extent to which companies would adopt concepts belonging to both agile and lean
manufacturing will depend on the product, process and market characteristics
(Holweg, 2005b).
Applying agile manufacturing systems a company become able to faster respond
to customers’ changing attitude being, therefore, more responsive (Dove, 2005).
This strategy eventually allows supply chains to positively deal with market
disruption giving them the ability to rapidly respond to short-term changes in the
demand (Li et al., 2009; Rajesh, 2015). A company that undertakes a pure agile
manufacturing will focus only on ﬂexibility and speed neglecting the cost factors
lying outside the production. Although this strategy by deﬁnition provides the
capability to rapidly meet changing market needs (Bahrin et al., 2016; Gunasekaran
and Yusuf, 2002), a responsive supply chain must go further.
In the responsiveness context, the decision is upon the strategy a company decides
to follow: if going for a hybrid leagile or a pure agile(Hallgren and Olhager,
2009). An interesting result coming from the research of Bahrin et al. (2016)
reveals how certain lean characteristics positively inﬂuences responsiveness: the
overall enhancement of productivity (i.g. lead-time reduction) and customer
value (Holweg (2005b) endorsed the same relation). Qrunﬂeh and Tarafdar (2013)
further investigates on the linkages between lean supply chain and its responsive
ability demonstrating how strategic supplier partnerships act as the essential
element in this relationship. They show how solely a focus on waste elimination,
20
==PAGE:22==
Supply Chain Responsiveness Framework
without the right partnership, will not lead to responsiveness.
4.3.3. Supply Chain Innovation
In order to gain competitive advantage in the market, manage risks and proactively
meet uncertainties in the business environment, supply chains must be able to
innovate themselves (Mandal and Rao Korasiga, 2015). The ﬁrm’s ability to
innovate and adapt to dynamic changes, providing new product and services,
is a dynamic capability directly related to a business’ adjustment to its dynamic
domain. It is, therefore, also a matter of supply chain innovation when companies
aim at reaching competitiveness: this ability helps companies in positively - or
even proactively - manage alteration in their businesses (Mandal, 2015).
4.3.4. Product characteristic
According to the literature a company can produce three types of product: func-
tional, innovative and hybrid. A functional product’s demand has the property of
being forecast quite accurately. Its market share tends to remain constant. During
its life cycle, furthermore, few are the alterations suffered. On the other hand, an
innovative product is a new type of artifact adapted to customer changing require-
ments (Fisher, 1997). Lastly, a hybrid artifact either uniﬁes these characteristics or
is made of a combination of functional products (Lo and M.Power, 2010).
Wang et al. (2004) linked product type with supply chain strategies pointing out
how a functional product combines better with a lean supply chain. It has char-
acteristics that call for cost efﬁciency more than responsiveness. Being SCR the
focus of this literature analysis, it is arguable that companies producing functional
products will not be the object of the study pursuing the pure efﬁcient strategy.
A responsive supply chain is, therefore, more suitable for companies producing
innovative or customized product which are tailored to customer need and not
standardize (Roh et al., 2014).
Product complexity
The product a company produce can be a very simple one as well as very complex.
The complexity of a product lies behind the number of customized components,
the skills and knowledge required for its production together with the dimension
of the product itself (Backhouse et al., 2016; Hobday, 1998).
4.3.5. Product variety
Product variety indicates the quantity of products that is made available down-
stream the supply chain for the buyers. From the company perspective, it in refers
21
==PAGE:23==
Supply Chain Responsiveness Framework
to the number of stock keeping units (SKUs) - and their variations - available to
its customers (Gunasekaran et al., 2007). It is also related to the number of brands
a company has (Randall et al., 2003).
Product variety affects product development and production processes. Supply
chain dealing with high product variety could ﬁnd difﬁculties to reach the respon-
siveness goal. The diversity they are offering to customer hinder their capacity to
react fast when facing unexpected events (Randall et al., 2003).
4.3.6. Postponement
Postponement refers to the delaying of product’s speciﬁcation decisions in the
manufacturing process (Gunasekaran et al., 2007). The attention to this topic is
raising with the increased demand of product customization. It allows to reduce
the variety of product to be produced in the ﬁrst place delaying the processes
that are carried out just when the actual demand is received. In this paper, the
concept of postponement particularly referes to production postponement and
logistic postponement: time delaying of manufacturing and packing activities
(Boone et al., 2007). It is the ability to postpone to the latest moment the supply
chains activities that gives to postponement so much relevance in SCR.
Modularization
Modularization refers to the decoupling of a product architecture into standardiz-
ing sub-components (i.e. modules) (Squire et al., 2009). Firm willingness to reach
responsiveness call for a change in the production processes. The development of
standardized solution involving modules with several different possible combina-
tions allows the manufacturing to deliver customized variations. The assembly of
modules according to different customer needs result into greater external variety
with an internal standardization (Burcu Balcik et al., 2015).
5.
Discussion
The presented framework (see Figure 4) aims at creating a holistic view of the
topic of supply chain responsiveness. It should be used as a support tool by
companies willing to continuously ﬁnd the most advantageous level of SCR for
their given market. The framework shows SCR related factors placed into their
respective categories. Through the arrows it further highlights the relationships -
that either foster of hinder responsiveness - existing between factors.
The paper has developed the framework following a combination of resource-
based view and dynamic capabilities theory. Particularly, the analysis depicts,
above others, supply chain innovation, manufacturing ﬂexibility and SCI as
22
==PAGE:24==
Supply Chain Responsiveness Framework
dynamic capabilities capable of sustaining the performance of a company in a
dynamic environment. These dynamic capabilities are shown to have a positive
inﬂuence on supply chain responsiveness. For example, the collaboration between
the nodes of a supply chain network enables the whole chain to respond faster
to market dynamics and uncertainties. The close relationship established let the
company increase its production capability: partnerships allow the supply chain
to deal with incoming events jointly which has a positive impact on the company’s
manufacturing ability and, eventually, would lead to an increase in responsiveness
(Roh et al., 2014). On the other hand, human factors, AMT and IS are depict
as essential resources when a company wishes to become more responsive and
it is therefore vital that these abilities are evaluated in order to determine the
current and optimal level of SCR the company has. Thus the ownership of highly
technological equipment, like for instance manufacturing equipment which allows
a faster production of different products, allows the company to reach competitive
advantage. However, an IT system alone does not meet the RBV criteria: examined
as just an IT tool that enables information exchange it can not be considered to
be rare or difﬁcult to imitate. Its value increases when considered together with
the trained staff that interacts with it and with the company’s specialization it
could present. Consequently, when seen embedded in organization procedures,
an information system offers beneﬁts (Wu et al., 2006).
Figure 3: Overview of the relations between SCR variants and SCR factors
The framework does not state responsiveness variants and their distinct linkages
with factors; it addresses the three different types of SCR - enablers, drivers
and triggers - as these act towards responsiveness. Figure 3 reveals the relations
between factors and supply chain responsiveness variants: it lists which factors
23
==PAGE:25==
Supply Chain Responsiveness Framework
contribute to every variant. For example, it shows how the information system
and SCI contribute to all three variants while supply chain complexity acts
only towards supplier network responsiveness. If the framework had shown
the three elements with the connection existing between them and the related
factors, it would not have had the same degree of clarity, transparency, and
comprehensibility.
5.1. Dynamic Analysis
Apart from being related to SCR, these entities are interacting in a dynamic
environment where factors are also related to each other. As a consequence, it
is essential to describe and depict their connections. Particularly, to deliver a
complete overview of supply chain responsiveness it needs to be shown how the
alteration of a factor affect other factors. According to the casual diagram notation
(Sterman, 2000), each relation is drawn with a causal link with an assigned polarity
- either positive (+) or negative (-) - to indicate the existing interdependence. A
positive bond means that if the factor increases its effect, it also increases the
related factor’s impact on SCR (while, otherwise, if the cause decreases, the associ-
ated factor’s effect decreases). A negative link indicates that if the factor increases
its effect, it decreases the related factor’s impact on SCR (while, otherwise, if the
cause decreases, the associated factor’s effect increases). Ultimately, the impact
on SCR - as represented in the legend in Figure 4 - can either foster or hinder the
responsiveness goal. Therefore, a dynamic analysis is performed: every factor is
analyzed singularly, and its relation with others is explained.
The information system allows companies to communicate promptly and more
efﬁciently with other actors in the supply chain and to spread over it information
coming from the customer side. This sharing of information increase the company
responsiveness because it would be easier for the manufacturing to alter the
production plan according to new information received (Roh et al., 2014). The
information sharing is, in turn, directly connected to the degree of supply chain
collaboration. The more the supply chain network is interconnected, the more
and better the ﬂow of information will be spread.
The IS capabilities are also related to the level of supply chain integration. The
integration between actors in the supply chain provides interconnections in the
information system so to create the infrastructure required for an effective collab-
oration and information sharing. Moreover, the enhancement of data distribution
increases the visibility inside the supply chain. The smoother and faster infor-
mation ﬂow fosters trust and cooperation in the network (Roh et al., 2014). The
ability of sharing strategic supply chain information (e.g. orders, production
scheduling), made possible by the information system, requires a high level of
24
==PAGE:26==
Supply Chain Responsiveness Framework
trust between the actors. Sharing conﬁdential data can be hindered by a network
where transparency and communication are not foster by the relationship nature
(Backhouse et al., 2016; Rajesh, 2015).
Additionally, it has been shown that high level of information sharing leads to
lower demand uncertainty (Backhouse et al., 2016; Wu et al., 2006). In this respect,
Lin et al. (2002) demonstrated how, for example, sharing information about cus-
tomers’ sales (e.g. using point-of-sales information) allows a superior demand
forecast.
Lastly, it has been shown how the role of IS to enhance visibility in the supply
chain - to efﬁciently tackle changes - have a relation with the characteristic of the
supply chain itself. The extent to which a company asks for interaction to deal
with alterations in its environment is linked to its size. The bigger is its scale,
the more complex the supply chain is, the more integration is required for being
responsive (Ngai et al., 2011). As just stated, supply chain complexity is related to
Figure 4: SCR Framework
the amount of companies acting in the supply chain. Having a high number of
suppliers generates organizational difﬁculties in managing the interaction with
many actors. The level of integration and the coordination required, thus, increase.
Consequently, it becomes difﬁcult to foster network’s collaboration (Milgate, 2001).
Along with supply chain characteristics, product complexity is another source of
25
==PAGE:27==
Supply Chain Responsiveness Framework
complexity analysed in this paper. It has been shown how a correlation between
these sources exists. Complex products require several components to be made
and assemble using high-skilled employees. The complexity of a product, in turn,
also require more companies in its development and manufacturing. Therefore,
high product complexity is related to high supply chain complexity (Milgate, 2001).
On the other hand, however, the creation of standard component that assembled
create a customized product inﬂuences the perception of product complexity. The
use of modules eases the manufacturing by creating less complexity regarding
both supplier customized components, and variety of skills and knowledge re-
quired. Therefore, modularization reduces the complexity of a product (Hobday,
1998).
The manufacturing of these standard components directly affects the production
strategy. Particularly, it is the leagile strategy’s coexistence of lean and agile
manufacturing that enables and fosters production standardization using mod-
ules. Modularization calls for a decoupling point in the manufacturing processes
where leanness is followed in the production of standard components while agility
allows a reaction to customers demand’s alterations (Stratton and Warburton,
2006). In this context, product characteristics are also related to the more general
concept of postponement. Hybrid products are the one where postponement can
be applied. Their features calling for both the production of a functional and an
innovative part required strategies coexistence (Wang et al., 2004). It is the agile
manufacturing that enables these reactions in the dynamic environment. Here,
the integration between partners in the supply chain is essential when companies
are asked to positively react to customer need. This because a high degree of
integration increases the visibility in the supply chain needed. Moreover, SCI
allows companies to provide great customer services (Ngai et al., 2011).
Advanced manufacturing technologies allow the supply chain to better respond to
environment uncertainties. The exploitation of these state-of-the-art technologies
enables and enhances the ﬂexibility of the production itself. They give companies
the ability to work on different volume and customizations, as well as with greater
product variety. In addition to this, AMT increases the company ability to deliver
products with new characteristics. Product innovation is, therefore, positively
related to AMT. Moreover, with an increasing product complexity, AMT assists
companies in the development of new complex ones (Roh et al., 2014).
The presence of AMT also infers with the quality of internal communication and
workﬂow due to their capacity to produce and share production data (Droge et al.,
2004). In this sense, it is possible to argue how a direct link between internal
integration and these technologies subsist: the more AMT helps in the sharing
of information the more coordination come up between internal departments
26
==PAGE:28==
Supply Chain Responsiveness Framework
and functions. That is AMT have the ability to facilitate internal integration
(Moyano-Fuentes et al., 2016).
The last factor’s linkage that literature highlights is the relationship between
product variety and demand anticipation capability. The number of different
outcomes of a production system inﬂuences the demand forecast capability of the
same production. The fact that market forecast need to deal with more products
ampliﬁed demand uncertainty (Gunasekaran et al., 2007).
5.2. Framework limitations
The main limitation of the framework is its inability to help companies clearly
understanding what level of responsiveness they are placed in. SCR is an capabil-
ity that companies can possess at different levels. This paper does not support a
detailed evaluation of what level or degree each factor should be on for a company
to reach a certain level of SCR, but it shows what factors has to be considered and
how they relate so a company can increase the factors they wish to focus on, and
decrease others.
The dynamic analysis reveals a relation between product complexity and sup-
ply chain responsiveness. Particularly, it reveals how increasing supply chain
complexity together with increasing complexity of products can hinder a high
level of responsiveness. It should be noted that there is a contradiction in this:
current trends are pushing supply chain towards expansion and globalization
which, in turn, raises their complexity. Secondly, customers demand increasingly
more complex products. On the other hand, companies must develop the ability
to promptly respond to unexpected events and changes in their environment. It
follows that these two notions seem to be in conﬂict. Accordingly, the more a
company expands and produces increasing complex products the more its chance
of developing a high degree of responsiveness should diminish.
In this context, the theory of mass customization intervenes to mitigate the effects
of product complexity over SCR. Manufacturing a product made up of standard
components allows to share its complexity over different supplier, therefore, re-
ducing the complexity level of every component. The supply chain would produce
customizable outcomes exploiting standard manufacturing and, hence, perceive
less complexity on them. This new way of production would reduce the nega-
tive effect of product complexity (Burcu Balcik et al., 2015). Consequently, it is
arguable that modularization mediates the effect of product complexity on SCR.
Whereas for the incongruity generated by the inclination towards wider sup-
ply chain and its negative impact on responsiveness the ﬁrst consideration to
27
==PAGE:29==
Supply Chain Responsiveness Framework
make is that recent studies show how companies are starting to consider reshoring
activities (Cohen and Lee, 2015). Thus the trend towards expansions is not gen-
eral and universal. The Zara example has shown how in-house production can
strengthen market delivery capabilities (Christopher, 2000).
Moreover, the exploitation of highly technological information system allows wide
and spread companies to gain competitive advantages enhancing collaboration
and sharing of information required by a responsive supply chain (Kim et al.,
2013a). Accordingly, the reshoring trend and IS exploitation mediate the effect of
supply chain complexity over responsiveness.
6.
Practical implications
The proposed framework asks for an alignment within the company itself and
its supply chain. To ﬁnd the most advantageous level of SCR a company needs
to understand where it stands on several factors. To do so and to change these
factors aiming at reaching the desired SCR goal, the company needs to align
its different functions and, in some cases, to alter current work practices and
equipment. Moreover, the responsiveness capability is not something a company
possesses or not; it is a growing ability that can be promoted and developed.
The steps presented below are designed to increase the degree of responsiveness.
Reaching the goal is, therefore, an iterative process.
Figure 5: Steps for using the framework
The utilization of the framework should follow the stages shown in Figure 5.
Furthermore, is important to notice that all three types of SCR - operation, logistic,
and supplier network - are viewed together in the framework. The case where
they have to be considered singularly - e.g. addressing factors solely related
to operation responsiveness - some of the factors presented here would not be
relevant for that speciﬁc context.
Step 1
The ﬁrst action companies should undertake is to understand where they stand
in respect of SCR. The framework should ﬁrstly be used by the company to
28
==PAGE:30==
Supply Chain Responsiveness Framework
understand which factors are considered in their activities. In order to do so,
a cross-functional team of company’s experts - having deep knowledge over
manufacturing activities and product characteristics - needs to be formed. This
team would check the framework factor by factor verifying which and to what ex-
tent the company is currently either exploiting its actions or considering its impact.
Step 2
When the company would understand the current situation, the deﬁnition of
the gap existing against the desired level of responsiveness has to be done. The
recognition of which factors are not pointed yet needs to be done. Aiming at
reaching a higher level of responsiveness, every factor needs to be addressed.
Step 3
Once the gap has been identiﬁed, the company should start acting towards
changing its assets and resources thus to close it. Representatives from strategic
departments and key partners in the supply chain are invited to be part of a series
of workshops to determine strategies to close the gap. A decision over the changes
to undertake should be made and agreed. The dynamic analysis, here, supports
the process by pinpoint which of the existing factors the company is already
exploiting can help to develop missing ones. Additionally, it could be beneﬁcial
to employ an extra ﬁgure as change manager: his activities will be focused on the
mediation between the different actors. In this occasion, a clariﬁcation of both
every factor depicted in the framework and their relation with responsiveness,
must be set clear to the participants. They should perceive this changes as a need
not only for the central company but as an objective for the supply chain as a
whole.
Step 4
The action plan for the implementation of the framework should be developed
together with all the stakeholders. They need to decide on which department
and which chain’s actor to involve in the transition. At this stage, it is important
to foresee any possible barrier that can hinder the implementation and already
decide on actions to undertake to prevent them.
Step 5
The beginning of the transition will occur with the roll-out of the changes. This
action will show if the implementation is running smoothly or new barriers arise
creating obstacles. At this point, the change manager would be essential to coor-
dinate the implementation.
29
==PAGE:31==
Supply Chain Responsiveness Framework
Step 6
Eventually, an implementation’s evaluation needs to be performed. In the event
of unforeseen barriers happening, the stakeholders should examine those and
revise the action plan to tackle them. This follow-up should be an iterative step
that would be repeated as long as needed. It would run until the desired level of
responsiveness is reached and, consequently, every factor addressed. This loop
will end when the team agrees with the results.
These steps cover the ﬁrst implementation of the framework in the company’s
environment. Arguably, it would be required to carry out again this process every
year. The steps repetition would allow the supply chain to verify and evaluate if
the effort towards the appropriate level of responsiveness has been correctly set.
Moreover, it would motivate the stakeholders to continue working towards the
goal.
7.
Theoretical implication
Current literature on SCR shows limited empirical analysis and practical case
studies. There is a lack of a detailed analysis which tries to understand and
explain all the factors related to it (Daugherty and Pittman, 1995; Holweg, 2005b;
Lau and Lee, 2000; Mohammad Bagheri et al., 2014; Sinha et al., 2015). This
paper addresses this gap by illustrating the factors which should be taken into
consideration when the goal is to reach a proper level of responsiveness. It,
for example, demonstrates how the supply chain strategies should be carefully
considered in accordance with the type and manufacturing characteristic of the
product. More importantly, this paper shows how the relations between SCR’s
factors can improve the responsive effect of a supply chain.
Companies that positively deal with the fulﬁllment and understanding of all fac-
tors and their interconnection considerably beneﬁt by improving time-to-market,
efﬁciency, and coordination.
The paper further demonstrates that in order for a company to move towards its
desired SCR level, it must include key supply chain partners. Isolated company’s
actions will not bring to the desired result. In this context it is essential to de-
velop and foster relationship both upstream and downstream in the supply chain
(Nehzati et al., 2015). In accordance with RBV and Dynamic capability theory,
supply chain’s partnerships yield resources and capabilities that are even harder
to imitate.
It is important to remember that different companies will have different desired
levels of SCR. A company which produces products requiring long production
30
==PAGE:32==
Supply Chain Responsiveness Framework
time, e.g. ships, would not aim at the same level of SCR as a producer of for
example mobile phones. Arguably, companies producing with long lead-times
will act towards a lower level of responsiveness compared to others.
7.1. Additional linkages
With the aim of creating a holistic view on SCR, it is necessary to highlight
further linkages between the identiﬁed SCR factors which current research has
not considered (see Figure 6).
Figure 6: SCR Framework with additional linkages
The literature does not explicitly depict a relation between human factors and
manufacturing ﬂexibility. The ability to alter the manufacturing processes cannot
just rely on the utilization of highly technological equipment. Skilled employees
involved in the production can ease and support its alterations. On the other
hand, top management understanding of required changes plays a role in the
ability to foster manufacturing ﬂexibility.
Human factors also inﬂuence the supply chain network.
The ability of top
management to partner up with other businesses to create a stable and trustful
cooperation increases the supply chain responsive capacity. Lastly, the ability of a
supply chain to innovate to anticipate changes in its environment can be fostered
or even triggered by top management’s capability to foresee future scenarios.
31
==PAGE:33==
Supply Chain Responsiveness Framework
Another missing relation is the one between modularization and product variety.
The latter was deﬁned as the number of different products a manufacturing
system absorbs. It is, hence, a representation of the variety that is both handed
by the manufacturing and perceived by customers. The introduction of standard
components in the production would reduce the effect of the variety from the
point of view of the company, while it would not affect the customers’ perspective..
Therefore, modularization would mediate the effect that product variety has over
SCR.
8.
Conclusion
Previous studies do not give a comprehensive overview of supply chain respon-
siveness, whereas they offer limited analysis of the topic (e.g. country speciﬁc,
industry speciﬁc). This paper addresses this gap by investigating supply chain re-
sponsiveness literature. The literature has been ordered to reveal which factors are
lying behind the development of a responsive supply chain able to quickly react
to - or even anticipate - unexpected changes in the market and the environment.
The paper introduces a holistic framework where thirteen factors related to SCR
are divided into impact categories (i.e. Enablers, Drivers, and Triggers). It reveals
both resources to exploit and capabilities to develop, in order to be responsive
in a dynamic environment. Furthermore, this paper further develops a dynamic
analysis showing structural relationships among the factors. These direct and
indirect connections represent the situation in a more holistic manner than just the
individual isolated elements. The performed analysis improves the scope of the
framework by displaying how factors of different categories are related to each
other. An understanding of how to improve the effect of speciﬁc factors actively
supports a company’s responsive object. Ultimately, the paper suggests additional
linkages connecting factors that the current literature has not addressed.
Companies should use the framework (see Figure 6) ﬁrstly to understand where
they are currently standing in regard to responsiveness. Secondly, they should
exploit it to cover the gap between the current situation and the desired state, by
reaching the appropriate level of responsiveness required for their given market.
Therefore, this research contributes to the body of research in the area of supply
chain responsiveness in several ways.
The results highlighted in this paper suggest four areas for further research.
Firstly, future research should conduct in-depth investigations on manufacturing
strategies.The analysis carried out in this paper highlights the importance of the
manufacturing strategy according to the responsiveness object. Literature presents
agile and leagile strategies as the ones best suited to face disruptions. Researchers
32
==PAGE:34==
Supply Chain Responsiveness Framework
should clarify how these two strategies act and which case would be the best to
follow, according to the speciﬁc strategy chosen. Therefore, future research should
take as a starting point the responsive goal and develop a detailed analysis on
how to decide which strategy is most suited for the given situation.
Secondly, another area could be supply chain innovation: in an environment
where supply chains are changing quickly due to external stimulus, this aspect
plays an important role. However, current literature on the topic is lacking. The
paper presents the concept and reveals its binding with AMT. It is arguable that
future research should further investigate innovation in this context and analyze
its role towards both responsiveness and the relating factors.
Further research should also focus on SCR types. The literature review performed
in this paper showed different characterizations of SCR. A differentiation of SCR
in operations, logistics, and network responsiveness has been followed. Future
research should help develop a ﬁnal characterization of SCR by building upon the
analysis presented here and coming up with a new comprehensive description of
the responsiveness building blocks. Having a deﬁnitive delineation of the factors
constituting SCR would allow researchers to extend the presented framework
where the actions of every factor are related to a precise responsiveness type.
Improvements in this context would allow companies to better implement the
framework by having a deeper knowledge of which factors to tackle according to
every SCR type. A ﬁrm interested in improving only one particular responsiveness
variety would, hence, know how to restructure its resources and capabilities to
address just this speciﬁc issue.
Lastly, as this framework is the result of a structured literature review, further
research should test the framework in practice. An implementation case would
allow researchers to understand which limitations currently exist and investigate
whether other factors than those highlighted in the literature are relevant to ad-
dress. A test of the framework would also allow further development of the SCR
analysis. Furthermore, as previously described, the literature review revealed
dynamic hypotheses that interconnect factors. These connections should also be
tested in case studies; the results of such studies can be used to further develop
and expand the framework as needed (Sterman, 2000).
33
==PAGE:35==
Supply Chain Responsiveness Framework
References
Backhouse, CJ, Hamid Moradlou, and Rajesh Ranganathan (2016). “Responsive-
ness, the primary reason behind re-shoring manufacturing activities to the UK:
an Indian industry perspective”. In: International Journal of Physical Distribution
& Logistics Management 47.2/3, pp. 222–236.
Bahrin, Atikah Shamsul, Ahmad Taher Azar, Karthikeyan Rajagopal, Gouri Ap-
pasamy, and Veera Pandiyan Kaliani Sundram (2016). “Determinants of Sup-
ply Chain Responsiveness among Firms in the Manufacturing Industry in
Malaysia”. In: International Journal of Supply Chain Management 5.3, pp. 18–24.
Barney, J. (1991). “Firm Resources and Sustained Competitive Advantage”. In:
Journal of Management 17.1, pp. 99–120. doi: 10.1177/014920639101700108.
Barney, Jay, David J. Ketchen, and Mike Wright (2001). “The resource-based view
of the ﬁrm: Ten years after 1991”. In: Journal of Management 27.6, pp. 625–641.
doi: 10.1016/s0149-2063(01)00114-3.
Boon-itt, Sakun and Chee Yew Wong (2011). “The moderating effects of techno-
logical and demand uncertainties on the relationship between supply chain
integration and customer delivery performance”. In: International Journal of
Physical Distribution & Logistics Management 41.3, pp. 253–276.
Boone, Christopher A, Christopher W Craighead, and Joe B Hanna (2007). “Post-
ponement: an evolving supply chain concept”. In: International Journal of Physi-
cal Distribution & Logistics Management 37.8, pp. 594–611.
Bozarth, Cecil C, Donald P Warsing, Barbara B Flynn, and E James Flynn (2009).
“The impact of supply chain complexity on manufacturing plant performance”.
In: Journal of Operations Management 27.1, pp. 78–93.
Burcu Balcik, Dr, Marianne Jahre, and Nathalie Fabbe-Costes (2015). “How stan-
dards and modularity can improve humanitarian supply chain responsiveness:
The case of emergency response units”. In: Journal of Humanitarian Logistics and
Supply Chain Management 5.3, pp. 348–386.
Cai, Zhao, Qian Huang, Hefu Liu, and Liang Liang (2016). “The moderating role
of information technology capability in the relationship between supply chain
collaboration and organizational responsiveness: Evidence from China”. In:
International Journal of Operations & Production Management 36.10, pp. 1247–1271.
Catalan, Michael and Herbert Kotzab (2003). “Assessing the responsiveness in
the Danish mobile phone supply chain”. In: International Journal of Physical
Distribution & Logistics Management 33.8, pp. 668–685.
Christopher, Martin (2000). “The Agile Supply Chain: Competing in Volatile
Markets”. In: Industrial Marketing Management 29.1, pp. 37–44. doi: 10.1016/
s0019-8501(99)00110-8.
34
==PAGE:36==
Supply Chain Responsiveness Framework
Cohen, Morris A. and Hau L. Lee (2015). “Global Supply Chain Benchmark
Study: An Analysis of Sourcing and Re-structuring Decisions”. In: Supply
Chain Navigator.
Danese, Pamela, Pietro Romano, and Marco Formentini (2013). “The impact of
supply chain integration on responsiveness: The moderating effect of using an
international supplier network”. In: Transportation Research Part E: Logistics and
Transportation Review 49.1, pp. 125–140.
Daugherty, Patricia J and Paul H Pittman (1995). “Utilization of time-based strate-
gies: creating distribution ﬂexibility/responsiveness”. In: International Journal
of Operations & Production Management 15.2, pp. 54–60.
Dove, Rick (2005). “Agile enterprise cornerstones: knowledge, values, and re-
sponse ability”. In: IFIP International Working Conference on Business Agility and
Information Technology Diffusion. Springer, pp. 313–330.
Droge, Cornelia, Jayanth Jayaram, and Shawnee K Vickery (2004). “The effects of
internal versus external integration practices on time-based performance and
overall ﬁrm performance”. In: Journal of operations management 22.6, pp. 557–
573.
Duclos, Leslie K, Robert J Vokurka, and Rhonda R Lummus (2003). “A conceptual
model of supply chain ﬂexibility”. In: Industrial Management & Data Systems
103.6, pp. 446–456.
Dyer, Jeffrey H and Harbir Singh (1998). “The relational view: Cooperative strategy
and sources of interorganizational competitive advantage”. In: Academy of
management review 23.4, pp. 660–679.
Fisher, Marshall L (1997). “What is the right supply chain for your product?” In:
Harvard business review 75.2, pp. 105–116.
Forrester, Jay W (2007). “System dynamicsâ ˘AˇTa personal view of the ﬁrst ﬁfty
years”. In: System Dynamics Review 23.2-3, pp. 345–358.
Fynes, Brian, Sean De Burca, and Donna Marshall (2004). “Environmental un-
certainty, supply chain relationship quality and performance”. In: Journal of
Purchasing and Supply Management 10.4, pp. 179–190.
Ghosh, Anupam, Sujoy Das, and Aashish Deshpande (2014). “Effect of respon-
siveness and process integration in supply chain coordination”. In: IUP Journal
of Supply Chain Management 11.1, p. 7.
Gunasekaran, Angappa and YY Yusuf (2002). “Agile manufacturing: a taxonomy
of strategic and technological imperatives”. In: International Journal of Production
Research 40.6, pp. 1357–1385.
Gunasekaran, Angappa, Andreas Reichhart, and Matthias Holweg (2007). “Cre-
ating the customer-responsive supply chain: a reconciliation of concepts”. In:
International Journal of Operations & Production Management 27.11, pp. 1144–1172.
35
==PAGE:37==
Supply Chain Responsiveness Framework
Gunasekaran, Angappa, Kee-hung Lai, and TC Edwin Cheng (2008). “Responsive
supply chain: a competitive strategy in a networked economy”. In: Omega 36.4,
pp. 549–564.
Hallgren, Mattias and Jan Olhager (2009). “Lean and agile manufacturing: external
and internal drivers and performance outcomes”. In: International Journal of
Operations & Production Management 29.10, pp. 976–999.
Handﬁeld, Robert B. and Christian Bechtel (2002). “The role of trust and rela-
tionship structure in improving supply chain responsiveness”. In: Industrial
Marketing Management 31.4, pp. 367–382. doi: 10.1016/s0019-8501(01)00169-
9.
Hobday, Mike (1998). “Product complexity, innovation and industrial organisa-
tion”. In: Research policy 26.6, pp. 689–710.
Hoffman, Joyce M and Satish Mehra (2000). “Efﬁcient consumer response as a
supply chain strategy for grocery businesses”. In: International Journal of Service
Industry Management 11.4, pp. 365–373.
Holweg, Matthias (2005a). “An investigation into supplier responsiveness: Em-
pirical evidence from the automotive Industry”. In: The International Journal of
Logistics Management 16.1, pp. 96–119.
— (2005b). “The three dimensions of responsiveness”. In: International Journal of
Operations & Production Management 25.7, pp. 603–622.
Hum, Sin-Hoon and Mahmut Parlar (2013). “Measurement and optimization of
supply chain responsiveness”. In: IIE Transactions 46.1, pp. 1–22. doi: 10.1080/
0740817x.2013.783251.
Kearns, Grover S and Albert L Lederer (2003). “A resource-based view of strategic
IT alignment: how knowledge sharing creates competitive advantage”. In:
Decision sciences 34.1, pp. 1–29.
Kim, Daekwan, S Tamer Cavusgil, and Erin Cavusgil (2013a). “Does IT alignment
between supply chain partners enhance customer value creation? An empirical
investigation”. In: Industrial Marketing Management 42.6, pp. 880–889.
Kim, DaekwanLee and P. Ruby (2010). “Systems Collaboration and Strategic
Collaboration: Their Impacts on Supply Chain Responsiveness and Market
Performance*”. In: Decision Sciences 41.4, pp. 955–981. doi: 10.1111/j.1540-
5915.2010.00289.x.
Kim, Minkyun, Nallan C. Suresh, and Canan Kocabasoglu-Hillmer (2013b). “An
impact of manufacturing ﬂexibility and technological dimensions of manu-
facturing strategy on improving supply chain responsiveness: Business en-
vironment perspective”. In: International Journal of Production Research 51.18,
pp. 5597–5611. doi: 10.1080/00207543.2013.790569.
36
==PAGE:38==
Supply Chain Responsiveness Framework
Kumar, Ashok and Jaideep Motwani (1995). “A methodology for assessing time-
based competitive advantage of manufacturing ﬁrms”. In: International Journal
of Operations & Production Management 15.2, pp. 36–53.
Lau, Henry CW and WB Lee (2000). “On a responsive supply chain information
system”. In: International Journal of Physical Distribution & Logistics Management
30.7/8, pp. 598–610.
Lee, Hau L (2004). “The triple-A supply chain”. In: Harvard business review 82.10,
pp. 102–113.
Li, Suhong, Bhanu Ragu-Nathan, T.S. Ragu-Nathan, and S. Subba Rao (2006).
“The impact of supply chain management practices on competitive advantage
and organizational performance”. In: Omega 34.2, pp. 107–124. doi: 10.1016/j.
omega.2004.08.002.
Li, Xun, Thomas J Goldsby, and Clyde W Holsapple (2009). “Supply chain agility:
scale development”. In: The International Journal of Logistics Management 20.3,
pp. 408–424.
Lin, Fu-ren, Sheng-hsiu Huang, and Sheng-cheng Lin (2002). “Effects of informa-
tion sharing on supply chain performance in electronic commerce”. In: IEEE
Transactions on Engineering Management 49.3, pp. 258–268.
Lo, Sonia and Damien M.Power (2010). “An empirical investigation of the re-
lationship between product nature and supply chain strategy”. In: Supply
Chain Management: An International Journal 15.2, pp. 139–153. doi: 10.1108/
13598541011028741.
Mandal, Santanu (2015). “An Empirical Competence-Capability Model of Supply
Chain Innovation”. In: Verslas: Teorija ir Praktika 17.2, pp. 138–149. doi: 10.
3846/btp.2016.619.
Mandal, Santanu and Venkateswar Rao Korasiga (2015). “An Integrated-Empirical
Logistics Perspective on Supply Chain Innovation and Firm Performance”. In:
Verslas: teorija ir praktika 17.1, pp. 32–45. doi: 10.3846/btp.2016.541.
Mandal, Santanu, Vishal Mishra, Rathin Sarathy, Sourabh Bhattacharya, and
Surajit Ghosh Dastidar (2010). “Supply Chain Responsiveness: A Relational
Capability Perspective”. In:
Martin, James H and Bruno Grbac (2003). “Using supply chain management to
leverage a ﬁrm’s market orientation”. In: Industrial marketing management 32.1,
pp. 25–38.
Mason-Jones, Rachel, Ben Naylor, and Denis R Towill (2000). “Engineering the
leagile supply chain”. In: International Journal of Agile Management Systems 2.1,
pp. 54–61.
McGinnis, Michael A and Rafeekh Mele Vallopra (1999). “Purchasing and supplier
involvement: issues and insights regarding new product success”. In: Journal of
Supply Chain Management 35.2, pp. 4–15.
37
==PAGE:39==
Supply Chain Responsiveness Framework
McMichael, Hamish, David Mackay, and Graeme Altmann (2000). “Quick re-
sponse in the Australian TCF industry: a case study of supplier response”.
In: International Journal of Physical Distribution & Logistics Management 30.7/8,
pp. 611–626.
Milgate, Michael (2001). “Supply chain complexity and delivery performance: an
international exploratory study”. In: Supply Chain Management: An International
Journal 6.3, pp. 106–118.
Minnich, Dennis and Frank Maier (2006). “Supply Chain Responsiveness and
Efﬁciency: Complementing Or Contradicting Each Other?” In:
Mohammad Bagheri, Mahdi, Abu Bakar Abdul Hamid, Iraj Soltanic, Abbas
Mardani, and Ehsan Kish Hazrate Soltan (2014). “The Role of Supply Chain
Antecedents on Supply Chain Agility in SMEs: The Conceptual Framework”.
In: Jurnal Teknologi 66.1, pp. 53–60. doi: 10.11113/jt.v66.1826.
Moyano-Fuentes, Jose’, Macarena Sacristan-Diaz, and Pedro Garrido-Vega (2016).
“Improving supply chain responsiveness through Advanced Manufacturing
Technology: the mediating role of internal and external integration”. In: Pro-
duction Planning & Control 27.9, pp. 686–697. doi: 10.1080/09537287.2016.
1166277.
Naylor, J Ben, Mohamed M Naim, and Danny Berry (1999). “Leagility: integrating
the lean and agile manufacturing paradigms in the total supply chain”. In:
International Journal of production economics 62.1, pp. 107–118.
Nehzati, Taravatsadat, Heidi C Dreyer, Jan Ola Strandhagen, Dag E Gotteberg
Haartveit, and Anita Romsdal (2014). “Exploring Responsiveness and Flexi-
bility in Multisite Production Environments: The Case of Norwegian Dairy
Production”. In: Advanced Materials Research. Vol. 1039. Trans Tech Publ, pp. 661–
668.
Nehzati, Taravatsadat, Heidi C. Dreyer, and Jan Ola Strandhagen (2015). “Produc-
tion network ﬂexibility: case study of Norwegian diary production network”.
In: Advances in Manufacturing 3.2, pp. 151–165. doi: 10.1007/s40436-015-
0111-8.
Ngai, Eric WT, Dorothy CK Chau, and TLA Chan (2011). “Information technology,
operational, and management competencies for supply chain agility: Findings
from case studies”. In: The Journal of Strategic Information Systems 20.3, pp. 232–
249.
Qrunﬂeh, Suﬁan and Monideepa Tarafdar (2013). “Lean and agile supply chain
strategies and supply chain responsiveness: the role of strategic supplier
partnership and postponement”. In: Supply Chain Management: An International
Journal 18.6, pp. 571–582. doi: 10.1108/scm-01-2013-0015.
Rajesh, Kumar (2015). “Modelling of critical factors for responsiveness in supply
chain”. In: Journal of Manufacturing Technology Management 26.6, pp. 868–888.
38
==PAGE:40==
Supply Chain Responsiveness Framework
Randall, Taylor R., Ruskin M. Morgan, and Alysse R. Morton (2003). “Efﬁcient
versus Responsive Supply Chain Choice: An Empirical Examination of Inﬂu-
ential Factors”. In: Journal of Product Innovation Management 20.6, pp. 430–443.
doi: 10.1111/1540-5885.00041.
Reichhart, Andreas, Jose M Framinan, and Matthias Holweg (2006). “The role
of inventory in enabling supply chain responsiveness”. In: IFAC Proceedings
Volumes 39.3, pp. 309–314.
— (2008). “On the link between inventory and responsiveness in multi-product
supply chains”. In: International Journal of Systems Science 39.7, pp. 677–688.
Roh, James, Paul Hong, and Hokey Min (2014). “Implementation of a responsive
supply chain strategy in global complexity: The case of manufacturing ﬁrms”.
In: International Journal of Production Economics 147, pp. 198–210.
Rowley, Jennifer and Frances Slack (2004). “Conducting a literature review”. In:
Management Research News 27.6, pp. 31–39.
Sabath, Robert (1995). “Volatile demand calls for quick response: the integrated
supply chain”. In: Logistics Information Management 8.2, pp. 49–52.
Sabet, Ehsan, B Yazdani, and Sander De Leeuw (2016). “Supply chain integra-
tion strategies in fast evolving industries”. In: International Journal of Logistics
Management.
Seth, Dinesh and Arpit Panigrahi (2015). “Application and evaluation of packaging
postponement strategy to boost supply chain responsiveness: a case study”.
In: Production Planning & Control 26.13, pp. 1069–1089. doi: 10.1080/09537287.
2015.1010626.
Sinha, A, P Swati, and A Anand (2015). “Responsive supply chain: modeling and
simulation”. In: Management Science Letters 5.6, pp. 639–650.
Squire, Brian, Paul D Cousins, Benn Lawson, and Steve Brown (2009). “The effect
of supplier manufacturing capabilities on buyer responsiveness: the role of
collaboration”. In: International Journal of Operations & Production Management
29.8, pp. 766–788.
Stank, Theodore P, Patricia J Daugherty, and Alexander E Ellinger (1996). “Infor-
mation exchange, responsiveness and logistics provider performance”. In: The
International Journal of Logistics Management 7.2, pp. 43–58.
Stank, Theodore P, J. Paul Dittmann, and Chad W Autry (2011). “The new supply
chain agenda: a synopsis and directions for future research”. In: International
Journal of Physical Distribution & Logistics Management 41.10, pp. 940–955.
Sterman, John D John D (2000). Business dynamics: systems thinking and modeling for
a complex world. HD30. 2 S7835 2000.
Stratton, Roy and Roger DH Warburton (2006). “Managing the trade-off implica-
tions of global supply”. In: International Journal of Production Economics 103.2,
pp. 667–679.
39
==PAGE:41==
Supply Chain Responsiveness Framework
Sukati, Inda, Abu Bakar Hamid, Rohaizat Baharun, Mohd Norﬁan Aliﬁah, and
Melati Ahmad Anuar (2012). “Competitive Advantage through Supply Chain
Responsiveness and Supply Chain Integration”. In: International Journal of
Business and Commerce 1.7, pp. 1–11.
Teece, David J (2007). “Explicating dynamic capabilities: the nature and micro-
foundations of (sustainable) enterprise performance”. In: Strategic management
journal 28.13, pp. 1319–1350.
Teece, David J., Gary Pisano, and Amy Shuen (1997). “Dynamic capabilities and
strategic management”. In: Strategic Management Journal 18.7, pp. 509–533. doi:
10.1002/(sici)1097-0266(199708)18:7<509::aid-smj882>3.0.co;2-z.
Thatte, Ashish A., Subba S. Rao, and T. S. Ragu-Nathan (2013). “Impact Of
SCM Practices Of A Firm On Supply Chain Responsiveness And Competitive
Advantage Of A Firm”. In: Journal of Applied Business Research (JABR) 29.2,
p. 499. doi: 10.19030/jabr.v29i2.7653.
Wagner Stephan M.Bode, Christoph (2008). “AN EMPIRICAL EXAMINATION
OF SUPPLY CHAIN PERFORMANCE ALONG SEVERAL DIMENSIONS OF
RISK”. In: Journal of Business Logistics 29.1, pp. 307–325. doi: 10.1002/j.2158-
1592.2008.tb00081.x.
Wang, Ge, Samuel H Huang, and John P Dismukes (2004). “Product-driven supply
chain selection using integrated multi-criteria decision-making methodology”.
In: International journal of production economics 91.1, pp. 1–15.
White, J (1998). “Supply chain responsiveness”. In:
Wong, Chee Yew, Jan Stentoft ArlbjÃÿrn, Hans-Henrik Hvolby, and John Johansen
(2006). “Assessing responsiveness of a volatile and seasonal supply chain: A
case study”. In: International Journal of Production Economics 104.2, pp. 709–721.
doi: 10.1016/j.ijpe.2004.12.021.
Wu, Fang, Sengun Yeniyurt, Daekwan Kim, and S Tamer Cavusgil (2006). “The
impact of information technology on supply chain capabilities and ﬁrm per-
formance: A resource-based view”. In: Industrial Marketing Management 35.4,
pp. 493–504.
Yusuf, Y.Y., E.O. Adeleye, and K. Sivayoganathan (2003). “Volume ﬂexibility: the
agile manufacturing conundrum”. In: Management Decision 41.7, pp. 613–624.
doi: 10.1108/00251740310495540.
Zollo, Maurizio and Sidney G Winter (2002). “Deliberate learning and the evolu-
tion of dynamic capabilities”. In: Organization science 13.3, pp. 339–351.
40
