==PAGE:1==
MASTER’S THESIS PROJECT
DATE: 01.07.2017
Socio-technical system design of an 
information platform: 
A case from the construction sector in Asia-Pacific
Frederik A. Bundesen,  Technical University of Denmark | BCI Asia  
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Title: Socio-technical system design of an information platform: A case from the construction sector in Asia-Pacific 
Author: Frederik Bundesen
Institution: Technical University of Denmark
Year of publication: 2017
New and emerging technologies in the building and construction industry have put a lot of pressure on the stakehold­
ers involved. The design specifiers are the ones who select and specify every single building product detail that is to 
be incorporated in a construction project. They include architects, interior designers consultants etc. With the tradi­
tional building product catalogue dying or obsolete in the industry, the Sydney based company BCI wants to create 
a new tool to assist the design specifiers in their product specification process. To do so, this project takes a holistic 
perspective on the current situation and presents needs in the building and construction industry with the emphasis on 
understanding how products are selected and added into the design specification before it is handed to the builder or 
owner of the construction project. This project is based on an internship at the company BCI Asia in Sydney, which is 
part of the larger international BCI Media group. This project describes the process of identifying key stakeholders, 
their needs and values, and how their needs can be transformed and framed into an innovative solution. In addition, 
the report will describe how Kees Dorst’s Frame Innovation has been applied as a guidance to the design process 
and complemented by practical models from the Product Service System (PSS) approach. The data and critical in­
formation has been collected through desk research, office meetings, overseas field research in Singapore including 
workshop facilitation and exhibitions. Findings indicate that the process of sourcing and selecting building products 
is a time consuming and tedious process involving several inconsistent steps. Design specifiers want tools that are 
modern and easy to use as well as adding value to their work routine, e.g. by decreasing time spent on selecting and 
specifying building products, and the building product manufacturers want an easy and transparent way to reach the 
design specifier. The proposed solution is based on the use of a digital project and product information platform that 
enables showcasing, product sourcing, storing previous projects, comparison and information management. Design 
specifiers can then easily find the right building product, save and add to an integrated sample board for better manag­
ing, comparing or share the information to other stakeholders. In addition, the solution also paves the way for a future 
add-on feature that focuses on how design specifiers, such as architects, can obtain the annually points required for 
Continuous Professional Development (CPD). While explaining the design process through Frame Innovation and 
PSS models, the project is also testing the application of such theory to a practical project in the building and construc­
tion industry and is reflecting on how this case could potentially be used for future educational purposes. 
==PAGE:4==
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This thesis is the culmination of a five months Master’s thesis project in close collaboration with the Sydney based company 
- BCI Asia. This thesis is a representation of a five year engineering education at the Danish University of Technology with 
the study line; Design & Innovation.  
I would like to take the opportunity to express my gratitude to the following people for their help, guidance and valuable 
insights that made this project possible. 
Client company:
• Robert Krups, COO BCI Asia
• Dr. Matthias Krups, CEO BCI Media Group
• Ashleigh Porter, BCI Academy Manager and AIS Manager
• Cathryn Zhao, Marketing Manager BCI Australia
• Shannon Daniel, Account Manager, BCI Australia
• BCI Singapore office and especially Sally Kheng, Regional Research Director
Authors behind Frame Innovation:
• Kees Dorst, Professor of Design Innovation at UTS, Sydney
• Rodger Watson, Deputy Director, DOC
Supervisors:
• Anja Maier PhD, Professor at DTU Management Engineering , Engineering Systems
• Tim C. McAloone PhD, Professor at DTU Mechanical Engineering, Engineering Design and Product Development
==PAGE:5==
Title page
Date
Title
Client
Programme
Project period
Supervisors
ETCS - Points
No of 
characters
(incl. spaces):
July 1st 2017
Socio-technical system design of an information platform: A case from the con­
struction sector in Asia-Pacific
Robert Krups, Chief Operating Officer - BCI Asia
Master’s thesis project, MSc Design & Innovation - DTU Civil ingeniør 
February 1st - July 1st, 2017
Anja Maier PhD:
Professor at DTU Management Engineering - Engineering Systems
Tim C. McAloone PhD:
Professor at DTU Mechanical Engineering - Engineering Design and Product 
Development
30 ETCS-points
186,550
Frederik Bundesen, s112949
LEARNING OBJECTIVES - THE STUDENT:
• 
Can identify and reflect on technical scientific issues and 
understand the interaction between the various compo­
nents that make up an issue.
• 
Can, on the basis of a clear academic profile, apply ele­
ments of current research at international level to develop 
ideas and solve problems.
• 
Masters technical scientific methodologies, theories and 
tools, and has the capacity to take a holistic view of and 
delimit a complex, open issue, see it in a broader aca­
demic and societal perspective and, on this basis, pro­
pose a variety of possible actions.
• 
Can, via analysis and modelling, develop relevant models, 
systems and processes for solving technological prob­
lems.
• 
Can communicate and mediate research-based knowl­
edge both orally and in writing.
• 
Is familiar with and can seek out leading international re­
search within his/her specialist area.
• 
Can work independently and reflect on own learning, aca­
demic development and specialization, masters technical 
problem-solving at a high level through project work, and 
has the capacity to work with and manage all phases of 
a project – including preparation of timetables, design, 
solution and documentation.
==PAGE:6==
Abstract .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   III
Acknowledgement .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . IV
Title page .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . V
 1.  INTRODUCTION .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 8
1.1 What is the scope of the project	
9
1.2 Who is the client?	
9
1.3 What is the background? 	
9
1.4 What is the problem situation?	
10
1.5 Research questions	
10
1.6 Project objectives	
11
1.7 Methodological approach	
13
1.8 Data collection	
15
1.9 Keeping up with time	
15
1.10 Structure of the thesis	
17
2.  BACKGROUND .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 18
2.1 Client company - BCI	
18
2.2 Offerings	
21
2.3 Industry and stages of construction	
24
2.4 BCI Research process	
26
2.5 Literature	
27
2.6 Summary	
29
3.  FRAME INNOVATION .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 30
3.1 Archaeology 	
31
3.2 Paradox	
35
3.3 Context 	
29
3.4 Field	
45
3.5 Themes	
49
3.6 Frames	
57
3.7 Futures	
61
3.8 Transformation	
67
3.9 Integration	
77
4.  PROTOTYPING AND EARLY TESTING .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 86
4.1 Wireframes	
86
4.2 In-office testing	
88
4.3 Testing with user	
89
4.4 General evaluation of the suggested solution	
90	
5.  VALUE PROPOSITION AND IMPLEMENTATION .   .   .   .   . 94
5.1 Final value proposition for the client	
94
5.2 Problems and idea in a nutshell	
95
5.3 Business idea	
96
5.4 Current version - wireframes	
96
5.5 Future platform	
97
5.6 Customer profiles	
98
5.7 Testing - My Boards	
99
5.8 Market size	
100
5.9 Industry and competition	
100
5.10 Revenue and cost structure	
102
5.11 Financing	
103
5.12 Implementation	
104
5.13 Marketing	
104
5.14 Idea protection	
104
5.15 Built on existing system or separate platform?	
104	
5.16 Risk and unintended consequences	
105
5.17 Additional future potentials of the concept	
106
TABLE OF 
CONTENT
==PAGE:7==
All illustrations are made by the student
Appendix numbers #.# will be referring to the supplementary appendix document. 
6.  DISCUSSION AND REFLECTION .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 108
6.1 Reflection on the design approach	
108
6.2 Reflection on methodology and Frame Innovation	
108
6.3 Holistic design approach	
109	
7. CONCLUSION .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .  110
Final words .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 111
REFERENCES .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .  112
Appendix .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . Separate
==PAGE:8==
8
Introduction
Designing and constructing buildings are ancient and traditional fields, going back even further than the cre­
ation of the Egyptian pyramids or the Roman Colosseum. 
Modern design and construction projects – including the choice of the right building products for the project 
- are neither simple nor straightforward processes. While the fundamental principles might be the same as in 
ancient time, the scale, complexity and the expectations in the industry have changed. A hospital or a football 
stadium is not simply designed by an architect. Neither is a bridge only designed by a civil engineer. Compa­
rable to many other technologies, products and services in todays market, is a result of an integrated system 
design, combining knowledge and technologies beyond the competence of a single practitioner.  
Numerous stakeholders are involved in the process in the various stages of construction. As competition 
stiffens, budget and profit margins become tighter, followed by demands for faster and more efficient turn­
around. As such, companies will need to adopt and embrace the emergence of new technologies in order to 
differentiate themselves in the market. 
Have you ever wondered why certain products or materials are used in buildings and who made the decision 
to incorporate these particular products? The answer lies in the so-called design or product specification doc­
ument, created by the ‘design specifier’. Within the construction industry, the design specifier is an architect, 
engineer, consultant or interior designer who decides every single type of building product or material to be 
used in a particular project. This is an area that should not be overlooked. McKinsey reported that building 
materials represent a $1 trillion global industry and materials will usually account for more than half the total 
cost of actual projects. (McKinsey & Company, 2016)  
In spite of the importance of finding and specifying the right building products, the process is considered 
tedious and highly time-consuming, involving various steps through web search, magazines, catalogue and 
face-to-face meetings with Building Product Manufacturers (BPM). The BPMs need to demonstrate their 
products and materials to the design specifier and the design specifiers need to find suitable products for their 
building projects. BCI Asia wants to investigate these challenges. 
1.	 INTRODUCTION 
==PAGE:9==
Figure 1.	
Architectural 
sketches from Pexels.com
Introduction
9
With the use of modern age technology BCI Asia wants to connect the BPM 
with the design specifier by creating a digital tool to find, research and specify 
products fast and efficiently. 
The first part of the thesis will introduce and highlight the context and scope of 
the project, the client, and the overall objectives of the project. Based on this, 
the reader should have a good understanding of the problem mapped out by this 
thesis, including the methods applied to collect data, to analyse the situation and 
to contemplate suitable solutions. 
1.1	
What is the scope of the project? 
The thesis project is part of an internship at BCI Asia (Building Construction In­
formation) and has been carried out in the Australian office in St Leonards, Syd­
ney. The thesis project has been carried out by one individual student, Frederik 
Bundesen over 5 months in the spring semester of 2017. The primary contact in 
BCI Asia is Robert Krups, Chief Operating Officer - BCI Asia, who has been be 
the central sparring partner throughout the entire process.
 
1.2	
Who is the client? 
BCI Asia is part of the BCI Media Group, which is the leading provider of busi­
ness–to-business sales leads for projects within the building and construction in­
dustry across Asia Pacific. They focus on research within the latest construction 
projects in Australia and Asia, from early stage concepts and design stages all the 
way through to completed construction projects. 
Having more than 240 researchers across Asia Pacific dedicated to obtaining the 
latest information, BCI saves their clients time and effort by delivering a short­
cut in their sales prospecting process. As such, the main service is to connect the 
stakeholders in the industry by providing relevant project leads to companies 
looking for new project and contracts. 
1.3	
What is the background?
With the traditional hard copy or online product catalogue becoming obsolete or 
disrupted, there is increasing interest in creating a tool to assist the architects and 
other design specifiers in the design specification process. 
During the construction stages of a new project, the design specifiers need to 
select and specify every single product detail that is incorporated in the project. 
Even though it is not the architects who buy the product, they still need to go 
through the specification, and the decisions they make in the specification can 
potentially be decisions worth billions of dollars in purchase every year. 
In an industry where the design specifiers need to pay attention to every single 
detail in a construction project, how do they know or select the right product or 
brand for each project? 
On the opposite side the BPM is constantly trying to get their products specified 
in future projects and potentially procured. Using the information provided by 
BCI, these actors are provided with access to sufficient data to be aware of when 
and where a relevant project is in the market and who to contact. 
==PAGE:10==
10
Introduction
Knowing this they are able to contact and demonstrate their product to the relevant design specifier early 
in the design stages and thus potentially increase their business. This means that architects are constantly 
bombarded with sales pitches from BPMs who want them to incorporate their products into their design 
specification.
1.4	
What is the problem situation then?
In order to find a solution to this problem, the project scope is to conceptualise an information platform for 
project showcasing, finding building product information and sharing information with relevant stakeholders. 
Ideally, the platform would serve as an inspiration for design specifiers, to help them identify and select new 
products and to help manage and share the necessary information. An essential aspect of the thesis project is 
not only to conceptualise a solution, but also to investigate what the building and construction industry across 
the Asia Pacific is ready for. For this purpose, the following research questions has been framed:
1.5	
Research questions
Design specification
• What are the different steps in the design specification and what are the key touch points among the 
stakeholders involved?
Industry contribution
• How can BCI Asia optimise the design specification through the use of modern technology?
Theoretical contribution
• In what way can Frame Innovation assist the design project and enable new ways of thinking?
Figure 2.	
BCI Office in Sydney
==PAGE:11==
USERS
Ev
al
ua
ti
on
 b
y
Sy
nt
he
si
se
 i
nt
o
A
na
ly
se
 a
ga
in
st
Conduct user reserach
Listen to stakeholders
Market landscape
Project scope based on 
client and customer needs
Opportunities in new 
technologies
Validate against project 
scope 
Road Map
 Move to Final Product
Satisfy problem and 
project scope
Rapid prototyping based 
on frames and user needs
Functional requirements
Architects, product suppliers
Concept testing
Feedback and validation
RESEARCH & DISCOVERY
CLIENT
SOLUTION
FINAL PRODUCT
DELIVERABLE
PROJECT SCOPE
EVALUATION
FRAME 
INNOVATION
(Dorst, 2015)
Figure 3.	
	
	
	
Overview of the objectives and design pro­
cess with the theoretical and practical as­
pect
11
Introduction
The project scope is then taken into the design process where the Frame Innovation works as the foundation 
in the development of a solution. The developed solution will be refined through testing and evaluation be­
fore delivery to the client, where the solution should be validated against the initial project scope. From here, 
the deliverable can go into a development of a final product. 
The outcome of the project is threefold, since it is not only a thesis but also an actual project envisioned to 
be carried out by BCI Asia. 
1.6	
Project objectives
Figure 3 illustrates an overview of the design process and objectives of the project. First and foremost, the 
project scope is defined in collaboration with the client and customer needs. 
==PAGE:12==
12
Introduction
1.6.1.	
Theoretical contribution
The project is applying the Frame Innovation approach to a new and real case at a company in Australia. 
Frame Innovation is primarily used on public problem situations, but applying the theory to a system design 
case would also work as a test of the strength of the theory. Furthermore, the project also tests how other 
theories can be combined into a Frame Innovation process which could strengthen the design process. 
1.6.2.	
Educational contribution
The project is using a holistic system design approach with Frame Innovation and is supported by the Product 
Service System approach (PSS). As such, the project has an educational contribution by testing a combination 
of the two theories, which could be used as a teaching example in the course ‘Holistic Design of Engineer­
ing Systems’. As of now, the two theories have not been deliberately combined before, thus the educational 
aspect of the report is to explore how the Frame Innovation could be strengthened through a combination of 
models from supporting theories. Besides exploring how the theories can be combined, the educational con­
tribution is also recognised by describing the transformation process of a real case study. 
1.6.3.	
Practical contribution
The objective in relation to the company is to provide a final presentation of a design suggestion and a 
business model proposal for a new digital information platform. But first, the objective is to investigate and 
justify the possible need for a social platform and if yes, what should it contain. 
The result will among other methods be based on market research, stakeholder and customer mapping, goal 
and Frame Innovation, ideation and conceptualisation with user testing.  
BCI Asia wants to have the regional focus on Singapore and Australia. The main target groups for the plat­
form will be architects and other design specifiers – and BPMs as the paying and driving customers. Although 
the platform is intended for Business-to-Business (B2B), it should not exclude private use and could poten­
tially also work as Business-to-Consumer (B2C). 
As the thesis is the final delivery for DTU’s Design and Innovation Master’s programme, the project will 
follow and be in compliance with the official learning objectives stated in the overall programme description 
(See title page for the learning objectives).
==PAGE:13==
Reading literature
Understanding the company and background
Exploring user needs
Identifying the problem situation
Field research and paradox
Exploring the context
Expanding the field of ‘players’
Analysing and creating themes
Defining frames
Setting requirement for 
future solution
Selecting frames
Transforming frames into
 specific solution
illustrating user journey
Early testing and evaluation
Suggested solution
Test and prove of concept
Implementation strategy
Deliver to client
Project scope
Final proposal
Research & discover
Data collection and 
defining frames
Develop
Implementation strategy
Deliver
Figure 4.	
	
	
	
	
The figure illustrates the use of the the same 
‘explore-define’-concept as the generic dou­
ble diamond model, but run over more steps.
13
Introduction
The design process in this project has been inspired by the sequence of the Frame Innovation approach by 
Kees Dorst, in which he divides the innovation process into nine stages in the ‘Frame Creation Model’, which 
is a part of the overall Frame Innovation process. 
In this case the terminology of a ‘frame’ is used to portray a viewpoint that gives a new perspective on a 
situation (Dorst, Kaldor, & Watson, 2016). The Frame Innovation describes a relatively new and revolution­
ary design process developed by Kees Dorst together with Designing Out Crime research centre, located in 
Sydney (DOC, 2017).  
1.7	
Methodological approach
The overall research and design process used is illustrated in figure 4. The figure shows how the models were 
used in a similar converging and diverging process as in the generic double diamond model, but divided into 
more steps.
==PAGE:14==
9. INTEGRATION
7. FUTURES
8. TRANSFORMATION
5. THEMES
6. FRAMES
4. FIELD
3. CONTEXT
2. PARADOX
1. ARCHAEOLOGY
INPUT
FRAME CREATION MODEL
OUTPUT - MODELS
- Map the problem situation
- Findings from Surveys
- Field research in Singapore
- ‘Because’ statements
- Paradox overview
- Actor-network
- All ‘players’ in the field active or     
   passive
- User Activity Cycle
- “From Context - Frames” Clusters 
themes
- Deep theme exploration
- Pairing themes
- “Who” is good at this...? exploration
- Paradigm and sequence models
- Conceptualisation and ideation
- “If the problem situation is  
   approached as if it is..., then...”
- Requirement specification
- Morphology chart based on User  
   Activity Cycle
- Concept configurations
- Service Blueprint Models
- Business Model Canvas
V l
P
C
- Business Model Canvas BCI Asia
-  Competitor comparison
“We investigate not only what happened 
but also what could have happened”
“What makes this problem hard to solve?”
Exploration of the practices of the inner 
circle of key stakeholders. 
“Consider all (potential) players, who might 
be connected to the problem or the 
solution at some point – actively or 
passively.” 
Investigate and analyse the wide ﬁeld of 
players and their needs, motivation and 
experiences to the problem.
Combine and cluster themes into new 
‘frames’ on the situation.
Thinking forward exercise “Design 
abduction”(Dorst, 2015, p. 49) Eliminate 
frames if they are not useful.
Explore what is required in order for the 
idea or concept to come together.
Integrate plans and ideas with the broader 
context and stakeholder needs. 
Figure 5.	

Steps in the Frame Creation Model - (Dorst, 2015), see 
appendix 1.1
14
Introduction
The Frame Innovation approach aims to structure the design process and investi­
gate a problem situation where it is critical to get a deep and thorough understand­
ing around the problem before considering solutions. 
The stages in the Frame Creation Model range from the initial investigation in the 
‘Archaeology’ stage all the way to ‘Integration’ of the newly identified frame and 
how the solution should be integrated into the broader context of the organisation 
and the stakeholders involved. 
Figure 5 provides an overview of the nine stages in the Frame Creation Model, 
including the inputs that need to be uncovered in each step. To support the Frame 
Innovation process, the project uses models and theory from the Product Service 
Systems (PSS) philosophy and in particular the PROTEUS workbook. (Finken et 
al., 2013) The PSS approach and models have proven to be very helpful in order 
to clearly illustrate the obtained findings achieved throughout the different stages. 
The right side of figure 5 gives an overview of where which models have been 
used in the design process.  
The combination of Frame Innovation and PSS is a new approach, which I have 
not used before. From previous experience with assignments and university proj­
ects, the methodology has been generally inspired by Nigel Cross’s engineering 
strategy and design methods. (Cross, 2008) These methods will also be used to a 
small extent in this project, with the main emphasis on Frame Innovation and sup­
porting methods and models from Product Service Systems (PSS).
The four coloured circles in the bottom corner of each page in the report are to 
indicate where the reader is in overall design process as described in figure 4. 
Also, the methods used and reflection upon use of the methods will be described in 
greater detail in the respective sections in chapter three of the thesis.
==PAGE:15==
Introduction
15
1.8	
Data collection
For the first part of the project, data has mainly been collected through meetings 
at the BCI office in Sydney during the first two weeks. This was important in 
order to get a deep understanding of not only the company operations, but also 
of their position in the market - before focusing on the concrete project scope. 
The reason for this widening of the brief in the beginning, was in order not to 
limit the problem situation before understanding the broader context, and to be 
open to whatever input that might appear. 
In addition to the meetings in the office, there has been two observations in the 
field. The first observation took place at a client meeting, where a trainer from 
BCI organised a live a demonstration session of BCI’s current service system. 
The second observation was during an ‘iFlex’ event at BKA Architecture, where 
BPMs were invited to present and demonstrate their products to the architects. 
In addition to the research conducted in Australia, there was a five day of field 
research in Singapore . The objective for the trip was to obtain insights from lo­
cal stakeholders in Singapore through semi-structured interviews, a two-and-a-
half-hour focus group workshop and from participation at a significant product 
exhibition, Equinox. 
The product exhibition was the final event in Singapore, where architects and 
BPMs come together at an informal but fashionable event, where the BPMs buy 
and set up booths where they can demonstrate their product to the architects. 
The focus group workshop was created with inspiration from the Master’s 
course Staging Co-Creation with Balder Onarheim and Phillip Cash. As such, 
the entire session was specifically designed to focus on realistic user scenarios, 
observing the users in action and testing competitors through strategically de­
signed tasks. The focus group outline can be seen in appendix 3.1.
To ensure a systematic approach to saving and processing the data, analytic note 
templates were used throughout the entire project. After each data collection 
session, an analytic template was filled in with information from the session. 
This also made it easy to go back and examine the gained knowledge and in re­
gards to follow-up meetings, these notes could be sent prior to the next meeting. 
1.9	
Keeping up with time
No matter how long a project is going to last, it is important to have a structural 
overview of the task and milestones. As such, a Gantt chart has been used to 
sustain an overview of methods and milestones throughout the project. When 
constructing the initial Gantt chart, substantial buffers were added in order to 
accommodate any potential risks of running out of time in case of late deliver­
ables from stakeholders or changes to the scope of the project. See Figure 6 on 
next page.
==PAGE:16==
Week numbers
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
Background and project scope
Meeting with Anja and Tim (9th feb)
Literature and methodology research  
Identifying current technologies in the field
Go to Australia (15 th of Feb)
Detailing scope of project with BCI
Stakeholders and market research
Problem statement formulated
Writing Milestone 1
Milestone 1 (handed in on 4th of March)
Hangouts meeting 7th March (7:30 - 8:30 DK)
Exploring user needs
Current and desired functions identified
Goal setting 
Ideation/concept generation
Chosing 3-4 concepts
Writing Milestone 2
Milestone 2 (handed in on 16th of April
Hangouts meeting 19th April (7:30 - 8:30 DK)
Concept evaluatuon and selection
Specifying details of chosen concept
Service blueprint and user journey
Usability testing with focus groups
Workshops with stakeholders
Business and Strategy Model Canvas
Writing Milestone 3
Milestone 3 (handed in on 27th of May
Hangouts meeting 1st May (7:30 - 8:30 DK)
Prototyping (Pretotyping)
Business strategy and implementation plan
Testing and validation of concept
Optimizing concept presentation
Finish writing the report
Hand in of thesis (1st of July)
Preparing presentation
Going back to DK (9th July)
Defend of Master Thesis around the 31st jul
Flight
Physical meetings
Milestones
Skype Meetings
July
February
Marts
April
May
June
Figure 6.	

Gantt-chart over design process (See 
detailed timetables in appendix 1.2)
16
Introduction
==PAGE:17==
17
Introduction
1.10	
Structure of thesis
Following the introduction to the case and the scope of the project, the thesis will guide the reader through an 
in-depth background research of the client company, the industry in which they are working, and supporting 
literature. The background research will be used as preparation for the Frame Innovation process and it is 
the foundation of the project. According to Dorst, this fundamental preparation can neither be neglected nor 
rushed if you want to achieve quality in the following stages of the Frame Creation Model (Dorst, 2015).
The background research will lead up to chapter three, which will be the main part of the thesis, Frame In­
novation.
Chapter three will take the reader through the nine stages of Dorst’s Frame Creation Model. Each step is 
introduced with concrete objectives for the process and outcome, including what input is needed in order to 
complete the current stage. Before moving on to the next stage in the Frame Creation Model, the findings will 
be reviewed and accompanied by a short reflection on the process. 
Chapter three leads up to the next section, which includes the development of the final value proposition and 
the development of the solution. 
Originally, Dorst and Designing Out Crime use the nine steps of the Frame Creation Model in relation to a 
two-hour workshop session with relevant stakeholders, however this does not have to be limited to a work­
shop setting and can with great benefit be used as the backbone of a longer design process.
==PAGE:18==
Background
18
This chapter will provide the reader with important background information of the case company including 
an overview of the client company BCI Asia, their offerings and a clarification of the key activities in the core 
business. As such, chapter two will explain why this is an important market and what the customer segments 
look like.
Along with a walk-through of the case company, this chapter will illuminate the stages of construction and 
the role of the company and how they collect the critical data, that is fundamental to their business. Lastly, the 
findings from the research should clearly show the need for a solution and highlight where along the stages 
of construction the scope of the project will have its focus. 
2.1	
Client company - BCI Asia
The client company is BCI Asia, which is part of BCI Media group based in Sydney, Australia.
The story of BCI has it origin in a story from the 20th century, when a young American entrepreneur rode 
down the streets of Boston, USA. He was taking notes on construction sites and selling the information on 
paper bullets to subcontractors looking for work – this was the birth of the unique business ‘project leads 
service’. 
In 1998, BCI Asia was the first company to introduce ‘project leads service’ in a range of countries in South­
east Asia: Indonesia, Singapore, the Philippines and Malaysia and later on Thailand, Vietnam and Hong Kong 
- See BCI’s Timeline in appendix 2.1
A few years later in 2002, the sister company BCI Australia, was founded to cover the Australian market. 
Today, BCI Media Group is the overall organisation, comprising BCI Asia, BCI Australia and BCI New 
Zealand, see figure 7.
2.	 BACKGROUND
==PAGE:19==
Figure 7.	

Overview of the BCI offices
Background
19
The core business of BCI Media group is to research and report on planning, design, tender­
ing and contracting of building and construction projects. (BCI, 2014) 
As such, the main service is to provide project leads to companies looking for new projects 
and contracts. The service essentially provides the necessary information to bring various 
stakeholders together; on one side, architects searching for products and technologies in or­
der to specify their building projects, and, on the other side, Building Product Manufacturers 
and services seeking to have their services procured and products specified by architects. 
Today BCI Media group is considered to be the leading provider of construction information 
services for Southeast Asia, Australia and New Zealand. Since January 2014, BCI Media 
Group has employed more than 500 people. One of the mission statements of the company 
is: 
“ 
To be the premier information provider for the construction industry, providing clients 
with timely, innovative solutions that enable them to reach their full potential. (BCI, 
2014) 
The overall structure of BCI Media Group is illustrated in figure 8. The organisation is led by 
the CEO and Chairman, Dr. Matthias Krups. This project will primarily focus on BCI Asia, 
and activities relevant to this market where Robert Krups is the Chief Operating Officer for 
this division. 
==PAGE:20==
Figure 8.	

BCI Media Group Organisational Chart
Background
20
==PAGE:21==
Figure 9.	

Offerings - BCI Media Group
Background
21
2.2	
Offerings
The main product offered by BCI Asia, is essentially a 12-month subscription to information 
on construction projects, addressing companies seeking new projects and helping them grow 
their own business. This information can be tied to a specific region or a specific category of 
project e.g. schools, offices or health care projects. Through the online database the subscrib­
ers will be notified about future building and construction projects with sufficient time for 
them to contact and demonstrate how their products and services can be used in these projects. 
The chosen subscription package can be customized and will be priced according to the level 
of information the subscriber wishes to have access to. 
The specific products offered by BCI Asia come in four overall formats as shown in figure 9
• BCI LeadManager
• 	BCI Academy
• 	BCI Economic 
• 	CMD –  Publications and Events
This is basically the same services that are offered in the departments in Australia and New 
Zealand. The main exception in BCI Asia is the absence of a TenderManager service, which is 
an additional application to be used by builders and subcontractors in the tender stages.
“TenderManager is not very relevant in Asia. Asian companies usually only pick subcontrac­
tors they already know through their own network, and they would not be interested in offers 
from unknown subcontractors.” - Robert Krups 
==PAGE:22==
Background
22
2.2.1.	
LeadManager 
LeadManager is the main tool offered by BCI and is the internet-based online service, designed to manage, 
track, share and follow up on project opportunities (BCI Asia, 2017).
The core value of LeadManager is to help the user find projects and to be the first in line to contact a decision 
maker in the building project. By using LeadManager, the user will save a lot of time researching and finding 
relevant projects and detailed information.
LeadManager contains a large search engine, that enable users to search and filter projects based on key­
words, categories, stage of construction, cost estimates, region etc. The identified projects can be saved for 
later on a ‘Watch list’ and users receive notification if there are any updates in the projects. Another function­
ality is the Customer Relationship Management (CRM) system, that allows the user to add notes, follow up 
on project or tasks and export saved companies and contacts to their Microsoft Outlook or Excel. 
When a company subscribes to BCI LeadManager, they might be interested in having more than one user. 
As such, another service is relevant for team management where projects can be shared among the ‘team 
members and managers can monitor the activity in the team and export activity reports and project status to 
Microsoft Excel. 
An additional feature in the BCI LeadManager service includes BCI Notifier, that allows the user to custom­
ise notifications about construction project. At a client meeting, where a training expert from BCI demon­
strated and set up the service to the client, the client could choose to only receive construction information 
relevant to their business and to batch the notifications in only one weekly email to be received on a specified 
day of the week.
2.2.2.	
BCI Academy
BCI Academy is a young division aimed towards helping clients such as BPMs, develop a stronger ability 
to approach and interact with other stakeholders in the industry in order have more sales success. BCI Acad­
emy focuses on face-to-face training and specialised courses including effective ‘Specification Selling’ and 
‘Masterclass Presentation Skills’.
==PAGE:23==
Figure 10.	

BCI Publications
Background
23
2.2.3.	
BCI Economics
BCI Economics reports on building and construction industry across Australia, New Zealand and South­
east Asia. It covers regular releases on forecasts, comprehensive analyses and data commentaries on 
emerging developments or trends within these areas.
2.2.4.	
Cross Media Division (CMD)
CMD is the Asia equivalent to Architectural Information Service (AIS) in Australia and New Zealand. 
This division of BCI Asia focuses on publications and events in the construction industry. 
2.2.5.	
Publications
Three different magazines promote creative architecture, sustainability and social responsibility. The 
three magazines are:
FuturArc, which is a bi-monthly magazine established in 2006 with focus on Green Architecture and 
reports on the substantial impact the building industry has on the environment and society. 
Architecture@, that is an annual publication that not only features the latest news in architecture and 
building technologies, but it also reviews the emerging trends and building technologies that will pave 
the way for innovation into the next generation of constructions in Asia-Pacific. 
Construction+, which is the newest bi-monthly magazine that presents wide-ranging and detailed B2B 
insights and highlights the newest updates from the building and construction industry. The magazine is 
currently focusing on insights from Malaysia, Hong Kong, Singapore and Indonesia and acknowledges 
the most significant developments within architecture, construction and design and they contribute to the 
local construction environment (BCI Asia, 2016).
==PAGE:24==
Background
24
Figure 11.	
	
	
	
Picture from an Equinox event
Figure 12.	
	
	
	

Picture from the BCI ASIA Awards 2016
2.2.6.	
Events and Awards
BCI offers different events with the aim of bringing architects and design specifiers together with relevant 
BPMs, while helping creating brand exposure for BPMs. In Australia these events are called, iFlex, Equinox 
or  Continuous Professional Development (CPD) presentation See further explanation and meeting with the 
AIS Manager in appendix 3.3.
At the events, the BPMs have the opportunity to interact directly with architects and design specifiers and to 
demonstrate their product in a relaxed and informal setting. 
It gives great value and saves time for both architects and design specifiers to see a range of building products 
in one location. For BPMs, the events are perfect opportunities to showcase their products to the architects. 
The benefit for BCI in hosting these events is networking and to maintain a good relationship with the stake­
holders and customers. 
“
It is important to establish good relationships with architects if you want them to share information 
about future project leads. It is not as easy to access this information in Asia as it is in Australia where 
it is publicly available” – Robert Krups. 
Finally, each year BCI Asia also hosts a ‘Top Ten’ award show where they acknowledge the leaders in the 
architecture, building and construction industry in Asia. This is a special celebration where domestic and 
international companies can network among other prominent firms from the industry. This is a very exclusive 
by invitation only event.
2.3	
Stages of construction
This section will provide an insight into the industry, the stages of construction and it will identify some of 
the main stakeholders involved. The stages described in the following, is defined by BCI Media group and is 
portrayed with a research perspective. The overall stages of the construction is illustrated in figure 13.
==PAGE:25==
Figure 13.	
	
	
	
 Stages of Construction, BCI defi­
nition (Appendix 2.3)
Background
25
The construction industry is not an insignificant one, it is rather comprehensive and it involves a large num­
ber of actors from various professions. From electricians and carpenters (subcontractors) to floor, furniture 
and window manufacturers (Building Product Manufacturers - BPM), builders, engineers, architects, urban 
planners, consultants and developers/owners of the project. 
With the different construction stages, come different stakeholders and decision makers. The first four stages 
are to be considered as the Design Stages where design specifications and documentation of the project are 
formed. Appendix 2.2 highlights the different roles and responsibilities. 
The first stage is competition, where architects are competing to be appointed to the project. However, not 
all projects will go through this stage and the owner of the project could bypass this stage by immediately 
appointing an architect without opening it up for competition.
==PAGE:26==
Background
26
The second stage is the where the concept is created and a design brief is formu­
lated by the developer/owner of the project. The project will go to feasibility 
studies to formulate a rough timeline, cost, construction limitations and how the 
project should proceed. Funding options are investigated and a rough business 
case is formulated. 
The third stage is the design stage. At this stage, the architects will specify and 
develop a more specific design plan of the project. This stage will include sup­
port from various engineers, interior designers or landscape architects. At this 
point, no products are finally selected, however potential BPMs might still have 
an influence over what eventually will be used. A development application is 
submitted to the government council for approval. 
The fourth stage, is the documentation where the detailed design specifications 
are written and technical/working drawings are created. By now, the architects 
need to specify all the small details in the project. This includes dimension and 
details about all the products that should be incorporated in the project - every­
thing from windows, floors, panels, wall paint, doors and even door knobs. This 
design specification, made by the architects or other design specifiers during the 
design stages is, however, still unfixed, and it is not a guarantee that the exact 
same products will be used in the final construction. The specification for a prod­
uct might therefore have a comment attached “or equivalent” (BCI Asia, 2017). 
The following two stages are the Tender stages, where the project has been sub­
mitted and approved by the council, state or government and a builder/main 
contractor is about to be appointed. 
The fifth Tender stage, is where the main contractors are called to compete to win 
the construction project. In this case there are two types of tender: An open ten­
der where any contractor is welcome to submit a bid to the project and a selected/
closed tender, where it is only a selected group of contractors who are invited to 
come forward with a bid.
At the sixth post tender stage, a builder has been appointed and the contractor 
starts negotiating final contracts with the potential subcontractors. The winning 
contractor is often decided based on the cost estimate and timeline for the con­
struction.
The final stage is the Construction stage, where the contractor moves to the site 
and starts building the project. Subcontractors, such as electricians and other 
installers also come to the site as the construction moves forward. 
2.4	
BCI research process
The different stages in the research process was explained by one of the local 
Research Managers in Sydney, Kevin Condell. The purpose of the meeting was 
to provide an overview of the research process and to gain insight into Kevin 
Condell’s role as a Research Manager and typical tasks. In order to collect the 
valuable information about current and future construction projects, BCI gener­
ally operates in two teams at each BCI office; A sales team and a research team.
The research team seeks and picks up leads on upcoming construction projects 
from a range of sources.
The sources range from:
• Published newspaper articles
• Websites – government, builders, architects or developers own website. 
• Field research 
• Networking
• Directly from a consultant or developer
• Google
Once the researchers have found a new project, they contact the developers/
owners of the projects, architects or other relevant stakeholders to confirm the 
information and to obtain additional details of the specific project, such as size 
and current status of the building project and the stakeholders involved. 
==PAGE:27==
Figure 14.	
	
	
	 Research Process, BCI
Background
27
This vast amount of information is entered into a big internal BCI database, which has to be confirmed by 
Kevin Condell or another Research Manager before the information can be published.  During the con­
struction stages, the researchers will follow the projects and the information will continuously be updated. 
In BCI Media Group, most of the research is outsourced to the Philippines for cost reasons. However, in 
the Asian countries, research has to be done locally due to the difference in culture, but the procedure of 
collecting the information will still be the same. “If a researcher from the Philippines calls a person from 
e.g. Vietnam or Malaysia, the person would most likely hang up if the researcher does not sound like a 
local.”-  Robert Krups. 
The sales team, on the other hand identifies possible and relevant customers from various sources, such 
as referrals, industry websites, yellow pages, exhibition catalogues etc. Once new potential customers are 
identified, the sales team strategically approaches them through phone calls or emails to tell about the prod­
ucts and highlight the benefits of subscribing to the BCI database. If a potential customer shows interest, 
they can either be offered a live demonstration, where the sales person shares his screen and directly shows 
how the database works, or the sales person can give them access to a free trial. 
2.5	
Literature - WRITE MORE HERE!!!
Studies and literature research shows that there are mainly three areas that are interesting to investigate. 
The building product search, the actual creation of a design specification and lastly the poor collaboration 
among the stakeholders involved in the construction. In terms of most result the poor collaboration has 
been proven richest in documentation. 
The first area that revolves the building product search, focuses on two perspectives. The tedious and time 
consuming process of searching and selecting the right building products and the other perspective that 
covers best practices for Building Product Manufacturers in approaching architects and selling their prod­
ucts. (Davis, 2012) It is no secret that architects do not like to be constantly approached by building product 
sales representatives. (Butcher, 2016)
The second area is the actual information search and creation of a design specification. This is also close­
ly related to the last and perhaps the most essential element, which is the poor collaboration among the 
stakeholders involved in the construction. Studies shows that a root of the problem is that many of these 
==PAGE:28==
Figure 15.	

Design specification
Background
28
stakeholders have their own focus and methods. For instance, the design specifier is responsible for several 
aspect of the design such as selecting the materials to be used in the project. A problem is the actual selection 
of the material and what influences the choice of material. A study conducted by the American Institute of 
Architects shows that 40 percent of professionally conservative architects are more preoccupied with getting 
a project done in time and do not want to risk missing deadlines (Schneidawind, 2016). Beside reaching the 
deadlines, the architects need to consider the client’s expectation in terms of functionality and aesthetics etc. 
While the engineer might be more focusing on specific issues and seek what is the “technical correct” way 
that solves the problem at the lowest cost (Zealand & Architects, 2014).
A UK study by the Task Force on the scope for improving the quality and efficiency of UK construction, 
argues that too many building projects perform poorly or that too much time is spent on construction site in 
order to make the design work in practice. They argue that this could be avoided and the efficiency could be 
improved if there were focused more collaboration among the different stakeholders. 
“
Designers should work in close collaboration with the other participants in the project process. They 
must understand more clearly how components are manufactured and assembled, and how their creative 
and analytical skills can be used to best effect in the process as a whole.”(Egan, 2015).
During a seminar at UTS in Sydney about Building Information Modelling (BIM) and Virtual Design Con­
struction (VDC), Sheryl Staub-French and Julie Jupp, were also talking about some of the issues across the 
supply chain in the building and construction industry, such as commen misunderstanding between the dif­
ferent stakeholders. 
Forward from her, the project will take a practical approach with field research and how to apply the practical 
Frame Innovation methodology on the digital case project. References to additional literature and studies will 
appear throughout the report. 
==PAGE:29==
Figure 16.	

Workers at construction site 
(Pexel)
2.6	
Summary of findings 
The first part of the project has clarified the background of the client company, BCI Asia, and their 
current situation as a service and information provider in the building and construction industry in 
Asia Pacific. From these two chapters, the reader should now have a broad understanding of the situ­
ation and the background of the project. It is obvious that the construction industry is a complicated 
but interesting field with numerous stakeholders and a lot of potential for improvement. 
According to the wishes and insights from BCI members and from field observations, not only the 
problem situation, but also the opportunities for a solution, are focused around the building product 
specification and the collaboration between architects and Building Product Manufacturers (BPM). 
The platform is something BCI Asia would like to build and this design project is therefore set up as 
an initial preparation and research project, where the content should be specified in collaboration with 
the company and relevant stakeholders. How can this background information help create a solution 
and where would it be relevant to focus? The next chapter will describe the transformation process of 
the case study and how an innovative solution emerged with the use of Frame Innovation. 
==PAGE:30==
Figure 17.	
	
	
Nine stages of the Frame 
Creation Model
Frame Innovation
30
This chapter will guide the reader through the nine stages of the Frame Creation Model approach, which has 
been the backbone of the entire design process. The nine steps are shown in figure 17. This new approach, 
developed by Kees Dorst and Designing Out Crime research centre, will illustrate how the fascinating new 
practices for achieving innovation can be applied to a Master’s thesis project. The objective of this thesis 
project is to conceptualise and prototype and develop an information platform for project showcasing, finding 
building product information and sharing information with relevant stakeholders in the design specification 
process. Finally, the objective is to propose a business case and implementation strategy for the final concept.
3.	 FRAME INNOVATION
==PAGE:31==
Figure 18.	

BCI Academy design specification surveys
(See Appendix 2.4 and 2.5)
Frame Innovation
31
3.1	
Archaeology - Digging
This section is the first of the nine stages in the Frame Creation Model; ‘Archae­
ology’ that together with the initial background research looks into the current 
situation in order to find the roots of the problem situation. 
“
We investigate not only what happened but also what could have hap­
pened” (Dorst, 2015, p. 74) 
The objective is to gain in-depth knowledge about the situation and to map out 
the findings before moving on to the next stage. As such, the description of ‘ar­
chaeology’ will refer to digging deep down into the apparent situation to find the 
problem behind the problem. 
3.1.1.	
Survey Findings
In addition to the background research, the BCI Academy department recently 
conducted a survey in January 2017 with 114 design specifiers in Australia, and 
98 in Singapore. The intention behind the survey was to find quantitative infor­
mation on how architects or other design specifiers source product information. 
And, how the design specifiers experience the BPM representatives. Some of 
the key findings from the survey are summarised as follows:
1.	
Sourcing product information
When design specifiers were asked how they find new products and technolo­
gies, the ‘search engines’ such as Google turn out to be the most used sources. 
Other sources which were also frequently used were the manufacturers’ own 
websites, digital or hard publications or architects own in-house library.
2.	
Time spent sourcing product information
39 percent of the respondents to the survey indicated that they use 1-2 hours per 
week searching for product information. However, 36 percent spends between 
2-5 hours on a weekly basis. A remark to this information, is that there is a con­
siderable correlation between the individual respondents’ work experience and 
the time spent searching for products (e.g. senior executive contra junior design 
specifier). 
3.	
Frequency and mode of the Building Product Manufacturer solicitation.  
The survey revealed that design specifiers are contacted weekly at least 9 times 
via email and four times via phone calls. This shows that BPMs are very active 
in pushing their products to the design specifiers.
The survey uncovers and shows a clear potential in optimising the process of 
sourcing product information. Not only from the design specifiers’ perspective 
and the amount of time and lack of specific tools to assist, but certainly also 
from the BPMs’ perspective and how they can better reach out to the design 
specifier. See a summery of the surveys in appendix 2.4 and 2.5.
==PAGE:32==
Figure 19.	
	
	
Skyline from Singapore 
(Shotstash)
Frame Innovation
32
3.1.2.	
Findings from Singapore
As the project focuses on Singapore and Australia, I had the opportunity to travel 
to Singapore as part of the field research to meet and interview local stakehold­
ers, facilitate an intensive focus group workshop and participate in a fashionable 
product exhibition. The overall purpose with the trip was to investigate how the 
local architects work and in particular to understand their process of finding and 
selecting the right product for their building projects. 
The first two sit-down interviews were conducted in semi-structured manner. As 
such, the preparation included specific questions and areas of relevance, but the 
actual questions used were dependent on the development of the conversation. 
The first meeting was with Jean Tan, a current architect at ‘61 Architects’ in Sin­
gapore with 10 years of experience in the industry. The interview was set up as 
a 45 minutes semi-structured interview at the architectural firm. The interview 
not only contributed to a validation of the previous findings from the survey, 
but Jean Tan also provided new information that was not considered prior to the 
meeting. See appendix 3.4.  
In Singapore there are generally two types of construction projects; Governmen­
tal and private projects. 
For governmental projects the architect is not allowed to specify the brand of the 
product. The architect is only allowed to specify the technical information and a 
description of the product, but in the end the client might not choose the product 
that was initially imagined. Jean Tan gave an example of choosing white colour 
tiles: 
“
There are many white colour tiles, so when the product is selected, the cli­
ent might just pick the white tiles that is within their budget, but it might 
not be the right colour or style that we wanted” – (Jean Tan, 2017) 
It is easier with private construction products where the architect is allowed to 
be very specific in describing what they want in their specification. If there is a 
specific product they really like, they are allowed to name the brand as well. In 
this way, the architects can be more comfortable when they hand over the spec­
ification to the client. 
When discussing which critical factors might influence the choice of product, Jean 
Tan stated the following:
• Trust is the most important factor, even more important than the price. 
When it comes to the price, Jean Tan would leave it up to the client, unless 
the price is obviously too expensive. 
• Project reference and pictures of how products have been applied in a pre­
vious construction is very important and it gives confidence when you can 
see that a product successfully has been used in another setting. 
• Information! And very detailed and technical information. Depending on 
the project, there is usually a lot of requirements they need to consider 
such as compliance and local standards. As such, it is very important to be 
able to read about the technical information of the products. 
==PAGE:33==
Frame Innovation
33
The second interview with the local architect Timothy Wung from WSP Parson 
Brinckerhoff was not as rich due to language barriers and less time. However, 
many of the previous findings were confirmed and similar to Jean Tan and the 
survey responses, Wung uses Google as one of the first options when searching 
for product information. 
Secondly, Wung just like Jean Tan, strongly emphasised the importance of 
knowing the product and manufacturer behind in order to have confidence in 
the specification. 
“
If we choose a new product from a manufacturer we are not familiar with, 
we do a background check to make sure they are legit and trustworthy” – 
Timothy Wung 
To effectively sustain an overview of the situation and information, the accu­
mulated data from the interviews and the initial research stage was mapped in 
a problem situation map in figure 20. Mapping the problem situation with this 
method can be an important factor to help understand why and how the involved 
stakeholders are stuck in this situation and why they are requesting a solution. 
As such, the map was essentially used to summarise the archaeological findings 
and was used in meetings to easily show a holistic overview of the problem 
situation.
3.1.3.	
Methods used in this section and how could it have been done differently
The model in figure 20 effectively maps out the problem situation and provides 
an overview of the findings. This helps to sustain a clear understanding of the sit­
uation. It explains what is the problem, who is involved, what are the reasons for 
the existence of the problem, and how previous attempts have tried to solve the 
situation, or how the situation could be avoided. The lower bottom of the model 
is to quickly connect some of the statements to visual images. The limitation of 
the model is that it does not show how the different statements in the circles are 
connected to each other, but instead it merely clusters the statements according 
to ‘what’, ‘who’, ‘where’, ‘why’ and ‘how solved’. However, at this early re­
search stage, the objective is to create a holistic overview and not necessarily to 
explore the correlation in detail between the problem areas as this could possibly 
lead to early fixation of the focus and limit the creativity when exploring the 
future frames. 
3.1.4.	
Important findings from this section
•	
	There is a poor relationship between the BPM and design specifier even 
though both sides need each other. 
•	
Specification and sourcing relevant product information is a tedious and 
time-consuming process including Google search, use from previous proj­
ects, and in-house library search.
•	
The workshop in Singapore confirmed that there is a need for a better and 
more transparent way of finding and selecting product information. 
•	
The architects would be reluctant to choose a BPM if they are not familiar 
with their work or if there is insufficient amount of product information. 
==PAGE:34==
Figure 20.	
	
	
Mapping the problem 
situation 
Frame Innovation
34
==PAGE:35==
Frame Innovation
35
3.2	
Paradox - Clarifying 
As the overall problem situation has been highlighted and mapped out, the next 
step is to dig deeper into the roots of the problem and ask the question: “What 
makes this problem hard to solve?” 
To answer this question, this stage will look into the paradoxical situations. The 
interpretation of a ‘paradox’ according to Dorst is the clash of rationalities and 
it can be used in the sense of a complex ‘because’ statement that consists of two 
or more conflicting statements (Dorst, 2006).
The problem situation map in figure 20 focuses on the design specification 
process with the emphasis on the architects and other design specifiers. It was 
noted that architects are under a lot of pressure from many angles including 
tight deadlines, requirements from the government with Continuous Profession­
al Development (CPD) points and bothersome and sometimes very irrelevant 
solicitations from pushy product sales representatives (Australian Institute of 
Architects, 2015). 
When it comes to the specification process, there are different intentions and 
needs depending on the viewpoint. 
3.2.1.	
Building Product Manufacturer - BPM
The BPM want to have their product specified by the architect in order to in­
crease their chances to be procured by the project owner of the project. Basical­
ly, their main intention is to sell their products and to get as many architects or 
other design specifiers to consider their product when designing a new building 
project.
• Because architects or other decision makers need to specify every single 
product in construction projects, the BPM try to approach and convince 
the architects to use their products.
3.2.2.	
Design specifiers
Architects want to find the right products for their project specification. It needs 
to be relevant. They do not like to be approached all the time and especially not 
if it is irrelevant. (Butcher, 2016)
• Because there are too many options for sourcing building product infor­
mation, the design specifiers use a lot of time sourcing – mainly through 
Google or or by attending events e.g. iFlex or Equinox.  
• Because architects are constantly approached by BPMs who found them 
through BCI LeadManager, the design specifiers have a negative percep­
tion of BCI and their services.
• Because, architects or other design specifiers need to specify every single 
product in construction projects, they are dependent on the BPMs and 
their knowledge. 
• Because, the architects need to have confidence in their choice of prod­
ucts, they need to do background checks and have direct contact with the 
manufacturer to make sure they are trustworthy.
Figure 21 shows some of the core paradoxes that make the problem hard to 
solve. For BCI Asia, it is critical to find out how to get a better relationship with 
the architects - without having to stop giving their contact information to the 
BPMs. 
3.2.3.	
==PAGE:36==
Figure 21.	
	
	
	
	
Core paradoxes – What makes this problem hard to 
solve?
Frame Innovation
36
==PAGE:37==
Figure 22.	

Time pressure (Pexels)
Frame Innovation
37
3.2.4.	
Methods used in this section and how could it have been done differently
The objective with constructing different paradoxes is to investigate what makes the problem hard 
to solve.  In connection with the problem situation, the identification of paradoxes is a good way of 
summarising the findings and to understand the situation. It is another way of studying different and 
conflicting discourses in the situation. All the above mentioned paradoxes are important to consider 
when moving closer to the creation of frames. 
3.2.5.	
Important findings from this section
•	
One of the core paradoxes is that researching and specifying new building products require 
time and confidence, but the the design specifiers are under time pressure due to competition 
and tight budget
•	
Because the design specifiers are under time pressure and tight budgets, they prefer going with 
something they are familiar with and trust. 
==PAGE:38==
Frame Innovation
38
Figure 23.	
	
	
	Business Model Canvas – 
BCI Asia – See appendix 
2.6
==PAGE:39==
Frame Innovation
39
3.3	
Context - Exploration
In the ‘Context’ stage, the idea is to explore the practices of the inner circle of 
key stakeholders. At this stage, the core paradoxes are put aside and not looked 
at again until much later in the process. 
“
We need to deliberately turn away from the core paradox if we are to shift 
the problem situation” (Dorst, 2015, p. 76) 
A well-organized approach to explore the stakeholders and their practices is to 
create a Business Model Canvas, which is also one of the essential models in 
PSS approach and is described in workbook #4 in PROTEUS. (Finken et al., 
2013). In addition to exploring BCI Asia and their closely related stakeholders, 
this section will also identify some of the potential competitors in the market 
who have tried to solve a similar problem situation.
3.3.1.	
Business Model Canvas and Identifying stakeholders
The Business Model Canvas (BMC) is based on the collected information from 
research and office meetings with representatives from various BCI depart­
ments. The entire BMC in figure 23, identifies BCI Asia’s current situation and 
has been brought to meetings where it has been reviewed and refined together 
with Robert Krups, COO and Cathryn Zhao, Marketing Manager. 
The customer segment in the current BMC covers a vast amount of stakeholders 
that are active in the construction stages. The architects, engineers, project own­
ers/developers and Building and Product Manufacturers (BPM), the latter being 
the largest and most important segment of the three mentioned. It also includes 
the main contractors (construction companies) and subcontractors (plumber, 
carpenter, electrician etc.). The subcontractors, will get involved once the main 
contractor is bidding on a project and seeks quotes from various subcontractors. 
For the customer segments, the relationship will generally start with a direct 
contact - either visit or phone call, which is also the primary sales channel. 
Architects or design specifiers are key partners in the BMC.  In order for BCI 
to connect with them, the events arranged by AIS or CMD have proven to be 
a key activity due to its popularity among these actors. By attending an iFlex 
event at BKA Architecture, this was quickly confirmed by one of the attending 
architects.
“
When I am going into the detailed product specification I will usually con­
tact AIS for an iFlex event” – Architect from BKA Architecture.
==PAGE:40==
Frame Innovation
40
3.3.2.	
What has been tried before?
With the traditional hard copy or online product catalogue obsolete or disrupted, 
there is an increasing interest in creating a tool to assist the design specifiers in 
sourcing product information. Before creating a new solution, it is important to 
understand the existing solutions in the market and what has been tried before. 
The following section will briefly go through some of the existing solutions on 
the market and the competing factors. The following parameters were used to 
determine which sites to investigate (Schade, 2013).
• Similar content and functionality to what a future solution should offer
• 	Best overall user experience 
• 	Unique digital features and innovative solution 
• 	Strongest and most important competitors in the market 
• 	Our customers are most likely to compare us against
Based on the above stated points the following; Architizer, Archello, Heinze 
and Sweets are currently the four biggest players in the field that are providing 
building product information. 
“
Our marketplace that matches manufacturers with actively specifying 
architects.”
Architizer is an American online digital-media start-up, that last year received $ 
7 million to develop their online product marketplace for architects. (McKnight, 
2016)
Their initial focus was to enable architects to create online portfolios and share 
their work with colleagues, but now they are also trying to focus on sourcing 
building product information (Architizer, 2017a). 
The user experience is positive and easy to use from the first attempt. The Arch­
itizer platform does not contain a lot of technical details, but instead it contains 
a large library of architectural project examples with large scenic professional 
pictures. However, with a large library of pictures, the loading and response 
time is rather slow, which has a negative effect on the user experience. Architiz­
er’s paying customers are the Building Product Manufacturers, who can have a 
brand gallery page that is compared to a Linkedin site for building material (Ar­
chitizer, 2017b). As such, their business model is based on promoting building 
product listings and advertisements.
Archello focuses on branding themselves as a storytelling website about ‘How 
it’s made’ (Archello, 2017).
They have regional websites, ensuring availability and relevance. The user 
experience is good and everything looks professional with large pictures. The 
product specification part is not very detailed and you will have to contact the 
manufacturers for more information. It is a good place for showcasing your 
projects but not very useful when sourcing in depth detail information. 
==PAGE:41==
Frame Innovation
41
Archello is not the closest competitor compared to Architizer due to the poor 
product information and more focus on the appearance. It is better for showcase 
and demonstration, but less relevant for specification. 
Heinze is a traditional German online product catalogue. They have optimised 
their platform and incorporated newer features to the existing solution. Such as 
product descriptions, manufacturer details and CAD-files – this is not available 
for most of the products. The entire site is in German and they also promote 
themselves as Germany´s leading information platform for building products, 
company profiles and architect objects (Heinze, 2017).
Sweets is an American based product catalogue with a range of content features. 
The idea is to search and use the comprehensive product library and select ap­
propriate building products (Sweets, 2017).
The strength lies in the access to comprehensive product information including 
CAD files, BIM objects, specification, catalogues, galleries, green product infor­
mation and more. 
In order to engage the users, Sweets focuses on being a one-stop sourcing lo­
cation for trusted building product information. It is up to the user how much 
content they want to upload, and there is no limit. 
Sweets is very strong in regards to specification and comprehensive product de­
tails. However, it is not well suited for browsing or finding inspiration. Overall it 
can be compared to the online and traditional German product catalogue Heinze. 
“
Selector.com is the premier destination for architects, designers and build­
ers looking for quality products from leading suppliers.” 
Selector from New Zealand offers product information with large project pic­
tures. The information is specifically concentrated in Australia and New Zea­
land, which makes it attractive to local users. It promotes the local BPMs and 
ensures availability for local design specifiers. 
Besides offering a pleasant user interface, the content is limited and so is the 
project information. 
3.3.3.	
Competitor comparison
Compared to the American Architizer, BCI has the advantage of being the owner 
of a vast amount of constantly updating data. It has to be further examined if this 
data somehow could be incorporated or used in connection with the architects’ 
search for relevant building products.
After all, BCI  has the data to know when and where a new project lead is on the 
market. 
Let us say, a new school building project is published on the database and the 
published data states that an architect has already been appointed to the project. 
Subsequently, the appointed architect should be notified and directed to the new 
platform, which will provide the architect with an overview of previous related 
building projects. Not only would this inspire the architect through project pic­
tures, but the previous building project should also be accompanied by a product 
list, in order to get detailed inspiration. 
==PAGE:42==
Figure 24.	
Competitor comparison
Frame Innovation
42
==PAGE:43==
Figure 25.	
S t a k e h o l d e r s 
shaking hands (Pexels)
Figure 26.	
Iflex Event ar­
ranged by AIS, Sydney
Frame Innovation
43
3.3.4.	
Methods used in this section and how could it have been done differently?
A mixture of business and market analysis has been used to explore the larger context of the situation. 
The BMC was used to ensure a structured and cohesive overview of the context and the current business of 
BCI Asia. The benefit of using the BMC is its ability to uncover all the essential parts of the business such 
as value proposition, key activities, revenue streams etc. As such, the different fields in the BMC force the 
designer to deeply understand each area and how they are connected. The BMC is also highly recognised 
in the PSS approach, where it is used  to uncover the current situation of a particular business and later to 
present a new design proposal. To improve the BMC an additional Value Proposition canvas could have 
been used to explore the fit between the customer needs and the service offered. However, this was not 
considered necessary in this case. The important thing was to understand the overall context and not to 
investigate the current value proposition in detail. In order to validate how the user would perceive these 
other players it will be beneficial to go through a usability test with design specifiers. Not only could this 
give a validation of the competitor comparison but it would also help understanding how design specifiers 
actually work and what is important to them.
3.3.5.	
Important findings from this section
•	
BCI was initially not on good terms with design specifiers, since BCI was responsible for them being 
bombarded with sales pitches.
•	
For this reason, BCI owns Architectural Information Service (AIS) in Australia and Cross Media Di­
vision (CMD) in Singapore. These separate departments are considered a key activity in sustaining a 
good relationship with design specifiers.
•	
	The market research revealed that other players have tried to solve the problem in their own way, 
nonetheless, how well they have succeeded in doing so is not entirely obvious. 
==PAGE:44==
Frame Innovation
44
Figure 27.	
	
	
	
	Actor-Network/Ecosystem 
representation – See appendix 
2.7
==PAGE:45==
Frame Innovation
45
3.4	
Field - Expanding 

Now the context has been uncovered including an overview of the stakeholders 
who are directly impacted by the current situation in BCI Asia.  When looking 
forward, which stakeholders could be involved in, or interested in a new solu­
tion? The Field stage aims to explore the potential stakeholders and their inter­
connections and common interests. 
3.4.1.	
Actors in the socio-technical system
Early in the process, the relevant stakeholders and their correlation were mapped 
in an Actor-Network representation of the socio-technical system, which also 
can be related to the Ecosystem map (Finken et al., 2013). The main idea of us­
ing this model is to better understand and visualise the interconnections among 
the stakeholders, which are important to be aware of when creating frames and 
future solutions. The elements that are included in the map are aligned with the 
findings from the Business Model Canvas.
3.4.2.	
Interconnections among stakeholders
The various flows of information, revenue or material/data are illustrated with 
different line colours. The key difference between the information and material/
data, is that material/data is the essential data that is published into the current IT 
platform, whereas the blue information line is human interaction, which has no 
direct influence on the data in the current IT platform. This includes interaction 
such as daily research, sales pitch or operational communication. 
When observing the architect and other design specifiers it seems clear that they 
get information from various directions. On the left side, the actors are more 
active and want to ‘push’ the information to the architect through pitching or 
taking the product to the architect. While on the right side, the actors or sources 
are more passive and it is essentially the architect and design specifiers who 
come to them to source product information. As such, these actors or sources 
are using a ‘pull’ strategy (Brocato, 2010). The area of intervention has been 
marked as the link between design specifiers and the BPMs during the product 
specification, which includes BCI Asia and the operational management as an 
important element. By creating the boundary, it narrows the scope of the project 
and it will make it easier to select which important stakeholders to include when 
identifying needs. 
3.4.3.	
Break-downs in the socio-technical system
The noticeable breakdowns are mapped two places in the Actor-network, these 
break-downs are represented by a red lightning and indicate where there are 
shortcomings in the current processes.
1.	
Product and project sourcing for architects and design specifiers.
The architect or another design specifier will have to determine and specify all 
the products that are to be incorporated into the construction project. This task is 
seen as a time consuming process that involves Google search, visiting BPMs’ 
websites and requesting quotes and technical specifications. Based on a survey 
made by AIS, architects use on an average 1-2 hours per week on this. 
“
To be honest, I am primarily using ve when sourcing products information. I 
am not using any website or product library in particular” – Architect from 
BKA Architecture
==PAGE:46==
Frame Innovation
46
2.	
Building Product Manufacturers don’t know how to approach and pitch 
architects with their products in an appropriate way
Architects do not like BCI as much as the BPMs do. A BPM who has subscribed 
to BCI and the BCI LeadManager, will be notified every time a relevant project 
lead comes up. Since the project lead usually will include contact details for the 
architect associated with the project, the architect is bombarded with calls from 
the BPM trying to demonstrate and sell them the product.  AIS and CMD, are the 
two groups that facilitate events for architects and BPMs such as an iFlex, and 
Equinox event, in order to help both parties connect and share ideas and insights 
across the fields.  
Creating an Actor-Network representation of the socio-technical system helped 
understand how the different stakeholders interact with each other and how BCI 
acts as a connecting link between the different actors in the construction indus­
try. An important remark to the representation is, that the departments and staff 
members are essential to the research and interaction driven operations which 
are the key resources for BCI and what lies behind their current IT platform. It 
is important to note that the Actor Network has been refined several times due to 
new information from the company as well as findings from field research. The 
current research has been confirmed by BCI Asia, however the representation 
illustrates a simplified picture of a much more complex system.
3.4.4.	
Exploration of the broad field of players
Together, the BMC and Actor-Network  provide a well-structured overview of 
the context of the current situation and the connection between BCI Asia and the 
key stakeholders.  The next objective is now, to consider all (potential) players, 
including anyone who might be connected to the problem or the solution at some 
point – actively or passively (Dorst, 2015). As such, the focus was moved from 
the ‘players’ that are already known, to the exploration of the broad potential 
field of players. 
This is mapped out in figure 28, where the inner circle highlights the players 
who definitely are involved in the potential solution. The outer circle is based 
on assumptions on who could potentially be involved. This includes students 
who might not be the primary target group, but their opinion should not be over­
looked. The project owner/developer of the construction project does not act as 
a design specifier, however the project owner/developer is the one who pays the 
bill, and who ultimately has the last saying when procuring products. As such, 
the handover of the technical design specification from the architect to the proj­
ect owner is a critical step. 
“
There is a big potential in creating a stronger collaboration and transpar­
ency between the architect and the project owner during the specification 
process.”- Shannon Daniel, Account Manager BCI Australia. 
Bloggers are also mentioned as potentially involved players. Online bloggers 
with a huge number of followers are becoming more and more recognised as an 
attractive marketing channel in regards to generating interest. But the need of 
design specifiers is currently still considered to be the foundation for any new 
solution.
==PAGE:47==
Frame Innovation
47
Figure 28.	
Who is involved and who could be involved?
==PAGE:48==
Figure 29.	
Google search is the first go-to 
place for design specifiers (Pexels)
Figure 30.	
Private or students who could be 
involved as stakaholders (Pexels)
Frame Innovation
48
3.4.5.	
Methods used in this section and how could it have been done differently
The main difference between the Actor-Network in figure 27 and the complementary overview of stake­
holders in figure 28 is that the latter is more exploratory as to who is involved, without considering how 
they are involved in connection to the surrounding stakeholders. In contrast, the Actor-Network structurally 
illustrates the interconnections and how the stakeholders are involved. The reason for using both models is 
that the Actor-Network model illustrates the current situation and analyzes the inner circle of current stake­
holders, while the circular model from the Frame Innovation gives more freedom to imagine who might be 
involved and to separate them from the inner circle. Another method to effectively identify the importance 
and commitment of the various stakeholders is to create a Stakeholder grid to map the stakeholders in a pow­
er/interest matrix (Hayes, 2007). However, this is primarily used in relation to change management where 
stakeholders attitude towards a proposed changed is analyzed.
3.4.6.	
Important findings from this section
•	
	In addition to the inner circle of the key stakeholders, other stakeholders such as students could be 
involved. After all, they are soon to become graduates and professional design specifiers.   
•	
	BCI Asia works as the connecting link between BPM and design specifier as such, BCI Asia would 
already be in a good position to create a stronger collaboration among them. 
==PAGE:49==
Figure 31.	
	
	
	Picture from the focus 
group session in Sin­
gapore
Frame Innovation
49
This was obtained by giving the attendees in the focus group a task – ‘Find a fit­
ting product your way’.  The following is an extract of the presented task sheets.
TASK 1: BUILDING PRODUCT SOURCING – Choose one
A.	
You have been asked to design  a hospital in Singapore.
• Could you please show us how you would source product options for the 
flooring in the patient rooms? 
• The client would like options that are sustainable as well as easy to main­
tain. They would like a locally sourced product.
B.	
You have been asked to design a high-end hotel in Singapore. 
• Could you please show us how you would source acoustic panelling op­
tions for the conference room areas? 
• The panelling will need to ensure it meets building codes for Singapore 
and has a quick installation time due to time constraints at construction.
3.5	
Themes - Thinking, Clustering and Analysing 

In this section, the objective is to create valuable and rich themes based on the 
stakeholder needs.  
3.5.1.	
User Activity Cycle 
Based on the field research in Singapore with interviews and an intensive focus 
group session, a User Activity Cycle has been created, see figure 32. The benefit 
of the model is that it effectively recognises the sequential user activities before, 
during and after the product specification process. 
The User Activity Cycle is divided into three focus areas: 
• 	Pre-activities: The time before the user starts their initial search process.
• 	During: This is the activities that the user goes through during the actual 
specification process. 
• 	Post: The time when the user hands over the technical specification and 
their needs for a selection process ends. Now it is up to the owner, contrac­
tor or subcontractor to procure and install the products. 
The benefit of creating the User Activity Cycle is to identify the fundamental 
activities in the design specification process and the related user needs. Having 
this overview also makes it easier to identify where and how the process could 
be optimised. One of the methods that was used to uncover this information was 
to observe the users in action. This is also one of the recognised techniques from 
Nigel Cross’s strategies for product design (Cross, 2008). 
==PAGE:50==
Figure 32.	

User Activity Cycle
Frame Innovation
50
==PAGE:51==
Figure 33.	
Overall activities in the User Activity Cycle
Frame Innovation
51
The idea was to set up a realistic scenario for the participants in order for them to demonstrate how 
they source the necessary product information. Each attendee subsequently would fill out a “mind 
map” to answer the following questions:
• Which product did you look for and what did you find?
• 	How was the process of narrowing down and choosing a product? (sources, keywords etc.)
• 	Critical information related to the product?
• Anything else?
The result was astonishing. Each one of the seven architects were highly engaged and they were 
sketching and explaining their process and what influenced their choice. See appendix 3.2 for a 
summary of the focus group session.
The first overall step in choosing the product starts with a design brief developed in collaboration 
with the project owner. Once the project has been approved by the governmental authority the 
design specifier now has to go into the detailed specification. It is at this stage the design spec­
ifier needs to research and find the right building product for the particular project. Having this 
understanding can be a main key when creating a solution that could satisfy their needs. In the 
second half of the Focus Group session, the participants were asked to test four different compet­
itor websites; Architizer, Blimp, Sweets and Archello. In this session, the participants indicated 
that they could see a potential in creating a new tool to easier and faster source building product 
information. This could potentially be a combination of the presented websites. There should be a 
balance between the level of information and an appealing front end with pictures and easy-to-use 
search function.  
3.5.2.	
Thinking - What is important to the stakeholders?
From the current archaeological knowledge within the field, it is now possible to create and iden­
tify frames. The process to find appropriate frames follows Dorst’s step-by-step model, where we 
go back and move from context to frames (Dorst, 2015).
1.	
Define criteria based on Design Brief
• Setting requirements and compliance to the 
specification based on the Design Brief
2.	
Start searching
• Looking into internal office library and previous 
projects
• Own contact and knowledge 
• Google Search, define keywords
• Platforms, (Arhcdaily, Blimp, BCA) Magazines. 
3.	
Narrowing search 
• Availability; region and delivery terms through 
filter search
• Performance; durability, warranties etc.
• Comparing and narrow the ‘basket’
• Go through company websites and shortlist 
relevant products
4.	
Contact BPM
• Detailed product information + samples
• Project reference and specs.
• Price points and maintenance
• Other
5.	
Product comparison
• Compare the final basket, Pros N’ Cons
• Compare to own contact, previous projects 
etc.
• Download and implement BIM object in the 
BIM Revit model
6.	
Selection
• Final product is selected
• Technical specification (In SGP you cannot 
specify the brand in governmental projects)
==PAGE:52==
Figure 34.	
Exploring stakeholders and what is important to them, 
(See larger version Appendix 4.3)
Frame Innovation
52
==PAGE:53==
Figure 35.	
Clustering themes (See larger version Appendix 4.3)
Frame Innovation
53
The first step is listing the current key stakeholders including potentially future key “players” in 
the field on a large canvas, see figure 34.  These identified stakeholders are now being examined 
according to their needs and what is important to them. This is written down on notes and placed 
next to the stakeholder. E.g. the needs from the design specifiers were based on the findings from 
Singapore, surveys, experiences during the events and interviews with architects. In addition to 
the key stakeholders, the private enthusiasts and architectural students have also been considered 
in the matrix. Even though they are not considered to be within the main customer segment they 
are still potential users and should therefore not be ignored. In systems design it is as always 
important to take account of the broad field of stakeholders (Elliott & Deasley, 2007).  The 
needs listed in this section are centred around specification processes and the process of sourcing 
building product information. The needs are based on the findings from the surveys, interviews, 
events, observation and focus group session in Singapore. 
3.5.3.	
Clustering themes
Once the needs, values and “currencies” of the stakeholders have been identified and listed as 
statements in the matrix, the next step towards formulating frames, is to re-cluster the statements 
into new abstract groups, see figure 35. By this step, the focus is moved away from the stake­
holders and the statements are not to be associated with the related stakeholder. Dorst describes 
the process of creating themes and ‘fruitful’ frames as one of the hardest parts of the Frame Cre­
ation process. This process also took a week where it originally was scheduled to be one or two 
days. Fortunately, the process was positively pushed forward as a result of a helpful and unique 
meeting with the authors. 
“
In a way, it should not surprise us that these steps are hard” (Dorst, 2015, p. 161) 
==PAGE:54==
Figure 36.	
	
Designing for the 
common good
Figure 37.	
Kees Dorst (t.l), Rodger Watson (t.r)
Figure 38.	

Themes and new layer of depth, See appendix 4.4
Frame Innovation
54
3.5.4.	
Meeting with the authors behind the theory 
During the theme and Frame Creation process I had the unique opportunity to meet and present the 
current findings to Professor Kees Dorst and Rodger Watson at the Designing Out Crime office in Syd­
ney. The purpose of the meeting was to meet and present the project to the authors behind the Frame 
Innovation approach, which is the backbone of the project to and to explain how the theory has been 
applied in this project. Secondly, this was a chance to have valuable feedback on the current findings, 
the design process and the next steps. From the meeting it was clear that the themes should be explored 
on a deeper level and subsequently another reflection on their deeper meaning. Kees pointed out, that 
information and knowledge are not the root of the problem situation. The information is already out 
there – just use Google.  But there are other reasons why architects need to use a lot of time. One of 
the most critical themes that emerged from this discussion was the human need of ‘trust’, which is also 
correlated to two other themes of confidence and reassurance.
The overall themes illustrated in figure 35 can be categorised as: a collaborative solution based on trust 
and support, and themes concentrating on availability of relevant information with attractive and trust­
worthy options. To move into a deeper exploration of the individual themes, they were mapped out in 
a nomological network. This is where the words and ideas to the themes emerge, based on experience 
and associations that express the meaning of the themes. The idea behind the nomological network, is 
to deepen the themes and to get a profound understanding of the theme and what lies behind it. Figure 
38 shows how two of the themes were explored on a deeper level. The exploration of all the themes 
can be seen in appendix 4.3.
==PAGE:55==
Figure 39.	
Factulty of Design, Architecture & Building 
- UTS
Figure 40.	
The iconic architecture of Sydney Opera house
3.5.5.	
Methods used in this section and how could it have been done differently
In this section, the objective was to create valuable and rich themes based on the stakeholder needs.  
Another way of organising qualitative data into related groups or themes is by the use of an Affinity diagram 
or KJ method after its author, Jiro Kawatika (Spool, 2004). Similar to the creation of themes, affinity dia­
gramming supports creative innovation since there are generally no predetermined categories. This method 
can, however, be a very time-consuming process since it usually involves a large data set, including state­
ments from interview transcripts and notes from user observations. In contrast, the theme creation method 
used in this project is a relatively quick and dirty way of clustering the stakeholder needs. 
All of the previously mentioned stakeholder needs are important to have in mind when creating suitable 
frames. It is, however, almost impossible to satisfy every single stakeholder need, but when exploring themes 
and deciding on which one to follow, it is important to be aware of any potential trade-offs that might occur. 
With regards to the User Activity Cycle, the Frame Innovation does not present a method to achieve the same 
insights, which makes it harder to create themes and analyse the user needs. As such, the model works as a 
good supplement to the Frame Innovation. 
3.5.6.	
Important findings from this section
•	
The ‘during’ stage in the User Activity Cycle does not start before the design brief is approved and the 
project has received a Development Approval (DA) from the council, state or government
•	
	A critical step before selecting the right building product is to contact and have a physical meeting with 
the BPM. 
•	
	From a meeting with the authors of Frame Innovation Kees Dorst and Rodger Watson, the themes were 
evaluated and ‘trust’ emerged as one of the most important themes. 
•	
The user activities were created on the findings from surveys and field research in Singapore
==PAGE:56==
Figure 41.	
	
	
	
Pairing themes – See appendix 
4.5
Frame Innovation
56
==PAGE:57==
IMMEDIATE NEED
RELIABLE CHOICES
FRAMES - PAIRING THEMES
“Who” is good at this.. (2. round)
Figure 42.	
	
	
	
Who is good at this; Immediate need and 
reliable choices.
Frame Innovation
57
3.6	
Frames - Analysing 
Even though the themes have proven rich in explanation und understanding, they cannot individ­
ually act as a fruitful frame. They would not cover the entire solution space but instead the themes 
would need to be combined in a structured process (Dorst, 2015).
When creating new combinations that might change into a new paradigm from the old, it is now 
evident to ask “Who has done this before?” and “How did they do it?” This can lead to new frames 
starting with: if the problem situation is approached as if it is…, then… Figure 41 is the result of a 
brainstorming session, where new potential frames emerged from combining the themes. 
Three of the themes are marked with a blue outline; the online sharing economy platform ‘Airbnb’, 
Australia’s online selling and buying market space ‘Gumtree’ and finally Duolingo - an application 
where users can learn new languages through gamification. These are examples of frames that 
successfully have been solving their own problem situation and with themes that are similar to the 
problem situation in this project.
These potential frames were presented to Robert Krups in an evaluation and brainstorming meeting. 
From the discussion it was recognised that one underlying aspect was overlooked. Instead of focus­
ing on the community as a driving factor for the success of e.g. Airbnb, Uber or ASOS, it might be 
more relevant to understand the problems or customer needs that these companies actually solve. 
For instance, do people go to Airbnb because they want to be a part of the community or is it simply 
because they are traveling and need a good place to stay at an attractive price? 
This discussion led to another round of frame exploration with the purpose of really understanding 
“why” are some of these companies successful in what they do, and what is the main purpose of 
their existence. Some of the identified companies, that could act as potential frames are listed in 
figure 42 and  further clarified on the following page. 
==PAGE:58==
Figure 43.	

Sequence of combined 
frames 
Frame Innovation
58
From this investigation, it was apparent that if the solution was approached as 
if it were Airbnb, UBER, or the online fashion market ASOS, then the solution 
should focus on immediate problem solving by having attractive and reliable 
options available. 
When combining these new identified perspectives, the successful sequence can 
be explained as shown in figure 43
• The customer has an immediate need, e.g. I need new shoes. How do we 
solve this need?
• What can I get? The customers are presented with a range of attractive 
options that fit their need e.g. shoes. By using filters, the customer can 
narrow the search and reduce the number of options. 
• ‘How can I trust it?’ The customer can now see reviews of the experience 
and opinion of other users (Community).
• Finally, the customer can make the final selection.
==PAGE:59==
Figure 44.	

Sequence of combined 
frames 
Frame Innovation
59
The strong but yet simplified sequence in figure 43 sets the design process on the 
road from the current situation and existing solutions in the market. The second 
round of frame exploration shifted the focus away from creating a solution that 
could be used for inspiration and showcasing to a problem solving platform with 
attention to immediate user needs and how to offer attractive and reliable options. 
Exploring alternative solutions that are too close to the themes would proba­
bly mean going back to existing solutions. Figure 44 illustrates how Architizer, 
which is one of the newer solutions in the market, tries to solve the situation with 
an alternative sequence model.
When Architizer addresses their customer, they have emphasis on offering brand 
profile and online showcase. They are targeting the BPM.
Their sequence model goes as follows:
• The BPM creates a branded profile page
• From here, they can reach the architects, link to their own website and 
potentially generate more sales.
• The BPM is encouraged to pay extra for ‘display advertising’, priority 
placement in search, attractive gallery and more.
• From here, the BPM can monitor the performance through analytics
• Based on the analytics, the BPM can refine their brand page 
==PAGE:60==
Figure 45.	
	
	
	
Trust and collaboration is the key - (Pexel)
Frame Innovation
60
3.6.1.	
Methods used in this section and how could it have been done differently
This process of identifying themes based on stakeholder needs and subsequently creating frames through the 
step-by-step method is very different compared to Nigel Cross or the process in the PSS approach. Instead 
of beginning with specifying the requirement and goal setting before moving on to the actual ideation, the 
Frame Innovation begins with user needs. The needs are transformed into new ideas and inputs, which sub­
sequently can trigger the emergence of completely new frames. As such, the chronological phases of diver­
gence and convergence in the design process are reversed. A benefit of the Frame Innovation approach is that 
it forces the designer to create a potential solution based on the stakeholder needs, and not just specifying the 
requirement based on the initial identified user needs. This helps the designer to avoid thinking of obvious 
solutions based on a premature requirement specification. Furthermore, the deep investigation of themes and 
frames ensure that the designer confidently can justify the “why did we choose to go in this direction?”.
For a designer, it is almost inevitable to think of solutions early in the process and imagine solutions. Howev­
er, by using the Frame Innovation step-by-step process, themes such as ‘trust’ or ‘reliable choices’ emerged 
instead of focusing on ‘inspiration’, ‘information’ or ‘knowledge’, even though they were not considered as 
an important aspect prior to the themes investigation. 
3.6.2.	
Important findings from this section
Some of the most important findings occurred during the discussion regarding the rationale behind particular 
theme groupings, and in this case it occurred during the first meeting with the authors of Frame Innovation 
and a brainstorming meeting with Robert Krups.
•	
Providing sufficient information and knowledge about the products are important but without trust, the 
information is irrelevant. 
•	
Community is not the reason why users will seek out a particular tool, it is the immediate need, such as 
finding accommodation for a holiday, a dress for the next company party or a transport to the airport. 
•	
The community aspect, however, is an important factor when it comes to reassurance and reliable 
choices, since the community is non-biased and has no vested interest when they express their views 
and opinions, as it is seen with Airbnb or Uber. 
==PAGE:61==
Frame Innovation
61
3.7	
Futures
The last stage in the Frame Creation Model is the Future stage, where the aim is to test the frames and to see 
how their working principles could be applied to a solution in relation to the building and design specifica­
tion. The following section discusses the four most fruitful frames, and gives a brief description of what the 
solution would look like if their working principle were applied. 
==PAGE:62==
Frame Innovation
62
==PAGE:63==
Frame Innovation
63
Airbnb, ASOS, and Gumtree are frames whose working principles could be applied to an online platform for 
design specifiers. Especially Airbnb and ASOS, who are following the sequence in figure 43.
However, if we see the situation as if it were Duolingo, it could solve a new problem that was not original­
ly considered. As in other professions, architects are required to take a certain amount of courses/training 
equalling 20 Continuing Professional Development points (CPD) every year - one CPD point is equivalent 
to one hour of CPD activity. 
As of now, the BCI and AIS, set up formal CPD presentations for the architects, where a selection of certified 
BPMs demonstrate their design and technical expertise, while educating the architects. 
As such, the CPD is to ensure that the architects continue learning and staying on top of the newest tech­
nology in the industry. However, many architects also perceived this as an annoying requirement that takes 
time and effort in a busy schedule. There is an obvious potential in creating something that could offer the 
architects a fun experience with higher flexibility and still in compliance with the requirements. 
==PAGE:64==
Frame Innovation
64
3.7.1.	
Frames evaluation with the company
When deciding on which frame to follow, it is important to consider a frame that 
is ‘fruitful’. In this case, ‘fruitfulness’ means a frame that is rich and sparks an 
interesting solution space. 
It is important to note that all of the above mentioned frames are in their own 
way related to the stakeholder needs, but when designing future concepts, the 
frames can with great benefit be combined in order to integrate the needs into a 
coherent solution. The solution should also respectfully consider both the needs 
of BCI Asia and still be in compliance with the objectives in a Master’ thesis. 
During a meeting with Robert Krups and Ashleigh Porter, the four frames were 
presented and evaluated both in relation to the interest of the company and in 
relation to how the user operates. Robert, who is the COO of BCI Asia was 
initially inspired by Archello and Architizer and expressed greatest interest in 
a combination of the ASOS and Airbnb frame, and how the sequence model in 
figure 43 could be applied to this situation. This combination would create an 
online community based on trust and providing attractive and relevant options to 
accommodate the immediate needs from the user.
On the other hand, the Duolingo frame is a really interesting idea and could 
possibly work well. That being said, he noted that he did not want this idea to 
be the main focus, but it should instead be considered as an add-on feature. The 
focus should first and foremost be on assisting the design specifiers in finding, 
selecting and choosing the building products via a digital platform. 
Ashleigh Porter, the BCI Academy and AIS Manager shared this opinion but she 
also saw the Duolingo solution as something that could differentiate the solution 
from the existing offers in the market. 
“
This is really something that would be a key selling point and something 
that would differentiate us from the rest of the market”
- Ashleigh Porter, on the ‘Duolingo’ frame. 
To be able to not only find what you are searching for, and be confirmed of the 
reliability of the choice through reviews from your peers, and at the same time to 
have access to an easy and convenient way of obtaining the required CPD points, 
was an excellent idea that is not yet offered elsewhere on the market. 
3.7.2.	
Suggested solution for further investigation
A combination of the Airbnb and ASOS approach was therefore chosen as the 
suggested frame and with a Duolingo gamification as an add-on feature. The 
next step is to envision how the new combination of the frames would work 
and identify what the steps in the identified sequence model should contain, and 
how to achieve themes such as ‘trust’ and ‘attractive options’ in a way that will 
provide value and actually solve the problem. 
 
==PAGE:65==
Frame Innovation
65
3.7.3.	
General evaluation of the suggested solution
In the Future stage of the Frame Creation Model, the aim is to find ways to combine the identified frames into 
an overall solution. The idea is to integrate the needs of the largest group of stakeholders into a coherent solu­
tion (Dorst, 2015). As such, the chosen combination of frames was not selected after a Pugh method, weighted 
objective matrix, or a House of Quality diagram. Instead the selection is based on how well they would satisfy 
the identified needs of the stakeholders. The approach in Frame Innovation leaves it more up to the designer’s 
judgement of the strength or “fruitfulness” of a frame instead of having a structured selection tool to guide the 
decision. 
“
Making these judgements requires a broad experience in the field, of course; being able to look into the 
future and prejudge situations and solution directions is almost the definition of expertise.” (Dorst, 2015, 
p. 160). 
A challenge with every ideation process in general is to know when the outcome is sufficient in order to stop 
and move on with the discovered ideas. In this case, the exploration of the frames could have been brought to 
yet another round of ideation, but it would be an assurance for better and more “fruitful” ideas. Thus, as the 
identified combination of frames seemed satisfactory to solve the current problem situation, it was decided 
to stop and focus on this for further development. The next step is to narrow the solution space and consider 
which practices that are necessary in order to develop the solution. 
3.7.4.	
Important findings from this section
The findings from this stage are based on the identified frames and how a further exploration led to a new 
dominant combination.  
•	
From the new exploration of the frames, the idea of obtaining the formal CPD Points through gamifi­
cation was discovered. 
•	
The selected coherent combination of frames is based on the themes; trust, community, reliable choices 
and support. 
•	
The selection is based on an instinctive judgement with the client and not on structured selection. How­
ever, by following the Frame Creation Model, it ensures that the solution would be in compliance with 
the stakeholder needs. 
==PAGE:66==
Weight 
1-5
FACTOR
REQUIREMENT
CRITERIA
COMMENTS
5
Main functionality
Help design specifiers with specification 
and building product information sourcing.
Give design specifiers a platform to 
showcase their work and track fellow 
design specifiers
See the stages in the user activity cycle
4
User Interface
Must be so easy to work with, that the user 
will understand the functionality of a given 
aspect after the first run-through 
Balance between the visual and 
technical information. Do not scare 
away by making it too tech and info 
overload
4
Profile
Users must be able to search and browse 
without signing in, but in order to save search 
and download details they have to register 
and sign in. 
Product supplier - Request product 
samples
The profiles should be different whether if 
you are a design specifier or a product 
supplier
Like Spotify where you can get a free 
account, but you need to upgrade if you 
want to access all the features.
5
Search product 
information
Familiar user experience. The first thing the 
user should meet when entering the platform
Really simple and still crisp search 
Filtering options:
- Material
- Region
- Project budget
- Catagory (Furniture, flooring, bathroom 
etc.)
- Typical use (Kitchen, office, school etc.)
- Project types (New, fit out, alterations and 
editions) 
Smart search - Learning and suggests
Twitter follow
Users are familiar with Google as a 
default screen - search field as the first 
thing on the screen
3
Level of product 
information
Users must have access to different 
download options:
- BIM
- Catalogs
- CAD
- Brand
- etc.
- Promted updated requirement. There 
should not be product visible if they are not 
on the market.
Should inform the user about performance, 
durability, warrenty, availability, standards 
and price
Access to 3D and BIM objects is 
something that should be considered in the 
solution, since it is a fast emerging 
technology.
Nice to have:
- Preferred installers
- Technical specialists
Price is an important request from the 
design specifiers but it might be difficult 
to have the product suppliers to provide 
that information. 
From the focus group session, the 
potential users liked the information level 
from Sweets - but less tech look
Within a few years, BIM and CAD will be 
mandatory to use in the design process 
(Singapore)
3
Project reference 
Users must be able to see how products 
have been applied in project context.
When something is uploaded, there is a 
minimun amount of information that must 
be provided. 
When uploading a project, the user should 
identify at least 3 product and the brand.
Difference between when an design 
specifier uploads or a product supplier.
It is important for the design specifiers 
to have actual project reference.
Architizer and Archello hav a lot of 'Dead 
Data' e.g. Some projects do not indicate 
which products were used. Some 
product and contact references leads to 
'empty contacts'.
3
Narrowing search
The information must be reliable in order for 
the design specifier to make a selection. 
Rating based on performance and 
feedback from peers. 
Like function so it remains positive and you 
cannot give negative feedback.
Users should be able to follow other users 
and their projects.
Filter by compliance /Certification
- BCA approved
- Green Label 
Filter by file download options
- Pdf
- CAD
- Catalogues
It is important to keep a positive 
athmosphere on the site - Only likes
Related to Search
Weight 
1-5
FACTOR
REQUIREMENT
CRITERIA
COMMENTS
4
Sample boards and 
share information 
Be able to save search and create project 
boards. 
Users must be able to create two level folders 
(e.g. Project A-->Office Panels)
User should be able to save product 
selection, feedback and sharing with 
colleagues and handover to the project 
owner. 
Handover to the client is an issue and 
there is no smooth tool to asist in doing 
this. 
It could work as a combination of 
Evernote and Pinterest, where you can 
save, share and document everithing 
and share it with peers or potentially 
project owner.
2
Other features
Access to 3D and BIM objects is 
something that should be considered in the 
solution, since it is a fast emerging 
technology.
3
Show case possibility
Specifiers should be able to use the platform 
as a showcase their project to potential new 
clients.
Share on other medias with a link
Not all architects have an online portfolio 
- this could be their opportunity.
1
Inspiration from previous 
projects
User should be able to upload their own 
work and use it for inspiration in new 
projects.
The findings shows that design 
specifiers first consider the products 
they are familiar with and have used 
previously  
3
Uploading project and 
product info
Building projects should include product 
information. (Which products have been used 
in the project)
From the focus group, it was resonable 
to ask the users to name at least 5 
prouducts with each project.
- If the design specifier are not aware of 
the final products that are used in the 
project, there should be another way to 
achieve the information. E.g. the 
product supplier themselves
3
Quick start of the system
Loading time should be fast and accurate
Bigger picture might reduce the speed.
5
Search filters
Tags, catagories, smart search
Need so be customised based on the 
initial search. This can be obtained by 
creating tags when uploading the 
content
Optimization of system 
interface and nature of 
use
All user interactions with the system should 
be tracked in order to optimise the platform 
Supporting new 
workmethods
Should incoporate BIM
Relation to BCI Asia
Could be a cross link from BCI website 
to the new platform. 
BCI knows when and where a new 
projects is going to be build and who is 
appointed.
AIS and CMD are already in irect 
contact with design specifiers and 
product suppliers.
Revenue streams
Must be free for Design specifiers
Product suppliers will be the main paying 
customers
Product suppleirs are interested in 
finding ways to attract design 
specifiers
Related to profile and inspiration
Related to technical development
Business perspective
Table 1.	
Requirement specification
Frame Innovation
66
==PAGE:67==
Frame Innovation
67
3.8	
Transformation
At Transformation stage, the frames and exploration of ideas are transformed 
into specific design goals for the solution. As of now, the direction of frame is 
identified and needs to be transformed into a solution with greater details. 
To effectively set up design goals for the solution, it should begin with a holistic 
system design approach. A helpful method to do so, is to use the N-Model to 
organise the design goals in accordance to system levels of intervention (Maier 
& Oehmen, 2016). This will help define the level of interventions and to identify 
how to effectively bring value to the primary users by narrowing the focus.
The Frame Innovation has led to the main goals for the project, which is now 
transformed into different requirements to the solution. According to the 
N-Model the goals can be viewed on different levels; artefact, complex and 
engineering. This way of using the different levels helps focusing on a practi­
cal and specific solution (artefact) and still consider how the artefact fits into a 
bigger system.
Artefact level
At the artefact level, the focus is on defining the necessary specification for 
a platform which would assist the design specifier in searching, selecting and 
organising information to create design specifications in the most efficient and 
user friendly way. The goal setting will primarily be focusing on interaction and 
feasibility for the user and how to satisfy the important needs identified in the 
previous creation of themes. 
The goal setting for the artefact level is as follows:
• Modern interface resembling familiar user experience
• Access to a large, organised product selection
• Visual project reference and access to download options
• Possibility to use customisable filters to narrow building product search 
• Ability to search, save and share information with relevant stakeholders.
Complex level
The complex level includes other stakeholders that are part of the design spec­
ification and would be users of of the solution. This includes BPMs, project 
owners and contractors. The goal setting for the complex level is as follows:
• Easy to access and upload content to be viewed by design specifiers
• Uniform interface and uploading form
• Access to project leads and to get new customers through the platform
• Ability to trace performance of uploaded content over time

Engineering level
On the engineering level, the main goal is to clarify and satisfy the needs of 
the client, BCI Asia, and to create a solution that can bring value to the larger 
group of stakeholders in the building and construction industry. As such, the 
solution for the client should consider socioeconomic complexities and external 
impacts from the construction industry. An important element that might be a 
challenge, is to consider the different requirements across country borders such 
==PAGE:68==
Frame Innovation
68
morphology chart helps widen the solution space, but still keeps the focus within 
the selected frames. The chart is seen in figure 46 and figure 47 on the following 
pages. 
The desired functions are listed on the left side of the figure and from each func­
tion a versatile amount of means is created. As such, the means are transforming 
the user needs into practical engineering characteristics, which ultimately works 
as a concept configurator when combined. 
The exploration of the different means to the desired functions was achieved 
through structured brainstorming together with Robert Krups. As seen in the 
chart, the various means includes all the different areas that have been discov­
ered as essential parameters to the platform, such as a rating, showcasing oppor­
tunities and recognisable search engine, since it is the first thing the user will 
look for and the reliability aspect when selecting the right product.
3.8.3.	
A hidden potential – Project Boards
When pursuing the chosen frame in the morphology structure, another hidden 
potential was discovered. So far, the problem situation has mainly been address­
ing design specifiers in the specification process and in particular in sourcing 
the right building products. However, findings from an earlier discussion with 
Shannon Daniel, Account Manager and the Marketing Manager Cathryn Zhao, 
highlighted a new and interesting perspective to the solution. This is mentioned 
in chapter 3.4. 
Firstly, it is not an unknown problem that the collaboration between the design 
specifier and project owner/builder often is quite poor. Secondly, once a design 
specifier has identified and selected a product, they usually copy, download and 
save the information on their own system before they handover the specification 
to whom it may concern.
as standards, delivery terms etc. The goal setting for the engineering level is as 
follows:
• Premier providers of a platform for design specifiers to showcase their 
work and connect with BPMs
• Connect the BPM with design specifiers and track information from both 
sides
• The information should be quantifiable in order to be able to transform it 
into analytical statistics regarding performance and progress
• Be able to scale the solution to different countries and potentially world-
wide
3.8.1.	
Requirement specification
The findings from the system analysis has been used to create a requirement 
specification (Cross, 2008). This was developed in collaboration with the client, 
see table 1. The fields in the requirement specification are based on the steps in 
the User Activity Cycle and are organised as to how they would occur for the 
user. The focus is primarily on the design specifiers’ perspective and how to 
satisfy their needs. The requirement specification was used to guide and narrow 
the design process through a dynamic document. During the design process, ini­
tial criteria were converted into requirements to the solution and as the desired 
functions were explored and transformed into practical means, the requirement 
specification would become more detailed. 
3.8.2.	
Morphology ideation
An effective way of ensuring a systematic ideation of practical means is with 
the use of a morphology chart. To delimit the design space, the desired functions 
will be sequentially listed in the way they occur for the user (Cross, 2008). The 
==PAGE:69==
Frame Innovation
69
The survey from AIS and the findings from Singapore verify that the design 
specification is a time consuming process. However, it did not focus on the poor 
collaboration between the design specifier and the project owner/builder. For 
this reason, a new application was added to the solution, which involved the 
creation of project boards where the user easily can save, document and share 
building product information. This could further improve the poor collaboration 
among the stakeholders involved in the process.  
“
The user should be able to save the search, share it with their own inter­
nal ‘group’ and sort of make their own internal library of recommended 
products” – Cathryn Zhao
In terms of ‘Frames’, it can be compared to an Evernote and Pinterest frame, 
where it is possible to share, save and document everything with peers. By cre­
ating boards, the user can share or send a link to colleagues, project owners or 
any other relevant stakeholder. 
By adding this perspective, the solution will cover:
• Saved product selection
• Feedback and sharing with colleagues
• Handover to the project owner, contractor or whom it may concern
This new hidden potential of creating project boards was added to the morphol­
ogy chart and included in the configuration of a new concept with added details.
3.8.4.	
Creating concept configurations
From the morphology chart, four different concept variations were created, all 
with a strong relation to a platform solution with the previous selected frames 
in mind; Trust, community, reliable choices and immediate problem solving.
1. ‘Time saving for the user’ 
A concept configuration where all the work is made as smooth as possible  for 
the design specifier. Everyone can access the platform through various channels. 
The potential value of this concept alone would however not justify the amount 
of effort needed. 
2. Smart collaboration
This configuration not only focuses on solving the desire for providing attrac­
tive options based on immediate needs but it also enables collaboration among 
the various stakeholders involved in the specification process. The user can 
search, save selected products in a sample board and share the selection with 
any relevant stakeholder. 
 
3. Primitive
As the specification works today without really adding extra value. This was 
only investigated in order to have a benchmark of what the solution at least 
should be superior to. 
 
4. Easy to implement
As the name implies, this configuration considered the means that are easy and 
fast to implement, while still aiming to satisfy the user needs. 
==PAGE:70==
Figure 46.	
	
	
	
Morphology chart 1/2
Frame Innovation
70
Group A
Group B
Project A
Subfolder
https://...
Projects
Products
Brands
Time saving for users
Smart collaboration
Primitive
Easy to implement
Folders and 
Sampleboards
Share with friends on 
Social media and ask 
for feedback
Save ‘watch list’
Download files to own 
computer
Manually without help 
from platform
(Magazines, previous 
projects etc.)
Upload own content 
on registered profile
Re-Use info (Previous 
projects and online 
portfolio showcasing)
Identify the products 
used in a poject 
picture, (Image 
recognition)
BIM Files and test in 
own Revit file
Create ‘Groups’ e.g. 
internal office library
Link to product 
supplier for detailed 
information
Embedded digital 
product catalogues
FInd info manually 
without help from BCI
Product catalogues or 
magazines - physical 
From the BCI Asia 
website
Other websites portals
Product or project 
value using symbols
Customised filters
(compliance 
certifications etc.)
Compare products 
and save in folders or 
‘boards’
Tagging and keywords
Other have showed 
‘interest in’ 
(most popular)
Buy or add to cart
Manually on own 
system
‘Twitter’ princip - follow 
other users (specifiers)
Immediately search 
‘anything’ bar. FIlter 
afterwards
Choose search 
catagory first
Request a list of 
relevant products
Receive email 
notification when 
suggested relevant 
comes up
Browse through 
product gallary
Suggested products 
based on recently 
watched
Call BCI for access 
and information / 
Invitation only
Social Media
Everybody can access 
the platform without 
restrictions
Free browsing and 
searching, but full 
access when signing 
in. 
CONFIGURATIONS
1
2
3
4
5
6
How to 
acces the 
product 
information 
platform?
How to find 
inspiration 
for new 
projects?
How to 
search and 
find relevant 
building 
products?
How to save 
selected 
products?
How to get 
product 
information?
How to 
narrow the 
search?
==PAGE:71==
Figure 47.	
	
	
	
Morphology chart 2/2
Frame Innovation
71
6 Months
FREE!
Symbols e.g. Likes 
(Only positive 
feedback)
Check list
Text comments
Only anonymos 
evaluation and not 
visible on the platform
Star rating 1-5 from 
both 
Manually create own 
specification without 
aid
Send a sample board 
via url link
Download a sample 
board and send file
Give permission to 
‘view and edit’ project 
folders. 
(Like a Dropbox folder)
Online courses
Available on all 
devices
Academy and physical 
training presentation
Gamification, 3D and 
VimTrek
Competition
BCI uploading 
assitance service
Free content upload 
for the first 6 months
Free advertising on 
magazine
(BCI puplications)
Focus on products
(Product suppliers 
upload first)
Focus on projects
(Design specifiers 
upload first)
Prompted update 
notification once 
content is uploaded. 
(avoid obsolete 
content)
Tablet
Internet
Smartphone
Computer browser
Cloud computing
Only subscribed users 
Available on all 
devices
7
8
9
10
11
How to 
evaluate the 
experience 
with the 
selected 
product?
How to 
handover 
design 
specifica-
tion?
How to 
obtain CPD 
points?
How to get 
and keep 
content on 
the 
platform?
Platform and 
technology?
==PAGE:72==
Functions/	  criteria
Weight	  1-­‐5
Points
Score
Points
Score
Access	  the	  platform
5
50
10
45
9
Find	  inspiration	  for	  new	  projects
2
14
7
16
8
Search	  and	  find	  relevant	  products
5
30
6
35
7
Narrow	  search
4
32
8
32
8
Get	  the	  product	  information
4
20
5
28
7
Save	  selected	  products
4
24
6
32
8
Evaluate	  the	  experience
2
0
0
12
6
Handover	  design	  specification
4
24
6
32
8
Obtain	  CPD	  points
2
14
7
10
5
Get	  and	  keep	  content	  on	  the	  platform
4
16
4
24
6
Platform	  and	  technology
5
50
10
50
10
Total
274
316
Time saving for users
Smart collaboration
Points
Score
Points
Score
10
2
35
7
2
1
0
0
35
7
25
5
20
5
20
5
8
2
24
6
4
1
24
6
0
0
10
5
4
1
24
6
8
4
0
0
24
6
28
7
50
10
0
0
165
190
Primitive
Easy to implement
Table 2.	
		
Pugh evaluation
Frame Innovation
72
3.8.5.	
Evaluation and selection of concepts
The five concept configurations each represents an independent focus. For in­
stance, the ‘Time saving for the user’ only focuses on means that would require 
a minimum amount of time and effort from the design specifier perspective. 
With this in mind, the various concept configurations were evaluated with the 
client in order to choose and exclude ideas, if the  potential value would not jus­
tify the amount of effort or cost needed. 
Besides having an overall discussion of the most desirable configurations, the 
five concepts were also evaluated with the use of a ‘Pugh’ scheme, see table 2 
(Cross, 2008). The functions in the morphology chart were listed as criteria and 
weighted on a scale from 1-5, in accordance to the level of importance. 5 being 
most important. Using this method ensures that the concept configurations are 
rated with a shared point of view. 
The weighting of the functions is based on the stakeholder needs and require­
ment specification. From the table, it is seen that ‘Time saving for users’ and 
‘smart collaboration’ received the highest aggregated scores. A combination of 
the two concept configurations were chosen with the primary focus on the ele­
ments in ‘smart collaboration’. 
This transformation of functions into means and subsequent concept configura­
tion will lead to a detailed envisioning of the solution and how the configuration 
of means will work together in reality. This will include mapping the user jour­
ney in a Service Blueprint, which is widely used in the PSS approach (Finken et 
al., 2013). 
==PAGE:73==
Frame Innovation
73
3.8.6.	
Service Blueprint
Following the morphology chart and concept configuration, the most desirable 
and important means from the morphology chart are brought together into a 
Service Blueprint representation (Finken et al., 2013). The Service Blueprint 
was used to visualise the various steps in the user journey and to understand how 
the user will interact with the platform. The Service Blueprint has been through 
several iterations together with Robert Krups, the internal IT team and Ashleigh 
Porter, who represents the design specifiers perspective. Since there will be two 
different key users of the solution, it was necessary to create two different Ser­
vice Blueprints; one with the focus on the design specifier and a corresponding 
edition with focus on the BPM.
3.8.7.	
Design specifier
The user journey of the design specifier is visualised in the Service Blueprint, 
see figure  48. The journey is divided into five overall phases;
1.	 The user becomes aware of the platform
2.	 The user enters and joins the platform
3.	 The user starts to use the platform 
4.	 The user continues to use the platform
5.	 The user leaves the platform
The main focus in the Service Blueprint is the visible interactions at the front 
stage, whereas the primary activities are the user interaction with the platform 
during the ‘use’ phase. The user starts a search after entering the welcome page, 
narrows the search with the use of customised filters and makes a selection. As 
seen, the user can choose different options in regards to the search. For instance, 
there are three overall categories; Products & brands, Projects and architecture 
and Events. Once the user has narrowed the search and found an attractive op­
tion, the user is able to save and add the option to ‘My Board’ where it can be 
organised into subfolders. 
The Service Blueprint also includes the backstage and supporting system. For 
instance, by offering an online user subscription platform, it requires a Customer 
Relationship Management (CRM) system and additionally, a large content da­
tabase and an intelligent search engine. However, the back stage and supporting 
systems have not been the driving focus at this point. During a meeting with 
the IT Manager, Dinesh Nagaraju, it was in fact found irrelevant to look at the 
backstage and supporting systems at this point.
“
Imagine that everything is possible in order not to delimit the solution. 
Right now we need to know the concept, who is going to use it and what is 
the user flow including functionalities” – Dinesh Nagaraju
For this reason, the Service Blueprints for both the design specifiers’ and BPMs 
perspective are highly detailed in regards to the visible front stage interaction 
and only roughly described in the non-visible layers.
==PAGE:74==
PHYSICAL 
EVIDENCE
SERVICE BLUEPRINT - Design Specifier’s perspective
Source products, create and share sample boards, 
showcase your work
Awareness
Join
Continue
Use
Leave
CUSTOMER 
JOURNEY
LINE OF INTERACTION
LINE OF VISIBILITY
FRONT STAGE
INTERACTIONS
BACK STAGE
INTERACTIONS
SUPPORT 
SYSTEMS
LINE OF INTERNAL
INTERACTION
Marketing strategy 
Campaign and 
promotion branding
Software e.g. Cold 
fusion
Product library,
Tagging
Search engine 
system
Database
Certified CPD 
content
CRM  system
- Add new member 
in the system
Promotion updates 
on different 
platforms, newspa-
pers, Magazines.
Customized filters
based on categories
Enable the user to 
create shareable folders 
and subfolders (two 
layers) 
Customized filters
based on categories
Provide the user 
with relevant 
options
Detailed level of 
product information
Already an user?
Login
New subscrip-
tion
Yes
No
Promotions 
-Social Media and other 
website, word of mouth, 
Google
BCI network, Magazines, 
Events. Sales personal
Welcome - Landing 
page
Choose category and 
location
Browse search result
Offer sign in or login 
if not used before
Browse and find 
building products and 
projects
Set up profile:
- Profile info
- Company info
Choose category:
- Products & Brands
- Project & Architecture
- Events
Scroll through initial 
result
Design specifier or 
product supplier?
Confirm ‘role’ - 
Design specifier
Register with email 
activation
Upload work and 
showcase
Search bar 
Default on product 
search and country 
(AUS). Users can 
choose another 
category and location
Filtering options in 
sidebar 
Customised filters 
based on initial search
View Product: 
- Image - ref to project
- Supplier page
- Others have ‘viewed’ 
or used in projects.
Related products or 
projects
- See ratings (symbols)
- Request quote -> Fill 
out form and send to 
supplier
Download files:
- Pdf., BIM, CAD
- Spec sheet
- Etc.
View Project:
- Product used in project
- Architect behind
View events or other
Product supplier page
Architect page 
(view related projects)
Create new:
- Project A
-->Subfolder
Edit, view and 
compare products
Symbols
- Likes
Add to current
- Choose project and 
subfolder
View and select
Customised filters 
Sidebar
- Typical use (office, 
kitchen, school etc.)
- Location
- Price (estimate)
- Compliance (ISO, etc.)
- Other... 
Add to personal project 
‘board’.
Share sampleboard 
through Social Media
Create groups within  
platform
Select course and 
category
- Take course 
Share URL Link
Finds out about the 
platform:
Social Media and other 
website, word of 
mouth, Google
Access the 
platform
Links, 
View and Welcome
 
Login or start 
exploring without 
registration
Register or login 
As design specifier or 
product supplier
(Optional but necessary 
for full access)
Narrowing the 
search
Specific search or 
free explore
Get inspired by 
gallery (projects) 
Product informa-
tion and download 
files
Add to My Boards
Selecting
Reviews and how to 
trust the options
Evaluating the 
experience
Reviewing the 
selection and make 
changes
Handover the 
specification
Contacting suppli-
ers for more info
Obtaining CPD 
point
Need to find relevant 
building product for 
a construction 
project
Website, Social Media 
and other channels
Website, Sales 
personal
Registration
page 
Search and filtering
Website
Website
My Boards
Website and product 
gallery
Website and 
introduction page
My boards
CPD online courses
Limited access
- Registration required
Project A
Subfolder
Figure 48.	
	
	

Service Blueprint - Design specifier perspective 
(See BPM and design specifier version in Appen­
dix 5.1 and 5.2)
Frame Innovation
74
==PAGE:75==
Frame Innovation
75
3.8.8.	
Building Product Manufacturer
In appendix 5.1 the Service Blueprint for BPM is visualised. The main difference is that the BPM is the 
paying customer, who is responsible for providing the content for the design specifier. Uploading and listing 
products on the platform is closely linked to the Airbnb approach, where a listing is created by using a uni­
form uploading template. Once a listing is created it has to be verified by the system before it is activated and 
visible on the platform.  
One of the complex functionalities on the platform is when a BPM joins the platform, registers and receives 
a subscription quote. The idea is to have different subscription bundles, where the customer can pay extra for 
e.g. banners, priority in search and unlimited number of listings. 
The creation of ‘Boards’ will not be directly included in the BPM journey. Instead the BPM can have access 
to analytics about how well the products are performing and if the design specifier has shown interest by sav­
ing a particular product to My Boards. This information can essentially be used to detect new project leads 
and the BPM can contact the design specifiers who have shown interest in their product. 
Similar to the design specifiers’ Service Blueprint, the BPM version has primarily focused on the front stage 
interactions, however it is still inevitable not to mention a CRM system here as well. For instance, when the 
BPM signs in and orders the first subscription, it is registered in the CRM system. This triggers a request to 
the accounting system which sends a quote and grants access to the system. 
When defining the different steps in the Service Blueprint, several rounds of refinement are required, espe­
cially when creating a smooth user journey. Nevertheless, the advantage of illustrating how the various steps 
would work together can help smoothen the flow and improve the overall user experience. It should be noted, 
that it is still based on assumptions and the next critical step is to test and evaluate the idea with potential 
users. 
==PAGE:76==
Figure 49.	
	
	
	

Interior design sample boards (Pexels)
Frame Innovation
76
3.8.9.	
Methods used in this section and how could it have been done differently
The transformation stage in the Frame Creation model aims to explore what is required in order for the idea 
or concept to come together. Ideas are chosen and excluded if they are not feasible or if the potential value 
does not justify the amount of effort needed. From experience with past university projects, the requirement 
specification and morphology chart would be the basis for further exploration of a concept. However, in 
this project, the morphology chart was used to structurally identify appropriate means that would work as 
practical engineering characteristics. From this step, there is less need for further investigation. The desired 
functions listed in the morphology chart are already based on the user needs and values from the large group 
of stakeholders. In contrast, the chart was used in past projects to generate concepts at an earlier stage. The 
outcome of the morphology chart used in this project,  can also be associated with the PSS configurator that 
combines a set of offerings, tailored to the current context and strategic priorities (Finken et al., 2013). The 
benefits of using the configurator tool is that it recommends surrounding offerings that should be included 
if a particular offering is selected. The Service Blueprint helped visualize the concept and highlight the user 
journey and interaction points with the platform. However, the Service Blueprint as presented in the PSS tool 
book, includes all visible as well as non-visible stages and how they are linked together, which in contrast 
the Service Blueprints for this project pay less attention to. In return, the front stage interaction is illustrated 
in great detail. How the desired interaction with the customer is achieved will not be the first priority. As 
long as the user journey is realised, then the back stage and supporting systems can be tailored accordingly. 
3.8.10.	
Important findings from this section
•	
	Pursuing the identified frames, led to a new emergence of ‘project boards’ or ‘My Boards’ where the 
user easily can find product information, save and organise selection and share it with colleagues, 
project owner or other relevant stakeholders. 
•	
	Sharing the information can provide the user with the opportunity to collect feedback on the selected 
projects and enhance transparency and collaboration among the stakeholders involved in the process. 
•	
	The Service Blueprint was merely used as a user flow diagram with respect to both the BPM as well 
as the design specifier.
==PAGE:77==
Frame Innovation
77
3.9	
Integration
In the final stage of the Frame Creation Model, the new frames and the practical 
development need to be well integrated into the broader context of the stake­
holders involved. This integration can with great benefit be illustrated in a new 
Business Model Canvas (BMC) with a corresponding Value Proposition Can­
vas (VPC). However, it was prioritised to create a prototype and wireframe of 
the solution before starting with the BMC. From the previous findings in the 
design process, the important stakeholder needs and values have already been 
highlighted and transformed into frames. The attention should therefore be on 
the practical functionalities and user experience before considering the broader 
context. 
The best way to test the practical functionalities and user experience is to create 
early stage mock-up and test and evaluate the idea with potential users. 
3.9.1.	
The platform - SpecBoards.com
The main idea behind the chosen concept is, that design specifiers can use a 
common platform to find building product information and during this search get 
inspiration to create their design specification. The name chosen for the platform 
is SpecBoards.com, which represents both the specification side and of the plat­
form as well as the innovative ‘My Board’ element. 
The platform will mainly be a collection of products and architectural projects 
uploaded by the design specifiers and BPMs. The BPMs are the paying custom­
ers who will have to subscribe to upload their products on an online database 
where it will be exposed to design specifiers.  
Furthermore, the design specifier should be able to select, save and create proj­
ect boards, which they can share with any relevant stakeholder or make public 
available to other registered users. 
3.9.2.	
Narrowing the focus
The detailed Service Blueprints served as a detailed presentation of the concept 
and how the user interacts with the solution. However, as seen in the two models, 
it includes several steps. Instead of focusing on the entire system when moving 
into the prototype and testing stage, it was decided to focus on one part of the 
solution. During an evaluation with Robert and Matthias Krups it was decided 
to focus on the ‘My board’ part, since this would act as the most essential and 
innovative part of the solution. They both expressed their excitement about the 
solution and in particular the ‘My Board’ idea. 
“
It will not only be a great tool for the design specifiers, but it will enhance 
the collaboration and transparency among the different stakeholders 
involved in the process.” – Robert Krups
3.9.3.	
‘My Boards’
The idea of ‘My Boards’ is to have a user-friendly and dynamic work environ­
ment for the design specifier. Figure 50 provides a quick overview of how the 
board will assist the design specifier in the specification process. The left side of 
the model is the uploading and content driven part of the solution. The content 
ranges from building products and brands, architectural projects, important con­
tact information and a linkage to AIS or CMD events through an event calendar 
search. The design specifier can search and select among the uploaded content, 
==PAGE:78==
Products & Brands
Internal Collaboration
Archive
Projects & Architecture
External Collaboration
Social Media
Subfolder 
(Windows)
Subfolder 
(Acoustic panels)
Contact Information
Event Calendar
Internal office 
Manager
Etc.
AIS or CMD 
events
Formal CPD 
preentations
Contractor
Project owner
etc.
EXPLORE
MY BOARDS
SHARE
DESIGN SPECIFIER
Project A
Figure 50.	
	
	

‘My Boards’ overview
Frame Innovation
78
==PAGE:79==
Frame Innovation
79
add to My Boards and organise in subfolders. In the illustration in figure 50, 
the design specifier has created a board called Project A and further created two 
subfolders about windows and acoustic panels. When a design specifier creates 
a board it can be shared with relevant stakeholders through social media, pri­
vate links or by archiving and send documents. The idea is also inspired by ve 
drive, where it is possible to send a link and give permission to view or edit 
documents. In the same way, it should be possible for the design specifier to 
give permission and invite colleagues to view their Boards and accommodate a 
collaborative environment. 
The sharing aspect of My Boards will also work as a self-promoting marketing 
channel. When the user invites or shares a ‘board’ to a colleague, friend, manag­
er etc., the new person would need to register (for free) on the platform in order 
to get access to the content. In this way the solution would attract traffic from 
both ends and the amount of users will expand through invitation and word-of-
mouth.  
3.9.4.	
New Business Model Canvas - BMC
The integration of the chosen concept of the Specboards platform into the 
broader context of stakeholders is illustrated in the BMC in figure 51. The mod­
el helps to clarify and organise the different elements necessary to develop the 
business idea in one place. 
The BMC has a strong focus on the subscription offerings and to be the premiere 
solution for sourcing, organising and sharing building product information. The 
customer segment is divided into the two overall segments; Firstly, the main 
user side, which primarily will address the design specifiers who can access the 
register for free, and secondly, the paying customer side of the platform, which 
will consist of the BPM. Beside the design specifier, the free user segment will 
also include students, subcontractors, builders and project owners. The common 
value proposition for all of these mentioned stakeholders is to build a platform 
that enhances a strong collaboration and transparency before, during and after 
the design specification process. 
One overall key activity in the BMC is the marketing and collaboration with key 
partners in order to generate content on the platform. The internal key partner 
will be the acquired company, Architectural Information Services (AIS), who 
plays an important role when it comes to inviting design specifiers and BPMs 
to the platform. 
The platform will also introduce new revenue streams and cost structure. The 
revenue streams from the subscription offerings will require a management and 
accounting system that needs to be operated continuously. The cost structure 
will naturally be strongly focused on the IT development and maintenance of 
the platform. The idea is to have everything built in-house and to minimise out­
sourcing options, which will ensure flexibility if something needs to be changed. 
However, it will also require new IT competencies since the platform is some­
thing that has not been developed before.  
==PAGE:80==
Figure 51.	
	
	

Business Model Can­
vas  BCI Asia and 
SpecBoards.com
Key 
Partners
Key 
Activities
Cost 
Structure
Revenue 
Streams
Key 
Resources
Value 
Proposition
Customer 
Relationships
Channels
Customer 
Segments
© http://www.businessmodelgeneration.com Icons from http://www.flaticon.com
On:
Author:
Business Model Canvas:
Iteration:
BCI Asia and SpecBoards.com
• Architectural Information 
Services (AIS)
• Architects and architectural 
companies (Design speciﬁers)
• Bloggers
• IT In house or outsourced 
(Web page maintenance and 
updates)
Potential partners:
• Universities (to include the 
students early)
• Architectural communities and 
magazines (Online)
• Managing building product 
sourcing in one place
• Be the premiere solution for 
sourcing  organising and sharing 
building product information.
• Collaboration and transparency 
before, during and after design 
speciﬁcation process
• Connecting design speciﬁers to 
relevant Building Product 
Manufacturer
BPM perspective:
• Subscription bundles
• Analytics and SEO performance
• Project leads
• Brand and product exposure
Main users and free customers:
Design speciﬁers: 
• Architects 
• Interior designers
• Engineers
• Consultants 
• Etc.
Paying customers
• Building Product Manufactur-
ers/ Suppliers (BPM) 
Other users:
• Students
• Private enthusiasts and bloggers
• Subcontractors 
• Main contractors: (construction 
companies)
• Project owners/developers
• Generate content on the 
platform. Invite Building Product 
Manufacturers from current 
network (BCI) onto the platform. 
Do the same with the design 
speciﬁers through AIS and CMD.
• Customer service and assistance
• Networking 
• Maintaining the platform and 
ensure high level of quality 
content
•  Online assistance
•  Events and awards 
• Discounts (Invite friends on 
board)
• Website
• Social Media, Facebook, 
Twitter, Pinterest, etc. 
• Bloggers (Architectural)
• Word-of-mouth
• Events (AIS and CMD)
• Call centers
• Magazines (FuturArc -Green 
architecture and design)
Staff 
• IT Web page maintenance and 
updates
• Marketing strategy
• Comprehensive content 
database
• Design speciﬁers and their 
projects
• Manufacturers and their 
products information
Staff
• IT  developers (Web page maintenance 
and updates)
• Researching department 
• Marketing strategy
• Sales
• Networking events
• Subscription management system
Subscriptions to the platform
• (12 Month subscriptions)
• Various sizes of quoted subscriptions; Region and/or category speciﬁc . Number of uploads, 
banners, priority in search. 
• First 6 Months for free
• Free registration for design speciﬁers
Frederik A. Bundesen
31-05-2017
Frame Innovation
80
==PAGE:81==
Frame Innovation
81
3.9.5.	
Value proposition 
The value proposition for the chosen concept is further explored in a Value Proposition Canvas (VPC). 
The model is originally created by Osterwalder and his team Strategyzer with the purpose of investi­
gating the fit between the customer segment and the offered product/services (Osterwalder, Pigneur, 
Bernarda, & Smith, 2014).
The model not only identifies what value the business is bringing to the customers, it also uncovers the 
current customer jobs, pains and gains that should be addressed.  Two separate VPC’s for each of the 
two main customer segments have been created and visualised in figure 52 and 53: the design specifiers 
who can browse and register for free, and the paying BPM who will sign up for a subscription package 
to create a company profile page, upload product listings on the platform and use other services to in­
crease their opportunity to reach the design specifier.  
The VPC for the BPM, shows that not all pains will be directly resolved. For instance, there will still be 
many products to compete against and it will also be optimistic to say that they can avoid spending time 
tracking down and contacting design specifiers. However, the platform will enable the BPMs to create 
unique filters to differentiate from the competitors and by having access to data and analytics, the BPMs 
will be able to know when a design specifier shows interest in their products.
==PAGE:82==
:  Strategyzer AG
The makers of Business Model Generation and Strategyzer
The Value Proposition Canvas
strategyzer.com
Time saving and enhanced collaboration
Design speciﬁer,
FUTURE POTENTIALS:
- Customer can also take 
online CPD courses. This can 
be combined with a Virtual 
experience with the use of 
VimTrek technology. 
- Reduce time and effort when searching 
for products.
- Better collaboration with other stake-
holders through sharable boards
- Product comparison 
- View relevant building product sugges-
tions
- Identifying the products that have been 
used in a particular project
- Online platform
- Product library and search engine
- Online tool for organising and sharing 
work through the creation of boards
- Customer support
- Portfolio and showcasing platform
- Transparency 
-  Manageing building product sourcing in 
one place
- Get feedback from peers
- Follow other design specifiers and get 
inspiration
- Save time
- A place to strengthen brand profile and 
to be seen by potential new clients
- Be part of a professional community 
- Building product sourcing in one place
- TIme saving 
- Find the right products fast
- Recognised by other speciffiers
- No subscription or cost
- Transparency 
- Good communication with other 
stakeholders
- Lack of time
- Too many products to choose from
- Poor collaboration among the 
stakeholders involved
- Choosing the wrong products
- Risk by not knowing the product 
supplier
- Resistant to change
- Availability
- Not always allowed to specify brands
- Wasting time if the specified products 
are not used in the final design
- Spending time on gathering offers 
and product samples
- Seeing a project without knowing 
which products that were used
- Create design specifications
- Find specific building product 
information
- Hand over specification documents 
and stay in contact with clients/Proj-
ect owners or builders
- Give recommendations 
- Showcase own projects and portfolio 
to potential new clients
- Confidence in selecting products
- Product samples to help deciding
- Integrity
- Balance between aesthetic and high 
level of information
- Possible to test and shareable 
- Feedback from peers
- Get inspiration from others 
- Narrow search 
- Organising work all in one place
Gain Creators
Pain Relievers
Pains
Gains
Products & Services
Customer Job(s)
Value Proposition
Customer Segment
Figure 52.	
	
	

Value Proposition Canvas - Design Specifier
Frame Innovation
82
==PAGE:83==
:  Strategyzer AG
The makers of Business Model Generation and Strategyzer
The Value Proposition Canvas
strategyzer.com
Exposure and project leads
Building Product Manufacturers /Suppliers
FUTURE POTENTIALS:
- Customer can also take 
online CPD courses. This can 
be combined with a Virtual 
experience with the use of 
VimTrek technology. 
Here the products could be 
incorporated into the CPD 
game
- Better collaboration with other stake-
holders 
- Identifying if the products have been 
used in other projects
- Save time in tracking and meeting 
design specifiers
- Online platform
- Product library and search engine
- Online database for uploading 
products and getting brand exposure
- Customer support
- Portfolio and showcasing platform
- Performance tracking (analytics)
- Project leads
- A place to strengthen brand profile and 
to be seen by potential new customers
- Be part of a professional community 
- Building product sourcing in one place
- Access to analytics and to view how well 
your products are performing
- Be contacted by design specifiers
- Create unique filters to differentiate from 
the competitors
- Relevant customer pool
- Find the right products fast
- Good communication with other 
stakeholders
- Good customer relationship
- More customers
- Too many products to compete 
against
- Not understanding the design 
specifier
- Not finding relevant project leads
- Not getting customers 
- Spending time tracking down and 
contacting design specifiers 
without any luck 
- Have their product specified 
but not included in the final 
construction 
- Used in projects without being 
recognised or mentioned
- Not knowing when your 
products are viewed or being 
specified
- Approach design specifiers who might 
be intersted in their products
- Have their products specified
- Impress design specifiers
- What is competition doing?
- Deal with compliances and standards
- Not only specified but actually 
incoporated into more projects
- Brand exposure
- Lower cost of ownership
- Better forecasting
 
Gain Creators
Pain Relievers
Pains
Gains
Products & Services
Customer Job(s)
Value Proposition
Customer Segment
Figure 53.	
	
	

Value Proposition Canvas - Building Procuct Man­
ufacturer (BPM)
Frame Innovation
83
==PAGE:84==
Figure 54.	

Logo for the platform, see ap­
pendix 5.6 for iterations
Frame Innovation
84
3.9.6.	
Methods used in this section and how could it have been done differently
The Integration stage is the ninth and final stage of the Frame Creation Model where the solution needs to 
be integrated into the broader context of stakeholders. The benefits of creating a Business Model Canvas 
(BMC), is to have an overview of the stakeholders and activities that are necessary to create value for the 
business. In the Context stage, the BMC for BCI Asia, was created to explore the current problem situation. 
In that case it was not considered necessary to look deeper into the customer profile or value proposition. 
However, with the new and novel concept proposal it was necessary to ensure that there is a fit between the 
offered products/services and the customer profiles. This is illustrated with a separate Value Proposition Can­
vas (VPC) for the design specifier and Building Product Manufacturer. 
A common mistake when making the VPC is to create the customer profile through the lens of your value 
proposition. The best way to avoid this, is to step back and try view the situation from the customer’s per­
spective, understanding their pains and motivation in their current jobs and then to see how well this fits with 
the value that the new business brings. 
3.9.7.	
Important findings from this section
•	
Instead of focusing on the entire system when moving into the prototype and testing stage, it was de­
cided to focus on one part of the solution – My Boards. 
•	
	The name for the overall solution is SpecBoards, which refers to the specification process and the us­
er’s ability to create customised project boards with My Boards. 
•	
	A critical element in the BMC is the IT development and maintenance of the platform, which will be 
the key resource as well as the largest part of the cost structure. 
•	
	The VPC was created to ensure a good fit between the customer profiles and the products/services 
offered. 
SpecBoards
==PAGE:85==
Figure 55.	

Sketches (Pexel)
Frame Innovation
85
==PAGE:86==
Figure 56.	
	
	

Wireframe early sketches - 
See also appendix 5.3
Prototyping and early testing
86
The suggested concept of a digital information platform has now, though several iterative steps been identi­
fied. How then, should a satisfactory prototype of the information platform be built, with who, how should 
it be tested, and how can this be used to improve the final solution? This chapter covers the development of 
the solution, from early sketches to development of interactive prototypes, through testing and validation 
with users. The objective is to create a prototype that will represent the suggested information platform for 
project showcasing, finding building product information, saving and organising selection and sharing the 
information with relevant stakeholders. Furthermore, the developed prototype will be tested and evaluated 
with relevant and potential users of the platform. 
4.1	
Wireframes
In order to test the workflow when designing the a new platform, a good way is to develop user friendly 
mockup wireframes. Wireframes are examples of basic layout of the web pages without colour images or a 
lot of text. The level of complexity in wireframes can range from being a very basic hand drawing to almost 
full working interactive wireframes. The benefit of using early stage wireframes is to help test features and 
functionalities that should be included in the design before any coding is created. In order to evaluate the 
platform and in particular My Boards, a series of wireframes were developed. This should illustrate the user 
journey from the design specifiers’ perspective. 
4.	 PROTOTYPING & EARLY 
TESTING
==PAGE:87==
Figure 57.	
	
	

Digital wireframes, grey scale 
colours.
Prototyping and early testing
87
==PAGE:88==
Prototyping and early testing
88
The first step in the development of the wireframes was to make quick and dirty drawings, as shown in figure 
56. From the initial sketching, the best wireframes were converted into digital versions through InDesign as 
seen in figure 57. Here it is possible to add interactivity to give a better idea of the functionality and the user 
experience. The benefit of doing this, is that it is a fast way to create real looking wireframes, but without 
any coding. 
4.2	
In-office testing
Before testing with the user, the wireframes were presented in-office to two test persons from AIS along with 
a test guide - see appendix 5.4. The first test person was Mika Meadows, who works in the AIS team together 
with Ashleigh Porter. The test was based on the wireframes in an Interactive PDF. document. 
The first test went smoothly and the overall impression was good. She liked the idea, and she could see this 
a being very beneficial for both the design specifier as well as the manufacturer. That being said, there were 
a few comments as listed below: 
•	
The PDF document did not prevent the test person from scrolling to the next page instead of clicking 
and activating the next page to appear. 
•	
	The test person is sceptical around the idea of having architects upload their own projects on the plat­
form and share it with everybody. That was her only concern. She is not worried about having manu­
facturers uploading their products. 
The following test was with Ashleigh Porter, who primarily is focusing on the poor collaboration between 
the manufacturer and the design specifier and how this can be improved. Hence, she has a very deep under­
standing of what these stakeholders would like to use. The wireframes were improved after the first test and 
instead of using PDF. Interactive document, the wireframes were converted into a functioning HTML file, 
using SWF flash interactivity. The test resulted in the following comments.
•	
Everything worked well and Ashleigh followed the steps in the guide
•	
	No real constructive comments, but she definitely thinks that it is ready for user testing. 
•	
	Very good starting point!
•	
 She wanted to click on everything and explore the functionalities
==PAGE:89==
Figure 58.	
	
	

User testiing with Bianca Gomes 
from Arkhaus
Prototyping and early testing
89
4.3	
User testing
In order to evaluate the My Board functionality and the user experience, the wireframes were presented to 
a potential user of the platform. The test person was Bianca Gomes who works as an architect for Arkhaus 
in Sydney. The test was set up at her home where the wireframes were presented along with a test guide. 
The idea was to have her follow the user journey with minimal assistance. Bianca gave the following 
feedback:
•	
“It is really good! I would normally use Google search and research the different companies”
•	
“This would be really helpful, especially if it could save me time”
•	
“Can you combine a particular product with another product in a board? E.g. a particular painting 
with a specific panel?”
Bianca mentioned that she is a member of closed Facebook groups for architects where members frequent­
ly share information or ask the group for inputs or help with projects. This could potentially be a place 
where boards could be shared in order to get feedback or inputs on a project. 
Bianca is currently working on finding a hot- water system for a residential building. She found two differ­
ent options; one is easy to install and the price is low, while the second options is more difficult to install 
and is expensive. However, the latter option will be a better choice in the long term in the project she is de­
signing. It would be relevant to be able to share this information and recommendation to the project owner. 
“
I want to share both options with the owner of the project and provide my recommendation so he can 
decide.”- Bianca Gomes, Graduate architect, Arkhaus
Following the test, Bianca was presented with the identified User Activity Cycle and also confirmed it as 
her usually work routine. 
==PAGE:90==
Prototyping and early testing
90
4.4	
General evaluation of the suggested solution
Since this project takes a holistic approach, it is important to assess how the 
solution fulfills the goals on the three system levels as described in the Trans­
formation stage. The artefact will be evaluated via the desired functions from 
the morphology chart and requirement specification. This will be visually illus­
trated by the use of a spider web concept evaluator. Secondly the complex and 
engineering levels are evaluated based on their respective goal settings.
4.4.1.	
Artefact level
On the artefact level, the suggested solution of Specboards is validated against 
the desired functions from the requirement specification and morphology chart. 
These are also part of the goal setting on the artefact level. Figure 59 gives an 
overview of how well the suggested solution fulfill the specification. The eval­
uation is based on feedback from the tests and from personal evaluation and 
“gut” feeling. An important element to note is that focus on the artefact level has 
primarily been on the design specifier and ‘My Boards’ element
. 
The overall evaluation on the artefact level can be summarised as:
• 	The solution fulfills most of the goals to a satisfactory degree. 
• 	Access to standard devices is a requirement, but the platform should pri­
marily focus on PC access, while still considering a future App version. 
• 	Obtaining CPD points is still an element worth of pursuing, but it has not 
been the focus at this point. 
4.4.2.	
Complex & Engineering level
Figure 60, illustrates that the solution is expected to fulfill some of the goals 
perfectly, while others will not be met. The goals that are not fulfilled perfectly 
have not been the primary focus in the final solution. However, the goal for 
BCI Asia to be the provider of the premiere platform for design specifiers to 
showcase their work and connect with BPMs can still be achieved, however, the 
suggested solution will be focusing more on the design specification and less on 
the actual showcasing.
The following chapter is a business case, describing the solution in greater de­
tail, how it should be built, the expected cost and potential revenue over the next 
five years including development and implementation strategy.
==PAGE:91==
Figure 59.	

Concept evaluation, artefact level
Prototyping and early testing
91
==PAGE:92==
Figure 60.	

Concept evaluation, complex 
and engineering level
Prototyping and early testing
92
==PAGE:93==
Figure 61.	

Sketches (Pexel)
Prototyping and early testing
93
==PAGE:94==
Value Proposition & Implementation Strategy
94
What is the next step? How much should the platform cost and how long will it take to build? 
The following is a business case, summarising the problem situation, the suggested idea in a nutshell. Fur­
thermore, the business case will include a brief market screening and a business plan including a rough cost 
and revenue estimate over the next 5 years. This chapter should work as a stand-alone business case that 
should clarify and suggest what, why and how the platform should be built. As such, it is important for the 
reader to be aware of repetition of some of the findings from the previous chapters. 
The business case will be delivered to the client along with a presentation of the concept and business case 
to the board. 
5.1	
Final value proposition for the client 
Modern design and construction projects, including the choice of the right building products for the project 
– are neither simple nor straightforward processes. While the fundamental principle might be the same as in 
ancient time, the scale, complexity and the expectations in the industry have changed. 
Prior to the arrival of the internet, finding the right building products for a construction project and writing 
design specification was possible, but usually more trouble than it what was worth and the product selection 
5.	 VALUE PROPOSITION AND 
IMPLEMENTATION STRATEGY
SpecBoards
==PAGE:95==
Value Proposition & Implementation Strategy
95
was limited to cost, availability or knowledge. 
Todays modern technology has changed the market, and building products 
information from all over the world can now be found with a simple Google 
search. The arrival of such digital comprehensive search engines has disrupted 
and killed the traditional hard copy product catalogues and sourcing building 
product information has moved online. 
We are now trading and sharing information with people from all around the 
world and the expectation of fast turnover and result have increased the com­
petition. 
Through social media, following services like Twitter or Pinterest and online 
shops like ASOS, we can replace the ties that used to happen face to face and 
create trust, give recommendations and share knowledge in ways that have not 
previously been possible.
5.2	
Problems and idea in a nutshell
In spite of the long legacy of the building and construction industry, design 
specifiers still face problems that could be solved by taking advantage of the 
new market trends. 
The Building Product Manufacturer (BPM) needs to reach the design specifiers 
to demonstrate their building products and the design specifiers still need to find 
and select the right building products for their projects. The design specifiers 
want to have tools that are modern and easy to use as well as adding value to 
their work routine, e.g., by decreasing time spent on selecting and specifying 
building products. The BPMs want an easy and transparent way to reach the 
design specifier and to get new project leads. 
Currently, the typical first go-to place for sourcing building product information 
is Google search.The benefit for the design specifier is that Google provides the 
user with an instant result based on the initial search. The down-side of using 
such a comprehensive search engine is that the range of results is too compre­
hensive. The results are not always relevant and the filtering process can seem 
almost unmanageable. Where is the product available? Who is the manufacturer 
behind the product? How much does it cost etc.? These are some of the ques­
tions that still need to be manually researched, which makes the specification 
process extremely tedious and time consuming, and often the design specifiers 
will go with something they are already familiar with. 
Based on surveys and field research with design specifiers, it has been con­
firmed that they face similar problems in Australia and Singapore:
•	
It takes time to find, select and specify the right building product infor­
mation
•	
	The design specifier is under time pressure
•	
	There are too many products to choose from
•	
	It is tedious to gather offers and product samples from various manufac­
turers
•	
	It is a risk to select products if the manufacturer is unknown
•	
	Design specifiers are not always allowed to specify brands
•	
	It is difficult to identify the products that have been used in other projects
•	
It is difficult to have a good and transparent collaboration among the 
stakeholders involved
==PAGE:96==
Figure 62.	
	
	

How it works infographic
Value Proposition & Implementation Strategy
96
5.3	
Business idea
With the above problems in mind, the idea is to create a platform where BPMs 
can upload and promote their building products in a way that fits the need of 
todays design specifier. For the design specifier, the platform is an online tool 
that will improve the efficiency of the design specification by making it easy to 
search, save, organise and share the design specification. 
The platform will mainly be a collection of products and architectural projects 
uploaded by design specifiers and BPMs. The BPMs are the paying customers 
while design specifiers will be able to register for free. When subscribing to the 
platform the BPM can choose among various sizes of quoted subscription bun­
dles based on region, number of listings, company profile and access to tracking 
and performance analytics. 
The name chosen for the platform is SpecBoards.com, which represents both the 
specification side of the platform as well as the innovative ‘My Boards’ element.
 
SpecBoards is the online peer-to-peer and business-to-business platform for sourc­
ing, organising and sharing building product information, through enhanced collabora­
tion and transparency before, during and after the design specification process.
My Boards – Simple management tool
The idea behind the ‘My Boards’ element, is based on the collaboration and in­
spiration trends from Pinterest, Spotify, Twitter, Google Drive or private blogs. 
There are serveral strong benefits with this feature:
•	
The users can organise their research and save products for later review. 
•	
The users can follow other peers and their project boards to get inspira­
tion.
•	
The users can view related options based on the content of the project 
boards. 
•	
The users can invite others to view or edit their boards. (Very beneficial if 
the user is working in teams and wants to share the thoughts and research) 
•	
The BPM will be notified when their products are saved and added to 
project boards – Project leads. (Analytics)
5.4	
Current version  - Wireframes
The current wireframes and user journey are created with the main emphasis 
on the design specifier. The wireframes show how the design specifier will ac­
cess the welcome page from where they freely can explore or perform an initial 
search, save and select results and organise in customisable project boards.
Explore or register for free
After accessing the platform, the design specifier can choose to register for free 
or to explore and use the website without registration. However, this will only 
give the user access to a limited layer of information. In order to get full access, 
the user needs to register, which will also give the option to setup a profile page 
and to save search.
==PAGE:97==
Figure 63.	
	
	 
Future landing page.
Value Proposition & Implementation Strategy
97
Search
During the search, the user can apply filters, which will be customised based on the 
initial search. E.g. special technical properties that will apply to a particular prod­
uct. This will help the user to narrow the search faster and to find the best and most 
relevant result available.
Add to My Boards
The user can select and save the products to project boards and create unique sub­
folders to organise and manage the result and thereby save products for later.  
Sharing and collaboration
Once a board is created, it can be shared and published on social media or other 
users can be invited to view the project boards via URL links. The idea is also to let 
the users give other users permission to view or edit and work on the same project, 
similar to sharing Google Docs folders and documents. 
When the user invites or shares a ‘board’ with a colleague, friend, manager etc., the 
new person would need to register (for free) on the platform in order to get access 
to the content. In this way the solution would attract traffic from both ends and the 
amount of users will expand through invitation and word-of-mouth.  
5.5	
Future platform
For the platform to work it is necessary to foster trust and create more than just 
listings and enabling building product information sourcing. The platform needs to 
be “simple” for the user to interact with and have a visually appealing layout with 
beautiful design.  
This combined with trust, approved quality content and social elements will create 
a collaborative arena where people can exchange information, be inspired by oth­
ers, search and organise research in customised project boards. 
See the wireframes in the appendix 5.5. 
==PAGE:98==
Value Proposition & Implementation Strategy
98
Following elements are to be incorporated in the platform:
•	
Rating – likes by peers (Creates trust and ensures a positive atmosphere 
on the site)
•	
Save search and move selection into project boards
•	
Customisable project boards and subfolders
•	
“How to use” video/illustration
•	
Access to analytics on “who viewed my product listings”
•	
Upload architectural projects as well as individual products
•	
Shareable project boards, making the design specification process more 
transparent and encouraging stronger collaboration among internal as 
well as external stakeholders
•	
Users will be able to follow other users’ projects and get inspiration. This 
can be compared to creating or following other users’ playlists on Spotify 
or projects on Pinterest
•	
Uniform template listing and product uploads will follow a uniform tem­
plate
•	
Get a quick quote from the manufacturer (Link)
Enhanced listing – Enable the BPMs to draw attention to their listed products 
by providing a platform where they can upload products and company informa­
tion to design specifiers. The BPMs can upload unique information by adding 
customised tick-boxes, include links to their own website, product catalogues, 
Building Information Modeling (BIM) and CAD files or other valuable informa­
tion that will help them stand out.
5.6	
Customer profiles 
Multisided platform means that the platform serves two primary groups of cus­
tomers, identified as Building Product Manufacturers (BPM) and design specifi­
ers. The BPMs are the ones listing and uploading content such as building prod­
uct information. These stakeholders will primarily be professional businesses 
constituting the paying side. 
The design specifiers, are the ones seeking either specific building product infor­
mation in order to complete their design specification or simply seeking general 
inspiration. This side constitutes the free users and the audience would also in­
clude other users. In addition to the design specifiers, private architectural enthu­
siasts and architectural students have also been considered. Even though they are 
not considered to be within the main customer segment they are still potential 
users.
5.6.1.	
Building Product Manufacturers (BPM)
These are the providers of the primary content on the platform such as building 
product information.
• Small companies – Seeking more exposure in order to attract new cus­
tomers. They might not have a website and are currently promoting them­
selves through networks, Facebook, Instagram etc.  These companies will 
typically only represent local regions. 
• Larger companies –  Some of these companies would represent several 
regions, which potentially could require multiple profile pages (One for 
each region). This is potentially a large source of content and henceforth 
larger source of revenue, since they will have to subscribe to a larger sub­
scription bundle.
==PAGE:99==
Value Proposition & Implementation Strategy
99
5.6.2.	
Design specifiers – Free users
The free users are the design specifiers who are responsible for the design spec­
ification and looking to find, select and document building products for a partic­
ular project. It may also be architects who want to have a place where they can 
upload projects and use it for showcasing. 
• Individual architects or teams – Design specifiers and in particular ar­
chitects would typically work on a project in a team. Being able to share 
project boards among the team members will support the collaboration 
and transparency during the project. 
Other users:
• Students – University students who seek inspiration for university pro­
tects, internships or general interest will also benefit from using the plat­
form. 
• Private enthusiasts – The platform is not restricted to professional use 
only. Private architectural enthusiasts or people just interested in build­
ings and building products can use the platform to explore and draw in­
spiration. 
• Project owners – In residential projects and in particular in Singapore, it 
is not unusual that project owners would like to follow and be included 
in the design process. As such, the design specifier can share the project 
boards with the project owner. For instance, the design specifier can share 
a project folder containing three types of acoustic panels. Here the design 
specifier can provide comments or recommendations to the project owner. 
• Main contractors or builders – These stakeholders constitute the building 
and procuring part of the projects. As such, it would be relevant to have 
access to the project boards similarly to the project owner as described 
above.
5.7	
Testing - My Boards
At this stage, a series of wireframes have been tested by four individuals in-
house and one architect from Arkhaus. The tests were focusing on the design 
specifiers and how they can use ‘My Boards’. The tests were carried out by 
providing the test person a step by step guide with instructions. However, the 
testing needs to be further extended and new wireframes are under development. 
The new wireframes should to be tested with 5-8 more users, preferably design 
specifiers from Singapore and Australia (Nielsen, 2012).
The current wireframe test is focusing on the design specifier and a method to 
test the platform from the BPMs’ perspective is to use Expression of Interest 
(EOI) - a method which is used to seek indication of interest from potential 
users who in this case would be interested in uploading products and creating a 
company profile page. From here, a more advanced working prototype should be 
developed and coded by the IT team. The platform will contain several features, 
which will require different tests – each focusing on a smaller set of features.
==PAGE:100==
Value Proposition & Implementation Strategy
100
Company Name
Country
Content
Price
Users
Archello
Europe (42%)
Asia 
US 
Project; Prod­
ucts; Materials; 
(brands, Events, 
Collection); 
Search
60,000+ products 
Free for Signing 
up.  Mem­
bership costs 
€1,900 per year
150,000 
newsletter 
subscribers 
(70 % design 
specifiers)
870K Facebook 
likes
Architizer
US 
Europe
News, Projects, 
Products, Brands, 
‘SOURCE’ 
A+awards, Search
65,000+ projects
Free for 
architects, It 
is unclear how 
much it cost for 
manufacturers 
and product 
suppliers
335,000 mem­
bers on Archi­
tizer community
1.8m Facebook 
likes
Heinze
DE
Project; Products; 
Company;
N/A
10K Facebook 
likes
Selector
NZ 
AUS
Building; Fin­
ishes; Flooring; 
Furniture; Kitchen 
and Bathrooms; 
Outdoors; Light­
ing; Windows and 
Doors.
12-month sub­
scription from 
$1,200 - 5,000
116,000 Users 
(2016)
16K Facebook 
likes
SpecifiedBy
UK
Products; 
Manufacturers;  
Catalogues; CAD; 
BIM; Specs
N/A
145 Facebook 
likes
Sweets
US
Products; 
manufacturers; 
Catalogues; CAD; 
BIM; Specs
N/A
1.4K Facebook 
likes
Table 4.	
Competitor review
5.8	
Market size
SpecBoards is moving into a total market of building product material that by 
McKinsey is reported to represent a US $ 1 trillion global industry, and materials 
will usually account for more than half the total cost of actual projects (McK­
insey & Company, 2016).  According to IBISWorld February 2017, there are 
approximately 14,350 registered architectural businesses in Australia with more 
than 35,000 employees (IBIS World, 2017). Singapore has around 320+ archi­
tectural firms and this does not include interior design, consultant or engineering 
firms that work with design specification (Directory, 2017).
In regards to the BPM, Australia accounts for more than 16,000 potential com­
pany brands of varying size. Hence, a further estimation of the market size will 
need to be undertaken. However, Architizer, which is considered one of the 
largest competitors  to SpecBoards, has reported to have 10,000+ manufacturer 
brands subscribed to their platform and 335,000 members on their online com­
munity (Architizer, 2017b).

Potential reach
BPM
Design specifier
Australia
Members on the current BCI 
database ≈ 1,400
Non-updated members ≈ 1,500
Non-members and potential 
customers ≈ 16,000
Architectural businesses = 14,350 
Employees = 35,000
Singapore
N/A
Architectural businesses = 320+
5.9	
Industry and competition
The few main competitors in the market can be seen in table 4. The competitors 
are primarily focusing on creating comprehensive building product libraries for 
the design specifiers.
Table 3.	
Potential market
==PAGE:101==
Value Proposition & Implementation Strategy
101
• Magazines – The BCI owned publications will be used as a channel to 
reach and promote the platform. (Construction+, FuturArc, and Architec­
ture@).
External
• Universities – The reason for including the universities, is to reach stu­
dents early in their carrier. Students are major users of social groups and 
share ideas among fellow students. If SpecBoards is accepted among the 
students, and shared through Social Media the potential reach can be huge. 
• Bloggers – Bloggers are known for being an important source of creating 
awareness and driving traffic to websites, as such it will be wise to have 
some influential bloggers write about SpecBoards. 
5.9.1.	
Competitive advantage
BCI has already developed a substantial network and database within the building 
and construction industry, consisting of numerous stakeholders from the overall 
project owners, contractors, subcontractors to design specifiers, consultants and 
Building Product Manufacturers. This wide-ranging network and information 
database means that BCI will have a significant head start in reaching the users. 
Regarding the features on the platform, two of the identified competitors - Arch­
itizer and SpecifiedBy, are also introducing project boards/collections elements 
on their sites. However, none of the competitors provide the sharing and col­
laboration element, which will be the key selling points. Also, the fact that the 
competitors are introducing the project boards or collections is a confirmation 
that SpecBoards is on the right path. 
SpecifiedBy, is the closest competitor in regards to creating boards (they call it 
projects). It is a young start-up founded in 2013 and based in Scotland. Due to 
its early stage and target region, they are not considered as a direct threat to this 
solution at this stage (SpecifiedBy, 2017).
5.9.2.	
Strategic partners
The key strategic partners are divided into two areas; Internal, which will in­
clude the already owned departments AIS and CMD and external, which will 
constitute the stakeholders that could help drive the platform in the right direc­
tion and attract new users.
Internal
The key strategic partners are Architectural Information Service (AIS) and Cross 
Media Division (CMD). They both have a strong relationship with design spec­
ifiers which will represent a key activity in promoting and inviting new users on 
board. 
==PAGE:102==
Value Proposition & Implementation Strategy
102
Subscription bundles
Features
12 Month 
Basic membership – Flat Rate
Brand page 
Unlimited product or project listing
Access to analytics
Lead generation
Link to own website
Link your products to projects
1 Country
$2,500 
Plus
2 Countries
$4,750 
Advanced
3 Countries
$6,750
Premium enterprise
Unlimited countries
$10,000
* Subscribers within first 6 months will be granted a  6-month free trial period
** Subscribers from Q3 onwards will be granted a 3-month free trial period
*** Subscribers from Q9 onwards will be granted a 1-month free trial period
The first year the focus is to generate content on the platform. As such, every­
one who subscribes to the platform within the first 6 months will be granted a 
6-months free trial period. After Q3, new subscribers will be granted a 3-months 
free trial period and after end of second year (Q9), new subscribers will have 
1-month free trial period. 
In order to expand the business model additional advertising packages will be 
offered. This will include:
• Priority placement in search
• Products in newsletters to be sent to the registered users
• Banner on home page or side bar
• Promotion on social media channels
Table 5.	
Subscription bundles and pricing
5.10	
Revenue and cost structure
Specboards will be focusing on having subscription flat rates for a basic mem­
bership package for 12 months. This basic membership will cost $AUD 2,500 
and will include:
• Brand page: A home page similar to a LinkedIn profile page with a gallery 
of company brands’ products and references to projects where they have 
been used.  
• Unlimited product or projects listing: The more products the BPM up­
loads to SpecBoards, the more likely it is for design specifiers to view and 
learn about their brand.
• Access to analytics: Real-time data on how well the products and brand 
page are performing. (e.g. how many downloads, how many views and 
products have been added to project boards)   
• Lead generation: Get an overview of who is interested in the different 
products. This will help targeting new customers   
• Link to own webpage: This will drive traffic to the BPMs’ own website. 
• Link products to projects: Connect products to existing projects uploaded 
by the BPM or an architectural firm. This will let design specifiers see 
where and who has used the products. 
The basic membership will be the flat rate subscription valid for one country re­
gion. The price is based on what is seen in the current market from Archello and 
Selector. If the subscriber has products in multiple regions and wishes to have 
exposure from all regions it will be possible to add this at an additional cost. 
Table 5 provides an overview of the subscription bundles and pricing model.
==PAGE:103==
Value Proposition & Implementation Strategy
103
Number of New Clients per month
First Year
10
Second Year
10
Following Years
10
Subscriptions
Flat Rate price
$2,500
First Year Renewal - FYR
60%
Recurring Renewal - RR 
80%
Subscribers after trial period (1st year)
0,7
Investment
Year
Maximum Investment
$ -368,000
Accumulative Cash Flow at end of FY
$ 292,480
5
Month When Acc. CF Positive
55th month
4,6
Month When Mon CF Positive
25th month
2,1
Elements that have not been included in the calculations:
•	
Various sizes of subscription packages
•	
Sales commission or salary increase
•	
Deferrals in subscriptions
•	
Discounts in subscriptions
Table 6.	
Clients growth
Table 7.	
Subscriptions renewals 
SpecBoards is highly scalable as it potentially has global reach and the marginal 
cost for serving additional users is minimal. Future potential revenue streams 
could also include an e-commerce site, where contractors or project owners can 
get quotes directly and buy products through the platform. Here SpecBoards will 
be able to charge a transaction fee for each transaction, for instance 10%.
5.11	
Financing
It is estimated that the IT development of the platform will require 360 man days 
of 8-hours work and it will cost AUD $115,200 to pay three people full time for 
120 days (8-hours x $40 x 120-days x 3 developers) and AUD $80,000 to pay a 
Project Manager full time for a year. 
The business plan is based on a range of assumptions such as IT maintenance, 
marketing budgets, account management cost and customer service (online as­
sistance or in the field) and highly critical: the number of new clients per month. 
However, the overall business plan gives a good estimate of the size of the over­
all investment and how many subscriptions that need be sold each month in 
order to break even and subsequently show a positive accumulated operating 
cash flow.  
The variables in table 6 and 7 below are assumptions. Changing the variable in 
regards to renewal rate, subscription price and number of new clients, will have 
an immediate impact on the cash flow and the overall investment in v. 
From this assumed scenario, the business will require a maximum investment of 
AUD $368,000, which will be spent within the first 2 years. From here, the cash 
flow moves towards a positive return as the subscription income commences. 
This shift happens when the income from the renewal of the subscriptions kick 
in at the 19th month. By the end of the fifth year, the accumulative Cash Flow 
is estimated to AUD $ 292,480, taking into account that this is a positively as­
sumed scenario. See appendix 5.7 for full business case estimate.
Table 8.	
Investment estimate 
==PAGE:104==
Value Proposition & Implementation Strategy
104
to post regularly on our Facebook to engage current and potential users. 
The purpose of investing in marketing campaigns is to attract design specifiers 
and other free users to the platform. From experience with AIS and CMD, if 
enough design specifiers show interest, the BPM will follow them. As such, the 
marketing campaign will also be targeting architectural universities and design 
schools to capture upcoming design specifiers. 
5.14	
Idea protection
There are no obvious ways for SpecBoards to patent or protect the business mod­
el. Therefore, it is important to take advantage of the established network and 
build a strong brand and large user base. There are no apparent competitors in 
the Asia Pacific region, thus, the first mover advantage is an important aspect to 
exploit, as it will give better exposure to media and online communities, which 
can help promote the platform. Getting the platform promoted while building a 
strong user base is essential to protect the platform from competition.
5.15	
Built on existing system or separate platform?
How should the platform be built? Should the platform be working as an add-
on to the current system or should it be a completely separate platform? These 
are some very essential questions that will determine the upfront cost, time and 
effort necessary to develop the platform.
At a meeting with the internal IT department in Sydney, it was revealed that 
there is another alternative to a separate platform solution. It could be built in-
house as an add on feature to the existing system. IT has already tried setting up 
the company profiles, resembling a company LinkedIn page, where the compa­
nies can provide general company information and later on listing their products.
The idea would be to take advantage of the BPMs that are already members of 
the system and give them the option of creating company profiles and later up­
5.12	
Implementation
After the test phase, the next step is to build the the Minimum Viable Product. 
“The goal of a start-up is to figure out the right thing to build – the thing that 
customers want and will pay for – as quickly as possible. “(Ries, 2011) This has 
to be tested by users and clients of the platform and adjusted accordingly. The 
following overall steps in the implementation are:
1.	 The first step is to build the platform, which has been estimated to six 
months (3*120 man days)
2.	 Release 1. A beta version, where it primarily is the BPM who will be invit­
ed to the platform and to upload products and projects
3.	 Customer service to assist the BPM  in uploading products and projects. 
It is important to ensure a high level of approved content on the platform 
before inviting the design specifiers on board
4.	 Design specifiers will be invited on board and encouraged to upload their 
projects and create profile pages 
5.	 The marketing campaign starts 6 months after the first Beta release 
5.13	
Marketing
In relation to the marketing effort, SpecBoards should build a social presence on 
Instagram and Facebook, where the marketing department will upload pictures, 
uodates and engage with global users through liking and commenting their pic­
tures. Furthermore, through the internal strategic partners, the platform will be 
promoted via publications, events and websites. 
The marketing campaign will have to wait until sufficient content from the BPM 
site is uploaded and ready on the platform. This is estimated to be ready at earli­
est 6 months after release. To ensure a good customer relationship it is important 
==PAGE:105==
Value Proposition & Implementation Strategy
105
5.16	
Risk and unintended consequences
The proposed solution might have unintended consequences. For instance, since 
the platform is to act as a middle man service, it is solely dependent on the users. 
The platform will not work without any users. 
Another element that has been requested as an element on the platform is pricing 
as a filter option. This was an unanimous request from the field research with 
design specifiers in Singapore. It will be difficult to determine this since there 
might be different ways of pricing a product e.g. from country to country. ($ per 
m2 vs. $ per ft2)
Allowing the BPM to have access to analytics about who viewed or added their 
products to their boards could result in a negative experience for the design 
specifier, if they are contacted every time they save a new product. Another way 
is to let the BPM wait until they are contacted by the design specifier instead of 
encouraging the BPM to be proactive. 
Allowing free users to register might result in competitors starting to copy the 
same features. Lastly, changing people’s work routines are challenging even if 
SpecBoards might be a great tool, it still has to be accepted by the users and 
incorporated in the design specification process.
loading and listing building products. 
Benefits of building the platform on the existing system:
•	
Faster and easier, since it will be built on the current system
•	
	Lower cost - Building a completely new system will naturally mean high­
er initial cost
•	
	Industry recognised – from the BPMs’ perceptive and there are already 
1,400 members in the system in Australia.
Risk by keeping BCI name:
•	
	The BCI name does not have a strong reputation among design specifiers
•	
	Limiting the flexibility in terms of layout and user experience since it is 
built on an existing platform
•	
Difficult to create a new branding strategy for an existing platform
Initially SpecBoards was intended as a completely separate platform due to the 
primary focus on the design specifier. 
• Because design specifiers are constantly being approached by manufac­
turers who found them through BCI LeadManager, the design specifiers 
have a negative perception of BCI and their services. 
• Design specifier and especially architects are very visually oriented and 
the UX of the platform is extremely essential. “If you do not like the look 
at first sight, you will not go for the detail” – Tunugntla Rajesh Associate 
architects, AWP Architects, Singapore
==PAGE:106==
Figure 64.	
	
	

An Architizer Source sample box 
(Architizer, 2017b)
Value Proposition & Implementation Strategy
106
5.17	
Additional future potentials of the concept
During the creation of frames and ideas, a Duolingo/ gamification approach was discovered as a future 
element that would add value to the design specifier by allowing them to easily obtain the required Con­
tinuous Professional Development points (CPD).  
Another potential is to incorporate Architizer’s ‘Source’ feature, which allows design specifiers to fill 
out a request for building products. Architizer will then match the request with relevant products and 
manufacturers. This will change the current situation where BPM is approaching and guessing what the 
design specifier would be interested in. The idea of Architizer’s ‘Source’ feature is for the BPM to see 
exactly what the design specifier is requesting, so they can reach out directly with the relevant infor­
mation. The reason why this is not included from the beginning is that it will require significantly more 
staff, and more importantly, it will require highly active and operative engagement from the BPM side. 
If a design specifier wants to use the feature and send a request and do not receive a response either 
real-time or within a day, it will leave the user with a negative perception of the feature. Therefore, such 
a ‘Source’ feature is something that could be introduced at a later stage once the platform has proven 
successful and the user database has reached a sufficient size.
Figure 65 shows the new and refined interactive wireframes. The colours and fonts are not fixed but 
are currently based on BCI Asia’s current look and feel. Appendix 5.5 will illustrate the wireframes in 
greater detail.
==PAGE:107==
Figure 65.	
	
	

Digital wireframes - Colours - See 
large version in Appendix 5.5
Value Proposition & Implementation Strategy
107
==PAGE:108==
Discussion & Reflection
108
6.	  DISCUSSION/REFLECTION
people to argue with. Nevertheless, the time and effort spent on sharing ideas 
and having deep discussions in a team are often necessary in order to see things 
in new perspectives. Furthermore, it is difficult to avoid making subjective deci­
sions when there is no regular team member to argue with. As such, it has been 
vital to keep timetables and to have weekly and sometimes daily meetings with 
Robert Krups or other colleagues in the BCI office in order to get new perspec­
tives on the situation.
In addition to involving in-office colleagues, the user involvement in the de­
sign process has included a trip to Singapore, as part of the field research to 
meet and interview local stakeholders and facilitate an intensive focus group 
workshop. This was an incredible learning experience and the findings from 
the focus group workshop were extraordinary and resulted in the creation of the 
User Activity Cycle.
Ideally, next step would be to invite the participants into another workshop ses­
sion to not only show them the value of their previous participation but also to 
test the new wireframes.  
6.2	
Methodology and Frame Innovation
The choice of using Frame Innovation as the overall method was made prior to 
the beginning of the project. It was evident that the project would involve a large 
number of stakeholders and a holistic design approach would be necessary. 
A significant benefit in using Frame Innovation as the overall approach is that it 
This chapter aims to highlight the most important reflections on the design pro­
cess, the methodology and outcome of the project.
6.1	
Reflection on the design process
The first part of the thesis project focused on getting not only physically but also 
mind-set wise into the company. A significant difference compared to experi­
ence with past university projects is, that this is the first time that I have been 
in this constant close collaboration with a company. Being inside the company 
has been very challenging, but also a great learning experience. The information 
is far more accurate and you can get instant input and feedback on the work 
throughout the entire process. Certainly, the company also has an expectation 
for the outcome of the project and has an interest in having accurate models 
that are based on facts and not just rough assumptions. Obtaining a profound 
understanding of the problem situation and refining the models, also require 
more time and sometimes the process can seem tedious but that is the difference 
between assumption and reality.  
Before going to Australia, I had only very limited knowledge about BCI Asia 
or the building industry in Asia-Pacific, which made the idea of traveling alone 
to Australia to conduct a Master’s thesis project both exciting and somewhat 
intimidating. Working alone and overseas has proved to be both advantageous 
and disadvantageous. Making fast decisions were easier since there were fewer 
==PAGE:109==
Discussion & Reflection
109
naturally expanded the solution space and opened up new perspectives through 
the creation of frames. Frame Innovation focuses not directly on solutions to a 
particular problem or on how to create incremental improvement to an existing 
solution, but it inspires completely new approaches to the problem situation. 
Nevertheless, the Frame Innovation also has its limitations. 
A challenge in using the Frame Innovation in this case, was the actual creation of 
frames, combining frames and the deciding and justifying which direction to go. 
How do we predict the success of an idea and how do we select and determine 
whether if an idea is ‘fruitful’ or not? 
Since there is no actual evaluation process described in Frame Innovation, it was 
necessary to use other methods such as a morphology chart, a requirement spec­
ification and finally Pugh’s evaluation matrix to weigh and compare the ideas. 
Frame Innovation argues that making these decisions is based on experience and 
that the designer makes decisions based on “gut” feeling rather than analytical 
evaluation. Is there a right answer and can a weighting analysis sometimes be 
better than the “gut” feeling? Weighting is useful for making an objective deci­
sion, however it splits the evaluation into smaller separate parts instead of look­
ing at the idea in a holistic view. This is why design tools are meant to be used 
as a flexible guidance to the process, but should not be used as strict manuals. 
Furthermore, as much as it is considered a strength to have a holistic view on the 
problem situation and solution space, expanding the perspectives and embracing 
other approaches in the frame creation process can also drive the focus away 
from the intended scope. Sometimes problem situations only require incremen­
tal solutions and the time and effort involved in expanding the solution space 
through Frame Innovation is not always beneficial. 
As such, the application of Frame Innovation will not always be the ideal choice, 
but in this case Frame Innovation combined with models from Product Service 
System led to the creation of SpecBoards. 
Overall, the Frame Innovation approach, has proved to be a good framework for 
the project and to spark the creation of an innovative solution that was not con­
sidered before. Even though the nine stages of the Frame Creation Model are 
originally used in relation to a two-hour workshop session, the same approach 
could evidently still be applied as the backbone of a longer design process.
6.3	
Holistic design approach
Tim Brown from IDEO focuses on the importance of using design as an ap­
proach in business and the advantage of bringing designers and their methods 
into business. His arguments are concentrated on having less focus on the object 
and more on design thinking as an approach, which would create much bigger 
impact (Brown, 2009).
The reason why this is very interesting to discuss in this case, is that the tradi­
tional product catalogues have not changed much except for the fact that they 
are online. As revealed from the findings, the commonly first go-to place for 
sourcing building product information is Google search. The benefit is that the 
design specifier can get an immediate result based on the search, however, the 
down-side of using such a wide-ranging search engine, is that the spread of 
results is too comprehensive. The results are not always relevant and the fil­
tering process is almost unmanageable. Where is the product available, who is 
the manufacturer behind the products, how much does it cost etc.? These are 
the questions that make the selection process extremely tedious and time con­
suming and often the design specifier will go with something they are already 
familiar with. 
Using holistic design thinking prevented the project from overlooking critical 
aspects elsewhere in the system, when developing a solution on the artefact lev­
el. Without a holistic approach, the final proposal to the client would probably 
not have been SpecBoards or the additional feature of incorporating a Duolingo/
gamification version of obtaining Continuous Professional Development (CPD) 
points. 
==PAGE:110==
Conclusion
110
The preliminary project scope was formulated via skype meetings between 
Denmark and the BCI office in Australia six months prior to the official start 
date. This early project scope initially evolved around creating a digital infor­
mation platform for architectural showcasing and to help the design specifiers 
find and select building products with fast results. 
Identifying the stakeholder needs and their daily working routines and to under­
stand the various stages in the design specification process have been central to 
the development of the final solution. 
By using a holistic design approach such as Frame Innovation, the focus of the 
project was not influenced by a premature fixation on a solution. Instead, Frame 
Innovation sparked the thought process by firstly creating a holistic view of 
the problem situation. This was followed by highlighting the critical paradoxes 
in the field and a clarification of the stakeholders involved. The stakeholders 
and their needs were subsequently transformed into important statements that 
were used as the foundation for the creation of themes and frames. The stages 
explained throughout chapter three have been useful in organising the findings 
and step-by-step move towards the final solution.
The final solution originated with the frames of ‘ASOS’ and ‘Airbnb’ with an 
additional feature of a Duolingo/ gamification add- on, and it was not until late 
in the ‘Transformation’ stage, that the idea of a ‘My Board’ emerged. By going 
back to the initially identified stakeholder needs, this was still in line with what 
7.	 CONCLUSION
the stakeholders were looking for and in line with what BCI Asia is capable of 
developing. 
In addition to the final outcome of Specboards, the project can be used as a 
theoretical case example that guides the reader through tools and methods that 
have been applied. The findings and outcome throughout chapter three can be 
used for inspiration and as a guide, offering not so much a how-to manual as a 
do-it-yourself case example. 
These are exciting times for the construction industry and the pace of change 
and emergence of new technologies will only accelerate from here. Michael S. 
Burke, the Chairman of the engineering firm AECOM said in a recent publica­
tion on the future of construction: 
“
In an environment where optimal performance is defined as faster, better, 
and smarter delivery, there is no choice but to wholeheartedly embrace 
technology and the benefits they afford – or risk being left behind.”
As competition stiffens, budget and profit margins become tighter, followed by 
demands for faster and more efficient turnaround. As such, companies will need 
to adopt and embrace the emergence of new technologies in order to differenti­
ate themselves in the market. The final proposal of Specboards is a holistic so­
cio-technical solution that not only focuses on solving an immediate need from 
the design specifiers perspective; the proposal will also be useful in finding 
==PAGE:111==
Conclusion
111
early inspiration, sourcing and selecting building products and sharing informa­
tion with relevant stakeholders. This will add value to the specification process 
by creating a more transparent solution that encourages involvement from peers 
and other relevant stakeholders.
During the project it has become evident, that not only are the stakeholders 
ready for a change, but there is certainly also a need for a new tool that can assist 
the design specifier and enhance the collaboration among the various stakehold­
ers involved in the design specification process.
Alongside the deliverable of the final business case as described in chapter five, 
I will leave the project by presenting the project to the Board at the BCI office 
- and it is gratifying to know that sufficient funds have already been set aside in 
the budget to develop and realise the project. 
Final Words  -  How did I end up at BCI?
“When one door closes, another door opens” - It may sound like a cliché but this 
is how I ended up joining BCI.
In 2015, I had just left a young start-up and was living and traveling in Australia 
as an exchange student from Denmark. The start-up was focusing on the surfing 
community by creating a global online sharing platform inspired by Airbnb. 
Just before leaving the company I met a young talented surfer to tell him about 
the idea.
Little did I know that this young surfer was going to connect me to his father Dr. 
Matthias Krups, CEO of BCI. After an interesting conversation with Matthias 
about BCI and my experience and educational background, Matthias invited me 
to join BCI as an intern while finishing my studies.
My role at BCI involves project management and development of a new on­
line platform and is both very exciting and challenging. I have my own proj­
ect, which gives me a lot of responsibility but at the same time flexibility in 
my work. The project was initially a combination of my Master’s thesis and a 
hands-on project at BCI and during the project I have experienced caring sup­
port and encouragement from the team here.
I have had the opportunity to travel to Singapore to meet local clients from 
the industry, facilitate workshops and study the differences in culture and busi­
nesses. I can only say that my experience with BCI has so far been incredibly 
positive and stimulating and I am grateful that I was given the opportunity to 
come all the way from Denmark to join this constantly forward moving and 
innovative organisation.
==PAGE:112==
References
112
Archello. (2017). Archello Media Kit: Archello Is About Storytelling. Retrieved 
from http://www.archello.com
Architizer. (2017a). Architizer: Architects, Buildings and Building Products. Re­
trieved March 4, 2017, from http://architizer.com/
Architizer. (2017b). Architizer Media Kit: Architizer builds tools that are revolu­
tionizing architecture. Business.
Australian Institute of Architects. (2015). Continuing professional development 
- CPD - Australian Institute of Architects. Retrieved April 13, 2017, from 
http://www.architecture.com.au/cpd-education/national/cpd
BCI,  media group. (2014). BCI Media Group Employee Guidelines.
BCI Asia. (2016). Magazines - BCI ASIA. Retrieved April 14, 2017, from http://
www.bciasia.com/publications/magazine/
BCI Asia. (2017). BCI LeadManager - BCI ASIA. Retrieved February 26, 2017, 
from http://www.bciasia.com/products/bci-lead-manager/
Brocato, D. (2010). Push and Pull Marketing Strategies. https://doi.
org/10.1002/9781444316568.wiem01053
Brown, T. (2009). Tim Brown: Designers -- think big! | TED Talk | TED.com. 
TedTalks. Retrieved from https://www.ted.com/talks/tim_brown_urges_de­
signers_to_think_big
Butcher, S. (2016). Why Architects don’t like Sales | Su Butcher | Pulse | Linke­
dIn. Retrieved March 7, 2017, from https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/why-
architects-dont-like-sales-su-butcher
Cross, N. (2008). Engineering Design Methods: Strategies for Product Design. 
Design (Vol. 1). Retrieved from http://www.amazon.de/dp/0470519266
Davis, R. (2012). Why Architects Could Be a Sales Rep’s Next Best Thing | Pro­
Sales Online | Sales, Sales Prospecting, Sales Closing, Architects. Prosales 
Magazine. Retrieved from http://www.prosalesmagazine.com/business/
sales/why-architects-could-be-a-sales-reps-next-best-thing_o
Directory, S. C. (2017). Singapore Architects List, Architectural Design Compa­
nies Directory. Retrieved June 22, 2017, from http://www.singapore-compa­
nies-directory.com/Categories/singapore_architects.htm#Singapore
REFERENCES
==PAGE:113==
References
113
DOC. (2017). Designing Out Crime. Retrieved April 13, 2017, from http://de­
signingoutcrime.com/
Dorst, K. (2006).  Design Problems and Design Paradoxes. Design Issues, 22(3), 
4–17. https://doi.org/10.1162/desi.2006.22.3.4
Dorst, K. (2015).Frame Innovation: Create New Thinking By Design. (K. Fried­
man & E. Stolterman, Eds.) (1st ed.). Sydney.
Dorst, K., Kaldor, L., & Watson, R. (2016). Designing for the Common Good 
(1st ed.). Amsterdam: BIS Publishers. Retrieved from https://books.google.
com.br/books?id=dscpjgEACAAJ
Egan, J. (2015). Rethinking the Report of the Construction Task Force. Con­
struction, 35.
Elliott, D. C., & Deasley, P. P. (2007). The Royal Academy of Engineering Creat­
ing systems that work : Creating systems that work. Engineering, (293074), 
17. Retrieved from www.raeng.org.uk/education/vps/pdf/RAE_Systems_
Report.pdf
Finken, K. H., McAloone, T. C., Avlonitis, V., Mateu, A. G. i, Andersen, J. B., 
Mougaard, K., … Hsuan, J. (2013). #4 PSS Tool Book (1st ed.). Technical 
University of Denmark (DTU). Retrieved from www.dtu.dk/proteus
Hayes, J. (2007). The Theory and Practice of Change Management Second edi­
tion (Second edi). Palgrave Macmillan.
Heinze. (2017). Heinze - Portal für Bauprodukte, Firmenprofile und Architek­
turobjekte - heinze.de. Retrieved March 4, 2017, from https://www.heinze.
de/’
IBIS World. (2017). Architectural Services in Australia Market Research | IBIS­
World. Retrieved June 22, 2017, from https://www.ibisworld.com.au/in­
dustry-trends/market-research-reports/professional-scientific-technical-ser­
vices/architectural-services.html
Maier, A., & Oehmen, J. (2016). Introductory lecture to course 42090 : Holistic 
Design of Systems. Technical University of Denmark. Spring 2016.
McKinsey & Company. (2016). Imagining construction’s digital future. Imagin­
ing Construction’s Digital Future, (June), 1–14. Retrieved from http://www.
mckinsey.com/industries/capital-projects-and-infrastructure/our-insights/
imagining-constructions-digital-future
McKnight, J. (2016). Architizer raises $7 million to launch a new products data­
base. Dezeen. Retrieved from https://www.dezeen.com/2016/01/28/architiz­
er-source-online-products-database-raises-7-million-dollars/
Nielsen, J. (2012). How Many Test Users in a Usability Study? Retrieved June 
22, 2017, from https://www.nngroup.com/articles/how-many-test-users/
Osterwalder, A., Pigneur, Y., Bernarda, G., & Smith, A. (2014). Value proposition 
design. Strategyzer series. https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781107415324.004
Ries, E. (2011). The Lean Startup. Book, 336. https://doi.org/23
==PAGE:114==
References
114
Schade, A. (2013). Competitive Usability Evaluations: Learning from Your 
Competitors. Nielson Norman Group. Retrieved from https://www.nngroup.
com/articles/competitive-usability-evaluations/
Schneidawind, J. (2016, December). The Truth About Specification | Archi­
tect Magazine | Specifications, Building Materials. AIA Feature, 1–5. Re­
trieved from http://www.architectmagazine.com/aia-architect/aiafeature/
the-truth-about-specification_o
SpecifiedBy. (2017). SpecifiedBy - Building Product Search, Discovery &amp; 
Comparison. Retrieved June 22, 2017, from https://www.specifiedby.com/
Spool, J. M. (2004). The KJ-Technique: A Group Process for Establishing Pri­
orities. User Interface Engineering. Retrieved from http://www.uie.com/ar­
ticles/kj_technique/
Sweets. (2017). Construction &amp; Building Materials Directory | Suppliers - 
Sweets. Retrieved March 4, 2017, from http://sweets.construction.com/
Zealand, N., & Architects, R. (2014). Improving Collaboration Between Archi­
tects and Engineers, 1–8.
Pictures used in the report: 
www.istock.com
www.pexels.com
www.shotstash.com
==PAGE:115==
