==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
          1 
 
Morten 
Risom 
Nielsen 
ARE WE 
RUNNING  
IN CIRCLES? 
A study of how 
to consume 
and design 
 in a Circular 
Economy 
==PAGE:2==
2 
 
 
 Master Thesis 
Technical University of Denmark MSc. Eng. in Design & Innovation 
 
 
Project Title (English): Feasibility study of a Living lab on design and consumption in a Circular Economy  
Project Title (Danish): Forundersøgelse af et Living Lab omhandlende design og forbrug i en Cirkulær Økonomi 
Author: Morten Risom Nielsen (s152184) 
Project Period: 23.01.2017 - 20.06.2017 
Supervisor: Yutaka Yoshinaka 
Word count report (Excl. Abstract, Preface, Table of Contents & Bibliography): 23.541 words 
Morten Risom Nielsen 
==PAGE:3==
 
 
 
          3 
 
Dear Reader,  
Thank you for your interest in my master thesis. 
 
My motivation for this master thesis is to analyse, synthesize and evaluate the 
methods and mind-set I have been taught for the past five years, in order to 
be best prepared for my future career as a Design Engineer. 
I started my engineering studies learning the fundamental mechanisms of 
how organizations run, and how you as a Design Engineer do R&D, with the 
end goal of satisfying customers for maximum profit. 
Starting my Master in Design & Innovation at DTU I gained competences with-
in sociotechnical systems, and user-centered design. Next to that, I have the 
newest expertise within the field of Circular Economy, and from that started 
to connect my work as a Design Engineer with a growing passion for the envi-
ronment. 
This has left me with a mind-set of Circular Design Thinking, eager to design 
for continuous well-being of both humans and our common home, Earth.   
The starting point of my master thesis has therefore been to question how to 
create well-being for humans, and at the same time take care of the funda-
mental natural systems that support us. The answer will be given from my 
point of view as a design engineering student, but with the aim of delivering a 
holistic view on a complex topic. 
When personal views or own findings are explained, this will be indicated by 
the usage of “I” or “my”. 
==PAGE:4==
4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The target group is specified into two segments:  
 The primary target segment: Danish consumers, 18-30 years old, 
with an average ecological footprint, but eager to learn about a 
more sustainable lifestyle.  
 The secondary target segment: Danish consumers, 18-30 years 
old, who are already aware of their ecological footprint as consu-
mers, and are eager to find new ways of living and to inspire other.  
 
The overall visions of the Living Lab are defined as Creating Circular 
Consumers and Discovering Circular Design Concepts. Moreover, a list 
of design guidelines has been clarified, and the overall architecture of 
the Living Lab is set to be a sailing ship. This is decided for two rea-
sons; resource in- and output is easily measured on a ship, since eve-
rything must be manually carried on board. Additionally, a sailing ship 
makes the Living Lab moveable, and thereby enables interaction with 
various stakeholders at different locations. 
The stage of Development first analyses current consumption patterns 
and possible alternatives with inputs from Focus Group interviews 
with the two target group segments.  
One reason for the growing consumption appears to be caused by the 
confusion of human wants and needs, which is creating an addiction 
for consuming more and more in today’s society.  
 
Executive Summary 
 
 
 
 
 
The goal of this thesis is to develop the concept of a Living Lab, which 
can bring forward the practices of Circular Economy to Danish consu-
mers. The project is done in collaboration with the Youth- and En-
vironmental Organization UngEnergi as a feasibility study of a project 
that will be launched after the completion of this thesis. The feasibility 
study is divided into the four phases: Discover, Define, Develop & Deli-
ver. 
In the Discover phase the fundamentals of a Living Lab are identified, 
as an experimental facility where new ideas can be tested in a real-life 
setting, and with a high degree of user involvement. The basic princi-
ples of Circular Economy are investigated, and related to how it is cur-
rently implemented, with Kalundborg Symbiosis Centre as a case. 
A consumer survey confirms that Danish consumers are far from cir-
cular. One central finding is that the consumers’ endless search for 
more is caused by the mechanism of Hedonic Adaption. Another rea-
son is the lack of awareness and knowledge on how to be more circu-
lar, making it hard for consumers to take action. However, the survey 
indicates that the respondents want to change behaviour, and that 
their fundamental needs are mainly unmaterialistic, and ultimately 
not related to consumption, but to social values such as security and 
comfort. 
In the Define section, the project is scoped to include only the users’ 
perspective, meaning that the Living Lab will focus on high user in-
volvement and co-creation.  
==PAGE:5==
 
 
 
          5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
However, the findings also indicate that the consumption patterns 
can be changed by experiences and by visualizing how a simpler life-
style might look.  
A co-creation workshop shows that the experience of building with 
trash, can change the perception of what you categorize as trash, and 
that the process of taking part in a design process, creates a closer 
connection and interest to the underlying vision. 
Based on the findings the concept of the Living Lab is developed, con-
sisting of the physical platform The FellowShip, where a crew of six 
persons will challenge modern consumption, and an online platform 
where findings are to be shared with the target group. The crew on 
board will conduct four experiments, which are designed to foster the 
optimal way of becoming more circular:  Circular Construction, Visual-
ize Consumption, Minimize Consumption and ReCircle.  
As a constraint, the experiments will focus on the consumption relat-
ed to personal shopping, usage of water/electricity, and food waste. 
These areas are chosen because of their high ecological footprint, and 
their viability to be implemented on board a ship. 
The goal of the last part, Deliver, is to investigate how to launch the 
FellowShip, including an implementation plan, budgeting and a risk 
assessment.  
Using the Business Model Canvas, the FellowShip organization is map-
ped, providing a helpful overview of both completed and missing 
aspects of the project.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
An important aspect in regards to implementation is a location for 
constructing the FellowShip. This is found to take place on Dreslette 
Skole, a folk school in the Municipality of Assens, where facilities will 
be available to this project for free, in return of engaging the local 
community in the project. 
An estimated budget is laid out for the project, and includes an initial 
investment on 75.000 DKK, to cover materials and the establishment 
of the online platform. The operating costs are estimated to 120.900 
DKK/year and revenue streams to 169.250 DKK/year, creating a profit 
48.350 DKK/year for covering unforeseen costs. 
The initial investments will be covered by grants and a crowdfunding 
campaign, that has already been validated through a prototype on 
Kickstarter. 
The two major risks in the project are to be partners failing to deliver 
agreed resources, and that the project doesn’t create as much atten-
tion as estimated. Both risks are based on the uncertainty of external 
parties, and are therefore best prevented by ensuring good communi-
cation. 
Finally, a roll-out plan for the entire project is made, starting from 
August 2017 with the establishment of the workshop at Dreslette Sko-
le and launch of the virtual platform, and ending in August 2018, with 
closing and evaluation of the FellowShip Experiment. 
==PAGE:6==
6 
 
 
 
Acknowledgements 
Thanks to: 
 Participants in the Focus Group s & Workshops 
 The respondents answering the online consumer survey 
 Volunteers from UngEnergi København 
 Per Møller, Senior Project Manager at Kalundborg Symbiosis 
 Jesper Andersen, chairman of the board, Dreslette Skole  
 Signe Hollerup, Social Media Manager at Syntese Media  
 Kim Brostrøm, CTO of DOLL Living Lab 
 Tore Muurholm, Grobund 
 Theresa Olesen, Affaldsimperiet 
 VerdensKulturCenteret Nørrebro 
 Café Mellemrummet 
 DTU Skylab Staff 
 
Special thanks to: 
 Friends, family and my lovely girlfriend for all the support 
 My supervisor Yutaka Yoshinaka, for the high engagement and for 
the invaluable feedback during the past five months 
Reading guidance 
 The project and report is based on the British Design Counsels 
Double Diamond Model. Each chapter represents a stage. Before 
the first stage there is an Introduction Chapter, and after the last 
stage there is a Discussion & Conclusion. 
 An appendix reference is highlighted using Bold/Italic. To get a de-
tailed overview of appendices see List of Appendices.  
 Italic is used to highlight relevant terms, and bold is used to high-
light minor headlines or key phrases in the text. 
 Sources are referred by (name, year), and the full description of 
the source is in the References & Bibliography. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:7==
 
 
 
          7 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
0: Introduction……..……………..…………………………….….. 9 
 
Project Description……………………………………………..…. 11 
 
Circular Theory……………………………….………………..……. 13 
 
Living Lab Literature…………….…………………………..……. 16 
 
Methodology…………………..…………………………………….. 17 
 
Project Planning……………………………………………….……. 20 
 
 
1: Discover…………………………….……….……..…………….. 21 
 
Living Lab Landscape..……………………………….………..…..23 
 
Potential Partners …….………………………………………….… 24 
 
Research at Kalundborg Symbiosis………………..……….. 26 
 
The circular consumer?................................................28 
 
Well-being as motivation……………………………………..... 29 
 
Current consumer awareness and addictions………….32 
 
Chapter conclusion………………………………………….…..….37 
 
2: Define……………………………………...….…………………… 39 
 
A circular Living Lab?........................……………...…....… 41 
 
Target group specification ….…………………………..….... 42 
 
Defining the design field ………………………………...…….. 44 
 
Personal criteria ……………………………..…………….…...…. 46 
 
Chapter conclusion……………………………………….…..…….47 
 
3: Develop……….…………………………………………………… 49 
 
Create an identity……………………………………………..…... 51 
 
Conceptualisation workshop …………………………..……..52 
 
What do we really need? ………………………………...…… 55 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Where is the value? ……………………………………….……..……. 56 
 
Co-creation Workshop………………………………..……...………. 56 
 
Perception makes trash ………………………………………………. 58 
 
Creating the framework …………………….……………………….. 58 
 
Concept evaluation at Sustainable Festival……………………61 
 
The Virtual FellowShip…………………..……………………………...63  
 
Designing a circular ship………………………………………………..65  
 
Designing an experiment…………………………………….………..67 
 
How to measure consumption? …………………………………...69 
 
How to measure happiness? ………………………..……………...74 
 
Feedback on the experiment setup………………………...…...77 
 
Prototyping the physical lab virtually…………………….……...78  
 
Chapter conclusion………………………………………………………..79 
 
 
4: Deliver………………………………..………………………….……. 81 
 
The FellowShip as a business …………………………..………….. 82 
 
Location…….…………………………………………………………………. 84 
 
Estimated Budget………………………………………………………… 85 
 
Roll-out plan………………………………….…………………………….. 87 
 
The FellowShip organization …………...………………………….. 88 
 
Risk assessment…………………………………………………………… 89 
 
Final Delivery…………………………………………………………………90 
 
Experiment Brief…………………………………………………………...92 
 
Discussion & Conclusion…...……………………….………….… 96 
References & Bibliography………………………….……………100 
Appendix list…………………………..……………………………….102 
==PAGE:8==
8 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:9==
 
 
 
0: Introduction          9 
 
Introduction 
 
 
 
 
This chapter will set the stage of the project, by describing the problem, re-
search question and learning goals. Moreover, the underlying theory, littera-
ture and methods will be introduced. 
Primary goal: Project specifications 
==PAGE:10==
10 
 
 
Chapter Content: 
 
Project Description 
 
Circular Theory 
 
Living Lab Literature 
 
 
Methodology 
 
Project Planning  
==PAGE:11==
 
 
 
0: Introduction          11 
Project Description 
Problem 
The fundamentals of our current society, centred on economic and 
materialistic growth, are undermining our finite resources of our plan-
et, and the well-being of the human species.  
Examples, happening right now, include the scarcity of resources like 
clean water, fossil fuels and rare earth minerals, causing huge envi-
ronmental damage and international conflicts. (United Nations, 2012) 
According to Professor Paul R. Ehrlich, Stanford University, the impact 
humans have on the environment is given by the formula:  
Impact = Population x Affluence x Technology 
The formula claims that there are fundamentally three variables in 
which humans can affect the environment: number of people (P), 
consumption per person (A) and impact per unit consumption (T). 
(Ehrlich & Holdren, 1971) 
The variable of population (P) is extremely hard to control, and it is 
therefore often considered out of the equation. Meaning that the 
only feasible way to decrease Impact (I) is by decreasing consumption 
per person (A) or developing green technologies (T), which decreases 
the impact of the consumption.  
The development of green technologies is increasing, but according to 
Dr. John Ehrenfeld, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, this can 
only take us some of the way. We also need to limit and understand 
our consumption in new ways. (Ehrenfeld, 2008) 
In the end the problem comes down to how consumers, like you and 
me, can limit our consumption.  
 
 
 
 
 
Both policy-makers and NGOs are working on this, however with lim-
ited success. Especially in western cultures, like Denmark, this is a 
huge problem, because we have become used to a high level of con-
sumption, and currently have an ecological footprint 4 times higher 
the world average. (World Wildlife Fund, 2014) 
So how can Danish consumers best limit their consumption, without 
compromising on their level of well-being? 
 
Project goal and partner 
The starting point of this project will be circular thinking, and how a 
closer relationship between consumer and technology can help gain 
more awareness of our consumption. With the aim of minimizing the 
extent to which we throw stuff away, and maximizing the value we 
get from them. 
 
The end-goal of the project is to create a platform or living lab, where 
the identified circular principles can be tested and presented to a cho-
sen segment of Danish consumers.   
 
The master thesis will work as a feasibility study, to identify the best 
practice of, and test if, this living lab is viable.  
 
The project is carried out in collaboration with UngEnergi, a Danish 
youth- and environmental organization, that works with spreading 
knowledge about environmental matters in a simple and positive way, 
to Danish citizen aged between 18 and 35.  The organization is driven 
by volunteers, and has five local sections around Denmark. UngEnergi 
is supported by the NGO VedvarendeEnergi. (UngEnergi, 2012)  
==PAGE:12==
12 
 
 
6. Design experiments concepts and validate and refine using  
 
feedback sessions 
7. Create tools for measurement and evaluation of  consumption in a 
living lab 
8. Develop an implementation plan for the living lab to help decide 
 
whether the project is feasible or not 
9. Document, evaluate and present the process and results in a  
 
illustrative and coherent manner 
 
DTU General Thesis Objectives  
The student shall comply with the general objectives of a DTU Master 
Thesis. See the list in Appendix 1. Below is given a description of how 
they relate to specific learning goals of this project: 
The general objectives of the thesis includes the objective of compre-
hending current research within a given academic subject, and to 
have knowledge within a specific field of engineering. This is related 
to Learning goals number 1 and 2. 
Furthermore, it is about mastering scientific methods with the aim of 
analysing problems in a holistic way, and propose relevant solutions. 
This is related to Learning goals 3-7.  
Lastly, it includes the capability to manage all phases in a project, to 
work independently and to reflect and document own learning.  This 
is related to Learning goals number 8 and 9 
 
Hypothesis  
My hypothesis is that Danish consumers want to, and can learn to, 
adopt a more circular lifestyle. And that this can be done by placing 
them in a temporary setting, where they have the possibility to co-
create alternative consumption patterns, of which they can choose to 
adopt the ones that provide most value for them. 
Research question 
Based on the problem related to the high consumption amongst 
Danes, my research question is the following: 
“How to facilitate circular thinking among Danish consumers, by 
the creation of a living lab?” 
The term “circular thinking” relates to Circular Economy, and will be 
further explained in this chapter. 
Learning goals 
After the project, the aim is for the student to be able to: 
1. Develop expertise within circular  economy and the current possi-
 
bilities and challenges hereof 
2. Understand the principle(s) of a living lab  and how it can be used 
 
in a specific context 
3. Analyse how and why consumers today are lacking circularity 
4. Analyse and define the optimal platform for experimenting with 
 
circular thinking 
5. Conduct Co-creation sessions, and evaluate outcome in an  
 
iterative process 
==PAGE:13==
 
 
 
0: Introduction          13 
Circular Theory 
As mentioned briefly, the project will be based on principles from Cir-
cular Economy theories. This section will describe the subject further. 
Figure 1 –  Flow of materials in a Circular Economy 
The Circular Flow chart 
The figure shows the value chain as we know 
it, from raw material to consumer good, but 
with two integrated feedback loops: The bio-
logical cycle and the technical cycle, which 
illustrates how all materials in theory can be 
put back into the circle, to become ”food” 
for new products in a Circular Economy. 
 (The Ellen MacArthur Foundation, 2013) 
==PAGE:14==
14 
 
 
 
Taken to its full extend, a Circular Economy will mean a societal para-
digm shift, requiring major changes for both governments, organiza-
tions and citizens. However, there are several associated concepts to 
Circular Economy, which all together can work as small stepping 
stones towards a full implementation. 
Some of the more concrete concepts are already implemented in or-
ganizations today, for example Life Cycle Assessment (LCA), working 
as a tool for identifying consumption and pollution over the full prod-
uct life cycle. (International Reference Centre for the Life Cycle of 
Products, 2015) 
However, organizations are still doing it secondarily, with the primary 
aim of saving money and fulfilling regulations. In Denmark there is the 
“declaration of environmental protection”, by the Ministry of Environ-
ment and Food and the European Union, requiring companies above 
a certain pollution level to prevent and report their emissions and 
savings. (Miljøstyrelsen, 2017) 
 
The theory of Circular Economy was first mentioned in the book Eco-
nomics of Natural Resources and the Environment, by the two envi-
ronmental economists David W. Pearce and R. Kerry Turner back in 
1990. 
But the term has first really gained attention within the past five 
years, especially thanks to the charity Ellen MacArthur Foundation, 
who has the aim of creating an economy based on circularity, to ben-
efit both people, planet and business. The concept works as an alter-
native to the current economy, explained as a “linear” economy, 
where resource consumption and pollution are only accounted for as 
externalities. (International Reference Centre for the Life Cycle of 
Products, 2015) 
The fundamentals behind Circular Economy can be explained by the 
Circular Economy System Diagram, which illustrates the basic rules 
and prerequisites for a Circular Economy. See figure 1 on the previous 
page. 
The system diagram shows a value chain as we know it, from raw ma-
terial to consumer good, but with two integrated feedback loops: The 
biological cycle and the technical cycle. The biological cycle centres 
around the material we consume (e.g. food), and how the waste can 
be fed back into the system (e.g. composting). Basically, mimicking 
the biochemical cycles in nature. (The Ellen MacArthur Foundation, 
2013) 
The technical cycle is centred around the materials that are not direct-
ly used up or split into other components in the use phase. These ma-
terials can be put back into the system by reusing, repairing, recycling 
etc. (The Ellen MacArthur Foundation, 2013) 
 
 
==PAGE:15==
 
 
 
0: Introduction          15 
 
This forces companies to slowly lower their negative environmental 
impact, but is not encouraging them to do any major changes. The 
issue can be framed as “doing less bad” instead of “doing more 
good”, as described by Dr. Braungart, University of Lüneburg, who 
defines two approaches for sustainability:  (Braungart, McDonough, & 
Bollinger, 2007) 
 Eco-efficiency: Seeks to minimize the harmfulness from current 
practices (doing less bad) 
 Eco-effectiveness: Seeks to maximize the benefits from alternative 
practices (doing more good) 
I see that a problem with “eco-efficiency” is that the fundamental 
problems in the system are not reached, and will therefore only work 
on a short-term basis. For example, a car manufacturer may produce 
a very fuel-efficient car, which will of course save emissions, but never 
eliminate them. This is eco-efficiency. One the other hand the manu-
facturer can develop an electric car. Here the environmental benefits 
will only increase as development continues. This is eco-effectiveness. 
The difference between the two is illustrated in Figure 2. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A well-established approach for “eco-effectiveness” is “Industrial Ecol-
ogy", where a symbiosis between industries help eliminate waste. The 
fundamental idea is that waste = food, meaning that by-products from 
one industry can work as raw materials for another. This ensures that 
leftover materials enters the biological- or technical cycle again, in-
stead of getting burned or buried. (International Reference Centre for 
the Life Cycle of Products, 2015)  
 
 
 
 
Figure 2 - The difference between eco-efficiency and eco-effectiveness. 
The left graph shows the decreasing negative impact over time, and 
the right graph show the increasing positive impact over time.  
(ADAPTED FROM Braungart et al., 2007)  
==PAGE:16==
16 
 
 
 
1. Map resource consumption and user experiences of sustainable 
innovations.  
2. Understand the discrepancy between people's awareness and 
actions concerning the use of sustainable innovations. 
3. Model factors in the use phase of sustainable innovations influ-
encing adoption and resource consumption effects. 
A living lab approach can therefore offer a holistic view of sustainable 
challenges and solutions, which I indeed find very relevant, simply 
because a transition to sustainable consumption requires a change in 
all aspects of living.  
 
The importance of Co-creation 
According to Dr. John Ehrenfeld, Massachusetts Institute of Technolo-
gy, a sustainable transition can only happen with the introduction of 
new human behaviors and mindsets. (Ehrenfeld, 2008)  
This is also why the user involvement is so important in a SLL.  Prof. 
Dr. David Keyson, Delft University of Technology, has created a model 
that explains three different approaches for user interaction in a Liv-
ing lab: (Keyson & Guerra-Santin, 2017) 
1. First level: provides verification of solutions by monitoring users 
2. Second level: explores new opportunities by user involvement  
3. Third level: supports users in developing and evaluating their own-
olutions and behavior 
 
Figure 3 shows what the three levels consist of and how they relate. 
Living Lab Literature 
With the overall goal of designing a Living lab, this approach will work 
as a foundation for the project. A short literature review is made on 
the subject, which will work as a baseline for the continued research 
in the next chapter Discover. 
According to Dr. Maria Jolanta Welfens, Wuppertal Institute for Cli-
mate, Environment and Energy, 85 % of all development efforts are 
spent on goods and services that never reach the market. She ex-
plains a Living Lab as an explorative approach to find long-term effec-
tive innovations by engaging users rather than restricting them or de-
signing around them.(Welfens, Liedtke, & Baedeker, 2010) 
The concept originates from Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
where the MIT MediaLab back in 1985 opened its doors for a test fa-
cility of various technologies in a real-life setting. The real-life aspect is 
an important part of Living Lab, and is the difference from the original 
laboratories, where scientists are standing behind closed doors. In-
stead a Living Lab brings together users and other stakeholders in the 
development process, with principles of co-creation and live-
monitoring. (Schumacher & Feurstein, 2007)  
Since 1985 many other Living Labs has opened, which has led to a 
broader definition of the concept, and todays living labs comes in 
many forms and functions. 
The review has revealed that there is a specific category for Sustaina-
ble Living Labs (SLLs), that focuses on both technological development 
and behavioural change in regards to sustainable living.  
Dr. Welfens  defines the aim of a Sustainable Living Lab (SLL) as one 
that seeks to foster development that minimizes resource consump-
tion, while optimizing user experience and comfort, with the three 
overall methods: (Welfens et al., 2010) 
 
==PAGE:17==
 
 
 
0: Introduction          17 
Figure 3 - The three levels of user integration within the domains: out-
come, users, design and research (ADAPTED FROM Keyson & Guerra-
Santin, 2017). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Methodology 
This section introduces the methods deemed relevant for the project. 
Each method is described by how it can contribute and what limita-
tions it might show.  
A Project on a Project  
As stated already, this thesis will work as a feasibility study for a pro-
ject to be implemented afterwards. A feasibility study, or pre-study, 
aims to discover as many opportunities and challenges in all phases of 
the project as possible. Ultimately, the feasibility study works as a de-
cision-maker to decide whether the project is viable to carry out or 
not. (Tonnquist, 2009) 
Due to the time constraints of this thesis, some aspects will then only 
be investigated briefly, to ensure that there will be enough time for 
the completion of all phases. 
 
The Double Diamond as framework 
The project follows the Double Diamond Design Process developed by 
the British Design Council in 2005. Essential for the model is the pre-
defined structures of the diverge and converge phases, that decides 
when in the process to explore and ideate, and when to focus and 
select. (Design Council, 2005) 
As a design engineering student, I have used this method for several 
projects, and have become quite familiar with its opportunities and 
limits. One drawback of the method is its linear approach, as I find it 
crucial to have a flexible and iterative design process. In this project I 
will therefore keep my mind open for iterations within each phase, as 
illustrated in Figure 4.  
1 
3 
2 
==PAGE:18==
18 
 
 
 
 
One approach that can be related to this is Design Thinking. As the 
name implies it is more a way of thinking than a specific method and 
it can therefore be used in various ways. During the past two decades 
the design consultancy IDEO has been a major advocate for Design 
Thinking, and has published several tools and courses in this regard. 
Tim Brown, CEO of IDEO, describes Design Thinking in the three stag-
es: Inspiration, Ideation and Implementation, and underlines that it is 
an iterative approach, where each stage might overlap and be execut-
ed several times. Furthermore, he identifies the following five key 
characteristics of Design Thinking: Empathy, Integrative thinking, Op-
timism, Experimentalism and Collaboration.  (Brown, 2008) 
At its core Design Thinking seeks to take development away from be-
ing only linear, analytical and in-house, and focus on a more human-
centered and experimental approach, in order to create more disrup-
tive solutions. 
This way of thinking is exactly what I aim to adopt in this project - and 
in my future career as a design engineer. The three stages of Inspira-
tion, Ideation and Implementation fits well together with the stages in 
the Double Diamond Model, and the experimental and human-
centered approach are complementing well with the Living lab ap-
proach. 
There are many methods and tools related to Design Thinking - for 
example interviews, fieldtrips and prototyping. Below a few of them 
are explained in accordance to how I will use them in this project. 
Figure 4 - My project process, adopted from the Double Diamond De-
sign Process DRAW YOURSELF with iterations 
 
Design Thinking 
With the overall goal of designing a Living Lab, the process will include 
various design methods.  
The definition of “design” is extremely broad, and will vary a lot de-
pending on who you ask. One example is the definition by Herbert 
Simon: “courses of action aimed to changing existing situations into 
preferred ones…” (Simon, 1996) 
With this definition, a person in any profession will be able to perform 
the act of design, no matter if it is a political system or a product. The 
reason why I find this interesting is that the challenges of sustainabil-
ity is not only political, social or technical, but highly interrelated. 
Therefore, solutions may benefit from design methods that are very 
inclusive and open.   
 
==PAGE:19==
 
 
 
0: Introduction          19 
 
Prototyping 
Prototyping is a well-known term within design engineering, and it is 
hard to say from where the practice originates.  
Professor Karl Ulrich and Professor Steven Eppinger describe a proto-
type the following way: “an approximation of the product along one 
or more dimensions of interest”. (Ulrich & Eppinger, 2012)  
With this notion a prototype is mainly a single object that can used to 
understand a concept from a certain perspective.   
Professor Elizabeth Sanders and Professor Pieter Stappers opens for a 
more explorative and inclusive approach: generative prototyping. This 
approach is not limiting the method to a single object, but more as an 
on-going practice, which enables easy evaluation throughout the en-
tire design process. The process is about giving form to an idea, so it 
can be easily understood and evaluated by an audience. The simpler 
the better, since this will not “freeze” the design in any way. (Sanders 
& Stappers, 2014)        
In this project the method is used primarily as a mind-set, during the 
entire Development phase. For example when conducting workshops 
(see page 56) and when creating the online CAD model (see page 78).  
Focus Group 
According to the Delft Design Guide by Professor Annemiek Boeijen & 
Professor Jaap Daalhuizen, a focus group is a form of qualitative re-
search where a small group of people are interviewed in a manner 
that opens up for discussion of a certain topic. Within design engi-
neering it is often used to get feedback on an idea or product from a 
specific target group.  
 
 
 
 
This can of course be carried out in various ways, the Delft Design 
Guide propose the following setup: (van Boeijen & Daalhuizen, 2010): 
 Make list of topics/questions to be addressed  
 Test topic/questions in a Pilot Focus Group  
 Invite chosen respondents from target group (minimum 3 groups) 
 Perform Focus Group (1-2 hours) 
 Analyse and report findings 
 
In this project the Focus Group method will be used both in the begin-
ning of the development process to get some opinions and percep-
tions towards consumption (see page 52), and later to gather feed-
back on the developed concepts. (see page 77) 
The focus groups will follow the above-mentioned setup, but adapted 
for the specific case and setting.  
 
Next to the methods mentioned here, several other methods, including 
Personas, Mindmap, Minimum Viable Product etc., will be used in the 
project. Due to their minor significance these will not be described 
here, but introduced in the context where they are used. 
 
==PAGE:20==
20 
 
 
Project Planning 
This master thesis is conducted during the spring semester 2017, with 
the starting date: 23rd of January and the hand-in date 20th of June. 
As already mentioned, the project will follow the Double Diamond 
Design Process, which has the four overall phases: Discover, Define, 
Develop and Deliver. Next to these four, there is added an Introduc-
tion phase in the beginning and a Documentation phase in the end. 
Each phase is put into a time table, to show the overall plan and dead-
lines. See Figure 5. 
The phase of Development is considered the most important one, and 
is therefore given more time, which is divided into two sprints. In be-
tween each phase there are feedback sessions with clients and con-
sumers, to ensure that the project is on the right track.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5 – Schedule of the project divided into the five phases: Introduction, 
Discover, Define, Develop, Deliver and Documentation. 
 
After each phase a milestone presentation with my supervisor is 
arranged, to show my progress and to gain guidance for the next 
phase.  
Each phase has the following overall goals: 
INTRODUCTION: Project specifications 
DISCOVER: Project opportunities 
DEFINE: Design specifications 
DEVELOP: Design opportunities 
DELIVER: Design solution(s) and implementation plan 
DOCUMENTATION: Written and oral documentation 
==PAGE:21==
 
 
 
          21 
 
 
Discover 
 
 
 
 
This chapter will explore the opportunities and challenges of Circular 
Economy and Living Labs, with help from present literature and ex-
pert interviews. Moreover, some of the major noncircular behaviors 
of consumers will be mapped out, using both primary and secondary 
research. 
Primary goal: Project opportunities 
==PAGE:22==
22 
 
 
 
Chapter Content: 
 
Living Lab Landscape 
 
Potential Partners  
 
Research at Kalundborg Symbiosis 
 
The circular consumer? 
 
Well-being as motivation 
 
Current consumer awareness and addictions 
 
Chapter conclusion 
==PAGE:23==
 
 
 
1: Discover          23 
Living Lab Landscape 
In order to get a better understanding of a Living Lab I will create an 
overview focused on Sustainable Living Labs. 
On a European level there is a network of Living Labs (ENoll), con-
sisting of 170 active members focused on anything from sustainabil-
ity, digitalization, infrastructure etc. The network works as a platform 
for promotion and sharing of knowledge. 56 of the 170 Living Labs, 
has a focus on sustainability. An overview of those 56 living labs can 
be found in Appendix 2. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Focusing on Denmark, six Sustainable Living labs are identified. In fig-
ure 6 below the six Living Labs are organized in regards to the three 
levels of user interaction by Prof. Dr. Keyson. The listing is not exhaus-
tive, but serves as an overview of the different types of Living Labs. A 
full description of the six Danish Sustainable Living Labs can be found 
in Appendix 3. 
Figure 6 – List of some Danish Sustainable Living Labs placed in the Model of 
user integration. Note here that most of them are placed in the outer level. 
==PAGE:24==
24 
 
 
Potential partners 
As concluded in the previous section a fundamental part of a Living 
Lab is partners who can give and gain something from the project. 
Since I am aware that contact with external parties can take time, I 
find it important to already start identifying and connect to relevant 
partners, so it will not be causing too much stress later in the process. 
In figure 7 the potential partners are identified, and presented by how 
they can contribute with content or context to the Living Lab.  
Context partners are organizations that can contribute with spreading 
awareness and connecting to the target group. Content partners are 
organizations that can contribute with both knowledge and physical 
resources to help building the Circular Living Lab. 
See Appendix 4 for a description of all the potential partners, including 
how they can contribute to the project, and how it might benefit 
them. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6 (previous page) illustrates that the identified SLL’s are either 
placed in the outer- or middle level of Prof. Dr. Keyson’s model, with 
relative low user influence, and focused on verifying already existing 
technologies.  
Moreover, it clarifies that a SLL can take many different physical 
forms, being a street, a house or an entire island.   
The organizers are primarily municipalities or educational institutions, 
but most of the Living Labs work as a community where other organi-
zations can take part in various ways. So, it seems that the best living 
labs are not a single organization, but rather an ecosystem of differ-
ent partners. 
One interesting point here is how Living Labs works as opponents to 
how R&D is normally done in organizations, by sharing ideas instead 
of keeping them secret. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7 – Listing of potential partners ordered in the three categories: Foundations & Communities, 
Project Hubs and Workshops, and ranging from delivering context or content to the project. 
==PAGE:25==
 
 
 
1: Discover          25 
Get in touch 
In this stage of the project there is already established contact with 
different departments of UngEnergi, Resource City and Affaldsim-
periet. The other organizations will be contacted during the thesis 
period, depending on when the project is mature enough to be 
paired.  Some organizations might not be interested in collaboration, 
and other organizations yet to be identified might be more relevant. 
It is expected that the Living Lab will still be feasible with only a few 
close partners, but the more the better.  
Partners or potential competitors? 
A part of a feasibility study is to check the competitive landscape, in 
order to identify if others are already delivering the same value on the 
market. (Tonnquist, 2009) 
Since, this project is not about delivering a product, but about spread-
ing awareness, the role of a competitor is slightly different. Many of 
the above-mentioned organizations are trying to deliver the same 
value to a similar target group, however they should not be seen as a 
threat to each other. When it comes to spreading awareness, the 
more voices that speaks up, the better.  
However, it is still important to understand how different organiza-
tions works and spreads their message. The main point here is to 
avoid stealing people from a given target group, and instead make the 
shared target group even bigger by finding new ways of spreading the 
message. 
So far, the organizations I have been in contact with are not afraid 
that the circular living lab will work as a competitor, and I believe that 
a key is just to keep communicating across the various organizations, 
in order to foster partnerships instead of competitors. 
 
  
==PAGE:26==
26 
 
 Research at Kalundborg Symbiosis 
In order to get a better understanding of how Circular Economy is 
implemented in the industry today, I will take a fieldtrip to Kalundborg 
Symbiosis Center, which is an example of how Industrial Ecology can 
work in practice. A meeting with Senior Project Manager, Per Møller is 
arranged. 
Figure 8 - Flow of materials, water and energy between the different 
partners in the Kalundborg Symbiosis  
The Kalundborg Symbiosis is a collaboration between 9 different com-
panies (see figure 8), providing leftover resources from one produc-
tion as raw material input for another production. An example is 
smoke from the DONG power plant that is made into gypsum, used in 
the production of gypsum boards at Gyproc. The entire resource flow 
is mapped on the figure below. (Kalundborg Municipality, 2017) 
Next to the 9 companies, there is a “Symbiosis Center” run by the 
municipality of Kalundborg. The center works as a medium between 
the different companies, to facilitate the optimal sharing of resources 
and knowledge  
==PAGE:27==
 
 
 
1: Discover          27 
 
During my visit, I asked Per Møller about how he sees the elements of 
Circular Economy in the Kalundborg Symbiosis, and what challenges 
he observes. The questions were open, and without introducing the 
aims of my project. 
It is easy to see that Per is passionate about the symbiosis, and be-
lieves that this is the only right way to do it. He says that the overall 
idea is that waste does not exist. There is only a flow of resources 
combined and separated over time, just like a natural ecosystem. An 
explanation that lies very close to the description of Circular Econo-
my. 
He does also admit that the system is not fully circular, because only 
fractions of all the resources are taken back in the loop, and the sys-
tem is still very relying on inputs from outside. 
He explains that the biggest challenge is communication between the 
different actors in the system. This is very important in order to en-
sure that inputs and outputs are matched, keeping the system in bal-
ance. Moreover, it is never a static flow, so the system needs to very 
flexible. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9 - Per Møller, Senior Project Manager at Kalundborg Symbio-
sis, giving a tour around the Utility and Alge Plant. 
 
Interview conclusion 
The Kalundborg Symbiosis shows that parts of the theoretical frame-
work behind Circular Economy can be put into practice, but not with-
out barriers. It is clear to see that the system is not working on a one-
to-one basis, but only with a larger amount of resource flows. Not 
even with 9 relatively big contributors, is the system close to being 
self-sufficient. 
A major take-away is the need of a facilitator-role in the system, simp-
ly because companies do not share resources and ideas automatically. 
This might very well be true on a consumer-level as well.  
==PAGE:28==
28 
 
 
 
The strategies are ordered by how requiring they are to implement 
(see figure 10).  
The first, and simplest, strategy is centered on product attachment 
and trust. This means creating a closer relationship between product 
and user, in order to maximize the value gained from the product, 
and minimizing the extent to which it is thrown away. (Bakker & den 
Hollander, 2013)  
As a design engineering student I find this strategy very useful, how-
ever I also see some obstacles for actually implementing it. Especially 
due to the fact that today’s consumer patterns are a major driver and 
part of our identity in modern society. 
So, why do Danes keep consuming more and more?    
The circular consumer? 
The previous research has shown that elements of Circular Economy 
and a “zero-waste” approach are already established in the industry, 
but when looking further down the value chain, there are still lots of 
waste generated at the consumer level. This section will analyze why 
and how Danes consume as they do today. 
With a recycling rate of only 44%, private households are the sector in 
Denmark where least waste is put back into the cycle. The rest of the 
waste is either burned or buried. (Fischer, 2014)  
This is why a greater focus on consumer awareness might be im-
portant. Moreover, it is relevant to focus on how to design for less 
waste at the consumer level. The two aspects are very much connect-
ed, as described in “Six design strategies for longer lasting products in 
a Circular Economy”, by Prof. Conny Bakker et al., Technical University 
of Delft.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 10 – The six design strategies for developing longer lasting products in 
a Circular Economy (Bakker & den Hollander, 2013) 
Design for… 
With the aim of… 
1: Product attachment and trust 
creating products that will be loved, liked or trusted longer 
2: Product durability 
developing products that can take wear and tear 
3: Standardisation and compatibility 
creating products with parts that fit other products as well 
4: Ease of maintenance and repair 
enabling products to be maintained in tip-top condition 
5: Upgradability and adaptability 
allowing for future expansion and modification 
6: Disassembly and reassembly 
ensuring product parts can be separated and reassembled easily 
==PAGE:29==
 
 
 
1: Discover          29 
Well-being as motivation 
To answer the question of why consumers are so focused on materi-
alistic wealth today, I will start out with a brief flashback of the past 
150 years. 
The Great Industrialization  
During the past 150 years, the industrialization has brought well-
being to humans, lifted us out of poverty and raised our life expec-
tancy. This has been built on the goals of extracting and forming re-
sources in a cheap an efficient manner, to create materialistic wealth. 
However, the continuous growth in materialistic wealth is putting 
great pressure on our finite resources. Additionally, studies show that 
the increased consumption seen for the past 30 years is not deliver-
ing the same well-being as it did 100 years ago (Nielsen, 2013). 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The graphs below shows a 30 % increase in private consumption over 
the past 30 years in Denmark, while our life satisfaction has stayed 
approximately the same. The data is gathered from Gallup World Poll, 
and is based on questionnaires from where the answered are trans-
lated till a score between 1-10. (Kramp, 2013)  
Of course there are most probably others reasons for the variation in 
life satisfaction, but it is interesting to investigate the correlation fur-
ther.   
 
 
Figure 11 – Development in Income/GDP per capita in Denmark (DST, 2015) 
and life satifcation in Denmark and USA (Kramp, 2013)  
==PAGE:30==
30 
 
The graph clarify that an increase in GDP leads also to an increase in 
well-being too, however the correlation levels off after a certain point 
in GDP growth, namely around 10.000 $ per capita. This indicates that 
money can buy well-being, but only to some extent.  
This condition is well-documented, and known as the Easterlin Para-
dox. First explained by Professor Richard Easterlin, University of 
Southern California in 1974. Stating that income growth is only relat-
ed to a higher happiness level on a short term basis. (Tatzel, 2014) 
 
But why do rich economies, like Denmark, then keep on consuming 
more? 
 
When comparing life satisfaction and income on a global level, an in-
teresting pattern appears: the figure below shows a ranking of coun-
tries related to their Subjective Well-Being (SWB) and GDP per capita. 
(New Economics Foundation, 2009)  
 
 
Figure 12 - Global Well-Being Index: Relation between GDP per capita 
and Subjective Well-Being (SWB) for 143 countries. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:31==
 
 
 
1: Discover          31 
Addicted to consumption 
According to Dr. John Ehrenfeld, Massachusetts Institute of Technolo-
gy, consumers are still consuming to gain well-being, but in a more 
addictive manner than in the past. The model below explains Dr. Eh-
renfeld’s theory, by stating that an unsatisfied need can be fulfilled in 
two ways. One way is by commodified consumption, which in many 
cases can give a quick an easy satisfaction to seemingly important 
needs. However, this satisfaction does not last for long, since it is not 
actually fulfilling the fundamental need . Alternatively, there is the 
authentic mode of satisfaction, where the fundamental need is 
reached. However, this satisfaction often is harder to reach, and there 
is a delay in the reward. (More on fundamental needs see page 55) 
Due to this, consumers can get trapped in an vicious circle, where 
they are consuming more and more in order to stay satisfied. 
(Ehrenfeld, 2008) 
 
 
 
 
Dr. Ehrenfeld certainly has a point, but the reality might not be that 
black and white. After all, consumers should know what is good and 
bad for themselves. 
Another cause might be the principle of the Hedonic Treadmill, first 
coined by Professors P. Brickman and D. Campbell in 1971. The He-
donic Treadmill, or Hedonic Adaptation, is based on human studies, 
which show that humans quickly return to the original state of well-
being after a change. (Brickman & Campbell, 1971) 
An example is the level of happiness amongst lottery winners, which is 
only increased for a while after winning, and then returning to the 
same level as before they won. (Bjørnskov, 2014) 
In terms of consumption this will mean that materialistic wealth after 
some time becomes the new normal, and therefore does not provide 
any gained value anymore. And instead, consumers have to reach an 
even higher level of materialistic wealth to stay satisfied, entering an 
endless circle of consumption. 
Interestingly, studies also show that the Hedonic Adaptation works 
the other way around: after a negative change, people are able to 
return to their original state of well-being, rather quickly. (Brickman & 
Campbell, 1971) 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 13 - Pattern of modern consumption leading to addiction, since 
the real satisfaction is delayed compared to the one gained from con-
sumption (Ehrenfeld, 2008)  
Delay 
==PAGE:32==
32 
 
 
 
The generally aware 
 
 
Avg. age: 25 
 
Avg. income: 5.000-10.000 DKK/month 
 
Avg. disposable amount: 2.000-5.000 DKK/mon. 
 
Top three expenditures on consumer goods: 
 
1: Food 
 
2: Experiences/Leisure activities 
 
3: Clothes 
 
 
The environmentally aware  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Avg. age: 30 
 
Avg. income: 10.000-15.000 DKK/month 
 
Avg. disp. amount: 10.000-15.000 DKK/mon. 
 
Top three expenditures for consumer goods: 
 
1: Food 
 
2: Experiences/Leisure activities 
 
3: Personal hygiene  
Current consumer awareness and addictions 
How aware are Danish consumers of their current consumption, in-
cluding how it affects themselves and the environment?  
Consumer Survey 
In order to get a better understanding of consumption for a segment 
of Danes, a survey is conducted. The survey is based on 14 questions, 
both closed and open-ended in regards to habits and reasoning be-
hind consumerism in Denmark. The environmental aspect is put in as 
a secondary layer, in order not to frame the respondent too much. 
The survey is distributed via Facebook, and channeled towards two 
different segments:  
 The generally aware: Danish consumers, slightly concerned about 
the environment  
 The environmentally aware: Danish consumers, very  concerned 
about the environment 
Findings 
The results are based on answers from 153 respondents, equally dis-
tributed between the two segments. The complete list of data and 
results can be found in Appendix 5.  
The basic traits of the two segments are  described to the right. 
The color codes mean: 
 
Student 
 
Full-time employee 
 
Other/Unemployed  
 
 
 
==PAGE:33==
 
 
 
1: Discover          33 
 
 
When asked about their most valued belonging the two segments 
had the following answers (size on word is related to popularity): 
 
 
 
 
Figure 14 - Most valuable belongs amongst the “general aware seg-
ment”. Note here Computer and Phone. 
 
 
 
 
An interesting finding here is that the two most valued goods 
amongst both segments are personal computers and phones. When 
asked why, most responded that this is goods they rely on every day 
for various tasks. In addition, it is goods that have not been known for 
more than 50 years, and one could deduct that it might be related to 
the fundamental needs of relations and knowledge. (More on funda-
mental needs see page 55) 
 
 
Figure 15 - Most valuable belongs amongst the “environmental aware 
segment”. Note also Computer and Phone. 
 
 
==PAGE:34==
34 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Understanding of most valued belonging:  
(composition, material, functionality, origin etc.)  
Already limiting consumption: 
 
Generally aware  
Environmentally aware  
Figure 16 - Pie charts comparing the two segments 
==PAGE:35==
 
 
 
1: Discover          35 
The two graphs about understanding show that both segments in 
general have a high or very high understanding of their most valua-
ble belongings. This clarifies that there is a relation between how 
attached we are to goods, and how well we understand them. 
However, there seems to be a misperception: Even though the con-
sumers say they fully understand their most valuable belongings, 
this is most probably not true for computers, phones, cars etc. 
These goods might have an easy understandable user interface, but 
the underlying composition and function is still a black box.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The graphs about limiting consumption show that he environmental 
aware segment is seeking to limit their consumption almost equally 
in all the mentioned areas, whereas the general aware segment is 
mostly seeking to reduce on food consumption and transport. 
When asked for the reason, the majority answered that these are 
areas, with great economical savings as well. 
 
 
Finally the respondents were asked about their level of happiness un-
der various circumstances. The answers are divided into a top-3 of 
most and least happy moments: 
Generally aware 
I feel very happy when I spend time on: 
 
Friends/family 
 
Learning something new 
 
Creative Projects 
I feel little happy when I spend time on: 
 
Shopping 
 
Home interior 
 
Personal gadgets 
 
Environmentally aware 
I feel very happy when I spend time on: 
 
Friends/family 
 
Creative Projects 
 
Learning something new 
I feel little happy when I spend time on: 
 
Personal gadgets 
 
Shopping 
 
Home interior 
Both segments agree that knowledge, learning and social aspects are 
what makes them most happy, and also agrees that more materialis-
tic aspects, does not contribute with much happiness.   
==PAGE:36==
36 
 
 
 
In a similar study, made by COOP Analyse, with a representative seg-
ment of Danish consumers, 30 % answered they were worried about 
the environment to a high or very high degree. 
Figure 18 - How concerned Danish consumers are about environmen-
tal issues (COOP Analyse, 2011) 
 
When comparing this with the data from the Global Well-Being 
Index, there is an interesting correlation: the countries with the 
highest levels of happiness, but still below the 10.000 $ GDP. 
shows to be mainly Latin American countries, like for example 
Costa Rica. Here the income is relative low, but with a greater 
focus on unmaterialistic values, like fellowship, equality, educa-
tion, and ecology. (New Economics Foundation, 2009) 
The consumer and the environment 
When the segment of general aware where asked about how aware 
they are of their ecological footprint as consumers, 38 % responded 
that they were either much aware or very much aware:  
Figure 17 - Awareness of personal ecological footprint for the general 
aware segment. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:37==
 
 
 
1: Discover          37 
 
Danish consumers are aware and concerned about how they affect 
the environment. Even so, according to the World Wildlife Fund, Den-
mark has the fourth biggest ecological footprint per capita. (World 
Wildlife Fund, 2014) So clearly, there is a big gap between the con-
sumers’ awareness and their actual action. 
Research conclusion 
- The research tells that the segment of Danish consumers give a lot 
of value to goods like computers, phones and clothes. This is also 
goods they spend a lot of money on.  
- The survey indicated that consumers in general have a good under-
standing of their most valued goods, but it seems to be mainly the 
user interface and not the technology behind it.  
- The survey indicates that happiness is more often found in unmateri-
alistic things, like socializing and learning, than the direct value 
from consumer goods. This correlate well with the data from the 
Global Well-Being Index. 
- Danish consumers are concerned of environmental issues, but does 
not see how big their own impact is. 
 
The findings from the research will be used in the next chapter 
“Define”, to help select focus area and design specifications. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter conclusion  
This chapter has discovered the fundamentals of a Living Lab, being 
an experimental facility where new ideas can be tested in a real-life 
setting, with a high degree of user involvement. The basic principles 
of Circular Economy have been investigated, and related to how it is 
currently implemented with Kalundborg Symbiosis Centre as a case. 
Finally, it is confirmed that the consumer level is far from circular. 
One reason is the consumers’ endless search for subjective well-
being, caused by the mechanism of “Hedonic Adaption”. Another rea-
son is the lack of awareness and knowledge on the subject, making it 
hard for consumers to take action.  
==PAGE:38==
38 
 
 
 
==PAGE:39==
 
 
 
          39 
 
 
Define 
 
 
 
 
In this chapter I will try to synthesize the knowledge gained in the previous chapter. This will 
include considerations in regards to how the principles of Circular Economy and Living Labs 
can be combined, and a specification of the target group based on the primary research in 
the previous chapter. Lastly, it includes design guidelines for the Develop chapter. 
Primary goal: Design specifications 
==PAGE:40==
40 
 
 
 
Chapter Content: 
 
A circular Living Lab? 
 
Target group specification  
 
Defining the design field  
 
Personal criteria  
 
Chapter conclusion 
==PAGE:41==
 
 
 
2: Define          41 
A circular Living Lab? 
From the previous chapter we have learned about the elements in a 
Circular Economy, and how it is currently being put into practice. It 
has become clear that most approaches are implemented on a higher 
industrial level, and not on the consumer level.  
I therefore find it relevant to focus on the lower levels and how con-
sumers themselves can be a part of a circular solution. This means I 
will center on the inner loops in the technical cycle, marked in the 
figure below. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Focusing on this part of the system also makes sense in an environ-
mental manner, because the smaller the resource loop, the smaller 
the energy consumption. For example it takes less energy to repair or 
reuse a steel frame, than recycling it back to raw steel. 
Figure 21 – Flow chart of materials in a Circular Economy, with the 
user/consumer level highlighted. (The Ellen MacArthur Foundation, 
2013)  
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:42==
42 
 
 
Vision of the Circular Living Lab 
Based on the knowledge gained so far, two overall aims of the Circu-
lar Living Lab can be determined. These will work as guidelines for 
defining future design criteria of the Circular Living Lab.  
 Create Circular Consumers: Foster the enlightenment of consumers 
to become more aware of circularity. 
 Discover Circular Design Concepts: Identify current problems areas, 
which can become future solutions in a Circular Economy, for me 
as a design engineer, and for partner organizations. 
Target group specification 
In this section I will specify the target group of Danish consumers, that 
the Circular Living Lab will seek to reach. 
Based on the knowledge from the survey described in the previous 
chapter, I have divided the target group into a primary and a second-
ary segment, in regards to how they are a part of the Circular Living 
Lab: 
 The primary target segment are the group of people the circular 
living lab will seek to inspire towards a more sustainable lifestyle. It 
is Danish consumers, 18-30 years old, with an average ecological 
footprint, but eager to learn about a more sustainable lifestyle. 
 
 The secondary target group should work as advocates for the circu-
lar living lab, help reaching the primary target group.  They are 
already aware of their ecological footprint as consumers, but are 
eager to find new ways of living and to inspire other. They can be 
citizens and organizations with interest in sustainable technolo-
gies, Open source, Circular thinking etc. 
 
For both segments, I have chosen the age group 18-30, since this is 
also the group UngEnergi is targeting. 
 
The base of the solution will be a Living Lab, where citizens can dis-
cover and test new ways of consuming and living. The concept of Liv-
ing Labs is emerging both internationally and nationally, however the 
analysis of current Sustainable Living Labs in Denmark tells that most 
are placed in the outer or middle layer of Prof. Dr. Keyson’s model 
below, focusing on mostly analyzing or verifying. 
Instead, I will try to put a focus on the elements from the inner layer, 
developing a highly experimental Living Lab, based on high user inter-
action: 
Figure 22 – The Keyson Model of Living Labs, with the inner level high-
lighted (Keyson & Guerra-Santin, 2017) 
 
==PAGE:43==
 
 
 
2: Define          43 
Personas 
To help further describe and visualize the two segments, one persona 
from each segment is made. According to Lene Nielsen, professor at 
IT University of Copenhagen, A Persona is a tool that helps  to com-
prehend an otherwise weakly defined target group, by the means of 
creating an imaginary version of the average individual in the specific 
target group. (Nielsen, 2011) 
Persona 1 – Asger 
 
“I like learning new sides of myself and the world” 
 Age 25 
 Lives in Odense, Denmark 
 Business student at University of Southern Denmark 
 Part-time job as a handball coach  
Asger likes travelling and get to know new people and cultures. 
Friends and family means everything to him, and he loves to go out 
for dinner and sports. 
He likes new technology, and always buy the newest gadgets. When 
done with his studies he hopes to get a job in a company working with 
development of electronics. 
He believes in climate change, but do not think he can make a big im-
pact himself. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Persona 2 - Annelore 
 
“I am passionate about creating a better future for all” 
 Age 29 
 Lives in Copenhagen, Denmark 
 Studies Environmental Sciences at University of Copenhagen 
 Volunteer in an environmental NGO 
Annelore is very dedicated about human rights and environmental 
protection. She puts a lot of time in NGO work, where she helps com-
municate sustainable matters to other people. She is curious, and al-
ways eager to try alternatives ways of living. 
Currently, she is very depended on her computer/internet, since most 
of her daily tasks can’t be carried out without. But one day she will 
move out of the city to start an organic farm, and life a simpler life. 
 
The Personas are used in the Development phase to help identify the 
right audience for workshops and feedback sessions. 
==PAGE:44==
44 
 
 
 
According to Professor Kuijner, all three elements need to be attacked 
if you as a designer want to make a lasting change in peoples practic-
es or behaviours. (Kuijer, 2014) 
In my case I have identified the following areas, as key for creating the 
optimal setting for behavioural change focused on Values, Stuff and 
Skills. 
Figure 23 – A Mindmap of my current thoughts of the Circular Living 
Lab, divided into Values, Stuff and Skills 
 
 
Defining the design field 
With the combined knowledge of both the target group and living 
labs in general, I can now setup the framework for the design process. 
Before describing specific design criteria, it has been helpful to make 
a simple Mindmap to illustrate current possibilities and thoughts. 
Since the Circular Living Lab is centred on consumer behaviour, I have 
based the mapping on the Theory of Practices developed by Professor 
Lenneke Kuijer, Delft University of Technology. This theory divides a 
practice into the three elements: Stuff (people and things), Values and 
Skills.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:45==
 
 
 
2: Define          45 
 
Drawing my thoughts on a paper helped to get an overview of the 
concept, and to make connections between different ideas. The pro-
cess also revealed an overall grouping of concepts into a physical and 
nonphysical part: 
Figure 24 – Grouping of physical and nonphysical elements in the Cir-
cular Living Lab 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Concluding from this, I will divide the development process into the 
“physical lab” and the “virtual lab”. The physical lab will be the experi-
mental settings from where consumer patterns and circular ideas will 
be tested. The virtual lab will be an online sharing platform, where 
knowledge can be gathered and conclusions distributed. 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:46==
46 
 
 
Personal criteria 
Since the thesis is a feasibility study of a project I as a project manager 
will carry out afterwards, I have some personal wishes I will seek to 
include in the development process. Firstly, I see both the feasibility 
study and the actual living lab, as a learning experience. This means 
that I will stay very open and explore various thoughts, instead of only 
focusing on one problem area. 
Secondly, if the project succeeds, I will be living in the living lab as a 
test person myself. This means two things: On one hand, I will be very 
motivated to make it is as liveable as possible, and on the other hand I 
will be diverted towards solutions that fit my personal needs best, 
instead of the general purpose of the living lab. I am very aware of 
this, and will remember to take that into account in decision process-
es. When a decision is made from a personal opinion, I will make sure 
to clearly state this. 
My Framework requirements 
In this stage of the project I find it beneficial to decide on the  frame-
work for the living lab, in order to better asses coming ideas in the 
development process.  
From the Mindmap earlier in this chapter, four different frameworks 
(places) for the living lab has been identified: a house, a camper, a 
ship or a DTU(/other educational) facility.  
Due to the importance of engaging with different partners in various 
environments, it is deemed essential that the living lab is moveable. 
Personally, I have great interest in ships, and have a big network of 
people with knowledge about ships.  
It is therefore chosen to use a ship as the framework for the living lab. 
Design guidelines  
The physical and virtual lab is given a set of preliminary design guide-
lines, based on the previous investigation on circular thinking and liv-
ing labs. The design guidelines will be used in the next chapter to de-
velop and test concepts.  
In the end (see page 91) the guidelines will be evaluated and adapted 
to fit for the final concept. 
Physical lab 
 Movable. In order to get inputs, and deliver outputs, to as many 
 
persons and organizations as possible, the living lab should be 
 
capable of changing location. 
 Livable. The living lab should be able to have people living on 
board  
and capable of mimicking normal consumption patterns.  
 Distinctive. In order to catch attention, the living lab shall have an 
 
appearance that makes it stand out.  
 Circular. The living lab itself should be based on circular thinking, 
 
meaning that it should be made from non-virgin resources, and 
 
be easily recyclable. 
 
Virtual lab 
 Overview. The virtual lab should provide a plan of the different pro
 
jects and events happening on the physical lab, in order to give 
 
the recipients an easy understanding of the full scope. 
 Interaction. The virtual lab should be based on two-way communi
 
cation, where recipients have a feeling that they can influence 
 
the content. 
 Open-source. All designs and technics should be public available, 
 
and published in a way so the recipients can further-develop 
 
the content. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:47==
 
 
 
2: Define          47 
Chapter Conclusion 
The processes introduced in this chapter has worked as tools for de-
limiting the project, and has given me as project manager a much 
better overview of the project. 
The overall visions of the Circular Living Lab have been set to Creating 
Circular Consumers and Discover Circular Design Concepts. Moreover, 
the target group has been specified in the two segments of young 
Danish consumers, either generally or very interested in the environ-
ment. Finally, some overall design guidelines have been clarified, 
which will work as decision-makers in the coming Development pro-
cess. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:48==
48 
 
 
 
==PAGE:49==
 
 
 
          49 
 
Develop 
In this chapter, we will dive into the processes of designing the Circular Living Lab in all its aspects. The physical 
framework is one thing, but just as important is the design of the experiments on board and how to best com-
municate these. 
The development phase will be an iterative process, where both the laboratory & experiment concepts will be 
tested and evaluated by the target group and partners. 
This chapter will not only include the process of how ideas are created and tested, but also theoretical research 
found to be relevant for the continuous development process.  
Primary goal: Design opportunities 
==PAGE:50==
50 
 
 
 
 
Chapter Content: 
 
Create an identity 
 
Conceptualisation workshop  
 
What do we really need?  
 
Where is the value?  
 
Co-creation Workshop 
 
Perception makes trash  
 
Creating the framework  
 
Concept evaluation at Sustainable Festival 
 
The Virtual FellowShip 
 
Designing a circular ship 
 
Designing an experiment 
 
How to measure consumption?  
 
How to measure happiness?  
 
Feedback on the experiment setup 
 
Prototyping the physical lab virtually 
 
Chapter conclusion 
==PAGE:51==
 
 
 
3: Develop          51 
Create an identity 
Since this stage of the project will include interaction with partners 
and the target group, I find it beneficial to now give the project an 
identity, so it can be easily recognised during the process and hope-
fully create more attachment to it.  
Name Brainstorm 
The project is centred primarily on the topics: Consumerism, Circu-
larity, Community, Sailing, and Experimenting. The brainstorm will be 
based on synonyms for these topics, combined in various ways: 
 
The ideas are shared with members of UngEnergi, who all agree that 
the name “FellowShip” sounds best. Since it can be translated into the 
Danish word “FÆLLESSKIBET” without losing its meaning, it is also 
beneficial because that the primary language of promotion is not cho-
sen yet. 
Figure 25 - Results from the Name Brainstorm 
==PAGE:52==
52 
 
 
Conceptualisation workshop 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
To initiate the ideation phase, persons from the target group are 
gathered for a workshop, to provide inputs to the basic concept of 
The FellowShip. The workshop is conducted as a Focus Group, modi-
fied for best matching the desired goals. To obtain inputs from both 
segments in the target group, the workshop includes 4 groups, with 2 
groups from each segment. 
 
Workshop Goals 
 Motivations for (not) adopting a circular lifestyle 
 Gather qualitative opinions on pains and gains in consumer habits 
 Identify specific areas of consumption were the target group are 
interested in a change 
 Indicators of target group are interested in circular thinking 
 
Logo 
With help from a graphical design student, the following logos are 
created. The three arrows seek to illustrate the circularity, and the 
connection between people and the natural environment made by 
the ship. The background is a compass, representing the goal of ex-
ploring new ways of living.   
These will work as prototypes for the FellowShip identity, and during 
upcoming feedback sessions the design can be revised. 
 
 
Figure 26 - Prototypes of the logo in Danish and English 
 
 
==PAGE:53==
 
 
 
3: Develop          53 
Setup 
The workshop was setup using the guidelines for a Focus Group, de-
fined in the Delft Design Guide. (van Boeijen & Daalhuizen, 2010)  
See page 18 in the Intro Chapter for further description. 
 
The participants from each segment are divided into the following 
groups: 
 2x6 participants, aged between 18-30, very environmentally 
aware, volunteering in the NGO UngEnergi 
 2x6 participants, aged between 18-30, interested in environment, 
students from DTU, CBS, KU and AAU 
 
The workshop is held in a relaxed atmosphere at VerdensKulturCent-
eret Nørrebro. It is facilitated by myself, and includes a short presen-
tation on the project and knowledge about Circular Economy, fol-
lowed by a break with tea and coffee. Afterwards the participants are 
split into groups discussing the proposed topics, and lastly we are dis-
cussing the topics in plenum. 
Moreover, the participants are asked to write down their individual 
interest/curiosity for Circular Economy on a post-it in the beginning 
and the end of the workshop. They are informed that their response 
will not be shared in plenum, in order to keep the answers as honest 
as possible. 
The presentation used can be found in Appendix 6. 
Results 
The starting presentation led to a lot of questions in regards to both 
Circular Economy and the living lab, which inspired both me as the 
facilitator and the other participants. With the mind set on the topic, 
the focus groups started discussing their personal consumption. A 
common subject were experiences, and how it in fact is the experi-
ence with a product that gives it value.  
 
Another point is that consumption helps to create identity, a good 
example said by a participant is about Christmas towels: Even though 
it can seem unnecessary to have specific red towels for Christmas and 
yellow for Easter etc., it helps to emphasise the feeling of Christmas, 
and belonging to a certain community or culture in general. 
 
Next part of the focus group discussion where centred on how con-
sumption can be minimized without affecting the overall happiness 
and cultural belonging. Here the groups ended up discussing what 
aspects of their consumption were based on respectively wants and 
needs. The answers were very subjective, but indicated that many 
consumer goods today are based on wants, for example fashion 
clothes and gadgets. 
It was easy for most groups to identify their basic needs, which includ-
ed food, warm clothes, bikes etc. But all agreed that these goods 
would not be enough to keep them happy.  
 
Perception of Circular Economy BEFORE the workshop  
The task of writing down their interest for Circular Economy showed 
two general themes before the workshop: Environmental Concern 
and Business Opportunities, with answers like: “How does Circular 
Economy affect the environment?” and “How to use waste as re-
sources in a production?” 
 
Perception of Circular Economy AFTER the workshop  
The responses after the workshop were more centred on the human 
perspective, in regards to both personal and societal benefits. An-
swers include: “How can I get maximum luxury for minimum foot-
print?” and “How to change the current model of society to fit into 
Circular Economy?”    
 
==PAGE:54==
54 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 27 -The first part of the focus group discussion where held 
around a table, but showed to exclude some people. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 28 - Prototypes Next part of the focus group discussion where 
moved into a circle. Here people were better included in the discus-
sion. 
Conclusions 
The topic of Circular Economy is perceived as something mainly rele-
vant for businesses by the segment. But the outcome of the workshop 
showed that it is possible to create interest on a personal level as 
well. 
The value of goods is created by the experiences we have with them.  
Many consumer goods are found to be unnecessary, but we cannot 
live with just the bare minimum either. There key is to find the bal-
ance between the two.  
 
Reflections on workshop setup 
It is important in a workshop to make room for both individual state-
ments, in groups and in plenum, since people have different ways of 
most comfortably express their opinions. 
 
Even though I had tried to make groups of more and less environmen-
tally aware, the groups had very similar opinions in the end. 
 
To make sure that enough people would show up, I had invited more 
than necessary. This resulted in groups of too many people, which 
might have made it harder for someone to express their opinion. 
 
In the first Focus Group session I had placed people around a table, 
which showed to exclude some people, due to the physical distance it 
created (see the dotted line on figure 27). In the next session I decid-
ed to move people in a circle, which created a more intimate  and also 
more inclusive atmosphere.  
See the two different setups in figure 27 and 28. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:55==
 
 
 
3: Develop          55 
What do we really need? 
A major outcome from the conceptual workshop was the topic of 
wants VS needs, and how we as consumers often confuse the two. 
When taking a look into the literature on the subject, I have found 
some interesting and useful theories. 
When investigating the basic physiological human needs, the Self-
determination theory by Professor Edward Deci and Professor Richard 
Ryan, University of Rochester, comes up. This theory states that we 
have three basic human motivations: Autonomy (feeling of freedom), 
Connectedness (feeling of belonging) and Competences (Feeling of 
wisdom).(Ryan & Deci, 2000) 
As the facilitator of the workshop I identified a common agreement 
that the need for consumption lies in the experiences consumer goods 
can provide.  
With the theory of self-determination in mind, I see a clear correlation 
between the two, since chances are that an experience are much 
more likely to contribute to autonomy, connectedness or compe-
tence, rather than just a product itself. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
For example, is the overall want to buy a new smartphone related to 
the deeper need for feeling connected to other people.  
But maybe this basic need for connectedness can also be satisfied from 
less materialistic wants? 
Another study on Self-determination, by Professor Anna Cooke et al., 
University of Queensland, shows how the theory ca be used as a tool 
for creating a pro-environmental behaviour. The principle is illustrat-
ed in figure 29.   
Firstly, Professor Cooke assumes that a lower personal ecological 
footprint can only happen from self-motivation. This motivation has 
to contribute to both autonomy, connectedness and competences 
before it will actually change a behaviour. The study concludes that 
especially the feeling of freedom of choice is related to how people 
will change towards a more environmental behaviour. (Cooke, Field-
ing, & Louis, 2016) 
Figure 29 - The steps towards a pro environmental behavior is closely linked to 
self-determination (Model ADAPTED FROM Cooke, Fielding, & Louis, 2016) 
==PAGE:56==
56 
 
 
Co-creation workshop 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
As earlier mentioned, the idea is to place the physical lab in a ship, 
constructed using co-creation principles. In order to find out whether 
this method is feasible, and to explore how a “co-creation construc-
tion process” might look, I will make a Co-creation workshop.  
Since the FellowShip shall be constructed from circular principles, this 
workshop will be about constructing a simple ship out of recycled ma-
terials.  
Workshop Goals 
 Test co-creation principles in practice 
 Learn how people work together on constructing 
 See how people perceive (and change perception) of reused mate-
rials 
 Discover creativity and building skills for non-experts 
 
 
. 
Where is the value? 
With the claim that consumers want experiences over products, does 
that mean that products have no value? And why are we then so ob-
sessed with owning stuff?  
As a design engineer I do believe that I can provide value for a specific 
user through a physical artefact. But I do also believe that the specific 
composition of materials only work as the “messenger”. The actual 
value is the interaction between the physical artefact and the user.  
This however, does not explain why some consumers buy stuff just for 
the course of having them. Looking at the behavioural concept of 
“The Endowment Effect”, first described by Psychologist Daniel Kahne-
mann, an explanation is that humans simply put more value in stuff 
we own. The reason lies in evolution; hence it has always been benefi-
cial for mankind to acquire ownership over resources that might be 
useful in the future. (Kahneman, Knetsch, Thaler, Johnson, & Profes-
sor, 1991) 
The problem comes when you are living in a place with abundance of 
resources, because then the behaviour might turn into an obsession.  
This insight seems to be an obstacle in a Circular Economy, where a 
major part is the mind-set of sharing. However it might also be possi-
ble to use as an advantage, since the obsession of ownership, might 
be an enabler for taking better care of the resources we already have 
on hand. 
This is something I will try to test out in the coming sessions. 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:57==
 
 
 
3: Develop          57 
Setup 
A group of 5 people from the target group are challenged to build a 
floating structure that can carry minimum 2 persons across a canal. 
The workshop are performed in collaboration with the already identi-
fied partner Guldminen (see page 24 and Appendix 4). 
 Guldminen is a Recycling Station in Sydhavnen, with free access to 
wasted materials. As the facilitator, I am providing tools and help with 
the construction, but not influencing the creative process of how the 
float is designed. 
Results 
The group was quick at getting many (crazy) ideas, but decided to 
start out by looking at what materials where available. Firstly, they 
were looking after containers and barrels for giving the float buoyan-
cy, and when that identified the started to concretise the ideas on 
paper. 
The decision process was partly about seeking to combine different 
ideas, and to go for the most simple one. In the end they decided to 
go for a design very similar a normal DIY raft. 
Doing the construction of the raft, something interesting happened: 
By coincidence they barrels were placed in an arrow shape, instead of 
two parallel lines as planned. With this visual outline, one from the 
group came up with the idea to connect the barrels like that, in order 
to make the float more aerodynamic in the water. 
 
 
 
 
With the float almost finished another group member got a new idea 
– to make a rudder making it easier to steer while paddling across the 
canal. The rest of the group were happy to help building it, but in the 
end the mechanism did not work, primarily due to lack of some essen-
tial parts. 
With the float almost finished another group member got a new idea 
– to make a rudder making it easier to steer while paddling across the 
canal. The rest of the group were happy to help building it, but in the 
end the mechanism did not work, primarily due to lack of some essen-
tial parts. 
Conclusions 
 With no specific knowledge within engineering or ship construc-
 
tion, the team proved to be able to build a floating construction 
 
that could carry two persons across the canal. 
 When informed that only reused materials are available, it is quick-
 
ly accepted as a valuable resource instead of trash, and ideas 
 
can now be developed around these materials. 
 The best ideas are more likely to be developed with the actual ma-
 
terials in hand, and not on paper. 
 When using hands and mind simultaneously, people seemed to be 
 
more focused and in flow. 
 The group enjoyed working together on constructing something 
 
creative together.  
 A creative process seems to start more easily with only a limited 
scope of resources.  
==PAGE:58==
58 
 
 
Creating the framework 
Most of the equipment and content in the living lab will be developed 
and constructed as co-creation amongst partners after launching the 
FellowShip.  The development prior the launch will therefore be fo-
cused on creating the most optimal framework for facilitating future 
experiments in the living lab. 
As previously stated, the physical lab will be placed in a ship. The crea-
tive process of designing the ship, will be centred on the already de-
fined design specifications, especially with focus on Movable, Livea-
ble, Modular, Distinctive and Circular.  
Exploration 
To get inspiration for the architecture of the ship, I will go on a 
fieldtrip to a nearby marina. Figure 31 shows a collage of different 
ship designs gathered in Roskilde and Svanemølle Marina.  
See the picture collage on the right. 
 
 
During the fieldtrip, I managed to talk with a few ship owners and visi-
tors at the harbour, providing me with some valuable insights: First of 
all, the marina is not perceived as a place only for people with a ship, 
but also for a recreative area, were local residents come down for a 
walk to enjoy the fresh air and the relaxed atmosphere. 
Moreover, a ship owner invited me on board his sailing ship,  showing 
me how homely and comfortable his ship were furnished. The ship 
was equipped with a fully functional kitchen, toilet, bath, living room 
and two bedrooms. 
The experiences confirm that a ship is a great platform for a living lab, 
and that a marina has a good relaxed environment for hosting events.  
Perception makes trash 
An interesting finding from the co-creation workshop is how partici-
pant’s perception decide what is trash and what is not – and that this 
perception can be changed. Researching the topic, I find that this per-
ception is something that has changed during that past 100 years. In 
the documentary The End of Ownership,  the Dutch architect Thomas 
Rau explains the reason as the gap between a products’ life cycle and 
its performance cycle. (Vpro, 2015) The gap is illustrated as the red 
arrow in figure 30.  
 
Figure 30 - The gap between product life cycle and product perfor-
mance cycle (ADAPTED FROM Vpro, 2015) 
The model assumes that every product loses value over time, but next 
to the actual life cycle of the product is its performance cycle, which is 
the perceived value of the product defined by the user. 100 years ago 
the two cycles would be almost the same – people simply used their 
stuff until it could not deliver a given function anymore. However this 
has changed today, where we more often throw away products even 
though the still provide their given function. Good examples on this 
are fashion clothes and phones, which we as consumers are tempted 
to swap with the newest brand long before the old version has 
reached end of life.      
==PAGE:59==
 
 
 
3: Develop          59 
 
Figure 31– Fieldtrip to Roskilde and Svanemølle Marina for exploring different ship 
designs. On the collage relevant pictures are highlighted with points of interest. 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
Distinctive 
Sources of 
sustainable 
energy 
Livable 
(not)  
moveable 
Open space 
Clear 
Message 
==PAGE:60==
60 
 
 
Sketch detailing 
Using the design criteria defined in the previous chapter: Movable, 
Liveable, Circular and Distinctive, it is clear that the different sketches 
all comply with being more or less movable.  
Sail is to prefer over motor, as this is the most circular method availa-
ble. 
In regards to liveability a double or triple hull is to prefer over a single, 
since this will provide more space for equipment and people on 
board. Moreover, this enables a more distinctive design that makes 
the ship easy to recognise.   
Below is a concept drawing of the overall architecture in mind:   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
. 
 
 
Figure 33 – Concept drawing of the FellowShip. The outriggers creates 
a distinctive design and the sails offers sustainable movability.   
Sketching 
With the inspiration from the exploration, I will craft a collection of 
simple sketches, which can afterwards be iterated in details. 
Figure 32 – Skeches of various ship designs. The left pictures indicates 
an overall characteristic, and the rest is an inspiration from those. 
==PAGE:61==
 
 
 
3: Develop          61 
Concept evaluation at Sustainable Festival 
With an overall concept of the FellowShip in place, it is time for getting 
some feedback from the target group and potential partners. Some 
truly useful insight has been gathered on a Sustainable Festival in Ros-
kilde.  
The festival is called Mange Bække Små and took place in the begin-
ning of April in the city centre of Roskilde, were different organiza-
tions and initiatives were hosting events to promote sustainability. 
The FellowShip were invited in to give a presentation of the concept 
and to facilitate a discussion about the Danish consumer culture in 
general. Moreover, I used this chance to engage with various partici-
pants to get further insights from a segment close to my target group. 
Results 
During the festival, I was seeking to get insights from how the percep-
tion of sustainability changed as participants got more knowledge 
from the various events. However, this showed to be quite hard, since 
it was always new people showing up to each event. 
 Next to this I made an interactive installation together with UngEner-
gi, where people themselves could come by and write their own per-
ception of sustainability. I did not provide any particular insights, but 
worked as a good object for starting a discussion with people. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The presentation about the FellowShip was held in ByLivsLab, an open 
space in the centre of Roskilde, starting with a short PowerPoint 
presentation held by me, followed by an hour of feedback and discus-
sion of the concept. 
The participants ended up being only members from other partici-
pating organizations, which framed the discussion and inputs to be 
primarily about how to create the best workshops on-board the Fel-
lowShip, and how to promote it the optimal way. The participants in-
cluded: local politicians and members of: Affaldsimperiet, ByLivsLab 
Roskilde, CoroLab, GenSalg and UngEnergi. 
The picture below is a section of the program, showing some of the 
events including “I samme båd”, which I choose to call the presenta-
tion of the FellowShip. 
==PAGE:62==
62 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
. 
Conclusions from Sustainable Festival 
Even though this was not the intended outcome, it showed to give 
some truly useful insight in the end. The main conclusions from the 
feedback session are: 
 Events only about sustainability will not attract much attention, 
 
since participants have a hard time identifying themselves with 
 
problems like climate change. The event needs to also offer 
 
something participants can more easily recognise and gain 
 
from. 
 Events can benefit from being an open walk-by installation, where 
 
people can join without having to commit themselves on be
 
forehand. 
 It is important to be very visible both in real life and virtually. 
 
There need to be something that can catch the participants’ 
 
attention instantly – here it can also be highly relevant to focus 
 
on more senses. 
 It can be useful to have more event activities simultaneously, so 
 
people with different interests can join at the same time. 
 Be very clear on the main topic of the event, otherwise people will 
 
not know what they are coming for. 
 
Lastly, we discussed about waste, since a few people where from the 
organization Affaldsimperiet, who works with promoting reusing and 
recycling. Here it was concluded that a huge issue with waste is how it 
is completely black boxed. A person throw something in the garbage 
bin, and then a system takes care of it, hiding the amount and its con-
sequences, so it becomes unimportant to the person what and how 
much he or she wastes.  
Maybe, a part of the FellowShip experiment can help visualizing this, 
in order to create more awareness among citizen. Affaldsimperiet 
would very much like to take part in and support the project.  
 
 
==PAGE:63==
 
 
 
3: Develop          63 
The Virtual FellowShip 
Next to the physical living lab, the FellowShip will also have an online 
platform, where results and ideas can be shared with the target 
group. Since the online platform potentially can connect with much 
more people, than the number of people who can visit the ship, this is 
just as an important part of the project. 
The online platform will consist of a webpage where all data about 
consumption and constructions will be public available. This site will 
be primarily targeted people with great interest in the project. Be-
sides the webpage, the FellowShip shall have an identity on Social 
Media, where overall conclusions can be shared with a larger group of 
people. The aim is to create a site where the lab results can be dis-
cussed and open up for new ideas to carry out on-board the Fellow-
Ship. Moreover, the site should work as an event calendar, where 
coming workshops in the living lab can be promoted. 
Social Media 
Since the project is already exposed to people as a part of the devel-
opment process, I will first create a social media page, so these peo-
ple can continue following the project. In Denmark almost everyone 
aged 18-30 have a profile on the Social Media site Facebook 
(Damgaard Nielsen, 2016), and it is therefore chosen to create a Face-
book page as a first step. On figure 34 is a screenshot of the page, 
which is called “TheFellowShipExperiment”. The content so far only 
consists of a logo, a description, contact details and a short animation 
video explaining the project. 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 34 – Screenshot of the FellowShip Facebook site  
 
Animation video 
To give new followers on the Facebook page an idea of what the pro-
ject is about, a short animation video that explains the vision is creat-
ed. This is done in the simple animation studio Moovly, and is made as 
a Minimum Viable Product, to quickly get some feedback and keep it 
open for changes. The video can be found online here:  
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Zc5iZAKXraA  
 
Figure 35 – Screenshots from the animation video:  
==PAGE:64==
64 
 
 
 
Signe has provided a great amount of valuable insights in the further 
development of the online platform. Especially in regards to the im-
portance of delivering quality content, in order to keep the credibility 
of the page high. Thus, it might not be a good idea to use a concept 
like Minimum Viable Product, but instead put some more effort in 
developing the right content before publishing it.  
The final design of the online platform should therefore include a de-
tailed plan for what and when content shall be published. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
. 
How to spread the word on Social Media? 
Since an important part of the online platform is to promote and pre-
sent the project for the target group, I find it relevant to learn more 
about how Social Media is best used as distribution channels. An in-
terview with Social Media Manager Signe Hollerup from Syntese Me-
dia is therefore arranged. 
Interview with Signe Hollerup 
Signe has a Master degree in Communication Management from Busi-
ness School, and is currently working as a consultant in marketing bu-
reau Syntese Media. I told her briefly about the project, and asked for 
inputs on the following questions: 
 How to reach your target group on social media? 
 How to keep followers interested? 
The concluding points from Signe are: 
 Make a Facebook add to reach users with specific characteristics, 
like age, city and interests 
 Content should be either entertaining or surprising in order to 
catch attention 
 Only one simple message per post 
 If making a video, the first 4 seconds should be able to capture 
attention, and the video should be able to communicate the  mes-
sage without sound 
 Make it sharable: If many people like or share a post, Facebook will 
distribute it to even more people 
 Make users interact with content, this makes it more likely to 
reach the same user in the future 
 Facebook remembers: if a page has made interesting content in 
the past, new content will be distributed more 
 Make sure to upload content on a regular basis, since this will give 
the page a higher credibility 
 
==PAGE:65==
 
 
 
3: Develop          65 
Ideas in the cloud 
As already mentioned the virtual lab should be a place where ideas 
for projects on-board the FellowShip can be co-developed and 
shared. Therefore it is deemed important to have an online platform 
where the physical lab can be presented, and new content can be 
easily added. 
As a design engineer I am familiar with CAD-modelling, and see this as 
a great tool for visualizing the physical lab, and for enable easy modi-
fying and adding of features.  
I have found an open-source and cloud-based CAD system called On-
Shape. Here it is possible for the FellowShip followers to freely access 
CAD models, without the need of downloading a program or buying a 
license. Furthermore, followers can copy the models, make changes 
and add new features, which can be shared on the webpage or Social 
Media sites. 
Below is a screenshot of a test drawing made in OnShape. The pro-
gram is easy to use for non-professionals, but also includes advanced 
features very similar to Autodesk Inventor, which I am used to work 
with as an engineering student. 
Figure 36 – Screenshot of test drawing in Onshape Online CAD  
 
Before followers can add content, there need to be a base of the Fel-
lowShip, from where features can be developed around. This base will 
be drawn when a more precise architecture of the FellowShip is in 
place. (See page 78  later in this chapter). 
 
 
 
 
Designing a circular ship  
Since the FellowShip shall promote a circular lifestyle, one of the de-
sign criteria is that the construction of the physical lab is also based 
on circular principles. In the design phase this includes designing with 
materials already in the circle, and designing for easy maintenance 
and disassembly, enabling the materials to re-enter the circle. (Confer 
the “Six Design Strategies for longer lasting products” on page 28) 
Material selection 
The single biggest part of a ship is the hull. On a sailing ship the most 
commonly used materials for a hull are either: aluminium, composites 
or wood. In a Life Cycle Assessment comparing the three materials for 
ship construction, it is clarified that a wooden hull has the smallest 
environmental impact. Moreover, the study concludes that using 
components from old ships, instead of assembling with new ele-
ments, makes a big difference as well. (Pommier, Grimaud, Princaud, 
Perry, & Sonnemann, 2016) 
It is therefore chosen to use an old wooden ship, and renovate with 
mainly recycled materials. 
==PAGE:66==
66 
 
 
 
Conclusions 
A major inspiration is that building with reused materials can actually 
look good. I find this to be an important part for the FellowShip, to 
show people that “building with scrap does not have to look crab”. 
Moreover, it is confirmed that building the hull of wood is most circu-
lar, since this is easiest to recycle afterwards. 
Finally, it is found to be beneficial to build with reused plastic for two 
reasons: First, plastic is very durable and water resistant, so it works 
well on floating structures.  Second, plastic pollution in the oceans is a 
huge problem, and by somehow displaying the reuse of plastic, it 
might be possible to spread awareness of the issue.  
A similar project has already been succeeded, where a catamaran, 
named Plastiki, was built from 12.500 water bottles, and afterwards 
sailed across the pacific. This experiment created a lot of attention, 
and has among other things collected over 20.000 pledges from citi-
zens across the world to stop using single-use plastic. (http://
myplastiki.com/takeaction.php)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
. 
Building with waste? 
In the Construction Workshop (See page 56) it has already been pro-
vided that it is possible to build with recycled materials, but to get 
more professional insights in the design possibilities and limitations, I 
will have a fieldtrip to the exhibition Wasteland at the Danish Archi-
tecture Centre in Copenhagen.    
Fieldtrip Wasteland 
Wasteland is an exhibition that displays how waste can be used to 
build our world of tomorrow. It is created by the Lendager Architect 
Group, who is a frontier in using waste as a resource. The exhibition 
displays various projects and materials they are working on, and 
hopefully this can provide some inspiration for the design of the Fel-
lowShip. 
 
Figure 37 – Pictures of  reused materials. Left: two ways of reusing 
plastic for insulation/wall construction. Right: Two ways of processing 
old wood into new products (insulation fibre and for furniture) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:67==
 
 
 
3: Develop          67 
Designing an experiment 
The FellowShip is a living lab, which implies that experiments are to be 
carried out on-board. The experiments will all be centered on how a 
circular living can be implemented amongst Danish consumers, with-
out compromising their well-being. The experiments will consist of a 
range of hypotheses divided into three overall goals.  
Three experiments goals 
As earlier concluded (see page 55) the mental well-being of humans 
can be based on how much the following factors are fulfilled: Autono-
my, Connectedness and Competences. Therefore, the experiments 
will use these categories as framework. The best experiments will of 
course include elements from all three categories. 
The overall goals are to find: 
 Autonomy. How can circular consumption create freedom? 
 Relatedness. How can circular consumption create fellowship? 
 Competences. How can circular consumption support the under-
standing of the environment around us (Technical, Social, and Nat-
ural)?   
 
Experiment hypotheses  
Experiments are based on hypotheses that can either be verified or 
falsified. In the phase of discovering and developing, a range of hy-
potheses have been identified. Below examples are listed. More hy-
potheses, will be gathered during the project, where the interaction 
with followers might invoke new thoughts. 
 
 
 
 
 
Autonomy  
 By limiting the amount of resources and products you rely on, you 
will gain a bigger perception of freedom 
 By firstly minimizing your consumption, and afterwards choosing 
what areas of consumption that you find most happiness in, will 
make you feel more in control of your daily consumption.    
 
Relatedness 
 Principles of co-creation in a project, will lead to a sense of owner-
ship and belongingness to the common vision of the project and to 
people with similar believes.  
 By visualizing the functionality and architecture of your consumer 
goods, will make you feel more attached to the goods and the re-
sources put into them. 
 
Competences 
 By illustrating the amount of waste you create, you will become 
more aware of the environmental impact your consumption have. 
 By presenting consumption in a simple and constructive manner, 
the audience will fell motivated to try a change their own. 
 By having a simple lifestyle, even just for a while, will make you 
mind more open for new ideas and create room for adopting new 
lifestyles on the long term. 
==PAGE:68==
68 
 
 
 
The next phase, Visualize Consumption, is focused on measuring and 
presenting what and how much an average Dane is consuming. This is 
done by having a crew living on board, but with a setup where no 
waste is allowed to leave the ship. 
In the third phase, Minimize Consumption, the crew living on board 
will try to limit their consumption to a minimum, with help from vari-
ous tool and technologies on board. Meanwhile, the consumption is 
monitored, and it is tested how it affects the happiness of the crew.  
The last phase called ReCircle, is the normalization phase, where the 
crew will be identifying what is really essential consumables, and with 
that in mind finding ways of putting their unavoidable waste back into 
the circle.  
 
 
 
 
. 
Experiment setup  
The experiments are put into a schedule or “Experiment Circle”, in a 
way where each experiment builds on the previous one. Furthermore, 
an experiment setup will help making it clear for the followers, what 
exactly is going on, and when. Details about the project plan can be 
found in the next chapter Deliver. 
Figure 37 introduces four phases in the project, there is deemed rele-
vant to explore how a Danish consumer best can become circular. 
First phase, the Circular Construction, is about the construction of the 
living lab, focused on co-creation principles and with the use of only 
reused and recycled materials. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 37– Illustration of the four experiments found to be conducted on board the FellowShip. 
Circle 
==PAGE:69==
 
 
 
3: Develop          69 
How to measure consumption? 
As the experiment setup clarifies, an important part of the FellowShip 
is its capability of measuring and visualizing consumption on board. In 
order to get inspiration for how consumption can be best visualized in 
a Living Lab setting, I have visited an exciting living lab, and gotten 
some useful inputs. Next to this I have investigated what areas of pri-
vate consumption that are most relevant to measure. 
Visiting a Living Lab 
In the Discover Chapter we identified the DOLL Living Lab, as one of 
the four biggest living labs in Denmark. DOLL Living Lab focuses on 
primarily lighting and intelligent energy solutions. Various technolo-
gies are displayed and used in a real life setting in an industrial area in 
Glostrup, DK. (“DOLL Living Lab,” n.d.)  
As earlier concluded (see page 24) the DOLL Living Lab as primarily 
focusing on verifying and analysing new technologies for users, with a 
relative high user contact.  
I arranged a visit to the DOLL Living Lab, with the CTO Kim Brostrøm, 
who was very kind to show me around in the area, and explain me 
how they monitor and visualize their solutions. 
Results 
The Living lab is based primarily outside, showcasing new energy effi-
cient lighting solutions. All solutions are tagged with a QR code, so 
users can go online and see specifications and average consumption 
on the various solutions. 
Moreover, the DOLL Living Lab consists of a “Virtual Lab”, where fu-
ture solutions can be designed and validated in a virtual 3D setting. 
One of the tools is for example Virtual Reality glasses, where users 
can see future light solution in a real life environment. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 38 – QR-code on a lamp post guides you to real life data on a 
Smartphone app.  
I find the interaction between a physical lab and a virtual lab quite 
interesting, hence it relates very well to the structure of the Fellow-
Ship living lab.  
The DOLL Living Lab showed to not have a lot of measuring equip-
ment. However, one solution inspired me for a way of visualizing con-
sumption: A lamppost where the electricity is directly generated on 
the spot, with a wind turbine mounted on the lamppost. This visual-
izes how much motion is actually needed in order to keep the light 
on: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 39 – Lamppost generating its own energy on the spot with solar 
cells and a small vertical wind turbine on top. 
==PAGE:70==
70 
 
 
What consumption to measure? 
Before going into further details about how consumption can be 
measured it is deemed important to identify what consumption to 
measure.  
The FellowShip aims to mimic the average Danish consumer setting, 
but it will be hard to measure all aspects of this. I have therefore cho-
sen to find a few areas of consumption to put focus on. 
Since the overall goal of the FellowShip is to create more sustainable 
consumer behaviour, I find it suitable to focus on the areas of con-
sumption that have the highest ecological footprint. In a study by  
NIRAS made for the Danish Environmental Protection Agency, the av-
erage personal ecological footprint has been calculated for a Danish 
citizen. (NIRAS, 2013) In figure 41 the footprint is divided into the five 
major sectors:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This can be applied to the FellowShip in more ways. First of all, the 
setup can be directly copied by installing a wind turbine on board to 
power specific appliances. But more interestingly, the same principle 
could be used in a human-powered generator, to emphasise how 
much energy is actually need to power our electrical devices. 
An example is an on board “generator bike” that can be plugged into 
various electrical devices, enabling the crew to visualize how much 
muscle power is required to charge their laptop or to bake a cake etc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 40  – Example of how one experiment on board the FellowShip 
can help visualizing electricity consumption of home appliances.    
 
. 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:71==
 
 
 
3: Develop          71 
Services (Restaurants, experi-
ences, insurance etc.)  
Nutrition (Foods and fluids)  
Shopping (Wearables, elec-
tronics etc.)  
Transport and travelling  
Utilities (Residential)  
Figure 41  – Pie chart of the average personal ecological footprint in Den-
mark, divided in the five biggest areas (ADAPTED FROM NIRAS, 2013)  
==PAGE:72==
72 
 
 
In order to make a test of how an experiment in regards to food 
waste might look, I have made a small-scale experiment in my dorm 
kitchen. 
 
Since the FellowShip will mimic a home setting, there will be put less 
focus on Transport and Services, as the consumption here takes place 
outside the home.  
This leaves us with the areas of Nutrition, Utilities and Shopping, 
which will all be relevant to incorporate in the FellowShip living lab. In 
the following each area is assessed in order to investigate, how it can 
become a part of the FellowShip Experiment Circle.  
Nutritional consumption 
The intake of foods and fluids account for 45 % of the ecological foot-
print for an average Dane. However, there are two things to take in to 
consideration here: Firstly, nutritional intake is something humans 
need in order to survive, and certain foods have a high cultural value, 
making it hard for people to change behaviour in this regard. Second-
ly, a big part of the nutritional consumption is not happening on con-
sumer level, but on production level, where feed and water for the 
farming industry create a high ecological footprint. (Gregersen & An-
dersen, 2015) 
However, there is one aspect of the nutritional consumption that is 
highly relevant to include in the FellowShip: Food waste. It is estimat-
ed that 12 % of the food we buy is thrown away instead of eaten. This 
is an issue for the consumer that pays for it, and for the environment, 
both in terms of the resources that are put into making the food, and 
the resources needed for handling it as waste afterwards.  (NIRAS, 
2013) 
The FellowShip will therefore include the following nutritional experi-
ments in the experiment circle: 
 Visualize: What types of foods are thrown out, and how much? 
 Minimize: How to plan, cook or eat different in order to limit food 
waste? 
 ReCircle: How can the unavoidable food waste best be handled to 
go back in the circle?  
The Food Waste Bucket: I live in a dorm with 16 other people shar-
ing one kitchen, on a daily basis there is created a lot of food waste.  
I have made a simple “drop bucket”, placed it above the ordinary 
waste bin, and with a note saying: “Please, put in your food lefto-
vers that would have otherwise gone in the waste bin. Thanks!” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
I did the experiment for a week and collected the food waste in 
another container every night. During the week some interesting 
things happened: 
 People on the kitchen started to question way I was doing it, 
and got interested in the topic of food waste. 
 Sometimes people threw something in the bucket that other 
people still found eatable, and it therefore turned into a kind of 
sharing platform for food leftovers. 
 Finally, people started to become a bit embarrassed when 
throwing too much in the bucket, because it became somehow 
uncool to throw food away. 
==PAGE:73==
 
 
 
3: Develop          73 
Consumption related to shopping  
Danes shop for almost 5 tonnes CO2 yearly, which makes it the single 
biggest emitter in our personal CO2 account. (CONCITO, n.d.) This 
area includes anything from clothes, furniture, electronics and per-
sonal care. Since, it is hard to assess what specific area that has the 
highest ecological footprint, there will be no further selection. 
Instead the experiments in this category will be centred on the indi-
vidual crew members and their perception of most needed consumer 
goods. 
The FellowShip will include the following experiments in the experi-
ment circle: 
 Visualize: The crew living on board will identify seemingly essential 
consumer goods 
 Minimize: During the stay the crew will be challenged to limit their 
consumer goods in order to identify what is really important for 
them.  
 ReCircle: How can these essential consumer goods, best be put 
back into the circle when end of life is reached? 
Residential utilities 
This area includes the usage of water, heat, electricity and mainte-
nance of residential buildings. Since the FellowShip will not be able to 
mimic the architecture of an average Danish home, the maintenance 
will not be included in the experiment circle. Instead the focus will be 
on water and electricity, which are both quite easy to measure. More-
over, there is a high potential for savings on both, with simple tech-
niques and by creating more awareness of actual consumption.
(HOFOR, 2015; Syd Energi, n.d.) 
The FellowShip will include the following experiments in the experi-
ment circle: 
 Visualize: How much water goes down the drain on a daily basis, 
and what is the source?  
 Minimize: How to minimize water consumption, without compro-
mising existing jobs to be done? 
 ReCircle: How can the unavoidable waste water best go back into 
the circle? 
 
A similar experimental setup will be made for electricity consumption. 
 
Conclusions 
In this section it has been investigated how consumption can be 
measured, and three areas of consumption have been chosen to fo-
cus on: Nutritional, Residential and Shopping. Each area has been re-
fined into the three experiment circles: Visualize, Minimize and ReCir-
cle.  
Furthermore, it can be concluded that the consumption in many ways 
does not have to be minimized per se, but rather optimized. The rea-
son is that we, as Danish consumers, waste a lot of resources, without 
receiving their full potential. 
In order to test how an experiment in regards to identifying essen-
tial consumer goods, I made a small-scale experiment with two 
friend called the Island-challenge. 
They where asked to pack for a 21-days trip on a Island, where 
they had food and shelter, and where limited to maximum 21 
items. Below is a picture of some of the items chosen: 
==PAGE:74==
74 
 
 
 
Instead, Professor Bjørnskov explains, that questions should be on a 
higher level and include a range of answers. For example: “I feel that 
life is very rewarding”, with the options “strongly agree, slightly agree, 
slightly disagree, strongly disagree”. Afterwards the answers can be 
replaced by numbers 1-4, and thereby translated into statistics. 
Professor Bjørnskov refers to the Oxford Happiness Questionnaire, as 
a good example of a test for identifying Subjective Wellbeing. 
Trying out the test on myself several times, I see a weakness in the 
fact that answers will be highly affected on how individuals perceive 
the meaning of “slightly” and “strongly”.  
However, this might not be a problem when testing crew members on 
board the FellowShip, since this test shall not compare results be-
tween individuals, but to higher degree show the change in happiness 
of each individual. 
Designing the Questionnaire 
With help from Gustav Bøg, psychology student at University of 
Southern Denmark, I have designed a questionnaire to find the level 
of happiness amongst the crew. It consists of 29 questions adapted 
from the Oxford Happiness Questionnaire, and are either related to 
Autonomy, Relatedness or Competences, as these form the basis for 
the experiment hypotheses. 
The questions have to be scored from 1-4, where 1= Strongly Disa-
gree and 4= Strongly Agree, which can afterwards be translated to an 
overall happiness level between 1 and 4.  
The Questionnaire will be filled in by participants before and after 
experiments on board the FellowShip, and then be used indicate de-
crease or increase in happiness levels. 
The newest version of the questionnaire can be found in Appendix 7. 
. 
How to measure happiness? 
Besides the measuring of consumption, the experiments on board the 
FelllowShip will measure the level of well-being amongst the crew, to 
verify or disprove the identified hypotheses. 
 
Since the level of well-being is not something that can be measured 
from a simple device, it is deemed useful to gain some insights in spe-
cific factors of well-being. 
Instead of well-being, I will, in this section, use the simpler term Hap-
piness equal to the Danish word Lykke, since this is what is mostly 
used in the literature. 
Christian Bjørnskov, professor in happiness at Aarhus University, has 
written the book “Lykke”, which, amongst other, explains how to best 
measure happiness. 
Firstly, the book defines happiness (lykke), as two different things: 
Positive Affect (Positiv Affekt) and Subjective Well-being (Subjektiv 
velbefindende). Positive Affect is the one that people will normally 
refer to if asked how happy they are in the moment, and will be based 
on external circumstances like sunny weather or a delicious dinner. 
On the other hand, Subjective Well-being, is the happiness that peo-
ple experience in between happy events, and that will reflect our life 
satisfaction as a whole. (Bjørnskov, 2014) 
The Subjective Wellbeing is the one that is most interesting to meas-
ure, since it reveals peoples state of happiness on a more fundamen-
tal level. According to Professor Bjørnskov, this is however also the 
hardest one to measure. Because if people are asked directly. “how 
happy are you right now?” or “What makes you happy?”, the answers 
will reflect only the Positive Affect.  
 
 
==PAGE:75==
 
 
 
3: Develop          75 
Test the test  
In order to test the structure and content of the questionnaire, I will 
make a small simulation of a FellowShip experiment, where partici-
pants will be given the questionnaire before and afterwards. 
In mid May UngEnergi held the yearly “Landsmøde”, where members 
where gathered for a weekend of workshops related to sustainability. 
I saw this as a good opportunity to test relation between happiness 
and learning about sustainability. 
I asked three members to take the test before and after the event, 
and give their feedback on its setup. 
Results  
Find all answers of the questionnaires in Appendix 8. 
The table below shows the subjective well-being of each respondent 
before and after taking part in an 2-day event about sustainability. 
The last column shows the change in percent. 
The results indicate that these respondents felt an increase in overall 
well-being after learning about sustainability. But it also clarifies that 
changes are rather small, with an average of 0,67 %, which tells that 
our well-being as a whole is quite stable. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Taking a look further into the results, it becomes clear that the an-
swers with a positive change is related to questions about social be-
longing. The reason for this is most probably that social belonging has 
been emphasized as a result of being part of a community where peo-
ple share the same thoughts. There were also a few negative changes 
in regard to personal competences, which might be explained by the 
feeling of helplessness towards topics like climate change that where 
discussed during the weekend. 
When asked about the survey setup, the respondents had two major 
points for improvement: 
 Too few options: The scale 1-4 does not provide room for a precise 
enough answer 
 Missing context: Some questions were hard to answer, since it 
would depend on the specific context  
Based on this feedback I have changed the scale from 1-6 and added 
a short introduction to how questions should be understood. In order 
to decide if this setup is better I carried out a second test.  
Respondent (#) 
 
Score before (1-4) 
Score after (1-4) 
Percentage change (%) 
#1 
3,31 
3,34 
0,75 % 
#2 
3,14 
3,17 
0,75 % 
#3 
3,39 
3,40 
0,5 % 
Figure 42  – The table shows the subjective well-being of each respondent before and after tak-
ing part in an 2-day event about sustainability. The last column shows the change in percent. 
==PAGE:76==
76 
 
 
 
These two views made me think of the graph by Dr. Braungart intro-
duced in the Discover Chapter, which describes how the industry can 
choose two paths towards becoming more sustainable; doing either 
less bad or more good:  
 
This might also be true for consumers; where doing less bad could be 
a behavior about only limiting your negative impact, and doing more 
good is about identifying new ways of actually doing something good 
and positive for the environment. 
If only focused on doing less bad,  consumers might lose motivation 
for keep doing it. But if they themselves could feel like they are part 
of shaping the solution, their motivation will be sustainable because 
the gain positive feelings towards the actions instead of feeling pun-
ished. 
This aspect of creating a positive feeling towards minimizing consump-
tion clarifies why co-creation principles are important to incorporate in 
the FellowShip. 
 
 
. 
Testing #2 
The first test was answered by people from the segment of environ-
mentally aware. In this second one, I will see how people from the 
generally aware segment respond. I therefore choose three persons 
from my acquaintance between 18-30 years old that where happy to 
try the test. The respondent group only did the test once, and had an 
average score 5 % lower than the respondents from the first test. 
Even though the number of respondents is far too low to generalise, 
the test indicates that the environmentally aware might have a higher 
life satisfaction than the segment only slightly concerned about the 
environment. 
During the feedback from the respondents from test #2 the aspect of 
environmental awareness was discussed, and I made some interesting 
findings about how these people perceived their role in helping the 
environment – or the reasons for not doing it. 
Doing less bad VS doing more good 
The three people from the generally aware segment, who are slightly 
concerned about the environment, knew about problems like Climate 
Change, and the fact the it is closely related to their activities as con-
sumers. However, they were not very motivated since they felt that 
no matter what they were doing it wouldn’t be enough. 
Members of UngEnergi (environmentally aware segment) on the oth-
er hand felt that they had an important role in making a change, and 
perceived every little action as a part of creating a better tomorrow. 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:77==
 
 
 
3: Develop          77 
Feedback on the experiment setup 
In order to validate the overall concept of the FellowShip experi-
ments, I have been in the field to gather feedback from the target 
group. A follower, who works at Mellemfolkeligt Samvirke, had seen 
my workshop in Roskilde, and then invited me to present my project, 
at an open event about Sustainable Living. The event was hosted at 
Café Mellemrummet at Nørrebro, and included young people, primar-
ily university students, and a few volunteers from UngEnergi. See fig-
ure 42. 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 42  – Pictures from the event. Top:  The FellowShip Experiments 
are presented in plenum. Bottom: One of the Focus Group Interviews. 
 
The event started with an introduction to Circular Economy and con-
sumer behaviour, followed by an explanation of the FellowShip and 
the planned experiments. 
Afterwards, the floor was open for questions from the audience, and 
lastly I conducted two small focus group interviews. One group con-
sisted of UngEnergi volunteers, and another of students generally 
aware of environment. Based on the experience from the conceptual 
workshop earlier in the process, I chose to place people in a circle 
without a table, in order to make the discussion more inclusive. 
Conclusions 
The target group finds the topic of circular thinking interesting, and 
many where engaged in the following discussion on how they as con-
sumers can change behaviour. One point from several people, were 
however that they believed a big responsibility lies at the governmen-
tal level, and therefore saw own actions as unnecessary. During the 
focus group especially this topic of personal changes where discussed. 
The groups  discovered that there were actually many things that 
could be done personally to minimize their consumption.  
Finally, when discussing the various FellowShip experiments, people 
in general found the concept appealing, and especially the setting of a 
sailship to be a good way of attracting attention.  
Some people also suggested alternative experiments: for example to 
make a “333 Challenge” on board, and in the same time encourage 
followers on social media to the same.  
The “333 Challenge” is about choosing 33 pieces of cloth, and then 
wear only these 33 pieces for 3 weeks. 
This occurrence of people helping to shape the experiments were 
very rewarding, since it is what I hope future workshops on board the 
FellowShip will foster as well. 
==PAGE:78==
78 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Prototyping the physical lab virtually 
As already mentioned the FellowShip will be co-designed during the 
construction, and one of the tools here is to have an open online 
platform, where “co-designers” easily can contribute their ideas.  
On page 65 we identified OnShape as a good online platform for this. 
With a rough design in place, I can draw the base of the FellowShip, 
from where content can be added and modified. 
The base of the FellowShip will consist of three main parts: under 
deck, on deck and two side pontoons. The type of sailing ship that will 
be used as framework is already known, and the measurement from 
this will therefore be used to create the virtual prototype. 
 
Figure 43 – Screenshots of the FellowShips’ overall architecture drawn 
in OnShape that enables easy and free modification from anyone with 
a link to the workspace. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:79==
 
 
 
3: Develop          79 
Chapter Conclusion 
The Development stage during this project has been a fuzzy pro-
cess, and has first of all revealed the many opportunities that lies 
in launching the FellowShip, but also confirmed that there need 
to be a clear scoping and direction of the future development 
process in order to deliver the proposed results.  
This chapter has included the major considerations and evalua-
tions of what is found to be most relevant to put focus on when 
initiating the experiment. Firstly we identified the current con-
sumption patterns and possible alternatives. And in order to chal-
lenge these patterns, four experiments are designed, namely: 
Circular Construction, Visualize Consumption, Minimize Con-
sumption and Recircle, which all fit into an “experiment circle” 
that works as a step by step plan for the overall project. 
Finally, the physical and virtual platform has been developed, in 
regards to how the FellowShip should look, and how to create 
and communicate the Online identity. 
==PAGE:80==
80 
 
 
 
Chapter Content: 
 
The FellowShip as a business  
 
Location 
 
Estimated Budget 
 
Roll-out plan 
 
The FellowShip organization  
 
Risk assessment 
 
Final Delivery 
 
Experiment Brief 
==PAGE:81==
 
 
 
          81 
 
 
Deliver 
 
 
 
 
This last part of the Double Diamond Model is on paper a converging pro-
cess, however I have taken the liberty to also explore new areas of the pro-
ject in this stage. I will investigate how to implement the concept via busi-
ness modeling, budgeting, scheduling and a risk assessment. Finally, I will 
present the findings in a coherent and clear way.  
Primary goal: Design solution and implementation plan 
 
==PAGE:82==
82 
 
The FellowShip as a business 
Even though the FellowShip will not run as business for making profit, 
it has proven to be beneficial to view the project as one, in order to 
identify potential challenges. 
I have mapped out the FellowShip using the Business Model Canvas, 
developed by Alexander Osterwalder, which is a tool that divides a 
business into nine well-defined parts. The nine parts are related in a 
way that is illustrated on figure 44. (Osterwalder, Pigneur, Clark, 
Demidoff, & Louise Ardenfelt Ravnild, 2015) 
Figure 44  – The nine different parts of the Business Model Canvas, and 
their relation. 
In the following, each part of the Business Model will be used to ex-
plain the structure of the FellowShip concept, with the aim of identify-
ing areas, where the concept needs elaboration before it is ready for 
implementation.  
Customer Segments 
The primary target group consists of two segments: Danish consum-
ers, aged 18-30, either slightly concerned about the environment, or 
very concerned about environment. 
The size of the two segments are calculated (see Appendix 9), and 
found to be: 
 Slightly concerned Danes aged 18-30: 440.000 persons 
 Very concerned Danes aged 18-30: 294.000 persons 
 
The outreach on board the FellowShip, will be rather limited, and esti-
mated from the size of the ship, it will count maximum around 1.000 
persons in 365 days. 10 % of these will be crew living on board, and 
the 90 % will be visitors at events and during the construction stage.   
The majority of the target group will be engaged on the virtual lab, 
where the Social Media channels will be able to reach a majority of 
both the slightly- and very environmentally concerned consumers 
between 18-30 years. (See page 63 for details about Social Media)  
 
Potential customers  
Besides the above-mentioned target group, I have identified two oth-
er potential target groups, during the Business Model exercise. Those 
target groups are: 
 
 Danish companies interested in data about design solutions for a 
Circular Economy. 
 Danish Governmental Institutions and NGOs, with visions of reduc-
ing the ecological footprint from Danish citizen.   
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:83==
 
 
 
4: Deliver          83 
Value propositions 
 Value for Consumer: Concrete tools to him/her on how to be more 
sustainable and gain a higher level of happiness 
 Value for Company: Data or insights in design solutions for future 
development. 
 Value for Governmental Institutions/NGOs: Added public aware-
ness of ways to reducing citizens’ ecological footprint. 
Channels 
Social Media sites and a website will be used to reach both potential 
crewmembers, visitors and interested organizations. UngEnergi and 
other context partners (see page 24) will help promote local events.    
Customer relationships 
The customer relationships are ranging from very close to quite loose, 
depending on if you are a crewmember or an governmental institu-
tion. However, all relationships will be managed respectfully, with a 
high focus on interaction and two-way communication. 
Revenue Streams 
 Accommodation fee for crew living on board 
 Event fee for hosting events 
 Grants from local or national funds  
The income and expenses will be described further in the section 
Budgeting on page 85. 
Key Resources 
The key resources are human and intellectual: People to help building 
and operating the FellowShip, and knowledge within construction and 
sustainable living.  
 
Key activities 
At first, the key activity is developing and constructing the FellowShip, 
at the same time followers and future partners shall be nurtured. Lat-
er on, the main activity is to maintain experiment involvement. 
Key partnerships 
Partner organizations that can co-host workshops and promote the 
experiment. During the construction phase, there will only be a few 
partners involved, at one specific location. When the FellowShip is 
moveable, more partner organizations will be reached and fully en-
gaged in the experiment.  
Partner organizations already on board for experiments includes 
Affaldsimperiet, Grobund & local departments of UngEnergi. Find de-
scriptions of the organizations in  Appendix 4. 
Cost Structure 
A mix between fixed costs during the construction of the FellowShip, 
and running costs during the operation of the FellowShip. 
 
Business Plan Conclusion 
The Business Plan reveals especially two areas where further investi-
gation is needed: Key partnerships and cost/revenue streams. 
Several organizations have already been contacted, and are interest-
ed in hosting events and taking part in various experiments.  Howev-
er, there is still a need for a key partner during the first phase of con-
struction. 
Moreover, the financial part of the project is still quite unclear, and an 
initial budget therefore has to be laid out, in order to assess whether 
the project is economically feasible.   
==PAGE:84==
84 
 
Location 
A key partner in the first phase of the project is a place for con-
structing the FellowShip. Optimally, the location has to offer tool shop 
facilities, and have a local network of people interested in the project. 
After speaking with a family member about the project, I got a great 
hint for a possible location: Dreslette Skole. This is an old public 
school that has recently shut down due to budget cutbacks. However, 
the board has agreed to reopen it as a folk school, and are currently 
looking for projects to engage as part of the curriculum on the school.  
The school is located close to the sea, and has a tool shop, and other 
rooms for hosting workshops etc.  
I contacted Jesper Andersen, the chairman of the board, and present-
ed him the project. After reviewing it with the rest of the board, he 
announced me that Dreslette Skole will be happy to host the project 
from August 2017 and onwards. Moreover, he explained that the lo-
cal municipality has set aside 15.000 DKK per project to help the 
launch. 
This is found to be the perfect spot for the construction phase, since I 
am also locally known in the area, and has contact to craftsmen and 
people who are interested in contributing to the project in various 
ways. 
Figure 45 and 46 shows two locations at Dreslette Skole where the 
project will take place. 
Figure 45  – The School yard at Dreslette Skole, where there will be 
put up a temporary tent for working on the FellowShip. Note the so-
lar cells on the roof that can supply the project with green electricity 
Figure 46  – The tool shop inside, where smaller parts can 
be created and practical workshops can be held. 
==PAGE:85==
 
 
 
4: Deliver          85 
Estimated budget 
Initial investments 
*The costs of the construction covers renovation 
of an old sail ship that is bought privately. This 
price is put rather low, since the renovation aims 
to include only reused and recycled materials 
available at a low price.  
Operating costs 
 
 
 
Startup Capital 
 
 
 
Revenue streams 
 
 
 
Estimated yearly profit to cover unforeseen costs and future invest-
ments:  169.250 – 120.900 = 48.350 DKK  
 
Expense 
Amount (DKK) 
Construction of physical lab* 
45.000 
Establish virtual lab (Website and Online promotion) 
5.000 
Development of onboard technology and equipment 
25.000 
SUM 75.000 DKK 
Costs are calculated from the condition that development and con-
struction are based on volunteer work. 
Operating costs and revenue streams are calculated from the assump-
tion that the living lab will be open for accommodation 365 days/year 
and host 1 event/week. This amount is not conclusive. 
Expense 
Quantity 
Amount (DKK/year) 
Daily running costs 
40 DKK x 365 days x 5 persons 
73.000 
Event expenses 
850 DKK x 52 events 
44.200 
Insurance 
3.700 DKK/year 
3.700 
SUM 120.900 DKK 
Income 
Amount (DKK) 
Assens Kommune 
15.000 DKK 
Kickstarter campaign 
10.000 DKK 
Other grants 
50.000 DKK 
SUM 75.000 DKK 
Income 
Quantity 
Amount (DKK/year) 
Accommodation fee 
50 DKK x 365 days x 5 persons 
91.250 
Event fee 
1.500 DKK x 52 events 
78.000 
SUM 169.250 DKK 
The numbers are estimates, and based on inputs from start-up advi-
sors in DTU Skylab, and from Glaring Yachts, a professional ship reno-
vation company. 
==PAGE:86==
86 
 
Grants 
It is crucial for the project that external funds will help covering the 
initial investments for constructing the FellowShip. As the construc-
tion will be done in collaboration with Dreslette Skole, the local mu-
nicipality, Assens Kommune, has already now set a site 15.000 DKK 
per project, when the folk school opens. 
To cover the remaining 60.000 DKK of Startup Capital, I have identi-
fied relevant Funds, who are especially interested in projects with 
social-and environmental aspects. The list and description of the 
Funds are to found in Appendix 10. 
Applications will be done on a regularly basis, accordingly to the spe-
cific deadlines. 
Due to the high user-involvement in the project it is deemed relevant 
to try and see if parts of the Startup Capital can be covered by crowd-
funding, on e.g. Kickstarter. 
By doing so, it will also be possible to get a close relationship to the 
target group at an early stage of the project. The campaign can for 
example promise a tour or free week on board the FellowShip, de-
pending on the amount of money sponsored. 
Prototyping a Kickstarter campaign 
With no prior experience with crowdfunding I have consulted a good 
friend, Tore Muurholm, who has done his Master Thesis one the topic 
of reward-based crowdfunding, and has done several crowdfunding 
campaigns related to business startups. Tore has given me some good 
practical tools for setting up the campaign, and his best advice is to 
first create a ‘prototype campaign’. The idea is to create and publish a 
Kickstarter campaign and promise some realistic rewards, even 
though they cannot be delivered yet. Before the campaign officially 
ends the campaign should be cancelled, which means that the sup-
porters will not be drawn any money, but leaving you with valuable 
feedback on what works and what does not. (Muurholm, 2017) 
 
 
The animation video created for the FellowShip Facebook site (see 
page 63) will be used as an introduction to the project along with a 
short text. The following awards are available for supporters: 
 Pledge DKK 75 or more and get a tour around the FellowShip 
 Pledge DKK 200 or more and become a pre-selected crew mem-
ber 
 Pledge DKK 500 or more and become crew member for a week 
 Pledge DKK 2,000 or more and become an official sponsor 
Figure 47  – Screenshot of the FellowShip Kickstarter campaign 
Find the campaign online:  
https://www.kickstarter.com/projects/933940566/the-fellowship-
experiment-finding-sustainable-happ  
Results 
During the first week of the campaign I have received pledges from 
several backers, and more importantly gotten in contact with peo-
ple that has given feedback for the crowdfunding campaign.  
Moreover, the process of distributing the kickstarter campaign has 
introduced the FellowShip to more people interested in following 
and becoming part of the project.   
==PAGE:87==
 
 
 
4: Deliver          87 
 
I have received the following inputs to the kickstarter campaign: 
 More details. Include more text and pictures to make interested 
fully understand the project they are supporting. 
 More personal. Instead of only an animation video also show a vid-
eo of yourself explaining the project, this will create more empa-
thy for the viewer. 
 Keep it local. Writing in English and using an international crowd-
funding site, excludes some local backers, since they does not feel 
as connected to the project. Instead the Danish crowdfunding 
page Boomerrang.dk can be used. 
The inputs will be discussed with Tore Muurholm, and included in the 
final crowdfunding campaign. 
Roll-out plan  
The roll-out plan consists of the major tasks/milestones during the 
experiment, the location and duration. In the beginning of each task, 
there will be made a detailed plan for the specific subject, and this 
plan will only serve as an overall guideline for administrative and pro-
motion purposes. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The experiment will officially begin in August 2017, where I am lucky 
to take part in the UNLEASH Innovation Lab, with the aim of gaining 
professional feedback on the project and identifying potential team 
members and partner organizations.  
 
Subject 
Location 
Period 
Completion of feasibility study 
DTU Lyngby 
June 2017 
Register as non-profit organization 
(CVR-registreret forening) 
Dreslette Skole 
June 2017 
Launch Virtual Lab, including social media and blog 
N/A 
August 2017 
Concept development as a part of the UNLEASH Innovation lab* 
Copenhagen 
August 2017 
Circular Construction 
Dreslette Skole 
Sept. 2017 – Feb. 2018 
Visualize Consumption 
Danish waters & harbors 
March - April 2018 
Minimize Consumption 
Danish waters & harbors 
April – July 2018 
ReCircle 
Danish waters & harbors 
July - August 2018 
Experiment evaluation and future perspectives 
Dreslette Skole 
August 2018 
UNLEASH 2017 is a 10-days innovation lab bringing to-
gether 1.000 talents from all over the world to work on 
ideas supporting the Sustainable Development Goals 
(SDG) setup by the United Nations. The aim of the lab is 
to form start-ups, non-profit organizations or other part-
nerships that will help bringing the World a step closer 
to reaching the SDGs. The event is established by the 
Carlsberg Foundation, The World Economic Forum and 
the UN Global Compact, and is held for the first time in 
Copenhagen this coming august.  
==PAGE:88==
88 
 
The FellowShip organization 
In order to carry out the FellowShip Experiment there need to be an 
organization to run it, both in practical and legal terms. The experi-
ment is carried out in close collaboration with the organization Un-
gEnergi (registered in the Danish CVR register), however the Fellow-
Ship can benefit from officially constitute as its own society, in regards 
to receiving funds and revenue in the future. 
By June 1st, the FellowShip has therefore registered as a “frivillig foren-
ing” under the Danish name FÆLLESSKIBET.  
The registration certificate can be found in Appendix 11. 
 The well-known saying: “The core of any business is a good team”, is 
of course also true for a volunteer society, and as the project founder, 
I have therefore been searching for some relevant team members. 
Within my network I have identified two key persons who want to be 
on board the project. 
Today, the organization consists of three main posts, divided between 
the following three persons: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Morten Risom Nielsen 
 Project Manager 
Design Engineer with special interest in Circular Economy  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Anne-Sophie Frausing 
 Communication and Social Media 
BSc. in Culture & Language and MSc. in Climate Change 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Martin Hansen  
Technician 
Experienced sailor and smith 
Next to these, a group of UngEnergi volunteers experienced in con-
struction and sustainable living will assist when needed, for hosting 
workshops and other practical tasks. 
==PAGE:89==
 
 
 
4: Deliver          89 
Risk assessment 
This last part of the feasibility study will include a risk assessment of 
possible downfalls, and how to accommodate these. This method 
used is adopted from a model in the book Project Management – a 
complete guide. (Tonnquist, 2009) 
In the model the identified risks are evaluated by Probability (P), Im-
pact (I) and given a Score (S), in order to clarify what risks are most 
important to take notice of. The P and I values range from 1-5, and 
are decided subjectively by myself as the project manager. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Risk conclusions  
The major risk in the project is identified to be partners failing to de-
liver agreed resources, and that the project does not create as much 
attention as estimated. Both risks are based on the uncertainty of ex-
ternal actors, and are therefore best prevented with better communi-
cation and by putting more focus on getting the message out. 
 
Figure 48  – Risk assessment including solutions for lowering probabil-
ity and impact and a Plan B in case it goes very wrong. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Risk 
P I 
S 
Lower probability 
Lower impact 
Plan B 
An experiment runs over 
time 
4 2 8 
Make a strict mile-
stone plan 
Add spare time after each experi-
ment 
Prolong the project period 
Crew members backs out on 
an experiment 
2 4 8 
Clear communication 
Make experiments flexible in re-
gards to no. of participants 
Find new crew members 
Partners fails to deliver re-
sources 
3 4 12 
Clear communication 
Identify resources several places 
Establish new partnerships 
The project does not create 
enough attention 
2 5 10 
Increase promotion 
  
Make events flexible in regards to 
no. of followers 
Adjust the experiment 
The entire project runs over 
budget 
3 3 9 
Make a strict purchase 
plan 
Leave room in budget for un-
knowns 
Apply for extra grants 
Unknown risk 
3 3 9 
Keep reviewing risks 
Stay proactive and flexible 
Adjust scope/vision 
==PAGE:90==
90 
 
Final Delivery 
As a final delivery of the feasibility study, I will create a brief that ex-
plains how The FellowShip Experiment shall be carried out, based on 
the findings from the past five months. Moreover, it will include a set 
of design specifications to be used in the construction and launch of 
the physical and virtual part of the living lab. 
An Experiment Brief  
During the last part of the project I have been wondering how to best 
present the results of the feasibility study, in order to give others and 
myself an overview of how the next steps of implementing the experi-
ment looks.  
When designing a product the planning phase often concludes with a 
design brief, which serves as a guideline for how to proceed into the 
actual development stage. (Ulrich & Eppinger, 2012) With inspiration 
from this I have created an “Experiment Brief”, also serving as a guide-
line or manual for the coming stages of the project. 
 
The central part of the brief is the Experiment Circle that serves to 
illustrate  the process of becoming more circular as a consumer, 
through the phases: Visualize, Minimize and ReCircle & Rethink, as 
mentioned in previous chapter. 
I have visualized the process as a circle, because it can then fit into 
the Circular Flowchart, where I think it provides a better understan-
ding than the current. Confer figure 49. 
Next to the Experiment Circle, the brief includes a breakdown of 
the project period into the three focus areas: Shopping, Utilities 
and Food.  
Each experiment phase is described by: Hypothesis, Period & Place, 
Key Activities, Key Partners and Deliveries. 
 
The Experiment Brief is to be found on the next set of pages. 
 Figure 49  – The “circular consumer” visualized in the Circular Economy Flow chart   
(ADAPTED FROM The Ellen MacArthur Foundation, 2013) 
==PAGE:91==
 
 
 
4: Deliver          91 
Design Specifications  
In chapter 2 - Define, there was made a set of preliminary guide-
lines to help developing the concepts of the physical and virtual 
lab. At this stage I will evaluate those and translate them into more 
tangible specifications instead.  
The ones defined in chapter 2 are called guidelines, and not speci-
fications, because they are not precise enough to be covered by 
that term. According to Professor Karl Ulrich and Professor Steven 
Eppinger, a specification needs to have both a metric and a value, 
so it can be tested if the solution actually fulfils the given specifica-
tion. (Ulrich & Eppinger, 2012) 
A value and a metric has therefore been integrated in the final spe-
cifications. Moreover, some specifications have been added. 
 
Physical Lab 
 Movable. In order to get inputs, and deliver outputs, to as many 
persons and organizations as possible, the FellowShip should be 
able to move at a speed of minimum 5 knots under normal sai-
ling conditions. 
 Livable. The FellowShip should be able to accommodate 3-6 
persons, in order to mimic a standard family.  
 Off-grid. The FellowShip should be autonomous and be able to 
function without any external power sources. Any resource in-
puts should be easily measured. 
 Measurable. To evaluate the various processes and projects in 
the living lab, all consumption in regard to water and electricity 
should be monitored automatically, and consumption of food 
and consumer goods manually. 
 
 Distinctive. In order to catch attention, the FellowShip shall have at 
least two characteristics that makes it stand out compared to ano-
ther sailing ship in the same size. 
 Circular. The living lab itself should be based on circular thinking, me-
aning that 100 % of the construction material shall come from non-
virgin resources, and be recyclable. 
 
Virtual Lab 
 Interaction. The virtual lab should be based on two-way communica-
tion, so recipients have a feeling that they can influence the content. 
The aim is to have at least half of the content made by followers and 
partners. 
 Dynamic. The virtual lab should be updated on regular basis, in order 
to keep recipients interested. On Social Media there should be mini-
mum 3 updates per week. 
 Open-source. All designs and technics should be public available, and 
published in a way so the recipients can further-develop the content. 
 Personal. The virtual lab should be able to tell a personal story of the 
people living on board, and by that create an emotional connection 
to the recipients. The content should therefore be equally balanced 
between behavioral and technical aspects.  
==PAGE:92==
92 
 
 
==PAGE:93==
 
 
 
          93 
 
 
==PAGE:94==
94 
 
 
==PAGE:95==
 
 
 
          95 
 
 
==PAGE:96==
96 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Methods for guidance and not for con-
straints 
Many of the methods I have learned during my master have 
been very useful - not so much in their direct use, but more as 
an inspiration for developing a sociotechnical & design thinking 
mind-set. 
During the first part of my master, I often felt too constrained 
by the usage of a specific method, simply because it created a 
very rigid frame or workspace, and thereby took away focus 
from the real goal. During a semester at Delft University of 
Technology and now on my master thesis, I have learned to use 
methods more as a guidance for reaching the goal at hand, and 
not care too much about following their exact structures and 
rules. 
An example is user-interaction: I have been part of several aca-
demic projects where an important aspect has been interviews 
and feedback sessions with users or other stakeholders. Often 
the project team has been cautious with this practice and afraid 
of doing it wrong, which has led to less input than desired.  
Instead I have now become less worrisome, and I am using eve-
ry opportunity to interact and gain feedback from others.  This 
means that many interviews have not followed a planned agen-
da - but instead I have gained more, and often better inputs, 
than before. 
Discussion  
I will use the discussion to reflect upon my process during the past five 
months and evaluate my usage of the chosen methods. I will make 
relations to my entire master degree, and take a brief look into the 
future perspectives of the project and my career as a Design Engineer. 
 
The process of running in circles 
During the past five years as an engineering student I have felt like I 
have been running in circles, and during the past five months I have 
learned to accept that.  
For every design project I have been involved in for the past five 
years, both academically and professionally, I have been searching for 
a simple, standardised and linear development process. Only now 
have I accepted that this doesn’t exist - or more importantly that it is 
not desirable.   
 My experience is that creativity and exploration might be too con-
fined if the process is too controlled. This might potentially be ok for 
a company developing goods for a well-known market need, with a 
primary concern of staying efficient, hence competitive. However my 
experience is that this is not beneficial if you are aiming to design so-
lutions that are more disruptive. 
The Double Diamond Design Model has been a great guideline for 
ensuring that I stayed on track, and remembered the overall project 
parts, but I am glad that I also used the experimental and open mind-
set of Design Thinking during the entire process, allowing more alter-
native thoughts to evolve. With that said, I am aware that the coming 
process of further development and implementing might need a 
more strict approach, because it would otherwise have a higher po-
tential of failing to deliver within time and budget. 
==PAGE:97==
 
 
 
          97 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Future perspectives 
The aim of this project is closely related to the aim of my future 
career as a design engineer: to facilitate a more sustainable liv-
ing, in order to raise the theory of Circular Economy from a niche 
level, to a level where it potentially can create a paradigm shift in 
our society. 
For me the feasibility study and the coming launch of the Fellow-
Ship are the perfect first stepping stone for reaching this goal.  
Firstly, because this master thesis has provided me with the cur-
rent expert knowledge within the field, and secondly because 
the coming experiments on board the FellowShip will give me 
hands-on experiences, which can help identify new opportunities 
within the transition to a Circular Economy. 
After the FellowShip Experiments are completed, I aim to find a 
job in a design consultancy or possibly start my own, where I can 
use my insights to design products and services for the future 
circular consumer. 
 
==PAGE:98==
98 
 
 
 
Instead, one of the thesis findings indicate that consumers will 
gain more well-being from buying experiences, rather than just 
products - which is why an important aspect of the FellowShip 
Experiment, is how consumers can get more experiences with 
less products.  
Moreover, a lifestyle with less products will make it easier for the 
consumers to get a closer relationship with their most valued 
belongings. This product attachment is found to be an important 
aspect of Circular Economy, since it in the end will mean that 
consumers will not throw away their belongings so often. 
The relationship also creates an ownership brought forward by 
the Endownment Effect, which might be an obstacle in a Circular 
Economy, because it is contradictory to the aspect of sharing. 
The above-mentioned conclusions are related only to the con-
scious and visible consumption. Just as important is the “hidden 
consumption” of for especially food, water, and electricity. Here 
the issue is the enormous amount of waste we as Danish con-
sumers create. The underlying problem is the fact that these re-
source- and waste streams are not visual, and consumers there-
fore have a hard time comprehending the amount of resources 
they account for.  
Visualizing the consumption is therefore an important tool on 
board the FellowShip, to first make consumers more aware, and 
afterwards empower them to minimize consumption of food, 
water, and electricity.  
One last finding in regards to facilitating circular thinking on 
board the FellowShip, is the aspect of how participants are more 
likely to adopt a new idea or behaviour if the process is based on 
self-determination. This means that experiments shall be con-
ducted in a way that will not force participants into a specific 
behaviour,  
 
Conclusion 
I will use this conclusion to answer the research question, which I have 
based this thesis upon: “How to facilitate circular thinking among 
Danish consumers, by the creation of a living lab?” 
The thesis has been carried out as a feasibility study, to test whether 
the concept of a circular living lab is viable to initiate or not. First, I 
want to conclude that there is indeed a need for the proposed solu-
tion, and that there is a doable plan for actually implementing it. I 
therefore find it feasible to go on with the project. 
Using the research question as a guideline for the feasibility study has 
been challenging, due to the diverging nature of a “how” questi-
on. And as mentioned in the Discussion, this has made the process 
quite fuzzy. However, this is also what has shown to open up a lot of 
interesting conclusions, which I had most likely not found otherwise.  
First point in regard to why Danish consumers are not circular today, 
lies in social practices. We are all bound more or less to a set of 
norms or meanings from our surroundings, which also affect our con-
sumer behaviour.  
One example is how certain consumer goods is closely related to our 
identity or cultural events. This is beneficial to a certain degree, but it 
seems like we, here in the western world, have reached a point 
where the materialistic values have overruled the underlying human 
needs, leaving consumers trapped in an endless craving for more, 
without ever really reaching the fundamental satisfaction they are 
searching for.  
One reason for this might be explained by the theory of Hedonic Ad-
aptation, stating that humans exposed to a positive change will expe-
rience increased well-being only for a while, before going back to the 
original state of well-being. In regards to consumption this means we 
get an immediate reward from buying stuff, but after a while the re-
ward disappears – and further shopping is therefore needed to stay 
satisfied.  
 
==PAGE:99==
 
 
 
          99 
 
 
 
 
but through inclusion and co-creation will facilitate the develop-
ment of new ideas created by the participants themselves. 
Parallel with the development of the experiments, the platform 
for the living lab has been conceptualized step by step, to best 
accommodate and communicate the experiments.  
The living lab has been validated and given a plan for implemen-
tation, so that the launch of the project can begin immediately 
after the feasibility study is concluded. 
With this study the course of the FellowShip has been set, 
and all there is left to do is to set sails! 
==PAGE:100==
100 
 
 
 
Ryan, R. M., & Deci, E. L. (2000). Self-determination theory and 
the facilitation of intrinsic motivation, social development, 
and well-being. American Psychologist, 55(1). (pp. 68-78) 
Schumacher, A. J., & Feurstein, B. K. (2007). Living Labs — a new 
multi-stakeholder approach to user integration. Enterprise 
Interoperability II. Springer London. (pp. 281–285) 
Welfens, M. J., Liedtke, C., & Baedeker, C. (2010). Living Lab: Re-
search and Development of Sustainable Products and Ser-
vices Through User-Driven Innovation. Environmental Ma-
nagement. (pp. 1-24) 
 
Books 
Ehrenfeld, J. R. (2008). Sustainability by Design: A Subversive 
Strategy for Transforming Our Consumer Culture. London: 
Yale University Press. (pp. 1-146) 
Keyson, D., & Guerra-Santin, O. (2017). Living Labs - Design and 
Assessment of Sustainable Living. Springer. (pp. 3-35) 
Nielsen, J. S. (2013). Den store omstilling: fra systemkrise til grøn 
økonomi. kort fortalt. Information. (pp. 1-141) 
Nielsen, L. (2011). Persona: Brugerfokuseret design. Aarhus Uni-
versitetsforlag. (pp. 1-205) 
Osterwalder, A., Pigneur, Y., Clark, T., Demidoff, N., & Louise Ar-
denfelt Ravnild. (2015). Business model generation : en 
håndbog for nytænkere, banebrydere og rebeller. Gylden-
dal. (pp. 14-44) 
Simon, H. A. (1996). The sciences of the artificial. London: MIT 
Press. (pp. 111-139) 
Tatzel, M. (2014). Consumption and Well-Being in the Material 
 World. Springer. (pp. 1-9)´ 
Tonnquist, B. (2009). Project management - a complete guide. 
 Hans Reitzels. (pp. 35-71) 
 
References and Bibliography 
Articles  
Bakker, C., & den Hollander, M. (2013). Six design strategies for longer 
lasting products in Circular Economy New opportunities. The 
Guardian. (pp. 3–5) 
Braungart, M., McDonough, W., & Bollinger, A. (2007). Cradle-to-
cradle design: creating healthy emissions - a strategy for eco-
effective product and system design. Journal of Cleaner Producti-
on, 15(13–14). (pp. 1337–1348) 
Brickman, P., & Campbell, D. (1971). Hedonic relativism and planning 
the good society. Adaptation-level theory: A symposium. Acade-
mic Press. (pp. 287-302) 
Cooke, A. N., Fielding, K. S., & Louis, W. R. (2016). Environmentally 
active people: the role of autonomy, relatedness, competence 
and self-determined motivation. Environmental Education Re-
search, 22(5). (pp. 631-657) 
Ehrlich, P. R., & Holdren, J. P. (1971). Impact of Population Growth. 
 
Science, 171(3977). (pp. 1212-1217) 
International Reference Centre for the Life Cycle of Products. (2015). 
Circular Economy: A Critical Review of Concepts. Journal of Che-
mical Information and Modeling, 53(9). (pp. 1689–1699) 
Kahneman, D., Knetsch, J. L., Thaler, R. H., Johnson, H., & Professor, L. 
(1991). Anomalies: The Endowment Effect, Loss Aversion, and 
Status Quo Bias Anomalies The Endowment Effect, Loss Aversi-
on, and Status Quo Bias. The Journal of Economic Perspectives 
Journal of Economic Perspectives, 5(1). (pp. 193-206)  
Kramp, P. L. (2013). Gross Domestic Product and Gross National Pro-
duct. Danmarks Nationalbank -Monetary Review (pp. 99-100) 
Pommier, R., Grimaud, G., Princaud, M., Perry, N., & Sonnemann, G. 
(2016). Comparative environmental life cycle assessment of ma-
terials in wooden ship ecodesign. Ternational Journal of Life Cy-
cle Assessment, 21(2). (pp. 265-275) 
==PAGE:101==
 
 
 
          101 
 
 
Homepages 
CONCITO. (n.d.). Forbrugets klimabelastning. Retrieved May 2, 
2017, from https://concito.dk/blog/forbrugets-
klimabelastning-ogsaa-sag-politikerne  
 
COOP Analyse. (2011). Danskerne og miljøhensynet. Retrieved 
May 17, 2017, from https://coopanalyse.dk/analyse/
danskerne-og-miljøhensynet 
 
Damgaard Nielsen, L. (2016). Danskerne og Facebook 2016. Retrie-
ved April 10, 2017, from http://digitalkommunikation.net/
danskerne-og-facebook-2016/  
 
DOLL Living Lab. (n.d.). Retrieved May 1, 2017, from http://
www.lightinglab.dk/Living-Lab/  
 
DST. (2015). Forbrugerundersøgelsen. Retrieved May 08, 2017, 
from http://www.dst.dk/da/Statistik/emner/priser-og-
forbrug/forbrug/forbrugsundersoegelsen  
 
Kalundborg Municipality. (2017). Kalundborg Symbiosis. Retrieved 
March 30, 2017,  from http://www.symbiosis.dk/en  
 
Syd Energi. (n.d.). Nedbring dit el-forbrug. Retrieved May 2, 2017, 
from https://www.se.dk/se-energi-og-klima/privat/
energiforbedringer/optimer-dit-energiforbrug/nedbring-dit-
elforbrug  
 
UngEnergi. (n.d.). UngEnergi Frivilligplatform. Retrieved May 18, 
2017, from http://ve.dk/ungenergi  
 
VPro. (2015). The End of Ownership. Retrieved June 14, 2017, 
from https://www.vpro.nl/programmas/tegenlicht/kijk/
afleveringen/2015-2016/einde-van-bezit.html    
Reports 
Bjørnskov, C. (2014). Lykke. Aarhus Universitetsforlag. (pp. 1-60) 
 
British Design Council. (2005). A study of the design process. Bri-
tish Design Council London. (pp. 6-8) 
 
Fischer, C. (2014). Affaldsstatistik 2014. Miljøstyrelsen. (pp. 17-
39) 
 
Gregersen, M., & Andersen, N. A. (2015). Madspild i Danmark. 
Landbrug & Fødevarer (pp. 4-14) 
 
HOFOR. (2015). Spar Vand - Spar Penge Så Skåner Du Også Miljø-
et. HOFOR (pp. 2-11) 
 
Kuijer, L. (2014). Implications of Social Practice Theory for Sustai-
nable Design. Delft University of Technology. (pp. 2-3) 
 
Miljøstyrelsen. (2017). Bekendtgørelse af lov om miljøbeskyttelse. 
Retsinformation (pp. 24-30) 
 
Muurholm, T. (2017). Success Factors for Reward-based Crowd-
funding. Copenhagen Business School. (pp. 51-79) 
 
New Economics Foundation. (2009). THE HAPPY PLANET INDEX 
2.0. New Economics Foundation London (pp. 3-45)  
 
NIRAS. (2013). Miljøråd. Miljøstyrelsen. (pp. 19-22) 
 
The Ellen MacArthur Foundation. (2013). Towards the Circular 
Economy. The Ellen MacArthur Foundation (pp. 13-35) 
United Nations. (2012). Environmental Scarcity and Conflict Tool-
kit and Guidance for Preventing and Managing Land and 
Natural Resources Conflict. (pp. 14-16) 
 
World Wildlife Fund. (2014). Living Planet Report 2014. World 
Wildlife Fund Washington. (pp. 58-74) 
==PAGE:102==
102 
 
 
Appendix List 
 
Appendix 1 - DTU General Thesis Objectives 
Appendix 2 – List of Sustainable Living Labs in the ENoll network 
Appendix 3 – Description of Danish Sustainable Living Labs 
Appendix 4 – Description of Potential Partners 
Appendix 5 – Questions and results from Consumer Survey 
Appendix 6  - Workshop Presentation 
Appendix 7 – Happiness Questionnaire 
Appendix 8 – Answers from Happiness Questionnaire 
Appendix 9 – Size of customer segments 
Appendix 10 – List of Funds 
Appendix 11 – CVR Registration Certificate 
 
==PAGE:103==
 
 
 
          103 
 
==PAGE:104==
104 
 
 
