==PAGE:1==
MASTER THESISModeling navigation 
 
 
==PAGE:2==
 
==PAGE:3==
Acknowledgements
First of all, thanks a lot to my main supervisor, Patrizio Mariani, for enabling me to work on
such an interesting topic. You were always open for discussions and questions, and I really
appreciated working with you. I hope we continue after this thesis!
Thank you also Uﬀe Høgsbro Thygesen for your co-supervision, your advice and your great
knowledge on stochastic diﬀerential equations. I am also very grateful to Antonio Celani
who got ﬁrst the idea and developed the theoretical framework behind this method.
I also want to thank all the researchers who provided me with tracks: Graeme Hays from
Deakin University, Susanne ˚Akesson and Giuseppe Bianco from Lund University, Paolo
Luschi and Giulia Cerritelli from Pisa University, Phillip Clapham and Alex Zerbini from
NOAA. Without them, this project would probably have been much less motivating! I also
want to give special thanks to Finn Larsen who helped me a lot by activating his impressive
network.
Doing a master and working at DTU Aqua was a very interesting experience, and I want
to thank all the master students, the researchers from DTU Aqua and the members of the
Center for Ocean Life for making this place such a nice working environment. Thanks to
Camila and Berthe for the great company and support, and Aurore for the advice and careful
proof reading of this master thesis (and for the great company as well!).
Finally, I would like to thank all my friends, may they come from France, Denmark or
elsewhere as well as my family for their constant support and encouragements.
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
The behavioral traits regulating the ability of individuals to migrate are largely unknown
but are likely dependent on a balance between individual preferences, energetic costs, risk
and advantages in moving and possibly collective decisions processes when moving in large
groups. Despite this complexity, migration between widely separated but geographically
stable locations is a wide spread phenomenon in animal ecology. For example, whales and
turtles are iconic marine species traveling thousand of kilometers during their life through
seasonal long-distance migrations. Speciﬁc adaptation of physiological, morphological and
life-history traits are present in those animals, likely shaped by the interactions between spe-
ciﬁc behavioral attitudes and local oceanographic conditions. However, risks or risk-averse
strategies of the single individuals can also aﬀect migratory tactics and can then drive meta-
population structures and emergence of diﬀerent personalities in those groups.
We hypothesized that migration routes are shaped by evolutionary constraints on physiolog-
ical, behavioral and personality traits as well as by the interactions with local environmental
conditions during repeated migrations. We investigated risk averse and risk prone migration
tactics in long distance migrants making explicit the trade-oﬀbetween migration time, mi-
gration costs and risk-attitudes in migrations. We present a general mathematical framework
based on optimal control theory applied to stochastic diﬀerential equations and describe op-
timal migration routes in realistic oceanographic conditions.
Combining available tagging data of long-distance migration routes and high-resolution hy-
drographic data, we use statistical inference methods to gain insight about personality traits
for a range of long-distance migratory marine animals. We show that all organisms are opti-
mizing to save energy rather than time even though the relative importance of both costs can
vary by several order of magnitude between individuals. Risk-attitudes were spread between
slightly risk-seeking and risk-averse strategies, sometimes within one population. This can
be explained from an evolutionary perspective and may have ecological consequences for the
considered populations.
==PAGE:5==
Contents
1
Introduction
3
2
Methods
9
2.1
Theoretical framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2
Inference of parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.2.1
Deﬁnition of the log-likelihood functions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.2.2
Finding the maximum of the log-likelihood
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.3
Simple model: Crossing a river . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.3.1
Set-up . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.3.2
Robustness test of the model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.4
Long distance migrations in marine animals
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.4.1
Available tracks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.4.2
Current ﬁelds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.4.3
Target areas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3
Results
21
3.1
River model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.1.1
Variability of tracks with parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.1.2
Inﬂuence of β . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.1.3
Inﬂuence of γ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.1.4
Inﬂuence of α . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.1.5
Inﬂuence of the diﬀusivity D . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.1.6
Inﬂuence of the current speed c . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.2
Assessment of the parameters: river model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.2.1
Parameter maps . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.2.2
A more eﬃcient approach: the Nelder-Mead algorithm
. . . . . . . .
29
3.3
Assessment of parameters in the case of long-distance oceanic migrants . . .
33
3.3.1
Reconstruction of behavioral traits
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.3.2
Shapes and migration times of the reconstructed tracks . . . . . . . .
34
4
Discussion
40
4.1
Ecology of migrations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.1.1
Behavioral traits and risk eﬀects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
1
==PAGE:6==
4.1.2
How do organisms assess the route to follow? . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.1.3
Multiple target areas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.1.4
Possible inﬂuence of the feeding events . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.2
Model limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.3
Conclusions and perspectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.3.1
Possible climate change impacts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.3.2
Extrapolation to a wide range of marine or ﬂying organisms
. . . . .
46
4.3.3
Linking the ﬁelds of mechanistic modelling and ﬁeld data acquisition
47
A Derivation of the equations
54
B Summary of the available data
58
C Trajectories of organisms crossing a river
61
D Summary of the reconstructed parameters
64
E Durations and straightness index of the original and reconstructed tracks
67
2
==PAGE:7==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Migrations are a very widespread phenomenon in the Animal Kingdom. Migrations are of-
ten the cause of impressive population movements, may it be the arrival of barn swallows in
Europe at the beginning of spring, the sudden occurrence of locusts in the African desert,
the annual arrival of turtles on a tropical beach to nest or the Diel Vertical Migration of
zooplankton [71, 42, 37, 52, 64].
Several types of migrations exist and may diﬀer among species: type of locomotion of the
organism, proportion of the population involved, duration and periodicity of the migration
[26] (see box 1 for deﬁnitions of migrations). In the marine environment alone, an impressive
number of organisms migrate [12]. Some of the most charismatic migrants are South Atlantic
green turtles migrating between nesting beaches in Ascension Island and foraging grounds
oﬀthe Brazilian coast [52], baleen whales traveling between high and low latitudes to give
birth to their calves [20], Southern elephant seals going between the Southern Ocean and
South American islands [55], eels swimming from Europe to the Sargasso Sea [72] or tunas
performing trans-oceanic migrations in the North Atlantic [53]. The extent and the impor-
tance of long distance migrations can be depicted using migration tracks from the Tagging
of Paciﬁc Predators project, a ﬁeld program which deployed 4306 tags on Paciﬁc predators
[12] (ﬁgure 1.1).
Although a precise deﬁnition of migration has been subject of extensive discussions (see
box 1 for details), all migration processes can be described by four major elements [56]:
• The organism’s internal state, which deﬁnes its motivation to move (“why does it
migrate?”).
• The motion, i.e. the physical processes enabling the organism to perform the migration.
• The navigation capabilities of the organism from its departure location to its target
area, i.e. its orientation and navigation system.
• All the external factors likely to aﬀect the movement.
This conceptual framework proposed by Nathan can help understanding the major compo-
nents of migrations and can help formulating questions describing this process for diﬀerent
3
==PAGE:8==
Figure 1.1: a. Daily mean position estimates of the Paciﬁc Predators from electronic tagging.
b. Daily mean position estimates of the major predators. From left to right: Tunas (Yel-
lowﬁn, Blueﬁn and Albacore), Pinnipeds (Northern elephant seals, California sea lions and
Northern fur seals), Sharks (Salmon, White, Blue, Common thresher and Mako), Seabirds
(Laysan and Black-footed albatrosses and Shooty shearwaters), Sea turtles (Leatherback and
Loggerhead) and Cetaceans (Blue, Fin, Sperm and Humpback whales). Figure from Block
et al 2011 [12].
animal categories.
More favorable conditions
An organism decides to migrate in order to ﬁnd more favorable conditions at a certain time
of its life. The need for these conditions may be dictated by the need to reproduce, to feed
or to avoid the arrival of predators. Previous models explored this migration propensity,
mainly from a ﬁtness optimization point of view for an individual [67] or a whole population
[64]. Alexander [8] presented a very simple model to assess the worthiness of a migration
in terms of survival probability and energy balance according to the travel distance and the
mode of displacement used (ﬂying, swimming, walking). For example, if an animal travels
quickly but relatively short distances then it may have time to build up energy reserves after
its migration, which will then allow the migration to occur.
4
==PAGE:9==
Box 1 - How to deﬁne migrations?
Many biologists discussed about what a migration is and how to deﬁne it [25, 26, 42].
One of the most famous deﬁnitions of a migration was given by JS Kennedy [13, 43],
an entomologist who spends many years studying migration ﬂight in the Black Bean
Aphid Aphis fabae: ”Migration behavior is a persistent and straightened-out movement
eﬀected by the animal’s own locomotory exertions or by its active embarkation on a
vehicle. It depends on some temporary inhibition of station-keeping responses, but
promotes their eventual disinhibition and recurrence”. This rich deﬁnition gives a list
of conditions so that a movement can be considered a migration. However, when one
notices a migration (for example in the form of a sudden appearance of animals such
as desert locusts) the movement may not be easily detectable or analyzable. Dingle
and Drake [26] formalized migrations not only from a behavioral perspective, but also
with a goal-oriented perspective for an individual or a population. Even though each
deﬁnition encompasses the others, they added three deﬁnitions of migrations to the
one of Kennedy:
1. A relocation of the animal that is on a much greater scale, and involves movement
of much longer duration than those arising in its normal daily activities;
2. A seasonal to-and-fro movement of populations between regions where conditions
are alternately favorable or unfavorable (including one region in which breeding
occurs);
3. Movements leading to redistribution within a spatially extended population.
Nature of motion
The nature of the motion is a very important characteristic. Diﬀerent locomotion systems
mean diﬀerent energy expenditures, and thus diﬀerent energy requirements and migration
possibilities. Migrating organisms have then evolved to be able to perform their journeys.
Physically, their shape can allow them to move in a very energy-eﬃcient way. For instance,
eels can swim 4 to 6 times more eﬃciently than diﬀerently shaped ﬁsh [72]. The animal’s
behavior can also be used to save energy, such as birds who are thought to swim in V-shaped
groups so that turbulences created by a bird in front can beneﬁt the one behind [23, 73].
To counterbalance this energy expenditure and because resources are not always available
during migrations [5], migrants prepare for their journey by acquiring enough resources be-
forehand, usually stored in the form of fat [7]. Even though birds can refuel along the way,
Sandberg et al. [65] showed that passerine birds can lose up to 50% of their body mass
during their migrations. However, these big storages of energy also need to be transported
during the migration and thus increase the cost to pay.
Orientation and navigation system
In order to save this precious energy, migrants optimize their journey and to do so they have
an orientation and a navigation system. Several sensory organs can inform them of their
5
==PAGE:10==
position. First of all, migrants can look around and use landmarks to position themselves on
a map [3, 2]. Visual perception can also be used for compass orientation with celestial cues,
may it be stars at night or the sun position during daytime [3, 2, 5]. The olfactory sense is
used by some migrants to follow odor plumes by beaconing. This seems to be for example
the case of green turtles migrating to Ascension Island [4]. Finally, some migrants have a
sensory organ that humans do not have: they can feel geomagnetic ﬁelds [3, 5, 77]. This has
been shown for several species such as birds, mole rats, lobsters and turtles [77, 50, 51] even
though this is still discussed for the latter [4].
External factors
External factors such as physical variables or the presence of predators can also aﬀect the
migration patterns. Herrings for example try to optimize their larvae survival rate by tar-
geting areas with higher temperature [68]. A very important feature of oceanic migrations is
the presence of currents which impose a strong orientation system: with no visual landmark,
it is impossible for the migrant to assess the strength of the current and thus the drift if it
does not have a sensory organ which can provide him with an idea of its position. Moreover,
knowing the current strength and direction can enable the migrant to use it to perform a
more cost-eﬀective migration [16]. Indeed, when navigating through the currents, the most
energy-eﬃcient route may neither be the shortest nor the fastest. Therefore, a migrant can
decide whether to perform a fast route or one less energy-demanding.
Figure 1.2: Zermelo’s problem. When subject to a linearly-sheared current (direction and
strength of the currents are represented on the little right panel), the fastest trajectories are
not straight lines but take advantage of the currents (represented here by the black lines,
the target being at the origin of the graph).
Dashed ellipses show contours of constant
time-to-go. From Bryson and Ho 1975 [14].
The question of which route to follow to optimize for migration time or energy expendi-
6
==PAGE:11==
ture can be formulated in mathematical terms similar to Zermelo’s problem. The German
mathematician Ernst Zermelo (box 2) was indeed the ﬁrst one to consider optimal routes
in a current ﬁeld as a general problem of control theory [79]. His famous problem was the
following: a boat limited by a maximum speed is navigating from a point A to a point B
in a current ﬁeld. The goal is to ﬁnd how to navigate to attain the point B as fast as pos-
sible. When the current ﬁeld is null, the answer trivially leads to a straight line. However,
depending on the current ﬁeld the answer can vary a lot (ﬁgure 1.2, see e.g. [14], [18]; or
[30] for a consideration of the optimality of turtles migrations in the Mediterranean).
Our work takes its foundations in this Zermelo problem. We want to study if the migration
routes undertaken by diﬀerent long distance ocean migrants are shaped by some general
optimization arguments (either time or energy) that have been shaped through evolution-
ary constraints. In order to do so, we developed a model which can reproduce migrations
routes based on a trade-oﬀbetween time and energy expenditure as well as a behavioral trait
accounting for the risk-attitude of the organism. Moreover, because of the high-variability
and uncertainties of ocean currents and migration routes, our model is not deterministic:
a stochastic part is added. We use dynamic programming theory to solve the model and
reconstruct migration routes.
Dynamic programming is a way of solving optimization problems that was developed by
Richard Bellman in the 40s [10, 36]. A complex problem is solved by dividing it into smaller
sub-problems. The solutions to these sub-problems are stored so that when encountered
again we can reuse them and solve the general problem more eﬃciently. Dynamic program-
ming is now used in domains as diverse as biology [47], decision processes in economics [9],
sequence alignment in bioinformatics [63] or quantum mechanics [62]. In ecology, it is a
tool used in a wide array of problems such as the management of invasive species [44] or
population dynamics like skipped-spawning phenomenon in ﬁsh [41].
In this study, the ﬁrst step was to implement the theoretical model. Using dynamic pro-
gramming, we construct the optimal solution when migrating in a certain current ﬁeld from a
departure point to a target. This optimal solution depends on four parameters: two deﬁning
the trade-oﬀbetween time and energy of the migrant, one corresponding to a behavioral
trait allowing the migrant to be more risk-seeking or risk-averse and a last one correspond-
ing to the overall variability of the system. Then, a log-likelihood function was deﬁned and
used to compare a given track with a theoretical migration strategy. Finally, the maximum
log-likelihood and therefore the trade-oﬀand behavioral parameters the migrant is the most
likely to use is found recursively, using the Nelder-Mead algorithm [54].
7
==PAGE:12==
Box 2 - Ernst Zermelo (1871 - 1953)
Zermelo was a German mathematician and logician, mainly known for
its work in set theory. He initiated the Zermelo-Fraenkel set theory,
which is an axiomatic set developed to be free of paradox such as
Russell’s paradox (which was initially discovered by Zermelo in 1900).
Completed with the axiom of choice (expressed for the ﬁrst time by
Zermelo in 1904), this set theory is nowadays the most standard form
of axiomatic set theory. This axiom of choice, equivalent to
Zermelo’s theorem (the well-ordering theorem) has historically been an important ﬁrst
step towards a solution of Hilbert’s ﬁrst problem.
Alongside his set theory work, he also made contributions to domains such as game
theory or optimal control with his navigation problem which interests us here.
8
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 2
Methods
2.1
Theoretical framework
We model the migration path of a marine organism. Following Nathan’s framework [56], we
make the following assumptions over the migration:
• The organism is in an internal state such that it wants to perform the migration: no
residency is considered in our model.
• The migrant is swimming to its target (this model could be adapted for ﬂying animals,
but none are considered here). It has an energy reserve ﬁxed at the beginning of the
migration which it can only deplete: no feeding along the way is considered.
• We do not describe explicitly the orientation and navigation system of the individual.
We just assume that it has one, and its inaccuracies are taken into account in the
stochastic part of our model.
• The only external factor that we consider is the currents which can inﬂuence the
migrant’s route. Eventual eﬀects of predators or human interactions are neglected.
All this stated, we can express the movement of an organism migrating as the following It¯o
equation:
dXt = (v + w) · dt +
√
2D dBt
(2.1)
Here, Xt is a bi-dimensional vector describing the position of the organism at time t. v
represents the oceanographic currents to which the organism is subject (external factor), w
is the control velocity of the migrant and D is a diﬀusion coeﬃcient accounting for the white
noise of the system (both the turbulent eddy diﬀusivity of the ocean and the noise arising
from imperfect decisions from the migrant). Bt represents Standard Brownian motion.
We deﬁne a cost C for the migration as a trade-oﬀbetween energy and time represented by
the following equation:
C = γ
2
Z T
0
|w(X(t))|2 dt + β · T.
(2.2)
9
==PAGE:14==
β and γ are two constants deﬁning the trade-oﬀbetween time and energy respectively, T is
the stopping time of the Stochastic Diﬀerential Equation (when is the organism hitting the
target?). The cost is transformed with a coeﬃcient α accounting for the risk-sensitivity of
the migrating animal:
F = 1
α log [< exp(αC) >]
(2.3)
Box 3 - The Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman equation
The Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman equation is an equation originating from the dynamic
programming theory (developed in the 1950s) and of big importance for optimal control
theory. Let’s assume we have the following controlled diﬀusion:
dXt = f(Xt, Ut)dt + g(Xt, Ut)dBt,
with the initial condition X0 = x.
For a given control {Ut}, we can deﬁne the total cost of the system until termination
T as:
C =
Z T
0
h(Xt, Ut, t)dt + k(XT, T)
Since the system is stochastic, we want to optimize the cost for a given initial position
x and a given control {Ut}:
J = EU,x[C] = EU,x
Z T
0
h(Xt, Ut, t)dt + k(XT, T)

(2.4)
In order to minimize J, we introduce the generator Lu of the controlled diﬀusion:
(LuV )(x) = ∂V
∂x (x) · f(x, u) + 1
2tr

gT(x, u)∂2V
∂x2 (x)g(x, u)

The Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman equation is
∂V
∂t + sup
u∈U
[LuV + h] = 0
(2.5)
If V satisﬁes the Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman equation and if u∗is such that
sup
u∈U
[LuV + h] = Lu∗V + h
then V is the optimized cost J and u∗is the optimal control leading to that cost.
α is an extra-degree of freedom which links the cost C to the utility function exp(αC). It
can be seen as a factor rescaling the cost axis giving more or less weight to the best or worst
cases. In that way, α measure the risk-propensity of the organism. When α →0 we recover
10
==PAGE:15==
the risk-neutral strategy with a cost equal to C, while α > 0 corresponds to a risk-averse
strategy where the highest values of the cost are disregarded in comparison to the lowest
ones. Conversely, α < 0 corresponds to a risk-seeking attitude from the organism which
disregards the worst cases in comparison to the best ones. Figure 2.1 is an illustration of
the function F with diﬀerent values of the parameter α. This risk-averse or risk-seeking
strategies can also be understood as strategies displayed by organisms with respectively a
pessimistic or optimistic behavior [75].
Figure 2.1: Eﬀect of the parameter α on the cost F as the standard deviation of C increases.
For this ﬁgure, we assumed C was following a normal distribution with mean µ = 10 and
diﬀerent standard deviations σ. Then, exp(α · C) follows a log-normal distribution with
mean exp(µ + α · σ2/2). When α > 0 the cost increases with the standard deviation so the
organism disregards the worst realizations, whereas when α < 0 the cost decreases as the
standard deviation increases: the realizations with the most noise are favored.
F is following the following Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman equation (see appendix A for the
derivation of the equations):
v · ∇F + (Dα −1
2γ )|∇F|2 + D∇2F = −β
(2.6)
11
==PAGE:16==
Operating a substitution of the cost variable with F = 1
δ log(Z) and δ = α −
1
2Dγ yields to
the following partial diﬀerential equation:
v · ∇Z + D∇2Z + βδ · Z = 0
(2.7)
The boundary conditions in our setup are related to how an organism reacts when it reaches
a coastline. We assume that an organism does not receive a penalty if it touches a coastline
(expect that it cannot go on it), but that it can follow the coast with no extra harm.
Therefore, we impose reﬂecting conditions everywhere but at the target where we set a
Dirichlet boundary condition which deﬁnes the cost explicitly: F = 0. Indeed, once at the
target there is no cost to pay to migrate there.
by solving this equation we can obtain the optimal control speed w∗as the gradient of the
cost F :
w∗= −1
γ ∇F
(2.8)
In order to solve the Partial Diﬀerential Equations (PDEs), several numerical method were in-
vestigated such as coding a Gauss-Seidel method, using MATLAB’s PDE Toolbox (MATLAB
2016b, The MathWorks Inc., Natick, MA, 2000) or solving the PDE with COMSOL (COM-
SOL Multiphysics R⃝v. 5.2. www.comsol.com. COMSOL AB, Stockholm, Sweden).The
most robust and accurate method was used to obtain the ﬁnal results. Hence in the follow-
ing all PDEs have been solved using COMSOL, coupled to MATLAB 2016b via Livelink.
Codes of the diﬀerent scripts used in this master thesis will be available on GitHub.
2.2
Inference of parameters
2.2.1
Deﬁnition of the log-likelihood functions
The GPS tracks of ocean migrants are sets of points ξ = (Xi, ti)i∈[1,N], where Xi is the
position of the migrant at time ti. Two diﬀerent log-likelihood functions were deﬁned:
L1(ξ|α, β, γ) = −
N−1
X
i=1
||(Xi+1 −Xi) −(v(Xi) + w∗(Xi)) · (ti+1 −ti)||2
(2.9)
L2(ξ|α, β, γ, D) = −
N−1
X
i=1
||(Xi+1 −Xi) −(v(Xi) + w∗(Xi)) · (ti+1 −ti)||2
4D · (ti+1 −ti)
−log(4πD(ti+1−ti))
(2.10)
Both functions are log-likelihood for datasets following a normal distribution. The main
diﬀerence between the two is that L1 assumes that the diﬀusivity D of equation 2.1 is known,
whereas L2 does not and can therefore help us to assess it. If we do not try to reconstruct
D both functions lead to the same maximum of log-likelihood.
The choice of the function will be done by comparing the performances of L1 and L2. If D
cannot be reconstructed properly (i.e. L1 has to be used), then it will have to be deﬁned
prior to the estimation of the maximum of log-likelihood.
12
==PAGE:17==
2.2.2
Finding the maximum of the log-likelihood
In order to ﬁnd the set of parameters best describing the migration undertaken by the
organism we aim at ﬁnding the maximum of our log-likelihood functions deﬁned equations
2.9 and 2.10. In order to do so, two main possibilities are available:
• Compute the log-likelihood value for many possible sets over the whole space of pa-
rameters, and select the set where the maximum is reached. This method has the
advantage of computing a big number of log-likelihood values and thus to allow com-
paring the log-likelihood of many diﬀerent sets to see if the function has several peaks
and therefore if diﬀerent sets of parameters are admissible. The big disadvantage of
this method is however the computational cost which becomes very quickly very heavy,
especially in a multi-dimensional parameter space.
• Use an algorithm to ﬁnd the maximum log-likelihood estimate.
Using an iterative
method to converge to the maximum likelihood has the advantage of reducing greatly
the computational cost. The Nelder-Mead algorithm [45] also called amoeba method
is a very robust numerical method to ﬁnd a maximum in a multi-dimensional space.
Brieﬂy, the method uses a simplex (n+1 points in a space of n dimensions) and calcu-
lates the likelihood function at each vertex of the simplex. The point with the worst
value is replaced by another point of the parameter space, and depending on the value
of this other point the second worst is also replaced [54]. The simplex can either be ex-
panded towards a certain direction, contracted closer to the two best values or shrank
towards the point with the best value. The simplex then ≪crawls and shrink ≫towards
the maximum of likelihood.
Results from the ﬁrst method are presented for the river-crossing case only because of com-
putational constraints. Results from the second method are presented for both study cases
(i.e. the river and the ocean basins).
2.3
Simple model: Crossing a river
2.3.1
Set-up
In order to understand the response of the model to the diﬀerent parameters, we started
by investigating what the migration path would look like in an ideal case. We imagined a
river with a shear-current which gets stronger as we get closer to the migration target. The
current speed is deﬁned as follow:
v(x, y) = c · yex + d,
(2.11)
where c is a constant and d is the constant (low) initial speed on the side of the river without
the target (ﬁgure 2.2). We can stress that this setup is similar to a classic deterministic
Zermelo problem where one has to cross a river as quickly as possible to avoid potential
13
==PAGE:18==
predators such as crocodiles.
As explained in the previous section, the target has a Dirichlet boundary condition with a
cost equal to 0, whereas the other banks have reﬂecting BC (Neumann boundary condition
with a ﬂux going through the boundary of 0). The two lateral boundaries have a very high
value (Dirichlet condition, with Z = 0 or 103 depending on the sign of δ) to prevent the
organisms from going there, as the river is supposed to be very long.
Several sets of parameters were tested, making α, β, γ and D vary as well as the current
speed c.
Figure 2.2: Velocity ﬁeld and target (in red) in an ideal case: the crossing of a river
2.3.2
Robustness test of the model
In order to test the robustness of the model and its assumptions, n tracks (n = 100) were
simulated with random parameters (α, β, γ and D) using a Monte-Carlo method with the
optimal cost and control calculated in section 2.3. Using the log-likelihood functions deﬁned
in the previous sections, the value of each parameter is reconstructed for these n tracks,
allowing comparisons with the initial values. This also allows us to select which log-likelihood
function we should use, either L1 or L2.
2.4
Long distance migrations in marine animals
For each studied migration, we modeled the geometry of the oceanic basin involved us-
ing MATLAB 2016b, and this geometry was then passed to COMSOL Multiphysics 5.2 via
14
==PAGE:19==
Livelink. The PDEs were solved with COMSOL, and the Livelink was used again to pass the
results to MATLAB. The Nelder-Mead algorithm was performed through MATLAB. Once
the parameters corresponding to the maximum of log-likelihood were found, we calculated
the covariance matrices to have an idea of the uncertainty of the estimations.
2.4.1
Available tracks
Thanks to contacts and discussions with researchers from many diﬀerent countries (Den-
mark, Sweden, Italy, The Netherlands, Australia, USA, Canada), we could get access to the
following tracks for our study:
• 18 green turtles migrating from Ascension Island to Brazil (and 4 extra tracks of
incomplete migrations) between April and August [52, 4] (ﬁgure 2.4).
• 6 green turtles migrating from Diego Garcia: two to Somalia, and four to the Seychelles
[32]. The recorded migrations occurred between October and February (ﬁgure 2.5).
• 4 humpback whales migrating between the Brazilian coast and the Southern Ocean
[38]. The recorded migrations occurred between October and March (ﬁgure 2.6).
Green turtle is a particularly interesting species for this study because it does not feed while
migrating: being exclusively vegetarian, they feed on sea grass which can only grow at shal-
low depths [52]. This means that the energy available to the turtle is ﬁxed at the beginning
of the migration and cannot increase. For humpback whales, this is a bit diﬀerent since they
can feed whenever they encounter resources. A few feeding and resting events were observed
in our tracks, whose consequences for our model need to be discussed.
For both green turtles populations, the tracks were acquired using Fastloc GPS, which en-
sures a signiﬁcant precision over the localization of the turtles. For humpback whales, tracks
were acquired using Argos data collection system, which is not as reliable as GPS tags.
Therefore, the data were ﬁltered to remove the points leading to unrealistic speeds.
A
(loose) threshold of 30 km/h was deﬁned [57]. After this ﬁltration, the data indicate that
the humpback whales performed the migration at an average speed of 5.6 km/h, which is
consistent with observations reported previously [57] (ﬁgure 2.3).
For a better description of the tracks we report the straightness index of each of them (Ap-
pendix B, alongside a complete summary of the available data). The straightness index is a
number between 0 and 1 which informs on the curvature of the track and is deﬁned by:
S.I. = |Final position −Initial position|
Total Distance Traveled
(2.12)
A straightness index of 1 corresponds to a perfect straight line, whereas a low straightness
index indicates a very sinuous path. For the green turtles from Ascension Island, the straight-
ness index appears to be homogeneous between individuals, ranging from 0.83 to 0.97. For
the population from the Indian Ocean, the straightness index is much more spread, ranging
15
==PAGE:20==
from 0.55 to 0.92. Whales have a straightness index ranging from 0.69 to 0.85, which appears
surprisingly low when compared to the overall shape of the tracks. This straightness index
can be explained by the presence of many feeding events during the migration.
Figure 2.3: Boxplots of the average and maximum speeds and average and maximum control
(|speed −currents|) of the individuals of the three populations considered
Table 2.1: Migration time and migration distance (and their standard deviations) for the
individuals who completed their migrations. Incomplete tracks are not considered in this
table.
Population
Mean migration
Standard
Distance
Standard
time (days)
Deviation (days)
(km)
deviation (km)
Ascension
40.25
5.96
2480
291
Indian Ocean
50.13
7.66
3146
594
Whales
78.60
24.58
6269
1189
2.4.2
Current ﬁelds
The oceanographic currents for the period of the considered migration were downloaded us-
ing E.U. Copernicus Marine Service Information [1] with a frequency of one day and a spatial
resolution of 10km. Because of the very big size of this dataset and the maximum download
size, a python script was used to download the data in a systematic way. Oceanographic
16
==PAGE:21==
currents were available from 2007 onwards, and for each population we averaged the currents
over the migration periods (table 2.2).
These currents maps were then averaged over time to have one average current velocity ﬁeld
corresponding to the migration period of the population (ﬁgures 2.4, 2.5 and 2.6).
Table 2.2: Migration time and migration distance (and their standard deviations) for the
individuals who completed their migrations. Incomplete tracks are not considered in this
table.
Population
Migration window used
Ascension
April →August
Indian Ocean
October →February
Whales
October →March
Currents in the South Atlantic between Ascension Island and the Brazilian coast are quite
week (ﬁgure 2.4). Overall, they go slightly south-westward, no stronger than 0.2 m · s−1.
North of Ascension Island is the Equatorial current a much stronger zonal current (up to
0.5 m · s−1). Naturally, the turtles going from Ascension Island to Brazil follow a Westward
trajectory. However, the trajectory is not completely straight. They seem to start going
a little bit southward before moving northward again up to mid-course where they direct
towards their feeding grounds (ﬁgure 2.4). We can notice that the turtles we tracked did not
get into the strong equatorial current going to Brazil (but slightly northward of their feeding
grounds).
The currents in the Indian Ocean between Diego Garcia and Africa are composed of a North
and a South Equatorial current going westward in the middle of which is a slightly stronger
Equatorial counter-current (up to 0.5 m · s−1 North of the Seychelles, ﬁgure 2.5). At the
considered season (Winter time) the Monsoon pattern drives the Somali current Southward
along the Somalian coast. The two tracked green turtles going to Somalia followed diﬀerent
paths (ﬁgure 2.5): one went quite straight and arrived slightly North of the feeding ground
before following the Somali current, whereas the other one went more Southward, passed by
the Seychelles before going against the Somali current to its feeding ground. Of the four
turtles tracked to the Seychelles, three approached it Southward following at least partly the
South Equatorial current, whereas one approached it from the North-East, going partially
against the Counter Equatorial current.
In the South Atlantic, currents are quite slow (ﬁgure 2.6). But as the whales enter the
Southern Ocean, they encounter the Antarctic currents, the Prevailing Westerlies and the
West Wind Drift which have some geographical disparities. However, the trajectories of all
the whales are very straight toward their feeding ground (except maybe one going South-
Eastward and correcting its course approximatively mid-way; ﬁgure 2.6). These trajectories
inspired Horton et al’s article about these tracks ”Straight as an arrow: humpback whales
swim constant course tracks during long-distance migration” [38].
17
==PAGE:22==
Figure 2.4: Migration routes and averaged currents over the migration period for the green
turtle population from Ascension island. The colormap and arrows show the strength and
direction of the currents. The orange ellipse shows the target area.
2.4.3
Target areas
The target areas were not deﬁned for each individual organism, but population-wise (or
sub-population-wise in the case of the turtles from the Indian ocean). For the turtles going
to Somalia and the Brazilian coast, we simply took the wide range of individual migration
arrivals along the coasts and deﬁned this boundary as the target area.
For whales and
turtles migrating to the Seychelles, the situation was slightly diﬀerent as we needed to create
boundary conditions inside our set-up. For the Seychelles, the target area was set as a square
of 2 x 1 degrees (from -6.5 to -4.5 degrees of latitude and from 53 to 54 degrees of longitude).
For the humpback whales the selected target area was set as a square encompassing the
beginning of the last feeding events of each whale (which resulted in a square positioned
from -60.5 to -53.5 degrees of latitude and from -35 to -17.5 degrees of longitude).
18
==PAGE:23==
Figure 2.5: Migration routes and averaged currents over the migration period for the green
turtle population from Diego Garcia in the Indian Ocean. The colormap and arrows show
the strength and direction of the currents. The orange ellipse and square show the target
areas.
19
==PAGE:24==
Figure 2.6: Migration routes and averaged currents over the migration period for the hump-
back whale population from the South Atlantic. The colormap and arrows show the strength
and direction of the currents. The orange square shows the target area. Whales are migrating
from the American coast to the Southern Ocean.
20
==PAGE:25==
Chapter 3
Results
3.1
River model
3.1.1
Variability of tracks with parameters
In order to have an idea of the variability of the model, three diﬀerent sets of parameters
deﬁning three diﬀerent strategies were created (table 3.1).
Table 3.1: The three strategies used to simulate trajectories
Strategy
Diﬀusivity D
Time
Energy
Behavioral
Current
importance β
importance γ
trait α
speed c
Strategy 1
1
1
1
0
10
Strategy 2
0.1
1
1
0
10
Strategy 3
100
100
1
0
0
Table 3.2: Time needed to complete the migration. Locations of departure points can be
seen on ﬁgures 3.1, C.2, C.3 or C.4.
Departure point
Strategy 1
Strategy 2
Strategy 3
A
0.28
0.537
0.0044
B
0.28
0.596
0.0084
C
0.25
1.59
0.007
D
0.273
11
0.0015
F
0.845
89.66
0.005
G
0.125
0.145
0.005
As expected, diﬀerent strategies lead to diﬀerent paths which are not performed at equal
speeds (appendix C for the plots of the trajectories and the total speed ﬁelds). The duration
of the migration changes with the strategy adopted (table 3.2). With strategy 1, the path is
somehow curvy, but not so long. When the diﬀusivity is lower (strategy 2), the probability
to be pushed away from the optimal path is lower, so the organisms tend to get more time
21
==PAGE:26==
to optimize their energy expenditure with a smart strategy. Finally, strategy 3 leads to
almost straight and very quick trajectories. This is a consequence of several eﬀects. A high
diﬀusivity lowers the importance of an engineered control as the risk to be pushed away from
it increases. A uniform current speed does not encourage the organism to use low currents
at the beginning of the river, and a very high β (importance to save time) leads to a will
to go as quick as possible to the target, i.e. in straight line. These big diﬀerences in path
shapes as well as in average speed shows that our model can be used for modeling a wide
variety of organisms, possibly displaying many diﬀerent kinds of migration behaviors.
It is worth noticing that there is not explicit limit for the speed. However, real organisms
are limited by a maximum speed which is not considered in this case study, leading to a very
broad migration duration range.
Figure 3.1: Trajectories corresponding to the strategies described in table 3.1, with several
departure points (A, B, C, D, E, F and G).
22
==PAGE:27==
3.1.2
Inﬂuence of β
In order to understand better the inﬂuence of each single parameter on our model, we
performed a sensitivity analysis of each parameter on the cost maps. All the cost maps
plotted in the following sections can be read in the same way: the geometry represents the
river to cross as deﬁned in ﬁgure 2.2. The colormap represents the optimal cost F. In order
to have the migration route from any departure point on the map, we need to compute the
gradient of F. Therefore, the trajectories are going ≪across color shapes≫, and toward the
bluest shapes.
As we increase β i.e. the importance of time, the general shape of the cost map changes
(ﬁgure 3.2). With a small importance of time, the trajectory (which is deﬁned by the control
speed −1/γ·∇F ) is taking into account the currents and is thus more curvy than with a high
importance of time. As β increases, the cost range increases which makes the organism swim
faster. Moreover, the general shape of the map changes, and in the higher case (β = 100,
panel d of ﬁgure 3.2), the organism would go almost in straight line to the target, departing
from any point in the river.
Figure 3.2:
optimal cost map (F*) showing the inﬂuence of β.
Maps created with
(D, α, γ, c) = (1, 0, 1, 10) and β = 0.1, 1, 10 and 100 (respectively in panels a, b, c and
d).
23
==PAGE:28==
3.1.3
Inﬂuence of γ
γ has the opposite eﬀect of β (ﬁgure 3.3). As an organism increases the importance of energy
in the trade-oﬀ, the general size of the cost map will change, and the organism will use more
and more the currents to reach the target.
Figure 3.3:
optimal cost map (F*) showing the inﬂuence of γ.
Maps created with
(D, α, β, c) = (1, 0, 1, 10) and γ = 0.01, 0.1, 1 and 10 (respectively in panels a, b, c and
d).
24
==PAGE:29==
3.1.4
Inﬂuence of α
The parameter α which can be interpreted as a personality trait of the organism has some
inﬂuence on the result, especially at high-values. When the organism is very risk-averse,
there are some cases where the path does not lead to the target. The risk of going there is
just not worth taking, and the organism prefers to go to the side boundaries, even if they
have a very high cost (computationally, we cannot set an inﬁnite cost on the boundaries).
A risk-seeking strategy (α < 0) reduces the cost range, and thus the control speed. The
organism will not be too eager to reach the target, and will rely a little bit on the diﬀusivity
to get there, may it take a lot of time.
Figure 3.4:
optimal cost map (F*) showing the inﬂuence of α.
Maps created with
(D, β, γ, c) = (1, 1, 1, 10) and α = −3, 0, 0.4 and 3 (respectively in panels a, b, c and d).
25
==PAGE:30==
3.1.5
Inﬂuence of the diﬀusivity D
With a low diﬀusivity, the organism really uses the currents to spend less energy swimming,
which results in a curvy trajectory. As the diﬀusivity rises, so does the uncertainty. It is
then not worth investing much in the control, and the best strategy is to go to the target in
straight line: the inﬂuence of the currents is negligible in front of the uncertainty caused by
turbulences.
Figure 3.5:
optimal cost map (F*) showing the inﬂuence of D.
Maps created with
(α, β, γ, c) = (0, 1, 1, 10) and D = 0.1, 1, 10 and 100 (respectively in panels a, b, c and
d).
26
==PAGE:31==
3.1.6
Inﬂuence of the current speed c
The eﬀect of the currents on the organism’s behavior is similar to what we would expect.
When the currents are very low, the control is almost symmetric, aiming in straight line at
the target. But as it gets stronger (and steeper), the organism will curve its path more and
more to use the currents and reach the target at lower cost.
Figure 3.6:
optimal cost map (F*) showing the inﬂuence of c.
Maps created with
(D, α, β, γ) = (1, 0, 1, 1) and c = 0, 10, 50 and 100 (respectively in panels a, b, c and d).
27
==PAGE:32==
3.2
Assessment of the parameters: river model
For the river model, we do not have real tracks. Therefore we created tracks with randomly
generated parameters and then used our log-likelihood function to try to reconstruct them,
which enabled us to assess how eﬃcient our log-likelihood is.
3.2.1
Parameter maps
First of all, let’s notice that when α →0, we recover the cost form F = C. If β and γ are
multiplied by a value x, we multiply the cost F from equation 2.8 by this value, and then we
have:
w = −1
x · γ ∇(xF) = −1
γ ∇F
Hence as expected it is the relative importance of the diﬀerent cost terms in equation 2.2
that deﬁnes the trade-oﬀ(ﬁgure 3.7). Then the log-likelihood function cannot reconstruct
the exact values of β and γ if α = 0. This is true in general and not for a particular geometry.
When α is diﬀerent than 0 (α ̸= 0), we can reconstruct more precisely the parameter sets
(ﬁgure 3.8). However, as explained in section 2.2.2, this method is very costly in computa-
tional power, and not very practical in more than two dimensions because of the diﬃculty
to visualize data in several dimensions. For both reasons, we use a Nelder-Mead algorithm
[45] to reconstruct the parameters in the rest of this study.
Figure 3.7: Log-likelihood in a (β, γ) plane, with (α = 0, D = 1). The red cross corresponds
to the true value of parameters, which is (β, γ) = (8.147, 9.057). As explained, the function
can reconstruct the ratio between β and γ but not their precise value.
28
==PAGE:33==
Figure 3.8: Log-likelihood in a (β, γ) plane, with (α = 0.01, D = 1). The red cross corre-
sponds to the true value of parameters, which is (β, γ) = (1.86, 7.49).
3.2.2
A more eﬃcient approach: the Nelder-Mead algorithm
i) in a 2D parameter space
When α and D are known, the algorithm can reconstruct fairly well the parameters for all
the trajectories simulated (table 3.3 and ﬁgure 3.9).
Table 3.3: Mean and standard deviation of the diﬀerences between the true and reconstructed
parameters in 2D
Parameter
Mean of the
Standard deviation
diﬀerence
of the diﬀerence
β
-0.0732
0.4889
γ
-0.0714
0.4814
ii) in a 3D parameter space
The algorithm can reconstruct α with a fair precision (mean = 0.0612, σ = 0.1746), but is
not very eﬃcient at reconstructing β or γ. However, as outlined in ﬁgure 3.10 and table 3.4
the ratio β/γ is found very accurately. In ecological applications (such as those considered in
the present thesis), this is enough to assess the ratio of the weights given to both expenditures
in the cost trade-oﬀ, and so the importance of one trait compared to the other.
29
==PAGE:34==
Figure 3.9: Distance between the true and the reconstructed parameters (β, γ).
Table 3.4: Mean and standard deviation of the diﬀerences between the true and reconstructed
parameters in 3D
Parameter
Mean of the
Standard deviation
diﬀerence
of the diﬀerence
β
0.7897
2.1901
γ
0.6444
1.8539
β/γ
-3.67 · 10−4
0.0071
α
0.0542
0.1746
iii) in a 4D parameter space
As explained in section 2.2.1, two types of log-likelihood function can be deﬁned. We compare
the results of function L1 and L2 to assess which one is the most eﬃcient at reconstructing
the parameters. We can see (table 3.5 and ﬁgures 3.11 and 3.12) that L2 seems to be slightly
more eﬃcient at reconstructing α. Both functions are comparable for reconstructing the ratio
β/γ, but L1 is more eﬃcient at reconstructing the individual parameters β and γ. Finally,
we do not try to reconstruct D with L1 since this function assumes the parameter known.
However, L2 performs very badly at reconstructing D. This diﬀerence in the reconstruction of
D does indicate that the algorithm is not always able to converge. Because of these results,
we select function L1 as the log-likelihood function to reconstruct the parameters in the case
of real oceanic migrants.
30
==PAGE:35==
Figure 3.10: Distance between the true and the reconstructed parameters in 3D.
Table 3.5: Mean and standard deviation of the diﬀerences between the true and reconstructed
parameters in 4D
Parameter
Mean of the
Standard deviation
Mean of the
Standard deviation
diﬀerence - L1
of the diﬀerence - L1
diﬀerence - L2
of the diﬀerence - L2
β
-4.3691
2.8322
139.7747
138.3162
γ
-2.8282
2.9220
150.1374
118.8319
β/γ
-0.5911
3.4009
0.3859
4.7049
α
0.1587
0.4249
0.0259
0.2699
D
-
-
72.3468
21.8723
31
==PAGE:36==
Figure 3.11: Distance between the true and the reconstructed parameters in 4D with L1.
Since we assume that D is known it is not represented on this ﬁgure.
Figure 3.12: Distance between the true and the reconstructed parameters in 4D with L2.
32
==PAGE:37==
3.3
Assessment of parameters in the case of long-distance
oceanic migrants
As stated in the previous paragraph, we will use function L1 as the log-likelihood function
to reconstruct the parameters. As a consequence, we need to specify a diﬀusivity for our
model. We ﬁxed the diﬀusivity to 1000 m2 · s−1, which is a general reference value for the
turbulent eddy diﬀusivity in the ocean basins [17].
For an easier interpretation of the ecological interpretations of the results, ﬁgure 3.13 displays
the risk-attitude α of the organism and the total cost ratio
Cenergy
Ctime
= γ/2
R T
0 w2(Xt)dt
β · T
,
where T represents the duration of the migration. All the values of the reconstructed pa-
rameters are provided appendix D.
For all the sets of reconstructed parameters, we also generated one track to get an idea of
the accuracy of the model applied to these cases (ﬁgures 3.14, 3.15, 3.16 and 3.17), and
compared the straightness index and time of travel of the original and reconstructed tracks
(boxplots ﬁgures 3.18 and 3.19, all data appendix D).
3.3.1
Reconstruction of behavioral traits
For the whales, although we had only four individuals to reconstruct parameters for, the
results are very clustered (ﬁgure 3.13). They almost all have the same trade-oﬀfor time
and energy, allocating about 10 times more to energy expenditure than time. They are all
slightly risk-sensitive, with a factor α of 5 · 10−3.
The reconstruction of parameters for turtles from the Indian Ocean is also quite clustered
(around the point α = −0.7 and Cenergy/Ctime = 5, ﬁgure 3.13), except for one outlier
(corresponding to turtle 61813, one of the turtles going to Somalia) with a risk-parameter of
α = 40. Hence our results suggest that turtles do optimize for energy rather than time, but
slightly less than the whales: the ratio of the total costs is only about 5. As for the whales,
the population estimate is coherent with the individual estimates.
For the turtles from Ascension Island, there is no clustering on the cost ratio axis but values
are ranging between 102 and 105 (ﬁgure 3.13), suggesting however that in all cases energy is
much more important than time for these individuals. We can see two general clusters for
the risk-attitudes: a very strong one around α = 6, which corresponds to a clear risk-averse
strategy, and a light one around α = 0, which may correspond to a risk-neutral strategy. It
is worth noticing that the estimates of the parameters of these individuals may not be very
accurate as there are signiﬁcantly less data points on each of these tracks than on the ones
of the other populations. The population estimate is diﬀerent from the reconstructed points,
both on the cost ratio and risk-attitude axis.
To assess the uncertainty on the reconstructed parameters, the covariance matrices were
established for each guess (appendix D). They indicate that the estimates are robust with
33
==PAGE:38==
Figure 3.13: Distribution of the reconstructed behavioral traits for diﬀerent populations:
whales (blue), green turtles from the Indian Ocean(green) and green turtles from Ascension
Island (red). Data are shown in terms of risk attitude (parameter α) and migration cost
ratio (Cenergy/Ctime). Crosses represent individual estimates, squares represent population
estimates and stars the medians of the individual estimates in both directions. Four points
are not displayed on this graph: one from an Indian Ocean turtle, whose risk-attitude was
reconstructed at +40, and three from Ascension Island turtles, whose risk-attitudes were
between -40 and -30.
small standard deviations on α and β/γ for the individual estimates of the turtles from
Ascension Island (σ ≃10−2 and σ ≃10−8 degrees2days−2 respectively for α and β/γ), the
individuals and the population estimates of the turtles from the Indian Ocean (σ ≃10−2
and σ ≃10−4 degrees2days−2 respectively for α and β/γ). The population estimates from
Ascension Island are very uncertain (σ ≃6.8 and σ ≃16.7 degrees2days−2). For the whales,
the estimates are uncertain on α (σ ≃360) but precise on β/γ (σ ≃10−5 degrees2days−2).
3.3.2
Shapes and migration times of the reconstructed tracks
Out of a total of 32 tracks, it is worth noticing that the reconstructed parameters led to
successful reconstructed tracks 31 times, which mean that only 1 set of parameters led to a
substantially diﬀerent migration track for the individual. This happened to the individual
11681M, which was tracked from Ascension Island to Brazil in 1998. We note that this
34
==PAGE:39==
Figure 3.14: Real tracks (top panel) and reconstructed tracks (bottom panel) for green turtles
from Ascension Island. The colormap of the bottom panel corresponds to the optimal cost
derived from the reconstructed parameters of one turtle, the individual 11678.
turtle was magnetically disturbed as a magnet was added on it to check for changes in its
navigation abilities. However the turtle arrived successfully at destination, and this does
not seem to have had any consequence on the migration track (moreover, other magnetically
disturbed individuals led to plausible parameter sets).
Concerning the general shapes of the reconstructed tracks, the eﬃciency diﬀers from popula-
tion to population. For the whales, the reconstruction seems very eﬃcient. Both the original
and the reconstructed tracks are very straight (ﬁgure 3.19). Except for one individual, the
travel time was slightly over-estimated with the reconstructed tracks (ﬁgure 3.18) .
For the Indian Ocean sub-population migrating towards Somalia, the reconstructed tracks
is also very similar to the original ones. The general shape and the straightness index cor-
respond between the original and the reconstructed tracks (ﬁgure 3.16 and 3.19), but the
time of travel is overestimated (ﬁgure 3.18), with reconstructed migrations being completed
in twice as much time as the original ones on average. The time of travel is estimated better
35
==PAGE:40==
Figure 3.15: Real tracks (green) and reconstructed tracks (red) of green turtles migrating
between Diego Garcia ans the Seychelles. The colormap corresponds to the optimal cost
derived from the reconstructed parameters of one turtle, the individual 4394.
for the Seychelles sub-population, with an average error of about 20%. The estimate of the
straightness index diﬀers of almost 25% between the original and the reconstructed tracks
for this sub-population. The general shapes of the reconstructed migrations to the Seychelles
correspond to the original ones at the beginning but diﬀers as we get to the target.
The tracks from Ascension Island are all arriving at their target, with a general shape similar
to the one of the real tracks but with much less amplitude, leading to a straightness index
slightly higher for the reconstructed tracks. The traveling time is however underestimated
for these tracks by almost a factor 2 (ﬁgure 3.18).
36
==PAGE:41==
Figure 3.16: Real tracks (green) and reconstructed tracks (red) of green turtles migrating
between Diego Garcia and Somalia. The colormap corresponds to the optimal cost derived
from the reconstructed parameters of one turtle, the individual 61811.
37
==PAGE:42==
Figure 3.17: Real tracks (green) and reconstructed tracks (red) of Humpback whales. The
colormap corresponds to the optimal cost derived from the reconstructed parameters of one
whale, the individual 24642. Whales are migrating from the American coast to the Southern
Ocean.
38
==PAGE:43==
Figure 3.18: Relative error between the duration length of the original and the reconstructed
tracks.
Figure 3.19: Relative error between the straightness index of the original and the recon-
structed tracks.
39
==PAGE:44==
Chapter 4
Discussion
We developed a general theoretical framework for the reconstruction of behavioral traits of
animals performing long distance migrations in the ocean. The model is able to reconstruct
migration tracks and produces diﬀerent sets of behavioral traits and trade-oﬀs which are
likely employed by the diﬀerent species that we have analyzed.
Migration tracks are sensitive to these behavioral parameters and we showed that not all
sets of parameters make viable migrations. For example in the idealized study case with
an organism crossing a shear ﬂow (e.g. a river) if the risk-attitude parameter α is high or
low, the migrant will not be able to reach its ﬁnal destination. Moreover all parameters can
aﬀect the shape of the track and the migration velocity. This aspect allowed the deﬁnition
of a log-likelihood function to reconstruct the behavioral parameters when provided with
migration tracks, current ﬁelds and target areas.
When this function is applied to the observed tracks, we obtained that 31 out of 32 param-
eters set led to plausible migration tracks, which means successful tracks completed with
a migration time comparable to the one of the original individual (appendix E). For some
populations (e.g. humpback whales and green turtles migrating from Diego Garcia to Soma-
lia), the reconstructed tracks were very close to the original. In other cases (Green Turtles
from Ascension Island and migrating from Diego Garcia to the Seychelles), although the
straightness index of the track was comparable to observations, the overall shape of the path
and the migration time (only for Ascension Island) were quite diﬀerent. Several reasons,
either numerical or ecological, can lead to these results and we will try to address some of
them below.
4.1
Ecology of migrations
4.1.1
Behavioral traits and risk eﬀects
The whale population and the turtles from the Indian Ocean (except maybe one outlier)
had similar values for the risk parameter and the cost ratio (ﬁgure 3.13). This could mean
that the optimization is homogeneous through the population and does not diﬀer between
40
==PAGE:45==
individuals. However for turtles migrating from Ascension Island there is a large variability
between individuals of the same population. Possibly this could be an artifact of the limited
number of data points per track, but it could also indicate the existence of a bi-strategy
distribution of the risk-parameter among the population.
In particular, the propensity to response to risks can be interpreted as an indication of bold-
ness levels in the population. Boldness can for example be deﬁned as the response to novel
objects or the feeding rates under predation risks and this has been studied in both humans
and animals and its distribution among a population can typically follow a continuum [76].
There may be also some density or frequency-dependence related to the boldness trait which
can then favor the emergence of risk-attitudes in the population [69, 76].
Even if the variation can be individual speciﬁc, behavioral variations can be related to dif-
ferent traits such as sex, age, size... It can be interesting to study the variations of the
reconstructed behavioral traits with these other traits. All our studied turtles were females
because they were tagged after nesting on the beach, but it could be interesting to investigate
the relationship between the behavioral traits and the size (or the age) of the individuals.
This could be done by checking if any correlation exists between the Curved Carapace Length
(CCL, which is a proxy for age) of the turtles from Ascension Island and the risk parameter.
These data exist but were unfortunately not accessible to us at the time of this report.
Concerning the risk attitude, one could think that organisms may behave as to minimize the
risks taken. In our model, this means that organisms would tend to be slightly risk-averse or
risk-neutral. However, we saw that some turtles displayed a risk-seeking attitude, meaning
they underestimated the consequences of the possible worst realizations of the control. This
could lead to a higher reward if turbulences are favorable but possibly to a much worse if
they are not.
How animals are dealing with risk is a fascinating topic, which got addressed extensively from
a predation risk perspective [48]. When introducing or removing predators, the predation risk
varies suddenly, which can allow to study the behavioral changes that this may induce on the
prey. One of the most impressive ﬁeld studies of this kind took place in Yellowstone National
Park, when wolves were reintroduced in 1995 and 1996 [22, 21]. After this introduction, elks
adapted their behavior (risk eﬀect) in order to cope with these changes (direct risk). They
changed their feeding grounds but also their reproduction regime (less calves per year).
The risk eﬀect may sometimes have bigger consequences than the risk itself, and so far
it has been proven diﬃcult to assess [22, 58]. Concerning migrations, it has been shown
for elks that even though migrating individuals were experiencing higher mortality rates
during their migrations, they were still beneﬁting from it because of reduced predation risk
afterwards [33]. We can hypothesize that turtles are similarly optimizing for a bigger trade-
oﬀ, where this increased risk would lead to an increased ﬁtness population-wise (ﬁgure 4.1).
When adopting a risk-seeking attitude some turtles will complete their migration in a more
eﬃcient way than risk-neutral or risk-averse individuals, thus reducing by that much their
energy consumption. Some turtles will of course perish or be completely energy depleted
after undertaking a migration event with such a strategy. However, it could turn out to be
41
==PAGE:46==
an advantage and beneﬁcial at the population level.
Some experiments conducted on ﬁsh emphasized the potential beneﬁts of a bold (or risk-
seeking) behavior. Sundstr¨om et al [70] compared the boldness level of diﬀerent brown trout
populations, originating either from the wild or from sea-ranched facilities. They showed that
hatcheries promote boldness level in ﬁsh, likely because of a loose selection on anti-predator
behaviors (which is linked to boldness). These risk-seeking organisms also tended to be more
dominant and more successful when competition increased in safe habitats. Extrapolating
this study with our results, we can hypothesize that risk-seeking behaviors from turtles may
also be understood as a component of a wider behavioral trait which can be beneﬁcial to the
individual at other life stages.
Figure 4.1: Is a risk-seeking attitude a good strategy? If the organisms that survive the
migration get a higher enough ﬁtness compared to the other ones and reproduce more, then
this strategy will spread in the population and be viable.
4.1.2
How do organisms assess the route to follow?
One of the assumptions formulated in order to establish the controlled diﬀusion equation
2.1 is that migrants have knowledge of the current ﬁeld of their ocean basins. In reality,
they may not know it explicitly but simply have derived the optimal control to follow. This
optimal control may have been acquired throughout evolution, or learnt and reﬁned through
repeated migrations.
Humpback calves can learn the routes to follow according to the ocean circulation during
their ﬁrst years while they are migrating in their maternal pod.
This phase of learning
42
==PAGE:47==
can lead to mother-deﬁned feeding grounds. Indeed, humpbacks calves and young whales
tend to return to speciﬁc feeding grounds shown by their mothers [74]. Also, since whales
migrate in pods (at least the females) they can possibly beneﬁt from the social transmission
of knowledge [74] as it has been similarly hypothesized for species such as tuna ﬁsh [24].
This can explain the fact that whales seem to have similar behavioral traits on a population
level with low variability among individuals.
On the other hand, turtles hatchlings appear to be independent of their parents and to behave
by themselves [15]. Therefore, they might have limited social transmission of information
such as migration routes. Hatchlings may have a memory of the magnetic ﬁeld of the beach
where they were born which allows them to return there later to nest. Moreover, they are
believed to possess an impressive number of sensory organs to navigate in the open oceans
[49, 28]. However, how they ﬁnd their feeding ground for the ﬁrst time is still puzzling. As
an entire population may go to the same place to feed, a plausible hypothesis is that they
indeed acquire some knowledge of their feeding grounds positions (and possibly the paths to
follow to reach it) through their ancestors [7], or that the hatchlings need to learn it during
their early years. Thus, the migratory route could be imposed by the currents and learnt
during the drifting phase of turtle hatchlings [31, 66].
Turtles from the Indian Ocean migrating between Diego Garcia and the Seychelles have
however low variability of the behavioral traits. But we can wonder whether these tracks are
indeed truly long-distance oceanic migrations or rather a migration based on geographical
or olfactive stepping stones. There are indeed a few islands south of the Seychelles, and
individuals from this sub-population may use landmarks and olfactive cues to be sure to
arrive at the ﬁnal destination, which would then explain that they do not optimize for a
speciﬁc trade-oﬀbut are proceeding by reaching several short distance landmarks. Even
though this kind of strategy is not considered in our model, we can hypothesize that it
would correspond to risk-averse strategies, as the individual is reaching one closer target
after the other to reach its ﬁnal destination.
4.1.3
Multiple target areas
We deﬁned the target area at a population (or sub-population in the case of the Indian
Ocean) level, i.e. for all the individuals of one studied population. Therefore the target area
is an average of all the individual targets, and one may ask to which level targets should be
deﬁned.
For the turtles, it has been shown that some populations go back to very precise locations
for nesting whereas others just go to an approximate area [46, 60, 11]. In our study, turtles
are tracked from their nesting places to their foraging grounds, so the information we need
to know is whether they go all the years to the same feeding area. It is however much harder
to get access to information on the feeding grounds than on the nesting place because turtles
do not go to beaches there and then it is more diﬃcult to have high-quality observations.
Moreover suitable feeding grounds along the coast (e.g., seagrass meadows) are often patchy
[29, 19], hence migration data would require site speciﬁc methods to discriminate between
close (but still diﬀerent) areas. Considering that our model provides good estimates of the
43
==PAGE:48==
straightness index and the arrival point of all our reconstructed tracks, we can expect that
tracks from Ascension turtles could be reﬁned better by deﬁning individual-speciﬁc targets,
when more data will be available from e.g. tagging and DNA methods [40].
For the whales, evidences seem to suggest that humpback whales from the South Atlantic
show ﬁdelity to speciﬁc feeding grounds [78, 27]. Therefore we could deﬁne more precise
areas for individuals. As our model already reconstructs the general shape of the tracks
quite eﬃciently to the general target area, we could expect that reﬁning the target areas to
speciﬁc feeding grounds could lead to even more precise estimates.
4.1.4
Possible inﬂuence of the feeding events
The data on humpback whale tracks displayed several feeding events, i.e. short distance
events where whales moved in all directions for some time before starting again the migration
(ﬁgure 4.2). Because of the ﬁltering we have applied on these tracks, most points likely
corresponding to these feeding events disappeared.
The remaining ones do not seem to
have had a big inﬂuence on the results as the whale tracks could all be reconstructed quite
eﬃciently. This is understandable as points corresponding to apparent random motions are
very unlikely to correspond to any strategy and just add some noise to our log-likelihood
function. These feeding events can however explain the low straightness index of the original
whale tracks compared to their overall straight trajectory.
Figure 4.2: Zoom on a feeding event on a humpback whale track (whale n◦111871). Whale
tracks are represented in red.
44
==PAGE:49==
4.2
Model limitations
Mathematically, this model is not over parametrized since each parameter is diﬀerent and
has a diﬀerent inﬂuence on the system. We cannot describe the migration process fully with
less than four parameters (the one we used were α, β, γ and D). However, as we explained
in section 3.2.2 we cannot distinguish precisely β and γ but only the relative value β/γ.
Even though we kept both terms for consistency, one can wonder the utility of doing that,
all the more so as in the end we only compare the relative costs so the ecologically relevant
term is β
γ . Reducing the number of degrees of freedom would clearly increase the speed of
convergence of the algorithm.
In the model the diﬀusivity was set to 1000 m2s−1, a value corresponding to an average
isotropic horizontal eddy turbulence diﬀusivity in the open oceans [17]. The range of this dif-
fusivity is very wide, from approximatively 200 in the North Paciﬁc to more than 10000 m2s−1
at some places of the Indian Ocean [17]. The ideal case would be to consider a diﬀusivity
matrix that could adapt to the speciﬁcity of the diﬀerent oceanic conditions. However, this
would increase tremendously the complexity of the problem. Moreover, this diﬀusivity cor-
responds only to the ocean turbulences. We also stressed out that the diﬀusivity should
account for the imperfections of the organism to decide of a control or the possible imper-
fections in its realization. One could argue for the introduction of a second diﬀusivity term
for the organism, but for simplicity we preferred to keep only one diﬀusivity term which
can be considered as accounting for all the noises occurring in the diﬀerent processes of the
system. Reapplying the method with diﬀerent diﬀusivity values could help us reﬁne our
estimates of the time taken to complete the migration (e.g. for green turtles from Ascension
Island). Indeed, organisms tend to complete their migrations faster when subject to a higher
diﬀusivity and to slow down their course if the diﬀusivity is lower: a low diﬀusivity enables
to optimize more carefully the trade-oﬀs, leading to more complex and sinuous tracks to use
eﬃciently the currents.
As all models, this one also relies on a number of approximations. One of them is that it
is solving the PDEs on a 2D surface using Mercator projection and not in 3D to mimic the
sphericity of the Earth. This is not a problem for the turtle populations as they migrate
close to the Equator. For the whales, this could potentially have bigger eﬀects as they mi-
grate between -15 and -60 degrees of latitude. However, their courses are mainly across the
latitudinal gradient and not so much across longitude (their routes cross almost 50 degrees
of latitude and about 20 of longitude), so the eﬀect of this bias is reduced.
One of the visible problems of our results is the population estimate of the Ascension turtles
which does not seem realistic when compared to the individual estimates. The estimate is
very far from the median of the parameters, but also from individual estimates. Therefore,
we hypothesized that the optimization for Ascension turtles homogeneous among the popu-
lation, and thus that is why the joint log-likelihood does not lead to any realistic estimates.
Moreover, the estimate is very uncertain so it could be a good idea to try to reﬁne it thanks
45
==PAGE:50==
to the adjunction of more tracks.
We should note that one of the great strength of the model is that it requires very lit-
tle parametrization in order to run and reconstruct the parameters from real tracks. For
example, there is no explicit mention of the speed an organism can swim at, it is just a con-
sequence of the trade-oﬀs it is optimizing for. All the details of the migrations can be derived
once the four parameters are known. The reconstruction of these parameters may not only
teach us on the ecology of migration, but on the species in general. Wilson assessed that
risk-attitudes and boldness is a very broad parameter trait that has applications in various
life-history events such as mating, foraging [76]. We can hypothesize that individuals with
risk-attitudes during migrations will also exhibit this kind of behavior at other times.
4.3
Conclusions and perspectives
4.3.1
Possible climate change impacts
One aspect to have in mind is that organism’s strategies and behavior have been shaped
through evolution occurring on very large time-scale. On the opposite, the adaptation of
organisms resulting from their plasticity occurs much faster. However, the speed at which
evolution and adaptation of organism´s behavior occur might not allow populations to cope
with a fast changing environment. Climate change is modifying environments and habitats
fast, and populations might not have the time to adapt/evolve fast enough to support their
complex life cycle in new conditions.
As a result, migrating species are exposed to an
extinction/decline risk [35].
On a global scale, climate change may change the currents (slowdown of the meridional
overturning circulation) and increase the occurrence of extreme events [39]. In our model,
this would translate in a slowdown of the currents and an increase of the diﬀusivity. The
consequences on the populations would depend on the individual’s ability to cope with these
changes, i.e. its ability to understand that the conditions changed and that the optimal
control (for their given set of parameters) is not the same anymore. Feeding grounds (and
maybe nesting/breeding areas) could change location; timing, amplitudes and periodicity
of migrations could also change.
In general, organisms will face many other challenges
during their lifespan because of climate change and it is very hard to assess how they will
manage these. If it is prudent to incorporate these evolutionary considerations in predictive
modelling, we also need to be aware of the uncertainties that we are still facing considering
climate change and careful on how to handle them [35, 59].
4.3.2
Extrapolation to a wide range of marine or ﬂying organisms
In this study, we used existing tracks to infer behavioral traits of existing individuals and
populations. For populations, results still need to be validated with more tracks. Then our
method could be applied to a wide array of populations and we may ﬁnd some patterns
46
==PAGE:51==
of strategy selections between diﬀerent populations of organisms from the same groups.
Interesting species to follow would be other populations and species of turtle and whales,
but also migrating ﬁsh such as tunas or birds such as shearwaters and albatrosses.
This could then be used to assess migration tracks of organisms which are diﬃcult to tag
or follow during a full migration. For example, blue whales have been spotted at diﬀerent
locations in the North Atlantic [61], but their migration routes are still largely unknown.
Moreover, they are quite hard to tag, the majority of tags that have been attached to blue
whales lasting just a few days (Richard Sears, personal communication). Being able to assess
parameters of blue whales would then allow us to predict their migrations paths, which could
be veriﬁed in the ﬁeld and used for potential conservation purposes.
4.3.3
Linking the ﬁelds of mechanistic modelling and ﬁeld data
acquisition
One of the most interesting fact of this project is that it managed to combine ﬁeld-acquired
data with mechanistic modelling in order to get an ecological understanding of the individual
and population studied which could not have been acquired by one or the other approach
alone. The theoretical framework and its numerical implementation can provide researchers
with an understanding of the diﬀerent migration routes and strategies, but not with the
strategies used by real organisms. GPS tracks and data can teach us about the migration
routes but can hardly enlighten us on the reasons behind such routes. Usually, mechanistic
models are based on mathematical considerations [53] and results are only compared to real
data. Studies based on data often rely on laboratory-acquired data and are often linked to
energetic costs and metabolic expenditure during migrations rather than behavioral traits.
So far this kind of work has been focusing mainly on ﬂying organisms such as birds [6] or
bats [34].
Linking these two ﬁelds represents a so far underrated approach to understanding marine
organisms’ ecology which we can only encourage to pursue and develop further.
47
==PAGE:52==
Bibliography
[1] Copernicus - Marine environment monitoring service - http://marine.copernicus.eu.
[2] Able, K. P. The concepts and terminology of bird navigation. Journal of avian biology
32, 2 (2001), 174–183.
[3] ˚
Akesson, S.
Avian Long-Distance Navigation: Experiments with Migratory Birds.
2003.
[4] ˚
Akesson, S., Broderick, A. C., Glen, F., Godley, B. J., Luschi, P., Papi,
F., and Hays, G. C. Navigation by green turtles: which strategy do displaced adults
use to ﬁnd Ascension Island? Oikos 103, April (2003), 363–372.
[5] ˚
Akesson, S., and Hedenstr¨om, A. How Migrants Get There: Migratory Perfor-
mance and Orientation. Bioscience 57, 2 (2007), 123–133.
[6] Alerstam, T. Bird Flight and Optimal Migration. TREE 6, 7 (1991), 210–215.
[7] Alerstam, T., Hedenstrom, A., and ˚
Akesson, S. Long-Distance Migration :
Evolution and Determinants. Oikos 103, 2 (2003), 247–260.
[8] Alexander, R. M. When Is Migration Worthwhile for Animals That Walk , Swim or
Fly ? 387–394.
[9] Beckmann, M. J.
Dynamic Programming of Economic Decisions, econometri ed.
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 1968.
[10] Bellman, R. The Theory of Dynamic Programming. Bulletin of the American Math-
ematical Society 60, 6 (1954), 503–515.
[11] Bjorndal, K. A., Meylan, A. B., and Turner, B. J.
Sea Turtles Nesting
at Melbourne Beach, Florida, 1. Size, Growth and Reproductive Biology. Biological
Conservation 26, 65 (1983).
[12] Block, B. A., Jonsen, I. D., Jorgensen, S. J., Winship, A. J., Shaffer, S. A.,
Bograd, S. J., Hazen, E. L., Foley, D. G., Breed, G. A., Harrison, A.-L.,
Ganong, J. E., Swithenbank, A. M., Castleton, M. R., Dewar, H., Mate,
B. R., Shillinger, G. L., Schaefer, K. M., Benson, S. R., Weise, M. J.,
48
==PAGE:53==
Henry, R. W., and Costa, D. P. Tracking apex marine predator movements in a
dynamic ocean. Nature 475, 7354 (2011), 86–90.
[13] Brady, J. J. S. KENNEDY ( 1912 – 1993 ): A Clear Thinker in Behavior ’ s Confused
World. Annual Review Entomol. 42 (1997), 1—-22.
[14] Bryson, A. E., and Ho, Y.-C. Applied optimal control.
[15] Carr, A., and Hall, B. Society for Conservation Biology New Perspectives on the
Pelagic Stage of Sea Turtle Development New Perspectives on the Pelagic Stage of Sea
Turtle Development. Conservation Biology 1, 2 (1987), 103–121.
[16] Chapman, J. W., Klaassen, R. H. G., Drake, V. A., Fossette, S., Hays,
G. C., Metcalfe, J. D., Reynolds, A. M., Reynolds, D. R., and Alerstam,
T. Animal Orientation Strategies for Movement in Flows Review. Current Biology 21,
20 (2011), R861–R870.
[17] Cole, S. T., Wortham, C., Kunze, E., and Owens, W. B. Eddy stirring and
horizontal diﬀusivity from Argo ﬂoat observations: Geographic and depth variability.
1–9.
[18] Comincioli, V. Biomatematica: interazioni tra le scienze della vita e la matematica.
[19] Copertino, M. S., Creed, J. C., Lanari, M. O., Magalh˜aes, K., Barros,
K., Lana, P. C., Sordo, L., and Horta, P. A. Seagrass and Submerged Aquatic
Vegetation (VAS) Habitats oﬀthe Coast of Brazil: state of knowledge, conservation and
main threats. Brazilian Journal of Oceanography 64, sp2 (2016), 53–80.
[20] Corkeron, P. J., and Connor, R. C. Why do Baleen whales migrate?
Marine
Mammal Science 15, 4 (1999), 1228–1245.
[21] Creel, S., and Christianson, D. Relationships between direct predation and risk
eﬀects. Trends in Ecology and Evolution 23, 4 (2008), 194–201.
[22] Creel, S., Christianson, D., Liley, S., and Winnie Jr, J. A. Predation Risk
Aﬀects Reproductive Physiology and Demography of Elk. Science 315 (2007), 960.
[23] Cutts, C. J., and Speakman, J. R. Energy savings in formation ﬂight of pink-footed
geese. Journal of Experimental Biology 189 (1994), 251–261.
[24] De Luca, G., Mariani, P., MacKenzie, B. R., and Marsili, M. Fishing out
collective memory of migratory schools. J. R. Soc. Interface 11 (2014).
[25] Dingle, H. Migration: The Biology of Life on the Move. Second Edition. 2014.
[26] Dingle, H., and Drake, V. A. What Is Migration ?
BioScience 57, 2 (2007),
113–121.
49
==PAGE:54==
[27] Engel, M. H., and Martin, A. R. Feeding grounds of the western South Atlantic
humpback whale population. Marine Mammal Science 25, 4 (2009), 964–969.
[28] Gould, J. L. Sensory bases of navigation. Current Biology 8 (1998), 731–738.
[29] Green, E. P., and Short, F. T. World Atlas of Seagrasses. 2003.
[30] Hays, G. C., Christensen, A., Fossette, S., Schofield, G., Talbot, J., and
Mariani, P. Route optimisation and solving Zermelo’s navigation problem during long
distance migration in cross ﬂows. Ecology Letters 17 (2014), 137–143.
[31] Hays, G. C., Fossette, S., Katselidis, K. A., Mariani, P., and Schofield,
G. Ontogenetic development of migration: Lagrangian drift trajectories suggest a new
paradigm for sea turtles. Journal of The Royal Society Interface 7, 50 (2010).
[32] Hays, G. C., Mortimer, J. A., Ierodiaconou, D., and Esteban, N. Use of
Long-Distance Migration Patterns of an Endangered Species to Inform Conservation
Planning for the World’s Largest Marine Protected Area. Conservation Biology 28, 6
(2014), 1636–1644.
[33] Hebblewhite, M., and Merrill, E. H.
International Association for Ecology
Multiscale Wolf Predation Risk for Elk: Does Migration Reduce Risk? Oecologia 152,
2 (2007), 377–387.
[34] Hedenstr¨om, A. Optimal Migration Strategies in Bats. Journal of Mammalogy 90,
6 (2009), 1298–1309.
[35] Hoffmann, A. A., and Sgr`o, C. M. Climate change and evolutionary adaptation.
Nature 470 (2011), 479–485.
[36] Høgsbro Thygesen, U. Lecture Notes on Diﬀusion and Stochastic Diﬀerential Equa-
tions. DTU, 2016.
[37] Holland, R. A., Wikelski, M., and Wilcove, D. S. How and Why Do Insects
Migrate ? Science 313, 5788 (2006), 794–976.
[38] Horton, T. W., Holdaway, R. N., Zerbini, A. N., Hauser, N., Garrigue, C.,
Andriolo, A., and Clapham, P. J. Straight as an arrow: humpback whales swim
constant course tracks during long-distance migration. Biology letters, April (2011),
674–679.
[39] IPCC. Climate Change 2014: Synthesis Report. Contribution of Working Groups I,
II and III to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change. Tech. rep., Geneva, Switzerland, 2014.
50
==PAGE:55==
[40] Jord˜ao, J. C., Bondioli, A. C. V., Guebert, F. M., de Thoisy, B., and
de Toledo, L. F. A. Green turtle (Chelonia mydas) genetic diversity at Paranagu´a
Estuarine complex feeding grounds in Brazil. Genetics and Molecular Biology 38, 3
(2015), 346–352.
[41] Jørgensen, C., Ernande, B., Fiksen, Ø., and Dieckmann, U. The logic of
skipped spawning in ﬁsh. Canadian Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences 63, 1
(2006), 200–211.
[42] Kennedy, J. S. The migration of the desert locust (Schistocerca gregaria forsk.) I. The
behavior of swarms II. A theory of long-range migrations. Philosophical Transactions
of the Royal Society of London. Series B, Biological Sciences 235 (1951), 163 – 290.
[43] Kennedy, J. S. Migration, behavioral and ecological. Contributions in Marine Science
(1985).
[44] Kern, D. L., Lenhart, S., Miller, R., and Yong, J. Optimal control applied to
native-invasive population dynamics. Journal of biological dynamics 1, 4 (2007), 413–26.
[45] Lagarias, J. C., Reeds, J. A., Wright, M. H., and Wright, P. E. Convergence
Properties of the Nelder–Mead Simplex Method in Low Dimensions. SIAM Journal on
Optimization 9, 1 (1998), 112–147.
[46] Lee, P. L. M., Luschi, P., and Hays, G. C.
Detecting female precise natal
philopatry in green turtles using assignment methods. Molecular Ecology 16, 1 (2007),
61–74.
[47] Lenhart, S., and Workman, J. T. Optimal control applied to biological models.
Chapman & Hall/CRC, 2007.
[48] Lima, S. L., and Bednekoff, P. A. Temporal Variation in Danger Drives Antipreda-
tor Behavior: The Predation Risk Allocation Hypothesis. The American Naturalist 153,
6 (1999).
[49] Lohmann, K. J., Lohmann, C. M., and Endres, C. S. The sensory ecology of
ocean navigation. The Journal of Experimental biology 211 (2008), 1719–1728.
[50] Lohmann, K. J., Lohmann, C. M. F., Ehrhart, L. M., Bagley, D. A., and
Swing, T. Geomagnetic map used in sea-turtle navigation. Nature 428, April (2004),
909–910.
[51] Lohmann, K. J., Lohmann, C. M. F., and Putman, N. F. Magnetic maps in
animals: nature’s GPS. Journal of Experimental Biology 210, Pt 21 (2007), 3697–3705.
[52] Luschi, P., Hays, G. C., Del Seppia, C., Marsh, R., and Papi, F.
The
navigational feats of green sea turtles migrating from Ascension Island investigated
by satellite telemetry. Proceedings. Biological sciences / The Royal Society 265, 1412
(1998), 2279–2284.
51
==PAGE:56==
[53] Mariani, P., Kˇrivan, V., Mackenzie, B. R., Mullon, C., and Dk, P. D. The
migration game in habitat network: the case of tuna. Theoretical Ecology 9 (2016),
219–232.
[54] Mathews, J. H., and Fink, K. K. Nelder-Mead Method. In Numerical Methods
Using Matlab. 2004, ch. 8, pp. 430–437.
[55] McConnell, B. J., and Fedak, M. A.
Movements of southern elephant seals.
Canadian Journal of Zoology 1496, 1485-1496 (1996), 74(8).
[56] Nathan, R. An emerging movement ecology paradigm. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences 105, 49 (2008), 19050–19051.
[57] Noad, M. J., and Cato, D. H. Swimming speeds of singing and non-singing hump-
back whales during migration. Marine Mammal Science 23, 3 (2007), 481–495.
[58] Pangle, K. L., Peacor, S. D., and Johannsson, O. E. Large nonlethal eﬀects of
an invasive invertebrate predator on zooplankton population growth rate. Ecology 88,
2 (2007), 402–412.
[59] Payne, M. R., Barange, M., L Cheung, W. W., MacKenzie, B. R.,
Batchelder, H. P., Cormon, X., Eddy, T. D., Fernandes, J. A., Hollowed,
A. B., Jones, M. C., Link, J. S., Neubauer, P., Ortiz, I., Queir´os, A. M.,
and Ricardo Paula, J. Uncertainties in projecting climate-change impacts in marine
ecosystems Uncertainties in projecting climate-change impacts in marine ecosystems. –
ICES. ICES Journal of Marine Science 73, 5 (2016), 1272–1282.
[60] Peare, T., and Parker, P. G.
Local genetic structure within two rookeries of
Chelonia mydas (the green turtle). Heredity 77, February (1996), 619–628.
[61] Pike, D. G., V´ıkingsson, G. A., Gunnlaugsson, T., and Øien, N. A note on
the distribution and abundance of blue whales (Balaenoptera musculus) in the Central
and Northeast North Atlantic. NAMMCO Scientiﬁc Publications 7 (2009), 19–29.
[62] Rosenbrock, H. H., and Ding, Z. Quantum mechanics and dynamic programming.
Transactions of the Institute of Measurement and Control 30, 1 (2008), 33–46.
[63] Russell, D. J. Multiple sequence alignment methods. No. 1. 2001.
[64] Sainmont, J., Thygesen, U. H., and Visser, A. W. Diel vertical migration arising
in a habitat selection game. Theoretical Ecology 6, 2 (2013), 241–251.
[65] Sandberg, R., and Moore, F. R. Fat Stores and Arrival on the Breeding Grounds
: Reproductive Consequences for Passerine Migrants. Oikos 77, 3 (1996), 577–581.
[66] Scott, R., Hays, G. C., Cott, R. E. S., and Arsh, R. O. M. Ontogeny of long
distance migration. Ecology 95, 10 (2014), 2840–2850.
52
==PAGE:57==
[67] Shaw, A. K., and Couzin, I. D. Migration or Residency? The Evolution of Move-
ment Behavior and Information Usage in Seasonal Environments. The American Nat-
uralist 181, 1 (2013), 114–124.
[68] Slotte, A., and Fiksen, Ø.
State-dependent spawning migration in Norwegian
spring-spawning herring. Journal of Fish Biology 56, 1 (2000), 138–162.
[69] Stamps, J. A. Growth-mortality tradeoﬀs and ’personality traits’ in animals. Ecology
Letters 10, 5 (2007), 355–363.
[70] Sundstr¨om, L. F., Petersson, E., H¨ojesj¨o, J., Johnsson, J. I., and J¨arvi,
T. Hatchery selection promotes boldness in newly hatched brown trout (Salmo trutta):
implications for dominance. Behav Ecol 15 (2004), 192–198.
[71] Turner, A. The barn swallow. 2006.
[72] van Ginneken, V., Antonissen, E., M¨uller, U. K., Booms, R., Eding, E.,
Verreth, J., and van den Thillart, G. Eel migration to the Sargasso: remarkably
high swimming eﬃciency and low energy costs. The Journal of experimental biology 208,
7 (2005), 1329–1335.
[73] Weimerskirch, H., Martin, J., Clerquin, Y., Alexandre, P., and Ji-
raskova, S. Energy saving in ﬂight formation. Nature 413, 6857 (2001), 697–698.
[74] Weinrich, M. Early experience in habitat choice by humpback whales (Megaptera
Novaeangliae). Journal of Mammalogy 79, 1 (1998), 163–170.
[75] Whittle, P. Risk-sensitive optimal control. Wiley, 1990.
[76] Wilson, D. S., Clark, A. B., Coleman, K., and Dearstyne, T. Shyness and
boldness in humans and other animals. TREE 9, 11 (1994), 442–446.
[77] Wiltschko, W., and Wiltschko, R. Magnetic orientation and magnetoreception in
birds and other animals. Journal of Comparative Physiology A: Neuroethology, Sensory,
Neural, and Behavioral Physiology 191, 8 (1995), 675–693.
[78] Zerbini, A., Andriolo, A., Heide-Jørgensen, M. P., Pizzorno, J. L., Maia,
Y., and VanBlaricom, G.
Satellite-monitored movements of humpback whales
Megaptera novaeangliae in the Southwest Atlantic Ocean.
Marine Ecology Progress
Series 313 (2006), 295–304.
[79] Zermelo, E. ¨Uber das Navigationsproblem bei ruhender oder veranderlicher Wind-
verteilung. ZAMM (1931), 114–124.
53
==PAGE:58==
Appendix A
Derivation of the equations
First, let’s establish the equation without control, and then add the optimization part. So
for now we have the following equation: dXt = v(Xt) · dt +
√
2D · dBt.
We want to ﬁnd :
E[exp(
Z τ
0
αβs ds)],
(A.1)
with τ = inf{t > 0, Xt /∈Ω}. Ωis the domain considered, i.e. the ocean in our case. We will
call ∂Ωits boundary. We can rephrase equation A.1 by EYτ after deﬁnition of the process:
Yt = exp(
Z τ
0
αβ ds)
(A.2)
Thanks to It¯o’s formula, we have dYt = αβYt dt, and we can establish the following system:
d
Xt
Yt

=
v(Xt)
αβYt

dt +
√
2D
0

dBt
(A.3)
We call M the generator of this system, which is deﬁned by:
(MV )(x, y) = v · ∂V
∂x + 1
2
√
2D
2∂2V
∂x2 + ∂V
∂y αβYt
(A.4)
Let’s assume that (MV)(x,y) = 0. We apply Dynkin’s formula to V:
EX0=x,Y0=yV (Xτ, Yτ) = V (X0 = x, Y0 = y) +


E
Z τ
0
MV (Xs, Ys) ds

= V (x, y)
(A.5)
Moreover, our system A.3 is linear in y, so a solution V (x, y) can be rewritten of the form
V (x, y) = yG(x) for a certain G.
We then have:
MV = 0 ⇔y(LG + αβG) = 0,
(A.6)
with L the generator of the ﬁrst SDE (Stochastic Diﬀerential Equation): LG = ∂G
∂x v +D ∂2G
∂x2 .
Summing it up, we have
EX0=x[exp(
Z τ
0
αβ dt)] = yG(x) = 1 · G(x) because Y0 = 1,
(A.7)
54
==PAGE:59==
with G solution of v · ∇G + D∇2G + αβG = 0. □
Now we want to establish this equation but with the control w, so we have the following
SDE:
dXt = (v + w) dXt +
√
2D dBt
(A.8)
Similarly to the previous case, we deﬁne the process Yτ = exp(
R τ
0 α · (β + γ
2|w|2)dt), with
Y0 = 1. What we are trying to evaluate is EYτ. Moreover, we want to evaluate it for the
optimal control w∗which minimizes EwYτ The system A.3 is then replaced by:
d
Xt
Yt

=

v + w
αYt(β + γ/2|w|2)

dt +
√
2D
0

dBt
(A.9)
The generator of this system is now M deﬁned by:
(MV )(x, y) = ∂V
∂x (v + w) + D∂2V
∂x2 + ∂V
∂y α(β + γ
2|w|2)Yt,
(A.10)
and the generator L is: LV = ∂V
∂x (v + w) + D ∂2V
∂x2 .
We assume that we have the Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman equation:
inf
w
h
LwV + α(β + γ
2|w|2)V
i
= 0
(A.11)
And we call w∗the control which minimizes this quantity:
w∗(t) = µ∗(Xt) = argmin
w
h
LwV + α(β + γ
2|w|2)V
i
(A.12)
Let’s verify that this function V is indeed E

exp(
R τ
0 α · (β + γ/2|w|2)dt)

.
We can rewrite Dynkin’s formula to establish that:
EX0=0,Y0=0V (Xτ, Yτ) = V (X0, Y0) +

E[
Z τ
0
(MV )(Xs, Ys) ds] = V (x, y)
(A.13)
As previously, we can rewrite V as V (x, y) = yG(x) because of the linearity of the system
in y. Then:
(MV )(x, y) = 0
= y
∂G
∂x (v + w∗) + D∂2G
∂x2 + Gα(β + γ
2|w∗|2)

(A.14)
So now we have:
Ew∗,X0=x[exp(
Z τ
0
α(β + γ
2|w∗|2) dt)] = W(x, y) = 1 · G(x),
(A.15)
with G solution of v · ∇G + D∇2G + αβW = 0. w∗is the optimal control possible because
if we take any other one we do not have MV = 0, thus the expectation of equation A.13 is
bigger than V (x, y). □
55
==PAGE:60==
If we reconsider equation 2.3, we can see that G is not exactly the cost F we deﬁned but is
linked to this cost by:
G = exp(αF)
(A.16)
We then have the following links between the derivatives:
∇G = α∇F · G
∇2G = α∇2F · G + |α∇F|2G, which leads us to:
(A.17)
(v + w) · ∇G + D∇2G = −α(γ2
2 |w|2 + β)G
⇔(v + w)α∇FG + D(α∇2FG + |α∇F|2G) = −α(γ
2|w|2 + β)G
⇔(v + w)α∇F + D(α∇2F + |α∇F|2) = −α(γ
2|w|2 + β)
⇔(v + w)∇F + D∇2F + Dα|∇F|2 = −γ
2|w|2 −β
(A.18)
In order to ﬁnd the optimal control, we ﬁx (x,y) and take the variation over w:
∇F + 0 + 0 = −γ
22w + 0
⇒w∗= −1
γ ∇F
(A.19)
We can then retake equation A.18 and replace the control by its optimal value:
(v −1
γ ∇F)∇F + D∇2F + D∇2F + Dα|∇F|2 = −γ
2
1
γ2|∇F|2 −β
⇒v∇F −1
γ |∇F|2 + D∇2F + Dα|∇F|2 + 1
2γ |∇F|2 = −β
⇒v · ∇F + (Dα −
1
2 · γ )|∇F|2 + D∇2F = −β
(A.20)
This equation A.20, corresponds to what we want, but it is not so easy to solve considering
that it is not a linear PDE. In order to make it linear, we perform a Hopf-Cole transformation.
We deﬁne Z by:
F = 1
δ log(Z),
(A.21)
with δ = α −
1
2Dγ. We then have:
v · ∇F + (Dα −
1
2 · γ )|∇F|2 + D∇2F = −β
⇔v · ∇Z
Zδ
+ (Dα −1
2γ )|∇Z|2
δ2Z2 + D( 1
δZ ∇2Z −|∇Z|2
δZ2 ) = −β
⇔|∇Z|2
δZ2 

(Dα −1
2γ )1
δ −D

+ ∇Z · v
Zδ
+ ∇2ZD
Zδ
= −β
56
==PAGE:61==
⇔D∇2Z + v · ∇Z + βδZ = 0
(A.22)
This is the equation we will solve, with the boundary condition on the target Z = exp(0) =
1 and a no-ﬂux boundary condition elsewhere.
57
==PAGE:62==
Appendix B
Summary of the available data
See tables in the following pages.
58
==PAGE:63==
Species
Individual 
ID
First track 
day
Last track 
day
Departure 
Arrival
Duration 
of 
migration 
(days)
Distance 
migrated 
(km)
Average 
speed
Maximum 
speed
Average 
control
Maximum 
control
Straightness 
index
Number 
of data 
points
Reference
Green turtle
11678M
03/06/1998 11/07/1998
Ascension 
Island
Brazilian 
coast
37.84
2513
0.79
3.17
0.79
3.15
0.9447
158
Luschi et al 
1998
Green turtle
11679M
28/05/1998 11/06/1998
Ascension 
Island
Incomplete 
record
25.02
969
0.92
1.81
0.91
1.79
0.9677
21
Luschi et al 
1998
Green turtle
11680M
07/06/1998 14/07/1998
Ascension 
Island
Brazilian 
coast
40.5
2397
0.74
3.77
0.74
3.77
0.9279
117
Luschi et al 
1998
Green turtle
11681M
19/06/1998 22/07/1998
Ascension 
Island
Brazilian 
coast
39.41
2490
0.74
3.20
0.74
3.19
0.9178
83
Luschi et al 
1998
Green turtle
11682
02/07/1997 07/08/1997
Ascension 
Island
Brazilian 
coast
35.76
2285
0.71
2.53
0.72
2.51
0.9452
110
Luschi et al 
1998
Green turtle
11683
28/06/1997 14/08/1997
Ascension 
Island
Brazilian 
coast
46.78
2095
0.48
2.50
0.48
2.49
0.9658
113
Luschi et al 
1998
Green turtle
11683M
05/06/1998 26/06/1998
Ascension 
Island
Incomplete 
record
24.51
1437
0.76
1.77
0.77
1.78
0.9498
92
Luschi et al 
1998
Green turtle
25476
24/04/2002 31/05/2002
Ascension 
Island
Brazilian 
coast
37.36
2570
1.01
4.52
1.00
4.51
0.8865
196
Åkesson et al 
03
Green turtle
27230
13/04/2002 08/05/2002
Ascension 
Island
Incomplete 
record
25.01
1926
1.11
4.49
1.11
4.48
0.8954
137
Åkesson et al 
03
Green turtle
27366
12/04/2002 16/05/2002
Ascension 
Island
Brazilian 
coast
34.55
2583
1.15
4.14
1.15
4.13
0.9112
105
Åkesson et al 
03
Green turtle
4394
03/06/1998 12/07/1998
Ascension 
Island
Brazilian 
coast
47.37
2915
0.88
4.00
0.88
4.00
0.9114
156
Luschi et al 
1998
Green turtle
4395
29/06/1998 30/07/1998
Ascension 
Island
Brazilian 
coast
32.49
2359
0.74
3.05
0.74
3.07
0.9563
99
Luschi et al 
1998
Green turtle
4650M
30/05/1998 10/07/1998
Ascension 
Island
Brazilian 
coast
40.2
2426
0.73
2.99
0.72
2.98
0.9561
81
Luschi et al 
1998
Green turtle
4651M
03/06/1998 10/07/1998
Ascension 
Island
Brazilian 
coast
38.05
2308
0.59
4.09
0.59
4.08
0.9625
160
Luschi et al 
1998
Green turtle
4662
04/06/1998 17/07/1998
Ascension 
Island
Brazilian 
coast
50.82
2602
0.78
4.06
0.78
4.07
0.8625
129
Luschi et al 
1998
Green turtle
6611
13/05/1997 17/06/1997
Ascension 
Island
Brazilian 
coast
35.28
2320
0.65
2.29
0.66
2.82
0.9581
101
Luschi et al 
1998
Green turtle
6614
23/06/1997 31/07/1997
Ascension 
Island
Brazilian 
coast
39.11
2347
0.75
2.30
0.75
2.98
0.9511
105
Luschi et al 
1998
Green turtle
6615
25/06/1997 28/07/1997
Ascension 
Island
Brazilian 
coast
32.87
1792
0.84
3.01
0.84
3.02
0.9381
63
Luschi et al 
1998
Green turtle
67769
05/05/2009 10/08/2009
Ascension 
Island
Brazilian 
coast
42.83
2848
0.82
4.79
0.82
4.81
0.838
590
Cerritelli et al 
(in prep)
59
==PAGE:64==
Species
Individual 
ID
First track 
day
Last track 
day
Departure 
Arrival
Duration 
of 
migration 
(days)
Distance 
migrated 
(km)
Average 
speed
Maximum 
speed
Average 
control
Maximum 
control
Straightness 
index
Number 
of data 
points
Reference
Green turtle
67770
06/05/2009 13/07/2009
Ascension 
Island
Brazilian 
coast
35.24
2614
1.11
5.02
1.11
5.02
0.864
560
Cerritelli et al 
(in prep)
Green turtle
94593
06/07/2009 22/08/2009
Ascension 
Island
Brazilian 
coast
45.38
3102
0.95
3.10
0.95
3.11
0.8683
330
Cerritelli et al 
(in prep)
Green turtle
94595
18/05/2009 09/09/2009
Ascension 
Island
Brazilian 
coast
52.99
2553
0.85
4.60
0.85
4.61
0.9005
310
Cerritelli et al 
(in prep)
Green turtle
4394
20/10/2012 27/11/2012 Diego Garcia
The 
Seychelles
47.97
2571
1.18
4.64
1.18
4.63
0.8123
332 Hays et al 2014
Green turtle
21914
28/10/2012 23/12/2012 Diego Garcia
The 
Seychelles
55.61
3912
1.43
4.55
1.43
4.55
0.5505
782 Hays et al 2014
Green turtle
21923
04/01/2013 28/02/2013 Diego Garcia
The 
Seychelles
54.94
2847
1.04
3.08
1.04
3.10
0.7572
103 Hays et al 2014
Green turtle
61811
16/10/2013 21/12/2013 Diego Garcia
Somalian 
coast
38.51
3758
1.18
5.13
1.19
5.11
0.8235
1551 Hays et al 2014
Green turtle
61813
09/01/2013 23/02/2013 Diego Garcia
Somalian 
coast
58.75
3251
1.67
4.82
1.66
4.83
0.9287
949 Hays et al 2014
Green turtle
117569
13/11/2012 03/01/2013 Diego Garcia
The 
Seychelles
44.99
2534
0.88
2.85
0.88
2.88
0.8396
232 Hays et al 2014
Humpack 
whale
111871
02/11/2012 20/04/2013
Brazilian 
coast
Southern 
Ocean
55.99
5403
6.32
29.08
6.32
29.10
0.7743
771
Horton et al 
2011
Humpack 
whale
121189
20/10/2012 20/08/2013
Brazilian 
coast
Southern 
Ocean (and 
back to 
Brazil)
67.48
6377
6.07
29.64
6.07
29.66
0.6159
466
Horton et al 
2011
Humpack 
whale
24642
27/10/2003 18/05/2004
Brazilian 
coast
Southern 
Ocean
78.01
5385
5.21
29.46
5.21
29.41
0.8591
271
Horton et al 
2011
Humpack 
whale
87783
18/09/2009 03/02/2010
Brazilian 
coast
Southern 
Ocean
112.91
7912
5.02
28.21
5.02
28.26
0.694
588
Horton et al 
2011
NB: 
-A M at the end of the individual ID means that it has been magnetically disturbed
-Data may be available for a longer period than the migration period, therefore duration
may be different than (last track day - first track day)
60
==PAGE:65==
Appendix C
Trajectories of organisms crossing a
river
Figure C.1: Trajectories arising from diﬀerent strategies.
a/ α = 0, γ = 1, D = 1; b/
α = 0, β = 1, D = 1; c/ β = 1, γ = 1, D = 1. There are curves in common between panel a
and b because α = 0 in both cases, so the trade-oﬀcan only be deﬁned relatively. In panel c
we can see that strategies which are too risk-averse or risk-seeking do not lead to the target.
61
==PAGE:66==
Figure C.2: Total speed ﬁeld and trajectories from speciﬁc departure points (A,B,C,D,E,F,G)
with strategy 1
62
==PAGE:67==
Figure C.3: Total speed ﬁeld and trajectories from speciﬁc departure points (A,B,C,D,E,F,G)
with strategy 2
Figure C.4: Total speed ﬁeld and trajectories from speciﬁc departure points (A,B,C,D,E,F,G)
with strategy 3
63
==PAGE:68==
Appendix D
Summary of the reconstructed
parameters
See tables in the following pages.
64
==PAGE:69==
Individual 
ID
Population
α [-]
β [day^-1] γ [days 
degrees^-2]
Cenergy / Ctime  [-]
Correlation 
coefficient
Number of 
data points
11678M
Ascension
4.9379
2.16E-04
1.45E-04
533.00
4.30E-03
4.61E-16
-2.35E-06
158
11679M
Ascension
2.9923
1.98E-04
1.87E-04
3.08E+04
9.76E-05
4.53E-15
-3.19E-04
21
11680M
Ascension
5.4171
1.83E-04
1.68E-04
1536.00
1.90E-03
4.46E-16
2.78E-05
117
11681M
Ascension
-39.9894
1.14E+00
7.71E-01
4.53E+03
5.80E-03
2.50E-03
8.11E-02
83
11682
Ascension
6.1798
2.28E-04
9.98E-05
3354.00
8.60E-03
-9.47E-14
1.07E+00
110
11683
Ascension
-0.1958
1.02E+00
6.99E-01
926.00
3.32E-05
1.10E-03
-7.88E-02
113
11683M
Ascension
8.12
2.07E-04
1.50E-04
446.00
1.20E-03
1.54E-15
-6.18E-07
92
25476
Ascension
9.5739
8.00E-04
1.80E-06
4.00
6.90E-03
1.29E-10
-2.39E-05
196
27230
Ascension
9.9984
2.23E-04
1.31E-04
453.00
2.90E-03
4.51E-15
2.91E-05
137
27366
Ascension
4.7648
1.98E-04
1.63E-04
43258.00
4.77E-04
2.13E-16
9.70E-05
105
4394
Ascension
7.9709
2.00E-04
1.66E-04
960.00
8.60E-03
3.31E-16
4.34E-05
156
4395
Ascension
5.3965
1.64E-04
1.71E-04
2293.00
1.40E-03
8.49E-16
9.38E-05
99
4650M
Ascension
4.6906
1.88E-04
1.68E-04
31912.00
7.16E-04
2.31E-16
1.62E-04
81
4651M
Ascension
-0.1267
2.80E-06
1.80E-06
445.00
1.00E-03
8.60E-18
-1.23E-06
160
4662
Ascension
-39.6702
1.79E-04
1.24E-04
7.41E+02
8.60E-03
2.13E-16
5.73E-05
129
6611
Ascension
-0.1696
3.40E-06
2.10E-06
1658.00
1.40E-03
4.23E-18
-3.55E-07
101
6614
Ascension
5.1035
2.03E-04
1.57E-04
2132.00
6.61E-04
4.52E-17
2.07E-05
105
6615
Ascension
4.8433
1.85E-04
1.67E-04
15688.00
2.26E-04
2.71E-16
-9.17E-06
63
67769
Ascension
0.3346
2.98E-09
6.72E-08
17852.00
1.37E-05
5.06E-22
-2.37E-03
590
67770
Ascension
5.1204
2.03E-04
1.49E-04
73.00
1.15E-06
1.17E-15
1.33E-06
560
94593
Ascension
4.4876
2.32E-04
1.35E-04
12565.00
4.30E-08
3.82E-16
-1.18E-05
330
94595
Ascension
-30.8272
5.81E-01
1.74E-01
37931.00
3.07E-08
2.15E-07
1.23E-15
310
All
Ascension
-2.8941
1.13E-01
1.17E+00
1.66E+05
4.69E+01
2.81E+02
8.70E-25
3816
4394
Indian 
(Seychelles)
-3.85
0.0440
0.5475
4.89
3.72E-02
2.46E-07
-2.81E-01
332
21914
Indian 
(Seychelles)
40.14
0.0035
0.0261
3.66
1.26E+01
9.83E-09
1.09E+00
782
21923
Indian 
(Seychelles)
-0.71
0.2757
2.6371
3.90
8.72E-05
9.77E-07
-3.27E-01
103
61811
Indian 
(Somalia)
-1.00
0.7477
8.7754
5.60
3.05E-04
5.28E-05
9.92E-01
1551
61813
Indian 
(Somalia)
-0.58
0.0686
1.2665
5.15
1.09E-02
5.59E-07
-1.30E-01
949
117569
Indian 
(Seychelles)
-0.75
0.2787
5.5278
5.52
8.16E-05
1.35E-06
6.32E-01
232
All
Indian
-0.61
0.1674
2.6657
6.14
2.23E-05
1.80E-07
-2.10E+03
3617
Variance
65
==PAGE:70==
Individual 
ID
Population
α [-]
β [day^-1] γ [days 
degrees^-2]
Cenergy / Ctime  [-]
Correlation 
coefficient
Number of 
data points
111871
Whale
0.0052
7.48E-07
1.21E-05
19.30
1.72E+06
1.47E-10
5.74E-03
771
121189
Whale
0.0051
9.79E-07
1.06E-05
14.07
1.32E+05
1.53E-10
1.67E-03
466
24642
Whale
0.0053
8.14E-07
1.15E-05
9.10
1.08E+02
1.18E-10
-8.95E-01
271
87783
Whale
0.0052
6.81E-07
1.32E-05
13.29
2.86E+05
5.18E-11
6.45E-03
588
All
Whales
0.0052
7.77E-07
1.21E-05
14.19
2.72E+04
1.54E-11
-1.16E-01
2096
Variance
66
==PAGE:71==
Appendix E
Durations and straightness index of
the original and reconstructed tracks
Individual
Population
Duration
of the
migration
Duration of
migration -
reconstructed track
Straightness
index of the
migration
Straightness
index-
reconstructed
track
11678M
Ascension
37.87
18.5
0.9447
0.9611
11679M
Ascension
25.02
18.5
0.9677
0.9624
11680M
Ascension
40.5
16.25
0.9279
0.9786
11681M
Ascension
39.41
>60 days
(not completed)
0.9178
0.5587
11682
Ascension
35.76
18.75
0.9452
0.9677
11683
Ascension
46.78
18.75
0.9658
0.9526
11683M
Ascension
24.51
18
0.9498
0.9632
25476
Ascension
37.36
29
0.8865
0.9113
27230
Ascension
25.01
18
0.8954
0.9652
27366
Ascension
34.55
19
0.9112
0.9552
4394
Ascension
47.37
16.75
0.9114
0.9757
4395
Ascension
32.49
17.75
0.9563
0.9702
4650M
Ascension
40.2
17.5
0.9561
0.9605
4651M
Ascension
38.05
19
0.9625
0.9669
4662
Ascension
50.82
17.75
0.8625
0.9690
6611
Ascension
35.28
17
0.9581
0.9726
67
==PAGE:72==
Individual
Population
Duration
of the
migration
Duration of
migration -
reconstructed track
Straightness
index of the
migration
Straightness
index-
reconstructed
track
6614
Ascension
39.11
17.75
0.9511
0.9684
6615
Ascension
32.87
17
0.9381
0.9684
67769
Ascension
42.83
52
0.8380
0.7662
67770
Ascension
35.24
18
0.8640
0.9714
94593
Ascension
45.38
18
0.8683
0.9614
94595
Ascension
52.99
38
0.9005
0.8709
4394
Indian
(Seychelles)
47.97
45
0.8123
0.9937
21914
Indian
(Seychelles)
55.61
33
0.5505
0.9502
21923
Indian
(Seychelles)
54.94
42
0.7572
0.9613
61811
Indian
(Somalia)
38.51
105
0.8235
0.8246
61813
Indian
(Somalia)
58.75
92
0.9287
0.8591
117569
Indian
(Seychelles)
44.99
41
0.8396
0.9463
111871
Atlantic whales
55.99
92
0.7743
0.9352
121189
Atlantic whales
67.48
98
0.6159
0.8569
24642
Atlantic whales
78.01
85
0.8591
0.9165
87783
Atlantic whales
112.91
104
0.6940
0.7537
68
==PAGE:73==
Figure E.1: Comparison of the migration duration of the real and reconstructed tracks for:
turtles from Ascension Island (in green), turtles from the Indian Ocean (in blue) and whales
(in red). The black line is the 1-1 ratio.
Figure E.2: Comparison of the straightness index of the real and reconstructed tracks for:
turtles from Ascension Island (in green), turtles from the Indian Ocean (in blue) and whales
(in red). The black line is the 1-1 ratio.
69
