==PAGE:1==
TECHNICAL UNIVERSITY OF DENMARK
MASTER THESIS
Improved superimpositioning method for anatomically
correct analysis of craniofacial growth.
An initial study.
A project between DTU Compute and 3D Craniofacial Image Reseach Labratory.
Author:
Betina Kopp Pedersen - s123323
Supervisors:
Vedrana Dahl
Sven Kreiborg
Tron Darvann
June 29, 2017
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This project is a master thesis written at DTU Compute in close collaboration with the 3D Cranio-
facial Image Research Laboratory. The project fulﬁls the requirements for a master’s degree in the
DTU programme Mathematical Modelling and Computation. The work of the project is equivalent
to 35 ECTS points, and the duration was half a year, from January 2 to July 2, 2017.
The project was supervised by:
- Assistant Professor Vedrana Andersen Dahl, (1), M.Sc., Ph.D.
- Professor Sven Kreiborg, (2), D.D.S., Dr. Odont, Ph.D.
- Research Engineer Tron Andre Darvann, (2), M.Sc., Ph.D.
(1) DTU Compute - Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science.
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324, DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby.
(2) 3D Craniofacial Image Research Laboratory (School of Dentistry, University of Copenhagen;
Centre of Head and Orthopaedics, Copenhagen University Hospital Rigshospitalet; and Depart-
ment of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, Technical University of Denmark), Copen-
hagen, Denmark.
Copenhagen, June 2017
Betina Kopp Pedersen
1
==PAGE:4==
Abstract (English)
This thesis presents the initial study of the development of an automatic voxel-based superimpo-
sitioning method. The ﬁnal goal is to obtain a method which superimposes based on both inner
ears in MRI or CT images, such that the midpoint between the inner ears obtains the exact same
position and orientation in all the superimposed images. This point can then be interpreted as an
origin in a system of reference useful for the analysis of craniofacial growth. In order to reach this
goal, an automatic superimpositioning method needs to be developed, and this is the goal of the
presented study.
The automatic superimpositioning method described in this thesis is based on one of the inner
ears. This means that the corresponding inner ears in the superimposed images will obtain the
same location and orientation. In a follow-up study the presented method can be further devel-
oped to include both inner ears, such that the ﬁnal goal can be reached.
The presented superimpositioning method is based on image and surface registrations, and the
method mainly consists of two parts: a semi-automatic and an automatic part. Even though the
semi-automatic part requires user interaction, it only needs to be done a single time, and therefore
the developed method can be considered automatic.
2
==PAGE:5==
Abstract (Danish)
Denne afhandling beskriver det første studie i udviklingen af en automatisk voxel-baseret super-
imposneringsmetode. Det endelige mål er at have en metode, som på baggrund af begge indre
ører superimponerer MRI eller CT billeder, således at midtpunktet mellem de to indre ører opnår
den præcis samme lokation og orientering i alle de superimponerede billeder. Dette punkt vil
således kunne opfattes som origo i et koordinatsystem velegnet til analyser af kraniofacial vækst.
Første skridt på vejen mod dette resultat er udviklingen af en automatisk voxel-baseret superim-
poneringsmetode, hvilket er målet for dette projekt.
I denne rapport beskrives en automatisk superimponeringsmetode baseret på det ene af de indre
ører, hvilket betyder at de tilsvarende indre ører i alle de superimponerede billeder vil have den
samme lokation og orientering. I et efterfølgende studie kan denne metode videreudvikles til at
benytte begge indre ører, således at det endelige mål kan opnås.
Den superimposnerings metode som beskrives i denne rapport er baseret på billede og overﬂade
registreringer. Metoden kan opdeles i en automatisk og en semi-automatisk del. Selvom den
semi-automatiske del indeholder manuelle steps, skal denne del kun udføres en enkelt gang, og
den samlede superimponeringsmetode kan derfor betragtes som automatisk.
3
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
This section is dedicated to the persons who have put their time and energy into this project. First
of all, I would like to thank Vedrana Dahl, Sven Kreiborg and Tron Darvann for their supervision
in the project. I have appreciated their engagement in the project, and their help and guidances
have been exceptional.
I would also like to thank the people who have been working at 3D Craniofacial Image Research
Laboratory in the period of the project. They have contributed to a good social environment, and
I have enjoyed to work there.
A special thank to Kasper Marstal, the developer of SimpleElastix. He has been incredible helpful
regarding how to use his software, and I have really appreciated his continued willingness to help
me, when I needed it. Without him, the project would probably not be as it is today.
At last I would like to thank William Baaré and Kathrine Skak Madsen from the Danish Research
Centre for Magnetic Resonance for providing me with their unique data.
4
==PAGE:7==
Contents
1
Introduction
7
1.1
Analysis of craniofacial growth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.2
Roentgencephalometry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.3
The inner ear . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.4
Related work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
1.5
Purpose of the study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2
Theory
12
2.1
Magnetic Resonance Imaging . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.2
Image registration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.3
The Marching Cubes algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.4
Iterative Closest Point
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.5
Principal Component Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3
Technicalities
21
3.1
Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2
Software . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.3
Hardware
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4
Method
25
4.1
Semi-automatic process
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.2
Automatic process
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5
Results
35
5.1
Construction of the atlas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.2
Image registration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.3
Rigid surface regsitrations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5.4
Accuracy of surface registration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5.5
Superimposing MRI images . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5.6
Analysis of the variance between and within subjects. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
6
Discussion
54
6.1
Resolution of the MRI images . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
6.2
Software . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
6.3
Computation time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
6.4
Noise in the data set
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
7
Applications
59
8
Future Work
62
9
Conclusion
63
A Additional results
64
5
==PAGE:8==
Betina Pedersen
Spring 2017
B
Installation of SimpleElastix
70
C SimpleElastix parameters
72
D Python code
75
Bibliography
100
Page 6 of 102
==PAGE:9==
1
|
Introduction
1.1
Analysis of craniofacial growth
Craniofacial growth analysis is an important part of orthodontics. Besides being a standard anal-
ysis, it is used for treatment of patients with congenital and acquired craniofacial deformations,
and knowledge of both normal and abnormal craniofacial growth is therefore essential.
In an analysis of growth a system of reference is used, such that the growth is determined in re-
lation to this system. Having a standard and central system of reference makes the interpretation
of growth easier. Mathematically, the growth could be described in relation to any system of ref-
erence or even by its local deformation, but then the interpretation would be harder.
To understand why an analysis of growth is important, it is necessary to know how a skull, and
thereby bone is growing. Bone is a hard tissue and a change of size or shape cannot happen
by bending or stretching. The processes require bone resorption and bone formation [Sørensen,
1994]. Bone resorption is the process where bone material is being removed whereas bone forma-
tion is the process where new bone material is being added to the bone. When a skull is growing,
bone resorption is happening at some locations while bone formation is happening at other lo-
cations, leading to a skull of a different size and shape. An analysis of craniofacial growth is
therefore an analysis of both size and shape.
For the past 75 years the standard method of analysing craniofacial growth has been based on
roentgencephalometry, especially in the lateral projection [Kreiborg et al., 2008].
This is a 2-
dimensional method using X-ray images of the lateral side of the face, where the cranial base
often is used as a reference because it only changes minimally after the brain is fully grown [Cev-
idanes et al., 2009c]. There are though three major problems with roentgencephalometry:
1. The method is only 2-dimensional.
2. The analysis is based on anatomical landmarks and structures that are not necessarily stable
over time in growing children.
3. The anatomical structures used for the superimpositioning might be inﬂuenced by cranio-
facial surgery.
This report presents an initial study of an improved superimposition technique for analysis of
craniofacial growth, that does not suffer from the above problems. Before a more elaborate de-
scription of the project is given, the above problems with roentgencephalometry needs to be clar-
iﬁed.
1.2
Roentgencephalometry
The standard procedure for analysing growth is by roentgencephalometry, especially using the
lateral projection. Here 2-dimensional X-ray images are captured and for the analysis of growth
anatomical landmarks are used for superimpositioning the images. In this way, the growth of
the different parts of the skull can be determined. It is important that these landmarks are stable,
meaning that the structures are not changing size and shape during the process of growth. It
7
==PAGE:10==
Betina Pedersen
Spring 2017
turns out that it is not as easy as it sounds to ﬁnd such a stable structure. Figure 1.1 shows an
example of how growth has been analysed by the roentgencephalometric method.
Figure 1.1: Analysis of craniofacial growth done by roentgencephalometry. The image is from
[Björk, 1965].
At an age of 6 years the frontal lobes of the brain have approximately attained their ﬁnal sizes
and the anterior cranial base changes only minimally after this age. Therefore, the anterior cra-
nial base is often used as a reference for children at this age or older. For younger children it is
harder to ﬁnd stable structures, and even though several structures have been proposed, the sta-
bility of them is always questionable. Furthermore, the anterior cranial base is abnormal in some
craniofacial anomalies [Kreiborg et al., 1993]. As superimpositioning is used in the treatment of
patients with craniofacial malformations, a reference system independent of the anomaly of the
anterior cranial base is therefore desirable.
Another important problem with the annotated landmarks are their reliability. Fenart et. al. have
shown that there is a high degree of error in the determination of the landmark Poiron, which is
of importance especially in some craniofacial surgeries [Dardenne et al., 1972]. Even though a
landmark is anatomical stable, its placement is inﬂuenced by variance that has an impact on the
results. The current method of roentgencephalometry is therefore not optimal as both variation
and anatomical instability are inﬂuential.
Roentgencephalometry is a 2-dimensional method and clearly information from the third dimen-
sion is missing. This is a serious problem within maxillofacial and craniofacial surgery, where the
Page 8 of 102
==PAGE:11==
Betina Pedersen
Spring 2017
patients often have asymmetric bony structures, making the interpretation of the 2-dimensional
roentgencephalometric images difﬁcult [Kreiborg et al., 2008].
These problems with the current method clearly shows, that there is a need for a new method. In
this thesis a 3-dimensional voxel based superimpositioning technique based on the inner ear is
proposed. This technique does not suffer from the above problems, and in the following sections
it will be clear why.
1.3
The inner ear
The inner ear plays an important role in this project and therefore a summary of its basic functions
is given. For a deeper description, see a book of anatomy such as [Rostgaard et al., 2012].
The ear consists of three main parts: the outer ear, the middle ear and the inner ear, see Figure 1.2
(a). The outer ear contains the visible part of the ear and the ear canal. Its function is to capture
the sound waves and transfer them into the middle ear.
The middle ear transmits the sound waves into mechanical vibrations, which are then intercepted
by the inner ear.
(a) The entire ear.
(b) The inner ear.
Figure 1.2: Schematic drawings of the entire ear in (a) and the inner ear in (b). The images are
from [Friese, 2012] and [Venkat, 2016], respectively.
The inner ear consists of two main functioning parts: the cochlea, important for hearing, and the
semicircular canals which are important for the balance. The inner ear has a special structure and
is often called the Labyrinth. It consists of a membranous part and a bony part which encloses
the membranous part. The membranous part is a closed structure containing a liquid called en-
dolymph, and between the membranous and bony parts is another liquid called perilymph. The
bony structure of the inner ear can be seen on CT images, but the liquids inside the structure can
be seen on MRI images. Therefore, both CT and MRI can be used for imaging the inner ear.
The bony labyrinth can be divided into three parts: the vestibule, the semicircular canals and
the cochlea. The vestibule contains receptors of the sense of gravity and linear acceleration. The
semicircular canals contain receptors for the rotation of the head. The cochlea is a spiral-shaped
structure with receptors of hearing [Myers, 2013]. Figure 1.2 (b) shows a schematic drawing of
the inner ear.
Page 9 of 102
==PAGE:12==
Betina Pedersen
Spring 2017
1.4
Related work
As 3-dimensional imaging modalities are becoming more commonly used, the idea of developing
a 3-dimensional superimpositioning method comes naturally. Cevidanes et al. have developed a
voxel based method for superimpositioning of 3-dimensional cone beam CT images based on the
anterior cranial base [Cevidanes et al., 2009b; Weissheimer et al., 2015; Cevidanes et al., 2009a].
They use structures which are believed to be stable after the age of 6, but for younger children their
method have the same problems with the unstable structures as roentgencephalometry. However,
as the method uses voxels instead of landmarks, the problem of variability of the placements of
the landmarks is solved. The method presented in this study resembles their method, but uses
the inner ear as reference instead of the anterior cranial base.
The idea of using the inner ear as a reference is not new. In the 1960’s Delattre and Fénart sug-
gested a registration method based on the semicircular canals. The lateral semicircular canal
is stable within the petrous part of the temporal bone and it has a constant relation to gravity.
[Vinchon et al., 2007]. Their method consisted of constructing a coordinate system where the hor-
izontal plane is determined by the two lateral semicircular canals, the vertical-coronal plane is
orthogonal to the horizontal plane and passes through the center of the lateral rings. The median
sagittal plane is orthogonal to the other planes and placed in the middle of the two semicircular
canals [Fenart and Canal, 1986; Bettega et al., 1996]. This coordinate system is important for this
project, and it is shown in Figure 1.3.
Why is it a good idea to use the inner ear as a reference? The inner ear is placed at the temporal
bone and by a technique where the temporal bone is coloured with different colours at different
times, Sørensen et al. were able to investigate how the temporal bone (and thereby the inner ear)
is developing [Sørensen, 1994]. From several experimental studies they concluded that the inner
ear is completely stable from birth regarding growth and movement in relation to the temporal
bone. The cells responsible for bone remodelling in the temporal bone is distributed centrifu-
gally outside the inner ear making the inner ear completely stable after the 16th gestational week,
where it has obtained its full size. The inner ear starts as a structure of cartilage and at the age of
2 years the structure has become ﬁlled with bone, but this change of material does not inﬂuence
its size and position in relation to the temporal bone [Sørensen, 1994].
The inner ear is a small structure with a total volume of 2 cm3 as shown by Christensen et al. in
[Christensen et al., 2003]. Lee et al. have studied the size and spatial relationships of the semicir-
cular canals [Lee et al., 2013]. They found that the semicircular canals are not exactly orthogonal
to each other. According to their studies the angles were 92.1, 84.4 and 86.2 degrees between the
anterior-posterior, anterior-lateral and posterior-lateral semicircular canals, respectively. Even
though the angles are not exactly 90 degrees, the inner ear has a unique 3-dimensional structure
useful as base for a 3-dimensional image registration method, and the semicircular canals almost
deﬁne an orthogonal coordinate system.
Page 10 of 102
==PAGE:13==
Betina Pedersen
Spring 2017
Figure 1.3: The vestibular orientation proposed by Delattre and Fénart. The drawing is from
[Bettega et al., 1996].
1.5
Purpose of the study
At this point it should be clear that there are three major problems with the current superimposi-
tioning method of roentgencephalometry. This thesis presents an initial study of the development
of a 3-dimensional automatic superimpositioning method. The superimposition is based on the
inner ear, as the inner ear is shown to be completely stable from birth. Therefore, the superim-
positioning method can be applied on images of subjects of any age. Furthermore, the inner ear
is not inﬂuenced by craniofacial surgery. Therefore, the presented method should be superior to
the current method of roentgencephalometry. The superimpositioning method will be developed
for MRI images, but as the inner ear is visible in both CT and MRI images, the method should be
applicable for both modalities.
The ﬁnal goal is to develop an automatic superimpositioning method based on both inner ears,
such that a coordinate system similar to the one presented by Fénart and Delattre shown in Figure
1.3 can be used in the analysis of craniofacial growth. However, this project is an initial study, and
due to a limited project period, it is unrealistic to reach the ﬁnal goals. Therefore, the presented
superimpositioning method is based on one of the inner ears. The focus in this thesis is therefore
to develop a good, automatic superimpositioning method based on a single inner ear. In a follow-
up study this method can be used in the development of the superimpositioning method based
on both inner ears.
Page 11 of 102
==PAGE:14==
2
|
Theory
2.1
Magnetic Resonance Imaging
The data used for this project are MRI images. This modality contains a signiﬁcant amount of
noise and distortion, which inevitably will inﬂuence the results of the superimpositioning tech-
nique. A brief description of the MRI process is given in order to understand how noise and
distortion arise in this imaging process. For a detailed description of the process, see [Hornak,
2017].
2.1.1
Basic theory
The MRI process is based on the spin of the nuclei of atoms. Such nuclei can have positive or neg-
ative spins, making them behave like tiny magnets [Hornak, 2017]. At rest, the spins are random,
but when the atoms are placed in an external magnetic ﬁeld, the spins align with the magnetic
ﬁeld. This alignment is then disrupted by introducing an energy in the radio frequency domain.
When the nuclei return to their resting state, they do so by emitting energy also in the domain
of radio waves. At a given time after the magnetic ﬁeld is introduced, the emitted energy from
the atoms is measured. Using Fourier transform the measured frequencies are transformed into
intensities in the image plane [Preston, 2006]. Varying the frequencies of the introduced radio
frequencies and the measured frequencies allows different images to be created.
Two time intervals are important when a MRI image is captured: the repetition time and the time
to echo. Repetition time (TR) is the time between applying two radio waves to the same slice of the
object. Time to Echo (TE) is the time between the applied and the transmitted signals. Combina-
tions of long and short TE and TR times lead to different kinds of images. Most common are T1-
and T2- weighted images, where T1 and T2 refer to the relaxation times.
The longitudinal relaxation time (T1) is the time rate at which an exited proton reaches its equilib-
rium. T1 is related to the recovery of magnetization in the longitudinal direction. The transverse
relaxation time (T2) is the time rate at which the MR signal decays in the transverse plane [Elster,
2017]. In T1-weighted MRI images fatty tissues will be bright and structures containing a lot of
water will be dark. In T2-weighted MRI images the opposite is the case.
2.1.2
Noise and distortion
MRI images diverge from the underlying truth in two ways. The ﬁrst is by containing image
noise like any other type of imaging modality. The second is by having geometric distortion. In
the following the two types of divergences will be described.
Noise
Due to the signal detection process, the MRI data is complex having a real and an imaginary part.
From this complex signal two different types of images can be obtained by calculating the mag-
nitude or the phase of the signal. In clinical applications a magnitude image is often the desired
type of image, whereas the phase images are more often used for a characterization of distortions
[Elster, 2017]. A magnitude MRI image is meant whenever the term MRI image is used in this
12
==PAGE:15==
Betina Pedersen
Spring 2017
thesis.
The noise in magnitude MRI images is shown to follow a Rician distribution [Gudbjartsson and
Patz, 1995]. The noise in each of the complex channels is Gaussian white noise, but the magnitude
image is calculated as the square root of the sum of the two channels, hence, the square root of
a sum of two independent Gaussians. Therefore, the noise in the magnitude image is Rician
distributed [Nowak, 1999]. Let m denote the measured pixel intensity and s be the true pixel
intensity without noise. The probability distribution for m is then given by
pm(m) = m
σ2 exp
−m2 −s2
2σ2

I0
sm
σ2

where I0 is the zero’th order Bessel function of ﬁrst kind, σ is the standard deviation of the Gaus-
sian noise in the real and imaginary channels, which is assumed to be equal. For small SNR,
s/σ ≤1, the Rician is far from Gaussian, but when the SNR is three or larger, the Rician distri-
bution approximates the Gaussian distribution [Gudbjartsson and Patz, 1995]. The mean of the
noise depends on the local intensity rather than being distributed around zero [Nowak, 1999].
At pixel locations where only noise is present, hence the signal s = 0, the noise follows a Rayleigh
distribution and the probability distribution becomes
Pm(n) = m
σ2 exp
−m2
2σ2

Analytical expressions for the mean and variance of this distribution exist. From these the amount
of noise, σ2, can be estimated from the magnitude images [Gudbjartsson and Patz, 1995].
Distortion
In order to image the spatial position of every small region of the scanned object, each region
must experience a unique magnetic ﬁeld [Hornak, 2017]. This is achieved by using a gradient
ﬁeld. In theory, the gradient ﬁeld is linear, such that there is a linear relationship between the
experienced magnetic ﬁeld at different locations inside the scanner. However, in practise the
linearity of the gradient ﬁeld falls as the distance to the isocenter of the magnetic ﬁeld is increased
[Elster, 2017]. Inhomogenities of the magnetic ﬁeld and/or the gradient ﬁeld will lead to distorted
images, where the spatial position of a voxel is shifted from where it should have been.
The data for this project have been corrected for the distortions caused by non-linearity in the
gradient ﬁeld, by the method described in [Jovicich et al., 2006]. This pre-processing step was
done before the data were provided.
2.2
Image registration
The goal of this project is to develop a superimpositioning method for MRI images, such that the
inner ear in the superimposed images have the same location and orientation. Many parame-
ters inﬂuence the position of the inner ear in the obtained MRI images. For example, the subject
might not lie exactly in the same position during two scans and the head is growing between the
scans. Therefore, it is necessary to align the obtained images such that the inner ears get the same
position and orientation. This is the process of image registration. Here the goal is to transform
one image into the space of another image, such that the anatomical structures obtain the same
locations and orientations.
The nomenclature in image registration theory differs between authors. Throughout this report
the source S is the data that have to be transformed into the space of the target T data.
Let x be a point in the d-dimensional source image S and let y be the corresponding point in the
target image T . The objective in image registration is then to ﬁnd the transformation T : x ∈
Page 13 of 102
==PAGE:16==
Betina Pedersen
Spring 2017
S →y ∈T that best transforms all source points to the corresponding target points. That is, the
following minimization problem has to be solved
ˆT = arg min
T
C(T(S), T )
(2.1)
where T(S) indicates that all points in S are transformed with the transformation T. Depending
on the data, different registration methods can be used, ranging from simple to complex and with
a different number of parameters. C is the cost function, and examples of cost functions are given
in Section 2.2.1. In the following a short description of some of the transformations T will be de-
scribed. The optimization problem in (2.1) is a hard problem, which cannot be solve analytically.
Optimization algorithms are therefore needed. For further reading, see [Fitzpatrick et al., 2000].
Rigid transformation
When the source and target images are related by a rotation and translation, a rigid transformation
should be used:
T(x) = Rx + t
(2.2)
where t is the translation given as a column vector and R is a d×d rotation matrix, so R has to be
orthogonal and det(R) = 1. For a 3-dimensional rigid transformation 6 parameters are needed,
µ = (θx, θy, θz, tx, ty, tz), where θi is the angle of rotation around the i’th axis.
Afﬁne transformation
When the transformation needs to include some scaling and shearing parameters, the transfor-
mation becomes afﬁne, which is given by
T(x) = Ax + t
(2.3)
A is also a 3 × 3 matrix, but it has not any constrains on its elements. If A is a diagonal matrix,
(2.3) becomes a rigid transformation with scaling. If all the elements in this diagonal matrix is
equal, (2.3) becomes a similarity transformation [Fitzpatrick et al., 2000].
The afﬁne transformation preserves the straightness of lines and parallelism, while changing
the angels between lines. For a 3-dimensional afﬁne transformation 12 parameters are needed,
µ = (A11, . . . , A33, t1, t2, t3).
Non-rigid transformation
The transformations described so far merely describes the global transformation from the source
to the target, but in order to describe the more local transformations a non-rigid transformation
has to be used. These transformations do not preserve the straightness of lines [Fitzpatrick et al.,
2000]. This is also known as a free-form deformation (FFD), where the underlying idea is to deform
the image by deforming an underlying mesh of control points. One way to do this deformation is
to use B-splines. For a mathematical description of B-splines, see [Christensen, 2010].
Let the image domain be denoted as Ω= (x, y, z)|0 ≤x < X, 0 ≤y < Y, 0 ≤z < Z. That is, x,
y and z are the elements of x. Let Q be a px × py × pz mesh consisting of control points qi,j,k,
each having a uniform spacing of δ. The FFD is then given as a 3-dimensional tensor product of
1-dimensional cubic B-splines [Rueckert et al., 1999].
T(x, y, z) =
3
X
l=0
3
X
m=0
3
X
n=0
Bl(u)Bm(v)Bn(w)qi+l,j+m,k+n
(2.4)
where
i = ⌊x/px⌋−1
u = x/px −⌊x/px⌋
j = ⌊y/py⌋−1
v = y/py −⌊y/py⌋
k = ⌊z/pz⌋−1
w = z/pz −⌊z/pz⌋
Page 14 of 102
==PAGE:17==
Betina Pedersen
Spring 2017
and the cubic B-splines are given as
B0(u) = (1 −u)3/6
B1(u) = (3u3 −6u2 + 4)/6
B2(u) = (−3u3 + 3u2 + 3u + 1)/6
B3(u) = u3/6
B-splines have compact support, so changing a control point in the mesh will only inﬂuence the
neighbourhood of the control point.
The degree of non-rigid deformation depends on the resolution of the mesh, and thereby on the
number of control points and the spacing between them δ [Rueckert et al., 1999]. The resolu-
tion of the mesh corresponds to the degree of freedom, so a high resolution will lead to a more
deformable mesh but at the same time being more computationally expensive. If the distance
between the control points is large, a global non-rigid deformation will be found, whereas a small
distance will lead to local deformations.
In order to reduce the computation time and still capture the local deformations, a multiresolution
strategy can be used. Here the image resolution and the resolution of the mesh are gradually
increased, and the ﬁnal transformation is then deﬁned as the sum of the transformations at each
level of resolution [Rueckert et al., 1999].
Let Φ1, . . . , ΦL denote the hierarchy of meshes starting with the mesh of lowest resolution. For
each mesh calculate the local B-spline transformation T l(x, y, z), and the ﬁnal transformation is
given as
Tmulti(x, y, z) =
L
X
l=1
T l(x, y, z)
A full image registration consists of both global rigid/afﬁne transformations and the local B-
spline transformations. The registrations can be combined as additions or compositions, but com-
positions are often preferred as the analysis of the image registration gets more intuitive [Klein
and Staring, 2010].
Addition:
T(x) = TRigid(x) + TNon-rigid(x) −x
Composition:
T(x) = TNon-rigid(TRigid(x))
2.2.1
Similarity measures
The goal of the transformation T is to get a small difference between the target image T and
the transformed source image T(S). Let y be a point in T corresponding to x in S. A good
transformation will minimize the distances between these corresponding points. However, as
the B-spline registration is capable of making extreme transformations, a penalty that preserves
linearity is often applied. The cost which should be minimized is therefore given as
C(T(S), T ) = −S(T(S), T ) + γP(T(S))
(2.5)
where S is the similarity and P is the penalty which has the weight γ. Instead of measuring the
similarity between two images, the distance between them is often measured as the similarity and
the distance are opposite. The minimization problem therefore becomes
C(T(S), T ) = D(T(S), T ) + γP(T(S))
Several different distance metrics exist, and their performance depend on the problem. In the
following some of the most common will be outlined. In order to keep the equations simple,
only the distance between two sets will be given. When implemented, the source data have to be
Page 15 of 102
==PAGE:18==
Betina Pedersen
Spring 2017
transformed, T(S), before the distance between the sets is measured.
Mean squared difference
The mean squared difference is given by
DSSD(S, T ) = 1
n
n
X
i=1
(yi −xi)2
where n is the total number of voxels in either of the images. This metric assumes that the inten-
sity levels are homogeneous at the different anatomical structures, so this metric is only useful
when the images are from the same modality [Ulysses and Conci, 2010].
Mutual information
Mutual information is based on the Shannon entropy. The marginal entropy for the target image
is deﬁned as
H(T ) = −
n
X
j=1
p(yj) log p(yj)
where p(yj) is the estimated probability of observing the intensities in voxel yj. The marginal
entropy for the source image is deﬁned similarly for the voxels xi. The joint entropy is deﬁned as
H(S, T ) = −
n
X
i=1
n
X
j=1
p(xi, yj) log p(xi, yj)
where p(xi, yj) is the estimated joint probability of observing the particular combination of voxel
intensities. The mutual information is then deﬁned as
DMI(S, T ) = H(S) + H(T ) −H(S, T )
The joint entropy could be used as a similarity measure, but it suffers from being sensitive towards
a large overlap of the background. Mutual information is less sensitive towards this since it
includes the marginal entropies as well [Pluim et al., 2003]. However, the mutual information
is dependent on the size of the overlap, so the Normalized Mutual Information (NMI) deﬁned by
Studholme et al. in [Studholme et al., 1998] is desired.
DNMI(S, T ) = H(S) + H(T )
H(S, T )
(2.6)
The mutual information and normalized mutual information is well suited for both mono and
multi modality registrations.
Mattes mutual information
Let LS and LT be sets of equally spaced intensity bin centres for the source and target images,
respectively. Let p(S, T ) be the discrete joint probability density function, and let p(S) and p(T )
be the marginal densities of the two images. The mattes mutual information is then deﬁned as:
DMMI(S, T ) =
X
s∈LS
X
t∈LT
p(T , S) log2
 p(S, T )
p(T )p(S)

(2.7)
The joint probabilities can be estimated using a B-spline Parzen window [Klein and Staring, 2010].
The metrics described so far are the most commonly used distance metrics in image registration.
They can be used individually or a weighted combination can be used.
Bending Energy Penalty
Although different penalty functions exist, the bending energy penalty is by far the most com-
mon. In general, penalty terms are based on the ﬁrst or second order spatial derivatives of the
Page 16 of 102
==PAGE:19==
Betina Pedersen
Spring 2017
transformation [Klein and Staring, 2010].
The bending energy penalty is deﬁned as
PBEP (T(x)) = 1
v
X
xp
3
X
i=1
3
X
j=1
3
X
k=1
∂2Ti(xv)
∂xj∂xk
2
Here v is the number of voxels, xv are the voxel positions, x1, x2 and x3 are the coordinates along
the x, y and z directions, respectively. Ti denotes the i’th component of the transform [Leibfarth
et al., 2013].
2.2.2
Interpolation
The metric measures the distance between intensities in the target image and the transformed
source image. As the transformations generally transform points into an off-grid position an in-
terpolation scheme is needed.
Nearest neighbour
Nearest neighbour interpolation is the simplest one, where the intensity of a point is set as the
value of the intensity of the nearest voxel. This method is fast but has a low quality.
Linear interpolation
The linear interpolator sets the intensity of the points as a weighted average of the nearest voxels
in the transformed source image.
B-spline interpolation
This interpolator approximates the intensity using a n’th order B-spline polynomial. n = 1 corre-
sponds to linear interpolation.
In order to obtain a good image registration, several choices need to be made. First of all, which
combination of transformations is desired? This question should be quite easy, as this is directly
related to the overall purpose of the image registration. The next questions are then: which com-
bination of similarity and penalty terms should be used and how should each term be weighted?
Which interpolator should be applied? How many resolutions should be used in the B-spline
transformation and how should each individual mesh be deﬁned? These are just some of the
choices that need to be made in order to do an image registration, and hopefully, this illustrates
that obtaining a good image registration is not necessarily an easy task as lots of different settings
can be used.
2.3
The Marching Cubes algorithm
In Chapter 4 the entire superimpositioning method is described. At one step the creation of a
surface model from a 3-dimensional image is needed. One way to this is by using the Marching
Cubes algorithm.
The Marching Cubes algorithm deﬁned by Lorensen and Cline [Lorensen and Cline, 1987] is used
to generate isosurfaces. The overall idea in the algorithm is to divide the 3-dimensional image
into a grid consisting of several cubes and determine if the vertices of the grid are outside or in-
side a user-speciﬁed surface. If two neighbouring vertices are on different sides of the surface, the
surface needs to intersect the edge between the vertices. A surface can intersect a cube in a limited
number of ways. Therefore, the algorithm can be implemented efﬁciently by using lookup tables
[Lorensen and Cline, 1987]. When the algorithm has determined how the surface intersects one
cube, the algorithm continues to the next cube. This is why the algorithm is named as it is.
Page 17 of 102
==PAGE:20==
Betina Pedersen
Spring 2017
Figure 2.1: The 14 different ways a surface can
intersect a cube. The ﬁgure is from [Lorensen
and Cline, 1987].
A cube has eight vertices which can either
be above (or equal) to a user-speciﬁed sur-
face level or below it.
That gives 28
=
256
possible
ways
a
surface
can
intersect
the cube.
Two types of symmetry reduce
this number to 14.
The ﬁrst kind of sym-
metry
is
related
to
contrariety.
For
ex-
ample,
if
one
vertex
is
outside
the
sur-
face and the other vertices are inside,
the
surface will intersect the cube in the same
way as if the situation was the opposite.
This reduces the number of possible cases
to 128.
Secondly, rotational symmetry re-
duces the actual number of possibilities to 14
[Lorensen and Cline, 1987].
Figure 2.1 shows
the different ways a surface can intersect a
cube.
As only 14 possible conﬁgurations exist, a
lookup table is generated which returns a 12 bit
number. Each bit corresponds to an edge of the
cube. If the bit is 1 the edge is intersected and
otherwise it is not. Looking up the cut vertices in
a similar 8-bit format returns the 12 bit number
of the intersected edges. Using linear interpola-
tion the intersection points are calculated. Let p1
and p2 be the neighbouring vertices of opposite
sites of the surface and let v1 and v2 be the in-
tensities at these vertices. Given a surface level
of t the intersection point p is:
p = p1 + (t −v1)(p2 −p1)
v2 −v1
(2.8)
After calculating the intersection points, the facets need to be found. Looking up the vertices in
another table tells which triangular facets that represents the isosurface [Bourke, 1994].
2.4
Iterative Closest Point
Some of the results presented in Chapter 5 are generated using the Iterative Closest Point algo-
rithm (ICP). This algorithm is used to rigidly register one surface to another while minimizing
the mean squared distance [Besl and McKay, 1992]. Thee following describes the overall idea of
the algorithm. For more information, see [Besl and McKay, 1992].
ICP can be used for several types of data, including point sets, line segments, surfaces etc. The
surfaces generated by the Marching Cube algorithm are sets of triangles. Therefore, the distance
between a point and a triangle is necessary.
Let t be a triangle consisting of the 3-dimensional points r1, r2 and r3. The distance between the
point p and t is given by
d(p, t) =
min
u+v+w=1 ||ur1 + vr2 + wr3 −p||
where || · || is the euclidean distance and u, v, w ∈[0, 1]. Using Lagrange multipliers a closed form
solution to this problem can be found. The distance between the point p and the set of triangles
Page 18 of 102
==PAGE:21==
Betina Pedersen
Spring 2017
T = {ti}, for i = 1, ..Nt, is then deﬁned as
d(p, T) =
min
i∈{1,...,Nt} d(p, ti)
The closest triangle yj in the set of triangles satisﬁes that d(p, yj) = d(p, T).
Let X be the set of points in the target model and let P be the set of points in the source model,
which need to be transformed. Let F denote the transformation operator, then the objective for
ICP is to minimize the mean squared error:
1
Np
Np
X
i=1
||xi −F(pi)||2
where Np is the number of points in P. The transformation F is rigid and consists of a rotation R
and a translation T . Using quarternions, this can be written as
f(q) = 1
Np
Np
X
i=1
||xi −R(qR)pi −qT ||2
qR is a four element vector qR = [q0, q1, q2, q3]T where q0 ≥0 and P3
i=1 q2
i = 1. The operation
R(qR) returns a 3 × 3 rotation matrix. The translation vector is qT = [q4, q5, q6]T . The objective
for ICP is then to ﬁnd the vector q = [q0, . . . , q6]T that minimizes the mean squared error f(q).
The optimal rotation matrix R(qR) and translation vector qT are estimated from the matrix Q,
deﬁned as:
Q(Σpx) =
tr(Σpx)
∆T
∆
Σpx + σT
px −tr(Σpx)I3

Here, Σpx is the cross-covariance matrix between the two sets X and P and I3 is the 3 × 3 identity
matrix. ∆is the vector [A23, A31, A12]T where A is a matrix with the elements Aij = (Σpx−ΣT
px)ij.
The rotation vector qR is the eigenvector of Q with the largest eigenvalue, and from this eigen-
vector the rotation matrix is constructed as
R(qR) =


q2
0 + q2
1 + q2
2 −q2
3
2(q1q2 −q0q3)
2(q1q3 + q0q2)
2(q1q2 + q0q3)
q2
0 + q2
2 −q2
1 −q2
3
2(q1q3 −q0q1)
2(q1q2 −q0q2)
2(q2q3 + q0q1)
q2
0 + q2
3 −q2
1 −q2
2


Estimating the center of masses µX and µP for the two sets, the optimal translation vector qT is
given by
qT = µX −R(qR)µP
Finally, the steps in the algorithm can be outlined
1. Initialize algorithm by setting P0 = P, q = [1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0]T , and k = 0.
2. Compute the set of closest points Yk = C(Pk, X) where C denotes the closest point operator.
3. Estimate the transformation vector qk between Y and P0 as described above.
4. Apply the registration to the initial point set, Pk+1 = qk(P0)
5. Repeat step 2 to 4 until the mean squared error is below some threshold τ.
It should be noted that the transformation vector is estimated in relation to the initial data set P0,
such that the ﬁnal registration also is the complete transformation.
ICP converges to a local minimum, so a good starting guess might be necessary in order to obtain
the desired results [Besl and McKay, 1992].
Page 19 of 102
==PAGE:22==
Betina Pedersen
Spring 2017
2.5
Principal Component Analysis
In order to investigate the variations between and within subjects, a principal component analysis
will be carried out. This is a linear transformation of data into a space where the axes are chosen
such that they explain most of the variance, but under an orthogonality constraint. The axes can
also be considered the directions that minimizes the projection errors, but the ﬁrst formulation is
used here. This section includes a brief survey of the method, so for a more thorough explanation
see [Bishop, 2006].
Let {xn} be a dataset consisting of the observations xn of dimensionality d where n = 1, . . . , N.
At ﬁrst, the goal is to project the data into a 1-dimensional space, such that most of the variance
in the data is explained. Let u1 deﬁne a unit vector with this direction.
The formulas for the sample mean and the covariance matrix is shown in (2.9) and (2.10), respec-
tively.
¯x = 1
N
N
X
n=1
xn
(2.9)
S = 1
N
N
X
n=1
(xn −¯x)(xn −¯x)T
(2.10)
The variance of a sample is given by 1
N
PN
n=1(xn −x)2, so the variance of the projected data uT
1xn
must be given by
1
N
N
X
n=1
 uT
1xn −uT
1 ¯x
2 = uT
1Su1
(2.11)
The goal is to ﬁnd the vector u1 that maximizes (2.11), but as uT
1u1 = 1, the maximization is
constrained and can be solved analytically by using a Lagrange multiplier λ1.
max uT
1Su1 + λ1(1 −uT
1u1)
Setting the derivative with respect to u1 equal to zero, the following is a stationary point
Su1 = λ1u1
This is an eigenvalue problem, so u1 is an eigenvector of S. By left-multiplying the eigenvalue
problem with uT
1 it is seen that the maximum variance is obtained for the largest eigenvalue λ1.
uT
1Su1 = λ1
To make it clear, the direction that describes most of the variance in the data is the eigenvector
of the covariance matrix of the data corresponding to the largest eigenvalue. The eigenvector
is referred to as the ﬁrst principal component and the eigenvalue corresponds to the variance
explained by this component. By doing similar computations it can be shown that the second
principal component is the eigenvector with the second highest eigenvalue and so forth. In sum-
mary, the principal components ui for i = 1, . . . , d are the eigenvectors of the covariance matrix
of the data, where the eigenvalues are ordered such that λ1 ≥λ2 ≥. . . ≥λd.
Page 20 of 102
==PAGE:23==
3
|
Technicalities
3.1
Data
The data are provided by the Danish Research Centre for Magnetic Resonance (DRCMR), Copen-
hagen University Hospital, Hvidovre, Denmark. The provided data consist of magnitude MRI
images of 48 typically developing children aged 7 to 13 scanned up to 12 times with intervals of
6 months. The MRI images are scans of the craniofacial region. The used scanner is a 3T Siemens
Magnetom Trio MR scanner.
The images used for this project is T2 weighted images. These are acquired using a turbo spin
echo sequence, with the speciﬁc parameters seen in Table 3.1. The images are corrected for spatial
distortions due to non-linearity in the gradient system of the scanner. A following correction of
the gradient of the intensities has not been made.
Table 3.1: Parameters for the T2-weighted MRI images
T2-weighted
Parameters
Turbo spin echo sequence
TR
3000 ms
TE
354 ms
Matrix
256 × 196
Sagittal slices
192
Voxel size
1 × 1 × 1 mm3
Acquisition time
8:29
Only a subset of the provided data has been used for this project. The subset was chosen such
each subject consisted of at least 9 MRI images at different stages. The subset consists of 15 sub-
jects, and Figure 3.1 shows at what ages these subjects have been scanned. The different images
of a particular subject will be referred to as images at different stages. The ﬁrst MRI is from stage
1 and so forth. When referring to a particular MRI image an abbreviation will be used. The MRI
image at stage 4 of Subject 002 will be abbreviated as Sub002-4.
No visual inspection or any other kind of outlier detection has been performed prior to the cre-
ation of the subset.
The data is provided as nifti ﬁles. Apart from containing the actual image such a ﬁle also includes
some meta data with technical speciﬁcations. This includes the voxel size, the speciﬁcations of the
world coordinate system etc. This kind of data is necessary for the superimpositioning method.
21
==PAGE:24==
Betina Pedersen
Spring 2017
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
Age
002
006
007
010
011
014
017
019
023
026
030
040
051
063
070
Subjects
Scan ages for the data set
Girls
Boys
Figure 3.1: The scan ages of the subjects used for this project.
3.2
Software
A lot of different programs and libraries are used in this project, and in the following each piece
of software will be described to give the reader an idea of its particular usage in this project. Table
3.2 summarizes these functionalities and the challenges of each piece of software.
The main piece of software used for this project is SimpleElastix [Marstal et al., 2016a]. This is a
medical image registration library applicable for several programming languages [Marstal et al.,
2016b]. The language used in this project is Python version 3.4.
SimpleElastix is used under the Apache License Version 2.0 and it can be downloaded from
https://simpleelastix.github.io/ where an installation guide also can be found. How-
ever, installing the software was troublesome in this project, so in Appendix B a description of
how I had to install it can be found. When installing SimpleElastix, SimpleITK and SimpleTrans-
formix are also installed.
SimpleElastix performs the actual image registration and saves the resulting image and the used
parameters. SimpleElastix is not capable of doing surface registration, but if the transformation
parameters are known, SimpleTransformix can be used instead. SimpleTransformix applies trans-
formation parameters found by SimpleElastix to an image or a point set.
Both SimpleElastix and SimpleTransformix are extensions of SimpleITK [Lowekamp et al., 2013],
which is a library of image processing algorithms. Whenever an image is processed in another
way than image registration, SimpleITK is used. That is, reading images, writing images, apply-
ing ﬁlters to images etc. are done using SimpleITK.
SimpleElastix, SimpleTransformix and SimpleITK are all used in Python, so these pieces of soft-
ware are all well suited for making an automatic superimpositioning technique.
Landmarker [Darvann, 2008] is a click-based program, which is mainly used to generate a surface
model from an image using its in-build Marching Cubes algorithm. Landmarker is a good visu-
alization tool as it can show both images, surfaces and surfaces on top of images. Landmarker is
expecting a certain endian, which does not correspond to the endian of any of the used comput-
ers in the project. Therefore, a byteswapping is necessary. Appendix D.15 shows a function that
Page 22 of 102
==PAGE:25==
Betina Pedersen
Spring 2017
performs this byteswapping on an image. It should be mentioned that whether a byteswapping
is necessary depends on the computer.
As Landmarker has a graphical user interface, the use of Landmarker should be minimized in
the superimpositioning technique in order to make the method automatic. Landmarker can be
downloaded from http://darvann.com/download_landmarker.html.
Segmentation of the inner ear is done using the open source program 3D Slicer version 4.6.2 [Fe-
dorov et al., 2012], which can be downloaded from http://download.slicer.org/. This
program also has a graphical user interface, so its use should also be limited.
Surface registrations are performed using the Image Registration Toolkit (IRTK) [Studholme et al.,
1999] which is used under the licence from Ixico Ltd. This software can be downloaded from
https://www.doc.ic.ac.uk/~dr/software/download.html. The transformation param-
eters from IRTK are binary, and they can therefore not be translated to parameter ﬁles suitable for
SimpleTransformix. IRTK is therefore not possible to use in the desired superimpositioning tech-
nique.
Table 3.2: Functionalities and challenges of the different pieces of software used in the project.
Software
Functionality
Challenge
SimpleITK
Image processing algorithms
SimpleElastix
Calculates and applies image
registration parameters
No surface registration
SimpleTransformix
Uses SimpleElastix
transformation parameters on
images and point sets
Landmarker
Visualisation of and algorithms
for surfaces and images
GUI
3D Slicer
Segmentation
GUI
IRTK
Surface registration
Binary output
Page 23 of 102
==PAGE:26==
Betina Pedersen
Spring 2017
3.3
Hardware
For this project the above software has been installed on two computers with the following tech-
nical speciﬁcations.
Table 3.3: Technical speciﬁcations of the two computers used for this project.
Name
Laptop
3D-Lab
Model
Lenovo IdeaPad U430 Touch
Lenovo ThinkStation P500
Processor
Intel® Core™i7-4500U CPU
@ 1.80 GHz 2.40 GHz
Intel® Xeon® CPU E5-1620 v3
@ 3.50 GHz 3.50 GHz
RAM
8.00 GB
32.0 GB
Operating system
Windows 10
Windows 10
System type
64 bit
64 bit
Page 24 of 102
==PAGE:27==
4
|
Method
In this chapter all the steps of the developed superimpositioning method will be described. The
aim is to obtain a superimpositioning based on one of the inner ears, such that when the method
is applied to a sequence of images, the inner ear in all these images will have the exact same po-
sition and orientation. In other words, the overall goal of the following steps is to ﬁnd the rigid
transformation parameters that secures this position of the inner ear.
In this project the goal is to develop an automatic superimpositioning method, and therefore au-
tomation of the individual processes is important. The superimpositioning method can be di-
vided in two steps: a semi-automatic and a fully automatic process as seen in Figure 4.1. The
semi-automatic process contains two manual steps, and the results of these steps are used in the
fully automatic process. However, the semi-automatic process only needs to be run once, and
afterwards the superimpositioning method will be automatic.
As a follow-up study is necessary in order to obtain the ﬁnal goal of developing a superimposi-
tioning method based on both inner ears, the following sections will include some level of tech-
nicality. It is important that each step is clear in order for a successor to develop the improved
version. As most of the steps are implemented in Python, a small explanation of the implemen-
tation is given when necessary. All the code can be found in Appendix D, where a description of
how to use the program also is given.
25
==PAGE:28==
Betina Pedersen
Spring 2017
Construct an atlas
Segmentation of 
the inner ear
Extraction of the 
inner ear
Rescale image 
intensities
Marching Cubes
Convert image 
coordinates to 
world coordinates
Register MRI to 
atlas
Transform surface
Convert world 
coordinates to 
image coordinates
Calculate mean 
surface
Transform surface 
volume
Final 
transformation of 
MRI
Semi-automatic process
Automatic process
Original MRI
Manual
Manual
Superimpositioning method
Figure 4.1: Flowchart of the entire superimpositioning method. The blue boxes are manual steps,
but the semi-automatic process is only necessary to compute once. Therefore, the superimposi-
tioning method can be considered fully automatic in this sense.
Page 26 of 102
==PAGE:29==
Betina Pedersen
Spring 2017
4.1
Semi-automatic process
This section describes all the steps in the semi-automatic process in the order shown in Figure 4.1.
4.1.1
Constructing an atlas
It is important that the MRI images are well aligned, and therefore they have to be registered to
the same image. This image is called an atlas, and is basically an average of several MRI images
from different subjects to capture the variability among persons. An atlas of MRI images from a
single person can also be constructed.
An atlas is constructed in the following way:
1. Choose a MRI image as the initial atlas.
2. Register all MRI images to the atlas.
3. Calculate the mean of all the registered images and let this image be the new atlas.
4. Repeat step 2 and 3 until the atlas has converged. This usually happens after a few repeti-
tions, and in this project 5 repetitions are used.
Throughout the report step 4 will be referred to as repetitions rather than iterations such that con-
fusion between this step and the number of iterations in the image registration can be avoided.
Figure 4.2 shows a slice of an atlas constructed of four subjects with two MRI from each subject.
From this ﬁgure it is seen how sharp the inner ear is compared to areas around the eyes.
Figure 4.2: Slice of the atlas constructed of 4 subjects with two MRI images from each subject.
Notice how sharp the inner ear is compared to the blur especially around the eyes.
The registrations done in this project are: an unmasked rigid transformation, a masked rigid
transformation and a masked B-spline transformation. The unmasked transformation is done
without a mask, so the transformation parameters are based on the entire image. The masked
rigid registration is done with a small mask covering one of the inner ears, as seen in Figure 4.3
(a) and the masked B-spline registration is done using a big mask covering both inner ears, as seen
Page 27 of 102
==PAGE:30==
Betina Pedersen
Spring 2017
in Figure 4.3 (b). When a mask is used the transformation parameters have been optimized for the
region of the image covered by the mask. This is why the atlas in Figure 4.2 is sharp around the
inner ears and blurry in the area around the eyes. The maskes only cover the inner ear regions. In
Appendix A.2 a short explanation of the chosen mask sizes is given.
(a) Small mask
(b) Big mask
Figure 4.3: The two masks used to make masked registrations. The small mask (a) is used for a
masked rigid registration, whereas the big mask (b) is used for a masked B-spline registration.
As described in Section 2.2 a lot of different choices regarding the image registration need to be
made. These include the metrics, the interpolating scheme, the number of resolutions etc. In
order to construct the atlas, most of the parameters that are default in SimpleElastix have been
used. These include the linear interpolating scheme, 4 resolutions and a combination of the mat-
tes mutual information and the bending energy penalty with equal weights. The only parameter
that has been changed from the default value is the number of iterations used in the optimization
part. The default is 256, but 2000 iterations were used instead to make sure the atlas converges.
In Table C.1 and C.2 the default SimpleElastix parameters can be seen. These parameters also
include some more technical parameters, which will not be described in this report.
The code for atlas construction can be found in Appendix D.2.
4.1.2
Segmentation of inner ear
The inner ear is segmented manually using the open source software 3D Slicer. Whenever an at-
las is constructed a segmentation has to be made manually. In order to get an entirely automatic
process, one atlas should therefore be used for all subjects. Then the following steps can be done
a single time, and the superimpositioning technique can be considered automatic.
There are several ways to segment the inner ear in 3D Slicer, but as the inner ear is such a small
structure, the easiest way is to manually select all the voxels that are part of the inner ear. Be sure
to cover the entire structure. It is better to select pixels outside the inner ear than to miss a pixels
of the inner ear. An isosurface can be created in 3D Slicer. This model can be used to see if the
segmentation is sufﬁcient, e.g. if the semicircular canals are closed rings.
Figure 4.4 shows an example where the inner ear has been segmented and an isosurface has been
generated. The result of the segmentation is a label image, which is a binary image where 1
indicates the voxel being part of the inner ear.
Page 28 of 102
==PAGE:31==
Betina Pedersen
Spring 2017
Figure 4.4: Manual segmentation of the inner ear on the atlas using 3D Slicer.
4.1.3
Extraction of the inner ear
The next goal is to create a surface model of the inner ear. Theoretically, the isosurface created in
3D slicer could be used, but in order to get the best possible surface, the following two steps are
done instead.
Before a surface model can be created, an image of only the inner ear is necessary. This image
can be constructed by combining the label image and the atlas. The idea is that a new image is
generated which has the intensities of the atlas whenever the corresponding voxel is one in the
label image. When the voxels in the label image are zero, the corresponding voxels in the new
image is set to zero. The result is then an image only containing voxels different from zero at
the location of the inner ear. This process is therefore referred to as extraction of the inner ear. The
implementation of this step can be found in Appendix D.5.
Figure 4.5 (a) shows a slice of the resulting image after extracting the inner ear. In (b) the image
has been zoomed in on the inner ear, such that the interesting part is more easily seen.
Instead of using the image consisting of the image intensities, the label image could be used in
the following step. However, the aim is to construct the best possible surface model, and as the
intensities of the inner ear contain more information than the segmentation, the intensity image
is used for creating the surface model.
Page 29 of 102
==PAGE:32==
Betina Pedersen
Spring 2017
(a) Slice of the image with the extracted inner ear.
(b) Close-up view of the inner ear in the image shown
in (a).
Figure 4.5: Image of the extracted inner ear. (a) shows a slice of the image where only the inner
ear intensities are different from zero. In (b) the image has been zoomed in on the inner ear.
4.1.4
Application of the Marching Cubes algorithm
At this point a surface model of the inner ear in the atlas can be created. This is done manually
in Landmarker using a Marching Cube algorithm. The user needs to select a threshold that gives
a visually good looking surface model. That is, a model that has the overall structure of an inner
ear and where the amount of noise is reduced. For this project a threshold of 49 was used, and
ﬁgure 4.6 shows a snapshot of the created atlas surface.
The process in Landmarker is manual. In order to make the superimpositioning technique auto-
matic, this step cannot be part of the process. Therefore, it is important to use an atlas of several
subjects. For such an atlas the manual segmentation and the application of Marching Cubes can
be done once and for all, leading to an automatic superimpositioning technique. Whenever a new
atlas is created, these two manual steps need to be done again.
Page 30 of 102
==PAGE:33==
Betina Pedersen
Spring 2017
Figure 4.6: The atlas surface generated by using the Marching Cubes algorithm with a threshold
of 49.
4.1.5
Conversion from image to world coordinates
Landmarker is working in image coordinates whereas SimpleElastix and SimpleTransformix are
working in world coordinates. Therefore, it is necessary to convert the coordinates of the surface
model from image coordinates to world coordinates. As the meta data of the MRI images contain
all the information about the coordinate systems, a conversion can easily be done.
Let S be a 3 × 3 diagonal matrix containing the spacing along the three axis, let D be a 3 × 3
matrix describing the directions of the three axis and let o be the origin given as a column vector.
A transformation from image coordinates pi = [i, j, k]T to world coordinates pw = [x, y, z]T can
then be done by
pw = DSpi + o
Transforming all surface points using the above formula gives an atlas surface in world coor-
dinates. The implementation of this coordinate transformation can be found in Appendix D.6.
Intuitively, this step is part of the semi-automatic process, but it is implemented in the automatic
part, as this reduces the work needed by the user.
4.2
Automatic process
Now the semi-automatic part has been done, and the fully automatic process can then be ex-
ecuted. Whenever the superimpositioning technique should be applied for a new subject, the
following steps need to be done.
4.2.1
Rescaling image intensities
The inﬂuence of the image intensities in the registrations need to be reduced, and therefore all the
images of a given subject are rescaled such that the images have the same distribution of inten-
sities. Let µi be the mean intensity of image Xi and σi be the corresponding standard deviation.
Furthermore, let µ be the average mean of all the images of the subject and let σ be the corre-
sponding average standard deviation. The image Xi is then rescaled in the following way, such
that its intensities are distributed with a mean being µ and a standard deviation being σ. The
subtraction and addition are done element wise.
ˆ
Xi = (Xi −µi) σ
σi
+ µ
Page 31 of 102
==PAGE:34==
Betina Pedersen
Spring 2017
The corresponding code can be found in Appendix D.4
4.2.2
Register MRI images to atlas
The MRI images are not necessarily well aligned. Therefore, the images need to be registered to
the atlas. This in done by applying an unmasked and a masked rigid transformation, where the
masked transformation is done with the same mask as used for constructing the atlas, see Figure
4.3 (a). These images will later be referred to as the rigidly aligned MRI images.
In the next step the images are registered to the atlas using a masked B-spline registration with
the mask shown in 4.3 (b). Apart from the number of iterations, all the registrations are done with
the default SimpleElastix parameters, see Table C.1 and C.2. The number of iterations are set to
2000 to make sure the registrations have converged. Appendix D.7 shows the implementation of
this step.
4.2.3
Transformation of the atlas surface
The atlas surface can now be transformed to each of the rigidly aligned MRI images using the
stored B-spline transformation parameters. This results in one surface per MRI image, where
each surface corresponds to the inner ear of the given subject at the given stage.
The implementation of this process can be found in Appendix D.8. One detail about the imple-
mentation needs to be made clear. In the previous step, the MRI images are transformed to the
atlas. In this step, the parameters are used to transform the atlas surface into the MRI space. In-
tuitively, the inverse parameters should be needed in the latter transformation. However, due to
the implementation of SimpleElastix this is not the case, as SimpleElastix estimates the parameters
from the target space to the source space, even though it performs the opposite transformation.
4.2.4
Conversion from world to image coordinates
The transformed atlas surfaces are in world coordinates. If they are to be visualized in Land-
marker, the coordinates have to be transformed into image coordinates. This step is not needed
in the superimpositioning method, but it is needed when the transformed surfaces are evaluated.
Using the same notation as in Section 4.1.5 where image coordinates were transformed to world
coordinates, the opposite transformation is given by
pi = (DS)−1(pT
w −o)
Appendix D.9 shows the corresponding implementation.
4.2.5
Calculation of the mean surface
As the cranium is growing the inner ear is moving in relation to the cranium. This movement
has to be eliminated as the inner ear should be at the exact same location after using the super-
impositioning technique. Therefore, all the surfaces of the inner ears have to be transformed to
some common reference, which in theory could be any of the transformed surfaces. However, to
make sure that a poor reference is not chosen, the mean of the transformed surfaces is used as the
reference and consequently, the mean of the transformed surfaces in world coordinates has to be
calculated. This implementation can be seen in Appendix D.10.
4.2.6
Rigid surface registrations
The next step is to transform the surfaces of the MRI images to the mean surface rigidly. The
purpose of this step is to align the surfaces to a common reference, such that the inner ear surfaces
are at the same location. In the end, the transformation parameters found in this step should be
applied to the rigidly aligned MRI images, and the result will be MRI images where the inner ears
Page 32 of 102
==PAGE:35==
Betina Pedersen
Spring 2017
are at the exact same location.
Before the images can be transformed, the surface registration needs to be applied in order to ﬁnd
the transformation parameters. Such a surface registration can be done in two ways.
Srreg
The simplest way to transform the surfaces is by making a surface registration using the software
IRTK. IRTK has a method called srreg that makes a rigid surface registration, and this function
is therefore the obvious choice for this process. Unfortunately, the transformation parameters
found by IRTK are binary and thereby unreadable. As these transformation parameters need to
be used on images as well, it is not possible to use IRTK for the surface registration in the super-
impositioning method. However, in order to evaluate the performance of the following surface
registration method, srreg will be used. In this way the results of the two methods can be com-
pared. This method will be referred to as the srreg method throughout the report.
In Appendix D.11 the code used to perform surface registrations using srreg can be found.
Surface volume
As SimpleElastix is already a main part of the code, it will be an advantage if SimpleElastix is also
used for the surface registration. Unfortunately, SimpleElastix cannot transform point sets, so the
surfaces need to be made into volume images before SimpleElastix can be used. Throughout the
report, the following method will be referred to as the Volume method.
A binary image is created which is initialized to be ﬁlled with zeros. Then the indices correspond-
ing to all the point coordinates of a given surface are set to 1. As such an image mostly consists of
zeros, a distance map of the binary image is created. Such a distance map estimates the euclidean
distance from each voxel to the closest voxel containing a one-element in the binary image. The
distance map of each of the MRI surfaces is then registered to the mean surface using a unmasked
rigid transformation.
Figure 4.7 (a) shows a slice of a the constructed binary image, where (b) shows a close-up view of
the inner ear in (a). Notice that the inside of the surface is zero in the binary image.
(a) Slice of entire binary image.
(b) Close-up view of the inner ear in (a).
(c) Distance map of the slice in (a).
Figure 4.7: The generated binary image and the corresponding distance map. (a) shows a slice of
the binary image. (b) shows a close up of the inner ear in (a). (c) shows the unsigned distance
map op the slice shown in (a).
SimpleITK has a build-in function that generates the distance map, so this process can be imple-
mented quite easy. It does not matter if the distance map is signed or unsigned, as the estimated
Page 33 of 102
==PAGE:36==
Betina Pedersen
Spring 2017
transformation parameters are exactly the same. It is though necessary to use a distance map in
the registration instead of registering the binary images, as the latter results in bad registrations.
Figure 4.7 (c) shows a slice of the unsigned distance map corresponding to the image seen in (a).
In Appendix D.12 the implementation of this method can be found.
4.2.7
The ﬁnal transformation of MRI images
All the transformation parameters needed for the superimpositioning technique are now found,
so the last step is to use these parameters on the original images such that the inner ear has the
same location on all MRI images.
The original images are transformed using an unmasked and a masked rigid transformation be-
fore the B-spline transformation is applied. Therefore, the ﬁrst two transformations have already
been applied to the images. The last transformation, which corresponds to the registrations of
the distance maps are then applied to the images. The implementation of this step can be seen in
Appendix D.13. The result of this step is the superimposed MRI images.
Page 34 of 102
==PAGE:37==
5
|
Results
This chapter contains the results of important steps in the superimpositining method and results
from a few additional experiments and analyses. A discussion of the results will be given imme-
diately after the particular results are shown to make the report more readable. The following
chapter will contain discussions that are not directly related to particular results.
5.1
Construction of the atlas
The results shown and discussed in this section all relates to the construction of the atlas. This
includes the image registration part of the process, the data used for the atlas and the convergence.
Figure 5.1 shows how a slice of the atlas changes during the construction process. (a) shows the
slice after the unmasked rigid registration, (b) shows the slice after the masked rigid registration
and (c) shows the slice after the masked B-spline registration. The atlas seen in (c) is the ﬁnal
atlas, and this atlas is constructed from eight MRI images: two MRI images from four subjects. It
should be noted that the shown slices are the same in all the sub-ﬁgures.
Figure 5.1 (c) shows a axial slice going through the inner ear. The corresponding sagittal and
coronal slices can be seen in Figure 5.2.
(a) Unmasked rigid transformation.
(b) Masked rigid transformation.
(c) Masked B-spline transformation.
Figure 5.1: A slice of the atlas after the unmasked rigid registration (a), the masked rigid registra-
tion (b) and the masked B-spline registration (c). The atlas in (c) is the ﬁnal atlas.
35
==PAGE:38==
Betina Pedersen
Spring 2017
(a) Coronal slice.
(b) Sagittal slice.
Figure 5.2: A coronal and sagittal slice of the atlas showing the inner ear. The corresponding
transversal slice can be seen in Figure 5.1 (c).
As expected, the atlas is blurry after the unmasked rigid registration due to the process of av-
eraging several rigidly aligned MRI images. After the masked rigid transformation some areas
appear less blurry, and especially the area around the inner ears changes. However, a big visual
difference between the atlases before and after the masked rigid registration cannot be observed.
When looking at the atlas after the masked B-spline registration has been applied, it is noticed
that the inner ears now appear sharp and with a high contrast to the surrounding tissues. From
the results shown in Figure 5.1 (c) and Figure 5.2 it is seen that only the area around the inner ears
are sharp.
By comparing Figure 5.1 (b) and (c) it is noticed that the shape of the atlas changes after the
masked B-spline registration is applied. The B-spline registration is applied using a mask that
does not cover the back of the head and the eye regions. The B-spline registration parameters are
therefore only based on the structures within this mask, which will lead to an incorrect atlas in
the other areas. In this project it is extremely important that the inner ears in the atlas are in focus.
The last registration performed in the superimpositioning method is only based on the inner ear,
and the blurry areas in the atlas will therefore not inﬂuence the ﬁnal registration. Theoretically,
it is possible to obtain an atlas where the entire head is in focus, but this requires a study of the
parameter conﬁguration used in the image registration. A discussion of the parameter conﬁgura-
tion used in this project will be given in Section 6.2.
The atlas is constructed using rigid registrations rather than afﬁne, as some problems have been
observed with the afﬁne registrations. These are illustrated in Appendix A.3.
5.1.1
Data for the atlas
Instead of creating an atlas based on several subjects, it can also be created for each individual
subject. Examples of individual atlases can be seen in Figure 5.3. From these atlases it is evident
that the shape of the atlas depends on the subject. If one atlas is used for several subjects, this
atlas has to capture the variance among subjects. Therefore, it is important to use an atlas based
on a high number of subjects.
Page 36 of 102
==PAGE:39==
Betina Pedersen
Spring 2017
(a) Subject 019
(b) Subject 050
(c) Subject 063
Figure 5.3: Individual atlases constructed from all the MRI images of the particular subject. In (a)
Subject 019 was used for the atlas, in (b) Subject 050 was used and in (c) Subject 063 was used.
In this project the atlas shown in Figure 5.1 (c) and Figure 5.2 has been used in the superimpo-
sitioning method. The images used to generate this atlas have been chosen such that their ages
cover most of the range of the ages in the data set. Furthermore, two images of each of the sub-
jects were used in order to capture some of the variance within a subject. Figure 5.4 shows the
scan ages of the MRI images used for the atlas. All the images were visually inspected before
they were used to make sure that the atlas was not based on poor images. The B-spline part of
the atlas construction code tends to crash, which will be discussed in Section 6.2. Because of these
crashes, it has not been possible to create an atlas based on more MRI images. Some results indi-
cate that the constructed atlas does not capture the variation among subjects. This is seen by the
registration error being approximately 0.1 mm. higher if the inter-subject atlas is used rather than
an atlas based on the particular subject. These results are shown in Appendix A.1, and it should
be mentioned that no investigation of this has been made, so other explanations to the problem
might exist.
The initial atlas
When constructing an atlas, an initial atlas has to be chosen among the MRI images. Theoretically,
any of the MRI images can be used, but the chosen image has an inﬂuence on the ﬁnal result.
Therefore, a random image is not necessarily the optimal choice. The orientation of the MRI image
matters when the image is visually examined, and the chosen initial atlas should preferably have
an orientation that makes sense in relation to the sagittal, coronal and axial planes. In that way,
the superimposed MRI images will have a similar orientation.
Page 37 of 102
==PAGE:40==
Betina Pedersen
Spring 2017
8
10
12
14
16
18
Age
011
023
083
092
Subjects
Scan ages for the atlas
Boys
Girls
Figure 5.4: The eight MRI images used to generate the inter-subject atlas. Two MRI images from
four different subjects were used. Prior to the atlas construction, the MRI images were visually
inspected to make sure they had a good quality.
5.1.2
Convergence
As stated in Section 4.1.1 only a few repetitions of the image registrations and averaging parts of
the construction algorithm is necessary in order for the atlas to converge. This is illustrated in
Figure 5.5 for the unmasked rigid registration part of the algorithm. The y-axis shows the total
L1-norm between the voxels of the old and the updated atlas on a logarithmic scale. The x-axis is
the number of repetitions.
0
2
4
6
8
10
105
106
107
108
Figure 5.5: L1 norm of the difference between the updated and the old atlas as a function of the
number of repetitions. The difference is calculated on each voxel, and the y-axis shows the total
sum of differences on a logarithmic scale.
Page 38 of 102
==PAGE:41==
Betina Pedersen
Spring 2017
From Figure 5.5 it is seen that the unmasked rigid registration converges after approximately
three repetitions. Similar behaviour has been observed for the masked rigid registration. As the
B-spline part tends to crash, it has not been possible to get the convergence pattern for this regis-
tration method. Five repetitions are used when constructing the atlas to make sure the atlas has
converged without increasing the computation time too much.
In an optimal program, the number of repetitions depends on a convergence criterion and not just
a ﬁxed number. As the current code tends to crash, such a criterion has not been implemented.
5.2
Image registration
In this section the results related to registering the MRI images to the atlas are presented. This
also includes results of applying the found B-spline parameters to the atlas surface. A discussion
of constructing the atlas surface can be found in Section 6.1.
5.2.1
Rigid registrations
Figure 5.6 shows an example of the result of applying the unmasked and masked registrations.
(a) shows the original MRI image of Sub026-10 and (b) shows the MRI image after it has been
rigidly registered to the atlas. The atlas is shown in (c). A red cross indicates the location of the
inner ear in the atlas. Notice how the cross is pointing towards the inner ear on the MRI after the
rigid registrations and not before the registrations.
(a) Original MRI.
(b) Rigidly aligned MRI
(c) Inter-subject atlas
Figure 5.6: Example showing the inﬂuence of the unmasked and masked rigid registrations. (a)
shows a slice of the original MRI of Sub026-10. (b) shows the same image after the rigid registra-
tions. (c) shows the atlas, which the MRI has been transformed to. The same slice is shown in the
three images, and a red cross is indicating the position of the inner ear in the atlas.
From Figure 5.6 it is seen that the rigid registrations do change the orientation and position of the
MRI such that its inner ear obtains approximately the same position as the inner ear in the atlas.
In this example the rigid registrations are mainly translating the MRI image. The brain in the
atlas is larger than the brain in the MRI image, so even though the original MRI image visually
seems to have a reasonable orientation and position in relation to the atlas, it has to be translated
in order for the inner ears to be aligned. This is easily seen by looking at the red crosses.
The red crosses are not pointing at the exact same point on the inner ear in the atlas and in the
MRI image, so a superimpositioning method cannot be based on these rigid registrations alone.
Page 39 of 102
==PAGE:42==
Betina Pedersen
Spring 2017
5.2.2
B-spline registration
Figure 5.7 shows examples of a successful and a failed B-spline transformation. The images are
cropped such that they only show the inner ear. The top row shows the results for Sub026-8 and
the bottom row shows the results of Sub026-9. The ﬁrst column shows the inner ear of the MRI
images after the rigid alignments. Notice the white areas in the middle ear in the left part of
the image from stage 9. The second column shows the result after non-rigidly transforming the
images in the ﬁrst column to the atlas with a B-spline registration. At stage 9 the inner ear gets
deformed too much. In the third row the B-spline transformation parameters have been applied
to the atlas surface. At stage 8 the shape of the surface corresponds to the shape of a physical
inner ear with a clear cochlea and semicircular canals. At stage 9 the surface has been deformed
too much, and only the shape of cochlea seems to bee reasonable.
(a) Stage 8: Rigidly aligned MRI.
(b) Stage 8: B-spline registered MRI.
(c) Stage 8: Transformed atlas surface.
(d) Stage 9: Rigidly aligned MRI.
(e) Stage 9: B-spline registered MRI.
(f) Stage 9: Transformed atlas surface.
Figure 5.7: B-spline transformation of Sub026-8 and Sub026-9 at the top and bottom row, respec-
tively. The ﬁrst column shows the inner ears after the unmasked and masked rigid registrations.
The middle column shows the inner ears after B-spline transforming the MRI images to the atlas.
The last column shows the atlas surfaces after transforming them with the B-spline transforma-
tion parameters used in the second column.
The upper row of Figure 5.7 shows an example of a successful B-spline transformation. After the
B-spline transformation, the size of the inner ear has been reduced, but the overall shape remains
the same. Furthermore, the inner ear seems to be rotated. When the same transformation param-
eters are applied to the atlas surface, the resulting surface has the overall shape of the inner ear.
The semicircular canals are well separated and the ﬁrst outer ring of the cochlea is visible.
In the bottom row of Figure 5.7 an example of a bad transformation is seen. A lot of white pixels
are located around in the middle ear next to the inner ear. Such pixels do not exist in the atlas.
Therefore, registering the MRI image to the atlas will lead to a huge deformation in the middle
and inner ear areas in order to get the ear in the MRI to look like the ear in the atlas. When these
Page 40 of 102
==PAGE:43==
Betina Pedersen
Spring 2017
extreme transformation parameters are applied to the atlas surface, the resulting surface does not
have the shape of an inner ear any more. The cochlea part of the surface has not been deformed a
lot, but the semicircular canals have been made ﬂat by the deformation.
The white pixels in the middle ear in Sub026-9 could be a sign of the patient having a middle ear
infection. In this case the results would probably be a lot better if the other inner ear was used for
the superimpositioning method as the white pixels only occur in the left side of the image.
An example showing the quality of the B-spline transformation is seen in Figure 5.8. Here the B-
spline transformed atlas surface is shown together with the rigidly aligned MRI image of Sub026-
10. Each sub-ﬁgure shows the transformed atlas surface with a slice of the MRI cutting through
the surface. In (a) the MRI slice is in front of the surface, and going through the sub-ﬁgures from
(a) to (k) the shown MRI slice is moving one slice at a time in the axial direction. Each movement
is in steps of 1 mm. Consequentially, more of the surface gets visible in each sub-ﬁgure.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
(j)
(k)
Figure 5.8: The B-spline transformed atlas surface shown together with slices of the rigidly
aligned MRI image of Sub026-10. The MRI slices cut through the surface, and in each sub-ﬁgure
the slice is moving 1 mm in the axial direction.
In sub-ﬁgure (a) the edge of one semicircular canal is not covered by the surface. The surface
appears in (b) at the right position but it does not entirely cover the pixels of the inner ear. Going
through the images from (a) to (k) it is observed that the surface has approximately the correct
position, but it seems a little too small compared with the inner ear in the image. If the threshold
in the Marching Cubes algorithm is set too high, the resulting surface will be too small, and this
might explained why the surface appears too small. However, the difference between the surface
and the inner ear in the image is small, so these results cannot be improved signiﬁcantly.
From sub-ﬁgure (h) to (k) it is observed that the surface cochlea does not cover a rather big part
Page 41 of 102
==PAGE:44==
Betina Pedersen
Spring 2017
of the inner ear in the image. This indicates that the B-spline parameters are not optimal as they
do not deform the surface enough to cover this part of the inner ear in the images. Another
conﬁguration of the image registration parameters could probably improve the results. In Section
6.2 a discussion of the conﬁguration parameters will be given.
5.3
Rigid surface regsitrations
As stated in Section 4.2.6 the rigid surface registration can be done in two ways, either by using
the method srreg from IRTK or by making a volume image of the surface and transform this
image using SimpleElastix. This section shows the difference between using the two methods.
Figure 5.9 shows an example of the mean surface of Subject 002 and the surface of Sub002-1 after
it has been rigidly transformed to the mean surface. In (a) the surface registration was done
using the srreg method and in (b) the volume method was used. The grey surfaces are the
registered surfaces and the blue surfaces are the mean surface. Ideally, the blue surfaces should
lie exactly on top of the grey surfaces. However, this behaviour is not observed, and therefore the
surface registration methods are not optimal. The following describes how the performance of
the methods is evaluated.
(a) srreg method.
(b) Volume based method
Figure 5.9: Surface of Sub002-1 rigidly registered to the mean surface of Subject 002. In (a) the
srreg method has been used for the surface registration and in (b) the volume based method
has been used. The grey surfaces are the registered surfaces and the blue surfaces are the mean
surface.
When a surface is registered to the mean surface, the distance between each face of the trans-
formed surface and the corresponding face in the mean surface is calculated. An example of this
can be seen in Figure 5.10. Here the colours indicate the distance in mm.
Histograms summarizing the distances of all the faces in all the transformed surfaces for the en-
tire dataset can be seen in Figure 5.11 and 5.12.
Page 42 of 102
==PAGE:45==
Betina Pedersen
Spring 2017
Figure 5.10: Example showing the distances from each face in the transformed surface to the mean
surface. This example shows the result for Sub002-1 using the srreg method. The distances are
in mm.
Figure 5.11 (a) shows a histogram of the distances for surfaces transformed using the srreg
method. This histogram is based on the entire dataset consisting of 15 subjects. (b) shows the
same histogram, but with the y-axis being logarithmic such that all bins can be visualized.
0
2
4
6
8
Distances in mm
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Total number of faces
×104
Srreg method
(a) Histogram with linear axes.
0
2
4
6
8
Distances in mm
100
101
102
103
104
105
Total number of faces
Srreg method
(b) Histogram with logarithmic y-axis.
Figure 5.11: Histograms of the distances between the faces in the transformed surfaces and the
faces in the corresponding mean surfaces. The surfaces are transformed to the mean, so ideally
the distances should be 0 for all faces. The histograms are based on results from the entire dataset
consisting of 15 subjects. The surfaces are transformed using the srreg method. (a) shows the
histogram with linear axes and (b) shows the same histogram but with the y-axis being logarith-
mic.
Figure 5.12 shows plots similar to Figure 5.11, but here the volume based transformation method
has been used instead of srreg.
Page 43 of 102
==PAGE:46==
Betina Pedersen
Spring 2017
0
2
4
6
8
Distances in mm
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
Total number of faces
×104
Volume based method
(a) Histogram with linear axes.
0
2
4
6
8
Distances in mm
100
101
102
103
104
105
Total number of faces
Volume based method
(b) Histogram with logarithmic y-axis.
Figure 5.12: Histograms of the distances between the faces in the transformed surfaces and the
faces in the corresponding mean surfaces. The surfaces are transformed to the mean, so ideally
the distances should be 0. The histograms are based on the results of the entire dataset consisting
of 15 subjects. The surfaces are transformed using the volume based transformation method. (a)
shows the histogram with linear axes and (b) shows the same histogram but with the y-axis being
logarithmic.
By comparing Figure 5.11 and 5.12 it is seen that srreg on average performs better than the vol-
ume method. The interdecile (10-90% quantile) range for the srreg method is [0.0816; 0.4977],
whereas the corresponding range for the volume based method is [0.33329; 1.0039]. The medians
of the srreg method and the volume based method are 0.1957 and 0.5906, respectively. As 90%
of the distances of the srreg method are less than the median observed with the volume based
method, the volume based method needs to be improved.
The srreg method has the advantage that information about the entire surface is used in the sur-
face registration. In the volume method, only surface vertices are put into a binary volume image,
which is then transformed using image registration. Information about the faces is therefore not
used in this method. The resolution of the images is lower than the resolution of the surfaces,
which means that several vertices of a surface have the same voxel position in the image. There-
fore, a great deal of the surface information is lost using the volume method. As Srreg cannot
be used for the entire process due to the binary transformation parameters, the volume method
is the only of these methods that can be used in the superimpositioning method.
In order to improve the surface registration in the superimpositioning method, the volume method
can be used as a starting guess for an ICP algorithm, which unlike the volume method uses all
the information in the surfaces to estimate the registration parameters.
5.3.1
Data with high errors
From Figure 5.11 (b) and 5.12 (b) it is seen that most of the transformed faces are within a distance
of 1 mm from the mean surface, but some faces have longer distances. Inspection of similar
histograms for each transformed surface reveals that only a few registrations cause the distances
above 2 mm in the histograms seen in Figure 5.11 (b) and Figure 5.12 (b). Therefore, it is worth
to investigate if the same surfaces result in poor registrations using the two different registration
methods. That is, if the same data give rise to the high errors in Figure 5.11 (b) and 5.12 (b). Table
5.1 shows a list of the 10 surfaces giving rise to the largest errors for the two registration methods.
Here, the error is deﬁned as the maximum error observed for the particular data and method.
The dark grey rows indicate that the data are the same for both registration methods. The light
grey cells indicate that the data are among the 10 worst registrations in both methods, but not at
the same position on the list. The white cells are data that are among the 10 worst registrations
within one of the methods but not the other method.
Page 44 of 102
==PAGE:47==
Betina Pedersen
Spring 2017
Table 5.1: The data corresponding to the 10 largest errors for the two different registration meth-
ods. The error is deﬁned as the maximum distance observed for the particular method and data.
The dark grey rows illustrate that the particular data have the same position on the list using
the two registration methods. The light grey cells illustrate that the data are on the list for both
methods, but with different positions. The white cells illustrate that the data are only on the list
for one of the methods.
srreg method
Volume based method
Order
Data
Error
Data
Error
1
Sub026-9
7.8069
Sub026-9
7.5988
2
Sub006-8
4.1229
Sub006-8
4.8494
3
Sub017-3
3.5052
Sub017-7
3.6792
4
Sub051-6
3.3194
Sub030-11
3.6054
5
Sub070-9
3.2319
Sub070-9
3.3598
6
Sub030-11
2.7543
Sub017-3
3.0221
7
Sub010-1
2.3530
Sub030-2
2.4365
8
Sub017-5
2.2315
Sub051-6
2.2340
9
Sub002-5
2.1810
Sub002-5
2.1298
10
Sub002-11
2.1139
Sub030-5
1.9476
When looking at which surfaces that give the highest errors in Table 5.1, it is seen that seven of
the surfaces have high errors using both methods, which indicates that the high errors are not
related to the surface registration. The absolute highest errors are obtained for Sub026-9, which
surface and B-spline transformation have already been discussed in Section 5.2.2. Inspection of
the original MRI images corresponding to the other six surfaces with high errors reveals that the
original MRI images are noisy and/or of poor quality. In Section 6.4 the quality of the images will
be discussed.
5.4
Accuracy of surface registration
The accuracy of the surface registration is really important as a small error close to the inner ear
might be large further away from it. Therefore, a small experiment that estimates the error far
from the inner ear is carried out. 145 landmarks were placed on the mean surface of Subject 002
such that the distance between the surface and each subsequent landmark is increasing with 0.5
mm. The landmarks and the mean surface were then ICP transformed to each of the surfaces
transformed either using the srreg method or the volume based method. Figure 5.13 shows the
landmarks on the mean surface of Subject 002.
Figure 5.13: The mean surface of Subject 002 with 145 landmarks placed such that the distance
between the surface and each subsequent landmark is increasing with 0.5 mm. The landmarks
are so close to each other that they appear as a line in the ﬁgure.
If the surface registrations are good, ICP cannot improve the results signiﬁcantly, and the land-
marks will therefore have almost the same position as before the ICP transformation. On the other
hand, if the surface registration is poor, ICP can improve the result and there will be a big dis-
tance between the landmarks before and after the ICP transform. For each landmark the distance
Page 45 of 102
==PAGE:48==
Betina Pedersen
Spring 2017
between it and the ICP transformed landmark is calculated. Figure 5.14 shows these distances
as a function of the distance from the original landmark to the surface. Figure 5.14 (a) shows the
result when srreg is used for the surface registration and in (b) the volume method has been
used. The x-axis shows the distance from the landmark to the inner ear and the y-axis is the
euclidean distance between a landmark before and after the ICP transformation. All axes are in
mm. The red curves are the mean error and the blue curves indicate the interdecile range. The
statistics are based on all data from Subject 002 and Subject 006, corresponding to a total of 19
surface transformations for both surface registration methods.
0
20
40
60
80
Distance from inner ear in mm
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Error in mm
Error using srreg
Mean error
10-90% range
(a) srreg method.
0
20
40
60
80
Distance from inner ear in mm
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
Error in mm
Error using volume method
Mean error
10-90% range
(b) Volume based method.
Figure 5.14: The mean error as a function of the distance to the inner ear. (a) shows the error based
on the srreg method and (b) shows the error based on the volume based method. The red curve
is the mean error and the blue curves indicate the interdecile range. The data is based on all data
from Subject 002 and Subject 006, corresponding to a total of 19 surfaces.
From Figure 5.14 it is clear that srreg is performing better than the volume method, as the mean
errors are lower for the srreg method. This corresponds to what is already described in Section
5.3. What is interesting about these plots is how the error becomes larger as the distance to the
inner ear increases. As the surface is transformed to the mean surface using ICP to generate these
plots, the center of rotation lies somewhere inside the inner ear, and then the error will increase
the further away from this point we get. Using the srreg method, the mean error is around 0.5
mm for a landmark 75 mm away from the inner ear. The corresponding error for the volume
method is four times as high, namely 2 mm. The interdecile range is shown with blue curves, and
this range gets wider as the distance to the inner ear increases. The range is approximately 0.9
mm for the srreg method for the landmark 75 mm away, where it is 2.5 mm for the correspond-
ing landmark transformed with the volume method. From these plots it is evident that a good
surface registration method is needed in order to reduce the error far from the inner ear.
Figure 5.15 shows the mean errors as functions of the distance to the inner ear for the two registra-
tion methods. The crosses indicate the observed means and the line is a second order polynomial
ﬁtted to the mean observations. The residual norm for the polynomial ﬁt for srreg is 0.0446
mm. whereas the residual norm of the volume method is 0.1819 mm. These plots illustrate the
expected mean error as a function of the distance to the inner ear. In (a) the errors are based on
the srreg method and in (b) the errors are based on the volume method.
Page 46 of 102
==PAGE:49==
Betina Pedersen
Spring 2017
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Distance from inner ear in mm
0
1
2
3
4
5
Error in mm
Regression of error using srreg
Regresssion
Mean of observed errors
(a)
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Distance from inner ear in mm
0
5
10
15
20
Error in mm
Regression of error using volume method
Regresssion
Mean of observed errors
(b)
Figure 5.15: The expected mean error as a function of the distance to the inner ear. (a) shows the
error based on the srreg method and (b) shows the error based on the volume based method.
The red crosses are the observed mean errors and the red curves are second order polynomials
ﬁtted to the observed mean values.
From Figure 5.15 it is seen that the expected error at a distance of 300 mm. from the inner ear is 4
mm. and 18 mm. for the srreg method and the volume based method, respectively. When the
size of a head is taken into account, a distance to the inner ear of 300 mm will never be observed.
Therefore, the expected error of any point in the head should lie somewhere on the curves shown
in Figure 5.15. It is important to mention that the interdecile ranges are wide for the two meth-
ods, so both higher and lower errors will be observed. Furthermore, a second order polynomial is
chosen for the regression as it captures the curvature at distances below 20 mm, as seen in Figure
5.14. The regressions give an idea of the size of the error at larger distances, but for a more precise
estimation of the error, the mean values should be based on more than 19 observations an the
underlying linear model should be investigated further. However, these the regressions in Figure
5.15 illustrate the magnitude of the expected error.
By comparing Figure 5.15 (a) and (b) it is evident that the error introduced by using the volume
based method is much higher than if the srreg method is used. Unfortunately, it is not possible
to use the latter method in the entire superimpositioning method. Therefore, it is recommended
to use the volume based registered surfaces as input to the ICP algorithm in order to reduce the
error of the surface registration as much as possible.
5.5
Superimposing MRI images
After applying all the rigid registrations in the superimpositioning method to the original MRI
images, the inner ear will have the same location in all images. This section shows the results of
superimposing the images with the described method.
Figure 5.16 shows an example of superimposed MRI images for Subject 017. The ﬁrst row shows
the MRI images after they have been rigidly aligned to the atlas. That is, the MRI image have
been transformed with the unmasked and masked rigid registrations, but the parameters from
the rigid surface registrations have not been applied in these images. The second row shows the
same MRI images after they have been superimposed, hence, after the ﬁnal rigid transformation
based on the surface registration.
(a) shows the MRI image of stage 1 and a red cross indicates a point on the inner ear. (b) shows
the MRI of stage 6 and (c) shows the MRI of stage 10. The red crosses on these images have the
same location as in (a) but they are not located on the inner ears in these images. The position of
the inner ear at stage 1 is therefore not the same as the position at stage 6 or 10.
(d) shows the MRI image at stage 1 after it has been superimposed based on the inner ear. The red
cross indicates a point on its inner ear. (e) shows the MRI image at stage 6 after the transformation
Page 47 of 102
==PAGE:50==
Betina Pedersen
Spring 2017
and (f) shows the MRI image at stage 10 after the transformation. The red crosses on these images
have the exact same pixel location as in (d) and now the crosses point to approximately the same
point on all three images (d), (e) and (f). Note that the red crosses only have the same pixel
location row wise.
(a) Before surface registration: Stage 1. (b) Before surface registration: Stage 6. (c) Before surface registration: Stage 10.
(d) After surface registration: Stage 1.
(e) After surface registration: Stage 6.
(f) After surface registration: Stage 10.
Figure 5.16: Transformation of MRI images of Subject 017 based on the surface registration pa-
rameters. The upper row shows the MRI images at different stages before the ﬁnal rigid transfor-
mation is applied. The bottom row shows the same MRI images after the ﬁnal rigid registration
is applied. The red crosses indicate a point on the inner ear at stage 1, and row wise the position
of the red cross is exactly the same.
From Figure 5.16 it is observed that a superimpositioning method based on only the unmasked
and masked rigid registrations is not sufﬁcient. The inner ear does not have the exact same posi-
tion in the three MRI images of Subject 017 at different stages. After the ﬁnal rigid registration is
applied, the inner ear obtains the same location in all the MRI images of different stages. There-
fore, the inner ear can be used as a common reference after the described superimpositioning
method has been applied to the MRI images.
Figure 5.17 shows results similar to the bottom row of Figure 5.16, but instead of showing the
same subject at different stages, Figure 5.17 shows the same stage for different subjects. (a) shows
Sub017-1 and the red cross is located at its inner ear. (b) shows Sub010-1 and (c) shows Sub002-1.
The red cross has the exact same pixel location in the three images, so the inner ear is not at the
same position when comparing different subjects.
Page 48 of 102
==PAGE:51==
Betina Pedersen
Spring 2017
(a) Sub017-1
(b) Sub010-1
(c) Sub002-1
Figure 5.17: The position of the inner ear is not the same when comparing subjects. (a) shows
Sub017-1, (b) shows Sub010-1 and (c) shows Sub002-1 after they have been aligned with the de-
scribed superimpositioning method. The red cross indicates the location of inner ear in (a).
From Figure 5.17 it is seen that the inner ear cannot be used as a reference when the images to
compare are from different subjects. This is because the surface registration transforms a surface
to the mean surface of the particular subject. Therefore, the surface registrations depend on the
particular subject, which is why the superimpositioning method does not seem to work across
subjects. This project is an initial study of the superimpositioning technique, and the focus has
therefore been to develop a method that works for individual subjects. If the surface registration
is utilizing an inter-subject mean surface, the above problem should be solved. In other words,
changing the superimpositioning method to work between subjects requires only few changes in
the code.
In Figure 5.18 two superimposed MRI images of Subject 011 has been shown on top of each other.
In the red layer the MRI image of stage 1 is seen and in the blue layer the image of stage 10 is
seen. The purple areas indicate where the structures in the two heads are overlapping. In (a) an
axial slice is seen, in (b) a frontal slice is seen and in (c) a sagittal slice is seen. All slices are going
through the inner ear used for the superimpositioning method.
Figure 5.18 (a) illustrates how the head has been growing from stage 1 to 10. The largest growth
has happened in the back of the head, seen in the bottom of the image. At stage 1 the size of the
head is illustrated in red, and at stage 10 this size corresponds to the head seen in blue. By inspec-
tion of all the sub-ﬁgures it is noticed that an expansion is the best way to describe the growth
process.
When looking at the inner ear in the left side of (a), it is seen that the inner ears in the two stages
have been perfectly aligned, as the inner ear appear purple everywhere. Unfortunately, the same
behaviour is not seen at the inner ear in the right side of the sub-ﬁgure. Here parts of the inner
ear from stage 1 are seen in red, and parts of the inner ear from stage 10 are seen in blue.
This project is an initial study of the development of a superimpositioning technique based on the
inner ears, which should be used in order to generate an anatomically correct system of reference
for analysis of craniofacial growth. This project has only focussed on one of the inner ears, but
in a following study both inner ears should be used for the superimpositioning method. When
both ears are used, a coordinate system with an origo between the two inner ears and with an
orientation deﬁned by the inner ears can be created. This corresponds to the ideas described by
Fénart and Delattre, see Section 1.4. If such a coordinate system was constructed for the presented
superimpositioning method, the location of origo would be inﬂuenced by inaccuracies in the su-
perimpositiong. Therefore, both ears have to be used in the ﬁnal superimpositioning method,
which will be developed in a following study based on the results from this study.
Page 49 of 102
==PAGE:52==
Betina Pedersen
Spring 2017
(a) Axial slice.
(b) Frotal slice.
(c) Sagittal slice.
Figure 5.18: Superimposed MRI images of Subject 011 at stage 1 (red layer) and stage 10 (blue
layer). The purple areas indicate where the two images are overlapping. In (a) an axial slice is
seen, in (b) a frontal slice is seen and in (c) a sagittal slice is seen. All slices are going through the
inner ear used for the superimpositioning method.
From Figure 5.18 (b) it is seen that the difference between the red and blue heads is larger in the
right side of the image than in the left. This is due to the superimpositioning based on the inner
ear in the left side. It seems like the head is growing more in the right side. This is obviously not
the case, so in order to improve the interpretation of growth by looking at superimposed images,
the reference should be at the center of the head instead of in one of the sides. This also illustrates
the need for a follow up study.
Page 50 of 102
==PAGE:53==
Betina Pedersen
Spring 2017
5.6
Analysis of the variance between and within subjects.
A principal component analysis have been carried out in order to investigate the inner ear vari-
ations between and within subjects. For this analysis the resulting surfaces of the B-spline trans-
formations are used. These are the initial surfaces corresponding to the inner ears of the MRI
images, that have been registered to the atlas using unmasked and masked transformations. It is
important to make clear that these surfaces have not been processed in any way that depends on
the particular subject. They have been transformed to individual MRI images, so if any pattern is
observed in the analysis, this pattern comes directly from the MRI images.
Figure 5.19 (a) shows the projection of all the surfaces onto the ﬁrst and the second principal com-
ponents1. The colours indicate different subjects. From this ﬁgure a vertical structure among the
subjects can be observed.
Four data points have at least one component which is more than 3 standard deviations √λi from
the mean surface µ on the principal component ui. These data points are Sub017-5, Sub026-9,
Sub070-5 and Sub070-7. The surface corresponding to Sub017-7 differs a lot from the other sur-
faces of Subject 017 in regard to its position. Another principal component analysis is carried out
where these 5 surfaces have been removed from the data. Figure 5.19 (b) shows the projections
of the remaining data onto the new ﬁrst and second principal components. Notice how the data
clusters into different subjects. The same behaviour is seen when the data is projected onto the
other principal components. This is illustrated in Figure 5.20, where the data is projected onto the
ﬁrst and third components in (a) and the second and third components in (b).
(a) PCA on all data.
(b) PCA after outlier removal.
Figure 5.19: The surfaces projected onto the ﬁrst two principal components. In (a) the PCA was
done before outliers were removed1. In (b) the PCA was done after 5 outliers were removed.
1One data point is not shown in this ﬁgure as it is too far from the other points. Figure A.8 shows the same ﬁgure but
with all data points visible.
Page 51 of 102
==PAGE:54==
Betina Pedersen
Spring 2017
(a) Projection onto the ﬁrst and third components.
(b) Projection onto the second and third components.
Figure 5.20: The surfaces projected onto the ﬁrst and third principal components in (a) an onto
the second and third components in (b). The PCA was performed after outliers were removed.
From Figure 5.19(a) it is seen how there is a vertical pattern in the data when it is projected onto
the principal components computed on all the data. This illustrates that the ﬁrst principal com-
ponent does not describe the variance within a subject, but rather the variance between subjects.
If ﬁve outliers are removed before the components are calculated, the results seen in Figure 5.19(b)
and Figure 5.20 are obtained. No matter how the data is projected onto the ﬁrst three principal
components, the data clusters into subjects. This illustrates that all the ﬁrst three principal compo-
nents describe variations in the shape of the inner ear and that the shape of the inner ear is subject
dependent. As the inner ear of a subject is shown to be stable [Sørensen, 1994], the variations
within a cluster are due to noise in the images and inaccuracies in the image registrations.
In Figure 5.21 the variance described by the three principal components can be seen. Each row
illustrates the variance described by a given component ui for i = 1, 2, 3. The upper row corre-
sponds to the ﬁrst principal component u1. The middle and bottom row correspond to u2 and
u3, respectively.
The middle column shows the mean surface µ from different angles. The angles are chosen such
that the variance described by the particular principal component is best visualized. The left col-
umn shows how the mean surface has changed when it is moved three standard deviations along
the negative direction of the corresponding principal component, that is µ −3√λiui. The right
column shows similar results, but where the mean is moved along the positive direction.
Row-wise the surfaces have the same location and orientation. However, the orientations are dif-
ferent in each row, in order to make the best visualization of the particular variations.
As seen from the upper row of Figure 5.21 the ﬁrst principal component describes the overall
shape of the three semicircular canals. The semicircular canals in the surface with a large negative
component, (a), span a wide space, whereas the semicircular canals in the surface with a large
positive component span a more narrow space. This is due to the spaces encircled by the canals
are changing shape from oval to circular. However, this is not easily seen in the images.
The second principal component describes the variance of the anterior semicircular canal. The
mean shape has a circular shaped anterior semicircular canal. In the shape with a large nega-
tive component a part of the semicircular canal has been pushed towards the inner ear. In the
shape with a large positive component the correponindng part of the semicircular canal has been
pulled away from the inner ear. It is worth emphasising that the illustrations in the left and right
columns show the extreme cases. From Figure 5.20 (b) it is seen that no surfaces have a value of
3 standard deviations on the second principal component, so none of the actual surfaces have an
anterior semicircular canal like the one shown in Figure 5.21 (f).
Page 52 of 102
==PAGE:55==
Betina Pedersen
Spring 2017
(a) µ −3√λ1u1
(b) µ
(c) µ + 3√λ1u1
(d) µ −3√λ2u2
(e) µ
(f) µ + 3√λ2u2
(g) µ −3√λ3u3
(h) µ
(i) µ + 3√λ3u3
Figure 5.21: Variation described by the principal components. Each row illustrates the variance
described by the particular principal component. The middle column shows the mean surface
from different angles. The left column shows how the mean surface changes when it is moved
three standard deviations along the negative direction of the particular principal component. The
right column shows the same but where the mean is moved in a positive direction.
The third principal component mostly describes the shape of cochlea. The surface shown in (g),
which has a large negative value of this component, has a short and wide cochlea. The surface in
(i), which has a large positive value, has a longer and more narrow cochlea.
Page 53 of 102
==PAGE:56==
6
|
Discussion
As the results presented in Chapter 5 were followed by an immediate discussion, this chapter
contains a more general discussion, that is not directly related to any particular results.
6.1
Resolution of the MRI images
The resolution of the images has a signiﬁcant inﬂuence on the results. The inner ear only covers a
few voxels and noise around the inner ear will therefore have a high inﬂuence. The atlas surface
(see Figure 4.6) is not smooth like a physical inner ear. This is due to the resolution of the images,
which is at a minimal level for the inner ear to be clear. The resolution is just good enough to
capture the outer part of cochlea, but the inner rings in this snail-shape cannot be separated. The
overall shape of the semicircular canals is also captured, but noise in the images results in some
unnatural peaks on the surface. It has not been possible to ﬁnd a threshold in the Marching Cubes
algorithm that gave a better visual result, as other thresholds either removed parts of the inner
ear or failed to remove noise. In general, taking the resolution of the images into account, the
constructed atlas surface is good.
The quality of the atlas surface also depends a lot on the constructed atlas, which needs to have
a clear inner ear that can easily be distinguished from its surroundings. The atlas constructed in
this project had this quality. The shapes of semicircular canals are clear and the overall shape of
cochlea is captured.
6.2
Software
6.2.1
SimpleElastix parameter conﬁguration
All image registrations have been performed using SimpleElastix. As the number of possible
conﬁgurations of metrics, interpolating schemes, resolutions, grid sizes etc. is inﬁnite, ﬁnding
the optimal conﬁguration for the superimpositioning method is a study in itself. As the default
SimpleElastix conﬁguration generally seemed to perform well, other conﬁgurations have not been
investigated. The only change from the default parameters was an increase in the number of
iterations from 256 to 2000, to make sure the optimization algorithm within the image registration
would converge. Table C.1 and C.2 show the default parameters for the used transformation
methods.
6.2.2
Crashing programs
When SimpleElastix is used to perform B-spline registrations in order to construct an atlas, it has
a tendency to crash. The B-spline registration never crashes in the automatic part, where the MRI
images are registered to the atlas. When the program crashes no error message is written to the
console, which makes it extremely hard to ﬁnd the problem. The atlas construction code crashes
during different repetitions, which could indicate that the problem is related to a lack of mem-
ory. This agrees with other observations made during the project. However, the atlas used in this
project was constructed on the laptop, with the smallest memory of the two computers used, see
54
==PAGE:57==
Betina Pedersen
Spring 2017
Table 3.3. This is in contradiction with the hypothesis that a lack of memory is the problem. Even
though one of the used computers have better speciﬁcations than the other, the only observable
difference is the computation time. The code seems to crash equally often on both computers.
What causes the problem is unknown, and this problem needs to be solved such that it is possible
to create an atlas based on lots of subjects.
Another crash has been observed when the mask used for the image registration got too small.
Experiments using an even smaller mask than the one shown in Figure 4.3 (a) also resulted in a
crash during the image registrations. All masks are created using the same code, so the problem
must lie somewhere in the size of the mask. Again, no error message tells the actual problem.
Two different mask sizes are used in this project. This is because the small mask in Figure 4.3 (a)
leads to deform inner ears if it is used for the B-spline registration. An example of this can be
found in Appendix A.2.
6.3
Computation time
In order to get an idea of the computation time of the superimpositioning method, the automatic
part of the method has been run on a dataset consisting of 11 images while the computation time
of each step has been measured. Table 6.1 shows the measured computation times for each pro-
cess. The precision of the measurements is in seconds as a regular stop watch was used for the
measurements. Furthermore, only one measurement of each part has been carried out. Therefore,
too much conﬁdence should not be put in the listed computation times. However, these measure-
ments give a clear indication of where time is spent in the program and hence, where to improve
the code. The computations were done on the computer 3D-Lab, with the speciﬁcations listed in
Table 3.3.
Table 6.1: Computation times for a data set consisting of 11 images. The measurements have only
been performed once and the precision of the measured times is in seconds. The computations
were done on the computer 3D-Lab.
Procedure
Time (s)
Time (h)
Unmasked and masked rigid registrations
547
0.18
Rescaling image intensities
9
≈0
B-spline registration
10328
2.87
Transformation of atlas surface using B-spline parameters
75
0.02
Volume based surface registration
474
0.13
Transformation of MRI with volume based registration parameters
33
≈0
Srreg based surface registration
4
≈0
Others
8
≈0
As seen from Table 6.1 the B-spline registration accounts for almost the entire time consumption,
and it takes approximately 15 minutes to register one MRI image to the atlas. In order to reduce
the total computation time, this process needs to be optimized. The B-spline registration is done at
several resolution levels, with a default of 4 resolutions. Furthermore, the optimization algorithm
runs 2000 iterations before it moves onto the next resolution. For 11 images this corresponds to
4 × 2000 × 11 = 88000 iterations. The optimization algorithm might not need 2000 iterations to
converge, so this number could possibly be reduced in order to save time.
As stated in Section 6.2 the default SimpleElastix parameters might not be optimal in order to get
the best registration. Therefore, optimizing the parameters might result in higher computation
times, and a compromise between the registration quality and the computation time might be
necessary.
Another way to reduce the computation time is by parallelisation of the code. As the registrations
of two different MRI images to the atlas are independent, the code can in theory be parallelised.
Page 55 of 102
==PAGE:58==
Betina Pedersen
Spring 2017
However, this should be done with caution to make sure the registration parameters are applied
to the correct data.
6.4
Noise in the data set
As described in Chapter 2.1 MRI is a special imaging technique that gives rise to both noise and
distortion in the images. This section describes different types of noise that has been observed in
the data.
No MRI images have been removed from the data set before the superimpositioning method.
Some of the results shown in Chapter 5 are therefore inﬂuenced by noise and poor image quality.
An example of an image with poor quality is seen in Figure 6.1 (a), where the MRI image shown
in (b) has a reasonable quality. Both images are of Subject 011 and the images are from stage 11
and 10, respectively. Compared to the usual MRI image in (b), the MRI image of poor quality is
grainy and dark. Some of the MRI images that resulted in the highest errors in Table 5.1 had a
poor quality like the image shown in Figure 6.1 (a).
(a) Sub011-11
(b) Sub011-10
Figure 6.1: Example of a MRI image of poor quality in (a) compared to a normal quality MRI
image (b).
Another type of noise observed in the images can be seen in Figure 6.2. This image shows how
the noise has a certain pattern at the top of the head. As this part of the head has an insigniﬁcant
inﬂuence on the superimpostioning method, the results should not be inﬂuenced by it. This kind
of noise is clearly related to the imaging technique of MRI. As an image registration algorithm
cannot tell this pattern apart from a signal, such noise could get an inﬂuence of the image regis-
tration results. Visual inspections of the images have only led to observations of this kind of noise
in the outer regions of the head, but it might also be present at lower magnitudes in more central
areas of the head. If this is the case, this kind of noise could be inﬂuential.
Page 56 of 102
==PAGE:59==
Betina Pedersen
Spring 2017
Figure 6.2: Noise pattern observed at the top of the head of Sub051-10.
The most important kind of noise observed in this project is bands of noise going through the
MRI image at the eye and ear regions. This is illustrated in Figure 6.3, where the colour map
of the image is changed in order to make the noise as visible as possible. The different colours
correspond to different pixel intensities. Ideally, all background pixels should have the same blue
colour, but two bands of noise are crossing the image from left to right, which is seen as the two
light blue bands. One of the bands is crossing the image where the inner ear is located, and this is
clearly a problem as the superimpositioning method is based on this structure. This kind of noise
has been observed in all MRI images, but the amount of noise was varying between the images.
Figure 6.3: Noise bands going through the eyes and ears of Sub010-7. Notice the band going
through the inner ear.
In this project MRI images have been used, as longitudinal data were available in this modality.
For an analysis of craniofacial growth CT images are desired, as CT show bony structures whereas
MRI show the soft tissue. Furthermore, CT does not have the same problems with noise and dis-
Page 57 of 102
==PAGE:60==
Betina Pedersen
Spring 2017
tortion as MRI, and the inﬂuence of noise should therefore be reduced when using CT instead of
MRI.
The data used for this project have not been corrected for a variation in the intensity levels. There-
fore, there are big differences between the intensity levels in the lower and upper parts of the head.
The intensity corrected images have not been used, as good image registration results could not
be obtained for this data.
Page 58 of 102
==PAGE:61==
7
|
Applications
An automatic superimpositioning method has several applications, and the following is just an
example of one of them. This is related to the analysis of craniofacial growth, where a vector
of growth is estimated between corresponding landmarks in images at different stages. As the
landmarks are annotated manually, inaccuracies of the user are inevitable, and an automatic esti-
mation of these growth vectors will therefore be desirable. The following experiment illustrates
how such vectors can be obtained automatically. This experiment is only illustrative, and the
method has not been optimized in any way. The purpose of this chapter is merely to illustrate
how other steps in the analysis of growth can be done automatically.
In the experiment 19 anatomical landmarks were annotated by an expert on 10 superimposed
MRI images of the same subject. The idea is then to non-rigidly transform the ﬁrst 9 MRI images
to the last image, in order to get the deformation ﬁeld, which describes the deformation from the
particular stage to the last stage. The checkerboard in Figure 7.1 shows an example of how such
a deformation can look. Here Sub011-5 is transformed to Sub011-10. The checkerboard in the
ﬁgure shows how the underlying MRI of Sub011-5 should be deformed to match the MRI image
of Sub011-10.
(a) Sagittal view.
(b) Axial view.
Figure 7.1: Deformed checkerboard shown on top of Sub011-5 after it has been non-rigidly reg-
istered to Sub011-10. The deformation applied to the checkerboard is the same as applied to the
underlying image.
If the same deformation is applied to the anatomical landmarks corresponding to Sub011-5, the
resulting landmarks should have the same positions as the annotated landmarks of Sub011-10.
The deformation ﬁeld therefore describes the deformation of each point in the MRI image. In or-
der for the user to be able to interpret the coordinates of the vectors in this ﬁeld, their coordinates
should be related to a common reference This should preferably be the coordinate system with
an origin at the center of the head, as described in Section 1.4. In such a coordinate system, these
59
==PAGE:62==
Betina Pedersen
Spring 2017
deformations can be converted into vectors of growth, corresponding to the vectors that currently
are estimated manually in an analysis of craniofacial growth. As such a coordinate system has
not been deﬁned in this initial study of the superimpositioning method, this experiment merely
shows the accuracy of the estimated deformation ﬁeld.
Figure 7.2 shows an example of a successful deformation of an anatomical landmark. The upper
row shows the annotated point in Sub011-5 from two different angles. The bottom row shows the
MRI of Sub011-10 with the deformed landmark from Sub011-5 on top. By comparing the posi-
tion of the landmarks column-wise it is seen that the transformed landmark obtains the desired
location.
(a) Sub011-5: Sagittal slice with annotated landmark. (b) Sub011-5:
Frontal slice with annotated
landmark.
(c) Sub011-10: Sagittal slice with the transformed land-
mark.
(d) Sub011-10: Frontal slice with the trans-
formed landmark.
Figure 7.2: Successful transformation of an anatomical landmark. The upper row shows Sub011-5
with the annotated landmark (green dot) from a sagittal and frontal view in (a) and (b), respec-
tively. The bottom row shows Sub011-10 with the transformed landmark in a sagittal and frontal
view in (c) and (d), respectively.
Not all the transformed landmarks obtain the desired position. Especially, in the mouth area the
transformed landmarks are off. Due to low image intensities at these areas it is not possible to
create illustrations of such examples.
Figure 7.3 summarizes the euclidean distances between all the transformed landmarks and the
corresponding landmarks from stage 10 in a histogram. The landmarks from stage 10 are con-
Page 60 of 102
==PAGE:63==
Betina Pedersen
Spring 2017
sidered the ground truth in this experiment, and some variations between these and the actual
ground truth should be expected due to the arrangement of the experiment.
0
5
10
15
20
Error in mm
0
5
10
15
20
25
Number of landmarks
Distribution of errors
Figure 7.3: Histogram showing the euclidean distances between the transformed landmarks and
the corresponding landmarks annotated in Sub011-10.
From Figure 7.3 it is seen that most of the distances between the transformed landmarks and the
"true" landmarks are less than 2 mm. When the arrangement of the experiment is taken into ac-
count an error of 2 mm. seems reasonable. However, a lot of the transformed landmarks result in
high errors. When inspecting the position of the landmarks with an average error less than 2 mm.
it is observed that these landmarks are in the interior of the head, whereas the remaining points
are in the mouth and and eye region. In Section 6.4 it was shown how a lot of noise is present in
the areas around the eyes, and such noise might be one of the reasons high errors are observed
for points in this area.
The most signiﬁcant reason for the high errors at some locations is due to a poor B-spline registra-
tion. Throughout this project it has been observed that the B-spline registration gave poor results
in some areas of the head, especially the upper part and the lower part of the head. Therefore,
transforming landmarks in these areas will lead to high errors. Whether the poor registrations are
due to the parameter conﬁguration or the data, is not investigated. As stated in Section 6.4 the
data used in this project has an uneven distribution of intensities and especially the mouth area
is dark. This might explain why the transformation is off in this particular area. Furthermore,
the anatomical landmarks are on bony structures which appear dark on the MRI images, and this
adds another level of uncertainty to the annotations. In spite of the imperfect arrangement of this
experiment, most of the errors are less than 2 mm., which illustrates that an automatic estimation
of the growth is not unrealistic. However, a lot of work need to be done for the estimations to be
reliable.
In summary, this experiment illustrates one of the possible applications of an automatic super-
impositioning method, namely an automatic estimation of growth vectors. The presented results
show low errors in the center of the head, but high errors at the mouth and eye regions. This
method therefore needs to be improved a lot, before it can be used as a step in the analysis of
craniofacial growth. The idea with this chapter is to illustrate that the automatic superimposition
paves the way for making other steps in the analysis of craniofacial growth automatic.
Page 61 of 102
==PAGE:64==
8
|
Future Work
This report describes an initial study of the superimpositioning method. Before the method can
be used in the clinic several problems need to be solved.
The overall goal of the superimpositioning mehtod is to align the images to a coordinate system
like the one described by Fénart and Delattre, see Figure 1.3, where the orientation and place-
ment of the origin is deﬁned by both inner ears. This study presents a method to superimpose
MRI images based on only one of the inner ears, so the next step is to use both inner ears for the
superimposition. Due to a limited amount of time, experiments using both inner ears have not
been made. Therefore, another study is needed where the aim is to further develop the presented
superimpostioning method to use both inner ears.
Based on the presented results, the following method is recommended for the improved super-
impositioning. First of all, an atlas based on lots of subjects need to be constructed in order to
capture the variance among subjects. Remember to choose a good initial atlas in order to get su-
perimposed images where slices corresponds to sagittal, frontal and axial slices. Masks covering
both inner ears should be used both for the atlas construction and for the following image regis-
trations.
In the constructed atlas both inner ears should be segmented, such that two atlas surfaces are
obtained. The image registrations can be done using the same method as described in Section 4.
Alternatively, a study in the optimal parameter conﬁguration for the registration can be made in
order to get as good image registrations as possible.
A surface registration is performed using the volume based method as a starting guess for an ICP
algorithm, which needs to be implemented in the Python code. As the distance between the inner
ears is increasing a little during the process of growth, the goal of this surface registration is not
to align the surfaces of both inner ears perfectly. The important thing for this surface registration
is that the midpoint between the two inner ear surfaces will get the same location for all the data,
and that all surfaces corresponding to one of the inner ears will have the same orientation. In
other words, all surfaces should lie on a common axis and the only difference between two sur-
faces of the same inner ear should be the distance to the midpoint.
Applying the parameters from the surface registrations to the MRI images that have been rigidly
aligned to the atlas using the parameters from the unmasked and masked rigid registrations,
should hopefully result in superimposed MRI images where the midpoint between the inner ears
is the stable point. This point can then be considered an origin in a system of reference. The axis
between the two inner ears corresponds to one of the axis in the coordinate system. The remain-
ing axes can be deﬁned by orthogonality and the anterior semicircular canal.
62
==PAGE:65==
9
|
Conclusion
This thesis presents an initial study of the development of an automatic voxel-based superimpo-
sitioning method for longitudinal MRI images. The superimpositioning is based on the inner ears
and the developed method consists of two processes: a semi-automatic and a full-automatic pro-
cess. The semi-automatic process requires two manual steps, but as the semi-automatic process
is independent of the data that are superimposed, it only needs to be done a single time. The
full-automatic process does the actual superimpostitioning of the MRI images, and this is done
without any user interaction. When the results of the semi-automatic process are obtained, the
superimpositioning can be considered an automatic process.
The described method superimposes MRI images based on one of the inner ears. The ﬁnal goal is
to superimpose based on both inner ears, such that the center between the two inner ears appears
stable and can be used as origin in a coordinate system applicable for an analysis of craniofacial
growth. A follow-up study is needed in order to reach this goal.
Hopefully, this thesis clears the way for such a study, as the presented results lead to clear sug-
gestions of how to further develop the superimpositioning method to include both inner ears.
63
==PAGE:66==
A
|
Additional results
A.1
Variance covered by atlas
It is important that the constructed atlas is based on several subjects, such that is covers the vari-
ance among subjects. This is illustrated in Figure A.1, which shows the distributions of registra-
tion errors for Subject 0631. The surface registrations are done using the srreg method, and the
difference between the two histograms is the atlas. In (a) an atlas based on only images of Subject
063 is used, whereas the atlas based on several subjects is used in (b). The registration errors seem
to be approximately 0.1 mm. lower for the results based on the individual atlas, which indicates
that the atlas based on a few subjects does not cover all the variance among subjects. It is im-
portant to mention that this relation has not been investigated further. The differences between
the two histograms might be related to other factors, and therefore similar experiments for other
subjects and other atlases need to be made before any conclusions can be drawn.
(a) Registration based on an individual atlas.
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Distance in mm
0
200
400
600
800
1000
Total number of faces
Inter-subject atlas: subject 063
(b) Registration based on the inter-subject atlas.
Figure A.1: The total distances of faces on the transformed surfaces and the mean surface of
Subject 063. The surface registration was done using the srreg method. In (a) the image regis-
trations were based on an individual atlas constructed only of images of Subject 063. In (b) the
image registrations were based on the inter-subject atlas.
A.2
Size of the masks
As stated in Section 4.1.1 two different mask sizes are used, see Figure 4.3. An example of why
the same mask is not used in both the rigid and the B-spline transformations can be seen in Figure
A.2. The ﬁgure shows the result of transforming Sub023-1 to the atlas using the small mask from
Figure 4.3 (a), which only covers the inner ear in the left side of the image. Notice the deformation
of this inner ear.
1For an explanation of how these are calculated, see Section 5.3
64
==PAGE:67==
Betina Pedersen
Spring 2017
Figure A.2: Sub023-1 registered to the atlas using a masked B-spline transformation and the small
mask from Figure 4.3 (a).
As seen in Figure A.2 the small mask cannot be used for the B-spline registrations, as the inner is
missing after the registration has converged. Therefore, the big mask from Figure 4.3 (b) is used
for the B-spline registrations. This mask is chosen to be so big that it covers both inner ears, but
without containing the front and the back of the head. Both the small and the big masks are boxes,
that only covers a few more slices than the slices containing the inner ear. The small mask covers
21 slices and the big mask covers 58 slices. The images contains a total of 256 slices. The size of
the big mask could probably be reduced, but as this mask seems to give good results, time has
not been spent on improving the size of the mask.
The mask used for the rigid transformation is small, but its size could be reduced. However, using
a smaller mask was not possible, as the program then crashes. The crash is happening somewhere
inside SimplElastix or SimpleITK, and as no error message is given it is extremely difﬁcult to ﬁnd
the problem. As the gain of using a smaller mask seems little compared to the amount of time
needed to solve the problem, it was decided to continue using the mask size, that did not let the
program to crash.
A.3
Rigid versus afﬁne registration
In Section 4.1.1 the atlas is constructed using rigid transformations, but examples have also been
made using afﬁne registrations. Figure A.3 (a) shows an atlas based on an unmasked afﬁne, a
masked afﬁne and a masked B-spline registration. In (b) the corresponding surface can be seen.
(c) shows the atlas surface based on rigid registrations instead of afﬁne. This surface is the atlas
surface used throughout the report. Notice that two semicircular canals are connected in (b) but
not in (c).
Page 65 of 102
==PAGE:68==
Betina Pedersen
Spring 2017
(a) Afﬁne atlas.
(b) Surface of the afﬁne atlas.
(c) Surface of the rigid atlas.
Figure A.3: Atlas based on unmasked afﬁne, masked afﬁne and masked B-spline registrations in
(a). The corresponding surface can be seen in (b). (c) shows the surface corresponding to the rigid
atlas, hence the surface used throughout the report.
In theory, it should be better to use an afﬁne registration than a rigid registration when construct-
ing an atlas, as the afﬁne registration also includes scaling and shearing. As seen in Figure A.3 (a)
the afﬁne atlas looks similar to the rigid atlas with a sharp inner ear and blurry areas around the
eyes and nose. Segmentation of the inner ear in the afﬁne atlas was harder than the corresponding
segmentation of the rigid atlas. This resulted in a surface with connected semicircular canals as
seen in (b). It was not possible to ﬁnd a threshold in the Marching Cubes algorithm which could
remove this connection without removing big parts of the inner ear as well. For the correspond-
ing surface based on the rigid registration, it was possible to select a threshold that resulted in a
surface with the overall structure of a physical inner ear.
In other experiments the rigid registration also seemed to perform better than the afﬁne. The
following is an example of this. Figure A.4 shows cropped MRI images of Sub017-1 and Sub017-
3, respectively. In this experiment, the image at stage 3 is the source image, which is registered
into the image at stage 1. This experiment was made on the data that have been corrected for the
different intensity levels.
(a) Cropped version of Sub017-1.
(b) Cropped version of Sub017-3.
Figure A.4: Cropped MRI images of Subject 017 at different stages. (a) is the target image where
(b) is used as the source image.
Figure A.5 (a) shows the transformed source image based on an afﬁne transformation. It is hard
to see on a static image, but ﬂicking between the target and the transformed source image reveals
that the transformation does not contain the entire rotation. In (b) the difference between the
target and the transformed source image can be seen. For an optimal result, everything but the
upper right corner should have the same gray intensity, but this can only be obtained if a non-
rigid registration is also applied.
Page 66 of 102
==PAGE:69==
Betina Pedersen
Spring 2017
(a) Source image after the afﬁne transformation
(b) Difference image
Figure A.5: The source image (Figure A.4 (b)) after an afﬁne transformation is seen in (a). The
difference between the transformed image and the target image is seen in (b).
Figure A.6 shows similar results but for a rigid transformation. Here, the result is as expected,
and when ﬂicking between the transformed image and the ﬁxed image, the overall head is placed
similarly. Figure A.6 (b) shows the difference image, and when compared to Figure A.5 (b) it is
noticed that the difference along the boarders of the skull is bigger for the afﬁne transformation,
conﬁrming the missing rotation. This behaviour has been observed even as the number of iter-
ations in the afﬁne transformation has been increased, and the missing rotation is therefore not
caused by a lack of convergence for the afﬁne registration.
(a) Source image after a rigid transformation
(b) Difference image
Figure A.6: The source image (Figure A.4 (b)) after a rigid transformation is seen in (a). The
difference between the transformed image and the target image is seen in (b).
It is important to mention that the afﬁne registration does well on some data, while it does not on
other. As problems with the rigid registration have not been observed, this type of registration
has been used in the project instead of afﬁne registrations.
A.4
Importance of surface registration
The surface registration is necessary in order to get a superimpositioning method where the inner
ear is stable. If such registration is not applied, the inner ear will appear moving as the head is
growing. Figure A.7 illustrates this. Here the centres of mass for Subject 002 are shown before
and after making a surface registration using the volume based method. The blue dots illustrate
the centres of mass of the surfaces before any surface registration. The red dots show the centres
of mass after the surface registration. Both sets of dots are connected with a line indicating the
movement from stage 1 to stage 112. The coordinates are in mm.
2Subject 002 only contains 9 MRI images, but due to the scan age of the last MRI image this corresponds to stage 11
and not 9.
Page 67 of 102
==PAGE:70==
Betina Pedersen
Spring 2017
Figure A.7: A graph sowing the position of the center of mass of the 9 stages of Subject 002. The
blue dots are the centres of mass before any surface registration is applied, where the red dots are
the centres of mass after a surface registration has been applied. The volume based registration
method has been used. All coordinates are in mm.
From Figure A.7 it is seen that the general movement of the ear before a surface registration is
applied follows a straight curve from approximately (−36, 24, −26.8) to (−34, 25, −26). Due to
noise in the images, the actual movement of the ear is scattered around the straight line. After the
surface registration the overall movement has been reduced but due to the noise, the centres of
mass are still scattered. The centres of mass have been transformed using the parameters found
by the volume method, and the transformations are therefore not as accurate as if they were trans-
formed using srreg. However, the red curve shows that the surface registration does remove the
overall movement of the ear.
The variance among the red dots in Figure A.7 is caused by noise in the MRI images and inaccura-
cies of the image registrations. As an estimate of the size of the amount of noise and inaccuracies,
the mean standard deviation among all the transformed centres of mass is calculated. The cen-
tres of mass are transformed using the parameters from the volume based surface registration
method. The average standard deviation in each direction is 0.1559 mm. This estimate is based
on 162 transformations, as the data set of 15 subjects contains 162 MRI images in total. As the
dimensions of the voxels in the images are 1 × 1 × 1 mm., a standard deviation between all the
transformed centres of mass on 0.16 mm. is acceptable.
A.5
Principal component analysis
The results presented in this section are from the initial principal component analysis, where no
outliers have been removed. Figure A.8-A.10 show the projection of data onto different combi-
nations of the ﬁrst three principal components. Figure A.8 shows the same illustration as Figure
5.19 (a), except the yellow point with the extreme value on the ﬁrst principal component was not
shown in Figure 5.19 (a).
Page 68 of 102
==PAGE:71==
Betina Pedersen
Spring 2017
Figure A.8: Surfaces projected onto the ﬁrst and second principal components. This PCA is based
on all data. A version of this image without the yellow outlier is shown in Figure 5.19 (a).
Figure A.9: Surfaces projected onto the ﬁrst and third principal components. This PCA is based
on all data.
Figure A.10: Surfaces projected onto the second and third principal components. This PCA is
based on all data.
In Figure A.8 andA.10 a vertical pattern among the subjects is observed. The ﬁrst principal com-
ponent merely captures the variance among the subjects. No clear structure is observed along the
second and third components.
Page 69 of 102
==PAGE:72==
B
|
Installation of SimpleElastix
The homepage of SimpleElastix contains an installation guide of the software,
https://simpleelastix.readthedocs.io/GettingStarted.html. Unfortunately, this
guide was not sufﬁcient for the installations on the computers used in this project, and this ap-
pendix is therefore a description of how I had to install the software. This description is for
installation on a 64-bit Windows 10 computer using Visual Studio.
B.1
Installing of the needed software
Installing CMake
Download and install CMake GUI from https://cmake.org/download/. Install the binary
distribution for your system. I had to install the binary distribution installer for a 64 bit version
of Windows.
Installing Python
Download and install Python from https://www.python.org/downloads/. I installed ver-
sion 3.4.
Installing Visual Studio
Download and install the Visual Studio Community IDE from
https://www.visualstudio.com/downloads/. I installed version 15.
Installing Python and C++ tools
Visual Studio has to be set up for Python. This is done by opening Visual Studio and select
File →New →Project →Python. Click on Install Python tools and follow the
instructions. I did similar for C++ in order to install C++ tools, but I do not know if this is a
necessary step.
B.2
Generating the code for SimpleElastix
The code for SimpleElastix is downloaded from
https://github.com/kaspermarstal/SimpleElastix. It is very important not to down-
load a zip ﬁle of the content, but to use git.
To generate the code, open CMake GUI and set the source path as .../SimpleElastix/SuperBuild
where ... indicates the path to where you have stored the SimpleElaxtix folder from git.
Set the build directory to an empty folder of your choice. According to the SimpleElastix manual
this folder should be close to the root of the computer and have a short name to avoid problems
with Visual Studio.
Now press configure. You need to select the correct Visual Studio compiler. I had to use
Visual Studio 14 2015 but you might need another version. Note: Even though my com-
puter is a 64 bit version, I should not use the 64 bit compiler. If it does not work, you need to select
File →Delete Cache to choose another compiler. If you keep getting errors, try to manually
70
==PAGE:73==
Betina Pedersen
Spring 2017
delete everything in your build directory and try again. When it succeeds without errors, press
Generate.
B.3
Building the project
Open Visual Studio IDE and press File →Open →Project/Solution.
Select the ﬁle
SuperBuildSimpleITK.sln in your build directory. Make sure the compiler is set to release
mode and right click on the ALL_BUILD project in the solution explorer and click Build. De-
pending on your computer, this step might be really time consuming.
After this step, SimpleElastix should be installed and ready for work. According to the SimpleE-
lastix manual, you have to import the SimpleElastix module in order to use it, which is done in
the following way:
import simpleITK as sitk
Unfortunately, the computers used in this project were not able to locate the module automati-
cally, so before I write the above, I have to set a path manually. The above code therefore becomes:
import sys
sys.path.append("...\\SimpleElastix\\Wrapping\\Python\\build\\lib")
import simpleITK as sitk
Once again ... indicates the path to where the SimpleElastix folder is stored. When I set up
the laptop, this folder existed in the downloaded code. However, when I installed it on the 3D-
Lab computer this folder DID NOT exist. The folder lib contains a folder called SimpleITK.
If you do not have the above directory, search for the folder SimpleITK on your computer and
add a path, as above, to the folder containing this folder, in other words, the parent folder of
SimpleITK.
The above lines of code can be avoided by running the following code in the command window,
after changing the directory to ..\SimpleITK-build\Python\Packaging, where "..." indi-
cates where the ﬁles are build to. However, on the computer 3D-Lab these ﬁles do not exist, so
on this computer I have to use the above method. Clearly, something has gone wrong during the
installation on the computer 3D-Lab.
python setup.py install
B.4
Installing ImageJ
Now we should think that SimpleElastix works, but if we want to show images using it, it turns
out that a program called ImageJ needs to be installed. Download it from
https://imagej.nih.gov/ij/download.html. I downloaded the version bundled with
64-bit and Java 1.8.0_ 112. You just click on the ImageJ.exe ﬁle and the program runs. Further-
more, we need to install the Bio Format plugin. Download it from
https://www.openmicroscopy.org/site/support/bio-formats5.3/users/imagej/
and put the ﬁle in the plugin folder of ImageJ. Open the program and check that you have the Bio
Format plugin under the plugin tab.
You need to set up a system path for SimpleElastix to ﬁnd this program. Go to Control panel →
System →Advanced system settings →Environment variables. Click on the System
path and push Edit. Add the path to the ImageJ folder and click OK.
Now you should be able to show your images using SimpleElastix. If you are not, try restarting
the computer or let ImageJ search for updates to the Bio Format plugin.
Page 71 of 102
==PAGE:74==
C
|
SimpleElastix parameters
SimpleElastix has some default registrations parameters, but the user is also able to set some or
all of these parameters. The easiest way to use SimpleElastix is to use the default parameters as
a template and then change one or more of these parameters. This is how the parameters are set
in this project, so the default parameters are always present, and when something else is stated,
only the mentioned parameters are changed.
SimpleElastix is used for rigid, afﬁne and bspline registrations. Table C.1 shows the default pa-
rameters that these transformations have in common. Table C.2 shows the parameters that are
different for these three types of registrations.
72
==PAGE:75==
Betina Pedersen
Spring 2017
Table C.1: Default parameters that the rigid, afﬁne and B-spline registrations have in common in
SimpleElastix
Variable
Parameters
AutomaticParameterEstimation
true
CheckNumberOfSamples
true
DefaultPixelValue
0
FinalBSplineInterpolationOrder
3
FixedImagePyramid
FixedSmoothingImagePyramid
ImageSampler
RandomCoordinate
Interpolator
LinearInterpolator
MaximumNumberOfIterations
256
MaximumNumberOfSamplingAttempts
8
MovingImagePyramid
MovingSmoothingImagePyramid
NewSamplesEveryIteration
true
NumberOfResolutions
4
NumberOfSamplesForExactGradient
4096
NumberOfSpatialSamples
2048
Optimizer
AdaptiveStochasticGradientDescent
ResampleInterpolator
FinalBSplineInterpolator
Resampler
DefaultResampler
ResultImageFormat
nii
WriteIterationInfo
false
WriteResultImage
true
Page 73 of 102
==PAGE:76==
Betina Pedersen
Spring 2017
Table C.2: Default parameters that the rigid, afﬁne and B-spline registrations do not have in common in SimpleElastix
Rigid registration
Afﬁne registration
B-spline registration
Variable
Parameters
Transform
EulerTransform
AfﬁneTransform
BSplineTransform
FinalGridSpacingInPhysicalUnits
(none)
8
GridSpacingSchedule
(none)
2.80322, 1.9881, 1.41, 1
Metric
AdvancedMattesMutualInformation
AdvancedMattesMutualInformation,
TransformBendingEnergyPenalty
Metric0Weight
(none)
1
Metric1Weight
(none)
1
Registration
MultiResolutionRegistration
MultiMetricMultiResolutionRegistration
Page 74 of 102
==PAGE:77==
D
|
Python code
This chapter contains the code developed for the superimpositioning method. Section D.1 de-
scribes how to use the implemented programs, whereas the remaining sections contain the code
for the implemented functions.
D.1
Design of the programs
The developed superimpositioning method consists of three main programs: One that constructs
the atlas, one that extracts the inner ear of the atlas and one that does the entire automatic process.
The three programs are designed such that they require as little user interaction as possible in or-
der to keep them simple. All the programs are run from the command line, and in the following it
is assumed that the current folder is the Program folder. This is considered the base directory and
whenever a program call or a path is described, this folder is assumed to be the current location.
The manual steps in the semi-automatic process cannot be done without any user interaction, but
all the other steps run almost automatically. When saving the results from these manual steps, a
certain ﬁle name has to be used. Furthermore, the user needs to save the MRI images in a certain
folder structure, before the automatic process can be started. In the following each of these ele-
ments will be described more precisely.
One user input is common for all the programs, and this is the pc input. Currently, SimpleElastix
is installed on two computers. Unfortunately, the installation did not fully succeed, and the path
to the installation folder is therefore needed in the Python code. As the path is different on the
two computers, a user input stating the current computer is therefore needed. This is the pc in-
put, which can be either "3D-Lab" or "Laptop".
D.1.1
How to run the programs
In the following a technical explanation of how a user runs the code will be given.
Constructing an atlas
In order to construct an atlas, the user has to do the following:
1. Put all the MRI images for the altas creation in the Atlas/AtlasImages folder. These
images are what the atlas should be an average of.
2. Run the atlas construction program by calling:
python ConstructAtlas.py pc
This program is extremely time consuming and the B-spline registration part is prone to crash.
The program saves all the intermediate atlases, such that the user can start the program at the last
ﬁnished step. This functionality is implemented such that only one B-spline repetition is done,
and the user can therefore choose if an atlas based on fewer B-spline repetitions is sufﬁcient. The
75
==PAGE:78==
Betina Pedersen
Spring 2017
function call for this functionality is
python ConstrucAtlas.py pc initialAtlas
where initialAtlas
has to be either "RigidMaskAtlas.hdr" or
"Atlas_2Rigid_Bspline_iter_X.hdr". Here X ∈[1, . . . , 4].
"RigidMaskAtlas.hdr" is the resulting atlas after the masked rigid registrations, whereas
"Atlas_2Rigid_Bspline_iter_X.hdr" is the resulting atlas after one of the masked B-spline
registrations.
If the atlas is constructed this way, the user has to make sure that the ﬁnal atlas is saved as
ATLAS.hdr in the Atlas folder. However, the process described in the numbered list should
be sufﬁcient, and here the user do not need to think about ﬁle names.
Segmenting the inner ear
The segmentation is done in 3D Slicer as described in Section 4.1.2. Make sure that the resulting
label image is saved as ATLAS-label.nii in the Atlas folder.
Extraction of the inner ear
The image only containing the inner ear intensities is generated by running
python ExtractAtlasEar.py pc.
The resulting image is automatically saved as atlasEar.hdr in the Atlas folder.
Marching cubes
Load atlasEar.hdr into Landmarker and follow the description of Section 4.1.4 to generate an
atlas surface. Make sure to save the surface as ATLAS-imageCoordinates.vtk in the Atlas
folder.
All the programs described so far only have to be run once.
Running the automatic process
Before the main program can be started, the user has to create a folder within the Program folder
called subXXX, where XXX is the number of the subject. Within this folder the MRI images are
stored in a folder called OriginalImages. The images have to be stored in the same format as
the data from DRCMR. That is, OriginalImages contains a folder for each MRI image, and the
folder has the name subXXX_MRYY where YY indicates the stage of the MRI. Within each of these
folders, a MRI image is stored as gsubXXX_MRYY_t2_1mm.nii. Other ﬁles and folders within
OriginalImages will be disregarded, and the user does not have to delete any of these ﬁles or
folders. To make it clear, data from DRCMR has this structure.
When OriginalImages is created with the correct format, the main program can be run. This
is done by
python MainFull.py pc subject
subject refers to the dataset, and has to be "subXXX" where XXX is the number of the subject.
Running this program is quite time consuming, so the program writes messages to the console
indicating which step the program is currently doing. A lot of intermediate results are saved dur-
ing the computations. The folder result contain the ﬁnal superimposed images.
Page 76 of 102
==PAGE:79==
Betina Pedersen
Spring 2017
Figure D.1 sums up the needed user interactions for the entire program. The interactions in the
semi-automatic process can be done a single time, whereas the interactions in the automatic pro-
cess needs to be done for every single subject.
Constructing an atlas
 MRI images in Atlas/AtlasImages
 Call: python ConstructAtlas.py pc 
Manual segmentation
 Load: Atlas/ATLAS.nii
 Save: Atlas/ATLAS-label.nii 
Extract inner ear
 Call: python extractAtlasEar.py pc
Marching cubes
 Load: atlasEar.hdr
 Save: Atlas/ATLAS-imageCoordinates.vtk
Main program 
 Make subXXX folder
 Put images in subXXX/OriginalImages
 Call: python MainFull.py pc subject
Semi-automatic process
Automatic process
Running the code
Figure D.1: Schematic overview of the needed user interactions in each step of the superimposi-
tioning method. The semi-automatic interactions can be done a single time, whereas the interac-
tions in the automatic process have to be done for every single subject.
The remaining part of this chapter contains all the code for the superimpositioning method. If
the particular code is not one of the three main programs, it is a function found in one of the two
Python ﬁles functions.py or Subroutines.py. These ﬁles contain all the needed functions
for the superimpositioning method, so the three main programs work by calling functions from
these ﬁles.
Functions within subroutines.py do smaller tasks and calculations. This could be return-
ing the number of ﬁles in a dictionary or reading coordinates from a vtk ﬁle. Functions within
functions.py do the actual work of implementing the superimpositioning method.
In order to make the use of each function clear, all functions within the functions.py and
Subroutines.py have been put into a section with its particular use. They can call each other,
even though it is not clear from the code in this appendix. Listing D.1 shows all the modules
needed for the superimpositioning method. Not all the modules are needed in each function.
Page 77 of 102
==PAGE:80==
Betina Pedersen
Spring 2017
Listing D.1: All the needed module loadings for the superimposining method.
1
import os
2
from os import listdir
3
from os.path import isfile, join
4
import sys
5
import Subroutines as SR
6
import functions
7
import numpy
8
import fnmatch
9
import errno
10
from shutil import copyfile
11
import re
D.2
Constructing an atlas
This section contains all the code for the atlas construction. The functions shown in Listing D.2-
D.4 are all from ConstructAtlas.py.
Listing D.2 is a function that counts the number of images in the AtlasImages folder and
thereby the number of images used to base the atlas upon.
Listing D.2: Function that returns the number of images in the AtlasImages folder.
1
def getNum():
2
num = 0
3
dataDir = "Atlas\\AtlasImages\\"
4
for root,dirs,files in os.walk(dataDir,topdown=False):
5
for name in files:
6
if len(name)==23:
7
num = num+1
8
return num
Listing D.3 shows the code that performs the image registration. The input arguments are the
atlas image, an array of images used for the atlas, the number of iterations used in SimpleElastix,
the number of repetitions of each registration, the mask image (if any), a string stating the current
registration, and a base number, respectively.
As the B-spline registration tends to crash the code has been written such that a single repetition
can be done in the B-spline part. The base number corresponds to the last ﬁnished repetition.
E.g. if the B-spline part crashes during repetition number 2, the base number in the next B-spline
registration is 1. This secures that the program does not run any unnecessary computations.
Listing D.3: Function that does the image registrations deﬁned by the input arguments.
1
def Register(atlas,images,iter,ConvIter,transform,mask,globalStr,
base):
2
import SimpleITK as sitk
3
# Set the needed parameters for SimpleElastix
4
p = sitk.GetDefaultParameterMap(transform)
5
p["MaximumNumberOfIterations"] = [iter]
6
SE = sitk.SimpleElastix()
7
SE.SetParameterMap(p)
8
9
# Set image mask if needed
10
if mask != "off":
Page 78 of 102
==PAGE:81==
Betina Pedersen
Spring 2017
11
SE.SetFixedMask(mask)
12
13
# Print which registration is being performed
14
print(globalStr + transform + "registration:",flush=True)
15
16
# Run until convergence
17
for j in range(base,ConvIter):
18
s = 0*atlas
19
# Register all images to atlas and update atlas
20
for i in range(len(images)):
21
print("
Transforming MRI %d: "%(i+1) ,end="",flush=
True)
22
# Register images to atlas
23
SE.SetFixedImage(atlas)
24
SE.SetMovingImage(images[i])
25
SE.Execute()
26
s += SE.GetResultImage()
27
print("Done",flush=True)
28
oldAtlas = atlas
29
# Update atlas to be the average of the registered images
30
atlas = (1/float(len(images)))*s
31
32
# Calculate difference of atlases to check for convergence
33
diff = sum(abs(atlas-oldAtlas))
34
35
# Save intermediate results for the B-spline transformations
36
if transform == "bspline":
37
sitk.WriteImage(atlas,"Atlas\\IntermediateResult\\
Atlas_2Rigid_Bspline_iter_%d.hdr"%(j+1))
38
print("
Iteration %d: Done. Difference: %.2f" % (j+1,diff))
39
print(globalStr + transform + "registration: Done",flush=True)
40
return atlas
Listing D.4 shows the main function of the atlas construction code. This function is called from
the command line and it expects the pc argument. Furthermore, an intermediate atlas result
can be given. This is implemented because the B-spline part has a tendency to crash. If any of
the intermediate B-spline registered atlases is given as an input, the next iteration will be run
an the new atlas is saved. This functionality should only be used if the entire code crashes, as
unnecessary computations are avoided.
Listing D.4: Main function of ConstructAtlas.py
1
# Main function: Generates the atlas using the registration function
2
def ConstructAtlas():
3
# Check for correct input arguments
4
length = len(sys.argv)
5
if length <2 or length >3:
6
sys.exit("ContructAtlas expects the pc as an input.")
7
else:
8
if(sys.argv[1] == "Laptop" or sys.argv[1] == "3D-Lab"):
9
pc = sys.argv[1]
10
else:
11
sys.exit("Pc has to be Laptop or 3D-Lab.")
12
# Specify starting image if only one iteration should be run
13
if(length==3):
14
initialAtlas = sys.argv[2]
Page 79 of 102
==PAGE:82==
Betina Pedersen
Spring 2017
15
else:
16
initialAtlas = ""
17
18
# Set directory to SimpleITK depending on the computer
19
SR.importSitk(pc)
20
import SimpleITK as sitk
21
22
# Make output folder for intermediate results
23
SR.makeFolder("Atlas\\IntermediateResult")
24
25
count = 0
26
# Get the number of images used to construct the atlas
27
num = getNum()
28
29
# Initialize array for images
30
images = [1]*num
31
32
# Read images in AtlasImages folder into the image array
33
dataDir = "Atlas\\AtlasImages\\"
34
onlyfiles = [f for f in listdir(dataDir) if isfile(join(dataDir,
f))]
35
for i in onlyfiles:
36
images[count] = sitk.ReadImage(dataDir+i)
37
count += 1
38
39
# Set the parameters in common for all the transformations
40
it = "2000"
41
convergenceIterations = 5
42
43
# Read mask images
44
maskSmall = sitk.ReadImage("Atlas\\smallMask2.nii",sitk.
sitkUInt8)
45
maskBig = sitk.ReadImage("Atlas\\MaskAtlas.nii",sitk.sitkUInt8)
46
47
# If no input atlas is given construct atlas from a full run
48
if initialAtlas == "":
49
50
# Set initial atlas as an arbitratry image
51
atlas = images[7]
52
53
# Make unmasked rigid registration and save the result
54
atlas = Register(atlas,images,it,convergenceIterations,"
rigid","off","unmasked",0)
55
sitk.WriteImage(atlas,"Atlas\\IntermediateResult\\RigidAtlas
.hdr")
56
57
# Make masked rigid registration and save the result
58
atlas = Register(atlas,images,it,convergenceIterations,"
rigid",maskSmall,"Masked",0)
59
sitk.WriteImage(atlas,"Atlas\\IntermediateResult\\
RigidMaskAtlas.hdr")
60
61
# Make masked B-spline registration and save the result.
This is the final atlas.
62
atlas = Register(atlas,images,it,convergenceIterations,"
bspline",maskBig,"Masked",0)
Page 80 of 102
==PAGE:83==
Betina Pedersen
Spring 2017
63
sitk.WriteImage(atlas,"Atlas\\ATLAS.hdr")
64
65
# If an input image is given, run only one iteration with the
given input as the initial atlas.
66
# This functionality is only implemented for the B-spline
registration, as this is the registration with a tendency to
crash.
67
else:
68
# If no B-spline registration has succeeded yet, use masked
rigid atlas as initial atlas
69
if initialAtlas == "RigidMaskAtlas.hdr":
70
atlas = sitk.ReadImage("Atlas\\IntermediateResult\\"+
initialAtlas)
71
# Run one iteration of the B-spline registration and
save the result
72
atlas = Register(atlas,images,it,1,"bspline",maskBig,"
Masked",0)
73
74
# Use a masked B-spline atlas as the initial atlas
75
elif initialAtlas[0:26] == "Atlas_2Rigid_Bspline_iter_":
76
# Check the user input
77
if initialAtlas[27:] != ".hdr":
78
sys.exit("The input needs the .hdr extension.")
79
# Run one iteration of the B-spline registration and
save the result
80
atlas = sitk.ReadImage("Atlas\\IntermediateResult\\"+
initialAtlas)
81
conv = int(initialAtlas[26])
82
atlas = Register(atlas,images,it,conv+1,"bspline",
maskBig,"Masked",conv)
83
84
# If the new atlas is the final atlas
85
if conv == convergenceIterations-1:
86
sitk.WriteImage(atlas,"Atlas\\ATLAS.hdr")
87
88
# If the user input is incorrect
89
else:
90
sys.exit("The second input has to be the masked rigid
intermediate result or any of the B-spline
intermediate results.")
91
92
# Main program:
93
if __name__ == '__main__':
94
ConstructAtlas()
Page 81 of 102
==PAGE:84==
Betina Pedersen
Spring 2017
D.3
Rigid registration of MRI images to the atlas
Listing D.5 shows how the MRI images are transformed to the atlas using an unmasked and a
masked rigid registration.
Listing D.5: Function that rigidly registers MRI images to the atlas.
1
def register2atlas(pc,sub):
2
3
# Set directory to SimpleITK
4
SR.importSitk(pc)
5
import SimpleITK as sitk
6
7
# Read the MR images into a list
8
count = 0
9
num = SR.getNum(sub)
10
images = [1]*num
11
dataDir = sub+"\\OriginalImages\\"
12
for root,dirs,files in os.walk(dataDir,topdown=False):
13
for name in dirs:
14
if len(name)==11:
15
fil = os.path.join(root,name)
16
17
images[count] = sitk.ReadImage(fil + "\\g" + name +
"_t2_1mm.nii")
18
count += 1
19
20
# Set atlas
21
atlas = sitk.ReadImage("Atlas\\ATLAS.hdr")
22
23
# For all the MR images
24
for i in range(num):
25
# Print the current MR image
26
print("
Transforming MRI number %d: "%(i+1) ,
end="",flush
=True)
27
28
# Make the unmasked rigid transformation and save the
parameters
29
SE1 = SR.SE_setup(atlas,images[i],"rigid","2000")
30
SE1.Execute()
31
os.rename('TransformParameters.0.txt',sub+'\\
InitialTransformParameters\\RigidTransPar_'+sub+'_%d.txt
'%(i+1))
32
33
# Make the masked rigid transformation and save the
parameters and the resulting image
34
SE2 = SR.SE_setup(atlas,SE1.GetResultImage(),"rigid","2000")
35
mask = sitk.ReadImage("Atlas//smallMask2.nii",sitk.sitkUInt8
)
36
SE2.SetFixedMask(mask)
37
SE2.Execute()
38
print("Done", flush = True)
39
os.rename('TransformParameters.0.txt',sub+'\\
InitialTransformParameters\\RigidMaskTransPar_'+sub+'_%d
.txt'%(i+1))
40
strName = sub+"\\InitialTransformedImages\\RigidMaskTrans_"+
Page 82 of 102
==PAGE:85==
Betina Pedersen
Spring 2017
sub+"_%d.nii" %(i+1)
41
sitk.WriteImage(SE2.GetResultImage(),strName)
D.4
Rescaling image intensities
Listing D.6 shows the code used to rescale images to get a common mean and standard deviation.
The code is part of the functions.py ﬁle.
Listing D.6: Code to rescale image intensities to a common mean and standard deviation.
1
def RescaleIntensities(pc,sub):
2
# Import SimpleITK depending on the computer
3
SR.importSitk(pc)
4
import SimpleITK as sitk
5
6
# Get the number of MRI images
7
num = SR.getNum(sub)
8
9
s = 0
10
sigma = 0
11
12
# Get statistics of all MRI images
13
for i in range(1,num+1):
14
im = sitk.ReadImage(sub+"\\InitialTransformedImages\\
RigidMaskTrans_"+sub+"_%d.nii"%i)
15
16
stat = sitk.StatisticsImageFilter()
17
stat.Execute(im)
18
19
s += stat.GetMean()
20
sigma += stat.GetSigma()
21
22
# Calculate overall mean and standard deviation
23
mean = s/num
24
sigma = sigma/num
25
26
# Rescale MRI images
27
for i in range(1,num+1):
28
# Get MRI image
29
name = sub+"\\InitialTransformedImages\\RigidMaskTrans_"+sub
+"_%d.nii"%i
30
31
im = sitk.ReadImage(name)
32
# Get statistic of this MRI image
33
stat.Execute(im)
34
thisMu = stat.GetMean()
35
thisStd = stat.GetSigma()
36
37
# Rescale image to get the common mean and standard
deviation
38
im = (im-thisMu) / thisStd * sigma + mean
39
sitk.WriteImage(im,name)
Page 83 of 102
==PAGE:86==
Betina Pedersen
Spring 2017
D.5
Extraction of the inner ear
The function shown in Listing D.7 creates an image where only the inner ear is different from 0.
This image is used in the Marching Cube algorithm to create a surface model. The function is
called from the command line with pc as the only input argument.
Listing D.7: Code extracting the inner ear using an atlas and a segmentation of the inner ear.
1
# Load the needed modules
2
import os
3
import sys
4
import Subroutines as SR
5
6
# Function that creates an image where only the inner ear is
different from 0.
7
def extractEar():
8
# Check user input
9
length = len(sys.argv)
10
if length <2 or length >2:
11
sys.exit("ExtractAtlasEaar expects the pc as an input
argument.")
12
else:
13
if(sys.argv[1] == "Laptop" or sys.argv[1] == "3D-Lab"):
14
pc = sys.argv[1]
15
else:
16
sys.exit("Pc has to be Laptop or 3D-Lab.")
17
18
# Import SimpleITK depending on the computer
19
SR.importSitk(pc)
20
import SimpleITK as sitk
21
22
# Read byteswapped atlas and label image
23
atlas = sitk.ReadImage("Atlas\\ATLAS.hdr",sitk.sitkUInt16)
24
SR.byteswap(atlas,"Atlas\\ATLAS16bit.hdr")
25
26
atlas = sitk.ReadImage("Atlas\\ATLAS16bit.hdr")
27
atlas_label = sitk.ReadImage("Atlas\\ATLAS-label.nii",sitk.
sitkUInt8)
28
29
# Cover atlas with label image and save the resulting image
30
ear = sitk.Mask(atlas,atlas_label,0)
31
sitk.WriteImage(ear,"Atlas\\atlasEar.hdr")
32
33
if __name__=='__main__':
34
extractEar()
Page 84 of 102
==PAGE:87==
Betina Pedersen
Spring 2017
D.6
Conversion of image coordinates to world coordinates
The function shown in Listing D.8 transforms image coordinates to world coordinates based on
the direction, spacing and origin parameters in the meta data of the images.
Listing D.8: Transforming image coordinates to world coordinates
1
def convertCoord2world(coord,Direction,Spacing,Origin):
2
# Convert a point in image coordinates to world coordinates
3
x = coord[0]*Direction[0]*Spacing[0]+coord[1]*Direction[1]*
Spacing[1]+coord[2]*Direction[2]*Spacing[2]+Origin[0]
4
y = coord[0]*Direction[3]*Spacing[0]+coord[1]*Direction[4]*
Spacing[1]+coord[2]*Direction[5]*Spacing[2]+Origin[1]
5
z = coord[0]*Direction[6]*Spacing[0]+coord[1]*Direction[7]*
Spacing[1]+coord[2]*Direction[8]*Spacing[2]+Origin[2]
6
7
# Return a list of the new coordinates
8
world = [x,y,z]
9
return world
Listing D.9 shows a function that returns the number of points in a vtk ﬁle. The output of this
function is used in several computations and not only for the conversion of coordinates.
Listing D.9: Function that returns the number of points in a vtk ﬁle.
1
def getNumberOfPoints(vtkName):
2
vtk = open(vtkName,"r")
3
for i in range(5):
4
line = vtk.readline()
5
if i == 4: # The number of points is written on the 5'th
line (using 0-indexing) in the vtk file
6
numPoints = int(line[7:line.find("float")]) # The number
of points
7
return numPoints
The function shown in Listing D.10 extracts the coordinates from a line in a vtk ﬁle. As such a
line can contain up to three points corresponding to nine coordinates, an input stating the length
of the line should be given. The length should be a number from 1 to 3.
Listing D.10: Reading coordinates from a vtk ﬁle
1
def getCoordinates(line,length):
2
# Read substrings
3
s1 = line.find(" ")
4
s2 = line.find(" ",s1+1)
5
s3 = line.find(" ",s2+1)
6
7
# If the line only contains 1 point (3 coordinates)
8
if(length == "1"):
9
# Convert the strings to floating point values
10
coord = [float(line[0:s1]), float(line[s1+1:s2]), float(line
[s2+1:s3])]
11
12
# If the line contaions 2 points (6 coordinates)
13
elif(length == "2"):
14
# Read the remaining substrings
Page 85 of 102
==PAGE:88==
Betina Pedersen
Spring 2017
15
s4 = line.find(" ",s3+1)
16
s5 = line.find(" ",s4+1)
17
s6 = line.find(" ",s5+1)
18
19
# Convert the strings to floating point values
20
coord = [float(line[0:s1]), float(line[s1+1:s2]), float(line
[s2+1:s3]), float(line[s3+1:s4]), float(line[s4+1:s5]),
float(line[s5+1:s6])]
21
22
# If the line contains 3 points (9 coordinates)
23
elif(length == "3"):
24
# Read the remaining substrings
25
s4 = line.find(" ",s3+1)
26
s5 = line.find(" ",s4+1)
27
s6 = line.find(" ",s5+1)
28
s7 = line.find(" ",s6+1)
29
s8 = line.find(" ",s7+1)
30
31
# Convert the strings to floating point values
32
coord = [float(line[0:s1]), float(line[s1+1:s2]), float(line
[s2+1:s3]), float(line[s3+1:s4]), float(line[s4+1:s5]),
33
float(line[s5+1:s6]), float(line[s6+1:s7]), float(line[
s7+1:s8]), float(line[s8+1:])]
34
35
# Return the list of coordinates
36
return coord
Listing D.11 shows the main function that converts all vtk ﬁles from image to world coordinates
for a given subject. The input numPoints is the number of points in the vtk ﬁle corresponding
to the output of Listing D.9.
Listing D.11: Main function converting all vtk ﬁles from image to world coordinates for a given
subject.
1
def im2world(pc,sub,numPoints):
2
# Set directory to SimpleITK depending on the computer
3
SR.importSitk(pc)
4
import SimpleITK as sitk
5
6
# Read atlas image to get the meta data needed to make the
conversion between the two coordinate systems
7
atlas = sitk.ReadImage("Atlas\\ATLAS.hdr")
8
Spacing = atlas.GetSpacing()
9
Origin = atlas.GetOrigin()
10
Direction = atlas.GetDirection()
11
12
# Open the original and the new vtk files
13
oldVtk = open("Atlas\\ATLAS-imageCoordinates.vtk","r")
14
newVtk = open("Atlas\\ATLAS-worldCoordinates.vtk","w")
15
16
# Copy the first 5 lines from the original vtk file to the new
one
17
for i in range(5):
18
line = oldVtk.readline()
19
newVtk.write(line)
20
Page 86 of 102
==PAGE:89==
Betina Pedersen
Spring 2017
21
# The format of the original vtk file is that 3 points (9
coordinates) is written on each line.
22
# This loop reads each line containing 3 points
23
for i in range(1,int(numPoints/3)+1):
24
line = oldVtk.readline()
25
# Extract the coordinates from the line
26
coord = SR.getCoordinates(line,"3")
27
28
# Converts the image coordinates to world coordinates
29
x1 = SR.convertCoord2world(coord[0:3],Direction,Spacing,
Origin)
30
x2 = SR.convertCoord2world(coord[3:6],Direction,Spacing,
Origin)
31
x3 = SR.convertCoord2world(coord[6:9],Direction,Spacing,
Origin)
32
33
# Write the world coordinates in a new format: Each line
contains 1 point (3 coordinates)
34
newVtk.write(str(x1[0])+" "+str(x1[1])+" "+str(x1[2])+"\n")
35
newVtk.write(str(x2[0])+" "+str(x2[1])+" "+str(x2[2])+"\n")
36
newVtk.write(str(x3[0])+" "+str(x3[1])+" "+str(x3[2])+"\n")
37
38
# This loop reads a line containing only 1 point in the original
vtk file
39
if(numPoints%3==1):
40
line = oldVtk.readline()
41
# Extract the coordinates from the line
42
coord = SR.getCoordinates(line,"1")
43
44
# Converts the coordinates to world coordinates
45
x1 = SR.convertCoord2world(coord,Direction,Spacing,Origin)
46
47
# Write the world coordinates to the new vtk file
48
newVtk.write(str(x1[0])+" "+str(x1[1])+" "+str(x1[2])+"\n")
49
50
# This loop reads a line containing only 2 points in the
original vtk file
51
if(numPoints%3==2):
52
line = oldVtk.readline()
53
# Extract the coordinates from the line
54
coord = SR.getCoordinates(line,"2")
55
56
# Converts the coordinates to to world coordinates
57
x1 = SR.convertCoord2world(coord[0:3],Direction,Spacing,
Origin)
58
x2 = SR.convertCoord2world(coord[3:6],Direction,Spacing,
Origin)
59
60
# Write the world coordinates to the new vtk file
61
newVtk.write(str(x1[0])+" "+str(x1[1])+" "+str(x1[2])+"\n")
62
newVtk.write(str(x2[0])+" "+str(x2[1])+" "+str(x2[2])+"\n")
63
64
# Copy the remaining lines from the original vtk file to the new
file.
65
for line in oldVtk:
66
newVtk.write(line)
Page 87 of 102
==PAGE:90==
Betina Pedersen
Spring 2017
67
68
oldVtk.close()
69
newVtk.close()
D.7
B-spline registration of MRI images to the atlas
Listing D.12 shows a function that sets necessary parameters and variables for SimpleElastix. As
image registrations are performed several times in the entire code, this function has been made
such that these lines of code do not have to be repeated for every image registration. This function
does not do the image registration. It only sets up the needed parameters.
Listing D.12: Function that sets up the main SimpleElastix parameters.
1
def SE_setup(fixed,moving,transform,iter):
2
import SimpleITK as sitk
3
SE = sitk.SimpleElastix()
4
p = sitk.GetDefaultParameterMap(transform)
5
p["MaximumNumberOfIterations"] = [iter]
6
SE.SetParameterMap(p)
7
SE.SetFixedImage(fixed)
8
SE.SetMovingImage(moving)
9
return SE
The function shown in Listing D.13 transforms all rigidly aligned MRI images of a subject to the
atlas using a B-spline transformation.
Listing D.13: Main function that transform MRI images to the atlas using a B-spline registration.
1
def transformMRI(pc,sub):
2
# Set directory to SimpleITK depending on the computer
3
SR.importSitk(pc)
4
import SimpleITK as sitk
5
6
# Get number of MRI images for the given subject
7
num = SR.getNum(sub)
8
9
# Initialize array for MRI images
10
images = [1]*num
11
12
# Read the MR images into the array in 16 bit format
13
print("
Reading and byteswapping images:" ,end="",flush=True)
14
for i in range(1,num+1):
15
FileName = sub+"\\InitialTransformedImages\\RigidMaskTrans_"
+sub+"_%d.nii"%i
16
images[i-1] = sitk.ReadImage(FileName,sitk.sitkInt16)
17
18
# Make byteswapped version of the images for Landmarker
19
SR.byteswap(images[i-1],sub+"\\
byteswappedInitialTransformedImages\\g"+sub+"_MR0%d-16
bit.hdr"%i)
20
21
# Read atlas in 16 bit format
22
atlas = sitk.ReadImage("Atlas\\ATLAS.hdr",sitk.sitkInt16)
23
print(" Done",flush=True)
24
Page 88 of 102
==PAGE:91==
Betina Pedersen
Spring 2017
25
# Load the mask image
26
mask = sitk.ReadImage("Atlas\\MaskAtlas.nii",sitk.sitkUInt8)
27
28
# Perform the transformation from all the MR images to the atlas
29
for i in range(0,num):
30
print("
Transforming MRI image number %d:"%(i+1) ,end ="",
flush=True)
31
32
# Set the needed parameters for Simple Elastix
33
SE1 = SR.SE_setup(atlas,images[i],"bspline","2000")
34
SE1.SetFixedMask(mask)
35
36
# Set the desired filenames
37
parameterName = sub+"\\TransformParameters\\Transform2Atlas_
"+sub+"_%d.txt"%(i+1)
38
imageName = sub+"\\TransformedImages\\Transform2Atlas_"+sub+
"_%d.hdr"%(i+1)
39
40
# Do the transformation
41
SE1.Execute()
42
print(' Done', flush=True)
43
44
# Save the transformation parameters and resulting image
45
p1 = SE1.GetTransformParameterMap()
46
SE1.WriteParameterFile(p1[0],parameterName)
47
sitk.WriteImage(SE1.GetResultImage(),imageName)
D.8
B-spline transformation of surfaces
Listing D.14 shows a function similar to the function in Listing D.12, but for SimpleTransformix
instead of SimpleElastix. The function in Listing D.14 sets up the main parameters for Simple-
Transformix.
Listing D.14: Sets up the basic SimpleTransformix parameters
1
# Function that sets up the standard SimpleTransformix parameters
2
def ST_setup(movingIm,parameterFile,log):
3
import SimpleITK as sitk
4
ST = sitk.SimpleTransformix()
5
transformParameterMap = ST.ReadParameterFile(parameterFile)
6
ST.SetTransformParameterMap(transformParameterMap)
7
ST.SetMovingImage(movingIm)
8
9
# Write log to console if wanted by the user
10
if(log=='on'):
11
ST.LogToConsoleOn()
12
elif(log=='off'):
13
ST.LogToConsoleOff()
14
ST.SetOutputDirectory(".")
15
return ST
Listing D.15 shows the function that transforms the atlas surface into a surface corresponding to
each stage based on the B-spline parameters found in D.13.
Page 89 of 102
==PAGE:92==
Betina Pedersen
Spring 2017
Listing D.15: Transforms the atlas surface using the B-spline transformation parameters
1
def transformSurface(pc,sub,log):
2
# Set directory to SimpleITK depending on the computer
3
SR.importSitk(pc)
4
import SimpleITK as sitk
5
6
# Path to output folder containing the vtk files
7
folder = sub+'\\TransformedSurfaces\\WorldCoordinates'
8
9
# Deletes the files in the output folder if this folder is not
empty
10
for the_file in os.listdir(folder):
11
file_path = os.path.join(folder, the_file)
12
if os.path.isfile(file_path):
13
os.unlink(file_path)
14
15
# Read the atlas image and convert it to 16 bit
16
atlas = sitk.ReadImage("Atlas\\ATLAS.hdr",sitk.sitkInt16)
17
18
# Get the number of MR images for the subject
19
num = SR.getNum(sub)
20
21
# Transform the atlas surface using all the transform parameter
files
22
for i in range(1,num+1):
23
print("
Transforming atlas to MRI %d:"%(i) ,end="",flush=
True)
24
25
# Set the file names
26
FileName = sub+"\\TransformParameters\\Transform2Atlas_"+sub
+"_%d.txt"%i
27
surfaceName = sub+'\\TransformedSurfaces\\WorldCoordinates\\
atlas2g'+sub+'_mr%d-WorldCoordinates.vtk'%i
28
29
# Set the transformix parameters
30
ST = SR.ST_setup(atlas,FileName,log)
31
ST.SetFixedPointSetFileName("Atlas\\ATLAS-worldCoordinates.
vtk")
32
33
# Make the transformation
34
ST.Execute()
35
print(" Done",flush=True)
36
37
# Rename resulting vtk file to the desired name
38
os.rename('outputpoints.vtk',surfaceName)
Page 90 of 102
==PAGE:93==
Betina Pedersen
Spring 2017
D.9
Conversion from world to image coodinates
The function shown in Listing D.16 converts the world coordinates into image coordinates based
on the origin, direction and spacing parameters in the meta data of the images.
Listing D.16: Converts world coordinates to image coordinates
1
def world2im(pc,sub,numPoints):
2
# Set directory to SimpleITK depending on the computer
3
SR.importSitk(pc)
4
import SimpleITK as sitk
5
6
# Read the atlas image to get the meta data needed to make the
conversion between the two coordinate systems
7
atlas = sitk.ReadImage("Atlas\\ATLAS.hdr")
8
Spacing = atlas.GetSpacing()
9
Origin = atlas.GetOrigin()
10
Direction = atlas.GetDirection()
11
12
# Get the number of MR images
13
num = SR.getNum(sub)
14
15
# For all the vtk files for the given subject
16
for MR in range(1,num+1):
17
# Set the vtk file names
18
oldName = sub+"\\TransformedSurfaces\\WorldCoordinates\\
atlas2g"+sub+"_mr%d-WorldCoordinates.vtk"%MR
19
newName = sub+"\\TransformedSurfaces\\ImageCoordinates\\
atlas2g"+sub+"_mr%d-ImageCoordinates.vtk"%MR
20
21
oldVtk = open(oldName,"r")
22
newVtk = open(newName,"w")
23
24
# Copy the first 5 lines from the original vtk file into the
new one
25
for i in range(5):
26
line = oldVtk.readline()
27
newVtk.write(line)
28
29
# Read the next lines form the original vtk file containing
the coordinates in world coordinates
30
for i in range(1,numPoints+1):
31
line = oldVtk.readline()
32
coord = SR.getCoordinates(line,"1")
33
34
# Convert the World coordinates into image coordinates
35
i1 = (coord[0]-Origin[0])/(Direction[0]*Spacing[0])
36
j1 = (coord[1]-Origin[1])/(Direction[4]*Spacing[1])
37
k1 = (coord[2]-Origin[2])/(Direction[8]*Spacing[2])
38
39
# Write the image coordinates to the new vtk file
40
newVtk.write(str(i1)+" "+str(j1)+" "+str(k1)+"\n")
41
42
# Copy all the remaing lines from the original vtk file to
the new one
43
for line in oldVtk:
Page 91 of 102
==PAGE:94==
Betina Pedersen
Spring 2017
44
newVtk.write(line)
45
46
oldVtk.close()
47
newVtk.close()
D.10
Generate a mean surface
Listing D.17 shows the code used to generate a mean surface for each subject. Apart from getting
the pc and subject parameters as input, this function also needs the number of points in the
vtk ﬁle and the desired coordinate system which is either World or Image.
Listing D.17: Calculates the mean transformed surface of a given subject.
1
def MeanVtk(pc,sub,numPoints,coordSystem):
2
# Set directory to SimpleITK based on the computer
3
SR.importSitk(pc)
4
import SimpleITK as sitk
5
6
# Initialize arrays for the coordinates of all the points, one
array for each direction X, Y and Z
7
arrayX = [0]*numPoints
8
arrayY = [0]*numPoints
9
arrayZ = [0]*numPoints
10
11
# Get the number of MR images for the given subject
12
num = SR.getNum(sub)
13
14
# Read the vtk file for each of the transformed surfaces
15
for MR in range(1,num+1):
16
# Read and create the needed vtk files.
17
# A txt file only containing the coodinates of the mean is
also generated, as Matlab do not support vtk files.
18
subject = "_mr%d-"%MR
19
vtkName = sub+"\\TransformedSurfaces\\"+coordSystem+"
Coordinates\\atlas2g"+sub+subject+coordSystem+"
Coordinates.vtk"
20
meanName = sub+"\\TransformedSurfaces\\"+coordSystem+"
Coordinates\\atlas2g"+sub+"_MEAN-"+coordSystem+"
Coordinates.vtk"
21
txtName = sub+"\\TransformedSurfaces\\"+coordSystem+"
Coordinates\\txt\\atlas2g"+sub+"_MEAN-"+coordSystem+"
Coordinates.txt"
22
23
vtk = open(vtkName,"r")
24
25
count = 0
26
count2 = 0
27
# Read the entire vtk file
28
for line in vtk:
29
count = count +1
30
# For the lines containg the point coordinates
31
if(count >5 and count <= numPoints + 5):
32
# Read the coordinates
33
coord = SR.getCoordinates(line,"1")
34
Page 92 of 102
==PAGE:95==
Betina Pedersen
Spring 2017
35
# Add coordinates in order to calculate the average
36
arrayX[count2] = arrayX[count2] + coord[0]
37
arrayY[count2] = arrayY[count2] + coord[1]
38
arrayZ[count2] = arrayZ[count2] + coord[2]
39
count2 = count2 + 1
40
41
# Calculate average of the coordinates
42
arrayX[:] = [x / float(num) for x in arrayX]
43
arrayY[:] = [x / float(num) for x in arrayY]
44
arrayZ[:] = [x / float(num) for x in arrayZ]
45
46
TXT = open(txtName,"w")
47
MeanVtk = open(meanName,"w")
48
vtk = open(vtkName,"r")
49
count = 0
50
count2 = 0
51
# Read any of the vtk files
52
for line in vtk:
53
count = count +1
54
55
# Copy everything else than the coordinates from a vtk file
to the mean vtk file
56
if(count <=5 or count >numPoints +5):
57
MeanVtk.write(line)
58
59
# Write the average coordinates to the mean vtk file and the
txt file
60
elif(count >5 and count <= numPoints + 5):
61
MeanVtk.write(str(arrayX[count2])+" "+str(arrayY[count2
])+" "+str(arrayZ[count2])+"\n")
62
TXT.write(str(arrayX[count2])+" "+str(arrayY[count2])+"
"+str(arrayZ[count2])+"\n")
63
count2 = count2 +1
64
vtk.close()
65
MeanVtk.close()
66
TXT.close()
D.11
Surfae registration using srreg
IRTK is a command line program and in order to perform a rigid surface registration of all sur-
faces of Subject 019 to its mean surface, the lines in Listing D.18 should be called. The paths to
all the ﬁles need to be full paths as the code need to be run through Python. However, the paths
have been deleted in this example to make the batch ﬁle more readable. In general, the batch ﬁle
has the form:
srreg source.vtk target.vtk -dofout parameterFileName.dof
stransformation source.vtk output.vtk -dofin parameterFileName.dof
The batch ﬁle shown in Listing D.18 is the default ﬁle. For each subject this ﬁle is copied and
the needed changes in the paths are made, such that the batch ﬁle can be run for the particular
subject.
Page 93 of 102
==PAGE:96==
Betina Pedersen
Spring 2017
Listing D.18: Batch ﬁle for running srreg from IRTK.
1
FOR /l %%x IN (1,1,11) DO (
2
srreg atlas2gsub019_mr%%x-WorldCoordinates.vtk^
3
atlas2gsub019_MEAN-WorldCoordinates.vtk^
4
-dofout sub019_srreg_MR%%x.dof
5
6
stransformation atlas2gsub019_mr%%x-WorldCoordinates.vtk^
7
sub019_srreg_MR%%x.vtk^
8
-dofin sub019_srreg_MR%%x.dof
9
)
Listing D.19 shows how the default batch ﬁle from Listing D.18 is copied and changed to match
the given subject.
Listing D.19: Python function that copies the default batch ﬁle and changes it for the given subject.
1
def CopySrregFile(pc,sub):
2
# Set the needed filenames
3
fname = sub+"\\SRREG\\srreg_"+pc+".cmd"
4
source = "srreg_"+pc+".cmd"
5
6
# If the desired batch file has not already been created
7
if not os.path.isfile(fname):
8
# Open the default and a new batch file
9
f = open(source, 'r')
10
newF = open(fname,'w')
11
12
# Get the number of MRIs of the subject
13
num = len(fnmatch.filter(os.listdir(sub+"\\
byteswappedInitialTransformedImages"), '*.hdr'))
14
# Copy the content of the default file and change the
strings depended on the particular subject
15
for line in f:
16
if (line.find("FOR /l %%x IN (1,1,11) DO (") != -1):
17
newLine = line.replace("(1,1,11)","(1,1,"+str(num)+"
)")
18
newF.write(newLine)
19
elif (line.find("sub019") != -1):
20
newLine = line.replace("sub019",sub)
21
newF.write(newLine)
22
else:
23
newF.write(line)
Listing D.20 shows the main function that does the surface registration using srreg. It creates
the correct batch ﬁle and runs it from the command line.
Listing D.20: Batch ﬁle for running srreg from IRTK.
1
def SRREG(pc,sub):
2
# Make needed changes to the default batch file
3
CopySrregFile(pc,sub)
4
5
# Run the new batch file from the command line
6
if(pc=="Laptop"):
7
os.system("C:\\Users\\Betina\\Desktop\\Program\\"+sub+"\\
SRREG\\srreg_Laptop.cmd")
Page 94 of 102
==PAGE:97==
Betina Pedersen
Spring 2017
8
elif(pc=="3D-Lab"):
9
os.system("C:\\Users\\bkopp\\Desktop\\Program\\"+sub+"\\
SRREG\\srreg_3D-Lab.cmd")
D.12
The volume based surface registration method
Listing D.21 shows the function that transforms surfaces using the volume based method.
Listing D.21: Creates a distance map and transforms it rigidly to the distance map of the mean
surface. These parameters are then used to transform the corresponding surfaces.
1
def transformSurfaceVolume(pc,sub,numPoints,log):
2
# Set directory to SimpleITK depending on the computer
3
SR.importSitk(pc)
4
import SimpleITK as sitk
5
6
# Load atlas image
7
im = sitk.ReadImage("Atlas\\ATLAS.hdr")
8
9
# Create a zero-filled image with the same orientation etc. as
the atlas
10
nda = sitk.GetArrayFromImage(im)
11
ndaNew = numpy.zeros_like(nda,dtype=numpy.int)
12
imMEAN
= sitk.GetImageFromArray(ndaNew)
13
imMEAN.CopyInformation(im)
14
15
# Read surface file
16
vtkMEAN_name =
sub+"\\TransformedSurfaces\\WorldCoordinates\\
atlas2g"+sub+"_MEAN-WorldCoordinates.vtk"
17
vtkMEAN =
open(vtkMEAN_name,"r")
18
i = 0
19
for line in vtkMEAN:
20
i = i +1
21
# Set voxels corresponidng to point to be 1
22
if(i >5 and i <= numPoints + 5):
23
coord = SR.getCoordinates(line,"1")
24
index_mean = im.TransformPhysicalPointToIndex(coord)
25
imMEAN.SetPixel(index_mean,1)
26
27
# Create a distance map of the binary image
28
imMEAN = sitk.SignedDanielssonDistanceMap(imMEAN)
29
vtkMEAN.close()
30
31
# For all MR images create a binary image with ones
corresponding to points in the vtk file
32
num = SR.getNum(sub)
33
for q in range(num):
34
print("
Transforming surface volume %d: "%(q+1) ,end="",
flush=True)
35
# Create zero-filled image with same metadata as the atlas
36
imMR
= sitk.GetImageFromArray(ndaNew)
37
imMR.CopyInformation(im)
38
39
# Open the vtk file
Page 95 of 102
==PAGE:98==
Betina Pedersen
Spring 2017
40
vtkMR_name = sub+"\\TransformedSurfaces\\WorldCoordinates\\
atlas2g"+sub+"_mr%d-WorldCoordinates.vtk"%(q+1)
41
vtkMR =
open(vtkMR_name,"r")
42
43
# Set voxels corresponding to points to 1
44
i = 0
45
for line in vtkMR:
46
i = i +1
47
if(i >5 and i <= numPoints + 5):
48
coord = SR.getCoordinates(line,"1")
49
index_mr = im.TransformPhysicalPointToIndex(coord)
50
imMR.SetPixel(index_mr,1)
51
52
# Create a distance map for the binary image
53
imMR = sitk.SignedDanielssonDistanceMap(imMR)
54
vtkMR.close()
55
56
# Register mean distance map to MRI distance map and save
parameters
57
SE = SR.SE_setup(imMEAN,imMR,"rigid","1000")
58
SE.Execute()
59
p1 = SE.GetTransformParameterMap()
60
SE.WriteParameterFile(p1[0],sub+"\\
SurfaceVolumeTransformParameters\\surfaceParameters_mr%d
.txt"%(q+1))
61
62
# Make inverse registration in order to transform the
surfaces
63
SE = SR.SE_setup(imMR,imMEAN,"rigid","1000")
64
SE.Execute()
65
p1 = SE.GetTransformParameterMap()
66
SE.WriteParameterFile(p1[0],sub+"\\
SurfaceVolumeTransformParameters\\
InverseSurfaceParameters_mr%d.txt"%(q+1))
67
68
## Transform MRI vtk to Mean vtk using the parameters. Save
the resulting surface.
69
ST = SR.ST_setup(im,sub+"\\SurfaceVolumeTransformParameters
\\InverseSurfaceParameters_mr%d.txt"%(q+1),log)
70
ST.SetFixedPointSetFileName(sub+"\\TransformedSurfaces\\
WorldCoordinates\\atlas2g"+sub+"_mr%d-WorldCoordinates.
vtk"%(q+1))
71
ST.Execute()
72
os.rename('outputpoints.vtk',sub+"\\
TransformedSurfaceVolumes\\TransformedSurfacesOutput_"+
sub+"_mr%d.vtk"%(q+1))
73
print("Done",flush=True)
Page 96 of 102
==PAGE:99==
Betina Pedersen
Spring 2017
D.13
Final transformation of MRI images
The function shown in Listing D.22 transforms the images, which are rigidly aligned to the atlas,
with the rigid transformation parameters found using the volume method.
Listing D.22: This program makes the ﬁnal transformation of the MRI images.
1
def FullTransformOfImages(pc,sub,log):
2
# Import SimpleITK depending on the computer
3
SR.importSitk(pc)
4
import SimpleITK as sitk
5
6
# Get number of MR images
7
num = SR.getNum(sub)
8
9
# Transform all MR images
10
for i in range(1,num+1):
11
print("
Transforming original MRI %d: "%i ,end="",flush=
True)
12
# Set image and parameters for SimpleTransformix
13
moving = sitk.ReadImage(sub+"\\InitialTransformedImages\\
RigidMaskTrans_"+sub+"_%d.nii"%(i))
14
ST = SR.ST_setup(moving,sub+"\\
SurfaceVolumeTransformParameters\\surfaceParameters_mr%d
.txt"%(i),log)
15
ST.Execute()
16
im1 = ST.GetResultImage()
17
# Save the resulting image. This is the main result of the
superimpositining technique.
18
sitk.WriteImage(im1,sub+"\\result\\FinalResult_"+sub+"_mr%d.
nii"%(i))
19
im1 = sitk.ReadImage(sub+"\\result\\FinalResult_"+sub+"_mr%d
.nii"%(i),sitk.sitkInt16)
20
SR.byteswap(im1,sub+"\\result\\FinalResult_"+sub+"_mr%
d_16bit.hdr"%(i))
21
22
print(" Done")
D.14
Main program
The function shown in Listing D.23 is the main program of the automatic process. It is run from
the commandline and it expects the pc and subject as input, as explained in Section D.1. A
third argument log is optional. It states whether SimpleTransformix should print the log to the
console or not. log can be either on or off, with off being default.
Listing D.23: This is the main program that performs the entire automatic process.
1
2
# import the needed modules
3
import sys
4
import functions
5
import Subroutines as SR
6
7
def Main():
Page 97 of 102
==PAGE:100==
Betina Pedersen
Spring 2017
8
# Check the user input
9
length = len(sys.argv)
10
if length <3 or length >4:
11
sys.exit("Wrong number of input arguments.")
12
else:
13
pc = sys.argv[1]
14
sub = sys.argv[2]
15
log = "off"
16
if length == 4:
17
masking = sys.argv[3]
18
19
# The superimpositining process:
20
# Make folders for the output
21
print('Making output directories:' ,
end='', flush=True)
22
functions.makeDirectory(sub)
23
print(' Done', flush=True)
24
25
#Initially align MR images
26
print('Register to atlas...', flush=True)
27
functions.register2atlas(pc,sub)
28
29
# Rescale MR images
30
print('Rescaling MRI images: ' ,end="", flush=True)
31
functions.RescaleIntensities(pc,sub)
32
print("Done",flush=True)
33
34
# Register MRI images to the atlas
35
print('Transforming MRI images to atlas...', flush=True)
36
functions.transformMRI(pc,sub)
37
print('Transformation of all MRI images: Done', flush=True)
38
39
# Get number of points in vtk file
40
vtkName = "Atlas\\ATLAS-imageCoordinates.vtk"
41
numPoints = SR.getNumberOfPoints(vtkName)
42
43
# Change landmarker output from image to world coordinates
44
print('Convert vtk file from image to world coordinatess:' ,end='
', flush=True)
45
functions.im2world(pc,sub,numPoints)
46
print(' Done', flush=True)
47
48
# Transform the surface using the stored transform parameters.
This is done in world coordinates.
49
print('Transform atlas surface to MRI images...', flush=True)
50
functions.transformSurface(pc,sub,log)
51
print('Transform atlas surface to MRI images: Done', flush=True)
52
53
# Change transformed surfaces from world to image coordinates.
54
print('Convert vtk files from world to images coordinatess:' ,end
='', flush=True)
55
functions.world2im(pc,sub,numPoints)
56
print(' Done', flush=True)
57
58
# Calculate the average of the transformed surfaces
59
print('Calculate mean transformed surface in image coordinatess:
' ,end='', flush=True)
Page 98 of 102
==PAGE:101==
Betina Pedersen
Spring 2017
60
functions.MeanVtk(pc,sub,numPoints,"Image")
61
functions.MeanVtk(pc,sub,numPoints,"World")
62
print(' Done', flush=True)
63
64
# Convert all vtk files to txt files
65
print('Convert vtk files to txt files:' ,end='', flush=True)
66
functions.AllVtkAsTxt(sub,numPoints,"Image")
67
functions.AllVtkAsTxt(sub,numPoints,"World")
68
print(' Done', flush=True)
69
70
# Calculate the centres of masses
71
print('Calculate centres of masses:' ,end='', flush=True)
72
functions.CenterOfMass(pc,sub,numPoints,"World")
73
print(' Done', flush=True)
74
75
# Make surface to a volume image and transform it
76
print('Transforming surface volumes...', flush=True)
77
functions.transformSurfaceVolume(pc,sub,numPoints,log)
78
print(' Done', flush=True)
79
80
# Transform the origianl images to get the final result with a
stable inner ear
81
print('Transforming original images...', flush=True)
82
functions.FullTransformOfImages(pc,sub,log)
83
84
print("Running SRREG...", flush=True)
85
functions.SRREG(pc,sub)
86
print('\n The entire program has run succesfully')
87
88
# Main program:
89
if __name__ == '__main__':
90
Main()
D.15
Byteswapping images
The function shown in Listing D.24 is called whenever a 16 bit image has to be byteswapped. This
is necessary if the image should be opened in Landmarker.
Listing D.24: Function that byteswaps a 16 bit image.
1
# Function that byteswaps a 16 bit image
2
def byteswap(image,name):
3
import SimpleITK as sitk
4
5
# Get image array and byteswap it
6
nda = sitk.GetArrayFromImage(image)
7
nda.byteswap(True)
8
9
# Put new array back into the image
10
res = sitk.GetImageFromArray(nda)
11
res.CopyInformation(image)
12
13
# Save the byteswapped image
14
sitk.WriteImage(res,name)
Page 99 of 102
==PAGE:102==
Bibliography
Besl, P. and N. McKay
1992. A method for registration of 3-D shapes. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine
Intelligence, 14(2):239–256. 2.4, 2.4
Bettega, G., M. Chenin, H. Sadek, P. Cinquin, J. Lebeau, M. Coulomb, and B. Raphael
1996. Three-dimensional fetal cephalometry. The Cleft Palate-Craniofacial Journal, 33(6):463–467.
PMID: 8939369. 1.4, 1.3
Bishop, C.
2006. Pattern recognition and machine learning, chapter 12. springer. 2.5
Björk, A.
1965. Käkarnas tillväxt och utveckling i relation till kraniet i dess helhet. Forlaget for Faglitteratur
(ed). Nordisk Klinsk Odontologi, ed, 1:1–44. 1.1
Bourke, P.
1994. Polygonising a scalar ﬁeld. Cupertino: http://paulbourke. net Available from: http://paulbourke.
net/geometry/polygonise [Accessed 1 April 2011]. 2.3
Cevidanes, L., G. Heymann, M. Cornelis, H. DeClerck, and J. Tulloch
2009a. Superimposition of 3-dimensional cone-beam computed tomography models of grow-
ing patients. American Journal of Orthodontics and Dentofacial Orthopedics, 136(1):94–99. 1.4
Cevidanes, L., M. Styner, and W. Profﬁt
2009b. Superposition tridimensionnelle (3-D) sur la base du crâne pour l’évaluation longitudi-
nale des effets de la croissance et du traitement. L’Orthodontie francaise, 80(4):347–357. 1.4
Cevidanes, L., M. Styner, and W. Profﬁt
2009c. Superposition tridimensionnelle (3-D) sur la base du crâne pour l’évaluation longitudi-
nale des effets de la croissance et du traitement. Orthod Fr, 80(4):347–357. 1.1
Christensen, G., J. He, J. Dill, J. Rubinstein, M. Vannier, and G. Wang
2003. Automatic measurement of the labyrinth using image registration and a deformable inner
ear atlas. Academic radiology, 10(9):988–999. 1.4
Christensen, O.
2010. Functions, spaces, and expansions: mathematical tools in physics and engineering. Springer
Science & Business Media. 2.2
Dardenne, J., G. Papernot-Cousteix, R. Fenart, and R. Empereur-Buisson
1972.
Utilité en céphalométrie de l’interprétation des images tomographiques de la région
temporale. 1.2
Darvann, T.
2008. Landmarker: a VTK-based tool for landmarking of polygonal surfaces. In silico dentistry-
the evolution of computational oral health science. Osaka, Japan: Medigit, Pp. 160–2. 3.2
Elster, A.
2017. Questions and answers in MRI: real v imaginary signals. http://mriquestions.
com/real-v-imaginary.html. Accessed February 15, 2017. 2.1.1, 2.1.2, 2.1.2
100
==PAGE:103==
Betina Pedersen
Spring 2017
Fedorov, A., R. Beichel, J. Kalpathy-Cramer, J. Finet, J. Fillion-Robin, S. Pujol, C. Bauer, D. Jen-
nings, F. Fennessy, M. Sonka, et al.
2012. 3D Slicer as an image computing platform for the Quantitative Imaging Network. Mag-
netic resonance imaging, 30(9):1323–1341. 3.2
Fenart, R. and P. Canal
1986. Etude de la symétrie des canaux semi-circulaires horizontaux des labyrinthes. Bulletin de
l’Association des anatomistes, 70(209):33–36. 1.4
Fitzpatrick, J., D. Hill, and C. Maurer Jr
2000. Image registration. In Handbook Of Medical Imaging, volume 2, Pp. 447–513. Spie Press,
Bellingham, Washington USA. 2.2, 2.2
Friese, T.
9.7.2012. Vestibular rehabilitation: How learning about inner ear strengthening breathed life
into a dead therapist part 1.
https://forwardthinkingpt.com/2012/07/09/vestibular-
rehabilitation-how-learning-about-inner-ear-strengthening-breathed-life-into-a-dead-
therapist-part-1/. Source of illustration. Accessed: 19.06.2017. 1.2
Gudbjartsson, H. and S. Patz
1995. The Rician distribution of noisy MRI data. Magnetic resonance in medicine, 34(6):910–914.
2.1.2
Hornak, J.
2017. The Basics of MRI. https://www.cis.rit.edu/htbooks/mri/inside.htm. Ac-
cessed February 15, 2017. 2.1, 2.1.1, 2.1.2
Jovicich, J., S. Czanner, D. Greve, E. Haley, A. van der Kouwe, R. Gollub, D. Kennedy, F. Schmitt,
G. Brown, J. MacFall, et al.
2006. Reliability in multi-site structural MRI studies: effects of gradient non-linearity correction
on phantom and human data. Neuroimage, 30(2):436–443. 2.1.2
Klein, S. and M. Staring
2010. Elastix the manual. v4. 3, Tech. rep. Utrecht: Image Sciences Institute, University Medical
Center. 2.2, 2.2.1
Kreiborg, S., P. Larsen, T. Darvann, H. Olafsdottir, N. Hermann, and H. Hove
2008. 3D Craniofacial growth analysis. In Mouth and Face Forum 2008-in Silico Dentistry (mff’08).
1.1, 1.2
Kreiborg, S., J. Marsh, M. Cohen, M. Liversage, H. Pedersen, F. Skovby, S. Børgesen, and M. Van-
nier
1993. Comparative three-dimensional analysis of CT-scans of the calvaria and cranial base in
Apert and Crouzon syndromes. Journal of cranio-maxillofacial surgery, 21(5):181–188. 1.2
Lee, J., K. Shin, J. Kim, J. Yoo, W. Song, and K. Koh
2013.
A morphometric study of the semicircular canals using micro-CT images in three-
dimensional reconstruction. The Anatomical Record, 296(5):834–839. 1.4
Leibfarth, S., D. Mönnich, S. Welz, S. Siegel, N. Schwenzer, H. Schmidt, D. Zips, and D. Thorwarth
2013. A strategy for multimodal deformable image registration to integrate pet/mr into radio-
therapy treatment planning. Acta Oncologica, 52(7):1353–1359. PMID: 23879651. 2.2.1
Lorensen, W. and H. Cline
1987. Marching cubes: a high resolution 3D surface construction algorithm. In ACM siggraph
computer graphics, volume 21, Pp. 163–169. ACM. 2.3, 2.1, 2.3
Lowekamp, B., D. Chen, L. Ibanez, and D. Blezek
2013. The design of SimpleITK. Frontiers in Neuroinformatics, 7:45. 3.2
Page 101 of 102
==PAGE:104==
Betina Pedersen
Spring 2017
Marstal, K., F. Berendsen, M. Staring, and S. Klein
2016a. SimpleElastix: A user-friendly, multi-lingual library for medical image registration. Interna-
tional Workshop on Biomedical Image Registration (WBIR). 3.2
Marstal, K., F. Berendsen, M. Staring, and S. Klein
2016b. Simpleelastix: A user-friendly, multi-lingual library for medical image registration. The
IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) Workshops. 3.2
Myers, J.
Dec 12, 2013.
Inner ear anatomy.
http://emedicine.medscape.com/article/
1968281-overview#a1. Accessed January 10, 2017. 1.3
Nowak, R.
1999. Wavelet-based rician noise removal for magnetic resonance imaging. IEEE Transactions
on Image Processing, 8(10):1408–1419. 2.1.2
Pluim, J., J. Maintz, and M. Viergever
2003. Mutual-information-based registration of medical images: a survey. IEEE Transactions on
Medical Imaging, 22(8):986–1004. 2.2.1
Preston, D.
November,
2006.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain and spine:
Ba-
sics.
http://casemed.case.edu/clerkships/neurology/Web%20Neurorad/MRI%
20Basics.htm. Accessed February 15, 2017. 2.1.1
Rostgaard, J., J. Tranum-Jensen, K. Qvortrup, and P. Holm-Nielsen
2012. Hovedets, halsens og de indre organers anatomi, chapter 5, Pp. 67–79. Munksgaard, 10th
edition edition. 1.3
Rueckert, D., L. Sonoda, C. Hayes, D. Hill, M. Leach, and D. Hawkes
1999. Nonrigid registration using free-form deformations: application to breast mr images.
IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging, 18(8):712–721. 2.2, 2.2
Sørensen, M.
1994. Temporal bone dynamics, the hard way: formation, growth, modeling, repair and quan-
tum type bone remodeling in the otic capsule. Acta Oto-Laryngologica, 114(sub512):5–22. 1.1,
1.4, 5.6
Studholme, C., D. Hawkes, and D. Hill
1998. Normalized entropy measure for multimodality image alignment. Proc. SPIE, 3338:132–
143. 2.2.1
Studholme, C., D. Hill, and D. Hawkes
1999. An overlap invariant entropy measure of 3D medical image alignment. Pattern recognition,
32(1):71–86. 3.2
Ulysses, J. and A. Conci
2010.
Measuring similarity in medical registration.
IWSSIP 17th International Conference on
Systems, Signals and Image Processing. 2.2.1
Venkat, N.
30.09.2016.
How does the ear help to maintain balance and equilibrium of the body?
https://owlcation.com/stem/How-does-the-ear-help-to-balance-the-body. Source of illustra-
tion. Accessed: 19.06.2017. 1.2
Vinchon, M., P. Pellerin, B. Pertuzon, R. Fénart, and P. Dhellemmes
2007. Vestibular orientation for craniofacial surgery: application to the management of unicoro-
nal synostosis. Child’s Nervous System, 23(12):1403–1409. 1.4
Weissheimer, A., L. Menezes, L. Koerich, J. Pham, and L. Cevidanes
2015.
Fast three-dimensional superimposition of cone beam computed tomography for or-
thopaedics and orthognathic surgery evaluation. International journal of oral and maxillofacial
surgery, 44(9):1188–1196. 1.4
Page 102 of 102
