==PAGE:1==
MARKET ANALYSIS OF A NON-GOVERNMENTAL
ORGANIZATION
Design and application of a contextual decision making
framework by literature analysis and a single case study
This MSc thesis was prepared at the department of Management Engineering at the Technical
University of Denmark in fulﬁllment of the requirements for acquiring a MSc of Industrial
Engineering and Management
June 9th 2017
Author:
Nawal Farhat Aguilar, s151463
Supervisor:
Zaza Nadja Lee Herbert-Hansen
==PAGE:2==
Executive Summary
Fundraising in non-governmental organizations (NGOs) is considered one of the main obsta-
cles that these organizations have to deal with. In order to accomplish a good performance,
every NGO requires funds to develop its work, that is, to be able to fulﬁll its purpose by helping
people in need. In particular, mental health NGOs represent a special case, as they have to face
the prevalent stigma associated with mental illnesses. This paper provides practitioners with a
framework that could help them with the evaluation of the most advantageous fundraising strat-
egy for this speciﬁc case of NGO. This is achieved by determining the distribution of resources
dedicated to improving internal and/or external strategies.
There is a lack of holistic approach towards market analysis in NGOs. Companies do develop
market analysis to maintain competitiveness over competitors. However, NGOs tend to miss
the fact that they operate in the market as well. Hence, they should design marketing plans to
achieve desired results by meeting the donor’s requests. The provided framework takes a holistic
method through qualitative and quantitative approaches to ascertain the optimal fundraising
strategy.
The key factors that affect the fundraising activities in mental health NGOs have been identiﬁed
through an extensive literature review. Two survey studies have been developed. The former,
directed towards all Denmark and called general survey, encompasses 36 respondents. The lat-
ter, within the mental health NGOs in Denmark called specialized survey, embraces 12 mental
health NGOs. The developed decision-making framework is applied to the case ﬁrm in order to
guarantee the practicability of the proposed framework.
NGO´s
fundraising 
strategy
INTERNAL 
LEVEL
EXTERNAL 
LEVEL
Resources
Strategic Planning
Governance
Communication
Human Resources
Capacity
R. NGO-Companies
R. NGO- Donors
Transparency
Seasonal Aspects
Philanthropy
Politics & Taxes
Social Stigma
Gender of Donors
Socioeconomic Status
The theoretical framework was developed based on the
literature review and subsequently applied to the case
study. The framework contains the key factors that must
be evaluated in order to ﬁnd the optimal fundraising strat-
egy for the particular NGO.
A novel opportunity for practitioners to address the management of resources within a NGO
is developed by means of two different approaches. The qualitative method studies the identi-
ﬁed key factors, in addition to the quantitative analysis that calculates the optimal fundraising
strategy based on the aforementioned key factors properly weighted. The specialized survey
was successful. In contrast, to ensure a better conﬁdence level for the general survey, further
research should be conducted in order to validate the robustness of the framework.
i
==PAGE:3==
Table of Contents
Executive Summary
i
Table of Contents
ii
Article
iii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.
Literature Review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.1
Fundraising in NGOs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Contextual key factors
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Summary of literature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.
Methodology Research Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.1
Literature review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.2
The case ﬁrm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.3
Data collection method: survey questionnaires
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.4
Summary of paper’s methodology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.5
Validity of collected data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.
Case Study Findings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.1
The case ﬁrm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.2
Survey questionnaires . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5.
Case Study Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5.1
Qualitative analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5.2
Quantitative analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
6.
Discussion and Recommendations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
7.
Contributions to Theory and Practise . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
7.1
Contribution to theory
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
7.2
Contribution to practise . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
8.
Conclusions and Further Research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
References
34
Appendix
1
A1. Survey Questionnaires . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
A2. Forecast Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
A3. Internal Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
==PAGE:4==
Article
iii
==PAGE:5==
Market Analysis of a Non-Governmental
Organization
Nawal Farhat Aguilar*
Zaza Nadja Lee Herbert-Hansen**
Technical University of Denmark, Management Engineering, 2800, Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark
*) E-mail: s151463@student.dtu.dk, Tel: +45 50298669
**) E-mail: znlh@dtu.dk, Tel: +45 45254440
Abstract
Purpose - Non-governmental organizations (NGOs) tend to miss the fact that they are operating in a market where
their clients are represented by donors. Furthermore, the unstable income characteristic, key in NGOs, generates an
increase in the importance of making a market analysis for this kind of organizations. Through a market analysis,
the NGO will be able to picture the demand in which it is interested in operate in and it will consequently gain
the competitive advantage. The purpose of this paper is thus to identify the key factors that inﬂuence NGOs, in
particular, mental health NGOs, to raise their funds and ﬁnd out the most advantageous strategy in this regard.
Design/methodology/approach - A wide review of the literature has been developed in this paper. Firstly, a scale
from 0% to 100% importance is determined. Secondly, the most important factors affecting fundraising in NGOs
are identiﬁed and uniﬁed in a framework. Finally, the key factors are tested in order to validate the framework
by using a single case study. This case study applies a triangulation approach that combines a qualitative and
quantitative method.
Findings - Results show the 15 key factors which determine the optimal strategy in regards of fundraising for
mental health NGOs in Denmark.
Practical implications - The typology and the set of key factors constitute a decision-making framework for
practitioners. Using the framework practitioners can assess the most advantageous fundraising strategy for mental
health NGOs based on its internal and external circumstances.
Originality/value - Every private company develops exhaustive market analysis to be prepared for the ﬂuctuating
environment and to meet the necessities of customers. NGOs as "third sector companies" should develop this
analysis as well. However, there is a lack of holistic approach towards market analysis in NGOs. This paper
contributes to ﬁlling this gap by identifying the key factors that determine the most advantageous fundraising
strategy and proposes a novel decision-making framework for practitioners.
Keywords: NGO, mental health NGO, fundraising, stigma, case study research, survey study.
Page 1 of 38
==PAGE:6==
1
Introduction
Market analysis studies enable non-governmental organizations (NGOs) to gain competitive
advantage in the market they are interested in. However, NGOs tend to neglect their belong-
ing to the market where the mechanisms to sustain themselves applies, as well as for private
companies (Arora, 2016). According to Berry (2005), the development of the so-called mar-
ket analysis empowers NGOs to reach donors in order to raise funds for their cause, to build
linkages and networks which endure their functions, and to grow (Berry, 2005).
There are common identiﬁed challenging issues for NGOs such as funding, limited management
expertise, restricted institutional capacity, low levels of sustainability, etc. (Bromideh, 2011).
Among all of them, the ﬁnancial problem is the most relevant. This is originated from the
natural unsteady income that characterizes NGOs.
To cope with this issue, some institutions such as UN, the World Bank, and the Asian Devel-
opment Bank have been created to expand international support, to mitigate poverty, and to
decrease the socio-economic gap between the developed and the emerging countries (Ministry
of Foreign Affairs of Denmark - Danida, 2000). Within Denmark, DANIDA is the institution
in charge of these matters. DANIDA’s annual report from 2004 (Royal Danish Ministry of For-
eign Affairs, 2004) reports disbursements to Danish NGO’s for developed programs of 145,355
USD.
Apart from all the problems that every NGO has to face, mental health related NGOs represent a
particular case, since they also deal with the stigma associated with the sort of illnesses they are
involved in. Several studies have demonstrated that people who experience this kind of diseases
are prejudged by the population (Crisp et al., 2000). People have a lack of knowledge on mental
illnesses, driving them to inaccurate thoughts and a deﬁcit of emotional support to people who
suffer them (Javaras et al., 2008).
There are many different categories of mental disorders as well as a wide variety of human
behavior’s facets that can be disordered (National Institutes of Health (US) et al., 2007). Eating
disorders, which involve irregular concern in matters of food and weight (Goldberg, 2016),
are currently a widely common illness that is increasingly affecting young people. Between
2011 and 2016, the number of teenagers affected by this kind of illnesses rose around 30%
in the entire Danish region, being the major number of cases reported in the middle region of
Denmark. Furthermore, it is estimated an increase of 64% throughout the following four years
(Tjørnholm and Skov-Jensen, 2016). This kind of diseases have the highest mortality rates
among psychiatric disorders (Arcelus et al., 2015). Moreover, within the eating disorders ﬁeld,
the anorexia nervosa has the highest mortality rate of all psychiatric disorder in adolescents
(Health, 2009).
Page 2 of 38
==PAGE:7==
Thereby, the two main hurdles to overcome are (1) to assess the public awareness and (2) to
evaluate the donation issue in mental health NGOs.
The purpose of this paper is thus to create and provide tools that would allow a mental health
NGO to identify which is the best manner to increase funding. This is achieved by identifying
different key factors such as public awareness, and by getting a better understanding of the
donor proﬁles. Therefore this paper will address the following research questions (RQs):
RQ1: How can a mental health NGO solve the donation issue by means of making a qualitative
and quantitative analysis based on the data obtained from the Danish public?
RQ2: Which are the key factors of the potential social awareness regarding this sort of NGOs
and how can they be tackled?
These RQs will be addressed through an in-depth case study of Landsforeningen mod spise-
forstyrelser og selvskade (LMS), a Danish mental health NGO working with people suffering
from eating disorders and self-harm.
This paper is structured in the following way: Section 2 identiﬁes contextual factors based on
a review of mental health NGOs literature; Section 3 provides the methodology implemented
in the case study; in Section 4 the ﬁndings are presented and subsequently discussed in Section
5. Section 6 provides the discussion and recommendations to the case study. In Section 7 the
theoretical and practical contributions of the paper are explained. The paper culminates with
Section 8 where conclusion and ideas for future research are exposed.
2
Literature Review
This section contains a presentation of the most signiﬁcant terms used in this paper together
with the identiﬁcation of the key factors by employing the contingency theory perspective.
The contingency theory states that a ﬁrm needs to ﬁnd the most proﬁtable performance through
an analysis of internal and external factors. In other words, the proﬁtable performance of an
organization depends on the surrounding environment and the internal work of the ﬁrm (Stewart
and Luthans, 1977). In order to investigate the most advantageous ways for a NGO to increase
funds, the paper identiﬁes the key factors that inﬂuence the fundraising of a mental health NGO.
Page 3 of 38
==PAGE:8==
2.1
Fundraising in NGOs
Fundraising is the process of gathering voluntary contributions of money or other resources,
by requesting donations from individuals, businesses, charitable foundations, or governmental
agencies. It can also be deﬁned as the act of persuading people or organizations to raise money
for a cause (Batti, 2014). There are several funding sources for NGOs such as membership dues,
the sale of goods and services, private sector for-proﬁt companies, philanthropic foundations,
grants from local, state and federal agencies, and private donations.
Despite their independence from the government, many NGOs heavily rely on governmental
funding in order to function. This fact could be viewed as controversial, because the fund-
ing may support certain political goals rather than national development goals (Folger, 2014).
Hence, NGOs should try to ﬁnd a balance between the different income streams that would
enable them to be sustainable and to deal with their ﬁnancial disadvantages. Creating the right
balance of fundraising sources is both a vital component in NGO’s ﬁnancial health and a ma-
jor factor in boosting other donors to contribute to the long-term projects (Ministry of Foreign
Affairs of Denmark - Danida, 2000).
The following section introduces the key factors which affect the NGO’s funding issue. The
identiﬁcation of these factors as well as the inﬂuence of each of them in the NGO’s income
problem is exposed.
2.2
Contextual key factors
The primary research question is to assess the donation issue in a mental health NGO based
on the different key factors that affect the NGO’s fundraising. In order to guide the reader to
understand the succeeding sections of the study along with addressing the matter in hand, most
of the factors that inﬂuence NGOs funds will be deeply explained.
The found key factors can be classiﬁed into two different groups depending on whether they
are considered challenges at NGO level, meaning internal challenges, or if they are considered
national and/or international challenges, that is, external ones (Bromideh, 2011).
Internal Level
The factors that are gathered in this subgroup are those within the boundaries of the NGO. In
other words, the NGO can directly act on them without taking into account externalities. The
internal factors are not affected by the environment that surrounds the NGO. Hence, they are
factors within the organization that impact the approach and success of NGO’s operations.
Page 4 of 38
==PAGE:9==
1. Administrative Resources
This factor relates to the administrative as well as expertise level of the board members
within every NGO. The term Board members is referred to the organization’s governing
body. It can be also named as the board, the trustees, the management committee, among
others. It is the frame with whole responsibility for leading the organization, managing
and controlling its administration (Snow, 2011).
In practise, board members often lack the time or the expertise to be able to carry out
these responsibilities effectively, and to undertake relief projects. Therefore, during this
time fewer funds are directed to normal development programs (Batti, 2014). Thereupon,
the senior staff is often left to make policy decisions with little or no support from board
members (Aruna and Thanasundari, 2015).
The organization should thus consider selecting staff and other interested stakeholders
with experience and expertise in the ﬁeld to form a resource mobilization committee.
At another level, the board should form a resource mobilization team that oversees re-
source mobilization efforts and commits itself to ensure board members involvement
(Batti, 2014). In addition to this, NGOs that have demonstrated professional expertise
and managerial competencies are more likely to receive supporting activities provided by
Banks (WorldBank, 1995).
2. Strategic Planning
In consonance with Thompson & Strickland (2003), the strategic plan is deﬁned as “the
process of developing a vision and mission, setting objectives, crafting a strategy, imple-
menting it and evaluating the performance by reviewing the situation” (Players, 2015).
The strategical initiatives and directions set up by the board members together with the
senior staff (in the form of mission and vision, statements and targets for cost saving) de-
ﬁne according to Grant (2003) "a framework of constraints and objectives that bounded
and directed strategic choices".
In reality, NGOs may have limited managerial and organizational capacities together with
limited strategic perspectives and weak linkages (Adera, 2014). This is due to the re-
stricted technical tools and relatively small resources belonging to NGOs.
For strategic planning to be effective and useful, there must be commitment and involve-
ment across all levels of the organization, in order to overcome innate problems such
as competitiveness among departments, projects, opposition to change, resource require-
ment and allocation, etc. Strategic planning has potential advantages and intrinsic values,
which are considered to be a vehicle that facilitates the improvement of a NGO’s perfor-
mance (Greenley, 1986).
Page 5 of 38
==PAGE:10==
3. Governance: Accountability
According to Jordan (2007), the term governance involves a set of relationships between
an organization’s management, its board and other stakeholders. Governance also pro-
vides the structure through which the objectives of the organization are set, and how
those objectives are reaching and monitoring (Jordan, 2008).
Moreover, Lekorwe and Mpabanga (2007) explain this crucial requirement for good gov-
ernance by identifying to whom are NGOs accountable. They point out that NGOs have
to account for the use of resources to the donors. Nevertheless, the ability to ensure that
accountability exists, among the NGOs and to all those concerned, remains debatable.
Therefore NGOs have no obvious accountability structures.
To improve this performance, NGOs have to ameliorate their governance and manage-
ment (Adera, 2014) and to see the necessity to take this issue seriously as there is a
growing emphasis on the need for proper monitoring (Lekorwe and Mpabanga, 2007).
Lekorwe and Mpabanga (2007) suggest the following measures to enhance NGO’s gov-
ernance:
• Stating their mission, values and objectives clearly and ensuring that these strategies
are followed.
• Better human resources development and training for their managers and staff in-
cluding board members and volunteers.
• Better management processes as well as ﬁnancial management, accounting, and
budget systems.
4. Marketing and Communications
Marketing and communications is a term referred to the way a ﬁrm communicates a
message to its desired market. These promotional messages are delivered through one or
more channels such as print, radio, television, direct mail, and personal selling (Doyle,
2011). Marketing and communications is an important factor to take into account when
the purpose is to attract the public attention and to approach society to NGOs in the form
of economic, human or symbolic resources. This would in fact generate tangible and
direct support to NGOs.
By means of marketing and communications, NGOs are able to achieve their goals no
matter if they are resources or awareness. In other words, NGOs are currently located
within a communication context where it is difﬁcult to get rid of the media logic and the
styles imposed by the publicizing. This occurs when their pretension is to generate an
impact as well as to be attended (Sabre, 2011).
Page 6 of 38
==PAGE:11==
5. Human Resources (HRs)
HRs deal with the management of people who work in an organization such as managers,
employees, project ofﬁcers, ﬁeld workers, coordinators, etc. (Fundsforngos, 2010). Re-
cruitment, compensation, training or promotion are often addressed as the key challenging
issues of HRs (Bromideh, 2011).
Nowadays, there are two main issues concerning HRs in the NGO environment. Firstly,
the high unemployment rate which causes a signiﬁcant number of under-qualiﬁed job
seekers. Secondly, the fact that the industry does not have the competitive advantage
when it comes to salary benchmarking, making it difﬁcult both to retain highly skilled
and qualiﬁed people and to keep them motivated (Sokkie, 2013).
Effective employee management should be on top of the list of priorities for progressive
improvement of an organization. A NGO must strive to draw, develop and hold qualiﬁed
and enthusiastic employees as they are the key to success. HRs in NGOs are the same
as HRs in any other private sector. The difference resides in the problems that HR pro-
fessionals face within the NGO industry compared to other sectors. That means, NGO’s
employees do not usually have access to learning and development opportunities that are
aligned with their careers.
6. Capacity Development
Capacity development is the process by which individual and organizations obtain, im-
prove, and retain the skills and knowledge needed to do their jobs competently. Capacity
development is interpreted differently depending on the strategies and structure of the
NGO in question. Therefore, some approaches of this factor often translate into short-
term visible efforts such as funding or teacher training. On the opposite, other NGOs
focus on long-term development and social transformation emphasizing organizational
and relational aspects linked to partnership and empowerment (Sorgenfrei, 2004).
The challenge is to ﬁnd the middle point for effective action so that the input will cor-
respond to the output. One way to overcome this obstacle is to better match the efforts
with the objectives, particularly, to extend the focus of capacity development beyond the
school, local communities and local NGOs (Ulleberg, 2009). While many NGOs aim
to fortify national capacities through training, technical advice, exchange of experiences,
research, and policy advice, only few are capable or willing to pay for such capacity
building.
Page 7 of 38
==PAGE:12==
External Level
The external factors represent the outsider inﬂuences that can impact a NGO business.
1. Relationship between NGOs and Private Sectors
Private companies together with NGOs own unlike resources: NGO’s assets lie in their
reputation and legitimacy within society (Lucea, 2010), while private ﬁrms are outﬁtted
with ﬁnancial, technological, physical and organizational resources (Das, 1998). There-
fore, NGOs struggle to overcome the competition for funding and memberships within
their sector. In contrast, private companies strive to improve legitimacy and reputation
within society (Graf and Rothlauf, 2012). Based on this, a relationship between both kind
of organizations could be beneﬁcial.
However, the drawback that arises in this kind of partnerships commonly falls back into
NGOs. In fact, they normally endure worse consequences when a private company does
not behave in line with the law, i.e. corruption cases, etc. In this case, the private ﬁrm
would be damaging the NGOs’ reputation and legitimacy, which is the base of these
organizations (Graf and Rothlauf, 2012).
2. Relationship between NGOs and Donors
NGOs should be aware of the relationship with donors in order to help them make better
funding decisions and to regulate unclear expectations of credibility (Walker, 2015). To
accomplish this, the network which connects NGO-donors has to be as solid as possible.
The motivation for having a ﬁrm network is summarized by Burger and Owens (2010) in
three main points:
1.
Expenditures are normally higher than expected, since the guarantee of holding a
donor is irregular, and NGOs normally prioritize organizational spending.
2.
There is a lack of donor agreement leading NGOs to adopt client-speciﬁc objectives
rather than general ones, causing a poor needs-based NGO project distribution.
3.
Donors prioritize positive information in the short-term while NGOs prefer “pro-
gram” funding to “project” funding in order to reduce this uncertainty and increase
accountability.
Page 8 of 38
==PAGE:13==
3. Transparency
NGOs are expected to have a more honest behavior than for-proﬁt companies. Private
ﬁrms usually operate focusing on beneﬁts. In contrast, NGOs are not motivated to maxi-
mize proﬁt, and therefore they are not tempted to commit any illicit activity in principle
(Fama and Jensen, 1983).
Despite the fact that it exists a push-pressure for improving the openness and transparency
within NGOs, it appears that most of these organizations remain averse to share informa-
tion, and many refuse to recognize the need for accountability (Elkington, 2003). NGOs’
relationships with their stakeholders are tense since there are asymmetries in the infor-
mation. This makes more difﬁcult for donors, government, and beneﬁciaries to observe
potential problems and to hold the liability of NGOs (Burger and Owens, 2010).
Therefore, NGOs should facilitate the access for stakeholders to relevant information such
as quality ﬁnancial reports. Besides, NGOs should establish open communication with
external parties. Achieving this, the collaboration with them could become easier, as they
could understand their work duties better (Gálvez Rodríguez et al., 2012).
4. Seasonal Aspects
The season of the year clearly inﬂuences number of donations. A remarkable tendency
regarding seasonal-donation is that about 34% of all donations are done during the last
three months of the year. Of those donations, about 18% are given in December alone.
Sam Worthington, CEO of InterAction, explains this fact by highlighting: “Many of our
members are dependent upon a good holiday season for a large portion of their annual
fund-raising,". The two main reasons that support this fact are: (1) as it is the end of
the year, people want to make sure that their giving is done before a new year starts, and
(2) people spend time with their families, so they think about others and want to have an
impact on the world around them (Mueller, 2014).
5. Philanthropy: Individual Interests
Philanthropy is deﬁned as the desire to promote the welfare of others, expressed espe-
cially by the generous donation of money to good causes. Bekkers and Wiepking (2010)
identify eight aspects that drive charitable giving: (1) awareness of need, (2) solicitation,
(3) costs and beneﬁts, (4) altruism, (5) reputation, (6) psychological beneﬁts, (7) values
and (8) efﬁcacy. With the deﬁnition of these aspects it is more likely to predict which
sort of people would ﬁnd donations as a more probably alternative. Furthermore, regional
preferences based on shared ethnicity, language, or culture as well as some harbor prej-
udices against speciﬁc regions could also affect positively or negatively potential donors
(Tremblay-Boire and Prakash, 2016).
Regarding the incentives for donating, it is in fact expected that individuals would give
more frequently to NGOs when they feel that their actions are improving the welfare
Page 9 of 38
==PAGE:14==
of others or one’s own. Hence, the psychological pleasure from the process of giving
normally drives donations positively (Sargeant and Jay, 2010).
6. Political interference’s and Taxes
In the past 30 years, Denmark has tried to increase the size and scope of its non-proﬁt
sector, using tax incentives as a way to encourage private giving (Clotfelter et al., 2014).
According to the Act on Tax Assessment (Ligningsloven, or “LL”, Consolidated act no.
1017 of October 28th 2011, article 8 A), both individual and corporate donors receive
limited tax beneﬁts when donating to recognized non-proﬁt organizations in the following
cases:
• Gifts exceeding 500 DKK up to 14500 DKK are deductible each year.
• Cash donations and in-kind donations are deductible. The limit of 14500 DKK is
valid for the ﬁscal year 2013. The limit is normally adjusted annually.
• If the donation is given through a covenant or an annuity for a ﬁxed period of at
least 10 years (written statement between donor and beneﬁciary), corporations and
individuals cannot deduct more than 15% of their taxable income.
Taxes take an important paper in donations. The promise of a big deduction is a great way
to drive people to give money to NGOs. For instance, when tax rates are higher, people
are generally willing to give more since it gives people a larger charitable deduction, and
hence a lower price of giving.
On the other hand, people might be willing to give money voluntarily to the government,
if the government would give them the chance to direct the money to a cause they approve
of. Hence, the government plays an important role here. If the government could ame-
liorate the job of explaining what tax revenue is used for by showing how it contributes
to the common good, people might feel better about paying taxes viewing it as charitable
giving (Blackman, 2015).
7. Social Stigma
The conception of mental illnesses as brain disorders leads to the public perception of in-
dividuals that suffer these illnesses as helpless and unable to integrate into the community
life. Stigma is not an issue only affecting the attitudes and behavior of the general public.
Many practicing social workers also adopt stigmatizing beliefs and attitudes, and these
views fall over into the treatment of clients (Melissa A. Hensley, 2006).
The harmful effect of the stigma against mental illness is present in every stage within the
treatment and rehabilitation of the person who suffers the mental illness. Stigma pushes
people to avoid to seek psychiatric help. The ignorance or lack of proper knowledge is
the root cause of all stigma. Therefore, the society mindset has to change in the sense
of erasing prejudices of all kind by promoting a proper scientiﬁc knowledge regarding
mental illnesses in order to alleviate the ignorance (Indian J. Psychiat, 1997).
Page 10 of 38
==PAGE:15==
8. Gender of Donors
The gender is an important factor that inﬂuences charitable giving in general. Women
tend to be more likely to give to charity, but the distributions of the donated amount
varying considerably depending on conjugal status (Piper and Schnepf, 2007).
For single people, studies have shown that about 90% of women give more than men. In
addition, for married people, when taking into account background factors (income, age,
education, etc.), female donations are still more signiﬁcant. The most common causes
that women support are animal welfare, education and the elderly. On the other hand,
marital status clearly affects donations. Married men give almost double than single men
(Piper and Schnepf, 2007).
9. Socioeconomic Status
The socioeconomic status is the social standing or class of an individual or group. Nor-
mally, the socioeconomic status is deﬁned as a combination of education, income, and
occupation (Heimer, 1997).
The general extended thoughts are that a low social class leads to a lower pro-social
behavior by prioritizing self-interest over the welfare of others. The more accepted ex-
planation would be that low classes have fewer resources, greater exposure to threat, and a
reduced sense of personal control. Nevertheless, according to Piff et al.(2010), the reality
is completely the opposite. Lower class individuals orient to the welfare of others as the
way to adapt themselves to their more antagonistic environments. In fact, this orientation
gives rise to greater pro-social behavior.
Several researchers have been investigating this fact, pointing out the main reasons that
make lower class individuals have a more pro-social behavior. The most relevant are a
greater commitment to democratic values as well as feelings of compassion. Social class
identity is a source of social stigma among lower class individuals (Croizet and Claire,
1998), and it is a cause by which individuals are categorized during social interactions
(Blascovich et al., 2001).
2.3
Summary of literature
The different factors affecting the mental health NGO’s fundraising are shown in Table 1. Here,
all the key factors are depicted with their respective label and a short description. The second to
last column indicate the impact of each key factor. The signs +/- point out if a factor could im-
pact the improvement of donations within a NGO positively, negatively or both. The references
of the articles used in order to develop this literature review are presented in the last column of
the Table 1.
Page 11 of 38
==PAGE:16==
Table 1: Summary of key factors.
KEY FACTOR
LABEL
DESCRIPTION
IMPACT
REFERENCES
INTERNAL
Administrative
Resources
KF1
Board members’ lack of ex-
pertise and administrative
skills.
-
(Snow, 2011) (Batti, 2014)
(Aruna and Thanasundari,
2015) (WorldBank, 1995)
Strategic Planning
KF2
Managerial
and
organiza-
tional capacities and per-
spectives.
+
(Players,
2015)
(Adera,
2014) (Grant, 2003) (Green-
ley, 1986)
Governance
KF3
NGO’s performance through
accountability.
+
(Jordan,
2008)
(Adera,
2014) (Lekorwe and Mpa-
banga, 2007)
Marketing and Com-
munications
KF4
NGOs
advertisement’s
channels.
+
(Doyle, 2011) (Sabre, 2011)
(Fundsforngos, 2010)
Human Resources
KF5
Qualiﬁcations and motiva-
tion of employees.
-
(Bromideh, 2011) (Sokkie,
2013)
Capacity
Develop-
ment
KF6
The
action
of
obtaining,
improving,
and
retaining
the skills and knowledge
needed,
through
training,
exchange experiences, etc.
+
(Sorgenfrei,
2004)
(Ulle-
berg, 2009)
EXTERNAL
R. NGO-Companies
KF7
Partnership between proﬁt
and
non-proﬁt
organiza-
tions.
+
(Lucea,
2010)
(Graf
and
Rothlauf, 2012) (Das, 1998)
R. NGO-Donors
KF8
Keep track of donors:due to
the fact that they are the
main driver of every NGO.
+
(Burger and Owens, 2010)
(Walker, 2015)
Transparency
KF9
Honesty by having openness
in NGOs’ activities.
+
(Fama
and
Jensen,
1983)
(Elkington,
2003)
(Burger and Owens, 2010)
(Gálvez Rodríguez et al.,
2012)
Seasonal Aspects
KF10
Period of year when people
are more willing to donate.
+/-
(Mueller, 2014)
Philanthropy
KF11
People’s altruistic concern
for human welfare and ad-
vancement.
+
(Bekkers
and
Wiepking,
2010) (Sargeant and Jay,
2010) (Tremblay-Boire and
Prakash, 2016)
Political
interfer-
ences and Taxes
KF12
Public fees and their effect
in donations.
+/-
(Blackman, 2015) (Clotfel-
ter et al., 2014)
Social Stigma
KF13
Lack of mental health disor-
ders awareness.
-
(Melissa A. Hensley, 2006)
(Indian J. Psychiat, 1997)
Gender of Donors
KF14
Women are more likely to
donate.
+/-
(Piper and Schnepf, 2007)
Socioeconomic Sta-
tus
KF15
Lower class people are more
pro-social.
+/-
(Blascovich et al., 2001)
(Croizet and Claire, 1998)
(Piff et al., 2010) (Heimer,
1997)
Page 12 of 38
==PAGE:17==
Framework for evaluating NGO’s performance in regards of fundraising
This paper proposes a theoretical framework to allow NGOs to analyze how is their internal
performance, as well as to evaluate how the environment that surrounds them is. With this
information, every NGO would be able to ﬁnd out their strengths and weaknesses and subse-
quently to develop its optimal fundraising strategy. In this study a theoretical framework for
evaluating the degree of importance of the different factors affecting the fundraising activity in
mental health NGOs is suggested. The framework is shown in Figure 1.
NGO´s
fundraising 
strategy
INTERNAL 
LEVEL
EXTERNAL 
LEVEL
Resources
Strategic Planning
Governance
Communication
Human Resources
Capacity
R. NGO-Companies
R. NGO- Donors
Transparency
Seasonal Aspects
Philanthropy
Politics & Taxes
Social Stigma
Gender of Donors
Socioeconomic Status
Figure 1: Theoretical framework: NGO’ fundraising strategy.
Through the literature review, the 15 key factors that inﬂuence NGOs’ fundraising strategy were
proposed. At this point, a quantitative analysis is applied. The quantitative analysis is computed
following Equation 1.
Importancek =
(IFk)(PIk)
∑15
k=1(IFk)(PIk)100%
(1)
Where the importance of key factor k, Importancek, illustrates how much of total resources the
NGO should employ to improve that key factor k. The impact of key factor k, IFk, depicts the
inﬂuence of that factor k in a NGO’s fundraising strategy, in this study it varies from 1 (lowest
impact) to 5 (highest impact). The potential improvement of key factor k, PIk, shows what the
gap for improvement of that key factor k is, it ranges from 1 (least likely to be improved) to 5
(most likely to be improved).
In short, the importance value would allow a NGO to ﬁnd out the most optimal fundraising
strategy by means of a better resource management in every particular case. The value of
importance for each factor k varies from 0% to 100%. Being the corresponding percentage
the recommended amount of total resources from the NGO in study required to reach the best
fundraising strategy. A 0% of importance would indicate that none of the resources should be
dedicated in the improvement of the respective factor and vice versa. Within resources it is
included: time, human power, and money among others.
Page 13 of 38
==PAGE:18==
3
Methodology Research Design
Due to the character of the proposed RQs, the investigation presented in this document conducts
a single case study as the most suitable research methodology in order to validate the exposed
theoretical framework (Vissak, 2010; Yin, 2009).
According to Yin (2009), a single case study is considered an empirical inquiry that investigates
a contemporary phenomenon in depth. Besides, it is recommendable to be applied when the
boundaries between the phenomenon and the context are not clearly evident (Yin, 2009). The
case study approach is relevant to be employed when a holistic method is taken as well as when
the aim is to answer how and why, i.e. RQs. The drawback of this method is that it is not
possible to pluralize the ﬁndings (Voss et al., 2002). In order to overcome this, the case analysis
should be evaluated following the four criteria stated by Hilmola et al. (2005) for a successful
descriptive case study. Those are relevant to practitioners, theoretical connections, usability in
practice and theoretical novelty value.
The descriptive case study method is used in the current case analysis, as it enables to demon-
strate the theoretical framework (Zainal, 2007). On the other hand, the descriptive deduc-
tive method draws logical ﬁndings from literature to answer the presented research questions
(Hilmola et al., 2005). The deductive method was chosen over the inductive, as it provides a
higher level of reliability when the ﬁndings are based on a single case ﬁrm, being the last one
the case in hand.
The purpose of the case study is twofold: to validate and clarify the proposed theoretical frame-
work, known as theory building (Voss et al., 2002), along with to provide insights into the prac-
tical implications of the framework’s implementation (Wacker, 1998). To fulﬁll this purpose
the case study has three speciﬁc objectives: (1) to assess the NGO’s current approach strategy
in regards of fundraising, (2) to identify the approach strategy that the key factors point to as
most advantageous for the NGO, and (3) to suggest speciﬁc actions that close the gap between
current and most advantageous approach strategy.
3.1
Literature review
The literature review was conducted according to the guidelines described by Rowley and Slack
(2004). The technique applied for revealing the key factors is called the synthesis matrix and
it has been used to generate the literature. This matrix enabled to sort out and categorize the
different arguments regarding the topic (Torraco, 2016). The procedure followed in order to
ﬁll out the synthesis matrix was the citation pearl growing, i.e. retrieving documents through
the references in analyzed sources and identifying the main authorities by investigating relevant
articles (Rowley and Stack, 2004). This information was cyclically added to the matrix until no
more relevant sources emerged. The research was conducted using the library database provided
Page 14 of 38
==PAGE:19==
by the Technical University of Denmark, also known as DTU Findit and Google Scholar search
engine.
The detailed methodology applied and the results obtained are detailed in the Table 2 depicted
below.
Table 2: Literature review methodology.
CONCEPT SEARCHED
Factors inﬂuencing the fundraising for mental health NGOs in
Denmark.
Guidelines, frameworks, recommendations and tools to evaluate
the strategy to follow by the NGO in regards to the fundraising
process improvement.
TERMS SEARCHED
"NGOs","NGOs challenges", "NGOs’ management", "Men-
tal health NGOs", "Mental health stigma","Charitable dona-
tions","Fundraising in NGOs", "Donor’s proﬁle","Danish Tax
system".
DOCUMENTS TYPE
Journal articles, conference papers, consultancy white papers,
reports, books, and other written material.
PRELIMINARY NO. OF ARTICLES
68
FINAL NO. OF ARTICLES
44
3.2
The case ﬁrm
The case ﬁrm is a Danish mental health NGO called Landsforeningen mod spiseforstyrelser og
selvskade (LMS). LMS is working with people suffering from eating disorders and self-harm.
The NGO owns 8 different ofﬁces spread throughout Denmark as shown in Figure 2. The
case study is based on data coming from the ofﬁce located in Copenhagen, but it contains the
information from all the other ofﬁces due to the centralized organizational structure. The focus
of this case study is within the 8 ofﬁces. Hence, this assessment illustrates how optimal LMS’
current employed fundraising strategy is and the best way to enhance it.
The study chose this kind of NGO due to the fact that apart from the challenges that every NGO
has to face, mental health NGOs in particular, have to deal with the stigma associated with
mental illnesses.
The analysis detailed in the following section is based on the information collected through a
number of different sources. Precisely, four sources: a general survey, a specialized survey,
interviews and internal data from LMS.
Page 15 of 38
==PAGE:20==
Marketing
Department
(3 members)
Fundraising
Department
(3 members)
Economics
Department
(1 member) 
Counselling
Department
(8 members)
Knowledge
Department
(5 members)
Course
Department
(7 member)
Cleaning
Department
(1 member)
Secretary 
General
CEO
Board 
Members
(8 members)
Counselling
Department
(1 member)
Counselling
Department
(3 members)
Counselling
Department
(1 member)
Counselling
Department
(1 member)
Course
Department
(1 member)
Cleaning
Department
(1 member)
Headquarters:
Copenhague
Næstved
Odense
Sønderborg
Aarhus
Aalborg
Nykøbing
Aabenraa
35
50
15
11
90
no. of 
volunteers
Figure 2: Organisational structure of LMS.
Internal data
Internal data was collected from (1) Facebook page, by using the tool insight, (2) website, by
means of google analytics, (3) donors’ information database, called Collectaz, and (4) VIOSS
database, which is LMS knowledge department in charged of the counselling data.
In order to analyze the gathered data The Holt-Winters seasonal method was developed, as it
is a widely used tool for forecasting business data containing seasonality, changing trends and
seasonal correlations (Yar and Chatﬁeld, 1990). This method was applied to the donations,
seasonally collected, and visits on Facebook and website, gathered by weekday. The purpose
was to see if there was a similarity between reality and forecast trends in order to be able to
fathom any clear correlation between the aforesaid variables (season-donations and weekday-
visits). A detailed analysis was developed in excel by the use of the tool so-called numXL is
shown in Appendix A2.
Some others graphical methods were applied in order to depict the distribution of numerical
data. The most frequent was histograms, as they better illustrate major features of the distribu-
tion of the data in a more convenient form. This helps the reader to understand how some of the
key factors suggested in the literature affect to the case study.
Page 16 of 38
==PAGE:21==
Interviews
The interviews were designed as semi-structured and open-ended interviews. This sort of inter-
views does not attach to a speciﬁc composition, allowing a grade of ﬂexibility in the questions
based on a framework of themes to be explored (Adams, 2015). Interviews were recorded,
,later transcribed and analyzed using the condensation principle (Thomas, 2006) to extract the
relevant information. This also allowed to ﬁner understand different perspectives in each of the
identiﬁed topics.
The sample of interviewees were employees in charge of different responsibilities withing the
company (see Table 3). Some interviewees pointed at other employees and therefore the study
reached a saturation of information. Due to this fact, a total number of 6 formal interviews
were conducted. Every interview had different purposes depending on the interviewee position
at the company. However, the common objective of all the interviews was to understand the
functioning of the NGO and clarify the impact of the key factors in the present study. Table 3
presents a detailed list of the conducted interviews.
Table 3: Interview’s data collection overview.
DATE
DURATION
TOPIC
POSITION
FORMAT
1
03/03/2017
5 min
Weighting the key fac-
tors.
Fundraiser
(less
than
a
year
of
expertise).
Questionnaire.
2
06/03/2017
5min
Weighting the key fac-
tors.
Necessities for
LMS to improve perfor-
mance in terms of facili-
ties.
Fundraiser
(more
than
a
year
of
expertise).
Questionnaire.
3
19/04/2017
29 min
Main
channels
where
LMS is announced and
procedures.
Necessities
for
LMS
to
improve
performance in terms of
HR.
Marketing
and
communication
chief (more than 2
years of expertise).
Semi-structured
interview. Audio
ﬁle + transcrip-
tion.
4
19/04/2017
16 min
Fund’s sources for LMS.
Deals
between
LMS
and government, private
companies and donors.
Fundraiser
(more
than
a
year
of
expertise).
Semi-structured
interview. Audio
ﬁle + transcrip-
tion.
5
28/04/2017
10 min
Organization
of
LMS.
Distribution of depart-
ments and number of
employees per depart-
ment.
Accountant
Chief
(more than 2 years
of expertise).
Open-ended,
unstructured
interview.
Notes
(without
tran-
scription).
6
01/05/2017
10 min
Distribution
of
volun-
teers in the different of-
ﬁces.
Leading
advisory
and activity coordi-
nator (more than 2
years of expertise).
Open-ended,
unstructured
interview. Notes.
Page 17 of 38
==PAGE:22==
3.3
Data collection method: survey questionnaires
The aim of the research in this paper is explorative as it seeks to investigate a topic of limited
coverage in literature, and therefore, an exploratory research approach is needed. A survey
questionnaire is the best way of conducting such a study (Bradburn et al., 1990). The paper thus
builds upon an exploratory study of Danish NGOs, which is conducted through an in-depth
survey questionnaire. The objective of the study was to develop an improved comprehension
of the decision processes that leads to a ﬁnal approach strategy in regards of fundraising. Two
surveys were developed to obtain unlike information regarding the topic of the paper. The
former, called general survey, was addressed to all Denmark, with the purpose of ﬁnding out
Danish people thoughts in this regard. The latter, named specialized survey, was forward to
Danish mental health NGOs. In this case, the goal was to understand the fundraisers’ opinion
in every key factor assessed in the framework to later compare the collected information with
the case study. Both the general and the specialized survey compose the primary source of
information and were constructed and structured into sections based on Bradburn et al. (2004).
This paper established the most suitable guidelines that would ensure accurate ﬁnal results.
For instance, in the general survey, the investigation of people’s opinions regarding NGOs was
developed by means of 30 questions distributed in different sections as depicted in Table 4.
Table 4: General survey - Number of questions.
SECTION OF SURVEY
NUMBER OF QUESTIONS
NGO’s and patient organizations in general.
8
NGO’s and patient organizations for people who support them.
3
NGO’s and patient organizations for people who do not support them.
2
Patient organizations mental health related.
2
Eating disorders and self-harm’s patient organizations.
9
General Information.
5
Final remarks.
1
Total
30
Sample Selection
The scope of the specialized survey is limited to Danish mental health NGOs. Based on this
criterion, a list of all Danish health NGOs was extracted from Sundhed database, obtaining a
total of 143 health NGOs in Denmark, all of them fulﬁlling the following criteria (Sundhed,
2016):
1. They cover a deﬁned disease / disabled area.
2. They are located in Denmark.
3. They are open to members access for every patient / relatives / citizen.
4. They have a director’s board.
5. They comply with the speciﬁc regulations which ensure a non-commercial purpose.
Page 18 of 38
==PAGE:23==
Out of the 143 health NGOs registered in the aforementioned list, only 14 should be taken into
account as Danish mental health NGOs to be part of this study. Out of the 14 NGOs selected,
11 answered. These thus became the study sample of the specialized survey.
Regarding the general survey, the target population represented all Denmark. A Cluster Ran-
dom Sampling was applied. Instead of sampling individual units, the cluster random sampling
consists of samples groups that are naturally present in the population, allowing the researcher
to generate a more efﬁcient probability sample (Teddlie and Yu, 2007). In the concerned study
case, the clusters selected were the 98 municipalities that conform the entire Denmark.
Based on Danmarks Statistiks, the Danish population in 2016 was 5.263.783. According to
Charan and Biswas (2013), to ensure a conﬁdence level of 95% with a conﬁdent interval of
10% taking into account all Denmark, the required number of answers from the general survey
have to be 96 (Charan and Biswas, 2013). Out of all Denmark, 36 people answered, and these
became part of the study sample. As the number of respondents was lower than 96, the new
conﬁdence interval became 16.33%. Therefore, it can be stated that the results extracted from
the survey do not truly reﬂect the population, but it serves as a valuable indication of Danish
population as not previous studies based on this topic have been developed.
Study Sample
As mentioned before, the sample of the specialized survey consists of 11 Danish mental health
NGOs. Note that respondents are the fundraising experts in each organization. This sample rep-
resents less than 8.5% of the total Danish health NGOs, so when comparing with Danish NGOs
of all kind, the sample is considered lower. As pointed by Isaac and Michael (1995), small sam-
ple sizes are allowable in the context of exploratory research, which is the current study case.
The sample is consistent with the recommendations for exploratory research approaches (Flint
et al., 2002), as it can be seen in Figure 3, where the diversity of the number of respondents to
the specialized survey among the different mental health NGOs in Denmark is reﬂected.
0
1
2
Det Sociale Netværk
Psykiatrifonden
Aspergerforeningen
OCD-foreningen
Autisme foreningen
ADHD-foreningen
Sind
LAP - Landsforeningen af nuværende og tidligere psykiatribrugere
LMS - Landsforeningen mod spiseforstyrrelser og selvskade
Depressionsforeningen
Borderlineforeningen
Bedre Psykiatri
Angstforeningen
Alzheimerforeningen
Figure 3: The different mental health NGOs respondents conforming the sample.
Page 19 of 38
==PAGE:24==
As previously explained, the general survey study sample consists of 36 people. The diversity
among the respondents is shown in Figure 4, in terms of gender (Figure 4, top left), location
(Figure 4, top right), level of studies achieved (Figure 4, bottom left) and age (Figure 4, bot-
tom right). According to Allmark (2004), the researcher has to ensure that the sample reﬂects
diversity by taking special into account the gender, age and social inﬂuences, among others
(Allmark, 2004).
Woman (47.2%)
Man (50.0%)
Other (2.8%)
Elementary School (0.0%)
High School (13.9%)
Undergraduate (2.8%)
Bachelor’s Degree (8.3%)
Master’s Degree (13.9%)
PHD (58.3%)
Other (2.8%)
Province Københavns omegn (70.6%)
Province Nordsjælland (5.9%)
Province Bornholm (2.9%)
Province Østsjælland,  
Vest- og Sydsjælland (2.9%)
Province Sydjylland (5.9%)
Province Østjylland (2.9%)
Province Vestjylland (2.9%)
Province Nordjylland (5.9%)
Province Fyn (0.0%)
65+ (8.2%)
55-65 (7.2%)
45-54 (6.6%)
35-44 (7.8%)
25-44 (46.6%)
18-24 (21.4%)
18- (2.2%)
Figure 4: Diversity among the respondents of general survey.
3.4
Summary of paper’s methodology
Table 5 summarizes the paper’s methodology. It includes the purpose of each type of data
as well as the source used to obtain the information. To determine the most advantageous
fundraising strategy for a NGO, the study uses the triangulation approach that combines both
qualitative and quantitative method.
Table 5: Methodology summary.
TYPE OF DATA
TARGET
SOURCE
Qualitative data
Provides the basis of the current situation of a
NGO as well as the evaluation of the key factors
proposed in the literature. It also enables to get
an in-depth investigation of the RQs offering new
perspectives and clariﬁcations of the current situ-
ation.
Open-ended
and
semi-
structured interviews, general
survey and internal data.
Quantitative data
Pictures the most advantageous fundraising strat-
egy for a NGO by means of the weighted key fac-
tors calculated following Equation 1.
Specialized survey.
Page 20 of 38
==PAGE:25==
3.5
Validity of collected data
The condensation principle, stated by Malterud (2012), is used for the data collection through
interviews. The condensation method offers a process of intersubjectivity, reﬂexivity, and fea-
sibility while maintaining a responsible level of methodological rigor. This approach rounds
around the conception of condensation, meaning that the optimal aftermath from interviews can
be achieved by means of the combination of the essential points rather than transcribing entire
interviews (Malterud, 2012). The principle started during the interviews when only notes were
taken. Next step was then to clean the notes and validate the remaining points with the inter-
viewee. This ensures that no interviewee is misinterpreted and they get the chance to further
elaborate on unclear formulations. In order to guarantee data reliability, the interview data is
coded by two independent persons. This is accomplished when the NGO’s point of view of the
15 key factors is determined. Essentially, care is taken to avoid some of the problems normally
associated with a case study based methodology, e.g. the lack of rigidity (Meredith, 1998).
The research relies on multiple data sources within the case ﬁrm, allowing the use of triangula-
tion to ﬁnd converging themes and lines of inquiry (Voss et al., 2002). Finally, results from the
case study are presented to managers and employees in the NGO in order to validate them.
4
Case Study Findings
This section presents the case study ﬁndings. The analysis of the key factors was conducted
using the guidelines presented in section Methodology research design. Firstly, the ﬁndings
derived from the case ﬁrm are presented. Secondly, a qualitative analysis is developed using
the key factors arisen from the study based on surveys. Eventually, the proposed theoretical
framework is quantitative tested.
4.1
The case ﬁrm
Derived from the case ﬁrm, ﬁndings were found from two different sources: interviews and
internal data. The LMS’ management, HRs, income sources and relationship with donors were
originated from interviews, whereas internal data provided information on communication and
marketing, seasonal aspects, donor’s gender and age, and socioeconomic status.
Founded on the interviews, some key factors were evaluated. Regarding the organization of
LMS, as it is a centralized, it leads to a decrease of employee’s creativity due to an inefﬁcient
usage of time. This means that everything has to be informed, reviewed and approved by the
central ofﬁce located in Copenhagen. Besides, it allows LMS to be aligned in all Denmark.
However, this managerial strategy causes the loss of opportunities due to the high amount of
time required to launch new campaigns or even take small decisions.
Page 21 of 38
==PAGE:26==
The number of employees, i.e. the human power, is the key to have a fast response and to be able
to act properly against a changing environment. In the current study case, the total workload
of LMS was found to be too high compared with the number of employees. Actually, most of
the employees agreed with the fact that the human power is the most signiﬁcant weakness. The
results showed that 15.55% of the workforce are salaried employees, being 4.2% full-time and
11.35% part-time. The remaining percentage relies on volunteers’, without a real expertise in
the ﬁeld but at the same time generating a small cost for LMS. This is one of the strategies that
LMS employs to reduce expenses in order to overcome their natural unstable income.
In order to understand why the income highly varies throughout the year, the income sources
should be identiﬁed. LMS has 4 main income sources which are (1) government, (2) founda-
tions, (3) private companies and (4) private donations from individuals. The main income source
is the government, with a yearly ﬁx amount of money (3 million DKK a year) that enables LMS
to cover general expenses. Besides, foundations offer funds for ﬁnancing trend campaigns that
LMS launches. This does not represent a direct income, but it allows LMS to accomplish new
projects increasing the organization’s visibility. For instance, LMS is currently involved in a
huge campaign called Mind Talk that is a workshops on self-esteem. With this activity they
help children and young people to reinforce conﬁdence, to ensure the general mental health
and to prevent new cases of eating disorders and self-harm in schools. Furthermore, private
companies were not found to be a crucial revenue for LMS, as private ﬁrms do not specially
like to be associated with the particular illnesses that LMS is supporting. This is another con-
sequence of the previously described social stigma. At the moment, the collaboration between
LMS and private companies is in the philanthropic level, meaning that the NGO is not receiving
any economical support from this kind of agreements. Instead, private companies collaborate
with LMS providing a free use of their platforms in other to promote the NGO using different
media, e.g. online videos. In these videos famous Danish characters promote LMS, increas-
ing simultaneously the private ﬁrm’s prestige (for private ﬁrms an important public character
means high status). Eventually, the last source of income is represented by private donations. In
fact, donors are currently the main ﬁnancial support for LMS. LMS has improved this business
branch in the past years, doubling the average number of individual donations from 30 DKK to
60 DKK per month per person.
In order to maintain and strengthen the individual donations, the relationship with donors be-
comes essential. For this purpose, LMS has social media such as Facebook and Instagram,
where it shows closeness to its donors as well as potential donors. Besides, LMS contacts once
a year with a call to donors to receive feedback from them. It also sends emails around 6 times
a year to inform about LMS’ activities, and 3 times a year with a magazine.
As previously described, the ﬁndings derived from the internal data are mainly related to ﬁnd
out the performance of LMS in accordance with donor’s gender and age, communication and
marketing, seasonal aspects , and socioeconomic status.
Page 22 of 38
==PAGE:27==
Figure 5 depicts from left to right, the most common gender of people who visit the webpage,
make use of the counselling service that LMS offers, visit Facebook respectively. Moreover,
last column depicts donations share among single men and women and couples. In general,
females seem more concerned about eating disorders and self-harm illnesses, with more than
80 % of overall activity. In addition, couples cover almost 75% of the total private donations,
giving an insight of how the donor proﬁle looks like.
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
Facebook
Webpage
Councelling
Donations
Couple
Female
Male
Figure 5: Common gender in LMS’s internal data by percentage.
The inﬂuence of communication and marketing and seasonal aspects in LMS fundraising was
properly studied by applying the Holt-Winters forecast method (see section 3 for more infor-
mation regarding the method).
Figures 6 and 7 depict the results for daily visits to the Facebook and webpage respectively. In
Figure 6, the registered visits to the Facebook page (red line, constant during the year and with
a signiﬁcant step between 2015 and 2016) in comparison with the forecast results (blue and
black dotted line) is illustrated. The match between registered and calculated values prove the
existence of a pattern. A future trend (black dotted line) is given based on this. That means, if
LMS follows the same Facebook activity, the plotted future forecast is likely to occur. The same
concept applies in Figure 7, where visits to the website are pictured. In general, visits peak on
Tuesdays, being Saturday the least common day. In this case the match is more visible, as more
data was collected and included into the forecast model. This also increases the precision of the
future forecast tendency (black dotted line).
Finally, the forecast method was also employed in order to ﬁnd out how seasons affect dona-
tions. Figure 8 shows a clear correlation between season and donations, with an accurate match
between registered and calculated results after the spring of 2015. As expected, it is clearly
depicted that winter is the most common season to donate.
Page 23 of 38
==PAGE:28==
2015Monday
2015Tuesday
2015Wednesday
2015Thursday
2015Friday
2015Saturday
2015Sunday
2016Monday
2016Tuesday
2016Wednesday
2016Thursday
2016Friday
2016Saturday
2016Sunday
2017Monday
2017Tuesday
2017Wednesday
2017Thursday
2017Friday
2017Saturday
2017Sunday
Weekday per year
250
300
350
400
450
Visits to the Facebook page [thousand of visitors]
Real visits
Past forecast visits
Future forecast visits
Figure 6: Forecast method: Daily Facebook’s visits.
2013Monday
2013Tuesday
2013Wednesday
2013Thursday
2013Friday
2013Saturday
2013Sunday
2014Monday
2014Tuesday
2014Wednesday
2014Thursday
2014Friday
2014Saturday
2014Sunday
2015Monday
2015Tuesday
2015Wednesday
2015Thursday
2015Friday
2015Saturday
2015Sunday
2016Monday
2016Tuesday
2016Wednesday
2016Thursday
2016Friday
2016Saturday
2016Sunday
2017Monday
2017Tuesday
2017Wednesday
2017Thursday
2017Friday
2017Saturday
2017Sunday
Weekday per year
5
10
15
20
25
30
Visits to the website [thousand of visitors]
Real visits
Past forecast visits
Future forecast visits
Figure 7: Forecast method: Daily webpage’s visits.
2013Spring
2013Summer
2013Autumn
2013Winter
2014Spring
2014Summer
2014Autumn
2014Winter
2015Spring
2015Summer
2015Autumn
2015Winter
2016Spring
2016Summer
2016Autumn
2016Winter
2017Spring
2017Summer
2017Autumn
2017Winter
Season of the year
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
Donation amount [kDKK]
Real income
Past forecast income
Future forecast income
Figure 8: Forecast method: seasonal income.
Page 24 of 38
==PAGE:29==
The last studied key factor was the socioeconomic status. This one shows how the people’s
economy affect the amount of money they donate. The relationship between average income
per person per region and percentage of number of donations per person per region over the total
number of donations per person in Denmark is shown in Figure 9. It can be pointed that there is
not a clear relationship between both variables. For instance, København omegen (Copenhagen
and surroundings), the second province in Denmark by average income per person, illustrates
the highest share of number of donations (approximately 25 %). In contrast, Nordsjælland
province, with the highest income per person, takes only the 10 % of them.
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_postal_codes_in_Denmark
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
0 kr.
50.000 kr.
100.000 kr.
150.000 kr.
200.000 kr.
250.000 kr.
300.000 kr.
Province Københavns
omegn
Province
Nordsjælland
Province Bornholm Province Østsjælland,
Vest- og Sydsjælland
Province Fyn
Province Sydjylland Province Østjylland Province Vestjylland Province Nordjylland
Average Income per person (DKK)
Percentage of number of donations per person  per province over the total number of donations per person in Denmark
Figure 9: Relationship between individual income per person and per region, and percentage of
number of donations per person per region over the total number of donations per person.
4.2
Survey questionnaires
Social stigma is another key factor studied by the general survey. Figure 10 shows the predom-
inance of individuals who recognize mental health illnesses as proper diseases. In fact, 87.9 %
of the respondents disagree with the idea that mental illnesses are self-inﬂicted. In contrast, 6%
ﬁrmly think that mental illnesses are not diseases, i.e they believe that the people who suffer do
nor experience a real disease.
Furthermore, Figure 11 shows that 50 % of people think that they do not have enough money to
donate, and none of them pointed that the reason why they are not supporting NGOs is due to
the fact that they are not trustworthy organizations. Eventually, 28.6 % never consider to donate
as a priority in their budget.
Strongly disagree (69.7%)
Disagree (18.2%)
Neither agree nor disagree (6.1%)
Agree (0.0%)
Strongly agree (6.1%)
Figure 10: Opinions regarding the
self-inﬂiction in mental illnesses.
I do not have enough money to donate (50.0%)
To donate is not a priority in my budget (28.6%)
I do not trust NGOs (0.0%)
I disagree with the principles of NGOs (7.1%)
I do not know an organization that is fighting for 
the right thing (0.0%) 
Other (14.3%)
Figure 11: Reasons why people do not
donate to NGOs.
Page 25 of 38
==PAGE:30==
As mentioned in the methodology, the specialized survey had the goal to understand the fundrais-
ers’ opinion in every assessed key factor to later compare the collected information with the case
study. The information extracted from the specialized survey is summarized in Table 6. The
weighted average of all 12 respondents (see Figure 3, note that two of the respondents belong
to LMS) for the 15 key factors is shown. Mental health NGOs’ fundraiser experts pointed to the
relationship between NGO and donors (KF8) as the factor with the highest impact (= 4.75 over
5). In terms of potential improvement, the experts believed that seasonal aspects (KF10) is the
factor which offers the highest gap for improvement (= 4 over 5).
Table 6: Specialized survey overview: weighted average of the key factors.
KF1
KF2
KF3
KF4
KF5
KF6
KF7
KF8
KF9
KF10 KF11 KF12 KF13 KF14 KF15
Weighted average
impact (1-less to
5-more impact)
3.92
4.33
2.75
2.75
4.17
3.25
3.50
4.75
4.42
2.50
2.58
4.33
3.91
4.58
4.5
Weighted
av-
erage
potential
improvement
(1-less to 5-more
ﬂexible)
2.42
3.00
3.25
2.33
2.83
3.17
3.83
1.92
2.42
4.00
3.25
3.83
3.00
3.00
2.75
5
Case Study Analysis
In this section, the analysis of the ﬁndings previously presented is exposed. Firstly, a qualitative
analysis of the 15 key factors is given. Secondly, a quantitative analysis founded on the two
LMS’ fundraising experts’ opinion is performed in order to ﬁnd out LMS’ optimal fundraising
strategy. Finally, the suggested optimal strategy is compared and discussed with the average
key factor importance. This average is calculated based on the remaining Danish mental health
NGOs (excluding LMS, i.e. 10 respondents).
5.1
Qualitative analysis
Table 7 depicts the qualitative analysis of all the key factors that inﬂuence the fundraising pro-
cess in mental health NGOs. In the ﬁrst column, the 15 key factors are presented. In addition,
the remarks to the case analysis are explained, that is, a brief analysis of the ﬁndings presented
in the last section. The last two columns respectively show how LMS performs in relation with
each key factor and how much impact each factor has in LMS. The scale used to evaluate the
performance goes from poor to really good, being the impact range low, average or high. The
values associated with the performance and impact of each key factor are rated based on the
remarks of the case company in accordance with the literature.
Page 26 of 38
==PAGE:31==
Table 7: Summary of the qualitative case analysis.
KEY FACTOR
REMARKS TO THE CASE ANALYSIS
*CASE
FIRM
PERFORMANCE
IMPACT
TO
CASE FIRM*
Administrative
Resources (KF1)
There is a clear lack of expertise. Only 15.55%
are employees with the suitable qualiﬁcation, be-
ing the remaining 84.45% volunteers.
Poor
High Impact
Strategic
Planning
(KF2)
There is deﬁned strategy, mission and vision. Ob-
jectives are continuously reviewed.
Good
High Impact
Governance (KF3)
Good communication between the board mem-
bers and the General Secretary (weekly meetings).
Budget system to be improved by better ﬁnancial
data management
Average
Average Impact
Marketing
Commu-
nications (KF4)
High activity in Facebook (steadily likes in the
Facebook page). Webpage to be enhanced spe-
cially during peak visitors (Tuesdays). Active in
different campaigns (e.g. Mind talk).
Good
High Impact
Human
Resources
(KF5)
Scarce workforce, meaning high workload for
salaried employees. No speciﬁc HRs department.
Really Poor
High Impact
Capacity
Develop-
ment (KF6)
Waste of resources in part-time employees train-
ing which usually leave after a short stay in the
organization.
Poor
Average Impact
Relationship
NGO-
Companies (KF7)
External relationships with private companies
should be ameliorated to obtain ﬁnancial support.
A visibility through these organizations is already
achieved.
Average
Average Impact
Relationship
NGO-
Donors (KF8)
Often personal contact with donors, who have
doubled their donations within the last years.
Really Good
High Impact
Transparency (KF9)
Trustworthy ﬁrm. No scandals registered.
Really Good
Average Impact
Seasonal
Aspects
(KF10)
Clear seasonal trend. Highest donations in winter
due to the Christmas festivity and the yearly clo-
sure of accounts in most of companies.
Good
High Impact
Philanthropy (KF11)
There is a limited social awareness of eating disor-
ders and self-harm. In fact, data analyses showed
that most donors have a relation with the illnesses.
Poor
Low Impact
Politics
and
Taxes
(KF12)
The general survey (with a 36.1% of negative re-
sponses) depicted that Danish public are ignorant
of the reduction of taxes in charitable donations.
Poor
High Impact
Social
Stigma
(KF13)
The general survey reﬂected that app. 70% of the
study sample agree that eating disorders and self-
harm are real illnesses, not considering them as
self-inﬂicted illnesses, although analyzed data en-
lightened the opposite.
Average
High Impact
Gender
of
Donors
(KF14)
Most of the donors and active people in LMS are
women. Hence, the awareness of males to be in-
creased.
Medium
High Impact
Socioeconomic Sta-
tus (KF15)
There is not a clear pattern between the socioeco-
nomic status and the donations. Cultural factors to
be studied.
Really Good
Low Impact
*Authors perception of ﬁndings being in accordance with literature.
Page 27 of 38
==PAGE:32==
5.2
Quantitative analysis
For the quantitative analysis, the two LMS’ fundraiser experts who are developing their work in
the organization headquarters assessed the importance as well as the potential improvement of
the 15 key factors. Table 8 shows each key factor importance calculated by using Equation 1.
Table 8: LMS’ quantitative analysis based on the NGO’s fundraising experts.
KEY FACTOR
IMPACT
FACTOR
POTENTIAL
IMPROVEMENT
IMPORTANCE
INTERNAL
Administrative Resources (KF1)
4
3
6.3%
Strategic Planning (KF2)
4
3
6.3%
Governance (KF3)
4
4
7.9%
Marketing Communications (KF4)
3
2
3.1%
Human Resources (KF5)
5
4
10.4%
Capacity Development (KF6)
3
2
3.1%
EXTERNAL
Relationship NGO-Companies (KF7)
3
5
7.8%
Relationship NGO-Donors (KF8)
4
2
4.7%
Transparency (KF9)
4
3
6.3%
Seasonal Aspects (KF10)
5
3
9.4%
Philanthropy (KF11)
2
5
5.1%
Politics and Taxes (KF12)
4
4
8.3%
Social Stigma (KF13)
4
4
8.3%
Gender of Donors (KF14)
5
3
7.8%
Socioeconomic Status (KF15)
5
2
5.2%
In general, the importance is nearly equal distributed among all key factors. That means, al-
though some factors are more important than others, they are all relevant for the case study.
Based on LMS’s experts’ opinion, 37% of the resources should be dedicated to improve the in-
ternal management of the organization, i.e. internal factors. Besides, the remaining 63% should
be employed to ameliorate the positive impact of outsider inﬂuences, i.e. external factors.
In the internal level, the highest importance falls on human power with 16.7%, i.e. administra-
tive (KF1) and human resources (KF5). Furthermore, the internal LMS’ management evaluated
founded on strategic planning (KF2), governance (KF3) and capacity development (KF6) cov-
ers a 20.3% of the required resources. Moreover, it is remarkable that the analysis shows a 3.1%
of importance in marketing and communications. This result is interesting since it matches the
qualitative study. LMS is currently working effectively in terms of communication and mar-
keting, and although the impact of this factor is relatively high, the performance is already
satisfactory. The connection between both qualitative and quantitative studies is also depicted
in human resources (KF5), where a high potential improvement and impact in LMS’ fundraising
leads to a higher need of resources for future improvement.
Page 28 of 38
==PAGE:33==
The external factors can be classiﬁed in 3 different categories: (1) relationship with stakehold-
ers (relationship NGO-Companies (KF7), relationship NGO-Donors (KF8) and transparency
(KF9)) with 18.3% of importance, (2) social aspects (philanthropy (KF11), social stigma (KF13),
gender of donors (KF14) and socioeconomic status (KF15)), which encompasses 26.4% of im-
portance and (3) other externalities (seasonal aspects (KF10) and politics and taxes (KF12)),
comprising 17.7% of importance. Social aspects illustrate a higher necessity for resources,
meaning that LMS should clearly focus on increasing people awareness, which seems to be
essential according to the qualitative or quantitative analysis.
In Figure 12 the suggested LMS’ optimal strategy previously described is now compared with
the average key factor importance calculation from the remaining Danish mental health NGOs
(excluding LMS, i.e. 10 respondents from the specialized survey). In overall, all key factors
picture a deviation below 3.4% (seasonal aspect’s maximum deviation (KF10)). Therefore, it
can be concluded that every mental health NGO in Denmark should follow a similar fundraising
strategy based on the presented results.
99.5
6.3%
5.7%
10.4%
7.8%
7.9%
5.4%
3.1%
3.9%
6.3%
7.1%
3.1%
6.2%
7.8%
8%
4.7%
5.5%
6.3%
6.5%
9.4%
6%
5.1%
5.1%
8.3%
10%
8.3%
7.1%
7.8%
8.2%
5.2%
7.5%
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
QUANTITATIVE
ANALYSIS FOR LMS
QUANTITATIVE
ANALYSIS OF DANISH
MENTAL HEALTH NGOS
KF1
KF2
KF3
KF4
KF5
KF6
KF7
KF8
KF9
KF10
KF11
KF12
KF13
KF14
KF15
Figure 12: Quantitative analysis comparison: LMS vs Danish mental health NGOs.
6
Discussion and Recommendations
The main objective of this paper was to ﬁnd the optical fundraising strategy for LMS. In accor-
dance with the literature, the research found that female is the gender who donates the most.
Therefore, women are the customer that LMS should focus on. Hence, a customer segmentation
is recommended, ﬁrstly to continuously promote female donations and secondly to foment male
awareness on LMS in order to increase ﬁnancial support from this group.
Regarding socioeconomic status and willingness to donate, the study found that there is no rela-
tion between both variables. This fact differs from what the literature indicates since, according
to Croizet (1998), the poorest people tend to be more pro-social. The interpretation of ﬁnal
results is that eating disorders and self-harm illnesses do not generate awareness to people in
general, but only to those who have a close relationship with people suffering the disease. This
Page 29 of 38
==PAGE:34==
occurs due to social stigma and it should be taken into account in any kind of strategy a mental
health NGO undertakes.
To close the gap between the current and most advantageous strategy approach in regards of
fundraising, the study suggests implementing a number of speciﬁc changes. All recommenda-
tions are gathered in Table 9.
Table 9: Suggestions of changes in LMS per department and area of interest.
DEPARTMENT
AREA
RECOMMENDATIONS
FUNDRAISING
Donors
To strengthen the relationship with donors by:
(1)"Thank you" entries.
To address donors not only with personal
emails, but with thanks notes on the Facebook page, tagging the donor
in the case that the he/she does not want to remain anonymous. This
might result in an increase of contributions, since his/her friends would
see the good deed and would be motivated to do the same, i.e. a kind of
positive chain affect. Moreover, this initiative could help LMS with to
ﬁght against the stigma if more people realize that it is normal to sup-
port mental health NGOs.
(2) To create appreciation events in order to ﬁnd creative ways to thank
donors. For instance, to leverage public holidays such as Children’s
Day or Women’s Day, e.g. Fight for the health and welfare of your
children: LMS" and "Our rights, our strength, our health, our welfare:
LMS respectively.
(3) LMS should gather donor’s age for every donation. This data offers
interesting information when a signiﬁcant age group is more likely to
donate. Note that during the data analysis the age group between 30
and 45 years old was found as predominant, probably corresponding to
children/teenager’s parents who suffer this kind of illnesses.
MARKETING
Campaigns
The potential topics for future campaigns could be:
(1) To aware Danes with the reduction on taxes due to charitable dona-
tions founded on what was depicted in Table 7, where 36.1% of Danes
mentioned that they are ignorant of this fact.
(2) Show the importance of eating disorders and self-harm in Denmark.
It is suggested to get help from the Danish organization "En Af Os" to
ﬁnd out the trends in accordance with eating disorders and self-harm.
(3) Be continuously updated in social tendencies to be able to rapidly
react and take the highest proﬁt of new situations. E.g. schools are
currently fostering good eating habits and LMS took advantage of this
launching Mind Talk.
Social Media
The activity in the webpage could be incremented:
(1) To increase the webpage activity on Tuesdays and Wednesday based
on a higher number of visitors during those days.
KNOWLEDGE
Awareness
To clearly show what LMS does for society increasing awareness by:
(1) The development of an annual report offering in-depth and compre-
hensive information on the activities carried out by LMS.
Survey
To promote new responses to the general survey in order to collect
enough people’s information and to categorically verify the ﬁndings de-
rived from the present study.
ECONOMICAL
Human
Resources
To better the quality and efﬁciency of human power in LMS:
(1) To increase the capital dedicated to full-time jobs, by decreasing the
number of part-time employees. Above all, in departments in which
the training for new workers is longer and harder, e.g. marketing and
communication department. The outcome would help with the upkeep
of LMS workers with better job conditions’ offers.
Page 30 of 38
==PAGE:35==
7
Contributions to Theory and Practise
This section is divided into two subsections, contribution to theory and contribution to practise.
The former covers the general contribution of the provided theoretical framework while the
latter provides the steps to follow in the practical usage.
7.1
Contribution to theory
The principal contribution to the theory of this paper is the identiﬁcation of the key factors in
order to determinate the optimal fundraising strategy for a Danish mental health NGO. The
paper shows how to conduct a qualitative and quantitative evaluation in order to recognize the
current situation of a NGO in any speciﬁc context. This enables to build up the most advan-
tageous fundraising strategy. The use of qualitative methodology presents a novel approach to
the analysis of NGO’s market. Hence, this paper contributes in the following ways withing this
matter:
• Identiﬁcation of the key factors leading to the optimal fundraising strategy for a Danish
mental health NGO.
• A quantitative analysis to determine the current performance as well as the optimal fundrais-
ing strategy for a NGO.
• Elaboration of a decision-making framework that would be helpful for practitioners in
order to assess the current and optimal strategy in terms of fundraising.
7.2
Contribution to practise
The paper provides practitioners with a speciﬁc framework to assess the optimal fundraising
strategy for a Danish mental health NGO by the identiﬁcation of 15 key factors. The framework
offers a holistic view of NGO’s fundraising strategies, i.e. NGOs’ managers would be able
to include multiple variables in the analysis rather than only focusing on a single variable at a
time. The paper provides an easy way to estimate the most advantageous fundraising strategy by
means of a qualitative approach to assess NGOs’ current strategy as well as the optimal strategy
based on the context. Furthermore, a quantitative analysis of the framework shows to NGOs’
managers the recommended amount of total resources (from 0% to 100%) from the NGO in
study required to reach the best fundraising strategy.
To use the framework, the study suggests an iterative method as illustrated in Figure 13. The
procedure has ﬁve steps and it is considered an iterative process as it shows a yearly cycle and
a 4-years cycle depending on the kind of suggested improvement, i.e. short-term and long-term
respectively. The different steps are explained below.
Page 31 of 38
==PAGE:36==
Figure 13: Iterative method of the framework’s application procedure.
• Step 1: Determine the current situation of a NGO in regards to fundraising strategy
This step consists of determining the percentage distribution of resources in a NGO. It is
done once and then is regularly updated, i.e. every year.
• Step 2: Determine the optimal fundraising strategy for a NGO by assessing the set of 15
key factors with the use of internal data and outsider inﬂuences
The ﬁrst iteration, it will require the involvement of all the stakeholders from a NGO
to be able to set and ensure the optimal fundraising strategy for it. It is recommended
to reevaluate the external key factors on a yearly basis, as the external environment is
continuously changing.
• Step 3: Based on the results from Step 2, to set the direction for improving the fundraising
strategy by suggesting speciﬁc enhancements
If the optimal and current fundraising strategies match in Step 2, no actions should be
taken until the following year. In the opposite case, a proposal for improving the present
strategy in order to achieve the optimal should be performed.
• Step 4 (a&b): To classify into short (a) and long (b) term improvements and then to
evaluate suggestions using cost-beneﬁt analyses
The involvement of all the key stakeholders across a NGO is highly recommended to
ensure both quantitative and qualitative beneﬁts and costs.
• Step 5 (a&b): Implement suggestions in the short (a) and long (b) term
The drastic improvements will be considered long-term as they will need time to be im-
plemented and accepted by the employees, and to become a part of the organizational
processes, procedures and culture. Therefore, it is suggested to verify the efﬁcacy of the
implementation every 4 years.
Page 32 of 38
==PAGE:37==
8
Conclusions and Further Research
The instabilities presented in the NGOs’ income make difﬁcult for this kind of organizations to
effectively utilize resources to ﬁnd out the best manner to raise funding. In addition, NGOs do
not normally develop an exhaustive market analysis, which is the key part of any business plan
that every company should perform in order to identify the best activities to favor them. Hence,
the purpose of this paper is to identify the key factors that determine the most advantageous
fundraising approach for LMS, a Danish mental health NGO, by developing a market analysis
based on both a qualitative and quantitative analysis. The study recognized 15 key factors in
a scale from 0% to 100% that shows the burden of each of them out of the total amount of
resources. The results depicted a relatively equally spread distribution of resources, with an
optimal allocation of 37% and 63% for internal and external factors respectively. Based on the
ﬁndings, the paper has developed a decision-making framework applicable and useful for any
other Danish mental health NGO.
The main limitation of the theoretical framework is the absence in the analysis of current social
trends in regards of body image and self-esteem, and the increasing importance that the social
media is gaining. This could be a signiﬁcant key factor since the awareness of body image
is related to the higher socioeconomic status which shows an incremental body dissatisfac-
tion (Hatami et al., 2015). Precisely, thinness norms and eating disorders are prevalent among
women of higher socioeconomic status (Drewnowski et al., 1994). The population has exper-
imental exposure to ultra-thin magazine models who generate a reduction of body satisfaction
and, consequently, self-esteem (Clay et al., 2005). According to Nagar and Virk (2017), the
exposure to unrealistic media images of female beauty is the main fact that inﬂuences this kind
of disorders. The study that they developed, shows how urban Indian women experience body
dissatisfaction and reduced self-esteem when exposed to Western thin-ideal images (Nagar and
Virk, 2017).
Further research can investigate the robustness of proposed framework by examining with ex-
haustiveness the identiﬁed key factors. In addition, a more detailed survey questionnaire should
be developed in order to verify with a higher conﬁdence interval (at least of 10%) if the ﬁndings
are representative of the Danish society. Finally, this paper leaves the door open to elaborate
similar studies in other countries with different body trends and different contact to thin-ideal
images in order to strengthen and further develop the framework.
Page 33 of 38
==PAGE:38==
References
Adams, W. C. (2015). Conducting Semi-Structured Interviews. Handbook of Practical Program
Evaluation: Fourth Edition, (1970):492–505.
Adera, M. (2014). Factors affecting the performance of non-governamental organizations in
Kenya: A case of action AID international.
Allmark, P. (2004). Should research samples reﬂect the diversity of the population?
J Med
Ethics, 30:185–189.
Arcelus, J., Mitchell, A. J., Wales, J., and Se, I. (2015).
Mortality Rates in Patients With
Anorexia Nervosa and Other Eating Disorders. 68(7):724–731.
Arora, S. (2016).
How Marketing and Communication Strategies can help NGOs achieve
Fundraising Success.
Aruna, R. and Thanasundari, S. (2015).
Organizational problems of non-governmental or-
ganizations (NGOS). International Journal of Home Science Extension & Communication
Management, 2(1):58–62.
Batti, R. C. (2014). Challenges facing local NGOs in resource mobilization. Humanities and
Social Sciences, 2(3):57–64.
Bekkers, R. and Wiepking, P. (2010). A Literature Review of Empirical Studies of Philanthropy:
Eight Mechanisms That Drive Charitable Giving. Nonproﬁt and Voluntary Sector Quarterly,
XX:1–50.
Berry, T. (2005). Conducting a Market Analysis for Your Business Plan.
Blackman, A. (2015). The Surprising Relationship Between Taxes and Charitable Giving.
Blascovich, J., Mendes, W. B., Hunter, S. B., Lickel, B., and Kowai-Bell, N. (2001). Perceiver
Threat in Social Interactions With Stigmatized Others. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 80(2):253–267.
Bradburn, N., Sudman, S., and Wansink, B. (1990). Asking questions: A practical guide to
questionnaire design. Computers, Environment and Urban Systems, 14(1):72.
Bromideh, A. A. (2011). The widespread challenges of NGOs in developing countries: Case
studies from Iran. International NGO Journal, 6(9):197–202.
Burger, R. and Owens, T. (2010). Promoting transparency in the NGO sector: Examining the
availability and reliability of self-reported data. World Development.
Charan, J. and Biswas, T. (2013). How to calculate sample size for different study designs in
medical research? Indian Journal of Psychological Medicine.
34
==PAGE:39==
Clay, D., Vignoles, V. L., and Dittmar, H. (2005). Body Image and Self Esteem Among Adoles-
cent Girls: Testing the Inﬂuence of Sociocultural Factors. Journal of Resarch on Adolescence,
15(4):451–477.
Clotfelter, C. T., Fack, G., and Landais, C. (2014). Charitable Giving and Tax Policy in the U.S.
C(May):38–62.
Crisp, A. H., Gelder, M. G., Rix, S., Meltzer, H. I., and Rowlands, O. J. (2000). Stigmatisation
of people with mental illnesses. The British Journal of Psychiatry, 177(1):4–7.
Croizet, J. and Claire, T. (1998). Extending the concept of stereotype threat to social class: The
intellectual underperformance of students from low socioeconomic backgrounds. Personality
and Social Psychology Bulletin — 1998, Volume 24, Issue 6, pp. 588-594, 24(6):588–594.
Das, T. (1998). Resource and risk management in the strategic alliance making process. Journal
of Management, 24(1):21–42.
Doyle, C. (2011). A Dictionary of Marketing. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Drewnowski, A., Kurth, C. L., and Krahn, D. D. (1994). Body weight and dieting in adoles-
cence: Impact of socioeconomic status. International Journal of Eating Disorders.
Elkington, J. (2003). Living with the enemy.
Fama, E. F. and Jensen, M. C. (1983). Separation of Ownership and Control. Source: Journal
of Law and Economics, 26(2):301–325.
Flint, D. J., Woodruff, R. B., and Fisher Gardial, S. (2002). Exploring the Phenomenon of
Customers’ Desired Value Change in a Business-to-Business Context. Journal of Marketing,
66(October):102–117.
Folger, J. (2014). How do NGOs get funding?
Fundsforngos (2010). Why is Human Resource Management Important for NGOs?
Gálvez Rodríguez, M. d. M., Caba Pérez, M. d. C., and Godoy, M. L. (2012). Determining
Factors in Online Transparency of NGOs: A Spanish Case Study. Voluntas, 23(3):661–683.
Goldberg, J. (2016). Types of mental Illness.
Graf, N. F. S. and Rothlauf, F. (2012).
Firm-NGO collaborations.
Zeitschrift für Betrieb-
swirtschaft, 82(S6):103–125.
Grant, R. M. (2003). Strategic planning in a turbulent environment: Evidence from the oil
majors. Strategic Management Journal, 24(6):491–517.
Greenley, G. E. (1986). Does strategic planning improve company performance? Long Range
Planning, 19(2):101–109.
Page 35 of 38
==PAGE:40==
Hatami, M., Taib, M. N. M., Djazayery, A., Mojani, S. M., and Mejlej, H. F. (2015). Rela-
tionship between body image, body dissatisfaction and weight status in Iranian adolescents.
Archives of Obesity, 1(1):1–7.
Health, N. C. C. f. M. (2009). Eating Disorders: Core Interventions in the treatment and man-
agement of eating disorders. NICE Guidelines, 32(4):809–19.
Heimer, K. (1997). Socioeconomic Status, Subcultural Deﬁnitions, and Violent Delinquency.
Social Forces, 75(3):799–833.
Hilmola, O.-P., Hejazi, A., and Ojala, L. (2005). Supply chain management research using case
studies: a literature analysis. International Journal of Integrated Supply Management, 1(3).
Indian J. Psychiat (1997). Stigma Against Mental Illness. EDITORIAL.
Javaras, K. N., Laird, N. M., Reichborn-Kjennerud, T., Bulik, C. M., Pope, H. G., and Hudson,
J. I. (2008). Familiality and heritability of binge eating disorder: results of a case-control
family study and a twin study. The International journal of eating disorders, 41(2):174–179.
Jordan, A. (2008).
The governance of sustainable development: Taking stock and looking
forwards. Environment and Planning C: Government and Policy, 26(1):17–33.
Lekorwe, M. and Mpabanga, D. (2007).
Managing Non-Governmental Organizations in
Botswana. The Public Sector Innovation Journal, 12(3):1–18.
Lucea, R. (2010). How We See Them Versus How They See Themselves- a cognitive perspec-
tive of ﬁrm-NGO relationship. Bus Soc 49:116–139.
Malterud, K. (2012). Systematic text condensation: a strategy for qualitative analysis. Scand J
Public Health, 40(8):795–805.
Melissa A. Hensley (2006). Mental Illness Stigma. University City, MO.
Meredith, J. (1998). Building operations management theory through case and ﬁeld research.
Journal of Operations Management, 16(4):441–454.
Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Denmark - Danida (2000). Funding for NGOs.
Mueller, E. (2014). Charitable giving increases as holiday season ramps up.
Nagar, I. and Virk, R. (2017).
The Struggle Between the Real and Ideal.
SAGE Open,
7(1):215824401769132.
National Institutes of Health (US), Biological Sciences Curriculum Study, NIH Curriculum
Supplement Series [Internet], and National Institutes of Health (US) (2007). Information
about Mental Illness and the Brain.
Page 36 of 38
==PAGE:41==
Piff, P. K., Kraus, M. W., Côté, S., Cheng, B. H., and Keltner, D. (2010). Interpersonal relations
and group processes: Having Less, Giving More: The Inﬂuence of Social Class on Prosocial
Behavior.
Piper, G. and Schnepf, S. V. (2007). Gender Differences in Charitable Giving. (3242).
Players, K. (2015). The international journal of business & management: Strategic Manage-
ment in Non-Governmental Organizations : Process , Application and Key Players Abstract.
3(1):104–113.
Rowley, J. and Stack, F. (2004). Conducting a Literature Review. Management Research News,
27(6):31–39.
Royal Danish Ministry of Foreign Affairs (2004). Danidas’s Annual Report 2004.
Sabre, M. E. (2011). Implicación y encuadre como factores de eﬁcacia en los mensajes public-
itarios de las ONG. Comunicacion y Sociedad, 24(1):269–301.
Sargeant, A. and Jay, E. (2010). Fundraising Management: Analysis, planning and practice.
Routledge edition.
Snow, J. (2011). Governance and NGOs Strengthening the Board. (June).
Sokkie, P. (2013). The Importance of HR Management in an NGO Environment.
Sorgenfrei, M. (2004). Capacity Building from a French Perspective. Praxis Papers, 1(1).
Stewart, T. I. and Luthans, F. (1977). A General Contingency Theory of Management. Academy
of Management Review, 2(2):181–195.
Sundhed (2016). Patientforeninger.
Teddlie, C. and Yu, F. (2007). Mixed Methods Sampling: A Typology With Examples. Journal
of Mixed Methods Research, 1(1):77–100.
Thomas, D. R. (2006). A General Inductive Approach for Analyzing Qualitative Evaluation
Data. American Journal of Evaluation, 27(2):237–246.
Tjørnholm, N. and Skov-Jensen, M. (2016). Stadig ﬂere børn og unge har ondt i psyken.
Torraco, R. J. (2016). Writing Integrative Literature Reviews: Using the Past and Present to
Explore the Future. Human Resource Development Review, 15(4):404–428.
Tremblay-Boire, J. and Prakash, A. (2016). Will You Trust Me?: How Individual American
Donors Respond to Informational Signals Regarding Local and Global Humanitarian Chari-
ties. Voluntas, pages 1–27.
Page 37 of 38
==PAGE:42==
Ulleberg, I. (2009). The role and impact of NGOs in capacity development: From replacing the
state to reinvigorating education. International Institute for Educational Planning, page 48.
Vissak, T. (2010). Recommendations for using the case study method in international business
research. The Qualitative Report, 15(2):370–388.
Voss, C., Tsikriktsis, N., and Frohlich, M. (2002). Case research in operations management. In-
ternational Journal of Operations & Management ProductionManagement, 22(2):195–219.
Wacker, J. G. (1998). A deﬁnition of theory : research guidelines for different theory-building
research methods in operations management.
Walker, D. (2015). When the Customer Isn’t Right: How Unsupportive Donor Demands Lead
to Ineffective NGO Practices. Policy Perspectives, Volume 22.
WorldBank (1995). Working with NGOs: A Practical Guide to Operational Collaboration be-
tween The World Bank and Non-governmental Organizations. (March):132.
Yar, M. and Chatﬁeld, C. (1990). Prediction intervals for the Holt-Winters forecasting proce-
dure. International Journal of Forecasting, 6(1):127–137.
Yin, R. K. (2009). Case Study Research: Design and Methods. SAGE Publications, Inc.,
London, 4th edition.
Zainal, Z. (2007). Case study as a research method.
Page 38 of 38
==PAGE:43==
Appendix
A1. Survey Questionnaires
The text post for introduce both surveys for the recipients was typed in danish due to the fact
that the survey was developed in order to ﬁnd out the danish public opinion. The original text
in danish is shown below.
"Jeg er i øjeblikket i færd med at lægge sidste hånd på mit speciale ved Danmarks Tekniske
Universitet (DTU). I mit speciale laver jeg en analyse af NGO markedet. Jeg kontakter dig, i
håb om at du vil hjælpe mig med min indsamling af data ved at svare på min undersøgelse.
Formålet med denne survey er at undersøge udtalelser vedrørende NGO’er og patient foreninger.
Spørgsmålene er relateret til NGO’er i almindelighed og inden for dem, specielt NGO’er re-
lateret til mental sundhed. Alle oplysninger vil blive behandlet fortroligt. Omdrejningspunktet
for undersøgelsen er at give psykiske NGO’er en måde at forbedre deres synlighed.
Undersøgelsen kan tilgås via dette link:
https://goo.gl/forms/ENklxwzW79J6Zr4l2 / https://www.surveymonkey.com/r/NXGT272
Hvis du har spørgsmål om denne undersøgelse er du velkommen til at kontakte mig på e-mail:
s151463@student.dtu.dk eller på telefon: +45 50.298.669.
På forhånd mange tak for din tid.
Mange venlige hilsner, Nawal Farhat
s151463@student.dtu.dk
Management Engineering. Danmarks Tekniske Universitet"
A1.1 The questionnaires
General Survey
NGO’s and patient organizations in general
Table 10 shows the questions from the survey gathered in this section. The purpose of this ﬁrst
section is to ﬁnd out the general thoughts about NGOs i.e. why people support or not NGOs by
answering the following questions:
1. How people see LMS as an organization? : Do they support NGOs, because they need
that help? Or just because they want to help people: Philanthropy?
2. What can LMS improve in regards of that?: Do people think that NGOs are/are not trans-
parent?, or do they think that the purpose of NGOs is not relevant?
Page 1 of 19
==PAGE:44==
Table 10: Q1 to Q8: NGO’s and patient organizations in general.
QUESTION
NO.
QUESTION
TYPE
1
Hvor vigtige er NGO’er og patientforeningers for-
mål?
Rating Scale 1 to 5 (less to
very important)
2
Hvor vigtige er de formål, som NGO’er arbejder
med? (fx. Røde Kors, Folkekirkens Nødhjælp)
Rating Scale 1 to 5 (less to
very important)
3
Hvor vigtige er de formål, som patientforeninger for
fysiske lidelser arbejder med? (fx. Kræftens Bekæm-
pelse, Gigtforenignen, Hjerteforeningen etc.)
Rating Scale 1 to 5 (less to
very important)
4
Hvor vigtige er de formål, som patientforeninger for
psykiske lidelser arbejder med? (fx. Angst forenin-
gen, Bedre Psykiatri)
Rating Scale 1 to 5 (less to
very important)
5
Hvor vigtige er de formål, som NGO’er for bedre
miljø og dyrevelfærd arbejder med? (fx. Greenpace,
Kattens Værn)
Rating Scale 1 to 5 (less to
very important)
6
Er du bevist om, at når du donerer penge til en
NGO eller en patientforening, så er beløbet fradrags-
berettiget?
Multiple choice: Yes/No
7
Er det en faktor, som du tager i betragtning, når du
støtter en NGO eller patientforening?
Multiple choice: Yes/No
8
Støtter du på nuværende tidspunkt nogle NGO’er og
patientforeninger?
Multiple choice: Yes/No
NGO’s and patient organizations for people who support them
Table 11 and 12 show the questions gathered in this section. This section in only available for
those who answer Yes in Question 8, which asks whether they are or not supporting any NGO.
The purpose of this section is to ﬁnd out the most common NGOs that Danish people support
together with the reason why they support this organization instead of other NGO with different
purpose. To conclude with this section, Q11 is made in order to ﬁnd out how Danish population
who collaborate with NGOs scale the different NGOs in relation with the different causes that
they support.
Table 11: Q9 to Q10: NGO’s and patient organizations for people who support them.
QUESTION
NO.
QUESTION
TYPE
9
Hvilken type NGO og/eller
patientforening støtter du?
Multiple choice: Nødhjælpsorganisationer (fx. Røde
Kors)/ Sygdomsbekæmpende Fysisk (fx.
Kræftens
bekæmpelse)/ Sygdomsbekæmpende Psykisk (fx.
Psykiatrifonden)/ Miljø og dyrevelfærd (fx. Green-
peace eller Kattensværn)
10
Hvorfor
støtter
du
den-
ne/disse organisation(er)?
Multiple choise: Jeg har kun penge til at støtte én or-
ganisation/ Der er ikke nok gemmensigtighed i andre
organisationer, så jeg ved ikke, hvad de gør medmine
penge/ Den kæmper for den rigtige sag/ Jeg er person-
ligt invovleret i den sag, de kæmper for/ Jeg har ikke
tænkt over, hvorfor jeg støtter denne i forhold til en
anden
Page 2 of 19
==PAGE:45==
Q11: Antag, at du har en sum penge til at donere til en NGO eller patientforening. Hvilket type
formål ville du donere til?
Table 12: Q11.
Første valg
Sekund valg
Tredje valg
Fjerde valg
Femte valg
Nødhjælpsorganisationer
(fx.
Røde Kors)
Sygdomsbekæmpende
-Fysisk
(fx. Kræftensbekæmpelse)
Sygdomsbekæmpende
-
Psykisk (fx.Psykiatrifonden)
Miljø
og
dyrevelfærd
(fx.
GreenpeaceellerKattensværn)
Jeg harikke nogen form for
særlig præference
NGO’s and patient organizations for people who do not support them
Table 13 shows the questions gathered in this section. This section in only available for those
who answer No in Question 8, which asks whether they are or not supporting any NGO.
The purpose of this section is to ﬁnd out the reasons why people do not support any NGO. In
addition to Q12, Q11 is made again in order to ﬁnd out how Danish population who do not
collaborate with NGOs scale the different NGOs in relation with the different causes that they
support.
Table 13: Q12: NGO’s and patient organizations for people who do not support them.
QUESTION
NO.
QUESTION
TYPE
12
Hvorfor støtter du ikke en
NGO eller patientforening?
Multiple choice: Jeg har ikke penge nok til at donere/
Jeg har det ikke som en prioritet i mit budget/ Jeg
har ikke tillid til NGO’er og patientforeninger/ Jeg er
uenig i værdierne og principperne for NGO’er og pa-
tientforeninger/ Jeg kender ikke en organisation, der
kæmper for den rigtige sag
Patient organizations’ mental health related
Table 14 shows the questions gathered in this section. The purpose of this section is to ﬁnd out
the general thoughts about mental health NGOs by answering the following questions:
1. What people think about this kind of NGO?: Assuming that the respondent supports at
least one NGO (or they think at least NGO’s role is transcendent) does He/She support
mental health NGOs? if not, ﬁnd out why do not, e.g. they do not understand the inﬂuence
of the mental disorders in the society?
2. What can LMS improve in regards of that?: If the general idea about mental health NGOs
is that they are not playing an important role in the Danish society- future advertising
campaigns of LMS could be based on promoting awareness of mental health NGOs.
Page 3 of 19
==PAGE:46==
Table 14: Q14 to Q15: Patient organizations’ mental health related.
QUESTION
NO.
QUESTION
TYPE
14
Psykiske lidelser er ikke særligt udbredt i det danske
samfund
Rating Scale 1 to 5 (less to
very important)
15
Psykiske lidelser er selvforskyldt
Rating Scale 1 to 5 (less to
very important)
Eating disorders and self-harm’s patient organizations
Table 15 shows the questions gathered in this section. The aim of this section is to ﬁnd out
the people’s thoughts regarding the speciﬁc disorder that LMS treats, i.e. eating disorders and
self-harm. The last 2 questions of this section (Q23 and Q24) ask for some feedback of the case
ﬁrm: LMS in case they know it.
Table 15: Q16 to Q24: Eating disorders and self-harm’s patient organizations.
QUESTION
NO.
QUESTION
TYPE
16
Kender du nogen danske patientforeninger, som hjælper
mennesker med psykiske lidelser?
Multiple choice: Yes/No
17
Hvilke af disse organisationer kender du?
Multiple choice
18
Har du læst eller hørt noget om spiseforstyrrelser i de sid-
ste 6 måneder?
Multiple choice: Yes/No
19
Hvorhenne har du læst eller hørt om spiseforstyrrelser?
Multiple choice
20
Har du læst eller hørt noget om selvskade i de sidste 6
måneder?
Multiple choice: Yes/No
21
Hvorhenne har du læst eller hørt om selvskade?
Multiple choice
22
Kender du Landsforeningen mod spiseforstyrrelser og
selvskade (LMS)?
Multiple choice: Yes/No
23
Hvorfra kender du LMS?
Multiple choice
24
Hvordan mener du, at LMS kan forbedre sig?
Open question
General Information
The questions of this section are gathered in Table 16. The reason of this section’s existence is
mainly to classify the respondents and be able to demonstrate with it the diversity of answers.
This diversity has to exist so as to ensure that the answers of the study are representative for the
case study.
Table 16: Q25 to Q29: General Information.
QUESTION
NO.
QUESTION
TYPE
25
I hvilket år er du født?
Open Question
26
Hvad er dit køn?
Multiple
choice:
Fe-
male/Male/Other
27
Postnummer
Open Question
28
Hvad er din højest gennemførte uddannelse?
Multiple choice
29
Hvad er din nuværende hovedbeskæftigelse?
Multiple choice
Page 4 of 19
==PAGE:47==
Final Remark
This last question is added to show gratitude for the participation and provide the opportunity
to ﬁnd out the Danish population opinion regarding the survey’s topic.
Table 17: Q30- Final Remark.
QUESTION
NO.
QUESTION
TYPE
30
Skriv din email her hvis du gerne vil modtage en kort
opsummering af resultaterne fra denne undersøgelse
Open Question
Specialized Survey
The specialized survey is composed of two questions presented in Tables 18 and 19. The survey
aim to ﬁnd out the opinion of fundraiser experts in mental health NGO within Denmark in re-
gards of the importance and degree of tempering of the 15 key factors identiﬁed in the literature
of the present paper. The purpose then of this survey was to compared the opinion of different
NGOs around Denmark with the case ﬁrm.
Table 18: Quantitative analysis.
KF1
KF2
KF3
KF4
KF5
KF6
KF7
KF8
KF9
KF10 KF11 KF12 KF13 KF14 KF15
Not important At
all
Of Little Impor-
tance
Of Average Im-
portance
Very Important
Absolutely
Essential
Table 19: Quantitative analysis.
KF1
KF2
KF3
KF4
KF5
KF6
KF7
KF8
KF9
KF10 KF11 KF12 KF13 KF14 KF15
Very ﬂexible to
handle
Flexible to handle
Moderately ﬂexi-
ble to handle
Slightly
ﬂexible
to handle
Not
ﬂexible
to
handle at all
Page 5 of 19
==PAGE:48==
A2. Forecast Method
The Winters-Holt method was applied in order to investigate if it actually exists a correlation
in three different scenarios. Figure20 shows that there is a correlation between season and
donations. As the forecast is adjust to the real demand it can be concluded that for the following
years LMS can expect a a similar distribution of money during 2017 as the model predict.
Figure 21 shows the relation together with the calculation of different signiﬁcant parameters of
the number of visits in the web-side depending on the day. As the forecast is quite accurate, it
can be concluded that the most popular days in the web-side are Tuesdays, being Saturdays the
least common day.
The last forecast method shown in Figure 22, was applied in order to investigate the visits in the
Facebook page. As there is not a lot of past data to investigate, there are no more conclusions to
extract from this methodology. Even though being Facebook the most popular channel for LMS
to get announced, with a really high number of daily visits, can be considered as a important
channel to be explored in the future years.
Table 20: Forecast Method: Week day vs Facebook visits.
Period
Real Demand
TESMTH
FORECAST
ERRORt
Abs ERROR
MADt
%Error
MAPEt
MADPt
BIAS
TS
2015Monday
1
289896
#N/A
0
2015Tuesday
2
290112
#N/A
0
2015Wednesday
3
290411
#N/A
0
2015Thursday
4
295814
#N/A
0
2015Friday
5
289495
#N/A
0
2015Saturday
6
289688
#N/A
0
2015Sunday
7
289756
#N/A
0
2016Monday
8
385395
392517
392517
-7122
7122
7122
1.85%
1.85%
1
-1.85%
-1.00
2016Tuesday
9
385675
392517
392517
-6842
6842
6982
1.77%
1.81%
1
-1.81%
-0.99
2016Wednesday
10
385920
389188
389188
-3268
3268
5744
0.85%
1.49%
0
-1.49%
-0.87
2016Thursday
11
386205
394460
394460
-8255
8255
6372
2.14%
1.65%
2
-1.65%
-0.97
2016Friday
12
392952
374893
374893
18059
18059
8709
4.60%
2.24%
4
-0.38%
-0.21
2016Saturday
13
393107
399950
399950
-6843
6843
8398
1.74%
2.16%
1
-0.61%
-0.33
2016Sunday
14
385128
396243
396243
-11115
11115
8786
2.89%
2.26%
2
-0.94%
-0.49
2017Monday
15
383909
383909
2017Tuesday
16
382738
382738
2017Wednesday
17
381604
381604
2017Thursday
18
383833
383833
2017Friday
19
381542
381542
2017Saturday
20
380278
380278
2017Sunday
21
374979
374979
Page 6 of 19
==PAGE:49==
Table 21: Forecast Method: Week day vs website visits.
Period
REAL DEMAND
TESMTH
FORECAST
ERRORt
Abs ERROR
MADt
%Error
MAPEt
BIAS
TS
2013Monday
1
13012
#N/A
0
2013Tuesday
2
12952
#N/A
0
2013Wednesday
3
12295
#N/A
0
2013Thursday
4
11672
#N/A
0
2013Friday
5
8351
#N/A
0
2013Saturday
6
5001
#N/A
0
2013Sunday
7
6779
#N/A
0
2014Monday
8
17392
17577
17577
-185
185
185
1.06%
1.06%
-1.06%
-1.00
2014Tuesday
9
18842
18375
18375
467
467
326
2.48%
1.77%
0.78%
0.55
2014Wednesday
10
18308
17846
17846
462
462
371
2.53%
2.02%
1.36%
0.84
2014Thursday
11
16365
17416
17416
-1051
1051
541
6.42%
3.12%
-0.43%
-0.22
2014Friday
12
11577
11811
11811
-234
234
480
2.02%
2.90%
-0.66%
-0.28
2014Saturday
13
7249
6898
6898
351
351
458
4.84%
3.23%
-0.21%
-0.08
2014Sunday
14
9579
9711
9711
-132
132
412
1.38%
2.96%
-0.32%
-0.12
2015Monday
15
16923
17827
17827
-904
904
473
5.34%
3.26%
-1.06%
-0.38
2015Tuesday
16
17544
17531
17531
13
13
422
0.08%
2.91%
-0.91%
-0.33
2015Wednesday
17
17233
16635
16635
598
598
440
3.47%
2.96%
-0.41%
-0.15
2015Thursday
18
16151
15649
15649
502
502
445
3.11%
2.97%
-0.07%
-0.02
2015Friday
19
11034
11397
11397
-363
363
439
3.29%
3.00%
-0.27%
-0.10
2015Saturday
20
7030
6753
6753
277
277
426
3.94%
3.07%
-0.11%
-0.04
2015Sunday
21
8811
9327
9327
-516
516
433
5.86%
3.27%
-0.37%
-0.12
2016Monday
22
22593
16599
16599
5994
5994
803
26.53%
4.82%
2.44%
0.79
2016Tuesday
23
24050
23045
23045
1005
1005
816
4.18%
4.78%
2.61%
0.84
2016Wednesday
24
23362
24061
24061
-699
699
809
2.99%
4.68%
2.11%
0.67
2016Thursday
25
21514
22579
22579
-1065
1065
823
4.95%
4.69%
1.58%
0.50
2016Friday
26
16281
15697
15697
584
584
811
3.58%
4.63%
1.69%
0.51
2016Saturday
27
10189
10365
10365
-176
176
779
1.73%
4.49%
1.58%
0.46
2016Sunday
28
12620
13790
13790
-1170
1170
798
9.27%
4.72%
1.16%
0.33
2017Monday
29
24236
24236
2017Tuesday
30
25717
25717
2017Wednesday
31
25309
25309
2017Thursday
32
23780
23780
2017Friday
33
17276
17276
2017Saturday
34
10908
10908
2017Sunday
35
14292
14292
Table 22: Forecast Method: Season vs Donations
PERIOD
DEMAND
TESMTH
FORECAST
ERRORt
Abs ERROR
MADt
%Error
MAPEt
BIAS
TS
2013Spring
1
12450
#N/A
0
2013Summer
2
14025
#N/A
0
2013Autumn
3
17300
#N/A
0
2013Winter
4
190700
#N/A
0
2014Spring
5
66188
89118
89118
-22930
22930
22930
34.64%
34.64%
-34.64%
-1.00
2014Summer
6
46450
22265
22265
24185
24185
23558
52.07%
43.36%
1.11%
0.03
2014Autumn
7
58530
29070
29070
29460
29460
25525
50.33%
45.68%
17.94%
0.43
2014Winter
8
179330
353471
353471
-174141
174141
62679
97.11%
58.54%
-40.92%
-1.06
2015Spring
9
97033
81066
81066
15967
15967
53337
16.45%
50.12%
-28.48%
-0.68
2015Summer
10
73130
57629
57629
15501
15501
47031
21.20%
45.30%
-21.50%
-0.48
2015Autumn
11
78710
72166
72166
6544
6544
41247
8.31%
40.02%
-17.59%
-0.38
2015Winter
12
264481.7
259034
259034
5447
5447
36772
2.06%
35.27%
-11.57%
-0.32
2016Spring
13
109271.5
119937
119937
-10666
10666
33871
9.76%
32.44%
-11.37%
-0.32
2016Summer
14
111242.5
87898
87898
23345
23345
32819
20.99%
31.29%
-8.05%
-0.23
2016Autumn
15
128593.5
96525
96525
32068
32068
32750
24.94%
30.71%
-4.55%
-0.13
2016Winter
16
241810.8
322392
322392
-80581
80581
36736
33.32%
30.93%
-9.33%
-0.30
2017Spring
17
136934
136934
2017Summer
18
127306
127306
2017Autumn
19
144299
144299
2017Winter
20
312157
312157
Page 7 of 19
==PAGE:50==
A3. Internal Data
A2.1 Facebook Relevant Data
The relevant data extracted from the Facebook Page is summarized in Table 23 and shown in
Figures 14, 15, 16, 17 18 and 19, .
Table 23: Summary of Facebook relevant data.
NO. OF FIGURE
REMARKS TO THE FIGURE
Figure 14
The number of likes denote an increasing linear behaviour.
Figure 15
Important Dates: 19/02/2015 with 68 new Likes, 05/08/2015 with 41,
08/11/2016 with 26 and 28/08/2015 with 25.
Figure 16
In this environment, Reach is deﬁned as the amount of people who re-
ceived impressions of a Page post, the important information extracted
form this graph is to ﬁnd out if it is proﬁtable for LMS to pay in order
to reach more people or not. Based on the graph it exists a 43% over the
total amount of users who are reach without paying (organic users).
Figure 17
In this environment, Impressions is deﬁned as the amount of times a
post from the Facebook page is displayed, the important information
extracted from this graph is is to ﬁnd out if it is proﬁtable for LMS to
pay in order increase the number of impressions.
Figure 18
The main gender regarding the visits to the Facebook page are females
with age between 25-34 years old (26.74%) followed by females be-
tween 35-44 years old (19.63%).
Figure 19
The main locations of Facebook visitors are Copenhagen followed by
Aarhus, Aalborg and Odense.
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
8000
9000
18-01-2015
18-02-2015
18-03-2015
18-04-2015
18-05-2015
18-06-2015
18-07-2015
18-08-2015
18-09-2015
18-10-2015
18-11-2015
18-12-2015
18-01-2016
18-02-2016
18-03-2016
18-04-2016
18-05-2016
18-06-2016
18-07-2016
18-08-2016
18-09-2016
18-10-2016
18-11-2016
18-12-2016
18-01-2017
Number of likes
Total number of likes
Figure 14: Total number of Likes in Facebook Page throughout the time horizon.
Page 8 of 19
==PAGE:51==
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
18-01-2015
08-02-2015
01-03-2015
22-03-2015
12-04-2015
03-05-2015
24-05-2015
14-06-2015
05-07-2015
26-07-2015
16-08-2015
06-09-2015
27-09-2015
18-10-2015
08-11-2015
29-11-2015
20-12-2015
10-01-2016
31-01-2016
21-02-2016
13-03-2016
03-04-2016
24-04-2016
15-05-2016
05-06-2016
26-06-2016
17-07-2016
07-08-2016
28-08-2016
18-09-2016
09-10-2016
30-10-2016
20-11-2016
11-12-2016
01-01-2017
22-01-2017
Number of likes
Daily New Likes
Daily Unlikes
Figure 15: New Likes and Dislikes in Facebook Page throughout the time horizon.
0
10000
20000
30000
40000
50000
60000
70000
18-01-2015
18-02-2015
18-03-2015
18-04-2015
18-05-2015
18-06-2015
18-07-2015
18-08-2015
18-09-2015
18-10-2015
18-11-2015
18-12-2015
18-01-2016
18-02-2016
18-03-2016
18-04-2016
18-05-2016
18-06-2016
18-07-2016
18-08-2016
18-09-2016
18-10-2016
18-11-2016
18-12-2016
18-01-2017
Number of users
Daily Total Reach
Daily Organic Reach
Daily Paid Reach
Figure 16: Total reach vs Organic reach vs Paid reach in Facebook Page throughout
the time horizon.
0
20000
40000
60000
80000
100000
120000
140000
18-01-2015
18-02-2015
18-03-2015
18-04-2015
18-05-2015
18-06-2015
18-07-2015
18-08-2015
18-09-2015
18-10-2015
18-11-2015
18-12-2015
18-01-2016
18-02-2016
18-03-2016
18-04-2016
18-05-2016
18-06-2016
18-07-2016
18-08-2016
18-09-2016
18-10-2016
18-11-2016
18-12-2016
18-01-2017
Number of users
Daily Total Impressions
Daily Organic impressions
Daily Paid Impressions
Figure 17: Total impressions vs Organic impressions vs Paid impressions in
Facebook Page throughout the time horizon.
Page 9 of 19
==PAGE:52==
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
M.65+
M.55-64
M.45-54
M.35-44
M.25-34
M.18-24
M.13-17
F.65+
F.55-64
F.45-54
F.35-44
F.25-34
F.18-24
F.13-17
Figure 18: Gender by Age of people visiting the Facebook Page.
Page 10 of 19
==PAGE:53==
0
100000
200000
300000
400000
500000
600000
700000
800000
Øm, Zealand Region, Denmark
Åbenrå, Region of Southern Denmark, Denmark
Aabenraa, Region of Southern Denmark, Denmark
Aalborg, North Denmark Region, Denmark
Aarhus, Central Denmark Region, Denmark
Albertslund, Capital Region of Denmark, Denmark
Amagerbro, Capital Region of Denmark, Denmark
Ballerup, Capital Region of Denmark, Denmark
Birkerød, Capital Region of Denmark, Denmark
Bornholm Regional Municipality, Capital Region…
Brønderslev, North Denmark Region, Denmark
Copenhagen, Capital Region of Denmark, Denmark
Esbjerg, Region of Southern Denmark, Denmark
Fredericia, Region of Southern Denmark, Denmark
Frederiksberg, Capital Region of Denmark, Denmark
Frederiksberg, Zealand Region, Denmark
Frederikshavn, North Denmark Region, Denmark
Frederikssund, Capital Region of Denmark, Denmark
Fyn, Denmark
Gentofte, Capital Region of Denmark, Denmark
Gladsaxe, Capital Region of Denmark, Denmark
Glostrup, Capital Region of Denmark, Denmark
Haderslev, Region of Southern Denmark, Denmark
Hedensted, Central Denmark Region, Denmark
Helsingør, Capital Region of Denmark, Denmark
Herning, Central Denmark Region, Denmark
Hillerød, Capital Region of Denmark, Denmark
Hjørring, North Denmark Region, Denmark
Holbæk, Zealand Region, Denmark
Holstebro, Central Denmark Region, Denmark
Horsens, Central Denmark Region, Denmark
Hvidovre, Capital Region of Denmark, Denmark
Ikast, Central Denmark Region, Denmark
København, Capital Region of Denmark, Denmark
Køge, Zealand Region, Denmark
Kalundborg, Zealand Region, Denmark
Kastrup, Capital Region of Denmark, Denmark
Kolding, Region of Southern Denmark, Denmark
Kongens Lyngby, Capital Region of Denmark,…
Lemvig, Central Denmark Region, Denmark
Middelfart, Region of Southern Denmark, Denmark
Næstved, Zealand Region, Denmark
Nexø, Capital Region of Denmark, Denmark
Nørresundby, North Denmark Region, Denmark
Nyborg, Region of Southern Denmark, Denmark
Nykøbing, Zealand Region, Denmark
Nykøbing Mors, North Denmark Region, Denmark
Nykjobing, Zealand Region, Denmark
Odense, Region of Southern Denmark, Denmark
Rødovre, Capital Region of Denmark, Denmark
Rønne, Capital Region of Denmark, Denmark
Randers, Central Denmark Region, Denmark
Region of Southern Denmark, Denmark
Ringsted, Zealand Region, Denmark
Roskilde, Zealand Region, Denmark
Søborg, Capital Region of Denmark, Denmark
Sønderborg, Region of Southern Denmark, Denmark
Silkeborg, Central Denmark Region, Denmark
Skanderborg, Central Denmark Region, Denmark
Skive, Central Denmark Region, Denmark
Slagelse, Zealand Region, Denmark
Sorø, Zealand Region, Denmark
Struer, Central Denmark Region, Denmark
Svendborg, Region of Southern Denmark, Denmark
Tårnby, Capital Region of Denmark, Denmark
Tønder, Region of Southern Denmark, Denmark
Taastrup, Capital Region of Denmark, Denmark
Unknown
Valby, Capital Region of Denmark, Denmark
Vanløse, Capital Region of Denmark, Denmark
Vejen, Region of Southern Denmark, Denmark
Vejle, Region of Southern Denmark, Denmark
Viborg, Central Denmark Region, Denmark
Vordingborg, Zealand Region, Denmark
Amount of people's likes per city
Number of facebook likes per city
Figure 19: People’s visits on the Facebook Page through the different regions in Denmark.
Page 11 of 19
==PAGE:54==
A2.2 Webpage Relevant Data
The relevant data extracted from the Webpage (Google Analytics) is summarized in Table 24
and shown in Figures 20, 21, 22 and 23.
Table 24: Summary of webpage relevant data.
NO. OF FIGURE
REMARKS TO THE FIGURE
Figure 20
The most popular day to visit the Webpage is Tuesday followed by
Wednesday. In contract the least popular is Saturday
Figure 21
The age of people who visit the Webpage are more distributed, so there
is not a clear predominant interval of age.
Figure 22
People from Copenhagen, followed by people from Aarhus, Odense and
Aalborg seems to be the most interested in LMS
Figure 23
Almost the same percentage of Webpage’s visitors correspond to return-
ing visitors and to new visitors
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
25000
30000
2013Monday
2013Tuesday
2013Wednesday
2013Thursday
2013Friday
2013Saturday
2013Sunday
2014Monday
2014Tuesday
2014Wednesday
2014Thursday
2014Friday
2014Saturday
2014Sunday
2015Monday
2015Tuesday
2015Wednesday
2015Thursday
2015Friday
2015Saturday
2015Sunday
2016Monday
2016Tuesday
2016Wednesday
2016Thursday
2016Friday
2016Saturday
2016Sunday
Visits in webpage
Number of visits to the website
Figure 20: Number of website’s visits throughout the time horizon.
Page 12 of 19
==PAGE:55==
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
65+
55-64
45-54
35-44
25-34
18-24
Figure 21: Age of people looking at LMS webpage.
53%
15%
9%
7%
3%
3%
3%
3%
2% 2%
Copenhagen
Aarhus
Odense
Aalborg
Roskilde
Hvidovre
Frederiksberg
Kolding
Sonderborg
Silkeborg
Figure 22: Location of people who visit LMS’ webpage.
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
Returning
Visitor
New Visitor
Figure 23: Webpage’s visits: New visitor vs Returning Visitor
Page 13 of 19
==PAGE:56==
A2.3 Counselling Relevant Data
The relevant data extracted from the Counselling Database is summarized in Table 25 and shown
in Figures 25, 26, 27, 24 and 28.
Table 25: Summary of Counselling Relevant Data.
NO. OF FIGURE
REMARKS TO THE FIGURE
Figure 24
The most popular channels of counselling are chat and phone calls.
Figure 25
The main person who contact the counselling service is the person in
need followed by the mother of the person in need.
Figure 26
The predominant gender that uses the counselling services are females
though all the channels that LMS offers.
Figure 27
The main patients are minor females, followed by females between 18
to 34 years old.
Figure 28
The two ﬁrst years shown in the Figure are not very representative due
to the lack of data in most of the counselling channels. Looking at the
last 4 graphs in the Figure, it can be seen that the predominant channels
are chat and phone calls, being the least popular the email. The SMS
seems to be unpopular as well, but as it is a new channel launched, there
is not enough data to support this statement yet.
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
Amount of people that contacted
Chat
Mail
Personal
Phone
SMS
Figure 24: Amount of people contacting LMS through the different channels over the years.
Page 14 of 19
==PAGE:57==
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
The person who is ill
Mother
Father
Brother/Sister
Other relative
Boyfriend/Girlfriend
Friend
Familiar
Colleague
 Doctor/Pedagogue
Another professional
Pupil / student /
journalist
Other
Don't know
Number of Times that contact LMS
Chat
Mail
Personal
Phone
SMS
Figure 25: Relation of the person who contact LMS with the person in need.
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
Chat
Mail
Personal
Councelling
Phone
Sms
UnKnown
Woman
Man
Figure 26: Gender of people contacting LMS’ counselling through the different
channels.
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
M65+
M55-64
M45-54
M35-44
M25-34
M18-24
M<18
F65+
F55-64
F45-54
F35-44
F25-34
F18-24
F<18
Figure 27: Gender of people by age contacting LMS’ counselling.
Page 15 of 19
==PAGE:58==
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
January
February
March
April
May
Jun
July
Augost
September
October
November
December
Amount of people that 
contacted
2012
Chat
Mail
Personal
Phone
SMS
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
January
February
March
April
May
Jun
July
Augost
September
October
November
December
Amount of people that 
contacted
2013
Chat
Mail
Personal
Phone
SMS
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
January
February
March
April
May
Jun
July
Augost
September
October
November
December
Amount of people that 
contacted
2014
Chat
Mail
Personal
Phone
SMS
0
50
100
150
200
250
January
February
March
April
May
Jun
July
Augost
September
October
November
December
Amount of people that 
contacted
2015
Chat
Mail
Personal
Phone
SMS
0
50
100
150
200
January
February
March
April
May
Jun
July
Augost
September
October
November
December
Amount of people that 
contacted
2016
Chat
Mail
Personal
Phone
SMS
0
50
100
150
200
January
February
Amount of people that 
contacted
2017
Chat
Mail
Personal
Phone
SMS
Figure 28: Amount of people contacting LMS through the different channels over the months in
every year.
Page 16 of 19
==PAGE:59==
A2.4 Database Relevant Data
The relevant data extracted from the Database is summarized in Table 26 and shown in Figures
29, 30, 31 and 32.
Table 26: Summary of Database Relevant Data.
NO. OF FIGURE
REMARKS TO THE FIGURE
Figure 29
The main locations of LMS’s Donors are Copenhagen Frederiksberg
and vicinity.
Figure 30
Most partnerships last 1 month and those ones are referred to "one pay-
ment one time". The most common number of years in partnership are
4 years (more than 700 partnerships) followed by 1.5 (more than 500
partnerships) years and 1 year ( almost 500 partnerships).
Figure 31
December shows the highest value of donation. During the rest months,
the distribution is mostly equal and stable.
Figure 32
Figure depicts the amount of money donated in each month over the
years. It can be highlight that while in every month the amount of
money donated is increasing through the years, the donations in De-
cember are still quite stable but higher.
42%
6%
0%
14%
7%
7%
7%
13%
4%
Copenhaguen, Frederiksberg and vicinity
Northem Zealand
Bornholm
Central, Southern and Western Zealand.
Funen islands
Southerm Jutland
Northwest, West, middle and southeast Jutland
Eastern Jutland
Northern Jutland
Figure 29: Location of donors gathered through the different provinces in Denmark.
Page 17 of 19
==PAGE:60==
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
Number of Partnerships 
Months
0
200
400
600
800
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
4
5
6
More
Number of Partnerships
Years
Time last for every partnership
Figure 30: Duration of Donor’s partnership in number of months (left), and in number of years
(right)
0 kr.
20,000 kr.
40,000 kr.
60,000 kr.
80,000 kr.
100,000 kr.
120,000 kr.
140,000 kr.
160,000 kr.
180,000 kr.
200,000 kr.
January
February
March
April
May
Jun
July
Augost
September
October
November
December
Money
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
Figure 31: Comparison of donations through the months in all the years.
Page 18 of 19
==PAGE:61==
 kr.-
 kr.20,000
 kr.40,000
 kr.60,000
 kr.80,000
 kr.100,000
 kr.120,000
 kr.140,000
 kr.160,000
 kr.180,000
 kr.200,000
2013
2014
2015
2016
Amount donated
Year
January Payment
February Payment
March Payment
April Payment
May Payment
June Payment
July Payment
Augost Payment
September Payment
October Payment
November Payment
December Payment
Figure 32: Donations over the years by month
Page 19 of 19
