==PAGE:1==
 i
The Super Cool 
Analysis Tool
Development of an analysis 
tool for theory inclusion in 
behavioural design projects 
Beatrice Angel 
Nanna Kristiansen
35 ECTS Master Thesis – DTU July 2017
Supervisor: Philip Cash - Associate Professor DTU 
==PAGE:2==
ii
English title:  The Super Cool Analysis Tool - Development of an analysis tool for theory inclusion in 
behavioural design projects
Danish title:  Det Super Seje Analyseværktøj - Udvikling af et analyseværktøj til at integrere teorier i 
adfærdsmæssige designprojekter
Project: Master Thesis in M.Sc. Design & Innovation
Hand-in date: 2nd of July 2017
ECTS points: 35
Institution: Technical University of Denmark 
Project description: This thesis combines literature and current industry practice to develop a support tool 
for behavioural design projects. Literature acknowledge the need for figuring out how to connect a behavioural 
problem with the most suitable behavioural theories, as well as the need for understanding and applying 
behavioural theories in the correct context. Current practice in industry acknowledge the need to build a 
theoretical back-catalogue to increase behavioural design capabilities and take advantage of theory inclusion in 
behavioural design projects. This leads to the development of an analytical behavioural design support tool that 
is able to meet the above-mentioned needs by providing a five step framework for problem analysis and theory 
inclusion.
Preface
Beatrice Angel
Student number: s123678
Stud.MSc.Eng. Design & Innovation
Technical University of Denmark
Nanna Kristiansen
Student number: s123420
Stud.MSc.Eng. Design & Innovation
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:3==
 iii
Many of the biggest challenges today are caused by human behaviour. This realisation is 
supported by the emerging field of Behavioural Design, in which designers, through applying 
a combination of behavioural theories and behavioural design approaches, aim to design 
solutions to cope with these challenges. Despite the fact that theory driven design leads 
to more successful behaviour change interventions, a gap exists between the realisation of 
the importance of integrative thinking of behavioural theories and the explicit visualisation 
of this knowledge in practical application methods. An investigation of current practice in 
five design consultancies revealed two different needs due to this gap: 1. Designers with 
limited experience of behavioural design need easy ways of achieving a theoretical back-
catalogue; and 2. Designers with comprehensive experience of behavioural design need 
ways of challenging their current tunnel vision in regard to a multifaceted combination of 
behavioural theories. Hence, by bridging findings from theory and practice, through different 
design activities, a support tool is developed: the Super Cool Analysis Tool. The Super Cool 
Analysis Tool is a gamified analysis support tool for the early stages of a behavioural design 
project that through five steps helps designers and other professions in a behavioural design 
project team in making a thorough problem behaviour analysis by:
• providing a structured overview of behavioural theories and their relations with 
respect to considering all perspectives of behavioural design problems.
• enabling better validation of the analysis and ensuring translatable documentation 
along the analysis steps.
The Super Cool Analysis Tool is developed from a design point of view where it is desired 
to transition from a comprehensive problem understanding to a solution and thus the tool 
contributes with: A detailed visualisation of problem behaviour influences, a theoretical framework 
for increasing integrative thinking of behavioural theories and a forced theory reflection, and an 
overview of the theories’ interaction. This thesis opens up for further research on exploring 
and studying the importance and significance of applying integrative thinking of behavioural 
theories, as well as establishing evidence of the effects that different problem perspectives 
have on behaviour. Additionally, for designers this thesis opens up for the realisation that a 
more thorough problem analysis combined with an open approach and integrative thinking 
of behavioural theories will increase the probability of developing successful solutions in 
behavioural design projects.
Abstract
==PAGE:4==
iv
A student successfully completing a Master Thesis shall:
1. be able to apply current engineering background to investigate, understand and 
reflect upon behavioural design literature concerning tools, methods, and theories 
within this field.
2. be able to formulate clear research aims and objectives, based on an identified 
relevant scientific problem in the context of behavioural design.
3. be able to identify, retrieve, and apply leading international research within the 
context of behavioural design to make a systematic literature review for framing 
and guiding the project.
4. be able to deconstruct scientific problems within the field of behavioural design 
through explanation, analysis, and discussion.
5. be able to select and apply relevant design tools and methods to support the aim 
of the project and its process.
6. be able to apply current engineering design background to ideate, conceptualise, 
and develop a support tool for behavioural design.
7. be able to formulate and visually set up a guide showing how to classify chosen 
behavioural design theories.
8. be able to critically assess knowledge in the professional field – through a continuous 
and dynamic collaborative process both with internal and external partners.
9. be able to plan, structure, and manage a master project with the use of milestones, 
to handle complexity and unforeseen events that may require new solution models.
10. be able to communicate the project clearly in writing, visually, and orally, as well as 
in an easy and understandable manner with proper documentation and references.
11. be able to adjust the staging of the project based on assessment of magnitude of 
the task, project complexity, and the desired result.
Learning Objectives
==PAGE:5==
 v
Our primary thanks go to our supervisor, Associate Professor Philip Cash from DTU 
Management Engineering, for his weekly valuable supervision and support throughout the 
development of the thesis. Without his guidance we would not have succeeded with this 
research project nor achieved a successful outcome.
Special thanks to Assistant Professor Jaap Daalhuizen from DTU Management Engineering 
for his valuable co-supervision, time, and interest in the thesis, as well as for acting as our 
stand-in supervisor in the very end of the project.
We would like to thank Assistant Professor Nynke Tromp from Delft University of 
Technology for her overseas late-night sharing of insights and sparring.  Her support and 
sharing of knowledge and insights from own experience was invaluable in the development 
of the Super Cool Analysis Tool.
Additionally, we are grateful to the behavioural design consultancies /KL.7 and The Nudging 
Company, as well as the engineering design consultancy DELTA – Idemolab, for their time and 
interest as well as continuous feedback during the thesis. Our thanks go to Sebastian Borum 
Olsen, Maria Mattsson, Thomas Christensen and Mikkel Leth Olsen. We would also 
like to thank the two behavioural design consultancies KRUKOW and Decision Design for 
participating in interviews.
Last, but absolutely not least, thanks to all the anonymous workshop participants, without 
your time and willingness to participate in workshops the Super Cool Analysis Tool would not 
have been successfully developed. In particular, thanks to the loyal Research Assistant Camilla 
K. E. Bay Nielsen from DTU Management Engineering for always being willing to help us 
and encouraging us to keep going. 
Acknowledgements
==PAGE:6==
vi
Behavioural design
“A specific type of design where designers seek to develop products and/or systems that influence 
human behaviour through interventions” (Nielsen & Aakerlund 2016, p.vi; Hartlev & Durazo 
2015, p.11).
Behavioural design method
Designed to support behavioural design activities through goal-oriented rationalisation and 
simplification of analysing and targeting behaviours.
Behavioural design situation
A behavioural design situation includes a problem related to a type of behaviour of individual(s), 
behavioural theories describing and analysing this behaviour and design approaches to 
propose an effective solution to the problem.
Behavioural science
A combination of behavioural economics, cognitive neuroscience and proven experiments, 
conducted by behavioural scientists around the world (Briefcase 2017).
Behavioural theories
An overall term for the theoretical constitution of behavioural design, which is specifically 
composed of models of behaviour and theory of change (Prager 2012).
Cognitive psychology
A branch of psychology that studies mental processes, i.e. how humans process information, 
which includes terms such as attention, memory, problem solving, and thinking (Gerrig & 
Zimbardo 2002).
Designer
A professional with design background whose professionalism combines socio-technical 
perspectives with technical product and/or service development skills and possesses the 
capabilities of proceeding successfully through all phases of a design process.
Design approach
An overall term for the practical constitution of design, specifically composed of design 
frameworks, design processes, design methods, and design tools.
Design framework
A coherent set of concepts and relationships posited about some phenomena (Bates & 
Zhong 2014) which supports and guides the designer in a given direction.
Design method
A goal-oriented rationalisation or simplification of engineering work in the form of a 
standardised work description for monitoring the design process and solving design sub-tasks. 
Design methods create a staging for creative activities or structured search, classification, 
discussion, evaluation, and decision-making (Andreasen et al. 2015). 
 
Nomenclature
==PAGE:7==
 vii
Design process
A composition of different design phases which refers to both the actual activities undertaken 
by the designer and the models used to describe these activities (Andreasen et al. 2015).
Design tool
A guide on how to apply models in certain contexts in order to complete development tasks 
(Andreasen et al. 2015). Design tools tend to be specific and practice-oriented (Niedderer 
et al. 2014).
Efficient behavioural design
Design interventions that changes the problem behaviour to a specific desired target 
behaviour as intended by the designer.
Engineering design company
A type of company that develops engineering solutions in regard to different kinds of product 
and/or service design. Among other things these types of companies are found in the fields 
of manufacturing or management.
Game
“A game is a system in which players engage in an artificial conflict, defined by rules, that results 
in a quantifiable outcome.” (Salen & Zimmerman 2014, p. 11)
Intervention
A behavioural design solution (in the form such as a product, an artefact, a system or a 
campaign) that addresses a specific behaviour either to enhance, reduce or remove it.
Model of behaviour
Focus on describing existing behaviour by explaining the determinant factors (e.g. intentions, 
attitudes, values) of underlying behaviour (Prager 2012). Models of behaviour tend to be 
linear (Darnton 2008b), as they describe behaviour when it occurs.
Support tool
A tool with the aim of positively influencing and helping a person with a certain task in a 
given context.
Theoretical back-catalogue
A theoretical foundation of behavioural theories obtained through years of experience.
Theory inclusion
Direct application of behavioural theories explicitly resulting in decisions, analysis or other 
obtained insights used in behavioural design activities. 
Theory of change
Focus on describing how to change one behaviour to another more desired behaviour (Prager 
2012) and thus theories of change support interventions for changing current behaviours or 
encouraging the adoption of new behaviours. Theories of change tend to be circular, as they 
==PAGE:8==
viii
Abbreviations
ARRM = AIDS Risk Reduction Model
BDS = Behavioural Design Situation 
DRM = Design Research Methodology
TPB = Theory of Planned Behaviour
TIB = Theory of Interpersonal Behaviour
==PAGE:9==
 ix
1. Introduction 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1
 
1.1 Aim of the thesis 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2
 
1.2 Research aim & objectives 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2
 
1.3 Structure of the thesis  
 
 
 
 
 
 
3
 
 
1.3.1 Reading guide 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3
2. Literature Review  
 
 
 
 
 
 
5
 
2.1 Introduction to the Literature Review  
 
 
 
 
6
 
2.2 Behavioural design 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6
 
 
2.2.1 Understanding the problem 
 
 
 
 
 
7
 
 
2.2.2 Understanding behaviour 
 
 
 
 
 
7
 
 
2.2.3 Understanding behaviour change 
 
 
 
 
8
 
 
2.2.4 Understanding design 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8
 
 
2.2.5 Solution  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8
 
 
2.2.6 Global assumptions of behavioural design  
 
 
 
9
 
 
2.2.7 The Behavioural Design Situation 
 
 
 
 
9
 
2.3 Behavioural problems, theories and design approaches  
 
10
 
 
2.3.1 Behavioural problems 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10
 
 
 
2.3.1.1 Problem perspectives  
 
 
 
 
11
 
 
 
2.3.1.2 Concluding remarks on behavioural problems  
 
13
 
 
2.3.2 Models of behaviour 
 
 
 
 
 
 
14
 
 
 
2.3.2.1 Individual factors of behaviour  
 
 
 
14
 
 
 
2.3.2.2 Social factors of behaviour 
 
 
 
 
18
 
 
 
2.3.2.3 Concluding remarks on models of behaviour   
 
21
 
 
2.3.3 Theories of change 
 
 
 
 
 
 
22
 
 
 
2.3.3.1 Understanding the factors of behaviour change 
 
22
 
 
 
2.3.3.2 Concluding remarks on theories of change 
 
 
26
 
 
2.3.4 Behavioural design approaches  
 
 
 
 
26
 
 
 
2.3.4.1 Framework 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 27
 
 
 
2.3.4.2 Process  
 
 
 
 
 
 
28
 
 
 
2.3.4.3 Method 
 
 
 
 
 
 
29
 
 
 
2.3.4.4 Tool 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
29
 
 
 
2.3.4.5 Concluding remarks on behavioural design approaches 
31
 
2.4 Research Framework  
 
 
 
 
 
 
32
 
 
2.4.1 Identification of issues 
 
 
 
 
 
 
32
 
 
 
2.4.1.1 Issue between problem and behavioural theories 
 
 33
 
 
 
2.4.1.2 Issue between integrative thinking among models of 
 
 
 
 
behaviour & theories of change 
 
 
 
33
 
 
 
2.4.1.3 Issue between behavioural theories and design approaches 
 34
 
 
2.4.2 Research aim & objectives 
 
 
 
 
 
35
 
 
 
2.4.2.1 Research aim   
 
 
 
 
 
 35
 
 
 
2.4.2.2 Research objectives 
 
 
 
 
 
35
 
2.5 Staging considerations of the support tool development  
 
35
 
 
2.5.1 General design processes 
 
 
 
 
 
35
Table of contents
==PAGE:10==
x
 
 
2.5.2 Staging design 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
36
 
 
2.5.3 Design mindset  
 
 
 
 
 
 
37
 
 
2.5.4 Relationship between the general design elements  
 
 
37
 
2.6 Conclusion & key findings of the Literature Review  
 
 
38
3. Methodology  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
39
 
3.1. Introduction to Methodology   
 
 
 
 
 
40
 
3.2 Stage 1: Research Clarification - Literature Review  
 
 
40
 
3.3 Stage 2 - Descriptive Study I: Investigation of Current Practice  
41
 
3.4 Stage 3: Prescriptive Study - Support Tool Development  
 
41
 
3.5 Stage 4: Descriptive Study II - Validation & Evaluation of the Support tool 42
4. Investigation of Current Practice  
 
 
 
43
 
4.1 Introduction to Investigation of Current Practice 
 
 
 
44
 
4.2 Interview setup  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
44
 
4.3 Analysis of the results  
 
 
 
 
 
 
45
 
 
4.3.1 Result 1: Problem analysis & theoretical back-catalogue  
 
45
 
 
4.3.2 Result 2: Tunnel vision & unstructured theory inclusion process  
47
 
 
4.3.3 Result 3: Staging & communication within behavioural design projects 49
 
 
4.3.4 Result 4: Testing solutions & translating insights  
 
 
51
 
 
4.3.5 Result 5: Project evaluation & project success   
 
 
51
 
 
4.3.6 User needs journey 
 
 
 
 
 
 
52
 
4.4 Conclusion & key findings of Investigation of Current Practice 
 
54
5. Support Tool Development  
 
 
 
 
55
 
5.1 Introduction to Support Tool Development   
 
 
 
56
 
5.2 Value Proposition Design  
 
 
 
 
 
 
57
 
 
5.2.1 Value Proposition Canvas 
 
 
 
 
 
57
 
 
5.2.2 User Scenarios  
 
 
 
 
 
 
58
 
5.3 Tool requirements specification 
 
 
 
 
 
60
 
5.4 Ideation & conceptualisation  
 
 
 
 
 
60
 
 
5.4.1 Definition of analysis support tool steps  
 
 
 
61
 
 
5.4.2 Ideation  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
61
 
 
5.4.3 Conceptualisation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
62
 
 
5.4.4 The basic concept: The Super Cool Analysis Tool  
 
 
66
 
5.5 Detailing & development 
 
 
 
 
 
 
67
 
5.6 Conclusion & key findings of the Support Tool Development 
 
70
6. The Super Cool Analysis Tool 
 
 
 
 
71
 
6.1 Introduction to the Super Cool Analysis Tool  
 
 
 
72
 
6.2 Overall support tool description 
 
 
 
 
 
72
 
6.3 Step 0: Preparation & instructions 
 
 
 
 
 
74
 
 
6.3.1 Purpose  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
74
 
 
6.3.2 Preparation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
75
 
 
6.3.3 Step by step procedure & outcome 
 
 
 
 
75
 
 
6.3.4 Considerations & recommendations 
 
 
 
 
76
==PAGE:11==
 xi
 
6.4 Step 1: Initial problem analysis 
 
 
 
 
 
76
 
 
6.4.1 Purpose  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
76
 
 
6.4.2 Preparation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
77
 
 
6.4.3 Step by step procedure & outcome 
 
 
 
 
77
 
 
6.4.4 Considerations, limitations & alternatives 
 
 
 
78
 
6.5 Step 2: Problem behaviour analysis  
 
 
 
 
79
 
 
6.5.1 Purpose  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
79
 
 
6.5.2 Preparation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
80
 
 
6.5.3 Step by step procedure & outcome 
 
 
 
 
80
 
 
6.5.4 Limitations & alternatives 
 
 
 
 
 
80
 
6.6 Step 3: Problem behaviour validation 
 
 
 
 
81
 
 
6.6.1 Purpose  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
82
 
 
6.6.2 Preparation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
82
 
 
6.6.3 Step by step procedure & outcome 
 
 
 
 
82
 
6.7 Step 4: Game evaluation & documentation  
 
 
 
83
 
 
6.6.4 Considerations & limitations  
 
 
 
 
 
83
 
 
6.7.1 Purpose  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
84
 
 
6.7.2 Preparation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
84
 
 
6.7.3 Step by step procedure & outcome 
 
 
 
 
84
 
 
6.7.4 Limitations & alternatives 
 
 
 
 
 
85
 
6.8 Accessibility & ownership 
 
 
 
 
 
 
86
 
6.9 Imagined use cases 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
87
 
 
6.9.1 Use case 1: Outcome driven application in design consultancies  
87
 
 
6.9.2 Use case 2: Output driven application in design consultancies  
88
 
 
6.9.3 Use case 3: Output driven application in engineering design companies 88
 
6.10 Conclusion & key findings of the Super Cool Analysis Tool 
 
89
7. Discussion 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
91
 
7.1 Introduction to the Discussion 
 
 
 
 
 
92
 
7.2 Contributions of the support tool 
 
 
 
 
 
92
 
 
7.2.1 Comprehensive visualisation of problem behaviour influences  
93
 
 
7.2.2 Theoretical framework for increasing integrative thinking 
 
94
 
 
7.2.3 Overview and forced reflection of behavioural theories  
 
94
 
7.3 Implications for research and practice 
 
 
 
 
95
 
 
7.3.1 Implications for design research  
 
 
 
 
95
 
 
7.3.2 Implications for design practice   
 
 
 
 
96
 
7.4 Limitations 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
97
 
 
7.4.1 Use context of the support tool  
 
 
 
 
97
 
 
7.4.2 Limited amounts of research about behavioural problem influences 
97
 
 
7.4.3 Simplified topics relating to behavioural theories 
 
 
98
 
 
7.4.4 Lack of validation  
 
 
 
 
 
 
98
 
 
7.4.5 Generalisability   
 
 
 
 
 
 
98
 
7.5 Conclusion and key findings of the Discussion 
 
 
 
99
==PAGE:12==
xii
8. Conclusion 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      101
 
8.1 Conclusion 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         102
 
8.2 Further work 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         103
 
 
8.2.1 Pilot implementation of the support tool  
 
                    103
 
 
8.2.2 Experimental validation  
 
 
 
 
         103
 
 
8.2.3 Expand to an international context 
 
 
 
         105
 
 
8.2.4 Establish evidence of problem layers 
 
 
 
         106
 
 
8.2.5 Web page and accessibility 
 
 
 
 
         106
 
8.3 Final words 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         106
9. References 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         107
10. Assignment A & B  
 
 
 
 
 
         115
 
10.1 Assignment A: Preliminary assignment 
 
 
 
         116
 
10.2 Assignment B: Postliminary assignment   
 
 
         120
11. Appendices  
 
 
 
 
 
 
         123
 
Appendix 1: Interview guide with sub-questions  
 
 
        124
 
Appendix 2: Affinity diagram (1 of 3) 
 
 
 
 
        125
 
Appendix 3: Interview 1 - KRUKOW (1 of 3) 
 
 
 
        128
 
Appendix 4: Interview 2 - Decision Design (1 of 3) 
 
 
        131
 
Appendix 5: Interview 3 - /KL.7 (1 of 3)  
 
 
 
        134
 
Appendix 6: Interview 4 - The Nudging Company (1 of 3) 
 
        137
 
Appendix 7: Interview 5 - Delta - Idemolab (1 of 2) 
 
 
        140
 
Appendix 8: Workshop 1 & 2 
 
 
 
 
 
        142
 
Appendix 9: Value Proposition Canvas - Customer profile 
 
        143
 
Appendix 10: Value Proposition Canvas - Value map 
 
 
        144
 
Appendix 11: Value Proposition Canvas - Value map match 
 
        145
 
Appendix 12: User scenarios 
 
 
 
 
 
        146
 
Appendix 13: Tool impact on current work practice 
 
 
        147
 
Appendix 14: Requirements specification (1 of 2) 
 
 
        148
 
Appendix 15: Workshop 3 & 4 
 
 
 
 
 
        150
 
Appendix 16: Weighted Objectives Method (1 of 2) 
 
 
        151
 
Appendix 17: Workshop 5 - 13 
 
 
 
 
 
        153
 
Appendix 18: Guide Book (1 of 7)  
 
 
 
 
        154
 
Appendix 19: Begin Card 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        161
 
Appendix 20: End Card 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        162
 
Appendix 21: Problem Documentation Card 
 
 
 
        163
 
Appendix 22: Theory Cards (1 of 21) 
 
 
 
 
        164
 
Appendix 23: Predetermined chain of Theory Cards 
 
 
        185
 
Appendix 24: Theory Overview Wheel  
 
 
 
        186
 
Appendix 25: Transformation of keyword into topics 
 
 
        187
 
Appendix 26: Types of application  
 
 
 
 
        188
 
Appendix 27: Final demonstration of the Super Cool Analysis Tool 
        189
 
Appendix 28: Qualtrics survey suggestion (1 of 7) 
 
 
        190
 
Appendix 29: Suggested participants to contact with survey 
                 197
 
Appendix 30: Survey design 
 
 
 
 
                198
==PAGE:13==
 1
Chapter 1
Introduction
==PAGE:14==
2
In today’s society many of the major challenges around the world (e.g. financial crises, 
sustainability issues, immigration issues, effects of mass production and irresponsible consumer 
behaviour) could to a large extent be solved if humans would start changing their behaviours 
(Branson et al. 2012). The realisation that behaviour affects humans in all parts of the world 
is supported by the emerging field of Behavioural Design, in which designers aim to design 
solutions for solving these challenges. They do so with the knowledge that social and collective 
problems are affected by both the aspect of individual behaviour and attitudes as well as 
the aspect of social and collective behaviour and norms (Tromp 2013). This implies that an 
integrative thinking of both aspects is needed to understand behaviour properly. 
The two aspects of individual behaviour and social behaviour are derived from numerous 
behavioural theories constituting the theoretical foundation of behavioural design. Yet, while 
behavioural theories are the link to understanding behaviour, design is the link to changing 
behaviour. Due to the fact that theory driven design leads to more successful behaviour change 
interventions (Glanz & Bishop 2010; Michie et al. 2008; Henkemans et al. 2015), designers 
must be able to do both. However, existing behavioural design literature and approaches 
reveal a gap between the realised importance of integrative thinking of behavioural theories, 
and the explicit visualisation of this knowledge in practical approaches for application. The 
gap is subject to critique, as it prevents designers from expanding their behavioural design 
capabilities and from understanding the behavioural theories’ relations in depth, which would 
enable them in making better and more validated choices of theory inclusion.Therefore, as 
this thesis aims to impact the quality of behavioural design solutions, it sets out to develop a 
behavioural design support tool to address this gap and make it easier for designers to apply 
all the valuable perspectives offered by behavioural theories.
1.1 Aim of the thesis
1.2 Research aim & objectives
Based on the aim of the thesis, the following research aim and objectives are: 
Developing a support tool for designers aimed at providing a structured overview of behavioural 
theories and their relations, with respect to considering all perspectives of behavioural design 
problems and tailoring this overview to fit with existing behavioural design approaches.
Research objectives:
1. Obtain and map a structural understanding of the different core behavioural elements in 
theory and in design industry. 
2. Identify path dependencies and other interconnections from behavioural problem to 
behavioural design approach with respect to integrative thinking of behavioural theory.
3. Based on the two previous answers above, develop a tool for supporting designers in 
structuring their understanding of behavioural problems and in selecting appropriate 
behavioural theories.
4. Validate and evaluate the support tool.
==PAGE:15==
 3
1.3 Structure of the thesis
This thesis consists of eight chapters, of which chapter 1 sets out to introduce the importance 
and the aim of the thesis, as well as the research aim and objectives.
Chapter 2 investigates current behavioural design literature and outlines the theoretical 
framework and the research framework which forms the foundation of the thesis.
Chapter 3 presents the methodology of the thesis and the chosen approach for the study.
Chapter 4 presents the study of investigating current industry practice, describing both the 
method and the results of the study, which involves an analysis of current behavioural design 
practice based on five Danish design consultancies. From this, a determination of the core 
focus of the support tool is presented.
Chapter 5 presents the development of the support tool, which outlines the design process 
and methods applied, as well as describes the conceptualisation and iterations leading to the 
final tool concept: The Super Cool Analysis Tool.
Chapter 6 describes the Super Cool Analysis Tool in detail and three likely use cases 
associated with application of the tool.
Chapter 7 discusses the main contributions, implications and limitations of the Super Cool 
Analysis Tool and its development process, of which all parts are compared and contrasted 
with findings from both the Literature Review (chapter 2) and the Investigation of Current 
Practice (chapter 4).
Finally, this leads to chapter 8, which concludes the thesis and presents the needs and 
possibilities of further work.
On the following page (4) figure 1.1 visualises the structure and contents of the thesis.
1.3.1 Reading guide
The thesis is meant to be read sequentially from beginning (chapter 1) to end (chapter 8), 
yet associated appendices (chapter 11) are attached to the thesis, optionally offering the 
reader the possibility of going into depth and detail with the provided information, methods 
or figures. Moreover, chapters 9 and 10 includes a list of References and the Assignment A & 
B as part of the official thesis formalities of the Technical University of Denmark.
==PAGE:16==
4
Chapter 1
Introduction
Chapter 2
Literature Review
Chapter 3
Methodology
Chapter 4
  Investigation of Current Practice
Chapter 5
Support Tool Development
Chapter 6
The Super Cool Analysis Tool
Chapter 7
Discussion
Chapter 8
Conclusion
Chapter 9
References
Chapter 10
Assignment A & B
Chapter 11
Appendices
page 1 - 4
page 5 - 38
page 39 - 42
page 43 - 54
page 55 - 70
page 71 - 90
page 91 - 100
page 101 - 106
page 107 - 114
page 115 - 122
A&B
page 123 - 198
Figure 1.1
Visualisation of the 
thesis’ structure
==PAGE:17==
 5
Chapter 2
Literature Review
==PAGE:18==
6
This chapter aims to explore current behavioural design literature and through this exploration 
investigate the core elements of behavioural design to identify and explore possible gaps.
To understand behavioural design, section 2.2 provides a description of behavioural design, its 
importance, core elements, and context of occurrence. 
Section 2.3 reviews several core elements of behavioural design. Current problem procedures 
in literature are identified and discussed in section 2.3.1, followed by section 2.3.2 that explores 
different psychological and sociological models of behaviour, developed to unravel the 
complexity of behaviour and identify factors that affect, influence and create human behaviour. 
Next, section 2.3.3 presents an exploration of the theories concerned with behaviour change, 
developed to support interventions designed for changing behaviour. Finally, section 2.3.4 
presents a review of existing behavioral design approaches.
Consequently, the research framework of the thesis is presented in section 2.4, along with its 
associated issues and a clarification of the concrete research aim and research objectives. This 
is followed by section 2.5 that presents staging considerations of the upcoming support tool 
development. 
2.1 Introduction to the Literature Review 
2.2 Behavioural design
Behavioural design is a relatively new field (that comes from behavioural science which was 
formed in the 1970s), with a theoretical foundation of combining theories from the fields 
of psychology, social neuroscience, cognitive science and economics (Datta & Mullainathan 
2012; Tantia 2017). Each of these fields are considerably wide and comprehensive with a large 
number of relating theories, thus rather complex themselves. As an example, psychologists 
have been investigating behaviour in a scientific way since the 1930s and these investigations 
have resulted in different psychological theories and large amounts of research (Nodder 
2013; Zachrisson & Boks 2012). Today the theories and research from these different fields 
are helpful for many different design disciplines, such as Design for X (e.g. Meerkamm & Koch 
2005), Participatory Design (e.g. Beyer & Holtzblatt 1998), and Behavioural Design (e.g. Cash et 
al. 2017). In behavioural design designers can be seen as the link between behavioural science 
and humans. As a consequence, designers have for the last decades tried to apply theoretical 
thoughts from behavioural science to practical product and/or system development (Tromp 
et al. 2011), in order to create solutions that effectively influence human behaviour in a way 
that improves society (Harford 2013). 
There are several elements important for designers to consider when performing and 
implementing behavioural design (Zachrisson & Boks 2012) in their current design practice. 
In this thesis five different core elements will briefly be elaborated on in the following sections 
(2.2.1-2.2.6) to give an understanding of what a desired Behavioural Design Situation (BDS) 
consists of.
==PAGE:19==
 7
The first core element to be considered in behavioural design is problem identification, 
definition, and understanding (Datta & Mullainathan 2012; Tantia 2017). Generally, at the start 
of every design process, the designer is faced with a well- or ill-defined problem which has 
to be turned into a well-defined solution (Cross 2008). Design problems usually originate 
from some form of a problem statement, normally called a design brief (Cross 2008). 
Design briefs can vary in content, depth, and details, and as a result, the nature of design 
problems means that analysing and understanding the problem is an influential part of the 
design process (Cross 2011). However, design problems can be multifaceted and e.g. include 
technical, infrastructural, contextual, and behavioural components. Crucial to understanding 
a design problem is therefore understanding the wider picture and all its components. Yet, 
as behavioural design primarily focuses on the behaviour aspect of a design problem, solely 
behavioural aspects of problem understanding is considered in this thesis. 
2.2.1 Understanding the problem
As behavioural design is concerned with influencing the behaviour of humans, another core 
element of behavioural design is understanding behaviour and why it occurs (Zachrisson & 
Boks 2012; Tantia 2017). Understanding the psychological processes and mechanisms (e.g. 
intentions) relating to a specific behaviour is crucial, as it forms the foundation for designing 
effective interventions (Darnton 2008b). Behavioural design’s theoretical foundation comes 
from multiple fields highlighted by Datta & Mullainathan (2012), yet in psychology two major 
categories exist: Individual factors and social factors. This is quite distinguishing for behavioural 
design, as it now more than ever deals with social issues or collective concerns, and due to the 
fact that individuals play an important role in realising and counteracting most social problems 
(Tromp 2013; Branson et al. 2012). Consequently, essential to understanding behaviour is 
understanding how the psychological processes of individual and social behaviour interact 
with each other.
From a design perspective, this understanding should be achieved through a practical approach 
of integrating different models of behaviour (Fogg 2003; Michie et al. 2008) in order to 
generate initial hypotheses of why certain behaviours occur (Tantia 2017). Many researchers 
have pointed out the importance of matching psychological processes with behaviour (Fogg 
& Hreha 2010) and for this purpose different descriptive social and/or cognitive psychological 
models have been developed. Effective integration of these models in the behavioural design 
process will enable better interventions (Darnton 2008a; Orji et al. 2013). Yet, to effectively 
integrate these models into the design, an open approach to model selection should be 
applied (i.e. understanding the broad range and then selecting) (Cash et al. 2017). In addition, 
effective integration should consist of a combination of understanding both key components 
of individual and social behaviour.
2.2.2 Understanding behaviour
==PAGE:20==
8
2.2.3 Understanding behaviour change
To develop effective behavioural design solutions (Michie et al. 2008), it is also necessary 
for the designer to understand how to actually change behaviour, once the basic behaviour 
is understood. One approach is to understand the way products can (or humans can be) 
influenced. Through the definition made by Tromp et al. (2011) influence is determined as 
four different types: Coercive, persuasive, seductive, and decisive. These four types can be used 
by the designer as a strategy for shaping the design and thus as a way of influencing humans to 
change behaviour. Another approach for understanding behaviour change, closely related to 
the above mentioned influence strategies, is the field of Persuasive Technology, also referred to 
as Persuasive Design. Persuasive technology is defined as technologies that aim to change the 
behaviour and attitude of humans (Fogg 2009a) without coercion or deception (Henkemans 
et al. 2015) as they are not considered to be positive persuasive elements (Wendel 2013). 
Thus, persuasive technology implies that the targeted humans are voluntarily participating 
in the behaviour change. This is a key element within persuasive technology in regards to 
design activities, as it limits the designer’s solution space to seduction or persuasion as possible 
design strategies. Hence, following the definition by Tromp et al., behavioural design can be 
seen as a broader field than persuasive technology, since humans can be both implicitly and 
explicitly influenced. Still, understanding how to influence humans is not the only aspect 
related to explaining how to change behaviour. There are several different prescriptive theories 
of change developed with the sole aim of explaining, while enabling, behaviour change. These 
theories relate to different aspects of changing behaviour, such as understanding the principles 
of behaviour, the strategy of change, the control of the persuasion, and the persuasion route. 
Together these form the key components of behaviour change and combined they prescribe 
different ways for the designer of applying and enabling behaviour change. 
2.2.4 Understanding design
Although the understanding of the different aspects of behaviour and behaviour change is 
crucial to behavioural design, so are the actual design activities. Humans have always designed 
things and therefore the world is full of tools, machines, artefacts, and many other things 
aimed at supporting design (Cross 2008). Several design approaches have been developed 
for different purposes within the design process, all of which aim to translate knowledge, 
creativity, or skills into visible and well-argued design decisions. In regards to behavioural 
design, the behavioural design approaches are vital for integrating theoretical knowledge into 
the actual design decisions. As the translation of theories into design activities (i.e. design 
approaches) should enable efficient behavioural design, the vitality of an integrative approach 
of theory and design practice is highlighted.
2.2.5 Solution
The last core element to briefly be elaborated on is naturally the last element of any design 
process: The solution. A solution can rarely stand alone and this is also distinguishing for 
==PAGE:21==
 9
2.2.6 Global assumptions of behavioural design 
Apart from the five core elements mentioned above there are other elements, such as context 
and ethics that are applicable and important to behavioural design. The context in which the 
behaviour occurs has a significant role in regards to how a human will experience an influence 
in comparison to the way that the designer anticipated (Tromp et al. 2011). For instance, 
context related factors could be time, money, and skills, all of which are external factors 
affecting behaviour (Ajzen 1991) that make behavioural design a complex task. However, the 
behavioural design core elements mentioned so far each requires an analysis and a consistent 
awareness of the context (Zachrisson & Boks 2012) to enable project success, which is why 
context is not considered as a core element itself. 
Moreover, ethics also contributes to making behavioural design a highly complex task. As briefly 
mentioned in section 2.2.3, persuasive technology has a lot of similarities with behavioural 
design and in terms of ethics it too offers valuable insights, as“the creators of a persuasive 
technology should never seek to persuade a person or persons of something they themselves 
would not consent to be persuaded to do” (Berdichevsky & Neuenschwander 1999, p.58). 
This statement is not only applicable for persuasive technology but for behavioural design 
as well, due to the fact that predicting certain influences (which is the main aim of most 
behavioural design projects) is just as difficult as predicting unintended outcomes. Hence, 
the use of ethical evaluation and analysis is crucial for the designer in trying to overcome 
these difficulties and minimise the magnitude of unintended outcomes. Together context 
and ethics can be considered as global assumptions of behavioural design as they are both 
vital to address in theory and design practice, to continuously adjust the design processes in 
accordance with possible implications and conflicts. 
As context and ethics in behavioural design are considered to be surrounding elements 
rather than core elements, they are not within the scope of this thesis and are therefore 
excluded subsequently (although acknowledged).
Based on the stated core elements of the previous sections (2.2.1-2.2.6) the desired BDS is 
in this thesis characterised as figure 2.1 (on the following page (10)). 
2.2.7 The Behavioural Design Situation
behavioural design, as the solution is viewed as an iterative process to systematically test ideas 
and prototypes in order to arrive at an intervention that enables a desired behaviour (Tantia 
2017). Despite the fact that theory driven design leads to successful interventions (Glanz & 
Bishop 2010; Michie et al. 2008; Henkemans et al. 2015), solutions are just as well affected by 
industry practice and real-world implications (further elaborated in section 4.3.4).
==PAGE:22==
10
2.3 Behavioural problems, theories and 
design approaches
What can be extracted from this is that in the desired BDS the designer needs to address 
models of behaviour, theories of change, and design approaches to effectively progress from 
problem behaviour to a solution that enables a desired behaviour. Consequently, as integrating 
and combining the five core elements is a rather complex task, the need to go into more 
depth and detail of behavioural problems, theories (models of behaviour and theories of 
change), and design approaches is emphasised. 
Figure 2.1
The Behavioural 
Design Situation
(BDS)
The following section aims to explore behavioural design in regards to behavioural problems, 
models of behaviour, theories of change and design approaches concerned with designing 
behaviour change interventions.
2.3.1 Behavioural problems
This part elaborates on understanding problems in a behavioural design context and exploring 
current procedures of behavioural problem identification. Generally, problem understanding is 
crucial for design, as the first step towards finding a solution is by identifying the root of the 
problem (Datta & Mullainathan 2012; Cross 2008; Andreasen et al. 2015). Hence, starting by 
asking why and who leads to a deeper understanding of the problem that identifies what, when, 
where and how (Prager 2012). Doing so will create a deeper understanding of the problem 
and its causes, which contributes to the foundation of finding a solution (Cross 2008). Yet, 
it is important to keep in mind that problem understanding evolves during the process of 
reaching the solution, and thus a continuous development of the understanding is necessary. 
Additionally, problem identification can be divided into two different aspects: goals and barriers, 
where goals describe what the problem is (e.g. “I want to..”) and barriers describe why the 
problem is present (e.g. “but..”) (SkillsYouNeed 2017). In regards to behavioural design, these 
barriers can take shape of psychological, social, and physical challenges (Ross & Ward 1995; 
Community Tool Box 2016b; Gigliotti & Jason 2012), and identifying them is crucial in any 
Problem
Behaviour
Models of 
Behaviour
Design
Approaches
Solution
Theories
of Change
==PAGE:23==
 11
behavioural design process, as they are the challenges that the designer has to overcome 
and solve with the designed solution. However, goals and barriers are not the only important 
aspects of problem identification, as the perspective through which a problem is viewed is 
just as essential for the designer to acknowledge and consider. 
2.3.1.1 Problem perspectives
Based on the description in section 2.2.1 design problems can consist of many different 
components such as technology, infrastructure, context and behaviour. These can be 
considered as different perspectives, through which a given problem can be analysed. In 
behavioural design literature there is an apparent distinction between individual concerns 
versus collective concerns (Tromp et al. 2011; Wendel 2014) and a distinction between 
problem behaviour caused by individual factors and behaviour caused by social factors 
(Darnton 2008b; Prager 2012). Hence, in this thesis the categorisation of behavioural problem 
perspectives is considered as: Individual, social, and time (Park et al. 2001). While being aware 
of other possible problem perspectives, only these three are considered to be relevant and 
thus elaborated on in this thesis, as mainly the individual and social perspectives are subject 
to in-depth exposition in behavioural design literature. Although the time perspective is not 
mentioned explicitly as an important aspect of problem understanding in behavioural design 
literature, it is reasonable to take the it into account, as it too has significant impact on a 
behavioural problem understanding. 
Individual perspective of problem behaviour
Individual behaviour is generally viewed through a psychological lens (Prager 2012) of personal 
problems and a physical lens of impersonal problems (SkillsYouNeed 2017; Schotte 1985):
• Personal problems relate to internal personal factors, such as health and psyche 
(figure 2.2).
• Impersonal problems relate to external personal factors, such as lack of money and 
time (figure 2.3).
Figure 2.2 (left) 
Personal problems 
Figure 2.3 (right) 
Impersonal problems
This way of distinguishing problems enables the designer to analyse behaviour in regards to 
terms such as intentions, attitudes and values, all of which are influenced by both internal and 
external personal factors. For instance, to encourage an individual to go see the dentist, it 
would be relevant to look at the current barriers, e.g. is it due to a lack of money (external 
physical personal factors) or due to fear (internal psychological personal factors)? These two 
lenses (psychological and physical) of individual problem behaviour adds two valuable layers 
to problem understanding in behavioural design. It offers a wide range of possibilities for 
==PAGE:24==
12
Social perspective of problem behaviour
Social behaviour is frequently viewed through the sociologic, anthropologic, economic or 
political lenses (Prager 2012) all of which refer to the perspective of social challenges, where 
problems can be distinguished as interpersonal problems and/or societal problems (Schotte 
1985; Park et al. 2001):
• Interpersonal problems relate to internal social factors, such as arguing with a friend 
or disagreeing with a study group, which can be seen as in-group behaviour (Tajfel 
& Turner 1979) (figure 2.4).
• Societal problems relate to external social factors, such as crime rates, littering, and 
pollution, which can be seen as out-group behaviour (Tajfel & Turner 1979) (figure 
2.5).
Figure 2.4 (left)
Interpersonal 
problems
Figure 2.5 (right)
Societal problems
This way of distinguishing problems enables the designer in analysing behaviour with respect to 
terms such as social norms, social impact as well as group behaviour. Humans are biologically 
and psychologically equipped to live in groups (Hossain & Ali 2014) and always basically try 
to copy each other’s behaviours in order to conserve energy and survive. Thus, to lower 
graffiti incidents it would for instance be relevant to investigate whether the problem is due 
to internal societal factors (such as gang conflicts) or due to external societal factors (such as 
already evident graffiti, i.e. negative existing choice-architecture). Problem behaviours caused 
by social behaviour can rarely stand alone, as society does not exist independently without 
individuals (Hossain & Ali 2014). Even though designers can distinguish between behaviour 
caused by individual factors and social factors, the two concepts always interact and cannot 
be excluded from one another. This elaboration of social problem behaviour adds another 
two valuable layers to problem understanding of behavioural design. 
the designer to extract the exact individual factors causing the problem behaviour, and thus 
enabling better possibilities of facilitating effective behaviour change solutions.
Time perspective of problem behaviour
Finally, in achieving a comprehensive problem understanding it is valuable to consider the time 
perspective of behaviour as well. The time perspective of behaviour is in this thesis viewed 
through the lenses story & background and frequency of change. 
• The story refers to the things prior to when the behaviour occurs, i.e. the bus was 
late, spilled coffee or a broken phone. The background refers to the mood, place in 
life, environment or childhood experiences of the individual.
==PAGE:25==
 13
2.3.1.2 Concluding remarks on behavioural problems
Based on the clarifications in the previous section (2.3.1.1), behavioural design problem 
understanding and identification can be viewed as the following figure 2.6:  
Figure 2.6
Overview of 
behavioural 
problem layers
I
m
p
e
r
s
o
n
a
l
P
e
r
s
o
n
a
l
Problem
Behaviour
P
P
PP
PP
I
n
t
e
r
p
e
rs
o
n
al
S
o
ci
et
al
Individual perspective
Social perspective
St
or
y 
& 
ba
ck
gr
ou
nd
Time perspective
Fr
eq
ue
nc
y 
of 
ch
an
ge
 
• The frequency of change refers to the span or frequency of the problem behaviour, 
i.e. is it a seldom behaviour or a frequent behaviour? (Fogg & Hreha 2010).
Although not mentioned explicitly in behavioural design literature, the time perspective has 
a significant impact on the obtained problem understanding, as it recognises behaviour as 
being agent-based (i.e. individuals have different stories and backgrounds). An individual may 
consider the story lens as causing the behaviour in the immediate situation, or may draw 
parallels to earlier situations (the background), as affecting the behaviour in the immediate 
situation. Additionally, the frequency of the behaviour (one time vs. frequent) affects the 
solution, as it has impact on e.g. the salience of the solution. Consequently, it is crucial to 
consider both the story, background, and frequency change as the top layers of a behavioural 
problem understanding.
• A comprehensive and useful problem analysis in behavioural design requires 
the designer to apply an integrative thinking of the individual perspective, social 
perspective together with the time perspective of problem behaviour. Hence, 
to do so one must focus on the correlation and interaction between individual 
problem layers (personal and impersonal), social problem layers (interpersonal 
and societal), and the time layers (story & background and frequency of change). 
Individually these six layers can be seen as means for identifying different factors 
that cause behavioural problems, yet combined they form a deeper understanding 
of the problem in total.
• This distinction of problem understanding may appear to be relevant to general 
design problems as well and not just behavioural problems. Yet, as behaviour is 
==PAGE:26==
14
complex and agent-based, understanding behavioural problems requires a greater 
and wider problem characterisation specifically regarding individual, social, and time 
factors. In contrast, in general design (e.g. redesign of a fountain) the problem is 
still complex, however it can often be measured and predicted and thus requires 
greater problem characterisation of other factors, such as technical or infrastructural 
factors.
This division of problems layers is valuable when trying to understand and identify a behavioural 
problem, yet a deeper theoretical understanding of behaviour and its determinants is equally 
valuable, and thus this is the next core element to explore in the BDS.
2.3.2 Models of behaviour
Numerous models of behaviour within the field of social and cognitive psychology have been 
developed to unravel the complexity of behaviour and identify factors that affect, influence, 
and create human behaviour (Zachrisson & Boks 2012). In this thesis 13 different descriptive 
models of behaviour are found relevant and will thus be explored and discussed in order 
to create a better understanding of this core element in the BDS. These are the main 
models of behaviour identified in behavioural design literature (through extensive systematic 
investigations done by authors such as Michie et al. (2008), Darnton (2008b) and Glanz & 
Bishop (2010)). The models of behaviour are divided into two categories:
Models of behaviour
Social factors of 
behaviour
Individual factors of 
behaviour
8
5
Figure 2.7
Categories 
of models of 
behaviour
This figure (2.7) identifies individual and social factors both describing behaviour and 
consequently, this section will identify what elements behaviour is shaped of and why humans 
behave as they do, i.e. the individual and social aspect of behavioural problem understanding 
(section 2.3.1.1).
2.3.2.1 Individual factors of behaviour
To understand the individual factors influencing and creating human behaviour eight different 
descriptive individual models of behaviour shaped by cognitive psychology will be explained 
in this section.
 
Bandura’s (1977) Theory of Self-efficacy explains that cognitive processes play a 
prominent role in the acquisition and retention of new behaviour patterns. The theory states 
that behaviour is determined by an individual’s efficacy expectations, defined as “the conviction 
that one can successfully execute the behaviour required to produce the outcomes” (Bandura 
==PAGE:27==
 15
1977, p.193). Thus expectations of personal efficacy determine whether a behaviour will 
be initiated, how much effort will be expended for this and how long it will be sustained 
for (Bandura 1977; Darnton 2008b). Furthermore, the theory states that besides efficacy 
expectations, outcome expectations also have an impact on behaviour. Individuals can believe 
that a particular course of action will produce certain outcomes, but if they hold serious 
doubts about whether they can perform the necessary activities or not, such information 
does not influence their behaviour. 
 
Similarly, Rosenstock’s (1974) Health Belief Model states that health related 
behaviour can be explained and predicted by focusing on the attitudes and beliefs of 
individuals (Behavioral Research Unit BRU 2002). This means that an individual’s belief, 
perceived benefits of action, and barriers to action, together with self-efficacy (Bandura 1977) 
explain engagement in health-promoting behaviours (Janz & Becker 1984; Rosenstock 1974). 
Even though it is a recognised framework for explaining and understanding health related 
decision making (Janz & Becker 1984) the Health Belief Model has also been used to analyse 
other types of behaviour, where explaining or predicting patterns of behaviours was essential 
(Morris et al. 2012). Both the Theory of Self-efficacy and the Health Belief Model are valuable 
for the designer in understanding the psychological processes of an individual’s personal 
issues to predict behaviour. Yet, as they are psychological models, they do not consider other 
factors such as environmental or economic factors. Neither do they incorporate the influence 
of social norms (Behavioral Research Unit BRU 2002). 
 
In the same way, Ajzen’s (1991) Theory of Planned Behaviour (TPB) can be 
applied in predicting behaviours of an individual. It is based upon his original Theory of 
Reasoned Actions, but without the original model’s limitations in dealing with behaviours over 
which human have incomplete volitional control (Ajzen 1991). Ajzen has adopted Bandura’s 
(1977) term of self-efficacy for the term perceived behavioural control (Darnton 2008b), which 
describes the perceived control an individual has over the opportunities and resources 
needed for an intended behaviour. It is much alike the term of self-efficacy, as perceived 
behavioural control too is the result of a deliberate calculation of how much effort should 
be expended for a specific behaviour (Darnton 2008b). However, whereas Bandura’s Theory 
of Self-efficacy uses expectations as the source for predicting behaviours, the TPB states 
that attitudes towards a behaviour together with subjective norms and perceived behavioural 
control all contribute to predicting intentions of different kinds (Ajzen 1991). And more so, 
these intentions, together with the perception of behavioural control, account for considerable 
variance in the actually performed behaviour. This combination of psychological processes has 
made the TPB very useful in predicting intentional (rational) behaviours (Piscicelli et al. 2016), 
such as health related behaviours (Armitage & Conner 1999).
 
In Triandis’ (1977) Theory of Interpersonal Behaviour (TIB) behaviour is not 
viewed as a solely deliberate process, due to the fact that habits are valued more influential 
than personal beliefs (Darnton 2008b). The TIB states that there are two routes which 
influences behaviour: intentions and habits. Intentions are the deliberate part (conscious 
thinking) of decision-making processes, whereas habits are the non-deliberate part 
==PAGE:28==
16
(nonconscious thinking) – both influenced by previous behaviours and experiences (Darnton 
2008b). Whereas the TPB (Ajzen 1991) states that intentions are created by attitude, social 
factors and perceived behavioural control, the TIB states that intentions are created by 
attitude, social factors, and affect, together with habits. Thus, the TIB includes the affective and 
habitual dimensions missing in the TPB (Piscicelli et al. 2016). The TPB relates variance of the 
performed behaviour to perceived behavioural control, while the TIB determines facilitating 
conditions as causing the variance. Facilitating conditions differs from perceived behavioural 
control as it describes the actual control (e.g. material circumstances) (Darnton 2008b), 
which is the factor that must allow for intentions to become real (Prager 2012). Despite their 
differences both the TPB and the TIB are valuable for the designer when trying to predict 
individuals’ behaviours. Yet, whereas the TPB aims to explain behaviouras caused by intentional 
decision-making, the TIB aims to explain behaviour caused by habitual decision-making. 
 
Contrary to the previous predictive models of behaviour, the Dual Process Theory 
focuses on understanding the decision-making processes of individuals. There are many 
variations of this theory, but one way of presenting it is Kahneman’s (2003) System Thinking. 
It describes how human minds have two different ways of processing information: System 1 
(nonconscious processing) and system 2 (conscious processing). The operations of system 
1 are fast, automatic, without effort, and governed by habits, which make them difficult to 
control. On the other hand, the operations of system 2 are slow, effortful, and controlled 
reactions using reflection and logic (Kahneman 2003). For a designer this means that, system 
1 behaviours are difficult to change as it relates to habits and routines, whereas system 
2 behaviours can change with persuasion or education, as they relate to intentions and 
rationality. 
 
In addition to the Dual Process Theory, Tversky & Kahneman (1974) have developed 
the Theory of Heuristics and Biases. This theory determines three different heuristics 
(representativeness, availability of instances, and adjustment from an anchor), all of which leads 
to different biases used for improving judgement and decisions of uncertainty. Since Tversky & 
Kahneman introduced the topic in 1974, several other cognitive and/or social biases have been 
developed, all of which provides suggestions for explaining behaviour in different contexts. 
These biases are highly applicable in behavioural design, as they add a level of reason to 
otherwise inexplicable behaviours, e.g. the bias of reactive devaluation: “the very act of offering 
a particular proposal or concession may diminish its apparent value or attractiveness in the eyes of 
the recipient” (Ross & Ward 1995, p. 270). In combination, the Dual Process Theory and the 
Theory of Heuristics and Biases offer disruptive ways of thinking about behaviour in relation 
to early behavioural economics, which assumes humans to be rational-thinking individuals 
(Investopedia 2017; Rosen 2015). However, the inclusion of non-conscious decision-making 
is currently more relevant than ever in behavioural design, since human behaviour is often 
nonconscious and controlled by habits and routines (Tromp 2013).
 
Duhigg’s (2014) theory How Habits Work adds another level to understanding 
behaviour with respect to non-conscious decision-making processes, as it is an attempt to 
==PAGE:29==
 17
visualise a basic way of diagnosing and shaping habits. The diagnosis consists of identifying 
the three parts that every habit loop contains: A cue, a routine, and a reward. By identifying 
these key elements in any habit, an understanding of the habit in question becomes available 
in terms of isolating the cue triggering a certain behaviour. As a result, the theory gives an 
understanding to the designer of how habits operate in order to gain the power over it and 
change behaviour. Even though the theory can be used to understand individuals’ behaviour 
in regards to habits, it has similarities with behavioural design approaches as it is concrete and 
includes a step-by-step guide on how to change a specific habit.
 
The last of the eight descriptive models of behaviour, the Self-determination Theory 
describes different types of motivation that influence behaviour (Deci & Ryan 2000). The 
theory distinguishes between intrinsic motivation and extrinsic motivation. Intrinsic motivation 
is propelled by an individual’s interest and enjoyment in the activity or task itself (Gagné & 
Deci 2005). Extrinsic motivation concerns activities that are not interesting and therefore an 
individual must be motivated externally, e.g. through strong coercion (Gagné & Deci 2005). 
Central to this theory is the distinction between autonomous motivation (non-conscious) 
and controlled motivation (conscious) (Gagné & Deci 2005). The theory offers a lot of value 
for the designer, as it provides insights and understanding of personal issues, i.e. how to 
extrinsically influence and motivate an individual towards a desired behaviour.
These eight individual models of behaviour emphasise behaviour from a cognitive point of 
view. When trying to understand the behaviour of an individual, factors of affective (e.g. 
emotions), normative (e.g. morals), and habitual (e.g. routines) dimensions are important 
to consider. For the designer this means that each of these descriptive models of behaviour 
(alone or combined) can be applicable when dealing with behavioural problems relating 
to habits or routines (nonconscious thinking), intentions (conscious thinking), attitudes and/or 
personal issues (self-efficacy, motivation) (see table 2.1 on the following page (18)). 
==PAGE:30==
18
Theories
Keywords
Brief Description
Theory of Self-efficacy 
(Bandura 1977)
Health Belief Model 
(Rosenstock 1974)
Theory of Planned 
Behaviour
 (Ajzen 1991)
Theory of Interpersonal 
Behaviour
 (Triandis 1977) 
Dual Process Theory 
(Kahneman 2003)
How Habits Work 
(Duhigg 2014)
Self-determination 
Theory 
(Deci & Ryan 2000)
Expectations of 
self-efficacy (confidence in 
one’s own ability) 
determine the performance 
of a given behaviour.
Health related behaviour 
can be explained and 
predicted by focusing on 
the attitudes and beliefs of 
individuals.
Behaviour can be explained 
by intentions, attitudes, 
subjective norms, as well 
as perceived behavioural 
control.
Behaviour is neither a fully 
deliberative process nor a 
fully automatic process. It 
is influenced by two routes: 
Intentions and habits.
Individuals have two ways of 
processing information: 
Conscious reasoning (slow and 
explicit) and nonconscious 
reasoning (fast and implicit).
The foundation for shifting 
behaviour can be made by 
identifying a habit loop 
(reward–cue–routine). 
Behaviour can be 
motivated in three ways: 
Amotivation, extrinsic 
motivation and intrinsic 
motivation.
Personal issues
Attitude
Habitual and routines
(nonconscious)
Personal issues
Attitude
Personal issues
Intentions
(conscious)
Intentions
(conscious)
Habitual and routines
(nonconscious)
Intentions
(conscious)
Habitual and routines
(nonconscious)
Heuristics and Biases
(Tversky & Kahnemann 
1974)
Humans rely on a limited 
number of heuristic principles 
which reduce the complex 
tasks of assessing probabili-
ties and predicting values.
Habitual and routines
(nonconscious)
Personal issues
Attitude
Table 2.1
Overview of the 
eight individual 
models of 
behaviour
2.3.2.2 Social factors of behaviour
In order to understand the social factors influencing an individual’s behaviour, as well as 
understanding the impact society has on individual decision-making processes, five different 
descriptive social models of behaviour shaped by social psychology will be explained in this 
section. 
 
Bandura’s (1986) Social Cognitive Theory explains human behaviour in three 
dynamic and continually interacting terms: cognitive and personal influences, environmental 
As different social or environmental issues often affect individual behaviour as well, it is also 
essential for the designer to investigate and understand social factors of behaviour.
==PAGE:31==
 19
influences and behavioural influences (Bandura 2001). A core premise of the theory is that 
an individual’s behaviour does not only come from personal experiences, but can also come 
from observing the actions of others and their resulting behavioural consequences (Glanz & 
Bishop 2010). Essential is the key element of reciprocal determinism, meaning that an individual 
can be a mean for change but also a responder to change (Bandura 1991; Glanz & Bishop 
2010). The theory distinguishes between three modes of human agency, through which given 
effects are produced: personal, proxy, and collective (Bandura 2001). Personal describes the 
cognitive, motivational and affective processes of an individual. Proxy describes the social 
conditions over which humans do not have direct control. Collective describes the collective 
processes, i.e. shared beliefs. This theory is important for a designer as it suggest that the 
environment plays a role in adopting healthy behaviours (Glanz & Bishop 2010). Additionally, 
it deepens the understanding of how different patterns of behaviour are created through 
environmental interaction (i.e. observations and agency). 
 
As an extension to the Social Cognitive Theory, Bandura (1991) developed the 
Social Cognitive Theory of Self-regulation. It states that human behaviour is extensively 
motivated and regulated by on-going self-influence and that most human behaviour happens 
due to some level of forethought, which happens through different levels of psychological 
sub functions (Bandura 1991): Self-monitoring of the individual’s behaviour and its effects, self-
guidance of the individual’s behaviour in relation to personal standards (and environment), and 
corrective self-reactions (Bandura 1991). However, what is important to notice is that, while 
these self-regulating systems are set by individuals, they can be based on the observations of 
others (Darnton 2008a). Thus, it is crucial to understand that the operations of these self-
regulations are affected by social interaction and not solely individually determined.
 
The core construct in the Social Cognitive Theory is central to Bronfenbrenner’s 
(1986) Social Ecological Model (Glanz & Bishop 2010), where the entire ecological system 
needs to be considered when trying to understand human behaviours. The model states that 
behaviour is affected by five different levels of influence that interact across levels: individual, 
interpersonal, organisational, community, and policy (Bronfenbrenner 1986). Similar to the Social 
Cognitive Theory, the Social Ecological Model emphasises that behaviour both shape and are 
shaped by the social environment (Glanz & Bishop 2010). Due to difficulties in articulation, 
application, and evaluation the model is one of the most often mentioned theoretical models 
not yet applied in research and practice (Glanz & Bishop 2010). Nonetheless, to understand 
social behavioural factors and their corresponding levels of relations, the description of the 
relationship between an individual and the individual’s social context is important for the 
designer to acknowledge in behavioural design. As this model of behaviour takes the entire 
ecological system into account, it relates to both social and environmental interaction.
 
Tromp et al.’s (2011) Socially Responsible Design Theory explains why socially 
desirable behaviour does not always align with personally desirable behaviour. Individuals 
often act in accordance with personal concerns, and thus in conflict with the collective concerns 
(Tromp 2013). The problem with acting on the basis of collective concerns often lies within 
the fact that what the individual gains or loses depends on the choices of other individuals 
==PAGE:32==
20
(i.e. society) and therefore a certain way of acting can become less attractive (Lilley 2007). 
This relates to the term of proxy agency in the Social Cognitive Theory (Bandura 1991). 
Additionally, the Socially Responsible Design Theory stresses the importance of design in 
regards to behavioural change, as it is the designer’s task to address the individual’s concerns 
through an intervention and thus elicit the desired social implication (Tromp et al. 2011). 
In other words, it is required that the designer understands the impact of the collective 
concerns as well as the more beneficial personal concerns in order to design for a desired 
social behaviour.
 
Another model of behaviour that offers valuable insights into the social factors of 
behaviour is Tajfel’s & Turner’s (1979) Social Identity Theory. It states that individuals, when 
interacting within a certain group context, acquire different social roles, or “levels of self”, 
which influences their behaviour. The theory distinguishes between interpersonal behaviour 
and intergroup behaviour. Interpersonal behaviour means two or more individuals acting 
solely on the grounds of individual concerns and characteristics, e.g. wife and husband. 
Intergroup behaviour being two or more individuals that behave solely on the grounds of 
social concerns and characteristics, e.g. soldiers in an army group (Tajfel & Turner 1979). 
Moreover, it distinguishes between being part of the in-group (us) and the out-group (them). 
What Tajfel and Turner realise is that individuals strive to achieve or maintain a positive social 
identity, and thus be part of the in-group (Tajfel & Turner 1979; Darnton 2008a). Whereas 
Socially Responsible Design Theory (Tromp et al. 2011) offers insights as to why individuals 
act on behalf of personal concerns, the Social Identity Theory is valuable as it offers insights 
as to why individuals act on behalf of (in-)group concerns and thus not on behalf of personal 
concerns. 
These five models of behaviour describe behaviour from a social point of view and try 
to distinguish the social factors that influence behaviour from the cognitive processes that 
influence behaviour. They emphasise the importance of distinguishing between personal 
influences and social influences, as these can be the cause of certain undesirable collective 
patterns of behaviour. For the designer this means that these five descriptive models of 
behaviour (alone or combined) can be applicable when trying to understand problems relating 
to social impact (social context having an impact on individual behaviour) and environmental 
interaction (environmental context having an impact on individual behaviour) (see table 2.2 
on the following page (21)). 
==PAGE:33==
 21
Theories
Keywords
Brief Description
An individual’s behaviour does 
not only come from personal 
experience, but can also come 
from observing others 
behaviour and their resulting 
behavioural consequences.
Human behaviour is 
extensively motivated and 
regulated by self-monitoring, 
personal standards and 
affective self-reaction.
Behaviour is affected by 
five levels of influence: 
Individual, interpersonal, 
organizational, community, 
and policy.
Behaviour is influenced by 
both individual concerns and 
collective concerns, which 
influences desired social 
behaviour.
An individual’s behaviour 
can be influenced by the 
different social personali-
ties one expresses in 
different group contexts.
Social Cognitive Theory 
(Bandura 1986)
Social Cognitive Theory 
of Self Regulation 
(Bandura 1991)
Social Ecological Model 
(Bronfenbrenner 1986)
Social Responsible 
Design Theory 
(Tromp et al. 2011)
Social Identity Theory 
(Tajfel & Turner 1979)
Social impact
Environmental 
interaction
Social impact
Social impact
Environmental 
interaction
Social impact
Table 2.2
Overview of the 
five social models 
of behaviour
2.3.2.3 Concluding remarks on models of behaviour 
Based on the exploration and discussion of the 13 selected descriptive models of behaviour 
in the previous sections (2.3.2.1 and 2.3.2.2), the following remarks can be concluded:
• Models of behaviour are essential as they identify what elements behaviour is 
shaped of and why certain behaviours occurs. Yet, an integrative thinking of both 
categories (individual behaviour and social behaviour) is essential, in order for the 
designer to fully understanding and map all important aspects of the behaviour in 
question, as individual and social behaviour are intertwined and rarely stands alone 
(Tromp et al.  2011).
• Both categories of models of behaviours are excellent in describing what elements 
behaviour consist of and the mechanics and processes that shapes it. However, 
as there are multiple models of behaviour in a complex and wide field, all of 
which can be analysed for individual behavioural design projects, an unintended 
complication of the theory inclusion occurs. Additionally, the models themselves 
show no practicality in regards to how to select the proper models of behaviour for 
inclusion, which consequently results in designers lacking ways of easily-obtaining a 
way of understanding how to apply them in the proper context. 
While these 13 models of behaviour are valuable in describing and understanding behaviour 
in itself, it is essential for the designer to investigate and understand behaviour change as well, 
and thus theories of change is the next core element to explore in the BDS.
==PAGE:34==
22
2.3.3 Theories of change
Whereas the previous section (2.3.2) presented 13 models of behaviour describing the 
individual and social factors affecting behaviour, this section describes eight prescriptive theories 
of change developed to support interventions designed for changing behaviour (Darnton 
2008b). As theories of change can relate to different aspects, such as time and control, the 
rationale for this selection of eight theories is to get a broad representation of several different 
types of theories of change.
2.3.3.1 Understanding the factors of behaviour change
In order to understand the underlying factors of behaviour change eight different theories of 
change and their relation to the aspects of how, when, and where to change behaviour will be 
explored in this section. 
 
In regards to realising how to change behaviour Cialdini’s (1984) Theory of Influence 
can be applied. The theory consists of six principles of persuasion: reciprocity (humans tend 
to return a favour), commitment and consistency (when humans commit, they do not back 
out), social proof (humans trust in things trusted by humans we trust); authority (humans tend 
to obey authorities), liking (humans are easily persuaded by human they like), and scarcity 
(relating to demand) (Cialdini 2007). The Theory of Influence is applicable in behavioural 
design, as the six principles offers suggestions on how to influence humans. The principles can 
be combined or they can stand alone, but most importantly they are open to some level of 
interpretation in regards to enabling a behaviour change.
 
Another theory that offers insights with respect to enabling a behaviour change is 
Fogg’s (2009b) Behaviour Model. It states that three factors must occur at the same time: 
motivation (the individual has to be sufficiently motivated), ability (the individual has to have 
the ability to perform the behaviour), and triggers (the individual must be triggered to perform 
the behaviour). Fogg (2009b) values the trigger as being the most important factor, as the 
designer must create the right trigger at the right time, otherwise it will be difficult to achieve 
the desired behaviour. Successful triggers have three characteristics: They are noticed, they are 
associated with the target behaviour, and they happen when the person is motivated and able to 
perform the behaviour. The Behaviour Model differs from Cialdini’s (1984) Theory of Influence, 
as it states the factors that must be influenced to create a specific behaviour (i.e. Cialdini’s 
six principles are applicable within each factor). However, both theories relate to the aspect 
of persuasion principles and together they provide a good understanding of how to enable a 
behaviour change.
 
In regards to realising when to enable a of change behaviour the AIDS Risk 
Reduction Model (ARRM) (Catania et al. 1990) can be applied for predicting and explaining 
behaviour change efforts of individuals, and was specifically made for the health domain of 
HIV and AIDS patients (thus the name). It consists of a three stage model that determines the 
stages of behaviour efforts: Recognition and labelling, making a commitment, and taking action 
(Behavioral Research Unit BRU 2002). For each stage several factors has been determined, 
which are hypothesised influences that aim at making an individual successfully complete a 
==PAGE:35==
 23
stage. While being developed for the aim of predicting specific health behaviours, the ARRM 
is a great source of inspiration in regards to realising the change stages an individual can be at.
 
A theory of change that offers further elaboration in regards to understanding the 
stages of change is the Transtheoretical Model, also known as the Stages of Change Model 
(Prochaska & Velicer 1997; Darnton 2008b). In comparison with the ARRM (Catania et al. 
1990) The Transtheoretical Model describes the process of intentional behaviour change 
through five stages of change: Precontemplation (no recognition of need for or interest in 
change), contemplation (thinking about changing), preparation for action (planning for changing), 
action (adopting new habits), and maintenance (on-going practice of new behaviour) 
(Prochaska et al. 1992; Glanz & Bishop 2010). It differs from the ARRM as it also considers 
the stages before commitment and preparation of change and after taking action. The model 
assumes that, when changing behaviour, an individual will rarely go through the stages as a 
linear progression but instead relapse (Prochaska et al. 1992). Additionally it adopts Bandura’s 
(1977) term of self-efficacy as it considers the individual’s own perception of progress with 
change (Darnton 2008b). Simultaneously it only deals with conscious thinking (system 2 in 
Dual Process Theory), which at the same time is the theory’s limitation. The use of both the 
ARRM and the Transtheoretical Model is limited, as they do not take the social context in 
which change occurs into account (Behavioral Research Unit BRU 2002). Both theories are, 
however, valuable in behavioural design as they deepen the understanding of how individuals 
perceive change and when to time influences in order to design successful interventions.
 
When realising where to change behaviour, Lilley’s (2009) Loughborough Model can 
be applied. It is a theory of change developed for designing sustainable interventions (Lilley 
2009), which states that the power of decision-making is determined by an axis of influence 
that ranges from the user agentive to the product agentive (Wilson et al. 2010). The theory 
distinguishes between three ways of staging a change: Guiding a change (enabling control of 
the change to the user, e.g. eco-feedback), steering a change (controlling the user’s interaction 
through affordances and constraints, e.g. behaviour steering), and ensuring change (e.g. forcing 
action) (Lilley 2009; Wilson et al. 2010). Additionally, Lilley points out that the influence of 
these interventions should range from being passive (informative), to assertive (persuasive), to 
aggressive (coercive) (Lilley 2009; Wilson et al. 2010). This relates well to Tromp et al.’s (2011) 
salience versus force dimensions of influence, where four types of influence is introduced: 
persuasive, coercive, decisive, and seductive (section 2.2.3). What Tromp et al. (2011) notice 
about these four types is that it is hardly ever possible for a designer to assign a product to 
a certain category of influence, while having the user perceive it in the same way. However 
despite the fact that it is difficult to predict a specific type of influence, these seven types of 
influence (four by Tromp et al., three by Lilley) create an understanding of the areas where a 
change of behaviour can be enabled and how the intervention should be perceived.
 
By expanding the Loughborough Model Tang (2010) created the Design Behaviour 
Intervention Model (Bhamra et al. 2011), which combines Triandis’ (1977) TIB with Lilley’s 
(2009) Loughborough Model. It states that change can happen in three different stages: 
Declarative, knowledge compilation, and procedural (Wilson et al. 2010; Bhamra et al. 2011). 
In the declarative stage an individual relates to intentions, where the individual is aware and 
==PAGE:36==
24
considerate of his/hers actions and more so in control of the influence, thus relating to the 
stage of guiding a change. In the knowledge compilation stage an individual relates to habits, 
where the individual forms and performs habits and therefore the individual is in the middle 
of complete control and no control of the influence, thus relating to the stage of maintaining a 
change. In the last stage, the procedural stage, the product/system is in complete control of the 
influence, and therefore the force of changing behaviour of an individual is strong, thus relating 
the stage to forcing the change. While the Design Behaviour Intervention Model is aimed at 
problems relating to sustainability (Tang 2010), it can be applied for problems with other 
focuses as well. The model is valuable for the designer as it links different cognitive processes 
to behaviour change stages, which enables a greater link between models of behaviour and 
theories of change, i.e. integrative thinking in the BDS.
 
The Elaboration Likelihood Model by Petty & Cacioppo (1986) also contributes 
to the where aspect of changing behaviour as it provides a framework for explaining how 
attitudes are shaped, formed, and reinforced by persuasive communications. The idea is that 
behaviour is guided by attitude, which can be influenced by persuasion. Thus, when an individual 
is presented with information, levels of “elaboration” occur, which means the effort the 
individual makes to accept/reject the message. Similar to Kahneman’s (2003) System Thinking 
the model describes two types of processing routes: central and peripheral processing routes 
(Darnton 2008b). The central process, is when the individual through conscious consideration 
(system 2), takes a central route to decision-making, which can lead to permanent change 
in attitude (Petty & Cacioppo 1986). The peripheral process, is when the individual only 
temporary changes attitude, as persuasion is on a superficial level and thus this process is 
less conscious (system 1) (Darnton 2008b). An individual’s level of motivation and ability 
determines the balance between the two routes, yet it can also be influenced by the context 
and the message (Darnton 2008b) and, furthermore, it can be influenced by the placement of 
the intervention. The model is related to principles of behaviour, as it determines clear ways 
of changing behaviour through persuasive communications.
 
Even though behaviour change can take place through both the central and the 
peripheral route, Kaptein et al. (2015) argues that persuasion is primarily effective through 
peripheral processing. Thus, a theory merely concerned with the peripheral route is Thaler’s 
and Sunstein’s (2009) Nudging, which is defined as an aspect of choice architecture that 
alter humans behaviour in a predictable way, without limiting human’s choice of freedom 
and without using economic incentives (Thaler & Sunstein 2009; Branson et al. 2012). Similar 
to the Elaboration Likelihood Model, Nudging also relates to Kahneman’s (2003) System 
Thinking, as Nudging only intends to change the behaviour of humans through influencing the 
subconscious part of the human decision-making processes (i.e. automatic behaviour, system 
1) (Kahneman 2003; Hartlev & Durazo 2015). Nudging is particularly well-suited to complex 
decisions and with a lot of different alternatives to choose from (Arvai 2016). However, 
when trying to solve some of the biggest problems that society faces, nudging is not enough 
(Burmester 2013). This is due to the fact that nudging is likely to only lead to temporary and 
superficial behaviour change (Prager 2012). However this is very valuable in regards to public 
interventions and thus a theory that is highly applicable in this context.
==PAGE:37==
 25
From a comparison of these eight theories of change it is possible to distinguish between 
theories that prescribe how to enable a change, when to enable a change, and where to enable 
a change. Additionally, this means for the designer that these theories of change (alone or 
combined) can be applicable in understanding behaviour principles, change strategies, control 
of persuasion, and/or direction of persuasion (see table 2.3). This distinction is valuable for a 
designer, as it will create a better and wider foundation and include the relevant aspects of 
theories of change in the BDS.  
Table 2.3
Overview of the 
eight theories of 
change
Understanding the 
factors of 
behavioural change
Theory of Influence
 (Cialdini 1984) 
Fogg’s Behaviour Model 
(Fogg 2009)
Aids Risk Reduction 
Model 
(Catania et al. 1990)
The Transtheoretical 
Model
(Prochaska & Velicer 
1997)
The Loughborough 
Model 
(Lilley 2009)
Design Behaviour 
Intervention Model 
(Tang 2010)
Nudging 
(Thaler & Sunstein 
2009)
Keywords
Brief Description
Persuasion can happen through 
six principles of influence: 
Reciprocation, commitment and 
consistency, social proof, liking, 
authority, and scarcity.
Behaviour is a product of three 
factors that are present at the 
same time: Motivation, ability, 
and triggers.
Behaviour change efforts of 
individuals can be predicted 
through the stages of recogni-
tion and labelling, commitment, 
and taking action.
The processes of change can 
be described through five 
stages: Precontemplation, 
contemplation, preparation for 
action, action, and maintenance.
The power of decision making 
is determined either by the 
influence of a user or by the 
influence of a product.
Due to the complexity of 
motivations for changing 
behaviour, different levels of 
interventions needs to ensure 
behavioural and habitual change.
Persuasion can happen via two 
routes: The central route (much 
cognitive processing) and the 
peripheral route (little cognitive 
processing).
Behaviour can be changed by 
implementing an intervention 
which exploits the automatic 
behaviour of individuals.
Elaboration Likelihood 
Model 
(Petty & Cacioppo 
1986)
Direct or indirect 
persuasion
Persuasion principles
Change 
timing
Persuasion 
principles
Persuasion 
principles
Change 
timing
Control of 
persuasion
Control of 
persuasion
Direct or indirect 
persuasion
Control of persuasion
Simultaneous application of theories of change together with models of behaviour enables the 
designer in creating the best possible theoretical foundation for the BDS, due to the fact that 
understanding what behaviour is and why it occurs, leads to realising how, when, and where to 
change it. Ultimately, this realisation in the BDS is essential to develop successful interventions.
==PAGE:38==
26
2.3.3.2 Concluding remarks on theories of change
Based on the exploration and discussion of the eight selected prescriptive theories of change 
in the previous section (2.3.3.1), the following remarks can be concluded:
• Understanding the different aspects of theories of change is crucial for the designer 
in order to enable an actual and successful change of behaviour, as they offer 
value for the designer in regards to behavioural mapping and allow for better 
possibilities of predicting behaviour. However, although the selected theories of 
change are prescriptive, they show little explicit guidance on how to exactly design 
for such a desired change (little direct relation to design activities). Furthermore, 
since behaviour happens through both conscious and nonconscious processing 
(Kahneman 2003; Petty & Cacioppo 1986), predicting the behaviour of an individual 
is a complex task, and thus theory inclusion in general (i.e. inclusion of both models 
of behaviour and theories of change) should not be underestimated.
• Combining the theories of change with the understanding derived from different 
models of behaviour, will create a more comprehensive foundation of understanding 
the complexity of behaviour and thus possibly lowering the difficulties of designing 
for behaviour change. Yet, the exploration of behavioural literature in this thesis 
have shown that few researchers in behavioural design have dealt with exploring 
and determining the importance and impact that an enablement of said integrative 
thinking will have on the behavioural design field. This leads to the realisation that 
current research to some extent underestimates, or at least does not visually 
communicate, the importance of integrative thinking of behavioural theories 
(models of behaviour and theories of change) to designers wishing to include 
them in the BDS. 
While this is a conclusion from an exploration of different behavioural theories, further 
measures must be taken to examine whether an exploration of the practical behavioural 
design approaches leads to the same conclusion.
2.3.4 Behavioural design approaches
Whereas behavioural theories are helpful for providing a basic understanding of behaviour 
and behaviour change, they offer little guidance on how to do it in practice (Michie et al. 
2008), as they are naturally theory focused. How to practically enable behavioural design is 
instead fulfilled by different behavioural design approaches that have been developed for the 
sole purpose of aiding the BDS. In this thesis, 15 different behavioural design approaches, 
found to be of relevance, will be described and discussed. The rationale of this selection is to 
include different categories of design approaches as well as having different types within each 
category. The four main categories are presented in figure 2.8 (on the following page (27)):
==PAGE:39==
 27
The aim of this division is to identify the strengths and shortcomings of the different types of 
design approaches, i.e. distinguishing how the different approaches vary in aiding the designer 
in the BDS. Moreover, the link between the different behavioural design approaches and their 
theoretical foundation will be addressed to obtain greater understanding of the elements of 
the BDS.
2.3.4.1 Framework
 
The Functional Triad made by Fogg (2003) is a framework for thinking about the 
roles that interactive technologies can play from the perspective of the individual. Persuasive 
technology is seen as an interactive product (Fogg 2003) designed to change attitudes, 
behaviours, or both, and can apply three different roles for making a desired outcome easier 
to achieve: A tool, a social actor, and a medium. Furthermore, the framework defines seven 
types of persuasive technology means: Reduction, tunneling, tailoring, suggestions, self-monitoring, 
surveillance, and conditioning. Using the Functional Triad as a design approach applies to the 
category of theories of change, however a weakness of this framework is that it does not 
explain how the principles can be transferred into actual design activities (Oinas-Kukkonen & 
Harjumaa 2008).
 
This is instead explained by the Systematic Framework made by Oinas-Kukkonen 
& Harjumaa (2008), which is a systematic framework built from a design perspective for 
designing and evaluating persuasive systems (based on the work of Fogg, i.e. the Functional 
Triad). It states that a system’s persuasiveness is mostly about system qualities and thus 
consists of 28 different design principles divided into four groups of system features:  Primary 
task support, dialogue support, system credibility support, and social support. It is primarily applied 
in system design and persuasive technology (i.e. the work of Fogg), however, the design 
principles offer great inspiration in more generic behavioural design cases as well.
 
Evil by Design made by Nodder (2013) is a framework of different approaches 
for using evil seductive persuasion in design. It claims that designs applying the underlying 
behavioural forces that underpin the seven sins (pride, sloth, gluttony, anger, envy, lust, and 
greed) are harder to discern (Nodder 2013). For each sin several design techniques are 
presented to be used for inspiration within behavioural design. The Evil by Design framework 
can be applied as a generic behavioural design approach, as it relates to both social models 
of behaviour (e.g. the work of Dan Lockton (Nodder 2013)) and to individual models of 
behaviour (“you shall not commit a sin”).
 
The MINDSPACE Way made by Dolan et al. (2012) states that behavioural problems 
can be tackled from two different perspectives: Changing minds and changing contexts. The 
framework can be used whenever behaviour change is being considered and aims at making 
Framework
Process
Method
Tool
Figure 2.8
Design approach 
categories 
==PAGE:40==
28
less coercive policies (e.g. softer nudges (Thaler & Sunstein 2009)) work better. Additionally, 
the framework presents nine robust behavioural effects to be considered in behavioural 
change: Messenger, incentives, shortcuts, norms, defaults, salience, priming, affect, commitment, 
and ego. For the designer the MINDSPACE way offers insights in regards to different possible 
incentives, yet it lacks integration with the wider design process (Cash et al. 2017).
 
The Social Implication Design Method made by Tromp (2013) is a framework 
aimed at supporting the designer in understanding what can be designed to induce behaviour 
change that brings about a desired social change. Because it points the designer in the direction 
of how to reason from a social problem to a design proposal (Tromp 2013), it appears more 
as a framework although it is named as a method. The framework states that the designer 
has to define the effects of the design at three levels (social, behavioural, and experiential 
level) before defining what to design (Tromp & Hekkert 2016). As the framework relates to 
both social problems and theories of change, the designer can apply it in relation to the two 
categories of social models of behaviour and theories of change. Yet, it lacks a logical and clear 
process to follow as well as guidance on how to move from goals to concrete interventions 
(Tromp & Hekkert 2016).
2.3.4.2 Process
 
The Eight-step Design Process made by Fogg (2009a) outlines a path to follow 
in designing persuasive technologies with techniques aimed at increasing the probability of 
behaviour change success. It consists of eight different steps to be carried out in sequence 
(Fogg 2009a): Choose a simple behaviour to target, choose a receptive audience, find what is 
preventing the target behaviour, choose an appropriate technology channel, find relevant examples 
of persuasive technology, imitate successful examples, test & iterate quickly, and expand on success. 
The designer can apply it as guidance on managing the different behavioural design phases, 
yet it is merely for inspiration, as it lacks clear guidelines and clear activities to take for the 
designer. The process can be applied in relation to the category of theories of change, as 
it is based on Fogg’s previous research.
 
The Process of Designing for Behavioural Change by Wendel (2014) defines 
four overall phases which a behaviour change process consists of: Understand, discover, design, 
and refine. In comparison with Fogg’s Eight-step Design Process, this process includes clear 
steps and activities suggested for the behavioural design project team in each phase, due 
to the inclusion of an integrated toolkit (Wendel 2013). The application of the Process of 
Designing for Behavioural Change should follow a linear process and can be applied for 
incorporating behavioural aspects into product development processes. Due to the toolkit, 
the process is very thorough in regards to theory, steps and guidelines (Cash et al. 2017) and 
due to the strong and multifaceted theoretical basis (Duhigg 2014; Kahneman 2003; Cialdini 
2007) (Wendel 2014) the process can be applied as a generic behavioural design approach.
 
The Behavioural Design Process made by Cash et al. (2017) integrates psychology, 
persuasive design and product development theory into a behavioural design process. It 
==PAGE:41==
 29
2.3.4.3 Method
 
The Behaviour Wizard made by Fogg & Hreha (2010) presents a method for 
matching target behaviours with solutions for achieving those behaviours. It classifies behaviour 
change targets into 15 different types. These types differ over the axes of flavour (five different 
behaviour distinctions visualised by colours) and duration (three different time aspects visualised 
by figures) (Fogg & Hreha 2010). Although the method lacks specific guidelines or design 
steps, it provides a common approach of categorising behaviour as well as allow for a deeper 
understanding of the winning patterns of behaviour change. It can be applied by the designer as 
a generic behavioural design approach, due to the fact that the obtained classifications relate 
to behaviour change as well as it can relate to both individuals and social groups.
 
The Behaviour Change Wheel made by Michie et al. (2011) is a method for 
characterising and designing behaviour change interventions and additionally linking them 
to an analysis of a targeted behaviour. It distinguishes between three aspects: Sources of 
behaviour, intervention functions, and policy categories (Michie et al. 2011). It is based upon 19 
different frameworks and aims at providing a more efficient method for choosing the kinds of 
interventions that are likely to be appropriate for a given behavioural target. However, it has yet 
to be researched whether this method leads to more efficient design of effective interventions 
(Michie et al. 2011) and it lacks integration with the wider design processes (Cash et al. 2017). 
Still, it can be applied by the designer as a generic behavioural design approach.
consists of seven steps: Behavioural problem/need, behaviour mapping, behavioural problem 
statement, fieldwork, behavioural specification, intervention development, and iterative testing 
and development (Cash et al. 2017). The Behavioural Design Process aims at closing a gap in 
current process support by means of clear integration with existing product development 
processes (Cash et al. 2017). While it explicitly details the development of the behaviour 
change intervention itself, it lacks the integrative aspects that the Process of Designing for 
Behavioural Change obtains from the toolkit (i.e. hands-on suggestions). It can be applied in 
relation to the category of theories of change yet refers to other parts of the BDS as well. 
2.3.4.4 Tool
 
The Developing an Intervention toolkit made by Community Tool Box (2016a) 
provides support for developing core components of a community intervention and adapting 
them to fit the context. It consists of a list of 13 steps to guide the designer through a complete 
behavioural design process, from problem identification to intervention implementation, monitoring 
and evaluation (Community Tool Box 2016a). It is aimed at solving community related problems 
and thus relates to social models of behaviour. 
 
The Design with Intent tool made by Lockton et al. (2010) is an innovation tool 
developed for helping humans use products and systems more efficiently. It is a suggestion 
tool, aimed at addressing relevant design techniques by providing examples of how similar 
behavioural problems have been tackled elsewhere (Lockton et al. 2010). These examples are 
divided into six different lenses, for which different techniques to inspire design solutions are 
==PAGE:42==
30
provided. The tool has two ‘modes’, inspiration and prescription, through which the designer or 
behavioural design project team can make use of the tool. While being an inspirational tool, 
it in itself is not supportive for ensuring an effective creation of successful interventions, yet it 
can be applied by the designer as a behavioural design approach relating to social models of 
behaviour and theories of change.
 
The Brains, Behaviour and Design toolkit made by Cervantes et al. (2011) is a 
tool developed to help designers in understanding and influencing decision-making processes. 
The toolkit is designed to be both informative and actionable, and thus enable an integration 
of the latest research in human behaviour and decision-making into practice (Cervantes et 
al. 2011). The toolkit consists of reference cards, concept ecosystem poster, irrational situations 
guides, strategy cards, and loss/gain worksheets. It is a tool that combines the understanding 
otherwise obtained through the previously mentioned behavioural theories and can be 
applied as a generic behavioural design approach.
 
Behaviour Change Strategy Cards made by Pfarr (2013) is a set of 23 cards 
developed to help designers think through strategies of nudging humans in a positive way 
when facing a behavioural design problem. The cards are divided into five thematic sections: 
Make it personal, tip the scales, craft the journey, set up the options, and keep it simple (Pfarr 
2013). The cards are an ideal tool as a supplement to an ideation session in a behavioural 
design project, which is also their limitation as they only cover a small part of the wider 
design process. As the cards cover individual and socials aspects of models of behaviour, the 
designer can apply them as a generic behavioural design approach.
 
The Persuasive by Design Model made by Hermsen et al. (2014) is a toolkit that 
describes a set of color-coded layers with accompanying questions aimed at addressing all 
aspects of a target behaviour and designing interventions for changing this behaviour. The 
layers consist of a behaviour layer, a bias and other threats layer, and a social influence layer. 
Furthermore, two additional layers of methods for changing behaviour and strategies to target 
automatic behaviour exist. What is especially valuable in this toolkit is that the tool reflects 
current behaviour thinking, by implicitly drawing parallels to several model of behaviours and 
theories of change, and in this way tries to enable the designer in making more evidence-based 
interventions (Hermsen et al. 2014). The toolkit is however limited by its complexity, which 
occurs because of the non-explicitly explained inclusion of the many models of behaviour 
and theories of change, which have made the tool difficult to apply for designers (Hermsen 
et al. 2015). 
The 15 behavioural design approaches that have been elaborated in the preceding sections 
(2.3.4.1-2.3.4.4) enables a practical transfer of behaviour and behaviour change understanding 
into design activities. This transfer is crucial in regards to increasing the likelihood of successful 
behavioural design, as design processes that are theory based are more effective than those 
that are not (Glanz & Bishop 2010; Michie et al. 2008; Henkemans et al. 2015). From the 
elaborations and discussion in the preceding sections, an attempt of linking the different 
behavioural design approaches with their theoretical foundation has been made (see table 
2.4 on the following page (31)).
==PAGE:43==
 31
The Functional Triad
(Fogg 2003)
Evil by Design
(Nodder 2013)
The MINDSPACE way
(Dolan et al. 2012)
The Social Implication 
Design Method
(Tromp 2013) 
Eight-step Design 
Process
(Fogg 2009a)
The Process of 
Designing for 
Behavioural Change
(Wendel 2014)
The Behavioural Design 
Process
(Cash et al. 2017)
The Behaviour Wizard 
(Fogg & Hreha 2010)
The Behaviour Change 
Wheel
(Michie et al. 
2011)
Developing an 
Intervention 
(Community Tool 
Box 2016a) 
Design with Intent
(Lockton et al. 2010)
Brains, Behaviour and 
Design
(Cervantes et al. 
2011)
The Behaviour Change 
Strategy Cards 
(Pfarr 2013)
Framework
Process
Method
Tool
Systematic Framework
(Oinas-Kukkonen & 
Harjumaa 2008)
The Persuasive by Design 
Model
(Hermsen et al. 
2014) 
Table 2.4
Overview of the 
15 behavioural 
design approaches
Two different ways of distinguishing such a link have been used in this thesis: generic behavioural 
design approaches (orange) and theory specific behavioural design approaches (red). What this 
attempt suggests is that all the selected behavioural design approaches are in fact associated 
with theory, regardless the specific or generic behavioural theory connection. Consequently, 
this further underlines the cruciality of enabling integrative thinking for theory inclusion in 
the BDS, as the behavioural design approaches, especially the generic ones, also require an 
understanding of the behavioural theories’ relations and applicability. 
• Although design approaches can be divided into the categories of frameworks, 
processes, methods, and tools, all four categories offer insights and different levels of 
detail relevant to all kinds of design projects. Thus, behavioural design approaches 
are not mutually exclusive, i.e. the choice of one type of behavioural design approach 
does not hinder choosing another one as well. Rather it enables better integration 
of all aspects of behavioral theories into the design activities. 
• From this exploration of 15 different behavioural design approaches it is shown 
that, while they offer practical ways of transferring behaviour and behaviour change 
understanding into design activities, they do so through an implicitly visualised 
integrative thinking. Several of the design approaches is derived from an inclusion 
of multiple behavioural theories, yet they offer little explicit, visual or practical 
guidance of the exact relations to the theories, i.e. the designers lack ways of 
understanding the explicit transfer of behavioural insights. And while it is possible 
to link specific behavioural design approaches to their associated specific theories, 
it is only feasible through an extensive review.
2.3.4.5 Concluding remarks on behavioural design approaches
Based on the exploration and discussion of the 15 selected behavioural design approaches in 
the previous sections (2.3.4.1-2.3.4.4), the following remarks can be concluded:
==PAGE:44==
32
2.4 Research Framework
Derived from the findings of the subsequent sections 2.2 and 2.3, the following section 
presents the research framework for this thesis, together with an identification of issues 
and finally the research aim and objectives. The following figure 2.9 visually represents the 
research framework for this thesis:
Framework
Process
Method
Tool
Understanding the 
factors of behavioural 
change
Social factors of 
behaviour
Individual factors of 
behaviour
Habitual and 
routines
(nonconscious)
Intentions
(conscious)
Attitude
Personal issues
Social interaction
Environmental 
interaction
Control of
 Persuasion
Direct of Indirect 
Persuasion
Change 
timing
Persuasion 
principles
Problem
Behaviour
Models of 
Behaviour
Design 
Approaches
Research Framework
Theories of 
Change
focus area
Solution
I
m
p
e
r
s
o
n
a
l
P
e
r
s
o
n
a
l
Problem
Behaviour
P
P
PP
PP
I
n
t
e
r
p
e
rs
o
n
al
S
o
ci
et
al
St
or
y 
& 
ba
ck
gr
ou
nd
Fr
eq
ue
nc
y 
of 
ch
an
ge
 
Figure 2.9
Research 
Framework
Unfortunately, what can be derived from an extensive review of literature as the desired BDS 
is currently far from reality, due to a complex situation affected by three main issues.
2.4.1 Identification of issues
This research framework forms the theoretical basis for the research of the thesis and 
presents the divergent and convergent steps the designer should go through in the BDS to 
develop a successful intervention. The designer can use this framework in different ways, since 
the combination of problems, models of behaviour, theories of change and design approaches 
can differ from project to project. Yet, the designer should obtain a holistic understanding of 
all relevant problem layers (section 2.3.1.1) and combine it with an integrative thinking of the 
behavioural theories (models of behaviour (section 2.3.2) and theories of change (section 
2.3.3)). Furthermore, to integrate theories continuously throughout the BDS, the integrative 
thinking of the behavioural theories should enable application of relevant behavioural design 
approaches.
==PAGE:45==
 33
2.4.1.1 Issue between problem and behavioural theories
• For designers there is an issue in figuring out how to connect a behavioural problem 
with the most suitable behavioural theories – a connection that should be based 
on a comprehensive and fully-understood problem identification. 
The synergy between behavioural problem understanding and behavioural theories is 
important because choosing theories based on the problem is essential, as it contributes to 
the foundation of achieving an effective solution (Fogg 2009b; Glanz & Bishop 2010; Darnton, 
2008b), i.e. generating the correct problem hypotheses (section 2.2.2). While this synergy is, 
to some extent, reflected in behavioural design literature (e.g. Darnton 2008b; Niedderer 
et al. 2016), few researchers analyse behaviour in regards to how it is affected on different 
problem layers, despite the fact that these layers logically do affect problem contexts in 
their own manner. From this, an issue arises for designers, due to a lack of visualisation 
and communication of how certain behavioural theories can contribute to certain problem 
contexts. This makes designers unable to reflect upon and independently determine which 
behavioural theories to apply in a given problem context. A consequence from this is that 
the designers have no opportunity of ascribing supremacy to the different behavioural theories 
(Bhattacharyya et al. 2006), which would offer a higher level of support in the selection 
process. Another consequence, which is the most outstanding, is the risk that an inefficient 
problem analysis can lead to an inefficient process (choosing an unsuitable theory), which 
can eventually lead to unsuccessful interventions. Solving this issue would therefore have an 
impact on the number of effective designed interventions, and additionally have an impact 
on the possibility of designers increasing their own behavioural design analytical capabilities.
2.4.1.2 Issue between integrative thinking among models of behaviour & theories 
of change
• Once specific models of behaviour have been chosen to describe a behavioural 
problem, designers face an issue of connecting it to the proper theories of change. 
Despite the fact that few researchers have dealt with the topic of integrative thinking among 
models of behaviour and theories of change (e.g. Prager 2012; Hermsen et al. 2014), research 
shows little indication of an explanatory practical approach for this integrative thinking. From 
this two issues arises. First of all, incorrect application occurs, as research lacks practical means 
for describing and explaining what each category of behavioural theories has to offer in the BDS 
(e.g. using theories of change to explain behaviour (Michie et al. 2008)). From this, designers 
are unable to make qualified decisions in regards to the proper combination of behavioural 
theories. Second of all, complicated application occurs, as behavioural design literature need to 
communicate why this integrative thinking is crucial in order to design successful interventions 
(understanding why it is important together with how to do it). Without this communication 
designers are not able to validate their selection processes and thus applying different 
theories in combination becomes unnecessarily complicated. While some behavioural design 
approaches (e.g. Hermsen et al. 2014 or Michie et al. 2011) do aim to provide the designers 
==PAGE:46==
34
2.4.1.3 Issue between behavioural theories and design approaches
• For designers there is an issue in connecting specific theories of change to the 
proper behavioural design approaches.
Currently research show a vague indication of which behavioural design approaches to use 
in extension of choosing a specific behavioural theory (Niedderer et al. 2016) in order to 
obtain the most efficient behavioural design solution (Zachrisson & Boks 2012; Bhattacharyya 
et al. 2006). From extensively reviewing relevant behavioural design approaches an indication 
of generic and theory-specific behavioural design approaches can be seen. Yet, without 
this review, this connection may not seem clear for designers, due to a lack of adequate 
knowledge within the psychology field and more so due to a lack of awareness, common 
language, resources, and ability to obtain this knowledge (Hermsen et al. 2014; Niedderer et 
al. 2016). The literature within the field of behavioural theories is comprehensive and has an 
unmanageable range (Zachrisson & Boks 2012), hence designers could use a more practical 
and systematic approach for making the task of incorporating knowledge obtained from 
behavioural theories into selection of design approaches manageable (Fogg & Hreha 2010). 
Yet, in order to solve this issue designers must ultimately possess the ability to understand 
and apply models of behaviour and theories of change in the correct context, and thus 
solving this third issue should come second to the two previous identified issues (section 
2.4.1.1 and 2.4.1.2). However, as literature show, this third issue has to some extent already 
been researched and dealt with (Niedderer et al. 2016; Michie et al. 2008; Zachrisson & Boks 
2012), thus it should be straightforward to solve. Further, the two previously identified issues 
are reckoned to have a bigger impact for the designer in the BDS and are thus granted the 
focus of this thesis.
with practical approaches for combining all valuable aspects of behavioural theories (i.e. 
apply integrative thinking), they do so through an extensive simplification of the behavioural 
theories. This have implicated the designers’ level of behavioural theory abstraction, as it is a 
result of a trade-off between: 1. A simplification of the behavioural theories (which is in line 
with the observation that, among others, psychological theories are viewed as “impenetrable” 
by designers (Hermsen et al. 2015)), and 2. The level of detail regarding the reasons behind 
the combination of behavioural theories that is communicated to the designers. Thus, current 
behavioural design approaches that do apply integrative thinking, do it only with respect 
to explaining how and completely leaves out the why. Consequently, current behavioural 
design literature lack ways of visualising the links and relations between the two categories 
of behavioural theories, as well as explaining why the links and relations are important to 
understand. For designers this currently leads to an unintentionally complicated and inefficient 
task of including behavioural theories in the BDS.
==PAGE:47==
 35
2.4.2 Research aim & objectives
Given the research framework and associated issues, the aim for this thesis is to develop a 
behavioural design support tool that connects behavioural problems to behavioural theories 
and thus enables a practical translation of knowledge in the BDS. In this way, the designer can 
obtain a holistic overview of the behavioural theories necessary for developing a successful 
behavioural design intervention. As a result, the research aim and objectives can be formulated 
as following: 
2.4.2.2 Research objectives
1. Obtain and map a structural understanding of the different core behavioural 
elements in theory and in design industry. 
2. Identify path dependencies and other interconnections from behavioural problem 
to behavioural design approach with respect to integrative thinking of behavioural 
theory.
3. Based on the two previous answers above, develop a tool for supporting designers 
in structuring their understanding of behavioural problems and in selecting 
appropriate behavioural theories.
4. Validate and evaluate the support tool.
This section aims at elaborating on general design to determine relevant contextual factors 
that influences design projects and thus have to be considered in the upcoming support 
tool development. To apply the findings from the literature review and develop a useful and 
successful support tool, certain relevant design knowledge about the designer is needed, 
which is the rationale behind including an elaboration of general design. Thus, it is necessary 
to take different relevant factors of general design into account when developing a support 
tool for behavioural design, as it deals with designers and their ways of working, their way of 
staging projects and their way of rationalising, conceptualising and thinking.
2.5 Staging considerations of the support 
tool development
2.4.2.1 Research aim 
Developing a support tool for designers aimed at providing a structured overview of behavioural 
theories and their relations, with respect to considering all perspectives of behavioural design 
problems and tailoring this overview to fit with existing behavioural design approaches.
2.5.1 General design processes
The first aspect of general design to acknowledge is design processes. By the definition of 
Hubka and Eder (1996) design processes are “an explanation of the actions of design in a 
socio-technical and industrial context” (Andreasen et al. 2015, p.65). However, the term design 
==PAGE:48==
36
The Double Diamond Model (Design Council 2007) presents the overall phases of a design 
project and is distinguished by its diverging and converging phases, in which different activities 
take place to support the aims discover, define, develop, and deliver. The Frame Creation 
Model (Dorst et al. 2016) presents nine different steps, which together form the analysis and 
creation central to creative design practice. Whereas the Double Diamond Model diverges 
and converges, the Frame Creation Model zooms in and out on different aspects of the 
creation of frames. Within each step of the Frame Creation Model a tool for reaching the aim 
is proposed, which makes it more prescriptive opposed to the Double Diamond Model that 
merely describes the overall phases.
Consequently, general design processes are valuable to consider in the development of the 
support tool, as behavioural design can be applied as both a complete design process or 
merely as part(s) of a general design process. Thus it is essential to acknowledge the former 
and latter parts of general design processes.
Discover
Define
Develop
Deliver
Problem
Problem
Definition
Solution
archaeology
paradox
content
field
themes
frames
futures
transformation
integration
Figure 2.10 (left)
Double Diamond 
Model
Figure 2.11 (right)
Frame Creation 
Model
2.5.2 Staging design
Whereas design processes describe and prescribe how designers work, design staging 
describes “the act of establishing and fitting a team’s space to a project, to best support the 
design activity” (Andreasen et al. 2015, p.72). In design staging it is essential to empower 
team activity and support innovation (Andreasen et al. 2015), yet it is often underestimated 
and overlooked, despite being an important aspect in creating the best possible conditions 
for design success (Andreasen et al. 2015). One aspect of staging could be the physical 
environment or work space encouraging creativity and creative mindsets. Design staging 
processes often refers to both the actual activities performed by the designer as well as the 
models describing and guiding these activities (Andreasen et al. 2015). This is supported by 
Cross (2008), who states that there are two ways of distinguishing between design processes: 
Descriptive models (describing the sequences of activities that occur in design) and prescriptive 
models (prescribing patterns of activities). Design processes often describe the sequence of 
activities or order of steps (Cross 2008) and thus when mapped they present a proposed 
flow, which can be seen in the two following examples of design processes: The Double 
Diamond Model (Design Council 2007) and the Frame Creation Model (Dorst et al. 
2016) (see figure 2.10 and 2.11).
==PAGE:49==
 37
Regarding the development of the support tool it is vital to consider design staging, as the 
tool is developed for designers and thus should be applicable in any design context. Since 
the support tool should enhance the possibility of creating successful behaviour change 
interventions, it is important that it does not hinder design staging, but rather enhances it to 
create the best possible conditions for design successes. 
2.5.3 Design mindset
Finally, design mindsets are defined as, “the proper understanding of a method’s use in 
accordance with the designer’s reality (interpretation of task, situation, execution, validation, etc.), 
and the method’s background and proper use” (Andreasen et al. 2015, p.57). A design mindset 
means understanding the proper context and phenomena related to method application 
(Andreasen 2003). In other words, a design mindset provide the designer with an approach 
for framing a design project, i.e. following a certain path within a given design field. Design for 
X (e.g. Meerkamm & Koch 2005), Behavioural Design (e.g. Cash et al. 2017) or Participatory 
Design (e.g. Beyer & Holtzblatt 1998) are all examples of design fields that can determine the 
approach for design projects and thus function as design mindsets. Consequently, the support 
tool will in a natural way address the behavioural design mindset, yet it would be beneficial if 
it was applicable with other types of design mindsets.
Figure 2.12
Design staging 
model
(Andreasen et al. 
2015, p.75)
2.5.4 Relationship between the general design elements 
Based on the elaboration of three general design aspects (design processes, design staging, and 
design mindsets) figure 2.13 on the following page (38) exemplifies the relationship between 
these three general design elements based on the Frame Creation Model.
brings individual designers together in an effective team by setting perspectives, defining 
contributions, clarifying roles, and creating motivation. In addition, staging is more than just 
supporting the team and innovation, it is also about integrating the user (Andreasen et al. 
2015) (see figure 2.12). 
==PAGE:50==
38
Figure 2.13
Relationship 
between design 
processes, design 
staging, and design 
mindset
The frame creation model prescribes the different steps of the design process. Different 
sequences of these steps may require different design staging and thus it can be interchanged 
from sequence to sequence within a design process. The mindset on top affects the entire 
process as well as the activities within each step of the process. Therefore, all three aspects 
of general design (design processes, design staging, and design mindsets) must be considered 
individually as well as together when developing the support tool.
As stated in this literature review the designer should obtain a holistic understanding of 
all relevant problem layers and combine it with an integrative thinking of the behavioural 
theories in order to effectively progress from problem behaviour to solution in the BDS. Yet, 
issues arise regarding this problem understanding and integrative thinking of behavioural 
theories. Thus, the aim of this thesis is to develop a support tool that connects behavioural 
problems to behavioural theories and enables a practical translation of knowledge in the BDS. 
Yet,  in order to develop a successful tool that highlights the designers’ ways of working, the 
three aspects of general design (design processes, design staging, and design mindsets) must be 
considered simultaneously. 
As the current theoretical basis of this thesis is obtained through literature, a more practical 
understanding is needed and thus interviews will be conducted through an Investigation of 
Current Practice in chapter 4. Yet, foremost the chosen methodology of the thesis will be 
presented in the following chapter (3). 
2.6 Conclusion & key findings of the 
Literature Review 
==PAGE:51==
 39
Chapter 3
Methodology
==PAGE:52==
40
Due to the findings from the Literature Review (chapter 2), the chosen methodology for this 
thesis is the Design Research Methodology (DRM) by Blessing & Chakrabarti (2009). It 
has been applied as a framework for the design research, providing guidelines for systematic 
planning of research and thesis activities. Hence, the thesis has been divided into four partly 
parallel and iterative main stages (figure 3.1).
3.1. Introduction to Methodology 
Stage 1: Research Clarification
Stage 2: Descriptive Study I
Stage 3: Prescriptive Study
Stage 4: Descriptive Study II
Literature 
Analysis
Emperical 
Data 
Analysis
Assumption 
Experience 
Synthesis
Emperical 
Data 
Analysis
Goals
Support
Evaluation
Basic means
Stages and Content
Main outcomes
Literature Review
Investigation of Current Practice
Support Tool Development
Validation & Evaluation of the 
Support Tool
Understanding
Figure 3.1
The DRM 
framework
The thesis has reached a type 3 design research, meaning that the content in the first three 
stages (1-3) have been performed comprehensively, whereas the content in the last stage 
(stage 4) has been performed on a very initial basis. The following sections 3.2-3.5 briefly 
describe each stage of the thesis both in regards to the theoretical methodology and the 
different thesis activities.
3.2 Stage 1: Research Clarification - Literature Review
In the Research Clarification stage the aim is to find supporting evidence or indications 
of the initial assumptions or hypotheses in literature, to formulate realistic and worthwhile 
research goals (Blessing & Chakrabarti 2009). As already presented in the previous chapter 
(2), a research framework was created by reviewing literature concerning behavioural design, 
current behavioural problem procedures, behavioural theories and behavioural design 
==PAGE:53==
 41
approaches. This was done to identify and explore possible gaps in current behavioural 
design literature and as a result, associated issues and a clarification of the concrete research 
aim and research objectives were determined. In this thesis these explorations were helpful 
for getting an understanding of the BDS and thus revealing the overall research aim.
3.3 Stage 2 - Descriptive Study I: Investigation of Current 
Practice
In the Descriptive Study I an investigation of current practice was obtained through the 
application of a qualitative approach (i.e. interviewing five different Danish design consultancies). 
In this thesis, a qualitative approach was preferred as the aim of this stage was to investigate 
the nature of the phenomena (the findings and gaps identified in the literature review) in 
practice, and less focus was put on investigating to what degree the phenomena occurs 
(Blessing & Chakrabarti 2009). While this study took place, a refinement of the literature 
review was conducted continuously, as Blessing and Chakrabarti (2009) suggest that a more 
detailed and better understanding of the existing situation can be obtained by identifying and 
clarifying possible gaps in practice and combining these with the knowledge obtained through 
literature. The key findings and deliverables of this stage confirmed the understanding of 
behavioural design obtained through the literature review and provided deeper insights and 
clarified some of the key factors (Blessing & Chakrabarti 2009) and the core focus regarding 
the upcoming support tool development. 
3.4 Stage 3: Prescriptive Study - Support Tool Development
From obtaining a deeper understanding of the existing situation through the two previous 
stages (1 and 2), corrections and elaborations of the initial description of the desired BDS 
took place through a Prescriptive Study. This led to a specification of the requirements of 
the support tool (most suitable factors to be addressed), chosen for the aim of improving 
the existing situation (Blessing & Chakrabarti 2009). With these requirements in mind, as well 
as with inspiration from other existing tools or games, several different support tool designs 
were developed. These proposals for solutions were then evaluated through a comparison 
of each other and against the identified gaps and need, which led to a chosen support 
tool design. This support tool design was verified in different relevant settings (workshops) 
through support evaluation (i.e. checking that the support fulfilled the requirements). This 
involved checking for consistency and completeness, as well as checking that the smallest 
elements of the support could function at the lowest intended level, and thus that it had a 
strong potential of realising the intended impact (Blessing & Chakrabarti 2009).  As a result, 
several iterations of the support tool design occurred from the support evaluation, leading 
to a final version of the support tool: The Super Cool Analysis Tool. While the support tool 
development took place, suggestions for the development of a future (partial) evaluation 
plan was made, in order to ensure that the indicators of impact would be measurable in the 
features and activities of the final version of the Super Cool Analysis Tool.
==PAGE:54==
42
3.5 Stage 4: Descriptive Study II - Validation & Evaluation 
of the Support tool
The final stage of this thesis was the Descriptive Study II, in which, according to Blessing 
and Chakrabarti (2009), the aim is to investigate and measure the impact of the support tool. 
In order to allow for an evaluation of the intended support (both in regards to application 
and success), an empirical study should have been performed together with experimental 
validation of the intended impact, (Blessing & Chakrabarti 2009). Yet, despite the fact that the 
support tool was fully developed and realised, the project duration of this thesis did not allow 
for a full evaluation, resulting in a very initial DS-II stage (making the conducted research in 
this thesis a type 3, as stated in the introduction). However, as initial evaluation of a research 
project was needed in order to round it off properly (Blessing and Chakrabarti 2009), different 
activities in regards to indicating the three aspects of 1. The applicability, usability and usefulness 
of the support; 2. The issues, factors and links that need detailed evaluation; and 3. A suggestion for 
an evaluation plan, took place. 
In this thesis an indication of the applicability, usability and usefulness of the support tool was 
provided through commencing a final demonstration of the tool and discussing the findings. 
Doing so allowed for a further indication of the issues, factors and links that need more detailed 
evaluation, which then provided suggestions for further evaluation and application measures. 
And finally from this, a suggestion for an evaluation plan was provided through a description of 
suggested activities and measures to be performed and taken into account in a experimental 
validation setting. To underline the fact that this stage was initial, the combined findings 
resulting in a suggestion for an evaluation plan is presented in the section describing the thesis’ 
further work (chapter 8), as this perfectly rounds of the research conducted in this thesis.
==PAGE:55==
 43
Chapter 4
Investigation of 
Current Practice
==PAGE:56==
44
This chapter seeks to investigate current behavioural design practice in industry to develop a 
support tool for designers applying behavioural design. As the support tool should enable a 
translation of behavioural insights (from theory) into the current design practice (industry), it 
is necessary to investigate how behavioural design happens in practice and not just base the 
support tool development on findings from literature. Hence, five explorative interviews with 
different Danish design consultancies were conducted to investigate the practical implications 
of the research framework and gather new valuable insights. 
Section 4.2 describes the interview setup and interview guide followed by an analysis of the 
results in section 4.3. Doing so allow for a determination of the core focus of the support 
tool, i.e. determining where the tool will have the biggest impact and create most value for 
the designer, with respect to the research framework (section 2.4). 
4.1 Introduction to Investigation of Current 
Practice
4.2 Interview setup
This section describes the setup and interview guide (Turner 2010) for the interviews with 
five Danish design consultancies: KRUKOW, Decision Design, /KL.7, The Nudging Company and 
Delta – Idemolab.
All five Qualitative Semi-structured Interviews (Fylan 2005) were conducted in meeting 
rooms at the respective design consultancies, and were audio recorded together with sporadic 
note taking. After the interviews, the audio recording was put into writing and combined 
with the interview notes. In all interviews the aim was to answer the main questions 
presented in the Interview Guide in table 4.1 on the following page (45), together with a 
number of sub questions illustrated in appendix 1.
However, in each of the interviews the strategy of the interview team was to apply the 
interview format of the general interview guide approach (Turner 2010) in which the 
interview team remains in the driver’s seat, but flexibility takes precedence based on perceived 
prompts from the participants. This way of interviewing ensured a relaxed atmosphere 
enhancing the possibility of getting relevant and true answers. 
Of the interviewed design consultancies four were behavioural design consultancies (offering 
expertise or professional advice only in regards to behavioural design), while one (Delta – 
Idemolab) was an engineering design consultancy (offering expertise or professional advice in 
multiple fields such as technology, sustainability or behavioural design).
==PAGE:57==
 45
Questions
Rationale
4.
5.
6.
7.
How do you prepare for the different 
projects?
1.
2.
3.
How do you define project success 
and how do you determine whether 
you reach it or not? 
Do you see any day to day challenges 
in the process?
Do you ever use or rely on 
behavioural theory in your projects?
How do you define and map out the 
behaviour?
How do you generally plan a design 
project that focuses on behaviour 
change?
When and how do you determine 
that the aim of the design should be 
behaviour change?
To get insight about when and how they 
consider behavioural design as being 
the solution. 
To get insight about what influences a 
project and how the projects differ.
To get insight in how they classify 
behaviour and against what factors they 
use to determine the behavioural 
elements.
To get insights in how theory is included or 
applied within behavioural design projects.
To get insight in how they translate theory 
into design decisions.
To get insight in what “applying” theory 
means in practice.
To get insight in behavioural design 
challenges in practice.
To get insight in their definition of what an 
efficient behavioural design solution is.
To get relevant input in terms of the tool 
development and in what context it 
must fit into (single tool vs group tool).
No.
Table 4.1
Interview guide
4.3.1 Result 1: Problem analysis & theoretical back-
catalogue
By using an Affinity Diagram (Beyer & Holtzblatt 1998) the interview notes and audio 
recording were analysed and combined into different findings assessed to be most important 
and relevant in regards to the upcoming support tool development and in regards to the 
scope of the thesis (see appendix 2). For more detailed information about each interview see 
appendices 3-7, however the overall results derived from the five interviews were as follows. 
4.3 Analysis of the results
All of the interviewed employees (founders, designers and behavioural economist) of the 
behavioural design consultancies have a behavioural theoretical foundation (i.e. theoretical 
back-catalogue) obtained through years of experience with behavioural design projects (table 
4.2 on page 47). In contrast, the designer interviewed from the engineering design consultancy 
==PAGE:58==
46
stated that behavioural design projects are often carried out by involving a sociologist to assist 
in making a behavioural analysis. This indicates that the employee in the engineering design 
consultancy does not have the capability to do so, i.e. lacks a theoretical back-catalogue. 
A theoretical back-catalogue affects many front-end behavioural design activities, and achieving 
such a back-catalogue requires a lot of effort and time, as the founder from Decision Design 
stated, “When you present a problem and say now we need some people to do something here. 
What is behind it? What theories do we need? I do not know! I’m not a behavioural economist, how 
should I learn it in an hour? So that’s the big challenge.” In all the behavioural design consultancies 
the problem analysis consists of data collection (e.g. observing and obtaining statistical data) 
as highlighted by the founder of KRUKOW, “[..] Based on this situation, you do what we call a 
behavioural mapping. Here you collect knowledge about two things: You collect knowledge about 
the existing choice-architecture design [..] and existing interaction data [..]” However, parallel to 
data collection activities the behavioural design consultancies expressed that they are trying 
to analyse the data and make sense of it in regards to theory e.g. through behaviour mapping 
or other models, as the designer from /KL.7 said, “We also apply work models from Beyer 
& Holtzblatt “Contextual Design” [e.g. flow model] in order to identify contact point where the 
behaviour occurs.“ The importance of the problem analysis phase in a behavioural design project 
in behavioural design consultancies was further highlighted by the founder of KRUKOW, “Yet 
behavioural mapping is the first and very important step in behavioural design. [..] It’s not hard to 
come up with good ideas, especially not when you have a rock-solid behavioural mapping.” 
In contrast, the engineering design consultancy tries to map the behaviour in similar ways 
to the behavioural design consultancies, yet their approach lacks a behavioural theory 
foundation. This is among others stressed by the fact that Delta - Idemolab obtains data 
through interviews, “We try to breakdown the behaviour in a kind of flowchart in order to 
obtain an understanding of the behaviour while making observations and interviews to get a 
deeper understanding.” (designer, Delta - Idemolab). This approach is by behavioural experts 
emphasised as unsuitable in a behavioural context, as this will not provide the correct data, 
“Typically, you don’t want to go in and ask, because people often have a hard time to explain why 
they do what they do.” (founder, Decision Design). However, after behavioural mapping two of 
the behavioural design consultancies and the engineering design consultancy directly stated 
that they make hypotheses regarding the problem behaviour, “We have some insights to be 
made into hypotheses” (behavioural economist from The Nudging Company). This emphasises 
similarities and differences across the two different types of design consultancies.
Consequently, due to the fact that problem analysis is emphasised as the first important step 
in behavioural design, designers with a theoretical back-catalogue have greater probabilities 
of developing successful interventions, as their problem understanding is theoretically 
founded. Therefore, applying behavioural design in a project without a theoretical back-
catalogue, complicates the process and adds uncertainty to the BDS. Evidently, there is a need 
for a way to achieve a theoretical back-catalogue without spending months or years on it, as 
it is proved by designers with comprehensive experience of behavioural design to have great 
==PAGE:59==
 47
When mapping behaviour all behavioural design consultancies (some implicitly, some 
explicitly) relies on behavioural insights derived from theory. Although there are many 
different behavioural theories applicable for behavioural design (just in this thesis 21 of 
them are explored) the behavioural design consultancies indirectly highlight the Theory of 
Heuristics and Biases (Tversky & Kahneman 1974) as the most important one (table 4.3 on 
the following page (48)). This indicates a level of tunnel vision in regards to behavioural design 
knowledge and theory inclusion for designers with a theoretical back-catalogue.  
In section 2.3 it was found that integrative thinking of different models of behaviour and 
theories of change leads to a more holistic understanding of the problem behaviour in 
question, and hence, to more effective interventions. Relying highly on the Theory of 
Heuristics and Biases (one of many behavioural theories) implies that the understanding of a 
multifaceted combination of behavioural theories is missing in behavioural design consultancies. 
However, the understanding does to some extent exist. Two of the four behavioural design 
Table 4.2
Interview result 1
influence on the direction of the project (i.e. the solution). This was confirmed by a designer 
from /KL.7, who stated that a tool that would secure at least a minimum of behavioural 
knowledge and thus push the designer in the correct direction, would be beneficial, as the 
behavioural design field is complex and requires expertise. 
Consultancy
Evidence
Delta - Idemolab
The Nudging Company
/KL.7
Decision Design
KRUKOW
“I have spent around 9 years with researchers within cognitive psychology 
and political science to try to say: Okay – which theories do they work with? 
and which do we as designers need?”
Founder of KRUKOW
“My dear big brother [the other founder of Decision Design]  is a behavioral 
economist so he has a huge theory apparatus. We also have a database 
where we have read the most [..]”
Founder of Decision Design
"It's not something that can be read anywhere, but it requires a back-cata-
logue, a knowledge of at least 10-20, maybe 30 most common biases [..] 
but, there is a back-catalogue with the most commonly used [biases]."
Designer from /KL.7
Result 1: All the interviewed employees in the behavioural design consultancies have 
obtained a theoretical back-catalogue through years of experience. 
“We have taken and benefited from 70 years of research on behaviour and 
stuffed many biases and heuristics types within several different categories, 
and then it's about going through them.” 
Behavioural economist from The Nudging Company
“All [the employees at The Nudging Company] have an understanding of 
these categories of biases, but I am the expert in them."
Behavioural economist from The Nudging Company
“There are not really any of us [employees at Idemolab] who has such a 
[theoretical background from psychology], other than what we have just 
read. So there is no one who has studied it [psychology] more in depth [..] 
We have some sociologists and the kind of people who know a lot about how 
human [..] Most often, they [the sociologists] will put a slightly higher level 
of a framework down on the problem to understand it [the problem] at a 
wider perspective.”
Designer from Delta - Idemolab
4.3.2 Result 2: Tunnel vision & unstructured theory 
inclusion process
==PAGE:60==
48
consultancies have combined different behavioural theories into a personalised process (i.a. 
design principles) to make the complex less complex. For instance, the founder of KRUKOW 
has formulated their own design principles, “We have such a scheme with our design principles 
[..] So I have made such principles and I have drawn from all sorts of places [..] So these [the 
design principles] are the ones you use when making system boards.”
Table 4.3
Interview result 2
Consultancy
Evidence
The Nudging Company
/KL.7
Decision Design
KRUKOW
“[..] we describe three types of barriers, and that is physical barriers, 
psychological barriers and social barriers [..] What we find here is: What 
barriers are we facing? Once they have been identified [..] then we go 
through visual views of the cognitive biases. So, we go through these and 
look at: Is it status quo bias we are up against? Is it unit bias? [..] What is at 
stake here? And, of course, here we draw on experience [..]”
Founder of KRUKOW
“[..] and then we try to go in every time and say, what are the biases or 
heuristics that might have an impact here? So it's very direct way to applying 
theoretical hypothesis in design.”
Founder of Decision Design
“We decide in the beginning with a project definition which heuristic and 
biases plays a role in this project.”
Designer from /KL.7
Result 2: All the interviewed employees in the behavioural design consultancies have some 
level of tunnel vision. 
“We have taken and benefited from 70 years of research on behaviour and 
stuffed many biases and heuristics types within several different categories 
[social proof, friction, salience, personality], and then it's about going 
through them.”
Behavioural economist from The Nudging Company
“All [the employees at The Nudging Company] have an understanding of 
these categories of biases, but I am the expert in them."
Behavioural economist from The Nudging Company
In contrast to behavioural design consultancies applying their personalised process, instead, a 
fairly unstructured ad-hoc process of behavioural theory inclusion is applied in the remaining 
behavioural design consultancies. Even for the design consultancies with a personalised and 
thoroughly contemplated process in place, the inclusion of behavioural theories can become 
unstructured. For instance, the founder of Decision Design emphasises that even though they 
have a database with behavioural theories, they still have to brush up on new theories, “We 
also have a database where we have read the most, but if we miss something, then we will try to 
research [..] Maybe we have to read new theories that we have not known before.” Likewise, a 
designer from /KL.7 explains that their theory inclusion process is random and unstructured: 
“[..] and sometimes it is kind of flavour of the month, if somebody just read a nice book. [..] No no 
no [answering if the theory inclusion process is structured], it is from the back-catalogue, but there 
are also some things we know work well from other projects. So there are definitely some things 
that go again.” Finally, the founder of KRUKOW states that even though they have made the 
complex less complex by developing their own design principles, it still occurs that they miss 
something and must return to theory, “Then it may occur that we gradually find out “okay, we 
really miss something here” [..] and then we always go back to the cognitive psychology and look 
“okay, out of these 450 biases - what can we have overlooked?” [..]”
This unstructured theory inclusion in behavioural design consultancies is due to differences in 
projects as well as due to the large complexity of behavioural theories and missing superiority 
or clear relevance, as stated by a designer from /KL.7, “We are rarely stuck due to a lack of 
==PAGE:61==
 49
Project staging in all the interviewed design consultancies is found to be a differentiating 
process, since project timelines, project contents and project participants’ backgrounds differ 
(i.e. behavioural economists, sociologists and designers) (see table 4.4 on the following page 
(50)). However, what all design consultancies have in common is that, in all behavioural design 
projects there is a distinctive need for communicating across different professions. 
For example, two behavioural design consultancies made it clear that they are not always 
involved in all phases of the behavioural design process, but merely part of separate phases 
(such as discover and define in the Double Diamond Model (section 2.5.1)). Moreover, not all 
employees are part of all phases in the behavioural design project. This indicates that several 
handovers, both internally and externally, occur in behavioural design and thus communication 
is an important part of the process. This seems to be a general feature of any kind of design 
project, but more complicated in behavioural design due to the field’s combination of several 
professions (e.g. sociologists, psychologists, economists and designers) and their very different 
professional languages. In The Nudging Company, a designer explains how she gets more 
involved in the beginning of the project to avoid misunderstandings, “[..] I get more involved 
in the beginning of the project and it suits me well, because for me, the design is also a lot about 
being informed of what is happening and sometimes the handovers may make it a bit unclear to 
me what I think is going on.” Communication through handovers in behavioural design projects 
is further stated by the behavioural economist from The Nudging Company, “Where much 
time is lost are by delivering to each other. We have phases where information must be moved. We 
have some insights to be made into hypotheses to be made to test. It takes insanely long time to 
deliver information. It is complex.”
4.3.3 Result 3: Staging & communication within 
behavioural design projects
theories, as there are so many theories you could include. It is more theory vs. time pressure, usually 
balancing of a lack of time compared to getting in depth.”
From making behavioural design less complex (either through combining specifically chosen 
theories into a personalised process or through an ad-hoc process), the theory selection has 
become inflexible and rigid, and to a certain degree, in all behavioural design consultancies, 
centered around the Theory of Heuristics and Biases (Tversky & Kahneman 1974). Hence, 
although the understanding of a multifaceted combination of behavioural theories does exist 
in the behavioural design consultancies, indications are that it is only used as a last resort, and 
not as the optimal point of origin for each behavioural design project.
This results in an implication of tunnel vision in regards to theory inclusion which in current 
behavioural design practice is difficult to overcome, due to huge amounts of behavioural 
theory to brush up upon and due to limited time to do so (considering all theories in depth 
is “mission impossible”). Yet, it is important to challenge this tunnel vision to encourage and 
enable more effective interventions and to realise supremacy among the behavioural theories, 
which would enable a more efficient process in all types of design consultancies.
==PAGE:62==
50
Additionally, due to different professions in the behavioural design project team, the 
employees lack ways of challenging each other’s possible theoretical blind spots, and further 
risk losing behavioural insights from one phase to another, if these handovers have not been 
thoroughly considered or planned for. Consequently, communication is an important aspect 
that impacts all phases of a behavioural design project, yet to some extent traditional project 
management tools can address it. However, as it has impact on the progress of behavioural 
design projects, it is essential to consider the consequences of both project staging and 
project communication in any support tool to be developed for behavioural design purposes. 
Table 4.4
Interview result 3
Consultancy
Evidence
The Nudging Company
/KL.7
Decision Design
KRUKOW
“We are a part of the whole behavioural design process.”
Founder of KRUKOW
“It is always the composition of a behavioural economist and behavioural 
designer. Then there may be more economists depending on how much 
data is to be processed. [..] Always these two roles and then a project 
manager [..]”
Founder of KRUKOW
“Often we are only hired into different stages of a behaviour design process, 
often the first part.”
Founder of Decision Design
“It is very different [..] It also depends on the time horizon [..] maybe we 
need 5 people to do the task. If we have one year for the same work, we can 
finish with only 2 people. It is very different. [..] sometimes we hire 
anthropologist, sociologist, etc.”
Founder of Decision Design
“In fact, we are probably best when we do the analysis, and do the concepts 
and when they [the concepts] are to be cast in bronze and such things, then 
we will pull back. As long as we are allowed to decide how the concepts 
should look. [..] Yes [answer for that they are included until prototype level] 
[..] Then we have someone externally to shape the concepts and then we 
will take over at the measurement again.”
Designer from /KL.7
“[..] we tend to be 2-3 pr. project [..] So what we want is a classic project 
manager type, an engineering type and then we also often have one that can 
do something with data and statistics.”
Designer from /KL.7
Result 3: Project staging differs in all design consultancies and they all experience a 
communication need across different professions.
“Yes, roughly speaking [answer to that the projects always run from problem 
definition to prototype and testing]. It has been structured like this for the 
last period of time [..]. However, sometimes the clients have their own 
testing systems that they want to use.”
Designer from The Nudging Company
“If the project is below 200,000 DKK then we should preferably only be two 
[..] but if we move over 300,000 DKK we are three to four persons on the 
project.”
Behavioural economist from The Nudging Company
“Yes, it may be [answer to that they are often a behavior economist and 
designer per project], but it depends on what is needed.”
Designer from The Nudging Company
“[..] but in the team [the company] there is a designer, an economist, an 
ethnologist, a sociologist and a rhetoric.”
Behavioural economist from The Nudging Company
Delta - Idemolab
“[..] but otherwise it's the early part of the product development phase that 
we are part of [..] in the production of the products, there are some others 
involved, but we will often join and have a role due to the studies we have 
made along the way.” 
Designer from Delta - Idemolab
“Often there are different employees in the projects mostly 2-3 employees 
pr. project.”
Designer from Delta - Idemolab
==PAGE:63==
 51
Three behavioural design consultancies highlighted practical implications in regards to testing 
designed interventions as very challenging in behavioural design (see table 4.5), due to the 
fact that factors such as ethics, physical layout, or surroundings are difficult to foresee when 
designing in a closed environment. This is for instance expressed by the founder of KRUKOW, 
“If you are in an academic world and test things in a closed environment then you have no clue 
about how and if it would work in real life settings.”
Unforeseeable practical implications impact the BDS in many ways, as it may contribute to 
a change of the intervention and thus change the results (due to being unable to measure 
the desired behaviour change (further elaborated in section 4.3.5)). However, this practical 
implication lies after the solution element in the BDS, and is therefore not within the 
scope of the research framework. Yet, strong emphasis is given to the aspect of how to 
convert theoretical insights to practical design, as this ideally should minimise the impact 
of unforeseeable practical implications. The challenges of converting theoretical insights to 
practical work is further emphasized by the founder of KRUKOW, “Everyone wants to perform 
behavioural design and include theories but there are so few descriptions on how exactly to do so, 
and how you convert it to changes in the real world.”
When asked, all design consultancies admit taking part in different kinds of evaluation activities 
(see table 4.6 on the following page (52)). Furthermore, all design consultancies determine 
project success, through either a measurable behaviour change or through satisfied clients, 
indicating that some level of post-project evaluation occurs in all design consultancies. 
This indicates that evaluation is a part of current behavioural design practice, yet it happens 
unstructured and often implicitly. Furthermore, although several design consultancies 
evidently see the value in evaluation, they struggle in seeing the benefits of evaluating their 
Table 4.5
Interview result 4
4.3.4 Result 4: Testing solutions & translating insights
Consultancy
Evidence
The Nudging Company
Decision Design
KRUKOW
“There are so many practical things when you get out in the real world, so 
that not all good solutions actually work. This contributes to that you often 
end up with a low-practice solution.”
Founder of KRUKOW
“To establish hypotheses and then figuring out that they do not have the 
effect as you thought. That is challenging in itself and also figuring out why.”
Founder of Decision Design
Result 4: Practical implications are challenging in behavioural design.
“Practical challenges contributes to that the focus might change, but it is 
rare that there is a need for more theoretical insight it is more the translation 
of insights and barriers that can be challenging.”
Behavioural economist from The Nudging Company
“When getting stuck in the process it is rarely because of lack of knowledge, 
but practical challenges. We always stick to our premise.”
Designer from The Nudging Company
4.3.5 Result 5: Project evaluation & project success 
==PAGE:64==
52
The five results from the previous sections (4.3.1 - 4.3.5) were not the only findings from the 
interviews, yet they have been given supremacy in this thesis, as they were the ones found 
to be most relevant in the task of investigating the practical implications of the research 
framework and gather new valuable insights. Consequently, among these five results another 
level of relevance exists. In order to visualise this relevance, a User Needs Journey (with 
inspiration from a customer decision journey (Court et al. 2009)) have been made (see figure 4.1 
on the following page (53)) illustrating a designer’s challenges, and hence needs, in a behavioural 
design project. What this User Needs Journey shows is that are five different clusters of needs 
each relating to the results mentioned above: a theoretical back-catalogue need, a challenging 
tunnel vision need, a handover need, a testing need and finally an evaluation need. 
4.3.6 User needs journey
theory inclusion. Both types of design consultancies, those with a personalised theory including 
approach and those with an ad-hoc theory-including approach, could benefit from evaluation, 
as it would allow them to learn from experience and challenge their own perception of what 
a good behavioural design project is and how behavioural theories affect these projects.
Consultancy
Evidence
The Nudging Company
/KL.7
Decision Design
KRUKOW
“For us, the only thing that determines whether we have succeeded or not is 
whether we have created measurable effect.”
Founder of KRUKOW
“In measurable projects we measure how much behaviour change we have 
achieved, where 4% is poor and for example 60% would be very good. In 
non-measurable projects we look at the client’s reaction. Is the client 
satisfied?”
Founder of Decision Design
“We evaluate after all projects.”
Designer from /KL.7
“Yes, yes [answer if they define success as measurable behavioural change] 
[..] There is a professional pride and then there is a more commercial 
success factor and it is if the clients have experienced that it has been a 
successful project [ ..] we also try to measure on them [KPI's] [..] and such a 
thing is a huge success for us, that is, we teach people an internal language 
for their target audience, their customers, citizens, patients [..] And that's 
because then they will come back to us again.”
Designer from /KL.7
“We always evaluate, but more explicit than implicit whose theory is 
evaluated against the method that was used.”
Behavioural economist from The Nudging Company
“External project success is about measurable behavioural change, but not 
always the success criterias are measurable because thousands things can 
go wrong through the process. It can also be about product satisfaction, nice 
cooperation with us eg. kind employees. [..]  Intern project success is more 
about if there were good handovers of information in the team.”
Behavioural economist from The Nudging Company
Delta - Idemolab
“Evaluation is not systematic but is done internally. There are some sessions 
in relation to the methodology, approach, cases etc.”
Designer from Delta - Idemolab
“Most often, it would be that the clients pay their bill and are happy and 
coming back. The clients are often happy when they have been progressed 
further and are closer to a product that can solve the problem they face.”
Designer from Delta - Idemolab
Result 5:  All interviewed employees in the design consultancies take part in different 
evaluation activities.
Table 4.6
Interview result 5
==PAGE:65==
 53
Project start
Analysis
Ideation
/Concept Development
Solution Developement
Testing
Finalising Solution
Project Finish
Evaluation
need for a 
theoretical 
back-catalogue
and problem 
understanding
need for handover 
(between e.g. behavioural 
economist and designer)
need for handover 
(between e.g. designer and 
behavioural analyst)
need 
practical 
fit
need for 
handover 
(between 
e.g. 
analyst 
and 
designer)
need for evaluation 
stucture
need for challenging 
tunnel vision and 
structuring theory 
inclusion
1 2
3
3
3
4
5
Figure 4.1
User Needs 
Journey
Combining this user needs journey with the findings and discussion points mentioned in 
sections 4.3.1-4.3.5, the following can be concluded:
• 
Within the scope of the research framework there are limited possibilities of addressing the 
testing need, as it relates more to practical implications than theoretical implications. The need 
will therefore not be addressed as the main focus of the support tool, yet the attempt of 
translating behavioural insights into practical design opportunities should be addressed.
• 
A support tool focused on evaluating different aspects within a behavioural design 
project could be beneficial. Yet, it has not been stressed as urgent by any of the 
interviewed design consultancies and it will thus be difficult for design consultancies 
to be convinced by or see the benefits of adapting such a tool. However, as evaluation 
activities offer great benefits regarding the research framework it can be addressed in the 
support tool development, but not as the main focus.
• 
Although the handover need occurs three times in the User Needs Journey and has 
a big impact on the behavioural design process, the need is really about communication. 
This can be addressed with traditional project management tools (i.e. not theory driven 
tools) such as the IT-communication tool Asana (Asana 2008). Moreover, only one design 
==PAGE:66==
54
consultancy highlighted communication as challenging. Finally, the theoretical back-catalogue 
need has a greater impact on the design consultancies’ project successes, as a good problem 
understanding (i.e. insights) is needed before needing to communicating obtained insights. 
• 
The two major identified needs both circle around the analysis phase of a behavioural design 
project. While the need for a theoretical back-catalogue relates to designers with limited 
experience of behavioural design, the need for challenging tunnel vision relates to designers 
with comprehensive experience of behavioural design. Therefore, to create a support tool 
that will add value to all kinds of designers involved with behavioural design (both behavioural 
design consultancies and engineering design consultancies), it would be valuable to address 
both needs in one support tool that will:
• 
Provide designers with limited experience of behavioural design simple ways of 
obtaining behavioural design knowledge with respect to integrative thinking of theory 
inclusion and thus enable better possibilities of easily designing successful interventions.
• 
Challenge designers’ with comprehensive experience of behavioural design tunnel 
vision in regards to theory inclusion, through structured ways of applying integrative 
thinking and thus opening up for new possibly valuable theory perspectives.
The aim of these five interviews was to investigate current behavioural design practice and 
from this, with respect to the research framework, determine where a support tool would 
have the biggest impact for designers. Consequently, the following key findings were derived:
• From investigating current practice it was highlighted that behavioural design 
concerns many different professions besides the designer, and hence, while 
focused on the designer, the upcoming support tool must be applicable for these 
other professions as well. As a result, every time the phrase “designer” is mentioned 
in the remaining parts of the thesis, it considers these other professions as well. 
• From the interviews five different needs stood out as being possible areas in 
which value could be added to current behavioural design practice. Yet, the needs 
concerned with front-end activities (such as problem analysis) were highlighted as 
most influential, and thus chosen as the core focus of the support tool. Additionally, 
each of the two chosen needs (theoretical back-catalogue need and challenging 
tunnel vision need) ideally addresses designers with both limited and comprehensive 
experience of behavioural design. Yet, in order to develop a support tool with the 
biggest possible reach, a combination of the two needs has been chosen. This is 
possible as both needs represent parts of the same phases and thus the features 
of the needs would complement each other well.
As the support tool focus has been formulated through a combination of two needs, valuable 
aspects of the other identified needs will be considered in the further development, without 
trying to solve all needs and thus loosing focus and limiting the usability of the support tool.
4.4 
Conclusion 
& 
key 
findings 
of 
Investigation of Current Practice
==PAGE:67==
 55
Chapter 5
Support Tool 
Development
==PAGE:68==
56
5.1 Introduction to Support Tool Development 
This chapter presents the support tool development stage of this thesis. The aim of the 
development is to create the most meaningful analysis support tool intended to have great 
impact for designers within the behavioural design field.
Section 5.2 (the first phase of the support tool development) deals with Value Proposition 
Design (Osterwalder et al. 2015) applied as means for identification of the designer’s needs 
for usability and practical application most essential to incorporate in the support tool design. 
Section 5.3 sets out the Specification Requirements that the support tool must address to add 
value for the designer. Finally, section 5.4 (the second phase of the support tool development) 
presents the ideation and conceptualisation phase followed by section 5.5 (the third phase of 
the support tool development) that presents the detailing and iterations leading to the final 
concept of the support tool.
The support tool development process (figure 5.1) has followed general design practice 
with the application of different general design methods and models (mentioned when 
applied). Throughout the entire support tool development stage, workshops have been 
performed, ensuring continuous involvement of the user (designer) to constantly develop a 
user orientated solution and obtain a common understanding of what is important. 
Value proposition design
Workshops 1 & 2
Ideation &
Conceptualisation
Workshops 3 & 4
Detailing & 
Development
Workshops
5-13
Final
tool
1st phase of 
the support 
tool 
deveopment
2nd phase of the 
support tool 
deveopment
3rd phase of the 
support tool 
deveopment
Figure 5.1
The support tool 
development 
process
==PAGE:69==
 57
Provides 
clear list of 
steps to do
“A shared 
language”
Get inside 
peoples 
minds
Presents 
valid/
distinctive 
overview
Leads to the 
better
solution
Applicable 
across 
projects and 
companies
Creates 
“experience”
Helps with 
picking the 
better focus
Help with 
selecting 
theories
Get from 
qualitative to 
quantitative 
data
Simple 
explanation 
of theories/
methods
Better client 
interaction
Confidence
Help me 
when I am 
stuck
Ensure 
objective 
data
Helps better 
cooperation
Validation 
of the focus
Clear 
indicators to 
measure 
progress
Shows 
typical 
users
Check the 
market 
perspective
Check for 
relevant 
theories/ 
methods
Map 
stakeholders
Realise 
relevant 
stakeholders
Testing 
concept/
product
Cooperate 
and coordi-
nate with 
colleagues
Understand 
and discover 
problem 
behaviour
Ideate, 
generate and 
conceptual-
ise solutions
Analyse 
problem
Client 
involvement
Look at 
previous 
projects
Expand 
competences 
Apply theory 
to case
Obtain 
relevant 
theoretical 
insights
Check for 
analogies
No clear 
path or 
application 
for theory
Important 
process 
steps are 
missed
Theories 
show no 
superiority
Communicat-
ing different 
“languages”
Overcome 
own initial 
bias
Going from 
qualitative to 
quantitative 
data
Not able to 
get in touch 
with the right 
users
Repeating 
mistakes
Tend to reuse 
the same 
methods
Difficult to 
prioritise
/select the 
right solution
Bad 
cooperation
Lack of data 
on area
Missing 
theoretical 
insights
Lack of 
structured 
overview of 
theories
Lack of 
confidence
Lack of 
experience
Who will pay 
and how 
much?
Not able to 
establish 
test-sessions 
with users
Lack of 
money
Reluctant 
users
Important 
insights are 
lost during 
handovers
Lack of 
relevant 
knowledge 
base
New field = 
little 
knowledge
Enables 
diverse 
selection of 
theories
Create 
problem 
behaviour 
hypotheses
Enables 
better 
creation of 
hypotheses
Figure 5.2
Customer profile
According to the methodology of Value Proposition Design (Osterwalder et al. 2015), 
the first step is to create a Value Proposition Canvas (including customer jobs, pains, and 
gains, figure 5.2 and appendix 9) by describing the customer profile and value map of a given 
product/service, in this case the analysis support tool. By ranking and relating the different 
jobs, pains and gains with the initial support tool aims (found in section 4.3.6), the aspect of 
when will the tool features have effect for whom was shown. Visualising the pains showed 
where the designers are struggling, and hence where they would be willing to apply an 
analysis support tool to provide substantiated value. Although there were many findings from 
this activity, the ones highlighted were:
• The need for clear structure (steps) and validation of decisions.
• The need for more diverse behavioural theory selecting possibilities.
• The need for fast ways to obtain an overview of the behavioural theories within 
the behavioural design field.
5.2.1 Value Proposition Canvas
5.2 Value Proposition Design 
Through an investigation of current practice (chapter 4) different needs in regards to 
behavioural theories, challenges and project staging were identified followed by a determination 
of the support tool focus: An analysis tool. However, as the investigation focused on the 
practical reflections of theoretically derived findings (from the literature review, chapter 
2), identification of different design needs regarding usability and practical application was 
necessary. In order to identify such design needs, the methods applied in the first phase of 
the support tool development were Value Proposition Design (Osterwalder et al. 2015), 
as well as User Scenarios (Cross 2008). However, to challenge own thesis bias and ensure 
objectiveness and inputs, two workshops were performed to support the first phase of the 
support tool development (see appendix 8 for information and contributions). 
In the second step of the Value Proposition Canvas, the value map (figure 5.3 left on the 
following page (58) and appendix 10) was generated to determine the expected value of 
the features in the analysis support tool, in terms of fulfilling the different design needs such 
as usability, flow and group context. Matching the value map (figure 5.3 right on the following 
page (58), appendix 11) with the customer profile was quite valuable, as this was the first 
step towards an elaboration of the specific analysis support tool and its determination of 
==PAGE:70==
58
Following the above validation of the match between the problem (i.e. needs) and the 
solution (i.e. analysis support tool), the next step in the optimal scenario would be to validate 
the match of the product (i.e. analysis support tool) with the market (i.e. the designers) 
(Osterwalder et al. 2015). However, due to time limitations and unforeseeable aspects in 
the design consultancies (such as project progress), matching the analysis support tool with 
designers in real ongoing behavioural design projects was not possible. 
The method of User Scenarios (Cross 2008) was applied to validate the match between 
the analysis support tool and the designers, and to substitute market observations. Having 
identified characteristics and benefits of the analysis support tool from the Value Proposition 
Canvas, different scenarios relevant to the analysis support tool context were generated and 
tested (see figure 5.4 or appendix 12) and as such the market context was simulated.
5.2.2 User Scenarios
Doing so allowed for an investigation of the actions and needs of each scenario. Essential to 
this method was the visualisation of the advantages and disadvantages of the analysis support 
tool, as well as its feasibility and relevance (i.e. on what level does the tool address the 
identified research aim). Finally, to relate the findings from the user scenario method with the 
findings from value proposition design, a Value Proposition Statement (Osterwalder et al. 
2015, pp.82–83) was formulated to translate the meaning of the identified needs into clear 
value statements. In this way, the aspects that would create most value regarding the given 
scenarios were explicitly visualised. Thus, a combination of the current practice reflection of 
Figure 5.4
User scenarios 
applicable to an 
analysis support 
tool
Behavioural 
Design
Participatory 
Design
Design for 
Interaction
P
S
While working in a project you have 
a hard time figuring out whether 
behavioural design will be 
beneficial to apply or not.
You know that behavioural design 
could be beneficial in your project, 
but is in doubt as to how to get 
from problem to the better solution 
in the most efficient way.
You have read that theory based 
behavioural design gives the best 
solutions, but is overwhelmed by 
the huge amount of theory in the 
field.
You feel that you often repeat the 
same mistakes and feel that your 
competence learning curve is 
slowing down, due to the fact that 
you forget to evaluate.
Persuasive 
technology
How habits work
Self-
determination
Self-
regulation
Nudging
mistakes
competences
time
number
Provides 
clear list of 
steps to do
“A shared 
language”
Get inside 
peoples 
minds
Presents 
valid/
distinctive 
overview
Leads to the 
right 
solution
Applicable 
across 
projects and 
companies
Creates 
“experience”
Helps with 
picking the 
right focus
Help with 
selecting 
theories
Enables 
diverse 
selection of 
theories
Get from 
qualitative to 
quantitative 
data
Simple 
explanation 
of theories/
methods
Better client 
interaction
Confidence
Help me 
when I am 
stuck
Ensure 
objective 
data
Helps better 
cooperation
Validation 
of the focus
Clear 
indicators to 
measure 
progress
Shows 
typical 
users
Check the 
market 
perspective
Check for 
relevant 
theories/ 
methods
Map 
stakeholders
Realise 
relevant 
stakeholders
Testing 
concept/
product
Cooperate 
and coordi-
nate with 
colleagues
Understand 
and discover 
problem 
behaviour
Ideate, 
generate and 
conceptual-
ise solutions
Analyse 
problem
Client 
involvement
Look at 
previous 
projects
Expand 
competences 
Apply theory 
to case
Obtain 
relevant 
theoretical 
insights
Check for 
analogies
No clear 
path or 
application 
for theory
Important 
process 
steps are 
missed
Theories 
show no 
superiority
Communicat-
ing different 
“languages”
Overcome 
own initial 
bias
Going from 
qualitative to 
quantitative 
data
Not able to 
get in touch 
with the right 
users
Repeating 
mistakes
Tend to reuse 
the same 
methods
Difficult to 
prioritise
/select the 
right solution
Bad 
cooperation
Lack of data 
on area
Missing 
theoretical 
insights
Lack of 
structured 
overview of 
theories
Lack of 
confidence
Lack of 
experience
Who will pay 
and how 
much?
Not able to 
establish 
test-sessions 
with users
Lack of 
money
Reluctant 
users
Important 
insights are 
lost during 
handovers
Lack of 
relevant 
knowledge 
base
New field = 
little 
knowledge
Create 
problem 
behaviour 
hypotheses
Enables 
better 
creation of 
hypotheses
Short, clear and 
useful content
Ensures that the 
designer expand 
his/her’s behavioural 
design  competences 
from project to project 
(“learning from 
experience”) 
Minimise the risk 
of tunnel vision 
and repeating 
mistakes 
Minimise the risk of 
overlooking/
missing relevant 
behavioural design  
theories
Minimise the risk 
of insecurity in 
regards to theory 
inclusion
Practical hands-on 
tool that is easy to 
use and 
understand
Behavioural 
Design 
Situation
Interactive tool 
for analysing 
problem 
behaviour 
Primary: 
Front-end 
behavioural design 
analytical support 
tool
Secondary: 
Post-project 
behavioural design 
evaluation tool
Helps to translate 
behavioural 
insights into design 
activities 
Considers a 
broad context of 
behaviours
Helps to analyse 
all problem 
layers 
Clear step-by-step 
guidance of front-end 
and post-project 
evaluation activities  
Updatable and 
customisable
Well-argued 
front-end decision 
making process
Common 
language for 
evaluation in a 
group context
Possible to 
integrate in other 
front-end or 
post-project 
design activities
Gives overview of 
available theories 
and their application 
(knowledge)
Provides 
clear list of 
steps to do
“A shared 
language”
Get inside 
peoples 
minds
Presents 
valid/
distinctive 
overview
Leads to the 
better
solution
Applicable 
across 
projects and 
companies
Creates 
“experience”
Helps with 
picking the 
better focus
Help with 
selecting 
theories
Get from 
qualitative to 
quantitative 
data
Simple 
explanation 
of theories/
methods
Better client 
interaction
Confidence
Help me 
when I am 
stuck
Ensure 
objective 
data
Helps better 
reflection
Validation 
of the focus
Clear 
indicators to 
measure 
progress
Shows 
typical 
users
Check the 
market 
perspective
Check for 
relevant 
theories/ 
methods
Map 
stakeholders
Realise 
relevant 
stakeholders
Testing 
concept/
product
Cooperate 
and coordi-
nate with 
colleagues
Understand 
and discover 
problem 
behaviour
Ideate, 
generate and 
conceptual-
ise solutions
Analyse 
problem
Client 
involvement
Look at 
previous 
projects
Expand 
competences 
Apply theory 
to case
Obtain 
relevant 
theoretical 
insights
Create 
problem 
behaviour 
hypotheses
Check for 
analogies
No clear 
path or 
application 
for theory
Important 
process 
steps are 
missed
Theories 
show no 
superiority
Communicat-
ing different 
“languages”
Overcome 
own initial 
bias
Going from 
qualitative to 
quantitative 
data
Not able to 
get in touch 
with the right 
users
Repeating 
mistakes
Tend to reuse 
the same 
methods
Difficult to 
prioritise
/select the 
right solution
Bad 
cooperation
Lack of data 
on area
Missing 
theoretical 
insights
Lack of 
structured 
overview of 
theories
Lack of 
confidence
Lack of 
experience
Who will pay 
and how 
much?
Not able to 
establish 
test-sessions 
with users
Lack of 
money
Reluctant 
users
Important 
insights are 
lost during 
handovers
Lack of 
relevant 
knowledge 
base
New field = 
little 
knowledge
Enables 
diverse 
selection of 
theories
Enables 
better 
creation of 
hypotheses
Short, clear and 
useful content
Minimise the risk 
of tunnel vision 
and repeating 
mistakes 
Minimise the risk 
of insecurity in 
regards to theory 
inclusion
Practical hands-on 
tool that is easy to 
use and 
understand
Behavioural 
Design 
Situation
Interactive tool for 
analysing 
problem behaviour 
Helps to translate 
behavioural 
insights into design 
activities 
Considers a 
broad context of 
behaviours
Helps to analyse 
all problem 
layers 
Clear step-by-step 
guidance of front-end 
and post-project 
evaluation activities  
Updatable and 
customisable
Well-argued 
front-end decision 
making process
Common 
language for 
evaluation in a 
group context
Possible to 
integrate in other 
front-end or 
post-project 
design activities
Gives overview of 
available theories 
and their application 
(knowledge)
Ensures that the 
designer expand 
his/her’s behavioural 
design  competences 
from project to project 
(“learning from 
experience”) 
Minimise the risk of 
overlooking/
missing relevant 
behavioural design  
theories
Primary: 
Front-end 
behavioural design 
analytical support 
tool
Secondary: 
Post-project 
behavioural design 
evaluation tool
Figure 5.3
Value map and 
match with 
customer profile
requirements. Interesting findings from this activity were:
• The features must be updatable and customisable (the “fluffier” the better).
• The features must translate theoretical insights from behavioural theories into 
further behavioural design activities.
• The features must be intuitive and easy-to-use.
==PAGE:71==
 59
theoretically derived findings from section 4.3 and the more design-oriented findings from 
section 5.2.1-5.2.2 resulted in the following value proposition statement for the analysis 
support tool:
“An easy understandable step-by-step analysis support tool that helps designers with 
comprehensive experience of behavioural design challenge their tunnel vision in regards 
to theory inclusion, and helps designers with limited experience of behavioural design with 
validating their decision-making processes, by providing structured ways of doing 
problem analysis and by providing an overview of available theoretical behavioural 
perspectives”.
As the value proposition statement has a rather simple composition, four additional value 
points (found through the user scenarios) were added to enhance an extra level of detail to 
the above statement:  
1. Clear means for documentation.
2. A continuously updated overview of behavioural theories with examples.
3. Checklists (e.g. to see if the problem concerns behavioural design).
4. Continuous evaluation that provides insights of previous behavioural design projects.
As evaluation could add to the feeling of ownership of the analysis support tool among the 
designers, the evaluation part of the process was integrated in the tool focus as well.  As 
the aspect of evaluation could add more structured ways for designers of learning from 
experience, and thus minimising the risk of repeating mistakes. Moreover, if the analysis 
support tool helps the designers recognize where their practice could be optimized, then the 
motivation to use it for next behavioural design project is much higher. Yet, evaluation was 
still regarded as a secondary focus of the analysis support tool, and in the case of non-
strengthening manifestation it can be eliminated from the analysis support tool.
To visualise the impact of the analysis support tool, the following figure 5.5 shows how the 
application of the tool is expected to change current work practice of designers with both 
limited or comprehensive experience of behavioural design (see appendix 13).
Designers with comprehensive experience of behavioural design 
problem
   analyse 
problem
        ad-hoc           
    theory 
choice
idea gen.
solution
testing
handover
  ad-hoc 
evaluation
problem
   analyse 
problem
theory?
idea gen.
solution
testing
handover
       learning    
     from
 evaluation?
    does not 
work?
xth solution
loads of iterations 
(guess-work)
validated iterations
evolving problem understanding 
through iterations
problem
   analyse 
problem
theory 
overview 
  reflected 
focus
testing
handover
   structured 
evaluation
idea gen.
solution
Designers with limited experience of behavioural design
Designers using the Analysis Support Tool
   midway 
check-up
create 
problem 
hypotheses
create 
problem 
hypotheses
create 
problem 
hypotheses
Issues of current 
practice steps
Analysis support 
tool impact steps
Current practice 
steps
Figure 5.5 
Analysis support 
tool impact on 
current behavioural 
design work 
practice
==PAGE:72==
60
5.3 Tool requirements specification
Based on the findings from the Investigation of Current Practice (chapter 4) and value 
proposition design (section 5.2) the following Requirements Specification (Cross 2008) 
was formulated (see table 5.1) to determine the course of the upcoming conceptualisation 
as well as to provide guidelines for measuring solution quality of the analysis support tool.
Table 5.1
Requirements 
Specification
5.4 Ideation & conceptualisation
Having identified different tool requirements, the next logic step of ideation and 
conceptualisation enabled going from random ideation sessions to determining a basic concept 
of the analysis support tool. For this, several methods such as analogies, open brainstorm, 
morphology chart (Cross 2008) was applied. Yet in order to receive inspiration and inputs 
regarding tool layout and interface, two workshops were performed to support the second 
phase of the support tool development (see appendix 15 for information and contributions). 
Topic
Requirements
Success Criteria
Unit
Comments
Purpose
The primary purpose of the 
tool is to be a step-by-step 
front-end analytical tool.
The aim of the tool is to help 
designers analyse all 
problem layers and make 
well-argued front-end 
decision-making processes. 
No. of 
applications 
in different 
behavioural 
design 
project 
phases
Must provide guidance for the 
task of completing a 
problem analysis and 
connecting problem aspects 
to the relevant behavioural 
theories and the further 
design work of a behavioural 
design project.
The tool should always refer 
to the behavioural design 
elements of problem 
behaviour, models of 
behaviour and theories of 
change, while at the same 
time consider the element of 
design approaches.
No. of 
elements
The BDS relates to both 
problem, models of 
behaviour, theories of change 
and design approaches, and 
therefore it is important that 
the tool provides guidance for 
all four aspects.
Must enable integrative 
thinking by applying 
behavioural theories from all 
categories.
Each problem analysis should 
refer to at least one theory 
from all three categories 
(individual, social and 
change theories).
No. of 
categories
Must provide the designer with 
a structured overview of 
available behavioural 
theories related to a range of 
problems, in order to check for 
relevant behavioural theories 
and obtain theoretical insights 
applicable for the further 
behavioural design process.
The tool must refer to a range 
of relevant behavioural 
design topics and a 
representative number of 
behavioural theories both 
models of behaviour and 
theories of change.
No. of 
behavioural 
design 
topics
No. of 
behavioural 
design
theories
Designers without a 
theoretical back-catalogue of 
behavioural theories need to 
acquire an initial under-
standing of behavioural 
theories, in order to increase 
the possibility of developing 
successful behavioural 
interventions.
In order to make a valid 
front-end decision in regards to 
behavioural design theory 
inclusion, the tool needs to 
ensure that the designer has 
considered or touched upon all 
elements of the BDS. Doing so 
will minimise the risk of tunnel 
vision and repeating mistakes, 
as well as minimise the risk of 
overlooking relevant 
behavioural design theories.
The following categories also included in the requirements are Physical Appearance, Application 
time, Accessibility, User, Context, and Maintenance (the full requirements specification can be 
found in appendix 14).
==PAGE:73==
 61
1. 
Problem Analysis
An analytical step, 
providing structured 
ways of viewing 
problem behaviours 
and parameters 
influencing 
behaviour (i.e. 
problem layers)
2. 
Behaviour Analysis
An overview step, in 
which a connection 
from the problem 
analysis step is 
visualised together 
with a simple way of 
overviewing different 
relevant behavioural 
theories
3. 
Validation
A validation step for 
determining project 
direction, before 
moving on from the 
problem and 
behaviour analysis 
tasks
4. 
Translation of 
theoretical insights
A step of translating 
insights retrieved 
from the behaviour 
analysis into 
recognisable design 
parameters
5. 
Evaluation
An evaluation step, 
for confirming the 
project approach 
and to learn from 
experience
Table 5.2
Overall content 
steps of the 
analysis support 
tool
It can appear a bit narrow to limit the ideation and conceptualisation to relate to these five 
steps only, however as the analysis support tool has a lot of different aims, this structure was 
preferred to ensure that all value-creating steps were considered.
5.4.2 Ideation
As ideation is a mixture of creative activities aimed at generating and communicating ideas, five 
different brainstorm activities took place to generate ideas in modes with an open solution 
space as well as a closed solution space. Although different ways of brainstorming were 
applied, each approach and its results (i.e. ideas) will not be explained in detail, merely 
presented to understand their connection and the combination of activities. 
The five different activities were: devising Analogies (about e.g. games, plays and ways to 
create overview) (Cross 2008), an Open Brainstorm (Cross 2008), a Guided Brainstorm 
(within the five content step), a Clustering of Ideas and as a prolonging another Guided 
Brainstorm (within each cluster to brainstorm for “missing” ideas). This combination of 
brainstorming activities was made to include unstructured ways of generating valuable ideas 
as well to fully explore the solution space parallel to the content steps determined to provide 
structure for the ideation activities. As an example Analogies and the Open Brainstorm was 
conducted to ensure immediate openness in regards to feature possibilities and to retrieve 
inspiration from other existing solutions to the same challenges. It worked well, as many ideas 
were generated, yet the approach also made it difficult to pinpoint specific tool functions and 
values. Therefore structured ways of brainstorming were needed as well. As an example, the 
Clustering of Ideas was applied as a brainstorming activity, due to the fact that the Guided 
Brainstorm began to show different correlations of idea clusters, hereunder maps, cards, 
5.4.1 Definition of analysis support tool steps
In order to create a strong concept for the analysis support tool and provide more structure 
for the ideation and conceptualisation, five overall tool content steps were clarified. They 
were based on the findings from the Literature Review (chapter 2), Investigation of Current 
Practice (chapter 4) and the design needs identification (section 5.2). In this way strong 
correlation between literature, current practice and design needs was ensured and translated 
into relatable ideation clusters. The five content steps of the analysis support tool were: 
==PAGE:74==
62
checklists, digital ideas, and games. Doing so allowed for another order of ideas and visualised 
different blind-spots in the idea generation. This was a closed approach for brainstorming, yet 
it allowed for more detail and therefore worked very well in this context.
All in all, this combination of brainstorming activities resulted in numerous specific and 
unspecific ideas applicable in the further activities in conceptualisation. 
5.4.3 Conceptualisation
The aim of this part of the support tool development was to transform the generated ideas 
into different concepts that would provide value for the designer in the analysis phase of a 
BDS. Therefore, based on the overall analysis support tool content steps (problem analysis, 
behaviour analysis, validation, translation of theoretical insights, and evaluation) and the clustering 
of ideas (maps, cards, checklists, digital ideas, and games) a Morphology Chart (Cross 2008) 
was conducted (figure 5.6). 
This resulted in 13 different concepts (most simple, most complex, designer with limited 
experience of behavioural design, designer with comprehensive experience of behavioural design, 
all game, all digital, all checklist, all maps, all cards, Beatrice’ favourite, Nanna’s favourite, fastest, 
and slowest). Especially combining ideas into the concepts for the designers with limited or 
comprehensive experience of behavioural design was valuable, as it provided a clear picture 
of what elements the concept should contain to satisfy both. For instance, the designer with 
comprehensive experience of behavioural design needed more detailed elements in the 
concept such as maps, whereas the designer with limited experience of behavioural design 
needed more checklists and guides. By comparing the 13 concepts, similarities and differences 
were highlighted and since some of the concepts had more in common than others, different 
combinations were made, reducing 13 concepts to eight concepts. From the similarities and 
differences, these eight concepts were placed within three categories: Output specific, content 
specific and context specific (application) (see table 5.3 on the following page (63)). 
Figure 5.6 
Morphology Chart
1. 
Problem Analysis
2.  
Behaviour Analysis
3.  
Validation
4.  
Translation of 
Theoretical Insights
5. 
Evaluation
Cards
Maps
Checklists
Digital
Games
1. Most simple
2. Most complex
3. Ex. behavioural designer
4. Inex. behavioural designer
5. All games
6. All digital
7. All checklists
8. All maps
9. All cards
10. Beatrice’s favourite
11. Nannas favourite
12. Fastest
13. Slowest
==PAGE:75==
 63
Category 1: 
Context specific
Category 2: 
Content specific
Category 3: 
Output specific
This cluster contains 
concepts specific to 
context, e.i. time frame 
and situation of 
application
Concept 1: 
Maximum Thoroughness 
Concept 2: 
Maximum Simplicity
This cluster contains 
concepts specific to 
content, e.i. only cards, 
only digital features and 
only checklists
Concept 4: 
All Cards
Concept 5: 
All Games
Concept 6:
All Checklists 
This cluster contains 
concepts specific to 
output, e.i. documentation, 
validation and reflection
Concept 4: 
Maximum Documentation
Concept 5: 
Maximum Validation
Concept 6:
Maximum Reflection
Table 5.3
Concept categories
In order to gain an overview, the eight concepts were visualised as the following: 
Category 1: Context specific concepts
Figure 5.7 
Context specific 
concepts
Concept 1: Maximum Thoroughness aims to provide the designer with a thorough problem 
behaviour analysis, where questionnaires are used to select most relevant behavioural theories 
to the given project and ensure that the designer fully understands these theories.
Concept 2: Maximum Simplicity is a quick and dirty concept that requires little effort. The 
concept contains simple elements, i.e. cards, a table, a decision tree and a checklist and is 
finished with a dialogue to evaluate.
These two concepts (figure 5.7) focus on time span and user involvement.
Category 2: Content specific concepts
These three concepts (figure 5.8 on the following page (64)) focus on functionality, i.e. the 
same type of means is applied in all steps.
Digital questionnaire 
leading to relevant 
theories
Wheel of theories showing 
relations and domains
Digital questionnaire 
relating the relation and 
content of theories
“Hang your ideas to dry”
– under theory relevant 
clusters
Evaluation booklet
Concept 1: Maximum thoroughness
Concept 2: Maximum simplicity
Problem example cards 
relating to different 
problem layers
Reference table of 
behavioural theories and 
their relating problems
Validating decision tree 
leading to a “5 why’s” task
Checklist to ensure 
translation of behavioural 
theories into the ideation
A structured fuck-up 
session, to share mistakes 
and wrong choices
==PAGE:76==
64
Figure 5.8 
Content specific 
concepts
Concept 3: All Cards use different card sets to facilitate the different steps in the analysis support 
tool. Evaluation is also performed through cards with defined questions to ask in the behavioural 
design project team.
Concept 4: All Digital performs each step through digital media such as computers and iPad’s and 
hence this concept relates mainly to individual use.
Concept 5: All Games aims at making the problem analysis a funny and interesting part of the BDS 
by incorporating game elements in all tool steps.
Category 3: Output specific concepts
Figure 5.9 
Output specific 
concepts
These three concepts (figure 5.9) focus on the output of the tool during, and after, usage. 
Roll the dice and relate 
your problem to your given 
problem layer card
Behavioural theory cards, 
with sets relating to the 
different theory clusters
Project board, to keep 
track and show missing 
areas to touch upon
Association cards (force 
yourself to associate X 
with B)
Question cards relating to 
different aspects of the 
project
Concept 3: All cards
Concept 4: All digital
Digital network with differ-
ent layers of problems and 
their relations
Digital network of 
behavioural theories and 
their relations
A chain of actions of the 
decisions relating to 
problems and theory 
Digital association 
brainstorm
Evaluation configurator, 
showing the results on an 
info screen
Concept 5: All games
Roll the dice and force 
yourself to relate your 
problem to a certain layer
Theory wheel of sections 
of clusters (relating to 
different theories)
Decision-making pitch, 
with 5 min to explain the 
choices and problem
Responsibility delegation  
to ensure consideration in 
the design
A structured fuck-up 
session, to share mistakes 
and wrong choices
Problem mapping with 
stars reflecting the biggest 
impact paramaters
Behaviour ranking of the 
previous parameters 
providing relevant theories
Validation spiderweb, 
including “5 why’s”
Initial brainstorm with 
semi-fixed mindmap
Question cards relating to 
different aspects of the 
project
Concept 6: Maximum documentation
Concept 7: Maximum validation
Problem mapping with a 
tool box ensuring good 
considerations
Problem checklist leading 
to different clusters of 
theory cards
Evaluation checklist on a 
visual wood board to hang 
in the office
Concept 8: Maximum reflection
Problem sliders ensuring 
reflection over relevance 
of problem layers
Behaviour ranking of the 
previous parameters 
leading to theory cards
Evaluation decision tree 
ensuring reflection of the 
project
Association cards (force 
yourself to associate X 
with B)
Validating decision tree 
leading to a “5 why’s” task
Validating decision tree 
leading to a “5 why’s” task
Checklist to ensure 
translation of behavioural 
theories into the ideation
==PAGE:77==
 65
Concept 6:  Maximum Documentation consists of problem behaviour mapping and ranking, followed 
by a spider-web to be filled out to ensure documentation of progress and decisions made and if 
relevant, can be returned to.
Concept 7: Maximum Validation consists of problem behaviour mapping followed by three checklists 
and a decision tree in order to ensure validation before moving on to each step.
Concept 8: Maximum Reflection aims at involving the designer through behaviour ranking, association 
cards etc. to obtain more knowledge and insights regarding behavioural theories after usage of the 
analysis support tool.
As the next step of the conceptualisation phase was to reduce eight concepts to one 
basic concept of the analysis support tool, a Weighted Objective Method (Cross 2008) 
combined with an Evaluation Matrix (Dalhousie University 2012) was used in order to 
evaluate the pros and cons of the eight concepts’ regarding the following sub-categories: 
Staging, problem analysis, behaviour analysis, and evaluation (appendix 16).
The criteria within each sub-category were formulated based on the specification 
requirements (table 5.1 and appendix 14) and the value proposition (figure 5.3 and 
appendices 9-11). At first, each criterion was weighted 1-3 with three being most important 
and one least important. Afterwards the eight concepts were given a score from 1-5 how 
much they fulfilled each criterion, with a five points score as the best and a one point score 
as the worst. Although the scoring was done subjectively, the scoring of the concepts took 
place over two different rounds, to secure that the results were as objective and dynamic 
as possible. In practice this meant that in the first round the concept was scored on its own 
(appendix 16, 1 of 2), while in the second round all concepts were scored in relation to each 
other (appendix 16, 2 of 2). Scoring the concepts in relation to each other ensured that the 
outcome and total score of the results would be in the same, regardless of the point system.
Applying this combination of methods provided structured ways of realising each individual 
concept’s strengths and weaknesses and from the method itself two concepts stood out: 
Maximum Documentation with 145 points (round 1) and 150 points (round 2) and Maximum 
Validation with 160 points (round 1) and 153 points (round 2). By breaking down each of 
the concepts sub-scores, it was possible to combine the two concepts into the strongest 
possible basic concept. Yet, despite the fact that the method stresses the choice of the highest 
scoring concept (Cross 2008), incorporations from other concepts were transferred into 
the basic concept as well. This was done both due to the fact that other concepts scored 
higher in certain sub-categories and due to the fact that a modification of ideas would secure 
a stronger link between the different concept steps. Hence, the basic concept was mainly 
based on ideas from the concepts Maximum Documentation and Maximum Validation, yet 
incorporation and modification of ideas from the other concepts has been made as well.
Evaluation of the concepts
==PAGE:78==
66
Step 1: 
Problem Analysis 
template
Basic concept: Super Cool Analysis Tool
Step 3: 
Validation 
spiderweb template
Step 5: 
Evaluation 
template
Step 2: 
Behavioural Theory Cards 
front page, with enclosed 
Theory Overview Wheel
Step 4: 
Translationg into design 
(Theory Cards back page)
A brief description of each step and its content can be found in the following table 5.4.
Figure 5.10 
The basic concept 
of the Super Cool 
Analysis Tool
1. 
Problem Analysis
Problem analysis 
template (paper) to 
map the problem 
behaviour. 
Afterwards, the 
identified 
actions/behaviours 
are categorised in a 
table illustrating 
seven problem 
factors (personal, 
impersonal, 
interpersonal, 
societal, story, 
background and 
frequency of change).
2. 
Behaviour Analysis
Based on the table 
with problem 
factors, theories that 
relate to the problem 
behaviour can be 
found based on 
symbols and 
colour-coded Theory 
Cards. An associat-
ed wheel gives an 
overview of all the 
21 Theory Cards and 
the meaning of the 
three colours.
3. 
Validation
A validation 
spider-web must be 
filled out to ensure 
that a comprehen-
sive analysis have 
been made and the 
root causes of the 
problem behaviour 
is understood based 
on the previous 
steps. How many 
problem layers are 
considered, can I 
answer the 5 why’s?
4. 
Translation of 
theoretical insights
On the back of the 
Theory Cards several 
design aspects to 
think about for each 
theory are 
visualised: 
Buzzwords, 
analogies, design 
contributions, 
mindmaps etc. in 
order to kick start 
the ideation session 
and translate the 
theoretical 
knowledge.
5. 
Evaluation
Post-project,  paper 
evaluation template 
must be filled out to 
evaluate tool the 
elements and learn 
from the “mistakes” 
in the project (what 
went bad).
Map current 
behaviour
Pick relevant 
theories
Validation of the 
analysis
Kick-start 
ideation 
Evaluate used 
theories
The basic concept of the Super Cool Analysis Tool is a concept based on behavioural 
design literature (chapter 2), an investigation of current practice in industry (chapter 4) and 
Value Propostition Design (section 5.2). Yet, to make the Super Cool Analysis Tool ready for 
implementation in current behavioural design practice, more iterations and improvements in 
regards to flow and usability were needed.
Table 5.4
Basic concept 
information
5.4.4 The basic concept: The Super Cool Analysis Tool
The basic concept of the analysis support tool is therefore the Super Cool Analysis Tool, 
which can be seen in figure 5.10 and covers the five steps identified in table 5.2: Problem 
analysis, behaviour analysis, validation, translation of theoretical insights, and evaluation.
==PAGE:79==
 67
5.5 Detailing & development
Throughout the third, and final, phase of the support tool development, nine workshops 
(see appendix 17 for information and contributions) were performed, all contributing to five 
overall iterations to ensure maximum usability and application in an industry context. 
Therefore, the basic concept has changed significantly to the final concept of the Super 
Cool Analysis Tool. In the basic concept the Super Cool Analysis Tool consisted of five steps 
described in table 5.4, including five different elements (Problem Analysis Template, Theory 
Cards, Theory Overview Wheel, a Validation Spider-web and Evaluation Template). The final 
concept of the Super Cool Analysis Tool only consists of four steps as the evaluation step has 
been eliminated to focus on the unique value-adding elements. In addition, the four remaining 
steps have been combined into only two elements: a Theory Card-set and a Theory Overview 
Wheel, to make it simpler, user friendly, and gamified. Despite this combination of steps, the 
Super Cool Analysis Tool still addresses all four steps (problem analysis, behaviour analysis, 
validation and translation of theoretical insights). In the following sections, the iterations are 
visualised and the key takeaways are highlighted.
• 
Step 1+4: The behavioural mapping element was eliminated and instead the problem 
analysis was combined into the Theory Cards by including problem layers and factors in 
the card tasks. Further, a “Force yourself” task was included on the backside of each Theory 
Card to provide guidance of how to apply the behavioural theory in a specific context.
• 
Step 2: Previously the Theory Overview Wheel only showed the behavioural theories’ 
relations to the three categories described in the literature review in section 2.3.2 and 
2.3.3 (named as individual models of behaviour, social models of behaviour and theories 
of change): Individual behaviour, social behaviour, and behaviour change. Now it is included 
to show the relations of the different behavioural theories in regards to different topics 
derived from the 10 keywords in tables 2.1, 2.2 and 2.3 describing the core of each of the 
elaborated behavioural theories. This visualisation of the behavioural theories enables a 
common language (applicable between different professions) and communicates complex 
Figure 5.11
Overview of the 
1st iteration
Iteration 1: Simplification of concept (figure 5.11)
Step 1+4: 
Behavioural Theory Cards 
(frontpage), including 
problem analysis tasks 
and design contributions 
(backpage)
Step 3+5: 
Evaluation form used for 
documentating and 
validating the steps
Step 2: 
Behavioural Theory 
Overview Wheel, detailed 
with behaviour relating 
topics
==PAGE:80==
68
Step 1+4: 
Behavioural Theory Cards with 
problem analysis task (front 
page) and design contribution 
and card progress validation  
(back page)
A “Master Card” and a card 
guide is introduced to help 
users get started with the tool
p
g
y
p
y
Step 3+5: 
Evaluation form used for 
documentating and 
validating the steps
Step 2: 
Behavioural Theory 
Overview Wheel, detailed 
with behaviour relating 
topics and list of all 
theories
• 
Step 1+4: Layout and content modifications of the Theory Cards were made to improve 
usability. For instance, symbols on the Theory Cards indicating the theory category (individual 
behaviour, social behaviour and behaviour change) were added. Moreover, a Guide Sheet 
describing each element of the Theory Card, and a Master Card with a decision tree to 
guide the designer regarding what Theory Card to begin with, was included to the Theory 
Card-set.
• 
Step 2: Theory Overview Wheel adjustments were made, so the wheel became more 
intuitive and clear. For instance, the three colours indicating theory categories were 
included in the wheel as well as three circles representing each category. Additionally a 
simplification of the 10 keywords into eight topics (attitude, thinking, change strategy, motivation, 
social impact, self-efficacy, habits, and principles of behaviour) was made, as it was assessed to 
enable better means for usability.
Figure 5.12
Overview of the 
2nd iteration
• 
Step 1+4: Further Theory Card modifications were made, such as the introduction of a 
Problem Layer Card (to make the Theory Cards less confusing and give the Super Cool 
Analysis Tool a clear finish line, i.e. to introduce a gamification element). Further it was 
discovered that each participant in the Super Cool Analysis Tool must have their own set of 
Theory Cards, therefore one tool contains more than one card set.
• 
Step 2: Theory Overview Wheel modifications were made, in order to translate theoretical 
knowledge from the Theory Cards into the designer’s own project. This was visualised 
through an incorporation of fields with the possibility of hanging ‘post-its’ with hypotheses. 
Likewise, small discs to place on already-covered behavioural theories were included to 
support measuring progress.
Iteration 2: Improving usability of the Super Cool Analysis Tool (figure 5.12)
Iteration 3: Gamification of the Super Cool Analysis Tool (figure 5.13 on p.69)
behavioural theory aspects in an easy, simple and more general language.
• 
Step 3+5: The Validation Spider-web object was combined into the Evaluation Sum-up List, 
so it was one step and thus an element lesser.
==PAGE:81==
 69
Figure 5.13
Overview of the 
3rd iteration
• 
Step 1+4: The Guide Sheet was instead turned into a Guide Book to ensure that the Super 
Cool Analysis Tool could work on its own. The aspect “How to add a Theory Card to the tool” 
(customisability and updatability) was added to the previous guide elements. Further the 
Master Card and the Problem Layer Card were made into a sole Begin Card, End Card, and 
Problem Documentation Card to create a better flow of the activities in the Super Cool 
Analysis Tool.
• 
Step 2: Together with the hypotheses field a box for “other considerations” was added to 
the Theory Overview Wheel, as this enabled both better reflection and documentation.
Figure 5.14
Overview of the 
4th iteration
Iteration 4: Key takeaways (figure 5.14)
Step 1+4: 
Behavioural theory cards are simplified, to include theory 
inclusion (frontpage) and design contribution and card 
progress validation  (backpage)
Together with the “master card” and the card guide a 
problem layer card is introduced, to highlight the 
importance of the problem layer analysis
3rd Iteration: Gamification of the Super Cool Analysis Tool
Step 2+3: 
Behavioural theory overview wheel made 
into a game board, with a bag of discs to 
ensure constant validation. Hypothesis 
areas are enhanced, to ensure running 
documentation. 
• 
Step 5: To focus on the unique value-adding elements and to simplify the Super Cool 
Analysis Tool, the evaluation part was excluded as the tool itself is comprehensive 
and evaluation merely adds more complexity. Yet documentation, reflection and 
measurements of progress were still incorporated through the Theory Cards and the 
Theory Overview Wheel elements. Yet, the importance of evaluation was not ignored and 
hence it is still strongly recommended to facilitate evaluation when applying the Super Cool 
Analysis Tool.
Step 1+4: 
Behavioural theory cards accompanied by an “begin” 
card (to assess problem layers and start the game) and 
an “end” card (to rank hypotheses and reflect) 
Together with the theory card is a small guide book for 
the game, to provide clear rules, process and steps of 
the game
4th Iteration: Improving flow and guidance of the Super Cool Analysis Tool
Step 2+3: 
A field for other considerations is 
included, to help document important stuff 
during the game
==PAGE:82==
70
5.6 Conclusion & key findings of the 
Support Tool Development
After ideation, conceptualisation and several workshops, the final concept, the Super Cool 
Analysis Tool was developed with the aim of making designers with limited experience 
of behavioural design build a theoretical back-catalogue, while at the same time challenging 
designers’ with comprehensive experience of behavioural design tunnel vision in regards to 
theory inclusion. Hence, the Super Cool Analysis tool is found to be meaningful and have 
great impact for designers within the behavioural design field with respect to the research 
framework. The key findings of this chapter are therefore:
• In the beginning of the second support tool development phase, five different tool 
content steps (problem analysis, behaviour analysis, validation, translation of theoretical 
insights, and evaluation) were determined to be vital in the final concept of the 
Super Cool Analysis Tool. However, through iterations the steps were combined 
dynamically to create better flow and coherence of the tool activities. Yet, despite 
the combination of the steps, all value-adding parts of the initial step activities are still 
part of the final tool features, just not as separate tasks.
• Through the investigation of current practice (chapter 4), evaluation was highlighted 
as being a possible value-adding aspect to the Super Cool Analysis Tool to the 
benefit of all kinds of designers. Yet, through the iterations it was clarified that the 
evaluation step did not provide any unique value to the concept, as the core of the 
concept rather were the Theory Cards, the Theory Overview Wheel and the flow in 
between them. Therefore, evaluation was eliminated from the further development 
of the Super Cool Analysis Tool to achieve greater focus and proof of concept of 
the truly unique tool elements. With that being said, evaluation is still acknowledged 
as being potentially valuable when having applied the Super Cool Analysis Tool, yet 
evaluation could be achieved from other tools and methods separated from the tool.
Other key findings are of course the features and elements of the final concept of the Super 
Cool Analysis tool to be described and elaborated in detail in chapter 6.
The final concept of the Super Cool Analysis Tool is described in details in the following chapter 6, yet 
the key takeaways of the final iteration were:
• 
Step 1+4: The aim of this iteration was to ensure better adaption to an industry context 
achieved through incorporating more gamification elements (e.g. time pressure, output in 
all tasks and staging considerations). Next, the Guide Book was updated and modified to 
ensure greater usability, among other things, by introducing a table of behavioural design 
approaches applicable after playing the game. Finally, the Theory Cards were updated and 
modified sufficiently as well to make the content more correct and more understandable.
Final concept of the Super Cool Analysis Tool
==PAGE:83==
 71
Chapter 6
The Super Cool 
Analysis Tool
==PAGE:84==
72
6.1 Introduction to the Super Cool Analysis Tool 
This chapter presents the Super Cool Analysis Tool which is a gamified analysis tool primarily 
developed for designers in behavioural design projects, yet applicable for other professions 
involved in behavioural design projects as well.
Section 6.2 provides an overall description of the Super Cool Analysis Tool, as well as visualises 
its content. Section 6.3-6.7 presents each of the steps in detail regarding purpose, tool activities, 
preparation, procedure, outcome, and considerations/limitations for each step. Finally, section 6.8 
reflects on accessibility and ownership of the Super Cool Analysis Tool followed by section 
6.9 exemplifying the different use cases in which the tool can be applied. All tool materials 
can be found in appendices 18-23 which are strongly recommended to be looked at when 
going through section 6.3-6.7.
Step 0: 
Introduction and 
Preparation
Step 1: 
Initial Problem 
Analysis
Step 2: 
Problem Behaviour 
Analysis
Step 3: 
Problem Behaviour 
Validation
Step 4: 
Game Evaluation and 
Documentation
An analytical step, 
providing structured 
ways of overviewing 
problem behaviours 
and parameters 
influencing 
behaviour (i.e. 
problem layers)
A guiding step for 
analysing the 
specific problem 
behaviour in 
relation to at least 
three different 
categories of 
behavioural theories 
– the order of the 
theories to assess is 
always given.   
A validation step for 
showing progress 
of the behavioural 
topics that have 
been analysed. This 
step visualises 
un-touched topics 
that could be 
analysed in order to 
add more depth to 
the problem 
analysis.
A step for evaluating 
the output of the 
game and  for 
ensuring a transfer 
of documentation 
into the further 
project activities. 
Back-tracking 
decisions are 
applied for enabling 
possibilites of 
learning from 
experience.
An introductory step 
for enabling better 
possibilities of 
maximising the 
wanted output and 
ensuring as little 
time loss as 
possible. Focuses on 
usability through 
explanations and 
guidance. 
6.2 Overall support tool description
The Super Cool Analysis Tool is a front-end gamified analysis support tool for the early stages 
of a behavioural design project (such as define and discover in the Double Diamond Model 
(Design Council 2007)). The Super Cool Analysis Tool helps designers in making a thorough 
problem behaviour analysis, while at the same time enabling better validation of the analysis and 
ensuring translatable documentation along the analysis steps. Based on easy-understandable 
behavioural theory examples and an overview of the theories’ relations, structured ways of 
doing problem analysis and challenging current behaviour analysis routines are obtained. In 
practice this is obtained by a 60-90 minutes game consisting of the five main steps visualised 
in the table 6.1. The Super Cool Analysis Tool is distinguished as a gamified tool, as it consists 
of several game elements: Clear purpose (where achieving this purpose means winning and 
ending the game), means, players (that actively participate and make decisions), limiting context 
(rules), conflicts, and quantifiable outcome (Salen & Zimmerman 2004) (further elaborated in 
section 6.3-6.7). 
Table 6.1
Steps of the Super 
Cool Analysis Tool
The intended use of the Super Cool Analysis Tool recommends going through all steps (0 to 
4), yet to keep from restraining the usage, each of the steps can be operated on a stand-alone 
==PAGE:85==
 73
basis and provides great value in itself as they are fitted with a sub-aim of single usage. 
The following figure 6.1 visualises the overall flow and contents of the gamified Super Cool 
Analysis Tool described in details in the subsequent sections 6.3-6.7. To ease the reading the 
tool will be labelled as a “game”, and the users of the tool will be labelled as “player(s)” in the 
subsequent sections 6.3-6.7.
Step 0: 
The Guide Book
Step 1: 
The Begin Card and 
The Problem Documentation Card 
(front)
Step 2: 
The Theory Cards
(front)
Step 3: 
The Theory Overview Wheel and 
The Theory Cards
(back)
Step 4: 
The End Card and 
The Problem Documentation Card
(back)
Figure 6.1
The overall flow 
of the Super Cool 
Analysis Tool
The Super Cool Analysis Tool is developed from a design point of view where it is desired to 
transition from a comprehensive problem understanding to a solution, and hence the primary 
intended users are designers (ranging from designers with limited experience of behavioural 
design to designers with comprehensive experience of behavioural design). Despite this 
==PAGE:86==
74
6.3 Step 0: Preparation & instructions
A quick guide to start the game: 
Although we recommend you (or at least one from your group) to read this Guide Book 
before playing the game, the following quick guide explains how to start the game quickly: 
• 
Place the Theory Overview Wheel so that all players can see it, and give each 
player their own set of Theory Cards (at all times all players must discuss the same 
Theory Card)
• 
Based on the chosen game-mode (page 6), you (as a group) should work your way 
thorugh the Theory Cards, meaning: 
1. 
Read the brief description and the relating bias
2. 
Read and understand the applied problem case
3. 
Complete the “force yourself” task
4. 
Complete the three remember-tasks on the back of the Theory Card
5. 
Go through the decision-tree and determine further steps of the game
6. 
Finally, again depending on your chosen game-mode, reach the “End Card” and 
finish the game successfully! 
• 
In order to make sure that you progress successfully through the game, keep the 
following two time frames in mind: 
1. 
If you struggle for more than five minutes in trying to formulate a hypothesis 
in relation to the theory – move on to the ne[t Theory Card stated on the 
backside of the current Theory Card.
2. 
Flip the hour-glass everytime you pick a new Theory Card – try not to spend 
more than 10 minutes on each card (you can always come back to it!)
Table of contents:
Quick guide   
 
 
 
How to understand the game
Explanatory list of game contents
How to prepare and play the game
How to enter the game
How to end the game
How to update the theory cards
Explanatory guide for the theory card elements  
List of useful design approaches to apply after 
playing the game                                                       
1
2
3-4
5
6
7
8
9-10
back of the 
guide book
1
How to understand the game
What is the Super Cool Analysis Tool? The Super Cool 
Analysis Tool is a game aimed at helping you make better problem analysis and 
behaviour hypotheses applicable in your design projects concerning Behavioural 
Design (or Design for Behaviour Change). The aim of the game is supported 
by the belief that in order to develop the most successful solutions, you have to 
achieve a deep level of problem understanding first. This is a crucial aspect to keep 
in mind in regards to the aim of the game, as you otherwise may misunderstand 
the game and therefore not achieve the output you hoped for. 
Who should apply this game? The game can be played by any 
kind of designer, yet it is the perfect game for 
• 
Experienced behavioural designers who wish broaden their horizon 
with new behavioural theories and 
• 
Designers with no or limited experience with behavioural design who 
wish to explore the (many!) benefits behavioural analysis have to offer 
different kinds of design work or to obtain relevant insights into 
human behaviour.
Although the game’s imagined user is a designer, the tool’s language and tasks could 
complement users of other professions as well (such as behavioural economist, 
sociologists, psycohologist). No matter the profession, the game can be played by 
either individuals or groups, however we recommend you to be maximum four 
people playing the game (otherwise split the team into two groups). This is due to 
the fact that being more than four people in one group will require more time to 
reach the same level of output, and thus the duration will be more than 90 minutes.
When should the game be played? As the game helps 
you  make better problem analysis and behaviour hypotheses, the game should 
2
Why should I play this game? The Super Cool Analysis Tool 
will help you by providing an overview of different possibly relevant behavioural 
theories and the insights each of them could offer you, as well as providing better 
possibilities of translating these insights into your design work (by helping you 
formulate and rank different problem hypotheses that could apply to your project).  
be played in the early-phase of your design 
work – more specificly in between the 
discovery and the definition of the problem 
presented in your design project (as you 
can see in the Double Diamond figure (Design 
Council 2007)). 
Discover
Define
Develop
Deliver
Problem
Problem
Definition
Solution
Game contents
What does the game contain? 
• 1 x Overall Guide Book (you are reading it)
• 1 x 10 minutes hour glass
• 1 x Begin Card to guide you into the game, by getting you 
to start assessing your problem and analysing it in regards to seven 
different problem layers:
• 1 x  Problem Documentation Card to guide the 
problem layer tasks on both the Begin Card and End Card.
• 1 x End Card to help you validate your problem analysis and 
to help you realise the potential and strenght of your formulated 
hypotheses.
• 4 x sets of Theory Cards, containing 
• 21 x Theory Cards in the three categories individual 
behaviour (8 pcs), social behaviour (5 pcs) and behaviour change 
(8 pcs)
• 
• 
Behaviour 
change cards: To 
understand how, when 
& where behaviour can 
be influenced. 
Social 
behaviour 
cards: To understand 
how social and 
environmental interaction 
affects an individual’s 
behaviour.
Individual 
behaviour 
cards: To understand, 
describe, explain & 
predict individual factors 
influencing and creating 
human behaviour. 8
5
8
Personal     Impersonal      Interpersonal           Societal           Story      Background    Frequency of 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         change 
3
Game contents
• 1 x Theory Overview Wheel that visualises the 21 different 
Theory Cards in regards to eight different topics (see below) relevant to 
behavioural theories, as well as how the different theories are related 
within the three categories of individual behaviour (the inner circle), social 
behaviour (the middle circle) and behaviour change (the outer circle). 
• 4 x stacks of post-its (one for each player) and 4 pens (one 
for each player) use for documenting your hypotheses, which can be 
placed in the hypotheses-box on the Theory Overview Wheel
• 1 x bag of 49 small discs you should use for keeping track of both 
the Theory Cards you have considered so far and the topics you have covered 
(put them on the letter representing the Theory Card). Keep in mind that most 
of the letters are represented on the Theory Overview Wheel several times. 
ATTITUDE
       A settled way of thinking or    
      feeling
THINKING
       Conscious (reflective) or nonconscious 
       (automatic) processing of information
CHANGE STRATEGIES
       A plan of action to achieve a 
       behaviour change
MOTIVATION
       Commitment and interest in a 
       given situation
SOCIAL IMPACT
       Group impact and/or environmental 
      impact on the individual’s behaviour
SELF-EFFICACY
       Confidence and belief in oneself  
       to achieve a certain result
HABITS
       Nonconscious and routine based 
       behaviour
PRINCIPLES of 
BEHAVIOUR
      General rules of thumb that 
     describe behaviour
4
NB! Although a facilitator is not stated as a necessity, using one when playing would 
probably ensure better results and more structure of the game. Therefore, if you wish to use 
a facilitator, (s)he should consider the following things before playing: 
• 
Have I read and understood the game? (it will save you time while playing!) 
• 
How big is the team who should play the game? Do we need to split the team into smaller 
groups?
• 
Am I open-minded in regards to the output of the tool? 
• 
How many times should we play the game? 
• 
How do we ensure the needed documentation? Who is responsible for transferring the 
results from the game into the project we are working on? 
How to prepare and play the game
5
Preparation for the game: 
1. 
Fold out the Theory Overview Wheel and place it for all to see.
2. 
Fold out the disc-bag and together with the Begin Card, Problem 
Documentation Card and End Card put it next to the Theory Overview 
Wheel.
3. 
Give each player their own set of Theory Cards.
4. 
Look through the game-modes and determine how you wish to enter 
the game. 
Playing the game: While the game-modes determines how you 
enter the game, the following steps describes how the game is played out: 
1. 
Flip the (10 minutes) hour-glass everytime you pick a new Theory Card. 
2. 
Read the brief description and the relating bias on the chosen Theory 
Card.
3. 
Read and understand the applied problem case
4. 
Complete the “force yourself” task in relation to your project problem.
5. 
Complete the three °remember±-tasNs on the back of the Theory Card:
6. 
Write your hypothesis on a post-it.
7. 
Write the theory-letter on your post-it (to backtrack your decisions).
8. 
Cover the theory letters with the discs (to realise progress).
9. 
Go through the decision-tree on the back of the Theory Card and 
determine the further steps of the game.
10. You should be able to move through one Theory Card in ma[imum 10 
minutes. If it takes you longer, try to wrap it up and move on. You can 
always come back to it later! 
11. Once enough cards have been considered (the game will tell you when that 
is), reach the End Card and finish the game successfully!
NB! Each of the Theory Cards has a task, which “forces” you/your group to formulate a 
hypothesis that should describe how a given theory applies to your problem (if you prefer 
two hypotheses, you can of course write both of them). An example of a hypothesis could be 
“people throw cigarette butts at the train platforms, due to a convenience need and due to time 
pressure”. For the Theory Cards it is important that you attempt to formulate a hypothesis, 
yet if you struggle for more than five minutes in trying to make sense of a specific theory 
in relation to your problem – move on to the ne[t Theory Card (found on the back of 
the card)  – it is not a nessecity to formulate a hypothesis from all theories, it is merely the 
reflection over each theory’s relevance that is important.
How to enter the game
*ame-mode 1
If you deal with a 
Vaguely specified 
problem: 
The purpose of this game 
mode is to, within 90 minutes, 
create three specific, realistic, 
and feasible hypotheses 
based on a vaguely specified 
problem. 
An example of a vaguely 
specified problem could be 
“reduce the amount of cigarette 
butts thrown in Copenhagen”. 
This problem gives no 
indication of the target group 
nor the root causes of the 
problem.
To play this mode, you/your 
group should start with the 
Begin Card, yet when 
entering the game you should 
choose the path that leads 
you to choose between 
the two categories 
of Theory Cards, and 
thereafter go through the 
theory cards all the way to 
the End Card.  
*ame-mode 2
If you deal with a 
Well-specified 
problem: 
The purpose of this game 
mode is to, within 90 minutes, 
create three specific, realistic, 
and feasible hypotheses 
based on a well-specified 
problem. 
An example of a well-
specified problem could be 
“reduce the amount of cigarette 
butts left at train platforms in 
Copenhagen”. This problem 
gives no clear indication of the 
root causes of the problem, 
yet it indicates the main target 
group. 
To play this mode, you/your 
group should start with the 
Begin Card, yet when 
entering the game, you should 
choose the path that leads 
you straight to the Theory 
Overview Wheel, and 
thereafter go through the 
theory cards all the way to 
the End card.  
*ame-mode 
If your want to achieve 
Inspiration for 
behaviour
The purpose of this game 
mode is to, within 90 minutes, 
get inspired in regards to the 
21 behavioural theories and 
obtain an understanding of 
the theories similarities and 
differences.
This game mode is entirely 
determined by your own 
choices as the Theory 
Cards and the Theory 
Overview Wheel offer 
a lot of valuable insights 
themselves. 
This game mode can 
therefore be several things: 
Browsing through the Theory 
Cards for inspiration 
for a project (or just for 
fun!), assessing the Theory 
Overview Wheel to acquire 
an overview of the 
theories or something entirely 
different – it is up to you! 
Pick one of the three game-modes to determine how to enter the game:
6
1.
2.
3.
NB! When choosing game-mode 2 the Begin Card prompts you to determine whether 
your project concerns the behaviour of an individual or of a group. This can be a tricky question 
to answer, as there is the possibility that your problem relates to both kinds of behaviours. So, 
in order to answer this question, the Problem Documentation Card will help you, as it gives 
you an indication of what problems layers affects your problem the most. Use this reflection to 
get started the right place in the game! 
How to end the game
7
Ending the game: Based on the game you have now formulated 
several hypotheses relevant to the behavioural problem you are trying 
to adress. Based on these hypotheses, the End Card will guide you 
through the task of ending the game.
This task will help you/your group to reflect upon the results from the 
game and ultimately help you transfer the insights you have obtained from 
playing the game into your further design work.  
Once you agree that you have the best hypotheses you wish to apply 
in your further activities, remember to: 
• 
Take the Theory Cards (from which your chosen hypotheses 
have been formulated). 
• 
Consider the key takeaways each individual Theory Card has 
to offer in your furhter design process.
• 
To provide even more inspiration for the further design 
process, the table on the backpage of this Guide Book 
shows different design approaces that could possibly benefit 
you and your project! 
How to update the game
Why would I want to update the game? Although the 
game has been developed to fit different companies, projects and problems, the 
possibility of updating the game has been included in the case that:
• 
You are super-experienced at behavioural design and would like to apply 
the game, yet some of the theories that you find to be very valuable in your 
projects are not included in the Theory Cards.
• 
You aren’t super-experienced at behavioural design, yet you would still like 
to learn and expand your behavioural theory back-catalogue – and to do so 
fully, you need the possibility of adding other theories as well.
Luckily, we have taken these scenarios into account and made it super simple 
for you to customise the Super Cool Analysis Tool to fit your context
How do I add new theory cards? Adding Theory Cards to the 
game is actually very simple and intuitive, all you have to do is: 
• 
)ind the empty template Theory Cards and fill in the information from 
the given theory you wish to add. To do so, you have to realise whether 
the theory is describing individual behaviour, social behaviour or 
behaviour change. You also have to reflect upon which of the eight 
topics the theory refers to. 
• 
Give the new theory a letter at the top of the Theory Card (a letter that 
has not been used for the other Theory Cards). If this is the first theory 
card you are adding, the letter would be V.
• 
All the Theory Cards are linked to each other, meaning that they are all a 
part of a big chain. When adding a new Theory Card you must therefore 
find the right place in the chain. To do so, there are only two simple 
rules to follow: 
1. 
The same card colour (individual, social or change) must not be next to 
each other in the chain – i.e. the Theory Cards before and after must be 
different than the one you are adding. 
2. 
The Theory Card can only have one topic in common which the Theory 
Cards next to it, i.e. the Theory Cards before and after should be 
somewhat describing another behaviour context. 
• 
Once you have found the place in the chain, be sure to remember to 
update the card-linNing bo[es on the Theory Card before and the 
Theory Card after - so the chain will not be broken when you play the 
game! 
• 
Finally, all you have to do is add the Theory Card to the Theory Overview 
Wheel. Make sure to place it in the correct circle – i.e. in the correct topics 
and in the correct category of behavioural theories. 
• 
Once this is done, you have customised the game and are good to 
go again! 
8
How to understand the Theory Cards
1. Symbol and colour illustrating the Theory 
Card category. 
2. Letter illustrating the Theory Card “no.” and its 
placement on the Theory Overview Wheel. 
Name of the behavioural theory. 
Brief theoretical description of the theory.
A reference, if interest in the specific theory has 
been awoken and further information is wanted.
A behaviour bias, relevant to either the theory 
on the card or the problem case on the card. Biases 
are easy-to-understand phrases developed to describe 
a certain type of behaviour - they are therefore great 
to consider in regards to your problem as well.  
An example of a case, to show how the theory 
could be valuable in a specific context. Do not let 
this example limit the application of the theory – it 
is merely meant as a clearer way to understand the 
theory. Even though your problem in no way relates 
to the problem example on the card, the theory 
can still be valuable! 
Together with each problem case is an illustration 
relating to either the way the theory works or showing 
the figure originally formulated together with the theory. 
Social Identity Theory
%pplied pVSFleQ case
Why are people eating more healthy things at home 
than they are at work? 
For a problem like this, environmental context 
is valuable to consider, yet explaining it from the 
perspective of Social Identity Theory adds 
another layer of knowledge. The roles which the 
employees take part in influences the behaviours. 
Perhaps the wife is super active and will only eat 
salad, which leads to the husband eating healthier 
at home, and perhaps “relaxing” a bit on the 
health-front at work (or opposite). Or maybe, the 
majority of the employees are eating healthy, 
and in order to not be “outside” of the 
group, the husband eats healthy at work – but 
not at home, where his wife loves pizza and pasta.
*SVce ySuVselJ XS JSVQulaXe a LypSXLesis 
How can your problem be explained by either ingroup behaviour 
or out-group behaviour?
&VieJ descVipXiSR The Social Identity Theory offers insights as to why individuals 
strive to achieve or maintain a positive social identity. It states that individuals act on behalf 
of (in-)group concerns (being part of the group) and not on behalf of personal concerns. 
Individuals, when interacting within a certain group context, acquire different social roles, or 
“levels of self”, which influences their behaviour. The theory distinguishes between interpersonal 
behaviour (two or more individuals acting solely on the grounds of individual concerns and 
characteristics, e.g. wife and husband) and intergroup behaviour (two or more individuals that 
behave solely on the grounds of social concerns and characteristics, e.g. soldiers in an army 
group).
Reference: 
Tajfel, H. & Turner, J., 1979. An Integrative Theory of Intergroup Conflicts. In The Social Psychology of Intergroup Relations. 
Brooks Cole Publishing, pp. 33–47.
J
        A bias relating to the theory on this card is the Ingroup bias: 
       The tendency for people to give preferential treatment to others they perceive to be 
members of their own groups
Out-group
In-group
versus
An explanation of the front of the Theory Cards
A small, but very important task, prompting 
you to formulate a hypothesis explaining 
your problem, relating to the chosen theory. 
This will enable you to obtain a better 
understanding of the theory.
9
1.
2.
How to understand the Theory Cards
A decision tree that helps you determine the 
further steps to be taken, and provides 
guidance to wether or not more Theory Cards 
will be relevant to look at.
A direct link to the next relevant Theory Card.
A direct link to the End Card to guide you 
into ranking your hypotheses and retrieving all the 
insights you have discovered while playing 
the game.
Key takeaways that will be valuable to consider 
in the next stages of your design project.
An explanation of the back of the Theory Cards
Three reminders-tasks, to help guide you 
through the game and make sure you remember 
to document all the lovely hypotheses you have 
created.
10
Social Identity Theory
J
That’s 
alright! Try to go 
and explore the:  
THEORY OF 
SELF-EFFICACY
(N)
Did this theory make it possible for you to 
formulate a hypothesis relevant to your problem?
YES
NO
Have you only applied one or 
two Theory Card colours to 
your problem case? 
YES
NO
Social cate-
gorisation
Positive 
social 
identity
Social roles
Ingroup 
behaviour
Outgroup 
behaviour
Expec-
tations of 
context
Keep these key takeaways in mind when generating ideas in 
your further design work:
Great! 
Then go to the 
End Card
.. to finish the game
Remember 
to write a 
hypothesis on a 
post-it and put it on 
the Theory Overview 
Wheel
Remember 
to write the 
theory letter J 
on the post-it
Remember
 to put a disc on 
the J in social 
impact on the 
Theory Overview 
Wheel
Framework
Process
Method
Tool
The Functional 
Triad
Evil by Design
The MINDSPACE way
The Social 
Implication Design 
Method
Systematic 
Framework
Eight-step Design 
Process
The Process of 
Designing for 
Behavioural Change
The Behavioural 
Design Process
The Behaviour 
Wizard 
The Behaviour 
Change Wheel
Developing an 
Intervention 
Design with Intent
Brains, Behaviour 
and Design
The Behaviour 
Change Strategy 
Cards 
The Persuasive by 
Design Model
Fogg, B.J., 2003. The Functional Triad: 
Computers in Persuasive Roles. In 
Persuasive Technology: Using 
Computers to Change What We Think 
and Do. San Francisco, USA: Morgan 
Kaufmann Publisher, pp. 23–29.
Oinas-Kukkonen, H. & Harjumaa, M., 
2008. A Systematic Framework for 
Designing and Evaluating Systems. In H. 
Oinas-Kukkonen et al., eds. 3rd 
International Conference on Persuasive 
Technology. Oulu, Finland: Springer, pp. 
164–176.
Nodder, C., 2013. Evil by Design: 
Interaction design to lead us into 
temptation 1st ed., Indianapolis, 
USA: John Wiley & Sons.
Dolan, P. et al., 2012. Influencing 
behaviour: The mindspace way. 
Journal of Economic Psychology, 
33(1), pp.264–277.
Tromp, N., 2013. Social design: 
How products and services can help 
us act in ways that benefit society. 
Delft University of Technology.
Fogg, B.J., 2009a. Creating 
Persuasive Technologies: An 
Eight-Step Design Process. In 4th 
International Conference on 
Persuasive Technology. Claremont, 
USA: ACM Press, p. Article No. 44.
Wendel, S., 2014. Designing for 
Behavior Change: Applying 
Psychology and Behavioural 
Economics 2nd ed. M. Treseler, 
ed., O’Reilly Media.
Cash, P.J., Hartlev, C.G. & Durazo, 
C.B., 2017. Behavioural Design: A 
Process for Integrating Behaviour 
Change and Design. Design 
Studies, 48(January), pp.96–128.
Fogg, B.J. & Hreha, J., 2010. Behavior 
Wizard: A Method for Matching Target 
Behaviors with Solutions. In T. Ploug, P. 
Hasle, & H. Oinas-Kukkonen, eds. 5th 
International Conference on Persuasive 
Technology. Copenhagen, Denmark: 
Springer-Verlag Berlin, pp. 117–131.
Michie, S. et al., 2011. The 
behaviour change wheel: A new 
method for characterising and 
designing behaviour change 
interventions. Implementation 
Science, 6(1), p.42.
Community Tool Box, 2016a. 
Developing an Intervention. 
Available at: 
http://ctb.ku.edu/en/develop-
ing-intervention
Lockton, D., Harrison, D. & 
Stanton, N.A., 2010. The Design 
with Intent Method: A design tool for 
influencing user behaviour. Applied 
Ergonomics, 41(3), pp.382–392.
Cervantes, M. et al., 2011. Brains, 
Behavior and Design toolkit. 
Available at: http://www.brainsbe-
havioranddesign.com/kit.html
Pfarr, N., 2013. Behavior Change 
Strategy Cards. Available at: 
https://www.artefact-
group.com/resources/behav-
ior-change-strategy-cards/ 
Hermsen, S., Renes, R.J. & Frost, J., 
2014. Persuasive by Design: A Model and 
Toolkit for Designing Evidence-based 
Interventions. In Proceedings from 
Making the Difference: CHI Sparks 
2014. The Hague, Netherlands, pp. 
74–77.
A framework for thinking about the roles that 
interactive technologies can play from the perspec-
tive of the individual. Applies to the category of 
behaviour change theories
A systematic framework for designing and 
evaluating persuasive systems. It can be applied for 
all kinds of behavioural theories, yet refers 
specifically to the work of B. J. Fogg.
A framework of different approaches for using evil 
seductive persuasion in design for interaction. It 
can be applied for all kinds of behavioural 
theories.
A framework to be used whenever behaviour change 
is being considered and aims at making less 
coercive policies work better. Applies well to the 
category of behaviour change theories. 
A framework aimed at supporting design to induce 
behaviour change, which brings about a desired 
social change. The approach can be applied for both 
behaviour change theories and social behaviour.
Outlines a path to follow in designing persuasive 
technology, with techniques aimed at increasing the 
probability of behaviour change success. Applies to 
the category of behaviour change theories. 
Defines the four overall phases which a behavioural 
change process consists of. The approach can be 
applied for all kinds of behavioural theories.
Integrates psychology, persuasive design and 
product development theory into a behavioural 
design process. It can be applied for all kinds of 
behavioural theories.
Presents a method for matching target behaviours 
with solutions for achieving those behaviours. It can 
be applied by the designer for all kinds of 
behavioural theories.
A method for characterising and designing 
behaviour change interventions and linking them to 
an analysis of a targeted behaviour. It can be for all 
kinds of behavioural theories.
Provides support for developing core components 
of a community intervention and adapting them to 
fit the context. It relates well to behavioural 
theories concerning social behaviour.
An innovation tool developed for helping humans 
use products and systems more efficiently. The 
approach can be applied for both behaviour change 
theories and social behaviour.
A tool developed to help in understanding and 
influencing decision-making processes. The 
approach can be applied for all kinds of 
behavioural theories.
A set of 23 cards developed to help designers think 
through strategies to nudge humans in a positive 
way when facing a behavioural design problem. The 
approach can be applied for all kinds of 
behavioural theories.
A toolkit aimed at addressing aspects of a target 
behaviours and designing interventions for chang-
ing these behaviours. The approach can be applied 
for all kinds of behavioural theories.
Behavioural design approaches to apply
These behavioural design approaches could be useful to apply after playing the game.
Page 1-2
Page 3-4
Page 5-6
Page 7-8
Page 9-10
Back page
The purpose of step 0 is, as the name indicates, to prepare and to get instructed for the game. 
The tasks in this step are prior to the actual game, to indicate that some level of preparation 
is needed before playing the game. Therefore, it is always recommended to go through step 0 
when playing the game for the first time, despite the possibility of applying all steps separately. 
First, the player(s) must read the Guide Book (see appendix 18) to get an understanding 
of the game as it describes the game in detail and provides the player(s) with guidelines and 
6.3.1 Purpose
Figure 6.2
Game contents of 
step 0: Guide Book
intended use, the Super Cool Analysis Tool can also be applied by other professions in a 
behavioural design project team, due to the tool’s application of non-profession dependent/
specific language. Further, the Super Cool Analysis Tool facilitates both individual usage as well 
as group usage. The tool is based on the belief that theory driven behavioural design results 
in the most successful interventions. Hence, the purpose of the Super Cool Analysis Tool is 
to build a theoretical back-catalogue for designers with limited experience of behavioural 
design and to challenge tunnel vision of theory inclusion of designers with comprehensive 
experience of behavioural design. Doing so will create the best foundation for successful 
development of behavioural design interventions for both kinds of designers. While this is the 
overall purpose of the Super Cool Analysis Tool, the actual purpose of the game itself is to, 
in maximum 90 minutes, create three specific, realistic and feasible hypotheses (describing a 
problem behaviour of a specific behavioural design project) that are transferrable and useful 
in the following behavioural design activities.
The Guide Book
This Guide Book will help you through the game, visualise 
game elements and give instructions for the usage both before, 
during and after the game
1-4 players
60-90 min.
==PAGE:87==
 75
instructions of the game. Thus, here the player(s) can get familiar with the purpose of the 
game and means provided to obtain this purpose as well as the rules structuring and limiting 
the activities of the game. The Guide Book focuses on usability, and is consistent with clear 
instructions (e.g. “quick guide for starting the game” on page 1 in the Guide Book) and any 
information necessary/nice to know about the game (e.g. “explanatory guide for the theory card 
elements” on page 9-10 in the Guide Book). Both elements are necessary to communicate 
as the game has to stand alone and be well communicated for others to apply. The Guide 
Book ensures this guidance through easy-understandable content explanations, such as step 
by step elements and a clear flow to measure progress in the creation of hypotheses. For 
instance, the hypothesis that theory driven behavioural design results in the most successful 
interventions (section 2.2.5) is in the Guide Book rewritten as “in order to develop the best 
solutions, you have to achieve a deep level of problem understanding”. Due to the fact that it 
was found that behavioural design differs a lot within and across design consultancies (section 
4.3.3), flexibility of the game is ensured by introducing a section, which sets up rules of how 
to update and customise the game (page 8 in the Guide Book). Likewise, the flexibility of 
the game is ensured by having three different game-modes (see page 6 in the Guide Book): 
Game-mode 1 deals with a vaguely-specified problem, whereas game-mode 2 deals with a 
well-specified problem. Furthermore, an inspiration game-mode (3) is introduced to extend 
the usage sphere. However, game-mode 3 has no intended structure or flow, and hence 
the following description of the game steps in this thesis are based on game-mode 1 and 
2 (despite the fact that the descriptions could somewhat be applicable for game-mode 3). 
Together the understanding of the game and its elements obtained from the Guide Book, 
combined with the choice of game-mode, form the foundation of proceeding to step 1. 
This step 0 is carried out by the Guide Book. Even though it can seem extensive to read 
the Guide Book, it is a necessity to ensure the intended game flow, successful experience, and 
outcome. However, a quick guide on page 1 in the Guide Book makes it possible to start the 
game immediately and use the Guide Book on an ad hoc basis during the game. 
6.3.2 Preparation
6.3.3 Step by step procedure & outcome
Due to the fact that step 0 is a preparation step for the game no preparations are needed 
other than determining whether the design project concerns behaviour or not. Obviously, 
this is an important aspect to clarify before playing the game, as the game otherwise will be 
irrelevant to play.
1. Determine whether to read the full instructions before playing the game, or skip 
the full instructions and start the game from the “quick guide for starting the game” 
instructions on page 1. If the full instructions have been skipped, the following 
procedure steps (2-6) are skipped as well (yet, visited if necessary).
2. Read page 2 to get an understanding of the game and its aim, while determining 
the number of players and the duration of the game.
==PAGE:88==
76
6.4 Step 1: Initial problem analysis
Problem Documentation Card
front
Personal problems
Impersonal problems
Interpersonal problems
place the post-it here
place the post-it here
place the post-it here
Societal problems
place the post-it here
Story
place the post-it here
Background
place the post-it here
Frequency of change
place the post-it here
The purpose of step 1 is to start a systematic reflection of the problem to be analysed in the 
behavioural design project and to lead this reflection into the game. First, the player(s) must 
discuss the preliminary problem perception to define the root causes and the target group 
of the problem behaviour. This is done by discussing how the seven different problem layers 
(section 2.3.1, appendix 19) affect the problem behaviour. This preliminary problem analysis is 
introduced as a starting task to get the players to systemise their observations (made prior 
to the game, elaborated in section 6.4.2). This will start a discussion of the perceived target 
6.4.1 Purpose
Figure 6.3
Game contents 
of step 1: Begin 
Card and Problem 
Documentation Card
3. Read page 3-4 to get an overview of the game contents and check if all contents 
can be located – it not, they should be found before proceeding.
4. Read page 5 to get information of each of the individual steps of the game and to 
understand the flow.
5. Read page 6 to choose a game-mode and thus a way to enter the game.
6. Read page 7 to understand what the goal of the game is and how to reach it.
The outcome of step 0 is an initial introduction to the game.
6.3.4 Considerations & recommendations
First, it is recommended to consider whether a facilitator would be beneficial to the game or 
not. If so, the player who takes on the facilitator role, should read the Guide Book thoroughly 
prior to playing the game, as well as plan the setup of the game. A well-prepared facilitator will 
ensure better flow and structure of the game to the benefit of the output. On page 4 of the 
Guide Book a facilitator check-list of elements to be considered before playing is visualised.
Begin Card
front
*iVsX XLiRgs fiVsX Since you have chosen to play this game, we imagine that you 
are faced with a problem concerning some type of behaviour – or at least you think so!
The following task will get you started in the structuring and analysis of the problem behaviour 
that you have identified. This task will ease the usability of the game and is therefore 
valuable to the process, but if you are short of time or already have a rather thorough 
understanding of your problem, you can skip this task and go straight to the back of this card. 
If not, start the game by identifying how the following seven problem layers affect 
the problem individually (based on you initial perception of the problem). If there are any 
problem layers in which you cannot identify your problem, don’t worry – the game should 
guide you through them anyway. As a group fill out the problem layers you are able to identify 
on post-its and place them on the front of the “Problem Documentation card”. 
Once this is done, you can go to the back of the Begin Card and start the game!  
8Le seZeR pVSFleQ layeVs aVe
Personal problems relate to internal personal factors such 
as health and psyche.
Impersonal problems relate to external personal factors 
such as lack of money and time.
Interpersonal problems relate to internal social factors 
such as arguing with a friend or disagreeing with a study group, 
which can be seen as in-group behaviour.
Societal problems relate to external social factors such as 
crime rates, littering, and pollution, which can be seen as out-group 
behaviour.
Immediate story refers to the things prior to when the 
behaviour occurs, i.e. the bus was late, spilled coffee, or a broken 
phone.
Longterm background refers to the mood, place in life, 
environment, or childhood experiences of the individual.
Frequency of change refers to the span or frequency of 
the problem behaviour, i.e. is it an seldom behaviour or a frequent 
behaviour?
==PAGE:89==
 77
groups (individual vs. social behaviour), as well as a discussion of whether a limited or a deep 
perception of the problem’s root causes (number of considered layers) is the case. Doing 
so will both enable the player(s) in understanding the aim of the game, as well as ease the 
task of formulating more focused hypotheses in the game activities to follow (elaborated in 
section 5.2.2). Additionally, this task can help the player(s) realise gaps in both the obtained 
observations and in the current way of analysing a problem behaviour (section 4.3.6). Once 
the discussion of the preliminary problem perception has been made, the player(s) must 
discuss and choose the path leading them into the game – i.e. choosing the starting point of 
step 2. This task is introduced to enable some degree of freedom in terms of customisation, 
to ensure that different companies can engage in the game in the way perceived to be most 
useful for them. The path links to the discussion of the problem perception, as the path 
choices refer to the findings from the discussion (vaguely-specified problem versus well-
specified problem, individual behaviour versus group behaviour).  
Step 1 is carried out by the Begin Card (see appendix 19), while the documentation of 
the step is supported by the Problem Documentation Card (see appendix 21), 
post-its and pens to ensure that the player(s) will be able to reflect upon the insights 
retrieved from playing the game. The Problem Documentation Card enables a comparison 
of the problem perception before and after playing the game (due to the fact that the 
Problem Documentation Card is also applied at the end of the game). Finally, the role of 
Problem Documentation Card supports a sense of productivity of the player(s), as it provides 
indicators to measure progress.
6.4.2 Preparation
In order to make the best initial problem analysis, the player(s) need(s) to have an initial 
understanding of the behavioural problem in question. Hence, to minimise guessing and 
pave the way for a focused process, it is strongly recommended to gather observations and 
statistical data of the problem behaviour (as current practice elaborated in section 4.3.1). 
However, as design projects often struggle with project duration, goal indicators and project 
costs (Ulrich & Eppinger 2012) the initial problem analysis can based on assumptions. However, 
this can affect the output of the game and is therefore a trade-off to discuss before playing 
the game. If possible, behavioural mapping could, parallel to the data collection activities, 
be beneficial to progress, as this will enable an even more thorough understanding of the 
problem. Yet, behavioural mapping is no easy task, and since the game guides the player(s) 
through structured ways of viewing and relating behaviour, behavioural mapping is not a 
required preparation, but a beneficial element.
6.4.3 Step by step procedure & outcome
1. Discuss and, once agreement is reached among the players, state the overall 
behavioural problem that the behavioural design project deals with. 
==PAGE:90==
78
2. Use the Begin Card (front) for reading and understand each of the seven problem 
layers. 
3. Discuss and identify how the seven problem layers are visualised in the given 
behavioural problem. Keep in mind that not all problem layers will seem relevant 
to the given problem behaviour. 
4. Once a layer has been identified, fill out a post-it describing the problem layer in the 
given problem behaviour context and place it on the Problem Documentation 
Card (front). 
5. When all layers have been discussed, go to the back of the Begin Card and go 
through the decision path, while focusing on answering the questions based on the 
previous discussions. 
6. Depending on the chosen path, the next step will be:
a. If the Begin Card states to start with either a yellow or a green Theory Card, 
pick such a card from the deck of Theory Cards. Keep in mind that all player(s) 
must go through the same card at once.
b. If the Begin Card states to assess the Theory Overview Wheel go to the Theory 
Overview Wheel and choose the theory found to have most relevance, based 
on the discussion that has just taken place. The choice of the first Theory 
Card should be based on the categories of theories (only the green individual 
behaviour cards or yellow social behaviour cards can be chosen as a starting 
point), as well as on the eight different topics.
The outcome of step 1 is an initial problem analysis and a chosen Theory Card for starting 
the problem behaviour analysis.
6.4.4 Considerations, limitations & alternatives
First, both the Begin Card and the Problem Documentation Card refers to the seven problem 
layers identified and described in section 2.3.1, yet the definition in the literature review 
refers only to six different layers. This is due to the fact that the layer “Story & Background” is 
divided into two separate layers in the game, as it offers a greater level of detail. The variance 
in the number of problem layers is looked upon as ignorable, with no implication for the 
level of detail in the literature review. Next, as stated on both the Begin Card and in the 
procedure steps, it is only possible to start the game with either a green or a yellow card. 
This is due to the fact that the output of the game was found to be at a higher level if the 
player(s) tried to understand the behaviour, before trying to figure out how to change it. 
This is a limitation of game-mode 2 (section 6.3.1) as it enables freedom in the game setting, 
which is then constrained by eliminating one of the theory categories (behaviour change) 
for the selection of a Theory Card. An alternative could be to open game-mode 2 up for 
choosing behaviour change theories as a first Theory Card, especially since the problem 
understanding in this game-mode should be quite substantial at this step.
==PAGE:91==
 79
6.5 Step 2: Problem behaviour analysis
Figure 6.4
Game contents of 
step 2: Theory Cards 
(front pages)
The purpose of step 2 is to, by using the Theory Cards as means (see appendix 22), 
create a thorough problem behaviour analysis by discussing different behavioural theories 
and reflecting upon their application in regards to the given problem behaviour context. This 
will allow the player(s) to create focused and valuable hypotheses (as already practiced in 
industry, section 4.3.1), each one explaining the problem behaviour in different contexts and 
ways. Although, some designers are not aware that they formulate hypotheses in general 
design projects, it is a task that is highly valuable, as formulating hypotheses to a given problem 
provides an explanation of the problem (based on theory) that directly reflects the devised 
solution (Boundless 2016; Koskinen et al. 2011). Thus, the game enables an already occurring 
activity of general design. First, the player(s) must understand a chosen behavioural theory and 
thereafter discuss it in relation to its appropriateness and relevance regarding the behavioural 
problem at hand. Here a game element of conflict can occur because if the specific Theory 
Card is not relevant for the player(s)’ problem behaviour, the Theory Card is an obstacle 
preventing the player(s) from easily achieving the goal of the game. Next, the purpose of 
the discussion is to create a hypothesis describing the problem behaviour in a very specific 
behavioural context (e.g. in regards to the aspects of intrinsic and extrinsic motivation, Deci & 
Ryan 2000). In order to ensure a high level of theoretical presence in the game, 21 behavioural 
theories in the categories individual behaviour (section 2.3.2.1), social behaviour (section 2.3.2.2) 
and behaviour change (section 2.3.3.1) are presented via three different colours of Theory 
Cards (green, yellow and purple). The different elements of the Theory Cards have been 
introduced to ease the understanding (e.g. a brief theoretical description) and translation 
of the theory into practice (e.g. an applied problem case), while at the same time giving 
the player(s) an in-depth understanding of the specific theory. Finally, the formulation of 
6.5.1 Purpose
Elaboration Likelihood Model
%pplied pVSFleQ case
How do I make sure that people do not smoke on 
planes?
The central route is efficient to use, once you 
have a person’s attention. Therefore it could be 
valuable to state that smoking is forbidden as a 
part of the security procedure in the beginning of 
the flight (i.e. when people are already reasoning 
with your logic). However, if the person is not 
paying attention to what you are saying, the 
peripheral route should be used. A way to do 
so, could be through small distractions leading to 
the same conclusions (e.g. through small pocket-
books stressing the dangers of smoking on planes 
or through strategically placed icons in the most 
obvious places).
*SVce ySuVselJ XS JSVQulaXe a LypSXLesis 
How can the behaviour in your own problem case be changed by addressing 
either the central processing route or the peripheral processing route?
&VieJ descVipXiSR The Elaboration Likelihood Model presents two different 
strategies of influencing the user through different processing routes.  The theory states that 
persuasion can happen via two types of processing routes: The central route (much cognitive 
processing, i.e. rational thinking) and the peripheral route (little cognitive processing, i.e. 
automatic responses). The idea in this theory is that behaviour is guided by attitude, which 
can be influenced by persuasion (e.g. through motivation and ability or context and message). 
Therefore the theory is valuable when considering how to enable a certain behaviour change, 
either through communication of a message or through the placement of an intervention.
Reference: 
Petty, R.E. & Cacioppo, J.T., 1986. The Elaboration Likelihood Model of Persuasion. Advances in Experimental Social 
Psychology, 19, pp.123–205.
G
        A bias relating to the theory on this card is the Framing Effect bias:  
             Drawing different conclusions from the same information, depending on how that 
information is presented
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
no
no
no
Direct attitude change
Direct 
attitude shift
Persuasive 
communication
Indirect 
cues
Motivation
Ability
Cognitive 
Processing
Social Identity Theory
%pplied pVSFleQ case
Why are people eating more healthy things at home 
than they are at work? 
For a problem like this, environmental context 
is valuable to consider, yet explaining it from the 
perspective of Social Identity Theory adds 
another layer of knowledge. The roles which the 
employees take part in influences the behaviours. 
Perhaps the wife is super active and will only eat 
salad, which leads to the husband eating healthier 
at home, and perhaps “relaxing” a bit on the 
health-front at work (or opposite). Or maybe, the 
majority of the employees are eating healthy, 
and in order to not be “outside” of the 
group, the husband eats healthy at work – but 
not at home, where his wife loves pizza and pasta.
*SVce ySuVselJ XS JSVQulaXe a LypSXLesis 
How can your problem be explained by either ingroup behaviour 
or out-group behaviour?
&VieJ descVipXiSR The Social Identity Theory offers insights as to why individuals 
strive to achieve or maintain a positive social identity. It states that individuals act on behalf 
of (in-)group concerns (being part of the group) and not on behalf of personal concerns. 
Individuals, when interacting within a certain group context, acquire different social roles, or 
“levels of self”, which influences their behaviour. The theory distinguishes between interpersonal 
behaviour (two or more individuals acting solely on the grounds of individual concerns and 
characteristics, e.g. wife and husband) and intergroup behaviour (two or more individuals that 
behave solely on the grounds of social concerns and characteristics, e.g. soldiers in an army 
group).
Reference: 
Tajfel, H. & Turner, J., 1979. An Integrative Theory of Intergroup Conflicts. In The Social Psychology of Intergroup Relations. 
Brooks Cole Publishing, pp. 33–47.
J
        A bias relating to the theory on this card is the Ingroup bias: 
       The tendency for people to give preferential treatment to others they perceive to be 
members of their own groups
Out-group
In-group
versus
Self-determination Theory
%pplied pVSFleQ case
How can I get people to recycle bottles?
Sustainability is a topic known to cause 
discussions and different opinions. People that 
are intrinsically motivated to recycle 
bottles, believe that it is for a good cause and see 
enjoyment in knowing that they do something 
good for mother earth. Maybe they have reached 
this intrinsic motivation by watching a movie or 
reading a book about plastic in the oceans. People 
that are not intrinsically motivated, i.e. see no 
enjoyment in taking the gross and sticky bottles 
to specific plastic sorting cans need extrinsic 
motivation instead. This could be in the form of 
a psysical bait, such as an economic prize.
&VieJ descVipXiSR The Self-determination Theory is valuable when dealing with 
problems relating to motivation. The theory offers insights into two kinds of motivation: 
Intrinsic motivation (an individual’s interest and enjoyment in the activity or task itself) and 
extrinsic motivation (activities that are not interesting and therefore an individual must be 
motivated externally). Motivation is a part of many other theories describing behaviour, yet 
what this theory states is that people need to witness their own competences (learn skills), 
connection (experience a sense of belonging), and autonomy (feel in control of own behaviours 
and goals) in order to change behaviour.
Reference: 
Deci, E.L. & Ryan, R.M., 2000. Self-Determination Theory and the Facilitation of Intrinsic Motivation, Social Development, and 
Well-Being. American Psychologist, 55(1), pp.68–78.
U
        A bias relating to the theory on this card is the Extrinsic Incentives bias: 
     When people view others as having (situational) extrinsic motivations, but (dispositional) 
intrinsic motivations for oneself
*SVce ySuVselJ XS JSVQulaXe a LypSXLesis 
How can the terms intrinsic motivation or extrinsic motivation be 
used to explain your own problem?
Non-self Determined
Self-Determined
Behaviour
Motivation
Regulatory 
Styles
Perceived 
Locus of 
Causality
Relevant 
Regulatory 
Processes
Amotivation
Non-regulation
Extrinsic motivation
Intrinsic motivation
Intrinsic Regulation
Integrated
Regulation
Identified 
Regulation
Introjected
Regulation
External 
Regulation
Impersonal
External
Somewhat 
External
Somewhat 
Internal
Internal
Internal
Nonintentional, 
Nonvaluing, 
Incompetence,
Lack of control
Compliance, 
External 
Rewards and 
Punishments
Self-control, 
Ego-involvement, 
Internal Rewards 
and Punishments
Personal 
Importance, 
Conscious 
Valuing
Congruence, 
Awareness, 
Synthesis with 
Self
Interest, 
Enjoyment, 
Inherent 
Satisfaction
==PAGE:92==
80
6.5.4 Limitations & alternatives
First, the main limitation in step 2 is the chain of Theory Cards which might lead to a Theory 
Card not (quite) relevant for the given behavioural design project. Thus, the player(s) may have 
to go through several Theory Cards before reaching a relevant. Yet, while this can seem as a 
6.5.2 Preparation
6.5.3 Step by step procedure & outcome
1. Flip the 10 minute hourglass. 
2. Start by reading the brief description of the theory in order to understand its 
content.
3. Read the behaviour bias stated in the green box, which is a phrase developed to 
describe a certain behaviour principle that can be relevant in the player(s) problem 
context.  
4. Read the applied problem case in order to understand the behavioural theory in a 
clearer way and see how it can be valuable for the specific problem context.
5. As a group, perform the task “Force yourself to formulate a hypothesis” in order 
to translate the theoretical knowledge from the theory into a relatable hypothesis 
applicable to the specific behavioural problem context. An example of such a task is: 
”How can your own problem be explained by the terms attitude, perceived behavioural 
control or subjective norms?”
6. If in doubt about any Theory Card element during the game, the player(s) can go 
to page 9-10 in the Guide Book. 
The outcome of step 2 is the first part of the behavioural problem analysis of the player(s)’ 
specific context, resulting in formulating hypotheses. 
No preparation is needed for this step. 
hypotheses is to be repeated until a semi-predetermined number of Theory Cards have 
been considered (each Theory Card guides the player(s) to the next card in an implicitly 
predetermined chain (see appendix 23)). The semi-predetermined number of Theory Cards 
to go through follows the definition: “a thorough behavioural analysis should consist of all three 
categories of behavioural theories to create a foundation of understanding the complexity of 
behaviour and to ensure integrative thinking” (section 2.3.3.2). Yet, the number of Theory Cards 
considered within each category is determined by the player(s) themselves, thus making the 
number of considered Theory Cards semi-predetermined. Furthermore, the predetermined 
chain ensures that the player(s) are constantly guided to a Theory Card that considers other 
topics relating to behavioural theory (the eight topics presented on the Theory Overview 
Wheel, section 6.6.1) than the ones just covered. The chain does so, as it only allows one 
similar topic between the linked Theory Cards (see appendix 23). 
This step 2 is carried out by applying the front page of the Theory Cards (one card per 
player) meanwhile the track of the time for each card is kept with the 10 min hourglass. 
==PAGE:93==
 81
6.6 Step 3: Problem behaviour validation
ATTITUDE
THINKING
CHANGE
STRATEGY
MOTIVATION
SOCIAL IMPACT
PRINCIPLES
of
BEHAVIOUR
HABITS
SELF-EFFICACY
N
A
A
A
B
C
D
D
E
E
F
F
G
G
G
I
J
K
L
M
K
L
M
O
P
T
O
P
U
Q
R
S
P
Q
S
Theory of Influence
Fogg’s Behaviour Model
Loughborough Model
Design Behaviour Intervention Model
AIDS Risk Reduction Model
Transtheoretical Model
Elaboration Likelihood Model
Nudging
Social Ecological Model
Social Identity Theory
Social Cognitive Theory of Self-regulation
Social Cognitive Theory
Socially Responsible Design Theory
Theory of Self-efficacy
Health Belief Model
Theory of Planned Behaviour
Theory of Interpersonal Behaviour
How Habits Works
Dual Process Theory
Theory of Heuristics & Biases
Self-determination Theory
 
Individual behaviour
S
ocial behaviour
Behaviour change
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
J
K
L
M
N
O
P
Q
R
S
T
U
Hypotheses:
Other considerations:
THEORIES
G
H
K
I
N
R
Behaviour change
Social behaviour
Individual behaviour
B
D
F
G
H
H
H
T
Figure 6.5
Game contents of step 3: 
Theory Cards (back pages) 
and Theory Overview Wheel
limitation for the player(s), it is not viewed as such, due to the tool’s purpose of challenging 
tunnel vision regarding theory inclusion. And as such, the linking of Theory Cards and forcing 
the player(s) to consider different perspectives of behavioural theories in a specific problem 
context deals with this. In other words, the order of the chain is carefully planned to introduce 
the player(s) to a new category of behavioural theories and as a result, the player(s) will 
constantly view the problem from new behaviour perspectives. Next, another limitation from 
the chain is the risk of player(s) coincidentally starting at the same Theory Card when playing 
the game again (which is not ideal when intending to expand theoretical knowledge). An 
alternative to this could be to include the possibility of choosing another Theory Card from 
the same category, but only if the limitation turns out to be a big frustration for the player(s). 
Consequently, these limitations can be fully eliminated by choosing game-mode 3 in step 
0 (section 6.4.1) which allows entirely free use of the Theory Cards with no instructions in 
terms of what Theory Cards to consider. Moreover, another limitation deals with the number 
of formulated hypotheses. In the game it is recommended to define one hypothesis per 
Theory Card per group playing. Yet, if the group consists of four players it can turn out to be 
difficult to agree on one or get all player(s) involved in defining one hypothesis. Alternatively, 
a workaround exists regarding an unrestricted number of hypotheses per Theory Card in the 
case of hypothesis disagreement. However, more hypotheses could jeopardise the player(s)’ 
selection of the top three hypotheses later on in step 4 (section 6.7). Finally, the last limitation 
of step 2 is that the Theory Cards are quite extensive information-wise and contain a lot 
of text which make them time consuming to read. Yet, this has to be put in contrast to the 
existing alternative, which requires one to read 40+ pages of an academic journal article just 
for one behavioural theory. Thus, the Theory Cards are in fact a simplification, despite their 
extensive appearance.
Elaboration Likelihood Model
G
That’s 
alright! Try to go 
and explore the: 
SOCIAL 
COGNITIVE 
THEORY (L)
Did this theory make it possible for you to 
formulate a hypothesis relevant to your problem?
YES
NO
Have you only applied one or 
two Theory Card colours to 
your problem case? 
YES
NO
Automatic 
behaviour
6e¾ecXiZe 
behaviour
Attitude
Motivation 
and ability
Context and 
message 
Decision
-making
Keep these key takeaways in mind when generating ideas in 
your further design work:
Great! 
Then go to the 
End Card
.. to finish the game
Remember 
to write a 
hypothesis on a 
post-it and put it on 
the Theory Overview 
Wheel
Remember 
to write the 
theory letter G 
on the post-it
Remember
 to put five discs on 
the G’s in attitude and 
thinking and motivation 
and habits and principles 
of behaviour on the 
Theory Overview 
Wheel
Social Identity Theory
J
That’s 
alright! Try to go 
and explore the:  
THEORY OF 
SELF-EFFICACY
(N)
Did this theory make it possible for you to 
formulate a hypothesis relevant to your problem?
YES
NO
Have you only applied one or 
two Theory Card colours to 
your problem case? 
YES
NO
Social cate-
gorisation
Positive 
social 
identity
Social roles
Ingroup 
behaviour
Outgroup 
behaviour
Expec-
tations of 
context
Keep these key takeaways in mind when generating ideas in 
your further design work:
Great! 
Then go to the 
End Card
.. to finish the game
Remember 
to write a 
hypothesis on a 
post-it and put it on 
the Theory Overview 
Wheel
Remember 
to write the 
theory letter J 
on the post-it
Remember
 to put a disc on 
the J in social 
impact on the 
Theory Overview 
Wheel
Self-determination Theory
U
That’s 
alright! Try to go 
and explore the: 
ELABORATION 
LIKELIHOOD 
MODEL (G)
Did this theory make it possible for you to 
formulate a hypothesis relevant to your problem?
YES
NO
Have you only applied one or 
two Theory Card colours to 
your problem case? 
YES
NO
Intrinsic 
motivation
Extrinsic 
motivation 
Competences
Experience 
a  sense of 
belogning
User 
control
Amotivation
Keep these key takeaways in mind when generating ideas in 
your further design work:
Great! 
Then go to the 
End Card
.. to finish the game
Remember 
to write a 
hypothesis on a 
post-it and put it on 
the Theory Overview 
Wheel
Remember 
to write the 
theory letter U 
on the post-it
Remember
 to put a disc on 
the U in 
motivation on the 
Theory Overview 
Wheel
==PAGE:94==
82
6.6.2 Preparation
The only preparation needed for this step is formulated hypotheses about the problem 
behaviour on post-its.
6.6.3 Step by step procedure & outcome
1. Flip over the Theory Card so that it faces the rear side.
2. Read the three reminder-tasks in order to remember
a. to write the formulated hypothesis on a post-it, and place it on the Theory 
Overview Wheel in the box saying “hypotheses”.
The purpose of step 3 is to visually provide the player(s) with a structured overview of the 21 
behavioural theories included in the game (see appendix 24) and their relation to the three 
behavioural theory categories (individual behaviour, social behaviour, and behaviour change) 
(section 2.3.2 and 2.3.3) and to eight topics relevant to behavioural theories (attitude, thinking, 
change strategy, motivation, social impact, self-efficacy, habits, and principles of behaviour). These 
eight topics are derived from the keywords describing the behavioural theories (in table 
2.1, 2.2, and 2.3), with the intended purpose of easing the reflection of how the different 
behavioural theories relate to each other. Yet, only eight topics are described in the game, 
despite the literature review presenting 10 keywords, as this was assessed through the 
iterations to enable better usability (the simplification from the 10 keywords to the eight 
topics can be seen in appendix 25). This division of eight topics ensures a relation across 
the behavioural theory categories, and especially a relation of the intuitively closest/most 
relevant topics. First, the player(s) must explicitly visualise the theory progress (i.e. through 
putting the hypothesis post-it on the Theory Overview Wheel and cover the theory letters 
with the appropriate amount of discs). Doing so will both make it possible for the player(s) 
to measure progress, while at the same time implicitly fulfil the sub-purpose of creating an 
indication of the missing topics in the behavioural problem analysis. Once the visualisation of 
the behavioural problem analysis progress has been shown, the player(s) must discuss and 
choose the path leading them into the next task of the game. Depending on the chosen path, 
the outcome will either lead the player(s) further into the chain of the Theory Cards or it will 
lead them towards the end of the game. This path requires little discussion, as it again follows 
the definition just described in section 6.5.1.
Step 3 is carried out by applying the back of the Theory Cards together with the 
Theory Overview Wheel. The documentation of the task is supported by post-its 
and pens and the progress on the board is visualised by the bag of discs. As with the 
Problem Documentation Card, post-its (and also discs) are applied to give the player(s) a 
sense of productivity and show clear indicators to measure progress. Further, using post-its 
to document the hypotheses (and for writing the theory letter), the player(s) are able to 
backtrack the progress and simultaneously ease the comparisons of the behavioural theories.
6.6.1 Purpose
==PAGE:95==
 83
6.6.4 Considerations & limitations 
As the Theory Overview Wheel refers to eight topics each relating to behavioural theories 
in different ways, it is worth noticing that these eight topics are based on the keywords found 
in table 2.1, 2.2, and 2.3, yet the names have been simplified in the game to make them 
more understandable and to enhance simplicity. A limitation from this is the risk of simplifying 
21 rather complex behavioural theories into eight more relatable and user-friendly topics. 
Compressing 21 behavioural theories into eight topics adds to the risk of lacking depth, which 
will only be visual to player(s) with a high level of behavioural design expertise. Although 
described as a limitation, it is rather a trade-off between theoretical depth and usability, i.e. 
usage for player(s) with limited experience of behavioural design as well.
6.7 Step 4: Game evaluation & documentation
Based on the game you/your group have now formulated several hypotheses. 
What you/your group should do now, is to try and identify the top 3 of 
your hypotheses in regards to the aspects of:
• 
Are the hypotheses realistic to address# (i.e. will it be possible to change the 
behaviour?)
• 
Are the hypotheses feasible# (i.e. will it be possible to make a solution for this#) 
• 
Will it provide value to the project to solve the identified hypotheses#
Once this is done, you can go to the back of this card to end the game! 
End Card 
front
1st hypothesis
2nd hypothesis
3rd hypothesis
place the post-it here
place the post-it here
place the post-it here
Figure 6.6
Game contents 
of step 4: End 
Card and Problem 
Documentation Card
b. to write the theory letter on the post-it.
c. to place a disc on the theory letter on the Theory Overview Wheel (or more 
discs as some letters occurs several times).
3. As a group, answer the questions in the decision path to determine further steps 
to be taken (either picking a new Theory Card or going directly to the End Card).
4. If in doubt about any Theory Card element during the game, the player(s) can go 
to page 9-10 in the Guide Book. 
The outcome of step 3 is an overview of the applied Theory Cards relations to the three 
categories of behavioural theories and the eight topics, as well as a visualised progress of the 
behavioural problem analysis (and also in the game).
Problem Documentation Card
back
Personal problems
Impersonal problems
Interpersonal problems
place the post-it here
place the post-it here
place the post-it here
Societal problems
place the post-it here
Story
place the post-it here
Background
place the post-it here
Frequency of change
place the post-it here
==PAGE:96==
84
6.7.2 Preparation
This task could be performed without going through the previous steps, as the only 
preparation needed for this step is an unspecified number of formulated hypotheses about 
the behavioural problem (written on post-its), which could come from other activities than 
this game. 
6.7.3 Step by step procedure & outcome
1. Rank and identify a top 3 of the strongest formulated hypotheses. This ranking 
should be based on the aspects of reality, feasibility, and created value.
2. Visualise the top 3 by placing the post-its on the End Card.
3. Go to the rear of the End Card and go through the decision path, while focusing 
on answering the questions based on the identified top 3.
6.7.1 Purpose
The purpose of step 4 is to create structured, flexible ways of evaluating the game output as 
well as enabling structured ways of documenting (and transferring) a behavioural problem 
analysis by discussing the formulated output’s (i.e. hypotheses) strengths and weaknesses. 
Doing so will allow for an even deeper level of reflection of the problem understanding, 
as it will visualise any clear gaps or lacks of knowledge. First, the player(s) must discuss and 
compare the hypotheses, based on the aspects of reality, feasibility, and created value (see 
appendix 20). The intention is to help the player(s) in validating their choices of hypotheses 
(section 5.2.2), while at the same time clearly visualising the complete amount of output 
created during the game. Once the discussion of the hypotheses has been completed, the 
player(s) must discuss and choose the path leading them either further into the game or 
towards ending the game. If the player(s) choose to end the game, they are prompted 
to repeat the problem layer task from the Begin Card, yet this time using the back of the 
Problem Documentation Card (see appendix 21). Repeating this task will create means for 
comparing the achieved behavioural insights as well as visualising whether ending the game is 
the correct choice or not. This visualisation is introduced with quite a level of freedom, as the 
player(s) themselves choose whether the problem understanding has enhanced significantly 
enough to end the game. If the player(s) have reached a quantifiable outcome (three strong 
hypotheses for their problem behaviour) the purpose of the game is achieved which means 
that the player(s) have won and the game is ended. If it indeed is the correct choice to the 
end game, the final tasks will be to gather the output (formulated hypotheses and applied 
Theory Cards) and apply them in the further behavioural design activities. If the game is not 
ended, the player(s) are sent back to look at more behavioural theories to enhance an even 
deeper problem behaviour understanding, before being asked to end the game again.
This step is carried out by using the End Card and the Problem Documentation 
Card (back) supported by post-its and pens.
==PAGE:97==
 85
6.7.4 Limitations & alternatives
Ending the game is based on a subjective opinion of the player(s) which is a limitation, as 
player(s) with limited experience of behavioural design may find it difficult to judge whether 
or not a given hypothesis is strong. However, the whole game is based on the assumption 
that the Theory Cards will guide the player(s) through different behavioural theory categories 
and topics, and support them with different perspectives on the behavioural problem to 
make them able to define strong hypotheses. Additionally, the task of filling out the Problem 
Documentation Card should make the player(s) able to see whether or not they have 
obtained a deeper problem understanding. Still, this limitation contains two risks, 1. Ending the 
game while still lacking problem understanding and 2. Leaving after applying 21 Theory Cards 
without knowing whether or not the problem understanding is thorough enough. In other 
words, the game guides and structures a thoroughly behavioural problem analysis, but in the 
end the game’s output depends on the player(s) skills and confidence. However, other game-
ending scenarios might create more complexity at the expense of usability and thus this 
limitation is a trade-off between rigidity and flexible use, whereas the latter is favoured and 
viewed most beneficial, since it relies on the player(s) own ability to make good reflections. 
Consequently, this limitation is difficult to eliminate.
4. Depending on the chosen path, the next step will be: 
a. If the hypotheses are strong:
i. 
Discuss and identify how the seven problem layers are visualised in the now 
thoroughly analysed behavioural problem. Once a layer has been identified, 
fill out a post-it describing the problem layer in the given problem behaviour 
context, and place it on the back of the Problem Documentation Card. 
ii. If the front Problem Documentation Card have been filled out before 
playing the game, compare and contrast the two different levels of problem 
behaviour analysis.
iii. Depending on the outcome follow the path to either go back to assess the 
Theory Overview Wheel or to end the game.
b. If something is still missing from the hypotheses: 
i. 
Follow the path and go back to assess the Theory Overview Wheel and 
choose a new theory, relating to the least covered topic. 
5. Once the game is ended, remember to take the formulated hypotheses and their 
relating Theory Cards, and include both in the further behavioural design project 
activities.
6. To acquire a level of inspiration for the further design activities, the back of the 
Guide Book can help the player(s) to continue the process, as it describes several 
different behavioural design approaches possibly relevant to the further design 
work (found in section 2.3.4).
The outcome of step 4 is a ranking of the top three most feasible, realistic, and valuable 
hypotheses and their corresponding Theory Cards regarding the behavioural problem.
==PAGE:98==
86
6.8 Accessibility & ownership
In order to make sure that the Super Cool Analysis Tool will be applied and found valuable 
in an industry context, the two aspects of accessibility and ownership have been carefully 
considered and incorporated in the Super Cool Analysis Tool.
To ensure easy accessibility of the Super Cool Analysis Tool, it should be available to companies 
through two options in which the full game experience is guaranteed: The first option is to 
download the tool as files from a web page, print them and cut them out. However, in order 
to ensure the full game experience, this option would require a laser cutter and associated 
material (acrylic, plexiglass, wood etc.) to print the discs, as well as an A2 printer to print the 
Theory Overview Wheel. Thus, if these facilities are not available at the company, the second 
option (recommended) is to buy a fully prepared version of the Super Cool Analysis Tool for 
a small amount of money (150-200 DKK) due to production and delivery costs. 
To create ownership of the Super Cool Analysis Tool, the initial suggestion was to incorporate 
structured ways of creating evaluation into the one of the features in the tool (section 5.2.2). 
However, due to the fact that a separate evaluation step appeared to provide no extra value 
to the core of the concept (the interaction between the Theory Cards and the Theory 
Overview Wheel), the evaluation step was removed and other more focused methods for 
creating ownership were applied, such as:
• Each of the steps in the Super Cool Analysis Tool have been developed with the 
aim of fitting into a step-by-step process and at the same time being able to 
stand alone (without the necessity of previous steps being performed). Doing 
so balances flexibility and rigidity (section 6.7.4) to make it possible for different 
industry companies (several of which will be elaborated on in the following section 
6.9) to take ownership of the tool.
• The option for the companies of updating the Theory Cards, through the add-
on of blank Theory Cards, provides the possibility of incorporating behavioural 
theories (not part of the original card set) which the companies find valuable and 
want to apply in their current practice. By doing so the companies can create their 
“own version” of the Super Cool Analysis Tool, and hence add ownership in each 
individual company. To enhance the simplicity of updating the card set, different 
rules (mentioned in section 6.3.1) have been established to ensure ongoing 
coherence of the purpose of the game, despite new behavioural theories being 
added. However, no specific guidelines exist regarding linking new Theory Cards 
to the three behavioural theories categories or eight topics. In such cases the 
companies are advised to look up the description of the categories and the topics 
in the Guide Book.
• As mentioned in section 6.3.4, it is recommended that the companies make use of 
a facilitator, for instance the person responsible for the Super Cool Analysis Tool 
(i.e. taking ownership), when playing the game. While the Guide Book provides 
==PAGE:99==
 87
6.9 Imagined use cases
While the steps in the Super Cool Analysis Tool can be applied in many different ways, either 
as consecutive steps or as inspirational individual activities, two different types of application 
will likely influence the usage: Outcome driven application and output driven application. 
Outcome driven application focuses on the non-case dependent outcome (e.g. applying the 
Super Cool Analysis Tool to obtain a buy-in with customers or applying the tool to show 
customers insights in behavioural design practice). Output driven application focuses on the 
actual case-specific immediate output (e.g. applying the Super Cool Analysis Tool to figure out 
why certain behaviour occurs and to understand it). While both types can be applied by the 
same group of designers, each application will have a different meaning for the needs of the 
designer and the expected results of playing the game. Figure 6.7 (appendix 26) illustrates 
the two types of application in relation to the Double Diamond Model (Design Council 
2007), as well as visualises likely main purposes of applying either outcome-driven or output-
driven application in the given process step. 
6.9.1 Use case 1: Outcome driven application in 
design consultancies
This use case could be imagined to take place in the plan and prepare phase of the design 
process, where the behavioural design project team (in this case consisting of a designer, 
behavioural economist and a project manager) would like to show the client company 
how they would analyse a given behavioural problem (e.g. cigarette butts in Copenhagen 
Municipality). Therefore, the aim of the application of the Super Cool Analysis Tool is to 
give the behavioural design project team an opportunity to impress and create interest 
guidance for the task of being a facilitator, the role in itself is not aimed at any specific 
kind of employee (e.g. project manager). Thus, the role can be enacted by different 
employees and additionally the facilitator role can shift between behavioural design 
projects, to ensure that no insights or time is lost in the case of employee rotations.
Outcome driven
Output driven
plan and prepare
discover
define
develop
deliver
Used as a mean for 
communication, to convince 
customers of the approach for 
the project
Used as a mean for discovering 
the potential of behavioural 
design, to determine if 
behavioural design should be 
applied in the project
Used as a mean for defining 
and understanding the targeted 
problem behaviour, to clarify 
possible project-goals
2
Used as a mean for 
discovering the potential of 
behavioural design, to realise 
potential project focuses 
Used as a mean for defining
 the targeted problem 
behaviour, to determine the 
target group
1
3
Figure 6.7
Types of 
application in 
relation to design 
project phases
While being aware of other relevant use cases, the following sections (6.9.1-6.9.3) describe 
three examples of use cases (i.e. different applications) likely to occur in three different kinds 
of companies: Behavioural design consultancies (definition in section 4.2), engineering design 
consultancies (definition in section 4.2), and engineering design companies (such as product 
manufacturing).
==PAGE:100==
88
This use case differs from the two previous use cases, as it describes the application of the 
Super Cool Analysis Tool in an engineering design company (a type of company not considered 
nor mentioned earlier in this thesis). Despite the fact that this type of company is imagined 
to be unfamiliar with behavioural design, there is still a huge potential for applying the Super 
6.9.3 Use case 3: Output driven application in 
engineering design companies
As opposed to use case 1, this use case mainly focuses on the output of the tool (i.e. 
applying the Super Cool Analysis Tool for the immediate benefits transferable to the project 
activities). This use case could be imagined to take place in the define phase of the design 
process, where the behavioural design project team (consisting of a behavioural economist 
and a designer) wishes to clarify problem hypotheses in relation to enabling physical activities 
in office spaces. The aim of the application of the Super Cool Analysis Tool is completely 
focused on producing results for the project, and therefore the behavioural design project 
team applies game-mode 1 (section 6.3.1), as the previous project data collection showed 
no clear behavioural coherence. This use case is likely to occur in both behavioural design 
consultancies and in engineering design consultancies, yet it would affect current work practice 
differently in the two kinds of consultancies. In engineering design consultancies, current work 
practice would change a lot, due to the fact that structured ways of developing a problem 
understanding require a larger amount of focus and time than what is currently being spent 
(section 4.3.1). In behavioural design consultancies (experts in understanding behavioural 
problems) applying this tool would not change current work practices much, yet it would 
add more structure and effectiveness to an already present process, while simply requiring a 
little extra time. Nonetheless, in both types of design consultancies a further formalisation of 
documentation of the results of the gamified tool is required (e.g. through a documentation 
form). 
6.9.2 Use case 2: Output driven application in 
design consultancies
from the client company (i.e. outcome driven). Thus, in order to show structure and clarify 
the capabilities of the specific design consultancy, the behavioural design project team, in 
cooperation with the clients, will apply game-mode 2 (section 6.3.1). This use case is likely 
to occur in both behavioural design consultancies as well as in engineering design consultancies, 
as both of them relies on the loyalty of returning client companies and winning bids on 
projects. Applying the Super Cool Analysis Tool in this use case would not change current 
work practice a lot, yet it would provide a fast opportunity to impress and a structured way 
of showing what behavioural design has to offer in the specific design consultancy. As the 
application focuses on the outcome (and not the output) of the Super Cool Analysis Tool, 
the need for documentation would be limited, and further formalisation of documentation is 
not needed for this use case.
==PAGE:101==
 89
6.10 Conclusion & key findings of the Super 
Cool Analysis Tool
The Super Cool Analysis Tool is a gamified front-end analysis tool that supports designers 
in making a thorough behavioural problem analysis with respect to integrative thinking of 
behavioural theory inclusion. Moreover, the Super Cool Analysis Tool enables better validation 
of said analysis and ensures translatable documentation throughout the analysis steps. The 
Super Cool Analysis Tool is aimed at designers working with (or interested in applying) 
behavioural design, by providing structured ways of understanding and overviewing different 
categories of behavioural theories (section 2.3.2 and 2.3.3) and making them adaptable to 
different problem contexts. Further, the key findings from the presentation of the Super Cool 
Analysis Tool are the following:
• As a pre-game step, step 0 prepares the player(s) for the game and explains 
different instructions, formulated to enhance the understanding of the game’s aim 
and to ensure maximum focus on the output from the very beginning of the game.
• As the first main step, step 1 facilitates an initial problem analysis based on a 
systematic reflection of the problem to be dealt with and linked to an analysis of 
seven different problem layers (section 2.3.1). This is determined as the first step 
of the game, as it prompts an initial discussion of the behavioural problem at hand 
and leads the player(s) into an analysing mindset (which is needed in the rest of 
the game).
• As a prolongation, by discussing different behavioural theories in relation to the 
same problem behaviour context step 2 facilitates a deeper level of behavioural 
problem analysis. Furthermore, the step ensures a certain level of discussion, 
Cool Analysis Tool. This is because engineering design companies aim to develop the best 
possible products (as selling these products are their main income) and thus they deal with 
user involvement and usability, i.e. behavioural design could be seen as a valuable input in 
their design practice. For instance this use case could take place in the discovery phase, 
where a UX group in a large manufacturing company wishes to introduce the Super Cool 
Analysis Tool to a specific design team, to get a different view on a project concerning the 
development of a new bike helmet. Therefore, the aim is completely focused on producing 
results for the project, and since the design team are believed to have limited experience 
with behavioural design, they apply game-mode 1 (section 6.3.1). This use case would change 
current work practice a lot, because the UX employees would have to take ownership of 
the Super Cool Analysis Tool and appoint a facilitator each time it is applied. Additionally, due 
to the fact that engineering design companies often consist of many different departments 
(each one responsible for their own part of the process), there would be an extensive need 
for documentation of the output of the Super Cool Analysis Tool, since all decisions must be 
traceable.  
==PAGE:102==
90
due to the chain of behavioural theories, forcing the player(s) to describe and 
understand the problem in relation to very different aspects and topics. The Super 
Cool Analysis Tool focuses on theory inclusion in the analysis phase of a design 
project, due to the fact that it is developed based on the belief that theory driven 
behavioural design results in the most successful interventions.
• Step 3 starts a reflection of how the different behavioural theories relate to each 
other in regards to the aspects of what behaviour do they address (individual, 
social or change) and in regards to the topic describing the theory (section 2.3.2 
and 2.3.3). This reflection is obtained through a clearly visualised overview of the 
different behavioural theories, which at the same time provides clear indicators for 
measuring progress.
• Finally, step 4 facilitates a comparison of the initial behavioural problem 
understanding, discussed in step 1, with the achieved behavioural problem 
understanding, determined in step 4. This allows for an evaluation of the game 
output, while visualising any clear gaps or lacks of knowledge in regards to 
behavioural design. Finally, step 4 guides the player(s) in regards to transferring 
the obtained understanding into the further design process activities by, among 
other things, referring to different behavioural design approaches (section 2.4.3) 
applicable in the later design phases.
Regarding application in industry, aspects such as accessibility and ownership of the Super 
Cool Analysis Tool have been considered, as well as different possible use cases. By 
considering these aspects in the development of the Super Cool Analysis Tool, a better, 
and more continuous, application of the tool should have been ensured. However, direct 
implementation of the Super Cool Analysis Tool has not been conducted, and therefore 
certain central elements, crucial for the application of the tool, have not yet been considered 
nor described in the given context. Therefore, the next chapter (7) discusses the different 
contributions, implications and limitations of the Super Cool Analysis Tool, together with a 
discussion of the thesis in general. 
==PAGE:103==
Chapter 7
Discussion
==PAGE:104==
92
7.1 Introduction to the Discussion
This chapter aims at discussing the Super Cool Analysis Tool in relation to the research 
framework and the findings from the Literature Review (chapter 2) and in relation to the 
results from the Investigation of Current Practice (chapter 4). Section 7.2 highlights the 
contributions of the Super Cool Analysis Tool, whereas section 7.3 highlights the implications 
that the thesis will have for both design research and design practice. Finally, section 7.4 
discusses the theoretical and practical limitations of the thesis.
7.2 Contributions of the support tool
The Super Cool Analysis Tool offers structure and guidance for the front-end activities in 
behavioural design projects by providing means for making a coherent problem behaviour 
analysis through the five steps of: Preparation and Instructions, Initial Problem Analysis, Problem 
Behaviour Analysis, Problem Behaviour Validation, and finally, Game Evaluation and Documentation 
(see description in chapter 6). The core of the Super Cool Analysis Tool (the five steps) 
directly reflects the research framework of the thesis (section 2.4), as it systematically 
represent the front-end steps a designer should go through to develop successful behaviour 
change interventions (section 2.4.1.1). Thus, the Super Cool Analysis tool can be regarded 
as an analytical behavioural design support tool consisting of a series of, both separate or 
consecutive, analytical design steps. Like few existing behavioural design tools the Super Cool 
Analysis Tool exclusively focuses on the activity of understanding, analysing and reflecting 
upon a problem behaviour, based on a combination of specific theoretical insights and 
practical observations. To highlight a few, the Super Cool Analysis Tool is associated with the 
Developing an Intervention toolkit (Community Tool Box 2016a) and the Persuasive by Design 
Model (Hermsen et al. 2014). While both of these tools communicate a problem behaviour 
analysis in a somewhat similar way to the Super Cool Analysis Tool, none of them provides 
clear visualisation of the benefits of making such a problem analysis. Providing structure 
for the problem analysis is important, yet if the designer fails to see the purpose of the 
results of the analysis, no value will be gained from this activity. Further, only the Persuasive 
by Design Model (Hermsen et al. 2014) explicitly reflects current behaviour thinking, by 
implicitly drawing parallels to several models of behaviour and theories of change. However, 
the Persuasive by Design Model, limited by its complexity, offers little explanation of the 
behavioural theories most likely to supply the designer with a better and deeper behavioural 
understanding. Therefore, the Super Cool Analysis Tool is a valuable contribution to the 
existing population of behavioural design support tools, as it guides the designer through 
clearly goal-oriented structured steps of making a problem analysis. At the same time it links 
these steps to explanations from explicit behavioural theories, each of them emphasising 
the purpose of the analysis. This combination of activities gradually increases the designer’s 
behavioural understanding as well as it simplifies the complexity currently affecting theory 
inclusion in behavioural design. 
==PAGE:105==
 93
7.2.1 Comprehensive visualisation of problem 
behaviour influences
The Super Cool Analysis Tool contributes to current problem understanding practice 
(achieved in step 1) as it divides the problem behaviour analysis in relation to seven different 
problem layers: Personal, impersonal, interpersonal, societal, story, background, and frequency 
of change (section 2.3.1.2 and 6.4.4). Defining the behavioural problem is nothing new in 
the behavioural design field, as several behavioural researchers in literature state problem 
identification, definition, and understanding as the first step in behavioural design (Datta & 
Mullainathan 2012; Tania 2017), and further that identifying the root of the problem is 
essential towards finding a solution (Datta & Mullainathan 2012; Cross 2008; Andreasen 
et al. 2015). Yet, few researchers distinguish between analysing problems in relation to 
how behaviour is affected on different levels (i.e. layers), despite the fact that these layers 
logically do affect problem contexts in their own manner (section 2.3.1). However, from 
combining the results of the few researchers who actually do distinguish between some 
type of problem layers (Tromp et al. 2011; Darnton 2008b; Prager 2012; Fogg & Hreha 
2010), a correlation between viewing problems in relation to the perspectives individual, 
social, and time is shown. For instance, Fogg’s & Hreha’s (2010) Behaviour Wizard considers 
the frequency of a target behaviour and thus takes the time perspective into account, yet 
this is in relation to the target behaviour and how this behaviour can be changed, and 
not specifically in relation to understanding the given problem behaviour. Moreover, the 
Behaviour Wizard considers neither the individual perspective nor social perspective of behavioural 
problems, as it mainly focuses on the frequency of behaviours. In contrast, the Developing 
an Intervention toolkit (Community Tool Box 2016a) contains a problem behaviour 
identification step where personal factors, environmental factors and implicit time factors 
(“people’s experience and history”) are considered through seven questions. The questions are 
quite comprehensive, yet with no overview in terms of their interconnections and individual 
contributions to explaining the specific behaviour, however asking these questions can lead to 
a deep problem analysis. Therefore, despite the fact that both behavioural design approaches 
to some extent reflects the three problem behaviour perspectives (either individual, social 
or time), neither the Behaviour Wizard nor the Developing an Intervention toolkit provide 
the designer with an easily obtainable way of identifying the root of the problem from 
interconnecting different problem affecting levels. On the contrary, the Super Cool Analysis 
Tool enables a problem understanding based on existing behavioural literature and clearly 
visualises the interconnections between the problem layers. Hence, the Super Cool Analysis 
Apart from this main contribution, the following sections (7.21-7.2.3) aim at discussing 
especially how the specific steps of the Super Cool Analysis Tool (namely step 1, 2 and 3) 
contribute to new knowledge in the field of behavioural design. This is done by discussing the 
logical processing in literature to the final version of the Super Cool Analysis Tool combined 
with a sense of practicality (derived from a comparison of existing behavioural design tools 
and approaches), which features the Super Cool Analysis Tool’s uniqueness and novelty.
==PAGE:106==
94
Step 2 of the Super Cool Analysis Tool elaborates the distinction of the three categories of 
behavioural theories: Individual behaviour, social behaviour, and behaviour change (section 
2.3.2 and 2.3.3). Several researchers in literature clearly distinguish between these categories 
and stress the importance of understanding the differences of their purposes and aims 
(Prager 2012; Darnton 2008b; Morris et al. 2012). Yet, behavioural design practice reflect no 
such distinction when including behavioural theories in behavioural design projects. Instead, 
in practice an individual division of the behavioural theories in regards to topics or different 
clusters of biases is widely applied due to preferences and familiarity (section 4.3.2). The 
same division is mirrored in the Behaviour Change Wheel (Michie et al. 2011). Although the 
Behaviour Change Wheel communicates different types of “sources of behaviour” (clearly 
derived from literature) it fails at including the designer in understanding them individually, as 
well as in communicating exactly what sources that are necessary to apply in order to achieve 
a successful behaviour change. To some extent, this division (seen both in current practice and 
in the Behaviour Change Wheel) displays a disconnected application of the theories in regard 
to their purpose and aim. From this, two different consequences arise: 1. Designers with 
limited experience of behavioural design have no experience with these behavioural theories 
and are therefore neither able to make their own applicable division of the theories, nor able 
to understand the divisions currently implicitly applied in behavioural design approaches. 2. 
Designers with comprehensive experience of behavioural design who lack experience with 
a given theory, unintended adapt a tunnel vision in regards to applying only formerly applied 
behavioural theories, which results in a non-optimal application of the theories. Therefore, 
the Super Cool Analysis Tool adds a valuable behavioural design contribution, as it provides 
a theoretical framework for understanding how the three categories of behavioural theories 
interconnect and thus add valuable insights – all of which require an integrative thinking 
of the three categories. Doing so will enhance the probability of applying the behavioural 
theories accordingly (e.g. applying theories of change to change behaviour and not to explain 
behaviour (Bhattacharyya et al. 2006)). 
7.2.3 Overview and forced reflection of behavioural 
theories 
Finally, the Super Cool Analysis Tool offers a reflection of behavioural theories through a 
holistic overview of 21 chosen behavioural theories, which relates them to each other and 
to the descriptive topics: Attitude, thinking, change strategy, motivation, social impact, self-efficacy, 
habits, and principles of behaviour (section 6.6.1). Dividing behaviour in relation to simplified 
descriptive topics (as mentioned in the previous section 7.2.2) is not a novel thing to the field 
7.2.2 Theoretical framework for increasing integrative 
thinking
Tool does create a valuable contribution to the field of behavioural design, as it provides a 
new way of visualising and structuring behavioural problems.
==PAGE:107==
 95
of behavioural design. For instance, both The Behaviour Change Wheel (Michie et al. 2011) 
and The MINDSPACE Way (Dolan et al. 2012) do the same. Whereas the Behaviour Change 
Wheel describes three “sources of behaviour” (motivation, capability, and opportunity), the 
MINDSPACE Way describes nine “robust effects” on behaviour (messenger, incentives, norms, 
defaults, salience, priming, affect, commitments, and ego). Both divisions of topics are derived 
from a best-judgement of categorising relevant behavioural literature, aimed at reducing the 
complexity of understanding behaviour (Michie et al. 2011). And due to the fact that the 
reasoning behind the division of the eight topics in the Super Cool Analysis Tool is the same 
(as they are based on the design contributions from the literature review sections 2.3.2.1, 
2.3.2.2 and 2.3.3.1, see appendix 25), this is not a main contribution to the field of behavioural 
design. However, combining this division with the forced chain of reflecting upon dissimilar 
behavioural theories is the Super Cool Analysis Tool’s novel contribution to behavioural design. 
It is a valuable contribution, as it in a systematic and thoroughly contemplated way guides the 
designer through enforced reflection resulting in a deeper and better understanding of the 
behavioural theories. Doing so boosts the designer’s capabilities of understanding behavioural 
theory while at the same time reflecting upon their strengths and weaknesses in relation 
to each other. All of which eventually results in building up a theoretical back-catalogue of 
behavioural theories.
7.3 Implications for research and practice
Based on Super Cool Analysis Tool’s valuable contributions to the field of behavioural design, 
this thesis can in many ways be seen as a substantial asset for both future research and 
practice. Therefore, the following two sections (7.3.1 and 7.3.2) will elaborate on implications 
arising in regards to behavioural design research and behavioural design practice.
7.3.1 Implications for design research
As presented in this thesis, current behavioural design researchers have dealt little with 
structuring and defining existing behavioural theories, or approaches, in relation to each 
other. And those who have (Niedderer et al. 2014; Darnton 2008b; Morris et al. 2012), 
focus either on sustainable innovation or on matching specific behaviour with specific 
behavioural models. Nevertheless, current behavioural design research does mirror an 
understanding of the differences and significances of the two kinds of behavioural theories 
(models of behaviour and theories of change) (Prager 2012; Darnton 2008a; Morris et 
al. 2012). Yet, still a gap exists between on one side the realisation of the importance of 
an integrative thinking of both models of behaviour and theories of change, and on the 
other side the actual visualisation of this knowledge in behavioural design frameworks (i.e. 
design approaches). This gap is further emphasised in this thesis, as the results of the study 
(chapter 4) show that, despite the fact that integrative thinking is somewhat implicitly present 
in current behavioural design practice, an explicit and structured connection between the 
integrative thinking and practical application is missing. Therefore, an implication of this thesis 
==PAGE:108==
96
7.3.2 Implications for design practice 
is the expansion of understanding the behavioural theories’ interconnected relations. This 
acknowledgement forms a suggestion for future design research in exploring and studying 
the importance and significance of applying integrative thinking in behavioural design projects.
A second implication of this thesis is the seven problem layer distinction’s contribution to 
current research of understanding problems in a behavioural context. Here a gap exists 
in current behavioural design research, as no researchers mirror a similar visualisation of 
problem influences, and thus the distinction in this thesis have been brought together by 
fragmented pieces of research. This acknowledgement can be part of future design research 
as well, in determining the effects problem perspectives have on behaviour as well as in 
exploring and studying each effect’s significance. This is an important issue to investigate, 
since research shows that a better understanding of the factors contributing to certain types 
of behaviours leads to a deeper understanding of the problem, which undoubtedly leads to 
more successful behavioural design interventions. 
The introduction of the theoretical framework will enable designers in applying behavioural 
theories in their behavioural design projects in a more practical way, which is important 
as theory based design is more effective than non-theory based design (Glanz & Bishop 
2010; Michie et al. 2008; Henkemans et al. 2015). While several current behavioural design 
approaches (Hermsen et al. 2014; Michie et al. 2011; Wendel 2014) do implicitly include the 
same categories of behavioural theories (individual behaviour, social behaviour, and behaviour 
change), a gap exists between simplifying the inclusion of these complex theories and 
extending the designer’s level of abstraction in regards to expanding theoretical behavioural 
expertise. Hence, as a practical implication designers should use this theoretical framework 
for enabling integrative thinking of behavioural theories, as well as for obtaining an overview 
and a more comprehensive reflection of these behavioural theories in their design work. This 
applies to designers with limited experience of behavioural design whom, with the help of 
this thesis, should be capable of obtaining an understanding the similarities and differences 
of the three categories of behavioural theories, and use this to expand their capabilities and 
current level of behavioural knowledge. Likewise, it applies to designers with comprehensive 
experience of behavioural design whom, with the help of this thesis, are forced to reflect 
upon their choices, and especially their deselection, of included behavioural theories, which 
should help them eliminate their current level of tunnel vision in regards to theory inclusion. 
Another practical implication of this thesis is the output of an analysis tool applicable to all 
kinds of professions involved in behavioural design projects (or projects open to investigating 
behavioural influences). Despite the fact that the investigations of both literature and practice 
in the thesis focus on designers with comprehensive experience of behavioural design, the 
Super Cool Analysis Tool aims at a wide application context. Thus, both companies and 
consultancies with limited or comprehensive experience of behavioural design interested in 
==PAGE:109==
 97
behavioural design will be able to apply the Super Cool Analysis Tool, through the facilitation 
of a shared language and a simplified “middle ground”. As a result, The Super Cool Analysis 
Tool enables different professions in the behavioural design project teams to participate in 
activities currently regarded as non-beneficial or as without any value adding contribution.
The two implications presented above is based on the work and the findings of this thesis 
(i.e. the development and use of the Super Cool Analysis Tool). Yet, the implications should 
still have an effect on designers choosing not to apply the Super Cool Analysis Tool as current 
(and future) designers should know or acknowledge that more time should be spent in 
the problem analysis phase. And additionally, that an open approach and integrative thinking 
of behavioural theories will add to the probability of developing successful solutions in 
behavioural design projects.
7.4 Limitations
Following the nature of research projects, some limitations regarding the methods and the 
representativeness of the results of the thesis exist. The following sections outline the five 
most essential and critical limitations of the thesis’s contributions.
7.4.1 Use context of the support tool
The first limitation applies to the usage of the tool, as the Super Cool Analysis Tool is a front-
end analysis tool and not a synthesis design tool, meaning that the Super Cool Analysis Tool 
does not offer in depth support to designers in all phases of a behavioural design project, but 
only the first initial phase of behavioural design - namely problem analysis. This is a limitation, 
since the application of the Super Cool Analysis Tool requires certain knowledge about what 
output to expect from the tool, when to apply it and how to transfer this output into the further 
design activities. To eliminate or reduce this limitation tool features, such as the Guide Book, 
were incorporated specifically with the aim of addressing these three w’s (what, when and 
how). However, actually overcoming this limitation requests an application of the Guide book 
in accordance with its intended manner.
7.4.2 Limited amounts of research about behavioural 
problem influences
Discovering and investigating current ways of distinguishing behavioural problem influences 
(section 2.3.1) revealed limited sources of literature and research concerning this topic. 
Therefore, a complete visualisation of problem influencing perspectives (i.e. the problem 
layers) was distilled by fragmented pieces of literature. This limitation does not impair any 
of the overall contributions of the thesis, it merely implies that it cannot be fully ruled out 
that other problem layers can as well be valuable to consider in the process of obtaining a 
comprehensive problem understanding of behaviour. 
==PAGE:110==
98
7.4.4 Lack of validation
The most significant limitation of the thesis is the lack of validating the Super Cool Analysis 
Tool in an experimental manner. Proof of concept has been verified through several iterations 
and involvement of several relevant actors. However, there is no significant proof that the 
Super Cool Analysis Tool will enable designers with limited experience of behavioural design in 
building a theoretical back-catalogue or that the tool will enable designers with comprehensive 
experience of behavioural design in extending their theoretical back-catalogue and diversity 
of theory application. In order to prove the significance of the Super Cool Analysis Tool, 
experimental validation sessions must be conducted and their results must be analysed in 
order to conclusively determine the difference created by the tool. This limitation does not 
obstruct any of the contributions stated in the previous sections, as it is the next evident 
step of making the Super Cool Analysis Tool ready for real-world application. Moreover, the 
aspects of conducting experimental validation sessions will be elaborated in the description 
of further work for this thesis (chapter 8). 
7.4.5 Generalisability 
From limitations of the study (chapter 4) the Super Cool Analysis Tool to some extent lacks 
generalisability, due to the fact that the interviews were conducted with only Danish design 
consultancies, and thus the results seem non-representative from an international point 
of view. However, there is an underlying assumption (confirmed by including international 
literature) that behavioural design is performed in the same way across cultural borders (i.e. 
shared application of behavioural theories, hypotheses, and barriers). Therefore, this has no 
implications for the contributions of the thesis, as further studies of including international 
companies/consultancies to confirm/reject this assumption are simply required to validate 
and accommodate the tool for an international context. This is also the next logical step 
elaborated in the description of further work for this thesis (chapter 8).
7.4.3 Simplified topics relating to behavioural theories
To support usability and clarity of the theory overview, the 21 chosen behavioural theories 
were divided into eight simplified topics, all in different ways relating to and describing 
behaviour. Since the determination of the eight topics is logically based on a contrast and 
comparison of different behavioural theories, it is prone to some level of subjectivity as no clear 
rules or guidelines for relating the behavioural theories to these topics exist.  Furthermore, while 
other researchers have divided behavioural theories in regards to topics as well, the division 
applied in this thesis is not precisely the same as any of the previous divisions. Consequently, 
despite the attempt of making the eight topics as broad and applicable as possible, there is 
a risk of designers adding a behavioural theory to the Super Cool Analysis Tool that is not in 
line with any of the current eight topics. This does not harm the overall contributions of the 
Super Cool Analysis Tool, it merely emphasises the need for further research to prove the 
representativeness and applicability of this division of behavioural theories. 
==PAGE:111==
 99
7.5 Conclusion and key findings of the 
Discussion
From the research conducted in this thesis, different gaps in current behavioural design 
practice (chapter 4) and research (chapter 2) have been identified. Together, these gaps 
indicate a lack in literature of emphasising the importance of problem analysis, as well as a 
lack of utilising integrative knowledge of both problem influences and behavioural theories 
in current behavioural design approaches. The findings derived from an extensive review of 
literature (chapter 2) and from an investigation of current practice (chapter 4) conclude the 
need for a theoretically-founded analysis tool specifically developed for the aim of performing 
behavioural design. The Super Cool Analysis Tool favours an integrative thinking of combining 
insights provided from the distinction of problem layers, models of behaviour, and theories 
of change. This integrative thinking is further combined with several factors of general design 
(section 2.5) to enhance usability and application. The Super Cool Analysis Tool directly 
reflects the research framework, as it guides the designer through clearly goal-oriented 
structured steps of making a problem analysis, while at the same time linking these steps to 
explanations from explicit behavioural theories, each of which emphasises the purpose of 
the analysis. Contributions and implications affecting both design practice and research are 
derived as:  
• The Super Cool Analysis Tool contributes to a new way of visualising and 
structuring behavioural problems through three types of problem perspectives. This 
acknowledgement forms a suggestion for future design research in determining 
the effects problem perspectives have on behaviour and studying each effect’s 
significance. 
• The Super Cool Analysis Tool provides a theoretical framework for understanding 
how the three categories of behavioural theories (individual behaviour, social 
behaviour, and behaviour change) interconnect and thus add valuable insight – all 
of which require an integrative thinking of the three categories. As a result, this 
acknowledgement can be part of future design research in exploring and studying 
the importance and significance of applying integrative thinking in behavioural design 
projects. Further, design practice are likely to change as the Super Cool Analysis 
Tool will enable designers in applying behavioural theories in their behavioural 
design projects in a more practical way. This contribution should have an effect on 
designers who choose not to apply the Super Cool Analysis Tool as well, as they 
should know or acknowledge that more time should be spent in the problem 
==PAGE:112==
100
analysis phase and that integrative thinking of behavioural theories increases the 
probability of developing successful solutions.
• The Super Cool Analysis Tool reflects upon behavioural theories through a holistic 
overview of 21 chosen behavioural theories, which relates them to each other and 
to eight descriptive topics (section 6.6.1). This composite overview of behavioural 
theories should increase the designers’ capabilities of understanding behavioural 
theories and their strengths and weaknesses in relation to each other. Therefore, 
forced reflection upon theories will eventually result in building up a theoretical 
back-catalogue of behavioural theories. Furthermore, these eight topics are 
simplified excerpts from complex behavioural literature, made in order to achieve 
a sort of “middle ground”. This should enable different kinds of professions involved 
in behavioural design, or projects open to investigating behavioural influences, to 
participate in activities which they currently view as non-beneficial or as without 
any value adding contributions. 
Thus, the Super Cool Analysis Tool adds a valuable contribution to the field of behavioural 
design. However, certain limitations follow from the research conducted and concern the use 
context of the tool, limited amounts of research, simplification of topics, validation of the concept, 
and finally, generalisability. In order to prepare the Super Cool Analysis Tool for real-world 
application, several of these limitations have been addressed during the development of the 
tool, yet some limitations still require further work (elaborated in section 8.2). 
==PAGE:113==
Chapter 8
Conclusion
==PAGE:114==
102
 
The aim of the thesis was to develop a relevant support tool for designers in 
behavioural design projects. The aim of such a tool was to provide designers with a structured 
overview of behavioural theories with respect to behavioural design problems and tailor this 
overview to fit with current behavioural design approaches. Based on guidelines from the 
Design Research Methodology this was done through a three-staged thesis, consisting of a 
Literature Review, Investigation of Current Practice and Support Tool Development of a behavioural 
design support tool. The findings from the first stage acknowledged the needs for designers 
in 1. To figure out how to connect a behavioural problem with the most suitable behavioural 
theories, i.e. the theories that will result in the most successful interventions. And 2. Be able 
to understand and apply models of behaviour and theories of change in the correct context. In 
addition, the findings from the second stage acknowledged the needs for 1. Designers with 
limited experience of behavioural design being able to build a theoretical back-catalogue to 
increase their behavioural design capabilities and take advantage of theory inclusion in their 
projects. And 2. Designers with comprehensive experience of behavioural design obtaining 
ways of challenging their current tunnel vision in regards to theory inclusion. 
 
Combining these findings resulted in the development of an analytical behavioural 
design support tool: The Super Cool Analysis Tool. The tool meets the above-mentioned 
needs, by providing a five step framework for problem analysis and theory inclusion. In regards 
to practical application, the framework is realised in a game through the following steps: 
Step 0 prepares the designers for the game and provide instructions. Step 1 facilitates an 
initial problem analysis based on a systematic reflection of the current problem understanding. 
Step 2 facilitates a deeper level of problem behaviour analysis by discussing different 
behavioural theories in relation to the problem behaviour context at hand. Step 3 reflects 
on how the different behavioural theories relate to each other through a clearly visualised 
overview of the different behavioural theories. Finally, Step 4 facilitates a comparison of the 
initial problem understanding, discussed in step 1, with the achieved problem understanding 
determined in step 4. 
 
All in all, the Super Cool Analysis Tool contributes with a detailed visualisation of 
problem behaviour influences, a theoretical framework for increasing integrative thinking of 
behavioural theories as well as forced reflection and relating overview of these theories. 
Hence, the thesis opens up for further research of exploring and studying the importance 
and significance of applying integrative thinking, as well as determining different problem 
perspectives’ effects on behaviour. Additionally, the thesis realises that a more thorough 
problem analysis combined with an open approach and integrative thinking of behavioural 
theories will increase the probability of developing successful solutions in behavioural design 
projects. In conclusion, three of the four stated research objectives (section 2.4.2.2) were met, 
making this thesis a successful contribution to both behavioural design research and practice. 
However, as the fourth research objective of “Validate and evaluate the support tool” is yet 
to be met, further work is needed in order for the Super Cool Analysis Tool to become an 
experimentally validated tool for industry application. 
8.1 Conclusion
==PAGE:115==
 103
8.2 Further work
This section provides recommendations and suggestions for future work that will add further 
value and detail to the contributions made by the thesis. As described in the Methodology 
(chapter 3), according to the DRM framework this thesis is a type 3 design research, meaning 
that the final stage of validating and evaluating the support tool is initial. Therefore, the 
following sections (8.2.1 - 8.2.5) present steps and aspects to consider in further research, to 
enhance the usability of the results and to experimentally validate the Super Cool Analysis 
Tool and its impact on behavioural design practice. 
8.2.1 Pilot implementation of the support tool 
8.2.2 Experimental validation
A final demonstration of the Super Cool Analysis Tool was made with students in a workshop 
setting (appendix 27). However, to maximise the level of output, detail and feedback, 
workshops with behavioural design consultancies and general engineering companies should 
be carried out. Additionally, to validate the tool’s applicability (Maxwell 2013) and value in 
a professional setting a full pilot implementation of the Super Cool Analysis Tool should 
take place in both general engineering companies and in design consultancies, as both kinds 
of pilot implementations would provide different insights and feedback. Contrary to the 
final demonstration, a pilot implementation should take place in real project settings (and 
preferably on different projects for a continuous period of time). 
Similar to the reasons for a comprehensive pilot implementation of the Super Cool Analysis 
Tool, further work is also needed in terms of experimental validation of the tool (determining 
the overall impact as well as the individual features and their results). Thus, this section 
presents suggested activities and measures to be performed in an experimental validation 
setting aimed at validating and evaluating the essence of the Super Cool Analysis Tool. This 
essence is defined as: To build a theoretical back-catalogue, i.e. expand the understanding of 
behavioural theories and their interrelations and to use this understanding in determining whether 
or not a theory is relevant to apply. This essence of the Super Cool Analysis Tool should be 
experimentally validated through a test of a null-hypothesis and an alternative hypothesis 
(Freund & Miller 2011) formulated as the following:   
Null hypothesis
A designer not applying the Super Cool Analysis 
Tool will achieve the same behavioural design 
understanding of behavioural theories as a 
designer applying the Super Cool Analysis Tool
Alternative hypothesis
A designer applying the Super Cool Analysis Tool 
will achieve a better behavioural design under-
standing of behavioural theories than a designer 
not applying the Super Cool Analysis Tool
Figure 8.1
Hypotheses for 
experimentally 
validating the 
essence of the 
Super Cool 
Analysis Tool
==PAGE:116==
104
The most optimal way of experimentally validating the essence of the Super Cool Analysis 
Tool would be to perform a pilot study (Maxwell 2013). In this study several (25+) different 
companies (mixture of behavioural design consultancies, engineering design consultancies. and 
engineering design companies) should be supplied with the Super Cool Analysis Tool, and the 
application and results in their real life projects should be measured. However, as this is a 
rather extensive method, it is instead recommended to experimentally validate the essence 
of the Super Cool Analysis Tool through simulated experimental settings with two sample 
groups: One group applying the tool to its full extent, opposed to a group applying only parts 
of the tool. 
Regarding the data collection from these two groups, it should be obtained through pre-tool-
application measurements and post-tool-application measurements to compare the initial 
starting point with the progressed understanding. It is recommended to apply the method 
of concept maps (Davies 2011; Johnson & O’Connor 2008), which is an illustration of a 
visual display of theories and their relations (Maxwell 2013). Before asking the participants 
to make a concept map, it is recommended to introduce them to different types of concept 
maps. Thus, through concept mapping the determination of an understanding of behavioural 
theories and their interrelations could be obtained by counting the number of behavioural 
theories, relations, clusters, non-randomly connections etc. in each concept, and thereby 
confirming/rejecting the null and alternative hypothesis.
In a more practical sense, the data collection of both groups should be based on concept 
maps of each individual participant’s behavioural understanding before using the Super Cool 
Analysis Tool. After making these concept maps, both groups of participants should then 
be presented to a fictional behavioural design project, including a design brief with data 
from imagined observations, followed by the task of individually going from design brief to 
hypotheses about the problem behaviour. For this task of formulating hypotheses, one group 
of participants are provided the full Super Cool Analysis Tool, whereas the other group of 
participants are merely provided the 21 Theory Cards without colour and symbols indicating 
their interrelations and the flow. Having individually worked their way through the task, the 
participants’ should again be asked to individually create concept maps of their progressed 
behavioural understanding.
This type of experimental validation allows for two kinds of comparisons: 1. Comparing 
across the application of the Super Cool Analysis Tool (comparing each individual participant’s 
understanding before and after applying the tool), and 2. Comparing across the availability of 
tool features (comparing participants who applied the full tool with participants who only 
applied parts of it). Whereas the first comparison allows for statistical analysis that takes prior 
behavioural design knowledge into account, the latter allows for a statistical validation of 
the Super Cool Analysis Tool’s impact. However, if time is short, the data collection could be 
simplified by skipping the introductory concept mapping, and thus a comparison of the Super 
Cool Analysis Tool’s impact could be made without taking each individual participant’s prior 
knowledge into account.
==PAGE:117==
 105
8.2.3 Expand to an international context
Despite the fact that behavioural design appears to be performed identically across borders, 
only applicability in a Danish context was investigated in this thesis, and thus further 
data collection is needed to validate the applicability of the Super Cool Analysis Tool in 
an international context. To do so and to apply the approach of concurrent triangulation 
(combining qualitative data with quantitative data (Creswell 2014)), a confirmatory survey 
should be conducted. An attempt for conducting such a confirmatory survey with the aim 
of exploring the connections, similarities and possible additions needed to move towards 
a substantiated internationally applicable Super Cool Analysis Tool was made in this thesis 
(see appendix 28). Yet, due to unforeseen data collecting complications and time limitations, 
the survey was removed from the investigation of current practice to the benefit of fully 
developing and realising features and aspects of the Super Cool Analysis Tool. However, the 
value adding perspective of a survey study is still taken into account through a detailed 
recommendation of conducting such a survey.
The aim of the survey should be to obtain data collection and to confirm and validate 
the insights discovered in the interviews (chapter 4) regarding theory inclusion, identified 
challenges and project staging in an international context. Further, conducting a survey 
provides the research with more representative results as well as better opportunities for 
statistically analysing results and providing stronger conclusions (Creswell 2014). Regarding 
the setup of the survey, it is suggested to conduct it in a professional data collection program 
such as Qualtrics (Qualtrics 2017, see appendix 28). An elaborate list of companies and 
relevant persons to contact and ask to participate in the survey can be found in appendix 
29. In this list four different countries are represented: Belgium, Denmark, the Netherlands, 
and United Kingdom. Regarding the survey questions, it is suggested to categorise them with 
regard to behavioural theories, behavioural design challenges and project staging. Suggestions 
for explicit questions to ask can be found in a suggested table of survey questions (appendix 
30). In this table, 14 questions are formulated to fully cover all survey aspects to explore, 
through a mixture of open-ended questions, agree-disagree questions and question matrices 
(Thayer-Hart et al. 2010). Apart from asking questions for the three overall topics, general 
questions about language, company name and general remarks should for practical reasons 
be added as well.
Different limitations of conducting such a confirmatory survey should be considered. First, 
there is a risk that the users do not understand the questions and thus the premise of 
answering the questions correctly is limited. Thus the questions must be formulated with 
To the benefit of representativeness of the experimental validation, the number of participants 
must be significant, as different statistical tests require different numbers of samples (Freund 
& Miller 2011). Although the Super Cool Analysis Tool is aimed at designers, the diversity of 
the participants should be considered as well, due to the fact that the tool can be applied 
by other professions part of a behavioural design project team as well. Whether or not to 
include other professions in the setting depends on the hypotheses to be investigated.
==PAGE:118==
106
8.3 Final words
8.2.4 Establish evidence of problem layers
In brief terms further work is needed to establish evidence of the comprehensive problem 
understanding presented in the Super Cool Analysis Tool (consisting of seven problem layers 
(section 6.4.1)). Through pilot implementation and experimental validation it should be 
investigated if the problem understanding is complete, or if other problem layers should be 
added in order to obtain a complete visualisation and understanding of problem behaviours. 
Obviously, It is recommended to address this topic through further work of this research 
project, although the topic itself could be an entirely separated research project.
8.2.5 Web page and accessibility
Finally, practical further work exists regarding the accessibility of the Super Cool Analysis Tool. 
To make it available for application in consultancies, companies and other design teams with 
interest, a web page with the tool documents and files should be set up. From this web page 
it should be possible to download the files for free, yet it should additionally be possible to 
buy a finished tool version, hence, a small production of the Super Cool Analysis Tool should 
also be established. 
a focus on both simplicity and at the same time understandability (e.g. by including figures 
illustrating specific parts of the questions). Secondly, the major limitation about the survey 
procedure is that participants often tell what they think they do, rather than tell what 
they actually do. Again, this requires some serious consideration in the formulation of the 
questions as well as different survey methods developed for overcoming survey bias (e.g. 
System Usability Scale, (Brooke 1996)). Finally, it can be challenging to gain new relevant 
information from surveys, as the questions in the survey are very specific and/or with answer 
options. To overcome this limitation, a closing remarks field should be added to the survey 
to catch valuable remarks for the study. 
This thesis has developed a gamified analysis tool, the Super Cool Analysis Tool, that provides 
designers with structured ways of analysing behavioural problems, and with easy-applicable 
and practical ways for understanding and selecting what behavioural theories to include 
in their behavioural design projects. Thus, with respect to emphasising integrative thinking 
of theory inclusion, the Super Cool Analysis Tool eases the process of theory selection for 
designers, eventually obtaining and expanding their theoretical back-catalogue concerning the 
field of behaviour.
==PAGE:119==
Chapter 9
References
==PAGE:120==
108
 Ajzen, I., 1991. The Theory of Planned Behavior. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision 
 
Processes, 50(2), pp.179–211.
Andreasen, M.M., 2003. Improving Design Methods’ Usability by a Mindset Approach. In P. D. I. U. 
 
Lindemann, ed. Human Behaviour in Design. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, pp. 209–218.
Andreasen, M.M., Hansen, C.T. & Cash, P., 2015. Conceptual Design: Interpretations, Mindset and 
 
Models. 1st ed., Springer International Publishing.
Armitage, C.J. & Conner, M., 1999. Distinguishing Perceptions of Control from Self-efficacy: 
 
Predicting Consumption of a Low-fat Diet using the Theory of Planned Behavior. Journal of 
 
Applied Social Psychology, 29(1), pp.72–90.
Arvai, J., 2016. Society’s biggest problems need more than a nudge. The Conversation. Available 
 
at: http://theconversation.com/societys-biggest-problems-need-more-than-a-
 
nudge-58832 [Accessed February 1, 2017].
Asana, 2008. From chaos to clarity. Available at: https://asana.com/go/project-management-
 
1?&mkwid=sgH8tNCRD&pcrid=154147574828&pkw=asanaproject&pmt=p&pdv
 
=c&utm_campaign=EU-Brand-Phrase-GGL&utm_source=Google&utm_medium
 
=pd_cpc_br&utm_term=Asanaproject&opti_ca=637390451&opti_ag=3213051607
 
6&opti_ad=154147 [Accessed June 16, 2017].
Attrup, M.L. & Olsson, J.R., 2008. Power i projekter & portefølje. 2nd ed., Jurist- og 
 
Økonomforbundets Forlag.
Bandura, A., 1977. Self-efficacy: Toward a Unifying Theory of Behavioral Change. Psychological 
 
Review, 84(2), pp.191–215.
Bandura, A., 2001. Social Cognitive Theory: An Agentic Perspective. Annual Review of Psychology, 
 
52(1), pp.1–26.
Bandura, A., 1991. Social Cognitive Theory of Self-Regulation. Organizational Behavior and Human 
 
Decision Processes, 50(2), pp.248–287.
Bandura, A., 1986. Social Foundations of Thought and Action: A Social Cognitive Theory. 1st ed., 
 
Prentice Hall.
Bates, M.J. & Zhong, J.Y., 2014. What is the difference between a theory, methodology, approach, 
 
method, framework, tool and process? Quora. Available at: https://www.quora.com/
 
What-is-the-difference-between-a-theory-methodology-approach-method-
 
framework-tool-and-process [Accessed February 2, 2017].
Behavioral Research Unit BRU, 2002. Behavior Change - A Summary of Four Major Theories. 
 
AIDSCAP. Available at: https://www.k4health.org/sites/default/files/Summary of BC 
 
theories.pdf [Accessed December 11, 2004].
Berdichevsky, D. & Neuenschwander, E., 1999. Toward an Ethics of Persuasive Technology. 
 
Communications of the ACM, 42(5), pp.51–58.
Beyer, H. & Holtzblatt, K., 1998. Contextual Design: Defining Customer-Centered Systems. 1st ed., 
 
San Francisco, USA: Morgan Kaufmann Publisher.
Bhamra, T., Lilley, D. & Tang, T., 2011. Design for Sustainable Behaviour: Using Products to Change 
 
Consumer Behaviour. The Design Journal, 14(4), pp.427–445.
9.1 References
==PAGE:121==
 109
Bhattacharyya, O. et al., 2006. Designing theoretically-informed implementation interventions: Fine 
 
in theory, but evidence of effectiveness in practice is needed. Implementation Science, 1, p.5.
Blessing, L.T.M. & Chakrabarti, A., 2009. DRM, a Design Research Methodology. 1st ed., London: 
 
Springer London.
Boundless, 2016. Formulating the Hypothesis. Boundless Sociology. Available at: https://www.
 
boundless.com/sociology/textbooks/boundless-sociology-textbook/sociological-
 
research-2/the-research-process-26/formulating-the-hypothesis-167-7473/ 
 
[Accessed June 16, 2017].
Branson, C. et al., 2012. Acceptable Behaviour? Public opinion on behaviour change policy.Social 
 
Research Institute, Ipsos MORI.
Briefcase, 2017. What is Behavioural Design? Briefcase. Available at: http://www.brief-case.co/
 
behavioural-design.php [Accessed February 6, 2017].
Bronfenbrenner, U., 1986. Ecology of the Family as a Context for Human Development: Research 
 
Perspectives. Developmental Psychology, 22(6), pp.723–742.
Brooke, J., 1996. SUS: A “quick and dirty” usability scale. In P. W. Jordan et al., eds. Usability 
 
Evaluation in Industry. CRC Press, pp. 189–194. Available at: https://www.usability.gov/
 
how-to-and-tools/methods/system-usability-scale.html [Accessed June 6, 2017].
Burmester, C., 2013. The power of behavioural design: looking beyond nudging. The Guardian. 
 
Available at: https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/power-behavioural-
 
design-beyond-nudging.
Cash, P.J., Hartlev, C.G. & Durazo, C.B., 2017. Behavioural Design: A Process for Integrating 
 
Behaviour Change and Design. Design Studies, 48(January), pp.96–128.
Catania, J.A., Kegeles, S.M. & Coates, T.J., 1990. Towards an Understanding of Risk Behavior: An 
 
AIDS Risk Reduction Model (ARRM). Health Education Quarterly, 17(1), pp.53–72.
Cervantes, M. et al., 2011. Brains, Behavior and Design toolkit. Available at: http://www.
 
brainsbehavioranddesign.com/kit.html [Accessed February 7, 2017].
Cialdini, R.B., 1984. Influence: The Psychology of Persuasion. 1st ed., HarperBusiness.
Cialdini, R.B., 2007. Influence: The Psychology of Persuasion. Revised ed., Harper Business.
Community Tool Box, 2016a. Developing an Intervention. Available at: http://ctb.ku.edu/en/
 
developing-intervention [Accessed February 7, 2017].
Community Tool Box, 2016b. Overview of Tactics for Modifying Access, Barriers, and Opportunities. 
 
Available at: http://ctb.ku.edu/en/table-of-contents/implement/access-barriers-
 
opportunities/overview/main [Accessed June 16, 2017].
Cooper, R.G., 2008. “The Stage-Gate Idea-to-Launch Process-Update, What’s new and NexGen 
 
Systems.” Product Innovation Management, 25(3), pp.213–232.
Court, D. et al., 2009. The consumer decision journey. McKinsey Quarterly. Available at: http://
 
www.mckinsey.com/business-functions/marketing-and-sales/our-insights/the-
 
consumer-decision-journey [Accessed June 9, 2017].
Creswell, J.W., 2014. Research Design: Qualitative, Quantitative and Mixed Method Approaches. 
 
3rd ed. V. Knight & S. Connelly, eds., Los Angeles, USA: Sage Publications.
Cross, N., 2011. Design Thinking: Understanding How Designers Think and Work. 1st ed., Oxford, 
 
UK: Bloomsbury Publishing.
==PAGE:122==
110
Cross, N., 2008. Engineering Design Methods: Strategies for Product Design. 4th ed., West Sussex, 
 
UK: John Wiley & Sons.
Dalhousie University, 2012. Evaluation Matrices. NSERC Chair In Design Engineering. Available 
 
at: http://design.engineering.dal.ca/content/evaluation-matrices [Accessed June 16, 
 
2017].
Darnton, A., 2008a. GSR Behaviour Change Knowledge Review. Practical Guide: Overview of 
 
behaviour change models and their uses. London, UK: Government Social Research 
 
Unit.
Darnton, A., 2008b. GSR Behaviour Change Knowledge Review. Reference Report: Overview of 
 
behaviour change models and their uses. London, UK: Government Social Research 
 
Unit.
Datta, S. & Mullainathan, S., 2012. Behavioral Design: A New Approach to Development Policy. 
 
Washington DC.
Davies, M., 2011. Mind Mapping, Concept Mapping, Argument Mapping: What are the differences 
 
and Do they Matter? Higher Education, 62(3), pp.279–301.
Deci, E.L. & Ryan, R.M., 2000. Self-Determination Theory and the Facilitation of Intrinsic Motivation, 
 
Social Development, and Well-Being. American Psychologist, 55(1), pp.68–78.
Design Council, 2007. Eleven Lessons: Managing Design in Eleven Global Brands: A Study of the 
 
Design Process. London, UK.
Dolan, P. et al., 2012. Influencing behaviour: The mindspace way. Journal of Economic Psychology, 
 
33(1), pp.264–277.
Dorst, K. et al., 2016. Designing for the Common Good. 1st ed., BIS Publishers.
Duhigg, C., 2014. How Habits Work. In The Power of Habit. Why We Do What We Do in Life 
 
and Business. Random House Trade Paperbacks, pp. 275–286.
Fogg, B.J., 2009a. Creating Persuasive Technologies: An Eight-Step Design Process. In 4th International 
 
Conference on Persuasive Technology. Claremont, USA: ACM Press, p. Article No. 44.
Fogg, B.J., 2003. The Functional Triad: Computers in Persuasive Roles. In Persuasive Technology:  
 
Using Computers to Change What We Think and Do. San Francisco, USA: Morgan 
 
Kaufmann Publisher, pp. 23–29.
Fogg, B.J., 2009b. A Behavior Model for Persuasive Design. In 4th International Conference on 
 
Persuasive Technology. Claremont, USA: ACM Press, p. Article No.: 40.
Fogg, B.J. & Hreha, J., 2010. Behavior Wizard: A Method for Matching Target Behaviors with Solutions. 
 
In T. Ploug, P. Hasle, & H. Oinas-Kukkonen, eds. 5th International Conference on 
 
Persuasive Technology. Copenhagen, Denmark: Springer-Verlag Berlin, pp. 117–131.
Freund, J. & Miller, I., 2011. Probability and Statistics for Engineers. 8th ed. D. Lynch, C. Cummings, 
 
& C. Lepre, eds., Prentice Hall, Pearson.
Fylan, F., 2005. Semi-structured interviewing. In A Handbook of Research Methods for Clinical 
 
and Health Psychology. Oxford University Press, pp. 65–76.
Gagné, M. & Deci, E.L., 2005. Self-determination theory and work motivation. Journal of 
 
Organizational Behavior, 26(4), pp.331–362.
Gerrig, R.J. & Zimbardo, P.G., 2002. Glossary of psychological terms. In J. N. Boyd, ed. Psychology 
 
And Life. Boston, USA: Pearson. Available at: http://www.apa.org/research/action/
==PAGE:123==
 111
 
glossary.aspx?tab=3 [Accessed June 6, 2017].
Gigliotti, R. & Jason, R., 2012. Physical Barriers. In Handbook of Loss Prevention and Crime 
 
Prevention. Butterworth-Heinemann, pp. 292–306.
Glanz, K. & Bishop, D.B., 2010. The Role of Behavioral Science Theory in Development and 
 
Implementation of Public Health Interventions. Annual Review of Public Health, 31(1), 
 
pp.399–418.
Harford, T., 2013. Can an app make us behave better? Financial Times Magazine. Available at: 
 
https://www.ft.com/content/87452044-8079-11e2-aed5-00144feabdc0.
Hartlev, C.G. & Durazo, C., 2015. Behavioural Design: The development of a new design method. 
 
Technical University of Denmark.
Henkemans, O.A.B. et al., 2015. Lost in persuasion: A multidisciplinary approach for developing 
 
usable, effective, and reproducible persuasive technology for health promotion. In 
 
9th International Conference on Pervasive Computing Technologies for Healthcare 
 
(PervasiveHealth). Istanbul, Turkey, pp. 49–56.
Hermsen, S. et al., 2015. Using The Persuasive by Design-Model to Inform The Design of Complex 
 
Behaviour Change Concepts: Two Case Studies. In 11th European Academy of Design 
 
Conference. Paris, France, pp. 1–10.
Hermsen, S., Renes, R.J. & Frost, J., 2014. Persuasive by Design: A Model and Toolkit for Designing 
 
Evidence-based Interventions. In Proceedings from Making the Difference: CHI Sparks 
 
2014. The Hague, Netherlands, pp. 74–77.
Hossain, F.M.A. & Ali, M.K., 2014. Relation between Individual and Society. Open Journal of Social 
 
Sciences, 2(August), pp.130–137.
Hubka, V. & Eder, W.E., 1996. Design science: Introduction to the Needs, Scope and Organization 
 
of Engineering Design Knowledge. 1st ed., Springer London.
Investopedia, 2017. Rational Behavior. Available at: http://www.investopedia.com/terms/r/
 
rational-behavior.asp [Accessed January 27, 2017].
Janz, N.K. & Becker, M.H., 1984. The Health Belief Model: A Decade Later. Health Education 
 
Quarterly, 11(1), pp.1–47.
Johnson, T.E. & O’Connor, D.L., 2008. Measuring Team Shared Understanding Using the Analysis 
 
Constructed Shared Mental Model Methodology. Performance Improvement Quarterly, 
 
21(3), pp.113–134.
Kahneman, D., 2003. Maps of Bounded Rationality: Psychology for Behavioral Economics. American 
 
Economic Review, 93(5), pp.1449–1475.
Kaptein, M. et al., 2015. Personalizing persuasive technologies: Explicit and implicit personalization 
 
using persuasion profiles. International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 77(May), 
 
pp.38–51.
Koskinen, I. et al., 2011. Design Research Through Practice: From the Lab, Field, and Showroom. 1st 
 
ed. R. Roumeliotis, ed., San Francisco, USA: Morgan Kaufmann Publisher.
Lilley, D., 2009. Design for sustainable behaviour: strategies and perceptions. Design Studies, 
 
30(6), pp.704–720.
Lilley, D., 2007. Designing for behavioural change: reducing the social impacts of product use 
 
through design. Loughborough University.
==PAGE:124==
112
Lockton, D., Harrison, D. & Stanton, N.A., 2010. The Design with Intent Method: A design tool for 
 
influencing user behaviour. Applied Ergonomics, 41(3), pp.382–392.
Maxwell, J.A., 2013. Qualitative Research Design: An Interactive Approach. 3rd ed. V. Knight & L. 
 
Habib, eds., Sage Publications.
Meerkamm, H. & Koch, M., 2005. Design for X. In J. Clarkson & C. Eckert, eds. Design Process 
 
Improvement. A review of current practice. Springer London, pp. 306–323.
Michie, S. et al., 2008. From Theory to Intervention: Mapping Theoretically Derived Behavioural 
 
Determinants to Behaviour Change Techniques. Applied Psychology, 57(4), pp.660–680.
Michie, S. et al., 2011. The behaviour change wheel: A new method for characterising and designing 
 
behaviour change interventions. Implementation Science, 6(1), p.42.
Morris, J. et al., 2012. Forestry, sustainable behaviours and behaviour change: Theories. The 
 
Research Agency of the Forestry Commission.
Niedderer, K. et al., 2014. Creating Sustainable Innovation through Design for Behaviour Change: 
 
Full Project Report. University of Wolverhampton, Project Partners & AHRC, 126pp.
Niedderer, K. et al., 2016. Design for Behaviour Change as a Driver for Sustainable Innovation: 
 
Challenges and Opportunities for Implementation in the Private and Public Sectors. 
 
International Journal of Design, 10(2), pp.67–85.
Nielsen, C.K.E.B. & Aakerlund, J., 2016. The Intervention Design Tool: Developing a design tool for 
 
early stage development in behavioural design projects. Technical University of Denmark.
Nodder, C., 2013. Evil by Design: Interaction design to lead us into temptation. 1st ed., Indianapolis, 
 
USA: John Wiley & Sons.
Oinas-Kukkonen, H. & Harjumaa, M., 2008. A Systematic Framework for Designing and Evaluating 
 
Systems. In H. Oinas-Kukkonen et al., eds. 3rd International Conference on Persuasive 
 
Technology. Oulu, Finland: Springer, pp. 164–176.
Orji, R. et al., 2013. Tailoring Persuasive Health Games to Gamer Type. In Human Factors in 
 
Computing Systems - CHI’13. Paris, France: ACM Press, pp. 2467–2476.
Osterwalder, A. et al., 2015. Value Proposition Design: How to create products and services 
 
customers want. 1st ed., John Wiley & Sons.
Park, E., Scherer, C.W. & Glynn, C.J., 2001. Community involvement and risk perception at personal 
 
and societal levels. Health, Risk & Society, 3(3), pp.281–292.
Petty, R.E. & Cacioppo, J.T., 1986. The Elaboration Likelihood Model of Persuasion. Advances in 
 
Experimental Social Psychology, 19, pp.123–205.
Pfarr, N., 2013. Behavior Change Strategy Cards. Available at: https://www.artefactgroup.com/
 
resources/behavior-change-strategy-cards/ [Accessed January 15, 2017].
Piscicelli, L. et al., 2016. The Individual-Practice Framework as a design tool to understand consumer 
 
behaviour. In A. Genus, ed. Sustainable Consumption: Design, Innovation and Practice. 
 
Springer International Publishing, pp. 35–50.
Prager, K., 2012. Understanding Behaviour Change: How to apply theories of behaviour change to 
 
SEWeb and related public engagement activities. James Hutton Institute.
Prochaska, J.O., Diclemente, C.C. & Norcross, J.C., 1992. In Search of How People Change: 
 
Applications to Addictive Behaviors. American Psychologist, 47(9), pp.1102–1114.
==PAGE:125==
 113
Prochaska, J.O. & Velicer, W.F., 1997. The Transtheoretical Model of Health Behavior Change. 
 
American Journal of Health Promotion, 12(1), pp.38–48.
Qualtrics, 2017. Qualtrics Online Questionnaire. Available at: https://www.qualtrics.com/ 
 
[Accessed March 27, 2017].
Rosen, D., 2015. The Behavioral Age. Interaction Design Association. Available at: https://vimeo.
 
com/120403188 [Accessed January 27, 2017].
Rosenstock, I., 1974. Historical Origins of the Health Belief Model. Health Education Monographs, 
 
2(4), pp.328–335.
Ross, L. & Ward, A., 1995. Psychological Barriers to Dispute Resolution. Advances in Experimental 
 
Social Psychology, 27, pp.255–304.
Salen, K. & Zimmerman, E., 2004. Rules of Play: Game Design Fundamentals. Cambridge, USA: 
 
The MIT Press.
Schotte, D.E., 1985. Problem-solving Skills in Suicidal Psychiatric Patients. Virginia Polytechnic 
 
Institute and State University.
SkillsYouNeed, 2017. Social Problem-Solving. Available at: https://www.skillsyouneed.com/ips/
 
social-problem-solving.html [Accessed January 23, 2017].
Tajfel, H. & Turner, J., 1979. An Integrative Theory of Intergroup Conflicts. In The Social Psychology 
 
of Intergroup Relations. Brooks Cole Publishing, pp. 33–47.
Tang, T., 2010. Towards sustainable use: design behaviour intervention to reduce household 
 
environment impact. Loughborough University.
Tantia, P., 2017. The New Science of Designing for Humans. Stanford Social Innovation Review, 
 
pp.28–33. Available at: https://ssir.org/articles/entry/the_new_science_of_designing_
 
for_humans.
Thaler, R.H. & Sunstein, C.R., 2009. Nudge: Improving Decisions about Health, Wealth, and 
 
Happiness. 2nd ed., The Penguin Group.
Thayer-Hart, N. et al., 2010. Survey Fundamentals. Office of Quality Improvement, University 
 
of Wisconsin-Madison. Available at: http://oqi.wisc.edu/resourcelibrary/uploads/
 
resources/Survey_Guide.pdf.
Triandis, H.C., 1977. Interpersonal Behavior. Monterey, USA: Brooks/Cole Pub. Co.
Tromp, N., 2013. Social design: How products and services can help us act in ways that benefit 
 
society. Delft University of Technology.
Tromp, N. & Hekkert, P., 2016. Assessing methods for effect-driven design: Evaluation of a social 
 
design method. Design Studies, 43(March), pp.24–47.
Tromp, N., Hekkert, P. & Verbeek, P.-P., 2011. Design for Socially Responsible Behavior: A 
 
Classification of Influence Based on Intended User Experience. Design Issues, 27(3), 
 
pp.3–19.
Turner, D.W., 2010. Qualitative Interview Design: A Practical Guide for Novice Investigators. The 
 
Qualitative Report, 15(3), pp.754–760.
Tversky, A. & Kahneman, D., 1974. Judgment under Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases. Science, 
 
185(4157), pp.1124–1131.
Ulrich, K.T. & Eppinger, S.D., 2012. Product Design and Development. 5th ed., New York, USA: 
 
McGraw-Hill.
==PAGE:126==
114
Wendel, S., 2014. Designing for Behavior Change: Applying Psychology and Behavioural Economics. 
 
2nd ed. M. Treseler, ed., O’Reilly Media.
Wendel, S., 2013. A Toolkit for Designing for Behavior Change. Meant to accompany the book: 
 
Designing for Behavior Change, by S. Wendel, published in 2013 (1st edition). 
 
HelloWallet, pp. 1–17.
Wilson, G.T., Bhamra, T.A. & Lilley, D., 2010. Reducing domestic energy consumption: a user-
 
centred design approach. In Knowledge Collaboration & Learning for Sustainable 
 
Innovation ERSCP-EMSU Conference. Delft, The Netherlands, pp. 200–222.
Zachrisson, J. & Boks, C., 2012. Exploring behavioural psychology to support design for sustainable 
 
behaviour research. Journal of Design Research, 10(12), pp.50–66.
==PAGE:127==
Chapter 10
Assignment A & B
A&B
==PAGE:128==
116
10.1 Assignment A: Preliminary assignment
Focus area and possible project options: 19/01-17
Formalia: 
Beatrice Angel, s123678, Stud.MSc.Eng. Design & Innovation, DTU Management Engineering
Nanna Kristiansen, s123420, Stud.MSc.Eng. Design & Innovation, DTU Management Engineering
Supervisor: 
Philip Cash, Associate Professor, DTU Management Engineering
Collaborative partner:
/KL.7 ApS
Nørregade 6
1165 København K
Denmark
Time frame and ECTS points:
January 2nd – July 2nd 2017.
35 ECTS
Scope:
Behavioural design: Development of support tool for designers based on a classification of 
behavioural design problems in regards to social theories.
NB! What was initally named social theories is in the actual thesis named as behavioural theories, 
as they were found to include perspectives of individual behaviour and behaviour change as well, 
thus the name “social theories” was misleading in this context. 
Focus:
The development of a design support tool will be based on design development and design 
research methodology, with a mapping of both theoretical and practical current practice. 
Further, it will be based on behavioural design theory.
We expect the design support tool to 
• provide a practical way for applying and tailoring theoretical determinants of 
behaviour in behavioural design situations. 
• aid the designers in gaining a holistic understanding of behavioural problems and 
related social theories
• be based on behavioural design theory and practice
Alternative end goals: 
All alternative end-goals will end up in a satisfying completed master thesis with proposals 
for further work.
1. Develop a design support tool for aiding designers in the behavioural design 
situation, through a classification of behavioural problems and social theories. 
Experimental validation (through workshops) and evaluation of the support tool, 
as well as real-life tested pilot implementation. 
==PAGE:129==
 117
2. Develop a design support tool for aiding designers in the behavioural design 
situation, through a classification of behavioural problems and social theories 
(thorough literature review as well as real-life case studies).
3. A classification of behavioural problems and social theories (merely through a 
thorough literature review and classification) and develop a research framework 
as the final delivery.
For further clarification see figure 10.1 on the following page (118) that visualises the 
preliminary Gantt chart (assignment A) of the thesis (Attrup & Olsson 2008).
Project Management:
We will from the beginning carefully estimate resources, time, and deliverables for the thesis 
in order to achieve a successful thesis progress and end results. This includes: 
• Manage our time and planning by using a Gantt chart and a shared Google calendar.
• Manage our resources through an assessment and good use of our skills, materials, 
literature and human capital (supervisor and collaborating partners).
• Manage and ensure good deliverables through on-going milestones (using the 
success criteria of the concept SMART (Attrup & Olsson 2008)) to monitor and 
manage the thesis.
Using the Gantt chart as a way of steering will help us navigate through this Master Thesis and 
inform us of possible detours of the thesis – thus, the Gantt chart will probably change from 
the beginning to the end (Attrup & Olsson 2008). The Gantt chart is used by the project 
group (us) and the supervisor to give overview, context and perspective on the thesis.
==PAGE:130==
118
W1
W2
W3
W4
W5
W6
W7
W8
W9
W10
W11
W12
W13
W14
W15
W16
W17
W18
W19
W20
W21
W22
W23
W24
W25
W26
W27
W28
Stage 0
Project planning
D
Stage 1
Research Clarification – Literature Review
Ongoing development of literature review
M
Stage 2
Descriptive Study I – Investigation of Current Practice
M
Stage 3
Prescriptive Study – Support Tool Development
M
Stage 4
Descriptive Study II – Validation & Evaluation of the Support Tool
M
Buffer period
Buffer period
Finalizing the thesis
Finalising the thesis
FD
Exam
D = Deadline
M = Milestone
FD = Final Deadline for the thesis
Figure 10.1
Simplified overview 
of the initial Gantt 
chart
==PAGE:131==
 119
W1
W2
W3
W4
W5
W6
W7
W8
W9
W10
W11
W12
W13
W14
W15
W16
W17
W18
W19
W20
W21
W22
W23
W24
W25
W26
W27
W28
Stage 0
Project planning
D
Stage 1
Research Clarification – Literature Review
M
Stage 2
Descriptive Study I – Investigation of Current Practice
M
Ӹ
Ӹ Ӹ
Ӹ
Ӹ
Stage 3
Prescriptive Study – Support Tool Development
M
Ӹ
Ӹ Ӹ Ӹ 
Ӹ Ӹ
Ӹ
Ӹ Ӹ Ӹ Ӹ
Ӹ Ӹ
Stage 4
Descriptive Study II – Validation & Evaluation of the Support Tool
M
Finalizing the thesis
Finalising the thesis
FD
Exam
D = Deadline
M = Milestone
FD = Final Deadline for the thesis
Ԝ = interɚieɛs and ɛorǧshoȣs
Figure 10.2
Simplified overview 
of the updated 
Gantt chart
==PAGE:132==
120
10.2 Assignment B: Postliminary assignment 
Project reflections 27/06-17
Main objective of postliminary assignment: To put the initial project plan (assignment A) 
into perspective by comparing it with the actual project plan (assignment B) and reflect on 
the difference in order to enable learning and improve project manager competences.
Scope: Development of an analysis tool for theory inclusion in behavioural design projects.
Scope: 
The project progressed as expected according to the predefined stages, yet compared to 
the initial project plan (assignment A) adjustments and changes occurred along the way, as 
knowledge and insight were obtained. First, the scope of the project changed, as the literature 
review showed that other authors (e.g. Darnton 2008b) had already studied the link between 
general behavioural problems and behavioural theories thoroughly. Additionally, investigating 
current practice revealed that another scope would have greater impact on current practice. 
Thus, the scope of the thesis changed to focus on comprehensive problem understanding 
and integrative thinking of behavioural theories. This change of scope was necessary to do, as 
the thesis must be adjusted in regards to the actual relevant situation (Attrup & Olsson 2008). 
Nonetheless, the delivery of a support tool for designers in behavioural design projects as 
well as the success criteria (learning objectives), remained the same from the initial project 
plan to the actual project plan. Additionally, the tool expectations set out in the preliminary 
assignment A were met, as the Super Cool Analysis Tool provides structured ways for obtaining 
a holistic/comprehensive problem understanding, a holistic overview of behavioural theories 
and practical ways of behavioural theory application to a specific behavioural problem. Finally, 
the Super Cool Analysis Tool combines findings from behavioural design theory and practice 
and hence, the last expectation was also met.
End of the thesis: 
The Design Research Methodology (Blessing & Chakrabarti 2009) was applied as a framework 
for the design research, providing guidelines for systematic planning of research and thesis 
activities. Hence, the thesis was divided into four partly parallel and iterative main stages:
• 
Stage 1: Research clarification – Literature Review
• 
Stage 2: Descriptive Study I - Investigation of Current Practice
• 
Stage 3: Prescriptive Study – Support Tool Development
• 
Stage 4: Descriptive Study II - Validation and Evaluation of the Support Tool
Due to priority given to the development of the Super Cool Analysis Tool, the thesis reached 
a type 3 design research (Blessing & Chakrabarti 2009), meaning that the content in the 
first three stages (1-3) was performed comprehensively, whereas the content in the last 
What changed & why did it change?
==PAGE:133==
 121
stage (stage 4) was merely on a very initial basis. Consequently, the alternative end-goal 2 
in preliminary assignment A was this thesis’ end, despite the fact that research objective no. 
4 referred to validating and evaluating the Super Cool Analysis Tool. However, all alternative 
end-goals (including no. 2) would constitute a complete and satisfying Master Thesis with 
proposals for further work and thus, the thesis can be viewed as successful. Moreover, it is 
better to formulate a very ambitious scope and then accept fulfilment to a 80% degree (in 
this case, the last stage/last research objective was subject to initial effort only) instead of 
making a lower, but realistic, scope (Attrup & Olsson 2008).  
Extended stages: 
In order to make an in-depth comparison of the initial project plan (assignment A) and the 
actual project plan (assignment B) in depth, two simplified Gantt charts representing each 
project plan can be found in figure 10.1 and 10.2 (page 118-119). As the project plans in this 
context are used as means for following up on the project, focus is on the stages rather than 
on the details. By comparing the initial Gantt chart with the actual Gantt chart clear changes 
are visualised. As Stage 1: Research Clarification – Literature Review progressed as planned 
and the milestone was reached on time, Stage 2: Descriptive Study I - Investigation of Current 
Practice was extended. This was partly because of the challenges to establish interviews, but 
mainly because of the preparation, development and distribution of a survey. Unfortunately, 
the survey preparation and data collection required more time than expected and as a result, 
Stage 3: Prescriptive Study – Support Tool Development was delayed. Additionally, stage 3 
was extended due to challenges in setting up workshop dates (especially with the design 
consultancies) but also due to the importance of focusing on the usability of the Super Cool 
Analysis Tool. However, after 13 workshops (resulting in five overall iterations), the Super 
Cool Analysis Tool was finalised and initial experimental validation ideas were generated, 
yet due to the delay in two previous stages, the focus shifted towards finalising the thesis. 
Consequently, changes occurred compared to the initial Gantt chart as several project stages 
were extended at the expense of the final stage of the project. Yet, in the end the thesis’ scope 
of developing a support tool for designers in behavioural design projects was met.
What did we learn from these changes?
Fortunately, reflection on why things went differently than expected, enables learning (Attrup 
& Olsson 2008) which leads to experience and valuable insight obtained in favour of increasing 
our project manager competences. Firstly, due to lack of knowledge of the actual problem 
ascertained in the beginning of a project, it is almost impossible to define the final scope at the 
first attempt (Attrup & Olsson 2008). Despite the fact that the defined scope will most likely 
change as a project evolves and more knowledge and insight are obtained, it is still important 
to formulate a scope, as it creates a path to follow and is very valuable when changes occur 
in a project. Next, we learned that to plan, prepare, conduct, send out, and collect a surveys 
data requires extensive amounts of time, especially in an international context with no other 
contacting details than a general info-mail. In addition, we found that delays in one stage will 
most likely result in delays in the following stages and thus postponing the whole ending 
==PAGE:134==
122
point of a project. Things take time and therefore a buffer of time for all the different stages 
should have been part of the initial project plan. The fact that project plans are often too 
optimistic is a classic project manager mistake (Attrup & Olsson 2008), yet one of the only 
ways to overcome this challenge is to learn from experience. Finally, we also learned that a 
project can still be successful in terms of achieving the scope and contributing to research 
and practice, despite a lack of meeting all research objectives and/or stages. In other words, 
further work will always occur in projects, as it is always possible to find other things to do 
or clarify. What we found is that the practical challenges of projects in terms of complexity 
(many activities simultaneously), human behaviour (get people to answer survey, participate 
in interviews, workshops etc.), and uncertainty (scoping of the project and clarifying focus) 
(Attrup & Olsson 2008) affect all types of projects. Therefore, these challenges must always 
be considered and dealt with at the time of occurrence, as they are nearly impossible to 
prepare for and prevent.
What would we do differently in the future? 
In the light of our achieved project management competences and skills, several things will 
be done differently in a similar future project. First, as the uncertainty of the project is high 
in the beginning and the actual knowledge is relatively limited, it can be appropriate not 
to set out the scope too soon before the required insight is obtained (Attrup & Olsson 
2008). According to Attrup & Olsson (2008), especially product development projects are 
characterised by a relatively long scope/goal phase compared to, for instance, construction 
projects, as the scope in product development projects must be validated by the customer 
group. Next, it should be determined beforehand if a survey should be conducted, and if 
so, carefully planned with a sufficient dedication of time. Thirdly, from the beginning of a 
project it is important to clarify and determine clear goals of the stages to allow for a better 
optimisation of time as well as realisation of when the goals are met. Managing this could be 
done by applying the Stage Gate Model (Cooper 2008), which is a blueprint for managing 
new product development processes to improve effectiveness and efficiency. As it consists of 
clear stages followed by gates, in which decisions to kill/go/redo are made, it is highly applicable 
to ensure that all objectives of a stage are sufficiently met. This will ensure a more efficient 
flow of the project stages, which in this thesis could have been likely to have decreased the 
amount of time spent in the stages, as well as decreased the amount of overlapping stages 
(the most noticeable difference between the two Gantt charts in figure 10.1 and 10.2).
 
==PAGE:135==
 123
Chapter 11
Appendices
==PAGE:136==
124
Appendix 1: Interview guide with sub-questions
Questions
Rationale
4.
5.
6.
7.
How do you prepare for the different projects?
1. How do you decide on how to execute projects in terms 
of e.g. team members, tools/methods to use?
1.
2.
3.
How do you define project success and how do you 
determine whether you reach it or not?
1. How do you evaluate after completing the project, whether 
the included behavioural theory has been applied correct or not?
2. How do you realize if you have any blind spots?
Do you see any day to day challenges in the process?
1. Can you explain them? (when and why?)
2. Do you ever experience getting stuck in behavioural design 
projects? And if so, how do you get out of this situation?
Do you ever use or rely on behavioural theory in your 
projects?
1. If so, which theories do you use?
2. Can you explain how you use them?
3. Do you apply the different theories in your design 
activities?
4. How does that influence your design work?
5. How and when do you consider changing your approach? 
For example, what may emerge in a project that will make 
you choose another theory/theory focus?
6. When in the process do you lack an understanding (need 
to include other theories)?
7. When getting new employees are there any particular 
theories they should read up on, to have the same 
“back-catalogue” as the other employees in the company? 
How do you define and map out the behaviour?
1. How do you categorise different kinds of behaviour and 
what determinants do you map it against?
2. Do you use anything to help you map the problem 
currently and/or how is this mapping organised in your 
company?
How do you generally plan a design project that focuses 
on behaviour change?
1. How do the different projects differ?
2. What factors influence the different projects?
3. What factors have the greatest impact?
4. What factors regarding the problem framing affect the 
planning of a project – and how do these differ across 
projects? 
When and how do you determine that the aim of the 
design should be behaviour change?
To get insight about when and how they 
consider behavioural design as being 
the solution. 
To get insight about when and how they 
consider behavioural design as being 
the solution. 
To get insight in how they classify 
behaviour and against what factors they 
use to determine the behavioural 
elements.
To get insight in how theory is included or 
applied within behavioural design projects.
To get insight in how they translate theory 
into design decisions.
To get insight in what “applying” theory 
means in practice. 
To get insight in behavioural design 
challenges in practice.
To get insight in their definition of what an 
efficient behavioural design solution is.
To get relevant input in terms of the tool 
development and in what context it 
must fit into (single tool vs. group tool).
No.
==PAGE:137==
 125
Appendix 2: Affinity diagram (1 of 3)
Need for problem analysis and theory inclusion
Problem analysis
→ Diﬀers from project to project
→  TranslaƟng theory to design is challenging
due to doubt and lack in knowledge
→ Behaviour mapping is an important step in behavioural design
Theory inclusion
→ HeurisƟcs and biases are highly applied
→ Unstructured theory selecƟon (ad-hoc proces-
ses)
→ Intransferable theories (needs tesƟng before 
true applicaƟon)
→ Amount of theory is huge and takes Ɵme to read 
up on it
Knowledge
→ There are limited expectaƟons of 
knowledge for new employees
→ Without behavioural design 
knowledge it is diﬃcult to design 
intervenƟons
→ Experts rely experƟse to do
behavioural design
Di: Very pracƟcal and moves fast 
from problem to soluƟon. Actually 
parallel process (go hand in hand). 
Through theory and experience 
Idemolab assumes that one's 
understanding of the problem 
develops while understand and 
arƟculate the soluƟon. Therefore 
liƩle eﬀort is put into the iniƟal 
problem understanding. 
DD: “When you present a 
problem and say now we 
need some people to do 
something here. What is 
behind it? What theories do 
we need? I do not know! I'm 
not a behavioural economist, 
how should I learn it in an 
hour? So that's the big 
challenge.” - Founder
Di: Open exploraƟve projects: 
Requires some analysis before the 
problem have been well deﬁned in 
order to come up with soluƟons → to 
realise that the project concerns 
behaviour can happen very late in the 
process. 
Projects with client: Well-deﬁned 
problem.
Di: “There are not really any of us 
[employees at Idemolab] who 
have such a [theoretical 
background from psychology], 
other than what we have just 
read. So there is no one who has 
studied it [psychology] more in 
depth [..] We have some 
sociologists and the kind of people 
who know a lot about how human 
[..] Most often, they [the 
sociologists] will put a slightly 
higher level of a framework down 
on the problem to understand it 
[the problem] at a wider 
perspective” - Designer 
TNC: The designer 
takes the behavi-
oural theories that 
the economist has 
idenƟﬁed with her in 
the design process if 
it ﬁts into the design 
theory/frame.
K: Selects one problem 
behaviour to focus on based 
on cost-beneﬁt analysis with 
social impact included.
Di: “We try to breakdown the behaviour in a kind of 
ﬂowchart in order to obtain an understanding of the 
behaviour while making observations and interviews 
to get a deeper understanding” - Designer 
K: “[..] Based on this situation, you do 
what we call a behavioural mapping. 
Here you collect knowledge about two 
things: You collect knowledge about 
the existing choice-architecture design 
[..] and existing interaction data [..].” - 
Founder 
DD: “To establish 
hypotheses and 
then ﬁguring out 
that they do not 
have the eﬀect as 
you thought. That 
is challenging in 
itself and also 
ﬁguring out why.” 
- Founder 
K7: Usually there is a good 
understanding of the problem 
because the client companies have 
tried everything else and now 
coming to /KL.7 as a last resort. Yet, 
we sƟll make problem deﬁniƟon, 
which includes (objecƟve and 
quanƟtaƟve (digital data)):
InvesƟgate if there are data we can 
use?
Which behaviour exist?
K: “Yet behavioural 
mapping is the ﬁrst and 
very important step in 
behavioural design [..] It's 
not hard to come up with 
good ideas, especially not 
when you have a rock-solid 
behavioural mapping.” - 
Founder
DD: The process up to an analysis of how we develop 
behavioural design is dictated by the behavioural 
economy staƟsƟcal analyses (i.e., measuring).
Di: "I think the more focused it [the tool] can be 
exactly about the behaviour part, the greater the 
likelihood is that you can get more people to use it 
and beneﬁt from it" - Designer
TNC: “[..] but it is 
rare that there is 
a need for more 
theoretical 
insight it is more 
the translation of 
insights and 
barriers that can 
be challenging.” - 
Behavioural 
economist 
K=KRUKOW                 K7= /KL.7                DD=Decision Design                TNC=The Nudging Company             Di=Delta - Idemolab
  
K7: “It is diﬃcult to understand behavioural 
design, there is a lot of stuﬀ to understand” - 
Designer
Di: When hiring new employees there are no 
expectaƟons to certain theoreƟcal foundaƟon 
concerning behaviour, just that they are design 
theoreƟcal.
K7: “If you are expert within a ﬁeld, it requires 
expertise and time to gain this. But if you develop a 
tool that at least secure a minimum of knowledge to 
point the designer in the correct direction...” - 
Designer 
K7: When geƫng new employees there certainly 
are an expectaƟon of a basic knowledge base 
(system 1 and 2 - dual processing theory, 
behavioural economics) and interest to learn more.
TNC: When geƫng new employees there is no 
certain theories that the employee must learn. 
He/she just have to be a good at what he/she is 
specialised in.
K7:  “[..] However, not all 
theories are transferable. 
The diﬃcult theories are 
tested on other projects, 
kind of pilot tests”- 
Designer
K: “[..] we describe three types of barriers, 
and that is physical barriers, psychological 
barriers and social barriers [..] What we 
ﬁnd here is: What barriers are we facing? 
Once they have been identiﬁed [..] then 
we go through visual views of the 
cognitive biases. So, we go through these 
and look at: Is it status quo bias we are up 
against? Is it unit bias? [..] What is at 
stake here? And, of course, here we draw 
on experience [..]”- Founder 
DD: “My dear big brother [the 
other founder of Decision Design]  
is a behavioural economist so he 
has a huge theory apparatus. We 
also have a database where we 
have read the most, but if we miss 
something, then we will try to 
research [..] Maybe we have to 
read new theories that we have 
not known before.” - Founder 
TNC: “We have taken and beneﬁted from 70 years of research on behaviour 
and stuﬀed many biases and heuristics types within several diﬀerent categori-
es, and then it's about going through them. So you have the problem and then 
you force yourself to only look at this category (eg. Friction). Boundaries create 
creativity. When the relevant categories then are selected, you can begin to 
delve into them and read up on theories” - Behavioural economist 
K7: “We are rarely stuck due to a 
lack of theories, as there are so 
many theories you could include. 
It is more theory vs. time pressure, 
usually balancing of a lack of time 
compared to getting in depth.” - 
Designer
K: ”We have such a scheme with our 
design principles [..] So I have made such 
principles and I have drawn from all sorts 
of places [..] So these [the design 
principles] are the ones you use when 
making system boards.Then it may occur 
that we gradually ﬁnd out “okay, we really 
miss something here” [..] and then we 
always go back to the cognitive psycho-
logy and look “okay, out of these 450 
biases - what can we have overlooked?” 
[..]” - Founder  
K7: "It's not something that can be read 
anywhere, but it requires a back-cata-
logue, a knowledge of at least 10-20, 
maybe 30 most common biases [..] but, 
there is a back-catalogue with the most 
commonly used [biases] that you quickly 
get into when you are here" - Designer 
K7: "We decide in the beginning with a 
project deﬁnition which heuristics and 
biases plays a role in this project. We also 
apply work models from Beyer & 
Holtzblatt “Contextual Design” [e.g. ﬂow 
model] in order to identify contact point 
where the behaviour occurs"- Designer
DD: "[..] and then we try to go in 
every time and say, what are the 
biases or heuristics that might 
have an impact here? So it's very 
direct way to applying theoretical 
hypothesis in design." - Founder 
K: “Everyone wants to perform behavioural 
design and include theories but there are 
so few descriptions on how exactly to do 
so, and how you convert it to changes in 
the real world” - Founder 
TNC: “All [the employees at The 
Nudging Company] have an 
understanding of these categories 
of biases, but I am the expert in 
them." - Behavioural economist 
K7: “[..] and sometimes it is kind of ﬂavor of the 
month, if somebody just read a nice book. [..] No no 
no [answering if the theory inclusion process is 
structured], it is from the back-catalogue, but there 
are also some things we know work well from other 
projects. So there are deﬁnitely some things that go 
again.” - Designer 
==PAGE:138==
126
EĞĞĚĨŽƌƉůĂŶŶŝŶŐĂŶĚĐŽŵŵƵŶŝĐĂƟŽŶ
Process planning
→ Project phases diﬀerenƟates from project to project 
→ Employee involvement (diﬀerent parƟcipants in diﬀerent phases)
→ Project approach diﬀers based on content
ŽŵŵƵŶŝĐĂƟŽŶ
→ Client interacƟon (documents 
decisions and streamlines
direcƟon)
→ Internal handovers (Ɵme and 
insights are lost if not eﬀecƟve)
General behavioural design project needs
Staging 
→ Number of employees on a 
project is 2-ϯ
→ Diﬀerent typical roles (e.g. 
designer, behavioural economist, 
anthropologist, project manager)
Project success 
→ Is determined by 
measurable behaviour 
change and client 
saƟsfacƟon
TNC: “[..] I get more involved in the beginning of the project 
and it suits me well,  because for me, the design is also a lot 
about being informed of what is happening and sometimes 
the handovers may make it a bit unclear to me what I think is 
going on.” - Designer 
DD: The subjects determines who to 
involve in regards to theory and 
determines what level of theory 
inclusion in made as well.
K: “We are a part of the whole 
behavioural design process.” - 
Founder
K7: Diﬀerent types of projects 
(behavioural strategy, 
behavioural campaign, 
behavioural studies, behavioural 
analysis) means diﬀerent 
content and level of theory 
inclusion.
K7: Double diamond is always 
puƩed on the behavioural 
design processes (if possible), 
but is more a model that we 
have in our heads (a kind of 
mental model) when we work 
through the process.
K7: The approach can change due 
to pracƟcal circumstances or when 
you get more insights by talking to 
others.
K7: Theory inclusion 
also draws on the 
network's 
knowledge and 
experience.
K7: “In fact, we are probably best when 
we do the analyses, and do the concepts 
and when they [the concepts] are to be 
cast in bronze and such things, then we 
will pull back. As long as we are allowed 
to decide how the concepts should look. 
[..] Yes [answer for that they are included 
until prototype level] [..] Then we have 
some external to shape the concepts and 
then we will take over at the measure-
ment again.” - Designer 
DD: “Often we are only hired into 
diﬀerent stages of a behaviour 
design process, often the ﬁrst 
part.” - Founder
Thus Decision Design can be seen 
as a very advisory company that 
has provided knowledge to a 
behavioural design process that 
then have contributed to design 
intervenƟons and behaviour 
change in the end. 
TNC: “Yes, roughly speaking [answer to that the projects always 
run from problem deﬁnition to prototype and testing]. It has 
been structured like this for the last period of time [..]. However, 
sometimes the clients have their own testing systems that they 
want to use.” - Designer
DD: The generally plan of the project vary from project to 
project, but generally: ObservaƟon and analyse the surrounding 
environment, Analysis of target group, Baseline measurement, 
Development of intervenƟons and Deasurements to see if the 
intervenƟons have change the target group͛s behaviour. 
Di: “΀..] but otherwise it's the early part of 
the product development phase that we 
are part of [..] in the production of the 
products, there are some others involved, 
but we will often join and have a role due 
to the studies we have made along the 
way.” - Designer 
Di: "The time in which we have 
been aware of the fact that 
behaviour design is a ﬁeld in itself 
and the quantity of projects where 
we have tested it [behavioural 
design] out, have not been long 
enough to be masters of conduc-
ting a behavioural design process 
or identifying when exactly in the 
project you have to include it.”
 - Designer
TNC: Three themes of projects: 
strategy, complaints and campaign 
model means diﬀerent content and 
phases is included. 
TNC: “Where much time is lost are by delivering to 
each other. We have phases where information 
must be moved. We have some insights to be made 
into hypotheses to be made to test. It takes 
insanely long time to deliver information. It is 
complex.” - Behavioural economist 
TNC: >ack of information (not enough time), “[..] 
therefore it is extra important to deliver the 
information as beneﬁcial as possible in order to not 
loose the existing information.” - Designer 
K7: Challenging to understand and read things 
from other kinds of professionals. 
DD: Anthropologists oŌen work with Decision 
Design on projects. ObservaƟon study where 
anthropologists are hired to invesƟgate.
TNC: As it is all about the client company͛s Ɵme, it 
diﬀers throughout the process of being individual 
(eg. analyƟcal work) versus group work (compilaƟ-
on in plenum). However, regular meeƟngs occur 
where informaƟon is delivered to each other. Idea 
generaƟon, observaƟons are in group work.
K: KRUKOW get hired by a client company that 
have very Ňuﬀy ambiƟons for behaviour change → 
translate this to problem behaviour together with 
client. 
DD: It's very important to idenƟfy the purpose of 
the client company͛s task in order to have the right 
approach to the project and thus more likely to 
achieve project success.
K: 
Ongoing 
client 
meeƟngs
Di: Extern employees from the client company 
because when an employee from the client 
company have been involved all the way, it is easier 
to argument for why diﬀerent decisions was made.
TNC: “Humans expect that when they 
have a complex problem, they must 
have a complex solution. But this does 
not add up. The point is that you must 
have a simple solution.”-  Behavioural 
economist
K7: “[..] we tend to be 2-3 pr. project [..] So what we 
want is a classic project manager type, an engine-
ering type and then we also often have one that can 
do something with data and statistics.” - Designer
Di: “Often there are diﬀerent employees in the 
projects mostly 2-3 employees pr. project.” - 
Designer 
K: “It is always the composition of a behavioural 
economist and behavioural designer. Then there 
may be more economists depending on how much 
data is to be processed. [..] Always these two roles 
and then a project manager [..]” - Founder 
DD: “It is very diﬀerent [..] It also depends on the 
time horizon [..] maybe we need 5 people to do 
the task. If we have one year for the same work, 
we can ﬁnish with only 2 people. It is very 
diﬀerent. [..] sometimes we hire anthropologist, 
sociologist, etc.” - Founder 
TNC: “If the project is below 200,000 D<< then we 
should preferably only be two [..] but if we move 
over 300,000 D<< we are three to four persons on 
the project.” - Behavioural economist 
TNC: “zes, it may be [answer to that they are often a 
behavior economist and designer per project], but it 
depends on what is needed.” - Designer
TNC: “[..] but in the team [the company] there is a 
designer, an economist, an ethnologist, a 
sociologist and a rhetoric.” - Behavioural 
economist 
DD: “In measurable projects we 
measure how much behaviour 
change we have achieved, where 
4й is poor and for example ϲ0й 
would be very good. In non-mea-
surable projects we look at the 
client͛s reaction. Is the client 
satisﬁed?” - Founder 
K7: “Yes, yes [answer if they 
deﬁne success as measurable 
behavioural change] [..] There is a 
professional pride and then there 
is a more commercial success 
factor and it is if the clients have 
experienced that it has been a 
successful project [ ..] we also try 
to measure on them [<WIΖs] [..] 
and such a thing is a huge success 
for us, that is, we teach people an 
internal language for their target 
audience, their customers, 
citizens, patients [..] nd thatΖs 
because then they will come back 
to us again.” - Designer
Di: “Most often, it would be that 
the clients pay their bill and are 
happy and coming back. The 
clients are often happy when they 
have been progressed further and 
are closer to a product that can 
solve the problem they face.” - 
Designer
TNC: “Extern project success is 
about measurable behavioural 
change, but not always the success 
criterias are measurable because 
thousands things can go wrong 
through the process. It can also be 
about product satisfaction, nice 
cooperation with us eg. kind 
employees. [..]  Intern project 
success is more about if there were 
good handovers of information in 
the team” - Behavioural economist
K: “For us, the only thing that 
determines whether we have 
succeeded or not is whether we have 
created measurable eﬀect.” - Founder 
Appendix 2: Affinity diagram (2 of 3)
==PAGE:139==
 127
Need not emphasised much 
ǀĂůƵĂƟŽŶ 
→ Happens in all design consultancies,
yet unstructured and implicitly
EĞĞĚŽŶůǇŵĞŶƟŽŶĞĚďǇŽŶĞ
design consultancy
Need not theory relevant 
/ŶƐƉŝƌĂƟŽŶ
→ Is found through
experience and examples
(cases)
WƌĂĐƟĐĂůŝŵƉůŝĐĂƟŽŶƐ
→ aﬀects the
soluƟon highly, but
cannot be solved
through theory
inclusion
Data 
→ Retrieving data is
diﬃcult, but cannot
be solved by theory
inclusion
K7:“We evaluate after all 
projects. [..] However, not 
all theories are transfe-
rable. The diﬃcult theories 
are tested on other proje-
cts, kind of pilot tests.” - 
Designer 
Di: “valuation is not 
systematic but is done 
internally. There are 
some sessions in relation 
to the methodology, 
approach, cases etc.” - 
Designer 
TNC: “We always evaluate, but more explicit than 
implicit whose theory is evaluated against the 
method that was used.” - Behavioural economist
TNC: The designer starts by 
looking at herself and begin 
invesƟgaƟon why she do as she 
does (looking at the context). 
Relies on experience. She also 
uses behavioural biology with 
inspiraƟon from animals.
TNC: Also look 
on other good 
cases that 
others have 
made to get 
inspiraƟon.
TNC: “When getting stuck 
in the process it is rarely 
because of lack of know-
ledge, but practical 
challenges. We always 
stick to our premise.” - 
Designer 
TNC:“Wractical challenges 
contributes to that the 
focus might change.” - 
Behavioural economist
K: “There are so many 
practical things when you 
get out in the real world, 
so that not all good 
solutions actually work. 
This contributes to that 
you often end up with a 
low-practice solution.” - 
Founder
K: “If you are in an acade-
mic world and test things 
in a closed environment 
then you have no clue 
about how and if it would 
work in real life settings.” - 
Founder 
DD: SomeƟmes it is 
diﬃcult just to collect 
data of the problem 
behaviour, e.g. hygiene in 
public toilets - how do 
you measure how much 
pee there is?
K: “Which data do we 
need for the test set-up? 
What is this data we 
need? How do we get it?” 
- Founder
DD: SomeƟmes the 
behaviour change can ﬁrst 
be measured several 
years aŌer the intervenƟ-
on, so it is diﬃcult to 
collect data and measure 
the behaviour change 
right here right now.
K7: Design methods are 
fundamental to what we 
do, but we always apply 
behavioural science and 
data in all steps.
Appendix 2: Affinity diagram (3 of 3)
==PAGE:140==
128
Appendix 3: Interview 1 - KRUKOW (1 of 3)
Date:   
21st February 2017 from 15.45-16.45 o’clock
Place:  
Strandvejen 124, 2900 Hellerup
Language:  
Danish
Participants:
 
 
Beatrice Angel (Student - Technical University of Denmark)
 
 
Nanna Kristiansen (Student - Technical University of Denmark)
 
 
Sille Krukow (Founder and behavioural design director - KRUKOW)
Key findings
• Applies KRUKOW Design Principles, which are “self-made” principles, based on e.g. cognitive 
psychology and behaviour economy, in order to define the problem behaviour and thus forming a 
solution for behaviour change. 
• KRUKOW does not explicitly state that it applies different behavioural theories, but mentions different 
buzzwords such as triggers (Fogg 2003) and priming (Cialdini 2007). Further, KRUKOW states that 
90% of all behaviour is controlled by automatic thinking, i.e. System 1 (Kahneman 2003) and therefore 
the behavioural design consultancy only works with behaviour relating to system 1. 
• Once the target behaviour has been determined, KRUKOW maps the problem behaviour and from 
this mapping, different types of barriers (physical, psychological and social) are identified and described 
by the use of heuristics and cognitive biases (Tversky & Kahneman1974).
• Success definition for a behavioural design project in KRUKOW is defined as whether the desired 
behaviour change was achieved or not and is determined through statistical measurements.
• KRUKOW states that everyone want to make behavioural design and include theoretical knowledge, 
yet there are few descriptions on how exactly to do so and how to convert knowledge into changes 
in the real world.
Answers
1.
2.
Initial work (in cooperation with the client company):
1. Problem behaviour identification: What does this ambition mean in practice? Well the problem behaviour is when customers 
choose x product instead of y, which happens in x markets.
2. Problem behaviour definition: The problem behaviour occurs when x,y,z.
3. Selecting one problem behaviour: Which one of these problem behaviours costs you the most? Cost-benefit analysis with 
social impact included (which human consequences does the problem behaviour have?) The problem behaviour is chosen 
(now we have a specific behaviour situation that represents a measurable problem (someone does this much at this time)).
4. Discussion with client company: How big/how small should the commercial package be? 
No.
KRUKOW get hired by a client company that have very fluffy ambitions for behaviour change e.g. “secure the sale of sustain-
able products.”
 
KRUKOW's purpose with behavioural design is to create measurable behaviour changes that make a difference in a positive 
manner, based on the assumption that no human on the earth want to die of diabetes, destroy the planet on purpose etc.
 
KRUKOW only work with companies within three areas:
 
– Sustainability 
 
– Health
 
– Safety (mainly financial safety) 
 
“We are a part of the whole behavioural design process” -  Founder of KRUKOW
==PAGE:141==
 129
Appendix 3: Interview 1 - KRUKOW (2 of 3)
4.
5.
3.
KRUKOW Behavioural Design Method
1. In behavioural mapping KRUKOW collect knowledge about:
 
1.1 Existing choice-architecture design that surrounds the negative decision process, because it is here the errors 
 
should be found (eg. cues, guides, triggers). 
 
1.2 Existing interaction data (eg. counting at Hovedbanegården). Often it is needed to cross two or more kinds of data 
 
sets (eg. the weather versus when do you turn on your kettle). What is the specific behaviour? Which interactions take 
 
place? Does this match what we found? Outcome: description of what is going on and the observed behaviour.
2. Set up test parameters: What do we expect that we can change? (eg. increase sales of product X by 10% compared to y)
3. Identify and describe three types of barriers with help of visual overviews of cognitive biases (draws on experience and 
speculating):
 
3.1 Physical (e.g. bus signs or bins placed invisibly).
 
3.2 Psychological (“the expert trap” - e.g. hospital signage).
 
3.3 Social (e.g. everyone else do this so I will also do that).
4. Design process starts: Now we know which barriers we must design us out of. In the first design research phase where 
system boards are made (kind of analogies where you look at other areas that have nice solutions to a barrier). Make a visual 
collection of good solutions, but what is practically possible? Then we start designing the solution into the new context, brand.
5. Prototyping 2-3 good solutions.
6. Design of test protocols and brief the observer that must make the tests (often employees) 
“Which data do we need for the test set-up? What is this data we need? How do we get it?” - Founder of KRUKOW
7. Test (pilot-testing).
8. Data analysis: What happened? What do the results show?
9. Recommendations about what changes in the choice-architecture must be made, what effects can the client company 
expect. Now the company can make these changes in other platforms that might be relevant as well. 
 
All steps happens with ongoing client meetings to agree on which way to go.
 
“[..] Based on this situation, you do what we call a behavioural mapping. Here you collect knowledge about two things: You 
collect knowledge about the existing choice-architecture design [..] and existing interaction data [..]” - Founder of KRUKOW
 
“[..] we describe three types of barriers, and that is physical barriers, psychological barriers and social barriers [..] What we find 
here is: What barriers are we facing? Once they have been identified [..] then we go through visual views of the cognitive 
biases. So, we go through these and look at: Is it status quo bias we are up against? Is it unit bias? [..] What is at stake here? 
And, of course, here we draw on experience [..]” - Founder of KRUKOW
 
“Yet behavioural mapping is the first and very important step in behavioural design. [..] It's not hard to come up with good 
ideas, especially not when you have a rock-solid behavioural mapping.” - Founder of KRUKOW
Cognitive psychology + automatic thinking: 
1. Reflective (system 2, which can be influenced through normal informative communication, only happens 10% of the time).
2. Automatic thinking (system 1, behaviour is 90% of the time controlled by automatic/uncontrolled thinking where we just 
react on our surrounding environment and their capability to work with or against our instincts).
 
Design principles (made by Sille Krukow) is based on cognitive psychology, behaviour economy etc. that you can use when you 
make system boards and then if we realise we miss something then we go back to cognitive psychology or social to see if we 
miss something. 
 
“We have such a scheme with our design principles [..] So I have made such principles and I have drawn from all sorts of 
places [..] So these [the design principles] are the ones you use when making system boards. Then it may occur that we 
gradually find out “okay, we really miss something here” [..] and then we always go back to the cognitive psychology and look 
“okay, out of these 450 biases - what can we have overlooked?” [..]” - Founder of KRUKOW
 
“Matter out of place” formulated by Mary Douglas to change automatic behaviour: Humans will go a long way to maintain our 
own personal systems (eg. how we put our cutlery), but where you can awaken automatic behaviour and make us aware 
(reflective) is if something breaks our system and thus causes us to act and behave differently.
 
*The founder doesn’t tell directly which theories they use but mentions triggers (Fogg 2009b), automatic thinking (Kahnemann 
2003), cues (Duhigg 2014) and priming (Cialdini 2007).
“There are so many practical things when you get out in the real world, so that not all good solutions actually work. This 
contributes to that you often end up with a low-practice solution.” - Founder of KRUKOW
 
General challenge:  To familiarise themselves with new fields and professions, and train employees to think differently (espe-
cially top management).
Answers
No.
==PAGE:142==
130
Appendix 3: Interview 1 - KRUKOW (3 of 3)
6.
7.
“For us, the only thing that determines whether we have succeeded or not is whether we have created a measurable effect.” - 
Founder of KRUKOW
A behavioural design process at KRUKOW consist of behavioural economists, behavioural designers and a project manager 
(often 1 economist, 1 designer and 1 project manager pr. project). 
1. Behavioural economists can understand and gather data, set-up protocols and logarithms.
2. Behavioural designers can shape and understand the design part. Collect information about choice-architecture (the 
tourist principle - go through what the customers go through). 
 
Throughout the process some work will be solo and other in groups.
 
“It is always the composition of a behavioural economist and behavioural designer. Then there may be more economists 
depending on how much data is to be processed. [..] Always these two roles and then a project manager [..]” - Founder of 
KRUKOW
Other
About Sille Krukow
Educated at The Royal Danish Academy of Fine Arts Schools of Architecture, Design and Conservation in the field of visual 
communication design. 
Been in the advertising industry:
“I have spent around 9 years with researchers within cognitive psychology and political science to try to say okay, which 
theories do they work with and which do we as designers need” - Founder of KRUKOW
Interest area: How do we use design to make measurable changes in behaviour?
Behavioural design definition 
Many different definitions of what behavioural design is - especially theoretical descriptions, but for Sille Krukow behavioural 
design is a practical view/understanding.
Often when humans view behavioural design from a theoretical perspective they have no real life practical experience with 
behavioural design and that is fine, but not how KRUKOW design works.
Behavioural design work in general 
KRUKOW's behavioural design methods is developed to make field experiments and design solutions in real life settings.
“If you are in an academic world and test things in a closed environment then you have no clue about how and if it would work 
in real life settings” - Founder of KRUKOW
Basically we are animals so we will always try to copy each other's behaviour only to conserve energy and survive. We always 
try to fit into the social norm in the context we are in.
Complexity we have created in our world (so much choice-architecture we must interact with all the time, information flows 
etc. all things that have not been taken into account that we are automatically thinking).
Important comments in regards to the research framework
The research framework only shows the behavioural mapping part of a behavioural design process because testing is not 
included (which is the most difficult part of a behavioural design process according to Sille Krukow). 
“Yet behavioural mapping is the first and very important step in behavioural design.”
 “Everyone wants to perform behavioural design and include theories but there are so few descriptions on how exactly to do so, 
and how you convert it to changes in the real world” - Founder of KRUKOW
Answers
No.
==PAGE:143==
 131
Appendix 4: Interview 2 - Decision Design (1 of 3)
Date:   
28th February 2017 from 10.00-11.00 o’clock
Place:  
Center Boulevard 5, 2300 København S
Language:  
Danish
Participants:
 
 
Beatrice Angel (Student - Technical University of Denmark)
 
 
Nanna Kristiansen (Student - Technical University of Denmark)
 
 
Thor Ridderhaugen (Founder of Decision Design)
Key findings
• Often Decision Design is only hired into the first part of a behavioural design process (discovery and 
problem definition), yet in some projects they contribute to development and implementation as well 
(the last part of behavioural design according to Decision Design). 
• The general project plan varies from project to project, but identical for all projects is the goal of 
applying a high level of measurements, as these measurements can be applied for determining whether 
the actual behaviour change occurs. 
• Decision Design distinguishes between different scientific levels of behavioural theories: Behavioural 
economics, anthropology, behavioural psychology, and communication. Yet, as the employees of Decision 
Design do not posses the knowledge of all these fields, different professionals with different expertises, 
i.e. anthropologists, are occasionally hired into different projects.
• Decision Design has a database with behavioural theories, which they use for investigation of relevant 
theories for specific projects. 
• Each project starts with determining a hypothesis of the problem behaviour in question, yet Decision 
Design faces a challenge of figuring out both whether the chosen hypothesis is relevant and whether 
it will achieve the desired effect. 
• Decision Design states that it is difficult to design successful interventions if you do not have the right 
theoretical understanding, yet achieving this understanding cannot be obtained easily. 
Answers
1.
No.
Private and public client companies contact Decision Design with a task, e.g. “We must develop a campaign”. Then Decision 
Design figures out what should be the purpose of the campaign, in order to figure out who to involve, e.g. if the company just 
wants to be visible, a communication bureau would be relevant to involve in the project.
 
It's very important to identify the purpose of the client company’s task in order to have the right approach to the project and 
thus more likely achieve project success.
 
“Often we are only hired into different stages of a behaviour design process, often the first part.” - Founder of Decision Design
 
Thus Decision Design can be seen as a very advisory company that has provided knowledge to a behavioural design process, 
that then have contributed to design interventions and behaviour change in the end. 
==PAGE:144==
132
Appendix 4: Interview 2 - Decision Design (2 of 3)
Answers
No.
4.
5.
2.
3.
The process up to an analysis of how we develop behavioural design is dictated by the behavioural economy statistical analyses 
(i.e., measuring). 
 
The generally plan of the project varies from project to project, but overall we would like to measure everything we can measure 
(“It is in the numbers that all magic occurs”), so if we can measure, the process would be:
 
1. Observation and analyse the surrounding environment.
 
2. Analysis of target group. 
 
3. Baseline measurement: create the data that we need in order to change the behaviour (e,g. humans eat x much 
 
and throw y out).
 
4. Development of interventions.
 
5. Measurements to see if the interventions have changed the target groups’ behaviour.
 
However in some projects you cannot measure, because the target group is too large and resources limited (or due to legal 
reasons). In these projects we instead begin to analyze the decisions about the problem (qualitative studies). E.g. whether a 
farmer has changed the bulb for the last 4 weeks cannot be measured, so instead we analyse which factors play a role into the 
farmer's world ,that can influence whether or not he has changed the bulb in the last 4 weeks. Maybe if the farmers can’t see 
the value over time in changing the bulbs, then their agriculture will not exist in the long run? Here anthropologic conclusions 
are made in order to continue the process of developing interventions (which are based on theory and experience).
Observation and analysing the surrounding environment:
Observation study where anthropologists are hired to investigate: How do humans behave? And why do they behave in this 
way? We rarely interview people, because people tend to have difficulties in explaining why they do as they do. 
Yet, interviews can guide you in some directions, so if we still need some answers after the observations, the anthropologists 
will conduct a participant-observation study to get insight in what is happened up to this point (that the decision is made)? 
 
Decision-mapping
“Typically, you don’t want to go in and ask, because people often have a hard time to explain why they do what they do." - 
Founder of Decision Design
We apply theories when we can. If the project deals with something communicative, then we look at communication theory, 
etc.
 
Sometimes we hire some anthropologists who have the whole theory apparatus to make an anthropological analysis and find 
out the motives of the problem decision and behaviour. 
 
When the project concerns behavioural economics we look at barriers and look at the financial decisions in practice.
 
“My dear big brother [the other founder of Decision Design]  is a behavioral economist so he has a huge theory apparatus. We 
also have a database where we have read the most, but if we miss something, then we will try to research [..] Maybe we have to 
read new theories that we have not known before.” - Founder of Decision Design
 
Outlines decision process model that outlines biases or heuristics and a direct way of applying theoretical hypothesis in design. 
E.g. Læger Uden Grænser sends a letter out to collect money. What decisions lies in reaching the point of actually donating 
money?
 
1. Do you open the letter or not? What can influence this decision? (first intention design – logo, the address is  
 
handwritten, written for your name etc.).
 
2. Do you read the content or not?
 
3. Do you want to donate money/was the content interesting enough?
 
4. How much money do I want to donate?
 
5. How will I donate the money?
 
Develop hypothesis: “[..] and then we try to go in every time and say, what are the biases or heuristics that might have an 
impact here? So it's very direct way to applying theoretical hypothesis in design.”- Founder of Decision Design
Theoretical challenge: “To establish hypotheses and then figuring out that they do not have the effect as you thought. That is 
challenging in itself and also figuring out why.” - Founder of Decision Design
 
Practical challenge: Collection of qualitative data.
Sometimes the behaviour change can first be measured several years after the intervention, so it is difficult to collect data and 
measure the behaviour change right here right now.
Sometimes it is difficult just to collect data of the problem behaviour, e.g. hygiene in public toilets - how do you measure how 
much pee there is?
==PAGE:145==
 133
Appendix 4: Interview 2 - Decision Design (3 of 3)
Answers
No.
6.
7.
“In measurable projects we measure how much behaviour change we have achieved, where 4% is poor and for example 60% 
would be very good. In non-measurable projects we look at the client’s reaction. Is the client satisfied?” - Founder of Decision 
Typically, we start with meetings to see whether we can help the client company or not. If not, can we involve our other 
company-partners in the project? 
 
Next, the founder evaluates the project and figures out how many employees do we need, which skills, how much money do we 
have? Then he hires a project team based on Decision Design’s network. The project team varies a lot from project to project:  
 
– A project running 1 year could be 2 team members .
 
– A project with a lot of money (several millions), then a project team of for instance 8.
 
“It is very different [..] It also depends on the time horizon [..] maybe we need 5 people to do the task. If we have one year for 
the same work, we can finish with only 2 people. It is very different. [..] sometimes we hire anthropologist, sociologist, etc.” - 
Founder of Decision Design
Other
Behavioural design in general
Behavioural design can be many different things, for instance to change the words in a certain context, to change physical 
arrangements of things that the target group faces, or something visual.
Behavioural economics started in the 1970s.
 
Behavioural theories
Behavioural theories takes place in many different scientific levels: Anthropology, behavioural psychology, behavioural 
economics, communication.
“When you present a problem and say now we need some people to do something here. What is behind it? What theories do we 
need? I do not know! I'm not a behavioural economist, how should I learn it in an hour? So that's the big challenge.”
 - Founder of Decision Design
It is difficult to design interventions when you don’t have a theoretical understanding.
 
“Important to have the right approach to a project”-example 
The government of United Kingdom wanted homeowners in England to insulate their attics to reduce CO2 emissions, so 
homeowners would get a energy saving (in heating their houses up) and United Kingdom as a EU state would achieve their 
targets of reducing CO2. The government offered homeowners economic incitement if they got their attic insulated. Nothing 
happened because humans are lazy. There was a barrier in the fact that the householders should first clean up the attic before 
it could be insulated. So they changed the offer so the homeowners could get their attics cleaned and donate some of their 
things from the attic for charitable purposes. Homeowners who now accepted the offer increased with 300% (3 times as many 
homeowners accepted the offer now compared to the first offer).
 
Ethics
The concept of ethics started to be mentions in relation to nudging.
We must not deprive the individual some freedom of choice when we make behavioural design.
The founder got the question “What do you think about using human as means to achieve a goal?” he answered “I use the 
environment and communication, not humans. We all have a goal as soon as we open our mouths.”
==PAGE:146==
134
Appendix 5: Interview 3 - /KL.7 (1 of 3)
Date:   
1st March 2017 from 14.00-15.00 o’clock
Place:  
Nørregade 6, 1165 København K
Language:  
Danish
Participants:
 
 
Beatrice Angel (Student - Technical University of Denmark)
 
 
Nanna Kristiansen (Student - Technical University of Denmark)
 
 
Sebastian Borum Olsen (Behavioural designer - /KL.7)
Key findings
• Projects in /KL.7 are distinguished between four different types: Behavioural strategy, behavioural 
campaign, behavioural studies and behavioural analysis. Each of these types determines different levels 
of involvement in the behavioural design process.
• All projects in /KL.7 deal with behaviour change, yet creating new behaviours or eliminating existing 
ones is relevant as well. 
• /KL.7 have a triangulation of expert areas: Data, design, and behavioural science. However, design 
methods (e.g. Double Diamond (Design Council 2005)) are viewed as a fundamental part of their 
process, and thus behavioural science and data are applied and added in each of the design phases. 
• Although the design consultancy states that behavioural theory is applied in each phase of a project, 
theory selection is composed of a non-structured selection process on the basis of each designer’s 
individual “back catalog” (i.e. the 10-30 most common biases (Kahneman, 1974) or existing theory 
knowledge).
• A tool that would secure a minimum of behavioural knowledge and thus point the designer in the 
correct direction would be beneficial, as the behavioural design field is complex and requires expertise, 
which takes time to gain. 
Answers
1.
No.
Almost all projects is about behaviour change or about creating a behaviour that does not exist. If we can eliminate the 
behaviour, it is also very fine. We only accept the project if it consist of elements of behaviour. 
 
The client company contact /KL.7 with projects, yet the projects differ so it is not always that /KL.7 are involved from start to 
end in the whole behavioural design process.  
 
“In fact, we are probably best when we do the analysis and the concepts, and when they [the concepts] are to be cast in bronze 
and such things, then we will pull back. As long as we are allowed to decide how the concepts should look. [..] Yes [answer for 
that they are included until prototype level] [..] Then we have someone externally to shape the concepts and then we will take 
over at the measurement again.” - Designer from /KL.7
==PAGE:147==
 135
Appendix 5: Interview 3 - /KL.7 (2 of 3)
Answers
No.
4.
5.
2.
3.
Double diamond is always put on the behavioural design processes (if possible), but is more a model that we have in our heads 
(a kind of mental model) when we work through the process:
 
1. Analysis.
 
2. Idea generation.
 
3. Conceptualisation.
 
4. Test.
Design methods are fundamental to what we do, but we always apply behavioural science and data in all steps. This 
behavioural design process is not called a general design process, because we have a lot of expertise knowledge that we bring 
into each step - especially the first one: what has been done before?
 
Types of projects: 
 
– Behavioural strategy
 
– Behavioural campaign (often trying to communicate to system 2) e.g. Realdania as client 
 
– Behavioural studies (analysis + testing of solutions on concept level through e.g. mock-ups) 
 
– Behavioural analysis (What is the problem? Why does the behaviour occur?) e.g. Grundfos as client
Usually there is a good understanding of the problem because the client companies have tried everything else and now goes to 
/KL.7 as a last resort. Yet, we still make problem definition, which includes (objective and quantitative (digital data)):
 
– Investigate if there is data we can use?
 
– Which behaviour exist?
 
“We also apply work models from Beyer & Holtzblatt “Contextual Design” [e.g. flow model] in order to identify contact points 
where the behaviour occurs“ - Designer from /KL.7
Duhigg with How Habits Work 
Kahneman system 1 and system 2
Richard Dawkins with The Middle World model
 
Non-structured selection process of theories on the basis of the “back catalogue” (knowledge about the 10-30 most common 
biases). Some projects are better with some theories than others.
 
"We decide in the beginning with a project definition which heuristics and biases plays a role in this project" - Designer from 
/KL.7
 
“[..] and sometimes it is kind of flavour of the month, if somebody just read a nice book. [..] No no no [answering if the theory 
inclusion process is structured], it is from the back-catalogue, but there are also some things we know work well from other 
projects. So there are definitely some things that go again.” - Designer from /KL.7
 
"It's not something that can be read anywhere, but it requires a back-catalogue, a knowledge of at least 10-20, maybe 30 most 
common biases [..] but, there is a back-catalogue with the most commonly used [biases] that you quickly get into when you are 
here" - Designer from /KL.7
 
Also draws on the network's knowledge and experience.
 
E.g. uses the Behaviour Model (Fogg 2009b) to idea generation in terms of evaluating the ideas and identify where the ideas 
could be better. Also uses Pyramid model: Design & Interaction vectors made by Rune Nørager.
 
The approach can change due to practical circumstances or when you get more insights by talking to others.
 
When getting new employees there certainly are an expectation of a basic knowledge base (system 1 and 2 - dual processing 
theory, behavioral economics) and interest to learn more .
Classical project management challenges.
 
To get acquainted with a lot of professionalism and expertise - understand it, read it etc. 
 
“We are rarely stuck due to a lack of theories, as there are so many theories you could include. It is more theory vs. time 
pressure, usually balancing of a lack of time compared to getting in depth” - Designer from /KL.7
==PAGE:148==
136
Appendix 5: Interview 3 - /KL.7 (3 of 3)
Answers
No.
6.
7.
The project have been a success if for instance:
 
– the client company is satisfied with the results.
 
– we have reached the KPIs defined in regards to the client company’s goal/purpose of the project. 
 
– the client company experience an eye opener.
 
– the client company return to /KL.7 with a new project. 
 
“Yes, yes [answer if they define success as measurable behavioural change] [..] There is a professional pride and then there is 
a more commercial success factor and it is if the clients have experienced that it has been a successful project [ ..] we also try 
to measure on them [KPI's] [..] and such a thing is a huge success for us, that is, we teach people an internal language for their 
target audience, their customers, citizens, patients [..] And that's because then they will come back to us again.” - Designer 
from /KL.7
 
“We evaluate after all projects. [..] However, not all theories are transferable. The difficult theories are tested on other projects, 
kind of pilot tests” - Designer from /KL.7
Never individual work - always group work. 
 
“[..] we tend to be 2-3 pr. project [..] So what we want is a classic project manager type, an engineering type and then we also 
often have one that can do something with data and statistics” - Designer from /KL.7
Other
Behavioural design in general
Human behaviour can almost always be measured, so measuring is a huge part of behavioural design.
Instead of watching behavioural design as a new approach to design, it is in our optic a basic approach to everything that 
humans touch/interact with. If there is no behavioural science behind, then it wont work. Behavioural design is above every-
thing related to product design, system design, service design, process design, information campaigns and so on.
 
/KL.7’s expert areas
Triangulation of expert areas:
 
– Behavioural science (engineering, economics, communication).
 
– Design (methods and processes). 
 
– Data (technology and statistik).
Experts in what shape humans.
 
Assumption: deep rationality
We do not like to talk about behavioural economics because here humans have a strange perspective as human being rational. 
Some others try to soften this by saying that humans are predictably irrational. But it is a false premise. We are irrational 
because the models that we have putted on us from the beginning, are not correct. In fact, there are lots of things that influence 
our decisions that can not be put into a model. Therefore we talk in KL/7 about deep rationality - there is a meaning that we as 
human stick to the flock for example. This is a perspective that we have in addition to behavioural economists.
 
References that Sebastian mentions
Dan Norman “The Design of Everyday Things” (from the 1980s)
Richard Dawkins “The God Delusion”
We human live in a middle world because we can’t understand things that are big or small og too long a way or too long since 
Rune Nørager “Design Psychology”
User-centered design: Ask the users 
Human-centered design: Ask the users + expert knowledge
 
Important comments in regards to the research framework
“It is difficult to understand behavioural design, as there is a lot of stuff to understand” - Designer from /KL.7
“If you are expert within a field, it requires expertise and time to gain this. But if you develop a tool that at least secures a 
minimum of knowledge to point the designer in the correct direction...” - Designer from /KL.7
==PAGE:149==
 137
Appendix 6: Interview 4 - The Nudging Company (1 of 3)
Date:   
8th March 2017 from 09.20-10.20 o’clock
Place:  
Svanemøllevej 33, 2900 Hellerup
Language:  
Danish
Participants:
 
 
Beatrice Angel (Student - Technical University of Denmark)
 
 
Nanna Kristiansen (Student - Technical University of Denmark)
 
 
Maria Mattsson (Behavioural designer - The Nudging Company)
 
 
Thomas Christensen (Behavioural economist - The Nudging Company)
Key findings
• Projects are in The Nudging Company distinguished between three themes: Strategy, compliance, 
and campaign model. Each of these themes determines the process and how behaviour is mapped 
explorative, however The Nudging Company are always a part of the entire behavioural design process 
regardless of the project theme.
• The Nudging Company relies on many behavioural theories throughout the behavioural design 
process, yet the most used is theory of Heuristics and Biases (Tversky & Kahnemann 1974), where all 
the employees at The Nudging Company have an understanding of the different categories of biases, 
but the behavioural economist is the expert in them. The behavioural designer takes the behavioural 
theories that the behavioural economist has identified with her in the design process if it fits into the 
design theory/frame.
• Projects in The Nudging Company differs between individual work (e.g. analysis) and group work (e.g. 
idea generation) and mainly there are 2-4 employees pr. project, where the competences differ from 
project to project. 
• The biggest challenge in The Nudging Company is to get enough information and then proper deliver 
this information to another employee by the phase shifts, so that no valuable insights and informations 
are lost in the process.
Answers
1.
No.
All projects are related to behavioural design and client companies contact The Nudging Company with a more or less defined 
issue.
 
Sometimes the problem can be easily solved (e.g. the disposal of coffee cups), but because of economic resources, The 
Nudging Company rejects the offer as it would cost to much versus the small problem it would solve. 
 
“Yes, roughly speaking [answer to that the projects always run from problem definition to prototype and testing]. It has been 
structured like this for the last period of time [..]. However, sometimes the clients have their own testing systems that they want 
to use.” - Designer from The Nudging Companyn
 
Longest projects are 3-4 months and multiple projects happen at the same time.
 
“When clients come to us, they have an expectation of something creative. Humans own thinking on creative is “noisy” and 
remarkable.” - Behavioural economist from The Nudging Company
 
“Humans expect that when they have a complex problem, they must have a complex solution. But this does not add up. The 
point is that you must have a simple solution.” - Behavioural economist from The Nudging Company
==PAGE:150==
138
Appendix 6: Interview 4 - The Nudging Company (2 of 3)
Answers
No.
4.
5.
2.
3.
“It does not matter whether it is a municipal project or private, it's more about what the project deals with. What projects 
requires of us is a part of categorizing projects.” - Designer from The Nudging Company
 
Three themes of projects:
 
– Strategy (change humans behaviour for the purpose of HR strategies, change management, IT Strategy etc.):
 
 
– Change/move mindset - help to rethink how they should go for it.
 
 
– Strategy it is about translating the client company’s visions to concrete behaviour.
 
– Compliance (you must do x,y,z): 
 
 
– Making it easier for humans what they want.
 
 
– The first thing is to define a desired behaviour (do x,y,z in this time frame) in strategy projects, yet this is 
 
 
not necessary in compliance projects as the behaviour is clearly defined.
 
– Campaign model:
 
 
– It is very rare that humans lack the knowledge to make a decision because we have access to endless 
 
 
amounts, but in theses kinds of projects it is when humans need specific knowledge about something that  
 
 
must be delivered in a proper way.
 
 
– Often clear defined desired behaviour, yet not as clear as compliance projects.
 
 
– Raising awareness about something and get it to lead to concrete action.
Depends on the project type.
 
Applies behavioural mapping more exploratively (observations, videotaping).
Cognitive psychology 
 
The designer starts by looking at herself and begins investigation why she do as she does (looking at the context). Relies on 
experience. She also uses behavioural biology with inspiration from animals. 
 
Also look on other good cases that others have made to get inspiration. 
 
Default mindset.
 
Biases (some of them):
 
– Social proof (If you are unsure about something, then the easiest way to remove your doubt, is by looking at others).
 
– Friction (availability biases).
 
– Salience (the remarkable).
 
– Personally.
 
“All [the employees at The Nudging Company] have an understanding of these categories of biases, but I am the expert in 
them."- Behavioural economist from The Nudging Company
 
“We have taken and benefited from 70 years of research on behaviour and stuffed many biases and heuristics types within 
several different categories, and then it's about going through them. So you have the problem and then you force yourself to 
only look at this category (eg. Friction). Boundaries create creativity. When the relevant categories then are selected, you can 
begin to delve into them and read up on theories.” - Behavioural economist from The Nudging Company
 
The designer takes the behavioural theories that the behavioural economist has identified with her in the design process if it fits 
into the design theory/frame.
 
“Practical challenges contributes to that the focus might change, but it is rare that there is a need for more theoretical insight it 
is more the translation of insights and barriers that can be challenging.” - Behavioural economist from The Nudging Company
 
When getting new employees there is no certain theories that the employee must learn. He/she just have to be a good at what 
he/she is specialised in.
“[..] therefore it is extra important to deliver the information as beneficial as possible in order to not loose the existing informa-
tion.” - Designer from The Nudging Company
 
“Humans are miserable to talk about behaviour.” - Behavioural economist from The Nudging Company
 
“Where much time is lost are by delivering to each other. We have phases where information must be moved. We have some 
insights to be made into hypotheses to be made to test. It takes insanely long time to deliver information. It is complex.” - 
Behavioural economist from The Nudging Company
 
“When getting stuck in the process it is rarely because of lack of knowledge, but practical challenges. We always stick to our 
premise.” - Designer from The Nudging Company
==PAGE:151==
 139
Appendix 6: Interview 4 - The Nudging Company (3 of 3)
Answers
No.
6.
7.
“External project success is about measurable behavioural change, but not always the success criterias are measurable 
because thousands things can go wrong through the process. It can also be about product satisfaction, nice cooperation with 
us eg. kind employees. [..]  Intern project success is more about if there were good handovers of information in the team.” - 
Behavioural economist from The Nudging Company
 
“We always evaluate, but more explicit than implicit whose theory is evaluated against the method that was used.” - 
Behavioural economist from The Nudging Company
“If the project is below 200,000 DKK then we should preferably only be two [..] but if we move over 300,000 DKK we are three 
to four persons on the project.” - Behavioural economist from The Nudging Company 
 
“Yes, it may be [answer to that they are often a behavior economist and designer per project], but it depends on what is 
needed.” - Designer from The Nudging Company
 
“[..] but in the team [the company] there is a designer, an economist, an ethnologist, a sociologist and a rhetoric.” - 
Behavioural economist from The Nudging Company
 
As it is all about the client companys time, it differs throughout the process of being individual (eg. analytical work) versus 
group work (compilation in plenum). However, regular meetings occur where information is delivered to each other. In the 
following situations it is in group work:
 
– Idea generation.
 
– Observations and interviews.
Other
General about The Nudging Company
The Nudging Company springs out from the communications agency BRO, which gives them a lot of contact and clients 
already 
The Nudging company have three areas 
Behavioural design projects 
Advises others' behavioural design projects that The Nudging Company are not a part of
Free lectures and workshops about behavioural design 
Have talked about turning around the behavioural design process, so we start with a theory-based prototype and then through 
iterations of the prototype solve some of the problems that might be.
“We remove ourselves completely from nudging when we start to remove human’s choice, then it becomes more behavioural 
design” - Thomas
 
General about Maria & Thomas
Maria is a behavioural designer and her job is to translate insight into design interventions. From a classical point of view Maria 
is mainly involved in the last part of the behavioural design process, but with respect to keeping the project participants in a 
practical size, she is also sometimes involved in the initial phases, which is very good since it is important to know what is 
going to be able to design good solutions:
“[..] I get more involved in the beginning of the project and it suits me well,  because for me, the design is also a lot about 
being informed of what is happening and sometimes the handovers may make it a bit unclear to me what I think is going on.” - 
Designer from The Nudging Company
When Maria is not a part of the initial phases, the delivery of information is sometimes unclear which gives Maria an unclear 
picture of what is going on. Maria has a background in behavioural biology and game design.
Thomas is a behavioural economist and is mainly responsible for client contact, test and analysis, so that everything is not too 
qualitatively. Thomas are mainly included in the initial phases of the process and the final part when testing is involved. 
 
Important comments in regards to the research framework
“Basically it is a comprehensive model you have made, but it has this fine Double Diamond shape where we converge and 
diverge. In regards to the talk we've had now, the problem behaviour is its own. There is a whole step before to clarify the 
problem behaviour. Because of one problem there is perhaps 14 problem behaviours where you have to pick one problem 
behaviour.” - Designer from The Nudging Company
“For me, models of behaviour should be before you can make a problem behaviour. You need to know models of behaviour 
before you can identify the problem behaviour. We start with the desired behaviour. What is the Barriers standing in the way of 
the desired behaviour?” - Behavioural Economist form The Nudging Company
==PAGE:152==
140
Appendix 7: Interview 5 - Delta - Idemolab (1 of 2)
Date:   
14th March 2017 from 13.30-14dv.30 o’clock
Place:  
Venlighedsvej 4, 2970 Hørsholm
Language:  
Danish
Participants:
 
 
Beatrice Angel (Student - Technical University of Denmark)
 
 
Nanna Kristiansen (Student - Technical University of Denmark)
 
 
Mikkel Leth Olsen (Interaction and electronic sketching specialist - Idemolab)
Key findings
• It is clear that Idemolab’s behavioural design processes are very ad hoc, non structural and without any 
inclusion of theory. Instead Idemolab have a more practical approach where they develop the solution 
while analysing and defining the problem parallely.
Answers
1.
2.
3.
Sketches procedure when designing for  behaviour change. Very practical and move fast from problem to solution. Actually 
parallel process (go hand in hand). Through theory and experience Idemolab assumes that one's understanding of the problem 
develops while understanding and articulating the solution (design research), and this why their project process looks like:
 
1. Understand the problem (both problem behaviour and desired behaviour) and make hypothesis: 
 
 
1.1 Observations
 
 
1.2 Interview
 
2. Solution sketching mood: potential solutions/changes are  implemented in the context they should work in and 
 
together with the humans who should use it. The solutions are interactive sketch or prototype.
 
3. Test.
 
Involvement of experts depending on the project. E.g. about diabetes, hires an expert in diabetics.
 
Two types of projects that both can concern behavioural design:
 
1. Open explorative project:
 
 
– No specific client (“GTS projects”).
 
 
– A lot of freedom.
 
 
– Often bigger projects extending over a longer time.
 
 
– Requires some analysis before the problem have been well defined in order to come up with solutions > to 
 
 
realise that the project concerns behaviour can happen very late in the process.
 
2. Project with cooperation with a client company:
 
 
– Well defined problem.
 
 
– Very specific. 
 
 
– Small projects.
 
“[..] but otherwise it's the early part of the product development phase that we are part of [..] in the production of the products, 
there are some others involved, but we will often join and have a role due to the studies we have made along the way.” - 
Designer from Delta - Idemolab
No.
Not all projects concern behavioural design. The designer determines ad hoc if a specific project concerns behaviour or not 
based on his own experiences.
We try to breakdown the behaviour in a kind of flowchart, in order to obtain an understanding of the behaviour while making 
observations and interviews to get a deeper understanding.This is also a good tool for identifying issues: Where is it things go 
wrong? How do we want to change it to something else?” - Designer from Delta - Idemolab
==PAGE:153==
 141
Appendix 7: Interview 5 - Delta - Idemolab (2 of 2)
Answers
No.
4.
5.
6.
7.
A bit, but not really no. 
 
“There are not really any of us [employees at Idemolab] who have such a [theoretical background from psychology], other than 
what we have just read. So there is no one who has studied it [psychology] more in depth [..] We have some sociologists and 
that kind of people who know a lot about how humans [..] Most often, they [the sociologists] will put a slightly higher level of a 
framework down on the problem to understand it [the problem] at a wider perspective.” - Designer from Delta - Idemolab
 
It happens that we change approach if:
 
– The behaviour will not give the expected effect.
 
– The problem/solution becomes too complex/expensive.
 
– Users express something else.
 
When hiring new employees there are no expectations to certain theoretical foundation concerning behaviour, just that they 
know design theories.
“The time in which we have been aware of the fact that behavioural design is a field in itself and the quantity of projects where 
we have tested it [behavioural design] out, have not been long enough to be masters of conducting a behavioural design 
process or identifying when exactly in the project you have to include it.” - Designer from Delta - Idemolab
 
It is not often we are stuck, but if it happens, it is usually because there are too many solutions and then it is about choosing the 
right option rather than finding a new.
“Most often, it would be that the clients pay their bill and are happy and comes back. The clients are often happy when they 
have been progressed further and are closer to a product that can solve the problem they face” - Designer from Delta - Idemo-
lab
 
“Evaluation is not systematic but is done internally. There are some sessions in relation to the methodology, approach, cases 
etc.” - Designer from Delta - Idemolab
“Often there are different employees in the projects mostly 2-3 employees pr. project.” - Designer from Delta - Idemolab
 
Often external employees from the client company are also involved, because when an employee from the client company have 
been involved all the way, it is easier to argument for why different decisions was made.
Other
Idemolab
Idemolab is a department established in 2009 and its primary focus is to use technology in interaction with humans.
The department concerns with design in regards to technology and how you apply technology as a design material. This 
involves several elements: Usability and user involvement, sketching hardware (electronic sketching), different methods, 
iteratively, develop prototypes to understand the design challenge.
Sometimes the projects concern designing things to change behaviour.
GTS company: Godkendt Teknologisk Service (7 GTS companies in Denmark exist).
GTS company means that a company have a special area that they have been approved for over a three year period, where 
financial support is provided. This financial support should then be used to develop new innovative solutions that can be offered 
to Danish companies. In other words, it is a Innovation Help for Danish industry.
 
Important comments in regards to the research framework
“It [the research framework] sounds valuable."
"I think the more focused it [the tool] can be exactly about the behaviour part, the greater the likelihood is that you can get more 
people to use it and benefit from it." - Designer from Delta - Idemolab
==PAGE:154==
142
Appendix 8: Workshop 1 & 2
Throughout the first phase of the support tool development, two workshops were held to ensure proper and 
objective inclusion of the designers’ needs and to prevent any thesis bias to be reflected in the different activities. 
Although the aim of each of the workshops had been determined beforehand, different contributions were 
emphasised and important considerations were brought to attention:
• 
Workshop 1: In order to develop a valuable support tool, the aspects of for whom will the tool have 
effect, and when will the tool have effect need to be clarified, as these have great impact on the application 
and the lifetime of the support tool. Furthermore, these two aspects are essential to determine, as 
they have a big impact on the perceived value of the tool. If different features are aimed at the wrong 
users, the application of the support tool will be misinterpreted and possibly misunderstood.
• 
Workshop 2: Value Proposition Design is a valuable methodology to apply in a support tool 
development phase, as it highlights all the important aspects that need consideration if a product is to 
be sold (i.e. valuable for all product design). However, the method is based upon market observations 
unavailable in this thesis). Thus, combining the methodology with the user scenario method, showed to 
be fairly meaningful, as it allowed the users to put the definition of “what will bring value?” into more 
easy-understandable and translatable words. However, the combination of activities in the workshop 
made it possible to find out what the users need, not what they say they want, which was found to be 
an important distinction in this case.
Workshop 1
Duration
Aim
Tasks
Results
Participants
2 D&I students
Initial
60 minutes
Valuable insights in 
regards to needs 
identification of the 
designer
Value proposition 
canvas method
User scenarios 
method/mapping
Value discussion
1st version of the 
value proposition 
of the tool
Workshop 2
2 D&I students
Initial
70 minutes
Insights in regards to 
the tool’s usability 
requirements
Value proposition 
statement and 1st 
version of a usability 
mindmap
Setting
March 27th,
DTU Skylab
April 3rd, 
DTU Skylab
Behavioural design 
knowledge
Workshop 1
Workshop 2
Workshop 2
Workshop 2
==PAGE:155==
 143
Appendix 9: Value Proposition Canvas - Customer profile
Provides 
clear list of 
steps to do
“A shared 
language”
Get inside 
peoples 
minds
Presents 
valid/
distinctive 
overview
Leads to the 
better
solution
Applicable 
across 
projects and 
companies
Creates 
“experience”
Helps with 
picking the 
better focus
Help with 
selecting 
theories
Get from 
qualitative to 
quantitative 
data
Simple 
explanation 
of theories/
methods
Better client 
interaction
Confidence
Help me 
when I am 
stuck
Ensure 
objective 
data
Helps better 
cooperation
Validation 
of the focus
Clear 
indicators to 
measure 
progress
Shows 
typical 
users
Check the 
market 
perspective
Check for 
relevant 
theories/ 
methods
Map 
stakeholders
Realise 
relevant 
stakeholders
Testing 
concept/
product
Cooperate 
and coordi-
nate with 
colleagues
Understand 
and discover 
problem 
behaviour
Ideate, 
generate and 
conceptual-
ise solutions
Analyse 
problem
Client 
involvement
Look at 
previous 
projects
Expand 
competences 
Apply theory 
to case
Obtain 
relevant 
theoretical 
insights
Check for 
analogies
No clear 
path or 
application 
for theory
Important 
process 
steps are 
missed
Theories 
show no 
superiority
Communicat-
ing different 
“languages”
Overcome 
own initial 
bias
Going from 
qualitative to 
quantitative 
data
Not able to 
get in touch 
with the right 
users
Repeating 
mistakes
Tend to reuse 
the same 
methods
Difficult to 
prioritise
/select the 
right solution
Bad 
cooperation
Lack of data 
on area
Missing 
theoretical 
insights
Lack of 
structured 
overview of 
theories
Lack of 
confidence
Lack of 
experience
Who will pay 
and how 
much?
Not able to 
establish 
test-sessions 
with users
Lack of 
money
Reluctant 
users
Important 
insights are 
lost during 
handovers
Lack of 
relevant 
knowledge 
base
New field = 
little 
knowledge
Enables 
diverse 
selection of 
theories
Create 
problem 
behaviour 
hypotheses
Enables 
better 
creation of 
hypotheses
==PAGE:156==
144
Appendix 10: Value Proposition Canvas - Value map
Provides 
clear list of 
steps to do
“A shared 
language”
Get inside 
peoples 
minds
Presents 
valid/
distinctive 
overview
Leads to the 
right 
solution
Applicable 
across 
projects and 
companies
Creates 
“experience”
Helps with 
picking the 
right focus
Help with 
selecting 
theories
Enables 
diverse 
selection of 
theories
Get from 
qualitative to 
quantitative 
data
Simple 
explanation 
of theories/
methods
Better client 
interaction
Confidence
Help me 
when I am 
stuck
Ensure 
objective 
data
Helps better 
cooperation
Validation 
of the focus
Clear 
indicators to 
measure 
progress
Shows 
typical 
users
Check the 
market 
perspective
Check for 
relevant 
theories/ 
methods
Map 
stakeholders
Realise 
relevant 
stakeholders
Testing 
concept/
product
Cooperate 
and coordi-
nate with 
colleagues
Understand 
and discover 
problem 
behaviour
Ideate, 
generate and 
conceptual-
ise solutions
Analyse 
problem
Client 
involvement
Look at 
previous 
projects
Expand 
competences 
Apply theory 
to case
Obtain 
relevant 
theoretical 
insights
Check for 
analogies
No clear 
path or 
application 
for theory
Important 
process 
steps are 
missed
Theories 
show no 
superiority
Communicat-
ing different 
“languages”
Overcome 
own initial 
bias
Going from 
qualitative to 
quantitative 
data
Not able to 
get in touch 
with the right 
users
Repeating 
mistakes
Tend to reuse 
the same 
methods
Difficult to 
prioritise
/select the 
right solution
Bad 
cooperation
Lack of data 
on area
Missing 
theoretical 
insights
Lack of 
structured 
overview of 
theories
Lack of 
confidence
Lack of 
experience
Who will pay 
and how 
much?
Not able to 
establish 
test-sessions 
with users
Lack of 
money
Reluctant 
users
Important 
insights are 
lost during 
handovers
Lack of 
relevant 
knowledge 
base
New field = 
little 
knowledge
Create 
problem 
behaviour 
hypotheses
Enables 
better 
creation of 
hypotheses
Short, clear and 
useful content
Ensures that the 
designer expand 
his/her’s behavioural 
design  competences 
from project to project 
(“learning from 
experience”) 
Minimise the risk 
of tunnel vision 
and repeating 
mistakes 
Minimise the risk of 
overlooking/
missing relevant 
behavioural design  
theories
Minimise the risk 
of insecurity in 
regards to theory 
inclusion
Practical hands-on 
tool that is easy to 
use and 
understand
Behavioural 
Design 
Situation
Interactive tool 
for analysing 
problem 
behaviour 
Primary: 
Front-end 
behavioural design 
analytical support 
tool
Secondary: 
Post-project 
behavioural design 
evaluation tool
Helps to translate 
behavioural 
insights into design 
activities 
Considers a 
broad context of 
behaviours
Helps to analyse 
all problem 
layers 
Clear step-by-step 
guidance of front-end 
and post-project 
evaluation activities  
Updatable and 
customisable
Well-argued 
front-end decision 
making process
Common 
language for 
evaluation in a 
group context
Possible to 
integrate in other 
front-end or 
post-project 
design activities
Gives overview of 
available theories 
and their application 
(knowledge)
==PAGE:157==
 145
Appendix 11: Value Proposition Canvas - Value map match
Provides 
clear list of 
steps to do
“A shared 
language”
Get inside 
peoples 
minds
Presents 
valid/
distinctive 
overview
Leads to the 
better
solution
Applicable 
across 
projects and 
companies
Creates 
“experience”
Helps with 
picking the 
better focus
Help with 
selecting 
theories
Get from 
qualitative to 
quantitative 
data
Simple 
explanation 
of theories/
methods
Better client 
interaction
Confidence
Help me 
when I am 
stuck
Ensure 
objective 
data
Helps better 
reflection
Validation 
of the focus
Clear 
indicators to 
measure 
progress
Shows 
typical 
users
Check the 
market 
perspective
Check for 
relevant 
theories/ 
methods
Map 
stakeholders
Realise 
relevant 
stakeholders
Testing 
concept/
product
Cooperate 
and coordi-
nate with 
colleagues
Understand 
and discover 
problem 
behaviour
Ideate, 
generate and 
conceptual-
ise solutions
Analyse 
problem
Client 
involvement
Look at 
previous 
projects
Expand 
competences 
Apply theory 
to case
Obtain 
relevant 
theoretical 
insights
Create 
problem 
behaviour 
hypotheses
Check for 
analogies
No clear 
path or 
application 
for theory
Important 
process 
steps are 
missed
Theories 
show no 
superiority
Communicat-
ing different 
“languages”
Overcome 
own initial 
bias
Going from 
qualitative to 
quantitative 
data
Not able to 
get in touch 
with the right 
users
Repeating 
mistakes
Tend to reuse 
the same 
methods
Difficult to 
prioritise
/select the 
right solution
Bad 
cooperation
Lack of data 
on area
Missing 
theoretical 
insights
Lack of 
structured 
overview of 
theories
Lack of 
confidence
Lack of 
experience
Who will pay 
and how 
much?
Not able to 
establish 
test-sessions 
with users
Lack of 
money
Reluctant 
users
Important 
insights are 
lost during 
handovers
Lack of 
relevant 
knowledge 
base
New field = 
little 
knowledge
Enables 
diverse 
selection of 
theories
Enables 
better 
creation of 
hypotheses
Short, clear and 
useful content
Minimise the risk 
of tunnel vision 
and repeating 
mistakes 
Minimise the risk 
of insecurity in 
regards to theory 
inclusion
Practical hands-on 
tool that is easy to 
use and 
understand
Behavioural 
Design 
Situation
Interactive tool for 
analysing 
problem behaviour 
Helps to translate 
behavioural 
insights into design 
activities 
Considers a 
broad context of 
behaviours
Helps to analyse 
all problem 
layers 
Clear step-by-step 
guidance of front-end 
and post-project 
evaluation activities  
Updatable and 
customisable
Well-argued 
front-end decision 
making process
Common 
language for 
evaluation in a 
group context
Possible to 
integrate in other 
front-end or 
post-project 
design activities
Gives overview of 
available theories 
and their application 
(knowledge)
Ensures that the 
designer expand 
his/her’s behavioural 
design  competences 
from project to project 
(“learning from 
experience”) 
Minimise the risk of 
overlooking/
missing relevant 
behavioural design  
theories
Primary: 
Front-end 
behavioural design 
analytical support 
tool
Secondary: 
Post-project 
behavioural design 
evaluation tool
==PAGE:158==
146
Appendix 12: User scenarios
Behavioural 
Design
Participatory 
Design
Design for 
Interaction
P
S
While working in a project you have 
a hard time figuring out whether 
behavioural design will be 
beneficial to apply or not.
You know that behavioural design 
could be beneficial in your project, 
but is in doubt as to how to get 
from problem to the better solution 
in the most efficient way.
You have read that theory based 
behavioural design gives the best 
solutions, but is overwhelmed by 
the huge amount of theory in the 
field.
You feel that you often repeat the 
same mistakes and feel that your 
competence learning curve is 
slowing down, due to the fact that 
you forget to evaluate.
Persuasive 
technology
How habits work
Self-
determination
Self-
regulation
Nudging
mistakes
competences
time
number
==PAGE:159==
 147
Appendix 13: Tool impact on current work practice
Designers with comprehensive experience of behavioural design 
problem
   analyse 
problem
        ad-hoc           
    theory 
choice
idea gen.
solution
testing
handover
  ad-hoc 
evaluation
problem
   analyse 
problem
theory?
idea gen.
solution
testing
handover
       learning    
     from
 evaluation?
    does not 
work?
xth solution
loads of iterations 
(guess-work)
validated iterations
evolving problem understanding 
through iterations
problem
   analyse 
problem
theory 
overview 
  reflected 
focus
testing
handover
   structured 
evaluation
idea gen.
solution
Designers with limited experience of behavioural design
Designers using the Analysis Support Tool
   midway 
check-up
create 
problem 
hypotheses
create 
problem 
hypotheses
create 
problem 
hypotheses
Issues of current 
practice steps
Analysis support 
tool impact steps
Current practice 
steps
==PAGE:160==
148
Appendix 14: Requirements specification (1 of 2)
Topic
Requirements
Success Criteria
Unit
Comments
Purpose
The primary purpose of the 
tool is to be a step-by-step 
front-end analytical tool.
The aim of the tool is to help 
designers analyse all 
problem layers and make 
well-argued front-end 
decision-making processes. 
No. of 
applications 
in different 
behavioural 
design 
project 
phases
Must provide guidance for the 
task of completing a 
problem analysis and 
connecting problem aspects 
to the relevant behavioural 
theories and the further 
design work of a behavioural 
design project.
The tool should always refer 
to the behavioural design 
elements of problem 
behaviour, models of 
behaviour and theories of 
change, while at the same 
time consider the element of 
design approaches.
No. of 
elements
The BDS relates to both 
problem, models of 
behaviour, theories of change 
and design approaches, and 
therefore it is important that 
the tool provides guidance for 
all four aspects.
Must enable integrative 
thinking by applying 
behavioural theories from all 
categories.
Each problem analysis should 
refer to at least one theory 
from all three categories 
(individual, social and 
change theories).
No. of 
categories
Physical 
appearance
Must be a hands-on tool that 
is easy to use and understand.
Should enable a practical 
application in the behavioural 
design process.
No. of 
people 
interacting
In order for the tool to be 
successful, designers need to 
apply the tool and should 
want to apply the tool, thus 
the tool can neither be too 
rigid (i.e. boring) nor add 
further complexity to the 
behavioural design  process.
Must be presented in a 
simple way and should be 
effortless in its application.
The required time for 
understanding the tool (i.e. 
the time from the tool is 
presented to the application 
starts) should be maximum 
10 minutes.
No. of 
minutes
As the tool deals with a 
complex part of the 
behavioural design process, 
it should be accompanied 
with a simple guide or 
instructions for the use of the 
tool.
Application 
Time
Must be timesaving to use 
the tool, compared with 
current practice.
The duration of the tool 
should be around 60 minutes 
and maximum 90 minutes.
No. of 
minutes
It is important that the total 
time of the tool is maximum 
60-90 minutes, in order to 
obtain a certain level of 
thoroughness, while at the 
same time avoiding being too 
comprehensive or 
time-consuming.
Must provide the designer with 
a structured overview of 
available behavioural 
theories related to a range of 
problems, in order to check for 
relevant behavioural theories 
and obtain theoretical insights 
applicable for the further 
behavioural design process.
The tool must refer to a range 
of relevant behavioural 
design topics and a 
representative number of 
behavioural theories both 
models of behaviour and 
theories of change.
No. of 
behavioural 
design 
topics
No. of 
behavioural 
design
theories
Designers without a 
theoretical back-catalogue of 
behavioural theories need to 
acquire an initial under-
standing of behavioural 
theories, in order to increase 
the possibility of developing 
successful behavioural 
interventions.
In order to make a valid 
front-end decision in regards to 
behavioural design theory 
inclusion, the tool needs to 
ensure that the designer has 
considered or touched upon all 
elements of the BDS. Doing so 
will minimise the risk of tunnel 
vision and repeating mistakes, 
as well as minimise the risk of 
overlooking relevant 
behavioural design theories.
==PAGE:161==
 149
Topic
Requirements
Success Criteria
Unit
Comments
Appendix 14: Requirements specification (2 of 2)
Accessibility 
Must for all designers be 
easy to acquire.
Should be easy to acquire, 
either by printing it, 
creating it or buying it at an 
affordable price.
Amount of 
$
User
Must be applicable for both 
designers with limited 
experience of behavioural 
design and for designers 
with comprehensive expe-
rience of behavioural 
design.
No.of 
projects 
where 
behavioural 
design has 
been 
applied
Context
Must be possible to integrate 
in other front-end and 
post-project design 
activities, i.e. the tool 
cannot not be disruptive with 
the current behavioural 
design context.
As the purpose of the tool is 
aimed at different process 
phases, the tool should 
complement current 
behavioural design 
activities, through clear 
visualisation of process 
placement and progress.
Placement 
on project 
timeline, 
i.e. process 
stage
In order to make it easier for 
the designer to apply the tool 
in current behavioural design 
context, the tool must show the 
different process steps and the 
current progress in the tool, 
i.e. what have been done and 
what needs to be done.
Must provide the opportunity 
of applying the tool in an 
individual as well as a group 
context.
The tool should be applicable 
for minimum one person and 
maximum four persons.
No. of 
people
As there is no standard way of 
performing the analysis 
phase nor the evaluation 
phase of behavioural design 
(in regards to design 
staging), it is necessary that 
both individuals as well as 
groups can apply the tool.
Must provide clear and 
simple ways of ensuring 
process documentation.
The tool should enable 
structured ways of 
documenting the analysis 
phase of a behavioural design 
project, without being the 
main focus of the tool 
application. 
No. of 
documentations
Documentation of the 
decision-making processes of 
the analytical phase is 
necessary in order to validate 
the decisions, as well as 
being able to evaluate the 
chosen focus and theory 
path.
Maintenance
Must be continuously updated 
(in regards to available 
behavioural theories) in order 
to ensure constant relevance to 
the field of behavioural design.
No. of new 
behavioural 
theories 
included
Behavioural design is still an 
emerging field, and therefore 
it is necessary that the tool is 
continuously updated in order 
to ensure on-going relevance 
to the field.
Must be customisable in 
regards to the user (i.a. 
company) of the tool. 
No. of 
adjustment 
possibilities
If the tool can be customised 
for different designers and/or 
companies, it is more likely 
that they will take ownership 
of the tool.
==PAGE:162==
150
Appendix 15: Workshop 3 & 4
Throughout the second phase of the support tool development, two workshops were held to involve the users 
in the ideation and conceptualisation process and to get inspiration from their initial ideas and needs regarding 
layout and interface. 
Although the aim of each of the workshops had been determined beforehand, different contributions were 
emphasised and important considerations were brought to attention:
• 
Workshop 3: Contributed with features and elements that the suport tool could include in order to 
be operationalised and add value for the designer. For instance, inclusion/presentation of behavioural 
theories in the support tool should be visualised and written to appear not too locked and neither too 
open for interpretation. Moreover, this workshop provided valuable insights in regards to the support 
tool’s possibilities and limitations.
• 
Workshop 4: Contributed directly with valuable ideas and suggestions for support tool layout and 
features, as this workshop was held as an open brainstorm session. 
Workshop 3
Duration
Aim
Tasks
Results
Participants
1 D&I graduate
Thorough
60 minutes
Insights in regards 
to different feature 
statements
Tool feature booklet
Mindmapping
Open feature 
brainstorm
2nd version of a 
usability mindmap 
and tool features 
Workshop 4
2 D&I students
Initial
70 minutes
Insights in regards to 
different feature ideas
Initial feature 
feedback and 
suggestions for layout 
and interfaces
Setting
April 4th, 
DTU Skylab
April 4th, 
DTU Skylab
Behavioural design 
knowledge
Workshop 4
How do I do it? 
Validation
selection
check it!
learn from it!
Analysis
theoretical 
overview
examples
checklists
guide
process steps
midway 
evaluation
adjustments
others work
insights
theories
checklist
understanding
clear content
Final Evaluation
others work
insights
checklist
structure
topics
cards
categories
e.g. Trumps matrix
e.g. design with 
intent or brains, 
behaviour & desig
e.g. topics
e.g. types of 
motivation
adaptable
text
open interpretation
pictures
fixed interpretation
validating 
parameters
decision 
tree
boundary object
common 
language
BD 101
fundamentals
stage-gate
mindset
transparancy
Results from workshop 3
==PAGE:163==
 151
Appendix 16: Weighted Objectives Method (1 of 2)
Selection criteria
Weights
Maximum
Thorough
Maximum
Simple
All
Cards
All
Digital
All
Games
Maximum
Documentation
Maximum
Validation
Maximum
Reflection
Staging (total score from 21-105)
Updatable and customisable (in order to create ownership)
Level of structure (clear indicators to measure progress)
Intuitive and easy to apply (step-by-step guidance)
Applicable in group context
Applicable in individual context
Time saving
Level of validation
Minimal maintenance
Level of documentation
Integrable in design context
Enables common language
Problem analysis (total score from 7-35)
Level of addressing relevant problem layers
Level of analysing problem layers
Level of reflecting on problem layers
Behaviour analysis (total score from 16-80)
Level of providing overview of available behavioural theories 
High quality of applied behavioural theories
Minimise theoretical tunnel vision
Increase analytical behavioural design skills of the users 
Level of addressing behavioural theory selection
Level of reflecting and understanding behavioural theory
Level of translating behavioural insights into design 
Evaluation (total score from 1-5)
Minimise repeated mistakes
Total weigthed score (45-225)
3
2
3
47
2
4
3
71
4
3
4
69
4
2
4
52
1
2
4
60
3
1
4
71
4
5
4
74
5
5
4
3
1
2
2
2
3
1
2
4
4
5
2
5
3
3
2
2
4
3
4
4
1
5
1
3
3
3
3
2
3
4
5
2
1
2
1
1
4
2
1
5
1
4
2
4
1
4
4
1
4
1
3
5
1
5
1
3
5
2
4
2
3
2
3
3
1
2
21
5
4
1
6
1
1
1
27
5
2
5
18
4
4
1
27
5
2
5
24
3
5
5
24
3
5
5
3
2
3
56
5
2
3
32
3
2
1
37
2
2
2
50
4
4
4
38
4
2
2
47
2
4
3
58
3
4
4
2
2
3
1
2
5
3
5
2
3
1
3
1
3
3
4
3
4
1
1
2
3
1
3
3
4
2
4
5
4
3
2
1
1
1
100
1
1
110
1
1
134
3
3
123
1
1
126
3
3
145
4
4
160
60
3
4
3
2
4
4
3
2
1
2
5
24
4
2
5
51
2
4
4
4
4
2
3
2
2
137
Round 1: Scoring the concepts on their own
==PAGE:164==
152
Appendix 16: Weighted Objectives Method (2 of 2)
Selection criteria
Maximum
Thorough
Maximum
Simple
All
Cards
All
Digital
All
Games
Maximum
Documentation
Maximum
Validation
Maximum
Reflection
Staging (total score from 21-105)
Updatable and customisable (in order to create ownership)
Level of structure (clear indicators to measure progress)
Intuitive and easy to apply (step-by-step guidance)
Applicable in group context
Applicable in individual context
Time saving
Level of validation
Minimal maintenance
Level of documentation
Integrable in design context
Enables common language
Problem analysis (total score from 7-35)
Level of addressing relevant problem layers
Level of analysing problem layers
Level of reflecting on problem layers
Behaviour analysis (total score from 16-80)
Level of providing overview of available behavioural theories 
High quality of applied behavioural theories
Minimise theoretical tunnel vision
Increase analytical behavioural design skills of the users 
Level of addressing behavioural theory selection
Level of reflecting and understanding behavioural theory
Level of translating behavioural insights into design 
Evaluation (total score from 1-5)
Minimise repeated mistakes
Total weigthed score (45-225)
38
1
2
2
78
3
3
4
58
3
2
1
62
1
3
5
51
2
1
1
74
5
5
3
85
5
5
5
1
5
1
2
2
4
5
4
4
2
2
2
1
5
3
5
5
1
1
1
3
3
3
3
2
4
4
5
1
5
1
2
5
2
3
5
4
2
4
2
1
3
3
3
5
1
4
1
3
4
1
4
2
4
2
5
10
2
2
1
10
2
2
1
26
5
3
4
6
1
1
1
26
5
3
4
20
3
5
3
20
3
5
3
52
4
4
4
25
3
1
1
32
2
2
1
46
5
3
3
38
4
1
1
55
1
4
2
44
1
4
2
2
3
2
4
1
2
1
2
3
2
2
3
2
3
1
3
3
2
2
5
5
4
5
5
4
4
3
2
1
1
101
3
3
116
2
2
118
4
4
118
3
3
118
1
1
150
4
4
153
70
4
4
3
3
2
4
4
2
3
2
3
19
3
4
3
48
1
4
2
4
4
4
3
2
2
139
Weights
3
2
3
3
1
2
2
2
1
2
1
3
1
2
3
2
3
2
2
3
1
1
Round 2: Scoring the concepts in relation to each other
==PAGE:165==
 153
Appendix 17: Workshop 5 - 13
Throughout the final phase of the support tool development, nine workshops were performed, all contributing 
to five overall iterations in order to improve and develop the most valuable Super Cool Analysis Tool.
Although the aim of each of the workshops had been determined beforehand, different contributions were 
emphasised and important considerations were brought to attention. As the link from the workshops to the 
iterations is stated in the table above and the contributions for each workshop are illustrated in the tool iteration 
figures (figure 5.11-5.14 in the report) there is no subject to further elaboration here.  
Duration
Focus
Tool version
Results
Participants
Behavioural design 
knowledge
Setting
Workshop 5
1 employee from 
/KL.7 
Thorough
30 minutes
1st Iteration
Added task to the 
Theory Cards
Workshop 6
2 employees from 
The Nudging 
Company
30 minutes
April 27th, 
Copenhagen
April 27th, 
Copenhagen
Thorough
Concept feedback
Company reassurance 
of the tool
Concept feedback
Company reassurance 
of the tool
Basic concept
Workshop 7
2 D&I master 
students
Initial
60 minutes
Workshop 8
3 D&I master 
students
60 minutes
May 4th, 
DTU Skylab
May 9th, 
DTU Skylab
Initial
Layout and content
Usability in a group 
context
Workshop 9
1 employee from 
Delta – Idemolab
Initial
45 minutes
Workshop 10
1 D&I graduate
90 minutes
May 9th, 
Hørsholm
May 11th, 
DTU Skylab
Thorough
Concept feedback
Company reassurance 
of the tool
Usability in an 
individual context
Workshop 11
2 D&I master 
students
Thorough
60 minutes
Workshop 12
2 HA.psych 
graduates
45 minutes
May 11th, 
DTU Skylab
May 16th, 
Copenhagen
Thorough
Tool flow and time 
span of the game
Relevance and 
representativeness of 
theoretical content
Basic concept
1st Iteration
2nd Iteration
2nd Iteration
3rd Iteration
3rd Iteration
4th Iteration
1st Iteration
Simplifying and 
combining the steps
2nd Iteration
Simplifying the 
Theory Overview 
Wheel 
3rd Iteration
Expanding playing 
context and flow
3rd Iteration
Expanding different 
game-modes
4th Iteration
Expanding 
documantation 
possibilities
4th Iteration
Simplifying tasks and 
better guidance
Final tool concept
Workshop 13
1 Associate 
professor
60 minutes
May 18th, 
Copenhagen
Thorough
Final walk-through of 
tool flow and usability
4th Iteration
Final tool concept
Workshop 10
Workshop 11
==PAGE:166==
154
Appendix 18: Guide Book (1 of 7)
The Guide Book
This Guide Book will help you through the game, visualise 
game elements and give instructions for the usage both before, 
during and after the game
1-4 players
60-90 min.
The following seven pages of the appendix show the consecutive pages of the Guide Book.
frontpage
==PAGE:167==
 155
Appendix 18: Guide Book (2 of 7)
How to understand the game
What is the Super Cool Analysis Tool? The Super Cool 
Analysis Tool is a game aimed at helping you make better problem analysis and 
behaviour hypotheses applicable in your design projects concerning Behavioural 
Design (or Design for Behaviour Change). The aim of the game is supported 
by the belief that in order to develop the most successful solutions, you have to 
achieve a deep level of problem understanding first. This is a crucial aspect to keep 
in mind in regards to the aim of the game, as you otherwise may misunderstand 
the game and therefore not achieve the output you hoped for. 
Who should apply this game? The game can be played by any 
kind of designer, yet it is the perfect game for 
• 
Experienced behavioural designers who wish broaden their horizon 
with new behavioural theories and 
• 
Designers with no or limited experience with behavioural design who 
wish to explore the (many!) benefits behavioural analysis have to offer 
different kinds of design work or to obtain relevant insights into 
human behaviour.
Although the game’s imagined user is a designer, the tool’s language and tasks could 
complement users of other professions as well (such as behavioural economist, 
sociologists, psycohologist). No matter the profession, the game can be played by 
either individuals or groups, however we recommend you to be maximum four 
people playing the game (otherwise split the team into two groups). This is due to 
the fact that being more than four people in one group will require more time to 
reach the same level of output, and thus the duration will be more than 90 minutes.
When should the game be played? As the game helps 
you  make better problem analysis and behaviour hypotheses, the game should 
2
Why should I play this game? The Super Cool Analysis Tool 
will help you by providing an overview of different possibly relevant behavioural 
theories and the insights each of them could offer you, as well as providing better 
possibilities of translating these insights into your design work (by helping you 
formulate and rank different problem hypotheses that could apply to your project).  
be played in the early-phase of your design 
work – more specificly in between the 
discovery and the definition of the problem 
presented in your design project (as you 
can see in the Double Diamond figure (Design 
Council 2007)). 
Discover
Define
Develop
Deliver
Problem
Problem
Definition
Solution
A quick guide to start the game: 
Although we recommend you (or at least one from your group) to read this Guide Book 
before playing the game, the following quick guide explains how to start the game quickly: 
• 
Place the Theory Overview Wheel so that all players can see it, and give each 
player their own set of Theory Cards (at all times all players must discuss the same 
Theory Card)
• 
Based on the chosen game-mode (page 6), you (as a group) should work your way 
thorugh the Theory Cards, meaning: 
1. 
Read the brief description and the relating bias
2. 
Read and understand the applied problem case
3. 
Complete the “force yourself” task
4. 
Complete the three remember-tasks on the back of the Theory Card
5. 
Go through the decision-tree and determine further steps of the game
6. 
Finally, again depending on your chosen game-mode, reach the “End Card” and 
finish the game successfully! 
• 
In order to make sure that you progress successfully through the game, keep the 
following two time frames in mind: 
1. 
If you struggle for more than five minutes in trying to formulate a hypothesis 
in relation to the theory – move on to the ne[t Theory Card stated on the 
backside of the current Theory Card.
2. 
Flip the hour-glass everytime you pick a new Theory Card – try not to spend 
more than 10 minutes on each card (you can always come back to it!)
Table of contents:
Quick guide   
 
 
 
How to understand the game
Explanatory list of game contents
How to prepare and play the game
How to enter the game
How to end the game
How to update the theory cards
Explanatory guide for the theory card elements  
List of useful design approaches to apply after 
playing the game                                                       
1
2
3-4
5
6
7
8
9-10
back of the 
guide book
1
==PAGE:168==
156
Appendix 18: Guide Book (3 of 7)
Game contents
• 1 x Theory Overview Wheel that visualises the 21 different 
Theory Cards in regards to eight different topics (see below) relevant to 
behavioural theories, as well as how the different theories are related 
within the three categories of individual behaviour (the inner circle), social 
behaviour (the middle circle) and behaviour change (the outer circle). 
• 4 x stacks of post-its (one for each player) and 4 pens (one 
for each player) use for documenting your hypotheses, which can be 
placed in the hypotheses-box on the Theory Overview Wheel
• 1 x bag of 49 small discs you should use for keeping track of both 
the Theory Cards you have considered so far and the topics you have covered 
(put them on the letter representing the Theory Card). Keep in mind that most 
of the letters are represented on the Theory Overview Wheel several times. 
ATTITUDE
       A settled way of thinking or    
      feeling
THINKING
       Conscious (reflective) or nonconscious 
       (automatic) processing of information
CHANGE STRATEGIES
       A plan of action to achieve a 
       behaviour change
MOTIVATION
       Commitment and interest in a 
       given situation
SOCIAL IMPACT
       Group impact and/or environmental 
      impact on the individual’s behaviour
SELF-EFFICACY
       Confidence and belief in oneself  
       to achieve a certain result
HABITS
       Nonconscious and routine based 
       behaviour
PRINCIPLES of 
BEHAVIOUR
      General rules of thumb that 
     describe behaviour
4
NB! Although a facilitator is not stated as a necessity, using one when playing would 
probably ensure better results and more structure of the game. Therefore, if you wish to use 
a facilitator, (s)he should consider the following things before playing: 
• 
Have I read and understood the game? (it will save you time while playing!) 
• 
How big is the team who should play the game? Do we need to split the team into smaller 
groups?
• 
Am I open-minded in regards to the output of the tool? 
• 
How many times should we play the game? 
• 
How do we ensure the needed documentation? Who is responsible for transferring the 
results from the game into the project we are working on? 
Game contents
What does the game contain? 
• 1 x Overall Guide Book (you are reading it)
• 1 x 10 minutes hour glass
• 1 x Begin Card to guide you into the game, by getting you 
to start assessing your problem and analysing it in regards to seven 
different problem layers:
• 1 x  Problem Documentation Card to guide the 
problem layer tasks on both the Begin Card and End Card.
• 1 x End Card to help you validate your problem analysis and 
to help you realise the potential and strenght of your formulated 
hypotheses.
• 4 x sets of Theory Cards, containing 
• 21 x Theory Cards in the three categories individual 
behaviour (8 pcs), social behaviour (5 pcs) and behaviour change 
(8 pcs)
• 
• 
Behaviour 
change cards: To 
understand how, when 
& where behaviour can 
be influenced. 
Social 
behaviour 
cards: To understand 
how social and 
environmental interaction 
affects an individual’s 
behaviour.
Individual 
behaviour 
cards: To understand, 
describe, explain & 
predict individual factors 
influencing and creating 
human behaviour. 8
5
8
Personal     Impersonal      Interpersonal           Societal           Story      Background    Frequency of 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         change 
3
==PAGE:169==
 157
Appendix 18: Guide Book (4 of 7)
How to enter the game
*ame-mode 1
If you deal with a 
Vaguely specified 
problem: 
The purpose of this game 
mode is to, within 90 minutes, 
create three specific, realistic, 
and feasible hypotheses 
based on a vaguely specified 
problem. 
An example of a vaguely 
specified problem could be 
“reduce the amount of cigarette 
butts thrown in Copenhagen”. 
This problem gives no 
indication of the target group 
nor the root causes of the 
problem.
To play this mode, you/your 
group should start with the 
Begin Card, yet when 
entering the game you should 
choose the path that leads 
you to choose between 
the two categories 
of Theory Cards, and 
thereafter go through the 
theory cards all the way to 
the End Card.  
*ame-mode 2
If you deal with a 
Well-specified 
problem: 
The purpose of this game 
mode is to, within 90 minutes, 
create three specific, realistic, 
and feasible hypotheses 
based on a well-specified 
problem. 
An example of a well-
specified problem could be 
“reduce the amount of cigarette 
butts left at train platforms in 
Copenhagen”. This problem 
gives no clear indication of the 
root causes of the problem, 
yet it indicates the main target 
group. 
To play this mode, you/your 
group should start with the 
Begin Card, yet when 
entering the game, you should 
choose the path that leads 
you straight to the Theory 
Overview Wheel, and 
thereafter go through the 
theory cards all the way to 
the End card.  
*ame-mode 
If your want to achieve 
Inspiration for 
behaviour
The purpose of this game 
mode is to, within 90 minutes, 
get inspired in regards to the 
21 behavioural theories and 
obtain an understanding of 
the theories similarities and 
differences.
This game mode is entirely 
determined by your own 
choices as the Theory 
Cards and the Theory 
Overview Wheel offer 
a lot of valuable insights 
themselves. 
This game mode can 
therefore be several things: 
Browsing through the Theory 
Cards for inspiration 
for a project (or just for 
fun!), assessing the Theory 
Overview Wheel to acquire 
an overview of the 
theories or something entirely 
different – it is up to you! 
Pick one of the three game-modes to determine how to enter the game:
6
1.
2.
3.
NB! When choosing game-mode 2 the Begin Card prompts you to determine whether 
your project concerns the behaviour of an individual or of a group. This can be a tricky question 
to answer, as there is the possibility that your problem relates to both kinds of behaviours. So, 
in order to answer this question, the Problem Documentation Card will help you, as it gives 
you an indication of what problems layers affects your problem the most. Use this reflection to 
get started the right place in the game! 
How to prepare and play the game
5
Preparation for the game: 
1. 
Fold out the Theory Overview Wheel and place it for all to see.
2. 
Fold out the disc-bag and together with the Begin Card, Problem 
Documentation Card and End Card put it next to the Theory Overview 
Wheel.
3. 
Give each player their own set of Theory Cards.
4. 
Look through the game-modes and determine how you wish to enter 
the game. 
Playing the game: While the game-modes determines how you 
enter the game, the following steps describes how the game is played out: 
1. 
Flip the (10 minutes) hour-glass everytime you pick a new Theory Card. 
2. 
Read the brief description and the relating bias on the chosen Theory 
Card.
3. 
Read and understand the applied problem case
4. 
Complete the “force yourself” task in relation to your project problem.
5. 
Complete the three °remember±-tasNs on the back of the Theory Card:
6. 
Write your hypothesis on a post-it.
7. 
Write the theory-letter on your post-it (to backtrack your decisions).
8. 
Cover the theory letters with the discs (to realise progress).
9. 
Go through the decision-tree on the back of the Theory Card and 
determine the further steps of the game.
10. You should be able to move through one Theory Card in ma[imum 10 
minutes. If it takes you longer, try to wrap it up and move on. You can 
always come back to it later! 
11. Once enough cards have been considered (the game will tell you when that 
is), reach the End Card and finish the game successfully!
NB! Each of the Theory Cards has a task, which “forces” you/your group to formulate a 
hypothesis that should describe how a given theory applies to your problem (if you prefer 
two hypotheses, you can of course write both of them). An example of a hypothesis could be 
“people throw cigarette butts at the train platforms, due to a convenience need and due to time 
pressure”. For the Theory Cards it is important that you attempt to formulate a hypothesis, 
yet if you struggle for more than five minutes in trying to make sense of a specific theory 
in relation to your problem – move on to the ne[t Theory Card (found on the back of 
the card)  – it is not a nessecity to formulate a hypothesis from all theories, it is merely the 
reflection over each theory’s relevance that is important.
==PAGE:170==
158
Appendix 18: Guide Book (5 of 7)
How to update the game
Why would I want to update the game? Although the 
game has been developed to fit different companies, projects and problems, the 
possibility of updating the game has been included in the case that:
• 
You are super-experienced at behavioural design and would like to apply 
the game, yet some of the theories that you find to be very valuable in your 
projects are not included in the Theory Cards.
• 
You aren’t super-experienced at behavioural design, yet you would still like 
to learn and expand your behavioural theory back-catalogue – and to do so 
fully, you need the possibility of adding other theories as well.
Luckily, we have taken these scenarios into account and made it super simple 
for you to customise the Super Cool Analysis Tool to fit your context
How do I add new theory cards? Adding Theory Cards to the 
game is actually very simple and intuitive, all you have to do is: 
• 
)ind the empty template Theory Cards and fill in the information from 
the given theory you wish to add. To do so, you have to realise whether 
the theory is describing individual behaviour, social behaviour or 
behaviour change. You also have to reflect upon which of the eight 
topics the theory refers to. 
• 
Give the new theory a letter at the top of the Theory Card (a letter that 
has not been used for the other Theory Cards). If this is the first theory 
card you are adding, the letter would be V.
• 
All the Theory Cards are linked to each other, meaning that they are all a 
part of a big chain. When adding a new Theory Card you must therefore 
find the right place in the chain. To do so, there are only two simple 
rules to follow: 
1. 
The same card colour (individual, social or change) must not be next to 
each other in the chain – i.e. the Theory Cards before and after must be 
different than the one you are adding. 
2. 
The Theory Card can only have one topic in common which the Theory 
Cards next to it, i.e. the Theory Cards before and after should be 
somewhat describing another behaviour context. 
• 
Once you have found the place in the chain, be sure to remember to 
update the card-linNing bo[es on the Theory Card before and the 
Theory Card after - so the chain will not be broken when you play the 
game! 
• 
Finally, all you have to do is add the Theory Card to the Theory Overview 
Wheel. Make sure to place it in the correct circle – i.e. in the correct topics 
and in the correct category of behavioural theories. 
• 
Once this is done, you have customised the game and are good to 
go again! 
8
How to end the game
7
Ending the game: Based on the game you have now formulated 
several hypotheses relevant to the behavioural problem you are trying 
to adress. Based on these hypotheses, the End Card will guide you 
through the task of ending the game.
This task will help you/your group to reflect upon the results from the 
game and ultimately help you transfer the insights you have obtained from 
playing the game into your further design work.  
Once you agree that you have the best hypotheses you wish to apply 
in your further activities, remember to: 
• 
Take the Theory Cards (from which your chosen hypotheses 
have been formulated). 
• 
Consider the key takeaways each individual Theory Card has 
to offer in your furhter design process.
• 
To provide even more inspiration for the further design 
process, the table on the backpage of this Guide Book 
shows different design approaces that could possibly benefit 
you and your project! 
==PAGE:171==
 159
Appendix 18: Guide Book (6 of 7)
How to understand the Theory Cards
A decision tree that helps you determine the 
further steps to be taken, and provides 
guidance to wether or not more Theory Cards 
will be relevant to look at.
A direct link to the next relevant Theory Card.
A direct link to the End Card to guide you 
into ranking your hypotheses and retrieving all the 
insights you have discovered while playing 
the game.
Key takeaways that will be valuable to consider 
in the next stages of your design project.
An explanation of the back of the Theory Cards
Three reminders-tasks, to help guide you 
through the game and make sure you remember 
to document all the lovely hypotheses you have 
created.
10
Social Identity Theory
J
That’s 
alright! Try to go 
and explore the:  
THEORY OF 
SELF-EFFICACY
(N)
Did this theory make it possible for you to 
formulate a hypothesis relevant to your problem?
YES
NO
Have you only applied one or 
two Theory Card colours to 
your problem case? 
YES
NO
Social cate-
gorisation
Positive 
social 
identity
Social roles
Ingroup 
behaviour
Outgroup 
behaviour
Expec-
tations of 
context
Keep these key takeaways in mind when generating ideas in 
your further design work:
Great! 
Then go to the 
End Card
.. to finish the game
Remember 
to write a 
hypothesis on a 
post-it and put it on 
the Theory Overview 
Wheel
Remember 
to write the 
theory letter J 
on the post-it
Remember
 to put a disc on 
the J in social 
impact on the 
Theory Overview 
Wheel
How to understand the Theory Cards
1. Symbol and colour illustrating the Theory 
Card category. 
2. Letter illustrating the Theory Card “no.” and its 
placement on the Theory Overview Wheel. 
Name of the behavioural theory. 
Brief theoretical description of the theory.
A reference, if interest in the specific theory has 
been awoken and further information is wanted.
A behaviour bias, relevant to either the theory 
on the card or the problem case on the card. Biases 
are easy-to-understand phrases developed to describe 
a certain type of behaviour - they are therefore great 
to consider in regards to your problem as well.  
An example of a case, to show how the theory 
could be valuable in a specific context. Do not let 
this example limit the application of the theory – it 
is merely meant as a clearer way to understand the 
theory. Even though your problem in no way relates 
to the problem example on the card, the theory 
can still be valuable! 
Together with each problem case is an illustration 
relating to either the way the theory works or showing 
the figure originally formulated together with the theory. 
Social Identity Theory
%pplied pVSFleQ case
Why are people eating more healthy things at home 
than they are at work? 
For a problem like this, environmental context 
is valuable to consider, yet explaining it from the 
perspective of Social Identity Theory adds 
another layer of knowledge. The roles which the 
employees take part in influences the behaviours. 
Perhaps the wife is super active and will only eat 
salad, which leads to the husband eating healthier 
at home, and perhaps “relaxing” a bit on the 
health-front at work (or opposite). Or maybe, the 
majority of the employees are eating healthy, 
and in order to not be “outside” of the 
group, the husband eats healthy at work – but 
not at home, where his wife loves pizza and pasta.
*SVce ySuVselJ XS JSVQulaXe a LypSXLesis 
How can your problem be explained by either ingroup behaviour 
or out-group behaviour?
&VieJ descVipXiSR The Social Identity Theory offers insights as to why individuals 
strive to achieve or maintain a positive social identity. It states that individuals act on behalf 
of (in-)group concerns (being part of the group) and not on behalf of personal concerns. 
Individuals, when interacting within a certain group context, acquire different social roles, or 
“levels of self”, which influences their behaviour. The theory distinguishes between interpersonal 
behaviour (two or more individuals acting solely on the grounds of individual concerns and 
characteristics, e.g. wife and husband) and intergroup behaviour (two or more individuals that 
behave solely on the grounds of social concerns and characteristics, e.g. soldiers in an army 
group).
Reference: 
Tajfel, H. & Turner, J., 1979. An Integrative Theory of Intergroup Conflicts. In The Social Psychology of Intergroup Relations. 
Brooks Cole Publishing, pp. 33–47.
J
        A bias relating to the theory on this card is the Ingroup bias: 
       The tendency for people to give preferential treatment to others they perceive to be 
members of their own groups
Out-group
In-group
versus
An explanation of the front of the Theory Cards
A small, but very important task, prompting 
you to formulate a hypothesis explaining 
your problem, relating to the chosen theory. 
This will enable you to obtain a better 
understanding of the theory.
9
1.
2.
==PAGE:172==
160
Appendix 18: Guide Book (7 of 7)
Framework
Process
Method
Tool
The Functional 
Triad
Evil by Design
The MINDSPACE way
The Social 
Implication Design 
Method
Systematic 
Framework
Eight-step Design 
Process
The Process of 
Designing for 
Behavioural Change
The Behavioural 
Design Process
The Behaviour 
Wizard 
The Behaviour 
Change Wheel
Developing an 
Intervention 
Design with Intent
Brains, Behaviour 
and Design
The Behaviour 
Change Strategy 
Cards 
The Persuasive by 
Design Model
Fogg, B.J., 2003. The Functional Triad: 
Computers in Persuasive Roles. In 
Persuasive Technology: Using 
Computers to Change What We Think 
and Do. San Francisco, USA: Morgan 
Kaufmann Publisher, pp. 23–29.
Oinas-Kukkonen, H. & Harjumaa, M., 
2008. A Systematic Framework for 
Designing and Evaluating Systems. In H. 
Oinas-Kukkonen et al., eds. 3rd 
International Conference on Persuasive 
Technology. Oulu, Finland: Springer, pp. 
164–176.
Nodder, C., 2013. Evil by Design: 
Interaction design to lead us into 
temptation 1st ed., Indianapolis, 
USA: John Wiley & Sons.
Dolan, P. et al., 2012. Influencing 
behaviour: The mindspace way. 
Journal of Economic Psychology, 
33(1), pp.264–277.
Tromp, N., 2013. Social design: 
How products and services can help 
us act in ways that benefit society. 
Delft University of Technology.
Fogg, B.J., 2009a. Creating 
Persuasive Technologies: An 
Eight-Step Design Process. In 4th 
International Conference on 
Persuasive Technology. Claremont, 
USA: ACM Press, p. Article No. 44.
Wendel, S., 2014. Designing for 
Behavior Change: Applying 
Psychology and Behavioural 
Economics 2nd ed. M. Treseler, 
ed., O’Reilly Media.
Cash, P.J., Hartlev, C.G. & Durazo, 
C.B., 2017. Behavioural Design: A 
Process for Integrating Behaviour 
Change and Design. Design 
Studies, 48(January), pp.96–128.
Fogg, B.J. & Hreha, J., 2010. Behavior 
Wizard: A Method for Matching Target 
Behaviors with Solutions. In T. Ploug, P. 
Hasle, & H. Oinas-Kukkonen, eds. 5th 
International Conference on Persuasive 
Technology. Copenhagen, Denmark: 
Springer-Verlag Berlin, pp. 117–131.
Michie, S. et al., 2011. The 
behaviour change wheel: A new 
method for characterising and 
designing behaviour change 
interventions. Implementation 
Science, 6(1), p.42.
Community Tool Box, 2016a. 
Developing an Intervention. 
Available at: 
http://ctb.ku.edu/en/develop-
ing-intervention
Lockton, D., Harrison, D. & 
Stanton, N.A., 2010. The Design 
with Intent Method: A design tool for 
influencing user behaviour. Applied 
Ergonomics, 41(3), pp.382–392.
Cervantes, M. et al., 2011. Brains, 
Behavior and Design toolkit. 
Available at: http://www.brainsbe-
havioranddesign.com/kit.html
Pfarr, N., 2013. Behavior Change 
Strategy Cards. Available at: 
https://www.artefact-
group.com/resources/behav-
ior-change-strategy-cards/ 
Hermsen, S., Renes, R.J. & Frost, J., 
2014. Persuasive by Design: A Model and 
Toolkit for Designing Evidence-based 
Interventions. In Proceedings from 
Making the Difference: CHI Sparks 
2014. The Hague, Netherlands, pp. 
74–77.
A framework for thinking about the roles that 
interactive technologies can play from the perspec-
tive of the individual. Applies to the category of 
behaviour change theories
A systematic framework for designing and 
evaluating persuasive systems. It can be applied for 
all kinds of behavioural theories, yet refers 
specifically to the work of B. J. Fogg.
A framework of different approaches for using evil 
seductive persuasion in design for interaction. It 
can be applied for all kinds of behavioural 
theories.
A framework to be used whenever behaviour change 
is being considered and aims at making less 
coercive policies work better. Applies well to the 
category of behaviour change theories. 
A framework aimed at supporting design to induce 
behaviour change, which brings about a desired 
social change. The approach can be applied for both 
behaviour change theories and social behaviour.
Outlines a path to follow in designing persuasive 
technology, with techniques aimed at increasing the 
probability of behaviour change success. Applies to 
the category of behaviour change theories. 
Defines the four overall phases which a behavioural 
change process consists of. The approach can be 
applied for all kinds of behavioural theories.
Integrates psychology, persuasive design and 
product development theory into a behavioural 
design process. It can be applied for all kinds of 
behavioural theories.
Presents a method for matching target behaviours 
with solutions for achieving those behaviours. It can 
be applied by the designer for all kinds of 
behavioural theories.
A method for characterising and designing 
behaviour change interventions and linking them to 
an analysis of a targeted behaviour. It can be for all 
kinds of behavioural theories.
Provides support for developing core components 
of a community intervention and adapting them to 
fit the context. It relates well to behavioural 
theories concerning social behaviour.
An innovation tool developed for helping humans 
use products and systems more efficiently. The 
approach can be applied for both behaviour change 
theories and social behaviour.
A tool developed to help in understanding and 
influencing decision-making processes. The 
approach can be applied for all kinds of 
behavioural theories.
A set of 23 cards developed to help designers think 
through strategies to nudge humans in a positive 
way when facing a behavioural design problem. The 
approach can be applied for all kinds of 
behavioural theories.
A toolkit aimed at addressing aspects of a target 
behaviours and designing interventions for chang-
ing these behaviours. The approach can be applied 
for all kinds of behavioural theories.
Behavioural design approaches to apply
These behavioural design approaches could be useful to apply after playing the game.
backpage
==PAGE:173==
 161
Appendix 19: Begin Card
Begin Card
front
*iVsX XLiRgs fiVsX Since you have chosen to play this game, we imagine that you 
are faced with a problem concerning some type of behaviour – or at least you think so!
The following task will get you started in the structuring and analysis of the problem behaviour 
that you have identified. This task will ease the usability of the game and is therefore 
valuable to the process, but if you are short of time or already have a rather thorough 
understanding of your problem, you can skip this task and go straight to the back of this card. 
If not, start the game by identifying how the following seven problem layers affect 
the problem individually (based on you initial perception of the problem). If there are any 
problem layers in which you cannot identify your problem, don’t worry – the game should 
guide you through them anyway. As a group fill out the problem layers you are able to identify 
on post-its and place them on the front of the “Problem Documentation card”. 
Once this is done, you can go to the back of the Begin Card and start the game!  
8Le seZeR pVSFleQ layeVs aVe
Personal problems relate to internal personal factors such 
as health and psyche.
Impersonal problems relate to external personal factors 
such as lack of money and time.
Interpersonal problems relate to internal social factors 
such as arguing with a friend or disagreeing with a study group, 
which can be seen as in-group behaviour.
Societal problems relate to external social factors such as 
crime rates, littering, and pollution, which can be seen as out-group 
behaviour.
Immediate story refers to the things prior to when the 
behaviour occurs, i.e. the bus was late, spilled coffee, or a broken 
phone.
Longterm background refers to the mood, place in life, 
environment, or childhood experiences of the individual.
Frequency of change refers to the span or frequency of 
the problem behaviour, i.e. is it an seldom behaviour or a frequent 
behaviour?
,S[ XS sXaVX XLe gaQe To figure out which Theory Card to start with, you 
should answer the following questions (if in doubt about the questions, the Guide Book gives 
you detailed descriptions and examples):
Begin Card
back
Does your project concern human behaviour?
YES
NO
Then this tool is not 
relevant: Go look 
at other tools 
instead.
Great! Then pick 
a green card.
Great! Then pick 
a yellow card.
Is your problem Zell specified 
or is it vaguely specified? 
RATHER
VAGUE 
PROBLEM
VERY 
SPECIFIC 
PROBLEM
Does the project concern the 
behaviour of an individual or 
the behaviour of a group? 
GROUP
BEHAVIOUR
INDIVIDUAL
BEHAVIOUR
Do you have an intuition in 
regards to what topics the 
problem might relate to?
YES
NO
Great! Then go to the Theory 
Overview Wheel and choose 
the Theory Card (no 
matter the colour) you think 
will be most relevant due to 
your initial perception of 
the problem. 
Remember, all players must go through the same theory card at the same time
==PAGE:174==
162
Appendix 20: End Card
,S[ XS eRd XLe gaQe Good job in ranking your hypotheses! Go through the 
following steps to figure out what to do next: 
%Ve ySu saXisfied [iXL ySuV LypSXLeses SV dSes iX Jeel liOe 
they could be better (i.e. something is still missing)? 
End Card 
back
THE 
HYPOTHESES ARE 
SATISFACTORY
No worries! Instead, 
try and go back to the 
Theory Overview 
Wheel and choose a 
theory relating to the 
topics (1-2) you have 
covered the least. Perhaps 
it will inspire you to make 
an even better hypothesis!
Once that it done, go back 
to the End Card and try 
to rank hypothesis again :-)
Great! Then gather the 
Theory Cards that made 
you formulate the chosen 
hypotheses and remember 
them in your ideation and 
conceptualisation phase! 
.. and don’t forget the 
key takeaways (on 
the bottom of the chosen 
Theory Cards)
SOMETHING 
IS STILL 
MISSING
Go to the “Problem Documentation 
Card” again and fill out the seven 
problem layers on the back of the card. 
Have your understanding of the problem 
become better or more detailed? 
YES
NO
Based on the game you/your group have now formulated several hypotheses. 
What you/your group should do now, is to try and identify the top 3 of 
your hypotheses in regards to the aspects of:
• 
Are the hypotheses realistic to address# (i.e. will it be possible to change the 
behaviour?)
• 
Are the hypotheses feasible# (i.e. will it be possible to make a solution for this#) 
• 
Will it provide value to the project to solve the identified hypotheses#
Once this is done, you can go to the back of this card to end the game! 
End Card 
front
1st hypothesis
2nd hypothesis
3rd hypothesis
place the post-it here
place the post-it here
place the post-it here
==PAGE:175==
 163
Appendix 21: Problem Documentation Card
Problem Documentation Card
front
Personal problems
Impersonal problems
Interpersonal problems
place the post-it here
place the post-it here
place the post-it here
Societal problems
place the post-it here
Story
place the post-it here
Background
place the post-it here
Frequency of change
place the post-it here
Problem Documentation Card
back
Personal problems
Impersonal problems
Interpersonal problems
place the post-it here
place the post-it here
place the post-it here
Societal problems
place the post-it here
Story
place the post-it here
Background
place the post-it here
Frequency of change
place the post-it here
==PAGE:176==
164
Appendix 22: Theory Cards (1 of 21)
AIDS Risk Reduction Model
%pplied pVSFleQ case
How can I get more people to wear bike helmets?
1. Recognition and labelling: Make it clear 
that the behaviour is a high risk behaviour (can 
you show examples of traffic accidents, maybe 
have earlier implicated victims tell their story?)
2. Commitment: How can you make it more 
beneficial for the users/how can you make it 
seem as being more beneficial to use a helmet# 
3. Taking action: Is it easy to take action? 
Are there both cheap and expensive helmets? 
Coloured vs. black# Messes up your hair# What 
factors limit this action-taking at the moment? 
Are there enough information to make a 
qualified decision# 
&VieJ descVipXiSR The AIDS Risk Reduction Model aims to explain and 
predict behaviour change efforts of individuals through the three stages of recognition and 
labelling, commitment, and taking action. Although being developed for the focus of predicting 
behaviours regarding sexual transmission of AIDS or HIV, the theory is valuable in regards 
to understanding when to change behaviour, as each of the three stages represents different 
lenses through which behaviour change can be viewed. The theory is also valuable in regards 
to considering individual behaviour, as it among others considers emotional influences and 
interpersonal processes.
Reference: 
Catania, J.A., Kegeles, S.M. & Coates, T.J., 1990. Towards an Understanding of Risk Behavior: An AIDS Risk Reduction Model 
(ARRM). Health Education Quarterly, 17(1), pp.53–72.
*SVce ySuVselJ XS JSVQulaXe a LypSXLesis 
How can the terms recognition and labelling, commitment, or taking 
action be used to change behaviour in your own problem case?
E
A bias relating to the problem case on this card is the Normalcy bias: 
The refusal to plan for, or react to, a disaster which has never happened before
NO
NO
NO
YES
YES
YES
Resignation
Resignation
No Action
Labelling
Commitment
Enactment
Help-seeking
Self-Help
Enacting  Solutions
AIDS Risk Reduction Model
That’s 
alright! Try to go 
and explore the: 
SELF-
DETERMINATION 
THEORY 
(U)
Did this theory make it possible for you to 
formulate a hypothesis relevant to your problem?
YES
NO
Have you only applied one or 
two Theory Card colours to 
your problem case? 
YES
NO
Effort
Inter-
personal 
processes
Emotional 
iR¾ueRces
Recognition 
& labelling
Commitment
Taking 
actions
Keep these key takeaways in mind when generating ideas in 
your further design work:
E
Great! 
Then go to the 
End Card
.. to finish the game
Remember 
to write a 
hypothesis on a 
post-it and put it on 
the Theory Overview 
Wheel
Remember 
to write the 
theory letter E 
on the post-it
Remember
 to put two discs 
on the E’s in 
change strategy 
and selJ-eJficacy 
on the Theory Over-
view Wheel
==PAGE:177==
 165
Appendix 22: Theory Cards (2 of 21)
Design Behaviour Intervention Model
%pplied pVSFleQ case
How can I get people to turn of the lights when 
leaving a room? 
1.  To guide a change, an electrical socket with 
a light bulb (that lights when the sock is turned 
on) could be used. The light in the socket would 
increase the user’s awareness of the electricity 
being used, without forcing any behaviours. 
2. To maintain a change, a lamp with a timer (that 
the user can adjusted when to turn on/off) could 
be used as a way of influencing the user’s habits. 
3. To force a behaviour change, sensors that 
automatically controls the light bulbs (depending 
on movement) could be used. The sensors would 
directly change the user’s behaviour by full product 
control, as the user can only influence the lights 
with his/hers presence. 
*SVce ySuVselJ XS JSVQulaXe a LypSXLesis 
How can the terms guiding a change, maintaining a change, or forcing 
a change be used to change behaviour in your own problem case?
&VieJ descVipXiSR The Design Behaviour Intervention Model is valuable in 
describing different strategies for how a behaviour change can take place. These strategies 
are guiding a change (influencing the user’s intentions), maintaining a change (influencing the 
user’s habits with force), and forcing a change (influencing the user with full product control). 
The theory states that change can happen in three different stages: Declarative (awareness of 
one’s intentions), knowledge compilation (controlled by habits), and procedural (controlled by 
the product in use). While the theory works great in the context of sustainability, it can be 
applied for problems with other focuses as well.
Reference: 
Tang, T., 2010. Towards sustainable use: design behaviour intervention to reduce household environment impact. 
Loughborough University.
D
        A bias relating to the problem case on this card is the Hyperbolic Discounting bias: 
               Discounting is the tendency for people to have a stronger preference for more 
immediate payoffs relative to later payoffs
Habits
Intention
Frequency of 
past behaviour
Affect
Social factors
Attitude
Knowledge
Beliefs about 
outcomes
Norms
Roles
Self-concept
Emotions
Control
Declarative 
stage
Knowledge 
compilation
stage
Procedural
stage
Old habit
Awareness
Consideration
Practice
Repeat action
New habit
Energy conversation –
guide the change
Energy conversation 
with force  –
maintain the 
change
Energy  force  –
ensure the change
Product
Product 
service
System
Points of intervention 
(power in 
decision-making)
3 levels of 
intervention
3 levels of 
behavioural chamge
Design Behaviour Intervention Model
D
That’s 
alright! Try to go 
and explore the: 
HEALTH BELIEF 
MODEL (O)
Did this theory make it possible for you to 
formulate a hypothesis relevant to your problem?
YES
NO
Have you only applied one or 
two Theory Card colours to 
your problem case? 
YES
NO
Intention 
control
Habit 
control
Product 
control
Guiding 
change 
Maintaining 
change 
Forcing 
change 
Keep these key takeaways in mind when generating ideas in 
your further design work:
Great! 
Then go to the 
End Card
.. to finish the game
Remember 
to write a 
hypothesis on a 
post-it and put it on 
the Theory Overview 
Wheel
Remember 
to write the 
theory letter D 
on the post-it
Remember
 to put three discs 
on the D’s in change 
strategy and habits 
and thinking on the 
Theory Overview 
Wheel
==PAGE:178==
166
Appendix 22: Theory Cards (3 of 21)
Elaboration Likelihood Model
%pplied pVSFleQ case
How do I make sure that people do not smoke on 
planes?
The central route is efficient to use, once you 
have a person’s attention. Therefore it could be 
valuable to state that smoking is forbidden as a 
part of the security procedure in the beginning of 
the flight (i.e. when people are already reasoning 
with your logic). However, if the person is not 
paying attention to what you are saying, the 
peripheral route should be used. A way to do 
so, could be through small distractions leading to 
the same conclusions (e.g. through small pocket-
books stressing the dangers of smoking on planes 
or through strategically placed icons in the most 
obvious places).
*SVce ySuVselJ XS JSVQulaXe a LypSXLesis 
How can the behaviour in your own problem case be changed by addressing 
either the central processing route or the peripheral processing route?
&VieJ descVipXiSR The Elaboration Likelihood Model presents two different 
strategies of influencing the user through different processing routes.  The theory states that 
persuasion can happen via two types of processing routes: The central route (much cognitive 
processing, i.e. rational thinking) and the peripheral route (little cognitive processing, i.e. 
automatic responses). The idea in this theory is that behaviour is guided by attitude, which 
can be influenced by persuasion (e.g. through motivation and ability or context and message). 
Therefore the theory is valuable when considering how to enable a certain behaviour change, 
either through communication of a message or through the placement of an intervention.
Reference: 
Petty, R.E. & Cacioppo, J.T., 1986. The Elaboration Likelihood Model of Persuasion. Advances in Experimental Social 
Psychology, 19, pp.123–205.
G
        A bias relating to the theory on this card is the Framing Effect bias:  
             Drawing different conclusions from the same information, depending on how that 
information is presented
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
no
no
no
Direct attitude change
Direct 
attitude shift
Persuasive 
communication
Indirect 
cues
Motivation
Ability
Cognitive 
Processing
Elaboration Likelihood Model
G
That’s 
alright! Try to go 
and explore the: 
SOCIAL 
COGNITIVE 
THEORY (L)
Did this theory make it possible for you to 
formulate a hypothesis relevant to your problem?
YES
NO
Have you only applied one or 
two Theory Card colours to 
your problem case? 
YES
NO
Automatic 
behaviour
6e¾ecXiZe 
behaviour
Attitude
Motivation 
and ability
Context and 
message 
Decision
-making
Keep these key takeaways in mind when generating ideas in 
your further design work:
Great! 
Then go to the 
End Card
.. to finish the game
Remember 
to write a 
hypothesis on a 
post-it and put it on 
the Theory Overview 
Wheel
Remember 
to write the 
theory letter G 
on the post-it
Remember
 to put five discs on 
the G’s in attitude and 
thinking and motivation 
and habits and principles 
of behaviour on the 
Theory Overview 
Wheel
==PAGE:179==
 167
Appendix 22: Theory Cards (4 of 21)
Fogg’s Behaviour Model
%pplied pVSFleQ case
How can I influence people to lose weight?
1. Increasing motivation could be through building 
more gyms close to apartment areas or showing 
clear benefits of losing weight. 
2. Increasing ability could be through making it 
easier to eat healthy (provide cheap but healthy 
meals) or by integrating easy activities during a 
work day (e.g. DHL relay). 
3. Placing different interventions in strategically 
through-out places, such as posters for the benefits 
of walking or visualising walking paths at bus stops 
or fitbit’s activity-tracker, constantly reminding (i.e. 
triggering) people to move.
*SVce ySuVselJ XS JSVQulaXe a LypSXLesis 
How can the behaviour in your own problem case be changed by 
the terms motivation, ability, or triggers?
&VieJ descVipXiSR Fogg’s Behaviour Model is valuable in determining which 
factors of behaviour must be intervened or influenced, in order to create a behaviour change. 
Fogg states that behaviour is a product of three factors presented at the same time: Motivation 
(the individual has to be sufficiently motivated), Ability (the individual has to have the ability 
to perform the behaviour), and Triggers (the individual must be triggered to perform the 
behaviour). Although all three factors must be present at a time, the trigger is crucial in 
achieving a behaviour change, as the wrong trigger in the wrong place cannot guarantee the 
desired behaviour.
Reference: 
Fogg, B.J., 2009b. A Behavior Model for Persuasive Design. In 4th International Conference on Persuasive Technology. Clare-
mont, USA: ACM Press, p. Article No.: 40.
B
        A bias relating to the theory on this card is the Dunning-Kruger bias: 
           The tendency for unskilled individuals to overestimate their own ability, and the 
tendency for experts to underestimate their own ability
Fogg’s Behaviour Model
B
That’s 
alright! Try to go 
and explore the: 
SOCIAL 
ECOLOGICAL 
MODEL (I)
Did this theory make it possible for you to 
formulate a hypothesis relevant to your problem?
YES
NO
Have you only applied one or 
two Theory Card colours to 
your problem case? 
YES
NO
Persuasion 
Principles 
Increase 
motivation
Increase 
ability
Noticed 
trigger
Associ-
ated trigger 
with target 
behaviour
Keep these key takeaways in mind when generating ideas in 
your further design work:
Great! 
Then go to the 
End Card
.. to finish the game
Remember 
to write a 
hypothesis on a 
post-it and put it on 
the Theory Overview 
Wheel
Remember 
to write the 
theory letter B 
on the post-it
Remember
 to put two discs 
on the B’s in moti-
vation and principles 
of behaviour on the 
Theory Overview 
Wheel
==PAGE:180==
168
Appendix 22: Theory Cards (5 of 21)
Nudging
%pplied pVSFleQ case
How can I decrease trash being thrown in public 
areas? 
Automatic responses in public can be limited 
due to busyness, crowded areas or different 
purposes. Nudging could enable a behaviour 
change despite of these limitations, e.g. through 
clearly visible footprints on the streets leading to a 
trash bin. These would work in areas with smaller 
crowds (i.e. where the pavement is visible), yet in 
places with huge crowds or where there are only 
cyclists, trash bins with other nudges would be 
needed (e.g. colored or tilted ones). 
*SVce ySuVselJ XS JSVQulaXe a LypSXLesis 
How can automatic responses (hint: nudges) be used to change 
behaviour in your own problem case?
&VieJ descVipXiSR Nudging is a theory that is valuable when wishing to create 
interventions that require little effort from people, yet at the same time has a big impact in 
the moment. Nudging theory believes that behaviour can be changed by implementing an 
intervention, which exploits the automatic behaviour of individuals. It is particularly well-suited 
to complex decisions and with a lot of different alternatives to choose from.  It has no clear 
principles of how to change behaviour, but is moreso a mindset of how behaviour change can 
be obtained. Nudging is efficient when needing temporary and superficial behaviour changes, 
which is very valuable in regards to public interventions and thus a theory that is highly 
applicable in this context.
Reference: 
Thaler, R.H. & Sunstein, C.R., 2009. Nudge: Improving Decisions about Health, Wealth, and Happiness 2nd ed., 
The Penguin Group.
H
        A bias relating to the theory on this card is the Choice-supportive bias: 
          In a self-justifying manner retroactively ascribing one’s choices to be more informed 
than they were when they were made
Nudging
H
That’s 
alright! Try to go 
and explore the: 
SOCIAL 
IDENTITY
 THEORY 
(J)
Did this theory make it possible for you to 
formulate a hypothesis relevant to your problem?
YES
NO
Have you only applied one or 
two Theory Card colours to 
your problem case? 
YES
NO
Automatic 
behaviour
Must 
ensure 
freedom of 
choice
Little user 
effort
Big impact
Temporary 
behaviour 
change
Public 
interventions
Keep these key takeaways in mind when generating ideas in 
your further design work:
Great! 
Then go to the 
End Card
.. to finish the game
Remember 
to write a 
hypothesis on a 
post-it and put it on 
the Theory Overview 
Wheel
Remember 
to write the 
theory letter H 
on the post-it
Remember
 to put four discs on 
the H’s in social impact 
and habits and change 
strategy and principles 
of behaviour on the 
Theory Overview 
Wheel
==PAGE:181==
 169
Appendix 22: Theory Cards (6 of 21)
Loughborough Model
%pplied pVSFleQ case
How can I decrease people talking loudly on their 
phones i public transport? 
1. By guiding a change, the influence could be 
communicated as informative through a folder on 
the table, prompting people to consider what they 
“share” with their co-travellers (by talking loudly 
about personal issues).
2. By steering people into a change, a “phone 
booth” (with sound-limiting design) at each end of 
the train wagon could give the illusion of private 
space and thus persuading people to move away 
from their co-travellers.
3. If the choice was to completely ensure the 
change, the solution could be coercive and perhaps 
sensors would remove the signal in the trains, thus 
making calls impossible. 
&VieJ descVipXiSR The Loughborough Model is a theory that considers different 
ways of creating influence. The theory distinguishes between three ways of staging a change: 
Guiding a change (enabling control of the change to the user), steering a change (controlling the 
user’s interaction through affordances and constraints), and ensuring change (forcing action). 
The theory further distinguished between three types of influence: Passive (informative), 
assertive (persuasive), and aggressive (coercive). The theory is created with the aim of solving 
sustainability problems, yet if the aim is to determine where the control of the intervention 
should lie, the model can be applied in other contexts as well.
Reference: 
Lilley, D., 2009. Design for sustainable behaviour: strategies and perceptions. Design Studies, 30(6), pp.704–720.
C
        A bias relating to the theory on this card is the Authority bias: 
         The tendency to attribute greater accuracy to the opinion of an authority figure (unrelated 
to its content) and be more influenced by that opinion
*SVce ySuVselJ XS JSVQulaXe a LypSXLesis 
How can the terms passive, assertive, or agressive influence
 be used to change behaviour in your own problem case?
Power in 
decision-making
Eco-
Feedback
Behaviour 
Steering
Persuasive 
Technology
Product
User
Guides 
change
Maintains 
change
Ensures
change
provides tangible aural, visual 
or tactile signs as reminders to 
inform users of resource use
encourages users to behave in 
ways prescribed by the designer 
through the embedded 
affordances and constraints
employs persuasive methods to 
change what people think or do, 
sometimes without their 
knowledge or consent
Loughborough Model
C
That’s 
alright! Try to go 
and explore the:  
HOW HABITS 
WORK (R)
Did this theory make it possible for you to 
formulate a hypothesis relevant to your problem?
YES
NO
Have you only applied one or 
two Theory Card colours to 
your problem case? 
YES
NO
Informative 
iR¾ueRce
Persuasive 
iR¾ueRce
Coercive 
iR¾ueRce
Decision
-making
User 
control
Product 
control
Keep these key takeaways in mind when generating ideas in 
your further design work:
Great! 
Then go to the 
End Card
.. to finish the game
Remember 
to write a 
hypothesis on a 
post-it and put it on 
the Theory Overview 
Wheel
Remember 
to write the 
theory letter C 
on the post-it
Remember
 to put a disc on 
the C in 
change strategy 
on the Theory Overview 
Wheel
==PAGE:182==
170
Appendix 22: Theory Cards (7 of 21)
Transtheoretical Model
%pplied pVSFleQ case
How can I tackle the challenge of alcoholism? 
As you have to appeal to the stage in which 
the user currently is located, different questions 
relating to these stages could be asked to realise 
the potential solutions. 
4VecSRXeQplaXiSR Is the user aware that 
(s)he is an alcoholic# Can you make them aware# 
'SRXeQplaXiSR Since the user has realised 
that (s)he has a problem, how do you make it 
seem beneficial to change behaviour# 
4VepaVaXiSR JSV acXiSR Is the user ready to 
stop drinking? How can you help him/her to do so?
%cXiSR Can you ease the task of forming new 
habits? Maybe through an app or an bracelet? 
1aiRXeRaRce How can you help the user stay 
away from alcohol in the future? 
&VieJ descVipXiSR The Transtheoretical Model is theory that is great at explaining 
different priorities (in regards to time) that can relate to making a change. The theory describes 
the process of intentional behaviour change through five stages of change: Precontemplation 
(no recognition of need for or interest in change), contemplation (thinking about changing), 
preparation for action (planning for changing), action (adopting new habits), maintenance (on-
going practice of new healthier behaviour). Each of these stages requires different kinds of 
interventions or information, as they must appeal to people with different perception and 
priorities. The theory is valuable as it deepens the understanding of how people perceive 
change and when to time persuasion in order to design successful interventions. 
Reference: 
Prochaska, J.O. & Velicer, W.F., 1997. The Transtheoretical Model of Health Behavior Change. American Journal of Health 
Promotion, 12(1), pp.38–48.
F
        A bias relating to the problem case on this card is the Hostile Attribution bias:
        The tendency to interpret others’ behaviours as having hostile intent, even when 
the behaviour is ambiguous 
*SVce ySuVselJ XS JSVQulaXe a LypSXLesis 
How can the stages precontemplation, contemplation, preparing for action, 
taking action, or maintenance be used to change behaviour in your own 
problem case?
Stages of change
Precontemplation
Contemplation
Preparation
Action
Maintenance
Not considering to 
change behaviour
Already changed 
behaviour
Transtheoretical Model
F
That’s 
alright! Try to go 
and explore the: 
THEORY OF 
INTERPERSONAL 
BEHAVIOUR (Q)
Did this theory make it possible for you to 
formulate a hypothesis relevant to your problem?
YES
NO
Have you only applied one or 
two Theory Card colours to 
your problem case? 
YES
NO
6e¾ecXiZe 
behaviour
7elJ-eJficacy
Awareness
Intentional 
behaviour 
change
Perception 
Priorities
Keep these key takeaways in mind when generating ideas in 
your further design work:
Great! 
Then go to the 
End Card
.. to finish the game
Remember 
to write a 
hypothesis on a 
post-it and put it on 
the Theory Overview 
Wheel
Remember 
to write the 
theory letter F 
on the post-it
Remember
 to put three discs 
on the F’s in thinking 
and selJ-eJficacy and 
change strategy on 
the Theory Overview 
Wheel
==PAGE:183==
 171
Appendix 22: Theory Cards (8 of 21)
Theory of Influence
%pplied pVSFleQ case
How can I increase the number of citizens voting? 
6ecipVSciXy Maybe promises/handing out 
favors (cake, free candy, balloons).
'SQQiXQeRX aRd cSRsisXeRcy Enhance 
in campaigns that if you have ever cared about 
politics, you must vote. 
7Scial pVSSJ Who is the most trustworthy in 
your country# Acquire them as an advocate. 
%uXLSViXy Again, have the authorities (school 
teachers, police etc.) stress that voting is a neces-
sity in a democracy.  
0iOiRg Have the most likeable people stand out 
and explain why they vote (e.g. sport stars).
*SVce ySuVselJ XS JSVQulaXe a LypSXLesis 
How can the terms reciprocity, commitment and consistency, social 
proof, authority, liking, or scarcity be used to change behaviour in 
your own problem case?
&VieJ descVipXiSR The Theory of Influence is a set of principles that can help 
understanding how persuasion can differ. The theory consists of six principles of persuasion: 
Reciprocity (people tend to return a favour); ommitment and consistency (when people commit, 
they do not back out); social proof (people trust in things trusted by people we trust); authority 
(people tend to obey authorities); liking (people are easily persuaded by person they like) and 
scarcity (relating to demand). The principles are applicable in targeting different solutions. They 
can be combined or they can stand alone, but most importantly they are open to some level 
of interpretation in regards to enabling a behaviour change.
Reference: 
Cialdini, R.B., 2007. Influence: The Psychology of Persuasion Revised ed., Harper Business.
A
        A bias relating to the problem case on this card is the Authority bias: 
         The tendency to attribute greater accuracy to the opinion of an authority figure (unrelated 
to its content) and be more influenced by that opinion
Influence 
principles
Consensus
Reciprocity
Scarcity
Similarity
Autrhority
Consistency
Theory of Influence
A
That’s 
alright! Try to go 
and explore the: 
DUAL PROCESS 
THEORY (S)
Did this theory make it possible for you to 
formulate a hypothesis relevant to your problem?
YES
NO
Have you only applied one or 
two Theory Card colours to 
your problem case? 
YES
NO
-R¾ueRce 
principles
Persuasion
Commit-
ment
Social proof
Group 
impact
Liking
Keep these key takeaways in mind when generating ideas in 
your further design work:
Great! 
Then go to the 
End Card
.. to finish the game
Remember 
to write a 
hypothesis on a 
post-it and put it on 
the Theory Overview 
Wheel
Remember 
to write the 
theory letter A 
on the post-it
Remember
 to put three discs 
on the A’s in social 
impact and principles 
of behaviour and mo-
tivation on the Theory 
Overview Wheel
==PAGE:184==
172
Appendix 22: Theory Cards (9 of 21)
Social Cognitive Theory
%pplied pVSFleQ case
How can I make people eat more vitamins? 
Since people observe what others do and 
the experiences they find, and relate this with their 
own personal experiences, you need to create 
these positive experiences. This can be done 
by acquiring several “vitamin-speakers”, advocating 
for vitamin use (and showing how and why they 
take vitamins) in appropriate places where people 
will see this. This approach is highly efficient and 
applied among the blogosphere at the moment.
*SVce ySuVselJ XS JSVQulaXe a LypSXLesis 
How can your problem be explained by addressing either 
personal experiences or the surrounding group of people?
&VieJ descVipXiSR The Social Cognitive Theory is valuable in relating individuals 
behaviours with behaviours of groups. The theory’s core premise is that an individual’s 
behaviour does not only come from personal experiences, but can also come from observing 
the actions of others and their resulting behavioural consequences. Therefore this theory is 
valuable when dealing with a problem behaviour where the surrounding environment play a 
role in adopting behaviours. Although the theory was developed for health purposes, the core 
premise is applicable for other behaviours too.
Reference: 
Bandura, A., 1986. Social Foundations of Thought and Action: A Social Cognitive Theory 1st ed., Prentice Hall.
L
        A bias relating to the problem case on this card is the Illusion of External Agency bias: 
        When people view self-generated preferences as instead being caused by insightful, 
effective and benevolent agents
Personal 
factors
Values, beliefs, goals, 
self-efficacy, 
expectations, 
attributions
Environmental 
factors
Reinforcement, 
instruction, feedback, 
other’s behaviours, 
conditions
Behavioural 
factors
Actions, choices, 
statements, learning, 
achievements
Social Cognitive Theory
L
That’s 
alright! Try to go 
and explore the:  
THEORY OF 
INFLUENCE (A)
Did this theory make it possible for you to 
formulate a hypothesis relevant to your problem?
YES
NO
Have you only applied one or 
two Theory Card colours to 
your problem case? 
YES
NO
Social 
interaction
Obser-
vations of 
others
Personal 
experience
Cognitive 
and personal 
iR¾ueRces
Envi-
ronmental 
iR¾ueRces
Behavioural 
iR¾ueRces
Keep these key takeaways in mind when generating ideas in 
your further design work:
Great! 
Then go to the 
End Card
.. to finish the game
Remember 
to write a 
hypothesis on a 
post-it and put it on 
the Theory Overview 
Wheel
Remember 
to write the 
theory letter L 
on the post-it
Remember
 to put two discs 
on the L’s in 
social impact and 
selJ-eJficacy on the 
Theory Overview 
Wheel
==PAGE:185==
 173
Appendix 22: Theory Cards (10 of 21)
Social Cognitive 
Theory of Self-regulation
%pplied pVSFleQ case
How can I make people eat more vitamins? 
Since people observe what others do and 
the experiences they find, and relate this with their 
own personal experiences, you need to create 
these positive experiences. This can be done 
by acquiring several “vitamin-speakers”, advocating 
for vitamin use (and showing how and why they 
take vitamins) in appropriate places where people 
will see this. This approach is highly efficient and 
applied among the blogosphere at the moment. 
Yet, besides making sure that people can observe 
others, arguments relating to rationality (such 
as “they are healthy”, “they will make you feel 
better”) is needed too, as they addresses the 
forethought of people.
*SVce ySuVselJ XS JSVQulaXe a LypSXLesis 
How can your problem be explained by addressing either the 
users self-influence or the signals the user gets from the surrounding 
environment?
&VieJ descVipXiSR The Social Cognitive Theory of Self-Regulation is valuable 
in relating individuals behaviours with behaviours of groups. It states that human behaviour 
is extensively motivated and regulated by on-going self-influence and that most human 
behaviour happens due to some level of forethought, which happens through different levels 
of psychological sub functions. However, what is important to notice is that, while these self-
regulating systems are set by individuals, they can be based on the observations of others. Thus, 
it is crucial to understand that the operations of these self-regulations are affected by social 
interaction and not solely individually determined.
Reference: 
Bandura, A., 1991. Social Cognitive Theory of Self-Regulation. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 50(2), 
pp.248–287.
K
        A bias relating to the problem case on this card is the Ilusion of Asymmetric Insight bias:  
        People perceive their knowledge of their peers to surpass their peers’ knowledge of them
Performance 
Dimensions
quality
productivity
originality
sociability
morality
deviancy
Quality of 
Monitoring
informativeness
regularity
proximity
accuracy
Personal standards
level
explicitness
proximity
generality
Referential 
Performances
standard norms
social comparison
self comparison
collective comparison
Valuation of Activity
valued
neutral
devalued
Performance 
Determinants
personal
external
Evaluative 
Self-reactions
positive
negative
Tangible 
Self-reactions
rewarding
punishing
No Self-reaction
Social Cognitive 
Theory of Self-regulation
K
That’s 
alright! Try to go 
and explore the: 
AIDS RISK 
REDUCTION 
MODEL (E)
Did this theory make it possible for you to 
formulate a hypothesis relevant to your problem?
YES
NO
Have you only applied one or 
two Theory Card colours to 
your problem case? 
YES
NO
6e¾ecXiZe 
behaviour
Social 
interaction
Obsevations 
of others
Motivation
Action
Surrounding 
Environment
Keep these key takeaways in mind when generating ideas in 
your further design work:
Great! 
Then go to the 
End Card
.. to finish the game
Remember 
to write a 
hypothesis on a 
post-it and put it on 
the Theory Overview 
Wheel
Remember 
to write the 
theory letter K 
on the post-it
Remember
 to put three discs 
on the K’s in social 
impact and thinking 
and motivation on 
the Theory Overview 
Wheel
==PAGE:186==
174
Appendix 22: Theory Cards (11 of 21)
Social Ecological Model 
%pplied pVSFleQ case
Through which channels can I influence people to 
change their minds? 
According to this model, influence can take place 
at: 1. The personal level  – does it appeal to my 
health, gender or age? 2. The interpersonal level 
– what do my family and peers think of this topic? 
3. The organisational level – do my co-workers 
agree or disagree? 4. The communal level – do 
my opinions stand out from what others think? 5. 
The policy level – what politicans agrees with me 
on this subject? Just as an individual can analyse 
the environmental context to change its mind, 
designers can do the same to change peoples’ 
behaviour.
&VieJ descVipXiSR The Social Ecological Model is valuable in overviewing different 
factors affecting behaviour. The model states that behaviour is affected by five different levels 
of influence, which interact across levels: Individual, interpersonal, organisational, community, and 
policy. It emphasises that behaviour both shape and are shaped by the social environment. 
This relationship between an individual and the individual’s social context, is important for the 
designer to acknowledge in behavioural design to understand social behavioural factors and 
their corresponding levels of relations.
Reference: 
Bronfenbrenner, U., 1986. Ecology of the Family as a Context for Human Development: Research Perspectives. 
Developmental Psychology, 22(6), pp.723–742.
I
        A bias relating to the theory on this card is the Courtesy bias: 
        The tendency to give an opinion that is more socially correct than one’s true 
opinion, so as to avoid offending anyone
*SVce ySuVselJ XS JSVQulaXe a LypSXLesis 
How can the terms individual, interpersonal, organisational, community 
or policy behaviour be used to explain your problem?
Public Policy
National, provincial/territorial local laws 
and policy
Community
Design, access, connectedness, 
spaces
Organisational
Organisations, schools, 
workplaces
Interpersonal
Family, friends, social 
networks
Individual
Knowledge, attitudes, skills
Social Ecological Model 
I
That’s 
alright! Try to go 
and explore the: 
THEORY OF 
PLANNED 
BEHAVIOUR (P)
Did this theory make it possible for you to 
formulate a hypothesis relevant to your problem?
YES
NO
Have you only applied one or 
two Theory Card colours to 
your problem case? 
YES
NO
Social 
environment
Social 
impact
Personal 
level
Organisation 
level
Policy level
Ecological 
system
Keep these key takeaways in mind when generating ideas in 
your further design work:
Great! 
Then go to the 
End Card
.. to finish the game
Remember 
to write a 
hypothesis on a 
post-it and put it on 
the Theory Overview 
Wheel
Remember 
to write the 
theory letter I 
on the post-it
Remember
 to put two discs 
on the I’s in 
social impact and 
change strategy 
on the Theory Over-
view Wheel
==PAGE:187==
 175
Appendix 22: Theory Cards (12 of 21)
Social Identity Theory
%pplied pVSFleQ case
Why are people eating more healthy things at home 
than they are at work? 
For a problem like this, environmental context 
is valuable to consider, yet explaining it from the 
perspective of Social Identity Theory adds 
another layer of knowledge. The roles which the 
employees take part in influences the behaviours. 
Perhaps the wife is super active and will only eat 
salad, which leads to the husband eating healthier 
at home, and perhaps “relaxing” a bit on the 
health-front at work (or opposite). Or maybe, the 
majority of the employees are eating healthy, 
and in order to not be “outside” of the 
group, the husband eats healthy at work – but 
not at home, where his wife loves pizza and pasta.
*SVce ySuVselJ XS JSVQulaXe a LypSXLesis 
How can your problem be explained by either ingroup behaviour 
or out-group behaviour?
&VieJ descVipXiSR The Social Identity Theory offers insights as to why individuals 
strive to achieve or maintain a positive social identity. It states that individuals act on behalf 
of (in-)group concerns (being part of the group) and not on behalf of personal concerns. 
Individuals, when interacting within a certain group context, acquire different social roles, or 
“levels of self”, which influences their behaviour. The theory distinguishes between interpersonal 
behaviour (two or more individuals acting solely on the grounds of individual concerns and 
characteristics, e.g. wife and husband) and intergroup behaviour (two or more individuals that 
behave solely on the grounds of social concerns and characteristics, e.g. soldiers in an army 
group).
Reference: 
Tajfel, H. & Turner, J., 1979. An Integrative Theory of Intergroup Conflicts. In The Social Psychology of Intergroup Relations. 
Brooks Cole Publishing, pp. 33–47.
J
        A bias relating to the theory on this card is the Ingroup bias: 
       The tendency for people to give preferential treatment to others they perceive to be 
members of their own groups
Out-group
In-group
versus
Social Identity Theory
J
That’s 
alright! Try to go 
and explore the:  
THEORY OF 
SELF-EFFICACY
(N)
Did this theory make it possible for you to 
formulate a hypothesis relevant to your problem?
YES
NO
Have you only applied one or 
two Theory Card colours to 
your problem case? 
YES
NO
Social cate-
gorisation
Positive 
social 
identity
Social roles
Ingroup 
behaviour
Outgroup 
behaviour
Expec-
tations of 
context
Keep these key takeaways in mind when generating ideas in 
your further design work:
Great! 
Then go to the 
End Card
.. to finish the game
Remember 
to write a 
hypothesis on a 
post-it and put it on 
the Theory Overview 
Wheel
Remember 
to write the 
theory letter J 
on the post-it
Remember
 to put a disc on 
the J in social 
impact on the 
Theory Overview 
Wheel
==PAGE:188==
176
Appendix 22: Theory Cards (13 of 21)
Socially Responsible Design Theory
%pplied pVSFleQ case
How can I make more people commute by public 
transport than by car? 
This is a problem in many cities due to limited 
parking spaces, air pollution and heavily trafficked 
rush hours. It is therefore clearly a collective 
concern to solve this problem. Yet, why is it 
then so difficult to solve# Could it be due to less 
comfort in a bus than in a car# Could it be due 
to overcrowded trains? Due to delays in public 
transport? Due to few direct connections, making 
commuting in public transport more of a hassle? 
In this example the collective concern which is the 
aim, is stated clearly – yet the causing personal 
concern is what is to be found.
*SVce ySuVselJ XS JSVQulaXe a LypSXLesis 
How can your problem be explained by the conflict of individual 
concerns versus collective concerns?
&VieJ descVipXiSR The Socially Responsible Design Theory is valuable as it offers 
insights as to why individuals would act in conflict with collective concerns (issues concerning 
the community). It explains why socially desirable behaviour does not always align with per-
sonally desirable behaviour. This is because individuals often act in accordance with personal 
concerns (“I find this important to me©”), and thus in conflict with the collective concerns (“As 
a community, this is important to us..”). Therefore it is important that the designer understands 
the impact of the collective concerns as well being able to make the personal concerns more 
beneficial in order to make the individuals act out desired social behaviours.
Reference: 
Tromp, N., Hekkert, P. & Verbeek, P.-P., 2011. Design for Socially Responsible Behavior: A Classification of Influence Based on 
Intended User Experience. Design Issues, 27(3), pp.3–19.
M
        A bias relating to the problem case on this card is the Reactance bias: 
      The urge to do the opposite of what someone wants you to do out of a need to resist 
a perceived attempt to constrain your freedom of choice
Reasons for Influencing
Ways of Influencing
Goal
Means
Means
Goal
Collective Concerns
Individual Concerns
Socially Responsible Design Theory
M
That’s 
alright! Try to go 
and explore the: 
THEORY OF 
HEURISTICS &
 BIASES (T)
Did this theory make it possible for you to 
formulate a hypothesis relevant to your problem?
YES
NO
Have you only applied one or 
two Theory Card colours to 
your problem case? 
YES
NO
Collective 
concerns
Personal 
concerns
Social 
behaviour
Personal 
behaviour
'SR¾icX 
Social 
Interaction
Keep these key takeaways in mind when generating ideas in 
your further design work:
Great! 
Then go to the 
End Card
.. to finish the game
Remember 
to write a 
hypothesis on a 
post-it and put it on 
the Theory Overview 
Wheel
Remember 
to write the 
theory letter M 
on the post-it
Remember
 to put two discs 
on the M’s in 
change strategy and 
social impact on 
the Theory Overview 
Wheel
==PAGE:189==
 177
Appendix 22: Theory Cards (14 of 21)
Dual Process Theory
%pplied pVSFleQ case
Why do so much impulse shopping happen at 
supermarkets?  
A textbook example of system 1 and system 2 is 
the layout of a supermarket. Walking through the 
supermarket, the consumer makes rational decisions 
on what to buy based on a shopping list and logic 
(system 2). However, once the consumer reaches 
the register, all kinds of candies and sweets are 
placed right next to it. Being tired from finding all the 
groceries, and perhaps calculating the amount it will 
cost, the brain is now more open towards irrational 
decisions (system 1). The consumer knows that 
(s)he has shopped only healthy groceries, yet, since 
the chocolate is placed right next to her/him, (s)he 
might as well buy a small one. 
*SVce ySuVselJ XS JSVQulaXe a LypSXLesis 
How can your problem be explained by addressing 
system 1 or system 2?
&VieJ descVipXiSR Dual Process Theory is a very valuable theory in regards to 
understanding in what ways individuals process information. The theory states that individuals 
have two ways of processing information: Nonconscious reasoning (fast and implicit, system 
1) and conscious reasoning (slow and explicit, system 2). This means that when designing for 
behaviour change, system 1 will take a long time to change as it relates to habits and routines, 
whereas system 2 may change with persuasion or education, as it relates to intentions and 
rationality. Several experts imply that around 90% of all decisions are based on system 1, 
i.e. automatic behaviour and thus this theory is important to have in mind when designing 
products or systems for behaviour change.
Reference: 
Kahneman, D., 2003. Maps of Bounded Rationality: Psychology for Behavioral Economics. American Economic 
Review, 93(5), pp.1449–1475.
S
        A bias relating to the theory on this card is the Restraint bias: 
     The tendency to overestimate one’s ability to show restraint in the face of temptation
intuition
reasoning
system 2
system 1
Dual Process Theory
S
That’s 
alright! Try to go 
and explore the: 
NUDGING 
(H)
Did this theory make it possible for you to 
formulate a hypothesis relevant to your problem?
YES
NO
Have you only applied one or 
two Theory Card colours to 
your problem case? 
YES
NO
Automatic 
behaviour
6e¾ecXiZe 
behaviour
Habits
Routines
Persuasion 
or education
Intentions 
and 
rationality
Keep these key takeaways in mind when generating ideas in 
your further design work:
Great! 
Then go to the 
End Card
.. to finish the game
Remember 
to write a 
hypothesis on a 
post-it and put it on 
the Theory Overview 
Wheel
Remember 
to write the 
theory letter S 
on the post-it
Remember
 to put two discs 
on the S’s in 
habits and 
thinking on the 
Theory Overview 
Wheel
==PAGE:190==
178
Appendix 22: Theory Cards (15 of 21)
Health Belief Model
%pplied pVSFleQ case
How can I make more people use the seatbelt when 
driving? 
Relating to the different aspects of the theory, keep 
in mind: First, people must be able to see the point 
of using a seat belt, i.e. that is his/her own belief that 
it is important. This could be done by highlighting that 
the seatbelt will avoid him/her from being thrown out 
of the window. Second, people must have a positive 
expectation for the recommended action of wearing 
a seatbelt (perceived benefits of action). Third, 
you must ensure that people can easily use the seat 
belt with comfort and without the feeling of being 
uncool (barriers to action). The barrier in this case 
can both be physical (pain from wearing the seatbelt) 
or psychological (others haunting him/her for his/her 
choice).
*SVce ySuVselJ XS JSVQulaXe a LypSXLesis 
How can the terms convincing the user, creating positive expectations, 
or removing barriers for action be used in your problem case?
&VieJ descVipXiSR The Health Belief Model is a theory applicable for explaining 
different factors that should be considered when predicting behaviours. The theory explains 
and predicts behaviour by focusing on the attitudes and beliefs of individuals. This means that 
an individual’s belief, perceived benefits of action and barriers to action, together with self-efficacy 
explain engagement behaviours. Although the theory was developed for predicting health-
promoting behaviours, it can be applied in other contexts as well.
Reference: 
Rosenstock, I., 1974. Historical Origins of the Health Belief Model. Health Education Monographs, 2(4), pp.328–335.
O
        A bias relating to the problem case on this card is the Risk Compensation bias: 
   The tendency to take greater risks when perceived safety increases
Background
Perceptions
Action
Sociodemographic Factors
e.g. education, age, sex, race, 
ethnicity
Expectations
 – perceived benefits of 
action (minus)
– perceived barriers to 
action
– perceived self-efficacy to 
perform action
Threat
 – perceived susceptibility 
(or acceptance of the 
diagnosis)
– perceived severity of 
ill-health condition
Cues to action
 – media
– personal 
influences
– reminders
Behaviour to reduce 
threat based on 
expectations
Health Belief Model
O
That’s 
alright! Try to go 
and explore the: 
SOCIAL COGNITIVE 
THEORY OF 
SELF-REGULATION 
(K)
Did this theory make it possible for you to 
formulate a hypothesis relevant to your problem?
YES
NO
Have you only applied one or 
two Theory Card colours to 
your problem case? 
YES
NO
Attitude
Beliefs
Awareness 
and insight
Convincing 
user
Positive 
expectation
Removing 
barriers to 
action
Keep these key takeaways in mind when generating ideas in 
your further design work:
Great! 
Then go to the 
End Card
.. to finish the game
Remember 
to write a 
hypothesis on a 
post-it and put it on 
the Theory Overview 
Wheel
Remember 
to write the 
theory letter O 
on the post-it
Remember
 to put two discs 
on the O’s in 
selJ-eJficacy and 
attitude on the 
Theory Overview 
Wheel
==PAGE:191==
 179
Appendix 22: Theory Cards (16 of 21)
Theory of Heuristics & Biases
%pplied pVSFleQ case
As mentioned above, the theory cannot be applied to 
describe generic behaviour, yet the individual biases 
are applicable to describe a given problem. 
The Anchoring bias: The tendency to rely 
too heavily, or “anchor”, on one trait or piece of 
information when making decisions. E.g. people 
who have just written a high number (completely 
irrelevant to the case) will give higher numeric 
guesses, than people who have written lower 
numbers. Or the Decoy bias: Preferences for 
either option A or B change in favor of option B 
when option C (which is similar to option B but 
in no way better) is presented. These are only two 
biases explaining different behaviour. Webpages 
such as Wikipedia has long lists of biases that can be 
perused to find relevant biases for your problem
*SVce ySuVselJ XS JSVQulaXe a LypSXLesis 
How can different biases be used to explain your own problem 
case?
&VieJ descVipXiSR The Theory of Heuristics and Biases is valuable when trying 
to explain behaviour in different contexts which otherwise could be seen as inexplicable 
behaviours. This theory distinguishes itself from the other theories described in this card set, 
as it is not as directly applicable in analysing behaviour. Moreso, it is a set of principles which 
can be applied to reduce complex decisions of propability and value. These principles provide 
fast and easy ways of explaining behaviours, and the three most commonly applied heuristics 
are: representativeness, availability of instances and adjustment from an anchor. When using this 
theory it is important to understand that, the theory itself does not provide a clear model for 
describing behaviour, but rather a set of principles to describe common mistakes in behaviour.
References: 
Tversky, A. & Kahneman, D., 1974. Judgment under Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases. Science, 185(4157), pp.1124–1131.
T
        A bias relating to the theory on this card is the Bias Blindspot bias: 
  The tendency to see oneself as less biased than other people, or to be able to identify 
more cognitive biases in others than in oneself
That’s 
alright! Try to go 
and explore the: 
DESIGN BEHAVIOUR 
INTERVENTION 
MODEL (D)
Theory of Heuristics & Biases
T
Did this theory make it possible for you to 
formulate a hypothesis relevant to your problem?
YES
NO
Have you only applied one or 
two Theory Card colours to 
your problem case? 
YES
NO
Automatic 
behaviour
6e¾ecXiZe 
behaviour
Availability
Anchoring
Representa-
tiveness
Common 
mistakes
Keep these key takeaways in mind when generating ideas in 
your further design work:
Great! 
Then go to the 
End Card
.. to finish the game
Remember 
to write a 
hypothesis on a 
post-it and put it on 
the Theory Overview 
Wheel
Remember 
to write the 
theory letter T 
on the post-it
Remember
 to put two discs 
on the T’s in 
principles of be-
haviour and habits 
on the Theory Over-
view Wheel
==PAGE:192==
180
Appendix 22: Theory Cards (17 of 21)
How Habits Work
%pplied pVSFleQ case
How can I change a person’s habit about eating cake 
every day in the late afternoon?
What is the routine in question? 
What’s the cue for this routine? Is it hunger? 
Boredom? Low blood sugar? 
What’s the reward? The cookie itself? The 
temporary distraction? Socializing with colleagues? 
In this way you can break down the habit and start 
to investigate what causes the habit and maybe 
you can change it. So if the cue for the routine 
is temporary distraction, then maybe replace the 
need for cake with a walk around the block.
*SVce ySuVselJ XS JSVQulaXe a LypSXLesis 
How can the terms cue, routine, or reward explain your current 
problem? What trigger is missing?
&VieJ descVipXiSR How Habits Work is a valuable theory when trying to explain 
how habits influence behaviours and decisions. The theory states that each habit refers to a 
loop, consisting of a cue, a routine, and a reward. By identifying these key elements in any habit, 
an understanding of the habit in question becomes available in terms of isolating the cue 
triggering a certain behaviour. As a result, the theory gives an understanding to the designer 
of how habits operate in order to gain the power over it and change a desired behaviour.
Reference: 
Duhigg, C., 2014. How Habits Work. In The Power of Habit. Why We Do What We Do in Life and Business. Random House 
Trade Paperbacks, pp. 275–286.
R
        A bias relating to the theory on this card is the Loss Aversion bias: 
     The disutility of giving up an object is greater than the utility associated with acquiring it
routine
reward
cue
Habits
That’s 
alright! Try to go 
and explore the: 
SOCIALLY RESPON-
SIBLE DESIGN 
THEORY (M)
How Habits Work
R
Did this theory make it possible for you to 
formulate a hypothesis relevant to your problem?
YES
NO
Have you only applied one or 
two Theory Card colours to 
your problem case? 
YES
NO
Automatic 
behaviour
-R¾ueRciRg 
habits
Cue
Routine
Reward
Trigger
Keep these key takeaways in mind when generating ideas in 
your further design work:
Great! 
Then go to the 
End Card
.. to finish the game
Remember 
to write a 
hypothesis on a 
post-it and put it on 
the Theory Overview 
Wheel
Remember 
to write the 
theory letter R 
on the post-it
Remember
 to put two discs 
on the R’s in habits 
and change strategy 
on the Theory Overview 
Wheel
==PAGE:193==
 181
Appendix 22: Theory Cards (18 of 21)
Self-determination Theory
%pplied pVSFleQ case
How can I get people to recycle bottles?
Sustainability is a topic known to cause 
discussions and different opinions. People that 
are intrinsically motivated to recycle 
bottles, believe that it is for a good cause and see 
enjoyment in knowing that they do something 
good for mother earth. Maybe they have reached 
this intrinsic motivation by watching a movie or 
reading a book about plastic in the oceans. People 
that are not intrinsically motivated, i.e. see no 
enjoyment in taking the gross and sticky bottles 
to specific plastic sorting cans need extrinsic 
motivation instead. This could be in the form of 
a psysical bait, such as an economic prize.
&VieJ descVipXiSR The Self-determination Theory is valuable when dealing with 
problems relating to motivation. The theory offers insights into two kinds of motivation: 
Intrinsic motivation (an individual’s interest and enjoyment in the activity or task itself) and 
extrinsic motivation (activities that are not interesting and therefore an individual must be 
motivated externally). Motivation is a part of many other theories describing behaviour, yet 
what this theory states is that people need to witness their own competences (learn skills), 
connection (experience a sense of belonging), and autonomy (feel in control of own behaviours 
and goals) in order to change behaviour.
Reference: 
Deci, E.L. & Ryan, R.M., 2000. Self-Determination Theory and the Facilitation of Intrinsic Motivation, Social Development, and 
Well-Being. American Psychologist, 55(1), pp.68–78.
U
        A bias relating to the theory on this card is the Extrinsic Incentives bias: 
     When people view others as having (situational) extrinsic motivations, but (dispositional) 
intrinsic motivations for oneself
*SVce ySuVselJ XS JSVQulaXe a LypSXLesis 
How can the terms intrinsic motivation or extrinsic motivation be 
used to explain your own problem?
Non-self Determined
Self-Determined
Behaviour
Motivation
Regulatory 
Styles
Perceived 
Locus of 
Causality
Relevant 
Regulatory 
Processes
Amotivation
Non-regulation
Extrinsic motivation
Intrinsic motivation
Intrinsic Regulation
Integrated
Regulation
Identified 
Regulation
Introjected
Regulation
External 
Regulation
Impersonal
External
Somewhat 
External
Somewhat 
Internal
Internal
Internal
Nonintentional, 
Nonvaluing, 
Incompetence,
Lack of control
Compliance, 
External 
Rewards and 
Punishments
Self-control, 
Ego-involvement, 
Internal Rewards 
and Punishments
Personal 
Importance, 
Conscious 
Valuing
Congruence, 
Awareness, 
Synthesis with 
Self
Interest, 
Enjoyment, 
Inherent 
Satisfaction
Self-determination Theory
U
That’s 
alright! Try to go 
and explore the: 
ELABORATION 
LIKELIHOOD 
MODEL (G)
Did this theory make it possible for you to 
formulate a hypothesis relevant to your problem?
YES
NO
Have you only applied one or 
two Theory Card colours to 
your problem case? 
YES
NO
Intrinsic 
motivation
Extrinsic 
motivation 
Competences
Experience 
a  sense of 
belogning
User 
control
Amotivation
Keep these key takeaways in mind when generating ideas in 
your further design work:
Great! 
Then go to the 
End Card
.. to finish the game
Remember 
to write a 
hypothesis on a 
post-it and put it on 
the Theory Overview 
Wheel
Remember 
to write the 
theory letter U 
on the post-it
Remember
 to put a disc on 
the U in 
motivation on the 
Theory Overview 
Wheel
==PAGE:194==
182
Appendix 22: Theory Cards (19 of 21)
Theory of Interpersonal Behaviour
%pplied pVSFleQ case
How can I get fewer people to drive too fast? 
First, start by asking yourself: What root cause do 
you wish to address? Is it that people have good 
intentions of driving safely and obeying the 
speed limits, yet have bad habits of getting late 
out of the door, so they end up driving too fast 
on the way to work? Or is the root cause that 
people intend to drive within the speed limit, 
yet have a habit of getting irritated when cars 
ahead of them drives too slow, and therefore ends 
up speeding and overtaking the car? Analysing the 
problem in this way can help you determine the 
behaviour you want to target.
*SVce ySuVselJ XS JSVQulaXe a LypSXLesis 
How can the terms intentions and current habits be used to 
explain your own problem?
&VieJ descVipXiSR The Theory of Interpersonal Behaviour is an all-around theory 
highly applicable for describing several factors influencing behaviour. However, the theory 
relates mainly to problems caused by habitual decision-making. It states that there are two 
routes which influences behaviour: Intentions and habits. Intentions are the deliberate part 
(conscious thinking) of decision-making processes, whereas habits are the non-deliberate part 
(nonconscious thinking). Intentions are created by attitude, social factors and affect whereas 
habits are created by frequency of past behaviour.
Reference: 
Triandis, H.C., 1977. Interpersonal Behavior, Monterey, USA: Brooks/Cole Pub. Co.
Q
        A bias relating to the problem case on this card is the Gambler’s Fallacy bias: 
     The tendency to think that future probabilities are altered by past events, 
when in reality they are unchanged.
Behaviour
Actual 
behavioural 
control
Habits
Intention
Frequency of 
past behaviour
Affect
Social factors
Attitude
Knowledge
Beliefs about 
outcomes
Evaluation 
of outcomes
Norms
Roles
Self-concept
Emotions
Theory of Interpersonal Behaviour
Q
That’s 
alright! Try to go 
and explore the: 
FOGG’S 
BEHAVIOUR 
MODEL (B)
Did this theory make it possible for you to 
formulate a hypothesis relevant to your problem?
YES
NO
Have you only applied one or 
two Theory Card colours to 
your problem case? 
YES
NO
Conscious 
Thinking
Habits
Facilitating 
conditions
Intentions
Decision
-making
Nonconscious 
thinking
Keep these key takeaways in mind when generating ideas in 
your further design work:
Great! 
Then go to the 
End Card
.. to finish the game
Remember 
to write a 
hypothesis on a 
post-it and put it on 
the Theory Overview 
Wheel
Remember 
to write the 
theory letter Q 
on the post-it
Remember
 to put two discs 
on the Q’s in 
thinking and 
habits on the Theory 
Overview Wheel
==PAGE:195==
 183
Appendix 22: Theory Cards (20 of 21)
Theory of Planned Behaviour
%pplied pVSFleQ case
Why do so many people buy an iPhone?
Try to think like the user: Your attitude thinks it 
makes good sense for you to buy a new smartphone 
and due to the subjective norms, your 
friends will definitely expect you to buy an Apple 
iPhone. Further, your perceived behavioural 
control makes you trust that, you are capable of 
understanding all the new features and using them 
well, since you have had a smartphone before. 
*SVce ySuVselJ XS JSVQulaXe a LypSXLesis 
How can your own problem be explained by the terms attitude, 
perceived behavioural control, or subjective norms?
&VieJ descVipXiSR The Theory of Planned Behaviour is a theory applicable when 
trying to explain why individuals behave as they do. The theory states that behaviour can 
be explained by an individuals intention, attitudes (the individual’s belief on how a certain 
behaviour makes a positive or negative contribution to the individual’s life), the subjective 
norms (social network, cultural norms etc.), and perceived behavioural control (how hard/easy 
is it to display certain behaviour). It is a highly valuable when trying to analyse the different 
aspects causing certain behaviours.
Reference: 
Ajzen, I., 1991. The Theory of Planned Behavior. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 50(2), pp.179–211.
P
        A bias relating to the problem case on this card is the Choice Supportive bias: 
    The tendency to remember one’s choices as better than they actually were
Attitude 
Toward the 
Behaviour
Subjective 
Norm
Perceived 
Behavioural 
Control
Intention
Behaviour
Theory of Planned Behaviour
P
That’s 
alright! Try to go 
and explore the: 
 
LOUGHBOROUGH 
MODEL (C)
Did this theory make it possible for you to 
formulate a hypothesis relevant to your problem?
YES
NO
Have you only applied one or 
two Theory Card colours to 
your problem case? 
YES
NO
6e¾ecXiZe 
behaviour
Rational 
decision
-making
Attitude
Subjective 
norms
User 
control
Intention
Keep these key takeaways in mind when generating ideas in 
your further design work:
Great! 
Then go to the 
End Card
.. to finish the game
Remember 
to write a 
hypothesis on a 
post-it and put it on 
the Theory Overview 
Wheel
Remember 
to write the 
theory letter P 
on the post-it
Remember
 to put three discs 
on the P’s in think-
ing and attitude and 
selJ-eJficacy on the 
Theory Overview 
Wheel
==PAGE:196==
184
Appendix 22: Theory Cards (21 of 21)
Theory of Self-efficacy
%pplied pVSFleQ case
Why do some people learn to ski faster than others? 
Imagine that you have two individuals whom 
both must learn how to ski. 
Imagine that they both have the same amount of 
sports talent, they are taught on the same slopes, in 
the same weather – i.e. all conditions are the same. 
Why do one person learn to ski faster than the 
other? 
If one person believes much more in his/her own 
ability to ski than the other, (s)he will probably: 1. 
put a lot of effort into learning how to ski, and 
2. have a more positive attitude towards the 
teaching and thus understand it faster. This is how 
self-efficacy can affect behaviours.
*SVce ySuVselJ XS JSVQulaXe a LypSXLesis 
How can your own problem be explained by increasing a persons 
self-efficacy (confidence in one’s own abilities)#
&VieJ descVipXiSR The Theory of Self-efficacy is valuable when trying to explain 
behaviours relating to personal issues. The theory explains why some people put a lot of 
effort into certain actions, whereas some don’t even try. It states that whether a behaviour 
will be initiated, how much effort will be expended for this and how long it will be sustained, 
behaviour is determined by an individual’s expectations of personal efficacy. Thus the higher 
the self-efficacy, the more an individual believes that they can perform a certain task. This 
theory is therefore great when trying to determine personal factors of behaviour.
Reference: 
Bandura, A., 1977. Self-efficacy: Toward a Unifying Theory of Behavioral Change. Psychological Review, 84(2), pp.191¯215.
N
        A bias relating to the problem case on this card is the Selective Perception bias: 
   The tendency for expectations to affect perception
Person
Behaviour
Outcome
Efficacy 
expectations
Outcome
expectations
Theory of Self-efficacy
N
That’s 
alright! Try to go 
and explore the: 
TRANSTHEORETICAL 
MODEL (F)
Did this theory make it possible for you to 
formulate a hypothesis relevant to your problem?
YES
NO
Have you only applied one or 
two Theory Card colours to 
your problem case? 
YES
NO
Increase 
cSRfideRce
Effort
Attitude
Increase 
capability
Expectations
Belief
Keep these key takeaways in mind when generating ideas in 
your further design work:
Great! 
Then go to the 
End Card
.. to finish the game
Remember 
to write a 
hypothesis on a 
post-it and put it on 
the Theory Overview 
Wheel
Remember 
to write the 
theory letter N 
in the square on the 
post-it so you can 
backtrack your 
decisions
Remember
 to put two 
discs on the N’s in 
selJ-eJficacy and 
attitude on the 
Theory Overview 
Wheel
==PAGE:197==
 185
Appendix 23: Predetermined chain of Theory Cards
E
U
G
L
A
S
H
J
N
F
Q
B
I
P
C
R
M
T
D
O
K
Attitude
Thinking
Change strategy
Motivation
Social Impact
Self-efficacy
Habits
Principles of behaviour
Chain of Theory Cards
Visualisation of the chain of Theory Cards (the letters) and their relating behavioural topics (the coloured dots).
==PAGE:198==
186
Appendix 24: Theory Overview Wheel
ATTITUDE
THINKING
CHANGE
STRATEGY
MOTIVATION
SOCIAL IMPACT
PRINCIPLES
of
BEHAVIOUR
HABITS
SELF-EFFICACY
N
A
A
A
B
C
D
D
E
E
F
F
G
G
G
I
J
K
L
M
K
L
M
O
P
T
O
P
U
Q
R
S
P
Q
S
Theory of Influence
Fogg’s Behaviour Model
Loughborough Model
Design Behaviour Intervention Model
AIDS Risk Reduction Model
Transtheoretical Model
Elaboration Likelihood Model
Nudging
Social Ecological Model
Social Identity Theory
Social Cognitive Theory of Self-regulation
Social Cognitive Theory
Socially Responsible Design Theory
Theory of Self-efficacy
Health Belief Model
Theory of Planned Behaviour
Theory of Interpersonal Behaviour
How Habits Works
Dual Process Theory
Theory of Heuristics & Biases
Self-determination Theory
 
Individual behaviour
S
ocial behaviour
Behaviour change
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
J
K
L
M
N
O
P
Q
R
S
T
U
Hypotheses:
Other considerations:
THEORIES
G
H
K
I
N
R
Behaviour change
Social behaviour
Individual behaviour
B
D
F
G
H
H
H
T
==PAGE:199==
 187
Appendix 25: Transformation of keyword into topics
Key words
from Literature Review 
(chapter 2, table 2.1, 2.2 
and 2.3)
Individual behaviour
 Theory topics
from The Super Cool 
Analysis Tool (chapter 6, 
section 6.6.1)
Personal issues
Self-efficacy
Motivation
Attitude
Attitude
Intentions (conscious)
Thinking
 Habitual and routines 
(nonconscious)
Habits
Social behaviour
Social impact
Social impact
Environmental interaction
Social impact
Behaviour change
Persuasion principles
Principles of behaviour
Direct or Indirect Persuasion
Principles of behaviour
Change timing
Change strategy
Control of Persuasion
Change strategy
==PAGE:200==
188
Appendix 26: Types of application
Outcome driven
Output driven
plan and prepare
discover
define
develop
deliver
Used as a mean for 
communication, to convince 
customers of the approach for 
the project
Used as a mean for discovering 
the potential of behavioural 
design, to determine if 
behavioural design should be 
applied in the project
Used as a mean for defining 
and understanding the targeted 
problem behaviour, to clarify 
possible project-goals
2
Used as a mean for 
discovering the potential of 
behavioural design, to realise 
potential project focuses 
Used as a mean for defining
 the targeted problem 
behaviour, to determine the 
target group
1
3
==PAGE:201==
 189
Appendix 27: Final demonstration of the Super Cool Analysis Tool
Final 
Demonstration
Duration
Aim
Tasks
Results
Participants
2 D&I students
Initial
90 minutes
To view the Super Cool 
Analysis Tool in action 
and see if the require-
ments are fulfilled
Play the Super Cool 
Analysis Tool
Setting
May 22nd,
Copenhagen
Behavioural design 
knowledge
An indication of the 
issues, factors and 
links that need more 
detailed evaluation
As the final activity in the support tool development a final demonstration of the Super Cool Analysis Tool was 
conducted. 
In the final demonstration of the Super Cool Analysis Tool the game was played entirely indenpendently by the 
players, without any interruptions, explanations, or clarifications from the inventors. The results from the final 
demonstration were as follows: 
• The Guide Book was through all game steps open on the “How to prepare and play the game” page 
(page 5). 
• The total time of the game was 1 hour and 22 minutes. The individual Theory Cards took between 
8-12 minutes to go through (as allowed by the hour glass). It was observed that the 10 minute hour 
glass did in fact not last 10 minutes, but differed between lasting five minutes and 20 minutes. Thus, 
the hour glass was in fact not used, yet the players managed to spend approximately 10 minutes per 
Theory Card anyway. 
• The players browsed through a total of four Theory Cards. It was observed that the latter Theory Cards 
were processed faster than the first ones, due to an understanding of the flow and recognition of tasks. 
• The task of creating hypotheses appeared natural and intuitive for the players. Further, it appeared that 
the purpose of formulating hypotheses were well-understood by the players, i.e. they saw the benefit 
that formulating hypotheses brings. 
• One of the players participating in the final demonstration had previously in the support tool 
development been part of one of the workshops in which the basic concept of the Super Cool 
Analysis Tool was tested. An observation from this was that the player could remember one of the 
behavioural theories applied in the workshop that tested the basic concept, indicating that this designer 
had in fact started to build up a theoretical back-catalogue of behavioural theories. 
==PAGE:202==
190
Appendix 28: Qualtrics survey suggestion (1 of 7)
==PAGE:203==
 191
Appendix 28: Qualtrics survey suggestion (2 of 7)
==PAGE:204==
192
Appendix 28: Qualtrics survey suggestion (3 of 7)
==PAGE:205==
 193
Appendix 28: Qualtrics survey suggestion (4 of 7)
==PAGE:206==
194
Appendix 28: Qualtrics survey suggestion (5 of 7)
==PAGE:207==
 195
Appendix 28: Qualtrics survey suggestion (6 of 7)
==PAGE:208==
196
Appendix 28: Qualtrics survey suggestion (7 of 7)
==PAGE:209==
 197
Appendix 29: Suggested participants to contact with survey
Company name
(or relevant persons)
Country
E-mail
No.
1
2
Belgium
Nascom
info@nascom.be
Philips Design
The Netherlands
thomas.visser@philips.com
3
Design Innovation Group
hello@designinnovationgroup.nl
4
BloomReach (Hippo)
hippo-sales@bloomreach.com
5
Noldus Consulting
Formula to ﬁll out at http://noldusconsulting.
-
com/form/do-you-want-actionable-results
6
7
Kristina Niedderer
k.niedderer@wlv.ac.uk 
Behaviour.Design
hello@behaviour.design
8
SUE Amsterdam
carmen@sueamsterdam.com 
hello@sueamsterdam.com
9
Nynke Tromp
n.tromp@tudelft.nl 
10
The United Kingdom
The Hunting Dynasty
lina@thehuntingdynasty.com
london@thehuntingdynasty.com
11
The United Kingdom
The United Kingdom
The Behavioural Insights Team
info@bi.team
The United Kingdom
The United Kingdom
12
13
14
Behavioural Design Lab
(Warwick Business School and the Design Council)
behaviouraldesign@wbs.ac.uk
Dan Lockton 
dan@danlockton.co.uk 
Tracy Bhamra
t.bhamra@lboro.ac.uk
15
16
17
Denmark
Denmark
Denmark
Denmark
Denmark
Denmark
Denmark
Denmark
Denmark
18
19
20
21
22
23
Operate
ko@operate.dk
operate@operate.dk
Is It a Bird
rasmus@isitabird.dk
anna@isitabird.dk
The Behaviour Bureau
info@behaviourbureau.com
iNudgeYou
mia@inudgeyou.com 
Delta - Idemolab
mlo@idemolab.dk
The Nudging Company
maria@thenudgingcompany.com
/KL.7
Decision Design
KRUKOW
sebastian@kl7.dk 
thor@decisiondesign.dk 
sille@krukow.net
The Netherlands
The Netherlands
The Netherlands
The Netherlands
The Netherlands
The Netherlands
The Netherlands
==PAGE:210==
198
Appendix 30: Survey design
Questions
Rationale
1.
When seeking to describe, analyse, and change 
behaviour, what are the 3-5 main behavioural theories 
that you use? (By use we mean theories actively referred 
to as a part of the behavioural design process)
To get insight in the most applied behavioural theories 
in regards to describing and analysing behaviour 
independently from this thesis categorisation of 
models of behaviour and theories of change.
Behavioural theories
No.
Behavioural Design Challenges
Project Staging
2.
How do you select the behavioural theories mentioned 
in the previous question? 
To get insight in the way the companies select 
theories in their behavioural design projects.
3.
What is the reasoning behind your way of selecting 
theories?
To obtain deeper insight into their reasoning of the 
selection of behavioural theories. 
4.
When a new employee is hired into the company you 
work at, are there any behavioural theories that he/she 
must learn? If yes, what theories?
To get insight into the companies’ expectations of new 
employees initial knowledge.
5.
Have you faced any of the following challenges in your 
behavioural design career? If yes, how often?
To get insight in day-to-day challenges that are 
common for all behavioural design project types.
6.
Based on the challenges mentioned above, which of the 
following features would you find meaningful and 
valuable to be operationalised in a behavioural design 
tool? 
To get insight into what the companies distinguish as 
valueable and meaningful, as well as what they find 
worthless.
7.
Can you please elaborate on your answers for which you 
answered "No, I would not find this meaningful nor 
valuable"?
To understand the rationale of the above asked 
question.
8.
How is your work within the different phases of a 
behavioural design project normally composed? I.e. 
how do you work within the different stages?
To get insight in the context that the tool must be a 
part of.
9.
What design tool/methods do you most often apply in 
the planning phase?
10.
What design tool/methods do you most often apply in 
the discover phase?
11.
What design tool/methods do you most often apply in 
the define phase?
12.
What parts of the behavioural design process do your 
projects most often consist of? 
13.
What is your most important criteria for project success?
To get insight in how project success is defined in 
order to take this into account when developing the 
tool.
14.
On the following scale from "Never" to "Always", what 
would you say is most typical for your behavioural 
design projects? 
To get insight in regards to being able to distinguish 
whether large theory inclusion has an effect on project 
success or not.
To get insight in the context that the tool must be a 
part of.
To get insight in the context that the tool must be a 
part of.
To get insight in the context that the tool must be a 
part of.
To get insight in the context that the tool must be a 
part of.
==PAGE:211==
