==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Liner Shipping Network Optimization
with Exact Modelling of Transshipment Time
Kasper Torp Steﬀensen (s123690)
Kongens Lyngby 2017
==PAGE:2==
DTU Management Engineering
Department of Management Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Produktionstorvet Building 424
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 4800
www.man.dtu.dk
Supervisors
Stefan Røpke
David Franz Koza
==PAGE:3==
Summary
In this thesis, a new model for the liner shipping network design problem is presented.
The new model includes time indices, which make it possible to track the time spent
on transshipment.
This is important for constructing realistic solutions whithout
a violation of the maximum transit time. Additionally, the model has the positive
feature of allowing more complex service design than previous models for the liner
shipping network design problem have done. To solve the problem, a column gener-
ation procedure is implemented, including a label-setting algorithm for solving the
associated subproblem. In addition to this, preprocessing techniques are suggested
to optimize the performance of the label-setting algorithm. Among other things, this
includes tightening of the time limits at ports, which is shown to be especially effi-
cient for larger data instances. In order to obtain integer solutions and improve lower
bounds, cutting and branching methods are implemented as well. Both methods are
efficient in regard to increasing the lower bound, but less efficient in terms of reduc-
ing fractionality. The cutting and branching techniques are combined with column
generation in order to set up both, a Branch and Price algorithm, and a Branch Cut
and Price algorithm. The performance of the algorithms are tested in various settings
on LINER-LIB data instances. By using the Branch and Price algorithm, an optimal
solution is found for the Baltic instance after 2 hours and 17 minutes. In general,
the implemented methods performed well on the small instances. For the large in-
stances there is, however, still room for improvement. Especially the performance of
column generation seems to be a bottleneck. Not because of the subproblem, which
is quickly solved by the label setting algorithm, but rather due to considerable time
consumption when solving the restricted master problem. The broad testing in this
thesis shows several efficient techniques, but also clarifies which methods should be
improved in order to fully benefit from the presented model’s ability to construct
realistic, flexible and profitable liner shipping networks.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This master’s thesis was completed at the Department of Management Engineering at
the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the requirements for acquiring
a master’s degree in Mathematical Modelling and Computation. It accounts for a
total of 35 ECTS points.
Kongens Lyngby, July 2, 2017
Kasper Torp Steffensen (s123690)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my deepest gratitude to my supervisors Stefan Røpke and
David Franz Koza for their support and guidance throughout the thesis. At all times,
they have been providing me with constructive feedback, which has been invaluable
for my work.
Especially I enjoyed our regular meetings, which have always been
the ground for interesting discussions. Not only has this made the project period
very educational, but also exceptionally exciting. Without their contribution, this
project would not have been possible.
A special thanks also goes to Rasmus Ø.
Mikkelsen, Berit H. Larsen and Laura H. Andersen, who have given me highly valuable
feedback on the report, and to Carolin-Therese Wolff for her continuous support and
the improvement of the literary content. All of this has enhanced the work immensely.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Summary
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
2
Liner Shipping Network Design
5
2.1
The Liner Shipping Business
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Network Design Components
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
The Liner Shipping Network Design Problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.4
Literature Review
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.5
Contribution
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3
Time Index Graph
13
3.1
Vertices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2
Arcs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.3
Complexity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.4
Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.5
Solution Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4
Column Generation
21
4.1
Costs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.2
The Master Problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.3
The Commodity Path Pricing Problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.4
Column Generation Procedure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5
Label-Setting Algorithm
33
5.1
Time Index Modification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.2
Labels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.3
Feasibility & Dominance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.4
Tightening Time Limits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.5
Runs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
5.6
Forward Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.7
Backward Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.8
Determining Runs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
6
Cutting & Branching
47
6.1
Valid Inequalities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
6.2
Branching . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
6.3
Branch and Price . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
7
Computational Tests
59
7.1
Data Instances
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
7.2
Runs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
7.3
Column Generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
7.4
Cutting
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
7.5
Branching Strategy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
7.6
Search Strategy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
7.7
Branch and Bound . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
7.8
Convergence Criterion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
7.9
Branch Cut and Price
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
83
7.10 Solution Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
84
8
Conclusions and Future Work
91
A
Data Fitting
95
Bibliography
99
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
For thousands of years, humans have utilized the unique qualities of upthrust to
carry goods by sea.
As stated in Archimedes principle: “Any object, wholly or
partially immersed in a fluid, is buoyed up by a force equal to the weight of the
fluid displaced by the object.” This makes vessels ideal for carrying large amounts of
goods and the scientific phenomenon has also been a continuous incitement to develop
increasingly larger vessels. This very ability might be one of the main reasons why
the maritime industry is such an important part of cross-border networks, which are
vital to modern global supply chains. In 2015, world seaborne trade was estimated
to account for over 80 per cent of total merchandise trade, and around 60 per cent in
terms of value (UNCTAD, 2016). The standardization of containers in 1961 served as
a catalyst of intermodalism because with standardized containers came the ability to
efficiently load cargo directly from one means of transport to another. In the article
The Economist (2013), it is said that “new research suggests that the container has
been more of a driver of globalization than all trade agreements in the past 50 years
taken together.” Figure 1.1 shows a steady increase in containerized cargo over the
last few decades.
In terms of value, about 60 per cent of the goods transported
internationally by sea are carried by liner vessels, of which a significant part are
container ships (World Shipping Council, 2017).
1980
1985
1990
1995
2000
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
0
500
1000
1500
2000
Figure 1.1: Container cargo loaded in international seaborne trade (millions of tons)
by years. Based on data from: UNCTAD, 2016.
All together, it is fair to say that liner shipping has a crucial role in globalization
==PAGE:12==
2
1 Introduction
and modern world trade. With the importance of liner shipping in world trade and the
increasing volumes of containerized cargo comes a demand for more efficient planning.
Carriers, the liner vessel operators, must design their network of vessel routes, so that
they can meet the shipping demands in the best way possible while minimizing their
costs. Decisions such as which types of vessels to use, which ports to visit and how
fast to sail between them are examples of important decisions the carriers face in the
search for a profitable liner shipping network.
Figure 1.2: Cost structure of Maersk Line (Maersk, 2013).
Figure 1.2 shows the cost structure at Maersk Line, the largest company in the
liner shipping industry.
Here, the importance of the aforementioned decisions is
underlined as the dominating categories are: Vessel, Terminal and Bunker costs,
which include expenses such as time charter of leased vessels, port fees and bunker
(fuel) cost, respectively.
If a certain distance is sailed with the same ship at two different speeds, the voyage
with the lower speed will be less expensive than the other, as less bunker is consumed.
This phenomenon is referred to as slow steaming and it is an efficient way of reducing
the costs associated bunker consumption. However, an optimal network design is not
necessarily one which only prioritizes the cost reduction, but also considers the ship-
pers’ needs. In Notteboom (2004), which provides a qualitative analysis of network
constellations, it is concluded that: “The optimal network design is not only function
of carrier-specific operational factors, but also of shippers’ needs (for transit time
and other service elements) and of shippers’ willingness to pay for a better service.”
Another important benefit of slow steaming is the reduced amount of CO2 emissions
it causes. Cariou (2011) has investigated this positive effect of slow steaming by com-
paring real life data from 2008 and 2010. This showed a decrease from 170 million
tonnes of CO2 to 151 million tonnes of CO2 due to slow steaming and the reduced
amount of bunker consumption it had caused. According to International Maritime
Organization (2015) “international shipping emitted 796 million tonnes of CO2 in
2012, which accounts for no more than about 2.2% of the total emission volume for
that year.” As mentioned above, the liner shipping industry composes a significant
part of the maritime industry and continues to increase. Because it composes a sig-
nificant part of the maritime industry, which again has a significant impact on the
==PAGE:13==
1 Introduction
3
total emission volume, reducing CO2 emissions within the liner shipping industry is
highly relevant for climate development.
In Figure 1.3, the amount of CO2 emission is shown for different means of trans-
port. It can be seen that container ships of type Triple-E, Maersk’s largest vessels,
emits significantly less than train, trucks and planes.
Figure 1.3: Grams of CO2 emitted by transporting 1 tonne of goods 1 km (Maersk,
2017).
In terms of low CO2 emission, the container ships’ ability to carry large volumes
of goods at once is a key feature.
Hence, for container ships to be environment
friendly, the capacity of the vessel must also be utilized well, which brings us back to
liner shipping network design. Capacity utilization is a vital part of network design
which follows naturally from the desire to reduce the cost of a network. Because
the financial benefits are positively correlated with the environmental benefits, these
benefits together form a dual incitement to solve the liner shipping network design
problem.
In this thesis, a new model for the liner shipping network design problem is pre-
sented.
The new model includes explicit transshipment time which is important
in terms of determining realistic solutions. It will be solved using various solution
methods from the field of operations research, including a column generation proce-
dure, a label-setting algorithm, together with cutting and branching methods. The
performance of the implemented methods are tested on various instances from the
benchmark data set LINER-LIB, which will be explained during the thesis. Further-
more, an analysis of the constructed networks is provided, where the effect of the
model and methods are investigated by making comparisons to previous work on the
liner shipping network design problem.
==PAGE:14==
4
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 2
Liner Shipping
Network Design
This chapter serves as an introduction to the Liner Shipping Network Design Problem
(LSNDP) by explaining the most essential parts of this problem. This introduction
includes industry insight, a general description of important concepts and description
of the terminology. Further, the problem domain of LSNDP is explained and a review
of existing research contributions within the field of LSNDP is given. As a part of the
literature review, an overview of methods and computational results is provided. This
overview is presented separately for articles which have considered the benchmark
data set LINER-LIB and for articles which have not considered LINER-LIB.
2.1
The Liner Shipping Business
It all begins with a demand for transportation of goods from one location to another.
The ones in possession of such a demand are called shippers, and the ones fulfilling
the demand are referred to as carriers. For obvious reasons it is desirable for shippers
to have their goods transported at low cost. However, they might also have other pri-
orities, such as requirements regarding transit time, the containers’ travel time from
origin to destination port and requirements regarding the carriers reliability. The
carriers will meanwhile aim for optimizing profitable networks of shipping routes on
which cargo can flow. This way, the liner shipping business is quite comparable with
public transport, where trains and busses also operate on networks of fixed routes
in order to satisfy a demand for traveling from one location to another. Just like
in public transport, it is not necessarily possible to travel directly from origin to
destination without shifts. Moving containers from one vessel to another is referred
to as transshipment. Commonly, carriers design their networks such that they have
direct travels over long distances between main ports, e.g. placed in different conti-
nents. Smaller vessels can then sail back and forth between the main port and smaller
surrounding ports for regional distribution. In the following, these concepts will be
further explained in the description of the most essential elements in liner shipping
network design.
==PAGE:16==
6
2 Liner Shipping Network Design
2.2
Network Design Components
Demands
The demands in LSNDP are estimations of the shippers need for trans-
portation of cargo at a certain level of service (maximum transit time). Hence, the
demands are estimated quantities of containers shipped from an origin port to a des-
tination port within a certain time frame. Furthermore, the demands have a revenue
value which is an estimation of what the carriers can earn from the associated product.
Because the demands are estimated values, the quality of a solution will of course
be highly dependent on the quality of the forecast of demand. The forecast of de-
mand is, however, not considered in thesis because the benchmark data LINER-LIB
already includes such demand data. The demands in LINER-LIB are given in weekly
frequencies.
Vessel Classes
The capacity of a vessel is one of its main features. Another is its
speed properties. Besides having minimum and maximum speed, a vessel has a certain
design speed which is the specific speed, that the vessesl’s design has been optimized
for. It is an important factor when calculating the vessel’s bunker consumption and
cost. The draft of a vessel is the distance from the water level to the bottom of the
vessel, and it is a critical factor in regards to whether a vessel can sail through a
certain canal or dock in a certain port. It is noted that the draft can vary depending
on the weight of the load being carried, but the draft is assumed to be fixed values
in this thesis. If it is feasible for a vessel to sail through a canal or dock at a port,
a fee must be paid if the vessel does so. These costs vary between different types
of vessels. When solving LSNDP, the fleet will be clustered into vessel classes with
vessels sharing the same features in the above mentioned categories. Depending on
the instance, only a certain amount of vessels will available for deployment for each
class.
Ports
The ports are the link between transportation by sea and inland distribution.
Furthermore, some ports serve as hubs where containers can be transshipped from
one vessel to another.
If cargo is being loaded or unloaded, either as part of a
transshipment or when connecting to inland transportation, an operational cost is
paid per unit for the service. Also, when docking at a port, a port call cost must be
paid. This includes a fixed cost and an additional cost depending on the size/capacity
of the vessel. Both, the port call costs, and operational costs vary, hence decisions
regarding which ports to call and use as hubs for transshipment are important in the
LSNDP. Lastly, it is not necessarily possible for a vessel to call a certain port, as
vessel requirements, such as maximum draft, must be fulfilled.
Legs
A leg is a specific route for sailing directly from one port to another. In theory,
many legs between ports could be considered. However, the purpose of LSNDP is to
construct a network by combinatorial considerations of already chosen direct sailing
routes, not to decide on the actual direct sailing routes. Nonetheless, multiple legs
==PAGE:17==
2.2 Network Design Components
7
from one port to another can exist, as vessels of different classes might be forced to
take different routes, e.g. due to canal restrictions. An example of this is shown in
Figure 2.1.
Dakar
Djibouti
Suez Canal
Figure 2.1: Illustration of two possible legs from Dakar to Djibouti. A vessel which
can sail through the Suez canal would use the blue leg as this is shorter. The red leg
has a larger distance, but is used as an alternative if the vessel cannot sail through
the Suez Canal.
Services
A service is a certain route on which a carrier operates on. It is defined by
a sequence of port calls which follows a published schedule (Brouer et al., 2014b). The
schedules are constructed such that services are performed in a loop with a certain
frequency. According to Brouer et al. (2014a), weekly frequencies are considered as
industry standards, and therefore this frequency is used in this thesis as well. When
services have weekly frequencies, it means that if a service includes a departure time
for a certain port, a vessel will leave at that time every week. A port could have
multiple departures during a week, but then each of the departure times would be
the same every week. For the carriers to be able to offer that, they also have to
allocate enough vessels to the service so that a weekly frequency can be maintained.
The service design is a vital element of LSNDP. Below, some of the standard service
designs are listed and Figure 2.2 illustrates examples of these.
• End-to-End: A direct shuttle between two ports
• Line Bundled: A single cyclic tour
==PAGE:18==
8
2 Liner Shipping Network Design
• Butterfly: Multiple separate cycles with a single shared port
• Conveyor Belt (generalized): Multiple separate cycles which can share a single
port with other cycles. Different from butterfly, there exist multiple ports which
are connecting cycles.
Figure 2.2: Examples of four standard service designs: End-to-End (black), Line
Bundled (blue), Butterfly (red) and Conveyor Belt (green).
Rotations
As mentioned, a service is offered with a specific frequency, which, de-
pending on the chosen legs and sailing speeds, will require a specific number of vessels.
In this regard, the term rotation will be used to describe an allocation of a number
of vessels of a certain class to a certain service, together with defined sailing speeds
along the service.
2.3
The Liner Shipping Network Design Problem
When solving LSNDP, one takes the carriers perspective. The aim is to design an
optimal network of rotations, which, as mention above, includes service design, fleet
deployment and speed considerations. An optimal network is one in which the profit
is maximized. Revenue is gained when the network meets a certain demand, which
requires a combination of rotations so that paths exist through the network with
sufficient capacity.
On the other hand, any inclusion of rotations in the network
results in additional costs. Hence, the cost must meanwhile be minimized by making
cost efficient connections, which includes both, well constructed, and well combined
rotations. In LSNDP, it is generally not required to satisfy all demands. However,
for a large carrier which operates all over the globe, it might not be satisfactory to
exclusively focus on one or a few demands just because they yield the best profit gain.
Therefore, it is common to include a penalty per unit demand not fulfilled.
==PAGE:19==
2.4 Literature Review
9
2.4
Literature Review
Rana and Vickson (1991) have made an early contribution by considering port call
sequences over an ordered set of ports.
For each vessel, a sequence of port calls
between two end points were determined in both, an in bound, and out bound direc-
tion. Thereby, a cyclic route were constructed for each vessel, and the vessels were
allowed to carry specific cargo if the cargo’s origin and destination port are visited
by the vessel. To simplify the problem and to deal with their model’s non-linearity,
they decomposed the problem and used Lagrangian relaxation.
This transformed
the problem into a number of MIP’s, which they solved using Bender’s partitioning
method. Fagerholt (2004) also considers simple cycles for the vessels, but models this
in a way which is similar to modelling of vehicle routing problems. Initially, all routes
which are feasible with respect to the vessel’s capacity and the maximum duration
are generated. The problem is thereafter solved as a MIP, where decision variables
are included for all feasible routes. With this approach, the problem is solved to
optimality for all tested instances in less than three minutes. The tested instances
are however not particularly large, as they are meant to be comparable with the
Norwegian coastline. For the same reason, only one single depot (hub) is considered
and hence modifications would be needed in order to make it suitable for designing
global networks with multiple hubs.
A weekly frequency is required for the first
time in Agarwal and Ergun (2008). They generate simple cycle services by solving a
subproblem and then a multi-commodity flow problem is solved to determine the op-
timal flow of cargo of a given subset of feasible routes. Three solution approaches are
tested: column generation, Bender’s decomposition and a greedy heuristic. Further-
more, two different strategies for constructing services are used, where one strategy
finds more realistic services than the other. To generate more realistic services, the
subproblem is additionally restricted. As examples, it is additionally restricted by
the number of ports in a cycle (can vary per region), and cycles must include an
origin-destination-pair for at least one demand. Naturally, the approach which finds
more realistic services is also more time consuming. The best solutions were found
when using column generation, but using Bender’s decomposition approach resulted
in almost as good solutions and seemed to outperform column generation in regards
to computational time. Both approaches were better than the greedy heuristic. In
the multi-commodity flow problem in Agarwal and Ergun (2008), it is allowed to
make transshipment but it is not restricted by neither hard nor soft constraints. This
is however done in Reinhardt and Pisinger (2012), which are the first to include
transshipment cost. The transshipment cost is added using constraints which are
added dynamically in a branch-and-cut setting. They have studied the route types
of Maersk liner shipping network and conclude that the number of butterfly routes
were almost the same as simple cycle routes. Together, the two types of routes make
up 72% of all Maersk routes, and there is therefore a clear incentive to include both
types of routes. They find optimal solutions for most of the tested instances, and
in general the implemented algorithm performs significantly better than CPLEX’s
branch-and-bound algorithm.
==PAGE:20==
10
2 Liner Shipping Network Design
Research Overview - Pre LINER-LIB
Article
Fleet
Routing
Constraints
Method
Vessels
Ports
Gap
Rana and
Vickson,
1991
Fixed no.
Heterogen
In/out bound
Planning H.
Lagrangian
Bender’s
3
5-20
0%-3%
Fagerholt,
2004
Homogen
Simple Cycles
VRP (depot)
Duration
MIP (all
feasible routes)
5-20
10-40
0%
Agarwal
and Ergun,
2008
Vessel
Class
Simple Cycles
Fleet size
Weekly freq.
Column Gen.
Bender’s
Greedy
18-100
6-20
2%-13%
Reinhardt
and Pisinger,
2012
Heterogen
Butterfly
Transshipment
Butterfly
Planning H.
Branch & Cut
3-6
5-15
0%-25%
Table 2.1: Overview of models, methods, instances and results within the field of
the LSNDP before the development of LINER-LIB. The category fleet describes if a
diverse fleet was considered or not and if vessels were grouped in classes. Routing
refers to the fundamental service design incorporated in the models. Also the most
relevant constraints included in the models are shown.
It is noted that standard
constraints regarding capacity and flow conservation are left out.
Besides giving a thorough introduction to the problem domain of LSNDP, Brouer
et al. (2014b) propose the benchmark data set LINER-LIB, and a base integer model
for the problem. They solve the problem using a heuristic column generation ap-
proach, where columns are generated by solving an auxiliary problem. A subset of
rotations are selected by using Tabu Search and then a multi-commodity flow problem
is solved in order to flow cargo on the current network of selected rotations. Results
for all instances are reported, except for ”WorldLarge”, which was left out as the size
of the instance was out of reach for the initially developed algorithm. Brouer et al.
(2014b) only allows a service to have one port called twice. Plum et al. (2014) suggest
a new model which allows a service to have multiple ports called twice. The problem
is solved using CPLEX’s standard branch-and-bound algorithm, but only for the 2
smallest instances (Baltic & WAF). An optimal solution is not found, but the smallest
gap was just 3 percent. As it can be seen in Table 2.2, the solutions were not very
profitable compared to the others. This could be due to the fact that the vessels are
only able to sail at design speed, which means benefits of slow steaming are not uti-
lized. In Brouer et al. (2014a), services are perceived as knapsacks and ports as items
to place in the knapsacks. The total profit of the knapsack depends on each port pair,
the distance between then and the demand which originates from or is destined for
the first and second port, respectively. To find improving solutions, an IP for each
service is solved to find promising ports to enter and leave the service. This is possible
as each port insertion and removal is associated with an estimated value for change
of distance and profit. This way, candidate solutions are constructed without having
to solve the extensive cargo flow problem. The amount of insertions/removals are re-
stricted in order to limit the scale of estimation errors. After modifying the services,
==PAGE:21==
2.4 Literature Review
11
column generation with a warm start is used to determine the cargo flow. Whether
the solution is accepted as the next current solution, is determined in a Simulated
Annealing setting. To apply diversification a reinsertion and perturbation heuristic is
used. The reinsertion heuristic constructs butterfly rotations of the simple cycle rota-
tions in a current solution, and the perturbation heuristic rebuilds the neighborhood
using the construction heuristic after having destroyed a part with low capacity uti-
lization. The approach seems to be an improvement for larger instances. Compared
to Brouer et al. (2014b), the results for the three largest instances (excluding World-
Large) are significantly better. That is even though only strictly weekly frequencies
were allowed. Karsten et al. (2015) have developed a label setting-algorithm which
efficiently finds cargo paths that do not violate the transit time of the demand. In
Brouer et al. (2015), this label setting algorithm is integrated with the matheuristic
suggested in Brouer et al. (2014a), in order to achieve more realistic solutions where
transit time is respected. The label setting algorithm is used to solve the resource
constrained shortest path problem when using column generation to determine cargo
flow. The MIP is however also modified in a way that the estimations accounts for
the transit time restriction as well. In Table 2.2 it can be seen that this approach
generally yields worse results in terms of profit compared to Brouer et al. (2014a). On
the other hand, introducing transit time restriction makes the solutions considerably
more realistic and it is therefore a valuable modification nonetheless.
Research Overview - LINER-LIB
Article
Routing
Constraints
Method
Baltic
WAF
Med.
Pa-
cific
AsiaEu-
rope
WorldS-
mall
Brouer
et al.,
2014b
Butterfly
(Bi)weekly
Heuristic
(CG & TS)
-0.33
-5.57
0.47
-2.10
-25.59
-44.83
Brouer
et al.,
2014a
Butterfly
Weekly
Matheuris-
tic
-0.24
-5.44
1.25
-2.71
-31.77
-54.44
Plum
et al.,
2014
Non-
simple
Weekly
MIP
-0.13
1.06
−
−
−
−
Brouer
et al.,
2015
Butterfly
Weekly
Transit Time
Matheuris-
tic
-0.14
-5.59
2.42
3.05
-16.71
-35.41
Table 2.2: Overview of models, methods and results from research within the field of
LSNDP where computational tests were based on the bechmark dataset LINER-LIB.
Routing refers to the fundamental service design incorporated in the models. Also
the most relevant constraints included in the models are shown.
It is noted that
standard constraints regarding capacity and conservation are left out. The values
under each instance of LINER-LIB are the best found weekly costs in mio. $ (revenue
is subtracted).
==PAGE:22==
12
2 Liner Shipping Network Design
2.5
Contribution
In Brouer et al. (2015) transit time restrictions were introduced, which makes the
solutions more realistic compared to previously reported solutions for LINER-LIB
instances. The transshipment time in the commodity paths has, however, not been
considered. Due to this, the maximum transit time of demands could potentially be
violated in reality although the commodity paths were feasible when solving the prob-
lem. To account for this, a new model is presented in this thesis which ensure that
the exact time spent on transshipment is included in the transit time of a commodity
path. Another positive feature of the presented model is that it allows more com-
plex services than previous models for the LSNDP. The label-setting algortihm from
Karsten et al. (2015) will be modified to be compatible with the new model’s under-
lying graph. Together with this modification, the algorithm is extended to also make
use of a backward procedure. This can especially be beneficial in single-hub networks
where many demands have the same destination port. In addition to this, various
preprocessing techniques are presented, which can be used to optimize performance of
the label-setting algorithm. The benchmark data set LINER-LIB is relatively young
and the reasearch which has considered the data set is still sparse. This thesis will add
to the pool of computational tests for LINER-LIB instances. Furthermore, the meth-
ods used to solve the LSNDP in this thesis are exact methods, which have not been
prioritized in the previous publications on the LSNDP which tested on LINER-LIB
instances.
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 3
Time Index Graph
The mathematical models used to formulate the LSNDP depends on the definition
of the underlying graph. Commonly, the vertices of this graph correspond to the
considered ports and the arcs correspond to sailing from one port to another. However,
in order to be able to describe transshipment time exactly, the graph presented in this
thesis is slightly extended compared to the standard LSNDP graph. This extension,
together with general LSNDP graph properties, is described in the following.
3.1
Vertices
The main difference in the new graph lies in the definition of the vertices. Instead of
letting vertices describe just ports, we let each vertex represent a port and departure
time combination. In Figure 3.1, this is illustrated using three ports and three time
indices.
Using three time indices (in hours over a week) means that the indices
correspond to the times t1 = 0, t2 = 56 and t3 = 112. If the number of time indices
is increased to seven, they will be t1 = 0, t2 = 24, t3 = 48, etc., corresponding to
one index for each day of the week.
p1
p2
p3
(a) Port vertices
p1, t1
p1, t2
p1, t3
p2, t1
p2, t2
p2, t3
p3, t1
p3, t2
p3, t3
(b) Port & time vertices
Figure 3.1: The standard port vertices and the extended port time vertices including
three ports and three time indices.
For convenience, a connection is defined as a combination of two vertices with
different port indices, where the first is considered as a departure and the second as
==PAGE:24==
14
3 Time Index Graph
an arrival. As an example, a connection (v1, v2) with v1 = (p1, t1) and v2 = (p2, t2)
would describe departing from p1 at time t1 and arriving at p2 such that it is ready
to depart from this port at time t2.
Sets
Description
V
Set of all vertices
Am
Set of all commodity arcs
At
Set of all transshipment arcs
As
Set of all vessel arcs
A
Set of all arcs (A = Am ∪At ∪As)
Parameters
Description
ca
Cost of arc a ∈As
Ca
Capacity of arc a ∈As
da
Duration of arc a ∈A
Table 3.1: List of main graph sets and parameters.
3.2
Arcs
As it can be seen in Table 3.1, there are three different arc types included in the
LSNDP: vessel, commodity and transshipment arcs, denoted by As, Am and At, re-
spectively. Vessel arcs, a ∈As, describe sailing with a certain vessel class at certain
times from one port to another. Similarly, commodity arcs, a ∈Am, describe trans-
port of commodity from one port to another at certain times. Due to these properties,
both types of arcs are directed, as shown in Figure 3.2.
p1, t1
p2, t2
Vessel Class 1
Commodity
Vessel Class 2
Figure 3.2: Commodity and vessel arcs on a connection. The example includes vessel
arcs for two different vessel classes, but additional vessel arcs could exist depending
on the data instance.
==PAGE:25==
3.2 Arcs
15
In a multicommodity flow problem, the flow of commodity is determined on arcs in
an already existing network. This is not the case in the LSNDP because the network
is not fixed, and hence it is not initially known if it is possible to flow commodity on
a certain arc. This is the reason why commodity arcs are separated from the vessel
arcs. The commodity arcs do not have a fixed capacity. Instead, their capacity is
limited by the capacity of the vessel class assigned to the connection. If no vessel class
is assigned to the connection, the capacity of the commodity arc is zero. To model
this, each vessel arc a ∈As has a capacity parameter Ca which equals the capacity
of the associated vessel class. It should be noted that because of the commodity arcs’
capacity properties, it only makes sense to include a commodity arc on a connection
if at least one vessel arc exists on the same connection. All arcs, a ∈A, have a
certain duration da. For vessel and commodity arcs, the duration equals the sum of
the sailing time on the connection and the idle time of the associated arrival port.
The reason that the idle time at the arrival port is included in the duration of an
arc is that the time index of each vertex is a departure time. Hence, the idle time at
target vertices must be included in the arc duration in order to have a coherent voyage
time. Furthermore, each vessel arc a ∈As has a cost ca which corresponds to the
cost of operating the vessels on the leg the arc corresponds to. This cost will, among
other things, depend on bunker consumption and time charter. The cost calculations
include parameters from LINER-LIB, and they are explained in detail in section 4.1.
The transshipment arcs, a ∈At, only connect vertices of the same port at different
times, as these arcs describe transshipments of certain lengths at specific ports. This
is illustrated in Figure 3.3. Because the time indices are defined as departure times,
the duration of a transshipment arc includes storage time and loading time. The time
spent unloading the transshipped cargo is included in the duration of the vessel arcs
as a part of the previously metioned idle time.
p1, t1
p1, t2
p1, t3
Figure 3.3: Transshipment arcs at a port p1.
==PAGE:26==
16
3 Time Index Graph
3.3
Complexity
Let P be the set of all ports and T the set of all time indices.
In a graph G =
(V, A), the number of all pairwise vertex combinations is |V |(|V | −1). In the stan-
dard LSNDP graph, where a vertex corresponds to a port, this number is simply
|P|(|P| −1). In the extended graph, the number of possible pairwise vertex combina-
tions is |P||T|(|P||T| −1). If the combinations consisting of vertices with the same
ports are excluded, the remaining combinations are the ones previously defined as
connections, i.e. the vertex combinations with two different ports. The amount of
such combinations is
|P||T|(|P||T| −|T|) = |P|2|T|2 −|P||T|2.
(3.1)
In an instance with 102 ports and seven time indices, the amount of combinations
would be 504,798 (approximately half a million). If the number of time indices was
increased from one to two per day, i.e. 14 time indices, the amount of combinations
would be 2,019,192 (approximately two million). Vessel and commodity arcs exist on
the connections, and since vessel arcs are separated by vessel class, the amount of
vessel classes increases the complexity even more. However, it might not be all con-
nections which are feasible for a certain vessel class. Therefore there is not necessarily
a vessel arc for each vessel class on a connection, and some connections might not
have any arcs at all. Nonetheless, the example above clearly shows that the amount
of time indices has a significant effect on the size of the graph.
3.4
Motivation
The increased complexity, which follows the inclusion of time indices, is fortunately
counterbalanced by the possibilities which time indices give in terms of constructing
realistic and flexible solutions. It is the presence of port and time vertices which makes
it possible to have transshipment arcs with varying duration. If time indices were not
included, it would not be possible to track how much time transshipped cargo spends
in the port at which it is being transshipped. Additionally, the extended graph has
the convenient feature of allowing for simple modelling of non-simple services. This
phenomenon is illustrated in Figure 3.4, which shows a service in the extended graph
together with the corresponding service in the standard graph. Here it can be seen
that the service, which is a cycle in the extended graph, has a conveyor belt structure
in the standard graph, where multiple ports are called twice.
==PAGE:27==
3.4 Motivation
17
p1, t1
p1, t2
p1, t3
p2, t1
p2, t2
p2, t3
p3, t1
p3, t2
p3, t3
p4, t1
p4, t2
p4, t3
p1
p2
p3
p4
Figure 3.4: A service in the extended graph (top) together with the corresponding
service in the standard graph (bottom).
Another positive characteristic of the extended graph is that the total duration of
any cycle is a multiple of a week. The reason for this is that no matter what vertex
is chosen as a starting point, coming back to the same vertex would mean coming
back to the same port at the same time index. This could for example correspond
to a vessel departing from Bremerhaven on Tuesday at 3:00 p.m. and arriving at
Bremerhaven on Tuesday at 3:00 p.m. later in time. Whatever voyage the vessel has
been on, the voyage time must be a multiple of a week. To give an example of this
phenomenon, an overview of the durations from the service in Figure 3.4 is shown in
Table 3.2. The durations are assumed to be a maximum of one week, which means
that the arcs in the figure can have three different durations: 56, 112 and 168. Starting
from (p1, t2), the duration of the first arc is 168 because the time index of the source
and target vertex is the same. On the following arc, the duration is 56 because it goes
from time index t2 = 56 to time index t3 = 112, and hence 112 −56 = 56 hours has
passed. When the vessel sails from (p3, t3) to (p4, t2), it takes 56 hours to reach the
end/beginning of the week at t1 = 0, and another 56 hours to reach the time t2 = 56.
Therefore, the duration of the arc on this connection is 56+56 = 112. The rest of the
durations can be calculated similarly. Underneath the durations, in Table 3.2, the
accumulated values are shown. The right most accumulated value is the total voyage
time of the service, which is 672 hours or four weeks. The durations were assumed
to be a maximum of one week, but the lengths of legs are likely to requrie a larger
duration than that. However, if the arc durations were increased, they would have to
be increased by a multiple of 168, otherwise the duration would conflict with the time
index combinations. Since an arc duration can only be increased by a multiple of a
week, the total voyage time can only be increased by a multiple of a week as well. As
the total voyage time is already four weeks, the total voyage time would therefore also
be a multiple of a week without the maximum duration assumption. The fact that
==PAGE:28==
18
3 Time Index Graph
any cycle in the extended graph is a multiple of a week is very convenient because
it means that restrictions ensuring a weekly frequency are not explicitly needed in
the model. These restrictions are already naturally enforced by the properties of the
graph.
Port Calls
(p1, t2)
(p2, t2)
(p3, t3)
(p4, t2)
(p3, t2)
(p2, t1)
(p1, t2)
Duration
0
168
56
112
168
112
56
Accumulated
0
168
224
336
504
616
672
Table 3.2: Overview of durations and accumulated duration of the service in Figure
3.4. The durations are written in hours and are associated with the arc coming from
the previous vertex in the list and ending in the vertex listed above the duration value.
All durations are assumed to be a maximum of one week.
3.5
Solution Method
The approaches used to provide results for LINER-LIB data have mainly been heuris-
tic or relied on standard solver’s Branch and Bound algorithm to solve a MIP. As an
alternative, this thesis will focus on an exact solution approach. As mentioned in the
graph complexity analysis in section 3.3, the amount of arcs is potentially very large,
and thus decomposing the problem is a reasonable choice; if not a necessity. The
heuristic approaches used to solve the LSNDP with LINER-LIB data have focused
on simultaneously designing the network and determining commodity flow. A simi-
lar setting could be used in an exact approach, if the problem was decomposed into
a master problem and two subproblems: one for determining rotations and one for
determining commodity paths. The purpose of the master problem would then be to
select which rotations and commodity paths to use together. However, the fact that
any cycle in the extended graph is a multiple of a week is a significant simplification
of the problem which deals with generating rotations. Therefore, it is reasonable to
include this in the master problem. With this in mind, the LSNDP is solved by using
column generation with only one subproblem which generates commodity paths, from
now on referred to as the commodity path pricing problem.
The commodity path pricing problem can be solved as a shortest path problem.
Including transit time restrictions does, however, make it a resource constrained short-
est path problem.
The label setting algorithm suggested in Karsten et al. (2015)
performed well on the time constrained multicommodity flow problem. Except for
the fact that the algorithm is used to determine time constrained commodity paths
on fixed networks, and hence does not consider reduced cost, the problem it has been
tested on is essentially the same as the commodity path pricing problem. It therefore
seems reasonable to solve the commodity path pricing problem using a procedure
based on the basic ideas of this algorithm. When solving a problem by using column
generation, the master problem must be LP relaxed in order to obtain dual variables.
==PAGE:29==
3.5 Solution Method
19
The downside of this is that it allows the rotations to be fractional. Since fractional
vessels are most likely undesirable, valid inequalities are tested in order to deal with
fractionality and hopefully determine integer solutions. It might not be enough to
add valid inequalities, which is why branching is also implemented. To summarize,
the solution approaches which are implemented in this thesis are:
• Column generation
– The LSNDP is decomposed into a master problem and a commodity path
pricing problem
– The commodity path pricing problem is solved by using a label-setting
algorithm similar to the one suggested in Karsten et al. (2015)
• Cutting and Branching
– Cutting in combination with column generation
– Branch and Price
– Branch Cut and Price
==PAGE:30==
20
==PAGE:31==
CHAPTER 4
Column Generation
In this chapter, the column generation procedure used to solve the LSNDP is ex-
plained.
This includes the definition of the master problem and the subproblem,
together with an explanation of their individual requirements and objectives as well
as the connection between the two problems. The notation defined in the previous
chapter will be used again in this chapter. Initially, the cost calculations, based on
LINER-LIB parameters, are explained.
4.1
Costs
In Table 4.1, a list of the LINER-LIB parameters, which are used to calculate costs,
is shown. Some are cost parameters themselves and some express features which are
used to calculate the cost parameters included in the models.
Port p
Parameter Description
cM
p
Cost of loading and unloading per unit
cT
p
Transshipment cost per unit
cP
p
Fixed port call cost
cU
p
Port call cost per unit capacity
Vessel Class e
Parameter Description
cL
e
Daily time charter cost
Ce
Vessel capacity
f S
e
Design speed
f D
e
Fuel consumption at design speed
f I
e
Fuel consumption when idle at port
Leg l
Parameter Description
hl
Distance on leg
cF
l
Canal fee (0 if leg does not require canal passage)
Demand k
Parameter Description
cR
k
Revenue
Table 4.1: List of the LINER-LIB parameters used to calculate the costs.
==PAGE:32==
22
4 Column Generation
In the following problem definitions, two types of costs are considered: commodity
path costs and vessel arc costs. Table 4.2 shows the sets which are used for cost
calculations and later for modelling of the LSNDP.
Sets
Description
E
Set of all vessel classes
K
Set of all demands
I
Set of all commodity paths
Ik
Set of commodity paths for demand k ∈K
Table 4.2: List of sets used for cost calculations and modelling of the LSNDP.
A commodity path i ∈I is a feasible path on which cargo can flow. The cost
of commodity paths describes the costs which are exclusively connected to handling
the containers. That includes loading and unloading operations; which necessarily
are performed at the demand’s origin and destination port.
The cost of such an
operation is cM
p , which must be paid to both ports. Furthermore, it may happen that
the commodity is transshipped one or more times along the commodity path. At
each port where a transshipment is performed, a transshipment cost cT
p is paid. This
cost contains all operational costs connected to the transshipment, including loading,
unloading and storage. The binary variable bai is 1 if and only if a transshipment
arc a ∈At is used in a commodity path i ∈I. The total transshipment cost of a
commodity path i ∈I can then be calculated as
∑
a∈At
cT
o(a)bai
(4.1)
where o(a) is the port of the source vertex of transshipment arc a ∈At. Finally,
because maximizing profit will be handled as cost minimization, the unit revenue cR
k
is subtracted in the commodity path cost. The commodity path cost can then be
calculated as
ci = −cR
k
|{z}
Revenue
+ cM
o(k) + cM
d(k)
|
{z
}
(Un)Loading
+
∑
a∈At
cT
o(a)bai
|
{z
}
Transshipment
∀i ∈Ik, k ∈K.
(4.2)
The origin and destination port of demand k is denoted o(k) and d(k), respectively.
Vessel arc cost is the cost of operating vessels on certain connections. If a port
is included in a service, a port call cost must be paid and therefore it is included in
the arc cost. It should, however, only be paid once, and therefore the port call cost
is only included for the port of the arc’s source vertex. The port call cost consist of
a fixed cost cP
p and a capacity dependent cost, which varies among the vessel classes.
The cost cU
p is the cost which must be paid per unit capacity if a vessel calls the port
==PAGE:33==
4.2 The Master Problem
23
p ∈P. The port call cost of a vessel arc a ∈As is therefore calculated by multiplying
cU
o(a) with the capacity of the associated vessel class, Ce(a), and then adding the fixed
cost cP
p . Here, o(a) is the port of the source vertex of a vessel arc a ∈As, and e(a)
denotes the vessel class e ∈E which this vessel arc is associated with. The cost of
leasing a vessel on daily basis, cL
e , is referred to as time charter cost and is given by
the LINER-LIB data set. Because each vessel arc is associated with a vessel class
and a certain duration, the time charter cost can be reformulated to be expressed as
a part of an arc cost. Because the time charter cost is the cost of leasing a vessel one
day, this daily cost must simply be multiplied with the arc’s duration in days to scale
it with the duration of the arc. The duration is expressed in hours, and therefore the
desired result is achieved by multiplying cL
e(a) with da divided by 24. An essential part
of the vessel arc cost is the bunker cost, which depends on the expected amount of
bunker consumption. The expected bunker consumption ef(a) for a vessel arc a ∈As
can be calculated as
ef(a) = f D
e
(da −24)
168


hl(a)
(da−24)
f S
e


3
.
(4.3)
When a ship is designed, it is optimized to sail at a certain speed, referred to as the
design speed, denoted f S
e for a vessel class e ∈E. As it can be seen in equation (4.3),
the fuel consumption is calculated using this parameter and parameter f D
e , which
expresses the fuel consumption at the design speed. Furthermore, it depends on the
time it takes to sail on the connection, which is the duration of the arc minus the
time spent idle at the port of the source vertex. This idle time is in Brouer et al.
(2014b) assumed to be 24 hours for all port visits. To make the model in this thesis
comparable with the base integer programming model from Brouer et al. (2014b), the
same idle time assumption is made. This is why da is subtracted with 24 in (4.3). The
formula also includes the distance of the leg which the arc is associated with. This is
denoted hl(a). Lastly, a canal fee must be paid, if the leg, which the arc corresponds
to, requires canal passage. This is added to the arc cost by adding the parameter
cF
l(a), where l(a) is the leg of vessel arc a ∈As. This equals the canal fee of the arc’s
associated canal in case it has one, and 0 otherwise. All together, the arc cost can be
calculated as
ca = cP
o(a) + cU
o(a)Ce(a)
|
{z
}
Port Call
+ cF
l(a)
|{z}
Canal
+ 600
(
ef(a) + f I
e(a)
)
|
{z
}
Bunker
+
1
24dacL
e
| {z }
Time Charter
∀a ∈As.
(4.4)
4.2
The Master Problem
Solving the master problem means constructing an optimal network by determining a
set of vessel arcs and commodity paths utilizing these arcs. Also, it is determined how
much cargo should flow along the commodity paths. The constraints of the master
problem and its objective function are described in the following.
==PAGE:34==
24
4 Column Generation
4.2.1
Objective Function
The purpose of the LSNDP is to design a network which maximizes the profit, defined
as revenue subtracted with cost. Maximizing a function Z is the same as minimizing
−Z, and we will focus on the latter case.
Minimizing the negative profit means
minimizing the cost subtracted revenue, which has been done in commodity path
cost ci as explaned in the previous section. In the same section, the cost of a vessel
arc, ca, was introduced. To calculate the entire cost of vessel operations, the cost of
all active vessel arcs in a solution must be added to the objective function. Let As
e
be the subset of vessel arcs As where the associated vessel class of the arcs are e ∈E.
Then the total vessel cost can be written as
∑
e∈E
∑
a∈As
e
caya,
(4.5)
where ya is the binary decision variable expressing whether the arc a ∈As
e is used
or not. The revenue is gained by delivering commodities. In the master problem it
is decided how much cargo to flow on a certain commodity path i ∈Ik for demand
k ∈K. This quantity is expressed by the continuous decision variable xi. The unit
profit which follows a certain commodity is expressed by −ci because the parameter
ci equals the unit cost subtracted the unit revenue. Because this negative cost is
expressed in units and xi expresses the quantity of cargo sent along commodity path
i ∈I, the total negative cost from transported cargo is
∑
k∈K
∑
i∈Ik
cixi.
(4.6)
It should be noted that the demands are specified by an origin and destination port
together with the maximum transit time. Because of that, revenue might differ among
different demands, but will not differ among the commodity paths for a certain de-
mand. Since the commodity path profit is already expressed as negative cost, the
total cost to be minimized is simply calculated by adding (4.5) and (4.6). That is
∑
e∈E
∑
a∈As
e
caya +
∑
k∈K
∑
i∈Ik
cixi.
(4.7)
4.2.2
Constraints
4.2.2.1
Flow Conservation
When flow is conserved, it means that all flow which is entering a point also leaves
the point. This explains the name flow conservation, that is used to describe the
constraints which ensure that if a vessel arc going into a vertex is active, then a vessel
arc going out from the vertex must be active as well. Actually, the flow conservation
constraints must be even more specific in this model, as it must be ensured that the
outgoing vessel arc has the same vessel class as the vessel arc which enters the vertex.
==PAGE:35==
4.2 The Master Problem
25
The reason for this is that services are round trips, which means that each vessel
which is assigned to the service will sail not just on a specific leg but on the entire
service. Hence, assigning a mix of vessel classes to a service, as it is shown in Figure
4.1, will result in an incorrect solution.
p1, t1
p2, t1
p3, t1
Figure 4.1: Example of an incorrect service, where two different vessel classes, red
and blue respectively, are assigned to the same cycle.
The flow is conserved by setting the ingoing flow equal to the outgoing flow. Let
δ−
e (v) and δ+
e (v) be the set of vessel arcs for vessel class e ∈E, which go into and
out from vertex v, respectively. Furthermore, let y(S) describe the sum of decision
variables ya over a set of arcs S. I.e. y(S) is equal to ∑
a∈S ya. Then the flow of
vessels of class e ∈E through each vertex is conserved by
y(δ+
e (v)) −y(δ−
e (v)) = 0
∀v ∈V, e ∈E.
(4.8)
4.2.2.2
Vertex Visit Restriction
In order to ensure correct transshipment cost, it must be enforced that each vertex
is visited at most once.
If that was not the case, a solution might include “free”
transshipment as illustrated in Figure 4.2. In this example, cargo enters the vertex
(p2, t2) on a vessel from the blue service and leaves the vertex on a vessel from the red
service. This is problematic because it corresponds to performing a transshipment
without adding transshipment cost from transshipment arcs to the objective function.
This can be prevented by restricting the solution to allowing a port to be called only
once at a certain time, which can be achieved by including
∑
e∈E
y(δ+
e (v)) ≤1
∀v ∈V
(4.9)
in the model. It should be noted that it is sufficient to restrict the sum of outgoing
arcs, as they are equal to the sum of ingoing arcs, due to the flow conservation
constraint (4.8).
==PAGE:36==
26
4 Column Generation
p1, t1
p1, t2
p1, t3
p2, t1
p2, t2
p2, t3
p3, t1
p3, t2
p3, t3
p4, t1
p4, t2
p4, t3
Figure 4.2: Example of incorrect transshipment where cargo (black) shifts from one
service (blue) to another (red).
4.2.2.3
Capacity
The purpose of the capacity constraint is to restrict the amount of cargo on a con-
nection to the capacity of the ship being assigned to the connection. This also means
that if no vessel is assigned to a certain connection, then cargo cannot flow on that
connection. The capacity of an arc, Ca, is equal to the capacity of the vessel class
which the arc is associated with. Therefore, the term Caya can be used to assign
capacity to a connection. This will equal the capacity of the vessel class which the
vessel arc a ∈As is associated with if the arc is active and otherwise it will be zero.
Due to the vertex visit restricting constraint (4.9), only one of the vessel arcs on a
connection can be active as long as ya is a binary variable. Hence, the sum of Caya
over the vessel arcs on a connection will equal to zero if no vessel is assigned to the
connection. If a vessel is assigned to the connection, the capacity on the connection
will equal the capacity of this vessel class. In theory, commodity arcs could exist
on all possible connections, but since cargo cannot flow on a connection without the
capacity from vessel arcs, it does not make sense to have a commodity arc on a con-
nection unless at least one vessel arc exist on the same connection. If bai is a binary
parameter which only equals 1 if a commodity path i ∈I uses commodity arc a ∈Am,
then the quantity of a demand k ∈K flowing on a commodity arc is expressed by
∑
i∈Ik baixi. Let ¯A(a) express the set of vessel arcs on the same connection as com-
modity arc a ∈Am. Then the total amount of flow on each commodity arc can be
restricted to the assigned vessel capacity by
∑
k∈K
∑
i∈Ik
baixi −
∑
¯a∈¯
A(a)
C¯ay¯a ≤0
∀a ∈Am.
(4.10)
Figure 4.3 shows different arcs on a connection together with their capacities. In this
example, there are two different vessel arcs present on the connection, one blue and
one red. Because vessel arcs exist on the connection, a commodity arc does as well.
==PAGE:37==
4.2 The Master Problem
27
If a is this black commodity arc, then the set ¯A(a) would consist of the blue and red
vessel arc, which in the following are referred to as ab and ar, respectively. As their
capacities are 450 and 800, respectively, the total cargo flow on the black commodity
arc is restricted by the sum 450yab + 800yar. Here it is clear to see the functionality
of the capacity constraint. The restricting sum will equal 450 if the arc ab is active,
800 if ar is active and 0 if neither ab nor ar is active.
p1, t1
p2, t2
450
800
Figure 4.3: A commodity arc (black) and vessel arcs (blue and red) on a certain
connection. The numbers on the vessel arcs are the capacities of the vessel classes.
4.2.2.4
Quantity
Revenue is gained by satisfying a certain demand. It should not be possible to gain
revenue while exceeding a certain demand, as that would give a false expression of
the expected profit of a network. Therefore, the total flow of a certain commodity is
restricted from above by the quantity qk for demand k ∈K. That is
∑
i∈Ik
xi ≤qk
∀k ∈K.
(4.11)
4.2.2.5
Number of Vessels
The fleet deployment is restricted by the number of available vessels Ne for each vessel
class e ∈E. In order to maintain a weekly frequency, a service of n weeks must have
n vessels assigned to it. When Ne vessels of a certain vessel class e ∈E are available,
it means that the sum of duration from all the services the vessel class e is assigned
to can at most equal Ne weeks. This can be enforced for all vessel classes by
∑
a∈Ase
daya ≤De
∀e ∈E,
(4.12)
where da is the arc duration in hours and De = 168Ne, which is the number of hours
in a week multiplied with the number of available vessels in the vessel class e ∈E.
==PAGE:38==
28
4 Column Generation
4.2.3
Mathematical Model
Master Problem (MP)
Minimize:
∑
e∈E
∑
a∈Ase
caya +
∑
k∈K
∑
i∈Ik
cixi
(4.13)
Subject to:
∑
k∈K
∑
i∈Ik
baixi −
∑
¯a∈¯
A(a)
C¯ay¯a ≤0
∀a ∈Am
(4.14)
∑
i∈Ik
xi ≤qk
∀k ∈K
(4.15)
∑
a∈As
e
daya ≤De
∀e ∈E
(4.16)
∑
e∈E
y(δ+
e (v)) ≤1
∀v ∈V
(4.17)
y(δ+
e (v)) −y(δ−
e (v)) = 0
∀v ∈V, e ∈E
(4.18)
ya ∈{0, 1}
∀a ∈As
(4.19)
xi ∈R+
∀i ∈I
(4.20)
A list of all sets, parameters and variables related to the master problem can be
seen in Table 4.3. Because the revenue is subtracted in the cost parameter for the
demands, ci, minimizing the objective function (4.13) corresponds to maximizing the
profit. The constraints (4.14) ensure that the amount of containers flowing from one
vertex to another does not exceed the capacity of the vessel which is chosen to sail
the associated connection. The total number of transported containers of a certain
demand is restricted by (4.15), and (4.16) restricts the number of used vessels to the
number available vessels within each class. The constraints (4.17) make sure that
only one vessel leaves a port at a certain time, which is necessary to prevent incorrect
transshipment operations. Lastly, the constraints (4.18) are the flow conservation
constraints and (4.19) together with (4.20) define the variable domain.
The column generation procedure requires the ability to get information about
dual variables. However, in order to obtain dual variables, it is necessary to make
an LP-relaxation of the master problem. That means relaxing the y-variables to be
non-negative continuous variable instead of binaries. The LP-relaxed master problem
(LMP) could in theory contain all feasible columns, but even for small instances this
would require the LMP to contain a tremendous amount of columns/variables. There-
fore, another version of the LMP is considered, namely one that will only consider
a subset of feasible commodity paths. We will refer to this version as the restricted
master problem (RMP), and this will be the problem that forms the basis of the
column generation framework.
==PAGE:39==
4.2 The Master Problem
29
Sets
Description
E
Set of all vessel classes
K
Set of all demands
I
Set of all commodity paths
Ik
Set of commodity paths for demand k ∈K
V
Set of all vertices
A
Set of all arcs (A = Am ∪At ∪As)
Am
Set of all commodity arcs
At
Set of all transshipment arcs
As
Set of all vessel arcs
As
e
Set of vessel arcs for vessel class e ∈E
¯A(a)
Set of vessel arcs with same source and target vertex as a ∈Am
δ+
e (S)
Set of vessel arcs for vessel class e ∈E which originates in the
arbitrary set of vertices S
δ−
e (S)
Set of vessel arcs for vessel class e ∈E which ends in the
arbitrary set of vertices S
Parameters
Description
ci
Cost of commodity path i ∈I
ca
Cost on arc a ∈A
Ca
Capacity on arc a ∈As
da
Duration on arc a ∈A
qk
Quantity of demand k ∈K
bai
Binary parameter which is 1 iff arc a ∈A \ As is used in path i ∈I
Ne
Number of available vessels in vessel class e ∈E
De
The total available duration for vessel class e ∈E.
That is the number of hours in a week multiplied with Ne
Variables
Description
xi
Non-negative continuous variables describing amount of
containers sent along commodity path i ∈I
ya
Binary variable equal to 1 iff vessel arc a ∈As is used
y(S)
Notation used to substitute ∑
a∈S ya where S is an arbitrary
set of vessel arcs
Table 4.3: List of all sets, parameters and variables related to the MP.
==PAGE:40==
30
4 Column Generation
4.3
The Commodity Path Pricing Problem
The LMP’s dual problem is a maximization problem in which the coefficient matrix
is transposed and the variable costs compose the right hand side of the constraints.
The constraints corresponding to the x-variables of the LMP are less than or equal
inequalities because LMP is a minimization problem and the x-variables are non-
negative. By using the notation from Table 4.4 and by transposing the x-variable
columns in the primal problem, the associate constraints in the dual problem can be
written as
∑
a∈Am
baiαa + βk ≤ci
∀i ∈Ik, k ∈K.
(4.21)
The dual variables αa and βk are the only ones included in (4.21) because the con-
straints they are associated with in the primal problem, are the only constraints which
have non-zero coefficients for x-variables.
Dual Variable
Domain
Constraint
Reference
αa
≤0 ∀a ∈Am
Capacity
(4.14)
βk
≤0 ∀k ∈K
Demand
(4.15)
Table 4.4: Dual variables included in the commodity path pricing problem.
One essential feature of the primal and dual relation is that the primal cannot
be optimal if the dual is infeasible. Constraint (4.21) in the dual problem is satisfied
when ci−∑
a∈Am baiαa−βk ≥0. If this is violated, that is ci−∑
a∈Am baiαa−βk < 0,
the dual is infeasible and the primal solution cannot be optimal. If all possible paths
are included in the LMP and the problem is solved to optimality, such a violation is
not possible. However, when only considering a subset of paths, as it is the case in
the RMP, the problem can be solved to optimality while paths not included in the
RMP cause a violation. Because it is desired to claim optimality for the LMP, paths
which cause a violation have to be added to the RMP. If multiple excluded paths
violate the constraints, one has to decide which to add to the RMP. The expression,
ci −∑
a∈Am baiαa −βk, corresponds to the coefficient of a none basic variable in the
simplex algorithm, also known as the reduced cost. In an optimal solution, these
coefficients would equal 0, but the variables not included in the RMP could not have
been considered when selecting the optimal basis, and hence they could potentially
be negative. In the simplex algorithm, the most negative reduced cost is used to de-
termine which variable enters the basis as this variable has the potential to improve
the objective the most. For the same reason, it make sense to select the previously
excluded variable with the most negative reduced cost to enter the RMP. The purpose
of the commodity path pricing problem is therefore to identify the column with the
minimum reduced cost, such that it can be added to the RMP. The dual variable βk
is constant for each demand k ∈K, and therefore its contribution to the reduced cost
==PAGE:41==
4.4 Column Generation Procedure
31
for each demand is constant as well. It is different for αa, which must be subtracted
in the reduced cost of path i ∈Ik, if a commodity arc a ∈Am is included in the path.
Whether or not that is the case is expressed by bai, which is a binary variable in
the commodity path pricing problem. There are no constraints in the LMP regarding
transshipment arcs, and hence including transshipment in a commodity path does not
affect the coefficient structure of the column. Performing a transshipment does how-
ever include a transshipment cost which, as previously explained, must be included in
ci. Because the profit and loading cost at origin and destination ports are fixed, the
only variable cost is the transshipment cost on each transshipment arc a ∈At and
the dual cost −αa on each commodity arc a ∈Am. Both the transshipment cost and
−αa are non-negative. The transshipment cost because of the properties of the data,
and −αa because the dual variable αa is non-positive. The dual variable αa is non-
positive because the primal problem is a minimization problem and the constraints
(4.14) are less than or equal inequalities. The commodity path pricing problem can
be solved as a resource constrained shortest path problem where transit time is the
constrained resource. Thus, the fact that all costs in this problem are non-negative
is an important observation, as it allows us to efficiently solve the problem using
a label-setting algorithm. How this algorithm is used to solve the commodity path
pricing problem is described in the following chapter.
4.4
Column Generation Procedure
An overview of the column generation procedure is presented in Algorithm 1. Initially,
the graph is constructed depending on the data instance, and the subsets I′
k are
initialized as empty sets. These are the subsets of feasible paths for each demand k ∈
K, and it is possible to initialize them as empty sets because there is no requirement
for fully satisfying a certain demand. Hence, having an empty network and thereby
not fulfilling any demand is indeed a feasible solution. After solving the RMP, the
commodity arcs are updated with the dual variables from the quantity and capacity
constraints, and the commodity path pricing problem can be solved for each demand
k ∈K. The minimum reduced cost for a demand k ∈K is denoted ck. In each
iteration, a column is added to the RMP for each demand if ck is strictly negative.
This is one out of many options, and the decision on how many columns to add is
commonly subject to performance tuning. After adding columns to the RMP, the
problem is solved again, and the process is repeated. When the minimum reduced
cost for all demands is no longer negative, the optimal solution for the RMP is an
optimal solution to the LMP, and the algorithm therefore terminates. Since the final
aim is to solve the MP, and not the LP-relaxed version of MP, cutting and branching
techniques are used to deal with the fractionality, which is likely present in the optimal
LPM solution. The details of this are presented in Chapter 6.
==PAGE:42==
32
4 Column Generation
Algorithm 1 Column Generation Procedure
1: Construct the graph G = (V, A)
▷Initialization
2: I′
k ←∅∀k ∈K
3: Solve the RMP
4: while min
k ck < 0 do
▷Column Generation
5:
Update cost of commodity arcs with dual variables
6:
for each k ∈K do
7:
Solve the commodity pricing problem for demand k
8:
if ck < 0 then
9:
Add the column with ck to I′
k
10:
end if
11:
end for
12:
Solve the RMP
13: end while
14: Return Optimal LMP solution
==PAGE:43==
CHAPTER 5
Label-Setting
Algorithm
The label-setting algorithm used to solve the commodity path pricing problem will
be based on the ideas behind the label-setting algorithm suggested in Karsten et al.
(2015). In this label-setting algorithm, demands having the same origin port were
clustered into one subproblem, where the time resource was constrained by the largest
maximum transit of the clustered demands. The argument for using this approach is
that any label found for the demand with the largest maximum transit time in such
a cluster is a valid label for all the other demands. In Karsten et al. (2015) a graph
contraction technique, which utilized information from fixed networks, was tested
as well. This technique is, however, less relevant in this thesis, as the label-setting
algorithm is used to find the minimum reduced cost of all possible paths, and not to
solve the cargo flow problem on a fixed network.
5.1
Time Index Modiﬁcation
The fact that the graph is extended to include time indices requires some minor
modifications to the algorithm.
The procedure is essentially the same, but when
multiple vertices exist for one port, there is not a unique source vertex for the demands,
as they could choose any vertex with their origin port as starting point for the path.
However, this can easily be fixed by introducing an auxiliary source vertex with arcs
going to the vertices representing the same port. These arcs will have 0 cost and 0
duration and does therefore not influence the solution value, but allow solutions to
start from any vertex which represents the relevant origin port. This is illustrated
in Figure 5.1, where p1 is considered the origin port. The figure also illustrates how
a similar technique could be applied for a destination port using an auxiliary sink
vertex. This becomes relevant when the algorithm is extended to consider both, a
forward and a backward procedure. This extension will be explained later in this
section.
==PAGE:44==
34
5 Label-Setting Algorithm
p1
p1, t1
p1, t2
p1, t3
p2, t1
p2, t2
p2, t3
p3, t1
p3, t2
p3, t3
p3
Figure 5.1: Source and sink nodes connected using arcs with 0 cost and 0 duration.
5.2
Labels
Labels are used to express possible solution values without storing information about
the actual paths. When information about possible solution values are stored in the
label, it is possible to compare labels and ignore the ones that are redundant. Due to
this it is possible to determine the optimal solution value without having to enumerate
all possible paths. Figure 5.2 illustrates how labels function. At vertex v1, a label is
present containing a cost of c = 5 and a duration of d = 8. The interpretation of this
is that some paths exist from the source vertex to this vertex v1, where the total cost
is 5 and the total duration is 8. The labels at v2 and v3 are constructed by extending
the label at v1 along the outgoing arcs of v1. The cost of the label at v2 is 12 and it
is calculated by adding the cost of the label at v1 with the cost of the arc connecting
the v1 and v2. Thereby the cost of the label becomes 5 + 7 = 12, and similarly the
duration of the label at v2 is calculated as 8 + 9 = 17. The same procedure is used
to generate the label at v3, and these new labels at v2 and v3 can then be extended
to generate other labels.
v1
v2
v3
7
9
15
13
c
d
5
8
c
d
20
21
c
d
12
17
Figure 5.2: Extension of a label along the arcs going out of the associated vertex.
Costs are marked with red, and duration values with blue.
==PAGE:45==
5.3 Feasibility & Dominance
35
Because a label contains the cost and duration for getting to a vertex from the
source vertex, it is necessary to store the associated vertex id of the label as well.
This is especially important for comparing labels, as comparisons really only make
sense when they involve labels for the same vertex. In Table 5.1 an overview of all
the information stored in a label is given.
Label
Cost
Duration
Vertex Id
Label Id
Predecessor Id
Table 5.1: Overview of the label features.
The label id and predecessor id are not necessary for the algorithm to function,
but are convenient to store, as they make it easier to generate the shortest paths after
processing all labels.
5.3
Feasibility & Dominance
The first thing to check after generating a new label is whether it is feasible or not. If
a label is feasible depends on its duration, as this is the constrained resource. After
having checked if a label is feasible, the label must be compared to other labels with
the same vertex id. The reason for making the comparison is to find out if the label is
dominating or is dominated by other labels. When a label is dominating another label,
it means that by its presence it makes the other label redundant. As an example, let
us compare two labels l1 with (c1, d1) = (5, 10) and l2 with (c2, d2) = (8, 10) for the
same vertex. As mentioned, a label express the total cost and duration of some paths
to the associated vertex starting from the source vertex. Therefore, l1 dominates l2,
because it refers to a path which has the same duration but a less expensive cost.
∧
c1 < c2
c1 = c2
c1 > c2
d1 < d2
l2
l2
-
d1 = d2
l2
=
l1
d1 > d2
-
l1
l1
Table 5.2: Possible scenarios in a dominance check between two labels from the
same vertex: l1 with (d1, c1) and l2 with (d2, c2). Each field shows the dominated
label. The symbol - indicates no domination and = indicates that both costs and
durations of the two labels are equal.
In Table 5.2, all possible scenarios of a dominance check are shown. Here it can
also be seen that sometimes a label is neither dominating nor dominated. If l2 for
example had the values (c2, d2) = (8, 9), both, label l1 and l2 might be needed. The
labels extended from l1 would be less expensive than the ones from l2, but their
==PAGE:46==
36
5 Label-Setting Algorithm
duration would also be 1 larger. That could be a crucial difference, as it might make
some labels infeasible while other are feasible.
5.4
Tightening Time Limits
As previously mentioned, the label-setting algorithm from Karsten et al. (2015) solves
the problem for multiple commodities with a shared origin port by using the maximum
transit time of the commodities as the time limit. Instead of having a single global
time limit, it may, however, makes sense to have individual time limits for each port,
as the time limits for ports can be tightened. This is particularly relevant in this
thesis, as a larger amount of arcs is considered. By using the distance on legs going
into the origin port of a demand, individual time limits for all other ports can be
calculated. This is possible because the distance on these legs divided by the highest
speed of all vessel classes will give a lower bound on the duration from each port to
the origin port. Thus, subtracting the maximum transit time with this value gives an
upper bound on the time limits at the ports. In Figure 5.3, a conceptual illustration
of port time limits is shown. The time indices are ignored in the figure, because a
time limit for a certain port applies to all vertices which are associated with the port.
The positions of the port vertices in the figure correspond to their actual positions on
a map. This makes it clearer that once a vessel has arrived at port p5, the shortest
distance to p6 is on the direct leg marked with blue. Sailing this leg with the highest
possible speed will necessarily be faster than sailing any other route.
p1
p2
p3
p4
p5
p6
p7
o(k)
d(k)
Figure 5.3: Illustration of a direct leg (blue), which can be used for tightening the
limit for separate ports. Black arcs are traversed, and dashed arcs indicate potential
routes. The positions of the vertices correspond to the ports’ actual positions on a
map.
Because the algorithm will solve the commodity path pricing problem for several
demands at the time, it is important that the individual vertex time limits allow any
==PAGE:47==
5.5 Runs
37
label which is relevant for at least one demand. In Figure 5.4 an example is shown
where two demands are being considered.
p1
p2
p3
p4
p5
p6
p7
5
8
τk1 = 20
τk2 = 30
bτ = 22
Figure 5.4:
Example of a time limit calculation when considering two different
demands k1 and k2 and their maximum transit time τk. The numbers on the arcs
indicate lower bounds on the durations necessary to get to the demand destinations
and bτ is the calculated time limit for p5.
The maximum transit time for the demand k1 is 20 and the maximum for the
demand k2 is 30. The lower bounds on the durations from port p5 to the destination
ports are 5 and 8, respectively. Subtracting 20 with 5 gives 15, and subtracting 30
with 8 gives 22. The time limit of p5 can therefore be set to bτ = 22, as this is the
greater value of the two. If it was 15, the time limit might be too tight, as it may
leave out labels which could be used to generate feasible paths for k2.
5.5
Runs
A run is defined as a set of demands with either a shared origin port or a shared
destination port together with a set of time limits: one for each port. If the set of
demands share an origin port, then a forward procedure is used to solve the com-
modity path pricing problem for all the demands in the run. If the demands share
a destination port, then a backward procedure is used to solve the problem for all
the demands in the run. In Figure 5.5 examples of path generation with runs are
shown. Both, subfigure 5.5(a) and 5.5(b) show black arcs which can be shared by the
two demands. If labels corresponding to these paths were calculated at p5, then they
could be extended along the dashed arcs and thereby generate paths for the demand
with corresponding color. The extension in subfigure 5.5(b) would just have to be
done along entering arcs instead of outgoing arcs.
==PAGE:48==
38
5 Label-Setting Algorithm
p1
p2
p3
p4
p5
p6
p7
p8
p9
o(k1), o(k2)
d(k1)
d(k2)
(a) Forward Procedure
p1
p2
p3
p4
p5
p6
p7
p8
p9
d(k1), d(k2)
o(k1)
o(k2)
(b) Backward Procedure
Figure 5.5: Illustration of path generation in a forward and backward procedure
run. The symbols o(k) and d(k) indicate origin port and destination port of demand
k, respectively. Black arcs are shared paths and dashed arcs correspond to potential
paths for demand marked with the same color as the arc.
It is noted that time indices temporarily are ignored in Figure 5.5 in order to keep
the illustration simple. However, the same principles apply to the extended graph
when adding source or sink vertex as previously shown in Figure 5.1.
5.6
Forward Procedure
The label-setting algorithm based on a forward procedure is presented in Algorithm
2. This algorithm is applied on a run containing a set of demands K and a set of
time limits bτ(p) for each port p ∈P. The run also contains information about the
shared source port ps and the individual sink ports pt
k for each demand k ∈K. The
set of processed labels, L, is initially empty, and the set of unprocessed labels U is
initialized such that it contains a label with zero cost, and zero duration ((0,0)-label)
for each vertex v ∈V which associated port, p(v), is the source port of the run, ps.
This corresponds to adding an auxiliary source vertex for the source port as explained
previously. While the set of unprocessed labels is not empty, the label l ∈U with
the minimum label cost, min c(l), is selected to be extended and moved to processed
labels. After a new label is constructed, a feasibility check and dominance check is
performed as described previously in this section. When checking for dominance, both,
processed labels, and unprocessed labels, are considered. After all necessary labels
have been constructed, and the set of unprocessed labels is empty, the shortest paths
are constructed for each demand in the run. This is done by selecting the feasible label
at each demand’s sink port with minimum (reduced) cost and thereafter constructing
the shortest path by following the stored predecessor labels to the source port.
==PAGE:49==
5.7 Backward Procedure
39
Algorithm 2 Label-Setting Algorithm - Forward Procedure
Require: G, the extended graph excluding vessel arcs: G = (V, A \ As)
Require: The demands in the run, K, the shared source port ps, the individual sink
ports, pt
k, and the time limit for each port bτ(p)
1: Initialize set of processed and unprocessed labels: L ←∅and U ←∅
2: Add (0,0)-label to set of unprocessed labels U for each vertex v where p(v) = ps
3: while U ̸= ∅do
▷Label Setting
4:
l ←argminl∈U(c(l))
5:
Delete l from U and add it to set of processed labels L
6:
for each arc a originating in v(l) do
7:
Generate l′ by exending l forward along a
8:
if d(l′) ≤bτ(p(v(l′))) and l′ not dominated by any label in L ∪U then
9:
Add l′ to U and delete any label in U dominated by l′
10:
end if
11:
end for
12: end while
13: for each demand k ∈K do
▷Shortest Paths
14:
Set l2 to the feasible label with minimum cost at pt
k
15:
while p(l2) ̸= ps do
16:
Set l1 to the predecessor of l2
17:
add arc from v(l1) to v(l2) to k’s shortest path
18:
l2 ←l1
19:
end while
20: end for
21: Return Shortest Paths
Label-setting refers to the fact that a lable is only processed once. As an alterna-
tive, a label-correcting algorithm might have to ”correct” a label at later stages. In
label setting it is not necessary to correct labels, because the arc cost is non-negative
and labels are selected using minimum cost. Therefore none of the labels can become
dominated once they are processed.
5.7
Backward Procedure
The label-setting algorithm based on a backward procedure is presented in Algorithm
3. The backward procedure is, as the name indicates, basically just a backward version
of the algorithm. That means that the algorithm initiates at the sink port vertices
and then labels are extended along entering arcs to the vertices which the entering
arcs originate in. Feasibility and dominance checks are the same as in the forward
procedure, and the label-setting part of the algorithm also stops when the set of
unprocessed labels is empty. When constructing the shortest paths for the demands
==PAGE:50==
40
5 Label-Setting Algorithm
in the run, the backward procedure starts at the source port of each demand, ps
k, and
follows predecessor labels to the shared sink port pt.
Algorithm 3 Label-Setting Algorithm - Backward Procedure
Require: G, the extended graph excluding vessel arcs: G = (V, A \ As)
Require: The demands in the run, K, the shared sink port pt, the individual source
ports, ps
k, and the time limit for each port bτ(p)
1: Initialize set of processed and unprocessed labels: L ←∅and U ←∅
2: Add (0,0)-label to set of unprocessed labels U for each vertex v where p(v) = pt
3: while U ̸= ∅do
▷Label Setting
4:
l ←argminl∈U(c(l))
5:
Delete l from U and add it to set of processed labels L
6:
for each arc a ending in v(l) do
7:
Generate l′ by extending l backward along a
8:
if d(l′) ≤bτ(p(v(l′))) and l′ not dominated by any label in L ∪U then
9:
Add l′ to U and delete any label in U dominated by l′
10:
end if
11:
end for
12: end while
13: for each demand k ∈K do
▷Shortest Paths
14:
Set l2 to the feasible label with minimum cost at ps
k
15:
while p(l2) ̸= pt do
16:
Set l1 to the predecessor of l2
17:
add arc from v(l2) to v(l1) to k’s shortest path
18:
l2 ←l1
19:
end while
20: end for
21: Return Shortest Paths
==PAGE:51==
5.8 Determining Runs
41
5.8
Determining Runs
When demands are clustered into runs, the question about how to cluster demands
becomes relevant. In this section, three models are suggested, which all aim to dis-
tribute the demands from an instance into sets of runs. First, the notation used in
this section is presented in Table 5.3. The sets K and P are as previously defined
the sets of all demands and ports, respectively. The set F is a new set introduced
to express implementation of either a backward or forward procedure of the label-
setting algorithm. For this reason, there are essentially only two elements in this
set, namely forward and backward. The set of procedures F becomes relevant when
used in combination with ports, as (f, p), with f ∈F and p ∈P, corresponds to
implementing procedure f initiated at port p. If f is the forward procedure and p cor-
responds to Bremerhaven, constructing runs with this combination makes it possible
to allocate all demands with Bremerhaven as origin port to the run. If f was instead
the backward procedure, only demands with Bremerhaven as destination port could
be assigned to the run.
Sets
Description
F
Set of possible procedures (forward and backward)
K
Set of all demands
P
Set of all ports
Parameters
Description
afkp
Binary parameter which is 1 iff algorithm for demand k
starts from port p when procedure f is used
τk
Maximum transit time for demand k
bτfkp
Minimum time limit for port p when procedure f is used
for demand k
M
Large constant used for modelling purposes
Variables
Description
χfk
Binary variable which is 1 iff procedure f is applied to
demand k
ψfp
Binary variable which is 1 iff procedure f is started from port p
ωfp
Non-negative variable used to model maximum transit time in
a run with procedure and port combination (f, p)
ϕfpp
Non-negative variable used to model the minimum time limit at
port p in a run with procedure port combination (f, p)
Table 5.3: List of sets, parameters and variables related to run construction models.
==PAGE:52==
42
5 Label-Setting Algorithm
5.8.1
Number of Runs
The first model suggested for run generation is one that will minimize the total
number of runs. This seems to be a natural choice, as minimizing the number of runs
corresponds to minimizing the number of times the label-setting algorithm must solve
the commodity path pricing problem in each iteration. Let ψfp be a binary variable
which is 1 if and only if procedure f is started from port p. Then minimizing the
sum of ψfp over all procedure-port combinations (f, p) corresponds to minimizing the
number runs. That is minimizing
∑
f∈F
∑
p∈P
ψfp.
(5.1)
The binary variable χkf is 1 if and only if procedure f is used to find paths for demand
k. The binary parameter afkp is 1 if and only if using procedure f to find paths for
demand k means starting from port p. Before a forward procedure can be used to find
paths for a demand k, a forward procedure must actually be started from k’s origin
port. Similarly, a backward procedure must be started from a demand k’s destination
port before a backward procedure can be used to find paths for the demand. This
can be ensured by the inequality
afkpχkf ≤ψfp.
(5.2)
In order to construct a run, it must however be allowed for several demands to be
assigned a certain procedure and port combination (f, p). Using the large constant
M the restriction is therefore modified to account for this by
∑
k∈K
afkpχfk ≤Mψfp
(5.3)
⇒
∑
k∈K
afkpχfk −Mψfp ≤0.
(5.4)
This constraint allows any possible amount of demands to be assigned to a certain
procedure-port combination (f, p). It can however only be done when ψfp = 1 in
which case a contribution is added to the objective function. Since the commodity
path pricing problem must be solved for all demands, each demand must also be
assigned to a procedure-port combination (f, p), which is ensured by
∑
f∈F
χfk = 1
∀k ∈K.
(5.5)
Then the model for constructing runs while minimizing the number of runs can be
written as follows:
==PAGE:53==
5.8 Determining Runs
43
Run Construction Problem (RCP)
Minimize:
∑
f∈F
∑
p∈P
ψfp
(5.6)
Subject to:
∑
f∈F
χfk = 1
∀k ∈K
(5.7)
∑
k∈K
afkpχfk −Mψfp ≤0
∀f ∈F, p ∈P
(5.8)
χfk ∈{0, 1}
∀f ∈F, k ∈K
(5.9)
ψfp ∈{0, 1}
∀f ∈F, p ∈P
(5.10)
The objective function (5.6) describes the total number of runs which is minimized.
The constraint (5.7) ensures that each demand is assigned to a run and (5.8) that
when at least one demand is added to a procedure-port combination, the combination
is then considered a run and a contribution is added to the objective function. The
constraints (5.9)-(5.10) define the domain of the decision variables.
5.8.2
Maximum Transit Time
As previously mentioned, the largest maximum transit time in a run can be used
as the time limit for all the demands in a run.
It makes sense to minimize this
value because it corresponds to minimizing the number of labels necessary to find the
shortest paths. The product afkpχfk can only equal 1 when χfk = 1 and when the
port p is start point when using procedure f on demand k. Therefore,
τkafkpχfk ≤ωfp
(5.11)
forces the continuous variable ωfp to be larger than the maximum transit time of
demand k if and only if χfk = 1 and the port p is start point when using procedure
f on demand k. By enforcing the constraint for all f ∈F, k ∈K and p ∈P, and by
adding the sum
∑
f∈F
∑
p∈P
ωfp
(5.12)
to the objective function, the variable ωfp will be equal to the largest maximum
transit time in a run at procedure-port combination (f, p) and equal to 0 if no run is
constructed for the combination (f, p). The model which considers maximum transit
time when constructing runs, RCP-TT, is an extension of the RCP, thus parts of the
model for RCP-TT are inherited from the RCP.
==PAGE:54==
44
5 Label-Setting Algorithm
RCP with Transit Time (RCP-TT)
Minimize:
∑
f∈F
∑
p∈P
ψfp +
∑
f∈F
∑
p∈P
ωfp
(5.13)
Subject to:
∑
f∈F
χfk = 1
∀k ∈K
(5.14)
∑
k∈K
afkpχfk −Mψfp ≤0
∀f ∈F, p ∈P
(5.15)
τkafkpχfk −ωfp ≤0
∀f ∈F, k ∈K, p ∈P
(5.16)
χfk ∈{0, 1}
∀f ∈F, k ∈K
(5.17)
ψfp ∈{0, 1}
∀f ∈F, p ∈P
(5.18)
ωfp ∈R+
∀f ∈F, p ∈P
(5.19)
The objective function (5.13) contains the sum of runs and the sum of the largest
maximum transit time in the runs. Minimizing this objective function will therefore
minimize the amount of runs as in the previous model for RCP and additionally min-
imize the largest maximum transit time in each run. In this model for RCP-TT the
two sums are equally balanced, but weights could be introduced to prioritize one over
the other. The constraints (5.14) and (5.15) are unchanged from the previous model,
but (5.16) is included additionally to ensure the properties of the ω-variables. The
domain of these new variables is defined by (5.19), and the domain of the remain-
ing variables is defined by (5.17) and (5.18). It should be noted that many of the
constraints (5.16) can be eliminating when afkp = 0.
5.8.3
Port Time Limits
When having tightened time limits for individual ports, it might be interesting to
consider these limits when constructing the runs, because these time limits can reduce
the amount of necessary labels more than the largest maximum transit time. With
this in mind, the non-negative continuous variable ϕfpp is introduced to describe the
time limit at port p in the run with procedure and port combination (f, p). These
values have to be larger than all port time limits associated with each demand in the
run in order not to exclude feasible labels. The time limit of a port p associated with a
demand k depends on what procedure f is chosen for it, and can be calculated initially
as the parameter bτfkp by using the method described in section 5.4. Figure 5.6 shows
the relation between the variables ϕfpp and parameters bτfkp for a run including two
demands which start a forward procedure f = f1 from port p = p2.
==PAGE:55==
5.8 Determining Runs
45
p1
p2
p3
p4
p5
p6
p7
5
8
o(k1)
o(k2)
d(k1)
τk1 = 28
d(k2)
τk2 = 30
ϕf1p2p5 = 25 ≥
{
bτf1k1p5 = 20
bτf1k2p5 = 25
Figure 5.6: Example of minimum time limit ϕfpp for a port p = p5 in a run with
forward procedure f = f1 and start port p = p2. The minimum time limit at port p5
is the largest of the two individual time limits for demand k1 and k2. These values
are expressed by bτfkp for demand k at port p5 when using forward procedure f1
and backward procedure f2, respectively. The colored arcs show the lower bound on
durations.
The time limits from demands should only affect the time limits of the run if the
demands are actually added to the run. This is ensured by again using the product
afkpbτfkpχfpp, but this time multiplied with each of the port time limits in a demand.
Then
bτfkpafkpχfk ≤ϕfpp
∀f ∈F, k ∈K, p, p ∈P
(5.20)
will ensure that ϕfpp will be larger or equal to the largest time limit for port p of all
demands k included in the run (f, p). When minimizing the sum of all the variables
ϕfpp they will necessarily become equal to this value because they are non-negative
variables. If it is still desired to minimize the number of runs the sum is expressing,
this can again be added to the objective function, which then can be written as
∑
f∈F
∑
p∈P
ψfp +
∑
f∈F
∑
p,p∈P
ϕfpp,
(5.21)
and the model can then be written as
==PAGE:56==
46
5 Label-Setting Algorithm
RCP with Time Limits (RCP-TL)
Minimize:
∑
f∈F
∑
p∈P
ψfp +
∑
f∈F
∑
p,p∈P
ϕfpp
(5.22)
Subject to:
∑
f∈F
χfk = 1
∀k ∈K
(5.23)
∑
k∈K
afkpχfk −Mψfp ≤0
∀f ∈F, p ∈P
(5.24)
bτfkpafkpχfk −ϕfpp ≤0
∀f ∈F, k ∈K, p, p ∈P (5.25)
χfk ∈{0, 1}
∀f ∈F, k ∈K
(5.26)
ψfp ∈{0, 1}
∀f ∈F, p ∈P
(5.27)
ϕfpp ∈R+
∀f ∈F, p, p ∈P
(5.28)
It should be noted that RCP-TL is an extension of the RCP as well, thus parts
of the model for RCP-TL are inherited from the RCP. The objective function (5.22)
consists of the number of runs together with the time limits for each port in a run. As
in the previous models, the constraint (5.23) ensures that one procedure is selected
for each demand and constraint (5.24) ensures that when at least one demand is
added to a run, the contribution from the run is added to the objective function.
The constraint (5.25) enforces, together with the objective function, the property of
the ϕ-variables, which means that for a certain run they will equal the largest of the
demands’ time limits at each port. For any potential run which is not in the solution,
all associated ϕ-variables will be equal to 0. Similar to (5.16) in RCP-TT, many of
the constraints (5.25) can be eliminated when afkp = 0. The constraints (5.26)-(5.28)
define the domain of the decision variables.
==PAGE:57==
CHAPTER 6
Cutting & Branching
The column generation procedure requires the master problem to be LP-relaxed,
which means the y-variables corresponding to sailing vessels are real numbers from 0
to 1 instead of binary variables. Thus, an optimal solution to the LMP may contain
fractional y-values.
That is, in fact, most likely the case due to the high cost of
operating vessels. A solution with fractional y-values does not have any realistic in-
terpretation, and therefore it is desirable to eliminate fractionality and ideally obtain
an optimal integer solution. This chapter will cover methods which can be applied
to deal with the fractionality, which includes branching on fractional variables, and
to eliminate dispensable fractional solutions by adding valid inequalities.
6.1
Valid Inequalities
A valid inequality is an inequality that holds for all the variables in their entire
domain. Adding valid inequalities can be useful because it can reduce the solution
space without excluding the optimal solution.
This is especially interesting when
dealing with relaxations.
An optimal solution to a relaxed problem gives a dual
bound, which in case of minimization is a lower bound. It is desirable to increase
the lower bound because it can reduce the optimality gap. This may be achieved
by reducing the solution space of the relaxed problem. When doing so by adding
valid inequalities, no feasible solution to the original problem is excluded. In the
following, two different valid inequalities are suggested. They differ in the amount of
variables they affect, but the essential idea is the same: the quantity of the demands is
used to increase the values of y-variables when cargo is transported along associated
commodity arcs.
6.1.1
Arc Inequalities
For a demand k ∈K, the total amount of commodity flow on a certain commodity
arc a ∈Am is the sum of flow on all the commodity paths for k which include this
arc a. That is calculated as ∑
i∈Ik
baixi
∀a ∈Am, k ∈K.
(6.1)
Because of the quantity constraint (4.15) it is known that ∑
i∈Ik xi cannot exceed the
quantity qk of the demand k ∈K, and hence ∑
i∈Ik baixi cannot exceed qk at any arc
==PAGE:58==
48
6 Cutting & Branching
a ∈Am. Therefore we have the valid inequality
∑
i∈Ik
baixi ≤
∑
¯a∈¯
A(a)
qky¯a
∀a ∈Am, k ∈K,
(6.2)
which can be rewritten as
∑
i∈Ik
baixi ≤qk
∑
¯a∈¯
A(a)
y¯a
∀a ∈Am, k ∈K
(6.3)
⇒1
qk
∑
i∈Ik
baixi ≤
∑
¯a∈¯
A(a)
y¯a
∀a ∈Am, k ∈K.
(6.4)
For comparison, the capacity constraint (4.14) is rewritten as
∑
i∈Ik
baixi ≤
∑
¯a∈¯
A(a)
C¯ay¯a
∀a ∈Am.
(6.5)
It can then be seen that (6.4) is a stronger inequality than (6.5) for any commodity
arc, a ∈Am, and any demand k ∈K where qk is less than the maximum capacity of
the associated vessel arcs ¯A(a). If qk is not less than the maximum capacity of the
vessel arcs ¯A(a), the inequality (6.4) will not be violated due to (6.5).
6.1.2
Vertex Inequalities
Let δ+(S) be the set of commodity arcs going out from the arbitrary set of vertices
S. Then the sum of commodity flow for a demand k ∈K going out from the vertex
v ∈V can be written as
∑
a∈δ+(v)
∑
i∈Ik
baixi
∀v ∈V, k ∈K.
(6.6)
Similar to single arcs, this can, due to the quantity constraint (4.15), not exceed qk
at any vertex v ∈V , and therefore we have the valid inequality
∑
a∈δ+(v)
∑
i∈Ik
baixi ≤
∑
e∈E
∑
a∈δ+
e (v)
qkya
∀v ∈V, k ∈K
(6.7)
⇒1
qk
∑
a∈δ+(v)
∑
i∈Ik
baixi ≤
∑
e∈E
∑
a∈δ+
e (v)
ya
∀v ∈V, k ∈K.
(6.8)
Due to the capacity constraint (4.14), the flow through a vertex is restricted by
∑
a∈δ+(v)
∑
i∈Ik
baixi ≤
∑
e∈E
∑
a∈δ+
e (v)
Caya
∀v ∈V.
(6.9)
==PAGE:59==
6.2 Branching
49
From this inequality it can be seen that the valid inequality (6.8) could potentially be
violated if a demand k ∈K’s quantity qk is less than the maximum capacity of the
vessel arcs a ∈δ+(v). It is noted that the valid inequality for vertices might not be
as strong as the ones for single arcs because they include multiple arcs. However, the
fact that multiple arcs are affected by the valid inequality may be desirable in regards
to avoid adding too many cuts, as this could potentially slow down the process of
solving.
6.1.3
Cutting in Column Generation
The cuts are added to the RMP, and since they include non-zero coefficients for the
x-variables, the dual variables must be subtracted in the reduced cost for the arcs
included in the cuts. Let U be the set of cuts added to the RMP, and let haku be a
binary parameter which is 1 if and only if the commodity arc a ∈Am is included in
the cut u ∈U and the cut is based on the demand k ∈K. The dual variable from a
cut u ∈U is denoted γu and the reduced cost of a commodity path i ∈Ik can then
be rewritten as
ci −
∑
a∈Am
baiαa −
∑
a∈Am
∑
k∈K
∑
u∈U
baihakuγu −βk
(6.10)
such that it includes the dual variables from the cuts. As previously mentioned, the
contributions ci and βk are fixed for a certain demand k ∈K. Thus the arc cost in
the pricing problem becomes
−
∑
a∈Am
baiαa −
∑
a∈Am
∑
k∈K
∑
u∈U
baihakuγu
(6.11)
when dual variables from cuts are included.
The dual variables γu are also non-
positive. Because these are subtracted in the reduced cost, the arc cost will still be
non-negative, and hence the label-setting algorithm can still be used. However, it can
be seen that when dual variables from cuts are added, the arc cost depends on the
demands k ∈K. This has the limiting effect that the pricing problem must be solved
individually for demands which are used in the set of cuts U.
6.2
Branching
While valid inequalities are used to reduce the solution space of a problem, branching
is based on a divide and conquer principle and aims to eliminate fractionality by
repeatedly separating one problem into two subproblems. The union of the solution
spaces of the subproblems composes the solution space of the original problem except
for some set of fractional solutions which are redundant when the aim is to obtain an
integer solution. When a problem is represented by nodes, separating the problem
into two subproblems gives two new nodes connected to the original node. Repeating
==PAGE:60==
50
6 Cutting & Branching
this procedure results in a tree of nodes and edges connecting them, which explains
the name branching, as separating a problem gives two new branches to the tree.
There are numerous ways to branch, and in the following, some of these branching
options are covered, starting with the simplest: branching on a variable.
6.2.1
Arc Flow
Let y′
a be a fractional value which the variable ya takes in an optimal solution to
the LMP. Because the variables express sailing on a certain connection, it should be
either zero or one to have a realistic interpretation, and therefore it is desirable to
eliminate the option of ya being fractional. How this can be achieved by branching
on the arc a ∈As is illustrated in Figure 6.1.
0
1
2
y′
a
ya ≤⌊y′
a⌋
ya ≥⌈y′
a⌉
Figure 6.1: Illustration of branching on arcs. The fractional value y′
a is obtained at
the parent node and is used to branch on the two child nodes.
In this figure, the fractional value y′
a has been obtained when solving the LMP to
optimality at the root node. Then two subproblems are constructed by adding the
two shown branching inequalities to the original problem. These are
ya ≤⌊y′
a⌋
and
ya ≥⌈y′
a⌉
(6.12)
for node 1 and node 2, respectively. The solution space at node 1 is the same as at
node 0, except ya cannot be strictly larger than ⌊y′
a⌋. Similarly, the solution space at
node 2 is the same as at node 0, except ya cannot be strictly less than ⌈y′
a⌉. Thereby,
the union of the solution spaces at node 1 and 2 equals the one at node 0, except
any solution which includes ⌊y′
a⌋< ya < ⌈y′
a⌉. Since ya in this problem only can be
between 0 and 1, we have ⌊y′
a⌋= 0 and ⌈y′
a⌉= 1.
6.2.2
Vertex Flow
When a problem contains a large amount of variables, it might be more efficient to
branch on something that influences more than just a single variable. This could for
instance be the flow of a certain vessel class e ∈E through a vertex v ∈V . This flow
on vessel arcs for e ∈E which is going out from v ∈V is written as
y(δ+
e (v))
(6.13)
==PAGE:61==
6.2 Branching
51
and due to the flow conservation constraint (4.18) it will be sufficient to add con-
straints for outgoing flow when branching on the flow through a vertex. Therefore
branching on the flow of a certain vessel class e ∈E through a vertex v ∈V can be
done using the branching constraints
y(δ+
e (v)) ≤⌊y′(δ+
e (v))⌋
and
y(δ+
e (v)) ≥⌈y′(δ+
e (v))⌉.
(6.14)
Due to the constraint, which restricts the amount of port visits at a certain time to
one, (4.17), the cutting values will also in this branching decision be ⌊y′(δ+
e (v))⌋= 0
and ⌈y′(δ+
e (v))⌉= 1.
6.2.3
Port Flow
Instead of branching on a single vertex, it might be interesting to branch on the
amount of vessels visiting a port at any time. The flow on arcs from vessel class
e ∈E going out of any vertex representing port p ∈P can be written as
y(δ+
e (Vp))
(6.15)
where Vp is the set of all vertices that represent p ∈P at different times.
The
branching constraints can then be written as
y(δ+
e (Vp)) ≤⌊y′(δ+
e (Vp))⌋
and
y(δ+
e (Vp)) ≥⌈y′(δ+
e (Vp))⌉.
(6.16)
The flow at each of the vertices in Vp can at most be 1, and hence the total flow can
at most be |Vp| = |T|. That means that the floor ⌊y′(δ+
e (Vp))⌋can be any integer
value between 0 and |T| −1, while the ceiling ⌈y′(δ+
e (Vp))⌉can be any integer value
between 1 and |T|.
6.2.4
Number of Vessels
An alternative to branching that includes flow on vertices, but still affects multiple
variables, is branching on the amount of vessel used from a vessel class, corresponding
to the total voyage time in weeks for all services of a vessel class e ∈E. The total
voyage time in weeks for a vessel class is calculated as
1
168
∑
a∈Ase
daya.
(6.17)
Though this is the total voyage time in weeks, corresponding to the amount of used
vessels of vessel class e ∈E, this value may be fractional in a fractional solution.
Hence, branching can be made in similar manner as the previously presented branch-
ing decisions. That is
1
168
∑
a∈Ase
daya ≤⌊1
168
∑
a∈Ase
day′
a⌋
and
1
168
∑
a∈Ase
daya ≥⌈1
168
∑
a∈Ase
day′
a⌉
(6.18)
==PAGE:62==
52
6 Cutting & Branching
The amount of used vessels from a vessel class is restricted by the number of available
vessels for the vessel class, which is ensured by constraint (4.16). Hence, the floor
⌊1
168
∑
a∈As
e day′
a⌋will be an integer value between 0 and De −1, while the ceiling
⌈1
168
∑
a∈Ase day′
a⌉will be an integer value between 1 and De.
6.2.5
Branching without Vessel Class
All of the aforementioned branching decisions can be made without a specific vessel
class. This can be done by calculating the sum of the expressions above over the set of
vessel classes. This gives the following expressions, which can be used for branching
without a specific vessel class:
• Arc flow on a ∈Am:
∑
¯a∈¯
A(a)
ya
• Vertex flow on v ∈V : ∑
e∈E
y(δ+
e (v))
• Port flow at p ∈P: ∑
e∈E
y(δ+
e (Vp))
• Number of vessels:
1
168
∑
e∈E
∑
a∈As
e
daya
6.3
Branch and Price
The Branch and Price method is based on a combination of column generation and
branching.
The branching can be done as suggested in the previous section and
at each node the problem is solved using column generation. In the following, the
essential parts of Branch and Price will be introduced, and finally an overview of the
basic Branch and Price algorithm will be presented, which will be used in this thesis.
6.3.1
Bounds
The primal bounds are upper bounds and the dual bounds are lower bounds because
a minimization problem is being solved. An upper bound is given by any feasible
integer solution, whereas the lower bounds are given by the optimal solution to the
LP-relaxed problems at each node. A local bound refers to a lower or upper bound
at a certain node. A global bound, on the other hand, is a bound for the entire tree
and thereby a bound for MP. The global upper bound is simply given by the lowest
solution value of all the found feasible integer solutions. A local lower bound expresses
how much an optimal solution for MP potentially can be improved by continuing the
search from a node. Since any non-pruned node may lead to the optimal solution, it is
the minimum of the local lower bounds of these nodes which expresses the potenitially
best solution value. Therefore, the global lower bound is the lowest value of the local
lower bounds on all the leaf nodes.
==PAGE:63==
6.3 Branch and Price
53
6.3.2
Pruning
Over time, the branch and price tree will grow in depth while searching for bounds
and of course the optimal solution. Stopping the search on a certain branch on the
tree is referred to as pruning. It is important to prune as soon as possible to avoid
redundant time consumption. In general, there are three cases of possible pruning:
• Prune by bound
• Prune by optimality
• Prune by infeasibility
Prune by bound is possible when a local lower bound becomes larger or equal to
the global upper bound. Because the local lower bound expresses the best possible
solution value on the particular node, it is not necessary to search further on the
branch if it cannot become better than what has already been obtained. When a
local upper bound equals the corresponding local lower bound, it is also not necessary
to continue the search on the branch, because the local optimum has already been
found. This case is referred to as pruning by optimality. When branching is performed,
constraints are added, which might make the problems infeasible. If a problem has
been made infeasible, there is no point of continuing the search as further branching
could not yield any feasible solution or any bounds for MP. This explains the last
case of pruning: pruning by infeasibility.
6.3.3
Search Strategies
Deciding which node to branch on next can have a significant impact on the per-
formance of the procedure. These decisions follow search strategies, which will be
explained in the following. The search strategies chosen for this thesis are Depth-
First Search and Best-First Search.
6.3.3.1
Depth-First Search
In a Depth-First Search, the nodes which are chosen to be branched on are the ones
on the largest level, meaning the level which is furthest down the tree. An argument
for using this strategy could be that it might be difficult to construct integer solutions,
and by searching in depth, the problems will necessarily become integer solutions at
some point (if not infeasible). An issue with this search strategy is, however, that
when searching in depth, the lower bound is less likely to be improved. For the same
reason, Best-First Search may be a desirable option as this focuses on increasing the
lower bound.
6.3.3.2
Best-First Search
In a Best-First Search, the node which is chosen to be branched on is the one which
holds the global lower bound. This is a promising choice because the node that holds
==PAGE:64==
54
6 Cutting & Branching
the lower bound is the one which potentially can yield the best solution value. Also, it
is the node that restricts the global lower to its current value, and hence it is desirable
to either prune the branch or increase the local lower bound, as this can improve the
global lower bound.
6.3.4
Convergence Criterion
Because it can be quite time consuming to solve the LMP for larger instances of
LSNDP, it might make sense to make use of a criterion to stop the column genera-
tion procedure, even though an optimal solution is not found. To end the column
generation procedure while negative reduced cost exists, does not exclude the option
of branching or cutting. These operations are essential when searching for integer
solutions and they might even help the column generation procedure, as the solution
space is reduced. Stopping column generation before an optimal solution is obtained
does however exclude the option of using this value to update the local lower bound.
This could perhaps make the problem solving process quite inefficient because of po-
tential limited improvement of the global lower bound. The column generation should
therefore not be stopped too often. In the following, a stopping criterion is defined.
This can be used to stop column generation when the procedure does not improve
the solution value (sufficiently). Because of this essiential feature, the stopping cri-
terion is refered to as the convergence criterion. While the generated columns are
improving the solution value for the RMP, it is not desirable to stop the algorithm,
because there is a clear progress in the problem solving process. When the added
columns do not improve the solution value, it may indicate that it has converged at
a certain level. It is however completely natural behavior that the adding of columns
in an iteration does not improve the solution value. Thus, when evaluating whether
the algorithm is converged or not, it might make sense to avoid comparing a solution
value with the one from the previous iteration. Instead, a solution value from an
iteration could be compared with one from a number of iterations before. This would
allow temporary stagnation, but would capture if the solution value over time did
not decrease sufficiently. Even though the solution value is not improving, it might
be that the minimum reduced cost is increasing, which is desirable in regard to be-
ing able to claim optimality. For instance, when a solution value does not improve
when adding columns, the reason could be that it was actually already the optimal
value. If negative reduced cost was still existing, it would however not be possible
to conclude that. Hence, in order not to stop column generation while the algorithm
is well on the way to proving optimality, it makes sense to consider the development
of the minimum reduced cost. Due to possible fluctuation in the minimum reduced
costs, comparing single minimum reduced cost values can, however, give a wrong im-
age of the general development of the reduced cost. Instead, minimum reduced cost
averages can be compared to limit the affection from fluctuation. If a comparison is
made every ζ’th iteration the solution value used to compare with the current could
just be the solution value which was observed ζ iterations ago. When comparing
averages of minimum reduced cost, several minimum reduced costs must however be
==PAGE:65==
6.3 Branch and Price
55
considered. In Figure 6.2 it is illustrated how this can be done. Here, a comparison
is made using values from the 40th and 80th iteration (ζ = 40). If the algorithm
was allowed to continue, the next comparison would be made at the 120th iteration
using values from the 80th and 120th iteration. The two averages of the two disjoint
sets of minimum reduced cost are denoted µ1 and µ2. The sets of minimum reduced
cost contain 20 minimum reduced cost values. The size of these sets can of course
vary, but it should be less than the interval between each comparison (less than ζ).
The solution values used for comparison, Z1 and Z2, can simply be obtained as the
optimal solution value for the corresponding RMP.
0
20
40
60
80
100
Iterations
-10
-8
-6
-4
-2
0
2
Z
105
0
20
40
60
80
100
Iterations
-2000
-1500
-1000
-500
0
500
min RC
Z1
Z2
µ1
µ2
Figure 6.2: Illustration of parameteres in the convergence criterion, where values
from the 40th and 80th iteration are used for comparison. The full lines indicate the
iteration where µ1 and µ2 are calculated, and the dashed lines indicate the ealiest
iteration from which minimum reduced costs are included in the respective set.
To express whether the algoritm is converged or not, a limit for the difference
between solution values and average reduced costs are introduced. They are denoted
ξZ and ξµ, respectively. The convergence criterion is defined by the following two
conditions, and the column generation procedure is stopped when both conditions
==PAGE:66==
56
6 Cutting & Branching
are met.
• Z2 −Z1 is less than the limit ξZ
• µ2 −µ1 is less than the limit ξµ
6.3.5
Inheritance of Bounds
The lower bound at a node is at least as good as the one from the parent node,
because it is not possible to improve a solution by reducing the solution space. The
lower bound can of course be increased when solving the LMP at the child node, but
even without solving the LMP, the lower bound is initially the same as the parent
node. This is useful to keep in mind because a lower bound is not given when stopping
on the convergence criterion mentioned above. In that case, the lower bound at the
node would not be updated, but it would at least have the ”inherited” lower bound
from the parent node. It is noted that this does not necessarily apply to upper bounds,
because an associated integer solution found at a parent node might become infeasible
due to an added branching constraint.
6.3.6
Branch and Price Procedure
Algorithm 4 shows the branch and price framework, which will be used in this thesis
in the search for an optimal solution to MP. It is considered a fundamental framework
and will be subject to minor modifications during the following chapter on compu-
tational tests. At first, column generation is performed and the bounds of the root
node are updated according to the solution. The root node is then saved in the set
of active nodes N. It is clear that in case the optimal solution at the root node is an
integer solution, then the global lower bound and global upper bound will be equal,
and hence the optimal solution to the LMP is an optimal solution to MP. When that
is the case, the algorithm terminates without branching at all. If there instead is a
difference between the bounds, the algorithm enters the while-loop and the process of
branching begins. The branching will be based on the search and branching strategies
as described previous in this section. For each of the child nodes, column generation
is performed until an optimal solution is found or the convergence criterion is met. If
the solution is optimal, the solution value is compared with the global upper bound.
In case it is fractional, the child node can be pruned by bound, if it is not strictly less
than this bound, and otherwise it is saved to the active nodes. Because a node with
an optimal integer solution can be pruned by optimality, the node is not saved to N,
which corresponds to pruning it. The solution is, however, stored when the solution
value is strictly less than the current global upper bound, as it could potentially be
the optimal solution for MP. Furthermore, when that is the case, the global upper
bound must be updated to take the lower value equal to the optimal solution value
for the integer solution. When the column generation procedure has converged, it is
not possible to state anything regarding the bounds, and the node is therefore just
saved in the set of active nodes. After a node is branched into two child nodes, it is
==PAGE:67==
6.3 Branch and Price
57
removed from N because it should not be revisited. If the global lower bound has
changed as a result of branching, it might be possible to prune some of the nodes
in N if their lower bound is larger than the new global upper bound. Finally, the
global lower bound must be updated as well, which was mentioned previously in this
section, should equal the minimum lower bound of all leaf nodes, which are the nodes
contained in the set of active nodes N. Because not saving a child node corresponds
to pruning it, nothing needs to be done when a child node is infeasible.
Algorithm 4 Branch and Price
1: Active nodes: N ←∅
▷Initialization
2: Global bounds: UB∗←∞, LB∗←−∞
3: Perform initial column generation
▷Root Node
4: Set bounds of root node and add it to N
5: while LB∗< UB∗do
▷Branch and Price
6:
Select node η ∈N using current search strategy
7:
Branch on η using current branching strategy
8:
for each of η’s child nodes ηh do
9:
Perform column generation
10:
if the LMP is optimal then
11:
if Solution value is less than UB∗then
12:
if Solution is fractional then
13:
Update LB(ηh) and save node: N ←N ∪{ηh}
14:
else
15:
Update UB∗and save solution
16:
end if
17:
end if
18:
else if Column generation is converged then
19:
Save node: N ←N ∪{ηh}
20:
end if
21:
end for
22:
Remove node: N ←N \ {η}
23:
if UB∗has changed then
24:
Search in N and prune by bound if possible
25:
end if
26:
Update global lower bound: LB∗←min
η∈N LB(η)
27: end while
28: Return Optimal solution to MP
==PAGE:68==
58
==PAGE:69==
CHAPTER 7
Computational Tests
The solution methods presented previously have been tested separately and combined.
Initially, the column generation procedure is tested including effect of different run
settings.
Then cutting and branching are tested including search and branching
strategies. Finally, an analysis of the best found solutions is provided, including an
analysis of the specific costs and network KPI’s. It should be noted that in order
to limit the scope of computational testing, the RCP model (Section 5.8.1) is tested
as the only run construction model and arc inequalities (Section 6.1.1) as the only
valid inequalities. The testing is focused on the overall effects of the several suggested
methods rather than detailed parameter tuning. The algorithms are implemented in
C++, using CPLEX as solver and LEMON graph library to handle the graphs. The
tests are carried out on a computer with 2 GHz Intel Core i7 processor and 8 GB
RAM. In the following, the LINER-LIB instances, which the algorithms have been
tested on, are introduced.
7.1
Data Instances
All computational tests are based on data instances from the benchmark data set
LINER-LIB. In Table 7.1 an overview of LINER-LIB data instances which will be
used. The name of the instances refers to the area where the ports of the instances
are located. The number of vessel classes, ports and demands are shown for each
instance. From these numbers, it can be seen that the size of the instances increases
from top to bottom. The two smallest instances are single-hub instances, meaning
that there is exactly one port which acts as hub. All the demand will have this hub as
either origin or destination port. The Mediterranean instance is a multi-hub instance
where there is larger variety in the demands origin and destination ports. The Pacific
instance reflects a trade lane between Asia and The Western United States, and the
World Small includes main ports from all over the globe. It is called World Small
because LINER-LIB contains another world instance, which includes more ports and
more demands. This World Large instance, together with a Europe-Asia instance are
however considered out of scope and will not be used when testing.
==PAGE:70==
60
7 Computational Tests
Instance
Category
Vessel Classes
Ports
Demands
Baltic
Single-Hub
1-2
12
22
West Africa (WAF)
Single-Hub
1-2
19
38
Mediterranean
Multi-Hub
1-3
39
369
Pacific
Trade Lane
1-4
45
722
World Small
World Scale
1-6
197
1764
Table 7.1: Overview of the LINER-LIB data instances which will be used for compu-
tational testing. The numbers under vessel classes refer to the numbers in the vessel
class overview shown in Table 7.2.
In Table 7.2, an overview of the vessel classes is is given, including a selection of
essential features. The time charter cost and bunker consumption naturally follow
the capacity of the vessels. The minimum speed does differ much among the vessel
class. Either it is 10 or 12 knots. With maximum speed, the difference is bigger and
varies between 14 and 23.
No.
Type
Capacity
Time Charter
Speed
Bunker
1
Feeder
450
5000
10-14
18.8
2
Feeder
800
8000
10-17
23.7
3
Panamax
1200
11000
12-19
52.5
4
Panamax
2400
21000
12-22
57.4
5
Post Panamax
4200
35000
12-23
82.2
6
Super Panamax
7500
55000
12-22
126.9
Table 7.2: The six different vessel classes from LINER-LIB. Capacity is shown in
FFE and the time charter cost is a daily cost in $. The vessel classes’ speed range is
shown in knots and the daily bunker consumption at design speed is shown in tons.
To simplify the graphs when testing different algorithm settings, it is assumed
that durations on arcs will not exceed 4 weeks. The assumption has no impact on
the three smallest instances: Baltic, WAF and Mediterranean. In the end of this
chapter, when analyzing the solutions, the maximum duration is extended to 6 weeks,
to test the effect of the assumption. The amount of time steps is handled in a similar
manner, meaning that the initial testing is focused on instances with 7 time indices,
and then the amount is increased to 14 time indices in the final solution analysis.
==PAGE:71==
7.2 Runs
61
7.2
Runs
To begin with, the effect of runs and tightening of time limits is tested. In the results,
Runs and Single refers to whether the commodity path pricing problem is solved for
multiple demands in runs or individually (runs with a single demand). The notation
MaxTT refers to using the maximum transit time as time limit for all ports in a run,
and PortLim refers to using tightened time limits for the individual ports. In Figure
7.1, the development of the solution value is shown for the Baltic instance. It takes
approximately 1 to 4 seconds to solve the LMP for the Baltic instance, depending
on how the commodity path pricing problem is solved.
Using runs seems to be
significantly faster than solving the commodity path pricing problem individually
for each demand. Tightening the time limits for each port also seems to make the
problem solving process faster. However, the impact is less than the one from using
runs.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Time (sec)
-8
-6
-4
-2
0
Z
105
Baltic - 7 Time Steps
Runs   - MaxTT
Runs   - PortLim
Single - MaxTT
Single - PortLim
Figure 7.1: Solution value over time in seconds with diffent run settings.
In Table 7.3, the average time spent on solving the commodity path pricing prob-
lem is shown for each of the 5 considered instances. Here it can be seen that using
runs in general is significantly faster when solving the commodity path pricing prob-
lem. The effect of tightening the time limits is rather insignificant when using runs.
On the other hand, tightening the time limits seems to have quite a positive effect
when solving commodity path pricing problems individually for each demand. This
is especially interesting because the valid inequalities presented in this thesis require
the demands used for cutting to be handled individually when solving the commod-
ity path pricing problem. That the effect of tightening the time limits for ports is
significant for individual demands and not for runs with multiple demands is not a
surprising result. When demands are solved individually, which corresponds to runs
==PAGE:72==
62
7 Computational Tests
having single demands, there is only one demand to consider for each run. Hence,
more ports can have time limits tightened compared to runs with multiple demands,
where multiple transit time requirements must be respected. The results could be
interpreted as incitement for testing the effect of solving the model RCP-TL in future
work, since the purpose of this problem is to structure the demands in runs, so that
time limits for ports are minimized.
Baltic
WAF
Med.
Pacific
World Small
Runs / PortLim
0.0047
0.0266
1.0976
2.4427
2.2482
Runs / MaxTT
0.0054
0.0309
1.0323
2.8337
2.3578
Single / PortLim
0.0315
0.1881
6.5539
15.8561
28.6674
Single / MaxTT
0.0358
0.2810
7.3970
19.6278
42.5978
Table 7.3: Average times in seconds spent on solving the commodity path pricing
problem by using different run settings.
7.3
Column Generation
The LMP is solved for all the considered instances by using column generation with
runs where port time limits are tightened. The results are reported in Table 7.4. Each
of the instances was solved to optimality except for World Small, which was stopped
at a time limit of 15 hours.
Baltic
WAF
Med.
Pacific
World Small
No. of Columns
1386
5311
61181
123571
194835
Avg. Time PP
0.0039
0.0251
0.8044
3.0647
5.0969
Avg. Time RMP
0.0047
0.0369
1.4305
15.1992
369.4632
Total Time (sec)
0.98
38.24
1371.09
11393.30
54037.10
Solution Val.
-806,115
-5,912,420
-1,082,830
-10,520,300
(-104,644,000)
Table 7.4: Column generation results. The solution value for World Small is in
parentheses as it is not optimal. Avg. Time PP and Avg. Time RMP are the average
times it takes to solve the commodity path pricing problem and restricted master
problem, respectively.
It should be noted that the average times for solving the commodity path pricing
problem is slightly larger than previously reported. This is because the results from
Table 7.4 are calculated by using values over a longer period of time. Over time, there
is a general tendency of increase in the pricing problem solve time, and this is what is
reflected in these results. From the table it is clear that solving the larger instances is
==PAGE:73==
7.3 Column Generation
63
quite time consuming. The increased solve time for the LMP seems to be explained
by the increased solve time for the RMP, which is quite high for Pacific and World
Small. To be able to understand the slow solve time for these larges instances, results
from the Pacific and World Small instance are investigated in detail in the following.
To begin with, the results for the Pacific instance are shown in Figure 7.2. These
are the development of solution value, minimum reduced cost, RMP solve times, PP
solve times, iterations and the number of columns over time. Initially, the reduced
cost increases with almost 2000, but thereafter there is little improvement for a period
of approximately 1 hour. Then the minimum reduced cost increases with almost 2000
again, before it slowly increases towards 0 over the remaining one and a half hours.
Although the minimum reduced cost does not improve much in the first hour, there
is a significant decrease in the solution value. It is however clear that the steepness
of the solution value curve decreases over time. There seems to be a steady increase
in the number of column over the entire period.
For a while, there is almost a
linear increase in the number of columns, before the increase fades towards the end
of the time period. The development of the RMP solve times is on the other hand
not very steady.
Actually, there is quite a lot of fluctuation of these values, and
the fluctuation seems to increase over time. The RMP solve times mainly fluctuate
between 0 and 100, but at some of the late iterations it takes up to 200-300 seconds
to solve the restricted master problem. The general level does, however, not increase
over time and stays below 1 minute. The PP solve time increase until it reaches
a maximum of approximately 5 seconds. Thereafter it decreases until it reaches 3
seconds, and then this level holds for the rest of the column generation procedure.
There is little fluctuation in the time it takes to solve the commodity path pricing
problem, and in general it seems to be much faster to solve this problem than to solve
the restricted master problem. The number of iterations increases towards the end
of column generation procedure, which indicates that iterations are finished faster.
This is in coherence with the fact that fewer columns are added towards the end. The
general level of the RMP solve times also decreases as natural effect of that.
==PAGE:74==
64
7 Computational Tests
Pacific - 7 Time Steps
0
5000
10000
-1.05
-1
-0.95
107
Solution Values
0
5000
10000
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
RMP Solve Times
0
5000
10000
-4000
-3000
-2000
-1000
0
Min Reduced Costs
0
5000
10000
1
2
3
4
5
6
PP Solve Times
0
5000
10000
0
5
10
15
104
No. of Columns
0
5000
10000
0
200
400
600
800
Iterations
Figure 7.2: Column generation results over time for the Pacific instance.
Each
minimum reduced cost is the minimum of all demands’ minimum reduced costs. All
times are shown in seconds.
==PAGE:75==
7.3 Column Generation
65
Figure 7.3 shows plotting of the same values as in Figure 7.2, but for the World
Small instance. When the column generation procedure was performed on this in-
stance, it was stopped at a time limit of 15 hours before it had reached an optimal
LMP solution. Therefore, the minimum reduced cost does not reach 0, as it can be
seen in the figure. The development of the solution values does however not converge
over this period, which might indicate that an optimal LMP solution could be found
if a larger time limit was used. Like the Pacific instance, there is quite a lot of fluc-
tuation in the RMP solve time, and the fluctuation also increases over time. Unlike
the Pacific instance, the general level of the RMP solve time for the World Small in-
stance also increases over time. Over the last period, before the procedure is stopped,
it takes approximately 8 to 15 minutes to solve the restricted master problem. In
contrast to this, the PP solve time is quite low. It never gets above 8 seconds and is
most of the time between 5 and 6 seconds. It is interesting that, when the fluctuation
is ignored, the curve of the graph is quite similar to PP solve time for the Pacific
instance. Initially it increases until it reaches the maximum level, and afterwards
decreases to a level where it stays for the rest of the problem solving process. The
number of iterations does not increase towards the end of the time period as it did
for the Pacific instance. However, the number of added columns together with the
general level of the RMP solve time also decreased towards the end for the Pacific
instance, which is not the case for the World Small instance. The Pacific instance
was however solved to optimality, whereas column generation for the World Small
instance was stopped, which probably explains the different behavior.
In general, the RMP solve time, together with the relatively slow improvement
of solution values, seems to be the reason that it takes quite some time to solve the
LMP using column generation procedure. This is a significant bottleneck, as column
generation is an essential part of the Branch and Price procedure, in which it is used
repeatedly to solve the LMP for each node in the tree. It is therefore highly relevant
to improve the performance of column generation in future work.
==PAGE:76==
66
7 Computational Tests
World Small - 7 Time Steps
0
2
4
104
-10.4
-10.2
-10
-9.8
-9.6
107
Solution Values
0
2
4
104
0
500
1000
1500
RMP Solve Times
0
2
4
104
-6000
-4000
-2000
0
Min Reduced Costs
0
2
4
104
0
2
4
6
8
PP Solve Times
0
2
4
104
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
105
No. of Columns
0
2
4
104
0
50
100
150
Iterations
Figure 7.3: Column generation results over time for the World Small instance. Each
minimum reduced cost is the minimum of all demands’ minimum reduced costs. All
times are shown in seconds.
==PAGE:77==
7.4 Cutting
67
7.4
Cutting
Figure 7.4 shows the distribution of y-values in the optimal LMP solution for the
Baltic instance, which was determined by using column generation. Only y-values
which are strictly larger than 0 are included in the distribution.
Baltic - 7 Time Steps
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0
5
10
15
20
25
Figure 7.4: Distribution of y-values in the optimal LMP solution for the Baltic
instance.
The amount of y-values larger than 0 is 82. Only 7.32% are larger than 0.5, and
53.66% are less than 0.1. Hence, the optimal solution to the LMP is clearly quite
fractional.
In section 6.1.1 it was explained how the quantity of demands could be used to
make valid inequalities for commodity arc and demand combinations. When testing
the effect of adding these valid inequalities, a new set of cuts is added to the RMP
each time no negative reduced cost exists. When no negative reduced cost exists, the
solution is investigated and a cut is added for each commodity arc where a violation
exist. Only the valid inequality, which is violated the most, is added for each of the
commodity arc. Figure 7.5 shows the development of solution value and minimum
reduced cost for the Baltic instance when this cutting approach is used. Initially, the
optimal solution with a value of -806115 is quickly found. Then the solution space is
reduced by adding the cuts, which is why the solution value increases instantly.
When cuts are added, the reduced costs are likely to change. Therefore, commod-
ity paths may yet again have negative reduced cost, in which case more columns must
be added. This is what happens when the solution value decreases again. The process
is repeated until no more cuts can be found. Each time the reduced cost reaches zero,
the solution is optimal and gives a lower bound. It is desirable to have a larger lower
bound, as this can be used to decrease the optimality gap, and thus it is positive that
the lower bound increases over time, as it can be seen in Figure 7.5. During the last
250 seconds, there is very little improvement, even though the reduced cost reaches
==PAGE:78==
68
7 Computational Tests
0 and cuts are added several times. However, the lower bound is rapidly improved
over the first 100 seconds. The final lower bound is -102178, which is a significant
improvement compared to the initial lower bound of -806115.
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
Time (sec)
-8
-6
-4
-2
0
Z
105
Baltic - 7 Time Steps
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
Time (sec)
-2500
-2000
-1500
-1000
-500
0
min RC
Figure 7.5: The development of solution value and minimum reduced cost over time
in seconds. Cuts were added each time the minimum reduced cost reached 0.
The effect of limiting the number of added cuts is tested by only adding cuts which
are violated more than a certain value. This value is referred to as the violation limit,
and 5 different values are tested for this limit. The test results are shown in Table
7.5. Here it can be seen that in terms of improving the lower bound it is best to
have a violation limit of 0. However, when the violation limits are larger than 0,
fewer cuts are added and the process of adding cuts is faster. Especially the violation
limit of 0.05 seems to be a good choice because with this limit, a lower bound, which
is almost as good as the best, is found while using less cuts and significantly less
time. It should be noted that No. of Cutting refer to the amount times cuts are
added, corresponding to the amount of times the minimum reduced cost becomes
non-negative. This amount is increasing when the violation limit increases, because
less cuts are added each time. As a result of this, fewer columns need to be added
before an optimal solution is obtained again.
==PAGE:79==
7.4 Cutting
69
Violation Limit
0.0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
No. of Columns
10526
7003
6539
5527
4999
No. of Cutting
43
56
69
77
94
No. of Cuts
2141
1845
1711
1604
1447
Total Time (sec)
242
84
79
67
63
Lower Bound
-102178
-108923
-128374
-180726
-220910
Table 7.5: Results from testing the violation limit on the Baltic instance. No. of
Cutting is the number of times cuts have been added, while No. of Cuts refers to the
total number of cuts added to the LMP.
In Figure 7.6 the distribution of y-values in the optimal LMP solution after having
added cuts is shown. The number of y-values which are larger than 0 is 167 and
the percentage of y-values which are less than 0.1 is 76.64%.
Although the cuts
have improved the lower bound, they have not improved the solution in terms of
fractionality.
Baltic - 7 Time Steps
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0
10
20
30
40
Figure 7.6: Distribution of y-values in the optimal LMP solution for the Baltic
instance after having added cuts.
The same cutting approach is used on the WAF instance. The development of
solution value and minimum reduced cost when using the approach can be seen in
Figure 7.7.
Here it is clearer to see the systematic increase and decrease of the
solution value when cuts and columns are added, respectively. The procedure was
for this instance stopped at a time limit of 10 minutes. Within this period, the lower
bound is yet again significantly improved, this time from -5912420 to -5650850.
==PAGE:80==
70
7 Computational Tests
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
Time (sec)
-5.9
-5.8
-5.7
-5.6
Z
106
WAF - 7 Time Steps
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
Time (sec)
-4000
-3000
-2000
-1000
0
min RC
Figure 7.7: The development of solution value and minimum reduced cost over time
in seconds. Cuts were added each time the minimum reduced cost reached 0.
Violation Limit
0.0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
No. of Columns
17058
15646
15730
14553
14158
No. of Cutting
22
30
33
47
59
No. of Cuts
2467
2016
1670
1876
1746
Lower Bound
-5,626,080
-5,628,580
-5,646,510
-5,693,040
-5,696,730
Table 7.6: Results from testing the violation limit on the WAF instance. No. of
Cutting is the number of times cuts have been added, while No. of Cuts refers to the
total number of cuts added to the LMP.
The effect of imposing a violation limit when cutting on the WAF instance is
shown in Table 7.6. The tendency seems to be the same as for the Baltic instance.
That is in terms of improving the lower bound it is best to have a violation limit of
0, but with larger limits fewer cuts are added. With a violation limit of 0.05, a lower
==PAGE:81==
7.4 Cutting
71
bound, which is almost as good as the best, is found while using less cuts. Because
the process was stopped at a time limit, the time spent is the same in all cases, and
therefore this is not shown in Table 7.6.
Similar to the Baltic instance, the optimal LMP solution for the WAF instance is
quite fractional, also after adding cuts. The distribution of y-values in this solution
can be seen in Figure 7.8. The number of y-values larger than 0 is 352, of which a
percentage of 74.72% is less than 0.1.
WAF - 7 Time Steps
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
0.45
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
Figure 7.8:
Distribution of y-values in the optimal LMP solution for the WAF
instance after having added cuts.
When testing the valid inequalites for arcs on the Mediterranean instance, the
procedure is stopped at a time limit of 1 hour. The development of solution value
and minimum reduced cost over time is shown in Figure 7.9. Again, adding the cuts
results in an improvement of the lower bound.
However, it can be seen that the
process is, as a result of increased complexity, significantly slower than previously.
Figure 7.10 shows the distribution of y-values in the optimal LMP solution for the
Mediterranean instance after having added cuts. In this solution, a lot of the values
are very small. Actually, 97.80% of the total 864 y-values which are larger than 0 are
also less than 0.1.
==PAGE:82==
72
7 Computational Tests
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
Time (sec)
-11
-10
-9
-8
-7
-6
-5
Z
105
Mediterranean - 7 Time Steps
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
Time (sec)
-4000
-3000
-2000
-1000
0
min RC
Figure 7.9: The development of solution value and minimum reduced cost over time
in seconds. Cuts were added each time the minimum reduced cost reached 0.
Mediterranean - 7 Time Steps
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0
200
400
600
800
Figure 7.10: Distribution of y-values in the optimal LMP solution for the Mediter-
ranean instance after having added cuts.
==PAGE:83==
7.4 Cutting
73
Altogether, the results in this section show that including valid inequalities for
commodity arcs is not efficient in regard to reducing the amount of fractionality in
the solution.
The valid inequlaties for commodity arcs include the quantity of a
certain demand. This means that after adding the cut, the use of the commodity
arc for the certain demand could force the sum of y-variables on the connection to
higher value. However, because of the large cost of operating vessels, and because
an alternative path might easily be found for the demand, this is does most likely
not occur.
Instead, it is more likely that alternative paths will be found for the
demand used to cut. Although the cuts were not efficient in regard to reducing the
fractionality, they were indeed efficient in regard to increasing the lower bound. For all
three of the tested instances, the lower bound was improved significantly when using
the arc inequalities. When testing the violation limit for Baltic and WAF, good lower
bounds were obtained considerably faster by including a small minimum violation
limit for added cuts. This is an interesting observation, as it might be beneficial for
optimizing the performance of a Branch Cut and Price algorithm, where cuts are
added repeatedly.
==PAGE:84==
74
7 Computational Tests
7.5
Branching Strategy
In this section, the different branching strategies are tested individually. Branching
on the number of vessels is not tested, as it was either not possible or only possible to
do a few times. When deciding which arc, vertex or port to branch on, the one with
the fractional level closest to 0.5 is chosen. The level 0.5 was chosen after pretesting,
where it performed the best. For testing branching strategies, the search strategy
Best First is used. In the following section, the Depth First search is tested as well.
Figure 7.11 shows the development of the lower bound over time, when branching
is performed on the Baltic instance. Branching with using a specific vessel class is
denoted V1 and branching without is denoted V0.
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
Time (sec)
-10
-8
-6
-4
-2
0
LB
105
Baltic - 7 Time Steps
V0, Port
V1, Port
V0, Ver.
V1, Ver.
V0, Arc
V1, Arc
Figure 7.11: Global lower bound over time in seconds while performing Branch and
Price using different branching decisions. Branching is made on either port, vertex
or arc flow. The notations V1 and V0 indicate whether the branching is made on
specific vessel arcs or commodity arcs, respectively.
In Figure 7.11, it can be seen that branching on ports seems to be significantly
more efficient than the other branching decisions. Especially branching on port flow
without using a specific vessel class seems to be efficient in terms of increasing the
lower bound fast. This procedure is however stopped after approximately 100 seconds,
as no more fractionality could be found on port flow, without considering a specific
vessel class. Figure 7.12 shows the average of y-values which are larger than 0 in the
solution at the node which is chosen to be branched on. Because of the fluctuation
of these values, the development of individual averages is not very clear. Therefore,
the data is fitted to second degree polynomials to be able to see the development of
the general level of the averages. The fitted curves are shown in Figure 7.13.
==PAGE:85==
7.5 Branching Strategy
75
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
Time (sec)
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
y-avg
Baltic - 7 Time Steps
Figure 7.12: The average value of the non-zero y-values in the solution at the node
chosen to be branched on.
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
Time (sec)
0.1
0.12
0.14
0.16
0.18
0.2
y-avg
Baltic - 7 Time Steps
V0, Port
V1, Port
V0, Ver.
V1, Ver.
V0, Arc
V1, Arc
Figure 7.13: The average value of the non-zero y-values in the solution at the node
chosen to be branched on. The data is fitted to a second degree polynomial.
In Figure 7.13, it can be seen that in all cases, the general level of the average of
y-values larger than 0 is quite low. When branching on port flow, the level however
seems to be especially low, compared to branching on vertex and arc flow. This is not
surprising, as this is also a branching decision of higher level than the other. In other
==PAGE:86==
76
7 Computational Tests
words, it affects more variables than vertex and arc flow branching. In Appendix A,
each fitted curve is shown individually together with the original observations.
The development of the lower bound over time when performing branching on the
WAF instance is shown in Figure 7.14. The result seems to be similar to the one
for the Baltic instance, meaning that there is a clear difference between branching
on port flow and the rest of the branching strategies. Branching on arc and vertex
flow seems to have little effect on the lower bound, whereas branching on port flow
raises the lower bound with more than 100,000 over the test period of 15 minutes.
Again, branching on port flow without using a specific vessel class seems to be the
best option in terms of increasing the lower bound.
0
200
400
600
800
1000
Time (sec)
-5.95
-5.9
-5.85
-5.8
-5.75
-5.7
LB
106
WAF - 7 Time Steps
V0, Port
V1, Port
V0, Ver.
V1, Ver.
V0, Arc
V1, Arc
Figure 7.14: Global lower bound over time in seconds while performing Branch and
Price using different branching decisions. Branching is made on either port, vertex
or arc flow. The notations V1 and V0 indicate whether the branching is made on
specific vessel arcs or commodity arcs, respectively.
Figure 7.15 shows, for the WAF instance, the average of y-values which are larger
than 0 in the solution at each node chosen to be branched on. The general levels
seem to be even lower than for the Baltic instance. Again, branching on port flow
without a specific vessel class results in the lowest level of averages.
==PAGE:87==
7.5 Branching Strategy
77
0
200
400
600
800
Time (sec)
0.115
0.12
0.125
0.13
0.135
0.14
0.145
y-avg
WAF - 7 Time Steps
V0, Port
V1, Port
V0, Ver.
V1, Ver.
V0, Arc
V1, Arc
Figure 7.15: The average value of the non-zero y-values in the solution at the node
chosen to be branched on. The data is fitted to a second degree polynomial.
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
4000
Time (sec)
-1.09
-1.08
-1.07
-1.06
-1.05
-1.04
-1.03
-1.02
LB
106
Mediterranean - 7 Time Steps
V0, Port
V1, Port
Figure 7.16: Global lower bound over time in seconds while performing Branch
and Price using port branching decisions. Vertex and arc branching did not yield
any improvement of LB within the time period and is therefore not shown for the
Mediterranean instance. The notations V1 and V0 indicate whether the branching is
made on specific vessel arcs or commodity arcs, respectively.
When the branching strategies were tested on the Mediterranean instance, only
branching on port flow resulted in an improvement of the bound within test period
==PAGE:88==
78
7 Computational Tests
of 1 hour. Therefore, the lower bound development is only shown for these branching
strategies in Figure 7.16. Also for the Mediterranean instance, these port flow branch-
ing strategies are effective. This is clear although branching is only performed a few
times within the time period of the test. Figure 7.17 shows, for the Mediterranean
instance, the fitted curves of the average of y-values which are larger than 0 in the
solution at each node chosen to be branched on. Because of the few times branching
has been done, fitted curves are very close to the original observations. This can be
seen in Appendix A, where the fitted curves are plotted together with the original
observations.
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
4000
Time (sec)
0.019
0.0195
0.02
0.0205
0.021
0.0215
y-avg
Mediterranean - 7 Time Steps
V0, Port
V1, Port
Figure 7.17: The average value of the non-zero y-values in the solution at the node
chosen to be branched on. The data is fitted to a second degree polynomial.
7.6
Search Strategy
Based on the results of the previous section, a priority list for branching strategies is
defined for the search strategy test. The priority list for branching decisions is chosen
to be
1. V0 - Port
2. V1 - Port
3. V1 - Vertex
4. V1 - Arc
Using this priority list, it will initially be tested if any port flow is fractional. If so,
branching is performed, and otherwise it is tested if any port flow for a certain vessel
==PAGE:89==
7.6 Search Strategy
79
class is fractional. This procedure is continued until a fractionality is found. If not
before, it will necessarily occur when investigating arc flow for specific vessel classes.
Otherwise, it would be an integer solution and it would not be possible to branch.
The development of bounds over time for the Baltic instance is shown in Figure
7.18. The search strategies were tested in half an hour for this instance. In this time
period, an upper bound was not found using the Best First search. Using Depth First,
an upper bound is found rather quickly, but it is not improved during the remaining
time period. In regard to the lower bound, the Best First search performs significantly
better. In the Depth First search, the lower bound is initially increased rapidly, but
from then on it stays at the same level.
0
500
1000
1500
2000
Time (sec)
-1
0
1
2
3
106
Baltic - 7 Time Steps
 LB, Best First
 LB, Depth First
UB, Depth First
Figure 7.18: The bounds found for Baltic using the two search strategies: Best
First and Depth First.
Figure 7.19 shows testing of search strategies for the WAF instance. These results
are similar to the ones for the Baltic instance. The Best First search has the best
lower bound development and only Depth First search provides an upper bond. For
this instance, the upper bound is, however, not found before the end of the time
period of one hour.
The result from testing search strategies for the Mediterranean instance is shown
in Figure 7.20. This test was performed in two hours for each search strategy. Within
this time, the development of the lower bound is very similar for the two strategies.
Also, neither of the strategies provided an upper bound within the time period.
==PAGE:90==
80
7 Computational Tests
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
Time (sec)
-6
-5
-4
-3
-2
-1
106
WAF - 7 Time Steps
 LB, Best First
 LB, Depth First
UB, Depth First
Figure 7.19: The bounds found for WAF, using the two search strategies: Best
First and Depth First.
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
8000
Time (sec)
-11.5
-11
-10.5
-10
-9.5
-9
-8.5
-8
105
Mediterranean - 7 Time Steps
 LB, Best First
 LB, Depth First
Figure 7.20: The bounds found for Mediterranean, using the two search strategies:
Best First and Depth First.
The Depth First search was implemented such that the child node at the largest
level with the smallest lower bound would be chosen to be branched on. It is not
unlikely that the smallest lower bound at the largest level equals the global lower
bound in the first few iterations. Since only a few iterations are performed when
testing the search strategies on the Mediterranean instance, this probably explains
==PAGE:91==
7.7 Branch and Bound
81
the very similar behavior. In general, Best First search does, however, seem to perform
the best in regard to increasing the global lower bound.
7.7
Branch and Bound
Only few upper bounds were found using Depth First and they were rarely improved
within the test period. Using Best First did not produce any upper bound at all. As an
alternative, upper bound can be found by solving the RMP as a MIP using CPLEX’s
Branch and Bound algorithm. The result will of course depend on how many and
which columns the RMP include at the time it is being solved. This approach has
been tested for the Baltic, WAF and Mediterranean instance, by initially solving the
LMP using column generation and the solving the problem as a MIP using the column
found during this procedure. The results are shown in Table 7.7 together with the
best upper bound found in the previous section. From this table, it is clear to see
that the method is beneficial to use, as it gives better bounds for all three instances.
UB
Baltic
WAF
Med.
Depth First
2.17 · 106
−1.44 · 106
∞
B & B
0.82 · 106
−2.81 · 106
6.94 · 106
Table 7.7: An overview of upper bounds determined by using Depth First seach and
Branch and Bound, respectively.
7.8
Convergence Criterion
After some additional testing of solving the RMP as a MIP, it was found that the
upper bounds in Table 7.7 were significantly improved after having added cuts to
RMP and performed column generation again. Adding cuts to the commodity arcs
forces the commodity paths to take alternative routes. That could be reason for the
improved bounds as it might result in constructing more diversive paths, which are
valuable in a MIP. Commonly, when cutting or branching is performed in combination
with column generation, it is not done before an optimal solution is reached. However,
when testing the column generation procedure on the Pacific instance, it took slightly
longer than 3 hours to solve to optimality. Thus, in this section it will be tested if
the convergence criterion can be used to apply cutting or Branch and Price earlier,
to generate more columns, which are valuable in a MIP, faster.
Table 7.8 shows the results for using different methods in combination with the
convergence criterion. The methods are Branch and Price, using Best First and Depth
First, respectively, and column generation in combination with the cutting approach
from section 7.4. The methods are used over 5 hours, and thereafter the RMP is
solved as MIP for 2 hours using all the columns generated. The parameters selected
for the convergence criterion are:
==PAGE:92==
82
7 Computational Tests
• The criterion is checked every 20th iteration: ζ = 20
• The minimum improvement of the objective is: ξZ = 100000
• The minimum improvement of the average of min. reduced costs is: ξµ = 500
The values for ξZ and ξµ are quite large. The reason they are chosen to be large
values is to provoke that the criterion is met several times, so that the methods will
have an effect on the generated columns. The size of the set of minimum reduced
cost is chosen to be 10.
Method
Converged
Columns
UB
Convergence - B & P w. BF
13
215,912
25,438,100
Convergence - B & P w. DF
9
173,311
24,688,900
Convergence - CG w. Cutting
4
101,840
23,253,800
Optimal - CG w. Cutting
-
148,111
22,662,400
Table 7.8: Results from testing the convergence criterion for the Pacific instance.
The first column describes the method used before solving the RMP as a MIP. The
numbers in the second column are the amount of times the convergence criterion was
met. The numbers in the third column are the total number of columns added before
solving the RMP as a MIP, and the values under UB are upper bounds provided by
solving the MIP.
The solution value of the best found integer solution (UB) depends on the columns
generated initially by using the methods listed in Table 7.8. The UB which was found
by using the columns generated during Branch and Price with Depth First search is
lower than the one from the similar approach with Best First. This might be explained
by the fact that when using Depth First, the RMP is solved for a larger level of the
branching tree, where the solution probably is closer to an integer solution than it is
at a smaller level of the tree. It could however also be due the number of columns
added, as it might be easier to find a good integer solution when there are less
columns and thereby less variables in the MIP. The upper bound is even lower when
column generation is performed in combination with cutting. The cuts are added
for a certain commodity arc and demand combination. Therefore, dual variables are
given for separate demands. This might force the columns to be more complex in
their structure, which potentially is beneficial when the problem is solved as a MIP.
For comparison, the problem is also solved without using the convergence criterion.
The fact that the upper bound is the lowest in this, may suggest that it is preferable
to use the convergence criterion if it is possible to solve the problem to optimality
within the time period.
==PAGE:93==
7.9 Branch Cut and Price
83
7.9
Branch Cut and Price
In a Branch Cut and Price procedure, Branch and Price is combined with cutting.
This is implemented by adding cuts at each node of the Branch and Price tree. Each
cut which is added at a node will be saved and used at all other nodes in the remaining
part of the algorithm. The Branch Cut and Price algorithm is tested on the Baltic
and the WAF instances and compared to the results from the performance test of
Branch and Price on these instances. When testing on the Baltic instance, cuts are
added until no more cuts can be found, and when testing on the WAF instance, cuts
are added no more than five times. The results can be seen in Figure 7.21 and 7.22.
0
500
1000
1500
2000
Time (sec)
-6
-4
-2
0
2
LB
105
Baltic - 7 Time Steps
B-P
B-C-P
Figure 7.21: Lower bound over time for both, Branch and Price, and Branch Cut
and Price.
It can be seen in Figure 7.21, that the Branch Cut and Price algorithm spends
quite some time initially on adding cuts. Therefore, it takes longer time before a
lower bound is found. Also, over time the lower bound is increased slower when using
the Branch Cut and Price algorithm on the Baltic instance. When cuts are added,
the commodity path pricing problem must be solved individually for the demands
that have been used to construct cuts due to associated dual variables. As it could
be seen in Table 7.3 with run setting results, more time was spent when solving the
commodity path pricing problem for individual demands. Thus, this could be part
of the reason. Furthermore, adding cuts might slow down the process of solving the
LMP at each node. When using the Branch Cut and Price algorithm on the WAF
instance, the benefit of adding cuts is, however, large enough for it to outperform
Branch and Price. At least within the 2 hours during which the algorithms were
tested.
==PAGE:94==
84
7 Computational Tests
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
4000
Time (sec)
-6
-5.8
-5.6
-5.4
LB
106
WAF - 7 Time Steps
B-P
B-C-P
Figure 7.22: Lower bound over time for both, Branch and Price, and for Branch
Cut and Price.
7.10
Solution Analysis
In this section, the best found bounds are presented, and the costs in the best found
solutions are analyzed together with the properties of the corresponding networks.
In the previous tests, the duration on arcs in the Pacific and World Small instance
were assumed to be a maximum of 4 weeks. To test the effect of this assumption, an
additional maximum duration of 6 weeks is considered in this section. The notation
W4 and W6 refer to whether the arcs in the instance have a maximum duration of 4
or 6 respectively. Likewise, the notation T7 and T14 refer to whether 7 or 14 time
steps were used for the instance.
7.10.1
Bounds
Bounds have been determined by using the knowledge gained from the test results
in the previous sections. As search strategy, Best First is used and the priority list
defined in Section 7.6 is used for branching decisions. To find good upper bounds,
solving the RMP as a MIP using CPLEX was a good approach. To find columns which
are beneficial when solving the RMP as a MIP, column generation is performed in
combination with the cutting as described in Section 7.4.
In Table 7.9, the best
found upper bounds are shown together with the methods used to produce the upper
bounds. M. Lim. is the time limit of the methods and BB. Lim. indicates the time
limit for the Branch and Bound algorithm used by CPLEX. When solving Baltic
T14 and WAF T7, the method has no time limit, but uses a limit for the number of
times cuts were added, denoted CL. When solving Baltic T7 by using the Branch
and Price algorithm, an optimal solution is determined after 2 hours and 17 minutes.
Due to rather rough time discretization, the optimal solution value for Baltic T7 is
however not so good compared to results previously reported for Baltic instance (see
==PAGE:95==
7.10 Solution Analysis
85
Table 2.2). For Baltic T14, on the other hand, the result is quite good. Actually,
it is the second best compared to previously reported results for the Baltic instance.
The results for the WAF instance do seem satisfactory, although a weekly cost of
approximately -5.5 million $ has been reported in several of previous tests for the
WAF instance.
The solutions for the Mediterranean instance does not seem very
profitable. Actually, these upper bounds are approximately 4 million $ larger than
the best found solution in Brouer et al. (2015), is the largest of previously reported
results on this instance. The solution values for the two largest of the considered
instance are not very good. The solution values for the Pacific instance are larger
than 20 million $, and the solution values for the World Small instance are more than
one hundred million $. For both instances, this is far from the previously reported
best solution values. When the maximum arc duration is increased to six weeks (W6),
less good solution values are found, probably due to increased complexity.
Instance
UB
Method
M. Lim.
BB. Lim.
Baltic T7
354139
Branch and Price
-
-
Baltic T14
-262799
CG w. cutting (CL = 40)
-
3
WAF T7
-3012220
CG w. cutting (CL = 20)
-
0.5
WAF T14
-4321160
CG w. cutting
6
3
Med. T7
6537170
CG w. cutting
6
3
Med. T14
6393410
CG w. cutting
8
4
Pacific T7W4
21729200
CG w. cutting
8
4
Pacific T7W6
24219100
CG w. cutting
8
4
World S. T7W4
102965000
CG w. convergence & cutting
12
6
World S. T7W6
103714000
CG w. convergence & cutting
12
6
Table 7.9: Best found upper bounds shown together with the methods used. M.
Lim. refers to the methods time limits. BB. Lim is the time limit for the Branch and
Bound algorithm used after the method. Both time limits are shown in hours.
In Table 7.10, the best found lower bounds are shown together with the methods
used to produce them. Because an optimal solution is found for Baltic T7, the lower
bound equals the upper bound. For Baltic T14, there is a small gap of 5.9%. The gaps,
however, increase considerably when the size of the instances is increased. Already
for WAF T7, the gap is increased to 42.76%. Lower bounds are not reported for the
World Small instance as column generation was stopped at a time limit of 15 hours,
before optimum was reached.
==PAGE:96==
86
7 Computational Tests
Instance
LB
Method
M. Lim.
Baltic T7
354139
Branch and Price
-
Baltic T14
-279474
Branch and Price
8
WAF T7
-5262810
Branch Cut and Price
7
WAF T14
-7207860
Branch and Price
6
Med. T7
-455572
CG w. cutting
6
Med. T14
-1351140
CG w. cutting
12
Pacific T7W4
-10161800
CG w. cutting
8
Pacific T7W6
-10168500
CG w. cutting
8
Table 7.10: Best found lower bounds shown together with the methods used. M.
Lim. refers to the methods’ time limit in hours.
7.10.2
Cost Analysis
In Table 7.11, an overview of explicit costs is provided for all of the best found
solutions.
Instance
Obj.
Revenue
TC
Fuel
Port
Canal
Move
Trans.
Penalty
Baltic T7
354
3434
252
358
441
0
1909
8.869
820
Baltic T14
-263
3735
252
431
336
0
2149
0
305
WAF T7
-3012
11464
1379
1645
533
0
2691
0
2204
WAF T14
-4321
13541
1946
2101
992
0
3232
0
948
Med. T7
6537
1153
497
522
268
0
579
0
5823
Med. T14
6393
1300
658
721
356
0
678
0
5280
Pacific T7W4
21729
23898
6986
7525
775
437
9210
0
20634
Pacific T7W6
24219
22438
7098
7228
800
437
8871
0.059
22223
World S. T7W4
102965
53915
16226
21287
2211
3550
13505
0
100101
World S. T7W6
103714
52854
18228
20892
2544
2144
13726
0
99034
Table 7.11:
Overview of the best found solutions’ weekly revenues and costs in
1,000$.
The penalty for not satisfying demands seems to be quite large for all instances.
For example, the penalty in World Small T7W4, which is approximately 100 million
dollars, is almost the same value as the solution value. As comparison, this value
is only approximately 15 million dollars in the best found solution in Brouer et al.
(2014b) (calculated as weekly cost). Naturally, canal cost is only included the solution
value for the two largest instances. For all instances, the transshipment cost is either
0 or very little compared to the other costs, as no or very little transshipment is
performed. This investigated further in the following section. The time charter cost
==PAGE:97==
7.10 Solution Analysis
87
(TC) and the fuel/bunker are for instances close to the same value, but in general,
bunker cost seems to be dominating cost of the two. They are both larger than the
port call cost in all instances except for the Baltic.
7.10.3
Network Analysis
To analyze the networks in best found solutions, the following key performance indices
(KPIs) are defined:
• Nr: Number of rotations
• AwP: Average weekly port calls
• Fd: Fleet deployment (%)
• Cu: Capacity utilization (%)
• Cr: Completely rejected demand (%)
• Sd: Satisfied demand (%)
• PwT: Number of commodity paths with transshipment
• AtT: Average transshipment time
The number Nr is simply the amount of rotations in the network. For each of
these rotations, it is calculated how many ports are called per week. The average
of these numbers is the average of the weekly port calls, AwP. The fleet deployment
percentage, Fd, is calculated by dividing the number of used vessels with the number
of available vessels, and the capacity utilization, Cu, is calculated by dividing all
flow on all commodity arcs with all the capacity on all active vessel arcs. The KPI
Cr expresses the percentage of all demands which were not handled at all. Hence,
when calculating this percentage, it is counted how many demands did not have any
containers shipped, and then this number is divided by the number of demands in
the instance. The KPI Sd, instead focusses on the total number of container units
shipped. When calculating Sd, this number is divided by the sum of unit quantity
for all demands.
The number of commodity paths which includes transshipment
is expressed by PwT, and the average transshipment time of all transshipments is
expressed by AtT. The KPIs have been calculated for all the best found solutions,
and are shown in Table 7.12. In this table, it can be seen that the solutions from five
different instances contain commodity paths with transshipment. This might seem
contradictory to the cost overview in Table 7.11, where only two solutions include
transshipment cost. However, this is explained by the fact that a few of the ports
from LINER-LIB have a transshipment cost of 0, which makes it possible to perform
“free transshipment”.
The number of rotations lies between 2 and 12. That this range is not higher
may be a bit surprising, as the number of rotations in Brouer et al. (2014b) is up
==PAGE:98==
88
7 Computational Tests
to 41 in the best solution for World Small.
The small number rotations may be
an effect of the model’s ability to construct more complex services.
The solution
from Brouer et al. (2014b) did, however, also fulfills significantly more demand. In
general, and especially for large instances, it seems to be challenging to determine
rotations which make it profitable to satisfy demands. For the three largest considered
instances, approximately 90 % of the demands are completely rejected. At the same
time, only approximately 50-71% of the fleet is deployed for these instances. By the
KPIs Sd, it can however be seen that in terms of quantity the rejected demand is less.
This could indicate that the solver prioritizes demands with large quantities, which
could be a side effect of using the cutting approach. Cuts are added for arc and
demand combinations, using the quantity of the demands. The smaller the quantity
of the demand is, the less commodity flow for the demand is required before the valid
inequality is violated, which might cause that more cuts are added for these demands.
Due to the associated dual costs, the construction of the columns for these demands
may be limited. The level of capacity utilization suggests that more cargo could be
carried by the vessels in the existing rotations. This is especially the case for the
Mediterranean instance.
Instance
Nr
AwP
Fd
Cu
CrD
Sd
PwT
AtT
Baltic T7
2
2
100
74.72
36.36
83.28
1
4
Baltic T14
2
2
100
76.93
36.36
93.78
0
0
WAF T7
4
0.50
66.67
55.09
45.95
74.20
0
0
WAF T14
5
0.80
95.24
46.07
27.03
88.90
3
1.67
Med. T7
3
2
50.00
19.87
89.86
22.82
0
0
Med. T14
4
2.25
70.00
19.55
89.86
30.02
0
0
Pacific T7W4
8
0.75
71.00
38.81
91.55
53.3
0
0
Pacific T7W6
9
1.11
68.00
33.94
92.80
49.7
1
2
World S. T7W4
10
0.60
60.46
23.65
92.86
21.97
3
2.33
World S. T7W6
12
0.69
66.92
20.52
92.46
22.8
2
1
Table 7.12: KPIs for each of the best found integer solutions.
Table 7.13 shows the rotations and a selection of the commodity paths from the
optimal solution for Baltic T7. Each line in the table corresponds to a directed arc
with the source vertex on the left side and the target vertex on the right side of the
duration of the arc. The vessel class Feeder 450 has been assigned to Rotation 1,
and Feeder 800 to Rotation 2. The sum of duration is 672 for Rotation 1 and 336
for Rotation 2, which means that the amount of vessels assigned to the rotations
is 672
168 = 4 and 336
168 = 2, respectively. An interesting feature of Rotations 1 is that
both, St.
Petersburg, and Bremerhaven, are visited twice.
This is a clear effect
of the model’s ability to construct non-simple services. The cargo on Commodity
==PAGE:99==
7.10 Solution Analysis
89
Path 2 begins its travel from Bremerhaven at time index 24, from where it is being
transported to St. Petersburg. This travel is located at the bottom of Rotation 1.
As the service of the rotation is cyclic, the vertex in the bottom right is the same as
on the top left in each of the rotations. Hence, the next travel in Commodity Path
2 is the same as the one in the top of Rotation 1. After this travel is performed, the
cargo is transported from Gnydia to its destination port Kotka, which it reaches at
time index 120, one and a half weeks after the start of the journey. The flow refers to
the amount of cargo sent along the paths, which is 6 for Commodity Path 2. Similar,
Commodity Path 1 and 4 can be tracked along the service of Rotation 2. The arcs in
Commodity Path 1, 2 and 4 are connected, meaning that each vertex on the right side
of the duration is the same as the one on the left side of the duration on the next line.
This is not the case for Commodity Path 3, which indicates that a transshipment
is performed. Initially, cargo on Commodity Path 3 is transported by a vessel on
Rotation 2 from Bremerhaven to Gdynia. At Gdynia it is being transshipped, and
therefore it leaves the port on a vessel from Rotation 1, which transports the cargo
to its destination port Kotka.
Commodity Path 1 - Flow 65
(p, t)
Dur.
(p, t)
(Bremerhaven,48)
96
(Gdynia,144)
(Gdynia, 144)
48
(Aarhus,24)
(Aarhus, 24)
48
(Stavanger,72)
Commodity Path 2 - Flow 6
(p, t)
Dur.
(p, t)
(Bremerhaven,24)
120
(St Petersburg,144)
(St Petersburg,144)
72
(Gdynia,48)
(Gdynia,48)
72
(Kotka,120)
Commodity Path 3 - Flow 181
(p, t)
Dur.
(p, t)
(Bremerhaven,48)
96
(Gdynia,144)
(Gdynia,48)
72
(Kotka,120)
Commodity Path 4 - Flow 660
(p, t)
Dur.
(p, t)
(Gothenburg,0)
48
(Bremerhaven,48)
Rotation 1 - Feeder 450
(p, t)
Dur.
(p, t)
(St Petersburg,144)
72
(Gdynia,48)
(Gdynia,48)
72
(Kotka,120)
(Kotka,120)
120
(Bremerhaven,72)
(Bremerhaven,72)
96
(Kaliningrad,0)
(Kaliningrad,0)
72
(St Petersburg,72)
(St Petersburg,72)
120
(Bremerhaven,24)
(Bremerhaven,24)
120
(St Petersburg,144)
Rotation 2 - Feeder 800
(p, t)
Dur.
(p, t)
(Gothenburg,0)
48
(Bremerhaven,48)
(Bremerhaven,48)
96
(Gdynia,144)
(Gdynia,144)
48
(Aarhus,24)
(Aarhus,24)
48
(Stavanger,72)
(Stavanger,72)
48
(Bremerhaven,120)
(Bremerhaven,120)
48
(Gothenburg,0)
Table 7.13: Example solution, showing the rotations in the optimal solution for
Baltic T7 together with a selection of the commodity paths. The commodity path
which includes transshipment is marked with blue.
==PAGE:100==
90
==PAGE:101==
CHAPTER 8
Conclusions and
Future Work
In this work, the effect of runs has been tested, whereby the clustering of demands
and solving the commodity path pricing problem for multiple demands at the same
time was shown to be an effective approach. The solve time for the pricing problem
when using this approach was on average approximately 2 seconds for the largest
considered instance, namely World Small. When demands were not clustered, the
solve time of the same problem was on average approximately 42 seconds for the
same instance. Tightening time limits for ports before solving the commodity path
pricing problem for individual demands also seems beneficial. When this was done, the
aforementioned solve time of approximately 42 second was reduced to approximately
29 seconds. This is an interesting result because the valid inequalities presented in
this thesis require the commodity path pricing problem to be solved individually for
the demands, which are included in cuts. Tightening time limits for ports had little
effect when demands were clustered into runs, which may be incitement for testing
the effect of solving the model RCP-TL in future work. As described in section 5.8.3,
this model can be used to structure the demands in runs, so that time limits for ports
are minimized. The computational tests, however, also show that it is probably more
relevant to reduce the solve time of the column generation procedure. This seems to
be a significant bottleneck for large instances, mainly because of slow improvement of
the solution value and a long solve time for the RMP. To reduce the solve time of the
column generation procedure, it may be relevant to implement stabilization methods,
and reduce the amount of columns included in the RMP. The latter may be achieved
by limiting the number of added columns. In this thesis, a column was added for each
demand, if the associated minimum reduced cost was negative. Instead, a parameter
could be used to limit the amount of added columns. If the limiting parameter was
5, then a column would only be added for the 5 demands which have the 5 lowest
minimum reduced costs. It could also be considered to remove columns from RMP.
If columns are not used over a certain amount of time during the column generation
or the Branch and Price procedure, it may be beneficial to remove these columns to
simplify the restricted master problem.
The arc inequalities were not effective in regard to reducing the fractionality, which
could be explained by the unbalanced cost-benefit relation between using a commodity
arc for a certain demand and operating vessels on the same connection. The arc
==PAGE:102==
92
8 Conclusions and Future Work
inequalities were however quite efficient for increasing the lower bound. Additionally,
the process of improving the lower bound can be made faster by using a small violation
limit, which may be especially useful in a branch cut and price setting. A violation
limit of 0.05 seems to be suitable for this. In future analysis of cutting techniques, it
could be prioritized to use demands which are already included in other cuts, as this
may prevent the removal of demands from runs. This is desirable as the results showed
significant faster solve time for the pricing problem when demands were clustered in
runs.
As a part of the Branch and Price settings, the effect of branching on port, vertex
and arc flow were tested separately. Branching on port flow yielded fast improvement
of the lower bound, especially, when this was done including all vessel arcs connected
to the port. When vessel arcs for a specific vessel class was used, the improvement
of the lower bound was less fast, but still considerably faster than branching on
vertex and arc flow.
Due to these results, the order: port flow, vertex flow and
arc flow, was used for determining what to branch on when performing Branch and
Price. It would be interesting to additionally consider the branch history of a node
when making these decisions.
For example, if the flow at a port was fixed to a
certain number, it could be that branching on vertices associated with the specific
port has a positive impact on the fractionality. Furthermore, it would be interesting
to consider additional branching options. For example could branching be made on
directed flow between sets of ports or vertices. The Best First search strategy generally
outperformed the Depth First search strategy in regard to improving the lower bound.
On the other hand, the Depth First search had the advantage that it found upper
bounds faster. The improvement of these upper bounds were however rather limited,
and solving the RMP as MIP using Branch and Bound seemed to provide better upper
bounds. The latter method is naturally dependent on the columns included in RMP
at the time it is being solved as a MIP. Column generation, together with adding of
arc inequalities, was an efficient appoach for generating columns which were useful for
constructing good integer solutions. In the aim of faster construction of paths, which
are useful in a MIP, the effect of branching and cutting before reaching optimum was
tested by using a convergence criterion. The results, however, showed that this was
not a desirable approach. At least not for the Pacific instance. Although the instance
was solved slowly, in did reach an optimal solution within reasonable time (slightly
more than 3 hours), and therefore it was better to solve the problem to optimality
before adding cuts or branching. The Branch and Price algorithm was extended to a
Branch Cut and Price algorithm. This improved the performance when solving the
WAF instance. On the Baltic instance, the Branch and Price algorithm was however
faster, as the time spent on cutting was too much compared to the gain. In future
studies it is therefore relevant to test the inclusion of the violation limit in Branch
Cut and Price, as it was shown to be useful for improving lower bounds faster and
reducing the amount of added columns.
By using the Branch and Price algorithm it was possible to determine an optimal
solution for the Baltic instance with 7 time steps. The rough time discretization,
however, is causing the optimal value to be significantly larger than values previously
==PAGE:103==
8 Conclusions and Future Work
93
determined for this instance. When the number of time steps was increased to 14
for the Baltic instance, a solution value was found which was better than most of
the previously reported solution values. This solution was not optimal, but had a
relatively small gap of 5.9%. For the WAF instance, both 7 and 14 time steps, solution
values were significantly better than the worst reported value, but also significantly
worse than best value reported for WAF. Also the gaps were increased considerably
compared to the Baltic instance.
In general, when the size of the instances was
increased, the solution values increased as well, compared to previously reported
results for LINER-LIB instances.
The cost analysis indicates that the large solution values were mainly caused by a
significant penalty from not being able to fulfill demands. This was especially the case
for large instances. Inspecting the constructed networks showed that, for the large
instances, there was much unutilized capacity, and also available vessels to deploy.
Hence, it seems like high solution values are not caused by the properties of the
graph and model, but rather by the challenge of determining good integer solutions.
One reason for this is that the exact methods tested in this thesis were quite time
consuming when solving the large instances, another is that they were not effective in
terms on reducing fractionality. This, of course, could be interpreted as motivation
for further improvement of the exact methods, or development of heuristic solution
approaches. As future work, it will also be relevant to experiment with the properties
of the graph. In this thesis, arcs were only included if the speed of vessels allowed
arrival at ports exactly 24 hours before next departure. It may happen that this is
not possible, but instead it is possible to arrive earlier than 24 hours before the next
departure, and just have slightly longer idle time. This would in reality be possible,
and including such arcs might give better options for constructing profitable networks.
It would also be interesting to consider simplifactions of the graph. Instead of letting
all vertices connect, it may be useful to impose auxiliary vertices which can function
as a link between multiple vertices. As an example, a vertex could correspond to a
location close to but slightly west of Europe. Instead of having directed arcs from
all ports in e.g. North East America to the ports in Europe, the directed arcs could
end in the auxiliary vertex corresponding to being close to but west of Europe at
a certain time. Given this location and time, it is possible to calculate how much
time it takes to get to the European ports. Hence, arcs from the auxiliary vertex to
vertices associated with the European ports could be included in the graph. Thereby,
a link from North East American ports to European ports would be made without
connecting all pairs of vertices explicitly.
In general, the time index graph and the model suggested in this thesis do indeed
pose challenges in regard to finding good integer solutions. Several methods were
tested and profitable networks were constructed for the two smallest instances from
LINER-LIB. There is, however, clearly room for improvement when solving the larger
instances. The benefits from construcing realistic, flexible and profitable networks
are vast, which is a motivation to develop the time index graph, model and methods
further.
==PAGE:104==
94
==PAGE:105==
APPENDIX A
Data Fitting
Baltic
0
20
40
60
80
100
Time (sec)
0.08
0.1
0.12
0.14
0.16
0.18
y-avg
V0 - Port
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
Time (sec)
0.1
0.15
0.2
y-avg
V1 - Port
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
Time (sec)
0.12
0.14
0.16
0.18
0.2
0.22
y-avg
V0 - Vertex
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
Time (sec)
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
y-avg
V1 - Vertex
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
Time (sec)
0.12
0.14
0.16
0.18
0.2
0.22
y-avg
V0 - Arc
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
Time (sec)
0.12
0.14
0.16
0.18
0.2
0.22
y-avg
V1 - Arc
Figure A.1: Original observations of the average of y-values plotted together with
their respective fitted curves. The averages were calculated from the LMP solutions
at parent nodes just before branching was performed.
==PAGE:106==
96
A Data Fitting
WAF
0
200
400
600
800
Time (sec)
0.09
0.1
0.11
0.12
0.13
0.14
y-avg
V0 - Port
0
200
400
600
800
Time (sec)
0.1
0.12
0.14
0.16
y-avg
V1 - Port
0
200
400
600
800
Time (sec)
0.1
0.12
0.14
0.16
0.18
y-avg
V0 - Vertex
0
200
400
600
800
Time (sec)
0.11
0.12
0.13
0.14
0.15
0.16
y-avg
V1 - Vertex
0
200
400
600
800
Time (sec)
0.12
0.13
0.14
y-avg
V0 - Arc
0
200
400
600
800
Time (sec)
0.11
0.12
0.13
0.14
0.15
y-avg
V1 - Arc
Figure A.2: Original observations of the average of y-values plotted together with
their respective fitted curves. The averages were calculated from the LMP solutions
at parent nodes just before branching was performed.
==PAGE:107==
A Data Fitting
97
Mediterranean
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
Time (sec)
0.019
0.0195
0.02
0.0205
0.021
0.0215
y-avg
V0 - Port
2000
2500
3000
3500
Time (sec)
0.0192
0.0194
0.0196
0.0198
0.02
0.0202
y-avg
V1 - Port
Figure A.3: Original observations of the average of y-values plotted together with
their respective fitted curves. The averages were calculated from the LMP solutions
at parent nodes just before branching was performed.
==PAGE:108==
98
==PAGE:109==
Bibliography
Agarwal, R. and Ö. Ergun. “Ship Scheduling and Network Design for Cargo Routing
in Liner Shipping”. In: Transportation Science 42.2 (2008), pages 175–196.
Brouer, B. D., G. Desaulniers, and D. Pisinger. “A Matheuristic for the liner ship-
ping network design problem”. In: Transportation Research Part E: Logistics and
Transportation Review 72 (2014), pages 42–59.
Brouer, B. D. et al. “A Matheuristic for the Liner Shipping Network Design Problem
with Transit Time Restrictions”. In: Computational Logistics: 6th International
Conference, ICCL 2015, Delft, The Netherlands, September 23-25, 2015, Pro-
ceedings. Edited by F. Corman, S. Voß, and R. R. Negenborn. Cham: Springer
International Publishing, 2015, pages 195–208.
Brouer, B. D. et al. “A Base Integer Programming Model and Benchmark Suite for
Liner-Shipping Network Design”. In: Transportation Science 48.2 (2014), pages 281–
312.
Cariou, P. “Is slow steaming a sustainable means of reducing {CO2} emissions from
container shipping?” In: Transportation Research Part D: Transport and Environ-
ment 16.3 (2011), pages 260–264.
Fagerholt, K. “Designing optimal routes in a liner shipping problem”. In: Maritime
Policy & Management 31.4 (2004), pages 259–268.
International Maritime Organization. Third IMO Greenhouse Gas Study. 2015.
Karsten, C. V. et al. “The time constrained multi-commodity network flow problem
and its application to liner shipping network design”. In: Transportation Research
Part E: Logistics and Transportation Review 76 (2015), pages 122–138.
Maersk. Annual Report 2013. 2013.
— Transport and Trade. 2017. url: http://www.maersk.com/en/industries/
transport (visited on April 11, 2017).
Notteboom, T. “A carrier’s perspective on container network configuration at sea and
on land”. In: Journal of International Logistics and Trade 1.2 (2004), pages 65–87.
==PAGE:110==
100
Bibliography
Plum, C. E., D. Pisinger, and M. M. Sigurd. “A service flow model for the liner
shipping network design problem”. In: European Journal of Operational Research
235.2 (2014). Maritime Logistics, pages 378–386.
Rana, K. and R. G. Vickson. “Routing Container Ships Using Lagrangean Relaxation
and Decomposition.” In: Transportation Science 25.3 (1991), page 201.
Reinhardt, L. and D. Pisinger. “A Branch and Cut algorithm for the container ship-
ping network design problem”. In: Flexible Services and Manufacturing Journal
24.3 (2012), pages 349–374.
The Economist. The humble hero. 2013. url: http://www.economist.com/news/
finance-and-economics/21578041-containers-have-been-more-important-
globalisation-freer-trade-humble (visited on April 20, 2017).
UNCTAD. “Review of Maritime Transport 2016”. In: 2016.
World Shipping Council. About The Industry. 2017. url: http://www.worldshipping.
org/about-the-industry (visited on April 20, 2017).
