==PAGE:1==
AUDIBILITY OF NONLINEAR
DISTORTION IN MICRO-SPEAKERS
MSC. THESIS
JULY 30TH 2017
Christoforos Kanavakis (s152799)
==PAGE:2==
Audibility of nonlinear distortion in micro-speakers
This report was prepared by:
Christoforos Kanavakis (s152799)
Advisors:
Finn T. Agerkvist - Associate Professor (DTU), fa@elektro.dtu.dk
Ewen Mc Donald - Associate Professor (DTU), emcd@elektro.dtu.dk
Morten B. Søndergaard - Senior Acoustic Engineer (Goertek EU), Birkmose@goertek.eu
Sune Olsen - Acoustic Engineer (Goertek EU), Sune@goertek.eu
DTU Electrical Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Elektrovej, Building 352
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
Tel: +45 45253954
studieadministration@elektro.dtu.dk
Project period:
January 30th, 2017- June 30th, 2017
ECTS:
30
Education:
Master of Science
Field:
Engineering Acoustics
Class:
Msc Thesis
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial fulﬁlment of the requirements for gradu-
ation in the above education at the Technical University of Denmark.
Copyrights:
©DTU, 2017
==PAGE:3==
Table of Contents
1
Introduction
2
2
Fundamental Theory
4
2.1
Signals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.1.1
Correlation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2.1
Linear Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2.2
Nonlinear Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Distortion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
Psychoacoustics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.4.1
The Human Ear . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.4.2
Frequency Selectivity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.4.3
Masking
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.5
Measures of Distortion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.5.1
Conventional Metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.5.2
Non-Conventional Metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.6
Speakers and micro-speakers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.6.1
The electro-dynamic loudspeaker
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.6.2
Linear model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.6.3
Major loudspeaker non-linearities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
2.6.4
Microspeakers
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3
Procedure
25
3.1
Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.2
Anechoic Measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.2.1
Ampliﬁer set-up and level output . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.2.2
Measuring the speaker’s responses - conventional Metrics
. . . . . . . .
27
3.2.3
Linear distortion compensation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.2.4
Recording the Samples for the Listening Tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
i
==PAGE:4==
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ii
3.3
Listening Tests - Assessors subjective evaluation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.3.1
Sample’s Characteristics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.3.2
Conﬁguration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.3.3
Testing method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.3.4
Assessors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4
Results and Analysis
37
4.1
Rnonlin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.2
Subjective Tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
4.3
Rnonlin versus Subjective Tests
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
5
Model improvements & Discussion
57
5.1
Addition of correlated noise
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
5.2
Addition of correlated noise in a stepped manner
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
5.3
Comparison of all Modiﬁcations to the Listening Results . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
5.4
The use of "Sine Forest" in the prediction of the performance of micro-speakers .
69
6
Conclusions
71
7
Further Work
74
Appendix A
75
Bibliography
80
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
The author would like to thank his supervisors, Sune, Finn, Ewen and Morten for their
invaluable support and the guidance on making this project possible.
A big "Thank you" to the always accessible and friendly people of Goertek EU, for sharing
knowledge and discussions throught the past months.
The undeniable support of my family and Margaux for baring with me through the long days
spent on this study.
1
==PAGE:6==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Today’s technology demands for devices that are inevitably becoming smaller in size. All
technological efforts are focused on more portable devices that are more convenient, easy to use
and demand the least amount of space. That space can vary from the space in a certain indoor area
or even the space a mobile phone or tablet takes in ones bag or pocket.
It is easy to imagine that as engineers strive to provide the best quality possible in the least
amount of space, by taking advantage of all the modern tools in areas such as electronics or displays,
little room will be left for the acoustics and the acoustical transducers in that phone.
While a limited space will require a speaker, referred to as micro-speaker, that is small in size;
the need to perform sufﬁciently loud enough is in high demand too. Fortunately, there is great
interest in solutions that excel in audio quality too.
A fundamental problem with speakers becoming smaller in size is the tendency to perform
poorly in the lower frequencies and have an output that is reduced for those frequencies. Whereas
that output will become analogous to certain amounts of distortion that ends up in the speaker.
Ways of compensating and controlling this behaviour have been proposed and are largely in use
with the means of Digital Signal Processing, but the need to know the limits and behaviour, through
the physics of the speaker, is important and advantageous in the ﬁrst place.
Throughout the past couple of decades, many mathematical models have been introduced that
measure the amount of occurring distortion in terms of a single harmonic excitation tone or even
the distortion product of two tones. Such models include the Signal to Noise ratio (SNR), the
Total Harmonic Distortion (THD), the inter-modulation distortion (IMD), the Rub&Buzz and so on.
Although those metrics appear to provide fundamental information on the performance and design
of a loudspeaker, they have proved to have poor correlation with subjective tests ([1], [2], [3],[4]).
The human perception is not a simple model and it is deﬁnitely not a single-variable equation.
The fact that the conventional metrics can only indicate the amount of spectral components does not
imply any relation to the spectro-temporal characteristics of the human perception. Psychoacoustic
effects, such as masking, tend to be the reason for such deviation but the subjective preference of
an individual seems to play a role too.
Focusing on the creation of distortion models that include psychoacoustic phenomena has been
approached by several researchers. Such models can use sine tones as the excitation signals, or
2
==PAGE:7==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
3
even musical and speech signals to directly relate to perception. Although plenty approaches exist
and all with their advantages and disadvantages, none has proven to be adequate to fully quantify
and describe the perceivable distortion in a loudspeaker.
Recent research by Olsen, Agerkvist, Macdonald, et al. [5] has shown the limitations to one of
those psychoacoustic model, called the Rnonlin (Tan, Moore, Zacharov, et al. [3]), but since the
model has been proposed with room for improvement and possible solutions it has been adopted in
this investigation. Furthermore, in the initial proposal of the Rnonlin model very high correlations
to the subjective tests have been shown (values above 0.92), while the aforementioned recent
research ([5]) values up to 0.76 have ben achieved. Additionally, the lack of previous research
particularly for micro-speakers found no reason for opposing to such research.
Consequently, this research will focus on the audibility of non-linear distortion for micro-
speakers with the use of the Rnonlin model. By the end of this investigation, it will try to answer
the research question of "Can the Rnonlin be a measure of predicting the perceivable distortion in
micro-spekaers?" with an effort to extend to the the sub-question of "Can the Rnonlin model be
modiﬁed to better predict and quantify the perceivable distortion in micro-speakers?".
The current research aims to answer these questions by ﬁrstly compensating for the linear
distortion part of the speakers as it moves on to investigate the inﬂuence of the weighting function in
the model and choosing a proper "reference" signal as the input to the Rnonlin model. Furthermore,
since the model is based on correlation, the sensitivity of the model to recording noise is exposed
and analysed.
In the ﬁnal part of this report, an investigation on solutions of introducing correlated noise
to the model is presented and its results are evaluated. A very promising solution that yields the
best results when the results from the Rnonlin model are compared to the subjective evaluation
performed in this study. On that matter, it is shown how the level of correlated noise introduced,
its type and the method of applying has a great impact on the results. As a ﬁnal approach an
investigation on simplifying the process with the use of only one stimuli is presented and the
possibility for further evaluation is suggested.
==PAGE:8==
CHAPTER 2
Fundamental Theory
Overview
The fundamental theory used in this investigation and in the latter chapters is being presented in
the current chapter. The basic knowledge in signal processing, acoustics and the physiology of the
human is assumed, as some concepts are not covered in-depth in this chapter. The structure of this
chapter starts with an introduction to signals and systems and continues with metrics for describing
them, as discussion passes to the physiology of the human ear and the psycho-acoustics of the
human perception. The chapter concludes by uniting the previous concepts into signal processing
models that include both the mathematical theory and the human perception, into measures of
predicting the subjective performance of loudspeakers. This study is focused on the Rnonlin model
and therefore more weight has been put into its explanation, while other models are merely touched
upon.
2.1
Signals
A signal can be deﬁned as a set of data that is being carried over a certain amount of time. Time
is set to be the independent variable as for the sake of acoustics and electrical signals changes occur
over time.
With regard to this report, the scope is limited to time-continuous periodic signals of the form
eiωt, with t ∈ℜ.
2.1.1
Correlation
Correlation is a measure of similarity or at least the degree of similarity between two signals.
Respectively, Cross-correlation is a measure of correlation and a measure of similarity of two
signals as a function of the time lag of one relative to the other.
Assuming two real-valued signals x(n), y(n) of ﬁnite energy, the cross-correlation of x(n) and
4
==PAGE:9==
CHAPTER 2. FUNDAMENTAL THEORY
5
y(n) is a sequence of rxy(l) deﬁned as,
rxy(l) =
∞
X
n=−∞
x(n)y(n −l)
(2.1)
where l = 0, ±1, ±2, ... is the time shift or lag index
If y(n) is equal to x(n) then the auto-correlation of the signal can be calculated from,
rxx(l) =
∞
X
n=−∞
x(n)x(n −l)
(2.2)
with the same lag index as before.
It is interesting to note that for a Linear Time-Invariant (LTI) system, the cross-correlation and
auto-correlation can be put in terms of convolution as,
rxy(l) = y(l) ∗x(−l)
and
rxx(l) = x(l) ∗x(−l)
As this may not seem straightforward, using the convolution deﬁnition, there are times that
calculations can be sped up and remove the ambiguity of built-in correlation functions for example.
2.2
Systems
Signals can be processed by systems which may modify, manipulate or even extract information
from them. A system then is an entity that processes a set of signals at the input and yields another
set of signals at the output. While a system can have any type of physical characteristics, we limit
ourselves to electrical, mechanical and acoustical systems here.
With regard to such systems, a loudspeaker is a combination of the three. It transforms electrical
signals into mechanical movement which then translates into acoustical waves. A loudspeaker is
not a simple system as it depends on many parameters. Therefore, modelling it is a challenging
task.
In general, depending on the type of process applied to the input signal, systems are summed
into two main categories: linear and non-linear systems.
2.2.1
Linear Systems
A signal passing through a system, i.e transducer, or a transmission channel will most likely be
affected or even altered. A linear system is a processor that affects only the amplitude and phase of
the complex signal and where the output is a constant multiple of the input irrespective of the input
level. The two main properties it has to fulﬁll are
==PAGE:10==
CHAPTER 2. FUNDAMENTAL THEORY
6
• Additivity: f(x + y) = f(x) + f(y)
• Homogenity: f(αx) = α · f(x)
The two properties form the principle of superposition which serves as an indication of a linear
system. A system that does not obey this principle, i.e. the output is not a constant multiple of the
input, is described as a non-linear system.
0
Input
0
Output
linear system
0
Input
0
Output
non-linear system
Figure 2.1: Input-Output relation of "linear" and "non-linear" systems
Figure 2.2 shows how a linear system affects the signal. In this case, the system shifts the phase
of the signal by 90 degrees and multiplies its amplitude by 1/2. In the right part of the ﬁgure, the
spectrum of the input and output signals can be seen, where it is observed that apart of the change
in gain at the output, no signiﬁcant difference appears in the signal and no additional spectral
components can be found.
Time
-1
0
1
Amplitude
Input Signal
Time
-1
0
1
Output Signal
Frequency
Spectrum
Input
Output
Figure 2.2: Linear system
2.2.2
Nonlinear Systems
Due to the nature of some systems, the input-output signals may not have a linear relationship.
At such, the output of a nonlinear system is not a constant multiple of the input. A system that
introduces components in the output signal that were not present in the input signal, is qualiﬁed as
nonlinear.
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 2. FUNDAMENTAL THEORY
7
The distinction between linear and non-linear systems is very important in the prediction of the
output signal. A linear system can be speciﬁed just by measuring the output and therefore be easy
to predict, but a nonlinear system is a much harder case. To model such systems one has to dig
deeper into the physics of the system and as, in many cases, identifying the source is challenging
only certain simpliﬁcations can be assumed.
Figure 2.1 shows a linear and a nonlinear system with respect to their input and output. In the
left part of the ﬁgure a constant slope can be identiﬁed, where the i/o relationship is linear, while in
the right hand-side, the system has a slope value that depends on the input and so the system can be
quantiﬁed as nonlinear.
Polynomial expansions can be used to model the input-output relationship of a non-linear
system and such possible expansion is,
f(x) =
N
X
αnxn
(2.3)
which expands to,
f(x) = α0 + α1x + α2x2 + ... + αnxn
(2.4)
The order of the expansion selected, and therefore the number of "N", will deﬁne the order of
non-linearity.
As an example, ﬁgure 2.3 shows the input and output time signals when processed by a non-
linear system of a third order non-linearity and their respective spectrum. Contrary to a linear
system (ﬁg. 2.2), the presence of additional spectral components in the output is noticed.
Time
-1
0
1
Amplitude
Input Signal
Time
-1
0
1
Output Signal
Frequency
0
Spectrum
Input
Output
Figure 2.3: Non-linear system with a 3rd order nonlinearity
2.3
Distortion
Non-linear systems introduce components at the output that were not present in the input.
Distortion is a characteristic of systems that are non-linear. Two common types of distortion
include,
• harmonic distortion (HD)
• inter-modulation distortion (IMD)
==PAGE:12==
CHAPTER 2. FUNDAMENTAL THEORY
8
The ﬁrst type is concerned with frequency components that are multiples of the fundamental,
while the second type with the interaction of two ore more frequency components and the respective
by-products. An interesting thing is that harmonic distortion does not necessarily sound dissonant
because the distortion components fall into the series of the fundamental.
Time
-1
0
1
Amplitude
Input Signal
Time
-1
0
1
Output Signal
Frequency
Spectrum
Input
Output
Figure 2.4: A complex input signal of Cmaj7 chord processed by a 5th order nonlinearity.
Figure 2.4 shows an example of a more complex signal processed by a non-linear system. It
is noticed how signals with more harmonics than sine tones, result in more complex output as
distortion components are excessively added. By looking at the spectrum of the same plots, it can
be seen how the more complex chord-signal will yield so many additional components that will be
actually quantiﬁed as distortion. As a matter of fact, the more components added, the higher the
distortion in the output and for that reason the additional components are referred to as distortion
components.
2.4
Psychoacoustics
Psychoacoustics is deﬁned as a science that combines acoustics with physiology and psychology.
Nowadays, its use is becoming increasingly popular "as engineers have come to realize that a human
ear is very different from the combination of a microphone connected to a spectrum analyzer",
Temme, Brunet, and Keele [6]. The initial approaches of dBSPL, fractional octave analysis and
A-weighted curves seemed to be unable to reveal the complete picture. Additionally, in the current
"digital era" a constant evaluation of audio systems and their subjective performance is necessary
and beneﬁcial in more than an R&D point of view.
2.4.1
The Human Ear
An illustration of the human ear can be seen in Figure 2.5, that helps to visualize the following
explanation.
An acoustical wave, sound, reaches the pinna of the ear where a part is reﬂected and a part
enters the ear. The reﬂected part is a copy of the one entering the ear, delayed by a few milliseconds.
The direction of arrival and the respective amount of reﬂections that will occur, will colorize the
sound reaching the ear drum and impose a certain spectral identity to the sound that will help to
localize sounds.
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 2. FUNDAMENTAL THEORY
9
As sound continues through the ear canal, it reaches the tympanic membrane at the end of it.
The ear canal is around 2.5cm long, with properties and the respective resonances of an open-closed
tube terminated by the ear drum.
Figure 2.5: A schematic representation of the Human Ear. The three main divisions can be seen:
Outer, Middle and Inner Ear - including their relevant components. (Plack [7])
The vibrations from the tympanic membrane are transmitted to the inner part of the ear through
three bones called the ossicles. These bones found by the names of Malleus, Incus and Stapes are
the smallest bones in the human body and together with the muscles in the Middle Ear have critical
properties. They transmit the pressure variations from and air-ﬁlled department to a ﬂuid-ﬁlled one
and this inherent impedance mismatch is balanced by these ossicles. Apart from this impedance
matching the middle ear serves the roles of transmission, pressure equalization, impedance matching
and protection to high sound pressure levels.
==PAGE:14==
CHAPTER 2. FUNDAMENTAL THEORY
10
20
100
1000
10000
Frequency (Hz)
-40
-35
-30
-25
-20
-15
-10
-5
0
5
10
dB  [re. 1 Pa]
Figure 2.6: Outer and Middle Ear transfer function, with the used of a 4096 coefﬁcient FIR ﬁlter.
Based on the initial research of Glasberg and Moore [8].
The previously discussed properties of the outer and middle ear, create a speciﬁc and character-
istic transfer function that is applied to any sound entering the ear and reaching the inner ear. The
characteristic outer/middle ear transfer function is seen in Figure 2.6.
The middle ear connects to the Inner through a small area on the cochlea, called the Oval
Window. The cochlea is a spiral shaped tube, ﬁlled with ﬂuid that encloses the basilar membrane.
The properties of the basilar membrane are some of the most important to the human hearing. Its
mechanical properties vary across its length so that different frequencies cause different parts of the
membrane to vibrate. The high frequencies resonate toward the Base, while the lower frequencies
toward the Apex.
This particular separation of frequencies, or "selectivity" as it is called, gives humans the ability
to discriminate different frequencies of sounds and put in a simplistic term, to extract the spectrum
of a sound.
2.4.2
Frequency Selectivity
Frequency selectivity is deﬁned as the inherent ability of the auditory system to discriminate
different frequency components in a complex signal. Hearing tones in a noisy signal or discrimi-
nating different instruments in a musical signal are all parts of the human’s frequency selectivity
ability.
As each place on the basilar membrane is tuned to a particular characteristic frequency, the
basilar membrane itself acts as a bank of overlapping band-pass ﬁlters, called the auditory ﬁlters.
Each ﬁlter is a function of frequency and its width determines its selective ability.
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 2. FUNDAMENTAL THEORY
11
102
103
104
Frequency [Hz]
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized Amplitude
Figure 2.7: Auditory ﬁlter bank representation. Illustration is obtained using the Gammatone ﬁlter
bank model, based on Glasberg and Moore [9].
Figure 2.7 shows a representation of a set of auditory ﬁlters, each tuned at different frequencies
across the basilar membrane. This group of recursive overlapping band-pass ﬁlters is extracted
using the gammatone ﬁlter model [10]. More speciﬁcally, the model is able to describe the tuning
properties at certain points of the basilar membrane and yield the relevant impulse response.
More analytically, to how the gammatone ﬁlterbank is calculated is as follows.
The function describing the impulse response of the gammatone ﬁlters writes,
g(t) = atn−1e−2πbtcos(2πf0t + φ)
(2.5)
where all variables are the properties of each ﬁlter, as a is its amplitude, n is the order, b is the
band width, f0 is the center frequency and φ is the phase.
The above equation has certain variables to be determined and therefore must be approximated.
For that matter, since a single summary statistic is useful, the Equivalent Rectangular Bandwidth
(ERB) can be used. The ERB of a ﬁlter is deﬁned as the bandwidth of a rectangular ﬁlter with the
same peak output and same area under the curve as that ﬁlter, an auditory ﬁlter in our case.
The mean ERB (ERBN of an auditory ﬁlter has been found by Glasberg and Moore [9] from a
set of notched-noise masking experiments to be,
ERBN = 24.7(0.00436fc + 1)
where fc is the center frequency in Hz.
With the use of those deﬁnitions, the variables in equation 2.5 are deﬁned and the gammatone
ﬁlter bank that can be seen in Figure 2.7 is extracted.
2.4.3
Masking
Masking is a psychoacoustic phenomenon that happens when one sound is made inaudible by
another sound. As a matter of fact, if the frequency selectivity of the auditory system is insufﬁcient
==PAGE:16==
CHAPTER 2. FUNDAMENTAL THEORY
12
to separate tonal components, masking occurs. That is the reason why frequency selectivity is
studied in terms of masking experiments.
In a noise+tone experiment, the amount of masking can be associated with the amount of noise
passing the so-called critical band. The critical band is a fair estimate of the bandwidth of an
auditory ﬁlter.
To simplify things, when a single tone resonates on the basilar membrane, a certain excitation
pattern is formed on the membrane. This pattern called the envelope of deﬂection is steeper toward
low frequencies and less steep toward frequencies. What this means is that masking will occur
more easily for higher frequencies than for lower and as a matter of fact a low frequency signal is a
better masker to a high frequency signal.
All in all, the effect of masking is threefold as it depends on intensity (Figure 2.8a), on frequency
(Figure 2.8b) and on time (Figure 2.8c). All ﬁgures (2.8) show different masking thresholds and
the respective dependency.
(a) Level dependency
(b) Frequency dependency
(c) Temporal dependency
Figure 2.8: Masking is a threefold phenomenon as it depends on level, frequency and time. Figures
are borrowed from Eberhard Zwicker [11] and Voishvillo [4] respectively.
The amount of masking is non-linearly related to the level and is clearly related to audible
distortion too. As seen in ﬁgure 2.8a more masking occurs at the right hand-side of the curves as it
does for the left. Additionally, the right side is more dependent on level than it is on the left. This
means that toward the high frequencies there is more masked distortion or IMD products than the
right. This is an important thing to consider, as the amount of inaudible distortion increases with
level and the amount of perceivable higher-order distortion is dependent on the level.
The dependency on the frequency content of a signal and the inherent audio region that it
covers is also an important masking property. What can be seen in ﬁgure 2.8b is the fact that lower
frequencies are better maskers than higher. This is an important property that is in fact one of the
limitations of the THD metric as we will see later.
The temporal dependency that masking has, is an additionally important characteristic. In
fact masking can occur in time-windows after a signal, called "Forward masking", or surprisingly
before a signal, called "Backward masking". This is illustrated in ﬁgure 2.8c. Because real-life
signals, like music for example, are not static this is an additionally important fact to consider in
the study of the audibility of distortion.
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 2. FUNDAMENTAL THEORY
13
2.5
Measures of Distortion
As signals have now been discussed along with the way they are interpreted by the human
auditory system, it is the right time to combine the two and begin considering the possibilities of
quantifying distortion in a (music) signal.
2.5.1
Conventional Metrics
During the past decades, several attempts at quantifying non-linear distortion by means of
mathematical formulas that yield the amount of distortion in a percentage of the inherent additional
harmonics introduced into the original signal. These approaches, often called "Conventional
Metrics" include the metrics of Total Harmonic Distortion (THD), Inter-Modulation Distortion
(IMD), Rub & Buzz or Higher Order Harmonic Distortion (HOHD), added noise and so on.
Total harmonic distortion can be deﬁned as a ratio of the root-mean-square (rms) values of the
distortion products to the total rms of the signal and is calculated by the formula,
THD(f0) =
qPnmax
n>1 |Y (nf0)|2
qPnmax
n=1 |Y (nf0)|2
(2.6)
where Y denotes the spectrum, f0 the fundamental frequency and nmax the maximum order of
the distortion products decided to be included into the calculations.
Although, the THD can also be represented by the ratio of the rms of the distortion products to
the rms value of the fundamental. Their main difference is that the ﬁrst can yield percentages above
100% of THD while the second seems to represent a more accurate percentage. Nonetheless, at
low distortion levels the two THD versions yield similar values and therefore we assume no great
difference between the two versions in our calculations as the ﬁrst approach is more preferable.
As it is now known, there are certain problems with the THD metric. Firstly, the THD metric
measures with the use of single-harmonic tones, but since no musical signal has such properties it
cannot be related to the perceivable distortion. Moreover, since the speaker is driven with a full
scale sine tone, the speaker is driven at its limits and this can in fact can show more distortion in
the metric, that it can actually be perceived by the human ear. Another problematic situation is
that higher order distortion can result in same the THD values. The metric ignores the corruption
of the fundamental and something that is often overlooked, it measures only harmonic distortion,
multiples of the fundamental. In fact, in realistic non-linear systems, distortion can occur at
non-harmonic intervals and this is a problem that will not appear in a THD measurement.
A very straightforward example is given by Temme, Brunet, and Keele [6] and can be seen in
ﬁgure 2.9. The plots show the harmonic distortion components for two sets of speakers that are
characterized as "Good" and "Bad" in a subjective evaluation of how distorted they sound. It is
shown how different speakers with different amount of higher order distortion end up in the exact
same THD value. A common approach would be to combine and compare the results to the higher
order harmonic distortion or Rub and Buzz too, as it will be discussed later on.
==PAGE:18==
CHAPTER 2. FUNDAMENTAL THEORY
14
Figure 2.9: An example of how the THD metric fails (borrowed from Temme, Brunet, and Keele
[6])
Another set of metric is the measure of Inter-Modulation Distortion. Here, a two-tone stimuli
can expose more problems, than a pure tone signal, by creating Inter-Modulation products. Unfor-
tunately, the main disadvantage of the metric is that its scope is restricted to these IMD products, as
there is no information outside that region.
Commonly, higher order harmonic distortions are grouped under the descriptive term of "Rub
& Buzz". These distortions are usually created in the loudspeaker by various mechanical defects
such as the voice coil rubbing the magnet or defective cone or spider parts. The metric detects
harmonic components above the 10th harmonic component. The downside with this metric is that
the method detects all instances, regardless of their audibility.
As shown in many previous researches and experiments, the use of the conventional metrics
is not enough to quantify the audibility of distortion in a speaker or their subjective performance.
Psychoacoustic effects, such as masking, seem to play a major role in that deviation. The measures
of simple single or two-tone stimuli, have poor correlation to perception and nonlinear systems can
cause non-harmonic distortion that refrains from the previous measurements.
2.5.2
Non-Conventional Metrics
Models that take perception into consideration are qualiﬁed under the descriptive term of "non-
conventional metrics". These models are clearly separated from the "conventional", where only
mathematical models that describe the amount of distortion-harmonics are considered. In recent
years, important research has been focused on new non-conventional metrics or the improvement
of existing ones.
With regard to the previous sections, it should be understood by now that the conventional
metrics have poor correlation to audibility. Quantifying the amount of distortion in a signal requires
more effort to implement a model that takes the psychoacoustical properties of the human hearing
into account. As the effect of masking is the main contestant, it is essential that it is included in
such a model and therefore its previously discussed properties (chapter 2.4.3) have been tried to be
implemented.
Summarising the reasons why the conventional metrics do not sufﬁce, the following can be
stated,
• The use of single-tone stimuli do not relate to signals that people will actually listen to, such
as music or speech.
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 2. FUNDAMENTAL THEORY
15
• The use of full scale sine tones forces the speaker at its limits. This will in fact show more
distortion in the metric, but the perceived distortion might be benign.
• Non-linearities can contaminate the signal but the perceivable amount is more important.
• Certain types of distortion can be preferable or more acceptable, e.g. 2nd order falls into
musical scaling context.
• Simple tone stimuli do no excite the auditory system as broad-band, time-varying signals do.
• Frequency discrimination depends on frequency bands. Its easier to detect distortion above
400 Hz. An effect that is related to hearing thresholds and the auditory ﬁlters.
• Temporal masking changes the just-noticeable-difference (JND) of distortion.
Therefore, for all the above reasons and since perception depends on spectral and temporal infor-
mation, more complicated models have to be developed.
The perceptual models proposed in resent researches can be summarized to:
• GedLee metric [2]
• DS metric [12]
• Rnonlin metric [3]
• ITU based metrics [13], PEAQ:
– Perceptual Rub&Buzz (PRB) [14]
– Audible non-linear distortion Level [15]
– Acoustic Sharpness [16]
– etc...
More speciﬁcally, the GedLee metric is based on two masking principles. Firstly, that higher
order harmonics are more perceptible, as lower order are more easily masked. Secondly, distortion
is more audible at low levels, due to the drop of the masking thresholds. The implementation of the
GedLee metric and a comparison to subjective tests has shown moderate correlation to listening
tests ( 0.67) and inability to be applicable to frequency dependent systems. The method assumes a
constant transfer function at all frequencies and it is mostly unconﬁrmed for real transducers.
The Distortion Score (DS) Metric includes a further implementation of auditory ﬁlters. It states
that energies within a critical band interact to produce the overall perception and the auditory
system has been modeled through Equivalent rectangular bands (ERB). Then, a difference score
compares the spectrum of the Input/Output, including the distortion products. The results have
shown perceptually relevant measures of spectrum differences between Input/Output. A higher
==PAGE:20==
CHAPTER 2. FUNDAMENTAL THEORY
16
correlation to subjective ratings for artiﬁcially distorted music and speech ( 0.97) existed, but results
have been moderate with real transducers (correlation of 0.65).
In an attempt to improve the DS metric, Rnonlin has been created. As an extension to better
correlate to real transducers, instead of a difference score between the Input/Output spectrum,
coherence analysis based on the cross-correlation of the two waveforms is being performed. More-
over, the model includes the transfer function of the outer-middle ear. Research results show a
higher correlation to subjective tests than the DS metric. Although, recent studies solely focused
on the Rnonlin metric have shown that the metric greatly depends on the nature of the input signal
(Olsen, Agerkvist, Macdonald, et al. [5]) and that different types of distortion can degrade the score.
Hence, in the study of real loudspeakers, the metric seems to not be generalizable unless the signal
meets certain criteria.
The ITU standard for the perceptual evaluation of audio codecs has expanded to the acoustic
world of transducers. With models like the PEAQ, PESQ etc.. the metric outputs the so-called
Model Output Variables (MOV) which can are used in different ways by the models seen in the
above list (2.5.2). The reader is referred to [13], [6],[14],[1] as to how the different MOVs are used
in each model. In all those ITU-based metrics, the excitation happens with (sweeping) tones where
the main disadvantage is that the speaker is driven at its limits for a constant period of time.
Since the purpose of this report is focused on real-life musical or speech signals played through
micro-speakers, it is not the purpose of this report to further analyze and investigate the sine-tone
based metrics. Hence, a brief discussion continues on the reasons of this study repulsing from such
approach.
There is a fundamental difference between sinusoidal test signals and real music or voice signals
and that is their statistical distribution. Musical or speech signals have a Gaussian distribution with
rare peaks across the signal. In contrast, sinusoidal signals, use the full scale and hit the peaks for
larger periods of time. Distortion measurements obtained through tonal excitation may yield large
THD, HOHD, etc. but psychoacoustically they might be only mild for musical or speech signals
that have the same peak output. This can be related to the effect of masking and in fact, depending
on the three factors discussed in section 2.4.3, certain distortion products can become inaudible.
An example of this is given in Figure 2.10 in terms of a histogram. The left plot shows the
results for a sine tone, while the right for two music signals, one pop track with a reduced dynamic
range and one classical where the dynamic range of the recorded orchestra is barely enhanced. The
y-axis shows the percentage of occurring x-values and the x-axis shows the absolute amplitude. As
seen in the same ﬁgure, for musical signals, the limits are barely reached and therefore a direct
relation to metrics that use such type of excitation stimuli might be counter-intuitive.
==PAGE:21==
CHAPTER 2. FUNDAMENTAL THEORY
17
Figure 2.10: Histograms for a sine tone (left) and for two music signals (right).
Although previous attempts in quantifying the distortion in a loudspeaker have been tried in the
above methods, the fact that all the ITU-based implementations use full scale sinusoidal signals
became a reason to sidetrack from them and focus on a metric that compromises "real-life" signals
like speech and music. In that sense the Rnonlin metric has been selected as the main metric, where
its applications in the micro-speakers ﬁeld were investigated and expanded.
Rnonlin Metric
The fact that the Rnonlin metric has been studied for real transducers and full-sized loudspeak-
ers makes it one of the most promising methods to be implemented and studied for micro-speakers
and therefore is the main metric for this investigation. In the initial proposal of the Rnonlin model
[3], very high correlations to the subjective tests have been shown (values above 0.92). Recent
research by Olsen, Agerkvist, Macdonald, et al. [5] showed values up to 0.76 being achieved. In
the latter, the limitations of the model have been clearly exposed, with possible improvements
and possible solutions that showed the path to adopting the Rnonlin model. Moreover, the lack of
previous research particularly for micro-speakers found no reason for opposing to such research
and attempting to obtain a more robust metric. A brief explanation on the Rnonlin metric follows.
Figure 2.11 shows the block diagram of the stages involved in the Rnonlin metric.
• The input signal is split into a signal y that passes through the system and a signal x that is
fed into the model. The signal y is subjected to distortion while x is a clean version of the
same signal.
• Both signals are ﬁltered through a 4097 coefﬁcient Finite-Impulse-Response (FIR) ﬁlter that
applies the transfer function of the outer and middle ear.
• The ﬁltered signals are passed through the gammatone ﬁlterbank with 40 bands of 1 ERBN
width. The center frequencies are spaced in the bandwidth of 50 to 19739 Hz as to cover the
audible frequency range.
==PAGE:22==
CHAPTER 2. FUNDAMENTAL THEORY
18
• The output of each ﬁlter j in the ﬁlterbank is then divided into non-overlapping frames i of
30 milliseconds each.
Figure 2.11: Rnonlin metric ﬂow diagram, borrowed from Tan, Moore, Zacharov, et al. [3].
• The cross-correlation, rxy between the two processed signals is then calculated with lags
from -10 to 10 ms, as it is run for all the frames and ﬁlters.
• The maximum value of the normalized cross-correlation, Xmax, is determined for each ﬁlter
in each frame over all the values of the lag index. The smaller value Xmax has, the less
similar the two signals are and therefore the larger the inﬂuence of distortion.
• To take into account the fact that low-level signals have less impact on the perception of
distortion, a weighting function is applied to Xmax. To determine the weighting, the power
at the output of each ﬁlter is calculated and converted to decibels. For the speciﬁc frame
the maximum value of Level(i, j) is determined, known as Levelmax(i). The weighting is
adjusted according to the three cases,
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 2. FUNDAMENTAL THEORY
19
– If Level(i,j) of a speciﬁc ﬁlter is within 40 dB of Levelmax(i), the maximum weighting
is applied to Xmax.
– If Level(i, j) of a speciﬁc ﬁlter is more than 80 dB below Levelmax(i), a weighting of
zero is applied to Xmax.
– If Level(i, j) lies between 40 and 80 dB below Levelmax(i), the weight applied to Xmax
increases linearly with Level(i, j).
• The weighted values of Xmax are summed across ﬁlters for each frame, giving an overall
measure of correlation for that frame.
• Finally, the mean correlation value across all the frames is found. This number is then deﬁned
as the Rnonlin value.
It is important to note that the described model does not explicitly state whether the "reference"
signal is the original signal or a modiﬁed version of it. This is important since all real systems
introduce linear distortion which the correlation measurement will pick up due to the bandwidth
of the gammatone ﬁlters. As this is not desirable, the inﬂuence of the linear distortion must be
mitigated.
In Tan, Moore, Zacharov, et al. [3], the frequency range of the output was limited to between
301Hz and 15900Hz to reduce the inﬂuence of the linear distortion, but it is not clear whether the
reference input signal was modiﬁed. This is only a partial solution since linear distortion within
that range will still occur.
A solution proposed by Olsen, Agerkvist, Macdonald, et al. [5] is recording the output of the
loudspeakers at very low levels and have that as the linear "reference" input to the model. Although
with some loudspeakers, their output levels would be so low that noise becomes an issue, but this is
still a promising approach as we shall later see in this report.
2.6
Speakers and micro-speakers
The main focus of this report has been the distortion produced by speakers that are based on
the electrodynamic principle. An electrodynamic or moving-coil loudspeaker is an electromagnetic
transducer that converts electrical signals into mechanical motion which then radiates into air
to produce sound. Micro-speakers follow the same principles as they compromise an electrical,
mechanical and acoustical part too.
The discussion starts with the description of a loudspeaker and the equations that describe it as
it moves on to the description of its linear and then the non-linear characteristics.
==PAGE:24==
CHAPTER 2. FUNDAMENTAL THEORY
20
2.6.1
The electro-dynamic loudspeaker
The main parts of a loudspeaker are summed to a magnet, a voice coil, an inner and outer
suspension and a diaphragm. The cross section of a moving-coil loudspeaker can be seen in
ﬁgure 2.12.
Figure 2.12: Cross section of a moving-coil loudspeaker, ﬁgure borrowed from Beranek and Mellow
[17].
The voice-coil is cited in the air-gap at the center of the magnet and therefore when an electrical
signal is applied to it, a force is created. Hence, when current runs through the voice coil a
mechanical force is created according to Lorentz’s law,
f = Bl(x)i.
(2.7)
This force causes the voice coil to move together with the diaphragm, that is connected to it.
On the other hand, the movement of the coil in the magnetic ﬁeld creates a voltage that is
obtained by,
e = Bl(x)u,
(2.8)
where u is the velocity of the voice coil.
With the voltage over the coil due to the current i deﬁned as,
eL = dΦ
dt = dL(x)i
dt
= L(x)di
dt + idL(x)
dt
= L(x)di
dt + idL(x)
dx
dx
dt
(2.9)
In total, the generator voltage eg yields,
eg = Rei + eL(x) + e = Rei + L(x)di
dt + idL(x)
dx
dx
dt + Bl(x)dx
dt ,
(2.10)
with Re being the DC-resistance of the coil.
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 2. FUNDAMENTAL THEORY
21
As the force created by the electric input signal moves the diaphragm, a second order differential
equation describes the system. One part is described by the mechanical force with respect to the
acceleration of the diaphragm. The second part part is described by an opposing force acting
against the movement represented by the damping of the suspension of the materials and with
respect to the velocity. The last part is described by the compliance of the same materials with
respect to the displacement.
Thus, the equation for the equilibrium state writes,
Bl(x)i = Mms
d2x
dt2 + Rms
dx
dt +
1
Cms(x)x
(2.11)
with Rms describing the mechanic damping and Cms the mechanic compliance of the system.
The movement of the diaphragm compresses and decompresses air and therefore creates a
pressure difference between the front and the back of the diaphragm which then translates into the
radiation of a sound wave.
Since most of the non-linearities occurring in loudspeakers depend on the displacement of the
voice coil, it is important to mention the relationship between sound pressure and displacement.
Although the approximations are strictly valid for frequencies way below the upper-piston frequency
limit, they are good approximations in describing the over-all performance. In the far-ﬁeld the
sound pressure generated by a loudspeaker in an inﬁnite bafﬂe can be approximated by
p(r) = jωρU e−jkr
2πr = ρSDae−jkr
2πr ,
(2.12)
with ρ being the density in air, U the volume velocity, k the wavenumber and SD the area of the
diaphragm.
In the right hand side of equation 2.12 the following relation has been used:
U = SDu = SDa/jω,
(2.13)
where u is the particle velocity and a the acceleration.
It can be seen from 2.12 that in order to obtain a constant sound pressure at all frequencies,
a constant acceleration is needed. As the acceleration is connected to the displacement x by
a = −ω2x it is seen that a large displacement x is needed for lower frequencies, which is in fact a
challenging task. Therefore since all equations depend on the displacement, we will see later on
that the lower frequencies (larger displacements) can create more distortion.
2.6.2
Linear model
If only small displacements of the voice coil are assumed, the equations 2.10 and 2.11 are
simpliﬁed as the dependency on the position x is eliminated. The ﬂux density B and therefore the
force factor Bl becomes a constant along with a constant L and a constant mechanic compliance
Cms. With these assumptions the derivatives descend to jω and so equations 2.10 and 2.11 can be
rewritten as
eg = Rei + jωLi + Blu,
(2.14)
==PAGE:26==
CHAPTER 2. FUNDAMENTAL THEORY
22
and
Bli = jωMmsu + Rmsu +
1
jωCms
u.
(2.15)
The loudspeaker can be modeled by means of electrical circuits and together with these
equations model its behavior. The equivalent circuits are shown in ﬁgure 2.13. The electrical part is
shown in (a), where the parallel connection between R′
E and LE models the para-inductance of the
voice coil. Circuit (b) represents the mechanical circuit with the previously discussed elements and
the circuit (c) represents the acoustic part of the system. Here UD is the volume velocity created by
the movement of the diaphragm, pD is the pressure difference between the back and the front of the
diaphragm and ZAB and ZAF represent the acoustic impedances at the back and front respectively.
Figure 2.13: Equivalent circuits for the loudspeaker, where (a) illustrates the electrical (b) the
mechanical and (c) the acoustical part. (ﬁgure borrowed from Leach [18] )
As a remark, we note that rearranging equations 2.14 and 2.15 yield the transfer function for
the volume velocity UD, which represents a band-pass response with resonance frequency ωs and
quality factor Qts,
UD =
SDBl
Re(Rms + (Bl)2/Re)
(1/Qts)(jω/ωs)
(jω/ωs)2 + (1/Qts)(jω/ωs) + 1eg.
(2.16)
2.6.3
Major loudspeaker non-linearities
A loudspeaker is a complicated system where non-linearities can occur in all of its inherent
parts, from the the electrical to the mechanical to the acoustical. On the other hand, certain
nonlinearities impose greater symptoms than others. The three main causes of nonlinear distortion
in loudspeakers are the dependence of the force factor Bl, the voice coil inductance Le and the
suspension compliance Cms on the voice-coil’s displacement x.
Non-linear force factor
As shown in equation 2.10 and 2.11 the force factor couples the electrical and the mechanical
part of the speaker. It is calculated by the integral of the cross product of the direction of the wire
==PAGE:27==
CHAPTER 2. FUNDAMENTAL THEORY
23
in the magnet gap ⃗n and the magnetic ﬂux density ⃗B
Bl(x) =
l
Z
0
⃗n(s) × ⃗Bds.
(2.17)
From that equation a clear dependency on the amount of windings in the air gap is seen. If the
length of the wire in the air gap decreases Bl decreases as well. Since the displacement of the voice
coil is high at low frequencies (equation 2.13), the Bl non linearity will show a strong inﬂuence
especially at the low frequencies. This results in both harmonic and inter-modulation distortion.
Non-linear compliance
The second major non-linearity of loudspeakers is related to the mechanical compliance of
the suspension. In a linear model the force is assumed to be proportional to the displacement by
F(x) = Kms · x, where Kms is a constant for small displacements. Although in loudspeakers this
is not always true. For small displacements this holds true, but due to the materials of the surround
and the spider, compromising the suspension, they greatly depend on the displacement x. Now the
force writes,
F(x) = Kms(x) · x
where it is noticeable that the compliance is a function of the displacement.
Moreover, since the mechanical part of the loudspeaker is compliance controlled at low
frequencies, a large inﬂuence of the displacement dependent compliance is expected at frequencies
below the resonance and will lead to high harmonic distortion. At high frequencies the mass is
dominating the inﬂuence of the compliance and less distortion is expected. For this reason a low
inter-modulation distortion is expected as well.
Non-linear voice coil inductance
The inductance L of a voice coil is calculated by
L = µN2A
l
,
(2.18)
with N being the number of windings of the coil, l the length of the coil and A the cross sectional
area.
If the voice coil of the loudspeaker moves towards the backplate, a larger part of windings
enclose iron. If the coil moves away from the backplate it encloses less iron. Since the permeability
of iron is higher than of air the voice coil impedance will be larger when moved inside than when
moved outside. The derivative of L with respect to x in equation 2.9 is therefore not zero and
the current signal is multiplied with the velocity causing distortion of the output signal. Since the
impedance of the voice coil is also dependent on frequency, a larger inﬂuence at high frequencies
is expected leading to more inter-modulation distortion than harmonic distortion.
==PAGE:28==
CHAPTER 2. FUNDAMENTAL THEORY
24
An important fact to consider is that the non-linear inductance is somehow more controllable
than the other two major non-linearities when care has been taken in the design of the magnet
system. By taking advantage of eddy currents, shorting rings can be placed in the magnet’s gap and
therefore counter compensate for the above phenomena. Additionally, in microspeakers due to their
excessively small magnet and voice coil size, the effect of the non-linear inductance is minimal.
In that case, the inductance Le(x) has a fairly linear and low value, when compared to the DC
Resistance of the voice-coil and therefore its inﬂuence could be negligible or at least minimal.
2.6.4
Microspeakers
In general, micro-speakers are a downsized/downscaled version of the electro-dynamic loud-
speaker. The electrical and mechanical part are particularly similar while the acoustic part can
show certain differences due to the much smaller size. For example, while the airﬂow is barely an
issue for full-sized loudspeaker drivers, for micro-speakers it is an important consideration. The
fact that the majority of micro-speakers are used in consumer electronics, like mobile devices, their
design has to incorporate a certain acoustic port that will radiate from the interior of the phone,
where the driver is, to the exterior casing outside the phone. Therefore, due to the limited space
non-linearities due to the airﬂow and the limited heat-dissipation are prominent.
In general, microspeakers consist of a ﬂat-surface diaphragm and suspension where the same
material for the diaphragm and suspension is found in most designs as seen in ﬁgure 2.14. The lack
of space in a commercially produced microspeaker, forces the loudspeaker to have a different design
and properties. The voice-coil wire is now much thinner and for that reason the impedance is found
to be higher than in a common full-size loudspeaker. Additionally, the driver does not incorporate a
spider to keep the coil in the resting position and to suppress rocking motion. That said, although
the microspeaker is also based on the electrodynamic principle and has similar properties to a
loudspeaker, differences in their observed responses, as well behaviours, are expected.
Figure 2.14: Cross-section illustatrion of a micro-speaker.
==PAGE:29==
CHAPTER 3
Procedure
3.1
Overview
The following chapter describes the experimental procedure followed in this investigation and
is divided into two parts. The ﬁrst describes the procedure followed in setting up the measurements
in the anechoic room, the method of compensating for the linear response of the speakers and the
recording of the different music samples when the speakers were driven at different levels.
The second part describes the procedure followed to conduct the listening tests, the reasons for
choosing the respective audio samples along with their spectrograms and then ﬁnally the methods
and set-up of the listening tests.
3.2
Anechoic Measurements
In order to remove the inﬂuence of the room in the measurement and extraction of the impulse
response of each one of the speakers, the recordings were performed in the anechoic chamber of
Goertek’s facilities. The anechoic chamber used has a cut-off frequency of 140 Hz. Since the
output of micro-speakers is weaker in the lower part of the spectrum, the frequencies below 100Hz
are excluded from the measurements. As we shall later see, frequencies below 500 Hz have limited
power in the output of the loudspeaker and if high Sound Pressure Levels are achieved at the output
of the speaker, all other frequencies are far above the noise ﬂoor. In such cases, it would be possible
to say that the room had a minimal inﬂuence on the measurements.
Figure 3.1 shows the set-up, where the speaker is clamped in a specialized micro-speaker stand
and the microphone is placed 12 cm away. The microphone used was a free-ﬁeld microphone of
type 26CA by GRAS. The term "free-ﬁeld" implies that the microphone is able to compensate for
the reﬂections occurring on the surface of its diaphragm for the high and very high frequencies and
therefore a ﬂat frequency response is to be expected in the audible range, with minimal corrections
that may have to be applied; as included in the data sheet of the microphone.
25
==PAGE:30==
CHAPTER 3. PROCEDURE
26
Figure 3.1: Experimental Setup
The microphone was connected to the AmpConnect®interface which supplied the microphone
with CCP power as well as it performs the appropriate Analog-to-Digital conversion (ADC). The
speaker was connected to the ampliﬁer and all of them were controlled by the LabView®-based
analysis software called SoundCheck®.
3.2.1
Ampliﬁer set-up and level output
An ampliﬁer is a device that ampliﬁes the incoming signal and where the resulting, output,
signal is a scaled version of the input. Due to the electrical limitations of ampliﬁers, distortion
can occur in the output of the ampliﬁer, and therefore in the output of the speaker, if the signal is
not handled properly by the ampliﬁer. That said, an evaluation of the distortion inherent in the
signal due to the ampliﬁer is recommended, especially in a study as such where the evaluation of
distortion is the main subject. Thus, making sure that the distortion indeed originates from the
speaker and not the ampliﬁer is greatly important.
(a) 8.5 Vpeak
(b) 18.5 Vpeak
Figure 3.2: Ampliﬁer’s output spectrum for a 1kHz full-scale sine tone at the input.
Figure 3.2 shows the output spectrum of a full-scale 1kHz tone for 8.5 and for 18.5 Volts peak
==PAGE:31==
CHAPTER 3. PROCEDURE
27
(Vpeak) and the occurring distortion components. It is to be observed that the distortion components
introduced by the ampliﬁer are well below 80 to 85dB in both cases. Although the measurements
did not exceed the 11 Vpeak range, the right hand-side of the ﬁgure is mostly to check and prevent a
worst case scenario and to evaluate a distortion-free working range.
Going forward, since the investigation was performed with musical signals that have different
root-mean-square (RMS) values, a common level of comparison between all the signals had to
be found. In that sense, all of the music samples have been normalized to their peak value and
with the use of full-scale 1kHz sine tones the peak levels of 0.7, 1.4, 2.8, 4.2, 5.6, 7.1, 8.5, 9.9 and
11.3 Vpeak have been selected to serve as the output of the ampliﬁer. Since the calibrations of the
ampliﬁer’s output have been performed with a sinusoidal signal, it is straightforward to see that
the pre-mentioned levels correspond to values of 0.5, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 and 8 Vrms for a sine tone.
Figure 3.3 shows that relation and how Vpeak levels are transformed to Vrms by diving with the
square root of two, as Vrms = Vpeak
√
2 .
Figure 3.3: Graphical representation of the Peak and Rms relationship for a sinusoidal signal.
By normalizing to the peak level, it is easier to control the levels of the speaker, as it made sure
that no value, such as an impulsive transient, crosses a certain limit that could cause more distortion.
By not normalizing to the RMS values of the signals, we run the risk of not driving the speaker
high enough to cause distortion when low-RMS signals, such as speech, are reproduced. Assuming
that the limits of the speaker are an important consideration when designing a loudspeaker, we
continue with the peak-normalization approach.
3.2.2
Measuring the speaker’s responses - conventional Metrics
In the investigation of the distortion in micro-speakers four different kinds of micro-speakers
have been chosen with similarities and differences in their responses and physical characteristics.
Their similarities seem to lay in their resonance frequency, found at around 1kHz, while differences
in their structural design like their front port, their front and back cavity are prominent across the
samples.
==PAGE:32==
CHAPTER 3. PROCEDURE
28
The four different micro-speakers selected can be seen in Figure 3.4 where due to conﬁdentiality
they will be called and referred-to as SPK#1, SPK#2, SPK#3 and SPK#4 from this point onward.
The same ﬁgure shows the frequency response, Total Harmonic Distortion (THD), Higher Order
Harmonic Distortion (HOHD) and Perceptual Rub and Buzz (PRB) for the level of 8.5 Vpeak.
100  
500  
1000 
2000 
5000 1000016000
Frequency (Hz)
0  
5  
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
45 
50 
55 
60 
65 
70 
75 
80 
85 
90 
95 
100
Frequency Response
100  
500  
1000 
2000 
5000 
10000
Frequency (Hz)
0
20
40
60
80
100
THD (%)
THD
100  
500  
1000 
2000 
5000 
Frequency (Hz)
0
20
40
60
80
HOHD (%)
HOHD
100  
500  
1000 
2000 
5000 
Frequency (Hz)
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
Phons
PRB
SPK#1
SPK#2
SPK#3
SPK#4
Figure 3.4: Frequency response, Total-Harmonic-Distortion, Higher-Order-Harmonic-Distortion
and Perceptual-Rub-n-Buzz for the 4 speakers used throughout this investigation.
It is to be noticed how different results occur for the THD, HOHD and the PRB, where even
high values of THD and HOHD can result in zero values of PRB. Such a value of PRB would
indicate that there is no audible higher order harmonic distortion occurring [14]. The main reason
the PRB calculation and plot is included in this ﬁgure is to show that this metric shows inconsistency
and suggests that the approach of this study using the Rnonlin metric could in fact be a better idea.
It is to be stated that the PRB method has shown inconsistencies throughout the measurements
when several the same or different levels have been performed.
3.2.3
Linear distortion compensation
As seen in ﬁgure 3.4, each speaker seems to have a different frequency response. When the
speaker is driven at low levels and therefore remain in its linear range, the obtained response is
due to its linear distortion characteristics. It is a fair assumption that the inﬂuence of the linear
distortion must be removed in order to focus on the non-linear part of the response and the resulting
non-linear distortion. This can be justiﬁed by three main reasons,
• The initial study of the Rnonlin [3] has indicated that the model cannot compensate for the
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 3. PROCEDURE
29
linear response of the speaker. A further study by Olsen, Agerkvist, Macdonald, et al. [5],
points in that direction too.
• The assessors need to evaluate only the difference in the non-linear distortion and if a speaker
has a very prominent resonant frequency to the point that it becomes annoying or irritating,
he or she can be biased of that even at the low levels and rate the speaker and/or the music
sample as highly distorted.
• It is not uncommon for resonant components that "defect" the output of a microspeaker to
be tuned out in the ﬁnal product. As a matter of fact, it is common for micro-speakers in
consumer products to have a certain DSP-related compensation to enhance and control the
response.
Moreover, since the measurements seem to show differences in the lower and higher part of the
responses across the speakers, some limits had to be set. Aiming for a comparable target-curve
across all speakers, an equally high-passed response at 700Hz and low-passed response at 10kHz
has been set. With such range, it is made sure that all of the speakers perform equally in their
lower part of their response and that the ambiguity of position, due to the very small wavelength,
is removed when obtaining the impulse response. It is to be noted that the limit of 700Hz would
be advisable to not be lowered as this limit is set by the excursion of the diaphragm of the micro-
speaker and in an attempt to exceed it more distortion would be caused. In such case the limits, set
by the mechanical properties of the suspension, will be far exceeded and as discussed in section
2.6.3 the speaker will become highly non-linear. On the other hand, it should not be forgotten how
the pressure transfer function of a loudspeaker in free-air follows a shape of a 12dB per octave
high-pass ﬁlter and the resonance frequency of the driver serving as the cut-off frequency (example
can be seen in [18]).
It is important to notice that the responses and resonances are attenuated down to the aforemen-
tioned target curve, in order to not cause a greater problem by forcing the speaker to become more
non-linear.
To compensate for the linear-distortion part of the responses, their impulse response had to be
extracted. All four speakers have been driven at a level where all of the conventional metrics did
not show any signiﬁcant distortion and it was perceptually evaluated as non-distorting. Hence, the
levels of 0.3 and 0.7 Vpeak have been selected, but the 0.7 Vpeak has been the one to be kept as it
had a higher Signal-to-Noise-Ratio (SNR) with regard to the noise ﬂoor, a case investigated in the
next chapter.
Several attempts showed that indeed the length of the stimuli and the analysis steps had a impact
on the "ﬂatness" of the ﬁnal curve. The impulse response was extracted through SoundCheck®,
where a sweep of 370 steps, logarithmically spaced, from 20k to 100 Hz has been used. With such
settings the sweep had a duration of 25.24 seconds, which proved to yield the best results in the
processing that follows.
Accordingly, the impulse response of the aforementioned level for each speaker has been used
to equalize and ﬂatten-out the response. More speciﬁcally, the impulse response is transformed
==PAGE:34==
CHAPTER 3. PROCEDURE
30
into the respective transfer function as it afterwards inversed. Figure 3.5 shows this is for one of
the speakers. The left hand-side of the ﬁgure shows the created transfer function, while the right
hand-side shows its inverse.
Frequency
Amplitude
Speaker's Transfer Function
Frequency
Amplitude
Speaker's Inverse Transfer Function
Figure 3.5: Transfroming the response to its inverse as it will later be sampled by a 4096-coefﬁcients
FIR ﬁlter.
Since the purpose is that the speaker’s output is ﬂattened-out, the inverse response has to be
applied onto all of the signals played through the microspeakers. This is done by creating a 4096
coefﬁcient Finite-Impulse-Response (FIR) ﬁlter that samples the inverse response for that same
number of points.
The created FIR ﬁlter is then transformed to the time-domain and applied into all the music
samples, in the time-domain, by using the overlap-add method. Another approach, that only
changed the computation time, was the convolution of the FIR ﬁlter(in the frequency domain)
directly with the time signals.
500  
1000 
2000 
5000 
10000
16000
Frequency (Hz)
58
60
62
64
66
68
70
72
74
76
78
80
82
84
86
88
90
92
94
96
98
Compensated Frequency Response - SPK#1
0.71 Vpeak
1.4 Vpeak
2.8 Vpeak
4.2 Vpeak
5.7 Vpeak
7.1 Vpeak
9.9 Vpeak
11.3 Vpeak
500  
1000 
2000 
5000 
10000
16000
Frequency (Hz)
58
60
62
64
66
68
70
72
74
76
78
80
82
84
86
88
90
92
94
96
98
Compensated Frequency Response - SPK#2
0.71 Vpeak
1.4 Vpeak
2.8 Vpeak
4.2 Vpeak
5.7 Vpeak
7.1 Vpeak
9.9 Vpeak
11.3 Vpeak
500  
1000 
2000 
5000 
10000
16000
Frequency (Hz)
58
60
62
64
66
68
70
72
74
76
78
80
82
84
86
88
90
92
94
96
98
Compensated Frequency Response - SPK#3
0.71 Vpeak
1.4 Vpeak
2.8 Vpeak
4.2 Vpeak
5.7 Vpeak
7.1 Vpeak
9.9 Vpeak
11.3 Vpeak
500  
1000 
2000 
5000 
10000
16000
Frequency (Hz)
58
60
62
64
66
68
70
72
74
76
78
80
82
84
86
88
90
92
94
96
98
Compensated Frequency Response - SPK#4
0.71 Vpeak
1.4 Vpeak
2.8 Vpeak
4.2 Vpeak
5.7 Vpeak
7.1 Vpeak
9.9 Vpeak
11.3 Vpeak
Figure 3.6: Linear-distortion compensated frequency responses for the 4 speakers used in this
experiment.
==PAGE:35==
CHAPTER 3. PROCEDURE
31
At this point, the compensated frequency responses can be seen in ﬁgure 3.6, where each
sub-plot corresponds to a different speaker. All data have been extracted for the same levels as seen
in their corresponding legends.
In the same ﬁgure there are several things to be noticed. At low levels the response is as
expected, rather ﬂat with a less than ± 1 dB ﬂuctuations and the same band-passed, 700Hz to
10kHz, range. As the level is increased, the speakers become highly non-linear and that impact is
prominent in all of the plots. Particularly for SPK#1, the occurring non-linearities seem to surpass
the non-linear effects on all the other speakers.
Finally, the compressive behaviour for the lower Frequencies is seen as there seems to be a
clear drop of lower-frequency output with increasing level. This can be explained by the limited
excursion that the driver can have. Lower frequencies need a greater excursion to be able to yield
the same output as higher ones. Thus, since there is a limit of maximum displacement the driver
can have, imposed by its mechanical properties, the speaker is unable to provide a consistent output
as the higher frequencies when the driving level increases.
3.2.4
Recording the Samples for the Listening Tests
As previously mentioned, the inverse transfer function of the lowest level of each of the speakers
is applied to all the musical signals before played through the respective micro-speaker and, later,
recorded. In that case, only the effect of non-linear distortion is expected to be present as the level
increases and the driver is driven into its non-linear range.
The samples discussed in section 3.3.1 are recorded at the levels of 0.7, 1.4, 2.8, 4.2, 5.6, 7.9,
9.9 and 11.3 Vpeak, where as it will be discussed later, the level of 0.7 Vpeak served as the reference
signal to the Rnonlin model and the rest of the levels as the comparable (distorted) signals. On the
other hand, the listening tests only included the levels of 1.4, 4.2, 7.9, and 11.3 Vpeak, as the test
has to be kept within a limit that was not fatiguing for listeners.
The samples were recorded and then normalized to their RMS values in order to be more
comparable between them in terms of "loudness"; necessary for the listening tests. It is noted that
using a phychoacoustical model, such as the one proposed by Eberhard Zwicker [11], to match the
perceivable loudness for all the recordings seemed unnecessary since the RMS approach worked
adequately. This is mainly explained by the fact that all the samples are band-passed in the 700 to
10000 Hz region and the fact that the speaker’s output is compensated for their linear range.
3.3
Listening Tests - Assessors subjective evaluation
This chapter describes the procedure followed in order to perform the listening tests as it
includes and explains the samples chosen along with their spectrograms, the conﬁguration of the
experiments and ﬁnally the testing method. It is to be noted that the analysis of samples using the
Rnonlin model has not been limited to the ones found in the listening test, and those results and
==PAGE:36==
CHAPTER 3. PROCEDURE
32
data can be found in the Appendix of this report.
3.3.1
Sample’s Characteristics
All the samples used in the listening evaluation by the assessors have been chosen in a
meaningful and broad way. As purpose of this investigation is to confront with any type of signal
used, the musical signals spanned in different music genres, as well as dynamic ranges and harmonic
content.
The signals used can be listed to,
• A pop track, referred to as "Pop"
• A speech signal with standardized phrases, referred to as "Speech"
• A classical track from Mozart’s Piano quartet no. 2, referred to as "Mozart"
• An intense classical part from Paganini’s Rondo à La Clochette, referred to as "Violins"
• A logarithmically-spaced sines signal, referred to as "SineForest".
More speciﬁcally, the pop track used, features very aggressive transients and its dynamic
range is extremely small comparing to the rest of the tracks used. Its time-domain waveform
and spectrogram, can be seen in Figure 3.7a. As a side note, due to the very low crest-factor
and its broad-band range, a fact realized in most pop tracks nowadays, the amount of masking
present makes it hard to distinguish the inherent distortion and therefore the track is expected to be
challenging to the assessors.
The speech signal is a part of the speech corpus library of "Harvard Sentences" and it features 7
different phrases of "Read Speech". That corpus, includes a revised list of phonetically balanced
sentences that are used for standardized tests in telecommunications; as recommended by the IEEE
association. Hence the choice of that signal. Its waveform and spectrogram can be seen in ﬁgure
3.7b.
The classical track of Mozart’s Piano quartet no. 2, has an interesting property. The selected
part of the original recording features a piano with very discrete, perfectly tuned harmonics and a
great majority of them around the 1 kHz area. It has been observed that the distortion is prominently
higher when using this music sample with these particular micro-speakers a fact that has been
conﬁrmed by the Tonnmeister at Goertek EU, and the R&D department that has suggested that this
is due to the resonance frequency of the drivers at 1kHz. Therefore, since a large proportion of the
track’s content coincide with the resonance frequency of the driver, particularly more distortion
is perceived. Moreover the lack of content throughout the frequency range, due to the absence of
other instruments, makes the distortion easier to detect. Its waveform and spectrogram can be seen
in ﬁgure 3.7c.
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER 3. PROCEDURE
33
(a) Waveform(upper part) and Spectrogram(lower
part) of the "Pop" track
(b) Waveform and Spectrogram of the "Speech"
track
(c) Waveform and Spectrogram of the "Mozart"
track
(d) Waveform and Spectrogram of the "Violins"
track
(e) Waveform and Spectrogram of the "SineForest"
track
Figure 3.7: Time-domain and spectrogram representations of all the signals used in the listening
tests.
The second classical track used, is very different than then previous one in terms of the type and
amount of organs performing. The part selected out of the original recording features a complete
orchestra where all the instruments play synchronously and therefore an emphasized effect of
masking is present. Unlike the Pop track, the dynamic range is greater and the crest factor is higher;
thus makes it an interesting case to compare the effect of content and dynamic range. Its waveform
and spectrogram can be seen in ﬁgure 3.7d.
The last signal used in the assessors evaluation is the previously acclaimed "SineForest" [5],
with regard to initial use by [3]. This signal features 10 sine tones logarithmically-spaced from
50Hz to 15kHz that do not fall into musical intervals. It has been initially proposed by Czerwinski,
==PAGE:38==
CHAPTER 3. PROCEDURE
34
Voishvillo, Alexandrov, et al. [19][20] as a meaningful signal to measure the perceived distortion
as the familiarity of musical and harmonic intervals, as music notes, is removed. Its waveform and
spectrogram can be seen in ﬁgure 3.7e.
3.3.2
Conﬁguration
The listening tests took place in two different locations, with the same equipment and slightly
different listening booths. Both booths featured the same RME sound interface and the same type
of headphones, the Sennheiser HD650. This particular type of open-back circumaural headphone
is tuned to a free-ﬁeld correction curve that makes the listening of the recordings a meaningful
representation of an up-close listening of the speakers.
The playback level has been set at 70 dBSPL(A), where a calibration with pink noise and an
A-weighted ﬁlter took place. It is to be noted that the playback level is not of critical importance,
but mostly to prevent fatigue and value comfort and where the equal-loudness curve does not
exhibit extremes, such as very low levels.
3.3.3
Testing method
The testing method used was based on the recommendation from ITU-R BS.1534-3 [21],
where it describes a method for the subjective assessment of intermediate audio quality. The
method, called “MUlti Stimulus test with Hidden Reference and Anchor (MUSHRA)”, has been
previously tested and evaluated thoroughly. Tests in the recommendation have demonstrated that
the MUSHRA method is "suitable for evaluation of intermediate audio quality and gives accurate
and reliable results", therefore an appropriate method to quantify the distortion in micro-speakers.
The method of MUSHRA has been decided to be modiﬁed to ﬁt this investigation, thus the
"Anchor" signals were not included. The method describes that two "anchor" signals should be used
in the test, one that is a low-passed version of the reference and one that is the maximally distorted
signal. Since the signals used are all band-passed in the 700Hz to 10kHz region, the ﬁrst anchor
seemed unnecessary. The second anchor has also been decided to be excluded as the maximally
distorted signal was also included as a testing condition and most importantly, the maximally
distorted signal is unique for each speaker, and not a general case as seen in the recommendation.
Although the MUSHRA method is a well established method "as is", with a hidden reference
and two anchor signals, it is not uncommon to modify such method to better suit the needs of
certain experiments. By removing the anchor points there is a risk of the results becoming unclear
if some assessors are not able to properly ﬁnd the right level of distortion. Although, by choosing
levels that clearly distort and that the difference between them is not subtle, such risk could be
mitigated. Additionally, a ﬁnal part that tests if the results are repeatable is added and is discussed
further on.
The assessors were presented with the question of "How much distorted does it sound (compared
to the reference)?" and were given sliders that ranged from 0 (Max distortion) to 2 (undistorted) to
rate how much the signal distorts when compared to the reference signal. Since the range is totally
==PAGE:39==
CHAPTER 3. PROCEDURE
35
dependent on the assessor, only three indications have been used; "Undistorted", "Med. Distorted"
and "Extremely Distorted". For the reference signal a band-passed version of the original music
signal, in the aforementioned 700Hz to 10kHz region, was presented. This consideration ﬁnds
reason since all the samples are compensated for the linear response of the speakers and as seen in
ﬁgure 3.6 the low levels of the speakers are indeed described by that band-passed characteristic.
The GUI used has been borrowed from the Whisper GUI which belongs to the Audio Commu-
nication Group of TU Berlin, by Ciba, Wlodarski, and Maempel [22]. An example screen-shot can
be seen in ﬁgure 3.8. Please note that the addition of "(compared to the reference)" is not shown in
the GUI, since this was a test trial of the test.
Figure 3.8: Example screen-shot of the MUSHRA method used in the main part of the listening
test. Original work of the GUI belongs to ’Audio Communication Group, TU Berlin’ [22].
The listening test was divided into three parts. The ﬁrst part was a Training Session, where the
listeners were able to become familiar with the music samples included in the test. The particularly
distinctive band-passed frequency response of the micro-speakers and the most and least distorted
signals have been an indication to what the assessors had to expect and focus on rating.
The second part of the listening test was the main part of the test and it included 20 different
testing conditions, seen as "Panels". Each panel referred to a combination of one of the ﬁve samples,
for one of the four micro-speakers. The respective panel included 5 sliders, where one was the
hidden reference and the rest were the levels of 1.4, 4.2, 7.1 and 11.3 Vpeak, in a randomized order.
The third part served mostly as a measure of repeatability between the ratings of the assessors
and it included only two panels, but nine sliders this time. The two panels corresponded to only
two of the samples, the "Mozart" track and the "Violins" track. The sliders included the hidden
reference and the least- and most-distorting levels for all four speakers.
==PAGE:40==
CHAPTER 3. PROCEDURE
36
3.3.4
Assessors
The proﬁle of the assessors is mainly described by either students enrolled in the MSc. Acous-
tics program or graduated from, and therefore are expected to be able to deﬁne distortion and
optimistically distinguish. Their ages spanned from 24 to 32 and all had no previous hearing-loss
record. A small percentage of the assessors had been previously ear-trained in evaluating sound in
a critical way, but the majority would be described as "naive" listeners. As described by Bech and
Zacharov [23], "naive" is a term for listeners who do not have speciﬁc experience in evaluating
sound in a critical way.
Of course the use of naive listeners imposes a challenge in the evaluation of the listening tests,
both in terms of discrimination but also in reliability of the results. Discrimination refers to the
measure of the ability to perceive differences between the test items, and reliability to the measure
of the closeness of repeated ratings of the same test item. Accordingly, the listening tests have
been performed twice by each assessor and the difference between the ﬁrst and second run has
been assessed. From a less scientiﬁc point of view, the ﬁnal results could also indicate whether an
average range of consumers are indeed able to rate distortion and "performance" in the evaluation
of a ﬁnal product.
A preliminary session with the assessors took place before performing the listening test, where
an explanation of what they were going to listen to and what they should be focused on took place.
The assessors were instructed to exclude the recording noise or hiss in some of the recordings as
distortion. Since all tests have been performed twice, a half an hour brake took place between the
sessions, to prevent fatigue and lack of focus.
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER 4
Results and Analysis
The following chapter presents the results obtained through the Rnonlin model, the results from
the listening tests and a latter comparison between the two. It follows the order of the way the
investigation has been performed and discusses problems and possible solutions found along the
way; further discussion and suggestions for improving the results can be found in the next chapter.
4.1
Rnonlin
Using the Rnonlin model we attempt to quantify the amount of distortion for each discrete
level and for each speaker. The levels and the speakers used can be found in the previous chapter
and a complete graphical plot of all the levels and all the music samples used are available in the
Appendix.
As previously mentioned, the Rnonlin model compares a reference signal to its distorted version
and with the use of the psychoacoustic modelling discussed in the theory, it yields a score from 0 to
1 in terms of how much distorted the signal is, based on perception. Since the model is based on
correlation, the value of 1 indicates a completely undistorted signal, as the two signals will be the
same, while the values decrease towards 0 as the distortion increases.
The initial Rnonlin analysis can be seen in ﬁgure 4.1 where the results for the four speakers
(symbols), ﬁve levels (colors) and ﬁve music samples (x-axis) are presented. It is noted that the
results for each speaker are shifted to the right to improve clarity and readability of the chart.
In the same plot, it is seen that the results between each music sample tend to differ and
although the results for each level are close to each other, there seems to be an increase of distortion
with increasing level. Hence, an indication that the model is functional but unclear to which degree,
yet.
On the other hand, performing a personal evaluation across the speakers and the music samples,
SPK#2 was found to be the least distorting across speakers and the Speech signal one of the least
distorting across samples. For that matter, the results could be questionable to how much they
could actually represent a subjective evaluation. This proposes that a further investigation has to be
performed and this starts with the alternation of the reference signal.
37
==PAGE:42==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND ANALYSIS
38
As a reference signal in this analysis, a version of the signal recorded at low levels, 0.7Vpeak in
this case is used. This, of course, assumes that the low-level signal is distortion-free but it had to be
investigated further.
Pop
Speech
Mozart 
Violins
SineForest
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Rnonlin
Rnonlin Comparison of All Speakers  [re 0.7Vpeak]
SPK#1 : 9.9 Vpeak
SPK#1 : 7.9 Vpeak
SPK#1 : 5.8 Vpeak
SPK#1 : 4.4 Vpeak
SPK#1 : 1.4 Vpeak
SPK#2 : 9.9 Vpeak
SPK#2 : 7.9 Vpeak
SPK#2 : 5.8 Vpeak
SPK#2 : 4.4 Vpeak
SPK#2 : 1.4 Vpeak
SPK#3 : 9.9 Vpeak
SPK#3 : 7.9 Vpeak
SPK#3 : 5.8 Vpeak
SPK#3 : 4.4 Vpeak
SPK#3 : 1.4 Vpeak
SPK#4 : 9.9 Vpeak
SPK#4 : 7.9 Vpeak
SPK#4 : 5.8 Vpeak
SPK#4 : 4.4 Vpeak
SPK#4 : 1.4 Vpeak
Figure 4.1: Rnonlin values for all the chosen speakers (symbols) and levels (colours) for each
sample. As the "reference" signal, the low-level recording of 0.7Vpeak has been used. Note: The
symbols for each speaker-group are shifted to the right to improve clarity and readability of the
chart.
As mentioned in chapter 3, in the proposal of the Rnonlin method [3] it is not clearly mentioned
what signal should serve as a reference, but an investigation by Olsen, Agerkvist, Macdonald, et al.
[5] showed that the use of the signal recorded at a low level, where the speaker is assumed to be in
its linear range, yielded the best results. Accordingly, a similar investigation is performed to ﬁnd if
this holds true for microspeakers and the case where the linear distortion has been compensated.
Respectfully, the reference signal is altered to a band-passed version of the original music
samples and the results are shown in ﬁgure 4.2. The band-passed version originates from three facts,
the micro-speakers are unable to perform efﬁciently below 700Hz, the speakers are compensated
for their linear-distortion and the ambiguity of the position in the equalisation of the speakers is
removed for frequencies above 10kHz.
In the same plot, it is to be seen that the results become confusing and rather senseless. The
fact that the Rnonlin values increase with increasing level impose a decrease of distortion with
level; a very improbable case. This shows that a version of the original samples cannot be used and
suggests that a low-level recording of the signals should used instead.
==PAGE:43==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND ANALYSIS
39
Pop
Speech
Mozart 
Violins
SineForest
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Rnonlin
Rnonlin Comparison of All Speakers  [re BP:700Hz-10kHz]
SPK#1 : 9.9 Vpeak
SPK#1 : 7.9 Vpeak
SPK#1 : 5.8 Vpeak
SPK#1 : 4.4 Vpeak
SPK#1 : 1.4 Vpeak
SPK#2 : 9.9 Vpeak
SPK#2 : 7.9 Vpeak
SPK#2 : 5.8 Vpeak
SPK#2 : 4.4 Vpeak
SPK#2 : 1.4 Vpeak
SPK#3 : 9.9 Vpeak
SPK#3 : 7.9 Vpeak
SPK#3 : 5.8 Vpeak
SPK#3 : 4.4 Vpeak
SPK#3 : 1.4 Vpeak
SPK#4 : 9.9 Vpeak
SPK#4 : 7.9 Vpeak
SPK#4 : 5.8 Vpeak
SPK#4 : 4.4 Vpeak
SPK#4 : 1.4 Vpeak
Figure 4.2: Rnonlin values for all the speakers used with a "reference" of a band-passed version of
the original music signals.
At this point it can only be assumed that the inherent recording-noise in the recordings is the
main reason. As a matter of fact, since the model is based on the correlation of the signals, an
introduction of uncorrelated noise could indeed contaminate the results. This seems to apply as
we notice that the lower recorded signals yield worse values and this could be justiﬁed by the fact
that when micro-speakers are recorded at low levels, their output is fairly low and very close to
the noise ﬂoor. As a matter of fact, as the level increases, their output increases and so does the
signal-to-noise-ratio (SNR); a very probable case in ﬁgure 4.2.
Pop
Speech
Mozart 
Violins
SineForest
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Rnonlin
Rnonlin:  [re: 0.3Vpeak]  -Vs-  [re: 0.7Vpeak]
SPK#3 [re0.3Vp] : 9.9 Vpeak
SPK#3 [re0.3Vp] : 7.9 Vpeak
SPK#3 [re0.3Vp] : 5.8 Vpeak
SPK#3 [re0.3Vp] : 4.4 Vpeak
SPK#3 [re0.3Vp] : 1.4 Vpeak
SPK#3 [re0.7Vp] : 9.9 Vpeak
SPK#3 [re0.7Vp] : 7.9 Vpeak
SPK#3 [re0.7Vp] : 5.8 Vpeak
SPK#3 [re0.7Vp] : 4.4 Vpeak
SPK#3 [re0.7Vp] : 1.4 Vpeak
SPK#2 [re0.3Vp] : 9.9 Vpeak
SPK#2 [re0.3Vp] : 7.9 Vpeak
SPK#2 [re0.3Vp] : 5.8 Vpeak
SPK#2 [re0.3Vp] : 4.4 Vpeak
SPK#2 [re0.3Vp] : 1.4 Vpeak
SPK#2 [re0.7Vp] : 9.9 Vpeak
SPK#2 [re0.7Vp] : 7.9 Vpeak
SPK#2 [re0.7Vp] : 5.8 Vpeak
SPK#2 [re0.7Vp] : 4.4 Vpeak
SPK#2 [re0.7Vp] : 1.4 Vpeak
Figure 4.3: Rnonlin for SPK#3 and SPK#2 when different "reference" signals of 0.3Vpeak and
0.7Vpeak have been used.
==PAGE:44==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND ANALYSIS
40
By altering the reference signal with the low-level recorded version, the question of "how low
must the recording level be?" arises. With regard to ﬁgure 4.3 it seems that the lowest level possible
is not the best case for micro-speakers. Indeed the speaker should be in its linear range, but an
appropriate SNR must be met in order to extract better and more meaningful results.
The comparison has been performed between speaker SPK#3 and SPK#2 for the same
levels as above and the reference signals of 0.3Vpeak and 0.7Vpeak. It is seen that using a very
low level recording not only the "distortion-steps" become more compact, but also that values
show worse performance for signals that are perceived as less distorting, i.e. speech. Therefore, a
proper SNR is not met and for that reason the level of 0.7Vpeak will serve as the reference signal
throughout the rest of this investigation.
As the reference signal is decided to be represented by the recording of the 0.7Vpeak level, the
ﬁnal graph is shown in ﬁgure 4.4. The graph is now truncated to include only the levels used in
the listening tests and this will serve as our ﬁnal Rnonlin plot which we will later refer to. The
respective standard deviation (STD) of the same values, for 1σ, can be seen in ﬁgure 4.5. The
values found in the STD plot, seem to suggest a model that is lucking stability.
Pop
Speech
Mozart 
Violins
SineForest
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Rnonlin
Rnonlin Comparison of All Speakers [re 0.7Vpeak]
SPK#1 : 11 Vpeak
SPK#1 : 7.9 Vpeak
SPK#1 : 4.4 Vpeak
SPK#1 : 1.4 Vpeak
SPK#2 : 11 Vpeak
SPK#2 : 7.9 Vpeak
SPK#2 : 4.4 Vpeak
SPK#2 : 1.4 Vpeak
SPK#3 : 11 Vpeak
SPK#3 : 7.9 Vpeak
SPK#3 : 4.4 Vpeak
SPK#3 : 1.4 Vpeak
SPK#4 : 11 Vpeak
SPK#4 : 7.9 Vpeak
SPK#4 : 4.4 Vpeak
SPK#4 : 1.4 Vpeak
Figure 4.4: Final Rnonlin plot for all the speakers and with only the levels included in the Listening
Tests. As the reference signal, the level of 0.7Vpeak signal has been used.
Time-frame analysis of Rnonlin and RMS values
Observing ﬁgure 4.4, it is noticed that the model’s output greatly depends on the signal and
therefore the type of input. For example, for the static signal of SineForest the most separated
results across the levels are obtained, while for more complex signals, in terms of harmonic content
over time, such as Pop and Violins the results are less clear. Furthermore, the fact that the Speech
signal still has a lower score and that the STD values cannot impose conﬁdence in the results, a
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND ANALYSIS
41
further investigation must be carried out.
As described in the Rnonlin model’s description, chapter 2, the ﬁnal and single Rnonlin value
extracted from the model is the mean of all values obtained for each time-frame of the signal. As
a reminder, the input signal is split into frames of 30 milliseconds long where the correlation of
each frame is found; under the application of the previously-discussed psychoacoustic methods.
Accordingly, the signals can be plotted with the Rnonlin values of each frame, in order to observe
the raw information before the "mean" of all those values is taken, and the values will be averaged
out.
Pop
Speech
Mozart 
Violins
SineForest
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
0.14
STD  (1σ)
STD of Rnonlin values - All Speakers
SPK#1 : 11 Vpeak
SPK#1 : 7.9 Vpeak
SPK#1 : 4.4 Vpeak
SPK#1 : 1.4 Vpeak
SPK#2 : 11 Vpeak
SPK#2 : 7.9 Vpeak
SPK#2 : 4.4 Vpeak
SPK#2 : 1.4 Vpeak
SPK#3 : 11 Vpeak
SPK#3 : 7.9 Vpeak
SPK#3 : 4.4 Vpeak
SPK#3 : 1.4 Vpeak
SPK#4 : 11 Vpeak
SPK#4 : 7.9 Vpeak
SPK#4 : 4.4 Vpeak
SPK#4 : 1.4 Vpeak
Figure 4.5: Standard deviation values for the data in ﬁgure 4.4 and 1 σ.
The analysis of the Rnonlin for the music samples of Pop and Speech can be seen in ﬁgure 4.6,
while for the samples of Mozart and Violins in ﬁgure 4.7. Illustration has been limited to only one
of the speakers, SPK#3, and the sample of SineForest is excluded as the values are constant over
time, as the signal is static. All plots are extracted for the value of 9.9Vpeak where it is easier for
the analysis to be illustrated, as all of the micro-speakers used will somehow distort in that level.
The top part of the plots shows the Rnonlin values for each frame (blue) and the root-mean-
square (RMS) value of the same individual frame (red). It is of critical importance to note that the
Rnonlin values are extracted from the recorded signal, while the RMS values are extracted from
the original audio signal and therefore they are unaffected by the recording noise. In the same top
part of the plots, the legend shows the mean Rnonlin value of all the time frames, called "Rnon",
which is the actual single-output value of the model. The respective standard deviation, skewness
and kurtosis are seen in the same legend.
The bottom part of the plots shows the histogram of the above Rnonlin (blue) and RMS (red)
values. For a more extensive analysis, the sum curve (thin blue line) and the median (pointed by
the arrow) of the Rnonlin values are shown in the same graph.
==PAGE:46==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND ANALYSIS
42
Figure 4.6: Analysis of Pop and Speech signals. Top part: Rnonlin values of the recorded signal for
each time-frame (blue) and the RMS value of the original audio signal but for the same individual
frame (red). Bottom part: histogram of the above Rnonlin (blue) and RMS (red) values, with the
addition of the sum curve (thin blue line) and the median (pointed by the arrow) of the Rnonlin
values.
Figure 4.7: Analysis of Mozart and Violins signals. For explanation, refer to caption of Figure 4.6.
In the analysis of the signals, there are several things to be noticed. Initially, looking at the top
==PAGE:47==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND ANALYSIS
43
part of the plots, it is noticed how the Rnonlin values of each ﬁlter (blue) follow the RMS values
of the same frame (red) in an inverse order. When the RMS of the signal reaches certain maxima,
the Rnonlin values decrease, which we would expect as there is more distortion produced. On the
other hand, an interesting observation comes from the Speech signal’s plot, where its ﬁnal Rnonlin
value is fairly low and actually reaching the value of the Mozart signal; the most distorting signal.
This looks rather suspicious since it can be seen that the power of the signal is fairly low for the
majority of time. This indicates that, when the power drops below a certain point, the Signal to
Noise Ratio will drop, and therefore the Rnonlin will yield lower values. Moreover by looking at
all the Rnonlin time-frame values in the plots, there seems to be a greater inﬂuence of the low RMS
signal than the actual inherent distortion in the sample, for example comparing the time-framed
Rnonlin values of Speech and Mozart.
Secondly, it is noticed how a single Rnonlin value might not tell the whole story. By looking at
the histogram of the Rnonlin values (blue bar plot), there seem to be a lot of values that deviate
from the mean and where in a subjective evaluation an assessor might evaluate the performance of
the speaker based on the most distorting values. In reality, the place on the distribution where each
person sets his criterion is totally subjective. This will indicate that a certain number of people
might rate the signal as "distorted" if it distorts even in a single point in time, while others might be
more tolerant and rate it only if several "distorting-moments" occur over the playback the signal.
For those reasons, the concepts of the "median" and, later on, the "percentile" are used to investigate
which one better correlates to the subjective tests.
Finally, it is noticed that the histograms show a certain similarity to a normal distribution but
the rather irregular shape and the values of skewness and kurtosis prove that the distribution is not
normal.
Up to this point, there seem to be more than one variables that affect the model, but with the
indication that the recording noise greatly affects the model. Discussion continues in terms of the
initial investigations performed in order to evaluate, explain and improve the results.
Removing Rnonlin values below a limit, set by the recording noise
At this point it would be logical to analyse the Rnonlin values that the "Recording Noise" yields
and possibly exclude them before the total averaging is applied.
Under this assumption the recording noise was compared to 5 musical samples recorded at the
9.9Vpeak level. The results can be seen in ﬁgure 4.8, where the top part shows the Rnonlin vales for
each time frame and the bottom their respective histogram. All calculations are performed with the
use of the ﬁve different music samples and in the legend at the bottom, the mean Rnonlin values of
the top plot are shown.
As seen in the same plot, the recording noise inherent in the recorded samples will mainly
induce Rnonlin values from around 0.3 to around 0.5 into the averaging of the single Rnonlin-value.
Therefore, an attempt to keep the values above a certain limit might improve the results. The limit
of 0.47 was set to be the lowest Rnonlin value allowed in the calculation of the average Rnonlin
==PAGE:48==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND ANALYSIS
44
value. The results can be seen in ﬁgure 4.9 where the mean Rnonlin values of all the speakers and
the selected levels can be seen.
Figure 4.8: Analysis of the Recording Noise included in the recorded audio samples. Top part:
Rnonlin values for each time frame. Bottom part: Histogram of the Rnonlin values.
Pop
Speech
Mozart 
Violins
SineForest
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Rnonlin
Rnonlin Comparison, values above 0.47
SPK#1 : 11 Vpeak
SPK#1 : 7.9 Vpeak
SPK#1 : 4.4 Vpeak
SPK#1 : 1.4 Vpeak
SPK#2 : 11 Vpeak
SPK#2 : 7.9 Vpeak
SPK#2 : 4.4 Vpeak
SPK#2 : 1.4 Vpeak
SPK#3 : 11 Vpeak
SPK#3 : 7.9 Vpeak
SPK#3 : 4.4 Vpeak
SPK#3 : 1.4 Vpeak
SPK#4 : 11 Vpeak
SPK#4 : 7.9 Vpeak
SPK#4 : 4.4 Vpeak
SPK#4 : 1.4 Vpeak
Figure 4.9: Rnonlin results, when values that are below the limit of 0.47 are excluded in the
averaging of all the time-frame Rnonlin values.
Contrary to what was initially thought, the comparison of ﬁgures 4.4 and 4.8 shows that keeping
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND ANALYSIS
45
values above the low-limit of 0.47, that is caused by the contamination from the recording noise,
does not improve the results. For that matter, the idea of removing values below the proposed limit
is abandoned and the investigation continues in a more extensive analysis of the noise.
Inﬂuence of Noise on the Rnonlin model
As of now it should be clear that noise has a critical impact on the model and its ﬁnal outcome.
Since the analysis is performed on recorded samples, and not on distorted signals created by an
algorithm, the recording noise is unavoidable, and so is its analysis.
An analysis on the inﬂuence of noise has been performed, where the original music samples
have been infused with uncorrelated noise of different signal to noise ratios (SNR). As the original
samples contain no noise are referred to as Clean, while the same music samples are infused with
noise of different SNRs. The cases where the "reference" in the model is the ’Clean’ signal and the
"distorted" is the signal with uncorrelated noise are represented by the ’dots’ in ﬁgure 4.10. The
reciprocal case, where the "distorted" is the clean signal and the "reference" contains the noise, are
represented by the diamonds in the same plot.
Pop
Speech
Mozart 
Violins
SineForest
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Rnonlin
Influence of Noise
Noise: 0 dB SNR [re Clean]
Noise: 6 dB SNR [re Clean]
Noise: 12 dB SNR [re Clean]
Noise: 18 dB SNR [re Clean]
Noise: 24 dB SNR [re Clean]
Noise: 30 dB SNR [re Clean]
Noise: 36 dB SNR [re Clean]
Clean [re Noise: 0 dB SNR]
Clean [re Noise: 6 dB SNR]
Clean [re Noise: 12 dB SNR]
Clean [re Noise: 18 dB SNR]
Clean [re Noise: 24 dB SNR]
Clean [re Noise: 30 dB SNR]
Clean [re Noise: 36 dB SNR]
Figure 4.10: Rnonlin values in an investigation on the inﬂuence of noise onto the Rnonlin model.
Noise is added into the 5 music samples of the x-axis in amounts that differ from 0 to 36 dB SNR.
’Dots’ show the case where the ’reference’ signals are the original "Clean" signals and ’distorted’
signals use the same signals plus noise at different ratios. The ’diamonds’ show the opposite case.
Inspection of ﬁgure 4.10 shows important information. Initially, it is noticed how noise affects
the Rnonlin values, where the more noise in the sample, the lower the rating. Secondly, across
all speakers there seems to be a certain pattern that differentiates the results, based on the type of
musical signal used. This seems to be an important observation as the characteristics of the signal,
==PAGE:50==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND ANALYSIS
46
such as dynamic range or low RMS values, can be affected differently by the noise and inﬂuence
the model. By comparing the same ﬁgure to ﬁgure 4.4, a similar footprint can be noticed.
On the other hand, the reciprocal case shows strong similarities with the previous observations
but proves it is not the same. It shows that the choice of which "reference" and "distorted" signals
contain noise in the Rnonlin model might be something to consider.
Now that the inﬂuence of a signal with noise has been analysed when compared to the clean
signal, it is time to test a more realistic scenario where both "reference" and "distorted" signals will
contain noise in different amounts. In fact when dealing with recorded signals from the output of a
speaker all recordings will contain noise up to a certain degree. Thus, since the low-level signal,
serving as the "reference" signal in the model, and the "distorted" signals will have different SNR’s
similar cases should be examined. Respectively, ﬁgure 4.11 has been extracted.
In ﬁgure 4.11, three cases are llustrated. Firstly, comparing the results with the red colour
two opposite cases, as before, are shown, switching between noise of 24dB SNR and 12dB SNR
between "reference" and "distorted" signals. Contrary to the previous ﬁgure, now we notice that
the reciprocal cases apply, as results are signiﬁcantly close for all music samples.
Pop
Speech
Mozart 
Violins
SineForest
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Rnonlin
Influence of Noise 
Noise: 24 dB SNR [re N:12 dB SNR]
Noise: 12 dB SNR [re N:24 dB SNR]
Noise: 30 dB SNR [re N:24 dB SNR]
Figure 4.11: Rnonlin values in an investigation on the inﬂuence of noise onto the Rnonlin model.
All symbols show the effect of using noise with different SNR for the "reference" and the "distorted"
signals of the model, into the 5 music samples.
Secondly, the data represented by the ’dots’ in the same plot, correspond to the case where the
"reference" signal is infused with noise of 24dB SNR and the "distorted" signal is altered. One
case with less noise, 30 dB SNR, is shown by the ’blue dots’ and another case with more noise, 24
dB SNR, by the ’red dots’. This approach tries to examine the differences of the ’reference’ signal
having more or less noise than the actual ’distorted’ signal. As expected, a higher noise-level yields
==PAGE:51==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND ANALYSIS
47
worse values than a case with less noise, but its degree of inﬂuence will depend on the type of signal.
Up to this point, there seems to be a clear inﬂuence of noise onto the model, that will also
depend on the signal used. This proves that the recording noise inherent in the samples is an impor-
tant consideration when such samples are used with the Rnonlin model. Methods of controlling
that inﬂuence and improving the results are presented and discussed in the next chapter.
Investigation on the applied weighting
With regard to previous discussion of how Rnonlin values are lower for signals with lower
RMS values an additional investigation is steered toward the applied weighting in the model. As
described in chapter 2, the model applies a weighting function depending on the power of each
ﬁlter. The cases are relative to the maximum power of each ﬁlter and separated in the cases of
"within 40 dB", "between 40-80dB" and "below 80dB" from the maximum value.
In the current section, those dB limits are switched to 20 and 40 dB in order to apply more
weighting on the parts of the signal with a higher RMS value. In that way, the lower RMS values
play a less important role in the calculation of the Rnonlin values and for signals with very quiet
parts or gaps in the recordings, such as speech, the overall model is less affected.
Pop
Speech
Mozart 
Violins
SineForest
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Rnonlin
Rnonlin Weighting Comparison: [40-80] Vs [20-40] range
SPK#2 [W:40-80] : 9.9 Vpeak
SPK#2 [W:40-80] : 7.9 Vpeak
SPK#2 [W:40-80] : 5.8 Vpeak
SPK#2 [W:40-80] : 4.4 Vpeak
SPK#2 [W:40-80] : 1.4 Vpeak
SPK#2 [W:20-40] : 9.9 Vpeak
SPK#2 [W:20-40] : 7.9 Vpeak
SPK#2 [W:20-40] : 5.8 Vpeak
SPK#2 [W:20-40] : 4.4 Vpeak
SPK#2 [W:20-40] : 1.4 Vpeak
Figure 4.12: Rnonlin values in an investigation on the inﬂuence of the weighting function applied
to the signals. Here, the unmodiﬁed weighting version of [40-80] is compared to the investigated
case of [20-40]. Results are shown for speaker SPK#2.
The results of comparing the original weighting of "40 - 80" dB to the modiﬁed version of "20 -
40" dB can be seen in ﬁgure 4.12. The results are shown for one of the speakers, SPK#2, for the
==PAGE:52==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND ANALYSIS
48
same levels found in ﬁgure 4.1. It can be seen that the alternation of the weighting function could
indeed be beneﬁcial in some cases, but the loss of sparsity across different levels could also make it
an undesirable option.
Although the results seem to improve for the low-power signals,i.e. speech, the idea has not
been adopted in the rest of the investigation. In cases where low-level signals outvote the recorded
signals, the adjustment of the applied weighting might be appropriate.
==PAGE:53==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND ANALYSIS
49
4.2
Subjective Tests
In order to evaluate the results from the Rnonlin model found in the previous section and
answer the research question with conﬁdence, listening tests had to be performed. Additionally, in
the case of a good prediction by the Rnonlin model, the possibility of predicting the performance
of micro-speakers would be a well-desired goal.
Before any analysis, a comparison of the two listening booths had to be performed. In that
way, systematic differences and possibilities of biasing the results, due to the room’s inﬂuence, is
estimated. An analysis on the inﬂuence of the room on the results showed a mean score-difference
of -0.011 and a standard deviation of 0.164 for 2σ (95.5%), the resulting plot can be seen in the
Appendix. With such values we can be conﬁdent that the locations and the different booths used in
the listening tests, had minimum inﬂuence.
The resulting data are presented in two different ways, one that combines information regarding
the level of each speaker and one that combines the information for each sample used. Respective
Analysis Of Variance (ANOVA) has been performed for all the groups of data presented in the
following paragraphs.
In ﬁgure 4.13 the results from the subjective evaluation are being presented, averaged over
each level and grouped per speaker. Here, each level represents the average value of all the music
samples used in the test. The scale from 1 to 0 has been converted with respect to the Rnonlin
output values, where 1 denotes a completely undistorted signal and values decrease toward 0 as
distortion increases. The graph includes the standard deviation for 1 σ.
Figure 4.13: The results from the subjective evaluation, grouped per "Speaker" and presented per
"Level". The subjective rating on the y-axis is converted to match the output of the Rnonlin model,
where 1:Undistorted and 0:Extreme distortion.
==PAGE:54==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND ANALYSIS
50
The same graph shows how the amount of perceivable distortion increases with increasing level,
with the case of SPK#2 and the level of 1.4Vpeak being the only exception. In fact it can be seen
that SPK#2 has a less-distorting rating compared to the other speakers overall and if we were to
comment the fact that the levels of 1.4Vpeak and 4.2Vpeak are inverted, it could be explained by the
fact that the assessors had difﬁculty in grading the two levels, probably due to being perceived as
equally distorted. Their respective standard deviation possibly conﬁrms that, and the respective
boxplot of ﬁgure 4.14 does too. The box plot shows the average of all samples used and since
SPK#2 covers a much smaller range, there is an idication it is more level and sound independent,
which could suggest a better-performing speaker.
In general, observing the standard deviation values it is seen that for the levels where the STD
values are greater, it is suggested that the perceivable distortion for some levels, greatly depends on
the sample used, as the results have covered a larger area of ratings.
If the data of ﬁgure 4.13 are summarised in a box-plot, then ﬁgure 4.14 will be extracted. An
interesting observation comes from the fact that SPK#2 is indeed rated as less distorting than
the other three speakers. Although, mainly due to the lower-level confusion explained before, the
median is shifted from the center of the distribution and therefore its distribution deviates from a
normal distribution.
SPK#1
SPK#2
SPK#3
SPK#4
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Subjective Rating
Mean of all levels and all samples
Figure 4.14: Box-plot representation of the results shown in the previous plot, ﬁgure 4.13.
In the analysis of the results, an analysis of variance between the means of the groups presented
must be run to determine if the results are signiﬁcant. This is shown in table 4.1, where the F-values
and the respective probabilities can be seen. It is seen that, the F-values are far from values of
"1" and that the respective probability values yield numbers well below 1%. This proves that the
results are signiﬁcantly different between the groups and there is a very small probability they
have occurred by chance. Therefore, the signiﬁcance of the results can be conﬁrmed as the null
hypothesis is rejected.
==PAGE:55==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND ANALYSIS
51
Source
Sum Sq.
d.f.
Mean Sq.
F
Prob
Speaker
0.132
3
0.0440
8.01
0.00656
Level
0.263
3
0.0878
16.00
0.00060
Error
0.049
9
0.0055
Total
0.445
15
Table 4.1: Two-way ANOVA analysis on the results from the subjective evaluations, for the groups
of "Speaker" and "Level".
Moving forward, an analysis of the music samples used, grouped per-speakers has also been
performed. The results are shown in ﬁgure 4.15 along with the relevant standard deviation for 1σ.
All results are extracted by averaging over all levels under investigation.
By looking at the same ﬁgure, it can be seen that the "Mozart" sample is evaluated as the most
distorting one among all the samples used. The fact that the STD for that sample spans across a
wide range can be justiﬁed by the fact that this sample has greater steps of perceived-distortion
from one level to the other. This seems to be the case for the "Violins" and "SineForest" too, but
not for the "Pop" and "Speech" in particular. In discussion with the assessors about these music
samples, they have expressed the fact that these two samples in particular where the hardest to rate
and since their standard deviation seems to be smaller, we can expect that the assessors have been
evaluating the samples in a much closer and smaller range of perceived distortion.
Figure 4.15: The results from the subjective evaluation, grouped per "Speaker" and separated per
"Sample". The subjective rating matches the output of the Rnonlin model, where 1:Undistorted and
0:Extreme distortion.
Accordingly, an analysis of variance between the groups of "Speaker" and "Sample" has been
performed and the respective results can be seen in table 4.2. In a similar manner as before, the
results show statistical signiﬁcance as we observe values much greater than 1 for the F-Test and
==PAGE:56==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND ANALYSIS
52
much less than 1% for its respective probabilities.
Source
Sum Sq.
d.f.
Mean Sq.
F
Prob
Speaker
0.165
3
0.0549
8.888
0.00225
Sample
0.218
4
0.0545
8.82
0.00146
Error
0.074
12
0.0062
Total
0.457
19
Table 4.2: Two-way ANOVA analysis on the results from the subjective evaluations, for the groups
of "Speaker" and music "Sample".
Since this investigation contains groups that differ and interact, it is unavoidable to not analyse
the results in a three-way ANOVA where the signiﬁcance of the results for the groups of "Speakers",
"Level" and "Sample" is analysed, as well as their interactions. The output of the analysis can be
found in table 4.3. It is noticed for all the groups of data, as well as their interaction, statistical
signiﬁcance exists. In fact, F-values well far from the value of "1" prove that each group is
signiﬁcantly different from the null-hypothesis, with probability values well below 1 % that are
enough to reject it. Therefore, statistical signiﬁcance exists both for the individual groups and their
interactions.
Source
Sum Sq.
d.f.
Mean Sq.
F
Prob
Speaker
0.659
3
0.2198
38.65
2.38E-11
Level
1.317
3
0.4389
77.20
9.51E-16
Sample
0.872
4
0.2181
38.36
1.63E-12
Speaker*Level
0.247
9
0.0274
4.83
0.0002944
Speaker*Sample
0.297
12
0.0247
4.35
0.0002926
Level*Sample
0.340
12
0.0283
4.99
8.36E-05
Error
0.205
36
0.0057
Total
3.937
79
Table 4.3: Three-way ANOVA analysis on the results from the subjective evaluations, for all the
groups in the test,"Speaker", "Level" and music "Sample", and their interactions.
Performing the analysis of variances for all the groups of data tested and proving that results
are signiﬁcant, we can now continue with conﬁdence in the investigation of relating the Rnonlin
values from the model to the subjective results.
==PAGE:57==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND ANALYSIS
53
4.3
Rnonlin versus Subjective Tests
As results from the Rnonlin model and the listening tests have been extracted and analyzed,
the reasonable next-step is to investigate the relation and correlation between the two. Analysis
is performed in terms of linear regression, where the coefﬁcient of determination(R2) is found;
as to describe the percentage in which the data are explained by the model. For every linear
regression ﬁtted, an analysis of variance has been run to ﬁnd the probability value (p) and determine
the extent to which those results happened by chance. Finally, it could be suggested that high
correlation between subjective tests and the Rnonlin results can predict the distortion performance
of a micro-speaker.
Results are ﬁrstly investigated for all the data simultaneously and laterly separated per "Speaker"
and per music "Sample".
Figure 4.16 shows the subjective results plotted against the subjective scores for all the samples
and all the speakers. Each symbol represents one of the four speakers and it includes the data of
all levels and all music samples. Respectively, a linear regression curve is ﬁtted to all the data in
the plot and with the coefﬁcient of determination R2 and the probability value p presented in the
legend of the plot.
The main advantage of using such plot and ﬁtting the line to the plot, is the fact that in high
correlations of model and subjective scores, the ability to relate and predict the performance of any
microspeaker, no matter the sample used could be possible. In such case, we would expect all the
data points found in the plot, to start converging towards a more deﬁned range of Rnonlin values.
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Rnonlin
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Subjective Rating
Rnonlin Vs Subjective Scores - per Speaker - all samples
SPK#1
SPK#2
SPK#3
SPK#4
R2: 0.0422, p: 0.0676
Figure 4.16: Comparison of Rnonlin results and subjective ratings for all groups of data. Each
symbol represents a different speaker for a different "Level" and music "Sample". A linear
regression line is ﬁtted to all the data with its R2 and p values shown in the legend.
In the current state, the results from the model and the subjective scores do not correlate well.
==PAGE:58==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND ANALYSIS
54
Therefore, modiﬁcations to the model might be necessary to improve the results. As it has been
discussed before, the noise for example could indicate the biasing and confusion of the results and
this will be investigated in the next chapter.
As investigation moves forward, it could be beneﬁtial to group the results in ﬁgure 4.16 in a
way where the average of all samples is taken. Indeed, this is shown in ﬁgure 4.17. Once more,
each symbol represents a different speaker and each data point relates to each amplitude level used.
For each point the average of all the music samples is taken.
In such plot, the possibility of guessing the performance of any micro-speaker, by taking the
average of many music samples could be indicated. Unfortunately, although the correlation seems
to increase the results are not satisfactory.
With regard to the research question of "Can the Rnonlin model predict the distortion per-
formance of any microspeakers", both ﬁgures 4.16 and 4.17 could follow that direction if high
correlation was to be observed. Since a part of this investigation is the attempt of improving the
model, such trials are investigated in the next chapter.
0.7
0.75
0.8
0.85
0.9
0.95
1
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1Rnonlin Vs Subjective Scores - per Speaker - mean(all samples)
SPK#1
SPK#2
SPK#3
SPK#4
R2: 0.39853, p: 0.00872
Figure 4.17: Comparison of Rnonlin results and subjective ratings when the mean of all the
"Samples" is taken for each "Level". Each symbol represents a different speaker at a different
"Level". A linear regression line is ﬁtted to the data with its R2 and p values shown in the legend.
At this point it might be interesting to see that although the attempt of predicting future speakers
and samples somehow fails, the plain results of the Rnonlin model and the subjective tests seem to
match more closely. Shown in ﬁgure 4.18, it is seen that if the results for each speaker are separated
from ﬁgure 4.17 and a linear regression line is ﬁtted separately to each speaker, a much higher
correlation between the two data sets is found.
Here, all the results show a high correlation, with R2 values above 0.8, but not all of them
can be quantiﬁed as signiﬁcant. Setting the limit of signiﬁcance for p below 5%, only SPK#3 and
==PAGE:59==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND ANALYSIS
55
SPK#4, meet this requirement. Those values show that there is a very low probability that results
occurred by chance and therefore accept their statistical signiﬁcance.
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Rnonlin
0
0.5
1
Subjective Rating
SPK#1
R2: 0.828,
p: 0.0901
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Rnonlin
0
0.5
1
Subjective Rating
SPK#2
R2: 0.81,
p: 0.1
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Rnonlin
0
0.5
1
Subjective Rating
SPK#3
R2: 0.958,
p: 0.0212
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Rnonlin
0
0.5
1
Subjective Rating
SPK#4
R2: 0.908,
p: 0.047
Rnonlin Vs Subjective - per Speaker - mean(all samples)
Figure 4.18: Comparison of Rnonlin results and subjective ratings when the mean of all the
"Samples". Each plot shows a different speaker and each point a different "Level". To improve
readability, each speaker is shown in a different subplot where a linear regression line is ﬁtted to
the data and the R2 and p values found in the legend.
Looking at ﬁgure 4.16, a different approach can be reached. By analyzing the data "per music
Sample", the abilities of each signal can analyzed. This time, grouping the data per music sample
and including the data for all the speakers, ﬁgure 4.19 will be extracted.
Each plot shows the data for each of the ﬁve music samples used along with the ﬁtted linear-
regression line and the respective probability.
This time the effect of using one of those music samples can be seen. It is noticed that the
highest correlation of all exists for the "SineForest" sample, with signiﬁcant results, while for
the "Violins" and "Mozart" the correlation is low but the slope has a positive incline, suggesting
meaningful results. On the other hand, for the samples of "Pop" and "Speech" it is seen that not
only there is very low correlation but also the negative incline of the slope suggests confusion, as
this indicates that distortion increases with increasing level.
==PAGE:60==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND ANALYSIS
56
0.5 
0.75
1   
0
0.5
1
Subj. Score
Pop
R2: 0.211, 
p: 0.0733
0.5 
0.75
1  
0
0.5
1
Speech
R2: 0.0141, 
p: 0.661
0.5 
0.75
1   
0
0.5
1
Subj. Score
Mozart
R2: 0.438, 
p: 0.00525
0.5 
0.75
1  
0
0.5
1
Violins
R2: 0.321, 
p: 0.022
0.5 
0.75
1   
Rnonlin
0
0.5
1
Subj. Score
SineForest
R2: 0.874, 
p: 1.13e-07
Rnonlin Vs Subjective - per music Sample
Figure 4.19: Comparison of Rnonlin results and subjective ratings for each "Sample" used. For
clarity, each musical "Sample" is shown in a different subplot where a linear regression line is ﬁtted
to the data and the R2 and p values found in the legend.
The confusion on the results of "Pop" and "Speech" can indicate that the assessors had difﬁcul-
ties in rating which samples levels distort more and therefore no clear desicions were taken. This
could indicate that some signals are less relevant in quantifying distortion and probably taken into
account for future investigations.
An interesting observation comes from the fact that since the "SineForest" has the highest
correlation between subjective and the model, such signal might be a useful contestant in quantify-
ing the distortion in micro-speakers. In fact, if such signal is proven to work individually, a sole
investigation of distortion could be extracted through the Rnonlin model, using only this signal.
Further discussion and improvements to the model are presented in the next chapter though.
Additionally, as previously mentioned, the ﬁnal Rnonlin value is the average of the Rnonlin
values for all the time-frames of the signal. The fact that the Mean value is taken, such approach
can be replaced by the introduction of the Median, Percentile or even Quantile. All of which are
related to the distribution of the Rnonlin values for all the time-frames. As seen in ﬁgures 4.6
and 4.7, in the histogram and the skewness and kyrtosis values, the distributions are not normal.
In such cases, Bech and Zacharov [23] propose that the median should be taken instead of the
mean. Moreover, as previously discussed the way each assessor sets his or hers criterion might
be different. For all those reasons, the subjective results have been compared to the Median, to
several Percentile’s and Quantile’s but the results were not signiﬁcantly improved. Although further
attempts have been performed when the modiﬁcation found in the next have been applied, the
improvements of such approaches could be considered minimal if any.
==PAGE:61==
CHAPTER 5
Model improvements & Discussion
So far, we have seen that the results from the Rnonlin model are not satisfactory. More
speciﬁcally, the output of the Rnonlin model (ﬁgure 4.4) can yield results that do not directly relate
to the perceivable distortion, such as the "Speech" signal, where the model shows high distortion,
but perceptually it is only benign. Moreover, the rather small steps of distortion from one level to
the next, apart from the "SineForest" signal, might be difﬁcult to interpret, while hard to compare
the "distortion performance" when the output seems to be sample-dependent.
Furthermore, a comparison of the Rnonlin model to a subjective evaluation shows:
• a very low correlation when all the data("Speakers","Levels" and "Samples") are taken into
consideration (ﬁgure 4.16)
• a low correlation when the data are averaged over all the music samples(4.17)
• high correlation when the results are separated for each speaker, ﬁgure 4.18, but without all
of being statistically signiﬁcant
• a correlation that depends on the type of signal used (ﬁgure 4.19), with the highest value for
the "SineForest" signal.
All the above indicate that the research question "Can the Rnonlin model be a measure of
predicting the perceivable distortion in micro-speakers?" will have a negative answer. On the other
hand, the successive sub-question "Can the Rnonlin be modiﬁed to better predict and quantify
the perceivable distortion in micro-speakers?" picks up the torch and tries to prove itself by trial
modiﬁcations to the Rnonlin model.
The following chapter focuses on the attempts made to improve the Rnonlin model, as to better
correlate to subjective evaluations of distortion and investigates the possibility of using the Rnonlin
model as a tool of evaluating the distortion in micro-speakers in future researches. It is important
to note that throughout this chapter and all the modiﬁcations performed, the calculations have been
re-run with HP and LP limits of 500Hz and 10kHz respectively that match the limits set in the
equalisation of the linear distortion part of the speakers. These new limits improved the results
while minimised the risk and effect of artefacts outside the region of interest. As the speakers
57
==PAGE:62==
CHAPTER 5. MODEL IMPROVEMENTS & DISCUSSION
58
output was set in the range of 700 to 10kHz, whatever found outside this region is irrelevant to the
calculations, therefore a reasonable approach.
5.1
Addition of correlated noise
Figure 4.10 has shown that there is a clear effect of noise onto the Rnonlin model, therefore the
attempt of improving the sensitivity of the model to noise would be beneﬁcial. The recording noise,
inherent in the recording samples is not possible to remove, and even if such attempt was made, a
possible manipulation of the distortion’s harmonics is not desirable. Since the model is based on
the correlation of the two signals, "reference" and "distorted", a possible improvement could be the
addition of correlated noise to both signals.
Insertion of the correlated noise can have a major inﬂuence on the model. At this point we
can assume that the correlation between the two signals will increase and so the values of the
Rnonlin (toward "1"). Thus, for the signals with low RMS values in each time frame, the introduced
correlated noise will mask the effect of the recording noise. In such case, it is made sure that the
results from the Rnonlin model correspond to the distortion inherent in the signals, as the inﬂuence
of the recording noise is minimized. More speciﬁcally, as previously explained, the model splits
the signals into frames of 30ms and ﬁnds the Rnonlin value for each of those frames. When the
RMS of the signal in each frame is low, the SNR of the signal to the noise ﬂoor is low. In such
cases, the model yields a value that does not correspond solely to the distortion but to the noise
too instead. As the ﬁnal Rnonlin value is the mean value of the all the Rnonlin values found in
each time-frame of the signal, input signals that are dominated by low RMS values throughout
their duration will greatly inﬂuence the ﬁnal result and yield lower values than expected. Those
low-RMS values can occur to any type of signal, but are particularly exaggerated in speech signals,
where small pauses exist between phrases for example, or even in musical signals that have a very
high dynamic range and very high crest factor.
The decision of inserting the "right amount" of correlated noise cannot be ignored. It is
important to choose appropriate levels for the correlated noise, as too high values will also mask
the distortion components and too low values will not be able to cover the recording noise. An
example is shown in the Appendix, ﬁgure 6.
The level of the correlated-noise added will be illustrated in terms of the signal to noise ratio
(SNR) and in fact the respective formula has been used throughout the calculations,
SNR = 20log10
Asignal
Anoise

(5.1)
where A denotes amplitude. Here, the signal to noise ratio is represented by the terms of the
"recorded signal" and the "added correlated noise". For that matter, Asignal is the amplitude of the
originally recorded signal and Anoise the amplitude of the correlated noise added to the model.
Through different trials, it has been found that when correlated noise of 18dB or 24dB below
the peak of the signal (18 and 24 dB SNR respectively) results seemed to be best. In fact, an
investigation of SNR’s that started from 0 dB and ended at -36dB has been performed. Such study
==PAGE:63==
CHAPTER 5. MODEL IMPROVEMENTS & DISCUSSION
59
showed that when correlated noise of very high level (small SNR value) is introduced, all values
converge toward "1" and reach an almost singular value, irrespective of the speaker, sample or level.
This of course suggests that all the distortion components have been masked and that the model is
not able to yield the perceived distortion, as neither would a human ear. On the other hand, when
very low levels of correlated noise where introduced (high SNR values), the recording noise was
not surpassed and therefore the results were becoming closer to the original ﬁgure 4.4. Due to a
large amount of space needed to present such data, discussion and illustrations are focused on the
best cases found.
In ﬁgure 5.1, the 24 dB SNR case is shown. Comparing the previous output of the model, ﬁgure
4.4, to ﬁgure 5.1, the effect of the added noise can be appreciated.
Pop
Speech
Mozart 
Violins
SineForest
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Rnonlin
Rnonlin Comparison, All Speakers, w/ WhiteNoise (24dB SNR) [re 0.7Vpeak]
SPK#1 : 11 Vpeak
SPK#1 : 7.9 Vpeak
SPK#1 : 4.4 Vpeak
SPK#1 : 1.4 Vpeak
SPK#2 : 11 Vpeak
SPK#2 : 7.9 Vpeak
SPK#2 : 4.4 Vpeak
SPK#2 : 1.4 Vpeak
SPK#3 : 11 Vpeak
SPK#3 : 7.9 Vpeak
SPK#3 : 4.4 Vpeak
SPK#3 : 1.4 Vpeak
SPK#4 : 11 Vpeak
SPK#4 : 7.9 Vpeak
SPK#4 : 4.4 Vpeak
SPK#4 : 1.4 Vpeak
Figure 5.1: Rnonlin values of all the speakers driven at different levels, when correlated white noise
24 dB below the peak of the original signal is added to the model.
Initially it is noticed how the "Speech" signal, which has a great amount of low-power values
through its length, is now improved and matches the range of the other music signals. Furthermore
and most importantly, the range of Rnonlin values seems to agree for all the music samples. This
is an important consideration, since the Rnonlin model should be a measure of distortion for any
speaker irrespective of the type of signal passing through. Of course the nature of the signal can
have an inﬂuence but this should be minimal if the overall performance of the speaker was to be
predicted. As a matter of fact, this seems to happen in ﬁgure 5.1 and therefore the performance of
the actual speaker for each level can be evaluated.
If a comparison was made to the previous standard deviation values (ﬁgure 4.5) to the ones
corresponding to ﬁgure 5.1, one would notice that the results are much more stable now, ﬁgure
5.2. Values are plotted again for 1σ where we see a major improvement in those values. This
==PAGE:64==
CHAPTER 5. MODEL IMPROVEMENTS & DISCUSSION
60
indicates now that the model is more stable than before as the Rnonlin values do not ﬂuctuate
between extreme values found across different time-frames.
Pop
Speech
Mozart 
Violins
SineForest
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
0.14
STD  (1σ)
STD of Rnonlin values - All Speakers
SPK#1 : 11 Vpeak
SPK#1 : 7.9 Vpeak
SPK#1 : 4.4 Vpeak
SPK#1 : 1.4 Vpeak
SPK#2 : 11 Vpeak
SPK#2 : 7.9 Vpeak
SPK#2 : 4.4 Vpeak
SPK#2 : 1.4 Vpeak
SPK#3 : 11 Vpeak
SPK#3 : 7.9 Vpeak
SPK#3 : 4.4 Vpeak
SPK#3 : 1.4 Vpeak
SPK#4 : 11 Vpeak
SPK#4 : 7.9 Vpeak
SPK#4 : 4.4 Vpeak
SPK#4 : 1.4 Vpeak
Figure 5.2: Standard deviation of values found in ﬁgure 5.1.
5.2
Addition of correlated noise in a stepped manner
At this point it should be clear that the addition of correlated noise in a level that is above the
recording noise, inherent in the recorded samples, and below the distortion components will have a
positive effect on the output of the Rnonlin model.
One thing that was not taken into consideration before, was the fact that when a micro-speaker
is driven at different levels, the resulting output in terms of the Sound Pressure Level changes.
This means of course that different driving levels will result in a different output, with each output
having a different signal to noise ratio as the recorded signal will enclose the noise ﬂoor of the
room recorded in.
In that manner, it would be logical to add noise in a stepped manner. Here this modiﬁcation
will be referred to as "Escalating Noise", as the highest level signal of 11Vpeak will have the least
amount of correlated noise added and the reference signal of 0.7Vpeak will have the most. This
makes sense, since the lowest levels have more audible recording noise than the higher ones, where
a higher SNR is achieved.
The way this stepped process is performed is important for optimum results. The most important
thing is that a proper spanning range must be set. This range is set in terms of the signal to noise
ratio throughout the process.
Firstly, a proper SNR has to be found for the lowest level according to the criteria set in
the previous section. In such cases, the Rnonlin results should be clear, with clear steps among
each level and not extreme ﬂuctuations between each music or speech sample occurring. For this
investigation it was found that the two values adequate to cover the recording noise but not mask
the distortion components were the values of 18 or 24 dB SNR. In chapter 4 it has been proven
==PAGE:65==
CHAPTER 5. MODEL IMPROVEMENTS & DISCUSSION
61
that the lowest level signal serves as the "reference" signal in the model and therefore the levels of
either 18 or 24 dB SNR are applied to the lowest-level signal of 0.7Vpeak.
The second step is to select a proper SNR for the highest level, where the least amount of
correlated noise will be introduced while meeting the same criteria as before. Investigating that
range, it was found that the best results lay in the range of 6 to 12 dB below the SNR selected in
the ﬁrst step. Accordingly for this report several combinations worked, that are presented in the
following sections, but the 18 to 30 dB SNR case is the one presented in ﬁgure 5.3. In that case,
correlated noise of -18dB is added to the lowest-level signal and -30dB to the highest-level one.
The ﬁnal step is to divide the range in the amount of levels found in the recordings. This could
be done in steps of dB, which will result in logarithmic spacing, or in steps of dividing the peak of
the signal by a relative factor, which will result in linear spacing. As a reminder, a division of the
peak of the signal by a factor of 2 results in 6 dB of attenuation, a factor of 4 in 12 dB and so on. A
minimal effect should be evident when choosing between the two, but here the linear spacing has
been chosen.
The spacing step is found by,
step = Levelfinal −Levelinitial
Nlevels −1
,
where Levelfinal is the minimum level of correlated noise that is applied to the highest level
signal, Levelinitial the one applied to the lowest-level signal and Nlevels the number of levels
considered in the experiment. The step formula can be used with both linear and logarithmic
spacing.
As the linear spacing might be confusing, an example follows. Assume that the highest level of
noise to be inserted is -18dB, and the lowest at -24 dB. The ﬁrst corresponds to 20log10(peak/8)
and the latter at 20log10(peak/16); if the signals are normalized, peak equals to 1 and the signals
correspond to -18dBFS and -24dBFS respectively. Using the previous formula, we ﬁnd the fractions
that correspond to the values between the two limits of 1/8 and 1/16 and apply them to all the
levels within the aforementioned limits.
Figure 5.3 shows the Rnonlin results when "Escalating Noise" of 18to30dB SNR is injected
into the recorded samples; its corresponding STD is seen in ﬁgure 5.4. Signiﬁcant differences can
be seen when the results are compared to initial results in ﬁgure 4.4 or when the same correlated
noise was added to all the signals, ﬁgure 5.1. Similarly to when the same correlated noise was
added to all the signals, the distortion range of all the music/speech samples seems to match and
clear steps of distortion are seen among different levels. With respect to the type of signal, the
results are slightly different for each sample which one would expect since the most distorting
sample of "Mozart", is also the one with the lowest scores. For that matter the results can be trusted
more than the ones extracted from the unmodiﬁed model, ﬁgure 4.4.
==PAGE:66==
CHAPTER 5. MODEL IMPROVEMENTS & DISCUSSION
62
Pop
Speech
Mozart 
Violins
SineForest
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Rnonlin
Rnonlin Comparison, All Speakers, w/ Escalating WhiteNoise (-18to-30dB) [re 0.7Vpeak]
SPK#1 : 11 Vpeak
SPK#1 : 7.9 Vpeak
SPK#1 : 4.4 Vpeak
SPK#1 : 1.4 Vpeak
SPK#2 : 11 Vpeak
SPK#2 : 7.9 Vpeak
SPK#2 : 4.4 Vpeak
SPK#2 : 1.4 Vpeak
SPK#3 : 11 Vpeak
SPK#3 : 7.9 Vpeak
SPK#3 : 4.4 Vpeak
SPK#3 : 1.4 Vpeak
SPK#4 : 11 Vpeak
SPK#4 : 7.9 Vpeak
SPK#4 : 4.4 Vpeak
SPK#4 : 1.4 Vpeak
Figure 5.3: Rnonlin values of all the speakers driven at different levels, when correlated white noise
that spans from 18 dB below the peak to 30dB below the peak of the original signal is added to the
signals.
Pop
Speech
Mozart 
Violins
SineForest
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
0.14
STD  (1σ)
STD of Rnonlin values - All Speakers
SPK#1 : 11 Vpeak
SPK#1 : 7.9 Vpeak
SPK#1 : 4.4 Vpeak
SPK#1 : 1.4 Vpeak
SPK#2 : 11 Vpeak
SPK#2 : 7.9 Vpeak
SPK#2 : 4.4 Vpeak
SPK#2 : 1.4 Vpeak
SPK#3 : 11 Vpeak
SPK#3 : 7.9 Vpeak
SPK#3 : 4.4 Vpeak
SPK#3 : 1.4 Vpeak
SPK#4 : 11 Vpeak
SPK#4 : 7.9 Vpeak
SPK#4 : 4.4 Vpeak
SPK#4 : 1.4 Vpeak
Figure 5.4: Standard deviation of data shown in 5.3.
Observing ﬁgure 5.4, it is noticed how the standard deviations values are slightly higher than
before which might indicate a scenario where the results are still inﬂuenced by the noise in each
time frame. This indicates that although results are far better than originally and the effect of noise
can be minimized, it cannot be removed. Accordingly, it is interesting to suggest that an evaluation
of the standard deviation during the evaluation of the Rnonlin results can indicate the extent to
which results are biased by the noise.
==PAGE:67==
CHAPTER 5. MODEL IMPROVEMENTS & DISCUSSION
63
On that matter, we will present the case that was found to have best correlation to the listening
tests. This is shown in ﬁgure 5.5 and the standard deviation of the same results in ﬁgure 5.6. Here,
the correlated noise is added in terms of Pink noise, but this will be discussed in the next section.
It is proved that in a case of results becoming more representative of the distortion produced
by a speaker, the respective STD of the model will have mimimal values. This shows again how
the Rnonlin found for each frame does not reach extreme values due to possible low-power signal
levels in each frame.
Pop
Speech
Mozart 
Violins
SineForest
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Rnonlin
Rnonlin Comparison, All Speakers, w/ Escalating PinkNoise (-18to-24dB) [re 0.7Vpeak]
SPK#1 : 11 Vpeak
SPK#1 : 7.9 Vpeak
SPK#1 : 4.4 Vpeak
SPK#1 : 1.4 Vpeak
SPK#2 : 11 Vpeak
SPK#2 : 7.9 Vpeak
SPK#2 : 4.4 Vpeak
SPK#2 : 1.4 Vpeak
SPK#3 : 11 Vpeak
SPK#3 : 7.9 Vpeak
SPK#3 : 4.4 Vpeak
SPK#3 : 1.4 Vpeak
SPK#4 : 11 Vpeak
SPK#4 : 7.9 Vpeak
SPK#4 : 4.4 Vpeak
SPK#4 : 1.4 Vpeak
Figure 5.5: Rnonlin values of all the speakers driven at different levels, when correlated pink noise
that spans from 18 dB below the peak to 24dB below the peak of the original signal is added to the
signals.
Pop
Speech
Mozart 
Violins
SineForest
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
0.14
STD  (1σ)
STD of Rnonlin values - All Speakers
SPK#1 : 11 Vpeak
SPK#1 : 7.9 Vpeak
SPK#1 : 4.4 Vpeak
SPK#1 : 1.4 Vpeak
SPK#2 : 11 Vpeak
SPK#2 : 7.9 Vpeak
SPK#2 : 4.4 Vpeak
SPK#2 : 1.4 Vpeak
SPK#3 : 11 Vpeak
SPK#3 : 7.9 Vpeak
SPK#3 : 4.4 Vpeak
SPK#3 : 1.4 Vpeak
SPK#4 : 11 Vpeak
SPK#4 : 7.9 Vpeak
SPK#4 : 4.4 Vpeak
SPK#4 : 1.4 Vpeak
Figure 5.6: Standard deviation of valeus found in 5.5.
==PAGE:68==
CHAPTER 5. MODEL IMPROVEMENTS & DISCUSSION
64
Comments on the noise-type
The type of noise selected to be injected as correlated noise into the recorded samples can vary.
In general, the type of noise must have a spectrum that matches the spectrum of the noise-ﬂoor. If
the spectrum of the added noise has a shape that does not cover all the frequencies found in the
spectrum of the recording noise, the effect of the noise added will not be maximal.
In general, we could assume that any type of noise can cover the noise ﬂoor, as long as its
level is high enough to exceed it. Although, this does not apply exactly here and caution should
be taken. As previously mentioned, the Rnonlin model is based on perception and the distortion
components should not be masked, for that reason there might be cases where the slope of the
spectrum of the added noise has frequency regions where its values are too high (and so mask the
distortion components) and regions where its values are too low (and so not cover the noise ﬂoor).
An example would be the use of Pink noise in a signal that has very low SNR.
In such manner, different combinations of either White or Pink noise have been investigated at
different levels as the resulting differences were to be observed.
5.3
Comparison of all Modiﬁcations to the Listening Results
As investigation continues, it is important go back at the results of the listening tests and
relate the new Rnonlin data to them. In section 4.3 a comparison between the Rnonlin model and
the subjective tests has been made when the unmodiﬁed version of the Rnonlin model was used.
All the results shown in the current section will be presented with regard to those results, as the
modiﬁcation of adding correlated noise is to be evaluated and compared to the unmodiﬁed version.
As previously seen in ﬁgure 4.16 and 4.17 the correlation between the Rnonlin model and the
subjective tests has been explicitly low. As mentioned in the same chapter (section 4.3), in order to
predict the performance of a micro-speaker it would be necessary to obtain high correlation values
in those two plots. In ﬁgure 4.16, because the model will then be able to predict the performance
of any micro-speaker regardless of the music/speech sample used, and in ﬁgure 4.17, because the
model will be able to predict its distortion performance if an average of many samples has been
taken.
For that matter, the results shown in the rest of the chapter combine the comparisons shown
by ﬁgures 4.16 and 4.17. In those, different types of correlated noise are introduced and their
correlation to the subjective tests is illustrated again in terms of the coefﬁcient of determination R2
and its respective probability p. As a reminder, a high R2 suggests a high correlation between the
two sets of data and a low p-value a low probability of the results occurring due to chance.
When the results found in ﬁgure 5.1, at the beginning of this chapter, are plotted against the
subjective scores ﬁgure 5.7 is extracted. As the same analysis is performed in ﬁgures 4.16 and 4.17,
dramatic improvements are noticed when compared to ﬁgure 5.7. Both plots have increased their
correlation values by a great factor which suggests that even the simplest approach of introducing
==PAGE:69==
CHAPTER 5. MODEL IMPROVEMENTS & DISCUSSION
65
only one level of correlated noise into the recorded signals can have a major impact. Obviously
the level in which the correlated noise is introduced is of great importance and should not be ignored.
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Rnonlin
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Subjective Rating
per Speaker - all samples
SPK#1
SPK#2
SPK#3
SPK#4
R2: 0.448, p: 1.16e-11
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Rnonlin
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
per Speaker - mean(all samples)
SPK#1
SPK#2
SPK#3
SPK#4
R2: 0.864, p: 1.92e-07
Figure 5.7: Comparison between Rnonlin and Subjective scores for the same 4 speakers, when
correlated white noise of -24dBFS has been introduced into the recorded ﬁles. A linear regression
line has been ﬁtted to: all the data ("Speakers","Levels","Samples") in the left plot, and to: the
mean of all the "Samples" used in the right plot, with each data point representing a different level.
The respective R2 and p-value are shown in the legends.
In this investigation, ﬁnding the right level, noise-type and method, i.e. constant or escalating,
for the correlated noise added, has yielded a large amount of data to be presented. For that reason,
the results from all those trials are summarized in one table, table 5.1, which illustrates the values of
R2 and p found in terms of the way data are presented in ﬁgure 5.7. Accordingly, the two columns on
the right show the R2 and p of the left hand-side plot in ﬁgure 5.7 and the two columns on the right
of the right hand-side plot. The table represents the values in dBFS, which in fact is equivalent to
SNR levels since our samples were normalized to their peak amplitude before the noise was applied.
Examination of table 5.1 shows that the highest correlation is achieved when "Escalating" Pink
noise that ranges from 18 to 24 dB SNR is applied to the recorded signals. As a reminder, the
lowest level signal is treated with 18 dB below the peak of the signal and the highest level signal
with 24 dB. In fact this case corresponds to the previously shown example in ﬁgure 5.5 and as it is
now compared to the listening results, ﬁgure 5.8 is extracted.
Observation of the same ﬁgure shows now a moderate correlation (∼0.59) when all the results
are taken into account and a high correlatetion (∼0.83) when the average of all the music/speech
samples is taken for each "Level".
==PAGE:70==
CHAPTER 5. MODEL IMPROVEMENTS & DISCUSSION
66
All Data
mean(all samples)
Modiﬁcations
R2
p
R2
p
Unmodiﬁed Model
0.042
0.0676
0.399
0.00872
White Noise -18dBFS
0.428
4.69E-11
0.885
5.75E-08
White Noise -24dBFS
0.448
1.16E-11
0.864
1.92E-07
White Noise -30dBFS
0.267
9.10E-07
0.785
4.94E-06
Pink Noise -24dBFS
0.496
3.03E-13
0.857
2.73E-07
Pink Noise -30dBFS
0.285
3.46E-07
0.76
1.08E-05
ESC White Noise -18to-24dBFS
0.543
6.67E-15
0.838
6.57E-07
ESC White Noise -18to-30dBFS
0.386
7.64E-10
0.76
1.09E-05
ESC White Noise -18to-36dBFS
0.24
4.04E-06
0.693
6.31E-05
ESC White Noise -24to-30dBFS
0.474
1.70E-12
0.837
7.00E-07
ESC White Noise -24to-36dBFS
0.344
1.11E-08
0.781
5.65E-06
ESC Pink Noise -18to-24dBFS
0.586
1.40E-16
0.834
7.95E-07
ESC Pink Noise -18to-30dBFS
0.427
5.03E-11
0.756
1.22E-05
ESC Pink Noise -18to-36dBFS
0.282
4.02E-07
0.685
7.59E-05
ESC Pink Noise -24to-30dBFS
0.499
2.48E-13
0.827
1.06E-06
ESC Pink Noise -24to-36dBFS
0.367
2.58E-09
0.765
9.41E-06
Table 5.1: Summarising table of the modiﬁcations performed to Rnonlin model with respect to
different types of noise and different SNR Levels. Values are shown in dBFS since the signals were
previously normalized to peak. The columns for "All Data" correspond to left hand-side plots of
ﬁgures 5.7,5.8 and the "mean(all Samples)" to the right hand side. "ESC" is an abbreviation of the
term used here as "Escalating Noise".
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Rnonlin
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Subjective Rating
per Speaker - all samples
SPK#1
SPK#2
SPK#3
SPK#4
R2: 0.586, p: 1.4e-16
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Rnonlin
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
per Speaker - mean(all samples)
SPK#1
SPK#2
SPK#3
SPK#4
R2: 0.834, p: 7.95e-07
Figure 5.8: Comparison between Rnonlin and Subjective scores for the same 4 speakers, when
correlated Pink noise, ranging from -18dBFS to -24dBFS, is introduced into the recorded ﬁles. A
linear regression line is ﬁtted to: all the data ("Speakers","Levels","Samples") in the left plot, and
to: the mean of all the "Samples" in the right plot; each data point representing a different level.
The respective R2 and p-value are shown in the legends.
==PAGE:71==
CHAPTER 5. MODEL IMPROVEMENTS & DISCUSSION
67
The results shown in table 5.1 have shown that although the introduction of correlated is a
major improvement to the model, the results when "All Data" are used to ﬁt the regression line do
not reach very high correlation values. There might be a fundamental reason for that.
As previously shown in ﬁgure 4.19, the correlation values between the Rnonlin model and the
subjective tests were particularly low for some of the "Samples" used in this investigation. In fact,
the samples of "Pop" and "Speech" had the lowest correlation values than the rest of the signals. At
this point it would be necessary to verify if those values have been altered with the introduction of
correlated noise. Such data will show if the low correlation was due to the recording noise in the
signals or the assessors having difﬁculties in rating the samples. With the use of the data that had
the highest correlation values so far, "Escalating Pink noise from 18 dB to 24dB SNR", ﬁgure 5.9
is extracted.
0.5 
0.75
1   
0
0.5
1
Subj. Score
Pop
R2: 0.16, 
p: 0.125
0.5 
0.75
1  
0
0.5
1
Speech
R2: 0.55, 
p: 0.00101
0.5 
0.75
1   
0
0.5
1
Subj. Score
Mozart
R2: 0.861, 
p: 2.25e-07
0.5 
0.75
1  
0
0.5
1
Violins
R2: 0.821, 
p: 1.33e-06
0.5 
0.75
1   
Rnonlin
0
0.5
1
Subj. Score
SineForest
R2: 0.834, 
p: 7.98e-07
Rnonlin Vs Subjective - per music Sample
Figure 5.9: Comparison of Rnonlin results and subjective ratings for each "Sample" used. For
clarity, each musical "Sample" is shown in a different subplot where a linear regression line is ﬁtted
to the data and the R2 and p values found in the legend.
In the same ﬁgure it can be seen that the results for the signals of "Mozart", "Violins" and
"SineForest" have very high correlation values to the subjective tests, while the sample of "Speech"
has a moderate value and the "Pop" track a very low correlation value. Although it could be claimed
that the results have improved, the value for the "Pop" track is still unsatisfactory.
There are clear indications that either the assessors were not able to grade the level of distortion
when the "Pop" track was used or the model yields values that are not representative of the inherent
distortion in that sample. Judging by the fact that the values of the subjective scores span in a greater
range for the same Rnonlin values (seen in the same ﬁgure; blue dots) and that some values ﬂuctuate
between opposite ratings, it is more probable that the ﬁrst case is true. This would mean that the
assessors were unable to clearly rate the distortion in each speaker in the same order their level was
increased, probably to the very high crest factor of that sample and the excessive amount of mask-
==PAGE:72==
CHAPTER 5. MODEL IMPROVEMENTS & DISCUSSION
68
ing caused by that sample. Hence, a debatable reason if such sample should be used in the ﬁrst place.
In a logical sense, the previously shown modiﬁcations could be performed in a way that
excludes the "Samples" with low-correlation values to observe the inﬂuence on the model. In
that manner, the same investigations are performed but only the data of "Mozart", "Violins" and
"SineForest" are kept in the ﬁtting of the regression lines. The results are shown in table 5.2.
Data of Samples:
"Mozart","Violins","SineForest"
mean(Samples:
"Mozart","Violins","SineForest")
Modiﬁcations
R2
p
R2
p
Unmodiﬁed Model
0.257
2.34E-04
0.753
1.32E-05
White Noise -18dBFS
0.588
2.13E-10
0.883
6.84E-08
White Noise -24dBFS
0.767
3.85E-16
0.906
1.38E-08
White Noise -30dBFS
0.741
4.44E-15
0.891
4.10E-08
Pink Noise -24dBFS
0.792
2.70E-17
0.902
1.94E-08
Pink Noise -30dBFS
0.65
4.69E-12
0.87
1.40E-07
ESC White Noise -18to-24dBFS
0.79
3.48E-17
0.858
2.66E-07
ESC White Noise -18to-30dBFS
0.735
7.34E-15
0.791
3.99E-06
ESC White Noise -18to-36dBFS
0.608
6.66E-11
0.737
2.10E-05
ESC White Noise -24to-30dBFS
0.795
2.01E-17
0.877
9.73E-08
ESC White Noise -24to-36dBFS
0.707
7.45E-14
0.831
8.83E-07
ESC Pink Noise -18to-24dBFS
0.808
4.25E-18
0.85
3.86E-07
ESC Pink Noise -18to-30dBFS
0.726
1.56E-14
0.78
5.78E-06
ESC Pink Noise -18to-36dBFS
0.605
7.95E-11
0.719
3.38E-05
ESC Pink Noise -24to-30dBFS
0.768
3.55E-16
0.863
1.98E-07
ESC Pink Noise -24to-36dBFS
0.667
1.50E-12
0.808
2.24E-06
Table 5.2: Summarising table of the modiﬁcations performed to Rnonlin model with respect to
different types of noise and different SNR Levels, excluding the "Samples" of "Pop" and "Speech".
Values are shown in dBFS since the signals were previously normalized to peak. The columns for
"All Data" correspond to left hand-side plots of ﬁgures 5.7,5.8 and the "mean(all Samples)" to the
right hand side. "ESC" is an abbreviation of the term used here as "Escalating Noise".
In the same table, the increase of the correlation values is to be observed. Interestingly enough,
the unmodiﬁed version of the Rnonlin model has increased its values by an important factor. This
would suggest that certain types of signals are more appropriate to use with the Rnonlin model than
others. Furthermore, this would indicate a very sample-based model that is not of high interest if
general cases of any type of musical or speech signal were to be predicted.
Additionally, it can be seen that all modiﬁcations have increased their correlation values when
all data are taken in to account (left columns in table 5.2) and this indicates that the use of certain
signals, like speech, might be less appropriate for the model.
On the other hand, when comparing the right columns of tables 5.1 and 5.2, where the average
of all the samples is taken, it is noticed how those values do not impose great differences. This is
an indication that when the average of a variety of musical signals has been taken, the results can
be considered as reliable, even no signal is excluded from the averaging.
==PAGE:73==
CHAPTER 5. MODEL IMPROVEMENTS & DISCUSSION
69
Summarising the results in this section, it can be seen that although results cannot become
perfect, the improvements show evidence that with the proper amount of correlated noise, the
Rnonlin model can in fact be used as a tool that will assist in the evaluation of distortion in
micro-speakers. In times where different micro-speakers are to be graded in a research phase, for
example, the Rnonlin model might be a tool to consider.
With regard to the sub-research question of "Can the Rnonlin model be modiﬁed to better
predict and quantify the perceivable distortion in micro-speakers?", there is a positive answer.
When correlated noise is introduced into the model at an appropriate level, type and method the
results are promising. In fact, in the cases where the average of a range of different samples is
taken, the results seem to become trustworthy.
5.4
The use of "Sine Forest" in the prediction of the performance of
micro-speakers
As shown before in ﬁgures 5.9, and previously in ﬁgure 4.19, one of the samples that had
always high correlation values to the subjective tests it was the sample of "SineForest". Since this
sample is easy to reproduce in future investigations of the distortion in micro-speakers, a reasonable
question arises of using only that signal to predict that distortion performance. Although, it should
be kept in mind that by only using this sample it does not necessarily mean that the distortion
occurring for any type of signal can be predicted. On the other hand, if only an indication of the
amount that certain micro-speakers distort, in a development stage for example, such approach
might be applicable.
Accordingly, an investigation has been performed onto the correlation of the Rnonlin results
against the subjective scores, when only the sample of "SineForest" has been used. The cases tested
match the cases in the previous section and are presented in table 5.3.
To validate the use of the "SineForest" sample, a comparison of the correlation only to "all
the Speakers" will not be adequate. It is undeniable that the correlation values when using only
that sample must reach high values for every speaker in particular too. On that matter, table 5.3
presents the correlation when a regression line is ﬁtted to "All Speakers" as well as each "Speaker"
individually.
As seen in the same table, the correlation values when using only the sineforest are very high,
except of a moderate correlation for SPK#2. Additionally, even the unmodiﬁed version of the
Rnonlin exhibits very high correlation values, which in fact is not surprising. The "SineForest" is a
static signal that has a constant power throughout its length and therefore the same Rnonlin values
will be extracted for each time-frame. Moreover, the fact that a constant high-RMS value is evident
throughout the signal, there will be no alternation of the SNR in that recording and the noise ﬂoor
will never exceed the signal (static signal where SNR is constant in all time-frames).
==PAGE:74==
CHAPTER 5. MODEL IMPROVEMENTS & DISCUSSION
70
All Speakers - "SineForest"
SPK#1 - "SineForest"
SPK#2 - "SineForest"
SPK#3 - "SineForest"
SPK#4 - "SineForest"
Modiﬁcations
R2
p
R2
p
R2
p
R2
p
R2
p
Unmodiﬁed Model
0.874
1.13E-07
0.994
3.23E-03
0.631
2.06E-01
0.995
2.48E-03
0.998
9.59E-04
White Noise -18dB
0.748
1.53E-05
0.917
4.22E-02
0.634
2.04E-01
0.906
4.80E-02
0.984
8.28E-03
White Noise -24dB
0.848
4.27E-07
0.944
2.86E-02
0.615
2.16E-01
0.972
1.41E-02
0.991
4.62E-03
White Noise -30dB
0.868
1.54E-07
0.952
2.43E-02
0.602
2.24E-01
0.991
4.41E-03
0.993
3.67E-03
Pink Noise -24dB
0.851
3.70E-07
0.948
2.62E-02
0.602
2.24E-01
0.973
1.38E-02
0.992
4.24E-03
Pink Noise -30dB
0.870
1.43E-07
0.953
2.36E-02
0.605
2.22E-01
0.991
4.53E-03
0.993
3.53E-03
ESC White Noise -18to-24dB
0.832
8.56E-07
0.952
2.42E-02
0.635
2.03E-01
0.962
1.92E-02
0.989
5.62E-03
ESC White Noise -18to-30dB
0.836
7.29E-07
0.984
7.86E-03
0.520
2.79E-01
0.994
3.24E-03
0.998
9.38E-04
ESC White Noise -18to-36dB
0.814
1.75E-06
0.986
7.08E-03
0.398
3.69E-01
0.997
1.51E-03
0.997
1.46E-03
ESC White Noise -24to-30dB
0.861
2.24E-07
0.955
2.25E-02
0.602
2.24E-01
0.988
5.83E-03
0.992
3.84E-03
ESC White Noise -24to-36dB
0.860
2.40E-07
0.970
1.53E-02
0.550
2.59E-01
0.996
2.07E-03
0.995
2.35E-03
ESC Pink Noise -18to-24dB
0.834
7.98E-07
0.961
1.96E-02
0.611
2.18E-01
0.966
1.72E-02
0.989
5.39E-03
ESC Pink Noise -18to-30dB
0.824
1.17E-06
0.989
5.35E-03
0.510
2.86E-01
0.994
2.76E-03
0.998
9.77E-04
ESC Pink Noise -18to-36dB
0.791
4.06E-06
0.987
6.70E-03
0.392
3.74E-01
0.996
2.02E-03
0.998
1.06E-03
ESC Pink Noise -24to-30dB
0.860
2.40E-07
0.961
1.99E-02
0.597
2.28E-01
0.988
5.82E-03
0.992
3.84E-03
ESC Pink Noise -24to-36dB
0.851
3.64E-07
0.975
1.24E-02
0.539
2.66E-01
0.996
2.08E-03
0.996
2.11E-03
Table 5.3: Summarising table of the modiﬁcations performed to Rnonlin model with respect to
different types of noise and different SNR Levels, when only the "SineForest" is used a measure of
distortion. "ESC" is an abbreviation of the term "Escalating Noise".
In any case, if the "SineForest" was to be considered as a signal that can be used with the
Rnonlin model in order to predict the non-linear distortion in micro-speakers it seems to be a
possible candidate. Although, cases where the results are not representative of distortion might
occur and for that matter it would be best if results were evaluated further with a considerably
greater number of micro-speakers. Although this has not been the topic of this investigation, it has
set the path for future research on that account.
==PAGE:75==
CHAPTER 6
Conclusions
The investigation on the "Audibility of non-linear distortion in micro-speakers" has ended with
mixed results. This study aimed to answer the research question of "Can the Rnonlin be a measure
of predicting the perceivable distortion in micro-speakers?" and for the reason the following steps
have been performed.
The initial step was to compensate for the linear distortion part of the response of the speakers.
This was done by extracting the impulse response of each micro-speaker at a low level, where
the assumption of being in its linear range has been validated. The obtained impulse response
was transformed into the inverse transfer function of each speaker which was then applied with
ﬁnite-impulse-response (FIR) ﬁlters to all the musical and speech signals investigated in this report.
The speakers were then driven at different levels with the use of those "compensated signals" and
were recorded in an anechoic room.
In parallel, an investigation on the Rnonlin model was conducted. An analysis was run on
the Rnonlin values that each-time frame yields, before the average of all frames it taken to yield
the ﬁnal Rnonlin value. Such investigation showed that when the power of the signal is low in
each frame, the signal to noise ratio is low, with respect to the noise ﬂoor in the recording and so
the model extracts values representative of the noise and not the actual distortion in the sample.
Respectively, the model has been tried to be improved by altering the weighting applied to signals,
in terms of how the human ear is less sensitive to low levels, and by keeping the Rnonlin values of
each time-frame that are above a certain limit. The later showed no signiﬁcant differences and the
former a possible approach when signals that are outvoted by low-RMS values.
Furthermore, a look into choosing a proper signal to serve as the "reference" signal of the
Rnonlin model was performed. It showed that it is more appropriate to use the low-level signal
than the actual original music/speech sample and further more to not use the lowest possible level
of the speaker as the results are inappropriate; mainly due to the recording noise inherent in the
recorded signals.
71
==PAGE:76==
CHAPTER 6. CONCLUSIONS
72
A comparison of the results from the unmodiﬁed version of the Rnonlin and the subjective
evaluation, showed very low correlation value (∼0.04) when a linear regression line was ﬁtted
to all the data used, "Speaker" "Level" "Sample". It slightly improved when the average of all
the musical/speech samples was taken but its correlation value remained low (∼0.39). On the
other hand, when the results where separated for each speaker and the average of all the samples
was taken, the results show high correlation of ∼0.8 to ∼0.95. Moreover, when the results were
grouped per music/speech "Sample", it was shown that the model depends on the type of signals as
values spanned from ∼0.01 to ∼0.87, depending on the "Sample" used.
At that point the answer to the aforementioned research question had a negative answer and so
the investigation continued in answering the sub-question of "Can the Rnonlin model be modiﬁed
to better predict and quantify the perceivable distortion in micro-speakers?". On that account,
an effort on improving the results from Rnonlin and therefore increasing the correlation to the
listening results was made.
The assumption that since the Rnonlin model is based on correlation, there is a very probable
approach of using correlated noise to increase the correlation values in the model by masking the
effect of the recording noise in the recorded music/speech samples. Research was performed on the
properties of the correlated noise to be added. It has been shown that the noise level, noise-type and
the method that the noise is infused into the recorded samples, before being fed into the Rnonlin
model, are all important factors to consider.
Analysis of the results when correlated-noise was introduced showed that the highest values
were achieved for the case of Pink noise added in "Escalating" steps that ranged from 18 to 24
dB below the peak level of the signal. In such case, results where again compared to the listening
results and showed an important increase in the correlation values when a linear regression line was
ﬁtted to the data of all groups ("Speaker", "Level", "Sample") with a moderate correlation value
of ∼0.57. Furthermore, when the average of all the musical/speech signals was taken a higher
correlation value of ∼0.83 was achieved.
The ﬁrst correlation value which is merely moderate showed that the Rnonlin model is now
more able to predict the distortion-performance of any type of signal used for any type of micros-
peaker, but still questionable. In contrast, when the average of a variety of musical samples is taken
and the averaged out, the results are very promising and in fact reaching high correlation values.
With regard to previously shown evidence that the model’s output depends on the type of
signal used, the investigation took a step back and raised the question if excluding some of the
music/speech samples used would in fact improve the results. A comparison on the correlation
values for each individual sample, when the modiﬁcation of adding correlated noise was introduced
showed high correlation values (above∼0.82) for the signals of "Mozart", "Violins" and "SineFor-
est", moderate correlation for the speech signal (∼0.55) and low correlation for the "Pop" track.
Therefore an attempt of excluding the samples of "Speech" and "Pop" was performed. Results
==PAGE:77==
CHAPTER 6. CONCLUSIONS
73
showed that indeed the correlation was increased when a regression was used for all the data but
results did not reach great differences in the case of averaging on those "Samples". This suggested
that the averaging of variety of musical samples is a good approach from the beginning without the
need of excluding some samples further on.
With regard to the aforementioned research sub-question, results showed that in fact the Rnonlin
model can be modiﬁed to predict the non-linear distortion for micro-speakers when certain criteria
are met. Partly with the appropriate correlated noise and partly with the appropriate averaging of
the samples.
To a further extent, a short analysis was performed on the data of using only the "SineForest" as
an input to the Rnonlin model in order to investigate the distortion performance of a micro-speaker.
That sample was chosen due its good agreement with the listening scores and its high reproducibility.
Results showed high correlations for three of the speakers (above ∼0.9) and moderate values for
the forth one (∼0.6). This indicates that there might be a good approach, with such conﬁguration ,
in using the Rnonlin model as a tool in the research of distortion of micro-speakers, but further
investigation has to be carried out with a greater variety and amount of micro-speakers to conﬁrm
its usability.
==PAGE:78==
CHAPTER 7
Further Work
Continuing the investigation found in this study, there are a few paths that can be followed.
A possible approach would be to re-evaluate the assumptions of using only the "SineForest"
as a tool to predict the distortion-performance of microspeakers. Such study should extend to
the point of the "SineForest" sample indeed being able to not only predict the performance of a
micro-speaker but also predict and relate to the performance of other music or speech samples that
could be used with that speaker. Inevitably, a greater amount of various micro-speakers should be
used to conﬁrm the aforementioned assumptions.
Another extension would be the comparison of the Rnonlin model with the modiﬁcations found
in this study to other perceptual models. Such study would be able to compare and evaluate possible
tools in the evaluation of distortion in micro-speakers. This would introduce a much desired set of
tools that could be selected and used by engineers in a research phase of micro-speakers.
74
==PAGE:79==
Appendix A
The current chapter includes the ﬁgures for all the cases tested in this study. All ﬁgures appear
in the order they are discussed in the text.
WNoise
Acapella
Pop 1
Pop
Speech
Male Speech
Mannerchor
Mozart 
Mozart 2
Paganini 1
Violins
BoWire 1
BoWire 2
BoWire 3
SineForest[5]
SineForest
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Rnonlin
Rnonlin Comparison, values above 0.47
SPK#1 : 11 Vpeak
SPK#1 : 9.9 Vpeak
SPK#1 : 7.9 Vpeak
SPK#1 : 5.8 Vpeak
SPK#1 : 4.4 Vpeak
SPK#1 : 2.8 Vpeak
SPK#1 : 1.4 Vpeak
SPK#2 : 11 Vpeak
SPK#2 : 9.9 Vpeak
SPK#2 : 7.9 Vpeak
SPK#2 : 5.8 Vpeak
SPK#2 : 4.4 Vpeak
SPK#2 : 2.8 Vpeak
SPK#2 : 1.4 Vpeak
SPK#3 : 11 Vpeak
SPK#3 : 9.9 Vpeak
SPK#3 : 7.9 Vpeak
SPK#3 : 5.8 Vpeak
SPK#3 : 4.4 Vpeak
SPK#3 : 2.8 Vpeak
SPK#3 : 1.4 Vpeak
Figure 1: Rnonlin values of all data investigated throughout this report.
75
==PAGE:80==
APPENDIX A
76
WNoise
Acapella
Pop 1
Pop
Speech
Male Speech
Mannerchor
Mozart 
Mozart 2
Paganini 1
Violins
BoWire 1
BoWire 2
BoWire 3
SineForest[5]
SineForest
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
0.14
STD
STD of Rnonlin values - All Speakers
SPK#1 : 11 Vpeak
SPK#1 : 9.9 Vpeak
SPK#1 : 7.9 Vpeak
SPK#1 : 5.8 Vpeak
SPK#1 : 4.4 Vpeak
SPK#1 : 2.8 Vpeak
SPK#1 : 1.4 Vpeak
SPK#2 : 11 Vpeak
SPK#2 : 9.9 Vpeak
SPK#2 : 7.9 Vpeak
SPK#2 : 5.8 Vpeak
SPK#2 : 4.4 Vpeak
SPK#2 : 2.8 Vpeak
SPK#2 : 1.4 Vpeak
SPK#3 : 11 Vpeak
SPK#3 : 9.9 Vpeak
SPK#3 : 7.9 Vpeak
SPK#3 : 5.8 Vpeak
SPK#3 : 4.4 Vpeak
SPK#3 : 2.8 Vpeak
SPK#3 : 1.4 Vpeak
Figure 2: Respective STD of previous ﬁgure.
WNoise
Acapella
Pop 1
Pop
Speech
MaleSpeech
Mannerchor
Mozart 
Mozart 2
Paganini1
Violins
BoWire 1
BoWire 2
BoWire 3
SForest[5]
SineForest
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Rnonlin
Influence of Noise
Noise: 0 dB SNR [re Clean]
Noise: 6 dB SNR [re Clean]
Noise: 12 dB SNR [re Clean]
Noise: 18 dB SNR [re Clean]
Noise: 24 dB SNR [re Clean]
Noise: 30 dB SNR [re Clean]
Noise: 36 dB SNR [re Clean]
Clean [re Noise: 0 dB SNR]
Clean [re Noise: 6 dB SNR]
Clean [re Noise: 12 dB SNR]
Clean [re Noise: 18 dB SNR]
Clean [re Noise: 24 dB SNR]
Clean [re Noise: 30 dB SNR]
Clean [re Noise: 36 dB SNR]
Figure 3: The inﬂuence of Noise for all the "Samples" investigated throughout this report.
==PAGE:81==
APPENDIX A
77
WNoise
Acapella
Pop 1
Pop
Speech
MaleSpeech
Mannerchor
Mozart 
Mozart 2
Paganini1
Violins
BoWire 1
BoWire 2
BoWire 3
SForest[5]
SineForest
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Rnonlin
Influence of Noise 
Noise: 24 dB SNR [re N:12 dB SNR]
Noise: 12 dB SNR [re N:24 dB SNR]
Noise: 30 dB SNR [re N:24 dB SNR]
Figure 4: The inﬂuence of Noise for all the "Samples" investigated throughout this report - when
both "reference" and "distorted" signal , contain noise.
0
20
40
60
80
100
Test Condition
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
Subjective Score Difference
Listening Booth's Influence
difference points (DTU-Goertek)
mean : -0.0111
 std : 0.164 (2 σ)
Figure 5: Booth’s inﬂuence, stantard deviation is for 2σ.
==PAGE:82==
APPENDIX A
78
102
103
104
Frequency (Hz)
-90
-80
-70
-60
-50
-40
dB
Spectrum of different noise types
White Noise
Pink Noise
ex. Rec Noise 1
ex. Rec Noise 2
Figure 6: Example Spectrum of different noise types, for White Noise, Pink Noise and two
Recording Noise extracted from this investigation. It can be seen how the inﬂuence of the shape
and level of the White and Pink noises can achieve a complete or partial "covering" of the recording
noise.
WNoise
Acapella
Pop 1
Pop
Speech
MaleSpeech
Mannerchor
Mozart 
Mozart 2
Paganini1
Violins
BoWire 1
BoWire 2
BoWire 3
SForest[5]
SineForest
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Rnonlin
Rnonlin Comparison, All Speakers, w/ WhiteNoise (24dB SNR) [re 0.7Vpeak]
SPK#1 : 11 Vpeak
SPK#1 : 9.9 Vpeak
SPK#1 : 7.9 Vpeak
SPK#1 : 5.8 Vpeak
SPK#1 : 4.4 Vpeak
SPK#1 : 2.8 Vpeak
SPK#1 : 1.4 Vpeak
SPK#2 : 11 Vpeak
SPK#2 : 9.9 Vpeak
SPK#2 : 7.9 Vpeak
SPK#2 : 5.8 Vpeak
SPK#2 : 4.4 Vpeak
SPK#2 : 2.8 Vpeak
SPK#2 : 1.4 Vpeak
SPK#3 : 11 Vpeak
SPK#3 : 9.9 Vpeak
SPK#3 : 7.9 Vpeak
SPK#3 : 5.8 Vpeak
SPK#3 : 4.4 Vpeak
SPK#3 : 2.8 Vpeak
SPK#3 : 1.4 Vpeak
Figure 7: Rnonlin values of all data investigated throughout this report, when correlated noise of
24dBFS is introduced
==PAGE:83==
APPENDIX A
79
WNoise
Acapella
Pop 1
Pop
Speech
MaleSpeech
Mannerchor
Mozart 
Mozart 2
Paganini1
Violins
BoWire 1
BoWire 2
BoWire 3
SForest[5]
SineForest
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Rnonlin
Rnonlin Comparison, All Speakers, w/ Escalating WhiteNoise (-18to-30dB) [re 0.7Vpeak]
SPK#1 : 11 Vpeak
SPK#1 : 9.9 Vpeak
SPK#1 : 7.9 Vpeak
SPK#1 : 5.8 Vpeak
SPK#1 : 4.4 Vpeak
SPK#1 : 2.8 Vpeak
SPK#1 : 1.4 Vpeak
SPK#2 : 11 Vpeak
SPK#2 : 9.9 Vpeak
SPK#2 : 7.9 Vpeak
SPK#2 : 5.8 Vpeak
SPK#2 : 4.4 Vpeak
SPK#2 : 2.8 Vpeak
SPK#2 : 1.4 Vpeak
SPK#3 : 11 Vpeak
SPK#3 : 9.9 Vpeak
SPK#3 : 7.9 Vpeak
SPK#3 : 5.8 Vpeak
SPK#3 : 4.4 Vpeak
SPK#3 : 2.8 Vpeak
SPK#3 : 1.4 Vpeak
Figure 8: Rnonlin values of all data investigated throughout this report, when escalating White
noise from 18 to 30 dBFS is introduced.
WNoise
Acapella
Pop 1
Pop
Speech
MaleSpeech
Mannerchor
Mozart 
Mozart 2
Paganini1
Violins
BoWire 1
BoWire 2
BoWire 3
SForest[5]
SineForest
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Rnonlin
Rnonlin Comparison, All Speakers, w/ Escalating PinkNoise (-18to-24dB) [re 0.7Vpeak]
SPK#1 : 11 Vpeak
SPK#1 : 9.9 Vpeak
SPK#1 : 7.9 Vpeak
SPK#1 : 5.8 Vpeak
SPK#1 : 4.4 Vpeak
SPK#1 : 2.8 Vpeak
SPK#1 : 1.4 Vpeak
SPK#2 : 11 Vpeak
SPK#2 : 9.9 Vpeak
SPK#2 : 7.9 Vpeak
SPK#2 : 5.8 Vpeak
SPK#2 : 4.4 Vpeak
SPK#2 : 2.8 Vpeak
SPK#2 : 1.4 Vpeak
SPK#3 : 11 Vpeak
SPK#3 : 9.9 Vpeak
SPK#3 : 7.9 Vpeak
SPK#3 : 5.8 Vpeak
SPK#3 : 4.4 Vpeak
SPK#3 : 2.8 Vpeak
SPK#3 : 1.4 Vpeak
Figure 9: Rnonlin values of all data investigated throughout this report, when escalating Pink noise
from 18 to 24 dBFS is introduced.
==PAGE:84==
Bibliography
[1]
S. Temme and P. Brunet, “MEASUREMENT OF HARMONIC DISTORTION AUDIBIL-
ITY USING A SIMPLIFIED PSYCHOACOUSTIC MODEL -UPDATED”, 2013.
[2]
E. R. Geddes and L. W. Lee, “Auditory Perception of Nonlinear Distortion -Theory”, 2003.
[3]
C. T. Tan, B. C. J. Moore, N. Zacharov, and V. V. Mattila, “Predicting the perceived quality
of nonlinearly distorted music and speech signals”, AES: Journal of the Audio Engineering
Society, 2004, ISSN: 15494950. DOI: 10.1121/1.3384932.
[4]
A. Voishvillo, “Measurements and Perception of Nonlinear Distortion – Comparing Numbers
and Sound Quality.”, 2007.
[5]
S. L. Olsen, F. Agerkvist, E. Macdonald, T. Stegenborg-Andersen, and C. P. Volk, “Modelling
the Perceptual Components of Loudspeaker Distortion”, 2016.
[6]
S. Temme, P. Brunet, and D. B. Keele, “Practical Measurement of Loudspeaker Distortion
Using a Simpliﬁed Auditory Perceptual Model”, 2009.
[7]
C. J. Plack, The Sence of Hearing, Second Edition. Routledge, 2014.
[8]
B. R. Glasberg and B. C. J. Moore, “A Model of Loudness Applicable to Time-Varying
Sounds”, J. Audio Eng. Soc, vol. 50, no. 5, pp. 331–342, 2002.
[9]
——, “Derivation of auditory ﬁlter shapes from notched-noise data”, Hearing Research, vol.
47, pp. 103–138, 1990.
[10]
R. Patterson, I. Nimmo-Smith, J. Holdsworth, and P. Rice, “ANNEX B OF THE SVOS
FINAL REPORT (Part A: The Auditory Filterbank) AN EFFICIENT AUDITORY FIL
TERBANK BASED ON THE GAMMATONE FUNCTION”, 1987.
[11]
H. F. Eberhard Zwicker, Psychoacoustics: Facts and Models. Springer, 1990.
[12]
C.-T. Tan, B. C. J. Moore, and N. Zacharov, “The Effect of Nonlinear Distortion on the
Perceived Quality of Music and Speech Signals”, J. Audio Eng. Soc, vol. 51, no. 11, pp. 1012–
1031, 2003.
[13]
ITU-R, “RECOMMENDATION ITU-R BS.1387-1 - Method for objective measurements of
perceived audio quality”, pp. 1387–1, 1998.
80
==PAGE:85==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
81
[14]
S. Temme, P. Brunet, and B. Fallon, “Practical Implementation of Perceptual Rub & Buzz
Distortion and Experimental Results”, 2010.
[15]
M. Pahomov and Y. H. Na, “Method for Objective Evaluation of Nonlinear Distortion”,
2015.
[16]
T. Zhou, M. Zhang, and C. Li, “New Method to Detect Rub and Buzz in Loudspeakers
Based on Psychoacoustic Sharpness”, 2015.
[17]
L. L. Beranek and T. J. Mellow, Acoustics, Sound Fields and Transducers. Academic Press,
2012.
[18]
M. W. J. Leach, Introduction to Electroacoustics and Audio Ampliﬁer design. Kendall Hunt,
2010.
[19]
E. Czerwinski, A. Voishvillo, S. Alexandrov, and A. Terekhov, “Multitone Testing of Sound
System Components’Some Results and Conclusions, Part 1: History and Theory”, J. Audio
Eng. Soc, vol. 49, no. 11, pp. 1011–1048, 2001.
[20]
——, “Multitone Testing of Sound System Components’Some Results and Conclusions,
Part 2: Modeling and Application”, J. Audio Eng. Soc, vol. 49, no. 12, pp. 1181–1192, 2001.
[21]
ITU-R, “Method for the subjective assessment of intermediate quality level of audio systems
Policy on Intellectual Property Right (IPR) Series of ITU-R Recommendations”, pp. 1534–3,
[22]
S. Ciba, A. Wlodarski, and H.-J. Maempel, “WhisPER - A New Tool for Performing
Listening Tests”, in Audio Engineering Society Convention 126, May 2009.
[23]
S. Bech and N. Zacharov, Perceptual Audio Evaluation. John Wiley & Sons Ltd., 2006.
