==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Branch misprediction and combinatorial
pattern matching
Enrico Cimitan (s151414)
Kongens Lyngby 2017
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary
Every piece of code containing control flow constructs generates branches when com-
piled; these can cause the long pipelines of modern computers to waste clock cycles
during the execution. To limit this problem a specialized circuit takes a guess on the
path that the code will follow: the branch predictor. Different prediction schemes
could be applied to take the decision, but no perfect predictor exists.
Therefore, on a higher level, research has focused on limiting the number of branch
mispredictions by modifying the source code. Using this technique, important results
have been achieved in speeding up different sorting algorithms, in particular Quicksort.
On the data structure side, a previous work has shown that binary trees perform
better when purposely unbalanced in order to get branches easier to predict.
Patricia trees are a compact version of tries, storing strings.
When a search
is performed, many levels of the tree are scanned, and for each level a number of
branch predictions go wrong.
To improve the performances of Patricia trees, the
data structure is manipulated in different ways, taking advantage of a family of hash
functions called Karp-Rabin fingerprints. One first attempt exploits tree separators,
applied to both binary and non-binary trees. This solution lowers mispredictions,
but does not outperform the original data structure in terms of time.
A second
enhancement of Patricia trees uses a variant of tree clustering algorithms. This new
solution has good performances but has some caveats in space efficiency.
These solutions are then combined in two different ways. The final data structure
has good branch performances, but still in most of the cases shows a longer execution
time than the original one. Therefore, the solutions are open to further improvements,
as many benchmarks are very promising.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at DTU Compute with the supervision of prof. Philip Bille
and prof. Inge Li Gørtz, in fulfillment of the requirements for acquiring an M.Sc. in
Engineering. The work was carried on between January 9 and June 9, 2017, for a
total workload of 30 ECTS.
In most of the courses, even at master level, the only measure used to analyze
algorithms is how many basic operations they perform; or, actually, how this number
looks like as a function of the size of the data handled – in short, the big-O notation.
This very elegant approach that seeks a somewhat mathematical purity, doesn’t satisfy
completely my engineering mindset. In a computer there are lots of different factors
that cannot be ignored when measuring performances. One of these, the cache, I
faced during the course of Algorithms for Massive Datasets at DTU, by studying and
using the I/O model and cache-oblivious model.
This insight that alternative points of view can be of primary importance in per-
formance improvement, led me to accept enthusiastically the proposal of Philip and
Inge to dig into the topic of branch mispredictions. Picking up the previous work in
the field, I had the chance to mix theoretical research in the literature and practical
hands-on experience, in this very open field called lean programming. This thesis is
the result of such a research.
Kongens Lyngby, June 9, 2017
Enrico Cimitan (s151414)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
Life is like riding a bicycle.
To keep your balance, you must keep moving.
Albert Einstein
I would like to thank Philip and Inge, whose passion for their job shines from every
lecture they deliver. You have been valuable guides and inspiration from the very
first glimpse I had of you more than one year ago. Working with you and helping you
as a teaching assistant have been my most rewarding academic achievements.
I would also like to mention all the professors I had the honor to work with in both
University of Padova and DTU, especially the ones in the algorithmic and AI areas;
but I’d cover too many pages, so I’ll say a general and heartfelt thanks to them.
Thanks to prof. Maria Elena Valcher, who handled all the shifts in my career as a
TIME student. You’ve been a strong example on how to be reliable and committed;
but never conceited, which is a rare quality in Italian Academia.
The more I grow adult, the more I appreciate how much the education we receive
from our parents shapes the individuals we become. Therefore, I would like to thank
mamma Gabriela and papà Francesco, who have been always supportive and never
clipped my wings. Any achievement I reach is an achievement of yours; any time you
are proud of me, be proud of you, as that’s what I feel deep inside.
I want to thank Giulia, my sister, for being one step ahead (and five years). You
have shown me how to pursue personal fulfillment; and without that I wouldn’t be
here today. Never too serious and always driven by your passions, you are an example
of standing in front of life, head high, to negotiate your future.
I would like to thank the rest of my family for being so close and compact, and
in particular my grandmothers.
Thanks to nonna Rosanna, to whom life didn’t
allow to witness this from Earth.
Your infinite love for your husband, daughters
and grandchildren has glued the family together; I feel like no one has brought love
==PAGE:8==
vi
Acknowledgements
into my life as you did. And thanks to nonna Ciana, who never stopped her job as a
teacher, and never will. Thanks for sharing your stories with me, and for never giving
up. Your attitude and advice have become part of my life mottos, inspiring me to
hold on during the hardest moments.
Thanks to Giulia, who always makes me feel home, and on whom I can count
every single day since twenty (and more) years ago. Your patience and determination
have helped me taking uncountable decisions; and even if you won’t understand one
word of this thesis, it wouldn’t probably exist without you.
Thanks to Sara, unfading enthusiast, because every time I come home you are
there, always involved in something new. Thanks for knowing how to handle any
situation, including me, and for doing that with an astonishing simplicity.
Thanks to Andrea, Beatrice, Federico, and all the group of the “Arrivati”, for
sailing with me this boat in a foreign country and culture. I honestly think I wouldn’t
have survived these two years without you. Thanks for sharing my struggles and my
moments of happiness, for being with me watching (Disney) movies, and for letting
me cool down the stress shooting a bullet in table football.
Also, a special thanks goes to my friends of Padova, the “Macchiato” company.
Thanks to Silvia, for being a sponge for my complaints and excitements; and for
hosting me in Stockholm when I had nowhere to shelter. Thanks to Nicolò, for the
priceless help both inside and outside university; being so different makes us stronger
together. And thanks to Riccardo, Davide and Fabio, because a five minutes break
is much more enjoyable with you, especially because it lasts half an hour.
Thanks to my colleagues at work, for making it the most amazing workplace one
can imagine. And last, thanks to Igor. We cannot see the road ahead of us, but we
can look back. You left everlasting traces and made it possible for me to arrive here.
I hope we’ll end up walking close again; but even if we won’t, I still feel like saying:
thank you.
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Summary
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
2
Motivation and previous work
3
2.1
The branch and the prediction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Prediction schemes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Branch mispredictions in algorithms and data structures . . . . . . . .
7
3
Patricia trees analysis
11
3.1
Methodology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.2
Performances . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4
Improving Patricia trees
17
4.1
Tree separators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.2
The Karp-Rabin fingerprint . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.3
Binary separator decomposition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.4
Non-binary separator decomposition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.5
Tree layering
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5
Hybrid data structures
35
5.1
Naive string routing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.2
Threshold leaves indexing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.3
Wrap up . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
6
Conclusions and future work
39
Bibliography
41
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER1
Introduction
This thesis will study the impact of branch mispredictions on Patricia trees, and will
propose some variations and enhancements of the data structure to try and improve
performances.
A branch prediction, or branch hazard, occurs every time the CPU has to process
the machine code obtained by compiling an if, while, for, …. In this situation, the
CPU starts processing the following instructions before having determined the path
to be taken; therefore making a prediction on that. The branch predictor that lies
inside the processor casts such a prediction, but if it takes the wrong guess, computing
time is wasted.
After the RAM model and the I/O model, the number of branch mispredictions has
played an important role as a measurement of efficiency of algorithms. This is true in
particular after 2004, year in which the algorithm Samplesort was improved to a new
version that outperformed its predecessors, just by lowering branch mispredictions.
Research has then bloomed around how to improve sorting algorithms, that by their
nature involve a rather high number of mispredictions. But few of the studies in
literature focus on improving data structures in these terms. The existing works are
mostly successful, though, as the attempt to skew binary search trees that resulted in a
15% improvement in performances. This leaves the doors open to further investigation
on this topic.
One of the basic data structures used in a number of string related applications
are Patricia trees. They are basically tries where any path with no bifurcation is
compacted into one node. When performing a search in such a data structure, many
levels are spanned; and for each level, mispredictions occur depending on the structure
of the tree and on the strings that it memorizes. The number of mispredictions in the
search phase increases as the data structure becomes bigger, up to 16 for each search
in the experiments here contained, and more than one sixth of all the predictions in
the search phase fails.
Benchmarks will be considered in terms of CPU time (measured from C code), and
branch mispredictions in a simulated run (with the tool Valgrind). Such measurement
will be conducted on strings from different alphabets and of different lengths.
Therefore, this thesis tries to improve such a data structure. The aim is to craft
a modified version of Patricia trees, capable of answering the search query with fewer
branch mispredictions but without worsening cache hits or other alternative bench-
marks; and therefore, performing better. Such a result would prove that string related
==PAGE:12==
2
1 Introduction
data structures can benefit from branch optimizations just as sorting algorithm, lead-
ing to new research in this field.
To pursue this goal, this thesis will continue with Chapter 2, which discusses the
importance of branch mispredictions in data structures, presenting the relevant liter-
ature and introducing some concepts that will be useful to understand the following
discussions. Chapter 3 will introduce Patricia trees, and benchmark three different
implementations to argue that they can be improved taking care of mispredictions.
This is what Chapter 4 will try to do, presenting some alternative ways of reducing
the mispredictions and improve the data structure performances. These solutions will
be then merged to some final data structures that will be presented in Chapter 5.
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER2
Motivation and
previous work
Historically, algorithmic research has been basing its time performance analysis on the
well known RAM model. According to this model, the algorithm or data structure
that we are analyzing can make use of an infinite amount of memory. Any basic
operation requires a constant time; meaning that we can characterize an algorithm
performances with the number of these basic operations that it performs. In such a
group we include arithmetic and boolean operations, accesses to memory, assignments,
pointer dereferencing, if statements, and so on.
Taking one moment to read again the previous lines, we find some important
caveats. The biggest one is to put on the same level the time required by any op-
eration. It is true that, time-wise, boolean operations are comparable with pointer
manipulations, and multiplications take just a constant number of times as much as
register assignments. But as soon as accesses to memory are taken into consideration,
things start to become more thorny.
Table 2.1 shows some approximate times that low-level CPU operations take in
Execute typical instruction
1 ns
Fetch from L1 cache memory
0.5 ns
Branch misprediction
5 ns
Fetch from L2 cache memory
7 ns
Mutex lock/unlock
25 ns
Fetch from main memory
100 ns
Send 2K bytes over 1Gbps network
20,000 ns
Read 1MB sequentially from memory
250,000 ns
Fetch from new disk location (seek)
8,000,000 ns
Read 1MB sequentially from disk
20,000,000 ns
Send packet US to Europe and back
150,000,000 ns
Table 2.1: Approximate times required by low-level CPU operations during code
execution (Norvig 2002).
==PAGE:14==
4
2 Motivation and previous work
a modern computer1. The first take away from these numbers is: access to memory
can’t be degraded to a plain constant time operation. Any algorithm is bound to
become code running in some machine, and such machine will likely have two or
three levels of cache with increasing access times. Accessing data that is already in
the cache is extremely faster (up to one hundred times) than fetching it again from
main memory.
Since 1988 (Aggarwal and Vitter), the algorithm research has been using, in par-
allel with the RAM model, the so called I/O model. This new perspective takes care
of the memory access issue, modeling caches of the modern calculators on a single
level, limited in size, with optimal replacement strategy and full associativity. The
only costly operation is to load (or copy back) a block of data from memory to cache;
any other operation is free.
This model refines the original way of analyzing algorithms: if a value is in cache,
the time required to access it is actually comparable to the time for a normal operation,
but if it is not, the time to load it dominates any arithmetic operation. On this track,
in 1999 (Frigo et al.) the I/O model was enhanced to a cache oblivious model, that
on top of the I/O model assumes that the memory and cache architecture exist but
are not known to the algorithm designer.
Still, some operations are oversimplified in all the previous models: the control
flow statements (e.g. the conditional if, and the loop while). When such instructions
are compiled, a conditional jump instruction is generated in the machine code; this
instruction moves the code execution to a different line if some condition is true, oth-
erwise the execution continues normally. Such events in the code are called branches.
Going back to Table 2.1 and pruning all the lines that are taken into consideration
by the I/O model, as well as the network-related ones, an entry related to branches
emerges as having some importance: the branch misprediction. Even if less impacting
than cache misses or high asymptotic complexity, these events can slow down code
execution, as we will see in the following sections.
2.1
The branch and the prediction
The branch misprediction problem is strictly tied to both code efficiency and computer
architecture, so let us leave aside the first and pick up some concepts from the second
one.
Once our code is compiled, the machine code is ready to be executed by the
processor of our computer. We might think that each line of code is executed when
the previous one is already completed, but in reality the CPU looks more like an
assembly line than like a single artisan. Each instruction needs different operations
to be performed, and while one line of code has passed one step, the following can
1Note that the data is highly dependent on the machine architecture; moreover, the data in the
table refers to 2002. A recent but less complete overview can be found in Scott (2012). For the
purpose of this thesis, the precise numbers are not relevant, as long as the orders of magnitude are
evident.
==PAGE:15==
2.1 The branch and the prediction
5
enter that step, in what is called instruction pipeline (see Hennessy and Patterson
(2011, Appendix C) among others).
This instruction pipeline in the ’60 consisted just of three steps: fetch the instruc-
tion, decode it, and execute it. In the classic RISC processors, this pipeline had two
more trailing steps, that allowed to decouple the memory access and the “writeback”
of the result to the registers. From there on, the development of processor pipelines
took two completely opposite approaches: the PIC microcontrollers just need a two
stage pipeline (fetch and execute); on the other hand, some Intel processors, as the
Pentium D, have a pipeline as long as 31 stages (although some of them are not real
steps but just some renaming and moving of values). In Figure 2.1 we can have a
glimpse on the different pipeline sizes (note that the Pentium 4 architecture is shown,
as the one from Pentium D is not fully disclosed).
Figure 2.1: The pipeline of the Pentium 4 (Carmean 2002) and of a PIC microcon-
troller.
Having longer pipelines can improve performances, as the clock cycle can be re-
duced (each task is extremely specialized, therefore each operation takes less time
and the length of each of the steps is reduced). On the other hand, as we will see
shortly, this worsens the problem of branch mispredictions, that become more and
more expensive with longer pipelines. This might be one of the reasons why in the
recent years the rush to make pipelines longer has stopped, or at least gathers less
interest than in the past.
What happens when a branch instruction gets into the pipeline?
The CPU is immediately faced with a dilemma: which instruction to insert into
the pipeline right after the branch. Since the condition of the branch has not been
evaluated yet (this happens typically at the end of the pipeline), which of the two
ways should be followed? Such a decision is, in principle, impossible to be taken,
and the pipeline should wait for the result before loading the following instructions.
This wastes clock cycles, though; so the CPU choses one of the two tracks to pursue.
Once the branch condition is checked, if it turns out that we chose the wrong path,
we have to throw away our results and recompute the last instructions (with a time
waste proportional to the pipeline length); but if our prediction was correct, we have
saved a lot of cycles and we can just proceed with our code.
==PAGE:16==
6
2 Motivation and previous work
This branch prediction2 that was just made has been attracting studies since
the very beginning of microprocessor architecture, and growing complexity has been
put into branch prediction schemes to be effective, as the following sections briefly
introduces.
2.2
Prediction schemes
This thesis will focus on optimizing code at a higher level, but to why this is impor-
tant and why some results occur, it is fundamental to understand how the branch
predictors work inside the CPU.
In this section we will distinguish the two possible code paths occurring at a
branch, calling the latter “taken” or “not taken”.
The guess about whether to take or not take a branch is made by a very specialized
component of the CPU, called branch predictor. Branch predictors have existed since
the Sixties, in their very ancestral form, and have subsequently been developed to be
more and more precise; today every CPU includes such a circuit, but in general we
can distinguish just two categories.
The first is the static branch predictor. Such a circuit is very simple and always
chooses the same direction when faced with a branch. Such approach can look dumb,
but in many cases turns out to be good, or even optimal: for example, when inside a
loop, a static branch predictor that always stays in the loop will only incur into one
wrong prediction (the last one). Static branch predictors are still implemented as of
today, because of their speed and as a fallback for dynamics predictors.
Dynamic predictors, in fact, take decisions on branches based on a previous history
that does not exist yet when the execution starts. Once the program is running, this
history is built in order to get more precise predictions in the future. If the decision is
taken only according to the history for the same branch in the code, then the branch
predictor is called local, otherwise it is called global. There exist hybrid predictors
between these categories, or even two level predictors, but the far most common is
the two bit saturating counter.
In general, a counter is a local dynamic branch predictor that keeps a small integer
for each branch in the code. The integer is initially zero, and is incremented each time
that branch is taken and decremented each time the branch is not taken, saturating
at some value. When a prediction is required, this integer is then used: if the value
is in the higher half, the branch is predicted as taken, otherwise it’s predicted as not
taken. In practical applications, the two bit saturating counter is one of the most
widely used (Kaligosi and Sanders 2006), as it’s space efficient and is still able to
cover more cases than the one-bit counter.
Such counters are used extensively as means of PHT, pattern history tables, struc-
tures keeping one counter for each branch up to a certain limit, and using some hashing
2In many computer architecture texts, the branch prediction problem is addressed under the
name of Branch Hazard, as in Patterson and Hennessy (2013).
==PAGE:17==
2.3 Branch mispredictions in algorithms and data structures
7
Figure 2.2: State machine representing a 2-bit saturating counter, as in Brodal and
Moruz (2005).
once the limit is passed (resulting therefore in branches updating a common counter,
which could result in lower performances). Counters are also used in branch history
registers (BHR) to overcome PHT issues, or in more complex global predictors as
correlation based and adaptive predictors3.
The architecture and general behavior of branch predictors should now be quite
clear to the reader.
Work is still going on in branch predictors and prediction
schemes (see for example Skadron, Martonosi, and Clark (2000)), but given the long
pipelines that make even few mispredictions expensive, and the already good predic-
tion schemes that are available as of today, the academic focus has shifted in the late
years to a higher level. The concern is now to feed the CPUs with algorithms coded
with a particular focus on avoiding mispredictions (and branches in general), in order
to alleviate the pressure on the predictors themselves.
In industry, as highlighted in Edelkamp and Weiß (2016), the branch predictor
used are more complicated and often not disclosed to the public. For this reason, and
in order to set up a worst case scenario, the underlying branch predictor is assumed
to be static in the majority of the works related to algorithm optimization. In this
thesis this assumption is not needed: the tools used in the following chapters will
simulate two-bit saturating counters, which are more expressive than the static ones,
still guaranteeing a simple structure.
2.3
Branch mispredictions in algorithms and data
structures
In 2004 (Sanders and Winkel), two German researchers dug into the performances
of Quicksort (in particular, its variant Samplesort) to identify the reasons of some
inefficiency that was not explained by the well known RAM and I/O models of com-
putation: they found out that branch mispredictions were the cause of this slowdown.
3A more complete survey is available in Brodal and Moruz (2005), and for some implementations
in Malishevsky et al.
==PAGE:18==
8
2 Motivation and previous work
They avoided them using predicated instructions, i.e. particular machine directives
that execute a conditional piece of code anyway, but commit the result just in case
the condition proves to be true after it exits the pipeline; therefore not causing a
branch. Such instructions are used by the compiler just in very special cases (see
Elmasry and Katajainen (2012)), for example the C in-line if:
(condition)?value1:value2
This optimization allowed the authors to get a 2-factor speedup in the sorting, with
an algorithm called Super Scalar Sample Sort. Such an achievement magnetized the
attention of algorithm researchers towards trying to get a similar speedup, focusing
mainly on sorting algorithms as the original paper did.
Later in Kaligosi and Sanders (2006), Quicksort was again under exam, in its
basic implementation due to Hoare (1961).
The authors note that attempting to
reach the optimal n log n + O(n) number of comparisons to sort an array of size
n causes a huge number of branch mispredictions. In fact, because of information
theory, reaching that bound for a comparison based sorting algorithm means that
one bit of information has to be added in each step. This effectively bounds us to
have branches that have a 50% chance of being taken. If we allow a bigger number
of comparisons (a constant times the optimal), though, we can have branches that
are easier to predict. This suggests to use a skewed pivot, that causes the elements
to be split in sets that are unbalanced up to 10%/90% of the total. The authors try
this promising technique, but in the end the performances, even if better than the
original Quicksort, are still less interesting than the previous work in Sanders and
Winkel (2004).
Motivated by this, in Elmasry, Katajainen, and Stenmark (2012) the authors
attempt to analyze Mergesort, which happens to be faster than Quicksort in some
cases with the benefit of being stable. Trying to make it even more lean (i.e. with less
branches), though, leads to a worse version that, despite making less mispredictions,
is overall slower. As a conclusion, they note that getting optimality in criteria as
branch mispredictions and instruction count risks to make other measures go worse,
as cache hits and element moves, and therefore affects the overall running time. Using
conditional moves to remove branches is powerful to eliminate unpredictable branches,
but should not be used for all of them, and especially not for predictable ones (see
also Intel (2016)).
An important theoretical result is proved in Brodal and Moruz (2005), and seems
to set a limit in the reduction of mispredictions for sorting algorithms:
Theorem: Consider a deterministic comparison based sorting algorithm
A that sorts input sequences of size n using O(dn log n) comparisons with
d > 1. The number of branch mispredictions performed by A is Ω(n logd n).
This theorem, though, takes other assumptions (as the original authors point out
themselves), mainly it considers a branch for each comparison. This is not necessarily
true, as some comparisons may not correspond to a branch, but could be used in
==PAGE:19==
2.3 Branch mispredictions in algorithms and data structures
9
normal arithmetic as integers, or to index arrays. Relaxing this hypothesis, in Elmasry
and Katajainen (2012) the authors describe a general rule to transform any program in
an equivalent lean one, i.e. with no branches except one required by an outermost loop.
They exploit conditional moves (which is another name for predicate instructions
mentioned earlier in this chapter) and other tricks of the trade, getting to the final
result:
Theorem: Every pure-C4 program can be transformed into an equivalent
pure-C program that has only one conditional branch [...]. If the size of
the original program is k and the running time t(n) for an input of size
n, then the size of the transformed program is O(k) and the running time
O(k · t(n)).
Applying this transformation, though, may result in slower performances anyway:
as the authors conclude, it is not possible to force the compiler in producing the code
we expect; in general, easy to predict branches perform better than any workaround,
so it is often not worth it to try and eliminate all the branches at once from the
programs.
On the line of decoupling comparisons from branches, in Edelkamp and Weiß
(2016) Quicksort is again modified to a block-wise version. From the original Quick-
sort, that could go quadratic and uses quite some mispredictions, to the dual pivot
version, that is faster as it uses fewer scans of the elements, up to Super Scalar
Sample Sort that uses predicated instructions and simple arithmetic to bucket the
elements: all these algorithm are analyzed with different pivot selection strategies. A
new version of Quicksort is then proposed and compared to the previous ones, where
the comparisons between elements are stored in an array and used at a later time
to rearrange elements. This reduces the mispredictions to a constant number, still
keeping a good cache performance and in general very good benchmarks if compared
with other state-of-the-art algorithms.
2.3.1
Data structures
In the last years, some research has been going on on optimizing branch predictions in
data structure as well. Brodal and Moruz (2006) worked on binary search trees, find-
ing that for some tree layouts, allowing a skewing factor enabled better performances.
In other words, they tried to make branches predictable instead of removing them, by
unbalancing the data structure. They focused on an already built binary search tree,
caring just about the static case for such a data structure. They managed to get a
15% improvement in running time, just by having the binary search tree have one of
the sides (the left one) smaller than the other by a constant factor for each level.
Another interesting application of branch optimization deserves to be mentioned:
the one implemented in Dato et al. (2016). The authors apply bit tricks, masks and
4Meaning that just the basic constructs are used, e.g. no function calls and exception handling
are allowed.
==PAGE:20==
10
2 Motivation and previous work
other similar strategies to regression trees; using as a measure branch mispredictions
among others, they managed to get a fast data structure for their purpose.
The promising results in both algorithm and data structure optimization naturally
lead to try and apply these techniques to some other commonly used data structures,
as the following chapters are going to show.
==PAGE:21==
CHAPTER3
Patricia trees
analysis
Patricia trees are one of the basic data structure related to string handling. They allow
to store a number k of strings with total length n using just O(k) space additionally
to the original strings, but allowing fast search of patterns (in the worst case O(m)
with m length of the pattern).
They were first introduced in Morrison (1968), who described an algorithm to
store and retrieve information related to strings efficiently. Later the structure was
formalized to be a tree, and as of today, NIST (Edelkamp 2010) defines a Patricia
tree as “A compact representation of a trie in which any node that is an only child is
merged with its parent”.
Some other definitions of Patricia trees restrict them to be binary tries, but in
this thesis the general definition from NIST will be used. We will consider it as static
(i.e. we won’t care about updates) and we will be considering the following query for
benchmarks and performance analysis:
• search(P): returns true if the pattern P is stored in the Patricia tree, false
otherwise.
Many other queries and updates are possible for this data structure, but this is
the basic one that every implementation has to take care of. Also, both insertion
and deletion perform operations similar to this query for their performance critical
routines, so it seems reasonable to take this query as most representative for this data
structure.
In the following sections two versions of Patricia trees are analyzed. One of them
allows any number of children from a parent (later called LET, as the splits on each
level are made on the letters, as in Figure 3.1(a)). This approach implies a maximum
node degree of |Σ| where Σ is the alphabet from which our strings are formed. The
second approach is to consider the binary ASCII representation of the strings, and
split on the single bits, obtaining a binary Patricia tree (therefore called BIN in the
following).
==PAGE:22==
12
3 Patricia trees analysis
(a) LET, the literal version
(b) BIN, the binary version
Figure 3.1: The two versions of Patricia tree for the single words in the sentence
“she sells sea shells on the shore”. Each string is terminated by a special
character of the alphabet, $ (displayed in ASCII as 00000000): this
guarantees that no string is prefix of another, meaning that no string
ends in an internal node.
3.1
Methodology
To measure running times of the algorithm, the C function clock() was used, which
reports the number of clock cycles from the program beginning, and divided by the
CLOCKS_PER_SEC constant gives the number of seconds the CPU was busy running
the program.
To measure branch mispredictions, the tool Valgrind (Nethercote and Seward
2007) is used. It is a profiling tool that measures performances on a simulated ar-
chitecture, providing detailed information about it. It’s been extensively used in the
field (see for example Elmasry and Katajainen (2012)), as it allows in-depth analysis
of programs including information about two levels of cache and branches. Note that
Valgrind allows to see the amount of branch mispredictions for each line of code writ-
ten by the programmer; this will allow to decouple the mispredictions in the code ad
identify clearly where the inefficiencies come from.
Another important information is that Valgrind uses two bit saturating counters
as branch predictors, which were described in Section 2.2. This means that its perfor-
mances are not as good as a predictor in industry, but still not as trivial as a static
one.
All the experiments in this thesis were executed on a machine with the following
specifications:
==PAGE:23==
3.1 Methodology
13
OS
Ubuntu 14.04 LTS x64
Linux kernel version
3.13.0-66-generic
RAM
4 GB
CPU
Intel® Core™i7-3537U @ 2.00 GHz
cores
2
threads
4
L1 data caches
2x32 KB
L1 instruction caches
2x32 KB
L2 caches
2x256 KB
L3 cache
4 MB
pipeline length
14 (16 if cache miss) instructions
Microarchitecture
Ivy Bridge
Benchmarking
The problem of data structures is that they have to be ready to
answer any distribution of queries. Simulating every possible situation is of course
impossible, but even figuring out a good measure to benchmark them is hard. In some
applications a data structure could be queried for shorter strings more often (think
about a search engine); or independently from the length, but with an unbalanced
distribution (for example an English dictionary).
This same problem affects the
decision on how to benchmark different tree structures.
This thesis picks the methodology used in Brodal and Moruz (2006), where the
authors benchmark over a “large number of random successful queries”; provided
that this number is large enough, each string in the data structure is searched for
approximately the same number of times. Therefore in the following the measure
used is to search in the data structure each string that is memorized in it just once,
and take the overall execution time and performances.
The code that reads the strings from the file is excluded from all the benchmarks.
Also, since the performances are limited to the search query, the creation of the data
structure is not included neither in the time nor in the branch prediction measure-
ments.
The experiments were run on six different files containing strings. For each of
three alphabets, two files are used, with different lengths:
Alphabet
String type
#strings, long
#strings, short
{a, b}
Random characters,
Gaussian
lengths with µ = 30, σ = 10
97900
8300
{g, c, t, a}
Random characters,
Gaussian
lengths with µ = 100, σ = 10
100000
500
{a, . . . , z}
English words from Dwyl (github)
(2017), restricted to words without
special characters
354973
46600
==PAGE:24==
14
3 Patricia trees analysis
ab long
ab short
gcta long
gcta short
words long
words short
BIN
1.7% M/B
2.00 M/W
0.134 s
2.1% M/B
2.00 M/W
0.007 s
0.8% M/B
2.00 M/W
0.201 s
0.9% M/B
2.02 M/W
0.0007 s
2.4% M/B
2.04 M/W
0.532 s
3.0% M/B
2.04 M/W
0.045 s
LET lin
10% M/B
10.5 M/W
0.126 s
11% M/B
7.83 M/W
0.006 s
14% M/B
9.02 M/W
0.163 s
15% M/B
5.81 M/W
0.0005 s
7.0% M/B
9.49 M/W
0.393 s
8.2% M/B
7.93 M/W
0.039 s
LET bin
8.5% M/B
9.48 M/W
0.138 s
8.6% M/B
7.78 M/W
0.008 s
12% M/B
9.59 M/W
0.172 s
14% M/B
6.33 M/W
0.0005 s
18% M/B
15.9 M/W
0.385 s
19% M/B
12.7 M/W
0.038 s
Table 3.1: Branch mispredictions (as a percentage of total branches, M/B; and for
each word searched, M/W) and running times (average of 10 runs) on
each of the six test files.
The benchmarks are for the binary version
(BIN), literal with linear search (LET lin) and literal with binary search
(LET bin).
3.2
Performances
Let us now discuss the performances for these implementations. The versions that
will be considered are BIN, and two variants of LET where the search for the correct
child inside one node is either performed with binary search or with linear search.
Space
As stated above, Patricia trees take a space O(k) with k number of strings
memorized, plus the space taken by the strings themselves. One way of arguing this
is noticing that each time a string is added to the tree, exactly one leaf is created, and
when this leaf is attached to the tree, either zero or one nodes are created (depending
on whether the leaf has to be linked to an existing node, or a new node has to be
created in the middle of a previously compressed path).
In the literal case, each element causes also one cell to be added to the array of
children of the parent node, still meaning a constant space overhead per string.
Asymptotic query time
For both the tree versions, in the worst case a query will
have to descend one node for each character of the searched pattern. If such pattern
has length m, then the number of nodes visited to answer the query is O(m) in the
worst case. For each node, in case of the literal version, a time dependent on the size
of the alphabet is spent for each node (O(|Σ|) for the linear search, O(log |Σ|) for the
binary search). In case of the binary version, constant time is required to retrieve the
bit (but a much higher constant for such an operation).
Cache efficiency
The nodes of the binary Patricia tree have constant size, so they
fit in a constant number of blocks. Therefore we have to load, in the worst case,
==PAGE:25==
3.2 Performances
15
O(m/B) blocks into memory to answer the query.
In the literal case, the nodes take a space that in the worst case might be O(|Σ|).
This means that the whole path to a leaf could use O(m · |Σ|) space, and therefore
O( m·|Σ|
B
) blocks will need to be loaded.
Branches and execution time
Running the Valgrind tool on the Patricia tree
implementation, and separately measuring the running time of the searches, we find
some interesting results summarized in Table 3.1. Let’s focus on the BIN version.
This implementation has generally worse time performances, and at the same time
better branch predictions than the other ones. The slow down in time is probably
due to multiple factors, such as the higher number of levels of the tree to walk (since
the splits are binary for each level) and the masks that are applied to extract bits
from bytes for every comparison during the search phase. This confirms what has
been stated in Chapter 2, about the many different factors that affect the running
time.
The reason why the branch predictions are few is that a first optimization has
already been applied. As seen in Section 2.3, the condition evaluated at each level
has been used to index the array of children, avoiding a branch in the following way:
condition ←CompareBits()
newNode ←oldNode.children[condition]
On the other hand, the performances of the two LET variants are, somehow
surprisingly, comparable. The one using binary search is even a bit slower on smaller
alphabets; this is probably to be blamed to the number of operations that binary
search executes: despite the lower number of iterations, each one is slower.
Note that in case of binary search on bigger alphabets, the branches are harder to
predict, and in some setups the branch misses for each word are substantially higher.
This is coherent with our expectations: in binary search it’s hard to say whether the
searched value will be in the right or left part; whereas in the linear search we expect
to be scanning on average half of the alphabet before we find the desired value, so we
can rely on the prediction of proceeding with the search.
All in all, we can appreciate how in the LET versions the number of branch
mispredictions is rather high; and even if the BIN version has few mispredictions,
it performs worse.
We can see, therefore, promising possibilities to improve the
performances of this data structure with respect to branch mispredictions, and overall
execution time.
==PAGE:26==
16
==PAGE:27==
CHAPTER4
Improving Patricia
trees
As we have seen in the previous chapter, Patricia trees show promising possibilities
for improvement.
One first approach seems to be preventing the branches at all,
transforming the single comparison lines to avoid them. Such an approach is already
implemented in the binary version of the tree presented earlier, but no trivial way
of applying it is possible in case of an unbounded alphabet. Trying to exploit the
predicated instructions doesn’t result in an improvement, either because the compiler
is optimized enough to also trigger them from the regular code, or because it doesn’t
trigger them even after changing the code.
The following approach is to try and rethink the data structure, and enhance it.
As the number of branch mispredictions is highly dependent on the number of levels
of the tree that the query has to scan, a first idea is to try and skip as many levels
as possible. In this, the tree separators come in handy. If we had a node that splits
the tree in roughly half, we would be allowed to jump to such a node saving a lot of
branches. Such a solution will be presented in the following sections.
One alternative way of skipping big parts of a tree to analyze is the tree clustering,
which allows to iteratively consider smaller and smaller subtrees to scan. A variant
of such a solution will be analyzed in the final part of this chapter.
4.1
Tree separators
The concept of tree edge separator comes from graph theory, and originally defines
a set of edges of a graph that, if removed from the graph, split it into two or more
connected components. A tree is a particular graph, and in such a case any single edge
is a tree separator, as removing it splits the tree in exactly two connected subtrees.
Note that vertex separators exist as well. Such vertexes have a similar origin and
definition to the edge separators, but in this case each non-root internal node is a
tree separator, as removing it from the tree causes the subtrees rooted in its children
to be split from the root.
==PAGE:28==
18
4 Improving Patricia trees
For trees, both edge and vertex separators gain interesting properties, but in the
following the edge separator will be more interesting for our purpose. The core idea
of this section is, instead of just walking down the tree edges to match the searched
pattern, to jump to a tree separator that allows to save some time in the search.
Doing this recursively can cut down the number of levels that we will need to walk
in the tree. But to make sure this is a viable optimization, we need a theorem to be
proven.
4.1.1
Separator theorem for binary trees
One important and well known result assures that some separators can actually boost
our search in the tree, and is directly drawn from the theorem for graphs (see for
example Lipton and Tarjan (1979)).
Theorem - first formulation: Any binary tree with N ≥2 nodes has an
edge separator that splits the tree in two subtrees with at least ⌊N
3 ⌋nodes.
Note that, being the subtrees just two, we can have a second formulation. The trivial
proof of their equivalence is here omitted.
Theorem - equivalent formulation: Any binary tree with N ≥2
nodes has an edge separator that splits the tree in two subtrees, each with
a number of nodes in I =
[
⌊N
3 ⌋, ⌈2N
3 ⌉
]
.
This powerful theorem applies to any tree having at least one edge to remove. We
can easily find an example to show the tightness of the bounds: in the tree in Figure
4.1, for example, we can remove any edge to get a split into sets of 1 and 3 nodes,
which fall onto the endpoints of the interval I = [1, 3] for this tree.
Figure 4.1: An example tree that reaches the bounds of the theorem.
From now on, for brevity, such an edge separator as the one claimed to exist in
the theorem will be called “good” edge separator. Let us now prove this theorem, in
its second formulation.
The proof is a constructive proof, as it describes an algorithm to find a good edge
separator for the tree (summarized in Algorithm 4.1). A tree could often have more
than one good edge separator; the following algorithm just allows to find one of them.
==PAGE:29==
4.1 Tree separators
19
Algorithm 4.1 Finding a good edge separator in a binary tree.
N set of nodes of the tree
I ←
[
⌊N
3 ⌋, ⌈2N
3 ⌉
]
n ←any node in N
B, C ←nodes of subtrees rooted, respectively, in left and right child of n
A ←N \ (B ∪C ∪{n})
while none of |A|, |B|, |C| falls in I do
X ←biggest of A, B, C
n ←the one and only node in X connected to the previous n
B, C ←nodes of subtrees rooted, respectively, in left and right child of n
A ←N \ (B ∪C ∪{n})
end while
return the edge connecting n to any of A, B, C whose size falls in I
Correctness proof
Call N the number of nodes of the tree, and I =
[
⌊N
3 ⌋, ⌈2N
3 ⌉
]
the interval for the size of the two separated subtrees, as in the statement of the
theorem above.
Pick any node n in the tree. Since the tree is binary, n has at most three incident
edges (two leading to children and one coming from the parent); and, as a consequence,
it is surrounded by three subtrees A, B, C as in Figure 4.2. B and C are, respectively,
the subtree rooted in the left and right child of n, while A is the original tree minus
the subtree rooted in n. Note that at most two of them are empty, as the tree has at
least one node other than n, and such a node has to be in one of the three subtrees.
Figure 4.2: Scheme used throughout the correctness proof.
Now, there are two cases.
Case 1: at least one of A, B, C falls in I; pick one, say X. The edge that connects X
to n is the good tree separator, as |X| ∈I, and therefore also N −|X| ∈I.
Case 2: none between A, B, C falls in I. This means that:
• At most one among A, B, C is bigger than the greater endpoint of I, ⌈2N
3 ⌉: if
two or all of them were bigger, the sum of the nodes of the tree would exceed
N.
==PAGE:30==
20
4 Improving Patricia trees
• At least one among A, B, C is bigger than the greater endpoint of I, ⌈2N
3 ⌉: if
none of them was bigger, all of them would need to be below the lower endpoint
of I.
We would have |A| < ⌊N
3 ⌋and therefore |A| ≤⌊N
3 ⌋−1.
Repeating
this reasoning for the other two subtrees we get |A| + |B| + |C| + |{n}| ≤
3(⌊N
3 ⌋−1) + 1 ≤3(⌊N
3 ⌋) −2 ≤N −2 < N, which is a contradiction, as any
node has to be in one of the components of the tree.
Since we have exactly one subtree that is bigger, we can take the node of that
component that is connected to n, and repeat the algorithm with this next candidate
as the new n. If the algorithm terminates on an edge, that edge is a good separator.
Therefore, it is just needed to prove that the algorithm terminates, i.e. that at some
point it will reach a node where one of A, B, C falls in I.
Termination proof
In the following, the subtrees A, B, C generated by the algo-
rithm while processing a node n will be called “subtrees induced by n”. Let us first
show that for each iteration of the algorithm, the size of the biggest of the three
induced subtrees A, B, C decreases.
Figure 4.3: Setup for the termination proof.
Pick a step of the algorithm where we walked an edge j connecting two nodes n1
and n2 in the direction of n2. This means that we run one iteration of the algorithm
on n1, and the subtree induced by n1 containing n2 has size S > ⌈2N
3 ⌉(see a scheme
in Figure 4.3). As a consequence, the whole subtree induced by n2 containing n1 has
size smaller than ⌊N
3 ⌋, as the two sum to N. Now, focus on the other two subtrees
induced by n2, i.e. the two not containing n1. Their sum has to be S −1, where the
−1 comes from n2 itself; this means that the biggest of them has to be ≤S −1 < S,
which means smaller than the biggest subtree of the previous step. Note that the
subtree induced by n2 and containing n1 cannot be the biggest, as otherwise all the
three subtrees would be < ⌊N
3 ⌋, which we have proven to be impossible above.
==PAGE:31==
4.2 The Karp-Rabin ﬁngerprint
21
Now we have proven that for each iteration of the algorithm, the size of the biggest
of the three subtrees A, B, C decreases by at least 1. This means that, in at most
N −⌈2N
3 ⌉steps, the algorithm will arrive in a node where the biggest of the subtrees
is below the biggest endpoint of I. Since the three subtrees cannot all have size below
I, at that point the biggest of the three subtrees will lie inside I.
□
4.2
The Karp-Rabin ﬁngerprint
Now, we have proven that there exists a good edge separator for any tree, that splits
the tree in two parts of at least one third of the nodes. Recall the interesting idea
of being able to recursively jump to the separator, and if our string lies below it, to
continue our search from there. To perform this check by just confronting the strings,
we might have to scan O(|pattern|) characters for each separator, and the number of
separators we have to scan might be O(log3 |nodes of the tree|) = O(log3 k) with k
the number of strings saved. We would like to have a constant time for each separator
to decide whether to continue from there or not.
The solution to this comes from a paper by Karp and Rabin (1987), who proposed
a hashing function for strings. For each string of any length, they propose a method
to compute a fingerprint for that string, to be originally used for matching real-time
streams of characters. They first compute the “binary representation” of the string
X = x1x2 . . . xn:
H(X) =
n
∑
i=1
xi2n−i
(4.1)
From this function, they suggest to compute the modulus to get a fingerprint in a
limited codomain:
Hp(X) = H(X)
mod p
(4.2)
Changing the prime number p causes the function to change, and the base 2 (in
general called σ) can be changed as well to get other alternatives. Among the many
hash functions for strings that we can construct, the Karp-Rabin family is particularly
interesting as it allows, having the hash value for a string Y = x1x2 . . . xn−1, to
compute the hash to a right-extension of such a string (e.g. X = x1x2 . . . xn−1xn) in
constant time per added character. In fact Equation 4.1 can be rewritten as:
H(X) = x1 · 2n−1 + x2 · 2n−2 + . . . + xn−1 · 21 + xn · 20
= xn + 2(xn−1 + 2(. . . + 2(x2 + 2 · x1) . . .))
= xn + 2 · H(Y )
(4.3)
==PAGE:32==
22
4 Improving Patricia trees
Substituting in Equation 4.2 and using the properties of the modulus we get:
Hp(X) = (xn + 2 · H(Y ))
mod p = (xn + 2 · (H(Y )
mod p))
mod p
= (xn + 2 · Hp(Y ))
mod p
(4.4)
In the same work, the authors introduce three algorithms to exploit these fin-
gerprints for string matching: the first algorithm calculates fingerprints for different
values of p. If all the calculated hashes are equal for two strings, then the strings are
said to match. A second algorithm computes just one fingerprint, but it compares
the stored and the candidate strings if they have the same hash value, to validate
the match. The third one is an enhancement of the second one, where a catastrophic
case is avoided by changing hash function at every false match (but gaining therefore
a substantial overhead).
In the following, the second of these approaches will be pursued. In fact, the first
one does not guarantee that the two strings that are compared are actually equal,
which we are interested in knowing for sure in a Patricia tree. The third one, on
the other hand, adds a substantial overhead, and since we are here considering static
data structures, we can be sure that the choice of the hash function has been made
already in the construction phase, and does not need to be adjusted.
This comes in handy, as it takes constant time to compare the hash value of two
strings. In the following this hash function will be used extensively; if not specified
otherwise, the Karp-Rabin fingerprints will use the same prime number and base for
the whole tree (p and σ above), therefore these numbers will not be explicitly inserted
as parameters.
4.3
Binary separator decomposition
The data structure here proposed is a recursive tree separator decomposition. Starting
from the full binary Patricia tree (i.e. the BIN version explained above, splitting on
the single bits of the ASCII representation of the strings), a good edge separator
is found (using the algorithm previously described in this chapter).
A new node
corresponding to it is set as a root of the new tree; in this node we save information
about the string that led to it in the original Patricia tree (note that this string
might be just a prefix of a string saved in the tree), i.e. its Karp-Rabin fingerprint
and its length. Then we proceed recursively, setting as left and right children the
nodes obtained from the subtree above the separator and from the subtree below the
separator (see pseudocode in Algorithm 4.2).
The algorithm creates one node for each edge of the tree (one edge is never pro-
cessed again), plus at most one node for each leaf, meaning O(k) nodes (with k size
of the initial Patricia tree) of constant size, excluding the space to store the original
strings.
At this point one might ask how the Karp-Rabin fingerprints are calculated on
such a binary tree, and how they are then used efficiently to match with the ones
==PAGE:33==
4.3 Binary separator decomposition
23
Algorithm 4.2 Obtaining the binary separator tree from the Patricia tree.
1: function SeparatorTree(Patricia tree T)
2:
n ←new node
3:
if numberOfNodes(T) > 1 then
4:
(s1, s2) ←FindEdgeSeparator(T)
5:
S ←stringLeadingTo(s2)
6:
n.fingerprint ←CalculateFingerprint(S)
7:
n.stringLength ←CalculateLength(S)
8:
T1, T2 ←SplitTreeOnSeparator(T, (s1, s2))
9:
n.leftChildren ←SeparatorTree(T1)
10:
n.rightChildren ←SeparatorTree(T2)
11:
else if there is a node in T and is a leaf then
12:
n.string ←string in the node in T
13:
end if
14:
return n
15: end function
Figure 4.4: Two steps of Algorithm 4.2. Note that different good separators are
possibe for each step.
H(x) represents the Karp-Rabin hash of the
string x.
==PAGE:34==
24
4 Improving Patricia trees
searched. In the following, three different options are implemented, benchmarked and
compared. A summary of the three methods is depicted in Figure 4.5.
Binary base
The first option is to use the binary base {0, 1} to calculate the
fingerprint. This means that we have to compute a modulus, a multiplication and a
sum (see Equation 4.4) for each bit of our strings. This is computationally expensive,
so we might want to do it all at once in the beginning of the search, in order to
be able to retrieve in constant time the value for the Karp-Rabin fingerprint during
the search phase. Therefore we compute all the fingerprints in constant time per bit,
saving them in memory in an array.
This approach needs a high number of operations, as they don’t depend on the
characters but on the single bits. Also, precomputing the fingerprint for each bit
of the searched pattern takes up time and space, and for long strings is not cache
efficient (as the fingerprints don’t fit in cache).
Figure 4.5: The three method illustrated to calculate the fingerprints.
Fingerprint on the go
A different approach is to feed to the Hp function the
characters instead, masking only the needed bits. Using this method, for example,
the Karp-Rabin fingerprint up to and including the bit 12 for the string aaa, which
in ASCII is 01100001 01100001 01100001, will be computed masking just the first
12 bits: 01100001 01100000. Note that this hash function is a variant of the Karp-
Rabin one. It will still hash the same string to the same value, and it will still use
different values for strings that have different bits up to the length of the string.
The only real difference is that we would not be able to distinguish the Karp-Rabin
fingerprint of the same string aaa until the bit 11, or until the bit 13 or 14, as the
0-bits do not make a difference when masked out. In this implementation this is not
an issue, as the length of the Karp-Rabin string is always kept besides the fingerprint.
==PAGE:35==
4.3 Binary separator decomposition
25
This alternative method saves computation time (one fingerprint requires around
1/8 of the computations of the previous alternative, as the calculations are byte-wise).
To try and save space as well, we can compute the Karp-Rabin fingerprints of the
pattern just when needed in the search phase. The issue then is how to save the
already computed fingerprints and exploit them as we have seen in Section 4.2. Since
we might jump up and down in the tree following the separators, we will need to
use prefixes of increasing or decreasing length for each step. This requires a dynamic
predecessor data structure, to be able to find the closest already computed fingerprint
and start from there. Such a data structure adds complexity and overhead (search
for predecessor, Karp-Rabin calculation and possibly an insertion in the predecessor
data structure) for every node visited in the search phase, using a space proportional
to the size of the searched pattern.
As an alternative, the implemented data structure computes the fingerprint from
scratch every time, being therefore inefficient in terms of computation, but efficient
in terms of cache and space.
Precomputed sample fingerprints
A third method tries to get the best of both
these options, and uses the modified Karp-Rabin method of the previous paragraph,
but precomputing some fingerprints. But instead of saving the fingerprints for all the
bits, it precomputes just the ones of the whole bytes. When one fingerprint is needed,
the algorithm adds the computation for the last bits (at most 7, which means one
byte), in constant time for each level.
Note that, by its nature, the Karp-Rabin fingerprint is an hash function, implying
that it is not a bijection. Take one node of the new tree that has a certain Karp-Rabin
fingerprint associated to it. There might exist a string in the tree that is completely
different from the one that originated the fingerprint, but still gives the same hash
value. This is a problem, as during the search phase we might match these two hash
values and proceed with the search in the subtree, even if the prefix string itself didn’t
match. To solve this problem, a check on the overall tree is needed, and rehashing
with a different sigma in case there exists such a string. Using a higher p reduces the
chances of this event.
4.3.1
Performances
Space
The data structure creates one separator node for each edge of the original
Patricia tree. Each separator node has constant size, and the edges of the original
tree are as many as the nodes minus one, which means O(k) with k number of saved
strings. Therefore, the overall space is again O(k) plus the space required by the
plain strings.
Asymptotic query time
Once this new data structure is in place, search is quite
simple. Starting from the root of the new data structure, we walk the tree downwards.
==PAGE:36==
26
4 Improving Patricia trees
For every node, we decide to proceed to the left or right depending on whether the
Karp-Rabin fingerprint for the pattern string matches the one saved in the node.
Once we get to a leaf, we can check the string to make sure it is equal to the searched
pattern, and in case return a positive match.
On one hand, this data structure can cut down dramatically the number of levels
for the search phase. For example, a very deep caterpillar-like Patricia tree would
require in the worst case a huge number of levels to be walked down; on the contrary,
after this transformation, the depth of the new tree would be O(log k) with k number
of stored strings.
On the other hand, though, in this tree we are always forced to reach the leaves
before we give an answer to the query. In fact, on each level, we have to descend both
if the fingerprint matches and if it doesn’t match.
This means that we will have to always scan O(log k) nodes. In case we use one of
the methods that precomputes the fingerprints, each node takes a constant time, but
we have to add the overhead to precompute, for a total query time of O(m + log k).
In case the fingerprint is computed on the go, in the worst case we might end up
with O(m · log k), which is usually not the case, as we will see in the not-so-bad
performances commented later.
Cache efficiency
The separator nodes have a constant size, so they fit in a constant
number of blocks, which means O( log k
B ) blocks of memory to be loaded, with k number
of memorized strings. We will need more I/O’s for the Karp-Rabin fingerprints; in
particular O( m
B ) for each level if we need to compute them on the go. Otherwise,
precomputing them would require O( m
B ) to be loaded; and an additional block for each
level will need to be loaded while descending the tree (from the array of precomputed
fingerprints).
ab long
ab short
gcta long
gcta short
words long
words short
BS {0, 1}
3.3% M/B
10.5 M/W
0.598 s
2.9% M/B
8.76 M/W
0.057 s
1.2% M/B
10.6 M/W
0.791 s
0.8% M/B
6.84 M/W
0.0086 s
7.4% M/B
11.4 M/W
0.937 s
6.8% M/B
9.97 M/W
0.116 s
BS char
4.9% M/B
20.0 M/W
0.514 s
6.0% M/B
16.9 M/W
0.042 s
9.5% M/B
22.9 M/W
0.387 s
11% M/B
10.8 M/W
0.0010 s
9.0% M/B
19.6 M/W
1.045 s
9.7% M/B
15.5 M/W
0.104 s
BS precom
11% M/B
10.5 M/W
0.170 s
11% M/B
8.76 M/W
0.015 s
6.9% M/B
10.9 M/W
0.379 s
5.3% M/B
7.14 M/W
0.0019 s
15% M/B
11.5 M/W
0.433 s
15% M/B
10.0 M/W
0.049 s
Table 4.1: Branch mispredictions (as a percentage of total branches, M/B; and for
each word searched, M/W) and running times (average of 10 runs) on
each of the six test files. The benchmarks are for the binary separator
trees with fingerprint on bits (BS {0, 1}), on characters computed on the
go (BS char), and on characters precomputed (BS precom).
==PAGE:37==
4.4 Non-binary separator decomposition
27
Branches and execution time
Let us now see some benchmarks for such a data
structure in Table 4.1. The benchmarks include the time and mispredictions of pre-
computing the fingerprints, when the solution requires it, as this is part of the search
phase.
The version using binary alphabet performs worse than the original BIN alterna-
tive in most of the benchmarks. It has branches easy to predict (although not easier
than the original binary), but more branches for each word, due to the fact that it
performs a number of operations that is proportional to the bits of the string. This
affects the running time as well, that is two to ten times longer than the original
binary Patricia tree. The second solution performs much better in terms of time, in
most of the cases. Computing the fingerprint on the go, though, causes the number
of branch mispredictions to blow up, as for any node we have to perform a lot of
computations. The third solution outperforms the original one in one of the bench-
marks, and in general performs better than the previous ones. But it still has a lot of
mispredictions, due to the calculations that are still needed in each level to compute
the bitwise fingerprint from the precomputed ones.
Handling the single bytes seems better than descending to the bit level. This
naturally leads to think if the same separator approach could be applied to the literal
version of the Patricia tree as well. This is what will be shown in the next section.
4.4
Non-binary separator decomposition
If we want to transpose the separator theorem to the non-binary (LET) trie, we have
to revise some of the bounds given in the previous sections. In particular, we can no
longer guarantee such a powerful bound as the
[
⌊N
3 ⌋, ⌈2N
3 ⌉
]
one. Tracing back to the
proof of Section 4.1.1, this bound was proven using the fact that when splitting the
tree in a node, the other nodes belonged to one of the three subtrees induced by that
node. But in case the tree is not binary, the number of children can go up to the size of
the alphabet, effectively bounding the number of edges of a node to D ≤|Σ|+1. The
strongest bound that we can guarantee, then, is that we can split into two subtrees
lying in I = [⌊N
D ⌋, ⌈N(D−1)
D
⌉], which is way weaker than the previous bound1. Still,
the solution is worth applying (for small alphabets, the bound sounds reasonable).
The solution precomputes the Karp-Rabin fingerprints as in the best performing of
the previous solutions.
Analyzing this solution further, we realize that we reach the worst case of these
bounds when the children of the separator have all the same size, and the same size of
the subtree above the separator as well. In this very bad case, we would pick all the
1We could prove a slightly better bound, i.e. that there exists an edge separator e = (n1, n2)
such that the sizes of the subtrees it splits lie in
I =
[
⌊N
M ⌋, ⌈N(M −1)
M
⌉
]
with M = 1 + max(degree(n1), degree(n2)), but the worst case would not be improved.
==PAGE:38==
28
4 Improving Patricia trees
edges connecting the separator to each of its children, as subsequent separators. This
means that we would span them all before being able to continue on the following
level, and this means having the depth of our new separator tree blowing in this
particular node. to solve this problem we can think of a mixed solution, that just
builds up the separator structure on the original Patricia tree, and allows to still walk
down the tree normally. Say, for example, that for every level we either jump down to
a lower level of the tree (exploiting the separator), or go down one level. This adds a
constant overhead for each level, but saves time and branches in most of the searches,
and prevents worst cases like the one described in the previous lines.
Space
For the pure version, as in the binary case, each separator node has constant
size, and the separator nodes are O(k) with k number of saved strings. Once again,
the space for the data structure is O(k) plus the space required by the strings. The
mixed version is built over the original Patricia tree, adding a constant overhead for
each node (the separator conditions and link), meaning again O(k) space.
Asymptotic query time
For the pure version, as in the binary case, O(log k)
levels are scanned in linear time, plus a precomputing time of O(m). The mixed
version uses, in the worst case, O(m) step, plus O(m) time for the precomputation.
Cache efficiency
In the worst case (no jump is possible), the mixed version per-
forms asymptotically just as the normal Patricia tree (one more block has to be loaded
for every node to descend because of the precomputed fingerprint, but this is domi-
nated by the memory accesses of the original version). Therefore, the total blocks to
be loaded are O( m·|Σ|
B
).
The pure version has to scan O(log k) levels of constant size, meaning O( log k
B )
blocks. For the Karp-Rabin fingerprints to be loaded, we need between O(m/B) and
O( m·log k
B
) blocks, depending on the memory size.
Branches and execution time
Let us show the benchmarks for these two solu-
tions in Table 4.2.
In terms of time, both these solutions are better than the ones shown in the
previous section in almost all the test files. In some cases the branch predictions are
a bit worse than the ones obtained in the version using binary alphabet, but this
difference is not enough to prefer the binary implementations. If compared with the
original literal versions, we witness here a sensibly lower number of branches for each
word, and a much easier predictability. The running times are close to the original
Patricia trees, outperforming one of them in a specific setup.
Despite the lower number of branch mispredictions, many other factors contribute
to slowing the execution of these solutions. Among these, the number of operations
needed to precompute the Karp-Rabin fingerprints and the number of levels of the
tree, that might still higher than the original for very balanced trees. The following
==PAGE:39==
4.5 Tree layering
29
section will discuss an alternative method that tries to patch the latter of these
problems.
ab long
ab short
gcta long
gcta short
words long
words short
LS mixed
3.7% M/B
3.98 M/W
0.175 s
3.8% M/B
3.55 M/W
0.016 s
2.2% M/B
3.35 M/W
0.359 s
2.3% M/B
3.03 M/W
0.0018 s
6.6% M/B
3.40 M/W
0.388 s
7.4% M/B
3.29 M/W
0.043 s
LS pure
3.0% M/B
2.17 M/W
0.164 s
3.3% M/B
2.16 M/W
0.014 s
1.6% M/B
2.26 M/W
0.372 s
1.8% M/B
2.29 M/W
0.0016 s
3.5% M/B
2.37 M/W
0.454 s
4.0% M/B
2.41 M/W
0.049 s
Table 4.2: Branch mispredictions (as a percentage of total branches, M/B; and for
each word searched, M/W) and running times (average of 10 runs) on
each of the six test files. The benchmarks are for the separator solutions
obtained from the literal version, in the pure form (LS pure) or allowing
normal descending (LS mixed).
4.5
Tree layering
Another idea to try and improve the performances of Patricia trees in terms of branch
mispredictions is the tree clustering. A tree clustering algorithm (as in Alstrup and
Rauhe (2002) and before in Frederickson (1997)) takes a tree as input, and outputs
a set of subtrees of the original tree, covering all the original nodes and intersecting
in some boundary node (at most two for each subtree).
Starting from the Patricia tree, we can apply a tree clustering algorithm recur-
sively, and for each iteration restrict our search to a smaller subtree, until we get
to a single node, where we can try to match the string with the one queried. This
algorithm is implicitly building a new data structure that resembles a tree, where the
root stands for the whole Patricia tree, and walking one edge means restricting the
search to a single cluster (i.e. subtree) of the tree the parent node stands for.
Once again as in the previous part of this chapter, the problem is how to find out
in constant time whether we can restrict the search to a cluster or not. One single step
of the clustering algorithm could generate subtrees on many different levels, starting
from any depth; for each of these we might need to scan O(k) characters to check the
string in the traditional way. We might then think to use the Karp-Rabin fingerprint
as in the previous discussion. But thinking again, this still doesn’t solve completely
the problem: for one path in the tree that leads to a leaf, we might have many clusters
that have their starting node in it. And we will have to find the deepest of them to
make sure we are exploiting this construction. Also, every cluster could require a
Karp-Rabin fingerprint for a different prefix of the pattern to be compared.
Alternatively, we take a different approach. In one clustering iteration, we force
all the clusters to start at the same level, so that we can compare the pattern with
==PAGE:40==
30
4 Improving Patricia trees
Figure 4.6: An example step of the non-implemented clustering solution. The gray
nodes are the boundary nodes; the following steps would process sep-
arately the subtrees obtained by the clustering, and split their nodes
recursively.
them using just one Karp-Rabin fingerprint. This effectively means that we slice the
tree at a certain depth, and take all the subtrees having their root at that level to
be the clusters. All the leaves lying at that level or above will be taken as special
clusters.
To make the search faster, these clusters are then indexed in the Karp-Rabin
fingerprint of their root, and saved in an array. This array will be the main part of
a node of a new tree-like data structure. In the search phase we can then start from
the root of the new tree, and descend the data structure by accessing the array in
the index corresponding to the Karp-Rabin fingerprint of the searched pattern (see
Figure 4.7).
Figure 4.7: One iteration of the levelizing algorithm. The gray node did not exist
in the original Patricia tree, but had to be created to make sure the
string-depth of the nodes at the same level is the same.
We proceed with this iteration until we get to have just leaves in one layer, as
made clear in Algorithm 4.3.
Note that the array mentioned above has to be as long as the highest possible
Karp-Rabin fingerprint value, i.e. p, the prime value used in the calculation formula
==PAGE:41==
4.5 Tree layering
31
presented Section 4.2. Also, we have to guarantee that there is no collision in the
fingerprints that need to be saved in one array; this effectively means that we cannot
save, for example, p nodes in an array of length p, otherwise our probability of having
no collisions is very low. We need to have less nodes saved in the array, up to a
certain threshold (hence the second parameter in Algorithm 4.3).
The solution implemented takes threshold = √p, making sure that threshold ≥
|Σ| with Σ alphabet of the strings. This way we can guarantee that:
E(#collisions) = E

∑
s1̸=s2
{
1
if Hp(s1) = Hp(s2)
0
otherwise


=
∑
s1̸=s2
E
({
1
if Hp(s1) = Hp(s2)
0
otherwise
)
=
∑
s1̸=s2
Pr(Hp(s1) = Hp(s2))
=
(threshold
2
)
· 1
p ≤threshold2
2
· 1
p = 1
2
(4.5)
where s1 and s2 are strings, and the Karp-Rabin fingerprint is assumed to be uniformly
distributed. If the expected number of collisions is smaller than one half, then we will
have no collisions after a constant number of rehashings. The price to pay for this is
a blow up in space, that will be proportional to p for each node. Also, recomputing
the fingerprint means that we will have different σ and p for each array and node;
meaning that we will not be able to precompute the fingerprints, but we will be forced
to calculate them on the go.
Space
Each node takes O(p) space, as that is the space the array in each node takes.
Now, the number of nodes of the tree requires some calculations.
For each internal node, we have a number of children in [lb, threshold] with lb =
threshold
|Σ|
: the upper bound is set by the algorithm that builds the tree. The lower
bound is due to the fact that, if the algorithm did not go down one level, this means
that it would have more than threshold nodes on that level. But from one level of
a literal Patricia Tree to the following, the number of nodes can grow at most of a
factor of |Σ|, hence the limit.
The leaves can have as few as 2 strings saved in them, and again up to threshold.
Therefore, being k the number of strings stored in the tree, the number of nodes is:
Leaves + Internal ≤k
2 +
⌈loglb k⌉
∑
i=0
lbi = k
2 + lb1+⌈loglb k⌉< k
2 + lb2+loglb k
= k
2 + k · lb2 = O
(k · threshold2
|Σ|2
)
= O
(k · p
|Σ|2
)
(4.6)
==PAGE:42==
32
4 Improving Patricia trees
Algorithm 4.3 Getting the levelized variant of Patricia tree. The character-depth
is defined as the number of characters of the string leading to a node (greater than
or equal to the node depth).
1: function LevelizeTree(Patricia tree T, int threshold)
2:
n ←new node
3:
i ←0
4:
L, S ←∅
5:
while |L| + |S| < threshold do
6:
L ←leaves of T at character-depth i or above
7:
S ←nodes of T at character-depth i
8:
i ←i + 1
9:
end while
10:
n.stringLength ←i −2
11:
▷undo the increment and get back to the level that was below threshold
12:
σ, p ←findKarpRabinParameters(L, S)
13:
n.sigma ←σ
14:
n.prime ←p
15:
for child ∈L do
16:
n.childArray[KarpRabin(child, σ, p)] ←child
17:
end for
18:
for child ∈S do
19:
R ←LevelizeTree(subtreeWithRoot(child), threshold)
20:
n.childArray[KarpRabin(child, σ, p)] ←R
21:
end for
22:
return n
23: end function
using the fact that lb ≥1. This means that, considering p and Σ constants, the space
is linear in k. But such constants can make the space really big for this solution.
Asymptotic query time
For each level, a Karp-Rabin fingerprint has to be com-
puted, so in the worst case m characters will need to be processed. The number of
levels is O (loglb k), as seen above, meaning O (m · loglb k) time for a query.
Cache efficiency
The levels to be scanned are O (loglb k), and each node takes
O(p) space. This means O
(
p·loglb k
B
+ m·loglb k
B
)
blocks, where the second part of the
sum is due to the Karp-Rabin fingerprints.
==PAGE:43==
4.5 Tree layering
33
Branches and execution time
Regarding performances (see Table 4.3), this alter-
native is slower than the fastest previous one, and causes more branch mispredictions.
We can still appreciate, though, how the branch predictions are substantially better
than the ones obtained in the original Patricia tree implementations.
ab long
ab short
gcta long
gcta short
words long
words short
LEV
5.5% M/B
7.44 M/W
0.182 s
5.4% M/B
6.78 M/W
0.016 s
1.3% M/B
4.53 M/W
0.420 s
1.6% M/B
3.81 M/W
0.0021 s
8.8% M/B
6.25 M/W
0.372 s
8.6% M/B
5.68 M/W
0.041 s
Table 4.3: Branch mispredictions (as a percentage of total branches, M/B; and for
each word searched, M/W) and running times (average of 10 runs) on
each of the six test files.
The benchmarks are for the levelized data
structure.
==PAGE:44==
34
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER5
Hybrid data
structures
Chapter 4 showed two different solutions that, although more efficient in avoiding
branch mispredictions, still performed worse than the original literal Patricia tree.
The new data structures, though, have different characteristics and behavior, and
their inefficiencies come from different factors.
The separator solution is very good in cutting off parts of the tree in the beginning
of the search. Later on, though, it might take some time for it to find the final leaf to
compare with the searched pattern. On the other hand, the levelized data structure
might uncompress some paths in the upper parts of the tree, and take some time to
get down many levels (especially if the degree for each internal node is high); but
once close to the leaves, it’s very efficient in skipping the last levels, that are basically
compacted into one array.
Two attempts to get the best of these two data structures are shown in the fol-
lowing; the benchmarks for them will be analyzed in the final section of the chapter.
Figure 5.1: A schema of the naive string routing solution.
==PAGE:46==
36
5 Hybrid data structures
5.1
Naive string routing
As noted above, the two data structures behave in a quite opposite way. The separator
one goes rapidly down deep trees, while the levelized one collapses the last levels into
one. This seems to suggest that longer strings are faster to be found in the first
version, and shorter strings in the second one. To confirm or negate this idea, the
first hybrid data structure has been implemented (see Figure 5.1).
For this solution, both the levelized and the separator trees are constructed. Dur-
ing the search phase, strings longer than the average are redirected to be searched
in the second one, whereas shorter strings are redirected to the first. Of course this
data structure uses much more space (the sum of the single ones), and both trees
have some nodes that will never be visited. But despite the space inefficiencies, we
are interested in seeing its branch and time performances, that will be benchmarked
in the last section of the chapter.
Space
The data structure requires a constant space plus the two data structures
explained, meaning a total space of O
(
k·p2
|Σ|2 + k
)
.
Asymptotic query time
In the worst case, the time is still the one used by the
worse performing of the two data structures, i.e. O
(
m · log threshold
|Σ|
k
)
.
Cache efficiency
Once again, the worst number of blocks to be loaded is the worst
case of the two data structure here blended.
5.2
Threshold leaves indexing
This data structure is based on the pure literal separator data structure (LS pure).
The only difference is that when some node of the tree has less than a certain number
of leaves, that node is transformed into a node of the levelized version, therefore
compacting the subtrees into just one node containing one array of strings, indexed
in their fingerprint (see Figure 5.2).
This allows the search phase to skip a lot of levels in the first phases, and just
bucket down when too few leaves are left in the current subtree. Taking the good of
both the initial data structures, this solution does not outperform one of them, as
seen in the following.
Space
The leaf nodes are created when below the separator in the original tree
there are no more than threshold leaves. Also, on average the leaves have not less
than threshold
2
strings, otherwise it would mean that.
The overall separator structure takes at most O(k) space. The leaves all in all are
keeping k strings.
==PAGE:47==
5.3 Wrap up
37
Figure 5.2: A schema of the second hybrid solution.
Asymptotic query time
The total query time requires O(m) time to compute the
Karp-Rabin fingerprints, O(log k) to descend the tree and constant time to address
the last level.
Cache efficiency
The separator nodes to be loaded from memory use O( log k
B )
blocks.
For the Karp-Rabin fingerprints, we need to load between O(m/B) and
O( m·log k
B
) blocks, depending on the memory size.
The last level needs to load O( p
B ) blocks from memory.
5.3
Wrap up
As displayed in Table 5.1, the performances for the two hybrid solutions are good but
not topping the charts. The naive one outperforms its two originating data structures
in some setups, but in the case of regular English words it takes longer to answer the
queries. It also uses a lot of space, which makes its use unfeasible, but proves us right
in the hypothesis that inspired its design.
Noticeably, the second hybrid solution achieves a (almost) constant number of
mispredictions for each word, which was one of the issues of the original literal Patricia
tree implementations. This is a remarkable benchmark; reducing the execution time
would make it a very competitive alternative to original Patricia trees
Time-wise, the best solutions are still the initial Patricia trees, in particular the
literal one using binary search. The time performances for the second hybrid solution
seem to get worse with longer words, which leads to blame the Karp-Rabin fingerprint
computation for that. In particular, as explained above, this solution forces us to
compute fingerprints using two different H functions, one for the main structure of
the tree, and one for the last level, causing an overhead in each search to be performed.
==PAGE:48==
38
5 Hybrid data structures
ab long
ab short
gcta long
gcta short
words long
words short
BIN
1.7% M/B
2.00 M/W
0.134 s
2.1% M/B
2.00 M/W
0.007 s
0.8% M/B
2.00 M/W
0.201 s
0.9% M/B
2.02 M/W
0.0007 s
2.4% M/B
2.04 M/W
0.532 s
3.0% M/B
2.04 M/W
0.045 s
LET lin
10% M/B
10.5 M/W
0.126 s
11% M/B
7.83 M/W
0.006 s
14% M/B
9.02 M/W
0.163 s
15% M/B
5.81 M/W
0.0005 s
7.0% M/B
9.49 M/W
0.393 s
8.2% M/B
7.93 M/W
0.039 s
LET bin
8.5% M/B
9.48 M/W
0.138 s
8.6% M/B
7.78 M/W
0.008 s
12% M/B
9.59 M/W
0.172 s
14% M/B
6.33 M/W
0.0005 s
18% M/B
15.9 M/W
0.385 s
19% M/B
12.7 M/W
0.038 s
BS {0, 1}
3.3% M/B
10.5 M/W
0.598 s
2.9% M/B
8.76 M/W
0.057 s
1.2% M/B
10.6 M/W
0.791 s
0.8% M/B
6.84 M/W
0.0086 s
7.4% M/B
11.4 M/W
0.937 s
6.8% M/B
9.97 M/W
0.116 s
BS char
4.9% M/B
20.0 M/W
0.514 s
6.0% M/B
16.9 M/W
0.042 s
9.5% M/B
22.9 M/W
0.387 s
11% M/B
10.8 M/W
0.0010 s
9.0% M/B
19.6 M/W
1.045 s
9.7% M/B
15.5 M/W
0.104 s
BS precom
11% M/B
10.5 M/W
0.170 s
11% M/B
8.76 M/W
0.015 s
6.9% M/B
10.9 M/W
0.379 s
5.3% M/B
7.14 M/W
0.0019 s
15% M/B
11.5 M/W
0.433 s
15% M/B
10.0 M/W
0.049 s
LS mixed
3.7% M/B
3.98 M/W
0.175 s
3.8% M/B
3.55 M/W
0.016 s
2.2% M/B
3.35 M/W
0.359 s
2.3% M/B
3.03 M/W
0.0018 s
6.6% M/B
3.40 M/W
0.388 s
7.4% M/B
3.29 M/W
0.043 s
LS pure
3.0% M/B
2.17 M/W
0.164 s
3.3% M/B
2.16 M/W
0.014 s
1.6% M/B
2.26 M/W
0.372 s
1.8% M/B
2.29 M/W
0.0016 s
3.5% M/B
2.37 M/W
0.454 s
4.0% M/B
2.41 M/W
0.049 s
LEV
5.5% M/B
7.44 M/W
0.182 s
5.4% M/B
6.78 M/W
0.016 s
1.3% M/B
4.53 M/W
0.420 s
1.6% M/B
3.81 M/W
0.0021 s
8.8% M/B
6.25 M/W
0.372 s
8.6% M/B
5.68 M/W
0.041 s
HY naive
6.5% M/B
8.74 M/W
0.171 s
6.7% M/B
7.87 M/W
0.011 s
3.0% M/B
7.70 M/W
0.351 s
2.7% M/B
6.37 M/W
0.0015 s
12% M/B
10.1 M/W
0.406 s
12% M/B
8.60 M/W
0.046 s
HY 2-lev
2.4% M/B
3.01 M/W
0.213 s
2.6% M/B
3.01 M/W
0.019 s
0.9% M/B
3.00 M/W
0.570 s
1.0% M/B
3.31 M/W
0.0026 s
3.9% M/B
3.14 M/W
0.463 s
4.3% M/B
3.15 M/W
0.052 s
Table 5.1: Branch mispredictions (as a percentage of total predictions, and for each
pattern searched) and running times in seconds (average of 10 runs) on
each of the six test files, for the solutions shown in the thesis. Underlined,
the three best performing algorithm for each benchmark and for each file.
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER6
Conclusions and
future work
Patricia trees suffer from branch mispredictions. A sensible percentage of the predic-
tions go wrong, up to 18%, and up to 15 for an average search. It is not straightforward
to solve this problem and improve branch predictions, though. Since the techniques
used in literature have no obvious way of being applied to the generic Patricia tree,
it is necessary to try and manipulate the very basic skeleton of the data structure.
Considering binary Patricia trees results in poor performances, due to the need
to process more bits; trying to combine a recursive separator tree from such data
structures with the Karp-Rabin hashing results in poor performances as well, therefore
this doesn’t seem like a feasible alternative to improve Patricia trees performances in
terms of time and branch predictions.
On the other hand, the separator data structure built on the literal version of
Patricia trees has good performances in both branches and time. The branch mispre-
dictions are remarkably almost constant, but the time fails to be competitive with
the original Patricia tree implementation. An alternative version keeps the Patricia
tree structure in parallel with the separators; it performs slightly better but it adds
complexity and still does not outperform the original implementations.
A totally different way of altering Patricia trees is to cluster their nodes level-
wise, effectively compacting many levels of the tree into one, and then exploiting once
again the Karp-Rabin fingerprint to index the children of a node. Such a solution
outperforms the original Patricia tree in at least one of the tested setups, both in
terms of time and in terms of mispredictions for each search. This solution uses too
much space, though, and requires many Karp-Rabin fingerprint computations.
The two solutions (clustered/levelized and separator literal) are then combined
into two hybrid data structures. One of them confirms that shorter strings are faster
to find in the clustered/levelized data structure than in the separator one, and longer
strings behave the opposite. The other hybrid version tries to plug the nodes from
the clustered/levelized solution into the lowest levels of the separator tree, obtaining
one of the best solution in terms of misprediction, in all the setups. Unfortunately,
the running time is still slower than the original one.
All in all, the solution presented achieve some very good bounds in terms of branch
==PAGE:50==
40
6 Conclusions and future work
mispredictions. As already highlighted multiple times, this is not enough to get more
performing data structures, as many other factors contribute to the overall running
time. Even if the solutions presented are slower than the original Patricia trees, there
are good possibilities to improve them, and get some alternative data structures that
cut down the branch mispredictions.
The work in this thesis is all but self contained. A lot more could be done in
improving the data structures presented, as well as trying new techniques to tackle
the branch misprediction problem in Patricia trees.
Besides the new data structure described, an interesting attempt would be to try
and improve the branch predictions for each node of the original Patricia trees. An
alternative to binary search that involves less unpredictable branches would affect
significantly the running time of the search query.
Another idea, focusing on the data structures explained in this work, is to try and
improve the Karp-Rabin fingerprint calculation. Right now that is a bottleneck of
the computations, as it computes multiple times modulus operations (known to be
slower than normal arithmetic operations). That could speed up the search in most
of the data structures here described.
The final data structure presented in section 5.2 can also be improved, for example
taking into account the number of leaves instead of the total amount of nodes (which
might become quite different in case of big deep trees). In parallel, one of the reasons
why this data structure performed poorly is the need to calculate a different fingerprint
for the leaf nodes. This became necessary because of the need for rehashing that
might occur in such nodes. It implies that we need to compute a different fingerprint
from the ones used for the separator structure, and we cannot know the σ and p to
calculate them before we reach the leaf node itself. Finding a way of having just one
Karp-Rabin function to be computed would cut down the time used to search, but
this is not an easy issue to solve.
==PAGE:51==
Bibliography
Aggarwal, Alok and Jeffrey S. Vitter (1988). “The Input/Output Complexity of Sort-
ing and Related Problems”. In: Commun. ACM 31.9, pages 1116–1127. doi: 10.
1145/48529.48535.
Alstrup, Stephen and Theis Rauhe (2002). “Improved Labeling Scheme for Ancestor
Queries”. In: Proceedings of the Thirteenth Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on
Discrete Algorithms. SODA ’02. San Francisco, California: Society for Industrial
and Applied Mathematics, pages 947–953.
Brodal, Gerth Stølting and Gabriel Moruz (2005). “Tradeoffs Between Branch Mispre-
dictions and Comparisons for Sorting Algorithms”. In: Lecture Notes in Computer
Science. Edited by Frank Dehne, Alejandro Lopez-Ortiz, and Jörg-Rüdiger Sack,
pages 385–395. doi: 10.1007/11534273_34.
— (2006). “Skewed Binary Search Trees”. In: Proceedings of the 14th Conference on
Annual European Symposium - Volume 14. ESA’06. Zurich, Switzerland: Springer-
Verlag, pages 708–719. doi: 10.1007/11841036_63.
Carmean, Doug (2002). The Intel Pentium 4 Processor - University of California San
Diego. url: http://cseweb.ucsd.edu/classes/wi02/cse240/carmean.pdf
(visited on May 27, 2016).
Dato, Domenico et al. (2016). “Fast Ranking with Additive Ensembles of Oblivious
and Non-Oblivious Regression Trees”. In: Acm Transactions on Information Sys-
tems 35.2, a15. doi: 10.1145/2987380.
Dwyl (github) (2017). A text file containing 479k English words for fast search auto-
completion / autosuggestion. url: https://github.com/dwyl/english-words
(visited on May 27, 2017).
Edelkamp, Stefan (2010). “Patricia Tree (NIST)”. In: Dictionary of Algorithms and
Data Structures [online]. Edited by Vreda Pieterse and Paul E. Black. url: https:
//www.nist.gov/dads/HTML/patriciatree.html (visited on May 27, 2017).
Edelkamp, Stefan and Armin Weiß (2016). “BlockQuicksort: How Branch Mispredic-
tions don’t affect Quicksort”. In: CoRR abs/1604.06697.
Elmasry, Amr and Jyrki Katajainen (2012). “Lean programs, branch mispredictions,
and sorting”. In: Lecture Notes in Computer Science (including Subseries Lecture
Notes in Artificial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics) 7288. Edited
by Evangelos Kranakis, Danny Krizanc, and Flaminia Luccio, pages 119–130. doi:
10.1007/978-3-642-30347-0_14.
==PAGE:52==
42
Bibliography
Elmasry, Amr, Jyrki Katajainen, and Max Stenmark (2012). “Branch mispredictions
don’t affect mergesort”. In: Lecture Notes in Computer Science (including Sub-
series Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics)
7276. Edited by Ralf Klasing, pages 160–171. doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-30850-
5_15.
Frederickson, Greg N. (1997). “Ambivalent Data Structures for Dynamic 2-Edge-
Connectivity and K Smallest Spanning Trees”. In: SIAM Journal on Computing
26.2, pages 484–538. doi: 10.1137/S0097539792226825.
Frigo, Matteo et al. (1999). “Cache-Oblivious Algorithms”. In: Proceedings of the 40th
Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science. FOCS ’99. Washington,
DC, USA: IEEE Computer Society, pages 285–.
Hennessy, John L. and David A. Patterson (2011). Computer Architecture, Fifth Edi-
tion: A Quantitative Approach. 5th. San Francisco, CA, USA: Morgan Kaufmann
Publishers Inc.
Hoare, C. A. R. (1961). “Algorithm 64: Quicksort”. In: Commun. ACM 4.7, pages 321–.
doi: 10.1145/366622.366644.
Intel (2016). Intel 64 and IA-32 Architectures Optimization Reference Manual. Order
Number: 248966-033. url: http://www.intel.com/content/dam/www/public/
us/en/documents/manuals/64-ia-32-architectures-optimization-manual.
pdf (visited on May 27, 2017).
Kaligosi, Kanela and Peter Sanders (2006). “How Branch Mispredictions Affect Quick-
sort”. In: Lecture Notes in Computer Science 4168. Edited by Yossi Azar and
Thomas Erlebach, pages 780–791. doi: 10.1007/11841036_69.
Karp, Richard M. and Michael O. Rabin (1987). “Efficient randomized pattern match-
ing algorithms”. In: Ibm Journal of Research and Development 31.2, pages 249–
260. doi: 10.1147/rd.312.0249.
Lipton, Richard J. and Robert Endre Tarjan (1979). “A Separator Theorem for Planar
Graphs”. In: SIAM Journal on Applied Mathematics 36.2, pages 177–189. doi:
10.1137/0136016.
Malishevsky, Alexey et al. (-). Dynamic Branch Prediction, Oregon State University.
url: http://web.engr.oregonstate.edu/~benl/Projects/branch_pred/
(visited on May 27, 2017).
Morrison, Donald R. (1968). “PATRICIA - Practical Algorithm To Retrieve Informa-
tion Coded in Alphanumeric”. In: J. ACM 15.4, pages 514–534. doi: 10.1145/
321479.321481.
Nethercote, Nicholas and Julian Seward (2007). “Valgrind: A Framework for Heavy-
weight Dynamic Binary Instrumentation”. In: Proceedings of the 28th ACM SIG-
PLAN Conference on Programming Language Design and Implementation. PLDI
’07. Code version 3.12.0 from http://valgrind.org/. San Diego, California,
USA: ACM, pages 89–100. doi: 10.1145/1250734.1250746.
Norvig, Peter (2002). Teach Yourself Programming in Ten Years. url: http : / /
norvig.com/21-days.html#answers (visited on May 8, 2017).
==PAGE:53==
Bibliography
43
Patterson, David A. and John L. Hennessy (2013). Computer Organization and De-
sign, Fifth Edition: The Hardware/Software Interface. 5th. San Francisco, CA,
USA: Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc.
Sanders, Peter and Sebastian Winkel (2004). “Super scalar sample sort”. In: Lecture
Notes in Computer Science 3221. Edited by S. Albers and T. Radzik, pages 784–
796.
Scott, Colin (2012). Latency Numbers Every Programmer Should Know By Year.
Mantained until August 2016. url: https://people.eecs.berkeley.edu/~rcs/
research/interactive_latency.html (visited on May 8, 2017).
Skadron, Kevin, Margaret Martonosi, and Douglas W. Clark (2000). “A Taxonomy
of Branch Mispredictions, and Alloyed Prediction As a Robust Solution to Wrong-
History Mispredictions”. In: Proceedings of the 2000 International Conference on
Parallel Architectures and Compilation Techniques. PACT ’00. Washington, DC,
USA: IEEE Computer Society, pages 199–.
==PAGE:54==
