==PAGE:1==
Master Thesis
Carbide transformations in centrifugally cast high 
temperature steels
Chiara Tibollo
June 2017
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Section of Materials and Surface Engineering
Nils Koppels Allé
Building 404
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone (+45) 45 25 19 60
http://www.mek.dtu.dk
Title:
Carbide Transformations in Centrifugally Cast High Temperature Steels
Project:
Master Thesis (30 ECTS)
Project period:
January 2017 - July 2017
Author:
Chiara Tibollo, MSc student (s155268). Materials and Manufacturing
Engineering, DTU
Supervisors:
John Hald, Professor. Section of Materials and Surface Engineering,
Department of Mechanical Engineering, DTU
Irina Fedorova, PhD student. Section of Materials and Surface
Engineering, Department of Mechanical Engineering, DTU
Frank Nießen, PhD student. The Danish Hydrocarbon Research and
Technology Centre, DTU
==PAGE:3==
Ever tried. Ever failed. No matter. Try again. Fail again. Fail better.
– Samuel Beckett
to Fabrizio for his love and support through this journey
==PAGE:4==
ABSTRACT
The aim of this thesis is to characterize and follow the evolution of the microstructure
of a centrifugally cast high temperature austenitic stainless steel, namely the HK40
alloy, adopted for production of ammonia, carbon monoxide and, among others, hy-
drogen, in steam reformer furnaces tubes, as Haldor Topsøe reformers. The main fo-
cus is to provide a better understanding of thermodynamics and kinetics of carbides
formation and transformations in the alloy. A parallel investigation is carried out on
another centrifugally cast high temperature austenitic stainless steel adopted for the
same applications, in order to support and conﬁrm the ﬁndings for the HK40 alloy, but
being a Nb micro-alloyed steel, it presents a more complex microstructure, less easy to
characterize.
The ﬁrst part of the project encompasses a series of techniques aimed at characteriz-
ing the microstructure of the as-cast material and its evolution with ageing at two dif-
ferent temperatures, 850, 950 ◦C. Light Optical Microscopy (LOM), Scanning Electron
Microscopy (SEM), Energy Dispersive X-ray Spectroscopy (EDS) and X-ray Diffraction
(XRD), as well as hardness testing are adopted for the analysis purposes on both as-cast
and aged materials. The results of the aforementioned material characterization give a
good representation of the microstructure thermodynamics and some insights into the
kinetics governing the formation and transformation of carbides. The microstructure
consists of a dendritic network of precipitates in a homogeneous matrix. The second
phase present in the as-cast material is conﬁrmed to be Cr-rich from EDS measure-
ments, as expected from literature [1, 2, 1, 3], even though the XRD analysis does not
give any support to this claim, due to inadequacy of the technique considering a ﬁx
i
==PAGE:5==
ii
scattering angle. The material presents, indeed, crystallography orientations, which
are far from being random, but have a strong preferred orientation (texture), due to
directional solidiﬁcation and dendritic ﬁnal microstructure.
The characterization performed on the aged materials shows the presence of a new
precipitate within the matrix, which is proven to be Cr-rich from the EDS analysis.
Nevertheless, EDS does not provide conclusive results with regard to characterization
of the secondary precipitates, revealed during the microstructural investigation with
LOM and SEM. They are found to be also Cr-rich, leading to assume that this is the
typical secondary carbide described in literature, but no understanding is provided
on how this intra-dendritic carbide relates to the primary inter-dendritic one. Image
analysis is then performed for gathering more information about this subject, but no
particular remarks can be made.
The last part of the project covers a thermodynamic modelling of solidiﬁcation for
the HK40 alloy with Thermo-Calc software, and tries to evaluate the goodness of a
moving boundary model (with Dictra Module in Thermo-Calc) as compared to Scheil-
Gulliver model of solidiﬁcation and an equilibrium calculation. The conclusions seem
to indicate that Scheil model is actually quite good for simulating solidiﬁcation of the
alloy, and only towards end of solidiﬁcation starts to fail due to its mathematical for-
mulation. Nonetheless, it is a good mean to determine the phases present upon solidi-
ﬁcation, while after solidiﬁcation, it is not able to take into account solid state diffusion,
which can indeed been considered in Dictra, where a moving boundary model is ap-
plied and gives a good understanding of how the primary carbides form from the liq-
uid in the inter-dendritic region once the austenite has solidiﬁed. The Cr and C proﬁles
give a good estimation of the amount of alloying element available in the austenite be-
fore and after solidiﬁcation, and they are actually comparable with the same quantities
predicted with Scheil, but close to the interface between austenite and primary carbide,
the possible formation of a PFZ is detected and this prediction is also supported by the
experimental material characterization of the aged material.
==PAGE:6==
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
First of all, I would like to thank John Hald, for giving me the opportunity to work with
him at such an interesting project and for being an exceptional supervisor. I couldn’t
hope for anyone better. Thank you for your patience and kindness but most of all for
your special guidance throughout all the months we have been working together. A
special thanks to Irina Fedorova, for being always supportive and available when I
needed it the most. Thank you for all the good advice about material characterization,
working with you has been a really valuable experience for learning how to charac-
terize a material. A very special thanks to Frank Nießen, for being so nice and patient
with me and for being always present when I needed advice about almost everything.
You have been really helpful through all the project and I have learned so much from
confronting myself with you. Thank you for being always available for a clariﬁcation
about even the smallest doubt and for encouraging my decisions regarding the project.
Thank you all so much, you made this experience even more interesting than expected.
I am very grateful to Seffen S. Munch, who helped me a lot in learning laboratory tech-
niques.
Then I would like to thank the two people that always supported me in every decision
I have made in my life, for good and for worse, they never stopped believing in me,
even when I was the ﬁrst one not believing in myself. Thank you mamma and papà
for all your efforts and sacriﬁces, for giving me more than I could ever have possibly
imagined. You dreamt the most incredible life for me since day one, and never stopped
trying to make it happen for me. Thank you for being always there, for being a reas-
suring constant in my life. You know how much I needed it, and how much I still do.
iii
==PAGE:7==
iv
If I am here today, if I have managed to achieve so much in life, it is because of you.
Thank you.
Then I want to thank my brother, Luigi, for being always present, even when I didn’t
realize it. Thank you for being my brother and being so special. A great thanks to my
grandmother, for her love and for having shared with me so many sweet moments.
A thank you from the hart to my best friend, Sara, for being the best of best friends.
Thank you for supporting me and encouraging me even when I decided to move 2000
km away from home. And a huge thank you to Susi, for always knowing when I
needed to talk and for being close to me when I needed it the most. A special thank
you to Alberto, for being such a great friend in the last period and for keeping me fo-
cused on my work.
And last, but not least, I would like to thank Fabrizio, for loving me and for stay-
ing with me always, no matter what, even when it wasn’t easy. Thank you for your
patience through this journey and thank you for wanting to share with me another
journey: life.
==PAGE:8==
PREFACE
This thesis is submitted as ﬁnalisation of the Master of Science Programme in Ma-
terials and Manufacturing Engineering at the Technical University of Denmark. The
project, rated as 30 ECTS points, has been carried out at the Section of Materials and
Surface Engineering, at DTU Mechanical Engineering Department, in the period be-
tween February 23rd and June 30th 2017, under the supervision of Prof. John Hald
and PhD students Irina Fedorova and Frank Nießen.
Chiara Tibollo
Kgs. Lyngby, June 2017
v
==PAGE:9==
CONTENTS
1
Introduction
4
1.1
Problem background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.2
Problem formulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
Theory
6
2.1
Steam reforming . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Centrifugal casting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Austenitic stainless steels
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4
Solidiﬁcation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.4.1
Scheil-Gulliver model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.4.2
Equilibrium solidiﬁcation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.5
Thermodynamic modelling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.5.1
The CALPHAD Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3
Methods
15
3.1
Material preparation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.2
Heat treatment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.3
Sample preparation for material characterization . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.3.1
LOM, SEM, EDS and XRD . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.4
Material characterization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.4.1
Light optical microscopy (LOM) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.4.2
Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
1
==PAGE:10==
CONTENTS
2
3.4.3
Energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.4.4
X-ray diffraction (XRD)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.5
Hardness testing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.5.1
Macro hardness testing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.5.2
Micro hardness testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.6
Image analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.6.1
Volume fraction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.6.2
Dendrite arm spacing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.7
Thermodynamic modelling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.7.1
Equilibrium calculations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.7.2
Scheil simulations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.7.3
Moving phase boundary simulations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4
Results
27
4.1
Material characterization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.1.1
HK-ar
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.1.2
HK-ht
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.1.3
HP-ar . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.1.4
HP-ht . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.2
Hardness testing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.2.1
Macro hardness testing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.2.2
Micro hardness testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.3
Image analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
4.3.1
Volume fraction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
4.3.2
Dendrite arm spacing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
4.4
Modelling of solidiﬁcation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
4.4.1
Equilibrium calculations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
4.4.2
Scheil-Gulliver model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
4.4.3
Moving boundary method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
5
Discussion
60
5.1
Characterization of carbides transformation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
5.2
Carbide volume fraction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
5.3
Hardness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
==PAGE:11==
CONTENTS
5.4
Modelling of solidiﬁcation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
6
Conclusions
70
7
Future work
72
Bibliography
74
List of Figures
79
List of Tables
80
Appendix
81
A LOM Micrographs
81
B
SEM Micrographs
86
C EDS Analysis
89
D XRD Analysis
97
E
Image Analysis
101
F
Hardness Testing
102
G Thermodynamic Modelling
104
3
==PAGE:12==
CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCTION
Since the 1960s centrifugal cast heat resistant alloys have been adopted for reformer
tubes resulting in the ideal material for this kind of application thanks to their good
creep resistance given by the precipitation of a inter-dendritic carbides network which
inhibits deformation towards temperatures close to the melting point. Hence, the ap-
peal of these alloys for high temperature applications, and especially for ﬁred heaters
service.
1.1
Problem background
Both chemical composition and solidiﬁcation conditions strongly affect the mechani-
cal properties of cast alloys. Therefore a great effort has been made in the past decades
to improve casting processes and material composition for avoiding failures in ser-
vice, which causes plants shut-downs at great expense to operating companies [4]. In
particular, beside investing in reformer tube metallurgy, failure modes and life assess-
ment over the life ot the tube, particular attention has to be put on the manufacturing
process after casting, but also on welding. The ﬁrst alloy being optimized for these
applications since the 1960s is the HK40 (25Cr-20Ni-0.4C-Fe), and only in the follow-
ing decades the HP30-N (25Cr-35Ni-0.4C-Fe with about 1 wt% Nb) has been adopted
in place of the HK40 for providing better mechanical properties at high temperature.
These tubes have to withstand critical operational conditions, being exposed to corro-
sive environment at high temperatures and they have to withstand a relatively high
internal pressure. The exceptional creep resistance is given from a combined action
of an inter-dendritic primary carbide network and a intra-dendritic network of ﬁne
4
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
dispersed secondary carbides. Thus, the high temperature strength of these alloys is
governed by the stability of these carbides, and it can easily be reduced by particle
coarsening due to temperature ﬂuctuations, during long time service [3].
1.2
Problem formulation
The scope of this thesis is the investigation of the microstructural evolution of the
HK40 alloy, which presents the simplest composition allowing an easier investigation
of the microstructure, being present less phases than in the new micro-alloyed cast HP
grades. The understanding of formation of primary carbides during solidiﬁcation is
of utmost importance, hence an experimental investigation of the as-cast material mi-
crostructure is followed by modelling of solidiﬁcation, with the aid of Thermo-Calc
software, for comparing the results predicted from the simulations with the expecta-
tions from the microstructural characterization.
In particular the project focuses on the thermodynamics and kinetics of the primary
carbides and the mechanism of precipitation of secondary carbides, by comparing the
results of material characterization and hardness testing for samples aged at two dif-
ferent temperatures with the ﬁndings of thermodynamic modelling of cooling after
solidiﬁcation, by adopting Dictra Module in Thermo-Calc.
A further investigation performed for a better understanding of the carbides trans-
formations with ageing is carried out through image analysis and performed on mi-
crographs taken during material characterization.
5
==PAGE:14==
CHAPTER 2
THEORY
2.1
Steam reforming
Steam reforming is a process employed for producing hydrogen and synthesis gases
destined to reﬁners and process purposes. The Topsøe reformers are side ﬁred, as
shown in Figure 2.1, meaning that the catalytic reaction that converts hydrocarbons
and steam into hydrogen and carbon dioxide, takes place in vertical tubes, directly
ﬁred with radiant burners placed in several rows in the two walls of the furnace cham-
ber. In fact, the burners ﬁre backwards on heat resistant bricks, which, in turn, heat the
reformer tubes by radiation. Because of the endothermic nature of the reforming reac-
tion, a catalyst is adopted, in order to supply enough heat for the reaction to continue.
Considering that the operating temperature is about 900 ◦C and the steam pressure
inside the tubes is around 10 bar, the material adopted for the tubes inside the furnace
chamber has to withstand severe conditions: high internal pressure, high temperature
exposure for extended periods of time combined with a corrosive environment. This
calls for creep and corrosion resistant materials, able to maintain good properties dur-
ing several years of continuous operation, avoiding breakdowns or instabilities.
6
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
Figure 2.1: Haldor Topsøe side ﬁred steam reformer
The design of reformer tubes is usually made on the basis of an expected life of
about 10 years, during which a typical statistical failure of around 5 % of the total
number of tubes in the furnace is expected. This, provided that normal operation con-
ditions are maintained. Nevertheless, short time exposures at temperatures above the
design one, during start-ups and shut-downs, can strongly affect the creep strength
and reduce drastically the life time of the material [5].
2.2
Centrifugal casting
This manufacturing process is performed by pouring the melt into a cylindrical mould,
spinning with several hundreds rpm and generating centrifugal forces which, during
solidiﬁcation, allow grain orientation in radial direction, increasing strength and creep
resistance. A sketch of the process is shown in Figure 2.2.
7
==PAGE:16==
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
Figure 2.2: Centrifugal casting process
The typical morphology of a centrifugally cast tube, using a metal mould, presents
a columnar structure, as it can be seen in Figure 2.3, starting from the outer diameter,
in contact with the coating deposited on the mould to avoid sticking of the melt on it.
Being the cooling rate quite high, the resulting solidiﬁcation process is termed ’direc-
tional solidiﬁcation’; despite this, depending on the pouring temperature of the melt
and the wall thickness, and equiaxed structure is produced towards the inner diameter
(Figure 2.4)[6].
Figure 2.3: Centrifugal casting with columnar structure
8
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
Figure 2.4: Centrifugal casting with columnar structure near the outer diameter and
equiaxed structure near the inner diameter
Centrifugal casting is adopted for producing reformer tubes since it provides uni-
formity of mechanical properties at a given radial distance. Moreover, impurities are
rather conﬁned towards the inner diameter, which can be later machined for removing
them.
2.3
Austenitic stainless steels
In order to match the requirements for reformer furnaces, tube materials have been im-
proved over the last 50 years and at the beginning, in the 1960s and 1970s, the mostly
used alloy was the 25Cr-20Ni-0.4C-Fe, designated as HK-40, while in the following
decades, the HP-40 grade, 25Cr-35Ni-0.4C-Fe, has become common because of its bet-
ter mechanical properties at high operating temperature. Since these high Cr-Ni alloys
are not easily drawn or extruded, cast structures are produced by adopting centrifugal
casting, which provides greater strength and better creep resistance, as already men-
tioned. Additions of Cr and Ni improve corrosion resistance and creep strength at
high temperature. Since reformers tubes fail during service by creep, through the for-
mation of creep voids, which seem to be related to microstructural features, in order to
improve the creep behaviour, the austenitic matrix of HP alloys is strengthened by a
dispersion of hard deformation-resistant carbide particles. Hence, the stability of these
carbides heavily affects the high temperature strength of these alloys, meaning that
particle coarsening due to temperature ﬂuctuations, during long time service, modi-
ﬁes the carbides morphology and their effect on the creep properties. For this reason,
since the mid 1990s to present, the HP alloy has been micro-alloyed with Nb, and more
recently, with Ti, Zr, Ta, Y and W, in order to enhance creep strength [3].
9
==PAGE:18==
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
In the as-cast condition, the standard HP and the HK alloys microstructure consists
of a dendritic network of primary carbides, M7C3, in an austenitic matrix, which is rel-
atively free of precipitates. On exposure to service temperatures, the primary carbides
transform, giving raise to an extensive precipitation within the matrix of secondary
carbides, M23C6. While the grain boundary carbide network is believed to inhibit grain
boundary sliding, the secondary matrix carbides obstruct dislocation motion. Since
chromium diffuses very quickly through the austenite matrix, the high coarsening of
the secondary carbides reduces the strengthening effect. For this reason, strong car-
bides formers are added, like niobium, in order to have partial replacement of the
primary chromium carbide with a niobium carbide, MC, reﬁning and fragmenting
the primary carbide network. The amount of replacement, reﬁnement and fragmen-
tation of the as-cast carbide network is a function of the niobium content. In general,
it has been shown that the niobium-modiﬁed HP alloys presents an increased rupture
life and lower minimum creep rates. Nevertheless, due to decomposition of niobium
carbides to G-phase (Nb16Nb6Si7) during exposure to elevated temperatures, the long-
term strengthening effect of niobium is relatively unknown [1].
The alloys investigated in this report are two samples of the HK40 and the HP30-N
alloys, the ﬁrst one being supplied by Schmidt + Clemens GmbH + Co. KG (designa-
tion Centralloy® G 4848), while the second one is a piece of the materials supplied for
a previous study [7]. The sample of HK40 is received in the as-cast condition, without
having undergone any machining process for removing impurities of the solidiﬁcation
process present in the portion of material close the internal diameter. The HP30-N
alloy should be in the same condition, even though a previous study on its microstruc-
ture [8] shows that the matrix of the alloy is not precipitate-free as it should be in the
as-cast condition, as it is well known from literature [1, 2]. The reasons for this mi-
crostructure could be many, and for example the sample could simply have already
undergone some temperature exposures or a low cooling rate could have allowed the
precipitation of secondary carbides. For the purposes of this work, the focus is on the
HK40 alloy, which with a less exotic composition (without any addition of strong car-
bides formers) allows a simpler investigation on the stability of the present phases and
the mechanisms behind the precipitation of secondary carbides.
The composition of these two alloys is given in Table 2.1 with reference to the dif-
ferent sources or methods.
10
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
Sample
Method/Source
C
Si
Mn
Cr
Mo
Ni
Al
Co
Cu
Nb
Ti
V
W
N
Fe
HP30N
Force T.(Fe-30)
0.35
1,10
0,27
23
0,049
34
0,002
0,026
0,030
0,82
0,012
0,050
0,051
0,13
40
HP30N
Certiﬁcate from supplier[7]
0.37
1,08
0,27
24,3
0,09
33,5
0,05
0,95
0,052
0,07
Bal.
HK40
Force T.(Fe-30)
0.48
2,09
1,02
25
0,032
21
0,059
0,030
0,051
0,066
0,010
0,054
0,007
0,085
50
HK40
Certiﬁcate from supplier
0.4
1,5
1,5
25
20
Bal.
HP30N
SEM-EDS [8]
1,7
29,1
31,4
37,8
HK40
SEM-EDS [8]
2,1
1,3
24,4
20,9
51,2
Table 2.1: Composition in wt% of HK40 and HP30N alloys investigated in the report
11
==PAGE:20==
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
2.4
Solidiﬁcation
Considering a pure metal, in order for solidiﬁcation to start and for crystals to form
in a melt, this has to be undercooled, meaning that its temperature has to be lower
than its melting point. Solidiﬁcation is the result of nucleation of nuclei in different
locations in the melt and their growth in crystals. Nucleation can be heterogeneous
or homogeneous, depending on whether foreign particles in the melt and surfaces can
act as nuclei from where the solid phase can actually grow. Homogeneous nucleation
involves embryos, i.e. several atoms ordered in a crystalline way, which arise sponta-
neously and randomly in the melt, and they can reach a critical minimum size becom-
ing nuclei. The process can be described by a thermodynamic parameter called Gibb’s
free energy (or free energy), G, and in particular a phase transformation occurs sponta-
neously when the change in Gibb’s free energy (∆G) has a negative value. There are
two contribution to the total free energy change: the free energy difference between the
solid and the liquid phases and the surface free energy associated with the formation
of a solid-liquid phase boundary during the process. A critical total free energy is asso-
ciated with a critical size of an embryo, which corresponds to an activation free energy,
i.e. the free energy required for the formation of a stable nucleus. A very large under-
cooling is required in order to start nucleation in a pure metal. In reality, it happens
at much higher temperatures, i.e. lower undercoolings, due to the presence of foreign
particles and surfaces which lower the activation free energy due to the lowering of
the surface free energy contribution. This is termed as heterogeneous nucleation.
The characteristics of solidiﬁcation change if an alloy is considered instead of a pure
metal and, in particular, if it solidiﬁes by dendritic solidiﬁcation, the concentration of
the alloying element will be unevenly distributed in the metal. This phenomenon is
called micro-segregation, and it can be described by a series of mathematical models.
2.4.1
Scheil-Gulliver model
This micro-segregation model is built on a simple geometry where the volume element
given in Figure 2.5 is considered. This is a representation of a small inter-dendritic
volume, given that the length of the element corresponds to half the dendrite arm
distance, λden
2 , that the volume element is small enough to allow that the temperature
inside is the same at any moment and, ﬁnally, that liquid and solid phases have the
same molar volume Vm.
Figure 2.5: Solidifying volume element considered in the Scheil-Gulliver model
The model is based on the following assumptions:
12
==PAGE:21==
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
• the melt presents an even composition at any moment due to high diffusion and
convection
• no diffusion is considered in the solid phase
• local equilibrium exists at the solid-liquid interface at any moment, i.e. for a given
interface temperature the composition of the solid and liquid phase in contact
with each other is given by the equilibrium phase diagram and the equilibrium
can be expressed by the partition constant kpart = xS
xL
A material balance for the alloying element being moved into the melt is considered
and the concentration of the alloying element in the melt at any time can be derived
resulting in the following equation:
xL =
xs
kpart
= xL
0

1 −2y
λden
−(1−kpart)
(2.1)
Where xL
0 is the initial concentration of the alloying element in the melt, while 2y/λden
represents the fraction of solidiﬁed material, and considering a general geometrical
shape it can be replaced by the variable fs, which is the fraction of the solid phase, and
Equation 2.1 can be rewritten as:
xL = xL
0

1 −fs
−(1−kpart)
Scheil −Gulliver segregation equation
(2.2)
Equation 2.2 predicts that the concentration of the alloying element approaches in-
ﬁnity towards the end of solidiﬁcation, therefore this has to be taken into consideration
as a limitation of the model, which does not take into account that a eutectic reaction
can occur or simply back diffusion in the solid, known as homogenization.
2.4.2
Equilibrium solidiﬁcation
Considering an inﬁnitely slow equilibrium solidiﬁcation, Equation 2.2 is not valid, be-
cause extensive diffusion in both solid and liquid phases is allowed, leading to an even
distribution of the allowing elements in each phase. Again it is possible to derive an
equation from a material balance of the alloying element:
xL =
xs
kpart
=
xL
0
1 −fs(1 −kpart)
Lever rule
(2.3)
Equation 2.3 can be visualized in the phase diagram given in Figure 2.6 [9, 10].
13
==PAGE:22==
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
Figure 2.6: Phase diagram of binary alloy
2.5
Thermodynamic modelling
In this project, thermodynamic modelling is employed for predicting equilibrium and
non-equilibrium phases, to model solidiﬁcation and micro-segregation for the case of
the HK40 alloy. The software used for this purpose is Thermo-Calc 2017a and Dictra
Module is used. A description of the software and its potentiality is given in Sec-
tion 3.7. The next subsection gives a brief description on the algorithm on which the
software is constructed.
2.5.1
The CALPHAD Method
The CALPHAD (CALculation of PHase Diagrams) method is adopted in Thermo-Calc
and it is based on a algorithm which models the thermodynamic properties of multi-
component systems. The principles of the method are well described in[11], and are
outlined in the following based on this description. The algorithm is based on the min-
imization of the Gibb’s free energy of a system for calculating its thermodynamic equi-
librium and being then able to get any phase diagram, chemical potential or chemical
composition of the stable phases. In particular, this is achieved through simple poly-
nomials, called Redlich-Kistler polynomials, which calculate the Gibb’s free energy of
each phase.
14
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 3
METHODS
This chapter encompasses the experimental procedures, measuring techniques and
softwares adopted during this project. First, the material preparation and designation
is explained, then the heat treatments chosen for the ageing of the examined alloys
are presented and a description of sample preparation for material characterisation
for both the as-cast material and the aged one follows. Afterwards, the techniques
adopted for material characterisation are introduced in the same order in which they
are applied during the project, and they comprise light optical microscopy, scanning
electron microscopy, energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy and X-ray diffraction. Af-
terwards, macro and micro hardness testing is carried out. Then image analysis is
performed on the micrographs obtained during the material characterization phase.
Lastly, thermodynamic modelling is carried out.
3.1
Material preparation
The materials examined in this project are a section of tube of approximately 75 mm
outer diameter and 8 mm wall thickness for the HK40 alloy, and a slice of section of tube
of approximately 14 mm wall thickness, for the HP30-N alloy, as shown in Figure 3.1a.
(a) HK40 alloy
(b) HP30-N alloy
Figure 3.1: Sections of the tubes received from the supplier
15
==PAGE:24==
CHAPTER 3. METHODS
* HK40
HK40 (Centralloy® G 4848 is the supplier designation) received is a centrifugally cast
austenitic 25% chromium 20% nichel steel. The particular composition provides excel-
lent structural stability, high stress rupture strength and good resistance to oxidation
and carburisation. It is widely used in structural applications up to 1100 ◦C, where long
term creep properties are not a major design criterion. Moreover this alloy can sustain
high temperature corrosive environment, in both oxidising and reducing conditions.
One of the main high temperature applications where this alloy is typically adopted,
which does not required any heat treatment, is steam reforming.
* HP30-N
HP30-N is a centrifugally cast austenitic steel 35% nichel, 25% chromium plus niobium
which has already been investigated in a previous study here at DTU [7]. As the afore-
mentioned HK40, this steels presents excellent structural stability, high stress rupture
strength and good resistance to oxidation and carburisation. The presence of niobium
further increases high temperature properties.
Typical applications of this alloy are those which require good oxidation and car-
burisation resistance combined with high creep rupture strength.
3.2
Heat treatment
These alloys are put into operation at around 900 ◦C directly after being cast (machined
on the inside to remove impurities pushed out during solidiﬁcation due to the cen-
trifugal casting process), and the strengthening mechanism is given by precipitation
hardening, while the alloy is kept at high temperature for the entire life of the tubes.
In order to simulate the same process, the samples in the as-received condition, are
isothermally aged in a furnace as shown in the overview in Table 3.1 and then all of
them are cooled in air.
850 ◦C
950 ◦C
HK40
168 h
332 h
504 h
168 h
332 h
504 h
HP30-N
168 h
332 h
504 h
168 h
332 h
504 h
Table 3.1: Overview of the ageing treatments of HK40 and HP30-N alloys
3.3
Sample preparation for material characterization
Sample preparation is of great importance in order to reveal correctly the microstruc-
ture. Both the as-cast and the aged material are prepared in the same way.
16
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 3. METHODS
3.3.1
LOM, SEM, EDS and XRD
Sectioning and material designation
Since the received materials are sections of the tubes, as shown in Figure 3.2, further
sectioning is required to get the correct size for sample preparation. A power hacksaw
in the workshop is used to cut the tubes for this purpose, and portions which cover the
entire section, from the external diameter to the internal one, are obtained, as shown in
Figure 3.2a.
(a) Cut samples of HK40 alloy
(b) Section investigated
Figure 3.2: Sample preparation for material characterization and section investigated
Then the samples are cut in half as shown in Figure 3.3a, using a Struers Accutom
50, in order to get two samples out of one and the generated cross-section of the spec-
imen which is examined in the investigation is the one shown in Figure 3.2b. In this
way it is possible to look at the microstructure from the outer diameter, which has been
in contact with the mould, to the inner diameter, where the impurities are pushed out
by the centrifugal casting process. The inner diameter of HP30-N has already been ma-
chined in order to remove the aforementioned impurities and inclusions, while HK40
has been received in the as-cast condition, without any further machining.
(a) Drawing of the cutting section
(b) Embedded specimen
Figure 3.3: Cutting section and ﬁnal embedded specimen
In order to differentiate between the two materials and the different conditions in-
vestigated during the project, the following designation is adopted:
[Matrial grade] −[Condition] −[Ageing temperature] −[Ageing time]
17
==PAGE:26==
CHAPTER 3. METHODS
where
• the material grade ”HK” stands for the HK40 alloy
• the material grade ”HP” stands for the HP30-N alloy
• the condition ”ar” stands for the as-received condition
• the condition ”ht” stands for the aged condition
• the ageing temperature ”a” stands for 850 ◦C
• the ageing temperature ”b” stands for 950 ◦C
• the ageing time ”1” stands for 1 week of ageing time, corresponding to 168 h
• the ageing time ”2” stands for 2 week of ageing time, corresponding to 336 h
• the ageing time ”3” stands for 3 week of ageing time, corresponding to 504 h
For example, HK-ht-a-1 would correspond to the HK40 alloy aged at 850 ◦C for 1 week,
while HP-ar would correspond to the HP30-N alloy in the as-received condition.
Mounting
After being cut, the samples are embedded with a hot mounting press, and in particu-
lar using a Struers CitoPress-20 and adopting a Duro Fast resin, which presents good
edges retention when dealing with hard materials, giving the possibility to investigate
also the edges of the embedded samples. Some embeddings are shown in Figure 3.3b.
Grinding and polishing
Grinding and polishing of the specimens is performed on a Struers RotoPol-22, by
following the procedure described in Table 3.2, which is based on the ﬁndings of a
previous study on these alloys which encompasses the methods for microstructural
characterization of these alloys [8], leading to the choice of adopting both diamond
polishing and OP-S polishing for a better polished surface.
18
==PAGE:27==
CHAPTER 3. METHODS
Grinding stage
Grid
Force
Time
1st
80 diamond
10
3 min
2nd
600 diamond
10
3 min
3rd
1200 diamond
10
3 min
4th
Sandpaper 1000
10
3 min
5th
Sandpaper 4000
10
3 min
Polishing stage
Cloth
Force
Time
1st
3 µm diamond + ethanol suspension
10
3 min
2nd
1 µm diamond + ethanol suspension
10
3 min
3rd
OP-S
10
2 min
4th
0,25 µm diamond + ethanol suspension
10
2 min
5th
0,25 µm diamond + ethanol suspension
5
3 min
Table 3.2: Grinding and polishing settings used to polish the samples after being cut
and mounted
Etching
In order to reveal the microstructural details, creating differences in reﬂectivity at the
surface of the as-polished metallographic specimens, they are subjected to the chemical
attack of Murakami etchant. The choice of this particular etchant is driven again from
the ﬁndings of the aforementioned previous study [8]. The action of the etching pro-
cess is caused by the corrosion behaviours of the different microstructural constituents,
meaning that, considering the electrochemical potential, more electropositive features
are more easily attacked rather than the more electronegative ones [12]. In particular,
grain boundaries in polycrystalline materials are revealed by means of light optical
microscope due to the fact that they are more severely attached by etchant and thus
reﬂect light differently.
The standard Murakami etch, i.e potassium ferrocyanide, is the result of the reac-
tion of potassium ferricyanide with potassium hydroxide and when used boiling, car-
bides are one of the features that result particularly attacked. Thus the adoption of this
etchant for the microstructural investigation of carbides transformation. In particular,
all the samples are etched for 3.5 min at 55 ◦C.
3.4
Material characterization
3.4.1
Light optical microscopy (LOM)
The microstructural characterisation is carried out at an early stage on the as-received
and un-polished specimens for both the alloys, HK40 and HP30-N, with a light opti-
cal microscope, and in particular an Olympus GX41, a compact inverted metallurgi-
cal brightﬁeld reﬂected light microscope with UIS2 Optical System (Inﬁnity-corrected)
and Olympus M Plan Achromat - MPLN objectives. A Leica DFC 450C digital micro-
scope camera with c-mount interface and with a 5 Megapixel CCD sensor is attached.
19
==PAGE:28==
CHAPTER 3. METHODS
The Peltier cooling reduces noise for imaging in low light conditions. The large SXGA
(1280x960 pixels) live image provides up to 18 frames per second (fps) and allows the
sample to be adjusted and focused directly on the computer screen.
This preliminary investigation on the as-received material, before proceeding with
any kind of etching techniques, is performed because some particular features, such as
inclusions, cracks or pores geometry, could be altered or even removed by the action
of the chemical attack. The LOM is used as the ﬁrst technique in the microstructural
characterization, due to its simplicity and for allowing to get the global informations
about the microstructure from very low magniﬁcations to higher ones.
3.4.2
Scanning electron microscopy (SEM)
For further investigation of the materials, scanning electron microscopy is employed,
in order to gather more informations about the composition of the material and the
microstructural features that cannot be resolved with light microscopy. Two micro-
scopes are used, a JEOL JSM-5900 and a Phenom ProX. Both instruments have a CeB6
ﬁlament as an electron source. Both of them have an Energy Dispersive X-ray Spec-
trometer (EDS) with a 50 mm2 and 25 mm2, respectively, silicon drift detector attached
for compositional analysis. This feature, is used on the JEOL microscope in order to
evaluate the compositions of the two alloys and compare them with the one given
by the supplier (in case of HK40 alloy) and the ones evaluated with Optical Emission
Spectroscopy (OES) at Force Technology (for both HK40 and HP30-N). For data acqui-
sition of the EDS measurement, the INCA and Element Identiﬁcation (EID) software
package are used.
Prior to looking at the samples, they are prepared in the same way as for light
microscopy (Table 3.2), but some are etched in order to get detailed information about
microstructural features, while others are left as-polished for performing EDS and get
information about local composition, but also to preserve features on the surface for
topographic examination. Thus, the necessity of having non-etched samples, which
are not altered by the chemical attack of the etchant.
In order to prevent surface charging, all samples are carbon coated (carbon is adopted
because it is cheap and almost invisible to most X-rays). In this way, image distortion
and artefacts are avoided and the actual surface topography can be revealed. Even
though charging is a main concern especially for non conductive materials, a metal
oxide layer and non conductive phases in metal specimens may also generate surface
charging. Hence, it is good practice to coat the specimens for composition as for topo-
graphic examination. During this project specimens coating is performed by means of
vacuum evaporation, which deposits conductive atoms on the specimen in a vacuum
chamber. For this purpose, a Q150R E rotary-pumped carbon ﬁbre coater is employed.
After coating, the samples are mounted with a conductive ”bridge”, in this case a cop-
per tape, connected from the top surface of the samples to the sample holder.
In particular, the acceleration voltage used is 15 kV for imaging and 28 kV for the
compositional analysis performed during EDS. A higher voltage has been adopted
for the elemental analysis in order to be sure to excite the characteristic X-rays of all
the elements present in the material (considering the composition proﬁle obtained by
means of OES at Force Technology). The acceleration voltage is the controlling factor of
20
==PAGE:29==
CHAPTER 3. METHODS
probe size of the gun, meaning that, the higher the acceleration voltage, the smaller the
probe size, the higher the resolution. Nevertheless, the higher the acceleration voltage
the higher the interaction volume between probe and specimen material, which lead
to a decrease in the lateral spatial resolution of the image. During operation a working
distance (WD) of 21 mm is adopted.
There are two types of electron signal: secondary electrons and backscattered elec-
trons. The ﬁrst are the primary source for achieving topographic contrast, the latter are
mainly used for compositional images [13].
Secondary electron imaging
Secondary electrons (SE) are low energy electrons which are ejected from atoms in the
specimen after inelastic scattering with high energy electrons from the primary beam.
Due to its low energy, they can escape from a small volume near the specimen surface.
The topographic contrast in this mode, is achieved thanks to different orientation of the
specimen surfaces: signals coming from the ones facing the detector will be abundant,
leading to bright areas in the image. On the contrary, surfaces not facing the detector
will emit signals which will reach the detector more difﬁcultly, resulting in dark areas
in the image. Moreover, the number of electrons that can escape from the edges of
topographical features is higher than the one from a ﬂat surface, due to the interaction
volume shape.
Backscatter electron imaging
Backscattered electrons (BSE) are high energy electron from the primary beam which
are elastically scattered from atoms in the specimen, therefore they have an energy
which is close to the one of the incident beam, which allows them to escape from a
deeper level of the interaction volume. The compositional contrast is achieved because
the ability of BSE to escape from the specimen depends on the atomic numbers of
the specimen atoms, and in particular areas containing chemical elements with high
atomic number will generate more BSE, resulting in brighter areas in the image. The
contrast is thus given by differences in grey levels in black and white images.
3.4.3
Energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS)
As already mentioned in Section 3.4.2, the X-ray spectrometer adopted is included as
a part of the SEM, meaning that the source used for exciting characteristic X-rays from
the material is a high energy electron beam, the same one used for image formation.
Even though the probe size of the electron gun in the SEM allows the chemical analysis
in a microscopic area, it must be mentioned that the characteristic X-rays are excited
from a volume under the surface of the specimen, and not from an area on it. The spa-
tial resolution of EDS is therefore affected by the interaction volume shape and it also
decreases with increasing the acceleration voltage, which has to be chosen not much
higher than the necessary to excite characteristic X-rays in the material [13]. Before ev-
ery session, calibration of the detector is carried out selecting an area of interest on the
copper tape. Two different modes of examinations are offered in EDS: stationary and
21
==PAGE:30==
CHAPTER 3. METHODS
scanning.
Elemental analysis
The elemental analysis is carried out with the stationary mode, where the probe stays
at the location selected until complete collection of the X-rays. The dwell time adopted
is 6 s, which is the maximum allowed, in order to acquire the highest number of counts
of characteristic X-rays. This mode is particularly indicated for analysing elements in
microscopic features, such as the precipitates investigated in this report.
Composition map
The composition maps are gathered with the scanning mode, where the electron probe
moves over the specimen surface recording the intensity of characteristic X-rays. In
this way it is possible to reveal elements distribution, allowing to examine composition
changes in a certain area of the specimen, which, in case of the present work, helps
characterizing the nature of the precipitates with respect to the matrix.
3.4.4
X-ray diffraction (XRD)
X-ray diffraction (XRD) is performed for collecting more informations about the phases
present in these alloys, and how their presence is related to the ageing process. This
method is used to complete the analysis carried out with the EDS. In fact, while with
the latter it is possible to identify chemical compounds from the chemical elements
present, with X-ray diffraction methods phases are identiﬁed from their crystal struc-
ture. The principle of the method is based on the diffraction of X-rays by periodic
atomic planes and the angle, or in case of this project, energy-resolved detection of the
diffracted signal. XRD measurements are taken at the materials science EDDI (Energy
Dispersive DIffraction) beamline at the Berlin synchrotron storage ring BESSY, which
presents excellent properties, such as the wide energy spectrum, the brilliance of the
photon source and the brightness of the beam. The energy-dispersive (ED) diffrac-
tion patterns contain peaks (diffraction lines) that occur for certain energies Ehkl and
all reﬂections are recorded simultaneously, having both sample and detector in ﬁxed
positions with respect to the primary beam [14].
Then in order to convert the energies Ehkl at which the signals are diffracted to the
correspondent interplanar dhkl spacings, Bragg’s law is used [15]:
Ehkldhkl = 6.999
sin θ0
keV Å
(3.1)
In particular, the scattering angle used in this analysis is 2θd = 8°.
3.5
Hardness testing
In order to investigate the effect of ageing on the two alloys, hardness testing is ap-
plied. In particular, Vickers and micro Vickers hardness are determined according to
22
==PAGE:31==
CHAPTER 3. METHODS
the speciﬁcations for Vickers indentation and micro indentation hardness described in
ASTM E92-17 [16].
3.5.1
Macro hardness testing
A Wolpert Dia Testor 2Rc is used to determine the hardness of the as-cast specimens
and all the aged ones, by applying a load of 5 kg for a dwell time of 10 s. Eight in-
dents per specimen are measured and averaged and a standard deviation between the
measurements is therefore obtained for each condition. The measurements are taken
randomly on the specimen surface, in the as-polished condition, avoiding the edges.
3.5.2
Micro hardness testing
A microhardness tester Future-Tech FM-700 is used to determine micro hardness of dif-
ferent features, by using a diamond Vickers indenter. The tester is equipped with objec-
tives which allow up to 100X magniﬁcations and with a Ikegami ICD-828P-RXACDC
1/2" 530 TVL colour camera with remote.
In particular, the micro hardness of the matrix of the specimens is measured by
taking a proﬁle from the outer towards the inner diameter of the section, considering
seven equidistant points, and keeping a sufﬁcient distance between the ﬁrst and last
point from the edge of the specimens, in order to avoid any inﬂuence from moulding,
but also from impurities present close to the inner diameter to the measurements. For
each point, six indentations are measured, in order to get a reliable standard deviation
between the measurements. These measurements are carried out with the diamond
Vickers indenter by applying a load of 50 g for a dwell time of 5 s and measured with
an objective lens with 50X magniﬁcation. The micro hardness proﬁling is carried out
on the as-cast materials and, afterwards, on the specimens in the different ageing con-
ditions, in order to evaluate the affect of the heat treatment on the proﬁle.
Furthermore, a similar procedure is carried out for getting a measure of the micro
hardness of the carbides present in the materials, and in particular, these measurements
are performed by applying a load of 5 g for a dwell time of 10 s and six indentations are
taken in three different zones of the section: section A, which corresponds to the area
from the outer diameter of the tube towards the center, section B, which corresponds
to the central area of the section and, ﬁnally, section C, which goes from the central
section to the inner diameter. The indentations are measured with an objective lens
with 100X magniﬁcation. Adopting such a small load, it is possible to precisely hit the
carbides surface in the center.
Lastly, a measure of the micro hardness proﬁle inside the dendrites is taken by
applying a load of 10 g for a dwell time of 10 s and the measurements are taken on ran-
dom dendrites on the specimen surface, by considering the distance from one carbide,
along the grain boundary, to the opposite one. Four points are considered, two on
the carbides and two inside the dendrite. Five dendrite proﬁles are measured for each
condition, in order to get a standard deviation, and the indentations are measured with
an objective lens with 50X magniﬁcation. In literature another study has been carried
out on these materials [17], focusing also on the micro hardness proﬁle inside the den-
drites, and the measurements have been taken by applying a load of 10 g for a dwell
23
==PAGE:32==
CHAPTER 3. METHODS
time of 10 s, hence the choice of using the same set-up, for comparing the results.
All micro hardness measurements are taken on as-polished specimens.
3.6
Image analysis
3.6.1
Volume fraction
Image-J software is used in order to get an estimation of the volume fraction of the
carbides present in the materials in the different conditions, and how the amount of
primary carbides changes with respect to the amount of secondary carbides, and vice
versa during ageing, but also for measuring the dendrite arm spacing of the investi-
gated alloys. These informations are then employed in the modelling section of this
report.
The volume fraction estimation of the different carbides is obtained by using the
Particle analysis feature on SEM images acquired on etched samples. At ﬁrst a scale,
based on the scale of the SEM image, is imposed. Then, a threshold range is set to
tell the objects of interest apart from the background; in this way, all the pixels in the
image whose values lie under the threshold, are converted to black, and all the ones
with values above the threshold are converted to white. In this way a binary image
is obtained. Then, with the particle analysis feature, it is possible to select a range for
the number of pixel which represent the size of the particles of interest, in order to
select all the particles present, or either the bigger ones or the smaller ones. In this
way an estimation of the area fraction covered by the selected particles is given, which
is deﬁned as the total area of the particles divided by the area of the ﬁeld, and that
corresponds to the volume fraction of the considered phase, which is the volume of
the considered phase per unit volume.
3.6.2
Dendrite arm spacing
Moreover an estimation of the Dendrite Arm Spacing (DAS) is achieved by applying
the intercept method on the same micrographs used for the volume fraction calcula-
tion.
3.7
Thermodynamic modelling
Thermo-Calc is a database and programming interface package for thermodynamic
calculations and in this project it is applied to determine phase equilibria, phase com-
positions and fractions, to model solidiﬁcation and micro-segregation, which are fur-
ther investigated with the Diffusion Module, DICTRA, for the HK40 alloy. The soft-
ware version used is Thermo-Calc 2017a and the calculations are based on a thermo-
dynamic database, TCFE6, and a kinetic one, NEWMOB. The ﬁrst one is used in both
Thermo-Calc and DICTRA, and contains thermodynamic data, while the second one is
necessary for performing diffusion simulations in DICTRA and it contains information
about the atomic mobility of individual components in relevant phases. The software
key strength is a wide selection of high-quality databases which are produced through
24
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 3. METHODS
critical assessment and systematic evaluation of experimental and theoretical data by
following the already mentioned CALPHAD method (Section 2.5.1) [18, 19].
The thermodynamic modelling is carried out on two simpliﬁed versions of the com-
position of the HK40 alloy, as shown in Table 3.3.
C
Si
Mn
Cr
Mo
Ni
Nb
Ti
N
Fe
Hk40-TC
0.48
2.09
1.02
25
0,032
21
0,066
0,010
0,085
Bal.
Hk40-D
0.41
2.1
26
32
Bal.
Table 3.3: Compositions in wt% of HK40 used in thermodynamic simulations: HK40-
TC is used in Thermo-Calc simulations while HK40-D is used in Dictra simulations
3.7.1
Equilibrium calculations
Initially, global equilibrium calculations are carried out by employing the ﬁrst simpli-
ﬁed composition. Solidiﬁcation is based on the lever rule (Section 2.4.2) and it allows to
get an equilibrium solidiﬁcation sequence, which is useful to predict the distribution of
phases in the as-cast material and then compare the ﬁndings with those obtained dur-
ing the material characterization of the as-cast material. Moreover, this calculations are
important in order to understand the kinetics behind the transformation of M7C3 to
M23C7, since they predict which phases are stable at a given temperature. The results
of these simulations can therefore be compared with the experimental results obtained
during the material characterization of the aged material.
The simulations are obtained by using the simpliﬁed HK40-TC alloy composition
displayed in Table 3.3.
3.7.2
Scheil simulations
The Scheil-Gulliver model is then employed for solidiﬁcation simulations based on the
same composition adopted for the equilibrium calculations. Being the cooling rate in
centrifugal casting quite high, the assumption of solid-state diffusion is far from the re-
ality, hence adopting this model it is possible to predict with better conﬁdence the ﬁnal
microstructure of the alloy, taking into account micro-segregation phenomena which
often lead to the formation of phases that would not be stable in an homogeneous sys-
tem but. It has to be mentioned that in these calculations back-diffusion of carbon and
nitrogen is considered, therefore an extended Scheil-Gulliver model is adopted.
3.7.3
Moving phase boundary simulations
At last, moving boundary simulations are performed in DICTRA Module, in order to
take into account the cooling rate and the solute concentration gradients in the liquid
ahead of the solidiﬁcation front, which is of utmost importance especially in rapid so-
lidiﬁcation. Therefore a comparison between this model and Scheil is made, in order
to understand whether the moving boundary simulation can reproduce with better ac-
curacy solidiﬁcation and solid-state diffusion afterwards, leading to a prediction of the
25
==PAGE:34==
CHAPTER 3. METHODS
ﬁnal microstructure which can be compared with the one observed during the experi-
mental characterization of the material. These simulations are based on the simpliﬁed
HK40-D alloy composition shown in Table 3.3.
26
==PAGE:35==
CHAPTER 4
RESULTS
This section encompasses the results obtained with the methods described in the previ-
ous section (Section 3). The ﬁrst subsection covers the results for the materials charac-
terization, from the LOM to the SEM and EDS and ﬁnally to XRD. Both alloys in exam
have been investigated with LOM and SEM, in both the as-received and aged condi-
tion, putting the focus on the HK40 alloy, which is the main subject of investigation
in the present work, and which is further investigated with EDS in both as-received
and aged condition, while for the HP30-N alloy only EDS in the as-received condition
is performed. The same is done for the XRD analysis. Then the results for hardness
testing are listed in another subsection for both materials in all conditions, and in the
third one image analysis ﬁndings are shown for the HK40 alloy. Finally, in the last
subsection, the thermodynamic modelling results of the HK40 alloy are presented.
4.1
Material characterization
In this section material characterization for both alloys is presented in the same chrono-
logical order in which is performed. The ﬁndings of this section are essential in order
to gather more information for a deeper understanding of the precipitation mechanism
which governs the carbide formation and transformation of these alloys, and especially
of the HK40, which is the main focus of this project, due to its simplicity in comparison
to the HP30-N, which, as already mentioned, presents a more complex microstructure
due to higher Nb content.
4.1.1
HK-ar
LOM
The alloy microstructure for the HK-ar is clearly revealed at ﬁrst by light optical mi-
croscopy performed on samples etched by Murakami’s reagent, which enhances the
microstructural features, which, it should be mentioned, are visible also in the as-
polished condition, even though considerably less sharply.
27
==PAGE:36==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
(a) Outer part of HK-ar
(b) Outer part of HK-ar
(c) Outer part of HK-ar
(d) Central part of HK-ar
(e) Central part of HK-ar
(f) Central part of HK-ar
(g) Inner part of HK-ar
(h) Inner part of HK-ar
(i) Inner part of HK-ar
Figure 4.1: LOM micrographs at different magniﬁcations of the HK-ar. The typical
dendritic structure of the centrifugally cast alloy is clearly visible and it is also possible
to recognize the microstructure of the austenitic matrix and the inter-dendritic primary
carbides
A preliminary investigation is focused on assessing the macro and microstructural
features along the radial direction. In particular, as already mentioned in Section 3.3.1,
the tube is divided into three zones: zone A, close to the outer wall of the tube; zone
B, in the central area of the tube and zone C, close to the inner wall. Depending on the
cooling rate, the mould temperature and the pouring temperature of the melt, different
macro structures can form in these three different zones, and a reﬁned dendritic struc-
ture is the one showing better creep strength compared to coarse columnar grains [6].
The growth conditions of the pre-solidiﬁed grains during solidiﬁcation and the so-
lute distribution in the melt are affecting microstructural features, such as the carbide
morphologies and, in the end, again the mechanical properties of the alloy. From Fig-
ure 4.1a, 4.1d, 4.1g and Figure 4.1b, 4.1e, 4.1h it is possible to state that the dendrites
do not show any signiﬁcant change in shape and preferred orientation along the ra-
dial direction. At higher magniﬁcations, (Figure 4.1c, 4.1f, 4.1i) it is possible to assess
28
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
the presence of carbides along the grain boundaries (in between the dendrites) and a
precipitate free matrix, as mentioned in Section 2.3.
Any morphology is particularly present in one area rather than in another one, and
the carbides are mainly present in a skeleton-like morphology (Figure 4.2a, 4.2b, 4.2c).
These carbides are indicated from literature [20, 21] to be M7C3, and they appear at
the optical microscope after etching as light grey in the centre and darker on the edges.
Prior etching the carbides are light grey-white coloured.
(a) LOM micrograph of the
outer part of sample HK-ar
(b) LOM micrograph of the
central part of sample HK-ar
(c) LOM micrograph of the in-
ner part of sample HK-ar
Figure 4.2: LOM micrographs at the highest magniﬁcation of the HK-ar. The carbides
morphology is clearly visible
SEM
In order to better resolve the microstructural features of the alloy in the as-cast condi-
tion, an investigation at the SEM follows and the results are presented in this section.
The same conclusions made after the investigation with the light optical microscope
can be asserted after the evaluation of the micrographs obtained at the scanning elec-
tron microscope.
In particular, in Figure 4.3 where BSE micrographs are shown, it is possible to recog-
nize the same dendritic microstructure seen at the LOM, and at higher magniﬁcations
the non-continuous carbide network and carbides morphology, which is very well re-
solved in the etched condition in the BSE imaging mode, thanks to the difference in
composition between the matrix and the carbides. These last ones are identiﬁed as
M7C3 and show a peculiar dark grey colouring, which is darker on the edges, while
the matrix is brighter, since it contains heavier elements (Ni, Fe). Moreover, from these
micrographs it is possible to gather a ﬁrst information about the size of these primary
carbides, which is in the order of 10 µm to 20 µm.
29
==PAGE:38==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
(a) SEM, BSE. Outer part of
HK-ar
(b) SEM, BSE. Central part of
HK-ar
(c) SEM, BSE. Inner part of
HK-ar
(d) SEM, BSE. Outer part of
HK-ar
(e) SEM, BSE. Central part of
HK-ar
(f) SEM, BSE. Inner part of
HK-ar
Figure 4.3: SEM, BSE micrographs at different magniﬁcations of the HK-ar. The typical
dendritic structure of the centrifugally cast alloy is clearly visible and it is also possi-
ble to see the microstructure of the austenitic matrix and the inter-dendritic primary
carbides
EDS
The elemental analysis results obtained through EDS on the as-cast material are given
in Figure 4.4. In each area of interest considered during the analysis, an elemental
composition is calculated for the total area selected, as shown in Figure 4.5 with a
purple rectangular designated as Spectrum 1, and another one is calculated for the
single spots, which are indicated as Spectrum 2 and 3. The results are then averaged.
The compositions shown in the graph, then, are the average over six measurements
taken in six different areas of interest in zone B for the total selected area (green) and
for the carbides (blue). The same procedure is followed to gather information in zone
A and C where the average is calculated over three measurements. The results for zone
A and B are given in Appendix C in Figure C.1 and C.2.
The amount of Cr in the area of interest is higher than at the initial composition of
almost 10%, while in the fraction of Fe is decreased of roughly the same amount. Apart
30
==PAGE:39==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
Figure 4.4: Histogram showing the average composition calculated for the total area
of interest selected during EDS analysis and for the carbides. Compositions are given
in mass fraction (wt%)
Figure 4.5: SEM, BSE micrograph showing the total area of interest selected during
EDS analysis and for the points on the carbides
31
==PAGE:40==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
from this consideration, the overall composition detected with EDS is very close to the
one measured with Force Technology. For what it concerns the carbides composition,
the fraction of Cr is around 65%, leading to conclude that this is deﬁnitely a Cr-rich
carbide.
In mapping mode, four frames have been acquired in each analysis. Again, the
investigation is carried out in all three zones, but zone A and C do not show any dis-
similarity with zone B. The map resulting from the analysis is shown in Figure 4.6,
where a carbide in zone B is selected and scanned. As already emerged from the sin-
gle point element identiﬁcation, the mapping is showing that the carbides are Cr-rich,
leading to identify them as the primary carbide described in literature as M7C3, since
they do not seem to contain any Nb, as expected. The matrix around is Fe and Ni-rich.
Figure 4.6: Mapping results for the HK-ar
Based on the ﬁndings of the characterization at the LOM and SEM on the as-cast
material, the following investigation on the aged one is performed focusing on zone
B, which is chosen as representative of the overall microstructure, keeping also into
consideration that close to the inner wall some impurities and inclusions might be still
present, being the material delivered as-cast, without any further machining.
XRD
As mentioned in Section 3.4.4, XRD is performed in order to complete the compo-
sitional analysis started with EDS, and gather more informations about the phases
32
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
present in the alloy. In Figure 4.7 it is displayed the XRD spectrum obtained for the
HK-ar, which is the result of diffraction of the synchrotron white beam by the sample,
and it presents characteristic intensity peaks at speciﬁc energies Ehkl. From the posi-
tion of the peaks it is possible to obtain information about the crystal structure of the
phases present in the material, as interplanar dhkl spacings. In particular the diffrac-
tion lines correspondent to austenite are plot on the spectrum, and it is possible to see
a very good ﬁt between the expected diffraction lines for austenite and the peaks from
the specimen. Hence, austenite is deﬁnitely present in the material, as expected. The
analysis followed on the spectra is only qualitative.
Figure 4.7: Spectrum of HK-ar, showing the diffraction lines for austenite in red
Next step is to look for peaks that could ﬁt diffraction lines for Cr7C3 and Cr23C6,
in order to try to determine whether the only precipitate present in the material in the
as-cast condition is one or the other carbide. The spectrum with the expected diffrac-
tion lines for Cr7C3, highlighted in green, is shown in Figure 4.8. Only a couple of
peaks ﬁt the diffraction lines, and one of them is also a ﬁt for a diffraction lines for
the G-phase but Cr7C3 is more likely to be present, rather than the G-phase, for both
position of the diffraction line and the fact that the G-phase, as known from literature,
should not be present in this material at this condition.
33
==PAGE:42==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
Figure 4.8: Spectrum of HK-ar, showing the diffraction lines for Cr7C3 in green
For what it concerns Cr23C6, no peaks seem to ﬁt any of the diffraction lines for the
secondary carbide, leading to the conclusion that the precipitate phase present in the
as-cast condition should indeed be Cr7C3.
Nevertheless, it should be mentioned that some peaks are left unidentiﬁed.
Figure 4.9: Spectrum of HK-ar, showing the diffraction lines for Cr23C6 in green
34
==PAGE:43==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
4.1.2
HK-ht
LOM
The characterization of the aged material is carried out starting from the material aged
for the longer time (3 weeks) and after the ﬁrst results, the investigation focus is moved
on shorter times (one and two weeks).
HK-ht-a-3
In order to be thorough with the characterization, in spite of the conclu-
sions made in the previous section about the as-cast material, the three different zones
are again investigated on the HK-ht-a-3 leading to the same conclusions drawn for
the as-cast material. Micrographs supporting this statement are given in Appendix A
in Figure A.1. As for the as-cast material, the aged ones are etched with Murakami’s
reagent prior investigation. Looking at high magniﬁcations (Figure 4.10a, 4.10b and 4.10c)
for each one of the three zones, it is possible to see how the microstructural features
have changed with ageing after three weeks.
(a) LOM micrograph of HK-
ht-a-3 (A)
(b) LOM micrograph of HK-
ht-a-3 (B)
(c) LOM micrograph of HK-
ht-a-3 (C)
(d) LOM micrograph of HK-
ht-b-3 (A)
(e) LOM micrograph of HK-
ht-b-3 (B)
(f) LOM micrograph of HK-
ht-b-3 (C)
Figure 4.10: LOM micrographs of the HK-ht-a&b-3. The carbides morphology and
distribution are clearly visible
The austenitic matrix is no longer homogeneous, but precipitation inside the austen-
ite grains has occurred. The intra-granular are identiﬁed from literature (Section 2.3)
as M23C6. Looking at zone C in Figure 4.10c, which represents the material last solidi-
ﬁed, it can be seen how much the microstructure so close to the inner wall is different
from the one anywhere else ,and it is possible to conﬁrm that not only zone B is a good
representation of the overall microstructure, but it is also a good choice to avoid zone
35
==PAGE:44==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
C, in particular close to the inner wall, because it is highly affected from the end of
solidiﬁcation, and which is always machined away before the tubes are put into oper-
ation. Focusing on zone B, the secondary carbides formed during ageing are present
overall in a round shape.
HK-ht-b-3
As for the lower ageing temperature, the specimen are etched with Mu-
rakami’s reagent, and the same procedure is followed, starting the investigation on
HK-ht-b-3 and looking afterwards to HK-ht-b-2 and HK-ht-b-1. Again, no peculiari-
ties characterize one zone rather than the others, as it can be seen in Appendix A in
FigureA.2. Considering the micrographs taken at high magniﬁcations and shown in
Figure 4.10d, 4.10e and 4.10f, microstructural changes (no longer homogeneous matrix
due to precipitation of secondary carbides) with respect to the as-cast material are evi-
dent, but no morphological differences can be seen between the different zones, beside
the same considerations made for zone C for the material aged at 850 ◦C. It can be no-
ticed, though, that the secondary carbides are no longer present only as round-shaped
particles, but some are present an acicular morphology, mostly towards the center of
the dendrites, indicating a different mechanism of growth (perhaps plate-like), com-
pared to the ones with round shape.
HK-ht-a,b-1,2
The micrographs taken at different magniﬁcations for both ageing tem-
peratures after one and two weeks are listed in Appendix A in Figure A.4.
(a) LOM micrograph of HK-
ht-a-1
(b) LOM micrograph of HK-
ht-a-2
(c) LOM micrograph of HK-
ht-a-3
(d) LOM micrograph of HK-
ht-b-1
(e) LOM micrograph of HK-
ht-b-2
(f) LOM micrograph of HK-
ht-b-3
Figure 4.11: LOM micrographs of the HK-ht-a&b-1&2&3. The carbides morphology
and distribution are clearly visible
36
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
In particular, looking at the material aged at 850 ◦C in Figure 4.11), where the evo-
lution of the microstructure during time for the two temperatures adopted for ageing
is shown (zone B), it seems that already after one week the acicular secondary carbides
are forming and they increase in dimension after two weeks, for later dissolving after
three weeks. On the contrary, looking at the material aged at 950 ◦C, it seems that only
after three weeks acicular carbides are forming. It is also clear that for both tempera-
tures and in general at all ageing times, ﬁne dispersed particles are forming also along
the grain boundaries in between the primary carbides.
SEM
HK-ht-a-1,2,3
The SEM investigation on the aged material is focused exclusively on
zone B of the tube, and the evolution of the microstructure over time at 850 ◦C is cap-
tured in the micrographs taken in BSE imaging mode on the samples etched with Mu-
rakami’s reagent and shown in Figure 4.12. SE images for the same conditions are
listed in Appendix B in Figure B.1 and B.2.
(a) SEM, BSE micrograph of
HK-ht-a-1
(b) SEM, BSE micrograph of
HK-ht-a-2
(c) SEM, BSE micrograph of
HK-ht-a-3
Figure 4.12: SEM, BSE micrographs of the HK-ht-a-1&2&3. The carbides morphology
and distribution are clearly visible
After one week in temperature (Figure 4.12a), a thick layer of ﬁne precipitates has
formed closely to the primary carbide network and with increasing distance from the
primary carbide towards the inner part of the grain, secondary carbides dimensions
seem to slightly increase, becoming also more coarse. Close to the centre of the grain
some carbides start to form in an acicular shape. It should be mentioned that this
feature is not resolved investigating the same material with LOM. After two weeks
of treatment (Figure 4.12b), the cloud of ﬁne secondary carbides close to the primary
ones is more sparse and with less precipitates than after one week, while the centre
of the grain presents less particles and the ones present are mostly acicular-shaped.
This could lead to the conclusion that the ﬁne precipitates present after one week have
coarsened in this acicular shape with one more week of ageing. After three weeks of
treatment (Figure ??), in the centre of the grain, more scattered precipitates are present
in a more cuboid shape, while the acicular ones seem to have disappeared or more
37
==PAGE:46==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
likely they have coarsened in the new cuboid-shape particles. Moreover, in between
the primary carbides, along the grain boundaries, it seems that those regions have been
populated with the presence of more ﬁne dispersed particles. From a ﬁrst visual anal-
ysis of the micrographs and from comparing them with the ones taken for the as-cast
material, it does not seem the case that the primary carbides are decreasing in dimen-
sion in favour of the the secondary ones and neither is their morphology changing with
ageing time.
HK-ht-b-1,2,3
The microstructural features changes during ageing at 950 ◦C are shown
in Figure 4.13, where SEM micrographs are acquired in BSE imaging mode on the sam-
ples etched with Murakami’s reagent.
(a) SEM, BSE micrograph of
HK-ht-b-1
(b) SEM, BSE micrograph of
HK-ht-b-2
(c) SEM, BSE micrograph of
HK-ht-b-3
Figure 4.13: SEM, BSE micrographs of the HK-ht-b-1&2&3. The carbides morphology
and distribution is clearly visible
After one week of treatment (Figure 4.13a), the precipitation of ﬁne secondary car-
bides is similar to the one for the ageing temperature of 850 ◦C, but in the centre of the
grain, there are already some acicular carbides. On the other hand, after two weeks
of treatment (Figure 4.13b), most of the acicular secondary carbides present in case of
the samples aged at the lower temperature, are disappeared, leading to think that at
this temperature those secondary carbides starts to grow more signiﬁcantly after just
one week of treatment but they almost dissolve after two weeks. Finally, after three
weeks of treatment (Figure 4.13c), comparing this situation with the same ageing time
at 850 ◦C, less cuboid-shape carbides are present in the centre of the grain, while the
acicular ones are still present. Again, it seems that the regions in between the pri-
mary carbides, along the grain boundaries, have been populated with the presence of
more ﬁne dispersed particles after one week and three weeks. As for the ageing tem-
perature of 850 ◦C, also here primary carbides does not seem to change in dimension
and morphology from a visual comparison between these micrographs and the ones
taken on the as-cast material. Moreover, at this ageing temperature, after three weeks
ot treatment, it seems that a very small PFZ (Precipitate Free Zone) is forming along
the primary carbides, even though it is quite difﬁcult to state this with certainty. This
38
==PAGE:47==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
could lead to the conclusion that this PFZ starts developing (if this is the case) only
after three weeks, while before it does not seem to be present, at least at this level of
magniﬁcation.
EDS
The elemental analysis results obtained through EDS on the aged material are given
in Appendix from Figure C.3 to Figure C.8. The same procedure followed for the as-
cast material is applied, considering in this case two different elemental composition
analysis for the two different carbides present. Several spots are considered on both
types of carbides and then averaged and displayed in the graphs, where the blue bar
represents the primary inter-dendritic network of carbides, situated along the grain
boundaries (GB carbides), while the yellow bar shows the elemental composition for
the secondary carbides precipitated inside the austenitic matrix (M carbides). It should
be taken into consideration in the evaluation of this analysis, that for these features the
interaction volume is comparable with the one of the analysed particles, therefore it
can highly affect the result.
Looking at the results after one week at 850 ◦C, and comparing them with the ones
for the as-cast material, the Cr content for the primary carbides is increased of about
5%, reaching a composition of about 60 wt%. On the other hand, the secondary car-
bides show a composition with around 40 wt% chromium. In particular, the focus is
on how the Cr content changes with time for each type of the two carbides and with re-
spect to each other. Considering the material after two and three weeks, the Cr content
for the primary carbides slightly decreases and then increases steeply for the mate-
rial aged for the longer time. In case of the secondary carbides, the trend is opposite,
but the decrease after three weeks is not as signiﬁcant as the increase in the primary
carbides.
Considering the results for the material aged at 950 ◦C, after one week the Cr con-
tent in the primary carbides is increased, as compared to the as-cast material, of about
20%, with a composition of around 70 wt%, which then slightly decreases after two
weeks and stays constant around 65 wt% after three weeks. For what it concerns the
secondary carbides, the show a Cr content of about 45%, which decreases and then
increases back after three weeks around the same value registered after one. At this
temperature, another feature is distinguished at high magniﬁcations in BSE mode as
a black needle-like shaped particle (Figure4.14), therefore an elemental analysis is per-
formed also on this feature, which is mainly located along the primary carbide net-
work. The results are inconclusive, presenting high values in composition of Cr, Fe
and Ni, which are probably reﬂecting the matrix composition, due to interaction vol-
ume comparable with dimensions of this feature. This particle is seen in the material
after one and two weeks of treatment, but disappears after three weeks.
In mapping mode, four frames have been acquired in each analysis, as for the as-
cast material. The maps resulting from the analysis are shown in Figure 4.15 and 4.16,
for the HK-ht-a-1 and HK-ht-a-2, where an area close to the primary carbide network is
chosen, in order to have both primary and secondary carbides scanned for composition
map. It can be seen that also the secondary carbides, both the cuboid-shaped ones and
the acicular ones, are Cr-rich, as the primary carbides along the grain boundary. Again,
39
==PAGE:48==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
Figure 4.14: SEM, BSE micrograph showing the black needle-like particle
the matrix around is Fe and Ni-rich.
Figure 4.15: Mapping results for the HK-ht-a-1
40
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
Figure 4.16: Mapping results for the HK-ht-a-2
XRD
The XRD spectrum for HK-ht-a-3 is shown in Figure 4.17, where beside the austenite
diffraction lines in red, diffraction lines for Cr7C3 are displayed. Five peaks seem to
ﬁt the diffraction lines and a closer look on the spectrum at different energies is given
in Appendix from Figure to Figure. Therefore Cr7C3 seems to be present. For what
it concerns Cr23C6, the correspondent diffraction lines are displayed on the spectrum
in Figure 4.18, where there is a very nice ﬁt with the intensity peaks in the material,
which allows to assert that Cr23C6 is deﬁnitely present in the material aged at 850 ◦C
after three weeks. The same can be observed in the HK-ht-a-2 and HK-ht-a-1, where
a signiﬁcant number of peaks ﬁt the diffraction lines for Cr23C6, while for Cr7C3 less
peaks are ﬁtting for the materials aged at lower times. In all three specimen at least
a couple of peaks always ﬁt the diffraction lines for NbC, and especially one peak is
present in all three specimens.
41
==PAGE:50==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
Figure 4.17: Spectrum of HK-ht-a-3, showing the diffraction lines for Cr7C3 in green
Figure 4.18: Spectrum of HK-ht-a-3, showing the diffraction lines for Cr23C6 in green
Looking at the ageing temperature of 950 ◦C and taking the spectrum for HK-ht-
b-3, it seems that no peaks are ﬁtting the diffraction lines for Cr7C3, while there is a
perfect ﬁt between peaks and diffraction lines for Cr23C6 and the same considerations
can be made for the shorter ageing times, where, even though some peaks are left
unidentiﬁed, the match for Cr23C6 is clear, while the presence of Cr7C3 cannot be
conﬁrmed by this analysis.
The spectra for the HK-ht-a-1,2 and HK-ht-b-1,2 are listed in Appendix D, from
Figure D.1 to Figure D.7.
42
==PAGE:51==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
Figure 4.19: Spectrum of HK-ht-b-3, showing the diffraction lines for Cr7C3 in green
4.1.3
HP-ar
As mentioned before, the main focus of this project is on the HK40 alloy. Neverthe-
less, a parallel characterization has been performed on the HP30-N, especially in the
as-received condition, in order to identify the microstructural features known from lit-
erature and an XRD analysis is performed on the as-received condition for having an
idea of how these results compare to the ones for the HK40.
LOM
The alloy microstructure for the HP-ar, as for the HK-ar, is clearly revealed with light
optical microscopy on samples etched with Murakami’s reagent. Even for this alloy,
the microstructural features are visible less sharply in the as-polished condition. The
same procedure followed for the HK40 alloy, is followed here, and the resulting mi-
crographs show no particular feature characterizing one zone rather than another one.
What can be seen immediately is that the austenitic matrix, which according to litera-
ture should be precipitate free as for the HK40, is not homogeneous but it presents in
this case ﬁne intragranular precipitates. This could be explained by either the material
being exposed to some temperature for some time or being cooled with a low cooling
rate that allows precipitation of these particles. Moreover, a previous investigation on
the as-polished material [7] has shown that two kinds of primary carbides are mainly
present: one with a white/light-grey appearance, and another one appearing dark at
LOM investigation. The ﬁrst one, from literature, has been identiﬁed as Cr7C3 and
the last one as NbC. From these micrographs, two kinds of carbides are revealed but it
should be taken into consideration that, due to the etchant action, the darker carbides
correspond to Cr7C3 and the brighter ones to NbC. LOM micrographs for this material
in the as-cast condition are listed in Appendix A in Figure A.5.
43
==PAGE:52==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
SEM
Also for the SEM investigation, the same considerations drawn from LOM investiga-
tion results about the uncertainty of the condition in which the material is received,
can be asserted here. The investigation in BSE mode suggests that the white carbides
are the ones containing the heavier elements, meaning that they can be identiﬁed as
NbC, while the dark ones are the ones containing the lighter elements, namely Cr,
therefore they can be identiﬁed as Cr7C3. SEM micrographs for the HP-ar are listed in
Appendix B in Figure B.3.
In particular, SEM micrographs taken at different magniﬁcations for the HP-ar in
the etched condition show clearly the carbides morphology and allow to better un-
derstand the differences between the two primary carbides. From the EDS analysis
(Section 4.1.3), it has also emerged that the white carbides could also be a partially
transformed NbC to G-phase. Finally, from these micrographs it is possible to get in-
formations about the size of the phases present in the microstructure, which which in
case of the black phase is in the order of 10 µm, while the white phase seems bigger, in
the order of 10 µm to 20 µm.
EDS
The elemental analysis results obtained through EDS on the as-received material are
given in Figure 4.20, and the same procedure adopted for the HK-ar is followed, by
focusing the attention of the different features present on the surface. In particular
the green bar is showing the average composition taken for the area of interest, while
the blue one is showing the average of the measurements taken on white carbides and
the yellow bar the average of measurements taken on the black carbides. Overall, the
composition is close to the initial one given in Section 2.3. Looking at the average of
the measurements taken on the black carbides, it is clear that these are Cr-rich, hence
they can be identiﬁed as the primary carbides Cr7C3. For what it concerns the white
carbides instead, they are Nb-rich, which could lead to identify them as the primary
carbides NbC, even though the amount of Si is signiﬁcant, which could indicate also
the possibility of the presence of G-phase if a stability range for this phase is reached.
In mapping mode, 4 frames are acquired considering a carbide in zone B. Looking at
the compositional map in Figure 4.21, Si and Nb seem to be present in the same phase
around the chromium rich region, leading to think that this ’greyish’ area could be
representative of G-phase starting to form at this early stage (due to the fact that, as al-
ready mentioned, this material in particular is not in the as cast condition as expected),
also due to what it seems a Ni-rich zone in correspondence of the same region. This
suggests that in the aged samples the solid state transformation from NbC to G-phase
could have taken place more clearly, but this has to be further investigate with EDS
on the samples that have been exposed for three weeks to 850 celsius and especially to
950 celsius, which from previous studies most likely lies out of the temperature stability
range for this phase.
44
==PAGE:53==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
Figure 4.20: Histogram showing the average composition calculated for the total area
of interest selected during EDS analysis and for the carbides. Compositions are given
in mass fraction (wt%)
Figure 4.21: Mapping results for the HP-ar
45
==PAGE:54==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
XRD
The XRD spectrum acquired for HP-ar is given in Figure 4.22, where beside the diffrac-
tion lines for austenite, displayed in red, the ones for Cr23C6 are displayed in green
and a very good match is found. A couple of peaks seem to ﬁt for NbC, but they are too
less to state something for sure and the same can be observed regarding the presence of
G-phase. Concerning Cr7C3, there seem to be only one peak ﬁtting the correspondent
diffraction lines, again, not enough to assert something.
Figure 4.22: Spectrum of HP-ar, showing the diffraction lines for Cr7C3 in green
4.1.4
HP-ht
LOM
HP-ht-a-3
As for the as-received samples, the aged ones are etched with Murakami’s
reagent. Micrographs showing the material aged for three weeks at 850 celsius and
950 celsius taken on the three different zones are listed in the Appendix A, in Figure A.6.
Also the HP alloy does not show any peculiar feature characterizing any of the three
zones, and the same goes for carbides morphology. The Cr7C3 carbides are coloured
almost black, with a series of different colours on some spots, that distinguish them
from the NbC, which appear completely black after the etching process. No presence
of a third phase is detected after the ageing at this temperature.
HP-ht-b-3
Similar considerations can be made on the micrographs obtained on the
samples aged at 950 celsius. It’s worth mentioned that at this temperature the par-
ticles identiﬁed as Cr7Cr3 are coloured differently by the etching action than in the
as-received material or the one aged at lower temperature, while the particle identiﬁed
as NbC appears black as in the as-polished condition. Moreover, at this stage, a third
phase can be detected in a small amount and it appears light grey/white.
46
==PAGE:55==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
SEM
Some micrographs taken in the aged condition are listed in Appendix B in Figure B.4
and B.5. The results conﬁrm what has already been discussed from the results at the
LOM.
4.2
Hardness testing
4.2.1
Macro hardness testing
Results of the macro hardness testing are listed in Table 4.1.
HK-hr
HK-ht-a-1
HK-ht-a-2
HK-ht-a-3
HK-ht-b-1
HK-ht-b-2
HK-ht-b-3
HV, (5 kgf)
199
219
214
221
224
232
216
HP-hr
HP-ht-a-1
HP-ht-a-2
HP-ht-a-3
HP-ht-b-1
HP-ht-b-2
HP-ht-b-3
HV, (5 kgf)
229
215
224
222
235
223
224
Table 4.1: Macro hardness testing results
4.2.2
Micro hardness testing
The results for the micro hardness testing on the HK40 alloy in the as-cast condition
are shown in Figure 4.23, 4.24 and 4.25, while the results for the HP30-N alloy in the as-
received condition are listed in Appendix F from Figure F.1 to Figure F.3. A comparison
for the micro-hardness proﬁle inside the dendrite for the aged HK40 and HP30-N alloy
is shown in Section 5.3 in Figure 5.3 and 5.4.
The micro hardness proﬁle along the radial direction of the section for the austenitic
matrix for HK-ar (Figure 4.23) seems to reach a plateaux at around 1.5 µm from the
external diameter of the tube, while in case of HP-ar, the values seem to decrease con-
stantly towards the internal diameter. No signiﬁcant trend is found for what concerns
the proﬁles for both the alloys in the aged conditions. The average of the measure-
ments is shown in the graph by a black cross.
Looking at the results for the micro hardness testing on carbides (Figure 4.24), the
measurements present a high standard deviation, due to size of indentation, close to
carbide size, and carbides morphology. The same considerations can be done for the
HP-ar. For this reason is quite difﬁcult to identify a particular trend, in both the as-
received and aged conditions. In general, it seems that the carbides in the HP-ar are
slightly higher than in HK-ar, and the hardness is decreasing with ageing for the HK40
alloy. Again, the average of the measurements is shown in the graph by a black cross.
Finally the results for the micro hardness proﬁle inside the dendrites (Figure 4.25)
are showing higher values on the carbides and lower ones inside the dendrite, in ac-
cordance with what expected, but the choice of the applied load, in this case 10 g, for
comparing the results with the ones in literature [17], is not allowing to record the mi-
47
==PAGE:56==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
Figure 4.23: Micro hardness proﬁle along the radial direction of the section for the
austenitic matrix
Figure 4.24: Micro hardness measurements on carbides in the three different zones
along the radial direction of the tube: from zone A, close to the outer diameter, through
zone B, in the central area of the section, to zone C, close to the inner diameter
48
==PAGE:57==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
cro hardness of the area closer to the carbides, due to the fact that indentations are too
central inside the dendrite, for measuring limitations restrictions [16]. The average of
the measurements is shown in the graph by a black cross.
An example of how the indentations are performed inside the dendrite is shown in
Figure 4.26.
Figure 4.25: Micro harness proﬁle inside the dendrite, from one eutectic carbide to the
opposite one
Figure 4.26: LOM micrograph showing the micro harness proﬁle inside the dendrite
49
==PAGE:58==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
4.3
Image analysis
4.3.1
Volume fraction
(a) Image after adjusting the threshold
(b) Drawing showing the outline of the par-
ticles analysed
Figure 4.27: Particle analysis for HK-ar
The results of the particle analysis on the HK40 alloy are shown in Table 4.2. The
count, the area, the average size and the area fraction of the particles are returned
from the analysis. In particular, according to the analysis performed on the as-cast
material, which presents only one type of particle (which is supposed to be M7C3 2.3),
the carbides volume fraction (which, as already mentioned in Section 3.6, is equivalent
of the area fraction) is 3.6 vol% and the average size is around 20 µm. The binary image
obtained after setting the threshold and outline of the analysed particles are given in
Figure 4.27.
The binary image obtained after setting the threshold and outline of the analysed
particles for the HK-ht-a-1 are given in Figure 4.27 as an example of the analysis in the
aged condition. The images obtained for the as-cast condition are listed in Appendix E
in Figure E.1.
Looking at the results for the material aged at 850 ◦C, after one week the total vol-
ume fraction of carbides is more than doubled, being 7.7 vol%. The binary image ob-
tained after setting the threshold is shown in Figure 4.28a and the outline resulting
from the analysis of all the particles present in the picture is shown in Figure 4.28b.
Then M7C3 and M23C6 are considered with two separated analysis, and the outline
resulting is given in Figure 4.28c and 4.28d, respectively. The sum of the two volume
fractions obtained sums up to the one obtained with the analysis done considering
all the particles, which gives a good feeling about the goodness of the method. This
applies to all the analysed conditions. In particular, the volume fraction of M7C3 is de-
creased to 2.4 vol% and after a further decrease of almost half in one week more, it rises
back to the same value measured after one week in temperature. On the other hand,
M23C6 volume fraction is found to be 5 vol% after one week, and it increases slightly
after two weeks for decreasing almost of the same amount after three weeks. It seems
50
==PAGE:59==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
Count
Total Area, µm2
Average size, µm
% Area
Area of interest
HK-ar
285
5735
20.1
3.6
All carbides
HK-ht-a-1
21998
11374
0.5
7.4
All carbides
182
3661
20.1
2.4
GB carbides
21816
7713
0.4
5
M carbides
HK-ht-a-2
56982
12508
0.2
7.7
All carbides
387
2118
5.5
1.3
GB carbides
56595
10389
0.2
6.4
M carbides
HK-ht-a-3
69194
15082
0.2
8.4
All carbides
639
4468
7
2.5
GB carbides
68555
10614
0.2
5.9
M carbides
HK-ht-b-1
38777
17007
0.4
8.7
All carbides
409
6262
15.3
3.2
GB carbides
38368
10745
0.3
5.5
M carbides
HK-ht-b-2
23467
13663
0.6
7.5
All carbides
275
6273
22.8
3.4
GB carbides
23192
7390
0.3
4
M carbides
HK-ht-b-3
54809
15170
0.3
8.5
All carbides
795
6159
7.7
3.4
GB carbides
54014
9011
0.2
5
M carbides
Table 4.2: Volume fraction measurements for the HK-ar and HK-ht at both ageing
temperatures for the different ageing times. The volume fraction corresponds to the
area fraction listed in the table, where the total area covered by carbides is given (All
carbides), and then the one calculated for the carbides on grain boundaries (GB) and
inside matrix (M) is shown
that the amount of one type of carbide is inversely proportional to that of the other
one. Considering the size of the particles, M7C3 maintains the same size as in the as-
cast material, and M23C6 is present with an average size of 0.4 µm. After two weeks of
ageing, the size of M7C3 is strongly decreased, being roughly four times smaller than
after one week in temperature and keeping almost the same size after three weeks.
Moreover, the size of M23C6 seems to decrease after one two weeks and stays constant
after three. Hence, the results seem to present a decreasing trend in particle size, for
both M7C3 and M23C6.
Looking at the results for the material aged at 950 ◦C, for what it concerns the M7C3,
its volume fraction is higher after one week, with respect to the same time at 850 ◦C,
and then there is an increase after two weeks, and that value stays constant for the
week after. Considering M23C6, there seems to be an opposite trend to the one seen
at the lower temperature. In fact, the volume fraction decreases after two weeks for
increasing again after three weeks. Overall, the average volume fraction of M7C3 at
this temperature is higher than the one at 850 ◦C, but it seems that, again, the amount
51
==PAGE:60==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
(a) Image after adjusting the threshold
(b) Drawing for outline of all the particles
(c) Drawing for outline of GB carbides
(d) Drawing for outline of M carbides
Figure 4.28: Particle analysis for HK-ht-a-1. The threshold set in this case is shown and
then the outlines resulting from the analysis of all present particles, carbides on grain
boundaries (GB) and the ones inside the matrix (M) are displayed
of one carbide is inversely proportional to the amount of the other one. Looking at
the average size of the particles, after one week, M7C3 shows a little decrease from the
as-cast condition, for increasing in size after two weeks and decreasing signiﬁcantly
after three weeks. On the other hand, M23C6 shows similar trend and values to the
ones seen at 850 ◦C.
4.3.2
Dendrite arm spacing
For what it concerns the dendrite arm spacing measures, the results are presented in
Table 4.3. In average, the alloy shows a dendrite arm spacing of 50 µm.
52
==PAGE:61==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
HK-hr
HK-ht-a-1
HK-ht-a-2
HK-ht-a-3
HK-ht-b-1
HK-ht-b-2
HK-ht-b-3
DAS, µm
50
49
42
57
49
46
50
Table 4.3: Dendrite arm spacing for HK40 alloy in the as-cast and aged conditions
4.4
Modelling of solidiﬁcation
In this subsection the modelling results achieved with Thermo-Calc software are shown.
First, equilibrium calculations are performed, then Scheil-Gulliver solidiﬁcation model
are applied. Finally the moving boundary model is adopted for simulating solidiﬁca-
tion by taking the cooling rate into account.
4.4.1
Equilibrium calculations
The results of the equilibrium calculation in Thermo-Calc performed at 1000 ◦C are
shown in Figure 4.29. The diagram displays the mass fraction of stable phases as func-
tion of temperature. Therefore, it is possible to get an indication of the phases forming
during a equilibrium solidiﬁcation. The ﬁrst one which forms from the liquid is de-
noted as FCC_A1, and its composition is shown in Appendix G in Figure G.1. From
here it is possible to identify it as the austenite forming from the liquid. The second
phase forming around 1300 ◦C is the one denoted as M7C3, and its composition is dis-
played in Figure 4.30, where it is possible to identify the phase as Cr7C3. Its mass
fraction increases and then stays constant until at around 1100 ◦C it starts decreasing
and disappears after 40 ◦C. Just when Cr7C3 ceases to be stable and its mass fraction
starts decreasing, M23C6 forms at around the same temperature and seems to remain
stable until 500 ◦C. It can be identiﬁed as Cr23C6 (Appendix G, Figure G.2). At 780 ◦C
the phase numbering of Thermo-Calc computes a different phase forming (FCC_A1#2),
but it is again austenite. At temperatures below 800 ◦C, phases denoted as SIGMA and
Z_PHASE are predicted to be stable from the diagram, but from literature these phases
are not stable in this range of temperatures. Finally, a very small amount of FCC_A1#3
is stable in the same range, but it consists mainly in Ti and N, so a nitrate that can be
disregard in the following analysis, being of no use for the purposes of this project and
being probably being pushed towards the inner wall of the tube in the centrifugal cast-
ing process. It should be mentioned that according to this calculation the liquid phase
ceases to exist, meaning solidiﬁcation is complete, at around 1280 ◦C.
53
==PAGE:62==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
Figure 4.29: Phase diagram for the equilibrium calculation performed in Thermo-Calc,
using the HK40-TC composition given in Table 3.3
54
==PAGE:63==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
Figure 4.30: Composition of M7C3, Cr7C3
4.4.2
Scheil-Gulliver model
As already mentioned in Section 3.7.2, thanks to Scheil-Gulliver model it is possible
to take into account micro segregation. The result of the simulation performed in
Thermo-Calc is a curve displaying the ranges of temperature in which the different
phases present in the system solidify, as function of the total fraction of solid. The
equilibrium curve obtained with the calculations performed in Section 4.4.1 is plot-
ted in dotted line in Figure 4.31, along with the resulting curve from Scheil-Gulliver
simulation of solidiﬁcation.
55
==PAGE:64==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
Figure 4.31: Extended Scheil-Gulliver solidiﬁcation curve with equilibrium solidiﬁca-
tion curve in dotted line
From the diagram, the ﬁrst phase that solidiﬁes at 1350 ◦C is FCC_A#1, which is
identiﬁed as austenite, from its composition shown in Appendix G, in Figure G.3.
Then, the second phase that forms is FCC_A1#2 at around 1330 ◦C, which from its
composition is Ti and Nb rich, therefore, for the same considerations made in the pre-
vious section, it can be disregard. Then M7C3 forms at 1295 ◦C, and it can be identiﬁed
as Cr7C3 from its composition, shown in Figure 4.32. It should be taken into consid-
eration, though, that this model is not very accurate towards the end of solidiﬁcation,
since the model is based on the assumption of no back diffusion in the solid (even
though it allows to consider some fast diffusers, as in this case C and N), at each step
of the simulation an equilibrium calculation is made on the volume at the solidiﬁca-
tion front, with a composition at that step (the solid retains its composition once it is
formed). Thus, at the very last steps before solidiﬁcation, the equilibrium is calculated
on a composition which is quite different from the initial one, where the concentra-
tion of the alloying elements becomes exponentially high. The end of solidiﬁcation
predicted from this model is around 1250 ◦C
56
==PAGE:65==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
Figure 4.32: Composition of M23C6, Cr23C6
4.4.3
Moving boundary method
In order to model micro segregation during solidiﬁcation, taking into account solid-
state transformations and cooling rate, Dictra module is adopted and a moving bound-
ary simulation is performed over a speciﬁc domain, which, in this case, is assumed to
be 25 µm wide, corresponding to half of the dendrite arm spacing measured in Sec-
tion 4.3.2. In particular, two different cooling rates are adopted. One simulation is
performed at 3 K s−1 for 270 s, while a second one is performed at 6 K s−1 for 135 s and
setting a starting temperature of 1600 ◦C for both simulations. In this way the results
can be compared. In Figure 4.33 the solidiﬁcation curve obtained for 6 K s−1 is dis-
played.
57
==PAGE:66==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
Figure 4.33: Moving boundary model solidiﬁcation curve, calculated with a cooling
rate of 3 K s−1
The temperature of end of solidiﬁcation is predicted at 1260 ◦C and 1255 ◦C for
3 K s−1 and 6 K s−1, respectively. Then it is interesting to look at the C and Cr pro-
ﬁles and their evolution with time. In particular, considering the simulation at 3 K s−1,
C and Cr proﬁles are given in Figure 4.34 and 4.35, for unitary time steps from 100 s to
125 s, which is an interval that covers partial solidiﬁcation. From the graphs it is pos-
sible to see how the proﬁles evolve with time, and in particular how the austenite is
solidifying from the left side of the domain and at some point of solidiﬁcation, M7C3
starts forming on the right side. Then diffusion is allowed, and it is possible to see
that at the last time steps considered in these graphs, where solidiﬁcation is complete,
solid-state diffusion is actually taking place, and it will continue until the end of the
simulation (Cr and C proﬁles for the entire simulation time are given in Appendix G,
in Figure G.5 and G.6)
58
==PAGE:67==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
Figure 4.34: Carbon proﬁle over the domain, showing the austenite forming from the
left and the M7C3 forming on the right. The proﬁle changes with time steps. C content
is given in wt%. Close-up of the interface region
Figure 4.35: Chromium proﬁle over the domain, showing the austenite forming from
the left and the M7C3 forming on the right. The proﬁle changes with time steps. Cr
content is given in wt%. Close-up of the interface region
59
==PAGE:68==
CHAPTER 5
DISCUSSION
5.1
Characterization of carbides transformation
From the EDS analysis of the HK-ar it has emerged that the precipitate phase present in
the as-cast condition is a Cr-rich phase, most likely the Cr7C3 as reported in literature.
In order to conﬁrm this assumption, XRD has been performed. Nonetheless, due to
a high textured morphology, which is far from being random, EDDI performed with
only one diffraction angle is not enough to gather useful informations about carbides
transformation. It could be the case, indeed, that the primary carbides, being quite
big in size and being mostly aligned with the dendritic structure, are quite difﬁcult to
detect by keeping the diffracting angle ﬁxed. Only a couple of peaks are identiﬁed as
ﬁtting the diffraction lines for Cr7C3 and in Figure 5.1 a logarithmic scale is applied in
order to better resolve the smaller peaks.
Figure 5.1: Spectrum of HK-ar, in logarithmic scale, showing the diffraction the posi-
tions of the peaks ﬁtting for the diffraction lines of Cr7C3
60
==PAGE:69==
CHAPTER 5. DISCUSSION
It should be mentioned that the two peaks identiﬁed in the as-cast material, are
actually not found in the aged ones. Moreover, for 850 ◦C, one peak for Cr7C3 il always
present in all three ageing times, leading to conclude that it could actually be that
Cr7C3 is present, even though not detectable with just one acquisition at ﬁxed angle.
Different diffraction angles should be employed for trying to overcome the texture
effect. On the other hand, in the aged material, Cr23 C6 is deﬁnitely present, being
a very god ﬁt with the diffraction lines for both temperature. All the conclusions are
made on a pure qualitative analysis of the spectra, since due to the absence of enough
peaks for identifying the M7C3, it is difﬁcult to ﬁt them and compare them with the
ones for M23C6 in order to get a quantiﬁcation of the evolution of one carbide to the
other and obtain informations not only on the crystal structure but also on the relative
fractions.
In addition to this, EDS is performed on the aged materials, in order to try to char-
acterize the carbides present in the microstructure and their evolution with time and
ageing temperature. But ﬁrst the microstructure is investigated at the LOM and SEM
and a comparison between the as-cast material and the aged ones at two and three
weeks is of utmost importance to capture the main features.
(a) LOM micrograph of HK-ar (b) LOM micrograph of HK-
ht-a-3
(c) LOM micrograph of HK-
ht-b-3
Figure 5.2: LOM micrographs of the HK-ar and HK-ht-a&b-3
In Figure 5.2 micrographs showing the typical microstructure are actually revealing
the presence of a PFZ, close to the primary carbides, and it seems particularly marked
for the ageing temperature of 950 ◦C, especially after two and three weeks of ageing, as
already shown in Section 4.1.2. The SEM investigation conﬁrms these conclusions and
, in general, comparing the behaviour of the HK40 alloy with the one of the HP30-N
alloy, the latter shows a more marked development of a PFZ along the inter-dendritic
carbide network. Finally, looking at the EDS results on the aged material (Appendix C
from Figure C.3 to Figure C.8), considering the ratio between the Cr content of the
primary carbides and the one of the secondary ones, and it change with time, for both
temperatures, no relevant trend can be observed in order to provide a solid argument
about the mechanism being transformation of primary carbide in secondary ones.
61
==PAGE:70==
CHAPTER 5. DISCUSSION
5.2
Carbide volume fraction
From the EDS analysis an increase in the Cr content is registered for the secondary
carbide, therefore it is quite interesting to compare this ﬁnding to the results of the im-
age analysis, in order to understand if the growth of M23C6 is at the expenses of the
M7C3. Looking at Table 4.2 it seems that this is not the case, being the amount of M7C3
more or less constant with the increase or decrease of the secondary carbide. What can
be noticed is that there could be some sort of trend for M23C6 to get smaller, but the
results are not enough clear to say anything about this. On the other hand, for the age-
ing temperature of 950 ◦C, there seem to be no change in M23C7 size, which could be
explained by considering that the ageing temperature adopted is still inside the stabil-
ity range for this carbide (from literature and from the results of the thermodynamic
modelling performed in this project).
5.3
Hardness
Even though different loads have been adopted to perform hardness testing on the
material, in general it is possible to make some considerations. First of all, macro hard-
ness values measured for the as-cast material are very close to the average value of
micro-hardness measured in the central zone of the tube. Considering the size of the
indentation, macro hardness measurements are taken on an area where both matrix
and carbide phases are present. Therefore, a higher value would be expected for the
average macro hardness. This phenomenon could be explained by the fact that the
primary carbides in the as-cast condition are only located at grain boundaries, thus
they are not contributing at high degree to increase the resistance of the material to
be deformed. Hardening of the material with ageing, instead, can be observed and in
particular an increase of about 20 HV and about 20 HV to 25 HV is measured for the
material aged at 850 ◦C and 950 ◦C, respectively. This seems to be in accordance with
what said about carbides playing a role in increasing the resistance to deformation of
the material, since with ageing the matrix is no longer homogeneous but ﬁne dispersed
precipitates are present. Thus, it can be asserted that precipitation upon ageing hard-
ens the material.
Regarding the HP-ar, the proﬁle for the matrix hardness shows a continuous de-
crease towards the inner wall of the tube. The average of this value for the matrix,
results lower than the measured macro hardness, which can be used as an argument to
support the assumptions made about the HK40 alloy. This could also be explained by a
higher hardness of the carbides present. Ageing seems to have little effect on hardness
fo the HP30-N, and a decrease of about 5 HV is measured, which is not enough to say
that the material softens with ageing, but it is certainly useful to give solid credibility
to the assumption that the higher initial value of macro hardness for this alloy, could
be mainly due to the presence of ﬁne dispersed particles in the matrix.
62
==PAGE:71==
CHAPTER 5. DISCUSSION
Figure 5.3: Comparison with respect to ageing time and temperature of micro harness
proﬁles inside the dendrite, from one eutectic carbide to the opposite one for HK40
alloy
Figure 5.4: Comparison with respect to ageing time and temperature of micro harness
proﬁles inside the dendrite, from one eutectic carbide to the opposite one for HP30-N
alloy
63
==PAGE:72==
CHAPTER 5. DISCUSSION
The results of the hardness proﬁles inside the matrix are not conclusive for the in-
vestigation of the inter-dendritic area, where a PFZ could be present, very close to the
primary carbide (as observed during material charcterization). In fact, even though
they show, as expected, a decrease in hardness towards the center of the dendrite, the
procedure followed does not allow to capture the actual PFZ close to the primary car-
bides, as explained in Section 4.2.2. It is also possible to notice for the HK40, that the
values measured ad different ageing conditions are lying in very narrow range, being
almost the same. In case of the HP30-N alloy instead, it seems that higher values of
hardness are found for the aged conditions in general, being HP-ht-a-1 the only condi-
tion with a hardness close to the one of the as-received material. This should be related
to allowing precipitation of more secondary carbides with the heat treatment, but as
already mentioned, the primary focus of this work is on the HK40 alloy, therefore, no
further investigation is carried out in this direction on the HP30-N.
5.4
Modelling of solidiﬁcation
From the results of the equilibrium calculations performed in Section 4.4.1, it is pos-
sible to gather informations about the possible phases that can be stable in the alloy,
and a sequence of solidiﬁcation but being the cooling rate adopted for the solidiﬁca-
tion of the alloy much higher in case of centrifugal casting, than the one adopted in the
equilibrium calculation, it is not a good representation of the real microstructure of the
material after cooling. In fact, looking at the results obtained during the material char-
acterization of the HK-ar, it is possible to conclude that only two phases are present
in the as-cast condition: the austenite and one second phase, which is proven to be
Cr-rich from EDS analysis, and should be Cr7C3, from literature. No M23C6 is found
during the as-cast material characterization, which is expected being C diffusion inhib-
ited from the fast cooling, and preventing the precipitation of M23C6. On the contrary,
in the aged conditions, for both ageing temperatures, two different phases are recog-
nized, beside the austenite, leading to the conclusion that the isothermal treatment
activated C diffusion and the precipitation of a new carbide.
From the equilibrium calculations it is also possible to extract the weight fraction
of M7C3 and M23C6 where these phases are stable, which for M7C3 at around 1170 ◦C
is 4 wt% wt%, while for M23C6 at around 900 ◦C is 8.2 wt%. Therefore comparing these
results with the ones gathered with image analysis of the aged materials at both tem-
peratures listed in Table 4.2, it is possible to see that there is an agreement, or a slight
overestimation, for the M7C3 with the volume fraction measured in the material aged
at 950 ◦C, which is already outside the range of stability for this phase, according to
the equilibrium calculations. Therefore it seems like this carbide is stable for a wider
range of temperatures than the one predicted from the simulation. In case of 850 ◦C,
the amount of these phase is decreased with respect to the one predicted from Thermo-
Calc, so this could indicate that at this temperature M7C3 is actually not stable any
more, as predicted. For what it concerns M23C7, it seems that the calculations are
overestimating the amount of this carbide, which is predicted to be more or less con-
stant over the stability range, and this is actually something that emerged also from
the image analysis.
64
==PAGE:73==
CHAPTER 5. DISCUSSION
Looking at the amount of Cr and C in M7C3 and M23C6, it is possible to make
a comparison between the values predicted with an equilibrium calculation, and the
ones predicted with Scheil solidiﬁcation simulation (only for M7C3, being M23C6 not
a stable phase according to Scheil). In particular, for M7C3, the amount of C present
according to the equilibrium calculation is 8.9 wt% while for Scheil is 8.7 wt%. The
amount of Cr is 77 wt% and 78 wt% for equilibrium and Scheil, respectively. There-
fore there seems to be a good agreement between the two methods. Moreover, this
can be related to the elemental analysis performed with EDS on the as-cast material,
where the amount of Cr is found to be close to 60 wt%. In this case there could be a
combined effect of overestimation of the Cr content from the numerical simulations
and an underestimation from the EDS measurements, due to interaction volume being
comparable with the particles size.
For what it concerns the M23C6, the C and Cr content predicted with the equilib-
rium calculations are, 8.9 wt% and 77 wt% respectively.
A comparison between the moving boundary model and the Scheil-Gulliver model
for solidiﬁcation is given in Figure 5.5.
Figure 5.5: Comparison between moving boundary model (3 K s−1) and Scheil-Gulliver
solidiﬁcation curves
Solidiﬁcation is over at 1250 ◦C according to Scheil, while according to Dictra at
1260 ◦C and 1250 ◦C for 3 K s−1 and 6 K s−1, respectively. Therefore it seems that overall,
Scheil model is good enough to predict the temperature of end of solidiﬁcation.
65
==PAGE:74==
CHAPTER 5. DISCUSSION
A comparison between the two simulations in Dictra at different cooling rates is
shown in Figure 5.6. The two curves are more or less matching with each other, but
they diverge towards the end of the simulation. In that region it is possible to see how,
especially the curve for 6 K s−1, at some point it diverges, probably where the austenite
has completely solidiﬁed and the carbide starts growing. Therefore, after solidiﬁcation
is concluded, solid-state diffusion is handled differently for the two different cooling
rates. In fact, for a higher cooling rate, the composition reached after solidiﬁcation will
be frozen, while in case of lower cooling rate, there will be more time for elements to
diffuse and therefore reach a different ﬁnal microstructure after solidiﬁcation.
Figure 5.6: Comparison between moving boundary model for two different simula-
tions at cooling rates of 3 K s−1 and 6 K s−1
Considering the C and Cr proﬁles and looking at the region close to the interface,
in the austenite phase for 3 K s−1, it is possible to see how their amount changes, being
decreased through solid-state diffusion.
In particular, considering the C proﬁle shown in Figure 5.7, it is possible to see how
the amount of C decreases from a value of 0.42 wt% in the liquid, to 0.0025 wt% at the
end of the simulation. Before solidiﬁcation, the proﬁles are completely ﬂat, because dif-
fusion is inﬁnitely fast. Then, after solidiﬁcation, the proﬁles start changing, meaning
that solid-state diffusion is acting in the system.
66
==PAGE:75==
CHAPTER 5. DISCUSSION
Figure 5.7: Carbon proﬁle over the domain of the simulation with cooling rate of
3 K s−1 for the entire simulation time. C content is given in wt%. Close-up of the
interface region
67
==PAGE:76==
CHAPTER 5. DISCUSSION
Figure 5.8: Chromium proﬁle over the domain of the simulation with cooling rate of
3 K s−1 for the entire simulation time. Cr content is given in wt%. Close-up of the
interface region
A similar behaviour can be seen for the Cr proﬁle in the same interval considered
(as shown in Figure 5.8). Looking at the Cr proﬁle along all simulation, a decrease
from about 25 wt% after 20 sto a value of 6.83 wt% after 270 s is registered. This is an
indication of possible formation of a precipitate free zone (PFZ) close to the primary
carbides, which forms at expenses of the solute from the adjacent region in the matrix,
resulting in a solute-depleted region around these precipitates. Considering the ﬁnd-
ings from the material characterization, a PFZ should be expected close to the carbides,
but its formation depend on the ageing temperature and it should be taken into con-
sideration that also the kinetics of formation of secondary carbides could play a role in
this mechanism, being related to the shape of the secondary carbides forming, thus to
their interfacial energy.
It seems therefore that Scheil-Gulliver model of solidiﬁcation is quite good for pre-
dicting the process until solidiﬁcation is concluded, comparing the values of C and Cr
from both simulations. What Scheil cannot reproduce, is solid-state diffusion taking
place after solidiﬁcation, and here the cooling rate could play an important role, since
from solidiﬁcation on, with a high cooling rate, mobility should be inhibited leading
to a different microstructure than the one obtained with a slow cooling rate. Dictra,
though, seems to work quite well for simulation of cooling for the austenite matrix,
taking also into consideration micro-segregation and solid-state diffusion, but it is im-
68
==PAGE:77==
CHAPTER 5. DISCUSSION
portant to relate the assumptions of the simulation with the real solidiﬁcation process.
In fact, once the dendrites are solidiﬁed, and touch between each other, pools of melt
can be left in the interdendritic areas. With a moving boundary simulation a cool-
ing rate is imposed, being the same for all the regions in the material, but in case of
dendritic solidiﬁcation, the formation of precipitates takes place exactly in those areas
which are outside of the simulation domain. Moreover, considering a simulation time
long enough to allow the total diffusion of C in the precipitate, the depletion of Cr in
the area surrounding the carbides will be extreme, and the same for C, leading the nu-
merical simulation to fail, for not being able to take into account zero C content. This
is therefore a limitation of the numerical model, which prevents further investigation
in this direction.
69
==PAGE:78==
CHAPTER 6
CONCLUSIONS
The preliminary characterization of the HK40 alloy in the as-cast condition has encom-
passed light optical microscopy, scanning electron microscopy, in both backscattered
and secondary electrons imaging modes, energy dispersive spectroscopy and X-ray
diffraction. A parallel investigation has been conducted on the HP30-N alloy in the
as-received condition, but the main focus of the carbides transformation has been on
the HK40 alloy. The results of this ﬁrst experimental characterization have conﬁrmed
that only one phase is present as precipitate in the austenite. The EDS analysis has
corroborated the previous statement, identifying the interdendritic network of precip-
itates ar Cr-rich phases, leading to the conclusion that it must be a Cr carbide, most
likely M7C3, as shown extensively also in literature.
Through the preliminary investigation of the alloy in the aged conditions, it has
been possible to identify the second phase which has precipitated during heat treat-
ment, being again a Cr-rich phase, which can be identiﬁed as M23C6, from literature
review but also from strong indication of its presence from the XRD analysis. Nonethe-
less, it has not been possible to characterize with a good margin of certainty the pres-
ence of either one carbide rather than the other in the aged microstructure, since EDS
could not provide good results about the secondary carbides, due to their relatively
small size. Also XRD has failed in providing information about the evolution of the
primary carbide into the secondary one through the ageing process, due to the high
texture of the material, which has prevented XRD analysis from getting good results in
recording the presence of the primary carbide, even in the as-cast condition. In fact, not
even a semi-quantitative analysis for an indication of how much of the primary carbide
actually transforms into the secondary one has been possible, since in the spectrum of
the as-cast material, not only Cr23C6 peaks were completely absent, but also intensity
peaks for primary carbides were scarcely identiﬁed. This leads to the conclusion that
this material is far from being fully characterized from an experimental point of view,
being the kinetics behind the formation of the secondary carbides still unknown. Fur-
thermore, from the SEM investigation, it was possible to identify the presence of a PZF
close to the primary carbides in most of the aged conditions under investigation. Also,
an important ﬁnding concerns the secondary carbides: their formation and growth is
highly affected from both time and temperature, leading to the formation of two differ-
ent kinds of secondary carbides, cuboid-shaped secondary carbides and acicular ones.
70
==PAGE:79==
CHAPTER 6. CONCLUSIONS
This difference in shape is a reﬂection of how the interfacial energy in their formation
could play an important role. In fact, the acicular carbides are most likely to have the
same crystallographic orientation as the austenitic matrix.
The results of the hardness testing gave a good insight about the effect of precipi-
tation on the hardness of the material, which upon ageing, for both investigated tem-
peratures, seems to harden of about 20 HV, even after only one week in temperature
at 850 ◦C. For what it concerns the investigation of the interdenrtic area, and how the
hardness can be affected by the possible presence of a PFZ, the results are not conclu-
sive, being the load applied too high for having an indentation proﬁle able to ﬁt into
the small area close to the grain boundaries. Nevertheless, comparing the obtained re-
sults with the ones in literature, it seems that there is a god agreement with the proﬁle
proposed in [6].
Regarding the thermodynamic modelling of solidiﬁcation, for this alloy the Scheil
model actually gives a good prediction of solidiﬁcation sequence and volume fraction
of phases and components, being in good agreement also with the equilibrium solidiﬁ-
cation. Moreover, the results of the image analysis in terms of quantiﬁcation of volume
fraction of the carbides in the aged condition, showed a good agreement with the pre-
diction of the volume fraction from the simulations, but again, it was not possible to
get some solid information whether the primary carbides transform into the secondary
ones or rather the formation of the secondary carbides starts with diffusion of Cr back
into the matrix when mobility is high enough and diffusion is activated with tempera-
ture.
In conclusion, even though Scheil proves to be a good model for solidiﬁcation sim-
ulation for this austenitic stainless steel, nevertheless, it is not able to capture informa-
tions related to the cooling rate and to solid-sate diffusion, which both play a signif-
icant role in microstructure evolution and, thus, in carbides transformations. Hence
the adoption of a moving boundary model which can take into account the cooling
rate and the micro-segregation, giving quite good results in terms of estimation of vol-
ume fraction of elements, and being also able to predict the possible formation of a
PFZ close to the interdendritic areas, where depletion of Cr results signiﬁcant. Again,
also the moving boundary model presents some limitations, consisting mainly in the
assumption that the cooling rate adopted is homogeneous in the material. This is true
until close to the end of solidiﬁcation, where, once the dendrites have solidiﬁed, a melt
pool is form in between them, and the cooling conditions of this region are far from
being similar to the ones followed by the dendrites, having also involved the release
of latent heat. For all of these reasons, also the moving boundary model can be im-
proved for getting closer to the real mechanism which governs the solidiﬁcation and
transformation of the interdendritic carbides.
71
==PAGE:80==
CHAPTER 7
FUTURE WORK
In the light of the ﬁndings of this report, some suggestions for future work are quite
interesting. First of all, TEM investigation should be performed on the secondary car-
bides and possibly also an EDS analysis directly on the TEM. In this way it could be
possible to gather more reliable informations about the composition of these precip-
itates, and also get informations about their orientation, in particular with respect to
the austenitic matrix.
At this purpose also EBSD could be a very valuable technique for characterizing the
phases present in the microstructure. Moreover, XRD should be performed at different
scattering angles, for getting more informations about the primary carbides and not
just identify the two different type of carbides, but also quantify their relative amount
and its evolution with respect to time and temperature.
Finally, considered the ﬁndings about a possible presence of a PFZ and depletion of
chromium in the areas close to the interdendritic carbides, it would be of great value to
extract different compositions from Dictra simulation, and in particular from austenite
close to the interface and another one from austenite far away from it. Then, with the
aid of a different model, simulate how these different compositions behave with re-
spect to carbides formations and transformations. A step backwards could encompass
a simple equilibrium calculation with these compositions at the temperatures adopted
for ageing the alloy. In this way there could be the bases for a comparison between
the microstructure seen at the microscopes after ageing and the one predicted by the
equilibrium at those temperatures and with the compositions extracted from Dictra
simulation.
72
==PAGE:81==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[1] K. G. Buchanan and M. V. Kral. Crystallography and morphology of niobium car-
bide in as-cast HP-niobium reformer tubes. Metallurgical and Materials Transaction,
43:1760–1769, June 2012.
[2] I. Le May L. H. de Almeida, A. Freitas Ribeiro. Microstructural characterization
of modiﬁed 25Cr-35Ni centrifugally cast steel furnace tubes. Materials Characteri-
zation, 49:219–229, December 2003.
[3] L.Bonaccorsi, E. Guglielmino, R. Pino, C. Servetto, and A. Sili. Damage analysis in
Fe-Cr-Ni centrifugally cast alloy tubes for reforming furnaces. Engineering Failure
Analysis, 36:65–74, October 2013.
[4] G. M. Webb and W. K. Taylor. Reformer tubes: not a commodity. Process Safety
Progress, 26(2):159–163, June 2007.
[5] M. José Landeira Østergård and S. G. Thomsen. High temperature degradation
of reformer tubes in hydrogen plants. 2004.
[6] X. Q. Wu, H. M. Jing, Y.G. Zheng, Z. M. Yao, W. Ke, and Z. Q. Hu. The eutectic car-
bides and creep rupture strength of 25Cr-20Ni heat-resistant steel tubes centrifu-
gally cast with different solidiﬁcation conditions. Material science and engineering,
A(293):252–260, May 2000.
[7] J. G. Jensen.
Microstructural evolution in centrifugally cast high temperature
austenitic alloys. M.sc. thesis, Technical University of Denmark, Nils Koppels
Allé, Building 404, 2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark, June 2015.
[8] C. Tibollo. Microstructure of centrifugally cast high temperature steels. Special
project report, Technical University of Denmark, Nils Koppels Allé, Building 404,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark, February 2017.
[9] D. A. Porter, K. E. Easterling, and M. Y. Sherif. Phase Transformations in Metals and
Alloys. Taylor & Francis Group, 2009.
[10] H. Fredriksson and U. Åkerlind. Materials Processing during Casting. John Wiley &
73
==PAGE:82==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Sons, Ltd, 2006.
[11] H. L. Lukas, S. G. Fries, and B. Sundman. Computational thermodynamics: the Cal-
phad method. Cambridge University Press, 2007.
[12] B. L. Bramﬁt and A. O. Benscoter. Metallographer’s Guide - Practises and Procedures
for Irons and Steels. ASM International, 2002.
[13] Y. Leng. Materials Characterization - Introduction to Microscopic and Spectroscopic
Methods. JohnWiley & Sons (Asia) Pte Ltd, 2008.
[14] C. Genzel, I. A. Denks, and M. Klaus. The materials science beamline EDDI for
energy-dispersive analysis of subsurface residual stress gradients. Materials Sci-
ence Forum, 524-525:193–198, 2006.
[15] J.W. Otto. On the peak proﬁles in energy-dispersive powder x-ray diffraction with
synchrotron radiation. Journal of Applied Crystallography, 30:1008â€“1015, 1997.
[16] ASTM E 92-17. Standard Test Method for Vickers Hardness and Knoop Hardness of
Metallic Materials, May 2017.
[17] Y. Kondo, Y. Sakurai, J. Namekata, M. Tanaka, and F. Hangai. Effect of high tem-
perature ageing on eutectic carbide morphology of centrifugally cast HK40 and
HP steels. ISIJ International, 76:1195–1201, 1990.
[18] J. O. Andersson, T. Helander, L. Höglund, P. F. Shi, and B. Sundman. Thermo-Calc
and DICTRA, Computational tools for materials science. Calphad, 26, 2002.
[19] A. T. Dinsdale. SGTE data for pure elements. Calphad, 15(4):317â€“425, 1991.
[20] A. A. Kaya. Microstructure of hk40 alloy after high-temperature service in ox-
idizing/carburizing environment ii. carburization and carbide transformations.
Materials characterization, 49:23–34, June 2002.
[21] J. Laigo, F. Tancret, R. Le Gall, and J. Furtado. Modelling and characterization of
precipitate formation and transformations in Fe-Ni-Cr reformer tube alloys. Solid-
to-Solid Phase Transformations in Inorganic Materials, 2005.
74
==PAGE:83==
LIST OF FIGURES
2.1
Haldor Topsøe side ﬁred steam reformer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Centrifugal casting process
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
Centrifugal casting with columnar structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.4
Centrifugal casting with columnar structure near the outer diameter and
equiaxed structure near the inner diameter
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.5
Solidifying volume element considered in the Scheil-Gulliver model
. .
12
2.6
Phase diagram of binary alloy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.1
Sections of the tubes received from the supplier
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.2
Sample preparation for material characterization and section investigated 17
3.3
Cutting section and ﬁnal embedded specimen
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.1
LOM micrographs at different magniﬁcations of the HK-ar. The typical
dendritic structure of the centrifugally cast alloy is clearly visible and it
is also possible to recognize the microstructure of the austenitic matrix
and the inter-dendritic primary carbides . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.2
LOM micrographs at the highest magniﬁcation of the HK-ar. The car-
bides morphology is clearly visible . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.3
SEM, BSE micrographs at different magniﬁcations of the HK-ar. The
typical dendritic structure of the centrifugally cast alloy is clearly visible
and it is also possible to see the microstructure of the austenitic matrix
and the inter-dendritic primary carbides . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.4
Histogram showing the average composition calculated for the total area
of interest selected during EDS analysis and for the carbides. Composi-
tions are given in mass fraction (wt%) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.5
SEM, BSE micrograph showing the total area of interest selected during
EDS analysis and for the points on the carbides . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.6
Mapping results for the HK-ar . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.7
Spectrum of HK-ar, showing the diffraction lines for austenite in red
. .
33
4.8
Spectrum of HK-ar, showing the diffraction lines for Cr7C3 in green . . .
34
4.9
Spectrum of HK-ar, showing the diffraction lines for Cr23C6 in green . .
34
75
==PAGE:84==
LIST OF FIGURES
4.10 LOM micrographs of the HK-ht-a&b-3. The carbides morphology and
distribution are clearly visible . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.11 LOM micrographs of the HK-ht-a&b-1&2&3. The carbides morphology
and distribution are clearly visible
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.12 SEM, BSE micrographs of the HK-ht-a-1&2&3. The carbides morphol-
ogy and distribution are clearly visible . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.13 SEM, BSE micrographs of the HK-ht-b-1&2&3. The carbides morphol-
ogy and distribution is clearly visible . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.14 SEM, BSE micrograph showing the black needle-like particle . . . . . . .
40
4.15 Mapping results for the HK-ht-a-1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.16 Mapping results for the HK-ht-a-2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.17 Spectrum of HK-ht-a-3, showing the diffraction lines for Cr7C3 in green
42
4.18 Spectrum of HK-ht-a-3, showing the diffraction lines for Cr23C6 in green
42
4.19 Spectrum of HK-ht-b-3, showing the diffraction lines for Cr7C3 in green
43
4.20 Histogram showing the average composition calculated for the total area
of interest selected during EDS analysis and for the carbides. Composi-
tions are given in mass fraction (wt%)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.21 Mapping results for the HP-ar . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.22 Spectrum of HP-ar, showing the diffraction lines for Cr7C3 in green
. .
46
4.23 Micro hardness proﬁle along the radial direction of the section for the
austenitic matrix . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.24 Micro hardness measurements on carbides in the three different zones
along the radial direction of the tube: from zone A, close to the outer
diameter, through zone B, in the central area of the section, to zone C,
close to the inner diameter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.25 Micro harness proﬁle inside the dendrite, from one eutectic carbide to
the opposite one . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
4.26 LOM micrograph showing the micro harness proﬁle inside the dendrite
49
4.27 Particle analysis for HK-ar . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
4.28 Particle analysis for HK-ht-a-1. The threshold set in this case is shown
and then the outlines resulting from the analysis of all present particles,
carbides on grain boundaries (GB) and the ones inside the matrix (M)
are displayed
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
4.29 Phase diagram for the equilibrium calculation performed in Thermo-
Calc, using the HK40-TC composition given in Table 3.3 . . . . . . . . . .
54
4.30 Composition of M7C3, Cr7C3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
4.31 Extended Scheil-Gulliver solidiﬁcation curve with equilibrium solidiﬁ-
cation curve in dotted line . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
4.32 Composition of M23C6, Cr23C6 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
4.33 Moving boundary model solidiﬁcation curve, calculated with a cooling
rate of 3 K s−1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
4.34 Carbon proﬁle over the domain, showing the austenite forming from the
left and the M7C3 forming on the right. The proﬁle changes with time
steps. C content is given in wt%. Close-up of the interface region
. . . .
59
76
==PAGE:85==
LIST OF FIGURES
4.35 Chromium proﬁle over the domain, showing the austenite forming from
the left and the M7C3 forming on the right. The proﬁle changes with
time steps. Cr content is given in wt%. Close-up of the interface region .
59
5.1
Spectrum of HK-ar, in logarithmic scale, showing the diffraction the po-
sitions of the peaks ﬁtting for the diffraction lines of Cr7C3 . . . . . . . .
60
5.2
LOM micrographs of the HK-ar and HK-ht-a&b-3 . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
5.3
Comparison with respect to ageing time and temperature of micro har-
ness proﬁles inside the dendrite, from one eutectic carbide to the oppo-
site one for HK40 alloy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
5.4
Comparison with respect to ageing time and temperature of micro har-
ness proﬁles inside the dendrite, from one eutectic carbide to the oppo-
site one for HP30-N alloy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
5.5
Comparison between moving boundary model (3 K s−1) and Scheil-Gulliver
solidiﬁcation curves . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
5.6
Comparison between moving boundary model for two different simu-
lations at cooling rates of 3 K s−1 and 6 K s−1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
5.7
Carbon proﬁle over the domain of the simulation with cooling rate of
3 K s−1 for the entire simulation time. C content is given in wt%. Close-
up of the interface region . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
5.8
Chromium proﬁle over the domain of the simulation with cooling rate
of 3 K s−1 for the entire simulation time. Cr content is given in wt%.
Close-up of the interface region . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
A.1 LOM micrographs of the HK-ht-a&b-1&2&3. The carbides morphology
and distribution are clearly visible
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
A.2 LOM micrographs of the HK-ht-a&b-1&2&3. The carbides morphology
and distribution are clearly visible
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
A.3 LOM micrographs of the HK-ht-a-1&2. The carbides morphology and
distribution are clearly visible . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
83
A.4 LOM micrographs of the HK-ht-a-1&2. The carbides morphology and
distribution are clearly visible . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
84
A.5 LOM micrographs at the highest magniﬁcation of the HP-ar. The car-
bides morphology is clearly visible and it is possible to recognize the
MC and M7C3 described in literature as NbC and Cr7C3 . . . . . . . . .
85
A.6 LOM micrographs of the HP-ht-a&b-3. The carbides morphology and
distribution are clearly visible . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
B.1
SEM, SE micrographs of the HK-ht-a-1&2&3. The carbides morphology
and distribution are clearly visible
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
86
B.2
SEM, SE micrographs of the HK-ht-b-1&2&3. The carbides morphology
and distribution are clearly visible
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
86
77
==PAGE:86==
LIST OF FIGURES
B.3
SEM, BSE micrographs at high magniﬁcations of the HP-ar. The typical
dendritic structure of the centrifugally cast alloy is clearly visible. The
microstructure of the austenitic matrix is not homogeneous but ﬁne pre-
cipitates in between the dendrites are present. The primary NbC and
Cr7C3 carbides are forming the interdendritic carbide network . . . . . .
87
B.4
SEM, BSE micrographs of the HP-ht-a-3 at different magniﬁcations. The
carbides morphology and distribution are clearly visible
. . . . . . . . .
87
B.5
SEM, BSE micrographs of the HP-ht-b-3 at different magniﬁcations. The
carbides morphology and distribution are clearly visible
. . . . . . . . .
88
C.1
Histogram showing the average composition calculated for the total area
of interest selected during EDS analysis and for the carbides. HK-ar
zone A. Compositions are given in mass fraction (wt%) . . . . . . . . . .
89
C.2
Histogram showing the average composition calculated for the total area
of interest selected during EDS analysis and for the carbides. HK-ar
zone A. Compositions are given in mass fraction (wt%) . . . . . . . . . .
90
C.3
Histogram showing the average composition calculated for the total area
of interest selected during EDS analysis and for the carbides. HK-ht-a-1.
Compositions are given in mass fraction (wt%) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
91
C.4
Histogram showing the average composition calculated for the total area
of interest selected during EDS analysis and for the carbides. HK-ht-a-2.
Compositions are given in mass fraction (wt%) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
92
C.5
Histogram showing the average composition calculated for the total area
of interest selected during EDS analysis and for the carbides. HK-ht-a-3.
Compositions are given in mass fraction (wt%) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
93
C.6
Histogram showing the average composition calculated for the total area
of interest selected during EDS analysis and for the carbides. HK-ht-b-1.
Compositions are given in mass fraction (wt%) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
94
C.7
Histogram showing the average composition calculated for the total area
of interest selected during EDS analysis and for the carbides. HK-ht-b-2.
Compositions are given in mass fraction (wt%) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
95
C.8
Histogram showing the average composition calculated for the total area
of interest selected during EDS analysis and for the carbides. HK-ht-b-3.
Compositions are given in mass fraction (wt%) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
96
D.1 Spectrum of HK-ht-a-3, close-up showing the diffraction lines for Cr7C3
in green . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
97
D.2 Spectrum of HK-ht-a-3, close-up showing the diffraction lines for Cr23C6
in green . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
98
D.3 Spectrum of HK-ht-a-3, close-up showing the diffraction lines for Cr7C3
in green . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
98
D.4 Spectrum of HK-ht-a-3, close-up showing the diffraction lines for Cr23C6
in green . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
99
D.5 Spectrum of HK-ht-b-1, close-up showing the diffraction lines for Cr7C3
in green . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
99
78
==PAGE:87==
LIST OF FIGURES
D.6 Spectrum of HK-ht-b-1, close-up showing the diffraction lines for Cr23C6
in green . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 100
D.7 Spectrum of HK-ht-b-2, close-up showing the diffraction lines for Cr23C6
in green . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 100
E.1
Particle analysis for HK-ar. The threshold set in this case is shown and
then the outlines resulting from the analysis of all present particles, car-
bides on grain boundaries (GB) and the ones inside the matrix (M) are
displayed . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101
F.1
Micro hardness proﬁle along the radial direction of the section for the
austenitic matrix for HP-ar . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 102
F.2
Micro hardness measurements on carbides in the three different zones
along the radial direction of the tube: from zone A, close to the outer
diameter, through zone B, in the central area of the section, to zone C,
close to the inner diameter. HP-ar . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 103
F.3
Micro harness proﬁle inside the dendrite, from one eutectic carbide to
the opposite one. HP-ar
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 103
G.1 Composition of FCC_A1, Austenite . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 104
G.2 Composition of M23C6, Cr23C6 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 105
G.3 Composition of FCC_A1, Austenite . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 105
G.4 Composition of M6C, M6C . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 106
G.5 Carbon proﬁle over the domain, showing the austenite forming from the
left and the M7C3 forming on the right. The proﬁle changes with time
steps. C content is given in wt% . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 107
G.6 Chromium proﬁle over the domain, showing the austenite forming from
the left and the M7C3 forming on the right. The proﬁle changes with
time steps. Cr content is given in wt% . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 108
79
==PAGE:88==
LIST OF TABLES
2.1
Composition in wt% of HK40 and HP30N alloys investigated in the report 11
3.1
Overview of the ageing treatments of HK40 and HP30-N alloys . . . . .
16
3.2
Grinding and polishing settings used to polish the samples after being
cut and mounted
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.3
Compositions in wt% of HK40 used in thermodynamic simulations: HK40-
TC is used in Thermo-Calc simulations while HK40-D is used in Dictra
simulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.1
Macro hardness testing results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.2
Volume fraction measurements for the HK-ar and HK-ht at both age-
ing temperatures for the different ageing times. The volume fraction
corresponds to the area fraction listed in the table, where the total area
covered by carbides is given (All carbides), and then the one calculated
for the carbides on grain boundaries (GB) and inside matrix (M) is shown 51
4.3
Dendrite arm spacing for HK40 alloy in the as-cast and aged conditions
53
80
==PAGE:89==
APPENDIX A
LOM MICROGRAPHS
(a) LOM micrograph of HK-
ht-a-3 (A)
(b) LOM micrograph of HK-
ht-a-3 (B)
(c) LOM micrograph of HK-
ht-a-3 (C)
(d) LOM micrograph of HK-
ht-a-3 (A)
(e) LOM micrograph of HK-
ht-a-3 (B)
(f) LOM micrograph of HK-
ht-a-3 (C)
(g) LOM micrograph of HK-
ht-a-3 (A)
(h) LOM micrograph of HK-
ht-a-3 (B)
(i) LOM micrograph of HK-ht-
a-3 (C)
Figure A.1: LOM micrographs of the HK-ht-a&b-1&2&3. The carbides morphology
and distribution are clearly visible
81
==PAGE:90==
APPENDIX A. LOM MICROGRAPHS
(a) LOM micrograph of HK-
ht-b-3 (A)
(b) LOM micrograph of HK-
ht-b-3 (B)
(c) LOM micrograph of HK-
ht-b-3 (C)
(d) LOM micrograph of HK-
ht-b-3 (A)
(e) LOM micrograph of HK-
ht-b-3 (B)
(f) LOM micrograph of HK-
ht-b-3 (C)
(g) LOM micrograph of HK-
ht-b-3 (A)
(h) LOM micrograph of HK-
ht-b-3 (B)
(i) LOM micrograph of HK-ht-
b-3 (C)
Figure A.2: LOM micrographs of the HK-ht-a&b-1&2&3. The carbides morphology
and distribution are clearly visible
82
==PAGE:91==
APPENDIX A. LOM MICROGRAPHS
(a) LOM micrograph of HK-ht-a-1
(b) LOM micrograph of HK-ht-a-2
(c) LOM micrograph of HK-ht-a-1
(d) LOM micrograph of HK-ht-a-2
(e) LOM micrograph of HK-ht-a-1
(f) LOM micrograph of HK-ht-a-2
Figure A.3: LOM micrographs of the HK-ht-a-1&2. The carbides morphology and
distribution are clearly visible
83
==PAGE:92==
APPENDIX A. LOM MICROGRAPHS
(a) LOM micrograph of HK-ht-a-1
(b) LOM micrograph of HK-ht-a-2
(c) LOM micrograph of HK-ht-a-1
(d) LOM micrograph of HK-ht-a-2
(e) LOM micrograph of HK-ht-a-1
(f) LOM micrograph of HK-ht-a-2
Figure A.4: LOM micrographs of the HK-ht-a-1&2. The carbides morphology and
distribution are clearly visible
84
==PAGE:93==
APPENDIX A. LOM MICROGRAPHS
(a) LOM micrograph of the
outer part of sample HP-ar
(b) LOM micrograph of the
central part of sample HP-ar
(c) LOM micrograph of the in-
ner part of sample HP-ar
Figure A.5: LOM micrographs at the highest magniﬁcation of the HP-ar. The car-
bides morphology is clearly visible and it is possible to recognize the MC and M7C3
described in literature as NbC and Cr7C3
(a) LOM micrograph of HP-
ht-a-3 (A)
(b) LOM micrograph of HP-
ht-a-3 (B)
(c) LOM micrograph of HP-ht-
a-3 (C)
(d) LOM micrograph of HP-
ht-b-3 (A)
(e) LOM micrograph of HP-
ht-b-3 (B)
(f) LOM micrograph of HP-ht-
b-3 (C)
Figure A.6: LOM micrographs of the HP-ht-a&b-3. The carbides morphology and
distribution are clearly visible
85
==PAGE:94==
APPENDIX B
SEM MICROGRAPHS
(a) SEM, SE micrograph of
HK-ht-a-1
(b) SEM, SE micrograph of
HK-ht-a-2
(c) SEM, SE micrograph of
HK-ht-a-3
Figure B.1: SEM, SE micrographs of the HK-ht-a-1&2&3. The carbides morphology
and distribution are clearly visible
(a) SEM, SE micrograph of
HK-ht-b-1
(b) SEM, SE micrograph of
HK-ht-b-2
(c) SEM, SE micrograph of
HK-ht-b-3
Figure B.2: SEM, SE micrographs of the HK-ht-b-1&2&3. The carbides morphology
and distribution are clearly visible
86
==PAGE:95==
APPENDIX B. SEM MICROGRAPHS
(a) SEM, BSE. Outer part of
HP-ar
(b) SEM, BSE. Central part of
HP-ar
(c) SEM, BSE. Inner part of
HP-ar
Figure B.3: SEM, BSE micrographs at high magniﬁcations of the HP-ar. The typical
dendritic structure of the centrifugally cast alloy is clearly visible. The microstructure
of the austenitic matrix is not homogeneous but ﬁne precipitates in between the den-
drites are present. The primary NbC and Cr7C3 carbides are forming the interdendritic
carbide network
(a) SEM, BSE micrograph of
HP-ht-a-3, low magniﬁcation
(b) SEM, BSE micrograph of
HP-ht-a-3, medium magniﬁ-
cation
(c) SEM, BSE micrograph of
HP-ht-a-3, high magniﬁcation
Figure B.4: SEM, BSE micrographs of the HP-ht-a-3 at different magniﬁcations. The
carbides morphology and distribution are clearly visible
87
==PAGE:96==
APPENDIX B. SEM MICROGRAPHS
(a) SEM, BSE micrograph of
HP-ht-b-3, low magniﬁcation
(b) SEM, BSE micrograph of
HP-ht-b-3, medium magniﬁ-
cation
(c) SEM, BSE micrograph of
HP-ht-b-3, high magniﬁcation
Figure B.5: SEM, BSE micrographs of the HP-ht-b-3 at different magniﬁcations. The
carbides morphology and distribution are clearly visible
88
==PAGE:97==
APPENDIX C
EDS ANALYSIS
Figure C.1: Histogram showing the average composition calculated for the total area
of interest selected during EDS analysis and for the carbides. HK-ar zone A. Composi-
tions are given in mass fraction (wt%)
89
==PAGE:98==
APPENDIX C. EDS ANALYSIS
Figure C.2: Histogram showing the average composition calculated for the total area
of interest selected during EDS analysis and for the carbides. HK-ar zone A. Composi-
tions are given in mass fraction (wt%)
90
==PAGE:99==
APPENDIX C. EDS ANALYSIS
Figure C.3: Histogram showing the average composition calculated for the total area
of interest selected during EDS analysis and for the carbides. HK-ht-a-1. Compositions
are given in mass fraction (wt%)
91
==PAGE:100==
APPENDIX C. EDS ANALYSIS
Figure C.4: Histogram showing the average composition calculated for the total area
of interest selected during EDS analysis and for the carbides. HK-ht-a-2. Compositions
are given in mass fraction (wt%)
92
==PAGE:101==
APPENDIX C. EDS ANALYSIS
Figure C.5: Histogram showing the average composition calculated for the total area
of interest selected during EDS analysis and for the carbides. HK-ht-a-3. Compositions
are given in mass fraction (wt%)
93
==PAGE:102==
APPENDIX C. EDS ANALYSIS
Figure C.6: Histogram showing the average composition calculated for the total area
of interest selected during EDS analysis and for the carbides. HK-ht-b-1. Compositions
are given in mass fraction (wt%)
94
==PAGE:103==
APPENDIX C. EDS ANALYSIS
Figure C.7: Histogram showing the average composition calculated for the total area
of interest selected during EDS analysis and for the carbides. HK-ht-b-2. Compositions
are given in mass fraction (wt%)
95
==PAGE:104==
APPENDIX C. EDS ANALYSIS
Figure C.8: Histogram showing the average composition calculated for the total area
of interest selected during EDS analysis and for the carbides. HK-ht-b-3. Compositions
are given in mass fraction (wt%)
96
==PAGE:105==
APPENDIX D
XRD ANALYSIS
Figure D.1: Spectrum of HK-ht-a-3, close-up showing the diffraction lines for Cr7C3
in green
97
==PAGE:106==
APPENDIX D. XRD ANALYSIS
Figure D.2: Spectrum of HK-ht-a-3, close-up showing the diffraction lines for Cr23C6
in green
Figure D.3: Spectrum of HK-ht-a-3, close-up showing the diffraction lines for Cr7C3
in green
98
==PAGE:107==
APPENDIX D. XRD ANALYSIS
Figure D.4: Spectrum of HK-ht-a-3, close-up showing the diffraction lines for Cr23C6
in green
Figure D.5: Spectrum of HK-ht-b-1, close-up showing the diffraction lines for Cr7C3
in green
99
==PAGE:108==
APPENDIX D. XRD ANALYSIS
Figure D.6: Spectrum of HK-ht-b-1, close-up showing the diffraction lines for Cr23C6
in green
Figure D.7: Spectrum of HK-ht-b-2, close-up showing the diffraction lines for Cr23C6
in green
100
==PAGE:109==
APPENDIX E
IMAGE ANALYSIS
(a) Image after adjusting the threshold
(b) Drawing for outline of all the particles
Figure E.1: Particle analysis for HK-ar. The threshold set in this case is shown and
then the outlines resulting from the analysis of all present particles, carbides on grain
boundaries (GB) and the ones inside the matrix (M) are displayed
101
==PAGE:110==
APPENDIX F
HARDNESS TESTING
Figure F.1: Micro hardness proﬁle along the radial direction of the section for the
austenitic matrix for HP-ar
102
==PAGE:111==
APPENDIX F. HARDNESS TESTING
Figure F.2: Micro hardness measurements on carbides in the three different zones along
the radial direction of the tube: from zone A, close to the outer diameter, through zone
B, in the central area of the section, to zone C, close to the inner diameter. HP-ar
Figure F.3: Micro harness proﬁle inside the dendrite, from one eutectic carbide to the
opposite one. HP-ar
103
==PAGE:112==
APPENDIX G
THERMODYNAMIC MODELLING
Figure G.1: Composition of FCC_A1, Austenite
104
==PAGE:113==
APPENDIX G. THERMODYNAMIC MODELLING
Figure G.2: Composition of M23C6, Cr23C6
Figure G.3: Composition of FCC_A1, Austenite
105
==PAGE:114==
APPENDIX G. THERMODYNAMIC MODELLING
Figure G.4: Composition of M6C, M6C
106
==PAGE:115==
APPENDIX G. THERMODYNAMIC MODELLING
Figure G.5: Carbon proﬁle over the domain, showing the austenite forming from the
left and the M7C3 forming on the right. The proﬁle changes with time steps. C content
is given in wt%
107
==PAGE:116==
APPENDIX G. THERMODYNAMIC MODELLING
Figure G.6: Chromium proﬁle over the domain, showing the austenite forming from
the left and the M7C3 forming on the right. The proﬁle changes with time steps. Cr
content is given in wt%
108
==PAGE:117==
DTU Mechanical Engineering
Section of Materials and Surface Engineering
Technical University of Denmark 
Produktionstorvet, Bld. 425
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby 
Denmark
Phone (+45) 4525 2205
Fax  (+45) 4593 6213
www.mek.dtu.dk
