==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
Complexity in Epistemic Planning
Author:
Mathias Nygaard Justesen
Supervisor:
Thomas Bolander
•
M.Sc. thesis
June 2017
==PAGE:2==
ii
==PAGE:3==
Summary
This thesis is concerned with the computational complexity of planning based on
dynamic epistemic logic. We provide an overview of the existing complexity and
decidability results for the decision problem of plan existence in both the single- and
multi-agent setting, considering many diﬀerent aspects of planning that inﬂuences
the complexity of the problem. We present two new results on the plan existence
problem. First, we show that the plan existence problem is NP-complete when
planning with only public announcements. Second, we provide an improved upper
bound and a lower bound on action stabilization for actions whose preconditions
are propositional and purely epistemic. This result has applications in planning with
common knowledge and in planning heuristics. Furthermore, the upper bound allows
us to determine the stabilization of functional actions, and we show that the plan
existence problem with such actions is in PSPACE.
iii
==PAGE:4==
iv
SUMMARY
==PAGE:5==
Sammenfatning
Denne afhandling omhandler kompleksitet af planlægning baseret på dynamisk episte-
misk logik. Vi giver et overblik over de eksisterende kompleksitets- og afgørbarheds-
resultater for beslutningsproblemet for planeksistens i tilfældet med både én og ﬂere
agenter, hvor mange aspekter, der er afgørende for kompleksiteten af problemet, tages
i betragtning. Vi præsenterer to nye resultater for planeksistensproblemet. Først viser
vi, at planeksistensproblemet er NP-komplet, når den eneste tilgængelige handling
for agenterne er bekendtgørelser, der kan høres af alle. Dernæst viser vi en ny øvre
grænse og en nedre grænse for hvornår handlinger stabiliserer, når handlingerne er
rent epistemiske og kun er betinget af propositioner. Resultatet har anvendelser inden
for planlægningsheuristikker og planlægning med almen viden. Ved hjælp af den øvre
grænse kan vi desuden afgøre stabiliteten for funktionelle handlinger, og vi viser at
planeksistensproblemet med sådanne handlinger er i PSPACE.
v
==PAGE:6==
vi
SAMMENFATNING
==PAGE:7==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at DTU Compute in fulﬁllment of the requirements for
acquiring an M.Sc. in Engineering.
The thesis deals with the computational complexity of planning based on dynamic
epistemic logic.
I would like to thank my supervisor, Thomas Bolander, for guiding me safely
through the new world of proving stuﬀrigorously and also the attendants of the
Dagstuhl seminar on Epistemic Planning for broadening my view on the topic.
Kongens Lyngby, June 23, 2017
Mathias Nygaard Justesen
vii
==PAGE:8==
viii
PREFACE
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Summary
iii
Sammenfatning
v
Preface
vii
Contents
viii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Goals
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Dynamic Epistemic Logic
5
2.1
Epistemic logic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Event models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Classes of epistemic models and event models . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.4
Bisimulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3
Computational Complexity
13
3.1
Problems and Turing machines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2
Decidability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.3
Complexity classes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4
Epistemic Planning
17
4.1
The plan existence problem
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.2
Mapping the complexity of epistemic planning . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.2.1
Single-agent planning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.2.2
Multi-agent planning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.2.3
Open problems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5
Public Announcements
27
5.1
Public announcement logic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.1.1
Muddy children . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5.2
Plan existence complexity of PAL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
ix
==PAGE:10==
x
CONTENTS
6
Propositional Planning
33
6.1
Basic notions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
6.1.1
Action iteration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
6.2
Functional actions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
6.3
Action stabilization by path counting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
6.3.1
Lower bound on action stabilization
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
6.3.2
Applications
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
7
Conclusion
51
8
Future Work
53
A Script for Testing Action Stabilization
55
Bibliography
59
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 1
Introduction
In the near future, when robots are ubiquitous, we want to be able to give a robot a
command and watch in delight as it fulﬁlls our request, as we would expect a butler
to do it. For example, when asking a robot for a cup of coﬀee, we expect it to ﬁnd
coﬀee beans and pour it in the coﬀee machine with water, wait for it to ﬁnish, and
then bring it over in a cup. So when we are giving the robot a command, we are really
supplying it with a goal it should fulﬁll, and it should be able to reach that goal on its
own. That is, we want the robot to come up with a plan that achieves the goal. This
is what the ﬁeld of automated planning is concerned with.
In scenarios more sophisticated than coﬀee making, we can imagine that it is
necessary for robots to cooperate with other robots or humans to achieve a goal. A
central ability that agents (human or artiﬁcial) must have to be able to carry out
cooperative plans, is that they can reason about the knowledge of other agents. For
example, when planning for throwing a surprise birthday party, it is important that
the actions involved in such a plan does not reveal anything to the birthday boy or
girl. Or it may simply be suboptimal or annoying to interact with robots that cannot
reason about the knowledge of others as illustrated in the following example.
Example 1.1. The card game whist is played by four players, who play together in
two partnerships. The purpose of the game is for a partnership to win the most tricks.
A trick is played by each player in turn putting down a card which matches the suit
of the ﬁrst card that was put down. The player with the highest ranked card wins the
trick, and the partners are awarded one point.1
Consider a situation in which you have the Ace of Spades (the Ace has the highest
rank), and your partner knows this, but you do not know which cards your partner
has. Your partner leads the trick by playing the Queen of Spades, followed by an
opponent playing 5 of Spades. You consider it possible that the fourth player has the
King of Spades, so you play your Ace to secure the trick. The situation is depicted in
Figure 1.1. The fourth player puts down 7 of Spades; you reckon it is perhaps to save
the King to win a future trick, since it has the highest rank of the remaining Spades.
Later, your partner plays the King of Spades to your surprise. Because although it
is a trick you will win, it means that you used your Ace on a trick that your partner
1We will disregard trumps in this example.
1
==PAGE:12==
2
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
Your partner
Opponent 1
A
♠
You
Opponent 2
Q
♠
7
♠
Figure 1.1: A game of whist. You consider it possible that Opponent 2 has the King
of Spades, so to secure the trick for your partnership, you play the Ace of Spades.
had already secured. Hence, you won only two out of three possible tricks with the
Ace and the King, while the Queen was wasted. Had your partner instead played the
King the ﬁrst time around, you would have known that the trick was secured, and
you could have saved the Ace for a round later in the game. However, because your
partner failed to reason about your knowledge, it appeared inconsequential to them
whether they played the Queen or the King ﬁrst; they were both certain tricks for
your partnership. This leads to a suboptimal plan for your partner’s play.
This notion of reasoning about knowledge is called epistemology and has long been
studied by philosophers. In terms of planning, it is referred to as epistemic planning,
which is a relatively new form of planning, that is based on dynamic epistemic logic.
Let us consider another (classic) problem for which epistemic reasoning is crucial.
Example 1.2 (Byzantine Generals). Two allied generals, a and b, stand with their
respective armies on each side of a valley with their enemy residing in a town on the
valley ﬂoor. Both generals know that they have to attack simultaneously from each
side, if they are to successfully defeat the enemy; attacking from only one side allows
the enemy to focus its eﬀorts there and defeat intruders.
Therefore, general a sends a message m to general b with the text: “I propose
that we attack the enemy the day after tomorrow at the break of dawn”. The only
means of communication available to the generals is sending a messenger through
the valley to the other side, but the messenger might be caught by the enemy, so
the message is never received by the other general. So to ensure that the attack is
coordinated, general b sends a message back to general a, acknowledging that he
has received m. When a receives this acknowledgement, he knows that b knows m,
written KaKbm. However, they still cannot be sure that the attack is coordinated,
because general b does not know whether a received the acknowledgement, and surely,
if a has not received an acknowledgment, b will not risk his army by attacking at the
proposed time. But then a can send a message back to b acknowledging that he has
==PAGE:13==
1.1. GOALS
3
received the acknowledgement. Can they be sure the attack is coordinated now? No,
because a does not know whether b received his acknowledgement, i.e., we do not
have KaKb KaKbm.
In order for the attack to be coordinated, it can be proven that m must be common
knowledge (Fagin et al., 1995), i.e., a knows that b knows that a knows, ad inﬁnitum,
that m holds. But this can never be established by sending messages via a messenger
through the valley. Hence, the generals cannot coordinate an attack on the enemy.2
As illustrated by our two examples, sometimes we can come up with a plan for
achieving a goal and sometimes it is demonstrably impossible to achieve the goal. The
negative result should come as no surprise; even without taking the knowledge of
others into account, we cannot always achieve a goal, since we just might not have
the necessary actions available to us that would allow us to come up with a plan.
Unfortunately, it turns out that we cannot always even tell, whether it is possible to
come up with a plan or not. In other words, epistemic planning is undecidable in the
general case. Therefore, to make epistemic planning feasible in a real-world setting, it
is crucial to ﬁnd decidable fragments and determine their computational complexity.
1.1
Goals
In this thesis, we consider the problem of whether a plan exists for a given goal.
The purpose of this thesis is to provide an overview of the existing complexity and
decidability results for epistemic planning in order to identify the relative diﬃculty of
epistemic planning for diﬀerent fragments, i.e., fragments that are somewhat limited
in their expressivity, so they do not exhibit the full power of dynamic epistemic
logic, but are still expressive enough to model interesting scenarios. Having such an
overview, we will identify fragments for which we can improve the existing result;
either by identifying a fragment for which we do not have a complexity result or by
reﬁning an existing result.
In section 1.3, we give a more detailed overview of the problems considered in
this thesis, but ﬁrst we provide some historic background on epistemic planning and
its complexity.
1.2
Background
Not only is epistemic planning diﬃcult, so is automated planning in general. Hence,
when the ﬁeld emerged in the 1960s, the planning problems were limited to to be ﬁnite,
fully observable, deterministic, and static, such that ﬁnding solutions was computa-
tionally feasible with the computational resources of the time. This is what we call
classical planning as deﬁned by Ghallab et al. (2004). Epistemic planning, as introduced
by Bolander and Andersen (2011), lifts the requirements of full observability and
determinism. It is based on dynamic epistemic logic (DEL), which grew out of work
on modal logics whose semantics are deﬁned in terms of Kripke structures. In DEL,
2A similar situation occurred at the Battle of Waterloo, when the Duke of Wellington invited Marshal
Blücher to join the attack on Napoleon at dawn. At that moment, the Duke of Wellington did not know
whether Blücher had received his message, and Blücher knew this (Aucher and Schwarzentruber, 2013).
==PAGE:14==
4
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
the states of a Kripke structure represent possible worlds with indistinguishability
relations among them, modelling the knowledge of agents, but also succinctly mod-
elling the knowledge that agents have about other agents, i.e., higher-order knowledge.
The logic is made dynamic by adding adding an operator for transforming Kripke
models. We refer to (van Ditmarsch et al., 2008) for a thorough introduction to DEL.
Bolander and Andersen (2011) showed that epistemic planning in general is un-
decidable, but at the same time they proved that it is decidable in the single-agent
setting. Jensen (2014) proceeded to determine the complexity of single-agent epistemic
planning in terms of the observability of actions and whether the plans are conditional
or not, and Jensen showed that the results coincide with that of automated planning
without epistemic notions.
While Bolander and Andersen (2011) established the ﬁrst decidability results for
epistemic planning, Löwe et al. (2011) took a bottom-up approach and considered
properties of actions that ensure tractability, although without considering the com-
plexity of the induced planning problem. This line of investigation is continued in
(Yu et al., 2013), in which it is shown that epistemic planning with actions, whose
applicability does not depend on knowledge, is decidable. In the following years, the
complexity and decidability results have been reﬁned further in terms of the modal
depth of the formulas (e.g. (Charrier et al., 2016)) and the underlying structure of the
actions (e.g. (Bolander et al., 2015)).
1.3
Structure
The following two chapters introduce relevant notions; chapter 2 is concerned with
dynamic epistemic logic, and chapter 3 gives a brief overview of the complexity classes
and proof techniques relevant for this thesis.
In chapter 4, we formally deﬁne the plan existence problem and elaborate on
section 1.2 by giving a systematic overview of the existing decidability and complexity
results for epistemic planning.
Chapter 5 is concerned with the planning problem, where the only type of actions
is public announcements. We show that the plan existence problem in such a domain
is NP-complete.
In chapter 6, we consider planning with actions whose applicability does not
depend on knowledge and which are purely epistemic, i.e., planning where only facts
are communicated. We provide an improved upper bound and a new lower bound on
the number of times such actions can be iterated, before it does not lead to any agent
gaining new knowledge. These results can be applied to planning heuristics, planning
with common knowledge, and planning with functional actions, and we show that
the plan existence problem with functional actions is in PSPACE.
We round oﬀwith a conclusion and a discussion of future work.
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 2
Dynamic Epistemic Logic
First, we deﬁne the syntax of epistemic logic and look at how its semantics are deﬁned
in terms of epistemic models that are Kripke structures. Second, we add the dynamic
part to epistemic logic with actions and an operator for updating an epistemic model
with an action. Finally, we consider diﬀerent classes of epistemic models and the
notion of bisimulation.
Notational conventions
Throughout this and the remaining chapters, we will use
the following notational conventions. We denote propositional symbols (or simply
propositions) p, q, r, . . . ∈P and agents a, b, c, . . . ∈A. We will often not explicitly
mention P and A. For a set of binary relations R, R∗is the transitive closure of R.
For a set S, 2S denotes the powerset of S.
2.1
Epistemic logic
Deﬁnition 2.1 (Epistemic language). Given a ﬁnite set P of propositions and a
ﬁnite set A of agents, the epistemic language LE (P, A) is generated by the following
grammar in Backus-Naur form,
ϕ ::= p | ¬ϕ | (ϕ ∧ϕ) | Kaϕ,
where p ∈P and a ∈A.
The symbols ¬ and ∧are the usual Boolean operators, and we deﬁne the other
usual operators as abbreviations. That is, disjunction ϕ∨ψ = ¬(¬ϕ∧¬ψ), implication
ϕ →ψ = ¬ϕ ∨ψ, and biimplication ϕ ↔ψ = (ϕ →ψ) ∧(ψ →ϕ). Furthermore,
we use the symbol ⊤as an abbreviation for the tautology p ∨¬p (for some p ∈P ),
and ⊥denotes ¬⊤.
For an agent a ∈A, Kaϕ is the knowledge modality denoting that “agent a knows
ϕ”, a notion we shall make precise shortly. We use the abbreviation ˆKaϕ = ¬K¬ϕ,
which is read as “agent a considers ϕ possible”. The language without the knowledge
modality is the propositional language LP.
5
==PAGE:16==
6
CHAPTER 2. DYNAMIC EPISTEMIC LOGIC
We use a shorthand notation for iterated modal operators. For a modal operator
X, we deﬁne X 0ϕ = ϕ and X n+1ϕ = X X nϕ. This allows us to deﬁne common
knowledge (which was hinted at in Example 1.2) that can be thought of as an inﬁnite
conjunction,1
C ϕ =
∞
^
n=0
^
a∈A
K n
a ϕ,
i.e., that all agents know ϕ, and all agents know that all agents know ϕ, etc. The
language including common knowledge is denoted LEC .
Deﬁnition 2.2 (Modal depth). The modal depth of a formula is deﬁned as follows.
md(p)
=
0
md(¬ϕ)
=
md(ϕ)
md(ϕ ∧ψ)
=
max{md(ϕ), md(ψ)}
md(Kaϕ)
=
1 + md(ϕ)
md(C ϕ)
=
∞
Where p ∈P, a ∈A, and ϕ, ψ ∈LEC (P, A).
Deﬁnition 2.3 (Epistemic model). With a set P of propositions and a set A of agents,
an epistemic model is a triple M = ⟨W , R,V ⟩, where
• W is a nonempty set of worlds, also called the domain Dom(M) of M.
• R : A →2W ×W assigns an indistinguishability relation to each agent a ∈A,
i.e., (w, v) ∈R(a) means that in a world w, agent a considers that world v
might be the actual world. We often write Ra instead of R(a) and wRav for
(w, v) ∈R(a).
• V : P →2W is a valuation function that for each proposition p ∈P gives
the set of worlds in which p is true. In W \ V (p), p is false, viz. closed-world
assumption.
Deﬁnition 2.4 (Semantics). The truth of an epistemic formula is evaluated in the
world of an epistemic model, written (M, w), where M = ⟨W , R,V ⟩and w ∈W .
For p ∈P, a ∈A, and ϕ, ψ ∈LE (P, A), we deﬁne the truth of formulas as follows.
(M, w) |= p
iﬀ
w ∈V (p)
(M, w) |= ¬ϕ
iﬀ
(M, w) ̸|= ϕ
(M, w) |= ϕ ∧ψ
iﬀ
(M, w) |= ϕ and (M, w) |= ψ
(M, w) |= Kaϕ
iﬀ
(M, v) |= ϕ for all wRav
If (M, w) |= ϕ for all w ∈W , then we write M |= ϕ, and if ϕ is true in all models M
(i.e. it is a tautology), then we write |= ϕ.
From the deﬁnition above, we can infer the semantics of our abbreviations, e.g.,
(M, w) |= ⊤
(M, w) |= ˆKaϕ
iﬀ
(M, v) |= ϕ for some wRav
(M, w) |= C ϕ
iﬀ
(M, v) |= ϕ for all (w, v) ∈{Ra | a ∈A}∗.
1Note that we cannot deﬁne it as an inﬁnite conjunction, since inﬁnite formulas are not allowed in the
formalism.
==PAGE:17==
2.2. EVENT MODELS
7
•
w1 : p, q
• w2 : p
w3 : q
w4 :
a, b
a
b
a, b
b
a, b
a
a, b
Figure 2.1: An epistemic state s = (⟨W , R,V ⟩,Wp). There are four worlds, W =
{w1, w2, w3, w4}, of which two are pointed out with a •, i.e., Wp = {w1, w2}. The
labelled edges are the indistinguishability relations, R. The propositions after a world
label are true in this world, i.e., V (p) = {w1, w2} and V (q) = {w1, w3}.
In an epistemic model there can be many worlds that the agents consider, but only
one of them is the actual world, which can be pointed out by an omniscient observer.
In general, we consider multipointed models, which represent the view of an agent,
who considers multiple worlds to be the actual one, following the conventions of
(Bolander and Andersen, 2011).
Deﬁnition 2.5 (Epistemic state). For an epistemic model M = ⟨W , R,V ⟩, we call
(M, w) a global epistemic state, where w ∈W is the actual world. An agent a considers
a local epistemic state with one or more actual worlds (M,Wp), where Wp ⊆W and
Wp is closed under Ra. Truth in a local epistemic state is deﬁned as follows for a
formula ϕ ∈LEC .
(M,Wp) |= ϕ
iﬀ
(M, w) |= ϕ for all w ∈Wp
We often refer to both global and local epistemic states simply as states.
Example 2.6. Let us consider some examples to get some intuition for all the termi-
nology. Consider Figure 2.1. We have that s is the local state of agent a, as {w1, w2} is
closed under Ra. Agent a knows p, since it is true in all worlds accessible by Ra from
the pointed worlds, i.e., s |= Kap. However, agent a does not know whether q holds,
s |= ¬Kaq ∧¬Ka¬q, but agent b does, s |= Kbq ∨Kb¬q. Furthermore, the state also
models higher-order knowledge, e.g., agent a knows that agent b knows whether q
holds, s |= Ka(Kbq ∨Kb¬q), and agent b knows this, and vice versa regarding p. In
fact, it is common knowledge among the agents that a knows whether p holds and
that b knows whether q holds, s |= C (Kap ∨Ka¬p) ∧C (Kbq ∨Kb¬q).
2.2
Event models
The logic we have considered so far is static; actions are what makes DEL dynamic.
They are modelled using event models, which interestingly are Kripke structures
just like epistemic models. Partial observability and nondeterminism can readily be
described using event models as we shall see.
==PAGE:18==
8
CHAPTER 2. DYNAMIC EPISTEMIC LOGIC
•
e1 : ⟨q, p := ¬p⟩
• e2 : ⟨¬q, ∅⟩
e3 : ⟨⊤, ∅⟩
a
b
a
b
a, b
Figure 2.2: The epistemic action α = (⟨E,Q, pre, post⟩, Ep) is modelled much like an
epistemic model. There are two events, E = {e1, e2, e3}, of which two are pointed out,
i.e., Ep = {e1, e2}. The labelled edges are the indistinguishability relations, Q. Since
Ep is closed under Qa, α is a local action of agent a. Each event is labelled with its
pre- and postconditions, i.e., e : ⟨pre(e), post(e)⟩. Postconditions are written as a list
of assignments, hence, if post(e) = id we denote it ∅, indicating no assignments. The
action α is nondeterministic, partially observable, ontic, and connected.
Deﬁnition 2.7 (Event model). An event model is a 4-tuple E = ⟨E,Q, pre, post⟩, where
• E is a nonempty set of events, also called the domain Dom(E) of E.
• Q : A →2E×E assigns an indistinguishability relation to each agent a ∈A, i.e.,
(e, f ) ∈Q(a) if agent a cannot distinguish the event e from f . We often write
Qa instead of Q(a) and eQa f for (e, f ) ∈Q(a).
• pre : E →LE (P, A) assigns a precondition for each event e ∈E.
• post : E →P →LE (P, A) is a postcondition mapping for each event e ∈E,
i.e., if post(e)(p) = ϕ, then p := ϕ where e occurs.
Just as we point out an actual world in epistemic models to get an epistemic state,
we point out the event that actually occurs in an event model to get an epistemic
action, and we point out multiple events to model nondeterminism and the local
perspective of an agent.
Deﬁnition 2.8 (Epistemic action). For an event model E = ⟨E,Q, pre, post⟩, we call
α = (E, Ep) an epistemic action (or simply an action), where Ep ⊆E. If Ep is closed
under Qa, we say that it is a local action of agent a.
If Ep is a singleton, we say that the action is deterministic, otherwise nondetermi-
nistic. If for all edges eQa f , e = f (i.e. all edges are reﬂexive), we say that the action
is fully observable, otherwise partially observable. If post is the identity function id for
all events, then no propositional symbols change their truth value and we say that
α is purely epistemic; otherwise, α can change facts about the world and we say that
it is ontic. If pre(e) ∈LP and post(e)(p) ∈LP for all e ∈E and p ∈P, then we say
that the action is propositional. If the graph underlying the event (i.e. E is the set of
vertices and {(w, v) ∈Qa | a ∈A} is the set of edges) is a connected graph, then we
say that the action is connected, otherwise unconnected.
See Figure 2.2 for an example.
==PAGE:19==
2.2. EVENT MODELS
9
States are updated with actions using an operator that is like a Cartesian product of
the worlds of the state and the events of the action, restricted by the indistinguishability
relations.
Deﬁnition 2.9 (Product update). Given a state s = (M,Wp) and an action α =
(E, Ep), where M = ⟨W , R,V ⟩and E = ⟨E,Q, pre, post⟩, the product update of s and
α is the state s ⊗α = (⟨W ′, R′,V ′⟩,W ′
p ), where
• W ′ = {(w, e) ∈W × E | (M, w) |= pre(e)},
• R′
a = {((w, e), (v, f )) ∈W ′ ×W ′ | wRav, eQa f } for all a ∈A,
• V ′(p) = {(w, e) ∈W ′ | (M, w) |= post(e)(p)} for all p ∈P, and
• W ′
p = {(w, e) ∈W ′ | w ∈Wp, e ∈Ep}.
Intuitively, the worlds in W ′ are those where some event e has occurred, i.e., its
precondition is satisﬁed. Two worlds are indistinguishable to an agent iﬀthe worlds
in which the events took place are indistinguishable and the events themselves are
indistinguishable to the agent. A proposition p is true in the worlds (w, e) where
post(e)(p) = ϕ and (M, w) |= ϕ.
Example 2.10. Figure 2.3 shows the product update of s (from Figure 2.1) and α
(from Figure 2.2). We will interpret the models as follows. Consider two coins, each
covered by a cup, standing in front of the agents, a and b. We have p if the ﬁrst coin
is heads and ¬p if it is tails; similarly, we have q if the second coin is heads and ¬q if
it is tails. Hence, s models that agent a knows that the ﬁrst coin is heads and agent b
knows whether the second coin is heads or tails. The action α then models that agent
a peaks at the second coin, and if a discovers that it is heads then a ﬂips the ﬁrst coin.
Meanwhile, agent b is oblivious of this happening as if b is looking the other way and
does not consider that a is tampering with the coins. The product update reﬂects this,
since agent b thinks nothing has changed, as represented by the edges from the actual
worlds to the submodel that is equivalent to s, and agent a knows whether p holds,
s ⊗α |= Kap ∨Ka¬p, and whether q holds, s ⊗α |= Kaq ∨Ka¬q.
Deﬁnition 2.11 (Applicability). Given a state s = (M,Wp) and an action α = (E, Ep),
the action α is applicable in s, if for each world w ∈Wp there is an event e ∈Ep, such
that (M, w) |= pre(e).
Applicability ensures that for all the actual worlds in a state, there is a correspond-
ing event that is actually happening. In particular, if a state is global and an event
is deterministic, then applicability ensures that the resulting pointed set W ′
p is not
empty. Hence, applicability ensures some sense of coherence between a state and an
action. Example 2.10 is an example of an applicable product update, since in α there
is a pointed event for each pointed world in s. Furthermore, it is an example of how
applicability ensures that the local perspective of an agent is consistent with an update,
as is made precise by the following lemma.
Lemma 2.12 (Bolander and Andersen, 2011). If a local action α = (E, Ep) of an agent
a is applicable in a local state s = (M,Wp) of the same agent, then s ⊗α is also a local
state of agent a.
==PAGE:20==
10
CHAPTER 2. DYNAMIC EPISTEMIC LOGIC
(w1, e3) : p, q
(w2, e3) : p
(w3, e3) : q
(w4, e3) :
•
(w1, e1) : q
• (w2, e2) : p
a, b
a
b
a, b
b
a, b
a
a, b
a
b
a
b
Figure 2.3: Product update of s and α.
Proof. From Deﬁnition 2.5 and Deﬁnition 2.8, we have that Wp and Ep are closed un-
der Ra and Qa, respectively. By Deﬁnition 2.9, it follows that s⊗α = (⟨W ′, R′,V ′⟩,W ′
p )
and W ′
p is closed under R′
a. Hence, s ⊗α is a local state of agent a.
□
We extend the epistemic language with a modality that ensures applicability of
the product update.
Deﬁnition 2.13 (Dynamic epistemic language). The dynamic epistemic language LD
is the epistemic language LE extended with the dynamic modality ⟨α⟩ϕ, where α is
an epistemic action and ϕ ∈LD. The dynamic language with common knowledge is
denoted LDC .
Deﬁnition 2.14 (Dynamic semantics). Given an epistemic action α, the truth of a
formula ⟨α⟩ϕ ∈LDC in a state s is deﬁned by
s |= ⟨α⟩ϕ
iﬀ
α is applicable in s and s ⊗α |= ϕ.
2.3
Classes of epistemic models and event models
The Kripke semantics of DEL ensure certain properties of knowledge and belief.
These consist of two axioms and two inference rules:
• |= ϕ where ϕ ∈LP (all propositional tautologies).
• (Kaϕ ∧Ka(ϕ →ψ)) →Kaψ for all a ∈A (distribution axiom).
• From M |= ϕ and M |= ϕ →ψ infer M |= ψ (modus ponens).
• From M |= ϕ infer M |= Kaϕ for all a ∈A (necessitation).
Modal logics with these axioms and inference rules are in the class K and, indeed,
DEL is such a modal logic. We can derive valid formulas in DEL semantically using
Kripke structures, but with these axioms and inference rules, we can also derive valid
formulas syntactically, however, this is often cumbersome.
==PAGE:21==
2.4. BISIMULATION
11
Reﬂexive
Transitive
Euclidean
K
KT
✓
K4
✓
K45
✓
✓
S4
✓
✓
S5
✓
✓
✓
Table 2.1: Naming of classes of Kripke structures considered in this thesis.
Depending on the properties of the indistinguishability relations of epistemic
models and event models, we get other axioms of knowledge and belief.
• Reﬂexivity (for all x, xSax) is deﬁned by Kaϕ →ϕ (knowledge axiom).
• Transitivity (for all x, y, and z, xSay and ySaz implies that xSaz) is deﬁned by
Kaϕ →KaKaϕ (axiom of positive introspection).
• Euclidicity (for all x, y, and z, xSay and xSaz implies that ySaz) is deﬁned by
¬Kaϕ →Ka¬Kaϕ (axiom of negative introspection).
The binary relation Sa can either be that of a model (Ra) or that of an event model
(Qa) for an agent a ∈A. The axioms are traditionally called T, 4, and 5, respectively.
There are other axioms which correspond to other notions of knowledge and belief,
but we will not consider them here, but refer to (Fagin et al., 1995) for further details.
Depending on the axioms that a modal logic obeys, the classes are named accord-
ingly with S being an abbreviation for KT, hence, S4 is KT4 and S5 is KT5. S5 is also
transitive (and symmetric) as it is implied by reﬂexivity and Euclidicity, i.e., in S5 all
relations are equivalence relations. An overview of the naming of classes and their
properties can be found in Table 2.1.
Belief is usually modelled in the class K45 as it entails positive and negative in-
trospection (“you know what you know and you know what you do not know”),
but also allows for beliefs to be fallacious, since the knowledge axiom is not required,
and indeed that is how we normally think of beliefs. For this reason, the knowledge
modality is sometimes called the belief modality in this class.
When knowledge is concerned, S4 or S5 is used as they both imply positive
introspection and the knowledge axiom ensures that agents can only know things that
are true.
2.4
Bisimulation
Bisimulation is an important notion in many of the complexity results in epistemic
planning we will see later on. It is a notion of similarity between states that we make
precise with the following deﬁnition.
Deﬁnition 2.15 (Bisimulation). Given two epistemic states M = ⟨W , R,V ⟩and
M′ = ⟨W ′, R′,V ′⟩, the relation B ⊆W ×W ′ is a bisimulation iﬀB is nonempty and
satisﬁes for all (w, w ′) ∈B that
==PAGE:22==
12
CHAPTER 2. DYNAMIC EPISTEMIC LOGIC
[atom] for all p ∈P, w ∈V (p) iﬀw ′ ∈V ′(p);
[forth] for all v ∈W and a ∈A, if wRav, then there is a v ′ ∈W ′ such that w ′R′
av ′
and (v, v ′) ∈B; and
[back] for all v ′ ∈W ′ and a ∈A, if w ′R′
av ′, then there is a v ∈W such that wRav
and (v, v ′) ∈B.
We say that two global states s = (M, w) and s′ = (M′, w ′) are bisimilar, written
s - s′, iﬀthere is a bisimulation between M and M′ such that (w, w ′) ∈B.
A bisimulation between two local states, (M,Wp) and (M′,W ′
p ), is a bisimulation
that also satisﬁes that the domain of B extends Wp, and that the image of Wp under B
is W ′
p (Bolander and Andersen, 2011), i.e.,
∀w ∈Wp
 ∃v ∈W ′ (w, v) ∈B
and
W ′
p = {w ′ | (w, w ′) ∈B, w ∈Wp}.
Having a bisimulation is suﬃcient for two states to agree on the truth of epistemic
formulas, as is made precise by the following theorem.
Theorem 2.16 (van Ditmarsch et al., 2008). For all states s and s′, if s - s′ then s |= ϕ
iﬀs′ |= ϕ for all formulas ϕ ∈LDC .
The proof is by structural induction on ϕ.
An important corollary of Theorem 2.16 is that all states have a minimal bisimula-
tion contraction, which is the state with a minimal set of worlds that veriﬁes the same
formulas as the original state. See, e.g., (Blackburn et al., 2001) for details. A minimal
bisimulation contraction can be computed in linear time (Dovier et al., 2001).
Figure 2.4 shows an example of two states that are bisimilar, where one is minimal.
•
w3 : p
w2 : q
•
w1 : p
w4 :
s =
• w ′
1 : p
w ′
2 :
s′ =
a, b
a, b
b
a
a, b
b
Figure 2.4: The two states s and s′ are bisimilar with the following bisimulation
relation B = {(w1, w ′
1), (w3, w ′
1), (w4, w ′
2)}. Note that s′ is minimal.
==PAGE:23==
Chapter 3
Computational Complexity
We deﬁne problems and Turing machines in terms of formal languages and automata.
We will leave some details about how Turing machines operate up to intuition, as they
are not important for the rest of the thesis, where we consider problems at a higher
level than that of formal languages and automata. However, we need these precise
deﬁnitions of problems and Turing machines to deﬁne what decidability is and to
deﬁne the complexity classes that are relevant for this thesis. Furthermore, we will
quickly describe the proof techniques that are relevant for determining decidability
and complexity of a problem.
We refer to (Hopcroft et al., 2003) for a more thorough introduction to the subject.
3.1
Problems and Turing machines
Decision problems are language inclusion problems, and we can (in most cases) design
Turing machines to decide them.
Deﬁnition 3.1. Given an an alphabet Σ of symbols, Σ∗is the set of all words, i.e.,
Σ∗=
[
n∈N
Σn.
A language L is a subset of all the words, L ⊆Σ∗, and a decision problem P is the
problem of deciding whether a word x ∈Σ∗is in L or not. Deciding whether a speciﬁc
word x = x1x2 · · · xn is in L is an instance of P of length n. We write L(P ) for the
language associated with the decision problem P.
Deﬁnition 3.2 (Turing machine). A Turing machine consists of an inﬁnitely long tape
of cells to which symbols can be read and written to by a tape head. The operations of
the machine are speciﬁed by an automata M = ⟨Q, Σ, q0, b, A, δ⟩, whose components
have the following meaning.
• Q is a ﬁnite set of states.
• Σ is a ﬁnite set of input symbols.
13
==PAGE:24==
14
CHAPTER 3. COMPUTATIONAL COMPLEXITY
• q0 ∈Q is the initial state.
• b < Σ is the blank symbol.
• A ⊆Q is the set of accepting states.
• δ : (Q \ A × Σ ∪b) →2Q×Σ∪b×{L,R} is a partial transition function.
The value of δ(q, x) is a set {(q1, x1, D1), . . ., (qi, xi, Di), . . ., (qm, xm, Dm)}
where qi is the next state, xi is the symbol written in the cell being scanned
(replacing whatever symbol was already there), and Di is the direction, either
left (L) or right (R), in which the head moves, i.e., one cell to the left or right
of the current cell. This process of scanning, writing, and moving the head is
one step of M.
If qi ∈A then we say that M halts in an accepting state. If δ(q, x) = ∅then we
say that M halts in a rejecting state.
If for all q ∈Q and s ∈Σ, we have that |δ(q, s)| ≤1, then M is a deterministic Turing
machine, otherwise M is a nondeterministic Turing machine.
Given a Turing machine M = ⟨Q, Σ, q0, b, A, δ⟩, L(M ) ⊆Σ∗is the set of words
x ∈L(M ), such that when the tape initially consists of x and all other cells are blank,
then following the transitions of δ, M halts in an accepting state q ∈A when starting
with the tape head over the ﬁrst symbol of x.1 Hence, M decides whether a word
x ∈Σ∗is in L(M ).
So for a deterministic Turing machine there is always a unique transition deﬁned
by δ until a halting state is reached. We can think of a nondeterministic Turing
machine as branching on all choices given by the transitions of δ and processing these
in parallel. Alternatively, we can think of a nondeterministic Turing machine as a
perfect guesser, so each time there is more than one transition to choose from, it
always chooses the one leading to an accepting state in the fewest possible steps.
3.2
Decidability
Deﬁnition 3.3. A decision problem P is decidable if there exists a Turing machine
M such that L(M ) = L(P ), and M always halts on all instances of P. We say that M
decides P. If no such Turing machine exists, we say that P is undecidable.
It follows that to show that a problem P is decidable, one must argue that there
exists Turing machine that decides P. This is often done by arguing that L(P ) is ﬁnite,
since then a Turing machine can be designed to recognize all words in L(P ) and can
then check whether an input x is equal to one of those words.
To show that a problem P is undecidable, one must reduce a known undecidable
problem Pu (most often the halting problem) to P. Formally, let Mu be a ﬁctitious
Turing machine with input symbols Σu that decides Pu; ﬁctitious, because we know
that Mu cannot exist as Pu is undecidable. Assume that there exists a Turing machine
1This is where we are a bit hazy with the details. Formally, we need a precise deﬁnition of how a Turing
machine operates based on the transition function and the contents of the tape. Here, we brush those
details under the rug and simply say that “M follows the transitions of δ”.
==PAGE:25==
3.3. COMPLEXITY CLASSES
15
M with input symbols Σ that decides P. If there is a deterministic translation algorithm
T : Σ∗
u →Σ∗, such that for all words x ∈Σ∗
u, T (x) ∈L(M ) iﬀx ∈L(Mu), then P is
undecidable, because then M (which can decide P ) could be used to decide Pu.
3.3
Complexity classes
We consider Turing machines whose computational resources are bounded by time
and space. We can then deﬁne classes of decision problems based on the resources
required by a Turing machine for deciding a given decision problem.
Deﬁnition 3.4. A decision problem P can be solved in time f (n), if there exists a
Turing machine M such that L(M ) = L(P ), and M halts within f (n) steps on all
instances of P of length n. The set of problems that can be solved on a determin-
istic Turing machine in time f (n) is denoted DTIME( f (n)). Similarly, the set of
problems solvable on a nondeterministic Turing machine in time f (n) is denoted
NTIME( f (n)).
Deﬁnition 3.5. A decision problem P can be solved in f (n) space, if there exists a
Turing machine M such that L(M ) = L(P ), and M scans at most f (n) diﬀerent tape
cells before halting on all instances of P of length n. The set of problems that can be
solved on a deterministic Turing machine in f (n) space is denoted DSPACE( f (n)).
Similarly, the set of problems solvable on a nondeterministic Turing machine in f (n)
space is denoted NSPACE( f (n)).
The complexity classes that are relevant for this thesis are deﬁned below.
Deﬁnition 3.6 (Complexity classes).
P
=
S
k∈N
DTIME(nk)
NP
=
S
k∈N
NTIME(nk)
PSPACE
=
S
k∈N
DSPACE(nk)
NPSPACE
=
S
k∈N
NSPACE(nk)
EXP
=
S
k∈N
DTIME(2nk )
EXPSPACE
=
S
k∈N
DSPACE(2nk )
2-EXP
=
S
k∈N
DTIME(22nk
)
ELEMENTARY
=
S
k∈N
k-EXP
NONELEMENTARY
=
All decision problems not in ELEMENTARY
By Savitch’s Theorem, PSPACE = NPSPACE (Savitch, 1970).
We have the following relationships between the complexity classes
P ⊆NP ⊆PSPACE ⊆EXP ⊆EXPSPACE
⊆2-EXP ⊆ELEMENTARY ⊆NONELEMENTARY.
==PAGE:26==
16
CHAPTER 3. COMPUTATIONAL COMPLEXITY
The relations P ⊂EXP ⊂2-EXP ⊂ELEMENTARY ⊂NONELEMENTARY and
PSPACE ⊂EXPSPACE are proper by the time and space hierarchy theorems, respec-
tively (Hartmanis and Stearns, 1965; Sipser, 1978). It is widely believed that all the set
containments are strict.
To show that a decision problem P belongs in some complexity class X, we have
to show that it can be solved by a Turing machine using the same time or space
requirements as the other problems in X.
If a problem P is at least as hard to solve as all other problems in a complex-
ity class X, we say that P is X-hard. We show that a problem is X-hard as fol-
lows. Let M = ⟨Q, Σ, q0, b, A, δ⟩be a Turing machine that decides P and let Mc =
⟨Qc, Σc, qc0, b, Ac, δc⟩be a Turing machine that decides Pc, which is known to be
X-complete (we will deﬁne X-complete problems below). The machines M and Mc are
both either deterministic or nondeterministic. If there is a deterministic translation
algorithm T : Σ∗
c →Σ∗, which runs in polynomial time, such that for all words x ∈Σ∗
c,
T (x) ∈L(M ) iﬀx ∈L(Mc), then P is X-hard.
We say that a problem P is X-complete, if it is as hard to solve as the hardest
problems in X. We show that P is X-complete by proving that P is in X and that P is
X-hard.
==PAGE:27==
Chapter 4
Epistemic Planning
Planning in an epistemic setting is similar to other types of automated planning in that
we want one or more agents to reach a goal by performing a number of actions. We
are concerned with whether such a sequence of actions exists, without regarding how
such a plan might be computed, but we can imagine it being found by searching from
the initial state with successor states being the results of applying the product update
with the available actions.1 Hence, the complexity of the decision problem is closely
related to the diﬃculty of ﬁnding an actual plan. We introduce this decision problem
formally, and we will then proceed to give an overview of the existing complexity
results.
4.1
The plan existence problem
Deﬁnition 4.1 (Planning task). An epistemic planning task is a triple T = ⟨s0, L, ϕg⟩,
where
• s0 is a global epistemic state, called the initial state;
• L is an action library, i.e., a set of epistemic actions; and
• ϕg ∈LE is the goal formula (or simply the goal).
A plan for a planning task is a ﬁnite sequence of actions α1, α2, . . ., αm ∈L, such that
s0 |= ⟨α1⟩⟨α2⟩· · · ⟨αm⟩ϕg.
If such a sequence of actions exist, we say that T is solvable.
Thus, a plan for such a problem is simply a sequence of actions that leads to a state
where the goal is satisﬁed. We can then formally deﬁne the problem of whether a plan
exists.
1Recent work has shown that agents can even coordinate such plans implicitly to achieve a goal without
relying on an omniscient coordinator (Engesser et al., 2015).
17
==PAGE:28==
18
CHAPTER 4. EPISTEMIC PLANNING
Deﬁnition 4.2 (Plan existence problem). The plan existence problem for a class X
of planning tasks, denoted PlanEx(X), is the following decision problem: Given a
planning task T ∈X, does there exists a plan for T ?
Note that the problem is deﬁned for classes of planning tasks, so we can talk about
their complexity as the tasks of the class scale. A class could for example be all single-
agent planning tasks or planning tasks with only deterministic actions. Furthermore,
the plan existence problem is a decision problem, so it falls under the usual complexity
classes deﬁned in chapter 3.
In order to talk about the complexity of the plan existence problem, we need to
deﬁne the size of a planning task. We do so following (Aucher and Schwarzentruber,
2013) extended with postconditions as in (Jensen, 2014).
Deﬁnition 4.3 (Size of planning task). Given a planning task T = ⟨s0, L, ϕg⟩, a set A
of agents, and a set P of propositions, the size of the planning task is
|T | = |P | × |A| × |Dom(M)|2 +
X
α∈L
|α| + |ϕg |,
where s0 = (M, w). The size of an action α = (E, Ep), where E = ⟨E,Q, pre, post⟩, is
|A| × |Dom(E)|2 +
X
e ∈E
 
|pre(e)| +
X
p∈P
|post(e)(p)|
!
.
Finally, the size of a formula is deﬁned inductively as follows.
|p|
=
1
|¬ϕ|
=
1 + |ϕ|
|ϕ ∧ψ|
=
1 + |ϕ| + |ψ|
|Kaϕ|
=
1 + |ϕ|
Where ϕ, ψ ∈LD, p ∈P, and a ∈A
Example 4.4. Let T = ⟨s, {α1, α2}, ϕg⟩be an epistemic planning task, where s0, α1,
and α2 are as in Figure 4.1 and
ϕg = Kb p ∧Kb¬q ∧Kb (¬Kaq ∧¬Ka¬q).
We interpret the models as in Example 2.10, i.e., we have p if the ﬁrst coin is heads
(and ¬p if is tails) and q if the second coin is heads (and ¬q if it is tails). Hence, the
goal is for agent b to know that the ﬁrst coin is is heads (Kb p) and the second is tails
(Kb¬q), while knowing that agent a does not know whether the second coin is heads
or tails (Kb (¬Kaq ∧¬Ka¬q)). A plan for T is to perform α1 and then α2, since
s |= ⟨α1⟩⟨α2⟩ϕg. Hence, T is solvable. The resulting state s ⊗α1 ⊗α2 is shown in
Figure 4.2. The plan corresponds to agent a public announcement of the ﬁrst coin
being heads, and then agent b ﬂips the second coin so it is tails without a noticing.
==PAGE:29==
4.1. THE PLAN EXISTENCE PROBLEM
19
•
w1 : p, q
w2 : p
w3 : q
w4 :
s =
•
e1 : ⟨p, ∅⟩
α1 =
• f1 : ⟨q, q := ⊥⟩
f2 : ⟨⊤, ∅⟩
α2 =
a, b
a
b
a, b
b
a, b
a
a, b
b
a
a, b
a, b
Figure 4.1: The initial state, s, and two actions, α1 and α2.
• (w1, e1, f1) : p
(w1, e1, f2) : p, q
(w2, e1, f2) : p
b
a
a
a, b
a
a, b
Figure 4.2: The resulting state, s ⊗α1 ⊗α2. We can verify that s ⊗α1 ⊗α2 |= ϕg.
==PAGE:30==
20
CHAPTER 4. EPISTEMIC PLANNING
4.2
Mapping the complexity of epistemic planning
Now that we have deﬁned planning formally, we can discuss the current results
regarding its complexity. There are many diﬀerent parameters to consider when
considering the complexity of the plan existence problem for diﬀerent classes of
planning tasks, e.g.,
• single- or multi-agent,
• with or without common knowledge,
• class of epistemic models,
• deterministic or nondeterministic actions,
• observability of actions,
• ontic or purely epistemic actions,
• propositional or arbitrary actions,
• connected or unconnected actions,
• graphs underlying actions,
• modal depth of pre- and postconditions.
Since we consider a wide range of planning tasks X, we will be very loose with the
notation for X, but it should be clear from context, which parameters are important.
We will ﬁrst consider single-agent planning and then multi-agent planning. Each
section begins by establishing the general decidability results and then various inter-
esting fragments are considered. Finally, we round oﬀby an overview of the open
problems.
4.2.1
Single-agent planning
The ﬁrst decidability results on the plan existence problem are due to Bolander and
Andersen (2011). They show that the plan existence problem is decidable for a single
agent in S5. We shall denote this class of planning tasks S51; the subscript indicating
the number of agents.
Theorem 4.5 (Bolander and Andersen, 2011). PlanEx(S51) is decidable.
The proof is based on the observation that there are only ﬁnitely many bisimulation
minimal states. There can be at most 2|P | worlds with diﬀerent valuations in a
connected state, since the indistinguishability relation is an equivalence relation,
hence, there can be no two worlds satisfying the same propositions in a bisimulation
minimal state. Thus, all connected states are substates of the state
s∗= (⟨W ,W ×W ,V ⟩,W ), where W = 2P and V (p) = {w | p ∈w}.
There can be at most 2|P | substates of s∗, hence, at most 22|P | worlds in a state in S5.
Since the state space is ﬁnite (as P is ﬁnite), we can decide the plan existence problem
==PAGE:31==
4.2. MAPPING THE COMPLEXITY OF EPISTEMIC PLANNING
21
by performing a breadth-ﬁrst search of the state space, using the bisimulation minimal
contraction of the computed states. Note that this holds for both purely epistemic
and ontic actions and with common knowledge.
Similarly, Aucher and Bolander (2013) argue that any planning task in K45 induces
a ﬁnite state space, so PlanEx(K451) is also decidable.
Theorem 4.6 (Aucher and Bolander, 2013). PlanEx(K451) is decidable.
Furthermore, Aucher and Bolander (2013) showed that the models must be Eu-
clidean and transitive for the plan existence problem to be decidable, hence, the plan
existence problem is undecidable for the other classes, even in the purely epistemic
case and without common knowledge.
Theorem 4.7 (Aucher and Bolander, 2013). PlanEx(S41) is undecidable, and as a direct
consequence of their properties, so are PlanEx(K41) and PlanEx(KT1).
The proof is by a reduction from the halting problem for two-counter machines to
the plan existence problem. The halting problem for two-counter machines is known
to be undecidable (Minsky, 1967).
If we restrict the available actions instead of the classes of models, we obtain the
following complexity results for S51 with ontic actions.
Theorem 4.8 (Jensen, 2014). PlanEx(S51) is 2-EXP-complete. If the actions in the action
library are all
• connected, then the plan existence problem is EXPSPACE-complete.
• fully observable, then the plan existence problem is EXP-complete.
• fully observable and connected, then the plan existence problem is PSPACE-complete.
These membership results are based on a procedure that works on planning graphs
with states as vertices and actions as edges, hence, the time and space complexity of
the procedure depends on the size of the planning graph. The hardness results are
based on creating planning problems to simulate deterministic or alternating Turing
machines with polynomial or exponential space bounds.
Notably, these results match those of automated planning. Classical planning,
which is fully observable and deterministic, is PSPACE-complete (Bylander, 1994).
Rintanen (2004) further showed that the complexity results of conditional planning
with partial observability match those of Theorem 4.8. Hence, the complexity results
of single-agent epistemic planning are as expected, yet Theorem 4.8 provides comfort
in that we are no worse oﬀthan automated planning in general.
4.2.2
Multi-agent planning
Since PlanEx(S41), PlanEx(K41), and PlanEx(KT1) are undecidable, so are they in
the multi-agent setting. Hence, the interesting cases are K45 and S5. Bolander and
Andersen (2011) showed that the plan existence problem for S5 is undecidable for
three or more agents with ontic actions. This was shown by a reduction from the
halting problem for Turing machines. This result was reﬁned by Aucher and Bolander
(2013), who showed that it is undecidable already for two agents with purely epistemic
actions only. As the other results of (Aucher and Bolander, 2013), this was shown by
a reduction from the halting problem for two-counter machines.
==PAGE:32==
22
CHAPTER 4. EPISTEMIC PLANNING
Theorem 4.9 (Aucher and Bolander, 2013). PlanEx(S52) is undecidable, and as a direct
consequence of its properties, so is PlanEx(K452).
These negative results may seem demoralizing for epistemic planning as a practical
planning formalism, hence, it is important to identify fragments of epistemic planning
that are decidable, yet can be used to model interesting scenarios. The ﬁrst positive
result in this direction was that epistemic planning with only propositional actions
is decidable (Yu et al., 2013). However, the problem is still intractable, as the plan
existence problem is in (k + 1)–EXP for a goal formula with modal depth k (Maubert,
2014), i.e., NONELEMENTARY in general, though it is not known whether these
bounds are tight.
Theorem 4.10 (Yu et al., 2013). PlanEx(S5n) and PlanEx(K45n) is in NONELEMEN-
TARY, if the actions in the action library are all propositional.
The proof is similar in nature to that of Theorem 4.5, in that the state space is ﬁnite
as long as states are replaced by their k-bisimulation contraction (i.e. a bisimulation
contraction that is a ﬁnite approximation of a full bisimulation contraction) after
each product update; k being the modal depth of the goal formula. Since k is ﬁnite,
the result is not applicable to planning with common knowledge, because the modal
depth of common knowledge is unbounded. However, Yu et al. (2013) also prove a
decidability result in the presence of common knowledge with certain action types.
Decidability is a result of there only being a ﬁnite number of action sequences to
check, as propositional actions commute (Löwe et al., 2011) (i.e. the order of their
evaluation is insigniﬁcant) and there is an upper limit on the number of times an
action of these types can be performed before it leads to a state that is similar to an
already seen state (modulo bisimulation, i.e., a full bisimulation).
Theorem 4.11 (Yu et al., 2013). PlanEx(Kn) is decidable, if the actions (⟨E,Q, pre, post⟩,
Ep) in the action libray are all propositional, purely epistemic and
• public,
• almost-mutex transitive (i.e. e⊤∈E, pre(e⊤) = ⊤, e⊤Qae⊤for all a ∈A, and the
formulas pre(e) with e , e⊤are pairwise inconsistent),
• possibly oblivious (i.e. e⊤∈E, pre(e⊤) = ⊤, and for all e ∈E and a ∈A, eQae⊤),
• functional (i.e. for each event e ∈E and each agent a ∈A, there is at most one
event f , such that eQa f ),
• binary (i.e. |E| = 2), or
• triple dichotomous (i.e. |E| = 3 and every indistinguishability relation is either
functional or related to at least two distinct events).
We can provide more ﬁne-grained results by considering the graphs underlying
the event models instead of just the class of models. We already saw such a result
in Theorem 4.8, namely that the plan existence problem with fully observable and
connected actions is PSPACE-complete in the single-agent setting, i.e., actions whose
underlying graph is just a single vertex. We call this class of planning problems
Singletons. It follows that PlanEx(Singletons) must be at least as hard in the
==PAGE:33==
4.2. MAPPING THE COMPLEXITY OF EPISTEMIC PLANNING
23
Types of epistemic actions
Underlying
graphs of actions
Purely epistemic,
propositional
Purely epistemic,
arbitrary
Ontic, propositional
Ontic, arbitrary
Singletons
NP-complete
(Bolander et al., 2015)
(open question)
PSPACE-hard
(Jensen, 2014)
PSPACE-hard
(Jensen, 2014)
Chains
NP-complete
(Bolander et al., 2015)
(open question)
(open question)
(open question)
Trees
PSPACE-complete
(Bolander et al., 2015)
(open question)
(open question)
(open question)
Graphs
PSPACE-complete
(Charrier et al., 2016)
Undecidable (Aucher
and Bolander, 2013)
NONELEMENTARY
(Yu et al., 2013)
Undecidable (Bolander
and Andersen, 2011)
Table 4.1: Complexity results for the plan existence problem in the multi-agent setting.
The types of actions are based on two parameters: Whether actions are with or without
postconditions (purely epistemic or ontic), and whether pre- and postconditions are
propositional formulas or arbitrary formulas. A similar table is found in (Bolander
et al., 2015).
multi-agent setting. Besides Singletons, Bolander et al. (2015) considered other types
of graphs, namely trees (Trees), unary trees (Chains), and arbitrary graphs (Graphs),
for propositional and purely epistemic actions.
Theorem 4.12 (Bolander et al., 2015). For propositional and purely epistemic actions
• PlanEx(Singletons) is NP-complete,
• PlanEx(Chains) is NP-complete,
• PlanEx(Trees) is PSPACE-complete, and
• PlanEx(Graphs) is in EXPSPACE.
The proofs rely on notions similar to those of Theorem 4.11, i.e., commutability
and an upper limit on action iteration. They ﬁnd that this upper limit depends on
the graphs underlying the actions. Shortly after, it was found that the bound for
PlanEx(Graphs) is not tight, in fact the plan existence problem is PSPACE-complete
in general with propositional and purely epistemic actions (Charrier et al., 2016).
Theorem 4.13 (Charrier et al., 2016). For propositional and purely epistemic actions,
PlanEx(Graphs) is PSPACE-complete.
The complexity results in the multi-agent setting discussed so far are summarized
in Table 4.1. There are two interesting features to consider: There is a big jump
in complexity going from planning with propositional actions to arbitrary actions
(PSPACE to undecidable in the general case with Graphs), and from purely epistemic
to ontic actions (PSPACE to NONELEMENTARY in the propositional case with
Graphs).
Finally, we will consider the decidability of the plan existence problem in terms of
the modal depth of pre- and postconditions. The results are summarized in Figure 4.3,
where the axes are the modal depth of pre- and postconditions, i.e., the coordinate
(x, y) is the class of planning tasks where preconditions have a modal depth of at most
==PAGE:34==
24
CHAPTER 4. EPISTEMIC PLANNING
: decidable
: undecidable
: unknown
: conjectured boundary
−1
0
1
0
1
2
x
y
Figure 4.3: Decidability of the plan existence problem in terms of the modal depth of
pre- and postconditions.
x and postconditions have a modal depth of at most y. If y = −1 then it is without
postconditions. Note that if x, y ≤0, then it corresponds to propositional planning.
The results on modal depth follow. Some of them we have seen already.
• Theorem 4.10 implies that PlanEx(0, 0) is decidable. Since PlanEx(0, −1) is
contained in PlanEx(0, 0), it is also decidable
• The reduction used in(Bolander and Andersen, 2011) for showing that PlanEx(S53)
is undecidable, uses only a modal depth of 1 for preconditions and 0 for post-
conditions, hence, PlanEx(1, 0) is undecidable. By extension, we have that
PlanEx(≥1, ≥0) is also undecidable.
• Charrier et al. (2016) show that PlanEx(2, −1) is undecidable by a reduction
from the halting problem for two-counter machines as in (Aucher and Bolander,
2013), but where their reduction requires unbounded modal depth of the actions,
the modal depth is limited to 2 in the reduction in (Charrier et al., 2016).
• Unpublished(and unﬁnished) work by Aucher, Bolander, Charrier, and Schwarz-
entruber suggests that PlanEx(0, 1) is undecidable and that PlanEx(1, −1) is
decidable. If this is indeed the case, then we have the full picture of decidability
in terms of modal depth and a clear boundary where PlanEx(x, y) is decidable
iﬀx + y ≤0.
4.2.3
Open problems
From Table 4.1 we see that there are still many unanswered questions regarding
complexity of the plan existence problem. Some questions are completely open, and
in other cases it is not known whether the bounds are tight. There are open questions
in terms of modal depth as illustrated in Figure 4.3, but as research is being done in
this area, we will not consider them further here.
The most obvious open question is what the complexity of PlanEx(Singletons)
with arbitrary preconditions is. We shall tackle this question in the following chapter.
We will also look closer at planning with propositional and purely epistemic
actions in terms of the graphs underlying the actions in chapter 6, where we provide a
==PAGE:35==
4.2. MAPPING THE COMPLEXITY OF EPISTEMIC PLANNING
25
tighter bound on action stabilization than the one in (Bolander et al., 2015) by taking
the agents of the indistinguishability relations into account.
In chapter 8, we discuss future work in terms of the complexity for other fragments
of epistemic planning.
==PAGE:36==
26
CHAPTER 4. EPISTEMIC PLANNING
==PAGE:37==
Chapter 5
Public Announcements
The ﬁrst notion of making epistemic logic dynamic was with public announcements
by Plaza (1989) and later, independently, by Gerbrandy and Groeneveld (1997). The
resulting logic is called public announcement logic (PAL).
A public announcement is the simplest form of action possible, since it is simply an
announcement of an epistemic truth. Although the action is simple, many interesting
scenarios can be modelled with only public announcements, and we will see such an
example in subsection 5.1.1.
Kooi and van Benthem (2004) showed that model checking for PAL is in P, and
Lutz (2006) showed that satisﬁability is PSPACE-complete, but the plan existence
problem of PAL has never been considered formally. In this chapter, we quickly
introduce PAL and provide a motivating example, before presenting the proof of the
plan existence problem for PAL being NP-complete.
5.1
Public announcement logic
Deﬁnition 5.1 (Public announcement logic). Public announcement logic is DEL
with actions only for announcing true properties about the world. The announcement
of ϕ ∈LEC (P, A) is the action
 ⟨{e}, ∪a∈AQa = {(e, e)}, pre(e) = ϕ, post = id⟩, {e}.
That is, a public announcement of ϕ is just a single event with a reﬂexive edge for
all agents and ϕ being the precondition:
•
e : ⟨ϕ, ∅⟩
A
Remark 5.2. A public announcement of ϕ is a restriction of the state to the worlds
where ϕ holds.
27
==PAGE:38==
28
CHAPTER 5. PUBLIC ANNOUNCEMENTS
Let s = (M,Wp) be an epistemic state where M = ⟨M, R,V ⟩, and let α be a be a
public announcement of ϕ. By Deﬁnition 2.9 and Deﬁnition 5.1 the product update
of s and α is s ⊗α = (⟨W ′, R′,V ′⟩,W ′
p ), where
• W ′ = {(w, e) ∈W × E | (M, w) |= pre(e)} = {(w, e) | (M, w) |= ϕ},
• R′
a = {((w, e), (v, f )) ∈W ′ × W ′ | wRav, eQa f } = {((w, e), (v, e)) ∈W ′ ×
W ′ | wRav} for a ∈A,
• V ′(p) = {(w, e) ∈W ′ | (M, w) |= post(e)(p)} = {(w, e) ∈W ′ | w ∈V (p)}
for p ∈P, and
• W ′
p = {(w, e) ∈W ′ | w ∈Wp, e ∈Ep} = {(w, e) ∈W ′ | w ∈Wp},
hence, W ′ is the worlds where ϕ holds, relations among these worlds are kept, and
the propositions that hold in these worlds are unchanged.
5.1.1
Muddy children
We end the introduction of PAL with an interesting example that highlights the
intricacies of public announcements.
Example 5.3 (Muddy Children). Three children, Anne, Bob, and Charlie, have been
out playing in the rain and are now coming in for supper. As you can imagine, some
of the children have become muddy from playing. Their mother will not like that
they are muddy when they sit at the table. Hence, it is not so bad if there is mud on
their rain coat, since they will take those oﬀ, but they might have mud in their face,
too. They cannot see this themselves; they can only see whether the other children
have mud in their face. To avoid their mother complaining about the mud, their father
stops them in the hallway and says: “At least one of you have mud in their face”. And
then: “Will those, who know whether they have mud in their face, step forward.” If
nobody steps forward, father will keep repeating the request. Can the children, who
are (naturally) perfect logicians, ﬁgure out which of them are muddy?
Let us model the situation. Let a, b, and c be the three agents, Anne, Bob, and
Charlie, and let ma, mb, and mc denote whether they are muddy. Say that Anne and
Bob are muddy, but Charlie is not, then the situation is modelled in Figure 5.1a by
the state (M0, wab). Note that everybody knows that at least one of them is muddy,
(M0, wab) |= Ka(ma ∨mb ∨mc) ∧Kb (ma ∨mb ∨mc) ∧Kc (ma ∨mb ∨mc),
but they do not all know that they know it, i.e., it is not common knowledge. For
example, Anne considers it possible that Bob considers it possible that nobody is
muddy, (M0, wab) |= ˆKa ˆKb¬(ma ∨mb ∨mc).
After father has announced that at least one child is muddy, ma ∨mb ∨mc, we
can remove the one world where it does not hold, w, and we get the situation in
Figure 5.1b. Nobody knows whether they are muddy or not, since they all consider
worlds where they are muddy and worlds in which they are not, as seen by the edges
wab Ra wb, wab Rb wa, and wab Rc wabc. Furthermore, notice that if only one child
was muddy, then that child would know it now, e.g., (M1, wa) |= Kama
After father’s request that those, who know they are muddy, should step forward,
nobody steps forward. It means that none of the children know that they are muddy,
==PAGE:39==
5.1. PUBLIC ANNOUNCEMENT LOGIC
29
w
wa
wb
•
wab
wc
wac
wbc
wabc
a
b
c
c
b
c
a
b
a
b
a
c
(a) The initial state, (M0, wab ).
wa
wb
•
wab
wc
wac
wbc
wabc
c
b
c
a
b
a
b
a
c
(b) After the announcement that at least one
child is muddy, (M1, wab ).
•
wab
wac
wbc
wabc
b
a
c
(c) After the ﬁrst request, (M2, wab ).
•
wab
(d) After the second request, (M3, wab ).
Figure 5.1: We use a shorthand notation for worlds, w ρ, where ρ is the list of agents
who are muddy in this world, e.g., wac is shorthand for wac : ma, mc. There is a
reﬂexive edge for a, b, and c in each world, which is omitted to avoid cluttering the
illustrations.
so epistemically, it corresponds to the announcement of ¬Kama ∧¬Kbmb ∧¬Kcmc,
hence, in M2 of Figure 5.1c, those worlds have been removed.
Now, Anne and Bob are fully aware of the situation, only Charlie does not know
whether he is muddy. So as Anne and Bob step forward after father’s second request,
it corresponds to the announcement that Anne and Bob know that they are muddy,
Kama ∧Kbmb, so the worlds wbc, wac, and wabc are removed in (M3, wab). Thus,
everybody knows whether they are muddy and can wash up accordingly before they
go to eat supper.
In its general form, there are n children of which m are muddy and the problem
is to prove that everybody knows whether they are muddy after m requests.
The muddy children problem is a classic logic puzzle dating at least as far back
as the 1950s. It often comes in other variations using hats instead of mud or with
cheating wives instead of children (van Ditmarsch et al., 2008). The puzzle has been
studied many times in the literature on epistemic logic. It was ﬁrst treated in terms of
public announcement logic by Plaza (1989).
==PAGE:40==
30
CHAPTER 5. PUBLIC ANNOUNCEMENTS
5.2
Plan existence complexity of PAL
Let PlanEx(PAL) be the plan existence problem for planning with only public an-
nouncements. The proof of the plan existence problem for PAL being NP-complete
is in two parts. First, we show that PlanEx(PAL) is in NP. Second, we show that it
is NP-hard.
Lemma 5.4. PlanEx(PAL) is in NP.
Proof. Let T = ⟨s0, L, ϕg⟩be an epistemic planning task, where s0 = (M, w) and L
consists only of public announcements.
Claim. T is solvable iﬀit can be solved after at most |Dom(M)| public announce-
ments.
Proof of claim. It follows from Remark 5.2, since a public announcement either reduces
the number of worlds, or it does not change the state at all. In the worst case, ϕg is
ﬁrst satisﬁed when there is only one world in the state. Hence, if T is solvable, it can
be solved after at most |Dom(M)| public announcements. The converse is trivial: If
we can solve T in at most |Dom(M)| announcements, then T is solvable.
It is important to note that the goal might only be satisiﬁed if we use strictly
fewer than |Dom(M)| announcements, because as we saw in Example 5.3, the state
can change by further announcements, even if it is the same announcement that is
repeated.
From the claim, it follows that we can check whether T is solvable by non-
deterministically guessing a sequence of m ≤|Dom(M)| public announcements,
(α1, α2, . . ., αm), and then we check whether
s0 |= ⟨α1⟩⟨α2⟩· · · ⟨αm⟩ϕg
in polynomial time (Kooi and van Benthem, 2004). If it does, we accept, otherwise
we reject. Hence, we can check whether a plan exists for T in nondeterministic
polynomial time, and since we assumed nothing about T (other than that it consists
of public announcements), we have proved that we can check whether a plan exists in
nondeterministic polynomial time for the whole class of PAL, and we conclude that
PlanEx(PAL) is in NP.
□
We show that PlanEx(PAL) is NP-hard by a reduction from SAT, which is similar
to a reduction found in (Bolander et al., 2015).
Lemma 5.5. PlanEx(PAL) is NP-hard.
Proof. Let ϕ(p1, . . ., pm) be the SAT formula in question, where p1, . . ., pm are the
propositional symbols in ϕ. Construct a planning task T = ⟨s0, L, ϕg⟩, where
• s0 is as in Figure 5.2,
• L = {α1, . . ., αm} and αi is as in Figure 5.2, and
• ϕg = ϕ( ˆK p1, . . ., ˆK pm) is ϕ with each occurence of pi replaced by ˆK pi.
==PAGE:41==
5.2. PLAN EXISTENCE COMPLEXITY OF PAL
31
•
v :
w1 : p1
w2 : p2
w3 : p3
. . .
wm : pm
s0 =
•
ei : ⟨¬pi, ∅⟩
αi =
a
a
a
a
a
Figure 5.2: Initial state and actions used in Lemma 5.5.
This reduction can be done in polynomial time, since there is only one action and
one world per proposition in T , and the goal formula ϕg is only m times bigger than
ϕ, therefore, |T | = Θ(|ϕ(p1, . . ., pm)|).
SAT is an NP-complete problem, so to prove that PlanEx(PAL) is NP-hard, we
must show that T is solvable iﬀϕ is satisﬁable. That is, there exists a sequence of
actions (αi1, αi2, . . ., αik ), such that s0 |= ⟨αi1⟩· · · ⟨αik⟩ϕg, iﬀthere exists a valuation
ν, such that ν |= ϕ.
For any propositional valuation ν, let sν be the restriction of s0 such that there is
an edge vRawi iﬀν |= pi. Hence, ν |= pi iﬀsν |= ˆK pi and by construction, ν |= ϕ iﬀ
sν |= ϕg. Note that s0 ⊗αi is exactly the restriction of s0 such that (v, wi) < Ra and
that αi is the only action that aﬀects this edge.
Now, let ρ = (αi1, αi2, . . ., αik ) be a sequence of actions such that αij ∈ρ iﬀ
ν ̸|= pij, then s0 |= ⟨αi1⟩· · · ⟨αik⟩ϕ iﬀν |= ϕ. Thus, T is solvable iﬀϕ is satisﬁable.
□
Now the result follows readily from Lemma 5.4 and Lemma 5.5.
Theorem 5.6. PlanEx(PAL) is NP-complete.
All event models in PAL are singletons, so PAL is contained in Singletons.
The only diﬀerence is that full observability is not required of Singletons, but we
never assumed full observability in Lemma 5.4 and Lemma 5.5, so the same holds
for Singletons. Therefore, we conclude that PlanEx(Singletons) is NP-complete,
hence, we have ﬁlled out the open question of the ﬁrst row in Table 4.1.
==PAGE:42==
32
CHAPTER 5. PUBLIC ANNOUNCEMENTS
==PAGE:43==
Chapter 6
Propositional Planning
In this chapter, we consider planning with only propositional actions that are purely
epistemic and deterministic. This might appear to be a severe restriction of the
epistemic planning formalism, but it is a fragment with which we can model the
communication of facts. In real life, this is often what we do; we exchange facts,
not knowledge about facts, and the epistemic properties are inherent in who and
how these facts are communicated. Most of the existing planning literature is also
concerned with propositions (e.g. STRIPS planning), and the primary reason for this
is, that it is more feasible to plan with only propositions. The same is the case for
epistemic planning, in fact it is only decidable with propositional actions in general
(Theorem 4.10).
In subsection 4.2.2, we mentioned the complexity results for propositional plan-
ning with certain actions in the presence of common knowledge (Theorem 4.11) and
in terms of the graphs underlying the action models (Theorem 4.12). Those results
are based on the observation that preconditions of propositional actions commute
(Löwe et al., 2011), i.e., the order of their evaluation is insigniﬁcant. Thus, there is an
upper bound on the number of times an action can be iterated before it is similar to a
previous iteration of the action. Bolander et al. (2015) ﬁnds that this upper bound
depends on the graphs underlying the actions; speciﬁcally, the maximal number of
distinct paths from the actual world in the event model. In this chapter, we strengthen
that result by taking the agents of the indistinguishability relations into account.
This observation is motivated for a speciﬁc type of event model that only has one
indistinguishability relation per agent per event. We show that the plan existence
problem with this type of action is in PSPACE and NP-hard. Then we strengthen the
bound on action iteration from (Bolander et al., 2015) by considering agents when
counting paths. But ﬁrst, we introduce the notions and results that are relevant for
propositional actions.
6.1
Basic notions
To reiterate Deﬁnition 2.8, actions are propositional when their pre- and postcondi-
tions are propositional formulas, i.e., without the knowledge modality. We will only
33
==PAGE:44==
34
CHAPTER 6. PROPOSITIONAL PLANNING
consider actions that are also purely epistemic, i.e., without postconditions, hence,
we omit post from the description of propositional epistemic actions in this chapter.
That is, we consider event models E = ⟨E,Q, pre⟩, where pre : E →LP. Finally, the
actions are deterministic, hence, for an action α = (E, Ep), Ep = {e} is a singleton, so
we will write α = (E, e) instead. To avoid cumbersome formulations, we will be a
little sloppy with the terminology in this chapter and say that an action is propositional,
if it is propositional, purely epistemic, and deterministic.
Just like we deﬁned bisimulation between states, we can do the same for actions.
Bisimulation is central to the proofs of this chapter. The following deﬁnitions are
originally from (Sadzik, 2006), but are adapted here from (Bolander et al., 2015).
Deﬁnition 6.1 (Bisimulation of actions). Given two epistemic actions α = (⟨E,Q, pre⟩, e0)
and α′ = (⟨E ′,Q ′, pre′⟩, e ′
0), the relation B ⊆E × E ′ is a bisimulation iﬀB contains
(e0, e ′
0) and satisﬁes for all (e, e ′) ∈B that
[atom] pre(e) ≡pre′(e ′);
[forth] for all f ∈E and a ∈A, if eQa f , then there is an f ′ ∈E ′ such that e ′Q ′
a f ′
and ( f , f ′) ∈B; and
[back] for all f ′ ∈E ′ and a ∈A, if e ′Q ′
a f ′, then there is an f ∈E such that eQa f
and ( f , f ′) ∈B.
We use the same notation as for epistemic states (as the meaning is clear from the
context) and write α - α′ if there is a bisimulation relation between α and α′.
Deﬁnition 6.2 (n-bisimulation of actions). Given two epistemic actions α = (E, e) =
(⟨E,Q, pre⟩, e) and α′ = (E′, e) = (⟨E ′,Q ′, pre′⟩, e ′), the n-bisimilarity between them,
written α -n α′, is deﬁned recursively. They are 0-bisimilar iﬀpre(e) ≡pre′(e ′). For
n > 0, they are n-bisimilar iﬀ
[atom] pre(e) ≡pre′(e ′);
[forth] for all f ∈E and a ∈A, if eQa f , then there is an f ′ ∈E ′ such that e ′Q ′
a f ′
and (E, f ) -n−1 (E′, f ′); and
[back] for all f ′ ∈E ′ and a ∈A, if e ′Q ′
a f ′, then there is a f ∈E such that eQa f
and (E, f ) -n−1 (E′, f ′).
This weaker form of bisimulation can be seen as a ﬁnite approximation of a full
bisimulation. Since epistemic actions are ﬁnite, we have the following.
Lemma 6.3 (Bolander et al., 2015). Given two epistemic actions α and α′, if α -n α′
for all n, then α - α′.
Bisimulation of actions have the properties we would expect of a bisimulation
notion.
Lemma 6.4 (Sadzik, 2006). Let s be any epistemic state, and let α and α′ be two epistemic
actions and ϕ ∈LDC .
1. If α - α′, then s |= ⟨α⟩ϕ iﬀs |= ⟨α′⟩ϕ.
2. If α -n α′ and md(ϕ) ≤n, then s |= ⟨α⟩ϕ iﬀs |= ⟨α′⟩ϕ.
==PAGE:45==
6.1. BASIC NOTIONS
35
Interestingly, the notion of bisimulation is not a necessary condition for case 1
and 2 above, that is, two actions might entail the same truths for any state and any
formula, but that does not mean the actions are bisimilar. A more careful notion of
action emulation between actions can be deﬁned so it is both a suﬃcient and necessary
condition for s |= ⟨α⟩ϕ iﬀs |= ⟨α′⟩ϕ, as explored by van Eijck et al. (2012). For
propositional actions the notions of action emulation and bisimulation are “much
closer”, but not equivalent; only in the case where preconditions are of the form
^
p∈S ⊆P
p ∧
^
p∈P\S
¬p,
i.e., the truth of all propositions is required, are action emulation and bisimulation
equivalent notions (van Eijck et al., 2012). Still, we will consider bisimulation here,
because it allows us to provide results on action iteration for whole classes of actions,
whereas action emulation is a more involved notion that is more useful for comparing
two actions, which is desirable, e.g., when designing actions for a planning problem,
but for our purposes, bisimulation is the relevant notion.
6.1.1
Action iteration
As mentioned in the beginning of the chapter, there is an upper bound on how many
times a propositional action can be iterated, after which the action is bisimilar to a
previous iteration. We will make this notion precise with the following deﬁnitions.
Deﬁnition 6.5 (n-ary product). Let α = (E, e) = (⟨E,Q, pre⟩, e) be an epistemic
action. The n-ary product of E is denoted En. We deﬁne
E0 = ⟨E0,Q0, pre0⟩= ⟨{e}, eQ0
a∈Ae, pre0(e) = ⊤⟩.
For n > 0 we deﬁne En = ⟨En,Qn, pren⟩, where
• En = {(e1, e2, . . ., en) | ei ∈E for all i = 1, . . ., n},
• Qn
a = { (e1, e2, . . ., en), ( f1, f2, . . ., fn) | eiQa fi for all i = 1, . . ., n} for each
a ∈A, and
• pren((e1, e2, . . ., en)) =
^
i=1,...,n
pre(ei).
The n-ary product of α is deﬁned as αn = (En, en), where en =
n times
z        }|        {
(e, e, . . ., e). We often
write events of n-ary products as vectors e = (e1, e2, . . ., en) ∈En. It is often useful to
have a notion of the number of occurrences of a speciﬁc event in such a vector, so we
let occ( f , e) denote the number of occurrences of f in e.
This deﬁnition of action iteration via the n-ary product is equivalent to performing
an action n times, as stated by the following lemma.
Lemma 6.6 (Bolander et al., 2015). For any propositional action α and formula ϕ ∈LEC ,
we have that ⟨αn⟩ϕ ≡⟨α⟩nϕ for any natural number n.
Finally, with the deﬁnition of bisimulation for actions and the n-ary product, we
can deﬁne a notion of when an iterated action is bisimilar to a previous iteration.
==PAGE:46==
36
CHAPTER 6. PROPOSITIONAL PLANNING
Deﬁnition 6.7 (Action stabilization). Let α be an epistemic action.
1. α is --stabilizing at stage m if αm - αm+k for all k > 0.
2. α is -n-stabilizing at stage m if αm -n αm+k for all k > 0.
Note that to show --stabilization of an action α at state m, it is suﬃcient to show
that αm - αm+1, because then it follows that αm - αm+k for k > 0 by deﬁnition of
the n-ary product. The same holds for -n-stabilization.
Van Benthem (2002) conjectured that all propositional actions --stabilize at some
ﬁnite stage,1 but Sadzik (2006) refuted this. In the same paper, Sadzik proves that there
is an an upper bound on -n-stablization of actions, but the bound is high, since Sadzik
consider it possible that any event can have up to |Dom(E)| successors. Bolander et al.
(2015) tightens the bound by counting paths in the underlying graph. Their results
are summarized in the following two lemmas.
Lemma 6.8 (Sadzik, 2006). Let α = (E, e) be a propositional action and n a natural
number, then α is -n-stabilizing at stage |Dom(E)|n.
Lemma 6.9 (Bolander et al., 2015, Lemma 4.2). Let α = (E, e) be a propositional action
and n a natural number, then α is -n-stabilizing at stage mpathse (n), where mpathse (n)
is the number of maximal paths of length at most n rooted at e (a maximal path is not a
preﬁx of any other path of length at most n).
The intuition behind the proof of Lemma 6.9 is that taking a path of length k ≤n
from em+1 in Em+1 corresponds to taking m + 1 paths of length k from e in E. Hence,
if m ≥mpathse (n), at least two paths are identical, so we can leave one out in m paths
from em in Em, so any event e ∈Em+1 reachable in at most n transitions from em+1
is bisimilar to an event e′ ∈Em reachable in at most n transitions from em, and vice
versa. Thus, (Em+1, em+1) -n (Em, em), so (E, e) is stabilizing at stage m. We will
build upon this intuition in section 6.3, tightening the bound on action stabilization
further.
6.2
Functional actions
Deﬁnition 6.10 (Functional actions.). An action α = (⟨E,Q, pre⟩, e0) is functional, if
for all events e ∈E and all agents a ∈A there is at most one event f ∈E such that
eQa f .
Public announcements are functional, but more interestingly, so are private an-
nouncements, where only some agents B ⊆A get to know some truth ϕ, whereas the
other agents are oblivious of the announcement. Private announcements are modelled
as follows.
•
e : ⟨ϕ, ∅⟩
f : ⟨⊤, ∅⟩
B
A −B
A
1It is not explicitly stated as a conjecture in (van Benthem, 2002), but it is afterwards referred to as the
Finite Evolution Conjecture, e.g., in (van Benthem, 2005).
==PAGE:47==
6.2. FUNCTIONAL ACTIONS
37
We will prove that when ϕ is propositional, then no new knowledge is gained by
the agents after the ﬁrst private announcement of ϕ. This is in contrast to arbitrary
announcements, which can lead to new knowledge after iterated application as we
saw in Example 5.3 with the muddy children.
Lemma 6.11. If α is a propositional and functional action, then α is --stabilizing at
stage 1.
Proof. By Deﬁnition 6.7, we need to show that α - α2. Let α = (⟨E,Q, pre⟩, e0) be
a propositional and functional action, and let α2 = (⟨E2,Q2, pre2⟩, e2
0) be its binary
product. We will show that α - α2 by a bisimulation B = (e, (e, e)) ⊆E × E2.
By deﬁnition of B, we have that (e0, (e0, e0)) ∈B.
[atom] For each (e, (e, e)) ∈B, we have that pre((e, e)) ≡pre(e) ∧pre(e) ≡pre(e)
by deﬁnition of the binary product and idempotency of conjunction.
[forth] For each (e, (e, e)) ∈B and eQa f for all a ∈A, there is an ( f , f ) ∈E2 such
that (e, e)Q2
a( f , f ) by deﬁnition of the binary product, and ( f , ( f , f )) ∈B.
Note that if there is no edge eQa f , then we are immediately ﬁnished.
[back] For each (e, (e, e)) ∈B and (e, e)Q2
a( f , g) for all a ∈A, we have that eQa f is
unique since α is functional, so f = g and we can instead write (e, e)Q2
a( f , f ),
and it follows that ( f , ( f , f )) ∈B. Again, the case is trivial if there is no edge
eQa f .
□
Lemma 6.12. PlanEx(Functional) is in PSPACE.
Proof. Given an epistemic planning task T = ⟨s0, L, ϕg⟩, where L consists only of
propositional, functional actions, we claim that T is solvable iﬀit can be solved after
at most |L| actions. By Lemma 6.11 and since propositional actions commute (Löwe
et al., 2011), we have that we do not gain anything new by performing an action more
than once. Hence, T is solvable iﬀit can be solved after performing each action at
most once, that is, at most |L| actions.
We nondeterministically guess a sequence of m ≤|L| actions, (α1, α2, . . ., αm),
and then we check whether
s0 |= ⟨α1⟩⟨α2⟩· · · ⟨αm⟩ϕg.
If it does, we accept, otherwise we reject. Model checking for DEL is PSPACE-
complete (Aucher and Schwarzentruber, 2013), hence, PlanEx(Functional) is in
NPSPACE, which is equal to PSPACE by Savitch’s Theorem (Savitch, 1970).
□
The proof is illustrative of why PlanEx(Functional) is in PSPACE, but it should
come as no surprise, since Functional is contained in Graphs and PlanEx(Graphs)
is PSPACE-complete, viz. Theorem 4.13. But might PlanEx(Functional) be of
lower complexity? Since PlanEx(Singletons) is NP-complete and Singletons is
contained in Functional, we know that PlanEx(Functional) is NP-hard, but we
have reason to believe that it is not in NP; because for it to be in NP, we need to show
that the model checking can be done in polynomial time. That does not appear to
==PAGE:48==
38
CHAPTER 6. PROPOSITIONAL PLANNING
•
w
⊗
• e0
e1
⊗
•
f0
f1
f2
=
•
(w, e0, f0)
(w, e0, f1)
(w, e0, f2)
(w, e1, f0)
(w, e1, f1)
(w, e1, f2)
a, b
a
a
a, b
a, b
a, b
a, b
a
a
a
b
b
b
a, b
a, b
a, b
Figure 6.1: The product update with (E, e0) and (E′, f0) contain all |Dom(E)| ×
|Dom(E′)| combinations of events. Valuations and preconditions are omitted to
avoid cluttering, but we can imagine that all events have a unique proposition as
precondition and that all these propositions are true in w.
be the case, as some product updates with actions (E, e) and (E, e ′) can lead to states
where all |Dom(E)| × |Dom(E′)| combinations of events occur (see Figure 6.1 for
an example), hence, the size of the state domain can end up being exponential in the
number of actions in the action library. Thus, the model checking cannot be done
in polynomial time, unless there is some property of functional actions that allow
us to do model checking without doing the product updates explicitly, which seems
unlikely.
If we could ﬁnd a reduction to PlanEx(Functional) from a PSPACE-complete
problem, it would of course imply that the bound is tight. We have not been able to
ﬁnd such a reduction, however, we can show that PlanEx(Functional) is at least as
hard to solve as PlanEx(Graphs) for goal formulas with constant modal depth, and
PlanEx(Graphs) is PSPACE-complete, viz. Theorem 4.12.
Lemma 6.13. There is a polynomial-time reduction from PlanEx(Graphs) with goal
formulas of constant modal depth m to PlanEx(Functional).
Proof. Given a planning task T = ⟨s0, L, ϕg ∈LE (P, A)⟩∈Graphs where md(ϕg) ≤
m, we transform it to a planning task T ′ = ⟨s0, L′, ϕ′
g ∈LD(P, A′)⟩∈Functional
as follows. For each action α = (⟨E,Q, pre⟩, e0) ∈L, we transform it to an action α′ =
(⟨E,Q ′, pre⟩, e0) ∈L′. That is, for each a ∈A, let Qa = {(e1, e2), (e2, e3), . . ., (ek, ek+1)},
then Q ′
a1 = {(e1, e2)},Q ′
a2 = {(e2, e3)}, . . .,Q ′
ak = {(ek, ek+1)}, where a1, a2, . . ., ak ∈
A′. Hence, all actions α′ ∈L′ are functional. We have ϕ′
g = T (ϕg), where
==PAGE:49==
6.3. ACTION STABILIZATION BY PATH COUNTING
39
T (p)
=
p
T (¬ϕ)
=
¬T (ϕ)
T (ϕ ∧ψ)
=
T (ϕ) ∧T (ψ)
T (Kaϕ)
=
Ka1T (ϕ) ∧Ka2T (ϕ) ∧· · · ∧KakT (ϕ),
i.e., we replace the knowledge modality Ka with a conjunction of knowledge modalities
Kai for all ai ∈A′. Both the transformation of Qa and ϕg can be done in polynomial
time, as the new set of agents is only |Q| times bigger than the original, and the
transformed goal formula is only larger by polynomial, as the modal depth m is
constant, i.e., |ϕ′
g | = O(|ϕg |m).
By the transformation it follows that T is solvable iﬀT ′ is solvable.
□
The transformation of the knowledge modality is exactly why the reduction is only
in polynomial time if the modal depth is constant, because in general, the transformed
formula is exponential in the modal depth of the original formula. In some epistemic
settings, the notion of group knowledge is deﬁned, using a modal operator E, to more
succinctly express such formulas, i.e., for B ⊆A
(M, w) |= EBϕ iﬀ(M, v) |= ϕ for all (w, v) ∈{Ra | a ∈B},
hence,
EBϕ ≡
^
a∈B
Kaϕ.
Indeed, DEL with group knowledge is exponentially more succinct than regular DEL
(van der Hoek et al., 2012). Unfortunately, there is a lack of complexity results on
DEL extended with group knowledge and common knowledge. If model-checking
DEL with group knowledge is in PSPACE, then it would follow from Lemma 6.12
and Lemma 6.13 that PlanEx(Functional) is PSPACE-complete, i.e., as hard as the
general case, PlanEx(Graphs). There is also the possibility that the complexity lies
somewhere in the polynomial hierarchy, between NP and PSPACE.
6.3
Action stabilization by path counting
We will improve upon the bound on action stabilization from Lemma 6.9 by counting
paths more carefully. We will consider three diﬀerent methods for counting paths and
then see which of them provide the tightest upper bound.
We start of with counting all maximal paths of length at most n as in Lemma 6.9.
We can deﬁne this way of counting by a recursive deﬁnition.
Deﬁnition 6.14. Let (⟨E,Q, pre⟩, e) be an epistemic action and n a natural number,
then
mpathse (0) = 1
mpathse (n + 1) =

1
if e has no successors
X
a∈A
X
eQa f
mpathsf (n)
otherwise.
==PAGE:50==
40
CHAPTER 6. PROPOSITIONAL PLANNING
In order to show -n-stabilization, it appears fruitful to only count the paths
for one agent at a time, because the deﬁnition of n-bisimulation only considers the
indistinguishability relations of one agent at a time in [forth] and [back]. Hence, we
get the following deﬁnition.
Deﬁnition 6.15. Let (⟨E,Q, pre⟩, e) be an epistemic action and n a natural number,
then
mapathse (0) = 1
mapathse (n + 1) =

1
if e has no successors
max
a∈A
X
eQa f
mapaths f (n)
otherwise.
Furthermore, it appears useful to restrict the paths to be of the same length. To
show that an action (E, e) is -n-stabilizing at stage m, we would need to show that
(Em+1, em+1) -n (Em, em), hence, for some descendant e of em+1, only if we can ﬁnd
a successor for all events e ∈e, does e have a successor, so it should not matter whether
there are longer paths for some of the events in e.
Deﬁnition 6.16. Let (⟨E,Q, pre⟩, e) be an epistemic action and n a natural number,
then
mapaths′
e (0) = 1
mapaths′
e (n + 1) = max
a∈A
X
eQa f
mapaths′
f (n)
and mapaths∗
e (n) = max{mapaths′
e (i) | 0 ≤i ≤n}.
Finally, in the recursive deﬁnition, instead of ﬁnding the agent that maximizes
the number of paths below it, we could consider path counting from a more global
perspective. That is, by ﬁxing the agent sequence initially to maximize the number of
paths that follow this exact agent sequence. This method for path counting is deﬁned
formally as follows.
Deﬁnition 6.17. Let E = ⟨E,Q, pre⟩be an event model. An agent path is a sequence
of events σ = e0, e1, . . ., ek such that
e0Qa1e1, e1Qa2e2, . . ., ek−1Qak ek.
We say that σ is a path of the agent sequence a1, a2, . . ., ak. Let magpathse (a1, a2, . . ., ak)
denote the number of distinct agent paths of the agent sequence a1, a2, · · · , ak rooted
at e. The maximum number of distinct agent paths of any agent sequence with length
at most n is
magpaths∗
e (n) = max{magpathse (a1, a2, . . ., ai) | 0 ≤i ≤n, aj ∈A}.
The following example illustrates the diﬀerent ways of counting paths.
Example 6.18. Consider the action in Figure 6.2. We have mpathse (3) = 7, mapathse (3) =
5, mapaths∗
e (3) = 4, and magpaths∗
e0(3) = 3. The following table illustrates which
paths are counted with the given deﬁnitions.
==PAGE:51==
6.3. ACTION STABILIZATION BY PATH COUNTING
41
•
e
f
g
f1
f2
f3
ℎ1
ℎ2
g1
g2
g3
a
a
a
a
b
a
a
b
b
a
Figure 6.2: The action (E, e) illustrates the diﬀerent ways of counting paths.
mpathse (3)
mapathse (3)
mapaths∗
e (3)
magpaths∗
e (3)
e, f , f1
✓
✓
✓
✓
e, f , f2
✓
✓
e, f , f2, ℎ1
✓
✓
e, f , f2, ℎ2
✓
✓
e, f , f3
✓
e, g, g1
✓
✓
✓
e, g, g2
✓
✓
✓
e, g, g3
✓
✓
With mpathse (n) we count all outgoing paths rooted at e regardless of agent labels as
long as they are maximal and at most of length n. This is tightened with mapathse (n),
as we only consider the outgoing edges in e of the agent which maximizes the number
of outgoing paths from e. With mapaths∗
e (n) we ensure that all paths are of the same
length. With magpaths∗
e (n) we ﬁx the agent sequence for all descendants of e from
the start, as oppose to mapaths∗, where the agent is decided based upon whether it
maximizes the number of paths local to the descendants of e.
Note that both a, a and a, b are agent sequences that maximize magpathse, so we
could have chosen to mark the paths e, f , f3; e, g, g1; and e, g, g2 instead.
In the example, it is the case that
mpathse (n) ≥mapathse (n) ≥mapaths∗
e (n) ≥magpaths∗
e (n),
and this is also holds in general. The ﬁrst inequality follows immediately from the
respective deﬁnitions, as summing over all agents a ∈A is greater than or equal to
maximizing over all agents, as the images of mpaths and mapaths are positive numbers.
The second inequality is a consequence of mapaths∗requiring that all paths have the
same length, where they can be of variable length with mapaths, since we have the
==PAGE:52==
42
CHAPTER 6. PROPOSITIONAL PLANNING
case mapathse (n) = 1 even if e has no successors. The third inequality follows from
ﬁxing the agent sequence initially from a global perspective based on the number of
paths from e, whereas the agent sequence need not be the same across with mapaths∗,
as it is ﬁxed from a local perspective of the descendants of e.
The authors of (Bolander et al., 2015) conjectured that the method of Deﬁni-
tion 6.17 is suﬃcient as an upper bound on action stabilization.2
Conjecture 6.19. Let (E, e0) be a propositional action and n any natural number, then
(E, e0) is -n-stabilizing at stage magpaths∗
e0(n).
Intuitively, this makes sense and builds upon the intuition of Lemma 6.9, i.e.,
taking a path of length k ≤n from em+1 in Em+1 corresponds to taking m + 1 paths
of length k from e in E following a speciﬁc agent sequence a1, a2, . . ., ak. Hence, if
m ≥magpaths∗
e (n), at least two paths are identical, so we can leave one out in m paths
from em in Em, so any event e ∈Em+1 reachable in at most n transitions from em+1
is n-bisimilar to an event e′ ∈Em reachable in at most n transitions from em, and
vice versa. However, this intuition is fallacious, and we shall refute the conjecture
by the following counter-example.3 But ﬁrst we need the following lemma that will
simplify this and other counter-examples and lemmas in this section.
Lemma 6.20 (Sadzik, 2006). Given two action actions α = (En, e0) and α′ = (En, e′
0),
where En is the n-ary product of E, if e0 and e′
0 only diﬀer in the order of their events, then
α - α′.
Proof. Let En = ⟨En,Qn
a, pren⟩, and let B be a bisimulation relation such that (e, e′) ∈
B iﬀe and e′ only diﬀer in the order of their events. It follows that (e0, e′
0) ∈B. For
all (e, e′) ∈B we have the following.
[atom] By deﬁnition of n-ary products and commutativity of conjunction, we have
that pren(e) ≡pren(e′).
[forth] If eQn
a f then eiQa fi for i = 1, . . ., n. Now, e′ consists of the same events, so
e ′
iQa f ′
i for i = 1, . . ., n, thus, e′Qn
a f′ and f and f′ consist of the same events, so
(f, f′) ∈B.
[back] is shown symmetrically.
□
Example 6.21 (Refuting Conjecture 6.19). Consider the action (E, e) = (⟨E,Q, pre⟩, e)
in Figure 6.3. We have that magpaths∗
e (2) = 3. If (E, e) was -2-stabilizing at stage 3,
we would have that (E4, e4) -2 (E3, e3), but we will argue that this is not the case.
We have (e, e, e, e)Q4
a( f , f , g, g), so by [forth] there must be an event f ∈E3 such
that (e, e, e)Q3
af and (E, ( f , f , g, g)) -1 (E, f). To ensure that f satisﬁes [atom], we
2This conjecture is not mentioned in the paper, but was relayed by Thomas Bolander.
3This author spent a considerable amount of time trying to prove Conjecture 6.19, because the intuition
was so strong. Although the conjecture and its refution is a negative result, it is signiﬁcant because it was
conjectured by the authors of (Bolander et al., 2015). Furthermore, the author feels obliged to include the
conjecture and its refutation in the hope that others will stumble upon it before embarking on the futile
process of proving it themselves. Trying for so long to prove something that turned out not to hold has
been a valuable lesson in proof techniques, however. In particular, the fact that we kept ﬁnding ﬂaws in the
proof and tried to circumvent them with more and more complicated deﬁnitions of a property that could
be proved inductively should have been identiﬁed as a red herring sooner.
==PAGE:53==
6.3. ACTION STABILIZATION BY PATH COUNTING
43
•
e
f
g
f1
f2
f3
g1
g2
g3
a
a
a
a
b
b
b
a
Figure 6.3: For this action (E, e), we have that magpaths∗
e (2) = 3, but it is not -2-
stabilizing at stage 3.
must have that both f and g occur in f, i.e., f = ( f , f , g) or f = ( f , g, g), as other
vectors with the same number of occurrences of f and g are bisimilar to these two,
viz. Lemma 6.20.
1. If f = ( f , f , g), then we have ( f , f , g, g)Q4
b ( f3, f3, g1, g2), but the only b-
successor of ( f , f , g) is g = ( f3, f3, g1) or g = ( f3, f3, g2) (modulo ordering) and
neither of those contain the same set of events as ( f3, f3, g1, g2), hence, [atom]
is not satisﬁed as pre(g1) might not be logically equivalent to pre(g2), thus,
prem+1(( f3, f3, g1, g2)) . prem(g).
2. If f = ( f , g, g), the case is symmetric. We have ( f , f , g, g)Q4
a( f1, f2, g3, g3), but
the only a-successor of ( f , g, g) is g = ( f1, g3, g3) or g = ( f2, g3, g3) (modulo
ordering) and neither of those contain the same set of events as ( f1, f2, g3, g3),
hence, [atom] is not satisﬁed.
Thus, when (e, e, e, e)Q4
a( f , f , g, g), no successor of (e, e, e) satisﬁes [forth], hence,
(E4, e4) ̸-2 (E3, e3) which means that (E, e) is not -2-stabilizing at stage magpaths∗
e (2) =
3.
Note that for the action (E, e) in Figure 6.3, we have mapaths∗
e (2) = 4, and (E, e)
is indeed -2-stabilizing at stage 4. However, although we count more paths with this
deﬁnition, it does not work as an upper bound for action stabilization either. The
counter-example is more elaborate than that of Example 6.21 and was only discovered
by constructing random actions and testing whether they obey the bound. The script
for constructing random actions and testing the bound is found in Appendix A.
Example 6.22 (Actions are not -n-stabilizing at stage mapaths∗
e (n)). Consider the
action (E, e) = (⟨E,Q, pre⟩, e) in Figure 6.4. We have that mapaths∗
e (4) = 3. If (E, e)
was -4-stabilizing at stage 3, we would have that (E4, e4) -4 (E3, e3), but we will
argue that this is not the case.
We have (e, e, e, e)Q4
a( f , f , g, g), so by [forth] there must be an event f ∈E3 such
that (e, e, e)Q3
af and (E, ( f , f , g, g)) -3 (E, f). For f to satisfy [atom], we must have
that both f and g occur in f, i.e., f = ( f , f , g) or f = ( f , g, g) as we do not need to
consider vectors that contain the same events in a diﬀerent order, viz. Lemma 6.20.
==PAGE:54==
44
CHAPTER 6. PROPOSITIONAL PLANNING
•
e
f
g
ℎ
i
j
a
a
a
a
a
a
a
Figure 6.4: For this action (E, e), we have that mapaths∗
e (4) = 3, but it is not -4-
stabilizing at stage 3.
1. If f = ( f , f , g), then we have ( f , f , g, g)Q4
a(ℎ, ℎ, i, j), but the only a-successor
of ( f , f , g) is g = (ℎ, ℎ, i) or g = (ℎ, ℎ, j) (modulo ordering) and neither of those
contain the same set of events as ( f3, f3, g1, g2), hence, [atom] is not satisﬁed,
since the events could have preconditions that are not logically equivalent.
2. If f = ( f , g, g), then we have ( f , f , g, g)Q4
a(ℎ, ℎ, j, j) and (ℎ, ℎ, j, j)Q4
a(g, g, f , f )
and (g, g, f , f )Q4
a(i, j, ℎ, ℎ). We can only follow this sequence of a-transitions
with ( f , g, g)Q3
a(ℎ, j, j) and (ℎ, j, j)Q3
a(g, f , f ), but then no a-successor of
(g, f , f ) contains both ℎ, i, and j, hence, [atom] is not satisﬁed.
Thus, when (e, e, e, e)Q4
a( f , f , g, g), no successor of (e, e, e) satisﬁes [forth], hence,
(E4, e4) ̸-4 (E3, e3) which means that (E, e) is not -4-stabilizing at stage mapaths∗
e (4) =
3.
However, it is possible to improve the bound on action stabilization by counting
paths using the method of Deﬁnition 6.15. The structure of the following proof is
similar to that of Lemma 4.2 in (Bolander et al., 2015).
Lemma 6.23. Let (E, e0) be a propositional action and n any natural number, then
(E, e0) is -n-stabilizing at stage mapathse0(n).
Proof. Let Em+1 = ⟨Em+1,Qm+1, prem+1⟩and Em = ⟨Em,Qm, prem⟩be the (m + 1)-
and m-ary products of E = ⟨E,Q, pre⟩, respectively. We will prove the following
property P by induction on n.
P(n): If e ∈Em+1 and e′ ∈Em only diﬀer by some event e∗, such that
occ(e∗, e) ≥mapathse∗(n) + 1
and
occ(e∗, e′) ≥mapathse∗(n),
then (Em+1, e) -n (Em, e′).
==PAGE:55==
6.3. ACTION STABILIZATION BY PATH COUNTING
45
Since e ∈Em+1 and e′ ∈Em only diﬀer by e∗occurring one more time in e than
in e′, we have that occ(e, e) = occ(e, e′) for all e , e∗.
Base case P(0): For n = 0, mapathse∗(n) = 1, hence, occ(e∗, e) ≥2 and occ(e∗, e′) ≥
1, thus, e and e′ contain the same sets of events. Recall from Lemma 6.20 that
the order of events in e and e′ does not matter. It follows by idempotency
of conjunction that prem+1(e) ≡prem(e′), which is suﬃcient to show that
(Em+1, e) -0 (Em, e′).
Induction step P(n): Assuming
occ(e∗, e) ≥mapathse∗(n) + 1
and
occ(e∗, e′) ≥mapathse∗(n),
we need to show that (Em+1, e) -n (Em, e′) given P(n −1). We proceed by the
three cases of n-bisimulation.
[atom] By Deﬁnition 6.15, we have that mapathse∗(n) ≥1, hence, occ(e∗, e) ≥2
and occ(e∗, e′) ≥1, thus, e and e′ contain the same sets of events. So as for P(0),
we have that prem+1(e) ≡prem(e′).
[forth] If eQm+1
a
f for any a ∈A, we need to ﬁnd f′ ∈Em such that e′Qm
a f′ and
(Em+1, f) -n−1 (Em, f′).
Claim. There exists an event f ∗∈f such that e∗Qa f ∗and
occ( f ∗, f) ≥mapaths f ∗(n −1) + 1.
Proof of claim. We will prove the claim by contradiction. The claim is that
∃f ∈f(e∗Qa f ∧occ( f ∗, f) ≥mapaths f ∗(n −1) + 1),
so assume the opposite,
¬∃f ∈f(e∗Qa f ∧occ( f , f) ≥mapaths f (n −1) + 1)
≡∀f ∈f(e∗Qa f →occ( f , f) ≤mapaths f (n −1)).
Since eQm+1
a
f, each occurrence of e∗in e has a Qa-successor and other events
e , e∗in e might have a Qa-successor that is also a Qa-successor of e∗. Hence,
we have
occ(e∗, e)
≤
X
e∗Qa f
occ( f , f)
(by eQm+1
a
f)
≤
X
e∗Qa f
mapaths f (n −1)
(by assumption)
≤
max
a∈A
X
e∗Qa f
mapaths f (n −1)
(by property of max)
=
mapathse∗(n)
(by Deﬁnition 6.15
since e∗has a successor).
==PAGE:56==
46
CHAPTER 6. PROPOSITIONAL PLANNING
e = (e1, e2, . . ., ej,
mapathse∗(n)+1
z                              }|                              {
e∗, e∗, . . ., e∗, e∗, . . ., e∗, e∗)
f = ( f1, f2, . . ., fj, f ′
1 , f ′
2 , . . ., f ′
k, f ∗, . . ., f ∗, f ∗
|           {z           }
mapathsf ∗(n)+1
)
e′ = (e1, e2, . . ., ej,
mapathse∗(n)
z                         }|                         {
e∗, e∗, . . ., e∗, e∗, . . ., e∗)
f′ = ( f1, f2, . . ., fj, f ′
1 , f ′
2 , . . ., f ′
k, f ∗, . . ., f ∗
|      {z      }
mapathse∗(n)
)
Figure 6.5: We must have e∗Qa f ∗to ensure that e′Qaf′. Note that the vectors need
not be ordered as shown, viz. Lemma 6.20; it is only for illustratory purposes.
However, this contradicts that occ(e∗, e) ≥mapathse∗(n) +1, hence, our assump-
tion must have been wrong. This completes the proof of the claim.
Let f ∗be given by the claim. There might be more than one f ∈f that satiﬁes
the claim, so pick one arbitrarily. We construct f′ to be like f, except we omit
one occurrence of f ∗.
To show that e′Qm
a f′, it is important to note that f ∗is a Qa-successor of e∗,
since it is e∗that occurs one fewer time in e′, so we would only have e′Qm
a f′ if
we omit an event that is a Qa-successor e∗. By eQm+1
a
f, it follows that for all
e ∈e′ we have eQa f where f ∈f′, as illustrated in Figure 6.5.
By the claim and construction of f′, we have that
occ( f ∗, f) ≥mapaths f ∗(n −1) + 1
and
occ( f ∗, f′) ≥mapaths f ∗(n −1),
so by the induction hypothesis P(n −1), we conclude that (Em+1, f) -n−1
(Em, f′).
This completes [forth].
[back] If e′Qm
a f′ for any a ∈A, we need to ﬁnd f ∈Em+1 such that eQm+1
a
f
and (Em+1, f) -n−1 (Em, f′). The proof is similar to that of [forth], so we will
be more brief this time around.
We claim there exists an event f ∗∈f′ such that e∗Qa f ∗and
occ( f ∗, f′) ≥mapaths f ∗(n −1).
The claim is proved similarly to that of [forth], except we assume
∀f ∈f′(e∗Qa f →occ( f , f′) < mapaths f (n −1)),
==PAGE:57==
6.3. ACTION STABILIZATION BY PATH COUNTING
47
and we reach the contradiction that occ(e∗, e′) < mapathse∗(n).
With f ∗given by the claim, we construct f like f′, except we add one occurrence
of f ∗. Hence, for all events e ∈e there is a Qa-successor in f, including the
event e∗that occurs one more time in e than in e′. Hence, we have eQm+1
a
f.
By the claim and construction of f, we have that
occ( f ∗, f) ≥mapaths f ∗(n −1) + 1
and
occ( f ∗, f′) ≥mapaths f ∗(n −1),
so by the induction hypothesis P(n −1), we conclude that (Em+1, f) -n−1
(Em, f′).
This completes [back].
Now, we have proved P(n) for all n. Given n, it follows that (E, em+1
0
) -n (E, em
0 )
for all m ≥mapathse0(n). From Deﬁnition 6.7, we immediately have that (E, e0) is
-n-stabilizing at stage mapathse0(n).
□
6.3.1
Lower bound on action stabilization
The bound of Lemma 6.23 is not tight. Generally, that can never be the case for
bounds of this type (i.e. also Lemma 6.8 and Lemma 6.9), because they consider
action stabilization where the events have arbitrary preconditions, so to ensure that
[atom] is satisﬁed, they require that two vectors contain the same sets of events. If
some events have logically equivalent preconditions, it might not be the case that we
need the same sets of events in the vectors to ensure bisimilarity. Even if we assume
that preconditions are arbitrary, in particular that the events are pairwise logically
inequivalent, the bound of Lemma 6.23 is not tight. The action in Figure 6.6 is an
example of an action for which the bound on action stabilization is not tight.
Since the upper bound on action stabilization is not tight, what can we say about
a lower bound? The methods mapaths∗and magpaths for counting paths turned out
not to work as suﬃcient conditions for action stabilization, but they might work as
necessary conditions. However, the action in Figure 6.6 is a counter example of this
hypothesis, too.
That leaves us with the following lower bound on action stabilization, but it
appears to be a rather trivial one, so it would be interesting to ﬁnd out whether a
stronger bound exists. We will leave this to future work.
Deﬁnition 6.24. Let E = ⟨E,Q, pre⟩be an epistemic event model. We deﬁne the
agent degree of an event e ∈E as
dega(e) = |{ f | eQa f }|,
where a ∈A. We deﬁne the distance between two events e, f ∈E as the length of the
shortest agent sequence a1, a2, . . ., ak such that
eQa1e1, e1Qa2e2, . . ., ek−1Qak f
and denote it dist(e, f ) = k. The maximum agent degree of an event, to which the
distance is less than n, can then be deﬁned as
madege (n) = max{dega( f ) | dist(e, f ) < n, a ∈A}.
==PAGE:58==
48
CHAPTER 6. PROPOSITIONAL PLANNING
•
e
f
g
ℎ
i
j
a
a
a
a
a
a
Figure 6.6: We have mapathse (3) = mapaths∗
e (3) = magpaths∗
e (3) = 4, but the action is
--stabilizing already at stage 2.
Lemma 6.25. Let (E, e0) be an epistemic action where the preconditions of all events
are pairwise logically inequivalent, and let n be any natural number, then (E, e0) is
-n-stabilizing at stage m ≥madege0(n).
The intuition behind the proof is that an action cannot stabilize sooner than stage
madege0(n), because we can reach an event f with agent degree madege0(n) and from
f we can get to madege0(n) successors. Hence, (E, e0) cannot stabilize sooner.
Proof. Assume the opposite, i.e., that (E, e0) is stabilizing at stage m < madege0(n).
By Deﬁnition 6.7, we then have that (Em+1, em+1
0
) -n (Em, em
0 ). Let Em+1 =
⟨Em+1,Qm+1, prem+1⟩and Em = ⟨Em,Qm, prem⟩, and let f be an event such that
dega( f ) = madege0(n) and dist(e0, f ) < n. By deﬁnition of madege0(n), we know
that f exists and that we can reach it by some agent sequence a1, a2, . . ., ak. Hence,
(Em+1, em+1
0
) -n (Em, em
0 ) iﬀ(Em+1, f m+1) -n−k (Em, f m),
(6.1)
where n −k ≥1. Since m < madege0(n) = dega( f ), we can choose a Qa-successor
g ∈Em+1 of f m+1 where occ(g, g) = 1 for all g ∈g. Hence, any Qa-successor g′ ∈Em
of f m cannot contain the same set of events, so g and g′ do not satisfy [atom] as the
preconditions of the events are pairwise logically inequivalent, i.e.,
prem+1(g) =
^
g ∈g
pre(g) .
^
g ∈g′
pre(g) = prem(g′).
Hence, (Em+1, em+1
0
) ̸-n−k−1 (Em+1, em+1
0
) and it follows from (6.1) that
(Em+1, em+1
0
) ̸-n (Em, em
0 ).
Thus, (E, e0) is not -n-stabilizing at stage m < madege0(n) and we have a contradic-
tion.
□
==PAGE:59==
6.3. ACTION STABILIZATION BY PATH COUNTING
49
6.3.2
Applications
Now, Lemma 6.11 is simply a corollary of Lemma 6.23 and Lemma 6.3, as any
functional action (E, e) is --stabilizing at stage 1, since mapathse (n) = 1 for all n.
Note that we could not conclude that functional events are --stabilizing at stage 1
from Lemma 6.9. Furthermore, it follows from Lemma 6.25 that this bound is tight
as madege (n) = 1 for all n.4
For the classes of planning tasks (Singletons, Chains, Trees, and Graphs)
considered in (Bolander et al., 2015), we should note that our new result does not give
a tighter bound on action stabilization than Lemma 6.9. Essentially, this is because
these planning tasks do not consider the agents of the indistinguishability relations,
therefore, our bound is not any more useful. In general, our result is more general
and provide a bound that is at least as good as that of Lemma 6.9, since
mapathse (n) ≤mpathse (n)
for any event e and any natural number n.
Furthermore, Lemma 6.23 is helpful in regard to establishing decidability and
complexity results for planning with common knowledge. As Yu et al. (2013) note,
when there exists a number m for an action α, such that α is --stabilizing at stage m,
then planning with such actions is decidable in the presence of common knowledge,
because the state space is ﬁnite. Formally, let T = ⟨s0, {α1, . . ., αn}, ϕg⟩be a planning
task, where there is an mi for each action αi, such that αi is --stabilizing at stage mi,
then we can restrict the search space to action sequences of the form αk1
1 , αk2, . . ., αkn
n ,
where ki ≤mi. Yu et al. (2013) list several actions that are --stabilizing (see The-
orem 4.11), of which functional actions is one of them, although they bound the
--stabilization of such an action (E, e) at stage |Dom(E)|, whereas we have found
that it --stabilizes already at stage 1.
Similarly, the bound on action stabilization can be used to improve the eﬃciency
of planners based on DEL. That is, with a planning task T = ⟨s0, L, ϕg⟩, when we
are searching for a plan using a state-based progression planner, we start from an
initial state s0 and apply the actions from the action library to get a new frontier of
states, and then the actions are applied again to the states in the frontier, etc., until we
have s |= ϕg for a state s in the frontier. For each action, (E, e) ∈L we can calculate
mapathse (n), and from Lemma 6.23 it follows that we need not apply (E, e) to the
states in the frontier, for which (E, e) has already been applied mapathse (n) times.
Hence, the bound decreases the size of the state space that we need to search. For
more sophisicated planners, the bound on action stabilization can be used in heuristics
for the same reason.
4Except if the functional action is a singleton with no indistinguishability relations at all, then
madege (n) = 0 and the action --stabilizes at stage 0.
==PAGE:60==
50
CHAPTER 6. PROPOSITIONAL PLANNING
==PAGE:61==
Chapter 7
Conclusion
The goal of this thesis was twofold. First, to provide an overview of the existing com-
plexity and decidability results for the plan existence problem for dynamic epistemic
logic. Second, to identify the complexity of fragments of epistemic planning for which
we can pose interesting planning problems. We consider these two goals in turn.
In chapter 4, we have provided an extensive overview of the complexity and de-
cidability of the plan existence problem in the single- and multi-agent setting. We
consider the planning problem in terms of diﬀerent aspects that aﬀect the expressivity
and complexity of the plan existence problem. In particular, Table 4.1 provides a com-
prehensive overview of the problem in terms of the types of actions allowed: Whether
actions are with or without postconditions (purely epistemic or ontic), whether pre-
and postconditions are propositional formulas or arbitrary formulas, and the type
of graph underlying the actions. This allowed us to identify that the complexity of
planning with public announcements has not previously been considered formally in
the literature. Furthermore, Figure 4.3 provides an overview of the decidability in
terms of the modal depth of pre- and post-conditions of actions, which highlights the
fragments whose decidability has still not been determined.
Having identiﬁed that the complexity of plan existence problem with public
announcements has not been determined, we proceeded to do so in chapter 5, ﬁnding
that it is NP-complete.
In chapter 6, we consider planning with actions that are propositional, purely
epistemic, and deterministic. Such actions are relevant for planning by communication
of facts. We proved a new upper bound for the stage at which such actions stabilize
(Lemma 6.23), i.e., the number of times an action can be performed before it no
longer constitutes any change in the epistemic state. We also provide a lower bound
on action stabilization (Lemma 6.25). Using these two bounds, it can be shown that
all functional actions (actions with one outgoing indistinguishability relation per
agent per event) stabilize at stage 1. Furthermore, we prove that the plan existence
problem with functional actions is somewhere between NP and PSPACE. Although
the new bound on action stabilization does not have any immediate consequences
for the complexity of fragments that have previously been considered in the ﬁeld of
epistemic planning, we have showed that it can be used to determine the complexity
51
==PAGE:62==
52
CHAPTER 7. CONCLUSION
of new fragments; planning with functional actions being an example of this. In
particular, it can be used to show decidability of planning with common knowledge
using actions that are --stabilizing at some ﬁnite stage. Furthermore, it is valuable
for improving the eﬃciency of planners based on dynamic epistemic logic, e.g., in a
state-based progression planner, an action is not considered if it has already been used
more times than the bound suggests, thus, leading to a smaller state space to search.
==PAGE:63==
Chapter 8
Future Work
As layed out in chapter 4, there are still gaps to ﬁll in the map of decidability and
complexity in epistemic planning. In terms of modal depth, we almost have the
complete picture in terms of decidability as illustrated in Figure 4.3 and work is
already being done in this area to ﬁll the two remaining gaps. In general, though,
there is a gap of completeness results for planning with ontic actions and planning
with actions whose pre- and/or post conditions can be arbitrary formulas as shown in
Table 4.1. We have shown that the plan existence problem with public announcements
is NP-complete, but that is the only completeness result in this category.
Tighter bounds on action stabilization are interesting if they allow us to say
something about the complexity of planning with classes of actions, other than
what we can already say with Lemma 6.23; just like Lemma 6.23 allowed us to say
something about the action stabilization of functional actions that the previous best
bound (Lemma 6.9) did not. Still, that did not enable us to provide a completeness
result for planning with functional actions. If we had a result on the complexity of
model checking DEL with group knowledge, then it would follow from our results
that it is PSPACE-complete. It goes to show that complexity results for DEL with
group knowledge is also interesting future work.
It appears that it might be diﬃcult to provide a tighter upper bound on action
stabilization than the one we found, at least if it is based on path counting, because
as soon as we try to ﬁx the length of the path or ﬁx the agent sequence of the path
from a global perspective, we found that those deﬁnitions do not work as upper
bounds. Hence, it appears that we need more complicated deﬁnitions for counting
paths or take a new perspective on ﬁnding a bound altogether. However, there might
be lower-hanging fruit in the case of lower bounds, where we have only established a
rudimentary result.
Finally, it would be interesting to investigate whether the results on action stabi-
lization have applications in other areas where graphs with labelled edges are used
in a form of restricted Cartesian product similar to the product update of DEL. The
similarity with products of automata is immediate, but automata products appear
only to be used as a product between two diﬀerent automata (e.g. for language inter-
section) and not, as with epistemic actions, for iterative products with the same graph
structure.
53
==PAGE:64==
54
CHAPTER 8. FUTURE WORK
==PAGE:65==
Appendix A
Script for Testing Action
Stabilization
import random
def reachable(Q, e0):
def dfs(em):
discovered.add(em)
for a in Q:
for (e,f) in Q[a]:
if e == em and not f in discovered:
dfs(f)
discovered = set()
dfs(e0)
return discovered
def print_action(a):
((E,Q),e0) = a
for e in sorted(E):
if e == e0:
print(’(’ + e + ’)’, end=’
’)
else:
print(e, end=’
’)
print()
print()
for a in sorted(Q.keys()):
for (e,f) in sorted(Q[a]):
print("{} =={}==> {}".format(e, a, f))
print()
55
==PAGE:66==
56
APPENDIX A. SCRIPT FOR TESTING ACTION STABILIZATION
def action_product(a1, a2):
((E1,Q1),e01) = a1
((E2,Q2),e02) = a2
E = [e1 + ’,’ + e2 for e2 in E2 for e1 in E1]
Q = dict()
Ag = set(Q1).intersection(Q2)
for a in Ag:
Q[a] = [(e1 + ’,’ + e2, f1 + ’,’ + f2)
for (e2,f2) in Q2[a] for (e1,f1) in Q1[a]]
e0 = e01 + ’,’ + e02
E = reachable(Q, e0)
for a in Q:
Q[a] = list(filter(lambda q: q[0] in E and q[1] in E, Q[a]))
return ((E,Q),e0)
def action_iteration(a, n):
a_n = a
for i in range(n - 1):
a_n = action_product(a, a_n)
return a_n
def n_stabilizing(a, n, m):
a_m1 = action_iteration(a, m + 1)
a_m = action_iteration(a, m)
return n_bisimilar(a_m1, a_m, n)
def n_bisimilar(a1, a2, n):
((E1,Q1), e1) = a1
((E2,Q2), e2) = a2
# [atom]
if set(e1.split(’,’)) != set(e2.split(’,’)):
return False
if n == 0:
return True
Ag = set(Q1).intersection(Q2)
for a in Ag:
succ_e1 = list(map(lambda q: q[1],
filter(lambda q: q[0] == e1, Q1[a])))
succ_e2 = list(map(lambda q: q[1],
filter(lambda q: q[0] == e2, Q2[a])))
# [forth]
for f1 in succ_e1:
if not any(n_bisimilar(((E1,Q1),f1), ((E2,Q2),f2), n - 1)
for f2 in succ_e2):
return False
# [back]
for f2 in succ_e2:
==PAGE:67==
57
if not any(n_bisimilar(((E1,Q1),f1), ((E2,Q2),f2), n - 1)
for f1 in succ_e1):
return False
return True
def mpaths(a, n):
((E,Q),e) = a
Ag = Q.keys()
if n == 0:
return 1
else:
m = sum(sum(map(lambda q: mpaths(((E,Q),q[1]), n - 1),
filter(lambda q: q[0] == e, Q[a]))) for a in Ag)
if m == 0:
return 1
else:
return m
def mapaths(a, n):
((E,Q),e) = a
Ag = Q.keys()
if n == 0:
return 1
else:
m = max(sum(map(lambda q: mapaths(((E,Q),q[1]), n - 1),
filter(lambda q: q[0] == e, Q[a]))) for a in Ag)
if m == 0:
return 1
else:
return m
def mapaths_s(a, n):
def mapaths_p(a, n):
((E,Q),e) = a
Ag = Q.keys()
if n == 0:
return 1
else:
return max(sum(map(lambda q: mapaths_p(((E,Q),q[1]), n - 1),
filter(lambda q: q[0] == e, Q[a]))) for a in Ag)
return max(mapaths_p(a, i) for i in range(n+1))
==PAGE:68==
58
APPENDIX A. SCRIPT FOR TESTING ACTION STABILIZATION
def random_action(events, agents, edge_prob):
E = [chr(ord(’e’) + i) for i in range(events)]
Ag = [chr(ord(’a’) + i) for i in range(agents)]
Q = dict()
for a in Ag:
Q[a] = []
for e in E:
for f in E:
for a in Ag:
if random.random() < edge_prob:
Q[a].append((e,f))
return ((E,Q),E[0])
def test_bound(paths, agents=2, edge_prob=0.05, iters=1000):
for i in range(iters):
a = random_action(random.randint(5,10), agents, edge_prob)
n = random.randint(2,4)
m = paths(a, n)
if 2 <= m <= 4:
print("paths_e({}) = {}".format(n, m))
if not n_stabilizing(a, n, m):
print_action(a)
test_bound(mapaths_s)
==PAGE:69==
Bibliography
Guillaume Aucher and Thomas Bolander. Undecidability in epistemic planning.
International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, pages 27–33, 2013.
Guillaume Aucher and François Schwarzentruber. On the complexity of dynamic
epistemic logic. Computing Research Repository, 2013.
Patrick Blackburn, Maarten De Rijke, and Yde Venema. Modal Logic. Cambridge
University Press, 2001.
Thomas Bolander and Mikkel Birkegaard Andersen. Epistemic planning for single-and
multi-agent systems. Journal of Applied Non-Classical Logics, 21(1):9–34, 2011.
Thomas Bolander, Martin Holm Jensen, and Francois Schwarzentruber. Complex-
ity results in epistemic planning. In International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial
Intelligence, pages 2791–2797, 2015.
Tom Bylander. The computational complexity of propositional STRIPS planning.
Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 69(1-2):165–204, 1994.
Tristan Charrier, Bastien Maubert, and François Schwarzentruber. On the impact of
modal depth in epistemic planning. In International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial
Intelligence, pages 1030–1036, 2016.
Agostino Dovier, Carla Piazza, and Alberto Policriti. A fast bisimulation algorithm.
In Gérard Berry, Hubert Comon, and Alain Finkel, editors, Computer Aided
Veriﬁcation: 13th International Conference, pages 79–90, 2001.
Thorsten Engesser, Thomas Bolander, Robert Mattmüller, and Bernhard Nebel. Coop-
erative epistemic multi-agent planning with implicit coordination. In 3rd Workshop
on Distributed and Multi-Agent Planning, pages 68–76, 2015.
Ronald Fagin, Joseph Y. Halpern, Yoram Moses, and Moshe Y. Vardi. Reasoning
about knowledge. MIT Press, 1995.
Jelle Gerbrandy and Willem Groeneveld. Reasoning about information change.
Journal of Logic, Language and Information, 6(2):147–169, 1997.
Malik Ghallab, Dana Nau, and Paolo Traverso. Automated Planning: theory and
practice. Elsevier, 2004.
59
==PAGE:70==
60
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Juris Hartmanis and Richard E Stearns. On the computational complexity of algo-
rithms. Transactions of the American Mathematical Society, 117:285–306, 1965.
John E. Hopcroft, Rajeev Motwani, and Jeﬀrey D. Ullman. Introduction to automata
theory, languages, and computation. Pearson, 2003.
Martin Holm Jensen. Epistemic and doxastic planning. PhD thesis, Technical Univer-
sity of Denmark, 2014.
Barteld Kooi and Johan van Benthem.
Reduction axioms for epistemic actions.
Advances in Modal Logic, number UMCS-04-9-1 in Technical Report Series:197–211,
2004.
Benedikt Löwe, Eric Pacuit, and Andreas Witzel. DEL planning and some tractable
cases. In Logic, Rationality, and Interaction: Third International Workshop, pages
179–192, 2011.
Carsten Lutz. Complexity and succinctness of public announcement logic. In Proceed-
ings of the Fifth International Joint Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent
Systems, pages 137–143, 2006.
Bastien Maubert. Logical foundations of games with imperfect information: uniform
strategies. PhD thesis, Université Rennes 1, 2014.
Marvin Minsky. Computation: ﬁnite and inﬁnite machines. Prentice-Hall, 1967.
Jan Plaza. Logics of public communications. In Proceedings of the 4th International
Symposium on Methodologies for Intelligent Systems, pages 201–216, 1989.
Jussi Rintanen. Complexity of planning with partial observability. In International
Conference on Automated Planning and Scheduling, pages 345–354, 2004.
Tomasz Sadzik. Exploring the iterated update universe. In ILLC Publications PP-2006-
26, 2006.
Walter J. Savitch. Relationships between nondeterministic and deterministic tape
complexities. Journal of Computer and System Sciences, 4(2):177 – 192, 1970.
Michael Sipser. Halting space-bounded computations. In Proceedings of the 19th
Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, pages 73–74, 1978.
Johan van Benthem. One is a lonely number: on the logic of communication. In
Zoé Chatzidakis, Peter Koepke, and Wolfram Pohlers, editors, ILLC Publications
PP-2002-27, Colloquium Logicum, pages 96–129, 2002.
Johan van Benthem. Open problems in logical dynamics. In Dov M. Gabbay,
Sergei S. Goncharov, and Michael Zakharyaschev, editors, Mathematical Problems
from Applied Logic I: Logics for the XXIst Century, pages 137–192, 2005.
Wiebe van der Hoek, Petar Iliev, and Barteld Kooi. On the relative succinctness
of two extensions by deﬁnitions of multimodal logic. In S. Barry Cooper, Anuj
Dawar, and Benedikt Löwe, editors, How the World Computes - Turing Centenary
Conference and 8th Conference on Computability in Europe (CiE), pages 323 – 333,
2012.
==PAGE:71==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
61
Hans van Ditmarsch, Wiebe van der Hoek, and Barteld Kooi. Dynamic Epistemic
Logic. Springer, 2008.
Jan van Eijck, Ji Ruan, and Tomasz Sadzik. Action emulation. Synthese, 185(1):
131–151, 2012.
Quan Yu, Ximing Wen, and Yongmei Liu. Multi-agent epistemic explanatory diagnosis
via reasoning about actions. In International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence,
2013.
