==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
Kongens Lyngby 2017
Master thesis
Investigation of ventilation eﬀectiveness
achieved by passive diﬀuser performing at
low supply air ﬂow rate and large room
and supply air temperature diﬀerence
Authors:
Niko Leppänen
Christian Plaetner-Cancela
Student Number:
s112877
s123095
Supervisors:
Arsen Malikov
Anders Vorre
Göran Hultmark
Association
DTU
Lindab
Lindab
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Civil Engineering
International Centre for Indoor Environment and Energy
Nils Koppels Alle, Buildings 402
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 4007
byg@byg.dtu.dk
www.byg.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Declaration of Authorship
We, Christian Cancela-Plaetner and Niko Emil Leppänen, declare that this the-
sis is our own work.
We acknowledge all the sources and have clearly stated them in the bibliog-
raphy.
This thesis has not been previously submitted for any other degree at the Tech-
nical University of Denmark or another university.
Signed:
Signed:
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
In modern time people spend a large portion of their time indoors where they
are exposed to pollution that aﬀects their productivity, comfort and some time
create health risks. Low supply ﬂow rate has become more attractive as part of
reducing energy consumption in buildings. This limits the mixing of air and the
risk of personal exposure is increased as a result. The pollution concentration
near an occupant should therefore determine the ventilation eﬀectiveness, rather
than the average concentration of the room. Ensuring proper ventilation with
low air ﬂow rates is an issue that therefore has to be evaluated.
The objective of this study was to study the ventilation eﬀectiveness of a passive
diﬀuser (Pascal system, Lindab) and supplying 10 l/s with a temperature diﬀer-
ence of 6-8K. A thermal manikin, simulating a sitting occupant performing desk
work, was used. The placement of the manikin with respect to the diﬀuser was
investigated. Additionally changing the size of the diﬀuser face plate mounted
at the bottom was also studied. Furthermore, a board was placed between the
manikin’s abdomen and the desk to limit the pollution emitted from the groin.
Finally adding additional clothing insulation to limit the convective boundary
layer formed around the manikin was also investigated.
The results revealed that understanding the ﬂow interaction between the supply
air and the thermal plume from heat sources located in the room is paramount
to evaluate the personal exposure. The location of the pollution source (away
from the manikin or on the manikin) had a considerable impact on the pollution
concentration measured in the mouth. The largest concentration was measured
when the manikin was located with the front towards the diﬀuser and 50 cm
away and the emission was placed at the groin. The ventilation eﬀectiveness
was generally poor at the mouth region ranging from 0.2 - 0.8. The location at
which the manikin was placed changed the ﬂow pattern. The largest improve-
ment was seen when a board was placed between the manikin’s abdomen and
the desk. The visualization of the ﬂow showed that the thermal plume was the
main interference deﬂecting the supply air. However, the supply air did not
have a large cooling eﬀect on the manikin even with a temperature diﬀerence of
6-8K.
To ensure that clean air is supplied to the occupants, when reducing the ﬂow
rate, a clear understanding of the airﬂow pattern is therefore required. Other-
wise the decrease of supply ﬂow rate can lead to problems with the Indoor air
quality.
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgement
We would like to express our gratitude to our supervisor, Professor Arsen Krikor
Melikov, for his patience, guidance and supervision throughout the whole thesis.
His immense knowledge and encouragement has guided us through the master
thesis project.
We are also very grateful to Lindab for letting us use their facilities. A huge
thank you to Anders Vorre, Daniel Bochen and Göran Hultmark, from Lindab,
for assistance, guidance and discussions about the Pascal system and other ven-
tilations systems.
We would also thank PhD Mariya Petrova Bivolarova for showing us how to
calibrate velocity probes and use INNOVA. Her time and the eﬀort she invested
in giving constructive criticism to our thesis is greatly appreciated.
We are
very grateful for getting help, by PhD student Chong Shen, who helped moving
equipment to the Lindab facilities and his willingness in providing his knowl-
edge about the thermal manikin. A thank you also to Nico Henrik Ziersen for
providing equipment and set up the facilities at DTU.
Our sincere gratitude goes to Lea and Meliha Beglerovic who provided helpful
feedback and corrections, throughout the whole duration of the Master Thesis.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Declaration of Authorship
i
Abstract
ii
Acknowledgement
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Importance of indoor environment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Thermal indoor climate
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2.1
General thermal comfort . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2.2
Local thermal comfort . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3
Indoor air quality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2
Ventilation
10
2.1
Air distribution methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.1.1
Displacement Ventilation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.1.2
Mixing Ventilation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.1.3
Personal ventilation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.2
Flows in rooms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.2.1
Convective ﬂow around the human body . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.2.2
Thermal plume . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.2.3
Ventilation ﬂows . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
2.2.4
Interaction of ﬂows . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
2.2.5
Ventilation eﬀectiveness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3
Air Supply Diﬀusers
31
3.1
Diﬀuser design
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.2
The Pascal system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.3
Justiﬁcation for research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4
Objective of the study
37
4.1
Overall objective . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.2
Speciﬁc objectives
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5
Method
38
5.1
Experimental facilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.1.1
Lindab . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.1.2
DTU . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5.2
Pascal diﬀuser . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5.3
Measuring Instruments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
==PAGE:8==
vi
CONTENTS
5.3.1
Temperature sensor
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5.3.2
Manikin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5.3.3
Visualization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5.3.4
Tracer gas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5.3.5
Anemometer
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
5.4
Experimental conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
5.5
Experimental procedures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
5.5.1
Heat loss and heat transfer coeﬃcient
. . . . . . . . . . .
54
5.5.2
Visualization of the airﬂow
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
5.5.3
Ventilation eﬀectiveness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
5.5.4
Velocity ﬁeld above the manikin
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
5.6
Data analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
6
Results
65
6.1
Full scale measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
6.1.1
Thermal comfort . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
6.1.2
Flow visualization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
6.1.3
Ventilation eﬀectiveness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
83
6.1.4
Velocity proﬁle above the manikin
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
92
7
Discussion
97
7.1
Thermal comfort . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
97
7.2
Ventilation eﬀectiveness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
99
7.3
Thermal plume velocity
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101
8
Conclusion
102
A Calibration data
104
A.1 Anemometer
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 104
A.2 Manikin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 106
B Results
107
B.1
Data and results for thermal comfort . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 107
B.2
Flow Visualization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 120
B.3
Data and results for ventilation eﬀectiveness . . . . . . . . . . . . 134
B.4
Data and results for velocity ﬁeld . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 140
Bibliography
141
==PAGE:9==
Nomenclature
Abbreviations
AAD
Advanced Air Distribution
ASHRAE
American Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air-Conditioning
Engineers
CBL
Convective Boundary Layer
CFD
Computational Fluid Dynamic
CRE
Contaminant Removal Eﬀectiveness
DR
Draught Rating
DS
Danish Standard
EN
European Norm
IAQ
Indoor Air Quality
ISO
International Organization for Standardization
PAQ
Perceived Air Quality
PCV
Pseudo Color Visualization
PIV
Particle Image Velocimetry
PMV
Predicted Mean Vote
PPD
Predicted Percentage Dissatisﬁed
TU
Turbulence Intensity
VAV
Variable Air Volume
VOC
Volatile Organic Compounds
==PAGE:10==
viii
CONTENTS
==PAGE:11==
C h a p t e r 1
Introduction
1.1
Importance of indoor environment
Ventilation with respect to human occupants, focuses particularly on generating
a good indoor climate. A suitable indoor climate can be engineered, by studying
the thermal and atmospheric indoor climate. The thermal indoor climate typi-
cally refers to the air temperature and the humidity in the air. These parameters
can be changed by the removal of heat generated by occupants, equipment or
solar gain, to avoid overheating. Supply air can also be heated, in winter peri-
ods, to ensure thermal comfort for the occupants. The removal of humidity is
an important part of regulating indoor climate for two reasons: in order to min-
imize health risks caused by the growth of mold and maintaining the eﬀective
lifetime of organic building materials. Although, in certain situations, higher
humidity may be required to be supplied to ensure comfort.
In modern society, people spend more than 80-90% of their time in artiﬁcially
created indoor environments. As a result of the energy-saving awareness, which
started in the 1970’s, the way that the indoor climate is perceived has changed
both positively and negatively [1].
Thermal comfort has generally become better as more insulation has been in-
stalled into buildings. This has led to an increase in surface temperatures of
the walls. Furthermore, development in low-temperature ﬂoor heating and heat
pumps has made installation of these systems cheaper. The temperature strat-
iﬁcation is improved when using ﬂoor heating, as opposed to radiators, which
typically improves thermal comfort especially under uniform radiant conditions
[2]. There has been a tendency to reduce the ventilation rate in order to decrease
the energy use. However, this has led to a deterioration of the indoor air quality.
High concentration of internally generated contaminants, with low supply rates,
has labelled some buildings with the so-called "sick building syndrome" [1].
The atmospheric indoor climate is, from a ventilation perspective, associated
with the removal of pollution from occupants (bio-eﬄuents), building materials
and oﬃce equipment and maintaining carbon dioxide at a low level. The removal
of CO2 is important due to a reduction in productivity level of the occupants
at higher concentrations [3], [4].
==PAGE:12==
2
Introduction
1.2
Thermal indoor climate
The thermal indoor climate plays an important role with respect to the amount
of energy required to heat or cool a building. When looking at the thermal
indoor climate it typically entails factors such as air temperature, humidity,
air velocity and radiation. In this thesis the main focus, when referring to the
thermal indoor climate, will be on the temperature and air velocity.
1.2.1
General thermal comfort
The primary notion when discussing thermal comfort is that occupant’s body
is in thermal balance, i.e. that the occupant feels thermally neutral.
The operative temperature is used by the ASHRAE Standard 55-2010 [5] as
a way of evaluating thermal comfort at diﬀerent activity and clothing levels.
The operative temperature can be deﬁned as the average of the mean radiant
and air temperature when weighted by the respective heat transfer coeﬃcient
[1]. At low air velocities (<0.2m/s) the operative temperature is simply the
average of the radiant temperature and the air temperature [6]. The operative
temperature can therefore be calculated by Eq. (1.1). It is also possible to
measure the operative temperature using measuring instruments. The opera-
tive temperature should be acceptable for 80% or more of the occupants for the
environmental conditions [1].
To = Ta + Tr
2
(1.1)
• To=Operative Temperature [°C]
• Ta=Air temperature [°C]
• Tr=Radiant temperature [°C]
The thermal comfort equation which was developed by Fanger is another way
of evaluating the thermal comfort. This equation is based on heavy analysis
from extensive experimental data. The idea is that a person senses his/her own
temperature rather than the environment. The equation was applied and used
by Fanger to develop the Predicted Mean Vote (PMV) and Predicted Percent-
age Dissatisﬁed (PPD) index. The comfort equation would only be applicable if
the occupant is in thermal equilibrium with the surrounding environment, since
the body would activate the eﬀector mechanism to change the skin temperature
==PAGE:13==
1.2 Thermal indoor climate
3
in order to achieve thermal balance[1]. Therefore, when evaluating the thermal
comfort the PMV index can be used [7]. The index expresses the average vote,
in terms of how cold or warm the occupants feel. Creating an environment which
satisﬁes everyone, can be diﬃcult due to diﬀerent clothing and activity levels of
the occupants [6]. However, the index only deﬁnes the thermal sensation and not
the level of thermal comfort. Therefore the PPD index in combination with the
PMV can be used to determine the comfort level, and evaluate if it satisﬁes the
requirements which the building owner wants. Figure 1.1 shows the correlation
between the PMV and the PPD. Fanger’s thermal comfort criterion produces
good results in standard conditions where an occupant wears light clothing and
is performing sedentary work. Furthermore, University of California Berkeley
has developed "CBE Thermal Comfort tool" [8]. This tool is able to estimate
the PMV and the PPD based on air-, mean radiant temperature, air speed,
humidity, metabolic rate and clothing level.
Figure 1.1: The correlation between PMV and PDD [9].
When designing the interior of a building in terms of thermal indoor climate,
Danish or European standards such as DS/EN 15251:2007 can be used. Ex-
amples of recommended design values for PMV and indoor temperature can be
seen in Table 1.1 and 1.2. Typically, buildings are designed using Category II
(can be referred to as "B").
==PAGE:14==
4
Introduction
Table 1.1: Examples of recommended values of the indoor temperature for
design of buildings and HVAC systems for a single oﬃces [10].
Operative temperature °C
Minimum for heating
Maximum for cooling
Category
(winter season),
(summer season),
∼1.0 clo
∼0.5 clo
I
21.0
25.5
II
20.0
26.0
III
19.0
27.0
Table 1.2: Examples of recommended PMV values when designing mechanical
heating and cooling for buildings [10].
Thermal state of the body as a whole
Category
PPD
Predicted
%
Mean Vote
I
<6
-0.2<PMV<+0.2
II
<10
-0.5<PMV<+0.5
III
<15
-0.7<PMV<+0.7
IV
>15
PMV<-0.7; or +0.7<PMV
1.2.2
Local thermal comfort
Local thermal comfort is often associated with the risk of radiant asymmetry,
vertical temperature diﬀerence and draught. A non-uniform thermal radiation
typically caused by cold/warm windows, walls or ceilings can further cause local
discomfort for the occupant. The radiant temperature asymmetry is described
as the temperature diﬀerence between two surfaces. In this case the occupant’s
skin is a surface which typically has a higher temperature than a window. The
area of the surfaces and the view factor determines the diﬀerence in temper-
ature. In oﬃce and residential buildings radiant asymmetry is mainly caused
by cold windows or heated ceilings [1]. Figure 1.2 illustrates the percentage
of dissatisﬁed occupants as a function of the temperature diﬀerence in thermal
radiation [9]. This relation can be used as a guideline to determine the impact
of thermal radiant asymmetry.
==PAGE:15==
1.2 Thermal indoor climate
5
Figure 1.2: Local thermal discomfort due to the radiant temperature asym-
metry [9].
The vertical air temperature gradient can also inﬂuence the thermal comfort of
an occupant if the diﬀerence in air temperature is great enough. In situations
where vertical air temperature diﬀerences occur a person can feel thermal dis-
comfort, because the head is too hot or the feet are too cold, even though the
rest of the body might be thermally neutral [7]. Figure 1.3 shows a graph which
makes it possible to estimate the percentage of dissatisﬁed occupants due to
vertical air temperature diﬀerence.
Figure 1.3: Local discomfort caused by vertical air temperature gradient [9].
==PAGE:16==
6
Introduction
Draught can be deﬁned as unwanted local cooling of the body due to movement
of air. In buildings this is the most frequent cause of complaint by occupants
[1]. The movement of air along the skin creates a cooling eﬀect by convection,
which is dependent on the temperature diﬀerence between the air and the skin.
The risk of draught is commonly associated with high velocity development.
However, studies have shown that even at low velocities the risk of draught
can occur when the temperature is below 23°C due to high turbulence intensity
(TU) of the air [11].
The percentage of dissatisﬁed occupants, due to draught, can be estimated us-
ing Eq. (1.2). This equation is empirically developed based on climate chamber
measurements and assumes light, sedentary activity with a thermal sensation
close to neutral [12]. The turbulence intensity is deﬁned as the ratio of the stan-
dard deviation of the velocity ﬂuctuation to the mean velocity, and determined
by Eq. (1.3) [13], [1]. A model for draught is shown on Figure 1.4 which shows
a combination of mean air velocity, air temperature and turbulence intensity
which will result in 15% dissatisﬁed due to draught.
DR = (34 −ta)(va −0.05)0.62 · (0.37 · va · Tu + 3.14)
(1.2)
Tu = 100 · stdv
¯va
(1.3)
• DR = Draught rate [%].
• ta = the local air temperature [°C].
• Tu = the turbulence intensity [%].
• stdv = the standard deviation of the velocities measured [m/s].
• va = the local mean air velocity [m/s].
The magnitude of the ﬂuctuation in velocity is by itself an important factor,
since the skin can quickly register sudden changes in air speed.
Complaints
can therefore occur even at mean air velocities lower than the recommended
standards due to TU [1].
==PAGE:17==
1.3 Indoor air quality
7
Figure 1.4: Draught rating model combining turbulence intensity, air velocity
and air temperature resulting in 15% dissatisﬁed occupants due to
draught [14].
1.3
Indoor air quality
In order to achieve good indoor air quality the occupants have two requirements.
The ﬁrst and main aim is to ensure that any health risk from breathing the sur-
rounding air should be negligible. The second is that the occupant perceives
the air as fresh and pleasant, and not stuﬀy or irritating [15].
Generally the human requirements vary according to the individual occupant.
This is because some people are very sensitive and require very good air quality,
while others are less sensitive. The indoor air quality in a building is inﬂuenced
by factors such as occupant activity, outdoor climate and building operation. It
can be assumed that the indoor air quality is high in situations where few people
are dissatisﬁed while keeping health risks negligible [15]. It is also important to
distinguish between the perceived air quality (PAQ) and the air quality which
aﬀects the health.
Indoor air quality and health risks
Any exposure to pollutants which can cause acute or long-term adverse eﬀects
when breathing the surrounding air should be avoided. Situations where oc-
==PAGE:18==
8
Introduction
cupants are subjected to such pollutants require strict regulation to limit the
exposure as much as possible [7].
Ensuring that health risks are reduced to low levels due to exposure requires an
extensive list of maximum permissible concentration. In buildings the common
pollution sources often originates from the building material, oﬃce equipment,
furniture, environmental tobacco smoke and outdoor air [1]. Formaldehyde can
be present in adhesives and foam insulation. High concentration of formalde-
hyde emission from building materials or furniture can cause irritation of the
eyes and respiratory system. High concentration as well as long duration of
exposure can even lead to tumors in the nasal epithelium [15]. Diﬀerent volatile
organic compounds (VOC) can also be emitted from furniture or building mate-
rials. The VOC makes it incredible diﬃcult to perform a health risk assessment,
as materials and furniture can contain hundreds of diﬀerent compounds which
potentially can react with other gases to form new compounds which can cause
health risks [15], [7], [1]. It is therefore vital that a suitable ventilation system is
installed to ensure the removal of any remaining contaminants from the build-
ings.
Perceived indoor air quality
Humans perceive the air quality by using two senses. The olfactory system and
the chemical sense, which are located in the nasal cavity, can register several
diﬀerent odors. These senses are very sensitive and can often detect spikes in
concentration levels better than instruments [1]. The combination of the two
senses is used to determine if the air is perceived as fresh and pleasant or irri-
tating and stuﬀy [15]. Although, the perceived air is typically associated with
comfort instead of directly causing health risks it is still an important factor
to consider when studying the indoor environment. Figure 1.5 illustrates the
estimated amount of dissatisﬁed occupants as a function of the PAQ.
Figure 1.5: The estimated percentage of dissatisﬁed as a function of PAQ [15].
==PAGE:19==
1.3 Indoor air quality
9
The temperature and relative humidity of the air when inhaled by the occupant
are necessary when investigating the PAQ. A study conducted by Melikov et al.
[16] investigated the eﬀect of air movement on the PAQ using diﬀerent combi-
nations of temperature, relative humidity and pollution level in the room air.
The study concluded that an increased air movement towards the face can pos-
itively inﬂuence the PAQ. The air movement decreased the negative impact of
elevated relative humidity, temperature and pollution concentration, although,
it had little inﬂuence on the odor intensity [16]. Using the ventilation system
to supply cooler air directly to the occupant could therefore improve the PAQ.
Measuring the concentration level of a pollution enables the possibility to cal-
culate the ventilation eﬀectiveness. This is important when evaluating the PAQ
as well as exposure to pollutants emitted by furniture or building materials [17].
A well designed ventilation system with high ventilation eﬀectiveness is likely
to result in improved PAQ for the occupants.
==PAGE:20==
C h a p t e r 2
Ventilation
2.1
Air distribution methods
2.1.1
Displacement Ventilation
The concept of displacement ventilation relies on buoyancy ﬂow as a driving force
due to the density diﬀerence between warm and cool air. Warm air rises and is
extracted at ceiling height, while clean and cooler air is supplied at ﬂoor level
[18]. Commonly, the displacement ventilation supplies air with a temperature
of 3 - 6°C below room temperature and with low velocity at ﬂoor level [19].
The heat generated by occupants and equipment creates an upwards movement
because of the buoyancy force. The region above the occupants is deﬁned as
the pollution zone. The displacement ventilation method is illustrated in Figure
2.1.
Figure 2.1: Displacement ventilation method [18].
The displacement ventilation method reduces cross-infections, because the buoy-
ancy ﬂow, from the occupants and equipment, transports the contaminants
above the occupants and air mixing is limited.
However, mixing of the air
can occur if there is a lot of movement in the room increase the chance of
==PAGE:21==
2.1 Air distribution methods
11
cross-infection. Furthermore, cross infections can also occur if the stratiﬁca-
tion height is low [19], [20]. If a pollution source is located at the ﬂoor close
to the occupant there is a possibility that it can reach the breathing zone and
aﬀect the inhaled air quality. This is because of the convective boundary layer
(CBL) that is generated by the body which passes the breathing zone of the
occupant. Displacement ventilation is the preferred method for supplying clean
air in restaurants, meeting rooms, classrooms and tall rooms such as conference
rooms, theaters and supermarkets [18]. Some advantages and disadvatanges of
using displacement ventilation can be seen in Table 2.1.
Table 2.1: Possible advantages and disadvantages of displacement ventilation.
Advantages
Disadvantages
-Less cooling required for a given
-Risk of cold draught along the ﬂoor.
temperature in the occupied space.
-Unsuited to provide warm air as it is
-Longer periods with free cooling
likely to never reach the occupied space.
Since the occupied space is coolest.
-Better air quality as contaminants
are directed towards the ceiling.
2.1.2
Mixing Ventilation
The concept of mixing ventilation is that clean supply air mixes and dilutes
polluted air in the occupied zone [21], [22]. This can be achieved by diﬀusers
installed outside the occupied zone such as ceiling or wall mounted diﬀusers.
Mixing ventilation is an expression of the room air distribution pattern, and
not of the ventilation system.
The air distribution is achieved by supplying
air with high velocities to ensure that the air ﬂow reaches the occupied zone,
creating a mixing pattern as seen in Figure 2.2.
Figure 2.2: Mixing ventilation concept.
==PAGE:22==
12
Ventilation
The main purpose of mixing ventilation is to dilute the concentration of con-
taminants and achieve a uniform temperature distribution by mixing the air in
a room. However, this can also cause cross-infection as contaminants. Mixing
ventilation is recommended in rooms with low ceiling height, approximately 2.3
meters.
2.1.3
Personal ventilation
Advanced air distribution (AAD) is a novel method of ventilation that focuses
on improving the air quality close to the occupant’s breathing zone by enhanc-
ing the micro-environment. AAD aims to give the user the control of their own
environment in terms of regulating the temperature and air they receive. Fur-
thermore, AAD also aims to measure and adjust to physiological changes of the
user [23], [24]. AAD revolves around incorporating personal and personalized
technology that provides ventilation into clothes or localized to the workstation
and furniture [25]. Studies have been made of diﬀerent personal ventilation so-
lutions, where one of the solutions consisted of integrating the ventilation into
a hospital pillow [26]. Another investigation concerned a hospital bed that con-
sisted of a cleansing unit that ﬁlters the exhaust air from the patient and mixed
it after with the surrounding air to avoid cross infections. On Figure 2.3 it can
be seen how the air was supposed to move [23], [25].
Figure 2.3: Personal ventilation for a hospital bed [25].
==PAGE:23==
2.1 Air distribution methods
13
Table 2.2: Advantages and disadvantages of advanced air distribution.
Advantages
Disadvantages
Creates micro-environment
Lack of guidelines
Energy eﬀective
Diﬃcult to change
Individual control
Pressure loss due to small ducts
Quick response
Need for large fans
Cleaner air inhaled
Reduced of risk of cross infections
There are indeed advantages of using AAD as described in Table 2.2, but it
is still in a phase, where challenges have to be overcome. It is expensive to
adjust each workplace or bed to meet the individual requirements of a single
person.
Although, the beneﬁts are that the occupant can adjust their own
micro-environment, hence fulﬁlling their needs for thermal comfort and PAQ.
It can be added that connection of ducts is not an issue. A study showed that
the PAQ with a ductless system can be clearly acceptable [20].
==PAGE:24==
14
Ventilation
2.2
Flows in rooms
2.2.1
Convective ﬂow around the human body
Hot air rises as the density diﬀerences and the gravitational ﬁeld act to produce
a buoyancy force, which drives the ﬂow [27]. Natural convection can be external
or internal. In this thesis the focus is on external convection as occupants have
a convective boundary layer.
The natural convection which occurs above a
concentrated heat source can be seen on Figure 2.4. This concentrated heat
source can interfere or change the ventilation jets from the diﬀuser.
Figure 2.4: The natural convection above a concentrated heat source [18].
The air velocity is great right above the heat source and the convection area is
fairly small, however, as the hot air rises due to the buoyancy force, ambient air
is pulled inwards and the width increases. Due to complex shapes and diﬀerent
heat outputs from body parts the convective boundary layer, around and above
people, will not act as ideally as shown on Figure 2.4. When the air detaches
from the occupant it develops into a thermal plume. The thermal plume can
take on irregular shapes, as opposed to a symmetrical thermal plume. This is
particularly true for seated occupants. The thighs and lower legs will contribute
to the buoyant ﬂow and make the thermal plume asymmetric due to higher tem-
perature distribution in the front [28]. The geometry and heat output from a
person will produce a CBL due to the buoyancy ﬂow. The CBL can disrupt the
ventilation ﬂow pattern and create issues in terms of exposure to pollutants.
Experimental investigation of the human CBL in a quiescent indoor environ-
ment was done by Licina et al. [29]. This study looked at the clothing insulation
==PAGE:25==
2.2 Flows in rooms
15
of the body and its inﬂuence on the human CBL. Diﬀerent clothing styles and
chairs, which are typical for oﬃce work, were used, which would lower the heat
output of the occupant. When the heat output was lowered the convective ﬂow
upwards also decreased and thereby a less apparent CBL was generated. The
table positioning was also investigated to evaluate the inﬂuence on the CBL as
illustrated on Figure 2.5. The study concluded that the convective ﬂow velocity
was inﬂuenced by the temperature diﬀerence between the skin and the room,
which correlated to pollutant transportation [29]. A thinner clothing style would
have a higher peak velocity compared to a thick clothing style. The table posi-
tioning and the inclination of the seated person changed the convective ﬂow and
could reduce its thickness. Furthermore, the implication of having hair on the
head also had an impact on the ﬂow velocity making the thermal plume weaker.
When the table was located closer to the manikin it would break the convective
ﬂow velocity. Particle image velocimetry (PIV) and Pseudo color visualization
(PCV) techniques were used to examine human CBL [29].
Figure 2.5: The table positioning: No table (left), table 10 cm (middle) and
table against abdomem (right) [29].
Pollutants originating from diﬀerent sources, below the breathing zone, can be
caught in the CBL. This causes the pollutants to ﬂow upwards, and reach the
breathing zone, and increasing the exposure level. However, if the pollutants
are located above the occupants and low supply air velocity is used, the CBL
can function as protection against pollutants. Licina et al. [30] investigated the
transportation of gaseous pollutants, by setting up two diﬀerent experiments.
The ﬁrst experiment examined the distribution of pollutants in the breathing
zone, when pollution was supplied at diﬀerent locations around the manikin,
as shown on Figure 2.6. The second experiment, aimed at investigating the
inﬂuence of room temperature, table positioning and body inclination angle on
the distribution of pollutants in the breathing zone [19].
==PAGE:26==
16
Ventilation
Figure 2.6: The locations for the supplied pollution (tracer gas N2O) and
sampling points [30].
The study showed that a large amount of the pollution would reach the breath-
ing zone especially close to the mouth. The location at which the pollution was
supplied from also changed the amount of concentration located in the breathing
zone. The concentration was highest close to the mouth and when the pollution
source was supplied at P1 (Fig. 2.6).
When looking at the impact of room air, table positioning and body inclina-
tion angle the pollution sources were located at the chest and the groin. The
measurements showed that at lower temperatures the concentration level would
increase, while the opposite was apparent when the temperature was increased.
This was mainly due to the temperature diﬀerence which created a stronger
convective forces around the manikin. A large amount of pollution was mea-
sured when there was no table located by the manikin. However, it reduced the
pollution released at the groin when a table was placed 10 cm from the occupant
and an even greater impact was observed when the manikin was located directly
against the table [19]. The use of furniture for breaking the convection and re-
ducing the thermal plume above a sitting person was also studied by Zukowska
et al. which reached the same conclusion [31].
2.2.2
Thermal plume
Mixing ventilation is diﬃcult to generalize. Diﬀerent factors such as the place-
ment of diﬀusers, thermal loads or the furniture arrangement aﬀect the ﬂow
distribution in an occupied zone. Thermal plumes are generated by heat emit-
ting objects like equipment and occupants, and they transport heat upwards.
==PAGE:27==
2.2 Flows in rooms
17
The upwards ﬂow, due to the buoyancy force, has a maximum velocity above
the source, where the ﬂow has the narrowest diameter. Air is mixed into the
plume, thus making it wider and increased volume ﬂow with the increment of
height. [32].
The thermal plume from an occupant can therefore alternate the air ﬂows in the
room. The distribution of the air provided from a diﬀuser can be aﬀected by
the furniture arrangement in the room. This also applies to the thermal plume
generated by an occupant. The thermal plume generated by a seated occupant
can be altered depending on the chair design, table position and clothing type.
These factors can decrease the heat output from the human, thereby reducing
the thermal plume.
A study conducted by Zukowska et al. [31] evaluated the impact of clothing
and breathing, chair design and the blocking eﬀect on the thermal plume of a
sitting occupant. The study involved experiments that were carried out in two
series. The ﬁrst study considered the impact of the clothing. Three diﬀerent
clothing types were taken into account: nude, tight and loose clothing. The
results showed that when the manikin was wearing loose clothing the thermal
plume above the manikin was wider.
The thermal plume had a lower max-
imum velocity and temperature excess compared to a nude or a tight ﬁtted
manikin. This is caused by the convective ﬂow in the boundary layer around
body, which gets more complex, when being equipped with loose clothing thus
creating a wider plume. Furthermore, it was discovered that the manikin was
supplied with less power when having loose clothing, whereas more power was
supplied to tight-ﬁtting clothing. The nude manikin, which was supplied with
most power, generated a strong plume with highest air velocity and temperature
excess. This is illustrated on Figure 2.7.
==PAGE:28==
18
Ventilation
Figure 2.7: Mean vertical air velocity for the thermal plumes 0.7 m above the
manikin’s head [31].
In the same study the chair design was also investigated.
A light support,
computer chair and executive chair were used. The results showed that the chair
controls the direction the heat is released from the body. The light support chair
did not give any protection to the body from the surrounding. This results in
larger radiation heat exchange and less convective heat loss. With the executive
chair a broad body area is in contact with the chair. This protects the back and
thereby less radiation heat loss and more convective heat exchange at the front
of the body is seen. This is caused by the increased thermal insulation at the
back of the body thus increasing the convective part of the sensible heat loss.
The executive chair resulted in higher buoyancy force density and enthalpy ﬂux
compared to the other plumes. However, the chair design did not aﬀect the
amount of air and movement in the plume. The diﬀerent clothing types and
chairs used in the study can be seen in Figure 2.8.
==PAGE:29==
2.2 Flows in rooms
19
Figure 2.8: Thermal plume above a manikin using diﬀerent clothing insulation
by Zukowska [31].
The second series of experiments were made with diﬀerent spacing between the
table and manikin abdomen. This was to investigate the blocking eﬀect of a
table on the thermal plume. It included two cases, one where the manikin’s
abdomen was touching the table, hence a distance of 0 cm. The second case
was with the manikin abdomen with a distance of 10 cm to the table. When
having the table touching the manikin’s abdomen the results showed a more
symmetrical and wider plume cross-section 0.7 m above the manikin head (Fig.
2.7). This was a consequence of the table blocking the free convective ﬂow from
the legs and redirecting it to the sides resulting in a higher volume ﬂux. In
the case where the abdomen was 10 cm from the table the results showed that
the velocity of the thermal plume was more concentrated and slightly higher
compared to the results when the manikin’s abdomen touched the table.
Another important aspect when dealing with the thermal plume is the type
of simulator used (Simulator refers to an artiﬁcial occupant as a heat source).
Diﬀerent types of simulators can be used to investigate the thermal plume and
the interaction with other air ﬂows in the room. Studies have been made of
simple cuboid made geometries and thermal manikins to evaluate the impact
on the airﬂow. These studies show that it is suﬃcient, when evaluating the
global ﬂow, but insuﬃcient when measuring local ﬂow conditions close to the
==PAGE:30==
20
Ventilation
simulator [33]. Therefore, studying the geometry of the simulator was done by
Zukowska et al. [34], to evaluate the convective ﬂow pattern. This needs to
be taken into account, since the geometry of the simulators will create diﬀerent
thermal plumes.
The study investigated the thermal plume created by a cylinder, a rectangular
box, a dummy and a thermal manikin. All the simulators had approximately
the same surface area of 1.60-1.63 m2 and a height of 1.20 m. Furthermore, all
were adjusted to supply 100 W. The results of the study showed that neither the
cylinder nor the rectangular box had a thermal plume that corresponded to the
one generated by a sitting human. However, the dummy had a thermal plume
with all four integral characteristics close to the characteristics of the thermal
manikin. The integral characteristics are deﬁned as volume ﬂux, momentum
ﬂux, buoyancy force density, and enthalpy ﬂux. The presence of legs causes the
correct shape of the plume, which is asymmetrical and more at the front, but
narrower at on sides. The conclusion of this study is that when making full scale
measurements, a humanlike simulator is preferred. It is essential that the simu-
lator has legs and thighs, because the eﬀect on the air velocity and temperature
is undeniable. When making an experiment it is therefore recommended to use
a thermal manikin when available. Although, a dummy, where the proper heat
distribution inside is ensured, can serve as a replacement if the manikin is un-
available. Furthermore a simple geometry as a cylinder and rectangular box are
not recommended as they generate a thermal plume which is too concentrated
above the heat source [34].
This was also concluded in another study by Zukowska et al. [35] that resulted
in the volume ﬂux between a cylinder and thermal manikin diﬀered by 40%,
when looking at room ventilated by an upward piston ﬂow.
Another research consisted of evaluating the thermal plumes generated by hu-
man body simulators with diﬀerent geometry and the impact on the airﬂow in
a full scale room with displacement ventilation. The experiment was conducted
with two thermal manikins resembling a human body shape and with two heated
cylinders [36].
The results showed that the temperature proﬁles with both the manikins and
cylinders were similar. However, the temperature, shown on Figure 2.9, was
more linear with cylinders, whereas the temperature ratio was constant and in-
dependent of the height in the upper part of the room with the manikin case.
Close to the diﬀuser the temperature were lower for both cases.
When performing the experiment, tracer gas measurements with CO2 were car-
ried out as well to determine the stratiﬁcation height shown on Figure 2.10 for
a cylinder and a thermal manikin. The results for the two cases varied and it
showed that with the case of the manikin a lower stratiﬁcation height of 1.3 m
was achieved due to the more intense air mixing that occurs with a complex
geometry. Furthermore, the cylinder generated a stratiﬁcation height of 1.7 m,
which showed that the volume ﬂux was smaller compared to a manikin thus giv-
==PAGE:31==
2.2 Flows in rooms
21
ing a higher stratiﬁcation height. It was concluded that a simpliﬁcation of the
geometry, when measuring airﬂow patterns in a room with displacement venti-
lation is insuﬃcient and it is therefore recommended to use a complex geometry
as a manikin.
Figure 2.9: Vertical temperature proﬁles for the manikin case (left) and cylin-
der case (right) [36].
Figure 2.10: CO2 concentration for manikin and cylinder [36].
==PAGE:32==
22
Ventilation
2.2.3
Ventilation ﬂows
Ventilation systems use air jets to distribute warm or cooled air to the occupied
zone. When investigating the necessary design criteria for speciﬁc rooms, the
trajectory of the jet is important to ensure that the air is correctly supplied to
the occupied zone without causing discomfort. Many diﬀerent air terminals are
available and are characterized as generating circular, plane or radial jet. The
supply air from a ceiling mounted diﬀuser is most often a radial jet. Further-
more, the jet will act as a wall jet as shown on Figure 2.11. The aim of a radial
jet is for the air to be distributed in every direction. In practice a combination
of the diﬀerent jets can exist to create the correct ﬂow pattern required in the
diﬀerent rooms.
Figure 2.11: Side and top view of a radial wall jet [32].
The velocity of the center line of the jet will depends on distance from the
opening. Three zone can be found when investigating a free jet as shown on
Figure 2.12 and past the axisymmetric behavior a terminal region occur [1]. The
length of the potential core depends on the opening diameter of the jet [1]. The
center velocity will be smaller for a wall jet compared to a free jet, but will have
the same zones.
Figure 2.12: The four zones of a free jet.
==PAGE:33==
2.2 Flows in rooms
23
In mixing ventilation the radial air jets are commonly used in small rooms. This
is typically because the air supplied to the diﬀuser has high speed in order to
have the correct throw length. Since wall jets supply air parallel with a surface
the Coanda-eﬀect will occur. This means that the turbulent mixing layer on
both sides of the jet entrains the ambient air. Along the ceiling new air is not
available to replace the air being dragged in. This creates an under pressure
along the ceiling. The jet will be deﬂected towards the ceiling and continue along
the ceiling until it reaches terminal velocity [21], [7]. Figure 2.13 illustrates the
Coanda-eﬀect.
Figure 2.13: Air ﬂow pattern in a plane jet close to a parallel surface [21].
Variable air volume (VAV) systems are becoming more common. This means
that the demand-based air ﬂow is a possibility for occupants. To avoid draught
problems when adjusting the ventilation ﬂow rate, it is vital to have an appro-
priate throw length of the jets [21]. In situations where the velocity is too low
to maintain the Coanda-eﬀect the air will detach and drop directly towards the
occupied zone. This concentrates the air directly towards the occupied zone as
shown on Figure 2.14. The ventilation changes from mixing towards a more
personalized ventilation type. If draught can be prevented, when using low ﬂow
rates, it could save energy as less supply air is required to deliver the air to the
occupants.
Figure 2.14: Low velocity air ﬂow from a ceiling diﬀuser [21].
==PAGE:34==
24
Ventilation
2.2.4
Interaction of ﬂows
The interaction of the supply air ﬂow and thermal plume is important to in-
vestigate, particularly due to eﬀorts to reduce the supply ﬂow rate as part of
saving energy.
Furthermore, due to constant energy-saving improvements of
equipment such as lamps and computers, occupants have become the dominant
heat source which generate thermal plumes. If the interaction of ﬂows is not
taken into account when designing a ventilation system it can change the ﬂow
pattern, which in terms can inﬂuence the ventilation eﬀectiveness.
When an occupant is located directly below the supply air outlet, a blocking
eﬀect occurs, because of the thermal plume and also since the occupant acts as
an obstacle. This makes the volume ﬂow decay faster and possibly even bypass
the occupant. Yang Bin [22] performed an investigation about the interaction
of the ﬂow using personalized ventilation above a seated manikin’s head. Bin
performed the experiments using an ambient temperature of 23.5°C and 26°C
in the experimental chamber and similar temperatures for the supply air. The
tests were performed using four diﬀerent ventilation ﬂow rates: 4 l/s, 8 l/s, 12
l/s and 16 l/s. The interaction of the thermal plume generated by the thermal
manikin with the downwards personal jet was evaluated using the neutral level
which is deﬁned as the distance from a nozzle (Bin used a nozzle with an outlet
diameter of 95 mm [22]), to the point at which the plume from the manikin was
detected shown on Figure 2.15.
Figure 2.15: The neutral level between the thermal plume and the downwards
volume ﬂow rate [22].
Bin found that a clear deformation of the velocity proﬁle occurred when the
==PAGE:35==
2.2 Flows in rooms
25
manikin was heated compared to when it was unheated which can be seen
on Figure 2.16-a and 2.16-b.
The deformations appeared to be stronger, at
low ventilation ﬂow rates, since the ﬂow was not strong enough to oﬀset the
buoyancy ﬂow from the manikin [22].
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.16: Air velocity proﬁles with 4 l/s personalized air ﬂow rate at 23.5°C
isothermal: (a) Unheated manikin and (b) Heated manikin.
The velocity at the outlet of the jet was almost unaﬀected when the manikin
was heated, however, at 0.2 m above the head the velocity was almost reduced
by half shown on Figure 2.16-b. The neutral level therefore changed according
to the volume ﬂow rate, and with a 16 l/s personalized ventilation jet, it was
possible to completely break down the thermal plume. Bin concluded this by
comparing the velocity proﬁles which showed that the blockage and the neutral
level were located at the same place when looking at an unheated and a heated
manikin. Figure 2.17 illustrates the correlation between increasing the volume
ﬂow rate and the neutral level as a function of the nozzle diameter.
==PAGE:36==
26
Ventilation
Figure 2.17: The dimensionless neutral level as a function of the ﬂow rate [22].
A study performed by Licina et al. [37] investigated the interaction between
the CBL and ventilation air ﬂow. The study looked at diﬀerent forms of ﬂows;
opposing airﬂow from above; transverse airﬂow from front and assisting airﬂow
from below as shown on Figure 2.18.
Figure 2.18: The experimental setup for Licina’s investigation of the interac-
tion of ﬂows [37].
The opposing ﬂow was generated using a perforated box which was designed to
deliver a uniform airﬂow distribution. The study showed that an opposed air
ﬂow of 0.175 m/s generated an insigniﬁcant eﬀect on the air ﬂow close to the
mouth region [37]. When the air velocity was increased to 0.3 m/s the CBL was
==PAGE:37==
2.2 Flows in rooms
27
substantially disturbed but was unable to completely oﬀset the thermal plume
generated by the manikin. It was however, able to reduce the peak velocity by
46% [37].
Figure 2.19: The mean velocity of when using opposing ﬂow [37].
The CBL was completely broken when opposing ﬂow with an air velocity of 0.425
m/s was used. In this case the ﬂow interaction resulted in a downwards ﬂow
approximately 20-30 mm from the mouth with a high turbulence intensity. The
turbulence intensity would progressively decline further away from the mouth.
The mean velocity proﬁle at diﬀerent distances from the mouth of the manikin
can be seen in Figure 2.19.
Figure 2.20: Pseudo color visualization for each velocity using opposing ﬂow
studied by Licina [37].
The shape of the thermal plume changes drastically depending on the air ve-
locity as can be seen in Figure 2.20. The opposing air ﬂow when 0.175 m/s
was used, collided at 0.4 m above the head of the manikin. The air velocity is
insuﬃcient to break the thermal plume, but instead spreads it in the horizontal
direction [19]. The collision zone above the manikin, when the air velocity of
0.175 m/s was at a similar height as the ﬁnding done by Bin [22]. When the
air velocity was increased to 0.3 m/s the collision height was reduced to 0.15 m
above the head. The thermal plume was strong enough to continue the upwards
ﬂow as can be seen on Figure 2.20 (third picture from the right). The thermal
plume was completely overpowered by the air velocity at 0.425 m/s.
==PAGE:38==
28
Ventilation
An investigation conducted by Rezgals [38] looked at the interaction of the
thermal plume from a sitting thermal manikin with a ﬂow from above under
iso-thermal conditions of approximately 21.5°C and 26°C. The supply air veloc-
ity used for the experiment was 0.05 m/s - 0.1 m/s. The supply air would enter
a mixing box with nets in, to create a uniform velocity ﬁeld. The supply air box
had an area of 1.08 m2. Rezgal found that at a uniform temperature of 21.5°C,
the thermal plume was penetrated at a much lower velocity (between 0.065 m/s
- 0.075 m/s) [38] seen on Figure 2.21.
Figure 2.21: A: Air velocity of 0.065 m/s; tsupply = 21.5°C; troom = 21.5°C
B: Air velocity of 0.075 m/s; tsupply = 21.5°C; troom = 21.5°C
[38].
The study concluded that the thermal plume generated by the manikin was more
laminar at 21.5°C and that it had turbulent patterns at 26 °C. Furthermore, the
thermal plume became stronger at 21°C compared to 26°C since the temperature
diﬀerence between the manikin and the ambient air was larger. This diﬀerence
in temperature greatly impacted the air movement [38]. Rezgal also found that
a large opening outlet of the supply air would increase length of the potential
core. This meant that even at lower velocity compared to the studies performed
by Bin and Licina, it was possible to break the thermal plume by increasing the
size of the opening outlet.
The ﬂow interaction changes a lot depending on the type and size of the sup-
plied ﬂow in addition to the air velocity as indicated from the reviewed studies.
All three studies showed that the thermal plume required a certain velocity or
air ﬂow to break the thermal plume. The surrounding temperature was very
inﬂuential, since the thermal plume would become weaker at larger room tem-
peratures. This is because the temperature diﬀerence between the skin- and the
==PAGE:39==
2.2 Flows in rooms
29
ambient air would be smaller and therefore reduce the temperature gradient.
The furniture has a major impact in the development of the CBL, since the
back is in contact with a chair which changes the ratio between radiation and
convection. If the occupant was sitting by the desk the CBL would also be
disrupted since the heat generated by the legs will be blocked by the desk. The
thermal plume would therefore be reduced making it possible for the ﬂow to
penetrate the thermal plume at a potentially lower velocity. Bin also illustrated
that the size of the diﬀuser was important as to the placement of the neutral
level. If the distance between the head of the manikin and the nozzle remained
constant while the nozzle diameter was increased it would make the collision
between the jet and the thermal plume occur much closer to the manikin (Fig.
2.17).
2.2.5
Ventilation eﬀectiveness
Installation of a good ventilation, during the design phase can be fairly simple.
Although in reality it might work diﬀerently. It is therefore important to assess
the air distribution performance of the ventilation in order to obtain good in-
door air quality. To evaluate the PAQ the ventilation eﬀectiveness can be used.
Measurements of the eﬀectiveness can be done during the design (test chambers)
as well as after completion help to evaluate occupant complaints [6].
When looking at ventilation eﬀectiveness there are two main concepts: the air
change eﬃciency and the contaminant removal eﬀectiveness (CRE). The ﬁrst
method looks at the age of air and the air change eﬃciency. In this project the
ventilation eﬀectiveness focuses on the CRE [17].
The airborne contaminants must be removed by creating an air ﬂow which re-
moves the contaminants, from diﬀerent sources, so that the local concentration
level remains low in the room. The ventilation eﬀectiveness can be deﬁned as a
global concentration or a local concentration. The global concentration refers to
the whole room while a local ventilation eﬀectiveness is at speciﬁc points in the
room. The equation which are used to determine the ventilation eﬀectiveness
in the room can be seen in Eq. (2.1). The local ventilation eﬀectiveness is,
however, more important when evaluating the PAQ as this directly relates to
the eﬀectiveness close to the occupant. Instead of using the mean room concen-
tration, the mean concentration at the sampling point is used. Equation (2.1)
can therefore be written as seen in Eq. (2.2) [7].
CRE =
concentration in the exhaust
mean concentration in the room
(2.1)
CRE =
ce
clocal
(2.2)
When looking at the ﬂow pattern the occupants will also have an eﬀect on the
concentration distribution due to the convective boundary layer and thermal
==PAGE:40==
30
Ventilation
plume, which were discussed in the previous sections. Figure 2.22 (left) illus-
trates a situation where the pollutant (Q) is caught in the CBL and moves
upward passing the mouth region. The CBL can also act as a protective barrier
around the person which will deﬂect some pollutants that are trying to enter as
shown on Figure 2.22 (right)[17]. The local modiﬁcation due to the CBL can
therefore change the ventilation eﬀectiveness. A negative impact of the PAQ
will be experienced by the occupant if the CBL is part of an increase of the
pollutants accumulated in the mouth region.
Figure 2.22: The inﬂuence of the CBL and air ﬂow on the pollutants (Q)[17].
To measure the ventilation eﬀectiveness in practice, tracer gases and associated
measurement equipment are required and has therefore been used during this
project.
==PAGE:41==
C h a p t e r 3
Air Supply Diﬀusers
3.1
Diﬀuser design
The main purpose of air supply diﬀusers for mixing ventilation is to dilute room
air with supply of clean conditioned air. Furthermore, it should be ensured that
low velocity conditions in the occupied zone are established to avoid thermal
discomfort in terms of draught. Air diﬀusion may be achieved with high or
low momentum air ﬂux diﬀusers. High momentum ﬂux diﬀusers has enough
momentum to mix the air in a whole room, whereas in low momentum ﬂux
diﬀusers the mixing is achieved by buoyant forces by the heat sources. The
diﬀerent type of diﬀusers are listed in Table 3.1 [21].
Table 3.1: Type of high momentum and low momentum ﬂux diﬀusers.
High momentum ﬂux diﬀusers
Low momentum ﬂux diﬀusers
Perforated diﬀusers
Textile terminals
Supply valves
Floor diﬀusers
Multi-nozzle diﬀusers
Linear slot diﬀusers
Swirl diﬀusers
Jet nozzle
Grilles
3.2
The Pascal system
The Pascal system is developed by Lindab and is marketed as a VAV system. It
has been made with the purpose of simplifying the installation and reduce the
energy consumption. The diﬀerence between a conventional VAV system and
the Pascal system is that the Pascal system requires a low amount of regulation
equipment. The Pascal system is controlled by an MBBV-box, which regulates
each diﬀuser in a system to provide the desired amount of supply air. The en-
ergy consumption is reduced by a fan optimizer that secures that the system
does not deliver more pressure than required and it can work up to 200 Pa with
==PAGE:42==
32
Air Supply Diﬀusers
a low noise level[39]. Furthermore it can be controlled by a sensor that captures
any occupant in a room. If no one is present it will be put in a stand by set
point with low airﬂow, reducing the energy consumption.
The system is composed of ﬁve standard components; a diﬀuser, an MBBV
box that regulates the amount of air required, a room temperature regulator, a
central control unit that regulates the exhaust air and optimizes the ventilation
and operation of the system. At last there is a volume ﬂow rate regulator that
controls the exhaust air [39]. The ﬁve standard components are shown on Figure
3.1 [39].
Figure 3.1: The ﬁve standard components in the Pascal system. a) Diﬀuser,
b) MBBV box, c) room temperature regulator, d) central control
unit and e) volume ﬂow regulator.
When the Pascal system supplies air at low ﬂow rates, a temperature diﬀerence
of 6-8K is preferred.
This is because the velocity decay is slower when the
temperature diﬀerence is large. This means that the Coanda-eﬀect does not
happen along the ceiling and the air will have a direct downwards ﬂow towards
the occupied zone. This method of ventilation tries to supply clean and fresh
air directly towards the occupants. The ﬂow pattern can be seen on Figure 3.2
for 10 l/s when no external heat sources are located in the room. The diﬀusers
geometrical shape makes it possible to maintain the Coanda-eﬀect when higher
supply ﬂow rate is required [40] and work as a conventional mixing system.
==PAGE:43==
3.3 Justiﬁcation for research
33
Figure 3.2: The formation of the ﬂow pattern at 10 l/s for the Pascal system
without a manikin.
3.3
Justiﬁcation for research
Lindab investigated the Pascal diﬀuser with regard to its draught performance
since it is the most common cause for discomfort among occupants. The air
velocity were measured for a seated person and a standing person (1.1 m and
1.7 m respectively). This was done by forming a line with the velocity probes,
as shown on Figure 3.3. The results showed that the estimated DR would not
exceed 15% when using a ﬂow rate between 10l/s - 60l/s which can be seen on
Figure 3.4.
==PAGE:44==
34
Air Supply Diﬀusers
Figure 3.3: Measurement setup [40].
Figure 3.4: Results of the velocity measurements [40].
Measurements of the CRE were required as part of evaluating the indoor air
quality for the occupants, when using the Pascal system at low ﬂow rates. This
would make it possible to determine the ventilation eﬀectiveness of the system,
which had not previously been studied. Furthermore, the investigations per-
==PAGE:45==
3.3 Justiﬁcation for research
35
formed by Lindab, only looked at cases without occupants or with cylindrical
heat sources. As already discussed previously in section 2.2.2 the cylindrical heat
sources have a very diﬀerent convection pattern compared to a thermal manikin.
Therefore, it was important to use a thermal manikin for the measurements in
order to study the interaction between the thermal plume and the supply air
ﬂow at a ﬂow rate of 10 l/s. This interaction was necessary to evaluate if the
ﬂow could penetrate CBL and mix with the air in the breathing zone thereby
improving the inhaled air quality. From reviewing literature investigating the
CBL, thermal plume and the ﬂow interaction in addition to the inﬂuence the
CBL has on the transportation of pollutants, 4 hypotheses were made for the
Pascal system:
Hypothesis 1:
Diﬃcult to supply the clean air directly to the occupied zone using a ﬂow
rate of 10 l/s.
A sitting occupant will generate a strong thermal plume which has a velocity
between 0.2 - 0.25 m/s [22]. This upwards ﬂow from the manikin should deﬂect
the supply ﬂow away from the manikin since the ﬂow rate is low and is not
supplied using a nozzle. This study will look at the ﬂow interaction between
the supply air ﬂow and the thermal plume.
However, the placement of the
manikin can change the ﬂow interaction as the back side of the manikin is less
concentrated.
Hypothesis 2:
The ventilation eﬀectiveness will be improved by supplying clean air directly
towards the occupied zone.
If air is directly supplied to the occupied zone the clean air will mix with the
polluted air. This can dilute the amount of pollutants present in the inhaled
air, thereby improving the ventilation eﬀectiveness and possibly the PAQ.
Hypothesis 3:
Limiting the CBL from the manikin by adding clothing insulation or a
board will improve the ventilation eﬀectiveness.
By adding a board or additional clothing the CBL development will be lower as
were reviewed in Chapter 2. This will decrease the movement of bio-eﬄuents
of the manikin towards the mouth region which should improve the ventilation
eﬀectiveness.
==PAGE:46==
36
Air Supply Diﬀusers
Hypothesis 4:
A smaller size diﬀuser face plate will improve the ventilation eﬀectiveness.
Changing the diﬀuser face plate allows for a larger opening which concentrates
the downward jet towards the occupied zone.
By potentially increasing the
amount of supply air towards the occupied zone an improve of the ventilation
eﬀectiveness should occur.
This study was performed in order to get a better understanding of these hy-
potheses.
==PAGE:47==
C h a p t e r 4
Objective of the study
4.1
Overall objective
The overall objective is to study the ventilation eﬀectiveness achieved by a
passive diﬀuser (Lindab’s Pascal system) when it is used at low supply air ﬂow
rate of 10 l/s and with a large temperature diﬀerence of 6-8K. An important aim
was to identify the interaction between the supply air and the thermal plume
generated by a sitting thermal manikin performing desk work below the diﬀuser.
4.2
Speciﬁc objectives
The ﬁrst speciﬁc objective, was to study diﬀerent placements of the occupant
with regards to the ventilation diﬀuser and to investigate how the thermal plume
possibly changed the air ﬂow from the diﬀuser.
The second speciﬁc objective was to study the importance of the size of the
diﬀuser face plate on ventilation eﬀectiveness.
The third speciﬁc objective was to study how the clothing thermal insulation,
would change the airﬂow interaction between the thermal plume and the supply
air. As this leads to a change in the strength of the thermal plume and the
inﬂuence this change has on the ventilation eﬀectiveness.
The fourth speciﬁc objective was to study the impact of a board on the ta-
ble in front of the manikin and touching its abdomen 1) on the strength of the
thermal plume and its interaction with the ventilation ﬂow generated by the
Pascal diﬀuser and 2) the resulting inhaled air quality for pollution generated
at the groin region.
The ﬁfth speciﬁc objective was to study the impact that the room air temper-
ature has on the ﬂow interaction between the thermal plume and the supply
air, while keeping the temperature diﬀerence constant constant. Under these
conditions the strength of the thermal plume generated by the manikin would
change and have impact on the airﬂow interaction.
==PAGE:48==
C h a p t e r 5
Method
5.1
Experimental facilities
In order to fulﬁl the general- and speciﬁc objectives, measurements in an en-
vironmental test chamber had to be done. The ﬁrst set of experiments were
carried out at the experimental facilities at Lindab Indoor Climate Laboratory
in Farum, Denmark. The main focus was to measure the ventilation eﬀective-
ness and visualize the ﬂow interaction at a constant temperature and ﬂow rate.
The second round of tests were performed at the Technical University of Den-
mark [DTU], Department of Civil Engineering. The experiments focused mainly
on the tracer gas measurements and the ﬂow interaction of the supplied ventila-
tion ﬂow with the thermal plume generated by seated human body at diﬀerent
room temperatures.
5.1.1
Lindab
The experimental test chamber had a wall which could be moved in order to
change the dimensions of the room.
To simulate a big single person’s oﬃce
environment the wall was moved to make a room with the following dimensions:
4.40 m (L) x 3.90 m (W) x 2.60 m (H). The room was located adjacent to a
show room and below another test chamber seen in Figure 5.1. A plexiglass wall
separated the show room from the test chamber shown on Figure 5.1-a. This
wall made it possible to observe the experiments without interfering with any
ongoing measurements. Furthermore, two of the walls were concrete walls and
the movable wall was made of styrofoam plates.
The room was ventilated using a ceiling mounted diﬀuser, constantly delivering
10 l/s, which was located 50 cm from the center towards the back wall, seen on
Figure 5.2-(a) and the exhaust was in the ceiling corner. The room contained a
thermal manikin, a chair, a desk and a printer as shown in Figure 5.2-(b).
==PAGE:49==
5.1 Experimental facilities
39
Figure 5.1: (a) The test chamber is mark with a red square. (b) The adjacent
showroom at the Lindab facilities.
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.2: (a) Environmental test chamber at Lindab. (b) Schematic layout
of the chamber for Location1.
==PAGE:50==
40
Method
5.1.2
DTU
The test chamber at DTU, had a sliding wall which could be adjusted to change
the length of the room shown on Figure 5.3. The walls consisted of styrofoam
plates.
The width of the room was ﬁxed and the chamber dimensions were
therefore 4.65 m (L) x 3.35 m (W) x 2.60 m (H).
Figure 5.3: Test chamber at DTU separated by an adjustable wall.
The room is within a larger room which was kept at the same temperature as
the test chamber to avoid any heat loss. All the gaps between the walls and
ceiling were taped to make the room as airtight as possible. The room had the
diﬀuser mounted in the center of the suspended ceiling. In order to achieve the
desired volume ﬂow rate of the supply air, a bleeding system was set up. This
setup consisted of a T-duct which was connected to the end of the main duct.
One end of the T-duct was left open and the other was connected to the room
diﬀuser as shown on Figure 5.4.
This bleeding system was vital, since the AHU was unable to deliver a supply
volume ﬂow rate below 20 l/s, without it. Therefore the AHU delivered con-
stantly a total of 90 l/s to the main duct. The end of the duct which was left
open had an Iris with a diameter of 250 mm installed. The Iris250 (Figure 5.5)
served as an adjustable damper which ensured that the correct ﬂow rate was
bled.
==PAGE:51==
5.1 Experimental facilities
41
Figure 5.4: The bleeding system using a T-duct.
To ensure that the correct amount of air was supplied to the test chamber, a
micromanometer was used. Two tubes were connected from the micromanome-
ter on either side of the iris250 (Fig. 5.4) to record the pressure diﬀerence. The
k-values were read from Figure 5.6 which corresponded to the iris250 set point.
By using the pressure diﬀerence, measured by the micromanometer, and the
k-value it was possible to calculate how much air was bled through the duct
using Equation (5.1).
Figure 5.5: The Iris250 opening at position 5.
==PAGE:52==
42
Method
Figure 5.6: Iris250 product sheet from Lindab.
qv = k ·
p
(∆pm)
(5.1)
The Iris250 opening was set to 5, which resulted in a k-value of 24.1. The aim
was to achieve a speciﬁc pressure diﬀerence of the bled air duct corresponding
to 70 l/s, 75 l/s, 80 l/s (Fig. 5.6). The damper located on the side that was
connected to the test chamber (Fig. 5.4) had to be adjusted to achieve the
correct pressure on the side where air was bled.
Due to minor ﬂuctuations,
the average of ﬁve measurements, with an interval of 15 seconds, was done.
Whenever a new experiment was started the pressure diﬀerence was checked to
ensure that the correct volume ﬂow rate was maintained.
5.2
Pascal diﬀuser
Two diﬀerent types of diﬀusers, provided by Lindab, were used throughout all
the experiments. The diﬀuser used for most of the experiments was the LCP dif-
fuser (Figure 5.7). It is a ﬂush mounted square diﬀuser, with a 450 mm circular
unperforated face plate. The diﬀuser was connected to an MBBV plenum box
which had an integrated volume ﬂow regulator, for the experiments at Lindab.
The plenum box ensures that a uniform velocity ﬁeld is achieved. However, at
DTU the duct was connected directly to the diﬀuser without the plenum box.
This was discovered after the system was installed. In order to evaluate if the
system could be used without the plenum box visualization were done before
measurements started. It was observed that the diﬀerence between the system
at Lindab and DTU were very small and the plenum box was therefore not
installed. The diﬀuser can be seen on Figure 5.7
==PAGE:53==
5.2 Pascal diﬀuser
43
Figure 5.7: LCP Diﬀuser from Lindab.
The LCP diﬀuser is suitable for supplying cool air in both vertical and horizontal
direction. It has a large dynamic range. This makes it possible to supply low
air ﬂows with large temperature diﬀerence, without the risk of draught [40].
To investigate how the size of the face place would aﬀect the ﬂow direction, the
LCP diﬀuser was reused. A new face plate was cut with a diameter of 370 mm.
This was done to try and concentrate the ﬂow of the jet to form a better vertical
ﬂow pattern.
The second diﬀuser used in the investigation was a perforated diﬀuser called
PCV illustrated on Figure 5.8. It is a circular diﬀuser with a perforated face
plate that has a diameter of 360 mm. PCV has an integrated damper which is
motorized. This damper ensures that the Coanda-eﬀect is always maintained
even at low ﬂow rates.
However, at DTU the perforated face plate was taken oﬀthe PCV diﬀuser and
mounted on the LCP diﬀuser. Thus making the LCP perforated with a face
plate of 360 mm. When doing unperforated measurements, the face plate was
taped to cover the holes simulating the small sized face plate.
Figure 5.8: PCV Diﬀuser from Lindab.
==PAGE:54==
44
Method
5.3
Measuring Instruments
5.3.1
Temperature sensor
Experiments at Lindab
The air temperature was measured using a Pt100 temperature sensing element.
It is possible to accurately decide the air temperature using this transducer as
the Pt100 element has a well deﬁned temperature coeﬃcient. By measuring the
change in resistance the room air temperature is determined. The element is
covered in order to prevent any thermal radiation from inﬂuencing the accuracy.
The measuring range of a Pt100 element is between: -40°C - 120°C with a
precision of 0.2°when measuring between the range of 5-40°C [41]. The multi
point temperature sensor was located 1 m away from the manikin to avoid
any direct inﬂuence from the heat output generated by the manikin. The four
measurement points were located at 0.1 m, 0.6 m, 1.1 m and 1.7 m above the ﬂoor
to measure the vertical temperature distribution. A large vertical temperature
diﬀerence between ankles can cause discomfort for an occupant.
Figure 5.9
shows the placement of the temperature sensor elements.
Figure 5.9: The temperature sensor, with each sensor located at 0.1, 0.6, 1.1
and 1.7 m above the ﬂoor.
==PAGE:55==
5.3 Measuring Instruments
45
Experiments at DTU
The temperature in the test chamber and in the supply air was measured using
a Craftemp Atra thermistor sensor with an accuracy of ±0.2°C shown on Figure
5.10. Two sensors were used, one inside the chamber, placed at a height of 1.1
m at a distance of 1.25 m from the manikin, and the other placed in the supply
diﬀuser (2.6 m).
The Craftemp Atra thermistor sensor measures the resistance in Ohms. Both
sensors were connected to a data acquisition unit, Agilent, that recorded the
resistance and converted it to temperature.
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.10: (a) Crafttemp Astra thermistor. (b) Data acquisition unit Agi-
lent.
5.3.2
Manikin
The thermal manikin is an accurately shaped human body simulator composed
of 17 individually controlled segments. Each segment is electrically heated which
enables control of the surface temperature, or keeping the electrical power con-
stant. The surface temperature of the manikin resemble the temperature of the
human skin, when in comfort mode.
The thermal manikin simulates a woman with a height of 1.7 m, (Figure 5.11).
The manikin is made of a ﬁberglass armed polystyrene shell with a thickness
of 3 mm. The 17 individually controlled body segments are listed in Table 5.1
including their respective surface area. In the investigation the thermal manikin
was used in comfort mode, i.e. the surface temperature was equal to the skin
temperature of an average person in a state of thermal comfort. The software
MANIKIN logs the electric power output in units of power (W/m2) and the
surface temperature (°C) of each body segment. This data is used to calculate
the equivalent temperature, as explained in section 5.5.1.
==PAGE:56==
46
Method
Figure 5.11: Manikin seen from the side sitting at a distance of 10 cm from
the table in Location 1.
Table 5.1: Area of the manikin body segments.
Body Part
Surface [m2]
Left foot
0.043
Right foot
0.043
Left lower leg
0.09
Right lower leg
0.09
Left thigh
0.16
Right thigh
0.166
Pelvis
0.17
Head
0.0625
Top of head
0.0625
Left hand
0.038
Right hand
0.037
Left forearm
0.05
Right forearm
0.05
Left upper arm
0.073
Right upper arm
0.078
Chest
0.14
Back
0.13
Total
1.483
5.3.3
Visualization
For the ﬂow visualizations a laser was used. The laser was a CNI Laser Module
Diode, which created a green laser sheet with a wavelength of 532±1 nm. When
operating the laser, safety glasses were used to avoid any damage to the eyes.
==PAGE:57==
5.3 Measuring Instruments
47
On Figure 5.12 the laser and power supply can be seen. A smoke generator
was also installed in the air supply system in order to visualize the ﬂow pattern
from the supply air. A hand held Sony RX100V camera was used to record the
ﬂow visualized by the smoke and the laser. This camera was able to record in
4K video and was also used to capture photographs of the set ups used in the
experiments.
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.12: (a) Laser module diode and (b) power supply[38].
5.3.4
Tracer gas
The equipment used for the tracer gas concentration measurements and the
analysis of the measurements performed at both Lindab and DTU were identi-
cal. The tracer gas equipment consisted of two Multi-gas Monitor (Type 1302)
and two Multipoint Sampler and Doser (Type 1303).
All measurements were made using the same system settings: "Water Com-
pensation" and "Cross Compensation". This made it possible to sample and
measure two gases, Freon134a and N2O, simultaneously.
The systems had six inlet channels, each with a tube-mounting stub in the
front. Tubes of 30-50 mm in length which had an air ﬁlter attached to the end
of the short tubes, were mounted on the stubs, enabling the sampling tubes to
be connected. The ﬁlter ensured that the samples were free of particles. The
INNOVA multi-gas monitor and sampler can be seen on Figure 5.13-a. The
whole logging cycle took approximately 7 minutes for the older INNOVA, while
the newer performed a whole cycle in 3.5 minutes.
The tracer gases, Freon134a and N2O, were selected because both are not nat-
urally present in the room air and they both have a density close to the density
of air (N2O: δ=1.9kg/m3; Freon 134a: δ =1.7kg/m3). The rotameters, shown
==PAGE:58==
48
Method
on Figure 5.13-b, made it possible to adjust the dosing level of the tracer gas
with the built in valves.
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.13: (a) The multi-gas monitor and sampler. (b) The rotameter.
5.3.5
Anemometer
To measure low air velocities, the low velocity thermal anemometer, Sensor
HT-400, was used. The anemometer was only used for the measurements con-
ducted at DTU. The anemometer calibrated for these experiments consisted of
12 Omni-directional thermal probes. The velocity sensor probes were spherical
(d=2mm) as shown in Figure 5.14. Each probe was connected to a transducer
with a wire. The transducer was connected to the measurement station with a
transducer cable, Figure 5.15. The measurement station converted the voltage
output from the transducer to a digital signal. By running the Omni-directional
ThermoAnemometer HT-400 software, the digital signal was stored in a com-
puter data set [42].
==PAGE:59==
5.3 Measuring Instruments
49
Figure 5.14: Low velocity thermal anemometer probe (HT-412-x) [42].
Figure 5.15: Connection between the low velocity probes and measurement
station [42].
==PAGE:60==
50
Method
5.4
Experimental conditions
Experimental conditions Lindab
The experimental facilities at Lindab were designed to simulate typical of-
ﬁce conditions with a large temperature diﬀerence between the supply air and
the room air temperature. The air temperature was kept between 21-22°C at
Lindab. A higher room temperature was diﬃcult to achieve because the neigh-
boring show room was kept at approximately 22°C. The supply air was cooled
to 6-8K below the the room temperature. A constant air ﬂow of 10 l/s was
used for the primary set of experiments. However, 12 visualizations were done
with air ﬂow rates of 15 l/s, 20 l/s and 25 l/s respectively. The air temperature
in the show room was set to 22°C to ensure that the ambient air- and radiant
temperature remained the same to avoid radiant asymmetry. It was desired to
have a room temperature of 22°C and a supply temperature of 14°C, but it was
not possible to keep a diﬀerence of 8K.
Diﬀerent conditions were studied at Lindab.
The placement of the seated
manikin with respect to the diﬀuser using a normal face plate was investigated
in order study the impact on the interaction of the supplied ventilation ﬂow and
thermal plume generated by the thermal manikin.
Therefore, four locations
were investigated using a normal sized diﬀuser (Normal size: diameter of 45
cm; Small size: diameter of 37 cm). The manikin was placed at four diﬀerent
locations for each experiment performed at Lindab. Each location is deﬁned
as Location1, Location2, Location3 and Location4. Figure 5.16 illustrates the
diﬀerent placement of the manikin according to where the diﬀuser was located.
Location1 is where the seated manikin is facing the diﬀuser at a distance of 50
cm from the center of the head to the centerline of the diﬀuser. At Location2 the
manikin head is placed right under the diﬀuser. At Location3 the center of the
manikin head is placed 50 cm to the side of the diﬀuser. Finally at Location4
the center of the manikin head is placed 50 cm from the diﬀuser, but at this
location the manikin is facing away from the diﬀuser. The manikin was placed
with a distance of 10 cm between the abdomen and the table.
The printer was located at the upper right corner and the exhaust was located
in the bottom left corner seen on Figure 5.16.
==PAGE:61==
5.4 Experimental conditions
51
(a) Location1.
(b) Location2.
(c) Location3.
(d) Location4.
Figure 5.16: The diﬀerent placements of the manikin performed at Lindab
deﬁned as Locations 1-4.
An investigation of the ﬂow interaction of the supplied ventilation ﬂow and the
thermal plume generated while the manikin was wearing a sweater, was also
performed. Three locations (Locations 1, 2 and 4) using both the normal and
the small face plate were selected based on results from previous visualization
and measurements. These were also performed with manikin abdomen having
a distance of 10 cm to the table.
Location 1, 2 and 4 were used again, when studying the inﬂuence on the ven-
tilation eﬀectiveness and ﬂow pattern when using a board, which was touching
the manikin abdomen. The board investigation was done with the normal and
==PAGE:62==
52
Method
small sized face plates. Lastly three cases were investigated with a PCV diﬀuser,
one of them with a t-shirt at location 1 and the other two with a sweater at
location 1 and 4. All with a distance of 10 cm from the abdomen to the table.
The cases that were investigated at Lindab are listed in Table 5.2.
Throughout the results at Lindab the cases will be referred to as the following:
LocationXYZ. X=case location (Locations 1-4), Y=Type/size of the diﬀuser
(N=normal, S=Small and P=PCV) and Z=Third parameter (T=sweater and
B=Board). An example of a case is as given: Location1ST = The manikin is
located, where it is facing the diﬀuser and is 50 cm away from the diﬀuser, the
face plate of the diﬀuser is small (37 cm in diameter) and the manikin wears a
sweater. The abbreviations for each case can be found in Table 5.2.
Table 5.2: Experimental conditions at Lindab.
Name
Location
Diﬀuser
Condition
Flow Rate
Troom
Tsupply
∆T
[l/s]
[°C]
[°C]
[K]
Location1N
1
Normal
T-shirt
10
21.7
14.2
7.5
Location2N
2
21.6
14.1
7.6
Location3N
3
21.6
14.7
6.9
Location4N
4
21.5
14.6
6.9
Location1NB
1
Board
10
21.4
14.1
7.3
Location2NB
2
21.5
14.3
7.2
Location4NB
4
21.5
14.4
7.1
Location1NT
1
Sweater
21.4
14.3
7.1
Location2NT
2
21.5
14.4
7.1
Location4NT
4
21.5
14.4
7.1
Location1S
1
Small
T-shirt
10
21.7
14.3
7.5
Location2S
2
21.2
14.3
7.0
Location3S
3
21.4
14.0
7.4
Location4S
4
21.3
14.4
6.9
Location1SB
1
Board
21.6
14.8
6.8
Location2SB
2
21.7
14.9
6.8
Location4SB
4
21.6
14.6
6.9
Location1ST
1
Sweater
21.1
14.5
6.6
Location2ST
2
21.3
14.8
6.5
Location4ST
4
21.2
14.7
6.5
Location1P
1
Perforated
T-shirt
10
22.0
15.3
6.8
Location1PT
1
Sweater
21.9
15.2
6.7
Location4PT
4
21.5
15.1
6.4
==PAGE:63==
5.4 Experimental conditions
53
Experimental conditions DTU
The objective of the study at DTU was to study the impact of the room air
temperature on the airﬂow interaction and thus on the ventilation eﬀectiveness,
i.e.
the exposure to the generated pollution.
Therefore measurements at a
nominal room temperature of 23.5°C, 25°C and 27°C were performed.
The
actual experimental conditions are listed in table 5.3. The manikin was placed
in a seated position with a distance of 50 cm from the manikin mouth to the
center line of the diﬀuser which is shown on Figure 5.17-(a).
Figure 5.17: (a) Manikin located with the front facing the diﬀuser and 50 cm
way for cases 1-19 at DTU. (b) Manikin place underneath the
diﬀuser at DTU for Case20.
The manikin was facing the diﬀuser and the abdomen was 10 cm from the table.
This was the position in all cases, except in case 14, where the seated manikin
was placed right under the diﬀuser shown on Figure 5.17-(b).
The aim was to supply air which was 8°C lower than the room temperature.
However, the ducts lacked insulation and resulted in temperature diﬀerences
between 4.5-6K.
The experiments were done with supply air ﬂows of 10 l/s and 20 l/s. At 10 l/s
and 20 l/s, tracer gas, air velocity and manikin measurements were performed,
these are listed in the Table 5.3.
==PAGE:64==
54
Method
Table 5.3: Experimental conditions at DTU.
Case
Diﬀuser
Flow rate
Troom
Tsupply
∆
Comments
[l/s]
[°C]
[°C]
[K]
1
Unperforated
10
23.6
18.3
5.3
2
Unperforated
10
25.4
20.2
5.2
3
Unperforated
10
27.2
21.7
5.5
4
Unperforated
20
23.4
17.9
5.5
5
Unperforated
20
25.1
19.8
5.3
6
Unperforated
20
26.9
21.1
5.8
7
Perforated
10
23.6
18.6
5
8
Perforated
10
25.5
20.3
5.2
9
Perforated
10
27.1
21.6
5.5
10
Perforated
20
23.5
17.9
5.6
11
Perforated
20
25.3
20.2
5.1
12
Perforated
20
26.8
20.9
5.9
13
None
10
23.6
19
4.6
14
None
10
23.6
18.9
4.7
Only visualization
5.5
Experimental procedures
5.5.1
Heat loss and heat transfer coeﬃcient
When calculating the heat transfer coeﬃcient of the manikin it is required to
make a calibration. The calibration was done by performing measurements at
known temperatures [43]. The calibration results for the diﬀerent body segments
of the manikin can be found in Appendix A.2.
The calibration was done at ﬁve diﬀerent temperatures in a climate chamber.
The calibration of the ﬁve temperatures were used to calculate the heat transfer
coeﬃcient, h. The temperatures in the chamber were measured with a mercury
(Hg) thermometer and compared to the temperatures given by the chamber
control software. The manikin was working in comfort mode and with summer
clothing. It was placed in front of an oﬃce table in a seated position. The clo
values of the clothing can be seen in Table 5.4.
==PAGE:65==
5.5 Experimental procedures
55
Table 5.4: Clo values of manikin
Clothes
Clo value
Underwear
0.03
T-shirt
0.09
Trousers
0.25
Socks
0.05
Shoes
0.02
Total
0.44
The clo level of 0.44 corresponds to 0.0682 m2K/W according to ISO 7730.
[9]. When calibrating the 5 diﬀerent temperatures it was required to wait for
steady state to occur at each set temperature. The heat loss was recorded at
each temperature and the data from the manikin was logged every 10 s for 6
min. The thermal manikin software output gave the values of the skin surface
temperature (°C) and power (W/m2) for each body segment.
Based on the calibration of the manikin the equivalent temperature could be
calculated for each body segment and is found by application of the heat transfer
coeﬃcient. The heat transfer coeﬃcient can be calculated using the following
equation:
hav =
Pbodysegment
Tbodysegment −Tthermometer
(5.2)
Hereby it is possible to calculate the manikin based equivalent temperature
Teq = Tbodysegment −Pbodypsegment
hbodysegment
(5.3)
Where
• Tbodysegment = Temperature of the individual body segment [°C]
• Pbodysegment = Power supplied to the individual body segment [W/m2]
• Tthermometer = Temperature measured by the Hg thermometer at the
reference point [°C]
• hav = Average heat transfer coeﬃcient [W/m2K]
• hbodysegment = Combined heat transfer coeﬃcient for the body segment
[W/m2K]
• Teq = Equivalent temperature for the manikin [°C]
==PAGE:66==
56
Method
The calibration is based on equivalent temperature, which is derived from the
operative temperature by including the eﬀect of air velocity on a heated body.
The equivalent temperature is deﬁned as the temperature of a uniform enclosure
in which a thermal manikin with realistic skin surface temperature will lose heat
at the same rate as a it would in the actual environment [44].
The calibrated heat transfer coeﬃcients for each body segment can be seen in
Appendix A.2.
The coeﬃcients will be used to calculate the manikin based
equivalent temperature.
When performing the logging of the power and surface temperature of the
manikin a total of 60 logged data points has been gathered over a logging time
of 10 min.
5.5.2
Visualization of the airﬂow
Every experiment was recorded using a Sony high resolution camera. In order to
visualize the air ﬂow pattern of the supply air in the room, smoke was generated
through the supply air. The visualization was always performed after all relevant
data was logged from the manikin, tracer gas and velocity. This was to avoid
any inﬂuence the smoke would have on the measurements, since the smoke is
slightly heavier than air.
The visualization at Lindab was done using a laser and with regular light. The
laser had a heat output which inﬂuenced the air movement when placed in the
room.
Since the room dimensions were not big enough to have the laser in
without interfering, the laser was moved to the entrance. A small gap was left
open by the door for the light of the laser to enter. The laser therefore had an
angle of about 30°which is shown on Figure 5.18. The regular light was placed
outside the room and at ﬂoor level at Lindab. At DTU the lights were mounted
in the ceiling of the testing chamber. To avoid "oversmoking" the room, the
smoke was generated for 3-4 seconds, which was enough to see the ﬂow pattern.
Waiting 25-30 minutes between the laser and the regular light visualization was
done in order to avoid any remaining smoke to be present. The videos were
recorded at a height of 1.7 m from the ﬂoor.
==PAGE:67==
5.5 Experimental procedures
57
Figure 5.18: The laser placement, which resulted in an angle of approximately
30°.
5.5.3
Ventilation eﬀectiveness
The tracer gas measurements were required to calculate the ventilation eﬀec-
tiveness and evaluate the ventilation performance of the Pascal system.
In all experiments the two tracer gases Freon134a and N2O were used to sim-
ulate the pollutant and airborne particles. Both tubes, used for dosing tracer
gas, had a diﬀuser stone at the end to ensure that the gas was evenly diluted,
shown on Figure 5.19.
Figure 5.19: Diﬀuser stone connected to the end of the dosing tubes.
The ﬁrst tracer gas (N2O) was dosed from the manikin groin which would
resemble the bio-eﬄuent generated by an occupant. The second (Freon134a)
was located on top of the printer and was an external pollutant, which can be
seen on Figure 5.20.
==PAGE:68==
58
Method
Figure 5.20: Doser (Yellow circle) at the printer serves as an active pollution
source.
A pressure control valve was connected to each gas bottle. From the pressure
control valves, plastic tubes were connected to a rotameter, which was used to
adjust the dosing ﬂow rate. Figure 5.22 illustrates the set up used at Lindab and
the exact same set up was used at DTU only with fewer sampling points. The
sampling points at DTU can be seen on Figure 5.23. This setup was necessary to
perform continuous measurement of the pollutant to determine the ventilation
eﬀectiveness. The rotameter was adjusted to deliver a dosing ﬂow rate of 0.1
l/min. Additionally the pressure control valve was set to 2.5 bars. The sampling
of the tracer gases started, when the dosing began. When the concentration level
in the room reached steady-state (in PPM) 20 measurements for each sampling
point were logged.
Sampling points were located at the exhaust, supply and lip of the manikin
(referred to as "mouth"). Studies done by Melikov and Kaczmarczyk (2007)
[45] found that a tracer gas sampling point between the nose and the mouth
of a thermal manikin with a distance of 10 mm or less from the skin would
accurately represent the concentration level in the air by an occupant. Therefore
to simulate the pollution sources an occupant would be inhaling a sampling point
was taped to the upper lip of the manikin. This can be seen on Figure 5.21.
==PAGE:69==
5.5 Experimental procedures
59
Figure 5.21: Sampling tube at upper lip of manikin.
Experiments at Lindab
In order to measure the pollution spread throughout the room, an additional 7
sampling points were placed in the room as seen on Figure 5.22. This required
two INNOVA instruments to have enough sampling inlets. The sampling points
P6 and P7 along with the sampling point in the mouth were dynamic. This
meant that they moved according to the measured case.
Figure 5.22: The tracer gas measurement set up. Sampling points (red stars)
and emission points (yellow stars) in the test chamber at Lindab.
==PAGE:70==
60
Method
The points P6 and P7 represented the back and front region of the manikin (50
cm from the manikin). They were used to measure the ventilation eﬀectiveness
around the manikin. The sampling points P1-P5 were never moved along with
the exhaust and supply points. The red stars indicate the sampling points and
the respective number and the yellow stars show the dosing location of the tracer
gas.
Experiments at DTU
The focus of the experiments at DTU changed slightly compared to the experi-
ments at Lindab and therefore the sampling points were limited to 3 locations
in the room, in addition the points located at the mouth, exhaust and supply.
Only one INNOVA system was used. The locations can be seen on Figure 5.23.
P1 and P2 were located 50 cm away from the mouth of the manikin while P3 was
approximately 1.25 m away from the manikin. The main aim was to calculate
the ventilation eﬀectiveness close to the manikin.
Figure 5.23: Sampling points (red star) and emission point (yellow star) for
the test chamber at DTU.
5.5.4
Velocity ﬁeld above the manikin
The calibration of the probes were done using a wind tunnel, shown in Figure
5.24-a. The probe was located at the bottom of the wind tunnel as indicated
by the red circle on Figure 5.24-b.
The probe was placed approximately in
the middle of the cross-section of the wind tunnel. Only one probe could be
calibrated at a time. The technical data for the wind tunnel can be found in
Table A.1 in Appendix A.1.
==PAGE:71==
5.5 Experimental procedures
61
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.24: (a) The anemometer probe (HT-412-x) and transducer (HT-428-
0). (b) The measurement station, red circle is the probe location.
A FCO510 micromanometer was used and is shown on Figure 5.25. This made
it possible to measure the pressure diﬀerence in the wind tunnel by connecting
two tubes at the top shown in Figure 5.24-a. The pressure input of the micro-
manometer were connected to the pressure outlets of the wind tunnel shown
on Figure 5.24-a. The micromanometer was also connected to a PC. Using the
"Tunnel2" software it was possible to calculate the air speed in the wind tun-
nel based on the pressure diﬀerence measured by the micromanometer, and a
pre-set value.
Figure 5.25: FCO510 which was used to measure the pressure diﬀerence.
==PAGE:72==
62
Method
When calibrating the probe, the voltage output is measured and logged in an
Excel sheet for each probe. A total of 26 diﬀerent measurement velocities, which
equated to 26 diﬀerent voltage outputs, were performed for each probe. The
voltage output and the barometric pressure were then used to ﬁnd the calibration
coeﬃcients. The coeﬃcients can be found in Appendix A.1.
After the calibration coeﬃcients were determined, they were corrected in the
vel.cfg ﬁle for the probe. To ensure the calibration was within requirements for
the ISO 7726 standard [46], another set of tests were performed to evaluate the
diﬀerence between the measured velocity from the probe and the air velocity
in the wind tunnel. The aim was to control the deviation at ﬁxed velocities.
Six velocities were used to control the deviation. As an example, the values
for probe 13 can be seen in Table 5.5 and the remaining data can be found in
Appendix A.1.
Table 5.5: The anemometer calibration test results for probe 13.
Wind
Probe
tunnel
velocity
Error
velocity
corrected*
V
Vs
DV=Vs-V
[m/s]
[m/s]
[m/s]
0.056
0.060
0.004
0.085
0.085
0.003
0.155
0.157
0.002
0.227
0.227
0.000
0.300
0.301
0.001
0.471
0.471
0.000
During the experiments 8 velocity probes were used. The 8 probes were mounted
on two stands at a distance of 1.40 m, 1.56 m, 1.73 m and 1.90 m from the ﬂoor.
The ﬁrst stand was placed next to the manikin as shown on Figure 5.26-(a).
The velocity probe sensor element was located at the center above the manikin
head. The lowest probe was placed 10 cm above the head of the manikin. The
velocity probes which were placed on the second stand were located on the
opposite side of the table, 1 m away from the ﬁrst stand. The probe at the
top of the second stand was approximately 0.85 m (diagonally), away from the
center of the diﬀuser. Figure 5.26-(b) shows the setup seen from the side with
the distances.
==PAGE:73==
5.6 Data analysis
63
Figure 5.26: The anemometer placement above the manikin and 1m away
from the manikin.
To investigate the interaction of the ﬂow from the supply air and the thermal
plume, the probes were placed above the manikin head. The second stand placed
further away, measured the air speeds, which were unaﬀected by the thermal
plume. Each air velocity measurement was performed for 3 min and used to
determine mean velocity, standard deviation of velocity, turbulence intensity
and draught rate.
5.6
Data analysis
In order to understand the ﬂow pattern of each experimental case, every recorded
video was reviewed. Several still pictures were extracted from these videos. The
pictures were used to visualize the development of the ﬂow using arrows to in-
dicate the ﬂow pattern on each picture. The sequence of pictures starts when
the smoke generated becomes visible. It stops when the smoke was diﬀused to
the point at which the pattern was no longer clear.
The tracer gas concentration, air temperature, manikin surface temperature and
air velocity measurements were all processed in several spreadsheets in Microsoft
Excel. The temperature measurements had a very large sample size and required
further averaging. Therefore the mean, using Eq. (5.4) was used to average the
measurements for every ﬁfth minute. In addition, a similar standard deviation
was implemented in Excel, seen on Eq. (5.5), to analyze the ﬂuctuation of the
data.
==PAGE:74==
64
Method
X = 1
N
N
X
n=1
xi
(5.4)
σ =
v
u
u
t
1
N −1
N
X
n=1
(xi −x)2
(5.5)
• X = Average value of a set of data.
• σ = Variation of the sample mean.
• N = Amount of data used in the average.
• xi = Each individual data value.
• x = Mean of the data set.
To analyze the vertical temperature distribution, graphs were made using the
average temperature. These graphs were made in order to evaluate if the air
temperature distribution at 0.1 m, 0.6 m, 1.1 m and 1.7 m would cause local
thermal discomfort. The CBE thermal comfort tool [8] was used to evaluate the
PMV and PPD under the speciﬁc conditions.
When investigating the comfort of the manikin, the measured heat loss (P)
and the measured surface temperature of the body segment (T) were averaged.
It was then possible to use the average surface temperatures and the power out-
put of the manikin to calculate the Teq which was used to evaluate the comfort.
After the tracer gas measurements were done the data was extracted and im-
ported into Excel. The average and standard deviation of the last 20 measure-
ments were determined for each sampling location. This made it possible to
calculate, using Equation (5.6), the ventilation eﬀectiveness for every sampling
location. Graphs for the ventilation eﬀectiveness were made for both Freon134a
and N2O showing the average amount of pollutant at a speciﬁc sampling point
including the standard deviation, as well as the corresponding ventilation eﬀec-
tiveness.
CRE = cexhaust
cSP
(5.6)
• CRE = Ventilation eﬀectiveness [-].
• cexhaust = Concentration level at the exhaust [mg/m3].
• cSP = Concentration level at the sampling point [mg/m3].
==PAGE:75==
C h a p t e r 6
Results
6.1
Full scale measurements
The experimental results comprise: (1) Thermal results to evaluate the thermal
comfort; (2) Flow visualization to illustrate the ﬂow pattern and interaction be-
tween the manikin’s thermal plume and the supply air ﬂow in order to evaluate
the eﬀectiveness of supplying air directly to the occupied zone; (3) Ventilation
eﬀectiveness, mainly in the breathing region and to evaluate inhaled air quality.
A comparison of the ventilation eﬀectiveness at the four locations of the manikin
using diﬀerent sizes of face plates for the diﬀuser and in case of external means
such as a board between the abdomen of the manikin and the desk and change
of thermal insulation of the manikin’s clothing was performed; (4) Velocity of
the thermal plume above the manikin
Throughout the results at Lindab the cases will be referred to as the following:
LocationXYZ. X=case location (Locations 1-4), Y=Type/size of the diﬀuser
(N=normal, S=Small and P=perforated) and Z=Third parameter (T=sweater
and B=Board). All the cases are listed in Table 5.2. An example of a case is
as given: Location1ST = The manikin is located where it is facing the diﬀuser
and is 50 cm away from the diﬀuser, the face plate of the diﬀuser is small (37
cm in diameter) and the manikin wears a sweater.
6.1.1
Thermal comfort
Results obtained at Lindab
The vertical temperature diﬀerence in the test facility can be seen in Figure
6.1. The results show that all the measurements at Lindab had a uniform tem-
perature distribution in the room. Figure 5.16 shows that the temperature for
Location1N at 1.7 m was 21.70°C while the temperature at 0.1 m was 21.67°C.
The largest diﬀerence in temperature was seen for the measurement at Loca-
tion2NT where the vertical diﬀerence was of 0.17°C. All the remaining results
on the vertical temperature proﬁles are included in Appendix B.1 Table B.10.
==PAGE:76==
66
Results
Figure 6.1: Measured room temperature at 0.1 m, 0.6 m, 1.1 m, 1.7 m at
Location1N, using a normal face plate.
The results from the CBE Berkeley tool are shown in Table 6.1, for a situation
were the occupant would be wearing a t-shirt under similar conditions as the
thermal manikin. These results show that when the operative temperature was
22°C and an occupant would wear a t-shirt the 19% would feel dissatisﬁed since
it would be slightly cool. However, when extra clothing insulation was added
the PMV was 0.1 for an operative temperature of 22°C, resulting in only 5%
estimated dissatisﬁed occupants. The values used for the calculations are shown
in Appendix B.1.
Table 6.1: PMV and PPD for clothing types at Lindab.
Cloth
To [°C]
PMV
PPD [%]
Sensation
T-shirt
22
-0.81
19
Slightly cool
Sweater
22
0.1
5
Neutral
The interaction between the ambient air and the manikin for Location1N, Lo-
cation2N, Location3N and Location4N can be seen on Figure 6.2. The ﬁgure
shows the equivalent temperature for each body segment and the average room
air temperature. Overall the Teq for the manikin follows the ambient tempera-
ture, although the segments on the arm and the hands of the manikin illustrate
that the room temperature is slightly below thermal equilibrium for all Loca-
tions.
However, the average Teq for all showed that at Location1N the Teq
was 21.7°C while at Location2N, Location3N and Location4N all were between
21.1°C - 21.2°C. These three locations were approximately 0.5°C below the aver-
age room temperature which was 21.6°C, while Location1N was slightly above.
==PAGE:77==
6.1 Full scale measurements
67
Figure 6.2: The manikin based equivalent temperature for each body segment
of the manikin for every LocationN.
The impact of the clothing insulation is shown in Figure 6.3. The results shows
the surface temperature measured by the manikin in the cases at Location1
performed with a normal diﬀuser. The average of for the cases shows that in
Location1N the surface temperature was 33.9°C, and in Location1NT it was
34.0°C, ﬁnally it was 33.8°C in Location1NB. This is in the interval of a person
in comfort performing sedentary work [47].
However, in the case where the
manikin was wearing a sweater, higher surface temperatures occurs in areas
that is in touch with the sweater. It is specially noticeably at the chest and the
back, where surface temperature of 34.8°C and 34.9°C respectively. It can be
seen on the ﬁgure, that the top of the head is also having a high skin temperature
for all cases. It is measured to 34.6°C. This is a result of the manikin wearing
a wig that insulates the head. However, in all cases it is seen that the lowest
surface tempeartures are measured in exposed skin area as the hands.
The
surface temperature of the hands are measured to 31.9°C in the case with a
board, which does not diﬀer a lot from the two other cases where a temperature
of 32.0°C was measured. The Teq for Location1 with a normal diﬀuser can be
seen in Appendix B.1.
The same tendency is present in Figure 6.4, where the small diﬀuser was used.
The ﬁgures reveal that the in case where the manikin has been used the back is
the warmest body segment with a surface temperature of 34.9°C. However, for
Location1S it is the pelvis with a surface temperature 34.7°C. In Location1SB
it is also the back, which measures highest surface temperature, yielding a tem-
perature of 34.6°C. The lowest temperatures occurs at the exposed areas as the
hands that experiences a variation of 31.9-32.1°C depending on the case. When
==PAGE:78==
68
Results
compairing the average body surface temperature they are measured to 33.9°C
for Location1S, 34°C for Location1ST and 33.8°C for Loaction1SB. Which indi-
cates thermal comfort.
Figure 6.3: Surface temperature for manakin at Location1 with normal dif-
fuser.
Figure 6.4: Surface temperature for manakin at Location1 with small diﬀuser.
==PAGE:79==
6.1 Full scale measurements
69
Results obtained at DTU
The PMV and PPD at DTU calculated by the Berkeley tool shows that a person
would feel neutral in the cases with 23.5°C and 25°C with a PMV of -0.36 and
0.08 respectively resulting in 5-8% dissatisﬁed. A person will feel slightly warm
in the cases with 27°C with a PPD of 15%.
Table 6.2: PMV and PPD at DTU with the Berkeley tool.
Cloth
Troom [°C]
PMV
PPD [%]
Sensation
T-Shirt
23.5
-0.36
8
Neutral
T-shirt
25
0.08
5
Neutral
T-shirt
27
0.69
15
Slightly warm
The manikin based equivalent temperatures that were measured and extrapo-
lated at DTU are shown in Figure 6.5, Figure 6.6 and Figure 6.7 for the room
air temperature of 23.5°C, 25°C and 27°C respectively. Results for the two ﬂow
rates, 10 l/s and 20 l/s, in the case of perforated and unperforated diﬀusers are
shown in the ﬁgures. It can be seen that the Teq increased, when the room air
temperatures increased. When the room air temperature was 23.5°C the body
segments Teq had similar temperatures as the surroundings; When the room
air temperature was increased to 25°C and 27°C (Fig. 6.6 and 6.7) the body
segments Teq increased and the resulting heat loss decreased. The head had the
highest equivalent temperature of all the body segments, while the left foot had
the lowest. At a room air temperature 23.5°C the Teq for the head resulted to
be 1-1.2°C higher for all the cases. With a room air temperature of 25°C the
Teq for the head was 1.3-1.7°C warmer. Finally the Teq for the head at a room
air temperature of 27°C resulted to be 1.5-2.0°C warmer. This was because the
cooling eﬀect from the supply air was deﬂected (Visualization results are shown
in Section 6.1.2) and did not cool the head of the manikin. The left foot resulted
in a temperature diﬀerence of -2.3°C for a ﬂow rate of 20 l/s and a room air
temperature of 23°C, which was the largest diﬀerence in the cases at this room
air temperature. The temperature diﬀerence is reduced to -1.8°C at the same
ﬂow rate and diﬀuser type with a room air temperature. This suggest that as
seen on the ﬁgures that the increment in the ﬂow rate does not aﬀect the Teq
in these measurements. This was also the case when diﬀerent types of diﬀusers
were used: there was little to no diﬀerence when the diﬀuser was perforated or
unperforated.
==PAGE:80==
70
Results
Figure 6.5: Manikin based equivalent temperature with a room temperature
of 23.5°C.
Figure 6.6: Manikin based equivalent temperature with a room temperature
of 25°C.
==PAGE:81==
6.1 Full scale measurements
71
Figure 6.7: Manikin based equivalent temperature with a room temperature
of 27°C.
6.1.2
Flow visualization
Results obtained at Lindab
This section provides the results of the ﬂow visualization. The main purpose of
this section is to give an overview of how the supplied air ﬂow interacted with
the manikin and the surrounding air. Cases which had a similar ﬂow pattern to
the ones presented in this section can be found in Appendix B.2.
Base Case
The Base case, seen in Figure 6.8, was visualized in an empty room in order
to see the development of air without the interference of external heat sources.
The development of smoke was slow and accumulated below the diﬀuser. In
the beginning of the potential core of the jet, the air would ﬂow towards the
center of the velocity seen on Fig. 6.8 -(2). The supply airﬂow continues to
move vertically down, however, slightly to the left. This inclination towards the
left could be because the diﬀuser was located closer towards the wall on the left
side (small surface proximity [1]) and the surface temperature of the wall being
slightly cooler than the room temperature. After reaching the terminal region
the air ﬂow starts to slightly break up as seen on Fig. 6.8 -(4).
==PAGE:82==
72
Results
Figure 6.8: Base case, using a normal sized diﬀuser face plate and a temper-
ature diﬀerence of 7.5K.
Normal sized diﬀuser face plate
The ﬂow pattern in Location1N can be seen in Figure 6.9. All the smoke was
deﬂected in front of the manikin and never directly reached the area around the
occupant due to the thermal plume.
However, in Location2N the air ﬂow was separated in to three main directions
as seen on Figure 6.10 - (2). The smoke indicated by the middle arrow started
to develop in to a vortex over the table seen on the third and fourth picture.
The air ﬂow got close to the occupant’s breathing zone. This interaction was
also seen in the results for ventilation eﬀectiveness (Section 6.1.3).
When the manikin was moved to the side in Location3N the air ﬂow was directed
towards the table and a vortex was formed when the ﬂow reached the table.
However, this did not interfere with the manikin’s breathing zone as can be
seen in Figure 6.11. In Location4N, Figure 6.12, the ﬂow formed a small vortex
over the table, but as in Location3N, it did not make contact with the manikin’s
breathing zone.
==PAGE:83==
6.1 Full scale measurements
73
Figure 6.9: Location1N with a normal sized diﬀuser face plate, supply air ﬂow
of 10 l/s and a temperature diﬀerence of 7.5K.
Figure 6.10: Location2N with a normal sized diﬀuser face plate, supply air
ﬂow of 10 l/s and a temperature diﬀerence of 7.5K.
==PAGE:84==
74
Results
Figure 6.11: Location3N with a normal sized diﬀuser face plate, supply air
ﬂow of 10 l/s and a temperature diﬀerence of 6.9K.
Figure 6.12: Location4N with a normal sized diﬀuser face plate, supply air
ﬂow of 10 l/s and a temperature diﬀerence of 6.9K.
==PAGE:85==
6.1 Full scale measurements
75
Normal sized diﬀuser face plate and board at abdomen
When the board was placed between the manikin’s abdomen and the desk, the
ﬂow direction was deﬂected around the occupant in Location1NB, Appendix
B.2. When the position of the manikin was changed to Location2NB the ﬂow
was directed towards the manikin, Figure 6.13. The same scenario was repeated
for Location4NB, where a more concentrated downward ﬂow occurred.
The
ﬂow fell to the side of the manikin and only a smaller amount of air reached the
manikin mouth.
Figure 6.13: Location2NB with a normal diﬀuser and board at the manikin
abdomen, supply air ﬂow of 10 l/s and a temperature diﬀerence
of 7.2K.
Normal sized diﬀuser face plate and sweater on manikin
In the case for Location1NT, the manikin was dressed with a sweater and the
downward ﬂow was directed away from the manikin which was also the case
in Location1N. The downward ﬂow was concentrated and touched the table
slightly without creating any change in the direction. By changing the position
of the manikin to Location2NT, the ﬂow was spread and covered a larger area.
However, the pattern was the same as for Location2NB. The ﬂow fell to the
side of the manikin without interfering with its breathing zone. Location1NT
and Location2NT can be found in Appendix B.2. In Figure 6.14 most of the
downward ﬂow was located behind the manikin, but a vortex was created at the
edge of the table, which reached the area around the manikin. When looking
at the laser visualization of Location4NT, the vortex at the manikin became
clearer as seen in Figure 6.15.
==PAGE:86==
76
Results
Figure 6.14: Location4NT with a normal diﬀuser and manikin wearing a
sweater, supply air ﬂow of 10 l/s and a temperature diﬀerence of
7.1K.
Figure 6.15: Location4NT with a normal diﬀuser and manikin wearing a
sweater, supply air ﬂow of 10 l/s and a temperature diﬀerence of
7.1K.
==PAGE:87==
6.1 Full scale measurements
77
PCV diﬀuser and sweater on manikin
Figure 6.16 shows the ﬂow distribution with a PVC diﬀuser. The diﬀuser was
able to maintain the Coanda-eﬀect even at 10 l/s. The supply airﬂow had a
very large initial velocity until it reached the wall. When the airﬂow reached
the wall it slowly descended along the wall. The manikin itself did not receive
any air directly even though the PCV diﬀuser had a perforated face plate.
Figure 6.16: Location4PT with a PCV diﬀuser and sweater, supply air ﬂow
of 10 l/s and a temperature diﬀerence of 6.4K.
Small sized diﬀuser face plate
When installing a smaller face plate (37 cm in diameter) the visualizations
showed a slightly diﬀerent type ﬂow pattern compared to the normal sized dif-
fuser face plate. The downward ﬂow was mainly deﬂected around the manikin.
In Location1S the downward ﬂow developed small vortices over the table, how-
ever, these vortices were deﬂected diagonally away from the manikin and had
little inﬂuence on the manikin breathing zone. This result was also seen for the
ventilation eﬀectiveness. Location4S illustrated a similar pattern, however, the
thermal plume did not interfere as much at Location4S as seen in Figure 6.17.
The ﬂow was initially forming a downwards ﬂow on the left side, while the right
side was deﬂected (seen on the second picture). The supply air slowly ﬂowed
towards the manikin head but was not strong enough to penetrate the CBL.
The supply air which was initially deﬂected away from the manikin developed a
small vortex slightly in front of the manikin breathing zone, as seen Figure 6.17
- (4). This is clariﬁed with the laser visualization, Figure 6.18, which shows the
ﬂow reaching the manikin and the thermal plume from the manikin forcing the
air upwards. The slight increase of air ﬂow towards the breathing zone was also
==PAGE:88==
78
Results
seen in the results for the ventilation eﬀectiveness. Location2S and Location3S
showed the same ﬂow pattern as Location2NB, in which the manikin deﬂected
the supply air to the sides.
The Figures for Location1S, Location2S and Location3S can be seen in Ap-
pendix B.2.
Figure 6.17: Location4S with a small sized diﬀuser face plate, supply air ﬂow
of 10 l/s and a temperature diﬀerence of 6.9K.
Figure 6.18: Location4S with a small sized diﬀuser face plate, supply air ﬂow
of 10 l/s and a temperature diﬀerence of 6.9K.
==PAGE:89==
6.1 Full scale measurements
79
Small sized diﬀuser face plate and board at abdomen
The visualization results in the cases of the diﬀuser with a small face plate
combined with a board placed at the manikin abdomen can be seen in Figure
6.19. Adding the board resulted in a lower CBL around the manikin. Although
ﬂow visualization showed that the airﬂow was deﬂected away from the manikin,
in a similar pattern as Location1N, it is clear that the air was closer to the
breathing zone. The results also show that the thermal plume of the manikin
arms and upper torso was able to deﬂect the air at 10 l/s. In Location2SB, when
the manikin was moved under the diﬀuser, the ﬂow fell to the side of manikin as
in Location2NB. This was also true for Location4SB, as there was no interaction
between the manikin and the downward ﬂow. Although all visualizations using
a board had a reduction in the degree of deﬂection of the air compared to
the results without a board. The Figures for Location1SB, Location2SB and
Location4SB can be found in Appendix B.2.
Figure 6.19: Location1SB with a small sized diﬀuser face plate and a board at
the manikin abdomen, supply air ﬂow of 10 l/s and a temperature
diﬀerence of 6.9K. .
Small sized diﬀuser face plate and sweater on manikin
The ﬂow interaction in the cases when the diﬀuser with a small face plate was
used together with the manikin wearing a sweater was visualized as well. The
visualization showed that the air ﬂow direction went towards the right of the
room for Location1ST. However, when the ﬂow was visualized with a laser it
was observed that a minor part of the ﬂow reached the manikin breathing zone,
as shown in Figure 6.20. The air touched the table and was redirected towards
the manikin, where the CBL forced the air upwards. This result was also seen
==PAGE:90==
80
Results
in the ventilation eﬀectiveness (Sec. 6.1.3). When the manikin was moved to
Location2ST the ﬂow fell to the side of the manikin as in Location2NB. The
same happened in Location4ST, where the air ﬂow went towards the side of the
manikin.
Figure 6.20: Location1ST with a small sized diﬀuser face plate, supply air
ﬂow of 10 l/s and a temperature diﬀerence of 6.6K.
Flow visualizations at DTU
The ﬂow visualizations done at DTU showed a consistency regardless of the
air ﬂow rate.
Figure 6.21 shows the ﬂow development for the unperforated
diﬀuser. The ﬂow direction suggests that the thermal plume from the front of
the manikin was too strong, thereby making the air ﬂow to the oppsite side of the
room. This was the tendency for all cases involving the unperforated diﬀuser.
When changing the diﬀuser to perforated, the ﬂow developed identically to
the cases which had an unperforated diﬀuser. This is shown in Figure 6.22.
However, when the face plate was removed, the ﬂow pattern of a jet nozzle
was created. The ﬂow fell vertically towards the table, which created a vortex
of air located close to the manikin breathing zone, Figure 6.23. All the cases
were performed at the same position, however Case20 studied the air ﬂow on
the manikin, when placed right under the air inlet. Figure 6.24 shows that air
ﬂow reached the occupant’s breathing zone without the thermal plume from the
manikin changing the air ﬂow direction.
==PAGE:91==
6.1 Full scale measurements
81
Figure 6.21: Case1 with unperforated diﬀuser, supply airﬂow of 10 l/s, a room
temperature of 23.6°C and ∆T=5.3K.
Figure 6.22: Case7 with perforated diﬀuser, supply airﬂow of 10 l/s, a room
temperature of 23.6°C and ∆T=5.0K.
==PAGE:92==
82
Results
Figure 6.23: Case13 with no face plate, supply airﬂow of 10 l/s, a room tem-
perature of 23.6°C and ∆T=4.5K.
Figure 6.24: Case14 with no face plate, supply airﬂow of 10 l/s, a room tem-
perature of 23.6°C and ∆T=4.7K.
==PAGE:93==
6.1 Full scale measurements
83
6.1.3
Ventilation eﬀectiveness
Ventilation eﬀectiveness results from Lindab
Figure 6.25 illustrates the ventilation eﬀectiveness, when supplying a constant
air ﬂow rate of 10 l/s and maintaining a temperature diﬀerence of 6.5 - 7.5K,
in the mouth region for both tracer gases (Freon134a and N2O) in every mea-
sured case. The Pascal ventilation system had a ventilation eﬀectiveness of 0.9
- 1.1, when removing the Freon 134a (generated at the "printer"), for each case
in the mouth region. The concentration level of Freon134a and the ventilation
eﬀectiveness for all sampling points can be seen in Appendix B.3. The venti-
lation eﬀectiveness never dropped below 0.9 at any of the sampling points for
Freon134a. However, large ﬂuctuation can be seen for the ventilation eﬀective-
ness of the N2O varying between 0.2 and 0.86, which was generated at the groin
of the manikin (Fig. 6.25).
Figure 6.25: The ventilation eﬀectiveness in the mouth region for Freon134a
and N2O for every case using a ﬂow rate of 10 l/s and ∆T=6-8K.
The N2O concentration level measured in the mouth region was 4 - 5 times
larger than the other sampling points as shown on Figure 6.26. Furthermore, the
measured concentration in the mouth region had large ﬂuctuations and resulted
in a large standard deviation of approximately 600 mg/m3. Every measured
case resulted in large concentration in the mouth region, which can been seen
in Appendix B.3.
==PAGE:94==
84
Results
Figure 6.26: The N2O concentration measured at each sampling point for Lo-
cation1N, supply ﬂow rate of 10 l/s and a ∆T=7.5K.
Figure 6.27 illustrates the normalized ventilation eﬀectiveness results obtained
when the manikin was move to diﬀerent Locations and the normal sized face
plate was used (See Fig. 5.16 for Location placement). These results were nor-
malized using Location1N as the reference case in order to evaluate the improve-
ment of each Location. The largest improvement, when moving the manikin to
a diﬀerent location, can be seen in the mouth region. The ventilation eﬀective-
ness changed very little (-5% to +15%) at sampling points P1-P7 compared the
much more apparent change (+30% to +350%) in the mouth region, Appendix
B.3.
Figure 6.27: Normalized ventilation eﬀectiveness for diﬀerent placements of
the manikin for every sampling point (N2O).
==PAGE:95==
6.1 Full scale measurements
85
The largest improvement of the ventilation eﬀectiveness (approximately 3.5
times) occurred at Location2N, when the manikin was located directly un-
derneath the diﬀuser. Figure 6.28 shows that the ventilation eﬀectiveness at
Location2 reached 0.7. Moving the manikin to Location3 slightly improved the
ventilation eﬀectiveness compared to Location1, however it was substantially
worse in comparison to Location2. When the manikin was located 50 cm away
and with the back towards the diﬀuser, the ventilation eﬀectiveness almost dou-
bled reaching 0.39 compared to Location1.
Figure 6.28: Ventilation eﬀectiveness for a normal size face plate at diﬀerent
locations for the mouth region (N2O).
The results show that the ventilation eﬀectiveness change when the size of the
face plate as well as the position of the manikin change which can be seen on
Figure 6.29. An improvement of the ventilation eﬀectiveness in the mouth region
occurred when the size of the face plate was reduced from 45 cm to 37 cm for all
cases except Location2N, which was almost 2.5 times larger than Location2S.
Location3 showed a small improvement of approximately 10% in the mouth
region. The ventilation eﬀectiveness did not seem to be inﬂuenced by moving
the manikin from Location2 to Location3 for the small sized face plate. The
ventilation eﬀectiveness was increased from 0.39 to 0.52 when comparing the
size of the diﬀuser at Location4, this was approximately a 33% improvement.
==PAGE:96==
86
Results
Figure 6.29: Ventilation eﬀectiveness comparison in terms of size of the dif-
fuser for each location at the mouth region (N2O).
Figures 6.30 and 6.31 show the change in ventilation eﬀectiveness when using a
normal (LocationN) and a small (LocationS) face plate, while the manikin wore
a sweater (LocationNT and LocationST) or when a board was placed on the
table (LocationNB and LocationSB) at diﬀerent locations.
When the manikin was wearing a sweater the ventilation eﬀectiveness became
better for both LocationN and LocationS except when the manikin was placed
right underneath the diﬀuser. Although the diﬀerence was more apparent for
LocationN as shown on Figure 6.30, where the ventilation eﬀectiveness was
reduced from 0.69 to 0.25. The results from the visualization showed that the
CBL was weaker when the manikin wore a sweater. The ventilation eﬀectiveness
slightly improved for the normal sized face plate.
The ventilation eﬀectiveness was almost doubled when the manikin was wearing
a sweater. This correlates with the results from the visualization (Fig. 6.20), in
which it was clear to see the supply air reach the table and move towards the
breathing zone. However, when the manikin was placed beneath the diﬀuser the
ventilation eﬀectiveness decreased. The results shown from the visualization for
Location2ST also illustrated a stronger deﬂection (Appendix B.2).
When looking at the results for the board for both the small and the normal sized
diﬀuser, it was clear to see that the board was able to limit the pollution source.
The concentration was reduced to 200 - 300 mg/m3 compared to the general
concentration level which was above 650 mg/m3 typically. All three locations
showed a larger increase compared to when the manikin wore a sweater. The
visualization did show slight reduction in the degree of deﬂection as well (Fig.
6.19).
==PAGE:97==
6.1 Full scale measurements
87
Figure 6.30: Ventilation eﬀectiveness in the mouth region at diﬀerent manikin
locations for the normal face plate (N2O).
Figure 6.31: Ventilation eﬀectiveness in the mouth region at diﬀerent manikin
locations for the small face plate (N2O).
Figure 6.32 shows the comparison between the Pascal diﬀuser using both a
normal and a small face plate and the PCV diﬀuser. The results when comparing
the diﬀuser, while the manikin wore a sweater, showed that at Location1 the
PCV diﬀuser was slightly better than the when the Pascal system with a normal
face plate. However, the small sized face plate performed 25% better than the
PCV diﬀuser for Location1. The PCV had a ventilation eﬀectiveness of around
==PAGE:98==
88
Results
0.23 when the manikin was placed at Location4.
While both the small and
the normal sized face plates had a ventilation eﬀectiveness of 0.44 and 0.47
respectively.
Figure 6.32: Ventilation eﬀectiveness in the mouth region at for Location 1
and 4, using a small, normal sized and PCV diﬀuser while the
manikin wore a additional clothing insulation (N2O).
Figure 6.33 shows the overall results for the mouth region. Overall the highest
ventilation eﬀectiveness (0.86) in the mouth region was achieved when using the
normal sized face plate, and the manikin had a board between the abdomen and
the desk while being located with the back towards the diﬀuser. The results
showed that a ventilation eﬀectiveness was higher at Location1 when using the
small face plate and board compared to the normal sized face plate and board.
It can be seen that the board had the biggest improvement on the ventilation
eﬀectiveness. Furthermore, the lowest ventilation eﬀectiveness was seen at Lo-
cation1N of 0.2.
==PAGE:99==
6.1 Full scale measurements
89
Figure 6.33: Ventilation eﬀectiveness at the mouth region for all the measured
Cases (N2O).
Ventilation eﬀectiveness results from DTU
The results of the ventilation eﬀectiveness of Freon134a at DTU can be seen
in Figure 6.34. The ventilation eﬀectiveness is between 0.8 - 1 for all cases.
Although the temperature diﬀerence between supply air and room temperature
remained constant, the results shows that the ventilation eﬀectiveness decreased
when the room temperature increases from 23°C to 27°C. Furthermore, the ven-
tilation eﬀectiveness was improved by 5% when supplying a constant ﬂow rate
of 10 l/s and the face plate was perforated. A 10% improvement was seen when
a constant supply ﬂow rate of 20 l/s was delivered and when using a perforated
face plate. However, at 27°C when supplying 20 l/s, the perforated face plate
performed worse than an unperforated at 10 l/s. A similar ventilation eﬀec-
tiveness trend was seen for the other sampling points. Tables B.15 and B.17 in
Appendix B.3 show the ventilation eﬀectiveness and the Freon134a concentra-
tion results for all sampling points.
==PAGE:100==
90
Results
Figure 6.34: Ventilation eﬀectiveness based on Freon134a in the mouth region.
Figure 6.35 illustrates the results obtained from an average tracer gas (N2O
generated at the groin) concentration level for an unperforated diﬀuser. The
mouth region has around 4 times higher concentration of N2O compared to
the other sampling points. A similar trend can be seen in Figure 6.36 for the
perforated. Both situations had 23°C room temperature and a ﬂow rate of 10
l/s.
Figure 6.35: Average concentration of N2O at sampling points using an un-
perforated diﬀuser; room temperature of 23°C; ﬂow rate 10 l/s.
==PAGE:101==
6.1 Full scale measurements
91
Figure 6.36: Average concentration of N2O at sampling points using an per-
forated diﬀuser; room temperature of 23°C; ﬂow rate 10 l/s.
All the other measurements performed at DTU, had a similar concentration pat-
tern, Appendix B.3. The high concentration level in the mouth region suggests
that the CBL of the manikin has a strong ability to carry the pollutants (N2O)
from groin to the mouth region.
Figure 6.37 shows that the overall ventilation eﬀectiveness changed very little
when the air ﬂow rate was changed from 10 l/s to 20 l/s for the respective
diﬀuser. There was no clear trend between the perforated face plate and the
unperforated face plate for the two ﬂow rates.
Figure 6.37: The ventilation eﬀectiveness in the mouth region, using a perfo-
rated and unperforated diﬀuser and using a ﬂow rate of 10 l/s
and 20 l/s, at diﬀerent room temperatures (N2O).
==PAGE:102==
92
Results
Figure 6.38 shows that the ventilation eﬀectiveness for N2O slightly decreased
when the room temperature was increased for both the perforated and unper-
forated diﬀuser, using a supply ﬂow rate of 10 l/s. A similar eﬀect was seen
for the ventilation eﬀectiveness of Freon134a. However, the large ﬂuctuation of
the measured concentration levels could be the reason for the minor decline in
ventilation eﬀectiveness.
Figure 6.38: The ventilation eﬀectiveness behind the manikin, using a perfo-
rated and unperforated diﬀuser, supply ﬂow rate of 10 l/s (N2O).
6.1.4
Velocity proﬁle above the manikin
The mean velocity proﬁles measured at DTU using a small unperforated diﬀuser
face plate with a supply ﬂow rate of 10 l/s can be seen on Figure 6.39. The mean
velocity proﬁle shows that the velocity at 10 cm above the manikin head was low
at approximately 0.06 m/s for all temperatures. The velocity increases when
the distance from the head is increased for all temperatures. The development
of the thermal plume increases as the heat around the manikin merges together
further above the head. The air velocity, when the room was 23°C and 25 °C,
seemed to continue to increase at a further distance from the head. However,
the air velocity, when the room was 27°, shows that the air velocity reaches the
maximum at approximately 45 cm above the manikin head.
==PAGE:103==
6.1 Full scale measurements
93
Figure 6.39: Velocity proﬁle above the manikin’s head, using a small unper-
forated face plate and a supply air ﬂow rate of 10 l/s.
Figure 6.40: Velocity proﬁle above the manikin’s head, using a small unper-
forated face plate and a supply air ﬂow rate of 20 l/s.
Figure 6.40 shows the velocity proﬁle when using the same diﬀuser plate but
with a supply ﬂow rate of 20 l/s. A similar pattern as when 10 l/s was supplied
can be seen. The velocity at 10 cm above the head of the manikin remains low,
however, an indication of continuous development of the air velocity past the
measured distance can be seen for all points. The highest air velocity was seen
==PAGE:104==
94
Results
when the room temperature was at 23.5°C and the weakest air velocity when
the room temperature was at 25°C.
Figure 6.41: Velocity proﬁle above the manikin’s head, using a small perfo-
rated face plate and a supply air ﬂow rate of 10 l/s.
Figure 6.42: Velocity proﬁle above the manikin’s head, using a small perfo-
rated face plate and a supply air ﬂow rate of 20 l/s.
The velocity proﬁles changed slightly when the face plate was perforated as seen
on Figure 6.41. The velocity above the manikin, when the supply ﬂow rate was
==PAGE:105==
6.1 Full scale measurements
95
10 l/s and the temperature was 23°C, was lower compared to the velocity with
the unperforated face plate (Fig. 6.39). The velocities also stabilize at around
45 cm, when the room temperature was 25°C and 27°C. Although, it did not
stabilize when the room temperature was 23.5°.
The air velocity, with a room temperature of 23.5°C and an air ﬂow of 20 l/s,
was 0.18 m/s, while both air velocities at 25°C and 27°C were 0.14 m/s. This
diﬀerence was much larger when using the perforated face plate compared to
the results from using the unperforated (Fig. 6.40).
Figure 6.43: Velocity proﬁle at stand 2, located 1m away from the manikin,
using a small unperforated face plate and a supply air ﬂow rate
of 10 l/s and 20 l/s.
The vertical velocity proﬁles for all temperatures using a supply ﬂow rate of 10
l/s and 20 l/s and an unperforated face plate for the stander located 1 m away
from the manikin can be seen on ﬁgure 6.43. All the air velocities are fairly
stable with some ﬂuctuations between 140 cm and 175 cm. However, all the
air velocities start to increase at 190 cm above ﬂoor level. The velocity proﬁles
also show a large diﬀerence (around 0.08 m/s) between the lowest velocity curve
(20ls/23.5°C) and the largest velocity curve (10ls/27°C) at 190 cm above the
ﬂoor.
Larger air velocities at stand 2, which was located 1 m in front of the manikin
with the probes at the same height above the manikin, can be seen on Figure
6.44. These results showed the diﬀerence in measured velocity when using a
perforated face plate compared to an unperforated at 23.5°C, 25°C and 27°C.
and supply ﬂow rate of 10 l/s and 20 l/s. All the velocities show an increase
at 190 cm above the ground except at 27°C with a supply ﬂow rate of 20 l/s,
==PAGE:106==
96
Results
which showed a drop of around 0.04 m/s.
Figure 6.44: Velocity proﬁle at stand 2, located 1m away from the manikin,
using a small perforated face plate and a supply air ﬂow rate of
10 l/s and 20 l/s.
==PAGE:107==
C h a p t e r 7
Discussion
7.1
Thermal comfort
The results from Lindab, showing the surface temperature for Location1N, sug-
gest that supplying air with a ﬂow rate of 10 l/s and a temperature which
is 6.5-7.5°C below the room temperature, from the Pascal system would not
cause discomfort, when looking at the average body segment surface tempera-
ture. At a room air temperature of 22°C the thermal plume is strong enough
to completely deﬂect the 10 l/s supply ﬂow when the manikin is located 50 cm
away and facing the diﬀuser (Location1). In this investigation the ambient air
temperature of the room proved to be the most inﬂuential in terms of thermal
comfort of the manikin, since the ﬂow is unable to penetrate the CBL. This also
indicates that draught is very unlikely to occur, when using the Pascal system
as was previously investigated by Lindab [40].
The results seen from the smoke visualization for Location4N (Fig. 6.12), when
the manikin had the back towards the diﬀuser and was located 50 cm away,
show that the thermal plume does not deﬂect as much of the supply air as in
Location1N (Fig. 6.9). This is due to the heat generated by a sitting person
is lower on the back because the chair insulates the backside of the manikin
, which was studied by Zukowska [31]. This also leads to an increased cooling
eﬀect from the supply air, which is indicated by a lower Teq for Location4N mea-
sured by the manikin’s body segments exposed to the air. However, the diﬀuser
does not have a direct cooling eﬀect in the occupied zone. The results for Teq at
Lindab show that the left thigh is much lower for every case in comparison to
the right thigh. This could be because the air which is deﬂected would reach the
left thigh, underneath the table creating a cooling eﬀect. The upper arms are
always experiencing the temperature as cool according the results from Lindab.
This is due to the manikin not wearing a sweater in a fairly cold room. This is
seen for every result except the results where the manikin wore a sweater, which
indicates that the thermal comfort is determined by the room air temperature.
Furthermore, the surface temperature at the arms also showed higher values
when the manikin wore a sweater.
The results performed at DTU point out that the manikin arms were in thermal
equilibrium when the room temperature was increased to 25°C, while wearing
==PAGE:108==
98
Discussion
a t-shirt. Although the temperature diﬀerence between the supply temperature
and the room temperature was 5.5K at DTU compared to the temperature dif-
ference of 6-8K at Lindab, it is still apparent that the room temperature is the
main reason the manikin would be in thermal equilibrium. The ideal situation
would therefore have been that the manikin was calibrated with a sweater in
order to get the correct conditions at Lindab.
The face plate is the main reason why the ﬂow development is unable to reach
the occupied zone when a stronger heat source is present. This is because the
buoyancy force of the supply air is not strong enough to counteract the con-
vection from the heat source. However, when the face plate was taken oﬀand
the manikin located underneath the diﬀuser, it was clear that the air (when
supplying 10 l/s) was able to reach the manikin. This is similar to the ﬁndings
done by Bin [22]. Although, the results show that when the manikin is placed
with the front 50 cm away from the diﬀuser it did not change the cooling, when
the face plate was perforated or unperforated. These results, along with the
smoke visualization, suggest that the thermal plume from the manikin is much
more developed in the front. This conﬁrms the results Zukowska et al. found
[35]. The thermal plume will therefore deﬂect more of the supply air when not
aligned with the diﬀuser. Furthermore, it also supports the hypothesis, that
the air would be unable to reach the occupied zone when using a ﬂow rate of
10 l/s. The size of the diﬀuser opening could increase the distance of the po-
tential core region of the jet which would potentially make it possible to reach
the table located below the diﬀuser (Location1) and reaching the mouth region
afterwards. However, the visualizations show that when the manikin is located
with the back towards the diﬀuser, the ﬂow changes. Increasing the diﬀuser
opening can therefore have a negative eﬀect depending on the location with
respect to the diﬀuser. Furthermore, a computer is typically also present on an
oﬃce desk. The computer would generate its own thermal plume which would
further change the ﬂow pattern (for Location1). The computer was not included
in the study to limit the amount of external heat sources which would contribute
to the internal load.
When evaluating the PMV the CBE thermal comfort tool [8] is used by inserting
the measured parameters from the experiments and assuming values for humid-
ity, metabolic rate etc. from Danish Standard [9]. When inserting these values
the results show that the PMV was approximately -0.81 which indicates that it
is slightly cool, with a PPD of 19%. This is expected as the manikin results,
from Lindab, show a lower Teq than the room temperature. However, when the
manikin has the sweater on, the CBE thermal comfort tool estimates a PPD of
5% equal to category I, which is also the result seen from the manikin.
==PAGE:109==
7.2 Ventilation eﬀectiveness
99
7.2
Ventilation eﬀectiveness
The ventilation eﬀectiveness results suggests that the bio-eﬄuents from the groin
are much more apparent than sources emitted further from the manikin. This is
seen by the concentration level in the mouth region of the N2O. The Freon134a
concentration is not exceedingly present in the mouth region in comparison to
N2O which suggests that the CBL is the dominant force when carrying pollu-
tants. The CBL is not penetrated since the ﬂow rate is unable to reach the
manikin directly which is seen from the visualization results. This means that
the ventilation eﬀectiveness does not improve by using this ventilation method
at Location1. However, the possibility of improving the ventilation eﬀectiveness
can still occur if the velocity is large enough to penetrate the CBL or disrupt the
CBL enough before reaching the mouth region as found by Licina [19]. When
the supply air ﬂow is increased to more than 20 l/s the Coanda-eﬀect will occur
creating a mixing ventilation pattern instead of supplying air directly to the
occupant.
The results from DTU show that even increasing the ﬂow rate to 20 l/s barely
improves the ventilation eﬀectiveness. Although, the results from Lindab also
suggest that the CBL potentially is able to protect the occupant from the pol-
lutants emitted by sources further away, like the printer, since the pollution
source is not fully mixed with the room air when using the Pascal system. It
could also be because the printer is too far away from the manikin for it to be
inﬂuential. Since the Pascal ventilation at low ﬂow rates functions as personal
ventilation and the pollutants are carried above the manikin due to convection
from the heat sources. This creates a pollution zone above the occupant similar
to the pollution zone for displacement ventilation.
The ﬂow from the diﬀuser does change the ventilation eﬀectiveness when the
manikin is moved to diﬀerent locations. This is due to the ﬂow interaction being
slightly weaker, and more air is directed towards the manikin.
The results show that having a smaller face plate can improve the ventilation
eﬀectiveness slightly. This is because the opening diameter of the diﬀuser in-
creases the potential core length, which would direct the air ﬂow downwards.
However, the blocking eﬀect of the face plate means that the velocity of the
jet is slower. Changing the size of the face plate can, however, cause problems
when trying to supply higher air ﬂow rates. If the face plate is too small the
Coanda-eﬀect cannot be formed properly and the supply air will fall directly to
the occupied zone with an undesired velocity causing draught.
The results show that placing a board between the desk and the manikin’s
abdomen improves the ventilation eﬀectiveness the most. This is because the
pollution source from the groins is blocked by the board and is not able to reach
the mouth region. Furthermore, the board breaks the development of the CBL
along the abdomen. Surprisingly the normal sized face plate results were better
than when the small sized face plate was used. This could be due to slightly
ﬂuctuating conditions and would need to be studied further. The ventilation
==PAGE:110==
100
Discussion
eﬀectiveness results show improvements when changing to the smaller diﬀuser
plate except when using the board.
Increasing the clo value can change the CBL. The results show that it did de-
crease the transportation of the pollutants to the mouth region when using a
normal sized diﬀuser. The improvement in ventilation eﬀectiveness is particu-
larly seen at Location1, where the manikin was sitting with the front towards
the diﬀuser and located 50 cm away from the diﬀuser. This is because heat
output from the manikin, speciﬁcally from the manikin arms and upper body, is
reduced, which weakens the thermal plume development in front of the manikin.
This is also conﬁrmed by the smoke visualization results. It allows more air to
reach the table and ﬂow along the table to reach the mouth region which is seen
on Figure 6.20. However, when the manikin wore a sweater and was located be-
low the diﬀuser it did not improve the ventilation eﬀectiveness when comparing
without a sweater which was slightly surprising. Since the increased clothing
insulation should reduce the thermal plume as found by Zukowska [31].
The decrease in ventilation eﬀectiveness from Location1ST to Location2ST,
however, conﬁrms that the thermal plume is strongest above the manikin, even
when wearing a sweater. This result is also seen from the visualizations results
that the manikin’s thermal plume deﬂects more air to the sides when located
below the diﬀuser. Although, the CBL was slightly reduced by higher clothing
insulation on the manikin, the pollutants were still transported in large quanti-
ties to the mouth region.
The ventilation eﬀectiveness measured at DTU also shows poor values when
the manikin was placed at Location1. Increasing the room temperature, while
maintaining a constant temperature diﬀerence seemed to slightly decrease the
ventilation eﬀectiveness of Freon134a (which was emitted at the printer). This
was unexpected, but could be due to the temperature increase in the room: the
thermal plume above the printer becomes weaker and the pollutants get closer
to the ﬂoor. When the pollutants are caught by the manikins CBL they get
transported to the mouth region reducing the VE. Similar tendency occurs for
the N2O (emitted at the groin) at the sampling points behind and in front of
the manikin, which is also unexpected. A weaker thermal plume is seen from
the velocity proﬁles when the room temperature is increased. This suggest less
pollution is transported to the mouth region, however, this reduction is not seen
in the concentration level at the mouth region of the manikin. Additionally the
thermal manikin heat loss was also reduced when the room air temperature,
which is also why the result is unexpected and must have been an error or be-
cause of the large ﬂuctuations in the concentration.
The results show that when a supply ﬂow rate of 10 l/s the Pascal diﬀuser is
potentially better than the PCV. The placement of the manikin inﬂuenced the
ventilation eﬀectiveness of the Pascal diﬀuser more than for the PCV diﬀuser.
This was also conﬁrmed by the visualizations of the PCV diﬀuser. The inter-
action between the supply air and the thermal plume was limited because the
PCV diﬀuser always generated the Coanda-eﬀect in order to maintain mixing
ventilation. This was not disrupted by the thermal plume and the location did
==PAGE:111==
7.3 Thermal plume velocity
101
therefore not aﬀect the ventilation eﬀectiveness.
Generally the ventilation eﬀectiveness was between 0.2 - 0.52 without the board
(with the exception of Location2N), which implies that the pollution concentra-
tion in the mouth region is poorly removed. Even when the board is added the
ventilation eﬀectiveness does not increase above 0.9. This would suggest that
the PAQ would be low for the occupant. The visualization was a valuable tool
for evaluating ventilation eﬀectiveness as it showed the pattern and interaction
of ﬂows between the manikin and the supply air.
7.3
Thermal plume velocity
The ﬂow measured above the thermal manikin shows that at higher tempera-
tures the thermal plume typically is weaker, because the heat transfer between
the manikin and the ambient temperature is lower. This is seen in the results
for air velocity above the manikin. Larger velocities were occasionally observed
for the air ﬂow when the room air temperature was 27°C compared to when
the room air temperature was 25°C. This uncertainty can be due to the ﬂuc-
tuation and accuracy of the measurements which was between 0.02 m/s. This
discrepancy only occurred for some of the measurements. Although the ﬂow
was deﬂected by the thermal plume it seems to still reduce the overall speed
as stated from previous studies (0.2 - 0.25 m/s CBL [22]). The development
of the thermal plume is not apparent, 10 cm above the manikin, because the
center velocity is not developed yet. The velocity continues to develop further
above the head as the CBL merges together. This is similar to the ﬁndings
from Zukowska [31] where it was found that the maximum velocity occurs 70
cm above the head of the manikin. The experimental results from the measure-
ments done at DTU suggest that the maximum velocity is almost reached at 60
cm above the head depending on the temperature. For some temperatures and
diﬀuser conﬁgurations the maximum velocity was already observed around 45
cm above the manikin. This in turn could suggest that the thermal plume was
weaker when meeting the supply velocity at this height and the neutral level as
described by Bin [22] would occur here.
==PAGE:112==
C h a p t e r 8
Conclusion
The ﬂow interaction between the ventilation ﬂow and thermal plume generated
by a seated occupant and its impact on the ventilation eﬀectiveness was studied.
A full size thermal manikin was used to resemble a seated occupant. Tracer gas
was used to simulate bio-eﬄuents generated by a human body and pollution from
oﬃce equipment. Flow visualization and multichannel low velocity anemometer
were used to study the generated ﬂow. The ventilation ﬂow was supplied by a
passive ventilation diﬀuser at low ﬂow rates of 10 l/s and 20 l/s and supply air
temperature which was 5-8 °C cooler than the room air. The placement of a
seated thermal manikin at a table with respect to the diﬀuser was investigated.
Furthermore, a board placed on the desk touching the manikins abdomen and
when the thermal manikin was wearing a sweater were also studied. Experiments
were conducted for room air temperature of 21, 23.5, 25 and 27 °C. It The
following has been concluded based on the experimental data:
• The ventilation air was unable to directly reach the breathing zone of the
thermal manikin, regardless of the placement of the manikin, while using
a supply air ﬂow rate of 10 l/s and a temperature diﬀerence of 7.5K. This
was due to the strong thermal plume generated by the manikin, which
pushed away the ventilation ﬂow.
• When emitting tracer gas at the groin it was found that the ventilation
eﬀectiveness for the mouth region always remained below 0.9 for every case
studied and was typically lower than commonly used mixing ventilation.
This means that the inhaled air quality was poor for low air supply ﬂow
rates with this design.
• The human CBL changes the ventilation air ﬂow pattern substantially.
When bio-eﬄuents originating from the human body are released, the
CBL becomes the main driving force, carrying the pollutants to the mouth
region. The results showed that low ventilation air ﬂow rates were unable
to penetrate the CBL due to the design of the Pascal diﬀuser.
• Reducing the size of the bottom face plate of the diﬀuser did improve the
ventilation eﬀectiveness with up to approximately 30% depending on the
manikin location.
==PAGE:113==
103
• The largest improvement of the ventilation eﬀectiveness was seen when a
board was placed between the manikin’s abdomen and the desk. This also
resulted in the best inhaled air quality situation.
• A large temperature diﬀerence between the supply air temperature and the
room air temperature did not cause the equivalent of a human’s experience
of thermal discomfort in the manikin.
• When the manikin was wearing a sweater the ﬂow pattern barely changed
and did not improve the ventilation eﬀectiveness.
• The thermal plume velocity was lower when the room air temperature was
increased, however, there were no observable diﬀerences in the ﬂow pat-
tern. Moreover, the heat loss was decreased when the room temperature
was increased.
The use of these results in practise do have certain limitations and the ventila-
tion eﬀectiveness can change depending on the room layout and should therefore
be carefully interpreted. The inﬂuence of other heat sources along with furniture
arrangement will cause the ﬂow from both the manikin and the supply air to
change. For example a person typically changes position while working which
will change the behavior of the CBL.
Future studies should investigate the ﬂow between the supply air and the manikin
using CFD-modelling to investigate in more detail the inﬂuence the location of
the manikin has on the air ﬂow. Furthermore, studying the inﬂuence of the
thermal plume and the supply air ﬂow using an even larger temperature dif-
ference, of for example 10K, should be studied by using a cooling coil close to
the supply outlet. This could potentially generate enough momentum for the
supply air to reach the breathing zone.
Improving the ventilation eﬀectiveness of the Pascal system at low ﬂow rates
can be done by reducing the size of the face plate or increasing the size of the
duct outlet of the supply air. Since the opening diameter of the jet changes the
length of the potential core region and the distance where it has a direct ﬂow.
Maintaining a temperature diﬀerence of 8K is necessary when supplying the
air, however this is diﬃcult to do unless cooling units are used close to the
diﬀuser outlet.
However, if the temperature diﬀerence is increased there is
a probability that the system could function in a single oﬃce without heat
generating equipment.
==PAGE:114==
A p p e n d i x A
Calibration data
A.1
Anemometer
Table A.1: Technical data for wind tunnel.
Cross inside dimensions
of the measuring pipe:
125x125 mm
Velocity range:
0.05-5 m/s
Accuracy:
0.005 m/s for the
range 0.05-0.5 m/s
Maximum range of
pressure diﬀerence:
0-2000 Pa
Table A.2: Anemometer calibration coeﬃcients used for the measurements.
0
1
2
3
4
U0
Uc
Probe 3
a
-0.6716
5.6923
-14.1294
16.5486
-7.4163
0.42
0.7971
b
0.1638
0.1972
-0.0238
0.0028
-0.0001
Probe 4
a
-0.3562
4.1853
-11.5454
15.0781
-7.4170
0.42
0.7952
b
0.1850
0.1968
-0.0241
0.0029
-0.0001
Probe 7
a
-0.3045
2.5462
-4.0191
2.2841
0.0108
0.45
0.8235
b
0.1683
0.1915
-0.0228
0.0027
-0.0001
Probe 8
a
-0.5812
5.1926
-13.1885
15.9517
-7.4163
0.42
0.7881
b
0.1694
0.1875
-0.0221
0.0025
-0.0001
Probe 10
a
-0.3460
4.0489
-10.8218
13.5711
-6.3571
0.42
0.7913
b
0.1868
0.1956
-0.0232
0.0027
-0.0001
Probe 12
a
-0.6536
5.0840
-12.3350
15.1009
-7.4165
0.42
0.7790
b
0.1535
0.1907
-0.0222
0.0025
-0.0001
Probe 13
a
-0.5996
4.6563
-11.4145
14.4801
-7.4168
0.42
0.7811
b
0.1520
0.1848
-0.0220
0.0026
0.0001
Probe 14
a
-0.0844
0.5594
-2.6711
8.7071
-7.4192
0.42
0.7911
b
0.1084
0.2062
-0.0309
0.0042
-0.0002
==PAGE:115==
A.1 Anemometer
105
Table A.3: The anemometer calibration test results for probe 3 and probe 4.
Probe 3
Probe 4
Wind
Probe
Wind
Probe
tunnel
velocity
Error
tunnel
velocity
Error
velocity
corrected
velocity
corrected
V
Vs
DV = Vs −V
V
Vs
DV = Vs −V
[m/s]
[m/s]
[m/s]
[m/s]
[m/s]
[m/s]
0.055
0.054
0.001
0.510
0.52
0.01
0.084
0.085
0.001
0.840
0.87
0.03
0.154
0.153
0.001
0.153
0.144
0.009
0.223
0.223
0.000
0.222
0.218
0.004
0.299
0.297
0.002
0.299
0.291
0.008
0.466
0.464
0.002
0.474
0.470
0.004
Table A.4: The anemometer calibration test results for probe 7 and probe 8.
Probe 7
Probe 8
Wind
Probe
Wind
Probe
tunnel
velocity
Error
tunnel
velocity
Error
velocity
corrected
velocity
corrected
V
Vs
DV = Vs −V
V
Vs
DV = Vs −V
[m/s]
[m/s]
[m/s]
[m/s]
[m/s]
[m/s]
0.054
0.057
0.003
0.053
0.055
0.002
0.083
0.087
0.004
0.081
0.085
0.004
0.151
0.155
0.004
0.15
0.150
0.000
0.221
0.224
0.003
0.221
0.218
0.003
0.297
0.299
0.002
0.295
0.290
0.005
0.464
0.464
0.000
0.468
0.46
0.008
Table A.5: The anemometer calibration test results for probe 10 and probe
12.
Probe 10
Probe 12
Wind
Probe
Wind
Probe
tunnel
velocity
Error
tunnel
velocity
Error
velocity
corrected
velocity
corrected
V
Vs
DV = Vs −V
V
Vs
DV = Vs −V
[m/s]
[m/s]
[m/s]
[m/s]
[m/s]
[m/s]
0.055
0.055
0.000
0.053
0.051
0.002
0.083
0.088
0.005
0.082
0.082
0.000
0.153
0.155
0.002
0.151
0.147
0.004
0.218
0.220
0.002
0.221
0.215
0.006
0.298
0.298
0.000
0.295
0.286
0.009
0.454
0.456
0.002
0.467
0.455
0.012
==PAGE:116==
106
Calibration data
Table A.6: The anemometer calibration test results for probe 13 and probe
14.
Probe 13
Probe 14
Wind
Probe
Wind
Probe
tunnel
velocity
Error
tunnel
velocity
Error
velocity
corrected
velocity
corrected
V
Vs
DV = Vs −V
V
Vs
DV = Vs −V
[m/s]
[m/s]
[m/s]
[m/s]
[m/s]
[m/s]
0.056
0.060
0.004
0.057
0.060
0.003
0.085
0.088
0.003
0.080
0.082
0.002
0.155
0.157
0.002
0.151
0.151
0.000
0.227
0.227
0.000
0.219
0.219
0.000
0.300
0.301
0.001
0.293
0.293
0.000
0.471
0.471
0.000
0.468
0.467
0.001
A.2
Manikin
Table A.7: Heat transfer coeﬃcients for the manikin at ﬁve temperature sets.
Body segments
Heat transfer coeﬃcients values (W/m2K)
21.92 °C
24.01 °C
25.99 °C
28 °C
30.04 °C
Average
L. Foot
3.527
3.486
3.568
3.587
3.360
3.506
R. Foot
3.457
3.400
3.533
3.396
3.364
3.430
L. Low leg
4.499
4.410
4.442
4.333
3.922
4.321
R. Low leg
4.607
4.503
4.577
4.406
3.977
4.414
L. Thigh
3.309
3.219
3.213
3.300
3.016
3.211
R. Thigh
3.472
3.372
3.385
3.475
3.049
3.351
Pelvis
2.614
2.548
2.555
2.590
2.346
2.530
Head
5.813
5.594
5.491
5.363
4.563
5.365
Top of head
2.848
2.757
2.686
2.675
2.234
2.640
L. Hand
8.164
7.910
7.751
7.280
6.218
7.465
R. Hand
7.380
7.126
7.071
7.100
6.183
6.972
L. Forearm
7.273
7.016
6.843
6.625
5.679
6.687
R. Forearm
7.344
7.032
7.058
7.053
6.086
6.915
L. Upper arm
4.590
4.495
4.529
4.464
4.244
4.465
R. Upper arm
4.620
4.507
4.490
4.643
4.150
4.482
Chest
2.833
2.780
2.807
2.844
2.703
2.793
Back
3.152
3.109
3.118
3.139
3.003
3.104
All
3.986
3.864
3.868
3.902
3.489
3.821
==PAGE:117==
A p p e n d i x B
Results
B.1
Data and results for thermal comfort
Table B.1: Manikin based equivalent temperature (°C) for Location1N, Loca-
tion2N, Location3N and Location4N at Lindab.
Location1N
Location2N
Location3N
Location4N
L. Foot
21.75
21.76
21.23
21.27
R. Foot
21.23
21.56
21.00
21.01
L. Low leg
22.04
21.50
21.74
21.77
R. Low leg
23.49
23.00
23.49
23.56
L. Thigh
19.45
19.35
18.95
19.04
R. Thigh
21.63
21.94
21.57
21.63
Pelvis
21.68
21.57
21.38
21.45
Head
22.92
22.12
22.02
21.86
Top of head
22.31
21.55
21.35
21.30
L. Hand
21.29
19.34
20.49
20.54
R. Hand
20.78
19.21
19.74
19.51
L. Forearm
22.02
20.56
20.71
20.61
R. Forearm
22.02
20.80
21.01
20.85
L. Upper arm
19.78
19.24
19.11
19.11
R. Upper arm
21.19
21.38
21.18
21.21
Chest
20.77
20.17
20.20
20.07
Back
23.84
23.46
23.22
23.26
All
21.68
21.16
21.14
21.15
==PAGE:118==
108
Results
Table B.2: Manikin based equivalent temperature (°C) for Location1NB, Lo-
cation2NB and Location4NB at Lindab.
Location1NB
Location2NB
Location4NB
L. Foot
21.52
21.50
21.14
R. Foot
21.02
20.96
21.10
L. Low leg
21.69
20.93
21.28
R. Low leg
23.10
22.36
22.83
L. Thigh
19.23
19.55
19.37
R. Thigh
21.41
21.12
21.22
Pelvis
21.64
20.27
21.76
Head
22.76
21.91
21.65
Top of head
21.95
21.48
21.41
L. Hand
20.30
20.50
19.78
R. Hand
19.98
19.48
19.66
L. Forearm
22.47
22.32
21.58
R. Forearm
21.82
21.53
20.80
L. Upper arm
19.76
18.37
19.22
R. Upper arm
20.89
20.05
19.64
Chest
20.36
20.35
19.65
Back
23.60
24.31
23.41
All
21.36
21.03
20.97
==PAGE:119==
B.1 Data and results for thermal comfort
109
Table B.3: Manikin based equivalent temperature (°C) for Location1NT, Lo-
cation2NT and Location4NT at Lindab.
Location1NT
Location2NT
Location4NT
L. Foot
21.50
21.54
21.52
R. Foot
20.90
21.00
21.10
L. Low leg
21.14
21.04
21.01
R. Low leg
22.53
22.47
22.54
L. Thigh
19.53
19.53
19.21
R. Thigh
21.14
20.98
21.28
Pelvis
22.17
22.34
21.29
Head
22.09
21.85
21.85
Top of head
21.95
21.93
21.67
L. Hand
20.81
20.34
22.13
R. Hand
21.04
19.59
20.04
L. Forearm
24.64
26.53
26.62
R. Forearm
24.43
26.42
26.14
L. Upper arm
23.75
24.13
23.85
R. Upper arm
24.75
24.71
24.46
Chest
24.27
24.21
24.32
Back
26.04
26.06
25.95
All
22.52
22.65
22.58
==PAGE:120==
110
Results
Table B.4: Manikin based equivalent temperature (°C) for Location1S, Loca-
tion2S, Location3S and Location4S at Lindab.
Location1S
Location2S
Location3S
Location4S
L. Foot
21.89
21.30
21.22
21.25
R. Foot
21.48
20.80
20.45
21.00
L. Low leg
22.20
21.50
21.56
21.56
R. Low leg
23.74
22.97
23.00
23.35
L. Thigh
19.59
18.64
18.74
18.77
R. Thigh
21.87
20.98
21.09
21.43
Pelvis
21.99
21.20
21.19
21.34
Head
22.99
21.87
22.08
21.83
Top of head
22.53
21.36
21.31
21.28
L. Hand
20.90
19.99
20.55
20.42
R. Hand
20.79
19.30
19.01
19.41
L. Forearm
22.07
21.09
21.22
20.69
R. Forearm
22.13
20.96
20.44
20.75
L. Upper arm
19.78
18.86
18.94
18.97
R. Upper arm
21.29
20.93
20.82
21.03
Chest
20.96
19.91
19.93
19.92
Back
23.92
23.33
23.29
23.16
All
21.76
20.86
20.86
21.02
==PAGE:121==
B.1 Data and results for thermal comfort
111
Table B.5: Manikin based equivalent temperature (°C) for Location1SB, Lo-
cation2SB and Location4SB at Lindab.
Location1SB
Location2SB
Location4SB
L. Foot
21.76
21.73
21.35
R. Foot
21.05
21.12
20.89
L. Low leg
21.39
21.14
21.20
R. Low leg
22.73
22.58
22.33
L. Thigh
19.71
19.67
19.65
R. Thigh
21.48
21.27
21.28
Pelvis
20.45
20.23
20.45
Head
22.73
22.55
22.53
Top of head
21.93
21.78
21.89
L. Hand
21.46
21.25
21.83
R. Hand
20.48
19.79
20.39
L. Forearm
23.15
22.89
23.06
R. Forearm
22.74
22.01
22.02
L. Upper arm
18.90
18.85
19.02
R. Upper arm
20.55
19.97
19.89
Chest
20.63
20.41
20.40
Back
23.95
24.12
23.98
All
21.40
21.22
21.25
==PAGE:122==
112
Results
Table B.6: Manikin based equivalent temperature (°C) for Location1ST, Lo-
cation2ST and Location4ST at Lindab.
Location1ST
Location2ST
Location4ST
L. Foot
21.17
21.27
21.15
R. Foot
20.98
20.85
20.82
L. Low leg
20.89
20.84
20.59
R. Low leg
22.03
21.93
21.86
L. Thigh
19.47
19.46
19.37
R. Thigh
21.18
20.95
21.04
Pelvis
23.12
23.19
22.90
Head
21.75
21.66
21.42
Top of head
22.10
22.00
21.80
L. Hand
20.65
20.82
22.21
R. Hand
20.41
19.28
21.22
L. Forearm
25.01
25.05
26.18
R. Forearm
25.82
25.78
26.58
L. Upper arm
24.24
24.09
24.10
R. Upper arm
25.10
24.95
24.29
Chest
23.39
23.54
23.21
Back
25.71
25.78
25.48
All
22.54
22.48
22.55
==PAGE:123==
B.1 Data and results for thermal comfort
113
Table B.7: Manikin based equivalent temperature (°C) for Location1P, Loca-
tion1PT, Location4PT at Lindab.
Location1P
Location1PT
Location4PT
L. Foot
22.13
22.11
21.43
R. Foot
21.87
21.86
21.17
L. Low leg
21.75
21.75
21.20
R. Low leg
23.08
23.06
22.48
L. Thigh
20.33
20.32
19.67
R. Thigh
22.30
22.29
21.34
Pelvis
21.83
21.88
23.27
Head
23.38
23.38
22.26
Top of head
22.03
21.98
22.61
L. Hand
22.18
22.13
21.49
R. Hand
21.14
21.11
21.60
L. Forearm
22.81
22.81
26.70
R. Forearm
23.27
23.25
27.16
L. Upper arm
20.92
20.93
24.47
R. Upper arm
21.11
21.11
25.21
Chest
21.62
21.65
23.67
Back
23.97
24.01
25.56
All
22.15
22.12
23.01
==PAGE:124==
114
Results
Table B.8: Manikin based equivalent temperature (°C) for Case 1, 2, 3, 4, 5,
and 6 at DTU.
Case 1
Case 2
Case 3
Case 4
Case 5
Case 6
L. Foot
21.48
23.65
25.52
21.22
23.05
25.21
R. Foot
23.80
25.80
27.59
23.51
25.21
27.36
L. Low leg
23.84
26.24
28.12
23.61
25.51
27.96
R. Low leg
24.30
26.57
28.60
23.89
25.91
28.29
L. Thigh
23.81
26.03
27.91
23.68
25.54
27.78
R. Thigh
24.69
26.77
28.63
24.60
26.22
28.48
Pelvis
24.03
26.14
27.99
24.01
25.64
27.86
Head
24.73
26.99
29.02
24.55
26.52
28.82
Top of head
24.39
26.80
29.05
24.30
26.26
28.80
L. Hand
23.41
26.01
28.20
23.47
25.41
27.77
R. Hand
23.51
25.80
27.94
23.40
25.15
27.55
L. Forearm
23.51
25.90
28.24
23.26
25.44
28.05
R. Forearm
23.93
26.48
28.66
23.85
25.95
28.35
L. Upper arm
23.61
25.95
27.85
23.70
25.53
27.72
R. Upper arm
22.14
24.64
26.82
22.19
24.16
26.69
Chest
23.26
25.40
27.40
23.05
24.95
27.21
Back
23.73
25.83
27.67
23.64
25.31
27.50
All
23.73
26.00
28.07
23.63
25.47
27.79
==PAGE:125==
B.1 Data and results for thermal comfort
115
Table B.9: Manikin based equivalent temperature (°C) for Case 7, 8, 9, 10,
11, 12 and 13 at DTU.
Case 7
Case 8
Case 9
Case 10
Case 11
Case 12
Case 13
L. Foot
21.39
23.53
25.30
21.20
23.21
24.74
21.34
R. Foot
23.70
25.69
27.51
23.41
25.40
26.91
23.53
L. Low leg
23.84
26.07
28.01
23.70
25.85
27.48
23.81
R. Low leg
24.20
26.49
28.48
23.87
26.12
27.91
24.05
L. Thigh
23.81
26.04
27.91
23.73
25.78
27.39
23.77
R. Thigh
24.67
26.77
28.60
24.60
26.55
28.04
24.60
Pelvis
24.07
26.17
27.98
23.99
25.87
27.43
24.07
Head
24.73
26.98
28.90
24.59
26.78
28.48
24.54
Top of head
24.43
26.81
28.94
24.31
26.69
28.46
24.34
L. Hand
23.15
25.74
27.85
23.22
25.60
27.38
22.83
R. Hand
23.10
25.41
27.46
22.72
25.25
26.95
21.76
L. Forearm
23.53
25.98
28.09
23.23
25.63
27.60
23.26
R. Forearm
23.89
26.40
28.40
23.82
26.14
27.93
23.61
L. Upper arm
23.67
26.02
27.76
23.76
25.78
27.34
23.64
R. Upper arm
22.18
24.72
26.74
22.22
24.53
26.25
22.08
Chest
23.27
25.31
27.26
23.01
25.24
26.88
22.98
Back
23.74
25.85
27.58
23.67
25.57
27.21
23.72
All
23.71
25.97
27.86
23.60
25.79
27.45
23.58
==PAGE:126==
116
Results
Table B.10: Vertical temperatures at 0.1 m, 0.6 m, 1.1 m and 1.7 m above the
ﬂoor for Lindab.
Height above ﬂoor
0.1
0.6
1.1
1.7
Temperature [°C]
Location1N
21.67
21.69
21.66
21.70
Location2N
21.69
21.71
21.64
21.63
Location3N
21.59
21.65
21.63
21.69
Location4N
21.52
21.57
21.50
21.48
Location1NB
21.49
21.51
21.41
21.39
Location2NB
21.57
21.56
21.48
21.41
Location4NB
21.60
21.61
21.51
21.51
Location1NT
21.54
21.52
21.41
21.39
Location2NT
21.60
21.59
21.49
21.43
Location4NT
21.53
21.56
21.46
21.44
Location1P
21.92
22.00
22.00
22.04
Location1PT
21.85
21.94
21.92
21.95
Location4PT
21.51
21.56
21.50
21.50
Location1S
21.70
21.72
21.70
21.71
Location2S
21.35
21.35
21.25
21.18
Location3S
21.40
21.40
21.35
21.33
Location4S
21.39
21.42
21.33
21.29
Location1SB
21.67
21.69
21.59
21.55
Location2SB
21.75
21.74
21.67
21.64
Location4SB
21.65
21.66
21.58
21.54
Location1ST
21.36
21.36
21.24
21.21
Location2ST
21.40
21.41
21.30
21.23
Location4ST
21.30
21.32
21.21
21.14
==PAGE:127==
B.1 Data and results for thermal comfort
117
Figure B.1: CBE Thermal Comfort Tool for the cases not involving a sweater
at Lindab.
Figure B.2: CBE Thermal Comfort Tool for the cases involving a sweater at
Lindab.
==PAGE:128==
118
Results
Figure B.3: CBE Thermal Comfort Tool for the cases involving a sweater at
Lindab.
Figure B.4: CBE Thermal Comfort Tool for the cases involving a sweater at
Lindab.
==PAGE:129==
B.1 Data and results for thermal comfort
119
Figure B.5: CBE Thermal Comfort Tool for the cases involving a sweater at
Lindab.
==PAGE:130==
120
Results
B.2
Flow Visualization
LocationNB
Figure B.6: Location1NB with normal diﬀuser and a board touching the
manikin abdomen. qv=10 l/s, ∆T=7.3K.
Figure B.7: Location4NB with normal diﬀuser and a board touching the
manikin abdomen. qv=10 l/s, ∆T=7.1K.
==PAGE:131==
B.2 Flow Visualization
121
LocationNT
Figure B.8: Location1NT with normal diﬀuser and the manikin wearing a
sweater. qv=10 l/s, ∆T=7.1K.
Figure B.9: Location2NT with normal diﬀuser and the manikin wearing a
sweater. qv=10 l/s, ∆T=7.1K.
==PAGE:132==
122
Results
LocationS
Figure B.10: Location1S with small diﬀuser. qv=10 l/s, ∆=7.5K.
Figure B.11: Location2S with small diﬀuser. qv=10 l/s, ∆=7.0K.
==PAGE:133==
B.2 Flow Visualization
123
Figure B.12: Location3S with small diﬀuser. qvT=10 l/s, ∆=7.4K.
LocationSB
Figure B.13: Location2SB with small diﬀuser and a board touching the
manikin abdomen. qv=10 l/s, ∆T=6.8K.
==PAGE:134==
124
Results
Figure B.14: Location4SB with small diﬀuser and a board touching the
manikin abdomen. qv=10 l/s, ∆T=6.9K.
==PAGE:135==
B.2 Flow Visualization
125
LocationST
Figure B.15: Location1ST with small diﬀuser and the manikin wearing a
sweater. qv=10 l/s, ∆T=6.6K.
Figure B.16: Location2ST with small diﬀuser and the manikin wearing a
sweater. qv=10 l/s, ∆T=6.5K.
==PAGE:136==
126
Results
Figure B.17: Location4ST with small diﬀuser and the manikin wearing a
sweater. qv=10 l/s, ∆T=6.5K.
15 l/s, 20 l/s and 25 l/s
Figure B.18: Location 1 with qv 15 l/s, 20 l/s and 25 l/s.
==PAGE:137==
B.2 Flow Visualization
127
Figure B.19: Location 2 with qv 15 l/s, 20 l/s and 25 l/s.
Figure B.20: Location 3 with qv 15 l/s, 20 l/s and 25 l/s.
==PAGE:138==
128
Results
Figure B.21: Location 4 with qv 15 l/s, 20 l/s and 25 l/s.
DTU
Figure B.22: Case2 with unperforated diﬀuser, supply airﬂow of 10 l/s, a room
temperature of 25.4°C and ∆T=5.2K.
==PAGE:139==
B.2 Flow Visualization
129
Figure B.23: Case3 with unperforated diﬀuser, supply airﬂow of 10 l/s, a room
temperature of 27.2°C and ∆T=5.5K.
Figure B.24: Case4 with unperforated diﬀuser, supply airﬂow of 20 l/s, a room
temperature of 23.4°C and ∆T=5.5K.
==PAGE:140==
130
Results
Figure B.25: Case5 with unperforated diﬀuser, supply airﬂow of 20 l/s, a room
temperature of 25.1°C and ∆T=5.3K.
Figure B.26: Case6 with unperforated diﬀuser, supply airﬂow of 20 l/s, a room
temperature of 26.9°C and ∆T=5.9K.
==PAGE:141==
B.2 Flow Visualization
131
Figure B.27: Case7 with perforated diﬀuser, supply airﬂow of 10 l/s, a room
temperature of 23.6°C and ∆T=5.0K.
Figure B.28: Case8 with perforated diﬀuser, supply airﬂow of 10 l/s, a room
temperature of 27.1°C and ∆T=5.5K.
==PAGE:142==
132
Results
Figure B.29: Case9 with perforated diﬀuser, supply airﬂow of 20 l/s, a room
temperature of 23.5°C and ∆T=5.5K.
Figure B.30: Case10 with perforated diﬀuser, supply airﬂow of 20 l/s, a room
temperature of 25.3°C and ∆T=5.1K.
==PAGE:143==
B.2 Flow Visualization
133
Figure B.31: Case11 with perforated diﬀuser, supply airﬂow of 20 l/s, a room
temperature of 26.8°C and ∆T=5.8K.
==PAGE:144==
134
Results
B.3
Data and results for ventilation eﬀectiveness
Table B.11: The concentration level of Freon134a (in mg/m3) for all cases
measured at Lindab.
Mouth
P1
P2
P3
P4
P5
P6
P7
Supply
Exhaust
Location1N
65.4
62.1
63.5
62.9
63.0
64.3
65.6
64.7
1.4
62.8
Location2N
64.0
59.9
60.1
59.9
63.1
61.6
62.8
65.4
1.3
64.5
Location3N
55.4
54.3
53.8
53.5
54.3
55.0
56.6
55.6
1.0
55.0
Location4N
56.5
55.8
56.9
55.2
53.8
57.1
58.6
56.5
1.1
53.0
Location1NB
54.6
53.5
54.7
53.7
54.7
56.3
55.9
55.0
1.0
55.0
Location2NB
48.9
46.3
46.0
46.0
47.0
46.6
48.9
49.3
1.7
49.2
Location4NB
46.1
43.0
42.9
43.0
44.3
44.3
46.0
46.9
3.2
47.5
Location1NT
39.9
36.0
37.5
36.0
36.6
37.9
39.3
40.0
1.3
37.2
Location2NT
48.9
46.8
46.7
46.9
48.5
47.5
48.9
49.8
1.5
49.7
Location4NT
50.9
48.2
48.2
48.0
48.9
48.8
50.3
51.8
1.4
50.8
Location1P
54.8
50.3
51.7
51.0
53.3
52.0
53.2
54.8
2.4
50.8
Location1PT
59.2
55.5
57.8
56.8
59.2
57.3
58.4
59.3
3.1
57.1
Location4PT
64.0
58.6
60.8
59.3
61.5
62.4
61.9
64.3
4.2
58.0
Location1S
68.3
67.2
68.8
67.9
68.6
69.6
70.0
68.4
1.3
68.1
Location2S
57.3
55.4
56.3
54.5
54.2
56.6
58.5
56.4
1.3
51.2
Location3S
58.2
56.7
56.6
56.7
56.9
57.6
58.9
58.6
1.2
57.2
Location4S
66.0
66.2
66.9
65.4
65.3
66.0
68.2
66.1
1.2
65.0
Location1SB
63.5
60.5
61.6
61.0
61.3
62.5
63.3
63.7
1.9
64.8
Location2SB
63.9
63.2
62.5
62.5
64.8
63.3
64.3
64.8
2.5
66.9
Location4SB
59.6
56.1
55.8
56.3
57.4
56.5
59.2
60.0
1.9
59.6
Location1ST
56.7
53.0
54.0
53.3
53.7
53.9
57.6
56.8
2.4
57.4
Location2ST
62.5
58.5
58.3
58.0
60.5
59.2
62.6
63.0
4.6
62.1
Location4ST
67.3
61.5
61.4
66.0
64.1
61.9
66.8
68.3
1.7
67.4
==PAGE:145==
B.3 Data and results for ventilation eﬀectiveness
135
Table B.12: The concentration level of N2O (in mg/m3) for all cases measured
at Lindab.
Mouth
P1
P2
P3
P4
P5
P6
P7
Supply
Exhaust
Location1N
1412.2
301.7
304.3
299.9
299.4
301.1
299.3
350.8
8.6
283.0
Location2N
128.7
96.2
90.8
89.4
86.3
87.4
99.4
90.8
2.0
90.4
Location3N
247.3
65.8
66.5
65.1
65.8
65.9
65.6
69.5
1.8
63.6
Location4N
541.9
251.6
243.1
244.7
235.0
244.9
253.7
255.4
5.6
213.4
Location1NB
255.2
173.4
172.0
172.5
171.7
166.2
171.0
211.3
4.3
171.4
Location2NB
209.4
172.9
175.2
166.0
164.4
165.8
188.6
167.5
3.5
167.0
Location4NB
201.9
174.3
177.9
173.2
165.1
161.2
179.9
167.8
3.6
174.0
Location1NT
537.1
154.2
150.6
154.6
153.1
148.5
158.7
164.1
4.4
148.2
Location2NT
686.3
178.5
173.8
172.8
166.2
167.2
187.9
173.1
4.2
174.3
Location4NT
370.2
161.7
165.5
160.8
157.2
158.4
186.1
185.7
4.5
162.3
Location1P
459.1
203.8
218.8
204.9
206.1
219.7
229.0
215.4
4.6
191.0
Location1PT
733.3
224.3
237.2
225.9
226.1
240.6
247.7
237.8
5.2
216.9
Location4PT
918.4
213.4
205.7
211.3
209.2
197.0
211.8
213.9
5.8
208.7
Location1S
1401.2
330.0
331.3
325.0
328.9
330.5
328.7
389.4
8.6
316.6
Location2S
818.6
301.6
295.0
293.1
289.4
292.1
308.4
311.9
7.2
255.2
Location3S
848.7
258.5
261.8
257.5
253.7
254.4
271.0
275.1
6.4
243.0
Location4S
453.1
255.1
250.6
249.1
244.5
247.9
248.7
258.3
5.5
234.5
Location1SB
288.9
216.0
206.1
211.9
209.3
200.1
212.0
215.0
5.0
208.2
Location2SB
314.5
224.9
229.1
215.7
216.3
218.3
227.5
222.5
4.9
215.1
Location4SB
271.6
188.7
198.5
187.6
183.6
192.9
214.1
188.0
4.5
186.6
Location1ST
527.1
200.1
194.4
200.9
202.3
192.2
198.8
207.4
5.3
200.9
Location2ST
734.2
222.2
212.7
213.4
198.6
200.8
221.5
210.4
5.7
205.0
Location4ST
511.4
228.2
223.3
228.0
221.3
224.7
236.6
229.5
5.6
224.2
==PAGE:146==
136
Results
Table B.13: Ventilation eﬀectiveness results for Freon134a at Lindab.
Mouth
P1
P2
P3
P4
P5
P6
P7
Location1N
0.96
1.01
0.99
1.00
1.00
0.98
0.96
0.97
Location2N
1.01
1.08
1.07
1.08
1.02
1.05
1.03
0.99
Location3N
0.99
1.01
1.02
1.03
1.01
1.00
0.97
0.99
Location4N
0.94
0.95
0.93
0.96
0.98
0.93
0.90
0.94
Location1S
1.00
1.01
0.99
1.00
0.99
0.98
0.97
1.00
Location2S
0.89
0.92
0.91
0.94
0.94
0.91
0.88
0.91
Location3S
0.98
1.01
1.01
1.01
1.01
0.99
0.97
0.98
Location4S
0.98
0.98
0.97
0.99
1.00
0.98
0.95
0.98
Location1P
0.93
1.01
0.98
1.00
0.95
0.98
0.96
0.93
Location1NB
1.01
1.03
1.01
1.02
1.01
0.98
0.99
1.00
Location2NB
1.00
1.06
1.07
1.07
1.05
1.06
1.01
1.00
Location4NB
1.03
1.11
1.11
1.11
1.07
1.07
1.03
1.01
Location1SB
1.02
1.07
1.05
1.06
1.06
1.04
1.02
1.02
Location2SB
1.04
1.05
1.07
1.06
1.03
1.05
1.04
1.03
Location4SB
1.00
1.06
1.07
1.06
1.04
1.06
1.01
0.99
Location1NT
0.93
1.03
0.99
1.03
1.02
0.98
0.95
0.93
Location2NT
1.02
1.06
1.06
1.06
1.03
1.05
1.02
1.00
Location4NT
1.00
1.06
1.06
1.06
1.04
1.04
1.01
0.98
Location1ST
1.01
1.08
1.06
1.08
1.07
1.06
1.00
1.01
Location2ST
0.99
1.06
1.06
1.07
1.03
1.05
0.99
0.99
Location4ST
1.00
1.10
1.10
1.02
1.05
1.09
1.01
0.99
Location1PT
0.96
1.03
0.99
1.00
0.96
1.00
0.98
0.96
Location4PT
0.91
0.99
0.96
0.98
0.94
0.93
0.94
0.90
==PAGE:147==
B.3 Data and results for ventilation eﬀectiveness
137
Table B.14: Ventilation eﬀectiveness results for N2O at Lindab.
Mouth
P1
P2
P3
P4
P5
P6
P7
Location1N
0.20
0.94
0.93
0.94
0.95
0.94
0.95
0.81
Location2N
0.70
0.94
1.00
1.01
1.05
1.03
0.91
1.00
Location3N
0.26
0.97
0.96
0.98
0.97
0.96
0.97
0.91
Location4N
0.39
0.85
0.88
0.87
0.91
0.87
0.84
0.84
Location1S
0.23
0.96
0.96
0.97
0.96
0.96
0.96
0.81
Location2S
0.31
0.85
0.87
0.87
0.88
0.87
0.83
0.82
Location3S
0.29
0.94
0.93
0.94
0.96
0.96
0.90
0.88
Location4S
0.52
0.92
0.94
0.94
0.96
0.95
0.94
0.91
Location1NB
0.67
0.99
1.00
0.99
1.00
1.03
1.00
0.81
Location2NB
0.80
0.97
0.95
1.01
1.02
1.01
0.89
1.00
Location4NB
0.86
1.00
0.98
1.01
1.05
1.08
0.97
1.04
Location1SB
0.73
0.97
1.02
0.99
1.00
1.05
0.99
0.97
Location2SB
0.68
0.96
0.94
1.00
0.99
0.99
0.95
0.97
Location4SB
0.69
0.99
0.94
0.99
1.02
0.97
0.87
0.99
Location1NT
0.28
0.96
0.98
0.96
0.97
1.00
0.93
0.90
Location2NT
0.25
0.98
1.00
1.01
1.05
1.04
0.93
1.01
Location4NT
0.47
1.07
1.04
1.07
1.10
1.09
0.93
0.93
Location1ST
0.38
1.00
1.03
1.00
0.99
1.05
1.01
0.97
Location2ST
0.28
0.92
0.96
0.96
1.03
1.02
0.93
0.97
Location4ST
0.44
0.98
1.00
0.98
1.01
1.00
0.95
0.98
Location1P
0.42
0.94
0.87
0.93
0.93
0.87
0.83
0.89
Location1PT
0.30
0.97
0.91
0.96
0.96
0.90
0.88
0.91
Location4PT
0.23
0.98
1.01
0.99
1.00
1.06
0.99
0.98
Table B.15: The concentration level of Freon134a (in mg/m3) for all cases
measured at DTU.
Mouth
P1
P2
P3
Supply
Exhaust
Case1
254.58
246.06
255.15
261.49
1.99
227.01
Case2
266.55
260.29
265.15
275.80
2.40
241.27
Case3
281.93
271.48
279.31
289.21
2.83
248.99
Case7
288.62
288.20
288.77
294.99
2.54
260.31
Case8
208.16
205.26
202.66
210.04
1.86
179.04
Case9
241.16
253.82
252.05
258.58
2.42
205.81
Case10
267.25
262.69
271.58
279.54
2.19
255.15
Case11
261.96
252.28
262.18
272.86
2.42
244.96
Case12
274.13
270.01
272.53
285.08
2.80
249.03
Case16
278.70
284.00
278.33
277.32
2.44
277.07
Case17
221.88
220.35
220.24
222.69
1.96
210.14
Case18
236.89
234.83
235.28
235.28
2.32
202.47
Case19
265.93
268.53
271.52
262.64
2.18
270.63
==PAGE:148==
138
Results
Table B.16: The concentration level of N2O (in mg/m3) for all cases measured
at DTU.
Mouth
P1
P2
P3
Supply
Exhaust
Case1
1756.35
390.05
416.72
418.34
3.30
378.11
Case2
1649.52
395.55
413.04
416.84
3.16
370.20
Case3
1843.50
430.41
446.06
440.57
3.33
379.21
Case7
1415.82
383.88
393.89
403.64
2.94
369.48
Case8
1546.66
376.25
389.48
377.16
2.79
329.09
Case9
1251.67
427.45
429.66
413.82
3.23
326.51
Case10
1813.52
397.00
419.50
419.30
3.31
388.95
Case11
1268.36
405.19
425.28
426.45
3.15
383.40
Case12
1573.88
429.98
423.94
423.83
3.53
371.39
Case16
1698.97
388.13
396.39
382.61
3.19
393.08
Case17
1663.81
382.88
408.89
385.28
3.00
362.48
Case18
1567.20
402.87
395.61
395.61
3.23
314.64
Case19
1416.56
384.97
390.82
373.73
3.00
383.64
Table B.17: Ventilation eﬀectiveness results for Freon134a at DTU.
Mouth
P1
P2
P3
Case1
0.89
0.92
0.89
0.87
Case2
0.91
0.93
0.91
0.87
Case3
0.88
0.92
0.89
0.86
Case7
0.90
0.90
0.90
0.88
Case8
0.86
0.87
0.88
0.85
Case9
0.85
0.81
0.82
0.80
Case10
0.95
0.97
0.94
0.91
Case11
0.94
0.97
0.93
0.90
Case12
0.91
0.92
0.91
0.87
Case16
0.99
0.98
1.00
1.00
Case17
0.95
0.95
0.95
0.94
Case18
0.85
0.86
0.86
0.86
Case19
1.02
1.01
1.00
1.03
==PAGE:149==
B.3 Data and results for ventilation eﬀectiveness
139
Table B.18: Ventilation eﬀectiveness results for N2O at DTU.
Mouth
P1
P2
P3
Case1
0.22
0.97
0.91
0.90
Case2
0.22
0.94
0.90
0.89
Case3
0.21
0.88
0.85
0.86
Case7
0.26
0.96
0.94
0.92
Case8
0.21
0.87
0.84
0.87
Case9
0.26
0.76
0.76
0.79
Case10
0.21
0.98
0.93
0.93
Case11
0.30
0.95
0.90
0.90
Case12
0.24
0.86
0.88
0.88
Case16
0.23
1.01
0.99
1.03
Case17
0.22
0.95
0.89
0.94
Case18
0.20
0.78
0.80
0.80
Case19
0.27
1.00
0.98
1.03
==PAGE:150==
140
Results
B.4
Data and results for velocity ﬁeld
Table B.19: Air velocities above the manikin (Stand 1) and 1 m away from
the manikin (Stand 2).
Height above ﬂoor
1.40
1.56
1.73
1.90
Velocity [m/s]
Case1
Stand 1
0.064
0.145
0.167
0.180
Stand 2
0.090
0.128
0.088
0.121
Case2
Stand 1
0.064
0.128
0.154
0.165
Stand 2
0.076
0.079
0.087
0.104
Case3
Stand 1
0.062
0.126
0.147
0.145
Stand 2
0.077
0.082
0.106
0.147
Case7
Stand 1
0.073
0.140
0.163
0.168
Stand 2
0.054
0.073
0.049
0.073
Case8
Stand 1
0.050
0.110
0.130
0.146
Stand 2
0.080
0.088
0.077
0.089
Case9
Stand 1
0.062
0.122
0.143
0.156
Stand 2
0.111
0.101
0.102
0.134
Case10
Stand 1
0.061
0.138
0.150
0.157
Stand 2
0.156
0.193
0.171
0.203
Case11
Stand 1
0.056
0.136
0.152
0.142
Stand 2
0.156
0.167
0.143
0.173
Case12
Stand 1
0.064
0.120
0.125
0.120
Stand 2
0.159
0.156
0.158
0.180
Case16
Stand 1
0.060
0.135
0.164
0.180
Stand 2
0.187
0.191
0.188
0.199
Case17
Stand 1
0.049
0.104
0.132
0.140
Stand 2
0.221
0.211
0.209
0.221
Case18
Stand 1
0.057
0.113
0.137
0.143
Stand 2
0.220
0.211
0.200
0.173
Case19
Stand 1
0.056
0.141
0.159
0.161
Stand 2
0.119
0.074
0.076
0.073
==PAGE:151==
Bibliography
[1] H. B. Awbi, Ventilation of buildings. Spon press, 1991.
[2] Z. Wang, J. Hou, C. Kang, and H. Ning, Proceedings of the 8th Interna-
tional Symposium on Heating, Ventilation and Air Conditioning: Thermal
comfort with ﬂoor heating, vol. 261. 2014.
[3] B. H. Petersen, “Komfortventilation,” Undervisningsnotat, 2011.
[4] P. Wargocki, J. Andersson, A. Boestra, D. Clements-Croome, K. Fitzner,
and S. olaf Hanssen, Indoor climate and productivity in oﬃces: How to
integrate productivity in life cycle costs analysis of building services. 2006.
[5] ASHRAE, “ANSI/ASHRAE Standard 55-2010. Thermal Environmental
Conditions for Human Occupancy,” p. 42, 2010.
[6] F. L. Ludvigsen, H. hørup Sørensen, and O. B. Stampe, Ventilation ståbi.
Nyt Teksnisk Forlag, 2 ed., 2001.
[7] Danvak ApS, Varme- og klimateknik: Grundbog. 2013.
[8] T. Hoyt, S. Schiavon, A. Piccioli, D. Moon, and K. Steinfeld, “CBE Thermal
Comfort tool,” 2013.
[9] DS/EN ISO 7730, “Dansk standard Ergonomi inden for termisk miljø –
Analytisk bestemmelse og fortolkning af termisk komfort ved beregning af
PMV- og PPD- indekser og lokale termiske komfortkriterier Ergonomics of
the thermal environment –,” p. 63, 2006.
[10] DS/EN15251, “Input-parametre til indeklimaet ved design og bestemmelse
af bygningers energimæssige ydeevne vedrørende indendørs luftkvalitet, ter-
misk miljø, belysning og akustik,” 2007.
[11] J. Toftum, “Air movement–good or bad?,” Indoor air, vol. 14 Suppl 7,
no. Suppl 7, pp. 40–45, 2004.
[12] P. O. Fanger, A. K. Melikov, H. Hanzawa, and J. Ring, “Air Turbulence
and sensation of draught,” Energy and Buildings, vol. 12, pp. 21–39, 1988.
[13] J. Babiak, B. W. Olesen, and D. Petras, REHVA Guidebook no7: Low
temperature heating and high temperature cooling. Rehva, 2007.
[14] DS474, “Code for Thermal Indoor Climate,” p. 30, 1995.
==PAGE:152==
142
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[15] O. P. Fanger, M. Jantunen, E. Skåret, and J. Schlatter, “Ventilation re-
quirements in buildings,” 1992.
[16] A. K. Melikov and J. Kaczmarczyk, “Air movement and perceived air qual-
ity,” Building and Environment, vol. 47, no. 1, pp. 400–409, 2012.
[17] H. M. Mathisen, P. V. Nielsen, and A. Moser, REHVA Guidebook no2:
Ventilation Eﬀectiveness. No. 2, 2004.
[18] H. Skistad, E. Mundt, P. V. Nielsen, K. Hagstrom, and J. Railio, “RE-
HVA Guidebook no1: Displacement ventilation in non-industrial premises,”
no. 1, 2002.
[19] D. Licina, Human convective boundary layer and its impact on personal
exposure. PhD thesis, 2015.
[20] B. Halvonova and A. K. Melikov, “Performance of "ductless" personalized
ventilation in conjunction with displacement ventilation: Impact of distur-
bances due to walking person(s).,” 2010.
[21] M. Dirk, C. Kandzia, R. Kosonen, A. K. Melikov, and P. V. Nielsen, RE-
HVA Guidebook no19: Mixing Ventilation. No. 19, 2013.
[22] Y. Bin, “Thermal Comfort and Indoor Air Quality Evaluation of a ceiling
mounted personalized ventilation system integrated with an ambient mixing
ventilation system,” 2009.
[23] A. K. Melikov, “Advanced air distribution: improving health and comfort
while reducing energy use,” 2015.
[24] Z. D. Bolashikov, “Advanced Methods for Air Distribution in Occupied
Spaces for Reduced Risk from Air- Borne Diseases and Improved Air Qual-
ity,” vol. 239, 2010.
[25] A. K. Melikov, “Advance airdistribution,” ASHRAE Journal, vol. 53,
pp. 73–77, 2011.
[26] P. Nielsen, M. Polak, H. Jiang, Y. Li, and H. Qian, “Protection against
cross infection in hospital beds with integrated personalized ventilation,”
Proc. Indoor Air, pp. 1–10, 2008.
[27] A. Mills and C. Coimbra, Basic heat and mass transfer. Temporal Publish-
ing, LLC, 3 ed., 2015.
[28] D. Zukowska, Z. Popiolek, and A. Melikov, “Determination of the integral
characteristics of an asymmetrical thermal plume from air speed/velocity
and temperature measurements,” Experimental Thermal and Fluid Science,
vol. 34, no. 8, pp. 1205–1216, 2010.
==PAGE:153==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
143
[29] D. Licina, J. Pantelic, A. Melikov, C. Sekhar, and K. W. Tham, “Experi-
mental investigation of the human convective boundary layer in a quiescent
indoor environment,” Building and Environment, vol. 75, pp. 79–91, 2014.
[30] D. Licina, A. Melikov, C. Sekhar, and K. W. Tham, “Transport of Gaseous
Pollutants by Convective Boundary Layer around a Human Body,” Science
and Technology for the Built Environment, vol. 4731, no. June 2015, pp. 00–
00, 2015.
[31] D. Zukowska, A. Melikov, and Z. Popiolek, “Impact of personal factors and
furniture arrangement on the thermal plume above a sitting occupant,”
Building and Environment, vol. 49, no. 1, pp. 104–116, 2011.
[32] P. K. Heiselberg and P. V. Nielsen, “Flow element models,” 1996.
[33] C. Topp, P. Hesselholt, M. R. Trier, and P. V. Nielsen, “Inﬂuence of ge-
ometry of thermal manikins on concentration distribution and personal
exposure,” no. 2003, pp. 1–6, 2003.
[34] D. Zukowska, A. Melikov, and Z. Popiolek, “Impact of geometry of a seden-
tary occupant simulator on the generated thermal plume: Experimental in-
vestigation,” HVAC&R Research, vol. 18, no. February 2015, pp. 795–811,
2012.
[35] D. Zukowska, A. Melikov, and Z. Popiolek, “Thermal plume above a
simulated sitting person with diﬀerent complexity of body geometry,”
Proceedings of the 10th International Conference on Air Distribution in
Rooms—Roomvent, pp. 191–198, 2007.
[36] D. Zukowska, A. Melikov, and Z. Popiolek, “Impact of Thermal Plumes
Generated by Occupant Simulators with Diﬀerent Complexity of Body ge-
ometry on Airﬂow Pattern in Rooms,” Proceeding of the 7th Internation
Thermal Manikin and Modelling Meeting - University of Coimbra, Septem-
ber 2008, no. September, pp. 3–6, 2008.
[37] D. Licina, A. Melikov, C. Sekhar, and K. W. Tham, “Human convective
boundary layer and its interaction with room ventilation ﬂow,” Indoor Air,
vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 21–35, 2015.
[38] L. Rezgals, “Heat Transfer from Human Body Exposed to Downward Flow,”
no. April, 2013.
[39] Lindab, “Lindab Pascal - Forenklet VAV-løsning med fuldt potentiale...,”
2017.
[40] Lindab, “Lindab Pascal - Creating Balance,”
[41] B. W. Olesen and T. L. Madsen, “Measurements of the physical parameters
of thermal environment,” 1995.
==PAGE:154==
144
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[42] Course 41721 DTU, “Ventilation and Climatic Systems - Low velocity
anemometers HT-400,” vol. 8, pp. 2–4, 2015.
[43] “Thermal Manikin manual,” no. September, pp. 1994–2011, 2011.
[44] I. H. H. O. Nilsson, “Comfort climate evaluation with thermal manikin
methods and computer simulation models,” pp. 28–37, 2001.
[45] A. K. Melikov and J. Kaczmarczyk, “Inﬂuence of geometry of thermal
manikins on concentration distribution and personal exposure,” Indoor air,
vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 50–59, 2007.
[46] DS/EN ISO 7726, “Ergonomics of the thermal environment – Instruments
for measuring physical quantities,” Management, pp. 1–62, 2001.
[47] P. O. Fanger, “Calculation of thermal comfort: introduction of a basic
comfort equation,” ASHRAE transactions.
