==PAGE:1==
National Food Institute
Technical University of Denmark
Thesis to obtain the degree
Master of Science in Engineering in Biotechnology
Potentiometric Detection of Redox
Reactions during Milk Fermentation
A Reassessment using Lactococcus lactis as a Model
Student
Benjamin Schwetz
s150767
Supervisor
Co-Supervisor
Co-Supervisor
Egon Bech Hansen
Mogens Kilstrup
Kim Ib Sørensen
National Food Institute
DTU Bioengineering
Chr. Hansen A/S
Professor
Associate Professor
Senior Principal Scientist
External Censor
Peter Stephensen L¨ubeck
Aalborg University Copenhagen
Associate Professor
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Camel milk is an important primary animal product among East African pastoral-
ists and a deeper understanding of the fermentation process is required to aid the
technology transfer from bovine dairy to camel milk products. Potentiometry has
received increasing attention as a method to assess the redox state of dairy pro-
cessing on-line. The theoretical limitations of this approach were summarized and
titration using Ellman’s reagent was tested as an alternative method to speciﬁcally
target the concentration of sulfhydryl groups as important redox active compounds.
The results indicated that this was too insensitive to replicate previously published
ﬁndings. Additional fermentation experiments merely supported a complex relation-
ship of negative electrode potentials with growth of Lactococcus lactis in milk. The
ﬁndings aligned with the theoretical considerations and it was concluded that an
interpretation of electrode potentials (E) in milk as redox potential (ORP, Eh, pE)
is ambigous and often misleading. This may change the focus to the development
of electrochemical biosensors that allow for speciﬁc investigations of the redox state
of fermenting milk on-line.
Dansk Abstrakt
Kamelmælk er et vigtigt primært animalsk produkt blandt Østafrikanske pastoral-
ister og dybere forst˚aelse af fermenteringsprocessen er nødvendig for at facilitere
teknologioverførslen fra komælk til kamelmælkeprodukter. De teoretiske begræn-
sninger af potentiometriske m˚alinger var opsummerede for at klargøre en vigtig dis-
tinktion mellem redox- og elektrodepotentialer. Titrering af sulfhydryl grupper blev
testet som en alternativ metode til at udforske koncentrationen af sulfhydryl grup-
per i fermentering af mælkeprodukter, men den anvendte metode var ikke sensitiv
nok til at replikere tidligere publicerede resultater. Yderligere eksperimenter med
næringssupplementering understøttede blot en uforudsigelig sammenhæng mellem
negative elektrodepotentialer og væksten af Lactococcus lactis i mælk. Derfor blev
det konkluderet at termen “redox potentiale” (ORP, Eh, pE) for en elektrodepo-
tentiale er misvisende. Resultaterne af de i denne artikel udførte undersøgelser kan
potentialt bidrage til at fokusere p˚a udviklingen af speciﬁkke elektrokemiske biosen-
sorer for en online kortlægning af redoxstadiet i mælkefermenteringer.
i
==PAGE:4==
Acronyms
A412
absorption at 412 nm wave length
aq. dest. distilled water
ATP
adenosine triphosphate
BCAA branched chain amino acids
B. subtilis Bacillus subtilis
CFU
colony forming units
DI-water deionized water
DTNB 5,5’-dithio-bis(2-nitrobenzoic acid)
E. coli Escherichia coli
EpH=7
electrode potential normalized for pH 7
ETC
electron transport chain
GTP
guanosine-5’-triphosphate
LAB
lactic acid bacteria
Lc. lactis Lactococcus lactis
M17lac M17 lactose
MK
menaquinones
Milli Q ultrapure water
MRS
Man-Rogosa-Sharpe medium
NAD
nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide
PTS
phosphotransferase system
ROS
reactive oxygen species
SHE
standard hydrogen electrode
TNB2−2-nitro-5-thiobenzoate
ii
==PAGE:5==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Fermented Dairy Products in Culture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Camel Milk . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Technology Transfer: From Bovine to Camel Milk Dairy
. . . . . . .
2
1.4
Project aim . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Background
3
2.1
Lactococcus lactis as a model organism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.1.1
Oxygen Reduction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.1.2
Cell Wall Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.1.3
Amino Acid Metabolism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Camel & Bovine Milk . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2.1
Composition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2.2
Limitations of Milk as a Growth Medium . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2.3
Electrochemistry in Milk Processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3
Analytical Methods
12
3.1
Potentiometry in Milk
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.1.1
Experimental Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.1.2
Basic Terms in Electrostatics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.1.3
Electrode Potentials
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.1.4
Redox Potential . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.1.5
Mixed Potential . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.2
Thiol Group Titration
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4
Experimental Strategy
17
5
Methods and Materials
18
5.1
Strains . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
5.2
Media
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
5.3
Precultures
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
5.4
Supplementation Experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
5.5
Sulfhydryl Group Titrations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
5.6
Statistics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
6
Results
23
6.1
Determination of Sulfhydryl Group Concentration During Fermentation 23
6.2
Electrode Potential in Milk Fermentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
6.2.1
Eﬀects of Catabolic Repression
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
iii
==PAGE:6==
CONTENTS
CONTENTS
6.2.2
Impact of Amino Acid Catabolism
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
7
Discussion
33
7.1
Accuracy of Thiol Group Titration in Milk . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
7.2
Normalization, Accuracy and Noise in On-Line Measurements
. . . .
34
7.3
Instabilities of Preculture Phenotypes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
7.4
Eﬀects of Amino Acid Supplementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
8
Conclusion
39
9
Perspectives
40
References
42
A Summarized Data for ’Catabolic Repression’ Experiment
50
B Supplementary Statistics for Thiol Titrations
51
B.1 Choosing a Dilution Factor for Thiol Titration . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
B.2 Heat Treatments
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
C Summary Statistics for Models Used
53
D Relationship Between EpH=7 and Acidiﬁcation in Fermentation
55
E rinac-Package for R
56
iv
==PAGE:7==
List of Figures
1.1
Top ten producing countries of camel milk . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.1
Oxygen reduction by Lc. lactis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Surface structure of gram-positive bacteria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Catabolic repression by glucose in Lc. lactis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.4
Vitamin content of camel compared to bovine milk
. . . . . . . . . .
8
2.5
Mineral content of camel compared to bovine milk . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.6
Amino acid content of camel compared to bovine milk . . . . . . . . .
9
3.1
Schematic of a galvanic cell
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
6.1
Explorative plot for thiol titration of fermenting camel milk
. . . . .
24
6.2
Temperature dependence of sulfhydryl-group concentrations
. . . . .
25
6.3
Dynamics of milk fermentation at diﬀerent fat & sugar concentrations
27
6.4
Impact of arginine on fermentation parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
6.5
Key parameters for fermentation of milk, supplemented with various
amino acids . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
6.6
Dynamics of milk fermentation high in arginine and ornithine
. . . .
31
6.7
Dynamics of milk fermentation supplemented with BCAA
. . . . . .
31
6.8
Dynamics of milk fermentation high in serine and glycine . . . . . . .
32
6.9
Dynamics of milk fermentation high in lysine, proline and histidine
.
32
7.1
Oscillations in the depletion of EpH=7 in milk fermentation . . . . . .
35
7.2
Potential-temperature-plot for EpH=7 drop in milk fermentation
. . .
36
7.3
Local polynomial regression ﬁtting to determine acidiﬁcation rates . .
37
B.1 Box and scatter plot for the concentration of sulfhydryl groups im-
mediately after pasteurization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
D.1 E −dpHdt−1-plot for milk fermentations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
v
==PAGE:8==
List of Tables
2.1
Gross composition of bovine and camel milk . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
6.1
Overview of the media used for catabolic repression experiment
. . .
26
6.2
Mean and CIs for Emin and acidiﬁcation in catabolic repression ex-
periment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
6.3
Key parameters for fermentation of milk, supplemented with various
amino acids . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
A.1 Key parameters for fermentation of bovine milk with diﬀerent sugar
and fat content . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
B.1 Comparing ﬁxed & corrected dilution factors for thiol group titration
51
B.2 Summary statistics for sulfhydryl groups immediately after pasteur-
ization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
C.1 Summary statistic for sulfhydryl group concentration in fermenting
camel milk . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
C.2 Summary statistic for minimum pH reached in the fermentation of
bovine milk with varying sugar and fat content
. . . . . . . . . . . .
54
C.3 Summary statistic for t(Emin) in the fermentation of bovine milk with
varying sugar and fat content
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
vi
==PAGE:9==
Chapter 1
Introduction
1.1
Fermented Dairy Products in Culture
The use of milk as a product from animal husbandry is considered to date back
to the earliest days of domestication, approximately 11 000 years ago[13]. Milk is
very nutritious but due to its high water activity, it is also prone to spoil fast.
It is therefore assumed, that milk fermentation played a role in animal husbandry
from its beginning. As many naturally present lactic acid bacteria (LAB) are non-
pathogenic, it is possible to obtain edible sour milk by spontaneous fermentation[13].
It is diﬃcult to date when people started to utilize this process deliberately but there
are several beneﬁts in doing so: Only 35 % of the world population are able to digest
lactose[13]. As LAB consume the sugar to produce lactic acid, the fermented milk
is more wholesome for most people. Furthermore, the product is often enriched
in vitamins through the microbial growth. Last but not least, milk’s shelf life is
increased, mainly by acidiﬁcation as a result of lactic acid fermentation[cf. 5, 19].
As it has evolved with animal husbandry, the main sources of dairy today are
popular domestic animals, namely cattle, buﬀalo, goat and sheep. Among them,
bovine milk is by far the most used in dairy industry, accounting for 85 % of the
world’s production[20].
Consequently, extensive research has been conducted to
optimize processes.
1.2
Camel Milk for Human Nutrition
Besides the aforementioned, other species are regionally important. The Dromedary
(Camelus dromedarius) is one of them in certain parts of Africa and the middle
East.
Due to its adaptation to arid climatic conditions, it is commonly herded
by pastoralists in these regions. The Dromedary is one of two camel species alive
today, the other being the Bactrian Camel (C. bactrianus), which is mainly herded
in Central Asia.
In East Africa, camel milk is highly valued as a traditional medicine[55]. Its
hypoallergenic and antimicrobial properties were also conﬁrmed in scientiﬁc stud-
ies[46]. This lead to a recent trend to explore camel milk as a healthier alternative
to bovine milk in Western Europe, North America and India. For many arid and
semi-arid regions in East Africa, this increasing interest could be the basis for sus-
tainable development, as more than three quarters of the global annual production
of fresh camel milks are located here (see ﬁgure 1.1).
1
==PAGE:10==
1.3 Technology Transfer: From Bovine to Camel Milk Dairy
1 Introduction
Chad
Mauritania
United Arab Emirates
Sudan
Niger
Saudi Arabia
Ethiopia
Mali
Kenya
Somalia
0
300
600
900
 Fresh Milk Produced (kt)
Country
East Africa
Rest
Figure 1.1: Top ten producing countries of fresh camel milk worldwide in 2014
and share of East Africa on the world production. Data: FAOSTAT[17]. (No data
available for Egypt, Kuwait and South Sudan.)
1.3
Technology Transfer: From Bovine to Camel
Milk Dairy
Despite the production volume of fresh milk, commercial products that are globally
available, are being manufactured mostly in the Middle East, where the sector is
more industrialized. While there are several socio-economic, cultural and legislative
hurdles to be taken in the process of increasing production of camel milk dairy in East
Africa, this thesis is placed in the context of the technology transfer from fermented
bovine dairy to camel milk products. The downside of camel milk being unique
in many aspects, is that most of the processing steps developed for bovine dairy
cannot be directly implemented in camel milk processing. This includes skimming
and pasteurization but also coagulation in cheese making[46].
On an industrial
scale, milk is fermented using well deﬁned starter cultures to ensure safety and a
consistent product. For this reason, the growth of a wide range of LAB strains is
well characterized on bovine milk, allowing for a rational design of starter cultures.
For camel milk, this research is still in its infancy. Commercial products available
for bovine milk however, do not perform as well on camel milk.
1.4
Project aim
My work aims to investigate the role of the redox state of milk in relation to key
factors, such as acidiﬁcation and amino acid metabolism. Especially potentiometric
measurements have received increasing attention in dairy research. Its interpreta-
tion even led to the hypothesis that Lactococcus lactis may utilize other terminal
electron acceptors than pyruvate in fermentation. However, theoretical aspects of
electrochemistry have often been overlooked in such interpretations. By combining
a review of the literature with an experimental assessment, I aim to investigate,
whether the interpretation of previous studies is coherent with the theoretical as-
pects of potentiometry and identify alternative methods to measure the redox state
of milk.
2
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 2
Background
2.1
Lactococcus lactis as a model organism for
lactic acid bacteria
The backbone of milk fermentation is the acidiﬁcation of the milk with organic acids.
Lactic acid is especially desired, because of its neutral taste. It is produced in the
reduction of pyruvate by a lactate dehydrogenase (EC 1.1.1.27). This pathway to
regenerate nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD) from pyruvate is wide spread.
The LAB strains mainly used in dairy are homolactic, i.e. they produce (almost)
only lactic acid (see eq. 2.1a). These organism are aldolase positive, which means
that they can metabolize sugars via glycolysis to produce two mole of pyruvate
per C6(H2O)6.
In comparison, heterolactic bacteria, grown on lactose, produce
ethanol and CO2 (eq. 2.1b), while Biﬁdum bacteria, which also lack an aldolase
have established a unique, slightly more energy eﬃcient pathway (eq. 2.1c).
homolactic:
C6(H2O)6 →2C2H4(OH)COOH
(2.1a)
heterolactic:
C6(H2O)6 →C2H4(OH)COOH + C2H5OH + CO2 + H2O (2.1b)
Biﬁdum bac.:
2C6(H2O)6 →2C2H4(OH)COOH + 3CH3COOH
(2.1c)
The acidiﬁcation of the medium represses growth of other microorganism, while
LAB themselves are able to withstand acid-stress. As Lactococcus lactis (Lc. lactis)
is a prominent model for LAB and transcriptomic data on the growth in milk was
recently published[26, 32], it was selected for this study. Lc. lactis is divided in
four subspecies [40] of which two are relevant in dairy: Lc. lactis subsp cremoris is
mainly applied in sour milk and soft cheese, while Lc. lactis subsp lactis is mostly
associated with hard cheese production[5].
2.1.1
Oxygen Reduction
The production of lactate from pyruvate is not the only way, Lc. lactis may re-
generate NAD.
It is also able to reduce molecular oxygen and reactive oxygen
species (ROS) via the AhpR system[24]. However, since it is unable to synthesize
heme, the electron transport chain (ETC) is considered incomplete[16]. This means
that oxygen reduction is much less beneﬁcial for Lc. lactis than for truly respiring
organisms. Thus, the pathway is mainly considered to function in response to ox-
idative stress, for example ROS, allowing Lc. lactis to grow under microaerophilic
3
==PAGE:12==
2.1 Lactococcus lactis as a model organism
2 Background
conditions[12]. Based on potentiometric studies of k/o-mutants, Tachon et al. dis-
cussed a primary role of the ETC in milk reduction, visualized in ﬁg. 2.1. The
authors proposed the reduction of protein-bound thiols and metal ions via the ETC
as a main contribution of Lc. lactis to the redox state of milk.
Figure 2.1: Two mechanisms of oxygen reduction by Lc. lactis relevant for milk
fermentation: NoxE/AhpR reduce intracellular oxygen.
NoxAB mediates reduc-
tions via menaquinones (MK) in the cell membrane. It was also discussed that the
electron transport chain (ETC) is able to reduce metal cations and thiol groups
(“Ox”→“RED”). Reprinted from Tachon et al.[52, p. 1317].
2.1.2
Cell Wall Structure
As members of the class Bacilli, LAB are gram-positive. Their cell membrane is
coated with multiple layers of peptidoglycan. This macromolecule mainly consists
of glycan and oligopeptides, as shown in ﬁgure 2.2[47].
The peptides consist of
alanine, glutamic acid, lysine and asparagine residues[11, 47]. Poortinga et al.[42]
summarized the electrochemical features as follows: Under physiological conditions,
the structure is negatively charged. This charge is caused by surface groups. The
cell wall is very conductive and allows for the ﬂow of charged ions. It is sensitive to
environmental factors, which causes e.g. surface adhesion to be pH-dependent.
Michelon et al. identiﬁed a close correlation of exofacial thiol-groups of bacterial
cells with the observed electrode potential, rather than a dependence on the growth
medium when comparing Man-Rogosa-Sharpe medium (MRS) and milk[36]. How-
ever, it was not possible for the authors to determine, whether this was due to cell
wall- or membrane-bound proteins. Roussel was able to conﬁrm the relevance of
thiol groups for the establishment of a low potential, but in her subsequent search
for cysteine rich proteins, she neglected cell wall bound proteins by extracting the
protoplasts prior to the analysis[45]. Nevertheless, the author was able to determine
a number of membrane proteins that responded to biotinylation of their sulfhydryl
groups.
4
==PAGE:13==
2 Background
2.1 Lactococcus lactis as a model organism
Figure 2.2: Arrangement of macromolecules on the surface of gram-positive bac-
teria, including ﬁbrillar proteins. Adapted from Poortinga et al.[42, p. 6].
PTS and Catabolite repression
Two of those proteins, with a characterized
function were part of the mannose permease (ptnAB and ptnD). The phosphotransferase
system (PTS) is a regulatory system responsible for controlled uptake of many sug-
ars. Catabolic repression describes the observation that cells actively repress the
uptake of a carbon-source in the present of a more preferred one. In gram-positive
bacteria, the repression of other transporters in the presence of glucose is mediated
via CcpA, illustrated in ﬁgure 2.3. Lc. lactis imports glucose via two PTS trans-
Figure 2.3: Parts of glucose-phosphotransferase system (PTS), relevant for CcpA-
mediated repression of genes from the lactose-PTS in Lc. lactis.
Glc: Glucose.
Glc-6P:Glucose-6-phosphate. Fru-1,6BP: Fructose-1,6-bisphosphate. *-P: phospho-
rylated Protein. cre: CcpA binding site. Subscripts indicate the modiﬁed amino
acid residue. Green/Red arrows represent activation/repression. Vertical lines show
the cell membrane.
porters named mannose-PTS permease, encoded by ptnABCD, and cellobiose PTS
permease, consisting of ptcBAC[9]. The latter is not to be confused with the PTS
permease, mainly responsible for transporting cellobiose, which is composed of celB
and ptcAB, with celB being the IIC homolog[2, 54]. Aleksandrzak-Piekarczyk et al.
demonstrated that this system was also facilitating cryptic lactose uptake in the
plasmid free Lc. lactis Il1403 strain and conﬁrmed that it was down-regulated by
5
==PAGE:14==
2.1 Lactococcus lactis as a model organism
2 Background
CcpA in the presence of glucose[2]. The detection of ptnAB and ptnD by biotinyla-
tion is in accordance with the model developed for glucose transport in Escherichia
coli (E. coli), where thiol groups play a key role in the active sites of PTS trans-
porters[44]. The detection of only two transporters also points to the fact that this
is not a general attribute of all permeases. celB for example, does not contain any
cysteine residues, according to the published genome of Lc. lactis Il1403[6].
2.1.3
Amino Acid Metabolism
The observation of negative electrode potentials during anaerobic fermentation was
reported for a number of organisms.
It has been linked to growth and proton
transport[3], intracellular NAD/NADH levels[22], and levels of cytotoxic compounds
in the broth[28]. Amino acids are the monomers, all proteins are made of. There
are currently 21 proteinogenic amino acids known and their role is not limited to the
synthesis of enzymes but also includes ﬁbrillar peptides on the cell surface or other
macromolecules, e.g. the aforementioned peptidoglycan. Amino acid metabolism
interacts on a metabolic but also on regulatory levels with other pathways and some
of these aspects are discussed here for Lc. lactis.
Arginine Deiminase Pathway
The degradation of arginine is one of the best
studied examples of catabolic degradations of amino acids. It generates ATP, by
degrading arginine to CO2 and NH3. It was named after the enzyme, catalyzing
the reaction in this pathway, given by eq. 2.2[18]. Budin-Verneuil et al. revealed the
genes involved in this pathway for Lc. lactis[8].
L-arginine + H2O ⇀
↽L-citrulline + NH3
(2.2)
BCAA
Besides Ccpa, CodY is another important regulator in gram-positive bac-
teria.
From studies of B. subtilis, it is known that CodY acts as a pleiotropic
regulator, repressing many genes involved in rapid growth[48].
In Lc. lactis, its role seems to be limited to regulating the expression of prote-
olytic genes[41], and it is insensitive to intracellular GTP concentration[50]. Instead,
it is activated only by high levels of branched chain amino acids (BCAA), which
serves as a signal for intracellular amino acid availability[41]. bcaT, a branched-chain
amino acid transferase (EC 2.6.1.42), is involved in this regulation as it consumes
isoleucine, leucine and valine, keeping intracellular concentrations low. This conclu-
sion was drawn from an experiment, where the growth rate of a bcaT-mutant was
practically zero, upon the addition of 2 mM of isoleucine to the medium[10]. For wt-
strains, a repression was only induced by the supplementation of BCAA-containing
dipeptides, as the uptake rate of the respective amino acids is very low[23]. Further-
more it was demonstrated that isoleucine is the corepressor, while valine and leucine
only have an indirect eﬀect when converted[41]. Lc. lactis lacks a complete valine
and isoleucine degradation pathway, known from other gram-positive bacteria[6, 15].
Other Roles of Amino Acids
The pathways of catabolic amino acid degra-
dation in LAB were discussed further by Fernandez and Zuniga[18]. Though it is
often not beneﬁcial for microorganisms to ferment amino acids for adenosine triphos-
phate (ATP). It is common that cells cannot suﬃciently cover their demand by what
6
==PAGE:15==
2 Background
2.2 Camel & Bovine Milk
is available in their environment. Depending on their niche, bacteria maintain path-
ways for the de-novo synthesis of amino acids. Milk as a nutrient rich environment
for LAB, is discussed in the next section.
2.2
Camel & Bovine Milk
2.2.1
Composition
Milk is the primary feed for mammalian infants. Following the colostrum, it has
to provide the newborn with all required nutrients for the early stage of its live.
It contains lipids, proteins, sugar, vitamins and other micro-nutrients. As some of
the components are immiscible, it is an oil-in-water emulsion. The most important
constituents of the aqueous phase are lactose, proteins, minerals and hydrophilic
vitamins. The micelles consist of lipids and fat-soluble vitamins, with amphiphiles,
mainly phospholipids, at the oil water interface. The exact composition varies from
one species to another and is subject of ongoing research. The state of knowledge has
been summarized by El-Sayed and El-Agamy[46]. Unless explicitly stated otherwise,
their ﬁndings for bovine milk (Bos taurus), and camel milk (C. dromedarius) were
summarized with a perspective on the implications for fermentation:
Gross Composition
It can be seen from table 2.1 that the overall composition
of the two milks is very similar. For camel milk, reported values could diﬀer consid-
erably. This is interpreted as seasonal variations, caused by the camels’ adaptation
to arid environments. In contrast to dry matter, El-Sayed and El-Agamy note that
the water content ranges between 86 % to 91 %, depending on water availability[46].
Table 2.1: The similarity in gross composition of bovine[19, p. 2] and East African
camel milk[29]. Values given as mass fractions (%w/w). Uncertainties for camel milk
are expressed as standard deviations, representing seasonal variations (see sec. 2.2.1).
Parameter
Bovine Milk
Camel Milk
fat matter
3.7
4.14 ± 0.80
total protein
3.4
3.33 ± 0.52
dry matter
12.7
12.69 ± 1.11
lactose
4.8
4.18 ± 0.72
ash
0.7
0.76 ± 0.09
Fat
The gross fat content between the two types of milk is fairly similar with
triacylglycerols making up for the vast majority of fats (98 %). Camel milk is richer
though in unsaturated fatty acids.
In addition, the diameter of micelles in the
emulsion is smaller than the diameter of those found in bovine milk.
Micro-nutrients
Fig. 2.4 illustrates that camel milk contains almost twice as
much vitamin C than bovine milk and six times more niacin, the precursor of NAD.
Fig. 2.5 show that the ash of camel milk contains three times more iron and four
times more copper than bovine milk, while other cations are present in similar
7
==PAGE:16==
2.2 Camel & Bovine Milk
2 Background
concentration.
However, this is not directly meaningful as most of it is protein
bound in-vivo and therefore does not necessarily reﬂect the bioavailability.
0
200
400
600
A
B12
B6
C
E
Folacin
Niacin
Panthothenic
acid
Riboflavin
Thiamin
Vitamins
Difference (%)
Figure 2.4: Relative diﬀerence in vitamin content of camel milk, compared to
bovine milk. Data: El-Sayed and El-Agamy[46].
0
100
200
300
400
Ca
Cu
Fe
K
Mg
Na
P
Zn
Minerals
Difference (%)
Figure 2.5:
Relative diﬀerence in mineral content of camel milk, compared to
bovine milk. Data: El-Sayed and El-Agamy[46].
Proteome
One of the cation-binding proteins is lactoferrin. It contributes to the
general immune response of milk by sequestering free iron-ions from the medium.
Besides iron, camel milk also contains approx. 2.4 times more lactoferrin than bovine
milk. Traditionally, proteins are grouped in caseins and whey proteins. The caseins
are organized in micelles as they are more hydrophobic than the others proteins. Due
to their hydrophobicity, caseins coagulate ﬁrst, when the pH drops in fermentation.
Casein micelles are smaller and camel milk is low in β-casein. but overall, the caseins
diﬀer only slightly in their molecular weight and structure from bovine milk.
The most relevant feature of the proteome for human nutrition is the lack of
β- lactoglobulin, the most abundant whey protein in bovine milk. As most people,
allergic to bovine milk, have a immune response to β- lactoglobulin, this renders
the milk hypoallergenic.
Besides, camel milk contains “whey acidic protein”, a
cysteine/cystine-rich peptide that was not described for other animals. This might
explain the higher abundance of cysteine, shown in ﬁg. 2.6. Camel milk contains
8
==PAGE:17==
2 Background
2.2 Camel & Bovine Milk
more glycine, methionine and proline. The abundance of aspartate and tyrosine
is almost identical, while there are 40 % less glycine in camel milk. Camel milk
proteins were shown to be more heat resistant than bovine ones. However, it can
not be sterilized using autoclavation: The milk becomes unstable and coagulates.
It has been discussed that this is due to the lack of lactoglobulin[46]. Enzymatic
coagulation on the other hand is more diﬃcult to induce. Using the established
methods for bovine milk is much slower and requires higher amounts of calf rennet,
or chymosin.
−40
−20
0
20
alanine
arginine
aspartate
cysteine
glutamate
glycine
histidine
isoleucine
leucine
lysine
methionine
phenylalanine
proline
serine
threonine
tryptophan
tyrosine
valine
Amino Acid
Difference (%)
Figure 2.6: Relative diﬀerence in amino acid content of camel milk, compared to
bovine milk. Data: El-Sayed and El-Agamy[46].
2.2.2
Limitations of Milk as a Growth Medium
Bovine and camel milk seem to be the obvious choices for growth medium, since
the purpose of this project was to understand diﬀerences in fermentation. However,
this approach has certain limitations in application, which need to be considered:
In general, growth media can be categorized by their function as follows: Culture
media are non-selective. they contain a wide range of nutrients and as the name
indicates, the primary function is to culture a strain. Minimal media on the other
hand contain only the essential nutrients required for the growth of a certain species.
This makes them organism speciﬁc. If supplied with an antibiotic, any of the two
types may be used as an selective media for antibiotic resistance. In addition, diﬀer-
ential media are used to distinguish diﬀerent organisms based on their phenotypes.
Another way to classify growth medium is by their constitution. Complex media
often contain a range of complex macromolecules, usually obtained by enzymatic
digest, e.g. tryptone. For deﬁned media, the chemical structure and amount of
constituents is known.
Milk can be considered a complex media. In contrast to conventional media
it hat several disadvantages: Camel milk cannot be sterilized by autoclavation, as
the protein solution becomes unstable. Bovine milk may withstand temperatures of
121 ◦C but non-enzymatic browning and protein denaturation occur. If purchased on
a retail level, milk is sanitized, homogenized and skimmed to match certain product
speciﬁcations. But it remains essentially a primary animal product and its content
9
==PAGE:18==
2.2 Camel & Bovine Milk
2 Background
is subject to many factors, seasonal variations in fodder being just one example[29].
Reconstituted milk is often used as an alternative in experiments. This milk is made
from skim milk powder. It is a reﬁned product, and powder from the same batch
may be easily stored. However, the drying process implies that its composition is
also further away from fresh milk. In general, there is no consensus for a method of
sterilization, comparable to autoclavation and sterile ﬁltration in the preparation of
other growth media. The choice of milk and the way of sanitizing it for research must
thus be considered a trade-oﬀbetween between sterility and reproducibility versus
nativity. However, the biggest diﬀerence from other lab media is the precipitation
of caseins at low pH, transforming the emulsion in a heterogeneous mix.
Still, milk is irreplaceable as a culture medium in applied research as its com-
plexity also entails that no other medium may serve as a replacement for all its
features. Nevertheless, these shortfalls, especially the lack sterility be considered in
the interpretation of fermentation experiments.
2.2.3
Electrochemistry in Milk Processing
A concept that has received increasing attention in applied research is the redox
state of milk. It connects the relationship of all compounds of the milk that may
participate in redox reactions with properties of dairy products relevant to the con-
sumer. Two categories of reactive species participate in redox reactions: Oxidizers
(oxidizing agents) and reducers (reducing agents). Oxidizers take up electrons and
are reduced themselves while reducers donate electrons and become oxidized in the
reaction. This is generalized in eq. 2.3
m ×
Aox + n e−⇀
↽Ared
n ×
Bred ⇀
↽Box + m e−
m Aox + n Bred ⇀
↽m Ared + n Box
(2.3)
Noyhouzer et al. determined that two reduced species contribute to the redox state
of fresh bovine milk. One of them is localized in the aqueous phase, while the other
is only present in the fat micelles[38]. It is agreed, that molecular oxygen is the
most prominent oxidizer in milk[32, 38, 52]. This rapidly changes upon inoculation
with Lc. lactis which reduces the oxygen to water (see section 2.1.1).The depletion
of O2 is reﬂected in a drop of the electrode potential, and this potential is lowered
even further during growth of LAB[32]. The parameter was therefore interpreted as
an assessment of the redox state of milk in fermentation and led to the development
of methods which allow for reproducible determination of the electrode potential in
dairy[c.f. 1]. Based on such measurements in the study of mutants, Tachon et al.
concluded that the ETC of Lc. lactis is involved in the reduction of other chemical
species than oxygen in milk (see section 2.1.1).
Besides, the initial electrode potential of milk was repeatedly discussed to aﬀects
the routing of metabolic pathways in the fermenting organisms, e.g. to control the
production of ﬂavor compounds from BCAA[1, 27, 32, 45]. Thus, the same authors
deem the electrode potential to be a relevant parameter that should not only be
observed but controlled in milk processing and future research should continue to
evaluate its relation to relevant features of dairy.
This view point has been disputed by Michelon et al. who point out that the
assumption of measuring an external reduction potential by probing the milk with
10
==PAGE:19==
2 Background
2.2 Camel & Bovine Milk
metal electrodes neglects the conclusions drawn by Peiﬀer et al. on the interpretation
of potentiometric measurements [36, 39](see section 2.1.2). Even though Roussel
conﬁrms the experimental results of Michelon et al., the author maintains the opinion
that focusing on the modiﬁcation of the electrode potential in milk holds ”vast
innovation potential”[45, p. 145].
In the case of camel milk, previous experiments showed that the electrode po-
tential of Lc. lactis fermentation was consistently higher than in bovine milk (Bech
Hansen, unpublished results). To determine how this should be interpreted correctly,
the relevant experimental methods were reevaluated in the next chapter.
11
==PAGE:20==
Chapter 3
Analytical Methods
3.1
Potentiometry in Milk
3.1.1
Experimental Design
The electrode potential of milk is measured in a galvanic cell, using a voltmeter (see
ﬁg. 3.1). The milk is sampled as the electrolyte of a half cells containing a platinum or
gold electrode. The measure is usually reported as the potential diﬀerence between
the solution and the standard hydrogen electrode (SHE), and is therefore measured
against a standard reference cell[1].
Half Cells
The SHE, the probe and the reference are all half cells, meaning they
consist of a combination of electrolyte (ion conductor) and electrode (electron con-
ductor). The SHE is a special case, as it is a theoretical reference standard, where
the electrolyte only contains hydrogen gas and protons. Those two species have a
chemical activity of 1 and the reaction given by eq. 3.1 occurs at the electrode.
2H+ + 2e−⇀
↽H2
(3.1)
For practical measurements, a silver electrode, submerged in a saturated solution
of silver chloride as electrolyte is most often applied as a reference today.
This
electrode has a standard electrode potential of approximately 210 mV against the
SHE[51]. The silver electrode participates in the reaction, as given in eq. 3.2
AgCl + e−⇀
↽Ag + Cl−
(3.2)
For the milk containing half cell, primary reaction involving the electrode are not
desired. Therefore, gold or platinum are used as inert materials[1].
Galvanic cell
As mentioned above, a galvanic cell is used to conduct the mea-
surements. In this setup, half cells are connected by a semi-permeable membrane
to determine the electrode potential and only the diﬀerence between the two that
can be observed (see ﬁg 3.1). At ﬁrst glance, this does not seem diﬀerent from any
other unit of measurement which are all deﬁned against a reference and often sensed
by electric signals. To explain how it is conceptually distinct, for example from a
concentration, we must ﬁrst introduce a few concepts of electrostatics.
12
==PAGE:21==
3 Analytical Methods
3.1 Potentiometry in Milk
Figure 3.1: Schematic of a Zn-Cu galvanic cell. The electrolytes (green) are con-
nected by a semi-permeable membrane (yellow) and the relative electrode potential
is measured using a voltmeter (V). Copper-ions on the right are reduced, molecular
zinc on the left is oxidized.
3.1.2
Basic Terms in Electrostatics
The theory of electrostasis, is well established and described e.g. by Levine[35]:
Electric charge
As the name implies, electrostasis deals with stationary charges
and in the following considerations, these are deﬁned as point particles. There are
two fundamental types of charge: positive and negative, reﬂected in the sign of their
magnitude. Two point charges exert a force on each other and the relationship of
force and charge is described with Coulombs Law (eq. 3.3). From the equation it
can be seen that same charges repel (F > 0), while opposites attract (F < 0). The
magnitude of this interaction is also dependent on the distance between the two
points.
F =ke
q1q2
r2
with
ke =8.99 × 109 Nm2 C−2
qn : the magnitude of charge for each particle
r : the distance between the two charges
(3.3)
The electric ﬁeld
The deﬁnition of charge by eq. 3.3 implies that a point charge
can only be observed by the help of a second point charge. This reference however
impacts the observation as well. In order to focus on the charge of interest, the
other one, named test charge, is treated as an inﬁnitesimal quantity in theoretical
considerations. By doing so, the electric ﬁeld can be determined as the force an
electric charge would exert on any point in space.
Electric potential
Building on these basic terms, the electric potential is deﬁned.
It denotes the amount of work required to move a test charge between two points
in an electric ﬁeld. The unit of potential is Volt, deﬁned in eq. 3.4.
1 V = 1 J C−1
(3.4)
13
==PAGE:22==
3.1 Potentiometry in Milk
3 Analytical Methods
For example, a point A may have a potential of V = 1 V to a reference point B.
This means that a charge of q = 1 C at A has a potential energy UE = 1 J compared
to the reference. It is important to note that the electric potential is the energy per
unit of charge. Thus, it is impossible to determine the potential energy of a charge
at a point A, based on the electric potential at this point alone. Also, the potential
of A must be deﬁned against an arbitrary reference.
3.1.3
Electrode Potentials
Reactions, such as eq 3.1 and 3.2 occur at the interface of the electrolyte and the
electrode, where the electrons are taken up by the electrode. In very simple terms,
these reactions have diﬀerent equilibria, which is why the electrodes become diﬀer-
ently charged. For example, copper is more noble than tin, which is why less copper
ions dissociate, illustrated in ﬁg. 3.1 by bold letters. Similarly, the working electrode
and the silver electrode, become diﬀerently charged, when they are submerged in
milk and silver chloride, respectively. This means that the measured quantity in
section 3.1.1 is technically not a property of the milk. It is the electromotive force
between the electrodes that is sensed as a voltage. Following IUPAC recommenda-
tions, this is named relative electrode potential[53]. It is adjusted for the diﬀerence of
the reference and the SHE, to obtain the electrode potential as given by eq. 3.5(not
to be confused with the absolute electrode potential, which is not discussed here)[33].
E =Em −Er
Em : measured potential (relative electrode potential)
Er : standard electrode potential of the reference
(3.5)
.
3.1.4
Redox Potential (Eh)
In the reviewed literature on milk, the term redox potential is often used, to describe
any potentiometric measurement in the context of redox chemistry. The deﬁnition
for redox potential recommended by IUPAC is however much more narrow. It is
deﬁned as follows: “[...] (T)he redox potential is the reduction/oxidation potential of
a compound measured under standards conditions against a standard reference half-
cell. In biological systems the standard redox potential is deﬁned at pH 7.0 versus
the hydrogen electrode and partial pressure of hydrogen = 1 bar”[14].
Standard
conditions include a chemical activity of a = 1 for all species involved in the half-
cell reaction. The redox potential for a compound is usually given as the reduction
potential, i.e the species of interest is reduced. Alternatively, the oxidation potential
is measured if the reference cell is reduced instead. The absolute value of reduction
and oxidation potential is identical but the signs are diﬀerent.
A compound in
this context is a chemical substance, participating in a known reaction. Therefore,
the redox potential is the measured quantity, from which the standard electrode
potential of a chemical substance is derived.
Standard Electrode Potential (E⊖)
As a fundamental concepts in biochem-
istry, it is deﬁned as the reduction potential against the SHE, i.e. the electromotive
force that is required to oxidize hydrogen at the left-hand electrode. Using this
14
==PAGE:23==
3 Analytical Methods
3.1 Potentiometry in Milk
deﬁnition, one can predict which species becomes reduced and which species are
oxidized in a chemical reaction.
Nernst-Equation
The Nernst-Equation (eq. 3.6) allows for the calculation of the
electrode potential of a chemical reaction under non-standard conditions, using the
standard electrode potential. The activity of a compound is the eﬀective concentra-
tion. For most applications, this can be replaced by the molarity of the compound
in solution or the partial pressure for gases.
E =E⊖−RT
zF ln aRed
aOx
with
E⊖: Standard electrode potential of the compound
R, F :Universal gas constant, Faraday constant
a :Activity of oxidized/reduced species
z :number of electrons
(3.6)
Exchange Current Density
Eq. 3.6 predicts inﬁnite potentials, when the ac-
tivity of either of the species approaches zero. This is not observed as the Nernst-
Equation is only valid for a small range of concentrations. The reason for it to break
down at low concentrations is the drop in exchange current, i.e. the absolute quan-
tity of electrons, that are transferred at the electrode surface. It can be calculated
from the exchange current density and the surface of the electrode. Without going
into the details of surface chemistry, the electrode density is not only depending on
the concentration of the reacting species but also depends on the electrode material.
For example, platinum surfaces catalyze the reaction eq. 3.1. This means that the
exchange current varies, depending on the electrode used in relation to the half-cell
reaction.
pH-Compensated Electrode Potential (Eh7)
Some redox reactions involve
protons, as written in eq. 3.7. As the pH can be probed directly, the Nernst equation
(eq. 3.6) for such reactions is commonly rewritten in the form given by equation 3.8,
to include the pH instead of proton activity. Upon revision, this equation can be
used to calculate the standard potential at pH 7 in biochemistry.
Aox + xH+ + ye−⇀
↽HxAred
(3.7)
E =E⊖−RT
zF ln aRed
aOx
−2.303RT
zF pHx
y
(3.8)
3.1.5
Mixed Potential
When submerging a platinum electrode in milk, the relative electrode potential is
impacted by the net current from the reactions of all compounds present in the
solution, at the electrode surface. Thus, we do not and cannot measure the redox
potential of milk, as we do not probe the solution of a single compound, nor do
we maintain standard conditions. One may dispute whether IUPAC recommenda-
tions should be followed this strictly. After all, the term redox potential has been
15
==PAGE:24==
3.2 Thiol Group Titration
3 Analytical Methods
used widely for electrode potentials. However, electrochemistry has been developed,
building on the IUPAC deﬁnitions. Thus, in comparison with other literature, it
seems that there would be a knowledge about the system of interest, that is not
given. The bias of the electrode potential in ill-deﬁned solutions was investigated by
Peiﬀer et al. who conducted a sensitivity analysis on aqueous solutions containing
multiple redox couples[39]. The authors conclude that it is beneﬁcial to divide the
redox couples present in two groups: sensor eﬀective redox couples (SERC) and
sensor ineﬀective redox couples (SIRC). They determine that a redox couple is only
eﬀective if its net current is at least 1 % of the highest net current found in the
solution.
Strong oxidizing agents usually have a high exchange current, thus they are
shifting what are SERCs and what are SIRCs in the electrolyte. Any statement,
relating the electrode potentials of a fermentation with and without such reagents
must therefore be considered overly simplistic. But even more, Peiﬀer et al. con-
clude that any explanation of the observed potentials requires detailed knowledge
about the redox couples involved. At this point it should also be clear that the
electrode potential alone does not allow for any conclusions on concentrations in the
electrolyte.
3.2
Thiol Group Titration
An alternative approach to assess the redox state of milk is to determine the amount
of reduced molecules in solution. In vivo, the state of functional proteins is often
regulated by the reduction or oxidation of thiols[cf. 44]. They are cysteine residues
and have an important role in deﬁning the protein structure as two may form sec-
ondary disulﬁde bridges for stabilization. This bond may be reduced to form two
sulfhydryl-groups, as shown in eq. 3.9. This ubiquitous feature is found for exam-
ple in ﬁbrillar peptides (sec 2.1.2), membrane transporters (sec 2.1.2) but also milk
proteins(sec. 2.2.1).
R −SS −R′ + 2H+ + 2e−⇀
↽R −SH + R′ −SH
(3.9)
5,5’-dithio-bis(2-nitrobenzoic acid) (DTNB) is a disulﬁde that can react in thiol-
disulﬁde exchange with sulfhydryl groups, producing 2-nitro-5-thiobenzoate (TNB2−)-
ions , which have an intensive yellow color. This feature is used for colorimetric
assays. It has been applied already to determine the amount of sulfhydryl-groups
on the surface of Lc. lactis cells, harvested from a milk fermentation[36].
16
==PAGE:25==
Chapter 4
Experimental Strategy
Many aspects of dairy production are based on redox chemistry and there is conse-
quently a great desire to probe the redox state of milk in production. However, most
of the interpretations of the electrode potential went beyond what is theoretically
veriﬁable using this method. The complexity of milk makes a full electrochemical
characterization, required to interpret the electrode potential better, seem very dif-
ﬁcult. This raises the question, whether the potential as a parameter is actually
meaningful for dairy fermentation.
The ﬁrst goal is to verify the hypothesis of thiol groups as alternative electron
acceptors of the ETC. Using a spectrophotometric assay for sulfhydryl groups has
the potential advantage to gain quantitative information by only targeting a speciﬁc
group of reduced compounds in the system.
The second aim is to reevaluate the meaningfulness of the electrode potential.
Previous studies on the matter would either use reducing and oxidizing agents,
knock out semi-essential genes, or kill the cells with other treatments. By using
nutrients instead to trigger diﬀerent regulatory mechanisms in Lc. lactis, I aim to
gain a deeper understanding of how the dynamics of E relate to other aspects of the
phenotype.
17
==PAGE:26==
Chapter 5
Methods and Materials
5.1
Strains
MS22318, MS22333, MS22336 and MS22337 were selected from a number of Lc. lactis
strains, previously isolated from spontaneously fermented camel milk samples in
Ethiopia[21]. Their genome was sequenced in advance of this project.[4] The se-
quencing data was automatically annotated using RAST[58, 60, 67] during the
preparation of this thesis.
5.2
Media
Sterile milk
All sterile milk was prepared from raw bovine milk, obtained at the
farm the same day it was autoclaved.
Processed milk
All other bovine milk was purchased at the local supermarket. It
was reﬁlled in sterilized borosilicate glass bottles and boiled once for 30 min at 85 ◦C
before use. According to package information, the products contained the follow-
ing: Lactose-free milk (Arla R
⃝Laktosefri) had 0.5 % fat and 2.8 % sugar. Skimmed
milk (Arla R
⃝Skummetmælk) contained 0.1 % fat and 4.7 % sugar.
Low-fat milk
(Arla R
⃝Minimælk) had 0.4 % fat and 4.7 % sugar.
Whole milk (Arla R
⃝Sødmælk)
contained 3.5 % fat and 4.7 % sugar.
Camel milk
All milk used came from C. dromedarius. For thiol-group titration,
milk was obtained directly at the dairy farm (Haramaya University). The camels
were milked by the farmers on our arrival. They collected it ﬁrst in the traditional
wooden container. The milk of four animals was pooled in a 5 l aluminum container.
It was then transfered in a 1 l aluminum beaker for easier pouring and ﬁnally trans-
fered in three sterilized blue cap bottles (1 l volume).
All other equipment was
sanitized with hot water and all of these tasks were performed outside. Low and
high pasteurized camel milk were obtained by incubating the milk for 30 min at
65 ◦C and 80 ◦C, in a water bath. Unpasteurized milk was used for experiments
immediately upon arrival.
For electrode potential & pH measurements, raw camel milk was obtained from
a Dutch farm (Kamelenmelkerij Smits). It was delivered frozen on wet ice, via air
18
==PAGE:27==
5 Methods and Materials
5.3 Precultures
mail and stored at −20 ◦C upon arrival. For experiments, it was thawed at 5 ◦C in
a water bath for 12 h to 18 h, then heated to 85 ◦C for 20 min in water bath.
M17 broth
42 g of broth powder were mixed with 950 ml distilled water (aq. dest.),
sterilized by autoclavation and supplied with 50 ml of sterile ﬁltered 10 % lactose so-
lution. The mix was stored at 5 ◦C in the fridge prior to usage.
M17 plates
Solid medium plates for colony counts were prepared using M17-agar
powder.
50 g were dissolved in 950 ml aq. dest., sterilized by autoclavation and
supplied with 50 ml of sterile ﬁltered 10 % lactose solution. The mix was cooled to
approx. 60 ◦C to 70 ◦C and poured in disposable, pre-sterilized petri dishes. Plates
were stored at room temperature in the safety cabinet for a week before use.
5.3
Precultures
For fermentation experiments, precultures were prepared in 15 ml falcon tubes, ﬁlled
with 10 ml of medium. Each batch was inoculated with an isolated colony, picked
from a streak-out on M17 lactose (M17lac), using a 10 µm loop. They were incubated
for 18 h to 24 h. For thiol-group titrations, the preculture was used immediately as
an inoculum. Otherwise, aliquots of 1 ml were stored at −20 ◦C and used over 4
weeks.
5.4
Supplementation Experiments
Fermentation
75 ml of fresh milk sample were inoculated with 375 µl of precul-
ture in 200 ml centrifuge tubes (Thermo-Scientiﬁc).
The fermentation was then
carried out in a temperature controlled water bath, set to 30 ◦C. The electrodes
were mounted to the ﬂasks through caps with a circular cut out.
Measurements
An iCinacTM(AMS Alliance, France) was used for on-line mea-
surements during fermentation. It was equipped with 16 probes (ISM R
⃝, Metler-
Toledo), which monitored temperature, pH and electrode potential simultaneously.
The pH sensor was equipped with a ceramic membrane.
the working electrode
for potentiometric measurements was made from gold. Both half-cells shared an
Ag//AgCl-reference electrode. Signals were converted in the probe and sent as digi-
tal signal to the computer. The system recorded one observation per minute. Based
on the sensor data, it computed and recorded the following parameters automati-
cally: time, pH, temperature, relative electrode potential, and electrode potential
normalized for pH 7 (EpH=7), which were used for analysis.
Calibration
Calibration was carried out using the procedure of the iCinacTM
software[51]. Two standard solutions of pH 4.01 and 7.00 (Mettler-Toledo) were
used for pH measurements, starting with the acid. No calibration was carried out
for the electrode potential.
19
==PAGE:28==
5.5 Sulfhydryl Group Titrations
5 Methods and Materials
Sugar
The following solutions were prepared in sterilized borosilicate bottles (an
overview is given by tab 6.1): 9.5 g of anhydrous lactose were dissolved in 200 ml heat
treated lactose-free milk. 4.4 g of glucose mono hydrate were dissolved in 200 ml of
low-fat milk. 4.4 g of glucose mono hydrate were dissolved in 200 ml of whole milk.
0.7 g of sodium chloride were dissolved in 200 ml of whole milk. 4.4 g of glucose mono
hydrate and 0.07 g of arginine were dissolved in 200 ml of low-fat milk. All solutions
were heat-treated again for 20 min at 85 ◦C, together with a bottle of 300 ml lactose-
free and a bottle of 300 ml low-fat milk. Two precultures of MS22333 were prepared
as described above, using lactose-free and whole milk as medium. Fermentations
were carried out as described above in all 14 combinations and two controls without
inoculum were prepared from lactose-free and low-fat milk.
Amino Acids
50 mM solutions of amino acids were prepared by adding 0.58 g of
L-histidine, 0.49 g of L-isoleucine, 0.55 g of L-lysine, 0.43 g of L-proline, 0.55 g of L-
glutamine, 0.65 g of L-arginine, 0.39 g of L-serine, 0.44 g of L-valine, and 0.50 g of L-
ornithine monohydrochloride to 100 ml of heat treated whole milk. The fermentation
was carried out as described above and a preculture of MS22333 grown in camel milk
was used as inoculum. In addition, whole milk without amino acid supplementation
was used as control.
5.5
Sulfhydryl Group Titrations
Fermentation
Preculture was grown in M17lac. Three sterilized Erlenmeyer-ﬂasks
were ﬁlled with 100 ml of milk and 0.5 ml of inoculum were added. The control was
supplemented with spent medium, which was 0.5 mL of sterile ﬁltered medium,
obtained from the same overnight preculture. They were incubated at 30 ◦C for the
duration of the experiment. Samples were taken at the beginning, after 4 h, 8 h, 12 h
and 24 h. They were analyzed as described below.
Colony forming units
Ten-fold serial dilutions of milk sample were prepared
from the samples obtained. 50 ml or 100 ml were spread using L-shaped cell spread-
ers. Dilution factors for the respective time points were determined in a preliminary
series. Every sample was plated at least in two diﬀerent dilutions. A total of 32
plates was used. The concentration of colony forming units (CFU) was calculated
using eq. 5.1
CFU = n × V −1 × 10f
n : Count on the plate
V : Volume pipetted
f : Number of dilutions
(5.1)
Buﬀers
100 mM solutions of NaH2PO4 (buﬀer A, 100 ml, 1.38 g) and Boric acid
(buﬀer B, 500 ml, 3.5 g) were prepared. The pH was adjusted to pH 7 for buﬀer A
and pH 8.2 for buﬀer B, using 1 M NaOH.
20
==PAGE:29==
5 Methods and Materials
5.5 Sulfhydryl Group Titrations
Ellman’s reagent
The stock solution was prepared from 25 ml of buﬀer A, 77.1 mg
DTNB, and 56.3 mg cystamine diHCL. The pH was adjusted to 7.0, using 1M NaOH
solution. Aliquots of 0.5 ml were stored for later usage at −20 ◦C.
Reagent mix
The reagent mix for sample analysis was prepared in aliquots in
1.5 ml Eppendorf tubes, using the following: 0.9 ml buﬀer B, 0.1 ml of 0.5M EDTA
solution (Bio-Rad), 0.05 ml of 1 M NaOH solution. The solutions were stored at
−20 ◦C.
Standard curve
The standard curve was prepared to determine the extinction
coeﬃcient and the absorption of the reagents. 236.42 mg L-cysteine hydrochloride
(anhydrous, ≥98%, CAS 52-89-1, Sigma-Aldrich) was dissolved in 50 ml of aq. dest.,
and then ﬁlled up to 500 ml to obtain a 3 mM solution. Reagent mix was prepared
in 12 falcon tubes by adding 2 ml of buﬀer B, 0.2 ml of 0.5 M EDTA and 0.1 ml 1 M
NaOH. Then, 0 µl, 10 µl, 20 µl, 25 µl, 30 µl and 40 µl of cysteine solution were added
to two tubes each and vortexed for 5 seconds. Afterwards, 100 µl of freshly thawed
Ellman’s stock solution were added and the mix was immediately vortexed, inverted
and vortexed again. absorption at 412 nm wave length (A412) was measured after
15 min of incubation against a water blank. Extinction coeﬃcient and absorption of
the reagents were determined from the linear model, given by eq. 5.2.
A412 =ϵ cSH + r412
A412 : absorption at 412 nm wave length
ϵ : extinction coeﬃcient
cSH : concentration of cysteine
r412 : absorption of reagents
(5.2)
Weighing
The empty eppendorf tubes were weighted using a micro scale and
labeled.
They were weighted again after prep aeration of the reagent mix and
weighted another time after addition of the sample.
Titration
The fermenting milk was taken out of the incubator and shaken care-
fully. Then, 100 µl were extracted three times and added to thawed reagent mix. It
was vortexed for 5 s. 50 µl of freshly thawed Ellman’s stock was added to the ana-
lyte and vortexed again. After exactly 15 min of incubation, the sample was sterile
ﬁltered and the absorption at 412 nm was read immediately against a water blank.
Blank value for milk
Six independent samples of fermented and unfermented
milk were mixed with thawed reagent mix, sterile ﬁltered and absorption was read
against a water blank. A blank value for milk was calculated as the mean from these
observations.
Calculation of thiol group concentration
Equation 5.2 was used to calculate
the amount of thiol groups from the absorption, after subtracting the experimentally
21
==PAGE:30==
5.6 Statistics
5 Methods and Materials
determined blank value for sterile ﬁltered milk. This gives eq. 5.3.
cSH(obs) =A412 −r412 −d412
ϵ
cSH(obs) : sulfhydryl concentration in diluted sample
d412 : absorption of ﬁltered milk at 412 nm
(5.3)
The thiol group concentration in the undiluted milk was then calculated, dividing
the measured concentration by the dilution factor, given by eq. 5.4.
cSH(sample) =cSH(obs)mfin −mempty
mfin −mmix
with
mempty : weight of empty tubes
mmix : weight of tubes with reagent mix added
mfin : ﬁnal weight after addition of milk sample
(5.4)
Sterility and Maintenance
All liquid handling was carried out in a safety cabi-
net for thiol group titration and under a laminar ﬂow hood for the other experiments.
Work benches were cleaned thoroughly before and after every usage using sterilizing
wet wipes. Glassware was washed and autoclaved for 15 min at 135 ◦C before usage.
Liquids were autoclaved at 121 ◦C for 15 min. Pipette tips were either pre-sterilized
by the manufacturer or autoclaved at 121 ◦C for 15 min prior to usage.
Hands
were washed thoroughly and wiped with sterilizing wipes. Pipettes were wiped the
same way. Sterile ﬁltration was carried out using disposable, pre-sterilized equip-
ment: 5 ml Syringes , 1.2 x 40 mm needles and 0.20 µm ﬁlters . Colony pickers and
cell spreaders were disposable and pre-sterilized When working with the iCinac, all
cleaning procedures were carried out using ultrapure water (Milli Q) and Ethanol
(70 %vol). Electrodes were ﬁrst rinsed with water, then alcohol and then again with
water. Before introducing the probes into the medium, the ﬁnal washing was skipped
to avoid contamination and the probes were left for a few seconds to dry instead.
Electrodes were not wiped dry. The caps used for mounting the electrodes were
reused and washed with detergent and rinsed with Ethanol (70 %vol) before and
after every usage. Water baths were ﬁlled with fresh deionized water (DI-water)
before use and cleaned with sanitizing wet wipes and paper towels afterwards.
5.6
Statistics
Data analysis was performed using R[68]. In general, linear ﬁxed eﬀects models were
formulated to test for statistical signiﬁcance of treatments. When required, mixed
eﬀects models were analyzed with the lme4 and lmerTest packages[59, 65]. As the
number of factors was small, backwards-elimination was used to determine all ﬁ-
nal models. Normal distribution of the residuals was veriﬁed using Shapiro-Wilk,
Cramer-von Mises, Lilliefors and Anderson-Darling tests for normality[63]. Explo-
rative analysis and results were plotted and presented using additional packages
for R[62, 64, 66, 69]. The raw data from the iCinac was imported using a custom
package (see appendix E) and handled using dplyr to ensure reproducibility[70].
dpHdt−1 was ﬁltered by local regression with 2nd-degree polynomials and a span
α = 0.5, using the loess()-function in R[68].
22
==PAGE:31==
Chapter 6
Results
6.1
Determination of Free Sulfhydryl Groups in
Fermenting Camel Milk with Ellman’s reagent
As the literature review revealed that the meaning of the electrode potential had
been often overestimated, the determination of sulfhydryl group was tested to see if
the reduction of sulfhydryls could be validated otherwise. Previous studies focused
either on cells isolated from milk fermentation or heat treatments alone. To investi-
gate the development in fermenting milk over time, the protocol for redox titration
from Riener et al.[43] was adapted for the use with camel milk samples. At ﬁrst, a
calibration series with cysteine was made to determine the extinction coeﬃcient of
TNB2−and the blank value for the reagent. In addition, the blank value for camel
milk was determined as the mean from a series of samples. In this context, it was
veriﬁed that neither fermentation nor pasteurization would have a signiﬁcant impact
on the blank (data not shown). The milk was incubated at 30 ◦C for 24 h. In the be-
ginning, unpasteurized milk, low-pasteurized milk (65 ◦C) and high-pasteurized milk
(80 ◦C) were titrated. Then, one batch of low- and one batch of high-pasteurized
milk were inoculated with preculture of Lc. lactis MS22333.
A third control of
high-pasteurized milk was incubated in parallel. It was supplemented with the same
volume of sterile-ﬁltered spent medium to rule out any impact of the carry-over. A
total of ﬁve time points were taken, to gather information about potential trends and
all measurements were performed in triplicates. Since the control was only sanitized
at 80 ◦C, an assessment of CFU was used to ensure that the control remained free of
bacterial growth. This was conﬁrmed for the ﬁrst 12 h. However, CFU counts had
the same order of magnitude after 24 h, indicating induced growth of heat resistant
spores or contamination at the second to last sampling (data not shown). In two
cases, one of the repeated measures was extremely far away from the other two and
those two data points were excluded from the statistical analysis. The explorative
analysis is presented in ﬁg. 6.1.
Investigating a time dependence, using linear ﬁxed eﬀects models
The
explorative plot (ﬁg. 6.1) showed very small deviations between individual time
points but no obvious trend over time. Therefore, both a linear regression and 2nd
degree polynomial regression of time were tested. Using the polynomial regression,
there was a signiﬁcant eﬀect of time but the model was rejected, because all tests
23
==PAGE:32==
6.2 Electrode Potential in Milk Fermentation
6 Results
G
G
G
GGG
GGG
G
G
G
GGG
G
G
0
50
100
150
0
5
10
15
20
25
time (h)
cSH (µM)
past. (°C)
and strain
G
65
MS22333
80
MS22333
80
none
unpast
none
Figure 6.1: Overview for sulfhydryl-group titration of heat-treated and fermented
camel milk using Ellman’s reagent. Outliers are circled in red and were excluded
from the statistical analysis. Unpasteurized milk was measured 2 h after milking. A
preculture of Lc. lactis MS22333 was used for inoculation.
for normality rejected the null hypothesis of normal distribution, and this could not
be improved by any data transformation applied. Instead, a linear regression model
was step wise reduced by the least signiﬁcant eﬀect using an ANOVA type II and
a maximal p-value of 0.05 for signiﬁcance. Only the pasteurization temperature
remained as a signiﬁcant eﬀect. The ﬁnal model is expressed by eq. 6.1 and least
square means are plotted in ﬁg. 6.2.
A separate analysis for all three levels of
pasteurization before fermentation is given in appendix B.2
Yi = µ + αPASTi + ϵi
with
ϵ ∼N(0, σϵ
2)
(6.1)
6.2
Impact of Nutrient Availability on the Dy-
namics in Acidiﬁcation and Electrode Poten-
tial in Milk Fermentation
As milk is a turbid emulsion, sample preparation for photometric assays is labor
intensive. The titration of sulfhydryl groups also seemed to be too insensitive for
meaningful results (see sec. 7.1 for discussion). The electrode potential as a param-
eter in fermentation was therefore explored further.
24
==PAGE:33==
6 Results
6.2 Electrode Potential in Milk Fermentation
cSH (µM)
past. temp (°C)
65
80
10
20
30
40
50
G
G
Figure 6.2: Least-squares-means and 95 %-conﬁdence intervals for the concentra-
tion of sulfhydryl groups in fermenting camel milk, titrated with Ellman’s reagent.
A signiﬁcant diﬀerence was caused by the pasteurization at diﬀerent temperatures.
The summary statistic is found in tab. C.1.
6.2.1
The Eﬀects of Catabolic Repression and Fat Content
Despite the insensitivity of the assay, exofacial thiol groups were demonstrated to
play a crucial role in the mediation of the electrode potential [36, 45].
As this
conclusion was derived from the use of masking agents targeting all exofacial thiol
groups equally, the goal of this experiment was to investigate, whether the expression
and regulation of diﬀerent PTS transporters would aﬀect the electrode potential in
milk fermentation. The analysis of the sequenced genome of Lc. lactis MS22333
conﬁrmed the assumption that the strain carried a plasmid coding for lacE, the
EIICB component for lactose uptake[54]. Milk, containing diﬀerent levels of glucose
and lactose was used as a medium. As surface structures were known to be sensitive
to a range of parameters of the medium, a control with equal molarity was prepared
and the molarity of sugars was kept constant between treatments. The negative
control was adjusted with NaCl to the same osmotic pressure. The required amount
of change was calculated as shown in eq. 6.2.
∆Πsugar = ∆csugarRT
∆ΠNaCl = 2∆cNaClRT
∆cNaCl = 0.5∆csugar
(6.2)
Arginine was supplemented in low concentration because it was demonstrated
that the arginine deiminase pathway enhanced glucose uptake in Lc. lactis[9]. In
addition, whole fat milk was used in the preparation of certain treatments. To inves-
tigate, whether the fat content would impact the observed electrode potential, some
of the media were prepared using whole milk instead of low-fat milk. Commercial
lactose-free milk was used for the preparation of experiments. It was assumed that
residual lactase present in the milk would be inactivated by the two heat treatments.
To verify, that any observed diﬀerence could be attributed to the sugar concentra-
tions, medium, containing equal amounts of sugars, was prepared from all three
milk products. An overview of the treatments tested is given in table 6.1. To rule
25
==PAGE:34==
6.2 Electrode Potential in Milk Fermentation
6 Results
out any impact of the sugar present in the preculture, all medium was used twice,
inoculated with preculture from lactose-free and low-fat milk, respectively.
Table 6.1: Overview of the diﬀerent media used to investigate the impact of sugar
uptake and fat content on the electrode potential in milk fermentation. +/o: Com-
pound concentration high/low. Each medium was used in duplicates, inoculated
with a preculture of Lc. lactis MS22333 grown in lactose-free and low-fat milk, re-
spectively.
Milk
Lactose
Glucose
NaCl
Arg
Description
low-fat
+
o
o
o
baseline
for
low-fat
milk, no glucose avail-
able
lactose-free
o
+
o
o
baseline
for
lactose-
free milk
whole
+
o
+
o
control for osmolarity
lactose-free
+
+
o
o
lactose
and
glucose
available
low-fat
+
+
o
o
lactose
and
glucose
available
whole
+
+
o
o
lactose
and
glucose
available, high fat
low-fat
+
+
o
+
lactose
and
glucose
available, arginine to
increase
glucose
up-
take
Minimal pH, maximum acidiﬁcation rate, minimal electrode potential (Emin)
and the time point, at which Emin was reached, were chosen as key parameters of
the fermentation. Change over time was not used as a parameter for E because
of strong oscillations in the measurement of electrode potential (see section 7.2).
Instead, the time passed before the potential reached its minimum, was used as a
simplistic description of the dynamics. This was adapted from a previous study[7].
The fermentation was stopped after 15 h. The statistical analysis of key parameters
(next paragraph) showed that only the arginine supplementation, not the PTS had a
signiﬁcant impact on two of the response variables. The time course of acidiﬁcation,
shown in ﬁg. 6.3 suggests, that this was rather caused by the release of ammonia.
All values for key parameters by treatment are presented in tab. A.1.
Linear regression analysis for key parameters
Based on the exploratory anal-
ysis, a linear mixed-eﬀect ct model was formulated, as given by eq. 6.3.
Yi =µ + αGLUCi + βLaci + γFATi + δSALT + ζARGi
a(PREi) + b(MILKi) + ϵi
with
a(PREi) ∼N(0, σ2
PRE),
b(MILKi) ∼N(0, σ2
MILK),
and
ϵ ∼N(0, σϵ
2)
(6.3)
Three-way ANOVA tests with restricted maximum likelihood estimation were used
for a stepwise reduction of the random eﬀects. Both, the type of preculture and
26
==PAGE:35==
6 Results
6.2 Electrode Potential in Milk Fermentation
0
250
500
750
5.00
6.00
time (min)
pH
−200
0
200
EpH=7 (mV)
Arginine
+
o
Figure 6.3: Dynamics of milk fermentation at diﬀerent concentrations of lactose,
glucose, fat and arginine. The statistical analysis showed that arginine supplemen-
tation (highlighted) had a signiﬁcant eﬀect on two parameters: the acidiﬁcation,
and the time point at which the electrode potential reached its minimum. Milk was
inoculated with a preculture of Lc. lactis MS22333 grown in camel milk. Horizontal
lines were negative controls without preculture.
the milk product used were not signiﬁcantly contributing to the explanation of the
variance in the data set. The resulting ﬁxed eﬀects model is given by eq. 6.4.
Yi = µ + αGLUCi + βLaci + γFATi + δSALT + ζARGi + ϵi
with
ϵ ∼N(0, σϵ
2)
(6.4)
To determine the ﬁnal model, a stepwise elimination of the least signiﬁcant ﬁxed
eﬀects was conducted. P-values were calculated using a two-way ANOVA test and
a threshold of 0.05 was used to determine signiﬁcance. Factors were eliminated in
the order: Glucose, Fat, NaCl, Lactose, Arginine. None of the factors remained, i.e.
the ﬁnal model is eq. 6.5.
Yi = µ + ϵi
with
ϵ ∼N(0, σϵ
2)
(6.5)
Models for minimum pH, maximal acidiﬁcation rate and the time until minimum
EpH=7 were analyzed using the same approach. The ﬁnal model for the acidiﬁcation
27
==PAGE:36==
6.2 Electrode Potential in Milk Fermentation
6 Results
rate was identical (eq. 6.5) and the summary statistics are given in tab. 6.2. The
supplementation of arginine remained a signiﬁcant eﬀect in the ﬁnal models for the
minimal pH reached and the time needed to reach the minimal EpH=7. The model
for these is given by eq. 6.6. The estimates for the ﬁnal model are plotted in ﬁg. 6.4.
Yi =µ + αARGi + ϵi
with
ϵ ∼N(0, σϵ
2)
(6.6)
Table 6.2: Summary statistics for milk fermentation with varying fat and sugar
content, using Lc. lactis MS22333 preculture for inoculation. Intercepts and conﬁ-
dence intervals are given two linear models, one for minimal electrode potential and
the other for acidiﬁcation rate. All treatments were omitted as insigniﬁcant factors
in the statistical analysis.
Dependent
CI
variable
Unit
Mean
2.5%
97.5 %
Emin
V
−0.305
−0.312
−0.298
dpHdt−1
h−1
−0.40
−0.42
−0.38
pH
Arginine
+
o
4.35 4.40 4.45 4.50
G
G
time (min)
+
o
600
650
700
750
G
G
Figure 6.4: Least-squares-means and 95 %-conﬁdence intervals for two linear mod-
els, one for minimum pH reached and the other for the time until the minimum
electrode potential was reached. The supplementation of arginine caused a signiﬁ-
cant change in the two parameters during fermentation of whole milk. +/o: argi-
nine concentration high/low. Milk was inoculated with a preculture of Lc. lactis
MS22333. Summary statistics are presented in tab. C.2 and C.3.
6.2.2
The Eﬀects of Amino Acid Catabolism on Acidiﬁca-
tion and Reduction Potential in Milk Fermentation
The previous experiment showed that neither the fat content, nor the glucose and
lactose availability had a signiﬁcant impact on the electrode potential in milk fer-
28
==PAGE:37==
6 Results
6.2 Electrode Potential in Milk Fermentation
mentation.
However, the arginine deiminase pathway, initially used to facilitate
glucose uptake, as suggested elsewhere[9], caused a change, both in redox potential
and pH. This pointed to the fact that amino acid catabolism would have the po-
tential to impact the observed redox potential. It has been established, that rich
nitrogen sources, can inhibit growth by mediating CodY activity[41]. LABs is also
capable of catabolizing other amino acids than arginine, to generate energy, without
necessarily producing ammonia[18]. To investigate whether these factors impact the
electrode potential, nine amino acids were supplemented. Preliminary experiments
indicated, that a concentration of 50 mM would trigger a sustained response in the
system and was used for all amino acids (data not shown).
The recorded data
for the treatments is visualized in ﬁg. 6.5. Local polynomial regression ﬁtting was
used to reduce noise in pH but not EpH=7 measurements, before calculating the key
parameters shown in tab. 6.3 (see sec. 7.2 for discussion).
Table 6.3: Key parameters for ten fermentations of whole milk with Lc. lactis
MS22333, supplemented with amino acids (50 mM). The three letter code for amino
acids is used, in addition ort is ornithine, none is the control without supplementa-
tion (entries in alphabetical order). min EpH=7: Electrode potential, corrected for
pH 7, using eq. 3.7. tE: time passed until the minimal EpH=7 was reached.
min EpH=7
tE
dpH dt−1
AA
mV
min
pH
min−1
arg
−164
2377
8.78
−1.79 × 10−4
gln
−318
1661
4.29
−3.01 × 10−3
his
−298
1727
4.85
−2.08 × 10−3
ile
−226
2299
5.31
−6.75 × 10−4
lys
−326
1843
4.57
−4.91 × 10−3
none
−311
1799
4.33
−1.73 × 10−3
ort
−322
1636
4.22
−3.90 × 10−3
pro
−284
1568
4.39
−2.53 × 10−3
ser
−291
1645
4.49
−2.24 × 10−3
val
−287
2187
4.82
−1.23 × 10−3
Arginine & Ornithine
Fig. 6.5 shows that the pH remained very high throughout
the fermentation with arginine. In the experiment, the EpH=7 decreased only slowly
and there were strong oscillations compared to the reference. For comparison, the
non-proteinogenic amino acid ornithine was also supplemented in one batch.
It
cannot be catabolized directly to generate ATP or ammonia. The culture had an
enhanced acidiﬁcation and a low EpH=7 was also established quickly and sustained
by the system (see ﬁg. 6.6).
BCAA
Isoleucine and valine were tested as two BCAA which were demonstrated
to be activating CodY repression in Lc. lactis[41]. Fig. 6.7 shows that the acid-
iﬁcation was linear for both. There was no exponential drop, compared to other
fermentations. However, the culture grown on valine had a slightly higher acidiﬁca-
tion rate towards the end of the experiment and reached a lower pH. The diﬀerence
between the two treatments was even more pronounced in the electrode potential.
29
==PAGE:38==
6.2 Electrode Potential in Milk Fermentation
6 Results
arg
gln
his
ile
lys
none
ort
proser
val
−300
−250
−200
−150
1500
1750
2000
2250
time for min. E (min)
min. EpH=7 (mV)
A
arg
gln
his
ile
lys
none
ort
pro
ser
val
−0.005
−0.004
−0.003
−0.002
−0.001
0.000
4
6
8
min. pH
dpH dt−1 (min−1)
B
Figure 6.5: Visualization of key parameters from tab.6.3 for fermentation of whole
milk with Lc. lactis MS22333, supplemented with amino acids (50 mM). A: mini-
mum electrode potential vs. time to reach that minimum. B: maximum acidiﬁcation
rate vs minimal pH. The three letter code for amino acids is used in the plot, in
addition ort is ornithine, none is the control without supplementation.
Lc. lactis MS22333 grown on excessive amounts of isoleucine did not reach a stable
minimum, unlike the culture grown on valine, which reached a similar minimum as
the reference, with a few hours delay.
Glycine and Serine
Glycine and serine were included as two amino acids with
similar chemical properties and transported by the same mechanism, but where the
catabolism in Lc. lactis was less well understood compared to the ones mentioned
before. The growth on milk, supplemented with glycine and serine is plotted in
ﬁg. 6.8. There were small diﬀerences in Emin serine caused a slightly elevated and
glycine a lower potential than the control. The same can be said about the pH. The
plot shows that acidiﬁcation with serine was delayed, while a culture supplemented
with glycine had a shorter lag-phase before the exponential drop in pH.
Lysine, Proline and Histidine
The dynamics of acidiﬁcation and reduction
potential are compared in ﬁg. 6.9. The supplementation of proline, a neutral amino
acid, did not aﬀect the acidiﬁcation rate. The electrode potential dropped faster
though the minimum was higher than the control. In comparison, the acidiﬁcation
and electrode potential in the presence of histidine was more similar to serine above
(see ﬁg 6.5, note the slightly diﬀerent scale for pH between ﬁg. 6.8 and 6.9). For
lysine, the initial pH was elevated, but dropped rapidly later on, reaching a value
close to the control.
30
==PAGE:39==
6 Results
6.2 Electrode Potential in Milk Fermentation
1000
1500
2000
2500
−300
−200
−100
0
100
time (min)
EpH=7 (mV)
4.00
5.00
6.00
7.00
8.00
9.00
pH
Amino acids
arg
ort
none
Figure 6.6: Development of pH and pH-compensated electrode potential in fer-
mentation of whole milk, compared to whole milk supplemented with arginine and
ornithine. A preculture of Lc. lactis MS22333 was used for inoculation.
1000
1500
2000
2500
−300
−200
−100
0
time (min)
EpH=7 (mV)
4.50
5.00
5.50
6.00
6.50
pH
Amino acids
ile
val
none
Figure 6.7: Development of pH and pH-compensated electrode potential in fer-
mentation of whole milk, compared to whole milk supplemented with valine and
isoleucine. A preculture of Lc. lactis MS22333 was used for inoculation. The dot-
ted line represents a contaminated negative control (see sec. 7.3 for discussion).
31
==PAGE:40==
6.2 Electrode Potential in Milk Fermentation
6 Results
1000
1500
2000
2500
−300
−200
−100
0
time (min)
EpH=7 (mV)
4.50
5.00
5.50
6.00
pH
Amino acids
gln
ser
none
Figure 6.8: Development of pH and pH-compensated electrode potential in fer-
mentation of whole milk, compared to whole milk supplemented with serine and
glycine. A preculture of Lc. lactis MS22333 was used for inoculation.
1000
1500
2000
2500
−300
−200
−100
0
time (min)
EpH=7 (mV)
5.00
6.00
7.00
pH
Amino acids
pro
his
lys
none
Figure 6.9: Development of pH and pH-compensated electrode potential in fer-
mentation of whole milk, compared to whole milk supplemented with lysine, proline
and histidine. A preculture of Lc. lactis MS22333 was used for inoculation.
32
==PAGE:41==
Chapter 7
Discussion
7.1
Accuracy of Thiol Group Titration in Milk
The calibration series with cysteine solutions showed a very good sensitivity, as the
experimentally determined extinction coeﬃcient was equal to the values reported
in literature[43] (data not shown). The ﬁnding that heat treatments had a signiﬁ-
cant eﬀect was in agreement with Zweig and Block who used Kolthoﬀ’s method to
titrate thiol groups in reconstituted, fresh milk[57] and observed that the content
of sulfhydryl groups changed with heat treatment. It must be noted however, that
pasteurization was not signiﬁcant, when only the observations before fermentation
were considered (see app. B.2). In that case, there was a high disturbance among
the samples, especially for unpasteurized milk. It seemed that raw camel milk was
not homogeneous enough to obtain consistent measurements. This disturbance was
less problematic when only looking at low and high pasteurized milk over the whole
duration of the experiment, because of the increased number of observations.
The problem of heterogeneity was already addressed in preliminary experiments,
where pipetting of fermented milk was found to be much less accurate, than pipetting
of water (data not shown). Therefore, the weight of the extracted milk sample and
reagent mix were determined and used to correct for the pipetting error, assuming
equal density among all samples. This adjustment slightly reduced the disturbance
among technical replicates (comparison in app. B.1) and was therefore kept for the
analysis (see ﬁg. 6.1) but apparently this did not eliminate all issues related to the
composition of milk.
The fact that no time dependent increase of sulfhydryl groups was detected con-
tradicted the ﬁndings of previous studies, which harvested the cells from the broth
and determined the exofacial thiol-group concentration on them[36, 45]. It indi-
cated that the method was not sensitive enough for these sulfhydryl groups. It has
been repeatedly reported, that the sensitivity for protein-bound sulfhydryl groups
is rather low, as Ellman’s reagent dissociates to the negatively charged DTNB2−in
water, which makes it interact poorly with thiols in hydrophobic cavities.
33
==PAGE:42==
7.2 Normalization, Accuracy and Noise in On-Line Measurements
7 Discussion
7.2
Normalization, Accuracy and Noise in On-
Line Measurements of pH and EpH=7
Tachon et al. and other authors used equation 7.1, formulated by Leistner and Mirna,
and an experimentally determined correction factor to calculate a pH compensated
redox potential for foodstuﬀs[cf. 34, 52].
Ecomp = E −α × (7 −pH)
(7.1)
However, the argument in section 3.1, that no redox potential can be deﬁned
for milk, it implies that no pH-compensated redox potential can be determined ac-
curately, because reaction mechanisms remain unknown. Nevertheless, this does
not challenge the fact that observed electrode potentials change with pH and must
therefore be normalized in some way to allow for a comparison of fermentations
with diﬀerent acidiﬁcation curves. Both, eq. 3.8 and 7.1 deﬁne a linear relation-
ship between the electrode potential and pH. Using eq. 3.8 was the default method
applied by the iCinac software and used for the experiments. This quantity was
labeled EpH=7 to avoid confusion with any Eh7. Due to the procedure, the absolute
values calculated in this project were not directly comparable with studies that used
eq. 7.1. However, based on the theoretical considerations that electrode potentials
are inherently biased measures, it does seem that such a comparison would not be
relevant anyway.
Fig. 6.6 and 6.9 show that the EpH=7 measured on-line oscillated, especially
during the rapid decrease of the redox potential. This hindered the formulation
of parametric models for statistical analysis because testing the normality of the
residuals would not be meaningful, without the addition of trigonometric terms.
To determine an appropriate pretreatment of the data, possible sources for the
oscillations were investigated:
The recorded data showed that the regulation of the water bath temperature var-
ied with 1 ◦C. To see, what impact the variations in temperature had on oscillations
in the electrode potential, the time series of one electrode from the ﬁrst experiment
was selected. To examine the problematic ﬂuctuations, a linear function was ﬁtted
as a low-pass ﬁlter and the predicted values were subtracted from the data points
between 250 min to 500 min, where the potential drops rapidly.
This process is
illustrated in ﬁg. 7.1. A one-to-one correspondence, when plotting the ﬁltered elec-
trode potential against temperature, would indicate a functional relationship, i.e.
Eres = f(T). Fig. 7.2 shows that such a relationship was not given. Instead, a span
of up to 100 mV were found for the same temperature. Therefore, other causes were
considered. Besides temperature variation, the interference with other electric ﬁelds
can severely impact measures[25]. Such ﬁelds could come from other lab equipment,
for example the power supplies for gel electrophoresis, that were placed in the same
room. Also the thermistor, heating the water bath, could disturb measurements,
with its electric ﬁeld. In that case, the signal would not only be dependent on the
temperature of the water bath, but also its regulation, which itself is dependent on
the room temperature. Husson et al. demonstrated that even stormy weather may
have a signiﬁcant impact and that shielded electrodes, with internal signal conver-
sion, as the ones used in this experiments, were also aﬀected by these factors[25]. In
general, oscillations were not reported in other recent studies on milk fermentation
with Lc. lactis[32, 36, 45], but studies on Clostridium acetobutylicum suggested,
34
==PAGE:43==
7 Discussion
7.3 Instabilities of Preculture Phenotypes
−200
−100
0
250
300
350
400
450
500
time (min)
EpH=7 (mV)
Function:
data
−0.1T + 228
ORP−f(T)
Figure 7.1: An example of high-pass ﬁltering to extract the oscillations in electrode
potential for further analysis. Parameters of f(T) were determined by ﬁtting a linear
model to the data, using least square estimates. The predicted values were then
subtracted from the data to isolate oscillations.
that there might also be a biological reason for the observations made. Kim et al.
found that the electrode potential correlated with butanol levels in the medium[28]
and Grupe and Gottschalk demonstrated a correlation with NAD(P)H levels during
acid shift[22]. This suggested, that more fundamental investigations were needed
before the time course of EpH=7 could be adapted for parametric modeling.
In contrast, the pH data was much less noisy. Low-pass ﬁltering only had to be
applied to improve the determination of the acidiﬁcation rate. This was required
because numerical derivation ampliﬁes noise in the data set. Local polynomial re-
gression ﬁtting, using 2nd degree polynomials and α = 0.5 were used. Fig. 7.3 shows
how this improved the determination of an acidiﬁcation rate while it barely altered
the pH curve.
7.3
Instabilities of Preculture Phenotypes
Extensive preliminary tests were carried out to verify the strain stability of the
isolated strains on a range of media (sterilized milk, pasteurized bovine milk, pas-
teurized camel milk and M17lac). MS22333 was selected for the experiments, because
it was the most reliable strain. Nevertheless, the preculture, used at the beginning
of the amino acid experiment, turned out to be only poorly acidifying. Therefore,
aliquots from another batch of preculture were thawed and supplied after approxi-
mately 1000 min. This was not carried out under the laminar ﬂow hood but with the
ﬂasks remaining in the water bath. The negative control was treated in the same
fashion with autoclaved Milli Q. The dropping pH indicated that this treatment
contaminated the control with a diﬀerent LAB. The data set was used, because
electrode potentials of the contaminated sample followed the same time course as
the positive control. This observation made it unlikely that a contamination, not
the treatment, would have skewed the other observations.
35
==PAGE:44==
7.4 Eﬀects of Amino Acid Supplementation
7 Discussion
−50
0
50
31.6
31.8
32.0
Temp (°C)
EpH=7 (mV)
300 350 400 450
Time
Figure 7.2:
Filtered potential from ﬁg.7.1 plotted against temperature at the
electrode, for the phase of rapid depletion of the electrode potential (EpH=7) in
milk fermentation with Lc. lactis. No one-to-one correspondence was visible. Data
points were connected in chronological order.
7.4
Eﬀects of Amino Acid Supplementation
Arginine Deiminase Pathway
The functional annotation on the sequencing
data conﬁrmed that the strain’s genome codes for all the genes ArcA, ArcB, ArcC,
ArcD and ArgR, required for the arginine deiminase pathway. Thus, the supplemen-
tation of arginine was assumed to result in catabolic degradation. Due to the low
pKB value of arginine, the initial pH was elevated. It remained at this levels because
of the ammonia release during growth. The alkaline conditions, together with the
cytotoxicity of ammonia inhibited growth. This was reﬂected in the slow decrease
of electrode potential and pronounced oscillations compared to the reference. This
curve was similar to the observations made in (cytotoxic) butanol production, using
Clostridium acetobutylicum [28]. In comparison, ornithine can serve as a precursor
several other amino acids, e.g. to produce arginine via the anabolic ornithine car-
bamoyltransferase argF (also present in the genome). It can also enter the citrate
cycle via conversion to fumarate. The automatic annotation via RAST predicted
an ornithine cyclodeaminase, catalyzing the conversion of ornithine to proline and
ammonia. The enhanced acidiﬁcation, showed that this pathway was not active.
BCAA
The expected sequence identity of codY, with the model strain, was con-
ﬁrmed in a sequence alignment, using blastn[71]. The 789 BP string found in the
MS22333 genome was 99 % identical to CodY of Lc. lactis Il1403[6]. Like the model
strain Il1403, the sequence annotation showed that the Lc. lactis MS22333 genome
lacked a complete valine and isoleucine degradation pathway but had a branched-
chain amino acid transferase. Since Petranovic et al. showed that the uptake of free
BCAA by Lc. lactis was very ineﬃcient, high concentrations of 50 mM were used
to sustain high intracellular concentrations during fermentation. The experiments
conﬁrmed that CodY repression was induced by supplementing excessive amounts of
36
==PAGE:45==
7 Discussion
7.4 Eﬀects of Amino Acid Supplementation
1400
1600
1800
2000
2200
2400
4.50
5.00
5.50
time (min)
pH
−0.50
−0.25
0.00
dpH dt−1(h−1)
Curve
raw
fitted
Figure 7.3: An example for the use of local polynomial regression ﬁtting as a low-
pass ﬁlter to improve the determination of maximal acidiﬁcation rates. Noise from
the pH measurement was ampliﬁed when computing the derivative.
isoleucine. The acidiﬁcation lacked an exponential phase (ﬁg. 6.7). The higher acid-
iﬁcation with valine conﬁrmed that isoleucine had a stronger eﬀect[10, 41]. This was
also reﬂected in the electrode potential: Only the culture grown on valine reached
a minimum as low as the reference.
Glycine and Serine
The glycine and serine metabolism were less well understood
for Lc. lactis[18]. The functional annotation indicated the presence of a permease
(CycA), responsible for both, glycine and serine transmembrane transport.
The
strain was also assumed to be able to convert between the two, as a serine hydrox-
ymethyltransferase (EC 2.1.2.1) was found. Both amino acids have a very similar
proton aﬃnity[37], the slower acidiﬁcation for serine was therefore not explained by
the presence of the molecule in the broth. Instead, it indicated the activity of a
serine dehydratase (EC 4.3.1.17), which was conﬁrmed by the genome sequence. It
could elevate the pH by catalyzing the reaction given by eq. 7.2
L-serine ⇀
↽pyruvate + NH3
(7.2)
When comparing the two, it seemed that the establishment of a low potential was
uncorrelated with the phase of rapid acidiﬁcation, which would be in agreement with
previous publications[36, 49].
Lysine, Proline and Histidine
The genome was searched for potential homo-
logues of a proline dehydrogenase (EC 1.5.99.8) and pyrroline-5-carboxylate reduc-
tase (EC 1.5.1.2), both identiﬁed in other LAB as enzymes involved in proline
catabolism[18], but no supporting evidence was found in sequence analysis. Thus,
it remained unlikely that there was catabolic degradation of proline.
Tab. 6.3 shows that lysine supplementation resulted in the lowest electrode poten-
tial measured and the second highest acidiﬁcation rate. The initial pH was elevated
because lysine became protonated in solution. However, there was no characterized
37
==PAGE:46==
7.4 Eﬀects of Amino Acid Supplementation
7 Discussion
pathway for lysine catabolism in LAB [18] and Lahtvee et al. found no growth rate
dependent uptake of lysine in Lc. lactis. But it is a substrate for peptidoglycan
synthesis and the genome of MS22333 coded for two genes, identiﬁed as speciﬁc
permeases. Therefore, the reason could be that Lc. lactis generally beneﬁted from
high concentrations in the medium .
No catabolic reactions for histidine were found in the annotated genome, neither
homologues for the histidine ammonia-lyase (EC 4.3.1.3) nor the histidine decar-
boxylase (EC 4.1.1.22), both crucial for the the only catabolic pathways, that were
identiﬁed experimentally[18]. Therefore it remained unclear what reduced the acid-
iﬁcation.
Diﬀerences in Electrode Potentials
In general, well acidifying cultures also
reached low electrode potentials. However, the trend of the pH was often not re-
ﬂected in the trend of the potential (compare valine & isoleucine or proline & the
positive control).
Instead, cultures with similar acidiﬁcation curves had distinct
curves for the electrode potential. A hypothesis for a relationship is elaborated in
appendix D.
38
==PAGE:47==
Chapter 8
Conclusion
The titration of sulfhydryl groups with DTNB was inconclusive.
The observed
diﬀerence caused by heat treatments was in agreement with a previous study[57], but
contradicted other ﬁndings[36]. The most likely explanation was a lack of sensitivity
for certain protein-bound thiols, reported elsewhere[43]. This bias made the method
unsuitable to accurately determine the total amount of sulfhydryl groups in complex
solutions. Thus, no statement about the reducing activity of Lc. lactis on thiol
groups of milk proteins can be made based on these results.
The reduction potential has been discussed repeatedly as a parameter provid-
ing information on the redox state of milk in fermentation[27, 32].
However, it
has been demonstrated that it is the cells themselves which cause the negative val-
ues observed[45]. My literature review showed that exchange current density is a
crucial parameter in the dynamics of electrode potentials, which implies that the
interaction of the bacteria with the electrode is easily obscured when adding strong
reagents. This masking limits the electrode potential as an attribute in analysis[39].
The observation that fat content was not relevant to the electrode potential, even
though the micelles contained a relevant portion of reduced compounds, illustrated
this. Therefore, it is not contradicting that in the experiments conducted, amino
acid metabolism aﬀected the electrode potential, while an inverse relationship was
postulated in a previous study, where oxidizing agents were used[27].
Brasca et al. and Larsen et al. demonstrated that measurements of electrode
potential vary, even between strains of the same species grown under the same
conditions[7, 31]. This points to the fact that the mechanisms of cellular interaction
with the electrode are not yet well understood. However, these eﬀects are more
related to the study of bacterial surface interactions rather than milk fermentation[cf.
e.g. 42, 56]. In this context, a possible target for future studies could be a better
characterization of the ﬁbrillar surface proteins of bacteria.
My results agreed with the considerations by Peiﬀer et al. that the use of the
electrode potential alone for direct comparisons should be avoided[39]. There are
methods available for quantitative electrochemical characterizations of complex so-
lutions but they are much more labor intensive[cf. 38, 39].
The measurement of the electrode potential alone is fast and inexpensive. Abra-
ham et al. demonstrated that reproducible measurements are possible in dairy[1].
As the electrode potential responds to factors such as oxygen but is also sensitive
to microorganisms, it could be applied to quickly validate a fermentation in process
control.
39
==PAGE:48==
Chapter 9
Perspectives
More than 200 years ago, Luigi Galvani postulated an intrinsic electrical force for
biological systems, based on his famous experiments with frog legs. By replacing
the frogs with salt water, Alessandro Volta soon disproved this concept of animal
electricity and laid the foundation for electrochemistry by constructing the ﬁrst
galvanic cell. Nevertheless, Galvani’s experiments remained the ﬁrst demonstration
of the role of membrane potentials for nervous signal transductions.
The use of electrochemistry to explore biological phenomena has ever since been
expanded: pH- and most oxygen sensors in use today are essentially galvanic cells.
Furthermore, Leland Clark applied the knowledge about the reaction mechanism
of the glucose oxidase to develop the ﬁrst biosensor, used to measure glucose-levels
in blood.
Today, advancements in nanotechnology and enzyme production keep
pushing the limits of what is possible and feasible in biosensor development.
There are many open questions related to redox reactions in dairy fermentation,
but the electrode potential is not the golden key to answer all of them at once. Elec-
tric signals in such complex systems are not interpretable without a rigid theoretical
basis. However, previous studies showed that many processes map to the electrode
potential already. Thus, further research may concentrate on the development of
speciﬁc electrochemical biosensors, relevant to the dairy industry. By targeting key
features of the fermentation process, they may supplement expensive metabolomic
and proteomic procedures with on-line measurements.
40
==PAGE:49==
Acknowledgements
First of all, I would like to thank my supervisors who sparked the idea for this project
and kept on listening to my thoughts throughout the last semester. By asking the
right questions, they helped me structure my work and kept me on track.
I am grateful to Mitiku Eshetu, Yonas Yonas Hailu and all the students at
Haramaya University, who planned and arranged countless things to make sure that
I could succeed with my experiments during my stay and learn about the wider
perspective of this study.
Last but not least, I would like to thank the staﬀat the Physical Chemistry
Department of the University of Oldenburg, who once confronted their student intern
with the basics of experimental electrochemistry.
Without that experience, this
thesis would surely not have been the same.
41
==PAGE:50==
References
42
==PAGE:51==
Literature
[1]
S. Abraham et al. “A procedure for reproducible measurement of redox po-
tential (E h) in dairy processes”. In: Dairy Science & Technology 93.6 (2013),
pp. 675–690.
[2]
T. Aleksandrzak-Piekarczyk, J. Polak, B. Jezierska, P. Renault, and J. Bar-
dowski. “Genetic characterization of the CcpA-dependent, cellobiose-speciﬁc
PTS system comprising CelB, PtcB and PtcA that transports lactose in Lac-
tococcus lactis IL1403”. In: International journal of food microbiology 145.1
(2011), pp. 186–194.
[3]
K. Bagramyan and A. Trchounian. “Decrease of redox potential in the anaer-
obic growing E. coli suspension and proton-potassium exchange”. In: Bioelec-
trochemistry and bioenergetics 43.1 (1997), pp. 129–134.
[4]
E. Bech Hansen. Complete genome sequence of Lactococcus lactis MS22333.
in prep.
[5]
E. Bech Hansen. “Microorganisms”. In: Handbook of food and beverage fer-
mentation technology. CRC Press, 2004.
[6]
A. Bolotin et al. “The complete genome sequence of the lactic acid bac-
terium Lactococcus lactis ssp. lactis IL1403”. In: Genome research 11.5 (2001),
pp. 731–753.
[7]
M. Brasca, S. Morandi, R. Lodi, and A. Tamburini. “Redox potential to dis-
criminate among species of lactic acid bacteria”. In: Journal of Applied Mi-
crobiology 103.5 (2007), pp. 1516–1524.
[8]
A. Budin-Verneuil, E. Maguin, Y. Auﬀray, D. S. Ehrlich, and V. Pichereau.
“Genetic structure and transcriptional analysis of the arginine deiminase (ADI)
cluster in Lactococcus lactis MG1363”. In: Canadian journal of microbiology
52.7 (2006), pp. 617–622.
[9]
R. Castro et al. “Characterization of the individual glucose uptake systems
of Lactococcus lactis: mannose-PTS, cellobiose-PTS and the novel GlcU per-
mease”. In: Molecular Microbiology 71.3 (2009), pp. 795–806. issn: 1365-2958.
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2008.06564.x.
[10]
E. Chambellon and M. Yvon. “CodY-regulated aminotransferases AraT and
BcaT play a major role in the growth of Lactococcus lactis in milk by regu-
lating the intracellular pool of amino acids”. In: Applied and environmental
microbiology 69.6 (2003), pp. 3061–3068.
[11]
P. Courtin et al. “Peptidoglycan structure analysis of Lactococcus lactis re-
veals the presence of an L, D-carboxypeptidase involved in peptidoglycan mat-
uration”. In: Journal of bacteriology 188.14 (2006), pp. 5293–5298.
43
==PAGE:52==
LITERATURE
LITERATURE
[12]
M. Cretenet et al. “Early adaptation to oxygen is key to the industrially
important traits of Lactococcus lactis ssp. cremoris during milk fermentation”.
In: BMC genomics 15.1 (2014), p. 1054.
[13]
A. Curry. “The milk revolution”. In: Nature 500.7460 (2013), p. 20.
[14]
M. De Bolster. “Glossary of terms used in bioinorganic chemistry (IUPAC
recommendations 1997)”. In: Pure and applied chemistry 69.6 (1997), p. 1294.
[15]
M. Debarbouille, R. Gardan, M. Arnaud, and G. Rapoport. “Role of BkdR, a
Transcriptional Activator of the SigL-Dependent Isoleucine and Valine Degra-
dation Pathway inBacillus subtilis”. In: Journal of bacteriology 181.7 (1999),
pp. 2059–2066.
[16]
P. Duwat et al. “Respiration Capacity of the Fermenting BacteriumLactococ-
cus lactis and Its Positive Eﬀects on Growth and Survival”. In: Journal of
Bacteriology 183.15 (2001), pp. 4509–4516.
[17]
FAOSTAT. Primary production of whole, fresh camel milk. Database. 2014.
url: http://www.fao.org/faostat/en/#data.
[18]
M. Fernandez and M. Zuniga. “Amino acid catabolic pathways of lactic acid
bacteria”. In: Critical Reviews in Microbiology 32.3 (2006), pp. 155–183. issn:
15497828, 1040841x. doi: 10.1080/10408410600880643.
[19]
P. Fox, T. Uniacke-Lowe, P. L. McSweeney, and J. A. O’Mahony. “Dairy
Chemistry and Biochemistry”. In: Springer, 2015. Chap. 13 Chemistry and
Biochemistry of Fermented Milk Products.
[20]
P. Fox, T. Uniacke-Lowe, P. L. McSweeney, and J. A. O’Mahony. “Dairy
Chemistry and Biochemistry”. In: Springer, 2015. Chap. 1 Production and
Utilization of Milk.
[21]
A. Fugl et al. “Characterization of lactic acid bacteria in spontaneously fer-
mented milk and selection of strains for fermentation of camel milk”. Manuscript
submitted for publication. 2017.
[22]
H. Grupe and G. Gottschalk. “Physiological events in Clostridium aceto-
butylicum during the shift from acidogenesis to solventogenesis in continu-
ous culture and presentation of a model for shift induction”. In: Applied and
environmental microbiology 58.12 (1992), pp. 3896–3902.
[23]
E. Gu´edon, P. Serror, S. D. Ehrlich, P. Renault, and C. Delorme. “Pleiotropic
transcriptional repressor CodY senses the intracellular pool of branched-chain
amino acids in Lactococcus lactis”. In: Molecular microbiology 40.5 (2001),
pp. 1227–1239.
[24]
M. Higuchi et al. “Functions of two types of NADH oxidases in energy metabolism
and oxidative stress of Streptococcus mutans”. In: Journal of bacteriology
181.19 (1999), pp. 5940–5947.
[25]
O. Husson et al. “Practical improvements in soil redox potential (Eh) mea-
surement for characterisation of soil properties. Application for comparison
of conventional and conservation agriculture cropping systems”. In: Analytica
chimica acta 906 (2016), pp. 98–109.
44
==PAGE:53==
LITERATURE
LITERATURE
[26]
A. de Jong, M. E. Hansen, O. P. Kuipers, M. Kilstrup, and J. Kok. “The
transcriptional and gene regulatory network of Lactococcus lactis MG1363
during growth in milk”. In: PloS one 8.1 (2013), p. 53085.
[27]
A. Kieronczyk, R. Cachon, G. Feron, and M. Yvon. “Addition of oxidizing or
reducing agents to the reaction medium inﬂuences amino acid conversion to
aroma compounds by Lactococcus lactis”. In: Journal of applied microbiology
101.5 (2006), pp. 1114–1122.
[28]
J. Kim, R. Bajpai, and E. Iannotti. “Redox potential in acetone-butanol fer-
mentations”. In: Applied biochemistry and biotechnology 18.1 (1988), pp. 175–
186.
[29]
G. Konuspayeva, B. Faye, and G. Loiseau. “The composition of camel milk:
a meta-analysis of the literature data”. In: Journal of Food Composition and
Analysis 22.2 (2009), pp. 95–101.
[30]
P.-J. Lahtvee et al. “Multi-omics approach to study the growth eﬃciency and
amino acid metabolism in Lactococcus lactis at various speciﬁc growth rates”.
In: Microbial cell factories 10.1 (2011), p. 12.
[31]
N. Larsen, B. B. Werner, F. K. Vogensen, and L. Jespersen. “Eﬀect of dissolved
oxygen on redox potential and milk acidiﬁcation by lactic acid bacteria isolated
from a DL-starter culture”. In: Journal of dairy science 98.3 (2015), pp. 1640–
1651.
[32]
N. Larsen et al. “Transcriptome analysis of Lactococcus lactis subsp. lactis
during milk acidiﬁcation as aﬀected by dissolved oxygen and the redox poten-
tial”. In: International journal of food microbiology 226 (2016), pp. 5–12.
[33]
H. Lehmann, X. Fuentes-Arderiu, and L. Bertello. “Glossary of terms in quan-
tities and units in Clinical Chemistry (IUPAC-IFCC Recommendations 1996)”.
In: Pure and Applied Chemistry 68.4 (1996), p. 971.
[34]
L. Leistner and A. Mirna. “Das redoxpotential von P¨okellaken”. In: Die Fleis-
chwirtschaft 8 (1959), pp. 659–666.
[35]
I. Levine. Physical Chemistry, 6th Edition. McGraw-Hill, 2002. Chap. 13. isbn:
978-0-07-253862-5.
[36]
D. Michelon et al. “Contribution of exofacial thiol groups in the reducing
activity of Lactococcus lactis”. In: FEBS journal 277.10 (2010), pp. 2282–
2290.
[37]
M. Noguera, L. Rodriguez-Santiago, M. Sodupe, and J. Bertran. “Protonation
of glycine, serine and cysteine. Conformations, proton aﬃnities and intrinsic
basicities”. In: Journal of Molecular Structure: THEOCHEM 537.1 (2001),
pp. 307–318. issn: 0166-1280. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/S0166-
1280(00)00686-2.
[38]
T. Noyhouzer, R. Kohen, and D. Mandler. “A new approach for measuring the
redox state and redox capacity in milk”. In: Analytical Methods 1.2 (2009),
pp. 93–99.
[39]
S. Peiﬀer, O. Klemm, K. Pecher, and R. Hollerung. “Redox measurements in
aqueous solutions - a theoretical approach to data interpretation, based on
electrode kinetics”. In: Journal of contaminant hydrology 10.1 (1992), pp. 1–
18.
45
==PAGE:54==
LITERATURE
LITERATURE
[40]
T. P´erez et al. “Lactococcus lactis subsp. tructae subsp. nov. isolated from
the intestinal mucus of brown trout (Salmo trutta) and rainbow trout (On-
corhynchus mykiss)”. In: International journal of systematic and evolutionary
microbiology 61.8 (2011), pp. 1894–1898.
[41]
D. Petranovic et al. “Intracellular eﬀectors regulating the activity of the Lac-
tococcus lactis CodY pleiotropic transcription regulator”. In: Molecular Mi-
crobiology 53.2 (2004), pp. 613–621. issn: 1365-2958. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-
2958.2004.04136.x.
[42]
A. T. Poortinga, R. Bos, W. Norde, and H. J. Busscher. “Electric double layer
interactions in bacterial adhesion to surfaces”. In: Surface science reports 47.1
(2002), pp. 1–32.
[43]
C. K. Riener, G. Kada, and H. J. Gruber. “Quick measurement of protein
sulfhydryls with Ellman’s reagent and with 4, 4’-dithiodipyridine”. In: Ana-
lytical and bioanalytical chemistry 373.4 (2002), pp. 266–276.
[44]
G. T. Robillard and W. N. Konings. “A Hypothesis for the Role of Dithiol-
Disulﬁde Interchange in Solute Transport and Energy-Transducing Processes”.
In: European Journal of Biochemistry 127.3 (1982), pp. 597–604.
[45]
C. Roussel. “Compr´ehension des m´ecanismes physiologiques et g´en´etiques im-
pliqu´es dans l’activit´e r´eductrice de Lactococcus lactis”. PhD thesis. Dijon,
2015.
[46]
El-Sayed and El-Agamy. “Camel Milk”. In: Handbook of milk of non-bovine
mammals. Blackwell Pub., 2006.
[47]
K. H. Schleifer and O. Kandler. “Peptidoglycan types of bacterial cell walls and
their taxonomic implications.” In: Bacteriological reviews 36.4 (1972), p. 407.
[48]
R. P. Shivers and A. L. Sonenshein. “Activation of the Bacillus subtilis global
regulator CodY by direct interaction with branched-chain amino acids”. In:
Molecular Microbiology 53.2 (2004), pp. 599–611. issn: 1365-2958. doi: 10.
1111/j.1365-2958.2004.04135.x.
[49]
D. Soghomonyan, K. Akopyan, and A. Trchounian. “pH and oxidation-reduction
potential change of environment during growth of lactic acid bacteria: eﬀects
of oxidizers and reducers”. In: Applied biochemistry and microbiology 47.1
(2011), pp. 27–31.
[50]
A. L. Sonenshein. “CodY, a global regulator of stationary phase and virulence
in Gram-positive bacteria”. In: Current opinion in microbiology 8.2 (2005),
pp. 203–207.
[51]
A. SYSTEA. iCinac User Manual. Version Rev.05. 2014.
[52]
S. Tachon, J. B. Brandsma, and M. Yvon. “NoxE NADH oxidase and the
electron transport chain are responsible for the ability of Lactococcus lactis to
decrease the redox potential of milk”. In: Applied and environmental microbi-
ology 76.5 (2010), pp. 1311–1319.
[53]
S. Trasatti. “The absolute electrode potential: an explanatory note (Recom-
mendations 1986)”. In: Pure and Applied Chemistry 58.7 (1986), p. 956.
46
==PAGE:55==
LITERATURE
LITERATURE
[54]
W. M. de Vos, I. Boerrigter, R. J. van Rooyen, B. Reiche, and W. Hengsten-
berg. “Characterization of the lactose-speciﬁc enzymes of the phosphotrans-
ferase system in Lactococcus lactis.” In: Journal of biological chemistry 265.36
(1990), pp. 22554–22560.
[55]
R. Yagil. “Camels and camel milk”. In: FAO, 1982. Chap. IV Milk products
and their uses: Mystical properties.
[56]
N. Yee, D. A. Fowle, and F. G. Ferris. “A Donnan potential model for metal
sorption onto Bacillus subtilis”. In: Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta 68.18
(2004), pp. 3657–3664.
[57]
G. Zweig and R. J. Block. “The eﬀect of heat treatment on the sulfhydryl
groups in skimmilk and nonfat dry milk”. In: Journal of Dairy Science 36.4
(1953), pp. 427–436.
47
==PAGE:56==
Software
[58]
R. K. Aziz et al. “The RAST Server: rapid annotations using subsystems
technology”. In: BMC genomics 9.1 (2008), p. 75.
[59]
D. Bates, M. M¨achler, B. Bolker, and S. Walker. “Fitting Linear Mixed-Eﬀects
Models Using lme4”. In: Journal of Statistical Software 67.1 (2015), pp. 1–48.
doi: 10.18637/jss.v067.i01.
[60]
T. Brettin et al. “RASTtk: a modular and extensible implementation of the
RAST algorithm for building custom annotation pipelines and annotating
batches of genomes”. In: Scientiﬁc reports 5 (2015), p. 8365.
[61]
U. Consortium et al. “UniProt: the universal protein knowledgebase”. In: Nu-
cleic acids research 45.1 (2017), pp. 158–169.
[62]
D. B. Dahl. xtable: Export Tables to LaTeX or HTML. R package version 1.8-2.
2016. url: https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=xtable.
[63]
J. Gross and U. Ligges. nortest: Tests for Normality. R package version 1.0-4.
2015. url: https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=nortest.
[64]
M. Hlavac. stargazer: Well-Formatted Regression and Summary Statistics Ta-
bles. R package version 5.2. Harvard University. Cambridge, USA, 2015. url:
http://CRAN.R-project.org/package=stargazer.
[65]
A. Kuznetsova, P. Bruun Brockhoﬀ, and R. Haubo Bojesen Christensen. lmerTest:
Tests in Linear Mixed Eﬀects Models. R package version 2.0-32. 2016. url:
https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=lmerTest.
[66]
R. V. Lenth. “Least-Squares Means: The R Package lsmeans”. In: Journal of
Statistical Software 69.1 (2016), pp. 1–33. doi: 10.18637/jss.v069.i01.
[67]
R. Overbeek et al. “The SEED and the Rapid Annotation of microbial genomes
using Subsystems Technology (RAST)”. In: Nucleic acids research 42.1 (2014),
pp. 206–214.
[68]
R Core Team. R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing. R
Foundation for Statistical Computing. Vienna, Austria, 2017. url: https:
//www.R-project.org/.
[69]
H. Wickham. ggplot2: Elegant Graphics for Data Analysis. Springer-Verlag
New York, 2009. isbn: 978-0-387-98140-6. url: http://ggplot2.org.
[70]
H. Wickham and R. Francois. dplyr: A Grammar of Data Manipulation. R
package version 0.5.0. 2016. url: https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=
dplyr.
48
==PAGE:57==
SOFTWARE
SOFTWARE
[71]
Z. Zhang, S. Schwartz, L. Wagner, and W. Miller. “A greedy algorithm for
aligning DNA sequences”. In: Journal of Computational biology 7.1-2 (2000),
pp. 203–214.
49
==PAGE:58==
Appendix A
Summarized Data for ’Catabolic Repression’ Experiment
Table A.1: Key parameters for bovine milk fermentation, inoculated with Lc. lactis MS22333 preculture to test eﬀects of catabolic
repression. Data summarized by treatments. Uncertainties expressed as standard deviations. +/o: Compound concentration high/low.
min EpH=7: Electrode potential, corrected for pH 7, using eq. 3.7. tE: time passed until the minimal EpH=7 was reached.
Emin(pH=7)
t(Emin)
dpH dt−1
Lactose
Glucose
Fat
Arginine
NaCl
mV
min
pH
min−1
+
+
high
o
o
−314 ± 6
633 ± 51
4.41 ± 0.00
−0.30 ± 0.02
+
+
low
+
o
−295 ± 20
692 ± 59
4.44 ± 0.06
−0.32 ± 0.04
+
+
low
o
o
−309 ± 14
636 ± 15
4.36 ± 0.03
−0.30 ± 0.01
+
o
high
o
+
−304 ± 14
614 ± 23
4.35 ± 0.07
−0.31 ± 0.03
+
o
low
o
o
−307 ± 3
582 ± 21
4.37 ± 0.03
−0.32 ± 0.02
o
+
low
o
o
−301 ± 11
634 ± 39
4.38 ± 0.04
−0.30 ± 0.02
50
==PAGE:59==
Appendix B
Supplementary Statistics for Thiol
Titrations
B.1
Choosing a Dilution Factor for Thiol Titra-
tion
The following linear model was formulated based on all data (including outliers
shown in ﬁg. 6.1). The concentration of sulfhydryl groups was calculated in two
ways: using eq. 5.4 to take the mass into account and using a ﬁxed factor of d = 0.1.
Yi = µ + αPASTi + βSTRAINi + γTIMEi + ϵi
with
ϵ ∼N(0, σϵ
2)
(B.1)
The two models were then compared for their residuals to see which dilution
factor improved the ﬁtting of the independent variables to the raw data. Repetitions
were not explicitly formulated as a random eﬀect, but R2 was used as a measure
of the fraction of variation explained by the ﬁxed eﬀects. The results are shown in
tab. B.1. Even with outliers included, the test indicated a slightly better ﬁt, using
a corrected dilution factor.
Table B.1: Comparing the R2 of model eq. B.1 for two diﬀerent ways to calculate
the concentration of sulfhydryl groups in milk from a spectrophotometric assay.
Either a ﬁxed dilution factor (d = 0.1) was used or an adjustment for the actual
mass of pipetted milk was made.
Dilution factor
R2
ﬁxed
0.313
corrected
0.330
B.2
Comparing Heat Treatments Only Before In-
oculation
In addition to the statistical analysis described in section 6.1, the signiﬁcance of
heat treatments was investigated for the data points before fermentation (t = 0).
51
==PAGE:60==
B.2 Heat Treatments
B Supplementary Statistics for Thiol Titrations
The explorative analysis is given in ﬁg B.1. The model eq. 6.1 was tested and the
heat treatment was an insigniﬁcant eﬀect (see tab B.2). The scatter plot in ﬁg. B.1
shows that this is due to the variation in the observations made on unpasteurized
milk.
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
65
80
unpast
20
40
60
80
cSH (µM)
pasteurization (°C)
20
40
60
80
65
80
unpast
pasteurization (°C)
cSH (µM)
Figure B.1: Box and scatter plot for the concentration of sulfhydryl groups in camel
milk, right after diﬀerent pasteurizations had been applied. All three measurements
for unpasteurized milk were also the most extreme observations in the data set.
Table B.2: Summary statistics for model eq. 6.1 for sulfhydryl group titration in
camel milk right after pasteurization. The pasteurization was insigniﬁcant.
Factor
c.SH
σ
µ & 65 ◦C
38.099∗∗∗
(9.291)
80 ◦C
15.746
(11.379)
unpast
18.310
(13.139)
Observations
12
Note:
∗p<0.1; ∗∗p<0.05; ∗∗∗p<0.01
52
==PAGE:61==
Appendix C
Summary Statistics for Models
Used
Table C.1: Summary statistic for the titration of sulfhydryl groups in fermenting
camel milk using model eq. 6.1. Heat treatments remained as a signiﬁcant eﬀect
after model reduction. Values in brackets represent standard errors
c.SH
µ & 65 ◦C
22.169∗∗∗
(5.457)
80 ◦C
26.316∗∗∗
(6.683)
Observations
45
Note:
∗p<0.1; ∗∗p<0.05; ∗∗∗p<0.01
53
==PAGE:62==
C Summary Statistics for Models Used
Table C.2: Summary statistic for minimum pH reached in the fermentation of
bovine milk with varying sugar and fat content. Only the supplementation of argi-
nine remained as a ﬁxed eﬀect. Values in brackets represent standard errors. +/o:
arginine concentration high/low.
pH
µ & Arg +
4.444∗∗∗
(0.028)
Arg o
−0.071∗∗
(0.030)
Observations
14
Note:
∗p<0.1; ∗∗p<0.05; ∗∗∗p<0.01
Table C.3: Summary statistic for time until minimum electrode potentials were
reached in the fermentation of bovine milk with varying sugar and fat content.
Only the supplementation of arginine remained as a ﬁxed eﬀect. Values in brackets
represent standard errors. +/o: arginine concentration high/low.
t(Emin)
µ & Arg +
692.000∗∗∗
(24.032)
Arg o
−69.333∗∗
(25.957)
Observations
14
Note:
∗p<0.1; ∗∗p<0.05; ∗∗∗p<0.01
54
==PAGE:63==
Appendix D
Relationship Between EpH=7 and
Acidiﬁcation in Fermentation
The idea, that acidiﬁcation and electrode potential are related, has been inves-
tigated repeatedly[cf. 3, 49].
To my knowledge, a relationship between the two
parameters maximal acidiﬁcation rate and minimum EpH=7 has not yet been dis-
cussed. Fig. D.1 shows the data from the amino acid experiment would support
this hypothesis. Added data from other experiments however did not align well
with this model. No statistical investigation of this model was conducted because
of the skewed distribution of observations to the right on the x-axis. Considering
that Husson et al. listed many potential causes of error, the comparison of absolute
E values from several diﬀerent experiments might also be problematic in its own
right. To avoid sampling bias and explore this relationship further, an improved ex-
perimental design could make use of the results obtained in this study with arginine
and isoleucine supplementation.
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
−300
−250
−200
−8
−7
−6
−5
log10(−dpH dt−1)
min. EpH=7 (mV)
Data
Set
G
G
G
Amino
Acids
Sugars
Prelimina
Experime
Figure D.1: E −dpHdt−1-plot for three data sets combined. The experiments on
catabolic repression, amino acid supplementation and preliminary data, all using
Lc. lactis MS22333 precultures.
55
==PAGE:64==
Appendix E
rinac-Package for R
56
==PAGE:65==
rinac- Helper Functions for Analysis of iCinac(TM)
Data in R
Benjamin Schwetz
2017-06-23
Purpose
A package that provides easy-to-use tools to import, annotate and restructure data, exported from the iCinac
software, in order to perform statistical analysis.
Development
The latest version can be found on github: https://github.com/benjaminschwetz/rinac
Installation
The devtools package needs to be installed. This can be done by running the following command in an R
session:
install.packages("devtools")
Download and Installation via devtools
In R run:
devtools::install_github("benjaminschwetz/rinac")
to download and install the package from github. It can then be loaded using
library(rinac)
Manual Download
Alternatively, go to https://github.com/benjaminschwetz/rinac and download the folder. Place it in a
directory of your choice and load the package using
devtools::load_all("/directory/")
Using github
You are of course welcome to fork this package.
1
==PAGE:66==
Functions
import_cinac()
This function creates a tidy data frame from two ﬁles: an exported table from the iCinac and an annotation
table. It makes use of the lower level functions:
• read_cinac()
• annotate_cinac()
find_extremes()
This function determines turn points in a series, using pastecs::turnpoints() and is compatible with
dplyr::filter()
multiplot()
An adaptation of the multiplot function found in the Cookbook for R
fmt_dcimals()
A function to help formatting axis labels with ggplot2
Development
Report issues here: https://github.com/benjaminschwetz/rinac/issues
License
GNU GPL 3.0: https://github.com/benjaminschwetz/rinac/blob/master/LICENSE
2
