==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Digital Media Engineering
Adapting Linguistic Style using Autoencoders
How to teach computers to write with style
Valentin Liévin
Kongens Lyngby 2017
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
This thesis reviews the use of neural networks to build a general natural language model and evaluate
its application to the task of linguistic style adaptation.
We name style adaptation the process of
transforming a sentence into another sentence which conveys the same meaning but uses a different
linguistic style. This work has been strongly influenced by the algorithm for artistic style proposed in
the computer vision field.
Hopefully, the work presented in this thesis will help to create better generative language model with
near human performances. We believe that this technology could be a strong asset in the translation
industry and could significantly improve current conversational interfaces.
The literature review has motivated the use of the Variational Auto-Encoder to build a continuous
representation of the language. During this thesis, we have first conducted an in-depth study of the
theory behind this framework and tested it against the case of the MNIST dataset modeling.
Motivated by the sequential natural of the language, we introduced the Recurrent Neural Network
architecture and proven that it was compatible with the Variational Auto-Encoder framework by testing
it against the modeling of a narrow set of time series.
As a second step, we applied the Variational Auto-Encoder to build a character-level language model.
For this purpose, a narrow set of sentences taken from the Large Movie Review Dataset has been used.
We reported poor generative performances but good recognition performances has been notably shown
by its ability to rephrase unknown sentences.
Thereafter, we justified the choice of the sentiment as a specific case of stylistic feature and we
proposed four different approaches for the task of style adaptation. Afterwards, we exploited the good
recognition performances of our model to build a simple prototype which can be regarded as a success-
ful case of style adaptation: the prototype has proven to be able to change the sentiment conveyed by
simples sentences while addressing the same object.
We hope that the analysis of the Variational Auto-Encoder and its application to the task of linguistic
style adaptation will motivate further research in this domain and we are convinced that our methods can
be applied to the task of natural language understanding in the near future. Lastly, we propose further
research in order to overcome the poor generative performances and apply this model to generative
tasks.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This Master thesis was prepared at the department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science at
the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the requirements for acquiring a Master degree in
Digital Media Engineering.
Kongens Lyngby, June 23, 2017
Valentin Liévin
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisor Professor Dr. Ole Winther for his availability and patience in
guiding me to complete this thesis project. I am particularly grateful for all the constructive feedback
discussions and the warm reception with which the proposition of this project has been received.
Special thanks to Professor Dr. Michael Kai Petersen for the co-supervision of this project, his most
helpful feedback and for sharing particularly relevant related works. Furthermore, I would like to thank
him for his role as teacher and supervisor during the two years I spent at DTU which have shown to
be a most fruitful experience.
I would also like to thank particularly the people working at EasyTranslate for their warm reception
and their support. In particular, I would like to thank Peter Ladegaard, Frederik R. Pedersen and
Jin Qian for the fruitful discussions we had and the insights about the translation industry I acquired
through my collaboration with them.
I am grateful to Catherine Lepez who communicated her passion for the mathematics during my
second year of preparatory classes. I couldn’t stress more about the quality of her teaching.
Last but not least, I would like to thank my family and friends for their continuous moral support
to keep me going during my thesis.
Kongens Lyngby, June 23, 2017
Valentin Liévin
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Linguistic Style . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Objective
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.4
Related Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.5
Approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2
Variational Auto-Encoder
13
2.1
Theoretical background
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.2
The Variational Auto-Encoder Framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.3
Implementing the Variational Auto-Encoder . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
2.4
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3
Variational Recurrent Auto-Encoder
31
3.1
Recurrent Neural Networks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.2
The Variational Recurrent Auto-Encoder
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.3
Additional Improvements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
3.4
Experiment: Modeling Timeseries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
3.5
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
4
Generating Sentences from a Continuous Space
53
4.1
Character-Level Encoding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
4.2
Dataset
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
4.3
Data Preprocessing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
4.4
Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
4.5
Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
4.6
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
5
Adapting the Linguistic Style
65
5.1
Sentiment as Stylistic Feature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
5.2
Unsupervised Learning and Sentiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
5.3
Adapting the Style . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
5.4
Prototype: The Pessimistic Machine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
5.5
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
6
Discussion
75
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
6.1
Variational Auto-Encoder . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
6.2
Modeling Recurrent Structures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
6.3
Difficulties with Training Deep and Large Neural Networks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
6.4
Variational Auto-Encoder, Natural Language and Style Adaptation . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
6.5
The Pessimistic Machine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
6.6
Difficulties in Measuring the Performances . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
7
Future Work
81
7.1
Larger Dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
7.2
Hyper-parameters tuning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
7.3
Improving the Generative Model: Adversarial Networks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
7.4
Hierarchical Encoder and Decoder
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
7.5
A more Expressive Latent Space: Hierarchical Latent Representation . . . . . . . . . . .
83
8
Conclusion
85
A
VAE: modeling hand-written digits (Jupyter Notebook)
87
B
VRAE: modeling timeseries (Jupyter Notebook)
99
C
Reconstruction of Random Samples
118
D
The Pessimistic Machine
119
D.1 Selected Samples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
119
D.2 Randomly Selected Samples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
119
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
In the computer vision field, deep learning has proven to be efficient at building highly an expressive
representation of unstructured data. In particular, neural algorithms are able to capture the artistic
style in images and can use this knowledge to create original works. Creating artworks was an ability
thought to be only accessible to human intelligence: creative skills are thought to be a human-only
ability.
Modeling the natural language is a major challenge in the context of human-computer interactions
and is a substantial step toward language interpretation. Nevertheless, progresses observed in the com-
puter vision field do not have an equivalent in the natural language processing field. As a consequence,
modeling the language with a focus on the artistic style remains a task open to future work and promises
significant scientific outcomes. This is precisely the problem we aim to solve during this project.
In this chapter, we will first define the concept of style with regards to the natural language. Second,
we will present specific problems we aim to solve using this technology. Last, we will introduce a plan
to tackle this problem.
1.1
Linguistic Style
By definition, the style is a particular procedure by which something is done. For example, tennis is
defined by its rules but the style of a tennis player is defined by the way he deals with the rules in order
to play. According to [LS07], the linguistic style is defined by the choices the author makes to shape
a given content within the global rules of the language. A style corresponds to a particular choice of
syntax and lexicon. Following this theory, we can divide the speech into two independent components.
The first component would be the content, the thought, the idea the speaker wants to transmit. The
second component would be the style: the aesthetic choices made by the speaker to shape the speech.
As a result, the same content can be expressed with different linguistic styles and a same linguistic style
can be used to express different ideas.
Indeed, we can easily observe that different people use a different style of language. Furthermore,
while listening to a single speaker, we can observe different ways of using the language depending on the
context and the purpose. For example, people will adopt a very particular lexicon and syntax depending
on the people they are talking to. In a familiar context, people could simply say ”Give me the water,
please.” to ask for water while in a more formal way, one would use a more polite form such as ”May I
have water please?”.
A particular style is often named by its context.
For example, we can distinguish the style of
Shakespeare, the Victorian Style or a formal style. For this reason, it is impossible to define an exhaustive
list of linguistic styles because we can identify as many styles as we find contexts. For instance, [PK99]
provides us with a non-exhaustive list of writing styles:
• Words of more than 6 letters
• First-person singular
• Negations
• Articles
• Positive emotions
==PAGE:12==
2
1 Introduction
• Negative emotions
• Causation
• Insight
• Discreptancy
• Tentative
• Social processes
• Past tense
• Present tense
• Inclusive
• Exclusive
To sum up, the speech can be defined by the combination of two components: the content and the
style. The style is a choice of lexicon and syntax which shapes the speech depending on the speaker,
the context and the purpose.
1.2
Problem
1.2.1
Translation Industry
The translation industry relies heavily on human abilities and remains mostly untouched by the progress
of machine learning techniques. In this section, we will introduce the industry and present how it could
be impacted by this project.
1.2.1.1
A Growing market
According to the Common Sense Advisory, a translation industry think tank, the size of the translation
industry was about $33.5 billion in 2012. Furthermore, in a context of hyper globalization, exchanges of
goods and services between countries are now significant. As a consequence, the need to communicate
with customers in different countries is on the rise. This is why companies nowadays don’t need only
to communicate with fellow citizens but with the whole world. For examples, simple things such as
instruction manuals have to be translated into every language spoken within a product’s market. As
the economic exchanges between countries persist, the translation industry is expected to remain in
place. indeed, according to the U.S. Bureau of Statistics, the translation industry is expected to grow
by 42% between 2010 and 20201.
1.2.1.2
Translation Industry and Machine Translation
However, as the automated translation progresses in terms of quality and affordability, traditional
translation agencies are potentially endangered. Even if the market is expanding, isn’t it likely to see
translation agencies loosing their market? Impressive progress has been made in statistical translation
and machine learning models are now reaching the human level [Wu+16].
Traditionally, two machine translation methods were used in the industry. First, the rule-based
approach with which language was translated using manually coded grammar rules. Second, the sta-
tistical which uses very large corpuses and a mathematical model to produce a translation. However,
these methods produce only limited outcomes. In the case of Google Translate, the translation was
often enough to have an overall understanding of a text but the translation was not accurate enough to
carry every detail within the source document. Yet the worst thing is that translated sentences are not
==PAGE:13==
1.2 Problem
3
Figure 1.1: On a construction site in Shenzhen. The old machine translation systems were often enough
to guess the meaning of a sentence. However, in terms of quality, the results are still far away from a
human translation
always grammatically correct as it is shown by the example in the figure 1.1. The automated translation
was still far behind the human translation.
In September 2016, [Wu+16] introduced a state of the art machine translation model ready to reach
the mass audience. Compared to the previous systems, this model uses neural networks to build a
high-level representation of the language. While the previous models were simply matching source and
target sentences, the neural models are trained on a large dataset to learn the complex rules of the
language by itself. Once it is trained, the model can encode a sentence from a source language into a
fixed length thought vector and decodes this vector in the target language using the rules learned by
the network.
However, these systems are still limited by the way they are trained: they learn a mapping between
two sets of parallel sentences and try to reproduce a translation independently of a broader context.
In this way, one sentence in one language corresponds to another in another language. A professional
translator, however, will take the context into account in order to adjust the style. Therefore such
system works on translating the meaning of the source document but will likely fail in adapting the
context and the linguistic style.
1.2.1.3
Human Translation Stays Ahead
In the translation industry, a good translation requires not only to carry the right meaning but also to
address the appropriate tonality, sentiment and requires to follow social norms. The translation industry
is built on the guarantee that information will be communicated in the right way. Indeed, the translated
communication materials are often the only way a company can communicate with its foreign markets.
Therefore this work is essential because it will directly affect how the company is perceived and how the
company performs abroad. Therefore trust is an important value in the translation industry because
the translation agencies are the guarantor of this communication.
As companies place trust in the translation agencies, the translation agencies need to focus on the
quality of the translations. This is why the agencies need to ensure that this work will be done by
human translators who can deal not only with the language itself but also with the social norms which
are specific to a language and a culture. On this point however machine learning models are far behind.
Deep learning models are especially criticized for their lack of transparency because these models work
like a black box and the quality of the translations are often difficult to assess. Indeed, how to measure
if a translation respects specific style? As a consequence, because the automated translation is built on
such models, it seems that the traditional translation industry remains ahead.
The lack of quality control and the lack of possibilities to control the quality explain why Machine
Learning is not yet a revolution in the translation industry. Existing solutions are translating sentences
1urlhttps://www.pangeanic.com/knowledgecenter/size −of −the −translation −industry/
==PAGE:14==
4
1 Introduction
independently from the context. In this way, we make sure that the translation carries the right meaning.
However, using such methods, we can’t ensure that the translation will fit the right context, expressed
with a particular style.
1.2.2
Conversational Interfaces
The quest for artificial intelligence has focused many efforts and significant progress have been made.
However, half a century after the introduction of the Turing Test, personal assistants are still far from
passing it.
1.2.2.1
Natural Language as Input and the Rise of the Personal Assistants
Since the beginning of the very first computing devices, inputs are mostly based on touch: keyboard,
mouse and touchscreen: all require to use our hands. While this form of interaction is useful in a
creative process because the computer becomes an extension of the hand, this form of input is limited
for communication and knowledge discovery. For this purpose, the speech is known to be more efficient.
First, voice input is faster. Humans can speak 150 words per minutes and can type only 40 words per
minute. Second, it is easy to use because it is convenient, hands-free and it doesn’t require any training.
Instead, voice interfaces use the natural language which makes computing devices accessible to anyone.
Third, as the voice interface becomes a universal interface, the size of the devices can decrease. As a
consequence, devices such as wearables, IoT objects or even cars become smarter and actionable.
In October 2011, Apple released Siri. Siri was the first personal assistant to reach the mass and
was, therefore, the first successful attempt to democratize the voice as a way to control a device. For
example, people could ask Siri about their next appointment, they could ask Siri to send a message or
they could even ask about general questions such as ”What is the height of the Eiffel Tower?”
Siri however, isn’t the only actor in the market. The tech giants are all developing their own voice
assistant: Google Voice, Baidu’s voice assistant, Amazon’s Alexa, Microsoft’s Cortana and Samsung’s
Bixby. In the meanwhile, the use of these voice assistant is growing. According to KPCB, in the USA,
the use of voice assistants has doubled between 2013 and 2015. In China, the voice assistant of the
giant Baidu is largely adopted because it is very efficient for the Chinese language which doesn’t fit the
traditional keyboard input. As a consequence, in 2014, 1 out of 10 Baidu queries came through Speech.
Finally, home assistant such as Google Home or Alexa are largely adopted: in 2015, the Amazon Echo
(a speaker with Alexa built-in) was the fastest selling speaker with almost 25% of US speaker market.
This large adoption is supported by important technological progress. On the one hand, the voice
recognition algorithms have made significant breakthroughs. According to Google CEO Sundar Pichai,
the recognition technology has now achieved a 4.9% error rate while the error rate was about 23%
in 2013. On the other hand, the systems controlled by voice assistant are more and more complex.
For instance, Alexa is now able to control media players using simple voice commands such as ”Alexa,
play songs by the Beatles”. The assistant is also able to get the last news, to recommend movies, to
recommend a restaurant and to order a taxi or products to be delivered.
1.2.2.2
Handling Emotions and Simulating Personality
As the technology behind the voice assistant becomes more accessible, smaller actors begin to build their
own chatbots, small automated agents made to answers questions or perform tasks through conversation.
Chatbots are particularly interesting for companies because it allows them to be more available for their
customers. Chatbots are reachable through instant messaging 24/7. However, dealing with customers
is a difficult task because they can ask any question and because questions sometimes require some
emotional intelligence.
In this direction, [Xu+17] evaluates the use of deep learning to build chatbots for customer service.
They observed that 40.5% of the requests were emotional and 59.5% of them were informational. In
the case of informational requests, the quality of the answer mostly depends on the information content
of the answer. For this reason, the information retrieval method performs well, as the deep learning
==PAGE:15==
1.2 Problem
5
method.
However, dealing with emotional requests such as ”my flight is canceled.” is difficult for
chatbots because the answer isn’t a simple information to be retrieved. In this case, a customer expects
to have emotional support such as apologies.
Moreover, it is critical for companies to engage with customers on an emotional level because it
builds a more intimate relationship. Furthermore, as a company is building a public image, it has to
be consistent and find a personal communication style. Most interestingly, in this paper, it has been
observed that the model was able to learn writing styles from a brand and transfer them to another.
First, this shows the ability of deep learning models to catch a particular linguistic style. Second, it
opens the way to create a more advanced brand image: a brand becomes an entity we can talk to on
the social media and this entity would have a consistent behavior with a singular personality.
Nowadays, this image is handled by community managers who try not only to answer to informa-
tional questions but also to engage emotionally with customers in order to build a brand identity. For
example, luxury companies will tend to use a formal lexicon while young companies such as Snapchat
will tend to use trendy expressions and an informal lexicon. Therefore, building chatbots technology
able to target a specific linguistic style would be a solution to build a true persona and this persona
would become a new kind of brand identity. Controlling the linguistic style would be an important step
in this direction. Indeed, according to [PK99], there is a correlation between an individual’s personality
and the linguistic style used to write. As a consequence, writing with a consistent and specific linguistic
style would produce the illusion of a personality.
Last but not least, building a personality for personal assistant seems to be a path to a stronger user
engagement. Siri’s personality is a response to the users’ needs of entertainment. For example, Siri was
built on two different personality traits: Siri is jealous and sassy. For example, to the question ”What is
0 divided by 0?”, Siri was giving a very abrupt answer”Imagine that you have zero cookies and you split
them evenly among zero friends. How many cookies does each person get? See? It doesn’t make sense.
And Cookie Monster is sad that there are no cookies, and you are sad that you have no friends.”. This
particular answer generated considerable commentary and public interest which has led to a growing
user base. We can easily imagine that an informational answer such as ”you can’t divide a number
by zero” would not have helped the assistant to become popular. Thus, creating a personality-based
personal assistant fosters engagement.
1.2.3
The Lack of Control over linguistic Style as a common Obstacle
In the case of the translation industry and the construction of advanced chatbots, we identified a
common problem. In both cases, progress is limited by the ability of Machine Learning systems to
control their linguistic style because they are modeled and train to carry the right meaning only. In
the case of the translation industry, the inability of the automated translation methods to fine tune
the translation to fit a particular context is the main obstacle. Controlling the writing style could be
a way to increase dramatically the quality of automated translations. In the case of the conversational
interfaces, the current systems could be greatly improved by providing a way to write in a particular
style. In this way, we open the possibility to build pseudo personalities which could be used to build a
powerful brand identity and engage users on an emotional level. Thus, controlling the stylistic features
in the context of text generation is a worthy challenge.
1.2.4
A New Hope: Style, Machine Learning and Computer Vision
In the computer vision field, [GEB15] has shown the ability of neural networks to transfer the style
from an artwork to another image. Using such model, it is now possible to turn a simple picture into an
artwork which mimics the artistic style of a famous painter 1.3. Looking from a different perspective,
this transformation preserves the information contained in the scene: the picture represents the same
objects or persons which are still recognizable. However, the way these elements are pictured is modified:
objects are represented with a different artistic style. This work is particularly interesting because it
==PAGE:16==
6
1 Introduction
shows the ability of neural networks to build a high-level representation of images in which different
components for the contents and the style can be identified and modified independently.
1.3
Objective
The last advanced in the Machine Learning field have shown the ability of neural networks to interpret
images in a very high-level fashion. Using such representation, it is now possible to deal with high-level
concepts such as the artistic style. Using such method, it was possible to transfer the style from an
artwork to another. Following this line of thought, we would like to apply such concept to the linguistic
field. In this way, we could transform sentences such as they convey the same information while changing
linguistic features such as the semantic field, level of politeness or emotion. For example, we would like
to transform the sentence ”Give me the water, please” into a more polite form as”May I have water
please?”. In this example, the main message stays the same: a request for water. However, the second
sentence is much more appropriate. Using this technology, we hope to improve the translation industry
by providing an on-demand translation with a language style perfectly adjusted to the client needs. We
also hope to improve chatbots technologies by providing a way for the bots to express themselves in a
unique manner with aim of imitating personality.
To sum up, the aim of this project is to develop a natural language model and investigate the use
of this model for the task of style adaptation.
1.4
Related Work
This project is directly inspired by the recent progress in the field of computer vision and neural-style
algorithm proposed by [GEB15]. However, we will present projects related to our problem which are
most likely to be useful in order to define a technical solution to the linguistic style adaptation problem.
1.4.1
Neural Style: a multi-modal representation of images
[GEB15] has demonstrated the ability of very deep convolutional neural networks to acquire a high-level
representation of images with separate components for the content and the style. This paper uses the
VGG Network, a very deep convolutional neural network used for image recognition purpose.
The VGG network transforms the image into a set of high-level features using the different layers
sequentially. Interestingly, some features are very explicit. For example, two pictures of dogs with a
totally different arrangement of pixels will share a common feature corresponding to the concept ”dog”.
Because these features represent explicit content, we call them content features.
Figure 1.2: The high level representation of an image can be separated into two independent components:
style and content
==PAGE:17==
1.4 Related Work
7
Figure 1.3: Deep learning models are able to change the style of an image without modifying its content.
The original image (top right) is transformed into new artworks (other images) that mimic the artistic
style of different painters. While the image represents the same thing (the houses are still recognizable),
the artistic style is changed. Reproduced from [GEB15]
On the other hand, other features were dedicated to capture the texture of an image. Textures fea-
tures were capturing local structures and colors. Thus, these stylistic features are a style representation
of an image: the subject of an image is defined by the content features but the local arrangements are
independently controlled by the stylistic features.
Using such representation, it is now possible to transfer the artistic style of an image by replacing
the style component of this image with the style component from another image. A few examples are
shown in the figure 1.3. This technique met a consequent success and has found practical applications.
For instance, the mobile application Prisma use this technique to transform any picture into an original
artwork (figure 1.4).
In this project, we aim to apply this concept to the natural language field. Thus, the first step
towards this direction will be to build a model with a multi-modal representation of the language with
distinct style and content representations.
1.4.2
Neural Photo Editing: modifying pictures using a latent representation
[Bro+16] shows how a high-level representation of images can be used in a creative creative context.
In this paper, a latent representation of a set of images is built using a highly expressive generative
model (VAE-GAN). Using the latent representation of the images, the user is able to interact with
high-level concepts. For instance, using a dataset of portraits, the user is able to modify the hairstyle or
to add a beard to the subject while keeping a photo-realistic result (figure 1.5). This is yet another ap-
proach to interact with high-level concepts using Deep Learning. Furthermore, this paper is particularly
interesting because it shows that specific features can be adjusted independently from the other.
Figure 1.4: Artworks created using the Prisma app. Prisma uses the neural representation of images to
transfer the artistic style from famous paintings to any picture
==PAGE:18==
8
1 Introduction
Figure 1.5: Neural Photo editing allows the user to transform a picture by interacting with high-level
features. For instance, in this picture, the user modifies the hairstyle by modifying the latent space.
Figure 1.6: A sequence2sequence model is able to translate modern English into Shakespeare’s English:
an interesting example of linguistic style transfer
1.4.3
Controlling the Linguistic Style
Adapting linguistic feature is not a new idea and some attempts have already been performed. [Xu+12]
proposes a model to translate modern English into Shakespeare’s. A few samples are available in the
figure 1.6. In this case, the problem was treated as a translation problem using sequence2sequence model
introduced by [Cho+14]. The sequence2sequence model encodes a source sentence into a thought vector
and decodes it into the target language. This allows translating one sentence into another language.
This approach produces good results. However such method requires having access to a large parallel
corpus from one style to another. This is why it would be difficult to apply the method to other stylistic
features.
[SHB16] uses yet another approach to adapt the linguistic style.
This paper proposes a neural
translation model which can translate English into German using a formal or informal style. Some
samples are available in the figure 1.7. In this case, the challenge was to build a multi-modal translation
model such as one source sentence can be translated into two different versions: a formal sentence and a
familiar one. For this purpose, side constraints are used. Sentences were labeled as formal and informal
and the model was trained taken this parameter as input. After training, it was possible to adjust the
politeness by modulating this parameter.
This approach is particularly interesting because it doesn’t depend on a parallel corpus with sen-
tences available in two different styles. Instead, side constraints were built using labeling. Furthermore,
such system can be trained using semi-supervised techniques which reduce further the need for labeled
specimen.
1.4.4
A Continuous and High-level Representation for the Natural Language
The two papers introduced in the previous sections show how deep learning can be used to handle
photographic data in a high-level fashion. [Bow+15] builds a generative model for natural language
featuring a highly expressive latent representation of the language.
In this paper, a Variational Auto-Encoder is used to model a very large corpus of text. Interestingly,
the obtained latent representation is continuous with regard to the meaning and generated sentences
are grammatically correct. As a consequence, points sampled from a path between two sentences in the
latent space will be decoded into grammatically correct sentences with an intermediate meaning from
the starting sentence to the end as shown in the table 1.1.
==PAGE:19==
1.4 Related Work
9
Figure 1.7: Side constraints can be used with a neural translation model to adapt the degree of politeness
These results are most interesting because it is a first step towards building a highly expressive model
for natural language that would allow us to interact with it in a high-level fashion such as it has been
observed in the field of computer vision. In the case of the sequence2sequence model introduced in the
previous example, side constraints had to be used to generate variations of the same sentence. In the
case of the Variational Auto-Encoder, the continuity of the latent space ensures that these variations
can be found within this latent representation.
1.4.5
Unsupervised Models for Sentiment Analysis
In[RJS17], a Recurrent Neural Network is trained in an unsupervised fashion to predict the next char-
acter in Amazon reviews.
After training, reviews are labeled with their corresponding sentiments:
negative review or positive. Surprisingly, one neuron is highly characteristic of the reviews sentiment
(figure 1.8). It is yet another example that shows that neural network can model high-level concepts
such as a particular stylistic feature.
Thereafter, the model is used to generate reviews by itself. By providing an initial vector, the recur-
rent neural network produces a sentence iteratively. In this context, we can constrain the network to
generate positive or negative reviews. With the same initial configuration but with different values for
the sentiment neuron, the network can generate reviews with a similar object and different sentiment.
For instance, using positive sentiment neuron we obtain:
i want to talk to you .
i want to be with you .
i do n’t want to be with you .
i do n’t want to be with you .
she did n’t want to be with him .
he was silent for a long moment .
he was silent for a moment .
it was quiet for a moment .
it was dark and cold .
there was a pause .
it was my turn .
Table 1.1: Interpolations between two sentences
==PAGE:20==
10
1 Introduction
Figure 1.8: After having been trained in an unsupervised way to predict the next character, a neuron
in the model can be used to classify positive and negative reviews
I couldn’t figure out the shape at first but it definitely does what it’s meant to do. It’s a great product
and I recommend it highly.
On the opposite, with a negative sentiment neuron, the network produces:
I couldn’t figure out how to use the product.
It did not work.At least there was no quality control;
this tablet does not work. I would have given it zero stars, but that was not an option.
Most interestingly, this example2 shows that unsupervised models can learn high-level features such
as the sentiment. Nevertheless, even if such model can be used for the generation of random snippets
of text, it seems impracticable to exploit it to adapt linguistic style. Indeed, this task would require
knowing the corresponding initial vector corresponding to the target snippet of text.
1.5
Approach
In the field of computer vision, neural networks have shown to be able to acquire a multi-modal repre-
sentation of the data. In this representation, we can identify very expressive features corresponding to
high-level concepts such as the subject of the picture: ”the picture shows a cat or a dog” or the artistic
style: ”this is a photo-realistic picture, this is a painting from Van Gogh”.
In the field of natural language, unsupervised neural models have shown to be surprisingly good
at modeling language and high-level features such as sentiment in an unsupervised fashion. Further-
more, the Variational Auto-Encoder has proven to be able to construct a high-level and continuous
representation of the language which is very relevant in the context of style modeling.
Consequently, we propose to use the Variational Auto-encoder framework as described by [Bow+15]
to build a natural language model. Using this representation of the language. First, we will investigate
the latent space for the expression of stylistic features such as the positivity or negativity. Secondly, we
will use this representation in order to adapt linguistic style.
According to [PK99], the use of positive or negative emotions are the expression of a particular
linguistic style and datasets for sentiment analysis are largely available. Therefore, the task of adapting
the sentiment is a good candidate to investigate the use of the Variational Auto-Encoder in the context
of style adaptation.
To accelerate the development of this project, we will work iteratively. Each step will consist in
attacking a simple problem and evaluating the proposed solutions. In this way, we will be able to
exploit the outcomes of the previous steps with confidence.
2This example has been reproduced from the original paper.
==PAGE:21==
1.5 Approach
11
More precisely, we will first develop a vanilla Variational Auto-Encoder for non-sequential data
structures such as simple pictures. Second, we will build a toy task using simulated time series with
the aim of building a Variational Auto-Encoder designed for sequential data. Third, we will adapt this
framework to the modeling of natural language. Lastly, we will adapt our general language model to
the task of style adaptation.
To sum up, we will deal with this problem in an iterative fashion. Small problems will be defined
and be attacked sequentially. The outcome of each step will be used to tackle the next problem. The
plan of this project can be summarized as follows:
1. Introducing and experimenting the Variational Auto-Encoder Framework
2. Presenting and experimenting an extension of the Variational Auto-Encoder Framework designed
for sequential data: the Variational Recurrent Auto-Encoder
3. Applying the Variational Recurrent Auto-Encoder to the task of natural language modeling and
assessing the performances
4. Investigating the use of our model for the task of linguistic style adaptation with a focus on the
case of the sentiment
==PAGE:22==
12
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 2
Variational Auto-Encoder
In this chapter we introduce the Variational Auto-Encoder framework introduced by [KW13]. First of
all, we will address the basics theory on the top of which the VAE is built. Second, we will deal with
the theory behind the framework itself. Finally we will apply the VAE framework to basic examples
such as the well-known MNIST dataset and discuss the results.
2.1
Theoretical background
The Variational Auto-Encoder is built on the top of neural network and relies heavily on the Bayesian
statistics. In order to study this framework in the best conditions, we must first construct a solid
knowledge basis of the underlying concepts.
2.1.1
Information Theory and Entropy
A digital image of the same screen size can require a different storage size depending on the content and
the compression algorithm. For exammple, for .jpeg images, an image composed of black pixels only
will be lighter than a picture of a cat. On the other hand, telling France’s history will take more time
than explaining a cooking receipe. In both case we could measure the quantity of information using the
disk space in the first case and the size of the book in the second case. However, these different metrics
are not comparable.
As a response to this problem, [Nyq24] and then [Har28] introduced a measure of the quantity of
information:
H = log Sn
where S represent the number of possible symbols (for example 0 or 1 for binary signals) and n the
length of the transmission. This formula provides us with an unbiased way to measure the capacity of
a media or a transmission device.
However, this measure of information is limited because the optimal encoding depends also on our
knowledge of the world. Indeed, frequent pieces of information should use less bits to be encoded since
they occur more frequently. This observation justifies the need for a measure which is not only able
to measure the quantity of information as an absolute value (without context) but as a measure the
unexpected: a measure of surprise. For example, during the summer period, knowing that the weather
is sunny in the South of France does not provide much information because it is occur very frequently.
Therefore this information has little value because it doesn’t teach us anything new. However, if the
same day we hear that it will snow in the South of France, it is unexpected because this event is
not common. Thus, the quantity of information contained in a message depends on the frequency of
occurrence of the same message.
Following this line, Shanon has introduced H as the entropy of information:
H =
∑
i
pi log 1
pi
= −
∑
i
pi log pi
where pi is the probability of each symbol to be communicated. This formula provides us the mean
to measure the performance of an encoding: if a message contains redundant pieces of information.
==PAGE:24==
14
2 Variational Auto-Encoder
Then this message doesn’t carry much information compared to its size. Therefore we expect a low
entropy for this message. However, if the message is optimal regarding the entropy, then every piece of
the message is useful (and unexpected): the entropy of the message is high.
2.1.2
Bayesian probabilities, Bayes’ Theorem and Bayesian Inference
2.1.2.1
Bayesian probabilities
The frequentist statistics depend on the fixed observation of the frequency of an event given a large
number of trials. Therefore, frequentists assume that their dataset is large enough to be a true repre-
sentation of the world. On the other hand, The Bayesian statistics make a reasonable hypothesis about
the state of the world given their actual knowledge. Then, the hypothesis is updated in the light of new
evidences.
2.1.2.2
Bayesian’s Theorem
The Bayes’ Theorem gives us a relation between the probability of two events:
P(A|B) = P(B|A)P(A)
P(B)
2.1.2.3
Bayesian Inference
In order to make inferences, we use the Baye’s theorem as followed:
P(H|E) = P(E|H)P(H)
P(E)
where H represents an hypothesis, E represents an evidence, P(H) represents the probability of
observing H the prior knowledge, P(E) stands for the probability of the event observed with the exper-
iment E, P(H|E) is the conditional probability of the event based on our knowledge (hypothesis) given
Figure 2.1: Plot of the Binary Entropy function. The binary entropy function is a special case of the
Entropy and provides a good illustration of this key concept of the Information Theory. Taking X as a
tossing coin event, if the coin is unbalanced, then p(X = 0) ∼1 or p(X = 1) ∼1 then the entropy is
very low: the outcome of the experiment is unlikely to be surprising because it is likely to be the same
at every trial. However, if the coin is balanced, then p(X = 1) = p(X = 0) = 0.5 and the outcome is
difficult to predict. Therefore each result is surprising: the entropy is very high. Credits: Wikipedia
==PAGE:25==
2.1 Theoretical background
15
the evidence E and P(E|H) represents the probability of observing E given H).
In other words, Bayesian inference allows us to update a probability for a hypothesis given a observable
evidence: it allows us update our knowledge given an observation. Therefore Bayesian inference is ex-
tremely important in for machine learning given that it enables us to update our model with observation
(i.e. data).
2.1.3
Latent Variable Model
A latent variable is defined as as a variable affecting an observation without being directly observable.
For instance, in Economics, latent variables can be defined by quality of life, morale, happiness or
conservative. These variables have an observable effect on the economy but can’t be directly observed.
Latent variable models are statistical models which treat observable variables as a posterior of an
unobservable variable and define a relation between them.
Latent variable are also very relevant for generative models. While the posterior distribution is of
very high dimensionality represent low level concepts (for example, the value of a pixel in an image),
the prior distribution is often of low dimensionality and represents higher level concepts such as the
content of the image itself or the artistic style in the case of a painting.
2.1.4
Kullback-Leibler Divergence
The KL Divergence is a measure between two probability distributions. The KL divergence from Q to
P is written DKL(P||Q) and is not symmetric, therefore DKL(P||Q) ̸= DKL(P||Q). Nevertheless, the
KL Divergence has vocation to be a metric and satisfies DKL ≥0.
Given H(P, Q) the cross entropy of P and Q, the KL Divergence is defined to be:
DKL(P||Q) =
∑
i
P(i) log P(i)
Q(i)
= −
∑
i
P(i) log Q(i) +
∑
i
P(i) log P(i)
= H(P, Q) −H(P)
(2.1)
The KL Divergence is a really interesting term in the domain of Bayesian Inference. Indeed, this
term can be interpreted as a measure of the information which is gained when our model changes his
belief from his prior knowledge to the posterior knowledge.
In a more pragmatic way, this term can be simply used to measure a distance between two distribu-
tions. Subsequently, this allows us to evaluate the quality of an estimator. Given a probability density
function P, if we try to approximate this distribution with another function Q then the KL Divergence
Figure 2.2: Bayesian inference allows us to update our belief given an experiment
==PAGE:26==
16
2 Variational Auto-Encoder
can be used to measure the distance between the two distribution. Thus measuring the quality of the
estimator Q.
2.1.5
Neural Networks
In 1943, [MP43], introduced the thresholded logic unit: a simple model designed to mimic the way a
neuron works. This artificial neuron takes one or more inputs and sums them to produce an output
which depends on a threshold. The output of a neuron is defined as:
yk = φ


m
∑
j=0
wkjxj


Most significantly, a group of such units could be used for pattern recognition: each neuron could
fire or not depending on its set of inputs and its activation level. This is what we call a neural network:
a group of artificial neurons tied together. Neural Networks can be used for various purposes. for
instance, based on this theory, in 1958, [Ros58] build the perceptron: a machine able recognize simple
visual patterns based on artificial neurons. The machine was taking an array of 400 photocells connected
to neurons with potentiometers acting as weights. The perceptron is a direct application of McCulloch’s
thresholded logic unit. Given f a threshold operation, the perceptron was defined as:
o = f


m
∑
j=0
ijxj


(2.2)
However, the perceptron has been quickly rejected by the scientific community because of its inca-
pacity to model simple non-linear functions such as the XOR function.
After a long pause, the resurgence of the neural networks happened in the 80’s with the democra-
tization of the back-propagation algorithm which made possible the training of multi-layered models
which are a solution to model more complex functions. In the meantime, the universal approximation
theorem has shown that multi-layer perceptrons were not only able to approximate the XOR function
but theoretically every function.
Nonetheless, neural networks weren’t very popular and methods such as SVMs were the favorite.
it is only after 2012 that Neural Networks re-gained in popularity with the work of [Hin+12] which
introduced a state-of-the-art model for speech recognition based on deep neural networks. This regain
of popularity can be mainly explained by two factors:
• the availability of large and labeled dataset: deep learning algorithms are very greedy
• the affordability of GPU computing which enable to train larger models
Today, deep learning algorithms are achieving state-of-the-art results in multiple domains such as
image recognition, image captioning and music generation.
Figure 2.3: The threshold Logic Unit was the first kind of artificial neuron. The artificial neuron sums
up input to produce a binary output. Credits: ResearchGate
==PAGE:27==
2.1 Theoretical background
17
2.1.5.1
Multi-layer Perceptron
A multi-layer perceptron (MLP) or deep feedforward network is a perceptron with multiple layers of
artificial neurons.
The goal of MLP is to approximate a function f ∗in order to learn a mapping y = f ∗(x). In the case
of the perceptron, given ϕ a given activation function, we defined the model as a single layer network
such as:
y = ϕ(Wx + b)
In the case of MLP, we simply compose layers together to form a single model. Each intermediate
layer, called a hidden layer, takes the outputs of the previous layer as inputs. Each hidden layer can be
considered as a different level of abstraction. The use of multiple layers explains why we name them
Deep Neural Network.
Formally, we define a MLP composed of N layers as following:



y0 = x
yi+1 = ϕ(Wiyi + bi), i ∈[0, N −1]
y = yN
2.1.5.2
Gradient descent
Gradient descent is an iterative optimization algorithm. The core idea is to consider the cost function
F as a surface parametrized by the parameters θ of the model. Because neural networks are continuous
and differentiable in every point, we can compute the slope (i.e. gradients) at the current point and
move down the surface (i.e. update θ) towards a local minimum.
Given a dataset X, a model f(X, θ) and F the cost function, γ an hyper-parameter (learning rate),
we can evaluate iteratively the parameter θ with regards to the cost function F:
∀n, θn+1 = θn + γF(θn))
2.1.5.3
Back-propagation
The universal approximation theorem states than a MLP can approximate any function. However, this
theorem doesn’t touch upon the learnability of the parameters. Unfortunately, training multi-layered
neural network is a difficult task because it requires to differentiate the cost function with regard to
every parameter and parameters can be very numerous. For each parameter θi, we would need compute:
∂F
∂θi
= F(θ + ϵei) −F(θ)
ϵ
Figure 2.4: A Multi-Layer Perceptron is composed of multiple layers.
According to the universal
approximation theorem, a MLP can approximate any function. Credits: Quora
==PAGE:28==
18
2 Variational Auto-Encoder
This operation requires one forward passes through the network for each parameter which is pro-
hibitively expensive to perform. Fortunately, deep neural networks formed of multiple layers, each of
them corresponding to an independent function. Therefore deep neural networks are a compositions of
functions:
f = f (1)of (2)of (3)...of (n)
The back-propagation algorithm uses the chain rule to compute the gradients using only one forward
pass and one backward pass.
First, the forward pass takes the input vector and pass it through the network in order to evaluate
the error as defined by the cost function.
Second, we will use the current value of the error to compute the gradients of the last layer with
regard to the error. Fortunately, we can re-use the gradients of the last layer to evaluate the next layers
thanks to the chain rule. For instance, let be y = g(x) and z = f(g(x)) = f(y). Then, in the case of a
scalar, the chain rule states that:
dz
dx = dz
dy
dy
dx
The neural network can be easily unrolled using the chain rule following a compational graph as the
one shown in the figure 2.5. It allows us to evaluate iteratively the partial derivates using the chain
rule.
Third, we can use the evaluation of the partial derivates in order to update the parameters as
described by the gradient descent algorithm.
2.1.5.4
Mini-batch and Stochastic Gradient Descent
The Gradient Descent requires to evalutes the error on the entire dataset which can be prohibitively
expensive. For instance, the WMT dataset used for machine translation consists in ∼5 million pairs
of sequences. We would need to evaluate the partial cost function for each of the pairs of sentences at
each iteration.
The stochastic Gradient Descent algorithm (SGD) is a response to this problem. Instead of com-
puting the true gradients based on the entire dataset, SGD proposes to compute an approximation of
the gradient based on a few samples (mini-batch). Thus, the SGD algorithm may not lead to the right
direction at each step. However, in average it is likely to lead towards a local minimum.
2.1.5.5
Supervised and Unsupervised Learning
In machine learning, we say that an algorithm learns in a supervised fashioned if the model is trained
using labelled data. For example, a classifier that learns to classify hand-written digits will be trained
with both a list of arrays of pixels: the image itself and with a list of label: the actual digit (”0”, ”1”,
etc..).
Figure 2.5: The backpropagation algorithm is based on the iterative evaluation of the partial derivates
which can be easily unrolled following computational graph. Credits: DeepLearningBook.org
==PAGE:29==
2.2 The Variational Auto-Encoder Framework
19
On the contrary, an algorithm that learns without any other clue than the data points themselves
will be labelled as unsupervised. Generally, these algorithms acquire an inner representation of the
structure of the data by identifying similar items. They are often used for clustering purpose.
However, it is important to notice that even models trained in an unsupervised way are used in a
supervised context. For example, the Principal Component Analysis or the Negative Matrix factoriza-
tion algorithms can be used to build a representation of a dataset with a lower dimensionality. This
representation allows us to find clusters corresponding to the different classes in the model space. The
model space, corresponding to a transformion of the pixels space has been obtained in an unsupervised
fashion. Nonetheless, the use of these results to classify new digits is a supervised algorithm because it
requires to know which digit corresponds to which cluster.
In other words, unsupervised algorithms have the ability to find underlying structure in a set of
objects but the rapprochement of these structures with human concepts is nothing else than a supervised
process because concepts are human interpretation.
2.1.5.6
Softmax and Classification Tasks
Neural Networks are commonly used for classification purpose. For a binary classification, we can use
the sigmoid function to map the output into the range [0, 1], the output would represent the probability
for an item to be of the class A or A.
Similarly, we can classify objects between multiple class using one output for each class. However,
we need to normalized the outputs to sum the probabilities up to 1.
In machine learning, the Softmax function or normalized exponential function is used for normal-
ization purpose in the context of classification of mutually exclusive classes. Given an output vector of
dimension K, the softmax function is defined as:
σ(z)j =
ezj
∑K
k=1 ezk , j = 1, , K.
Additionaly, the exponential nature of the Softmax function is particularly interesting in the context
of neural networks because such models are often trained using the log likelihood as objective function.
2.2
The Variational Auto-Encoder Framework
We will now present the underlying problems encountered when building generative models. Then we
will introduce the Variational Bayesian method and its application to the Variational Auto-Encoder.
Lastly, we will compare the framework with its deterministic equivalent.
2.2.1
Generative Models
Generating data such as music, images or speech has been a longstanding problem.
For example,
generating pictures of human faces requires first to know that a face features two eyes, a nose, lips,
Figure 2.6: In the context of generative models, we consider that a continous variable X is generated
from a random process involving a latent variable Z
==PAGE:30==
20
2 Variational Auto-Encoder
eyebrows, hairs and potentially facial hairs. The next step will be to know how to organize them all
together in a meaningful way. Last, the model must be able to render a realistic lighting which depends
on the size, intensity, and position of the light source. We are therefore facing a very complicated
problem, especially knowing that the machine only deals with a matrix of pixels.
We represent the ensemble of all the possible images of faces by a continuous variable X. p(X)
represents the probability for an image to be a image of a face, p(X) is a thin manifold in the image
space, observable through a set of samples of x. However, X is often of a very high dimensionality and
samples of X are very sparse. Consequently, it is difficult to find the probability density function p(X)
which could be used generate samples x.
Instead, in the context of a generative model, we assume that the variable X is generated from a
random process involving a hidden random variable z: a latent variable of a lower dimensionality. For
instance, this latent variable could represent a set of features such as the length of the nose, the color
of the eyes, etc.. Finally, we define the generative processs as a two step mechanism:
• Firt, samples z(i) are generated from a prior distribution pθ∗(z).
• Second, the samples x(i) are generated from a given conditional distribution pθ∗(x|z).
it is important to notice that this process depends on an unknown parameter θ∗. Because this
parameter is unknown, we aim to find the maximum of the marginal likelihood: θ = arg max
θ
log p(x | θ).
Indeed, we want to maximize log p(X) because we want to make sure that every point from the latent
space leads to a valid specimen (i.e. p(X) = 1).
However, computing the marginal likelihood requires to evaluate p(X) and, unfortunately, p(X) is
intractable. Indeed, the equation 2.3 shows that p(X) depends on the unknown posterior probability
p(x|z).
p(x) =
∫
p(z, x)dz
=
∫
p(z)pθ(x|z)dz
(2.3)
Solutions exist but come with their own disadvantages. Traditionally, two methods are used to
approximate the posterior distribution:
• Using Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods which involve an expensive iterative process
for each datapoint. As a consequence, this method doesn’t scale to large datasets.
• Making strong simplifying assumptions on the posterior distribution.
For example, we could
assume that pθ(x|z) would be a diagonal Gaussian. However, this assumption might not refect
the complexity of the real world.
The Variational Auto-Encoder (VAE) proposes a novel solution to this problem. Instead of using
expensive sampling methods (MCMC) or using strong assumptions, [KW13] and [JMW14] implemented
the Variational Inference method on the top of standard optimization algorithms such as SGD. The
variational Auto-Encoder solves two problems: scalability and the need to make strong assumptions.
2.2.2
Variational Bayesian Method
Instead of using an expensive sampling method to approximate the true posterior distribution, the
Variational Bayesian method consists in using optimization in order to approximate the intractable
true posterior pθ(z|x). Fo this purpose, we approximate pθ(z|x) using an auxiliary function qϕ(z|x)
==PAGE:31==
2.2 The Variational Auto-Encoder Framework
21
called the recognition model1. Using the recognition model, we can now propose a new expression
of the marginal likelihood as shown by the equation 2.4.
However, in the equation 2.4, the term
DKL(q(z(i)|x)||pθ(z|x(i))) is still problematic because its dependency on pθ(z|x(i)). Consequently, com-
puting the likelihood is still out of range.
∀i, log p(x(i)) =
∑
z
q(z|x(i)) log p(x(i))
=
∑
z
qϕ(z|x(i))
[qϕ(z|x(i))pθ(x(i), z)
pθ(z|x(i))qϕ(z|x(i))
]
=
∑
z
qϕ(z|x(i)) log qϕ(z(i)|x)
pθ(z|x(i)) +
∑
z
q(z|x(i)) log pθ(x, z) −
∑
z
qϕ(z|x(i)) log qϕ(z|x(i))
= DKL(qϕ(z|x(i))||pθ(z|x(i))) + Eqϕ(z|x(i))[−log qϕ(z|x(i)) + log pθ(x(i), z)]
= DKL(qϕ(z|x(i))||pθ(z|x(i))) + L(θ, ϕ; x(i))
(2.4)
Nevertheless, in the context of a generative model, we are not required to evaluate the term log p(X),
we need to maximize it. Fortunately, DKL(q(z(i)|x)||pθ(z|x(i))) >= 0 because the Kullback-Leibler
Divergence is non-negative. Therefore, we can define a Variational Lower Bound of log p(X(i)) such as:
log p(X) ≥L(θ, ϕ; x(i)) = Eq(z(i)|x)[−log q(z(i)|x) + log pθ(x, z)]
We can easily observe that summing up over the mini-batch keeps the inequality:
log p(X) =
N
∑
i=1
p(x(i)) ≥
N
∑
i=1
L(θ, ϕ; θ(i))
Last, the Variational Lower Bound can be expressed in a different and more convenient form:
L(θ, ϕ; x(i)) = Eqϕ(z|x(i))[−log qϕ(z|x(i)) + log pθ(x(i), z)]
=
∑
z
qϕ(z|x(i)) log qϕ(z|x(i)) −
∑
z
qϕ(z|x(i)) log pθ(z)) +
∑
z
qϕ(z|x(i)) log pθ(x(i)|z)
= −DKL(qϕ(z|x(i))||pθ(z)) + Eqϕ(z|x(i))[log pθ(x(i)|z)]
(2.5)
In the equation 2.8, every term of L(θ, ϕ; x(i)) can be easily expressed and computed. The left term
Ll = −DKL(qϕ(z|x(i))||pθ(z)) will be called the latent loss or regularization loss. This term measures
the quality of the estimator qϕ(z|x(i)) with respect to the target distribution pθ(z) (a choice which
depends on the use case). The second term Lr = Eqϕ(z|x(i))[log pθ(x(i)|z)] measures the ability of the
model to generate valid specimen. We will name it reconstruction loss.
2.2.3
Variational Auto-Encoder
The Variational Auto-Encoder is a direct application of the Variational Inference using Neural Networks.
As defined in the previous section, we want to model an unobservable variable Z to control the generation
of a an observable random variable X. In this context, the Variational Bayesian method identifies 3
key elements:
1. the generative model pθ(x|z)
1 [KW13] proposes to call the recognition network pθ(z|x) a probabilistic encoder and the generative network pθ(z|x)
an probabilistic decoder since this model encodes a datapoint x into a code z and decodes it into a datapoint x.
==PAGE:32==
22
2 Variational Auto-Encoder
2. the recognition model qϕ(z|x) which approximates pθ(z|x)
3. the lower bound of the marginal likelihood L(θ, ϕ; θ(i))
The latent loss Ll = −DKL(qϕ(z|x(i))||pθ(z)) depends on pθ(z) which is an unknown distribution.
We choose to use an isotropic Gaussian to shape the distribution of z:
pθ(z) = N(z; 0, I)
(2.6)
Furthermore, the posterior distribution pϕ(z|x) is still free of taking any form. We will assume that
the true posterior distribution is a circular Gaussian with parameters σ(i) and µ(i) as shown in the
equation 2.7. As a result, for each datapoint, its representation in the latent space will be a diagonal
Gaussian controlled by two parameters which will be controlled by the recognition model.
qϕ(z(i)) = N(z, µ(i), σ(i)I)
(2.7)
These two choices may seem oversimplyfing. Nonetheless, no assumption is made on the posterior
pθ(x|z) and we can find a function mapping the latent variable Z to the observation variable X, we
simply need a powerful approximator for pθ(x|z). The ability of the model to generate complex data
structure only depends on the ability of the generative model to model complex mappings. Thus, it is
important to stress that the generative model needs to be a particularly strong approximator.
In the context of this framework, the recognition and generative models will be implemented using
Neural Networks and the Variational Lower Bound will be used as objective function. At training time,
the model is implemented as a feed-forward neural network. This is interesting because it allows us to
use optimization algorithms such as Stochastic Gradient Descent. For this purpose, we need to evaluate
the loss function over a mini-batch and propagate the gradients through the network. The backprop-
agation algorithm requires each operation in the graph to be differentiable. However, as shown in the
figure 2.7, reconstructing a datapoint x(i) requires to sample z ∼N(z, µ(i), σ(i)I). Unfortunately, the
sampling operation is not differentiable. As a consequence, the gradients can’t be propagated through
the sampling operation.
In response to this problem, [KW13] and [JMW14]2 propose to reparametrize the sampling operation.
Instead of defining z as a random variable drawn from N(z, µ(i), σ(i)I), z is expressed as the result of
a deterministic function which takes an independent random variable as input:
z = gϕ(ϵ, x) with ϵ ∼p(ϵ)
More specifically, as z ∼N(z, µ(i), σ(i)I), we have:
z = µ(x) + ϵ ∗σ(x) with ϵ ∼N(0, 1)
2[KW13] and [JMW14] are cross-referencing each other
Figure 2.7: At training time, the model is implemented as a feed-forward neural network.
Using
backpropagation, the gradients are propagated through the network in order to update the parameters
ϕ and θ. However, this requires every operation to be differentiable. Reconstructing a datapoint x(i)
requires to sample z ∼N(z, µ(i), σ(i)I) and the sampling operation is not differentiable
==PAGE:33==
2.2 The Variational Auto-Encoder Framework
23
The flow chart updated with the implementation of the reparametrization trick is shown by the
figure 2.8. As we can observe, we can now find a path from the reconstruction loss to the recognition
model which doesn’t involve non-differentiable operations such as sampling.
To sum up, we have built a generative model which can theoritically model complex data structures
because no assumption has been made on the posterior distribution pθ(x|z). Assumptions are only
made on the prior distribution and the ability of the model to generate complex objects depends on the
efficiency of the generative model. Fortunately, this model is implemented using neural networks which
have shown to be able to learn complex non-linear dependencies. Last, the Variational Auto-Encoder
is scalable because it is built on the top of Neural Networks and is fully trainable using SGD. For this
reason, it doesn’t involve expensive computationally expensive methods relying on looping over every
sample (MCMC).
2.2.4
Stochastic versus Deterministic Models
Stochastic models differ from deterministic models in the use or non-use of random variables. More
specifically, the Variational Auto-Encoder is a stochastic model because of the sampling operation
z ∼qϕ(z|x). By contrast, a vanilla Auto-Encoder which simply transforms datapoints into a higher-level
representation using layers of a lower dimensionality and without sampling operation is a deterministic
model. Deterministic Auto-Encoders can be applied to extract high-level features by lowering the di-
mensionality of the data. Thus, the question arises: why should we use the Variational Auto-Encoder
which seems to be overly commplex and is known for its difficulty to be trained?
This choice depends on the problem to be tackled. In the context of this project, first, we aim to
build a generative model such as samples taken from the latent space are decoded into valid data points.
Indeed, in the context of the style adaptation, we will need to generate sentences with a different style.
Thus, a generative model is required. Second, we aim to build smooth latent representation which
would allow us to transform one data point to another in a continuous fashion. Regarding the style
adaptation, a smooth representation would mean that similar items are likely to be placed close to
another. Indeed, we assume that sentences with a different style but a similar meaning share a great
similarity. As a consequence, a smooth space would ensures that sentences with similar meanings are
represented in the same neighborhood of the latent space. To sump up, this problem requires a dense
and smooth representation3.
Density
The stochastic nature of the Variational Auto-Encoder and the constrains on the distribution
p(z) are the guarantee of the creation of a dense and smooth latent representation. Regarding the
density property, the key difference between the two methods lies in the differences in the definition of
3By using the term dense, we intend to say that the latent space is filled up with valid codes z: codes which are
decoded into correct data-points x.
Figure 2.8: The reparametrization tricks allows the gradients to be propagated from the evaluation of
the error (Lr) and Ll)) to the parameters parameters θ and ϕ of the generative and recognition models
p and q
==PAGE:34==
24
2 Variational Auto-Encoder
the problem itself. Indeed, a deterministic model will encode an input vector into another low-dimension
vector without applying constrains on the overall distribution of the latent representations. By contrast,
the Variational Auto-Encoder deals explicitely with the distribution of the latent repsentations. More
precisely, this distribution is assumued to be N(0, 1). On the other hand, the objective of the model is
to maximize the log likehood log p(x) =
∫
z p(x, z)dz which pushes every point z ∼N(0, 1) to be valid.
In other words, the latent space is filling up with valid latent representations of x, hence the density
property is obtained.
Smooth Representation
Concerning the smoothness of the latent representation, we can argue that
this property is a consequence of the adversarial effects of the approximation of the posterior distribution
pθ(z|x) assumed to be diagonal Gaussian and the constrains imposed to p(z). First, we have seen that
data points are represented as distributions of qϕ(z|x) = N(σx, µx). By using such representation, we
ensure that every data point is represented with a non-null width σ.4 As a consequence, the model is
pushed to store many data points with a non-null width representation into a space of a finite capacity.
This process forces the model to optimize the available space to fit the whole dataset. In practice, this
is done by placing similar items close to another because similar items share some properties which
means they can partially share the same code. Thus, the need to optimize the available space leads to
the construction of a smooth representation.
By contrast, none of these properties is expected to be true in the context of a vanialla Auto-Encoder.
The latent representation of such model is unbounded and not dense wich prevents us from using such
model in a generative context.
2.3
Implementing the Variational Auto-Encoder
In the previous chapters, we introduced the Variational Auto-Encoder framework with a theoretical
point of view. We will now focus on the implementation of the model using Tensorflow. First, we will
present the general implementation of the model. Second, we will showcase the model using a simple
example: modeling pictures of hand written digits.
2.3.1
Architecture
At training-time, the Variational Auto-Encoder is an extension of the Auto-Encoder framework and is
trained as a feed-forward neural network.
• First, the encoding or recognition model encodes a datapoint x(i) into its latent representation
qϕ(z(i)) = N(µ(i), σ(i)I).
4The use of the random process z ∼N(σx, µx) is simply a way to implement the distribution qϕ(z|x).
Figure 2.9: The architecture of the VAE. The Encoding and Decoding layers are implemented using
2 non-linear layers.
The stochastic layer is implemented using the parametrization trick to ensure
the possibility for back propagation. The latent distribution is modeled using mixtures of Gaussian.
Therefore the distribution is represented using two parameters: µ and σ
==PAGE:35==
2.3 Implementing the Variational Auto-Encoder
25
• Second, the stochastic layer samples the posterior distribution: z ∼N(µ(i), σ(i)I).
• Third the decoder function pθ(x(i)|z) decodes the samples z into the original datapoint x.
Regarding the recognition and generative model (q and p), any kind of neural network can be used
if they can be trained as a feed-forward neural network: Multi-Layer Perceptrons (MLP), Recurrent
Neural Networks (RNN) or Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN).
For simple problems such as the modeling of the MNIST dataset introduced in ([LC10]), we will
chose to use simple MLP layers to model the encoding network. Moreover, in the section 2.2.2, we
have stated that pθ(z|x) is assumed to be diagonal Gaussian and controlled by two parameters µ and
σ. Thus, we can express these parameters as following:
µ(x) = LINEAR(MLP(x)) and σ(x) = LINEAR(MLP(x))
The stochastic layer represents the latent representation of the data-points. When using the model
as a generative model, we sample z ∼pθ(z). Moreover, we have to make sure that the model is trainable
using backpropagation. As described in section 2.2.2, we implement the reparametrization trick such
as:
z = µ(x) + ϵ ∗σ(x) and ϵ ∼N(0, 1)
Finally, the generation model will be modeled as a MLP with a final linear layer to adjust the output
to the right dimension:
xreconstruction = LINEAR(MLP(z))
The complete architecture is represented in the figure 2.9.
2.3.2
Training
The model is trained using Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD). For each mini-batch, the gradients
are evaluated using the objective function. Then, the gradients are propagated backwards through the
graph and the parameters (θ, ϕ) are updated.
In the section 2.2.2, we have defined the objective function as the Variational Lower bound:
L = Ll + Lr
with Ll = −DKL(qϕ(z|x(i))||pθ(z))
and Lr = Eqϕ(z|x(i))[log pθ(x(i)|z)].
Fortunately, TensorFlow computes gradients automatically. For this purpose, we need to provide
the framework with an explicit expression of the objective function.
2.3.2.1
Expression of the Latent Loss Ll
The latent loss measures the quality of the estimator q with respect to the assumed posterior distribution
pθ(z|x) = N(0, 1).
If J is the dimension of z, we have:
==PAGE:36==
26
2 Variational Auto-Encoder
Ll(θ, ϕ; x(i)) = −DKL(qϕ(z|x(i))||pθ(z))
=
∫
qϕ(z|x(i)) log pθ(z)dz −
∫
qϕ(z|x(i)) log qϕ(z|x(i))dz
=
∫
N(µ, σ2) log N(0, 1)dz −
∫
N(µ, σ2) log N(µ, σ2I)dz
= −1
2
J
∑
j=1
(µ2
j + σ2
j ) + 1
2
J
∑
j=1
(1 + log σ2
j )
= 1
2
J
∑
j=1
(1 + log σ2
j −µ2
j −σ2
j )
(2.8)
2.3.2.2
Expression of the reconstruction Loss Lr
The reconstruction loss measures the quality of the generated points x which are a reconstruction of
the input data points. Indeed, Lr is the expected value of x given z. As z is the encoding of the input
x, we have:
Lr = ∥x −xreconstruction∥
The expression of the quality of the reconstruction depends on the problem. For example, for a
regression problem, we will tend to use the Root-Mean-Squarre-Error (RMSE) while we will tend to
use the cross entropy for classification problems.
2.3.3
Experiment on The MNIST Dataset
In this section, we will implement the Variational Auto-Encoder using Tensorflow and we will showcase
its use on a simple toy task
2.3.3.1
The MNIST Dataset
The MNIST dataset ([LC10]) is a dataset of pictures of hand-written digits. The database contains 70
000 examples (60 000 for the training set and 10 000 for the testing set). Each image is a binary array
of 28x28 pixels. Each image is centered, normalized and comes with its label: an interger in [0,9]. The
MNIST dataset is traditionally used in the machine learning community as a benchmarking dataset for
the comparison and developpement of various machine learning models.
2.3.3.2
Setting up the Problem
In this section, we aim to build a generative model for hand-written digits. we aim to find a continous
latent variable z which produces valid elements x using the generative model pθ(x|z). Each element x
is a binary array of size 28x28. The model will be fed with 60 000 examples without any other clue
such as the corresponding labels or any other feature.
2.3.3.3
Implementation
The code is available in the appendix A as a Jupyter Notebook. The recognition and generative models
are implemented using a two-layered multi-layer perceptron with respectively 400 units for the first
layers and 200 units for the second layers. Only two dimensions are used for the latent space for the
sake of the ease of vizualization.
==PAGE:37==
2.3 Implementing the Variational Auto-Encoder
27
Regarding the reconstruction loss Lr, we implement it as the binary cross entropy5:
Lr(θ, ϕ; θ(i)) = H(x(i), x(i)
r ) = −
N
∑
j=1
(x(i)
j log x(i)
rj + (1 −x(i)
j ) log(1 −x(i)
rj ))
2.3.3.4
Results
Reconstruction
The figure 2.10 shows the reconstruction of a few samples taken from the dataset.
The reconstructions are not perfect and the results could be greatly improved using more complex
neural networks for the recognition and generative models. Nonetheless, these results are sufficient to
show the usability of the Variational Auto-Encoder in a generative context. Additionally, we observe
that latent representations of the inputs are distributed over N(0, 1): the sample is centered around
(0, 0) and most of the points are located within a radius of 1.
Latent Space
The figure 2.11 provides a visualization of the latent space. Images are decoded from
different configurations of z. From this vizualization, we can notice the following points:
• Every digit is represented in the latent space which seems to indicates that the inner representation
of the model covers the whole hand-written digit manifold in the image space.
• Every point in the latent space corresponds to a correct reconstruction (the reconstructed output
represents a hand-written digit). Thus, we have succesfully built a generative model for hand-
written digits.
• The latent space is continuous: small variations of z come with small variation of the generated
samples with regard to high level features such as the writting style.
The figure 2.12 provides another example of continous variations in the latent space. Each image
decoded from interpolations are valid hand-written digits.
Stylistic features in the Latent Space
The aim of this project is to model the language as two
different components: content and style. In the context of the hand-written digits, the same concept
can be applied. The content a picture of a hand-written digit is its meaning: the digit itself. The
style of the hand-written digit is the way the digit is drawn: it can be the overall orientation or a
particlar curvature. First, in the figure 2.11, we observe that the latent representation of the model
is able to catch the content of each class of the dataset because each digit is represented in the latent
space. Second, we observe that the latent space is not only constitued of one example for each class
but is constitued of a multitude of different specimens and the different specimen for a same class are
drawn with a different style.
Most interestingly, the different items from the different classes share common stylistic features. For
instance, the x-axis of the latent space seems to have an influence on the orientation of the digits. The
ones displayed in the center are straight while the ones of the left or on the right are leaning in different
direction. We observe the same tendency for the digits 5, 6 and 0 althought this effect is less visible.
The fact that stylistic features depends on the same properties in the latent space is a first hint
in the direction of using such model to modify the style of high-level objects such as the hand-written
digits.
5The expected predict output must be in [0,1]. Thus, we apply the sigmoid function to the output of the decoder
==PAGE:38==
28
2 Variational Auto-Encoder
Figure 2.10: Reconstruction of handwritten digits by a simple VAE model. The left column shows the
true inputs x, the middle column shows the latent representation of the elements of the mini-batch
qϕ(z|x) and the current element. The right column represents the products of the generative model
pθ(x|z) (i.e. reconstructions)
Figure 2.11: Vizualization of the latent space learnt by the Variational Auto-Encoder. This figure is an
array representing images x generated with pθ(x|z) and with samples of z. Each position (x, y) in the
figure space corresponds to the relative combination of z = (z1, z2) ∈[−3, 3]2. As we can observe, the
model has learnt a continous representation of the hand-written digits space
==PAGE:39==
2.4 Conclusion
29
Figure 2.12: Interpolations between two random points in the latent space. Each row corresponds to a
different serie.
2.4
Conclusion
First, we introduced the basics of the information theory, the Bayesian probabilities, neural networks
and the Variational Bayesian inference. Second, we proposed the Variation Auto-Encoder framework
as an implementation of the Variational Bayesian method. Last, we tested the Variation Auto-Encoder
against the task of modeling the MNIST dataset. We observed that the model is able to create a complex
latent representation of the initial dataset and that continous variations in this space produce continuous
variations on the hand-written digits manifold. Furthermore, we observed that our model is able to
model different styles of hand writting and that the stylistic features are correlated to orientations in
the latent space.
The Variational Auto-Encoder used in this chapter is really basic and can difficultly be applied to
more advance uses. The next step will be to developp a more complex model with the aim of modeling
more complex objects. More specifically, we will focus on developping a model suited to sequential data.
==PAGE:40==
30
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER 3
Variational Recurrent
Auto-Encoder
In the previous chapter, we introduced the Variational Auto-Encoder framework and tested it against
a simple example: generating pictures of handwritten digits. Unfortunately, this framework doesn’t
scale to more complicated data structures such as time series or natural language. For instance, we
count (28 ∗28)2 = 614, 656 possible combinations for a binary image of the size of the ones used in the
MNIST dataset while for sentences of only 10 words and vocabulary limited to 10,000 words we count
100002 = 100, 000, 000 different combinations. A problem that seems too complex to be tackled using
simple multi-layered neural networks.
However, both in the case of the time series and the sentences, we can observe dependencies between
time steps. As a consequence, a term within a sequence can often be predicted using the previous terms.
In this section, we will introduce an extension of the VAE framework adapted to sequential data: The
Variational Recurrent Autoencoder.
3.1
Recurrent Neural Networks
A common use case of a neural network is the approximation of a posterior distribution p(y|x) using a
function f : x →f(x) with f(x) = p(y) (figure 3.1).
In the case of sequential data such as time series, sentences or videos, it becomes difficult to find
the correct sequence Y given an input X because of the very high dimensionality of the data. On the
other hand, the structure of such data is very helpful: in a sequence y it is much easier to predict the
element yt knowing the previous elements yt−1, yt−2,etc..
For example, let imagine that we have a single neural network which is able to predict the next
word in a sentence iteratively. Then for each word xt in the sentence, there would be a function f such
as xt+1 = f(xt). As a result, we could model the function f using an arbitrary neural network and
generate sentences easily as shown by the figure 3.2.
This technique may apply to a very small dataset, nonetheless, it is impossible to find such function
f for larger corpus a same word can be followed by different words. In order to model a real-world
corpus of sentences, we need to build a model which is able to transmit a history of all the previous
elements.
In this way, at each step, the neural network would be able to make a prediction using
not only the previous element but the three or more past elements. A simple way to implement this
manually would be to feed more inputs to the function f. Using the example of the sentence, we can
feed one dimension for the t-th word and one dimension for the (t-1)-th word (figure 3.3):
Figure 3.1: Simple neural networks learn to map inputs x with outputs y
==PAGE:42==
32
3 Variational Recurrent Auto-Encoder
Figure 3.2: A single neural network could be used to generate sequential data by predicting every next
element using the previous one
• For the first step the neural network will predict ”like”, store it in the first dimension and place
”trains” in the second dimension
• For the second step the neural network will predict ”trains” using the two dimensions ”I” and
”like”. Then it will store ”trains” in the second dimension for further predictions.
Most interesingly, this is in total accordance with the core concept because we define a function f
which predicts Xt+1 given Xt with Xt =
(
xt
xt−1
)
. We have:
(
xt
xt−1
)
= f
( xt−1
xt−2
)
.
3.1.1
Formal Definition
We introduced the core concept underlying the Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) and their ability to
transmit information. Now we can propose a formal definition of this architecture. An RNN cell, which
is used recursively for each time step, takes two inputs: the previous hidden state st−1 which represents
the memory of the network, updated at each step and the current input xt which corresponds to the
t-th element of a sequence and can be left void. Then the function learns a transformation f, invariant
in time, such as:
(
st
ot
)
= f
(
st−1
xt
)
At each step, the RNN cell yields the updated hidden state st and the output value yt. The cell is
represented in the figure 3.4. Any kind of network can be used as an RNN cell: multi-layer perceptron,
convolutional neural network, LSTM, GRU, etc..
Moreover, this architecture is particularly interesting because the gradients can be propagated in the
network following the connections within the unstacked network which make the RNN fully compatible
with standard optimization methods and with other Deep Learning frameworks.
3.1.2
RNN as an encoder
3.1.2.1
Theory
We have seen that the Recurrent Neural Networks are able to transmit information by updating a hidden
state vector st. In fact, this hidden state acts as a summary which retains the information present in
the previous steps. Therefore, using an adequate objective function, if we select the last hidden state
we could obtain a summary of the whole input sequence, as described in [Cho+14]. In other terms, an
RNN can be used to create a fixed-length representation of a sequence. Moreover, as the hidden state is
Figure 3.3: Recurrent Neural Networks can use more dimensions to store previous elements which are
used to predict next elements
==PAGE:43==
3.1 Recurrent Neural Networks
33
Figure 3.4: A RNN cell takes a previous hidden state st−1 and an optional input xt as inputs and emit
an output yt and the upadted hidden state st
a fixed size vector, its information capacity is limited. Thus, such neural network may have to perform
a form of compression to transmit the information which presence is fostered by the objective function.
3.1.2.2
Example
In order to demonstrate the ability of RNN to summarize information, we would like to build a simple
example. In this example, we consider a sinusoid signal generated with t →sin(πt) and a time vector t
sampled constantly. We would like to predict the value at the step T + u given T first points (fig. 3.6).
This task not only require knowing the value of the previous point but also the variation between the
points in the previous steps.
In order to perform this prediction, we encode the input sequences using a simple RNN with a simple
non-linear layer as a cell. given the inputs xt, W and b the weights and biases of the non linear layer,
we construct the hidden state such as:
Figure 3.5: A RNN is used to encode a sequence into a fixed length vector.
Figure 3.6: An RNN is trained to predict the value of the point T+u given a sequence of T observations
sampled from a sinusoid. This would demonstrate the use of an RNN as an encoder since this task
requires to known about the previous steps in order to infer the value of the point at the step T + u.
This graph shows the training data: the full line is the sequence of observations x and the green point
is the label y
==PAGE:44==
34
3 Variational Recurrent Auto-Encoder
st+1 = f
(
st
xt
)
= tanh(
(
st
xt
)
W + b)
We implement this model using Tensorflow as follows:
Listing 3.1: Implementation of the Encoder RNN
1
1 def static_rnn(inputs):
2
# initial memory
3
initial_memory = tf.zeros([batch_size, state_size], dtype=dtype)
4
memory = initial_memory
5
rnn_inputs = tf.unstack(inputs, signal_size , axis=1)
6
for x in rnn_inputs:
7
# group inputs (previous memory s_t-1 + current input x_t)
8
cell_inputs = tf.concat( [memory, x], 1)
9
# applying the operation f performed by the cell
10
memory = tf.nn.tanh( tf.add( tf.matmul( cell_inputs , W), b ) )
11
return memory
In order evaluate the next value after u steps, we use a fully connected layer to ”interpret” the
hidden state and train the model using the RMSE as the objective function. After training, the model
successfully predicts the value of the step T +u. The full code is available on my Github 1. This example
demonstrates the ability of RNN to encode the information contained in a whole input sequence (figure
3.7).
3.1.3
RNN as a decoder
3.1.3.1
Theory
The RNN can also be used as a generative model. Given an initial state vector, the network can produce
results iteratively. For example, given the information representing a sentence, an RNN could produce
each word one after another. In this case, however, it is important to notice that the dimension of the
hidden state can be different than the dimension of the data. Therefore an additional layer has to be
added to the neural network to project the cell state into the data space. A simple non-linear layer can
be used for this purpose.
1https://github.com/vlievin/Tensorflow-tutorials
Figure 3.7: Using more dimensions, we can transmit previous elements to the next steps
==PAGE:45==
3.2 The Variational Recurrent Auto-Encoder
35
Figure 3.8: A decoder network takes an input as initial state vector and produce each element of
a sequence iteratively.
As the dimension of the hidden state and the dimension of the data don’t
necessarly match, we use a projection layer
3.1.3.2
Example
To demonstrate the use of such model, we use the same example as described in the section 3.1.2.2 and
try to predict not only one point but a whole serie of points.
Again, we use a non-linear layer as a cell with W and b the weights and biases of the RNN cell. In
this case, we use a linear layer as projection layer with Wproj and bproj the weights and biases. We can
define:
( st+1
yt
)
=
(
tanh(stW + b)
st+1Wproj + bproj
)
The decoder is implemented as follows using Tensorflow:
Listing 3.2: Implementation of the Decoder RNN
1
1 def decoder(inputs_encoding):
2
W = tf.Variable(tf.random_uniform([state_size , state_size], 0, 1), dtype=dtype)
3
b = tf.Variable(tf.zeros( [state_size] ), dtype=dtype)
4
hidden_state = inputs_encoding
5
outputs = []
6
for _ in range(signal_size):
7
# update the hidden state
8
hidden_state = tf.nn.tanh( tf.add( tf.matmul( hidden_state , W), b ) )
9
# project the output
10
output = tf.add( tf.matmul( hidden_state , W_proj), b_proj )
11
outputs.append(output)
12
outputs = tf.stack(outputs ,1)
13
return outputs
Using the RMSE as objective function, we train the model and obtain a very good reconstruction
(fig. 3.9). The code is available on my Github 2.
3.2
The Variational Recurrent Auto-Encoder
3.2.1
Introduction
The Variational Recurrent Autoencoder (VRAE) is basically a Variational Autoencoder (VAE) with
the recognition and generative models implemented as Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN).
In [Fv14], the original paper, the model was applied to the generation of short pieces of music and
was trained on video games musics such as the theme of Super Mario. Using the VAE framework applied
to images (section 2.3.3), we obtained a latent representation of the images. In this latent space, the
2https://github.com/vlievin/Tensorflow-tutorials
==PAGE:46==
36
3 Variational Recurrent Auto-Encoder
Figure 3.9: The decoder RNN is able to interpret the encoding vector produced by the encoder network
to predict the next T points
same digits were grouped together. Similarly, the VRAE model is able to encode a set of music samples
into a low dimension latent space. From this latent space, we are able to generate short music by
drawing variable from the latent space. Similarly to the case of the VAE, we observe that continuous
variations in the latent space come with continuous variations in the generated music samples. This
property also shows that the model is able to generate brand-new samples since we can generate an
infinite number of new samples because of the continuous property of the model.
In this chapter, we are going to implement the VRAE framework with some improvements. Then
we apply the model to a simple task: the generation of time series where the series are points sampled
from sinusoids with variable phases and frequencies.
3.2.2
The Model
The model is an extension of the VAE presented in the previous chapter. The overall architecture of the
model is similar except for the implementation of the encoder and decoder networks which are made
using RNNs. The architecture is presented in the figure 3.10.
3.2.3
Encoder q(z|x)
The encoder network is an RNN as described in the section 3.1.2. For each timestep is fed the corre-
sponding element of the input and the last hidden state is fed to the stochastic layer. This input fed to
the stochastic layer has to be representative of the whole input sequence.
Indeed, the information representing the whole sentence needs to be transmitted to the stochastic
layer because the model is required to reconstruct the complete sentence which is impossible to achieve
without transmitting a complete representation of the sentence through the model.
Figure 3.10: The VRAE is similar to the VAE model except that the encoder and decoder networks
are implemented using Recurrent Neural Networks
==PAGE:47==
3.3 Additional Improvements
37
The summarization of the input sequence is operated in a step-wise fashion. At each time step, the
model is fed with both the previous hidden state and the corresponding element from the input. Thus,
the current output is a representation of the information contained in the previous hidden state and
the current input. Following this line of thought recursively, we build this overall representation step
by step.
3.2.4
Decoder p(x|z)
The decoder network is an RNN as described in the section 3.1.3. The decoder receives the samples
from the stochastic layer as input and produces an element of the sequence at each step.
3.2.5
The objective Function
The objective function is similar to the Variational Lower Bound introduced in the section 2.2.2 in the
context of the VAE framework: we optimize the lower bound of the expected value of the reconstruction
of x. As a reminder, this term is decomposed into two terms: the regularization term which shapes
the latent space to a uniform Gaussian and a reconstruction loss which evaluates the quality of the
reconstruction. As we are working with sequential data, the reconstruction loss may be a reduction of
more basic measures applied to each sequence element.
3.2.6
Training the model
Similarly to the VAE framework, the model is trained using Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD). Gradi-
ents are computed automatically by Tensorflow. Thanks to the re-parameterization trick and because
unfolded RNNs behave like a feed-forward neural network, the gradients can be propagated at every
point of the graph.
Given the complexity of the model, we use a GPU acceleration to speed up the process.
First
experiments have shown that the use of the GPU seepds up the training process from 10 to 20 times.
3.3
Additional Improvements
Training the Variational Auto-Encoder was more difficult than training a deterministic auto-encoder
because the stochastic nature of the representation and the constraints on the latent representations
step up the complexity of the problem. Furthermore, training very deep neural networks is known to
be a difficult task which is evenly true for recurrent neural networks which can be seen as deep archi-
tectures in their unfolded form. This is why it is not surprising to see the vanilla Variational Recurrent
Auto-Encoder fail on the task of modeling complex data structures such as time series: we are training
a remarkably complex structure into an especially demanding framework.
In this section, we will introduce some additional improvements to the architecture previously pre-
sented in this chapter. Thus, this section is a listing of different features which can be added indepen-
dently to the actual framework. it is important to notice that most of these features a commonly used
in the machine learning communities. However, these features are not explicitly stated in the research
papers which explain that state-of-the-art results are often difficult to obtain.
Last, because some features are considered as elementary good practices in the deep learning com-
munities. Some features have been expected to have a positive effect on the overall performances and
have not been evaluated in the context of this project.
==PAGE:48==
38
3 Variational Recurrent Auto-Encoder
Figure 3.11: The dynamic_rnn class from Tensorflow implements the vanilla RNN (left): cells are
simply fed with the previous hidden states.
By contrast, our custom implementation of the RNN
(right) couples the RNN cell with a projection layer which produces an approximation of the true
output. this predicted output is used as input for the next RNN cell which can use this knowledge to
make better predictions. The squares represent the RNN cell, the triangles represent the projection
layer and the circles the outputs
3.3.1
Decoder: Feeding back the predicted Values
In the previous sections, we stated that the decoder model was implemented as a recurrent neural
network. However, the implementation of the dynamic RNN available in Tensorflow is designed such
as the RNN cells transmit only the hidden state between time steps.
However, this model can be improved because, in the context of the vanilla RNN, predictions are
made using a representation of all the previous steps. Nonetheless, most recent time steps are often
more helpful to predict the next value than the older ones. For instance, when generating text, knowing
that the last character is a ’v’ is enough to guess that the next character is a vowel. Thus, fostering the
transmission of information related to the last step could greatly reduces the complexity of the decoding
task.
Projection Layer
In the context of a decoding model, each RNN cell predicts one element of the
output sequence. Depending on the structure of the data, we are predicting either a value in a range
(regression problem) or particular class (classification problem). Thus, the raw output of the RNN cell
must be converted to fit the output’s requirements. In response to this problem, a projection layer
is used. the projection layers acts at two levels. First it adapts the dimension of cell’s output to the
dimension of the true output (i.e. the dimensionality of a data point within the sequence or the number
of classes). Second, the this output need to be normalized because, in the case of a classification problem,
the output over each dimension corresponds to a likelihood for the element to belong to each class. In
the case of a regression problem, we are most likely to wish our output to lie in [0, 1]. Therefore, in the
case of classification task such as predicting a specific character, the projection layer will be defined as
follows:
yt = Softmax(Wprojyrawt + bproj)
In the case of a regression problem, we can simply use a linear layer and additionally normalize the
output using an activation function.
Last, this is important to notice that this projection operation is the same for every time step. Thus,
only one set of parameters must be defined.
Feeding back the Predicted Values
We have seen that a decoder can be improved by using an
approximation of the preceding data point. In practice, this is done by coupling the projection layer
with the RNN cell and by adding a connection from the output of projection layer t −1 to the input of
the RNN cell t. In this way, the RNN cell can directly use an approximation of the previous element.
This wiring scheme is shown in the figure 3.11 and shows the difference with the vanilla decoder.
==PAGE:49==
3.3 Additional Improvements
39
Implementation
In order to take profit from the dynamic capability and the gain of performances
provided by the use of Tensorflow’s API, we are required to use this API. Implementing the vanilla
RNN with Tensorflow is straightforward using the dynamic_rnn class. Unfortunately, this class does
not allow us to feed back the predicted values.
Fortunately, Tensorflow’s API is quite flexible and features a class raw_rnn that allows to implement
custom operations and a custom wiring scheme between the cells using a customizable callable loop_fn.
The implementation follows this line:
Listing 3.3: loop_fn
1
1 def loop_fn(time, cell_output , cell_state, loop_state):
2
emit_output = cell_output
# == None for time == 0
3
prev_out = cell_output
4
elements_finished = (time >= num_steps)
5
finished = tf.reduce_all(elements_finished)
6
if cell_output is None:
# time == 0
7
next_cell_state = cell.zero_state(batch_size, tf.float32)
8
next_input_value = tf.concat([inputs_ta.read(time),tf.zeros([batch_size ,data_dim],dtype=tf.
,→float32)], 1)
9
else:
10
next_cell_state = cell_state
11
next_input_value = tf.cond(
12
finished,
13
lambda:tf.concat([ tf.zeros([batch_size,state_size], dtype=tf.float32), tf.add(tf.matmul(
,→prev_out, W_proj), b_proj)], 1) ,
14
lambda:tf.concat([inputs_ta.read(time), tf.add(tf.matmul(prev_out, W_proj), b_proj) ], 1) )
15
16
next_input = tf.cond(
17
finished,
18
lambda: tf.zeros([batch_size, data_dim + state_size], dtype=tf.float32),
19
lambda: next_input_value )
20
next_loop_state = None
21
return (elements_finished , next_input, next_cell_state ,
22
emit_output , next_loop_state)
Evaluation
We observed that feeding back the previous projected outputs significantly helps the
model. In practise, it has been observed that this technique makes the model more robust and accelerates
the training. The figure 3.12 shows the evolution of the objective function over time for two problems
distinguished by the use and non-use of this technique only.
3.3.2
Decoder: Teacher Forcing
Using the output at t−1 to facilitate the prediction at the step t improves the decoder model. However,
during the early stage of the training, the predicted output is very likely to be false. Therefore the
model is most likely to be trained using wrong predicted previous steps and will tend to learn incorrect
relationships since the value of the predicted outputs will change with time. As a consequence, the
Figure 3.12: Feeding the projected previous output (the expected values) makes the model more robust
and makes it converge faster
==PAGE:50==
40
3 Variational Recurrent Auto-Encoder
model will be required to learn new relationships while the predicted output is corrected over time and
this will most likely slow down the process.
[WZ89] introduces a technique to speed up the training process. Instead of feeding the previously
predicted output, the cell is fed with the true previous output during training. In this way, the model
can learn directly to predict elements using the true information while the model is not yet robust
enough to produce it by itself.
In order to measure the effectiveness of this technique, we trained similar models on a single language
modeling task (character level) with sentences from 8 to 30 characters. We observe that teacher forcing
accelerate the training process (figure 3.13). Moreover, the quality of the reconstruction obtained with
teacher forcing seems conductive to a better quality. Few examples of reconstructions are shown table
3.1. We can observe that the model trained with teacher forcing is better at reconstructing existing
words while the other model tends to produce meaningless chains of characters.
This technique, however, presents some drawbacks. Indeed, [Chi+17] points out the trade-off be-
tween short term and long term accuracy. In this paper, the goal is to build a my model able to play
video games by taking only the matrix of pixels as input. In order to take a decision, such model must
be able to simulate the next frames. This paper shows that using teacher forcing increases short-term
accuracy but affects negatively the ability to model long-term dependencies.
Regarding the language modeling task, we will choose to use teacher forcing because our experiment
will be limited to short sentences. Moreover, regarding the language modeling task, the first quality
assessment judges the ability of the model to form real words instead of forming meaningless chains
of characters. In this context, teacher forcing is a good choice since it fosters short term accuracy (ie.
word reconstruction).
ground true
teacher forcing
no teacher forcing
what does neil simon do?
what does he lane teer?
what moee coue ee do?
minor spoilers ahead.
monor spoilers ahead!
lonee peeele teat.
again, i’ve done research.
avoid it like per eraters.
aooon, lave ae crencs
it really was that bad.
it really was that bad.
it really was that bad.
Table 3.1: Reconstruction of a few sentences after 10000 training steps. the model using teacher forcing
tend to perform slightly better. For instance, the model with teacher forcing forms some meaningful
chain of characters while the other model totally fails (line 3). Similar results are observed on randomly
picked sentences
Figure 3.13: Using teacher forcing helps the model to reach higher accuracies
==PAGE:51==
3.3 Additional Improvements
41
3.3.3
A Solution to the Vanishing gradients problem: LSTM
3.3.3.1
Problem
Recurrent Neural Networks, introduced in section 3.1, are a great architecture to model sequential data
since at each step the information of the previous elements can be used to infer the current element.
As a consequence, recurrent neural networks are theoretically able to propagate information from early
elements to the last.
A basic RNN uses simple a non-linear layer as a cell. A common choice is the sigmoid function or
hyperbolic tangent. However, these functions map values from the range of the real numbers to the
small range [0,1]. This non-linear layer is fundamental for the cell to learn non-linear dependencies.
However, this mapping, by transforming a large input range into a very small range, reduces the ability
of the network to preserve information while transmitting it from the first layers to the last. Gradients
will be recursively mapped to a smaller range, which makes them progressively vanish.
Indeed, for example, in the case of a pure decoder, we can easily find a sufficient condition on the
weights of the layer for the Vanishing Gradients problem. Given st the state size, xt the input, and zt
a variable fed to a basic decoder and ϕ a non-linear function such as the sigmoid function, we have:
st+1 = ϕ(zt) where zt = Wst + b
Then |st+1 −st| = |ϕ(zt) −ϕ(zt−1|
However, ∀a, b ∈R2, a ̸= b, ∃c [a, b] | ϕ′(c) = ϕ(b) −ϕ(a)
b −a
because ϕ ∈C∞(mean value theorem)
Let set c ∈[zt, zt−1]|ϕ′(c) = ϕ(zt) −ϕ(zt−1)
zt −zt−1
Then we have |st+1 −st| = |ϕ′(c)||zt −zt−1| = |ϕ′(c)| ∥W∥|st −st−1|
Finally, st+1 = |ϕ′(c)| ∥W∥∆st
As for sigmoid or tanh ∀c ∈R, ϕ′(c) ≤1
∆st+1 ≤∥W∥∆st
By recurrence ∀k, ∆t+k ≤∥W∥k ∆t
Therefore if ∥W∥< 1
Then
lim
k→∞∆st+k = 0
This is why basic RNN cells are incompatible with long-term dependencies: when sequences become
longer, information vanishes progressively.
This problem of long terms dependencies prevents us from building more advanced models. For
example, in the sentence ”The trees are green”, it is pretty obvious that the last word to be predicted is
”green” because know that trees are always green, therefore we don’t need other contextual information
to make this prediction. The word ”tree” was enough to predict ”green” and the dependencies are really
==PAGE:52==
42
3 Variational Recurrent Auto-Encoder
short. However, if we try to predict the last word in the sentence ”I used to study music when I was
younger, that’s why I can play music.”, then we need to access information about the context contained
in the words ”studied music” which are placed far away from the last word. Therefore the task becomes
much more difficult for our model because it has to use the information related to ”study music” which
is diluted with other information representing the beginning of the sentence: ”I used to study music
when I was younger that’s why I can”.
3.3.3.2
Concept
A solution to this problem is the Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) cell introduced by [HS97]. The
LSTM is a type of RNN cell which is able to control what it reads, write and delete from the hidden
state. The cell doesn’t morph this information by shrinking it into a small space but adopts an additive
process with which information is changed incrementally.
Indeed, LSTM cells have the ability to learn how to explicitly select what to write and what to
forget. Using this technique, the network doesn’t learn to transform a hidden state with a non-linear
transformation. Instead, the network learns to take binary decisions to write or delete information. In
the previous section, we have observed that the sequential application of the cell transformation was
causing the Vanishing Gradient Problem. Thus, the binary reading and writing mechanism keeps the
information flow from this decaying process observed with vanilla RNN.
The LSTM cell has to be compatible with gradient descent and back-propagation.
Thus, this
mechanism uses a system of gates which are themselves controlled by differentiable functions. A gate
can simply be represented as the multiplication by a scalar from 0 to 1. If the gate is set to 0, no
information is passed. If the gate is set to 1, the information can go through. This can be simply
implemented as a non-linear layer which is compatible with usual optimization algorithms.
3.3.3.3
Implementation
Using standard non linear layers as cell for a recurrent neural network, we define the hidden state at
each timestep t such as:
st = h(Wst−1 + Uxt + b)
where st is the current state, st−1 the previous state, xt is the current input, W and U are weights,
b is the bias and h is the activation function which is commonly a non-linear function such as tanh or
ReLU. For this kind of RNN cell, we output directly the hidden state.
By contrast, the LSTM cell adopts a different mechanism in order to choose what information to
transmit or not. This transmission mechanism is controlled by 3 different mechanisms:
• write: write down the information to the memory (i.e.: transmit the information to the next cell)
Figure 3.14: A basic RNN cell: a simple non linear layer
==PAGE:53==
3.3 Additional Improvements
43
• read: read the information from memory (i.e.: read the information from the previous cells)
• forget: delete a part of the information (i.e.: do not transmit an information received from the
previous steps)
In order to control these mechanisms, the LSTM cell uses a system of ”gates”. The gates let the
information flow or not depending on their own values. Mathematically, we express the gates as following
with independent weights and biases:
• the input gate it = σ(Wist−1 + Uixt + bi) for writing
• the output gate ot = σ(Wost−1 + Uoxt + bo) for reading
• the forget gate ft = σ(Wfst−1 + Ufxt + bf) to forget information
Where W and b are weights and biases, σistheactivationfunction(sigmoid).
Besides these gates, the LSTM cell uses not only one output: the hidden state ht but also a cell
state Ct which acts as a writable memory.
At each timestep, a memory candidate C′
t = tanh(ht−1 + xt) is created inside the cell and will be
added to the cell state Ct depending on the value of the input gate it. If it is 1, then the candidate C′
t
is fully written to the memory (the previous cell state) Ct, itself controlled by the forget gate:
Ct = ft ∗Ct−1 + it ∗C′
t
On the other hand, the output of the cell is controlled by the output gate. Indeed, the output of a
current cell is a transformation of the current state of the cell (memory). Following this line of thoughts,
we define:
ht = ot ∗tanh(Ct)
The full cell is shown in the figure 3.15. The LSTM cell is trainable with SGD and is fully compatible
with usual deep learning architectures.
Figure 3.15: Inside an LSTM cell. An LSTM cell is able to learn what to read, write or delete in the
memory Ct. The values it, ot and ft control the input, output and forget gates which control this
mechanism. At each timestep, a memory candidate C′
t is added or not to the previous memory Ct
depending on the output gate. Thanks to this architecture, the LSTM cell allows to construct RNNs
with longer dependencies
==PAGE:54==
44
3 Variational Recurrent Auto-Encoder
3.3.4
Deterministic Warm-up and Weak Regularization
Training VRAE is a difficult task because of the complexity of the model and the presence of two terms
in the loss function which can be competing against each other during the training phase. Indeed, one
of the terms fosters the accuracy while the other regularize the model. It is not obvious that improving
the accuracy improve the regularization and the other way around.
The first trials with the VRAE model used on sequential data (sinusoids) failed because the model
was unable to converge into a state with which a good reconstruction performances were obtain without
damaging the regularization quality. During training, we have seen the regularization loss converging
fast while the reconstruction loss remained stagnant: minimizing the the regularization loss provided
more outcomes than minimizing the reconstruction loss and both process seem to be antagonist. As a
result, the model had good regularization qualities but was only able to generate zero filled vectors.
In order to explain why both terms are adversarial, let’s focus on the objective function.
As a
reminder, we want to maximize the Variational Lower Bound:
L ≥Lv = −DKL(q(z|x(i))||p(z)) + Eq(z|x(i))(log p(x(i)|z)
As a reminder, this lower bound can be expressed as two independents terms : latent loss Ll and
the reconstruction loss Lr with Lv = Ll + Lr:
Ll = −DKL(q(z|x(i))||p(z))
Lr = Eq(z|x(i))(log p(x(i)|z)
The reconstruction loss Lr evaluates the reconstruction quality of the input. The latent loss Ll,
however, acts as a regularization term and ensures that prior distribution is shaped as Gaussian distri-
bution. In practical terms, it forces the model to distribute all the inputs in the latent space such as
they form a Gaussian distribution.
On the one hand, the inputs are represented in the latent space not as a single point but as a Gaussian
distributions with a non-null width. On the second hand, pushed by the effect of the regularization
term, the model tries to occupy the whole space to fit the target distribution p(z). As a result, the
model tries to encode inputs x into a large Gaussian distribution in order to fill-up the whole space.
Consequently, samples z drawn from the posterior distributions qϕ(z|x) are randomly distributed in an
area that grows as the regularization term is minimized and the parameter σ becomes bigger. Regarding
the generative model pθ(x|z), the decoding task becomes more and more difficult because samples z
becomes noisier and noisier. The difficulty of the decoding tasks increases as the regularization term is
fostered and the model indefinitely fail to favor the reconstruction term. As a result, the model fails to
find a reasonable minimum. Two solutions help us to overcome this problem:
1. Weakening the Latent loss by simply adding a weight to this loss. This weight will be called αl
and noted latent_loss_weight in the code. In this way, the model is pushed to prioritized the
reconstruction cost because it returns a bigger outcome3.
2. Deterministic warm-up, which has been proposed by [Kaa+16], helps the model to focus on
reconstruction during the early steps of training by starting with a null latent loss and adding
progressively this term over time. The weight controlling this deterministic warm-up will be called
β and noted B in the code.
To sum up, both techniques taken into account, we optimize:
L′
v = βαlLl + Lr, β ≤1, αl ≤1
Using this technique, we are now able to train the model and obtain a reasonable reconstruction
accuracy.
3this technique was implemented in the original paper [Fv14]
==PAGE:55==
3.3 Additional Improvements
45
3.3.5
Dynamic RNN
Tensorflow is originally made to create a static graph before processing. For Recurrent Neural Networks,
the network is unfolded during the construction of the graph with a fixed number of steps. For example,
20 units will be unfolded to process sequences of 20 elements each. However, while it seems reasonable
to use such approach for time series since we set a fixed number of samples to use, it is less reasonable
to do so for natural language. Indeed, sentences may be of an average length of 20 words in our dataset.
However, we will also find much longer sentences up 100 words. In this case, if we wish to process the
whole dataset, we will need to unroll a static RNN composed of 100 steps which is an important waste
of memory and computing power.
A first solution, as used in the earliest version of the sequence2sequence model, was to split the data
into buckets of same sentence size. For example, sentences from 5 to 20 words were put together in a
bucket and sentences from 20 to 40 words were put together in another bucket. Then, different RNN
were constructed to process the different bucket.
In the last releases, Tensorflow has been updated with a dynamic implementation of the RNN:
the graph is now unfolded on run time which ensures to unfold the minimum number of units and
save computational resources.
However, this forces us to use the Tensorflow API which makes the
implementation slightly more difficult, especially to implement some techniques such as the projection
feedback as described in the section 3.3.1 or teacher forcing.
3.3.6
Learning Rate Decay
Setting the learning rate value is a trade-off between robustness and convergence speed. We would like
this value to be high to save time: the model will converge faster. However, a model will fail to converge
if the learning rate is too high because the parameters will change abruptly and the model will be likely
to miss a local minimum. This effect is represented in the figure 3.16.
Scheduling the learning rate is a good solution speed up the training in the early stage while keeping
a slow approach when fine tuning is required. The idea is simple: we use a high learning rate in the
early steps and decrease this value progressively. We choose to decrease the learning rate if the loss
stays constant after a given number of steps.
3.3.7
Reversing inputs
According to [Cho+14], reversing inputs can lead to a better utilization of the LSTM memory and lead
to better results. Indeed, for sequential data such as the language, the information contained in the
first elements of the sequence is often more valuable to predict the whole sentence than the last element.
Figure 3.16: The optimization algorithm fails to find a minimum if the learning rate is too high. For
this example, we try to find the minimum of the function f (gray curve). In red are shown the steps of
the optimization algorithm with a high learning rate. In blue is shown the steps with a smaller learning
rate
==PAGE:56==
46
3 Variational Recurrent Auto-Encoder
For example, given the sentence ”roses are red”, it seems easier to predict the last word ”red” given the
first word ”rose” than it is to predict the first word ”roses” given the last word ”red”.
However, we have seen previously that our model uses Recurrent Neural Networks to encode sen-
tences. With RNNs, the information contained in the first element of the input has to go through the
whole unfolded network to reach the last input which is connected to the stochastic layer. However,
even if the LSTM cells presented in the section 3.3.3 increase the ability of the network to transmit
information, this information is still likely to be lost.
Reversing the input is a simple yet efficient solution to this problem. Indeed, first elements of the
sequence are now placed at the end of the RNNs. In this way, the information representing the first
elements of the sentence can be transmitted more easily to the stochastic layer which means a better
transmission to the decoder. Since the decoder has a better access to the first elements of the sequence,
those can be decoded more easily.
3.3.8
Bidirectional RNN
In the previous section, we introduced a simple trick consisting in reversing the input sequence. This
was motivated by the fact that the last elements of a sequence are encoded more easily since they are less
likely to be transformed by other RNN layers. While the first elements of a sequences are more useful
to the decoder, other elements are still valuable. Therefore an easy way to encode more information
would be to use two RNNs side by side: one would encode the sentence in one direction and the other
would encode the sentence in the opposite direction. Using two encoders, we benefit from both encoding
directions.
This is the motivation for the bidirectional RNN introduced by [SPG97] and represented in the
figure 3.17. The bidirectional RNN is an RNN with forward and backward connections. The network
uses two distinct cells which process information respectively in positive and negative direction. This is
particularly useful to encode long sequences since the difficulty to encode first elements increase as the
length of a sequence increases. In practice, it has proven to be more efficient than the unidirectional
RNN as it is supported by the experiment presented in the figure 3.18.
3.3.9
Dropout
Large neural networks are prone to overwriting: instead of learning general rules about the structure
of the observed data, the model learns specific examples. in the field of machine learning, a common
approach to avoid overfitting is to use Bagging (Bootstrap Aggregation) which improves stability, accu-
racy and reduce variance and overfitting. In bagging, multiple models are trained on randomly chosen
subsets. The final model is obtained by averaging the sub-models.
This technique is doable with traditional machine learning models since their complexity is relatively
low in comparison with nowadays hardware.
However, the application of bagging to deep learning
Figure 3.17: The bidirectional RNN process information in both negative and positive directions. This
allows us to predict elements using past and future information. When used as an encoder, the bidirec-
tional RNN is useful to keep a good encoding of both the begining and the end of a sequence
==PAGE:57==
3.4 Experiment: Modeling Timeseries
47
Figure 3.18: Using a bidirectional rnn as encoder, the model conerges faster than using a simple rnn as
encoder. The y axis corresponds to the reconstruction loss. In this experiment, the RMSE is used
Figure 3.19: Dropout acts as a regularization technique for the neural networks by imitating the Bagging
technique. At each training step, a randomly chosen set of units is muted. Thus, different versions of
the same model are trained on virtually different training sets. At test time, however, all units are kept
a produce an average result of the sub-models used during training
models seems unrealistic because of three reasons. First, each model would need to be fined tuned
and hyper-parameters tuning is an exhausting task. Second, deep learning models are computationally
expensive thus the number of sub-models is bound to the hardware availability. Third, deep learning
models require to be trained on very large datasets and available datasets are often limited by their
size.
[Sri+14] proposes a simple yet efficient alternative solution to adapt such technique to the neural
networks. This technique doesn’t involve the use of independent models, hence it solves the problem
of hardware requirements and independent hyper-parameters tuning. The dropout technique virtually
combines a high number of different architecture by randomly muting part of the neurons during
training.
At each training step, a random set of units is ”dropped out” which provides us with a
different architecture at each time step. A simple way to drop units is to set their connections to zero.
Usually, the probability of keeping a unit is chosen to 0.5 for output units while it is chosen close to 1
for input units. At test time, however, all units are kept. Because of the linear combinations between
units, we obtain an averaging of the sub-models models used during training.
Regarding the Variational Recurrent Auto-Encoder, we wish to apply dropout to the cells within the
recurrent neural networks with the aim to regularize the model and improve generalization. A better
generalization would mean a better ability to model higher level language features. The implementation
of the dropout with Tensorflow is straightforward using the module DropoutWrapper.
3.4
Experiment: Modeling Timeseries
3.4.1
Motivations
The aim of this project is to build a generative model of the language using the Variational Autoencoder
framework. However, working with natural language is a difficult task by itself because of the complexity
==PAGE:58==
48
3 Variational Recurrent Auto-Encoder
of the structure of the data. Moreover, it requires important computational resources, therefore, it would
slow down the development because each validation experiment would require hours to run. On the
other hand developing the model itself is a difficult task because it requires dealing with advanced deep
learning techniques.
This motivates the choice to work with a toy experiment at first. Time series are a good candidate
because results can be assessed visually and because we can choose a limited set of functions which are
easy to model.
3.4.2
Data
Time series are sequences of values indexed on an ordered time range. The recorded value can be a
specific exchange rate, the gas price or the height of ocean tides over time. Time series are interesting
because they often present a recurrent behavior. For example, the height of the ocean tides have a cyclic
behavior related to the moon phases and general variation patterns can be observed with exchange rates
because the markets tend to adopt similar behaviors in reaction to specific events.
Regarding this experiment, we simulate our own set of time series using sinusoids. Sinusoids are well
fitted to evaluate the usability of Recurrent Neural Networks within the VAE framework because it is
a simple function to model with RNNs. Nonetheless, because we are dealing with a generative model,
we wish not only to model a single sinusoid but a family F of sinusoids defined by different phases and
frequencies. In order to do so, the functions f ∈F depend on two continuous variables x and y:
f : t ∈R →sin(πxt + πy))
Finally we can define the ensemble of functions F:
F = {t →sin(πxt + πy), (x, y) ∈[−1, 1]2}
The next step is to generate timeseries from the family of functions F. For the sake of simplicity,
we use a fixed time vector named t. Thus, we finally have a family of timeseries St defined as:
St = {f(t), f ∈F}
Finally, the ensemble of observations in St are generated using two uniform variables x and y. A
visualization of the dataset is presented in the figure 3.20.
3.4.3
Implementation
The model described in section 3.2 and the improvements proposed in section 3.3 have been implemented
using Tensorflow. The whole code is presented in a Jupyter Notebook available the appendix B. The
loss function used for the reconstruction term introduced in the section 3.2.5 is the RMSE (root-mean-
square error) which measures the average point-wise distance between the true output and the predicted
output:
RMSE =
√∑n
t=1(ˆyt −yt)2
n
.
The mode has been implemented using Tensorflow and its API which features high-level functions
such as an implementation of a dynamic recurrent network and LSTM cells. However, other parts
such as the decoder have been implemented manually using lower level modules such as the module
raw_rnn.
The time vector t was fixed to a length of 40 elements, the model was configured with the following
parameters:
==PAGE:59==
3.5 Conclusion
49
Figure 3.20: The time series are generated from a family of functions F and fixed time vector t. The
family of functions F is generated from two continuous variables x and y. On this graph are represented
a few samples of these time series. Each sample corresponds to a different configuration of the variable
(x,y): the Y axis controls the frequency and the X axis controls the phase. The goal of this experiment
is to model this ensemble of sequences using the VRAE
1
1 num_steps = 40
# length of each record
2 batch_size = 256
3 state_size = 60
# RNN Cells state size
4 learning_rate = 0.0005
5 epoches = 5000
6 beta_decay_offset = 300
# Deterministic Warm up
7 beta_decay_period = 1000
# Deterministic Warm up
8 latent_loss_weight = 0.03
# latent loss weight
9 data_dim = 1
# dimension of the data
10 latent_dim = 2
# latent space dimension
3.4.4
Results
Given a fixed time vector t, the model has successfully learn the space of observations St = {sin(πxt +
πy), (x, y) ∈[−1, 1]2} with an acceptable reconstruction error. Furthermore, the qaulitative analysis
of the results indicates good performances as well. A few samples are presented in the figure 3.21.
However, the most remarkable result with this experiment is the ability of the model to find a latent
representation of this set of observations. While the model was generated by controlling the phase x
and the frequency y, the two dimensions of z seem to control different features. This can be explained
by the fact that the model doesn’t learn the whole sinus function but a limited set of observations
restricted by a fixed time range. Thus, the concept of frequency and phase is quite irrelevant.
the reconstruction of sequences is not the most interesting result because a deterministic model such
as the encoder-decoder framework presented in the section 3.1 would have been perfectly fitted to this
reproduction task. The most interesting point is the generative nature of the model: for any z from
the latent space we can construct a time series ˆx with similar properties to the initial specimen. Most
interestingly, we observe that the model has built a smooth representation of the data set: similar items
are represented with similar latent codes.
3.5
Conclusion
Sequential data are often complex to model but their structure can be used to lower the complexity
of the task. Indeed, with sequential data, previous elements can help the model to predict a current
==PAGE:60==
50
3 Variational Recurrent Auto-Encoder
Figure 3.21: The VRAE model learns by reconstructing observations. The left column shows the inputs
fed to the model, the second column shows the position of the inputs in the latent space and the third
column shows the reconstruction. We can observe that the model performs a good regularization (the
latent space is Gaussian-shaped) and provide good reconstructions
Figure 3.22: The following plot represents the latent representation of the set of observation by the
model. We sample (z1, z2) ∈[1.5, 1.5] from the latent space and draw their reconstruction. Each point
(x, y) in the grid corresponds to a different combination (z1, z2). The model has built a smooth latent
representation of the ensemble of observations
==PAGE:61==
3.5 Conclusion
51
element. Therefore instead of predicting a full sequence, we can predict each element one after another
using the past information. Recurrent Neural Network is a special case of a neural network which is
based on this property. A unique cell is used at each time step to predict the current input based on
the previous inputs.
In this chapter, after having introduced recurrent neural networks, we have introduced the Varia-
tional Recurrent Auto-Encoder framework: a deep generative model built on the top of the Variational
Auto-Encoder framework.
This is basically a VAE model which uses recurrent neural networks as
encoder and decoder to tackle problems involving sequential data.
With additional improvements (LSTM, dropout, etc..), the VRAE model performed well on the task
of modeling an ensemble of time series. The model was not only able to reconstruct each of the input
with an acceptable error but it was also able to find a structured latent representation of the ensemble
of observations. The model is now ready to face the natural language modeling task.
==PAGE:62==
52
==PAGE:63==
CHAPTER 4
Generating Sentences from
a Continuous Space
In the previous chapter, we introduced the Variational Recurrent Auto-Encoder. A generative model
fitted for the modeling of sequential data. The aim of this chapter is to apply this model to the natural
language modeling task, a highly challenging task on three levels:
First, it is required to model a very large vocabulary. As a reference, the English Oxford Dictionary
contains 171,476 words. A large number which can be increased by the existence of proper nouns, slang
and words that exist in different forms such as the verb to be (I am, you are, he is). Second modeling
language requires mastering its grammar: a complex set of rules which is often difficult to master even
for a human being. Third, natural language is also based on a set of informal rules which depend on
the context and require to use the right linguistic style.
In this chapter, we will investigate the use of the Variation Recurrent Auto-Encoder with regard to
this task. First, we will present how to encode language, then we will motivate the choice of a limited
dataset and we will last analyze the performances of the model with regard to the natural language
modeling task.
4.1
Character-Level Encoding
We chose to use a character-level encoding to build the language model. The next section will present
the underlying motivations behind this choice.
4.1.1
Characters versus Word Level Encoding
Natural Language Models are based on Recurrent Neural Networks which require being fed with units
of language iteratively. The unit of text can be chosen as the word as used in [Cho+14], the character
as in [Kim+15] or even sub-words units as in [Wu+16].
For each approach, a vocabulary needs to be defined. For example, in the case of the character-level
models, the vocabulary can be simply the alphabet.
However, in regard to word-level models, the
vocabulary has to be limited and rules to limit this vocabulary have to be defined.
As a result, character-level models are attractive for their generalization capacity because they are
independent of a fixed vocabulary. On the contrary, the need to use a word-based vocabulary is the key
weakness point of the word-level models.
First, the use of a static vocabulary necessarily exclude some words. Therefore we need to define
rules to handle unknown words and when missing words are encountered. furthermore, we can’t guar-
antee to obtain good results because the network will make an inference based on the unknown when
unknown words are encountered. Moreover, a word-based model is prone to errors when misspellings
are encountered because misspelled words are considered as unknown words. By contrast, a character-
level model is more likely to handle unknown words and misspellings because the structure of the words
is likely to be similar to known words at the character level.
==PAGE:64==
54
4 Generating Sentences from a Continuous Space
Second, using a vocabulary require applying the softmax operation on a vector of the dimension of
the vocabulary which is extremely costly. Thus, using a character-based vocabulary tends to be a good
solution for this project because of the limited hardware availability.
Third, [RJS17] presents state-of-the-art results in sentiment modeling using a character model. Thus,
it seems that this model is well adapted to the purpose of this project.
Nevertheless, using character-based encoding increases drastically the sizes of the encodings of the
sequences. For instance, the sentence ”I hate this movie.” can be encoded into 4 words but is encoded
into 18 characters.
In the section 3.3.3, we introduced the vanishing gradients problem.
Even if
the LSTM cells are a partial solution to this problem, encoding long sentences remains an important
challenge. As a consequence, a project focusing on long textual structures would foster the use of a
word-based solution.
4.1.2
Practical Considerations Behind the Choice of a Character-level Model
First, this project has not been done in an industrial context and is done with limited computing
resources. Second, this project aims to provide a proof of concept for the transfer of stylistic linguistic
features. Thus, the main objective is not to build a model which can handle any sentence including the
long ones and focusing on small sentences is a viable choice. Third, the Large Movies Review dataset
is made from online reviews written in a non-professional context which explains that misspellings are
very likely to occur.
These reasons motivate the choice to build a model at the character level. Furthermore, it is also
very interesting to build a model based only on characters because this approach reduces the prior
knowledge provided by human hand to the model.
4.1.3
One-Hot Encoding
Sequences are encoded at the character level using a one-hot encoding. Each character is encoded into
a vector of the size of the vocabulary (alphanumeric symbols and additional characters). A one-hot
encoded vector is a vector of 0s with a 1 corresponding to the encoded character in the vocabulary.
An example is shown in the figure 4.1. The one-hot encoding operation is performed by Tensorflow
at runtime.
4.2
Dataset
The aim of this project is to build a generative model able represent the language in two separate
components: meaning and linguistic style. Ideally, we would like to have a dataset as large as possible
Figure 4.1: The sentence ”abc bc” is one-hot encoded with the vocabulary ” ,a, b, c”. Each character
is encoded into a vector of the size of the vocabulary. A sentence of 10 characters is encoded into an
array of size <sentence size> x <vocabulary size>
==PAGE:65==
4.3 Data Preprocessing
55
to increase the likelihood to cover all the intrinsic rules of the language. A good choice would be the
WMT dataset1, a very large public dataset dedicated to the research in statistical machine translation.
However, working with such large dataset increases de facto the complexity of the task and the
hardware requirements. Indeed, this would require implementing the model using multiple GPUs which
comes with a higher cost and requires more fluency in the use of TensorFlow. Hence, using a smaller
dataset is a necessity for such project.
Furthermore, because we aim to model stylistic features, a dataset oriented towards a specific feature
is a good choice. Consequently, a dataset of reviews such as movie reviews or food reviews is a good
choice because the language used in the reviews present many differences in terms of negativity and
positivity and because the field of language is limited.
This positivity and negativity is often labeled as sentiment in the machine learning community and
has been widely studied because it is a critical component for customer services nowadays. As a result,
many datasets for sentiment analysis are available and tools to measure sentiment are at disposal.
For this project, we will choose to use the Large Movie Review Dataset ([Maa+11]), a dataset
designed for sentiment analysis purposes.
The dataset contains 50,000 movie reviews with ratings
(from 1 to 10). The reviews are split into 25,000 positive reviews and 25,000 negative reviews. Samples
are presented in the table 4.1.
4.3
Data Preprocessing
The dataset comes in raw format. Potentially, HTML code is present in the reviews and any character
can be present. In order to remove HTML elements, we use the Python package Beautiful Soup 2.
Characters different than alphanumeric characters and (”’.!,?”) are removed using regular expression.
Finally, digits are normalized to 0. For example, The string ”1999” will be converted into ”0000”.
Modeling natural language and the difficulty increases with the length of the text elements to model.
To reduce the overall length of each data entry in our dataset, we split reviews into sentences and we
use sentences as separate items.
Sentences are encoded at the character level as explained in the section 4.1.1. Thus, the model is
fed with list of integers and produces list of integers.
Furthermore, deep learning models are computationally expensive to train and this cost increases
with the length of the structures we use because each additional character requires the addition of a
corresponding RNN cell on run time. This is why we limit the size of the sentences to 45 characters
during the experiments. This number was defined as a compromise between the length of sentences,
the number of sentences in the dataset and the time required to train the model.
4.4
Implementation
In this section, we will apply the model developed in the previous section to model natural language.
The model as presented in the previous section was compatible with this task. Only auxiliary functions
for data pre-processing, training management and a specific cost function had to be implemented.
The full project is available on my Github3.
4.4.1
Practical Matters
For this project, we have chosen to use Google’s open source deep learning framework Tensorflow because
of its large and active community. As a result, Tensorflow features a rich API containing high-level
1http://www.statmt.org/
2https://www.crummy.com/software/BeautifulSoup/bs4/doc/
3https://github.com/vlievin/VRAE-Tensorflow
==PAGE:66==
56
4 Generating Sentences from a Continuous Space
Rating
Review
1
The action in this movie beats Sunny bhai in Gadar. Akshay Kumar
possess the superpowers of Leonidus in 300, Neo in Matrix along with
Spiderman and Superman. It is hilarious. Except for the typical Akshay
Kumar and Anil Kapoor comedy I cannot see anything positive in this
film. The story looks like the writer told his 10yr old son to write. The
movie is so unreal that Anil Kapoors long range shooting with a shotgun
is the least most mistake by the director. Except for the directors Tashan
to make this movie there is no other Tashan. I regret wasting my money
on this movie and I would not recommend it to anybody. 1/10 is the
least I can give on IMDb or I would give it a zero.
2
Much worse than the original. It was actually *painful* to sit through,
and it barely held my six year old’s interest.Introduction of some new
Pokemon is marginally interesting, but storyline is extra-thin, dialogue
is still bad, and music is mediocre. Watch the television show instead -
it is much better.
9
Geniuses William Cameron Menzies and Herbert George Wells craft this
extraordinary anticipation film, with ambition and scope hard to find
today. They predict World War II and the way Great Britain was at-
tacked, and also the fact that the war would be followed by a space
race. They change the timing; in the film the war and the space ex-
ploration are much longer, but there are so many qualitatively correct
things that it is amazing. We even see an helicopter (the film is older
than them).Unforgettable giant planes and a futuristic meritocracy of sci-
entists that seem Romans with bubble-helmets: if you can see through
those funny costumes you may appreciate the state of the art architecture
by masters from the 30s, Well’s vision of a rationalistic society, interest-
ing reflections on the nature of power, and John Cabal as archetype of
the adventurous and inventive human being, the one that chooses to
shape reality and not to be shaped by it.9 1/2 out of 10. Inspiring like
that final monologue by John Cabal.
7
What could be more schlocky than the idea of private detectives getting
involved with the women they’re supposed to be spying on? And most of
the dialogue as written is perfectly banal.But the actors turn the dialog
into something that makes sense. You can see real people behind the
unreal lines. And the directing is wonderful. Each scene does just what
it has to and ends without dragging on too long.I showed this to several
friends in the mid-80s because I was perplexed at how such bad material
could be made into such a good movie. The friends enjoyed it too.
Table 4.1: Randomly selected samples from the Large Movie Reviews Dataset
==PAGE:67==
4.4 Implementation
57
features such as the implementation of the dynamic RNN and the LSTM. Furthermore, Tensorflow is
compatible with GPUs, which is a significant asset when considering training a deep and large model.
Regarding the training management, the code presented in the previous section had to be refactorized
to be used in a batch fashion: we leave the Jupyter Notebook environment for simple Python scripts
because the model will need to be trained for longer periods (from hours to days). Unfortunately, using
Jupyter Notebooks requires to be constantly connected to the server, using scripts allows us to run the
code in the background. Furthermore, the code has been adapted to be compatible with Tensorboard,
a visualization module included in Tensorflow. Tensorboard allows us to visualize the computational
graph and different training parameters over time.
4.4.2
Reconstruction Loss
In the section 2.3, we presented the implementation of the Variation Auto-Encoder and stated that the
reconstruction loss Lr is specific to the data structure and the problem we aim to solve. For instance, in
the case of the MNIST dataset, we were using the binary cross entropy because we were facing a binary
classification problem for each pixel of a given image. In the case of the time series, the binary cross
entropy couldn’t be used because each data point within a serie had to approximate a scalar within a
range [0,1]. Therefore, time series modeling was a regression problem, which justifies the choice of the
RMSE as reconstruction term.
In the case of natural language, each sentence is a chain of characters encoded as a chain of integers
each of them corresponding to an index of the vocabulary. At runtime, as described in the section 4.1.3,
each sentence is one-hot encoded vector.
The Variational Recurrent Auto-Encoder takes each one-hot encoded sentence and generates a re-
construction using the generation model pθ(x|z) of the same shape as the the input tensor. The i-th
element of the input or of the output of the model can be denoted as follows:
xi =
M
∑
j=1
pi,jej
where ej are coordinate vectors and pi,j corresponds to the probability of the i-th character to be
the j-th character in the vocabulary. Because we are dealing with probabilities, pi,j must sum up to 1.
In the case of the input sequence, the probabilities correspond to the ground true: pi,j is 0 or 1. In the
case of the generated sentences, our model doesn’t ensure that outputs are summing to 1. Therefore,
we will apply the Softmax function to the output 4.
We will name ˆx the reconstructed values of x and ˆpi,j the normalized predicted probabilities. For
each element of the sequence we are facing a classification problem, we use the average cross entropy
as loss function:
4In this case we use the Softmax function as normalization because characters are mutually exclusive classes
Figure 4.2: Tensorboard is a visualization module included with Tensorflow. It allows us to monitor
training parameters and to visualize the computational graph
==PAGE:68==
58
4 Generating Sentences from a Continuous Space
Lr(x) =
N
∑
i=1
H(xi, ˆxi)
= −
N
∑
i=1
M
∑
j=1
(pi,j log ˆpi,j + (1 −pi,j) log(1 −ˆpi,j))
(4.1)
4.4.3
Hyper-parameters Tuning
Tuning the hyper-parameters of very large models trained with a large dataset is a difficult challenge
because training the model takes hours or even days. Generally, 4 different methods can be used to find
a good set of hyperparameters:
• Manual Search: in this case, we try to use our knowledge and small experiments to guess good
parameters
• Grid Search: this method consists in searching the optimal parameters using brute-force search.
Ranges are defined for each parameter and the performances of the model are evaluated for each
combination. This method provides good results but is extremely time-consuming because the
model needs to be trained with each configuration.
• Random Search: ([BB12]) different configuration of parameters in the same way as the Grid
Search method. However, this method differs in the choice of the parameters. Instead of varying
parameters linearly in a range, the random search uses different configurations of these parameters
within the fixed range. The Random Search method has shown to be more efficient than the Grid
Search algorithm for models with many hyperparameters.
However, this method is still very
time-consuming.
• Bayesian Optimization: in this case, the objective function is considered as a noisy function of the
hyper-parameters. The main idea consists in using a set of observations (evaluations after training
using different parameters) to define a prior of distribution of the objective function conditioned
on the hyper-parameters.
In practice, automated hyper-parameters tuning processes are performed using clusters of computers.
In this way, experiments can simply run in parallel on different machines. In the context of this project,
it seems impracticable to use such methods because of limited hardware availability. For this reasons,
we will limit this project to the use of a Manual Search for hyper-parameters and let the implementation
of more advanced techniques for further work.
Experimenting with hyper-parameters is a long-winded affair and has required much time and at-
tention during this project. Indeed, multiple parameters can be adjusted which makes the task difficult
without any prior knowledge about such model.
A ballpark estimation of the hyper-parameters have been defined by looking into different projects
using sequence2sequence models. As a second step, we tried to focus on finding a configuration that
works. This task alone took already an astonishingly high number of hours during this project. This is
why we will settle for a sub-optimal configuration because the gain of performances seems to decrease
exponentially with the invested amount of time. Consequently, it is important to keep in mind that the
model presented in this project is likely to be suboptimal.
Finally, the model was trained using the hyper-parameters presented in the table 4.2.
==PAGE:69==
4.5 Evaluation
59
Table 4.2: Hyper parameters chosen for the proposed model
Parameter
Chosen Value
Parameter Description
initial_learning_rate
0.001
initial learning rate
encoder_state_size
1024
State size of the RNN cell of the encoder model
encoder_num_layers
2
Number of layers used for the RNN cell of the encoder model
decoder_state_size
1014
State size of the RNN cell of the decoder model
decoder_num_layers
2
Number of layers used for the RNN cell of the decoder model
latent_dim
16
Number of dimensions used for the latent space
batch_size
256
Number of data points per mini-batch
input_keep_prob
0.9
input keep probability for dropout
output_keep_prob
0.5
output keep probability for dropout
cell
LSTM
type of RNN cell (basic, LSTM, GRU, LNLSTM)
beta_offset
10
deterministic warm-up parameter
beta_period
10
deterministic warm-up parameter
latent_loss_weight
0.001
weight used to weaken the regularization loss
4.4.4
Training
During the early phases of the training, we feed the model with shorter sentences and increase the
length progressively. We started with sentences from 8 to 40 characters and increased progressively the
upper limit to 40 characters. In total, the model was trained on 34 490 sentences which are considered
as a very small dataset for such task. However, training the model using such small dataset was already
time-consuming: two days were required to reach a local minimum with an acceptable accuracy. The
model was trained using an Amazon ec2 p2 instance with a single GPU during 10 hours.
4.5
Evaluation
4.5.1
Reconstruction
The Variational Auto-Encoder is built on the top of the Sequence2sequence model. Therefore it is
first designed to reconstruct the input sentence into the target sentence.
Because the model is an
auto-encoder, the target sentence is the input sentence itself. As a reminder, the model produces a
probability pi,j for each character i to belong to the class j.
ˆxi =
M
∑
j=1
ˆpi,jej
In order to produce a human readable output, we need to use this probability to choose a class. We
define each predicted character as:
ˆci = argmax
j
M
∑
j=1
pi,jej
Cross Entropy
First, we evaluate the capacity of the model to perform the reconstruction task on
the training set itself and on the testing set to evaluate the ability of the model to generalize. This
allows us to have a clear vision on the capacity of the model to learn the structure of a subset of the
natural language.
In the context of text generation, the reconstruction loss measures the classification error for each
character. The model is trained using the sentence loss as described in the section 4.4.2 which can be
considered as the average cross entropy between the true character class and the predicted character
==PAGE:70==
60
4 Generating Sentences from a Continuous Space
class. After initialization, the model produces random chains of characters and scores an average cross
entropy around 3. After training, the model scores an average cross entropy of 0.35 on the training set
and 7.41469 on the testing set.
Average Number of Missclassifications
Nonetheless, the interpretation of the cross entropy is
challenging and gives little hints on how the model performs in practice. Indeed, the average cross
entropy has not been chosen for its verbosity but for its mathematical properties (continuity and
concavity) which are compatible with SGD. In response to this problem, we introduce a first human
readable measure: the misclassification rate:
emissclassification =
Nnumber_of_errors
Nnumber_of_characters
We report a misclassification rate of 0.03 for the training set and 0.61 for the testing set. Similarly,
we come to the same conclusion: the model performs well on known sentences but generalizes very
poorly because reconstructions are very dissimilar to the original inputs.
Qualitative Evaluation
As a third evaluation, we inspect a few reconstructions. Randomly selected
samples are presented in the table 4.3. The model is often unable to reproduce identical sentences from
the testing set which is in accordance with the high misclassification rate. Most interestingly, however,
in some cases, reconstructions and input sentences are similar with regard to the meaning: instead of
producing the same chain of character, the model re-phrase the input sentences while trying to keep the
same meaning. For instance, the sentence ”it was a waste of time to watch it.” is interpreted as ”it was
a story not worth watching.”: sentences are very different but the meaning remains the same. Other
examples of interesting cases of re-phrasing are displayed in the table 4.4. For instance, the model
interprets ”It was terrible.” as ”it is worse than the matrix sequels”: a biased but very meaningful
example.
The main objective of this project is to adapt the linguistic style. Adapting the linguistic style
requires transforming an input sentence into a version with a different style while keeping the same
meaning. In this way, these results are an important step towards this goal because the re-phrasing
examples are an adaptation of the linguistic style.
4.5.2
Latent Space
In the context of the Variational Auto-Encoder framework, we aim to build a latent representation of
the observed variable x. For simplification purpose, we assumed that p(z) = N0, 1). The latent term
Ll of the loss evaluate the distance from the actual posterior distribution of the model qϕ(z|x) to the
expected distribution p(z):
Ll = −DKL(qϕ(z|x)||pθ(z))
This term is particularly important in the design of the VAE as a generative model because it ensures
that every data point has its latent representation distributed within N0, 1) and especially that every
sample z drawn from N(0, 1) will be decoded into a correct sentence. Furthermore, the regularization of
the latent space is a condition for a continuous representation of the language as described in [Bow+15]
because the regularization constraints the model to create a dense representation of the language which
forces the model to encode similar sentences into a similar z.
Unfortunately, asides from the fact that we obtained a sub-optimal model, it is important to re-
member that we had weakened the regularization term as explained in the section 3.3.4 . As a result,
we can’t ensure the latent space to be conform to the ideal Variational auto-Encoder and sentences
sampled from some areas in the latent space may be decoded into wrong sentences (random chains of
characters, grammar errors, etc..).
==PAGE:71==
4.5 Evaluation
61
Training Set
input
reconstruction
it really is that terrible.
it really is that terrible.
do yourself a favor and don’t watch.
do yourself a favor and don’t watch.
this film is self indulgent rubbish.
this film is self indulgent rubbish.
the writing was trite and shallow.
the writing was trite and shallow.
i know where the maniac lives!
i know where the maniac lives!
bashki is capable of much more.
bashki is capable of much more.
Testing Set
input
reconstruction
it was a waste of time to watch it.
it was a story not worth watching.
you wanna cry when the music starts.
you can sue that from the beginning.
overall a disappointment.
overall, a disappointment.
what can i say about ocean’s twelve?
what can you say about shomteve soo?
i could rewatch it tomorrow.
i could barely sit through.
the viewer never knows!
the only real oy vey!
the acting was mediocre.
the acting was tery bad.
this film was terrible.
this film was terrible.
next time do ur own thing!
nev see enolt on tve doo?
the vertigo shot!
the best one for me.
Table 4.3: Randomly selected reconstructions from the VRAE model with the original input. The model
has learned to reproduce sentences from the training set with a very low error rate. Most interestingly,
the model is often unable to reproduce the sentences from the testing set. However, in some cases, a
different set of character doesn’t mean that where are facing a wrong reconstruction: the model
input
reconstruction
It was terrible.
it is worse than the matrix sequels.
this movie was craptacular.
this movie was pure trash.
have you ever watched it?
why don’ t do it?
otherwise, it did suck.
otherwise, don’t bother.
the plot is almost nonexistent.
the plot makes no sense at all.
nothing could have helped.
nothing makes much sense.
first of all, the title daily is a lie.
first of all, it was a disappointment.
this film has no life in it.
this film however, is a void.
the suspense is laughable.
the story is pletty stupid.
avoid this movie it makes you bitter.
avoid this movie at all costs, folks.
where is the truth ?
why is the truth ?
Table 4.4: Hand-picked reconstructions.
These example show an ability of the model to interpret
unknown sentences with its state of knowledge
==PAGE:72==
62
4 Generating Sentences from a Continuous Space
4.5.2.1
Fit to N(0, 1)
After training, we obtain a latent loss of 19.7 for the training set and 19.5 for the testing set. The model
performs equivalently with known and unknown data. However, this term is difficult to interpret: further
investigations are required.
The figure 4.3 shows the distributions of samples z drawn from qϕ(z|x) where x is a mini-batch of
5000 data points. Each sub-graph represents an independent dimension of z. The distribution N(0, 1)
is presented as a reference. Plots indicate a good fit to N(0, 1). However, it is difficult to evaluate the
quality of the distribution at very small scale: overall the model seems to fit N(0, 1) but it can present
some local distortions.
4.5.2.2
Smoothness and density
In order to check the smooth and dense nature of the latent space, we need to ensure that every point
within the latent distribution p(z) = N(0, 1) generate valid sentences and we need verify if sentences
decoded from a neighborhood are similar with regard to the meaning. Hence, naming f the generative
model, we propose the following steps as evaluation technique:
• First, we sample x0 from p(z) = N(0, 1)
• Second, we sample neighboring points x = x0 + ϵ ∗r
• Third, we assess qualitatively the proximity of f(x) with f(x0) with regards to the meaning
In practice, sampling directly z from N(0, 1) showed that the latent space is very sparse: decoded
z are often grammatically incorrect and the model often fails to generate meaningful words.
As a
consequence, we conclude that the latent representation is not dense.
We can now pursue with analysis of the model and check if the model is locally soft. For this purpose,
we choose x0 as an element of the training set. The table ?? shows three examples of neighborhoods
but similar results can be observed with other points. In this case, we observe that the model fails to
generate perfectly correct sentences. Nonetheless, by interpreting the noisy outputs, we observe that
those neighbors seem to be related to the same concepts. For instance, the sentence ”the writing was
terrible” has ”the writing, though, was unrealistic” as neighbor. Both sentences are about the writing
and convey a negative point of view.
Figure 4.3: This figure shows the distribution of samples z ∼qϕ(z|x) for each dimension of the latent
space. As a reminder, we assume p(z) = N(0, 1) as a constraint. The distribution of latent representa-
tions seems to fit N(0, 1)
==PAGE:73==
4.6 Conclusion
63
the acting is very poor!
the actors look as if they are drugged.
the writing was terrible.
the acting is even some pretty dook.
the actor who played jesus was miscast.
the writing, these isn’t really bad.
the acting is perhaps the more everynde.
the actor really gets what he paid for.
the writing, though, was unrealistic.
the acting is perhaps the more ever need
the actor who played jesus was miscast.
the writing, though, was unrealistic.
the acting is perhaps the dose even ne.
the actor who played jesus was miscast.
the writing, though, was untereating.
the acting is perhaps the dore desient.
the actor really gets what he paid for.
the writing, this were interesting.
the acting is ever some pretty dork.
the actor really gets what he paid for.
the writing, this were interesting.
the acting is perhaps the more everynde.
the actor wholl is hard wath hes belut.
the writing, though, was unterlibating.
the acting is perhaps the dose even need
the actor who played jest was mistart.
the writing, though, was unrealistic.
the acting is perhaps the vose ending.
the actor who piace ias wast has beadt.
the writing, though, was unrealistic.
the acting is even some pretty dork.
the actor really gets what he paid for.
the writing, these isn’t realistic.
Table 4.5: Sentences decoded from the neighborhood of an initial point (first row). As we see, recon-
structions are not perfect but the model seems to be locally continuous with regards to the meaning:
neighboring sentences have similar meaning to the input sentence
4.6
Conclusion
We have now built and trained a natural language model based on the Variational Recurrent Auto-
Encoder framework. In a second phase, we proposed methods to assess the performances of the model
regarding two points: the quality of the reconstructions and the regularization quality with a focus on
the continuous nature of the latent space which is required for generative tasks.
We observe that the model the latent representation is very sparse.
Nevertheless, despite poor
generative performances, the similarity of the sentences within a neighborhood and the case of the
rephrasing phenomenon seems to indicate a good recognition performances and a certain softness.
==PAGE:74==
64
==PAGE:75==
CHAPTER 5
Adapting the Linguistic
Style
We introduced the Variational Recurrent Auto-Encoder in the context of natural language modeling.
This model, despite being trained on a very small dataset, seems to have acquired a high-level repre-
sentation of the language and presents some smoothness in the language space: similar points in the
latent space corresponds to sentences with similar meanings. Furthermore, we have seen that the model
tend to rephrase unknown sentences using its state of knowledge. This rephrasing ability is the first
step towards style transfer because generated sentences were conveying the same meaning as the input
sentences but were using a different style.
Similarly to the model described in [GEB15], we aim to build a high-level representation of the
language with separate components for the style and the content. Furthermore, [RJS17] has proven
that neural networks can learn to model stylistic features such as the sentiment in an unsupervised
fashion. Furthermore, [SHB16] has also revealed that the use of side constraints could be effective for
style modeling.
First, we will inspect the latent space of our model for stylistic features such as the positivity and
negativity. Then, we will propose practical methods to adapt the linguistic style using such model.
5.1
Sentiment as Stylistic Feature
5.1.1
Style and Sentiment
Style in language can take many forms. For instance, [PK99] provides a few examples including the
pronounced use of long words, the use of first person singular, the use of negations and the presence
of positive or negative emotions or the use of causations. Furthermore, the border between style and
content is blurry because different styles often come with a different content. For instance, people using
the first-person singular heavily in their conversations will use a more direct linguistic style but they
will also relate things from their point of view which can distort the content. Additionally, people using
positive emotions and negative emotions will tend to present a different view on the same object. As a
result, we should keep in mind that a change of style will likely come with a slight change of content.
In natural language processing, sentiment refers to the attitude of a speaker with respect to some
topic. For instance, in the context of the film reviews, the review of a person who disliked a movie
will be labeled with a negative sentiment. By contrast, a review from a fan of the same movie will be
labeled with a positive sentiment.
The sentiment lies on the limits of the definition of the linguistic style because sentences conveying
very different sentiments carry different meanings. For instance, a negative movie review will say that
a particular movie is bad and a good one will transmit a positive view on the same movie. Therefore it
seems that modifying the style will inevitably change the content. Nonetheless, sentiment is interesting
because it comes in many shades. Indeed, we can find reviews carrying positive views about the same
movie which use a different degree of positivity. For instance, the sentences ”I like this movie.” and ”I
love this movie.” transmit the same content but use different styles expressed as a difference of sentiment:
one use more positive emotions. Thus, slight variations of sentiments can be considered as variations
==PAGE:76==
66
5 Adapting the Linguistic Style
of style.
Furthermore, diametrically opposite sentences on the sentiment spectrum won’t carry the
same meaning but can address the same object. For instance, the sentence ”I loved the sequence when
James Bond was riding in Istanbul” and the sentence ”I hated the sequence with James Bond riding in
Istanbul” exhibit a very different point of view. However, both sentences inform that James Bond was
riding in Istanbul. As a consequence, even if the point of view of the author is changed, we can keep
an important component of the content while significantly changing the sentiment.
Last, the sentiment is a good candidate for practical reasons. First, sentiment analysis is a field
widely studied and measuring tools are largely available. Second, datasets focusing on the sentiment are
available. Third, the sentiment is a feature that exhibits a large panel of nuances which are interesting
in the context of a qualitative study.
5.1.2
Sentiment Analysis
Sentiment Analysis refers to the use of natural language processing tools to measure the affective states
of a speaker towards a particular topic. Sentiment analysis models are usually based on machine learning
techniques. Typically, models are trained using a labeled dataset such as product reviews: the review
itself is the object to classify and the note of the review is the label.
A wide variety of techniques from the simple frequency analysis (which words occur more frequently
in the context of positive or negative reviews) to complex character-based deep learning models are
used.
In the context of the project, we have chosen to use the Large Movie Review Dataset from [Maa+11]
because it provides reviews with their corresponding ratings. The ratings would have been used as a
sentiment metric. Unfortunately, we split the reviews into sentences because processing a whole review
was computationally too intensive and because it allows us to increase the total number of examples.
However, sentences themselves taken out of their context lack of coherence with the overall rating of a
review. Indeed, a bad review doesn’t necessarily mean that every sentence in the reviews is negative.
Indeed, despite a generally negative point of view, the author may have liked some parts of the movie
and have written few positive lines about it.
As a response to this problem, we use an external sentiment analysis tool to measure sentences.
We chose to use the [HG14] for this project. Vader is a good compromise between availability and
performances. Indeed, Vader is directly included into the NLTK, the popular open source Natural
Language ToolKit widely used in the machine learning community. Furthermore, as described in the
original paper (released in 2014): “Vader performed as well as (and in most cases, better than) eleven
other highly regarded sentiment analysis tools” and “Vader outperforms individual human raters”. Vader
predicts a sentence to be of 3 different sentiments: negative, neutral or positive. Some examples are
provided in the table ??.
5.2
Unsupervised Learning and Sentiment
We now have decided to work with the sentiment as a stylistic feature to model. We will now present
arguments in favor of the unsupervised learning of the linguistic style and we will present the results
based on a few experiments.
5.2.1
Fundamental Motivations
In machine learning, unsupervised models are trained without any additional data but the data points
themselves. In the context of this project, the model is fed with chains of integers corresponding to
the encoding of the different characters. No additional information such as the sentiment value or any
other label is provided to the model. Thus, it seems that there is no reason that such model could learn
to model sentiment because the sentiment is a human concept.
==PAGE:77==
5.2 Unsupervised Learning and Sentiment
67
sample
neg
neu
pos
bad, sad, and rubbish.
0.767
0.233
0.0
great old movie drama.
0.0
0.423
0.577
i always enjoy thomas gomez.
0.0
0.484
0.516
it is a perfect scene.
0.0
0.448
0.552
this film sucks!
0.583
0.417
0.0
the two actors are very natural.
0.0
0.642
0.358
it was hilarious.
0.0
0.426
0.574
it was dumb.
0.623
0.377
0.0
well acted and good enough plot.
0.0
0.444
0.556
it was weak, very very weak.
0.592
0.408
0.0
it’ s horrible.
0.778
0.222
0.0
nothing more, nothing less.
0.0
1.0
0.0
she’ s a good actress.
0.0
0.408
0.592
Table 5.1: Randomly selected sentences from the Large Movie Review Dataset and their associated
sentiment found using the Vader sentiment analysis tool
However, the design of the model is the key motivation behind the assumption that the model can
learn stylistic feature. Indeed, the model is designed on the top of the auto-encoder framework and
the particularity of the Variational Auto-Encoder is to have a limited capacity due to its regularization.
As a consequence, the model has to learn to encode the input sentences into an optimal code in order
learn an important number of sequences. Thus, the latent representation is the optimal encoding of the
language.
We will define the concept of pure information as the component of information which is independent
of the encoding. This is the actual information we want to transmit using a media (voice) and an
encoding (language). In this sense, the content of a sentence is pure information.
The optimal encoding contains the element of pure information to transmit otherwise it couldn’t be
decoded while preserving its content. On the other hand, the optimal encodes nothing more than the
pure information otherwise it would see its size growing. As a result, we can argue that the optimal
encoding is pure information.
In the context of the Variational Auto-Encoder, the latent representation is the content conveyed
by the speech because the latent representation is the optimal encoding of the speech. For instance,
elements in the latent space may be the information people think that Matrix is a good movie or Orson
Welles has a good reputation. Then, the job of the decoder is to decode this language into natural
language such as I love Matrix. or Orson Welles is such a good director.
However, the information people think that Matrix is a good movie can be decoded into I love Matrix
or I like Matrix.
Thus, the language contains more its apparent content; it contains the choice of
expression which is an expression of the context. Indeed, the choice between like or love depends on
the context: this is the speaker’s favorite movie or maybe the speaker tends to use superlatives more
frequently. Thus, the actual content is formed of the apparent content and the context and as the
context is part of the content, context is pure information. Because linguistic style is an expression of
the context, as stated in the section 1.1, then the linguistic style is pure information. Therefore the
linguistic style is likely to be represented as an explicit feature in the optimal encoding of the language.
5.2.2
Sentiment Distribution and Sentiment Feature
If the model explicitly learns stylistic features of the language, then the stylistic features are discrimi-
native features of the sentences in the latent space. As a result, sentences with different styles will be
located in different areas of the latent space. On the other hand, if the style is not represented in the
latent space, sentences with different styles will be distributed uniformly in the latent space.
==PAGE:78==
68
5 Adapting the Linguistic Style
The figure 5.1 displays the distribution of positive, neutral and negative sentences in the latent
space. Each subgraph corresponds to a dimension of the latent space. Overall, sentences are uniformly
distributed except for some dimensions which present different distribution for the positive, neutral and
negative sentences. For instance, over dimension number 11, neutral sentences are mostly distributed
on the negative values of z and other sentences are mostly distributed on the z positive values of z.
We use the KL divergence to measure the divergence between the latent positions of the mostly
negative and mostly positive sentences for each dimension of the latent space. We find that the mean
KL Divergence is about 0.13 and the variance is about 0.0017 which indicates a narrow distribution of
divergences over the dimensions. Last, we find that one dimension which stands out of the crowd with
a divergence of 0.25.
We investigated further the discriminative potential of this dimension by analyzing qualitatively
examples generated using similar the same latent code except for the value of the most discriminative
dimension. We report that in a few cases, sentences generated over this axis present variations in the
use of the verb such as like or love but this phenomenon remains isolated and can’t be considered as a
general result.
5.3
Adapting the Style
The Variational Auto-Encoder has shown to be able model high-level features of the language such as
style and content. We will now propose methods to adapt the linguistic style. The four methods are
represented in a schematic way in the figure 5.2.
5.3.1
Dimension Feature
[RJS17] has shown the ability of a model trained in an unsupervised fashion to adapt the linguistic
style. Indeed, in this paper, one neuron corresponds to the sentiment and fixing this neuron during a
generative process allows us to generate reviews with a positive or a negative point of view on the same
object.
However, the analysis of the sentiment with regard to each dimension in section 5.2.2 has proven
the non-ability of our model to model such feature.
Figure 5.1: Distribution of positive, neutral and negative sentences in the latent space. Each sub-graph
corresponds to a dimension of the latent space. Overall, sentences are uniformly distributed except for
some dimensions which present different distribution for the positive, neutral and negative sentences
==PAGE:79==
5.3 Adapting the Style
69
((a)) Sentiment feature
((b)) Linear Transformation
((c)) Neighborhood
((d)) Interpolation
Figure 5.2: The four different methods proposed to modify the linguistic style
5.3.2
Linear Transformations in the Latent Space
[Mik+13] introduced the Skip-gram model1 which allows us to represent words encoded into a sparse
one-hot vector into a compact representation. These word embeddings are interesting because they
represent words at the concept level and this high-level space presents interesting properties. Indeed,
some language patterns are explicitly represented as linear transformations in the embedding space.
For instance, the result of a vector calculation vec(“Madrid”) - vec(“Spain”) + vec(“France”) is closer
to vec(“Paris”) than to any other word vector. We can conclude that the relation vec([Country]) ->
vec([Capital]) is explicitly represented in the structure of the embeddings and is shared among the
examples of this rules such as vec(”Madrid”) -> vec(”Spain”) and vec(”Paris”) -> vec(”France”).
The Skip-gram models build embeddings using the context in which the words are used. Thus, words
used in the same context will share similar embedding. Thus, words representing similar concepts are
placed side-by-side in the embedding space.
Similarly to the Skip-gram algorithm, the Variational Auto-Encoder encodes sentences in a space of
a lower dimensionality. Additionally, similarly to the Skip-gram embeddings, the sentences embeddings
1the word2vec model is an implementation of this model
==PAGE:80==
70
5 Adapting the Linguistic Style
tend to be related to high-level concepts because adjacent sentences in the latent spaces share similar
meanings.
Linear transformations in the concept space such as observed with the word embeddings seem to be
applicable to the latent representation of the sentences. Concepts such as negation seem to be encoded
in a way they can be transferred to other sentences in this space. For instance, let set za the encoding of
the sentence a ”I liked it.” and zb the encoding of the sentence b ”I didn’t like it.” Then the vector zb−za
must represent the concept of negation because this is what differentiate the two sentences. Finally, if
we encode the sentence c ”I recommend this movie.” into zc, then the code zd = zc + zb −za is expected
to be decoded into the sentence d ”I don’t recommend this movie.” because we apply the concept of
negation zb −za to the sentence c. In practice, we obtained the sentence ”i did not recommend this
movie this one.”: a result which presents interesting similarities with the expected result.
Applying this transformation seems to be applicable to others cases despite noisy results. Some
other examples are available in the table 5.2. We can see that transformed sentences are not always
correct but we can observe that the model does not simply add ”don’t” before the verb to create a
negation: it seems that the model has partially learned some basic grammar rules. For instance, ”I
was” is transformed into ”I am not” and ”I like it very much” is transformed into ”I didn’t find it very
enjoyable”.
This finding confirms that transfers of concepts using linear transformations as observed with the
Skip-gram model are possible in the latent representation of the Variational Auto-Encoder.
In the
future, we hope to apply such technique to more advanced linguistic concepts and apply it to the task
of the adaptation of the linguistic style.
5.3.3
Neighborhood
We observed that similar codes are decoded into similar sentences. As a consequences, sentences f(z)
decoded from a neighborhood of an input sentence f(z0) will be similar to the input sequence with
regard to the meaning. Instead of generating sentences by controlling the a specific feature in the latent
space, we propose to generate sentences within a neighborhood and select the one that present the right
characteristic with regard to the style. In this way, we expect the generated sentence keeps a meaning
similar to the input sentence but uses the right style.
The existence of sentences conveying similar meanings but using different styles in a neighborhood
has been presented in the section 4.5.2.2.
Original Sentence
Negation
I recommend this movie.
i did not recommend this movie this one.
I know what this movie is about.
i don’t know why this movie is hotted.
I was captivated by her.
i am not a parent, neither am i a movie.
I watched this movie two times.
i can’t wait to see this movie to sinh.
i like it very much!
i didn’t find it very enjoyable to it.
i think it is only available on vhs.
i didn’t know anything about it either.
i like it very much!
i didn’t find it very enjoyable to it.
i will definitely buy it.
i absolutely don’t really like this film
Table 5.2: Some examples of linear transformation using the vector vec(”I didn’t liked it.”) - vec(”I liked
it”.) which seems to represent the concept of negation. Transformed sentences are not always correct
but we can observe that the model does not add simply ”don’t” to create a negation. For instance, ”I
was” is transformed into ”I am not” and ”I like it very much” is transformed into ”I didn’t find it very
enjoyable”
==PAGE:81==
5.3 Adapting the Style
71
5.3.4
Nuances of Style: Homotopies
The Variational Auto-Encoder has shown to be able to build a ”dense” and smooth high-level repre-
sentations of complex data structures such as images, music and natural language. In the case of the
language, [Bow+15] exhibits a very interesting property of the latent representation of the language:
the existence of homotopies. In other words, the existence of homotopies makes possible to interpolate
between two sentences in the language space using interpolations of their latent representations.
For instance, let set z1 and z2 two points in the latent spaces and f(z1) andf(z2) their respective
decoded sentences. Then, it has been observed that points z = (1 −t)z1 = tz2, t ∈[0, 1] are decoded
into correct sentences (because the latent space is continuous) and that sentences f(z) are a smooth
transition from f(z1) to f(z2) with regard to the meaning.
In the context of this project, this property is particularly interesting because it could be applied
to control the artistic style in an analogical fashion. For instance, we could obtain a sentence slightly
positive by taking an interpolation of a very positive sentence and a very negative sentence. In other
words, the existence of homotopies allows us to adapt the linguistic style with nuances.
We will now investigate the compatibility of our model with the homotopic property.
For this
purpose, we select points within the latent space and greedily decode the intermediate points. We
evaluate the quality of the results using a qualitative approach. The table ?? shows an example of
interpolation between the sentences ”I loved it.” and ”I hated it.”. Despite having a scattered language
representation (decoded sentences are not correct), the model exhibits an interesting property: the
verbs used in the interpolated sentences are intermediate concepts between the initial verbs love and
hate.
I loved it.
The music was grandiose.
I loved the acting
i loved it, my wife loved it.
the music and script was maghel gaod.
i loved khisewtere than the latter.
i loved it, my wife loved it.
the music and scrne was a very good mnl.
i loved thi titler watch the ending.
i loved it, my wife loved it.
the music and scrne was a very good movi
i loved ihe tiilewand and the time.
i loved the original scary movie.
the music and scone was a very good movi
i loved ih the filetlana change ahen.
i loved the film’anemation wou.
the music and songs are also will good.
i loved it better than the matrix !
i liked the firmt onder it off.
the music and songs are also well good.
i could iever watch the entire family.
i liked the oold on gatbat tovies.
the music and songs are also well good.
i couldn’t believe what i was seeing.
i liked the ooigina swive s lot.
the music and songs are also well good.
i did like the rest times that rathly.
i liked the film and ihist time.
the music and songs are also will good.
i did like the rest tean in the matrrx.
i will get the point of the film.
the music and songs are also walt aodent
i did like the restaten she thanking.
i will get this doiet on testla s.
the music and songs are also walteton.
i did like the reseaten shr thenking.
i wished she told him to stuff it.
the music and songs are also waste of .
i did like the reseaten shrtt the acting
i wited the tilm and she r bit onls.
the music was awso waste offail thang.
i did like the reseaten shrat the acting
i hated this oilm lelevise though.
the music was also waste offai they.
i did like the reseaten shrat thengs.
i hated this oilm televis d though.
the music was also waste of a fan time.
i did like the reseater save that trap.
i hated this lilm teee on the tiallg
the music was also waste of a fal attet.
i did like the ceseaating a thai thete.
i hated this lilm the firmt time a.
the music was also w waste of a falm.
i didnlike the cried and the trinking.
i hated this lilm the trieiti night.
the music was also a waste of a must.
i didn’t find the anier in the tating.
i hated this silmed the frieg ends.
the music was also a waste of time.
i disn’t fied the arien entertaining.
i hated this sileed throw it blcks.
the music was also a waste of time.
i disliked the linht acting happens.
I hated this film.
the music was just awful.
I disliked the acting.
Table 5.3: Decoded sentences of the interpolations z = (1 −t)z1 = tz2, t ∈[0, 1] with z1 and z2 the
codes of the sentences ”I loved it.” and ”I hated it.”. Despite having a scattered language representation
(decoded sentences are not correct), the model exhibits an interesting property: the verbs used in the
interpolated sentences are intermediate concepts between the initial verbs. Relevant concepts are shown
in italics
==PAGE:82==
72
5 Adapting the Linguistic Style
5.4
Prototype: The Pessimistic Machine
In this section, we will introduce a practical implementation of the style adaptation. In the previous
section, we have seen that the sentiment was not modeled as a sentiment dimension. Furthermore, the
use of linear transformations in the latent space is promising but this method couldn’t be applied to the
sentiment feature. As a consequence, the neighborhood within the latent space seems to be the most
usable method for a practical application.
Use case
The aim of this prototype is to produce a conversation at cross-purposes between the user
and a virtual agent for entertainment purposes. In this context, we expect the user to talk about a
particular movie using short sentences such as I liked the acting or the music was really nice. In response
to the comment, the Pessimistic Machine will address the same topic using a negative point of view.
For instance, given the input sentence I loved this movie, the model is expected to answer I hated this
movie. A mockup of the application is shown in the figure 5.3.
Method
We have seen that the model was performing quite poorly at generating sentences because
the latent space is very sparse. As a consequence, using the model in a full generative fashion seems
impossible for practical use. However, in the section 4.5.1 we have shown that the model was good
at rephrasing unknown sentences which indicates that the model features a robust recognition model.
This is why we chose to construct this prototype using the recognition model qϕ(z|x) only. We will use
the sentences of the training set as potential answers to ensure to produce meaningful outputs.
The prototype will work as follows. First, we need to compute the latent representation z of every
sentence x using the recognition model: z = q(x). On runtime, when the model receives an input
sentence x0, its latent representation z0 = q(x0) is computed. Last, we identify potential answers by
Figure 5.3: Use case of the Pessimistic Machine.
The user sends messages sends a movie critic to
the Pessimistic Machine answers with a similar but negative sentence. Answers are generated by the
prototype
==PAGE:83==
5.5 Conclusion
73
finding its k nearest neighbors from the original dataset. Finally, we identify the adequate candidate
within the nearest neighbors with regard to the target linguistic style.
Evaluation
Evaluating the performances of the model using a measure is it difficult because it requires
using a measure which is able to catch the meaning of different sentences and compare them. For this
reason, the scope of this project will be limited to the qualitative assessment only.
We will process as follows: we select a random sentence from the dataset and request an answer
from the Pessimistic Machine. We also evaluate the capacity of the model answer unknown sentences
by inputting them manually. A set of these answers is available in the table 5.4. Two other sets of
experiments are available in the appendix D. One corresponding to samples generated from a set of
human inputs and another generated from randomly selected sentences from the dataset.
5.5
Conclusion
First, we argued that the sentiment can be considered as an example of the linguistic style and presented
motivations for the use of an unsupervised model to model the linguistic style. Second, we investigated
the performances of the current model with regard to this task and showed that the model failed on
this point. Third, we proposed four techniques to adapt the linguistic style using such representation:
using an explicit stylist latent feature, transferring properties using linear transformations, using a
neighborhood and finally using interpolations between sentences to adjust the style. Last we proposed
an prototype which implements the style adaptation and evaluated its performances on a set of examples.
We will now analyze further the results in the chapter 6.
input
answer
I totally loved it.
i totally hated the movie.
I was really bad.
it’ s really bad.
it was terrible.
thats terrible.
the acting was mostly good.
the acting is mostly horrendously bad.
I liked this movie.
i liked this movie.
it was a nice movie.
this is a waste of time and money.
the story was amazing.
the story was bad.
it was not bad.
it was bad.
The acting was good.
the irony is horrible.
The music was good.
the music is horrendous.
Table 5.4: Some answers provided by the Pessimistic Machine. The prototype handles short sentences
in most of the cases. The Pessimistic Machine catches the object of the input sentence and provides an
answer which addressing the same object but conveying a negative sentiment
==PAGE:84==
74
5 Adapting the Linguistic Style
Figure 5.4: Diagram of the Pessimistic Machine. The Pessimistic machine encodes the input sentence
into its latent representation. Second, sentences from the dataset are found within a neighborhood
of the code of the input sentence within the latent space. Last, the sentence with the most negative
sentiment within the neighborhood is returned. This sentence is expected to address the same object
as the initial sentence but convey a negative sentiment
==PAGE:85==
CHAPTER 6
Discussion
We have introduced the Variational Auto-Encoder and applied the model to a natural language modeling
task and investigated its use in the context linguistic style adaptation. We will now discuss the benefits
and drawbacks of the choices we have made, the results of the experiments detailed in the previous
sections and address the problems encountered during this project.
6.1
Variational Auto-Encoder
This project focuses strongly on the Variational Auto-Encoder which has shown to be most interesting
study subject in many aspects.
First, this model makes an intensive use of neural networks. Thus, it was a unique opportunity to
focus on this topic and to acquire a general knowledge in this field.
Second, this model is a complex mathematical object which pushed to gain an in-depth understand-
ing of its underlying mathematics which helps to acquire a deeper understanding of the last advances
in the machine learning community. At some extents, this knowledge gained during this work allows
to become not only a user of the existing deep learning frameworks but provides with the means to be
a force for bringing forward proposals.
Third, the Variational Auto-Encoder has shown to be a powerful tool in the context of building
generative models for unstructured data.
The model has proved to be able to model the MNIST
dataset and sequential data structures such as a set of time series and, to some extent, natural language.
This framework is especially interesting because it can be trained in an end-to-end fashion using the
Stochastic Gradient Descent algorithm which promises that this framework can scale to more complex
tasks and larger dataset. By contrast, generative model relying on sampling methods are known to
scale poorly.
Last, the latent representation built using this model presents interesting properties such as the
softness of the representation, a high expressivity and the existences of linear relationships between
items.
Nevertheless, training deep and large stochastic model has proven to be a delicate task. In particular,
the need to weaken the regularization loss was a key obstacle toward the obtention of better results
because it drastically reduces the generative performances of the model. In this context, we suggest
constructing more powerful encoder and decoder models.
6.2
Modeling Recurrent Structures
During this project, we focused on the use of the Recurrent Neural Networks as language model. As
a previous step, we introduced the theory underlying the RNNs and presented a naive implementation
of the model applied to the encoding and decoding of a sinusoid signal. This experiment was especially
worthy because it allowed us to understand how the RNNs can transmit information over time steps.
We have seen that RNNs are relevant in the context of sequential data because they can model
complex sequential behaviors. In particular, the modeling experiment of a set of sinusoids undertaken
in the section 3.4 has proven that the model could encode and decode a wide variety of complex behaviors
using a reasonable number of parameters.
==PAGE:86==
76
6 Discussion
Furthermore, coupled with LSTM cells, the RNNs have proven to be an adequate language model.
Indeed, our model has been able to encode and decode a set of 34 490 sentences with an error rate of 3%.
Nevertheless, the poor generalization of our model stresses the need for more efficient regularization
techniques.
6.3
Difficulties with Training Deep and Large Neural Networks
Training deep neural architectures is a computationally intensive task. First experiments have proved
that using CPU computing for such task was impracticable because of the slowness of the process. For
this project, we have used the Amazon Web Services with free credits obtained in the context of the
Educate program. Thanks to this program, we could run the experiments using an instance with one
GPU. However, these resources are still insufficient compared to the resources available in a production
context. Indeed, a larger scale model would require more than one GPU to be trained in a reasonable
time. As a consequence, the size of the model trained during this project was bounded by the hardware
and time availability.
Furthermore, training deep architectures is a difficult task whose difficulty decreases with general
experience. This why the search of the adequate hyper-parameters has been a long and exhausting
work which has result in an extensive investment of time. The advancement of this project has been
most likely slowed down by a lack of experience with large and deep neural networks, but the many
experiments have resulted in a fruitful gain of knowledge.
6.4
Variational Auto-Encoder, Natural Language and Style
Adaptation
The choice of the Variational Auto-Encoder in the context of the style adaptation is a cornerstone of
this project. We will now discuss the results about the natural language generation task and the style
adaptation task.
6.4.1
Natural Language Modeling
Modeling natural language at the character level is a particularly challenging task because it requires
to learn a vocabulary and requires to get to organize words into sentences. Furthermore, we must
stress that the model is learning in an unsupervised fashion. Thus, no additional knowledge about the
structure of the words and the grammatical rules is provided.
Because of computing power limitations, we have limited the scope of this project to a narrow dataset.
However, we can argue that this restriction is a critical handicap toward the construction of a general
language model because such model needs a huge number of observations to catch the underlying rules
of the language. As the size of the training dataset decreases, the ability of the model to learn strong
and general rules decreases as well.
Reproducing Sentences
The model is trained by reconstructing the input into identical sentences.
Thus, evaluating the model with regard to this task was required to assess the performances of the model.
We have seen that the cross entropy is hard to interpret which motivated us to introduce the average
misclassification error and to conduct a qualitative analysis. We observed that the model successfully
learned to reproduce items for the training set (3% of misclassified characters) and found that the model
performs quite poorly regarding generalization: sentences from the testing set were not reconstructed
correctly at the character level (61% of misclassification). However, we observed that the model gained
a remarkable ability to rephrase unknown sentences using its knowledge. A generated sentences could
be composed of a different set of words, but a similar meaning was conveyed. For instance, this film
has no life in it. is interpreted as this film however, is a void. This is a fascinating result because
==PAGE:87==
6.4 Variational Auto-Encoder, Natural Language and Style Adaptation
77
the rephrasing is a successful adaptation of the style: the model keeps the same content (meaning) but
changes the way to say it (style).
Generative Nature
The goal of this project was to build a soft and dense representation of the
language.
Nevertheless, we have seen that the latent representation is still very sparse despite the
regularization constraints. Indeed, sentences generated from random samples in the latent space are
likely to be meaningless chains of characters. We remind that this aspect has been evaluated trough
the qualitative analysis of random samples.
However, despite being very noisy, sentences selected from a neighborhood present interesting sim-
ilarities when considering their meaning. A few examples of sentences decoded from a neighborhood
are presented in the table ??. More precisely, in the neighborhood of ”the acting is very poor!”, are
decoded the sentences ”he acting is even some pretty dook.” and ”the acting is perhaps the more ever
need” which share a similar syntactic structure and a common subject (the acting).
Nevertheless, the sparse nature of the latent space and the incorrectness of the decoded sentences
prevent us from using this model in a purely generative context.
Performances and Scale of the Experiment
It is necessary to put into perspective the size of
the model used for this study.
Indeed, the model was trained on a very narrow dataset.
Only 34
490 sentences were used while neural translation models are usually trained using million of pairs of
sentences. Therefore it is not surprising to see that the model generalizes very poorly and that the model
struggles to build a continuous space since this the dataset by its small size presents some sparsity.
Furthermore, the recognition and generative models used for this experiment are very rudimentary.
We expect stronger models to lower the difficulty in applying constraints on the latent space because
of higher abstraction capabilities. As a result, we could use a more robust regularization on the latent
variable which would improve the latent representation with regards to its density.
6.4.2
Style Modeling and Application Style Adaptation
We introduced the sentiment as a stylistic feature and stated our motives in favor of the use of an
unsupervised algorithm to learn high-level features such as the sentiment. As a second step, we investi-
gated the existence of the sentiment as an explicit latent variable. Finally, we proposed four different
methods to adapt the linguistic style and introduced them using small examples. Finally, we introduced
the Pessimistic Machine, an agent which answers movie critics with similar but negative critics.
Style as a Latent Variable
Modeling the linguistic style as a latent variable was the initial strategy
conceptualized in the aim of adaptation the style. Indeed, this variable could have been used as a
parameter to adjust the style while generating sentences.
Methods for Style Adaptation
We introduced four different methods compatible with a high-level
language model:
1. Controlling an explicit latent feature corresponding to style Transferring concepts between sen-
tences using linear transformations
2. Using a set of similar sentences using the neighboring sentences in the latent space and choosing
the best fit
3. Interpolating interpolation in the latent space to adjust the style
Sentiment as a latent feature
Our model has shown to be unable to model the style of as an
explicit feature. Thus, we can exclude the use of this technique in the context of this project.
==PAGE:88==
78
6 Discussion
Linear Transformations
Similarly to the case of the transfer of relations with the Skip-gram repre-
sentation, linguistic rules can be transferred in our latent space. Indeed, we observed that the concept
of negation could be represented by a vector in the latent space and that this vector could be applied
to another sentence. More precisely, we defined the vector vvt = code(I didn’t like it) - code(I liked
it) and applied this vector to a few examples. Notably, applying this negation vector to the sentence i
like it very much! produces the sentence ”i didn’t find it very enjoyable to it.” and applying it to the
sentence ”I was captivated by her.” returns the sentence ”i am not a parent, neither am i a movie.”.
Despite noisy results, we observe that the model does not simply learn to add ”don’t” before the verb.
Instead, the model has learned complex rules which are compatible with modal and non-modal verbs
(I am not, I can’t and I don’t known. Furthermore, the transposition of the expression ”I like it” into
”I didn’t find it” is notable because it shows the retention of informal rules. Indeed, we can argue that
”I didn’t find it very enjoyable” is a better negation of ”i like it very much!” than ”I don’t like it very
much”.
This observation is particularly interesting because it provides hints about how the model encode
information. Indeed, the observation that the negation is encoded as a linear transformation seems to
indicate that sentences are encoded as compositions of independent concept because the negation can
be applied independently to different objects. As a consequence, it seems that the negation is encoded
in a very explicit way.
It would be very interesting to investigate the existence of such explicit encoding for other linguistic
rules in the context of a more advanced model. In the context of the negation, it is most likely that the
model has learned this rule because of the abundance of parallel examples (i.e. I like it. and I don’t like
it). Thus, we expect to observe more examples of this phenomenon as the number of parallel examples
increases. For instance, I like it and I love it) is another example of parallelism because the two verbs
are used in the same contexts.
Neighborhood
The analysis of the continuity of the latent space and the experiments with the
Pessimistic Machine act as a basis of experiments for this method. Overall, we observed that the model
tend to encode sentences with similar meanings in the same neighborhood which is also supported by
the good recognition performances we have observed with the rephrasing cases. Additionally, we tend to
observe that sentences addressing a similar object but conveying different sentiments are encoded into
the same area of the latent space. Thus, we proposed to use sentences decoded from a neighborhood of
the input sentence and pick the most relevant one.
Furthermore, it has been observed that the neighborhoods were more consistent for smaller sentences
than for longer ones.
However, one can observe that the difficulty in modeling sentences increases
exponentially with the number of characters while the number of example for each length stays constant.
Interpolations
The continuous nature of the latent representation of the language is particularly
interesting when considering the analogical character of the linguistic style. This is particularly true
in the case of the sentiment. A sentence can be either very positive or slightly positive. In the case
of a perfect model, we expect that interpolating between diametrically opposite sentences generates
sentences with intermediate styles while conserving the intent.
Additionally, the experiments tend to confirm this assumption. For instance, interpolating between
the sentences ”I loved it.” and ”I hated this film.” generate sentences using the words loved, liked, wished
and hated. Similarly, we have found sentences containing the expressions very good, well good and waste
of time between the concepts grandiose and awful. This finding allows us to argue that the Variational
Auto-Encoder has partially built a continuous and ordered representation of the sentiment.
6.5
The Pessimistic Machine
Regarding the Pessimistic Machine, we assessed the quality of the answers on two levels. First, we
inspected the model’s outputs by querying simple sentences inputted by hand such as ”I like this
==PAGE:89==
6.6 Difficulties in Measuring the Performances
79
movie.””. Despite some errors, the model successfully catches the object of the sentence and adapts the
sentiment. For instance, the model returns ”the acting is mostly horrendously bad” for the input ”the
acting was mostly good.” and the model returns ”the story was bad.” for the input sentence ”the story
was amazing.”. In each case, the subject acting or story is preserved.
Second, we analyzed how random samples taken from the dataset were processed and observed that
this exercise has challenged the Pessimistic Machine. For instance, the sentence ”He should be a star.”
produces the answer ”he’ s at wrong.”: an unsatisfactory result. Nevertheless, in the case of random
samples, we observe that inputs sentences are much more complex than the ones inputted by hand
which increases the difficulty of the task. Furthermore, the manual inputs were relating to examples
which are highly represented in the dataset However, these results are not totally wrong because the
model partially catches the object of some input sentences. More precisely, in the neighborhood of the
sentence ”Carla finally gets laid.”, we can find the sentences ”cheat on all fronts!”, ”charming film but
naive film.” and ”Well and culmination fight full orgy.”. The expressions gets laid, cheat, ”charming”
and orgy share the same semantic field. Similarly, the sentence ”warning this could spoil your movie.”
share a neighborhood with the sentences ”watch this movie forget your troubles.”, ”what is wrong with
some of you?” and ”watch this at your own risk.” which share the semantic field of the danger or risk
(warning, risk, troubles).
This experiment is most interesting because it shows that the model has built a high-level repre-
sentation of the language organized around the concepts of individual words: simple sentences with a
similar object are represented in the same neighborhood and sentences sharing a same semantic field are
grouped together. This result stresses further the good recognition performances of the model. Both
experiments allow us to argue that the model interprets sentences at a conceptual level.
Additionally, the Pessimistic machine proves that the Variational Auto-Encoder can be used in the
context of a style adaptation task. More precisely use of a strong negativity mimics a specific personality
trait: being grumpy. Thus, we can imagine that such model could be used to create a more complex and
subtle personality which would be very interesting to build human-like virtual assistants. Regarding the
translation industry, this method could be used to generate different versions of the same translations
and let the customer chose the one which uses the adequate linguistic style.
6.6
Difficulties in Measuring the Performances
Evaluating the performances of the model was problematic because the representation we are aiming
to build is dealing with human concepts such as the intent and the linguistic style. Regarding the
language modeling task, we have first introduced the cross entropy to measure the performances of the
model. The cross entropy is interesting to compare different models or datasets because this shows
the model measures itself its performance during the training. However, the interpretability of the
metric is very limited. As a result, we introduced a human-readable metric: the average number of
misclassification per character.
This metric is interesting in the situation where we expect a given
input to be reconstructed exactly in the same way. Nevertheless, the ability of the model to re-phrase
unknown sentences shows the limit of this measure because we can argue that a sentence reconstructed
with the same meaning but a different style is a good result.
Therefore, a new measure which compares the meaning of sentences would be a good asset in the
context of such project because it would help to asses the performances of the model. Indeed, in the
context of this project, most of the performances evaluation has been done by analyzing qualitatively
random samples. Better measures would help to compare performances in a more consistent fashion
and would be an important asset in order to improve the current model.
Regarding the style adaptation task, current tools such as the Vader sentiment analysis tool were
sufficient to measure the change of style since we have chosen to focus on the sentiment. However,
we can easily imagine that applying this method to other linguistic styles would require to develop
additional measuring tools.
==PAGE:90==
80
==PAGE:91==
CHAPTER 7
Future Work
During this project, we introduced the Variational Auto-Encoder and applied it to a narrow language
generation task and to a simple style adaptation task. the model has shown to perform poorly on the
generation task only but presents good performances on the recognition task. However, despite of the
improvements introduced in the section 3.3, the model is still very rudimentary: dropout, bidirectional
RNN and teacher forcing are commonplace. In this section, we will introduce a few improvements that
could greatly improve the model and propose further applications.
7.1
Larger Dataset
Deep Learning algorithms are greedy, and the availability of data limits possibilities. Fortunately, the
Variational Auto-Encoder is trained in an unsupervised fashion.
Fortunately, the quantity of text
available on the Internet is limitless. Indeed, data can be taken from many different sources such as
social media, Wikipedia, forums or books.
We expect that using more data will significantly improve the performances of the model because the
model will be presented with much more examples of the same grammatical rules. Indeed, understanding
how to use the verb to be may be difficult with 1 000+ examples, however, it becomes more trivial using
a million of examples.
7.2
Hyper-parameters tuning
Tuning deep learning models manually is a long and tedious task because it requires many attempts
and each attempt takes a lot of time. Furthermore, manual searching is likely to provide us with a sub-
optimal set of hyperparameters. However, using automated parameters search methods was not doable
for this project given that it requires much more computing resources. Using better hyper-parameters
tuning techniques is most likely to improve the current model.
7.3
Improving the Generative Model: Adversarial Networks
Generating realistic samples using generative models is a difficult task. In the computer vision field,
generated images are often blurry. In the context of this project, we have seen that produced samples
tend to be very noisy. [Goo+14] proposes a solution to improve the quality of the generated samples.
The strategy employed here is to use one generative network G and one discriminative network D
which recognizes fake samples. Both networks are trained against each other: the generator network
learn to produce samples that fool the discriminator network D and the discriminator network learn to
differentiate true samples from fake ones. In this way, the discriminator becomes better and better at
identifying fakes items and the generator becomes better at producing fooling items. As a result, the
generator becomes better at producing realistic sentences.
Such concept could be applied to the task of natural language generation and could improve the
generative performances. [Wu+17] has shown that such principle could be used to improve machine
translation models.
==PAGE:92==
82
7 Future Work
7.4
Hierarchical Encoder and Decoder
In the section 4.1.1, we discussed the advantages and disadvantages of using character-level or word-level
encoding. Using a character level encoding comes with many advantages, but this encoding increases
significantly the number of steps to encode with the RNN. As a result, the capacity to encode longer
sentences or entire documents is bound by the vanishing gradients problem and the limited hardware
capacity.
In response to this problem, we introduced a hierarchical structure which can be used for the
recognition model qϕ(z|x). The solution consists in using a word model on the top of the character
model. First, a character model is used to create embeddings from the chain of characters. This model
is a simple bidirectional character RNN which encodes words in both positive and negative directions.
The cornerstone consists in building the embeddings from the hidden state after the word for the positive
direction of the RNN and preceding the word the negative direction. In this way we allow the model
to create a representation of the word using both the chain of characters of the world itself and the
surrounding context (previous words and future words).
The architecture is represented in the figure 7.1. Regarding this example, the embedding of the
word like is a concatenated vector composed from the encoding of I like and like trains: both the word
and its context are encoded.
This architecture is directly inspired by the Skip-gram model presented in [Mik+13]. the Skip-gram
representation of words depends on the context in which the words are used.
Indeed, the training
objective of the Skip-gram model is to find representations of words that are useful for predicting the
surrounding words in a sentence. Thus, embeddings are a context-dependent representation of words.
Because of the success of the Skip-Gram model, we hope that implementing a model which can consider
not only the chain of character forming the word itself but the surrounding context can help to create
better embeddings.
This architecture is a solution for both the vanishing gradient problem and the computing power
limits because it allows us to us a narrower at the character level. Indeed, the information doesn’t need
to be carried over the whole sentence. Thus, the capacity of the character RNN can be decreased which
limits de facto the overall complexity of the model. Second, the information of the whole sentence will
be carried over the word-level RNN which is made of a smaller number of steps.
This model is also attractive to encode longer language structures such as a whole document. Indeed,
this architecture is expected to scale well because additional layers can be built. A first layer which
creates word embeddings from characters, a second layer which generates sentences embeddings from
word embeddings and the last layer which creates the final document embedding.
This architecture has shown to be efficient in the context of a neural Question-Answering task has
experimented by Yannis Flet-Berliac in his Master Thesis.
Figure 7.1: the char2word architecture allows us to takes profit from both the character-level encoding
and the word-level encoding. The solution consists in creating embeddings from the characters. Embed-
dings are created using both the word itself and the past and previous words thanks to a bidirectional
RNN at the character level. Embeddings are then fed into the word RNN
==PAGE:93==
7.5 A more Expressive Latent Space: Hierarchical Latent Representation
83
7.5
A more Expressive Latent Space: Hierarchical Latent
Representation
In the context of Deep Learning models, it has been observed that deep architectures were able to model
unstructured data with a high level of abstraction, each layer creating a more abstract representation
from the previous layer in an iterative fashion.
More particularly, in the computer vision field, the use of a multi-layered architecture has shown to
be a good solution to represent images with different levels of abstraction. For instance, in [GEB15],
it ha been observed that the artistic style (or texture) corresponds to the lowest layers of the deep
convolutional model and that the content corresponds to the latest layers.
Unfortunately, such hierarchical structure does not exist in the context of the Variational Recurrent
Auto-Encoder: only one stochastic layer is used.
However, it is possible to create a multi-layered
representation of the data by using multiple stochastic layers.
Unfortunately, introducing multiple
layers of stochastic variable increases the difficulty in training the model. [Kaa+16] proposes a solution
to this problem by constructing a model with multiple stochastic layers corrected by a term depending
on the data itself. In practice, this makes possible to train deep stochastic models.
The Ladder Variational Auto-Encoder has shown to outperform the simple Variational Auto-Encoder
framework by creating a more expressive latent representation of the data. We propose to investigate
the use of such framework for the task of natural language generation in the context of style modeling
for future work.
==PAGE:94==
84
==PAGE:95==
CHAPTER 8
Conclusion
The goal of this thesis was to build a general language model with the aim of adapting the linguistic
style. This project was strongly inspired by the the artistic style transfer as it has been performed in the
computer vision field. The translation industry’s needs to build better natural language processing tools
and the opportunity to improve current conversational interfaces by providing the tools to understand
and generate natural language at a human level are the main motivations behind this project.
Driven by the last advances in natural language modeling, we proposed the use of the Variational
Auto-Encoder framework for the purpose of building a high-level representation of the language with
the aim of building an explicit representation of the linguistic style.
We have focused first on the theory behind the framework itself and presented a first use case:
modeling the MNIST dataset. Motivated by the sequential nature of the language, we introduced the
Recurrent Neural Network and demonstrated its ability to encode and generate sinusoids. Thereafter,
we implemented the Variational Recurrent Auto-Encoder which uses Recurrent Neural Networks as
encoder and decoder. Lastly, we validated the viability of such model by testing it against a simple
study case: the modeling of a set of time series.
As a second step, we applied our model to the modeling of the natural language. In this context,
two major choices had to be made. First, we chose to encode sentences at a character level. Second, we
decided work with the Large Movie Reviews Dataset.
Our model has shown poor generative performances which is presumably due to the limited size
of the dataset and the necessity to train the model with weak regularization constrains. Nevertheless,
the model has proven to be good at recognizing the meaning in the natural language which is notably
supported by its capacity to rephrase unknown sentences.
We argue that, at some extent, our model has built a high-level representation of the language at a
content and style level which is supported by three notorious cases. First, the model is able to represent
syntacticly and stylistically similar sentences into similar codes. Second, the model has acquired an
inner representation of high-level concepts such as negation. Third, the model has proven to have built
an ordered representation of concepts which is supported by the interpolation case.
We proposed methods to adapt the style and introduced a simple prototype: the Pessimistic Machine
and showed that the neighborhood method was viable in the case of simple queries which resulted in the
observation of successful style adaptation cases. In other words, the case of the Pessimistic Machine
proves that adapting the linguistic style can be achieved using the Variational Auto-Encoder.
Finally, we argued that the current model can be greatly improved and we believe that the further
improvements would be greatly profitable in succeeding to generalize our findings.
We have also acquired a clearer picture of the style adaptation problem and acquired a deeper
understanding of the potential and limitations of the model which both extends and nuances the field
of applications. While the actual task of transferring style as observed in the computer vision field
seems to remain an important step ahead, the good recognition performances of our model shorten the
path to the construction of human level natural language understanding tools.
==PAGE:96==
86
==PAGE:97==
APPENDIX A
VAE: modeling
hand-written digits (Jupyter
Notebook)
==PAGE:98==
VAE-mnist-toy
March 6, 2017
1
VAE MNIST
Generating Hand-written digits
This Notebook is inspired by this Github Tutorial
1.1
Libraries, Constants and Helpers
In [1]: import numpy as np
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
%matplotlib inline
import tensorflow as tf
print("Tensor Flow version {}".format(tf.__version__))
from tensorflow.contrib.tensorboard.plugins import projector
import os
Tensor Flow version 1.0.0
In [2]: from IPython import display
class updatable_display():
"""
display a graph which is updated every iteration
"""
def __init__(self):
self.X = []
self.Y = []
def update(self, x,y):
"""
add value and display
"""
self.X += x
self.Y += y
plt.plot(self.X,self.Y, "gray")
display.clear_output(wait=True)
display.display(plt.gcf())
def close(self):
"""
close the display
"""
display.clear_output()
In [3]: flags = tf.app.flags
FLAGS = flags.FLAGS
1
==PAGE:99==
flags.DEFINE_boolean(’re_train’, True, ’re-Train the model’)
flags.DEFINE_float(’learning_rate’, 0.0005, ’Initial learning rate.’)
flags.DEFINE_integer(’max_steps’, 200, ’Number of steps to run trainer.’)
flags.DEFINE_integer(’hidden1’, 600, ’Number of units in hidden layer 1.’)
flags.DEFINE_integer(’hidden2’, 601, ’Number of units in hidden layer 2.’)
flags.DEFINE_integer(’z_dimension’, 2, ’Dimension of the latent space’)
flags.DEFINE_integer(’batch_size’, 128, ’Batch size.’)
flags.DEFINE_string(’train_dir’, ’mnist_train_200iters’, ’Directory to put the training data.’)
flags.DEFINE_string( ’log_dir’, "tensorboard/mnist", "directory for variable summaries, made to
print "tensorboard --logdir="+ FLAGS.log_dir
tensorboard --logdir=tensorboard/mnist
2
Load dataset
In [4]: from tensorflow.examples.tutorials.mnist import input_data
mnist = input_data.read_data_sets(’MNIST_data’, one_hot=True)
n_samples = mnist.train.num_examples
print("Number of samples {} Shape of y[{}] Shape of X[{}]"
.format(n_samples, mnist.train.labels.shape, mnist.train.images.shape))
plt.imshow(np.reshape(-mnist.train.images[4242], (28, 28)), interpolation=’none’,cmap=plt.get_cm
Extracting MNIST data/train-images-idx3-ubyte.gz
Extracting MNIST data/train-labels-idx1-ubyte.gz
Extracting MNIST data/t10k-images-idx3-ubyte.gz
Extracting MNIST data/t10k-labels-idx1-ubyte.gz
Number of samples 55000 Shape of y[(55000, 10)] Shape of X[(55000, 784)]
Out[4]: <matplotlib.image.AxesImage at 0x7fdef6b4abd0>
2
==PAGE:100==
3
TensorFlow
3.1
Helpers
In [5]: def variable_summaries(var):
"""Attach a lot of summaries to a Tensor (for TensorBoard visualization)."""
with tf.name_scope(’summaries’):
mean = tf.reduce_mean(var)
tf.summary.scalar(’mean’, mean)
with tf.name_scope(’stddev’):
stddev = tf.sqrt(tf.reduce_mean(tf.square(var - mean)))
#
tf.summary.scalar(’stddev’, stddev)
#
tf.summary.scalar(’max’, tf.reduce_max(var))
#
tf.summary.scalar(’min’, tf.reduce_min(var))
tf.summary.histogram(’histogram’, var)
def weight_variable(shape):
"""
define a weight variable
"""
return tf.Variable(tf.truncated_normal(shape, stddev=0.1))
def bias_variable(shape):
"""
define a bias variable
"""
return tf.Variable(tf.constant(0.1, shape = shape))
def nn_layer(input_tensor, input_dim, output_dim, layer_name, act=tf.nn.relu):
"""Reusable code for making a simple neural net layer.
It does a matrix multiply, bias add, and then uses relu to nonlinearize.
It also sets up name scoping so that the resultant graph is easy to read,
and adds a number of summary ops.
"""
# Adding a name scope ensures logical grouping of the layers in the graph.
with tf.name_scope(layer_name):
# This Variable will hold the state of the weights for the layer
with tf.name_scope(’weights’):
weights = weight_variable([input_dim, output_dim])
#variable_summaries(weights)
with tf.name_scope(’biases’):
biases = bias_variable([output_dim])
#variable_summaries(biases)
with tf.name_scope(’Wx_plus_b’):
preactivate = tf.matmul(input_tensor, weights) + biases
#tf.summary.histogram(’pre_activations’, preactivate)
activations = act(preactivate, name=’activation’)
#tf.summary.histogram(’activations’, activations)
return activations
def distribution_feature( input_tensor, input_dim, output_dim, layer_name ):
"""
3
==PAGE:101==
define a feature which represents part of a distribution.
For example, to represent Gaussian distribution, this layer can represent mu or log(sigma^2)
"""
with tf.name_scope(layer_name):
with tf.name_scope(’weights’):
weights = weight_variable([input_dim, output_dim])
#variable_summaries(weights)
with tf.name_scope(’biases’):
biases = bias_variable([output_dim])
#variable_summaries(biases)
with tf.name_scope(layer_name):
feature = tf.add(tf.matmul(input_tensor,weights), biases)
variable_summaries(feature)
return feature
3.2
Encoder
In [6]: # Input
n_input = 28*28
n_labels = 10
n_hidden_1 = FLAGS.hidden1
n_hidden_2 = FLAGS.hidden2
n_z = FLAGS.z_dimension
x_input = tf.placeholder("float", shape=[None, 28*28], name="x_input") #Batchsize x Number of P
#y_ = tf.placeholder("float", shape=[None, 10])
#Batchsize x 10 (one hot encoded)
with tf.name_scope("Encoder"):
q_h_1 = nn_layer(x_input,n_input, n_hidden_1, "q_layer_1", act = tf.nn.softplus)
# Second hidden layer
q_h_2 = nn_layer(q_h_1,n_hidden_1, n_hidden_2, "q_layer_2", act = tf.nn.softplus)
# Parameters for the Gaussian
with tf.name_scope("z"):
# parameters of the gaussian (distribution of the latent space)
# the distribution z is therefore parametered by the mean mu and the variance sigma^2
z_mu = distribution_feature(q_h_2,n_hidden_2,n_z, "mu" )
# a little trick from the original tutorial: sigma > 0 but we don’t want to enforce the netw
# therefore we ask the network to model the parameter log(sigma^2) in [-inf,+inf]
z_ls2 = distribution_feature(q_h_2,n_hidden_2,n_z, "log_sigma_power2" )
#z_mean = tf.add(tf.matmul(q_h_2, weights([n_hidden_2, n_z])), bias([n_z]))
#z_log_sigma_sq = tf.add(tf.matmul(h_2, weights([n_hidden_2, n_z])), bias([n_z]))
3.3
Decoder
In [7]: batch_size = FLAGS.batch_size
with tf.name_scope("Decoder"):
with tf.name_scope(’random_sample’):
eps = tf.random_normal((batch_size, n_z), 0, 1, dtype=tf.float32) # draw a random number
with tf.name_scope(’z_sample’):
z = tf.add(z_mu, tf.multiply(tf.sqrt(tf.exp(z_ls2)), eps))
# a sample it from Z -> z
variable_summaries(z)
4
==PAGE:102==
# first hidden layer
n_hidden_1 = FLAGS.hidden1
p_h_1 = nn_layer(z,n_z, n_hidden_1, "p_layer_1", act = tf.nn.softplus)
# second hidden layer
n_hidden_2 = FLAGS.hidden2
p_h_2 = nn_layer(p_h_1,n_hidden_1, n_hidden_2, "p_layer_2", act = tf.nn.softplus)
# reconstruction distribution
with tf.name_scope("x_reconstruction_mean"):
x_reconstr_mean = tf.nn.sigmoid(tf.add(tf.matmul(p_h_2,
weight_variable([n_hidden_2, n_inpu
#x_mu = distribution_feature(p_h_2,n_hidden_2,n_input, "mu" )
#x_ls2 = distribution_feature(p_h_2,n_hidden_2,n_input, "log_sigma_power2" )
3.4
Loss function
In [8]: with tf.name_scope("Cost"):
with tf.name_scope(’reconstruction_loss’):
reconstr_loss = -tf.reduce_sum(x_input * tf.log(tf.clip_by_value(x_reconstr_mean,1e-10,1
+ (1-x_input) * tf.log(tf.clip_by_value(1 - x_reconstr_me
variable_summaries(reconstr_loss)
with tf.name_scope(’latent_loss’):
latent_loss = -0.5 * tf.reduce_sum(1 + z_ls2 - tf.square(z_mu) - tf.exp(z_ls2), 1)
variable_summaries(latent_loss)
with tf.name_scope(’cost’):
cost = tf.reduce_mean(reconstr_loss + latent_loss)
# average over batch
variable_summaries(cost)
with tf.name_scope(’train’):
optimizer =
tf.train.AdamOptimizer(learning_rate=FLAGS.learning_rate).minimize(cost)
3.4.1
summaries
In [16]: sess = tf.Session()
merged = tf.summary.merge_all()
train_writer = tf.summary.FileWriter(FLAGS.log_dir,
sess.graph)
4
Training
In [10]: if FLAGS.re_train:
runs = FLAGS.max_steps #Set to 0, for no training
else:
runs = 0
init = tf.global_variables_initializer()
saving_path = FLAGS.log_dir
saver = tf.train.Saver()
dis = updatable_display()
with tf.Session() as sess:
sess.run(init)
# TensorBoard
writer = tf.summary.FileWriter(saving_path)#, graph=tf.get_default_graph())
batch_xs, _ = mnist.train.next_batch(batch_size)
5
==PAGE:103==
print(batch_xs.shape)
dd = sess.run([cost], feed_dict={x_input: batch_xs})
print(’Test run after starting {}’.format(dd))
xx = []
yy = []
for epoch in range(runs):
avg_cost = 0.
total_batch = int(n_samples / batch_size)
# Loop over all batches
for i in range(total_batch):
batch_xs, _ = mnist.train.next_batch(batch_size)
_,d, summary = sess.run([optimizer, cost , merged], feed_dict={x_input: batch_xs})
avg_cost += d / n_samples * batch_size
# write log
writer.add_summary(summary, epoch * total_batch + i)
xx.append(epoch)
yy.append(avg_cost)
# Display logs per epoch step
if epoch % 10 == 0:
save_path = saver.save(sess, saving_path ) #Saves the weights (not the graph)
#print("Model saved in file: {}".format(save_path))
#print "Epoch:", ’%04d’ % (epoch+1), "cost=", "{:.9f}".format(avg_cost)
dis.update(xx,yy)
xx = []
yy = []
dis.close()
6
==PAGE:104==
5
Tests
5.1
reconstruction of a real hand-written digit
In [11]: saver = tf.train.Saver()
print saving_path
with tf.Session() as sess:
saver.restore(sess, "./"+saving_path)
print("Model restored.")
x_sample = mnist.test.next_batch(batch_size)[0]
x_reconstruct,z_vals,z_mean_val,z_log_sigma_sq_val
= sess.run((x_reconstr_mean,z, z_mu, z_
plt.figure(figsize=(8, 12))
for i in range(5):
plt.subplot(5, 3, 3*i + 1)
plt.imshow(x_sample[i].reshape(28, 28), vmin=0, vmax=1,
interpolation=’none’,cmap=plt
plt.title("Test input")
#plt.colorbar()
plt.subplot(5, 3, 3*i + 2)
plt.scatter(z_vals[:,0],z_vals[:,1], c=’gray’, alpha=0.5)
plt.scatter(z_mean_val[i,0],z_mean_val[i,1], c=’green’, s=64, alpha=0.5)
plt.scatter(z_vals[i,0],z_vals[i,1], c=’blue’, s=16, alpha=0.5)
plt.xlim((-3,3))
plt.ylim((-3,3))
plt.title("Latent Space")
plt.subplot(5, 3, 3*i + 3)
plt.imshow(x_reconstruct[i].reshape(28, 28), vmin=0, vmax=1, interpolation=’none’,cmap=
plt.title("Reconstruction")
#plt.colorbar()
plt.tight_layout()
tensorboard/mnist
Model restored.
7
==PAGE:105==
8
==PAGE:106==
5.2
Latent Space
In [14]: nx = ny = 20
x_values = np.linspace(-3, 3, nx)
y_values = np.linspace(-3, 3, ny)
canvas = np.empty((28*ny, 28*nx))
saver = tf.train.Saver()
with tf.Session() as sess:
saver.restore(sess, "./"+saving_path)
for i, yi in enumerate(x_values):
for j, xi in enumerate(y_values):
z_mu = np.array([[xi, yi]])
d[0] = z_mu
x_mean = sess.run(x_reconstr_mean, feed_dict={z: d})
canvas[(nx-i-1)*28:(nx-i)*28, j*28:(j+1)*28] = x_mean[0].reshape(28, 28)
plt.figure(figsize=(8, 10))
Xi, Yi = np.meshgrid(x_values, y_values)
plt.imshow(canvas, origin="upper", vmin=0, vmax=1,interpolation=’none’,cmap=plt.get_cmap(’gray
plt.tight_layout()
9
==PAGE:107==
In [ ]:
10
==PAGE:108==
98
==PAGE:109==
APPENDIX B
VRAE: modeling timeseries
(Jupyter Notebook)
==PAGE:110==
VRAE+Timeseries
May 11, 2017
1
VRAE: timeseries
This notebook showcases the use of VRAE to learn a ensemble of time series and generate them from a
latent contiunous variable. The exercice is motivated by the desire to build this model on a simple example
(sinusoids) and adapt it afterwards to more complicated sequential data: natural language.
The ensemble of functions is a group of sinusoids generated by two uniform independent variables which
modulate the phase and the frequency of the curves.
The implementation has been inspired by this implementation of the VRAE by the author with Thenao,
the seq2seq tutorial and an implementation of a VAE with Tensorﬂow.
And RNN tutorials this and this
In [1]: import numpy as np
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
%matplotlib inline
import tensorflow as tf
print("Tensor Flow version {}".format(tf.__version__))
from sklearn.preprocessing import OneHotEncoder
from IPython import display
import time
import pickle
class updatable_display():
"""
display a graph which is updated every iteration
"""
def __init__(self, headers=None):
if headers != None:
self.X = []
d = dict()
for h in headers:
d[h] = []
self.ys = d
def update(self, x,ys):
"""
add value
"""
self.X += x
for h in self.ys.keys():
self.ys[h] += ys[h]
def display(self,keys= None,live = True):
"""
plot the training data
1
==PAGE:111==
"""
if keys == None:
keys = self.ys.keys()
plt.clf()
fig, axes = plt.subplots(1, len(keys), figsize=(len(keys) * 5,5))
fig_i = 0
for h in keys:
ax1 = axes.flatten()[fig_i]
ax1.plot(self.X,self.ys[h],"gray")
ax1.set_title(h + ": " + str(self.ys[h][-1])[:6])
#ax1.annotate(self.ys[h][-1],xy=(
, np.mean(self.ys[h]) ) )
fig_i+=1
fig.tight_layout()
if live:
display.clear_output(wait=True)
display.display(plt.gcf())
plt.close()
else:
plt.plot()
plt.show()
def close(self):
"""
close the display
"""
display.clear_output()
def save(self, filename):
"""
save data to file
"""
save = dict()
save["x"] = self.X
save["ys"] = self.ys
pickle.dump( save, open( filename, "wb" ) )
def load(self,filename):
"load class from file"
save = pickle.load( open( filename, "rb" ) )
self.X = save["x"]
self.ys = save["ys"]
/Users/valentin/anaconda/lib/python2.7/site-packages/matplotlib/ init .py:1035: UserWarning: Duplicate
(fname, cnt))
Tensor Flow version 1.0.0
2
Constants
In [2]: maxTime = 1
num_steps = 40 * maxTime
# length of each record during training
batch_size = 256
state_size = 60
# RNN Cells state size
transition_layers = []
# add fully connected layers between Decoder and stochastic layer
2
==PAGE:112==
learning_rate = 0.0005
epoches = 5000
beta_decay_offset = 300
# Beta start to increase after this number of epoches
beta_decay_period = 1000
# Beta needs this time to vary from 0 to 1
latent_loss_weight = 0.03
# latent loss weight (from original VRAE: #Use a very wide prior t
dtype=tf.float32
data_dim = 1
# dimension of the data: one dimension
latent_dim = 2
# latent space dimension: here we choose 2 since
summaries_dir = "VRAE"
saving_path = "VRAE"
3
Deterministic Warm-up
Training VAE is a diﬃcult task because of the complexity of the model and the presence of two terms in the
loss function. For information, we want to maximize the loss function:
L = log(p(x))
However, we can show the existence of a lower bound Lv such as:
L ≥Lv = −DKL(q(z|x(i))||p(z)) + Eq(z|x(i))(log(p(x(i)|z))
We will call:
• the latent loss Ll:
Ll = −DKL(q(z|x(i))||p(z))
• the reconstruction loss Lr:
Lr = Eq(z|x(i))(log(p(x(i)|z))
Which gives:
L ≥Lv = Ll + Lr
The reconstruction loss Lr evaluates the reconstruction quality of the input.
The latent loss Ll however acts as a regularization term and ensures that prior distributions are shaped
as Gaussian distribution. In practical terms, it distributes all the input into the Gaussian distribution such
as our whole dataset occupy the whole latent space.
For each input, this ensures that this one will be
represented by a gaussian distribution in the latent space. As we force the inputs to be not a single point int
the latent space but a distribution with a non null width and because our model tries to occupy the whole
space, the model will place similar inputs side by side such as part their distribution are joint.
However the problem occurs when it’s easier for the model to optimizes the latent loss at the expenses
of the reconstruction loss. Then the model fails to ﬁnd a reasonable minima. Two solutions help us to solve
this problem:
• Weakening the Latent loss by simply adding a weight to this loss. This weight will be called αl and
noted “latent loss weight” in the code.
• Deterministic warm-up which has been proposed by this paper helps the model to focus on reconstruc-
tion during the early steps of training by starting with a null latent loss and adding progressively this
term over time. The weight controlling this deterministic warm-up will be called β and noted B in the
code.
Using these twos techniques we optimize:
L′
v = βαlLl + Lr, β ≤1, αl ≤1
3
==PAGE:113==
In [3]: # this function creates generator which controls the value of B over time
# the generator uses B-splines in order to ensures a continuty for both the function and its der
# copied from stackoverflow
import scipy.interpolate as si
from scipy import interpolate
points = [[0,0], [0, beta_decay_offset],[0, beta_decay_offset + 0.33 * beta_decay_period], [1, b
points = np.array(points)
x = points[:,0]
y = points[:,1]
t = range(len(points))
ipl_t = np.linspace(0.0, len(points) - 1, 100)
x_tup = si.splrep(t, x, k=3)
y_tup = si.splrep(t, y, k=3)
x_list = list(x_tup)
xl = x.tolist()
x_list[1] = xl + [0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0]
y_list = list(y_tup)
yl = y.tolist()
y_list[1] = yl + [0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0]
x_i = si.splev(ipl_t, x_list)
y_i = si.splev(ipl_t, y_list)
beta_generator = interpolate.interp1d(y_i, x_i)
xx = xrange(epoches)
plt.plot([beta_generator(i) for i in xx])
plt.xlim([0,epoches])
plt.show()
4
==PAGE:114==
3.1
Data
Timeseries are sequence of values over time. A classical use case is the variation of price over time: at each
time step is recorded value of the price of goods such as gas or a currency. Then analyst try to forecast future
value in order to take better business decisions. This kind of data is diﬃcult to model because it depends
on many external factor such as social or political events or even the ﬂuctuation of the value of other goods.
For this experiment we generate a simpler form of time series: sinusoids. Sinusoids are well ﬁtted to test
the use Recurrent Neural Networks with the VAE framework because at each step the next value can be
easily inferred knowing the previous values. As we are working with a generative model, we wish not only
to model a single sinusoid but a family F of sinusoids with diﬀerent phases and frequencies. In order to do
so, the functions f ∈F depend on two continuous variables x and y:
f : t ∈R →sin(πxt + πy))
Finally we can deﬁne the ensemble of functions F:
F = {t →sin(πxt + πy), (x, y) ∈[−1, 1]2}
The next step is to generate timeseries from the family of functions F. For the sake of simplicity, we use
a ﬁxed time vector named t. Thus, we ﬁnally have a family of timeseries St deﬁned as:
St = {f(t), f ∈F}
Finally, the enemble of observations in St are generated using two uniform variables x and y.
In [4]: t = np.linspace(-1*maxTime,1*maxTime,num_steps)
# time value for the generated sinusoids
print "length of the time vector", len(t)
def gen_sinusoid((x,y)):
"""
generate samples from the latent variable (tuple x,y)
"""
return np.array( map(lambda u :
0.5 + 0.499 *np.sin(3.14 *u * x
+ 3.14 * y), t) )
def next_batch(batch_size):
""" Get a number of sample from our distribution of functions.
Generate a mixture of sinusoids from a random uniform variable
Arg:
batch_size: (Integer) number of samples
Return:
a list of size batch_size of data points representing mixtures of sinusoids
"""
# generate the prior variable
z_1 = np.random.uniform(-1,1,batch_size)
z_2 = np.random.uniform(-1,1,batch_size)
return map( gen_sinusoid, zip(z_1,z_2) )
length of the time vector 40
5
==PAGE:115==
3.1.1
Plot samples
Randomly selected samples
In [5]: sins = next_batch(10)
for s in sins:
plt.plot(s, alpha=0.7)
plt.show()
Samples generated from (x,y)
In [6]: fig = plt.figure()
fig.set_figheight(15)
fig.set_figwidth(15)
#plt.tight_layout()
i = 1
n = 10
for xx in np.linspace(-1,1,n):
for yy in np.linspace(-1,1,n):
#print xx,
#print yy
X = gen_sinusoid((xx,yy))
ax1 = fig.add_subplot(n,n,i)
ax1.plot(X)
ax1.set_xlim([0,num_steps])
ax1.set_ylim([0,1])
#ax1.axis(’equal’)
ax1.axis(’off’)
i+=1
plt.show()
6
==PAGE:116==
3.2
The model
3.2.1
Variational Recurrent AutoEncoder
This model is an extension of the VAE with RNNs cells. It has been proposed in this paper to model and
generate video games melodies.
As for the traditional VAE, This model tries to ﬁnd a relation P(X|Z) between the observation X and a
latent variable Z. However in this case, elements drawn from X are sequences of elements like sound waves
or sentences.
This model implements the encoding function qφ(x|z) and the decoding function pθ(x|z) as Recurrent
Neural Networks. LSTM cells will be choosen because of their capacity to handle the vanishing gradients
problems that occur with long term dependencies.
3.2.2
Helper Functions
In [7]: # prepare Tensorboard
def variable_summaries(var):
7
==PAGE:117==
"""Attach a lot of summaries to a Tensor (for TensorBoard visualization)."""
with tf.name_scope(’summaries’):
mean = tf.reduce_mean(var)
tf.summary.scalar(’mean’, mean)
with tf.name_scope(’stddev’):
stddev = tf.sqrt(tf.reduce_mean(tf.square(var - mean)))
#
tf.summary.scalar(’stddev’, stddev)
#
tf.summary.scalar(’max’, tf.reduce_max(var))
#
tf.summary.scalar(’min’, tf.reduce_min(var))
tf.summary.histogram(’histogram’, var)
def weight_variable(shape):
"""
define a weight variable
"""
return tf.Variable(tf.truncated_normal(shape, stddev=0.1))
def bias_variable(shape):
"""
define a bias variable
"""
return tf.Variable(tf.constant(0.1, shape = shape))
def simple_weight_layer(input_tensor, input_dim, output_dim, layer_name):
"""
define a layer as a simple set of weights
"""
with tf.name_scope(layer_name):
with tf.name_scope(’weights’):
weights = weight_variable([input_dim, output_dim])
return tf.matmul(input_tensor, weights)
def nn_layer(input_tensor, input_dim, output_dim, layer_name, act=tf.nn.relu):
"""Reusable code for making a simple neural net layer.
It does a matrix multiply, bias add, and then uses relu to nonlinearize.
It also sets up name scoping so that the resultant graph is easy to read,
and adds a number of summary ops.
"""
# Adding a name scope ensures logical grouping of the layers in the graph.
with tf.name_scope(layer_name):
# This Variable will hold the state of the weights for the layer
with tf.name_scope(’weights’):
weights = weight_variable([input_dim, output_dim])
#variable_summaries(weights)
with tf.name_scope(’biases’):
biases = bias_variable([output_dim])
#variable_summaries(biases)
with tf.name_scope(’Wx_plus_b’):
preactivate = tf.matmul(input_tensor, weights) + biases
#tf.summary.histogram(’pre_activations’, preactivate)
activations = act(preactivate, name=’activation’)
#tf.summary.histogram(’activations’, activations)
8
==PAGE:118==
return activations
def linear_layer( input_tensor, input_dim, output_dim, layer_name ):
"""
define a feature which represents part of a distribution.
For example, to represent Gaussian distribution, this layer can represent mu or log(sigma^2)
"""
with tf.name_scope(layer_name):
with tf.name_scope(’weights’):
weights = weight_variable([input_dim, output_dim])
variable_summaries(weights)
with tf.name_scope(’biases’):
biases = bias_variable([output_dim])
variable_summaries(biases)
with tf.name_scope(layer_name):
feature = tf.add(tf.matmul(input_tensor,weights), biases)
variable_summaries(feature)
return feature
# from http://ruishu.io/2016/12/27/batchnorm/
def dense(x, size, scope):
return tf.contrib.layers.fully_connected(x, size,
activation_fn=None,
scope=scope)
def dense_batch_relu(x, num_out, phase, scope):
with tf.variable_scope(scope):
h1 = tf.contrib.layers.fully_connected(x, num_out,
activation_fn=None,
scope=’dense’)
h2 = tf.contrib.layers.batch_norm(h1,
center=True, scale=True,
is_training=phase,
scope=’batch_norm’)
return tf.nn.relu(h2, ’relu’)
3.2.3
The encoder network qφ(x|z)
In [8]: tf.reset_default_graph()
"""
Placeholders
each record is num_steps long
"""
x_input = tf.placeholder(tf.float32, [None, num_steps], name=’input_placeholder’)
#training_phase = tf.placeholder(tf.bool, name=’training_phase_state’)
#beta = tf.placeholder(tf.float32, name=’beta_value’)
"""
RNN input
The RNN API requires an additional dimension fore the dimension of each element in each record
"""
9
==PAGE:119==
#print rnn_inputs.shape
with tf.name_scope("Preprocessing"):
rnn_inputs = tf.expand_dims(x_input,-1)
print rnn_inputs.shape
rnn_inputs = tf.reverse(rnn_inputs, [1])
"""
Encoder
"""
with tf.name_scope("Encoder"):
with tf.variable_scope(’lstm_enc’):
cell = tf.contrib.rnn.LSTMCell(state_size,state_is_tuple=True)
#cell = tf.contrib.rnn.LayerNormBasicLSTMCell(state_size)
#cell = tf.contrib.rnn.BasicRNNCell(state_size)
rnn_outputs, final_state_tuple = tf.nn.dynamic_rnn(cell, rnn_inputs, dtype=tf.float32, scope
print rnn_outputs.shape
final_state = final_state_tuple[0] # get real state and not the hidden state (for lstm)
tf.squeeze(final_state, name="squeeze_operation") # drop dimensions of size 1 # for lstm
print final_state.shape
# reduce size and batch normalization
# encoder_out = nn_layer(final_state , state_size , decoder_out_size , "encoder_out_nn")
#dense_batch_relu(final_state, decoder_out_size, training_phase, "encoder_batch_norm")
if len(transition_layers) == 0:
enc_out = final_state
enc_size_out = state_size
else:
l_in = final_state
size_in = state_size
for s in transition_layers:
l_in = nn_layer(l_in, size_in, s, "enc_out_" + str(s) , act=tf.nn.relu)
size_in = s
enc_out = l_in
enc_size_out = s
(?, 40, 1)
(?, 40, 60)
(?, 60)
3.2.4
The latent space
In [9]: """
paramterization trick
"""
with tf.name_scope("Z"):
z_mu = linear_layer( enc_out, enc_size_out, latent_dim, "z_mu" )
z_ls2 = linear_layer( enc_out, enc_size_out, latent_dim, "z_ls2" )
3.2.5
The Decoder Network pθ(x|z)
Z sampling
In [10]: """
draw a random number from z
"""
10
==PAGE:120==
with tf.name_scope("Z_samples"):
with tf.name_scope(’random_sample’):
eps = tf.random_normal((batch_size, latent_dim), 0, 1, dtype=tf.float32) # draw a rand
with tf.name_scope(’z_sample’):
z = tf.add(z_mu, tf.multiply(tf.sqrt(tf.exp(z_ls2)), eps))
# a sample it from Z -> z
#z = tf.expand_dims(z,-1)
print z.shape
(256, 2)
Output Projection
Thanks ematvey for the example
In [11]: W_proj = tf.Variable(tf.random_uniform([state_size, data_dim], 0, 1), dtype=tf.float32)
b_proj = tf.Variable(tf.zeros([data_dim]), dtype=tf.float32)
Dynamic RNN Decoder
In [12]: def decoder_rnn( cell_dec, z_input ):
def loop_fn(time, cell_output, cell_state, loop_state):
emit_output = cell_output
# == None for time == 0
prev_out = cell_output
elements_finished = (time >= num_steps)
finished = tf.reduce_all(elements_finished)
if cell_output is None:
# time == 0
next_cell_state = cell.zero_state(batch_size, dtype)
next_input_value = tf.concat([z_input, tf.zeros([batch_size,data_dim], dtype=dtype)
else:
next_cell_state = cell_state
next_input_value = tf.cond( #
finished,
lambda:tf.concat([ tf.zeros([batch_size,state_size], dtype=dtype),
tf.add(tf.m
lambda:tf.concat([z_input, tf.add(tf.matmul(prev_out, W_proj), b_proj) ], 1) )
next_input = tf.cond(
finished,
lambda: tf.zeros([batch_size, data_dim + state_size], dtype=dtype),
lambda: next_input_value )
next_loop_state = None
return (elements_finished, next_input, next_cell_state,
emit_output, next_loop_state)
return tf.nn.raw_rnn(cell_dec, loop_fn)
"""
Decoder network
"""
with tf.name_scope("Decoder"):
# connect z to the RNN
h_z2dec = nn_layer(z, 2, state_size, "z2initial_decoder_state", act=tf.nn.tanh)
# RNN Cell
with tf.variable_scope(’lstm_dec’):
dec_cell = tf.contrib.rnn.LSTMCell(state_size)
outputs_ta, final_state, _ = decoder_rnn(dec_cell, h_z2dec )
# this implementation is ready for dynamic rnn
rnn_outputs_decoder = outputs_ta.stack() # stack outputs
print "rnn_outputs_decoder", rnn_outputs_decoder.shape
11
==PAGE:121==
decoder_max_steps, decoder_batch_size, decoder_dim = tf.unstack(tf.shape(rnn_outputs_decode
decoder_outputs_flat = tf.reshape(rnn_outputs_decoder, (-1, state_size)) # flatten (batch_s
print "decoder_outputs_flat", decoder_outputs_flat.shape
decoder_logits_flat = tf.add(tf.matmul(decoder_outputs_flat, W_proj), b_proj) # projection
rnn_outputs_decoder = tf.transpose( tf.reshape(decoder_logits_flat, (decoder_max_steps, bat
print "rnn_outputs_decoder", rnn_outputs_decoder.shape
"""
Reconstruct Variables from series
"""
with tf.name_scope("x_reconstruction"):
rnn_outputs_decoder = tf.squeeze( rnn_outputs_decoder, [2])
print "rnn_outputs_decoder", rnn_outputs_decoder.shape
x_reconstr_mean = linear_layer(rnn_outputs_decoder, num_steps, num_steps, "x_mu" )
#x_ls2 = linear_layer(rnn_outputs_decoder_stacked, num_steps, num_steps, "x_ls2" )
rnn outputs decoder (?, 256, 60)
decoder outputs flat (?, 60)
rnn outputs decoder (256, ?, 1)
rnn outputs decoder (256, ?)
3.3
Loss Function
In [13]: """
Cost: lower bound
"""
with tf.name_scope("Cost"):
B = tf.placeholder(tf.float32, name=’B’)
with tf.name_scope(’reconstruction_loss’):
#reconstr_loss = tf.reduce_sum(0.5 * x_ls2 + (tf.square(x_input-x_reconstr_mean)/(2.0
clip_x_input = tf.clip_by_value(x_input, 1e-8, 1-1e-8)
clip_x_reconstr_mean = tf.clip_by_value(x_reconstr_mean, 1e-8, 1-1e-8)
reconstr_loss = tf.sqrt( tf.reduce_mean( tf.pow( clip_x_input - clip_x_reconstr_mean, 2
variable_summaries(reconstr_loss)
with tf.name_scope(’latent_loss’):
latent_loss = -0.5 * tf.reduce_sum(1 + z_ls2 - tf.square(z_mu) - tf.exp(z_ls2), 1)
variable_summaries(latent_loss)
with tf.name_scope(’LB’):
cost = tf.reduce_mean(reconstr_loss + B * latent_loss_weight * latent_loss)
# averag
variable_summaries(cost)
# Use ADAM optimizer
with tf.variable_scope(tf.get_variable_scope(), reuse=False):
with tf.name_scope(’train_step’):
optimizer =
tf.train.AdamOptimizer(learning_rate).minimize(cost)
4
Training
In [16]: init = tf.global_variables_initializer()
saver = tf.train.Saver()
# monitor training
12
==PAGE:122==
bs =[]
lls = []
rls = []
ls = []
dis = updatable_display( ["loss", "latent_loss" , "recons_loss" , "beta" ] )
# training
try:
with tf.Session() as sess:
start = time.time()
tf.set_random_seed(42)
sess.run(init)
xx = []
for epoch in range(epoches):
beta = beta_generator(epoch)
batch_xs = next_batch(batch_size)
_,d,r_c,l_c = sess.run([optimizer, cost, reconstr_loss,latent_loss ],
feed_dict={x_input: batch_xs, B:[beta]})
xx.append(epoch)
lls.append(l_c[0])
rls.append(r_c)
ls.append(d)
bs.append(beta)
# Display logs per epoch step
if epoch % 20 == 0:
save_path = saver.save(sess, saving_path ) #Saves the weights (not the graph)
dis.update(xx,{"loss" : ls, "latent_loss":lls , "recons_loss":rls , "beta":bs})
dis.display()
xx = []
lls = []
rls = []
ls = []
bs = []
dis.close()
except KeyboardInterrupt:
print(’training interrupted’)
dis.display(live=False)
end = time.time()
print(end - start)
dis.save(’training_records/latest.p’)
<matplotlib.figure.Figure at 0x7f48d16d9b90>
13
==PAGE:123==
670.799466133
In [17]: print "cost: " + str(d)
print "reconstruction loss: " + str(r_c)
print "latent loss: " + str(l_c[-1])
cost: 0.184534
reconstruction loss: 0.0824755
latent loss: 3.83601
5
Reconstruction
In [21]: saver = tf.train.Saver()
print saving_path
with tf.Session() as sess:
saver.restore(sess, "./"+saving_path)
print("Model restored.")
x_sample = next_batch(batch_size)
x_reconstruct,z_vals,z_mean_val,z_log_sigma_sq_val
= sess.run((x_reconstr_mean,z, z_mu, z_
plt.figure(figsize=(8, 12))
for i in range(5):
plt.subplot(5, 3, 3*i + 1)
plt.ylim((0,1))
plt.plot(x_sample[i])
plt.title("Test input")
#plt.colorbar()
plt.subplot(5, 3, 3*i + 2)
plt.scatter(z_vals[:,0],z_vals[:,1], c=’gray’, alpha=0.5)
plt.scatter(z_mean_val[i,0],z_mean_val[i,1], c=’green’, s=64, alpha=0.5)
plt.scatter(z_vals[i,0],z_vals[i,1], c=’blue’, s=16, alpha=0.5)
plt.xlim((-3,3))
plt.ylim((-3,3))
plt.title("Latent Space")
plt.subplot(5, 3, 3*i + 3)
plt.ylim((0,1))
plt.plot(x_reconstruct[i])
plt.title("Reconstruction")
#plt.colorbar()
plt.tight_layout()
VRAE
INFO:tensorflow:Restoring parameters from ./VRAE
Model restored.
14
==PAGE:124==
15
==PAGE:125==
6
Latent Space
The following plot represent the latent representation of the set of observation by the model. We sample
(z1, z2) ∈[−1.5, 1.5]2 from the latent space and draw their reconstruction. Each point (x,y) in the grid
corresponds to a diﬀerent combination (z1, z2).
In [19]: fig = plt.figure()
fig.set_figheight(15)
fig.set_figwidth(15)
#plt.tight_layout()
n = 15
fig_i = 1
r = 1.5
x_values = np.linspace(-r, r, n)
y_values = np.linspace(-r, r, n)
saver = tf.train.Saver()
with tf.Session() as sess:
saver.restore(sess, "./"+saving_path)
for i, xi in enumerate(x_values):
for j, yi in enumerate(y_values):
z_mu_sample = np.array([[xi, yi]])
dd = z_mu_sample
ddd = [ dd[0] for x in xrange(batch_size)]
x_mean = sess.run(x_reconstr_mean, feed_dict={z: ddd})
# X = np.var(x_mean, 0) # check variance
X = x_mean[0,:]
#X = movingaverage(X, 5)
ax1 = fig.add_subplot(n,n,fig_i)
ax1.plot(X)
ax1.set_xlim([0,num_steps])
ax1.set_ylim([0,1])
#ax1.axis(’equal’)
ax1.axis(’off’)
fig_i+=1
plt.show()
INFO:tensorflow:Restoring parameters from ./VRAE
16
==PAGE:126==
6.0.1
Interpretation
Given a ﬁxed time vector t, the model has succesfully learnt the space of observations with an acceptable
reconstruction error (0.08). However the most remarkable result here is the ability of the model to create a
latent representation of this set of observations. While the model was generated by controlling x the phase
and y, here the two dimensions of z seem to control diﬀerent features. This can be explained by the fact that
the model doesn’t learn the whole sinus function but a few data points corresponding to the time vector.
Last but not least, this example is a working example of the application of the Variation Recurrent
Autoencoder to model time series. We will now apply this model to more complex data structures such as
natural language.
In [ ]:
17
==PAGE:127==
APPENDIX C
Reconstruction of Random
Samples
==PAGE:128==
118
C Reconstruction of Random Samples
input
reconstruction
you get what you pay for.
you get what you pay for.
lolita did it.
lordi i laughi
make no mistake, this is crap.
maceruwaisis not the cherism.
i never saw something like that.
i never tire of watching this.
throw it out!
throwg it wrong
save your money.
save your money.
why is that?
why is that?
out of
out of
tu pa tam is for me very bad movie.
tr il to the problbmawis af a comeny
one thing is for sure.
one think is sure too.
that makes no sense at all.
that makes no sense at all.
specialeffects?
special effects?
a gay teacher?
a gead weppen?
reba sucks.
read suuff.
the songs are instantly forgettable.
the songs are sweet and memorable.
go right ahead.
go aid that.
and the jokes aren’t even funny!
and the e nonsteven gen funness
don’t waste your time i wish i hadn’t.
do not waste your time watching this!
man, this movie is just plain bad.
man, this movie is a buteboeton.
cheney is a very stagey early talkie.
cheese scenes are truly wilsed etcel.
i mean, horrible.
i mean, celerablo.
the lesser the better.
the ole thates perfect.
so, nothing to blow up.
so, don’t listen to them
they call this film euro trash horror.
they launt mist the surp of his lock.
it is utter garbage.
it is so talknt aad.
i can’t think of any anyway.
i can’t wait into have anyway
please do not buy this movie!
please do not see this movie!
one of the worst movies i’ve ever seen.
one of the worst movies i’ve ever seen.
quite corny.
quite taste.
nothing comes of this development.
nothing makes to sense in her povi.
yes, the whole movie.
yes, the pool teres.
he seems to be always sermonizing.
he seems home ao an evie eyperate.
i’m not making that up.
i’m not lying about it.
im sorry to myself, you know why.
i’m sorry john, you should have wo
i’m american.
i’m married.
johansson is for once tolerable i.
john certain shoild aomos to rocess.
why watch this movie?
why was this movie d
how was your summer?
how about m nos woro?
is robocop machine or man?
is martifor hommelt ned red
nothing happened.
nothing happens.
i even liked the romance.
i remember the early days.
i couldn’t enjoy the film at all.
i couldn’t enjoy the film at all.
it was sooooooo long.
it was soooo ooo!
this one however is beyond bad.
this one had le rdrider cooe out
seriously, what where they thinking?
seriously what were they thinking?
who wants to be in it?
who wants to live it?
Table C.1: Randomly selected reconstructions from the VRAE model with the original input. Most
interestingly, the model is often unable to reproduce the sentences from the testing set but in some
cases, the model re-phrase the input sentences: outputs are different sentences but have very similar
meanings
==PAGE:129==
APPENDIX D
The Pessimistic Machine
D.1
Selected Samples
I totally loved it.
I was really bad.
it was terrible.
the acting was mostly good.
I liked this movie.
it was a nice movie.
the story was amazing.
it was not bad.
The acting was good.
The music was good.
0
i totally hated the movie.
it’ s really bad.
thats terrible.
the acting is mostly horrendously bad.
i liked this movie.
this is a waste of time and money.
the story was bad.
it was bad.
the irony is horrible.
the music is horrendous.
1
i absolutely loved it.
it was retarded.
it’ s terrible.
the acting sucked.
i liked this movie.
it is a waste of time and money.
the story is a crap.
it was bad.
theacting was horrible.
the music was bad.
2
i absolutely loved it.
i was really lost.
it’ s terrible.
the action is horrible.
i liked this movie.
it was a movie.
the storyline was a mess.
it was bad.
theacting was horrible.
the music was bad.
3
i absolutely loved it.
it is really bad.
it’ s terrible.
the acting was poor.
i liked this movie.
what is a movie?
the story was all screwed up.
it was just bad.
the acting was horrific!
the cast is boring.
4
i truly laughed.
it was really really bad.
it’ s terrible.
the acting was poor.
i liked this movie.
this is a tedious movie.
the story is tired and played.
it was just bad.
tragic and touching.
the case was boring.
5
i thoroughly enjoyed it.
it was really really bad.
it’ s terrible.
the acting is poor.
i liked this movie.
it wasn’ t a movie.
the score was amazing.
it was boring.
the acting was horrendous!
this movie was pain for me.
6
i absolutely loved this movie.
it was pretty bad.
it’ s terrible.
the actors did not help matters.
i liked this movie.
i had an open mind.
the story amazing.
it was boring.
the acting was horrible.
the movie was just not good.
7
i absolutely loved this movie.
it was pretty bad.
it’ s terrible.
the acting is mostly poor.
i liked this movie.
it has none.
the two aunts are a delight.
that is not bad.
the acting was horrible.
the music is good.
8
i absolutely loved this movie.
i was really bummed.
it was terrible!
the acting is horrible, save kirk.
i liked this movie.
it was a nice, subtle moment.
the story was average.
it was not.
the acting was horrible.
the music is good.
9
i absolutely loved this movie.
i’ m really caught here.
it was terrible.
the characters are not compelling.
i liked this movies.
it was a good movie.
the spots were amazing.
it was not.
the acting was horrible.
the music is good.
10
i absolutely loved this movie.
it was really good.
it was terrible.
the acting was ok.
i did like this movie.
this is a vestron movie.
the story was abysmal.
it was not.
the acting was horrible.
the music was too intrusive.
11
it totally deserves more!
ah really?
it was terrible.
the attempts at humor are not.
i like this movie.
that’ s a nice view.
that show was magic.
it was not.
the acting was horrible.
the music was great.
12
i absolutely love it.
i was blown away.
it was terrible.
the acting was soso.
i like this movie.
i watch it almost every day.
the cast was amazing.
thank you glend
the acting is horrid.
the music is cool enough.
13
not bloody likely.
i was blown away.
it was terrible.
the acting was only but regular.
i loved this movie.
it was made in provo 0.
the story was brilliant.
it was okay.
the acting, however, is bad.
the cast is good.
14
i just totally loved it!
i was blown away.
this was terrible.
the acting is borderline comical.
i loved this movie.
that is an incorrect view.
the soundtrack was hip, and eclectic.
it was okay.
third it was boring.
the cast is good.
15
i truly enjoyed it.
it was really incredible!
it is terrible.
the acting’ s rock bottom.
i loved this movie.
with a nine mil.
the soundtrack was excellent.
it was okay.
the acting was good and bad.
the movie was good.
16
i absolutely loved it!
i warmly recommend i
it is terrible.
that was an old poem.
i loved this movie.
it has a tvmovie feeling to it.
the truth was unreal.
it was okay.
the acting was ok.
the movie was absolute garbage.
17
i absolutely loved it!
i actually feel happy.
it was too real.
the cast is good looking.
i loved this movie.
i saw it on video.
the two are wellpaired.
i want to be a friend?
the acting is wooden at best.
this movie was o.
18
i truly do.
i really laughed.
it’ s actually the second.
the script are you kidding my?
i loved this movie.
it hadn’ t improved much.
this was total carnage.
i think you can.
the acting is wooden and ham.
this man is a psychologist.
19
a guy fell apart.
the acting however is brilliant.
this is a decent movie.
the story is absorbing.
to anyone.
the writing, however.
the music was very good.
D.2
Randomly Selected Samples
carla finally gets laid.
he is gunna be big in hollywood.
this is one of them.
warning this could spoil your movie.
plot twists?
this film shows a pirate hero a little!
yikes!
disappointed.
i rate this film capital f minus.
he should be a star.
0
cheated on all fronts!
his fear was because of his guilt.
this is one of them.
guess what it took to kill killjoy?
plain stupid!
this film is so bad that its painful.
yikes!
disappointed.
i hate this film with a vengeance.
he’ s flat wrong.
1
charming film but naive film.
he is neither a good man or a bad man.
this is one of them.
watch this movie forget your troubles.
plain stupidity?
this movie was horrible, simply put.
yikes!
disappoint.
although i missed the last episode.
he should be ashamed.
2
well and culmination fight full orgy.
he is driven to find and stop the killer.
this is one of them.
what is wrong with some of you?
the plot was stupid.
this movie is also very sad at times.
yikes!
disappointment.
a cry in the dark is likewise clinical.
we should be ashamed.
3
walker warns pilot about sheba.
he is uproarious, daring, and moronic.
this is one of them.
watch this at your own risk.
the plot is stupid.
this film shook me when i first saw it.
yikes!
disappointing.
i rate this movie a very fair 00.
she looks up in fear.
4
randall and fischer?
he had no getup and go.
this is one of them.
watch this film at your own risk!
the plot is stupid.
this film has other flaws as well.
yikes!
disappointing.
i rate this film a 000.
he should not be trusted.
5
raul julia as general santa anna.
he is a spoiled brat and it bothers me.
this is one of them.
watch this with your soul mate.
the plot is stupid.
this film should be rated t for tripe.
yikes!
disappointing.
i rate this film a 000.
he looks old and lethargic.
6
was below standards, even for a fan.
he does great job as riddick.
this is one of them.
raisuli what kind of rifle does he use?
pretty stupid, eh?
this film came right on time actually.
yikes!
disappointing.
i rate this film a 000.
he looks about thirty.
7
wang lee hom is absolutely great.
it has dialog with bite in it.
this is one of them.
random shots of dolls.
flip on the lights?
this film should have made them stars.
yikes!
disappointing.
with all the ingredients.
who is julia to her?
8
carole landis fares best.
he’ s an adult going to high school.
this is one of them.
wait till it comes out on cable.
pwog fits the bill.
this film looks so fresh and smart.
yikes!
disappointed!
i saw this title again on shemaroo.
he looks around.
9
secluded and peaceful.
so he drives off a building?
this is not one of them.
fans will spend tons of money on it.
blessings to all.
this movie was absolutely ghastly!
yikes!
disturbing.
i watched this film version of r.
he looks around.
10
hardly anyone talks.
it’ d rule and you know it.
this is not one of them.
watch it with someone you truly love.
please rent this film.
this film shows all of that and more.
yikes!
delicious.
all the acting is magnificent.
he shouldn’ t be.
11
screenplay by james l.
his family owns a local diner.
this is not one of them.
random shots of children.
fullstop.
this film is class pure and simple.
yikes!
dir glenn mcquai
i rate this movie a 0.
she looks upward.
12
dallas all over again.
he is finally bond in a video game!
this is one of t.
watch this movie you should enjoy it.
from the sas?
she is simply put, his savior.
yikes!
dialogue editing.
i played that back in junior high.
he wouldn’ t, period.
13
wonderfully atmospheric.
he is good in comedy.
this was one of them.
characters start to live in the movie.
plan to return to it at 00.
she plays a prissy little tramp.
yikes!
silence.
i caught this film late at night on hbo.
should be shot.
14
hydrogen filled flying bladders?
g.
this is one of those.
garfield was slimmed down somewhat.
flush now.
this film surprised me a little.
yikes!
silence.
i gave this film a one.
this will be somewhat short.
15
wonderfully acted and superbly cast.
g.
this is one of those.
watch this film with your kids.
plus the dogs are cute too.
this stuff happens all the time.
yakitate!
sidney poitier.
i rate this film 00.
how to tell a story?
16
stanley yelnats iii henry winkle
g.
this is one of those.
giants too, some of us may recall.
formulaic to the max.
this movie starts slow, then tapers off.
yakitate!
kids flying kites.
wait till it appears on tv.
he also paints with love.
17
warming and humble.
he is a good actor.
this is one of those.
and the list of whoppers goes on and on.
also props to this website!
the film sags a bit during the third act.
yikes.
sidesplitting.
i caught it last night on tmc.
he is too talented!
18
dallas leads 0000.
he is good and exudes charm.
this is one of those.
all the stunt work is gorgeous.
plot spoilers!
this movie was quite a pleasant surprise.
yikes.
delusional.
i gave this movie a rating of 0.
her two male foils act well too.
19
==PAGE:130==
120
==PAGE:131==
Bibliography
[BB12]
James Bergstra and Yoshua Bengio. “Random search for hyper-parameter optimization”.
In: Journal of Machine Learning Research 13.Feb (2012), pages 281–305.
[Bow+15]
S. R. Bowman et al. “Generating Sentences from a Continuous Space”. In: ArXiv e-prints
(November 2015). arXiv: 1511.06349 [cs.LG].
[Bro+16]
A. Brock et al. “Neural Photo Editing with Introspective Adversarial Networks”. In: ArXiv
e-prints (September 2016). arXiv: 1609.07093 [cs.LG].
[Chi+17]
S. Chiappa et al. “Recurrent Environment Simulators”. In: ArXiv e-prints (April 2017).
arXiv: 1704.02254 [cs.AI].
[Cho+14]
K. Cho et al. “Learning Phrase Representations using RNN Encoder-Decoder for Statistical
Machine Translation”. In: ArXiv e-prints (June 2014). arXiv: 1406.1078 [cs.CL].
[Fv14]
O. Fabius and J. R. van Amersfoort. “Variational Recurrent Auto-Encoders”. In: ArXiv
e-prints (December 2014). arXiv: 1412.6581 [stat.ML].
[GEB15]
L. A. Gatys, A. S. Ecker, and M. Bethge. “A Neural Algorithm of Artistic Style”. In: ArXiv
e-prints (August 2015). arXiv: 1508.06576 [cs.CV].
[Goo+14]
Ian Goodfellow et al. “Generative Adversarial Nets”. In: Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems 27. Edited by Z. Ghahramani et al. Curran Associates, Inc., 2014,
pages 2672–2680. url: http://papers.nips.cc/paper/5423-generative-adversarial-
nets.pdf.
[Har28]
Ralph VL Hartley. “Transmission of information”. In: Bell Labs Technical Journal 7.3 (1928),
pages 535–563.
[HG14]
Clayton J Hutto and Eric Gilbert. “Vader: A parsimonious rule-based model for sentiment
analysis of social media text”. In: Eighth international AAAI conference on weblogs and
social media. 2014.
[Hin+12]
Geoffrey Hinton et al. “Deep Neural Networks for Acoustic Modeling in Speech Recognition”.
In: IEEE Signal Processing Magazine 29 (November 2012), pages 82–97. url: https://www.
microsoft.com/en-us/research/publication/deep-neural-networks-for-acoustic-
modeling-in-speech-recognition/.
[HS97]
Sepp Hochreiter and Jürgen Schmidhuber. “Long Short-Term Memory”. In: Neural Comput.
9.8 (November 1997), pages 1735–1780. issn: 0899-7667. doi: 10.1162/neco.1997.9.8.
1735. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1162/neco.1997.9.8.1735.
[JMW14]
D. Jimenez Rezende, S. Mohamed, and D. Wierstra. “Stochastic Backpropagation and Ap-
proximate Inference in Deep Generative Models”. In: ArXiv e-prints (January 2014). arXiv:
1401.4082 [stat.ML].
[Kaa+16]
C. Kaae Sønderby et al. “Ladder Variational Autoencoders”. In: ArXiv e-prints (February
2016). arXiv: 1602.02282 [stat.ML].
[Kim+15]
Y. Kim et al. “Character-Aware Neural Language Models”. In: ArXiv e-prints (August 2015).
arXiv: 1508.06615 [cs.CL].
[KW13]
D. P Kingma and M. Welling. “Auto-Encoding Variational Bayes”. In: ArXiv e-prints (De-
cember 2013). arXiv: 1312.6114 [stat.ML].
==PAGE:132==
122
Bibliography
[LC10]
Yann LeCun and Corinna Cortes. “MNIST handwritten digit database”. In: (2010). url:
http://yann.lecun.com/exdb/mnist/.
[LS07]
Geoffrey N Leech and Mick Short. Style in fiction: A linguistic introduction to English
fictional prose. 13. Pearson Education, 2007.
[Maa+11]
Andrew L. Maas et al. “Learning Word Vectors for Sentiment Analysis”. In: Proceedings of
the 49th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
Technologies. Portland, Oregon, USA: Association for Computational Linguistics, June 2011,
pages 142–150. url: http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/P11-1015.
[Mik+13]
T. Mikolov et al. “Distributed Representations of Words and Phrases and their Composi-
tionality”. In: ArXiv e-prints (October 2013). arXiv: 1310.4546 [cs.CL].
[MP43]
Warren S McCulloch and Walter Pitts. “A logical calculus of the ideas immanent in nervous
activity”. In: The bulletin of mathematical biophysics 5.4 (1943), pages 115–133.
[Nyq24]
Harry Nyquist. “Certain factors affecting telegraph speed”. In: Transactions of the American
Institute of Electrical Engineers 43 (1924), pages 412–422.
[PK99]
James W Pennebaker and Laura A King. “Linguistic styles: language use as an individual
difference.” In: Journal of personality and social psychology 77.6 (1999), page 1296.
[RJS17]
A. Radford, R. Jozefowicz, and I. Sutskever. “Learning to Generate Reviews and Discovering
Sentiment”. In: ArXiv e-prints (April 2017). arXiv: 1704.01444 [cs.LG].
[Ros58]
Frank Rosenblatt. “The perceptron: A probabilistic model for information storage and or-
ganization in the brain.” In: Psychological review 65.6 (1958), page 386.
[SHB16]
Rico Sennrich, Barry Haddow, and Alexandra Birch. “Controlling politeness in neural ma-
chine translation via side constraints”. In: Proceedings of NAACL-HLT. 2016, pages 35–
40.
[SPG97]
Mike Schuster, Kuldip K. Paliwal, and A. General. “Bidirectional recurrent neural networks”.
In: IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing (1997).
[Sri+14]
Nitish Srivastava et al. “Dropout: A Simple Way to Prevent Neural Networks from Over-
fitting”. In: Journal of Machine Learning Research 15 (2014), pages 1929–1958. url: http:
//jmlr.org/papers/v15/srivastava14a.html.
[Wu+16]
Y. Wu et al. “Google’s Neural Machine Translation System: Bridging the Gap between
Human and Machine Translation”. In: ArXiv e-prints (September 2016). arXiv: 1609.08144
[cs.CL].
[Wu+17]
L. Wu et al. “Adversarial Neural Machine Translation”. In: ArXiv e-prints (April 2017).
arXiv: 1704.06933 [cs.CL].
[WZ89]
R. J. Williams and D. Zipser. “A learning algorithm for continually running fully recurrent
neural networks”. eng. In: Neural Computation 1.2 (1989), pages 270–80, 270–280. issn:
1530888x, 08997667. doi: 10.1162/neco.1989.1.2.270.
[Xu+12]
Wei Xu et al. “Paraphrasing for style”. In: 24th International Conference on Computational
Linguistics, COLING 2012. 2012.
[Xu+17]
Anbang Xu et al. “A New Chatbot for Customer Service on Social Media”. In: Proceedings
of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. CHI ’17. Denver,
Colorado, USA: ACM, 2017, pages 3506–3510. isbn: 978-1-4503-4655-9. doi: 10.1145/
3025453.3025496. url: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/3025453.3025496.
