==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Processor emulation in Webassembly
Rasmus
Thomas
Tjalk-Bøggild
(s103433)
Kongens Lyngby 2017
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads
Building 324
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary
This thesis concerns processor emulation in the context of the WebAssembly platform,
particularly how to generate an equivalent WebAssembly program for a source binary
created for another platform.
The thesis details three overall strategies for emulation: pure interpretation, ahead-
of-time compilation and just-in-time compilation. The thesis shows that pure inter-
pretation is generally applicable, but also generally slower than the other approaches;
it shows that ahead-of-time compilation is not generally applicable and details the
reasons the reasons and circumstances for when it is not applicable. Finally it shows
how to apply the just-in-time compilation in relation to WebAssembly and how to
work around the restrictions of the platform.
The thesis shows that it is possible to build an emulation platform that can emu-
late arbitrary binaries for the source platform; even binaries containing self-modifying
code or using control flow graphs that cannot directly be translated to the WebAssem-
bly platform.
The emulator platform is illustrated using two source processors, and the ability
of the platform is illustrated by simulating a Commodore 64 systems, complete with
video subsystem and keyboard I/O. This system is demonstrated using the original
C64 operating system, BASIC interpreter and a simple game, that can be loaded at
run-time.
Finally the emulation platform is evaluated and processor emulation on the We-
bAssembly platform is found to be implementable and with significant speed-ups
from the hybrid methods. The evaluation also finds key features missing from the
WebAssembly platform, that could potentially improve emulation performance signif-
icantly; all features, that are planned for future WebAssembly releases.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at DTU Compute in fulfillment of the requirements for
acquiring an M.Sc. in Engineering.
The thesis was conducted from January 23rd 2017 to June 15th 2017 under su-
pervision of professor Christian Probst. The thesis deals with processor emulation in
WebAssembly and performance optimization techniques.
Kongens Lyngby, June 15, 2017
Rasmus Thomas Tjalk-Bøggild (s103433)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisor Christian Probst for his help and guidance
throughout this thesis. I would also like to thank my wife and daughter for their
patience during the project period.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Summary
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
2
Preliminaries and theory background
3
2.1
Dictionary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Overview of processor emulation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
General compiler structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.4
Compilation techniques for emulation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.5
WebAssembly target . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.6
Reducible CFG . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.7
6502 source environment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.8
ARM Cortex M3 source environment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.9
Related works . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3
Analysis of the problem
21
3.1
Source instruction implementation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2
Translation from source to target . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.3
Other optimizations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4
Implementation work
37
4.1
WebAssembly platform . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.2
Emulation platform . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.3
C64 Simulator . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
4.4
Limitations of the current implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
5
Testing and performance analysis
57
5.1
Benchmark setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
5.2
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
6
Discussion
63
6.1
Suitability of WebAssembly as an emulation platform
. . . . . . . . .
63
6.2
Suitability of using hybrid techniques . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
6.3
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
7
Conclusion
71
A
Appendix A - 6502 addressing modes
73
B
Appendix B - Tool output
75
B.1
Emscripten
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
B.2
Binaryen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
84
Bibliography
85
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
The modern web browser has become a ubiquitous computing platform driving ev-
erything from online banking, word processors and spreadsheets to games and social
media. At its core is the Javascript language [ECM11], which until recently was the
only programming language available on the web platform. Javascript is a dynamic
language distributed in a plain text format and although massive improvements have
been made with regards to performance and optimizations, the language was never
designed with performance in mind and substantial engineering effort is required to
gain the modern level of performance [HCU91]
Additionally, Javascript has become a compilation target, to allow existing soft-
ware to take advantage of the wide availability of web. To improve the performance of
these programs that were compiled to Javascript, a new standard was defined, asm.js,
which uses only a subset of Javascript and annotates all variables with types to allow
easier and more efficient optimizations [Moz14]. This had the benefit of instant legacy
browser support, since the programs was still Javascript, but with huge performance
gains for the supporting browsers. However, the compiled programs were still tech-
nically Javascript (even if specially annotated), which causes larger than necessary
source files and a resulting overhead in verification and compile time. To get around
this, a new standard was introduced as a dedicated compilation target: WebAssembly.
WebAssembly promises to be a more compact and efficient format for distributing
programs for the web [W3C17e]. To take advantage of this, however, it appears that
every program would have to be adapted and re-compiled for this new standard.
In this thesis we will investigate how to take advantage of the WebAssembly format
in creating an emulation platform. Emulation allows binaries for applications built
for other platforms to be executed, without modification, on a new platform. By
using an emulation platform, we can extend the lifetime of applications, that could
otherwise not be ported, either due to prohibitive costs or because the sources are
inaccessible.
The thesis will first examine the necessary theoretical background for emulators.
We will start by examining the reasons for emulating and the potential benefits and
drawbacks. We will use two source platforms as the basis for this investigation: the
legacy processor MOS 6502 and the contemporary ARM Cortex M3 processor.
As part of this examination we will look at the WebAssembly format in detail,
including the instructions and control flow supported and the environment in which
WebAssembly programs reside in the browser. In particular, we will investigate the
==PAGE:12==
2
1 Introduction
properties of control flow graphs that are possible to directly represent in WebAssem-
bly, since the format only supports so-called well-formed control flow graphs. We
will compare this to the concept of reducible control flow graphs and examine how
to test for reducibility and how to work around this limitation in WebAssembly for
non-reducible control flow graphs.
We will then analyze the different strategies for emulation and how we could apply
those to the WebAssembly platform. This analysis will detail how to reconstruct
the control flow graph and how to use that to recreate an equivalent program in
WebAssembly, using the native constructs available there. Lastly we will analyze how
to use this recreated structure as the basis for further optimizations of the emulated
program.
The thesis will then describe how the emulation platform was actually imple-
mented, with a particular focus on how to work around the current limitations of
the WebAssembly platform. The implementation focuses on two parts: how to, cor-
rectly, emulate each instruction of the source platform and how to implement the
analyzed emulation strategies. The more advanced strategies must also deal correct
with source constructs such as self-modifying code, and the implementation describes
ways to deal with such constructs.
The implementation is constructed to support several of the discussed emulation
strategies. The implementation is then tested in a benchmarking framework to see
the performance effect of the various strategies and how they compare in a number
of scenarios.
Finally the results are analyzed and discussed and we examine the suitability of
using WebAssembly as a platform for processor emulation.
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 2
Preliminaries and
theory background
This chapter will provide the theoretical background needed to understand the report.
The central terms of the report will be defined in a dictionary. Furthermore it will give
an overview of the subject of processor emulation techniques and the WebAssembly
target.
2.1
Dictionary
Emulation
The task of executing an instruction set for one processor on a different
processor by means of software translation. For the purpose of this thesis, this means
emulation of instruction set and memory only.
Simulation
The task of simulating an entire platform using an emulator for the
instruction set and memory, but also including peripherals (video subsystems, user
input, network I/O, etc).
Environment
The processor, memory, peripherals, etc. of a given platform..
Target / Host environment
The environment that the emulated is executed in.
Source / Native environment
The environment that the emulated binary was
originally targeting.
Control Flow Graph (CFG)
A directed graph with basic blocks as vertices and
successors as edges.
Basic block
A collection of one or more instructions, with the property that only
the first instruction can be the target of a jump instruction and only the last instruc-
tion (the terminator) may be a jump instruction.
==PAGE:14==
4
2 Preliminaries and theory background
Successor
A basic block that may be reached from the terminator
Jump instruction
An update the PC (either relative to the current value or to
an absolute address). If based on a condition, sometimes called a branch instruction
instead.
PC
Program counter - the register marking the location of the next instruction
SP
Stack pointer - the register marking the current top of the stack
LR
Link register - the register marking the return address for a branch
Path
A sequence of edges (v1, v2), (v2, v3), ..., (vn−1, vn) in the CFG, denoted P(v1, vn).
A path can be found statically by observing the CFG.
Trace
A path that is observed to be executed by the program. Can only be observed
at run-time.
Handle
A set of vertices such that every vertex in the CFG is reachable through a
path starting in a vertex in the set. [NNH99, p. 419]
Interpretation
The emulation process of reading, parsing and executing one in-
struction at a time. Trades slow execution for fast start-up.
Ahead-of-time (AOT) compilation
The emulation technique where all instruc-
tion of the source binary are compiled to the host environment before executing any
instructions. Trades slow start-up for fast execution.
Just-in-time (JIT) compilation
An emulation technique where instructions are
compiled as they are needed. Often combined with interpretation to allow very fast
start-ups, while also benefitting from fast execution (once instructions have been
compiled).
Function vs Subroutine
In this thesis, I will use the term function to refer to
WebAssembly functions and subroutine to refer to methods/functions/(sub)routines
present in the source binary, to allow easier distinction between the two.
==PAGE:15==
2.2 Overview of processor emulation
5
2.2
Overview of processor emulation
2.2.1
Why emulation?
A substantial amount of software has been written for platforms that are now obsolete.
These platforms range from mainframes that are no longer supported, to legacy PCs
and gaming platforms. The large and widely used software packages are often ported
and re-compiled for new platforms, but a large portion of relatively niche software
packages will never be ported due to prohibitive costs. This does not mean that
individual users would not benefit from porting the software, simply that for any one
user or corporation the costs would be too high compared to the benefits. Emulating
a platform can be a way to extend the lifetime of applications beyond the end of
life of the platform that they originally targeted. In comparison with porting every
useful application for a platform, creating just a single emulator program can be
a much more manageable and economic task.
Additionally, since most platforms
that are beyond their end of life data are relatively less powerful than contemporary
platforms, many emulators are able to execute the software applications at similar
speeds (or faster) than the original platforms.
Emulation also serves a purpose for gaining insight into platforms that may be
difficult to monitor directly.
For instance, for Internet of Things (IoT) or other
embedded programming platforms, debugging is often difficult due to the limited
access to the processors and on-board memory. In these scenarios an emulator can
execute the intended binary on a development machine and provide complete access
to processor and memory state - giving a much better development and debugging
environment compared to telemetry provided via UART, Bluetooth or similar where
a debugger cannot be attached directly.
To illustrate these two use-cases in this report I will investigate the legacy 6502
processor (used in the Commodore 64/128 and Atari consoles among other) and the
contemporary ARM Cortex M3 (used in embedded platforms and IoT devices such
as the Texas Instruments SensorTag).
2.2.2
Emulation vs simulation
Emulation and simulation are often used interchanegably, but in this thesis, we will
make the following distinction:
Emulation focuses on parsing an instruction set from one binary and executing
it in the host environment. The emulation process includes processor state (usually
general purpose registers, PC, SP and a register for state flags) and memory.
In
the pure emulator calls to co-processors, bus calls to peripherals and calls via shared
memory are ignored. The emulator therefore focuses narrowly on executing the binary
and monitoring the effect on the registers and memory, but is unable to provide any
direct I/O.
==PAGE:16==
6
2 Preliminaries and theory background
Simulation on the other hand also simulates peripherals. This can be done either
by simulating the peripherals via the original communication means (for instance, in
the Commodore 64 simulator, by monitoring the portion of the memory that is shared
with the video subsystem - or by translating the user input into the appropriate writes
and interrupts). This technique is the most general, but may not always be feasible
or be the most efficient. For instance, if trying to simulate the Bluetooth Low Energy
subsystem for the ARM Cotex-M3 on the TI SensorTag, it may be more feasible
to intercept the system calls for updating the GATT profile rather than trying to
simulate the communication at the antenna level. For other networking purposes, it
may be more efficient to intercept calls to the TCP/IP stack rather than simulating
the low-level network operations, since the host environment may have access to
higher level APIs for which the system calls map easier.
2.3
General compiler structure
Compilers come in many shapes and forms depending the nature of the programming
language being translated and the type of output, but there are still some general
elements that occur in (almost) every compiler. Overall, the job of a compiler is
to take a program in one language and output an equivalent program in another
language [ASU86]. The definition is purposely broad to encompass both a ”tradi-
tional” compiler from some programming language into assembly or machine code,
and ”transpilers” from one programming language to another, or one architecture to
another.
The job of a compiler can be split into three broad sections:
• Front end: The job of the front end is to parse the source language into an inter-
nal representation. This could be from a C source language file into an Abstract
Syntax Tree. This is typically based on a context free grammar from which a
lexer and a parser can be (semi) auto generated1. The front end should reject
programs with syntax errors, but otherwise should not do any error checking.
• Analysis and optimization: The analysis section is where all error checking takes
place. Depending on the nature of the source language this may be semantic
analysis, type checking, etc.
After all analyses are completed, the program
should be error free (in the sense that there are no errors preventing the compiler
from generating output code, not in a ”bug free” sense). Optimizations may
change the program from one form into an equivalent, but (preferably) more
efficient form along some parameter (execution speed, code size, power use, etc).
• Back end: The back end takes the error free program from the internal repre-
sentation and produces an equivalent program in the output language.
1Though languages like C are not actually context free, even after pre-processing, due to typedefs
among others.
==PAGE:17==
2.4 Compilation techniques for emulation
7
2.3.1
Phases
Each section of the compiler can further be separated into a number of phases. The
front end typically contains at least a lexer and a parser; the analysis will typically
contain at least a syntax analysis, semantic analysis and one or more optimizing
phases. Each phase is associated with an internal representation: the lexer produces
a token stream, the parser produces an abstract syntax tree and the analyses will
typically transform the program from a high level intermediate representation over
one or more mid level intermediate representations to a final low level intermediate
representation that can be transformed by the back end into the desired language.
Exactly what is in each intermediate representation depends on the compiler and
language - often the higher level intermediate representations will contain high level
features of the source language and the lower level intermediate representations will
be closer to the output language. So, if we are building a Java compiler, the higher
level intermediate representations may still contain classes, methods and loops, where
the lower levels will be closer to Java bytecode and thus contain GOTOs instead of
loops and so on.
Since most compilers take a high level programming language like Java, c++, c,
SML, etc and output a lower level language like assembly, machine code or some form
of byte code, we talk of these transformations as lowerings. Conversely, if we were to
move from a representation closer to assembly to one closer to C, we would call that
highering.
A lowering transformation might be to take a representation containing a loop
and outputting a representation where that loop was transformed into a guard, a
conditional branch and an unconditional branch. Reconstructing the loop or detecting
an array from pointer calculations and so on would be examples of higherings.
Of particular interest with regards to intermediate representations is the LLVM
project [LA04]. The LLVM compiler framework has a single intermediate representa-
tion that is broad enough to be the target of a whole range of programming languages,
yet low level and simple enough to be relatively straight forward to construct back
ends for. This has allowed a large number of compiler optimizations to be shared
across a several compilers. LLVM does not contain any front ends2, but does provide
a number of back ends. This means that a new project only has to provide a front
end that performs that initial lowering to LLVM IR to get access to all the provided
optimizations and back ends. Or, by providing a new back end, a project can provide
a compiler for a whole range of source languages to a new platform. This, in fact,
was exactly what the Emscripten project did for WebAssembly [Zak11].
2.4
Compilation techniques for emulation
In this thesis, we will consider three distinct approaches to emulation. Pure interpre-
tation of the binary, where one instruction at a time is read and executed in a loop,
2Though the companion project Clang provides a front end for C and C++
==PAGE:18==
8
2 Preliminaries and theory background
with no attempt at optimization. AOT compilation, where the entire native binary is
translated up front and executed only afterwards. And finally JIT techniques, where
instructions are translated on the fly.
2.4.1
Pure interpretation
Pure interpretation is the simplest approach, but also potentially the slowest. The
interpreter have one main loop and will at each iteration fetch, parse and execute and
instruction. The interpreter does not make any assumptions about the native code
and is able to execute all forms of code (including self-modifying code). The process
is potentially wasteful because each instruction may be parsed many times.
2.4.2
AOT
The AOT compiler attempts fetch and parse all instructions in the native binary
before starting executing and translating them into the host counter-part. The upside
of this is that at run-time no parsing takes place, but only the executing of the
instruction (including updating processor state, registers and memory). For platforms
with a good match between the native and the host environment, this may yield close
to native performance as each instruction in the native program is emulated by its
host counterpart. The down-side is that there is a cost up front, but also that the
compiler must be able to distinguish between data and code in the binary.
This
is non-trivial in 6502 where data and code is mixed and jumps may be performed
indirectly (to a location stored in memory). Since every instruction is translated up
front, it also means that AOT cannot deal with self-modifying code in any elegant
way.
2.4.3
Hybrid / JIT techniques
Hybrid approach is an umbrella term for many different techniques that can optimize
execution of the native binary while the program is executing. The techniques that
we will be investigating in this thesis are just-in-time (re)compilation of ”hot” code
sections. Hot in this context simply means code that is executed often. The JIT
compilation can use information gained at run-time that is not accessible to the AOT
compiler. This means, among other things, that the JIT compiler can distinguish
between code and data, by tracing what parts of the memory is executed as instruc-
tions. It also means that the JIT compiler can various assumptions about the state
of the program and simply bail out to the interpreter if these become invalidated.
This allows for a whole range of aggressive optimizations like reducing a subroutine
to its most-used path and only compiling that, but hoisting the invariant checks to
the beginning of the method. It also means that the hybrid techniques can deal with
self-modifying code by simply invalidating the compiled code and bailing out to the
interpreter.
==PAGE:19==
2.5 WebAssembly target
9
2.5
WebAssembly target
WebAssembly (wasm) is a newly developed binary format intended, as the name
implies, to be executed in a web context. In supersedes the ASM.js [Moz14] standard
as the target for binaries compiled for the web. Whereas ASM.js was still source
compatible with Javascript (and therefore, transported in clear text), WebAssembly
was designed from the ground up as a new binary format to allow smaller download
sizes and faster execution. WebAssembly reached the 1.0 milestone in April 2017 and
is currently supported by all major browsers [W3C17d].
2.5.1
Why WebAssembly as a target?
The modern web browser acts as a host environment for a variety of different pro-
grams, either written directly in Javascript or compiled to Javascript. With more
than 3 billion internet uses, the vast majority of which uses a modern, Javascript-
enabled browser, Javascript is estimated to be one of the most executed programming
languages in the world today [ICT17][Net17].
The initial version of WebAssembly is currently supported by all major browsers,
Microsoft Edge, Google Chrome, Mozilla Firefox and WebKit [W3C17d] and devel-
oped under a World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) group. It is therefore expected to
take over the role as the primary web compilation target from Javascript and ASM.js
and the widespread support for WebAssembly gives some indicating that it could be
supported for a long time.
Browsers today are implemented on a very large variety of platforms and operating
systems ranging form desktops running Linux, Mac OS or Windows to tablets or
mobile phones running Android, iOS or Windows.
These operating systems also
spans a wide range of x86, x64 and ARM processors.
All this makes it possible
to execute an emulator targeting WebAssembly on a very wide range of platforms.
Additionally, the browser host environment provides sandboxing of the emulated code,
which provides some mitigation of potential security flaws in the source application.
Currently WebAssembly is only supported in a browser environment, but stand-
alone implementations are in progress [W3C17c].
2.5.2
Characteristics of the target
Since WebAssembly is executed across such a wide range of devices and platforms, the
instructions do not match any one architecture, but are rather intended to be easily
translated to the final instruction set. The WebAssembly instructions are concrete,
but the WebAssembly specification makes a number of abstractions and conceptual
simplifications that help to decouple it from a specific platform or operating system.
For instance, rather than specifying a calling convention, WebAssembly supports
functions, calls and return statements, which can easily be translated to the host
environment’s platform and conventions.
==PAGE:20==
10
2 Preliminaries and theory background
2.5.2.1
Machine model
The WebAssembly machine model is a stack machine with a limited number of basic
types (32 & 64 bit integers and floats). The memory is modelled as a linear piece
of virtual memory, currently only addressable with 32-bit addresses (meaning a max-
imum of approximately 4 GB of memory)3. In addition to the main memory the
machine model allows global and local variables [W3C17e].
The WebAssembly stack machine specifies the execution model as a regular stack
machine, but with special support for control flow structures: functions, blocks, loops,
ifs and breaks - what the specification names an structured stack machine [W3C17e].
Functions work as expected with the arguments pushed to the stack before a call
statement and the return value placed on the stack after the arguments are consumed.
Blocks do not affect control flow directly, but rather introduce a label at the end that
can be jumped to with one of the break statements (BR or BR_TABLE). A loop
construct is similar to a block except that the label introduced is at the top of the
block. This is the only construct that allows jumps to a lower PC4.
The breaks are limited to jumping to labels introduced by a surrounding block
or loop. This introduces the noteworthy exception to the control flow structure that
there are no mechanism for a generalized jump or GOTO. Informally, this limits We-
bAssembly to expressing well-formed CFGs. This means that control flow constructs
of many high-level programming languages can be directly represented in WebAssem-
bly, but it also means that languages that allow a generalized jump/branch/GOTO
mechanism cannot be guaranteed to produce CFGs compatible with this restriction.
An example of how a non- well-formed CFG could be created in the C-programming
language using a loop with a jump from outside the loop into the middle of the loop
is shown here.
1
if (skip_init) goto AFTER_INIT;
2
3
while (...){
4
//INIT code here
5 AFTER_INIT:
6
...
7
}
Listing 2.1: non-Well-formed CFG.
While neither idiomatic C or best-practice, the above example illustrate that it is
quite possible to create programs that are not directly expressible in the WebAssem-
bly format.
A binary application, of course, is only restricted by the underlying
instruction set which in most cases does not impose any restrictions on the CFG.
This does not mean, however, that is impossible to compile a program with a
non-well-formed CFG to WebAssembly, but it does mean that the CFG will have to
be transformed into a form that can be expressed.
3A 64-bit version of WebAssembly is planned
4Disregarding function calls which obviously set the PC to a value that is either higher or lower
than the current value
==PAGE:21==
2.5 WebAssembly target
11
We shall investigate the formal properties of these well-formed graphs in the
section 2.6 - Reducible CFG. A general mechanism for translating non-well-formed
graphs into equivalent well-formed graphs given and the performance consequences
of this construct is analysed in the section 3.2 - Translation from source to target.
2.5.2.2
Runtime environment
The only option for hosting WebAssembly currently available is in a browser with a
Javascript API as the only means of interacting with the WebAssembly code [W3C17b].
This means that the only I/O available to WebAssembly programs is via the host envi-
ronment. A WebAssembly program can import foreign (Javascript) functions that are
callable like regular WebAssembly functions and can export WebAssembly functions
to the Javascript host environment, where they are callable like regular Javacript
functions.
The memory available to a WebAssembly program is also available to
the host Javascript environment and can be shared across multiple WebAssembly
modules [W3C17b].
WebAssembly do not provide a standard library (malloc, free or the like), which
means that the program must provide this part of the runtime environment itself. The
main WebAssembly compiler (Emscripten) provides an implementation of libc for its
LLVM backend. Although based on LLVM the current implementation is branched
off the primary LLVM source and is currently only able to translate c, c++ and Rust
source programs to WebAssembly [Ems17].
2.5.2.3
Compilation
WebAssembly modules are compiled in the Javascript host environment from their bi-
nary representation and are immutable once compiled [W3C17b]. This would appear
to prevent JIT compilation, but since we can share memory between modules we can
create code on the fly, compile it via the Javascript API and have it share the same
memory as the main module and thus have it be callable from the main module.
This requires some help on the Javascript side though, as all WebAssembly imports
most be resolved at compile time, which prevents us from importing the newly created
WebAssembly functions on the fly. Instead, we must have an intermediary Javascript
function that can be imported into the main module and provide access to the newly
created functions.
2.5.2.4
Binary format
The WebAssembly format is designed to be verifiable using a single pass over the
binary.
To achieve this all definitions has to be declared before use; the format
achieves this by structuring the binary into the following sections:
• Types: This section defines function signatures
==PAGE:22==
12
2 Preliminaries and theory background
• Imports: This section defines all imports from the outside environment (func-
tions, memory, tables or globals).
• Functions: This section defines local functions.
• Table: This section defines an optional table used for indirect function calls.
This may only be defined, if it was not imported.
• Memory: This section defined a segment of linear memory. This may only be
defined if not imported from the outside.
• Globals: This section defines global variables (separate from the linear memory)
• Exports: This section defines exports from the module (functions, memory, ta-
bles or globals)
• Start: This section defines an optional function to run automatically after ini-
tializing the module.
• Elements: This section defines optional defaults for the table entry (allowing
tables to be initilized to internal or imported functions)
• Code: This section defines the code (opcodes) for each local function.
• Data: This section defines data to be placed in the linear memory.
• Optional sections: This section contains optional data (e.g. debug data) and
may be repeated unlike the other sections.
Everything in WebAssembly is identified by indices: signatures maps the param-
eter types and an optional return type to a unique, but sequential, index. Imports
maps external definitions (identified by a namespace and an identifier string) to a lo-
cal index; functions are only identifiable from their index. The encoding uses a single
function index space for both imported and local functions, with imported functions
before local functions.
This means that validation is simply a matter of:
1. Check that the given index is in range: so a function is defined using a previously
defined signature index; function calls only used defined functions and so on
2. For code:
• check that the stack contains (at least) the correct number of arguments
when invoking a function.
• check that when a block construct ends that it added zero or one elements
to the stack (depending on whether the block returns a value or not)
==PAGE:23==
2.6 Reducible CFG
13
A block is encoded as a start instruction (block, if, loop) and an end instruction.
The end instructions are shared among all block constructs and simple ends the
immediate parent block. Labels are implicit for each block and are encoded, again,
using just the index: in this case the index is the number of block levels relative to
the current instruction. This allows for the validation code to simply keep track of
the current block level and immediately check that a break instruction is in range.
Each instruction is encoded as an opcode followed a number of operands as re-
quired by the opcode. Since the current number of instruction types is below 256,
each opcode is simply a byte, followed by the appropriate number of bytes to encode
the operands.
2.6
Reducible CFG
There are many definitions of reducible graphs going back to the original papers
and definitions by Allen [All70], Cocke [Coc70], Hecht and Ullaman [HU72] and Tar-
jan [Tar73]. They all differ slightly in their definitions and algorithms for testing
reducibility. The defitions used here are based on the summary provided by Nielson
& Nielson [NNH99] .
We define a CFG formally as a collection of vertices, directed edges and a handle
G = (V, E, H). The vertices are basic blocks and the edges denote successors to the
basic block of the edge’s starting vertex.
Every other vertex in the flow graph is
reachable from one or more vertices in the Handle H.
2.6.1
Dominance
A vertex v1 dominates a vertex v2 iff all paths from s to v2 includes v1. [NNH99, p.
420]
2.6.2
Depth-First Spanning Tree (DFST)
A Spanning Tree of G is a graph with the same nodes as G, but a subset of edges in G
such that the result is a tree. The DFST is a Spanning Tree formed by a depth-first
search of G. The DFST is not necessarily unique [NNH99, p. 422].
2.6.3
Structure of a reducible graph
A CFG is said to be reducible if we can create a DFST and characterize the remaining
edges in terms of forward edges and back edges. Specifically, given a DFST, T, for G,
we define:
• A forward edge as an edge, (v1, v2), where P(v1, v2) ∈T.
• A retreating edge as an edge, (v2, v1), where P(v1, v2) ∈T.
==PAGE:24==
14
2 Preliminaries and theory background
• A back edge is a retreating edge, where v1 dominates v2.
• A cross egde is an edge (v1, v2), where P(v1, v2) /∈T ∧P(v2, v1) /∈T.
A graph G is said to be reducible iff, all retreating edges are back edges and cross
egdes do not form cycles.
In other words for a graph to be reducible, all edges that form cycles when added
to T must be back edges.
2.6.4
Testing reducibility
Testing whether a graph is reducible or not can now be done by creating a DFST and
calculating the dominator sets. First we check that all retreating edges are in fact
back edges - if not, the CFG is not reducible. If they are, we remove all back edges
and check that the resulting graph is acyclic. If it is, the CFG is reducible.
2.6.5
Relation to well-formedness
The property that all edges in a reducible CFG are either forward edges (or part of
T) or back edges makes it easy to translate to the WebAssembly notion of a well-
formed CFG: all back edges form loops, whereas all other edges are either branches
to surrounding blocks or simply consecutive instructions that require no branches.
IF
IF
WHILE
Figure 2.1: An example of a reducible CFG showning both a forward edge (green)
and back edge (blue).
==PAGE:25==
2.7 6502 source environment
15
The fact that there can be no branches into a loop follows directly from the
dominator property of the back edges: if there was a branch into some vertex inside
the loop, vi, from outside the loop, then the first vertex in the loop, v1 would not
dominate vi and thus, (v2, v1) would not be a back edges.
The acyclic portion of G (T and all forward edges) can be ordered with respect to
the starting PC for each basic block in a ascending manner.
In the WebAssembly context this means that the blocks that form the labels for
the forward edges are either completely contained in a loop or completely outside it.
From this property it follows that it is always possible to place blocks to form the
reducible CFG in the following manner: at the destination of each back edge (or s
for the case outside loops), start all the blocks that are required to place the needed
labels inside the loop. At each required label, end a block.
2.7
6502 source environment
In this section we will address the properties that are distinct for the 6502 source
environment that must be addressed in an emulation context.
2.7.1
Registers
The 6502 have 6 register in total:
X A general purpose register with special addressing modes
Y A general purpose register with special addressing modes
Acc A general purpose register with special arithmetic instruction
Status A register for maintain 7 flags, including Carry and Overflow flags from the
arithmetic results
PC Updated automatically after each instruction or using the various branch, jump
and return instructions
SP Updated using the various push / pull instructions
Unlike later platforms the instructions on the 6502 are directly linked to a specific
register - that is, for instance, there is no general MOV instruction that can move
a value from a register to main memory, but rather the three STX, STA and STY
instructions, that can move a specific register to memory.
==PAGE:26==
16
2 Preliminaries and theory background
2.7.2
Binary encoding
The 6502 binary encoding is very simple: each instruction is encoded as an opcode,
that encodes the operating and the operand addressing. Based on the addressing the
following 0 - 3 bytes contains the operand. The operands can be:
1. implied (as in INX will increase the X register)
2. immediate (a single byte value)
3. a relative offset (for branching)
4. an absolute memory address, potentially with the value of register added
5. an indirect address (meaning that the operand is the value at the address), also
potentially offset with the value of a register
The details of the addressing modes can be seen in Appendix A.
2.7.3
Code & data pages
While the 6502 supports both ROM and RAM, the ROM were usually used exclusively
for OS pages and thus regular application code and data pages were placed among one
another with no special support for pages containing code. The 6502 were limited to
addressing a block of 64KB of memory at a time (called a memory bank) with some
support for swapping these on the fly5. Since this addressing also contained the OS,
the main mode of communicating with peripherals was shared memory, wide ranges
in this addressing space was already occupied with a binary started. The resulted in
widespread use of self-modifying code as well as having data and code spread all over
the addressing space, making it difficult to reason statically about what parts were
code and what parts were data.
2.8
ARM Cortex M3 source environment
To contrast the 6502 source environment, we will address the properties of the ARM
Cortex M3 processor. The ARM Cortex M3 are a set of low-energy, 32-bit processors
based on the ARMv7-M Architecture [ARM10], which defines the instruction set
and registers. The ARM Cortex M3 processors are most often used in embedded
systems, since they are low cost and low energy. They are also relatively restricted in
comparison with modern desktop CPUs, with a single core, low clock speeds (200 MHz
for the top of the range models). The currency model is based efficient interrupts and
thus, being single threaded, focuses on concurrent rather than parallel programming.
5The Commodore 64 only has 64KB of memory, but the ROM was mapped on top of that, so it
had support for temporarily disabling reads from the OS pages and using the memory available at
those addresses. The Commodore 128 had, as the name implies, two banks of 64 KBs each
==PAGE:27==
2.8 ARM Cortex M3 source environment
17
2.8.1
Registers
All the ARMv7-M processors have 13 general purpose registers (R0 through R12) and
four dedicated registers: SP, PC, LR and Status. The 13 general purpose registers
are all equally addressable and are not linked to a specific instruction; instead each
instruction takes one or more registers as operands. Some allow direct interaction
with the special purpose registers, but most of the interaction with the special purpose
registers are through dedicated instructions: branch, B, for interacting with the PC,
PUSH/POP for interacting with the SP and so on.
2.8.2
Binary encoding
The encoding uses the Thumb-2 instruction set [ARM10]. This set allows for either 16
bit or 32 bit encodings of instructions, known as narrow or wide encodings. There are
narrow encodings of, almost, all instructions in the set, but they are usually limited in
some way: e.g. it might only be possible to specify an 8 bit immediate, even though
the instruction accepts 16 bit immediates and so on.
The binary encoding is much more complicated than the 6502: first of all, the
parser needs to distinguish between narrow and wide encodings. The wide encodings
uses one of three special patterns on the 5 most significant bits of the instruction.
This allows the parser to fetch 16 bits, check the pattern, and then fetch another 16
bits, if the encoding was wide.
Regardless of whether a narrow or wide encoding was used, those 2 or 4 bytes
includes information about the opcode, operands and any flags set. This encoding
is a mixed of a fixed pattern for the instruction and flags and operands (immediates
and registers).
As an example consider two of the narrow encodings of the ADD
instruction [ARM10, p A6-24]:
Even though it is the same instruction, the encodings are quite different - the
fixed bit pattern are not equal and the operands are encoded quite differently.
To guide the parsing in the face of this, ARM publishes a parse hierarchy, where
a number of related instructions are grouped by their encoding prefixes, but the
encoding is still quite complex to parse correctly for all instructions and all encodings,
both narrow and wide, with 262 pages of the manual dedicated to specifying the
encodings [ARM10, pp A6-17 - A6-278].
2.8.3
Code & data pages
The ARM Cortex M3 features a much stricter separation of code and data than the
6502. In fact, in most embedded systems, the code pages of the Cortex M3 will reside
in a ROM section with data residing in the main memory, leaving the two physically
separated and disjoint in the address space. The ARMv7-M does not support virtual
==PAGE:28==
18
2 Preliminaries and theory background
Figure 2.2: The encoding for ADDS <Rd>,<Rn>,<Rm>.
Figure 2.3: The encoding for ADD<c> <Rdn>,<Rm>.
memory, so all addresses used are equal to their physical addresses. This also makes
self-modifying code (almost) impossible6
The binaries are typically distributed in the ELF format, which also marks code
and data sections, making it easy to analyze the final binary.
2.9
Related works
2.9.1
Automatic generation of machine emulators
Automatic generation of machine emulators [FGP07] investigates the use of Java as an
implementation language and the Java Virtual Machine as a target for emulators. The
paper places particular focus on how to reuse an emulation platform across multiple
source platforms and how to use a single specification for each source platform to
be used in multiple settings: pure interpretation and JIT compilation of various
optimization levels.
It thereby introduces two key ideas used in this thesis:
6Some instances does have support for flashing the ROM on the fly, which are used for over-
the-air updates of firmware in embedded systems, but this replaces the entire program and not the
single instructions we usually associate with self-modifying code
==PAGE:29==
2.9 Related works
19
• Using a compiler as a code generator to allow a single platform specification to
be used in multiple settings
• Using a virtual machine as a target rather than a concrete platform to increase
the durability of the created emulators
2.9.2
Binary Translation
Static and Dynamic Binary Translation are techniques that focuses on translating
the source binary to a target binary. It is in many instances similar to emulation
(in particular Dynamic Binary Translation, which focuses on rewriting on the fly),
and are sometimes used synonymously with emulation, but focuses more narrowly
on translation from one instruction set to another, including rewriting of registers,
patching of addresses, re-encoding of immediates, etc. The static variant is, in the
general case, insufficient for platforms with shared code and data memory, but the
dynamic variant can overcome this and also self-modifying code [Pro02].
Many of the ideas proposed in relation to Dynamic Binary Translation are of inter-
est in the context of general emulation, like trace-based optimizations [Böh+11]. Not
all is transferable though, in particular the narrow focus on remapping the instruc-
tions and registers from the source to the target platform, makes it less applicable
when moving form a register machine to a stack machine.
2.9.3
Emulating the legacy hardware using FPGAs
An FPGA Based Hybrid Processor Emulation Platform [Wan+10] investigates the use
of FPGAs for processor emulation. The paper focuses particularly on using emulation
for evaluation new or proposed hardware for system-on-chips (SoCs), but the ideas
are equally applicable to legacy platforms, where speed of the emulation would be of
the essence. The paper is exclusively focused on how to increase the performance of
the emulators using the hardware optimizations available via FPGAs.
==PAGE:30==
20
==PAGE:31==
CHAPTER 3
Analysis of the
problem
This chapter will describe the different choices I have made when building the em-
ulation platform. It will suggest solutions and show examples that illustrate some
of the challenges that have to be overcome when using WebAssembly as a target for
processor emulation.
3.1
Source instruction implementation
In order to emulate the source binary on the host platform, each instruction must be
fetched, parsed and executed on the emulator. This section addresses the options for
implementing these operations.
3.1.1
Direct implementation
The simplest approach is to just write the parsing and execution code for each in-
struction directly. This, however, is also the most error prone. For a relatively simple
processor like the 6502, this is manageable as it only contains 56 distinct instructions
and 132 distinct opcodes [MOS76]. Since all the addressing modes are shared, this
means that only code for the 56 instructions and 13 addressing modes are required
in addition to the machine model.
Even for this relatively simple processor, verification is still an issue. In particular
for this processor family, the specification is very informal, so without access to the
original hardware I have relied on verification programs [Kla17] as well as reference
implementations [Ski17][Mbo17]. The verification programs exercises every instruc-
tion, addressing mode, every state flag possible by each instruction and the corner
cases of operand, but the process is still slow and does not provide guarantees that
the final implementation is correct.
To illustrate how this is tested, compare the tests for TXA and TXS. These two
instructions are, on the surface, very similar. They move a value from one register to
==PAGE:32==
22
3 Analysis of the problem
another (either from X to A or from X to SP), but with one crucial difference: TXA
updates the zero and negative flags of the Status register, where TXS does not.
1740
; ...
1741
ldx #$ff
1742
set_stat $ff
; Macro that sets the status flag vis the stack
(LDA, PHA, PLP)
1743
txa
1744
tst_a $ff,$ff-zero
; Macro to test the value of A and the status
flag
1745
; .. additional tests for all the combinations of status flags and
stating values of the status register
Listing 3.1: Snippet for the TXA tests.
1876
; ...
1877
ldx #1
;01
1878
set_stat $ff
1879
txs
1880
php
; Push status to stack
1881
lda $101
; Load status to A register
1882
cmp_flag $ff
1883
trap_ne
; Macro to trap if not equal
1884
; ...
Listing 3.2: Snippets for the TXS tests.
In addition to the careful testing of that the correct status flags are affected (and
only those) are affected by each and every instruction, the test suite also includes a
number of tests for addressing modes:
2074 ; indexed wraparound test (only zp should wrap)
2075
ldy #3+$fa
2076 tldx4
ldx zp1-$fa&$ff,y
;wrap on indexed zp
2077
txa
2078
sta abst-$fa,y
;no STX abs,y!
2079
dey
2080
cpy #$fa
2081
bcs tldx4
2082
ldy #3+$fa
2083 tldx5
ldx abs1-$fa,y
;no wrap on indexed abs
2084
stx zpt-$fa&$ff,y
2085
dey
2086
cpy #$fa
2087
bcs tldx5
2088
ldy #3
;testing wraparound result
2089
ldx #0
2090 tstx1
lda zpt,y
2091
cmp zp1,y
2092
trap_ne
;store to zp data
2093
stx zpt,y
;clear
2094
lda abst,y
2095
cmp abs1,y
2096
trap_ne
;store to abs data
==PAGE:33==
3.1 Source instruction implementation
23
2097
txa
2098
sta abst,y
;clear
2099
dey
2100
bpl tstx1
Listing 3.3: Indexing wrap around tests.
The snippet highlights the difference between zero page and absolute indexing,
when offset by a register: if a zero page, say 00FF is offset by a register with the
value 10, then the result is the address 000F and not 01FF because of the wrap
around. For absolute indexing offset by a register, the opposite would be the case,
since they do not wrap around. The test suite contains tests for all the addressing
modes and all the page boundary cases that can occur.
The test suite also includes tests for the branching instructions, indirect jumps
and self-modifying code (for rewriting some of the jump addresses). Because of the
comprehensiveness of this test suite (which itself has been verified on the actual
hardware), we can have a high degree of confidence that the emulator is correct, once
these tests passes.
3.1.2
Using a hardware and instruction description language
An alternative to the direct implementation of each emulated instruction is to use a
special language for describing the instructions, which can be verified first and then
translated to the desired programming language.
ARM specifies each of their instructions using pseudo code. This ”pseudo code” is
actually a fully specified language known as the ARM Specification Language [Rei17].
ARM has specified, verified and published code for parsing and executing every in-
struction in their instruction set. This code is usually embedded in the manuals, but
were recently released in a machine readable format for some ARM platforms [Ala17].
Since the specification has been verified by ARM, we can assume that it correctly re-
flects the hardware implementation. It has not been proven correct though, so it may
still contain bugs, but it is a reasonable assumption. The task, then, is to transform
the source specification into programming language of our emulator. This is, again,
a compilation task.
We can still introduce errors in the compilation process, so the end result still need
to be verified, but rather than having to go through each and every instruction and
ensure that our direct implementation is correct, we can now test that the specification
language compiler can correctly translate all the language constructs. This is a much
smaller task. Also, since the specification is given in the specification language, if we
don’t build a formal compiler, we are in fact just manually compiling code from one
language to another, which is an error prone process.
==PAGE:34==
24
3 Analysis of the problem
3.1.3
Code re-use
For pure interpretation, the code to emulate each instruction should just be callable
from the main interpretation loop. That is, if we write our emulator in C++, say,
then each instruction should be written as a C++ method that is callable from the
main interpreter loop.
For compiled emulators (AOT or JIT), however, the code
for emulating each instruction must be available as WebAssembly (binary) code in
order to create the final WebAssembly binary. For JIT in particular, we must have
access each instruction emulation method both in a form that we can call from the
interpreter and in a WebAssembly form, that can be used to create the compiled
version.
This means, that we either have to write each instruction in directly in WebAssem-
bly in addition to the source language version or we have to work with a compiled
version of the emulated instructions. To avoid writing each instruction twice (and
thereby risking yet another source of errors) it is therefore very much preferable to
have a mechanism in place that allows code re-use across these two domains.
Since the WebAssembly binary format still contains functions explicitly, it is very
possible to work with the compiled output.
The primary requirement is that we
ensure that each function is exported from the resulting WebAssembly module, as
this is the only way to give a name to the functions and thereby know which function
should be used to emulate each function (otherwise, each function is only identified
by an index). WebAssembly further gives us two options for reusing the code: the
exported functions can be imported into a JIT compiled WebAssembly module and
used directly - or the WebAssembly module can be parsed and the individual opcodes
for each instruction can be patched into the compiled WebAssembly module.
By piggy-backing on the primary WebAssembly compiler we can thereby re-use
the code for each instruction - and thus we only have to ensure the correctness of one
version of each instruction.
3.2
Translation from source to target
The overall goal of the compiler (whether AOT or JIT) is to recreate an equivalent
program of the source binary on the target platform. Where a ”normal” compilation
process entails lowering from a high-level programming language through a number
of intermediate representations to the final binary format, this compiler must reverse
a few of those steps and attempt a ”highering” into a WebAssembly structures from
the low level instructions.
The best case scenario is that equivalent structures are present in the source binary
and are successfully detected allowing us to build a WebAssembly program that uses
only the native control flow constructs to emulate the control flow in the source binary.
This is ”The good” case described below.
In the absence of (detected) equivalent structures the output code must still func-
tion correctly - the output program must then incorporate structures to simulate
==PAGE:35==
3.2 Translation from source to target
25
arbitrary jumps on a platform that does not support them. This not impossible, but
it is ”the bad” case described below.
Finally we have the cases where the source program modifies itself. Since the
target platform very much does not support self-modifying code, this is ”the ugly”
case described below, since the output program must still function correctly even in
the face of these constructs.
3.2.1
Reconstructing the CFG
The first step in compiling a target program from the source binary is to re-create
the CFG. In principle, this is a simple process:
1. Start at the root instruction and add it to a new basic block
2. Keep adding instructions until a branch is encountered and mark this as the
terminator
3. Add edges from the basic block to the next instruction (if the branch is condi-
tional) and any branch targets, where the target basic blocks are:
• Newly created and added to the graph, if the target does not exist in the
CFG. In this case, instructions are added to the new basic block similarly
to how the root basic block was created.
• Split to set the target as the first instruction in a basic block, if the target
was already in a basic block. In this case, processing for the basic block
stops.
This high-level process relies on two crucial pieces of information: what are the
instructions and what are the potential targets for the branch instructions. Neither
is trivial in practice for a platform like the 6502 and branch targets are not always
statically known, regardless of platform as we shall see.
3.2.1.1
Code vs data
The encoding scheme on the 6502 makes it difficult to reliably detect whether a piece
of memory is an instruction or an arbitrary piece of data: the 132 distinct opcodes
makes it very likely that an arbitrary byte will coincide with some instruction and
addressing encoding and the operands will always appear to be valid values as the
entire range is used. The initial PC value is always known, however, so some starting
point will be known.
This can be contrasted with the ARM Cortex M3 platform, where the binaries
are usually distributed in the ELF format, which contains meta-data about which
part of the binary is data and which part is code. This means that the code can
be fully parsed before attempting to build the CFG and thus can be used to restrict
==PAGE:36==
26
3 Analysis of the problem
the value branch targets, whereas the 6502 must use the branch targets to try and
disambiguate which parts of the binary is code and which part is data.
To further complicate matters an ELF binary will clearly mark which system
libraries are linked to, whereas a 6502 binary will just perform a JMP or JSR to
some address that will/should be a system library. On the Commodore 64 platform,
these system libraries are placed on a separate ROM, which shares the addressing
space, and thus the branch target may further depend on the memory bank selected.
3.2.1.2
Determining branch targets
On the 6502 there is only one source of unknown branch targets, the JMP to an in-
direct address. All conditional branches can only use relative branch targets and the
JSR can only use absolute addressing and are thus trivial to determine branch targets
for. The unconditional branch to an indirect address poses a challenge though: to
successfully determine the branch target, the possible memory values at that address
must be statically determined. The only sound analysis for this is an over approxi-
mation and may thus in the worst case yield the result that the potential target is
the entire memory space.
The ARM Cortex M3 also support indirect branching via the BX and BLX
instructions which both branch to an address stored in a register. The analysis in
this case requires reasoning statically about the value of a specific register, which in
the general case, is also not possible to guarantee a bound on values.
So even though techniques exist, that can take advantage of the fact that assembly
code for the ARM platform is almost always produced by a compiler [Fle+10] and thus
are subject to certain rules and constraints, we cannot in the general case guarantee
that we have a complete CFG. We can, however, know where the points of uncertainty
lie and deal with them appropriately.
Actually, knowing that a binary was produced by a compiler from a source program
that only uses proper structures is not enough, as the program may still contain secu-
rity flaws (ie. buffer overflows [Cow+00]) that can cause the program to modify the
control flow on the fly (Return-Oriented Programming, Return-to-libc, etc [PR12]).
It is, of course, not a goal to reproduce the security flaws, but it is difficult for an emu-
lator to decide what was intended and what was not, so the most reasonable approach
is to take the binary at face value and emulate it faithfully. There is a whole research
area dedicated to ensuring that the control flow present in the source program is also
present in the binary, known as Control Flow Integrity techniques [Aba+09].
3.2.2
The Good
Any program with a well-defined and well-formed CFG can be represented by the
native WebAssembly control flow constructs. In the context of WebAssembly this
means that every branch instruction can be related to a function call, a loop, an
if-else construct or a jump to a break out of a block.
==PAGE:37==
3.2 Translation from source to target
27
3.2.2.1
Functions
Functions and function calls are the first high-level construct to detect: these map
directly to the WebAssembly functions and function calls. They can be identified in a
platform-specific manner either by special instructions (the jump to subroutine, JSR,
and return from subroutine, RTS, instructions on the 6502) or by calling conventions
(the Procedure Call Standard for ARM Architecture). The calling convention define
how to establish a new stack frame and the responsibilities of the caller and callee
in the hand-over and these specific sequences of instructions can be used to detect
function calls and returns. A subset of the calling convention can sometimes be used
in non-public methods where the compiler can ensure that certain registers are unused
by a subroutine and therefore do not need to be pushed/popped from the stack. In
these cases the exact sequence of instructions depend on the compiler, but are usually
consistent enough to detect1 - and if not, the resulting CFG would not be reducible
in any case, if the subroutine is used more than once.
In the following sections, we will assume that all function and function calls have
been identified and we are left with modelling the internal structure of each function.
3.2.2.2
Re-ordering
To ensure translation to the WebAssembly constructions are possible, we will need
to guarantee that the only branches from higher PCs to lower PCs are back edges.
As is not necessarily so for a reducible CFG in the general case, we will introduce a
”virtual PC”, by performing a topological sort on the DFST and all forward edges.
Figure 3.1: An example illustrating an example of acyclic CFG with PCs out of
order.
1The ARM BL instruction is used to branch and set the LR registers; the BX LR is used to return.
==PAGE:38==
28
3 Analysis of the problem
This ordering now ensures that a back edge in a reducible CFG always goes from
a higher PC to a lower PC.
3.2.2.3
Loops
A loop is formed by every back edge. Each loop is modelled in WebAssembly as a
Block surrounding a Loop. Both are needed, to allow breaking out of loop, since a
break to a Loop will set the PC to the beginning of the loop, not the end of it.
Figure 3.2: A typical CFG for a While loop.
1 Block 0 (Loop_exit){
2
Loop {
3
[Condition expressions]
4
BR_IF Loop_exit
5
6
[Loop body]
7
BR loop
8
}
9 }
Listing 3.4: Structure of a translated While loop.
At the end of the loop, a BR inst is needed to jump to the start of the loop again.
Because the CFG is reducible, there can be no branches into the the loop body,
but there may still be branches out of the loop from the loop body. That is, the loop
body may contain a branch similar to the ”break” and ”continue” constructs of many
imperative languages.
3.2.2.4
Blocks
Blocks are used to place labels. Since the first instruction in every basic block is a
potential branch target, a naive, but correct, way of construction is simply to add a
block that end before each basic block. These blocks all start at the beginning of the
function (or beginning of the loop, if inside one) to ensure that they surround the
relevant instruction.
After the terminator instruction of each basic block a WebAssembly BR or BR_IF
can be inserted to branch to the correct label based on the new value of the machine
PC.
==PAGE:39==
3.2 Translation from source to target
29
Branches can be avoided if the target is the immediate successor (ie. have the
next PC value).
3.2.2.5
IFs and IF-ELSEs
Certain of these blocks and branches can be replaced by native constructs, if IF and
IF-ELSE patterns can be detected. An IF statement is detected by having a basic
block with two successors where the basic block dominates both and one successor is
also the successor of the path going through the other.
Figure 3.3: A typical CFG for an IF construct.
In this case, the native WebAssembly constructs uses a single IF construct to
represent what was a two branches before.
1 [Condition expressions]
2 IF {
3
[IF body]
4 }
Listing 3.5: Structure of a translated If.
1 Block 0 (end_block) {
2
Block 1 (if_block) {
3
[Condition expressions]
4
BR_IF if_block
5
BR end_block
6
}
7
8
[IF body]
9 }
Listing 3.6: Structure without using native IF.
An IF-ELSE is detected when a basic block dominates two successors and there
exist a common descendant of both successors.
==PAGE:40==
30
3 Analysis of the problem
Figure 3.4: A typical CFG for an IF-ELSE construct.
In this case, the native WebAssembly constructs uses a single IF-ELSE construct
to represent what was a two branches before.
1 [Condition expressions]
2 IF {
3
[IF body]
4 }
5 ELSE {
6
[ELSE body]
7 }
Listing 3.7: Structure of a translated If.
1 Block 0 (end_block) {
2
Block 1 (else_block) {
3
Block 2 (if_block) {
4
[Condition expressions]
5
BR_IF if_block
6
}
7
[ELSE body]
8
BR end_block
9
}
10
11
[IF body]
12 }
Listing 3.8: Structure without using native IF.
3.2.3
The Bad
For the cases where the CFG is not reducible, we still need a construct that allows us
to translate the program. This construct is necessarily a work-around, since it must
represent the non-reducible CFG inside a reducible CFG.
Such constructs obviously exists in the form of the interpreter loop, where the each
instruction is read from the current PC, parsed and executed and the PC updated.
This construct contains too much overhead, however, and does not encode a fixed
CFG.
==PAGE:41==
3.2 Translation from source to target
31
Instead we propose a construct, where each basic block in the non-reducible CFG
is given a label to represent the starting PC. Every WebAssembly block starts from
the very top of the CFG and there are no loops inside these blocks. The first (and
inner-most) block contain a switch statement that will branch to the correct label
based on the value of the PC. Surrounding the whole construct is a loop that is
branched to after each terminator instruction in the basic blocks.
1 Loop{
2
Block 0 (Unknown_PC){
3
Block 1 (PC_xxx3) {
4
Block 2 (PC_xxx1) {
5
GET_LOCAL PC_INDEX
6
CONST FIRST_PC
7
SUB
8
BR_TABLE PC_xxx1 Unknown_PC PC_xxx3 Unknown_PC
9
}
10
[ PC_xxx1 starts here]
11
BR loop
12
}
13
[PC_xxx2 starts here]
14
BR loop
15
}
16 }
Listing 3.9: Structure of the construction for non-reducible CFGs.
This pseudo-WebAssembly code shows the general construct2. The code enters at
the top and falls through to the inner-most block without executing anything. Then
the PC is pushed to the stack along with the PC of the first basic block to calculate
the relative offset. This offset is then used in a jump-table (BR_TABLE) to select
the correct label for the active PC. Since the jump-table must be continuous, the gaps
are filled with a label for the ”unknown PC”, which is also used as the default jump.
If the PC correspond to one of the basic blocks, the correct basic block is executed
and the loop repeated. If not, the default label is selected and execution falls through
the bottom of the loop.
The effect of this is, that all jumps (even long jumps out of the subroutines) will be
dealt with correctly: either the new PC is included in the construct and the relevant
basic block executed or it is not, in which case the code bails out to the interpreter.
This construct is clearly not as efficient as using the proper constructs, as a single
source branch instruction now becomes:
1. A branch to the loop
2. A fetch of the PC
3. A subtraction for the PC to calculate the offset
2WebAssembly is normally presented in S-expressions, but here we instead focus on the order of
the instructions
==PAGE:42==
32
3 Analysis of the problem
4. A BR_TABLE based on the offset
.
Additionally it also affects code size negatively as the jump table in particular can
become huge if the CFG spans a large area of source code.
It can, however, be combined with the constructs for reducible CFGs by using it
only on the non-reducible subgraphs of the CFG and using the reducible constructs
for the rest.
3.2.4
And the Ugly
Compiling a non-reducible CFG is not necessarily enough to compile all programs, as
there are still two major hurdles:
3.2.4.1
Self-modifying code
Self-modifying code was one trick used particularly on the 6502 to overcome some
of the constraints of the platform. Additionally the layout of opcodes followed by
operands made it quite easy to modify one or the other using simple writes. Especially
when compared to the ARM Cortex-M3, which makes self-modifying code difficult,
by not only mingling the encoding of opcodes and operands, but also by splitting the
memory in execute-only and no-execute pages and often putting the code section in
a dedicated ROM-block.
Self-modifying code have the property that it can potentially invalidate the CFG
at run-time, thereby invalidating any code compiled from it.
The compiler must
therefore either guarantee that the code is not self-modifying or provide a mechanism
for detecting self-modifying code at run-time. Guaranteeing that the code does not
modify itself requires guaranteeing that no write occurs within the code addresses.
For absolute addresses this is trivial, but for register offset addressing and/or indirect
addressing, this becomes essentially a range-value analysis, which can be difficult or
impossible to perform with enough accuracy to determine whether code-rewriting
occurs at run-time, due to the fact that data and code can be placed very close to
each other on the 6502.
Detecting rewrites at run-time is easier, but comes with a run-time overhead, since
each write must be checked against the known code addresses.
In an AOT compiler we have to guarantee that no code-rewrites occur, which
means that some programs may not compile. In the 6502 setting, there is at least one
prominent program that uses a form of self-modifying code: the BASIC interpreter,
which allows execution of arbitrary machine code loaded into memory. The BASIC
interpreter was the main interface for the 6502-based Commodore 64 system, among
others, and thus a large portion of the software written for the 6502 assumes the
presence of the BASIC interpreter and contains the necessary headers to hand-over
from the BASIC interpreter to the contained machine code.
A pure AOT compiler is therefore insufficient for dealing with the 6502 platform.
==PAGE:43==
3.3 Other optimizations
33
A JIT compiler on the other hand can be combined with an interpreter to allow
optimistically compiling code and bailing out to the interpreter, if the code is modified
at run-time. The fundamental trade-off here is compile-time vs run-time. The time
spent compiling is often modified it may be more efficient to always use the interpreter
rather than wasting time compiling code, that is maybe never executed. On the other
hand, if the code is only changing rarely, such as when loading a new program via
the BASIC interpreter, it may be more efficient to compile it rather than use the
interpreter.
The JIT approach requires run-time detection of modified code to avoid execut-
ing stale copies of the code, but may be combined with an under-approximation of
the updated code addresses to avoid compiling code, that is guaranteed to be self-
modifying.
3.2.4.2
Indeterminable CFGs
Until this point we have been assuming that a CFG could be constructed from the
source instructions. This is not always the case: almost every platform includes an
indirect branch that will set the PC to the value stored at a specific memory address.
Even if the platform did not provide this natively, it could easily be simulated on
the 6502 using self-modifying code, by simple updating the operand of an absolute
branch. This makes it difficult or impossible to determine the CFG statically in some
cases.
Again, in a pure AOT compiler solution, this may result in failing to compile
programs with well-defined, but difficult to determine CFGs.
In a JIT compiler
solution, there are a more compelling alternative: we can compile the program for the
portion of the CFG that we can determine, and if an unknown branch is encountered,
we simply bail out to the interpreter.
3.3
Other optimizations
So far we have skipped over the content of the actual instructions and only focused
on the structure of the code. There are two overall approaches to actually executing
the code emulating each of the instructions in a basic block:
• Extract the code for each instruction in a method and call with appropriate
parameters
• Produce code for all side effects of the instruction in place
This is essentially a trade-off between code size and a run-time overhead, similar
to the trade-off faced by any compiler with the option to inline code. In this case the
number of different functions (instruction types) is likely to be vastly smaller than
the number of invocations (call sites), which would usually favor the large benefit in
code size over a relatively small run-time penalty.
==PAGE:44==
34
3 Analysis of the problem
There is in our case, however, one compelling reason to inline the code - namely
optimizations. Inlining the code for each instruction allows a number of optimizations
that were not possible before. The main observation enabling optimizations is that the
emulator must simply produce the same observable side-effects as the real execution
of an instruction.
As a concrete example, if two instructions in a straight-line segment both affect
the carry and overflow flags, with no instructions in between observing the flags, then
there is no reason to update the flags in the first case.
Having access to the code that make up the instruction emulation and not just the
instruction type thereby allows for (sound) re-orderings and dead code elimination.
Re-orderings can also allow the stack to be used more efficiently: if two consecutive
instructions both use the same register, then the value representing that register can
be pushed to the stack, used for both instructions and only then be stored back into
main memory.
3.3.1
Patching function bodies
To actually inline a WebAssembly function, we need to patch the instructions to the
target function.
There are four main issues that need to be dealt with:
• Arguments: Arguments usually reside on the stack when passed to a function.
We need to ensure that they are available in a local variable (in the calling
function) and update the indices in the callee, before inlining.
• Local variables: Local variables must be moved to the caling function and the
indices updated.
• Return: The control flow needs to be modelled correctly, such that a return
statement in the callee function becomes a break in the inlined code. We must
also ensure that return variables are handled correctly; this can be achieved by
adding a local variable to store the return function.
• Blocks: The above modifications may turn a single instruction in the callee
into multiple instructions; in that case it may be necessary to wrap the new
instructions in a block (and update labels where necessary).
Additionally we need to check for recursion before inlining. The instruction em-
ulation functions are very unlikely to be recursive, but it is still worth mentioning
that trying to inline a recursive function requires special handling. This is non-trivial
and one strategy could be simply to identify recursive calls and avoid inlining those
functions.
Consider a slightly silly Add if positive function that adds two integers and
return the result, but only if it is positive to illustrate how this might work in practice:
==PAGE:45==
3.3 Other optimizations
35
1 (func $add (param $0 i32) (param $1 i32) (result i32)
2
(local $2 i32)
3
(set_local $2 (i32.add (get_local $0) (get_local $1))
4
(if (i32.lt (get_local $2) (i32.const 0))
5
(return (i32.const 0))
6
)
7
(return (get_local $2))
8 )
9
10 (func $main (result i32)
11
(return (call $add (i32.const 21) (i32.const 21))))
12 )
Listing 3.10: Add if positive before inlining.
To inline this, we must first add two new local variables to store the arguments
and one new local to store the result:
1
2 (func $main (result i32)
3
(local $arg1 i32)
4
(local $arg2 i32)
5
(local $ret i32)
6
(set_local $arg1 (i32.const 21))
7
(set_local $arg2 (i32.const 21))
8
// .. inline code and set $ret
9
(return (get_local $ret))
10 )
Listing 3.11: Adding local variables to store arguments and return variables.
To actually inline the code now, we must add the local(s) used in code and update
all indices. In the code snippets here, we use names for the variables to make it easier
to distinguish, but keep in mind that the actual encoding is just an index for each
variable (with arguments taking up the first indices and local variables placed after
that)
1
2 (func $main (result i32)
3
(local $arg1 i32)
4
(local $arg2 i32)
5
(local $ret i32)
6
(local $inlined_local i32)
7
(set_local $arg1 (i32.const 21))
8
(set_local $arg2 (i32.const 21))
9
10
(block $inlined_func
11
(set_local $inlined_local (i32.add (get_local $arg1) (get_local
$arg2))
12
(if (i32.lt (get_local $inlined_local) (i32.const 0))
13
(block
14
(set_local $ret (i32.const 0))
15
(br $inlined_func)
16
)
==PAGE:46==
36
3 Analysis of the problem
17
)
18
(set_local $ret (get_local $inlined_local))
19
(br $inlined_func)
20
)
21
22
(return (get_local $ret))
23 )
Listing 3.12: Add if positive after inlining.
We had to introduce two new blocks in order to keep the control flow the same
for the first return statement and in order to put more than one instruction inside
the if-statement. The two (br $inlined_func) statements are, again, encoded using
indices, so even though the textual representation is the same, the actual encodings
are different (the first must break out of two blocks and the second must only break
out of one).
==PAGE:47==
CHAPTER 4
Implementation work
This chapter will highlight the most important aspects of the implementation of
the emulator and compilation framework. The chapter will start with a very short
overview of the necessary tooling for working WebAssembly and will then go into
detail of the most important aspects of the emulation framework.
4.1
WebAssembly platform
4.1.1
Tools
The WebAssembly format is currently supported by all major browsers, but to actu-
ally produce a binary in the format, a number of tools are available.
4.1.2
Emscripten
The primary compiler is the Emscripten project [Zak11][Ems17]. This compiler suite
is a fork from the main LLVM branch along with support libraries for C and C++
programs. Originally designed for asm.js, it has been retrofitted for the WebAssembly
format. The support libraries include an implementation of libc (malloc, free, etc)
suitable for the web host environment. The libraries are implemented in Javascript
and bindings are available for the source programs - either using the regular lan-
guage mechanics and regular libraries (e.g. ”new” operator in C++, ”malloc” calls
in c++; std::out or printf calls, etc.) or using explicit APIs for e.g manipulating the
browser environment, which is not normally available to the source program. The
implemented libraries focueses heavily on bringing games to the browser with heavy
support for OpenGL (translated to WebGL) and SDL1 for keyboard/joystick/audio
I/O and sockets for client/server communcations.
All of this means that a large part of the run-time environment relies on spe-
cial methods implemented in a Javascript library, also for WebAssembly programs.
The compiler packages all of this into a single Javascript library that is responsi-
ble for loading the WebAssembly binary and exposing the run-time library to the
loaded module. Furthermore this means that even for programs that uses none of the
1Simple DirectMedia Layer
==PAGE:48==
38
4 Implementation work
Javascript-bindings explicitly a lot of the execution of the WebAssembly binary will
in fact take place in the Javascript run-time support libraries.
It also means that a simple ”Hello, World!” program in plain c compiled by Em-
scripten 1.37 needs to import 16 functions from the environment, exports 19 functions
back to the environment and requires 9578 lines of WebAssembly (in the disassembled
form). On top of this 2414 lines of Javascript are required for the run-time library
and another 1300 lines of mixed HTML/css/Javascript to invoke the program and
present the console to write to. All to write a single line of text to the screen. The
output is detailed in Appendix B.
This seems a bit excessive, especially for a program that does not actually allocate
any memory. The nature of the split libraries, partially implemented by hand in the
host environment, makes it difficult to apply the regular LLVM optimizations on the
whole output program. The roots as an asm.js compiler, however, also contribute
significantly to the problem. For obvious reasons, the embscripten team does not
want to support two competing versions of the included libraries. But this means,
for instance, that WebAssembly programs must implement the stack and heap access
in the same manner as asm.js programs, rather than relying on the stack natively
available in the WebAssembly format.
4.1.3
Binaryen
The Binaryen project contains a WebAssembly assembler, optimizer and disassem-
bler and is used as the final stage in compilation, transforming the output of the
Emscripten compiler into WebAssembly [Web17]. The tool provides C bindings to
allow it to be embedded in the Emscripten compiler, among others, but it also dis-
tribute separate binaries to allow working directly with the WebAssembly format.
The tool currently compiles three formats to WebAssembly: the Emscripten output
assembly format, the Rust MIR format and asm.js source programs.
4.1.4
EMSDK
The EMSDK project is a distribution tool that is responsible for downloading, com-
piling and setting up the Emscripten project and dependencies. Since Emscripten
relies on very specific versions of Clang, Binaryen, Java, Python, Node.js and Em-
scripten itself, this is quite helpful, but it does underline a certain fragility of the
project environment.
4.1.5
State of the platform
The WebAssembly platform is overall characterized by being very new - the current
specification defines what the W3C working group names an MVP2 [W3C17e]. The
2Minimally Viable Product
==PAGE:49==
4.1 WebAssembly platform
39
speficication for this early version was only finalized during the project period, in
March 2017 [W3C17d]. This has stabilized WebAssembly APIs themselves, but the
supporting tools mentioned above are still (as of May 2017) in a somewhat unstable
state.
The documentation states that the Binaryen optimizers are used as part of the
tools’ assembler, but the actual output binary contains a number of dummy bytes:
empty sections, maximum rather than minimum number of bytes used to encode
numbers, etc. The details are specified in Appendix B.
The EMSDK tool is also quite brittle: Several times during the project period,
updates to the stable channel caused some of the dependents projects (Binaryen,
Emscripten) to fail even compiling due to syntax errors. Since the EMSDK manages
the version of the other tools, unfortunately there are no official way to roll back the
offending changes when such an error occur.
The Emscripten compiler output is also a curious mix of very aggressive opti-
mizations in some cases, provided by the LLVM toolchain (common subexpression
elimination, constant folding, loop invariant hoisting, etc, etc), but very inefficient
output in other cases: for instance, a switch statement is implemented using a jump
table - which in the WebAssembly format means a Br_Table instruction and a block
for each case in the switch.
This is fine, when the case values are continuous or
nearly continuous, but when there are gaps, this can be a problem. For instance, the
compiler will also apply this strategy even for a switch statement with the integer
cases ’0’, ’10’, ’100’ and ’1000’. That is, the compiler prefers a jump table with 1001
entries over an if-else construction with four tests. This example is shown in full in
Appendix B.
4.1.6
Working with Emscripten
Emscripten currently officially support three source languages: C, C++ and Rust.
Despite being based on the LLVM toolchain, only these languages are supported,
due to the requirements associated with providing a libc equivalent in the browser
environment.
Since Emscripten is the only official way to compile to WebAssembly at the mo-
ment, this means that the emulator framework has to be written in one of these
languages. C and C++ both have a long history of compiler implementations, but
have an equally long history of terrible memory bugs:
buffer overflows,use after
free, double free, use of uninitialized pointers, null pointer dereference, data races,
etc, etc.
While a number of work-around and detection schemes has been pro-
posed [Cow+00] [Cab+12] [Aba+09], the root cause seems to be the broken type
system and lack of safety features in the two languages. It is therefore worth investi-
gating the alternative, Rust.
==PAGE:50==
40
4 Implementation work
4.1.6.1
Rust
Rust is relatively new systems language, that eliminates large classes of memory errors
by eliminating ”null”s and enforcing a notion of ownership on the memory.
The
result is that all accessible memory is initialized and that the compiler can provide
guarantees against data races.
The trade-off is that the programs written in Rust must be guaranteed to be
correct. These guarantees are made in the compiler using a static analysis framework.
This means that the programmer has to have a working understanding of the analyses
being performed, since the compiler necessarily makes an under-approximation of the
valid programs. In practice, however, this moves a large class of (potential) errors
from run-time to compile-time, which makes them a lot easier to debug than say, a
dangling pointer.
Features, that support compiler development
In relation to compiler devel-
opment, Rust brings a few very relevant features from the ML-language tradition to
the table, that neither C nor C++ has:
• Tagged unions: Implemented as enums that are allowed to have different fields
depending on the value. This is very for, say, storing the type and operand
of an instruction, while still allowing the instructions to be treated as a single
type.
• Pattern matching: In combination with the tagged unions, pattern matching
is a very compact notion for dealing with cases of the various steps in the
intermediate representations of a compiler.
• Higher order functions: While not exclusively relevant for compilers, it is still
a very handy feature to have.
• Rich type system: While arguably C++ also have a very rich type system, this
is nonetheless a very relevant feature and a huge step up over c.
Interacting with the Javascript environment
Rust includes a Foreign Function
Interface (FFI), which is recognized by Emscripten and used to interact with the
outside world. This allows Rust code to call Javascript functions; the other direction
is ensured by marking public functions as callable from the outside world.
Because Rust places almost everything on the stack, special case needs to be taken
when dealing with the outside environment. In particular, the code must ensure that
the returned values are not placed on the stack (where they could be overwritten)
and must ensure that the destructors are not accidentally run on values that were
supposed to be preserved for the outside world. This requires the use of some of the
”unsafe” features of Rust, as we are essentially asking the system to potentially leak
memory.
==PAGE:51==
4.1 WebAssembly platform
41
Function name mangling
Rust uses code specialization to deliver generics: that
is, to have a version of a function, sum, that operates on both integers and floats,
Rust would actually produce two versions of the code underneath: one that takes
integer arguments and return values and one that takes floating point values and
return values.
To distinguish between the two versions, Rust uses a mangling scheme similar to
C++, which encodes the types in the name.
This is fine, except that we must know the name of a function in order to export
it, and the mangling scheme makes this difficult to predict. We can easily suppress
mangling for functions by a compiler directive, but this comes at a particular cost:
with no mangling, we cannot use generics.
In our case we would really like generics for the 6502 instructions, since we need
to exchange the memory management between the emulator (which uses a continuous
piece of memory) and the simulator (which additionally needs to check with memory
mapped peripherals).
This is not directly possible in Rust, but to avoid having
two implementations of the same instructions, we use the Rust macro system to
generate two different versions of the same code in a fashion where we can control
the names ourselves. It is not ideal, but preferable to having two implementations of
the instructions that need to be verified.
4.1.7
Memory management
The WebAssembly platform currently only supports a single piece of linear memory
for a module. That piece can be grown using the special grow_memory instruction,
but cannot (in the MVP) be shrinked again. The linear memory behaves as a virtual
address space by presenting a continuous piece of memory with no reserved addresses
(out of bounds addresses still cause exceptions, however).
When a module is initialized a linear memory segment and, once initialized, that
piece of memory represents the only memory addressable by the module for the
lifetime of the module. Each linear memory segment can be shared between multiple
modules, allowing JIT-compiled modules to affect the main module’s memory.
In practice, the primary Emscripten module will initialize a segment of memory,
which is exposed via the global Javascript variable, Module. This piece of memory
is exposed both as a Javascript Uint8Array and as a WebAssembly.Memory instance,
allowing us to access and manipulate the memory both from Javascript functions and
from other WebAssembly modules.
4.1.7.1
Loading files and arguments
Emscripten will automatically load the main module itself, but will not load any
arguments. To actually emulate a binary we therefore need to load the binary and
place it in memory somehow. WebAssembly do not have any notion of arrays, so it
is not possible to pass the loaded binary directly via the exposed functions from the
==PAGE:52==
42
4 Implementation work
module. Additionally, WebAssembly do not have direct access to the XmlHTTPRequest
and similar in the Javascript API (”Ajax”), which can request data via HTTP, so we
cannot request new data directly from the inside the WebAssembly module.
Instead, we must manually place the data in memory and invoke the module’s
functions with a pointer and a length parameter, which can be translated into an
array in the emulator program (or rather a Rust Vec). To do this, we must ensure
that the memory is not overwritten later on by the module’s malloc function, so we
must ensure that the module’s memory allocation mechanism is aware of the memory
now used to store the data.
So, to actually load the data representing the binary to emulate, we first request
it into the browser via the Javascript Ajax functionality; we then call the module’s
malloc directly, with the number of bytes we need to store the binary data. Finally
we copy the binary’s data into the memory via the Uint8Array interface starting at
the address returned as a pointer from malloc. After these steps we can invoke the
module’s functions with the data array.
Aside from being a hassle to go through these steps, this setup has the obvious
and significant downside that we now have a piece of memory inside the module that
is managed from outside the module. That means, that it is now necessary for the
Javascript program to run free on the module, once the module is done with the
memory. Since Javascript is a garbage collected language with no destructors, there
are no automatic ways to set this up, so this practice requires a very disciplined
approach on the side of the programmer to avoid memory leaks in the module.
4.1.7.2
Sharing memory between modules
A newly created module can get access to the main module’s memory by sharing the
linear memory reference. Doing this means that the new module’s only memory is now
the same as the main module’s. Because Emscripten placed the C/C++/Rust stack
in main memory, this also means that the two modules now share a stack and their
heap. This is actually very good news, because it allows us to seamlessly calling out
of the main module and into the newly created module, since the calling convention
is the same and the two modules share a stack.
Part of the initialization code of the main memory is to setup the stack and heap
pointers, so to avoid destroying the existing memory when compiling a new module,
we have to compile it as a Side Module as it is known in Emscripten terminology.
This simply means that it is compiled without initialization code, but also that it is
compiled withoutlibc and friends.
The effect of this is, that the newly created module does not have access to libc
functions and thus cannot call malloc, free and so on. This again means that the
newly compiled functions can only use the stack for new variables. Fortunately Rust
places everything on the stack unless we very explicitly request that it uses the heap3.
3Via the Box construct or via standard library functions that uses this construct
==PAGE:53==
4.2 Emulation platform
43
4.2
Emulation platform
The emulation framework itself consists of two parts: one part is specific to the
platform being emulated and one part is shared among all emulators on the platform.
The shared part is setup to allow different levels of optimizations ranging from pure
emulation, emulation with instruction caching to various JIT compiler options. In
the simplest case, the pure emulation, the emulation framework simply requests an
instruction parse from the machine specific part on the current PC, updates the PC to
the next position and executes that instruction, indefinitely, whereas the JIT modes
detects subroutines and compile them on the fly.
4.2.1
Source platforms
The machine specific part are setup to implement a parse operation (that can parse
one instruction from a given position in memory), one function per instruction (taking
the appropriate addressing arguments) and one function that can select the correct
instruction function to invoke from the parsed instruction. All machine state is ex-
pected to be maintained in a single struct which contains all the relevant registers
and memory is expected to be emulated as a single array of byte values.
4.2.1.1
6502
The 6502 predates formal specifications, so each of the instructions have been im-
plemented by hand. To save time and space, and avoid copy-paste errors, the im-
plementation of addressing modes and each instruction are implemented separately
as macros that are then combined for each opcode. Furthermore, some instructions
share the same functionality, but are implemented for more than one of the general
purpose registers. As an example, consider the CMP instruction (compare register A
with memory), which is mirrored by CPX and CPY which are identical, but function
on the X and Y registers instead.
1 macro_rules! abs_x_addr {
2
($machine:ident, $addr:expr) => { $addr + $machine.X as u16 }
3 }
4 // absolute y addressing, zeropage addressing , indirect addressing, etc.
....
5
6 macro_rules! compare {
7
($machine:ident, $reg:ident, $val:expr ) => {
8
let val = ((($machine.$reg) as i16 - ($val) as i16) & 0xFF) as u8;
9
$machine.Status = setZeroAndNegative!(setFlags!(carry => $machine.
Status, ($machine.$reg >= $val) as u8), val);
10
}
11 }
12
13 macro_rules! cmp {
14
($machine:ident, $val:expr ) => {
15
compare!($machine, A, $val);
==PAGE:54==
44
4 Implementation work
16
}
17 }
18 // CPX, CPY
19
20 // CMP
21 inst_fun_imm!(CMP_imm, machine, imm, cmp!(machine, imm));
22 inst_fun_addr_read_only!(CMP_abs, machine, $($mem,)* addr, cmp!(machine,
deref!( addr $(,$mem)*)));
23 inst_fun_addr_read_only!(CMP_abs_x, machine, $($mem,)* addr, cmp!(machine,
deref!(abs_x_addr!(machine, addr) $(,$mem)*)));
24 // ...
Listing 4.1: Implementation of addressing modes and instructions for CMP.
The only effect of the CMP instruction is to set the carry, zero and negative flag
bits on the status registers. This allows subsequent branch instructions to operate
on those flags. The actual implementation is to subtract the given value (memory
or immediate) from the general purpose register and then check if the result caused
each of the three flags to be set (again, implemented as macros to share between all
the instructions that affect the status flags).
Since all addressing modes are not available for all instructions, we need to specify
for each instructions exactly the addressing modes that are available. The names for
each function can be arbitrary, but do need to match the names given in the instruc-
tion selection function, so for obvious reasons it is easier to work with a consistent
naming scheme - the one chosen here is simply [Instruction Memonic]_[adressing
mode]
4.2.1.2
ARM
The ARM processors do have a formal specification, so rather than a direct implemen-
tation, we build a separate compiler from the ARM Specification Language (ASL) to
Rust, adapted to fit the emulation platform. To avoid confusion with the JIT compiler
of the emulator itself, we will call this the ”transpiler”.
There are three parts to the specification of each instruction:
1. Diagram: This is a definition of which bits mark a given instruction encoding
as well as which bits are used to encode operands.
2. Decoding: This is specification, in ASL code, for how to interpret the bits of the
operands. Each encoding for an instruction may encode different operands, but
the decoding functions ensure that they all map the same, shared operands for
the instruction. That is, the decoding function can combine or split operands
or provide implicit values for the operands not provided in an encoding.
3. Execution: This is a specification for how each instruction affect the machine
state and memory.
==PAGE:55==
4.2 Emulation platform
45
Each instruction may have several diagram, decoding pairs, but only one execution
specification.
Additionally decoding and execution functions may rely on shared
library code, also provided in ASL. As an example of the concrete syntax and how
we translate it to Rust, consider the diagram and decode for first Thumb-2 encoding
of the ADR instruction:
1 TAG:adr_T1:decode
2 d = UInt(Rd);
imm32 = ZeroExtend(imm8:'00', 32);
add = TRUE;
3
4 TAG:adr_T1:diagram
5 T16
6 15:12 _ 1010
7 11:11 _ 0
8 10:8 Rd xxx
9 7:0 imm8 xxxxxxxx
10
11 TAG:adr:index
12 Decode: adr_T1:decode@adr_T1:diagram
Listing 4.2: ASL specification for ADR T1 encoding.
The diagram specifies that the instruction is 16 bits long, that bits 11 to 15 should
form the pattern, ”10100”, for the instruction to be an encoding of the ADR. The
operands are defined on bits 8 to 10 and 0 to 7, respectively.
The decode function then define how to actually interpret the operands: the
register defined by Rd is just interpreted as an unsigned integer, but the immediate
value given must be extended to be 32 bits long. For this encoding, the add operand
is implicitly true.
In Rust code, this becomes:
1
pub fn parse_adr_T1(inst : &u32) -> Option<Instruction > {
2
if (inst >> 12) & 0b1111u32 != 0b1010u32 {
3
return None;
4
}
5
6
if (inst >> 11) & 0b1u32 != 0b0u32 {
7
return None;
8
}
9
10
let Rd = (inst >> 8) & (1u32 << 3) - 1;
11
let imm8 = (inst >> 0) & (1u32 << 8) - 1;
12
let d = UInt(Rd);
13
let imm32 = ZeroExtend((imm8 << 2) + 0b00u32 ,32);
14
let add = 1;
15
return Some(Instruction::adr {add: add as u32, d: d as u32, imm32:
imm32 as u32, });
16
17
}
Listing 4.3: Generated code for ADR T1 encoding.
The if blocks correspond to the bit patterns that should be present: if they are
not, then the encoding is for a different function and we return None to signal that
==PAGE:56==
46
4 Implementation work
the instruction could not be parsed. To actually compare the bits, we have to extract
a portion of the integer we are interested in.
There are a few ways this can be
achieved, but the solution chosen is to shift the desired portion of the integer to the
least significant bits and apply a binary and for the desired number of bits.
Implementation
The transpiler is implemented in F# with the lexer and parser
auto-generated using the FsLex and FsYacc tools. ASL is an imperative language,
which allows us to directly model many of the constructs directly in Rust. Indentation
is used to indicate blocks in ASL: this requires the lexer to keep track of the current
level of indentation and produce a BEGIN token every time the indentation level is
increased. It also means that the lexer potentially has to produce multiple tokens for
a single newline character, since multiple blocks may be closed on a single line.
Variables in ASL are not declared before use and, in many cases, do not have
explicit types. This requires a bit of management on our part, since we must infer
the types and translate correctly to Rust. In most cases we can safely default to
just using 32-bit unsigned integers, but in a lot of cases we need to know the explicit
bit-width of the variables. As an example, consider the SInt shared function:
1 integer SInt(bits(N) x)
2
result = 0;
3
for i = 0 to N-1
4
if x<i> == '1' then result = result + 2^i;
5
if x<N-1> == '1' then result = result - 2^N;
6
return result;
Listing 4.4: ASL SInt code.
This code is equivalent to writing ((x as u32 << (32- N)) as i32) >> (32 -
N)
in Rust; that is, it simply interprets the N bits as a signed int. To run the ASL
code, however, we must keep track of the bit-width of the variable passed to SInt
and pass it as an explicit variable in the generated Rust code.
To do this, the transpiler does an initial pass over the code to calculate the global
environment (functions) and local environment for each shared, parse and execute
function. This also allows the Rust code to declare all local variables in the top-most
scope, since blocks in Rust form scopes whereas blocks in ASL does not.
With these differences in mind, the end code is then produced more or less using
the equivalent Rust structures directly from the type-annotated AST.
Testing
To test the transpiler a number of test-cases has been prepared to ensure
that the transpiler produces legal and equivalent Rust code for each of the ASL
constructs.
The tests are split in two parts: one part tests the diagram and parsing code
to ensure that the correct guards and the correct bits are being extracted from the
binary encoding. The other part focuses on the imperative language constructs in
ASL and ensures that they are correctly translated.
==PAGE:57==
4.2 Emulation platform
47
4.2.2
JIT platform
The JIT compiler must work in concert with the pure interpreter and detect sections of
code that represent a feasible target for compilation. The implementation focuses on
detection of subroutines: partly, because a subroutine is structural great match for a
WebAssembly function, and thus allows easy composition of compiled sections; partly
because subroutines are feasible to detect and easy to detect the code boundaries of.
The hierarchy of the components in the implementation are as follows:
• The pure interpreter parses instructions, executes them and hands them over
to the cache
• The cache stores the parsed functions and retrieves instructions previously
stored as required
• The compiler detects when a subroutine call is present in the cache and compiles
it (and stores a reference in the cache)
4.2.2.1
Compiling new functions
The cornerstone of the JIT compiler is, naturally, the compilation of new code on
the fly. When identifying a subroutine to compile, we also check for any subroutines
called as part of that code and include those in the code to compile (if we do not
already have a reference to compiled functions representing those subroutines). The
overall process is as follows:
1. Optionally: Ensure that the cache contains the entire subroutines to be com-
piled (this is not necessarily the case, since the executed code might not have
touched all branches)
2. Build the CFG for each subroutine to be compiled
3. For each subroutine CFG, determine if it is reducible or not
• If if is, detect the structures to be compiled (loops, etc)
• If it is not, compile using the fallback method
4. For each basic block, replace each instruction with the code to execute that
instruction
To ensure correct cooperation between compiled functions and interpreted code,
the compiled functions are created in such a way, that at any program point where
they might return, the underlying machine and memory must be in such a state, that
the interpreter can seamlessly take over. Conversely, this also means that when we
can guarantee that the function cannot return, we are not required to write values to
the machine register or the main memory, as long as the state is consistent afterwards.
==PAGE:58==
48
4 Implementation work
In particular, this means that for each basic block, we know that once the basic block
starts executing it will continue executing until the last instruction in the block. This
allows us to update the PC only once for each basic block. To ease implementation, we
simply update the PC for the whole basic block before executing the first instruction
in the basic block. If the terminator of the basic block is a branch where the conditions
are met, then the PC will also be updated in that instruction, but the effect will be
the same.
For subroutines with incomplete CFGs this also means, that we simply exit early
from the compiled function, if an undefined part of the CFG is reached at run-time.
An undefined part of the CFG may be reached either because an indirect branch
was made, where the address could not be predicted, or because the cache was not
pre-filled with the whole subroutine. In the later case, it may be beneficial to clear
the cache to allow recompiling the subroutine next time with a greater part of the
CFG. The performance trade-off between pre-filling the cache and not is investigated
in the chapter 5 - Testing and performance analysis.
4.2.2.2
Caching
In principle, it is not necessary to postpone compilation until a function is in the
cache (that is, until the second time it is invoked) - this is purely a heuristic, to
avoid compiling code that is only used, say, in initialization of a program. The cache
is, however, crucial to ensuring a sound compiler: the cache’s role is both to store
the parsed instructions (and thus avoid wasted work), but also to detect when the
underlying code pages are modified.
The cache contains a reference to the instruction on the address of that instruction,
but also references from the operand bytes back to the actual instruction. Thus, when
a write is executed and the destination was in the cache, any reference is followed
before clearing the cache. This ensures that a write to an operand will clear the cache
for that instruction and allow the emulator to detect, upon reaching that program
point, that the instruction was no longer in the cache and that it must re-parse that
instruction.
For compiled functions, a similar approach is used: at the location of first instruc-
tion in the function, a reference to the function is inserted into the cache; for all other
instructions and operands included in the compiled function a reference back to the
function is inserted. This allows us to invalidate the compiled function as soon as one
instruction or operand in the function is overwritten. It is necessary to invalidate the
cache this aggressively, since the compiled code is frozen at compile time and thus
cannot be modified afterwards.
For this to work, every write, whether interpreted, cached or in a compiled func-
tion, must be checked against the cache and the destination potentially invalidated.
One solution is to compile the cache-handling code into each of the JIT modules, but
this is balloons the code size and is a computationally heavy operation, since it re-
quires parsing and patching in parts the binary WebAssembly output of the emulator
itself. Another solution, which is the one implemented, is to export a function from
==PAGE:59==
4.2 Emulation platform
49
the main emulator module, that can clear the cache, and call that from the compiled
module. The difficulty in either method lies in the fact the (cached) instruction is
available when compiling the JIT module, but is not actually present in the compiled
code. The effect of the instruction is present, of course, but the actual struct repre-
senting the instruction is not. The instruction is needed to calculate where the write
takes place, since that location may depend on the value of memory and registers
only known at run-time.
There are many ways around this, from reconstructing the instruction in the
compiled code, patching part of the instruction code in to calculate the address that
way, expose the address calculating functions separately and so on, but the solution I
found most straight-forward was to pass a reference to the instruction and recalculate
the address in the main memory. This way, we accept a slight overhead, but the
implementation becomes a lot simpler.
After potentially invalidating the cache, the compiled function must check that it
itself was not invalidated - and if it was, it must abort computation. This is done by
returning early from the function and passing a flag as the return value, to allow the
caller to also exit early.
Similarly a function, when it is first invoked, must check that it is still in the
cache, since it could have been called from a compiled module that just invalided
that function.
4.2.2.3
Working with binary WebAssembly
The WebAssembly binary format is quite straight-forward to parse and produce, but
the focus on the easy validation has some unfortunate consequences for modifying
existing code and patching code segments together.
The focus on validation also, to some degree, makes debugging more difficult. As
an example, consider a module, where we want to add a new local function that uses
some external function. First we have to add a new import statement: that is an
isolated change to the import segment and we can easily insert the relevant bytes
and update the size and count arguments for the section. However, if we only insert
the new import definition, the most likely outcome is that the module now fails to
validate with a message, which could be about an empty stack or type mismatches.
Why? Because, once we inserted the imported function, all local function indices were
incremented by one - means that all call instructions to local functions now point to
incorrect functions and - most likely - the local functions do not have the take the
same number of arguments and types.
So, to properly add an import statement to a module, we have to not only add the
new import statement, but also find and increment all function calls, that called a
local function (that is, an index equal to or higher than the newly imported function).
Debugging these kinds of errors are not trivial, especially since the debugging
tools available are close to non-existing: if a module fails to validate, it cannot be
disassembled and thus the only way to debug it is to inspect the binary data and be
guided by the error message. The error messages vary a bit between the tools: the
==PAGE:60==
50
4 Implementation work
browsers will usually give an error message pointing to a position in the binary and
a message related to the stack, with no indication that the error originated because
of a function call. The Binaryen disassembly tool just flat out crashes if run on a
non-validating module.
In the end, I found the easiest way to debug module validation errors was to load
the Binaryen tool into a debugger and inspect the state of the tool at the point of
the uncaught exception.
4.2.2.4
Compilation new modules on the fly
Once the WebAssembly binary representing a new module has been prepared it must
be handed over a Javascript handler to allow creating a new WebAssembly module
and share the memory of the main module.
The Javascript handler is responsible for:
1. Initialize the WebAssembly module
2. Patch the existing WebAssembly memory reference into the new module
3. Cache a reference for each exported function from the module (each corresponds
to a subroutine, named after the starting address)
The WebAssembly compilation is an asynchronous API. In a pure Javascript world
this is very convenient to work with as we can either continue on and be notified once
the compiled module is ready or we can simply await the call and block execution
at that program point (without blocking the brower UI). In relation to Emscripten,
however, there are no support for async methods. This means that we have to imple-
ment the callback logic ourselves and ensure that the emulator can continue correct
when returning from the Javascript method even when the compiled function is not
yet ready. To do this, the interface to compile a new module is actually two-way:
A Javascript function is exposed to the emulator module that allows the module to
pass a WebAssembly binary and compile the module it represents - and a WebAssem-
bly callback from the main emulator, that is exposed to the Javascript function.
The job of the Javascript function is then to respond to the callback from the We-
bAssembly compilation, update the Javascript cache and then call the WebAssembly
module to continue. An alternative to this approach could be to take advantage of
the asynchronous API and simply continue the emulator with the interpreter until
the compilation completed. That approach seems advantageous, but there are some
practical difficulties in actually implementing it: First of all, we can only start the
compiled function at the first instruction in the current version, so either we would
have to support passing in a PC and starting at a more or less arbitrary point or
we would have to wait until the next invocation of the function before executing
it. Secondly, we actually have two separate caches that we need to synchronize: we
have the internal emulator cache, that keeps track of which instructions are cached
and which instructions are contained in a compiled function. For this approach to
==PAGE:61==
4.2 Emulation platform
51
work correctly, we would have to postpone updating the internal cache until after
the WebAssembly compilation promise returned (or ignore cache and run with pure
emulation for compilations in-progress).
Since we cannot have a real parallel compilation pipeline due to the single-thread
restriction on the emulator itself, it is only the very last stage of the compilation that
is actually parallel. Therefore this, more complicated approach, is not as attractive
as it might seem at first glance.
The newly created methods are invoked from the main emulator module instead of
an instruction, and whenever the function returns, the emulator continues as before.
Since the main emulator module cannot contain a reference to the compiled functions
(as they do not exist at the time of the emulator initialization), the actual invocation
must use a Javascript function as stand-in. In the actual implementation there are
a few Javascript methods that work together to maintain a cache of the compiled
functions and invoke them as necessary.
4.2.3
Ensuring correctness
In addition to ensuring that the individual instructions of the source platform are
correctly implemented, we must ensure that the emulator itself is implemented cor-
rectly. For the pure emulator, this is quite easy, as the only job is to update the PC
correctly, call the parse code and then call the instruction emulator code.
For the JIT compiling emulator, we must also ensure that the produced modules
are correct. Since full format verification of the compiler is outside the scope of this
thesis, the correctness has been tested by a number of test cases. In particular, the
test cases focuses on the following:
Emulator module
Javascript function
WebAssembly API
JIT-compiled module
WASM binary
Instantiate
Promise
Return
Module
Invoke
Return
Return
Figure 4.1: Interaction between Emulator module, Javascript, WebAssembly API
and JIT-compiled module during compilation.
==PAGE:62==
52
4 Implementation work
• Self-modifying code: The compiled subroutines can be seen as a cached version
of the instructions that make up the subroutine. To ensure the correctness of
the implementation, we must therefore have test cases for self-modifying code,
that invalidates that cache. The subroutine can be modified both from within
itself and from outside code; both needs to be tests.
• Non-reducible CFGs: The compiler needs to be able to build a correct work-
around for non-reducible CFGs. This necessarily includes loops and part of the
test is to ensure that the correct number of iterations are taken, and that the
exits work as expected.
• Reducible CFGs: For the reducible CFGs we also need to test correctness: in
particular, that the code for the loop constructs are correct and that branches
work correctly in the simulated control flow. The test cases focuses on this.
4.3
C64 Simulator
Using the emulator as the base a Commodore 64 simulator is created. The addi-
tional components are: The VIC-II simulator (to simulate the video subsystem) and
the CIA-6526 interface for the keyboard. All of these operate using shared memory,
which means that a read or a write to a memory location no longer can be emulated
by a simple write to an array. If a mapped address is read or written to, the appropri-
ate subsystem must be consulted rather than main memory. The operating system
was also present in the form of three ROM sections, for the OS proper, the Basic
Interpreter and the Character Code Page (for localization). The C64 still had 64
Kbs of memory, so it also had a mechanism for changing between the shared memory
mode and a memory-only mode (again, implemented by shared memory).
In the context of the emulator, this means that all reads and writes from memory
needs to be intercepted and replaced with a more complex system.
To avoid re-
implementing all peripherals, the peripherals from the c64js project was used for
memory management, CIA-6526 and the VIC-II. The images for the operating system,
basic interpreter and character pages are all copies of the original distributions.
4.4
Limitations of the current implementation
The emulator platform is completely implemented for the 6502 (core instruction set)
and is, with the simulated peripherals, able to run the original Commodore 64 oper-
ating system and BASIC interpreter. The current implementation of the emulator
platform does has a few limitations, though:
==PAGE:63==
4.4 Limitations of the current implementation
53
Figure 4.2: Showing the C64 emulator after invoking a BASIC command to change
the background-color.
4.4.1
Optimizations
The emulator JIT compiler currently does not implement any optimizations. It im-
plements the CFG reconstruction, reducibility test and recreates the control flow in
WebAssembly, but does not, currently, implement any optimizations of the emulated
instructions themselves. The instructions are provided in a separate WebAssembly
module and called from that. The instruction inlining is currently incomplete; the
instructions are parsed from the source WebAssembly module, but not yet inlined in
the produce module.
4.4.2
Compiler performance
The JIT compiler have a few components that could potentially be optimized quite a
bit. For instance, during the CFG reconstruction, the compiler needs to look for basic
blocks preset at various addresses. Since each basic block has a starting address and
a length, this is an ideal case for a data structure that supports a predecessor query,
if we index the basic blocks by starting address. There are a few data structures that
support these queries in O(log log u) such as the van Emde Boas trees [Cor+09, p 551]
or y-fast tries [Cor+09, p 558]. However, the number of basic blocks in a CFG for a
single function is usually not that large, so it may be that any gain here is completely
==PAGE:64==
54
4 Implementation work
Figure 4.3: The classic C64 loading color pattern.
negligible; without proper profiling it is difficult to gauge the relative importance of
the various compiler components in relation to performance.
4.4.3
ARM
The ASL to Rust transpiler is not yet feature complete. This means that only a tiny
subset of the instructions are currently being translated from ASL to Rust, but with
parsing, decoding, execution and shared library code produced correctly. Additionally,
the emulation framework still contains some platform specific implementations for the
6502, mostly related to the generation of the WebAssembly code, where the signatures
for the instruction functions are not generalized to the format of the ARM instructions,
where each instruction can take many operands.
The ASL specification itself is published in a machine readable format for both
the ARM M-8 and the ARM A-8. To use it we therefore have to take the diagram
code from the M-8 (which is identical to the M-7, since they both use the Thumb-
2 instruction set encoding), but copy the instruction and parse ASL code from the
ARM Cortex M3 specification. This work is not fully completed.
There are not enough instructions written yet for the ARM emulator to emulate
even simple programs, so the transpiler remains somewhat of a proof-of-concept rather
than a fully funcioning compiler.
==PAGE:65==
4.4 Limitations of the current implementation
55
Figure 4.4: A back-port of the ”Flappy bird” game for the C64 running in the
emulator.
==PAGE:66==
56
==PAGE:67==
CHAPTER 5
Testing and
performance analysis
In this chapter we will investigate the performance characteristics of the various
emulation techniques analyzed and implemented in this thesis.
The chapter will
start with a detailed description of the test setup, including the difficulties faced
when trying to measure accurately the performance of an application running in the
browser. The second part of the chapter is the actual measurements.
5.1
Benchmark setup
The performance benchmark of the emulation framework is set up as a number of
individual tests for measuring execution time. Each test consists of a binary for the
source platform which is loaded into a new instance of the emulator for the platform
and run until completion.
The tests are split into two parts: one part contains
computationally heavy operations, that are designed to measure raw execution time
and allow for a number of optimizations to take effect. The other part contains corner
cases, such as self-modifying code, both to ensure that the optimizations do not affect
correctness, but also to examine how such constructs affect performance.
Each test is executed both with and without the JIT compiler to measure the
relative benefit/drawback of the hybrid approach.
5.1.1
Proof-of-work
To ensure that the emulated program are actually emulated each test is associated
with a proof of work. This proof is in the form of a list of expected values in the
emulated program’s memory. The benchmark will test at startup, that the memory
does not contain the expected value, and then, after completing the test run, it will
confirm that the memory does in fact contain the expected value.
The proofs measures the end result of the task and disregards the intermediate
calculations’ effect on the memory. This is easier to reason about, since we know
==PAGE:68==
58
5 Testing and performance analysis
exactly what the output of a benchmark is supposed to be, but not necessarily what
the intermediate calculations are supposed to be.
As an example, for the benchmarks that calculates primes, we know that the
output of the first 10 numbers is supposed to be: 0x01 0x01 0x01 0x00 0x01 0x00
0x01 0x00 0x00 0x00
(where 0x01 signals that the given number is a prime and
0x00 signals that it is not).
5.1.2
Included tests
The benchmark suite contains the following tests:
5.1.2.1
Tests of performance
Primes
This test calculates prime numbers on the 6502. Since the 6502 does not
have a multiplication instruction, the test contains a subroutine for multiplication
and, of course, for the primality test itself and therefore tests nested subroutine calls.
The primality test is written in a quite naive way and is thus quite computationally
heavy.
5.1.2.2
Tests of structures
Methods
This test includes a subroutine for copying a string, accepting arguments
for the source, length and the destination. The subroutine is called a number of times
to allow the emulator to detect the subroutine and compile it.
Self-modifying code
This test includes two subroutines that are both modified
at run-time: one modifies itself (and thus requires the compiled code to detect the
self-modification) and one is modified from the outside of the function.
Reducible and non-reducible CFGs
This test includes two subroutines: one
with a reducible CFG and one with a non-reducible CFG.
5.1.3
Optimization modes
The following modes are tested in the benchmark:
• Pure emulation
• Pure emulation with instruction caching
• JIT compilation
• Pre-run JIT compilation
==PAGE:69==
5.2 Results
59
The pre-run JIT is included to try and separate the overhead of the compiler from
the potential benefit of the compiled code. This is achieved by resetting the PC to
the initial value and rerunning the test with the same cache.
5.1.4
Test machine
The Benchmarks are all executed on an Intel Core i7-3630QM, 2.4 GHz CPU, running
Windows 10. The browser used for the tests are: Firefox Nightly, v 55.01a, source
revision: 275588f4d852d7dc183a9dcc70a311413dc7a063.
5.2
Results
For the 6502, the raw results of the benchmark are as follows:
Benchmark name
Interpreter run
Cache run
JIT run
JIT re-run
Structural tests
Methods
20.7 ms
16.1 ms
31.4 ms
1.4 ms
Self-modifying code
2.1 ms
2.7 ms
63.5 ms
61.9 ms
Reducible &
non-reducible CFG
4.4 ms
5.3 ms
34.9 ms
1.5 ms
Stress tests
Prime numbers
1228.5 ms
1238.8 ms
89.1 ms
38.2 ms
Figure 5.1: Raw measurements of the benchmarks.
The first observation is, that for the actual stress tests, we see a significant boost
from the JIT compiler: for the prime numbers test, we see a 92% reduction in execu-
tion time for JIT compiled version and more than 96% reduction for the pre-JIT’ed
version. This test, of course, is designed to be compiled, with all of the computation
being performed in subroutines, that can be compiled. Still, more than 90% is an
enormous speed-up, so it is worth investigating the potential reasons for this.
For the structural tests, we generally see that the interpreter and interpreter with
caching are almost equal in terms of performance. The JIT is generally significantly
slower than the interpreter, with the re-run JIT being the fastest. The notable excep-
tion of course being the self-modifying code test, where the JIT and JIT re-run are
almost equally bad.
==PAGE:70==
60
5 Testing and performance analysis
5.2.1
JIT overhead
The structural tests indicate that there is a JIT overhead which outweighs the speed
up of the compiled code. That is, because these tests are tiny and mostly focuses on
one structural aspect of the emulator, the code does not run long enough to regain
the time invested in compiling the subroutines. The JIT re-run on the other hand
indicate, that the compiled code is still significantly faster, and that given a longer
test case, the compilation time would have been regained.
5.2.2
Cache thrashing
The one noteworthy exception to the JIT re-run being the fastest is the self-modifying
code. In this test case both the JIT and JIT re-run perform equally bad. The reason
for this is cache thrashing, where the emulator will continuously fill the cache, compile
and then throw everything away once the code is modified.
For each call to the
subroutine the JIT will do the following:
1. When the cache is empty, the emulator will not compile anything and just
fill the cache using the interpreter. This will clear out one instruction in the
subroutine (because of the self-modifying code), but most instructions will stay
in the cache.
2. When the first instruction of the subroutine is in the cache, the subroutine
will be compiled. The compiler will first ensure that the cache is filled with
all reachable instructions in the cache, and will thus fill in the instruction that
was cleared, and then compile the entire subroutine. Once the subroutine is
compiled, all instructions in the cache are linked to the same cache entry. Thus
when one instruction is overwritten, the entire function is evicted from the
cache.
This back and forth of caching and flushing can be compared to Cache thrashing
and generally results in poor performance. In particular in our case, the compiled
function is evicted from the cache almost as soon as it was put in there and thus takes
a huge performance penalty, since the compilation overhead is massive compared to
the slight gain in execution speed for executing just a few instructions from a compiled
function.
5.2.3
Sources of performance gains in the compiled subroutines
Still, for the cases where the compiled function stays in the cache, there is a significant
speed-up. Much larger in fact, that what we could reasonably expect from a compiler
which only builds the control flow and calls the appropriate instruction emulation
functions. There are two main differences between the interpreted version and the
compiled version:
==PAGE:71==
5.2 Results
61
• Context switching: WebAssembly is tightly associated with the Javascript en-
vironment, but there is still an overhead associated with calling in and out the
WebAssembly modules.
• The emulator code itself: The compiled version of a function, of course, bypasses
the emulator code, including the code to parse, check and update cache, etc.
Bypassing the emulator code is clearly the main goal of compiling the subroutines,
but it is possible that a significant part of the observed speed-up comes from the fact
that the compiled subroutines are kept entirely in a WebAssembly module. There
are a number of reasons why a function call entirely in WebAseembly is faster than
a call to a Javacript method, even if they both reside in the same virtual machine:
Javascript is a dynamic language with an emphasis on meta-programming and run-
time reconfiguration of the environment. This means that every function in Javascript
is in fact an object that can be queried and modified. It also means that if we invoke
a function, say o.foo(); then in order to find the code to actually execute, we must
first look up the concrete instance of o, then search for foo, which could be defined
on the object itself or any of the parents in the prototype chain. If foo is found,
we then execute it - even if we didn’t provide any arguments the function may still
expect them, so we must query for the signature of the function and fill in undefined
for the missing arguments (and also construct and provide access to the arguments
via the special arguments object).
If we are calling from WebAssembly, we have bound the imported functions to a
specific instance, so the lookup can be bypassed, but we still need to map arguments
from the WebAssembly counterpart. WebAssembly modules uses only primitive nu-
meric types (integers, 32 or 64 bits as well as floating points); Javascript uses a single
”Number” type for all numeric types, which is defined as a double precision IEEE
754 [ECM11, p 46].
Additionally Javacript objects are garbage collected whereas
WebAssembly is an explicitly managed language. These conversions and differences
causes an overhead when switching between the Javascript and WebAssembly con-
text.
Unfortunately, there are no profilers in existence that can measure where the time
is spent, so it is difficult to say exactly what the negative contributions of these two
sources of slow downs are. I believe it is safe to say, that both contribute as we know
for sure that there is less code in the compiled modules, but not 90% less code being
executed.
5.2.4
Optimizations in the WebAssembly environment
The executing environment itself poses an additional challenge when trying to gauge
how various changes and optimizations in the JIT compiler and produced code con-
tribute: the WebAssembly module itself is executed in a JIT optimized environment;
how the performance for the WebAssembly part is, is not published, but a lot of en-
gineering effort has gone into optimizing the Javascript JIT compiler, often claiming
==PAGE:72==
62
5 Testing and performance analysis
”near native” performance on various tasks. WebAssembly was introduced to provide
even faster execution, however, the state of the optimizations are not known. This,
combined with the lack of profiling tools, causes a huge unknown in terms of what
contributes to the run-time execution time, since we do not known which optimiza-
tions are implemented and how they impact performance. It is safe to assume that
there are some optimizations and that they impact performance; it may be contribut-
ing factor in the speed-ups we see, since the JIT compiled WebAssembly are entirely
on the WebAssembly side, and thus may be easier to analyze and optimize.
==PAGE:73==
CHAPTER 6
Discussion
In this chapter we will discuss the suitability of using WebAssembly as an emulation
host environment. Based on the previous chapters we will evaluate WebAssembly
as the platform currently stands and discuss how the proposed improvements to the
platform might affect an emulation framework. We will also discuss how the hybrid
techniques interact with the WebAssembly platform.
Finally, we will discuss the
effects of implementing an emulation framework rather than a single emulator.
6.1
Suitability of WebAssembly as an emulation
platform
The WebAssembly platform as investigated in this thesis has proved to be a valid
choice for a emulation host environment.
It has support across a wide range of
computing platforms, it supports the c family of source languages as well as more
modern systems programming language with support for more languages planned -
and it has proven to be possible to implement a hybrid approach to emulation in a
reasonably efficient manner. The binary format is quite straight-forward to produce,
even if it is error prone to make adjustments to existing binary code. However, in a
number of areas, the WebAssembly platform has been less than ideal for supporting
an emulation platform.
6.1.1
Shortcomings of the contemporary WebAssembly platform
The contemporary WebAssembly platform is the so-called Minimally Viable Product.
This version has widespread browser support, but is also restricted, in particular in
the following areas:
6.1.1.1
Dependence on the Javascript environment
Partly because of the existing tooling and partly because of the limitations of the
platform itself, the WebAssembly programs relies heavily on the Javascript environ-
ment to the point where it is difficult to compile anything to WebAssembly without
forcing a context switch out of WebAssembly and into a Javascript support library:
anything that touches heap or any form of I/O will go via a Javascript library. This
==PAGE:74==
64
6 Discussion
means that most of the standard library in Rust or C++ will cause the WebAssembly
module to call out to the Javascript environment.
It is great that we can have the seamless integration with Javascript, but if we end
up using Javascript for the majority of the tasks, a natural question is: would we be
better off implementing the emulation framework entirely in Javascript? Javascript,
after all, has fantastic support for changing code on the fly and are supported by quite
efficient JIT compilers; the same JIT compilers that now co-host the WebAssembly
environments in fact, which is what allows them to do this seamless integration in
the first place.
6.1.1.2
Poor I/O support
WebAssemblys primitives do not support arrays in any form - this restriction forces
us to limit the data transfer to and from WebAssembly to either one integer at a time
or to use the Javascript interface entirely. Neither option is very desirable, since we
either have a very inefficient data transfer with a large context switch and function
call overhead or we have a situation where there are two separate entities that must
coordinate the role of memory management for the WebAssembly module.
6.1.1.3
Source environment emulation support
This thesis focused primarily on emulation where we purposely limited ourselves to
the CPU and main memory of the source environment. For an emulator to be use-
ful we must combine it with a simulator of at least some peripherals of the source
environment: disk, networking, etc. These parts of the source environment can only
be simulated via a Javascript interface since WebAssembly itself do not have direct
access to either the filesystem API, networking APIs, audio or screen APIs. In fact,
WebAssembly does not even have a console of its own - everything must be passed
out through the Javascript interfaces.
This also means that there are some peripherals that will be impossible to imple-
ment in pure Javascript and which would then need another layer of indirection to
implement: any peripherals for which no Javascript API or counter part exist, would
have to be emulated completely outside the browser and then have a way to commu-
nicate with the browser (via WebSockets or similar), which could then communicate
into the WebAssembly module. Such a situation could arise if the emulated binary
communicated with say, a legacy printer via a serial connection; or it could arise
in emulating IoT devices, where it is common to have sensors that have no support
in a browser: barometers, infrared temperature sensors, air quality sensors, etc. In
situations like this, the difficulties introduced by the required peripheral support may
outweigh the benefits of the widespread support for WebAssembly.
==PAGE:75==
6.1 Suitability of WebAssembly as an emulation platform
65
6.1.1.4
Indirect JIT support
The MVP allowed us to build an indirect support for JIT by building the final
WebAssembly module in the emulator module and then pass out this binary to a
Javascript handler, which could invoke module instantiating and take care of patch-
ing the modules together. Because of the lack of support for passing out arrays, we
again had to pass out a pointer and a length parameter and then let the Javascript
handler read directly from the emulator’s memory.
Ultimately there is not much
difference between the instantiating of the emulator WebAssembly module itself and
the subsequent JIT compiled modules then, apart from where the binary source orig-
inated.
Aside from doing most of the heavy lifting on the Javascript side, the feature that
allowed us to get even this minimal version of JIT support was the ability to share
memory segments. Without this ability to have two instances share a single piece of
memory, we would have had to copy the entire emulator’s memory back and forth
between each function call, which would have made JIT compiling unfeasible.
6.1.1.5
Poor control flow support
The limitation of the WebAssembly to supporting reducible control flow graphs is a
significant limitation when building an emulator. While we were able to build a work-
around, this limitation still forces us to do a full reducibility analysis for every JIT
compilation. It also means that indirect branches, where we cannot always predict
the destination, are impossible to support in a compiled version. This means that -
even in the absence of self-modifying code - we cannot in the general case guarantee
that we can produce native WebAssembly code corresponding to a the source binary,
without having an interpreter to bail out to.
6.1.1.6
Single-threaded
The MVP is single threaded in the sense that only a single thread can operate on a
piece of linear memory. In addition to preventing us from compiling in parallel, this
restricts us to emulating single threaded source environments, which is potentially a
deal-breaker in terms of using WebAssembly as an emulation host platform.
6.1.2
Proposed changes to WebAssembly platform
A number of changes are proposed for the WebAssembly platform that, if imple-
mented, would significantly affect the suitability of the WebAssembly platform in
relation to an emulation platform [W3C17a]:
==PAGE:76==
66
6 Discussion
6.1.2.1
Direct JIT support
JIT support is perhaps the most significant change proposed. The proposal suggests
that the WebAssembly modules would get direct API access to the WebAssembly JIT
interface, which would allow the module to produce and compile the code directly
without the Javascript intermediary. Perhaps even more significantly, the proposal
suggest that the future versions of WebAssembly would be able to modify a module
on the fly. This would allow the emulator to add, remove and modify functions on
the fly, rather than having to produce external modules and interface with these via
a Javascript intermediary.
Of particular interest in this regard, is the proposed support for Polymorphic
Inline Caches [HCU91]. These structures would allow us to build a JIT emulator, that
would first produce a very naive, compiled version of the binary and then gradually
optimize more and more as a given instruction is visited again and again. This could
work by first inserting a call to a parse function the first time a PC is visited. The
next time, the result of the parse could be inlined to call the parsed instruction
directly. At later stages, the instructions could be inlined and optimized using all
the techniques discussed in this thesis. The fine-grained control allows for a much
more responsive optimizations as well as allowing for the whole class of trace-based
optimizations [Böh+11]
6.1.2.2
Support for non-reducible control flow
The WebAssembly future proposal suggest that support for non-reducible control
flow might be coming, either in the form of a general GOTO instruction or in the
form of support for some of the most used non-reducible patterns. Exactly what
those patterns would be, is non mentioned in the proposal, so the for purpose of the
emulator, we can only assume that this would be relevant, if a general purpose GOTO
instruction was included. This would, however, both allow us to eliminate the ugly
fallback solution for non-reducible CFGs, but also allow for easier code generation of
partial functions. This would make it possible to, say, (re)compile a loop on the fly,
rather than a whole function, even if we did not place all blocks for the branch labels
in the outside code.
6.1.2.3
Multi-threaded execution
Having multi-threaded execution, as proposed, would allow us to compile in parallel
and thus remove a big portion of the performance penalty of the JIT compiler. It
would also, naturally, allow for actually emulating multi-threaded platforms, which
expand the usability of the platform quite a bit.
==PAGE:77==
6.2 Suitability of using hybrid techniques
67
6.1.2.4
Better tooling
The current state of tooling is quite immature and it is one of the top priorities of
the WebAssembly project to improve this.
The goals are two-fold: improve com-
piler support and output, including better optimizations of mixed Javascript and
WebAssembly programs; and include debugging and profiling tools.
All of this is essentially related to delivering a better performing emulation plat-
form: better compilers and optimizers could deliver better performance on the existing
code base; better tools would guide the performance tuning of the code base. Without
a profiling tool, it is very difficult to gauge which parts of the code-base is causing
performance bottlenecks - in particular since the target is so new and somewhat un-
predictable from a performance point of view. The translation from source code to
output instruction is non-trivial and the performance of the individual WebAssembly
instructions rely heavily on the WebAssembly implementation, the host Javascript
JIT compiler and the host computing environment.
6.1.2.5
Non-web embeddings
Part of the appeal of the WebAssembly platform is that it almost instantly delivers
run-time support for an emulator across millions, if not billions of devices. However,
there might be cases where running an emulator in a browser is less than ideal. For
applications that require security or predictable performance, having a non-web em-
bedding might matter a great deal. For instance, if emulating a banking mainframe
application, it might matter a great deal to know the performance is consistent rather
than sometimes very fast and sometimes not depending on the browsers JIT optimiza-
tions. And it will certainly matter a great deal to know for sure that the browser
does not have restart in the middle of a batch job to apply updates.
Additionally, non-web embeddings might make it easier to simulate certain kinds
of periphereals. For instance, while Javascript does have a form of a filesystem API
it is generally very limited due to safety reasons. An application that interacts a lot
with the filesystem might be emulated much faster by having a more direct access to
the filesystem exposed to the WebAssembly module. Or the emulated program might
need to interact with a low-level peripheral for which no communication means exist
in the Javascript world.
6.2
Suitability of using hybrid techniques
The promise of the hybrid techniques is to get the best of two worlds: we get fast
start-up times due to the interpreter, but we also get good performance due to the
JIT compilation of the most used portions of the application. As we investigated
in this thesis, this claim is not without pitfalls. In particular for the WebAssembly
platform, there are a few drawbacks:
==PAGE:78==
68
6 Discussion
• Code size: To actually parse and produce WebAssembly binaries, the JIT com-
piler must include its own library for working with the format, since there are
no native facilities for this. Due to the restrictions on the control flow in the
output, the JIT compiler is also forced to include mechanism for reconstructing
the CFG and have fallback methods for outputting non-reducible CFGs. This
is on top of the code required to actually construct a sequence of WebAssembly
instructions emulating each source binary instruction. Since WebAssembly is
itself running in a JIT compiled environment, all else being equal, larger code
modules will result in slower startup, since there are more code to compile in
the browser.
• Slow compilation: This is a two-fold problem. One part is surely the current im-
plementation, but with no profiling tools available, it is difficult to guess where
the performance bottlenecks are. The other part of this, is the current state
of the platform, which with its coarse granularity pushes the compiler in the
direction of compiling bigger chunks at a time, which again causes compilation
time to go up.
The proposed changes to the platform is sure to improve some of this, but it is
inevitable that a mixed mode emulator will require more code that a pure emulator,
and thus on the WebAssembly platform, start-up times will always be somewhat
higher.
An AOT compiler may in many regards be more suitable for the platform, since
it can produce the more efficient output and avoid including the compiler itself in
the WebAssembly module, but, of course, only where the code is guaranteed not
to change during run-time.
This may be well suited for emulating or simulating
embedded applications, but is insufficient for simulating whole systems, that load
programs on the fly, like the Commodore 64 investigated in this thesis.
The hybrid methods still does bring significant advantages, also when used on the
WebAssembly platform, even in spite of the current state of the platform; and the
drawbacks are many ways completely outweighed by the benefits. In particular, a
simulation of a whole operating system is only possible using pure interpretation or
hybrid methods, since the actual programs of interest in this case will be loaded at
run time. We have shown that the hybrid methods do carry a significant advantage
over the pure interpretation and at no additional implementation cost to future source
platforms that could be added to the emulator.
6.3
Future work
One area of future work is to support additional platforms; in particular the ARM
platform should be completed. While this adds support for new binaries that can
be emulated, it does not in itself bring many new insights about the platform or
emulation in general, with one major exception: the ARM platform has great support
==PAGE:79==
6.3 Future work
69
from C & C++ compilers, whereas 6502 does not. By adding the ARM platform to
the emulation platform we thereby gain access to the huge number of benchmarks
available in the C language and can thus use these to guide the future performance
improvements.
Another interesting prospect is to add support for optimizing the generated output.
This work would rely heavily on (or perhaps contribute to) the improved tooling for
WebAssembly. With proper profilers and a better benchmarks, we could have an
informed discussion about where spending more time compiling would be a reasonable
trade-off compared to the run-time of the compiled code.
With more and more granular code generation available from future versions of
the platform, we might also have the option to add stub code that simply record
function usage, which could then be re-compiled and optimized as the usage counts
increases.
==PAGE:80==
70
==PAGE:81==
CHAPTER 7
Conclusion
In this thesis we have investigated the use of WebAssembly as a host platform for an
emulator. We examined the WebAssembly format and found a particular feature of
the stack machine to be troublesome: the lack of a general purpose branch instruction.
This restriction forced us to examine the cases where a source binary could have
its control flow represented directly in WebAssembly and how to work around the
limitations, when it could not. In particular, we investigated the concept of control
flow graph reducibility; how to test it and how to use it as the basis for a code
generation strategy for WebAssembly.
For the non-reducible control flow graphs,
we developed a work around code generation strategy to ensure that the emulator
platform could support arbitrary source binaries.
For the emulation platform, we analyzed three overall strategies: pure interpreta-
tion, ahead-of-time compilation and hybrid/just-in-time compilation. We found that
pure interpretation was the easiest to implement, but also the slowest in the general
case; we found that ahead-of-time was not applicable in the general case, because of
difficulties relating to indirect branches, where the destination depends on the run-
time values, which causes difficulties with separating data from code in the binary on
some platforms and because of self-modifying code. For the hybrid methods, we inves-
tigated how to compile parts of the binary to WebAssembly on during the emulation
of the binary.
For the MOS 6502 platform in particular, we also examined the concept of self-
modifying code and how to emulate that. We found that for pure interpretation, this
caused no problems, but for the cached strategies (including the hybrid strategies)
this required special treatment, since the compiled or cached binary could change
during run-time. We developed special detection and handling of self-modifying code
to ensure that all emulation strategies worked correctly for an arbitrary source binary.
For both platforms, we investigated how to validate the correctness of the emula-
tor, in particular, how to ensure that the individual instruction emulation functions
are correctly implemented. To do this, we examine two different strategies: direct
implementation and validation via exhaustive test cases and implementation via an
instruction specification language.
For the final evaluation of the performance of the emulation platform we found
significant speed-ups for the hybrid strategies when the test case ran long enough to
win back the compilation overhead. The exception being self-modifying code, where
the hybrid strategies suffered a large penalty due to repeated recompilation of the
==PAGE:82==
72
7 Conclusion
changed code with little or no change to take advantage of the compiled code.
In the discussion we found that while the current state of the WebAssembly plat-
form allowed us to build an emulation framework, some aspects of the platform worked
against the performance of the emulator. In particular, the lack of granularity in com-
pilation, lack of threading (for parallel compilation) and lack of support for arbitrary
control flow.
Solutions to all three challenges are on the roadmap for future We-
bAssembly platforms, though, and we can thus expect the platform to become a
more suitable target for an emulation platform in the future.
==PAGE:83==
APPENDIX A
Appendix A - 6502
addressing modes
This appendix lists the addressing mode of the 6502 processor [MOS76].
Accumulator
OPC A.
This addressing mode is implicit to an opcode and uses the A register as the
operand.
Absolute
OPC $HHLL.
This addressing mode uses an absolute address as the operand. The address is
given by two bytes (page and offset).
Absolute, X-indexed
OPC $HHLL, x.
This addressing mode uses an absolute address, incremented by the value of the
X register. The addition is performed with carry and do carry over to the next page,
if the offset exceeds FF.
Absolute, Y-indexed
OPC $HHLL, y.
This addressing mode is identical to the x-indexed variant, but uses the Y register
instead.
Immediate
OPC #$LL.
This addressing mode uses the value immediate byte given as the operand.
Indirect
OPC ($HHLL).
This addressing mode uses loads the two bytes stored at the given address first
(HHLL and HHLL + 1); this address is then the absolute address of the operand.
Indirect, X-indexed
OPC ($LL,x).
This addressing mode first add the X register to the address given. If the result
overflows, only the low byte is used. This creates a zero-page address (00LL) - this
address is then used as an indirect address.
==PAGE:84==
74
A Appendix A - 6502 addressing modes
Indirect, Y-indexed
OPC ($LL),y.
This addressing mode first loads the value at the zero page as an indirect address
(00LL) and then adds the Y register. This address is then used an absolute address.
Relative
OPC $BB.
This addressing mode is used exclusively for branching. It calculates a new PC
value by adding the relative byte given to the current PC. The relative byte is given
as a signed integer in two’s complement.
Zero-page
OPC $LL.
Like absolute addressing, but on the zero-page: 00LL
Zero-page, X-indexed
OPC $LL, x.
A zero-page, incremented by the X register. The result is not allowed to overflow
and thus only the low byte of the result is used.
Zero-page, Y-indexed
OPC $LL, y.
Like the X-index variant, but uses the Y register instead.
==PAGE:85==
APPENDIX B
Appendix B - Tool
output
This appendix lists a number of example programs and outputs from the WebAssem-
bly tools, as referenced in the thesis.
B.1
Emscripten
B.1.1
Hello World
The ”Hello, world!” program:
1 #include <stdio.h>
2 int main() {
3
printf("Hello, world!\n");
4
return 0;
5 }
Listing B.1: Hello.c.
The program is compiled with the command: emcc.bat hello.c -Os -s WASM=1
-o hello.html -g.
The options used are:
-Os : Like LLVMs -O3, but with special Emscripten options to reduce code size.
-s WASM=1 : The option to output WebAssembly rather than asm.js
-g : Output a text-version of the WebAssembly module in addition to the binary
1 (module
2
(type $FUNCSIG$iiii (func (param i32 i32 i32) (result i32)))
3
(type $FUNCSIG$ii (func (param i32) (result i32)))
4
(type $FUNCSIG$vii (func (param i32 i32)))
5
(type $FUNCSIG$vi (func (param i32)))
6
(type $FUNCSIG$i (func (result i32)))
7
(type $FUNCSIG$iii (func (param i32 i32) (result i32)))
==PAGE:86==
76
B Appendix B - Tool output
8
(type $FUNCSIG$v (func))
9
(import "env" "DYNAMICTOP_PTR" (global $DYNAMICTOP_PTR$asm2wasm$import i32)
)
10
(import "env" "STACKTOP" (global $STACKTOP$asm2wasm$import i32))
11
(import "env" "STACK_MAX" (global $STACK_MAX$asm2wasm$import i32))
12
(import "env" "abort" (func $abort (param i32)))
13
(import "env" "enlargeMemory" (func $enlargeMemory (result i32)))
14
(import "env" "getTotalMemory" (func $getTotalMemory (result i32)))
15
(import "env" "abortOnCannotGrowMemory" (func $abortOnCannotGrowMemory (
result i32)))
16
(import "env" "___lock" (func $___lock (param i32)))
17
(import "env" "___syscall6" (func $___syscall6 (param i32 i32) (result i32)
))
18
(import "env" "___setErrNo" (func $___setErrNo (param i32)))
19
(import "env" "_abort" (func $_abort))
20
(import "env" "___syscall140" (func $___syscall140 (param i32 i32) (result
i32)))
21
(import "env" "_emscripten_memcpy_big" (func $_emscripten_memcpy_big (param
i32 i32 i32) (result i32)))
22
(import "env" "___syscall54" (func $___syscall54 (param i32 i32) (result
i32)))
23
(import "env" "___unlock" (func $___unlock (param i32)))
24
(import "env" "___syscall146" (func $___syscall146 (param i32 i32) (result
i32)))
25
(import "env" "memory" (memory $0 256 256))
26
(import "env" "table" (table 6 6 anyfunc))
27
(import "env" "memoryBase" (global $memoryBase i32))
28
(import "env" "tableBase" (global $tableBase i32))
29
(global $DYNAMICTOP_PTR (mut i32) (get_global
$DYNAMICTOP_PTR$asm2wasm$import))
30
(global $STACKTOP (mut i32) (get_global $STACKTOP$asm2wasm$import))
31
(global $STACK_MAX (mut i32) (get_global $STACK_MAX$asm2wasm$import))
32
(global $__THREW__ (mut i32) (i32.const 0))
33
(global $threwValue (mut i32) (i32.const 0))
34
(global $tempRet0 (mut i32) (i32.const 0))
35
(elem (get_global $tableBase) $b0 $___stdio_close $b1 $___stdout_write
$___stdio_seek $___stdio_write)
36
(data (i32.const 1212) "\b0\05")
37
(data (i32.const 1268) "\f8\04\00\00\05")
38
(data (i32.const 1284) "\01")
39
(data (i32.const 1308) "\01\00\00\00\02\00\00\00\cc\07\00\00\00\04")
40
(data (i32.const 1332) "\01")
41
(data (i32.const 1347) "\n\ff\ff\ff\ff")
42
(data (i32.const 1396) "\f8\04\00\00Hello, world!")
43
(export "_malloc" (func $_malloc))
44
(export "getTempRet0" (func $getTempRet0))
45
(export "_free" (func $_free))
46
(export "_main" (func $_main))
47
(export "setTempRet0" (func $setTempRet0))
48
(export "establishStackSpace" (func $establishStackSpace))
49
(export "stackSave" (func $stackSave))
50
(export "_memset" (func $_memset))
51
(export "_sbrk" (func $_sbrk))
52
(export "_emscripten_get_global_libc" (func $_emscripten_get_global_libc))
53
(export "_memcpy" (func $_memcpy))
==PAGE:87==
B.1 Emscripten
77
54
(export "stackAlloc" (func $stackAlloc))
55
(export "setThrew" (func $setThrew))
56
(export "_fflush" (func $_fflush))
57
(export "stackRestore" (func $stackRestore))
58
(export "___errno_location" (func $___errno_location))
59
(export "runPostSets" (func $runPostSets))
60
(export "dynCall_ii" (func $dynCall_ii))
61
(export "dynCall_iiii" (func $dynCall_iiii))
62
... 9577 lines of function code omitted
63 )
Listing B.2: Hello.wast (header only).
B.1.2
Switch
The current compilation strategies of Emscripten are not always well adapted to
WebAssembly. Consider the following snippet of a switch statement (with side effects
to avoid optimizing the cases away)
1 int a = argc;
2 int retVal = 0;
3 int sideEffect = 0;
4 switch(a){
5
case 0:
6
retVal = 42;
7
sideEffect ++;
8
break;
9
case 10:
10
retVal = 43;
11
sideEffect --;
12
break;
13
case 100:
14
retVal = 13;
15
sideEffect -=10;
16
break;
17
18
case 1000:
19
retVal = 13;
20
sideEffect -=10;
21
break;
22
default:
23
retVal = -1;
24
sideEffect = 0;
25
break;
26 }
Listing B.3: Switch statement snippet with huge gaps in the case values.
1 (block $switch i32
2
(block $switch-default
3
(block $switch-case2
4
(block $switch-case1
==PAGE:88==
78
B Appendix B - Tool output
5
(block $switch-case0
6
(block $switch-case
7
(br_table $switch-case $switch-default $switch-default $switch-
default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch
-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-case0 $switch-
default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch
-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-
default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch
-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-
default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch
-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-
default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch
-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-
default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch
-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-
default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch
-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-case1 $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-
default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch
-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-
default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch
-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-
default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch
-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-
default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch
-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-
default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch
-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-
default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch
-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-
==PAGE:89==
B.1 Emscripten
79
default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch
-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-
default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch
-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-
default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch
-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-
default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch
-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-
default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch
-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-
default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch
-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-
default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch
-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-
default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch
-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-
default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch
-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-
default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch
-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-
default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch
-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-
default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch
-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-
default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch
-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-
default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch
-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
==PAGE:90==
80
B Appendix B - Tool output
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-
default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch
-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-
default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch
-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-
default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch
-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-
default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch
-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-
default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch
-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-
default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch
-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-
default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch
-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-
default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch
-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-
default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch
-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-
default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch
-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-
default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch
-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-
default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch
-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-
default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch
-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-
default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch
-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
==PAGE:91==
B.1 Emscripten
81
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-
default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch
-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-
default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch
-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-
default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch
-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-
default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch
-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-
default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch
-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-
default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch
-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-
default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch
-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-
default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch
-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-
default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch
-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-
default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch
-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-
default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch
-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-
default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch
-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-
default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch
-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-
default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch
==PAGE:92==
82
B Appendix B - Tool output
-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-
default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch
-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-
default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch
-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-
default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch
-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-
default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch
-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-
default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch
-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-
default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch
-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-
default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch
-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-
default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch
-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-
default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch
-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-
default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch
-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-
default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch
-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default
$switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-
default $switch-default $switch-default $switch-default $switch
-default $switch-default $switch-case2 $switch-default
8
(get_local $0)
9
)
10
)
11
(set_local $1
12
(i32.const 1)
13
)
==PAGE:93==
B.1 Emscripten
83
14
(br $switch
15
(i32.const 42)
16
)
17
)
18
(set_local $1
19
(i32.const -1)
20
)
21
(br $switch
22
(i32.const 43)
23
)
24
)
25
(set_local $1
26
(i32.const -10)
27
)
28
(br $switch
29
(i32.const 13)
30
)
31
)
32
(set_local $1
33
(i32.const -10)
34
)
35
(br $switch
36
(i32.const 13)
37
)
38
)
39
(set_local $1
40
(i32.const 0)
41
)
42
(i32.const -1)
43
)
Listing B.4: Corresponding WebAssembly output.
==PAGE:94==
84
B Appendix B - Tool output
B.2
Binaryen
B.2.1
Binary output
Consider a minimal WebAssembly, where all required parts are imported from the
outside environment:
1 (module
2
(type $0 (func (result i32)))
3
(import "env" "memory" (memory $0 256 256))
4
(import "env" "table" (table 6 6 anyfunc))
5
(import "env" "memoryBase" (global $memoryBase i32))
6
(import "env" "tableBase" (global $tableBase i32))
7
(export "main" (func $main))
8
(func $main (result i32)
9
(return (i32.const 42))
10
)
11 )
Listing B.5: Minimal WebAssembly module (minimal.wast).
If we compile this with the Binaryen assembler: wasm-as minimal.wast and load
the result into a hex editor we get the following:
Figure B.1: The byte content of the produced WebAssembly binary.
Two byte sections are highlighted:
• Right after the header ”.asm” and the version byte value 0x01, we get three
empty bytes. That is an optional section (id 0x00) with an empty name (0x00
length) and an empty payload (0x00).
• The payload length of the type section is five bytes. This is encoded as a variable
length integer - presumably specified like this to avoid wasting space for small
integers. Instead, the Binaryen tool uses the maximum number of bytes: the
value 0x05 is encoded as 0x85 0x80 0x80 0x80 0x00. This pattern is repeated
is many places in the binary.
==PAGE:95==
Bibliography
[Aba+09]
Martı́n Abadi et al. “Control-flow integrity principles, implementations,
and applications”. In: ACM Trans. Inf. Syst. Secur. 13.1 (2009), 4:1–4:40.
doi: 10.1145/1609956.1609960. url: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/
1609956.1609960.
[Ala17]
Alastair Reid. ARM Releases Machine Readable Architecture Specifica-
tion. https://alastairreid.github.io/alastairreid.github.io/
ARM-v8a-xml-release/. Accessed: 2017-04-23. 2017.
[All70]
Frances E. Allen. “Control Flow Analysis”. In: SIGPLAN Notices 5.june
(1970), pages 1–19.
[ARM10]
ARM Limited. ARMv7-M Architecture. Reference Manual. ARM Lim-
ited., 2010.
[ASU86]
Alfred V. Aho, Ravi Sethi, and Jeffrey D. Ullman. Compilers: Princi-
ples, Techniques, and Tools. Addison-Wesley series in computer science /
World student series edition. Addison-Wesley, 1986. isbn: 0-201-10088-6.
url: http://www.worldcat.org/oclc/12285707.
[Böh+11]
Igor Böhm et al. “Generalized just-in-time trace compilation using a par-
allel task farm in a dynamic binary translator”. In: ACM SIGPLAN No-
tices. Volume 46. 6. ACM. 2011, pages 74–85.
[Cab+12]
Juan Caballero et al. “Undangle: early detection of dangling pointers in
use-after-free and double-free vulnerabilities”. In: International Sympo-
sium on Software Testing and Analysis, ISSTA 2012, Minneapolis, MN,
USA, July 15-20, 2012. 2012, pages 133–143. doi: 10.1145/2338965.
2336769. url: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2338965.2336769.
[Coc70]
John Cocke. “Global common subexpression elimination”. In: SIGPLAN
Notices 5.june (1970), pages 20–24.
[Cor+09]
Thomas H. Cormen et al. Introduction to Algorithms, 3rd Edition. MIT
Press, 2009. isbn: 978-0-262-03384-8. url: http://mitpress.mit.edu/
books/introduction-algorithms.
[Cow+00]
Crispin Cowan et al. “Buffer overflows: Attacks and defenses for the vul-
nerability of the decade”. In: DARPA Information Survivability Confer-
ence and Exposition, 2000. DISCEX’00. Proceedings. Volume 2. IEEE.
2000, pages 119–129.
==PAGE:96==
86
Bibliography
[ECM11]
ECMA International. ECMAScript Language Specification. https : / /
www.ecma-international.org/publications/files/ECMA-ST/Ecma-
262.pdf. Accessed: 2017-06-08. ECMA International, June 2011.
[Ems17]
Emscripten Constributors. Main - Emscripten 1.37.10 documentation.
http://kripken.github.io/emscripten-site/. Accessed: 2017-05-23.
2017.
[FGP07]
Michael Franz, Andreas Gal, and Christian W. Probst. “Automatic gener-
ation of machine emulators: Efficient synthesis of robust virtual machines
for legacy software migration”. In: Software Engineering 2007, Fachta-
gung des GI-Fachbereichs Softwaretechnik, 27.-30.3.2007 in Hamburg.
2007, pages 83–94. url: http://subs.emis.de/LNI/Proceedings/
Proceedings105/article1464.html.
[Fle+10]
Andrea Flexeder et al. “Interprocedural Control Flow Reconstruction”. In:
Proceedings of the 8th Asian Conference on Programming Languages and
Systems. APLAS’10. Shanghai, China: Springer-Verlag, 2010, pages 188–
203. url: http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1947873.1947892.
[HCU91]
Urs Hölzle, Craig Chambers, and David Ungar. “Optimizing Dynamically-
Typed Object-Oriented Languages With Polymorphic Inline Caches”. In:
ECOOP’91 European Conference on Object-Oriented Programming, Geneva,
Switzerland, July 15-19, 1991, Proceedings. 1991, pages 21–38. doi: 10.
1007/BFb0057013. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/BFb0057013.
[HU72]
Matthew S. Hecht and Jeffrey D. Ullman. “Flow Graph Reducibility”. In:
SIAM J. Comput. 1.2 (1972), pages 188–202. doi: 10.1137/0201014.
url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1137/0201014.
[ICT17]
ICT Data and Statistics Division. ICT Facts and Figures 2016. http:
//www.itu.int/en/ITU-D/Statistics/Pages/facts/default.aspx.
Accessed: 2017-05-23. 2017.
[Kla17]
Klaus2m5. Klaus2m5/6502_65C02_functional_tests. https://github.
com/Klaus2m5/6502_65C02_functional_tests. Accessed: 2017-04-20.
2017.
[LA04]
Chris Lattner and Vikram Adve. “LLVM: A Compilation Framework
for Lifelong Program Analysis & Transformation”. In: Proceedings of the
2004 International Symposium on Code Generation and Optimization
(CGO’04). Palo Alto, California, March 2004.
[Mbo17]
Mborgbrant. mborgbrant/c64js. https : / / github . com / mborgbrant /
c64js. Accessed: 2017-04-20. 2017.
[MOS76]
MOS TECHNOLOGY INC. MCS6500 MICROCOMPUTER FAMILY.
PROGRAMMING MANUAL. MOS TECHNOLOGY INC, 1976.
[Moz14]
Mozilla Inc. asm.js - Working Draft. http://asmjs.org/spec/latest/.
Accessed: 2017-05-10. 2014.
==PAGE:97==
Bibliography
87
[Net17]
NetMarketShare. Browser Market Share. https://www.netmarketshare.
com/browser-market-share.aspx. Accessed: 2017-05-23. 2017.
[NNH99]
Flemming Nielson, Hanne Riis Nielson, and Chris Hankin. Principles of
program analysis. Springer, 1999. isbn: 978-3-540-65410-0. doi: 10.1007/
978-3-662-03811-6. url: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-662-
03811-6.
[PR12]
Marco Prandini and Marco Ramilli. “Return-Oriented Programming”. In:
IEEE Security & Privacy 10.6 (2012), pages 84–87. doi: 10.1109/MSP.
2012.152. url: https://doi.org/10.1109/MSP.2012.152.
[Pro02]
Mark Probst. “Dynamic binary translation”. In: UKUUG Linux Devel-
oper’s Conference. Volume 2002. sn. 2002.
[Rei17]
Alastair Reid. “Trustworthy Specifications of ARM v8-A and v8-M Sys-
tem Level Architecture”. In: (2017). url: https://alastairreid.github.
io/papers/fmcad2016-trustworthy.pdf.
[Ski17]
Skilldrick. Easy 6502 by skilldrick. https://skilldrick.github.io/
easy6502/. Accessed: 2017-04-20. 2017.
[Tar73]
Robert Endre Tarjan. “Testing Flow Graph Reducibility”. In: Proceedings
of the 5th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, April 30
- May 2, 1973, Austin, Texas, USA. 1973, pages 96–107. doi: 10.1145/
800125.804040. url: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/800125.804040.
[W3C17a]
W3C. Features to add after the MVP - WebAssembly. http://webassembly.
org/docs/future-features/. Accessed: 2017-06-02. 2017.
[W3C17b]
W3C. Javascript API - WebAssembly. http://webassembly.org/docs/
js/. Accessed: 2017-05-23. 2017.
[W3C17c]
W3C. Non-Web Embeddings - WebAssembly. http://webassembly.org/
docs/non-web/. Accessed: 2017-05-23. 2017.
[W3C17d]
W3C. Roadmap - WebAssembly. http://webassembly.org/roadmap/.
Accessed: 2017-05-10. 2017.
[W3C17e]
W3C. Semantics - WebAssembly. http : / / webassembly . org / docs /
semantics/. Accessed: 2017-05-10. 2017.
[Wan+10]
Qigang Wang et al. “An FPGA Based Hybrid Processor Emulation Plat-
form”. In: International Conference on Field Programmable Logic and
Applications, FPL 2010, August 31 2010 - September 2, 2010, Milano,
Italy. 2010, pages 25–30. doi: 10 . 1109 / FPL . 2010 . 16. url: https :
//doi.org/10.1109/FPL.2010.16.
[Web17]
WebAssembly. WebAssembly/binaryen. https://github.com/WebAssembly/
binaryen. Accessed: 2017-04-20. 2017.
==PAGE:98==
88
Bibliography
[Zak11]
Alon Zakai. “Emscripten: an LLVM-to-JavaScript compiler”. In: Compan-
ion to the 26th Annual ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Object-Oriented
Programming, Systems, Languages, and Applications, OOPSLA 2011,
part of SPLASH 2011, Portland, OR, USA, October 22 - 27, 2011. 2011,
pages 301–312. doi: 10.1145/2048147.2048224. url: http://doi.acm.
org/10.1145/2048147.2048224.
