==PAGE:1==
Deep learning for prediction of
hospitalization of dialysis patients
Niklas Hansson
Kongens Lyngby 2017
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary
In this thesis the author have applied deep learning techniques in order to predict
the hospitalization of dialysis patients. The goal was to predict if a patient will
be hospitalized within the next 30 days. The data set consists of several records
where the main data used has been collected form a multivariate time series
based upon measurements during the dialysis session. Dialysis is a vital treat-
ment for patients with reduced kidney function and today over 670 000 patients
in the US need dialysis treatment to survive. Dialysis is usually received three
times a week during a 3-4 hour session where the blood is cleaned outside the
body. The patients are frequently hospitalized, resulting in suﬀering and large
costs. Predicting the hospitalizations, preventive actions can be taken, suﬀering
reduced and resources used more eﬃciently.
As reference models a Random
forest model and a k-Nearest neighbor model were implemented. In terms of
neural networks, three diﬀerent types of models were built and evaluated, a feed-
forward neural network; a recurrent neural network and a convolutional neural
network. The thesis was conducted in cooperation with Lytics Health AB, in
Malmö, Sweden. Deep learning was successfully implemented, and for the neural
networks the best performance in terms of area under the receiver operational
characteristic curve was achieved with a feedforward neural network, with AUC
of 0.689. The best performance was achieved by the Random forest model with
an area under the receiver operation characteristics curve of 0.692.
Keywords: Deep learning, Machine learning, Dialysis
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at DTU Compute in fulﬁllment of the requirements
for acquiring an M.Sc. in Electrical engineering. The thesis was conducted in
collaboration with Lytics Health AB, in Malmö, Sweden. The thesis have been
supervised by Prof. Ole Winther at DTU COMPUTE, Institut for Matematik og
Computer Science and Dr. Fredrik Ståhl at Lytics Health AB, Malmö, Sweden.
Lyngby, 23-June-2017
Niklas Hansson
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisors Prof. Ole Winther at DTU COMPUTE
and Dr. Fredrik Ståhl at Lytics for their help and feedback. I would also like
to thank all the people working at Lytics for the opportunity and the warm
welcome. A special thanks to Erik Gillsbro and Mattias Albinsson for all the
lunch break walks and feedback. I would also like to thank Filip Thor helping
with proof reading and the editorial feedback. Last but not least, I would also
like to thank my family and friends for their support.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Summary
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Outline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Theory
5
2.1
Renal failure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Dialysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Accuracy metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
Reference methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.4.1
Random forest
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.4.2
k-Nearest Neighbors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.5
Deep learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.5.1
Neural networks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.5.2
Backpopagation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.5.3
Optimization techniques . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.5.4
Gradient descent variants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.5.5
Convolutional neural networks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.5.6
Recurrent neural networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
2.6
Regularisation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
2.6.1
Dropout . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
2.6.2
Batch-normalisation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
2.6.3
Early stopping
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
2.6.4
L2 Parameter Regularization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
==PAGE:10==
viii
CONTENTS
2.7
Padding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
2.8
Hyper parameter optimisation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
2.8.1
Hyperopt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
2.9
Related work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
3
Data
43
3.1
Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
3.2
Pre-processing and standardization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
4
Methods
53
4.1
Pipeline, feature extraction and feature generation . . . . . . . .
53
4.2
Approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
4.3
Developed models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
4.3.1
Random forest
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
4.3.2
kNN . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
4.3.3
Feedforward neural network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
4.3.4
Convolutional neural network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
4.3.5
RNN models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
5
Results
65
6
Discussion
73
6.1
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
7
Conclusion
79
Appendices
81
A Rough estimation of signiﬁcance
83
B Receiver operation characteristics curves
85
C RNN model without early stopping
87
D Results for alternative feedforward model
89
E Feature importance for Random forest
91
Bibliography
103
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 1
Introduction
In health care large amount of data is collected but its usage is not always
optimal. Utilizing technologies as machine learning and artiﬁcial intelligence
could make improvements in the use of data for diagnosis accuracy, tailor-make
treatments and in the long run replace work performed by clinicians [ESM17].
The development of intelligent systems within health care is related to the de-
velopment of electronic health records (EHR) and the digitization of the health
care.
The development of EHR has increased nine times between 2008 and
2015 in the US. By digitizing the health records the expectations is to achieve
safer, more intelligent, eﬃcient, and cost eﬃcient health care solutions [JH17].
Machine learning and artiﬁcial intelligence have made promising steps showing
that it could be an key component in this development. The health care analyst,
IDC predict that by 2018, 30 % of the health care providers will use cognitive
analytics on health care data [ESM17].
Deep learning has been introduced with great success delivering state of the
art performance in several ﬁelds like machine translation [BCB14] and speech
recognition [HCC+14]. Recently, machine learning have been used to predict
heart attacks with great success — beating the doctors at the task [SFW17]. In
their work predicting heart attacks, F.Wang et al [SFW17] showed that using
machine learning and neural networks they could predict hundreds of heart
attacks that doctors miss while also rising less false alarms.
==PAGE:12==
2
Introduction
In this thesis, machine learning and neural networks will be used for predicting
the hospitalization of dialysis patients. Dialysis is a medical treatment for pa-
tients with reduced kidney functions where the blood is cleaned. Hospitalization
is frequent among dialysis patients, and reducing the number of hospitalization
would result in both increased life quality and reduced cost [Jaa17].
1.1
Problem
For patients with reduced or malfunctioning kidneys, dialysis is a vital treatment
where the cleaning of the blood is done artiﬁcially outside the body. Dialysis is
an expensive medical treatment where a lot of the patients continuously have to
be hospitalized due to worsening conditions and sequelae. These unscheduled
hospitalization is very expansive and if prevented, the life quality of the patients
could be improved, and the cost of the health care could be reduced. An average
hospitalization for hemodialysis patients is ∼2700$ per day according to the
Centers for dialysis Care in the US. In 2013, 117 162 new cases of end stage
renal disease (end stage renal disease is deﬁned as when dialysis is needed for
survival) were reported in the US [S0216]. The number of patients that received
treatment for end stage renal disease in the US was in the end of 2014, 678
33, a number that is increasing due to falling mortality rates [S0216]. In this
thesis deep learning and neural networks will be used in order to predict if a
patient will be hospitalized within 30 days. The thesis is conducted together
with Lytics. Lytics is a start up focusing on artiﬁcial intelligence and machine
learning for health care. They have been working with the data and the problem
over a longer period of time. However previous investigation have not involved
sequential methods or neural network which is the main goal of this thesis to
investigate.
In theory sequential methods should suit the problem very well
since the data is a multivariate time series and the health state of the patients
are expected to progress over time. The data that will be used is supplied by
the Centers for dialysis Care in the US which is working together with Lytics.
Previous work within health care have also found success using recurrent neural
networks [LKEW15], [AM16], [CBS15]. The goal is to predict if a patient will be
hospitalised within 30 days or not and is thus a classiﬁcation problem. 30 days
have been selected as the period in previous discussion between the doctors at
the dialysis clinics and Lytics, based upon the time needed to be able to make
additional investigation and take preventive measures.
==PAGE:13==
1.2 Outline
3
1.2
Outline
The outline of the report is the following:
• The ﬁrst chapter introduces the problem and why it is important.
• The second chapter includes the theory and background. Chapter two also
includes a background to renal failure and dialysis.
• The third chapter introduces the data and presents some basic statistics
of the data.
• The fourth chapter describes the developed models and the data pipeline.
• The ﬁfth chapter presents the results.
• The sixth chapter includes the discussion.
• The seventh chapter includes the conclusion of the master thesis.
==PAGE:14==
4
Introduction
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 2
Theory
In this chapter the background to the investigated methods, metrics, renal fail-
ure and dialysis will be presented. Related work that the author considered
relevant for the work will also be brieﬂy presented.
2.1
Renal failure
Renal failure, kidney failure or kidney insuﬃciency are medical conditions due
to malfunction of the kidneys, resulting in insuﬃcient ﬁltering of the blood.
This in turn results in toxic and harmful substances stay in the blood. Patients
suﬀering from reduced kidney functions usually also collect large amount of
water in the blood resulting in that the patients gets swollen with an elevated
blood pressure and are in general exhausted. There are several reasons for renal
failure. Some of the most common are diabetes and high blood pressure [Natb].
End-stage kidney disease is deﬁned as when dialysis is needed for survival due
to that the remaining kidney function is so severely reduced. The earlier the
kidney problems are detected, the better can they be handled —resulting in
slowing down or stopping the progression [Nata].
==PAGE:16==
6
Theory
2.2
Dialysis
Dialysis is a medical process that removes waste products and excess water from
the blood[Natb]. Dialysis treatments is essential for patients that have reduced
or completely failed kidney functions. Since the kidneys are responsible for the
cleaning of the blood and maintain the equilibrium of water and minerals in
the body this process has to be done artiﬁcially when the kidney function is
reduced by 85 to 90 %. [Natb]. Dialysis is used to control the amount of salt
and preventing water from building up in the body. Dialysis also helps with
control the blood pressure.
There are diﬀerent causes to kidney failure where some conditions can improve
over time making dialysis unnecessary after recovery. For chronic or end-stage
renal failure dialysis treatment is needed for the rest of the patients life with the
exception of transplantation where the kidney is replaced. Two types of dialysis
is available, hemodialysis and peritoneal dialysis.
Hemodialysis is a type of dialysis where the blood is cleaned outside the body
in a specially designed dialysis machine. In order to receive this treatment, a
small channel is inserted through surgery into a blood vessel which allows the
patient to be connected to the dialysis machine and the blood to be cleaned.
Hemodialysis session usually lasts for 4 hours with a frequency of 3 sessions
per week. It is possible to do Hemodialysis at home but then the frequency
of treatments is usually higher[Natb]. The treatment schedule and amount of
dialysis is set by doctors. Getting the correct amount of dialysis is critical and
studies have shown that it aﬀects hospitalization and life expectancy[Natb]. Lab
test are used to set the correct amount of dialysis which is usually done with a
frequency of once a month. According to The national Kidney Foundation, two
of the key metrics are:
• Kt/v (which should be below 1.2) K is the average blood ﬂow, t is the
dialysis time and v is the ﬂuid removed.
• URR ( which should be at least 65 ). URR is urea reduction ration.
Since the kidneys play such a critical role in the human body the loss of kidney
function also aﬀect the diet. The time needed for dialysis is aﬀected by:
• The level of kidney function
• How much ﬂuid the patient gains between the sessions
==PAGE:17==
2.3 Accuracy metrics
7
• The size of the patient, this aﬀect the amount of blood
• The type of hemodialysis
The alternative to hemodialysis is peritoneal dialysis. Peritoneal dialysis uses
a cleansing tube that is operated in to part of the abdomen and ﬁlterers the
waste products from the blood. The data set only contains patients that receives
hemodialysis.
The average life expectancy for patients receiving dialysis is 5 −10 years. How-
ever, some patients have lived for 20 to 30 years[Natb]. Depending on the type
of dialysis, the price per patient and year is up to $ 72.000 for hemodialysis and
$ 53.000 for peritoneal dialysis according to the U.S Renal Data System. The
average cost per day of hospitalization is $ 2700 according to the Centers for
dialysis Care in US. For reference it should be noted that in the U.S there are
more than 670,000 dialysis patients.
2.3
Accuracy metrics
In this section metrics for evaluation will be presented. It should be noted that
the data set is imbalanced with ≈15% positive labels and ≈85% negative
labels. This aﬀects the metrics suitable to measure performance. The most
common metrics for machine learning is accuracy, which is deﬁned as:
Accuracy = Correct classiﬁed observations
Total number of observations =
P True positive + P True negative
P Observation
(2.1)
The possible types of correct and wrong classiﬁcation for a binary classiﬁers are
illustrated by the confusion matrix, see Figure 2.1. True positive is the sequence
that where classiﬁed as positive which also is the true label. True negative are
samples that are classiﬁed as negative which also holds as true. False positive are
samples that are classiﬁed as positive but are in reality false. False negative are
the opposite of false positive and are the samples that are incorrectly classiﬁed
false.
==PAGE:18==
8
Theory
Figure 2.1: Illustration of the confusion matrix.
Accuracy doesn’t take into account the misclassiﬁcations or imbalances in the
data set. An alternative metric is the receiver operation characteristics(ROC).
ROC measures the relation between the true positive rate and the false positive
rate for varying thresholds. By looking at the distribution of the positive and
negative labels for diﬀerent thresholds, i.e probabilities, the ROC can be drawn,
see illustration in Figure 2.2. Figure 2.3 show the probability density for three
binary classiﬁers. The ﬁgures should illustrate how well separated two classes
are based up on the probability distribution.
A superior model results in a
better separation of the positive and negative labels.
The area under the ROC curve is often called the area under the curve.
A
perfect classiﬁer have an area of 1, randomly guessing gives and area of 0.5.
The area under the ROC curve will be the primary metric for evaluation of
diﬀerent methods and comparing results.
This is due to that it is a metric
well suited for imbalanced data sets and that it is the primarily used metric
for benchmark at Lytics. The area under the receiver operation characteristic
curve will be abbreviated as AUC.
==PAGE:19==
2.3 Accuracy metrics
9
Figure 2.2: Illustration of a receiver operation characteristics curve. The dot-
ted line indicates when the area under the curve is 0.5 and thus
the model performs as good as guessing.
Figure 2.3: The ﬁgure should illustrate the distribution of the data for three
classiﬁers. The distribution is plotted against the probability for a
positive label. Calculating the true positive and false positive for
diﬀerent thresholds, the ROC curve can be draw. The better the
separation of the distribution of the positive and negative labels,
the better is the classiﬁer.
==PAGE:20==
10
Theory
2.4
Reference methods
In order to compare the methods based upon neural networks, two baseline
methods from the machine learning library scikit learn in Python will be used.
These two methods, Random forest and k-Nearest Neighbors will here brieﬂy
be described.
2.4.1
Random forest
Random forest is a type of bagging method which means that it averages many
noisy but almost unbiased models and by doing so reduces the variance in the
predictions. This is done using many models of a type known as Decision trees,
hence the name Random forest. Decision trees is an algorithm which uses simple
but eﬃcient splits to partition the data in to subsets. The aim is to ﬁnd split that
have the ability to classify the data according to a set problem. The interested
reader are referred to The Elements of Statistical Learning by Hastie et al [TH16]
for further reading about Decision trees and Random forest. Random forest have
proven to give very good results with very little tuning according to Hastie et
al [TH16].
2.4.2
k-Nearest Neighbors
k-Nearest Neighbors methods uses the observations in the training closest to an
observed input, x to from a prediction ˆy. k-Nearest Neighbor methods are based
upon the assumption that input observations have the most in common with
training observation which they are closest to in space. In terms of classiﬁcation
the input observation is given the class label of the closest training target or of
a weighted sum of a group of the k closest neighbors. Closeness, the way the
distance is measured is done based on Euclidean distance. The interested reader
are referred to The Elements of Statistical Learning by Hastie et al [TH16] for
further reading about k-Nearest Neighbor methods.
2.5
Deep learning
In this section deep learning and the diﬀerent techniques used in this thesis will
be discussed and explained. Deep learning is a subcategory of machine learning
==PAGE:21==
2.5 Deep learning
11
focusing on neural networks. As indicated by the name, the models are "deep";
this is achieved by stacking units on top of each other to be able to model more
complex and abstract relations. Deep learning uses large amounts of non-linear
processing units to model complex patterns in data. In its simplest from, a
processing unit in an neural network performs the following: the input data is
multiplied with a weight, then a bias is added and ﬁnally a transfer function
is applied before the data is passed on, see Figure 2.4 (here tanh is chosen as
transfer function for the examples but it is just one of several transfer functions
that will later be described).
Figure 2.4: Illustration of a unit in a neural network. X is the input and X’
is the output of the unit
2.5.1
Neural networks
As described earlier, neural networks combine non-linear equations in order to
model data. The smallest units is often known as "units" or neurons and by
combining several a layer is built, several layers together build a network. In
Figure 2.5 a neural network is presented, the basic structure of the networks
can be described by the three layers. The input layers fed the information in to
the network. The information is fed using a simple linear equation W · x + B.
The input is feed to all neurons in the next layer, known as a hidden layer. The
layers between the input and output layers are known as hidden layers. The
input to each of the hidden units is a sum of the output from the previous layer
to the corresponding hidden unit zL
j = P
k wL
jkxL−1
k
+ bL
j , where k is a unit in
the previous layer, j is the unit in the hidden layer and L is the layer. As an
example the input to h11 in Figure 2.5 is equal to w11 · x1 + b11 + w12 · x2 +
b12 + w13 · x3 + b13 + w14 · x4 + b14. The hidden layer transforms the input using
a transfer function, this transfer function also allows the network to model non
linear behaviours.
==PAGE:22==
12
Theory
Figure 2.5: Illustration of a neural network
The commonly used transfer functions are:
tanh(x) =
2
1 + e−2x −1
(2.2)
sigmoid(a) =
1
1 + e−x
(2.3)
Relu, =
 0 for x < 0
x for x ≥0
(2.4)
For the output layer, a transfer function known as softmax function is often used.
The output from the softmax is a probability distribution. The softmax layer
looks at the other units in the layer in order to calculate the output and thus
separates itself from the other transfer functions. The ﬁrst step is to summarize
the inputs to the units as for all units the in network, oj = P
k wL
jkxL−1
k
+ bL
j ,
then the output at unit j, is equal to:
Oi =
eoi
P2
n=1 eon
(2.5)
Neural network are trained to minimize a cost function and thus to ﬁnd the best
values for the weights and biases. The cost function is set based on how good
the model performs and then the error is backpropagated through the network
==PAGE:23==
2.5 Deep learning
13
in order to adjust the parameters. This is described more thoroughly in section
2.5.2.
2.5.2
Backpopagation
The goal with neural networks is to, based upon a limited number of observa-
tions, ﬁnd a model that generalizes well to all data for a given problem. The
designer of the models sets the framework for the model by choosing the number
of units, type of units, etc, these parameters are known as hyperparamters. The
model is then fed data during which the model is trained to ﬁnd the best possible
weights based upon a loss function. This is achieved using the back propagation
algorithm, where data is fed through the model, the error calculated and then
the weights are updates in order to minimize the loss. The backpropagation
algorithm can be explained by the following ﬁve steps[Nie17a]:
• Input step: The input is feed to the network, meaning that the values of
the neurons in the input layer are put to the input vales.
• Feedforward: The activations, input values are feed through the network.
For layers l = 2, 3, ..., L the output is calculated based on zl = wlal−1 + bl
and al = σ(zl) where σ should represent the sigmoid function.
• Calculate the error in the output layer: The error is calculated based
on the δL = ∇aC ⊙σ′(zL)
• Backpropagate the error through the network The error at each
layers is calculated, l = L −1, L −2, ..., 2, δl = ((wl+1)T δl+1 ⊙σ′(zl))
• Calculate the gradient based on the error The gradient step based
on the cost is
∂C
∂wl
jk = al−1
k
δl
j and ∂C
∂bl
j = σl
j
The error is thus propagated backwards through the network and the weights
are updated. For this work the cross entropy is used as loss function:
C(w, b) = −
X
p(x) log q(x)
(2.6)
Where p(x) is the true probability and q is the predicted probability. The cross
entropy cost function is implemented in order to avoid the slow down of the
learning which can be a problem when the root mean square error is used.
==PAGE:24==
14
Theory
While training neural networks the performance is usually continuously evalu-
ated during the development process. However evaluating after each backprop-
agation step is computationally costly. Therefore the performance is usually
evaluated after the whole training data set have been feed through the network,
also known a one epoch. The data set is feed through the network several epoch
depending on the nature of the data and the network. The number of epochs
to training the neural network for can be viewed as a hyperparameter among
others.
2.5.3
Optimization techniques
Optimization within machine learning and deep learning is diﬀerent from tradi-
tional optimization in terms of that the optimization is only acting indirectly on
the performance measurement, the generalization error. For deep learning the
optimization is based on the cost of the training data but the true performance
measure(on the validations data) is expected to increase as the cost function
is minimized[GBC16]. This is diﬀerent from traditional optimisation where the
goal is to minimize the cost function itself[GBC16].
2.5.4
Gradient descent variants
Gradient descent is the standard algorithm for training neural networks[Nie].
Based on the gradient of the cost the biases and weights are updated. This
update can be done in diﬀerent ways. There are three types of gradient descent
with the diﬀerence between them in the amount of data used. Before the diﬀer-
ence between them is described gradient descent in general will be described.
The ﬁrst step of a learning algorithm is to use some from of coast function also
known as loss function. An example of a cost function is:
C(w, b) = 1
2n
i=n
X
i=0
| xi −yi |2
(2.7)
This is known as the mean square error loss function.
The goal during the
learning phase is to minimize the cost function by ﬁnding weights and biases
such that the mean square error is minimized. Gradient descent is based on the
concept of calculating the gradient and then "move in the opposite direction".
Often an analogy with ﬁnding the lowest location in a valley is used where the
==PAGE:25==
2.5 Deep learning
15
lowest point is the minimum of the cost function. Minimizing the function is
done by taking steps in the opposite direction of the gradient and thus moving
towards the minimum. The step length in the analogy is known as learning
rate in machine learning. Assuming that the cost function C is depending on n
variables, v1, v2, v3, ..., vn the change in the cost function based on a small step
= (∆v1, ∆v2, ∆v3, ...∆vm)2 is equal to:
∆C ≈∇C · ∆v,
(2.8)
where ∇C is the partial derivative of C. The gradients that is calculated through
the cost function is:
∇C ≡( ∂C
∂v1
, ..., ∂C
∂vm
)T
(2.9)
In order to calculate the change in the variables can thus be done according to
∆v = −η∇C
(2.10)
in order to minimize the cost function we should move in the opposite direction
of the gradient and thus the negative sign. η set the "length" of the step and
is commonly known as learning rate. Using these steps the weights and biases
are updated in order to move towards a minimum.
v′ = v −η∇C.
(2.11)
In the following sections 2.5.4.1, 2.5.4.2 and 2.5.4.3 three variants of gradient
descent are described. They oﬀer a trade-oﬀbetween accuracy and the compu-
tational burden.
2.5.4.1
Batch gradient descent
Batch gradient descent uses the complete training set in every update of the
weights and parameters, v′ = v −η∇C(Θ) . This gives a high accuracy but
makes the updates slow since the computational burden is high.
This also
limits the model in terms of updating the model on the go, also known as online
[Rud].
==PAGE:26==
16
Theory
2.5.4.2
Stochastic gradient descent
Stochastic gradient descent is the opposite of batch gradient descent where the
parameters are update for each training sample, v′ = v −n∇C(Θ, x(l), y(l)).
Stochastic gradient descent have the advantage that it can be used online. The
downside is that the updates have a high variance and that this causes the cost
function to ﬂuctuate.
2.5.4.3
Mini-batch gradient descent
Mini-batch gradient descent tries to combine the advantages of batch learning
with stochastic gradient descent. This is done by using mini batches with a set
of, n training examples, v′ = v−η∇C(Θ, xl:l+n, yl:l+n). This limits the variance
in the cost function. Many deep learning libraries also have implementations
that allow mini-batches optimisation very eﬃcient [Rud].
2.5.4.4
Momentum
Stochastic gradient descent have problems when the surface is signiﬁcantly
steeper in one direction [Rud16].
Stochastic gradient descent have problems
due to oscillations along the steeper slope when ﬁnding the minimum, this is
illustrated in ﬁgures 2.6 and 2.7.
Figure 2.6
Illustration of Stochastic gradient
descent with momentum. The ﬁgure
should illustrate the minimization for a
simple example.
Figure 2.7
Illustration of Stochastic gradient
descent and the minimization process.
The ﬁgure should illustrate the
minimization for a simple example.
To reduce this problem a technique known as momentum can be implemented,
which add a fraction of the update vector from the past step to the current
update.
==PAGE:27==
2.5 Deep learning
17
∆v = γ∆vt−1 + η∇C
(2.12)
v′ = v −∆v
(2.13)
The fraction of the previous update is determined by the gamma. Adding the
fraction of the previous state gives the updating function a momentum. An
analogy with a ball rolling down a hill picking up speed can be made. This
reduces oscillation and a faster convergence can be gained [Rud].
2.5.4.5
Adaptive moment estimation optimization
Adaptive moment optimization (Adam) computes individual adaptive learning
rates for diﬀerent parameters from estimates of the ﬁrst and second derivatives
of the gradients [KB14]. Adam keeps individual learning rates for each weights
and have a exponentially decay average of previous gradients. The algorithm
for Adam optimization is describe in Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1 Adam optimization as deﬁned by Kingman et al. [KB14] and
implemented in tensorﬂow. g2
t indicates the elementwise squared gt⊙gt. Default
setting in tensorﬂow and recommended by Kingman et al [IS15] is α = 0.001,
β1 = 0.9, β = 0.999 and ϵ = 10−8. All the vectors are elementwise. βt
1 and βt
2
β1 denotes β2 to the power of t
Require: α: Step size (also known as learning rate)
Require: β1,β2 ∈[0,1]: Exponential decay rate for the moment estimates
Require: f(Θ): Stochastic objective function with parameters Θ
Require: Θ0: Initial parameter vector
1: m0 ←0(Initialize the ﬁrst moment vector)
2: v0 ←0(Initialize the second moment vector)
3: t ←0(Initialize time step)
4: while Θt not converged do
5:
t ←t + 1
6:
gt ←∇Θft(Θt−1)(Get gradients with regards t stochastic objective func-
tion at timestep t)
7:
mt ←β1 · mt−1 + (1 −β1) · gt (Update biased ﬁrst moment estimate)
8:
vt ←β2 · vt−1 + (1 −β2) · g2
t
9:
ˆ
mt ←mt/(1 −βt
1)(Compute bias-corrected ﬁrst moment estimate)
10:
ˆvt ←vt/(1 −βt
2)(Compute bias corrected second raw moment estimate)
11:
Θt ←Θt−1 −α · ˆ
mt/(√ˆvt + ϵ) (Update parameters)
12: end while
13: return
==PAGE:28==
18
Theory
2.5.5
Convolutional neural networks
When the input contains spatial information, where the location of the data
observation in relation to other observations carry information convolutional
neural networks have proven successful. Feedforward neural networks treat every
observation in the same way no matter how they are related in there input
space.
Convolutional neural networks look at the spatial information of the
observed data and extract features from these data [Nie17b].
Convolutional
neural network uses three diﬀerent structural layers as basic building blocks,
convolutional layers, pooling layers and ﬂattening layers [Nie17b]. The output
after the ﬂattening layer is feed to a feedforward neural network. The diﬀerent
layers will be described in the following section. Convolutional layers use ﬁlters
to extract structural information. The convolutional ﬁlters process the input
in local areas and slide over the input, see Figure 2.8. The length of the steps
of the sliding movement is known as stride length. The output from the ﬁlters
are extracted to the hidden layers next in line in the model. The ﬁlter size are
set depending upon the structure of the data and how the data are spatially
related. An example using a three-by-three ﬁlter for a one channel input the
output from a ﬁlter is :
Hidden neuron = f(
3
X
n=0
3
X
m=0
wn,ma(j+n),(k+m) + b)
(2.14)
The function f is a transfer function, for example the sigmoid function. a is the
input from the previous layer where j and k should represent the index of the
ﬁlter location in the input layer. w is the weights of the ﬁlter and are shared
for the ﬁlter. That the weights are shared result in that each ﬁlter will look for
the same trend at diﬀerent location in the input data. Thus several ﬁlters are
needed to extract several features. The shared weights play an important role
in reducing the computational burden of the model. For a convolutional layer
several diﬀerent ﬁlter are often used. It should be noted that each ﬁlter is sliding
over all the channels simultaneously when ﬁltering the input data, see Figures
2.9. In combination with convolutional layers pooling layers are often used, these
are used to reduce the dimensionality by condensing the input. Reducing the
dimensions also reduce the computational burden and also control overﬁtting.
There are a range of diﬀerent types of pooling layers were some of the most
used are max pooling, Average pooling and L2 pooling.
Pooling layers are
similar to convolutional ﬁlter where the ﬁlter slide over a local region extracting
information to the next hidden layer. Max pooling takes the maximum input
from the previous layer as output, see Figure 2.10. Average pooling look at
==PAGE:29==
2.5 Deep learning
19
(a) Network 1
(b) Network 2
(c) Network 3
(d) Network 4
Figure 2.8: Illustration of a convolutional ﬁlter and how it slides over the observa-
tions. The ﬁlter should illustrate a 3x3 ﬁlter with a stride of one.
the average value and outputs the average as the output. L2 pooling takes the
square root of the activations in the ﬁlter region. Pooling is done for each layer
individually.
The last type of layer in a convolutional neural network is the ﬂattening layer
which ﬂattens the matrices to a one-dimensional array. This is done in order
to allow the information to be passed to a feedforward neural network. With
this set up the convolutional neural network extract features from the spatial
information in the data and then passes these features to a feedforward net-
work. In similarly with feedforward neural networks the weights and biases are
trained by back propagating the error. An example of a simple structure for
a convolutional neural network can bee seen in Figure 2.11. For the set up in
Figure 2.11 it can be noticed that the ﬂattening layer ﬂattens on all dimensions
only keeping data separated by batch. Thus the spatial information is lost.
==PAGE:30==
20
Theory
(a) Filter 1 out of 3, for a ﬁlter size of
3x3
(b) Filter 2 out of 3, for a ﬁlter size of
3x3
(c) Filter 3 out of 3, for a ﬁlter size of
3x3
Figure 2.9: Illustration of how the ﬁlters look at all the channels when predic-
tion the output to the next layers.
==PAGE:31==
2.5 Deep learning
21
Figure 2.10: Illustration of max pooling. The pooling ﬁlter has a size of 2x2,
the input dimensions is of size 6x4 and the output dimensions
are 5x3
Figure 2.11: Illustration of a simple convolutional neural network. The ﬁrst
layers is a convolutional layer with four ﬁlters. Secondly there
is a pooling layer reducing the dimensions. Lastly the hidden
layer is ﬂatten in order for the extracted features to be feed to a
feedforward neural network.
==PAGE:32==
22
Theory
2.5.6
Recurrent neural networks
Recurrent neural networks(RNN) is a type of neural network specialised on
working with sequential data i.e (x(1), x(2), ..., x(n))[GBC16]. Recurrent neural
networks relay heavily on weight sharing in order to limit the computational
burden. The weight sharing allows the model to be dynamic in terms of length
of the sequences. This is of key importance because the weight sharing allows for
sequences of diﬀerent length than those trained on can be used for inference due
to the shared weights[GBC16]. To illustrate and demonstrated how recurrent
neural networks work an example will in this section be unfolded and described.
Assume a dynamic system
st = f(st−1; θ)
(2.15)
The equation for the system is recurrent since state s at time t depend on that
state at t −1. With a ﬁnit number of steps a networks can be unrolled using
the equation for the systems in t-1 steps. Thus unrolling a network having the
dynamic system equal to equation 2.15 at t = 3 is thus equal to:
s(3) = f(s(2); θ) = f(f(s(1); θ); θ)
(2.16)
Completely unfolding the network result in a expression that does not involve
recurrence.
The same behavior is used in RNN but where a external signal
drives the system. h(t) = f(h(t−1), xt; θ) is usually used for RNN[GBC16]. In
this case the information about the previous states in the network is compressed
into the ht which is known as the hidden state. In order to make prediction
further layers are introduced on top of the hidden state, see Figure 2.12.
Training the network with the goal to predict a future state based on the se-
quence information the network learns how to compress the sequence into a losy
hidden state h. This hidden state is then a summary of the most important
information related to make the prediction. To summarise the RNN maps the
input sequence (x0, x1, ..., xt−1, xt) of a arbitrary length in to a vector of ﬁxed
size h. It should be noted that, t don’t have to be time steps but any binary
step in a sequence.
In Figure 2.12 the unfolded network is presented,with the size of the network is
depending on the number of sequence steps. In a similar way as in equation 2.16
the unfolding of recurrence after time step t can be done. Here the unfolding is
represent by a function gt.
ht = g(t)(x(t), x(t−1), ..., x(0)) = f(h(t−1), x(t); θ)
(2.17)
==PAGE:33==
2.5 Deep learning
23
Figure 2.12: Figure to illustrate a Recurrent neural network and how it can
be unfolded. The weight sharing is also illustrated in from of the
weight matrices U, V and W which are shared in the unit. x is
the input, h is the hidden state, o is the output(prediction), L is
the loss and y is the true label. Thus the output at each sequence
step is depending on the hidden state of the previous step and the
input at the current step. The inputs are eﬀected by the weights
and the transfer function. For the sequence labeling softmax is
used on the output from the hidden state to get the probabilities
of the class labels. This ﬁgure is a recreation of ﬁgure 10.3 in
[GBC16], chapter 10.
The input at each sequence, concerning previous sequence steps is constant and
is not aﬀected by the length of the sequence. Thus the network can handle
sequences of varying length since the same transition functions and parameters
are used at every time step.
Recurrent neural networks can be designed in
several diﬀerent ways, see Figure 2.13, some of the design patterns are:
• At each time step the network produces an output, the state of the hidden
unit is connected to the next sequence step. This is known as many-to
many.
• At each time step the network produce an output and the output is for-
warded as an input to the next sequence step. When all the input sequence
steps are taken the model in order returns the same number of outputs as
==PAGE:34==
24
Theory
input sequence steps. This is known as many-to-many.
• An sequence is read and the information is passed between the hidden
units, the entire sequence then produce a single output. This is known as
many-to-one.
Figure 2.13: Structures of RNN illustrated. The illustration to the left is the
more traditional many to many while the second illustration from
the right side is a encoder decoder setup. The set up illustrating
many to one is furthest to the right. Figure inspired by Andrej
Karpathy [Kar15]
An example of an RNN in its folded and unfolded set up is illustrated in Figure
2.12, the ﬁgure is a recreation of ﬁgure 10.3 in [GBC16], Chapter 10. In Figure
2.12, o should represent the output at each time step. A softmax function can be
implemented on the output thus assuming that the output is the unnormalised
log probabilities. The loss is represented by L where the predicted sequence
label and the true sequence label is compared. The U weight matrix is used
in the connection between input and hidden state, W in the hidden to hidden
connections, V matrix is used in the transfer from the hidden states to the
output.
The following equations should mathematically demonstrate the functions of
the RNN in Figure 2.12:
==PAGE:35==
2.5 Deep learning
25
a(t) = b + Wh(t−1) + Ux(t)
(2.18)
h(t) = tanh(a(t))
(2.19)
o(t) = c + Vh(t)
(2.20)
ˆy(t) = softmax(o(t))
(2.21)
Figure 2.14: a(t) takes the input to the hidden states and apply the linear
transformation on the data. The weights W and U are trained
during the training process. A non linear transformation function
is then applied on the state. The output is the calculated by
doing a linear transformation of the hidden state h(t) before the
softmax function is applied.
In the example demonstrated in Figure 2.12 an input sequence is mapped to
an output sequence of equal length. The losses can be calculated based on the
miss labeling for all time steps compared to the correct labels. The loss can be
evaluated in diﬀerent ways but for this work the cross entropy loss function will
be used to avoid the slow down in the learning. The cross entropy loss function
makes the neural network learn faster when the initial weights are far from the
optimal values[Nie].
2.5.6.1
Back propagation through time
The back propagation for RNN is diﬀerent compared to feedforward neural
networks due to the weight sharing and folding over time. The gradients at each
sequence step is summed up in order to get the gradient of the weights. The
gradients are as for forwards neural networks calculated using the derivatives
based on the chain rule.
Based on Figure 2.15 and equations 2.21 the error at time t is used as example,
Et, where Et = −yt · logˆyt(the cross entropy loss function).
∂Et
∂V = ∂Et
∂ˆyt
∂ˆyt
∂V
(2.22)
Equation 2.22 illustrate the gradient for the weight V. V is only dependent
on the true target, predicted value and the state ht. This is the same for the
bias c. For the weights W,U and b this is diﬀerent since they depend on the
previous hidden state.
==PAGE:36==
26
Theory
Figure 2.15: Simple illustration of a RNN E is the error at time t, h is the
hidden state and x is the output.
Figure 2.16: Illustration of a RNN, E is the error at time t, h is the hidden
state and x is the output.
∂Et
∂W = ∂Et
∂ˆyt
∂ˆyt
∂ht
∂ht
∂W
(2.23)
where ht is, ht = tanh(b+Wh(t−1)+Ux(t)), this is illustrated in Figure 2.16. It
should be noted that the basic idea and approach is the same as for feedforward
neural networks. The diﬀerence is due to the design of RNN:s and that the
==PAGE:37==
2.5 Deep learning
27
backpropagation have to be adjusted for this. The key diﬀerence is that the
gradient are summarized to ﬁnd the ﬁnal gradient to update the weights at each
sequence step.
2.5.6.2
Vanishing and exploding gradient
When training RNN two of the most common problems is the vanishing and
exploding gradient problems. When training deep neural networks the earlier
layers have a tendency to learn faster than neurons in the later layers. In this
case, earlier refers to closer to the output layers of the neural network, see
Figure 2.17.
This is known as vanishing gradients due to that the gradient
in the later layers in the networks becomes very small, "vanish" during the
back propagation[Nie17c]. There can also be a problem if the gradients in the
earlier layers become very large, explode also known as exploding gradients.
Instabilities of the gradients is a common problem for all types of gradient
based learning[Nie17c]. For the learning process itself the exploding or vanishing
gradient is in itself not the biggest problem. Instead that it is that the gradient
in earlier layers is the product of the gradient in all the later layers. Thus the
weights in the network will be trained with a diﬀerent speed depending on where
they are in the network if not speciﬁc techniques are used.
Figure 2.17: Illustration of a neural network to show what "early" and "later"
refers to in the meaning of gradient instability
==PAGE:38==
28
Theory
2.5.6.3
Long Short Term Memory
Standard RNN of the type discussed in section 2.5.6 have problems to learn
long range dependencies. This has been thoroughly discussed by Bengio, et al
[BSF94]. They show that the gradient based learning methods have increasing
diﬃculty when the length dependencies to be captured by the RNN increase. A
method to solve the problem and increase the capabilities of the RNN to handle
long-term dependencies is to use Long Short Term Memory networks (LSTM).
In Figure 2.18 an unfolding of two sequence steps of RNN is illustrated. This
illustration should act as a comparison for the LSTM unit that is presented in
Figure 2.19.
Figure 2.18: Figure illustrating the most common conﬁguration of a RNN unit
unfolded for two time steps.
The structure of the LSTM units will be further described. The key features
introduced for the LSTM unit is the cell state that is illustrated in Figure 2.19
and the diﬀerent gates introduce in order to control the information stored in
the cell state. The gates controls the information that is stored. In the following
section a more through introduction of the LSTM unit and the mechanism will
be presented.
==PAGE:39==
2.5 Deep learning
29
Figure 2.19: Illustration of a LSTM unit unfolded for two time steps. The
ﬁgure illustrated how the units are connected, the cell state and
the hidden state is marked.
==PAGE:40==
30
Theory
The ﬁrst gate controls the amount of information let through from the previous
cell state, c(t−2), see Figure 2.20. The transfer function is depending on the
concatenation of the input to the state x(t−1) and the previous hidden state
h(t−2). ft = σ(Wf · [ht−1, xt] + bf). This decision layer is also known as the
forget gate layer. If the sigmoid function outputs 1 everything from the previous
hidden cell state is kept, if it outputs zero nothing of the previous cell is let
through.
The following step determines what information will be added to the cell state.
This step has two sub-parts where the ﬁrst is known as the input gate layer see
Figure 2.20. The input gate layer sets which values in the cell state the will be
updated. it controls the input gate and has the function it = σ(Wi · [ht−1, xt] +
bi). New candidates values of the cell state are calculated based on the hidden
state and the input values according to C′(t−1) = tanh(Wc · [ht−1, xt] + bc)
Figure 2.20: Illustration of the concepts of LSTM units. The ﬁrst gate and
the input gates is marked. The ﬁgure should illustrate how the
cell state is updated.
The cell states is updated based on the input gate layer and the candidate
values, it ∗C′(t−1) and thus the candidate values are scaled by the input gate
layer. Last task is to calculate the output values.
==PAGE:41==
2.5 Deep learning
31
Figure 2.21: Illustration of the concepts of LSTM units. The ﬁgure should
illustrate how the hidden state is updated based on the input,
previous hidden state and the cell state.
The output is calculated based on the cell state but ﬁltered by the input and the
hidden state, see Figure 2.21. The ﬁltering function is ot = σ(W0[ht−1, xt]+b0).
The output is calculated based on ht−1 = ot ∗tanh(C(t−1)). The output will
also be the hidden state for the next layer. Figure inspired by blog post by
Christopher Olah[Ola].
==PAGE:42==
32
Theory
2.5.6.4
Attention
LSTM have resulted in increased performance and given state of the art [KDG15].
However LSTM still have some problems dealing with long range dependencies[Bri].
Attention is a techniques that have shown promising results in improving this.
Attention allowed the networks to attend to certain part of the sequence at each
time step of when the output is generated. The model learns which part of the
sequence it should put attention to at a certain output, thus the name Atten-
tion. To generate the output, the network looks at all the states and based on
the weights representing the importance of each part of the sequence at given
time step the output is calculated.
2.6
Regularisation
The goal with deep learning and any machine learning technique is that based
on a limited set of training data ﬁt a model that generalize well. In order to do
so the model have to learn as much as possible from the data but not to much
to ﬁt the model only to the training data and thus perform worse on new data.
When the model ﬁt to well to the training data and get worse on generalisation
is known as overﬁtting. Regularisation are techniques to allow the model to
have a better generalisation performance while extracting as much information
as possible from the training data[GBC16]. Regularisation techniques have been
an important area within machine learning and deep learning[GBC16]. In this
section a selected range of methods will be discussed and explained. In Figure
2.22 an example of overﬁtting is illustrated. The data is collected during the
development of the RNN model.
==PAGE:43==
2.6 Regularisation
33
Figure 2.22: Example of overﬁtting. During the training the initial ﬁts better
to training, test and validation set but over several epochs the
model start to ﬁt to well to the training data and ﬁt worse to
the test and validation set. Thus the model is overﬁtting and
perform worse in terms of generalization. The example is taken
from the process of ﬁtting the RNN model
.
==PAGE:44==
34
Theory
2.6.1
Dropout
Dropout was ﬁrst presented in 2014 by Srivastava et al [SHK+14]. The idea be-
hind dropout is very simple yet it has shown to signiﬁcantly reduce overﬁtting[SHK+14].
The name Dropout refers to that some of the units in the neural network is
dropped out see Figure 2.6.
(a) Simple
feedforward
nerual
network.
(b) Simple
feedforward
neural
network with dropout.
Figure 2.23: The ﬁgures (a) and (b) should illustrate the eﬀect of implement-
ing dropout.
Dropout provides a approximately combination of exponentially many diﬀerent
neural network architecture.
The dropout is set by a hyper parameter that
represent the probability keeping each individual unit in the layer. Usually the
dropout probability is closer to 1 than 0.5 [SHK+14]. Applying dropout to a
neural network has the eﬀect comparable to sampling a thinned network from
the original network, see Figures 2.23a and 2.23b. Where the thinned network is
composed of the units that survived the dropout process. The neural network in
2.23a with n units (8) can be seen as a weighted combination of 2n (28) possible
thinned networks sharing weights. For each training sample one of the thinned
networks is trained. This will result in that each of the networks get trained very
rarely if ever through out the training of the network[SHK+14]. However at test
time it is not possible to test a sample on all the possible thinned networks (2n)
instead the weight are multiplied with the probability used for the dropout, thus
scaled depending on the dropout. For a traditional neural network,see Figure
2.23a the feedforward operation is as follows:
z(l+1)
i
= bl+1
i
+ Wi
l+1y(l),
(2.24)
yl+1
i
= f(zl+1
i
),
(2.25)
==PAGE:45==
2.6 Regularisation
35
Where b is the biases, W are the weights, y is the output from the previous
layer of the input to the model and f is the transfer function. implementing
dropout the feedforward, see Figure 2.23b operations becomes:
rl
j ∼Bernoulli(p),
(2.26)
y′(l) = rl ∗yl,
(2.27)
z(l+1)
i
= bl+1
i
+ Wl+1y′(l),
(2.28)
yl+1
i
= f(zl+1
i
),
(2.29)
The same notiﬁcations are used as in the previous equation with the added
parameters p which is a probability. The Bernoulli function returns 1 or 0.
2.6.2
Batch-normalisation
Batch-normalisation is a regularization technique that allows for a higher learn-
ing rate in the model and also less attention is needed for the initialization of the
weights and biases [IS15]. Using batch normalisation also reduces the need for
dropout[IS15]. According to batch normalisation for a layer with x = (x1...xd),
each dimension will be normalised to:
bx(k) = x(k) −E[xk]
p
V ar[x(k)]
.
(2.30)
The mean and the variance is calculated for each feature. Batch-normalisation
also introduces a new transfer function for each activation function x(k) accord-
ing to:
y(k) = γ(k)bx(k) + β(k).
(2.31)
Where γ, β are trainable parameters that are trained together with the rest
of the parameters in the network.
This allows the network to ﬁnd the best
distribution of the features in the network by shifting and scaling[IS15].
2.6.3
Early stopping
Early stopping is a regularisation method that is based upon the concept of
stopping the training when the model starts overﬁtting. For models with large
==PAGE:46==
36
Theory
amount of parameters it can often be observed that the training error decrease
steadily over time while the test error after a while start to increase [GBC16].
Thus a model with a better generalization error can be obtained by returning
to the earlier parameter settings. According to Goodfellow et. al [GBC16] early
stopping is probably the most common from of regularization in deep learning
due to its eﬀectiveness and simplicity. The early stopping algorithm is presented
in Algorithm 2.
Algorithm 2 Early stopping algorithm as deﬁned by GoodFellow et.al [GBC16]
1: Let n be the number of steps between evaluations.
2: Leta p be the number of times to observe worsening test set error before
giving up.
3: Let Θc be the initial parameters
4: i ←0
5: j ←0
6: v ←∞
7: Θ∗←Θ
8: i∗←i
9: while j < p do
10:
Update Θ by running the training algorithm for n steps.
11:
i ←i + n
12:
v′ ←Test set error(Θ)
13:
if v′ < v then
14:
j ←0
15:
Θ∗←Θ
16:
i∗←i
17:
v ←v′
18:
else
19:
j ←j + 1
20:
end if
21: end while
22: Best parameters are Θ∗, best number of training step is i∗
The number of epochs a neural network is trained can be viewed as a hyper
parameter and thus selecting the best number of epochs is a type of hyper
parameter optimization. However there are a signiﬁcant diﬀerences between the
number of epochs and other hyperparameters. Training a neural network several
epochs are evaluated in comparison to other hyperparameters where only one set
up is evaluated for each complete training session. Early stopping doesn’t eﬀect
the underlying learning dynamics of the model. This is sometimes a problem
for other regularization methods as weight decay(e.g L2) where care have to be
taken not to limit the network to a local minimum.
==PAGE:47==
2.7 Padding
37
2.6.4
L2 Parameter Regularization
L2 regularization is a also known as weight decay and is a regularisation method
that drives the weights closer to the origin by adding a norm penalty, Ω(Θ) =
1
2 ∗ω.The norm penalty is usually set to only penalizes the weights, Ωand leave
the biases unaﬀected [GBC16]. This is due to that leaving the biases unregu-
lazied should only induce a limited amount of variance, it has also been noted
that regularizing the biases could result in a signiﬁcant underﬁtting [GBC16].
The weight decay for the regularization should ideally be ﬁtted individually for
the diﬀerent layers, however this result in a larger search space during hyper
optimization. It is reasonable to set the same decay at all layers and thus limit
the search space [GBC16].
2.7
Padding
Recurrent neural networks can work with sequences of varying length however
Tensorﬂow cannot handle input data of varying size within each batch. In order
to solve this the sequences are padded with zeroes to have a speciﬁc length. The
output from the sequence steps where the input data is the result of padding is
discarded when the cost and accuracy is calculated. Thus the network is only
trained on the steps where true input data is feed to the network. The padding
is done in preprocessing step. The Figure below, Figure 2.24 illustrate the result
of zero padding.


[1.0, 2.1]
[1.1, 1.9]
[1.0, 2.0]
[1.1, 2.2]
[1.0, 2.0]
[1.1, 2.1]
[1.3, 2.2]
[1.0, 2.2]

=


[1.0, 2.1]
[1.1, 1.9]
[1.0, 2.0]
[0.0, 0.0]
[1.1, 2.2]
[1.0, 2.0]
[1.1, 2.1]
[1.3, 2.2]
[1.0, 2.2]
[0.0, 0.0]
[0.0, 0.0]
[0.0, 0.0]


Figure 2.24: Illustration of padding.
2.8
Hyper parameter optimisation
Machine learning models are trained based on a set hyper parameters, λ to
minimize the loss function in order to achieve the best performance. The process
of ﬁnding good values for the hyper parameters are known as hyper parameter
optimization [JB12]. Machine learning models, f are algorithms that should
ﬁnd a function that minimized the expected loss L(x; f) where x should be a
sample from the true distribution of the data, Gx. In order to achieve good
==PAGE:48==
38
Theory
performance the hyper parameters λ have to evaluated and optimized and thus
there are both a "inner" and a "other" optimization problem. L is a machine
learning model with a set of hyper parameters will be denoted A. The goal is
to minimize the generalization error by setting the best hyper parameters.
λ = argmin E(x∼Gx)(L(x; Aλ(x(train)))
(2.32)
The following equations describe how hyper parameters optimisation is handled
in practice according to Bergstra and Bengio [JB12]:
λ ≈argminλ∈Λ meanxΛxvalid L(x; A(λ)(x(train))
(2.33)
≡argminλ∈ΛΨ(λ)
(2.34)
≈argminλ∈λ1,...,λnΨ(λ)
(2.35)
The parameter optimization described in equation 2.33, 2.34, 2.35 is based upon
the use of cross-validation in order to replace an expectancy with a mean over a
validation set. Equation 2.35 is known as the hyper parameter response function
Grid search over the hyper parameters space is the most common and widespread
approach to hyper parameter optimization [JB12]. It is also the most straight
forward approach where the parameter space is evaluated according to a set pat-
tern. Research have shown that random search for neural networks outperform
grid search at ﬁnding a model that are as good or better in a small fraction
of the computational time [JB12]. Allowing random search the same computa-
tional it has proven to ﬁnd better models by searching a larger but initially less
promising space. There has also been investigations indicating that only a frac-
tion of the hyper parameters really matter for the performance. However which
parameter that matters varies between diﬀerent data sets. Random search also
poses some other advantages which are[JB12]:
• At any time the random search can be stopped and from a complete ex-
periment
• If extra computational power is available new tests can be added to old
experiments and from a new experiment
• If a single random search fails it can be abandoned with out eﬀecting the
complete experiment.
• Tests are independent of other tests and can be carried out asynchronous
==PAGE:49==
2.8 Hyper parameter optimisation
39
Recently focused on hyperparamter optimization have been put on ﬁnding bet-
ter ways of choosing the hyper parameter search based on previous searches of
the hyper parameter space. Sequential model-based optimization(SMBO) which
is also known as Bayesian optimization is a general technique for function opti-
mization that have been used for optimization of neural networks[JB13]. SMBO
where initially developed to be used for experiment design and oil exploration[JB13].
In general SMBO are used for minimizing functions that are costly to evaluate.
In comparison to other methods for minimization, as conjugated gradient de-
scent methods, SMBO uses more computational power to evaluate which set of
parameters to use for each evaluation. This is advantageous when the evalu-
ations become more and more expensive. Another advantage is that Bayesian
optimization doesn’t require derivatives. The SMBO algorithm is presented in
Algorithm 3. First step in the algorithm is to build a model ML that captures
the dependencies of the loss function L based on a hyper parameter setting λ,
see line 1. The following steps are iterated until the time is up(or number of
computations). For each iteration the ﬁrst step is to determine a promising con-
ﬁguration of the hyper parameters λ. Then the loss c is calculated for the set of
hyper parameters λ. These values are then used to update the model ML that
should capture the dependencies for the loss in relation to the hyper parame-
ters. In order to choose the next set of hyper parameters to use, an acquisition
function aML uses the predictive distribution of model ML for arbitrary hyper
parameters λ ∈Λ to quantify how useful conﬁguration λ would be. Then this
function is maximised over Λ in order to ﬁnd the most useful λ to evaluate.
This result in that the space is continuously evaluated by looking at the hyper
parameter set up that is expected to give the most information about the hyper
parameter space.
Algorithm 3 Sequential Model-Based Global Optimization
1: initialise model ML; H ←Θ
2: while Time budget have not been exceeded do
3:
λ ←candidate conﬁguration from ML.
4:
Compute the cost function, c = L(Model to optimise hyper parameters for)
5:
H ←H ∪(λ, c)
6:
Update Ml given H
7: end while
8: return λ from H with minimal c
There are several diﬀerent acquisition functions available. For this thesis hyper
parameter optimization have been done using Hyperopt [JB13].
==PAGE:50==
40
Theory
2.8.1
Hyperopt
Hyperopt is an Python library for "optimisation over awkward search spaces
with real-valued,discrete and conditional dimensions"[Hyp17].
Hyperopt was
originally developed for optimisation of hyper parameters for neural networks.
By deﬁning a objective function which should be optimised and an a search
space, Hyperopt will use the the chosen algorithm for ﬁnding the best hyper
parameters. Currently two optimisations algorithms are implemented: random
search and Tree of Parzen(TPE) estimators(Bayesian optimisation).
TPE was ﬁrst proposed by Bergsta et al [BBBK11] for hyper parameters opti-
mization. It uses tree structured Parzen estimators to model the error distribu-
tion in a non-parametric way.
2.9
Related work
An article named Learning to Diagnose with LSTM Reccurent Neural Networks
was published in 2016 by Lipton et al [LKEW15].
The authors investigate
how RNN and LSTM could be used for diagnose based on clinical medical
data. The report was based on a data set which contained 13 frequently but
irregularly sampled clinical measurements from the intensive care unit.
The
goal was to predict the diagnose out of 128 diﬀerent diagnosis. According to
the authors this was the ﬁrst article published to their knowledge about the
use of RNN and LSTM for health diagnosis on a multiclass case. The RNN
model was compare with a ﬁxed window and a set of hand engineered features.
The data was irregularly sampled, containing missing values.
The data was
down sampled to an hourly rate and the missing data was imputed. The initial
rate of sampling was not mentioned in the article. The model used was of the
type many to one where the input from all time steps was used to make a
ﬁnal prediction. However there test indicated that training the model to make
the prediction of the diagnosis at each time step was superior, the authors call
this method sequential target replication. According to there results the RNN
model outperformed a feedforward network over a sliding window. However the
diﬀerence between the sliding window approach and the RNN is below 1%. The
authors also prove that combining the recurrent neural networks and the sliding
window model increase the results. Interesting to notice is that the authors saw
improvements of using the ﬁrst 6 hours of the time series and the last 6 hours
instead of the last 12 hours for the sliding window approach.
Deep learning have also been applied to predict the health status of Parkinson’s
==PAGE:51==
2.9 Related work
41
disease [NYH15]. The investigate data was multivariate continues time series.
The data was collected in from the daily life of the patient in terms of the
movement. For the predictions an sliding window model was used. it should be
noted that the over all results of this work was very low.
In the article Using recurrent neural network models for early detection of heart
failure onset the use of neural networks for detection of heart failure was inves-
tigated [EC16]. In the work a many to one approach was used. The developed
RNN model outperformed the other methods also showing that the RNN model
became better compare to the other models with a larger window/length on the
input sequence. The predictions was based upon if heart failure was detected
within a prediction window, where prediction windows of 3 to 9 months was
investigated. For all the investigated prediction windows and observation win-
dows the RNN outperformed the other methods investigated(Logistic regression,
SVM,MLP, kNN). It should however here also be noted that the diﬀerences be-
tween the RNN and the second best models was very small below 1.6 % for all
investigated cases. They observed that longer observation windows improved
the results for all methods.
Adam et al have wirtten an article named Predicting Patient State-of-Health
using Sliding Window and Recurrent Classiﬁers which investigate using data
from intensive care units to classify the patients health status[AM16].
The
input data were a multivariate time series. In there results they report slight
improvement of using RNN compare to using feedforward neural networks on a
sliding window model on three out of four tests. The authors also mention that
combining approaches could increase the results further.
In the article Doctor AI:Predicting Clinical Events via Recurrent Neural Net-
works by E.Choi et al recurrent neural networks used for prediction based on
electronic health care records [CBS15]. The goal with the designed models and
their study was to " use longitudinal patient visit records to predict the physi-
cian diagnosis and medication order of the next visit. As a secondary goal we
predicted the time to the patients next visit." The designed models makes mul-
tiple predictions at each time step, one prediction for each of the investigated
conditions/medication categories. As input the authors uses discrete medical
codes e.g from diagnosis, medication, procedures extracted from longitudinal
patient visit records.
Longitudinal patient record is a comprehensive record
that should be based upon several records in order to give a complete picture
of the patients health background.
==PAGE:52==
42
Theory
==PAGE:53==
Chapter 3
Data
In this chapter the data will be described and some statistics of it will be pre-
sented. This chapter will give a background to the variables and how the data
is collected.
3.1
Data
The data set consists of approximately 5700 patients. The patients have been to
dialysis treatments a number of times at which measurements on the patient and
the dialysis have been collected. The patients have been treated for a diﬀerent
number of days and thus the number of dialysis treatments varies for the patients
resulting in a data set with varying sequence lengths. The sequence lengths vary
between a few sequence steps up to several hundreds. The frequency at which
the patients receive dialysis treatment is also varying. Since the patients are
usually not hospitalized, the data set is imbalanced towards patients that will
not be hospitalized within 30 days. From each dialysis treatment the following
variables are used:
• Average Blood Flow Rate - The blood ﬂow rate during the dialysis session
in ml/min.
==PAGE:54==
44
Data
• Start Sitting Pulse - The patients pulse before the dialysis session was
started in bpm.
• Liters Processed - The number of liters processed during the dialysis ses-
sion in liter.
• Time in Dialysis - The number of minutes that a patients have been con-
nected to the dialysis in minutes.
• Fluid Removed - The amount of ﬂuid removed during the dialysis session
in L.
• Patient Temp Start - The temperature of the patients at the start of the
dialysis session in Fahrenheit.
• Patient Temp End - The temperature of the patients at the end of the
dialysis session in Fahrenheit.
• Start Sitting Systolic Bp - The systolic blood pressure before the dialysis
session in mmHg.
• Start Sitting Diastolic BP - The diastolic blood pressure before the dialysis
session in mmHg.
• End Sitting Systolic BP - The systolic blood pressure at the end of the
dialysis session in mmHg.
• End Sitting Diastolic BP - The diastolic blood pressure at the end of the
dialysis session in mmHg.
In addition to the measurements from the dialysis treatment sessions there are
also 4 other records available, these are:
• Patient Schedule records
• Patient Demographic records
• Patient Hospitalisation records
• Patient List records
The Patient Schedule contains information about the dialysis schedule of the
patient. This includes the number of sessions per week the patient should receive
treatment, it also contains the schedule the patient is on i.e which weekdays
the patient receive treatment. The Patient Demographic contains information
such as age, ethnic background, and date of ﬁrst dialysis session. The Patient
==PAGE:55==
3.1 Data
45
Hospitalisation is the record of previous hospitalizations containing information
about the arrival date, stay length, reason for hospitalization and diagnose. The
Patient List contains information about the dialysis settings, clinic and where
the patient lives. The data collection process is described in Figure 3.1
Figure 3.1: Visualization of the data collected over time for a patient. Ini-
tially, records about the patient are set up. These include Patient
Schedule, Patient Demographics and Patient List. Some of the
values in these are updated during the treatment, for example the
number of treatments per week that the patient should receive.
The illustration is based upon the most common case where the
patient receive dialysis treatment three times a week. No treat-
ments are usually given at the weekends which is also indicated
in the illustration.
During the dialysis treatments data is col-
lected about the treatment and the health of the patient. During
hospitalization no data about possible dialysis treatments are re-
covered. However records about the hospitalization and diagnoses
are stored and available.
The number of treatments patients have received is varying and the distribution
is presented in Figure 3.2. The mean sequence length is 296 and the median
is 188.
Usually the patients received dialysis treatments three times a week
and thus the mean number of days that the patient been in the record is 296 ∗
7/3 ≈684 . The life expectancy is 5-10 years according to the National Kidney
Foundation [Natb] and thus the sequences are shorter than expected. There are
several reasons for the relatively short sequence lengths. One possible reason is
that the patient gets a kidney transplantation and thus doesn’t need to receive
dialysis any longer. The data is from clinics in USA and due to the privatization
of the hospitals, a change in health insurance might result in that the patients
==PAGE:56==
46
Data
are forced to change clinics and thus results in shorter sequences. Important
to notice is also that the records only go back to 2009, and that a lot of the
patients have received dialysis long before the records started.
Figure 3.2: Distribution of the number of treatment the patients have been
to.
Figure 3.3: The distribution of sequences shorted than 15 sequence steps and
there ID numbers. It should be noted that the ID:s are distributed
in ascending order for new patients.
==PAGE:57==
3.1 Data
47
The distribution of sequences shorter than 15 in relation to patient ID number
was investigated, see Figure 3.3. Patient ID is given in the order the patient
gets registered at the clinics thus the patients receiving a ID number starting
with 8xxx are the most recently submitted to dialysis. The large part of short
sequences for the patients with the highest ID number is due to that they have
note been admitted long enough to have been to more than 15 treatments.
However, it should be noted that for patients with ID:s between 4000 and 7000,
there is an over-representation of short sequences in relation to the expected
lifespan of patients. The relatively large distribution of short sequences might
be related to patients shifting health insurance and thus are forced to change
clinics. If this is the true reason for the high representation of relatively short
sequences in relation to the expected life of dialysis patients is unknown to the
author. When patients shift clinics this aﬀects the quality of the medical history
available due to that previous data is unknown.
Figure 3.4: The distribution of the length of the hospitalisations.
The distribution of the length of the hospitalizations can bee seen in Figure
3.4. For all the patients the median hospital length is 4 days and the mean
hospitalization length is 5.9 days. The frequency for the hospitalization was
also brieﬂy investigated, see Figure 3.5.
==PAGE:58==
48
Data
(a) Patient A
(b) Patient B
(c) Patient C
(d) Patient D
Figure 3.5: The hospitalizations plotted as binary points in time against the days
the patient has been receiving dialysis treatment for four diﬀerent pa-
tients A,B,C and D. The data was ﬁltered to only include patients that
have been hospitalized a minimum of two times. The four samples of
the patients were randomly chosen.
It seems as though the hospitalization often come in groups, see Figure 3.5. The
number of hospitalization doesn’t show any obvious pattern to increase over
time. The hospitalizations do not seem to be evenly distributed over time, but
rather the patients have periods of higher and lower hospitalization frequencies.
In Figures 3.6 and 3.7 the variables based on the measurements during dialysis
is plotted to show their distribution.
In order to investigate if there were some obvious patterns in the data an PCA
analysis was conducted for the data. The labels are indicated by red and green.
As can be seen in Figure 3.8 no obvious pattern is presented in the data based
upon the PCA.
==PAGE:59==
3.1 Data
49
[A]
[B]
[C]
[D]
[E]
[F]
[G]
Figure 3.6: The distribution for seven of the parameters that are continuously
measured for the dialysis patients. The distributions are plotted
and normal distribution curves are plotted for comparison.
==PAGE:60==
50
Data
[A]
[B]
[C]
[D]
Figure 3.7: The distribution for four of the parameters that are continuously
measured for the dialysis patients. The distributions are plotted
and normal distribution curves are plotted for comparison.
Figure 3.8: Principal component analysis of the original 11 features. The data
was plotted for the ﬁrst two principal components where the green
and red should indicate the two labels. Based on the two ﬁrst
principal components it is not possible to make any successful
classiﬁcation.
==PAGE:61==
3.2 Pre-processing and standardization
51
3.2
Pre-processing and standardization
The data was preprocessed to remove outliers and measurements that have
shown very abnormal behavior. This step was done before the data was re-
ceived by two master thesis students at Lytics. Therefore the ﬁrst step in the
preprocessing was to standardize according to common practice [Gra12] so that
the mean, mi is 1 and that the standard deviation, σi is 1 for each feature.
mi = 1
n
i=n
X
i=0
xi
(3.1)
σ =
v
u
u
t 1
n
i=n
X
i=0
(xi −mi)2
(3.2)
ˆxi = xi −mi
σi
(3.3)
The new standardized feature is represented by ˆxi and the input feature is
represented by xi. By standardizing the data the performance is increased due
to that the values are in a more suitable range for the common used activation
functions [Gra12].
==PAGE:62==
52
Data
==PAGE:63==
Chapter 4
Methods
The diﬀerent methods implemented and how they where designed will here be
presented. The pipeline of the feature extraction/feature engineering will also
be presented and the approaches to the problem.
4.1
Pipeline, feature extraction and feature gen-
eration
Based on the diﬀerent record there is a possibility to create features beyond
the continuously measured dialysis variables, features that could carry a lot of
predictive information. The work with creating these features, and why these
features were chosen will be explained in this section. It should be noted that
the features generated, and which features to generate were discussed with a
specialist nurse working at Lytics, who has knowledge in which features are used
by doctors and which features could prove to have an eﬀect on the predictions.
However, the goal was not only to generate previously known indicators, but
also to create new features to improve and extend the previous results.
As
mentioned in the introduction to the 3.1 Data, simultaneously to this thesis
work, another thesis project was conducted at Lytics focusing on imputation of
missing data, thus investigating missing data and outliers will not be conducted,
==PAGE:64==
54
Methods
instead the data used for the predictive models will be preprocessed according
to their ﬁndings [MA17]. An illustration of the pipeline is presented in Figure
4.1. In the ﬁgure, the light red rectangle to the left illustrates the part of the
pipeline that was conducted by the other master thesis students. The green
rectangle illustrates the work conducted by the author.
==PAGE:65==
4.1 Pipeline, feature extraction and feature generation
55
Data removed 
when patient is 
hospitalised
Hospitalisations
Labels 
generated
Dataset with 
generated features, 
standardization
Hospitalisations, 
Demographic, Schedule, 
Patient Lists
Final 
dataset
Dialysis 
measurem
ents (Raw 
input)
Removed 
missed 
treatments, 
Hospitalisations
Dialysis 
measurements
Impute 
missing 
data
Rescale 
outliers or 
impute 
outliers
Figure 4.1: Illustration of the pipeline and the collaboration with a master thesis group working on imputation of
missing data
==PAGE:66==
56
Methods
The generated features are described in Table 4.1 and 4.2
Generated features
Variable name
Explanation
Variable type
Days since the last 20
hospitalizations;
Days
since last hospitalisa-
tion, Days since second
last hospitalisation, ...,
Days
since
twentieth
hospitalisation
The number of days since
the
last
20
hospitaliza-
tions. Days since each of
the 20 last hospitalisations
is generated as an individ-
ual feature.
Discrete, ratio
Length
of
the
20
last
hospitalisations;
length
of
the
last
hospitali-
sation,
length
of
the
second last hospitalisa-
tion, ..., length of the
20:th last hospitalisa-
tion
Number of days for each
of the 20 last hospitalisa-
tions. The length of each
hospitalisations is gener-
ated as an individual fea-
ture.
Discrete, ratio
Number
of
previous
hospitalisations
The number of times the
patients have been hospi-
talised
Discrete, ratio
Number
of
days
the
patient received dialy-
sis.
The number of days the
patient have been receiv-
ing dialysis treatment
Discrete, ratio
Schedule of the dialy-
sis treatment
The schedule for the dialy-
sis treatment. This is one-
hot-encoded.
Thus each
possible schedule is gener-
ated as a feature of its own
Discrete, nominal
Number of scheduled
dialysis treatments per
week
The number of dialysis
treatments per week that
the doctors have sched-
uled the patient for
Discrete, ratio
Table 4.1: Table describing the generated features.
==PAGE:67==
4.2 Approach
57
Generated features
Variable name
Explanation
Variable type
Days since last dialysis
session
The number of days since
last dialysis session
Discrete, ratio
Sex
The sex of the patient is
one-hot-encoded thus one
feature for each sex is gen-
erated
Discrete, nominal
Age
The age of the patient in
years
Discrete, ratio
Clinic Id
The clinic Id for the clinic
the patients is receiving
treatment at
Discrete, nominal
Table 4.2: Table describing the generated features.
Most of the generated features are related to time and how the sequence steps
are related in terms of time. The generated features also include medical history
of the patient. Life expectancy for dialysis patients is short, between 5-10 years
and thus the time in dialysis, and the number of previous hospitalization could
potentially include information about the probability for new hospitalizations.
In order to speed up the feature generation for the data sets, which became very
time consuming, parallelization of the calculations was implemented utilizing
more of the computational power at the server at which the calculations were
done.
4.2
Approach
Two separate approaches to the predictions were taken. The ﬁrst one taken was
to have a sliding window where the models were fed a window of n sequence
steps and the label for the last sequence step. The model should then used the
window to predict the label at the last time step, see Figure 4.2. This allows
the model not only to account for the current sequence step but also previ-
ous steps. This allows the model to learn patterns over time and thus detect
patterns for the patients rather than only look at the values at the present
==PAGE:68==
58
Methods
sequence step. This approach have been used previously for feedforward neu-
ral networks on predicting the Respiratory Motion Predictions of Lung Cancer
Patients [TBP15], classify cases of gout, leukemia [TAL13], and critical illness
[CKL+15]. Sliding window has also been used as reference method to RNN for
diagnose in several articles [EC16], [AM16], [BSF94]. It can also be noticed
that trends are today monitored by the dialysis clinics as an indication of the
health status of the patients. This was done over a three months period, which
equals 36 dialysis treatment for a patient receiving treatment three times a week,
which is most common. This would indicate that having larger windows would
be advantageous. The sliding window approach will be used for feedforward
neural networks, Random Forest, kNN and a convolutional neural network. No
previous work have been found by the author of using CNN for predictions on
health care time series data. CNN should have an advantage ﬁnding trends and
relations between variables.
Figure 4.2: Illustration of the sliding window approach, where the model is
given a window of data and should predict the label for the last
sequence step.
The second approach that was investigated was to look sequentially at the time
series, similarly like a doctor, see Figure 4.3. Ideally this should allow the models
to look at the complete history of the patient which potentially would allow for
improved results. Compared to the sliding window, this approach could be illus-
trated as a sliding window with a growing window size for each sequence step.
However there are obvious computational limitations with learning behaviours
from long sequences.
The raw data is unevenly spaced with the most common frequency of 3 mea-
surements per week. However, no special care was taken towards making the
==PAGE:69==
4.3 Developed models
59
Figure 4.3: Illustration of the the principal with the sequential model pre-
dicting the current output on the current input and all previously
known inputs.
time series evenly space, with the expectation that the models should be able
to handle this. It should be noticed that the labels at each time step is set
according to if the patient will be hospitalized within 30 days from that date.
4.3
Developed models
Three diﬀerent methods based upon neural networks were developed; a recurrent
neural network, and convolutional neural network, and a feedforward neural
network. To compare two baseline methods from the Python machine learning
library sci-kit learn was also used, a Random forest model and an k-Nearest
Neighbor classiﬁer. In this section, the design of the diﬀerent models will be
presented. Hyperparamters are chosen based validation set performance. For
the neural networks, Tensorﬂow was used for the implementation. Tensorﬂow
is an open source library developed by Google for machine learning.
4.3.1
Random forest
A Random forest model was implemented based on the sci-kit learn package
for Python. The model was based upon the sliding window approach discussed
earlier. The ﬁnal model used 700 trees to make the prediction. The hyperpa-
rameters for the Random forest model were chosen based on a grid search. No
increase in AUC score was found with a larger number of trees than 700. The
==PAGE:70==
60
Methods
Random forest was optimized based on the number of trees, maximum number
of features to try for each tree and minimum sample leaf size.
4.3.2
kNN
The kNN model was very computationally demanding — a problem that is well
known for large data set since the distance between all data points in the test
data and the training data have to be calculated. In order to run the models
on a reasonable time, a reduced data set was used. The reduced data set was
based upon a random selection of ∼1/3 of the data. The models was ﬁt based
upon the 3 closest neighbours.
4.3.3
Feedforward neural network
A feedforward network was built using a sliding window approach in order to
let the model get data over a certain sequence window. This was done since
it is assumed that it is not only the absolute values but also the trends over
time that is important for predicting the hospitalization. That the trend is of
importance is known since earlier tests, and is currently practiced at the dialysis
clinics which Lytics cooperates with. The model was originally built using two
hidden layers with dropout layers introduced between the layers in order to
avoid overﬁtting.
Initially a model was developed with ∼400 000 trainable
parameters. The initial model was developed with a larger number of parameters
to allow the model to model more complex relations in the data. This model
was later further developed and shrunken to ∼20 000 trainable parameters.
It was found that a lower number of parameters could give the same results
in terms of AUC with a lower computational burden.
The hyperparameter
optimization packaged Hyperopt was partly used for optimization of the model.
Using the hyper optimization packaged should be used with care, which will be
discussed more in the discussion. An illustration of the model is presented in
Figure 4.4, the ﬁnal number of units is indicated in the model. Dropout was
implemented between hidden layer 1 and hidden layer 2 with a probability of
0.95. Dropout was also implemented between hidden layer 2 and the output
layers with a probability of 0.9. Dropout was chosen due to that it performed
great and was relatively easy to tune. As transfer function the relu function
was used. The output is a softmax output layer. The total amount of trainable
parameters in the ﬁnal model is 19813. For the model, Adam optimization was
implemented. Adam optimization was chosen since it should in theory allow
for less optimization of the learning rate and improved learning compare to
==PAGE:71==
4.3 Developed models
61
stochastic gradient descent due to use of momentum. A learning rate of 0.01
was used.
Figure 4.4: Illustration of the developed feedforward neural network model.
4.3.4
Convolutional neural network
A convolutional neural network was built and evaluated on the hypothesis that
it could be superior on ﬁnding trends in the data which could allow for better
predictions. It should also have the possibility to ﬁnd trends between diﬀerent
features. The input data was fed based upon a sliding window of 20 sequence
steps. The input was fed as a matrix where each column represented a sequence
step and thus each row is the input from one feature for 20 sequence steps, see
Figure 4.5.


x1,1
x1,2
x1,3
. . .
x1,20
x2,1
x2,2
x2,3
. . .
x2,20
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
x31,1
x31,2
x33,3
. . .
x31,20


Figure 4.5: Illustration of the input for the CNN model.
The design of the convolutional neural network is presented in Figure 4.6. The
ﬁrst convolutional layer was set to ﬁlter all the 31 features simultaneously. For
this, a relatively high number of ﬁlters were chosen — 24 diﬀerent ﬁlters. This
was done in order to be able to capture diﬀerent trends between the diﬀerent
==PAGE:72==
62
Methods
features. No spatial relation was assumed between any speciﬁc features and the
ﬁrst ﬁlter was thus set to ﬁlter based upon all features. The general design
is inspired by the design of convolutional neural networks for image analysis.
The model also uses a 1x1 convolutional layer. The model contained 1334828
trainable parameters. For the model, Adam optimization was implemented with
a learning rate of 0.05.
==PAGE:73==
4.3 Developed models
63
Figure 4.6: Illustration of the developed convolutional neural network.
==PAGE:74==
64
Methods
4.3.5
RNN models
The developed RNN models proved hard to optimise, and initially the author
struggled with getting a good ﬁt. Several diﬀerent types of regularization were
tested; dropout, batch normalisation, L2 regularization, but in the end a combi-
nation of dropout and early stopping was implemented in order to avoid overﬁt-
ting. Dropout and early stopping was selected based upon that they performed
the best on the problem and were relative easy to tune. The model uses 14322
trainable parameters. The number of units was selected through optimization
of the model. Tensorﬂow unfolds the recurrent neural network when performing
the calculations. In order to represent a training batch as a single tensor the
shape has to be (batch size x max length x nbr features). In order to achieve
this the shorter sequences were padded in order to have similarly length. The
padded sequence steps should not be evaluated, only evaluating the actual data.
By using a binary mask based on the true sequence length this was achieved,
where 1 represent true states and 0 for padded sequence steps. The binary mask
was multiplied with the predictions to reduce the padded steps to zero. For the
setup, the binary mask was generated in the preprocessing step and fed to the
Tensorﬂow. For the predictions, LSTM units were used. Due to problems with
the models, there was sadly no time to implement batch padding which would
have reduced the computational time, by only padding the sequences based upon
the longest sequence in each batch. For the model, Adam optimization was im-
plemented with a learning rate of 0.001. RNN was evaluated using LSTM units,
standard RNN units, and Attention. The size of the model was kept constant
for the diﬀerent variations of RNN models, see Figure 4.7.
Figure 4.7: Illustration of the developed recurrent neural network model.
==PAGE:75==
Chapter 5
Results
In this section the results from the implemented models is presented. The data
set was initially split to data for training(80) and test(20%). The split was done
based on the patient ID’s in order to make sure that the RNN and the sliding
window would be validated against the same data. It was also done in order to
not break the causality of the data. The training data was split into training
data(80%) and validation data(20%). For the investigate models a window size
of 20 sequence steps was used if not stated otherwise. This was selected due to
that the hospitals look at trends over 3 months (∼40 sequence steps). However,
a large amount of the sequences are relative short see Figure 3.4 and thus in
order to be able to utilize as much of the data as possible the window size was
set to 20 sequence steps.
Due to lack of time and problems with the models, a selection of the generated
features was done. For the evaluation of the models, 31 features were used.
The 11 continuous features discussed in section 3.1 were used, together with the
days since the last 20 hospitalizations which is discussed in section 4.1. The
11 continuous features were selected since they had previously been found by
Lytics to be very important to describe the health status of the patients. The
previous hospitalization parameters were chosen based upon that it has been
reported that repeated hospitalizations might be common for dialysis patients
[PJ09]. Repeated hospitalizations refer to hospitalizations that occur within a
short period (couple of weeks) following a previous hospitalizations. Groups of
==PAGE:76==
66
Results
hospitalizations were also identiﬁed when previous hospitalizations were plotted
agings time, see Figure 3.5.
Figure 5.1: ROC-curve for the investigated models. The ROC-curves are plot-
ted individually in Appendix B
Model
AUC score
kNN
0.545
Random forest
0.692
FFNN
0.689
RNN
0.650
RNN(LSTM)
0.675
RNN(LSTM) with Attention
0.680
CNN
0.678
Table 5.1: AUC score for the developed models
==PAGE:77==
67
Based upon the developed models, the best performance was achieved with a
Random forest model. The AUC score for the diﬀerent models are presented in
Table 5.1. The receiver operation characteristics curves are presented in Figure
5.1. It should be noted that the CNN model is signiﬁcantly larger (in terms of
trainable parameters) than the FFNN and the RNN models, in that the CNN
model proved to give the best results. The loss, AUC-score, and accuracy for
the CNN, FFNN and RNN model using LSTM units and Attention is presented
in Figures 5.4, 5.3 and 5.2. As can be seen in (a) and (c) in Figures 5.4, 5.3
and 5.2 the RNN model achieved a lower accuracy and higher loss than the
CNN and FFNN. A feedforward neural networks with a larger number of units
in the hidden layers was created for comparison, see Appendix D. However,
the results where not improved, thus the smaller model was selected since the
computational burden is smaller.
==PAGE:78==
68
Results
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 5.2: Results for the RNN model. (a) Is the AUC score plotted against
the number of epochs. (b) Is the accuracy plotted as a function
of the number of epochs and (c) is the loss plotted against the
number of epochs.
==PAGE:79==
69
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 5.3: Results for the CNN model. (a) Is the AUC score plotted against
the number of epochs. (b) Is the accuracy plotted as a function
of the number of epochs and (c) is the loss plotted against the
number of epochs.
==PAGE:80==
70
Results
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 5.4: Results for the FFNN model. (a) Is the AUC score plotted against
the number of epochs. (b) Is the accuracy plotted as a function
of the number of epochs and (c) is the loss plotted against the
number of epochs.
==PAGE:81==
71
Figure 5.5: The AUC score for diﬀerent lengths of the window for the Random
forest model. As can be seen in the ﬁgure the model is very insen-
sitive to the length of the sliding window. It should be noted that
the performance for a window of 20 sequence steps is lower than
the performance presented in Table 5.1. This is due to diﬀerences
in the data used. For the comparison of the sliding window size
only sequences longer than 60 is used where as for the data used
in Table 5.1 uses sequences with a minimum of 20 sequence steps.
For the Random forest model, the feature importance was brieﬂy investigated.
The most importance features were found to be the previous hospitalizations
parameters. The complete results form the feature importance is presented in
Appendix E. That the previous hospitalizations was the most important fea-
tures might indicate that it is common with repetitive hospitalizations. For the
Random forest model the sliding window size was also investigated brieﬂy, see
Figure 5.5.
==PAGE:82==
72
Results
==PAGE:83==
Chapter 6
Discussion
With an aging population, shortage of physicians and a growing number of
chronic diseases the health care cost are expected to increase [Mon16]. Thus new
more intelligent systems and tools are needed to keep the costs in check. Data
analytics and Machine learning are one of many tools that have great potential
to do that. According to the Wall Street Journal the pressure to deliver more
with less resources have resulted in that insurers, pharmacy beneﬁt managers
and health-care providers are pushing the development in data analysis [Tib13].
Thus the future for machine learning and AI within health care looks very
promising. By utilizing data analytics better care can be provided for a lower
cost.
The investigated models showed that neural network can perform well on the
problem. According to the investigated models the best performance was achieved
with a Random forest with a AUC of 0.692. For the neural networks the best
performance was achieved with a feedforward neural network with a AUC score
of 0.689. A rough estimation of signiﬁcance was done based on the error rate,
see appendix A, which indicates that there might be a signiﬁcant diﬀerence.
However this has to be further investigated. It should be noted that the results
from the kNN model could be questioned due to that only a limited amount of
data was used to train the model.
Health care data are in some ways diﬀerent compared to other ﬁelds. Where
==PAGE:84==
74
Discussion
decisions might be about life or death for a patient, it makes having robust
algorithms very important[DS17]. Data sets for health care are also often im-
balanced, since most people are healthy and some diseases are rare. The problem
with the imbalance is present in this problem where the data set has an imbal-
ance of ∼15 % positive labels and ∼85 % negative labels. Veriﬁcation also
becomes very important since it is a matter of peoples life and well being [DS17].
Machine learning have the advantage of outperforming humans in terms of speed
and accuracy. However, the logic behind the decision are often hard to under-
stand.
This is especially a problem for neural networks where even experts
are uncertain how a network draws conclusions [DC16]. The process of under-
standing the logic is important in terms of incorporating intelligent systems in
health care due to legal liabilities and regulatory processes as well as for get-
ting acceptance of the technology by professionals and patients [STC16]. To
make mistakes is human, but machine learning algorithms also make mistakes
(wrong predictions which in it self might not be classiﬁed as an error). In the
interaction between humans and intelligent systems the issue of accountability
becomes ambiguous and who should be held accountable is not clear [Sin16]. It
has also been found that if the professionals and the patients don’t understand
how the data is used for predictions it may be diﬃcult to achieve acceptance
of the system [STC16]. However it could be argued that good results in com-
bination with low risk are most important and not how the algorithms operate
[Rei16].
Neural networks have reported state of the art performances in many ﬁelds.
However, in comparing neural networks to other models such as Random forest
and kNN, they require more knowledge and are harder to develop and optimize.
For projects with a limited time the diﬀerence in results might be bigger due
to better engineered features than to investigate more complex methods. To
build neural networks is a craft where ﬁnding the best parameters is a trick of
the trade. Using optimization tools might reduce the stepping stone. However,
the optimization process is costly in terms of computational burden and the
better the original model and the search space is deﬁned the less optimization
is required.
Hyperopt was initially used for hyperparamter optimization. Initial care were
not taken and to high expectations was put to the software. When using hy-
perparamter optimization software only the ﬁnal loss is evaluated which result
in that only part of the models behavior is evaluated. The author used Hy-
peropt to early on in the process which resulted in heavily overﬁtting of the
models when the complete behaviour was evaluated on a late stage. This re-
sulted in that the models had to be redesigned. The conclusion from this is
that hyper parameter optimization tools should be used with care on models
that behave properly, in terms of train and validation losses, before automated
==PAGE:85==
75
hyperparameter optimization is used.
For the given problem data were available from several records. This makes it
hard to look over the data and also to understand the relations. Data is not
only data, by understanding the problem and the relations in the data, time
can be saved. Neural networks perform great on the raw input data but when
the problems grow inputting all the raw data might not be the best solution.
When the input data grows the required computational power also grows, in
terms of memory required, the time to train the models and thus the process of
optimizing the models becomes slower. Therefore the author beliefs that it is
important to be critical and try to only incorporate data that is relevant to make
better predictions. However by starting with understanding the problem, the
data and gather domain knowledge better choices in terms of feature selection,
generation and extraction can be done, resulting in higher performance, faster
optimization and overall better results.
For the random forest model the size of the sliding window was investigated,
see Figure 5.5. The results indicate that the performance doesn’t increase for
windows larger than 3 sequence steps. This behaviour is unexpected since dis-
eases are developed over time and doctors at the clinics have found correlations
between trends and hospitalizations. These trends are measured over 3 months
of time which should correlate with ∼40 sequence steps (based on three dialysis
sessions a week, which is the most common). This might also be the reason for
why the sliding window model outperforms the RNN model. Due to a limited
amount of time this is left for future work. However it could be noticed that
the behaviour of the other models might be diﬀerent.
Several other similar studies where investigated in 2.9 Related work. The dif-
ference between the sliding window and the RNN models where relatively small
for these investigated cases, ∼1 −1.6 %. This could indicate that even though
RNN in theory should be well suited for multivariate time series the performance
increase might be relatively small compared to a sliding window approach for
FFNN.
Neural networks perform very well working with raw data, so in utilizing more
of the available raw data, the neural networks might be able to achieve better
results compare to other models with less feature engineering. For the current
predictions the Random forest put a lot of importance to the engineered features,
see Appendix E .
==PAGE:86==
76
Discussion
6.1
Future work
In order to further improve upon the performance of the models the obvious
ﬁrst step would be to utilize more of the available data. Several records were
used during the feature generation process but more data is available, such as
medication reacords, hospitalization reasons, demographics etc. It could also
be noticed that a large amount of the generated features where never used in
the developed models. The data sources are hard to combine and the author
experienced that the EHR where built for storing data and not designed to
be used for analyzes. This makes it harder to work with, and more work is
needed to combine the records in a proper way.
This would also require a
better understanding of how the diﬀerent records are related and how the data
gathering process is done in order to utilized the data in the best possible way.
Depression and anxiety are among the most common comorbid illnesses for pa-
tients with end stage renal disease[FMRP+10]. Patients with end stage renal
disease face many challenges related to their illness that increase the likelihood
to develop depression or anxiety. This is related to a general feeling by patients
of unwellness caused by the disease it self or by the treatment and the major dis-
ruption of the lifestyle [FMRP+10]. These disruptions includes complying with
the treatments, dialysis schedules, diets, water restrictions, hospitalization, fear
of disability, morbidity, and shortened lifespan [FMRP+10]. Medication given
to dialysis patients might also be a potential source of psychiatric disorders,
sterioides and various glomerulopathies which are sometimes given after trans-
plantaiton have been linked to depression, mania, and psychotic symptoms [J07].
Kimmel et al [FMRP+10] showed that patients with chronic kidney diseases had
to be hospitalized for psychiatric disorders 1.5 to 3 times more than individuals
with other chronic diseases. To collect data about the mental health of the pa-
tients could thus also improve the predictions since potentially a large number
of the hospitalizations are linked to mental health.
From a medical standpoint the data set could potentially be used for other
predictions as well, such as which treatments could be recommended, optimal
dialysis settings, medication amount and type of medication. Utilizing the data
on other predictions could potentially improve the health care for the patients.
In terms of the developed models evenly sampled batches were brieﬂy investi-
gated, however this could also be done more thoroughly. Combining the diﬀerent
models to an ensemble could also be investigated to possible boost the perfor-
mance. Also investigating which hospitalizations the models are able to predict
would be interesting to understand to better know which actions should be taken
for the patients that are expected to be hospitalized within the next 30 days.
Padding of the sequences were done based on the length of the longest sequence
==PAGE:87==
6.1 Future work
77
in order to have equal length of all sequences. The computational burden could
have been reduced by using bucketing. Bucketing is a method to handle se-
quences of diﬀerent lengths in an eﬃcient way[Ten]. Bucketing uses the concept
of sorting out the sequences in to "buckets" of similar length. Then padding is
applied within each bucket to make all the sequences have the same sequence
length as the other sequences in the bucket. Bucketing allow for a faster train-
ing and predictions since fewer unwanted predictions are made. Investigating if
the models are too late or early in there predictions would also be interesting
and thus maybe a better size of the prediction horizon could be developed to-
gether with the hospitals. The used sliding windows of 20 sequence step is an
assumption that also should be challenged and for future work the predictions
for diﬀerent window sizes should be evaluated.
Having large windows could
have the potential to improve the predictions. However, the brief investigation
of window size that was conducted indicated that longer time windows than 3
sequence steps did not improve the results for a Random forest model. Further
work could also be put to handle the irregular sampling of the sequences.
==PAGE:88==
78
Discussion
==PAGE:89==
Chapter 7
Conclusion
The hospitalization of dialysis patients where successfully predicted and Convo-
lutional, Feedforward, and Recurrent neural networks successfully implemented
for the problem. The best results where achieved with a Random forest model
with a AUC score of 0.692.
Of the neural networks the feedforward model
performed the best with a AUC score of 0.689. To further improve the perfor-
mance more of the available data should be utilized. In this work it has also
been showed that machine learning has the potential to be a great tool within
health care.
==PAGE:90==
80
Conclusion
==PAGE:91==
Appendices
==PAGE:92==
==PAGE:93==
Appendix A
Rough estimation of
signiﬁcance
Assuming independent test examples and binary classiﬁcation. The observed
test error is:
ϵtest = nwrong
Ntest
(A.1)
Assuming that the number of wrong predictions, nwrong have a binomial distri-
bution with a unknown mean of Ntest · ϵ and variance Ntest · (1 −ϵ) gives that
ϵtest will have a mean of:
Ntest · ϵ
Ntest
= ϵ
(A.2)
and variance of
Ntest · ϵ · (1 −ϵ)
N 2
test
= ϵ · (1 −ϵ)
Ntest
(A.3)
==PAGE:94==
84
Rough estimation of signiﬁcance
Which gives that
ϵtest ≈ϵ ±
s
ϵ · (1 −ϵ)
Ntest
(A.4)
ϵ is unknown but is approximately replaced with the observed value for the
standard deviation
s
ϵ · (1 −ϵ)
Ntest
≈
s
ϵtest · (1 −ϵtest)
Ntest
(A.5)
Equation A.5 is the uncertainty of the error rate and is used as a rough estima-
tion of the error rate of the AUC score, see Table A.1. The test set consists of
1100 patients with the mean length of 296 sequence steps.
Method
AUC
AUC uncertainty
kNN
0.545
± 0.00088
Random Forest
0.692
± 0.00081
FFNN
0.689
± 0.00082
RNN
0.650
± 0.00084
RNN(LSTM)
0.675
± 0.00083
RNN(LSTM) with Attention
0.680
± 0.00082
CNN
0.678
± 0.00082
Table A.1: The AUC score and uncertainty for the AUC score.
==PAGE:95==
Appendix B
Receiver operation
characteristics curves
In Figure 5.1 the ROC curves are plotted together. In Figure B.1 the ROC
curves are plotted individually.
==PAGE:96==
86
Receiver operation characteristics curves
(a) Receiver
operating
characteristic
curve for the CNN model.
(b) Receiver
operating
characteristic
curve for the RNN model.
(c) Receiver
operating
characteristic
curve for the FFNN model.
(d) Receiver
operating
characteristic
curve for the Random forest model.
(e) Receiver
operating
characteristic
curve for the kNN model.
Figure B.1: The receiver operating characteristic curves for the diﬀerent de-
veloped models.
==PAGE:97==
Appendix C
RNN model without early
stopping
For the RNN model early stopping was implemented. Early stopping found the
optimal performance to be achieved after 30 epochs. The results for 50 epochs
are presented in Figure C.1. The overﬁtting of the model is visible after 30
epochs in plot (c) in Figure C.1.
==PAGE:98==
88
RNN model without early stopping
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure C.1: This is the result from the RNN model when early stopping is not
implemented and the model is allowed to run for 50 epochs. (a)
Is the AUC score plotted against the number of epochs. (b) Is
the accuracy plotted as a function of the number of epochs and
(c) is the loss plotted against the number of epochs.
==PAGE:99==
Appendix D
Results for alternative
feedforward model
In comparison to the ﬁnal feedforward neural network a larger model in terms
of number of trainable parameters was developed. The results from this model
is presented in Figure D.1. The smaller model was selected since the validation
performance was equivalent and the computational cost was far less due to the
reduced number of parameters.
==PAGE:100==
90
Results for alternative feedforward model
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure D.1: This is the result from the larger feedforward neural network. The
model was redeveloped due to its large size and was for the ﬁnal
model shrunken from ∼400 000 to ∼20 000 trainable parameters.
(a) Is the AUC score plotted against the number of epochs. (b)
Is the accuracy plotted as a function of the number of epochs and
(c) is the loss plotted against the number of epochs.
==PAGE:101==
Appendix E
Feature importance for
Random forest
The feature importance for the Random forest model was evaluated based on
the built in function for feature importance in sci-kit learn, see Figure E.1a and
E.1b. The Random forest model used the sliding window approach. The size
of the sliding window is 20 sequence steps where each sequence step have 31
features, which gives a total of 620 features. The latest sequence step has the
highest feature numbers, see Table E.1.
Time step
Feature numbers
t
588-619
t-1
557-588
...
...
t-19
0-30
Table E.1: Table that describes how the feature numbers are asserted.
==PAGE:102==
92
Feature importance for Random forest
The 31 feature at each time step are explained in Table E.2.
Feature
Represents
Feature 1 at time t
Average blood ﬂow
Feature 2 at time t
Start sitting pulse
Feature 3 at time t
Liters processed
Feature 4 at time t
Time in Dialysis
Feature 5 at time t
Fluid removed
Feature 6 at time t
Patient temp start
Feature 7 at time t
Patient temp end
Feature 8 at time t
Start sitting systolic Bp
Feature 9 at time t
Start sitting diastolic Bp
Feature 10 at time t
End sitting systolic Bp
Feature 11 at time t
End sitting diastolic Bp
Feature 12 at time t
Days since last hospitalization
Feature 13 at time t
Days since second last hospitalization
Feature 14 at time t
Days since third last hospitalization
Feature 15 at time t
Days since fourth last hospitalization
Feature 16 at time t
Days since ﬁfth last hospitalization
Feature 17 at time t
Days since sixth last hospitalization
Feature 18 at time t
Days since seventh last hospitalization
Feature 19 at time t
Days since eighth last hospitalization
Feature 20 at time t
Days since ninth last hospitalization
Feature 21 at time t
Days since tenth last hospitalization
Feature 22 at time t
Days since eleventh last hospitalization
Feature 23 at time t
Days since twelfth last hospitalization
Feature 24 at time t
Days since thirteenth last hospitalization
Feature 25 at time t
Days since fourteenth last hospitalization
Feature 26 at time t
Days since ﬁfteenth last hospitalization
Feature 27 at time t
Days since sixteenth last hospitalization
Feature 28 at time t
Days since seventeenth last hospitalization
Feature 29 at time t
Days since eighteenth last hospitalization
Feature 30 at time t
Days since nineteenth last hospitalization
Feature 31 at time t
Days since twentieth last hospitalization
Table E.2: The features and how they are numbered.
==PAGE:103==
93
(a)
(b)
Figure E.1: (a) The feature importance for the 20 last hospitalization, for a
window of 20 sequence steps. (b) The feature importance for the
11 continuously measured variables for the same window. The
feature importance is plotted in two graphs for easier compari-
son of the 11 continues variables and the days since the previous
hospitalizations. It should be noticed that the Random forest is
trained based on all 31 features for a window size of 20 sequence
steps.
==PAGE:104==
94
Feature importance for Random forest
The feature importance is presented in the table below. The most important
features are the feature about previous hospitalizations.
1. feature 600 (0.013004)
2. feature 601 (0.011178)
3. feature 570 (0.010660)
4. feature 569 (0.010153)
5. feature 603 (0.009689)
6. feature 571 (0.009510)
7. feature 508 (0.009338)
8. feature 539 (0.009323)
9. feature 541 (0.009079)
10. feature 572 (0.008934)
11. feature 538 (0.008558)
12. feature 602 (0.008117)
13. feature 446 (0.007592)
14. feature 510 (0.007223)
15. feature 509 (0.007161)
16. feature 415 (0.007036)
17. feature 573 (0.006903)
18. feature 540 (0.006525)
19. feature 507 (0.006498)
20. feature 604 (0.006491)
21. feature 478 (0.006450)
22. feature 542 (0.006448)
23. feature 477 (0.006178)
24. feature 476 (0.005319)
25. feature 322 (0.005279)
26. feature 353 (0.005253)
27. feature 414 (0.005156)
28. feature 447 (0.005089)
29. feature 479 (0.004733)
30. feature 605 (0.004668)
31. feature 448 (0.004662)
32. feature 445 (0.004349)
33. feature 383 (0.004294)
34. feature 386 (0.004182)
35. feature 291 (0.004116)
36. feature 449 (0.004031)
37. feature 480 (0.003996)
38. feature 260 (0.003912)
39. feature 323 (0.003889)
40. feature 416 (0.003859)
41. feature 384 (0.003850)
42. feature 385 (0.003807)
43. feature 321 (0.003756)
44. feature 511 (0.003591)
45. feature 352 (0.003550)
46. feature 574 (0.003532)
47. feature 417 (0.003378)
48. feature 543 (0.003329)
49. feature 292 (0.003302)
50. feature 229 (0.003242)
51. feature 198 (0.003190)
52. feature 354 (0.003175)
53. feature 105 (0.003140)
54. feature 259 (0.003125)
55. feature 74 (0.003097)
56. feature 418 (0.003084)
57. feature 230 (0.003018)
58. feature 355 (0.003015)
59. feature 167 (0.003002)
60. feature 589 (0.002924)
61. feature 606 (0.002915)
62. feature 197 (0.002903)
63. feature 166 (0.002902)
64. feature 607 (0.002891)
65. feature 73 (0.002875)
66. feature 608 (0.002865)
67. feature 261 (0.002840)
68. feature 135 (0.002828)
69. feature 544 (0.002808)
70. feature 168 (0.002802)
71. feature 387 (0.002754)
72. feature 42 (0.002733)
73. feature 228 (0.002732)
74. feature 290 (0.002707)
75. feature 576 (0.002699)
76. feature 558 (0.002674)
77. feature 43 (0.002669)
78. feature 293 (0.002663)
79. feature 104 (0.002661)
80. feature 11 (0.002586)
81. feature 591 (0.002582)
82. feature 527 (0.002546)
==PAGE:105==
95
83. feature 356 (0.002528)
84. feature 12 (0.002521)
85. feature 512 (0.002487)
86. feature 136 (0.002486)
87. feature 465 (0.002460)
88. feature 496 (0.002443)
89. feature 560 (0.002416)
90. feature 75 (0.002375)
91. feature 325 (0.002368)
92. feature 545 (0.002355)
93. feature 575 (0.002353)
94. feature 529 (0.002336)
95. feature 169 (0.002334)
96. feature 434 (0.002326)
97. feature 137 (0.002324)
98. feature 546 (0.002315)
99. feature 593 (0.002285)
100. feature 403 (0.002282)
101. feature 498 (0.002263)
102. feature 13 (0.002250)
103. feature 598 (0.002247)
104. feature 341 (0.002243)
105. feature 467 (0.002229)
106. feature 577 (0.002187)
107. feature 372 (0.002186)
108. feature 514 (0.002184)
109. feature 590 (0.002172)
110. feature 596 (0.002171)
111. feature 436 (0.002166)
112. feature 374 (0.002165)
113. feature 0 (0.002165)
114. feature 2 (0.002163)
115. feature 62 (0.002158)
116. feature 562 (0.002157)
117. feature 64 (0.002134)
118. feature 217 (0.002134)
119. feature 248 (0.002122)
120. feature 33 (0.002121)
121. feature 567 (0.002109)
122. feature 531 (0.002108)
123. feature 343 (0.002101)
124. feature 31 (0.002099)
125. feature 95 (0.002096)
126. feature 93 (0.002093)
127. feature 186 (0.002093)
128. feature 279 (0.002089)
129. feature 405 (0.002089)
130. feature 106 (0.002088)
131. feature 155 (0.002085)
132. feature 310 (0.002073)
133. feature 250 (0.002068)
134. feature 126 (0.002062)
135. feature 124 (0.002060)
136. feature 312 (0.002059)
137. feature 559 (0.002048)
138. feature 219 (0.002048)
139. feature 44 (0.002041)
140. feature 565 (0.002039)
141. feature 157 (0.002038)
142. feature 281 (0.002024)
143. feature 263 (0.002018)
144. feature 534 (0.002015)
145. feature 188 (0.002006)
146. feature 324 (0.001990)
147. feature 231 (0.001989)
148. feature 199 (0.001987)
149. feature 528 (0.001961)
150. feature 536 (0.001948)
151. feature 262 (0.001931)
152. feature 45 (0.001929)
153. feature 592 (0.001929)
154. feature 469 (0.001920)
155. feature 438 (0.001908)
156. feature 500 (0.001905)
157. feature 294 (0.001901)
158. feature 232 (0.001889)
159. feature 497 (0.001877)
160. feature 450 (0.001873)
161. feature 505 (0.001858)
162. feature 530 (0.001852)
163. feature 503 (0.001845)
164. feature 14 (0.001843)
165. feature 474 (0.001836)
166. feature 345 (0.001833)
167. feature 561 (0.001831)
168. feature 314 (0.001830)
169. feature 407 (0.001823)
170. feature 466 (0.001820)
==PAGE:106==
96
Feature importance for Random forest
171. feature 468 (0.001810)
172. feature 597 (0.001809)
173. feature 128 (0.001800)
174. feature 435 (0.001796)
175. feature 221 (0.001795)
176. feature 376 (0.001791)
177. feature 499 (0.001790)
178. feature 170 (0.001785)
179. feature 472 (0.001785)
180. feature 97 (0.001784)
181. feature 481 (0.001783)
182. feature 441 (0.001776)
183. feature 252 (0.001773)
184. feature 127 (0.001771)
185. feature 610 (0.001771)
186. feature 3 (0.001768)
187. feature 65 (0.001768)
188. feature 190 (0.001768)
189. feature 4 (0.001767)
190. feature 373 (0.001766)
191. feature 437 (0.001765)
192. feature 283 (0.001763)
193. feature 66 (0.001759)
194. feature 404 (0.001759)
195. feature 34 (0.001758)
196. feature 412 (0.001758)
197. feature 96 (0.001755)
198. feature 375 (0.001749)
199. feature 35 (0.001746)
200. feature 443 (0.001743)
201. feature 313 (0.001740)
202. feature 158 (0.001740)
203. feature 189 (0.001738)
204. feature 220 (0.001735)
205. feature 251 (0.001726)
206. feature 76 (0.001724)
207. feature 379 (0.001715)
208. feature 138 (0.001715)
209. feature 566 (0.001715)
210. feature 344 (0.001709)
211. feature 159 (0.001708)
212. feature 410 (0.001707)
213. feature 200 (0.001705)
214. feature 381 (0.001699)
215. feature 342 (0.001698)
216. feature 350 (0.001691)
217. feature 406 (0.001681)
218. feature 311 (0.001670)
219. feature 282 (0.001661)
220. feature 319 (0.001658)
221. feature 535 (0.001657)
222. feature 348 (0.001654)
223. feature 77 (0.001651)
224. feature 513 (0.001649)
225. feature 515 (0.001646)
226. feature 107 (0.001635)
227. feature 317 (0.001633)
228. feature 226 (0.001625)
229. feature 38 (0.001619)
230. feature 280 (0.001618)
231. feature 504 (0.001614)
232. feature 288 (0.001612)
233. feature 133 (0.001603)
234. feature 162 (0.001602)
235. feature 7 (0.001600)
236. feature 156 (0.001598)
237. feature 201 (0.001596)
238. feature 473 (0.001595)
239. feature 286 (0.001593)
240. feature 102 (0.001591)
241. feature 193 (0.001589)
242. feature 257 (0.001587)
243. feature 40 (0.001586)
244. feature 255 (0.001583)
245. feature 164 (0.001581)
246. feature 131 (0.001579)
247. feature 224 (0.001576)
248. feature 9 (0.001570)
249. feature 249 (0.001570)
250. feature 218 (0.001560)
251. feature 71 (0.001560)
252. feature 1 (0.001560)
253. feature 195 (0.001559)
254. feature 125 (0.001557)
255. feature 100 (0.001556)
256. feature 411 (0.001543)
257. feature 69 (0.001542)
258. feature 32 (0.001542)
==PAGE:107==
97
259. feature 442 (0.001538)
260. feature 349 (0.001524)
261. feature 94 (0.001522)
262. feature 380 (0.001511)
263. feature 63 (0.001509)
264. feature 46 (0.001508)
265. feature 580 (0.001507)
266. feature 187 (0.001505)
267. feature 452 (0.001505)
268. feature 419 (0.001490)
269. feature 483 (0.001487)
270. feature 611 (0.001473)
271. feature 609 (0.001466)
272. feature 8 (0.001464)
273. feature 256 (0.001457)
274. feature 15 (0.001454)
275. feature 318 (0.001453)
276. feature 484 (0.001448)
277. feature 579 (0.001447)
278. feature 139 (0.001440)
279. feature 108 (0.001440)
280. feature 482 (0.001438)
281. feature 163 (0.001437)
282. feature 39 (0.001432)
283. feature 295 (0.001416)
284. feature 225 (0.001412)
285. feature 70 (0.001404)
286. feature 599 (0.001403)
287. feature 194 (0.001399)
288. feature 132 (0.001389)
289. feature 101 (0.001389)
290. feature 388 (0.001385)
291. feature 568 (0.001377)
292. feature 287 (0.001371)
293. feature 422 (0.001361)
294. feature 421 (0.001336)
295. feature 506 (0.001334)
296. feature 453 (0.001324)
297. feature 578 (0.001322)
298. feature 537 (0.001322)
299. feature 41 (0.001314)
300. feature 547 (0.001294)
301. feature 451 (0.001289)
302. feature 475 (0.001288)
303. feature 202 (0.001281)
304. feature 444 (0.001274)
305. feature 196 (0.001272)
306. feature 413 (0.001263)
307. feature 134 (0.001260)
308. feature 10 (0.001257)
309. feature 72 (0.001253)
310. feature 420 (0.001252)
311. feature 351 (0.001251)
312. feature 258 (0.001251)
313. feature 165 (0.001247)
314. feature 612 (0.001247)
315. feature 103 (0.001243)
316. feature 382 (0.001239)
317. feature 289 (0.001238)
318. feature 357 (0.001233)
319. feature 549 (0.001232)
320. feature 227 (0.001231)
321. feature 233 (0.001219)
322. feature 16 (0.001216)
323. feature 548 (0.001213)
324. feature 320 (0.001213)
325. feature 326 (0.001202)
326. feature 47 (0.001196)
327. feature 264 (0.001183)
328. feature 109 (0.001177)
329. feature 358 (0.001157)
330. feature 78 (0.001150)
331. feature 171 (0.001147)
332. feature 486 (0.001147)
333. feature 140 (0.001141)
334. feature 390 (0.001138)
335. feature 389 (0.001106)
336. feature 297 (0.001098)
337. feature 518 (0.001071)
338. feature 79 (0.001045)
339. feature 203 (0.001045)
340. feature 296 (0.001042)
341. feature 485 (0.001040)
342. feature 456 (0.001038)
343. feature 172 (0.001038)
344. feature 234 (0.001032)
345. feature 327 (0.001027)
346. feature 17 (0.001026)
==PAGE:108==
98
Feature importance for Random forest
347. feature 359 (0.001025)
348. feature 48 (0.001024)
349. feature 265 (0.001016)
350. feature 110 (0.001011)
351. feature 141 (0.001010)
352. feature 391 (0.001007)
353. feature 328 (0.000991)
354. feature 455 (0.000970)
355. feature 594 (0.000968)
356. feature 360 (0.000964)
357. feature 516 (0.000956)
358. feature 517 (0.000951)
359. feature 487 (0.000936)
360. feature 454 (0.000931)
361. feature 142 (0.000930)
362. feature 519 (0.000923)
363. feature 266 (0.000910)
364. feature 563 (0.000910)
365. feature 235 (0.000894)
366. feature 111 (0.000891)
367. feature 49 (0.000890)
368. feature 393 (0.000889)
369. feature 470 (0.000889)
370. feature 532 (0.000888)
371. feature 439 (0.000887)
372. feature 173 (0.000886)
373. feature 18 (0.000883)
374. feature 204 (0.000880)
375. feature 80 (0.000879)
376. feature 501 (0.000878)
377. feature 98 (0.000871)
378. feature 408 (0.000871)
379. feature 613 (0.000869)
380. feature 423 (0.000868)
381. feature 298 (0.000866)
382. feature 67 (0.000857)
383. feature 377 (0.000854)
384. feature 329 (0.000847)
385. feature 36 (0.000843)
386. feature 160 (0.000842)
387. feature 315 (0.000842)
388. feature 425 (0.000837)
389. feature 394 (0.000835)
390. feature 581 (0.000833)
391. feature 284 (0.000832)
392. feature 346 (0.000832)
393. feature 191 (0.000830)
394. feature 533 (0.000829)
395. feature 143 (0.000827)
396. feature 129 (0.000825)
397. feature 5 (0.000822)
398. feature 112 (0.000821)
399. feature 50 (0.000814)
400. feature 222 (0.000814)
401. feature 424 (0.000812)
402. feature 19 (0.000812)
403. feature 174 (0.000812)
404. feature 81 (0.000811)
405. feature 68 (0.000811)
406. feature 236 (0.000809)
407. feature 361 (0.000807)
408. feature 253 (0.000806)
409. feature 564 (0.000796)
410. feature 267 (0.000792)
411. feature 595 (0.000786)
412. feature 300 (0.000785)
413. feature 409 (0.000784)
414. feature 502 (0.000783)
415. feature 192 (0.000782)
416. feature 205 (0.000781)
417. feature 6 (0.000777)
418. feature 550 (0.000777)
419. feature 130 (0.000776)
420. feature 161 (0.000773)
421. feature 316 (0.000773)
422. feature 99 (0.000772)
423. feature 37 (0.000772)
424. feature 285 (0.000771)
425. feature 471 (0.000767)
426. feature 440 (0.000767)
427. feature 378 (0.000765)
428. feature 223 (0.000760)
429. feature 347 (0.000759)
430. feature 254 (0.000745)
431. feature 331 (0.000744)
432. feature 20 (0.000744)
433. feature 488 (0.000741)
434. feature 51 (0.000740)
==PAGE:109==
99
435. feature 82 (0.000729)
436. feature 299 (0.000728)
437. feature 362 (0.000726)
438. feature 175 (0.000721)
439. feature 237 (0.000721)
440. feature 614 (0.000713)
441. feature 392 (0.000707)
442. feature 113 (0.000700)
443. feature 301 (0.000699)
444. feature 144 (0.000694)
445. feature 269 (0.000693)
446. feature 83 (0.000689)
447. feature 330 (0.000689)
448. feature 268 (0.000688)
449. feature 332 (0.000677)
450. feature 207 (0.000671)
451. feature 363 (0.000666)
452. feature 582 (0.000666)
453. feature 270 (0.000664)
454. feature 551 (0.000664)
455. feature 615 (0.000659)
456. feature 238 (0.000658)
457. feature 457 (0.000657)
458. feature 206 (0.000657)
459. feature 145 (0.000654)
460. feature 21 (0.000650)
461. feature 176 (0.000650)
462. feature 52 (0.000648)
463. feature 114 (0.000648)
464. feature 617 (0.000629)
465. feature 583 (0.000623)
466. feature 489 (0.000603)
467. feature 239 (0.000597)
468. feature 177 (0.000591)
469. feature 22 (0.000589)
470. feature 426 (0.000581)
471. feature 84 (0.000572)
472. feature 146 (0.000567)
473. feature 115 (0.000564)
474. feature 616 (0.000558)
475. feature 521 (0.000558)
476. feature 208 (0.000556)
477. feature 520 (0.000549)
478. feature 240 (0.000549)
479. feature 395 (0.000547)
480. feature 364 (0.000546)
481. feature 302 (0.000541)
482. feature 333 (0.000532)
483. feature 586 (0.000532)
484. feature 458 (0.000530)
485. feature 490 (0.000517)
486. feature 53 (0.000516)
487. feature 116 (0.000515)
488. feature 147 (0.000514)
489. feature 210 (0.000510)
490. feature 365 (0.000510)
491. feature 552 (0.000508)
492. feature 584 (0.000504)
493. feature 23 (0.000501)
494. feature 271 (0.000497)
495. feature 85 (0.000495)
496. feature 178 (0.000494)
497. feature 54 (0.000491)
498. feature 427 (0.000489)
499. feature 428 (0.000480)
500. feature 272 (0.000478)
501. feature 396 (0.000475)
502. feature 179 (0.000475)
503. feature 459 (0.000474)
504. feature 55 (0.000473)
505. feature 86 (0.000473)
506. feature 334 (0.000469)
507. feature 117 (0.000466)
508. feature 618 (0.000458)
509. feature 553 (0.000457)
510. feature 209 (0.000455)
511. feature 303 (0.000453)
512. feature 554 (0.000448)
513. feature 24 (0.000445)
514. feature 585 (0.000443)
515. feature 241 (0.000440)
516. feature 366 (0.000440)
517. feature 242 (0.000433)
518. feature 397 (0.000426)
519. feature 118 (0.000425)
520. feature 273 (0.000423)
521. feature 523 (0.000420)
522. feature 555 (0.000417)
==PAGE:110==
100
Feature importance for Random forest
523. feature 148 (0.000417)
524. feature 335 (0.000414)
525. feature 56 (0.000413)
526. feature 304 (0.000412)
527. feature 211 (0.000411)
528. feature 180 (0.000407)
529. feature 87 (0.000406)
530. feature 619 (0.000406)
531. feature 149 (0.000405)
532. feature 25 (0.000404)
533. feature 524 (0.000403)
534. feature 274 (0.000399)
535. feature 26 (0.000391)
536. feature 491 (0.000389)
537. feature 556 (0.000387)
538. feature 181 (0.000387)
539. feature 57 (0.000384)
540. feature 367 (0.000383)
541. feature 587 (0.000383)
542. feature 461 (0.000381)
543. feature 182 (0.000381)
544. feature 522 (0.000380)
545. feature 368 (0.000376)
546. feature 243 (0.000376)
547. feature 150 (0.000373)
548. feature 430 (0.000373)
549. feature 525 (0.000371)
550. feature 336 (0.000370)
551. feature 88 (0.000367)
552. feature 119 (0.000366)
553. feature 492 (0.000360)
554. feature 460 (0.000359)
555. feature 213 (0.000357)
556. feature 58 (0.000354)
557. feature 494 (0.000353)
558. feature 244 (0.000353)
559. feature 429 (0.000351)
560. feature 275 (0.000351)
561. feature 89 (0.000346)
562. feature 27 (0.000345)
563. feature 588 (0.000343)
564. feature 306 (0.000343)
565. feature 398 (0.000339)
566. feature 399 (0.000339)
567. feature 493 (0.000339)
568. feature 337 (0.000335)
569. feature 120 (0.000333)
570. feature 151 (0.000330)
571. feature 29 (0.000330)
572. feature 305 (0.000329)
573. feature 431 (0.000328)
574. feature 60 (0.000327)
575. feature 462 (0.000323)
576. feature 557 (0.000323)
577. feature 432 (0.000323)
578. feature 338 (0.000321)
579. feature 91 (0.000320)
580. feature 212 (0.000319)
581. feature 400 (0.000317)
582. feature 61 (0.000312)
583. feature 30 (0.000311)
584. feature 92 (0.000306)
585. feature 526 (0.000305)
586. feature 464 (0.000303)
587. feature 307 (0.000301)
588. feature 245 (0.000300)
589. feature 90 (0.000298)
590. feature 123 (0.000296)
591. feature 121 (0.000286)
592. feature 370 (0.000286)
593. feature 154 (0.000286)
594. feature 216 (0.000285)
595. feature 463 (0.000284)
596. feature 122 (0.000284)
597. feature 369 (0.000282)
598. feature 59 (0.000282)
599. feature 28 (0.000281)
600. feature 371 (0.000281)
601. feature 277 (0.000279)
602. feature 340 (0.000276)
603. feature 276 (0.000276)
604. feature 339 (0.000274)
605. feature 183 (0.000274)
606. feature 153 (0.000272)
607. feature 433 (0.000271)
608. feature 214 (0.000269)
609. feature 401 (0.000268)
610. feature 184 (0.000264)
==PAGE:111==
101
611. feature 152 (0.000264)
612. feature 495 (0.000261)
613. feature 215 (0.000259)
614. feature 309 (0.000258)
615. feature 278 (0.000256)
616. feature 402 (0.000256)
617. feature 246 (0.000256)
618. feature 308 (0.000255)
619. feature 247 (0.000253)
620. feature 185 (0.000246)
==PAGE:112==
102
Feature importance for Random forest
==PAGE:113==
Bibliography
[AM16] Williams Adam McCarthy, Christopher K.I.
Predicting pa-
tient state-of-health using sliding window and reccurent classiﬁers.
arXiv, eprint arXiv:1612.00662, December 2016.
[BBBK11] James S. Bergstra, Rémi Bardenet, Yoshua Bengio, and Balázs
Kégl. Algorithms for hyper-parameter optimization. In J. Shawe-
Taylor, R. S. Zemel, P. L. Bartlett, F. Pereira, and K. Q. Wein-
berger, editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-
tems 24, pages 2546–2554. Curran Associates, Inc., 2011.
[BCB14] Dzmitry Bahdanau, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua Bengio. Neu-
ral machine translation by jointly learning to align and translate.
CoRR, abs/1409.0473, 2014.
[Bri] Denny
Britz.
Attention
and
memory
in
deep
learn-
ing
and
nlp
–
wildml.
http://www.wildml.com/2016/
01/attention-and-memory-in-deep-learning-and-nlp/.
Ac-
cessed in Feb, 2017.
[BSF94] Y. Bengio, P. Simard, and P. Frasconi. Learning long-term depen-
dencies with gradient descent is diﬃcult. IEEE Transactions on
Neural Networks, 5(2):157–166, Mar 1994.
[CBS15] Edward Choi, Mohammad Taha Bahadori, and Jimeng Sun. Doc-
tor AI: predicting clinical events via recurrent neural networks.
CoRR, abs/1511.05942, 2015.
[CKL+15] Zhengping Che, David Kale, Wenzhe Li, Mohammad Taha Ba-
hadori, and Yan Liu. Deep computational phenotyping. In Pro-
ceedings of the 21th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on
==PAGE:114==
104
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, KDD ’15, pages 507–516,
New York, NY, USA, 2015. ACM.
[DC16] Nature
Davide
Castelvecchi.
Can
we
open
the
black
box
of
ai?
http://www.nature.com/news/
can-we-open-the-black-box-of-ai-1.20731,
oct
2016.
Accessed in May, 2017.
[DS17] Massachusetts Institute of Technology David Sontag.
Machine
learning for healthcare, lecture 1 : What makes healthcare unique?,
jan 2017.
[EC16] Walter F Stewart Jimeng Sun Edward Choi, Andy Schuetz. Using
reccurent neural network models for early detection of heart failure
onset. Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association,
292, 2016.
[ESM17] Steven Escaravage Ernest Sohn, Joachim Roski and Kevin Maloy.
Four lessons in the adoption of machine learning in health care.
Health Aﬀairs blog, 2017.
[FMRP+10] U. Feroze, D. Martin, A. Reina-Patton, K. Kalantar-Zadeh, and
J. D. Kopple. Mental health, depression, and anxiety in patients
on maintenance dialysis.
Iran J Kidney Dis, 4(3):173–180, Jul
2010.
[GBC16] Ian Goodfellow, Yoshua Bengio, and Aaron Courville. Deep Learn-
ing. MIT Press, 2016. http://www.deeplearningbook.org.
[Gra12] Alex Graves. TSupervised Sequence Labelling with Recurrent Neu-
ral Networks. Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg, 2012. An optional
note.
[HCC+14] Awni Y. Hannun, Carl Case, Jared Casper, Bryan Catanzaro, Greg
Diamos, Erich Elsen, Ryan Prenger, Sanjeev Satheesh, Shubho
Sengupta, Adam Coates, and Andrew Y. Ng. Deep speech: Scaling
up end-to-end speech recognition. CoRR, abs/1412.5567, 2014.
[Hyp17] Hyperopt. What is hyperopt?
https://www.hyperopt.github.
io/hyperopt, 2017. Accessed in April, 2017.
[IS15] Sergey Ioﬀe and Christian Szegedy. Batch normalization: Accel-
erating deep network training by reducing internal covariate shift.
CoRR, abs/1502.03167, 2015.
[J07] Butler J. Handbook of liaison psychiatry. 1st:p.506–26, 2007.
==PAGE:115==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
105
[Jaa17] Laura C. Bernard G. Jaar. Preventing repeat hospitalizations in
dialysis patients: a call for action. 76(3):249–251, 2017.
[JB12] Yoshua Bengio James Bergstra.
Random search for hyper-
parameter optimization. Journal of Machine Learning Research,
13 (2012) 281-305, Submitted 3/11; Revised 9/11; Published 2/12.
[JB13] David D. Cox James Bergstra, Dan Yamins. Hyperopt: A python
library for optimizing the hyperparameters of machine learning
algorithms.
PYTHON IN SCIENCE CONF., PROC. OF THE
12th, (SCIPY 2013).
[JH17] PhD; Talisha Searcy MPA MA; Vaishali Patel PhD MPH
JaWanna Henry, MPH; Yuriy Pylypchuk. Adoption of electronic
health record systems among u.s. non-federal acute care hospitals:
2008-2015. ONC Data Brief 35, 2017.
[Kar15] Andrej Karpathy.
The unreasonable eﬀectiveness of recur-
rent neural networks. http://karpathy.github.io/2015/05/21/
rnn-effectiveness/, May 21, 2015.
[KB14] Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochas-
tic optimization. CoRR, abs/1412.6980, 2014.
[KDG15] Nal Kalchbrenner, Ivo Danihelka, and Alex Graves.
Grid long
short-term memory. CoRR, abs/1507.01526, 2015.
[LKEW15] Zachary Chase Lipton, David C. Kale, Charles Elkan, and Ran-
dall C. Wetzel. Learning to diagnose with LSTM recurrent neural
networks. CoRR, abs/1511.03677, 2015.
[MA17] Erik Gillsbro Mattias Albinsson. Imputation methods in dialysis
data.
http://www.lunduniversity.lu.se/lup/publication/
8912742, May,2017. Accessed June, 2017.
[Mon16] Mike Montgomery. The future of health care is in data analytics.
https://www.forbes.com/sites/mikemontgomery/2016/10/
26/the-future-of-health-care-is-in-data-analytics/
#661a01323ee2, Oct 2016. Accessed June,2017.
[Nata] Glomerular ﬁltration rate (gfr). https://www.kidney.org/atoz/
content/gfr. Accessed in May, 2017.
[Natb] A to z health guide, national kidney foundation. https://www.
kidney.org/atoz/content/dialysisinfo.
Accessed in March,
2017.
==PAGE:116==
106
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[Nie] Michael Nielsen.
Neural networks and deep learning.
http://
neuralnetworksanddeeplearning.com. Accessed in May 2017.
[Nie17a] Michael Nielsen. How the backpropagation algorithm works. http:
//neuralnetworksanddeeplearning.com/chap2.html, jan 2017.
Accessed in Feb, 2017.
[Nie17b] Michael Nielsen.
Introducing convolutional networks.
http:
//neuralnetworksanddeeplearning.com/chap6.html, jan 2017.
Accessed in March, 2017.
[Nie17c] Michael Nielsen.
Why are deep neural networks hard to train?
http://neuralnetworksanddeeplearning.com/chap5.html, jan
2017. Accessed in March,2017.
[NYH15] Peter Andras Lynn Rochester Richard Walker Thomas Ploetz Nils
Yannick Hammerla, James Fisher.
Pd disease state assessment
in naturalistic environments using deep learning. AAAI Publica-
tions,, Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence,
February 18, 2015.
[Ola] Christopher
Olah.
Understanding
lstm
networks
–
colah’s
blog.
http://colah.github.io/posts/
2015-08-Understanding-LSTMs/. Accessed in Feb, 2017.
[PJ09] Laura C. Plantinga and Bernard G. Jaar. Preventing repeat hos-
pitalizations in dialysis patients: a call for action. Kidney Inter-
national, 76(3):249 – 251, 2009.
[Rei16] Matthew
J
Reid.
Black-box
machine
learn-
ing:
implications
for
healthcare.
https:
//www.polygeia.com/single-post/2017/04/06/
Black-box-machine-learning-implications-for-healthcare,
april 2016. Accessed in April,2017.
[Rud] Sebastian
Ruder.
An
overview
of
gradient
descent
optimization
algorithms.
http://sebastianruder.
com/optimizing-gradient-descent/index.html#
gradientdescentvariants. Accessed in Feb, 2017.
[Rud16] Sebastian Ruder.
An overview of gradient descent optimization
algorithms. CoRR, abs/1609.04747, 2016.
[S0216] Us renal data system 2015 annual data report: Epidemiology of
kidney disease in the united states. American Journal of Kidney
Diseases, 67(Supplement 1):A4, 2016.
==PAGE:117==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
107
[SFW17] Joe Kai Jonathan M. Garibaldi Nadeem Qureshi Stephen F. Weng,
Jenna Reps.
Can machine-learning improve cardiovascular risk
prediction using routine clinical data? PLoS ONE, 12(4), April 4,
2017.
[SHK+14] Nitish
Srivastava,
Geoﬀrey
Hinton,
Alex
Krizhevsky,
Ilya
Sutskever, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov.
Dropout: A simple way
to prevent neural networks from overﬁtting. Journal of Machine
Learning Research, 15:1929–1958, 2014.
[Sin16] Jatinder Singh.
The tech-legal aspects of machine learn-
ing:considerations for moving forward. 2016.
[STC16] Science and UK parliament Technology Committee, House of Com-
mons. Science and technology committee (house of commons), re-
port on robotics and artiﬁcial intelligence, 2016.
[TAL13] Mia A. Levy Thomas A. Lasko, Joshua C. Denny.
Computa-
tional phenotype discovery using unsupervised feature learning
over noisy, sparse, and irregular clinical data. PLOS ONE, 8(8)),
June 24, 2013.
[TBP15] P. T. Teo, N. Bruce, and S. Pistorius. Application and Parametric
Studies of a Sliding Window Neural Network for Respiratory Mo-
tion Predictions of Lung Cancer Patients, pages 595–598. Springer
International Publishing, Cham, 2015.
[Ten] Tensorﬂow.
Sequence-to-sequence
model.
https://www.
tensorflow.org/tutorials/seq2seq#bucketing_and_padding.
Accessed in April,2017.
[TH16] Jerome Friedman Trevor Hastie, Robert Tibshirani. The Elements
of Statistical Learning, Datamining, Inference, and prediction, vol-
ume Second Edition. Springer Series in Statistics, 2016.
[Tib13] Shara
Tibken.
Numbers,
numbers
and
more
numbers.
https://www.wsj.com/articles/
SB10001424052702304692804577285821129341442,
Feb.
14,
2013. Accessed in May, 2017.
