==PAGE:1==
Technical University Of Denmark
Master Thesis
Experimental Determination of Sulfuric Acid
Condensation and Cold Corrosion in a Marine Diesel
Engine
Martin Braae Meyer S072877
June 1, 2017
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Project:
Master Thesis - 35 ECTS points
Location:
Technical University of Denmark, Department of
Mechanical Engineering, Section of Thermal Energy
Carried out by:
Martin Braae Meyer, s072877
Project title:
Experimental Determination of Sulfuric Acid Condensation
and Cold Corrosion in a Marine Diesel Engine
Supervisors:
Professor Jesper Schramm
Researcher Rasmus Faurskov Cordtz
PhD Student Lars Kjemtrup
Project time frame:
1st of September 2016 until 1st of June 2017
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
This master project deals with experimental determination of sulfuric acid condensation
and subsequent cold corrosion on the cylinder liner. This work follows Work Package 1
of the SULCOR project - a project made in collaboration between the Mechanical and
Chemical Department of DTU and MAN Diesel & Turbo.
The International Maritime Organization has passed legislation designed to cut down
on emissions. These legislations sets requirements to a ships eﬃciency and to the amount
of sulfur content of the fuel. To improve eﬃciency, an operating practice called slow steam-
ing has become a common practice. Liner temperatures during slow steaming promotes
condensation of corrosive sulfuric acid which is formed during the combustion process
of sulfur-containing fuel. Corrosion as a consequence of acid condensation on cold liner
surface is termed cold corrosion.
The focus of the work is to conduct corrosion experiments on a BUKH-DV24 two-cylinder,
four stroke diesel engine which has been build and reﬁned during the project. While the
engine is running at constant speed and with ﬁxed liner and oil temperature the intake
gas is conditioned with diﬀerent solutions of various concentrations of water and sulfuric
acid. Oil samples from each experiment are analysed with standard test method ASTM
D7751-16.
Results of the experiments has shown that it is possible to make sulfuric acid condensate
on the cylinder liner. A condensation model displays good ability to predict the amount
of condensed sulfur. When sulfuric acid condenses on the cylinder liner an accumulation
of iron particles can be measured in the lubrication oil. The share of iron accumulation
increases with increasing sulfuric acid concentration in the solution. Accumulation of iron
particles does not occur unless sulfuric acid is present in the intake gas. The test results
combined with a visual inspection leads to the conclusion that it is possible experimentally
to make sulfuric acid condensate onto the liner and cause cold corrosion.
i
==PAGE:6==
==PAGE:7==
Resum´e
Denne rapport er skrevet som afrapportering af afgangsprojektet Eksperimentel bestem-
melse af svovlsyre kondensation og koldkorrosion i en marin diesel motorer der er gen-
nemført p˚a kandidatuddannelsen i Konstruktion og Mekanik p˚a Danmarks Tekniske Uni-
versitet. Projekt er kørt sideløbende med SULCOR projektet Work Package 1.
Projektet omhandler eksperimentel bestemmelse af svovlsyrekondensation og
efterfølgende koldkorrosion p˚a cylinderforingerne i en BUKH-DV24 to cylinder, ﬁretakts
dieselmotor. Arbejdet følger Work Package 1 i SULCOR projektet - et projekt i samar-
bejde mellem DTU Mekanik, DTU Kemi og MAN Diesel & Turbo.
I kraft af strengere emissionskrav p˚alagt af IMO har man fra motorproducenternes side
kommet p˚a tiltag som begrænser emissionen. Et tiltag er slow steaming hvor motoren
arbejder ved dellast. Herved spares der brændstof og udledningen mindskes. Under slow
steaming bliver foringstemperaturen lav nok til, at vand og svovlsyre, som er restproduk-
ter fra afbrændingen af brændstoﬀet, kan udkondenseres. Sker dette korroderes lineren -
et fænomen kaldet koldkorrosion.
Projektet undersøger svovlsyrens korroderende egenskaber og mekanismen bag kondenser-
ing. Arbejdet med den eksperimentelle forsøgsmotor færdiggøres s˚aledes at forsøg kan
foretages under rette betingelser. Motoren bliver drevet af en elmotor for at udelukke
usikkerheder fra forbrændingsprocessen. Under forsøgene holdes motorens hastighed, tem-
peraturen af cylinderforingen og smøringsolien konstante. Forsøg hvor motorens indsug-
ningsgas f˚ar tilsat opløsninger af vand og svolvsyre med forskellig koncentrationer køres.
Olieprøver udtages med faste intervaller og analyseres ved m˚alemetoden ASTM D7751-16.
Resultaterne fra eksperimenterne viser at det er muligt, at f˚a svolvsyre til at udkon-
densere p˚a cylinderforingerne. N˚ar dette sker m˚ales der en ophobning af jernpartikler
i smøreolien. Dette sker ikke n˚ar der kun er vand tilstede i indsugningsgassen. Resul-
taterne viser ligeledes, at jernopbygningen øges med andelen af svovlsyren i opløsningen.
En kondenseringsmodel viser lovende resultater i forudsigelse af den udkondenserende
svovlmængde. M˚aleresultater og en visuel inspektion af motoren ledes til konklusionen at
svovlsyrekondensering p˚a cylinderforingerne er mulig, og at det for˚arsager koldkorrosion.
iii
==PAGE:8==
==PAGE:9==
Preface
This Master Thesis is the result of the work conducted at the Technical University of Den-
mark. The project Experimental Determination of Sulfuric Acid Condensation and Cold
Corrosion in a Marine Diesel Engine has extended over the period of 1st of September
2016 until 1st of June 2017.
The project deals with sulfuric acid condensation and cold corrosion in a BUKH-DV24
engine. A substantial part of the work has been the experimental work of setting up a
functional experimental test rig and investigating the sulfur and iron accumulation when
the intake gas is conditioned with a water and sulfuric acid solution.
A special thanks supervisor Professor Jesper Schramm for useful sparring and sugges-
tions to the work. Also a very special thanks to Researcher Rasmus Faurskov Cordtz
for his countless sparring and guidance throughout this study. I also want to express
my sincere gratitude to PhD Student Lars Kjemtrup without whose advice and valuable
guidance this project work would have been impossible.
Martin Braae Meyer
v
==PAGE:10==
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Abstract
i
Resume
iii
Preface
v
Nomenclature
ix
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background and Purpose with the Study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
2
Theory
4
2.1
Sulfuric Acid
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.1.1
Properties of Sulfuric Acid . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.1.2
Sulfuric Acid Corrosion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.3
Formation of Sulfuric Acid in a Marine Engine . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2
Condensation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2.1
Condensation Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3
Experimental Method
19
3.1
Experimental Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.1.1
Engine unit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.1.2
Oil lubrication unit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.1.3
The intake air unit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.2
Lubrication Oil when Testing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.3
Intake Gas Composition
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.4
Test Procedure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.5
XRF Analysis of Oil Samples
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4
Results
37
4.1
Condition of the Engine
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.1.1
Sulfur Accumulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.1.2
Iron Accumulation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.2
The Inﬂuence of Water . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.2.1
Sulfur Accumulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.2.2
Iron Accumulation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.3
Inﬂuence of Acid with 500 ppm Sulfur
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.3.1
Sulfur Accumulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.3.2
Iron Accumulation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
4.4
Inﬂuence of Acid with 1000 ppm Sulfur . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
vii
==PAGE:12==
4.4.1
Sulfur Accumulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
4.4.2
Iron Accumulation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
4.5
Comparing all Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
4.6
Visual Inspection of the Engine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
5
Discussion and Future Work
65
6
Conclusion
67
Appendix A
72
Appendix B
80
Appendix C
83
viii
==PAGE:13==
Nomenclature
B
[mm]
Cylinder bore
D
[m2/s]
Diﬀusion coeﬃcient
DAB
[m2/s]
Binary diﬀusion coeﬃcient
CAdt
[s/CAD]
Seconds per crank angle
γ
[-]
Heat capacity ratio
h
W/m2K
Heat transfer coeﬃcient
hm
[kg−m/s]
Mass transfer coeﬃcient
L
[mm]
Length
Le
[-]
Lewis number
Ka
[-]
Acid dissociation constant
N
[kmol/s·m2]
Molar ﬂux
n
[-]
Gas turbulence intensity
J
[kmol/s·m2]
Diﬀusive ﬂux
gA
[kg/m2CAD]
Deposited acid
p
[Bar]
Pressure
Sp
[m/s]
Mean piston speed
ps
[Bar]
Partial pressure
Q
[J]
Energy
R
[J/kg·K]
Speciﬁc gas constant
ρ
[kg/m3]
Density
T
[◦C]
Temperature
θ
[CAD]
Crank shaft angles
V
[m3]
Volume
w
[m/s]
Characteristic velocity
x
[mol/mol]
Molefraction
g
[kg/m2−s]
Diﬀusive ﬂux
σ
[m/s]
Mass transfer coeﬃcient
ix
==PAGE:14==
Subscripts
A
Acid (sulfuric acid)
CA
Connection Arm
CR
Connection Rod
DP
Dewpoint
i
Initial
loss
Lost energy
HR
Heat release
w
Waste
s
Substance (water or sulfuric acid)
Abbreviations
ABDC
After Bottom Dead Center
ATDC
After Top Dead Center
BBDC
Before Bottom Dead Center
BDC
Bottom dead center
BTDC
Before Top Dead Center
CAD
Crank angle degrees
CLO
Cylinder Lubricant Oil
ECA
Emission Controlled Areas
ED-XRD
Energy Dispersive X-Ray Fluorescence
EEDI
Energy Eﬃciency Design Index
EVO
Exhaust valve opening
HFO
Heavy Fuel Oil
GHG
Green House Gas
IMO
International Maritime Organisation
IVC
Intake valve closing
rpm
Rotations per minute
TDC
Top dead center
x
==PAGE:15==
==PAGE:16==
Chapter 1
Introduction
1.1
Background and Purpose with the Study
Transport of goods by ship form the backbone of the worlds economy. More than 80 %
[19] of the global trade is transported by sea in a cost and energy eﬃcient way. Without
international shipping it is safe to say that modern world would not exist. The driving
force in the development of ships is the prospect of increasing economic growth coupled
with increased eﬃciency. Bigger ships capable of carrying ever increasing loads with min-
imal running- and fuel cost is key to achieving this goal. Although it is not only the
economy that promotes this agenda.
From a global society aspect a more eﬃcient and clean international shipping would ben-
eﬁt the population of the entire globe. It is no secret that the fuel used by the ships
engines are basically a waste product of the reﬁnery production and very polluting when
used in a combustion engine making it toxic to the environment and human health.
According to The International Maritime Organization (IMO), the governing body of in-
ternational shipping, international shipping on average accounts 2.4% of the global GHG
emission when looking at a period from 2007-2012 [28]. With respect to NOx and SOx
international shipping accounted for 13% and 12% of the global NOx and SOx emission in
the same period. This makes the shipping industry a major contributor to global warming
and because of this the IMO is taking legislative steps to counter this.
From July of 2011 it has been a requirement that all new ships must comply with the
Energy Eﬃciency Design Index (EEDI). The EEDI sets a requirement of how much CO2
can be emitted per tonne-mile of goods transported for diﬀerent ship type. This will
ensure a reduction in CO2 emission of 20% by 2020 and 30% by 2025 when comparing to
an average ship of same type built between 2000-2010 [18].
Likewise requirement to reduce NOx and SOx has also been implemented.
For SOx
this means that, as of 2020 ships sailing within ECA, Emission Controlled Areas, are per-
mitted to use fuel with an allowable sulfur content of up to 1000 ppm while ships outside
ECA areas must switch to fuel with a sulfur content of up to 5000 ppm.
These stricter emission standards have forced the manufacture of marine engines to come
up with new ways of improving the eﬃciency. One way of improving the eﬃciency is
by changing the operation practice of the engine by running it on part load termed slow
steaming. According to MAN Diesel & Turbo reducing the speed by e.g. 6 knots reduced
1
==PAGE:17==
the power requirements by some 65 % [38] and hence reduce CO, CO2, NOx and SOx
emission.
Although, it is not without problems running the engine on part load. A phenomena
called cold corrosion is found increasingly during the changed conditions of slow steaming
and it greatly decreases the lifetime of piston liners, valves and piston rings among others.
Sulfuric acid is formed during the combustion process where sulfur from the fuel is ox-
idized and subsequently reacts with water to form sulfuric acid H2SO4 which is highly
corrosive. The turbocharger boost pressure during slow steaming is increased to ensure
optimized combustion conditions making the partial pressures of components within the
cylinders higher than normal. During slow steaming the liner temperatures are lower
when comparing to running on full load and this promotes more condensation of water
and sulfuric acid onto the liner causing corrosion hence the term cold corrosion. The
combined eﬀect of cold corrosion with abrasive wear from the piston rings scraping up
and down the liner surface give rise to a phenomenon called tribocorrosion. When tribo-
corrosion occurs, wear on the liner and piston rings increases dramatically.
The work of this thesis follows Work Package 1 of the SULCOR project - a project
carried out in collaboration between the Department of Mechanical Engineering and De-
partment of Chemical Engineering at the Technical University of Denmark and MAN
Diesel & Turbo along with other international partners [27]. A test rig is build at DTU
MEK where tests on a BUKH-DV24 two-cylinder, four stroke diesel engine are conducted,
see Fig. 1.1.
The purpose of this thesis is to see whether it is possible experimentally to make a
charged gas conditioned with a water and sulfuric acid solution condense on a cylinder
liner and then subsequently give rise to an increase of iron particles in the lubricant oil.
During the experiments the engine is kept at close to steady state condition with oil and
liner temperature constant. The liners will be kept at a temperature promoting conden-
sation of water and sulfuric acid. Meanwhile the engine is running at constant rpm during
the entire experiments. Oil samples are continuously collected for analysis of its chemi-
cal elemental composition by an ED-XRF. Several tests with diﬀerent concentrations of
water and sulfuric acid solutions will be conducted. This is to see whether there is a
connection between the concentration of sulfuric acid in the intake gas and the amount
of iron accumulating. Experiments where the intake gas is conditioned with water alone
will also be conducted. This is to investigate waters inﬂuence on iron accumulation. If
iron particles starts to accumulate as a consequence of sulfuric acid present in the intake
gas, then this indicates that cold corrosion takes place on the liner. The results of the
sulfur condensation experiments are compared with a condensation model proposed by
Researcher Rasmus Cordtz.
2
==PAGE:18==
Figure 1.1: BUKH-DV24ME test rig
3
==PAGE:19==
Chapter 2
Theory
2.1
Sulfuric Acid
Sulfuric acid is the most manufactured chemical of all chemical products. As of 2011 the
annual production of sulfuric acid was estimated at 260 milliontonnes [26]. Sulfuric acid
is mainly used in the production of fertilizer. Around 50 % [26] is used in the process of
phosphoric acid which in turn makes phosphate fertilizer. Besides fertilizer it is used in a
wide variety of things spanning from production of chemical acids, explosives and drugs
to the reﬁning of petroleum and other reﬁnery products. Sulfuric acid is also greatly used
in the metal processing industry e.g. as a cleaner of steel and iron before plating in a
process called pickling.
2.1.1
Properties of Sulfuric Acid
Sulfuric acid is a colorless to slightly yellowish oily substance used in various concentra-
tions. It is very corrosive and toxic and when mixed with water it completely dissociates.
Fig. 2.1 gives a comparison of the acidity of diﬀerent acids. Sulfuric acid range among
the strongest acids of all. The Ka values listed in Fig. 2.1 describes the acids ability to
dissociate. Ka for sulfuric acid is larger than 1 which means that all of the acid dissociates
into conjugate base and hydrogen ions in a solution.
Figure 2.1: Acid strength for diﬀerent acids [25]
4
==PAGE:20==
The sulfuric acid molecule consists of a center sulfur atom with four oxygen atoms
attached to it. Two of the oxygen atoms have double-bonds while the remaining two have
a single bond to the sulfur atom and a single bond to one hydrogen atom, see Fig. 2.2.
Figure 2.2: Solid state structure of sulfuric acid
As can be seen in Fig. 2.2 sulfuric acid is a diprotic acid meaning that it is capable of
delivering two hydrogen ions per molecule when dissociated in water. For concentrated
sulfuric acid this means that it is a highly oxidizing and dehydrating agent which has
high aﬃnity for water. When it is dissolved in water it reacts vigorously in an exothermic
reaction see reaction 2.1.
H2SO4 + H2O ↔H3O+ + HSO−
4
(2.1)
HSO−
4 + H2O →H3O+ + SO2−
4
Some general properties for sulfuric acid are found in Tab. 2.1
Property
Value
Unit
Molecular formula
H2SO4
[-]
Molecular weight
98.072
[ g/mol]
Density 95-97 %
1.84
[g/cm3]
Boiling point
337
[◦C]
Vapour pressure (20 ◦C)
0.001
[mmHg]
Table 2.1: Sulfuric acid properties[15]
2.1.2
Sulfuric Acid Corrosion
Sulfuric acids corrosive ability varies with its concentration and temperature. In concen-
trated form the amount of water present in sulfuric acid solution is very limited and by
looking at reaction 2.1 this would mean the equilibrium is shifted toward left. Here very
little acid is dissociated making the solution rich in H2SO4 molecules and lean in H+ ions.
For a corrosion process to occur free ions capable of carrying a charge is needed within
the solution and therefore the corrosive capabilities of concentrated sulfuric acid is lim-
ited. Sulfuric acids corrosive properties can be studied by looking at its conductivity. In
5
==PAGE:21==
Fig. 2.3 the conductivity of sulfuric acid at various Fahrenheit temperature ranging from
0-240 ◦F and at diﬀerent concentrations is given. The bottom curve is the conductivity
of sulfuric acid at 0 ◦F and the top is at 240 ◦F.
Figure 2.3: Constant temperature curves of conductivity versus concentration [12]
The conductivity follows a characteristic humped curve with maximum conductivity
for all temperatures in the range of 25-35 % concentration. In this range the number of
ions within the sulfuric acid solution is such that the the highest conductivity is found
making the acid the most corrosive in this region.
The eﬀect of temperature on the
reaction kinetics is quite clearly visible. As the temperature increases the solutions vis-
cosity will decrease giving an increased mobility of ions in the solution. Furthermore, as
temperature increases this leads to an increase in ions in the solution because of further
dissociation of molecules [5] thereby increasing its corrosive abilities.
Sulfuric acids corrosive capabilities when it comes to a metal varies a lot.
One way
of examining a metals corrosion resistance is through an iso-corrosion diagram. In Fig.
2.4 such a diagram shows the corrosion rate of stainless steel alloys 304 and 316. Piping
of the intake system on the test rig consists of metals very similar to these. The lines
represents a corrosion rate of of 0.1 mm/year at various temperatures and acid concentra-
tions. At temperatures or concentrations above the line the corrosion rates are higher
than 0.1 mm/year while below the line the corrosion rate is lower than 0.1 mm/year. From
the diagram it is obvious that neither the temperature nor the sulfuric acid concentration
6
==PAGE:22==
needs to increase substantially before corrosion rates higher than 0.1 mm/year are found for
both stainless steel alloys. This underlines the harsh environment created by the presence
of sulfuric acid.
Figure 2.4: Iso-corrosion diagram for stainless steels in sulfuric acid [1]
Metals which are not of stainless steel are inherently prone to corrosion at a much
higher scale. The cylinder liner of BUKH-DV24 engine consists of ordinary cast iron.
This mainly consists of iron with no corrosion-resistant elements added to the metal. A
cylinder liner from the BUKH-DV24 has been analysed by the ED-XRF, see results in
Tab. 2.2.
Alloy type
304
316
Cylinder liner
Chromium
17
16
0.35
[%]
Nickel
8
10
0.2
[%]
Molybdenum
-
2
-
[%]
Sulfur
0.03
0.03
0.09
[%]
Table 2.2: The chemical composition of 304 [34], 316 [23] [35] and BUKH-DV24 cylin-
der liner from ED-XRF analysis.
To see how the cast iron of the cylinder liner behaves in an electrochemical system a
potential/pH diagram or Pourbaix diagram is useful. A Pourbaix diagram for iron will
give a hint of the liners corrosive resistance. The diagram displays the diﬀerent metal
ions and compounds that the metal forms in a given system at 25 ◦C [24].
7
==PAGE:23==
Figure 2.5: Pourbaix diagram for iron [37]
Passivation is the formation of an oxide layer on the surface of the metal which essen-
tially is corrosion. Therefore, from Fig. 2.5 iron will corrode or create a passive oxide layer
under almost all circumstances no matter the potential or the pH value. This highlights
the importance of keeping the cylinder liner free of any electrolytes.
Looking at the reaction between sulfuric acid and iron there are two outcomes. If the
sulfuric acid is concentrated the reaction with iron creates iron(II) sulfate (ferrous sulfate)
and iron(III) sulfate (ferric sulfate)
3Fe + 8H2SO4 →FeSO4 + Fe2(SO4)3 + 4SO2 + 8H2O
(2.2)
If the sulfuric acid is diluted it creates iron(II) sulfate
Fe + H2SO4 →FeSO4 + H2
(2.3)
2.1.3
Formation of Sulfuric Acid in a Marine Engine
The heavy fuel oil (HFO) fueling large diesel marine engines contains sulfur of up to 3.5
wt%. During the combustion process the fuel is oxidized forming compounds such as
sulfur dioxide SO2. A fraction of this SO2 later converts into sulfur trioxide SO3. The
amount of SO3 formed from combustion of HFO is investigated both on a model basis
and experimentally by R. Cordtz [7] [10].
Using a 0D phenomenological multizone model with complex sulfur reaction mechanism
the formation of SO3 at various engine loads is simulated. After the combustion of fuel
and as the gas expands and cools down, SO3 start to form at the expense of SO2. This
happens when the temperature of the expansion gas is between 1300-2000 K. The study
shows that the amount of SO3 formed depends on the load conditions of the engine and
the fuel quality, hence sulfur content. Result from the model study shows a conversion
8
==PAGE:24==
of fuel sulfur to SO3 between 2.7-3.69 % with declining conversion as the load increases.
This is for fuel with sulfur content of 2 wt%. The model therefore predicts SO3 concen-
tration of less than 20 ppmv in the combustion gas [9].
Similar results are found from experimental work where SO3 levels in combustion gasses
from burnt HFO are measured by SO3 monitor. Results show that 0.5-2.4 % SO3 is
formed from fuel sulfur corresponding to 4-14 ppmv. This is for a fuel with a sulfur con-
tent of 1.6 wt% and 2.24 wt%. If the fuel sulfur content is further increased e.g. 4.5 wt%
sulfur content, the SO3 concentration increases to 38-47 ppmv [10].
Besides fuel sulfur content, the contributing factors to SO3 formation is the operating
conditions of the engine. By reducing the load, the SO3 conversion is promoted. This
is because the reduced load increases the mixing time of air and gas which beneﬁts the
SO3 formation. Also contributing to SO3 formation is elevated pressure and premixed
combustion.
During the combustion process a lot of water is present in the combustion gas.
Sul-
furic acid H2SO4 is formed when SO3 reacts with H2O in the bulk gas. This happens
within the combustion gas when temperatures are lower than 1000 K. and primarily close
to the liner surface where temperatures are lower.
Calculating the actual amount of
formed sulfuric acid is a very complicated matter since it is dependent on many factors.
Considering that SO3 and H2O reacts in the ratio of 1 to 1 potentially all SO3 in the
combustion gas could react to form H2SO4.
9
==PAGE:25==
2.2
Condensation
Predicting the amount of condensation in a real working engine is not straight forward.
There is a lot of things going on during the combustion process that aﬀects the amount
of condensation and where the condensation is taking place. Bulk gas within a cylinder
contains a lot of diﬀerent species, among them water and SO3. As determined in the
previous section SO3 can react with water to form sulfuric acid. Condensation of water
and sulfuric acid onto to the liner wall occurs if the temperature of the liner surface is
lower than the dewpoint temperature of the two species. Water is a major combustion
product compared to SO3 [9] and sulfuric acid is therefore heavily diluted if/when water
condenses. Now, a cylinder liner is continuously lubricated with an oil containing addi-
tives specially designed to seize and neutralize harmful components from the combustion
process. If the condensation takes place on an oil ﬁlm containing neutralizing additives,
the model studies show that a complete neutralization of harmful components from the
combustion process should occur [6]. If the cylinder liner is properly lubricated severe
corrosion from condensation should not take place. In reality sulfur fuel leads to increased
wear and liner corrosion [8] and it is especially pronounced when operating under slow
steaming conditions.
A model proposed by R. Cordtz [7] seeks to determine the amount of sulfuric acid con-
densing onto the liner. The model is reviewed in the following section, Appendix A.
2.2.1
Condensation Model
Results of the condensation model will be compared to the results obtained during the
BUKH-DV24 engine testing. The condensation model is based on multiple assumptions:
• The composition of the gas within the cylinder is homogeneous and that the
condensation is due to convective heat and mass transfer from bulk to liner
• Gas complies with ideal gas conditions
• Gas pressure within the cylinder is uniform
• The air is dry and consists of 79% N2 and 21% O2
• Blow-by eﬀects are neglected
• The cylinder geometry is determined by the bore, the position of the piston within
the cylinder and compression ratio
• No abrupt liner cooling of the acid is taking place which could otherwise cause an
overestimate of acid deposition
Now in reality, the gas mixture within the cylinder is far from homogeneous but very
irregular with rich and lean zones creating turbulent intensities which would make mod-
eling very diﬃcult.
During testing the BUKH-DV24 engine is kept under conditions which is quite simi-
lar to the conditions made for the model. Mixing of acid and air in the intake system is
taking place far from the inlet of the cylinder enabling for the gas to become homogeneous.
Furthermore there are no combustion taking place eliminating the turbulent inﬂuence of
combustion to the gas mixture. The lack of combustion also means that the temperature
10
==PAGE:26==
ﬂuctuations during each cycle is more limited with no acid mist formation.
The model is divided into three parts.
The ﬁrst part is an engine model.
Based on
the geometry of the BUKH-DV24 engine the model uses the following diﬀerential equa-
tion to determine the varying bulk gas pressure per crank angle degree (CAD) from 0 to
360 CAD.
dp
dθ = 1 −γ
V
dQw
dθ −γ p
V
dV
dθ
(2.4)
Where θ is the angle of the crank shaft, γ is the heat capacity ratio and Qw is the sum
of two components - the Qloss which is the energy loss due to friction and QHR the heat
release from the combustion of fuel. V is the volume inside the cylinder. The changing
volume per crank angle is determined from the following diﬀerential equation
dV
dθ = πB2
4

sin(θ) + LCA
2LCR
sin(2θ)

· LCA
(2.5)
B is the cylinder bore while LCA and LCR are the length of the connection arm and connec-
tion rod. The temperature of the gas is found from the ideal gas law. An initial gas state
is set at ’Intake Valve Closing’ (IVC) where the temperature, volume and pressure of the
charged gas is determined. At IVC the energy loss Qw,IV C = 0. Likewise the molar com-
position of the charged gas at IVC is deﬁned. With an initial condition of the charged gas
set, it is a matter of solving the system of Eq. 2.4 and Eq. 2.5 along with the ideal gas law.
The following ﬁgures are based on the initial conditions from Tab. 2.3. These initial
conditions are representative of the conditions found during actual testing on the BUKH-
DV24 engine.
Parameter
Value
Unit
pIV C
1.15
[Bar]
VIV C
4.8 · 10−4
[m3]
TIV C
160
[◦C]
xH2SO4,IV C
31.5
[ppm]
xH2O,IV C
57200
[ppm]
xair,IV C
942768.5
[ppm]
Qw,IV C
0
[J]
Table 2.3: Initial condition parameters at IVC
11
==PAGE:27==
Stroke (mm)
-80
-60
-40
-20
0
20
40
60
80
Pressure [Bar]
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
Figure 2.6: Total gas pressure
12
==PAGE:28==
Stroke (mm)
-80
-60
-40
-20
0
20
40
60
80
Temperature [◦C]
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
Figure 2.7: Gas temperature
Position 0 mm correspond to the piston being at TDC. From Fig. 2.6 and Fig. 2.7 the
pressure and temperature of the trapped gas has a spiked shaped curve. As the volume
compresses the pressure and temperature increases until peaking at TDC. It is clear that
both the pressure and the temperature of the gas doubles several times from IVC to TDC.
With the total gas pressure determined, the partial pressures of water and sulfuric acid
in the bulk gas relative to the crank angle can be found. These partial pressures are
shown in Fig. 2.8 and Fig. 2.9. The partial pressure of each species is equivalent to the
pressure each of them would exert if they were alone within the volume. The maximum
pressure at which the partial pressure can assert at a given temperature corresponds to
the saturation vapour pressure for that species.
13
==PAGE:29==
Stroke (mm)
-80
-60
-40
-20
0
20
40
60
80
Pressure [Bar]
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
Figure 2.8: Partial pressure of water
14
==PAGE:30==
Stroke (mm)
-80
-60
-40
-20
0
20
40
60
80
Pressure [Bar]
×10-3
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
Figure 2.9: Partial pressure of sulfuric acid
The magnitude of each partial pressures are depicted by the fraction of the substance
in the gas. Since the fraction of water is many times larger than the fraction of sulfu-
ric acid so is the partial pressure of water compared to the partial pressure of sulfuric acid.
The second part of the model determines the dewpoint temperatures for water and sulfuric
acid. The model uses a correlation suggested by Verhoﬀand Banchero [39] to determine
the dew point temperature of sulfuric acid. This correlation is based on empirical for-
mula and experimental data of acid dew points in relation to bulk gas partial pressure of
SO3/H2SO4 and H2O [7].
1
TDP
= 2276 · 10−6 −2943 · 10−8 ln(pH2O) −858 · 10−7 ln(pH2SO4) + ...
620 · 10−8(ln(pH2SO4))(ln(pH2O))
(2.6)
where pH2SO4 and pH2O are the partial pressures of each species within the bulk gas.
The dew point for water is found by an interpolation of tabular values [17] for water in
terms of saturation temperature and pressure and with query point equal to the initial
partial pressure. Fig. 2.10 shows a constant liner temperature along with the dew point
temperature for each species.
15
==PAGE:31==
Stroke [mm]
-80
-60
-40
-20
0
20
40
60
80
Temperature [◦C]
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
220
H2SO4 dew point
H2O dew point
Liner temperature
Figure 2.10: Dew point temperature of water and sulfuric acid along with the liner
temperature
Dew point temperature for both species follows the same progression as the partial
pressure curve with a maximum dew point temperature at TDC. For the sulfuric acid the
dew point temperature is at all time above the liner temperature. This implies that sulfuric
acid condense onto the liner during the entire cycle. For water the liner temperature is
above the dew point except in a narrow range around TDC. Since the fraction of water in
the bulk gas is signiﬁcantly larger than sulfuric acid a substantially larger portion of water
will condense compared to sulfuric acid. It should also be noted that the condensation is
occurring in the upper part of the cylinder as mentioned which ﬁts in terms of corrosion
found in an operating marine diesel engine cylinder.
16
==PAGE:32==
The last part of the model determines the condensing ﬂux. Sulfuric acid is transported
from the bulk gas, through a species boundary layer an onto the gas liquid interface, see
Fig. 2.11
Figure 2.11: Sulfuric acid diﬀusion through gaseous boundary layer
Condensation is perpendicular to the liner surface. In steady state the partial pres-
sure(concentration) of sulfuric acid(A) reduces as it moves through the boundary layer
from the free stream towards the gas-liquid interface. Pressure in the boundary layer
equals the sum of partial pressure of sulfuric acid and air(B)
p = pA + pB
(2.7)
To compensate for the reduced partial pressure of sulfuric acid, the pressure of the air
must increase. Molar transport through the boundary layer is modeled as a molar ﬂux of
sulfuric acid (NA) through air. From Fick’s second law the molar ﬂux NA is comprised
as the sum of convective ﬂux (xAN), where x is molefraction, and diﬀusive ﬂux (JA).
NA = xAN + JA = xA(NA + NB) + JA
(2.8)
Air will not enter or dissolve at the liquid interface and concentration gradient in the
boundary layer will result in no diﬀusion of air since Eq. 2.7 is satisﬁed. This leads to
the conclusion that the ﬂux of air in steady state NB = 0. Therefore
NA = xANA + JA
(2.9)
NA =
1
1 −xA
JA
(2.10)
17
==PAGE:33==
Since the concentration of sulfuric acid in the cylinder is very low, see section 2.1.3, Eq.
2.10 reduces to
NA = JA = cDAB
dxA
dz
(2.11)
Eq. 2.11 relates heat transfer (surface temperature gradient) with diﬀusive mass transfer
(surface concentration gradient) and the heat and mass transfer analogy is therefore ap-
plicable.
The equation that governs the sulfuric acid condensation [8] is
ga = hm (pH2SO4,Bulk −pH2SO4,Liner)
1
Racid · Tgas
(2.12)
Eq. 2.12 determines the amount of acid condensation on the liner surface and has the
unit kg·CAD/m2. The partial pressure of sulfuric acid in the bulk gas is found in the engine
model part. The partial pressure of sulfuric acid at the liner surface is determined from
the dew point temperature by Verhoﬀand Banchero [39] in the models second part.
Partial pressure of the acid at the liner surface is so small compared to the bulk gas
and is therefore set to zero. Racid is the gas constant speciﬁc to sulfuric acid and Tgas is
average bulk gas temperature. The convective mass transfer coeﬃcient, hm, is used and
determined from [20]
hm =
h
ρcpLe1−n
(2.13)
where ρ is the density of trapped gas, cp is the speciﬁc heat capacity of the cylinder gas,
Le is the Lewis number and n is the gas turbulence intensity set to 1/3. Woschni’s heat
tranfer correlation, h, is determined from the following equation [29]
h = 3.26 · B · p0.8 · T −0.55 · w0.8
(2.14)
where p is the pressure, T is the temperature and w is the characteristic velocity. The
characteristic velocity [29] is
w = 2.28 · Sp
(2.15)
where Sp is the mean piston speed.
From Eq. 2.12 it is possible to predict the fraction of sulfuric acid from the bulk gas
that will condense onto the liner. These predictions will be used later in the results.
18
==PAGE:34==
Chapter 3
Experimental Method
3.1
Experimental Setup
Since there is no empirical data on how to construct an experimental setup testing for
sulfuric acid condensation and cold corrosion in a marine diesel engine a detailed descrip-
tion of the setup will be given here. The majority part of the time spend on this project
has gone into making a properly functioning test engine. Fig. 3.1 provides a schematic
overview of the setup. Additional features have since the making of the overview been
added.
Figure 3.1: A schematic overview of the setup [22]
For simplicity the setup will be divided into three major subsystems consisting of an
engine system, a lubrication system and an intake system.
19
==PAGE:35==
3.1.1
Engine unit
The engine selected for the experimental testing is a BUKH-DV24 two cylinder, four-
stroke diesel engine in Fig. 3.2.
Figure 3.2: BUKH-DV24 before modiﬁcations[2]
Table 3.1: Technical data for BUKH-DV24 with valve timing and injection points[3]
Parameter
Value
Unit
Cycle
4
stroke
Cylinders
2
[-]
Valves per cylinder
2
[-]
Bore and stroke
85x85
[mm]
Swept volume
964
[cm3]
Length of con. rod
159.8
[mm]
Compression ratio
18.5:1
[-]
Speed at idle
800-1000
[rpm]
IVO
32
CAD BTDC
IVC
64
CAD ABDC
EVO
64
CAD BBDC
EVC
32
CAD ATDC
20
==PAGE:36==
The BUKH-DV24 is a marine life boat motor known for its toughness and simple de-
sign making it easy to service. In the setup the engine has been stripped for all its external
parts such as the oil-, fuel and air systems along with ﬁlters, alternator, reduction gear
etc. Only the bare engine block from sump till cylinder head cover along with ﬂywheel is
kept. As previously mentioned, combustion is omitted in the purpose of eliminating any
uncertainties in relations to condensation of combustion products, minimize oil consump-
tion and to ensure that the gas composition is as homogeneous as possible. Therefore the
engine is driven by a KLEE 1.5 kW electrical AC motor throughout all experiments. The
AC motor is aligned with a worm drive which is then connected to the engine by an 0.5
m long axle. The purpose of the worm drive is to reduce the rotational velocity of the
electrical motor and in this case reduces it by a factor of 1:15.
Figure 3.3: Alignment of Klee AC motor and worm drive
A frequency converter controls the output speed of the AC motor which can run at a
maximum of 50 Hz. Since the experiment aims to mimic the conditions found within
a large marine diesel engine the BUKH-DV24 engine is run at comparable speeds. At
maximum capacity the AC engine runs at 1440 rpm which should correlate to around 96
rpm on the engine. Testing showed that setting the frequency converter to 38 Hz gave
the engine a speed of 98 rpm. Running the engine at 98 rpm is signiﬁcantly lower than
the idle speed of a normal operating BUKH-DV24 engine which is between 800-1000 rpm,
see Tab. 3.1 and has presented some challenges in relations to the stability of the setup.
At lower speeds the test rig is more susceptible to oscillations and without any measure-
ments to dampen these oscillation the setup shakes quite a bit. The engine is therefore
tightly mounted on a steel frame which is fastened into the ground. Two additional ﬂy-
wheels weighing approximately 15 kg have been added to the existing ﬂywheel providing
the engine with extra inertia working to counteract the oscillations. Two additional stiﬀ-
ened dampers has been attached to the frame of the engine on each side. These dampers
has further fastened the test rig to the frame. All the modiﬁcations has stabilized the
test rig greatly compared to the initial setup and the rig hardly displays any oscillations
during testing.
21
==PAGE:37==
Figure 3.4: A Two Mica 220 W plate heaters and B one stiﬀened damper assembly
Since there is no combustion taking place, it is necessary to heat the engine-block
during the entire experiment to obtain near realistic working conditions. Five Micaﬂat
Plate Heaters with a capacity of 220 W and capable of heating up to 160 ◦C have been
installed, see Fig. 3.4. The plate heaters have been placed two-and-two together on each
side of the engine block while the last one is placed on the oil base cover. With this
arrangement the temperature of the engine block and oil can be kept constant within a
few degrees certainty during testing.
All the heating elements in this setup are controlled by a system consisting of a RS
Pro Thermocouple along with a RKS REX-C100 PID controller. The system works by
choosing a setpoint temperature for the PID controller. A sensor, in this case the thermo-
couple, feeds the PID controller with an actual temperature of the heating element or the
medium. The PID then compares the setpoint temperature with the actual temperature
and if there is a discrepancy between these two the PID makes corrective action. This is
either turning the power supply on or oﬀto the heating element depending on the situ-
ation. Essential thermocouple readings are monitored in a LAB view program enabling
recordings of these temperatures e.g. liner and oil temperatures.
Part of testing in the future is to see how parameters such as varying liner tempera-
tures aﬀect the rate of sulfur condensation and iron accumulation. It is therefore vital
22
==PAGE:38==
that the liner temperatures can be controlled. The engines existing coolant system where
the liners are cooled on the outside is ﬁlled with a coolant. Ethylene glycol is chosen as the
coolant medium and the system contains around 4 litres. It is chosen because of its high
boiling point at 197.3 ◦C. To monitor the temperature of the liner 8 thermocouples are
placed along the liner outside surface. These thermocouples are placed into 7 mm deep
holes which are drilled from the outside into the liner. They are evenly distributed over
the entire outside surface of the liner to get the temperature of as many cross sectional
areas as possible. Since the shape of the liner is slightly conical with a greater thickness
at the top, the thermocouples are located within 0.4-0.5 mm from the inner liner surface.
To heat up the ethylene glycol two PID controlled Defa 550 W Hose Heaters are con-
nected to the line which goes from the ethylene glycol reservoir, through the circulating
pump, a CPSS-IN-2 Chugger pump, and into the engine. This is diﬀerent from when the
engine came from the manufacturer where the coolant pump was driven by the camshaft.
This setup is not feasible under these test conditions.
3.1.2
Oil lubrication unit
As previously described the engine is running at very low speeds during testing to mimic
the working conditions of a large marine diesel engine. The original oil lubricating system
that came with the engine was driven by the camshaft and would therefore not provide
suﬃcient lubrication during testing under these conditions. A new system that could
ensure proper lubrication independent of engine speed and without the need of a large oil
volume needed to be constructed. There are two reason why a small oil volume is desired.
First, it makes the detection of any abnormal oil consumption easily noticeable. Second,
the oil samples taken for analysis are more concentrated which is useful when working
with small levels of sulfuric acid concentrations as in these experiments.
The design of the lubrication system has been revised more than once. In the ﬁrst draft,
the system consisted of one high pressure pump, a Danfoss BFP-21 L3, see Fig. 6.2,
connected to some 1/8” Swagelok tubing, circulating the oil through a ﬁlter and then on
to the cylinder oil nozzles and crankshaft. This design was revised since the pump was
unable to provide a suﬃcient oil pressure throughout the entire system.
The ﬁnal design of the oil system as it looked during this project consists of two sep-
arate pump units, both drawing oil from the same reservoir. The Danfoss BFP-21 L3
pump provides pressurized oil to two Danfoss fuel oil nozzles in the base cover. These
nozzles lubricate the pistons and cylinder liner, see Fig. 3.5. Oil scraper rings on the pis-
tons drags the oil up and onto the remaining part of the liner. If the oil needs additional
heating before entering the nozzles two ring heaters are installed on the tubing leading
into the nozzles.
Within the base cover the nozzles are positioned slightly oﬀthe center line.
This is
to ensure that spray passes the crankshaft and hits the bottom of the piston and the
liners. Otherwise the cylinder liner would not be suﬃciently lubricated.
23
==PAGE:39==
Figure 3.5: Two Danfoss fuel nozzle embedded into base cover.
Table 3.2: Technical data for Danfoss BFP-21 L3 [4]
Parameter
Value
Unit
Viscosity of oil
1.3-12
[cSt]
Pressure range
7-20
[bar]
Max. pressure at suction
2
[bar]
Oil temperature range
0-70
[◦C]
When using the Chevron Neutral Oil 600R, see Tab. 3.5, as lubrication oil it was found
from testing that the spray pattern of the nozzles changes from a thin stream to a desired
ﬂat spray when the Danfoss BFP-21 L3 pump delivers a pressure of 13-15 bar with an oil
temperature of 65-70 ◦C. As an extra precaution two threaded holes are drilled into the
oil base cover allowing for a visual inspection of the nozzles performance during testing,
see Fig. 3.6.
The oil drains out from the base cover through a drain hole and into the oil lubrication
reservoir. The reservoir is a 600 ml beaker glass mounted onto a 400 W hotplate stirrer.
The oil is continuously stirred and the temperature is monitored with a thermocouple.
24
==PAGE:40==
Figure 3.6: A: Two inspection holes in base cover above.
B: Tubing leading into
the nozzles with ring heaters wrapped around.
C: 600 ml oil reservoir
with visible suction for crankshaft pump. D: Filter on oil string to the
crankshaft pump.
To lubricate the crankshaft a low pressure Scherzinger Aluminium pump 51 FBR/GM005
is used, Fig. 3.7. The pump is capable of delivering the lubrication oil at 0-3 bar pressure,
see Tab. 3.3. It draws oil from the reservoir through 6 mm Swagelok tubing to a ﬁlter and
thereon into the crankshaft main bearing and connecting rod bearings. In the operations
manual from the manufacturer it is speciﬁed that a minimum oil pressure of 0.8 bar is
needed for proper lubrication of the crankshaft bearing.
A manometer connected to the crankshaft bearing allows for monitoring of the oil pres-
sure. To collect oil samples a valve is connected to the string of the crankshaft pump.
This allows for extraction of the 5 ml oil sample during testing, see Fig. 3.7.
Table 3.3: Technical data for Scherzinger Aluminium pump 51 FBR/GM005 [36]
Parameter
Value
Unit
Flow rate
180
[l/h]
Pressure range
0-3
[bar]
Max. pressure at suction
±0.5
[bar]
Fluid temperature range
-10 to 80
[◦C]
25
==PAGE:41==
Figure 3.7: A: Scherzinger Aluminium pump 51 FBR/GM005. B: Oil valve for sam-
ple extraction. C: Manometer to monitor oil pressure inside crankshaft.
Normally the rocker arm and valve assembly are lubricated from oil being pumped
around the system entering at the top of the cylinder head cover. Since the engine runs
at lower speeds, the same amount of lubricant for the rocker arm and valve assembly is
not needed. A plug with a plastic tube is screwed into a cover lit on the cylinder head
assembly. Oil is then dispensed by a syringe from time till time during testing to lubricate
the rocker arm and valve assembly.
3.1.3
The intake air unit
The design of the air intake system has continuously undergone changes to get to where
the conditions for the intake gas is as desired. The intake gas system consists of about 2 m
long piping of various diameters where pressurized air enters at one end. The pressure can
be varied as desired. During this project it was kept at approximately 1.15 bar correlating
to about 50 L/min. The piping is of austenitic stainless steels, type 304 and 316L (L for low
carbon content leas than 0.03 %). Even though these steel types are corrosive resistant
they are no match for sulfuric acid in concentration range of 20-85 % at any temperature.
Elevating the temperature elevates the corrosion rate of sulfuric acid as seen in section
2.1.2. But since the sulfuric acid concentrations used in these experiments are extremely
low, these steel types are usable.
The ﬁrst design of the intake system consisted of one-size 2” piping. From preliminary
testing it was found that pulsations from the engine aﬀected the air ﬂow within the intake
system. To cancel out these pulsating eﬀects, a pipe with a signiﬁcant volume, approxi-
mately 10 L was put in, see Fig. 3.8.
26
==PAGE:42==
To get the right conditions inside the cylinder, the intake gas is preheated. With the
signiﬁcant ﬂow of air running through the system when testing, it requires a substantial
amount of energy. When the pressurized air enters, it is initially heated by a PID con-
trolled RS 750 W Air Heater capable of heating the air up to 540 ◦C. This will not ensure
that the gas stays heated until entering the engine. Therefore, three additional PID con-
trolled Omega 780 W Dual-Element Heating Tapes are wrapped around the piping from
just after the RS 750 W Air Heater and all the way to the intake manifold. These heating
tapes are capable of heating the pipe up till temperatures of 760 ◦C. The heating tapes
heats up the intake piping from the outside to a temperature well above the dew point
temperature of sulfuric acid. This will prevent any condensation of water and acid before
entering the engine. Finally, insulation is put on top of the piping and heating tape. This
is obviously to insulate the heat but also to ensure a safe test environment.
Figure 3.8: A previous conﬁguration of the intake piping with Omega 780 W Heat tape
wrapped around. In new setup there is no bend on the piping.
Thermocouples are placed at various positions inside and outside the intake pipe to
closely monitor the intake air temperature. Two thermocouples are placed just before
the cylinder intake valves within the cylinder head. The air heater and heating tapes are
adjusted accordingly to get the right air temperature just before entering the cylinder.
To get the water/acid solution into the air stream, a hole is drilled into the pipe and
a Stainless Steel Swagelok Reducer, 1/4 in. x 1/2 is then welded into place. The solu-
27
==PAGE:43==
tion is then pumped into the intake system by a Longer Pump LP-BT100-2J 10 roller
Peristaltic Pump. The many rollers in the peristaltic pumps allows for a very precise
continuous dosing. The pump is connected to the Swagelok reducer by an acid resistant
thermoplastic hose.
Table 3.4: Technical data for Longer Pump LLP-BT100-2J [13]
Parameter
Value
Unit
Speed
0-100
[rpm]
Speed Precision
0.1
[rpm]
Min. Flow Rate
1.5
[µl/min]
Max. Flow Rate
600
[ml/min]
Fluid temperature range
0 to 40
[◦C]
In an earlier setup the water-acid solution was dozed by a fuel injector from a moped.
Dozing was controlled by an Arduino which had been uploaded with a modiﬁed blink
function code turning the injector on and oﬀto a desired frequency and period. Even
though the concentration of sulfuric acid in the solution injected during testing was in
the order magnitude of 0.15 wt% this was too corrosive for the moped fuel injector and it
seized after a couple of hours. This was discovered when the consumption of water-acid
mixture after a while was abnormal and further investigation found that the injector was
constantly open.
The peristaltic pump draws the water/acid solution from a reservoir beaker placed on
a scale just beside it. Placing the reservoir on a scale enables a constant monitoring of
the consumption.
28
==PAGE:44==
Figure 3.9: Bottom left: Thermocouple and Omega heating tape wrapped around,
Bottom right: Stainless Steel Swagelok Reducer welded into pipe, Top:
Longer Pump Peristaltic Pump
As can be seen in Fig. 3.9 the Omega 780 W Heat tape is carefully wrapped around
the tubing where the water/acid solution enters the intake air. Both the temperature of
RS Air heater and the Omega Heating Tape is set at a temperature slightly above the
boiling point of sulfuric acid, between 340-350 ◦C. The purpose is to minimize sulfuric
acid wetting of the piping surface and instead vaporizing. Likewise the remaining heating
tapes downstream are also set at high temperature, around 250 ◦C, to prevent sulfuric
acid condensing on the intake piping.
29
==PAGE:45==
3.2
Lubrication Oil when Testing
Since the aim of this project is to determine if it is possible to make sulfuric acid con-
densate on the cylinder liner and subsequently measure the amount of condensate, it is
imperative that the right lubrication oil is chosen. Traditional cylinder lubrication oil
(CLO), have a signiﬁcant sulfur content when comparing to the amount fed into the in-
take gas during testing. CLO manufacturers such as Castol, Chevron Marine, ExxonMobil
all produce CLO with a sulfur content in the area of 10-12.000 ppm. Using an oil like this
would make it extremely diﬃcult to detect minute relative changes in the sulfur concen-
tration.
Therefore choosing a lubrication oil with a low sulfur content is essential to the suc-
cess of these tests. At the same time the CLO must retain all other properties of general
CLO to get comparable working conditions. The chosen lubrication oil is Chevron Neutral
Oil 600R which is a clear base oil containing very little sulfur, see Tab. 3.5.
Table 3.5: General properties for Chevron Neutral Oil 600R [16]
Parameter
Value
Unit
Flash Point
212
[◦C]
Density @ 15.6◦C
0.861
[kg/L]
Viscosity @ 40◦C
102
[cSt]
Viscosity @ 100◦C
11.9
[cSt]
Sulfur Content measured by ED-XRF
< 1.0
[ppm]
It should be noted, that when comparing physical properties of the Chevron Neutral
Oil 600R with the technical capabilities of the Danfoss BFP-21 L3, the pump is working
close to the limit of what it is capable of. This has also been revealed during testing where
a close monitoring of the pump and the nozzles are vital to ensure that the pump delivers
as intended and that the condition of the spray is as desired. The problem is that the oil
needs to be heated suﬃciently for the viscosity to be low enough so that the pump is able
to circulate the oil around. At an oil temperature around 65-70 ◦C the oil properties is
just right and the pump can circulate at a pressure where the nozzles turn the oil into a
spray.
3.3
Intake Gas Composition
To mimic conditions of the combustion gas within a marine diesel engine, alterations to
the intake gas composition is made. In reality combustion of HFO results in many diﬀer-
ent species such as CO2 and NOx among other. However these species are not of concern
in relations to the formation of sulfuric acid and are therefore neglected. As described
in section 3.1.3, model work and experimental studies show that concentrations of sulfur
acid are found in the order magnitude of up to 1-40 ppm depending on fuel sulfur content,
engine load condition, pressures etc.
Based on these studies, diﬀerent mixtures of H2SO4 and H2O will be introduced into
the intake gas. As described in section 3.1.3 the intake air is heated well above the boiling
point of H2SO4 and the idea is that it vaporizes before entering the cylinder. Here it
30
==PAGE:46==
hopefully condenses and is captured by the lubricant oil. To compare the results of tests
with a water/acid solution, test runs where only water is introduced into the intake air
will also be conducted and likewise dry runs where nothing besides atmospheric air enters
the engine.
If a water or water/acid solution is introduced into the intake gas, a new air composition is
calculated based on a mass balance of the diﬀerent species going in, see Appendix 6. The
new air composition calculation is based on the assumption that atmospheric air com-
prises of 79 % nitrogen and 21 % oxygen. Results of the new air composition calculation
will be showed in a table along with other important parameters from each test.
3.4
Test Procedure
Each test run follows the same systematic procedure to ensure uniformity in each test.
The oil reservoir containing oil from the previous test is emptied and reﬁlled with fresh oil.
Not emptying the reservoir directly after each test allows for the oil to drain oﬀas much as
possible. If the test requires a larger oil volume than the beaker can hold, the remaining
oil is poured in via the cylinder head cover after the pumps have started circulating the oil.
Before starting the engine, the heat stirrer, ethylene glycol heater and circulation pump
along with the Micaﬂat plate heaters are turned on. When the oil has reached a tempera-
ture of 45-50 ◦C the oils viscosity is low enough for the Scherzinger low pressure pump to
work and oil is circulated through crankshaft housing. The Danfoss high pressure pump
starts to circulate oil when the temperature reaches 60 ◦C.
Before the engine is started the condition of the oil spray is checked. The engine is not
started until a ﬂat spray has developed. If started before the ﬂat spray has developed,
the sounds that the engine produces immediately reveals that the liners are not properly
lubricated. As soon as the ﬂat spray has developed the pressurized air is turned on and
fed into the intake system. When all these preconditions are fulﬁlled the AC motor can
be turned on and the engine starts turning.
When the engine starts to turn the intake gas can be heated. The air heater and the
heating tapes heats up the air to the desired temperature within minutes. When the
termocouples in the manifold measures an acceptable intake temperature, dozing of the
solution can be started.
Before the dozing starts, the weight of the solution is noted. A protective ﬁlm is put over
the reservoir holding the solution for protective measures and to hamper/slow down any
evaporation.
As soon as the water/acid ﬂow has started, the ﬁrst 5 ml oil sample is extracted. From
thereon an oil sample is taken every 20 min. Every time an oil sample is extracted the
weight of the solution is noted to calculate the consumption. Since the water/acid ﬂow is
inﬂuenced by the back-pressure caused by the pressurized air in the intake, this can vary
a little during testing. If consumption is to high or to low corrections can be made by
adjusting the rpm of the peristaltic pump.
Usually a test takes about 5-6 hours from when the ﬁrst oil test has been extracted.
After each test run the 5 ml oil samples are taken for ED-XRF analysis at laboratory
facilities at MAN Diesel & Turbo. The engine is not turned oﬀimmediately after the
31
==PAGE:47==
end of a test run. When testing is over, the engine is still turning while the intake is fed
with either water and hot air or cold air depending on test. Water and hot air is used
in the case where sulfuric acid have been injected into the intake system. The aim is to
ﬂush out any contaminants within the entire system. This ﬂushing usually take 20-30 min.
A logbook is used during testing to note any events that might cause any deviation
of the results. This can then be included in the ﬁnal analysis.
32
==PAGE:48==
3.5
XRF Analysis of Oil Samples
To analyze the elemental composition of the oil samples, an analytical technique called
ED-XRF (Energy Dispersive X-Ray Fluorescence) provides an accurate determination
hereof. ED-XRF is a standard test method for determination of additive elements in
lubricating oils described by ASTM D7751-16 [11]. Energy-dispersive means the ability
to diﬀerentiate between the energy of x-rays while X-Ray is the source of ionizing radiation
and Fluorescence is the absorption of energy and subsequent emission of energy. By using
the ED-XRF technique a fast and accurate determination of the sample is provided with
minimal preparation and without destroying the sample. The technique can be applied
to solids and liquids as well as powder or ﬁltered forms. The ED-XRF machine used
during this project is an AMETEK SPECTRO XEPOS, see Fig. 3.10, and is provided
by MAN Diesel & Turbo. The machine can detect chemical elements from sodium (Na)
and upwards.
Figure 3.10: SPECTRO XEPOS ED-XRF [30]
Before any oil sample can be analyzed by the ED-XRF the sample must be prepared
to ensure the most accurate result. First the sample is homogenized using a vortex mixer
and then 5 ml of the sample is subsequently loaded into a sample cassette, Fig. 3.11. The
sample cassette is a plastic container with a lid in one end and a 4 µm thin plastic ﬁlm
in the other end.
33
==PAGE:49==
Figure 3.11: A sample cassette and three samples
The sample cassette is then placed in another container in the sample tray to ensure
that any undetected leakage of the sample cassette does not reach the analysis area of
the ED-XRF. When the lid is closed the sample tray will rotate placing the sample above
the analysis area. A total of 12 samples can be placed in the sample tray enabling a
consecutive sample analysis, see Fig. 3.12.
Figure 3.12: Sample tray containing a sample
34
==PAGE:50==
From Fig. 3.14 a basic setup of an ED-XRF is given. The X-ray source, a 50 W
end-window X-ray tube [31], irradiates the sample with X-ray radiation. If the energy of
irradiating X-ray is suﬃcient, it will interact with atoms within the sample causing for
instance an electron from the inner shell within the atom to be excited and ejected. The
gap from the ejected electron is then ﬁlled out by an electron from a higher energy shell
falling down into the inner shell and subsequently releasing a speciﬁc amount of energy
in the form of ﬂuorescent X-ray. The energy of the emitted ﬂuorescent X-ray is equal to
the diﬀerence between the energy of the electron from the two shells.
The SPECTRO XEPOS uses a high resolution silicon drift detector [31] (SDD) which
collects and process this emitted ﬂuorescent X-ray energy. Since the energy of the emitted
ﬂuorescent X-ray is characteristic for each chemical element, a qualitative determination
of the sample is possible. By counting the amount of ﬂuorescent X-ray signals a determi-
nation of elemental concentration within the spectrum is also possible, see Fig. 3.13 for
XRF-spectrum.
From the ED-XRF spectrum, each detectable element is visible as a peak starting with
the lightest element followed by the remaining elements in chronological order. The peak
height indicates the intensity of the element and therefore its concentration. For each
element two sharp peaks are visible in Fig. 3.13. The more intense peak is the Kα transi-
tion where the electron transitions from n = 2 →n = 1. The less intense peak is the Kβ
where the electron transitions from n = 3 →n = 1. The baseline onto which the peaks
originates from is termed the Bremsstrahlung radiation deﬁned as braking radiation of
the electron ejected from the X-ray source.
Figure 3.13: ED-XRF spectrum
The detector has a detection area of 30 mm2 and a thickness of 450 µm with a res-
olution of ≤130 eV (Mn Kα) and an input rate of 1 million counts per second [31]. To
compensate for a lower sensitivity when it comes to lighter elements such as sodium (Na)
to chloride (Cl) a polarizer is used [33]. Likewise, a bandpass ﬁlter where only the cobalt
Kα excitation radiation is let through [32] will enhance the sensitivity for elements such
35
==PAGE:51==
as vanadium, chromium and manganese [33]. Therefore, applying ﬁlter and polarizers is
a way of conditioning the irradiating X-ray to increase the overall sensitivity of ED-XRF.
The manufacturer can calibrate the ED-XRF such that the machine is more sensitive
and therefore more precise in detecting speciﬁc chemical elements. MAN Diesel & Turbo
has had their ED-XRF calibrated to detect sodium as well as sulfur and iron which are
elements examined for in this project.
Figure 3.14: Basic sketch of an ED-XRF setup
With the ED-XRF an oil sample can be analyzed in 13 minutes for its concentration of
sulfur and iron down to around 2 ppm with a statistical precision of ±1 %. The precision
of the apparatus is tested with a calibration sample containing a ﬁxed sulfur content of
84 ppm. The ED-XRF analysed the sample to contain 83.7 ppm sulfur. This correspond
to a relative error of 0.3 %. It should however be noted that concentrations below 2 ppm
is undetectable for the ED-XRF and will be noted as < 2.
36
==PAGE:52==
Chapter 4
Results
In the following section the results from the tests will be presented starting with the sim-
plest test case. The plotted values are directly taken from the XRF analysis. When this
test was conducted the engine had already been running under various conﬁgurations for
approximately 70 hours. This includes the test performed with a moped fuel injector.
In Tab.
4.1 the test conditions for each test is listed.
Due to limited time with the
ED-XRF not all tests have been analyzed. The tests that have been selected for analysis
are those tests who are conducted under the most similar conditions. For instance, if an
oil pump worked insuﬃciently during testing the samples are not chosen for analysis. The
aim is that the samples chosen for analysis are those that will provide the best basis for
comparison.
From tests where the intake gas is conditioned with a water/acid solution the result
will contain a table with the amount of condensed sulfur measured by the ED-XRF and
the amount predicted by the condensation model.
For each test a short description of the previous test will be outlined to nuance the results.
Calculations for the values in Tab. 4.2, Tab. 4.3, Tab. 4.4 and Tab. 4.5 along with
the ED-XRF ASCII ﬁles and LAB view data ﬁles can be send upon request.
37
==PAGE:53==
Table 4.1: Conditions during each test
DATE
08.02.17
16.02.17
17.02.17
04.04.17
11.04.17
21.02.17
23.02.17
22.03.17
24.03.17
Intake Air Temperature
153-160
155-165
153-160
175-183
174-182
158-168
161-166
176-181
179-188
[◦C]
Cylinder Liner Temperature
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
[◦C]
Lube Oil Composition
Chevron
Chevron
Chevron
Chevron
Chevron
Chevron
Chevron
Chevron
Chevron
[-]
Lube Oil Amount
680
680
680
680
680
690
680
680
680
[ml]
Lube Oil Temperature
65-75
68-71
68-69
69-71
70-72
67-70
69-70
68-71
68-73
[◦C]
Intake Air Pressure
1.2
1.15
1.15
1.15
1.15
1.15
1.15
1.15
1.15
[bar]
Intake Air Flow
50
50
50
47-48
44
50
50
46
53
[L/min]
H2SO4 in H2O
-
-
-
-
-
1470
1470
2935
2935
[ppm]
S in H2SO4
-
-
-
-
-
480
480
960
960
[ppm]
H2O Flow
-
158.8
144.0
143.2
160.2
-
-
-
-
[g/h]
H2O/H2SO4 Flow
-
-
-
-
-
159.7
154.8
165.0
161.0
[g/h]
Engine Speed
98
98
98
98
98
98
98
98
98
[rpm]
Duration
258
292
300
380
360
300
297
361
376
[min]
Species
Air Composition
N2
79
74.4
74.8
74.6
73.7
74.4
74.5
73.8
74.6
[%]
O2
21
19.8
19.9
19.8
19.6
19.8
19.8
19.6
19.8
[%]
H2O
-
5.9
5.4
5.6
6.7
5.9
5.7
6.6
5.6
[%]
H2SO4
-
-
-
-
-
15.3
14.8
34
29.1
[ppm]
38
==PAGE:54==
4.1
Condition of the Engine
The ﬁrst result is from the test run 08.02.2017. Like all the test the engine is motored and
the only modiﬁcation done to the intake gas is heating. The purpose of this test is to see
what condition the engine is in. Every new engine has a ’run in’ phase where an excess
accumulation of iron particles can be found in the lubrication oil. A machined surface, like
a cylinder liner for instance, has an initial roughness and when it experiences an abrasive
wear, such as the piston movement, the surfaces is abraded causing iron accumulation.
It is vital for the outcome of these tests that the engine is suﬃciently run in. Otherwise,
it would be diﬃcult to say if any accumulation of particles, iron or sulfur, is due to the
initial surface abrasion or induced by any substance introduced into the intake.
Time [min]
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Sulfur Content [mg/kg]
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
08.02.2017
Figure 4.1: Sulfur content in the lubrication oil from test with air
39
==PAGE:55==
Time [min]
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Iron Content [mg/kg]
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
08.02.2017
Figure 4.2: Iron content in the lubrication oil from test with air
40
==PAGE:56==
Time [min]
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Content [mg/kg]
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
Sulfur
Iron
Figure 4.3: Sulfur and iron from 08.02.17 in same plot for comparison purpose
The test on 08.02.17 has been conducted just after a period where conditioning of the
intake gas was conducted by the moped fuel injector. As described, this setup was faulty
and led to an excess injection of sulfuric acid. The fault was discovered and the injector
was replaced with a peristaltic pump.
Test on 08.02.17 is performed in the period between the two injection conﬁgurations.
The three tests performed prior to this test had the intake gas conditioned with a wa-
ter/acid solution. The combined testing duration of the three tests were 604 minutes with
the latest just two days before on 06.02.17. Here, the intake gas was conditioned with a
water/acid solution corresponding to a sulfur content of 500 ppm. Just like all other test
runs the test on 06.02.17 ended with a with a 20-30 minute ﬂushing of the system where
the engine was fed with hot air conditioned with water.
4.1.1
Sulfur Accumulation
Starting by considering the sulfur content in Fig. 4.1 it is clear from looking at the ﬁgure
that the sulfur content ﬂuctuates quite a bit over the entire course. It might seem like
there is a baseline for the sulfur content at around 8 ppm from where ﬂuctuation up to
14-15 ppm occurs. The ﬂuctuations in sulfur content could be explained by inadequate
stirring of the oil leading to concentration diﬀerences in the oil. This implies that the
sulfur content baseline is somewhere in between 8 and 15 ppm. However it should be
mentioned that whenever the ﬁrst test is extracted the oil has already been circulating
through the engine for some time which argues that the oil is fairly homogeneous at this
41
==PAGE:57==
point.
Another and possibly more plausible explanation for the ﬂuctuating sulfur content is
inadequate ﬂushing of the engine from previous tests. One could imagine that as the
engine heats up and the oil gets around all the bearings, crevices etc. where pockets
with high sulfur concentrations are swept away by the oil. If the stirring process of this
sulfur takes a while it could lead to multiple samples with a higher sulfur content than the
average sulfur content of the entire oil volume. Since there is approximately 20 minutes
between each test this would mean by looking at Fig. 4.1 that the oil is 40 minutes to be
suﬃciently diluted. Although test number 8 after 140 min contradicts this in which case
test number 2, 3, 4 and 8 are four samples out of a total of 14 samples taken just after
one of these sulfur pockets.
The sulfur ﬂuctuations could also be due to measurement uncertainties by the ED-XRF.
As mentioned in section 3.5 the ED-XRF has a statistical precision of ±1% relative and
from repeated measurement of the same sample this seems to be true. Analysis of the
calibration sample showed that the ED-XRF measured the sample with a relative error of
0.3 %. However, this does not mean that the ED-XRF cannot measure imprecise sulfur
contents but it is probably not as signiﬁcant as the ﬂuctuations suggests.
For now it is noted that sulfur is detected even though no sulfur is added to the in-
take. Looking at the results from this test in comparison with other tests might give a
more nuanced picture of the sulfur content.
4.1.2
Iron Accumulation
Looking at Fig. 4.2 and Fig. 4.3 it is clear that the iron content does not experience the
same ﬂuctuating concentrations as the sulfur content. It increases 1 ppm from the ﬁrst to
the second sample. From hereon it stays almost constant at around 6 ppm throughout the
entire test. Whether an iron content of 6 ppm can be expected when the engine is motored
is not entirely certain. It could be that some of the iron content from previous tests have
not been fully depleted during ﬂushing thereby leading to an overall higher content than
would normally be found when motoring. It could seems as sulfur from the previous test
causes the initial jump in iron content from sample one to sample two. What appears to be
certain from this test is that no further iron accumulation is occurring which leads to the
conclusion that the engine is properly run in and that the liners are suﬃciently lubricated.
At this point in time looking at Fig. 4.3 there appears to be no clear connection be-
tween the sulfur ﬂuctuations and the iron content within the lubrication oil. Since no
sulfur was injected into the intake no sulfur accumulation was expected. This further
strengthen the idea that the sulfur ﬂuctuations in this test is caused by sulfur residues
from previous tests.
42
==PAGE:58==
4.2
The Inﬂuence of Water
After verifying that the engine is properly run in the experiment turns toward uncovering
the inﬂuence on particle build-up from when the intake gas is conditioned with water.
The experiment has been repeated multiple times. This is partly to verify that the test
results are reproducible and partly to see what inﬂuence, if any, prior testing has on the
outcome.
Time [min]
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
Sulfur Content [mg/kg]
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
16.02.17 w. H2O 158.8 g/h
17.02.17 w. H2O 144.0 g/h
04.04.17 w. H2O 143.2 g/h
11.04.17 w. H2O 160.2 g/h
Figure 4.4: Sulfur content in the lubrication oil from testing with water in the intake
air
43
==PAGE:59==
Time [min]
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
Iron Content [mg/kg]
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
16.02.17 w. H2O 158.8 g/h
17.02.17 w. H2O 144.0 g/h
04.04.17 w. H2O 143.2 g/h
11.04.17 w. H2O 160.2 g/h
Figure 4.5: Iron content in the lubrication oil from testing with water in the intake air
Before analyzing any of the results a brief comment on the testing prior to these test
is needed. First looking at test on 16.02.17 and 17.02.17 which are two consecutive tests.
The testing done prior to these two test are the run in test from 08.02.17 discussed in
section 4.1 and the second test is from the 13.02.17. In test 13.02.17 the intake gas was
conditioned with water similarly to the testing on 16.02.17 and 17.02.17. Testing on the
13.02.17 lasted for 306 minutes and had an average water ﬂow of 149.3 g/h. Altogether
the engine has been running 336 minutes including ﬂushing between the test 08.02.17 and
test 16.02.17.
The same is not entirely true for tests conducted prior to testing on 04.04.17 and 11.04.17.
There are no testing done in between these two tests. Prior tests to the test on 04.04.17
is a series of four tests in total where the intake gas was conditioned with various degrees
of concentrated water/sulfuric acid solutions. The total testing time of these four test
runs was around 1333 minutes without the end-of-test ﬂushing. With ﬂushing the total
testing time was approximately 1450 minutes
4.2.1
Sulfur Accumulation
Starting by examining the sulfur content from Fig. 4.4 it is clear that content varies a lot
depending on which test is being examined. The tests from the 16.02.17 and 17.02.17 show
similar trends with hardly any ﬂuctuations. They both start with a content of around 4
ppm and where the sulfur content from 17.02.17 basically remains at the same level the
entire time, the sulfur content in test 16.02.17 increases slightly after 140 minutes to just
44
==PAGE:60==
under 6 ppm where it remains until the end of the test. Looking at Tab. 4.1 the only
diﬀerence between the two runs are the water ﬂow. On average the water ﬂow on 16.02.17
is 14.8 g/h higher than on 17.02.17 but this appears not to have any considerable eﬀect on
the sulfur accumulation. If the extra water promotes wear it should appear in the iron
plot which will be examined later.
Sulfur content found in the test runs from 04.04.17 and 11.04.17 are not quite the same.
Compared to 16.02.17 and 17.02.17 the ﬂuctuations in sulfur content are far greater. Es-
pecially in the test from 04.04.17. It starts low at 5 ppm but increases quickly with a steep
gradient the ﬁrst 60 minutes after which it starts ﬂuctuating between 8 and 16 ppm. Bare
in mind that tests prior to 04.04.17 contained sulfuric acid in various concentrations. The
only test so far which have been analyzed on the same basis as test 04.04.17 is the run
in test from 08.02.17 and these two test show some similarities in terms of the magnitude
of ﬂuctuations. The water ﬂow on 04.04.17 are almost completely the same as the water
ﬂow on 17.02.17 which leads to believe that conditioning the intake gas with water is
not to blame for the elevated sulfur content. It rather points towards blaming previous
sulfuric acid test and inadequate ﬂushing for contaminating this test with an elevated
sulfur content.
Sulfur content found in the test at 11.04.17 is also slightly higher to begin with if com-
paring with test run 16.02.17 and 17.02.17. Although it does not display quite the same
erratic behavior as the test on 04.04.17 and after 150 minutes shows no sulfur accumu-
lation and with content levels similar to tests 16.02.17 and 17.02.17. Sulfur results from
all four tests tell that when the intake gas is conditioned with water, sulfur content only
accumulates as a consequence of remnant sulfur from older tests being ﬂushed out during
testing. This discovery also supports the ﬁndings during the run in test. There can only
be two sources for the sulfur content in the lubrication oil. One, if the charge gas contains
sulfuric acid. Two, if the sulfur is released from the cast iron liner as a consequence of
abrasion since 0.09%, Tab. 2.2, of the liner consists of sulfur. From a sulfur perspective
this means that the tests conducted on 16.02.17, 17.02.17 and 11.04.17 are most repre-
sentative of what is happening when adding water to the intake gas. A closer look at the
corresponding iron plot may help to support this.
4.2.2
Iron Accumulation
From Fig. 4.5 showing the iron accumulation it is clear that three out of four tests basi-
cally show no iron accumulation. The one plot showing a minor iron accumulation is the
test from 04.04.17. Taking a closer look at the course of the 04.04.17 plot there seems to
be two gradients for the curve. Within the ﬁrst 100 minutes iron accumulation are some-
what steep with an iron content accumulating from 2 ppm to 3 ppm which correspond to
an increase of 0.2 ppm every 20 minutes. In comparison with the remaining 280 minutes
where the iron content only increases by 0.4 ppm giving an increase of 0.029 ppm every 20
minutes. This is roughly ten times less accumulation when comparing to the beginning of
the test. The explanation for the elevated iron accumulation on 04.04.17 must be found in
the prior testing and insuﬃcient ﬂushing after these tests. Leftover sulfur from prior test
must have remained in the engine causing the elevated sulfur content and has given rise
to the subsequent iron accumulation. This highlights the importance of suﬃcient ﬂushing
the engine after each test.
45
==PAGE:61==
As mentioned earlier there is no real diﬀerence in the execution of the four tests that
could explain the diﬀerence seen in result. From Tab. 4.1 it is clear that tests are con-
ducted under quite similar conditions and that testing on 04.04.17 actually had the lowest
dozing of water in intake air compared to the other tests. With a low water dozing the
partial pressure of water is low compared to the other tests. This will lead to the lowest
amount of water condensing on the liner which contradicts the results that water pro-
motes wear and results in elevated sulfur and iron particles. With less water condensing
the lubrication ﬁlm is more intact and the liner is in fact better lubricated during testing
04.04.17 compared to all of the other tests.
Looking at the remaining three tests which are clearly more inline with each other. They
all have similar prior testing where the intake gas is conditioned with water which in a
sense have acted as an extended ﬂushing. This implies that these tests are more repre-
sentative to what is happening when water is injected into the intake air. None of the
tests show accumulation in the iron nor sulfur content as described above. They all show
a constant iron content around 2 ppm which is close to being none detectable. This is de-
spite the fact that the liner temperature around TDC is below the dewpoint temperature
of water which promotes condensation onto the liner. Now, since it is impossible to de-
tect water with the ED-XRF relying on the iron content is the only way to know whether
substance promotes wear. This is not the case with water alone according to these results.
Although it is not clear what inﬂuence water has on the lubrication ﬁlm protecting the
liner, it is clear that its presence does not cause any accumulation of iron particles and
therefor no abrasive wear. Therefore, water alone does not cause corrosion. The fact that
these results are reproducible acts as a validation. It can be concluded that the engine is
still protected against corrosion with the presence of only water in the intake air.
4.3
Inﬂuence of Acid with 500 ppm Sulfur
Up until now studies have showed that the engine is properly run in, suﬃciently lubricated
and that the intake gas conditioned with water has no inﬂuence in promoting a build-up
of sulfur or iron particles in the lubrication oil and therefore does not cause corrosion.
The next phase of the experiments is to investigate the inﬂuence of sulfuric acid. From
theory in section 2.1.3 it is given that the SO3 amount within the combustion gas can
be found in concentrations of up to 47 ppmv. Results in this section have been produced
on the basis of injecting a solution containing approximately 1500 ppm sulfuric acid in
water. This corresponds to a sulfur content of approximately 500 ppm in the solution.
With a feed rate and an air ﬂow as noted in Tab. 4.1 this gives a content of about 15-30
ppm sulfuric acid in the intake air - a realistic quantity found in a real operating engine.
46
==PAGE:62==
Time [min]
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Sulfur Content [mg/kg]
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
21.02.17 w H2O/H2SO4 - 159.7 g/h
23.02.17 w H2O/H2SO4 - 154.8 g/h
Figure 4.6: Sulfur content in the lubrication oil
Table 4.2: ED-XRF measured sulfur condensation versus predicted condensation by
condensation model
Method
21.02.17
23.02.17
ED-XRF
Mass of sulfur in solution
398.6
385.1
[mg]
Mass of sulfur in oil
1.7
5.6
[mg]
Model
Predicted sulfur mass in oil
13.6
13.1
[mg]
47
==PAGE:63==
Time [min]
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Iron Content [mg/kg]
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
21.02.17 w H2O/H2SO4 - 159.7 g/h
23.02.17 w H2O/H2SO4 - 154.8 g/h
Figure 4.7: Iron content in the lubrication oil
Table 4.3: ED-XRF measured iron content
Parameter
21.02.17
23.02.17
Accumulation of Fe
1.6
2.8
[ppm]
Mass of Fe in oil
0.9
1.6
[mg]
Corrosion Rate (best case)
4.2
7.7
[µm/y]
Corrosion Rate (worst case)
8.4
15.4
[µm/y]
These two consecutive sulfuric acid test on 21.02.17 and 23.02.17 are conducted just
after testing on 16. and 17.02.17. From previous test results this implies that the engine
is thoroughly ﬂushed at the start of the test.
4.3.1
Sulfur Accumulation
Starting with the sulfur content from the two tests it seem as they are both following a
somewhat similar trend for the most part of the test. They both start with an initial
sulfur value of 4 ppm but where the test on 23.02.17 steadily increases until 6 ppm sulfur
at 250 minutes the test on 21.02.17 ﬂuctuates through the entire testing until it reaches
7 ppm. After 250 minutes the sulfur content in test 23.03.17 increases by 12 ppm over a
period of 40 minutes. This is six times as much as the sulfur increased over the previous
48
==PAGE:64==
250 minutes. From the test there are no incidences that can explain this sudden increase.
As stated it seem as if the overall trend in both tests are the same with relatively similar
sulfur gradient. It could seem like test 23.02.17 have a slight delay in the sulfur response
of approximately 100 minutes before it starts to incline. Remembering the result from
the water test, the overall accumulation of sulfur in this test is not very diﬀerent. Apart
from test 04.04.17 the sulfur accumulation during these tests are just a little bit higher.
At this point in time it is too early to say something about the order of magnitude of
sulfur response in test 21.02.17 and 23.02.17. Later review of results from tests where the
intake gas is conditioned with a solution containing double amount of sulfuric compared
to this test will provide some hints.
Since the intake gas is conditioned with a water/acid solution the measured amount
of sulfur content is compared with the predicted amount of sulfur from the condensation
model. Tab. 4.2 gives the mass of sulfur in the solution which is used for conditioning the
intake gas. Just below is the mass of the sulfur measured from the samples along with the
predicted sulfur mass. The sulfur content in the oil is an average value of four samples,
two in the beginning and two in the end. By subtracting the beginning value from the
end value an accumulation of sulfur over the entire course in ppm is found. By every
sample the oil volume is reduced and to account for this when calculating the sulfur accu-
mulation an average oil volume for the entire experiment is determined. This is done by
subtracting the average oil sample volume from the start volume. By multiplying the cal-
culated ppm sulfur value with this average oil volume the mass of sulfur in the oil is given.
From Tab. 4.2 it is clear that intake gas is conditioned with approximately the same
amount of sulfur in both tests. In Tab. 4.1 it is given that the testing conditions for
both tests are also almost identical with similar air compositions. Despite this the test
on 23.02.17 has twice the amount of sulfur measured in the oil compared to test 21.02.17.
The explanation for the diﬀerence in the two values lies in the sudden increase in sulfur
at the end for test 23.02.17. Had it not been for this increase the two test would properly
have had the same mass of condensed sulfur in the lubrication oil. Stated earlier there are
no incidence from the testing that could explain this diﬀerence. Perhaps the diﬀerence
between the two test results lies in the observation made in prior testing. That remnants
from earlier tests which in this case would be test 21.02.17 inﬂuences the sulfur response
for some time if proper ﬂushing has not been conducted. If that is the case it happens
quite far into the test. At this point it is only speculations and many more tests are
needed to substantiate this.
When comparing the measured sulfur content with the model prediction tests show that
at best, less than half the sulfur has condensed. Explaining this diﬀerence is a bit more
speculative. One major diﬀerence between the model and the real engine is that the model
does not take into account some of the blow-by eﬀects occurring in the engine. The model
calculates the condensation based on swept volume which gives a ﬂow rate of only 27 l/min.
In the model all charged air experiences compression and subsequent condensation. In
reality the engine needs an air ﬂow of 50 l/min, almost twice the size of the model, for it
to have a suﬃcient air ﬂow into the cylinders. There are times during the engine cycle
where the charge gas is wasted because it is fed pressurized. One noticeable source of
waste is due to the valve timing, see Tab. 3.1. During the engine cycle a valve overlap of
64◦CAD occurs where a substantial amount of the charge air blows directly through the
49
==PAGE:65==
engine without being compressed. This happens of course for both cylinders. In reality
this causes a smaller fraction of the injected sulfuric acid to be condensed compared to
the models prediction.
Another possible explanation for the discrepancy between model prediction and mea-
sured sulfur amount is the slow sulfur build-up discussed earlier and indicated in the
beginning of test 23.02.17. A delay could cause a smaller amount of condensate especially
in tests with short duration. If the sulfur build-up has a delay it would probably also
show in the iron plots.
Whether it is the engine conditions or a sulfur build-up delay or something entirely dif-
ferent causing the diﬀerence is not entirely clear at this point in time. For now it is
noted that there is a diﬀerence between the model predictions and the measured amount
although it is considered to be minor. The results of the sulfur test suggests that intake
gas conditioned with a water/sulfuric acid solution gives rise to increasing sulfur content
in lubrication oil. It seem reasonable to think that it is possible to make sulfuric acid
condensate and subsequently measure a sulfur accumulation in the lubrication oil.
4.3.2
Iron Accumulation
If sulfuric acid condense on the liner it should cause corrosion and lead to a measurable
build-up of iron particles in lubricant oil. Fig. 4.7 shows that iron is accumulating over
time. For both tests the initial iron content is 2 ppm. After a delay of 60 minutes the iron
content start accumulating. If this delay in iron accumulation has a connection to the
delay in sulfur accumulation it is shorter. Looking beyond the ﬂuctuations there appears
to be a similar underlying linear trend for both tests. Just as it was determined during
the sulfur analysis. The gradient of test 23.02.17 is perhaps slightly more steep than test
21.02.17. When comparing Fig. 4.6 and Fig. 4.7 there seems to be a connection between
the accumulation of sulfur and iron. For test 23.02.17 it was seen that sulfur content
accumulated rapidly at the end and so does the iron content of the same test.
A comparison of all the tests conducted so far reveals that sulfur content can ﬂuctu-
ate a great deal but iron particles only accumulates as direct consequence of acid being
injected into the intake gas. The iron accumulation during testing is continuous without
any longer periods of stagnation except for an initial delay period perhaps. From start
till end the the iron content has almost doubled for the ﬁrst test of 21.02.17 and more
than doubled for test 23.02.17.
Tab.
4.3 contains the amount of iron accumulated over the entire test.
Just like in
the sulfur calculation, an average of two samples from the beginning is subtracted from
an average of two samples in the end thereby giving the accumulated amount. It is pos-
sible to determine a corrosion rate from the weight of the iron particles in the oil. This
is done using ASTM G1 - 03(2011)[21]. From the surface area and the mass lost during
testing an assessment of the corrosion damage is determined. The corrosion rate is:
Corrosion Rate =
K · W
A · T · D
(4.1)
where K is a constant whose value depend on the desired unit of corrosion rate. To get
the rate in unit µm/y means K = 8.76 · 107. W is mass loss in grams, T is exposure
time in hours, D is density of metal in g/cm3 and A is the surface area in cm2. Since the
50
==PAGE:66==
surface area exposed is constantly changing because of the piston movement two scenar-
ios are calculated. A best case scenario where the corrosion rate calculation is based on
the entire surface area of the swept volume and a worst case corresponding to half the area.
The corrosion rate in both cases are rather small and if the numbers are transferred
into a more comprehensible context the material loss would correspond to the material
loss of a low carbon steel exposed to a low(C2) corrosive environment, from ISO 12944-2
[14], see Tab. 6.3 in Appendix 6. Perhaps increased test duration will reveal a diﬀerent
picture. Nevertheless, material degeneration is taking place and it seems to be corrosion
taking place. Both tests seems to suggest a correlation between sulfur accumulation and
iron build-up. Additional testing might clarify these ﬁndings.
4.4
Inﬂuence of Acid with 1000 ppm Sulfur
Time [min]
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
Sulfur Content [mg/kg]
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
22.03.17 w H2O/H2SO4 - 165.0 g/h
24.03.17 w H2O/H2SO4 - 161.0 g/h
Figure 4.8: Sulfur build-up in the lubrication oil
51
==PAGE:67==
Table 4.4: ED-XRF measured sulfur condensation rate versus predicted condensation
rate by condensation model
Method
22.03.17
24.03.17
ED-XRF
Mass of sulfur in solution
974
1009
[mg]
Mass of sulfur in oil
29.5
15.9
[mg]
Model
Predicted sulfur mass in oil
33.1
34.1
[mg]
Time [min]
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
Iron Content [mg/kg]
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
22.03.17 w H2O/H2SO4 - 165.0 g/h
24.03.17 w H2O/H2SO4 - 161.0 g/h
Figure 4.9: Iron build-up in the lubrication oil
Table 4.5: ED-XRF measured iron content
Parameter
22.03.17
24.03.17
Accumulation of Fe
14
7
[ppm]
Mass of Fe in oil
7.6
3.8
[mg]
Corrosion Rate (best case)
29.9
14.9
[µm/y]
Corrosion Rate (worst case)
59.8
29.8
[µm/y]
52
==PAGE:68==
The tests conducted prior to tests analyzed in this section is the tests with 500 ppm sulfur
in the intake gas. The tests in this section are consecutive tests.
4.4.1
Sulfur Accumulation
From Fig. 4.8 sulfur contents are unmistakably higher than any other previous test runs.
When comparing these two tests there are noticeable similarities between the two runs.
Even though test 22.03.17 start with a 10 ppm lower sulfur content than 24.03.17 they
both display an initial delay period where the content does not accumulate noticeably.
For testing 22.03.17 this delay last between 80-100 minutes while sulfur content on test
24.03.17 remains steady for 160 minutes. Hereon after they both increase by approxi-
mately 10 ppm. From 280-300 minutes the sulfur content in both tests starts to increase
in a ﬂuctuating manor. This behavior of increase towards the end of the test is similar
to the 500 ppm sulfur testing from 23.02.17. Whether this is a coincidence or a symptom
that sulfur progression takes time can only be revealed by new tests of longer duration.
Basically the underlying trend in the two tests are remarkably similar. Just as it was seen
in the 500 ppm sulfur case.
From start till end test 22.03.17 sulfur content increases threefold and peaks at 70 ppm
afterwards dropping to 50 ppm while sulfur content of test 24.03.17 doubles over the entire
test duration.
Based on the information of the two tests from Tab.
4.1 the diﬀerence seen in mea-
sured sulfur condensation from Tab. 4.4 is diﬃcult to explain. The water/acid ﬂow rate
during testing 24.03.17 was only 4 g/h less than 22.03.17 but since the duration of test
24.03.17 was longer this adds up to an excess of 35 mg sulfur injected. With this in mind
is was expected that test 24.03.17 would have a larger sulfur portion measured in the
lubrication oil or at least the same as test 22.03.17.
Glancing again at Tab. 4.1 one minor diﬀerence between the two test is the intake air
ﬂow. Now, it is not entirely certain that the diﬀerence in air ﬂow has been this consider-
able during the entire test but if assuming that there was a slight diﬀerence, this would
mean that some of the eﬀects from the engine conditions such as valve overlapping, also
mentioned in section 4.3, would be more prominent with a higher air ﬂow rate. With
that said, a diﬀerence in sulfur content of 13.6 mg between the two test seems rather
substantial because of an air ﬂow diﬀerence of 9 L/min.
Looking at Tab. 4.4 it is clear that the model prediction of the sulfur content in test
22.03.17 is very close to the measured amount. This is obviously not the case for test
24.03.17 where the relationship between measured and predicted value mimics some of the
ﬁndings during the 500 ppm sulfur testings. Although, based on these results alone not
considering the obvious diﬀerences between the model and the engine, the models ability
to predict the sulfur content at this point is fairly close. However, the complexity of the
setup and the relative simplicity of the model provides that more testing under diﬀerent
conditions is needed to give a more accurate analysis of the models predictions.
4.4.2
Iron Accumulation
Turning the focus towards the iron accumulation of the two tests it is clear from Fig. 4.9
that there is a distinct linear trend for both test cases. Just as it was seen in the sulfur
plot, the starting point for test 24.03.17 is slightly higher indicating iron remnants from
53
==PAGE:69==
the previous test. From what was seen in the sulfur plot and measured in the lubrication
oil, see Tab. 4.4, less sulfur was accumulating during testing on 24.03.17 and the same
applies for the iron as stated in Tab. 4.5. Only about half the amount of iron is measured
in lubrication oil during testing 24.03.17 compared to 22.03.17 which is almost exactly
the same for the sulfur content.
It is interesting when analyzing Fig.
4.8 and Fig.
4.9 together.
It seems as if the
sulfur testing on 22.03.17 has had a dampening eﬀect on the sulfur and iron progression
in 24.03.17 testing. One could argue that the same dampening eﬀect was also visible in
the ﬁrst 100 minutes of the 500 ppm test case. An explanation might be that there is
left-over sulfuric acid on the cylinder liner after ﬂushing. This could very well be, since we
know from test 08.02.17, where no alterations to the intake gas other than heating, that
a sulfur content from previous test is measurable some time after. Test 04.04.17 further-
more showed that both sulfur and iron accumulation from older tests could be measured
some time after. It could be that this leftover sulfur creates a passive oxide layer on the
liner after the end of testing and ﬂushing. When a new test begins, the oxide layer must
be removed before new acid can condense and corrode the liner thereby creating a delay
in sulfur condensing and subsequent iron accumulation. This is of course only speculation
and further testing is needed to see if this a coincidence or something that can be veriﬁed.
From these two tests the idea that there is the connection between a measured sulfur
response and the amount of iron accumulated is strengthened.
A corrosion rate is determined for this case also applying the same method as in the
case of 500 ppm sulfur. In the best case scenario the corrosion rate correspond to what
is found at a low to medium corrosive atmospheric environment. The worst case scenario
corresponds to what is found at a medium to high corrosive atmospheric environment
according to ISO 12944-2[14]. This goes to show that even with relatively small amounts
of sulfuric acid injected into the intake gas, in the 1000 ppm case which is equals to about
0.3 wt% sulfuric acid to water, the corrosive environment created inside the cylinder is
quite severe.
54
==PAGE:70==
4.5
Comparing all Results
Time [min]
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
Iron Content [mg/kg]
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
H2O
H2O
H2O
500 ppm S
500 ppm S
1000 ppm S
1000 ppm S
Figure 4.10: Iron build-up for all the tests with altered intake gas
55
==PAGE:71==
Time [min]
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
Sulfur Content [mg/kg]
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
H2O
H2O
H2O
500 ppm S
500 ppm S
1000 ppm S
1000 ppm S
Figure 4.11: Sulfur build-up for all the tests with altered intake gas
For comparison purposes all the diﬀerent test runs with conditioned intake gas, except
for one, have been plotted in Fig. 4.10 and Fig. 4.11. The results from test 04.04.17 is
omitted since they are very diﬀerent from the results obtained under similar conditions.
After reviewing all the results it is the perception that the results obtained on 04.04.17 are
heavily inﬂuenced by previous sulfur containing test and subsequent inadequate ﬂushing.
When considering Fig.4.10 and Fig.4.11 they suggests a correlation between the con-
centration levels of the water/acid solution conditioning the intake gas and the response
in sulfur and iron accumulation. The iron displays a relatively linear behavior for each
test regime whereas the sulfur seems a little more erratic at times although an underlying
trend seems to be present.
There are numerous things that could explain the erratic behavior in the sulfur content.
Perhaps the ED-XRF is having diﬃculties measuring very small quantities of sulfur in
the oil like the ones seen in tests up until 1000 ppm test case. Another explanation could
be the much discussed delay eﬀect. As discussed there are possibly two delay eﬀects. The
initial delay in the sulfur build-up where it takes time for sulfur to start accumulating.
This can be seen in the relationship between water test of 17.02.17 and 500 ppm sulfur test
of 21.02.17. Both tests start with a sulfur content almost identical but because of possible
delay the sulfur content in test 21.02.17 is unable to accumulate substantially until just
before the end. Then there is the possible delay from previous sulfur testing. As said
this delay could be due to remnant sulfur in the cylinder after testing and ﬂushing. This
56
==PAGE:72==
remnant sulfur could then create a passive ﬁlm on the liner initially hampering the sulfur
condensation and iron build-up. Possible examples of this is seen in the subsequent sulfur
test. Obviously additional testing is required to establish whether these delay eﬀects are
real or just a random occurrence in the testing.
What is given from the results in Tab. 4.2 and Tab. 4.4 is that doubling the concen-
tration of sulfur in the intake gas leads to between 3-17 times as much sulfur condensed
depending on which test is compared. At the same time results from Tab. 4.4 and Tab.
4.5 shows that doubling the acid concentration of the intake gas results in an increase of
the iron content up till eight times depending on which test is compared.
What seems certain at this point from Fig. 4.10 and Fig. 4.11 is that when sulfuric
acid is introduced into the intake gas, it results in an iron build-up in the lubricating oil.
A build-up which is not seen when the engine is running on a heated intake gas only or
with a heated intake gas conditioned with water.
57
==PAGE:73==
4.6
Visual Inspection of the Engine
When measuring an iron content in the lubrication oil after testing there is no way to
be absolutely certain that the measured content originates from the cylinder liner. An
internal visual inspection of the engine provides some answers to where the wear is coming
from. This means disassembling the test rig. In this case the disassembling was done just
after a test run. The inspection starts at the point of injection of water/acid solutions
where no sign of corrosion or wear was found. The remaining intake air piping did also
not show signs of acid corrosion or material breakdown. Moving further on into the engine
the ﬁrst sign of corrosion starts to appear.
Fig.
4.12 shows the inlet pipe branch.
This is the ﬁrst part of the engine assembly
in contact with the acidic intake gas. From hereon the air is led into the two cylinders.
Figure 4.12: A: The placement of the inlet pipe branch on the test rig.
B: Looking into the inlet pipe branch where spots of corrosion are visible.
C: The back side of the inlet pipe branch with a clear corrosive layer.
A closer look at the corrosion in the inlet pipe branch shows small localized rust-
colored elevations distributed over the entire surface, see Fig. 4.12 C. It resembles pitting
corrosion which is characterized by being localized corrosion where pits in the material
58
==PAGE:74==
is produced. The pits can either be exposed leaving a dent in the surface or closed and
covered by corrosion products creating a cup-shaped semi-permeable membrane. Upon
touching the surface it appears dry and when scratched it is unaﬀected. In Fig. 4.12 B
big white-yellow splotches with a crystal-like appearance can be seen. This is probably
iron which have reacted with sulfuric acid creating iron(II) sulfate. Iron(II) sulfate as a
monohydrate has a white-yellow color just like the ones in the picture.
Taking the above discoveries into account it is reasonable to think that the surface has
experienced an initial corrosion and thereby creating an oxide layer which is a passive
ﬁlm eﬀectively prohibiting further corrosion taking place on the surface. It is believed
that the corrosion accumulated here have not played a role in the measured iron accu-
mulation since this would otherwise require that the iron particles were released from the
surface, carried along the air stream into the cylinder where it deposits on the liner surface.
Then the cylinder head cover is removed to inspect the rocker arm arrangement along
with the valve springs.
Figure 4.13: Valve assembly with reddish stains
In Fig. 4.13 marked with red cursors on the spring guides are red-brownish splotches
of what could be a sign of wear. The substance look runny because it is dissolved in oil.
Due to its location it must be a cause of wear between the rocker arm and the upper
part of the valve assembly although no wear-signs are visible. The color of the substance
indicates that it is probably some sort of iron oxide. If it is wear between these two above
described parts iron particles will be released onto the spring guides. These iron particles
can then react with the surrounding air and start to form iron oxides which has this
red-brownish color. Now the big question is whether these iron oxide have entered into
the cylinders and interfered with the test results. This does not seem entirely plausible
59
==PAGE:75==
due the assembly of the valves. The substance would need to run down the spring, pass
the valve seal designed to keep out foreign particles and then onto the valves. Inspecting
the valves is the only way to make sure that these iron oxide have not played a part in
the iron accumulation during testing. Although, ﬁnding these spots does highlight the
importance of proper lubrication of the valve springs and rocker arm assembly. Before
new series of tests can begin a diﬀerent setup has to be constructed.
To inspect the cylinder head, the valves and later the cylinder liner, the complete cylinder
head assembly is removed. Valves for the cylinder closest to the ﬂywheel are disassembled
to inspect their condition, see Fig. 4.14.
Figure 4.14: Intake and exhaust valves. To the right a closeup of the intake valve.
Red arrow: Indicates an area with ﬂakes of black material.
Green
arrow: A blue-green area on the valve
The valves are made out of a material called HNV6 which is stainless steel material
with a high content of Cr (19-21%) designed to make it very corrosive resistant. From
Fig. 4.14 it is clear that the intake valve have suﬀered the most beating. In the upper
part of upper of the valve stem, both valves have a brown-reddish oil residue whose origin
is not located. It can be wiped away and it does not appear to come from the area it is
located. It could have been applied by the valve guides or from part of the main assembly
during extraction. At the valve head black deposits are located. Its consistency varies
depending on where it is located. In Fig. 4.14 a closeup of the intake valve stem and
head can be seen. The red arrow indicates the area where the black deposit has a ﬂaky
consistency. Further down in the bottom of the valve head it changes and becomes more
of a powder-like substance. Samples of the substance have been taken for analysis but the
answer lies beyond this thesis and for now its content can only be speculated. One guess
is that it is escaped oil from the cylinder which has deposited on the valves during intake
and exhaust. Fig. 4.14 also has a green arrow which indicates an area on the intake valve
neck which have a signiﬁcant green-blue-like color. Iron reacts with sulfuric acid to create
60
==PAGE:76==
iron(II) sulfate in the simple reaction:
Fe + H2SO4 →FeSO4 + H2
(4.2)
From literature iron(II) sulfate ranges as a salt and dissolves readily into water. In the
form of iron(II) sulfate heptahydrate, FeSO4 · 7H2O it has a blue-green color similar to
the substance found on the valve neck. Furthermore, when the substance was cleaned
from the valve it had a grainy consistency much like a salt or mineral. This leads to
believe that the deposit is in fact iron(II) sulfate.
Moving on to the cylinder head and focusing on an area just below the injection noz-
zles, see Fig. 4.15.
Figure 4.15: The cylinder head with valves removed for the cylinder closest to the
shaft. A closeup of a scraped area on the cylinder head.
A relatively thick layer of probably burned oil covers the cylinder. Scraping oﬀthe
layer on the cylinder head reveals some discoloration of the base material. Brown-reddish
spots are visible and scattered over the surface area. The cylinder head is made from
ordinary cast iron and a guess would be that the spots are iron(III) oxide, Fe2O3, which
arises when iron(II) sulfate, FeSO4 · xH2O, is decomposed during heating. Water is the
ﬁrst component to evaporate from iron(II) sulfate and upon further heating sulfur dioxide
and sulfur trioxide are released. The decomposition takes place in the following reaction:
2FeSO4(s) →Fe2O3(s) + SO2(g) + SO3(g)
(4.3)
The decomposition of iron(II) sulfate starts at a temperature around 680◦C. From Fig.
2.7 the gas reaches these temperatures and beyond when the piston are within a few
millimeters from TDC. Iron(III) oxide is hematite and ﬁnding it here conﬁrms the believe
of what is happening inside the combustion chamber.
61
==PAGE:77==
After inspecting the cylinder head the liners are examined in Fig. 4.16 and Fig. 4.17.
Just as with the cylinder head a thick layer of presumably charred oil covers the upper part
of the liner. The top of the liner surface has areas which are clearly deﬁned by separation
lines corresponding to the position of the piston rings and the oil scraper ring when the
piston is at TDC. The red arrows in Fig. 4.16 and Fig. 4.17 marks the separation lines
between the diﬀerent areas. See Fig. 6.1 in Appendix B for comparison of piston ring
position and scraped area height.
Figure 4.16: The liner surface of cylinder closest to the shaft.
There is clearly a diﬀerence between the wear of the diﬀerent areas on the liner surface.
The upper area, between arrow 1 and 2, has a pale discoloration from wear and a brown-
reddish brim on the entire circumference. This is rust in the form of iron(III) oxide and it
is consistent with what was expected to see. The material has reacted with the condensed
sulfuric acid and because of the high temperatures formed this layer of iron(III) oxide.
It is also clear from looking at Fig. 4.16 that the iron(III) oxide layer is only present in
the lower part of the area and on the separation-line with the black area. The piston
rings exerts the most force just before and at TDC. It is possible that the rust have been
scraped away from these areas onto the separation line and to the bottom area where the
spring force has subsided a bit.
62
==PAGE:78==
The area just below the upper pale area, between arrow 2 and 3, shows slightly less
discoloration and with no sign of rust. Finally the area between arrow 3 and 4 shows
some scraping induced by the oil scraper ring. It is clear from both ﬁgures that the wear
becomes less severe moving down the liner towards BDC. This aligns with the theory that
the severity of corrosion and wear becomes progressively worse as you move up the liner
towards TDC where the conditions for condensation of corrosive substances are promoted.
Figure 4.17: The liner surface of cylinder closest to the ﬂywheel.
Both Fig. 4.16 and Fig. 4.17 showed substantial amount of wear on surface area of the
liner that experiences the most harsh conditions in terms of corrosion and abrasion. So
far the inspection has not revealed anywhere else displaying the same substantial amount
of wear and this leads to believe that the iron content measured in the samples originates
from the liner surface.
Finally a part of the black area is cleaned to investigate the condition of the metal be-
neath. The piston moves all the way up to where the piston top is ﬂush with the line
marked with a green arrow in Fig. 4.18. This means that the side of the piston has passed
this area on the liner surface and some wear in this part can not be eliminated. Although
oil have accumulated over time indicating that the extend of wear is not similar to the
one discussed just above. Underneath the black layer the metal shows various degrees of
brownish-red color. It is clear the sulfuric acid has corroded the metal forming rust in the
form of iron(III) oxide. This coincide with the discoveries made during the inspection of
the cylinder head.
63
==PAGE:79==
Figure 4.18: Liner closest to shaft with upper part of liner scraped clean of black sub-
stance. Green arrow: Marks the line at which the piston is ﬂush with
at TDC.
64
==PAGE:80==
Chapter 5
Discussion and Future Work
From reviewing the results accumulation of sulfur content displayed two key characteris-
tics. One was a ﬂuctuating behavior which was observed both in the beginning of some
tests but also at the end for others. The second characteristic was a delay where the
response in accumulation of sulfur content was not detectable before a certain amount of
sulfur containing intake gas had passed through the cylinder.
The analysis evolved around multiple factors that could account for these characteris-
tics. One was that perhaps the ED-XRF is unable to measure small quantities of sulfur
like the ones produced during some of the experiments. For this reason two samples con-
taining amounts of 10 and 50 ppm sulfur are currently being produced by the ED-XRF
manufacturer AMETEK. This will either dismiss or conﬁrm whether ﬂuctuations in sul-
fur content can be expected for this experiment. If indeed the measurements obtained
by the ED-XRF are accurate and ﬂuctuations in the sulfur content do occur ﬁnding the
cause must be the next priority. Revising the test procedure is the most obvious place to
start. As insinuated during the results review the duration of ﬂushing is currently much
to short. Extending the duration so it has similar length as a regular tests will most
certainly reduce the initial ﬂuctuations seen in some tests. It is also believed that this
will eliminate any formation of a passive oxide layer after a sulfuric acid test which could
also cause a delay in sulfur accumulation.
To dampen the overall ﬂuctuations throughout the entire testing it is believed that turn-
ing oﬀthe engine and water/acid injection at certain intervals when testing would help.
This could be intervals of twenty minutes where the engine is turning and the water/acid
solution is injected into the intake gas and twenty minutes where they both are turned
oﬀ. When the engine is stopped the oil would only be circulated by the crankshaft pump.
This would allow for the oil on the liner to drain oﬀand become homogenized throughout
the entire oil volume. It is believed that this will help to give a more accurate view of the
sulfur content throughout the entire test.
In the results the iron content did not show quite the same ﬂuctuating behavior as the
sulfur content. Actions such as extending ﬂushing time and stopping the engine and wa-
ter/acid dozing are believed to have a positive inﬂuence on the iron accumulations.
In the future parameters of inﬂuence should be altered to better understand their indi-
vidual as well as their collective inﬂuence on sulfur condensation and iron accumulation.
Parameters include liner temperature, partial pressure of water and sulfuric acid, speed
65
==PAGE:81==
of engine, temperature of engine and oil and the ﬂow of oil. In the future tests where the
lubrication oil contains TBN designed to neutralize acids should be conducted. Whether
there is speciﬁc amount of TBN that neutralizes the most acid while the oil keeps its
lubricating properties
Furthermore the type of iron in the lubrication oil should be examined.
By diﬀeren-
tiating between corroded iron and abraded iron a more detailed understanding of the
magnitude of wear induced by sulfuric acid condensation can be obtained.
66
==PAGE:82==
Chapter 6
Conclusion
A majority part of the work has been optimizing, retroﬁtting and rebuilding the ex-
isting test rig so that it can perform as desired when testing. The result is a test rig
capable of conducting long duration experiments with the possibility of changing any de-
sired parameters such as temperatures, pressures, speed almost instantaneously if needed.
Tests have been conducted and they have so far showed good results in promoting sul-
furic acid condensation and iron accumulation. When the intake gas is conditioned with
a solution of water and sulfuric acid measurable accumulation of iron particles in the
lubrication oil is found. The results have showed that iron accumulation displays a linear
behavior for every test regime examined. Increasing the concentration of sulfuric acid in
the intake gas results in a direct increase of iron particles in the lubrication oil. This does
not happen under any other circumstances investigated in this thesis.
Accumulation of sulfur particles in the lubrication oil is also measured when the intake
gas is conditioned with a water and sulfuric acid solution. Results show that this also hap-
pens sometimes when sulfuric acid is not present in the intake gas. Therefore the results
of sulfur accumulation is at this point not quite as compelling as the iron accumulation.
Despite this it seems reasonable to conclude that a correlation between the magnitude of
sulfur and iron response exists.
A condensation model created by R. Cordtz proved good in predicting the amount of
sulfur condensing on the liner surface. The small deviations are thought to arise from the
delay in sulfur accumulation and valve overlapping.
Visual inspection of the engine revealed corrosion material and corrosion attacked surfaces
several places. Analysis of the contents from color and conditions at speciﬁc position led
to the determination of the corroded material. The inspection also eliminated the pos-
sibility that the iron particles measured in the oil samples originated from other places
than the combustion chamber. The liner area showed areas with severe corrosion along
with extensive wear. In correspondence with theory the wear increased closer to top of
the liner surface corresponding to the position of the piston rings at TDC.
The work have showed that it is possible to make a solution of sulfuric acid conden-
sate on the cylinder liner and give rise to accumulation of iron particles. Investigation
showed that the iron did not accumulate unless the charge gas contained sulfuric acid.
Water alone was found not to induce corrosion. The accumulation of iron particles under
67
==PAGE:83==
the right conditions indicates that cold corrosion is taking place on the liner surface. The
visual inspection conﬁrmed this.
68
==PAGE:84==
Bibliography
[1] Corrosion of metals.
url: http://xapps.xyleminc.com/Crest.Grindex/help/
grindex/contents/Metals.htm.
[2] BUKH A/S.
-.
url: http://bukh.dk/upload_dir/docs/FAQ/Bukh%20RME%20%
20-%20Data/Bukh%20RME%20-%20Product%20Images/BUKH%20RME%20-%20Images/
BUKH%20DV24RME/BUKH_DV24_Prd_back.jpg, -.
[3] BUKH A/S. Owner’s handbook. url: http://www.bukh.dk/upload_dir/pics/
Produkt-Ark/DV-24-RME/Owners-Handbook---BUKH-DV-24-RME.pdf.
[4] Danfoss A/S.
Bfp 21 servicepumpe datablad.
url: http://258.pcmtest.net/
PCMPDF/BFP%2021%20L-R%203_5.pdf.
[5] John J. Barron and Colin Ashton. The eﬀect of temperature on conductivity mea-
surement. url: https://www.reagecon.com/pdf/technicalpapers/Effect_of_
Temperature_TSP-07_Issue3.pdf.
[6] Mikkel Brendstrup.
Investigations of sulphur related corrosion in 2-stroke diesel
engines. Master thesis, Technical University of Denmark, June 2016.
[7] Rasmus Faurskov Cordtz and Jesper Schramm. The Inﬂuence of Fuel Sulfur on the
Operation of Large Two-Stroke Marine Diesel Engines. PhD thesis, The Technical
University of Denmark, 2015.
[8] Rasmus Lage Cordtz, Svend S. Jesper Schramm Eskildsen, and Stefan Mayer. Mod-
eling the condensation of sulfuric acid and water on the cylinder liner of a large
two-stroke marine diesel engine. JASNAOE, 2017.
[9] Rasmus Lage Cordtz, Stefan Mayer, Jesper Schramm, and Svend S. Eskildsen. Char-
acteristics of sulfuric acid condensation on cylinder liners of large two-stroke marine
engines, 2014.
[10] Rasmus Lage Cordtz, Jesper Schramm, and Rom Rabe. Investigating so3 formation
from the combustion of heavy fuel oil in a four-stroke medium speed test engine.
Energy and Fuels, 27(10):6279–6286, 2013.
[11] ASTM D7751-16. Standard test method for determination of additive elements in
lubricating oils by edxrf analysis, astm international, west conshohocken, pa. url:
www.astm.org, 2016.
[12] H. E. Darling. Conductivity of sulfuric acid solutions. J. Chem. Eng. Data, page
421–426, July 1964.
69
==PAGE:85==
[13] Drifton. Longer pump lp-bt100-2j slangepumpe. url: http://www.drifton.dk/
product/lp-bt100-2j-13/.
[14] European Standard EN ISO 12944-2: Paints and varnishes – Corrosion protection of
steel structures by protective paint systems. Standard, International Organization
for Standardization, Brussels, May 1998.
[15] National Center for Biotechnology Information.
Pubchem compound database;
cid=1118. url: https://pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/compound/sulfuric_acid#
section=Solubility, -.
[16] Chevron Group. Material safety data sheet. url: http://www.renkertoil.com/
PDF/Chevron-Group-II-Neutral-Oil-SDS-NA.PDF.
[17] Ole B. Stampe (red.) H.E. Hansen, P. Kjerulf-Jensen. Varme og Klimateknik. Danvak
Aps., Danvak, 2. udgave, 1. oplag, 1997.
[18] IMO.
Energy
eﬃciency
measures.
url:
http://www.imo.org/
en/OurWork/Environment/PollutionPrevention/AirPollution/Pages/
Technical-and-Operational-Measures.aspx.
[19] IMO. Introduction to imo. url: http://www.imo.org/en/About/Pages/Default.
aspx, 2017.
[20] Frank P. Incropera and David P. DeWitt. Fundamentals of Heat and Mass Transfer.
John Wiley and Sons, United States of America, 2002.
[21] ASTM International. Astm g1 - 03(2011) - standard practice for preparing, cleaning,
and evaluating corrosion test specimens. In ASTM Volume 03.02 Corrosion of Metals;
Wear and Erosion. ASTM International, 2011.
[22] Lars Kjemtrup, editor.
EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION OF SULFURIC
ACID CONDENSATION AND CORROSION RATE IN MOTORED BUKH DV24
DIESEL ENGINE. ASME 2017, October 2017.
[23] United Performance Metal.
304 vs. 316 what’s the diﬀerence?
url:
https://www.upmet.com/sites/default/files/whitepapers/304-vs.
-316-whats-the-difference.pdf, -.
[24] Per Møller and Lars Pleht Nielsen. Advanced Surface Technology, volume 1-2. Møller
& Nielsen, 2013.
[25] Toratane Munegumi. Where is the border line between strong acids and weak acids?
url: http://pubs.sciepub.com/wjce/1/1/4/Table/1.png, 2013.
[26] The Essential Chemical Industry online.
Sulfuric acid.
url:
http://www.
essentialchemicalindustry.org/chemicals/sulfuric-acid.html, 2013.
[27] Jesper Schramm. Sulcor. url: http://www.sulcor.mek.dtu.dk, 2015.
[28] T. W. P. Smith, J. P. Jalkanen, B. A. Anderson, J. J. Corbett, J. Faber, S. Hanayama,
E. O’Keeﬀe, S. Parker, L. Johansson, L. Aldous, C. Raucci, M. Traut, S. Ettinger,
D. Nelissen, D. S. Lee, S. Ng, A. Agrawal, J. J. Winebrake, M. Hoen, S. Chesworth,
70
==PAGE:86==
and A. Pandey. Third IMO GHG Study 2014. Technical report, International Mar-
itime Organization (IMO) London, April 2015.
[29] Spencer C. Sorenson. Engine principles and vehicles. Polyteknisk Forlag„ 2014.
[30] SPECTRO. url: http://www.spectro.com/about-us/press/press-pictures.
[31] SPECTRO. High precision analysis using energy-dispersive x-ray ﬂuorescence spec-
trometry. url: http://xrf.spectro.com/spectro-xepos/application-briefs/.
[32] SPECTRO.
Q&a:
The rise of ed-xrf.
url:
http://xrf.spectro.com/
spectro-xepos/q-a-the-rise-of-ed-xrf/, 2016.
[33] SPECTRO.
The rise of ed-xrf - key technology advancements and impli-
cations for your analysis.
url:
http://xrf.spectro.com/spectro-xepos/
on-demand-webinars/the-rise-of-ed-xrf/on-demand, 2016.
[34] Stal. Types 302 (s30200), 304 (s30400), 304l (s30403), 305 (s30500. url: http:
//www.stal.com.cn/pdffile/302304304l305.pdf, -.
[35] Stal. Types 316 (s31600), 316l (s31603), 317 (s31700), 317l (s31703) ). url: http:
//www.stal.com.cn/pdffile/316316l317317l.pdf, -.
[36] Scherzinger
Pump
Technology.
Aluminium
pump
51
fbr/gm005
12v/4,9a.
url:
http://www.scherzinger.de/en/shop/aluminium-pumps/
flow-rate-150-lpmin.html.
[37] Tem5psu.
-.
url:
https://commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?curid=
34096832, -.
[38] Man
Diesel
&
Turbo.
Low
container
ship
speed
facilitated
by
versatile
me/me-c engines.
url:
http://marine.man.eu/docs/librariesprovider6/
technical-papers/low-container-ship-speed-facilitated-by.pdf?sfvrsn=
20.
[39] JT Verhoﬀ, FH; Banchero. Predicting dew points of ﬂue gases. Chemical Engineering
Progress — Issue 8, 70:71–72, 1974.
71
==PAGE:87==
Appendix A - Matlab Code
72
==PAGE:88==
Condensation Model
Main Script
1 clear all
2 close all
3 clc
4
5 %% Engine dimensions in m
6 B = 85e−3;
% Bore −D cyl
7 L = 159.8e−3; % Connecting rod −L CR
8 S = 85e−3;
% Stroke −S
9 R = S/2;
% Crank shaft arm −L CA
10 epsilon = 18.5;
% Geometric compression ratio
11
12 n cyl = 2;
% Number of cylinders
13 rpm = 100;
% Rev. per minute
14 T w = 100+273; % Liner temperature
15
16 %% Gas turbulence intensity
17 n = 1/3;
18
19 %% Charge air temperature and pressure
20 T ch = 160+273; % K
21 p ch = 1.15*1e5; % Bar i Pa
22
23 %% Intake gas composition mol/mol
24 x H2SO4 = 31.5e−6;
% From 23/3/17
25 x H2O
= 5.72/100;
26 x air = 1−(x H2SO4+x H2O);
27
28 %% Crank angle vector
29 theta deg = (−180:1:179);
30 theta = theta deg*pi/180; % (radians)
31
32 %% CAD where intake valve closes and exh valve opens
33 i IVC = find(theta deg ==−116); % 64ˆ0 After BDC
34 i EVO = find(theta deg == 116); % 64ˆ0 Before BDC
35
36 %% Molar masses g/mole
37 MW KOH
= 56.1;
% KOH
38 MW CaCO3 = 100.09;
% CaCO3
39 MW H2SO4 = 98.08;
% H2SO4
40 MW H2O
= 18.015;
% H2O
41 MW S
= 32.065;
% Sulfur
42 MW air
= 28.9;
% Air
43
44 %% Gas constant
45 R u = 8.314;
% Universal, J/mole−K
46 R air = 286.9;
% Specific for air J/kg−K
47 R H2O
= R u*1000/MW H2O; % Specific for H2O J/kg−K
48 R H2SO4 = R u*1000/MW H2SO4; % Specific for H2SO4 J/kg−K
49
50
51 ComputingResults
52 T l = ones(1,length(theta))*100;
53 % Fraction of acid in charge air that is condensing in the cylinder (%...
73
==PAGE:89==
m/m)
54 x cond = 100*Ga hr/M H2SO4 hr
Computing Results
1
2 %% Pre−allocating
3 y = zeros(1,length(theta));
4 V = y; x = y; p = y; T=y;
5
6 %% Cylinder volumes
7 V d=(pi/4)*(Bˆ2)*S;
% Displacement volume
8 V c = V d/(epsilon−1);
% Compression volume
9
10 %% Initial gas state (charge air conditions) at IVC
11 p(i IVC)
= p ch; % Pressure
12 V(i IVC)
= V c + (pi/4)*Bˆ2*(R*(1−cos(theta(i IVC)))+...
13
(Rˆ2/(2*L))*(sin(theta(i IVC)))ˆ2); % Volume Eq (2.106) p...
. 109 in Spencer
14 T(i IVC) = T ch; % Temperature
15
16 p H2SO4(i IVC) = p(i IVC)*x H2SO4;
% H2SO4 pressure in charge
17 p H2O(i IVC)
= p(i IVC)*x H2O;
% H2O pressure in charge
18
19 dQ w(i IVC) = 0;
20
21 %% Dew points
22 % Sulfuric acid
23 T ad(i IVC) = 1/(2276e−6−2943e−8*log(p H2O(i IVC)/133.32)−...
24
858e−7*log(p H2SO4(i IVC)/133.32)+...
25
620e−8*(log(p H2SO4(i IVC)/133.32)*log(p H2O(i IVC)/133.32)))...
−273;
26
27 % Water
28 Tdew H2O
29 T wd(i IVC)=interp1(psatH2O,TsatH2O,p H2O(i IVC))−273;
30
31 %% Mole charge per cylinder
32 N ch = p ch*V(i IVC)/(R u*T ch);
33 %% Mass charge per cylinder, kg
34 M ch = N ch*(x air*MW air+x H2O*MW H2O+x H2SO4*MW H2SO4)*1e−3;
35 %% Species flow rate (in engine intake) moles/min
36 N intake min = n cyl*N ch*(rpm/2);
% Total
37 N H2SO4 min
= x H2SO4*N intake min;
% H2O
38 N H2O min
= x H2O*N intake min;
% H2SO4
39 N air min
= N intake min−(N H2O min+N H2SO4 min);
40 %% Intake flow rate L/min
41 T room = 298; % K room temperature
42 qV min = 1000*N intake min*R u*T room/p ch;
43
44 %% Species flow rate (in engine intake) g/hr
45 M H2SO4 hr = 60*N H2SO4 min*MW H2SO4;
46 M H2O hr
= 60*N H2O min*MW H2O;
47 M air hr
= 60*N air min*MW air;
48
49 %% Aqeous H2So4 mass percent in water−acid mixture
50 Ca = 100*M H2SO4 hr/(M H2SO4 hr+M H2O hr);
74
==PAGE:90==
51
52 %% Heat loss parameters
53 S p = 2*S*rpm/60;
% Mean piston speed
54 w = 2.28*S p;
55
56 %% Specicfic gas constant of charge gas
57 R mix = (R air*M air hr+R H2O*M H2O hr+R H2SO4*M H2SO4 hr)/...
58
(M air hr+M H2O hr+M H2SO4 hr);
59
60 %% seconds per crank angle
61 dt CA = 1/(360*rpm/60);
62
63 %% Integrating gas conditions throughout compression and expansion
64 options = odeset('abstol',1e−9,'reltol',1e−9);
65
66 %% Loading thermal properties of dry air
67 DryAirData=xlsread('DryAirData');
68
69
70 p H2SO4 span = (1e−5:5/1e5:1);
71
72 for i = i IVC:1:i EVO
73
74 gamma(i) = 1.35;
75
76 [CA z] = ode45(@(CA,z) diffeq(CA,z,B,L,R,gamma(i), dQ w(i)) ,...
77
[theta(i) theta(i+1)],[p(i) V(i) ],options);
78
79 p(i+1)
= z(end,1);
% Gas pressure (Pa)
80 V(i+1)
= z(end,2);
% Cylinder volume (m3)
81
82 % Instat stroke and liner area
83 S x(i) = (V(i)−V c)/((pi/4)*Bˆ2); % (m)
84 A x(i) = S x(i)*pi*B; % (m2)
85
86 % Gas temperature (K)
87 T(i+1) = p(i+1)*V(i+1)/(N ch*R u);
88
89
90 % Partial pressure ini cylinder gas
91 p H2SO4(i+1)=p(i+1)*x H2SO4; % H2SO4 pressure (Pa)
92 p H2O(i+1)=p(i+1)*x H2O;
% H2O pressure (Pa)
93
94 % H2SO4 dew point (degC) From Verhoff and Banchero
95 T ad(i) = 1/(2276e−6−2943e−8*log(p H2O(i)/133.32)−...
96
858e−7*log(p H2SO4(i)/133.32)+...
97
620e−8*(log(p H2SO4(i)/133.32)*log(p H2O(i)/133.32)))−273;
98
99 % H2O dew point (degC)
100 T wd(i)=interp1(psatH2O,TsatH2O,p H2O(i))−273;
101
102
103 T ad s = 1./(2276e−6−2943e−8*log(p H2O(i)/133.32)−...
104
858e−7*log(p H2SO4 span/133.32)+...
105
620e−8*(log(p H2SO4 span/133.32)*log(p H2O(i)/133.32)))−273;
106
107 % Acid pressure at liner surface, Pa
108 %interp1(T ad s,p H2SO4 span,T w−273);
75
==PAGE:91==
109 p H2SO4s(i) =
1e−6 ;% Good approximation!!!
110
111 % Density of trapped gas;
112 rho(i) =
M ch/V(i);
113
114 % Thermal conductivity of cylinder gas W/m−K
115 k air(i) = interp1(DryAirData(:,1),DryAirData(:,6),T(i))*1e−2;
116
117 % Specific heat capacity of cylinder gas J/kg−K
118 cp air(i) = interp1(DryAirData(:,1),DryAirData(:,2),T(i))*1e3;
119
120 % Estimated diffusion coefficients of H2O and H2SO4 in air, D = f(T,p)
121 k ag = 0.08e−4*101325/296ˆ(3/2);
122 k wg = 0.26e−4*101325/293ˆ(3/2);
123
124 D ag(i) = k ag*T(i)ˆ(3/2)/p(i); % mˆ2/s
125 D wg(i) = k wg*T(i)ˆ(3/2)/p(i); % mˆ2/s
126
127 % LEwis number
128 Le w(i) = k air(i)/(rho(i)*cp air(i)*D wg(i));
129 Le a(i) = k air(i)/(rho(i)*cp air(i)*D ag(i));
130
131 % Heat transfer coefficient W/m2−K
132 h(i) = 3.26*Bˆ(−0.2)*(p(i)/1000)ˆ(0.8)*T(i)ˆ(−0.55)*wˆ0.8;
133
134 % Instant heat loss (J/rad)
135 dQ w(i+1) = h(i)*A x(i)*(T w−T(i))*1/(2*pi*rpm/60);
136
137 % Mass transfer coefficient m/s
138 hm(i)=h(i)/(rho(i)*cp air(i)*Le a(i)ˆ(1−n));
139
140 % Deposited acid kg/m2*CAD
141 ga(i) = hm(i)*(p H2SO4(i)−p H2SO4s(i))*dt CA*1/(T(i)*R H2SO4);
142
143 % Deposited acid kg for entire surface
144 Ga(i) = ga(i)*A x(i);
145
146 T l(i)=T w−273;
147 if i
≤180
148 ga i(i,i:180) = ga(i);
149 end
150
151 if i
≥181
152 ga i(i,180:−1:(180−i+181)) = ga(i);
153 end
154
155 end
156
157
158 %% condensing acid g/hr
159 Ga hr = 60*1000*rpm*(1/2)*sum(Ga)*n cyl;
76
==PAGE:92==
Solver
1 function dA=diffeq(theta,A,B,L,R,gamma,dQ wall)
2
3 p=(A(1));
4 V=A(2);
5 %T=A(3);
6 %x=A(4);
7 %Q heat=A(4);
8
9
10
11
dQ heat = 0;
12 % dm fuel = 0;
13 %
14 % if theta
≥theta 0
15 % dm fuel = M fuel cycle*(pi/(2*Delta theta))*sin(pi*(theta−theta 0)/...
Delta theta);
16 % %dQ heat = Q fuel*(pi/(2*Delta theta))*sin(pi*(theta−theta 0)/...
Delta theta);
17 % dQ heat = dm fuel*Hu;
18 % end
19 %
20 % if theta
≥theta 0+Delta theta
21 % dm fuel = 0;
22 % % dQ heat = 0;
23 % dQ heat = 0;
24 % end
25
26 % Derivatives
27 dV = ((pi/4)*Bˆ2*R)*(sin(theta)+(R/(2*L))*sin(2*theta)); % Cyl vol
28 dp = ((gamma−1)/V)*(dQ heat+dQ wall)−gamma*(p/V)*dV; % Cyl press
29 %dT = (V*dp+p*dV)/(R gas*m gas); % Gas temp
30
31 dA=[dp; dV];
32 end
77
==PAGE:93==
Water dewpoint determination
1
2
3 %% Dew point of pure water from DANVAK (Book)
4 % Constants
5 A0 = 20.82648355;
6 A1 = 2948.997118;
7 A2 = 5.02808;
8 A3 = 29811.33781;
9 A4 = 32.923061;
10 A5 = 25.21934913;
11 A6 = 1302.8503;
12
13 % H2O vapor saturation temperature and pressure
14
15 TsatH2O = [(0:250)]+273.15;
16 psatH2O = 101325*10.ˆ(A0−A1./TsatH2O−A2.*log10(TsatH2O)−...
17
A3*10.ˆ−(TsatH2O/A4)+A5*10.ˆ−(A6./TsatH2O));
Determining Gas Composition
1 clc;clear all; close all;
2
3 %%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
4 % Determining Gas Composition of solution with H2O/H2SO4 %
5 %%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
6
7
8 P = 1.15; %[bar]
9 V = 53; %[l/min]
10 T = 20+273.15; %[K]
11 R = 0.08314472; %[L bar molˆ−1 Kˆ−1]
12 m H2O = 1000+1.6*1.84*0.04; %[g] Water used (test 22/3−17)
13 m H2SO4 = 1.6*1.84*0.96; %[g] ml H2SO4 with densitet 1.84 (test ...
22/3−17)
14
15 MW H2SO4 = 1.008*2+32.085+16*4;
%[g/mol]
16 MW O2 = 2*16; %[g/mol]
17 MW N2 = 2*14; %[g/mol]
18 MW S = 32.085; %[g/mol]
19 MW Ar = 39.95; %[g/mol]
20 MW H2O = 2*1.008+16; %[g/mol]
21 n air = P*V/(R*T); %[mol/min]
22 n N2 = 0.79*n air; %[mol]
23 n O2 = 0.21*n air; %[mol]
24 n Ar = 0.01*n air; %[mol]
25
26
27 m H2O H2SO4 = 161/60; %[g/min] (test 22/3−17)
28 n H2SO4 =
(m H2O H2SO4*(m H2SO4/(m H2O+m H2SO4)))/MW H2SO4; %[mol/min...
]
29 n H2O = (m H2O H2SO4*(m H2O/(m H2O+m H2SO4)))/MW H2O; %[mol/min]
30 n S = n H2SO4*(MW S/MW H2SO4); %[mol/min]
31
32 n tot = n air + n H2SO4 + n H2O; %[mol/min
78
==PAGE:94==
33
34
35 n N2 tot = n N2/n tot
36 n O2 tot = n O2/n tot
37 n H2O tot = n H2O/n tot
38 n H2SO4 tot = n H2SO4/n tot
39
40
41 %%
42
43 %%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
44 % Determining Gas Composition of solution with H2O %
45 %%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
46
47 P = 1.15; %[bar]
48 V = 44; %[l/min]
49 T = 20+273.15; %[K]
50 R = 0.08314472; %[L bar molˆ−1 Kˆ−1]
51 m H2O = 1000; %[g] Water used in the solution
52
53 MW O2 = 2*16; %[g/mol]
54 MW N2 = 2*14; %[g/mol]
55 MW S = 32.085; %[g/mol]
56 MW Ar = 39.95; %[g/mol]
57 MW H2O = 2*1.008+16; %[g/mol]
58 n air = P*V/(R*T); %[mol/min]
59 n N2 = 0.79*n air; %[mol]
60 n O2 = 0.21*n air; %[mol]
61 %n Ar = 0.01*n air; %[mol]
62
63
64 m H2O min = 160.2/60; %[g/min]
65 n H2O = m H2O min/MW H2O; %[mol/min]
66
67 n tot = n air + n H2O %[mol/min]
68
69
70 n N2 tot = n N2/n tot
71 n O2 tot = n O2/n tot
72 n H2O tot = n H2O/n tot
79
==PAGE:95==
Appendix B - Additional Pictures
80
==PAGE:96==
Figure 6.1: Picture of the aluminum piston
81
==PAGE:97==
Figure 6.2: Danfoss BFP-21 L3
82
==PAGE:98==
Appendix C - Table
83
==PAGE:99==
Figure 6.3: From [14].
84
