==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Speech Recognition Systems with Kaldi
Speech-Enabling Applications with an Improved
Method for Generating Recognizers
Kristian Jagd
Mathias Thulstrup Johansen
Kongens Lyngby 2017
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads
Building 324
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary (English)
The aim of this thesis is to simplify the process of building and using speech recog-
nizers with the Kaldi toolkit. This is done by creating a tool, which makes it easier
and faster for developers to use the open source, speech recognition toolkit Kaldi.
The thesis presents general background information about speech recognition and the
speech recognition toolkit Kaldi. An analysis shows why Kaldi is difficult to use for
developers who are new to speech recognition. Based on this information, we derive
the requirements specification for our tool. We then describe and discuss how the
tool is designed and implemented.
Lastly, the developed tool has undergone a user evaluation. The evaluation indicates
that the tool does indeed allow the target users to setup and test a speech recognizer
based on a Deep Neural Network (DNN) much faster than when using Kaldi without
the tool.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Summary (Danish)
Målet med denne afhandling er at simplificere det at bygge og bruge talegenkendere
med Kaldi. Dette gøres ved at lave et værktøj, som gør det lettere og hurtigere for
udviklere at bruge open source, talegenkendelsesværktøjet Kaldi.
Specialet præsenterer general baggrundsinformation om talegenkendelse og Kaldi. En
analyse viser hvorfor at Kaldi er svært at bruge for udviklere der er nye indenfor
talegenkendelse. Baseret på denne information udarbejder vi en kravspecifikation for
vores værktøj. Derefter beskriver og diskuterer vi hvordan vores værktøj er designet
og implementeret.
Til sidst har vores værktøj været igennem en brugerevaluering. Evalueringen indikerer
at værktøjet hjælper målgruppen til at oprette og teste en talegenkender baseret på
et Dybt Neuralt Netværk (DNN) hurtigere end hvis brugeren havde brugt Kaldi uden
vores værktøj.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at DTU Compute in fulfillment of the requirements for
acquiring a M.Sc. in Engineering. The thesis was prepared under the supervision of
Associate Professor Ekkart Kindler. The thesis was done in cooperation with Dictus
ApS where Jens Kjærum has been the supervisor. Both authors of the project have
contributed equally to all parts of the thesis. The thesis corresponds to 32.5 ECTS
for both authors.
Kongens Lyngby, June 16, 2017
Kristian Jagd
Mathias Thulstrup Johansen
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank our supervisor Ekkart Kindler for providing valuable guidance
and feedback throughout the project.
Thanks to Jens Kjærum, Marcus Uneson, and everyone else at Dictus ApS for their
help and support - it was much appreciated!
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
List of abbreviations
AM - Acoustic Model
ASR - Automatic Speech Recognition
CER - Character Error Rate
CMVN - Cepstral Mean and Variance Normalization
CPU - Central Processing Unit
CRUD - Create, Read, Update, and Delete
DNN - Deep Neural Network
DNN-HMM - Deep Neural Network-Hidden Markov Model
EM - Expectation-Maximization
EOF - End Of File
fMLLR - Feature space Maximum Likelihood Linear Regression
GMM - Gaussian-Mixture Model
GMM-HMM - Gaussian-Mixture Model-Hidden Markov Model
GPU - Graphics Processing Unit
GUI - Graphical User Interface
HMM - Hidden Markov Model
JSGF - JSpeech Grammar Format
KGS - Kaldi Gstreamer Server
LDA - Linear Discriminant Analysis
==PAGE:12==
x
List of abbreviations
LM - Language Model
LSTM - Long Short-Term Memory
LVCSR - Large Vocabulary Continuous Speech Recognition
MFCC - Mel-Frequency Cepstral Coefficients
MLLR - Maximum Likelihood Linear Regression
MLLT - Maximum Likelihood Linear Transform
NST - Nordisk SpråkTeknologi
OS - Operating System
PLP - Perceptual Linear Prediction
RNN - Recurrent Neural Network
SAT - Speaker Adaptive Training
SGMM - Subspace Gaussian Mixture Model
STC - Semi-Tied Covariance
TDNN - Time-Delayed Neural Network
VM - Virtual Machine
WER - Word Error Rate
WFST - Weighted Finite State Transducer
YAML - YAML Ain’t Markup Language
==PAGE:13==
Contents
Summary (English)
i
Summary (Danish)
iii
Preface
v
Acknowledgements
vii
List of abbreviations
ix
Contents
xi
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Solution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.4
Structure of the thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
Speech Recognition
7
2.1
Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Weighted finite state transducers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.3
Language model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.4
Feature extractor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.5
Acoustic model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.6
Decoder . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
2.7
Evaluating speech recognizers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
2.8
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3
The Kaldi Toolkit
33
3.1
Kaldi overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.2
Data requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
3.3
Recipes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
3.4
DNNs in Kaldi . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
3.5
Graph composition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
3.6
Lattice decoding
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
==PAGE:14==
xii
Contents
3.7
Online decoding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
3.8
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
4
Requirements for Kaldigen
63
4.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
4.2
Domain overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
4.3
Scope of Kaldigen
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
4.4
Use cases
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
4.5
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
86
5
Design
87
5.1
Solution overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
87
5.2
Kaldigen configuration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
88
5.3
Kaldigen components . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
91
5.4
Communication between components . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
100
5.5
Life cycles in Kaldigen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
106
5.6
Choice of tools
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
109
5.7
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
117
6
Evaluation of Kaldigen
119
6.1
Evaluation criteria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
119
6.2
Threats to validity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
120
6.3
User evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
122
6.4
Differences between Kaldi and Kaldigen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
123
6.5
Related work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
132
6.6
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
135
7
Process
137
7.1
Work process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
137
7.2
Tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
140
7.3
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
141
8
Conclusion
143
A
Kaldigen API
145
A.1 Kaldigen HTTP API . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
145
A.2 Kaldigen WebSocket API
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
147
A.3 WebSocket API provided by Kaldi GStreamer server . . . . . . . . . .
148
B
Specialized recipe
149
C
Kaldigen Docker file
153
D
Kaldigen install instructions
155
==PAGE:15==
Contents
xiii
E
Kaldi for dummies recipe
157
Bibliography
161
==PAGE:16==
xiv
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Speech recognition is the process of transforming spoken language into written text.
This is useful in many contexts for businesses and consumers alike. Many businesses
have a need to register data more efficiently or even while away from a computer.
For example, warehouse workers need to take notes on inventory while moving it
and dentists need to register dental information while checking the teeth of the pa-
tient. Using speech recognition, these tasks can be performed quickly and hands-free.
Speech recognition can also speed up regular transcription work, such as transcribing
speeches, meetings or providing television subtitles. In the consumer market, speech
recognition can help persons with disabilities to interact with computers.
As the
performance of speech recognition has drastically improved during recent years, more
everyday consumer-oriented applications have also started to appear. Most notably
are the personal agents used in mobile phones such as Siri and Google Now.
Developing high quality, specialized speech recognition services is not an easy task.
Creating a speech recognizer involves numerous different mathematical models and
algorithms. Developers who wish to use speech recognition in their own applications
have therefore had to buy speech recognition services from big companies such as
Google, Amazon, Microsoft, or Nuance. However, sometimes a solution is required
to handle very domain specific speech, such as within the legal or medical field. In
other cases, only a special set of commands are allowed or an uncommon language
or dialect must be supported. In all these cases, there is a need for a specialized
solution, which the existing services might not support. Furthermore, being reliant
on an external service can also be undesirable or too expensive. Therefore, building
and maintaining a speech recognition service locally can be advantageous.
A speech recognizer consists of many different components.
The most important
components are the language model and the acoustic model. The language model
estimates which words usually follow each other, while the acoustic model deals with
how words are pronounced. These components are usually created and configured
based on a large set of training data. The language model is in most cases a statistical
model built on a large text corpus. The acoustic model is trained on speech features
which are derived from raw audio using a feature extraction component. The acoustic
model training also requires transcriptions of the used audio. These components can
be used in a decoder to produce text from speech. While some of these components
==PAGE:18==
2
1 Introduction
are simpler than others, they are all complex and can be constructed and used in
many different ways.
The open source, speech recognition toolkit Kaldi [Pov+11] allows developers to create
state of the art speech recognizers. Kaldi is made by speech recognition researchers
for speech recognition researchers and is a relatively new toolkit which is actively
developed. It is therefore rather difficult for the average developer to know where
and how to begin working with Kaldi. Kaldi is primarily a research tool for acoustic
modelling, while language model generation is handled by other tools.
In speech recognition, there is a distinction between online and offline recognizers.
Online recognizers can decode speech to text in real-time, whereas offline recognizers
must wait for all the audio to be captured before decoding. Online recognizers are
therefore preferred in many contexts as they can give quicker feedback. Both Siri and
Google Now are examples of such. It is possible to use Kaldi for online decoding, but
it requires a lot of additional work.
1.1
Problem
This section gives a brief overview of the problem we are going to solve.
Kaldi is not a single coherent program. Instead, Kaldi consists of numerous smaller
programs. These programs can be combined in a multitude of different ways, de-
pending on the desired result. To actually build a functional speech recognizer, the
developer must have profound knowledge of Kaldi and speech recognition. Only then
can the developer combine the programs in a meaningful way. In Kaldi, this is done us-
ing so-called recipes. A recipe is a big collection of scripts (mostly Bash and Python),
that combines the different Kaldi programs to create the components that are used to
build a speech recognizer. A recipe can be considered a step-by-step guide that details
how to create the building blocks for a speech recognizer. The recipe itself does not
create a functional speech recognizer, but simply tests and scores the accuracy of the
building blocks. The recipes require certain data such as audio with transcriptions
and a text corpus in order to create the components. Many different recipes for sev-
eral data sets in different languages are publicly available on Kaldi’s GitHub page1.
These recipes give some insight for newcomers on how the many different programs in
the Kaldi toolbox can be combined. However, the recipes are not easy to understand,
and in order to configure them properly, Kaldi and speech recognition experience is
needed. This is problematic for developers without this experience, who simply want
a working recognizer.
Recently, Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have seen much use in machine learning,
and speech recognition is no exception. This adds yet another layer of complexity
1https://github.com/kaldi-asr/kaldi/tree/master/egs
==PAGE:19==
1.2 Solution
3
to creating a speech recognizer. At the time of writing, Kaldi has three different
implementations of DNNs with equally many published papers [Ves+13], [PZK14],
[Pov+16]. For a developer who wants to use Kaldi to speech-enable an application,
this adds even more complexity, as they now need knowledge of DNNs as well. The
developer now has to choose the best setup of the three different DNN implementa-
tions and configure the DNN properly according to their data, their hardware, and
their use case.
As stated previously, the goal of the existing recipes is not to produce a ready-to-use
recognizer. Instead, Kaldi is used by researchers to test the efficiency of different
recognition strategies by computing the word error rate on test sets. To actually use
the recognizer to decode speech, more work is required. This is especially true for
online decoding. In this case, a component capable of streaming and slicing the input
audio into smaller pieces before it is processed is also needed. This functionality is
not part of Kaldi and requires custom or third-party software.
There are therefore three main problems with Kaldi, which makes it difficult to create
and use a speech recognizer:
• Kaldi is mainly used for speech recognition research. Using Kaldi requires both
good insight into speech recognition and Kaldi itself, which is difficult to obtain.
• Once a recipe has been constructed and executed it does not produce a ready-
to-use recognizer. Putting the components together requires additional work.
• Online decoding is not directly supported in Kaldi and requires additional soft-
ware.
The above factors therefore make it rather difficult for developers who want to speech-
enable their applications to use Kaldi. This is the problem we want to solve:
The aim of this thesis is to simplify the process of building and using
speech recognizers with the Kaldi toolkit.
1.2
Solution
Here we will give a short summary of our solution.
We will create a tool which can be configured to generate recognizers based on some
provided parameters and training data. The tool should make it easy for a developer
without Kaldi and speech recognition knowledge to configure a speech recognizer.
Once a recognizer has been configured, it should be possible to train the recognizer
==PAGE:20==
4
1 Introduction
from within the tool, and the user should be able to monitor the progress. The tool
should be able to generate a ready-to-use recognizer, in contrast to what the Kaldi
recipes produce. The tool must generate the same components as the Kaldi recipes
but also provide an easy way to use them. In this way, developers can use the tool
to create their own recognizers, without writing Kaldi recipes themselves.
Once a recognizer has been created with our tool, it should be possible to deploy the
recognizer using Kaldi GStreamer server [Alu14] with little effort. Kaldi GStreamer
Server (KGS) is an open source application, which uses the GStreamer framework
to stream audio from a client to a server. Kaldi GStreamer server decodes audio
to text using some provided Kaldi components (such as those the tool we develop
can generate) and sends the transcribed text back to the client. Kaldi GStreamer
server has support for online recognition and supports the two most common DNN
implementations in Kaldi.
Before it is possible to build and use a speech recognition service, a lot of steps are
required. These steps include compiling Kaldi and other accessory tools from source
and configuring Kaldi GStreamer server correctly. Some of the software has a lot of
dependencies and only works on Linux systems. To overcome this problem, we will
provide a Docker container [Mer14], allowing the developers to fetch and automati-
cally configure the required software. Containers make it easy to ship applications by
bundling all the dependencies in a lightweight operating system independent format.
This allows the developer to install our tool locally or on an remote server without
issues.
A very important aspect of speech recognition is achieving a recognizer with high
accuracy.
To do this, we will figure out the best practices for building accurate
recognizers in Kaldi. The results will depend on the available computing power as
well as the size and quality of the data set. For instance, a big data set will benefit
from being trained on a DNN, but this imposes huge hardware requirements. Training
a DNN for speech recognition usually requires at least one high-end GPU and, for
really big data sets, multiple high-end GPUs are needed to complete the training in
reasonable time. We will inform the user of the requirements in the tool.
Our success criterion is that our tool should make it significantly faster for a developer
with no Kaldi nor speech recognition experience to speech-enable their application,
compared to them learning and using Kaldi by themselves.
1.3
Results
We have enabled developers to speech-enable their applications. This was achieved
by producing a tool, named Kaldigen, which allows developers with no Kaldi experi-
ence to generate recognizers much quicker than if they had to set up a Kaldi recipe
==PAGE:21==
1.4 Structure of the thesis
5
themselves. A web page allows the developer to control the most relevant parameters
while other parameters can be inferred. This ensures some flexibility, allowing recog-
nizers to be generated for different purposes. We ensure that the user of Kaldigen
does not need to have prior knowledge of Kaldi, speech recognition, or deep learning.
Kaldigen also allows users to deploy the created recognizers and transcribe speech
to text. However, Kaldigen does impose flexibility restrictions compared to regular
recipes for Kaldi experts.
Kaldigen is documented and reflections have been made on the used development
methodology. As part of the evaluation, examples have been created to show how
Kaldigen works differently from the Kaldi recipe work flow. To test that Kaldigen
is actually faster, a test subject with no theoretical speech recognition nor Kaldi ex-
perience has used it to build a recognizer with a DNN acoustic model. This took
just a few hours, compared to the indicated several days for Kaldi. As our focus
was on creating Kaldigen and not on validating it, we only did a single user evalua-
tion. Although we cannot conclude on just a single observation, we consider the user
evaluation a meaningful indication.
1.4
Structure of the thesis
The thesis is split into several chapters, an overview is provided below:
• Chapter 2 - Speech Recognition: This chapter serves as an introduction to speech
recognition and the most important speech recognition components.
• Chapter 3 - Kaldi: This chapter introduces the Kaldi toolkit and lists its capa-
bilities and weaknesses.
• Chapter 4 - Requirements for Kaldigen: In this chapter the functional and non-
functional requirements for the tool we build will be described in detail.
• Chapter 5 - Design: This chapter explains the design of Kaldigen in detail. The
different components of Kaldigen will be detailed and several design choices will
be discussed.
• Chapter 6 - Evaluation of Kaldigen: This chapter evaluates Kaldigen. The user
evaluation of Kaldigen will be discussed and the workflow of Kaldigen and Kaldi
will be compared.
• Chapter 7 - Process: This chapter looks at the processes used throughout the
project. The work plan used will be shown and explained. The work processes
and methods will be detailed and discussed.
• Chapter 8 - Conclusion: This chapter will conclude on all the findings done
throughout the project.
==PAGE:22==
6
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 2
Speech Recognition
This chapter serves as an introduction to speech recognition, more precisely to Au-
tomatic Speech Recognition (ASR). The main focus of the chapter is on the speech
recognition details which are used in the Kaldi toolkit.
The first section provides an overview by outlining the basic goals and components
of speech recognition. Section 2.2 gives a short introduction to weighted finite state
transducers, which are often used in speech recognition to represent and combine the
information from many different models. Then Section 2.3 explains how the language
model component is built and used in speech recognition. Section 2.4 explains what
feature vectors are, and how they are extracted from speech and mentions the most
used kinds of feature vectors. Section 2.5 describes what an acoustic model is and
its purpose. Section 2.6 explains how the finished speech recognizer is used to de-
code speech into text. At last Section 2.7 explains how the performance of speech
recognizers are usually measured.
2.1
Overview
This section provides a short overview of the different components in speech recogni-
tion and how they work together.
The goal of a speech recognizer is to transform spoken language into text. This is
done by transforming speech into a sequence of feature vectors Z using a component
called a feature extractor. The produced feature vectors are often multidimensional,
partially psychoacoustically motivated frequency distributions. The speech recognizer
then tries to find the sequence of words W with the highest probability of having
created the feature vectors. The goal of a speech recognizer is therefore [GY08, p.
200-201]:
w = arg maxW{P(W|Z)}1
(2.1)
Modeling P(W|Z) is difficult since the conditional probability requires an observation
of a sequence of feature vectors in order to determine the word sequence. It would
1arg max returns a specific input argument that provides the maximum function value.
==PAGE:24==
8
2 Speech Recognition
therefore require a huge amount of observations of feature vector sequences to be
able to give the probability for a word sequence. Therefore, most speech recognizers
use Bayes’ Rule, to transform the conditional probability from Equation 2.1 into the
reverse conditional probability:
w = arg maxW{P(Z|W) · P(W)
P(Z)
} = arg maxW{P(Z|W) · P(W)}
(2.2)
The probability P(Z) is disregarded since the observation has been made and it
is therefore a constant. The problem has now been split into two parts: finding the
probability of the sequence of feature vectors given the sequence of words P(Z|W) and
finding the probability of the sequence of words P(W). Calculating P(Z|W) is still
hard, but much easier than the reverse, since the different number of word sequences
is finite for a fixed sequence length whereas the number of multidimensional feature
vector sequences is infinite for any positive sequence length. The first part of the
equation is determined using the acoustic model while the second is determined using
the language model.
Large Vocabulary Continuous Speech Recognition (LVCSR) and Automatic Speech
Recognition (ASR) are two terms for the same, namely being able to speak to a com-
puter while it transcribes what is spoken. Much earlier, speech recognizers required
the speaker to make a short pause between each word. The speech recognizers there-
fore only looked at one word at a time. Continuous speech recognition on the other
hand allows the user to speak without artificial pauses between the words. Previ-
ously, speech recognizers were only able to transcribe a few thousand different words.
Large vocabulary speech recognizers made it possible to transcribe several hundred
thousands different words. Today, the term LVCSR is used rarely, since most assume
both properties for any modern speech recognizer.
An overview of a ready-to-use speech recognizer can be seen in Figure 2.1. There are
four main components and a pronunciation dictionary in a speech recognizer. The
feature extractor, the decoder and the pronunciation dictionary are relatively simple
compared to the acoustic and the language model. The acoustic model and the lan-
guage model are both trained with machine learning on numerous observations using
algorithms such as Expectation Maximization (EM). The pronunciation dictionary
simply lists how each word is pronounced. An alternative to a dictionary can be a
collection of phonetic rules such that a pronunciation can be generated for any word
in a language, but this is often less precise than the dictionary. The feature extractor
transforms speech into a sequence of spectral feature vectors that represent the dif-
ferent sounds of speech. Feature extraction is explained in Section 2.4. The language
model is most often an N-gram model, where the probability of a word is assumed to
depend only on the N −1 prior words. The language model can be used to estimate
a probability for a sequence of words, which is what was needed to calculate P(W).
==PAGE:25==
2.1 Overview
9
Figure 2.1: Overview of a ready-to-use speech recognizer. The language model and
the acoustic model are trained according to observations. The training
setup can be seen in Figure 2.2.
==PAGE:26==
10
2 Speech Recognition
The language model is explained in further detail in Section 2.3. The acoustic model
associates phones, which are the base sounds of a language, to the feature vectors
extracted earlier. Several words can be modeled in sequence by splitting them up
one by one. Thus the acoustic model can find the probability of a sequence of fea-
ture vectors given a specific sequence of words P(Z|W), this is explained in detail in
Section 2.5.
After the speech has been converted to feature vectors, it is the job of the decoder to
find the most likely word sequence as described in Equation 2.2, using the language
model, the pronunciation dictionary, and the acoustic model. This is done using the
Viterbi algorithm [Vit67], although often modified. The Viterbi algorithm is able
to find the most likely sequence of hidden states given a sequence of observations.
In most speech recognizers, the hidden states are the phones and the observations
are the feature vectors.
The output of the decoder is then the most likely word
sequence uttered according to the language model, the pronunciation dictionary and
the acoustic model. The decoder component is explained in Section 2.6.
The language model and the acoustic model of a speech recognizer are trained using
machine learning and often by utilizing deep learning. These two components are the
most complicated and by far the hardest to produce. Creating good acoustic models
requires huge data sets consisting of speech labeled with matching transcriptions,
which is often the most difficult part to get a hold of when creating a speech recognizer.
This is used together with the pronunciation dictionary to create models for how
each phone in the language is usually represented as a feature vector. Furthermore,
acoustic models are often trained on top of each other to produce continuously better
models. Language models are based on huge corpora with millions of word sequences.
Figure 2.2 gives an overview of how the models for speech recognition are trained and
created. The feature extractor and decoder are not trained as they are not based on
data. As when using a speech recognizer, training also requires feature extraction. It
is important that the same type of features are used for training and when decoding
speech later. The figure also gives the impression that the acoustic model is more
difficult to train, or at least requires more parameters. This is somewhat true as most
progress in speech recognition over the last years has been focused on the acoustic
models. However, this does not mean that creating a good language model is trivial,
but good tools exist and there has not been made as much progress on language
models in the past years.
Recently, Weighted Finite State Transducers (WFSTs) have seen much use in speech
recognition. The primary reason is that WFSTs can be used to represent language
models, pronunciation dictionaries and core components of the acoustic model in one
huge, optimized WFST. The Kaldi toolkit heavily relies on WFSTs and therefore an
introduction to WFSTs and their use in speech recognition will be presented next.
==PAGE:27==
2.2 Weighted finite state transducers
11
Figure 2.2: Overview of how the models used in a speech recognizer are trained.
The acoustic model and the language model are used in the finished
recognizer in Figure 2.1.
2.2
Weighted finite state transducers
This section introduces the concept of Weighted Finite State Transducers (WFSTs)
and their use in speech recognition.
After considerable study of WFSTs at AT&T in the late 1990’s and early 2000’s
[MPR02] they have become increasingly popular in speech recognition. The publi-
cation by M. Mohri et al. in 2008 [MPR08], which detailed their earlier findings,
made the use of WFSTs in speech recognition even more understandable and detailed
exactly how they could be used. We will here give an introduction to WFSTs and
their properties in speech recognition since the Kaldi toolkit is built around WFSTs.
A WFST is a finite state machine which has both input and output labels on each arc
along with a weight. The input and output can be arbitrary strings. Figure 2.3 shows
a simple WFST with arcs on the form input : output/weight, where the weights are
==PAGE:28==
12
2 Speech Recognition
probabilities. This WFST transduces the character sequence a,p,e into either c,o,w
or c,a,t. The weights on the arcs are probabilities and the transducer therefore
outputs cow with a higher probability than cat. To calculate the weights along a
path, the weights for each path are multiplied if they are probabilities and summed
if they are log or negative log probabilities. The WFST works like any other finite
state machine, each time an input is received it progresses to the next state, but also
produces an output. A WFST can also be used to calculate the most likely sequence
of states given a sequence of outputs with the Viterbi algorithm. If a state has two
different outgoing arcs with the same input, the WFST is called non-deterministic.
Figure 2.3: A simple non-deterministic weighted finite state transducer that trans-
duces ape into cow with probability 0.7 or into cat with probability
0.3.
There are several reasons why WFSTs have become popular for speech recognition.
The most common model used in acoustic modeling, the Hidden Markov Model
(HMM), can be represented using a WFST. The most commonly used model for
language modeling, the N-gram language model, can also be represented using a
WFST. Furthermore, two WFSTs can be composed into a new WFST which has the
input of the first WFST and the output of the second and where the new states are
pairs of states from each WFST. After composition of two WFSTs W1 and W2 the
composed WFST W satisfies the following [MPR08, p. 5]:
• The initial state of W is the pair of the initial state of W1 and the initial state
of W2.
• The final states of W are pairs of final states from W1 and W2.
• If x1, . . . , y1 are states from W1 and x2, . . . , y2 are states from W2, then for every
transition t1 between a pair of states in W1 and for every transition t2 between
a pair of states in W2, there exists a transition t if and only if the output of
of t1 matches the input of t2. The transition t of the new WFST thus has the
input label from t1 and the output label from t2. The weight is combined by
multiplying if the weights are probabilities and by summing if the weights are,
possibly negated, log probabilities.
==PAGE:29==
2.3 Language model
13
The newly composed WFST therefore only has paths where the previous WFSTs
had matching input and output. This can be used to create one huge WFST that
captures most parts of the acoustic and all of the language model. It is then possible
to decode speech using this WFST. Furthermore, it is possible to keep the final graph
rather small compared to the graphs it was composed of, using several transducers
optimization steps. This also yields a speed up for decoding [MPR08, p. 26].
2.3
Language model
Here an overview will be provided of the language model component in speech recog-
nition. As mentioned earlier, the language model is used to estimate the probability
of a word sequence P(W), which is needed for the decoder.
The language model is most often constructed as an N-gram model, but can also be
made using a Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) or a simple grammar depending on
the use case. Language models are also used for many other tasks such as machine
translation and text summarization. In speech recognition, the job of the language
model is to determine the probability of a word sequence and determine what word
sequences are possible. A finite state transducer grammar can be seen in Figure 2.4.
The grammar determines that the sentence 'change to browser' is in the language,
but 'change to image' or 'open close' is not in the language and can thus never
be output by the language model. Grammar based language models are most often
used for command style speech recognition, which can for instance be used to control
a computer.
Figure 2.4: A grammar based language model.
2.3.1 N-gram language models
An N-gram model is the usual choice for a large vocabulary recognizer which needs
to support a lot of words and a huge amount of combinations. An N-gram language
model can estimate the probability of a word given the prior N −1 words, and can
therefore also be used to compute the probability of a word sequence. An N-gram
==PAGE:30==
14
2 Speech Recognition
language model is an approximation and the higher the N, the more precise the
approximation is, but more data is also required to construct the N-gram.
The
probability of a sentence, or a word sequence, can be computed as follows using an
N-gram model, for the sequence w = w1, · · · , wM [GY08, p. 210]:
P(w)N =
M
∏
i=1
P(wi|wi−1, · · · , wi−N+1)
(2.3)
As can be seen, for each word in the sequence, the N −1 prior words are used to
condition the probability of that word. All the probabilities are then multiplied to
find the probability of the sentence. Of course this is not the exact probability in the
language, but rather an approximation made by the N-gram given the N −1 prior
words.
An N-gram language model is constructed by going through huge training sets of a
specific language. The probability of a word sequence is then computed by dividing
the number of times that the word sequence appears by the numbers of times that
the first N −1 words appear in sequence. For example, consider the three sentences:
'I want to eat', 'I want to sleep', and 'I want to go'. Let us construct a
bigram (2-gram) model from the three sentences. The probabilities of any N-gram
can be computed as follows, where C is the count of a sequence:
P(wi|wi−1, . . . , wi−N+1)N =
C(wi−N+1, . . . , wi)
C(wi−N+1, . . . , wi−1)
(2.4)
Thus for our bigram we get the following probabilities, where < s > represents sen-
tence begin and < /s > represents sentence end.:
==PAGE:31==
2.3 Language model
15
P(I| < s >) = C(< s >, I)
C(< s >)
= 3
3 = 1
P(want|I) = C(I, want)
C(I)
= 3
3 = 1
P(to|want) = C(want, to)
C(want)
= 3
3 = 1
P(eat|to) = P(sleep|to) = P(go|to) = C(to, sleep)
C(to)
= C(to, eat)
C(to)
= C(to, go)
C(to)
= 1
3
P(< /s > |sleep) = P(< /s > |eat) = P(< /s > |go) =
C(sleep, < /s >)
C(sleep)
= C(eat, < /s >)
C(eat)
= C(go, < /s >)
C(go)
= 1
1 = 1
In the example below, it is shown how Equation 2.3 can be used to compute the
probability of a sentence with a bigram model, now that we have computed the
probability of each factor:
P(I want to sleep)N=2 = P(I| < s >) · P(want|I) · P(to|want)
· P(sleep|to) · P(< /s > |sleep)
= 1 · 1 · 1 · 1
3 · 1
= 1
3
Unsurprisingly we get the probability 1
3, which makes good sense, since the sentence
was one of the three training sentences that the N-gram was based on.
Were this language model used to find the probability of the utterance 'I go to
eat', the probability would be zero. The factor P(go|I) would be zero, as it had
not appeared in our training set, even though all the words themselves do appear in
the training set. This is a problem since it is highly unlikely to find a training set
where each possible word sequence is present. This problem also occurs in regular
sized N-gram language models since there exists so many different combinations of
words. When increasing the N of the model, the problem becomes worse since even
more training data is needed. The problem is often called data sparsity, which means
that there is not enough data for the model to produce proper results.
==PAGE:32==
16
2 Speech Recognition
2.3.2
Smoothing techniques
There are a multitude of different ways to go about remedying the problem of data
sparsity. Some of note are Good Turing Smoothing, Kneser-Key Smoothing, Laplace
Smoothing, the Backoff Approach, and the Katz Smoothing Approach [Kat87] which
we will go into details with. More information on smoothing techniques can be found
in the book Foundations of Statistical Natural Language Processing by C. D. Manning
and H. Schütze [M+99].
Katz smoothing requires N-grams for every order below the target N-gram to exist
as well. So if a language model is based on a 3-gram model and uses Katz smoothing,
then bigrams and 1-grams (unigrams) must also be computed. The smoothing then
works as follows [GY08, p. 211]:
P(wi | wi−N+1 · · · wi−1) =

















C(wi−N+1 · · · wi−1wi)
C(wi−N+1 · · · wi−1)
if C > k
dC(wi−N+1 · · · wi−1wi)
C(wi−N+1 · · · wi−1)
if 0 < C ≤k
α(wi−N+1 · · · wi−1)P(wi | wi−N+2 · · · wi−1)
otherwise
(2.5)
Here the condition C means C(wi−N+1 · · · wi−1wi) i.e. the count of the word sequence.
The k is a chosen threshold. The d is the so called discount which can be estimated
in different ways. α is a constant which is opposite to the discount. If there are a lot
of observations of a word sequence in the training data, then the regular estimate is
used. If there are only a few observations then the probability is slightly discounted.
If no observations have been made at all, then the model resorts to a lower N-gram.
The same calculation is then done again, checking the counts of the now shorter word
sequence and choosing a case. If no observations have been made once again, another
lower N-gram is chosen. This can thus happen recursively until the unigram case,
where every word in the dictionary has a probability. The different parameters and
the counts (k, d, α, C) are all determined in the language model training step of
Figure 2.2.
Figure 2.5 shows a bigram model with included unigrams as a WFST. The symbol #0
is a special construct which is used to make the graph determinizable. The epsilon,
< eps >, means no input or no output depending on where it is. The graph can then
be traversed to find the probability for a given word sequence, the lower the weight,
the higher the probability for the word sequence. For instance, the following traversal
through the states: 1, 2, 7, 6, 4, transduces the sentence I want to go and has
the weight 0.28768 + 0.28767 + 0.28767 + 1.7918 + 0.69315 = 3.34799. The graph can
==PAGE:33==
2.3 Language model
17
Figure 2.5: A WFST bigram language model with included unigrams. The arcs
have the form input : output/weight.
The end nodes, indicated by
double circles, also have a weight for stopping in that node.
==PAGE:34==
18
2 Speech Recognition
thus be used to determine the probability of a word sequence and find the most likely
word sequence for P(W). As usual, the lower the weight (cost) on an arc, the more
likely the arc will be traversed. This is also discussed in Section 2.6. Some language
models use scores, or probabilities instead of weights and costs, in these cases the
higher the score the more probable.
There exists several different toolkits which can be used to generate N-gram based
language models from a prepared text corpus. A text corpus would consist of millions
of sentences. Some notables toolkits include SRILM, IRSTLM, KenLM, and pocolm. It is
straightforward to transform the output of these tools into WFSTs, which can then
be combined with other WFSTs.
N-gram language models do of course also have some weaknesses. They are always
bound by a finite N and can thus never model any dependency longer than N. Also,
most N-grams are trained on written language, as it is most easily available, but in
speech recognition they are used to model spoken language, which has certain rules
of its own.
2.4
Feature extractor
This section deals with the feature extractor component. It will explain the inputs
and the different types of output of a regular feature extractor.
Once speech has been captured by a microphone it needs to be represented in a way
that makes it possible to distinguish phones (explained in Section 2.5.1) while at
the same time being rather compact. Features are often stored as multidimensional
vectors and the two most often used representations are called Mel-Frequency Cepstral
Coefficients (MFCCs) and Perceptual Linear Prediction (PLP). These representations
are partially based on psychoacoustics, or the ’perception of sound’, and will be
explained in the next section.
2.4.1
Spectral features
MFCC feature extraction is usually the preferred and slightly simpler way to extract
spectral features. The features are computed using a non-linear frequency scale called
the mel scale, which is based on the perception of frequencies by the human ear. The
idea is to only preserve the most important data, to keep the size of the features down.
To create the feature vectors, multiple steps are applied to the audio signal.
First, the audio is segmented into multiple overlapping frames of about 25ms duration
with a 10ms frame shift. Using a window function e.g. Hamming, the data is selected
and the energy of the frame is computed. Then, a fast Fourier transformation is
performed to compute the power spectrum. Now, the frame is represented in the
==PAGE:35==
2.4 Feature extractor
19
power domain. Using triangular overlapping bins from the mel scale as shown in
Figure 2.6, the energy is calculated for each mel bin. The bins represent the human
perception of frequencies. Then the log of the energy is taken for each mel bin, and a
truncated discrete cosine transformation is applied. Finally, the lower 13 coefficients
are normalized and kept to be used as features possibly along with the previously
computed frame energy [GY08, p. 202].
Figure 2.6: A distribution of the triangular mel bin filters. The filters are applied
to the power spectrum of a frame.
PLP feature vectors are more sophisticated than MFCCs but follow the same overall
structure. The main difference is that the PLP method attempts to use more con-
cepts related to how humans perceive sounds. This includes estimations of critical-
band masking and in particular the sensitivity and perception of frequencies and
loudness. Lastly the auditory spectrum is approximated by performing an inverse
discrete Fourier transformation. PLP can be especially good in noisy environments
and handling speaker-independent recognition [Her90].
2.4.2
Transformation features
In addition to the spectral features calculated using MFCC or PLP, additional trans-
formation features can be applied in later stages of the training. These features are
typically appended to the basic spectral features. In this section some of the most
used transformations will be briefly described [GY08]. The possible combinations of
the following features is a big part of constructing a good recognizer.
==PAGE:36==
20
2 Speech Recognition
Cepstral Mean and Variance Normalization (CMVN) is used to normalize
the features in order to limit the effects of noise. CMVN is usually used for speaker-
independent training.
Delta and delta-delta transformation are transformations based on taking the
first- and second-order derivatives of the existing features using a sliding window.
These features are appended to the spectral features, and serve to help with the
assumed conditional independence which is introduced.
Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA) is a linear transformation, which is usually
used to decrease the dimensionality of the feature vectors. This is accomplished by
performing a supervised transformation, which is calculated by using the average class
covariance.
Global Semi-tied Covariance (STC) and Maximum Likelihood Linear Trans-
form (MLLT) estimation introduces a covariance matrix where feature distribu-
tions are able to share a certain few full covariance matrices, while still maintaining
some local data.
Maximum Likelihood Linear Regression (MLLR) is a technique where linear
transforms are used to map an existing model to a new model. This is particularly
useful for speaker adaption, where a model should be able to adapt to new voices and
for building noise robust systems.
These transformation features, and a few others, are used throughout all Kaldi recipes
building acoustic models.
The next section will give an introduction to how the
acoustic models are built, using the extracted features.
2.5
Acoustic model
In this section the Acoustic Model (AM) component of speech recognizers will be
explained in detail. The goal of the acoustic model is to estimate the probability
of a sequence of feature vectors given a sequence of words. First, the phone will be
introduced, then the standard model used in acoustic modeling, the Hidden Markov
Model (HMM), will be introduced. Later two different forms of modeling the output
of HMMs, namely Gaussian Mixture Models (GMMs) and Deep Neural Networks
(DNNs) will be explained.
2.5.1
Phones
Words consist of a sequence of unique phones, each of which is a representative of a
phoneme. Each word can therefore be split into a sequence of phones.
==PAGE:37==
2.5 Acoustic model
21
Phones should not be confused with phonemes, which are language specific and can
consists of several phones so long as they have the same function within that language.
Phones and phonemes are often used interchangeably in speech recognition [Kir16, p.
24]. Kaldi uses the phone terminology.
It is a property of each language how many different phones are used, for English there
are 41, depending on the method of analysis, while there are only 26 for Japanese
[YB95, p. 3513]. Below is shown how a few different English words and their corre-
sponding phonetic transcriptions look, in lowercase arpabet2:
I [a i]
want
[w 0 n t]
to
[t u]
eat [i t]
If each word is pronounced slowly, it can be determined that the distinct number of
sounds per word matches that of the phonetic transcription.
It is the job of the acoustic model to be able to relate the feature vectors to the
phones of the chosen language. A pronunciation dictionary is then required to get a
sequence of phones for each word.
In speech recognition, special phones are often created for silence. These phones are
used to label audio data such that the recognizer learns not to output any text when
there is silence or simple background noise.
2.5.2
Hidden Markov models
Almost all acoustic models in speech recognition use Hidden Markov Models (HMM)
to model phones. A simple example of an HMM that often appears in literature is
shown in Figure 2.7.
In this example, a prisoner is kept inside at all time, and can therefore not observe
the weather directly. However, once in a while a guard comes by and checks on the
prisoner. The prisoner can then make educated guesses on the weather based on
whether the guard wears sunglasses or carries an umbrella. The hidden states are
therefore the weather and the observations are the clothings of the guard. In this
example it seems most likely that if the guard has an umbrella, then it is raining,
but it could also be the case that it only looked like it was going to rain and kept
dry. Sunglasses are also most likely to be worn when it is dry outside, but it could
also be a day of rain showers with spots of sun. In a hidden Markov model there are
different probabilities on each of the arcs. The arcs between the hidden states are
the description of the model behind. In this example, they determine whether a dry
day is followed by another dry day or a rainy day. Every time there is a transition
2Using lowercase arpabet http://fave.ling.upenn.edu/downloads/ARPAbet.pdf
==PAGE:38==
22
2 Speech Recognition
Figure 2.7: A hidden Markov model where the hidden states are the weather and
the observations are pieces of clothing.
into an emitting state an observation is produced with a state-specific probability
distribution.
Hidden Markov models are used to represent discrete, sequential data. In the previous
example, the weather of each day can only fall into the categories dry or rainy and
thus the weather for each day is discrete and at the same time sequential as a new
observation of the weather is made each day. Hidden Markov models are built on
top of Markov models, but with the distinction that in a regular Markov model the
state itself can be observed whereas in the hidden Markov model only an observation
produced by the state can be observed. Given a sequence of observations, the hidden
Markov model can be used to estimate the sequence of states that produced them.
Hidden Markov models differentiate between emitting states and non-emitting states.
In the example, the Start state is non-emitting while the rest are emitting. Non-
emitting states are usually used for concatenating HMMs or making them more clear.
Transitions between hidden states are called transition probabilities and the output
for each state is called output probabilities or emission probabilities.
2.5.3
Hidden Markov models in speech recognition
In speech recognition, HMMs are used to couple phones to feature vectors. Here the
hidden states represent the phones and the observations represent the feature vectors
according to either a Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM) or a Deep Neural Network
(DNN). In Figure 2.8 the regular HMM topology used to model a single phone in
==PAGE:39==
2.5 Acoustic model
23
speech recognition can be seen. Contrary to the HMM shown earlier, HMMs used
in speech recognition do not go backwards to an earlier state, but instead always
progresses to the next state or uses the self loop. Thus, they are left-to-right HMMs
where the sequence of states represents monotonically increasing time. As the possi-
bilities for different feature vectors are practically endless, in very high dimensionality,
the output of each hidden state is a distribution which can produce different feature
vectors. It should be noted that feature vectors are multidimensional and therefore
the distributions shown in the figure can not actually encapsulate a real feature vec-
tor. As mentioned in Section 2.4 feature vectors are often sampled every 10ms and
have an overlapping span of 25ms. In the figure this would mean that the shortest
duration for a phone would be 45ms where all three emitting states will have to be
traversed with no self-loops. The HMM in the figure captures only one phone and
because of the non-emitting start and end states it can easily be concatenated onto
another HMM to form for instance all the phones of a word.
In speech recognition the Viterbi algorithm is used to predict the most likely sequence
of hidden states based on observations. The observations are then the feature vectors
and the hidden states are the phones, which can be concatenated into words using
the pronunciation dictionary.
In a finalized acoustic model, each phone would have a corresponding HMM with dif-
Figure 2.8: Hidden Markov model for a single phone. The hidden states 0-4 repre-
sent the phone, while the observations are feature vectors modeled by
a distribution. The distributions are shown very simplified.
==PAGE:40==
24
2 Speech Recognition
ferent distributions as output for each hidden emitting state. During training of an
acoustic model, speech with transcriptions and phonetic transcriptions are required.
This allows the acoustic model to pinpoint, with some accuracy, where each phone is
uttered in the speech. Using this information the distributions are then updated for
every phone utterance in the speech data, such that the distribution can encapsulate
all the different pronunciations of the same phone. More about this in Sections 2.5.5
and 2.5.6. The transition probabilities themselves can also be updated during train-
ing.
The job of the acoustic model is to find the probability P(Z|W) i.e. the probability of
a sequence of acoustic vectors given a word sequence. So far, we have only seen that
the acoustic model is able to model phones. By using a pronunciation dictionary,
the HMMs for different phones can be concatenated together to form words. For
instance; if the word ask is pronounced as [ah s k] then the HMMs for ah, s, and
k are concatenated to form the word and thus the AM can give a probability that a
sequence of feature vectors correspond to the word 'ask'. Even more HMMs can be
concatenated to form word sequences.
2.5.4
Triphone models
However, the model introduced so far has a problem. Even though each word has been
split up into phones using a pronunciation dictionary, not every phone is pronounced
the same way in every context. As an example Gales [GY08, p. 206] mentions that
cool and mood share the same phone for the o-sound, but that the sound is actually
pronounced differently due to the consonant phones before and after. The model
we looked at before did not take this into account and is therefore called a context
independent or a monophone model.
The usual way to make context dependent models are through the use of triphone
models. These take into account the phone before and the phone after, thus the name
tri as three phones are looked at. Triphones are also represented using an HMM, so
the monophone model in Figure 2.8 can also represent a triphone.
Transcribing 'ask' as before using context dependent phones looks as the following:
[sil-ah+s ah-s+k s-k+sil]. Where sil indicates silence. Thus it takes just as
many context dependent phones to model a word as with context independent phones
(plus or minus one, depending on how silence is modeled), they are just more complex.
The notation used above indicates that the phone before the minus is the left context
and the phone after the plus is the right context.
If there exists N context independent phones then there are N 3 context dependent
phones. For English which has 41 phones and 41 corresponding HMMs this would
create 68921 HMMs. This creates two problems: As with language models, sparsity
of data can occur as numerous occurrences are needed for each context dependent
==PAGE:41==
2.5 Acoustic model
25
phone. The models produced would also be very big. Luckily it is not necessary to
model all of the HMMs. Some of the context dependent phones never occur in speech
due to specific language constraints and can therefore be omitted, while others are
very similar.
To figure out which context dependent phones are similar a process of state tying is
used. This process usually involves a phonetic decision tree (PDT) which has choices
based on what type of sound the phones correspond to, such that acoustically indis-
tinguishable phones are grouped together. Then, calculations are made based on the
distributions to see how similar they are. Figure 2.9 shows how four different context
dependent phones share some output distributions. In the top of the figure it is shown
that the middle output of both t-ih+n, t-ih+ng, and f-ih+l are quite similar. After
state tying the outputs therefore point to the same distribution. Also shown is that
only one output distribution among these four context-dependent phones is actually
unique. Several papers report that the use of state-tying can reduce the number of
triphones to below 10000 on several English testing sets [YOW94], [RC98].
2.5.5
Gaussian mixture model based acoustic models
The feature vectors produced by the feature extractor are multidimensional. There-
fore a model or distribution which can easily encapsulate multidimensional vectors is
Figure 2.9: The process of state tying, coupling similar HMM states. This figure is
based upon [You96, p. 8].
==PAGE:42==
26
2 Speech Recognition
needed. For this purpose Gaussian Mixture Models (GMMs) are often used in classic
speech recognition systems to model the output of the HMMs. A quick introduc-
tion to GMMs is given next and then it is explained how they are used in speech
recognition.
As the name suggests, GMMs are based on Gaussian distributions. Several Gaussian
distributions are then mixed to form another distribution which is not Gaussian, but
has some well defined properties. Figure 2.10 shows the probability density function of
a one-dimensional GMM. As can be seen, the mixture model uses multiple underlying
Gaussians to produce another distribution. Multidimensional GMMs work the same
way with multidimensional Gaussians and produces a multidimensional distribution
based on the underlying Gaussians.
Figure 2.10: The probability density function of a one-dimensional Gaussian mix-
ture model. If feature vectors were one-dimensional this distribution
could have been the distribution used to model the emission of Fig-
ure 2.8.
For the output of each emitting HMM state, we have a matching distribution. The
probability density function of a GMM given the state i of an HMM is given as follows,
with M Gaussians in the mixture model [GY08, p. 218]:
pi(x) =
M
∑
k=1
αikN(x|µik, Cik)
(2.6)
==PAGE:43==
2.5 Acoustic model
27
Here αik is the probability of choosing the Gaussian k for state i, also known as a
probability mass function. The requirements for such are as follows:
M
∑
k=1
αik = 1,
0 ≤αik ≤1
(2.7)
Thus, the probabilities sum up to one and each probability is between one and zero.
The alpha therefore determines the weight of each Gaussian in the distribution for
each state i. Each Gaussian in Equation 2.6 has a mean µ and a covariance matrix C
given the state i as well.
GMMs have proven useful in modeling arbitrary multidimensional data well and is
therefore used to model the feature vectors in speech recognition where it has been
the standard for several decades.
During training of a GMM in speech recognition, a lot of feature vectors corresponding
to phones and thereby given HMM states are used. The Expectation-Maximization
(EM) algorithm is then used to tweak the parameters α, µ, C for a given state. This
is done in several iterative passes and the EM algorithm guarantees that the log-
likelihood does not decrease at each step [Stu03, p. 48]. Between the passes, align-
ments are often made. An alignment uses the current acoustic model to better align
phones with their corresponding time in speech. This is very useful to make sure
that the correct feature vector is associated with the correct phone. After several
iterations of parameter optimization and alignments the GMM will converge.
This is the final part of the acoustic model. Now, given a sequence of feature vectors
it is possible to calculate the most likely distribution which mathes with the HMM
topology. This makes it possible to connect a sequence of feature vectors to phones.
By forming a sequence of words from phones, using a pronunciation dictionary, the
equation P(Z|W) can be maximized, and the most probable word sequence outputted.
An acoustic model based on a GMM is often called a GMM-HMM acoustic model.
2.5.6
Deep neural network based acoustic models
While GMM-based recognizers are able to obtain acceptable performance, it is espe-
cially difficult to get good results in a Large Vocabulary Continuous Speech Recog-
nition (LVCSR) setting where many thousands of words must be differentiated. Re-
searchers have for decades experimented with alternative models, including the use
of Deep Neural Networks (DNNs). However, both the available algorithms and hard-
ware have limited the usage of DNNs to provide additional features to the GMM-
HMM models in tandem setups. This situation has changed in the last decade with
the availability of much cheaper computational power and the introduction of support
for doing the calculations on a dedicated GPU. These factors make it possible to train
==PAGE:44==
28
2 Speech Recognition
DNNs fairly efficient. This has sparked much research and basically all commercial
speech recognizers now use DNNs [Hin+12]. This section gives a short introduction
to neural networks and how they are used in speech recognition.
Neural networks are based on the simple idea that instead of programming a long list
of rules to solve a problem, we simply present some observations which the neural net
is able to learn from. Figure 2.11 shows a very simple feed-forward neural network
with an input layer, an output layer and two hidden layers. Each adjacent layer is
fully connected. For example, if we wanted to train a neural network to recognize
pictures with dogs in them, we would train it with many labeled pictures with and
without dogs in. For each picture, the pixels of the image is encoded and provided
to the networks input layer, while the binary value of the observation (1 if there is
a dog, 0 otherwise) is supplied to the output layer. The units in the hidden layer
are configured to fire depending on the input received and their bias.
The bias
values could be randomly initialized. Now each image we want to train on is fed
through the network. Whenever an image is wrongly predicted, a backpropagation
algorithm is used to go back over the network and modify the bias values slightly.
This adjustment is performed many times, and as a result the network gets better
and better at predicting.
By using this principle, the neural network is able to infer its own rules, allowing for
much more flexibility in areas which might be difficult to model with rules. Since
2006, the concept of stacking multiple hidden layers to create a deep neural network
has gained popularity and allowed neural networks to be applied successfully to a
wide range of applications [Nie15]. A DNN usually consists of an input layer capable
Figure 2.11: A simplified overview of a feed-forward deep neural network. In a more
realistic setting, there would be many more units and possibly more
hidden layers as well.
==PAGE:45==
2.5 Acoustic model
29
of reading the features and an output layer, which is able to label the data.
In
between, a number of hidden layers are placed, which are capable of adapting during
training. The number of these hidden layers is typically somewhere between two and
seven, while each layer could have between a few hundreds and a few thousand units.
For further background information on DNNs, Michael Nielsen [Nie15] provides an
excellent introduction to neural networks and deep learning while Dong Yu and Deng
Li [YD14] give a thorough understanding of how deep learning is used in speech
recognition.
As mentioned earlier, deep neural networks are widely used in speech recognition.
Hinton et. al [Hin+12] present a shared view on the usage of DNNs for acoustic
modeling based on the research of four different groups; the University of Toronto,
Microsoft, Google and IBM. Here it is argued that DNNs might be better at modeling
data which dimensionally “lies on or near a non-linear manifold” than the conventional
GMM approach. This is the case for speech recognition. The recent advances in deep
neural networks and hardware capabilities make it possible to do this by using multiple
hidden layers and a large output layer. The network can then be trained to replace
the role which the GMM previously had. The extracted feature vectors are supplied
to the networks input layer, and the output layer is configured to predict the tied
HMM phone-states previously described in Section 2.5.4. The DNN can replace the
GMM when decoding, but the GMM is still needed during training. To actually train
the DNN with backpropagation, the expected tied phone-state is required to perform
supervised training. Therefore a GMM-based model is trained and used for forced
alignment. The result of this alignment uses the GMM-HMM recognizer to map the
sliced windows with the MFCC features to the phones provided in the transcription.
This alignment is then used as labeled training data when training to adjust the
weights of the units in the hidden layers. The performance of the underlying GMM-
based model is therefore crucial, as a poor alignment would cause the DNN to perform
poorly.
2.5.6.1
DNN techniques for speech recognition
There are many techniques and possible configurations available when working with
DNNs, but these will not be described in detail here. However, in the context of speech
recognition there are some practices which are known to be effective. It is possible to
build a well-performing DNN with a rather simple feed-forward network which only
works on a single phone at a time. However, recent papers have shown how more
complex setups using Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN) are able to perform even
better. Sak et al. [SSB14] demonstrate how a recurrent Long Short-Term Memory
(LSTM) network can be applied to speech recognition. Peddinti et al. [PPK15] show
how a Time Delayed Neural Network (TDNN) is able to model a long temporal context
efficiently. Both of these network architectures are able to use sequential data to train
the acoustic model and achieve state-of-the-art performance. Section 2.7 introduces
how the performance of recognizers usually is measured, and what the performances
==PAGE:46==
30
2 Speech Recognition
of the currently best implementations are.
The DNN is used to model the multidimensional input features and their associations
to the hidden tied phone-states of the HMM. Therefore, the DNN replaces the GMM
distributions previously shown in Figure 2.8. Thus, the acoustic model is able to
calculate P(Z|W) with the use of DNNs.
The acoustic model is last component
needed before the decoder is able to recognize speech.
2.6
Decoder
This section will give a short introduction to the decoder component.
It will be
explained how the decoder works, what input it requires, and what output it produces.
The decoder component of Figure 2.1 is the one which solves the equation, that was
presented in Section 2.1:
w = arg maxW{P(Z|W) · P(W)}
(2.8)
So far, we have seen how the acoustic model calculates P(Z|W) with the help of a
pronunciation dictionary and how the language model calculates P(W). The job of
the decoder is to perform the arg max operation. That is, finding the maximum of
P(Z|W) · P(W) and returning the word sequence, W, that maximizes the function.
This word sequence is then the most probable word sequence. The decoder therefore
needs a language model, an acoustic model, and a pronunciation dictionary. For each
utterance, a sequence of feature vectors should be produced and fed to the decoder,
that in return produces the most likely sequence of words.
A form of the Viterbi algorithm [Vit67] is usually used to calculate the maximum of
Equation 2.8. The Viterbi algorithm is used to find a sequence of hidden states with
the highest probability given a sequence of observations. The algorithm traverses the
entire graph, such as an HMM, in a breadth-first manner and for each state stores
the most likely prior state and the costs associated with reaching that state. As the
algorithm reaches the final state, when there are no more observations, the most likely
sequence can be produced by backtracking through the most likely states, since each
state stores the most likely prior state. In speech recognition the hidden states of the
HMM represent phones and the observations represent feature vectors. The phones
can then be concatenated into words using the pronunciation dictionary. This can
then in turn be transformed into the most likely word sequence using the language
model.
When used for speech recognition, the standard Viterbi algorithm will output the
most likely word sequence, however this is not always enough. An n-best list is often
==PAGE:47==
2.7 Evaluating speech recognizers
31
used. This list consists of the n most likely word sequences and can be used to error
correct and debug. Kaldi uses a modified version of the Viterbi to produce n-best
lists, using lattice-decoding. Decoding in Kaldi is also different due to the use of
WFSTs. This is described in more detail in Section 3.6.
2.7
Evaluating speech recognizers
This section explains how speech recognizers are usually evaluated and compared to
each other.
When all the components of a speech recognizer have been created, it is important to
evaluate how well it performs. This is done by decoding speech in a test set and then
comparing the output to the actual transcriptions. The most common evaluation
metric is the Word Error Rate and will be explained here.
Word error rate (WER) is a percentage measurement of how many words are erro-
neous.
This is calculated for two word sequences by measuring the edit distance
between the words.
The edit distance is the minimum number of word deletions,
insertions and substitutions required to make one sequence equal to the other. The
WER is then calculated as the amount of word edits divided by the total amount of
words in the correct string:
WER = min{S + D + I}
N
(2.9)
Here S is the number of substitutions, D is the number of deletions, I is the number
of insertions, and N is the total number of words in the correct word sequence. Even
though word error rates are often shown in percent, they have no upper bound. If a
single word is recognized as two distinct words, the word error rate is 2 or 200%.
Below an example can be seen of a transcription and the corresponding recognized
output with deletions, insertions, and substitutions shown.
Transcription:
I
often
go
for
a
walk
on
sunday
Recognizer output:
I
often
do
walk
on
a
sunday
Edits:
S
D
D
I
Calculating the WER of the sentence yields: WER = 1+2+1
8
= 50%.
The state-of-the-art result from IBM as of March 6th 2017 on the conversational
test set switchboard was at 5.5% [Sao+17]. The best result reported by the Kaldi
authors on the same test set is 8.5% [Pov+16]. While WER has some drawbacks,
such as punishing wrong word boundaries hard, it remains the de-facto standard for
==PAGE:48==
32
2 Speech Recognition
evaluating speech recognizers as seen in the papers mentioned above. However, an
alternative approach called Character Error rate (CER) does exist.
2.8
Summary
This chapter has provided an overview and defined the basic concepts of speech recog-
nition. We started by introducing the most important equation in speech recognition,
Equation 2.2, which describes how the goal is to find the word sequence most likely
to have produced the feature vectors.
We briefly discussed how WFSTs can be used to model many of the components used
in speech recognition. As WFSTs are used thoroughly in Kaldi, their usage will be
further elaborated on in Chapter 3.
Then we introduced the four major components of speech recognition; language model,
feature extractor, acoustic model, and decoder as shown in Figure 2.1.
The language model is a statistical model trained on a large text corpus. Usually an
N-gram model is used, where the N prior words estimate the probability of the next
word. This can be used to condition the probability of a word sequence, P(W), which
was one of the two components of Equation 2.2. The feature extractor uses partially
psychoacoustically motivated distributions and Fourier transformations to produce a
spectral feature vector from spoken speech which can be extended with additional
transformation features. These feature vectors are used to represent speech and also
to train the acoustic model. The acoustic model is a hidden Markov model where the
output distributions of the HMM-states are modeled using either Gaussian Mixture
Models or Deep Neural Networks. The acoustic model can be used to solve the last
part of Equation 2.2, namely calculating P(Z|W), the probability of a sequence of
feature vectors given a sequence of words. At last, the decoder component solves the
equation with the use of the constructed language model, the created acoustic model,
and incoming feature vectors and produces the most likely word sequence.
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER 3
The Kaldi Toolkit
In this chapter, the speech recognition toolkit Kaldi is explained and detailed.
Section 3.1 gives an overview of the toolkit and its capabilities. Section 3.2 details
the data requirements for building speech recognizers with Kaldi. Section 3.3 gives
an introduction to the notion of recipes in Kaldi. Section 3.4 deals with Deep Neural
Networks (DNNs) in Kaldi and how they are used to make improved acoustic mod-
els. Section 3.5 explains how WFSTs are used in Kaldi to form the decoding graph.
Section 3.6 explains how decoding is performed in Kaldi on the decoding graph with
the help of the acoustic model and how lattices are used to produce n-best results.
At last, Section 3.7 explains how online decoding with Kaldi can be done and which
external programs can be helpful in doing it.
3.1
Kaldi overview
This section gives a short overview that explains what Kaldi is and how it can be
used.
Kaldi is an open source speech recognition toolkit [Pov+11]. The toolkit contains
most of the functionality necessary to create a fully functional speech recognizer.
Kaldi is a huge toolkit which has been under active development for over 7 years.
The development can be followed and contributed to on their GitHub repository1.
Kaldi is made by researchers for other researchers, which makes it rather hard to get
started with for developers who simply want to speech-enable their applications. The
main focus of Kaldi is on allowing researchers to experiment and create better acoustic
models. When Kaldi started out, the focus was on Gaussian Mixture Models (GMMs)
and Subspace Gaussian Mixture Models (SGMMs), but at the time of writing, the
focus of Kaldi has changed completely to Deep Neural Networks (DNNs). The GMMs
are however still used as a basis for the DNNs, but no one is doing anything new with
them and there is a somewhat standard way of using the GMMs. The change from
GMMs to DNNs has made Kaldi a lot more complex and a lot harder to set up.
Section 3.4 provides an overview of using DNNs in Kaldi.
1https://github.com/kaldi-asr/kaldi
==PAGE:50==
34
3 The Kaldi Toolkit
As the focus of Kaldi is not on the language models, it is standard to use third-party
tools such as IRSTLM, SRILM, or pocolm for creating language models. These models
are then transformed into WFSTs which are usable by Kaldi, but Kaldi does not
focus on improving the language models themselves.
Kaldi is a big toolkit and therefore contains lots of different tools and small programs.
Recipes are the main way to use and link the many different tools in Kaldi. A recipe
is a step-by-step script which downloads data, transforms data, and then uses the
different Kaldi tools to create the basic building blocks of a speech recognizer, such
as the acoustic model and the language model. Kaldi hosts numerous different recipes
on their GitHub repository and these recipes also act as documentation on how to
use the different programs in Kaldi. The many different recipes can be found in the
egs directory, short for examples. A full overview of Kaldi’s file structure can be seen
in Figure 3.1.
Recipes are composed of a lot of scripts which use different Kaldi programs via
standard input and standard output. While it is possible to write a recipe from
scratch, it usually makes more sense to copy the structure of an existing currently
up-to-date recipe. A downside to recipes is that they are very low-level. The pri-
mary recipe parts are Bash scripts, that must be modified directly. Recipes require
a lot of data. This data typically consists of audio recordings with transcriptions, a
Figure 3.1: An overview of the file structure of Kaldi. All the source code is in the
src directory. Different third party tools and their installation scripts
are located in the tools directory. The recipes are in the egs directory
and the recipes use the compiled programs from src and the different
tools in the tools directory. The dot notation simply indicates that
there are many more directories and possibly files.
==PAGE:51==
3.1 Kaldi overview
35
text corpus to generate a language model, and a pronunciation dictionary for all the
words in the language model. Section 3.2 will give an overview of exactly what data
is needed to get started with Kaldi. Once a recipe has been successfully executed, it
is possible to see how well the different acoustic models performed by using an evalua-
tion measurement, such as the word error rate previously defined in Section 2.7. The
recipes are then continuously modified to improve the word error rate for a particular
data set. However, when a recipe has been completely executed there is still not a
ready-to-use speech recognizer, more work has to be done to create one. The main
missing part is a pipeline for getting speech in real-time, and then transforming the
speech into text on the fly. How to do this will be explained in Section 3.7.
One important part of Kaldi is the use of WFSTs. These are used extensively for
decoding and for combining the different data models into one big graph, called the
decoding graph. Section 3.5 gives an introduction to how Kaldi uses WFSTs to create
the decoding graph and Section 3.6 explains how exactly the WFSTs are used in
decoding.
Kaldi fully supports offline decoding. A few different Kaldi programs, an existing
acoustic model, and a language model is enough to transcribe an audio file containing
speech into text. This is useful in many scenarios where the recorded audio can be
post-processed. Kaldi does however not fully support online decoding, that is on the
fly recognition while someone is speaking into a microphone. Kaldi provides the means
to create an online decoder as libraries. But there is no pipeline for getting speech
in real-time and feeding it to the decoder. It is therefore up to the developer using
Kaldi to write code to interface with Kaldi, for the exact use case. Online decoding
is also more difficult than offline decoding, since there are stricter requirements to
decoding speed and some techniques such as normalization have to be implemented
in a sliding window function. These factors make it rather difficult to use Kaldi for
online decoding out of the box. Luckily, there exist some helpful third party tools.
We will introduce online decoding and the third party tool Kaldi GStreamer server
in Section 3.7.
In summary, the main problems with Kaldi are therefore:
• Kaldi is mainly used for researching acoustic models, to use Kaldi requires both
good insight into the toolkit itself and into speech recognition.
• Once a recipe has been constructed and executed it does not produce a ready-
to-use recognizer. It is possible to transcribe audio using the generated models,
but it requires several additional steps.
• Online decoding of speech requires additional third-party software or writing
extensive amounts of custom code.
==PAGE:52==
36
3 The Kaldi Toolkit
These problems are further discussed in the upcoming sections and in the later chap-
ters we will introduce solutions that can solve the problems.
Kaldi requirements
In order to use Kaldi, there are certain requirements which will be listed here.
Kaldi works best on Debian or Red Hat Linux but should also function on other
Linux distributions, Cygwin, and on OS X. Windows is not directly supported, as all
recipes require a UNIX shell.
Apart from the operating system, a few software applications are required such as
git, wget and a shell with standard UNIX utils such as grep, perl, awk etc.
Kaldi needs to be compiled from source and since it is written in C++, this requires
a C++ compiler. Furthermore, to use the neural network code with GPU training,
Kaldi needs to be compiled with Nvidia’s CUDA library, which is also used for many
machine learning applications.
3.2
Data requirements
Here the data requirements for creating recognizers with Kaldi will be explained. This
is the first step of a recipe as explained in the next section.
In order to use Kaldi, a lot of data is needed to train the different parts of the
speech recognizer. The data needed is split up into three different parts. A simple
introduction to the different data parts can be found in the Kaldi for Dummies tutorial
[Zie16]. The different data parts are:
• Labeled audio data
• A text corpus
• Pronunciation dictionary
Figure 3.2 gives an overview of how the directories for each recipe are structured.
The data directory is the main focus of this section and will be explained in further
details throughout. The labeled audio data is usually located in data/local/data
and the finished pronunciation dictionary is located in data/local/dict.
Labeled audio data
The most important data, and the hardest to obtain, is
labeled audio data. Labeled audio data consists of audio files of people speaking and
==PAGE:53==
3.2 Data requirements
37
Figure 3.2: An overview of the file structure of a typical Kaldi recipe. The data
directory is the main focus in this section. The bold directories contain
scripts. The conf directory contains different configuration files. The
exp directory contains the output for each acoustic model. Each direc-
tory contains multiple more directories and files than what is shown.
matching transcriptions of what exactly was spoken in the given audio recording. It
is important that the transcriptions matches the audio as precisely as possible and
that errors and pauses are also transcribed. To create a proper recognizer, several
hundred hours of labeled audio data is needed. It is also important that silence and
noise is labeled in the audio data, such that the acoustic model can learn not to
output anything when there is simply silence or background noise.
Different data sets exist for different languages, but many are commercial and many
have several errors in files and transcriptions. Some of the most used data sets are
distributed by the Linguistic Data Consortium (LDC), and typically costs several
thousand dollars.
Data sets based on volunteer recordings are also available, but
often the quality suffers. For Danish, Norwegian and Swedish the best freely available
data set is the Nordisk Språkteknologi (NST)2 database although it has some flaws.
The availability of these language resources is quite unique, since the resources were
curated by NST, which went bankrupt in 2003. The resources were then bought by
2http://www.nb.no/sprakbanken
==PAGE:54==
38
3 The Kaldi Toolkit
several parties, and are now freely hosted by the Norwegian national library. The
data set has several hundred hours of audio for all three languages with matching
transcriptions.
The raw labeled audio data should be placed in data/local/data.
The finished
Kaldi data files will be split into subsets such as test and train, which can be seen
in Figure 3.2.
The transcriptions of the audio data should be linked to the audio files. Each utterance
needs a unique id, which could be the file name of the audio file. One large text file is
then created, each line should contain an utterance id followed by a whitespace and
then the transcription for the utterance. This file is simply called text.
Kaldi requires the audio data to be in wav format. The sample frequency must be the
same for all the data. Each audio file requires a unique id and so does each speaker.
A file called utt2spk should be created which links each utterance to a speaker.
Knowing the gender of the speakers also helps Kaldi to create better acoustic models.
Gender information can be placed in a file called spk2gender which has a line for
each speaker with their id followed by m for male or f for female.
Finally, a file named wav2scp should be created, which for each line should contain
an utterance id and a full path to the audio file.
All these files should be created for each subset such as train and test and placed
in the directories.
Text corpus
In order to create a proper language model, using for instance an
N-gram model, a large text corpus is needed. The text corpus is used to train the
language model to properly model what words are most likely to follow which other
words.
As mentioned in Section 2.3 data sparsity might be a problem, and it is
therefore important to get as much text as possible, to create a proper language
model.
If the language model should be domain specific, the text gathered should mostly be
within that domain. Once the corpus has been collected and placed in txt files, a
language model tool is used to create the language model. It is somewhat different
what input the language model tools require, but a single text file with a line for each
sentence in the corpus will often suffice.
In some Kaldi recipes, the language model is sometimes created only based on the
transcriptions of the audio files. While this works alright for testing the acoustic
model, it will not suit any real-life needs as the transcriptions will most likely never
provide enough data to create a proper language model. Additionally, it is very easy
to get unreliable word error rates, as the language model gets very good at the specific
domain which is tested. This problem is even worse if sentences are reused from the
==PAGE:55==
3.2 Data requirements
39
training data in the test data.
There are no requirements or best practices on where to place a text corpus, and it
could even be placed outside the recipe directory itself.
Pronunciation dictionary
In speech recognition, the acoustic models are built
to recognize phones, it is therefore not enough to have textual transcriptions of the
words uttered in the audio files. It is also necessary to find the mapping between the
words’ orthography and the actual pronunciation of the word. For this, a pronunci-
ation dictionary is used. This dictionary can either be made by hand, such that for
each word someone with linguistic knowledge will phonetically transcribe the word.
It can also be made with automatic tools such as eSpeak3 which can generate pho-
netic transcriptions for many languages based on certain rules. The quality of such
automatic transcriptions are however not always of high quality. This is especially
true for languages where the spelling and pronunciation can be very different, since
this makes it harder to automatically generate the phonetic transcriptions. This is
the case for many languages, including English and Danish.
No matter how the pronunciation dictionary is created, it is important to end up with
a file that has a line for each word with the word followed by the phones that make
up the word, this file is called lexicon.txt. Two files should also be created to detail
all the different normal and silence phones, as explained in Section 2.5. Additionally,
a file which details any special silence phones can be supplied. These special silence
phones are used to mark for instance laughter or unknown words. All these files are
placed in data/local/dict.
Kaldi differentiates between local scripts and “non-local” scripts. The local scripts
are customized for a single recipe while the others are used for many different recipes.
A lot of local scripts are used to transform data into the specific format that Kaldi
requires since data sets never look quite alike.
Table 3.1 summarizes the required data files.
3.2.1
Kaldi data summary
As mentioned, it depends on the language model tool how the text corpus should be
prepared. However, a single text file with a sentence on each line named e.g. corpus.txt
can often be used.
A single line from each file can be seen in Listing 3.1.
3http://espeak.sourceforge.net/
==PAGE:56==
40
3 The Kaldi Toolkit
Filename:
Description:
Audio specific files
(Made for each subset and placed in e.g. data/train)
wav.scp
Links utterance id to full path of audio file
spk2gender
Links speaker id to gender
utt2spk
Links utterance id to speaker id
text
Links utterance id to transcription
Language specific files
(These files must be placed in data/local/dict)
lexicon.txt
Links each word to its pronunciation
nonsilence_phones.txt
Lists phones which occur during speech
silence_phones.txt
Lists phones which occur during silence
optionalsilence_phones.txt
Lists optional silence phones, used for unknown words
Table 3.1: An overview of the data files needed before Kaldi tools can be used. The
audio files should be made for each data subset such as train or test
and the only optional file is spk2gender. The language files should only
be made once and not for each subset.
wav.scp
speech01 /home/usera/kaldi/egs/numbers/data/local/data/speakerb/speech01.wav
utt2spk
speech01 speakerb
spk2gender
speakerb m
text
speech01 one to three
lexicon.txt
one w ah n
nonsilence_phones.txt
ah
silence_phones.txt
spn
optionalsilence_phones.txt
sil
Listing 3.1: A single line shown from each of the files from Table 3.1
3.3
Recipes
In this section we will give an example of how a Kaldi recipe is typically structured
and used.
==PAGE:57==
3.3 Recipes
41
A recipe consists of many different scripts which performs numerous different jobs.
Most recipes usually start out by calling scripts which download a lot of data, such
as labeled audio data. Then some scripts are used to transform this data to conform
to the Kaldi format as explained in the previous section.
Later, the scripts are
mainly used to call different Kaldi programs and tools to perform all kinds of speech
recognition functions. As mentioned earlier, some scripts are written for a specific
recipe and data set while some are general and used in many different recipes. The
former are called local scripts. The general scripts are located in the wsj recipe (which
is based on the Wall Street Journal corpus) as shown in Figure 3.2, while the local
scripts are stored in the local directory in the recipe directory.
The main function of a recipe is to train an acoustic model and a language model
based on the training data. When this has been done, the word error rate (WER) is
calculated based on a test set, which the model has not been trained on. Afterwards,
parameters are changed and scripts are added or removed from the recipe to hopefully
improve the word error rate. In Kaldi, the recipes also serve as general guidelines.
Kaldi has some high-level documentation, but the recipes are the best way to get an
idea of how the different tools are used and how they work together.
All recipes have a top-level Bash script called run.sh which calls other high-level
scripts from the subdirectories steps, local, or utils, those scripts in turn call
other scripts or Kaldi programs.
The best way to get an overview of a recipe is
therefore by looking at the run.sh script. If everything is set up correctly it should
be possible to simply execute run.sh and the recipe will then finish when all steps
are completed.
It is important to note that a Kaldi recipe does not produce a ready-to-use recognizer,
but instead creates the building blocks needed to create a recognizer. The recognizer
must be setup properly after the recipe has finished. As mentioned earlier, Kaldi is
made by speech recognition researchers for speech recognition researchers and it can
therefore be rather hard to figure out how the different speech recognition building
blocks should be put together for someone with no experience in the field.
Most recipes, and their corresponding run scripts, follow the steps shown in Figure 3.3
which is explained in more detail next. As mentioned earlier, the main focus of Kaldi
is on acoustic modeling which therefore takes up most of a recipe.
3.3.1
Initial recipe steps
The initial parts of the recipe are concerned with data preparation, feature extraction,
and the language model, while the later steps deal with acoustic models.
==PAGE:58==
42
3 The Kaldi Toolkit
Figure 3.3: The standard flow of a Kaldi recipe.
==PAGE:59==
3.3 Recipes
43
3.3.1.1
Data preparation
The data preparation step consists mainly of local scripts and a few shared ones. The
step deals with collecting and sorting the training and test data, namely labeled audio
files.
These are often downloaded from different repositories.
Afterwards specific
files are created, which Kaldi requires as discussed in Section 3.2. The step is very
dependent on how the data is acquired and stored, and is therefore often very specific
to the recipe and therefore uses a lot of local scripts. The pronunciation dictionary
and the corpus are also be made ready in this step.
When the newly created Kaldi data files has been put in the correct directories, a
Kaldi script can be used to validate that the data is complete and placed in the
correct order. If it is not, then a Kaldi script can try to fix it. After this, a script
which creates the language directory (lang in Figure 3.2) is executed. The script
transforms the pronunciation dictionary (lexicon) files from data/local/dict into a
WFST and places it in data/lang and also contains lots of checks to make sure that
everything is correct. At the same time the script creates a lot of helper files in the
same directory for Kaldi to deal with the language.
3.3.1.2
Feature extraction
When the data has been properly prepared, the speech features are extracted from
the training and test data. Feature extraction is generalized and the recipe writer
does not have to write a local script for this part. However, there are a two different
forms of feature extraction and they have a few parameters each. The parameters for
feature extraction are stored in a .conf file in the conf folder of Figure 3.2.
Almost all Kaldi recipes use Mel-Frequency Cepstral Coefficient (MFCC) features but
Kaldi support Perceptual Linear Prediction (PLP) features as drop-ins for MFCCs as
well. Once the base features are extracted, Cepstral Mean and Variance Normalization
(CMVN) is almost always applied to the features. A short explanation of the different
features can be found in Section 2.4.
The step uses the audio files prepared in the earlier step and then extracts the features
and saves them together in an archive for each subset of the data, such as train and
test.
In the code below, it is shown how to make MFCC features and apply CMVN to them
for the train subset. The first scripts uses the wav.scp file in the data/train direc-
tory to localize the audio files and then it creates a new directory data/train/data
where it outputs the features. A new file named feats.scp is created in data/train
which, like wav.scp, has a single line for each utterance with the utterance id and the
full path to the feature file. $nj and $train_cmd are variables set earlier in the recipe.
$train_cmd relates to how the computations are performed, such as on a cluster or
just a single computer. $nj details the number of jobs to run in parallel.
==PAGE:60==
44
3 The Kaldi Toolkit
steps/make_mfcc.sh --nj $nj --cmd "$train_cmd" data/train
steps/compute_cmvn_stats.sh data/train
3.3.1.3
Language model creation
While language models are a rather important part of speech recognition, they fall
outside the main focus of Kaldi, and Kaldi recipes skip over them quite fast compared
to the acoustic models. The language model is usually created by a third-party tool
and then transformed into a WFST using another tool. This is done in a local script.
A few different tools exist which can be used to create language models and their
output can be transformed into WFSTs, these include SRILM, IRSTLM and pocolm.
The tools have different licenses, and some of them cannot be used for commercial
purposes. The main author of Kaldi, Daniel Povey, has created the language model
tool called pocolm but has decided to keep it separate from Kaldi itself and only a
few recipes use it so far.
All these language model tools generate N-gram language models, which are then
transformed into WFSTs as explained in Section 2.3. However, it is possible to create
for instance a grammar and transform it to a WFST and then use that in the recipe
as well.
Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) can also be used to create language models and
although it is possible to use them in Kaldi with a lot tweaking, almost no recipes
make use of this. The main author has mentioned on the help forums that Recurrent
Neural Network Languge Models (RNNLMs) would help decrease word error rate,
but that there will be no easy way to utilize them in the near future.
The input for the language model step is often a single text file with a complete
sentence on each line. The language model tool then transforms it into the commonly
used ARPA format4 which represents the N-gram. openfst, which is a WFST library,
is then used to transform the arpa file into a WFST which can be used by Kaldi. As
mentioned earlier the text corpus can be placed anywhere, but the resulting WFST
language model must always be named G.fst and placed in data/lang.
3.3.2
Acoustic model steps
Creating acoustic models is usually the main focus of a Kaldi recipe. In this phase,
many different acoustic models are created based on the provided training data. The
GMM acoustic models, which are created first, are usually built on top of each other,
such that the second acoustic model will use data from the first and so forth iteratively.
4http://www.speech.sri.com/projects/srilm/manpages/ngram-format.5.html
==PAGE:61==
3.3 Recipes
45
There are different choices of acoustic models and for each model there are often a
few parameters to tune.
As the main focus of Kaldi is acoustic model research, there are a number of steps
taken for each acoustic model. Below, the different steps for creating a GMM acoustic
model will be detailed. The steps can also be seen in Figure 3.3. Each acoustic model
has a separate directory in the exp (experiment) directory as shown in Figure 3.2.
The alignment for each GMM acoustic model also has a separate directory in exp,
such that if the acoustic model is called mono, then the alignment is called mono_ali.
• Initialize and extract. In this step further feature transformations may be ap-
plied to the existing features, these transformations could for instance be delta
and delta-delta or LDA as mentioned in Section 2.4. In case of a triphone model
the triphones will be created and the triphone states will be tied together as
explained in Section 2.5.4. This step uses the base features, MFCC or PLP,
and outputs transformed features. If triphones are used, the lang directory is
updated with the new triphone structure.
• Training and aligning. This step creates the Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM)
and during the training the parameters of the GMM will be updated to better
reflect the training data. The training is done in passes as mentioned in Sec-
tion 2.5.5 and in between these passes alignments are made. An alignment uses
the current existing model to align the phones to the utterances. The alignment
tries to pinpoint exactly where in the utterance which phone was uttered. After
a certain number of training passes and alignments, the GMM acoustic model
is done.
Below a Bash line is shown, which trains a monophone model.
steps/train_mono.sh --nj $nj --cmd "$train_cmd" data/train data/lang exp/mono
This step uses the features made in the previous step from the data/train
directory and the language directory, data/lang where the triphone or mono-
phone data is stored. The step produces an acoustic model in a new directory,
exp/mono, which contains numerous files such as logs but most important is the
model file itself, which is a big binary detailing the GMM. The alignments are
stored in a compressed directory.
• Decoding graph creation. The decoding graph is a WFST composition of the
HMM structure of the acoustic model, the language model, the pronunciation
dictionary and more, which will be explained in further detail in Section 3.5.
The decoding graph is one of the two main parts used when decoding utterances
into text. Every time a new acoustic model has been trained, a new decoding
graph is built.
Creating a decoding graph for the monophone recognizer in the previous step
can be done with the following command:
==PAGE:62==
46
3 The Kaldi Toolkit
utils/mkgraph.sh --mono data/lang exp/mono exp/mono/graph
This step uses the newly created acoustic model in exp/mono, and the data/lang
language directory with the WFST pronunciation dictionary, the WFST lan-
guage model and information about the phones to produce a single WFST
graph in exp/mono/graph.
• Scoring. During the scoring phase, the decoding graph is used to decode the test
data. The test data is separate from the training data and can therefore be used
to test how well the recognizer performs on data it has not seen before. The
test data, like the training data, has matching transcriptions in order to see how
well the recognizer performs. After decoding, the word error rate is calculated
based on the difference between the true transcription and the output from the
decoding graph as explained in Section 2.7.
Below is shown the command for decoding all utterances in the data/test
directory. Like $train_cmd, $decode_cmd controls which resources to use for
the job.
steps/decode.sh --nj $nj --cmd "$decode_cmd" exp/mono/graph data/test \
exp/mono/decode
The command uses the newly created WFST graph in exp/mono/graph and the
acoustic model in the directory above. It places the results of the decodings for
the utterances in the test set in exp/mono/decode. The word error rate is then
output in the console after all utterances have been decoded.
• Aligning. After scoring, an alignment is made using the newly created acoustic
model to try and match the phones optimally with the utterances.
In the
next iteration this alignment is then used for training the acoustic model. The
alignment produces a file which details the exact sequence of HMM states for
each utterance using the current acoustic model for the training data. Below,
the alignment command is shown which aligns the data in the train directory
using the mono model and outputs it to the mono_ali directory.
The lang
directory is also used since it contains information about the phones.
steps/align_si.sh --nj $nj --cmd "$train_cmd" data/train \
data/lang exp/mono exp/mono_ali
After the GMMs have been trained, most newer Kaldi recipes move on to training
DNNs. The DNN process is much more complex compared to the GMM process. The
DNN process therefore almost exclusively consists of local scripts since there are so
many parameters to fine tune for each recipe. The finer details of the DNN setup
will be explained in Section 3.4, while we will only provide a short overview here to
briefly explain the different parts of Figure 3.3.
==PAGE:63==
3.3 Recipes
47
After the final GMM model has been trained and the training data has been aligned
using it, an i-vector extractor is created. An i-vector extractor is a kind of generalized
speaker adaptation. It looks at all the training data and extracts unique features for
the speakers that are important for decoding their speech. These features are then
passed on to the deep neural network such that it works better for similar-sounding
speakers. Now, whenever a new utterance is decoded each small piece of audio is put
into the i-vector extractor which then tries to find similarities in the trained data
which is then used for the DNN. This can thus improve the recognition if the new
speaker has some properties that sound similar to speakers in the training set. This
is used when decoding new utterances, such as those in the test set or when using the
DNN model in production.
Afterwards, DNN models are trained and they are scored just like their GMM coun-
terparts.
However, the training is very different and most of the different DNNs
require a GPU to train them in a reasonable time frame.
When all models, both GMM and DNN, have been trained the word error rates for
each model are usually compared to see which performed best.
In Kaldi, the main interest is looking at the word error rate produced by the created
models, and then continue fine-tuning or adding new models to get a better accuracy.
Therefore, when a recipe is finished there is no direct way to decode new speech,
as could be expected from a complete speech recognition system.
Instead, there
exists a language model, several acoustic models and multiple decoding graphs. New
audio files will need to undergo some of the same steps as taken in the recipe, namely
proper data preparation and feature extraction. An acoustic model and corresponding
decoding graph must then be chosen from the created ones. Then the features can
be fed to the decoder and the output can be transformed into human-readable text
using some of Kaldi’s utility programs. Thus it still takes a lot of additional steps to
start using the produced models and create a complete speech recognizer.
3.3.3
Using a recipe
This section will briefly explain how a recipe is used.
After compiling Kaldi it is possible to run one of the recipes. The recipes are found in
the egs directory of Kaldi and there are numerous recipes, all for different data sets.
The recipe for the wsj (Wall Street Journal) corpus contains all the generalized code
for running the different steps, and therefore all other recipes create a symbolic link
to utilize the scripts from the wsj recipe. On the basis of this, one could therefore be
led to believe that wsj is one of the active and maintained recipes and a good one to
look into, but that would be wrong. The wsj recipe mostly covers the basic GMM
setup but much of the newer work done on DNNs is not in the main recipe (run.sh).
Some of the new DNN work can instead be found in the tedlium recipe. There has
==PAGE:64==
48
3 The Kaldi Toolkit
also been made a lot of DNN work on the aspire and swbd (switchboard) recipes,
but it is not included in main recipe (run.sh) but instead somewhat hidden in the
folder local/chain. These frequent changes make it rather difficult to know exactly
what to run at the time of writing.
All recipes contain a run.sh file which is the top level script for that recipe. This
file is often a few hundred lines depending on the data set.
In theory, it should
be possible to simply execute any run.sh after having compiled Kaldi, but this is
rarely the case. Many of the recipes rely on data sets which are not freely available.
Furthermore simply executing run.sh will likely result in some error which can be
due to numerous things, such as not having the correct dependencies installed for
that recipe. This happens as the dependencies are not explicitly stated, but only
implicitly used.
The authors of Kaldi therefore recommend that each line in the
recipes are executed one at a time by pasting them into a terminal, which can be
rather time consuming. This is further encouraged due to the fact that executing
the complete run.sh may take a very long time and utilize most of the hardware
available on the machine or the cluster if one is not careful. This could be annoying
for others using the same resources. After getting a lot of Kaldi experience it is of
course possible to execute run.sh and let the recipe finish on its own. This is only
possible after setting the needed parameters and making sure everything is setup
correctly and ensuring that all the required dependencies are installed.
3.3.4
Acoustic models in common recipes
Looking at several different Kaldi recipes has revealed that there is a somewhat
standard way of setting up the GMM acoustic model. We looked at the most active
recipes, which some of the main Kaldi developers have also contributed to: tedlium,
wsj, libri, swbd, and aspire. They all have in common that a monophone GMM is
trained first, followed by triphone models with the following feature transformations:
Delta+delta-delta, LDA+MLLT, and SAT+fMLLR. Some of them have a few slight
variations but this seems to be the standard. This therefore seems to be the preferred
way of setting up the best GMM acoustic model.
The DNN setup is a lot more
fractured as will be explained in the next section.
3.4
DNNs in Kaldi
This section details how acoustic models can be trained using deep neural networks in
Kaldi. While Section 2.5.6 gave a brief overview of DNNs and their general application
in speech recognition, this section will focus on how DNNs are used in Kaldi. As
previously mentioned, there are three different supported DNN ’setups’ in Kaldi. At
the time of writing (spring, 2017), the state of the three setups are:
==PAGE:65==
3.4 DNNs in Kaldi
49
• nnet1 [Ves+13] is the old setup, where only single-GPU training is supported.
This makes the setup a bit simpler, but is not optimal for big data sets.
• nnet2 [PZK14] introduces training in parallel on GPUs and even on several
computers by periodically averaging the parameters between the different com-
puters.
• nnet3 [Pov+16] is the newest and recommended setup. This setup was created
in order to support more different types of DNN setups without requiring code
changes. Features such as multi-GPU training from nnet2 are also implemented
here.
Since nnet3 currently is the most active and recommended setup, we will only focus
on this.
3.4.1
The nnet3 setup
The nnet3 setup is a flexible setup where each layer in the neural network is repre-
sented as a Component. But rather than having a predefined order of the components,
a graph structure is used to stitch the components together. This setup makes it pos-
sible to combine the layers in interesting ways, such as when creating a Recurrent
Neural Network, where there is a dependency on the previous timeframe. The com-
ponents and the graph are defined in a configuration file where the inputs and the
outputs of the different layers can be joined.
Since there are a lot of parameters to configure, it can be very helpful to look at
existing setups in the ’egs’ examples directory, where recipes and various utility
scripts for different data sets are provided. While the neural network setup usually is
more specialized than the GMM training steps, there still exist scripts for producing
and configuring some of the most used DNNs setups. This includes scripts for using
Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) and Time Delayed Neural Network (TDNN). In
most cases it is possible to base new DNN training scripts on these, and make some
adjustments which often depends on the available hardware and used data set.
3.4.2
Configuration of a DNN
To give an overview of the different scripts and configurations used to train a DNN,
we will examine how an LSTM model is trained using the nnet3 setup. The DNN
models must use a previously trained GMM model for alignment. Usually this will
be the last model from the previous GMM training. In this example we will assume
that this GMM model is already produced.
After the last GMM-based alignment is done, the recipe invokes a local script
local/nnet3/run_lstm.sh. This script is essentially responsible for producing the
==PAGE:66==
50
3 The Kaldi Toolkit
local configuration which the network should use. This includes some general options
such as which aligned model to use, which data to train on and how many computer
resources to use when training. In addition, configurations particularly related to
the specific DNN are set here. This includes configuring the size and amount of the
hidden layers. For the LSTM setup, it also includes time delays and left- and right-
context. The configuration is mainly done by setting Bash variables as shown in the
snippet here:
# LSTM options
lstm_delay=" -1 -2 -3 "
label_delay=5
num_lstm_layers=3
cell_dim=1024
hidden_dim=1024
chunk_left_context=40
chunk_right_context=0
...
Next the training itself is configured. This includes tuning parameters for the learning
rate, the amount of training epochs and how many samples there should be used in
each training iteration. Since a DNN potentially could train for a very long time, it is
important to set realistic settings based on the hardware, the data set used, and the
available time. The most important settings and their descriptions are summarized
in Table 3.2:
All these parameters are rather dependent on both the available data set and the
available hardware which the training is running on. Unfortunately, there is no exact
solution for determining the best parameters. It is not always the case that using
more iterations, more layers or bigger layers leads to better performance. Therefore,
the settings are often just ’best-guesses’ as the long training time makes it infeasible
to fine-tune every parameter.
3.4.3
DNN Training
When the DNN configuration is complete, the first training script to run is called
run_ivector_common.sh. I-vectors are intermediate representations used to provide
Setting
Description
Minibatch size
Controls how much data to process at a time.
Number of epochs
The amount of times the entire data set is processed.
Learning rate
Controls how aggressively the weights in the neural network
are updated. It is possible to set both the initial and the final
learning rate.
Table 3.2: Deep neural network general acoustic model settings.
==PAGE:67==
3.4 DNNs in Kaldi
51
speaker identity. Since speaker properties are stored in this multidimensional vector,
the network is able to adapt to the speaker based on previous utterances during
decoding. To create these i-vectors, some data preparation steps are run first. One
important step is to add some variance to the data, as it makes the system more
robust. It is therefore recommended to run speed- and volume-perturbation. These
steps take the input data and duplicate it with either a different playback speed or
volume setting. A common setup would increase the amount of data three times,
using 0.9, 1.0 and 1.1 playback speed. Additional steps such as performing a high
resolution feature extraction and computing a smaller GMM model is performed
before the i-vector extractor is trained.
At this point the training of the neural network can begin. This is done by running a
separate Python script for instance train_rnn.py with all the configured parameters
and extracted i-vectors. When all the iterations are complete, the word error rate is
calculated and the training is done.
Usually it is only possible to train a neural network using a GPU. Training with CPUs
would take a very long time, and is generally not supported. In order to train with
GPUs, Kaldi must be compiled with a flag which enables GPU training. Additionally
Nvidia’s platform and API for parallel GPU computations, Cuda,5 must be installed.
It is difficult to give exact time estimates for training. A ballpark estimate is that
executing a recipe with a DNN model as the target with around 500 hours of speech,
would take about a week to complete. This is using a desktop computer with an SSD,
a recent single GPU, and a recent quad-core processor.
3.4.4
Chain models
An important reason for using the nnet3 setup is that it supports chain models [Pov+16].
This kind of model is a new type of DNN, with the clear advantage that decoding is
about three times faster, due to a throttled output frame rate. This makes it feasible
to build a system which can run on reasonable resources with a good real-time factor.
This factor is the proportion in time between the generated transcriptions and the
incoming audio signal. A real-time factor below 1 thus means that the system is able
to transcribe the audio faster than it is receiving it. This is easily achievable using
a chain model. The chain models have gotten about 5% relatively better word error
rate results compared to conventional nnet3 DNN models.
The chain models are
trained to have a sequence-level objective, that is, the network is trained to predict
a sequence of phones. Additionally, a unconventional HMM topology is used, which
allows it to be traversed faster.
The configuration of a chain model is slightly different than the one previously ex-
plained in the standard nnet3 setup. The main difference is that the neural network
5https://developer.nvidia.com/cuda-toolkit
==PAGE:68==
52
3 The Kaldi Toolkit
is configured in an Xconfig file. This configuration file makes it possible to adjust the
layers and their composition. An example of an Xconfig for a TDNN can be seen in
Listing 3.2.
1 input dim=100 name=ivector
2 input dim=40 name=input
3
4 # please note that it is important to have input layer with the name=input
5 # as the layer immediately preceding the fixed-affine-layer to enable
6 # the use of short notation for the descriptor
7 fixed-affine-layer name=lda input=Append(-1,0,1,ReplaceIndex(ivector, t, 0))
8 affine-transform-file=$dir/configs/lda.mat
9
10 # the first splicing is moved before the lda layer, so no splicing here
11 relu-renorm-layer name=tdnn1 dim=450
12 relu-renorm-layer name=tdnn2 input=Append(-1,0,1) dim=450
13 relu-renorm-layer name=tdnn3 input=Append(-1,0,1,2) dim=450
14 relu-renorm-layer name=tdnn4 input=Append(-3,0,3) dim=450
15 relu-renorm-layer name=tdnn5 input=Append(-3,0,3) dim=450
16 relu-renorm-layer name=tdnn6 input=Append(-6,-3,0) dim=450
17
18 # adding the layers for chain branch
19 relu-renorm-layer name=prefinal-chain input=tdnn6 dim=450 target-rms=0.5
20 output-layer name=output include-log-softmax=false dim=$num_targets
21 max-change=1.5
22
23 # adding the layers for xent branch
24 relu-renorm-layer name=prefinal-xent input=tdnn6 dim=450 target-rms=0.5
25 output-layer name=output-xent dim=$num_targets
26 learning-rate-factor=$learning_rate_factor max-change=1.5
Listing 3.2: An example of an Xconfig for a TDNN from Kaldi. The dollar signs
indicates variables that are set at runtime through Bash scripts.
The official documentation of the chain model setup is available in the online Kaldi
documentation6.
3.5
Graph composition
This section explains what the main purpose of WFSTs is in Kaldi.
As mentioned in Section 2.2, WFSTs have seen much use in speech recognition lately
and they are also used extensively in Kaldi. In the section on recipes, it was mentioned
that every time a new acoustic model is made, a new decoding graph is created. This
is the main purpose of WFSTs in Kaldi, as composing multiple WFSTs can be done
while keeping the final WFST rather small, which makes it fast for decoding.
In Figure 3.4, it is shown how WFSTs are used in Kaldi to capture all the information
from the language model, the pronunciation dictionary and the context dependent
phones. A WFST can also represent the HMM topology but not the GMM or DNN
models.
6http://kaldi-asr.org/doc/chain.html
==PAGE:69==
3.5 Graph composition
53
Figure 3.4: WFST composition in Kaldi. The circles are WFSTs which are com-
posed two at a time as explained in Section 2.2 to form a third. The
figure is based on [Kir16, p. 25].
==PAGE:70==
54
3 The Kaldi Toolkit
The pronunciation dictionary is transformed into a WFST called L, where the input
consists of context-independent phones and the output is the word which the phones
make up. The language model is transformed into a WFST called G, where both
input and output are the same word, as the example in Section 2.3. Once composing
L with G a third WFST called LG is created which still has context-independent
phones as input and words as output but now has phonetic pronunciations for the
entire language model.
The WFST C has context-dependent phones as input and context-independent phones
as output. This means that for instance the phones ah-s+k, e-s+k, and o-s+e all
map to the phone s. Once C has been composed with LG the resulting WFST CLG
now maps from context-dependent phones to words.
The WFST H is a representation of the HMM topology which maps from context-
dependent HMM-states to context-dependent phones. When composed with CLG the
final decoding graph HCLG is created which maps from context-dependent HMM-
states to words. With the help of the acoustic model, the most likely sequence of
HMM-states can be calculated and thus decoding is possible using the HCLG graph.
Decoding is explained in further detail in Section 3.6.
The decoding graph is very large, even for limited vocabularies and it is therefore not
feasible to show an example here. It should be noted that even though the input of
e.g. CLG is context-dependent phones and the output is words, there is not a one-to-
one relation. Instead, the same input and the same output occurs multiple times in
the graph and the output is dependent on the sequence of inputs.
3.6
Lattice decoding
This section describes how decoding is done using WFSTs in Kaldi.
As mentioned in Section 2.6, decoding is usually done using some form of the Viterbi
algorithm. The decoding algorithm used in Kaldi is not actually a form of Viterbi, but
it is still a graph search. The algorithm used in Kaldi is designed to work specifically
on WFSTs which are “fully expanded”.
This means that it is best applicable on
WFSTs where the input symbols are context-dependent HMM states, namely the
HCLG graph described in the previous section [Pov+12].
Compared to Viterbi, the aim of the algorithm used in Kaldi is not to generate a
one-best path through the graph, but instead to generate a lattice. This lattice is
itself a WFST which stores the information of the n-best paths through the WFST.
Thus the lattice can give several results compared to the Viterbi algorithm and stores
them in a compact format.
The algorithm uses beam pruning, which is a parameter that allows it to discard
==PAGE:71==
3.6 Lattice decoding
55
unlikely alternatives during decoding. This saves both time and memory, and the
beam pruning can be changed to generate more and better alternatives or simply
work faster and with less memory. This has the added benefit of defining a worst-
case runtime for the algorithm which can determine whether the algorithm can decode
in real-time.
Figure 3.5 gives an overview of how the HCLG decoding graph is coupled with the
GMM or DNN model. Each feature vector is fed to the GMM or DNN model which
then produces the most likely context-dependent HMM-state from the decoding graph.
As the decoding graph is fully expanded, the same context-dependent HMM-state will
appear multiple times. In an offline decoding scenario, all the feature vectors will go
through the GMM or DNN model one by one and produce the most likely states.
Then the decoder uses the decoding algorithm to find the most likely paths of hidden
states through the decoding graph. These most likely paths will then be transformed
into the lattice.
Figure 3.5: The decoder combines the decoding graph with the acoustic model. This
picture is very simplified and shows a single feature for a single frame
and a very simplified decoding graph.
In Figure 3.6 a lattice is seen which shows a decoded utterance consisting of several
Danish digits. As can be seen, the decoder was very sure about the first four digits
et fem syv to, but then provides alternatives for the later digits. There are five
different paths through the last path of the lattice with weights as follows:
==PAGE:72==
56
3 The Kaldi Toolkit
et fire = 260.74 + 693.33 + 424.33 = 1378, 40
et fire fire = 260.74 + 693.33 + 428.85 = 1382, 92
et et fire = 260.74 + 691.52 + 428.85 = 1381, 11
fire = 952.84 + 434.36 = 1387, 2
fire fire = 952.84 + 428.85 = 1381, 69
0
1
3:et/1559.7
2
4:fem/565.02
3
9:syv/873.78
4
10:to/553.54
5
3:et/260.74
7/434.36
5:fire/952.84
6/424.33
5:fire/693.33
9
3:et/691.52
8
5:fire/428.85
5:fire/428.85
5:fire/428.85
Figure 3.6: Lattice for decoding a sequence of Danish digits. The arcs are of the
form: input:output/weight. The large states have a weight for stopping
in that state.
The most likely output of the lattice is the one with the lowest weight. The most
likely sentence is therefore: 'et fem syv to et fire' while the least likely sentence
is: 'et fem syv to fire'. This corresponds to the problem of finding the cheapest
path to a final state in a graph.
Kaldi, of course, also provides tools to efficiently generate any n-best sequence from
a lattice. Generally, the lattices do not have the actual words on the output arcs,
instead they have integers which are mapped to words. The lattice tool therefore
outputs a sequence of integers which must then be mapped to words to get the word
sequence.
In speech recognition, the language model and the acoustic model often have different
weights in decoding, such that one is more important than the other. In Kaldi, this
weight can easily be changed when generating the best or n-best word sequences from
the lattice.
3.6.1
Decoding a single utterance
When a recipe has been executed, at least one acoustic model and one decoding
graph are produced. These can be used to produce a transcription, but not directly.
In order to decode a single utterance, such as a wav file, several steps should be taken.
The audio file must use the same sample rate as the training data. Figure 3.7 gives
==PAGE:73==
3.6 Lattice decoding
57
an overview of the different steps. The figure looks a lot like the speech recognition
overview of Figure 2.1 with the exception that a lot of the information is now in the
decoding graph. Furthermore, there is also a specific Kaldi data preparation state
now.
Figure 3.7: The steps needed to produce a transcription using a speech recognizer
trained with Kaldi.
As when readying a recipe, several data files should exists, the bare minimum is
creating a wav.scp file and an utt2spk files as explained in Section 3.2. The file
called text, which contains transcriptions, is obviously not necessary since it is only
used for training and for scoring test data. Then, the same feature extractor as used
in the training should be used to extract features from the utterance.
Afterwards, decoding can be done with a specified acoustic model and decoding graph
to produce a lattice. To get the most likely word sequence, the best path is found
through the lattice with a specified weight for the acoustic and the language model.
==PAGE:74==
58
3 The Kaldi Toolkit
This weight denotes the relative importance of the models. In this way, it is possible
to scale the importance of the models to find out what works best, At last, the output
from the lattice, which is a sequence of integers, is converted back to words and output
to the user. Listing 3.3 shows how offline decoding is performed using a script. The
wav.scp and utt2spk should be present in the decode_now directory.
1 utils/utt2spk_to_spk2utt.pl decode_now/utt2spk > decode_now/spk2utt
2
3 steps/make_mfcc.sh --nj $nj --cmd "$train_cmd" decode_now \
4 exp/make_mfcc/decode_now mfcc
5
6 steps/compute_cmvn_stats.sh decode_now exp/make_mfcc/decode_now mfcc
7
8 steps/decode.sh --config conf/decode.config --nj $nj --cmd "$decode_cmd" \
9 --skip-scoring true exp/tri1/graph decode_now exp/tri1/decode
10
11 lattice-best-path --lm-scale=7 --word-symbol-table=exp/tri1/graph/words.txt \
12 "ark:gunzip -c exp/tri1/decode/lat.*.gz|" ark,t:exp/tri1/decode/scoring/7.tra
13
14 cat exp/tri1/decode/scoring/7.tra | utils/int2sym.pl -f 2- \
15 exp/tri1/graph/words.txt
Listing 3.3: Script for decoding all utterances in a directory named decode_now and
outputting the transcriptions to the console. Here, the acoustic model
and graph called tri1 is used. The language model scale is 7 (as seen
in line 11), which means that the language model has 7 times as much
weight as the acoustic model.
This is an example of offline decoding, where the utterance is captured to a file and
afterwards decoded. The next section will concern online decoding where speech is
decoded in real-time as it is spoken.
3.7
Online decoding
This section explains how online decoding is supported in Kaldi. Online decoding is
different from how Kaldi is used normally in research papers. Usually, when the word
error rate is calculated, it is done by decoding the test audio file-by-file. This decoder
takes whole wave files, and returns a transcription hypothesis. While it is convenient
to decode a complete utterance, it is not how decoding of natural speech works. In
natural speech, the user is speaking and a partial hypothesis is produced and updated
live. Therefore words already decoded might be changed due to the context used by
the language model. This is very advantageous when performing tasks where the user
might want to stop or retry based on the partial hypothesis.
Kaldi does not aim to provide an out-of-the-box solution which enables online de-
coding using streaming of audio. Rather, Kaldi provides some programs which can
be used to create a complete solution. In this way, developers can fit Kaldi to their
exact needs. The downside is that it makes it rather difficult to get online decoding
==PAGE:75==
3.7 Online decoding
59
working in a setup which is usable for production. Fortunately, there exists some
third party tools which are able to help. An example of this is GStreamer plugins.
3.7.1
Kaldi GStreamer plugins
GStreamer7 is a framework used to construct media pipelines and supports task such
as recording and playback of audio and video as well as resampling or applying effects.
As the name suggests, media streaming is also supported which is very useful when
creating a speech recognition service. There exist multiple GStreamer plugins for
Kaldi, which can be used depending on the purpose. The Kaldi source code comes
bundled with a gst-plugin directory, which contains a GStreamer plugin for online
GMM decoding. This plugin is however deprecated and does not produce very good
results, but serves mostly as a proof-of-concept.
Another GStreamer plugin, gst-kaldi-nnet2-online, is maintained in a separate
repository8 by a third party. This plugin only works with DNNs, but despite the
name both nnet2 and nnet3 models are now supported. This plugin is up-to-date
compared to the GMM plugin, and is capable of getting quite good results. Many of
the newer Kaldi models, including the chain models explained in Section 3.4.4, are
supported.
These GStreamer plugins are not enough on their own to create a recognition service,
as they only function as local wrappers to the Kaldi code. To actually be able to
stream audio over the internet, a proper client/server setup is needed. Fortunately,
a separate client/server setup for Kaldi is also available. This project is called Kaldi
GStreamer server9.
3.7.2
Kaldi GStreamer server
The Kaldi GStreamer server is the glue that makes it possible to stream audio from
a client and receive the partial transcriptions back in real-time. The server is full-
duplex, meaning that you can send and receive data at the same time.
This is
implemented using the WebSocket10 technology.
The server also has support for
more conventional HTTP post requests where a complete sound file can be submitted.
The server supports both GMM and DNN models as it can use both the Kaldi GMM
GStreamer plugin and the gst-kaldi-nnet2-online plugin.
The server is written in Python, and consists of a master server and a worker com-
ponent. The master server is launched on a port on the host computer, where it can
accept incoming requests. There can be multiple workers connected to one master
7https://Gstreamer.freedesktop.org/
8https://github.com/alumae/gst-kaldi-nnet2-online
9https://github.com/alumae/kaldi-gstreamer-server
10https://www.websocket.org/
==PAGE:76==
60
3 The Kaldi Toolkit
server. The workers are responsible for doing the actual decoding using the previ-
ously mentioned GStreamer plugins. There should at least be as many workers as
the expected number of concurrent connections. When a worker is launched, it uses
a configuration defined in a YAML (YAML Ain’t Markup Language) file. This file
denotes exactly which models the decoder should use with which settings. This can
be used for example to change the decoding speed and hence the quality of the lattice
search. It is also possible to configure a post-processor that for example appends full
stops after each sentence.
While decoding, the server continuously returns a JSON object with the following
fields:
- status: Response status.
- message: Status message.
- result: Object with transcription hypothesis and final result.
- hypothesis:
- transcript: The recognized words.
- confidence: A confidence score from 0 to 1.
- final: A boolean value which shows if the transcription hypothesis is locked.
This response object can then trivially be used by any client. The complexity of the
client depends heavily on the purpose. If the audio files already are recorded and
simply needs to be processed, then a really simple client capable of sending a HTTP
POST request would suffice. Using a client such as curl, the server API would be
available using:
curl -T test.wav "http://localhost:8080/client/dynamic/recognize"
However, if the online capabilities are needed, then the client needs to be able to
read from a microphone input and send chunks of data to the server continuously.
Creating such a client is out of the scope of this project, however there are some
solutions available. Dictate.js11 is a small javascript client, based on the recorder.js
library. The dictate.js client uses the browser audio recording API to get access to
the microphone input. Then the client is able to connect to the master server using a
WebSocket connection. Since the client is web-based it can either be hosted locally on
the client computer or fetched from a remote server. As the client receives the partial
hypotheses back, it is simply a matter of displaying them to the user, or integrating
them into another system.
11https://kaljurand.github.io/dictate.js/
==PAGE:77==
3.8 Summary
61
3.8
Summary
In this chapter we took many of the concepts earlier explored in Chapter 2 and looked
at how they are used in the context of Kaldi. First, we gave an overview of the current
state of Kaldi in Section 3.1. We found that the three main problems were that it is
difficult to get into Kaldi due to its academic nature, the recognizers produced are
not ready for use, and that online recognition requires additional software.
To get a better understanding of these problems, we started out by looking at the
data requirements in Section 3.2. In order to train a model it is necessary to create
several text files, which links the audio with transcriptions. This data preparation
step is very often the first step in a recipe. The recipe is just a collection of scripts
which performs various tasks by using Kaldi programs and other utilities. Figure 3.3
gave an overview of the typical flow of a recipe. After the data preparation follows
feature extraction, language model creation and different acoustic model steps. After
this, it is possible to further improve the performance by using DNNs.
Section 3.4 explored the current state of DNN models in Kaldi. The nnet3 setup is
currently the most promising setup for configuring DNNs. Here it is possible to setup
different networks only by writing configuration files. It is also possible to train a
network on a cluster of computers. Lastly the chain model was introduced. This new
model has good word error rate performance and fast decoding time, which is needed
for online decoding.
Section 3.5 explained how WFSTs are used in Kaldi to compose the decoding graph
HCLG. This decoding graph is able to take context-dependent HMM-states as input
and produce words as output. To actually decode with this graph, a special graph
search algorithm is used. This makes it possible to create a lattice, where the n-best
paths are found. Section 3.6 described how the decoding graph is used with lattice
decoding. A pruned graph with different hypotheses is created, and the most likely
transcription can be created by finding the shortest path in the lattice.
At last, Section 3.7 explained how it is possible to do online decoding in Kaldi. This
could be done by setting up a full-duplex server which can create real-time partial
hypotheses by using some additional software based on GStreamer.
==PAGE:78==
62
==PAGE:79==
CHAPTER 4
Requirements for
Kaldigen
In this chapter, the functional and non-functional requirements for the tool we develop
are derived. To avoid ambiguity, the tool will from now on be referred to by its name
’Kaldigen’. The name implies that Kaldigen helps Kaldi users to generate recognizers.
Section 4.1 gives an introduction to the overall problems and the goals which the so-
lution should fulfill. Section 4.2 gives an overview of the solution domain. Section 4.3
breaks the requirements down into details and prioritizes them with the MoSCoW
method. Finally, Section 4.4 provides detailed use cases for the six most important
scenarios.
4.1
Introduction
In Chapter 3, we looked at how the Kaldi toolkit can be used to create a speech
recognizer. By using a few additional pieces of software, it was also possible to use
the recognizer in an online service which transcribes speech in real-time. However,
in order to accomplish this, the developer must have a good understanding of the
different components and techniques which are used in speech recognition. The de-
veloper should also know how the components work in Kaldi, as well as how the more
Kaldi-specific tools and data formats work. Without this understanding, it becomes
very difficult to do anything other than copying other developers’ recipes.
While
these recipes are a good source of inspiration, they will most likely need several mod-
ifications to give the desired result. In addition to the required speech recognition
knowledge, the developer should also be proficient in Linux and particularly in Bash
scripting. Knowing Python would also be advantageous in many cases.
For developers without these skills, it becomes very time consuming to speech-enable
an application. While many developers can write scripts in Bash and Python and
use Linux, speech recognition skills are much more rare and time consuming to learn.
Therefore our goal is to focus on enabling developers with little to no speech recogni-
==PAGE:80==
64
4 Requirements for Kaldigen
tion knowledge to build a speech recognition service easily. The most important part
of the solution is that the developer should not have to connect the building blocks
by writing a Bash script, but rather combine them at a higher level. Before getting
into the solution, we will review the problems we have identified with using Kaldi in
more detail.
4.1.1
Problems with using Kaldi
The problems listed next, are all problems which can make it difficult for most devel-
opers to create a functional speech recognition service which can be used either on
its own or in another application.
• Building or modifying existing recipes requires both extensive speech recogni-
tion and Kaldi knowledge. The major building blocks of a speech recognizer
were introduced in Chapter 2, but these are often broken down in even smaller
components in the Kaldi implementation. The developer must be able to com-
bine all these components. As this is not straight-forward, it takes a long time
for Kaldi newcomers.
• Composing the different components in a recipe requires Bash-scripting profi-
ciency. Bash scripts can be difficult to maintain and develop further.
• Kaldi is not designed for producing a ready-to-use recognizer, but rather for
optimizing and comparing word error rates. This makes it hard for newcomers
to use the created recognizers to transcribe other audio than just the test set.
• Producing a real-time speech recognition service requires many third party tools
which can be difficult to configure properly. In order to configure and deploy a
recognizer, Linux proficiency is needed.
• Recognizers are trained on data sets which can be difficult to come by. Fur-
thermore, the data sets must be preprocessed before they can be used. This
preprocessing step is very dependent on the quality of the data and how the
data is structured.
In combination, these problems mean that using Kaldi to speech-enable an application
could take the average developer weeks. The goal is therefore to create a tool which
enables developer to speech-enable applications in a matter of a few days, excluding
the actual training time for the acoustic models. The next section outlines the goals
of the solution on a high level.
==PAGE:81==
4.1 Introduction
65
4.1.2
Solution goals
The previous section outlined the problems with Kaldi, that makes creating and
deploying a speech recognizer time consuming. To solve this problem, we will develop
a tool named Kaldigen, which makes it much faster to produce a ready-to-use speech
recognizer.
However, in the given timeframe of this project, it is not possible to
eradicate all the problems listed above. Therefore, we will focus on the following
primary goals:
1. Kaldigen should enable developers to configure the speech recognition compo-
nents without manually writing recipes in Bash.
2. Kaldigen should make it easy to experiment with the Kaldi components. Kaldigen
should make it possible to add or remove components and they should be con-
figurable when applicable.
3. After a recognizer is trained, it should be easy to deploy the recognizer in a test
environment using Kaldigen.
These overall goals give an idea of the purpose of Kaldigen. Using Kaldigen would still
require minimal knowledge of speech recognition, but Kaldigen should be able to give
additional knowledge. Thus, it should enable those with an minimum understanding
of the most important components to quickly create and configure a recognizer. While
Kaldigen removes a lot of the need for scripting, there is still some programming to
do.
The preprocessing of the training and test data still needs to be done with
custom scripts, since it is too dependent on the structure of the data set to automate.
Therefore, the target users of Kaldigen are developers who might have some overall
knowledge of how speech recognition works, but are not familiar with Kaldi. When
Kaldigen is correctly set up, and the data preprocessing is working, it would also be
possible for people who are not developers to modify parameters and run the training,
in order to improve the word error rate.
Figure 4.1: Overview of the different steps required to create and deploy a produc-
tion ready speech recognizer. The green steps should be supported by
Kaldigen, the yellow should be somewhat supported, and finally the red
steps will not be supported.
Figure 4.1 shows the sequential high-level steps required to create and use a recog-
nizer. Kaldigen should support most of the steps with absence of some of the data
==PAGE:82==
66
4 Requirements for Kaldigen
preparation and actually deploying the recognizer on a system capable of handling
many concurrent connections.
4.2
Domain overview
Here the solution domain is presented. It includes the different entities necessary to
create and manage different recognizers. Figure 4.2 shows the overall domain model.
The overall structure is based around that it is possible manage multiple projects. A
project is build around a data set. Each project consists of multiple recognizers, which
all are trained on the same data set. The recognizers can have different configurations,
and are thus able to produce different speech recognizers.
Next the entities from the domain model are discussed in more detail.
4.2.1
Kaldigen
Kaldigen is the toplevel entity, which corresponds to an installation of the Kaldigen
tool.
4.2.2
Project
Kaldigen can have multiple projects, but each project can only have one data set. A
project is identified by a name, which also corresponds to the name of the directory
where all files are located. A project can have multiple recognizers.
4.2.3
Dataset
The Dataset covers all the files used to train and test a recognizer.
The most
important data is the matching set of Transcription and Sound. That is, each
sound file must have a matching transcription and vice-versa. The Acoustic model
is however not trained directly on the sound files, but rather on the Extracted
features which are created from the sound files.
The dataset also contains a Language corpus which is used to create the language
model. Finally, the dataset contains a Pronunciation dict capable of mapping
words to phone sequences.
4.2.4
Recognizer
A recognizer has a name and a description. The recognizer has a status which
summarizes the training status and the best word error rate any of the models pro-
duced. The recognizer has a general Config, which determines some common set-
==PAGE:83==
4.2 Domain overview
67
Figure 4.2: The Kaldigen domain model.
tings such as the computer resources it can use, and the AcousticModelType that
the recognizer should target.
==PAGE:84==
68
4 Requirements for Kaldigen
The recognizer can have one language model and multiple acoustic models.
4.2.5
Acoustic model
An acoustic model has an AcousticModelType and uses an Acoustic model
config. The configuration details depend on the type of the acoustic model. An
acoustic model can also have a Result which holds the word error rate.
4.2.6
Language model
The language model have a LanguageModelType, which can be N-gram or gram-
mar. Depending on the type, settings are available in the Language model config.
In the next section, the scope of the functionality will be outlined. Here we will define
which functional and non-functional requirements Kaldigen should fulfill.
4.3
Scope of Kaldigen
The overall goals of Kaldigen were described previously. This section aims to break
the goals down into more detailed and prioritized requirements while also defining
which parts are out of scope.
4.3.1
Requirement priorities
The priority of the different requirements are summarized in the following MoSCoW
analysis, where each requirement either is assigned to the Must, Should, Could or
Won’t category. First are the functional requirements:
1. Must have:
a) Project management with CRUD operations. Each project is related to a
data set.
b) Recognizer management with CRUD operations. Each recognizer is related
to a project.
c) Feature extraction configuration and creation.
d) Language model configuration and creation:
i. N-gram models.
ii. Custom grammars.
e) Acoustic model configuration and training (GMM and DNN).
f) Evaluation of recognizers by decoding test sets.
==PAGE:85==
4.3 Scope of Kaldigen
69
2. Should have:
a) Kaldigen should be able to be controlled from client machines while train-
ing on a remote machine.
b) Multiple users should be able to use Kaldigen simultaneously. It should be
possible for different users to setup, train and evaluate different recognizers
at the same time.
c) While training a recognizer, the progress of the different steps should be
shown to the user.
d) Recognizers should be able to be deployed on the machine where it was
trained. This makes it possible to evaluate the performance of the recog-
nizer.
3. Could have:
a) Guidance and help which provides information about the components.
b) A small sample client which can be used to test speech recognition by using
a deployed recognizer.
4. Won’t have:
a) Advanced wizards for performing the data preparation step.
b) Production-ready deployment where the decoding load can be distributed
across multiple servers.
c) Support for grid-computing training.
d) User authentication and management.
A few non-functional requirements are also prioritized:
5. Must be:
a) User-friendly to developers, such that Kaldi and speech recognition new-
comers can use it.
b) Stable, such that Kaldigen can run for a long time without problems.
6. Should be:
a) Able to handle errors from Kaldi without crashing itself. Instead the user
should be shown the Kaldi errors such that they can take action.
b) Documented to such a degree that users will not have to consult external
sources much.
==PAGE:86==
70
4 Requirements for Kaldigen
c) Able to run on any Debian based Linux systems with a CUDA supported
NVIDIA GPU and the newest drivers installed.
d) Easy to setup including its dependencies.
7. Could be:
a) Maintainable as Kaldi is developed further.
8. Won’t be:
a) Secure from outside threats. The security of Kaldigen will not be consid-
ered.
4.3.2
Functional requirements details
The functional requirements derived from the MoSCoW model are explained in more
detail here. All the requirements that have been categorized as won’t have will not
be detailed further.
4.3.2.1
Project and recognizer settings
Here requirements 1.a and 1.b are detailed.
It should be possible to perform Create, Read, Update and Delete (CRUD) operations
on the projects. A project is based on a data set, such that for each data set, a new
project should be created. A project must have a unique name, which is used to create
a directory which should contain the training and test data. If the data is placed in
a data format supported by Kaldigen, then Kaldigen should be able to perform a
simple data preparation step for the developer. This format is known as the Kaldigen
format. Otherwise, it is up to the developer to produce the initial data files required
by Kaldi as explained in Section 3.2. This data format is known as the Regular Kaldi
format.
Each project must be able to have an arbitrary numbers of recognizers. A recognizer
describes which speech recognition components should be trained and their configura-
tions. The recognizer and its settings must be editable with CRUD operations. Each
recognizer should have the general settings as summarized in Table 4.1.
4.3.2.2
Feature extraction and language model creation
Here requirements 1.c and 1.d are detailed.
Kaldigen should allow the user to choose between MFCC or PLP feature extraction
(The differences are explained in Section 2.4). The user should be able to see the
progress and any errors, if present.
==PAGE:87==
4.3 Scope of Kaldigen
71
Function
Description
Name
The name and identifier of the particular recognizer.
Description
Optional field for helping users identifying what the recog-
nizer is made for.
Feature type
Selection of the feature extractor the recognizer should use.
Can be MFCC or PLP.
Phonetic language
The phonetic language to be used when creating the lexicon
based on the words in the language model.
Sample rate
The sample rate used for the audio files in the project.
Number of jobs
The numbers of cores the computer is allowed to use during
training. CPU dependent.
Table 4.1: General recognizer settings. The sample rate should be able to be inferred
if the data is in the correct format.
The language model should be able to support N-gram models and grammars as
described in Section 2.3. For the N-gram model, the order N should be configurable
within a reasonable range. Kaldigen must support grammars expressed in the JSGF1
format.
4.3.2.3
Acoustic model configuration and training
In this section the requirement 1.e is further explained.
It should be possible to use Kaldigen to train many different acoustic models. For
the Gaussian Mixture Models (GMMs), the most important requirement is that it
should be possible to define what model the training should stop at, since the models
are usually built on top of each other in Kaldi as explained in Section 3.3.4. It should
be possible to create the following models:
• A standard monophone model
• The following triphone models:
– Delta + delta-delta
– LDA + MLLT
– SAT + fMLLR
These transformation features were previously explained in Section 2.4.2. For each of
the triphone models, it should be possible to set the number of leaves and the number
1https://www.w3.org/TR/jsgf/
==PAGE:88==
72
4 Requirements for Kaldigen
of Gaussians. Leaves relates to the number of context-dependent phones, while the
number of Gaussians relates to the total number of gaussians in the GMM model as
explained in Section 2.5.5.
For DNN models, Kaldigen should allow the user to create the recommended nnet3
chain models. In particular, the TDNN and LSTM networks described in Section 2.5.6.1
should be supported. The DNN models are much more advanced to configure than
the GMM models. Since many of the DNN settings are subject to experimentation
and should be changed according to the input data, is must be possible to configure
the minibatch size, the number of epochs, and the learning rates. These settings are
explained in more details in Section 3.4.2.
Additionally the user should be able to configure the composition of the DNN. For the
chain models, this is done in an Xconfig configuration file as described in Section 3.4.4.
4.3.2.4
Decoding test sets
The requirement 1.f is explained here.
When the acoustic models have been trained it should be possible to decode a test
set, using a trained language model, to see how well the acoustic models do compared
to each other in terms of word error rate.
4.3.2.5
Tool usage requirements
The requirements 2.a, 2.b and 2.c are detailed here.
A server capable of performing the training would usually run a Linux system without
graphical interface. But since it should be easy to implement and experiment with
multiple recognizers, a terminal interface would not suffice. Therefore, it is a require-
ment that Kaldigen should be accessible from client computers, while Kaldigen runs
on a remote server. At the same time, multiple client computers must be able to
connect simultaneously, as it should be possible to, for instance, test one recognizer
while training another.
Since training is a process which could take anywhere from a few minutes up to many
weeks depending on the data set, it should be possible to monitor the progress of the
training. For each step in training the current status such as the training iteration
number should be displayed. When an acoustic model has finished training, the word
error rate of the model should also be calculated and displayed.
4.3.2.6
Deploy and test recognizers
This section deals with requirement 2.d and 3.b.
==PAGE:89==
4.3 Scope of Kaldigen
73
After the acoustic models are ready, it should be possible to test how they perform
in a real-world application together with a language model. The user must therefore
be able to select an acoustic model and deploy a speech recognizer on a chosen port
on the server running Kaldigen. It should then be possible for the user to transcribe
already recorded audio.
In order to evaluate the real-time duplex performance, a small client with streaming
capabilities could be provided. This would make it possible to test the online decoding
functionality.
Deploying the recognizer to other servers in a production environment is outside of
the scope.
4.3.2.7
Guidance and help
This part deals with requirement 3.a.
Kaldigen could have advanced guidance to indicate errors in file locations and missing
files when setting up a new project. Additionally, information could be provided when
the user is configuring a recognizer.
Kaldigen could provide the ability to create ready-made projects with data sets, such
that the user can play around with the functionality without having to set up a data
set first.
4.3.3
Non-functional requirements details
Here the most important non-functional requirements will be explained in more detail.
The requirements that have been categorized as won’t be will not be detailed further.
The most important requirement is that managing and training recognizers should
be a lot more user-friendly than when doing it through recipes.
This should be
accomplished through a graphical user interface as compared to writing and running
Bash scripts from the terminal. The requirements of the user interface will be further
elaborated in Section 4.3.4.
As explained in the MoSCoW analysis, there are several other non-functional require-
ments as well that are detailed below.
4.3.3.1
Stability of Kaldigen
This section explains requirements 5.b and 6.a in detail.
It is important that Kaldigen is stable. Training acoustic models take a very long
time and it is therefore important that Kaldigen can run for a long time without
==PAGE:90==
74
4 Requirements for Kaldigen
problems. It is also important that the user can start training, close their client, and
come back later to see how far the training has come.
4.3.3.2
Hardware and operating system requirements
The requirement 6.c is detailed here.
Kaldigen should be able to run on any Debian based Linux systems with a high-end
NVIDIA GPU where the newest Nvidia drivers are installed. CUDA should also be
supported. In order to properly train a recognizer on a large data set the following
specs are recommended:
• CPU: A new CPU with at least four cores with about 3GHz per core.
• RAM: 8GB minimum, 16GB recommended.
• GPU: At least one new high-end NVIDIA GPU such as a 980, 1080 or TITAN.
• Free space on hard disk: Minimum 150GB preferably more.
• OS: Ubuntu 16.04 LTS.
4.3.3.3
Setup of Kaldigen
This section details requirement 6.d.
It should be easy to install and setup Kaldigen. Kaldi has many dependencies and
needs to be compiled with CUDA from the Kaldi source code. Kaldigen should make
this step easier as well. Kaldigen itself also has several dependencies which should be
easy to install and set up.
4.3.3.4
Maintainability of Kaldigen
Here requirement 7.a will explained.
As Kaldi is in a constant state of flux due to its research nature, there are constantly
new updates.
Kaldigen could be made maintainable such that it would be easy,
programming wise, to add new Kaldi features into Kaldigen.
4.3.4
User interface requirements
This section will focus on the requirements of the user interface, namely requirements
5.a and 6.b. Screenshots of how the graphical user interface looks are also provided.
==PAGE:91==
4.3 Scope of Kaldigen
75
4.3.4.1
Graphical user interface
Here the graphical user interface of Kaldigen will be detailed, and the most important
parts of the GUI will be shown with screenshots.
On the recognizer overview page, the user should be able to see which recognizers are
in a project and add a new one. The user should also be able to select a recognizer to
change the setup, train it or deploy it. The overview page can be seen in Figure 4.3.
Figure 4.3: The graphical user interface of the recognizers overview page.
The recognizer setup page should allow the user to change many different recognizer
settings and also go directly to training or deploy the recognizer. The setup page can
be seen in Figure 4.4.
The training page should display progress and info for each of the different stages in
training process. It should also be possible to start training from any stage if the
previous stage has finished succesfully. The training page can be seen in Figure 4.5.
The deploy page should allow the user to deploy a recognizer by choosing an acoustic
model on a specific port. It should also be possible to undeploy recognizers again.
The deploy page can be seen in Figure 4.6.
==PAGE:92==
76
4 Requirements for Kaldigen
Figure 4.4: The graphical user interface of the recognizer setup page.
It should be possible for the user to navigate between the pages. The navigation
possibilities can be seen in Figure 4.7.
4.3.4.2
Usability and learnability
This section will focus on usability and learnability in Kaldigen, which is the main
focus of requirement 5.a and 6.b.
When working with Kaldi recipes, the user must directly manipulate scripts and run
them, usually entirely from a command line. To give a better overview of Kaldi and
a better understanding of speech recognition, the most important requirement to the
user interface is that it is a graphical user interface. This makes it much easier to get
an overview and understanding of the underlying properties of speech recognition for
newcomers.
The user interface needs to provide knowledge about speech recognition while also
==PAGE:93==
4.3 Scope of Kaldigen
77
Figure 4.5: The graphical user interface for the training page.
providing functionality to create speech recognizers.
Kaldigen therefore needs to
guide the users through the process of creating speech recognizers while they use it.
Kaldigen also needs to have a high learnability and usability to make sure that users
quickly will be familiar with it and be able to perform operations without errors. This
is especially important since training speech recognizers can take days, and it would
be very annoying to get an error after several days due to a user error that could have
been prevented.
Three overall requirements for the user interface can be set up:
1. The user interface should guide the user through the process of creating a speech
recognizer using Kaldi.
2. A new user should quickly be able to use Kaldigen without errors (learnability).
3. Kaldigen should be efficient to use and it should be easy for the user to remember
how to perform the different functions (usability).
==PAGE:94==
78
4 Requirements for Kaldigen
Figure 4.6: The graphical user interface of the deploy page.
In order to fulfill the first requirement, Kaldigen must have extensive text and images
explaining what the different choices do.
To fulfill the second requirement Kaldigen must provide feedback when choices are
made such that the user can quickly learn what works and what does not. Choices
can also be restricted such that users are not able to make certain errors. The user
interface should be clear such that the user can easily see the different functionalities
and select the right next step. The user interface should therefore not be cluttered.
To fulfill the last requirement, the user interface should make it easy for the user to
perform what they want with as few actions as possible. This both makes the user
interface efficient while it also makes it easy for the user to remember how to perform
the different tasks. This also affects the time each task requires.
4.4
Use cases
This section provides detailed use cases for the most important functionality of
Kaldigen.
==PAGE:95==
4.4 Use cases
79
Figure 4.7: Page flow showing how it is possible for the user to navigate in the
Kaldigen user interface. Help can accessed from anywhere as a pop-up
box.
As mentioned earlier, Kaldigen is focused on developers who have little to no Kaldi
and speech recognition experience. As this is the primary user of Kaldigen we will
refer to the this user simply as the user from now on. Furthermore, all users have
access to the same functionality of Kaldigen as there are no roles or user management.
When a speech recognizer has eventually been created and integrated into another
application, there will be other types of users who use the recognizers created by
Kaldigen, but they are not users of Kaldigen itself.
An overview of the use cases can be seen in the use case diagram of Figure 4.8. Next,
the six most important use cases are detailed:
1. Create new project
2. Create new recognizer
3. Train recognizer
4. Deploy recognizer
5. Undeploy recognizer
6. Transcribe speech with recognizer
==PAGE:96==
80
4 Requirements for Kaldigen
Figure 4.8: Use case diagram showing the possible use cases.
4.4.1
Use case 1 - Create new project
In this use case, the user creates a new project and properly sets up data.
Name: Create new project.
Description: The user creates a new project and places necessary data files in the
project directory.
Precondition: The user has prepared some data which can be moved into the project
directory when it is created.
Main scenario:
1. The user goes to the start page of Kaldigen.
2. The user clicks on the New Project button.
==PAGE:97==
4.4 Use cases
81
3. The user enters a name for the new project in the top field.
4. The user selects the appropriate data format by clicking Kaldigen format or
Regular Kaldi data and is taken to the project view page.
5. According to the data format, the system informs the user of any missing files
or empty directories.
6. The user adds the correct files to their appropriate locations.
7. The user presses Refresh beneath the warning.
8. Kaldigen checks that all required files are present, the warning disappears, and
the project is ready.
Alternative scenarios:
1. The user forgets to specify a project name.
a) The system informs the user that a name is needed for the project.
2. The user places only some of the correct files in the correct locations and presses
Refresh.
a) Some of the warnings disappear while others remain, informing the user
that more files are needed.
b) The user places all the correct files in the right locations.
4.4.2
Use case 2 - Create new recognizer
In this use case a new recognizer is set up.
Name: Create new recognizer.
Description: The user creates a new recognizer and sets up the different models.
Precondition: The user has already created a project and added the correct data
to the project.
Main scenario:
1. The user goes to the start page of Kaldigen.
2. The user selects the project name in the list of projects and is redirected to the
project page.
3. The user adds a name for the new recognizer in the Name new recognizer field.
4. The user clicks New Recognizer and is taken to the recognizer setup page.
==PAGE:98==
82
4 Requirements for Kaldigen
5. The user adds a description to the recognizer.
6. The user sets up the base feature type, the phonetic language and sample rate,
and the number of jobs to be used in the basic recognizer settings.
7. The user selects the acoustic model type to be a simple GMM-HMM in the
Acoustic model settings.
8. The user selects the language model type to be an N-gram in the Language
model settings and selects an N-gram order.
9. The user clicks Save Changes.
Alternative scenarios:
1. The user forgets to specify a recognizer name.
a) The system informs the user that a name is needed for the recognizer.
2. The user selects the acoustic model type to be an advanced GMM-HMM model
as the acoustic model.
a) The user must select between a monophone recognizer and a triphone
recognizer.
b) In case of a triphone recognizer, the user must select which final triphone
model they want for their recognizer and setup leaves and Gaussians for
each.
3. The user selects the acoustic model type to be a simple DNN-HMM as the
acoustic model.
a) The user must specify the number of GPUs on their machine to be used
for DNN training.
b) The user must select if they want a TDNN, a TDNN-LSTM, or both
acoustic models to be trained.
4. The user selects the acoustic model type to be an advanced DNN-HMM model
as the acoustic model.
a) The user must specify the number of GPUs on their machine to be used
for DNN training.
b) The user must select if they want a TDNN, a TDNN-LSTM, or both
acoustic models to be trained.
c) For each chosen model, the user specifies minibatch size, number of epochs,
initial learning rate, and final learning rate using dropdowns.
==PAGE:99==
4.4 Use cases
83
d) The user changes the layer composition of the deep neural network by
changing the Xconfig in a text field.
5. The user selects a grammar as their language model.
a) The user must specify a JSGF grammar in a text field.
Postcondition: The recognizer will be ready for training.
4.4.3
Use case 3 - Train recognizer
In this use case the user trains a recognizer.
Name: Train recognizer.
Description: The user wants to train a recognizer.
Precondition: The project has been properly setup with data. A recognizer has
been setup.
Main scenario:
1. The user goes to the start page of Kaldigen.
2. The user selects the project name in the list of projects and is redirected to the
project page.
3. The user selects the recognizer in the list of recognizers and is redirected to the
recognizer page.
4. The user clicks Go to training and ends on the training page where they can
see progress for each stage in training.
5. On the training page, the user selects the stage he wants the training to start
from.
6. The user then presses Start and training commences. The user can follow the
progress of each stage on the page and see a log by pressing Show log.
7. After a long time, depending on data and hardware, all stages should display
done. The user can see word error rates displayed in a column next to the
acoustic models. The user is informed that the training has finished.
Alternative scenarios:
1. Training fails in some stage due to file issues.
a) The specific state where training has failed will display ERROR.
==PAGE:100==
84
4 Requirements for Kaldigen
b) The user must make changes to files or change the location of files and can
then rerun training from the failed stage.
2. Training fails in some stage due to recognizer setup.
a) The user must go back to the setup page and make changes.
b) The user must save the changes, which overwrites the current results.
c) The user must go to the training page and restart the training from the
beginning.
Postcondition: Acoustic and language models have been trained.
4.4.4
Use case 4 - Deploy recognizer
In this use case the user deploys a recognizer.
Name: Deploy recognizer.
Description: The user wishes to deploy a recognizer.
Precondition: A project has been properly setup with data. A recognizer has been
setup. Training has been successfully completed.
Main scenario:
1. The user goes to the start page of Kaldigen.
2. The user selects the project name in the list of projects and is redirected to the
project page.
3. The user selects the recognizer in the list of recognizers and is redirected to the
recognizer page.
4. The user clicks Deploy recognizer and ends on the deploy page.
5. The user looks at the list of ready-to-deploy recognizers based on acoustic mod-
els and chooses the preferred one by setting a port and clicking Deploy next to
it.
6. The Deploy status label shows that the recognizer has been deployed.
Postcondition: A recognizer has been deployed and is ready for use.
4.4.5
Use case 5 - Undeploy recognizer
In this use case the user undeploys a recognizer.
Name: Undeploy recognizer.
Description: The user wishes to undeploy a recognizer which is currently deployed.
==PAGE:101==
4.4 Use cases
85
Precondition: A project has been properly setup with data. A recognizer has been
setup. Training has been successfully completed. A recognizer has been deployed.
Main scenario:
1. The user goes to the start page of Kaldigen.
2. The user selects the project name in the list of projects and is redirected to the
project page.
3. The user selects the recognizer in the list of recognizers and is redirected to the
recognizer page.
4. The user clicks Deploy recognizer and ends on the deploy page.
5. The user looks at the list of recognizers based on acoustic models clicks Undeploy
next to the recognizer that should be undeployed.
6. The button changes from Undeployed to Deploy to show that the recognizer is
no longer deployed. The status of the recognizer also shows that the recognizer
is no longer deployed.
Postcondition: The recognizer has been undeployed.
4.4.6
Use case 6 - Transcribe speech with recognizer
In this use case a deployed recognizer is used to transcribe speech.
Name: Transcribe speech with recognizer.
Description: The user wishes to use a deployed recognizer to transcribe speech.
Precondition: A project has been properly setup with data. A recognizer has been
setup. Training has been successfully completed. The recognizer has been deployed.
Main scenario:
1. The user goes to the start page of Kaldigen.
2. The user selects the project name in the list of projects and is redirected to the
project page.
3. The user selects the recognizer in the list of recognizers and is redirected to the
recognizer page.
4. The user clicks Deploy recognizer and ends on the deploy page.
5. The user clicks Deployed below Deploy status on the deployed recognizer and is
redirected to the deployment page.
6. The user allows the browser to capture voice from the microphone.
==PAGE:102==
86
4 Requirements for Kaldigen
7. The user clicks Start and talks into the microphone and transcriptions will
continuously appear in the text field below, using a WebSocket connection.
Alternative scenarios:
1. The user wishes to test the recognizer with an HTTP request.
a) On the deployment page the user clicks Using HTTP to get information
on how to transcribe audio using HTTP requests.
b) The user must then prepare a wave file and send it using an HTTP request.
4.5
Summary
In Section 4.1 we used our knowledge of speech recognition systems, and in particular
Kaldi, to identify the major problems that arises when developers want to speech-
enable applications. We decided that the primary goal of Kaldigen should be to make
it easier to create, modify, and evaluate recognizers. This should be accomplished
through a graphical tool where the recognizers can be managed, such that the user
will not have to write Kaldi recipes themselves.
In order to find out exactly what Kaldigen must be able to do, the problems were
broken down into smaller problems and then prioritized using the MoSCoW method
in Section 4.3. We found that the most important functional requirements were the
creation, configuration and management of the different speech recognition compo-
nents as well as the ability to train the models directly from the tool. The most
important non-functional requirement was being user-friendly to developers, as the
goal is to replace the not so user-friendly recipe system.
In Section 4.4 detailed use cases were created for the six most important tasks. These
use cases can then be used during implementation to ensure that the most important
usage scenarios for Kaldigen are covered.
==PAGE:103==
CHAPTER 5
Design
This chapter gives a detailed look at the different components of Kaldigen. It also
focuses on the design of Kaldigen and different design choices. Section 5.1 gives a
short overview of the solution. Section 5.2 explains the choices for how a recognizer is
configured in Kaldigen. Section 5.3 gives an overview of the components and explains
the most important ones in more detail.
Section 5.4 details how the components
communicate, using sequence diagrams. Section 5.5 explains the most important life
cycles in Kaldigen. Section 5.6 details the many external tools and libraries used to
create Kaldigen.
5.1
Solution overview
Here a quick summary of the final design will be given, along with references to the
sections where each part is explained in more detail. The chapter starts out with
some Kaldi design choices and then focuses on software design for the rest of the
chapter.
It was important to define exactly what Kaldi functionality should be available to the
user in Kaldigen. Based on the requirements from the previous chapter, the possible
recognizer configurations will be described in Section 5.2. Our special Kaldigen data
format, which makes it very easy to build a recognizer prototype with a few self-
created files will also be explained.
The most important functional and non-functional requirements made it clear that
a graphical user interface was needed for Kaldigen.
However, it requires a quite
powerful machine to train Deep Neural Network (DNN) acoustic models and likewise
for Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM) acoustic models for large data sets. Therefore,
training in Kaldi is almost always done on powerful servers. These servers are often
headless, meaning they have no monitor attached and often run no graphical user
interface at all, thus making it rather difficult to create an application with a graphical
user interface. The solution to this problem was therefore to run a web server on the
machine, running Kaldi and Kaldigen, and then provide the user with a web client,
which can access the web server. Section 5.6.1 goes into this in detail.
==PAGE:104==
88
5 Design
Kaldigen is therefore split into a web client that can run on all sorts of clients and a
back end where the training takes place. The many different components in Kaldigen
are detailed in Section 5.3.
5.2
Kaldigen configuration
As previously mentioned, Kaldi is a huge framework with many different programs
and components which can be combined in many different ways. While this makes
it possible to create highly specialized tools, it also makes it difficult to know which
components to use and how to configure them for the more basic speech recognition
tasks. It is therefore important for Kaldigen to limit the options and only allow the
users to create sensible configurations. Furthermore, it would be impossible to fit
every single configuration possibility into a graphical user interface.
The first difficult step in building a speech recognizer is the data preparation step.
The problem is, that all the data files described in Section 3.2 must be created exactly
right. These are the files linking the audio, transcriptions, and speakers. One minor
misstep might cause the training to fail completely and it can be difficult to derive
the error from the Kaldi logfiles. Since each utterance in the data requires an entry in
multiple files, it is unfeasible to manually do this data preparation step. Therefore this
step is usually done with a specialized script. Any project where the data preparation
is handled outside of the Kaldigen tool is using what we call the Kaldi format.
5.2.1
The Kaldi format
When using the Kaldi format, a specialized script is usually used. This is necessary,
since the creation of required data files is highly dependent on the structure of the
training data. Such scripts might undergo several steps, such as:
• Download the data set.
• Extract and move the data.
• Convert the audio and transcriptions to a format supported by Kaldi.
• Create the required data files described in Section 3.2.
After these steps are done, Kaldigen can take over and validate the data. Since the
data preparation steps are completely dependent on the data source, it is very difficult
to create a general tool which can do this. Still, Kaldigen should enable users to create
a simple recognizer without programming anything. For this reason we provide our
own simplified Kaldigen format.
==PAGE:105==
5.2 Kaldigen configuration
89
5.2.2
The Kaldigen format
The Kaldigen format has strict rules about where the user can place the audio, tran-
scription and text corpus files. Figure 5.1 shows the structure. The audio and tran-
scription folder structure is mirrored, which enables Kaldigen to link them. Both the
audio and transcription folders contains the two automatically created folders test
and train. Inside these, a folder should be made for each speaker that contains the
relevant data. The corpus folder contains .txt files, which are all used to create the
language model. The audio files should be in .wav format and have a unique name
across the project. The transcription files should match the unique name, but be in
.txt format.
Figure 5.1: The basic folder structure of the Kaldigen format.
When the data is ready, it is time to configure the recognizer with the required settings
described in Section 4.3.2.
5.2.3
Recognizer configuration
While it should be possible to configure all the settings outlined in the requirements,
it should also be easy for someone without much experience to train a recognizer and
not worry too much about the different settings at first.
If the Kaldigen format is chosen, the user must select a language. They must also
select the feature type and how many concurrent jobs there should run on the machine
(how many cores should be utilized on the CPU). If the Kaldi format is used, the
==PAGE:106==
90
5 Design
user must select the sample rate of the files but does not need to choose the language,
since the pronunciation dictionary should have been created in advance.
Afterwards, the user will have the choice between a simple GMM or an advanced
GMM. In the simple model, the target GMM is automatically SAT+fMLLR for
speaker adaptive training. In the advanced model, the user can stop the training
at the monophone model or either one of the triphone models. It is also possible
to configure the number of leaves and Gaussians for each triphone model. Since the
GMM models are trained on top of each other, the user is only allowed to determine
which final model they want to train, the base models are automatically created for
the chosen final model.
For the DNN models, an important decision was settling on nnet, nnet2, or nnet3. As
mentioned earlier the nnet3 setup as it is the newest and best working. Furthermore,
the new nnet3-chain models introduced by Kaldi only has improvements over regular
nnet3 models. Therefore the user can only train nnet3-chain models. The two most
commonly used nnet3-chain models are the TDNN and TDNN-LSTM models.
In the DNN setup, the user can also choose between the simple or the advanced
setup. In the simple setup the user can just choose the type of DNN models to build.
The GMM models from the simple GMM setup will be trained as well, since the
DNN models need an alignment produced by a GMM model. The user must also
choose how many GPUs they want to use for training. In the advanced model it is
possible to configure a lot of parameters and even the Xconfig previously described
in Section 3.4.4 can be changed. While there exists a lot more settings which could
have been used in the DNN configuration, we decided only to allow the user to choose
the most important settings, as the target users are novices. If further fine tuning is
desired, then Kaldigen should probably not be used, since it is not targeted towards
very proficient Kaldi users. However, allowing the user to write their own Xconfig
gives very high degrees of freedom, but can also very easily go wrong. A warning is
therefore added next to the Xconfig setup.
For the language model, the user can choose between an N-gram or a grammar. The
user must choose the N order for the N-gram and put in a JSGF grammar if grammar
is chosen.
The recognizer settings are therefore split in three: Basic settings, acoustic model
settings, and language model settings. A full overview of all settings can be seen
below:
• Basic settings
– Feature type
– Number of jobs
==PAGE:107==
5.3 Kaldigen components
91
– Language (only for Kaldigen format)
– Sample rate (only for Kaldi format)
• Acoustic model settings
– Simple GMM
– Advanced GMM, choose final model, all models above will also be trained
* Monophone model
* Triphone model
· Delta+delta-delta with leaves and Gaussians
· LDA+MLLT with leaves and Gaussians
· SAT+fMLLR with leaves and Gaussians
– Simple DNN
* Number of GPUs for training
* Choose TDNN, LSTM, or both
– Advanced DNN
* Choose leaves and Gaussians for all triphone models (Delta, LDA, and
SAT)
* Number of GPUs for training
* Choose TDNN, LSTM, or both and settings below for each
· Minibatch size
· Number of epochs
· Initial learning rate
· Final learning rate
· Setup Xconfig
• Language model settings
– N-gram
* Choose the N order
– Grammar
* Supply a JSGF grammar
5.3
Kaldigen components
This section gives an overview of the different components in Kaldigen and how they
interact.
As discussed previously, Kaldigen features a back end and a front end that can run
on different machines. The front end is a composed of HTML, CSS and JavaScript
==PAGE:108==
92
5 Design
web pages that are served by the back end. The front end can communicate with the
back end using WebSockets and regular GET and POST requests. An overview of the
components can be seen in Figure 5.2. As it can be seen, the back end has the most
components by far and will therefore be the main focus of this section. The blue
components and parts of the figure are third-party, and therefore not implemented
or made by us, the green parts are implemented or made by us.
Figure 5.2: The Kaldigen component overview.
The blue components are other
projects that Kaldigen relies on, while the green components are imple-
mented by Kaldigen. The front end component shows the different web
pages which can be received from the back end.
The components can be split into five different parts:
==PAGE:109==
5.3 Kaldigen components
93
• Kaldigen back end
The Kaldigen back end is the most important and most intricate component.
It features a Tornado web server, a NoSQL database, and a specialized Kaldi
recipe.
The Tornado web server features numerous handlers which execute
Python code on the back end before serving HTML pages with JavaScript based
on the Python code. In order for the back end to work, it relies on input data,
namely audio and transcriptions as explained in Section 3.2. This data should
be provided as files in the correct directories. The back end produces models,
namely acoustic and language models and their decoding graphs which can be
deployed.
• Kaldigen web client (front end)
The Kaldigen web client allows the user to manage projects and recognizers. The
web client is composed of HTML pages with JavaScript which are served by the
back end. This component is the main interaction point for the user (except
for setting up data initially). The web client also uses a modified version of
the third-party library dictate.js to allow the user to easily test their built
recognizers.
• Kaldi and dependencies
Kaldi itself is very important to Kaldigen, as the specialized recipe makes use of
Kaldi to do all the work behind the scenes of training acoustic models, language
models, feature extraction etc. Kaldi is also used by the GStreamer plugins
when using deployed recognizers.
• Kaldi GStreamer plugins
The Kaldi GStreamer plugins allow a GStreamer server to stream audio to
Kaldi and have text transcriptions sent back.
The GMM plugin is called
onlinegmmdecodefaster, while the DNN plugin is called kaldinnet2onlinedecoder.
• Kaldi GStreamer server
The Kaldi GStreamer server makes it easy to set up a GStreamer server that can
handle audio and then send it to a Kaldi GStreamer plugin. Kaldi GStreamer
server can also handle multiple simultaneous connections and makes it possible
to have workers spread across different machines.
5.3.1
Kaldigen back end
This section will give an overview of the Kaldigen back end.
The most important part of the Kaldigen back end is the Tornado web server. The
web server is responsible for handling all requests from the client. These requests are
sometimes handled by Tornado itself, but often the requests are processed and passed
on to other components such as the specialized recipe or the Kaldi GStreamer server.
==PAGE:110==
94
5 Design
5.3.1.1
API overview
The Tornado web server supplies web pages for many different POST and GET requests
and they are also used for:
• Creating, reading, updating, and deleting projects.
• Creating, reading, updating, and deleting recognizers.
• Deploying recognizers.
• Undeploying recognizers.
Additionally, WebSockets are used for some longer running connections:
• Managing the training process of recognizers.
• Transcribing audio using a trained recognizer.
The full API can be seen in Appendix A. A few examples are shown below. These
requests are automatically made for the user when different buttons are clicked in the
web GUI, but can also be made independently from a console or any software capable
of sending HTTP requests. If a project is called testProject and a recognizer is
called testRecognizer, it can be deployed by making a POST request to
/proj/testProject/recognizers/testRecognizer/deploy with info about the port
and action. Likewise, to update the settings of a recognizer, a POST request can be
sent to /proj/testProject/recognizers/testRecognizer/save with a body con-
taining the new settings in JSON format.
Training recognizers is a very time consuming process and it is therefore important
that the client can be updated to show the training progress to the user. We therefore
use WebSockets to start and stop training as well as sending progress reports back
to the client. The recognizers deployed with Kaldi GStreamer server also use Web-
Sockets to send audio one way and transcription hypotheses the other way. Using
the example from before, and assuming the webserver is running locally on port 8888,
the WebSocket for training the recognizer can be reached on
ws://localhost:8888/status/testProject/reg/testRecognizer. If a recognizer
has been deployed on port 8080, the recognizer can be used by connecting to the
WebSocket at ws://localhost:8080/client/ws/speech. Each deployed recognizer
must be deployed on an unique port. The full WebSocket API can also be seen in
Appendix A.
==PAGE:111==
5.3 Kaldigen components
95
5.3.1.2
Tornado web server implementation
An overview of the classes of the Tornado web server can be seen in Figure 5.3. The
Tornado web server consists of many RequestHandlers which handles POST and GET
requests for the many different URLs, which the client can access. Apart from that,
the web server implements several different runners which can run processes in the
background and some can inform the user of the progress. The most important place
to show the user the progress is during training of the recognizer, since this takes
a long time. We therefore use WebSockets for two-way communication as these can
stay open for a very long time. The choice of WebSockets is described in more detail
in Section 5.6.4.
Figure 5.3: A class diagram over the most important classes in the Kaldigen
Tornado web server.
There are 11 more classes that inherit from
RequestHandlers which are not shown in the image.
==PAGE:112==
96
5 Design
Training is performed by obtaining an instance of the __TaskRunner class, and calling
run_proj. The class StatusSocketHandler inherits from Tornado’s WebSocketHandler
and is responsible for the communication between the client and the __TaskRunner
instance. The TaskRunner singleton keeps track of which __TaskRunner instances ex-
ist and which sockets are connected to which __TaskRunner instances, using a tuple
consisting of the project and the recognizer name. Thus, if multiple clients want to
monitor the same or different recognizers they can connect to the same __TaskRunner
or to different __TaskRunner instances seamlessly.
The __TaskRunner starts the
Kaldi training and keeps track of the progress and continuously informs the client.
For each unique recognizer there exists a single __TaskRunner which keeps track of
the progress of exactly that recognizer in that project. When a client visits the train-
ing webpage for a recognizer, the client is connected to a WebSocket. Every time
there is some form of progress, the __TaskRunner informs all its connected WebSock-
ets of the change. This means that multiple people can look at the progress of the
same recognizer. It is also possible to train multiple recognizer in the same project or
in different projects at the same time with unique __TaskRunner instances for each.
The life cycle of a __TaskRunner instance will be looked at in detail in Section 5.5.
The Tornado web server only provides interfaces to the web client. Two different inter-
faces are provided. The regular RequestHandler interface and the WebSocketHandler.
The RequestHandler interface supports GET and POST operations from the client. The
WebSocketHandler interface supports open, on_close, and on_message. In this way,
the client is able to open and close WebSocket connections as well as send messages
through open WebSockets to the server. This is used when training the recognizer to
allow the client to send start and stop messages to the back end.
5.3.1.3
NoSQL Mongo Database
The NoSQL Mongo Database in the Kaldigen back end is used to keep track of the
program state. The database is not used to store the data produced or consumed by
Kaldi, which is always stored in files on the file system. Rather, the database keeps
track of the projects, the recognizers, and the training meta-data. The database has
an interface which can be accessed directly through Python.
An overview of the database can be seen in Figure 5.4. The top level is the Collection
which can store an unlimited amount of projects. Each Project can in turn store
an unlimited amount of Recognizers. A recognizer consists of a Language model
an Acoustic model and Results. The Language model stores the language model
choices. The Acoustic model stores the standard GMM acoustic model choices. The
Acoustic model has an LSTM and a TDNN which stores DNN choices if the user wishes
to train those models.
The Results store a Progress for how each stage of the
training progresses and finishes.
There are no cross references between neither projects nor recognizers which makes
==PAGE:113==
5.3 Kaldigen components
97
Figure 5.4: The JSON data structure used to store data in the NoSQL database.
The num_stages depend on exactly what stages the user chooses to
train. There is only one result per trained stage. The items in brackets
such as <wer> indicate that they are optional. Many key names have
been spelled out for better understanding.
it possible to use NoSQL, since none of the settings are shared. The choice of using
NoSQL is detailed in Section 5.6.2.
5.3.1.4
Specialized recipe
The specialized recipe component in the Kaldigen back end is used every time a
recognizer is trained.
The recipe is specialized since it is based on regular Kaldi
recipes, but has a lot of configurable variables which is used to alter the flow of the
recipe. This allows us to use a single recipe, but change the file location paths for
input and output data easily. It also makes it easy to control what parts of the recipe
==PAGE:114==
98
5 Design
should be executed based on user input. The user can also set certain parameters
from the client which are then used in the recipe. The different parameters and how
they were chosen will be explained in Section 5.2. The main part of the recipe can
be seen in Appendix B.
Since the recipe is a Bash script, it does not supply an interface. Instead the web
server starts the Bash script from within Python with certain parameters using the
Python library Pexpect. This makes it easy to search for patterns in the output of
the Bash script and thus enables us to check the progress. We also make sure that
the progress is written to a log file on the disk. The use of Pexpect is explained in
further details in Section 5.6.4.
5.3.1.5
Input and output
The back end has limited functionality without input data. The user is therefore
required to add some input data for the back end to work with. Kaldigen warns the
user if it detects that some input data is missing. The specialized recipe uses the
input data to perform the Kaldi training.
The recipe continuously produces models and decoding graphs and puts them on the
file system as is standard in Kaldi. As the web server started the recipe, it will know
the locations of models and graphs for when they should be deployed.
5.3.2
Kaldigen web client
This section details the Kaldigen web client.
The web client is implemented with Tornado web templates and JavaScript. The
templates allow the server to create HTML pages based on Python data structures
and then send them to the client. The template system also allows inheritance which
is used to create a base template, that all other templates inherit from. The choice
of Tornado is explained in more detail in Section 5.6.2.
The web client implements all the use cases as defined in Section 4.4, which is also
shown in the component overview in Figure 5.2. Testing the deployed recognizers
is done with an open source tool called dictate.js, which makes it easy to record
audio in the browser. This dictation tool is integrated into the Kaldigen web client.
While all parts of the client uses the GET and POST interfaces from the back end, only
the training page and the sample client provide their own interfaces. Both interfaces
are provided using WebSockets. For the training page, the interface allows the back
end to send progress messages such that the page can display the progress of the
training.
The sample web client uses the interface provided by Kaldi GStreamer
==PAGE:115==
5.3 Kaldigen components
99
server to send audio and provides an interface for receiving transcription hypotheses
in return.
5.3.3
Kaldi and dependencies
The functionality of the Kaldi component was described in Chapter 3, and will there-
fore not be elaborated upon in much detail here. As long as all Kaldi dependencies
have been set up correctly and Kaldi has been successfully compiled from source, the
component should work. It should be noted that there are no Kaldi binaries avail-
able and Kaldi therefore needs to be compiled from source on each machine where it
should be used. Different C++ compilers, different C++ compiler versions, and different
CUDA versions make it a hassle to compile. This is made easier with our Docker image,
which will be explained in Section 5.6.7.
The provided interfaces are compiled C++ programs which are then called from Bash
by the recipe and called from other C++ programs by the Kaldi GStreamer plugins.
5.3.4
Kaldi GStreamer plugins
The Kaldi GStreamer plugins provide a C++ wrapper for sending audio to Kaldi
and getting transcription hypotheses back. The plugins therefore rely on the Kaldi
component. The plugins themselves provide an interface which makes it easy to send
audio to them through GStreamer. The Kaldi GStreamer plugins are third-party
libraries that Kaldigen simply sets up correctly.
5.3.5
Kaldi GStreamer server
The Kaldi GStreamer server component makes it easy to deploy recognizers. Deploy-
ing the recognizers is done by calling several Python scripts with relevant parameters.
In order to undeploy the recognizers again, the running processes are killed. The
tornado web server uses a Bash script to call the different Python scripts to deploy
recognizers and uses another Bash script to undeploy the recognizers again as there
is no API.
When the models have been deployed they can be accessed by anyone through HTTP
or WebSockets. An interface is provided for receiving audio and an interface is re-
quired to send back the transcription hypotheses as explained in Section 3.7. The
sample web client dictate.js uses the WebSocket API interface to showcase the
deployed models.
The Kaldi GStreamer server is a third-party library that Kaldigen simply sets up
correctly and makes easy to use.
==PAGE:116==
100
5 Design
5.4
Communication between components
This section deals with the communication between the different components im-
plemented by Kaldigen. Sequence diagrams are used to show the most important
scenarios.
5.4.1
Entering the training page
In this scenario the web client connects to the Tornado web server of the Kaldigen
back end.
In Figure 5.5, it is shown what happens when a user opens the training view for a rec-
ognizer. The training page first connects to the TrainingHandler which renders the
page with the Tornado template. Then the training page uses a WebSocket and opens
a new connection by creating a StatusSocketHandler. This StatusSocketHandler
then asks for an instance of a __TaskRunner, which can run the training process in
the background. If another user has previously entered the page they will share the
__TaskRunner, otherwise a new one is created. At last, the StatusSocketHandler
adds itself to the lists of WebSockets for that project-recognizer combination such that
the training page will receive messages when progress is made by the __TaskRunner.
5.4.2
Starting training
Here the web client connects to the Tornado web server which then controls the
specialized recipe.
Figure 5.6 shows what when happens the user clicks Start on the training page,
assuming the initial connection shown in Figure 5.5 has already been established.
When Start is clicked, a message is sent through the WebSocket with information
that start has been clicked and what stage to start training at. This is then relayed
to the runner which will start the specialized recipe using the Python library pexpect.
Thus the runner will start the script in the background and listen for different output.
Whenever an expected output occurs, the database is updated with the progress and
the training page is informed using the WebSocket connection, such that the user can
see the progress. When training stops the output stream from the recipe will end and
EOF (End Of File) will be seen in the output. The database is once again updated to
reflect that training has ended and the WebSocket is messaged twice, once indicating
that the current stage has finished, and once indicating that training has completely
finished. The user can then see on the training page that the training is done.
5.4.3
Deploying and undeploying
This scenario shows the communication between the web client, the back end, and
Kaldi GStreamer server when deploying and undeploying recognizers.
==PAGE:117==
5.4 Communication between components
101
Figure 5.5: Sequence diagram showing what happens when a user opens the training
page for a recognizer.
A sequence diagram showing the interactions when a user clicks Deploy, and Undeploy
can be seen in Figure 5.7. When a user clicks Deploy an asynchronous POST request
==PAGE:118==
102
5 Design
Figure 5.6: Sequence diagram showing what happens when a user clicks Start on
the training page and a successful training starts and ends.
==PAGE:119==
5.4 Communication between components
103
is made to the DeployRecognizerHandler.
This handler then checks whether to
deploy or undeploy and checks whether the port is already in use. When the port is
not in use, a new DeployRunner is created in the background which uses the Python
library pexpect to start the deploy Bash script. Then the runner simply waits for
the deployment to end. When the runner has been started, the status is updated in
the database, such that it informs the user of the deployment. Then the asynchronous
request completes and the deploy page is updated based on the how it went.
Now the user is able to undeploy the recognizer. When the user clicks Undeploy,
another asynchronous POST request is made to the handler. It checks the action
and sees that it is an undeploy call.
Then a synchronous static call is made to
DeployRunner which starts an undeploy scripts that kills all GStreamer processes
that have been deployed on the specific port. As before, pexpect is used and when
EOF is received the scripts are done. The undeploy script kills the deploy script process
and the runner therefore detects EOF and stops. Afterwards, the undeploy script is
done and the TaskRunner detects EOF and returns to the handler. The handler then
updates the status in the database and informs the deploy page that it is no longer
deployed. An update is then made on the deploy page to show that the recognizer is
no longer deployed.
5.4.4
Using a recognizer
This example shows how to use a deployed recognizer, which was referred in the
previous section. None of the components used are implemented by us, we have just
set them up such that they are ready for use.
When a deployed recognizer is used to transcribe speech, numerous different compo-
nents are in use. A very simplified overview can be seen in Figure 5.8. There are four
components communicating in this scenario: The dictate.js component, the Kaldi
GStreamer server component, the GStreamer plugin component, and Kaldi itself.
This process is very advanced, just between the GStreamer component and Kaldi
there are more than ten different classes in use, which would never fit in a sequence
diagram. The figure therefore instead aims to give a simple overview. When the user
presses Start, a WebSocket connection is established between dictate.js and Kaldi
GStreamer server. This connection is then used to send audio one way and hypothe-
ses the other. Kaldi GStreamer server then sends the audio to a GStreamer plugin
which wraps the required Kaldi functionality. The job of the GStreamer plugin is
then to transform the audio to formats usable by Kaldi and call the required Kaldi
functionality and return the hypothesis. The hypothesis is then propagated all the
way back to the client.
==PAGE:120==
104
5 Design
Figure 5.7: Sequence diagram showing the successful interaction when a user clicks
Deploy and afterwards clicks Undeploy. The Use Recognizer scenario
can be seen in Figure 5.8
.
==PAGE:121==
5.4 Communication between components
105
Figure 5.8: Very simplified sequence diagram showing how speech is transcribed in
Kaldigen.
==PAGE:122==
106
5 Design
5.4.5
Creating a recognizer
This scenario shows communication between the front end and the back end when
creating a new recognizer.
The sequence diagram in Figure 5.9 shows the interactions when creating a new recog-
nizer. The user starts on the recognizers page and enters a new name for a recognizer
and clicks the New recognizer button.
The user is then taken to a new page for
that recognizer. The user then sets up the recognizer and finally clicks Save changes.
When clicked, an asynchronous POST request is sent to a RecognizerSaveHandler.
First, the configuration is saved in the database. Then, numerous different setup
steps are performed, some dependent on the configuration.
Figure 5.9: Sequence diagram showing the successful creation of a new recognizer.
5.5
Life cycles in Kaldigen
This section looks at some of the life cycles in Kaldigen.
==PAGE:123==
5.5 Life cycles in Kaldigen
107
5.5.1
Training life cycle
The most important life cycle in Kaldigen is the training life cycle. It is important that
the training can stably run for a long time while informing the user of the progress
of the underlying Kaldi training. As was shown in the previous section, the user can
start the training by pressing the Start button after having selected a start stage. The
user is also able to click the Stop button, which will immediately terminate training.
If the user clicks the Start button again, the training is restarted from the currently
selected stage. An overview can be seen in Figure 5.10.
Figure 5.10: Life cycle of a training from the users point of view.
We now look at how Kaldigen keeps track of the Kaldi training progress. This is
handled by a __TaskRunner as mentioned earlier. The life cycle of a __TaskRunner
can be seen in Figure 5.11.
The life cycle starts by checking which state to start in based on the output of pexpect.
Any of the states in the super state to the right is a legal start state. When the Kaldi
training progresses to a new stage, pexpect will be notified by the output of the recipe
and change the internal state. The states (monophone, feature extraction, preparation
etc.)
correspond to the different stages that training a complete recognizer goes
through. Each state eventually ends either naturally or with an error. When a state
ends, it is checked whether an error has occurred and if not a new state is entered
using pexpect to determine it. The states where acoustic models are trained, all
keep track of the iterations of the trained model. Then they check the word error
rate and create a YAML file for deploying with Kaldi GStreamer server. The Deep
Neural Networks (DNNs) have a few additional steps but also check iterations, word
error rates, and create a YAML file as the other acoustic models.
If a Kaldi error is encountered in some of the sub-states it will be propagated back
and the __TaskRunner will stop tracking the progress. The same happens if a Kaldi
error occurs during any of the regular states. If Kaldi training ends naturally, it will
stop the output and then End Of File (EOF) is reached. Then the life cycle also ends,
as there is no more progress to track for the __TaskRunner. Should the user press
Stop at any time during training it will immediately terminate with the terminate
call.
==PAGE:124==
108
5 Design
Figure 5.11: Life cycle of a __TaskRunner tracking the progress of training a recog-
nizer.
==PAGE:125==
5.6 Choice of tools
109
5.5.2
Deploy life cycle
The deploy life cycle deals with deploying recognizers. The user is able to deploy
a recognizer by pressing the Deploy button next to it. After deploying, the user is
able to undeploy the same recognizer by clicking Undeploy next to it. At any time
the user can click Undeploy all, which will immediately undeploy all recognizers. An
overview of the actions can be seen in Figure 5.12.
Figure 5.12: Overview of the possible actions the user can take when deploying and
undeploying.
5.6
Choice of tools
To implement the different components, many different external tools and technologies
must be used and combined. This is necessary, as the scope of the Kaldigen project
is so big that it would be very time consuming to properly implement and test all the
components ourselves.
There are many possible tools or technologies to choose from for each component. In
this section we will analyze the requirements of each component and compare the
different tools and technologies available.
5.6.1
Client/Server setup
The most important decision is how the overall client/server setup should be struc-
tured. In Chapter 4, the requirements of Kaldigen were analyzed. The requirements
made it clear, that the reason for using a client/server setup is, that the strenuous
hardware requirements for training on a large data set make it improbable to train on
a personal computer. Therefore training will most likely be done on a powerful Linux
server with a dedicated GPU. Such a server can be remotely controlled using ssh for
instance. However, since the point of the project is to make it easy to configure and
test recognizers, a simple remote terminal interface would not suffice. By having a
==PAGE:126==
110
5 Design
client, with a graphical user interface, it is possible to configure, monitor and test the
created recognizers from a user-friendly interface.
There are many possible ways to create a client, but there are some requirements:
• The client should easily be able to communicate with the server.
• The client should support creating a user-friendly graphical user interface.
• The client should be able to run on many different computers.
• The client should support microphone recording.
Additionally, it is important to remember that the client is a rather thin client - all
the training is performed on the server and only the need to use a microphone relies
on more advanced functions.
The client could be developed in frameworks such as Swing or JavaFX in Java or
using WPF in C#. However, this approach introduces dependencies on the Java or
.NET runtime, and it is not possible to use it from all client computers such as a
smartphone. Therefore, such a client would be unnecessarily ’thick’.
An alternative is to create a web application. A web app is good choice for a thin
client, where the main task is displaying data and sending and receiving messages
from the server. The user interface is easy to create with HTML and CSS and the
client would be able to run on all modern devices. All modern browsers have built-
in support for audio recording which can be leveraged as well. Web technologies are
very much built around the ability to communicate with other servers, therefore there
are plenty of ways to communicate with our server. Additionally, no installation is
necessary as the client can be fetched from the server like any other website.
One problem with using a website as the client, is that it is more difficult to restrict
access without having a built-in access control mechanism. Everyone with the correct
URL would potentially be able to access and control the server. However, for this
project we will leave it to the server administrator to limit the access through other
means.
Due to these reasons we decided to use a web app as the client. This decision also
impacts the server, as the server should be able to deliver the different pages in the
web app.
5.6.2
Server
The server is responsible for multiple tasks. Since we decided to use a thin web client,
the server must be able to produce the dynamic webpages required. The server should
==PAGE:127==
5.6 Choice of tools
111
also support the back end operations for all the project and recognizer settings. Data
should be stored in a database, and this data must be readable and writable through
the website. However, the server must in addition to this also be able to control the
training of the recognizers and display the progress to the client. The server should
also be able to handle deployment of a recognizer. When a recognizer is being used,
full-duplex communication must be used to continuously give partial hypotheses.
When building a web application, the software used to build the foundation is known
as a stack. A stack usually consists of at least:
• An operating system.
• A programming language.
• A web server.
• A database.
The possible combinations of these make it possible to come up with many different
stacks. However, in the case of Kaldigen we already had a good idea of some of the
requirements that influence the choice. The Kaldi framework runs on Linux, and so
must the Kaldigen back end. Additionally, a large part of the Kaldi utility scripts are
written in Python. By also using Python in the stack, it is easy to integrate or modify
these scripts. Lastly, it is relatively easy to run and manage external processes in
Python.
There are many different Python web servers and frameworks available, often with
quite different feature sets. Some larger frameworks like Django have a lot of function-
ality and integrations, while the SimpleHTTPServer module only serves simple GET
requests. For this project, something in between is needed. To serve dynamic pages,
the web server should support a template engine and database integrations, but there
is currently no need for user authentication and the content administration tool that
Django offers. However, it should be possible to implement user authentication at a
later time.
Tornado1 is an asynchronous Python web framework with a focus on keeping many
connections open for a long time. This is very useful, as tasks such as monitoring
the training progress or actively running a recognizer session uses a long running
connection. Tornado also comes with a powerful template system and it is possible
to add user authentication at a later stage. Since the choice of the web server is not
that important and Tornado fulfills all the apparent requirements, it was chosen.
1http://www.tornadoweb.org/en/stable/
==PAGE:128==
112
5 Design
Lastly, a database management system is needed. It is important to note that the
database is not going to be used to save the Kaldi related data such as training data
or the generated models. This would not work well, as Kaldi is not designed to use
data from a database at all. Rather, the database is going to save the state of the
training and the various settings for each recognizer. This data is not relational, since
each recognizer must define its own settings, and can not reuse settings from other
recognizers.
Most database systems use SQL and are relational, but in this case it is possible
to use a non relational ’noSQL’ database, since the data is not relational and there
are no cross references. We only save the project and recognizer configurations, the
training status and the results.
This would also be possible to do with a simple
file, but it is much easier to manage with a proper database, which can for instance
handle concurrency. With noSQL it is possible to apply logic, such as only updating
a field if the new value is lower than the current. One such noSQL database system
is MongoDB, which uses a document-structured JSON format to store data. There
are several reasons for choosing to work with MongoDB. The biggest reason is that it
is very fast to iterate and try things out when developing, since the database scheme
is very flexible and allows for changes without migrating or resetting the database
entirely. Additionally, there is excellent Python support through PyMongo, which
makes it easy to integrate with the Tornado server. For these reasons, we decided to
use MongoDB.
To summarize, the chosen web stack runs on Linux and uses Python as the program-
ming language. The web server runs Tornado, and the database used is MongoDB.
5.6.3
Client
This section details how the technologies used to built the client.
The web pages are created using HTML, CSS and JavaScript. Since it is very time-
consuming to design and layout a website from scratch, we use the HTML, CSS
and JS framework Bootstrap2 as a base. As the name implies, Bootstrap enables
developers to use and extend some common elements and interactions. We also use
the JavaScript library JQuery3 to manipulate the HTML documents, and to perform
various requests.
The HTML documents themselves are generated using Tornado’s template system.
This system allows for inserting tags in the HTML code which is compiled to Python
code by the server before being interpreted and served to the client. This makes
it possible to query the database and generate the populated HTML easily. It also
2http://getbootstrap.com/
3https://jquery.com/
==PAGE:129==
5.6 Choice of tools
113
allows the developer to inherit from other templates and thus isolates each template
to only deal with the specific data which should be displayed.
5.6.4
Client and server communication
To some extent the client/server communication is handled through the template sys-
tem with GET and POST requests from the client. The client sends the data submitted
by the user with a POST request, and the template system shows the user the data.
However, for our purposes we need additional methods for exchanging data, since
the training runs in the background. The status of the training should dynamically
update the status on the website, without having the user refresh the page. This
long-lived connection should be sustained for days.
To do this we use WebSockets4, since they are both supported in Tornado (through
WebSocketHandler) and in the client through native JavaScript, which is supported
in all modern browsers.
WebSocket is a communication protocol with full-duplex
communication.
When a connection is established, the client and the server can
communicate by sending messages with, for instance, JSON objects. When the server
reaches a step in the training to report, it can send a message out to all connected
WebSockets. When the client receives the message, it can simply update the webpage
using JQuery manipulations.
As the client is running JavaScript and the server
is running Python, JSON is used as an intermediary data representation. This is
chosen since it is easy to work with in both languages. It is very easy to transform a
JSON object into a dictionary in Python. In JavaScript, JSON can be transformed
into native JavaScript objects easily as well, since JSON is just JavaScript Object
Notation.
However, it is not trivial for the server to track the training updates. The training
runs in a separate background thread, and the output of this background job is what
shows the progress. While it would be possible to send a message between each step
of the program (for example between training two triphone models), most of the
time is spent training in iterations. To show this progress, the log output should
be monitored. This is done using the Python tool pexpect5. This tool is a Python
module made for spawning and controlling processes. When a process is spawned,
the output can be matched with regular expressions. Then it is possible to build a
state-machine which uses WebSockets to report the training status back to the client.
The following Python snippet shows how the training of a recognizer is started:
cmd = "cd ../src && ./run.sh " + self.proj + " " + self.reg
+ " 2>&1 \
| tee " + self.log_path
self.task = pexpect.spawn ('/bin/bash', ['-c', cmd], timeout=None)
self.check_state()
4https://www.websocket.org/
5https://pexpect.readthedocs.io
==PAGE:130==
114
5 Design
Here, the command changes to the source directory before running the run.sh shell
script. The project and recognizer name is passed as arguments. The standard output
and standard error stream is used with tee, which duplicates the output so it goes
both to standard output and a logfile. The command is now spawned with pexpect,
which enables pexpect to listen to the generated output. The check_state() func-
tion matches the state machine previously shown in Figure 5.11. The start and stop
stage of the training is defined by the recognizer configuration. However, these set-
tings must be loaded by the run.sh script. When the script is started, it takes the
project- and recognizer-name as parameters. These parameters are used to locate a
key-value configuration file, which is created whenever the recognizer configuration
is saved. This simple key-value configuration file is interpreted by the shell, which
creates the variables the script needs to decide which stages to run with which pa-
rameters.
5.6.5
Recognizer deployment
As stated in Chapter 3, it is not trivial to actually deploy a trained recognizer in a
setting where is it easy to use. Section 3.7.2 introduced the Kaldi GStreamer server
for running a full-duplex server and the gst-kaldi-nnet2-online plugin which enabled
neural network support for the GStreamer server.
Also the dictate.js library for
recording and sending audio data from a web client was introduced. By integrating
the Kaldi GStreamer server into the server, and using dictate.js in the client, it is
possible to deploy and test recognizers directly from the tool. The integration still
requires some code, for example, the YAML models which describe the recognizer
configuration in Kaldi GStreamer server will have to be specifically generated for
each recognizer.
5.6.6
Pronunciation dictionary
As stated in Chapter 2, an important part of the data used for training speech rec-
ognizers is the pronunciation dictionary. This dictionary provides a mapping from a
word to a sequence of phones. Optimally this dictionary would be manually created,
but this is a very time consuming resource to produce, as it would need an entry for
each word. Fortunately, there exist tools capable of deriving the phone sequences
based on some pronunciation rules. One of these tools is the open source project
eSpeak6. The main purpose of eSpeak is to function as a speech synthesizer for many
different languages. However, it can be configured to output phones instead of audio,
which is exactly what is needed to produce a pronunciation dictionary. The quality
depends on the language and how good the rules for the chosen language are, but in
some cases the pronunciation dictionary is adequate for the creating decent recogniz-
ers. eSpeak is therefore used to automatically create the pronunciation dictionary for
6http://espeak.sourceforge.net/
==PAGE:131==
5.6 Choice of tools
115
the Kaldigen data format. When the Kaldi format is used, the user has to supply the
pronunciation dictionary themselves.
5.6.7
Installation tools
This client/server setup makes the Kaldigen tool very easy to use, but since all the
tools have to be installed and setup correctly, it can be difficult to get everything
running.
One way of solving this is to setup a Virtual Machine (VM), which can be distributed
with all the components configured properly. However, VMs are not very efficient
since each VM runs an entire guest operating system on top of the host OS. Over the
last few years, containers have gained a lot of popularity. Containers are different
from VMs, as the containers only bundle the required libraries and applications, which
might even be shared among the different container instances. The containers are
able to run directly on top of the host OS, and do not suffer from the slow hardware
virtualization that VMs do, which could make it hard to use GPUs for training.
Figure 5.13: Containers running on Docker. Source: docker.com
One specific project which is used to create and manage such containers is Docker.
Figure 5.13 shows how containers run on top of Docker. In Docker, you create images
which are the packages that include everything needed to run the desired software.
Thus, a running container is an instance of the image, which runs isolated from the
host OS. These images are built in layers. For example, an image could use the shared
Ubuntu layer, and provide a specific application on top of this. This application might
also have some requirements, which could be installed in a different layer. If only the
application layer is changed, the layers below would not need to be rebuilt. This
makes it fast to update the application code and redeploy.
==PAGE:132==
116
5 Design
The image layers are defined in a Dockerfile. A simplified version of the Kaldigen
dockerfile which installs and configures everything required to run Kaldigen is shown
in Listing 5.1. The full Dockerfile can be seen in Appendix C.
1 FROM nvidia/cuda:8.0-devel-ubuntu16.04
2
3 RUN apt-get update && apt-get install -y \
4
gcc \
5
g++ \
6
git \
7
gstreamer1.0-tools \
8
make \
9
mongodb \
10
python2.7 && \
11
pip install tornado && \
12
pip install pexpect && \
13
pip install pymongo && \
14
ln -s /usr/bin/python2.7 /usr/bin/python ; ln -s -f bash /bin/sh
15
16 RUN cd /opt && \
17
git clone https://github.com/kaldi-asr/kaldi && \
18
cd /opt/kaldi/tools && \
19
make && \
20
cd /opt/kaldi/src && ./configure --shared && \
21
make depend -j 3 && make -j 3 && make ext -j 3 && \
22
cd /opt/kaldi/src/online && make -j 3 depend && make -j 3 && \
23
cd /opt/kaldi/src/gst-plugin && make depend -j 3 && make -j 3 && \
24
cd /opt/kaldi/tools && ./extras/install_irstlm.sh && \
25
cd /opt && \
26
git clone https://github.com/alumae/gst-kaldi-nnet2-online.git && \
27
cd /opt/gst-kaldi-nnet2-online/src && \
28
make depend && make && \
29
cd /opt && git clone https://github.com/alumae/kaldi-gstreamer-server.git
30
31 COPY dockerstart.sh /opt/
32 COPY kaldigen /opt/kaldigen/
33
34 RUN chmod +x /opt/dockerstart.sh
35
36 CMD ["sh", "/opt/dockerstart.sh"]
Listing 5.1: A simplified Kaldigen Dockerfile.
The dockerfile for Kaldigen is based on Ubuntu, and installs all the dependencies
such as Kaldi, GStreamer, Kaldi GStreamer server, gst-kaldi-nnet2-online,
MongoDB, Tornado, eSpeak, Python and various Python libraries and all the build
tools (make, g++, CUDA, etc.) required for building Kaldi.
Since CUDA is required to compile the DNN Kaldi code, it needs to be included
in our Dockerfile as well. The first line of the Dockerfile therefore determines that
the image should be based on Ubuntu 16.04 and have the development branch of
CUDA 8 installed.
The development branch is required to compile with CUDA.
Unfortunately, Docker does not support utilizing CUDA out of the box, and therefore
the Docker wrapper ’NVIDIA-Docker’ is required to run the image as well. Full install
instructions can be seen in Appendix D.
Each Docker command such as FROM, RUN, COPY or CMD creates a new layer. The first
==PAGE:133==
5.7 Summary
117
RUN block fetches all the dependencies from the Debian package repository and from
the Python Package Index. It also makes sure that the correct version of Python
and Bash is used throughout. The complete image uses additional packages which
can be seen in the appendix. The next RUN block is responsible for fetching and com-
piling the non-standard dependencies. This includes Kaldi, the Kaldi online plugins,
Kaldi GStreamer server and the gst-online plugin. Some additional steps related to
compiling and removing obsolete files are omitted from the short example. Then the
dockerstart.sh script are copied over and granted executable rights. This script
simply starts the mongo database and the tornado webserver. The Kaldigen project
itself is also copied over. The last command in the Dockerfile is CMD. This ensures
that the dockerstart script is started automatically when a container instance is
launched.
Now this image can be built and launched, and all the required software would auto-
matically be installed and configured. Since all containers launched from this image
would run with exactly the same software dependencies, it would be very easy to
deploy this as a cloud application. If a user of the Kaldigen tool does not have a pow-
erful enough computer to run the training, he could just launch a container running
on a powerful computer in the cloud and do the training there.
To communicate with the webserver running in a Docker instance, the desired ports
must be opened and forwarded. Docker also allows linking directories from the host
OS to the container instance when the container is launched. This can be used to
store the training data on the host OS, which is then linked and used in the container
instance. Examples of these techniques are also shown in Appendix D.
5.7
Summary
Section 5.1 gave an overview of the Kaldigen tool. Since Kaldi usually runs on a
headless server, the solution features a thin client which can run on many different
machines and connect to a server running Kaldigen.
Section 5.2 explained what
it should be possible for the user to configure in the client. The Kaldigen format
which makes it easy to use small self-made data sets was also introduced. Section 5.3
introduced the different components that the solutions consists of. This includes the
back end, which uses Tornado with MongoDB and the front end, which is a web
client. Section 5.4 detailed how the different components communicate. The back
end and front end is able to communicate in full-duplex using WebSockets.
This
makes it possible to track the training in real-time. In Section 5.5 the training life
cycle was examined.
The state of the training is tracked through the use of the
pexpect tool. The training is started with this tool, and the output from the training
is used to control the state.
Section 5.6 discusses the choice of many of external
tools used to create Kaldigen. The web stack runs on Linux and is created using
Tornado and MongoDB in Python. Since it is difficult to configure all the external
==PAGE:134==
118
5 Design
tools correctly, Kaldigen can be installed and run from a Docker container, which
configures everything automatically.
==PAGE:135==
CHAPTER 6
Evaluation of Kaldigen
In this chapter Kaldigen will be evaluated. Section 6.1 gives a short overview of the
evaluation and states our hypothesis. Section 6.2 explains some of the concerns about
the validity of the evaluation and the steps taken to answer the concerns. Section 6.3
details the user evaluation and whether it supported the hypothesis or not. Section 6.4
shows the differences in work flow between creating a recognizer with Kaldi and with
Kaldigen to exemplify the improvements. At last Section 6.5 looks at some related
work.
6.1
Evaluation criteria
This section defines the criteria which the evaluation should cover and how we have
tried to carry out the evaluation.
We stated in the introduction: “The aim of this thesis is to simplify the process of cre-
ating and using speech recognizers built with the Kaldi toolkit.” To measure whether
Kaldigen simplified the process, we would like to test the following hypothesis:
A software developer and Kaldi novice will use several days of work to
setup a recognizer with a deep neural network acoustic model with Kaldi.
In contrast, it should take the same novice only several hours to do the
same in Kaldigen.
However, as the focus was on creating the tool and not on validating it, we only
prioritized a very limited user evaluation. In order to properly prove or disprove the
hypothesis, we would need two large groups of Kaldi novices and have them create a
deep neural network acoustic model with either Kaldi or Kaldigen. Instead, the time
for creating a deep neural network acoustic model with Kaldi has been estimated
based on our own and one other person’s experience with Kaldi, while the Kaldigen
time estimate was based on a single user evaluation. We will discuss the threats to
validity of this approach in Section 6.2. The single user evaluation will be elaborated
upon in detail in Section 6.3.
==PAGE:136==
120
6 Evaluation of Kaldigen
The time estimates exclude preparing the data sets and training the models, which
can take a very long time depending on the data set. The Kaldi time estimates are
shown in Table 6.1, while the Kaldigen time estimate is in Section 6.3. The reason
the hypothesis deals with creating a deep neural network acoustic model, is the fact
that this is what most people want to in Kaldi, and it is hard to do. Furthermore, it
is easy to test how long it takes people to set it up.
Subject
Description
Time spent
Mathias
Thesis co-author. Kaldi novice. Speech recognition
novice. Linux intermediate.
∼25 hours
Kristian
Thesis co-author. Kaldi novice. Speech recognition
novice. Linux proficient.
∼25 hours
Subject B
Kaldi novice.
Natural language processing expert.
Speech recognition intermediate. M.Sc. in Computer
Science, PhD in linguistics. Linux expert.
∼20 hours
Table 6.1: Self-reported time estimates for setting up a recognizer with a deep neural
network acoustic model in Kaldi. The time estimates for both authors
of this thesis is joint, and would likely have taken longer individually.
After creating a deep neural network acoustic model, it would also be interesting to
look into how long it took Kaldi users versus Kaldigen users to deploy the model and
use it in a realistic setting. This is interesting since Kaldigen makes it very easy to
deploy using several third-party libraries which are automatically set up for the user.
Unfortunately, we have no data from any novice Kaldi users about how long it took
them to set up a recognizer for use, as this is not part of the standard Kaldi toolbox.
We can therefore only look at our own time spent, and since that is not objective, we
have not formally tested this part.
The Docker image has not been part of the evaluation, since Kaldi setup time is not
part of our hypothesis. It is not part of the hypothesis since it can vary wildly and
thus be hard to put a specific time on. Most of the time spent when setting up the
Docker image is also waiting for the installation and setting up Docker itself, which is
not very interesting to the project. Once Docker has been set up, running our image
requires only a few single steps, but building the image takes quite a while, since
many programs are downloaded and compiled.
6.2
Threats to validity
This section looks at the different threats to validity that we have been aware of
during the evaluation.
The first concern is that the scope of the project did not permit us to make a thorough
==PAGE:137==
6.2 Threats to validity
121
evaluation. We therefore have only a single test subject to try out Kaldigen. This is
obviously far from enough for validating the hypothesis, but the scope of the project
did not allow for a more thorough test. On the other hand, our tool was targeted
towards Kaldi novices and our test user had some minimal knowledge about what
Kaldi was but had never tried Kaldi before and therefore fit that criteria perfectly.
There will be more information about the test user and the test in Section 6.3. We did
not include ourselves in the Kaldigen time estimate, since we have been developing the
software, and as we know everything about it our time estimates would be unreliable.
The Kaldi time estimates from Table 6.1 were based only on a few users, some of
them ourselves. It is of course never a good idea to include yourself in your own test,
but otherwise we would only have one data sample for the Kaldi time estimate as well.
When we started the project we were complete Kaldi novices, which makes us suitable
candidates for the time estimate. The Kaldi time estimate is also based on a third
user, subject B, who has not been part of Kaldigen and therefore his time estimate
is valid. He does, however, have quite a lot of experience with speech recognition
and related fields, and may therefore learn Kaldi somewhat quicker than the regular
developer.
Another concern is the fact that we have focused on enabling the creation of a Danish
recognizer during the development. This means, that while Kaldigen has been devel-
oped, we have tried the functionality solely with Danish data sets. If the evaluation
was also made with a Danish data set, it could be that Kaldigen was only good for
Danish. Therefore, the evaluation is done using a Swedish data set that has never
been used in Kaldigen before. Compared to Danish, Swedish pronunciation is closer
to spelling, as are many other European languages which Kaldi is normally used for
(English, Czech, Estonian, etc.). This makes Swedish a good candidate for a test
since it has some of the same properties as the other languages. Kaldi also has a
very large Chinese community, but we have not looked into languages with non-Latin
script alphabets.
The data sets that have been used for evaluation during development, have been
variously sized subsets of the Danish Nordisk Språkteknologi (NST) corpus. The NST
corpus provides free audio and transcriptions for Danish, Norwegian, and Swedish.
The Swedish evaluation set will also be taken from NST as it is the only free and
available Swedish data set. This could cause the two data sets to look somewhat alike,
which might be a threat to the validity of the evaluation. However, their likeness
is mainly in the structure of the data sets and how they are prepared, which are
outside the scope of Kaldigen and the hypothesis. Both the Danish and the Swedish
evaluation data sets are rather small, consisting of only approximately 10 hours of
audio. This means that the recognizers built with these evaluation data sets will not
be very good, but it makes it a lot easier to test with, as they can be trained in a day
instead of in a few weeks.
==PAGE:138==
122
6 Evaluation of Kaldigen
The NST corpora have the advantage that there exist Kaldi recipes, which can be
used to prepare the data in Kaldi format. As mentioned in Chapter 4, Kaldigen only
deals with data preparation to some extent and that has therefore been left out of the
hypothesis and evaluation. This is due to the fact that each corpora is very different
and it is not sensible to set a time estimate on preparing a corpus for Kaldi use.
The NST evaluation data sets have very bad language models, since the language
models are only built with the transcriptions from the training data and test data.
This causes the recognizer to actually score better, due to the similarity of the training
and test data. However, when the recognizer afterwards is used in other contexts, it
would perform a lot worse than when using a proper language model.
6.3
User evaluation
In this section, the user evaluation is described in detail.
The user evaluation featured subject A, who had to create a recognizer in Kaldigen
with a DNN acoustic model. Subject A is 29 years old, works as a software developer
at Dictus ApS, and holds a Bachelor of Engineering from The Technical University
of Denmark. Subject A has worked with finished speech recognition products before,
but has never been involved in creating speech recognizers. Subject A is therefore
a novice in both the development of speech recognizers and with regards to Kaldi
as well. Subject A is therefore a good fit for our user evaluation as he works as a
software developer but has no prior experience with creating speech recognizers nor
with Kaldi.
In the user evaluation, Subject A had two tasks. He was supposed to create a small
recognizer using some of his own audio recordings and self-made transcriptions to get
a feel of Kaldigen and learn how to prepare data files. After playing around with his
own recognizer, he was supposed to create a Swedish recognizer with a DNN model
based on a subset of the Swedish NST corpus. We chose a subset of a size such that
training could finish overnight instead of taking weeks. This made it a lot easier to
check if it was successful as we did not have to wait for weeks.
The Kaldigen tool features an option for downloading and setting up a small Danish
and Swedish evaluation subset from NST. However, it takes approximately an hour to
download and there were some hard disk space issues on the server, so we had prepared
the data in advance. Data preparation is not part of the hypothesis however, so it
can be left out the evaluation.
Subject A spent approximately three hours on setting up his own recordings and
creating a recognizer. Unfortunately he encountered a critical error, which we noticed
as we were following his logs while he was working. The error occurred due to the
==PAGE:139==
6.4 Differences between Kaldi and Kaldigen
123
fact that he was on a Windows machine and transfered files to our Linux machine.
All the files therefore had Windows line endings which Kaldi could not work with.
This created some very weird errors that were impossible for subject A to figure out
by himself. Since the files had wrong line endings, Kaldi could not figure out where
the lines ended and it therefore “fixed” the data directory by only keeping a single
audio file and matching transcription. Then, as training starting there were errors
during the training of the different models since only one audio file existed. It was,
however, not clear to see from the error log that this was due to the fact that there
was only one file, since the error occurred much later than the file warning. At the
same time, training actually succeeded with just a single file in some cases, but ended
up creating a terrible recognizer. We therefore had to issue a hotfix to the server in
order for subject A to be able to create a recognizer with his own files.
After subject A had got some experience using Kaldigen by training a recognizer on
his own data files, he had to create a Swedish recognizer with a DNN acoustic model.
The training and test data for this recognizer had already been prepared earlier due
to the download size. As subject A now had some experience using Kaldigen, he was
able to set up a recognizer with a deep neural network in a little less than 30 minutes.
Afterwards he started training, and saw that Kaldigen started to run the initial steps
without error and left the experiment to run during the night.
The following day the Swedish recognizer had finished training without errors and
with a word error rate of about 26 percent, which is adequate for such a small data
set. This marked the end of the official evaluation which was only focused on training
the recognizer. Subject A spent about 3 hours on learning the tool using his own
data set and afterwards spent about 30 minutes on setting up the training for the
Swedish recognizer. The total time spent to set up a recognizer with a deep neural
network was therefore approximately 3 hours and 30 minutes as seen in Table 6.2.
We therefore consider the user evaluation a success, but we can by no means validate
our hypothesis solely based on this evaluation.
Subject
Description
Time spent
Subject A
Kaldi novice. Speech recognition novice. Linux
novice. BEng in Software Technology.
3 hours 30 minutes
Table 6.2: Time spent for subject A to set up a recognizer with a deep neural
network acoustic model in Kaldigen.
6.4
Differences between Kaldi and Kaldigen
This section will look at how a few common tasks are carried out in Kaldi and
likewise in Kaldigen. While the main focus of the evaluation is to compare the time
==PAGE:140==
124
6 Evaluation of Kaldigen
it takes to setup the training itself, we will also look at steps such as installation, data
preparation and deployment.
6.4.1
Tools installation
The first step when using either Kaldigen or Kaldi, is to install the necessary depen-
dencies and the tools themselves. Here we will compare how this is done in Kaldigen
and in Kaldi.
6.4.1.1
Kaldigen
Kaldigen provides a Docker image. This requires that Docker and NVIDIA-Docker is
installed on the system as explained in Appendix D. Once both have been installed
and the Kaldigen Docker image has been downloaded, the Kaldigen docker image
must be built as follows:
nvidia-docker build -t kaldigen .
This step fetches all dependencies, including CUDA, and prepares the image. Now
an instance can be launched:
nvidia-docker run -p 8888:8888 -p 8070-8090:8070-8090 \
-v /data/projects:/opt/kaldigen/proj kaldigen
This causes a Kaldigen instance to launch and be available on port 8888. The project
data resides in a linked volume, which makes it easy to maintain the project data
in a separate location on the host machine. The Docker image also provides all the
dependencies to easily Deploy and use recognizers.
6.4.1.2
Kaldi
When installing Kaldi, the Kaldi git repository must be cloned. Then several make
files should be run in the correct order to compile everything from source. To compile
the neural network code, it is required that an NVIDIA GPU, and driver are installed
along with CUDA. After compilation the user must run several Bash scripts to install
extra dependencies from the Kaldi tools folder.
6.4.1.3
Comparison
The installation steps when using only Kaldi is very dependent on the needed features.
Many tools and features have to be individually compiled or installed by running
install scripts. All these steps are automated in the Dockerfile in Appendix C. Our
Dockerfile also sets up numerous different tools which can be used to deploy and
use the built recognizers which Kaldi does not support itself. Even without the extra
==PAGE:141==
6.4 Differences between Kaldi and Kaldigen
125
tools, the Kaldigen Docker image makes it a lot easier to setup Kaldi. Normally Kaldi
needs to be compiled with CUDA to work with DNNs. This is made much easier with
our Docker image which uses NVIDIA-Docker to easily install CUDA. Furthermore,
since Kaldi is in constant development, it does not always compile and some features
might be broken. The Kaldigen Dockerfile makes sure to download a version of Kaldi
which has been tested and that compiles.
6.4.2
Data preparation
When installation has completed, data must be prepared to create a recognizer. This
section compares how it is done in Kaldigen and in Kaldi.
6.4.2.1
Kaldigen
The data preparation step in Kaldigen is fairly different from the regular setup in the
case where the Kaldigen format explained in Section 5.2.2 is used. If the Kaldigen
format is used, it is just a matter of placing the audio and transcription files in the
correct directories. Kaldigen also support regular Kaldi data which requires all the
data files described in Section 3.2 to be produced, most likely by a script. It is also
important that the user supplies a file named corpus.txt in the data/lang directory
which contains a line for each sentence, for the language model. If the data files are
created like this, Kaldigen is able to use them the same way that Kaldi is.
6.4.2.2
Kaldi
Kaldi only support setting up all data files described in Section 3.2.
6.4.2.3
Comparison
If the Kaldigen data format is used, then the data can be prepared a lot faster with
Kaldigen, compared to Kaldi. If regular Kaldi data is used, it takes the same amount
of time. The data preparation step is therefore a lot faster in Kaldigen in the best
case, and the same as in Kaldi in the worst case.
6.4.3
Creating a monophone recognizer
This section compares setting up the simplest recognizer, a monophone recognizer in
Kaldi and in Kaldigen. It is assumed that data has already been prepared.
6.4.3.1
Kaldi
To setup a monophone recognizer in Kaldi, a recipe is needed.
The first step of
creating a Kaldi recipe is to copy another recipe and adjust it.
==PAGE:142==
126
6 Evaluation of Kaldigen
A novice would likely find and use the Kaldi for Dummies tutorial [Zie16], which
includes a simple recipe. Several configuration files need to be prepared and placed
in the correct folders.
Paths to required binaries would have to be set up, such
that the different Kaldi tools can be called by the recipe. Two directories must be
symbolically linked in order to call different Kaldi utility scripts from the wsj recipe
as well.
When all the files have been setup, the Kaldi for dummies recipe’s run.sh script itself
can be looked into. The full script can be seen in Appendix E. On the first run of the
recipe it would likely end up with an error, since the data is likely not sorted. This can
be fixed by uncommenting the lines 43 and 45, allowing the fix_data_dir.sh script
to sort them. On the next run the user would likely get the error “SRILM toolkit is
probably not installed” from line 86. After the user has fixed this by installing the
toolkit, the next run of the recipe should completely successfully. The user would
then have trained a monophone recognizer.
6.4.3.2
Kaldigen
To create a monophone recognizer in Kaldigen, the user would start on the project
page. Here, the user would be warned of any missing files and then the user would
have to create a new recognizer by clicking New recognizer as shown in Figure 6.1.
Then the user would have to set up the basic recognizer settings, as can be seen in
Figure 6.2. Here, the user should select a monophone acoustic model as shown in
Figure 6.3 and press Save changes and Go to training afterwards. At last, the user
must press Start on the training page which can be seen in Figure 6.4
6.4.3.3
Comparison
In this monophone example, the difference in setup time is not that big. Kaldigen
mainly helps by creating a valid configuration and by making sure that all tools are
installed. The user is also warned if all the data is not in the correct places.
6.4.4
Creating a recognizer with a DNN acoustic model
This compares how to create a recognizer with a deep neural network acoustic model
in Kaldi and in Kaldigen.
6.4.4.1
Kaldi
If a user wants to create a recognizer with a DNN acoustic model in Kaldi, the user
needs to copy a recipe which uses one. It can be time consuming to figure out which
one to copy and which DNN implementation to use. After having copied a recipe such
as tedlium1, the user must set up several different configuration files. The run.sh
1https://github.com/kaldi-asr/kaldi/tree/master/egs/tedlium/s5_r2
==PAGE:143==
6.4 Differences between Kaldi and Kaldigen
127
Figure 6.1: First the user must create a new recognizer by clicking New recognizer.
recipe must be modified extensively to fit the user’s own data and hardware setup.
Several extra dependencies must also be installed and set up correctly. The GMM
acoustic model steps should work out of the box, if everything is set up correctly.
Kaldi itself must also be compiled with CUDA, which only happens if the correct
NVIDIA tools are installed before compiling.
When the DNN is to be trained, the user must set the network up correctly which
can take quite a while.
The user must first figure out which DNN to train and
then modify the scripts according to their own setup. As mentioned earlier, Kaldi
uses an i-vector extractor before DNN training. The user must therefore change the
run_ivector_common.sh script, which can be quite time consuming. To make sure
that the changes work, the user must run the script. It can take several hours before
an error is produced, and the user can figure out how to solve it. The same must be
done to the chosen DNN script such as run_lstm_1d.sh. Again, errors will only be
encountered after several hours of training, so setting up the script correctly can take
quite a while, as each small mistake or typo will only be encountered after quite a
==PAGE:144==
128
6 Evaluation of Kaldigen
Figure 6.2: The user must then set up the basic recognizer settings.
while.
6.4.4.2
Kaldigen
In Kaldigen, we take care of all the tedious set up steps. To train a recognizer with a
DNN acoustic model, the user can follow the same instructions as for the monophone
recognizer, with a few changes. When selecting the acoustic model, the user has to
select a DNN network as shown in Figure 6.5. Then they can go to training and press
Start which will then train their DNN acoustic model.
6.4.4.3
Comparison
One of the first issues of creating a recognizer with a DNN acoustic model is figuring
out which recipe to look at and copy. This is mostly done by following community
discussions, in order to find out which scripts are actively developed and produces
==PAGE:145==
6.4 Differences between Kaldi and Kaldigen
129
Figure 6.3: The user must choose a monophone model under acoustic model settings.
The user can then click Save changes, and then click Go to training.
the best results. This is not a problem in Kaldigen, where the best general-purpose
DNN scripts have been curated. In Kaldi, the user has to set up and change a lot in
several different Bash scripts. For every error in the set up, the user will likely have
to wait several hours before the script encounters the error and they can fix it. This
causes the setup to take even longer. In Kaldigen the user does not need to change
any Bash scripts and most of the set up is done by Kaldigen. Should the user choose
advanced DNN setup, they can change the most important parts of the DNN acoustic
model, along with settings for the GMM acoustic model which the DNN is based on.
6.4.5
Managing projects and recognizers
Here we look at managing different projects and different recognizers within the same
project in Kaldi and in Kaldigen.
==PAGE:146==
130
6 Evaluation of Kaldigen
Figure 6.4: When at the training overview, the user must press Start to commence
training the recognizer.
6.4.5.1
Kaldi
When creating recognizers, it is very common to experiment by creating different
recognizers with variations in training data or variations in the training configuration.
In Kaldi, this can be a very cumbersome task, as generated models are overwritten
when training again. To circumvent this, the old models must manually be backed up,
or the training script must be modified to output to a new directory. Additionally,
the default recipes stop training if there exist old intermediary files. These files must
be configured to be removed or reused depending on the situation. In Kaldi, there is
no notion of a ’project’. If the same scripts are to be used with a different data set,
you would have to make a copy of all these scripts to a new location. This makes it
difficult to update and maintain the different scripts across projects and recognizers.
==PAGE:147==
6.4 Differences between Kaldi and Kaldigen
131
Figure 6.5: The user can choose between a simple or an advanced DNN setup and
must then choose the models to train.
6.4.5.2
Kaldigen
Kaldigen makes it easy to manage recognizers, as each recognizer is linked to a project
consisting of a data set. Therefore, the different recognizers of a project uses the same
data, but can try out different configurations. In the interface, it is possible to create
an unlimited numbers of projects, and an unlimited numbers of recognizers for each
project. The recognizers all have a name and a description, which makes it easy to
document the differences. Each recognizer has their own setup configuration, and
==PAGE:148==
132
6 Evaluation of Kaldigen
thus there is no need to change or copy scripts. Additionally, the recognizer overview
shows the best word error rate for easy comparison of the recognizers. Kaldigen uses
the same scripts, but with a different configuration, for each project, which makes
sure that scripts are not copied around.
6.4.5.3
Comparison
If a user wants to create different types of recognizers with the same data in Kaldi,
then they must copy a lot of scripts and data around. In Kaldigen, this is all taken care
of, such that the users do not need to copy or modify anything. Furthermore, Kaldigen
makes sure that all trained models from a recognizer is always easily available, and
requires no backup or moving around.
It is therefore a lot easier to create both
different projects and different recognizers in each project with Kaldigen.
6.4.6
Deployment
As mentioned earlier, actually deploying a trained model to be used from a client
is not part of the Kaldi toolkit. It can therefore be rather hard to figure out how
to do it. This section describes how a recognizer can be deployed and tested using
Kaldigen.
As soon as one of the acoustic models in a recognizer is done training, the button
Deploy recognizer will be available from either the training page or the recognizer
overview page. This button leads to the deployment page, as seen in Figure 6.6. For
each acoustic model trained, the user can choose a port, and click Deploy.
After a model is deployed, a link takes the user to a site which includes information
about how to connect and a small demo client. The demo client can be seen running
for a triphone model with danish numbers in Figure 6.7.
It is also possible to upload sound files over HTTP and receive a transcription back.
For example, using curl:
curl -T test.wav "http://localhost:8080/client/dynamic/recognize"
The sample client uses WebSockets to communicate with the GStreamer server. To
use the service as a client with WebSockets, the user can connect to the WebSocket.
An example of a WebSocket path can be seen below:
ws://localhost:8080/client/ws/speech
6.5
Related work
This section briefly looks at related work.
==PAGE:149==
6.5 Related work
133
Figure 6.6: All the trained acoustic models for a recognizer are available for deploy-
ment.
Figure 6.7: The sample client provides real-time transcriptions. Here, some danish
numbers are transcribed.
==PAGE:150==
134
6 Evaluation of Kaldigen
Not much work has been done on making Kaldi more available, which was also one
of the reasons why we started this project. As the Kaldi about page2 states: Kaldi is
intended for use by speech recognition researchers. The Kaldi developers themselves
have therefore not made much effort to trivialize the use of Kaldi. Often the sentiment
on the Kaldi help group is, that the developers do not wish to make things easier,
as it would cause an influx of inexperienced people, who do not know what they are
doing, to start using Kaldi. This would in turn create even more questions on the
help group and most of the Kaldi developers do not seem interested in this at all. The
main focus of the Kaldi developers is of course to make Kaldi better, and it therefore
makes perfect sense that they do not have the time to make their tool more accessible.
As we have mentioned earlier, Kaldi previously supported a GMM GStreamer plugin,
but this was deprecated some time ago. The point is that Kaldi does not focus on
using the recognizers but instead provides the functionality as a library.
A piece of related work that we use in the project is the Kaldi GStreamer server [Alu14]
and the gst-kaldi-nnet2-online GStreamer plugin. Both of these projects, by the
same author, make it much easier to use recognizers produced in Kaldi. However,
they do still contain quite a bit of set up. As these tools both make it easier to use
Kaldi, we have included them in our project as well.
ASR-Server3 from API-AI is also an example of related work. This project makes it
easy to setup a Kaldi decoding server using the FastCGI protocol. However, both this
project and the previously mentioned GStreamer project just helps decoding speech.
They do not make it easier to use or setup Kaldi itself, they only add additional layers
that the user also has to setup.
The Github user jcsilva has created a Dockerfile for the Kaldi GStreamer server4.
This Dockerfile makes it easy to install the Kaldi GStreamer server and the required
underlying Kaldi tools. This was an inspiration for us when we created our Dockerfile
for Kaldigen. There is a significant difference however, as jcsilva’s Dockerfile is meant
for use with finished models, our Kaldi installation needs to be able to train models.
This requires CUDA for DNN models and therefore also NVIDIA-Docker as discussed
in Section 5.6.7.
In conclusion, not many projects have tried to make Kaldi easier to use, and it should
not be expected from the Kaldi developers themselves. Some projects such as Kaldi
GStreamer server makes it much easier to use a recognizer, but also creates another
layer of setup. With Kaldigen we have tried to combine all the different tools and
improvements with our own improvements and make all of them easier to use.
2http://kaldi-asr.org/doc/about.html
3https://github.com/api-ai/asr-server/
4https://github.com/jcsilva/docker-kaldi-gstreamer-server
==PAGE:151==
6.6 Summary
135
6.6
Summary
This chapter focused on evaluating Kaldigen. Section 6.1 presented our hypothesis
and gave an overview of how we have evaluated Kaldigen. The hypothesis states
that is should take a novice several hours of work instead of several days to create a
recognizers trained with a neural network. Section 6.2 looked at the different threats
to validity that our evaluation faced. Most importantly we have only a single user
evaluation and thus can not conclude anything on the basis of this.
Section 6.3
described how the user evaluation went. We consider it a success, since our Kaldi
novice subject A was able to create a Kaldi recognizer with a deep neural network
in about 3.5 hours. Section 6.4 looked at different examples to compare Kaldi to
Kaldigen. Many of the examples show that the user has to spent considerably less
time setting up different tools and configuration files, also for the steps outside of
the evaluation hypothesis. In an example, we also showed how to easily deploy a
recognizer once it has been trained to be used in a real-time dictation setting. This
is something that is not possible using only Kaldi and is far from obvious how to do.
Section 6.5 looked at related work and how Kaldigen has tried to take the best of the
related work and make it easily available for the user.
==PAGE:152==
136
==PAGE:153==
CHAPTER 7
Process
This chapter provides insight into how we have worked throughout the project, and
also looks at testing Kaldigen.
7.1
Work process
This section looks at the final work plan of the project and how we have worked
during the project.
Throughout the project we have used several tools and techniques to make sure that
the project was moving along at a steady pace. At the start of the project we created
an initial work plan. This work plan has since been updated numerous times.
7.1.1
Work plan
The initial work plan was much less dense than the final version which can be seen in
Table 7.1. The first work plan version was much less detailed and had many weeks
without planned work.
During the project work, we have kept revising the work
plan every time new challenges have arisen, our understanding of the project has
changed, and when the implementation or report schedule has been changed. Thus,
the finalized work plan is quite far from the initial.
When we started the work, there were many areas in both Kaldi and speech recogni-
tion where we had almost no knowledge. It was therefore important to quickly get a
broad overview in order to identify those areas. After we had achieved an overview
we started to narrow down the riskiest areas, which were the ones we knew nothing
about or things we knew would be hard to get knowledge of, or implement. We there-
fore conducted several smaller experiments on some of the identified risky areas very
early in the process. These areas included training a Deep Neural Network (DNN)
and figuring out how to stream sound to be recognized. We also made some early
prototypes, which we used ourselves in getting to know Kaldi, which we felt added
value. We then kept improving on the prototype until some parts of it eventually
became parts of the final tool, Kaldigen.
==PAGE:154==
138
7 Process
Table 7.1: The finalized work plan
Week
Concept
Implementation
Report
Milestones
1
Basic ASR research
2
Basic ASR research
Simple ASR examples
3
Basic Kaldi research
Simple prototype
Introduction
4
Holiday
Holiday
Holiday
5
Basic Kaldi research
Simple prototype & experiment DNN & stream
Introduction
6
Adv. Kaldi & Conceptualize tool
Simple prototype & experiment DNN & stream
Introduction
Simple prototype done
7
Adv. Kaldi & Conceptualize tool
Further DNN and streaming experiments
Example
Show prototype to users
8
Indepth ASR
Further DNN and streaming experiments
Speech recognition
9
Indepth ASR
Prototype with Web GUI
Speech recognition
TOC to 2nd level
10
Indepth ASR & Docker
Prototype with Web GUI
Speech recognition
11
DNN & Core concepts clear
Prototype with Web GUI & Simple Docker
Kaldi
DNN prototype
12
Kaldi DNN & Core concepts clear
Add DNN to tool & Add DB to tool
Kaldi
Usability test
13
Kaldi DNN & Core concepts clear
Add DNN to tool & Add DB to tool
Kaldi and KGS
Tool first edition
14
Kaldi DNN
Add DNN to tool
Kaldi and KGS
15
Online decoding & KGS
Add DNN to tool
Requirements
Tool with DNN
16
Online decoding & KGS
Provide more settings in tool
Requirements
17
Online decoding & KGS
Add KGS to tool
Design
Tool core functionality
18
Docker & NVIDIA-Docker
Add KGS to tool
Design
19
Docker & NVIDIA-Docker
Polish tool & User evaluation & NVIDIA-Docker
Design
Tool done
20
Polish tool & NVIDIA-Docker
Evaluation
NVIDIA-Docker done
21
Create danish speech recognizer with tool
Evaluation
22
Create demo
Process
23
Process & Conclusion
24
Polish thesis
Hand in
==PAGE:155==
7.1 Work process
139
As can be seen in the work plan, we have written the thesis alongside the implemen-
tation. This ensured that one was never too far ahead of the other. It also ensured
that when something was implemented, it was described in the report shortly after.
The user evaluation was held in week 19. This was several weeks ahead of what we
had preferred, but it was the only possible week for our test subject. This caused
us to push the final Docker version with NVIDIA-Docker till later in the project.
Unfortunately, it also meant that we had a user test less than what we would have
liked before the evaluation. This is also discussed in Section 7.2.
7.1.2
Development methods
This section looks at how we have worked during the project.
As mentioned previously, we started out with a minimum prototype, and kept on
improving it with additional features.
This was intentional as we aimed to work
Agile on the project. We wanted to work Agile to keep short iterations and continu-
ously iterate on the processes and products we made. This was especially important
since we worked in a relatively new field, and thus sudden realizations could dramat-
ically change the schedule. A waterfall process would therefore not do, since these
realizations could happen both during the requirements, the design, and the imple-
mentation phase. In a typical waterfall process it would be expensive to go back and
make changes, while in our Agile development it was fairly easy as we already had a
quick iteration cycle and several cycles which were unplanned.
Throughout the project we have used different tools to manage our work flow. The
most important tool was a virtual Kanban board to keep track of all the small things
that should be implemented or documented. We have also used a virtual issue tracker
to note all bugs and follow up on them. An actual whiteboard has also seen much
use during the project.
Whiteboards have been used for noting big tasks and arranging them and their priority.
Whiteboards have been used excessively to draw numerous different diagrams to easily
discuss and change them, such as domain models, use cases, and sequence diagrams.
Web page mock ups have also been made on whiteboards as well as the page flow of
the final tool. To document the many commands used to configure and run both the
internal and external tools, an internal wiki page was used and updated throughout
the project.
On several of the earlier mentioned risky tasks, we have used pair programming
as part of our Agile development. This was to ensure that both of us got a good
understanding of the risky tasks, as well as to ensure that they worked correctly.
Additionally all code was continuously available from a shared git repository. By
incorporating version control into the workflow, we could develop different features
==PAGE:156==
140
7 Process
simultaneously without any issues. Git also allows experimental and breaking changes
to be developed in a separate branch, and then merged when stable.
7.2
Tests
This section looks at the tests conducted to make sure that Kaldigen works as ex-
pected.
In general, software products have numerous unit tests to accompany the code. This
is not the case with Kaldigen, and there are several reasons for this. First of all,
most of Kaldigen’s functionality is entirely GUI based, which is quite problematic to
unit tests. Secondly, a lot of Kaldigen functionality interacts with other tools such
as Kaldi and Kaldi GStreamer server. In order to unit test the interactions with for
instance training in Kaldi, a unit test would take several hours to complete which is
infeasible. A mock-up Kaldi process could be made instead, but this would be just as
much work as creating the code itself, and would not work as well, since the mock-up
could then contain errors, or perhaps the mock-up would miss a specific case.
Another thing that makes unit tests very difficult to implement, is that much of the
critical input which can lead to failures are provided by the user through the file
system. This is the case for all the training data, and there are essentially limitless
ways for the user to provide faulty data. Some examples are faulty encodings, wrong or
differing data formats, mismatching data, low quality data, or just plainly corrupted
data files to name a few. While Kaldigen performs quite a few ’sanity checks’ on the
various user inputs, a critical error might only arise at a late Kaldi-specific training
stage. While Kaldi itself is unit-tested, and does provide some sanity checks as well,
it is often the case that some specific step fails without prior warning, due to the
modular composition of the Kaldi code. Finding the cause of the error often requires
the user to dig through various crash-logs. Thus, in order to unit test probably, the
training would have to be run for a very long time and this would be unfeasible. There
would also still be endless other ways to provide input data which we could not test.
Instead of unit tests we have therefore conducted user tests manually. As discussed
in the evaluation, using ourselves as test subjects is a rather bad idea. However, this
has been done in lack of better test subjects, we did however test each other’s features
when applicable. We also performed a small user test with someone who had never
seen the program before. This was both used to validate a lot of test cases and to get
feedback of the look and feel of the tool.
The evaluation was done two weeks before we intended to, due to lack of time on the
subject’s part. This meant that we had to scrape a second user test which we wanted
to conduct in that time period. Since we were conducting the user evaluation anyway,
we used feedback from our test subject to further improve the robustness as well as
==PAGE:157==
7.3 Summary
141
the look and feel of the tool.
In general, we wanted to have conducted more test and more formal tests in order
to make sure that the accuracy of the tool was high. The schedule did however not
permit this.
7.3
Summary
Here a short summary of the chapter is presented along with an auto evaluation of
the project.
Throughout the project we have worked Agile. We initially created a project plan,
which we have kept revising as our understanding of the project changed. We have
used different tools and techniques to structure our work, such as a Kanban board,
an issue tracker, and plain whiteboards.
We felt that our work flow and working methods have generally worked very well
throughout the project and that we have been able to meet the milestones and goals
that we have set.
==PAGE:158==
142
==PAGE:159==
CHAPTER 8
Conclusion
In this thesis we have developed a tool, ’Kaldigen’, which enables developers to quickly
build and evaluate speech recognizers. Before creating the tool, we started out by
analyzing the background of modern Automatic Speech Recognition (ASR). Here
we analyzed the functionality and importance of the many different components a
speech recognizer consists of. The most important are the acoustic model, the lan-
guage model, and feature extraction. In ASR, most of the recent improvements come
from developing better acoustic models. While acoustic models based on Gaussian
Mixture Models (GMM) can provide reasonable results, nearly all recent substantial
improvements come from utilizing Deep Neural Networks (DNN).
We then analyzed the open source speech recognition toolkit Kaldi. In this analysis
we found that, due to Kaldi’s focus on being a research tool, it was difficult for those
without extensive speech recognition and Kaldi experience to create and use speech
recognizers in Kaldi.
Kaldi consists of many small programs, and each program
provides a specific functionality. To create a speech recognizer, these programs must
be combined in a sensible way, which typically happens in a recipe. Writing such
recipes may be too difficult or time consuming for newcomers.
Using our knowledge of ASR systems and Kaldi, we set up requirements for a tool
that should make it easier for developers to speech-enable their applications. We then
designed and implemented the tool ’Kaldigen’. The tool consists of a web applica-
tion, which utilizes Kaldi and other programs to provide an interface for building and
using speech recognizers. This makes it easy for users to run Kaldi and train a recog-
nizer on a powerful, GPU-enabled headless server, while still being able to configure
the recognizers from any device with the help of a graphical user interface. Each
recognizer can be configured from a web interface, and the training process of the
recognizers can be monitored. The tool also integrates Kaldi GStreamer server and
dictate.js, which adds support for online decoding of the trained recognizers directly
in the browser. This makes it easy to test the quality of the recognizer before using it
further. We also created a Docker image, which makes it easy to install and configure
our tool and all dependencies correctly. We used NVIDIA-Docker to automatically
set up NVIDIA’s CUDA library, making it possible to train deep neural networks on
the GPU using the Docker image.
==PAGE:160==
144
8 Conclusion
Lastly, we sought to validate our hypothesis which states that it should be significantly
faster for newcomers to create a recognizer with a deep neural network acoustic model
using Kaldigen, compared to just using Kaldi. However, to actually do a statistically
sound analysis would require a vastly more time-consuming evaluation, which was
outside the scope of the project. The main focus on the project was gathering knowl-
edge of speech recognition and then designing and implementing Kaldigen. We did
however perform one user evaluation. The evaluation showed that it indeed was possi-
ble for a user with no Kaldi experience to use Kaldigen to create a working recognizer
with a deep neural network acoustic model, in only a few hours. In contrast, three
subjects (including the authors) were able to do the same with Kaldi, using a few
days of work.
The user in our evaluation was therefore able to perform the task
significantly faster with Kaldigen.
==PAGE:161==
APPENDIX A
Kaldigen API
A.1
Kaldigen HTTP API
URL
/
Action
GET
Description
Returns the homepage.
Parameters
None
Response
projects.html
URL
/
Action
POST
Description
Deletes the project with the given name and returns the homepage.
Parameters
(delete, project_name)
Response
projects.html
URL
/proj/init/<project>
Action
GET
Description
Returns the initialization page.
Parameters
None
Response
init.html
URL
/proj/init/<project>
Action
POST
Description
Returns the initialization page and starts initialization.
Parameters
None
Response
init.html
URL
/proj/init/log/<project>
Action
GET
Description
Get the last two lines of the initialization log of the given project.
Parameters
None
Response
last two lines of log
==PAGE:162==
146
A Kaldigen API
URL
/proj/<project>/recognizers
Action
GET
Description
Returns an overview of the different recognizers in a project.
Parameters
None
Response
recognizers.html
URL
/proj/<project>/recognizers
Action
POST
Description
creates a new project.
Parameters
(format, project_format)
Response
recognizers.html
URL
/proj/<project>/recognizers/<recognizer>
Action
GET
Description
Returns the recognizer setup page.
Parameters
None
Response
recognizer_setup.html
URL
/proj/<project>/recognizers/<recognizer>/save
Action
POST
Description
Updates the setup of a recognizer.
Parameters
Recognizer setup in JSON
Response
None
URL
/proj/<project>/recognizers/<recognizer>/deploy
Action
GET
Description
Returns the deploy page.
Parameters
None
Response
deploy.html
URL
/proj/<project>/recognizers/<recognizer>/deploy
Action
POST
Description
Deploys or undeploys the recognizer, can also undeploy all recog-
nizers if port is 0
. Parameters
(action, port)
Response
None
URL
/proj/<project>/recognizers/<recognizer>/deploy/<recognizer_model>
Action
GET
Description
Returns the recognizer test page.
Parameters
None
Response
mob.html
URL
/proj/<project>/recognizers/<recognizer>/log
Action
GET
Description
Returns the recognizer training log.
Parameters
None
Response
log file
URL
/new
Action
GET
Description
Returns the new project page.
Parameters
None
Response
new.html
==PAGE:163==
A.2 Kaldigen WebSocket API
147
URL
/proj/<project>/recognizers/<recognizer>
Action
POST
Description
Returns the recognizer setup page for a new recognizer.
Parameters
None
Response
recognizer_setup.html
URL
/proj/<project>/recognizers/<recognizer>/training
Action
GET
Description
Returns the recognizer training page.
Parameters
None
Response
training.html
URL
/proj/<project>/recognizers/<recognizer>/delete
Action
POST
Description
Deletes a recognizer.
Parameters
None
Response
redirect to recognizers.html
A.2
Kaldigen WebSocket API
This API requires a client that supports WebSockets. The client can open a con-
nection to subscribe to updates. When connected, the client can also control the
training. During training, the server continuously returns JSON objects with the
following fields:
- msg: Message informing of status.
- step: What stage is currently being trained.
- type: either update, error, or finish to let the client know the progress.
==PAGE:164==
148
A Kaldigen API
URL
ws://<host_name>:<port>/status/<project>/reg/<recognizer>
Action
OPEN
Description
Subscribe to training updates from a recognizer.
Parameters
None
Response
None
URL
ws://<host_name>:<port>/status/<project>/reg/<recognizer>
Action
MESSAGE
Description
Allows the client to tell the server to start from a specific stage or
stop the training of a recognizer.
Parameters
JSON with key ’msg’ containing ’start’ or ’stop’. For ’start’ also a
key ’state’ containing the start stage.
Response
None
URL
ws://<host_name>:<port>/status/<project>/reg/<recognizer>
Action
CLOSE
Description
Unsubscribe to training updates from a recognizer.
Parameters
None
Response
None
A.3
WebSocket API provided by Kaldi GStreamer
server
This API requires a client that supports WebSockets. While transcribing audio, the
client will receive messages in return as described in Section 3.7 where the API itself
is also described. More information can be found on the Kaldi GStreamer repository1
web page.
URL
ws://<host_name>:port/client/ws/speech
Action
MESSAGE
Description
Send audio data to be recognized.
Parameters
None
Response
None
URL
ws://<host_name>:port/client/ws/status
Action
MESSAGE
Description
Subscribe to status updates.
Parameters
None
Response
None
1https://github.com/alumae/kaldi-gstreamer-server
==PAGE:165==
APPENDIX B
Specialized recipe
This appendix shows the main part of the specialized recipe, run.sh. The file is called
runng.sh in our repository.
1 #!/bin/bash
2 #
3 # This is the current version of the specialized recipe.
4 # Depending on input it will train a specific speech recognizer,
5 # make decoding graphs and score the speech recognizer.
6
7 # Setup variables
8 asrpath="proj/"$1
9 projname=$1
10 reg=$2
11 leaves_tri1=2000
12 gaussians_tri1=10000
13 leaves_tri2=2500
14 gaussians_tri2=15000
15 leaves_tri3b=3000
16 gaussians_tri3b=20000
17
18 . ./cmd.sh # Run configurations
19 . ./path.sh # Set up paths to Kaldi
20 . ../$asrpath/regs/$reg/conf/$projname".conf" # Load our specific configs
21 nj=$num_jobs
22
23 # Kaldigen data preparation setup
24 if [[ $start_stage -le 0 && $end_stage -ge 0 && $format = "kaldigen" ]]; then
25
echo "state: prepstart"
26
python prepng.py $asrpath $lang $lm_type $feature $reg || exit 1;
27 fi
28
29 # Additional language preparation for both formats
30 if [[ $start_stage -le 1 && $end_stage -ge 1 ]] ; then
31
if [[ $format != "kaldigen" ]] ; then
32
echo "state: prepstart"
33
fi
34
35
# Remove old features so they are recomputed
36
rm -f ../$asrpath/data/train/feats.scp
37
rm -f ../$asrpath/data/test/feats.scp
38
39
# validate and fix data directories
40
utils/validate_data_dir.sh ../$asrpath/data/train # validate train dir
41
utils/fix_data_dir.sh ../$asrpath/data/train || exit 1; # fix and sort data
42
utils/validate_data_dir.sh ../$asrpath/data/test # validate test dir
43
utils/fix_data_dir.sh ../$asrpath/data/test || exit 1; # fix and sort data
44
45
# Prepare the language with a Kaldi script. Creates lexicon WFST and more
46
utils/prepare_lang.sh ../$asrpath/data/local/dict "<UNK>"
==PAGE:166==
150
B Specialized recipe
47
../$asrpath/data/local/lang ../$asrpath/data/lang || exit 1;
48
echo "state: prepdone"
49 fi
50
51 # Feature extraction step, MFCC or PLP depending on choice of user
52 if [[ $start_stage -le 2 && $end_stage -ge 2 ]] ; then
53
echo "state: featstart"
54
if [ $feature = "mfcc" ] ; then
55
mfccdir=../$asrpath/mfcc
56
steps/make_mfcc.sh --mfcc-config ../$asrpath/conf/mfcc.conf --nj $nj
57
--cmd "$train_cmd" ../$asrpath/data/train
58
../$asrpath/regs/$reg/make_mfcc/train $mfccdir || exit 1;
59
steps/make_mfcc.sh --mfcc-config ../$asrpath/conf/mfcc.conf --nj $nj
60
--cmd "$train_cmd" ../$asrpath/data/test
61
../$asrpath/regs/$reg/make_mfcc/test $mfccdir || exit 1;
62
63
steps/compute_cmvn_stats.sh ../$asrpath/data/train
64
../$asrpath/regs/$reg/make_mfcc/train $mfccdir || exit 1;
65
steps/compute_cmvn_stats.sh ../$asrpath/data/test
66
../$asrpath/regs/$reg/make_mfcc/test $mfccdir || exit 1;
67
else
68
plpdir=../$asrpath/plp
69
steps/make_plp.sh --plp-config ../$asrpath/conf/plp.conf --nj $nj --cmd
70
"$train_cmd" ../$asrpath/data/train
71
../$asrpath/regs/$reg/exp/make_plp/train $plpdir || exit 1;
72
steps/make_plp.sh --plp-config ../$asrpath/conf/plp.conf --nj $nj --cmd
73
"$train_cmd" ../$asrpath/data/test ../$asrpath/regs/$reg/make_plp/test
74
$plpdir || exit 1;
75
76
77
steps/compute_cmvn_stats.sh ../$asrpath/data/train
78
../$asrpath/regs/$reg/make_plp/train $plpdir || exit 1;
79
steps/compute_cmvn_stats.sh ../$asrpath/data/test
80
../$asrpath/regs/$reg/make_plp/test $plpdir || exit 1;
81
fi
82
echo "state: featdone"
83 fi
84
85 # Create the language model with a grammar or N-gram.
86 # Also support specific commands, but not from web interface
87 if [[ $start_stage -le 3 && $end_stage -ge 3 ]] ; then
88
echo "state: lmstart"
89
if [ $lm_type = "commands" ] ; then # Not supported from web interface
90
python local/utils/grammar_from_commands.py ../$asrpath || exit 1;
91
elif [ $lm_type = "grammar" ] ; then
92
local/utils/jsgf_grammar_creator.sh ../$asrpath/regs/$reg/
93
../$asrpath/data ../$asrpath/data/lang/G.fst || exit 1;
94
else
# train n-gram
95
local/train_irstlm.sh ../$asrpath/data/lang/corpus.txt $n_gram "gram"
96
../$asrpath/data/lang $asrpath || exit 1;
97
fi
98
echo "state: lmdone"
99 fi
100
101 # Train an acoustic monophone model,
102 # make the decoding graph and score the model
103 if [[ $start_stage -le 4 && $end_stage -ge 4 ]] ; then
104
echo "state: mono"
105
# Train monophone model
106
steps/train_mono.sh --nj $nj --cmd "$train_cmd" \
107
../$asrpath/data/train ../$asrpath/data/lang ../$asrpath/regs/$reg/mono
108
|| exit 1;
109
110
# with LM or grammar automaticcaly populated in ../$asrpath/data/lang
111
utils/mkgraph.sh --mono ../$asrpath/data/lang ../$asrpath/regs/$reg/mono
==PAGE:167==
B Specialized recipe
151
112
../$asrpath/regs/$reg/mono/graph || exit 1;
113
steps/decode.sh --nj $nj --cmd "$decode_cmd" \
114
../$asrpath/regs/$reg/mono/graph ../$asrpath/data/test
115
../$asrpath/regs/$reg/mono/decode || exit 1;
116 fi
117
118 # Train an acoustic triphone delta+delta-delta model,
119 # make the decoding graph and score the model
120 if [[ $start_stage -le 5 && $end_stage -ge 5 ]] ; then
121
echo "state: tri1"
122
# Train tri1 (delta+delta-delta)
123
steps/align_si.sh --nj $nj --cmd "$train_cmd" \
124
../$asrpath/data/train ../$asrpath/data/lang ../$asrpath/regs/$reg/mono
125
../$asrpath/regs/$reg/mono_ali || exit 1;
126
steps/train_deltas.sh --cmd "$train_cmd" \
127
$leaves_tri1 $gaussians_tri1 ../$asrpath/data/train
128
../$asrpath/data/lang ../$asrpath/regs/$reg/mono_ali
129
../$asrpath/regs/$reg/tri1 || exit 1;
130
131
# Decode test set
132
utils/mkgraph.sh ../$asrpath/data/lang ../$asrpath/regs/$reg/tri1
133
../$asrpath/regs/$reg/tri1/graph || exit 1;
134
steps/decode.sh --nj $nj --cmd "$decode_cmd" \
135
../$asrpath/regs/$reg/tri1/graph ../$asrpath/data/test
136
../$asrpath/regs/$reg/tri1/decode || exit 1;
137 fi
138
139 # Train an acoustic triphone LDA+MLLT model,
140 # make the decoding graph and score the model
141 if [[ $start_stage -le 6 && $end_stage -ge 6 ]] ; then
142
# Train tri2 (adds LDA+MLLT) so it is now built on.
143
# Aligned on delta+delta-delta
144
145
echo "state: tri2"
146
steps/align_si.sh --nj $nj --cmd "$train_cmd" \
147
../$asrpath/data/train ../$asrpath/data/lang \
148
../$asrpath/regs/$reg/tri1 ../$asrpath/regs/$reg/tri1_ali || exit 1;
149
steps/train_lda_mllt.sh --cmd "$train_cmd" $leaves_tri2 $gaussians_tri1 \
150
../$asrpath/data/train ../$asrpath/data/lang
151
../$asrpath/regs/$reg/tri1_ali \
152
../$asrpath/regs/$reg/tri2 || exit 1;
153
utils/mkgraph.sh ../$asrpath/data/lang ../$asrpath/regs/$reg/tri2
154
../$asrpath/regs/$reg/tri2/graph || exit 1;
155
steps/decode.sh --nj $nj --cmd "$decode_cmd" \
156
../$asrpath/regs/$reg/tri2/graph ../$asrpath/data/test
157
../$asrpath/regs/$reg/tri2/decode || exit 1;
158 fi
159
160 # Train an acoustic triphone SAT&fMLLR model,
161 # make the decoding graph and score the model
162 if [[ $start_stage -le 7 && $end_stage -ge 7 ]] ; then
163
# Train tri3 (adds SAT&fMLLR) so it is now built on. Aligned on LDA + MLLT
164
# SAT uses fMLLR, therefore new decode with fmllr
165
166
echo "state: tri3"
167
steps/align_si.sh --nj $nj --cmd "$train_cmd" \
168
--use-graphs true ../$asrpath/data/train \
169
../$asrpath/data/lang ../$asrpath/regs/$reg/tri2
170
../$asrpath/regs/$reg/tri2_ali || exit 1;
171
steps/train_sat.sh --cmd "$train_cmd" $leaves_tri3b $gaussians_tri1 \
172
../$asrpath/data/train ../$asrpath/data/lang \
173
../$asrpath/regs/$reg/tri2_ali ../$asrpath/regs/$reg/tri3b || exit 1;
174
utils/mkgraph.sh ../$asrpath/data/lang \
175
../$asrpath/regs/$reg/tri3b ../$asrpath/regs/$reg/tri3b/graph || exit 1;
176
steps/decode_fmllr.sh --nj $nj --cmd "$decode_cmd" \
==PAGE:168==
152
B Specialized recipe
177
../$asrpath/regs/$reg/tri3b/graph ../$asrpath/data/test \
178
../$asrpath/regs/$reg/tri3b/decode || exit 1;
179 fi
180
181 # DNN preparation set up
182 if [[ $start_stage -le 8 && $end_stage -ge 8 ]] ; then
183
echo "state: dnn_prep"
184
# Alignment used to train the DNNs,
185
# keeping the name 3b as it is a standard name in Kaldi
186
steps/align_fmllr.sh --nj $nj --cmd "$train_cmd" \
187
../$asrpath/data/train ../$asrpath/data/lang \
188
../$asrpath/regs/$reg/tri3b ../$asrpath/regs/$reg/tri3b_ali || exit 1;
189
190
local/nnet3/prep_dnn.sh --asrpath $asrpath --reg $reg --nj $nj || exit 1;
191 fi
192
193 # Train deep neural networks, either TDNN, LSTM or both
194 if [[ $start_stage -le 9 && $end_stage -ge 9 ]] ; then
195
if [[ ! -z "$tdnn" ]] ; then
196
echo "state: dnn"
197
echo "state: dnn_tdnn"
198
local/chain/run_tdnn.sh --stage 14 --asrpath $asrpath --reg $reg --nj
199
$nj --num_gpu $num_gpu --type $type || exit 1;
200
fi
201
if [[ ! -z "$lstm" ]] ; then
202
echo "state: dnn"
203
echo "state: dnn_lstm"
204
if [[ ! -z "$tdnn" ]] ; then
205
local/chain/run_tdnn_lstm.sh --stage 17 --asrpath $asrpath --reg
206
$reg --nj $nj --num_gpu $num_gpu --type $type || exit 1;
207
else
208
local/chain/run_tdnn_lstm.sh --stage 14 --asrpath $asrpath --reg
209
$reg --nj $nj --num_gpu $num_gpu --type $type || exit 1;
210
fi
211
fi
212
echo "done with dnn"
213 fi
214
215 # Show final word error rate results for all scripts
216 for x in ../$asrpath/regs/$reg/*/{,*/}/decode*; do [ -d $x ] && grep WER
217 $x/wer_* | utils/best_wer.sh; done
==PAGE:169==
APPENDIX C
Kaldigen Docker file
1 FROM nvidia/cuda:8.0-devel-ubuntu16.04
2
3 RUN apt-get update && apt-get install -y \
4
vim \
5
screen \
6
gcc \
7
autoconf \
8
automake \
9
bzip2 \
10
g++ \
11
git \
12
graphviz \
13
gstreamer1.0-plugins-good \
14
gstreamer1.0-tools \
15
gstreamer1.0-pulseaudio \
16
gstreamer1.0-plugins-bad \
17
gstreamer1.0-plugins-base \
18
gstreamer1.0-plugins-ugly
\
19
libatlas3-base \
20
libgstreamer1.0-dev \
21
libtool-bin \
22
libjansson-dev \
23
make \
24
mongodb \
25
python2.7 \
26
python-pip \
27
python-yaml \
28
python-simplejson \
29
python-gi \
30
sphinxbase-utils \
31
subversion \
32
wget \
33
zlib1g-dev && \
34
apt-get clean autoclean && \
35
apt-get autoremove -y && \
36
pip install ws4py==0.3.2 && \
37
pip install tornado && \
38
pip install pexpect && \
39
pip install pymongo && \
40
pip install numpy && \
41
ln -s /usr/bin/python2.7 /usr/bin/python ; ln -s -f bash /bin/sh
42
43 RUN cd /opt && \
44
git clone https://github.com/kaldi-asr/kaldi && \
45
cd /opt/kaldi && git checkout 5bad9b && \
46
cd /opt/kaldi/tools && \
47
make && \
48
./install_portaudio.sh && \
49
cd /opt/kaldi/src && ./configure --shared && \
50
sed -i '/-g # -O0 -DKALDI_PARANOID/c\-O3 -DNDEBUG' kaldi.mk && \
==PAGE:170==
154
C Kaldigen Docker file
51
make depend -j 3 && make -j 3 && make ext -j 3 && \
52
cd /opt/kaldi/src/online && make -j 3 depend && make -j 3 && \
53
cd /opt/kaldi/src/gst-plugin && make depend -j 3 && make -j 3 && \
54
cd /opt/kaldi/tools && ./extras/install_irstlm.sh && \
55
cd /opt && \
56
git clone https://github.com/alumae/gst-kaldi-nnet2-online.git && \
57
cd /opt/gst-kaldi-nnet2-online/src && \
58
sed -i '/KALDI_ROOT?=\/home\/tanel\/tools\/kaldi-trunk/c\KALDI_ROOT?=\/opt\/kaldi'
Makefile && \
59
make depend && make && \
60
rm -rf /opt/gst-kaldi-nnet2-online/.git/ && \
61
find /opt/gst-kaldi-nnet2-online/src/ -type f -not -name '*.so' -delete && \
62
rm -rf /opt/kaldi/.git && \
63
rm -rf /opt/kaldi/egs/ /opt/kaldi/windows/ /opt/kaldi/misc/ && \
64
find /opt/kaldi/src/ -type f -not -name '*.so' -delete && \
65
find /opt/kaldi/tools/ -type f \( -not -name '*.so' -and -not -name '*.so*' \) -
delete && \
66
cd /opt && git clone https://github.com/alumae/kaldi-gstreamer-server.git && \
67
rm -rf /opt/kaldi-gstreamer-server/.git/ && \
68
rm -rf /opt/kaldi-gstreamer-server/test/
69
70 COPY dockerstart.sh /opt/
71
72 COPY kaldigen /opt/kaldigen/
73
74 RUN chmod +x /opt/dockerstart.sh
75
76 CMD ["sh", "/opt/dockerstart.sh"]
==PAGE:171==
APPENDIX D
Kaldigen install
instructions
Kaldigen is made easy to install and set up using Docker and NVIDIA-Docker.
NVIDIA-Docker is required in order for CUDA to run on the Docker image. CUDA
is required to compile the Kaldi DNN code.
The following instructions are for Ubuntu with a CUDA compatible NVIDIA graphics
card. It is also possible to install on most other Linux distributions, but some of the
steps would then be different.
1. Install Docker1
2. Install the newest GeForce driver for your GPU2, note the requirements for
CUDA 83
3. Install NVIDIA modprobe (if not already installed):
apt-add-repository multiverse
apt-get update
apt-get install nvidia-modprobe
4. Install NVIDIA-Docker4
wget -P /tmp \
https://github.com/NVIDIA/nvidia-docker/releases/download/v1.0.1/nvidia-
docker_1.0.1-1_amd64.deb
sudo dpkg -i /tmp/nvidia-docker*.deb && rm /tmp/nvidia-docker*.deb
5. Test if nvidia-docker works (has access to nvidia-smi):
1https://docs.docker.com/engine/installation/linux/ubuntu/#install-using-the-
repository
2https://help.ubuntu.com/community/BinaryDriverHowto/Nvidia
3https://github.com/NVIDIA/nvidia-docker/wiki/CUDA#requirements
4https://github.com/NVIDIA/nvidia-docker#quick-start
==PAGE:172==
156
D Kaldigen install instructions
nvidia-docker run --rm nvidia/cuda:8.0-devel-ubuntu16.04 nvidia-smi
6. Make sure the Kaldigen project folder is next to the Kaldigen Dockerfile
7. Build the project (this will take a while), the image will be called kaldigen:
nvidia-docker build -t kaldigen .
Kaldigen and all dependencies have now been built and should work. The Docker
image can be started as follows (if you called the image kaldigen):
nvidia-docker run -it -p 8888:8888 -p 8070-8090:8070-8090 -v /data/projects:/opt/
kaldigen/proj kaldigen
This will automatically start the database and the webserver and run on port 8888.
Kaldigen can now be reached via the browser on hostname:8888. The /data/projects
folder will be shared, such that data can be stored on the host and used by the image.
The port range 8070-8090 allows for recognizer deployment on the given range, but
can of course be changed.
==PAGE:173==
APPENDIX E
Kaldi for dummies
recipe
This appendix shows the main part of the Kaldi for dummies recipe, run.sh.
1 #!/bin/bash
2
3 . ./path.sh || exit 1
4 . ./cmd.sh || exit 1
5
6 nj=1 # number of parallel jobs - 1 is perfect for such a small data set
7 lm_order=1 # language model order (n-gram quantity) - 1 is enough for digits
8 grammar
9 # Safety mechanism (possible running this script with modified arguments)
10 . utils/parse_options.sh || exit 1
11 [[ $# -ge 1 ]] && { echo "Wrong arguments!"; exit 1; }
12
13 # Removing previously created data (from last run.sh execution)
14 rm -rf exp mfcc data/train/spk2utt data/train/cmvn.scp
15 data/train/feats.scp data/train/split1 data/test/spk2utt data/test/cmvn.scp
16 data/test/feats.scp data/test/split1 data/local/lang data/lang
17 data/local/tmp data/local/dict/lexiconp.txt
18
19 echo
20 echo "===== PREPARING ACOUSTIC DATA ====="
21 echo
22
23 # Needs to be prepared by hand (or using self written scripts):
24 #
25 # spk2gender
[<speaker-id> <gender>]
26 # wav.scp
[<uterranceID > <full_path_to_audio_file >]
27 # text
[<uterranceID > <text_transcription >]
28 # utt2spk
[<uterranceID > <speakerID >]
29 # corpus.txt
[<text_transcription >]
30
31 # Making spk2utt files
32 utils/utt2spk_to_spk2utt.pl data/train/utt2spk > data/train/spk2utt
33 utils/utt2spk_to_spk2utt.pl data/test/utt2spk > data/test/spk2utt
34
35 echo
36 echo "===== FEATURES EXTRACTION ====="
37 echo
38
39 # Making feats.scp files
40 mfccdir=mfcc
41 # Uncomment and modify arguments in scripts below if you have any
42 #problems with data sorting
==PAGE:174==
158
E Kaldi for dummies recipe
43 # utils/validate_data_dir.sh data/train
# script for checking
44 #prepared data - here: for data/train directory
45 # utils/fix_data_dir.sh data/train # tool for data proper
46 #sorting if needed - here: for data/train directory
47 steps/make_mfcc.sh --nj $nj --cmd "$train_cmd" data/train
48
exp/make_mfcc/train $mfccdir
49 steps/make_mfcc.sh --nj $nj --cmd "$train_cmd" data/test
50
exp/make_mfcc/test $mfccdir
51
52 # Making cmvn.scp files
53 steps/compute_cmvn_stats.sh data/train exp/make_mfcc/train $mfccdir
54 steps/compute_cmvn_stats.sh data/test exp/make_mfcc/test $mfccdir
55
56 echo
57 echo "===== PREPARING LANGUAGE DATA ====="
58 echo
59
60 # Needs to be prepared by hand (or using self written scripts):
61 #
62 # lexicon.txt
[<word> <phone 1> <phone 2> ...]
63 # nonsilence_phones.txt [<phone>]
64 # silence_phones.txt [<phone>]
65 # optional_silence.txt
[<phone>]
66
67 # Preparing language data
68 utils/prepare_lang.sh data/local/dict "<UNK>" data/local/lang data/lang
69
70 echo
71 echo "===== LANGUAGE MODEL CREATION ====="
72 echo "===== MAKING lm.arpa ====="
73 echo
74
75 loc=`which ngram-count`;
76 if [ -z $loc ]; then
77
if uname -a | grep 64 >/dev/null; then
78
sdir=$KALDI_ROOT/tools/srilm/bin/i686-m64
79
else
80
sdir=$KALDI_ROOT/tools/srilm/bin/i686
81
fi
82
if [ -f $sdir/ngram-count ]; then
83
echo "Using SRILM language modelling tool from $sdir"
84
export PATH=$PATH:$sdir
85
else
86
echo "SRILM toolkit is probably not installed.
87
Instructions: tools/install_srilm.sh"
88
exit 1
89
fi
90 fi
91
92 local=data/local
93 mkdir $local/tmp
94 ngram-count -order $lm_order -write-vocab $local/tmp/vocab-full.txt
95
-wbdiscount -text $local/corpus.txt -lm $local/tmp/lm.arpa
96
97 echo
98 echo "===== MAKING G.fst ====="
99 echo
100
101 lang=data/lang
102 arpa2fst --disambig-symbol=#0 --read-symbol-table=$lang/words.txt
103
$local/tmp/lm.arpa $lang/G.fst
104
105 echo
106 echo "===== MONO TRAINING ====="
107 echo
==PAGE:175==
E Kaldi for dummies recipe
159
108
109 steps/train_mono.sh --nj $nj --cmd "$train_cmd" data/train data/lang
110
exp/mono
|| exit 1
111 echo
112 echo "===== MONO DECODING ====="
113 echo
114
115 utils/mkgraph.sh --mono data/lang exp/mono exp/mono/graph || exit 1
116 steps/decode.sh --config conf/decode.config --nj $nj --cmd "$decode_cmd"
117
exp/mono/graph data/test exp/mono/decode
118
119 echo
120 echo "===== MONO ALIGNMENT ====="
121 echo
122
123 steps/align_si.sh --nj $nj --cmd "$train_cmd" data/train data/lang
124
exp/mono exp/mono_ali || exit 1
125
126 echo
127 echo "===== TRI1 (first triphone pass) TRAINING ====="
128 echo
129
130 steps/train_deltas.sh --cmd "$train_cmd" 2000 11000 data/train data/lang
131
exp/mono_ali exp/tri1 || exit 1
132
133 echo
134 echo "===== TRI1 (first triphone pass) DECODING ====="
135 echo
136
137 utils/mkgraph.sh data/lang exp/tri1 exp/tri1/graph || exit 1
138 steps/decode.sh --config conf/decode.config --nj $nj --cmd "$decode_cmd"
139
exp/tri1/graph data/test exp/tri1/decode
140
141 echo
142 echo "===== run.sh script is finished ====="
143 echo
==PAGE:176==
160
==PAGE:177==
Bibliography
[Alu14]
Tanel Alumäe. “Full-duplex Speech-to-text System for Estonian”. In: Baltic
HLT 2014. Kaunas, Lithuania, 2014.
[GY08]
Mark Gales and Steve Young. “The application of hidden Markov models
in speech recognition”. In: Foundations and trends in signal processing 1.3
(2008), pages 195–304.
[Her90]
Hynek Hermansky. “Perceptual linear predictive (PLP) analysis of speech”.
In: the Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 87.4 (1990), pages 1738–
1752.
[Hin+12]
Geoffrey Hinton et al. “Deep neural networks for acoustic modeling in
speech recognition: The shared views of four research groups”. In: IEEE
Signal Processing Magazine 29.6 (2012), pages 82–97.
[Kat87]
Slava Katz. “Estimation of probabilities from sparse data for the language
model component of a speech recognizer”. In: IEEE transactions on acous-
tics, speech, and signal processing 35.3 (1987), pages 400–401.
[Kir16]
Andreas Søeborg Kirkedal. “Danish Stød and Automatic Speech Recog-
nition”. PhD thesis. Copenhagen Business School, 2016.
[M+99]
Christopher D Manning, Hinrich Schütze, et al. Foundations of statistical
natural language processing. Volume 999. MIT Press, 1999.
[Mer14]
Dirk Merkel. “Docker: lightweight linux containers for consistent develop-
ment and deployment”. In: Linux Journal 2014.239 (2014), page 2.
[MPR02]
Mehryar Mohri, Fernando Pereira, and Michael Riley. “Weighted finite-
state transducers in speech recognition”. In: Computer Speech & Language
16.1 (2002), pages 69–88.
[MPR08]
Mehryar Mohri, Fernando Pereira, and Michael Riley. “Speech recognition
with weighted finite-state transducers”. In: Springer Handbook of Speech
Processing. Springer, 2008, pages 559–584.
[Nie15]
Michael A Nielsen. “Neural Networks and Deep Learning”. In: URL: http:
//neuralnetworksanddeeplearning.com/. Determination Press. (vis-
ited: 15.05. 2017) (2015).
==PAGE:178==
162
Bibliography
[Pov+11]
Daniel Povey et al. “The Kaldi speech recognition toolkit”. In: IEEE
2011 workshop on automatic speech recognition and understanding. EPFL-
CONF-192584. IEEE Signal Processing Society. 2011.
[Pov+12]
Daniel Povey et al. “Generating exact lattices in the WFST framework”.
In: Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), 2012 IEEE Inter-
national Conference on. IEEE. 2012, pages 4213–4216.
[Pov+16]
Daniel Povey et al. “Purely sequence-trained neural networks for ASR
based on lattice-free MMI”. In: Submitted to Interspeech (2016).
[PPK15]
Vijayaditya Peddinti, Daniel Povey, and Sanjeev Khudanpur. “A time
delay neural network architecture for efficient modeling of long temporal
contexts.” In: INTERSPEECH. 2015, pages 3214–3218.
[PZK14]
Daniel Povey, Xiaohui Zhang, and Sanjeev Khudanpur. “Parallel train-
ing of DNNs with natural gradient and parameter averaging”. In: arXiv
preprint arXiv:1410.7455 (2014).
[RC98]
Wolfgang Reichl and Wu Chou. “Decision tree state tying based on seg-
mental clustering for acoustic modeling”. In: Acoustics, Speech and Signal
Processing, 1998. Proceedings of the 1998 IEEE International Conference
on. Volume 2. IEEE. 1998, pages 801–804.
[Sao+17]
G. Saon et al. “English Conversational Telephone Speech Recognition by
Humans and Machines”. In: ArXiv e-prints (March 2017). arXiv: 1703.
02136 [cs.CL].
[SSB14]
Haşim Sak, Andrew Senior, and Françoise Beaufays. “Long short-term
memory based recurrent neural network architectures for large vocabulary
speech recognition”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1402.1128 (2014).
[Stu03]
Matthew Nicholas Stuttle. “A Gaussian mixture model spectral represen-
tation for speech recognition”. PhD thesis. University of Cambridge, 2003.
[Ves+13]
Karel Veselỳet al. “Sequence-discriminative training of deep neural net-
works.” In: Interspeech. 2013, pages 2345–2349.
[Vit67]
Andrew Viterbi. “Error bounds for convolutional codes and an asymptoti-
cally optimum decoding algorithm”. In: IEEE transactions on Information
Theory 13.2 (1967), pages 260–269.
[YB95]
Yonghong Yan and Etienne Barnard. “An approach to automatic lan-
guage identification based on language-dependent phone recognition”. In:
Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing, 1995. ICASSP-95., 1995 Inter-
national Conference on. Volume 5. IEEE. 1995, pages 3511–3514.
[YD14]
Dong Yu and Li Deng. Automatic speech recognition: A deep learning
approach. Springer, 2014.
[You96]
Steve Young. “A review of large-vocabulary continuous-speech”. In: IEEE
signal processing magazine 13.5 (1996), page 45.
==PAGE:179==
Bibliography
163
[YOW94]
Steve J Young, Julian J Odell, and Philip C Woodland. “Tree-based state
tying for high accuracy acoustic modelling”. In: Proceedings of the work-
shop on Human Language Technology. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics. 1994, pages 307–312.
[Zie16]
Wit Zielinski. Kaldi for Dummies tutorial. URL: http://kaldi- asr.
org/doc/kaldi_for_dummies.html. (visited: 03.28.2017). 2016.
==PAGE:180==
