==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
Msc. Thesis
Petroleum Engineering
Thermodynamic Modelling and Heat
Integration Simulation of CO2
Compression for EOR Application
Author:
Torsten Stilling
Supervisor:
Philip L. Fosbøl
30th June, 2017
CERE
Center for Energy Resources Engineering
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
The amount of conventional oil and gas resources are diminishing, which urges the
application of new methods for improving oil recovery. Miscible CO2 ﬂooding currently
shows great results as a new form of EOR, but faces challenges regarding CO2 transporta-
tion from its source to the point of use. Gas is usually transported at high pressures in
pipelines, which therefore requires the CO2 to be compressed, after it has been captured.
In this work the compression process of a simple gas stream containing CO2 and water is
evaluated, in order to minimize the energy use of the process. The compression process
consists of several compression steps, where the gas stream is cooled between each step.
The cooling is provided by using either cold seawater or an active cooling cycle. To
evaluate the process, calculations have been done on ﬁve comparable compression cases,
which varies in the number of compression steps, amount of cooling and whether or not an
active cooling cycle were used. The active cooling used in two of the cases, were assumed
to be a vapour-compression refrigeration cycle, using pure ammonia as refrigerant, and
sea water as coolant.
To evaluate the cases, routines were built in Matlab to calculate the enthalpy and entropy,
and simulate the compression and refrigeration processes. The cases were modelled using
the CPA EOS in the ExpertThermo software.
In Case 1 the gas stream was compressed during 8 compression steps, cooling the gas
stream with seawater to 40◦C before each compression step, using a total of 309.6 kJ/kgCO2.
In Case 2 the gas was compressed during 12 compression steps, cooling the gas stream
with seawater to 40◦C before each compression step, using a total of 297.4 kJ/kgCO2. In
Case 3 compression were done in 8 steps, cooling the gas stream with seawater to 25◦C
before each compression step, using a total of 270.1 kJ/kgCO2. In Case 4 compression were
done in 8 compression steps, cooling the gas stream with active cooling to 40◦C before
each compression step, using a total of 429.0 kJ/kgCO2. Finally in Case 5 the compression
were done in 8 compression steps, cooling the gas stream with active cooling to 10◦C
before each compression step, using a total of 322.2 kJ/kgCO2.
The lowest energy use was achieved in Case 2 using sea water as cooling, however using
active cooling as in Case 5, showed promising results, and could potentially be improved
to further minimize the energy use.
To further decrease the energy use of the compression process, it was considered how
the heat, transferred to the sea water during cooling, could be integrated in other contexts.
If heat integration could be done without much heat loss, this could greatly reduce the
over energy use of the compression process. However it was also observed that only Case 4
and 5 using active cooling, would heat the sea water enough, to consider heat integration
in relevant contexts. This again suggests, that using active cooling in the compression
process could be preferable, if the process is further improved.
==PAGE:3==
CONTENTS
30th June, 2017
Contents
Compression and Liquefaction of CO2 for Transport
1
Project Description
1
Applied Methods
2
1
Background and Applied Theory
3
1.1
Enhanced Oil Recovery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.1.1
Miscible CO2 Flooding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.2
CO2 Impurities and EOR Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.2.1
CO2 Requirements for EOR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.2.2
CO2 Sources and Capture Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.3
Gas Compression . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.3.1
Thermodynamics of Compression . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.3.2
Phase Transition and Liquefaction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.4
Thermodynamics of Heat Exchange . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
1.4.1
Logarithmic Mean Temperature Diﬀerence . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
1.5
Vapor-Compression Refrigeration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
1.5.1
Refrigeration Eﬃciency . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
1.5.2
Choice of Refrigerant . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
1.6
Equations of States . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
1.6.1
Cubic Equations of States . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
1.6.2
Association Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
1.6.3
Mixing Rules
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2
Model Choice and Validation
16
2.1
System of Investigation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.2
Choice of Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.2.1
Equation of State for Modelling Water-CO2
. . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.2.2
Equation of State for Modelling Pure ammonia
. . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.3
Discussion of Model-Choice and Further Validation
. . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3
Methods for Evaluating Compression and Refrigeration Processes
27
3.1
Calculation of Thermodynamic Properties
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.1.1
Calculation of Enthalpy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.1.2
Calculation of Entropy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.1.3
Validation of Enthalpy and Entropy Calculations
. . . . . . . . .
30
3.2
Modelling Procedure and Matlab Implementation
. . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.2.1
Compression Calculations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
==PAGE:4==
3.2.2
Active Refrigeration Calculations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.2.3
Combined Compression & Refrigeration Cycle . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4
Modelling and Results
38
4.1
Case 1: Validation of Compression Calculations . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.1.1
Dehydration and Mass Flow Development
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.1.2
Total Work of Compression
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.1.3
Heating of Seawater
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.1.4
Comparison to Results From Litterature . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.2
Case 2: Varying the Number of Compression Steps
. . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.2.1
Total Work of Compression
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.2.2
Heating of Sea Water . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.2.3
Compression During Fewer Compression Steps . . . . . . . . . . .
49
4.3
Case 3: Lowering Inital Temperature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
4.3.1
Total Work of Compression
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
4.3.2
Heating of Sea Water . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
4.4
Case 4: Application of Active Cooling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
4.4.1
Total Work of Compression
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
4.4.2
Heating of Sea Water During Active Cooling . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
4.5
Case 5: Active Cooling to Temperatures Bellow Sea Waters . . . . . . . .
59
4.5.1
Total Work of Compression
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
4.5.2
Heating of Sea Water During Active Cooling . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
4.6
Summary of Results and Observations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
4.6.1
Gas Stream Phase Behaviour
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
5
Optimisation and Discussion
65
5.1
Minimizing Energy Cost of Compression . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
5.2
Heat Integration With Capture Plant or Heavy Industry
. . . . . . . . .
66
5.3
Phase Behaviour of Gas Stream . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
Conclusion and Future Work
71
Litterature
73
A References
75
A.1 Enthalpy, Entropy and Gibbs Free Energy Departure Calculation in Aspen
Plus User Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
B Matlab scripts
81
B.1 Matlab funtion: Calculation of Enthalpy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
B.2 Matlab funtion: Calculation of Entropy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
87
B.3 Matlab funtion: Evaluation of Compression . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
92
B.4 Matlab funtion: Evaluation of Refrigeration Cycle . . . . . . . . . . . .
100
B.5 Matlab funtion: Evaluation of Full Compression Process . . . . . . . . .
103
==PAGE:5==
CONTENTS
30th June, 2017
Conditioning of CO2 for Transport
As the worlds energy consumption is increasing, the current use of natural oil and gas as
one of the main energy sources, is still essential. In the meantime, conventional oil & gas
sources are being depleted and the need of innovative methods for hydrocarbon extraction
is crucial. An emerging method for this, is the injection of supercritical CO2 into the oil
reservoirs, which enables reaching a recovery factor of up to 90 % of OOIP [15]. Another
advantage of this method, is that it not only increases the hydrocarbon extraction, but
also enables sequestration of huge amounts of CO2 underground. Large amounts of CO2
can therefore be harvested at highly pollutant industry facilities like steel or power plants,
and thereby minimize their negative environmental impact.
Injection of supercritical CO2 has been used with great success, but is also associated
with both great risks, and logistic challenges which has to be accounted for. One of these
challenges is to transport CO2 from its source to the site of use. Two typical schemes
for CO2-transport is to either transport the gas under high pressure in pipelines, or as
liqueﬁed gas in large specially designed ships.
Constructing pipelines involves very high implementation costs and low ﬂexibility. In
return it can deliver a large and stable gas stream, without the need of external CO2
storage before subsurface injection. On the other hand transporting CO2 using ships oﬀers
relatively low implementation cost and ﬂexible transport possibilities, as long as the CO2
density can be kept as high as possible. One of the larger issues regarding ship transport
is the need for re-conditioning the gas, before it can be externally stored and injected into
the subsurface for EOR purposes.
The feasibility of both transportation methods are currently being investigated, while
this project mainly will focus on the issue of transporting compressed gas in pipelines.
In pipelines the CO2 is transported at the same critical conditions, as when the CO2 is
injected into the subsurface. This means that the CO2 will have to be compressed from
around ambient pressure and to 150 bar. These conditions are achieved by compressing
the source gas from a heavy industry plant, through several stages with inter cooling.
Project Description
The scope of this project is to minimize the speciﬁc energy cost of conditioning CO2 for
pipeline transport, by optimizing the compression process. This can be done by adjusting
the number of compression steps, and the amount of inter cooling between each step.
The applied inter cooling may be delivered as active cooling from a vapour-compression
refrigeration cycle, or by using cold seawater for directly cooling the gas stream. In both
cases the cooling of the gas stream will return large amounts of heat. This excessive heat
may be integrated elsewhere in the source gas capture plant, or in other heavy industries,
to lower the overall energy cost of the compression process.
To be able to minimize the cost energy for gas compression, the thermodynamics of the
process is modelled using the available ExpertThermo software tools in Matlab. To
perform the calculations a thermodynamic model that suits the system of interest, should
ﬁrst be found and validated. When a satisfactory model have been established, routines
for performing compression and refrigeration calculations, are build and implemented in
Matlab.
Before being able to make an adequate discussion and analysis of the compression process,
an extensive literature study has been performed, to gather information of similar studies
1
==PAGE:6==
CONTENTS
30th June, 2017
and relevant theory. Finally the ﬁndings have been reported in this report.
The overall objectives of this work can be summed up as:
• Describe how CO2 is used to enhance oil recovery, and which factors could be
improved to increase its oﬀshore availability.
• Perform a literature search around the process of conditioning of CO2 for EOR and
CCS purposes.
• Find a suitable model for modelling a representative system of a source gas con-
taining CO2 and possible other components. Compare the model performance with
experimental data.
• Find a suitable model for modelling a refrigeration cycle using pure Ammonia.
Compare the model performance with experimental data.
• Build routines for calculating thermodynamic properties such as enthalpy and
entropy in Matlab, using the ExpertThermo software package. Compare the
routines performance to reference data.
• Implement the enthalpy and entropy routines in a Matlab framework to enable
the modelling of processes as compression and refrigeration.
• Replicate existing multi-stage CO2 compression calculations from literature, using
the framework built in Matlab.
• Analyse how diﬀerent parameters aﬀect the multi-stage compression process.
• Compare diﬀerent compression cases which vary in the number of compression steps
and the use of cooling.
• Suggest how the energy demand of the compression process is minimized, by adjusting
process parameters and consider the use of heat integration with other processes.
• Report ﬁndings in a written report.
Applied Methods
To accommodate the objectives of this work, diﬀerent methods has been taken into
use. Literature search has mainly been conducted using the DTU Findit and Web of
Science databases. Thermodynamic calculations has been done in Matlab using the
CPA equation of state in ExpertThermo software package available at DTU CERE. One
of the reasons for using this software package, rather than more commercially applied
software, were not only that it provided straight forward modelling using the CPA EOS,
but also to test the performance of the software.
To evaluate the compression process performance, ﬁve diﬀerent compression cases has
been calculated. The ﬁve cases have a varying number of compression steps and amount
of cooling. The ﬁve cases are discussed and compared to identify the most important
parameters for optimizing the compression process.
2
==PAGE:7==
CHAPTER 1. BACKGROUND AND APPLIED THEORY
30th June, 2017
Chapter 1
Background and Applied Theory
1.1
Enhanced Oil Recovery
Since natural oil is still one of the most used energy sources on earth, the increasing energy
consumption makes it necessary, to produce oil and gas reserves, previously not accessible.
This have given rise to the implementation of several methods which improve reservoirs
recovery factor beyond the conventionally achievable. These methods are together labelled
as Enhanced Oil Recovery or EOR.
In reservoir engineering the residual oil saturation Sor, is the term used for the
remaining hydrocarbon saturation, after conventional methods have been used. The oil
left in reservoirs is typically stuck due to high viscosity of the oil or high capillary forces
between the rock and ﬂuid. Basically the goal of EOR is to reduce the oil saturation of a
reservoir below Sor, by increasing the mobility of the residual oil. This is done by either
increasing the capillary number Nc or the mobility ratio M.
The capillary number represents the ratio between viscous forces and surface tension
forces acting on an interface:
Nc = νµ/σ
Here ν is the Darcy velocity, µ is the viscosity and σ is the inter facial tension. In other
words increasing the capillary number means increasing the viscous forces compared to
the surface tension, or decreasing the surface tension vice versa. This means that the ﬂow
forces acting on the ﬂuid will become higher than the forces acting between the ﬂuid and
the reservoir surface, and thereby making the ﬂuid more mobile.
The mobility factor is given as the ratio between the mobility of the displacing ﬂuid
λing and the displaced ﬂuid λed [15].
M = λing/λed
The ﬂuid to be displaced in a reservoir is obviously hydrocarbons and the displacing ﬂuid
can be a range of diﬀerent ﬂuids depending on the type of EOR, e.g. water, CO2 or other
gasses. The mobility factor tells us that if M > 1 the oil will ﬂow more readily than
the displacing ﬂuid would. If M < 1 the front between the displacing ﬂuid and the oil
will become unstable, which will lead to the displacing ﬂuid bypassing the oil instead of
pushing it forward.
3
==PAGE:8==
CHAPTER 1. BACKGROUND AND APPLIED THEORY
30th June, 2017
1.1.1
Miscible CO2 Flooding
EOR methods is generally split into thermal and non-thermal methods. Traditionally
thermal EOR methods have been the most commercially applied, but lately non-thermal
methods have become more widely used. Non-thermal methods typically involves the
injection of a ﬂuid into the reservoir in order to alter the hydrocarbon properties and
mobilise it for extraction. Lately the injection of supercritical CO2 has gained increasing
attention, due to the possibility of sequestrating the CO2 underground in the process, also
called Carbon Capture and Storage or CCS.
When injecting CO2 in a reservoir it will be miscible with the present hydrocarbons,
if the reservoir pressure is higher than the Minimum Miscibility Pressure (MMP). The
miscible gas then forms a transition zone with increasing CO2-concentration at the
hydrocarbon front. The development of the transition zone with time can be seen on
Figure 1.1 below.
Figure 1.1 – Shows the concentration distribution in the transition zone as time progresses and the oil is displaced.
Source: S. Thomas Enhanced Oil Recovery - An Overview 2008 [15].
On Figure 1.1 it is seen how the transition zone becomes wider when time progresses
and the oil is displaced. The mixing of CO2 lets the capillary number go towards inﬁnity
since the inter facial tension becomes zero. This results in a nearly perfect displacement
of the hydrocarbons if the mobility factor is below one [15].
4
==PAGE:9==
CHAPTER 1. BACKGROUND AND APPLIED THEORY
30th June, 2017
1.2
CO2 Impurities and EOR Requirements
When performing miscible CO2 injection in hydrocarbon reservoirs, some attention should
be directed towards the puriﬁcation requirements of the injected CO2. When captured
from a given source the CO2 will initially contain some amount of impurities like water,
O2, N2, SOx, H2 etc. These impurities will be present in diﬀerent extent depending on
the source and capture methods and can be further reduced using diﬀerent puriﬁcation
techniques.
1.2.1
CO2 Requirements for EOR
Some of the major concerns when using CO2 for enhanced oil recovery is that the oxygen
impurities may react with the present hydrocarbons, which cause overheating at the
injection point. Also toxic products like H2S, CO, SO2 and NOx should be avoided for
safety reasons, in case of breakouts. Finally some impurities like N2 and H2 may decrease
the CO2 miscibility with the hydrocarbons, and thereby aggravate the oil production [2].
The impurities of a CO2 stream should also be taken into consideration during transport.
Here impurities in the gas stream may cause the formation of gas hydrates or two-phase
ﬂows which will obstruct the pipes during high pressure transport. A special concern is
the water content of the gas stream, which causes pipes to corrode, and thereby increasing
the operational costs of transportation.
Ideally a suitable CO2 gas for transportation and EOR would consists mostly of CO2
(>95%) and mainly impurities like N2, H2, CO and Ar [2]. It should all though be noted
that some water content is acceptable, since the gas will be further dehydrated during
compression [3].
1.2.2
CO2 Sources and Capture Methods
To provide CO2 for extensive EOR projects, a large point source with high CO2 emission
should be chosen as the source. This is also beneﬁcial since capturing the CO2 at the
source, greatly reduces its contribution to the overall air pollution. Large coal-ﬁred power
plants contributes to 30% of the total CO2 emissions in the United States [13], and
capturing CO2 from plants like these would be an obvious choice for further use in a EOR
scheme.
A typical and well developed method for capturing CO2 from a exhaust gas stream
is by amine scrubbing. In this method the CO2 is stripped from the exhaust gas at
temperatures around 40 to 60◦C, by an aqueous amine which absorbs the CO2 molecules.
The CO2-rich amine is afterwards regenerated at temperatures around 100 to 120◦C,
where the amine will release the CO2 [13]. The resulting CO2 stream will have a very
high percentage of CO2 and contain only minuscule amounts of contaminations dependent
on the source of the initial exhaust gas. A schematic of a amine scrubbing process can be
seen below on Figure 1.2.
As seen in Figure 1.2 the amine undergoes several temperature changes during the
amine scrubbing process. Initially the lean amine has to be cooled to ≈40◦C, before
entering the absorber. This is done by ﬁrst exchanging heat with the cold rich stream at
point A and then externally cooling it to the desired temperature at point B. The rich
amine must also be heated to ≈100◦C at point C before entering the regenerator. Finally
one of the most costly energy processes in the amine scrubbing process is the reboiler at
5
==PAGE:10==
CHAPTER 1. BACKGROUND AND APPLIED THEORY
30th June, 2017
Absorber
Regenerator
Reboiler
Initial 
exhaust gas
Sweetened
exhaust gas
Enriched CO2
B
C
CO2-rich 
amine
CO2-lean 
amine
A
Heat Exchanges:
A: The hot lean stream exchanges heat 
with the cold rich stream.
B: The hot lean stream is cooled to 40⁰C 
before entering absorber.
C: The cold rich stream is heated to 100⁰C 
before entering the regenerator.
D: The reboiler is heated to 120⁰C by at 
kettle or by heat exchange with steam.
D
Figure 1.2 – Shows a schematic of the amine scrubbing process for capturing CO2 from a exhaust gas. In the ﬁgure are
marked four places where heat is exchanged within the systems or with the surroundings.
the regenerator in point D which "boils oﬀ" any remaining CO2 before returning the lean
amine to the absorber. These temperature changes is if possible done by exchanging heat
within the amine scrubbing process, but in most cases additional cooling or heating is
necessary.
6
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1. BACKGROUND AND APPLIED THEORY
30th June, 2017
1.3
Gas Compression
Compression of gas implies increasing the pressure of by reducing its volume and conse-
quently increase its temperature. This is done by exerting work on the gas which is the
purpose of a gas compressor. In this section the thermodynamics of gas compression will
be explained, with the purpose of being able to predict the physical behaviour of the gas
during compression and to calculate the energy needed in the process.
1.3.1
Thermodynamics of Compression
Usually the temperature and pressure of a gas stream is known before compression,
while only the pressure is known after compression. To calculate the temperature after
compression, and estimate the amount of work that has to be applied in the process, some
assumptions must be made.
Ideally compression can be treated as a reversible isotropic process, i.e. it does not involve
any loss of entropy. Assuming this, the temperature after compression can be calculated,
using a suitable equation of state - see section 1.6. This illustrated by the equation:
S(T rev
2
,P2) = S(T1,P1)
Where S is the entropy and the subscript 1 and 2 implies that the temperature and
pressure are evaluated before and after compression. The superscript rev indicates that
the temperature is for a completely reversible system, which will see is not the true
temperature after compression.
A compressor is considered as a closed system, that increases a ﬂuid with the molar
ﬂow rate ˙n in mol/s and temperature and pressure T1,P1, to the temperature and pressure
T2,P2, by exerting the work W. If it is assumed that there are no heat interaction with the
environment, all incoming energy has to be equal to the outgoing energy. The energy of
the ﬂuid is at any point calculated as the product of the total heat content of the stream,
or enthalpy H, and the molar ﬂow rate. The reversible energy balance of the system then
yields:
W rev = ˙nH (T rev
2
,P2) −˙nH (T1,P1)
However compression will usually not be a completely reversible process, so the energy
balance is corrected by a isotropic eﬃciency factor η. The real work exerted by the
compressor is then W real = W rev/η. The ﬁnal energy balance of the compression then
becomes [9]:
W real = ˙nH (T rev
2
,P2) −˙nH (T1,P1)
η
(1.1)
Finally the real temperature after compression can be found using a suitable equation of
states hence the new energy balance yields:
W real = ˙nH

T real
2
,P2

−˙nH (T1,P1)
(1.2)
When injecting CO2 into a hydrocarbon reservoir for miscible ﬂooding it has to be under
supercritical pressure e.g. 150 bar. A typical CO2 transport scheme would be to pressurise
it to these conditions and send it from source to the needed location using pipelines.
Doing so will eliminate the need for further conditioning on site. Pressurising CO2 to the
mentioned conditions is usually done in a step-wise compression with inter-cooling.
7
==PAGE:12==
CHAPTER 1. BACKGROUND AND APPLIED THEORY
30th June, 2017
A. Alabdulkarem et.al. has done a simulation of a typical compression scheme, using
eight compression steps with inter-cooling. The compression simulation is performed
on a CO2 stream with a ﬂow-velocity of 80.48 ton/hr, where the CO2 is isothermally
compressed from 1.8 to 150 bar, consuming 6.25 MW [3].
1.3.2
Phase Transition and Liquefaction
When the temperature and pressure of a ﬂuid is changed, it may undergo phase transitions,
like for example when hot water vapour at atmospheric pressure will start to condense
when cooled below 100◦C.
If pure CO2 gas is cooled down at atmospheric pressure, the gas will undergo a phase
transition into the solid state and not into the liquid phase, like one would expect of water.
To liquefy CO2 the pressure of the gas must be increased above the triple point pressure
before cooling. This is illustrated in Figure 1.3 below.
Figure 1.3 – Shows a CO2 phase diagram where the lines indicates the point in the P-T-plane where phase transitions
occur. Source: A. Alabdulkarem et.al. Development of CO2 liquefaction cycles for CO2 sequestration, 2012 [3].
A phase diagram like the one seen in Figure 1.3 for CO2 can be used to predict the
point where phase transitions occurs, if the temperature and pressure are changed. It can
here be seen that cooling the gas will move the state negatively in the x-direction, and
pressurising the gas will move it positively in the y-direction. It is then easily seen how
cooling the gas below the triple point pressure, will result in a phase transition from gas
to solid.
When mixing CO2 with water the phase behaviour of the mixture changes dramatically
compared to what is expected of pure CO2. This change in behaviour is mainly due to
the molecular interactions between the CO2 and water molecules. A schematic of the
behaviour of an increasing amount of CO2 in water can be seen below on Figure 1.4.
In Figure 1.4 it is seen how the phase behaviour of the CO2-water system changes
when the mole fraction of CO2 increases. It should here be noted that the diagram is
compressed across the x-axis so the lines seen for low and high CO2 mole fraction lies
around a mole percent of 2 −3 % and 99.4 −99.8 %.
For low CO2 concentrations it can be seen that the ﬂuid will be located to left of line
A and B on Figure 1.4, where the ﬂuid will be in a single phase of liquid. At pressures
below the triple phase pressure, the ﬂuid lies in the region between line A and the dotted
8
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 1. BACKGROUND AND APPLIED THEORY
30th June, 2017
Figure 1.4 – Shows a schematic of the CO2-water system behaviour with an increasing amount of CO2, at a temperature
below the critical temperature of CO2. The lines in the plot are made with data based on temperatures between 15 and
25◦C. Source: M.B. King et.al. The Mutual Solubilities of Water with Supercritical and Liquid Carbon Dioxide, 1992 [3].
line. In this region the ﬂuid will split into a equilibrium of a water-rich liquid phase and a
CO2-rich gas phase. If the ﬂuid lies above the triple phase pressure and between the lines
B and C, the ﬂuid will split into an equilibrium between two liquid phases.
At high CO2 concentrations the ﬂuid will lie to the right of the C line and the dotted
line. In this region the ﬂuid will be 100 % gas, if the pressure lies below the triple phase
pressure and 100 % liquid if the pressure is above the triple phase pressure. This behaviour
is as expected quite similar to the behaviour of pure CO2 seen in the phase diagram for
pure CO2 in Figure 1.3. Finally it should be noticed that there is a small liquid-liquid
equilibrium for high CO2-concentrations just around the triple-phase pressure.
9
==PAGE:14==
CHAPTER 1. BACKGROUND AND APPLIED THEORY
30th June, 2017
1.4
Thermodynamics of Heat Exchange
To be able to evaluate cooling of the gas stream between compression steps one has to
consider the thermodynamics of heat exchange between two streams. The process of
cooling is basically an exchange of energy between two systems. A cold and a hot stream
enters a heat exchanger, and the warm stream will thereby cool of, by transferring its
heat to the cold stream. A schematic of a simple heat exchanger can be seen below in
Figure 1.5.
Figure 1.5 – Shows a schematic of a simple heat exchanger. Thi indicates the temperature of the hot stream when
entering and Tci indicates the temperature of the cold stream when entering. The hot stream that ﬂows from 2 to 4 is
indicated by the red arrows and and has a ﬂow rate of ˙m in mol/s. The cold stream ﬂows from 1 to 4 is indicated by the
blue arrows and and has a ﬂow rate of ˙n in mol/s. Source: M. L. Michelsen 28322 - Teknisk Termodynamik 2010 [9].
The heat exchanger in Figure 1.5 is taken to be ideal i.e. it suﬀers no loss of heat to
the surroundings. If this is true the total energy of the heat exchanger must be conserved,
which means that the ingoing enthalpy times the ﬂow rates ˙n and ˙m must be equal to the
outgoing enthalpy times the ﬂow rates:
˙nH1 + ˙mH3 = ˙nH2 + ˙mH4
(1.3)
If the hot stream is cooled by a active refrigeration cycle, one would initially know the
enthalpy of the cold stream before and after heat exchange. The ﬂow rate and enthalpy
of the hot stream before heat exchange will in most cases be known, so if the temperature
of the hot stream after heat exchange is speciﬁed, one can then use equation 1.3, to ﬁnd
the necessary ﬂow-rate of refrigerant in the cooling cycle.
1.4.1
Logarithmic Mean Temperature Diﬀerence
The logarithmic mean temperature diﬀerence (LMTD) is a measure of a heat exchangers
ability to move heat from one stream to another. The LMTD is logarithmic average of
the temperature diﬀerences of the in- and outgoing streams and is given as:
LMTD =
∆T1 −∆T2
ln (∆T1) −ln (∆T2)
(1.4)
In most heat exchangers the cold and the hot stream will ﬂow from opposite directions. If
this is the case the temperature diﬀerences ∆T1 and ∆T2 is calculated as:
∆T1 = Th1 −Tc2 , ∆T2 = Th2 −Tc1
Where the subscripts h and c denotes the hot and cold stream respectively, 1 denotes the
incoming temperature and 2 denotes the outgoing temperature.
LMTD is a parameter given for many heat exchangers and will typically have a value
between 10 to 20 K. If the LMTD is known for a given heat exchanger, equation 1.4 can
be used to calculate one of the stream temperatures if the other three temperatures are
known. A good heat exchanger will have a low LMTD, since this would mean that the
cold stream will be heated the same degrees as the warm stream is cooled.
10
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 1. BACKGROUND AND APPLIED THEORY
30th June, 2017
1.5
Vapor-Compression Refrigeration
To generate cooling for the compression process, a active refrigeration unit could be
considered.
One way to provide active cooling is by a classical vapour-compression
refrigeration system. This type of refrigeration involves compressing a saturated vapour of
a refrigerant into a super heated state, where after it is cooled until the ﬂuid is completely
condensed. The liquid refrigerant is then throttled through a expansion valve, until it
reaches the original pressure and temperature. Finally the refrigerant is evaporated by
removing heat and thereby cooling its surroundings. A schematic of the whole process
can be seen in Figure 1.6 below.
Figure 1.6 – Shows a schematic of the vapour-compression refrigeration cycle. The arrows indicates the ﬂow-direction of
the refrigerant. Source: R. Radermacher & Y. Hwang Vapor Compression Heat Pumps with Refrigerant Mixtures, 2008
[12].
To be able to thermodynamically evaluate this system some assumptions has to be
made. It is assumed that the cycle is ideal, and does not suﬀer any pressure loss throughout
the process. It is also assumed that the refrigerant is completely saturated vapour when
exiting the evaporator and completely saturated liquid when exiting the condenser. Finally
it is assumed that the compressor has some molar eﬃciency coeﬃcient η as described in
section 1.3.1.
As there are no loss of pressure in the system, it can be assumed that the pressure
is constant during evaporation and condensation. The evaporation and condensation
pressures are usually speciﬁed for a given refrigeration system along with the eﬃciency
coeﬃcient of the compressor. Assuming this the enthalpy and entropy of the system can
be evaluated at the diﬀerent points of the cycle as the pressure and temperature changes.
Evaporation:
The evaporator seen in Figure 1.6 is essentially a heat exchanger where
heat from the CO2 is transferred to the refrigeration cycle, and by that evaporating the
refrigerant. Since it is assumed that the refrigerant is completely saturated vapour when
exiting the evaporator, the temperature is simply given by the dew point temperature at
the given evaporation pressure.
Compression:
After evaporation, the refrigerant is compressed from P1 and T1 to the
given pressure P2 and a elevated temperature T2. This temperature is calculated as
described in section 1.3.1.
Condensation:
At step 3 the refrigerant is cooled down at constant pressure until the
refrigerant is completely condensed. The condenser on Figure 1.6 is, like the evaporator,
a heat exchanger where heat from the refrigerant is transferred to the surroundings, or
an external coolant like air or water. Since the pressure after condensation is given, the
temperature T4 can be found as the bubble point temperature at this pressure.
11
==PAGE:16==
CHAPTER 1. BACKGROUND AND APPLIED THEORY
30th June, 2017
Expansion:
After condensation, the refrigerant is throttled through an expansion valve,
to reach the initial pressure and temperature. Throttling is an isenthalpic process meaning
that there is no change in enthalpy from stage 4 to 5 [9]. When the pressure of the
refrigerant is decreased, a fraction of the liquid will undergo a phase transition and turn
into vapour. Since the refrigerant at step 5 is split into two phases, the enthalpy at this
step should be considered for each phase separately. The phase split of the refrigerant
after throttling can now be derived considering the equation:
xLHL (T1,P1) + (1 −xL) HV (T1,P1) = HL (T4,P4)
Where x is the molar fraction in a given phase, the subscript L indicates the liquid phase
and the subscript V indicates the vapour phase.
Finally the remaining liquid refrigerant at stage 5 re-enter the evaporator, where it is
evaporated at constant temperature and pressure until reaching stage 1.
1.5.1
Refrigeration Eﬃciency
The change in enthalpy from stage 5 to stage 1 in Figure 1.6 is equal to the total enthalpy
transferred from the CO2 stream to the refrigerant, i.e. how much the stream has been
cooled.
Q
˙n = H1 −H4
Where Q is the heat transferred to the refrigerant system and ˙n is the ﬂow velocity of the
refrigerant in mol/s.
The eﬃciency of the refrigeration process is measured by the coeﬃcient of performance
or COP, which is given by the total increase in enthalpy from step 1 to step 5 divided by
the total work W exerted by the compressor [9].
COP = Q
W
(1.5)
1.5.2
Choice of Refrigerant
When considering a refrigeration system, one has to choose a working ﬂuid as the refrigerant.
Working ﬂuids in vapour-compression refrigeration cycles would typically be ﬂuids like
carbohydrates, CO2 or NH3. When having to choose between these refrigerants one should
both consider the availability, performance and special safety precautions of the ﬂuid.
F. Engell and A. Kather has done a research on the speciﬁc energy demand of multi-
stage refrigeration of CO2, where several working ﬂuids have been tested. According to
their research ammonia shows some of the best performance, all though it is considered a
hazardous substance. They suggest that a better working ﬂuid could be propene, however
this would neither be preferable since propene is highly explosive [4].
12
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 1. BACKGROUND AND APPLIED THEORY
30th June, 2017
1.6
Equations of States
To solve many of the discussed problems in the previous sections one has to be able to
predict certain properties of a system with only limited information. To do so an equation
of state (EOS) is applied, to relate the pressure, temperature and molar volume of a given
system. A very classic equation of state is for example the ideal gas equation which states
that these there properties are related to the gas constant R as [9]:
PV = RT
The development of EOS is still an ongoing research and there is not yet found a
speciﬁc equation which is able to predict the behaviour of all possible systems. Some
the most recognised and industrial applied equations are the two cubic three-parameter
equations of states Soave-Redlich-Kwong (SRK) and Peng-Robinson (PR).
Among newer research models have been designed to speciﬁcally consider inter-molecular
forces like hydrogen-bonding, and thereby improve calculations on systems where forces
like these can be dominant. These models are called association models, and includes
the Statistical Associating Fluid Theory (SAFT) and the Cubic Plus Association model
(CPA).
1.6.1
Cubic Equations of States
The most widely used EOS are the cubic ones, which refers to their degree with respect to
the volume V . Among these both the Van der Vaals- and Redlich–Kwong-equations could
be mentioned, but the most applied are the already mentioned SRK and PR equations.
These equations use three component speciﬁc parameters to predict the relationship
between the pressure, temperature and molar volume. These parameters are; a which
accounts for the intermolecular forces, b which corrects for the fact that molecules have a
ﬁnite volume and ﬁnally the acentric factor ω which is a measure of the non-sphericity of
molecules.
The two three-parameter equations of state are quite similar in construction with the
only diﬀerence that the PR EOS has an extra term in one of the denominators. The SRK
equation of state is written as:
P =
RT
V −b −
a(T)
V (V + b)
(1.6)
And the PR equation of state is written as [8]:
P =
RT
V −b −
a(T)
V (V + b) + b (V −b)
(1.7)
The pure component parameters a, b and ω can be estimated using diﬀerent methods e.g.
the measurement of a compounds critical temperature and pressure.
Generally the cubic EOS give an easy and often very precise prediction of the behaviour
of systems containing both single and multiple components. It very well describes the
behaviour in both the vapour and liquid phase, within a large pressure range. The
equations work especially well on mixtures containing hydrocarbons, gasses and other
non-polar compounds when the inter-compound interaction parameter is chosen properly.
On the other hand the cubic EOS show poor results on mixtures containing polar and
13
==PAGE:18==
CHAPTER 1. BACKGROUND AND APPLIED THEORY
30th June, 2017
associating compounds like water. This problem can to some extent be accounted for by
using two interaction parameters, or more advanced mixing rules [8] - more about this in
section 1.6.3.
In the literature the PR EOS have seen wide use for calculations of compression and
liquefaction of CO2 using ammonia as a refrigerant e.g. A. Alabdulkarem et.al. [3], L. Øi
et.al [11] and by F. Engel et. al. using the Boston-Mathias modiﬁcation [4].
1.6.2
Association Theory
A problem with the standard cubic equations of state, is that they fail to explicitly take
the energy of hydrogen bondings into account. Hydrogen bonds are a quasi-chemical
attractive force, and can in some cases be almost as strong as covalent bonds in molecules.
They usually form between polar compounds like for example water and ammonia. The
formation of hydrogen bonds between molecules is called association, and a number of
models have been developed to take this into account.
Statistical Associating Fluid Theory model (SAFT)
The Statistical Associating Fluid Theory or SAFT EOS is a model based on perturbations
in a systems residual Helmholts energy. The residual Helmholtz ares energy of a system is
a measure of how much work the system can produce, and is in SAFT theory treated as
being a sum of three contributions. The three contributions going into the SAFT model
is the segment energy aseg, the chain energy achain and the association energy aassoc:
ares = aseg + achain + aassoc
(1.8)
In the SAFT model a ﬂuid is treated as a number og hard spheres with a dispersion
potential between each other to account for the attraction between ﬂuid particles. This
dispersion gives rise to the segment contribution aseg of the residual Helmholtz energy.
Each of the spheres are then given one or several "sticky" spots, where the spheres will
connect to form chains. The formation of chains give rise to the chain contribution achain
in the residual Helmholtz energy. Finally the chains are allowed to associate through
speciﬁed association sites, resulting in the associative term in Helmholtz energy aassoc.
For associative compounds a association scheme should also be chosen according to how
the compound usually forms hydrogen bonds.
The chain and association terms can strictly be translated to apply for mixtures leaving
only the need for mixing rules on the dispersion term. This makes it quite straightforward
to apply the SAFT EOS for systems containing several compounds.
Many variations exist of the SAFT model where diﬀerent expressions are used for the
dispersion Helmholtz energy contributions. Common to most variations is that they use
ﬁve diﬀerent pure component parameters namely the chain length number m, the segment
diameter σ, the segment energy parameter ε, the volume of association κAiBj and the
energy of association εAiBj. Here the association volume and energy are only needed if the
compound is self-associating like water. The need for more pure component parameters is
obviously a limitation for a model, although one widely used variant of SAFT, namely the
Perturbed Chain SAFT or PC-SAFT, has a extensive number of parameters available.
One of the great advantages of the SAFT EOS is that it not only works signiﬁcantly
well on associating compounds, but the model also shows great results on a lot of non-polar
systems. Especially PC-SAFT can be used with good results on a lot of polar systems
due to the extensive amount of available parameters [8].
14
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 1. BACKGROUND AND APPLIED THEORY
30th June, 2017
Cubic Plus Association model (CPA)
Another model able to account for associating compounds are the Cubic Plus Association
or CPA EOS. As the name suggests this model is a variation of the cubic equations of
state, combined with a associative term. More precise the model consists of the SRK
EOS shown in equation 1.6 added the associative term from the SAFT model (1.8). This
model also uses ﬁve pure component parameters, together with the association scheme of
the compounds. Three of the parameters come from the SRK term namely a, b and c,
and for associating compounds also the association energy εcross and association volume
βcross are needed.
The CPA EOS combines the straightforward computations from the cubic equations of
state, with the consideration of associating molecules from SAFT. This model has shown
great results for many diﬀerent systems, including systems containing CO2 and water. In
this case CO2 has been modelled as a self-associating compound, all though this is not
the physical reality. The reason for this is that CO2 forms rather strong Lewis acid and
Lewis base bonds with water, which in practice can be thought of as hydrogen bonds [8].
1.6.3
Mixing Rules
All the equations of states mentioned in the previous sections 1.6.1 and 1.6.2 use parameters
for a each speciﬁc pure compound. To extent the models to mixtures of several compounds,
one needs to apply mixing rules for the individual parameters. Some of the most classic
combining rules are the van der Waals one-ﬂuid (vdW1f) mixing rules and the classical
combining rules, which suggests that the mixing of the diﬀerent molecules happens
randomly. For the energy and volume parameters in the cubic equations of state these
rules are written as:
a =
n
X
i=1
n
X
j=1
xixjaij
b =
n
X
i=1
n
X
j=1
xixjbij
(1.9)
aij = √aiaj (1 −kij)
bij = ai + aj
2
(1 −lij)
(1.10)
Where xi and xi are the molar fractions of each compound, and kij and lij are interaction
parameters measured between the two compounds. Sometimes the interaction parameter
lij can be set to zero but for more advanced systems both interaction parameters should
be included.
There are many mixing rules beyond the classical vdW1f eg. the Lorentz–Berthelot
and Huron-Vidal. The choice of mixing rule and interaction parameters will often have
great inﬂuence on the quality of the results, especially if very advanced systems are
investigated.
15
==PAGE:20==
CHAPTER 2. MODEL CHOICE AND VALIDATION
30th June, 2017
Chapter 2
Model Choice and Validation
To be able to predict the energy cost of conditioning CO2 a proper thermodynamic model
has to be chosen, for performing calculations on the compression process. This includes
choosing a representative system of compounds, the best suiting equation of state and the
correct pure- and cross-component parameters for the system properties.
In this chapter the choice of model for the extent of this work will be discussed and
validated. This is done through comparison of the performance of diﬀerent models and by
validating the given model against reference data.
2.1
System of Investigation
The choice of system is an important part in designing the model, since it deﬁnes the
framework, of where the chosen EOS has to perform. The system choice aﬀects both the
precision but also the simplicity of the model. In general one would want a very simple
system which does not suﬀer from any loss of generality.
As mentioned in section 1.2.1, a captured stream of CO2 may contain a broad variety
of compounds. While an adequate description of the CO2-stream system would be to
include all compounds in the calculations, the CO2 stream will in this work be modelled
as only containing CO2 and water. The motivation for doing so is that many typical CO2
sources will have water as the main contamination, [3] and therefore a ﬂow containing
only water and CO2, is not far from the reality. Furthermore it could also be expected
that compounds such as N2 and O2 would not aﬀect the system behaviour as much as
water, since they are relatively inert and therefore will react ideally with the CO2. Water
on the other hand should be expected to act more non-idealy in interaction with CO2,
due to the high polarity of the water molecule. It is therefore advantageous to choose a
system which contains this non-ideality, so it can be taking into account when choosing
the EOS and component parameters.
In the work by A. Alabdulkarem calculations are performed on a CO2 stream with
a total ﬂow velocity of 80.47 ton/hr containing CO2, water, N2 and O2. In this stream
mass percentage of CO2 is 90 %, the mass percentage of water is ≈10 % and the mass
percentage of N2 and O2 is < 1 %. The stream to be considered in this work is taken as
having the same total ﬂow-rate and mass percentage of CO2 leaving the rest of the stream
as water. The initial stream content can be seen below in Table 2.1.
The refrigerant in the active cooling system is modelled as being pure Ammonia.
The reason for choosing Ammonia as refrigerant was brieﬂy discussed in section 1.5.2.
Choosing to model the refrigerant as being pure Ammonia is also done without much
16
==PAGE:21==
CHAPTER 2. MODEL CHOICE AND VALIDATION
30th June, 2017
Table 2.1 – Shows the initial ﬂow-rate and molar percentages of the CO2-stream considered in this work.
Compound
Flowrate
Molar Percentage
CO2
72.42 ton/hr
78.64 %
Water
8.05 ton/hr
21.36 %
Total
80.47 ton/hr
loss of generality, since very high purity of Ammonia is typically used for active cooling
cycles.
2.2
Choice of Model
Choosing the correct model will aﬀect how well physical properties like solubility, speciﬁc
volume etc. can be predicted, for the components in the systems discussed in the previous
section 2.1. In this section the choice of EOS and component parameters will be discussed,
to arrive at the best ﬁtting model for describing the system of consideration.
2.2.1
Equation of State for Modelling Water-CO2
A straight forward choice of EOS would in many cases be the cubic equations like PR or
SRK. These equations are easily applicable, and have been used in great extent throughout
the literature for similar problems [3][4]. To investigate the performance of the cubic
EOS a phase equilibrium study is done, by applying these equations in the ExperThermo
software. The results can be seen in Figure 2.3 to 2.6.
Although the ordinary cubic equations would seem to be the obvious choice, some
precautions should be made when dealing with systems containing water. Water is a very
small and polar molecule, and therefore great attention should be directed towards the
models ability to predict the behaviour caused by inter-molecular forces. A way of doing
so is to use an EOS that takes association forces into account, like for example the CPA
EOS described in section 1.6.2. Another choice could have been the PC-SAFT model,
but in this work the investigation will be limited to only include the performance of CPA,
since this EOS has been widely applied to similar systems.
A study has been done by I. Tsivintzelis et. al. where the the CPA model is tested on a
CO2-Water mixture [16]. In this study it is analysed how the cross component parameters
i.e. kij, βcross, εcross and the association schemes of CO2, aﬀects the CPA EOS ability to
predict the solubilities in the vapour and liquid phases of the system. In this study the best
results were achieved, when treating CO2 as being able to cross-associate with water, by
having a single association cite. Using this CO2 association scheme and cross-parameters
from the study the VLE of CO2 and water can be done using the ExpertThermo software.
Validating Pure Component Parameters of CO2
In the work of I. Tsivintzelis et. al. a set af CPA pure component parameters for CO2, is
associated with each CO2 association scheme. Before testing the performance of the EOS
on the full CO2-water system, these pure component parameters are tested, by calculating
liquid molar density and vapour pressure of CO2, using the CPA EOS. The results are
compared to the empirical models from the DIPPR correlations. The DIPPR correlation
17
==PAGE:22==
CHAPTER 2. MODEL CHOICE AND VALIDATION
30th June, 2017
for the molar density of liquid is given as [1]:
ρL =
A
B1+(1−T/C)D
(2.1)
Where A = 0.2768×101, B = 0.26212, C = 0.30421×103 and D = 0.29080 are the DIPPR
coeﬃcients for CO2 and T is the temperature. By using these coeﬃcients, equation 2.1
gives the molar density of liquid CO2 in the units of kmol/m3.
The DIPPR correlation for the saturation pressure is given as [1]:
Psat = exp

A + B
T + C ln (T) + DT E

(2.2)
Where A = 0.14054 × 103, B = −0.47350 × 104, C = −0.21268 × 102, D = 0.40909 × 10−1
and E = 0.1 × 101 are the DIPPR coeﬃcients for CO2 and T is the temperature. By
using these coeﬃcients, equation 2.2 gives the saturation pressure of CO2 in SI units.
In the ExperThermo software the compressibility Z can be directly calculated at any
given temperature and pressure. The molar density can then be calculated from the
compressibility as ρ = P/ZRT. The vapour pressure is simply calculated as the saturation
pressure in ExpertThermo.
The calculations using the CO2 pure component parameters from the work of I. Tsivintzelis
et.al, is compared to the existing pure component parameters from the ExpertThermo
software. The results can be seen in Figure 2.1 and 2.2.
−60
−50
−40
−30
−20
−10
0
10
20
30
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Molar Density of Liquid CO2, P = 20 bar
Temperature [K]
Molar Density [kmol/m3]
 
 
CPA (ExpertThermo)
CPA − CO2 w. 1 ass. cite (I. Tsivintzelis)
DIPPR correlation
Figure 2.1 – Showing the molar density of liquid CO2 at 20 bar. The molar density is calculated using the
ExpertThermo software, and are compared to the DIPPR correlation (black dashed line). ExpertThermo calculations
have been performed using the CPA EOS with the pure component parameters from the work of I. Tsivintzelis et.al[16]
(blue line) and the original pure component parameters from the ExpertThermo database (red line).
Figure 2.1 shows the molar density of liquid CO2, calculated as function of temperature
for constant pressure. Figure 2.2 shows the calculations of pure CO2 vapour pressure as
function of temperature. In both Figures the calculations have been done in ExpertThermo,
using the existing pure-component parameters (red line), and the pure-component param-
eters from the work of Tsivintzelis et.al[16] (blue line). The calculations are compared to
the DIPPR correlation (black dotted line).
18
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 2. MODEL CHOICE AND VALIDATION
30th June, 2017
−60
−50
−40
−30
−20
−10
0
10
20
30
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Vapour Pressure of CO2
Temperature [K]
Vapour Pressure [bar]
 
 
CPA (ExpertThermo)
CPA − CO2 w. 1 ass. cite (I. Tsivintzelis)
DIPPR correlation
Figure 2.2 – Showing the vapour pressure of CO2. The vapour pressure is calculated using the ExpertThermo software,
and are compared to the DIPPR correlation (black dashed line). ExpertThermo calculations have been performed using
the CPA EOS with the pure component parameters from the work of I. Tsivintzelis et.al[16] and the original pure
component parameters from the ExpertThermo database (red line).
As seen on Figure 2.1 and 2.2 the pure component properties of CO2 are very poorly
predicted by using the pure component parameters from the work of I. Tsivintzelis et.al,
represented by the blue line in both plots. Especially the vapour pressure is predicted as
being one order in magnitude lower than the DIPPR correlation, using these parameters.
In Figure 2.1 it is also noticed, how the molar density calculated using the pure com-
ponent parameters from the ExperThermo database represented by the red line, goes
strongly towards zero at around 20◦C. This is because the software predicts that a phase
transition will occur around this point. Besides this eﬀect it is seen that using the existing
ExpertThermo database values for the pure-component parameters of CO2, gives better
prediction of both the molar density and vapour pressures.
On the basis of these results, only the cross-component parameters from the work of I.
Tsivintzelis et.al is used to perform the phase equilibrium study.
VLE Calculations on CO2-Water System
The VLE study of the CO2-water system is performed by calculating the phase split for
constant temperature on an arbitrary mixture of the components. The amount CO2 and
water is then evaluated in each phase. The VLE calculations are done using the CPA EOS,
with the original ExpertThermo cross component parameters and the cross component
parameters from the work of I. Tsivintzelis et.al. To compare the association models with
the standard cubic models the calculations are also performed with the PR EOS. The
results can be seen on Figure 2.3 and 2.4.
Figure 2.3 and 2.4 shows the solubility of CO2 in the water-rich phase and the solubility
of water in the CO2-rich respectively. The solubilities are shown as a function of pressure
for constant temperature.
In Figure 2.3 it is seen how the cubic PR EOS (black line) completely fails to predict
the equilibrium solubility of CO2 in the water-rich phase. This is most probably explained
by the equations inability to account for inter-molecular forces between the water and
19
==PAGE:24==
CHAPTER 2. MODEL CHOICE AND VALIDATION
30th June, 2017
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
0.02
0.025
0.03
Pressure [bar]
X CO2
Amount of CO2 in the liquid phase for T = 35°C
 
 
PR − database values
CPA − database values
CPA − CO2 w. 1 ass. site
Valtz et. al. 2004
Wiebe & Gaddy 1940
Figure 2.3 – Showing the CO2 solubility in the water-rich phase for a CO2-water mixture at T = 35◦C. Equilibrium
solubilities is calculated using PR (black line), CPA with ExpertThermo database values (pink), and CPA assuming 1
association site (blue line) with cross-parameters from I. Tsivintzelis et. al. [16]. Experimental data from [17] [19] [7].
CO2 molecules. If no such forces are present, most of the CO2 will leave the liquid phase,
resulting in a very low solubility of CO2 in water. It is also seen on Figure 2.6 that the PR
EOS (black line) fails to predict the solubility of water in the CO2-rich phase at pressures
above 80 bar.
On the other hand it can be seen on both Figure 2.3 and 2.6, that calculations using the
CPA EOS, very well predicts the vapour-liquid equilibrium. Particularly good results is
achieved by treating CO2 as having a single association cite (pink line) as done in the
work of I. Tsivintzelis et. al. [16]. This model predicts the equilibrium in both the CO2-
and water-rich phases, where the CPA using ExpertThermo database values (blue line)
fails to predict the increasing amount of water in the vapour-phase at around 80 bar.
Finally it should be noted, that the behaviour of the calculations assuming CO2 as
having a single association cite, is very similar to the behaviour seen in the work by I.
Tsivintzelis et. al [16]. One could argue that this is rather surprising, due to the fact
that the pure-component parameters used in [16], was not used in the calculations seen in
Figure 2.3 and 2.4.
This issue will not be addressed further within this work, but the answer is probably
found in the way the parameters are implemented in the ExpertThermo software.
To completely validate the model for the CO2-water system, the phase equilibrium
solubilities are investigated for higher isobars, and as function of pressure instead of
temperature. In Figure 2.5 and 2.6 the phase equilibrium solubilities of the CO2-water
system can be seen as function of temperature for P = 18 bar.
Figure 2.5 and 2.6 shows the solubility of CO2 in the water-rich phase and the
solubility of water in the CO2-rich respectively. The solubilities are shown as a function
of temperature for constant pressure.
On Figure 2.5 it is seen how the PR EOS (black line), as one should anticipate, fails
to predict the amount of CO2 in the water-rich phase at low temperatures. This is once
again most likely explained by the PR EOS inability to take inter-molecular forces into
20
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 2. MODEL CHOICE AND VALIDATION
30th June, 2017
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
Amount of water in the vapour phase for T = 35°C
Pressure [bar]
Y Water
 
 
PR − database values
CPA − database values
CPA − CO2 w. 1 ass. site
Valtz et. al. 2004
King et. al. 1992
Figure 2.4 – Shows the water solubility in the CO2-rich phase for a CO2-water mixture at T = 35◦C. Equilibrium
solubilities is calculated using PR (black line), CPA with ExpertThermo database values (pink), and CPA assuming 1
association site (blue line) with cross-parameters from I. Tsivintzelis et. al. [16]. Experimental data from [17] [19].
account. These forces will tend to be stronger at low temperatures, which thereby enables
more CO2 to stay in the liquid phase. This argument again stresses the importance of
choosing a model which accounts for these intermolecular forces.
Further more it is observed on both Figure 2.5 and 2.6, how the CPA EOS predicts the
amount of CO2 in the water-rich phase, and the amount of water in the CO2-rich phase
to a satisfactory level. Finally it is seen on Figure 2.4 how all investigated models gives
adequate predictions of the amount of water in the CO2-rich phase at 18 bar. This should
also be expected, as it was seen on Figure 2.4 that all models very well predicts the
solubility at this pressure.
2.2.2
Equation of State for Modelling Pure ammonia
In extension to section 2.2.1, the CPA EOS seems to be an appropriate method for per-
forming calculations on the CO2-water system. To completely describe the thermodynamic
behaviour of the compression and refrigeration system, a suiting model must also be found
for describing ammonia.
ammonia is a very small and polar molecule, and therefore some caution should be made
when modelling its thermodynamic behaviour. Like for the CO2-water system both the
performance of the PR and CPA-model are tested on ammonia, using the existing pure
component parameters from ExpertThermo. To test the model-performance for ammonia
the models are tested against the empirical function for molar density of liquid, given by
the DIPPR correlations in equation 2.1 - written here again for convenience [1]:
ρL =
A
B1+(1−T/C)D
Where A = 0.35383 × 101, B = 0.25443, C = 0.40565 × 103 and D = 0.28880 are the
DIPPR coeﬃcients for ammonia and T is the temperature. By using these coeﬃcients
equation 2.1 gives the molar density of liquid ammonia in the units of [kmol/m3]. The
21
==PAGE:26==
CHAPTER 2. MODEL CHOICE AND VALIDATION
30th June, 2017
−20
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
0.02
0.025
Amount of CO2 in the liquid phase for P = 18 bar
Temperature [°C]
X CO2
 
 
PR − database values
CPA − database values
CPA − CO2 w. 1 ass. site
Valtz et. al. 2004
Müller. al. 1988
Figure 2.5 – Showing the CO2 solubility for the water-rich phase in a CO2-water mixture at P = 18 bar. Equilibrium
solubilities is calculated using PR (black line), CPA with ExpertThermo database values (pink), and CPA assuming 1
association site (blue line) with cross-parameters from I. Tsivintzelis et. al. [16]. Experimental data from [17] [10].
speciﬁc volume can then be calculated by dividing the molar density by the molar mass
of ammonia MNH3 = 17.031 g/mol.
In the ExperThermo software the compressibility Z can be directly calculated at any
given temperature and pressure. The speciﬁc volume can then be calculated from the
compressibility as V = ZRT/P.
The speciﬁc volume is now calculated using each EOS in ExpertThermo and compared to
the DIPPR correlation. The results is shown in Figure 2.7.
In Figure 2.7 it can be seen that the molar volume is well predicted by the CPA EOS,
(red line) while the PR EOS (blue line) shows very bad resemblance with the DIPPR
correlation. The PR EOS predicts a constant deviation from the reference calculations,
which could be explained by the models lacing ability of accounting for inter-molecular
forces. Association forces will tend to pull the molecules closer to each other, and the
volume will thereby become lower. If these forces are not accounted for, the predicted
volume may be to high.
Finally it is noticed how the ExpertThermo calculations deviate from the DIPPR correla-
tion at higher temperatures. A reason for this could be that the ExpertThermo software
is better suited for predicting the behaviour at more non-ideal conditions, compared to
the DIPPR correlation.
To further validate the CPA EOS performance on pure ammonia the speciﬁc volume
is calculated at other isobars, and as function of pressure instead of temperature.
Since the DIPPR correlation for liquid density is only dependent on temperature, it is not
suitable to plot for constant temperature. A. Harlow et.al. have developed an empirical
model for calculating the speciﬁc volume of ammonia [6]. This model calculates the
speciﬁc volume as a polynomial function of pressure:
V = A + BP −1 + CP + DP 2 + EP 3 + FP 4 + GP 5 + HP 6 + IP 7 + KP 8 + LP 9 (2.3)
Where A to L are coeﬃcients given for the isotherm T = 25◦C which can be seen in
Table 2.2 below. To get at better picture of the EOS performance, the function developed
22
==PAGE:27==
CHAPTER 2. MODEL CHOICE AND VALIDATION
30th June, 2017
−20
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
Amount of water in the vapour phase for P = 18 bar
Temperature [°C]
Y Water
 
 
PR − database values
CPA − database values
CPA − CO2 w. 1 ass. site
Valtz et. al. 2004
Müller et. al. 1988
Figure 2.6 – Showing the water solubility in the CO2-rich phase for a CO2-water mixture at P = 18 bar. Equilibrium
solubilities is calculated using PR (black line), CPA with ExpertThermo database values (pink), and CPA assuming 1
association site (blue line) with cross-parameters from I. Tsivintzelis et. al. [16]. Experimental data from [17] [10].
by Harlow et.al is plotted together with the DIPPR correlation and the ExperThermo
calculations. The results can be seen in Figure 2.8.
In Figure 2.8 it is seen how the PR EOS unsuccessfully predicts the speciﬁc volume of
ammonia. This should be expected, as it is seen in Figure 2.7, that the PR calculations
deviates from the reference DIPPR correlations in the full temperature interval. Further
more it is seen how the CPA EOS correlates with the empirical model by Harlow et.al. to
satisfactory level, while also being very close to the DIPPR correlation at low pressures.
23
==PAGE:28==
CHAPTER 2. MODEL CHOICE AND VALIDATION
30th June, 2017
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
1.6
1.7
1.8
1.9
2
2.1
2.2
2.3
2.4
2.5
2.6
Specific volume as function of temperature for P = 15 bar
Temperature [C]
Specific volume [cm3/g]
 
 
PR
CPA
DIPPR correlation
Figure 2.7 – Showing the speciﬁc volume of ammonia at P = 15 bar calculated by ExperThermo and using the DIPPR
correlation REF DIPPR. In ExperThermo the calculations have been done using the existing database parameters for
ammonia and using the PR (blue line) and CPA (red line) EOS.
Table 2.2 – Showing the coeﬃcients used in equation 2.3 for calculating the speciﬁc volume of ammonia at the isotherm
T = 25◦C [6].
Coeﬃcients
Value
Units
A
1.648859
cm3/g

B
0.028572
cm3 (0.1MPa) /g

C
−0.000233
cm3/ (0.1MPa) g

D
0.000000116
h
cm3/ (0.1MPa)2 g
i
E
−4.88909 × 10−11
h
cm3/ (0.1MPa)3 g
i
F
1.397209 × 10−14
h
cm3/ (0.1MPa)4 g
i
G
−2.52446 × 10−18
h
cm3/ (0.1MPa)5 g
i
H
2.745052 × 10−22
h
cm3/ (0.1MPa)6 g
i
I
−1.63318 × 10−22
h
cm3/ (0.1MPa)7 g
i
K
4.072686 × 10−22
h
cm3/ (0.1MPa)8 g
i
L
−
h
cm3/ (0.1MPa)9 g
i
24
==PAGE:29==
CHAPTER 2. MODEL CHOICE AND VALIDATION
30th June, 2017
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
1.6
1.65
1.7
1.75
1.8
1.85
1.9
1.95
Pressure [bar]
Specific volume [cm3/g]
Specific volume as function of pressure for T = 25°C
 
 
PR
CPA
Refference function from Harlow et.al. (1997)
DIPPR correlation
Figure 2.8 – Showing the speciﬁc volume of ammonia at T = 25◦C calculated using ExperThermo, the function
developed by A. Harlow et.al. [6] and using the DIPPR correlation [1]. In ExperThermo the calculations have been done
using the existing database parameters for ammonia and using the PR and CPA EOS.
25
==PAGE:30==
CHAPTER 2. MODEL CHOICE AND VALIDATION
30th June, 2017
2.3
Discussion of Model-Choice and Further Valida-
tion
As discussed in section 2.2.1 the CPA EOS was shown to be the most promising model
for performing calculating on the CO2-water system. The best results were achieved by
assuming CO2 as being a self-associating compound, with a single association cite, like
done in the work by I. Tsivintzelis et.al. The motivation for using this model is to account
for inter-molecular forces between the CO2 and water molecules, which is proposed to
be Lewis acid-base interactions between carbon atoms in the CO2 molecules and oxygen
atoms in water molecules [16]. These are not exactly association interactions as the CPA
EOS predicts, but nonetheless these interactions can be predicted by using a proper
association scheme.
In Figure 2.3 to 2.6 it is seen how the best results is achieved by considering CO2 as self
associating compound. To apply this behaviour in ExpertThermo, the cross-component
parameters and association scheme used in the work of I. Tsivintzelis et.al. for this
particular scheme [16] were used. It was seen that the pure component parameters of
CO2, should not be changed in compliance with [16], since this was shown to give bad
predictions of CO2 pure component properties.
Furthermore it could be seen in Figure 2.3 to 2.6, that the CPA model predictions CO2
and water VLE, was superioir compared to the ordinary cubic equations. It was discussed
that the reason to the better performance, was due to the PR EOS inability to account
for the inter-molecular forces.
To further validate the calculations, several VLE studies was performed using the CPA
EOS for the CO2-water system at diﬀerent isotherms and isobars (not shown here). The
results showed satisfactory compliance with experimental data within the temperature
and pressure range relevant for this work.
In Figure 2.7 and 2.8 it was seen, that the CPA EOS also showed great performance,
for predicting the speciﬁc volume of ammonia, while it again should be mentioned that
the cubic PR EOS did not give satisfactory results. Generally the PR EOS predicted a
higher liquid volume than the reference models, which again probably is explained by the
inter-molecular forces.
Further calculations of ammonias pure component properties was performed, using the
CPA EOS at diﬀerent isotherms and isobars, (not shown her) to validate the model within
the temperature and pressure range relevant for this work. The results showed adequate
compliance with the reference models.
26
==PAGE:31==
CHAPTER 3. METHODS FOR EVALUATING COMPRESSION AND
REFRIGERATION PROCESSES
30th June, 2017
Chapter 3
Methods for Evaluating Compression
and Refrigeration Processes
To use the ExpertThermo software package to perform calculations on processes relevant
for this work, a framework for calculating thermodynamic properties and simulating the
processes must be built.
In this chapter the method for calculating thermodynamic properties like enthalpy and
entropy will be described, and their performance discussed.
Furthermore it will be
described how these methods are implemented into Matlab routines, which can be used
for simulating compression and refrigeration processes.
3.1
Calculation of Thermodynamic Properties
As described in section 1.3, 1.4 and 1.5, calculations regarding compression, heat exchange
and active cooling, requires evaluation of a mixtures entropy and enthalpy, at a given
temperature and pressure. Both entropy and enthalpy consists of an ideal and a residual
part and are measured as the diﬀerence between some known value at a reference condition,
and the given conditions. The ideal part treats the ﬂuid as acting like an ideal gas, and
the residual part takes the non-ideal behaviour into account. ExpertThermo allows the
user to calculate only the residual parts of Entropy and Enthalpy, and therefore some
routine has to be built in order, to calculate the total entropy and enthalpy.
In this section the method for calculating the total enthalpy and entropy is thoroughly
explained and validated. Additionally the method for implementing these calculations in
Matlab using the ExpertThermo software will be described.
3.1.1
Calculation of Enthalpy
The total enthalpy H at some temperature and pressure T and P, is as mentioned the sum
of an ideal, a residual part and some known formation value at a reference temperature
and pressure 1.
H(T,P) =
N
X
i=1
yiHi,form(T0,P0) +
N
X
i=1
yiHi,ig(T) +
S
X
j=1
xjHres(T,P,nj)
nj = y1,j,y2,j, . . . ,yi,j
(3.1)
1See work by A. Arya et.al. in Appendix A.1
27
==PAGE:32==
CHAPTER 3. METHODS FOR EVALUATING COMPRESSION AND
REFRIGERATION PROCESSES
30th June, 2017
Where Hform is the enthalpy of formation, Hig is the ideal gas enthalpy and Hres is
the residual enthalpy. Here the subscript i denotes each of N diﬀerent components,
the subscript j denotes each of S diﬀerent phases, yi denotes the molar percentage of
component i and xj denotes the total molar percentage of phase j. Normally one was to
ﬁnd the diﬀerence in enthalpy between to stages, at diﬀerent conditions, like for example
before and after compression. For this reason the enthalpy of formation is typically
neglected since it would cancel out when calculating the diﬀerence between two diﬀerent
conditions. The importance of the formation values will therefore not be discussed further
in this work.
To calculate the total enthalpy of a mixture the enthalpy of each present phase is calculated
separately. The residual contribution to enthalpy of a phase is calculated directly using
the ExpertThermo software, by specifying the temperature, pressure and molar fraction
of components in the given phase.
The ideal gas enthalpy of each component is calculated as the integral of the ideal gas
heat capacity, over the reference temperature T0 to the given temperature T 2:
Hig =
Z T
T0
Cp,ig dT
(3.2)
The ideal gas heat capacity is given from the DIPPR correlation as a function of T [1]:
Cp,ig = A + B


C
T sinh

C
T



2
+ D


E
T cosh

E
T



2
(3.3)
Where A, B, C, D and E are the DIPPR coeﬃcient given for each compound and can be
seen in Table 3.1. Inserting these coeﬃcients in equation 3.3 gives the speciﬁc heat capacity
in the units J/(kmol · K). Inserting the expression for the ideal gas heat capacity from
Table 3.1 – Showing the DIPPR coeﬃcients for 2, Water and NH3 for calculating speciﬁc heat capacity. These
coeﬃcients should be used in equation 3.3 and gives the speciﬁc heat capacity in the units [J/(kmol · K)] [1].
A
B
C
D
E
CO2
0.29370 × 105
0.34540 × 105
0.14280 × 104
0.26400 × 105
0.58800 × 103
Water
0.33363 × 105
0.26790 × 105
0.26105 × 104
0.88960 × 104
0.11690 × 104
Ammonia
0.33427 × 105
0.48980 × 105
0.20360 × 104
0.22560 × 105
0.88200 × 103
equation 3.3 in equation 3.2 and solving the integral, results in the following expression
for the ideal gas enthalpy:
Hig = AT +
BC cosh

C
T

sinh

C
T

−
DE sinh

E
T

cosh

E
T

−AT0 . . .
. . . −
BC cosh

C
T0

sinh

C
T0

+
DE sinh

E
T0

cosh

E
T0

(3.4)
The ideal gas enthalpy is calculated for each component in every phase using this equation.
It should here be noticed that the ideal gas enthalpy is not dependent of the pressure.
This can be explicitly proven and therefore the only pressure dependency of the enthalpy
comes from the residual part.
For more details in the calculation of enthalpy, the Matlab function used for calculating
the entropy in this work can be seen in Appendix B.1.
2See work by A. Arya et.al. in Appendix A.1
28
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 3. METHODS FOR EVALUATING COMPRESSION AND
REFRIGERATION PROCESSES
30th June, 2017
3.1.2
Calculation of Entropy
Entropy is generally calculated in the same way as the enthalpy but with some minor
diﬀerences. The entropy S at some temperature and pressure T and P, is like the enthalpy
given as the sum of the formation entropy Sform, ideal gas entropy Sig and residual entropy
Sres:
S(T,P) =
N
X
i=1
Si,form(T0,P0) +
N
X
i=1
Si,ig(T,P) + Sres(T,P)
(3.5)
To calculate the total entropy of a mixture the entropy of each present phase is
calculated separately. The residual contribution to entropy of a phase is, like the enthalpy,
calculated directly with the ExpertThermo software, by specifying the temperature,
pressure and molar fraction of components in the phase.
The ideal gas entropy is calculated as the integral of the fraction between the ideal gas
heat capacity and the temperature 3.
Si,ig =
Z T
T0
Cp,i
T
dT
(3.6)
Using the heat capacity from the DIPPR correleations given in equation 3.3, the expression
for ideal gas entropy in equation 3.6 can be evaluated as:
Sig = A ln (T) + 2BC
T
+
2BC
T

exp

2C
T

−1
 −B ln

exp
2C
T

−1

−2DE
T
. . .
. . . +
2DE
T

exp

2E
T

+ 1
 + D ln

exp
2E
T

+ 1

−A ln (T0) . . .
. . . −2BC
T0
−
2BC
T0

exp

2C
T0

−1
 + B ln

exp
2C
T0

−1

+ 2DE
T0
. . .
. . . +
2DE
T0

exp

2E
T0

+ 1
 −D ln

exp
2E
T0

+ 1

(3.7)
The ideal gas entropy is calculated for each component in each phase using equation 3.7.
Contradictory to the calculation of enthalpy, it can be shown that the entropy have to be
corrected according to the pressure. The pressure correction to the ideal gas entropy Sp is
given as:
Sp = −R ln
 P
P0

(3.8)
Where R is the gas constant. The pressure correction is added to the ideal gas entropy
for each component.
For more details in the calculation of entropy, the Matlab function used for calculating
the entropy in this work can be seen in Appendix B.2.
3See work by A. Arya et.al. in Appendix A.1
29
==PAGE:34==
CHAPTER 3. METHODS FOR EVALUATING COMPRESSION AND
REFRIGERATION PROCESSES
30th June, 2017
3.1.3
Validation of Enthalpy and Entropy Calculations
The calculations of enthalpy and entropy described in section 3.1.1 and 3.1.2 are im-
plemented in a Matlab routine, to enable using them for evaluating compression and
refrigeration processes. These calculation-routines should be validated against a prescribed
reference, to be able to analyse the performance of the calculations. In this section the
enthalpy and entropy of CO2, water and ammonia will be calculated and compared to
reference values from the literature.
Validation of Enthalpy/Entropy of CO2
To validate the enthalpy and entropy calculations for CO2, they are compared to the
results of the work done by R. Span and W. Wagner, 1996 [14]. In this work, enthalpy and
entropy are calculated using the equation of state developed speciﬁcally for calculating
the properties of CO2.
To compare the enthalpy and entropy calculations to this reference data they are plotted
as function of temperature at an isobar of P = 20 bar. The enthalpy and entropy are
calculated with respect to the reference condition T0 = 25◦C and P0 = 1 atm, and the
calculated enthalpy and entropy at this condition is added to the reference values. The
results can be seen in Figure 3.1 and 3.2.
−100
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
−20
−10
0
10
20
30
40
Enthalpy of CO2 at P = 20 bar.
Temperature [°C]
Enthalpy [kJ/mol]
 
 
Total enthalpy
Ideal−Gas contribution from DIPPR
Residual contribution from ExpertThermo
Refference values from Span & Wagner (1994)
Figure 3.1 – Showing the enthalpy of CO2 calculated as a function of temperature at the isobar P = 20 bar. On the
ﬁgure is seen the contributions from the residual and ideal gas enthalpy plotted separately. Reference data from the work
of R. Span & W. Wagner, 1996 [14].
Validation of Enthalpy/Entropy of Water
To validate the enthalpy and entropy calculations for water they are compared to the values
given by the International Association for the Properties of Water and Steam-formulation
(IAWPS) from 2002 by W. Wagner [18]. This formulation is broadly accepted as the
global standard for describing thermodynamical properties of water.
To compare the enthalpy and entropy calculations to this reference data they are plotted
as a function of temperature for an isobar of P = 1 bar. The enthalpy and entropy are
30
==PAGE:35==
CHAPTER 3. METHODS FOR EVALUATING COMPRESSION AND
REFRIGERATION PROCESSES
30th June, 2017
−100
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
−100
−80
−60
−40
−20
0
20
40
60
80
Entropy of CO2 at P = 20 bar.
Temperature [°C]
Entropy [J/(mol ⋅ K)]
 
 
Total entropy
Ideal−Gas contribution from DIPPR
Residual contribution from ExpertThermo
Entropy pressure correction
Refference values from Span & Wagner (1994)
Figure 3.2 – Showing the and entropy of CO2 calculated as a function of temperature at the isobar P = 20 bar. On the
ﬁgure is seen the contributions from the residual, ideal gas and pressure corrections to the entropy plotted separately.
Reference data from the work of R. Span & W. Wagner, 1996 [14].
calculated with reference to the triple point T0 = 273.16 K and P0 = 611.66 kPa, and the
calculated enthalpy and entropy at this condition is added to the reference values. The
results can be seen in Figure 3.3 and 3.4.
Validation of Enthalpy/Entropy of Ammonia
To validate the enthalpy and entropy calculations for ammonia they are compared to the
work by L. Haar and J. Gallagher from 1978 [5].
To compare the enthalpy and entropy calculations to this reference data they are plotted
as a function of temperature for an isobar of P = 20 bar. In the reference work the
enthalpy and entropy are calculated with respect to the reference state at T0 = 0 K and
P = 1 atm. Since the formulation for calculating the ideal gas enthalpy and entropy, given
in equation 3.4 and 3.7, cannot be evaluated in Matlab at this temperature, the reference
temperature used for calculations was T0 = 7 K. The results can be seen in Figure 3.3
and 3.4.
In Figure 3.1, 3.3 and 3.3 the enthalpy of CO2, water and ammonia (blue line) has
been plotted as function of temperature for constant pressure, and compared to reference
data (black circles). In the Figures can also be seen the ideal-gas (red dotted line) and
residual (pink dotted line) contributions to the enthalpy.
In Figure 3.2, 3.4 and 3.4 the entropy of CO2, water and ammonia (blue line) has been
plotted as function of temperature for constant pressure, and compared to reference data
(black circles). In the Figures can also be seen the entropy pressure correction, (green
dotted line) ideal-gas (red dotted line) and residual (pink dotted line) contributions to
the entropy.
On all plots it can be seen that the respective compound undergoes a phase transition
from liquid to vapour when the temperature increases. This can be seen by a sudden
increase of both the enthalpy and entropy. For CO2 this is seen on Figure 3.1 and 3.2
at around −20◦C, for water on Figure 3.3 and 3.4 at around 100◦C and for ammonia on
31
==PAGE:36==
CHAPTER 3. METHODS FOR EVALUATING COMPRESSION AND
REFRIGERATION PROCESSES
30th June, 2017
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
−50
−40
−30
−20
−10
0
10
20
30
40
Enthalpy of Water at P = 1 bar.
Temperature [°C]
Enthalpy [kJ/mol]
 
 
Total enthalpy
Ideal−Gas contribution from DIPPR
Residual contribution from ExpertThermo
Refference values from he IAPWS formulation (1995)
Figure 3.3 – Showing the enthalpy of water calculated as a function of temperature at the isobar P = 1 bar. On the
ﬁgure is seen the contributions from the residual and ideal gas enthalpy plotted separately. Reference data from the
IAWPS formulation by W. Wagner, 2002 [18].
Figure 3.3 and 3.4 at around 50◦C.
In Figure 3.1 to 3.6 it has been seen, that the enthalpy and entropy calculations
generally complies well with the reference data, both before and after the liquid-vapour
phase transition. One exception to this is seen in the calculation of entropy for ammonia
in Figure 3.6. Here it shows that the entropy lies approximately 50 J/ (mol · K) below the
reference value. This is probably due to the fact that the ideal gas values could not be
calculated with respect to the same reference temperature as in the work by L. Haar and
J. Gallagher, thus introducing a permanent lateral shift of some magnitude to the entropy
and enthalpy.
More importantly Figure 3.1 to 3.6 shows, that the phase transition and slopes of both the
enthalpy and entropy are in accordance with the reference data for all three components.
As mentioned in the beginning of section 3.1.1 one would typically only be interested in
enthalpy and entropy diﬀerences between states. These diﬀerences will always be depen-
dent on the diﬀerential behaviour of the calculations between two conditions. Therefore
the exact lateral displacement of enthalpy and entropy is therefore not as important their
slope with regard to the temperature or pressure.
A sudden increase in both enthalpy and entropy, when increasing the temperature, indi-
cates that the compound undergoes a phase transition from liquid to vapour. Looking at
the enthalpy calculations, it is seen that the main contribution to enthalpy in the vapour
phase comes from the ideal gas enthalpy while the residual enthalpy contribution is close
to zero. In the liquid phase the compound will obviously not behave like an ideal gas, and
this is clearly accounted for by the residual enthalpy which is non-zero before the phase
transition.
The same behaviour is seen in the entropy calculations where the residual entropy is zero
after the phase transition. Here one should note how the pressure correction shifts the
entropy calculations downwards to ﬁt the reference data.
Enthalpy and entropy calculations were performed for several isobars, (not shown
32
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER 3. METHODS FOR EVALUATING COMPRESSION AND
REFRIGERATION PROCESSES
30th June, 2017
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
−120
−100
−80
−60
−40
−20
0
20
40
60
80
Entropy of Water at P = 1 bar.
Temperature [°C]
Entropy [J/(mol ⋅ K)]
 
 
Total entropy
Ideal−Gas contribution from DIPPR
Residual contribution from ExpertThermo
Entropy pressure correction
Refference values from he IAPWS formulation (1995)
Figure 3.4 – Showing the entropy of water calculated as a function of temperature at the isobar P = 1 bar. On the
ﬁgure is seen the contributions from the residual, ideal gas and pressure corrections to the entropy plotted separately.
Reference data from the IAWPS formulation by W. Wagner, 2002 [18].
here) to validate the routine within the relevant temperature and pressure regime, of this
work. In general the calculations show satisfactory compliance to the reference values
from literature.
33
==PAGE:38==
CHAPTER 3. METHODS FOR EVALUATING COMPRESSION AND
REFRIGERATION PROCESSES
30th June, 2017
−100
0
100
200
300
400
500
−30
−20
−10
0
10
20
30
Enthalpy of NH3 at P = 20 bar.
Temperature [°C]
Enthalpy [kJ/mol]
 
 
Total enthalpy
Ideal−Gas contribution from DIPPR
Residual contribution from ExpertThermo
Refference values from Haar & Galagher (1978)
Figure 3.5 – Showing the enthalpy of ammonia calculated as a function of temperature at the isobar P = 20 bar. On the
ﬁgure is seen the contributions from the residual and ideal gas enthalpy plotted separately. Reference data from the work
of L. Haar & J.S. Gallagher, 1978 [5].
−100
0
100
200
300
400
500
−100
−50
0
50
100
150
200
250
Entropy of NH3 at P = 20 bar.
Temperature [°C]
Entropy [J/(mol ⋅ K)]
 
 
Total entropy
Ideal−Gas contribution from DIPPR
Residual contribution from ExpertThermo
Entropy pressure correction
Refference values from Haar & Galagher (1978)
Figure 3.6 – Showing the entropy of ammonia calculated as a function of temperature at the isobar P = 20 bar. On the
ﬁgure is seen the contributions from the residual, ideal gas and pressure corrections to the entropy plotted separately.
Reference data from the work of L. Haar & J.S. Gallagher, 1978 [5].
34
==PAGE:39==
CHAPTER 3. METHODS FOR EVALUATING COMPRESSION AND
REFRIGERATION PROCESSES
30th June, 2017
3.2
Modelling Procedure and Matlab Implementa-
tion
When the routines for calculating enthalpy and entropy is established, some attention is
directed towards using these calculations to evaluate the compression and refrigeration
processes, described in sections 1.3 and 1.5. In the following section the procedure of
implementing these calculations into Matlab routines able to describe these processes
will brieﬂy be described.
3.2.1
Compression Calculations
The operations of the compression routine follow the steps described in section 1.3. An
initial temperature and pressure is deﬁned together with the post-compression pressure.
Assuming the compression as being an isentropic process, the reversible temperature after
compression is found by iteration of the entropy. When the reversible temperature is
found the true work of compression is found using equation 1.1 as described in section
1.3.1 about thermodynamics of compression. The true temperature is ﬁnally found by
iteration of enthalpy, when knowing the enthalpy at this temperature must give the true
work calculated by equation 1.1.
If the compression routine is performed on a single component, eg. ammonia in the
refrigeration cycle, the entropy and enthalpy after compression may lie at the saturation
point for the given pressure. In this case the temperature after compression must be the
saturation temperature, and the entropy and enthalpy is then deﬁned by the phase split
after compression. In this case the phase split is found by iteration of the phase split,
quite similar to how it is done with temperature.
For more details in the compression routine the full script can be found in appendix B.3.
3.2.2
Active Refrigeration Calculations
The operations of the vapour-compression refrigeration routine follows the steps described
in section 1.5. In the refrigeration routine the evaporation and condensation pressures
are deﬁned together with the eﬃciency coeﬃcient η.
The initial temperature after
evaporation is found as the dew point temperature by assuming that the refrigerant is
completely saturated vapour. The refrigerant is then compressed to the condensation
pressure following the procedure described in the previous section 3.2.1, which gives the
temperature after compression. The temperature after condensation is again found as the
bubble point temperature, by assuming that the refrigerant is completely saturated liquid.
Finally the pressure and temperature of the refrigerant is returned to the initial value
during isenthalpic throttling. The phase split after throttling is found by iteration of
enthalpy, assuming that throttling is an isenthalpic process.
For more details in the refrigeration routine the full Matlab script can be found in
appendix B.4.
Heat Exchange with External Coolant
When the refrigerant in the refrigeration cycle is condensed, heat is transferred to the
surroundings or some external coolant, which in this work will be assumed to be seawater.
Since the temperature of the refrigerant is known before and after condensation, the
35
==PAGE:40==
CHAPTER 3. METHODS FOR EVALUATING COMPRESSION AND
REFRIGERATION PROCESSES
30th June, 2017
temperature of the seawater exiting the condenser can be calculated using equation 1.4 as
described in the section about heat transfer 1.4.1. This is done by specifying the initial
seawater temperature and the logarithmic mean temperature of the heat exchanger.
When the seawater temperature is known, the enthalpy of the seawater can be calculated
at both sides of the heat exchanger, by assuming that the seawater is at ambient pressure.
The amount of seawater passing through the heat exchanger can then be calculated by
assuming that no enthalpy is lost, and using equation 1.3 in section 1.4.
3.2.3
Combined Compression & Refrigeration Cycle
To arrive at the full framework necessary for calculating the energy use for multi-stage
compression with inter-cooling, the compression and refrigeration routines need to be
combined. The compression routine also include a phase separator, to remove any liquid
from the stream after cooling. The combined compression and cooling cycle consist of
three stages, which are repeated for each compression step. The three stages is illustrated
in Figure 3.7 below:
1
2
3
1 (next step)
Liquid out
Cooling
Compression
Dehydration
Figure 3.7 – Showing a schematic of a single compression step in the compression and refrigeration routine. The
numbers represents the stages of the compression step. Stage 1 is before compression, at initial temperature and pressure.
Stage 2 is after compression at elevated temperature and pressure. Stage 3 is after the gas has been cooled to the
temperature at stage 1. Finally the ﬂuid goes from stage 3 to stage 1 on next compression step, by removing all liquid,
resulting in a diﬀerent molar composition and ﬂow rate compared to previous stage 1.
To initiate the calculations, an initial and ﬁnal pressure is speciﬁed together with
the total number of compression steps. By applying that the pressure is ampliﬁed with
a constant percentage between each step, the pressure of each compression step can be
calculated. The properties at stage 2 of each compression step is then calculated using
the procedure described in section 3.2.1, to arrive at the conditions after compression.
After compression the gas is cooled down to its initial temperature from stage 2 to 3. At
this stage the cycle is distinguished between cooling the stream with seawater, or using
active cooling with a vapour-compression refrigeration cycle. In both cases the cooling
implies heating of seawater. If the heated seawater should be used for heat integration
with the capture plant or other heavy industry, the temperature and mass ﬂow of the
water should be known. When the stream is cooled using active cooling the mass ﬂow
and temperature of the seawater coolant is found as described in section 3.2.2 about
vapour-compression refrigeration. If the gas stream is cooled directly by sea, the method
for ﬁnding the mass ﬂow and temperature is somewhat analogous to when active cooling
is used. The only diﬀerence is that the enthalpy diﬀerence is calculated over the CO2
stream instead of the cooling cycle, when ﬁnding the amount of seawater passing through
the heat exchanger.
Once the CO2 has been cooled from stage 2 to 3 the gas stream is dehydrated before the
36
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER 3. METHODS FOR EVALUATING COMPRESSION AND
REFRIGERATION PROCESSES
30th June, 2017
next compression step. This is done by calculating the phase split and phase fractions at
the stage conditions. The molar composition of the gas stream is then redeﬁned as the
molar composition of the most dense phase, and the new molar ﬂow is calculated as the
old molar ﬂow times the total fraction of gas after cooling. In situations where the gas
stream consists of two liquid phases, this operation will simply remove the most dense
phase.
It should be noted that since most of the liquid phase after cooling will consist of water, the
dehydration will result in a change of the total molar composition at the next compression
step. As will be seen later in chapter 4, a change in molar composition will also result in
a change of enthalpy even though the temperature and pressure is the same before and
after dehydration.
After dehydration, the three stages of each compression step is repeated, until the
ﬁnal pressure is reached. The total work is then calculated as the sum of the compression
work of the stream compressor and the refrigeration compressor at each compression step.
For more details in the complete compression and refrigeration routine the full Matlab
script can be found in appendix B.5.
37
==PAGE:42==
CHAPTER 4. MODELLING AND RESULTS
30th June, 2017
Chapter 4
Modelling and Results
To be able to evaluate the compression process and propose possible design improvements,
calculations will have to be done for diﬀerent process designs, so they can be compared.
In this work ﬁve diﬀerent compression routine designs have been tested in ﬁve diﬀerent
cases. The cases varies in number of compression steps, initial temperature and whether
or not active cooling is used. Process simulations have been performed for all cases using
the framework described in chapter 3, and the results is reported and brieﬂy discussed in
the following chapter.
4.1
Case 1: Validation of Compression Calculations
Initially compression calculations from literature should be replicated, to be able to
validate the calculations in the following cases. In the ﬁrst case described in this section,
compression calculations from literature will be replicated as a consistent reference case
for the calculations done in following cases. To validate the compression routines of this
work, the calculations by A. Alabdulkarem et.al. is replicated, using the model discussed
in chapter 2 and the calculation methods described in chapter 3. In this work a typical
simulation of a compression scheme, using eight compression steps with inter-cooling is
performed. The compression simulation is performed on a CO2 stream with a ﬂow-velocity
of 80.48 ton/hr, where the CO2 is isothermally compressed from 1.8 to 150 bar, consuming
6.25 MW [3]. The isentropic eﬃciency of the compressors are 0.8, and the gas stream is
cooled to its initial temperature between each compression step. The cooling is provided
by seawater and the CO2 stream were dehydrated after each compression step. The
compression calculations were performed using the PR EOS in the HYSIS software [3].
To replicate these calculations the gas stream with the initial molar fractions given
in Table 2.1 on page 17, is compressed from the initial conditions of 40◦C and 1.8 bar to
150 bar using 8 compression steps. At each step the pressure is increased with a constant
percentage of 73.82 %, to arrive at the ﬁnal pressure. Between each step the stream is
cooled to the initial temperature, by exchanging heat with seawater. After cooling, the
stream is dehydrated by only letting the vapour phase pass to the next compression step.
Some additional speciﬁcations for the compressor and heat exchanger can be seen below
in Table 4.1.
The pressure, temperature and enthalpy of the gas stream is evaluated at all stages in
each compression step. A pressure-temperature and enthalpy-pressure diagram can be
seen in Figure 4.1 and 4.2 below.
On Figure 4.1 the temperature and pressure development of the CO2 stream is
38
==PAGE:43==
CHAPTER 4. MODELLING AND RESULTS
30th June, 2017
Table 4.1 – Showing the isentropic compression eﬃciency coeﬃcient η, the heat exchangers logarithmic mean
temperature diﬀerence LMTD and the initial seawater temperature Tsea, used for the compression routine described in
Case 1.
Property
η
0.8
LMTD
15◦C
Tsea
15◦C
Figure 4.1 – Case 1: Showing the temperature development at each pressure step. The coloured background indicates
the phase behaviour of the ﬂuid at the given temperature, pressure and molar fraction. The grey dashed lines indicates
where the molar fraction changes, which leads to diﬀerent phase behaviour for the gas stream.
visualized. The stream starts at 40◦C and 1.8 bar in the bottom left corner marked "IN",
and terminates at 40◦C and 150 bar in the bottom right corner marked "OUT". It is
here clearly seen how the temperature increases, when the pressure is increased during
compression. After compression it is seen how the temperature decreases at constant
pressure during cooling.
The colours indicates the phase behaviour of the gas stream at the current conditions.
The dashed grey lines indicates the point where the gas is dehydrated and thus the point
where the gas stream molar composition changes. This is the reason for the change in
phase behaviour which is seen just after dehydration at each step. It should here be
noted that the gas stream will consist of only one phase, at the conditions right after
dehydration, which should also be expected since the most dense phase has been removed.
It should here be mentioned that the gas stream is in a completely liquid state at the
ﬁnal conditions. This is somewhat quite inconvenient as gas is usually transported in
the vapour state. To vaporize the gas it should be heated to temperatures around 65◦C,
however since this would not be in compliance with the reference by A. Alabdulkarem
et.al. the ﬁnal calculations are not altered, so a proper comparison can be done.
Figure 4.1 show, how the constant fractional increase in pressure, give rise to a close to
constant increase of temperature, excluding the ﬁrst and last compression step. The reason
why the temperature increase at the ﬁrst compression step is lower than the successive
39
==PAGE:44==
CHAPTER 4. MODELLING AND RESULTS
30th June, 2017
−10
−8
−6
−4
−2
0
2
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
310 K
320 K
330 K
340 K
350 K
360 K
370 K
380 K
390 K
400 K
410 K 420 K 430 K
Enthalpy [kJ/mol]
Pressure [bar]
Isoterms calculated for final molar composition, 
[CO2] = 99.98 % by mass
OUT
IN
Figure 4.2 – Case 1: Showing the enthalpy of the CO2 stream at each pressure step (pink) for. The isothermal enthalpy
lines (black) are plotted for the CO2 molar fraction at the ﬁnal compression step. Special caution is therefore advised
when comparing the ﬁrst three points (bottom middle) to the isotherms, since the CO2 fraction is initially much lower.
steps is most likely, that the gas stream is dehydrated between each step. As will be
seen later in section 4.1.1, the dehydration at the ﬁrst step will remove a large amount of
water from the gas stream. Therefore, the water molar fraction will be much higher at the
initial step, resulting in a larger liquid phase compared to the following steps. If the liquid
phase is large, much of the work applied during compression will go to evaporate the ﬂuid,
instead of increasing the temperature, resulting in a smaller increase in temperature.
It is also seen that the temperature increase at the ﬁnal compression step is slightly lower
than the preceding steps. This is most likely explained by the slower increase of enthalpy
at higher pressure. This behaviour can also be seen by looking at the isothermal lines
plotted in Figure 4.2.
On Figure 4.2 the development of the gas stream enthalpy can be seen at each pressure
step. The pink line indicates the gas stream enthalpy, and the circles indicates each stage
of every compression step. The gas stream starts with an enthalpy around −7.5 kJ/mol
at the point marked "IN", and terminates with an enthalpy around −10 kJ/mol at the
point marked "OUT".
The black lines seen on Figure 4.2 are the enthalpy calculated for the gas stream at
constant temperatures and assuming the molar composition of the ﬁnal compression step.
Comparing the gas stream enthalpy to the isothermal lines should therefore be done
carefully, especially at the ﬁrst compression step, since the molar composition at this
step is radically diﬀerent from the ﬁnal molar composition. At all steps preceding the
initial the isothermal lines gives a good comparison of the gas stream enthalpy. It can also
be seen that the enthalpy of the gas stream roughly follows two isothermal lines, which
reﬂects the behaviour seen in Figure 4.1.
It can here be seen how the enthalpy changes three times during one compression step.
First the enthalpy and pressure increases simultaneously during compression, where after
the enthalpy decreases at constant pressure during cooling. Finally it is seen that after
cooling the enthalpy slightly increases when the gas stream is dehydrated. The reason
for this is that the enthalpy of a CO2-water mixture generally will increase if the molar
40
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 4. MODELLING AND RESULTS
30th June, 2017
fraction of CO2 increases, which as mentioned earlier is the case when the gas stream is
dehydrated. This behaviour is speciﬁcally notable at the ﬁrst compression step where the
enthalpy increases from −8 to 3 kJ/mol, because of the large amount of water removed
at this step. It should here be stressed that the increase of enthalpy during dehydration
does not reﬂect an overall increase of the systems energy, since the ﬂow rate is decreased
during the same process.
4.1.1
Dehydration and Mass Flow Development
During each compression step the gas stream is dehydrated by removing the liquid or
most dense phase from the gas stream. The dehydration of the gas stream, will obviously
reduce its overall mass ﬂow but will also increase the CO2 purity, since the liquid phase
consists mostly of water. For the ﬁrst case the ﬁnal purity of the conditioned CO2 is
calculated to be 99.98 % by mass. The purity and the total mass ﬂow of the gas stream
can be seen in Figure 4.4 and 4.3.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
72
73
74
75
76
77
78
79
80
81
steps
Mass flow [ton/hr]
 
 
Final CO2 flow = 72.4 ton/hr
Flowrate of CO2 stream at each compression step
Figure 4.3 – Case 1: Showing the total mass ﬂow development of the CO2 stream as function of the amount of
compression steps.
In Figure 4.3 it can be seen how the mass ﬂow rate of the gas stream is greatly reduced
at ﬁrst compression step. This is because the ﬂuid will form a relatively large liquid
phase when the water content is high, and therefore a larger part of the gas stream will
be removed by dehydration. Further more it is seen on Figure 4.4 how the CO2 purity
drastically increases at the ﬁrst compression step. The reason for this is that the large
liquid phase at this step mainly will consist of water, which therefore will be removed
from the liquid.
It is then noticed how the mass ﬂow rate and CO2 purity at following steps does not
change as drastically. This is because the CO2 concentration is suﬃciently, so only very
small amounts of liquid is formed at each step, thus only small amounts of water are
removed from the stream each time.
41
==PAGE:46==
CHAPTER 4. MODELLING AND RESULTS
30th June, 2017
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
88
90
92
94
96
98
100
steps
Ammount of CO2 by mass [%]
 
 
Final CO2 purity = 99.98 %
Mass fraction of CO2 at each compression step
Figure 4.4 – Case 1: Showing the development of the total CO2 mass fraction in the stream as function of the amount
of compression steps.
4.1.2
Total Work of Compression
The total work of compression is calculated as the sum of the compressor work at each
compression step. The gas stream enthalpy after compression is calculated following
the procedure described in section 3.2.1 and the work of compression is calculated using
equation 1.2 as described section 1.3 about compression. The compression work of each
compression step and total compression work can be seen in Figure 4.5.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
steps
Power [MW]
 
 
Total work = 6.23 MW
Stream Compression Work
Cumulative Work
Figure 4.5 – Case 1: Showing the compression work of each step (blue) and cumulative work of compression (red). The
total work of compression is calculated as 6.23 MW.
On Figure 4.5 the work of each individual compression step can be seen plotted together
with the cumulative work for all preceding steps. The total work of compression needed to
compress the gas stream from 1.8 to 150 bar, during eight compression steps, is 6.23 MW,
42
==PAGE:47==
CHAPTER 4. MODELLING AND RESULTS
30th June, 2017
with an average work pr. step of approximately 0.8 MW. It is noticed that the work
needed to compress the gas stream decreases over the amount of steps, even though the
pressure increase becomes larger at each step. This trend can also be seen in Figure 4.2
where it is seen how the enthalpy increase during compression becomes smaller.
4.1.3
Heating of Seawater
When the gas stream is cooled by seawater during each compression step, the seawater
exiting the heat exchanger will have been heated to some extent. To be able to consider
the use the heated water for heat integration in other processes, the temperature and total
mass ﬂow of the hot seawater stream is calculated. This is done for each compression
step, using the method described in section 3.2.3. The average temperature of the heated
seawater is calculated as a mean temperature weighted by the ﬂow rate at each compression
step. The results can be seen in Figure 4.6 and 4.7.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
50
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
Steps
Temperature [°C]
 
 
Average output temperature = 73.33°C
Temperature of output sea water at each compression step
Figure 4.6 – Case 1: Showing the temperature of the seawater exiting the heat exchanger after each compression step.
The average temperature of the total water ﬂow is calculated to be 73.33◦C
Figure 4.6 shows the temperature of the seawater when it exits the heat exchanger, for
each compression step and Figure 4.7 shows the ﬂow of seawater necessary for providing
the cooling needed at each compression step, together with the cumulative ﬂow of seawater
for all preceding steps.
From Figure 4.7 it can be seen, that the necessary ﬂow of seawater is 197 ton/hr with an
average ﬂow rate of approximately 25 ton/hr. At this ﬂow rate the average temperature
of the seawater exiting the heat exchanger after cooling will be 73.33◦C as seen in Figure
4.6. In Figure 4.6 it is noticed that the temperature of the heated seawater, generally
follows the trend of the post compression temperature of the gas stream, which can be
seen in Figure 4.1. The seawater temperature at the ﬁrst and ﬁnal compression step is
several degrees lower than the average temperature which reﬂects the smaller increase in
temperature, that the gas stream experiences at these stages.
Quite contradictory to this it is seen that the ﬂow rate of the heated seawater is higher at
the ﬁrst and ﬁnal compression step, compared to the steps in between. This is because
the necessary ﬂow rate is calculated from the enthalpy diﬀerence of the gas stream across
43
==PAGE:48==
CHAPTER 4. MODELLING AND RESULTS
30th June, 2017
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
Steps
Flowrate [ton/hr]
 
 
Total flow of sea water = 197 ton/hr
Flow of sea water at each compression step
Cummulative flow of sea water
Figure 4.7 – Case 1: Showing the total necessary mass ﬂow of seawater passing through the heat exchanger after each
compression step (blue) and the cumulated ﬂow of seawater after all compression steps (red).
the heat exchanger, rather than from the temperatures of the gas stream. This was also
seen in equation 1.3 in section 1.4 about heat exchange. In Figure 4.2 it can be seen that
the decrease in enthalpy during cooling, is approximately the same as the following steps.
Since the temperature of the heated seawater is lower at this step, this means that the
enthalpy of the seawater will likewise be lower. If the enthalpy balance in equation 1.3
has to hold the seawater ﬂow rate must consequently be higher at this step. In other
words; if the decrease in enthalpy is the same for hot and a cold stream, it will require
most seawater to cool the cold stream, since less heat is transferred to the seawater.
In the two ﬁnal compression steps it can be seen how the enthalpy change during cooling
is larger than the preceding steps. The larger change of enthalpy is reﬂected in a larger
ﬂow rate of seawater.
4.1.4
Comparison to Results From Litterature
To completely validate the compression routine calculations, the results of the compression
calculations described in the previous sections, is compared to the results from the reference
work by A. Alabdulkarem et.al. The design speciﬁcations for the compression process
described earlier is not exactly the same as the one described in the reference work. In
the reference work the compression steps were characterized by the gas stream having
a speciﬁed temperature when exiting the compressor, rather than knowing the output
pressure after compression. However, it could be seen in Figure 4.1 that the temperature
after each compression step were close to constant for most compression steps, which
implies that this design speciﬁcation might not make the two calculations incomparable.
Another distinction between the design speciﬁcations of the compression processes of this
work and the reference work is the initial content of the gas stream. As discussed earlier
when deﬁning the system in section 2.1, this discrepancy should neither have any larger
eﬀect on the calculations.
The two compression calculations are compared by their overall energy consumption seen
in Table 4.2. Here it can be seen that the compression calculations in Case 1 only have
44
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER 4. MODELLING AND RESULTS
30th June, 2017
a discrepancy of −0.38 % to the results from the reference work. This stresses that the
methods described in section 3.2 for performing the compression simulation, is in good
compliance with literature.
Table 4.2 – Showing the total work of compression as calculated in the work of A. Alabdulkarem et.al.[3] and as
described for Case 1 in section 4.1.
A. Alabulkarem et.al.
Case 1
Work of compression
6.25 MW
6.23 MW
Discrepancy
−
−0.38 %
Case 1 Recap:
To validate the model and calculation method Case 1 was made to
replicate data from the literature. Furthermore Case 1 will serve as a consistent point of
reference for following cases. It was seen that the compression calculations complied very
well, with the results given in the work by A. Alabdulkarem et.al. [3].
Finally Case 1 has given insight in the thermodynamical behaviour of the gas stream
during the compression and cooling process. It has also been seen how the phase behaviour
of the gas stream aﬀects its enthalpy, and thereby the cost of compression and amount of
cooling needed at each compression step.
45
==PAGE:50==
CHAPTER 4. MODELLING AND RESULTS
30th June, 2017
4.2
Case 2:
Varying the Number of Compression
Steps
In the previous section calculations were shown for a simple compression process with
eight compression steps and inter cooling. In the second case described in this second the
number of compression steps will be increased to investigate how this aﬀects the overall
energy use.
For the second case the gas stream is again compressed from the initial conditions of
40◦C and 1.8 bar to 150 bar. In this case the amount of compression and cooling steps
is increased to 12 compared to only 8 steps in Case 1. At each step the pressure is now
increased with a constant percentage of 44.57 %, to arrive at the ﬁnal pressure. Between
each step the stream is cooled to the initial temperature with seawater, where after it is
dehydrated. The compressor and heat exchanger speciﬁcations are the same as for Case 1
shown in Table 4.1 on page 39.
The pressure, temperature and enthalpy of the gas stream is evaluated at all stages in
each compression step. A pressure-temperature and enthalpy-pressure diagram can be
seen in Figure 4.8 and 4.9.
Figure 4.8 – Case 2: Showing the temperature development at each pressure step. The coloured background indicates
the phase behaviour of the ﬂuid at the given temperature, pressure and molar fraction. The grey dashed lines indicates
where the molar fraction changes, which leads to diﬀerent phase behaviour for the gas stream.
On Figure 4.8 it is seen that the development of the temperature and pressure is very
similar, as to what was seen in Case 1 on Figure 4.2. The stream starts at 40◦C and
1.8 bar in the bottom left corner marked "IN" and terminates at 40◦C and 150 bar in the
bottom right corner marked "OUT".
Like in Case 1 it is seen how the temperature increase at the initial and ﬁnal compression
steps, are smaller than at the other steps. What diﬀers from Case 1 is that the increase
in temperature at each step, is generally smaller than what was seen for Case 1. This
is related to the smaller increase in pressure, which quite intuitively would result in a
smaller temperature increase.
Finally some attention should be directed towards the phase behaviour of the gas stream
at the last compression step. On Figure 4.8 it is seen how the gas stream will be in a
liquid-liquid equilibrium condition after it has been cooled at approximately 105 bar. This
46
==PAGE:51==
CHAPTER 4. MODELLING AND RESULTS
30th June, 2017
−10
−8
−6
−4
−2
0
2
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
310 K
320 K
330 K
340 K
350 K
360 K
370 K
380 K
390 K
400 K
410 K
420 K
Enthalpy [kJ/mol]
Pressure [bar]
Isoterms calculated for final molar composition, 
[CO2] = 99.98 % by mass
OUT
IN
Figure 4.9 – Case 2: Showing the enthalpy of the CO2 stream at each pressure step (pink). The isothermal enthalpy
lines (black) are plotted for the CO2 molar fraction at the ﬁnal compression step. Special caution is therefore advised
when comparing the ﬁrst three points (bottom middle) to the isotherms, since the CO2 fraction is initially much lower.
does not essentially aﬀect the calculations in any way, but in practice it will have to be
considered since normal gas compressors are not able to compress liquid.
On Figure 4.9 the enthalpy of the ﬂuid can be seen at each compression step. Also
here it is seen that the enthalpy shows behaviour quite similar to what was seen for
Case 1 in Figure 4.2. What here should be noticed is the large enthalpy decrease that
occurs during cooling at around 105 bar, followed by a smaller decrease in enthalpy
during cooling at the ﬁnal pressure. The reason for the large decrease in enthalpy at
the penultimate cooling step, is that the gas stream changes condenses during cooling
at the given pressure. This is also clearly illustrated in Figure 4.8, where it is seen
that the gas stream will be in a liquid-liquid equilibrium after cooling. In Case 1 this
condensation did not occur before the ﬁnal step. The reason why the gas stream conden-
sates earlier in Case 2, is that the pressure increase for each step are smaller. Therefore
the liquefaction pressure will be reached at an earlier compression step compared to Case 1.
The gas stream in Case 2 is dehydrated during each compression step like described in
Case 1. The CO2 purity and mass ﬂow development of the gas stream (not shown here)
showed very similar behaviour to what was seen for Case 1 in Figure 4.4 and 4.3. The
ﬁnal gas stream of Case 2 was calculated to have the CO2 purity of 99.98 % and a mass
ﬂow of 72.4 ton/hr.
4.2.1
Total Work of Compression
The total work of compression is calculated, following the same procedure as in Case 1.
The work of compression at each step and total compression work can be seen in Figure
4.10.
It is seen on Figure 4.10 that the total energy cost of performing the compression,
has been decreased with 0.25 MW compared to Case 1. This is because the average cost
of each compression step in Case 2 is only approximately 0.5 MW, while it was 0.8 MW
47
==PAGE:52==
CHAPTER 4. MODELLING AND RESULTS
30th June, 2017
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
steps
Power [MW]
 
 
Total work = 5.98 MW
Stream Compression Work
Cumulative Work
Figure 4.10 – Case 2: Showing the compression work of each step (blue) and cumulative work of compression (red).
The total work of compression is calculated as 5.98 MW.
for Case 1. So even though Case 2 uses a higher number compression steps, the overall
energy use will still be lower.
4.2.2
Heating of Sea Water
For Case 2 the the temperature and total mass ﬂow of the hot seawater stream exiting
the heat exchanger after cooling is calculated, following the same procedures as in Case 1.
The results can be seen below on Figure 4.6 and 4.7.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
40
45
50
55
60
65
70
Steps
Temperature [°C]
 
 
Average output temperature = 59.98°C
Temperature of output sea water at each compression step
Figure 4.11 – Case 2: Showing the temperature of the seawater exiting the heat exchanger after each compression step.
The average temperature of the total water ﬂow is calculated to be 59.98◦C
From Figure 4.11 and 4.12 it can be seen, that the seawater will be heated to an
average temperature of 59.98◦C. The necessary ﬂow rate of seawater was calculated
48
==PAGE:53==
CHAPTER 4. MODELLING AND RESULTS
30th June, 2017
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Steps
Flowrate [ton/hr]
 
 
Total flow of sea water = 258.4 ton/hr
Flow of sea water at each compression step
Cummulative flow of sea water
Figure 4.12 – Case 2: Showing the total necessary mass ﬂow of seawater passing through the heat exchanger after each
compression step (blue) and the cumulated ﬂow of seawater after all compression steps (red).
258.4 ton/hr, leading to an a average ﬂow rate of approximately 22 ton/hr pr. step. The
seawater in Case 2 is thus not heated to the same temperature as in Case 1, however the
necessary ﬂow rate of seawater is higher. As explained earlier in section 4.2 the lower
pressure increase at each steps leads to lower temperature increase. Since the gas stream
has to be cooled from a lower temperature, the resulting heating of seawater will likewise
be lower.
As explained in section 4.1.3 a lower seawater temperature will give rise to a higher
seawater ﬂow rate, if the gas stream enthalpy diﬀerence across the heat exchanger is the
same. In Case 2 the temperature of the seawater exiting the heat exchanger is lower than
in Case 1, meaning that less energy have been transferred to the seawater from the gas
stream. However, since the enthalpy decrease of the gas stream is also lower than in Case
1, the necessary ﬂow rate of seawater will be approximately the same as in Case 1. Since
Case 2 have more compression steps than Case 1, the total necessary ﬂow rate of seawater
will be higher.
4.2.3
Compression During Fewer Compression Steps
In Case 2 it is observed that increasing the number of compression steps decreases the
overall energy use of the compressors. Furthermore it is seen that a higher ﬂow rate
seawater is necessary for cooling the stream, all though the resulting seawater temperature
will be lower.
Instead of increasing the number of compression steps, it is also tested how the reducing
the number of compression steps, aﬀects the compression process. The same calculations,
as have been done for Case 2, were performed for a case containing only 4 compression
steps and a constant fractional pressure increase of 202.14 % pr. step (not shown here). All
other design speciﬁcations were kept similar to Case 1 and 2. The results showed the quite
opposite behaviour of what was observed with an increasing the number of compression
steps. Reducing the number of compression steps increases the over all energy consumption
of the compression process to 7.08 MW, with a maximum gas stream temperature of
49
==PAGE:54==
CHAPTER 4. MODELLING AND RESULTS
30th June, 2017
147.98◦C. The necessary ﬂow rate of seawater used for cooling is 57.3 ton/hr which results
in seawater exit temperature of 89.55◦C.
Case 2 Recap:
In Case 2 it has been seen that increasing the amount of compression
steps, will decrease the overall energy use of the compression process, by lowering the
average work of compression for each compression step. It was also seen that the smaller
pressure steps gave rise to a smaller increase in temperature at each compression step.
This resulted in a reduced temperature of the seawater exiting the heat exchanger. The
average necessary ﬂow rate of seawater coolant at each step was approximately the same
as in Case 1, but because of the larger amount of compression steps the total necessary
ﬂow of seawater was higher than for Case 1.
50
==PAGE:55==
CHAPTER 4. MODELLING AND RESULTS
30th June, 2017
4.3
Case 3: Lowering Inital Temperature
The third case described in the following section analyses the behaviour of the compression
routine, if the initial temperature before compression is lowered. The gas stream in Case
3 is compressed from the initial conditions of 25◦C and 1.8 bar to 150 bar. Between each
step the stream is cooled to the initial temperature with seawater. Since the seawater is
assumed to have the same temperature as in Case 1, the LMTD of the heat exchanger is
lowered to 12◦C, to be able to provide enough cooling to reach the lower temperature.
Apart from these changes all design speciﬁcations are the same as the ones described for
Case 1 in section 4.1.
The pressure, temperature and enthalpy of the gas stream is evaluated at all stages in
each compression step. A pressure-temperature and enthalpy-pressure diagram can be
seen in Figure 4.13 and 4.14.
Figure 4.13 – Case 3: Showing the temperature development at each pressure step. The coloured background indicates
the phase behaviour of the ﬂuid at the given temperature, pressure and molar fraction. The grey dashed lines indicates
where the molar fraction changes, which leads to diﬀerent phase behaviour for the gas stream.
On Figure 4.13 it is seen that the development of the temperature and pressure is
quite similar, as to what was seen in Case 1 on Figure 4.2. The average temperature
increase during compression for Case 3 is approximately 50◦C, which is approximately
the same, as what was seen in Figure 4.1 for Case 1. This should also be expected since
the pressure increase for each compression step is the same for both cases.
Similar to Case 1, it is also seen how the temperature increase at the initial and ﬁnal
compression step is smaller than at the other steps. What should be noticed here, is that
the temperature increase for the last compression step, is extremely small compared to
the other steps. This is because the low gas stream temperature, ensures that the gas
will not partly vaporize, but instead remains as pure liquid during compression at this
pressure. This results in a lower temperature increase because the enthalpy does not
increase as much, as if it would vaporize. This is the same behaviour as was seen in the
last compressions step of Case 2 shown on Figure 4.8.
Like in Case 2 it should also be stressed that the gas stream will be completely liqueﬁed
when, before the ﬁnal compression step around 105 bar. This should as mentioned in
51
==PAGE:56==
CHAPTER 4. MODELLING AND RESULTS
30th June, 2017
−12
−10
−8
−6
−4
−2
0
2
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160 290 K 300 K
310 K
320 K
330 K
340 K
350 K
360 K
370 K
380 K
390 K
400 K
410 K 420 K
Enthalpy [kJ/mol]
Pressure [bar]
Isoterms calculated for final molar composition, 
[CO2] = 99.99 % by mass
OUT
IN
Figure 4.14 – Case 3: Showing the enthalpy of the CO2 stream at each pressure step (pink). The isothermal enthalpy
lines (black) are plotted for the CO2 molar fraction at the ﬁnal compression step. Special caution is therefore advised
when comparing the ﬁrst three points (bottom middle) to the isotherms, since the CO2 fraction is initially much lower.
section 4.2 be taken into consideration when designing the routine in practice.
On Figure 4.14 the enthalpy of the ﬂuid can be seen at each compression step. The
behaviour of the enthalpy show great resemblance with what was seen in Case 1 and 2 on
Figure 4.2 and 4.9. As all ready mentioned one should here notice the very small enthalpy
increase at the ﬁnal compression step, explained by the phase behaviour of the gas stream
under these conditions.
What also should be noticed is the large enthalpy decrease that occurs during cooling at
approximately 85 bar. As seen in Figure 4.13, the reason for the large decrease in enthalpy,
is because the gas stream condenses into two liquid phases when cooled at this pressure.
This behaviour is similar to what was seen for the ﬁnal cooling step in Case 1 and the
cooling step at 105 bar for Case 2
The gas stream in Case 3 is like Case 1 and 2, dehydrated between each compression
step. The CO2 purity and mass ﬂow development of the gas stream (not shown here)
showed very similar behaviour to what was seen for Case 1 in Figure 4.4 and 4.3. The
ﬁnal gas stream of Case 3 was calculated to have the CO2 purity of 99.99 % and a mass
ﬂow similar to Case 1 of 72.4 ton/hr.
4.3.1
Total Work of Compression
The total work of compression is calculated, following the same procedure as in Case 1.
The work of compression at each step and total compression work can be seen in Figure
4.15.
It is seen on Figure 4.15 that the total energy cost of performing the compression, has
been decreased with 0.80 MW compared to Case 1. This is again because the average cost
of each compression step is only approximately 0.7 MW in Case 7, while it was 0.8 MW
for Case 2. It should here be noted that the energy demand for the ﬁnal compression step
is essentially zero, which also is reﬂected in the very low increase in enthalpy at this step
52
==PAGE:57==
CHAPTER 4. MODELLING AND RESULTS
30th June, 2017
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
steps
Power [MW]
 
 
Total work = 5.43 MW
Stream Compression Work
Cumulative Work
Figure 4.15 – Case 3: Showing the compression work of each step (blue) and cumulative work of compression (red).
The total work of compression is calculated as 5.43 MW.
seen in Figure 4.14.
4.3.2
Heating of Sea Water
For Case 3 the the temperature and total mass ﬂow of the hot seawater stream exiting
the heat exchanger after cooling, is calculated following the same procedures as in Case 1
and 2. The results can be seen below on Figure 4.16 and 4.17.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
Steps
Temperature [°C]
 
 
Average output temperature = 40.59°C
Temperature of output sea water at each compression step
Figure 4.16 – Case 3: Showing the temperature of the seawater exiting the heat exchanger after each compression step.
The average temperature of the total water ﬂow is calculated to be 40.59◦C
From Figure 4.11 and 4.12 it can be seen, that the seawater will be heated to an
average temperature of 40.59◦C, with the necessary ﬂow rate of 416.7 ton/hr, giving an
average ﬂow rate of approximately 52 ton/hr pr. step. The temperature of the seawater
53
==PAGE:58==
CHAPTER 4. MODELLING AND RESULTS
30th June, 2017
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
Steps
Flowrate [ton/hr]
 
 
Total flow of sea water = 416.7 ton/hr
Flow of sea water at each compression step
Cummulative flow of sea water
Figure 4.17 – Case 3: Showing the total necessary mass ﬂow of seawater passing through the heat exchanger after each
compression step (blue) and the cumulated ﬂow of seawater after all compression steps (red).
exiting the heat exchanger after cooling is thus not as high as seen for Case 1 in Figure
4.6, which is because of the general lower temperature of the gas stream in Case 3.
The average ﬂow rate of seawater pr. step, necessary cooling the gas stream in Case 3, is
almost twice as high compared to Case 1 and 2. The reason for this is that the decrease
of gas stream enthalpy during cooling, is approximately the same as in Case 1, but the
enthalpy increase of seawater is smaller. By using equation 1.3 in section 1.4 about heat
exchange, it can be seen that the necessary ﬂow rate of seawater has to be higher, for the
enthalpy balance to hold. This is diﬀerent from Case 2 where both the gas stream and
seawater enthalpy diﬀerence decreased, resulting in approximately the same average ﬂow
rate pr. step as in Case 1.
Case 3 Recap:
In Case 3 it was investigated how lowering the initial temperature of
the gas stream before compression, aﬀected the overall energy use of the compression
process. It was seen that lowering the temperature reduced the overall energy needed for
compression. The generally lower temperature of the gas stream throughout the process,
resulted in a lower temperature of the seawater exiting the heat exchanger. This resulted
in an increase of the average seawater ﬂow rate pr. step, compared to Case 1. The reason
for this is that less heat is transferred to the seawater, because the temperature diﬀerence
between the gas stream and seawater is not as large as for Case 1.
54
==PAGE:59==
CHAPTER 4. MODELLING AND RESULTS
30th June, 2017
4.4
Case 4: Application of Active Cooling
In Case 4 an active cooling cycle is applied, instead of using seawater as coolant. This could
be a design speciﬁcation for a gas conditioning plant, where a suﬃcient supply of seawater
is not accessible, or where the seawater temperature is not suﬃciently low. The gas stream
is conditioned from the initial conditions of 40◦C and 1.8 bar to 150 bar, following the
same procedure as in Case 1. The gas stream is cooled to its initial temperature between
each step using an active cooling cycle as described in section 3.2.2 and 3.2.3. The design
speciﬁcations for the refrigeration cycle can be seen in Table 4.3 below. ANGIV COP
Table 4.3 – Showing the design speciﬁcations used for the refrigeration cycle used in Case 4. The shown properties are
the type of refrigerant, evaporation pressure Pevap, condensation pressure Pcond, the temperature of evaporation Tevap
and the temperature before and after condensation, Tcond,1 & Tcond,2.
Property
Refrigerant
Ammonia
Pevap
2 bar
Pcond
9 bar
Tevap
−18.4◦C
Tcond,1
128.2◦C
Tcond,2
21.6◦C
The refrigerant in the refrigeration cycle is condensed using seawater at 15◦C for
cooling. This would of course not be reasonable if a steady water supply was not present,
but to be able to compare this case to the preceding cases, this is assumed nonetheless.
The condensation heat exchanger is modelled in the same way as the heat exchanger of
the main gas stream in Case 1 to 3, with a LMTD of 15◦C. Besides the use of active
cooling instead og seawater all other design speciﬁcations are the same as described for
Case 1 in section 4.1.
The pressure, temperature and enthalpy of the gas stream is evaluated at all stages in
each compression step. Since the design speciﬁcations is essentially the same as for Case 1
the HP- and PT-diagrams, will show the exact same behaviours as seen on Figure 4.1
and 4.2. The same goes for the total gas stream mass ﬂow and CO2 purity seen on Figure
4.4 and 4.3.
For the refrigeration cycle the necessary ﬂow rate of refrigerant is calculated at each
stage following the procedure described in section 3.2.2. The calculated refrigerant ﬂow
rate for each step can be seen on Figure 4.18. On Figure 4.18 it can be seen that the
necessary ﬂow rate of refrigerant, greatly increases at the two ﬁnal compression steps.
This is reﬂected in the large decrease in gas stream enthalpy at these two steps, which
can be seen on the enthalpy-pressure diagram in Figure 4.2 on page 40.
4.4.1
Total Work of Compression
The total energy needed of compressing the gas stream will be the same as seen on
Figure 4.5 for Case 1. However, adding active cooling will increase the total energy cost
of the process, since there also will be a energy demand from the compressor in the
refrigeration cycle. The total work of compression at each step for both the main stream
55
==PAGE:60==
CHAPTER 4. MODELLING AND RESULTS
30th June, 2017
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
6.5
7
Average refrigerant flow rate = 4.1 ton/hr
steps
Mass flow [ton/hr]
 
 
Necessary flowrate of Ammonia coolant at each compression step
Figure 4.18 – Case 4: Showing the total ﬂow rate of the refrigerant in the cooling cycle.
and refrigeration compressor can be seen together with the total compression work on
Figure 4.19.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
steps
Power [MW]
 
 
Total work = 8.63 MW
Stream Compression Work
Refrigeration Compression Work
Cumulative Work
Figure 4.19 – Case 4: Showing the compression work of each step (blue), the work of the refrigeration compressor
(cyan) and the cumulative work of compression (red). The total work of compression is calculated as 8.63 MW.
It is seen on Figure 4.19 that performing the compression using active cooling, costs
more energy in total compared to Case 1, where the cooling was essentially free. The cost
of active cooling in Case 4 is approximately 2.40 MW for the full compression routine.
Since all design speciﬁcation were the same in Case 1 and 4, except for the application of
active cooling, one would also have expected a higher energy demand, since the cost of
active cooling would come on top of the energy cost calculated in Case 1. Active cooling
should therefore be used to cool the gas stream to lower temperatures, as this would lower
the energy cost of compression, like seen in section 4.3. Using active cooling also enables
56
==PAGE:61==
CHAPTER 4. MODELLING AND RESULTS
30th June, 2017
cooling of the gas stream to temperatures lower than or comparable to the seawater
temperature, which may lower the overall energy cost of the compression routine, enough
to make the use active cooling preferable. This will be discussed further in section 4.5.
4.4.2
Heating of Sea Water During Active Cooling
As mentioned earlier, seawater is providing the cooling needed for condensation in the
refrigeration cycle. In Case 4 the temperature and total mass ﬂow of the heated seawater
are calculated, using the method described section 1.4 and 1.5. Since the refrigeration
cycle is running at the same conditions for all compression steps, the temperature of the
seawater after heat exchange will also be the same for all steps. The seawater ﬂow rate
will on the other hand still change, as the amount of refrigerant in the refrigeration cycle
is not the same at each step. The temperature of the heated seawater exiting the heat
exchanger was calculated to be 99.62◦C. The seawater ﬂow rate can be seen in Figure
4.20.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
0
50
100
150
Steps
Flowrate [ton/hr]
 
 
Total flow of sea water = 146.1 ton/hr
Flow of sea water at each compression step
Cummulative flow of sea water
Figure 4.20 – Case 4: Showing the total necessary mass ﬂow of seawater passing through the heat exchanger in the
cooling cycle after each compression step (blue) and the cumulated ﬂow of seawater after all compression steps (red).
In Figure 4.20 it can be seen how the ﬂow rate of seawater at the last two compression
steps reﬂects the increased necessary ﬂow rate of refrigerant at these steps as seen in
Figure 4.18.
Compared to Case 1 the temperature of the seawater exiting the heat exchanger has
been increased by above 25◦C, while the necessary seawater ﬂow rate has been decreased
with above 80 ton/hr. The higher seawater temperature is intuitively explained by the
high condensation temperature of the refrigerant seen in Table 4.3. Since the ﬂow rate of
refrigerant is quite low compared to the ﬂow rate of the gas stream, the necessary amount
of seawater needed for condensing the refrigerant will likewise be low. This explains be
low ﬂow rate of seawater in Case 4 compared to Case 1.
Case 4 Recap:
In Case 4 it was seen that the application of active cooling, adds an
extra contribution to the total energy cost of the compression routine. The application of
active cooling will still give rise to heating of seawater, which is used to provide cooling for
57
==PAGE:62==
CHAPTER 4. MODELLING AND RESULTS
30th June, 2017
condensing the refrigerant in the refrigeration cycle. The heated seawater will generally
have a higher temperature compared to Case 1, while the ﬂow rate will be lower.
58
==PAGE:63==
CHAPTER 4. MODELLING AND RESULTS
30th June, 2017
4.5
Case 5: Active Cooling to Temperatures Bellow
Sea Waters
One advantage with active cooling is, that it enables cooling gas stream to temperatures
which is lower than the temperature of available seawater. In the previous case described
in section 4.4, active cooling were used to cool the gas stream in a compression process
similar to Case 1, which resulted in a higher overall energy cost compared to Case 1.
In the following case the initial temperature of the gas stream before compression, will be
lowered to temperatures below the seawater temperature, by using active cooling. The
gas stream is conditioned from the initial conditions of 10◦C and 1.8 bar to 150 bar, by 8
compression. The gas stream is cooled to its initial temperature between each step using
an active cooling cycle as described in section 3.2.2 and 3.2.3. The design speciﬁcations of
the refrigeration cycle are the same as in Case 4 and can be seen in Table 4.3 on page 55.
Besides the lower inital temperature and application of active cooling, all other design
speciﬁcations are the same as in Case 1.
The pressure, temperature and enthalpy of the gas stream is evaluated at all stages during
each compression step. A pressure-temperature and enthalpy-pressure diagram can be
seen in Figure 4.21 and 4.22.
Figure 4.21 – Case 5: Showing the temperature development at each pressure step (blue dashed line). The coloured
background indicates the phase behaviour of the ﬂuid at the given temperature and pressure condition. The phase
behaviour is calculated for the CO2 molar fraction at the ﬁnal compression step. Special caution is therefore advised when
comparing the ﬁrst three points (far left) to the shown phase behaviour, since the CO2 fraction is initially much lower.
On Figure 4.21 it is seen how temperature initially behaves similar to what has been
seen in the preceding cases. It is then noticed how the temperature slightly decreases
when the gas stream is compressed from approximately 50 to 90 bar. This is most likely
because the temperature is suﬃciently low, so the gas stream does not transcend from the
liquid-liquid equilibrium to pure liquid conditions. The increase in pressure and enthalpy
during this compression step, will therefore force some of the ﬂuid to be displaced from
one liquid phase to another, on behalf of a decrease in temperature.
Like in Case 2 and 3 it is here seen how the gas stream is completely liqueﬁed already
at the penultimate compression step at approximately 50 bar. This should again be
59
==PAGE:64==
CHAPTER 4. MODELLING AND RESULTS
30th June, 2017
−12
−10
−8
−6
−4
−2
0
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
270 K280 K
290 K
300 K
310 K
320 K
330 K
340 K
350 K
360 K
370 K
380 K
390 K
400 K 410 K
Enthalpy [kJ/mol]
Pressure [bar]
Isoterms calculated for final molar composition, 
[CO2] = 100 % by mass
OUT
IN
Figure 4.22 – Case 5: Showing the enthalpy of the CO2 stream at each pressure step (pink). The isothermal enthalpy
lines (black) are plotted for the CO2 molar fraction at the ﬁnal compression step. Special caution is therefore advised
when comparing the ﬁrst three points (bottom middle) to the isotherms, since the CO2 fraction is initially much lower.
considered when designing the compression routine in practice.
The behaviour seen on Figure 4.22 is very similar to what has been seen for the
previous cases in section 4.1 to 4.4. It should here be noticed that the large decrease in
enthalpy, that occurs when the gas stream changes phase behaviour, happens at a lower
pressure compared to the previously mentioned cases. It should also be seen how the
enthalpy increases during the two ﬁnal compression steps, even though the temperature
decreases at the penultimate step.
For the refrigeration cycle the necessary ﬂow rate of refrigerant is calculated at each
stage following the same procedure as in Case 4. The calculated refrigerant ﬂow rate for
each step can be seen on Figure 4.23. On Figure 4.23 it is seen how the average refrigerant
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
−2
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
Average refrigerant flow rate = 3.3 ton/hr
steps
Mass flow [ton/hr]
 
 
Necessary flowrate of Ammonia coolant at each compression step
Figure 4.23 – Case 5: Showing the total ﬂow rate of the refrigerant in the cooling cycle.
60
==PAGE:65==
CHAPTER 4. MODELLING AND RESULTS
30th June, 2017
ﬂow rate is lower compared to Case 4. This is because the increase in enthalpy for each
compression step is generally lower than in Case 4, which results in an additionally lower
enthalpy decrease during cooling. When the enthalpy does not decrease as much, the
amount of cooling required will also be lower.
It is also noticed that the refrigerant ﬂow rate is much higher at the 6th compression step.
This is also reﬂected in the large decrease in enthalpy during cooling at this step, which
can be seen in Figure 4.22 at around 50 bar.
4.5.1
Total Work of Compression
The total work of compression is calculated, following the same procedure as in the
preceding cases. Like in Case 4 there will also be a contribution to the total energy cost.
from the refrigeration cycle. The total work of compression and refrigeration can be seen
for each step in Figure 4.24.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
−1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
steps
Power [MW]
 
 
Total work = 6.48 MW
Stream Compression Work
Refrigeration Compression Work
Cumulative Work
Figure 4.24 – Case 5: Showing the compression work of each step (blue), the work of the refrigeration compressor
(cyan) and the cumulative work of compression (red). The total work of compression is calculated as 6.48 MW.
In Figure 4.24 it is seen that the energy cost of compressing the gas stream is
signiﬁcantly lower than in Case 4 and close to the energy cost calculated in Case 1. As
discussed earlier this is because the work of compression becomes lower when the initial
temperature of the gas stream is lower, leading to an average work of compression of
0.6 MW pr. step, which is 0.2 MW lower than in Case 4. It may therefore be beneﬁcial
to use active cooling, even though additional energy has to be used for the refrigeration
cycle. Further more it should be noticed, that the average refrigerant ﬂow rate in Case 4
is lower than in Case 4. This results in a lower average energy cost of refrigeration which
is approximately 0.25 MW pr. step in Case 5 compared to 0.3 MW in Case 4.
4.5.2
Heating of Sea Water During Active Cooling
Like in Case 4, seawater is providing the cooling needed for condensation in the refrigeration
cycle. The seawater temperature and total mass ﬂow are calculated, using methods
described section 1.4 and 1.5. Since the refrigeration cycle runs at the same conditions as
61
==PAGE:66==
CHAPTER 4. MODELLING AND RESULTS
30th June, 2017
in Case 4, the seawater temperature after heat exchange will be 99.62◦C like in that case.
The seawater ﬂow rate can be seen in Figure 4.25.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
−20
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Steps
Flowrate [ton/hr]
 
 
Total flow of sea water = 116.5 ton/hr
Flow of sea water at each compression step
Cummulative flow of sea water
Figure 4.25 – Case 5: Showing the total necessary mass ﬂow of seawater passing through the heat exchanger in the
cooling cycle after each compression step (blue) and the cumulated ﬂow of seawater after all compression steps (red).
It can be seen on Figure 4.25 that the necessary ﬂow rate of seawater is lower compared
to Case 4. This is again reﬂected in the refrigerant ﬂow rate seen in Figure 4.23 which is
also lower for Case 5 compared to Case 4.
Case 5 Recap:
In Case 5 it could be seen that the application of active cooling may
lower the overall energy use, if the gas stream is cooled to suﬃciently low temperatures.
The low gas stream temperature leads to a lower energy cost of compressing the gas
stream, since the enthalpy increase during compression becomes smaller, which further
will lead to a lower energy cost of refrigeration. The extra energy needed to run the
refrigeration cycle may thereby be cancelled out, if the gas stream temperature is low
enough.
The application of active cooling will still give rise to heating of seawater, which is used
to condense the refrigerant in the refrigeration cycle. The heated seawater will generally
have a higher temperature compared to Case 1, while the ﬂow rate will be lower.
62
==PAGE:67==
CHAPTER 4. MODELLING AND RESULTS
30th June, 2017
4.6
Summary of Results and Observations
In the preceding sections 4.1 to 4.5 results for the cases modelled in this work have been
described. In this section the ﬁndings are recapped, and important observations will be
ascertained. The most import results for each case can be seen in Table 4.4:
Table 4.4 – Shows the results for the ﬁve compression cases described in section 4.1 to 4.5. The values shown are total
work of compression/refrigeration for the considered stream Wtot, the average temperature of heated seawater Tsea,avg,
the total ﬂow rate of heated seawater ˙msea and the average ﬂow rate of the ammonia refrigerant in the cooling cycle
˙mcool,avg.
Wtot
Tsea,avg
˙msea
˙mcool,avg
Case 1
6.23 MW
309.6 kJ/kgCO2
73.33◦C
197.0 ton/hr
−
Case 2
5.98 MW
297.4 kJ/kgCO2
59.98◦C
258.4 ton/hr
−
Case 3
5.43 MW
270.1 kJ/kgCO2
40.59◦C
416.7 ton/hr
−
Case 4
8.63 MW
429.0 kJ/kgCO2
99.6◦C
146.1 ton/hr
4.1 ton/hr
Case 5
6.48 MW
322.2 kJ/kgCO2
99.6◦C
116.5 ton/hr
3.3 ton/hr
In Case 2 it was seen that the overall energy use was decreased, if the number of
compression steps was increased. Increasing the number of compression steps also increased
the necessary ﬂow rate seawater for cooling, and resulted in a lower temperature of the
seawater exiting the heat exchanger.
The same behaviour was seen in Case 3 where the initial temperature of the gas stream
before each compression step was reduced. This also reduced the overall energy use, while
greatly increasing the necessary ﬂow rate of seawater, and decreasing the temperature of
the seawater exiting the heat exchanger.
These two cases would initially sound promising since the overall energy demand for
compression has been signiﬁcantly reduced compared to Case 1. Some concern should all
though be directed towards the lower seawater temperature, because if it is too low, it will
not be as useful for heat integration. For example it can be seen on Figure 1.2 in section
1.2.2 about CO2 capture, that most locations relevant for heat integration needs heating
to temperatures higher than 100◦C. In these cases the temperature of the seawater in
Case 2 and 3 would not be suﬃciently high to be applicable for heat integration.
In Case 4 and 5 an active cooling cycle were applied instead of using seawater for
cooling. In Case 4 it was seen that applying active cooling will demand an additional
signiﬁcant amount of energy for running the refrigeration process. Because of this, active
cooling the gas stream to relative high temperatures, would not be eﬀectively applicable,
in any cases where seawater would be accessible for cooling.
In Case 5 the active cooling cycle were used to run the compression cycle at a temperature
lower than the temperature of seawater. This showed a signiﬁcantly lower overall energy
cost which could make the use of active cooling a lot more applicable. Active cooling
could therefore show promising results, if used to cool the gas stream to relatively low
temperatures.
Regarding the seawater that was used to condense the refrigerant in the cooling cycle, both
cases using active cooling resulted in a signiﬁcantly lower necessary ﬂow rate of seawater,
compared to the other cases. The temperature of the seawater exiting the condenser was
however calculated to be just below 100◦C, and could therefore be applicable in some heat
integration schemes.
63
==PAGE:68==
CHAPTER 4. MODELLING AND RESULTS
30th June, 2017
4.6.1
Gas Stream Phase Behaviour
In all cases it was observed that the phase behaviour greatly aﬀected both the necessary
cooling and work of compression at each compression step. It could be seen that cooling
the gas stream at a suﬃciently high pressure, would cause the gas stream to condense into
one or two liquid phases, consequently decreasing the enthalpy. To perform this reduction
of gas stream enthalpy, would require larger amounts of cooling.
The LLE state of the gas stream would usually occur at one of the last compression
steps, when the pressure is suﬃciently high. It was also seen that when the gas stream
was in a LLE state before compression, the required work of compression would be
signiﬁcantly decreased, accompanied with very low temperature increase compared to
other compression steps.
Finally it was observed how even small changes in molar composition have great impact
of the ﬂuids phase behaviour. This should indeed be taken into account since the molar
composition changes between each compression step, when it is dehydrated.
64
==PAGE:69==
CHAPTER 5. OPTIMISATION AND DISCUSSION
30th June, 2017
Chapter 5
Optimisation and Discussion
In the preceding chapter the simulation results were presented and described for the ﬁve
diﬀerent cases of investigation. To be able to arrive at a conclusion for how the most
eﬃcient compression process is designed, the results will have to be discussed on the basis
of their overall energy use and, possibilities for heat integration and concerns regarding
practical implementation.
In the following chapter the results will be discussed within the framework given by the
objectives of this work.
5.1
Minimizing Energy Cost of Compression
In chapter 4 it was seen that several factors aﬀects the overall energy use of the compression
process. Generally speaking, the work of compression is characterized by the enthalpy
diﬀerence of the gas stream, from before to after it has been compressed. The smaller this
diﬀerence is the less work the compressors has to exert on the gas stream. In Case 2 it
was seen, that one way to reduce this enthalpy diﬀerence, was to increase the number of
compression steps, consequently reducing the pressure increase at each step. If the pressure
are increased with smaller amounts, the resultant increase in enthalpy will likewise be
smaller. The smaller energy cost pr. compression step were however partly outweighed by
the larger number of compression step, but the overall energy cost was still lower than
the reference Case 1.
It could be suggested, that increasing the number of compression steps, would serve as a
adequate method for decreasing the overall energy use of the compression routine. This
would however involve a more intricate system design and the possibility for condensation
of the gas stream between compression steps.
Another way of reducing the increase of enthalpy during compression, is lowering the
initial temperature of the gas stream before compression. The low temperature leads
to a smaller increase of enthalpy during compression, which also can be seen in the
pressure-enthalpy diagrams, where the distance between the isothermal lines are smaller
for lower temperatures. This behaviour was observed in Case 3, where the overall energy
cost of the compression process were reduced, by lowering the temperature, and keeping
the same amount of compressions steps as in Case 1.
One limitation of this design speciﬁcation is that the temperature of the gas stream can
not be lowered to temperatures close to or below the temperature of the seawater, which
initially is used for cooling. To do so active cooling must be applied. In Case 4 it was
recognized, that the use of active cooling demands a signiﬁcant amount of extra energy
65
==PAGE:70==
CHAPTER 5. OPTIMISATION AND DISCUSSION
30th June, 2017
for the compression process, which urges the use of active cooling, to enable running the
compression process at temperatures lower than sea temperature. This was done in Case
5 resulting in a total energy cost comparable to the reference Case 1.
In Case 5 it was seen that the total energy cost of the compression process, could be
lowered signiﬁcantly by decreasing the temperature. Using active cooling, thus provides
an alternative way of cooling the gas stream, without the temperature limitations of using
seawater. Since the gas stream temperatures can be be lowered even further using active
cooling, the total energy use might also be reduced even more.
Since the evaporation temperature in the investigated cooling cycle is only −18◦C, it
might be possible to lower the work of compression additionally, by lowering the gas
stream temperature even more. This would however make the gas stream to liquefy earlier,
which could generate other complications in the compression process.
Summary:
It was seen that the lowest overall energy cost was achieved in Case 3, by
using seawater to reduce the temperature of the gas stream to 25◦C. It was however
seen that the use of active cooling in Case 5, signiﬁcantly reduced the energy use of the
compression process, by decreasing the temperature below seawater temperature. Since
the use of active cooling is not limited by the temperature of seawater, it could show
promising results if the gas stream temperature is reduced even further, or the number of
compression steps are increased.
5.2
Heat Integration With Capture Plant or Heavy
Industry
In all gas compression cases investigated in this work, seawater has been used for cooling.
Either as directly cooling the gas stream between compression steps, or as coolant to
ensure condensation in an active cooling cycle. Using seawater as coolant will obviously
heat the water, dependent on the temperature of the stream it is cooling.
The initial seawater temperature considered in this work is 15◦C, which is a typical value
for the seawater in colder regions, where after it is heated to temperatures ranging from
about 40 to 100◦C. It was also seen that the necessary ﬂow rate of seawater varied between
the ﬁve cases, with the highest ﬂow rates for the cases resulting in the lowest seawater
temperature, and the lowest ﬂow rates for the cases using active cooling. All results can
be seen in Table 4.4 on page 63.
To give an estimate, of how much heat that has been transferred to the water during the
cooling, the classic calorimetric equation can be used:
Q = m · Cp · ∆T
(5.1)
Where Q is the transferred heat, m is the mass of water, ∆T is the seawater temperature
diﬀerence from before and after cooling and Cp is the speciﬁc heat capacity of water,
which is assumed to be 4.19 J/(g · K). Calculating Q for all cases, using the mass ﬂow
rates and ﬁnal temperatures listed in Table 4.4, an estimate for the energy transferred
to the seawater stream, can be calculated for all cases. The results can be seen below in
Table 5.1.
In Table 5.1 it is seen that a huge amount of heat is transferred to the seawater, which
could potentially cancel out most of the energy in the compression process. It should
however be noted that heat integration would involve a certain amount of loss during the
66
==PAGE:71==
CHAPTER 5. OPTIMISATION AND DISCUSSION
30th June, 2017
Table 5.1 – Shows an estimate of the amount of heat Q transferred to the seawater used for cooling, and the average
seawater temperature Tsea,avg in each compression case. The initial seawater temperature is assumed to be 15◦C and the
ﬂow rates of the seawater stream can be seen in Table 4.4 on page 63.
Case
Q
Tsea,avg
Case 1
13.4 MW
73.33◦C
Case 2
13.5 MW
59.98◦C
Case 3
12.4 MW
40.59◦C
Case 4
14.4 MW
99.6◦C
Case 5
11.5 MW
99.6◦C
process.
Moreover it is noticed that the energy transferred to the sea water is higher than the work
transferred to the gas during compression. This is due to the condensation of the gas
stream and to the fact that some of the gas stream is "lost" during dehydration at each
step.
If the heated seawater is used for heat integration in a process, it is important that
the water temperature is higher than or comparable to the temperatures that the process
runs on. One possibility of using heat integration, could be in a CO2-capture process like
amine scrubbing, which is explained in section 1.2.2. This would be beneﬁcial since the
gas stream would typically be conditioned at the same place where it is captured, and the
heated seawater could thereby be used on-site.
As it can be seen on Figure 1.2 in section 1.2.2 about CO2-sources, the relevant places for
heat integration are before entering the regenerator at point C and in the reboiler at point
D, where the amine stream is heated to respectively 100 and 120◦C. For temperatures this
high Case 1, 2 and 3 would not be considerable for heat integration, since the resultant
seawater temperature is to low to heat the amine stream.
The seawater temperatures in Case 4 and 5 could also be considered to low, since the
temperatures are not higher than the process temperatures in the amine scrubbing process.
However these cases could still be considered, since the seawater temperature is close
enough to the process temperature, to partly heat the amine stream.
Furthermore the two cases 4 and 5 that are using active cooling, could be modiﬁed to
increase the seawater temperature additionally. If the condensation pressure in the cooling
cycle is increased, the temperature of the refrigerant will be higher, when it is exchanging
heat with the seawater. In this case the resulting seawater temperature would also be
higher, and thereby be more suiting for heat integration within the amine scrubbing
process.
Another possibility for heat integration is to use the heated seawater for district
heating. In district heating water temperatures in the heating network would typically be
in the range of 70 to 100◦C. The lower temperatures of district heating could make some
of the other investigated cases considerable for heat integration within this context. One
could however argue that using the water for district heating, would cause a greater loss
in energy, compared to using the heated water at the process plant.
Summary:
If it is assumed that the heated seawater in the investigated cases could be
used for heat integration in some context, the overall energy use of the compression process
could be greatly reduced. It should however again be stressed, that far from all cases
67
==PAGE:72==
CHAPTER 5. OPTIMISATION AND DISCUSSION
30th June, 2017
seems equally applicable for heat integration, because of the low seawater temperature.
5.3
Phase Behaviour of Gas Stream
In the investigated cases it was seen that the phase behaviour of the gas stream, had a
remarkable impact on the amount of energy needed for compression, and the amount
of cooling that had to be provided for the gas stream. This is due to the large change
in enthalpy that occurs when the ﬂuid changes phase. If for example the gas stream
undergoes a phase transition from gas to liquid during cooling, it will result in a large
drop in enthalpy. To "remove" this large amount of molar energy, additional cooling will
be needed, to fully condense the gas stream before the target temperature can be reached.
It has been seen that several factors aﬀects the phase behaviour of the gas stream.
As one would intuitively expect, high temperature and low pressure will result in phases
consisting of mostly vapour, while the opposite conditions will result in phases containing
mostly liquid. Finally it is seen that even minuscule amounts of water in the CO2 gas
stream, will cause the gas stream to form two phases.
To illustrate this, the phase behaviour of the CO2-water system has been modelled, using
the ExpertThermo software. The phase behaviour of the ﬂuid was calculated as function
of pressure and the molar fraction of CO2 for two diﬀerent temperatures. The results can
be seen on Figure 5.1.
Figure 5.1 – Shows the phase behaviour of the CO2-water system at 15 (left) and 40◦C (right) as function of pressure
and CO2 molar fraction, calculated in the ExpertThermo software. The coloured background indicates the phase
behaviour at the given conditions.
On Figure 5.1 it is seen that the transition from phases containing vapour to phases
only containing liquid happens at approximately 50 bar for 15◦C and at 90 bar for 40◦C.
After this point the gas stream will be completely liqueﬁed, and will split into two liquid
phases, if the water content is suﬃciently high. In this case one of the phases will be very
gas-like and consist mostly of CO2, while the other phase will be a lot denser and consist
mostly of water. If the the CO2 purity is above approximately 99.8 %, all water will be
miscible in the CO2, and only one liquid phase will form.
68
==PAGE:73==
CHAPTER 5. OPTIMISATION AND DISCUSSION
30th June, 2017
The eﬀect of these observations is exactly what causes the behaviour seen in the penultimate
compression step for Case 5 seen on Figure 4.21 and 4.22. The enthalpy and temperature
are plotted for the last two pressure steps of this case in Figure 5.2.
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
−13.5
−13
−12.5
−12
Enthalpy [kJ/mol]
Pressure [bar]
 
 
40
60
80
100
120
140
1605
10
15
20
Temperature [°C]
Enthalpy
Temperature
END
STEP 7
Figure 5.2 – Shows the temperature and enthalpy development for the two ﬁnal pressure steps in Case 5 described in
section 4.5.
In Case 5 the temperature before compression is 10◦C, and the CO2 purity is suﬃciently
low for the gas stream to be in a single liquid phase before compression at the 7th
compression step. Here it is seen that when the pressure increases from approximately
50 to 90 bar, the temperature slightly decreases while the enthalpy increases. Usually
it is observed that both the temperature and the enthalpy of the ﬂuid increases during
compression. The reason for the quite contradictory behaviour, is that the gas stream
goes into a liquid-liquid equilibrium during compression. This implies that the gas stream
separates into two phases, which thereby increases the enthalpy. To negate this increase
in enthalpy the temperature decreases.
It is also seen that both the temperature and enthalpy increase at the ﬁnal step is
signiﬁcantly lower compared to the other steps seen in Figure 4.21 and 4.22. This is
because the compression is performed on a pure liquid, which will cause the enthalpy and
thereby the temperature to increase at a much slower rate.
These eﬀects will as discussed have a serious eﬀect on the compression process. One
could argue that compressing liqueﬁed gas stream is beneﬁcial, since it requires less work
of compression since the increase in enthalpy is lower. This should however be carefully
thought through, since the compression of liquid would require liquid pumps, in contrary
to gas compressors.
On the other hand it could be disputed if a phase transition is desired at all, since this
would require additional cooling. The demand for additional cooling could be a signiﬁcant
factor for cases using active cooling, since the energy use of the refrigeration cycle will be
higher.
To be able to use this behaviour to improve the energy use of a compression process,
it should be considered to split the compression routine into sequences of multi-stage
compression processes. In this way diﬀerent design speciﬁcations and pressure increases
can be made in each sequence, and the exact occurrences of the phase transitions can more
69
==PAGE:74==
CHAPTER 5. OPTIMISATION AND DISCUSSION
30th June, 2017
easily be controlled. This would be a notably improvement to the compression process
simulated in this work, where the design speciﬁcation simply was that the pressure is
increased with a constant fraction at each compression step.
It should ﬁnally be mentioned, that all the investigated cases ends with the gas stream
as being completely liqueﬁed. These observations could also be seen when reproducing
the results from A. Alabdulkarem [3] in Case 1 seen in section 4.1, however this was not
the case in the reference work [3]. This behaviour should be taken into consideration,
when implementing the full compression and transportation scheme, since liquid should
be handled diﬀerently than gas.
For instance the stream should be completely vaporized before transport. This would
require that it should be heated to temperatures above approximately 65◦C, after com-
pression. This temperature should be maintained throughout the pipe transport to avoid
liquefaction in the pipes, unless the gas stream is mixed with compounds to keep this
from happening. These problems should at some point be addressed, yet the main focus
of this report will be on compression of the gas stream to the desired pressure.
All though this is not within the scope of this work, it could also be argued that the
compression schemes described in the investigated cases, could be used to liquefy CO2
for ship transport. This should however be done at even lower temperatures, since this
enables liquefaction at lower pressures, which are more preferable when storing CO2 in
tanks.
Summary:
It has been seen that the phase behaviour of the gas stream greatly aﬀects
the compression and cooling properties. If the gas stream is in a liquid state during
compression, the enthalpy increase and thereby the required work of compression will
become signiﬁcantly lower. If the gas stream is condensed during cooling the decrease of
enthalpy will be larger than usual, and cooling will therefore require substantially more
cooling. Finally it has been observed how minuscule amounts of water in the gas stream
greatly aﬀects its phase behaviour.
A proposed solution to exploit this behaviour, is to divide the compression routine into
sequences, and thereby enable better regulation of when phase transitions occurs.
70
==PAGE:75==
CHAPTER 5. OPTIMISATION AND DISCUSSION
30th June, 2017
Conclusion and Future Work
Miscible CO2 ﬂooding is an emerging method for enhanced oil recovery, and enables the
retrieval of previously inaccessible fossil fuel resources. One of the major challenges of this
method, is to have a access to a sustainable CO2-source. This implies the development of
eﬀective methods for transporting the gas from its source to the point of use, which could
be done in pipelines.
Transport by pipelines implies compressing large amounts of CO2, which requires signiﬁcant
amounts of energy. The investigated compression process consists of several inter-cooled
compression steps, where the cooling is either provided by cold sea water or an active
cooling cycle. The goal of this work has been to minimize the total energy use of the
process, by optimizing the design speciﬁcations. This have been done by adjusting the
number of compression steps, and the amount of cooling needed during the compression
process.
To be able to evaluate the compression and refrigeration processes, a suitable model for
describing a typical source gas containing CO2 was found. It was chosen to use the CPA
EOS, since this gave the most satisfactory predictions of phase equilibrium measurements
on a CO2-water system. CO2 was treated as being a self associating compound, by using
the CO2-water cross component parameters and association scheme from the work of I.
Tsivintzelis et.al were used [16].
To be able to analyse the full compression process, an vapour-compression refrigeration
cycle, using ammonia as refrigerant, will also have to be evaluated.
To model the
refrigeration cycle the CPA EOS was also chosen, since it gave adequate results for
calculating the speciﬁc volume of ammonia.
To evaluate the compression processes, routines were built in Matlab for calculating
the enthalpy and entropy of a ﬂuid, at given temperature and pressure. These calculations
were validated against reference data, and showed great compliance. The enthalpy and
entropy calculations was then straightforwardly implemented in routines for evaluating
compression and refrigeration processes.
Five diﬀerent compression schemes were investigated in ﬁve diﬀerent cases, varying
in number of compression steps, amount of cooling and whether or not the cooling was
supplied by an active cooling cycle. The ﬁrst case served as a reference case, where
the results from the work of A. Alabdulkarem et.al. [3] was replicated, to validate the
compression and refrigeration calculations. Very good compliance to the reference were
achieved with a discrepancy of only −0.38 %.
The lowest energy cost of compression was calculated to be 270.1 kJ/kgCO2, and was
achieved in Case 3, where the initial gas stream temperature were lowered from 40 to 25◦C
before compression. However Case 5 showed promising results as well, by using active
cooling to further lower the gas stream temperature. In this Case the total energy use of
the compression process was 322.2 kJ/kgCO2, but this could possibly be reduced further if
the gas stream temperature was even lower. This would only be possible by using active
cooling, since this will not be limited by the temperature of the available seawater.
Seawater were used for cooling in all processes, either as directly cooling the gas stream
or to condensate the refrigerant in the cooling cycle. When seawater is used for cooling, it
will receive large amounts of heat from the process. To minimize the overall energy use of
the compression process, it is suggested to use the heated seawater in heat integration
with other processes. Suggested processes could be in the CO2 capture plant or in district
heating. By evaluating the necessary ﬂow rate and outgoing temperature of the seawater,
71
==PAGE:76==
CHAPTER 5. OPTIMISATION AND DISCUSSION
30th June, 2017
it was seen that the overall energy use of the compression process could potentially be
greatly reduced. However, the only Cases where heat integration could be considered are
the cases 4 and 5 using active cooling, since the seawater temperature in the other cases
are too low, to be integrated within the suggested processes.
Finally it was seen that the phase behaviour of the gas stream, aﬀected the compression
and refrigeration processes signiﬁcantly. This should be taken into account for optimizing
the compression process. It is suggested that the compression process is split into several
sequences, to better control when phase transitions occur.
Future Work:
For future work it should be investigated how case of using active cooling
in the compression process could be further optimized. This could be done by further
decreasing the gas stream temperature and by increasing the number of compression steps.
It should also be examined how changing the condensation and evaporation pressures
in the cooling cycle will aﬀect the compression process. If the condensation pressure is
decreased, it could enable cooling the gas stream even lower temperature, and thereby
lower the energy use of compression. On the other hand increasing the evaporation
pressure could increase the cooling cycle eﬃciency, while also increasing the temperature
of the seawater exiting condenser.
Furthermore the compression process should be split into sequences with diﬀerent design
speciﬁcations. For example it could be speciﬁed that a speciﬁc number of steps should be
used before condensation, or that the gas stream temperature changes throughout the
compression process. This should enable better control of the gas stream phase behaviour
during the compression process.
Finally work should be done concerning the full implementation of heat integration of
the heated seawater. Concerns should also be directed towards calculating the practical
energy use of compression and energy gain of heat integration. This could be done by
implementing eﬃciency factors for the investigated processes.
72
==PAGE:77==
LITTERATURE
30th June, 2017
Litterature
[1] American Institute of Chemical Engineers. DIPPR 801 Database, 2017. Online: Avail-
able at: https://www.aiche.org/dippr/events-products/801-database, Last Accessed
June 2017
[2] Zeina Abbas, Touﬁc Mezher, and Mohammad R M Abu-Zahra. CO2 puriﬁcation.
Part I: Puriﬁcation requirement review and the selection of impurities deep removal
technologies. International Journal of Greenhouse Gas Control, 16:324–334, 2013.
[3] Abdullah Alabdulkarem, Yunho Hwang, and Reinhard Radermacher. Development
of CO2 liquefaction cycles for CO2 sequestration. Applied Thermal Engineering,
33-34:144–156, 2012.
[4] F Engel and A Kather. Conditioning of a Pipeline CO2 Stream for Ship Transport
from Various CO2 Sources. Energy Procedia, 00:1–11, 2017.
[5] Lester Haar and John S. Gallagher. Thermodynamic properties of ammonia, 1978.
[6] E. U. Harlow, A.; Wiegand, G.; Franck. The Density of Ammonia at High Pressures
to 723 K and 950 MPa. Ber. Bunsenges. Phys. Chem., 101(10):1461–1465, 1997.
[7] M. B. King, A. Mubarak, J. D. Kim, and T. R. Bott. The mutual solubilities of
water with supercritical and liquid carbon dioxides. The Journal of Supercritical
Fluids, 5(4):296–302, 1992.
[8] Georgios M. Kontogeorgis and Georgios K. Folas. Thermodynamic Models for In-
dustrial Applications: From Classical and Advanced Mixing Rules to Association
Theories. 2010.
[9] M L Michelsen. 28322 - Teknisk Termodynamik. 2010.
[10] G. Müller, E. Bender, and G. Maurer. Das Dampf-Flüssigkeitsgleichgewicht des
ternären Systems Ammoniak-Kohlendioxid-Wasser bei hohen Wassergehalten im Bere-
ich zwischen 373 und 473 Kelvin. Berichte der Bunsengesellschaft für physikalische
Chemie, 92(2):148–160, 1988.
[11] Lars Erik Øi, Nils Eldrup, Umesh Adhikari, Mathias Håvåg Bentsen, Jayalanka Liyana
Badalge, and Songbo Yang. Simulation and cost comparison of CO2 liquefaction.
Energy Procedia, 86(1876):500–510, 2016.
[12] Reinhard Radermacher and Yunho Hwang. Vapor Compression Cycle Fundamentals.
In Vapor Compression Heat Pumps with Refrigerant Mixtures, chapter 3, pages
65–134. CRC Press, 2005.
73
==PAGE:78==
LITTERATURE
30th June, 2017
[13] Gary T Rochelle. Amine Scrubbing for CO2 Capture. Science, 325(5948):1652–1654,
2009.
[14] Roland Span and W. Wagner. A new EOS for CO2 covering the ﬂuid region from
the triple point temperature to 1100K at pressures up to 800MPa.pdf, 1996.
[15] S Thomas. Enhanced Oil Recovery - An Overview. Oil & Gas Science and Technology,
63(1):9–19, 2008.
[16] Ioannis Tsivintzelis, Georgios M. Kontogeorgis, Michael L. Michelsen, and Erling H.
Stenby. Modeling phase equilibria for acid gas mixtures using the CPA equation of
state. Part II: Binary mixtures with CO2. Fluid Phase Equilibria, 306(1):38–56, 2011.
[17] Alain Valtz, Antonin Chapoy, Christophe Coquelet, Patrice Paricaud, and Dominique
Richon. Vapour-liquid equilibria in the carbon dioxide-water system, measurement
and modelling from 278.2 to 318.2 K. Fluid Phase Equilibria, 226(1-2):333–344, 2004.
[18] W. Wagner. The IAPWS Formulation 1995 for the Thermodynamic Properties of
Ordinary Water Substance for General and Scientiﬁc Use. Journal of Physical and
Chemical Reference Data, 31(2):387–535, 2002.
[19] R. Wiebe and V. L. Gaddy. The Solubility of Carbon Dioxide in Water at Various
Temperatures from 12 to 40 degrees and at Pressures to 500 Atmospheres. Critical
Phenomena. Journal of the American Chemical Society, 62(4):815–817, 1940.
74
==PAGE:79==
APPENDIX A. REFERENCES
30th June, 2017
Appendix A
References
This Appendix includes references used in this work which are not public accessible.
A.1
Enthalpy, Entropy and Gibbs Free Energy De-
parture Calculation in Aspen Plus User Model
An internal document about corrections to the enthalpy, entropy and free Gibbs energy
calculations in Aspen plus, has been prepared by Alay Arya and Xiaodong Liang in 2015.
This document serves as a reference for some of the enthalpy and entropy calculations
described in chapter 3. The document is attached to the following pages:
75
==PAGE:80==
 
 
Enthalpy, Entropy and Gibbs 
Free Energy Departure 
Calculation in Aspen Plus 
User Model 
 
 
Prepared by: Alay Arya, Xiaodong Liang 
Supervisor: Prof. Georgios Kontogeorgis  
Center for Energy Resources Engineering (CERE), 
Department of Chemical and Biochemical Engineering, 
Technical University of Denmark.  
 
Date: 6th August 2015 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:81==
Page 1 of 4 
 
 
Problem 
BP found that there is a problem with enthalpy calculation using Aspen Plus CPA User Model while 
simulating turbine block for syngas (CO+H2). BP also showed the comparison between CPA and 
SRK results, which showed considerable difference. 
Solution 
 
(1) ThermoSystem is used to generate Aspen Plus input file. User has to make sure that CPA 
parameters (a0, 𝑏𝑏, 𝑐𝑐1) are entered before creating Aspen Plus input file through 
ThermoSystem. For example, H2 and CO components do not have CPA parameters (a0, 𝑏𝑏, 𝑐𝑐1) in 
the database of CPA and therefore to use these components user need to calculate them using 
standard correlations, based on critical parameters, of SRK EoS. 
 
H2:  a0 = 0.2476 𝑏𝑏𝑏𝑏𝑏𝑏(𝐿𝐿𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚
⁄
)2, 𝑏𝑏= 0.0182 𝐿𝐿/𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚, 𝑐𝑐1 = 0.1318 
CO:  a0 = 1.4903𝑏𝑏𝑏𝑏𝑏𝑏(𝐿𝐿𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚
⁄
)2, 𝑏𝑏= 0,0273 𝐿𝐿/𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚, 𝑐𝑐1 = 0.5554 
 
(2) Aspen Plus calculates Enthalpy, Entropy and Gibbs free energy as per eqn-1, 2 and 3 
respectively. 
 
𝐻𝐻𝑚𝑚(𝑇𝑇, 𝑃𝑃) = ෍𝑦𝑦𝑖𝑖
𝑁𝑁
𝑖𝑖=1
𝐻𝐻𝑖𝑖
𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓+ 𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷+ ෍𝑦𝑦𝑖𝑖
𝑁𝑁
𝑖𝑖=1
𝐻𝐻𝑖𝑖
𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 
𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷= −න൬𝑃𝑃−𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅
𝑣𝑣൰
𝑣𝑣
∞
𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑−𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅ln(𝑍𝑍) + 𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅(𝑍𝑍𝑚𝑚−1) + 𝑇𝑇ቌ−න൤൬𝜕𝜕𝜕𝜕
𝜕𝜕𝜕𝜕൰
𝑣𝑣
−𝑅𝑅
𝑣𝑣൨
𝑣𝑣
∞
𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑+ 𝑅𝑅ln(𝑍𝑍)ቍ 
𝐻𝐻𝑖𝑖
𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖(𝑇𝑇, 𝑃𝑃) = 𝐻𝐻𝑖𝑖
𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖(𝑇𝑇, 1 𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎) =
න
൫𝐶𝐶𝑃𝑃,𝑖𝑖
𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖൯
𝑇𝑇
298.15𝐾𝐾
𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑 
 
 
 
 
1 
 
 
 
Department of Chemical and Biochemical Engineering, Technical University of Denmark. 
==PAGE:82==
Page 2 of 4 
 
𝑆𝑆𝑚𝑚(𝑇𝑇, 𝑃𝑃) = 𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷+ ෍𝑦𝑦𝑖𝑖
𝑁𝑁
𝑖𝑖=1
𝑆𝑆𝑖𝑖
𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 
𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷= −න൤൬𝜕𝜕𝜕𝜕
𝜕𝜕𝜕𝜕൰
𝑣𝑣
−𝑅𝑅
𝑣𝑣൨
𝑣𝑣
∞
𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑+ 𝑅𝑅ln(𝑍𝑍) −𝑅𝑅ln ൬
𝑃𝑃
1 𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎൰ 
𝑆𝑆𝑖𝑖
𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖(𝑇𝑇, 𝑃𝑃) =
න
൭
𝐶𝐶𝑃𝑃,𝑖𝑖
𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖
𝑇𝑇൱
𝑇𝑇
298.15𝐾𝐾
𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
 
𝐺𝐺𝑚𝑚(𝑇𝑇, 𝑃𝑃) = 𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷= −න൬𝑃𝑃−𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅
𝑣𝑣൰
𝑣𝑣
∞
𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑−𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅ln(𝑍𝑍) + 𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅(𝑍𝑍𝑚𝑚−1) + 𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅ln ൬
𝑃𝑃
1 𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎൰ 
 
 
3 
 
 
 
𝐻𝐻𝑖𝑖
𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓= 𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀 𝐻𝐻𝐻𝐻𝐻𝐻𝐻𝐻 𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜 𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹 𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜 𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝 𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐 𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎 298.15𝐾𝐾 𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎 1 𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎 
𝐶𝐶𝑃𝑃,𝑖𝑖
𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖= 𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆 𝐻𝐻𝐻𝐻𝐻𝐻𝐻𝐻 𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎 𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐 𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝 𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓 𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔 
𝐻𝐻𝑚𝑚(𝑇𝑇, 𝑃𝑃) = 𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀 𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸ℎ𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙 𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜 𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚 𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎 𝑇𝑇 & 𝑃𝑃 
𝐻𝐻𝑖𝑖
𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖(𝑇𝑇, 𝑃𝑃) = 𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀 𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼 𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺 𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸ℎ𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎 𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜 𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝 𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐 𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎 𝑇𝑇 & 𝑃𝑃 
𝑆𝑆𝑚𝑚(𝑇𝑇, 𝑃𝑃) = 𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀 𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸 𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜 𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚 𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎 𝑇𝑇 & 𝑃𝑃 
𝑆𝑆𝑖𝑖
𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖(𝑇𝑇, 𝑃𝑃) = 𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼 𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺 𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀 𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸 𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜 𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝 𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐 𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎 𝑇𝑇 & 𝑃𝑃 
𝐺𝐺𝑚𝑚(𝑇𝑇, 𝑃𝑃) = 𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀 𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺 𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹 𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸 𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎 𝑇𝑇 & 𝑃𝑃 
𝑦𝑦𝑖𝑖= 𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚 𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓 𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜 𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐 𝑖𝑖 𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 𝑡𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑒 𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚 
𝑍𝑍= 𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶 𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓 
𝑇𝑇= 𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇 
𝑃𝑃= 𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃 
𝑣𝑣= 𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚 𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣 
𝑁𝑁= 𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛 𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜 𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐 
𝑅𝑅= 𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺 𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐 
a0 = 𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸 𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃 𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆 𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡 𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜 𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶 
𝑏𝑏= 𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶 𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃 𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆 𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡 𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜 𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶 
 
 
 
It should be noted that Aspen Plus does not explicitly show the pressure correction (which are 
marked in red fonts in above equations) in its manual. Also, Aspen Plus does not show equation 
for ideal gas enthalpy and entropy. Thus, it could be the reason that no pressure correction was 
made in Aspen Plus CPA User Model and could have thought that it would be accounted in ideal 
Department of Chemical and Biochemical Engineering, Technical University of Denmark. 
==PAGE:83==
Page 3 of 4 
 
gas equation. And this was the reason behind the difference between SRK and CPA results. 
Aspen Plus imports DHMX, DSMX and DGMX from Aspen Plus CPA User Model. In updated 
version, CERE (DTU) corrected the CPA User Model code by accounting this pressure correction. 
New cpaum.dll has been generated. 
 
 
 
 
Department of Chemical and Biochemical Engineering, Technical University of Denmark. 
==PAGE:84==
Page 4 of 4 
 
Screenshot of Correction in the Code 
 
Department of Chemical and Biochemical Engineering, Technical University of Denmark. 
==PAGE:85==
APPENDIX B. MATLAB SCRIPTS
30th June, 2017
Appendix B
Matlab scripts
This Appendix includes some of the most important Matlab functions and scripts that
have been applied in this work.
B.1
Matlab funtion: Calculation of Enthalpy
In the following appendix the Matlab-function for calculating enthalpy, that have been
used in this work is attached. The method is explained in chapter 3.
1 %%
% Function
f o r
evaluating
the
enthalpy
of a
f l u i d
with temperature T,
3 % pressure P,
molar composition N of
the components given
in
the
vector
% named component .
5
% Author :
Torsten
S t i l l i n g −30/6−2017
7 %%
9 function
[H, PhaseSplit , Hig_tot , Hres_tot , Hevap_tot , H0_tot , show , ID ] =
enthalpy2 (T,P,N, component , PhaseSplit_input , T0)
11 % ID = 1 −> pure
l i q u i d
phase
% ID = 2 −> pure vapour
state
13 % ID = 3 −> mixed phases with
multiple
components
% ID = 4 −> mixed phases with pure component ( saturation
point )
15 % ID = 5 −> pure component ( saturation
point ) phase
s p e c i f i e d
by input
17 i f
nargin < 5
| |
numel ( PhaseSplit_input ) == 0
PhaseSplit_input = [1
1 ] ;
19 end
21 % I n i t i a l i s i n g
names
Ammonia = 93;
23 CO2
= 42;
Water
= 90;
25 nder
= 5;
R
= 8.314;
27 show
= true (1 ,2) ;
ID
= 0;
29
%% Calculating
pressent
phases
31
% I f
only one component
i s
pressent and solution
i s
at
saturation
point
81
==PAGE:86==
APPENDIX B. MATLAB SCRIPTS
30th June, 2017
33 i f
numel ( component ) == 1
T_sat = PhaseSATT(N,P, component ) ;
35
T_dew = T_sat (2) ;
T_bub = T_sat (1) ;
37
t o l = mean(T_sat) ∗1e −5;
39
i f
(T_dew −t o l < T) && (T_bub + t o l > T)
LiqFrac
= 1;
41
VapFrac
= 1;
PhaseSplit = [1
1 ] ;
43
PhaseInd
= [1
−1];
ID = 4;
45
i f
nargin < 5
display ( ’ATTENTION:
Pure compound
i s
at
saturation
point −
enthalpy depends on vapour/ l i q u i d
balance .
Consider
s p e c i f y i n g
composition . ’ )
47
end
end
49
[ PhaseSplit , PhaseFrac , PhaseInd ] = Sort2Flash (T,P,N) ;
LiqFrac
= zeros ( length ( component ) ,1) ;
51
LiqPhase = 0;
VapFrac
= zeros ( length ( component ) ,1) ;
53
VapPhase = 0;
f o r
i = 1: length ( PhaseInd )
55
i f
PhaseInd ( i ) == 1
LiqFrac
= LiqFrac + PhaseFrac ( : , i )∗PhaseSplit ( i ) ;
57
LiqPhase = LiqPhase + PhaseSplit ( : , i ) ;
e l s e i f
PhaseInd ( i ) == −1
59
VapFrac
= VapFrac + PhaseFrac ( : , i )∗PhaseSplit ( i ) ;
VapPhase = VapPhase + PhaseSplit ( : , i ) ;
61
end
end
63 % Or any other
event
e l s e
65
[ PhaseSplit , PhaseFrac , PhaseInd ] = Sort2Flash (T,P,N) ;
LiqFrac
= zeros ( length ( component ) ,1) ;
67
LiqPhase = 0;
VapFrac
= zeros ( length ( component ) ,1) ;
69
VapPhase = 0;
f o r
i = 1: length ( PhaseInd )
71
i f
PhaseInd ( i ) == 1
LiqFrac
= LiqFrac + PhaseFrac ( : , i )∗PhaseSplit ( i ) ;
73
LiqPhase = LiqPhase + PhaseSplit ( : , i ) ;
e l s e i f
PhaseInd ( i ) == −1
75
VapFrac
= VapFrac + PhaseFrac ( : , i )∗PhaseSplit ( i ) ;
VapPhase = VapPhase + PhaseSplit ( : , i ) ;
77
end
end
79 end
81 % I f
the
solution
i s
at
saturation
point and
s p l i t
i s
described by user
i f
( nargin == 5) && (ID == 4)
83
PhaseSplit = PhaseSplit_input ;
ID
= 5;
85
LiqFrac = PhaseSplit (1) ;
VapFrac = PhaseSplit (2) ;
87 end
82
==PAGE:87==
APPENDIX B. MATLAB SCRIPTS
30th June, 2017
89 i f
numel ( component ) == 1
LiqPhase = LiqFrac ;
91
VapPhase = VapFrac ;
PhaseFrac (1 ,1) = LiqFrac ;
93
PhaseFrac (1 ,2) = VapFrac ;
end
95
i f
( VapPhase == 0) && (ID ~= 4) && (ID ~= 5)
97
ID
= 1;
show (1 ,2) = f a l s e ;
99 e l s e i f
( LiqPhase == 0) && (ID ~= 4) && (ID ~= 5)
ID
= 2;
101
show (1 ,1) = f a l s e ;
e l s e i f
( LiqPhase ~= 0) && ( VapPhase ~= 0) && ( numel ( component ) ~= 1)
103
ID = 3;
end
105
%% Defining
r e f f e r e n c e
temperature and pressure
107 i f
nargin < 6
T0 = 25 + 273.15; % (K)
109 end
111 %% DIPPR Parameters
% Storing DIPPR c o r r e l e a t i o n
parameters
in
array .
113 % Column number i n d i c a t e s
component number
% Row number i n d i c a t e s
parameter A−E
115 %
(1−5 fo r Cp ig , 6−10 i s
heat
of
vapourisation )
DIPPR = zeros (15 , length ( component ) ) ;
117
Tc = zeros (1 , length ( component ) ) ;
119 H0 = zeros (1 , length ( component ) ) ;
f o r
i = 1:
length ( component )
121 i f
component ( i ) == Ammonia
% Getting
the
c r i t i c a l
temperature
fo r
component from database
123
Tc( i ) = GETPROP( component ( i ) ,3) ;
H0( i , 1 )
= −0.4590E2 ; % ( kj /mol )
125
H0( i , 1 )
= H0( i , 1 ) ∗1 e3 ; % (J/mol )
% Cp gas DIPPR Parameters (ammonia)
( e107 )
127
DIPPR(1 , i ) = 0.33427E+05;
DIPPR(2 , i ) = 0.48980E+05;
129
DIPPR(3 , i ) = 0.20360E+04;
DIPPR(4 , i ) = 0.22560E+05;
131
DIPPR(5 , i ) = 0.88200E+03;
% Vap heat DIPPR Parameters
(ammonia)
( e106 )
133
DIPPR(6 , i ) = 0.31523E+08;
DIPPR(7 , i ) = 0.39140E+00;
135
DIPPR(8 , i ) = −0.22890E+00;
DIPPR(9 , i ) = 0.23090E+00;
137 e l s e i f
component ( i ) == CO2
% Getting
the
c r i t i c a l
temperature
fo r
component from database
139
Tc( i ) = GETPROP( component ( i ) ,3) ;
H0( i , 1 )
= −3.9351E8 ; % (J/kmol )
141
H0( i , 1 )
= H0( i , 1 ) ∗1e −3; % (J/mol )
% Cp gas DIPPR Parameters (CO2)
( e107 )
143
DIPPR(1 , i ) = 0.29370E+05;
DIPPR(2 , i ) = 0.34540E+05;
145
DIPPR(3 , i ) = 0.14280E+04;
DIPPR(4 , i ) = 0.26400E+05;
83
==PAGE:88==
APPENDIX B. MATLAB SCRIPTS
30th June, 2017
147
DIPPR(5 , i ) = 0.58800E+03;
% Vap heat DIPPR Parameters
(CO2)
( e106 )
149
DIPPR(6 , i ) = 0.21730E+08;
DIPPR(7 , i ) = 0.38200E+00;
151
DIPPR(8 , i ) = −0.43390E+00;
DIPPR(9 , i ) = 0.42213E+00;
153 e l s e i f
component ( i ) == Water
% Getting
the
c r i t i c a l
temperature
fo r
component from database
155
Tc( i ) = GETPROP( component ( i ) ,3) ;
H0( i , 1 )
= −241.83; % ( kJ/mol )
157
H0( i , 1 )
= H0( i , 1 ) ∗1 e3 ; % (J/mol )
% Cp gas DIPPR Parameters (ammonia)
( e107 )
159
DIPPR(1 , i ) = 0.33363E+05;
DIPPR(2 , i ) = 0.26790E+05;
161
DIPPR(3 , i ) = 0.26105E+04;
DIPPR(4 , i ) = 0.88960E+04;
163
DIPPR(5 , i ) = 0.11690E+04;
% Vap heat DIPPR Parameters
(ammonia)
( e106 )
165
DIPPR(6 , i ) = 0.52053E+08;
DIPPR(7 , i ) = 0.31990E+00;
167
DIPPR(8 , i ) = −0.21200E+00;
DIPPR(9 , i ) = 0.25795E+00;
169 e l s e
display ( ’ERROR: Component not
suported by t h i s
function ’ )
171 return
end
173 end
175 %% Calculating
r e s i d u a l
enthalpy
fo r T ( Hres )
177 % Calculating
Hres
Hres = zeros (1 , length ( PhaseInd ) ) ;
179 f o r
i = 1: length ( PhaseInd )
i f
( PhaseInd ( i ) ~= 0) && (sum( PhaseFrac ( : , i ) ) ~= 0)
181
[~ ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~ ,AUX, ~ ] = FUGACITY(T,P, PhaseFrac ( : , i ) , PhaseInd ( i ) , nder ) ;
Hres ( i ) = AUX(1) ;
183
Hres ( i ) = Hres ( i ) ∗R;
e l s e
185
Hres ( i ) = 0;
end
187 end
189 %% Calculating
the
heat
of
evaporation
fo
each component at T0 ( Hevap0 )
191 % I n i t i a l i s i n g
array
f o r
storing Hevap0 of
each component
Hevap0 = zeros ( length ( component ) ,1) ;
193 f o r
i = 1: length ( component )
% Calculating Hevap0 from DIPPR (106)
195
Hevap0 ( i , 1 ) = DIPPR(6 , i ) ∗(1−(T0/Tc( i ) ) ) . . .
^(DIPPR(7 , i )+DIPPR(8 , i ) ∗(T0/Tc( i ) ) . . .
197
+DIPPR(9 , i ) ∗(T0/Tc( i ) ) ^2) ; % (J/kmol )
199
% Hevap0
i s
scaled
to SI
units
Hevap0 ( i , 1 ) = Hevap0 ( i , 1 ) ∗1e −3; % (J/mol )
201 end
203 %% Calculating
i d e a l
gas
enthalpy from DIPPR ( Hig )
84
==PAGE:89==
APPENDIX B. MATLAB SCRIPTS
30th June, 2017
205 % I n i t i a l i s i n g
array
f o r
storing
Hig
of
each component
Hig
= zeros ( length ( component ) ,1) ;
207 f o r
i = 1: length ( component )
% Calculating
Hig from DIPPR
209
Hig ( i , 1 ) = DIPPR(1 , i ) ∗T . . .
+ (DIPPR(2 , i ) ∗DIPPR(3 , i ) ∗cosh (DIPPR(3 , i ) /T) ) /( sinh (DIPPR(3 , i ) /T) )
. . .
211
−(DIPPR(4 , i ) ∗DIPPR(5 , i ) ∗sinh (DIPPR(5 , i ) /T) ) /( cosh (DIPPR(5 , i ) /T) )
. . .
−DIPPR(1 , i ) ∗T0 . . .
213
−(DIPPR(2 , i ) ∗DIPPR(3 , i ) ∗cosh (DIPPR(3 , i ) /T0) ) /( sinh (DIPPR(3 , i ) /T0) )
. . .
+ (DIPPR(4 , i ) ∗DIPPR(5 , i ) ∗sinh (DIPPR(5 , i ) /T0) ) /( cosh (DIPPR(5 , i ) /T0) )
;
215
% Hig
i s
scaled
to SI
units
217
Hig ( i , 1 ) = Hig ( i , 1 ) ∗1e −3; % (J/mol )
end
219
%% Calculating
t o t a l
enthalpy
221
% Calculating H0 contribution
223 H0_L = 0;
f o r
i = 1: length ( component )
225
H0_L = H0_L + H0( i ) ∗LiqFrac ( i ) ;
end
227 H0_L = H0_L∗PhaseSplit (1) ;
229 H0_V = 0;
f o r
i = 1: length ( component )
231
H0_V = H0_V + H0( i ) ∗VapFrac ( i ) ;
end
233 H0_V = H0_V∗PhaseSplit (2) ;
235 H0_tot = [H0_L H0_V] ;
237 % Calculating
heat
of
evaporation
contribution
Hevap_L = 0;
239 f o r
i = 1: length ( component )
Hevap_L = Hevap_L + Hevap0 ( i ) ∗LiqFrac ( i ) ;
241 end
Hevap_L = Hevap_L∗PhaseSplit (1) ;
243
Hevap_V = 0;
245 f o r
i = 1: length ( component )
Hevap_V = Hevap_V + Hevap0 ( i ) ∗VapFrac ( i ) ;
247 end
Hevap_V = Hevap_V∗PhaseSplit (2) ;
249
Hevap_tot = [ Hevap_L Hevap_V ] ;
251
% Calculating
i d e a l
gas
enthalpy
contribution
253 Hig_L = 0;
f o r
i = 1: length ( component )
255
Hig_L = Hig_L + Hig ( i ) ∗LiqFrac ( i ) ;
end
257 Hig_L = Hig_L∗PhaseSplit (1) ;
85
==PAGE:90==
APPENDIX B. MATLAB SCRIPTS
30th June, 2017
259 Hig_V = 0;
f o r
i = 1: length ( component )
261
Hig_V = Hig_V + Hig ( i ) ∗VapFrac ( i ) ;
end
263 Hig_V = Hig_V∗PhaseSplit (2) ;
265 Hig_tot = [ Hig_L Hig_V ] ;
267 % Calculating
r e s i d u a l
enthalpy
contribution
Hres_L = 0;
269 Hres_V = 0;
f o r
i = 1: length ( Hres )
271
i f
PhaseInd ( i ) == 1
Hres_L = Hres_L + Hres ( i ) ∗PhaseSplit ( i ) ;
273
e l s e i f
PhaseInd ( i ) == −1
Hres_V = Hres_V + Hres ( i ) ∗PhaseSplit ( i ) ;
275
end
end
277
Hres_tot = [ Hres_L Hres_V ] ;
279
% Calculating
t o t a l
enthalpy
281 H_L = Hig_L + Hres_L ;
H_V = Hig_V + Hres_V ;
283
H = [H_L H_V] ;
86
==PAGE:91==
APPENDIX B. MATLAB SCRIPTS
30th June, 2017
B.2
Matlab funtion: Calculation of Entropy
In the following appendix the Matlab-function for calculating entropy, that have been
used in this work is attached. The method is explained in chapter 3.
%%
2 % Function
f o r
evaluating
the
entropy
of a
f l u i d
with temperature T,
% pressure P,
molar composition N of
the components given
in
the
vector
4 % named component .
6 % Author :
Torsten
S t i l l i n g −30/6−2017
%%
8
function
[ S , PhaseSplit , Sig_tot , Sres_tot , Sp_tot , S0_tot , show , ID ] = entropy (T,
P,N, component , PhaseSplit_input , T0, P0)
10
i f
nargin < 5
| |
numel ( PhaseSplit_input ) == 0
12
PhaseSplit_input = [1
1 ] ;
end
14
% ID = 1 −> pure
l i q u i d
phase
16 % ID = 2 −> pure vapour
state
% ID = 3 −> mixed phases with
multiple
components
18 % ID = 4 −> mixed phases with pure component ( saturation
point )
% ID = 5 −> pure component ( saturation
point ) phase
s p e c i f i e d
by input
20
% I n i t i a l i s i n g
names
22 Ammonia = 93;
CO2
= 42;
24 Water
= 90;
nder
= 5;
26 R
= 8.314;
show
= true (1 ,2) ;
28 ID
= 0;
30 %% Calculating
pressent
phases
32 % I f
only one component
i s
pressent and solution
i s
at
saturation
point
i f
numel ( component ) == 1
34
T_sat = PhaseSATT(N,P, component ) ;
T_dew = T_sat (2) ;
36
T_bub = T_sat (1) ;
t o l
= mean(T_sat) ∗1e −5;
38
i f
(T_dew −t o l < T) && (T_bub + t o l > T)
40
LiqFrac
= 1;
VapFrac
= 1;
42
PhaseSplit = [1
1 ] ;
PhaseInd
= [1
−1];
44
ID = 4;
i f
nargin < 5
46
display ( ’ATTENTION:
Pure compound
i s
at
saturation
point −
entropy depends on vapour/ l i q u i d
balance .
Consider
s p e c i f y i n g
composition ! ’ )
end
48
end
[ PhaseSplit , PhaseFrac , PhaseInd ] = Sort2Flash (T,P,N) ;
50
LiqFrac
= zeros ( length ( component ) ,1) ;
87
==PAGE:92==
APPENDIX B. MATLAB SCRIPTS
30th June, 2017
LiqPhase = 0;
52
VapFrac
= zeros ( length ( component ) ,1) ;
VapPhase = 0;
54
f o r
i = 1: length ( PhaseInd )
i f
PhaseInd ( i ) == 1
56
LiqFrac
= LiqFrac + PhaseFrac ( : , i )∗PhaseSplit ( i ) ;
LiqPhase = LiqPhase + PhaseSplit ( : , i ) ;
58
e l s e i f
PhaseInd ( i ) == −1
VapFrac
= VapFrac + PhaseFrac ( : , i )∗PhaseSplit ( i ) ;
60
VapPhase = VapPhase + PhaseSplit ( : , i ) ;
end
62
end
% Or any other
event
64 e l s e
[ PhaseSplit , PhaseFrac , PhaseInd ] = Sort2Flash (T,P,N) ;
66
LiqFrac
= zeros ( length ( component ) ,1) ;
LiqPhase = 0;
68
VapFrac
= zeros ( length ( component ) ,1) ;
VapPhase = 0;
70
f o r
i = 1: length ( PhaseInd )
i f
PhaseInd ( i ) == 1
72
LiqFrac
= LiqFrac + PhaseFrac ( : , i )∗PhaseSplit ( i ) ;
LiqPhase = LiqPhase + PhaseSplit ( : , i ) ;
74
e l s e i f
PhaseInd ( i ) == −1
VapFrac
= VapFrac + PhaseFrac ( : , i )∗PhaseSplit ( i ) ;
76
VapPhase = VapPhase + PhaseSplit ( : , i ) ;
end
78
end
end
80
% I f
the
solution
i s
at
saturation
point and
s p l i t
i s
described by user
82 i f
( nargin == 5) && (ID == 4)
PhaseSplit = PhaseSplit_input ;
84
ID
= 5;
LiqFrac = PhaseSplit (1) ;
86
VapFrac = PhaseSplit (2) ;
end
88
i f
numel ( component ) == 1
90
LiqPhase = LiqFrac ;
VapPhase = VapFrac ;
92
PhaseFrac (1 ,1) = LiqFrac ;
PhaseFrac (1 ,2) = VapPhase ;
94 end
96 i f
( VapPhase == 0) && (ID ~= 4) && (ID ~= 5)
ID
= 1;
98
show (1 ,2) = f a l s e ;
e l s e i f
( LiqPhase == 0)
&& (ID ~= 4) && (ID ~= 5)
100
ID
= 2;
show (1 ,1) = f a l s e ;
102 e l s e i f
( LiqPhase ~= 0) && ( VapPhase ~= 0) && ( numel ( component ) ~= 1)
ID = 3;
104 end
106 %% Defining
r e f f e r e n c e
temperature and pressure
i f
nargin < 6
| |
numel (T0) == 0
108 T0 = 25 + 273.15; % (K)
88
==PAGE:93==
APPENDIX B. MATLAB SCRIPTS
30th June, 2017
end
110 i f
nargin < 7
| |
numel (P0) == 0
P0 = 1.01325∗1 e5 ; % (Pa)
112 end
114 %% DIPPR Parameters
% Storing DIPPR c o r r e l e a t i o n
parameters
in
array .
116 % Column number i n d i c a t e s
component number
% Row number i n d i c a t e s
parameter A−E
118 %
(1−5 fo r Cp ig , 6−10 i s Cp l i q u i d
and 11−15
i s
heat
of
vapourisation )
DIPPR = zeros (15 , length ( component ) ) ;
120
f o r
i = 1:
length ( component )
122 i f
component ( i ) == Ammonia
S0 ( i , 1 )
= 192.3; % (J/( mol∗K) )
124 % Cp gas DIPPR Parameters (ammonia)
( e107 )
DIPPR(1 , i ) = 0.33427E+05;
126 DIPPR(2 , i ) = 0.48980E+05;
DIPPR(3 , i ) = 0.20360E+04;
128 DIPPR(4 , i ) = 0.22560E+05;
DIPPR(5 , i ) = 0.88200E+03;
130 e l s e i f
component ( i ) == CO2
S0 ( i , 1 )
= 213.6; % (J/( mol∗K) )
132 % Cp gas DIPPR Parameters (CO2)
( e107 )
DIPPR(1 , i ) = 0.29370E+05;
134 DIPPR(2 , i ) = 0.34540E+05;
DIPPR(3 , i ) = 0.14280E+04;
136 DIPPR(4 , i ) = 0.26400E+05;
DIPPR(5 , i ) = 0.58800E+03;
138 e l s e i f
component ( i ) == Water
S0 ( i , 1 )
=
6 9 . 9 ; % (J/( mol∗K) )
140 % Cp gas DIPPR Parameters (ammonia)
( e107 )
DIPPR(1 , i ) = 0.33363E+05;
142 DIPPR(2 , i ) = 0.26790E+05;
DIPPR(3 , i ) = 0.26105E+04;
144 DIPPR(4 , i ) = 0.88960E+04;
DIPPR(5 , i ) = 0.11690E+04;
146 e l s e
display ( ’ERROR: Component not
suported by t h i s
function ’ )
148 return
end
150 end
152 %% Calculating
r e s i d u a l
entropy
( Sres )
154 % Calculating
Sres
Sres = zeros (1 , length ( PhaseInd ) ) ;
156 f o r
i = 1: length ( PhaseInd )
i f
( PhaseInd ( i ) ~= 0) && (sum( PhaseFrac ( : , i ) ) ~= 0)
158
[~ ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~ ,AUX, ~ ] = FUGACITY(T,P, PhaseFrac ( : , i ) , PhaseInd ( i ) , nder ) ;
Sres ( i ) = AUX(2) ;
160
Sres ( i ) = Sres ( i ) ∗R;
e l s e
162
Sres ( i ) = 0;
end
164 end
166 %% Calculating
i d e a l
gas
entropy from DIPPR ( Sig )
89
==PAGE:94==
APPENDIX B. MATLAB SCRIPTS
30th June, 2017
168 % I n i t i a l i s i n g
array
f o r
storing
Hig
of
each component
Sig
= zeros ( length ( component ) ,1) ;
170 f o r
i = 1: length ( component )
% Calculating
Sig from DIPPR
172
Sig ( i , 1 ) = DIPPR(1 , i ) ∗log (T)
. . .
+ (2∗DIPPR(2 , i ) ∗DIPPR(3 , i ) ) /T . . .
174
+ (2∗DIPPR(2 , i ) ∗DIPPR(3 , i ) ) /(T∗( exp (2∗DIPPR(3 , i ) /T) −1))
. . .
−DIPPR(2 , i ) ∗log ( exp (2∗DIPPR(3 , i ) /T) −1)
. . .
176
−(2∗DIPPR(4 , i ) ∗DIPPR(5 , i ) ) /T . . .
+ (2∗DIPPR(4 , i ) ∗DIPPR(5 , i ) ) /(T∗( exp (2∗DIPPR(5 , i ) /T)+1))
. . .
178
+ DIPPR(4 , i ) ∗log ( exp (2∗DIPPR(5 , i ) /T)+1)
. . .
−DIPPR(1 , i ) ∗log (T0)
. . .
180
−(2∗DIPPR(2 , i ) ∗DIPPR(3 , i ) ) /T0
. . .
−(2∗DIPPR(2 , i ) ∗DIPPR(3 , i ) ) /(T0∗( exp (2∗DIPPR(3 , i ) /T0) −1))
. . .
182
+ DIPPR(2 , i ) ∗log ( exp (2∗DIPPR(3 , i ) /T0) −1)
. . .
+ (2∗DIPPR(4 , i ) ∗DIPPR(5 , i ) ) /T0
. . .
184
−(2∗DIPPR(4 , i ) ∗DIPPR(5 , i ) ) /(T0∗( exp (2∗DIPPR(5 , i ) /T0)+1))
. . .
−DIPPR(4 , i ) ∗log ( exp (2∗DIPPR(5 , i ) /T0)+1) ; % (J/( kmol∗K) )
186
% Scaling
to SI
units
188
Sig ( i , 1 ) = Sig ( i , 1 ) ∗1e −3; % (J/( kmol∗K) )
end
190
%% Pressure
c o r r ec t i o n
192
Sp = −R∗log (P/P0) ;
194
%% Calculating
t o t a l
entropy
196
% Calculating H0 contribution
198 S0_L = 0;
f o r
i = 1: length ( component )
200
S0_L = S0_L + S0 ( i ) ∗LiqFrac ( i ) ;
end
202 S0_L = S0_L∗LiqPhase ;
204 S0_V = 0;
f o r
i = 1: length ( component )
206
S0_V = S0_V + S0 ( i ) ∗VapFrac ( i ) ;
end
208 S0_V = S0_V∗VapPhase ;
210 S0_tot = [ S0_L S0_V ] ;
212 % Calculating
i d e a l
gas
enthalpy
contribution
Sig_L = 0;
214 f o r
i = 1: length ( component )
Sig_L = Sig_L + Sig ( i ) ∗LiqFrac ( i ) ;
216 end
Sig_L = Sig_L∗LiqPhase ;
218
Sig_V = 0;
220 f o r
i = 1: length ( component )
Sig_V = Sig_V + Sig ( i ) ∗VapFrac ( i ) ;
222 end
Sig_V = Sig_V∗VapPhase ;
224
90
==PAGE:95==
APPENDIX B. MATLAB SCRIPTS
30th June, 2017
Sig_tot = [ Sig_L Sig_V ] ;
226
% Calculating
r e s i d u a l
enthalpy
contribution
228 Sres_L = 0;
Sres_V = 0;
230 f o r
i = 1: length ( Sres )
i f
PhaseInd ( i ) == 1
232
Sres_L = Sres_L −Sres ( i ) ∗PhaseSplit ( i ) ;
e l s e i f
PhaseInd ( i ) == −1
234
Sres_V = Sres_V −Sres ( i ) ∗PhaseSplit ( i ) ;
end
236 end
238 Sres_tot = [ Sres_L Sres_V ] ;
240 % Calculating
pressure
c o r r e c t i o n
term
Sp_L = Sp∗LiqPhase ;
242 Sp_V = Sp∗VapPhase ;
244 Sp_tot = [Sp_L Sp_V ] ;
246 % Calculating
t o t a l
enthalpy
S_L = Sig_L + Sres_L + Sp_L;
248 S_V = Sig_V + Sres_V + Sp_V;
250 S = [S_L S_V ] ;
end
91
==PAGE:96==
APPENDIX B. MATLAB SCRIPTS
30th June, 2017
B.3
Matlab funtion: Evaluation of Compression
In the following appendix the Matlab-function, that have been used in this work, for
evaluating the compression of a ﬂuid is attached. The method is explained in chapter 3.
1 %%
% Function
f o r
evaluating a compression
process
of a
f l u i d
at
temperature
3 % T1 ,
pressure P1 and molarcomposition N of
components given
in
the
vector
% named component . The compression
process
has the
i s e n t r o p i c
e f f i c i e n c y
5 % f a c t o r
of
eta .
7 % Author :
Torsten
S t i l l i n g −30/6−2017
%%
9 function
[ T2, P2 ,H1,H2, S1 , S2 , PhaseSplit2 , T2rev ] = compression (T1, P1 , P2 ,N,
component , eta , tol , maxstep , PhaseSplit1_input )
i f
nargin < 9
11
PhaseSplit1_input = [0
0 ] ;
end
13 i f
numel ( maxstep ) == 0
maxstep = 1e3 ;
15 end
i f
numel ( t o l ) == 0
17
t o l = 1e −4;
end
19
PhaseSplit2 = [ ] ;
21
display ( ’ Compression
routine
started ’ )
23
%% Description
25 %
∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗
% input :
27 % T1
= i n i t i a l
temperature
% P1
= i n i t i a l
pressure
29 % P2
= f i n a l
pressure
% N
= vector
containin
composition
of
f l u i d
31 % component = vector
containing component names
% eta
= compression
e f f i c i e n c y
( eps −1)
33 % t o l
= tolerance
of
i t t e r a t i o n
error
% maxstep
= maximal number of
steps
used
in
i t t e r a t i o n s
35 %
∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗
% output :
37 % T2
= f i n a l
temperature
% P2
= f i n a l
pressure
39 % H1
= i n i t i a l
enthalpy
% H2
= f i n a l
enthalpy
41 % S1
= i n i t i a l
entropy
% S2
= f i n a l
entropy
43 % T2rev = f i n a l
temperature
( assuming
r e v e r s i b l e
compression )
%
∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗
45 %% Test parameters
% c l c
92
==PAGE:97==
APPENDIX B. MATLAB SCRIPTS
30th June, 2017
47 % c l e a r
a l l
% c l o s e
a l l
49 % T1 = 2+273.15; %K
% P1 = 4∗1 e5 ; %Pa
51 % P2 = 17∗1 e5 ; %Pa
% N = [ 1 ] ; %Pure
53 % component = 93; %Ammonia
% CPA
= [3 1 0
0 ] ;
55 % MODEL_INI(CPA, component )
% eta = 0 . 9 ;
57 % maxstep = 1e6 ;
% t o l = 1e −5;
59 %% Calculating
i n i t i a l
entropy and enthalpy
i f
nargin < 9
61 [ H1_split ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~] = enthalpy2 (T1, P1 ,N, component ) ;
H1 = sum( H1_split ) ;
63 [ S1_split , PhaseSplit1 ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~] = entropy (T1, P1 ,N, component ) ;
S1 = sum( S1_split ) ;
65 e l s e
[ H1_split ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~] = enthalpy2 (T1, P1 ,N, component , PhaseSplit1_input ) ;
67 H1 = sum( H1_split ) ;
[ S1_split , PhaseSplit1 ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~] = entropy (T1, P1 ,N, component ,
PhaseSplit1_input ) ;
69 S1 = sum( S1_split ) ;
end
71
%% Guessing
r e v e r s i b l e T2
73
i f
numel ( component ) == 1
75
% Calculating
saturation
temperatures
at P2
[ T2sat , ~ ] = PhaseSATT(N, P2 , component ) ;
77
% Defining
i n i t i a l
temperature
step
f o r
i t t e r a t i o n
79
Tstep_ini = 10^( f l o o r ( log10 ( abs (mean( T2sat ) ) ) ) −1) ;
Tstep
= Tstep_ini ;
81
T2sat = mean( T2sat ) ;
83
% Calculating and
t e s t i n g
enthalpy
at both
s i d e s
of
sat
point
Ttest = [ T2sat−5∗Tstep , T2sat+5∗Tstep ] ;
85
f o r
i = length ( Ttest )
i f
Ttest ( i ) < 0
87
Ttest ( i ) = 200;
end
89
end
[ S2rev_split ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~] = entropy ( Ttest (1) ,P2 ,N, component ) ;
91
S2test (1) = sum( S2rev_split ) ;
[ S2rev_split ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~] = entropy ( Ttest (2) ,P2 ,N, component ) ;
93
S2test (2) = sum( S2rev_split ) ;
dStest = abs (( S2test−S1 ) /S1 ) ;
95
T2rev = mean( Ttest ( find ( dStest == min( dStest ) ) ) ) ;
97
% Calculating
enthalpy
f o r
pure vapour and pure
l i q u i d
at
sat
point
[ S2rev_satLsplit ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~] = entropy ( T2sat , P2 ,N, component , [ 1
0 ] ) ;
99
S2rev_satL = sum( S2rev_satLsplit ) ;
[ S2rev_satVsplit ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~] = entropy ( T2sat , P2 ,N, component , [ 0
1 ] ) ;
101
S2rev_satV = sum( S2rev_satVsplit ) ;
e l s e
103
Ttri = 0;
93
==PAGE:98==
APPENDIX B. MATLAB SCRIPTS
30th June, 2017
f o r
i = 1: length ( component )
105
Ttri = Ttri + GETPROP( component ( i ) ,5) ∗N( i ) ;
end
107
Tcri = 0;
109
f o r
i = 1: length ( component )
Tcri = Tcri + GETPROP( component ( i ) ,3) ∗N( i ) ;
111
end
113
% Calculating and
t e s t i n g
enthalpy
at both
s i d e s
and between
sat
points
Ttest = [ Ttri , mean ( [ Ttri
Tcri ] ) , Tcri ] ;
115
[ S2rev_split ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~] = entropy ( Ttest (1) ,P2 ,N, component ) ;
S2test (1) = sum( S2rev_split ) ;
117
[ S2rev_split ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~] = entropy ( Ttest (2) ,P2 ,N, component ) ;
S2test (2) = sum( S2rev_split ) ;
119
[ S2rev_split ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~] = entropy ( Ttest (3) ,P2 ,N, component ) ;
S2test (3) = sum( S2rev_split ) ;
121
dStest = abs (( S2test−S1 ) /S1 ) ;
T2rev = mean( Ttest ( find ( dStest == min( dStest ) ) ) ) ;
123
% Defining
i n i t i a l
temperature
step
f o r
i t t e r a t i o n
125
Tstep_ini = 10^( f l o o r ( log10 ( abs (mean( T2rev ) ) ) ) −1) ;
Tstep
= Tstep_ini ;
127 end
129 %% Finding
r e v e r s i b l e
temperature
f o r
adiabatic
compression by
i t t e r a t i o n
i f
( numel ( component ) == 1) && ( S1 > S2rev_satL ) && ( S1 < S2rev_satV )
131
% T2 must be the
saturation
temperature
T2rev = T2sat ;
133
% Defining
i n i t i a l
phase
step
f o r
i t t e r a t i o n
135
Pstep_ini = 0 . 1 ;
Pstep
= Pstep_ini ;
137
% I n i t i a l
guess
i s
pure
l i q u i d
139
Phase1 = 1;
Phase2 = 1−Phase1 ;
141
PhaseSplit2rev = [ Phase1 Phase2 ] ;
143
% Calculating
entropy
at T2rev , P2
[ S2rev_split ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~] = entropy ( T2rev , P2 ,N, component ,
PhaseSplit2rev ) ;
145
S2rev = sum( S2rev_split ) ;
147
% Calculating
i n i t i a l
deviation
of
entropy
dS_ini = abs (( S2rev−S1 ) /S1 ) ;
149
f o r
i = 1: maxstep
151
% Calculating
r e v e r s i b l e
entropy
at T2rev , P2
[ S2rev_split ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~] = entropy ( T2sat , P2 ,N, component ,
PhaseSplit2rev ) ;
153
S2rev = sum( S2rev_split ) ;
dS = abs (( S2rev−S1 ) /S1 ) ;
155
% Checking
i f
the
s t e p s i z e
has to be shortened
157
i f
f l o o r ( log10 ( dS_ini ) )−f l o o r ( log10 (dS) ) > f l o o r ( log10 ( Pstep_ini ) )−
f l o o r ( log10 ( Pstep ) )
Pstep = Pstep ∗1e −1;
94
==PAGE:99==
APPENDIX B. MATLAB SCRIPTS
30th June, 2017
159
end
i f
Pstep < t o l
161
Pstep = t o l ;
end
163
% Checking
i f
entropy
d i f f e r e n c e
i s
l a r g e r
than
tolerance
165
i f
abs (( S2rev−S1 ) /S1 ) > t o l
Phase1_iter = Phase1 + Pstep ;
167
i f
Phase1_iter > 1
Phase1_iter = 1;
169
end
Phase2_iter = 1−Phase1_iter ;
171
PhaseSplit2_iter = [ Phase1_iter
Phase2_iter ] ;
173
[ S2rev_iter_split ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~] = entropy ( T2rev , P2 ,N, component
, PhaseSplit2_iter ) ;
S2rev_iter = sum( S2rev_iter_split ) ;
175
i f
abs (( S2rev_iter−S1 ) /S1 ) >= abs (( S2rev−S1 ) /S1 )
177
Phase1_iter = Phase1 −Pstep ;
i f
Phase1_iter < 0
179
Phase1_iter = 0;
end
181
end
e l s e
183
break
end
185
% Defining new ph as es pl it
of
i t t e r a t i o n
187
Phase1 = Phase1_iter + Pstep∗1e −1;
Phase2 = 1−Phase1 ;
189
PhaseSplit2rev = [ Phase1 Phase2 ] ;
end
191 e l s e
% Calculating
entropy
at T2rev , P2
193
[ S2rev_split ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~] = entropy ( T2rev , P2 ,N, component ) ;
S2rev = sum( S2rev_split ) ;
195
% Calculating
i n i t i a l
deviation
of
entropy
197
dS_ini = abs (( S2rev−S1 ) /S1 ) ;
199
f o r
i = 1: maxstep
% Calculating
r e v e r s i b l e
entropy
at T2rev , P2
201
[ S2rev_split ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~] = entropy ( T2rev , P2 ,N, component ) ;
S2rev = sum( S2rev_split ) ;
203
dS = abs (( S2rev−S1 ) /S1 ) ;
205
% Checking
i f
the
s t e p s i z e
has to be shortened
i f
f l o o r ( log10 ( dS_ini ) )−f l o o r ( log10 (dS) ) > f l o o r ( log10 ( Tstep_ini ) )−
f l o o r ( log10 ( Tstep ) )
207
Tstep = Tstep∗1e −1;
end
209
i f
Tstep < t o l
Tstep = t o l ;
211
end
213
% Checking
i f
entropy
d i f f e r e n c e
i s
l a r g e r
than
tolerance
i f
abs (( S2rev−S1 ) /S1 ) > t o l
95
==PAGE:100==
APPENDIX B. MATLAB SCRIPTS
30th June, 2017
215
T2rev_iter = T2rev + Tstep ;
[ S2rev_iter_split ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~] = entropy ( T2rev_iter , P2 ,N,
component ) ;
217
S2rev_iter = sum( S2rev_iter_split ) ;
219
i f
abs (( S2rev_iter−S1 ) /S1 ) > abs (( S2rev−S1 ) /S1 )
T2rev_iter = T2rev −Tstep ;
221
end
e l s e
223
break
end
225
% Defining new temperature
of
i t t e r a t i o n
227
T2rev = T2rev_iter ;
end
229 end
231 %% Calculating work exerted by compressor
% Calculating
enthalpy
at
r e v e r s i b l e
conditions
233 [ H2rev_split ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~] = enthalpy2 ( T2rev , P2 ,N, component ) ;
H2rev = sum( H2rev_split ) ;
235
% Calculating work as
the
d i f f e r e n c e
in
enthalpies
237 Wrev = H2rev −H1;
239 % Calculating
the
true work by applying
the
compression
e f f i c i e n c y
W = Wrev/ eta ;
241
i f
numel ( component ) == 1
243
% Defining
i n i t i a l
temperature
step
f o r
i t t e r a t i o n
Tstep_ini = 10^( f l o o r ( log10 ( abs (mean( T2sat ) ) ) ) −1) ;
245
Tstep
= Tstep_ini ;
247
% Calculating and
t e s t i n g
enthalpy
at both
s i d e s
of
sat
point
Ttest = [ T2sat−5∗Tstep , T2sat+5∗Tstep ] ;
249
f o r
i = length ( Ttest )
i f
Ttest ( i ) < 0
251
Ttest ( i ) = 200;
end
253
end
[ H2_split ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~] = enthalpy2 ( Ttest (1) ,P2 ,N, component ) ;
255
H2test (1) = sum( H2_split ) ;
[ H2_split ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~] = enthalpy2 ( Ttest (2) ,P2 ,N, component ) ;
257
H2test (2) = sum( H2_split ) ;
dHtest = abs ( ( ( H2test−H1)−W) /W) ;
259
T2 = mean( Ttest ( find ( dHtest == min( dHtest ) ) ) ) ;
261
% Calculating
enthalpy
f o r
pure vapour and pure
l i q u i d
at
sat
point
[ H2_satLsplit ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~] = enthalpy2 ( T2sat , P2 ,N, component , [ 1
0 ] ) ;
263
H2_satL = sum( H2_satLsplit ) ;
[ H2_satVsplit ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~] = enthalpy2 ( T2sat , P2 ,N, component , [ 0
1 ] ) ;
265
H2_satV = sum( H2_satVsplit ) ;
e l s e
267
% Calculating and
t e s t i n g
enthalpy
at and between
Ttri and Tc
Ttest = [ Ttri , mean ( [ Ttri
Tcri ] ) , Tcri ] ;
269
f o r
i = length ( Ttest )
i f
Ttest ( i ) < 0
271
Ttest ( i ) = 200;
96
==PAGE:101==
APPENDIX B. MATLAB SCRIPTS
30th June, 2017
end
273
end
[ H2_split ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~] = enthalpy2 ( Ttest (1) ,P2 ,N, component ) ;
275
H2test (1) = sum( H2_split ) ;
[ H2_split ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~] = enthalpy2 ( Ttest (2) ,P2 ,N, component ) ;
277
H2test (2) = sum( H2_split ) ;
[ H2_split ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~] = enthalpy2 ( Ttest (3) ,P2 ,N, component ) ;
279
H2test (2) = sum( H2_split ) ;
dHtest = abs ( ( ( H2test−H1)−W) /W) ;
281
T2 = mean( Ttest ( find ( dHtest == min( dHtest ) ) ) ) ;
283
Tstep_ini = 10^( f l o o r ( log10 ( abs (mean(T2) ) ) ) −1) ;
Tstep
= Tstep_ini ;
285 end
287 %% Finding
true
temperature
a f t e r
compression by
i t t e r a t i o n
i f
( numel ( component ) == 1) && (W > (H2_satL−H1) ) && (W < (H2_satV−H1) )
289
% T2 must be the
saturation
temperature
T2 = T2sat ;
291
% Defining
i n i t i a l
phase
step
f o r
i t t e r a t i o n
293
Pstep_ini = 0 . 1 ;
Pstep
= Pstep_ini ;
295
% I n i t i a l
guess
i s
pure
l i q u i d
297
Phase1 = 1;
Phase2 = 1−Phase1 ;
299
PhaseSplit2 = [ Phase1 Phase2 ] ;
301
% Calculating
enthalpy
at T2, P2
[ H2_split ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~] = enthalpy2 (T2, P2 ,N, component , PhaseSplit2 ) ;
303
H2 = sum( H2_split ) ;
305
% Calculating
i n i t i a l
deviation
of
enthalpy
dW_ini = abs ( ( (H2−H1)−W) /W) ;
307
f o r
i = 1: maxstep
309
% Calculating
r e v e r s i b l e
entropy
at T2rev , P2
[ H2_split ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~] = enthalpy2 (T2, P2 ,N, component , PhaseSplit2 )
;
311
H2 = sum( H2_split ) ;
dW = abs ( ( (H2−H1)−W) /W) ;
313
% Checking
i f
the
s t e p s i z e
has to be shortened
315
i f
f l o o r ( log10 (dW_ini) )−f l o o r ( log10 (dW) ) > f l o o r ( log10 ( Pstep_ini ) )−
f l o o r ( log10 ( Pstep ) )
Pstep = Pstep ∗1e −1;
317
end
i f
Pstep < t o l
319
Pstep = t o l ;
end
321
% Checking
i f
entropy
d i f f e r e n c e
i s
l a r g e r
than
tolerance
323
i f
abs ( ( (H2−H1)−W) /W) > t o l
Phase1_iter = Phase1 + Pstep ;
325
i f
Phase1_iter > 1
Phase1_iter = 1;
327
end
97
==PAGE:102==
APPENDIX B. MATLAB SCRIPTS
30th June, 2017
Phase2_iter = 1−Phase1_iter ;
329
PhaseSplit2_iter = [ Phase1_iter
Phase2_iter ] ;
331
[ H2_iter_split ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~] = enthalpy2 (T2, P2 ,N, component ,
PhaseSplit2_iter ) ;
H2_iter = sum( H2_iter_split ) ;
333
i f
abs ( ( ( H2_iter−H1)−W) /W)
>=
abs ( ( (H2−H1)−W) /W)
335
Phase1_iter = Phase1 −Pstep ;
i f
Phase1_iter < 0
337
Phase1_iter = 0;
end
339
end
e l s e
341
break
end
343
% Defining new ph as es pl it
of
i t t e r a t i o n
345
Phase1 = Phase1_iter + Pstep∗1e −1;
Phase2 = 1−Phase1 ;
347
PhaseSplit2rev = [ Phase1 Phase2 ] ;
end
349 e l s e
% Calculating
enthalpy
at T2, P2
351
[ H2_split ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~] = enthalpy2 (T2, P2 ,N, component ) ;
H2 = sum( H2_split ) ;
353
% Calculating
i n i t i a l
deviation
of
enthalpy
355
dW_ini = abs ( ( (H2−H1)−W) /W) ;
357
f o r
i = 1: maxstep
% Calculating
enthalpy
at T2, P2
359
[ H2_split ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~] = enthalpy2 (T2, P2 ,N, component ) ;
H2 = sum( H2_split ) ;
361
dW = abs ( ( (H2−H1)−W) /W) ;
363
% Checking
i f
the
s t e p s i z e
has to be shortened
i f
f l o o r ( log10 (dW_ini) )−f l o o r ( log10 (dW) ) > f l o o r ( log10 ( Tstep_ini ) )−
f l o o r ( log10 ( Tstep ) )
365
Tstep = Tstep∗1e −1;
end
367
i f
Tstep < t o l
Tstep = t o l ;
369
end
371
% Checking
i f
work
d i f f e r e n c e
i s
l a r g e r
than
tolerance
i f
abs ( ( (H2−H1)−W) /W) > t o l
373
T2_iter = T2 + Tstep ;
[ H2_iter_split ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~] = enthalpy2 ( T2_iter , P2 ,N, component ) ;
375
H2_iter = sum( H2_iter_split ) ;
i f
abs ( ( ( H2_iter−H1)−W) /W) > abs ( ( (H2−H1)−W) /W)
377
T2_iter = T2 −Tstep ;
end
379
e l s e
break
381
end
383
% Defining new temperature
of
i t t e r a t i o n
98
==PAGE:103==
APPENDIX B. MATLAB SCRIPTS
30th June, 2017
T2 = T2_iter + Tstep∗1e −1;
385
end
end
387
%% Calculating
f i n a l
entropy and enthalpy
389 % [~ ,~ ,~ ,~ ,H2] = enthalpy (T2, P2 ,N, component ) ;
[ H2_split ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~] = enthalpy2 (T2, P2 ,N, component ) ;
391 H2 = sum( H2_split ) ;
[ S2_split ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~] = entropy (T2, P2 ,N, component ) ;
393 S2 = sum( S2_split ) ;
[ PhaseSplit2 ,~ ,~ ,~] = Sort2Flash (T2, P2 ,N) ;
395
display ( ’ Compression
routine
ended ’ )
397 end
99
==PAGE:104==
APPENDIX B. MATLAB SCRIPTS
30th June, 2017
B.4
Matlab funtion: Evaluation of Refrigeration Cy-
cle
In the following appendix the Matlab-function, that have been used in this work, for
evaluating an vapour-compression refrigeration cycle is attached. The method is explained
in chapter 3.
1 %%
% Function
f o r
evaluating a cooling
process
of
with
molarcomposition N of
3 % the components
l i s t e d
in
the
vector named component . The cooling
process
% runs with an evaporation
pressure
at P1 and condensation
pressure
at P2 .
5 % The compression
process
has the
i s e n t r o p i c
e f f i c i e n c y
f a c t o r
of
eta .
7 % Author :
Torsten
S t i l l i n g −30/6−2017
%%
9 function
[H, S ,T,P,COP] = cooling (P1 , P2 , eta ,N, component , tol , maxstep )
11 i f
nargin < 7
maxstep = 1e6 ;
13 end
i f
nargin < 6
15
t o l = 1e −5;
end
17
display ( ’ Cooling
routine
started ’ )
19
%% Test parameters
21 % c l c
% c l e a r
a l l
23 % c l o s e
a l l
% component = 93; %Ammonia
25 % CPA
= [3 1 0
0 ] ;
% MODEL_INI(CPA, component )
27 % N = [ 1 ] ; %Pure
% P1 = 4.75∗1 e5 ; %Pa
29 % P2 = 17∗1 e5 ; %Pa
% eta = 0 .781;
31 % maxstep = 1e6 ;
% t o l = 1e −5;
33
%% Calculating
saturation
temperature
a f t e r
evaporation T1
35 % Temperature
i s
saturation
temperature
[ T1 , ~ ] = PhaseSATT(N, P1 , component ) ; %K
37 % The f l u i d
i s
at dew point
T1 = T1(2) ;
39
%% Calculating
temperature
a f t e r
compression T2 enthalpy + entropy
at
stage
1 + 2
41 % Taking the
f l u i d
as
saturated
vapour at
stage 1
[ T2 , P2 ,H1,H2, S1 , S2 , ~ , ~ ] = compression (T1, P1 , P2 ,N, component , eta , tol , maxstep
, [ 0
1 ] ) ;
43
%% Calculating
saturation
temperature
a f t e r
condensation T3
45 % Temperature
i s
saturation
temperature
[ T3 , ~ ] = PhaseSATT(N, P2 , component ) ;
47 % The f l u i d
i s
at bubble
point
T3 = T3(1) ;
100
==PAGE:105==
APPENDIX B. MATLAB SCRIPTS
30th June, 2017
49 % Pressure
at
stage 3
i s
the same as
at
stage 2
P3 = P2 ;
51 % Calculating
enthalpy
at
stage 3 ( saturated
l i q u i d )
[ H3_split , PhaseSplit3 ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~] = enthalpy2 (T3, P3 ,N, component , [ 1
0 ] ) ;
53 H3
= sum( H3_split ) ;
[ S3_split ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~] = entropy (T3, P3 ,N, component , [ 1
0 ] ) ;
55 S3 = sum( S3_split ) ;
57 %% Calculating
phase
s p l i t
at
stage 4
% Temperature and pressure
i s
the same as
at
stage 1
59 T4 = T1 ;
P4 = P1 ;
61
% Assuming
l i q u i d
phase
63 LiqPhase4
= 1;
VapPhase4
= 1 −LiqPhase4 ;
65 PhaseSplit4 = [ LiqPhase4 VapPhase4 ] ;
67 % Defining
i n i t i a l
temperature
step
f or
i t t e r a t i o n
Pstep_ini = 10^( f l o o r ( log10 ( abs ( LiqPhase4 ) ) ) −1) ;
69 Pstep
= Pstep_ini ;
71 % Calculating
enthalpy
at T4, P4
[ H4_split ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~] = enthalpy2 (T4, P4 ,N, component , PhaseSplit4 ) ;
73 H4
= sum( H4_split ) ;
75 % Calculating
i n i t i a l
deviation
of
enthalpy from guess
dH_ini = abs ((H4−H3) /H3) ;
77
% Starting
i t t e r a t i o n
to minimize the
enthalpy
deviation
from
stage 3 to 4
79 f o r
i = 1: maxstep
% Calculating
enthalpy
at T2rev , P2
81
[ H4_split , PhaseSplit4 ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~] = enthalpy2 (T4, P4 ,N, component ,
PhaseSplit4 ) ;
H4 = sum( H4_split ) ;
83
dH4 = abs ((H4−H3) /H3) ;
85
% Checking
i f
the
s t e p s i z e
has to be shortened
i f
f l o o r ( log10 ( dH_ini ) )−f l o o r ( log10 (dH4) ) > f l o o r ( log10 ( Pstep_ini ) )−
f l o o r ( log10 ( Pstep ) )
87
Pstep = Pstep ∗1e −1;
end
89
i f
Pstep < t o l ∗1e−1
Pstep = t o l ∗1e −1;
91
end
93
% Checking
i f
enthalpy
d i f f e r e n c e
i s
l a r g e r
than
tolerance
i f
abs ((H4−H3) /H3) > t o l
95
LiqPhase4_iter = LiqPhase4 + Pstep ;
i f
LiqPhase4_iter > 1
97
LiqPhase4_iter = 1;
end
99
VapPhase4_iter = 1 −LiqPhase4_iter ;
PhaseSplit4_iter = [ LiqPhase4_iter VapPhase4_iter ] ;
101
[ H4_split_iter ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~] = enthalpy2 (T4, P4 ,N, component ,
PhaseSplit4_iter ) ;
H4_iter = sum( H4_split_iter ) ;
103
i f
abs (( H4_iter−H3) /H3) >= abs ((H4−H3) /H3)
101
==PAGE:106==
APPENDIX B. MATLAB SCRIPTS
30th June, 2017
LiqPhase4_iter = LiqPhase4 −Pstep ;
105
end
e l s e
107
break
end
109
% Defining new l i q u i d
f r a c t i o n
of
i t t e r a t i o n
111
LiqPhase4 = LiqPhase4_iter ;
VapPhase4 = 1 −LiqPhase4 ;
113
PhaseSplit4 = [ LiqPhase4 VapPhase4 ] ;
end
115 % Calculating
enthalpy
at
f i n a l
p ha se sp li t
[ H4_split ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~] = enthalpy2 (T4, P4 ,N, component , PhaseSplit4 ) ;
117 H4 = sum( H4_split ) ;
[ S4_split ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~] = entropy (T4, P4 ,N, component , PhaseSplit4 ) ;
119 S4 = sum( S4_split ) ;
121 %%
% Defining
arrays
containing
a l l
values
at
a l l e
stages
f or
output
123 T = [ T1 , T2, T3, T4 ] ;
P = [ P1 , P2 , P3 , P4 ] ;
125 H = [H1,H2,H3,H4 ] ;
S = [ S1 , S2 , S3 , S4 ] ;
127
COP = (H1−H4) /(H2−H1) ;
129 display ( ’ Cooling
routine
ended ’ )
end
102
==PAGE:107==
APPENDIX B. MATLAB SCRIPTS
30th June, 2017
B.5
Matlab funtion: Evaluation of Full Compression
Process
In the following appendix the Matlab script, that have been used in this work, to
calculate the results presented in chapter 4 is attached. The method is explained in
chapter 3.
%%
2 % Script
f or
evaluating
compression
processes
with
i n t e r
cooling .
Choosing
% Case 1 evaluates
the
process
using
sea
water as
coolant and choosing Case
4 % 2 uses an active
cooling
cycle .
6 % Author :
Torsten
S t i l l i n g −30/6−2017
8 %%
10 c l c
c l e a r
a l l
12 c l e a r mex
c l o s e
a l l
14
model
= [3 1 0
0 ] ;
16 Ammonia = 93;
CO2
= 42;
18 Water
= 90;
20 %Defining mass stream
comp_s
= [CO2 Water ] ;
22 m_s_ini = 80.47∗1000/(60∗60) ; % kg/ s
m_s_CO2 = 72.42∗1000/(60∗60) ; % kg/ s
24 m_s_W
= m_s_ini −m_s_CO2; % kg/ s
%Defining
molar mass of
each component
26 M_CO2
= 44.01∗1 e −3; %kg/mol
M_W
= 18.01528∗1 e −3; %kg/mol
28 %Calculating
molar stream
n_s_CO2 = m_s_CO2/M_CO2; %mol/ s
30 n_s_W
= m_s_W/M_W; %mol/ s
n_s_ini = n_s_CO2+n_s_W; %mol/ s
32 %Calculating
molar
f r a c t i o n
of
components
N_s_ini = [n_s_CO2/n_s_ini n_s_W/n_s_ini ] ; %mol/mol
34 %Calculating
t o t a l
molar mass
M_s_ini = M_CO2∗N_s_ini (1) + M_W∗N_s_ini (2) ; %kg/mol
36
% Specifying
stream
compression
e f f i c i e n c y
38 eta_s
= 0 . 8 ; % #
40 % Spcyfing
i n i t i a l
temperature and pressure and
f i n a l
pressure
T_s_ini = 10+273.15;
42 P_s_ini = 1.8∗1 e5 ;
P_s_end = 150∗1 e5 ;
44
% Sea water heat exchange Tlm
46 Tlm = 15;
% Sea water
i n i t i a l
temperature and pressure
48 T_sea_ini = 15+273.15;
P_sea =
1.01325∗1 e5 ;
50 % Sea water molar weight
103
==PAGE:108==
APPENDIX B. MATLAB SCRIPTS
30th June, 2017
M_sea
= M_W;
52 % Calculating
i n i t a l
sea
water
enthalpy
comp_sea = Water ;
54 N_sea
= 1;
MODEL_INI( model , comp_sea)
56
H_sea_ini_split = enthalpy2 ( T_sea_ini , P_sea , N_sea , comp_sea) ;
58 H_sea_ini
= sum( H_sea_ini_split ) ;
60 % Set
binary
p ro pe rt ie s
ass_ref = int32 (010) ; % s e t s
one
a s s o c i a t i o n
s i t e
f or CO2
62
beta_crs_ref = 0.0162; % Refference
beta
value
64 eps_crs_ref
= 142; % Refference
epsilon
value
( bar L /mol )
eps_crs_ref
= eps_crs_ref /8.314∗1 e2 ; % Scaling
to
f i t
model
66 k ij _ re f
= 0.1141; % Refference
k i j
68 SETPROP(CO2,31 , ass_ref ) % set
a s s o c i a t i o n
scheme
SETPROP(CO2, Water ,62 , beta_crs_ref ) % set
beta_crs
70 SETPROP(CO2, Water ,63 , eps_crs_ref ) % set
eps_crs /R
SETPROP(CO2, Water , 6 0 , [ kij_ref 0
0 ] ) % set
k i j
72 SETPROP(CO2,32 , int32 (29) ) ;
74 % Specyfying
case
Case = 2;
76
f o r
c = 1: length ( Case )
78
%% Case 1
i f
Case ( c ) == 1
80
MODEL_INI( model , comp_s)
% Specifying
case
pr op er ti es
82
cool
= f a l s e ;
compsteps = 8;
84
step
= 1: compsteps ;
Pamp
= (P_s_end/P_s_ini ) ^(1/ compsteps )∗ones (1 , length ( step ) ) ;
86
% I n i t i a l i s i n g
arrays
88
P_s
= zeros ( compsteps +1 ,3) ;
T_s
= zeros ( compsteps +1 ,3) ;
90
H_s
= zeros ( compsteps +1 ,3) ;
W_s
= zeros ( compsteps , 1 ) ;
92
PhaseSplit2 = zeros ( compsteps , 2 ) ;
N_s
= zeros ( compsteps +1 ,2) ;
94
m_s
= zeros ( compsteps +1 ,1) ;
M_s
= zeros ( compsteps +1 ,1) ;
96
n_s
= zeros ( compsteps +1 ,1) ;
T_sea
= zeros ( compsteps , 1 ) ;
98
n_sea
= zeros ( compsteps , 1 ) ;
m_sea
= zeros ( compsteps , 1 ) ;
100
H_sea
= zeros ( compsteps , 1 ) ;
W_sea
= zeros ( compsteps , 1 ) ;
102
% Defining
i n i t a l
p ro pe rt ie s
104
T_s(1 ,1) = T_s_ini ;
P_s(1 ,1) = P_s_ini ;
106
N_s( 1 , : ) = N_s_ini ;
m_s(1 ,1) = m_s_ini ;
108
M_s(1 ,1) = M_s_ini ;
104
==PAGE:109==
APPENDIX B. MATLAB SCRIPTS
30th June, 2017
n_s (1 ,1) = n_s_ini ;
110
% Calculating
i n i t i a l
p ha se spl it
112
[ PhaseSplit1 , PhaseFrac1 , ~ ,~ ] = Sort2Flash (T_s(1 ,1) ,P_s(1 ,1) ,N_s
( 1 , : ) ) ;
M_s(1)
= M_CO2∗N_s(1 ,1) + M_W∗N_s(1 ,2) ; %kg/mol
114
% Calculating
compression
steps
116
f or
i = 1: compsteps
display ( [ ’ Compression
step number
’ , num2str ( i ) ] )
118
% Defining
a pl y fi ed
pressure
120
P_s( i , 2 ) = P_s( i , 1 ) ∗Pamp( i ) ;
122
% Calculating
temperature and pressure
a f t e r
compression
[T_s( i , 2 ) ,P_s( i , 2 ) ,H_s( i , 1 ) ,H_s( i , 2 ) ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~] = compression (T_s
( i , 1 ) ,P_s( i , 1 ) ,P_s( i , 2 ) ,N_s( i , : ) ,comp_s , eta_s , [ ] , [ ] ) ;
124
% Calculating work of
compression
126
W_s( i ) = (H_s( i , 2 )−H_s( i , 1 ) ) ∗n_s( i ) ; %W
128
% Defining
temperature and pressure
a f t e r
heat exchange
T_s( i , 3 ) = T_s( i , 1 ) ;
130
P_s( i , 3 ) = P_s( i , 2 ) ;
132
% Calculating
heat exchange with
seawater
T_sea( i , 1 ) = heat_ex (T_s( i , 2 ) ,T_s( i , 3 ) , T_sea_ini , Tlm) ;
134
MODEL_INI( model , comp_sea)
Hsea_split = enthalpy2 (T_sea( i , 1 ) ,P_sea , N_sea , comp_sea) ;
136
H_sea( i , 1 ) = sum( Hsea_split ) ;
MODEL_INI( model , comp_s)
138
% Calculating
enthalpy
of
stream
a f t e r
heat exchange
140
H_s_split = enthalpy2 (T_s( i , 3 ) ,P_s( i , 3 ) ,N_s( i , : ) ,comp_s) ;
H_s( i , 3 ) = sum( H_s_split ) ;
142
% Calculating
stream
v e l o c i t y
of
seawater
144
n_sea ( i , 1 ) = (H_s( i , 2 ) −H_s( i , 3 ) ) ∗n_s( i ) /(H_sea( i , 1 )−H_sea_ini
) ;
m_sea( i , 1 ) = n_sea ( i , 1 ) ∗M_sea ;
146
% Calculating
t o t a l
power of
heated
seawater
148
W_sea( i , 1 ) = (H_sea( i , 1 ) −H_sea_ini ) ∗n_sea ( i , 1 ) ;
150
% Calculating
ph as es pl it
a f t e r
heat exchange
[ PhaseSplit2 ( i , : ) , PhaseFrac2 , PhaseInd2 , ~ ] = Sort2Flash (T_s( i , 3 )
,P_s( i , 3 ) ,N_s( i , : ) ) ;
152
% Dehydrating by only
choosing
vapour phase
154
n_s( i +1) = n_s( i ) ∗PhaseSplit2 ( i , 2 ) ; %mol/ s
N_s( i +1 ,:) = PhaseFrac2 ( : , 2 ) ; %mol/mol
156
M_s( i +1) = N_s( i +1 ,1)∗M_CO2 + N_s( i +1 ,2)∗M_W; %kg/mol
m_s( i +1) = n_s( i +1)∗M_s( i +1) ; %kg/ s
158
160
% Defining
temperature and pressure
fo r
next
step
T_s( i +1 ,1) = T_s( i , 1 ) ;
162
P_s( i +1 ,1) = P_s( i , 3 ) ;
105
==PAGE:110==
APPENDIX B. MATLAB SCRIPTS
30th June, 2017
164
% Calculating
enthalpy
at
next
step
H_s_split = enthalpy2 (T_s( i +1 ,1) ,P_s( i +1 ,1) ,N_s( i +1 ,:) ,comp_s) ;
166
H_s( i +1 ,1) = sum( H_s_split ) ;
end
168
W_tot = [W_s] ;
%% Case 2
170
e l s e i f
Case ( c ) == 2
% Specifying
case
pr op er ti es
172
MODEL_INI( model , comp_s)
P1_c = 2∗1 e5 ; %Pa
174
P2_c = 9∗1 e5 ; %Pa
M_NH3 = 17.031∗1 e −3; %kg/mol
176
M_c = M_NH3;
eta_c = 0 . 8 ;
178
comp_c = Ammonia ;
N_c = 1;
180
compsteps = 8;
182
cool = true ;
step = 1: compsteps ;
184
Pamp = (P_s_end/P_s_ini ) ^(1/ compsteps )∗ones (1 , length ( step ) ) ;
186
% I n i t i a l i s i n g
arrys
P_s
= zeros ( compsteps , 3 ) ;
188
T_s
= zeros ( compsteps , 3 ) ;
H_s
= zeros ( compsteps , 3 ) ;
190
W_s
= zeros ( compsteps , 1 ) ;
W_c
= zeros ( compsteps , 1 ) ;
192
PhaseSplit2 = zeros ( compsteps , 2 ) ;
N_s
= zeros ( compsteps +1 ,2) ;
194
m_s
= zeros ( compsteps +1 ,1) ;
M_s
= zeros ( compsteps +1 ,1) ;
196
n_s
= zeros ( compsteps +1 ,1) ;
n_c
= zeros ( compsteps , 1 ) ;
198
m_c
= zeros ( compsteps , 1 ) ;
T_sea
= zeros ( compsteps , 1 ) ;
200
n_sea
= zeros ( compsteps , 1 ) ;
m_sea
= zeros ( compsteps , 1 ) ;
202
H_sea
= zeros ( compsteps , 1 ) ;
W_sea
= zeros ( compsteps , 1 ) ;
204
% Defining
i n i t a l
p ro pe rt ie s
206
T_s(1 ,1) = T_s_ini ;
P_s(1 ,1) = P_s_ini ;
208
N_s( 1 , : ) = N_s_ini ;
m_s(1 ,1) = m_s_ini ;
210
M_s(1 ,1) = M_s_ini ;
n_s (1 ,1) = n_s_ini ;
212
% Calculating
ph as es pl it
before
compression
214
[ PhaseSplit1 , PhaseFrac1 , ~ ,~ ] = Sort2Flash (T_s(1 ,1) ,P_s(1 ,1) ,N_s
( 1 , : ) ) ;
M_s(1)
= M_CO2∗N_s(1 ,1) + M_W∗N_s(1 ,2) ; %kg/mol
216
% Calculating
enthalpies
f o r
cooling
cycle
218
MODEL_INI( model , comp_c)
[H_c, S_c ,T_c,P_c, ~ ] = cooling (P1_c , P2_c , eta_c ,N_c, comp_c , [ ] , [ ] ) ;
106
==PAGE:111==
APPENDIX B. MATLAB SCRIPTS
30th June, 2017
220
MODEL_INI( model , comp_s)
222
% Calculating
compression
steps
f or
i = 1: compsteps
224
display ( [ ’ Compression
step number
’ , num2str ( i ) ] )
226
% Defining
a pl y fi ed
pressure
P_s( i , 2 ) = P_s( i , 1 ) ∗Pamp( i ) ;
228
% Calculating
temperature and pressure
a f t e r
compression
230
[T_s( i , 2 ) ,P_s( i , 2 ) ,H_s( i , 1 ) ,H_s( i , 2 ) ,~ ,~ ,~ ,~] = compression (T_s
( i , 1 ) ,P_s( i , 1 ) ,P_s( i , 2 ) ,N_s( i , : ) ,comp_s , eta_s , [ ] , [ ] ) ;
232
% Calculating work of
stream compressor
W_s( i ) = (H_s( i , 2 )−H_s( i , 1 ) ) ∗n_s( i ) ;
234
% Defining
temperature and pressure
a f t e r
cooling
236
T_s( i , 3 ) = T_s( i , 1 ) ;
P_s( i , 3 ) = P_s( i , 2 ) ;
238
% Calculating
enthalpy
of
stream
a f t e r
heat exchange
240
H_s_split = enthalpy2 (T_s( i , 3 ) ,P_s( i , 3 ) ,N_s( i , : ) ,comp_s) ;
H_s( i , 3 ) = sum( H_s_split ) ;
242
% Calculating
nescesary
flow
of
r e f r i g e r a n t
244
n_c( i ) = n_s( i ) ∗(H_s( i , 3 )−H_s( i , 2 ) ) /(H_c(4)−H_c(1) ) ; %mol/ s
m_c( i ) = n_c( i ) ∗M_c;
246
% Calculating work of
r e f r i g e r a t i o n
compressor
248
W_c( i ) = (H_c(2)−H_c(1) ) ∗n_c( i ) ;
250
% Calculating
heat exchange with
seawater
T_sea( i , 1 ) = heat_ex (T_c(2) ,T_c(3) , T_sea_ini , Tlm) ;
252
MODEL_INI( model , comp_sea)
Hsea_split = enthalpy2 (T_sea( i , 1 ) ,P_sea , N_sea , comp_sea) ;
254
H_sea( i , 1 ) = sum( Hsea_split ) ;
MODEL_INI( model , comp_s)
256
% Calculating
stream
v e l o c i t y
of
seawater
258
n_sea ( i , 1 ) = (H_c(2) −H_c(3) ) ∗n_c( i ) /(H_sea( i , 1 )−H_sea_ini ) ;
m_sea( i , 1 ) = n_sea ( i , 1 ) ∗M_sea ;
260
% Calculating
t o t a l
power of
heated
seawater
262
W_sea( i , 1 ) = (H_sea( i , 1 ) −H_sea_ini ) ∗n_sea ( i , 1 ) ;
264
% Calculating
ph as es pl it
a f t e r
heat exchange
[ PhaseSplit0 , PhaseFrac0 , PhaseInd0 , ~ ] = Sort2Flash (T_s( i , 1 ) ,P_s(
i , 1 ) ,N_s( i , : ) ) ;
266
[ PhaseSplit1 , PhaseFrac1 , PhaseInd1 , ~ ] = Sort2Flash (T_s( i , 2 ) ,P_s(
i , 2 ) ,N_s( i , : ) ) ;
PhaseSplit ( i , : ) = [ PhaseSplit0 , PhaseSplit1 ] ;
268
[ PhaseSplit2 ( i , : ) , PhaseFrac2 , PhaseInd2 , ~ ] = Sort2Flash (T_s( i , 3 )
,P_s( i , 3 ) ,N_s( i , : ) ) ;
270
% Dehydrating by only
choosing
vapour phase
n_s( i +1) = n_s( i ) ∗PhaseSplit2 ( i , 2 ) ; %mol/ s
272
N_s( i +1 ,:) = PhaseFrac2 ( : , 2 ) ; %mol/mol
M_s( i +1) = N_s( i +1 ,1)∗M_CO2 + N_s( i +1 ,2)∗M_W; %kg/mol
107
==PAGE:112==
APPENDIX B. MATLAB SCRIPTS
30th June, 2017
274
m_s( i +1) = n_s( i +1)∗M_s( i +1) ; %kg/ s
276
% Defining
temperature and pressure
fo r
next
step
T_s( i +1 ,1) = T_s( i , 1 ) ;
278
P_s( i +1 ,1) = P_s( i , 3 ) ;
280
% Calculating
enthalpy
at
next
step
H_s_split = enthalpy2 (T_s( i +1 ,1) ,P_s( i +1 ,1) ,N_s( i +1 ,:) ,comp_s) ;
282
H_s( i +1 ,1) = sum( H_s_split ) ;
end
284
W_tot = [W_s W_c] ;
286
e l s e
display ( ’ Case number not
recognised ’ )
288
break
end
290 %% I n i t i a l i s i n g
Plotting
Hplot = zeros (1 , s i z e (H_s, 1 ) ∗s i z e (H_s, 2 )−s i z e (H_s, 2 ) +1) ;
292
Pplot = zeros (1 , s i z e (P_s, 1 ) ∗s i z e (P_s, 2 )−s i z e (P_s, 2 ) +1) ;
Tplot = zeros (1 , s i z e (T_s, 1 ) ∗s i z e (T_s, 2 )−s i z e (T_s, 2 ) +1) ;
294
f o r
i = 1: compsteps
Hplot ( i ∗3−2) = H_s( i , 1 ) ;
296
Hplot ( i ∗3−1) = H_s( i , 2 ) ;
Hplot ( i ∗3
) = H_s( i , 3 ) ;
298
Pplot ( i ∗3−2) = P_s( i , 1 ) ;
Pplot ( i ∗3−1) = P_s( i , 2 ) ;
300
Pplot ( i ∗3)
= P_s( i , 3 ) ;
Tplot ( i ∗3−2) = T_s( i , 1 ) ;
302
Tplot ( i ∗3−1) = T_s( i , 2 ) ;
Tplot ( i ∗3)
= T_s( i , 3 ) ;
304
end
Hplot ( end ) = H_s( end , 1 ) ;
306
Pplot ( end ) = P_s( end , 1 ) ;
Tplot ( end ) = T_s( end , 1 ) ;
308
s t e p s plot = zeros (1 , compsteps ∗3) ;
310
f o r
i = 1: compsteps
s te psplot (3∗i −2) = step ( i ) −2/3;
312
s tepsplot (3∗i −1) = step ( i ) −1/3;
s te psplot (3∗i )
= step ( i ) ;
314
end
s t e p s plot = [0
stepsplot ] ;
316
%% Plot 1
318
count = 0;
320
count = count +1;
f i g u r e ( count )
322
hold on
set ( gca , ’ FontSize ’ ,20)
324
plot ( stepsplot , Tplot −273.15 , ’b−’ , ’ DisplayName ’ , ’ Temperature at each
compression
step ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2 , ’ MarkerSize ’ ,15)
legend ( ’ show ’ , ’ lo c at i on ’ , ’ southeast ’ )
326
xlabel ( ’ steps ’ )
ylabel ( ’ Temperature [^{\ c i r c }C] ’ )
328
xlim ( [ 0
compsteps ] )
ylim ( [ f l o o r (( min( Tplot −273.15)+5)/10)∗10−10
f l o o r (max( Tplot −273.15+5)
/10) ∗10+10])
108
==PAGE:113==
APPENDIX B. MATLAB SCRIPTS
30th June, 2017
330
count = count +1;
332
f i g u r e ( count )
hold on
334
set ( gca , ’ FontSize ’ ,20)
plot ( stepsplot , Pplot ∗1e −5, ’ r−’ , ’ DisplayName ’ , ’ Pressure
at each
compression
step ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2 , ’ MarkerSize ’ ,15)
336
legend ( ’ show ’ , ’ lo c at i on ’ , ’ northwest ’ )
xlabel ( ’ steps ’ )
338
ylabel ( ’ Pressure
[ bar ] ’ )
xlim ( [ 0
compsteps ] )
340
count = count +1;
342
f i g u r e ( count )
hold on
344
set ( gca , ’ FontSize ’ ,20)
plot ( stepsplot , Hplot ∗1e −3, ’ c−’ , ’ DisplayName ’ , ’ Enthalpy at each
compression
step ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2 , ’ MarkerSize ’ ,15)
346
legend ( ’ show ’ , ’ lo c at i on ’ , ’ southeast ’ )
xlabel ( ’ steps ’ )
348
ylabel ( ’ Enthalpy
[ kJ/mol ] ’ )
xlim ( [ 0
compsteps ] )
350
%% Plot 2
352
count = count +1;
f i g u r e ( count )
354
hold on
set ( gca , ’ FontSize ’ ,20)
356
plot ( 0 : compsteps ,N_s( : , 1 ) ∗M_CO2. / (N_s( : , 1 ) ∗M_CO2 + N_s( : , 2 ) ∗M_W) ∗100 , ’b
−x ’ , ’ DisplayName ’ , ’Mass f r a c t i o n
of CO_{2} at each
compression
step ’ , ’
LineWidth ’ ,2 , ’ MarkerSize ’ ,15)
legend ( ’ show ’ , ’ lo c at i on ’ , ’ southeast ’ )
358
xlabel ( ’ steps ’ )
ylabel ( ’Ammount of CO2 by mass [%] ’ )
360
text (1 ,mean ( [ min(N_s( : , 1 ) ∗M_CO2. / (N_s( : , 1 ) ∗M_CO2 + N_s( : , 2 ) ∗M_W) ∗100)
. . .
max(N_s( : , 1 ) ∗M_CO2. / (N_s( : , 1 ) ∗M_CO2 + N_s( : , 2 ) ∗M_W) ∗100) ] ) , . . .
362
[ ’ Final CO_{2}
purity = ’ , num2str ( SpecRound (N_s( end , 1 ) ∗M_CO2/(N_s(
end , 1 ) ∗M_CO2 + N_s( end , 2 ) ∗M_W) ∗100 ,2) ) , ’ %’ ] , ’ FontSize ’ ,20)
xlim ( [ 0
compsteps ] )
364
count = count +1;
366
f i g u r e ( count )
hold on
368
set ( gca , ’ FontSize ’ ,20)
plot ( 0 : compsteps ,m_s∗60∗60/1 e3 , ’ r−x ’ , ’ DisplayName ’ , ’ Flowrate
of CO_{2}
stream at each compression
step ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2 , ’ MarkerSize ’ ,15)
370
legend ( ’ show ’ , ’ lo c at i on ’ , ’ northeast ’ )
xlabel ( ’ steps ’ )
372
ylabel ( ’Mass flow
[ ton/hr ] ’ )
text (1 ,mean ( [ min(m_s∗60∗60/1 e3 ) max(m_s∗60∗60/1 e3 ) ] ) , . . .
374
[ ’ Final CO_{2} flow = ’ , num2str ( SpecRound (m_s( end ) ∗60∗60/1 e3 , 1 ) ) , ’
ton/hr ’ ] , ’ FontSize ’ ,20)
xlim ( [ 0
compsteps ] )
376
i f
cool == true
count = count +1;
378
f i g u r e ( count )
hold on
109
==PAGE:114==
APPENDIX B. MATLAB SCRIPTS
30th June, 2017
380
set ( gca , ’ FontSize ’ ,20)
plot ( 1 : compsteps ,m_c∗60∗60/1 e3 , ’ c−x ’ , ’ DisplayName ’ , ’ Necessary
flowrate
of Ammonia coolant
at each compression
step ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2 , ’ MarkerSize ’
,15)
382
text (2 ,mean ( [ mean ( [ min(m_c∗60∗60/1 e3 ) max(m_c∗60∗60/1 e3 ) ] ) max(m_c
∗60∗60/1 e3 ) ] ) , . . .
[ ’ Average
r e f r i g e r a n t
flow
rate = ’ , num2str ( SpecRound (mean(m_c)
∗60∗60/1 e3 , 1 ) ) , ’ ton/hr ’ ] , ’ FontSize ’ ,20)
384
legend ( ’ show ’ , ’ lo c at i on ’ , ’ northwest ’ )
xlabel ( ’ steps ’ )
386
ylabel ( ’Mass flow
[ ton/hr ] ’ )
xlim ( [ 1
compsteps ] )
388
end
390
%% Plot 3
N_CO2_plot = mean(N_s( 2 : end , 1 ) ) ;
392
N_CO2_plot = N_s( end −1 ,1) ;
N_W_plot =
1 −N_CO2_plot ;
394
N_plot = [ N_CO2_plot N_W_plot ] ;
isoT_plot = SpecRound (min(T_s( find (T_s ~= 0) ) ) /10^( f l o o r ( log10 (min(T_s(
find (T_s ~= 0) ) ) ) ) −1) ,0) . . .
396
∗10^( f l o o r ( log10 (min(T_s( find (T_s ~= 0) ) ) ) ) −1)−10^( f l o o r ( log10 (min(
T_s( find (T_s ~= 0) ) ) ) ) ) : . . .
10^( f l o o r ( log10 (max(max(T_s) ) ) ) −1) : SpecRound (max(max(T_s) ) / . . .
398
10^( f l o o r ( log10 (max(max(T_s) ) ) ) −1) ,0) ∗10^( f l o o r ( log10 (max(max(T_s) )
) ) −1) . . .
+10^( f l o o r ( log10 (max(max(T_s) ) ) ) ) ;
400
P_plot = linspac e (( min( Pplot )−abs (min( Pplot ) ) ∗0.05) , . . .
(max( Pplot )+abs (max( Pplot ) ) ∗0.05) ,50) ;
402
H_isoT = zeros ( length ( isoT_plot ) , length ( P_plot ) ) ;
ind = zeros ( length ( isoT_plot ) , length ( P_plot ) ) ;
404
f o r p = 1: length ( isoT_plot )
f or pp = 1: length ( P_plot )
406
H_isoT_split = enthalpy2 ( isoT_plot (p) , P_plot (1 , pp) , N_plot ,
comp_s) ;
H_isoT(p , pp) = sum( H_isoT_split ) ;
408
[~ ,~ , PhaseInd2 , ~ ] = Sort2Flash ( isoT_plot (p) , P_plot (1 , pp) , N_plot
) ;
i f
numel ( find ( PhaseInd2 == 1) ) == 1 && numel ( find ( PhaseInd2 ==
0) ) == 1
410
ind (p , pp) = 4;
e l s e i f
numel ( find ( PhaseInd2 == 1) ) == 2
412
ind (p , pp) = 3;
e l s e i f
numel ( find ( PhaseInd2 == 1) ) == 1 && numel ( find ( PhaseInd2
== −1)) == 1
414
ind (p , pp) = 2;
e l s e i f
numel ( find ( PhaseInd2 == −1)) == 1 && numel ( find (
PhaseInd2 == 0) == 1)
416
ind (p , pp) = 1;
end
418
display ( [ ’HP−plot , number of
c a l c u l a t i o n s
l e f t :
’ , num2str (
length ( isoT_plot ) ∗length ( P_plot ) −((p−1)∗length ( P_plot )+pp) ) ] )
end
420
end
422
count = count + 1;
f i g u r e ( count )
424
hold on
110
==PAGE:115==
APPENDIX B. MATLAB SCRIPTS
30th June, 2017
set ( gca , ’ FontSize ’ ,20)
426
f o r p = 1: length ( isoT_plot )
f or pp = 1: length ( P_plot )
428
i f
ind (p , pp) == 1
color = ’y . ’ ;
430
e l s e i f
ind (p , pp) == 2
color = ’ g . ’ ;
432
e l s e i f
ind (p , pp) == 3
color = ’ c . ’ ;
434
e l s e i f
ind (p , pp) == 4
color = ’b . ’ ;
436
end
438
plot (H_isoT(p , pp) ∗1e −3,P_plot (pp) ∗1e −5, color , ’ MarkerSize ’ ,5)
end
440
plot (H_isoT(p , : ) ∗1e −3,P_plot∗1e −5, ’k−’ )
i f
H_isoT(p , find ( P_plot == max( P_plot ) ) ) ∗1e−3 > . . .
442
(min( Hplot )−abs (min( Hplot ) ) ∗0.05) ∗1e−3 && . . .
H_isoT(p , find ( P_plot == max( P_plot ) ) ) ∗1e−3 < . . .
444
(max( Hplot )+abs (min( Hplot ) ) ∗0.05) ∗1e−3
text (H_isoT(p , find ( P_plot == max( P_plot ) ) ) ∗1e −3,max( P_plot ) ∗1e
−5 , . . .
446
[ num2str ( isoT_plot (p) ) , ’ K’ ] , ’ FontSize ’ ,16)
end
448
end
plot ( Hplot ∗1e −3,Pplot ∗1e −5, ’mo−’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2 , ’ MarkerSize ’ ,15)
450
xlabel ( ’ Enthalpy
[ kJ/mol ] ’ )
ylabel ( ’ Pressure
[ bar ] ’ )
452
text (min( Hplot ∗1e−3) ∗0.95 ,max( P_plot∗1e−5) ∗0 . 2 , [ ’ Isoterms
calculated
f o r
f i n a l
molar composition
,
[CO_{2}] = ’ . . .
, num2str ( SpecRound (N_s( end , 1 ) ∗M_CO2/(N_s( end , 1 ) ∗M_CO2 + N_s( end , 2 ) ∗
M_W) ∗100 ,2) ) , ’ % by mass ’ ] , ’ FontSize ’ ,20)
454
xlim ( [ ( min( Hplot )−abs (min( Hplot ) ) ∗0.05) ∗1e−3 (max( Hplot )+abs (min( Hplot )
) ∗0.05) ∗1e −3])
456
%% Plot 4
P_plot = linspac e (min( P_plot ) ,max( P_plot ) ,100) ;
458
T_plot = linspac e (( min( Tplot )−abs (min( Tplot ) ) ∗0.05) , . . .
(max( Tplot )+abs (max( Tplot ) ) ∗0.05) , numel ( P_plot ) ) ;
460
ind2 = zeros ( length ( P_plot ) , length ( T_plot ) ) ;
f o r p = 1: length ( P_plot )
462
f or ppp = 1: length (P_s ( : , 1 ) )−1
i f
P_plot (p) > P_s(ppp , 1 ) && P_plot (p) <= P_s(ppp+1 ,1)
464
N_plot = N_s(ppp , : ) ;
e l s e i f
P_plot (p) > max(P_s ( : , 1 ) )
466
N_plot = N_s( end , : ) ;
end
468
end
f or pp = 1: length ( T_plot )
470
[~ ,~ , PhaseInd2 , ~ ] = Sort2Flash ( T_plot (pp) , P_plot (1 ,p) , N_plot ) ;
i f
numel ( find ( PhaseInd2 == 1) ) == 1 && numel ( find ( PhaseInd2 ==
0) ) == 1
472
% Pure
l i q
ind2 (pp , p) = 4;
474
e l s e i f
numel ( find ( PhaseInd2 == 1) ) == 2
% LLE
476
ind2 (pp , p) = 3;
e l s e i f
numel ( find ( PhaseInd2 == 1) ) == 1 && numel ( find ( PhaseInd2
111
==PAGE:116==
APPENDIX B. MATLAB SCRIPTS
30th June, 2017
== −1)) == 1
478
% VLE
ind2 (pp , p) = 2;
480
e l s e i f
numel ( find ( PhaseInd2 == −1)) == 1 && numel ( find (
PhaseInd2 == 0) == 1)
% Pure gas
482
ind2 (pp , p) = 1;
end
484
display ( [ ’PT−plot , number of
c a l c u l a t i o n s
l e f t :
’ , num2str (
length ( T_plot ) ∗length ( P_plot ) −((p−1)∗length ( T_plot )+pp) ) ] )
end
486
end
488
count = count + 1;
f i g u r e ( count )
490
hold on
set ( gca , ’ FontSize ’ ,20)
492
surface ( P_plot∗1e −5,T_plot −273.15 , ind2 , ’ EdgeColor ’ , ’ none ’ , ’ FaceAlpha ’
, 0 . 5 )
colormap (autumn)
494
plot3 ( Pplot ∗1e −5,Tplot −273.15 ,(max(max( ind2 ) )+1)∗ones ( s i z e ( Tplot ) ) , ’bo
−−’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2 , ’ MarkerSize ’ ,15)
f o r p = 1: length (P_s ( : , 1 ) )
496
plot3 ( [ P_s(p , 1 ) P_s(p , 1 ) ]∗1 e −5 ,[min( T_plot ) max( T_plot ) ] −273.15 ,(
max(max( ind2 ) )+1)∗ones (1 ,2) , ’ color ’ , [ 0 . 4 , 0 . 4 , 0 . 4 ] , ’ LineStyle ’ , ’−−’ , ’
LineWidth ’ , 0 .5 )
end
498
view (0 ,90)
text (mean ( [ min( P_plot ) ∗1e−5 max( P_plot ) ∗1e −5]) ,max( T_plot −273.15)
∗0.9 ,1 , ’ Phase behaviour
calculated
f o r
molar composition
of CO_{2} at
each
step ’ , ’ FontSize ’ ,20)
500
xlabel ( ’ Pressure
[ bar ] ’ )
ylabel ( ’ Temperature [^{\ c i r c }C] ’ )
502
xlim ( [ min( P_plot ) ∗1e−5 max( P_plot ) ∗1e −5])
ylim ( [ min( T_plot ) −273.15 max( T_plot ) −273.15])
504
%% Plot 5
506
count = count + 1;
508
f i g u r e ( count )
hold on
510
set ( gca , ’ FontSize ’ ,20)
cumW = zeros ( length (W_tot) ,1) ;
512
f o r
i = 1: length (W_tot)
cumW( i ) = sum(sum(W_tot( 1 : i , : ) ) ) ;
514
end
plot ( 1 : compsteps , W_tot ( : , 1 ) ∗1e −6, ’bo−−’ , ’ DisplayName ’ , ’ Stream
Compression Work ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2 , ’ MarkerSize ’ ,15)
516
i f
cool == true
plot ( 1 : compsteps , W_tot ( : , 2 ) ∗1e −6, ’ cs−−’ , ’ DisplayName ’ , ’ Refrigeration
Compression Work ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2 , ’ MarkerSize ’ ,15)
518
end
plot ( 1 : compsteps ,cumW∗1e −6, ’ r^−−’ , ’ DisplayName ’ , ’ Cumulative Work ’ , ’
LineWidth ’ ,2 , ’ MarkerSize ’ ,15)
520
legend ( ’ show ’ , ’ Location ’ , ’ northwest ’ )
xlabel ( ’ steps ’ )
522
ylabel ( ’ Power
[MW] ’ )
text ( 1 . 5 , 0 . 7 ∗max(cumW∗1e−6) , [ ’ Total work = ’ , num2str ( SpecRound (max(cumW
112
==PAGE:117==
APPENDIX B. MATLAB SCRIPTS
30th June, 2017
∗1e−6) ,2) ) , ’ MW’ ] , ’ FontSize ’ ,20)
524
xlim ( [ 1
compsteps ] )
526
Wton = cumW( end ) /(m_s( end ) ∗N_s( end , 1 ) ∗M_CO2/(N_s( end , 1 ) ∗M_CO2 + N_s( end
, 2 ) ∗M_W) ) ;
528
%% Plot 6
530
count = count + 1;
f i g u r e ( count )
532
hold on
set ( gca , ’ FontSize ’ ,20)
534
plot ( 1 : compsteps , T_sea−273.15 , ’bo−−’ , ’ DisplayName ’ , ’ Temperature
of
output
sea
water at each compression
step ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2 , ’ MarkerSize ’
,15)
legend ( ’ show ’ , ’ Location ’ , ’ southeast ’ )
536
xlabel ( ’ Steps ’ )
ylabel ( ’ Temperature [^{\ c i r c }C] ’ )
538
text (2 ,mean ( [ mean(T_sea−273.15) min(T_sea−273.15) ] ) , [ ’ Average output
temperature = ’ , num2str ( SpecRound (sum(T_sea .∗n_sea ) /sum( n_sea ) −273.15 ,2)
) , ’ ^{\ c i r c }C ’ ] , ’ FontSize ’ ,20)
xlim ( [ 1
compsteps ] )
540
count = count + 1;
542
f i g u r e ( count )
hold on
544
set ( gca , ’ FontSize ’ ,20)
cumm_sea = zeros ( s i z e (m_sea) ) ;
546
f o r
i = 1: length (m_sea)
cumm_sea( i ) = sum(m_sea ( 1 : i ) ) ;
548
end
plot ( 1 : compsteps , m_sea∗60∗60/1 e3 , ’bo−−’ , ’ DisplayName ’ , ’ Flow of
sea
water at each compression
step ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2 , ’ MarkerSize ’ ,15)
550
plot ( 1 : compsteps , cumm_sea∗60∗60/1 e3 , ’ r^−−’ , ’ DisplayName ’ , ’ Cummulative
flow
of
sea
water ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2 , ’ MarkerSize ’ ,15)
legend ( ’ show ’ , ’ Location ’ , ’ northwest ’ )
552
xlabel ( ’ Steps ’ )
ylabel ( ’ Flowrate
[ ton/hr ] ’ )
554
text (2 ,mean(cumm_sea) ∗60∗60/1 e3 , [ ’ Total
flow
of
sea
water = ’ , num2str (
SpecRound (max(cumm_sea∗60∗60/1 e3 ) ,1) ) , ’ ton/hr ’ ] , ’ FontSize ’ ,20)
xlim ( [ 1
compsteps ] )
556
count = count + 1;
558
f i g u r e ( count )
hold on
560
set ( gca , ’ FontSize ’ ,20)
cumW_sea = zeros ( s i z e (W_sea) ) ;
562
f o r
i = 1: length (W_tot)
cumW_sea( i ) = sum(W_sea( 1 : i ) ) ;
564
end
plot ( 1 : compsteps ,W_sea∗1e −6, ’bo−−’ , ’ DisplayName ’ , ’ Energy
transfered
to
sea
water stream at each compression
step ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2 , ’ MarkerSize ’
,15)
566
plot ( 1 : compsteps ,cumW_sea∗1e −6, ’ r^−−’ , ’ DisplayName ’ , ’ Cumulative energy
transfered
to
sea
water stream ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2 , ’ MarkerSize ’ ,15)
legend ( ’ show ’ , ’ Location ’ , ’ northwest ’ )
568
xlabel ( ’ steps ’ )
ylabel ( ’ Power
[MW] ’ )
113
==PAGE:118==
APPENDIX B. MATLAB SCRIPTS
30th June, 2017
570
text (2 ,mean(cumW_sea∗1e−6) , [ ’ Total
energy
transfered
to
seawater = ’ ,
num2str ( SpecRound (max(cumW_sea∗1e−6) ,1) ) , ’ MW’ ] , ’ FontSize ’ ,20)
xlim ( [ 1
compsteps ] )
572
%%
574
count = count +1;
f i g u r e ( count )
576
hold on
[ ax ,HP,TP] = plotyy ( Pplot ( end −6:end ) ∗1e −5,Hplot ( end −6:end ) ∗1e −3,Pplot (
end −6:end ) ∗1e −5,Tplot ( end −6:end ) −273.15) ;
578
set (ax , ’ FontSize ’ ,20)
set ( get ( ax (1) , ’ Ylabel ’ ) , ’ String ’ , ’ Enthalpy
[ kJ/mol ] ’ , ’ FontSize ’ ,20 , ’
color ’ , ’k ’ )
580
set ( get ( ax (2) , ’ Ylabel ’ ) , ’ String ’ , ’ Temperature [^{\ c i r c }C] ’ , ’ FontSize ’
,20 , ’ color ’ , ’k ’ )
set ( ax (1) , ’ Ycolor ’ , ’ r ’ )
582
set ( ax (2) , ’ Ycolor ’ , ’b ’ )
xlabel ( ’ Pressure
[ bar ] ’ )
584
set (HP, ’ color ’ , ’ r ’ , ’ Linestyle ’ , ’−−’ , ’ Marker ’ , ’^ ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2 , ’
MarkerSize ’ ,15 , ’ DisplayName ’ , ’ Enthalpy ’ )
set (TP, ’ color ’ , ’b ’ , ’ Linestyle ’ , ’−−’ , ’ Marker ’ , ’ o ’ , ’ LineWidth ’ ,2 , ’
MarkerSize ’ ,15 , ’ DisplayName ’ , ’ Temperature ’ )
586
legend ( ’ show ’ )
588 end
114
