==PAGE:1==
Investigation of Pressure Fields in Arterial
Stenoses Using Catheters and 3D Finite Element
Models
23rd June, 2017
Written by:
Charlotte Bølling Mikkelsen, s113280
Lilly Svanberg Cordes, s123576
==PAGE:2==
.
==PAGE:3==
This paper is developed by:
Charlotte Bølling Mikkelsen, s113280
s113280@student.dtu.dk
tgv568@alumni.ku.dk
And
Lilly Svanberg Cordes, s123576
s123576@student.dtu.dk
rdg305@alumni.ku.dk
We declare that the work in this report was carried out in accordance
with the requirements of the University’s Regulations and Code of
Practice for Research Degree Programmes.
Except where indicated by speciﬁc reference in the text, the work is
the students’ own work. Work done in collaboration with, or with the
assistance of others, is indicated as such. Any views expressed in the
dissertation are those of the authors.
SIGNATURE:
Charlotte B. Mikkelsen
...................................................................................
23rd June, 2017
SIGNATURE:
Lilly S. Cordes
...................................................................................
23rd June, 2017
==PAGE:4==
.
==PAGE:5==
This thesis is developed in collaboration with:
The Technical University of Denmark
DTU Electro, Biomechanical Engineering
Campus Lyngby
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Danmark
studieadministration@elektro.dtu.dk
Project supervisors:
Jørgen Arendt Jensen
Marie Sand Traberg
Jacob Bjerring Olesen
Building 349, room 222
Building 349, room 232
Building 349, room 206
Lyngby Campus
Lyngby Campus
Lyngby Campus
jaj@elektro.dtu.dk
mse@elektro.dtu.dk
jbolesen@bkultrasound.com
==PAGE:6==
.
==PAGE:7==
Projekt period: 23.01.2017 - 23.06.2017
Dansk titel:
Undersøgelse af trykfelter ved karstenoser med katetermålinger og
3D ﬁnite element modeller
Engelsk titel:
Investigation of pressure ﬁelds in arterial stenoses using catheters
and 3D ﬁnite element models
ECTS:
2x30
Field of Study:
Biomedical Engineering
Version:
1. edition
Copy:
© Charlotte Bølling Mikkelsen, Lilly Svanberg Cordes and
DTU Biomechanical Engineering, 2017
==PAGE:8==
==PAGE:9==
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
First, we owe many thanks to our advisers, Jacob Bjerring Olesen, Marie Sand
Traberg and Jørgen Arendt Jensen for continuous support and aid in making this
project possible.
We would also like to thank other co-worker at Center for Fast Ultrasound Imaging
(CFU) and the Technical University of Denmark (DTU) for their expertises: Niclas
Møller - for helping us understand and use the general experimental setup, Kaj-
Åge Henneberg - for helping us troubleshoot and expand the LabVIEW script for
data collection.
While working on this project we have had the great fortune of being surrounded
by many wonderful people, some of whom deserve special thanks for the enter-
tainment, assistance, and friendship, which they have provided: Rikke Egstand
and Mikkel Schou.
Also a special thanks to Katrine B. Kaalund for proofreading the thesis.
Finally, we are most grateful for the support of our dear families, who have dis-
played endless patience, understanding, and encouragement through the course of
us writing this thesis.
ix
==PAGE:10==
==PAGE:11==
PREFACE
This project has been developed in cooperation with The Department of Electrical
Engineering, Biomedical Engineering Group at the Technical University of Den-
mark, under the supervision of Marie Sand Traberg, Jacob Bjerring Olesen and
Jørgen Arendt Jensen.
This project considers the investigation of pressure ﬁelds in arterial stenoses. The
aim of this study is to propose a method, which considers the compliance between
measured pressure gradients and a corresponding numerical model. Hence, follow-
ing the hypothesis that this is possible when making thoughtful decisions about
the setup.
xi
==PAGE:12==
==PAGE:13==
ABSTRACT
Measurements of the pressure gradient, across an arterial stenosis, is used in assess-
ing the severity of atherosclerosis development in arteries. The standard method
to evaluate pressure gradients in peripheral arteries has been by the use of ﬂuid-
ﬁlled catheters.
This project aimed to investigate how well a Finite Element Model (FEM) can
simulate the current intravascular blood pressure measurements using a blood
pressure transducer system with a ﬂuid-ﬁlled catheter.
Fluid-ﬁlled catheters have shown to exhibit some technical limitations. However,
it was desired to develop a geometrically compliant FEM model to simulate the
intravascular blood pressure measurements, to evaluate the geometrical limitations
of introducing a catheter into the lumen of a vessel. For this investigation, ﬂow-
phantoms were analyzed in an experimental setup and COMSOL Multiphysics v.
5.2a was used for all FEM studies.
This project investigated a range of geometries, including stenotic straight tubes,
carotid arteries of healthy subjects and one stenotic carotid artery. The diﬀer-
ent geometries contributed to the establishment of a broad understanding of the
limitations of the experimental setup, as well as the numerical models.
When evaluating the results of the study, the best compliance was found in the
simplest cases. For the stenotic straight tubes, did it become evident, when the size
of the stenosis increases, a larger inconsistencies occurred between the measured
and simulated values.
The same general inconsistency occurred in the results for the healthy patient ge-
ometries and the geometry of the patient with a stenosis. Hence, a more compli-
cated structure leads to poor in compliance between the measured and numerically
found pressure gradients.
In conclusion, was it determined that both the experimental setup and the FEM
model exhibited strong limitations, making it diﬃcult to achieve conclusive knowl-
edge about the established pressure gradients. Thus, the study showed that even
when making thoughtful decisions about the setups, full compliance between the
measured pressure gradients and those found in a numerical model, was not pos-
sible to achieve without further advancements of the model.
xiii
==PAGE:14==
==PAGE:15==
RESUMÉ
Den nuværende metode til at måle det intravenøse blodtryk, hvor man måler tryk-
forskellen over en stenose, består af et væskefyldt kateter som er forbundet til en
transducer. Dette projeket ønsker at undersøge om det er muligt at simulere den
nuværende intravenøse blodtryksmåling via en simulationsmodel ved brug af Fi-
nite Element Model (FEM) i COMSOL. Baggrunden herfor er, at den nuværende
kliniske intravenøse blodtrykmåling, har vist sig at være letpåvirkelig og derved
forekommer der visse usikkerheder omkring metoden. Derfor ønskes det at udvikle
en geometrisk kompatibel FEM model til at simulere intravenøs blodtryksmåling.
I projektet blev en forsøgsopstilling med ﬂow-phantomer analyseret og COMSOL
Multiphysics v. 5.2a blev brugt til at simulere alle FEM simuleringerne. For at
få en bred forståelse undersøgtes en række forskellige geometrier: Lige rør med
stenose, carotis af raske forsøgspersoner og en carotis med stenose. Disse forskel-
lige geometrier bidrog til etablering af en bred forståelse af begrænsningerne i den
eksperimentelle opsætning samt de numeriske modeller. Resultaterne viste at den
bedste overensstemmelse forekom ved de simpleste strukturer: For de lige rør med
stenose, fremkom det at, når stenose størrelse stiger, bliver uoverensstemmelsen
mellem de målte og simulerede værdier større. Den samme generelle inkonsistent
forekommer i resulaterne for patienterne og patienten med en stenose ses det,
at disse mere komplicerede strukturer medfører øget inkompatibilitet mellem de
målte og numerisk fundne trykgradienter. På bagrund af dette konkluderes det
at både den eksperimentelle opsætning og FEM-modellen udviser stærke begræn-
sninger, og at den nuværende simulerede model endnu ikke kan benyttes som en
valideringsmodel til intravenøse blodtrykmåling. Projektet viste at på trods af
omhyggelige beslutninger om opsætningerne, var det ikke muligt at opnå fuld ov-
erensstemmelse mellem de målte trykgradienter og dem, der ﬁndes i en numerisk
model, uden yderligere videreudvikling af modellen.
xv
==PAGE:16==
==PAGE:17==
GLOSSARY AND ACRONYMS
Acronym
Description
BP
Blood Pressure
Blood pressure describes the pres-
sure that is exerted by the blood
upon the walls of the blood vessels.
∆P
Pressure Gradient
Change in pressure over a deﬁned
distance. The gradients are found by
subtracting the upstream measure-
ment from the downstream.
MRI
Magnetic Resonans Imaging
CAD
Computer Aided Design
CFD
Computational Fluid Dy-
namics
PLA
Polylactic acid
PVA
Polyvinyl alcohol
US
Ultrasound
VFI
Vector Flow Imaging
FEM
Finite Element Modelling
CCA
Common Carotid Artery
ICA
Internal Carotid Artery
ECA
External Carotid Artery
CT
Computer Tomography
Re
Reynolds Number
Q
Flow Rate
A or a
Area
El
Entrance Length
g
Gravitational acceleration
P or p
Pressure
β
Damping ratio
fn
Natural Frequency
α
Womersly Number
µ
Dynamic viscocity
E
Young’s Modulus
R or r
Radius
L
Length / distance
h
height
ν
Kinematic viscosity
(µ
ρ)
ρ
density
v
velocity
F
Force
F
French
1French = 0.03cm
Kt
imperial constant 1.5
ω
angle frequency
2π
T where T is the period
K
bulk modulus
Of the catheter wall material
xvii
==PAGE:18==
==PAGE:19==
TABLE OF CONTENT
Acknowledgments
ix
Preface
xi
Abstract
xiii
Resumé
xv
Glossary and Acronyms
xvii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Aim of the Study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Overview of the Project
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Background
3
2.1
The Cariovascular System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.1.1
The Carotid Artery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.1.2
Mechanics of the Cardiovascular System
. . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.3
Physical Properties of Blood . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Cardiovascular Fluid Dynamics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2.1
Steady Flow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2.2
The Vascular Resistance and Branching . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2.3
Pulsatile Flow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2.4
Turbulent Flow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.2.5
Entrance Length
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.3
Blood Pressure Measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.3.1
Direct Blood Pressure Measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.3.2
Blood Pressure Waveforms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.4
Catheterzation of Blood Vessels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.5
Computational Fluid Dynamics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.5.1
The Finite Element Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
xix
==PAGE:20==
TABLE OF CONTENT
3
Materials and Methods
21
3.1
The Experimental Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.1.1
Material Setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.1.2
Phantom Molding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.2
General Experimental Protocol
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.2.1
Straight Tubes Experimental Protocol
. . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.2.2
Patients Phantoms Experimental Protocol . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.3
Dynamic Accuracy of the Experimental Setup . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.3.1
Fast-Flush Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.3.2
Calibration of the Pressure Transducer . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.3.3
Optimization of Sample Frequency of the DAC Card
. . . .
33
3.4
Data Processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.4.1
Straight Tubes Data Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
3.4.2
Patient Data Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
3.5
Computational Simulation Setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
3.5.1
Inlet Flow Deﬁnition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
3.5.2
Angle Correction for Patient Inlets
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
3.5.3
Boundary Conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
3.5.4
Global Deﬁnitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
3.5.5
Mesh Deﬁnition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
3.5.6
Study Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
3.6
Preliminary Investigations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
3.6.1
Preliminary Experimental Study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
3.6.2
Preliminary FEM Study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
4
Results
53
4.1
Straight Tubes - Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
4.1.1
Straight Tubes - COMSOL Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
4.1.2
Straight Tubes - Experimental Data Comparison of ∆P Over
the Stenosis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
4.2
Patients - Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
4.2.1
Patients - COMSOL Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
4.2.2
Patients - Experimental Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
4.3
Stenotic Patient - Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
4.3.1
Stenotic Patient - COMSOL Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
4.3.2
Stenotic Patient - Experimental Results
. . . . . . . . . . .
75
4.4
Correlation Between Study Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
4.4.1
Compassion of ∆P Over Stenoses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
4.5
Validation of the COMSOL Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
4.5.1
Mass Conservation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
4.5.2
Flow Pattern Comparison
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
83
xx
==PAGE:21==
TABLE OF CONTENT
4.5.3
Flow Distribution Comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
83
5
Discussion
85
5.1
Straight Tubes Studies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
86
5.2
Patients Studies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
87
5.2.1
Flow Distribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
88
5.3
General Study Concerns . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
89
5.3.1
Introducing a Catheter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
89
5.3.2
Rigid vs. Flexible Vessel Walls . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
92
5.4
Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
93
5.4.1
Limitations of the Experimental Setup . . . . . . . . . . . .
93
5.4.2
Limitations of the FEM Studies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
94
5.5
Future Outlook . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
96
6
Conclusion
97
7
Bibliography
99
Appendix A Pressure Transducer Speciﬁcations
103
Appendix B Patient Info
105
Appendix C Scatter Agent for Phantom Molding
107
Appendix D Flow-pump Settings - Carotid2
109
Appendix E Matlab Code - Sample Frequency Analysis
111
Appendix F LabView Graphic Overview
113
Appendix G Matlab Code - Constant Flow Data Analysis
115
Appendix H Matlab- Time-dependent Flow Data Analysis
121
Appendix I
Pateint Geometries for COMSOL
123
Appendix J
Matlab Code - VFI ﬂow proﬁle
125
Appendix K Mean Velocity Correction for COMSOL Inlet
133
Appendix L Matlab Code - Construct inlet proﬁles for FEM using
Womersley’s theorem
135
Appendix M Angle correction
145
Appendix N Patients - COMSOL Evaluation Speciﬁcations
147
xxi
==PAGE:22==
TABLE OF CONTENT
Appendix O Straight Tubes - COMSOL 2D Surface Plots
155
O.1 Straight Tubes - Experimental Data Comparison of ∆P in the Mid-
dle of the Stenosis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 161
Appendix P Patients - COMSOL Inlet Color-Plots
163
Appendix Q Straight Tube Geometry - Visualized using US
167
Appendix R Flow distribution Between ICA and ECA
169
Appendix S
Catheter Placement Visualization With US
171
0
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCTION
1.1
Motivation
Measurements of the pressure gradient, across an arterial stenosis, is used in assess-
ing the severity of atherosclerosis development in arteries. The standard method to
evaluate pressure gradients in peripheral arteries has been by the use of ﬂuid-ﬁlled
catheters. Despite recent advances in non-invasive techniques, ﬂuid-ﬁlled catheter
measurement remains the most common method for direct pressure acquisition in
the clinic. However, it is also commonly known, that the measurement accuracy
of the golden standard ﬂuid-ﬁlled catheters manometer system can be aﬀected by
several technical limitations. In addition to the technical limitations, passing a
catheter through a stenosis will lead to seemingly obvious geometrical limitations,
by reducing the cross-sectional area, and therefore might be expected to alter the
ﬂow patterns and downstream pressures.
This is a complicated ﬁeld of study, which has been investigated for many decades.
More current advancements in the use of computational ﬂuid dynamics have shown
to be an eﬃcient tool in validating pressure gradients.
We believe that further evaluation of pressure gradients in varying geometries -
both in a laboratory setup of molded phantoms and by the use of numerical models
- might lower the need of complicated time consuming experimental setups.
1.2
Aim of the Study
This project aims to investigate how well a Finite Element Model (FEM) can simu-
late the current intravascular blood pressure measurements using a blood pressure
transducer system with a ﬂuid-ﬁlled catheter. Hence, making FEM a valid way of
verifying new blood pressure measurement techniques.
To investigate diﬀerent geometries, experimental phantom models are used for
catheter data collection. The investigated dimensions are three straight tubes,
with diﬀerent artiﬁcially created stenosis degrees of 30%, 70%, and 90% respec-
tively.
The straight tubes are investigated, to ﬁrstly avoid any complex ﬂuid
dynamics eﬀect caused by physiologically correct geometries. Thus, hindering the
identiﬁcation of the causes of error in the measurement.
Furthermore, three healthy patients had their carotid artery scanned using Mag-
netic Resonance Imaging (MRI) so that the geometry could be molded into phan-
toms as well. Finally, an artiﬁcially molded carotid artery, including a 50% stenosis
1
==PAGE:24==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
at the internal carotid artery bulbous, was investigated. After investigating the
geometries in an experimental setup, was it desired to analyze the same situa-
tions in a numerical simulation using COMSOL Multiphysics v. 5.2a software.
This provided the opportunity to investigate some of the situations, both with
and without the presence of the catheter, and to quantify the variations in the
recorded pressure gradients.
1.3
Overview of the Project
This project is composed of the following chapters.
Chapter 2: Basic description of the cardiovascular system, ﬂuid dynamics and
the principles behind blood pressure measurements using a ﬂuid-ﬁlled
catheter systems.
Chapter 3: Walk through of the experimental setup, the numerical model in COM-
SOL and all considerations done to make sure the setups are valid and
the results are trustworthy.
Chapter 4: Presentation of the key results.
Chapter 5: Discussion of the results including the limitations of the experimental
and FEM setups.
Chapter 6: Conclusions
2
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 2
BACKGROUND
2.1
The Cariovascular System
Figure 2.1:
Schematic of the cardiovascular
system.[1]
The circulatory transport system, (see
ﬁgure 2.1) also known as the cardiovas-
cular system, is responsible for the cir-
culation of blood, and thereby the de-
livery of nutrients, hormones, and oxy-
gen to all body tissues, as well as re-
moval of waste products.[1, 2]
The heart is the pump, which gener-
ates the pressure gradient necessary to
drive the blood through the body. The
heart consists of two main pumps - the
right and the left side.
From there
the blood travels through two separate
loops. Each side of the heart is com-
posed of an atrium, that receives the
blood, and a ventricle, which pumps
the blood away from the heart.[1, 2]
All blood vessels that carry blood away from the heart, belonging to the pulmonary
system, are called arteries and those that transport blood towards the heart, be-
longing to the systemic system, are called veins.[1] The cardiac cycle consists of the
diastole - during which the ventricles are being ﬁlled with blood, and the systole -
during which the ventricles contract, and pumps the blood out of the heart.[2] The
function of the cardiovascular system can be measured in a variety of ways. These
include both simple methods such as taking the pulse as an indicator of a person’s
heart rate, measuring blood pressure using, for example, a sphygmomanometer,
or listening to the heart for murmurs which may indicate problems with the heart
valves. An electrocardiogram can also be used to evaluate the way in which elec-
tricity is conducted through the heart.[3] To get more precise knowledge about the
state of the cardiovascular system more invasive means can be used. A cannula
or catheter, inserted into an artery, may be used to measure pulse pressure or
pulmonary wedge pressures. Ultrasound can also be used, particularly to identify
the health of blood vessels, and a Doppler ultrasound of the carotid arteries or
Doppler ultrasound of the lower limbs can be used to evaluate for narrowing of
3
==PAGE:26==
CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND
the carotid arteries, due to arteriosclerosis, or thrombus formation in the legs,
respectively.[3]
Atherosclerosis
Atherosclerosis is a speciﬁc form of arteriosclerosis, but even many physicians fail
to distinguish between the two, assuming that all degenerative disease in arteries
is caused by atherosclerosis. Atherosclerosis is simply characterized by thickening,
hardening and loss of elasticity of the walls of arteries, only due to the formation
of intimal plaques, which might limit the blood ﬂow to tissues downstream. This
narrowing of the artery is known as stenosis.[3]
There are many theories on how and why atherosclerosis develops, but still, no
single clear answer remains, thus it is believed that atherosclerosis is the result of
many pathophysiological features. It has though been found, that atherosclerosis
characteristically occurs at locations where geometrical phenomenon’s like branch-
ing, bifurcations, and curvatures are observed. It is from that believed that the
changes in ﬂow that occurs at these sites, contribute to the risk of atherosclerosis
development, by preventing the cells, at the arterial wall, from aligning.[3]
Figure 2.2: Schematic of three methods of mea-
suring the degree of carotid stenosis, when it is
placed within the bulbus. [4]
The severity of the stenosis degree have
been deﬁned diﬀerently throughout the
literature [4].
In ﬁgure 2.2, P. M. Rothwell [4] sum-
marizes some of the used measurement
methods.
However, in the work done here, the
stenosis degree of stenotic straight
tubes are calculated as the percent de-
crease in area, not in diameter, as fol-
lows:
Stenosis degree = A −a
A
∗100%
(2.1)
where, A is the original cross sectional area and a is the cross sectional area at
the site of the stenosis, as described by N. Westerhof et al. [5].
2.1.1
The Carotid Artery
This project concerns investigations of pressure ﬁelds in the carotid artery, which
are located along the sides of the neck. At the neck, the Common Carotid Artery
(CCA) branches into the well-known bifurcation, which consists of the internal
and external carotid arteries.
The Internal Carotid Artery (ICA) supplies the
brain whereas the External Carotid Artery (ECA) supplies the face and skull,
(see ﬁgure 2.3). This branch is a common site of atherosclerosis, which develops
4
==PAGE:27==
2.1. THE CARIOVASCULAR SYSTEM
right at the bifurcation. This can lead to insuﬃcient blood supplies and in some
cases emboli, leading to stroke, (see ﬁgure 2.3).[6]
Analysis of the carotid artery has lead to a mean Reynolds number of about 300,
a Womersley parameter varying from 1-12.5[7] and that the two branches are
approximately angled between 25-49◦oﬀ-axis[6, 8].
Normally under physiological conditions, the ﬂow in the ICA bulbous is neither
fully developed laminar ﬂow nor turbulent ﬂow, (see ﬁgure 2.4). It can be described
as laminar ﬂow with periodically returning vortices. These vortices are created at
the beginning of the diastolic phase. Signiﬁcantly, these areas are also the areas
where arteriosclerosis takes place.[8]
Figure 2.3: A) The anatomical placement of
CCA, ICA and ECA. B) Healthy arteries.
C) An example of atherosclerosis build up
in the arteries. [9]
Figure 2.4:
Ultrasound image of the
velocity ﬁeld in the bifurcation of the
carotid artery.[10]
2.1.2
Mechanics of the Cardiovascular System
The mechanical parts of the cardiovascular system include the heart, arteries, veins
and capillaries. This is a non-ideal system, but science aims to simplify the anal-
ysis by making educated assumptions about it. For example, when investigating
the mechanics of the cardiovascular system, blood vessels are generally assumed
regionally homogeneous, incompressible, elastic and cylindrically orthotropic. [11]
That blood vessel walls exhibit inelastic behavior such as length-tension and
pressure-diameter hysteresis, stress relaxation, and creep has been reported ex-
tensively. However, blood vessels are able to maintain stability and contain the
pressure and ﬂow of blood under a variety of physiologic conditions. [11]
As for this project, only the lumen of the vessels are studied, giving a much simpler
model.
2.1.3
Physical Properties of Blood
One of the most important blood parameters is the viscosity. However, the viscos-
ity of blood and plasma varies with samples due to the variations in species as well
5
==PAGE:28==
CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND
as in various constituents like protein and red blood cells between samples. The
viscosity of a ﬂuid is also strongly dependent upon the temperature. In general,
viscosity of liquids decreases with increasing temperature.[3] Human blood has a
density of about 1057 kg/m3 and its viscosity coeﬃcient ranges between 2.10e−3
- 4.53e−3 Pa · s[12]. The presence of plasma proteins and blood cells results in
a higher viscosity compared to water. From experimental measurements, it has
been shown that blood behaves as a Newtonian ﬂuid1 only at high shear rates.
In small arteries and in the capillaries, where the shear rate is very low, blood
must be treated as a non-Newtonian2 ﬂuid. At low rates of shear, the red blood
cells tend to aggregate and thus exhibit an increase in viscosity. As the shear rate
increases, the aggregates break up.[3]
For most experimental setups, is it not possible to use real human blood, so a
replacement has to be considered. For this project, a blood-mimicking ﬂuid, with
a density of 1030 kg/m3 and a dynamic viscosity of 4.1e−3 Pa·s, was used. For the
geometrical structures investigated, this liquid was considered having Newtonian
characteristics.
In Poiseuille or laminar ﬂow, concentric cylindrical layers of liquid undergo shear-
ing. The force applied to the liquid layer is called the wall shear stress and the
velocity gradient obtained between adjacent layers of the liquid is the shear rate.
A Newtonian liquid is, therefore, one in which the coeﬃcient of viscosity is con-
stant at all rates of shear. The resistance to ﬂow arises from the friction between
these neighboring layers, which make shear stress the product of viscosity and
shear rate.[3]
It is known that viscoelasticity and ﬂow velocity of blood determine shear stress at
the vessel wall, which stimulates the endothelium of the artery to produce vasoac-
tive substances. The shear stress has furthermore been implicated as an important
determinant in the initiation, localization, and progression of atherosclerosis. But
full understanding of the relationship between shear stress and atherosclerosis is
limited.[13]
2.2
Cardiovascular Fluid Dynamics
Cardiovascular ﬂuid dynamics describe the analysis of blood pressure, volume and
ﬂow within the cardiovascular system. To understand the system, the general con-
cepts of mass, momentum, and energy conservation are considered and described
through the governing equations in ﬂuid dynamics.[11]
1A Newtonian ﬂuid is one in which the viscosity is constant. In reality, many ﬂuids do not
follow the ideal linear relationship between the viscous shear stress and the shear rate. Here,
the viscosity is not a constant but depends on the shear rate at which it is measured.[3]
2Non-Newtonian ﬂuids have a viscosity, which depends on the shear rate.
6
==PAGE:29==
2.2. CARDIOVASCULAR FLUID DYNAMICS
The ﬁrst equation describes the conservation of mass as follows:
∂ρ
∂t + ∇· (ρv) = 0
(2.2)
where v is the velocity ﬁeld, t is time and ρ is the density of the ﬂuid.
Blood is a suspension of particles, but in tubes, it behaves as a Newtonian liquid,
therefore blood is considered as an incompressible volume. The density of the
volume can, therefore, be assumed constant, leading to a simpliﬁcation of (2.2).[11]
∇· v = 0
(2.3)
The governing equations for ﬂuid dynamics include the Navier-Stokes equation,
which describes the conservation of momentum. The Navier-Stokes equation can
be written in many diﬀerent ways, but the general time-dependent ﬂuid ﬂow is
given as:
ρ(∂v
∂t + (v · ∇)v) = −∇p + µ∇2v + ρF
(2.4)
where, v is the velocity ﬁeld, ρ is the density of the liquid, p is the pressure, µ is
the dynamic viscosity of the liquid and F is all applied body forces (i.e gravity).
2.2.1
Steady Flow
Although the liquid ﬂow in the vascular system shows unsteady tendencies, partic-
ularly at the precapillary level, steady ﬂow is a common assumption and can lead
to insight into the properties of human arteries. Steady ﬂow models are preferred,
because of their simplicity, due to the absence of time variations in the governing
equations. They also avoid the complexity of the moving interface between the
blood and the vessel wall as the artery distends with the pulse pressure.[3]
Poiseuille’s Equation
The simplest model of a blood vessel is that of a straight, uniform, rigid tube
with a steady rate of laminar liquid ﬂow. To maintain such a steady ﬂow, there
must be a constant level of pressure applied to the liquid because of its viscosity.
Steady ﬂow in a rigid cylindrical tube is described by the Poiseuille equation,
which considers a thin cylindrical liquid shell of thickness δr.
It has an inner
radius r and length L, and its axis z is following the direction of the tube, and
the velocity v is parallel to the axis everywhere and is a function of the distance
r from this axis, (see ﬁgure 2.5).[3]
7
==PAGE:30==
CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND
Figure 2.5: 1. A thin cylindrical liquid shell of thickness δr, inner
radius r and length L for the derivation of the Poiseuille equation. 2.
The velocity proﬁle in steady laminar ﬂow.[3]
From these assumptions, the velocity proﬁle over the cross-section, shows to take
the shape of a parabola and is given by:
v(r) = (P1 −P2)
4µL
(R2 −r2)
(2.5)
where (P1, P2) are the pressures at the ends of the length of the cylinder, R is the
inner radius, r describes the velocity as a function of the radius (r), L is the length
of the tube and µ the dynamic viscosity.
When r=0 the velocity is at its peak value, which is then given by:
vmax = (P1 −P2)
4µL
R2 = vmean · 2
(2.6)
Inserting this into (2.8), for a cylindrical straight tube (A=π R2), gives:
Q = πR4(P1 −P2)
8µL
(2.7)
This is known as the Poiseuille equation. Which relate the pressure diﬀerence and
the steady ﬂow through a uniform stiﬀtube.[5]
Several assumptions were made to make the derivation possible, and the validity
of the models, describing blood ﬂow, should therefore be critically examined.[3]
The conditions for which the Poiseuille’s equation applies are:[3]
The liquid is homogeneous with constant viscosity.
The liquid does not slip at the wall. This is the assumption that velocity is zero
when r = R, also called the no-slip condition.
The ﬂow is laminar (the liquid is moving parallel to the walls of the tube).
The rate of ﬂow is steady. As the ﬂow in all large arteries is markedly pulsatile,
it is clear that Poiseuille’s equation cannot be applied to these vessels, under
physiological conditions.
The ﬂow is fully developed. Close to the inlet of a tube, the ﬂow has not yet
become established with the parabolic velocity proﬁle. (see section 2.2.5)
The tube is cylindrical in shape.
The tube is rigid. The diameter does not vary with the internal pressure.
8
==PAGE:31==
2.2. CARDIOVASCULAR FLUID DYNAMICS
2.2.2
The Vascular Resistance and Branching
Changes in the lumen of arteries, can be associated with the occurrence of curves
and/or branches, as the one in the carotid artery. These branches will be indi-
vidually narrower than the parent trunk, as the total cross-sectional area nearly
always increases with repeated branching. It is therefore of interest to know how
the change in the size and shape of the channel, due to the presence of curves
and/or branches, aﬀects the rate of ﬂow, the Reynolds number, and the pressure
gradient.[3]
Bernoulli’s equation
In ﬂow through constrictions and across i.e. stenosis, the application of Bernoulli’s
equation is useful. [3]
The ﬂow rate can be expressed as:
Q = A ⟨v⟩
(2.8)
where, A is the cross sectional area of the tube, and ⟨v⟩is the mean velocity of
the ﬂuid.
Figure 2.6: Sketch of the ﬂow rate conservation through a narrowing cylindrical tube.
The ﬂow rate at the entrance of a tube, must be the same as the one a passing
out of the tube so Q1 = Q2, following the sketch in ﬁgure 2.6, which give:
A1⟨v⟩1 = A2⟨v⟩2
(2.9)
where in a cylinder A = πr2 and ⟨v⟩= mean velocity.
Hence, the energy which comes into a system, must be equal to the energy leaving
the system E1 = E2.
The energy consists of work done on the ﬂuid entering the tube per unit time, pres-
sure energy, kinetic energy and potential energy. With the assumption of steady
ﬂow and incompressible ﬂuid, the Bernoulli’s equation is given by the relationship:
p + ρgh1 + 1
2ρ1v2
1 = constant
(2.10)
where ρ is the density of the liquid, p the pressure, v the velocity, g the gravita-
tional acceleration constant (9.82m/s²) and h the height of the tube.
9
==PAGE:32==
CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND
Constrictions in the Cardiovascular System
The velocity through a narrow segment will increase. If the cross-sections under
consideration are relatively near each other, we can neglect the eﬀects of the
viscous dissipation and apply the Bernoulli equation. If h1 = h2, the gravitational
forces are also negligible and the relationship reduces to:
p1 + ρv2
1
2
= p2 + ρv2
2
2
(2.11)
In the considered case, the pressure at the narrowed part will be substantially
lower, which may result in caving in or even completely closing of the vessel.
Then the ﬂow velocity will slow down due to the frictional resistance, the kinetic
energy will be converted to pressure and the vessel will reopen. This phenomenon
will repeat itself causing ﬂuttering of the vessel.[3]
Figure 2.7: Diagram to illustrate Bernoulli’s principle. The cross-sectional area of the rigid tube
decreases from A1 at site C to A2 at site D. The cross-sectional area and velocity at site E are
the same as those at site C. Lateral pressures P1, P2, and P3 are indicated by the height of the
ﬂuid in the small vertical tubes at each cross-section. Since A1 > A2, V1 < V2, and if the tube is
horizontal P1 > P2 and P2 < P3. Since there is ﬂow along the tube, P1 is slightly greater than
P3. [3]
Simple Analytic Calculation of Pressure over an Arterial Stenosis
The simplest arterial stenosis consists of a converging section, a narrow section,
with the minimal luminal section deﬁning the degree of stenosis, and a diverging
section, as shown in ﬁgure 2.8. In the converging section, Bernoulli’s equation
holds, and within the narrow section, Poiseuille’s law is assumed to apply, (pro-
vided that this narrow section is long enough with approximately constant diame-
ter). In the diverging section, ﬂow separates and is often turbulent with signiﬁcant
viscous losses, which means that in this region neither Bernoulli’s nor Poiseuille’s
law applies.
Pressure losses over a narrowing can be treated through semi-empirical relations.
It was found that the pressure drop, ∆P, across an arterial stenosis can be related
to the ﬂow rate, Q, through the following relation:[5]
∆P = 8πµls
a2
Q + Ktρ
2A2
A
a −1
2
Q2
(2.12)
where, µ an ρ are the dynamic viscosity and density of the ﬂuid, respectively. ls
10
==PAGE:33==
2.2. CARDIOVASCULAR FLUID DYNAMICS
is the distance over the stenosis, from which the ∆P is wished to be calculated.
A and a is the cross sectional areas before and in the middle of the constraint
respectively. Kt is an empirical coeﬃcient of approximately 1.5, but is shown to
strongly depending on the shape of the stenosis.[5] (see ﬁgure 2.8)
Figure 2.8: Sketch of a stenotic straight tube, for the calculation of pressure changes over a
stenosis.
2.2.3
Pulsatile Flow
So far the system has been considered independent of time, which is very useful
when establishing the basic characteristics of the cardiovascular system. However,
as the pressure waves, generated by the pump cycle of the heart, is generated
over time, the time-depending component cannot always be ignored. It is also
known, that the pressure pulse changes in shape, as it travels downstream, due
to the interaction between the forward-moving waves and the waves reﬂected at
discontinuities in the arterial system such as branching and curvature sites. The
governing equations for oscillatory blood ﬂow can be very complicated.[3] Which
helps to support the importance of the more simple stationary study.
Womersleys Number
Considering laminar pulsatile ﬂows, the ﬂow proﬁle is no longer parabolic and
changes its shape depending on the Womersleys number. Womersleys number, α,
is a dimensionless value and can be described in terms of forces as follows:
α2 = ωρr2
µ
= interia force
viscous force
(2.13)
where, ω is the frequency of oscillation ω = 2fπ, where f is the frequency, r is the
tube radius, µ is the viscosity and ρ is the density of the liquid.
For low α values (low frequency, small radius) the inertia force could be ignored.
Hence, making the viscous forces dominate and reach all the way into the center
of the vessel. The velocity proﬁle would follow the pressure gradient and remain
parabolic at all times. For medium values of α the velocity proﬁle would be ﬂatter
and the maximum velocity would no longer only be in the center of the tubes. For
a large α, (high frequency and or large vessels), the viscous forces in the ﬂuid are
not as strong, and the eﬀect of the no-slip at the boundary reaches only a short
distance into the ﬂuid. Thus, the force of inertia will dominate. As a result, a
delay with respect to the driving pressure gradient can be observed in the bulk
ﬂow, and the velocity proﬁle becomes ﬂat in the central region of the tube. [5, 14]
11
==PAGE:34==
CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND
Figure 2.9: Left: low α values shows a parabolic velocity proﬁle. Middle: Medium α values
shows a more ﬂatten velocity proﬁle. Right: High α values gives a ﬂat velocity proﬁle [5]
2.2.4
Turbulent Flow
When the ﬂow has an irregular ﬂuctuation it is deﬁned as turbulent ﬂow. Meaning
that the ﬂow is changing in both magnitude and direction. Reynolds number is a
unit-less value, used to express when a ﬂow becomes turbulent. Reynolds number,
when applied to liquid ﬂow in a circular tube, is given as:
Re = ⟨v⟩Dρ
µ
(2.14)
where, ⟨v⟩is the mean velocity of ﬂow, D is the diameter of the tube, ρ is the
density of the liquid and µ its dynamic viscosity.[3]
In a circulatory system, the ﬂow is normally laminar, although in large blood
vessels and under deceleration phase of late systole in aorta the ﬂow can brieﬂy be
in a turbulent state. However ﬂexible vessel walls and arterial narrowing diminish
the turbulence in the ﬂow. [3]
This project follows the assumption of laminar ﬂow, when having a Re < 2000.
2.2.5
Entrance Length
Figure 2.10:
The ﬁgure shows how the
velocity proﬁle changes during entrance
length. [15]
To use Poiseuille’s equation the ﬂow must
be fully developed. To obtain a fully devel-
oped ﬂow, so the velocity proﬁle remains
constant, the ﬂuid ﬂow needs an accept-
able entrance length. When the liquid en-
ters into the pipe, it is not aﬀected by the
friction between ﬂuid and wall.
Right at the entrance, a boundary layer is
formed due to a shear in the liquid. As the ﬂow moves further in, the eﬀect of
the wall friction moves in toward the pipe middle. At last a parabolic velocity
proﬁle is made and the ﬂow is considered fully develop and the velocity proﬁle is
constant, as shown in ﬁgure 2.10. [3]
The entrance length, for the development of a steady-state parabolic velocity pro-
12
==PAGE:35==
2.3. BLOOD PRESSURE MEASUREMENTS
ﬁle, is given from the Reynolds number as:[16]
El ≈rRe
15
(2.15)
where, r is the radius of the tube and Re is the Reynold number, as calculated
from (2.14).
2.3
Blood Pressure Measurements
Blood Pressure (BP) is a standard clinical measurement and is used to quantify
the physiological integrity of the cardiovascular system. More speciﬁcally the BP
describes the pressure, which is exerted by the blood upon the vessel walls. [1, 17]
Accurate measurements of BP is important as they are used as a biomarker for
cardiovascular disease and for preoperative assessments. Therefore can measure-
ment errors have very important diagnostic implications associated with both cost
and treatment of the patients.[18]
Many researchers have been trying to develop reliable methods for BP measure-
ments. Remote sensing of blood pressure by means of catheters have in many
cases replaced the indirect cuﬀtechnique in physiological research and in many
clinical investigations.[19] The catheter aﬀords continuous recording of BP at vir-
tually any site in the cardiovascular system outside the microvasculature features,
which the cuﬀtechnique lacks.[20] Nevertheless, catheters have also shown to have
a variety of weaknesses, leading to inaccurate direct blood pressure measurements.
2.3.1
Direct Blood Pressure Measurements
Direct BP measurements commonly uses an extravascular system, which consists
of a catheter connected to a three-way stop block and a pressure sensor, (see ﬁgure
2.11).[1]
Diagnostic catheterization is routinely used for pressure acquisition; however, the
measurement accuracy of for example ﬂuid-ﬁlled catheters can be aﬀected by tech-
nical limitations. One source of disturbance, impairing the dynamic response from
the catheter, is the presence of air bubbles in the lumen, which for example can
occur if the catheter has a too small diameter. If there is too high a ratio between
the radius of the catheter, compared with the ratio of the vessel partial obstruc-
tion of the lumen can occur, resulting in pressure overestimation in relatively small
vessels.[3, 18] Another, quite complicated problem, is the changes in physiological
state of the subject due to the insertion of a catheter into the arterial system.[19]
There is also a continued risk of blood-clotting at the catheter tip, which has to
be prevented by regular ﬂushing of the catheter system [1, 3].
13
==PAGE:36==
CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND
Figure 2.11: Pressure-sensor system.[1]
Because invasive direct arterial
pressure monitoring involves
substantial cost, risk of infec-
tion, and other complications,
one must be concerned with
the necessity and beneﬁt of in-
vasive monitoring.[20]
To a signiﬁcant extent, pres-
sure wires can overcome most
of the drawbacks of the catheter,
because the transducer is placed
directly at the tip of the wire,
and the wire-to-vessel ratio is
thought to be negligible, compared to the ﬂuid-ﬁlled catheter. However, despite
the good measurements, the wires remain less commonly used in clinical applica-
tion, due to technical complications (i.e., kinking, entangling with other intravas-
cular equipment and increased expenses).[18]
2.3.1.1
The Pressure Transducer
The pressure transducer used in a pressure-sensor system (see ﬁgure 2.11), consist
of a strain gauge, diaphragm, dome, inlet to ﬂushing and an outlet into the vessel
(see ﬁgure 2.12).
Figure 2.12: Scheme of the pressure transducer showing the outlet to the vessel, the ﬂushing,
dome diaphragm and the strain gauge, which is conﬁgured in Wheatstone bridge, which is the
electrical corresponding of two parallel voltage divider circuits.
The diaphragm is a ﬂexible membrane, thus allowing pressure eﬀects to cross the
barrier. A change in pressure will make the diaphragm deﬂect. The strain gauge
will use the detected deformation to make a corresponding change in resistance
and give a voltage output, which can be measured and converted to a pressure
drop.[21]
To measure small changes in resistance the Wheatstone bridge strain gauge is often
applied in clinical pressure transducers and is the electrical circuit of two parallel
14
==PAGE:37==
2.3. BLOOD PRESSURE MEASUREMENTS
voltage dividers as shown in ﬁgure 2.12. The resistance R1 and R2 represent one
voltage divider circuit, and R3 and R4 represent the second. V0 is the output and
is measured between the two nodes in the middle of each voltage divider, and is
given by:
V0 =

R3
R3 −R4
−
R2
R2 −R1

· VEX
(2.16)
When V0 is zero (R1 /R2 = R4 /R3) the bridge is balanced. Hence, any change in
one of the strain gauge resistances will unbalance the bridge, and give an output
voltage diﬀerent from zero. [21]
2.3.2
Blood Pressure Waveforms
The cardiovascular pressure pulse is a cyclic waveform, which is analyzed using
Fourier theory. The advantage of the technique is that it allows for a quantita-
tive representation of the physiological waveform.[1] In 1971 O’Rourke[1] points
out, that the arterial pulse can be represented in terms of its frequency response.
The blood pressure pulse can so be divided into its fundamental component and
its signiﬁcant harmonics. Figure 2.13 shows the ﬁrst six harmonics of the blood
pressure waveform and the resulting sum. The ﬁgure shows that there is a great
compliance between the original waveform and the reconstructed Fourier function.
The accuracy of the reproduction can be increased by adding more harmonics.[1]
Figure 2.13: The ﬁgure shows the ﬁrst 6 har-
monics of the blood pressure waveform, in rela-
tive values of amplitude.[1]
When using the pressure-sensor sys-
tem, as described in section 2.3.1, the
generated pressure wave travels all the
way down the arterial tree and through
the catheter, stopcocks, tubing, and
ﬂush device, until it ﬁnally ends at the
pressure transducer. Along this way of
travel, the pressure wave signal must be
invariably altered, and it becomes most
critical to investigate this alteration, so
a reliable interpretation of the results
can be made.[22]
Error in the measurements of the physiological pressure can have great conse-
quences in the clinic. Therefore is it very important that the system is optimally
damped. For example, has it been shown, that an underdamped system can lead
to an overestimation of the measured pressure gradient. Figure 2.15 shows how
the damping can aﬀect the recorded pressure wave. The system is described by
the natural frequency (fn) and the damping ratio (β), which is functions of the
15
==PAGE:38==
CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND
system parameters as follows:
β = 4ν
r3
s
L
πρK
(2.17)
and
fn = 1
2π
s
πr2K
ρL
(2.18)
Figure 2.14: Graphic evaluation of the damp-
ing ratio and natural frequency of the catheter-
transducer system. [20, 23]
where, ν is the viscosity and ρ the den-
sity of the ﬂuid, r is the radius, L the
length of the catheter, and K is the
bulk modulus of the wall material of
the catheter.[1, 3, 18]
From (2.17) it can be observed, that in
respect to the choice of the catheter,
the damping does not only vary with
the square root of the length but also
inversely with the cube of the radius.
(2.18) also yields, that a short, wide,
rigid tube, conducts a higher natural
frequency.
Figure 2.14 is used to aid the evaluation of the "quality" of a system setup. Hence,
only after careful validation of the performance of the monitors and the full sys-
tems, should the blood pressure results, that are so eﬀortlessly generated, be used
to make clinical decisions. According to R. M Garder [20] even correctly assembled
direct arterial pressure monitoring systems, under optimal conditions, are usually
undersampled, but a few even fall into the unacceptable area. This underdamping,
in the ﬂuid-ﬁlled catheters, can result in overestimation of systolic pressures.[18]
Therefore is it very important to be aware of the dynamic response of the used
system.
Figure 2.15: (a) shows a recording of an undistorted left-ventricular pressure waveform via a
pressure sensor with bandwidth dc to 100Hz. (b) underdamped response, where peak value is
increased. A time delay is also evident in the recording. (c) Overdamped response that shows a
signiﬁcant time delay and an attenuated amplitude response.[1]
16
==PAGE:39==
2.4. CATHETERZATION OF BLOOD VESSELS
The dynamics response is easily tested using the ‘fast-ﬂush’ technique. The fast-
ﬂush is preformed by opening the valve of the continuous ﬂush device (for example
by pulling and quickly releasing the pigtail on the ﬂush device, (see ﬁgure 2.11)).
The rapid closure of the ﬂush valve generates a square wave, from which fn and
β of the plumbing system can be measured, (see ﬁgure 2.16).[20]
Figure 2.16: Typical result of transient test. β
is obtained from A2/A1, and fn for τD and β.
[23]
’
Several factors lead to poor dynamic
responses: air bubbles in the system
usually caused by poor initial plumb-
ing system set-up; pressure tubing that
is too long, too compliant, or with too
small a diameter.[3, 20] The best way
to enhance the system’s dynamic re-
sponse is to maximize its natural fre-
quency. Small bubbles in a monitoring system are often diﬃcult to see and may
be hidden in stopcocks or connections. Therefore, clinical use of fast ﬂush testing is
commonly used to determine if a particular monitoring system setup is performing
optimally. The fast-ﬂush method is superior to other techniques for characteriz-
ing catheter-transducer systems, because it can be used to test the entire system
response from the catheter tip to display. [20]
2.4
Catheterzation of Blood Vessels
The standard method to evaluate pressure gradients in peripheral arteries has been
by the use of the ﬂuid-ﬁlled catheter. However, the placement of such catheters
have shown to contribute to the gradient resulting in an overestimation of the true
translesion gradient.[24]
The issues concerning BP measurements using ﬂuid-ﬁlled catheters have been
studied and discussed for a long time. A study by LH Back [25] used an analytic
ﬂow model, to estimate the increase in mean pressure drops, due to the presence
of a catheter, depending on diameter ratio of catheter diameter to vessel diameter,
di/do. From the ﬂow analysis, it was shown, that an angiographic catheter over
a range of di/do from 0.3-0.7, had an increase in ﬂow resistance, by a factor of
3.3-33. Even very small pressure wires, with a di/do as small as 0.08-0.18 lead to
increases in ﬂow resistance with a factor of around 1.6-2.2. [25]
This mathematical concept was further illuminated in the study done by LA Gar-
cia [24], which compares in vivo measurements using a 4F ﬂuid-ﬁlled catheter with
a 0.014" pressure wire. It showed a statistically higher BP measurement using the
catheter compared to the pressure wire. Due to the small sample size of this study,
A. de Vecci [18] performed an in vitro study, using a pulsatile ﬂow phantom setup,
analyzing a 6F ﬂuid-ﬁlled catheter and a 0.014" pressure wire. The ﬂow phantom
17
==PAGE:40==
CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND
had an inner radius of do = 8mm. They further used water (µ = 0.001002Pa · s,
ρ = 998kg/m3) as the ﬂuid for the system. The applied pulsatile ﬂow was de-
ﬁned by a Reynolds number of (Re=1308) and a Womersleys number of (α=20).
From this A. de Vecci [18] showed that the 6F ﬂuid-ﬁlled overestimated the peak
systolic pressure with about 25%. This was furthermore supported by a FEM of
the structure. A. de Vecci [18] show that ﬂuid-dynamic principles could be used
to provide physical explanations for the pressure overestimation in the catheter
measurements. The model created by the group showed that the radial pressure
change, in the cross-section, at the catheter tip was not signiﬁcant, suggesting that
the major determinant of the overestimation is due to the increased ﬂow resistance
in the annular region, rather than the artifacts around the tip. This study even
demonstrated signiﬁcant errors with low radius ratios of 0.125.
2.5
Computational Fluid Dynamics
Fluid problems can be approached experimentally, theoretically, or numerically.
For the experimental approach, physical limitations from the equipment and in-
strumentation setup can occur, as mentioned. However, today complex geometri-
cal models can be developed, using suitable software, and complex phenomenons
can easily be visualized, compared to in the experimental setup. [26]
To solve and analyze problems that involve ﬂuid ﬂows, numerical simulations are
carried out using computers. The computers perform the calculations required to
simulate the interaction of liquids and gases with surfaces deﬁned by boundary
conditions. This approach is commonly known as Computational Fluid Dynamics
(CFD).[26]
The theoretical model equations, governing the system, are deﬁned as shown in
section 2.2. To be able to compute the model, simplifying assumptions, on the
physical nature, are made to construct a solvable problem. However, these sim-
pliﬁcations often limits the results of the investigation. But, if all simpliﬁcations
are done in a concise, mathematical form, the results can be used to illustrate
some physical phenomenons.
CFD modeling often entails assumptions on the
nature of the problem, in order to solve the equations deﬁning the model, but
complicated geometries can usually all be accommodated. Numerical models are
primarily limited by computational resources and by the understanding of the
physical nature of the problem.[26] In numerical modeling, decisions on the mod-
eling parameters (e.g., ﬂuid properties, boundary conditions) potentially impact
the simulation quality. Reducing the model complexity can result in reduced so-
lution time; however, the speed increase must be balanced against the cost of the
reduction in quality of the solution.[18, 26]
The two most disputed simpliﬁcations in artery models are the Newtonian ﬂuid
18
==PAGE:41==
2.5. COMPUTATIONAL FLUID DYNAMICS
assumption and the use of compliant walls. For the purposes of the current study,
the ﬂuid is considered as an incompressible, Newtonian ﬂuid, which ﬂows in a rigid
artery in the laminar ﬂow regime. Although blood is known not to be strictly New-
tonian and arteries are not rigid, these assumptions are made for model simplicity
and must be considered when analyzing the results.
2.5.1
The Finite Element Method
The complicated mathematical problems, which is wished to be solved with CFD,
can be approached in various ways.
For all of them, the same basic procedure includes:[27]
– Deﬁning the geometry and physical boundaries of the problem. This
can be deﬁned using Computer Aided Design (CAD) and imported into
the CFD software.
– The volume occupied by the ﬂuid is then divided into discrete elements.
The mesh may be uniform or non-uniform, structured or unstructured,
consisting of a combination of hexahedral, tetrahedral, prismatic, pyra-
midal or polyhedral elements (see ﬁgure 2.17).
– The physical modeling is deﬁned – for example, the equations of ﬂuid
motion.
– Boundary conditions are deﬁned.
This involves specifying the ﬂuid
behavior and properties at all bounding surfaces of the ﬂuid domain.
The simulation is started and the equations are solved continually. Finally, a post-
processor is used for the analysis and visualization of the resulting solution.[27]
For a full mathematical solution, the problem usually will need to be divided
into a number of discreet elements. The stability of the selected discretization is
generally established numerically. Special care must also be taken to ensure that
the discretization can handle discontinuous solutions.[27]
One discretization method is the Finite Element Method (FEM), which commonly
is used in structural analysis of solids and ﬂuid dynamics. However, the FEM
formulation requires special care to ensure a conservative solution.
The FEM
formulation has been adapted for use with ﬂuid dynamics governing equations.
Although FEM must be carefully formulated to be conservative, it is much more
stable than other ﬁnite approaches. [27]
19
==PAGE:42==
CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND
Meshing
Figure 2.17: An example of dif-
ferent type of mesh elements in
3D problems.[28]
As
mentioned
the
FEM
needs
to
compute
a
solution for many smaller elements at a time.
The
deviation
into
these
smaller
elements
is
done by the meshing of the geometrical struc-
ture.
Many
diﬀerent
types
of
cells
of
basic
structures can be used to ﬁt the problem, some
are shown in ﬁgure 2.17.
It is not simple to
choose the ’right’ mesh for a geometrical struc-
ture,
and in most cases,
special care must be
taken.[27]
COMSOL Multiphysics
The widely used software COMSOL Multiphysics is a commonly used computa-
tional software for FEM modeling.
COMSOL Multiphysics is a ﬁnite element
analysis, solver and simulation software. It includes software packages for vari-
ous physics and engineering applications, especially coupled phenomena or multi-
physics.
COMSOL Multiphysics version 5.2a is used throughout this project.
20
==PAGE:43==
CHAPTER 3
MATERIALS AND METHODS
It is desired to show how well a numerical model can comply with an experimental
setup for investigating pressure gradients in stenoses. To investigate the compli-
ance of the ﬂuid-ﬁlled catheters, when investigating pressure gradients in arteries,
diﬀerent geometrical situations are investigated throughout this project.
The data collected using a ﬂuid-ﬁlled catheter, (see section 3.1), were to be com-
pared with the results of a FEM study of the corresponding geometrical structures
(see section 3.5).
The FEM study will for all geometrical setups, both be run with and without a
simulated catheter present. The simulations can then be used as a reference study,
to evaluate the inﬂuence of the catheter.
For the ﬂow settings, two situations were investigated. First a stationary inlet
ﬂow, where a mean ﬂow rate of 15ml/s was applied. Second, a time-dependent
inlet ﬂow, was chosen to mimic a simple waveform of a person in rest. The time-
dependent ﬂow rate was 276.3ml/min, and had a peak ﬂow of 15ml/s and a cycle
volume of 3.849ml, following JB Olesen[29] and DR Enzmann[30].
The ﬁrst geometries investigated are geometrically controlled straight tubes, in-
cluding artiﬁcially composed stenotic areas of 30%, 70%, and 90% respectively.
The straight tubes are investigated, to ﬁrstly avoid any complex ﬂuid dynamics
eﬀects caused by physiologically correct geometries. Thus, getting a more simple
look into the compliance of the formulated FEM models and the experimental
measurements.
Secondly, is it well established that the carotid artery has a much more com-
plex geometrical structure, also including the bifurcation into the ICA and the
ECA. To investigate the compliance of the ﬂuid-ﬁlled catheter, in such complex
geometries, these are investigated as well. To do so 10 healthy subjects were,
previously to this study, scanned in an MRI and each had their carotid artery seg-
mented using ScanIP software. From the segmentation, a 3D model was generated
for each person (from now on referred to as patient001, patient002...patient010).
Patient001-010 were all considered for further investigations, but only patient002,
009 and 010 were investigated, due to both time considerations and available ge-
ometrical ranges of the CAD ﬁles, for each patient.
To investigate the inﬂuence of the presence of the ﬂuid-ﬁlled catheter, in the carotid
artery, the experimental data collected, is held up against a computational model
21
==PAGE:44==
CHAPTER 3. MATERIALS AND METHODS
of the same geometry, both simulated with and without the presence of a catheter-
geometry.
The two studies, ﬁrst analyzing the stenotic straight tubes, and later the complex
geometries of patient002,009 and 010, becomes interesting when analyzing the
pressure chance in a stenotic patient.
One geometry of an artiﬁcially created concentric stenotic carotid of 50% stenosis
degree, as determined by RF Smith[31] is also studied. The 50% stenosis degree
was chosen due to geometrical limitation of still being able to pass a 4F ﬂuid-ﬁlled
catheter through the stenotic area.
22
==PAGE:45==
3.1. THE EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
3.1
The Experimental Setup
In general, when planning experiments, care must be taken so that it can be
ensured that useful models and reliable conclusions can be made.
The initial experimental setup was developed in a prior master thesis, written by
Niclas D. Møller [32].
The experimental setup is used to gain knowledge of the pressure gradient (∆P)
measured using an intravenous ﬂuid-ﬁlled catheter. The measured values can then
be compared with a numerical simulation of the corresponding geometric model,
with and without a catheter present.
3.1.1
Material Setup
The experimental setup is illustrated in ﬁgure 3.1. The image shows the coupling of
the three main elements: ﬂow-pump, phantom, ﬂuid-ﬁlled catheter, and pressure
transducer. The ﬂow phantom inlet is formed so that a tube can be connected
to the ﬂow pump, which pumps a blood-mimicking ﬂuid through the phantom.
Thus having another inlet of a fork, which could be used to attach an arterial
sheath. The arterial sheath was attached using shrink plastic, and allowed for the
repeated passage of the ﬂuid-ﬁlled catheter into the ﬂow phantom of the vessel.
The ﬂuid-ﬁlled catheter was connected to the pressure transducer, which samples
and records the pressure, by converting a pressure measurement into an analog
electrical output signal1.
The pressure transducer is then connected to a bio-
ampliﬁer, which gives an input excitation voltage for the transducer (10V DC)
and an ampliﬁcation of the gain signal (G=1000) as well as ﬁltering with a low-
pass ﬁlter of 50Hz as an output signal, to eliminate high-frequency noise. Data
is collected using a BNC connector and then processed using LabView software.
The sampling rate was set to fs = 400Hz (see section 3.3.3). A fenwell bag, with
demineralized water, was also connected to the pressure transducer and used for
fast-ﬂushing. See table 3.1 for speciﬁcations on the elements used, and ﬁgure 3.1
for a visualization of the main part of the experimental setup.
1For this project, the pressure transducer measured the gauge pressure in the phantoms in
relation to atmospheric pressure, see section 2.3.1 for a description of the pressure transducer.
23
==PAGE:46==
CHAPTER 3. MATERIALS AND METHODS
Figure 3.1: Overview of the setup: 1: The phantom. 2: An arterial sheath for introducing
the catheter into the phantom. 3: The catheter. 4: a Pressure transducer, with a three-way
stopcock. 5: Flush tap. 6: Pressure transducer connected to a bio-ampliﬁer. 7: Fenwell bag
ﬁlled with demineralized water. (Fenwell bags are commonly ﬁlled with a saline solution. This
was replaced with demineralised water, so that the contamination of the blood-mimicking-ﬂuid,
was kept at a minimum when fast-ﬂushing the system).
Table 3.1: Main material element speciﬁcations.
Element
Speciﬁcation
Arterial sheath
9F, bite tip sheath, REF401-911M, by Cordis
Pressure Transducer
TruWave Disposable Pressure Transducer,
by Edwards Lifesciencesa
Fluid-ﬁlled Catheter
4F, Soft-Vu Bernstein, 40cm, REF10723503,
by Angiodynamicsb
Guide wire
Half Stiﬀtype, angled J, 0.035", 180cm, RF*HR35183M,
by Radifocus®
Flow-pump
CompuFlow 1000,
by Shelly Medical Imaging Technologies, Toronto, Canada
Blood-mimicking ﬂuid BMF-US,
by Shelly Medical Imaging Technologies, Toronto, Canadac
Bioampliﬁer
ETH-256, CB Sciences
BNC connector
BNC-2090, National Instruments, TX USA
DAC card
PCIe 6251, National Instruments, TX USA
Software
LabView, National Instruments, TX USA
aSee further speciﬁcations in Appendix A.
bA 4F catheter corresponds to a catheter with an outer radius of 4F = 0.67mm.
cThe blood-mimicking ﬂuid had a dynamic viscosity of 4.1·10−3 Pa · s and a density of
1030kg/m3.
24
==PAGE:47==
3.1. THE EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
3.1.2
Phantom Molding
3D Printed Geometries
All 3D geometries were printed using a 3D printer2 using polylactic acid (PLA)
as printing material. First, three straight tubes, with a stenosis degree of 30%,
70%, and 90% were printed (see ﬁgure 3.2). Secondly, 10 carotid arteries from
10 volunteers were printed, as shown in ﬁgure 3.3. Thirdly, the stenotic patient
referred to as patient050S, was printed, see ﬁgure 3.4. The 3D printed geometries
were all molded into phantoms, with the exception of patient003, as the printer
did not manage to print this fatigue structure (see ﬁgure 3.3). Furthermore, side-
plates, which aimed to hold the 3D geometries in place during molding, were
printed (see ﬁgure 3.5).
Figure 3.2: PLA structures of the three straight tubes, which each is approximately 16cm long.
Figure 3.3: PLA structures of patient001-010 scanned using MRI and deﬁned using ScanIP
software, by a secondary part. All structures were molded, with the exception of patient003,
which did not successfully print on the 3D printer. Each patient structure is approximately 16cm
long. (For patient info see appendix B).
Figure 3.4: PLA structures of patient050S, which is approximately 16cm in length.
2An Ultimaker 2+ printer (Ultimaker, Geldermalsen, Netherlands), with a depth-width res-
olution of 12.5 m and a resolution in height of 5 m was used for printing all geometries.
25
==PAGE:48==
CHAPTER 3. MATERIALS AND METHODS
General Molding Process
To obtain the desired ﬂow phantoms were fabricated as compliant anthropomor-
phic ultrasound (US) phantoms using poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA) cryogel as the
tissue mimicking material. Thus, molding them in the same geometries as imple-
mented into COMSOL.
For the straight tubes a batter of water, potassium sodium, PVA powder and sil-
icon dioxide was mixed together, following the instruction of the manual [33] (see
table 3.2 for material speciﬁcations). For all remaining geometries a better US
visibility was obtained by replacing the silicon dioxide with ﬁne graphite particles
following CK Ho [34] (see Appendix C, for a visual comparison of the two, scatter
agents.)
The PVA cryogel solution was, in either case, left overnight at room temperature
to facilitate degassing. Next, the 3D printed structures were placed into plastic
boxes and ﬁxed with side-plates. The side-plates were then ﬁxed to the plastic box
using tape before the PVA cryogel solution was poured into the mold (see ﬁgure
3.5). The 3D geometry of the patients was always placed having the ICA upper to
the ECA. After ﬁlling the boxes with the PVA cryogel solution, the mold was then
placed in a –20°C freezer for 24 hours and then placed inside a 4°C refrigerator for
24 hours, also called the freeze-thaw cycle. The freeze-thaw cycle was repeated
three times until the phantom had hardened.
Patient050S distinguishes from the rest of the ﬂow phantoms, by being processed
using a diﬀerent PVA powder (Sigma-Aldrich 341584-1kg, this was simply the
only PVA available at the time). For this reason, the freeze-thaw cycle was re-
peated ﬁve times to achieve an approximately identical stiﬀness, as for the other
phantoms.
Table 3.2: Materials used for the PVA solution used in phantom moldings.
Name
Part Number
Weight Percent [%]
Water
Tab water were used
88.7
Potasium Sorbate Sigma-Aldrich 85520-25g
0.3
Silicin Diocide
or
Graphite
Sigma-Aldrich S5631-1kg
or
Sigma-Aldrich 282863-1kg
1.0
or
3.0
PVA Powder
International Laboratory USA
4106002-1kg
10.0
When the phantoms had fully thawed, after the last freeze-thaw cycle, the PLA
structures had to be removed, leaving the desired lumen behind. For the straight
tubes, the phantoms could be slightly bent to break the 3D printed geometry,
which made them easy to pull out.
For the more complex structures of the patients, each phantom was also bent
slightly, but desirably, only at ICA and ECA of the 3D printed geometries, so
26
==PAGE:49==
3.1. THE EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
these could be pulled out. The 3D geometry at CCA is then left inside the phan-
tom. Chloroform is then poured into the lumen of ICA and ECA, placing the
phantoms vertically, with the CCA exit downwards. For safety, all chloroform
was handled under a chemical fume hood.[33] Leaving the phantoms like this, for
about 24-48hours, made it possible to dissolve the bulbus to pull the remaining
PLA structure out by grabbing the CCA, which was left behind.
The phantoms had a tendency to develop a small bulge on the surface of the
phantoms, which made US visualization quite troublesome. To remove this bulge
a cooking sheet was placed on the top of the phantoms, and a regular iron was
used to melt the bulge away.
When not in use, the phantoms were placed in demineralized water and kept in
the refrigerator.
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.5: Figure (a) shows how one of the 3D printed patient geometries is placed in a mold/-
plastic box. Figure (b) shows the side-plate and how the side-plate have been taped to the
box.
Stenosis
estimation
Measured
stenosis
diameter
Stenosis
area
Calculated
stenosis degree
A−a
A 100%
a
Calculated
stenosis degree
C−D
C 100%
b
30
6.5mm
33.18mm²
34%
19%
70
4.5mm
15.95mm²
68%
44%
90
2.5mm
4.6mm²
90%
69%
Table 3.3: Phantoms molded the 14.marts 2017, of straight tubes of diﬀerent stenosis
degree, in 3D printed structures in PLA. The diameter of the straight tube is 8mm.
aCalculated from (2.1)
bCC-method, described by, P. M. Rothwell [4], see ﬁgure 2.2
As shown in table 3.3 there are diﬀerent ways to calculate the stenosis degree.
The straight tubes stenosis was originally calculated as (2.1). However, for easier
comparison to the stenosis degree of patient050S, the stenosis degree of the straight
27
==PAGE:50==
CHAPTER 3. MATERIALS AND METHODS
tubes was also calculated from the decrease in diameter. Hence, it is observed,
that the original 70% stenotic straight tube, has a stenosis degree of 44%, by
the cc-method, making it the one closest to the 50% of patient050S, for later
comparisons.
3.2
General Experimental Protocol
For each fabricated phantom, the following experimental setup was performed to
obtain realistic measurements. The fabricated phantoms were connected to a ﬂow
pump system that circulates the blood-mimicking ﬂuid, with a viscosity of 4.1·10−3
Pa · s and a density of 1030kg/m3, around the system.
The ﬂow pump was, to begin with, only turned on running at a low constant ﬂow
rate. Thus getting rid of air bubbles in the connected phantom, and to ensure
homogeneity of the blood-mimicking ﬂuid, which tends to form precipitates when
not in use.
A linear probe (8 MHz) connected to a BK5000 scanner, (BK Ultrasound, Herlev,
Denmark), was used for continuous visualization of the catheter placement in the
phantom. To insert the catheter in the phantom, the guide wire was rinsed in
water, and inserted into the ﬂuid-ﬁlled catheter. The ﬂuid-ﬁlled catheter/guide
wire was then inserted, through the inlet of the arterial sheath, into the phantom.
First, the guide wire was placed in the desired location by US guidance. Then
the ﬂuid-ﬁlled catheter was pushed in, while the guide wire was carefully pulled
back out. Air bubbles in the catheter were removed using a syringe, which was
ﬁlled with demineralized water. First, it was used to pull back until the blood-
mimicking ﬂuid reaches the syringe, and then to ﬂush the system.
Then the pressure transducer was zeroed/calibrated to atmospheric pressure. This
was done by opening up to atmospheric pressure, and adjust the monitor, to read
zero and then close the vent from atmospheric pressure3
The Fenwell bag was prepared with 300mmHg pressure, and connected to the ﬁrst
outlet of the pressure transducer (see ﬁgure 3.1). The Fenwell bag was used for
repeated ﬂushes of the system, by shortly pulling out in the blue rubber handle, to
hinder any residue formation at the ﬂuid-ﬁlled catheter tip. This was done after
approximately every 5th measurement.
(For all element speciﬁcations see table 3.1).
3The zeroing process is used to compensate for oﬀset caused by hydrostatic pressure diﬀer-
ences, or oﬀset in the pressure transducer, ampliﬁer, oscilloscope, recorder, or display.[20]
28
==PAGE:51==
3.2. GENERAL EXPERIMENTAL PROTOCOL
Experimental Inlet Flow Specifications
When the setup was prepared, the ﬂow pump was set to the desired inlet rate
settings as follows:
• Stationary inlet: 15ml/s constant ﬂow.
• Time-dependent inlet: "Carotid2", which was a predeﬁned ﬂow proﬁle as
shown in appendix D. For all experiments, the peak ﬂow of the time-dependent
ﬂow proﬁle was set to 15ml/s, complying with the study by JB Olesen[29].
With a "stroke volume" of 396.478mL and a "stroke time" of 86.52sec, this
gives a ﬂow rate of 275.5mL/min, which is in the low end of what DR
Enzmann[30] determines to be the average resting ﬂow rate, in a human
carotid artery [302±21 mL/min].
During the experiments, the ﬂow pump is moving back and forth in cycles, where
one cycle includes the pump running from one end to the other.
To be able
to process the data output later, was it important for the experiments with a
stationary ﬂow rate, to measure over two full cycles.
For the time-dependent
measurement, the data was only collected during one pump cycle to shorten the
time-consuming procedure of collecting all three cycles.4.
3.2.1
Straight Tubes Experimental Protocol
The following experiments were carried out on the three straight tubes with a
30%, 70% and 90% concentric constraint, respectively. For all phantoms, both the
stationary and time-dependent study were performed, with the inlet settings as
described in section 3.2.
It was desired to ﬁnd the pressure gradient over the stenotic area, which is regis-
tered by measuring proximal and distal to the narrowing. For this purpose, the
ﬂuid-ﬁlled catheter was located just about 2mm before the stenosis, in the middle
and roughly 2mm after the stenosis. The catheter was marked, using a magic
marker, with 5mm intervals, to be used as secondary guidance when placing the
ﬂuid-ﬁlled catheter at the correct position. At each position, the study was carried
out 5 times. All data were then processed in Matlab (see section 3.4).
4It was previously shown by Niclas Møller [32], that the ﬂow-pump did not have the same
output running left to right, as for the right to left. So for the time-dependent experiments, a
small analysis was made to ensure that measurements only were done, when the ﬂow-pump was
running in the direction with the best output.(this study is not shown).
29
==PAGE:52==
CHAPTER 3. MATERIALS AND METHODS
3.2.2
Patients Phantoms Experimental Protocol
Figure
3.6:
Hand
drawn
sketch of a simple carotid
artery, illustrating the ap-
proximate placement of the
nine
measurement
points.
The
two
arrows
illustrate
how the catheter is moved
from position 9-1 in ICA and
ECA, respectively.
Pressure
measurements
in
healthy
patient
phan-
toms only include patient002, 009 and 010, due to
their good geometrical segment available for COM-
SOL simulations (see section 3.5), as well as due
to the phantom molding being a complicated pro-
cess, where trial and error lead to a small num-
ber of phantoms being available in a timely fash-
ion.
For all patient phantoms (patient002, 009, 010 and
patient050S) both the stationary and time-dependent
study were performed, with the inlet settings as de-
scribed in section 3.2.
The sketch in ﬁgure 3.6 illustrates the position of the
catheter in reference to position 1-9.
Using US as guidance, the ﬂuid-ﬁlled catheter was ﬁrst
placed as far up, each bifurcation, as possible and then
moved 5mm between each of the nine measurement
points, moving the ﬂuid-ﬁlled catheter back into the
CCA. This procedure was repeated three times in ECA
and ICA, respectively, both for the stationary and time-
dependent ﬂow rates.
As shown in ﬁgure 3.6 position 1-6 is the same whether the measurements were
done moving from ECA to CCA or from ICA to CCA.
3.3
Dynamic Accuracy of the Experimental Setup
3.3.1
Fast-Flush Analysis
It is very important to verify that the dynamic response of the catheter system
does not fall into an unacceptable range.
As described in section 2.3.2 the fast-ﬂush method can be used to, determine the
damping ratio and the natural frequency of a system, and thereby the dynamic
response.
For this investigation the experimental setup was as explained in section 3.1 - here,
just only using the 70% stenotic straight tube phantom, running a stationary ﬂow
rate of 15ml/s, and placing the ﬂuid-ﬁlled catheter well before the stenosis. For
the fast-ﬂush analysis, the gain of the ampliﬁer was also adjusted to G=500, to
make it possible to visualize the output response. The fast-ﬂush was performed
30
==PAGE:53==
3.3. DYNAMIC ACCURACY OF THE EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
ﬁve times, so an average β and fn could be found. All ﬁve fast-ﬂush outputs are
plotted in ﬁgure 3.7a, However, they are time-shifted relative to each other, for
the sake of visualization. Figure 3.7b, shows one of the ﬁve outputs, to visualize
the measurements done on the signal to ﬁnd β.
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.7: Response of the fast-ﬂush performed (a) ﬁve times for averaging purposes and (b)
one time, visualizing the distances measured for the calculations of β. fs =1000Hz, stationary
ﬂow rate of 15ml/s.
Manometer systems, which can be described by Poiseuille’s equations, can also be
applied the following relation: [35]
Λ = ln
d1
d3

(3.1)
where, d1 and d3 are found as shown in ﬁgure 3.7b, and Λ is a parameter used to
calculate β as:
β =
Λ
√
4π + Λ2
(3.2)
Since friction and inertia cannot be eliminated in real systems, one cannot measure
31
==PAGE:54==
CHAPTER 3. MATERIALS AND METHODS
the undamped fn of a pressure wave, but instead, we ﬁnd the wave’s damped
natural frequency, f0:
f0 =
√
4π2 + Λ2
2π τ
(3.3)
where τ is the period of one complete oscillation.
Applying the above equation, on the response shown in ﬁgure 3.7, for a fast-ﬂush
investigation of the catheter without bending, gives:
β = 0.218 ± 0.034
f0 = 63.2Hz ± 0.5
which provides an acceptable dynamic response for measuring physiological blood
pressure signals following ﬁgure 2.14.
3.3.2
Calibration of the Pressure Transducer
Figure 3.8: 1) Water column, 2)
Pressure transducer, 3) Fenwell
bag.
To ﬁnd the calibration factor between the output of
the pressure transducer [volt] and the pressure [pas-
cal], a static calibration was carried out. This was
performed by using a cylinder water column and a
fenwell bag.
The pressure transducer has connected a tube, which
was leading to the fenwell bag, and another tube,
which was leading to the bottom of a cylinder water
column. The pressure transducer was placed in the
same vertical plane as the bottom of the column. [20]
Using that:
P = lρg
(3.4)
where P is pressure, l the height of the liquid column, ρ the density of the liquid
(1 g/cm3 for water) and g is the gravity acceleration (9.82m/s−2), a calibration
line for the transducer could be determined, (see ﬁgure 3.9).
During the experiment, initially the column is empty, and the pressure transducer
is zeroed to atmospheric pressure. At this point, the hydrostatic pressure is zero as
the altitude of the water column is 0mm. Next, the column was ﬁlled with 50ml
which corresponds to 5cm for this column, and an increase of pressure 491Pa,
using (3.4). This was repeated ﬁve times, each time adding 50ml of water to the
column, corresponding to 5cm each time, until the column was ﬁlled. Each time
water was added, a new measurement was obtained by the pressure transducer
and sampled by the DAQ card at a fs of 400Hz.
The experiment was repeated ﬁve times, and the results are showed in ﬁgure 3.9.
32
==PAGE:55==
3.3. DYNAMIC ACCURACY OF THE EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
The regression line was ﬁtted to the data points and showed a calibration factor
(C) of:
C = 3.391 · 10−4 V
Pa
(3.5)
Figure 3.9: Calibration curve for the pressure transducer. Five experiments were carried out at
six diﬀerent points.
3.3.3
Optimization of Sample Frequency of the DAC Card
Aliasing arises when a signal is discretely sampled at a rate that is insuﬃcient,
to capture the changes in the signal from the pressure transducer system. The
Nyquist sampling theorem provides a prescription for the nominal sampling inter-
val required to avoid aliasing[36]. It is simply stated as follows:
fs ≥2fc
(3.6)
where, fs is the sampling frequency (how often samples are taken per unit of time
or space), and fc is the highest frequency contained in the signal.
To ﬁnd fc we applied the Matlab code, as shown in Appendix E, to a data set
which was collected as follows.
A full experimental setup was assembled as described in section 3.1.1, the only
diﬀerence being an obviously overestimated fs setting of 1000Hz.
The 70% phantom was used for the study, and measurements were done, both
running a stationary ﬂow rate of 15ml/s and a time-dependent ﬂow with a peak
ﬂow of 10ml/s, (see appendix D for ﬂow-pump speciﬁcations).
The Matlab code applied, takes the collected data (which have been collected
with a sampling frequency far above the expected) and plots the frequencies, so
33
==PAGE:56==
CHAPTER 3. MATERIALS AND METHODS
the highest used frequency can be visualized.
Figure 3.10 shows the acquired
plots from the Matlab analysis. Figure 3.10a shows, that under a steady ﬂow of
15ml
s , the necessary sampling frequency is around 8-10Hz. Figure 3.10b illustrates
the time-dependent ﬂow rate having its highest frequencies around 5-10Hz. Now
following the Nyquist sampling theorem, a sampling frequency of around 20Hz
would be acceptable for the time-dependent inlet. The sampling frequency was
chosen to be 400Hz, for both the stationary and time-dependent ﬂow rates, in
all following experiments. Hence, to be fully conﬁdent that it at any time would
be suﬃcient, and by not varying the fs between measurements, simplifying the
following data manipulation in Matlab.
To make sure that all experiments complied with the Nyquist theorem during
all measurements, the original LabView script was expanded with an additional
window-graph, which made it possible to check the fs during the experiments.
(a) Constant ﬂow of 15ml/s
(b) Carotid2, peak ﬂow rate 10ml/s
Figure 3.10: Frequency magnitude plots for analysis of the necessary sampling frequency, anal-
ysed on a previously molded 70% phantom, whit the catheter placed just before the stenoses
with a sampling frequency of 1kHz.
34
==PAGE:57==
3.4. DATA PROCESSING
3.4
Data Processing
The raw data, as shown in ﬁgure 3.11 and 3.12, were acquired using a modiﬁed
pre-programmed5 Labview script. However, modiﬁed with a sampling frequency
plot, (see appendix F), and analyzed using Matlab.
The data were ﬁrst imported as .lvm ﬁles and then re-formatted into .mat ﬁles.
The raw data were then divided with the calibration factor as described in section
3.3.2. This is due to the raw data being in units of [V/s], and as it was desired to
ﬁnd the pressure, it was converted to [Pa/s].
Figure 3.11: Raw data from two pump cycles for stationary ﬂow, 15ml/s
Figure 3.12: Raw data from one pump cycle, collected of a time-dependent measurement.
5Setup by Niclas Møller, [32].
35
==PAGE:58==
CHAPTER 3. MATERIALS AND METHODS
3.4.1
Straight Tubes Data Analysis
The data processing for the stationary and time-dependent ﬂows, were processed
a bit diﬀerently from one another.
In both cases the ﬁve 5 measurements, for each of the positions of the ﬂuid-
ﬁlled catheter (before, middle and after), were collected into one matrix, with 5
columns respectively, thus creating three input-matrices (P_before, P_middle,
P_after). For the stationary data, the three inputs were then used to run the
function Steady_straight_tubes (P_aft,P_mid,P_bef, N_cyc) (see
appendix G for the full Matlab code). For the time-dependent inlet the three in-
puts P_before, P_middle, P_after, were used to run the function Puls_straight_tubes(
P_aft,P_mid,P_bef, N_cyc) (see appendix H for the full Matlab code).
The outputs from the scripts are in both cases the pressure gradients from before
- after and before - middle, including the standard deviation for the gradient.
All standard deviations are found, using the built-in function std, in Matlab.
3.4.2
Patient Data Analysis
The data processing for patient002, 009, 010 and patient050s were analyzed fol-
lowing almost the same procedure, as for the straight tubes. However, it required
an expansion of both the stationary and time-dependent Matlab scripts. It was
desired to ﬁnd the pressure changes, when moving up through the CCA to ICA
and ECA, respectively. As described in section 3.2.2, the data were collected three
times at each of the nine positions from CCA to ECA and from CCA to ICA, re-
spectively.
The output data were collected into a matrix with 3 columns - one for each mea-
surement, and 9 rows - one for each measurement position. This gave 9 input
matrix, which were then used to run the expanded functions in Matlab. For the
time-dependent data analysis, the recorded signal, as shown in ﬁgure 3.12, was
used. The data recorded only includes one cycle of the ﬂow-pump. As for the
stationary data, this was also collected into a 3x9 matrix, which was then used
to run the expanded Matlab function for a time-dependent inlet. (see appendix
H for the full Matlab code for straight tubes, the expanded version is not shown.).
The outputs from the scripts are in both cases the pressure gradients from one
measuring position to the next, hence ∆P:1-2, ∆P:2-3, ∆P:3-4 and so forth. The
standard deviation for the gradients is found, using the built-in function std, in
Matlab.
36
==PAGE:59==
3.5. COMPUTATIONAL SIMULATION SETUP
3.5
Computational Simulation Setup
This section describes the general simulation setup using COMSOL Multiphysics
version 5.2a. All geometries were imported as .STEP ﬁles using the CAD import
module in COMSOL.
Straight Tubes Geometries
(a) CAD structure 30% stenosis straight tube.
(b) CAD structure 70% stenosis straight tube.
(c) CAD structure 90% stenosis straight tube.
Figure 3.13: Geometries of the three straight tubes, as they are imported into COMSOL. All
tubes has a length of 160mm and a max diameter of 8mm. The concentric constriction is 1cm
in length
Patient Geometries
When importing the STEP ﬁles of patient001-010 into COMSOL, it was clear that
the inlet of the CCA is angled compared to the inlet-plan in COMSOL. This has
to be taken into account, when deﬁning the inlet ﬂow for the patient geometries,
as described later in section 3.5.2.
(a) Patient1
(b) Patient002
(c) Patient003
(d) Patient004
(e) Patient005
(f) Patient006
(g) Patient007
(h) Patient008
(i) Patient009
(j) Patient010
Figure 3.14: Patient001-010 as imported into COMSOL. The scale is in [mm]. The ﬁgures show
that the axial orientation varies between patient models, as well as the size of the extracted
geometry of the artery, making some of them more desirable for COMSOL modeling. For bigger
images see appendix I.
37
==PAGE:60==
CHAPTER 3. MATERIALS AND METHODS
Stenotic Patient Geometry
Figure 3.15: 3D geometry of the artiﬁcially deﬁned concentric stenotic
carotid of 50% stenosis degree, as determined by R.F. Smith[31] and
imported into COMSOL. The axis are in [mm].
Catheter Geometry
The 4F ﬂuid-ﬁlled catheter was simulated as a straight cylinder, with a radius of
0.67mm. The length of the catheter changes with the placement, as described in
section 3.5.6. The built-in function "diﬀerence" is used to subtract the geomet-
rical structure of the catheter, from the geometrical structure of the investigated
geometries, living a lumen behind.
The catheter is placed longitudinally with the CCA, within all geometries. For
the patient, the following speciﬁcations apply:
Patient002:
The catheter was positioned in (x,y,z)=(-19, -10.5, -20) and rotated -9◦around
the y-axis, to follow the direction of the patient geometry.
Patient009:
The catheter was positioned in (x,y,z)=(-22, -11.3, -19) and rotated -8◦around the
y-axis and 7◦around d the x-axis, to follow the direction of the patient geometry.
Patient010:
The catheter was positioned in (x,y,z)=(-27.1, -29.9, 7) and rotated 1◦around the
y-axis, to follow the direction of the patient geometry.
Patient050S:
The catheter was positioned in (x,y,z)=(-27.1, -29.9, 7) and rotated 1◦around the
y-axis, to follow the direction of the patient geometry.
38
==PAGE:61==
3.5. COMPUTATIONAL SIMULATION SETUP
3.5.1
Inlet Flow Definition
The numerical models have to be as compliant as possible with the experimental
setup, to get a high comparative value of the two. For computational reasons,
the numerical models are furthermore wished to be kept as simple as possible.
The inlet of all models is always deﬁned in the same end as where the catheter is
placed. Hence having the catheter facing in the same direction as the ﬂow.
In table 3.4 the unit-less parameters Re and α reveals that the ﬂow can be con-
sidered laminar (at the inlet) and that the velocity proﬁle of the time-dependent
ﬂow is not a fully developed parabola.
3.5.1.1
Stationary Inlet
For the stationary inlet, the mean velocity was used for all numerical simulations,
as listed in table 3.4.
For computational reasons the stationary ﬂow rate studies, were done as semi-
time-dependent studies, where a ramp function (see ﬁgure 3.16) was multiplied by
the mean velocity input. The results could then be studied at t=1s, where the full
mean velocity is applied.
Inlet
radius
[m]
COMSOL
inlet area
[m2]
Mean
velocity
[m/s]
¯v=Q
A
Rynolds
Number
Re = ¯vDρ
µ
Entrance
Length [m]
El=rRe
15
Womersleys
number
α =
2π
T ρr2
µ
Patient002
0.0034
3.598e-5
0.42
712
0.16
22
Patient009
0.0033
3.447e-5
0.44
722
0.16
20
Patient010
0.0029
2.583e-5
0.58
864
0.16
16
Patient050S
0.0046
6.778e-5
0.22
512
0.16
40
3D print
ﬁtted inlet
0.0030
2.827e-5
0.54
800
0.16
17
Straight
Tubes
Inlet
0.0040
5.027e-5
0.30
600
0.16
30
Table 3.4: Calculation of Reynolds number (Re), entrance Lengths (El), Womersleys number
(α) and mean velocity for the inlet. The values are calculated using the values: Q=15ml/s=15 ·
10−6m3/s, ρ = 1030kg/m3 and µ = 0.0041Pa·s, as deﬁned for the experimental setup. The
period, T, of the system is 0.84sec, as shown in appendix D.
39
==PAGE:62==
CHAPTER 3. MATERIALS AND METHODS
Straight Tubes Stationary Inlet
Figure 3.16: Ramp function applied to the
stationary inlet for better compliance of the
model.
x-axis=t(s) y-axis=numerical fac-
tor.
For the straight tubes the mean velocity,
from table 3.4 multiplied by the ramp func-
tion, was applied as a "normal inﬂow veloc-
ity". The inlet velocity proﬁles are shown
in ﬁgure 4.2.
Patient Stationary Inlet
For the patients, the stationary inlet was
also deﬁned as the mean velocity, from ta-
ble 3.4, multiplied by the ramp function.
But due to the angling of the inlet-plan,
the inlet was applied as a "velocity ﬁeld",
where the angling could be corrected. The correction values are shown in table
3.6, and found as follows from section 3.5.2.
3.5.1.2
Time-dependent Inlet
To make sure that the COMSOL simulations correspond, as accurately as possible
with the experimental measurements, the following procedure was carried out.
When the setup was prepared, as described in section 3.1, a linear probe (8 MHz)
connected to a BK5000 scanner, (BK Ultrasound, Herlev, Denmark) was placed
in a holder, visualizing the inlet of the phantom.
Using Vector Flow Imaging
(VFI), data were collected in the axial direction. (VFI can be used to estimate
the direction and velocity of ﬂow in all directions and at any angle). The VFI data
is collected and used to ﬁnd the mean velocity over the diameter of the vessel. For
the analysis of the VFI data the software CFU visualization program, version 7.0
(see appendix J), was used.
The mean velocity proﬁles were determined individually for each geometry. Since
the sampling of the velocity is made in one scan plane, it is assumed that the
cross-sectional area of the vessel is circular. The sampling of the velocity is taken
along the diameter of the vessel and the ﬂow is assumed to be at a steady-state
of pulsation.
The output of the CFU Visualization Program is a mean velocity proﬁle of the
inlet ﬂow. However, VFI is limided by: a) is diﬃcult to be sure that the US-prope
is placed exactly at the middle of the vessel, which can result in sampling, not
at the center line, which is a problem as the ﬂow is assumed to have a somewhat
parabolic shape.
b) it is assumed that the vessel does not expand during the
pulse cycle. However, this is not true when using time-dependent ﬂow, as it can
be observed in the US, that the vessels diameter changes over time. Ultrasound
photographs can see on ﬁgure 5.1 where the percent deviations is also found [37]
40
==PAGE:63==
3.5. COMPUTATIONAL SIMULATION SETUP
To overcome some of the shortcomings, a correction of the found mean velocity
proﬁle is made, by using the speciﬁcations of the ﬂow pump.
Assuming that the walls of the phantoms are rigid, it can also be assumed that
the continuity of the collected mean velocity proﬁle is qualitatively identical to
the continuity of the true volume ﬂow rate proﬁle. The "true" volume ﬂow rate
can, therefore, be found as:
Qtrue = mean velocity profile measured
cycle volume
R
velocity profile measured
(3.7)
were the cyclus volume of the pump is deﬁned as 3.849·10−6m3 (see appendix D),
with an accuracy of the ﬂow pump of 2%. Using (3.7) the "true" mean velocity is
calculated for each individual geometry. (see appendix K)
Figure 3.17 shows an example of the diﬀerence between the mean velocity output
from the VFI data, and the corrected mean velocity proﬁle, which is used as input
for the FEM study. This procedure was carried out for each geometrical structure
and all mean velocity corrections are shown in Appendix K.
Figure 3.17: Mean velocity proﬁle for patient010, before and after correction
using (3.7). The ﬁgure shows that the VFI clearly underestimates the true
mean velocity proﬁle created by the ﬂow-pump.
Due to the geometries individual orientation in space, a correction for the center
inlet is necessary. Therefore, Womerslys theorem is applied to the mean velocity
output of the previously described procedure of requiring the mean velocity proﬁle
at the inlet, (see appendix L). The Matlab script then uses a deﬁned (x,y)-
coordinate for the center of the inlet, to give the output as a 4-dimensional .txt
ﬁle including [x-coordinate, y-coordinate, t, man_vel], meaning that the mean
velocity at each (x,y)-coordinate at any time in the period, can be applied as
input to the FEM study.
41
==PAGE:64==
CHAPTER 3. MATERIALS AND METHODS
Geometry
Position of inlet center point (x,y) Area of the inlet
Patient002
(-19,-10.5)mm
31.97mm2
Patient009
(-22.1,-11.2)mm
30.00 mm2
Patient010
(-27.2,-29.6)mm
23.28mm2
Patient050S
(8.16,14.5)mm
65.78mm2
Straight Tubes
(0,0)mm
50.00mm2
Table 3.5: List with inlet center points and inlet areas for each geometry, as used in the Matlab
scrip presented in appendix L.
Straight Tubes Time-dependent Inlet
For the straight tubes, the 4-dimensional txt-ﬁle was created using the speciﬁca-
tions in table 3.5. The interpolation was run as a "normal inﬂow velocity", and
the output velocity proﬁles are shown in ﬁgure 4.1.
Patients Time-dependent Inlet
For the patient geometries, the 4-dimensional txt-ﬁle was created using the speci-
ﬁcations in table 3.5. Due to the angling of the inlet-plan, the inlet was applied as
a velocity ﬁeld, where the angling could be corrected. The correction values are
shown in table 3.6, and found following section 3.5.2.
42
==PAGE:65==
3.5. COMPUTATIONAL SIMULATION SETUP
3.5.2
Angle Correction for Patient Inlets
To obtain the correct inlet angle for the three patients (patient002, 009 and 010)
an angle correction value, had to be identiﬁed. The angles are ﬁrst determined
manually from the MRI data using the ScanIP software, and then run through a
Matlab scrip, as shown in appendix M6.
Table 3.6 shows the angle correction values, as they were implemented into COM-
SOL7. Figure 3.18 gives an example of the inﬂuence of the angle correction on
patient009.
Patient id Angle Correction
Patient002
vx = -0.11198 vz
vy = -0.056519 vz
vz = 0.9921 vz
Patient009
vx = -0.088911 vz
vy = -0.10609 vz
vz = 0.99037 vz
Patient010
vx = -0.30014 vz
vy = 0.12135 vz
vz = 0.94615 vz
Table 3.6: The table shows the angle corrections applied to COMSOL input for
each pationt, at a "velocity ﬁeld".
The values are the output of the Matlab script shown in appendix M
(a) Patient009 sagital velocity, WITH angle cor-
rection.
(b)
Inlet
pressure,
WITH angle correction.
(c) Inlet velocity, WITH
angle correction.
(d) Patient009 sagital velocity, WITHOUT an-
gle correction.
(e)
WITHOUT
angle
correction
(f)
WITHOUT
angle
correction
Figure 3.18: The ﬁgure shows the inﬂuence of the angle correction in the sagital plan of pa-
tient009.
6This was mainly preformed by Marie S. Traberg.
7It has to be mentioned, that the sagital angle for Patient010, was quite diﬃcult to determine
from the MRI image, due to the placement of the carotid artery in space.
43
==PAGE:66==
CHAPTER 3. MATERIALS AND METHODS
3.5.3
Boundary Conditions
The boundary conditions of all simulated models include the inlets as described
in the previous section.
Furthermore, all simulations comply with the no-slip
condition at all surfaces.
The outlet was deﬁned to p0 = 0Pa at all outlets.
3.5.4
Global Definitions
For all simulations the following parameters were deﬁned, as shown in table 3.7.
Name
Value
Description
ρ
1030[kg/m3]
Density of blood-mimicking ﬂuid
µ
0.0041[Pa · s] Dynamic
viscosity
of
blood-
mimicking ﬂuid
Angle Correction x
see table 3.6
Angle Correction y
see table 3.6
Angle Correction z
see table 3.6
Stationary mean velocity
see table 3.4
Mean velocity calculated from table
3.4
Catheter radius
0.67 [mm]
Deﬁned radius of a 4F catheter.
Time step 1
0.1 [s]
Time
step
for
the
semi-time-
dependent stationary study, when
ramping the mean inlet velocity.
Time step 2
0.84/54 [s]
The
time
step,
for
the
time-
dependent study, were deﬁned as the
period of the pulse, divided by the
number of data points in the mean
velocity proﬁles (see appendix K).
Table 3.7: The table shows the global parameters, which are deﬁned for each simula-
tion. The angle corrections only apply for patient002, 009 and 010.
3.5.5
Mesh Definition
When modeling using COMSOL, a mesh is applied to the structure, to aid the
mathematical computation, as described in section 2.5.1.
Tetrahedral elements are the default element type in COMSOL Multiphysics.
Tetrahedral elements have the advantage of being able to ﬁt onto any 3D vol-
ume, regardless of shape or topology. For the most part, the higher resolution of
the applied mesh, the better is the solution of the model. The larger resolution
of ﬁner meshes, though improving the model’s performance, will also increase the
memory load, and by that increase the computation time dramatically, which is
why a ﬁne mesh is not always feasible.
When implementing the catheter into the model geometries, the sharp edges, at
44
==PAGE:67==
3.5. COMPUTATIONAL SIMULATION SETUP
the tip of the catheter, are a well-known FEM problem. The problem occurs be-
cause the solution will tend to diverge due to of the large gradients associated with
sharp edges. COMSOL’s built-in function ﬁllet, is used to round the edges of the
catheter. The ﬂuid-ﬁlled catheter has sharp edges, so using the ﬁllet function is
a necessary trade-oﬀbetween computational eﬃciency and real life imitation. A
ﬁllet radius of 0.5mm is used at the tip of the catheter.
Straight Tubes Meshing
When applying the inlet, as described in section 3.5.1, it was investigated, if a
"normal" mesh had a good enough resolution, for the straight tubes models.
In ﬁgure 3.19 a "normal" mesh is compared to a "ﬁne" tetrahedral mesh. The
simulation is run on the 90% stenotic straight tube, without the presence of a
catheter. The results of the investigation are shown in table 3.8. The table shows,
that even the "normal" mesh, is not suﬃcient, but with a computation time of
61h, for the "ﬁne" mesh, and about 5h, for the "normal" mesh, was it decided to
tolerate the "normal" mesh8.
(a) Normal mesh
(b) Fine mesh
Figure 3.19: 90% stenotic straight tube including a catheter placed after the steno-
sis. This situation was chosen for the mesh evaluation, due to the complexity of the
structure.
Mesh Domain2
Normal
Fine
Mesh elements
466260
1138847
Pressure at x=68mm
19110Pa
17260Pa
Diﬀerence [%]
-
9.7
Pressure at x=75mm
-4955Pa
-5780Pa
Diﬀerence [%]
-
16.7
Pressure at x=82mm
-2755Pa
-2949Pa
Diﬀerence [%]
-
7.0
Table 3.8: Mesh evaluation for 90% stenotic straight tubes, investigating how much the
pressure changes in x=68,75,82mm. Only the time-dependent situation is evaluated,
at t=0.1296s.
8It was not investigated if the "ﬁne" mesh even supports a tolerable level of compliance.
45
==PAGE:68==
CHAPTER 3. MATERIALS AND METHODS
Patient Meshing
Patient002, 009, 010 and patient050S were all run using a "physics-controlled
mesh" with an element size of "normal" tetrahedral elements.
This is partly
decided based on the mesh analysis for the simple straight tubes. Hence, even
though the geometry is very diﬀerent, it was still believed that increasing the
mesh elements would make computation time increase dramatically.
The consequences of the mesh deﬁnition have been evaluated in section 4.5.1.
3.5.6
Study Setup
It is an advantage to make a simple and suﬃcient study setup, which is also
time-saving for the applicant. Accordingly, the following setups were designed in
COMSOL.
Straight Tubes
(a) 70% stenosis straight tube with the catheter placed just before the stenosis (68mm).
(b) 70% stenosis straight tube with the catheter placed just before the stenosis (75mm).
(c) 90% stenosis straight tube with the catheter placed just before the stenosis (82mm).
Figure 3.20: Example of catheter placement using the 70% stenotic straight tube in COMSOL.
The cylinder structure simulates the 4F catheter used in the experiments, and has therefore an
outer radius of 0.67mm.
Figure 3.21: Study setup as done
in COMSOL.
It was desired, to make many diﬀerent simulations,
both varying between a time-dependent and sta-
tionary ﬂow rate, as well as changing the geomet-
rical placement of the catheter, as shown in ﬁgure
3.20. To simplify the simulation, the built-in func-
tion "Parametric Sweep" was used.
The "Para-
metric Sweep" changes a parameter where after
the geometry, mesh, and physics are regenerated
each time and looped around. Each time the solver
will restart, with a diﬀerent parameter, here the
catheter length, as shown in ﬁgure 3.22.
To make the "Parametric Sweep" act on both a time-dependent and a stationary
study, the two were ﬁrst deﬁned and then added as reference studies in "Study 4",
46
==PAGE:69==
3.5. COMPUTATIONAL SIMULATION SETUP
after the "Parametric Sweep" (see ﬁgure 3.21). A simulation without the inclusion
of a catheter-like structure was carried out in a separate simulation, neglecting the
"Parametric Sweep".
Figure 3.22: The parameter sweep, is done changing the length of the catheter,
so it gets placed just before the stenosis (length=68mm), in the middle of the
stenosis (length=75mm) and just after the stenosis (length=82mm).
Patient Study
The study setup is fundamentally similar to that used simulating ﬂow in straight
tubes, but due to the complexity of the geometrical structure of the patients, the
"Parametric Sweep", moving the catheter, had to be individualized.
Example of catheter placement:
Using the US as guidance the catheter was visualized, in the molded phantom of
patient002. This was used to ﬁnd an initial place for the catheter tip, (see ﬁgure
3.24). Based on these data, it was moved 5mm at a time in the z-direction, as
shown in ﬁgure 3.23, and used as the "Parametric Sweep" values. See Appendix
N for the speciﬁc catheter lengths for each patient.
(a) Position 4
(b) Position 5
(c) Position 6
Figure 3.23: Example of how the catheter is placed in the COMSOL simulation of patient002.
The placement numbers are in reference to how they are called in section 3.2.2 and ﬁgure 3.6.
47
==PAGE:70==
CHAPTER 3. MATERIALS AND METHODS
Figure 3.24: The image shows how the catheter is placed in the axial direction at position 6. US
image using a BK Ultrasound Scanner Class I Type B with a ﬂat transducer head.
3.6
Preliminary Investigations
3.6.1
Preliminary Experimental Study
In section 3.5 the COMSOL model is explained. As described, the catheter was
modulated as a cylinder, to simplify the calculation and programming in COM-
SOL. However, the catheters, which were available for the experiments had a
bench on them. To ensure that the experimental setup complies with the COM-
SOL model, a preliminary study was made, to investigate if it would inﬂuence the
measurements if the tip was simply cut oﬀ. Therefore one catheter now kept the
bench, and the other catheter had the bench cut oﬀ.
The inﬂuence of the catheter tip modiﬁcation is investigated in the following.
Influence of Catheter Tip Modification
For the experimental setup, we were able to get hold of two 4F Soft-Vu angio-
graphic catheters9. Due to the complexity, this geometry would inﬂict on a corre-
sponding FEM study, was it desired to investigate if a similar catheter, with this
bending cut oﬀ, measures inexplicably diﬀerent or not.
The experimental setup, for this investigation, includes one phantom geometry
of patient002, two catheters (with and witout the bench), and one ﬂow rates of
pulsating ﬂow (as deﬁned in section 3.2).
9Speciﬁcations shown in table 3.1
48
==PAGE:71==
3.6. PRELIMINARY INVESTIGATIONS
Figure 3.25:
The image shows the two
catheters, which were investigated. A) with
and B) without the bending present.
Figure 3.26: Approximate placement of the
catheter in Patient002, viewed on a 2D
sketch as seen in COMSOL.
Experimental protocol
During the experiment, two catheters were used and marked with the permanent
maker, with points 5mm apart. Then the same procedure as in 3.2.2 was carried.
Results
Figure 3.27 shows a visualization of the changing pressure gradient from position
1-9 in the CCA to ICA of patient002 (including the standard deviation of the
gradients). First, it is noted that both catheters follows the same general curves,
from CCA to ICA and fall within the standard deviation of one another. Hoewer,
the catheter with bending shows a generally lower standard deviation.
Figure 3.27: Preliminary investigation of the diﬀerence between two catheters.
One with a
bending at the end, and one without. Nine measurements have been done, moving each catheter
5mm steps down through ICA (distal to proximal) of a phantom made from a 3D printed
structure of a patient’s carotid artery. Sampling frequency: 400Hz.
49
==PAGE:72==
CHAPTER 3. MATERIALS AND METHODS
Discussion
The variation between the two catheters could be due to diﬀerent factors. One
factor is the fact that even if the catheter is marked at every 5mm, it is hard to be
sure that the catheter is placed at the exact same position every time. Another
observation is that the catheter with bending is more likely to be placed against
the wall, and as the wall is moving during the pulse, this might inﬂuence the
measured pressure. The catheter without bending may not be exposed as much
to this factor. Even though the velocity proﬁle is unknown, in all ﬂow patterns
the velocity falls rapidly at the wall, leading to a very small kinetic energy[3].
On the US images, for respectively the bent and straight catheter, it seems to be
a diﬀerence in where the catheter place themselves. The bend catheter always
situated at the wall, whereas the straight catheter positions have a tendency to
vary more, across the radial component. (It is more or less impossible to inﬂuence
the radial placement of the catheter, using this setup.)
Conclusion
It was concluded, that the geometrical diﬀerence between the two catheters, did
not have a remarkable inﬂuence on the measurements, as there are many other
error sources. Therefore it was decided to use the catheter with the tip cut oﬀ,
for the rest of the experiments, so the catheter geometry easier cold be compared
to that of the FEM studies.
50
==PAGE:73==
3.6. PRELIMINARY INVESTIGATIONS
3.6.2
Preliminary FEM Study
One thing that is practically impossible to control during the experimental proto-
col, is the radial placement of the ﬂuid-ﬁlled catheter. Therefore, was it important
to make a small preliminary study in COMSOL, to investigate how much the pres-
sure can be suspected to vary over the diameter of a tube.
Radial Coordinate Influence on Pressure in Tubes
A small preliminary FEM study was made, to visualize how the radial component
could inﬂuence the measured pressure. From ﬁgure 3.28 the radial component of
the pressure ﬁeld is visualized, both with the stationary and time-dependent inlet
ﬂow. Both plots show that the radial component has the biggest inﬂuence at the
stenosis (x=75mm), which suggests, that we have to be most attentive, to the
experimental placement of the catheter in this area, compared to the two other
positions of the catheter.
(a) Stationary, 15ml/s
(b) Time-dependent peak ﬂow, 15ml/s
Figure 3.28: Radial pressure in a straight tube with a 70% stenosis. There are no catheter
present in the simulation.
Blue: Just before the stenosis, x=68mm. Red: Just after the stenosis, x=82mm. Green: The
middle of the stenosis, x=75mm.
51
==PAGE:74==
==PAGE:75==
CHAPTER 4
RESULTS
This project aims to investigate how well a Finite Element Model (FEM) can
simulate the intravascular blood pressure measurements, using a blood pressure
transducer system with a ﬂuid-ﬁlled catheter.
To investigate this, phantoms have been molded for experimental data collection,
using a ﬂuid-ﬁlled catheter.
The investigated geometries have been:
• Three straight tubes, with each having a diﬀerent concentric stenosis degree
of 30%, 70% and 90%, respectively.
– The three straight tubes were used to investigate how comparable the
experimental setups, and the numerical models, were when determine
the pressure gradients over a single stenotic area.
• Three carotid arteries from three healthy subjects.
– The three healthy patients (patient002, 009 and 010) were used to in-
vestigate how comparable the experimental setup and the numerical
model were when determining the pressure changes when moving up
through the CCA to the ICA.
• One geometrical structure of an artiﬁcially created carotid artery having a
50% stenosis at the ICA bulbus.[31]
– This geometry was used to study if phenomenons, from the two previ-
ous studies, could become evident in a stenotic carotid artery.
In this chapter the key results are presented, and divided into three subsections,
corresponding to each of the three geometrical situations, stenotic straight tubes,
healthy patients and a stenotic carotid artery, respectively.
In each section both the results from the experimental setup and the numerical
models will be presented, pointing out the most interesting observations.
53
==PAGE:76==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
4.1
Straight Tubes - Results
The three straight tubes each had stenosis degrees of 30%, 70%, and 90%, respec-
tively. They were investigated as described in chapter 3, to determine the pressure
gradients over the stenosis. In section 2.2 an analytic method, of calculating the
pressure gradient over a stenotic tube, is presented. This calculation is intended
as a small guidance value of how trustworthy we can ﬁnd the experimental and
numerical results found.
Analytic calculation of the ∆P over Stenotic Straight Tubes
Using (2.12), as shown below, the following expected pressure gradient (∆P) over
the stenosis, can be calculated for the stenotic straight tubes, when assuming
steady fully developed ﬂow.
∆P = 8πµls
a2
Q + Ktρ
2A2
A
a −1
2
Q2
where, µ and ρ are the dynamic viscosity and density of the ﬂuid, respectively.
ls is the distance over the stenosis, from which ∆P is wished to be calculated.
A and a is the cross-sectional area before and in the middle of the constraint,
respectively. Kt is an empirical coeﬃcient of approximately 1.5, but is shown to
strongly depending on the shape of the stenosis.[5]
For all straight tubes, the following apply:
Q = 15e-6 m3/s
µ = 0.0041 Pa · s
ρ = 1030 kg/m3
ls = 0.0014 m
A = 5.027e-5 m2
Kt = 1.5
Using the measured diameters, at the stenosis, as shown in table 5.1, the following
∆P’s can be calculated.
30% stenosis:
a30 = 3.32e-5 m2, leading to a suspected ∆P over the stenosis of 20.14Pa
70% stenosis:
a70 = 1.59e-5 m2, leading to a suspected ∆P over the stenosis of 329.9Pa
90% stenosis:
a90 = 4.909e-6 m2, leading to a suspected ∆P over the stenosis of 5963Pa
54
==PAGE:77==
4.1. STRAIGHT TUBES - RESULTS
4.1.1
Straight Tubes - COMSOL Results
(a) Time-dependent inlet velocity pro-
ﬁles, without a catheter.
(b) Time-dependent inlet velocity pro-
ﬁles, with a catheter.
(c) Velocity proﬁles at x=67mm, with a
catheter.
Figure 4.1: Velocity proﬁles of the time-
dependent velocity proﬁle. Figure (a) and
(b) are at the inlet, with and without the
presence of a catheter, whereas (c) is at
x=67mm, to evaluate have the proﬁle has
developed around the position that we are
interested in evaluating.
All the straight tubes were analyzed both
with a stationary and time-dependent in-
let. When running the FEM study, as de-
scribed in section 3.5, for the straight tubes,
the stationary inlet was deﬁned as a normal
inﬂow velocity of 0.3m/s. Figure 4.2a and
4.2c shows how the velocity proﬁle looks
at the inlets with and without a catheter.
(It is assumed, that all straight tubes are
identical at the inlet).
The two ﬁgures
show that the velocity proﬁles, that occur
on each side of the catheter, have approxi-
mately the same peak value, as the proﬁles
without a catheter. Figure 4.1a and 4.1b
shows the velocity proﬁle at seven diﬀer-
ent time-steps of the time-dependent inlet.
The original inlet is shown in ﬁgure K.1e in
Appendix K. The graph shows a mean peak
velocity of 0.42m/s, of the time-dependent
inlet proﬁle. The seven time-points are cho-
sen, to show the velocity proﬁles around
the peak value (time=0.15556s), as well
as the initial (time=0s) and ﬁnal state
(time=0.84s).
Figure 4.1c, 4.2d and 4.2b shows how
the velocity proﬁles have established at
x=67mm (just before the ﬁrst placement
of the catheter measurement) for the time-
dependent ﬂow with a catheter, the station-
ary ﬂow with a catheter, and the stationary
ﬂow without the catheter, respectively.
In appendix O, 2D surface plots of all ana-
lyzed situations are shown, for the peak ve-
locity and pressure. These ﬁgures give a vi-
sual understanding of the catheter’s place-
ment and inﬂuence on both the velocity and
pressure at the stenosis when introducing a
catheter.
55
==PAGE:78==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
(a) Stationary inlet velocity proﬁle, without a
catheter.
(b) Stationary velocity proﬁle at x=67mm, with-
out a catheter.
(c) Stationary inlet velocity proﬁle, with a
catheter.
(d) Stationary velocity proﬁle at x=67mm, with
a catheter.
Figure 4.2: Figure (a) and (b) shows the velocity proﬁle of the stationary ﬂow at the inlet of the
straight tubes and at x=67, respectively. The ﬁgures show, that even tough the velocity proﬁle
is applied as a plug-ﬂow, a more parabolic shape has developed when we reach the stenotic area.
Figure (c) and (d) shows that the same characteristics of the velocity proﬁle apply when the
catheter is placed in the geometry. (x=67mm: just before the before measurement).
4.1.1.1
Axial Pressure Drop In Straight Tubes
Figure 4.3, 4.4 and 4.5 shows the axial pressure, in the center of the tube, along
the axial length of the geometries. ( x=50-120mm, are chosen to give a better
view of the interesting area around the stenosis). Figure 4.3a shows the pressure
changes for the stationary inlet, and ﬁgure 4.3b shows the pressure chance at the
peak of the time-dependent inlet, of the 30% stenotic tube. Both in ﬁgure 4.3a
and 4.3b the axial pressure changes are plotted for both the simulation without a
56
==PAGE:79==
4.1. STRAIGHT TUBES - RESULTS
catheter, as well as for the three situations of placing the catheter before, in the
middle and after the stenosis.
In ﬁgure 4.3a the pressure changes along x is not as drastic as in ﬁgure 4.3b.
Especially the simulation without the catheter does not seem inﬂuenced by the
stenosis (x=70-80mm). However, the change in pressure over the stenosi, seem
to increase in the simulation with a catheter. Furthermore, small "bumbs" in
pressure occurs just in front of the catheter, for the stationary simulation. These
does not seem to be signiﬁcantly dependent on the placement of the catheter.
Figure 4.3b, with the time-dependent inlet, shows even greater "bumbs", at the
tip of the catheter.
These increase in magnitude, when moving the catheter,
making the inﬂuence of the catheter on the pressure, seem greater than for the
stationary simulation.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.3: Axial pressure along the length of the 30% stenotic straight tube. Figure (a) for the
stationary inlet, and (b) for the time-dependent inlet. Where the simulation is run without a
catheter and the catheter placed before, ind the middle and after the stenosis. The three dashed
lines indicate the beginning, the middle and the end of the stenotic area.
57
==PAGE:80==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
Figure 4.4 shows the axial pressure, in the center of the tube, along the length
of the 70% stenotic straight tube. Figure 4.4a shows the pressure changes for
the stationary inlet, and ﬁgure 4.4b shows the pressure chance at the peak of
the time-dependent inlet. Both in ﬁgure 4.4a and 4.4b the axial pressure changes
are plotted for both the simulation without a catheter, as well as for the three
situations of placing the catheter before, in the middle and after the stenosis.
In ﬁgure 4.4a the pressure without the presence of a catheter, and where the
catheter is placed before the stenosis, seems to follow one another quite good. But
the two axial pressures, following a catheter placed in the middle, and after the
stenosis, makes the pressure change more dramatically, having a quite considerable
curvature at the tip of the catheter. In ﬁgure 4.4b, for the time-dependent study,
these "bumbs" are even more signiﬁcant, and even tend to have an increased
slight downward arch, before continuing up. For the time-dependent study, the
axial pressures occurring with and without the catheter, seem to deviate more
from one another than in the stationary simulation.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.4: Axial pressure along the length of the 70% stenotic ﬁgure (a) for the stationary inlet,
and (b) for the time-dependent inlet. Where the simulation is run without a catheter and the
catheter placed before, ind the middle and after the stenosis. The three dashed lines indicate
the beginning, the middle and the end of the stenotic area.
58
==PAGE:81==
4.1. STRAIGHT TUBES - RESULTS
Lastly, ﬁgure 4.5 shows the axial pressure, in the center of the tube, along the
length of the 90% stenotic straight tube. Figure 4.5a shows the pressure changes
for the stationary inlet and ﬁgure 4.5b shows the pressure change at the peak of
the time-dependent inlet. Both in ﬁgure 4.5a and 4.5b the axial pressure changes
are plotted for both the simulation without a catheter, as well as for the three
situations of placing the catheter before, in the middle and after the stenosis.
In ﬁgure 4.5a the pressure without the presence of a catheter, and where the
catheter is placed before the stenosis, again seems to follow one another quite
good.
However, as observed in ﬁgure 4.4, the two axial pressures, following a
catheter placed in the middle, and after the stenosis, makes the pressure change
quite dramatically, having a big inﬂuence on the pressure change just at the tip
of the catheter.
In ﬁgure 4.5b, for the time-dependent study, these "bumbs"
again becomes even more signiﬁcant, and also tend to have an increased slight
downward arch, before continuing up. For the time-dependent study, the axial
pressures occurring with and without the catheter seems to deviate more from
one another than in the stationary simulation.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.5: Axial pressure along the length of the 90% stenotic ﬁgure (a) for the stationary inlet,
and (b) for the time-dependent inlet. Where the simulation is run without a catheter and the
catheter placed before, ind the middle and after the stenosis. The three dashed lines indicate
the beginning, the middle and the end of the stenotic area.
59
==PAGE:82==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
4.1.2
Straight Tubes - Experimental Data Comparison of
∆P Over the Stenosis
In ﬁgure 4.3, 4.4 and 4.5 the pressure changes along the axial axis of the straight
tubes have been shown. As described in section 3.2 the pressure measurements
done, using a ﬂuid-ﬁlled catheter, were only preformed before, in the middle and
after the stenosis.
Therefore, the pressure gradient (∆P) over the stenosis is
calculated as the pressure diﬀerence between the pressure before the stenosis minus
the pressure after the stenosis, to show if there are any similarities between the
simulated ∆P and the measured ∆P.
In ﬁgure 4.6, 4.7 and 4.8 both the experimentally measured ∆P are shown, with
their corresponding standard deviations, as well as the simulated ∆P from the
FEM study, both with and without the catheter included. The pressure values
exported from COMSOL, were in all cases deﬁned at y = 0mm, z = 0mm and x =
68, 75 and 82mm, corresponding to before, in the middle and after the stenosis.
When the catheter is included in the simulation, this will then correspond to the
pressure just at the tip at the catheter each time it is moved.
Figure 4.6 shows the ∆P over the 30% stenotic straight tube, both for the station-
ary and time-dependent inlet. Figure 4.6a shows that the ∆P values all lies within
a small range, whereas for ﬁgure 4.6b the scattering between the measured ∆P,
the simulation with a catheter and the simulation without a catheter, becomes
quite distinct.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.6: Pressure diﬀerence over the 30% stenotic straight tube. Figure (a) shows the mean
and standard deviation (±12.16Pa) for the experimental measurements, COMSOL simulation
without a catheter, COMSOL simulation with a catheter and an analytic value as calculated in
section 4.1. Figure (b) shows the mean and standard deviation (± 13.1Pa) for the experimental
measurements, COMSOL simulation without catheter and COMSOL simulation with a catheter,
for the time-dependent inlet.
60
==PAGE:83==
4.1. STRAIGHT TUBES - RESULTS
Figure 4.7 shows the experimentally measured ∆P over the 70% stenotic straight
tube, for the stationary and time-dependent inlet. As for the 30% stenotic tube,
ﬁgure 4.7a show ∆P values lying within a much smaller range, than the time-
dependent values, (see ﬁgure 4.7b).
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.7: Pressure diﬀerence over 70% stenotic straight tube. Figure (a) shows the mean and
standard deviation (± 6.09Pa) for the experimental, COMSOL simulation without a catheter,
COMSOL simulation with a catheter and an analytic value. Figure (b) shows the mean and
standard deviation (± 17.26Pa) for the experimental, COMSOL simulation without catheter and
COMSOL simulation with catheter, for the time-dependent inlet.
Lastly, when comparing the ∆P values over the 90% stenotic straight tube, (see
ﬁgure 4.8), the stationary values, (see ﬁgure 4.8a), again lie within a small range
compared to the time-dependent plot, (see ﬁgure 4.8b). But due to the increased
size of ∆P, dispersion of the value, of the time-dependent study, becomes even
more distinct.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.8: Pressure diﬀerence over 90% stenotic straight tube. Figure (a) shows the mean and
standard deviation (± 16.50Pa) for the experimental, COMSOL simulation without a catheter,
COMSOL simulation with a catheter and an analytic value. Figure (b) shows the mean and
standard deviation (± 13.26Pa) for the experimental, COMSOL simulation without catheter and
COMSOL simulation with catheter for the time-dependent inlet.
61
==PAGE:84==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
In ﬁgure 4.3, 4.4 and 4.5 all established ∆P values are plotted. Table 4.1, shows
the calculated percentage diﬀerence between the simulated ∆P with and without
the presence of a catheter.
30% stenosis 70% stenosis 90% stenosis
Stationary inlet
14.3%
2.05%
-20.3%
Time-dependent inlet
6.6%
2.97%
3.52%
Table 4.1:
Percent deviation between the COMSOL simulation without
the catheter and to COMSOL simulation with a catheter, for the diﬀerent
stenotic sizes.
Table 4.1 shows how the simulation without a generally exhibits a higher ∆P than
the simulations with a catheter.
Table 4.2, shows the calculated percentage diﬀerence between the experimentally
measured mean ∆P and the values from the COMSOL simulation, including a
catheter.
30% stenosis 70% stenosis 90% stenosis
Stationary inlet
-81.4%
-23.1%
-65.3%
Time-dependent inlet
-1591%
-1460%
-1958%
Table 4.2: Percent deviation between the experimental mean ∆P and the
COMSOL simulation with the catheter, for the diﬀerent stenotic sizes.
Furthermore, N Møller [32] also performed measurements on a 70% stenotic straight
tube1. N Møller observed a peak systolic ∆P, over the 70% stenosis, of 188Pa
±39Pa std. As we found a peak systolic ∆P of 149Pa ±17Pa std, over the 70%
stenosis, the two experiments fall within the same range, conﬁrming the validity
of the experimental procedures.
1The only diﬀerence, from the experiments performed by N Møller[32], where the available
catheter, which in his case was a 4F Turmo Medical, NJ USA. Both available catheters have
only end-holes.
62
==PAGE:85==
4.2. PATIENTS - RESULTS
4.2
Patients - Results
Each patient has their own special geometry, as visualized in chapter 3. When
analyzing these geometries (patient002, 009 and 010), the pressure changes up
through the CCA to the ICA, and from CCA to the ECA, where investigated.
The investigation was carried out, both for a stationary and time-dependent inlet
ﬂow.
As described in chapter 3 the axial placement of the catheter could be controlled
quite satisfactory, whereas the radial placement of the catheter was impossible
to control.
But when comparing the measured pressures, from the ﬂuid-ﬁlled
catheter experiments, with the FEM study, only speciﬁc points in COMSOL were
investigated. These points were chosen based on a by eye visualization using US
of the axial direction positioning, and then to the best of our ability, in the center
of the radial axis.
4.2.1
Patients - COMSOL Results
The cutlines, cutpoints, and cutplanes, used for analyzing the COMSOL results,
are deﬁned in Appendix N, for each patient. The same speciﬁcations were used
for investigations of the models with and without the catheter.
In appendix P, 2D-inlet plots are shown for each patient. Both the velocity and
the pressure are plotted in the situation with and without the catheter. The 2D-
inlet plots shows how the catheter has been placed in the center of the vessels. The
pressure plots also show, that a higher pressure often occurs just at the border of
the catheter structure at the inlet of the model.
The inlet, for the patient’s simulations, were up for much discussion due to the
complex CAD model available for COMSOL. The inlets were individualized and
are therefore also presented for each of the three patients, in ﬁgure 4.9, 4.10 and
4.11.
63
==PAGE:86==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
(a) Inlet velocity without catheter.
(b) Inlet velocity, as i looks on both sides of the
catheter.
Figure 4.9: Patient002. Time-dependent velocity proﬁles at the inlet.
(a) Inlet velocity without catheter.
(b) Inlet velocity, as i looks on both sides of the
catheter.
Figure 4.10: Patient009. Time-dependent velocity proﬁles at the inlet.
(a) Inlet velocity without catheter.
(b) Inlet velocity, as i looks on both sides of the
catheter.
Figure 4.11: Patient010. Time-dependent velocity proﬁles at the inlet.
64
==PAGE:87==
4.2. PATIENTS - RESULTS
Figure 4.12, 4.13 and 4.14 shows the core velocity of the three healthy patients
at the peak systole. As described in section 3.5.2, the inlet for each patient had
to be angled to follow the direction of the CAD structure. Figure 4.12 and 4.13
shows that the angling were successful for patient002 and 009, whereas ﬁgure
4.14 shows that the inlet ﬂow for patient010, does still not follow the direction
of the carotid artery. For this reason, it was decided not to exploit much further
into the COMSOL results of patient010, due to the arguable compliance with the
experimental situation.
The velocity color plots in ﬁgure 4.12, 4.13 and 4.14 also include the velocity
vector ﬁelds. The velocity vectors show the velocity distribution in the deﬁned
plane. For all patients, the w-component of the velocity ﬁeld is plotted in the
x-direction, and the v-component of the velocity ﬁeld is plotted in the y-direction.
The velocity vectors are scaled logarithmic, to make the small velocities at the
bublus of ICA visible.
(a) Velocity color plot. Without catheter.
(b) Velocity color plot. With the catheter at position 5.
Figure 4.12: Patient002 core velocity, for the time-dependent FEM study at t=0.1509s. (a)
shows the velocity ﬁeld without the catheter and (b) shows how the catheter inﬂuences the
velocity in the core when placing the catheter in position 5. The arrows indicate the direction
and magnitude of the velocity ﬁeld and are scaled logarithmic with a scale factor of 2.
65
==PAGE:88==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
(a) Velocity color plot. Without catheter.
(b) Velocity color plot. With the catheter at position 5.
Figure 4.13: Patient009 core velocity, for the time-dependent FEM study at t=0.13778s. (a)
shows the velocity ﬁeld without the catheter and (b) shows how the catheter inﬂuences the
velocity in the core when placing the catheter in position 5. The arrows indicate the direction
and magnitude of the velocity ﬁeld and are scaled logarithmic with a scale factor of 1.2.
(a) Velocity color plot. Without catheter.
(b) Velocity color plot. With the catheter at position 5.
Figure 4.14: Patient010 core velocity, for the time-dependent FEM study at t=0.19055s. (a)
shows the velocity ﬁeld without the catheter and (b) shows how the catheter inﬂuences the
velocity in the core when placing the catheter in position 5. The arrows indicate the direction
and magnitude of the velocity ﬁeld and are scaled logarithmic with a scale factor of 0.8.
66
==PAGE:89==
4.2. PATIENTS - RESULTS
Figure 4.15, 4.16 and 4.17 shows the pressure in the core cut planes, as they are
deﬁned in Appendix N. The plots also include pressure counter lines, which each
indicate a change in the pressure. The counter lines expand the inside into how
the pressure changes through the geometries. In all three patients, it becomes
evident, that pressures change around the fork of the bifurcation. Furthermore,
pressure changes alongside the catheters become more visible.
(a) Pressure color plot. Without catheter.
(b) Pressure color plot. With the catheter at position 5.
Figure 4.15: Patient002 core pressure, for the time-dependent FEM study, at t=0.1509s. (a)
shows the pressure ﬁeld without the catheter and (b) shows how the catheter inﬂuences the
pressure in the core when placing the catheter in position 5.
67
==PAGE:90==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
(a) Pressure color plot. Without catheter.
(b) Pressure color plot. With the catheter at position 5.
Figure 4.16: Patient009 core pressure, for the time-dependent FEM study, at t=0.13778. (a)
shows the pressure ﬁeld without the catheter and (b) shows how the catheter inﬂuences the
pressure in the core when placing the catheter in position 5.
(a) Pressure color plot. Without catheter.
(b) Pressure color plot. With the catheter at position 5.
Figure 4.17: Patient010 core pressure, for the time-dependent FEM study, at t=0.1905s. (a)
shows the pressure ﬁeld without the catheter and (b) shows how the catheter inﬂuences the
pressure in the core when placing the catheter in position 5.
68
==PAGE:91==
4.2. PATIENTS - RESULTS
4.2.2
Patients - Experimental Results
During the experimental procedure, catheter measurements are done at nine dif-
ferent positions, both moving from CCA to ICA and from CCA to ECA. From the
measurements, a mean peak pressure was found in each of the nine positions of the
catheter for both the stationary and time-dependent situation. It was desired to
investigate the pressure changes when moving the catheter from position 1-9 (see
ﬁgure 4.18b). In the following, ∆P is therefore shown as the pressure diﬀerences
between position 1-2, 2-3, 3-4 and so forward.
Only the results moving from CCA to ICA are presented in this report.
Figure 4.18a and 4.20a show the mean pressure changes for patient002 and 009,
respectively, when running a stationary inlet. Figure 4.19a and 4.21a illustrate
the mean systolic pressure for patient002 and 009, respectively. The plots both
include the experimentally found values, as well as the output from the FEM study
both with and without the catheter. Due to the limited extents of the geometries
available for the FEM study, only position 4-9 and position 4-8 were available for
patient002 and 009, respectively.
As the catheter, in the FEM study, gets placed at position 4, 5 and 6, these pressure
values are exported just at the tip of the catheter for each time it is moved, as when
evaluating the straight tube models. When evaluation the pressure in position 7-9
with the catheter, the pressures are assessed, for the simulation where the catheter
is in position 6 (moving the catheter showed to have little inﬂuence on the pressure
values later in the carotid artery model).
(a)
(b) Guide sketch.
Figure 4.18: Figure (a) shows the mean pressure changes up through ICA for patient002 at a
stationary inlet. The experimental measurements, including the standard deviations between
the gradients (blue) and the COMSOL simulation with (red) and without (green) the catheter,
are compared. Figure (b) shows a generic carotid artery, for visual guidance of the measuring
positions.
69
==PAGE:92==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
(a)
(b) Guide sketch.
Figure 4.19: Figure (a) shows the peak systolic pressure changes up through ICA for patient002
time-dependent inlet. The experimental measurements, including the standard deviations be-
tween the gradients (blue) and the COMSOL simulation with (red) and without (green) the
catheter, are compared. Figure (b) shows a generic carotid artery, for visual guidance of the
measuring positions.
In ﬁgure 4.18a, the experimental pressure gradients show a small tendency to
increase before the bifurcation and decrease around the bifurcation, as well as
becoming negative in the later region. However, the FEM study show a sleight
opposite trendency.
In ﬁgure 4.19a, the experimental pressure gradients show a small tendency to in-
crease before the bifurcation and become negative afterwards. However, the FEM
study show more or less the opposite trend. The COMSOL results with and with-
out the catheter is observed to follows the same general course.
Figure 4.20a displays the pressure gradients for patient009 at a stationary inlet.
The experimentally measured ∆P is more or less constant through the structure.
The interesting observations occur in the ∆P from COMSOL where with and
without catheter both rise at the bifurcation. The FEM study without the catheter
seems to increase, where the FEM study with a catheter, shows a drastic drop in
∆P after the bifurcation.
Figure 4.21a displays the pressure gradients for patient009. The experimentally
measured pressure changes exhibit the same small values as for patient002. How-
ever, looking at the results from the FEM study, higher pressure gradients seem
to occur around the bifurcation and in the bulbus. As for patient002 the two sim-
ulated situations, with and without the catheter, show generally higher pressure
changes than the ﬂuid-ﬁlled catheter, and both seem to follow the same tendencies.
70
==PAGE:93==
4.2. PATIENTS - RESULTS
(a)
(b) Guide sketch.
Figure 4.20: Figure (a) shows the average pressure changes up through ICA for patient009 at
a stationary inlet. The experimental measurements, including the standard deviations between
the gradients (blue) and the COMSOL simulation with (red) and without (green) the catheter,
are compared. Figure (b) shows a generic carotid artery, for visual guidance of the measuring
positions.
(a)
(b) Guide sketch.
Figure 4.21: Figure (a) shows the peak systolic pressure changes up through ICA for patient009
for the time-dependent inlet. The experimental measurements, including the standard deviations
between the gradients (blue) and the COMSOL simulation with (red) and without (green) the
catheter, are compared. Figure (b) shows a generic carotid artery, for visual guidance of the
measuring positions.
71
==PAGE:94==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
4.3
Stenotic Patient - Results
The geometry of the stenotic patient was deﬁned by [31], having a stenosis degree
of 50% at the ICA bulbus.
As for the healthy patients, the pressure changes
up through the CCA to the ICA, and from CCA to the ECA, were investigated
during the experiments. This investigation was carried out, both for a stationary
and time-dependent inlet ﬂow. In the following, only the study of ICA are shown.
As described in chapter 3, the axial placement of the catheter could be controlled
quite satisfactory, whereas the radial placement of the catheter was impossible to
control. When comparing the measured pressures, from the ﬂuid-ﬁlled catheter
experiments, with the FEM studies, only speciﬁc points were investigated for the
COMSOL model. These points were chosen based on a by eye visualization using
US, of axial positioning of the catheter, and then to the best of our skills, in the
center of the radial axis.
4.3.1
Stenotic Patient - COMSOL Results
The cutlines, cutpoints, and cutplanes used for analyzing the COMSOL results
are deﬁned in Appendix N. The same speciﬁcations were used for investigations
of the models with and without the catheter. In appendix P, 2D-inlet plots are
shown. Both the velocity and the pressure are plotted in the situation with and
without the catheter. The 2D-inlet plots show how the catheter has been placed
in the center of the vessel. The pressure plots also show that a higher pressure
often occurs just at the border of the catheter structure, at the inlet of the model.
Figure 4.22 shows the inlet velocity proﬁles for the situation with and without the
catheter. In both cases, a very ﬂat proﬁle occurs, following the high calculated
womerslys number (α=40). The low peak velocity follows the increased area of
the inlet, in comparison to the healthy patients.
(a) Inlet velocity without catheter.
(b) nlet velocity, as i looks on both sides of the
catheter
Figure 4.22: Inlet velocity with catheter, as i looks on both sides of the catheter.
72
==PAGE:95==
4.3. STENOTIC PATIENT - RESULTS
Figure 4.23 illustrates the velocity ﬁeld for patient050s with a time-dependent
inlet.
Thus, ﬁgure 4.23a is without a catheter and ﬁgure 4.23b is where the
catheter is placed at position 5. Figure 4.23 illustrate how the velocity rises at the
stenosis, leaving areas in the ICA with very low velocities and back swivels.
The velocity color plots in ﬁgure 4.23a also include the velocity vector ﬁelds. The
velocity vectors show the magnitude and direction of the velocity ﬁeld. For all
patients, the w-component of the velocity ﬁeld is plotted in the x-direction, and
the v-component of the velocity ﬁeld is plotted in the y-direction. The velocity
vectors are scaled logarithmic, to make the small velocities after the stenosis visi-
ble.
(a) Velocity color plot. Without catheter.
(b) Velocity color plot. With the catheter at position 5.
Figure 4.23: Patient050s core velocity, for the time-dependent FEM study at t=0.1684s. a) shows
the velocity ﬁeld without the catheter and (b) shows how the catheter inﬂuences the velocity
in the core when simulation the catheter at position 5. The arrows indicate the direction and
magnitude of the velocity ﬁeld and are scaled logarithmic with a scale factor of 2.
73
==PAGE:96==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
Figure 4.24 illustrates the pressure ﬁelds for patient050s with a time-dependent in-
let, where ﬁgure 4.24a is without a catheter and ﬁgure 4.24b is where the catheter
is placed at position 5 (see ﬁgure 4.26b). The pressure color-plots show a simi-
lar pattern as observed for the stenotic straight tubes in appendix O, having the
highest pressures prior to the stenosis, before going towards 0Pa at the boundary.
The plots also include pressure counter lines, which each indicate a change in
the pressure. The counter lines expand the inside into how the pressure changes
through the geometry. In all three patients, it becomes evident, that pressures
change around the fork of the bifurcation.
(a) Pressure color plot. Without catheter.
(b) Pressure color plot. With the catheter at position 5.
Figure 4.24: Patient050s core pressure, for the time-dependent FEM study, at t=0.168s. (a)
shows the pressure ﬁeld without the catheter and (b) shows how the catheter inﬂuences the
pressure in the core when placing the catheter in position 5.
74
==PAGE:97==
4.3. STENOTIC PATIENT - RESULTS
4.3.2
Stenotic Patient - Experimental Results
In ﬁgure 4.25a and 4.26a the experimentally measured ∆P is compared with the
output from the two FEM studies, both with and without the catheter at either
stationary or time-dependent inlet, respectively.
As for the healthy patients, the pressure gradients for the experimental data,
show very small diﬀerences in ∆P along the position of the catheter. However,
ﬁgure 4.25a show a high ∆P at "∆P:6-7", indicating that the pressure changes
dramatically in position7 (at the stenosis).
When only looking at the experimental data at the time-dependent inlet, the
50% stenosis, in the ICA, does not seem to lead to increased pressure gradients,
(see ﬁgure 4.26a). But, the FEM study shows a very diﬀerent tendency of ∆P
over the stenosis. Both the ﬁgures for the stationary and time-dependent inlets
shows a huge pressure gradient from position 6 to 8 (see ﬁgure 4.25a), both in the
simulation with and without a catheter.
(a)
(b) Guide sketch.
Figure 4.25: Figure (a) shows the average pressure changes up through ICA for patient050S at
a stationary inlet. The experimental measurements, including the standard deviations between
the gradients (blue) and the COMSOL simulation with (red) and without (green) the catheter,
are compared. Figure (b) shows a generic carotid artery, for visual guidance of the measuring
positions.
75
==PAGE:98==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
(a)
(b) Guide sketch.
Figure 4.26: Figure (a) shows the peak systolic pressure changes up through ICA for patient050S
time-dependent inlet. The experimental measurements, including the standard deviations be-
tween the gradients (blue) and the COMSOL simulation with (red) and without (green) the
catheter, are compared. Figure (b) shows a generic carotid artery, for visual guidance of the
measuring positions.
76
==PAGE:99==
4.3. STENOTIC PATIENT - RESULTS
For further analysis of the pressure change over the stenosis in patient050S, a non-
invasive pressure estimation was carried out using US. The method is developed
by Jacob B. Olesen[38], and derives pressure changes along streamlines using a
high frame rate ultrasound technique.
Using a linear probe (8MHz) connected to a BK5000 scanner, (BK Ultrasound,
Herlev, Denmark) the non-invasive pressure gradient was visualized, as shown in
ﬁgure 4.27. The deﬁned streamlines runs approximately from position 5-9 when
compared with the experimental setup. The still-frame images in ﬁgure 4.27, shows
the ∆P for the stationary inlet of -671Pa and ∆P for the time-dependent inlet
of -307Pa, at the instance the screen was frozen. For both the time-dependent
and stationary ﬂows, the pressure gradient varied over time.
This lead to an
average ∆P of -609.5Pa and -307.2Pa for the stationary and time-dependent ﬂows,
respectively over 10sec video.
(a) Stationary inlet of 15ml/s. In the left bottom
corner the ∆P value are shown, varying from -
565Pa to -713Pa over the 10sec video.
(b) Time-dependent inlet, Carotid2 with a peak
ﬂow of 15ml/s.
In the left bottom corner the
∆P value are shown, varying from from -299Pa
to -371Pa over the 10sec video.
Figure 4.27: Figure (a) and (b) each show a US still frame from a 10sec video of Patient050S,
running a stationary (a) and time-dependent (b) inlet ﬂow. The images show how the non-
invasive pressure estimation, using a linear probe (8 MHz) connected to a BK5000 scanner, (BK
Ultrasound, Herlev, Denmark) ﬁnds a streamline (indicated by the narrow green lines) from
which the pressure gradients are calculated. The method was developed by Jacob B. Olesen[38]
77
==PAGE:100==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
4.4
Correlation Between Study Results
First, the experimentally measured ∆P from patient002, 009, 010 and patient050S
are collected into two ﬁgures - one for the stationary (see ﬁgure 4.28a) and one
for the time-dependent (see ﬁgure 4.29a) inlet.
Both ﬁgures illustrates very even pressure gradients up through the CCA to the
ICA. Only patient050S, in the stationary situation, shows a burst in ∆P, which
occurs over the stenosis. The stenosis in patient050S does not become detectable
in ﬁgure 4.29a, of the time-dependent inlet.
(a)
(b) Guide sketch.
Figure 4.28: Figure (a) show the average pressure gradients from the experimental measurements
with a stationary inlet, for all patient geometries, including the standard deviations of the
gradients. The pressure [Pa] is indicated on the y-axis and the pressure gradients between two
measuring positions are indicated on the x-axis. Figure (b) shows a generic carotid artery, for
visual guidance of the measuring positions.
78
==PAGE:101==
4.4. CORRELATION BETWEEN STUDY RESULTS
(a)
(b) Guide sketch.
Figure 4.29: Figure (a) show the systolic pressure gradients from the experimental measurements
with the time-dependent inlet, for all patient geometries, including the standard deviations of
the gradients. The pressure [Pa] is indicated on the y-axis and the pressure gradients between
two measuring positions are indicated on the x-axis. Figure (b) shows a generic carotid artery,
for visual guidance of the measuring positions.
4.4.1
Compassion of ∆P Over Stenoses
Second, a comparison between some of the diﬀerent scenarios studied are pre-
sented.
Through the project, the pressure gradient over a stenosis has been evaluated both
in the simple geometry of the stenotic straight tubes, as well as in the complex
structure of patient050S. In ﬁgure 4.30 a summary of these results are shown, to
investigate if there can be observed any correlation between the two studies.
The 70% stenotic tube has been chosen for the comparison. (Following table 3.3,
this stenosis degree is the one closest to the 50% stenosis degree, in patient050S).
The compared situations are:
A Experimentally measured ∆P over the 70% stenotic tube.
B Experimentally measured ∆P over the stenosis in patient050S (position 6-8).
C COMSOL simulation of the ∆P over the 70% stenotic tube, with the catheter.
D COMSOL simulation of the ∆P over the 70% stenotic tube, without the
catheter.
E COMSOL simulation of the ∆P over the stenosis in patient050S (position
6-8), with the catheter.
F COMSOL simulation of the ∆P over the stenosis in patient050S (position
6-8), without the catheter.
G Experimentally measured ∆P over the stenosis in patient050S (position 5-9).
H Non-incisively measured ∆P over the stenosis in patient050S (position 5-9)
using US.
79
==PAGE:102==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
Figure 4.30a compare the stationary situation, whereas ﬁgure 4.30b compares the
values from the time-dependent setups. For both situations all values lie within a
considerably big range, not indicating any clear correlation between measurement
techniques and geometrical scenario.
(a) The standard deviations for the stationary measurements are for the: 70% stenotic straight
tube, ±6.09Pa, Patient050s (position 6-8), ±101.0Pa, Patient050s (position 5-9) ±48.29Pa and
for the US measurement ± 58.28Pa.
(b) The standard deviations for the tiem-dependent measurements are for the: 70% stenotic
straight tube, ±17.26Pa, Patient050s (position 6-8), ±11.76Pa, Patient050s (position 5-9)
±12.20Pa and for the US measurement ± 47.78Pa.
Figure 4.30: Both ﬁgure (a) and (b) exhibits the ∆P values for the following situations: A) Ex-
perimentally measured ∆P over the 70% stenotic tube. B) Experimentally measured ∆P over the
stenosis in patient050S (position 6-8). C) COMSOL simulation of the ∆P over the 70% stenotic
tube, with the catheter. D) COMSOL simulation of the ∆P over the 70% stenotic tube, without
the catheter. E) COMSOL simulation of the ∆P over the stenosis in patient050S (position 6-8),
with the catheter. F) COMSOL simulation of the ∆P over the stenosis in patient050S (position
6-8), without the catheter. G) Experimentally measured ∆P over the stenosis in patient050S
(position 5-9). H) Non-incisively measured ∆P over the stenosis in patient050S (position 5-9)
using US.
80
==PAGE:103==
4.5. VALIDATION OF THE COMSOL MODEL
4.5
Validation of the COMSOL Model
4.5.1
Mass Conservation
The FEM model in COMSOL works by transforming the governing Partial Diﬀer-
ential Equations (PDEs) into integral equations. When solving ﬂuid models this
way, residual errors may build up, and therefore needs to be investigated.
To evaluate the credibility of the COMSOL simulations, a short evaluation of the
mass conservation can be made. In the following the mass conservation is found in
the four patient simulations for the time-dependent and stationary inlets, without
the catheter.
For the investigation, the built-in "probe"-function was used in COMSOL, to ﬁnd
the velocity integral at the CCA, ICA and ECA boundary, leading to table 4.3,
4.4, 4.5 and 4.6.
Patient002
Boundary integral
value
Total outlet =
ICA+ECA
inlet−outlet
inlet
[%]
Without Catheter
Time-dependent
CCA
1.7628·10−5 m3
s
ICA
9.577·10−6 m3
s
1.762·10−5 m3
s
0.05
ECA
8.0418·10−6 m3
s
Without Catheter
Stationary
CCA
1.4832·10−5 m3
s
ICA
8.19543·10−6 m3
s
1.482·10−5 m3
s
0.08
ECA
6.6525·10−6 m3
s
Table 4.3: The table displays the boundary integral values found using the COMSOL build-in
"probe"-function. For the time-dependent values, integral are derived at t=0.1509s. The ﬂow
division, between ICA and ECA, were in both cases approximately 54:46[%].
Patient009
Boundary integral
value
Total outlet =
ICA+ECA
inlet−outlet
inlet
[%]
Without Catheter
Time-dependent
CCA
2.2602·10−5 m3
s
ICA
1.3743·10−5 m3
s
2.258·10−5 m3
s
0.42
ECA
8.8336·10−6 m3
s
Without Catheter
Stationary
CCA
1.3188·10−5 m3
s
ICA
8.2038·10−6 m3
s
1.316·10−5 m3
s
0.21
ECA
4.956·10−6 m3
s
Table 4.4: The table displays the boundary integral values found using the COMSOL build-in
"probe"-function. For the time-dependent values, integral are derived at t=0.13778s. The ﬂow
division, between ICA and ECA, were in both cases approximately 61:39[%].
81
==PAGE:104==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
Patient010
Boundary integral
value
Total outlet =
ICA+ECA
inlet−outlet
inlet
[%]
Without Catheter
Time-depending
CCA
2.4347·10−5 m3
s
ICA
1.6447·10−5 m3
s
2.342·10−5 m3
s
3.8
ECA
6.9755·10−6 m3
s
Without Catheter
Stationary
CCA
1.447·10−5 m3
s
ICA
8.813·10−6 m3
s
1.389·10−5 m3
s
4.0
ECA
5.0747·10−6 m3
s
Table 4.5: The table displays the boundary integral values found using the COMSOL build-in
"probe"-function. For the time-dependent values, integral are derived at t=0.19855s. The ﬂow
division, between ICA and ECA, were in both cases approximately 70:30[%].
Patient050S
Boundary integral
value
Total outlet =
ICA+ECA
inlet−outlet
inlet
[%]
Without Catheter
Time-depending
CCA
2.5718·10−5 m3
s
ICA
6.0556·10−6 m3
s
2.808·10−5 m3
s
8.9
ECA
2.20255·10−5 m3
s
Without Catheter
Stationary
CCA
1.4565·10−5 m3
s
ICA
2.719·10−6 m3
s
1.515·10−5 m3
s
4.0
ECA
1.247·10−5 m3
s
Table 4.6: The table displays the boundary integral values found using the COMSOL build-in
"probe"-function. For the time-dependent values, integral are derived at the t=0.16848s. The
ﬂow division, between ICA and ECA, were in both cases approximately 20:80[%].
Patient002 (see table 4.3) and patient009 (see table 4.4) show good mass conserva-
tion. However, both patient010 (see table 4.5) and in particular patient050s (see
table 4.6) show very high deviations between the inlet and total outlet integral.
82
==PAGE:105==
4.5. VALIDATION OF THE COMSOL MODEL
4.5.2
Flow Pattern Comparison
It is well known that a returning vortex occurs at the bulbus of ICA, (as shown in
ﬁgure 2.4). To investigate if the same phenomenon occurs in both the simulated
COMSOL model and in the ﬂuid phantoms, patient050S is investigated. Figure
4.31 shows a still-frame of patient050S, visualized using a linear probe (8MHz)
connected to a BK5000 scanner, (BK Ultrasound, Herlev, Denmark). Using the
VFI settings, the vector ﬁeld of the liquid is shown. The image shows how the
liquid swivel after the stenosis.
Figure 4.31:
US VFI still-frame of pa-
tient050S, using a linear probe (8 MHz)
connected to a BK5000 scanner, (BK Ul-
trasound, Herlev, Denmark. The catheter
is placed in position 7, in the middle of the
stenosis. VFI illustrates the velocity mag-
nitude and direction of the liquid.
Figure 4.32:
Patient050s core velocity,
for
the time-dependent FEM study at t=0.1684s.
Shows the velocity ﬁeld without the catheter and
approximate placement of the catheter in Pa-
tient002, viewed on a 2D sketch as seen in COM-
SOL. The arrows indicate the direction and mag-
nitude of the velocity ﬁeld and are scaled loga-
rithmic with a scale factor of 2.
4.5.3
Flow Distribution Comparison
The presented FEM study are validated by comparing the ﬂow distribution (ICA:ECA)
observed in COMSOL, to the ﬂow distribution (ICA:ECA) observed in the labo-
ratory.
In section 4.5, the investigation of the mass conservation in COMSOL gave an
insight into the ﬂow distribution between ICA:ECA. These values are to be held
up against values from the experimental setup.
Using US Doppler, the velocity, at a point, can be registered. Finding the ﬂow
velocity in both ends ICA and ECA can then indicate the distribution of ﬂuid
between the two during the experiment.
The ICA:ECA ratio was investigated for both the stationary and time-dependent
inlet, leading to table 4.7, for the US Doppler results. The outlet integrals found in
COMSOL for ICA and ECA, lead to the ICA:ECA distributions as listed in table
4.7. The investigating in COMSOL did not show any distinct diﬀerence between
83
==PAGE:106==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
the stationary and time-dependent situation.
All investigations have been performed without the catheter.
Patient002 Patient009 Patient010 Patient050S
US Doppler
Stationary
37:67
43:56
40:60
50:50
Time-dependent
42:58
44:55
42:58
25:75
COMSOL
54:46
61:39
70:30
20:80
Table 4.7: This table illustrates a calculated ﬂow division between ICA: ECA. When Investi-
gating the velocities in ICA and ECA, using US Doppler, a BK5000 scanner and a linear probe
(8MHz), was used. The velocity measurements were performed as far away from the fork, as
possible, to avoid any swirling ﬂows around the bulbus of ICA. The COMSOL values originate
from the mass conservation study (see section 4.5.1).
(a) Dopper velocity recording in patient009
during stationary inlet ﬂow in ECA and ICA
to examine the ﬂow distribution
(b) Dopper velocity recording in patient009 dur-
ing time-dependent inlet ﬂow in ECA and ICA
to examine the ﬂow distribution
Figure 4.33: The two ﬁgures show patient009 visualized using a BK5000 scanner and a linear
probe (8MHz). Dopper-mode is turned on, and a position is marked in the ECA, for velocity
measurements.
84
==PAGE:107==
CHAPTER 5
DISCUSSION
This project has aimed to investigate how well a Finite Element Model (FEM)
can comply with current intravascular blood pressure measurements using a blood
pressure transducer system with a ﬂuid-ﬁlled catheter. In this chapter, the results,
from the applied method (as described in chapter 3), as well as the limitations of
the setups, are discussed.
The following chapter is divided into three main sections, each discussing the
results form the study of the stenotic straight tubes, the healthy carotid arteries,
and the stenotic carotid artery, respectively. Furthermore, a general walk-through
of the limitations of all the studies is presented.
85
==PAGE:108==
CHAPTER 5. DISCUSSION
5.1
Straight Tubes Studies
Three straight tubes with concentric stenosis degrees of 30%, 70%, and 90%, re-
spectively, were studied based on their simple geometrical structures. Investigating
the ∆P over a well-known narrowing also made it possible to investigate the weak-
nesses of the method setups.
Following (2.8) the velocity, in a cylindrical tube increases with r2, and following
(2.11), an increase in velocity will lead to a decrease in pressure. Also following
Poiseuilles equation, (2.7), the pressure gradient over a straight cylindrical tube,
depends on r4. Subsequently to this, the decrease in radius will lead to an increase
of the velocity and consequently lead to a decrease in pressure. This phenomenon
becomes evident in the color plots presented in Appendix O. Both Bernoulli’s and
Poiseullis law assumes that the ﬂow is steady and fully developed. As described,
this is not the case, as supported by a womerslys number of α=30. Therefore,
was the analytically ∆P values not expected to ﬁt the measured and simulated
∆P values entirely. However, it was observed, that the analytic values lied close
to the measured ∆P values, for both the 30% and 70% stenotic tube.
In section 4.1.1.1 the axial pressure is plotted along the center line, of each straight
tube geometry.
When the catheter is positioned in the middle and after the
stenosis, fast pressure changes were observed at the tip of the catheter.
It is
believed, that these "bumbs" in pressure are caused by artifacts from the ﬂow-
disruptions, that the catheter inﬂicts on the liquid. The "bumbs" in pressure also
becomes more profound when simulating the time-dependent inlet ﬂow, as well as
when the stenosis degree increases.
In table 4.1, the percentage diﬀerence between the simulated ∆P values, with
and without the catheter, are shown. The table shows how the simulation with
a catheter generally underestimates the ∆P, compared to the simulation without
a catheter. Looking at ﬁgure 4.6, 4.7 and 4.8, it slightly shows that simulations
with a catheter comply better with the catheter measurements, than the simu-
lation without a catheter. Hence, implying that the simulations, which include
a catheter, does manage to better approximate the measured ∆P compared to
simulations neglecting to include the catheter geometry. However, when directly
evaluating the compliance between the FEM study with a catheter, and the mea-
surements done in the laboratory, the deviation becomes indisputable. Table 4.2
shows that the percent diﬀerence, is found to be up to approximately 1958%.
This huge diﬀerence, between the FEM study and the measured ∆P, is believed
to mainly be caused by the deﬁned outlet boundary condition (BC) of 0Pa, in the
FEM study. This also becomes noticeable, when looking at the axial pressure plots
(see ﬁgure 4.3, 4.4 and 4.5). They show how the BC of 0Pa at x=160, "forces" the
86
==PAGE:109==
5.2. PATIENTS STUDIES
pressure to converge towards 0Pa. For the 30% straight tube, the inﬂuence of the
BC is not as evident, as for the 70% and 90% stenotic straight tube, due to the
relative minor pressure changes over the smaller stenosis. However, this observa-
tion indicates that the outlet BC of the FEM study model does not comply with
the experimental setup. It should in the future, therefore, be investigated when
the ∆P value can be considered unrestricted by the BC at the outlet.
Another critical point, from the FEM study, is the applied meshes (see section
3.5.5). The mesh analysis for the straight tubes reveals a dissatisfying diﬀerence
between the chosen "normal" mesh and the ﬁner resolution mesh.
A desired
diﬀerence between the two mesh-settings was not respected, but the "normal"
mesh was nevertheless chosen, due to the extreme compute-time a "ﬁne" mesh
induced. To overcome this dispute between mesh resolution and compute-time, a
2D model could be considered in the future, as we do assume axis-symmetry.
5.2
Patients Studies
In the following, the studies of all the investigated patients (patient002, 009, 010
and patient050S) will be discussed. When evaluating the established ∆P values
from the patient studies, many variables come into play. Most of these are believed
to be driven by the geometric complexity of such structures, as that of the carotid
artery.
It can be quite diﬃcult to ﬁnd any direct correlations between ∆P, up through
the CCA to the ICA, in the patient geometries. This is largely due to the evident
dissimilarities in their geometries.
Variations were observed between the four
patients studies, and from ﬁgure 4.25a and 4.26a it becomes apparent that no
general patterns appear. Only the stationary study of patient050S displayed a
big variation in ∆P, between position 6 and 8. The big change in pressure is
caused by the 50% stenosis in the ICA. But, as the same change in pressure is
not observed for the time-dependent measurements, the measurement technique is
deemed very undependable. Despite the poor features of the ﬂuid-ﬁlled catheter,
it was expected that a bigger pressure gradient could be detected over the stenosis
in patient050S, following the discoveries made in the stenotic straight tubes.
Comparing the two FEM studies, with and without the catheter, no general pat-
terns appear. However, in 4.25a it is the simulation, which includes the catheter,
that complies best with the measured gradients. This observation implies that the
simulated catheter can lead to some of the same disturbances, as the ﬂuid-ﬁlled
catheter inﬂict, on the system in the experimental setup.
The stationary FEM studies also generally showed to follow the experimental data
better than the time-dependent investigations. This is assumably caused by the
complexity introduced by the general setup, when running the pulsating ﬂow,
which is elaborated in section 5.3.
87
==PAGE:110==
CHAPTER 5. DISCUSSION
5.2.1
Flow Distribution
In section 4.5.3 the ﬂow distribution between ICA and ECA is described for both
the numerical model and the experimental setup. Table 4.7 shows that the FEM
study of the healthy patients, exhibits a ﬂow distribution, which favors the ICA.
However, this ﬁnding is not evident from the US Doppler investigation, which
shows a general ﬂow distribution, which favors the ECA in the phantoms.
The velocities collected with US Doppler might not be that reliable. Hence, the
division of ﬂow causes a ﬂow disturbance, which can inﬂict the velocity mea-
surements. In appendix R an investigation of the ICA:ECA ﬂow ratio has been
investigated using point velocities in COMSOL. The ﬂow distributions found by
this method, show a diﬀerent picture, than the values found from the outlet in-
tegrals, used for the mass conservation investigation. Especially the results for
patient050S give a very diﬀerent picture when evaluating the ﬂow distribution
in the FEM study. This is most likely because the velocity point in the ICA in
COMSOL is deﬁned in the area with very low velocities (see ﬁgure 4.23).
From the inlet velocity proﬁles from FEM study, it is know that the velocity is
not constant over the cross-sectional area of the vessel. For this reason, small
divergence from the center of the vessel will inﬂuence the velocity value found,
both in COMSOL and by using US Doppler.
K Perktold [39], D Liepsch [8] and FP Glor [13] all have a 70:30 distribution of
ﬂow between ICA and ECA when solving numerical ﬂow problems in a healthy
carotid artery. FP Glor substantiates this outlet boundary deﬁnition using MRI
for velocity measurements, at the ICA and ECA. In our study, a 70:30 distribution
was only observed in the FEM study for patient010 (see table 4.7). This is believed
to be caused by the tilted inlet, which could not be rectiﬁed for the FEM study
(see section 3.5.2). In future studies, it might be an idea to "force" the outlet
distribution of the FEM study to match the observed distribution in the phantoms.
A study done by SG Imbersi [40], investigated the method of measuring pres-
sure across vascular stenoses using a catheter. Running a pulsatile ﬂow rate of
600ml/min, they observed a ﬂow distribution between ICA and ECA of 50:50[%]
in their phantoms of a 58% stenotic patient geometry cast from a human cadaver.
This distribution corresponds better with the observations done in section 4.5.3.
However, this is for a stenotic patient, and comparing with patient050S we again
observe a generally diﬀerent distributions in our study.
88
==PAGE:111==
5.3. GENERAL STUDY CONCERNS
5.3
General Study Concerns
5.3.1
Introducing a Catheter
As described, it is more or less impossible to place the ﬂuid-ﬁlled catheter perfectly
concentric within the vessel of the ﬂow phantoms.
As it was demonstrated in section 3.6.2, this FEM study suggests that there exist
an inconstant pressure in the radial component of the straight tube. Figure 3.28
imply, that the radial pressure diﬀerence is most distinct in the middle of the
stenosis. There can also be observed a small radial component of the pressure
before. Thus, leading to more varying pressure measurements when the radial
component can not be controlled in the experimental setup.
Due to these observations, it would be desirable to be able to place the ﬂuid-ﬁlled
catheter in the midst of the radial component each time.
However, the ﬂuid-
ﬁlled catheter was not compliant to this, and placed itself in any radial position
it found most accessible. For the straight tubes, the radial placement was much
more varying than for the patient geometries. This was mainly caused by the
short length of the catheter, which made it became more ﬁxated in the complex
patient geometries, and usually positioned the tip of the catheter, along the walls
of the vessels.
A simulation, where the placement of the catheter becomes even more critical,
is when it is placed after a stenosis.
It is evident, that a jet-stream of liquid
occurs after a stenosis. (see appendix O for a visualization of this in the straight
tubes). As the ﬁgures in appendix O shows, the simulation of the catheter after
the stenosis is placed right in the middle of this jet-stream.
However, in the
experimental setup, was it impossible to control this placement, and it is therefore
unknown exactly where the catheter was lying in the radial component, during
each measurement.
It could be recommended to use a longer catheter, which had a smaller tendency
to get ﬁxed at one position against the wall. This way could the inﬂuence of the
radial component might be averaged out in the experimentally collected data.
Following the observations, of the preliminary study in section 3.6.2, we also detect
bigger standard deviations, in pressure gradients measured between the middle and
before the stenosis (see appendix O.1), compared to the pressure gradients over
the stenosis.
The axial placement of the ﬂuid-ﬁlled catheter was controlled by manual markings
on the shaft of the catheter. By using US to keep continuous track of the axial
placement of the catheter, did it become clear that the markings on the ﬂuid-ﬁlled
catheter were a reliable way of controlling the axial positioning.
89
==PAGE:112==
CHAPTER 5. DISCUSSION
In general, using a catheter for pressure measurements introduces some evident
implications:
• The catheter can lead to disruptions of the ﬂow, before the point of mea-
surement.
• When placing the catheter in the direction of the ﬂow, it can physically block
some of the ﬂow, which can lead to incorrect measurements.
LA Garcia [24] and R Leiboﬀ[41] concludes, that failure to include the presence
of the catheter, as a source of pressure decrease across a stenosis, would tend to
underestimate pressure gradients. Considering the analysis of the straight tube
geometries, this trend, is not evident for the FEM studies of the straight tubes.
These studies ﬁnd lower pressure gradient for the simulations with a catheter,
compared to the FEM studies without a catheter. Thus implying that the model
which includes the catheter does not perpetuate a physiological situation. Looking
at the analysis of the four carotid artery studies, no continuous correlation of this
was observed.
5.3.1.1
COMSOL - Catheter Definition
It is not only the radial positioning, which distinguish the FEM study from the
experimental setup, in terms of the catheter.
A major diﬀerence between the
simulations and the experimental study is, that the catheter in the numerical
model is rigid and ﬁxed co-axially in the geometry, while during the experiments
it is ﬂexible, free to ﬂuctuate and therefore not concentric.
A future model might, therefore, beneﬁt from including a structure-ﬂuid interac-
tion, between the catheter and the blood-mimicking ﬂuid.
Another way the numerical model diﬀers from the experimental setup is in the
geometry of the tip of the catheter. The tip of the catheter used for the exper-
imental setup is completely ﬂat, whereas the catheter in the FEM study had to
have rounded edges for the simulation to converge. As the COMSOL measurement
points were exported just in front of the catheter, these could be inﬂuenced by
the pressure artifacts at the tip of the catheter. However, A. de Vecci [18] claims
that the main cause of incorrect pressure measurements are not due to the shape
of the catheter, but caused by the increased ﬂow resistance, which the catheter
introduces.
90
==PAGE:113==
5.3. GENERAL STUDY CONCERNS
5.3.1.2
Diameter Ratio Investigation
The ﬂow resistance in a tube, have shown to be very dependent on the diameter
ratio between the catheter and the vessel. As described in section 2.4, following
LH Back [25] angioplasty catheters, over a range of di/do from 0.3 to 0.7, can
show an increase in ﬂow resistance by a factor of 3.3-33, at pulsatile ﬂows. This
increase is believed to be the eﬀect of the elevated shear stress along the arterial
wall, due to the presence of the catheter. Another explanation is the eﬀects of
the additional frictional resistance of the catheter wall surface, which also exerts
a shear force on the liquid. This is slightly evident from ﬁgure 4.2d, which shows
that the velocity curves along the catheter displays a modest lean towards the
catheter wall.
Stenosis
Measured
Diameter
(do)
Diameter ratio
(di/do)
0
8.0mm
0.16
30
6.5mm
0.20
70
4.5mm
0.29
90
2.5mm
0.53
Patient050s
2.0mm
0.66
Table 5.1: The table shows the diameter ratio between the catheter and the narrowest part each
straight tube and the stenosis in patient050S. Stenosis 0 referes to the part of the straight tubes
before the narrowing. The 4F catheter used has a outer diameter of 1.33mm (di), resulting in the
listed ratios. In appendix Q ultrasound images of the three straight tube phantoms are shown.
Here do are visualized and measured, which ﬁnds that the ﬁnished phantoms comply with the
geometries of the 3D PLA structures to a satisfactory level.
From table 5.1 a di/do of 0.16-0.53, for the constricted straight tubes, conﬁrms the
suspicion that the presence of the ﬂuid-ﬁlled catheter will have a great inﬂuence
on the pressure. However, LH Back [25] furthermore shows that the catheters
inﬂuence on the ﬂow resistance decreases when placed oﬀ-axis. This might be the
case for the main fraction of the measurements done through this project, whereas
the simulated catheter is always placed concentrically in the FEM studies.
As it is evident from the study of the straight tubes, the peak systolic pressures
with the catheter are generally lower than those of the FEM study without a
catheter. However, A de Vecchi [18] found that catheter measurements can sig-
niﬁcantly overestimate peak pressure even with a moderate radius ratio of 0.125.
They furthermore created a numerical model, which reproduced this pressure over-
estimation without the frequency damping of the catheter.
We recognize that this is the opposite tendency as observed in ﬁgure 4.3b, 4.4b and
4.5b. However, A de Vecchi does not indicate the distance from the catheter tip,
which the numerical pressure value is taken. Thus, as we observe steep "bumbs"
of pressure close to the catheter tip, values taken here can lead to the observation
of overestimated pressures, using catheters in a numerical model.
91
==PAGE:114==
CHAPTER 5. DISCUSSION
5.3.2
Rigid vs. Flexible Vessel Walls
One of the biggest sources of error, between the FEM studies and the experimen-
tal data collected, is believed to be caused by to the rigid wall assumption. For
all numerical models, only the lumen of the structure were simulated, and the
assumption of rigid walls was applied. However, it was observed with US, that
during pulsating ﬂows the phantom walls moved severely over the pulse cycle.
Figure 5.1 shows still-frame images of the CCA of patient050S. The ﬁgures shows
the diﬀerence in vessel diameter, between the relaxed vessel (ﬁgure 5.1a) and the
maximally expanded vessel (ﬁgure 5.1b). A diﬀerence in diameter between the
two conditions showed to be around 7%.
This observation makes it clear that the rigid walls assumption becomes inade-
quate when trying to comply with the experimental setup. This might be resolved
by additionally "hardening" the ﬂow phantoms, by exposing them to more "freeze-
thaw" cycles, during the molding procedure. However, there existed a maximum
limit to when another "freeze-thaw" cycle can further increase the hardness of a
phantom.
(a) Ultrasound picture using stationary inlet,
15ml/s. The walls does not expand
(b) Ultrasound picture using Time-dependent
peak ﬂow inlet, 15ml/s, showing the walls at
peak expansion during pulsating ﬂow.
Figure 5.1: Figure (a) and (b) shows the CCA of patient050S, visualized using a BK5000 scanner
and a linear probe (8MHz). The images illustrate the expansion of the vessel when exposed to
pulsating ﬂow. (b) shows the max expansion, whereas (a) shows the relaxed vessel diameter.
In general, the results from all the stationary investigations lies within a smaller
range, than the results from the time-dependent studies. It is highly believed, that
the increased scatter between the established pressure gradients, is highly caused
by this ﬂuctuation in vessel diameter during the time-dependent experiments.
Expanding the FEM study could therefore be an option worth exploring, and
thereby incorporating the ability of the ﬂexible walls.
92
==PAGE:115==
5.4. LIMITATIONS
Following R Leiboﬀ[41] pulsating ﬂows will furthermore result in an additional
component of pressure loss across a stenosis. This component of pressure loss
is deemed important for mild to moderate stenosis, although it is thought to
be insigniﬁcant, relative to other sources of pressure loss when evaluating pres-
sure gradients over severe stenoses.
This phenomenon is also indicated in our
ﬁndings, where the pressure gradient generally was found to be smaller for the
time-dependent study, compared to the stationary (see for example ﬁgure 4.30).
5.4
Limitations
There are some clear limitations to the studies performed during this project.
These include a limited sample size of investigated geometries, and a small number
of measurements collected at each position of the catheter during the experimental
setup.
Furthermore, some general limitations follow the applied experimental setup, as
well as the assumptions done for the numerical simulation.
5.4.1
Limitations of the Experimental Setup
For the experimental setup, only one pressure transducer was available for pressure
measurements. Thus, this pressure transducer was not designed to be reusable,
which makes the integrity of the component debatable.
Furthermore, was the
ﬂuid-ﬁlled catheter additionally not designed to be reusable, adding doubt about
the reliability of the material setup.
As described in section 2.3.2, the dynamic accuracy of a pressure measurement
system is very important. The dynamic accuracy of the setup was tested as de-
scribed in section 3.7, which showed a satisfying "quality" of the setup. However,
this investigation was only performed once, thus was the continuous integrity of
the system not tested.
Air bubbles in the lumen of the ﬂuid-ﬁlled catheter are also known to inﬂuence
the pressure measurements. Therefore, great care was taken to eliminate any air
bubbles during pressure measurements, by regularly ﬂushing the system. How-
ever, when reusing the catheter the guide-wire was repeatedly introduced into the
catheter lumen, which could disturb the integrity of the lumen wall, as well as
introduce ﬁlth.
Furthermore, during the experiments, air bubbles occurred in the blood-mimicking
ﬂuid. They occurred in a great extend, just after alternating the phantom geome-
try connected to the ﬂow pump. Most of the air bubbles could be removed from the
system, by letting the ﬂow-pump run for about 10min before doing measurements.
However, even after this consideration, small air bubble would still occasionally
93
==PAGE:116==
CHAPTER 5. DISCUSSION
appear in the system. Sometimes they could linger just after the stenosis in the
straight tubes, and around the bulbus of the patient geometries. The speciﬁc con-
sequence of this has not been investigated.
Lastly, small divergences may have occurred between the 3D printed PLA geome-
try and the ﬁnished mold, rendering the ﬁnal phantom geometry slightly diﬀerent
from that of the CAD structure used in COMSOL.
5.4.2
Limitations of the FEM Studies
The results from a numerical model will always be governed by the assumptions
applied to the model. Hence, leading to some important limitations of the FEM
study.
Regarding simulations of the human physiology, many simpliﬁcations are made.
As discussed in section 5.3.2 the assumption of rigid walls, for the time-dependent
inlet, is not valid for the experimental setup.
The accuracy of the FEM studies also depends on the applied meshes. Meshing
a geometry for numerical solutions requires complex methodical techniques. As
meshing is not the focal point of this study, only a modest mesh evaluation is
performed for the straight tubes geometry in section 3.5.5. However, the conse-
quences of the chosen meshes have been evaluated. Following table 3.8, it was
found that the "normal" mesh was not suﬃcient for the straight tubes geome-
tries. Due to signiﬁcantly increased compute time, when increasing the resolution
of the mesh from "normal" to "ﬁne", it was decided to ceep a "normal" mesh.
Thus baring in mind, the possible imprecisions of the associated studies. The pa-
tient geometries were also studied applying a "physics-controlled mesh" with an
element size of "normal" tetrahedral elements. It was not speciﬁcally studied if
the mesh was suﬃcient. However, the mass conservation study shown in section
4.5.1 implies that the mesh, for the most part, were to be considered tolerable.
Merely, patient010 and patient050S showed tendencies to having an insuﬃcient
mesh setting, which might result in imprecise results from the models. This was
not investigated further, due to the time limitations of this project.
5.4.2.1
COMSOL Boundary Definitions
Many considerations were made to make sure that the boundary conditions of the
numerical model, were in compliance with the experimental situation. The cause
of most concern was the deﬁnition of the inlet and outlet boundaries.
For all simulations the outlet boundary was deﬁned as p=0Pa, thereby assuming
zero pressure at all outlets. When assessing the axial pressure in the straight tubes
(see section 4.1.1.1), this boundary setting seems to inﬂuence the pressure by forc-
94
==PAGE:117==
5.4. LIMITATIONS
ing the pressure to converge towards 0Pa. When evaluating the very alternating
pressures, which occur in the time-dependent studies of the 70% and 90% stenotic
tubes, the inﬂuence of the boundary setting becomes seemingly clear.
Evaluating this further would be highly recommended, thereby reassuring that
the pressures around the investigated area of the stenosis, are not inﬂuenced by
the boundary deﬁnition at the outlet. This could either be done by elongating the
straight part of the tubes, after the stenosis. Hence, making sure that the distance
between the investigated area and the outlet is big enough for the pressure not
to be inﬂuenced by the BC. However, when the length of the tube increases, the
resistance may also increase and lead to higher relative pressures. In further work,
it would be suggested to measure the pressure at the outlet of the experimental
phantom, and then use the measured pressure as the boundary setting.
Time-dependent Inlet
When determining the mean velocity curves for the time-dependent inlet ﬂow
in COMSOL, VFI data was initially used to ﬁnd the mean velocity curves, which
developed at the inlet of the ﬂow phantoms during the experimental measurements.
The constructed mean velocity curves then had to be corrected, in relation to the
known output of the ﬂow pump. The results from this are shown in Appendix K.
From this, it becomes apparent that a greater diﬀerence between the established
mean velocity proﬁles is present for patient002 and patient050S. This could be
due to a poor prosecution of the VFI measurements. But, it is also believed to
be caused by the two phantoms having a tendency to leak from an in- or outlet,
causing some of the "stroke volume" of the pump, not to contribute to the ﬂow.
Stationary Inlet
The stationary inlets were all deﬁned as velocity plug-ﬂows. This was necessary
to make the model comply with the deﬁned resolution of the mesh. Following the
calculated Womersley numbers (see table 3.4), the assumption of a ﬂat velocity
proﬁle, is not completely unsound. Hence, it shows that a perfect parabola is not
present either. However, the assumption of a full plug-ﬂow seems quite harsh, and
therefore challenges the compliance of these models, especially when analyzing
results close to the inlet boundary.
Plots of the velocity proﬁle later in the geometry, gave a glimpse into how the
velocity proﬁles have developed into a more parabolic ﬂow.
(see for example
ﬁgure 4.2).
95
==PAGE:118==
CHAPTER 5. DISCUSSION
5.5
Future Outlook
Through this project, we have proposed a method of investigating the compliance
between our experimental setup and a numerical model. However, it was found
that a full correlation between the setups has not been accomplished. Based on
the experiences gained through this process, some recommendations for future
advancements of the FEM study, are as follows:
• Flexible walls - Fluid dynamics and wall mechanics are in many studies
evaluated separately. But as this report shows, and as it is known physio-
logically, the arterial walls are moving, even in fabricated ﬂuid phantoms.
Therefore, would further studies of the eﬀects of the moving walls’ inﬂuence
on the ﬂow seem appropriate.
• Fluid-Structure-Interaction - It is quite evident that the ﬂuid-ﬁlled catheter
is ﬂexible, free to ﬂuctuate and therefore not concentric. Hence, would it be
recommended to investigate the full impact of this feature using FEM.
Lastly, it is always recommended to plan for failed phantom moldings, as it showed
to be a complex procedure, resulting in multiple failed attempts.
96
==PAGE:119==
CHAPTER 6
CONCLUSION
This project has considered the investigation of pressure ﬁelds in arterial stenoses.
The aim of the study was to propose a method, which could consider the compli-
ance between measured pressure gradients and a corresponding numerical model.
Hence, following the hypothesis that this is possible when making thoughtful de-
cisions about the setups.
Our study showed that the ﬂuid-ﬁlled catheter exhibited a clear incompetence
when measuring ∆P values when compared to the results of the formulated FEM
study.
However, the numerical model also displayed some evident limitations,
which needs to be addressed, to gain a better compliance between the two study
methods.
The most inﬂuential diﬀerences between the experiments and the numerical models
were believed to be introduced by the soft moving walls of the phantoms, as well
as the ﬂow disturbances introduced by the catheter when it could not be placed
perfectly concentric within the phantoms.
Hence, the stenotic straight tubes, with a stationary inlet, showed far better com-
pliance than the more elaborate models, running a time-depending inlet ﬂow. Even
though it became evident that as the stenosis degree increased, the measured re-
sults became more and more distinct from the numerical model. This observation
is believed to be a product of the increased diameter ratio value between the
catheter and the narrow lumen of the stenosis.
The study of the three healthy patients did not show any clear patterns in either
the measured ∆P nor the FEM output ∆P. Nevertheless, did the patient050S show
a clear consistency between the measured ∆P values, and the ∆P values from the
FEM study, when running a stationary inlet. However, this was not the case for
the time-dependent inlet. When running a time-dependent inlet, only the FEM
study showed a drop in pressure over the stenosis. The same observation was not
evident for the experimental measurements.
In conclusion, is it determined that both the experimental setup and the FEM
model exhibited strong limitations, making it diﬃcult to achieve conclusive knowl-
edge about the established pressure gradients. Thus, the study showed that even
when making thoughtful decisions about the setups, full compliance between the
measured pressure gradients and those found in a numerical model, was not pos-
sible to achieve without adding further advancements to the methods.
97
==PAGE:120==
==PAGE:121==
CHAPTER 7
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[1] J. G. Webster, Medical Instrumentation - Application and Design. John Wiley
& Sons, Inc., 4th ed., 2010.
[2] D.
Eland
and
S.
Einav,
Standard
Handbook
og
Biomedical
En-
gineering
and
Design:
Chapter
3
-
Physical
and
Flow
Proper-
ties
of
Blood.
https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/c114/
2c6fc7e25d329b5bc211b7888a71c345c955.pdf, visited: 05.04.2017.
[3] W. W. Nichols, M. F. O’Rourke, C. Vlachopoulos, A. P. Hoeks, and R. S.
Reneman, McDonald’s Blood Flow in Arteries - Theoretical, Experimental
and Clinical Principles. Taylor and Francis Group, LLC, 6th ed., 2011.
[4] P. M. Rothwell, R. J. Gibson, J. Slattery, R. J. Sellar, and C. P. War-
low, “Equivalence of measurements of carotid stenosis. a comparison of three
methods on 1001 angiograms. european carotid surgery trialists’ collaborative
group.,” Stroke, vol. 25, no. 12, pp. 2435–2439, 1994.
[5] N. Westerhof, N. Stergiopulos, and M. I. Noble, Snapshots of hemodynam-
ics: an aid for clinical research and graduate education. Springer Science &
Business Media, 2nd ed., 2010.
[6] D. M. Wootton and D. N. Ku, “Fluid mechanics of vascular systems, dis-
eases, and thrombosis,” Annual review of biomedical engineering, vol. 1, no. 1,
pp. 299–329, 1999.
[7] M. K. Banerjee, R. Ganguly, and A. Datta, “Eﬀect of pulsatile ﬂow wave-
form and womersley number on the ﬂow in stenosed arterial geometry,” ISRN
Biomathematics, vol. 2012, 2012.
[8] D. Liepsch, “An introduction to bioﬂuid mechanics—basic models and appli-
cations,” Journal of biomechanics, vol. 35, no. 4, pp. 415–435, 2002.
[9] “http://medicalpicturesinfo.com/common-carotid-artery/,”
visited: 04.05.2017.
[10] J. B. Olesen, “Presentation: Dmts landsmøde 32,” September 18, 2014.
99
==PAGE:122==
CHAPTER 7. BIBLIOGRAPHY
[11] J. D. Bronzino, Biomedical Engineering Handbook - Vol 1, Chapter 19. CRC
Press LLC., 2nd ed., 2000.
[12] “https://www.itis.ethz.ch/virtual-population/
tissue-properties/database/viscosity/,” visited: 07.04.2017.
[13] F. Glor, Q. Long, A. Hughes, A. Augst, B. Ariﬀ, S. M. G. Thom, P. Ver-
donck, and X. Xu, “Reproducibility study of magnetic resonance image-based
computational ﬂuid dynamics prediction of carotid bifurcation ﬂow,” Annals
of Biomedical Engineering, vol. 31, no. 2, pp. 142–151, 2003.
[14] C. Pozrikdis, “Fluid dynamic theory, computation, and numerical simulation,”
no. 2nd edition, 2009.
[15] “http://img.bhs4.com/a7/4/a747bcaa3997a49eb84\
ea8b30328019ad7ce8c70_large.jpg,” visited: 19.04.2017.
[16] J. A. Jensen, “31545 medical imaging systems - lecture 5: Blood ﬂow in the
human body,” September 12, 2016.
[17] “http://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/blood%
20pressure,” visited: 10.10.2016.
[18] A. de Vecchi, R. E. Clough, N. R. Gaddum, M. C. Rutten, P. Lamata,
T. Schaeﬀter, D. A. Nordsletten, and N. P. Smith, “Catheter-induced errors
in pressure measurements in vessels: An in-vitro and numerical study,” IEEE
Transactions on Biomedical Engineering, vol. 61, no. 6, pp. 1844–1850, 2014.
[19] J. Li, A. van Brummelen, and A. Noordergraaf, “Fluid-ﬁlled blood pressure
measurement systems,” Journal of applied physiology, vol. 40, no. 5, pp. 839–
843, 1976.
[20] R. M. Garder, “Direct arterial pressure monitoring,” Current Anesthesia and
Critical Care, no. 1, pp. 239–246, 1990.
[21] “http://www.ni.com/white-paper/,” visited: 23.05.2017.
[22] E. Lee Daugherty, D. Shade, and H. E. Fessler, “Chapter 16 - invasive pressure
monitoring: General principles,” pp. 155–162, October 22, 2008.
[23] M. Allan, W. Gray, and A. Asbury, “Measurement of arterial pressure using
catheter-transducer systems improvement, using the accudynamic,” British
journal of anaesthesia, vol. 60, no. 4, pp. 413–418, 1988.
[24] L. A. Garcia and J. P. Carrozza, “Physiologic evaluation of translesion
pressure gradients in peripheral arteries: Comparison of pressure wire and
100
==PAGE:123==
catheter-derived measurements,” Journal of interventional cardiology, vol. 20,
no. 1, pp. 63–65, 2007.
[25] L. Back, “Estimated mean ﬂow resistance increase during coronary artery
catheterization,” Journal of biomechanics, vol. 27, no. 2, pp. 169–175, 1994.
[26] A. K. Wake, Modeling Fluid Mechanics in Individual Human Carotid Arteries.
Georgia Institute of Technology, 2005.
[27] “https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Computational_fluid_
dynamics,” visited: 19.04.2017.
[28] “https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Types_of_mesh,”
visited:
12.06.2017.
[29] J. B. Olesen, C. A. Villagomez Hoyos, N. D. Møller, M. S. Traberg, A. J. Y.
Chee, B. Y. S. Yiu, C. K. Ho, C. Ewertsen, K. L. Hansen, A. C. H. Yu,
M. B. Nielsen, B. Bech, L. Lônn, and A. J. Jensen, “Non-invasive estimation
of intravascular pressure changes using vector velocity ultrasound,” 2017.
[30] D. R. Enzmann, M. R. Ross, M. P. Marks, and N. J. Pelc, “Blood ﬂow in major
cerebral arteries measured by phase-contrast cine mr,” American Journal of
Neuroradiology, vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 123–129, 1994.
[31] R. F. Smith, B. K. Rutt, A. J. Fox, and R. N. Rankin, “Geometric charac-
terization of stenosed human carotid arteries,” Academic Radiology, vol. 3,
no. 11, pp. 898 – 911, 1996.
[32] N. D. Møller, “Pressure ﬁelds derived using 3-d simulation models and
catheter measurements,” Master Thesis, DTU Elektro, January 2017.
[33] “http://www.mt.elektro.dtu.dk/CFUwiki/Phantom_
fabrication,” visited: 02.03.2017.
[34] C. K. Ho, A. J. Chee, B. Y. Yiu, A. C. Tsang, K. W. Chow, and C. Alfred,
“Wall-less ﬂow phantoms with tortuous vascular geometries: Design princi-
ples and a patient-speciﬁc model fabrication example,” IEEE transactions on
ultrasonics, ferroelectrics, and frequency control, vol. 64, no. 1, pp. 25–38,
2017.
[35] I. T. Gabe, “Pressure measurement in experimental physiology,” Cardiovas-
cular ﬂuid dynamics, vol. 1, pp. 11–50, 1972.
[36] B. A. Olshausen, Aliasing. http://redwood.berkeley.edu/bruno/
npb261/aliasing.pdf, visited: 02.20.2017.
101
==PAGE:124==
CHAPTER 7. BIBLIOGRAPHY
[37] J. Jonas, O. J. Bjerring, S. M. Bo, H. P. Møller, N. M. Bachmann, and
J. J. Arendt, “Vector velocity volume ﬂow estimation: Sources of error and
corrections applied for arteriovenous ﬁstulas",” Ultrasonics, no. 70, pp. 136–
146, 2016.
[38] J. B. Olesen, Imaging of In-vivo Pressure using Ultrasound. Phd Project -
Technical University of Denmark, CFU, 2016.
[39] K. Perktold and D. Hilbert, “Numerical simulation of pulsatile ﬂow in a
carotid bifurcation model,” Journal of biomedical engineering, vol. 8, no. 3,
pp. 193–199, 1986.
[40] S. Imbesi and C. Kerber, “Pressure measurements across vascular stenoses:
Practice and pitfalls,” Interventional Neuroradiology, vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 139–
144, 1999.
[41] R. Leiboﬀ, G. Bren, R. Katz, R. Korkegi, and A. Ross, “Determinants of
transstenotic gradients observed during angioplasty: an experimental model,”
The American journal of cardiology, vol. 52, no. 10, pp. 1311–1317, 1983.
102
==PAGE:125==
APPENDIX A
PRESSURE TRANSDUCER SPECIFICATIONS
Figure A.1: Speciﬁcations of the pressure transducer by Edwards Lifesciences, used in the ex-
perimental setup.
103
==PAGE:126==
==PAGE:127==
APPENDIX B
PATIENT INFO
Table B.1: The table shows the speciﬁcation information on each of
the 10 available patients. Avagage age = 32.1years, 8 M(Male) and
2F (Female), avarege weight = 76.4kg
Age [years] Gender [M/F] Weight [kg]
Patient001
32
M
80
Patient002
27
M
93
Patient003
33
F
52
Patient004
29
M
72
Patient005
52
F
69
Patient006
31
M
87
Patient007
29
M
82
Patient008
30
M
66
Patien009
26
M
80
Patient010
32
M
83
105
==PAGE:128==
==PAGE:129==
APPENDIX C
SCATTER AGENT FOR PHANTOM MOLDING
(a) Patient 10: Phantom molded using graphite particles as scatter agent.
(b) Patient 2: Phantom molded using silicon dioxide as scatter agent. This
phantom had been molded previously to this study.
Figure C.1: The two images clearly show a better image-visibility using graphite as the scatter
agent. The white spots in ﬁgure (b), is believed to be cased by the silicon dioxide, which has a
tendency to clump together, even after careful stirring.
107
==PAGE:130==
==PAGE:131==
APPENDIX D
FLOW-PUMP SETTINGS - CAROTID2
Figure D.1: Flow-pump settings when running the Carotid2 setting
adjusting for a max peak ﬂow rate of 15ml/s
Figure D.2: Flow-pump settings when running the Carotid2 setting adjusting for a max peak
ﬂow rate of 10ml/s. This ﬂow rate was only used in the sample frequency analysis described in
section 3.3.3
109
==PAGE:132==
==PAGE:133==
APPENDIX E
MATLAB CODE - SAMPLE FREQUENCY ANALYSIS
The applied code takes collected data (which have been collected with a sampling
frequency far above the expected) and plots the frequencies, so the highest used
frequency can be visualised.
c l c ;
y = P; % Deﬁne the data set P as y.
f s = 1000; %To get a good resolution of the data, a high sampling frequency is used.
L = length (y ) ; %signal length.
NFFT = f l o o r (2^ nextpow2 (L) ) ; % Deﬁnition of the resolution
Y = f f t (y ,NFFT) /L ; % ﬁnd the fast-Fourier-transform (ﬀt) of the signal, y.
Ytilde = abs (Y) ; % ﬁnds the absolute value of the Fourier transformed data, Y.
Ynorm = Ytilde /max( Ytilde ) ; %normalizing the data.
f = f s /2∗l i n s p a c e (0 ,1 ,NFFT/2+1) ; % deﬁne the frequency axis.
y_y = 2∗abs (Y( 1 :NFFT/2+1) ) ; % Deﬁne the positive domain of the spectrum.
plot ( f , y_y) ;
xlim ( [ 0
2 5 ] ) ;
ylim ( [ 0
2 ] ) ;
t i t l e ( ' Frequency
Magnitude
Plot ' )
x l a b e l ( ' Frequency
(Hz) ' )
y l a b e l ( ' Frequency Magnetude ' )
111
==PAGE:134==
==PAGE:135==
APPENDIX F
LABVIEW GRAPHIC OVERVIEW
(a) Labview block diagram.
(b) Labview user interface.
Figure F.1: Labview data collection setup.
113
==PAGE:136==
==PAGE:137==
APPENDIX G
MATLAB CODE - CONSTANT FLOW DATA
ANALYSIS
This Matlab code have originally been developed by Niclas Møller [32].
To be usable for the data collected during this project, some modiﬁcations have
though been deemed necessary.
function
[ D_high , S_high ] = Steady_straight_tubes ( P_aft , P_mid, P_bef , N_cyc)
% This function ﬁlters the data and ﬁnds the mean pressure diﬀerences between datacollection points,
% and the standard deviation between the diﬀerences.
% The function need inputs in form of P_aft, P_mid, P_bef, which are the pressure matrices
% containing all the runs, for each position of the catheter.
% P_aft, P_mid, P_bef need to be converted from voltage to Pa before using the function.
% The number of cycles must be at least 2
%The function only uses 2 cycles and additional pump cycles are ignored
%Ncyc is a conservative estimate of the length of on pump cycle in data
%samples. N_cyc defaults to 5500 for 15 mL/s.
i f
nargin < 4
N_cyc = 5500;
end
dataSets = length ( P_aft ( 1 , : ) ) ;
%Filter 50 Hz noise
LPF = d e s i g n f i l t ( ' l o w p a s s f i r ' ,
' PassbandFrequency ' ,
4 0 , . . .
' StopbandFrequency ' ,
48 ,
' PassbandRipple ' ,
. 0 0 1 , . . .
' StopbandAttenuation ' ,
20 ,
' SampleRate ' ,
400) ;
P_aft = f i l t e r (LPF, P_aft ) ;
P_mid = f i l t e r (LPF,P_mid) ;
P_bef = f i l t e r (LPF, P_bef ) ;
%Extract pump cycles from each dataset by ﬁnding the peaks in the data.
cycExt = 2; %Number of cycles to extract. Make sure each dataset
%contains minimum cycExt cycles.
MPH_aft = max(max( P_aft ) )−max(max( P_aft ) ) /7; %Minimum peak height
MPH_mid = max(max( P_aft ) )−max(max(P_mid) ) /7;
MPH_bef = max(max( P_aft ) )−max(max( P_bef ) ) /7;
%After
P_aft_cyc = zeros ( cycExt∗N_cyc , dataSets ) ;
f o r
i = 1: length ( P_aft ( 1 , : ) ) ;
[ pks , l o c s ] = findpeaks ( P_aft ( : , i ) , ' MinPeakDistance ' , 2 0 0 , . . .
' MinPeakHeight ' ,MPH_aft) ;
peak_diff = d i f f ( l o c s ) ;
f o r
j = 0: cycExt −1;
c y c l e s = P_aft ( l o c s ( j +1)+(peak_diff ( j +1)−N_cyc) /2: l o c s ( j +2) −...
115
==PAGE:138==
G: Matlab Code - Constant Flow Data Analysis
( peak_diff ( j +1)−N_cyc) /2−1, i ) ;
P_aft_cyc ( j ∗N_cyc+1:( j +1)∗N_cyc , i ) = c y c l e s ;
end
end
%Middle
P_mid_cyc = zeros ( cycExt∗N_cyc , dataSets ) ;
f o r
i = 1: length (P_mid ( 1 , : ) ) ;
[ pks , l o c s ] = findpeaks (P_mid ( : , i ) , ' MinPeakDistance ' , 2 0 0 , . . .
' MinPeakHeight ' ,MPH_mid) ;
peak_diff = d i f f ( l o c s ) ;
f o r
j = 0: cycExt −1;
c y c l e s = P_mid( l o c s ( j +1)+(peak_diff ( j +1)−N_cyc) /2: l o c s ( j +2) −...
( peak_diff ( j +1)−N_cyc) /2−1, i ) ;
P_mid_cyc( j ∗N_cyc+1:( j +1)∗N_cyc , i ) = c y c l e s ;
end
end
%Before
P_bef_cyc = zeros ( cycExt∗N_cyc , dataSets ) ;
f o r
i = 1: length ( P_bef ( 1 , : ) ) ;
[ pks , l o c s ] = findpeaks ( P_bef ( : , i ) , ' MinPeakDistance ' , 2 0 0 , . . .
' MinPeakHeight ' ,MPH_bef) ;
peak_diff = d i f f ( l o c s ) ;
f o r
j = 0: cycExt −1;
c y c l e s = P_bef ( l o c s ( j +1)+(peak_diff ( j +1)−N_cyc) /2: l o c s ( j +2) . . .
−(peak_diff ( j +1)−N_cyc) /2−1, i ) ;
P_bef_cyc ( j ∗N_cyc+1:( j +1)∗N_cyc , i ) = c y c l e s ;
end
end
%Divide data into high and low pump cycles, and then remove the low pump
%cycles.
k = 0;
%After
P_cyc_aft_high = zeros (N_cyc , dataSets ) ;
P_cyc_aft_low = zeros (N_cyc , dataSets ) ;
f o r
i = 1: dataSets ;
cycDif = mean( P_aft_cyc ( 1 : N_cyc , i ) )−mean( P_aft_cyc (N_cyc+1:2∗N_cyc , i ) ) ;
i f
cycDif > 0;
i f
mod( cycExt , 2 ) == f a l s e ;
while
k < cycExt /2;
P_cyc_aft_high ( k∗N_cyc+1:(k+1)∗N_cyc , i ) = . . .
P_aft_cyc (2∗k∗N_cyc+1:(2∗k+1)∗N_cyc , i ) ;
P_cyc_aft_low ( k∗N_cyc+1:(k+1)∗N_cyc , i ) = . . .
P_aft_cyc ((2∗k+1)∗N_cyc+1:2∗(k+1)∗N_cyc , i ) ;
k = k+1;
end
e l s e
while
k < c e i l ( cycExt /2) ;
P_cyc_aft_high ( k∗N_cyc+1:(k+1)∗N_cyc , i ) = . . .
116
==PAGE:139==
@¸ secnumdepth > @ne chapapp G: Matlab Code - Constant Flow Data Analysis
P_aft_cyc (2∗k∗N_cyc+1:(2∗k+1)∗N_cyc , i ) ;
i f
2∗k > cycExt /2
break
e l s e
P_cyc_aft_low ( k∗N_cyc+1:(k+1)∗N_cyc , i ) = . . .
P_aft_cyc ((2∗k+1)∗N_cyc+1:2∗(k+1)∗N_cyc , i ) ;
k = k+1;
end
end
end
e l s e
i f
mod( cycExt , 2 ) == f a l s e ;
while
k < cycExt /2;
P_cyc_aft_low ( k∗N_cyc+1:(k+1)∗N_cyc , i ) = . . .
P_aft_cyc (2∗k∗N_cyc+1:(2∗k+1)∗N_cyc , i ) ;
P_cyc_aft_high ( k∗N_cyc+1:(k+1)∗N_cyc , i ) = . . .
P_aft_cyc ((2∗k+1)∗N_cyc+1:2∗(k+1)∗N_cyc , i ) ;
k = k+1;
end
e l s e
while
k < c e i l ( cycExt /2) ;
P_cyc_aft_low ( k∗N_cyc+1:(k+1)∗N_cyc , i ) = . . .
P_aft_cyc (2∗k∗N_cyc+1:(2∗k+1)∗N_cyc , i ) ;
i f
2∗k > cycExt /2
break
e l s e
P_cyc_aft_high ( k∗N_cyc+1:(k+1)∗N_cyc , i ) = . . .
P_aft_cyc ((2∗k+1)∗N_cyc+1:2∗(k+1)∗N_cyc , i ) ;
k = k+1;
end
end
end
end
k = 0;
end
%Middle
P_cyc_mid_high = zeros (N_cyc , dataSets ) ;
P_cyc_mid_low = zeros (N_cyc , dataSets ) ;
f o r
i = 1: dataSets ;
%high = [];low = [];
cycDif = mean(P_mid_cyc ( 1 : N_cyc , i ) )−mean(P_mid_cyc(N_cyc+1:2∗N_cyc , i ) ) ;
i f
cycDif > 0;
i f
mod( cycExt , 2 ) == f a l s e ;
while
k < cycExt /2;
P_cyc_mid_high( k∗N_cyc+1:(k+1)∗N_cyc , i ) = . . .
P_mid_cyc(2∗k∗N_cyc+1:(2∗k+1)∗N_cyc , i ) ;
P_cyc_mid_low(k∗N_cyc+1:(k+1)∗N_cyc , i ) = . . .
P_mid_cyc((2∗k+1)∗N_cyc+1:2∗(k+1)∗N_cyc , i ) ;
k = k+1;
end
e l s e
while
k < c e i l ( cycExt /2) ;
117
==PAGE:140==
G: Matlab Code - Constant Flow Data Analysis
P_cyc_mid_high( k∗N_cyc+1:(k+1)∗N_cyc , i ) = . . .
P_mid_cyc(2∗k∗N_cyc+1:(2∗k+1)∗N_cyc , i ) ;
i f
2∗k > cycExt /2
break
e l s e
P_cyc_mid_low(k∗N_cyc+1:(k+1)∗N_cyc , i ) = . . .
P_mid_cyc((2∗k+1)∗N_cyc+1:2∗(k+1)∗N_cyc , i ) ;
k = k+1;
end
end
end
e l s e
i f
mod( cycExt , 2 ) == f a l s e ;
while
k < cycExt /2;
P_cyc_mid_low(k∗N_cyc+1:(k+1)∗N_cyc , i ) = . . .
P_mid_cyc(2∗k∗N_cyc+1:(2∗k+1)∗N_cyc , i ) ;
P_cyc_mid_high( k∗N_cyc+1:(k+1)∗N_cyc , i ) = . . .
P_mid_cyc((2∗k+1)∗N_cyc+1:2∗(k+1)∗N_cyc , i ) ;
k = k+1;
end
e l s e
while
k < c e i l ( cycExt /2) ;
P_cyc_mid_low(k∗N_cyc+1:(k+1)∗N_cyc , i ) = . . .
P_mid_cyc(2∗k∗N_cyc+1:(2∗k+1)∗N_cyc , i ) ;
i f
2∗k > cycExt /2
break
e l s e
P_cyc_mid_high( k∗N_cyc+1:(k+1)∗N_cyc , i ) = . . .
P_mid_cyc((2∗k+1)∗N_cyc+1:2∗(k+1)∗N_cyc , i ) ;
k = k+1;
end
end
end
end
k = 0;
end
%Before
P_cyc_bef_high = zeros (N_cyc , dataSets ) ;
P_cyc_bef_low = zeros (N_cyc , dataSets ) ;
f o r
i = 1: dataSets ;
%high = [];low = [];
cycDif = mean( P_bef_cyc ( 1 : N_cyc , i ) )−mean( P_bef_cyc (N_cyc+1:2∗N_cyc , i ) ) ;
i f
cycDif > 0;
i f
mod( cycExt , 2 ) == f a l s e ;
while
k < cycExt /2;
P_cyc_bef_high ( k∗N_cyc+1:(k+1)∗N_cyc , i ) = . . .
P_bef_cyc (2∗k∗N_cyc+1:(2∗k+1)∗N_cyc , i ) ;
P_cyc_bef_low (k∗N_cyc+1:(k+1)∗N_cyc , i ) = . . .
P_bef_cyc ((2∗k+1)∗N_cyc+1:2∗(k+1)∗N_cyc , i ) ;
k = k+1;
end
e l s e
while
k < c e i l ( cycExt /2) ;
118
==PAGE:141==
@¸ secnumdepth > @ne chapapp G: Matlab Code - Constant Flow Data Analysis
P_cyc_bef_high ( k∗N_cyc+1:(k+1)∗N_cyc , i ) = . . .
P_bef_cyc (2∗k∗N_cyc+1:(2∗k+1)∗N_cyc , i ) ;
i f
2∗k > cycExt /2
break
e l s e
P_cyc_bef_low (k∗N_cyc+1:(k+1)∗N_cyc , i ) = . . .
P_bef_cyc ((2∗k+1)∗N_cyc+1:2∗(k+1)∗N_cyc , i ) ;
k = k+1;
end
end
end
e l s e
i f
mod( cycExt , 2 ) == f a l s e ;
while
k < cycExt /2;
P_cyc_bef_low (k∗N_cyc+1:(k+1)∗N_cyc , i ) = . . .
P_bef_cyc (2∗k∗N_cyc+1:(2∗k+1)∗N_cyc , i ) ;
P_cyc_bef_high ( k∗N_cyc+1:(k+1)∗N_cyc , i ) = . . .
P_bef_cyc ((2∗k+1)∗N_cyc+1:2∗(k+1)∗N_cyc , i ) ;
k = k+1;
end
e l s e
while
k < c e i l ( cycExt /2) ;
P_cyc_bef_low (k∗N_cyc+1:(k+1)∗N_cyc , i ) = . . .
P_bef_cyc (2∗k∗N_cyc+1:(2∗k+1)∗N_cyc , i ) ;
i f
2∗k > cycExt /2
break
e l s e
P_cyc_bef_high ( k∗N_cyc+1:(k+1)∗N_cyc , i ) = . . .
P_bef_cyc ((2∗k+1)∗N_cyc+1:2∗(k+1)∗N_cyc , i ) ;
k = k+1;
end
end
end
end
k = 0;
end
%Assemble output matrixes for the high pump cycles
%means
meanMat_high = zeros ( dataSets , 3 ) ;
meanMat_high ( : , 1 ) = mean( P_cyc_aft_high ) ;
meanMat_high ( : , 2 ) = mean(P_cyc_mid_high) ;
meanMat_high ( : , 3 ) = mean( P_cyc_bef_high ) ;
zr = zeros ( dataSets , 1 ) ;
% Findes the diﬀerence between two points.
diff_data=d i f f ( transpose (mean(meanMat) )
% mean of diﬀerence between two pouits
mean_diff=mean( tranpose ( diff_data ) )∗−1
% standard deviation
std_diff=std ( transpose ( diff_data )
119
==PAGE:142==
==PAGE:143==
APPENDIX H
MATLAB- TIME-DEPENDENT FLOW DATA
ANALYSIS
This Matlab code have originally been developed by Niclas Møller [32].
To be usable for the data collected during this project, some modiﬁcations have
though been deemed necessary.
function
[DMAP_high, SMAP_high, Dsys_high , Ssys_high ] = Puls_straight_tubes ( P_aft , ←-
P_mid, P_bef )
%This function ﬁlters the data.
%Find mean systolic pressure drops and the standard deviation.
%The function need inputs in form of P_aft, P_mid, P_bef which are the pressure matrices with all the runs.
% The matrices can only contain one cycles form the pump.
%P_aft, P_mid, P_bef need to be cut and calculated from volt to Pa before using the function.
dataSets = length ( P_aft ( 1 , : ) ) ;
% The data is ﬁltede
%Filter 50 Hz noise
LPF = d e s i g n f i l t ( ' l o w p a s s f i r ' ,
' PassbandFrequency ' ,
4 0 , . . .
' StopbandFrequency ' ,
48 ,
' PassbandRipple ' ,
. 0 0 1 , . . .
' StopbandAttenuation ' ,
20 ,
' SampleRate ' ,
400) ;
P_aft = f i l t e r (LPF, P_aft ) ;
P_mid = f i l t e r (LPF,P_mid) ;
P_bef = f i l t e r (LPF, P_bef ) ;
% To avoid small local peaks which can occur because of noise, we set a
% mean peak prominence.
MPP = 500;
%Meansystolic matrixes
meanSysMat= zeros ( dataSets , 3 ) ;
MPH = max(max( P_aft ) )−max(max( P_aft ) ) /7; % To only obtain the max peaks, we
% deﬁnd a minmum peak heigth.
% Find the mean systolic matrixes for the data
% located after the stenois
f o r
i = 1: dataSets
pks = findpeaks ( P_aft ( : , i ) , ' MinPeakProminence ' ,MPP, . . .
' MinPeakHeight ' ,MPH) ;
meanSysMat( i , 1 ) = mean( pks ) ;
end
% Find the mean systolic matrixes for the data
% located at the stenois
f o r
i = 1: dataSets
121
==PAGE:144==
H: Matlab- Time-dependent Flow Data Analysis
pks = findpeaks (P_mid ( : , i ) , ' MinPeakProminence ' ,MPP, . . .
' MinPeakHeight ' ,MPH) ;
meanSysMat( i , 2 ) = mean( pks ) ;
end
% Find the mean systolic matrixes for the data
% located before the stenois
f o r
i = 1: dataSets
pks = findpeaks ( P_bef ( : , i ) , ' MinPeakProminence ' ,MPP, . . .
' MinPeakHeight ' ,MPH) ;
meanSysMat( i , 3 ) = mean( pks ) ;
end
%Systolic pressure drops
% Find the diﬀerence between two points.
diff_data=d i f f ( transpose (mean(meanMat) )
% mean of diﬀerence between two pouits
mean_diff=mean( tranpose ( diff_data ) )∗−1
% standard deviation
std_diff=std ( transpose ( diff_data )
end
122
==PAGE:145==
APPENDIX I
PATEINT GEOMETRIES FOR COMSOL
Figure is on next page, due to the size. (Figure I.1).
123
==PAGE:146==
I: Pateint Geometries for COMSOL
(a) Patient1
(b) Patient2
(c) Patient3
(d) Patient4
(e) Patient5
(f) Patient6
(g) Patient7
(h) Patient8
(i) Patient9
(j) Patient10
Figure I.1: Patient 1-10 as imported into COMSOL. The scale is in [mm].
The ﬁgures show that the axial orientation varies between patient models, as well as the size of the extracted geometry of the artery,
making some of them more suitable for COMSOL modeling.
124
==PAGE:147==
APPENDIX J
MATLAB CODE - VFI FLOW PROFILE
The scripts, which was run is to get a mean velocity proﬁles used for the COM-
SOL models, was written by Ramin Moshavegh, Technical University of Denmark,
CFU.
In the following Matlab code the GUI main script is shown.
The measurement used was: "process_vﬁ_ﬂow_proﬁle".
Each time a measurement is preformed, a plot will be generated indicating the
mean velocity proﬁle along the chosen line, which is deﬁned perpendicular to the
vessel and is manually marked, when running the script. The data belonging to
that measurement is saved for further usage.
Each measurement will generate a measurement folder belonging to that dataset.
New measurements on the same dataset will overwrite the old measurement results
of that dataset. The output is a mean velocity proﬁle, deﬁned as [cm/s]/[s].
function
varargout = c f u _ v i s u a l i z a t i o n ( varargin )
% CFU_VISUALIZATION MATLAB code for cfu_visualization.ﬁg
%
% CFU visulaization program for displaying B-mode and velocity
% videos in real time. The program is also extendable with various
% processing modules for deriving quantitative data.
% Revision history:awea
%
% Version 2.11, Feb 15, 2016: JAJ
% Comments added to improve readability
% Command added for showing information about the data loaded
% Last Modiﬁed by GUIDE v2.5 22-Jun-2016 10:14:41
%———————————————————————-
% Begin initialization code - DO NOT EDIT
gui_Singleton = 1;
gui_State = s t r u c t ( 'gui_Name ' ,
mfilename ,
. . .
' gui_Singleton ' ,
gui_Singleton ,
. . .
' gui_OpeningFcn ' ,
@cfu_visualization_OpeningFcn ,
. . .
' gui_OutputFcn ' ,
@cfu_visualization_OutputFcn ,
. . .
' gui_LayoutFcn ' ,
[ ]
,
. . .
' gui_Callback ' ,
[ ] ) ;
i f
nargin && i s c h a r ( varargin {1})
gui_State . gui_Callback = str2f unc ( varargin {1}) ;
end
i f
nargout
[ varargout {1: nargout }] = gui_mainfcn ( gui_State ,
varargin { : } ) ;
e l s e
gui_mainfcn ( gui_State ,
varargin { : } ) ;
125
==PAGE:148==
J: Matlab Code - VFI ﬂow proﬁle
end
% End initialization code - DO NOT EDIT
%————————————————————————-
%=============================================
% This section are the controls for initializing the GUI
%=============================================
% — Executes just before cfu_visualization is made visible.
function
cfu_visualization_OpeningFcn ( hObject ,
eventdata ,
handles ,
varargin )
% Make the global data visible to this function
g l o b a l
global_data
% Add the path of the program and keep it in global
[ global_data . sys . program_path ,~ ,~] = f i l e p a r t s ( f i l e p a r t s ( mfilename ( ' f u l l p a t h ' ) )←-
) ;
addpath ( genpath ( global_data . sys . program_path ) )
% Call the function to initialize the program
[ handles ] = vis_cb_start_gui ( handles ) ;
handles . output = hObject ;
guidata ( hObject ,
handles ) ;
% UIWAIT makes cfu_visualization wait for user response (see UIRESUME)
% uiwait(handles.ﬁgure1);
%===========================================
% This section are the controls for input of data and the call backs
%===========================================
% This function selects which data format to input into the program
% — Executes on selection change in select_data_format.
function
select_data_format_Callback ( hObject ,
eventdata ,
handles )
% hObject handle to select_data_format (see GCBO)
% eventdata reserved - to be deﬁned in a future version of MATLAB
% handles structure with handles and user data (see GUIDATA)
% Make global data visible to this function
g l o b a l
global_data
% Find which data format has been selected
contents = c e l l s t r ( get ( hObject , ' String ' ) ) ;
% Returns Select_data_format contents as cell array
global_data . data . import_format = contents { get ( hObject , ' Value ' ) };
% Returns selected item from Select_data_format
handles . output = hObject ;
guidata ( hObject ,
handles ) ;
% — Executes during object creation, after setting all properties.
126
==PAGE:149==
@¸ secnumdepth > @ne chapapp J: Matlab Code - VFI ﬂow proﬁle
function
select_data_format_CreateFcn ( hObject ,
eventdata ,
handles )
% hObject handle to select_data_format (see GCBO)
% eventdata reserved - to be deﬁned in a future version of MATLAB
% handles empty - handles not created until after all CreateFcns called
% Hint: popupmenu controls usually have a white background on Windows.
% See ISPC and COMPUTER.
i f
i s p c && i s e q u a l ( get ( hObject , ' BackgroundColor ' ) ,
get (0 , '←-
defaultUicontrolBackgroundColor ' ) )
s e t ( hObject , ' BackgroundColor ' , ' white ' ) ;
end
% — Executes on button press in select and import_data.
function
import_data_Callback ( hObject ,
eventdata ,
handles )
[ handles ] = vis_cb_import_data ( hObject , handles ) ;
handles . output = hObject ;
guidata ( hObject ,
handles ) ;
% This shows information about the data loaded
% — Executes on button press in data_information.
function
data_information_Callback ( hObject ,
eventdata ,
handles )
% hObject handle to data_information (see GCBO)
% eventdata reserved - to be deﬁned in a future version of MATLAB
% handles structure with handles and user data (see GUIDATA)
[ handles ] = vis_cb_data_information ( handles ) ;
% — Executes on selection change in data_list_popup_menu.
function
data_list_popup_menu_Callback ( hObject ,
eventdata ,
handles )
% hObject handle to data_list_popup_menu (see GCBO)
% eventdata reserved - to be deﬁned in a future version of MATLAB
% handles structure with handles and user data (see GUIDATA)
[
handles
] = vis_cb_data_list_popup_menu
( hObject , handles ) ;
handles . output = hObject ;
guidata ( hObject ,
handles ) ;
% Hints: contents = cellstr(get(hObject,’String’)) returns data_list_popup_menu contents as cell array
% contentsget(hObject,’Value’) returns selected item from data_list_popup_menu
% — Executes during object creation, after setting all properties.
function
data_list_popup_menu_CreateFcn ( hObject ,
eventdata ,
handles )
% hObject handle to data_list_popup_menu (see GCBO)
% eventdata reserved - to be deﬁned in a future version of MATLAB
% handles empty - handles not created until after all CreateFcns called
% Hint: popupmenu controls usually have a white background on Windows.
% See ISPC and COMPUTER.
i f
i s p c && i s e q u a l ( get ( hObject , ' BackgroundColor ' ) ,
get (0 , '←-
defaultUicontrolBackgroundColor ' ) )
s e t ( hObject , ' BackgroundColor ' , ' white ' ) ;
end
%==============================================
127
==PAGE:150==
J: Matlab Code - VFI ﬂow proﬁle
% This section are the controls for selecting the display of data
%==============================================
% — Executes on selection change in select_display_method.
function
select_display_method_Callback ( hObject ,
eventdata ,
handles )
[
hObject , handles
] = vis_cb_select_display_method (
hObject , handles
) ;
handles . output = hObject ;
guidata ( hObject ,
handles ) ;
% Hints: contents = cellstr(get(hObject,’String’)) returns select_display_method contents as cell array
% contentsget(hObject,’Value’) returns selected item from select_display_method
%===============================================
% This section are the controls for controlling the video display
%===============================================
% — Executes on slider movement.
function
slider_frame_Callback ( hObject ,
eventdata ,
handles )
[
handles
] = vis_cb_slider_frame (
handles ) ;
handles . output = hObject ;
guidata ( hObject ,
handles ) ;
% — Executes during object creation, after setting all properties.
function
slider_frame_CreateFcn ( hObject ,
eventdata ,
handles )
% Hint: slider controls usually have a light gray background.
i f
i s e q u a l ( get ( hObject , ' BackgroundColor ' ) ,
get (0 , '←-
defaultUicontrolBackgroundColor ' ) )
s e t ( hObject , ' BackgroundColor ' , [ . 9
. 9
. 9 ] ) ;
end
% — Executes on button press in Pause_button.
function
Pause_button_Callback ( hObject ,
eventdata ,
handles )
[
handles
] = vis_cb_pause_button (
handles
) ;
handles . output = hObject ;
guidata ( hObject ,
handles ) ;
% — Executes on button press in play_button.
function
play_button_Callback ( hObject ,
eventdata ,
handles )
[
handles
] = vis_cb_play_button (
handles , hObject
) ;
handles . output = hObject ;
guidata ( hObject ,
handles ) ;
% — Executes on button press in fast_forward_button.
function
fast_forward_button_Callback ( hObject ,
eventdata ,
handles )
[
handles
] = vis_cb_fast_forward_button (
handles
) ;
128
==PAGE:151==
@¸ secnumdepth > @ne chapapp J: Matlab Code - VFI ﬂow proﬁle
handles . output = hObject ;
guidata ( hObject ,
handles ) ;
% — Executes on button press in last_button.
function
last_button_Callback ( hObject ,
eventdata ,
handles )
[
handles
] = vis_cb_last_button (
handles
) ;
handles . output = hObject ;
guidata ( hObject ,
handles ) ;
% — Executes on button press in fast_backward.
function
fast_backward_Callback ( hObject ,
eventdata ,
handles )
[
handles
] = vis_cb_fast_backward_button (
handles
) ;
handles . output = hObject ;
guidata ( hObject ,
handles ) ;
% — Executes on button press in begin_button.
function
begin_button_Callback ( hObject ,
eventdata ,
handles )
[
handles
] = vis_cb_begin_button (
handles
) ;
handles . output = hObject ;
guidata ( hObject ,
handles ) ;
%===============================================
% This section are the controls for controlling the processing of the
% data
%===============================================
% — Outputs from this function are returned to the command line.
function
varargout = cfu_visualization_OutputFcn ( hObject ,
eventdata ,
handles )
% Get default command line output from handles structure
varargout {1} = handles . output ;
% — Executes on button press in create_movie.
function
create_movie_Callback ( hObject ,
eventdata ,
handles )
[
handles
] = vis_cb_create_movie
(
hObject , handles
) ;
handles . output = hObject ;
guidata ( hObject ,
handles ) ;
% — Executes on button press in pushbutton12.
function
pushbutton12_Callback ( hObject ,
eventdata ,
handles )
% — Executes during object creation, after setting all properties.
function
text_box_total_frame_num_CreateFcn ( hObject ,
eventdata ,
handles )
129
==PAGE:152==
J: Matlab Code - VFI ﬂow proﬁle
% — Executes during object deletion, before destroying properties.
function
text_box_total_frame_num_DeleteFcn ( hObject ,
eventdata ,
handles )
% — Executes during object creation, after setting all properties.
function
video_type_save_CreateFcn ( hObject ,
eventdata ,
handles )
% Hint: popupmenu controls usually have a white background on Windows.
% See ISPC and COMPUTER.
i f
i s p c && i s e q u a l ( get ( hObject , ' BackgroundColor ' ) ,
get (0 , '←-
defaultUicontrolBackgroundColor ' ) )
s e t ( hObject , ' BackgroundColor ' , ' white ' ) ;
end
% — Executes on button press in Print_frame.
function
Print_frame_Callback ( hObject ,
eventdata ,
handles )
[
handles
] = vis_cb_print_frame
(
hObject , handles
) ;
handles . output = hObject ;
guidata ( hObject ,
handles ) ;
% — Executes during object creation, after setting all properties.
function
select_display_method_CreateFcn ( hObject ,
eventdata ,
handles )
% hObject handle to select_display_method (see GCBO)
% eventdata reserved - to be deﬁned in a future version of MATLAB
% handles empty - handles not created until after all CreateFcns called
% Hint: popupmenu controls usually have a white background on Windows.
% See ISPC and COMPUTER.
i f
i s p c && i s e q u a l ( get ( hObject , ' BackgroundColor ' ) ,
get (0 , '←-
defaultUicontrolBackgroundColor ' ) )
s e t ( hObject , ' BackgroundColor ' , ' white ' ) ;
end
% — Executes on selection change in Select_axis_format.
function
Select_axis_format_Callback ( hObject ,
eventdata ,
handles )
% hObject handle to Select_axis_format (see GCBO)
% eventdata reserved - to be deﬁned in a future version of MATLAB
% handles structure with handles and user data (see GUIDATA)
g l o b a l
global_data
contents = c e l l s t r ( get ( hObject , ' String ' ) ) ; % returns Select_axis_format contents as cell array
global_data . display . f l a g s . axis_format = contents { get ( hObject , ' Value ' ) }; % returns
% selected item from Select_axis_format
handles . output = hObject ;
guidata ( hObject ,
handles ) ;
% Hints: contents = cellstr(get(hObject,’String’)) returns Select_axis_format contents as cell array
% contentsget(hObject,’Value’) returns selected item from Select_axis_format
130
==PAGE:153==
@¸ secnumdepth > @ne chapapp J: Matlab Code - VFI ﬂow proﬁle
% — Executes during object creation, after setting all properties.
function
Select_axis_format_CreateFcn ( hObject ,
eventdata ,
handles )
% hObject handle to Select_axis_format (see GCBO)
% eventdata reserved - to be deﬁned in a future version of MATLAB
% handles empty - handles not created until after all CreateFcns called
% Hint: popupmenu controls usually have a white background on Windows.
% See ISPC and COMPUTER.
i f
i s p c && i s e q u a l ( get ( hObject , ' BackgroundColor ' ) ,
get (0 , '←-
defaultUicontrolBackgroundColor ' ) )
s e t ( hObject , ' BackgroundColor ' , ' white ' ) ;
end
% — Executes on button press in exit_program.
function
exit_program_Callback ( hObject ,
eventdata ,
handles )
c l c ;
c l e a r S t r = ' c l e a r
a l l ' ;
e v a l i n ( ' base ' , c l e a r S t r ) ;
c l o s e ( handles . f i g u r e 1 )
% — Executes on selection change in select_data_processing.
function
select_data_processing_Callback ( hObject ,
eventdata ,
handles )
% hObject handle to select_data_processing (see GCBO)
% eventdata reserved - to be deﬁned in a future version of MATLAB
% handles structure with handles and user data (see GUIDATA)
[
hObject , handles
] = vis_cb_select_processing <_method(
hObject , handles
) ;
handles . output = hObject ;
guidata ( hObject ,
handles ) ;
% Hints: contents = cellstr(get(hObject,’String’)) returns select_data_processing contents as cell array
% contentsget(hObject,’Value’) returns selected item from select_data_processing
% — Executes during object creation, after setting all properties.
function
select_data_processing_CreateFcn ( hObject ,
eventdata ,
handles )
% hObject handle to select_data_processing (see GCBO)
% eventdata reserved - to be deﬁned in a future version of MATLAB
% handles empty - handles not created until after all CreateFcns called
% Hint: popupmenu controls usually have a white background on Windows.
% See ISPC and COMPUTER.
i f
i s p c && i s e q u a l ( get ( hObject , ' BackgroundColor ' ) ,
get (0 , '←-
defaultUicontrolBackgroundColor ' ) )
s e t ( hObject , ' BackgroundColor ' , ' white ' ) ;
end
% — Executes during object creation, after setting all properties.
function
text_box_datapath_CreateFcn ( hObject ,
eventdata ,
handles )
% hObject handle to text_box_datapath (see GCBO)
% eventdata reserved - to be deﬁned in a future version of MATLAB
% handles empty - handles not created until after all CreateFcns called
function
current_frame_edit_box_Callback ( hObject ,
eventdata ,
handles )
131
==PAGE:154==
J: Matlab Code - VFI ﬂow proﬁle
% hObject handle to current_frame_edit_box (see GCBO)
% eventdata reserved - to be deﬁned in a future version of MATLAB
% handles structure with handles and user data (see GUIDATA)
[
handles
] = vis_cb_current_frame_edit_box (
hObject , handles
) ;
handles . output = hObject ;
guidata ( hObject ,
handles ) ;
% Hints: get(hObject,’String’) returns contents of current_frame_edit_box as text
% str2double(get(hObject,’String’)) returns contents of current_frame_edit_box as a double
% — Executes during object creation, after setting all properties.
function
current_frame_edit_box_CreateFcn ( hObject ,
eventdata ,
handles )
% hObject handle to current_frame_edit_box (see GCBO)
% eventdata reserved - to be deﬁned in a future version of MATLAB
% handles empty - handles not created until after all CreateFcns called
% Hint: edit controls usually have a white background on Windows.
% See ISPC and COMPUTER.
i f
i s p c && i s e q u a l ( get ( hObject , ' BackgroundColor ' ) ,
get (0 , '←-
defaultUicontrolBackgroundColor ' ) )
s e t ( hObject , ' BackgroundColor ' , ' white ' ) ;
end
% — Executes when user attempts to close ﬁgure1.
function
figure1_CloseRequestFcn ( hObject ,
eventdata ,
handles )
% hObject handle to ﬁgure1 (see GCBO)
% eventdata reserved - to be deﬁned in a future version of MATLAB
% handles structure with handles and user data (see GUIDATA)
% Hint: delete(hObject) closes the ﬁgure
d e l e t e ( hObject ) ;
132
==PAGE:155==
APPENDIX K
MEAN VELOCITY CORRECTION FOR COMSOL
INLET
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Figure K.1: Correction of the mean velocity proﬁle found using VFI US.
133
==PAGE:156==
==PAGE:157==
APPENDIX L
MATLAB CODE - CONSTRUCT INLET PROFILES
FOR FEM USING WOMERSLEY’S THEOREM
The following script was origanally developed by Marie S. Traberg, Technical
University of Denmark, CFU, to be able to correct for the center of inlet. The
script has since been adjusted, to ﬁt the current situation. The following script,
is an example, using the values of patient010.
%==================================
%
% Construct inlet proﬁles for ﬁnite element model using Womersley’s theorem.
%
% Created 22/6-2016 by Marie S. Traberg
% edited 11/11-2016: extraction of data for COMSOL
% edited 06/12-2016: correction of center of inlet from
% CAD model
%
%==================================
% Velocity data are obtained from VFI from BK5000, run through CFU
% visulization, version 7.0, (see appendix J)
% Modeﬁed to ﬁt Patient 10
% File_name2 = ’mean_vel_proﬁle_P010CCA_p15.mat’
% area_vessle = 2.328e-5 [m2]
%
% x0 = -27.2e-3
% y0 = -29.6e-3
%==================================
%==================================
c l e a r
a l l ;
c l o s e
a l l ;
c l c ;
s e t (0 , ' d e f a u l t a x e s f o n t s i z e ' ,15) ;
s e t (0 , ' d e f a u l t t e x t f o n t s i z e ' ,15) ;
% Set path for directory with velocity data and load data
data_dir = ' /home/ s113280 /Desktop/COMSOL_simuleringer/MARIE_SCRIPTS/ ' ; % data path to
% folder with extracted data
file_name = ' mean_vel_profile_P010CCA_p15 . mat ' ; % ﬁle name for imported dataﬁle of
%mean velocity proﬁle.
% Load the data
load ( [ data_dir , file_name ] )
patient_id = file_name ( 1 : 2 8 ) ; % patient identiﬁcation
patient_id_mod = s t r r e p ( patient_id , '_' , '−' ) ; % modifying patient id for plot labeling
% Path for saving inlet and outlet data data
save_path_dat1 = ' /home/ s113280 /Desktop/COMSOL_simuleringer/MARIE_SCRIPTS/ ' ;
% path for saving data
135
==PAGE:158==
L: Matlab Code - Construct inlet proﬁles for FEM using Womersley’s theorem
save_path_dat2 = ' /home/ s113280 /Desktop/COMSOL_simuleringer/MARIE_SCRIPTS/ ' ;
% path for saving data
% To save or not to save data...
save_dat = 1;
% DEFINE MEAN SPATIAL VELOCITY FROM "CFU visualization, v.7.0" mean velocity proﬁle:
% the imported data is saved as "Y", and is devided by 100, to change the unit from cm/s to m/s.
VFI_mean_vel = Y/100; % [m/s]
%
area_vessel =2.28e −5;
% [m2] area of the CCA inlet, calculated from smallest radius
% at the deﬁned point to the vessle wall.
T = 0 . 8 4 0 ;
% [s] length of the cardiac cycle (deﬁned by the pump)
F = 1/T;
% [Hz] harmonic frequency
t=l i n s p a c e (0 ,T, length (VFI_mean_vel) ) ; % time vector for plot of velocity variation
%==================================
% Adjusting the mean velocity proﬁle, to be corrected for radial
% distribution.
i n t e g r a l _ v e l o c i t y = trapz ( t , VFI_mean_vel) ; % [m] gives the course of the velocity curve,
% which is expected to be similar to
% the ﬂow rate curve.
% The ﬂow pump claims to have a cycle volume of 3.849e-6m3, which is believed to be the
% "true volume", and can therefore be used to ﬁnd the "true ﬂow rate".
Q_true=VFI_mean_vel ∗(3.849 e−6/ i n t e g r a l _ v e l o c i t y ) ; % [m3/s] Pump ﬂow rate
spatial_mean_vel=Q_true/ area_vessel ;
% [m/s] ﬁnal mean velocity curve.
%==================================
N = length ( spatial_mean_vel ) ;
% number of samples in the period
f s = N/T;
% [Hz] sampling frequency of the signal
v0 = max( spatial_mean_vel ) ;
% [m/s] peak velocity in the cross-section
omega_0 = 2∗pi ∗F;
% [rad/s] angular frequency
Rsam = 20;
% number of radial samples
deltaR = 1/Rsam ;
% sampling interval along r when reconstructing proﬁles
R = sqrt ( area_vessel / pi ) ;
% [m] radius of the artery assuming the cross-section is circular
Tsam = N;
% number of samples along t
deltaT = 2∗pi /(omega_0∗Tsam) ;
% sampling interval of waveform
% PLOT OF THE ORIGINAL VELOCITY VARIATION - FIG 1A
f i g u r e ( 'Name ' , ' Decomposition
of
adjusted
v e l o c i t y
v a r i a t i o n ' , ' Unit ' , ' Centimeter←-
' , ' Position ' ,
[50
0 25
2 0 ] )
subplot (2 ,2 ,1)
plot ( t ' , spatial_mean_vel , ' LineWidth ' ,2)
grid
on
x l a b e l ( ' time
[ s ] ' )
y l a b e l ( ' Velocity
[m/ s ] ' )
t i t l e ( 'The
o r i g i n a l
v e l o c i t y
v a r i a t i o n ' )
%===============================================
% CALCULATION AND PLOT OF THE FREQUENCY SPECTRUM - FIG 1B
envelope = h i l b e r t ( spatial_mean_vel ) ;
% ﬁnding the envelope using the Hilbert transform
136
==PAGE:159==
@¸ secnumdepth > @ne chapapp L: Matlab Code - Construct inlet proﬁles for
FEM using Womersley’s theorem
P = 1/N∗f f t s h i f t ( f f t ( envelope ,N) ) ;
% calculating the spectrum of the signal using the ﬀt-rutine
f = ( 0 :N−1)/N∗fs −f s /2;
% [Hz] deﬁning the frequency axis
% Plot of the resulting spectrum
subplot (2 ,2 ,2)
plot ( f , abs (P) , ' LineWidth ' ,2)
grid
on
x l a b e l ( ' Frequency
[ Hz ] ' )
y l a b e l ( ' Amplitude
[V] ' )
t i t l e ( ' Spectrum
of
the
v e l o c i t y
v a r i a t i o n ' )
%===============================================
% CALCULATION AND PLOT OF THE FREQUENCY HARMONICS IN THE SPECTRUM
% Deﬁning the number of harmonics to be included in the estimation of the
% velocity estimation when using Womersley’s theorem
J = 10; % number of harmonics
M = 0 : 1 : J ;
% remember that the 0’th hamonic must have a f = 0 Hz
% The frequency harmonics are found as harmonic divided by the length of
% the period: f_ham = M/T where M is the n’th harmonic and T is the length of the period
f_ham = M/max( t ) ;
% [Hz] the frequency harmonics
% Finding the amplitude and phase of the spectrum for each harmonic
P_ham = abs (P(( f l o o r (N/2)+1+M) ) ) ;
% the spectrum amplitude for each harmonic
phase_ham = angle (P( f l o o r (N/2)+1+M) ) ;
% the phase for each harmonic
%===============================================
% FIGURE 1C AND 1D
% Plot of the harmonics in the spectrum (amplitude and phase) FIG 1C and 1D
subplot (2 ,2 ,3) % FIG 1C
hold on
plot ( f , abs (P) , ' LineWidth ' ,2)
stem (f_ham ,P_ham, ' f i l l ' , ' r−−' , ' LineWidth ' ,2)
hold
o f f
grid
on ;
box on
axis ([ −20 20 0
0 . 2 0 ] )
x l a b e l ( ' Frequency
[ Hz ] ' ) ;
y l a b e l ( ' Amplitude
[V] ' )
t i t l e ( ' Spectrum
of
the
pulse
with
harmonics ' )
subplot (2 ,2 ,4) % FIG 1D
hold on
plot ( f , angle (P) , ' LineWidth ' ,2)
stem (f_ham , phase_ham , ' f i l l ' , ' r−−' , ' LineWidth ' ,2)
hold
o f f
grid
on ;
box on
axis ([ −20 20 −pi
pi ] )
x l a b e l ( ' Frequency
[ Hz ] ' ) ;
y l a b e l ( ' Phase
[ rad ] ' )
t i t l e ( ' Phase
of
the
spectrum
with
harmonics ' )
%===============================================
% RECONSTRUCTION OF THE VELOCITY VARIATION AND PROFILES
% Womersley’s theorem assumes that the ﬂuid is Newtonian, entrance
% eﬀects are neglected, and the ﬂow has reached a steady-state of
% pulsation. Adding the resulting sinusoidals for each harmonic the spatial
% mean velocity can be found.
137
==PAGE:160==
L: Matlab Code - Construct inlet proﬁles for FEM using Womersley’s theorem
%
% The reconstruction of the velocity proﬁles using Womersley’s theorem has been programmed
% in the function womersley.m
%
% The input arguments are:
% patient_id = identiﬁcation of patient
% area_vessel = cross-sectional area of vessel
% deltaR = sampling interval for radial position
% deltaT = sampling interval for time
% J = number of harmonics
% P_ham = amplitude of hamonics from FFT of the measured mean spatial velocity
% phase_ham = phase of the harmonics from FFT of the measured mean spatial velocity
% omega_0 = angular frequency
% v0 = peak velocity in the velocity variation
% t = time vector for the VFI velocity data
% spatial_mean_vel = spatial mean velocity variation extracted from VFI scan
%
% The output arguments are:
% mean_vel_rec = reconstructed mean spatial velocity variation
% proﬁles = reconstructed velocity proﬁles
[ mean_vel_rec , p r o f i l e s ] = womersley_BM( patient_id_mod , area_vessel , deltaR , deltaT ←-
, J , . . .
P_ham, phase_ham , omega_0 , v0 , t , spatial_mean_vel ) ;
%===============================================
% FIGURE 2 AND 3
% The function womersley.m produces 2 ﬁgures: One comparing the original and
% reconstructed proﬁle, and one showing the velocity as a function of time
% and space from the vessel center to the vessel wall.
%===============================================
% STRUCTURING AND VISUALIZATION OF RECONSTRUCTED VELOCITY PROFILES
% Setting parameters for casting the reconstructed proﬁles from 2D-axis
% symmetry into full 3D
%===============================================
% FIGURE 4 - 2D VELOCITY PROFILES
% Plot of several 2D-velocity proﬁles
time = l i n s p a c e (0 , t ( length ( t ) ) , s i z e ( prof_2D , 2 ) ) ;
f i g u r e ( 'Name ' , ' 2D v e l o c i t y
p r o f i l e s ' )
plot ( rr ∗10^3 ,prof_2D ( : , 1 ) , . . .
rr ∗10^3 ,prof_2D ( : , 5 ) , . . .
rr ∗10^3 ,prof_2D ( : , 1 0 ) , . . .
rr ∗10^3 ,prof_2D ( : , 1 5 ) , . . .
rr ∗10^3 ,prof_2D ( : , 2 0 ) , . . .
rr ∗10^3 ,prof_2D ( : , 2 6 ) , ' LineWidth ' ,2)
grid
on
x l a b e l ( ' diameter
[mm] ' ) ; y l a b e l ( ' v e l o c i t y
[m/ s ] ' )
t i t l e ( [ ' Examples
of
2D v e l o c i t y
p r o f i l e s
f o r
'
num2str ( patient_id_mod ) ] )
legend ( [ ' t = '
num2str ( time (1) ) ] , [ ' t = '
num2str ( time (6) ) ] , . . .
[ ' t = '
num2str ( time (11) ) ] , [ ' t = '
num2str ( time (16) ) ] , . . .
[ ' t = '
num2str ( time (21) ) ] , [ ' t = '
num2str ( time (26) ) ] )
% Deﬁning grid for the 3D velocity proﬁles
[Mx,My]= meshgrid ( rr , rr ) ;
Mrho = sqrt (Mx.^2+My.^2) ;
% Pre-allocation
inlet_prof_3D = zeros ( s i z e ( prof_2D , 1 ) , s i z e ( prof_2D , 1 ) , s i z e ( prof_2D , 2 ) ) ;
138
==PAGE:161==
@¸ secnumdepth > @ne chapapp L: Matlab Code - Construct inlet proﬁles for
FEM using Womersley’s theorem
% Revolving the 2D-axis symmetric proﬁles around the z-axis to obtain full
% 3D velocity proﬁles
f o r
t_sam = 1: s i z e ( prof_2D , 2 )
f3d = interp1 ( rr , prof_2D ( : , t_sam) ,Mrho) ;
f3d ( isnan ( f3d ) ) = 0; % setting all NaN to zero in the matrix
inlet_prof_3D ( : , : , t_sam) = inlet_prof_3D ( : , : , t_sam) + f3d ;
end
%===============================================
% Extract data for COMSOL
% The data structure must be x-coordinate y-coordinate time velocity
%===============================================
% Calculating position (x0,y0) of center in the CAD model
% Data is obtained manually from the CAD model imported in COMSOL
x0 = −26.2e −3;
y0 = −29.6e −3;
%===============================================
% Pre-alocating vectors for x and y coordinates
x_coor = zeros ( s i z e ( prof_2D , 1 ) ^2 ,1) ;
y_coor = zeros ( s i z e ( prof_2D , 1 ) ^2 ,1) ;
% Deﬁning radial position and angle vectors
r = l i n s p a c e (−R,R,2∗1/ deltaR+1) ;
theta = l i n s p a c e (0 , pi , s i z e ( prof_2D , 1 ) ) ;
% Pre-alocating vector for velocity magnitude components
vel_vec = zeros ( s i z e ( prof_2D , 1 ) ^2 , s i z e ( prof_2D , 2 ) ) ;
% Calculating (x,y,t) coordinates and assigning velocity magnitude
f o r
k = 1: s i z e ( prof_2D , 1 )
f o r
n = 1: s i z e ( prof_2D , 1 )
x_coor (( k−1)∗s i z e ( prof_2D , 1 )+n , 1 ) = x_coor (( k−1)∗s i z e ( prof_2D , 1 )+n , 1 ) +←-
. . .
x0 + r (1 , n) ∗cos ( theta (1 , k ) ) ;
y_coor (( k−1)∗s i z e ( prof_2D , 1 )+n , 1 ) = y_coor (( k−1)∗s i z e ( prof_2D , 1 )+n , 1 ) +←-
. . .
y0 + r (1 , n) ∗s i n ( theta (1 , k ) ) ;
f o r
p = 1: s i z e ( prof_2D , 2 )
vel_vec (( k−1)∗s i z e ( prof_2D , 1 )+n , p) = vel_vec (( k−1)∗s i z e ( prof_2D , 1 )+←-
n , p) +
. . .
prof_2D (n , p) ;
end
end
end
% Deﬁne time vector for data ﬁle for COMSOL
t_vec = l i n s p a c e (0 , t ( length ( t ) ) , s i z e ( prof_2D , 2 ) ) ;
i f
save_dat
% Save data in a txt-ﬁle for import to COMSOL
f i d = fopen ( [ save_path_dat2 , ' inlet_data_ ' , num2str ( patient_id ) , ' . txt ' ] , 'w ' ) ;
f o r
i = 1: s i z e ( prof_2D , 2 )
tsam = zeros ( s i z e ( x_coor , 1 ) ,1) + t_vec ( i ) ;
f p r i n t f ( fid ,
'%f %f %f %f
\n ' ,
[ x\_coor y\_coor tsam
vel \_vec ( : , i ) ] ' ) ;
end
%fprintf(ﬁd, ’fclose(ﬁd);
disp ( [ ' Data
save
to
'
save_path_dat2 , ' inlet_data_ ' , num2str ( patient_id ) ] )
end
139
==PAGE:162==
L: Matlab Code - Construct inlet proﬁles for FEM using Womersley’s theorem
%===============================================
% FIGURE 5 - 4D VELOCITY PROFILE
% Plot of velocity at a given time in the cardiac cycle
f i g u r e ( 'Name ' , ' Reconstructed
v e l o c i t y
p r o f i l e ' , ' Unit ' , ' Centimeter ' , ' Position ' , ←-
[50
50 25
2 0 ] )
t_plot = 14; % sample no. in the time vector t_sam
mesh(Mx∗10^3 ,My∗10^3 , inlet_prof_3D ( : , : , t_plot ) )
axis
t i g h t ;
grid
on ; box on ;
x l a b e l ( ' diameter
[mm] ' ) ; y l a b e l ( ' diameter
[mm] ' ) ; z l a b e l ( ' v e l o c i t y
[m/ s ] ' )
t i t l e ( [ ' Velocity
p r o f i l e
f o r
'
num2str ( patient_id_mod )
' at
t = '
num2str (max( t )←-
/t_sam∗t_plot )
' s ' ] )
Womersley’s Theorem
To run the previous script, the following function was created by Marie S. Traberg.
%===============================================
% Function for calculating velocity as a function of time and space using
% Womersley’s theorem.
%
% The input arguments are:
% patient_id = identiﬁcation of patient
% area_vessel = cross-sectional area of vessel
% P_ham = amplitude of harmonics from FFT of the measured mean spatial velocity
% phase_ham = phase of the harmonics from FFT of the measured mean spatial velocity
% omega_0 = angular frequency
% v0 = peak velocity in the velocity variation
% t = time vector for the VFI velocity data
% mean_vel = spatial mean velocity variation extracted from VFI scan
%
% The output arguments are:
% mean_vel_rec = reconstructed mean spatial velocity
% variation
% proﬁles = reconstructed velocity proﬁles
%
% Created 28/6-2016 by Marie S. Traberg
%
%===============================================
function
[ mean_vel_rec , p r o f i l e s ] = womersley_BM( patient_id_mod , area_vessel , ←-
deltaR , . . .
deltaT , J ,P_ham, phase_ham , omega_0 , v0 , ←-
t , mean_vel )
%===============================================
% SETTING PHYSIOLOGICAL PARAMETERS
rho = 1.03 e3 ;
% [kg/m3] density of the blood mimicking ﬂuid
mu = 0 . 0 0 4 1 ;
% [Pa*s] dynamic viscosity of the blood mimicking ﬂuid
R = sqrt ( area_vessel / pi ) ;
% [m] radius of the artery assuming the cross-section is circular
%deltaT = 2*pi/(omega_0*40);
%===============================================
% CALCULATION OF PSI
140
==PAGE:163==
@¸ secnumdepth > @ne chapapp L: Matlab Code - Construct inlet proﬁles for
FEM using Womersley’s theorem
% The equations for reconstructing the velocity proﬁles are given in
% Estimation of Blood Velocities Using Ultrasound: A Signal Processing
% Approach, 2nd Edition on pages 55-58.
% Psi is given in eq. (3.27b)
p s i = 0;
f o r
c = 1: J
disp ( [ ' Harmonic number ' ,
num2str ( c ) ] )
omega = c∗omega_0 ;
% harmonic angular frequency
tau_p = sqrt (−1) ^(3/2) ∗R∗sqrt ( omega∗rho/mu) ;
index = 1;
% calculating psi for each radial position
f o r
r_rel = 0: deltaR : 0 . 9 9
Be = tau_p∗b e s s e l j (0 , tau_p ) ; % ﬁrst term in the nominator and denominator
p s i ( index , c ) = (Be −tau_p∗b e s s e l j (0 , r_rel ∗tau_p ) ) /(Be −2∗b e s s e l j (1 ,←-
tau_p ) ) ;
index = index + 1;
end
end
%===============================================
% SUMMATION FOR ALL RADIAL POSITIONS AND TIME
% Summing over all radial positions and time to get the proﬁle across the artery
% from the center and out
% Listing the amplitude and phase in a matrix
Vp = [P_ham'
; phase_ham ' ] ' ;
time_index = 1;
n = 1 ; % number of periods (heart beats)
time_points = 0: deltaT :2∗n∗pi /omega_0 ;
% [s] time vector for the period 2T
% Pre-allocation for the velocity proﬁles
p r o f i l e s = zeros (1 ,
length ( time_points ) ) ;
f o r
time = time_points
index = 1;
f o r
r_rel = 0: deltaR : 0 . 9 9
prof = v0 ∗(1 −r_rel ^2) ;
% parabolic velocity proﬁle (Poiseuille ﬂow),
% remember v0 is v_max
f o r
c = 1: J
% summing over all frequency harmonics
% calculating the time evolution of the velocity proﬁle using
% eq. (3.31)
prof = prof + Vp( c +1 ,1)∗abs ( p s i ( index , c ) ) ∗cos ( c∗omega_0∗time + Vp( c←-
+1 ,2) + angle ( p s i ( index , c ) ) ) ;
end
p r o f i l e s ( index , time_index ) = prof ;
index = index + 1;
end
time_index = time_index + 1;
end
%===============================================
% RECONSTRUCTION OF THE MEAN PROFILE
% Pre-allocation before summation over time
mean_vel_rec = zeros ( length ( time_points ) ,1) ;
141
==PAGE:164==
L: Matlab Code - Construct inlet proﬁles for FEM using Womersley’s theorem
K = s i z e (Vp, 1 ) ;
time_index = 1;
f o r
time = time_points
f o r
c = 1:K
mean_vel_rec ( time_index ) = mean_vel_rec ( time_index ) + Vp( c , 1 ) ∗cos (( c−1)←-
∗omega_0∗time + Vp( c , 2 ) ) ;
end
time_index = time_index + 1;
end
%===============================================
% PLOTS OF RECONSTRUCTED MEAN SPATIAL VELOCITY VARIATION AND 2D PROFILES
% Plot original and reconstructed mean spatial velocity variation
f i g u r e ( 'Name ' , ' Comparison
o r i g i n a l
and
reconstructed
v e l o c i t y
v a r i a t i o n ' )
plot ( time_points , mean_vel_rec , t , mean_vel , ' r ' , ' LineWidth ' ,2)
x l a b e l ( 'Time
[ s ] ' ) ; y l a b e l ( ' Velocity
[m/ s ] ' ) ;
t i t l e ( [ ' Velocity
comparison
f o r
'
num2str ( patient_id_mod ) ] )
legend ( ' Reconstructed
s p a t i a l
mean
v e l o c i t y ' , ' Measured
s p a t i a l
mean
v e l o c i t y ' )
grid
on
% Plot of the velocity variation as function of time and space
% Pad with zeros for the largest radius
p r o f i l e s ( f l o o r ( sqrt (2) / deltaR ) ,
time_index −1) = 0 ;
% Constructing a matrix with no. of radial samples (Npos) and time samples (Ntime)
[ Npos ,
Ntime ] = s i z e ( p r o f i l e s ) ;
[X,Y] = meshgrid ( 1 : Npos , 0 : Ntime−1) ;
f i g u r e ( 'Name ' , ' Reconstructed
v e l o c i t y
p r o f i l e s ' , ' Unit ' , ' Centimeter ' , ' Position ' ,←-
[50
1 25
2 0 ] )
s u r f (X( : , 1 : 1 / deltaR+1) , f l i p u d (Y( : , 1 / deltaR+1)) , p r o f i l e s (1:1/ deltaR +1 ,:) ')
box on
x l a b e l ( ' radius
[mm] ' ) ;
y l a b e l ( ' time
[ s ] ' )
z l a b e l ( ' v e l o c i t y
[m/ s ] ' )
t i t l e ( [ ' 3D v e l o c i t y
p r o f i l e s
f o r
'
num2str ( patient_id_mod ) ] )
% set axis
axis ( [ 0
1/ deltaR+1 0 Ntime−1 0
1 . 2 ] ) % manual setting of the axis, should ﬁt most cases
s e t ( gca , ' XTick ' , l i n s p a c e (0 ,1/ deltaR , 5 ) )
r_step = R/4∗10^3; % [mm] radial step for plotting
s e t ( gca , ' XTickLabel ' ,{ ' 0 ' , num2str ( r_step ) , num2str ( r_step ∗2) , num2str ( r_step ∗3) ,←-
num2str (R∗10^3) })
% set(gca,’XTickLabel’,’0’,’0.25’,’0.5’,’0.75’,’1’)
s e t ( gca , ' YTick ' , l i n s p a c e (0 , Ntime −1 ,5) )
t_step = max( t ) /4; % [s] time step for plotting
s e t ( gca , ' YTickLabel ' ,{ num2str (4∗t_step ) , num2str (3∗t_step ) , num2str (2∗t_step ) ,←-
num2str ( t_step ) , ' 0 ' })
%set(gca,’YTickLabel’,’0’,num2str(max(t)/5),’0.5’,’0.75’,’1’)
142
==PAGE:165==
@¸ secnumdepth > @ne chapapp L: Matlab Code - Construct inlet proﬁles for
FEM using Womersley’s theorem
(a) Comparison plot of the original and recon-
structed velocity proﬁle.
(b) Plot showing the velocity proﬁle as a func-
tion of time, and the distence from the center of
the vessle to the wall.
Figure L.1: Example of ﬁgure-output from the script, running Patient010 values.
143
==PAGE:166==
==PAGE:167==
APPENDIX M
ANGLE CORRECTION
The following script was created by Marie S. Traberg to calculate the needed angle
correction, which has to be applied to the inlet in COMSOL.
Figure M.1: The angles are found by viewing the MRI image in ScanIP. The angles in the table
are used to run the script, converting them to applicable angles for the COMSOL setup.
%===============================================
% ANGLE CORRECTION FOR INLET TO COMSOL SIMULATION MODEL
%
% Calculates the velocity ﬁeld components when adjusting for the tilt of
% frontal and sagittal plane in the MRI phase contrast data relative to
% the COMSOL coordinate system.
%
% Created 16/12-2016 by Marie Sand Traberg
%
%===============================================
c l e a r
a l l ;
c l o s e
a l l ;
c l c ;
%===============================================
% Deﬁne angle of rotation for the two planes
load angles_CAD . txt % 1st column is patient ID, 2nd column is frontal plane angle
% 3rd column is sagittal plane angle
ex = [1
0
0 ] ;
145
==PAGE:168==
M: Angle correction
ey = [0
1
0 ] ;
ez = [0
0
1 ] ;
%===============================================
% Choose patient ID
patient_ID = 1;
%===============================================
% Calculate contribution to velocity components
f o r
k = patient_ID
theta = angles_CAD(k , 3 ) ;
phi = angles_CAD(k , 2 ) ;
% Sagittal plane
ex_sag = cosd (0) ∗ex + cosd (90) ∗ey + cosd (90) ∗ez ;
ey_sag = cosd (90) ∗ex + cosd ( theta ) ∗ey + cosd (90+ theta ) ∗ez ;
ez_sag = cosd (90) ∗ex + cosd(90−theta ) ∗ey + cosd ( theta ) ∗ez ;
% Frontal plane
ex_sag_front = cosd ( phi ) ∗ex_sag + cosd (90) ∗ey_sag + cosd (90+ phi ) ∗ez_sag ;
ey_sag_front = cosd (90) ∗ex_sag + cosd (0) ∗ey_sag + cosd (90) ∗ez_sag ;
ez_sag_front = cosd(90−phi ) ∗ex_sag + cosd (90) ∗ey_sag + cosd ( phi ) ∗ez_sag ;
% Calculating the velocity component resulting from the rotation of planes
v_vec = [0
0
1 ] ; % the velocity magnitude is measured normal to the transverse plane
basis_vec = [ ex_sag_front ;
ey_sag_front ;
ez_sag_front ] ;
% Correction factor needed for deﬁning the velocity ﬁeld in COMSOL. The
% components listed below must be multiplied on to the velocity ﬁeld in
% the inlet deﬁnition.
vx_sag_front = v_vec∗basis_vec ( 1 , : ) ' ;
vy_sag_front = v_vec∗basis_vec ( 2 , : ) ' ;
vz_sag_front = v_vec∗basis_vec ( 3 , : ) ' ;
end
disp ( [ ' vx = '
num2str ( vx_sag_front )
'
vz_mri ' ] )
disp ( [ ' vy = '
num2str ( vy_sag_front )
'
vz_mri ' ] )
disp ( [ ' vz = '
num2str ( vz_sag_front )
'
vz_mri ' ] )
146
==PAGE:169==
APPENDIX N
PATIENTS - COMSOL EVALUATION
SPECIFICATIONS
Patient002
Figure N.1: Core cut plane for evaluation of patient002.
Figure N.2: Inlet plane deﬁned for patient002
Figure N.3: Inlet line deﬁned for patient002
Figure N.4: ICA points for patient002
The time-dependent study was evaluated at t=0.1530s.
147
==PAGE:170==
N: Patients - COMSOL Evaluation Speciﬁcations
Patient002 Catheter Placement
The catheter was positioned in (x,y,z)=(-19, -10.5, -20) and rotated -9◦around
the y-axis, to follow the direction of the patient geometry.
The length of the cathere, used for the "parametric-sweep", were p6=21mm,
p5=16mm and p4=11mm.
(a) Position 4
(b) Position 5
(c) Position 6
Figure N.5: Example of how the catheter is placed in the COMSOL simulation of patient002.
The placement numbers are in reference to how they are called in section 3.2.2 and ﬁgure 3.6.
148
==PAGE:171==
@¸ secnumdepth > @ne chapapp N: Patients - COMSOL Evaluation Speciﬁcations
Patient009
Figure N.6: Core cut plane for evaluation of patient009.
Figure N.7: Inlet plane deﬁned for patient009
Figure N.8: Inlet line deﬁned for patient009
Figure N.9: ICA points for patient009
The time-dependent study was evaluated at t=0.13778s.
149
==PAGE:172==
N: Patients - COMSOL Evaluation Speciﬁcations
Patient009Catheter Placement
The catheter was positioned in (x,y,z)=(-22, -11.3, -19) and rotated -8◦around the
y-axis and 7◦around d the x-axis, to follow the direction of the patient geometry.
The length of the catheter, used for the "parametric-sweep", were p6=11.3mm,
p5=6.3mm and p4=1.3mm.
(a) Position 4
(b) Position 5
(c) Position 6
Figure N.10: Example of how the catheter is placed in the COMSOL simulation of patient009.
The placement numbers are in reference to how they are called in section 3.2.2 and ﬁgure 3.6.
150
==PAGE:173==
@¸ secnumdepth > @ne chapapp N: Patients - COMSOL Evaluation Speciﬁcations
Patient010
Figure N.11: Core cut plane for evaluation of patient010.
Figure N.12: Inlet plane deﬁned for patient010
Figure N.13: Inlet line deﬁned for patient010
Figure N.14: ICA points for patient010
The time-dependent study was evaluated at t=0.19855s.
151
==PAGE:174==
N: Patients - COMSOL Evaluation Speciﬁcations
Patient010 Catheter Placement
The catheter was positioned in (x,y,z)=(-27.1, -29.9, 7) and rotated 1◦around the
y-axis, to follow the direction of the patient geometry.
The length of the catheter, used for the "parametric-sweep", were p6=13.4mm,
p5=8.4mm and p4=3.4mm.
(a) Position 4
(b) Position 5
(c) Position 6
Figure N.15: Example of how the catheter is placed in the COMSOL simulation of patient010.
The placement numbers are in reference to how they are called in section 3.2.2 and ﬁgure 3.6.
152
==PAGE:175==
@¸ secnumdepth > @ne chapapp N: Patients - COMSOL Evaluation Speciﬁcations
Patient050S
Figure N.16: Core cut plane for evaluation of patient050S.
Figure N.17: Inlet plane deﬁned for patient050S
Figure N.18: Inlet line deﬁned for patient050S
Figure N.19: ICA points for patient050S
The time-dependent study was evaluated at t=0.168s.
153
==PAGE:176==
N: Patients - COMSOL Evaluation Speciﬁcations
Patient050S Catheter Placement
The catheter was positioned in (x,y,z)=(-27.1, -29.9, 7) and rotated 1◦around the
y-axis, to follow the direction of the patient geometry.
The length of the catheter, used for the "parametric-sweep", were p6=26mm,
p5=21mm and p4=16mm.
(a) Position 4
(b) Position 5
(c) Position 6
Figure N.20: Example of how the catheter is placed in the COMSOL simulation of patient050S.
The placement numbers are in reference to how they are called in section 3.2.2 and ﬁgure 3.6.
154
==PAGE:177==
APPENDIX O
STRAIGHT TUBES - COMSOL 2D SURFACE PLOTS
Straight Tube 30% Stenosis
STATIONARY
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure O.1: The four above ﬁgures shows the
2D color plot of the stationary velocity [m/s] in
a 30% stenotic straight tube. It shows that the
peak velocity, in the stenotic area, is not inﬂu-
enced that much by the presence of the catheter.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure O.2: The four above ﬁgures shows the 2D
color plot of the pressure[Pa] stationary input
velocity in a 30% stenotic straight tube. It shows
that the pressure, in the stenotic area, is not that
inﬂuenced by the presence of the catheter.
155
==PAGE:178==
O: Straight Tubes - COMSOL 2D Surface Plots
TIME-DEPENDENT
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure O.3: The four above ﬁgures shows the 2D
color plot of the time-dependent velocity [m/s] in
a 30% stenotic straight tube. It shows that the
peak velocity, in the stenotic area, is not inﬂu-
enced that much by the presence of the catheter.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure O.4: The four above ﬁgures shows the 2D
color plot of the pressure[Pa] time-dependent in-
put velocity in a 30% stenotic straight tube. It
shows that the pressure, in the stenotic area,
is not that inﬂuenced by the presence of the
catheter..
156
==PAGE:179==
@¸ secnumdepth > @ne chapapp O: Straight Tubes - COMSOL 2D Surface Plots
Straight tube 70% stenosis
STATIONARY
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure O.5: The four above ﬁgures shows the
2D color plot of the stationary velocity [m/s] in
a 70% stenotic straight tube.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure O.6: The four above ﬁgures shows the 2D
color plot of the pressure[Pa] stationary input
velocity in a 70% stenotic straight tube.
157
==PAGE:180==
O: Straight Tubes - COMSOL 2D Surface Plots
TIME-DEPENDENT
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure O.7: The four above ﬁgures shows the 2D
color plot of the time-dependent velocity [m/s]
in a 70% stenotic straight tube.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure O.8: The four above ﬁgures shows the
2D color plot of the pressure[Pa] time-dependent
input velocity in a 70% stenotic straight tube.
158
==PAGE:181==
@¸ secnumdepth > @ne chapapp O: Straight Tubes - COMSOL 2D Surface Plots
Straight tube 90% stenosis
STATIONARY
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure O.9: The four above ﬁgures shows the
2D color plot of the sationary velocity [m/s] in
a 90% stenotic straight tube.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure O.10: The four above ﬁgures shows the
2D color plot of the pressure[Pa] stationary in-
put velocity in a 90% stenotic straight tube.
159
==PAGE:182==
O: Straight Tubes - COMSOL 2D Surface Plots
TIME-DEPENDENT
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure O.11: The four above ﬁgures shows the
2D color plot of the time-dependent velocity
[m/s] in a 90% stenotic straight tube.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure O.12: The four above ﬁgures shows the
2D color plot of the pressure[Pa] time-dependent
input velocity in a 90% stenotic straight tube.
160
==PAGE:183==
@¸ secnumdepth > @ne chapapp O: Straight Tubes - COMSOL 2D Surface Plots
O.1
Straight Tubes - Experimental Data Com-
parison of ∆P in the Middle of the Stenosis
(a)
(b)
Figure O.13: Pressure diﬀerence over 30% stenotic straight tubes with stationary (a) and time-
dependent (b) inlet. Figure (a) shows the mean and standard deviation +/- 6.61Pa for the
experimental, COMSOL simulation without catheter, COMSOL simulation with catheter and
an analytic value. Figure (b) shows the mean and standard deviation +/- 8.25Pa for the exper-
imental, COMSOL simulation without catheter and COMSOL simulation with catheter for the
time-dependent inlet
161
==PAGE:184==
O: Straight Tubes - COMSOL 2D Surface Plots
(a)
(b)
Figure O.14: Pressure diﬀerence over 70% stenotic straight tubes with the stationary (a) and
time-dependent (b) inlet. Figure (a) shows the mean and standard deviation +/- 196.89Pa for
the experimental, COMSOL simulation without catheter, COMSOL simulation with catheter
and an analytic value. Figure (b) shows the mean and standard deviation +/- 11.10Pa for the
experimental, COMSOL simulation without catheter and COMSOL simulation with catheter for
the time-dependent inlet
(a)
(b)
Figure O.15: Pressure diﬀerence over 90% stenotic straight tubes with stationary (a) and time-
dependent (b) inlet. Figure (a) shows the mean and standard deviation +/- 294.44Pa for the
experimental, COMSOL simulation without catheter, COMSOL simulation with catheter and
an analytic value. Figure (b) shows the mean and standard deviation +/- 316.11Pa for the
experimental, COMSOL simulation without catheter and COMSOL simulation with catheter
for the time-dependent inlet
162
==PAGE:185==
APPENDIX P
PATIENTS - COMSOL INLET COLOR-PLOTS
Patient002 - Inlet Velocity and Pressure Plots
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure P.1: Patient002 - Inlet Velocity with catheter(a), without catheter(c) and pressure plots
with catheter (b), without catheter(d)
163
==PAGE:186==
P: Patients - COMSOL Inlet Color-Plots
Patient009 - Inlet Velocity and Pressure Plots
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure P.2: Patient009 - Inlet Velocity with catheter(a), without catheter(c) and pressure plots
with catheter (b), without catheter(d)
164
==PAGE:187==
@¸ secnumdepth > @ne chapapp P: Patients - COMSOL Inlet Color-Plots
Patient010 - Inlet Velocity and Pressure Plots
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure P.3: Patient010 - Inlet Velocity with catheter(a), without catheter(c) and pressure plots
with catheter (b), without catheter(d)
165
==PAGE:188==
P: Patients - COMSOL Inlet Color-Plots
Patient050S - Inlet Velocity and Pressure Plots
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure P.4: Patient050S - Inlet Velocity with catheter(a), without catheter(c) and pressure plots
with catheter (b), without catheter(d)
166
==PAGE:189==
APPENDIX Q
STRAIGHT TUBE GEOMETRY - VISUALIZED
USING US
Figure Q.1: Straight tube with a suspected 30% seneosis, visualized using a BK5000 analogic
Ultrasound scanner and a ﬂat head ultrasound transducer.
The diameter at the stenosis is measured to 0.65cm.
Figure Q.2: Straight tube with a suspected 70% seneosis, visualized using a BK5000 analogic
Ultrasound scanner and a ﬂat head ultrasound transducer.
The diameter at the stenosis is measured to 0.43cm.
Figure Q.3: Straight tube with a suspected 90% seneosis, visualized using a BK5000 analogic
Ultrasound scanner and a ﬂat head ultrasound transducer.
The diameter at the stenosis is measured to 0.25cm.
167
==PAGE:190==
==PAGE:191==
APPENDIX R
FLOW DISTRIBUTION BETWEEN ICA AND ECA
Patient002 Patient009 Patient010 Patient050S
US Doppler
velocity
Stationary
37:67
43:56
40:60
50:50
Time-dependent
42:58
44:55
42:58
25:75
COMSOL
Stationary
48:52
50:50
61:39
10:90
Time-dependent
49:51
52:48
52:48
4:96
Table R.1: This table illustrates a calculated ﬂow division between ICA:ECA. For the COMSOL
investigation, measuring points have been deﬁned, as shown in appendix N. The "ICA point"
used for calculating the ratio, is the position furthest up the ICA available, also used for pressure
investigations in COMSOL. The "ECA points" are deﬁned below, for each patient.
When
Investigating the velocities in ICA and ECA, using US Doppler, a BK5000 scanner and a linear
probe (8MHz), was used. The velocity measurements were preformed as far away from the fork,
as possible, to avoid the any swirling ﬂows around the bulbus of ICA.
Points of investigation of the velocity in ECA, used for ﬂow distribution analysis
in COMSOL:
Patient002
(x,y,z) = (-27.4 , -6.5 , 16)
Patient009
(x,y,z) = (-27.3, -9.5 , 3.7)
Patient010
(x,y,z) = (-28, -25.5, 25.7)
Patient050S
(x,y,z) = (8.2 , 7 , 63.3)
169
==PAGE:192==
==PAGE:193==
171
==PAGE:194==
S: Catheter Placement Visualization With US
APPENDIX S
CATHETER PLACEMENT VISUALIZATION WITH
US
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Figure S.1: 70% stenotic tube phantom visualized using US. The catheter is placed just before
the stenosis, and shows, that even though the axial placement is easy to hit, the radial position
of the catheter changes.
BK Ultrasound Scanner, Flat head ultrasound transducer.
172
