==PAGE:1==
Analysis of Patient Flow at
Region Sjælland
Tobias Skovlund Petersen
Kongens Lyngby 2017
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary (English)
This thesis deals with patient ow, and the goal of the thesis is to provide
analysis tools for report generation for the treatment of a single patient, as well
as analyse the consequences of prioritising certain patient groups with respect
to accessing hospital resources.
The tool has been used to make analyses on cancer patients, based on data
provided by Region Sjælland. The cancer patients provide an interesting ap-
proach because of the cancer packages, which sets time limit for the diagnosis
and treatment of the patients enrolled in them. The cancer patients can there-
fore be prioritised over other patients in order to keep the deadlines set by the
cancer packages.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Summary (Danish)
Denne afhandling omhandler patient forløb, og har til formål at stille analyse
redskaber til rådighed med henblik på rapport generering for behandlingsforløb
at enkeltstående patienter, samt at analysere konsekvenserne af at prioritere
nogle patientgrupper i forhold til at får adgang til hospitals ressourcer.
Redskaberne er blevet benyttet til at analysere kræftpatienter, baseret på data
stillet til rådighed af Region Sjælland. Kræftpatienterne giver en interessant
indgangsvinkel grundet kræftpakkerne, der sætter deadlines for udredning og
behandlingsstart for patienterne. Kræftpatienterne kan derfor blive prioriteret
over andre patienter for at hospitalerne overholder deadlines.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at DTU Compute in fullment of the requirements for
acquiring an M.Sc. in Engineering.
The data used for this project was provided by Region Sjælland. The data is
condential, as it contains information about real people, and has therefore not
been submitted as part of the project.
The tool is developed using functional programming in the programming lan-
guage F#. The reader is assumed to be familiar with this type of programming,
as it will not be described in this thesis.
Lyngby, 02-June-2017
Tobias Skovlund Petersen
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Summary (English)
i
Summary (Danish)
iii
Preface
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Danish health sector . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2.1
Region Sjælland
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.2.2
Cancer packages
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.2.3
Diagnosis-related group (DRG) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.3
Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.4
Related work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.5
Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2
Fundamentals of Patient Flow Analysis
13
2.1
Overview of patient ow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.2
Basic concepts
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.2.1
Person to procedures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.2.2
Hospital structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.2.3
Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.2.4
SKS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.3
Data provided by Region Sjælland
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.3.1
Data sets
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
2.3.2
Parsing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
2.4
Requirement specication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
==PAGE:10==
viii
CONTENTS
3
Analysis of Individual Patients
31
3.1
Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.1.1
Report types . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.1.2
Feature highlighting in report visualizations . . . . . . . .
34
3.1.3
Graphviz
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.2
Design and implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
3.2.1
Markdown reports . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
3.2.2
DOT reports . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
3.2.3
Unied tool . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
3.3
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4
Resource Analysis
45
4.1
Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.1.1
Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.1.2
Scheduling principles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
4.1.3
Assumptions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
4.2
Design and implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
4.2.1
Generating requests
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
4.2.2
Scheduling and simulating . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
4.2.3
Waiting times . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
4.3
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
5
Applications
57
5.1
Report generation of patient history
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
5.2
Analysing a single patient . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
5.2.1
Feature highlighting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
5.2.2
Filtering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
5.3
Resource analyses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
5.3.1
Resource dimensioning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
5.3.2
Comparison of scheduling algorithms . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
5.3.3
Waiting lists
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
5.4
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
6
Conclusion
75
6.1
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
6.2
Fullment of requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
6.3
Future development
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
A Source Code for the Data Model
79
B Source Code for Parsing Data
83
C Source Code for Parsing Data from Data Set III
91
D Source Code for Cancer Codes
93
==PAGE:11==
CONTENTS
ix
E Source Code for Generation of Formatted Strings
95
F Source Code for Report Generation
109
G Source Code for Types Dened for Resource Analyses
113
H Source Code Containing Functions for Gathering Data About
Scans
115
I
Source Code for Simulations
119
J
Script for Splitting Contacts from Diagnoses
125
K Script for Finding the Distribution of Requisitions and Proce-
dures
127
L
Scan data
131
M Script Used for Applications Chapter
139
N Cancer Cases
143
O DOT les used for generation of graphs
145
Bibliography
147
==PAGE:12==
x
CONTENTS
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Within hospital systems there are some general challenges as they operate with
limited resources, such as medical equipment, doctors, sta, medicine, and
money. Some hospital systems consists of multiple hospitals, which must cover
large areas. Oering treatments to a variety of patients spread across the land,
can therefore be challenging, as quality patient care must be oered within rea-
sonable waiting times. This is particularly dicult when the hospital system
has hospitals in multiple locations, as it limits the use of resources to specic
geographic locations. Furthermore, the amount of patients increases, adding
extra pressure on the hospitals to quickly see patients through the system, to
make room for new patients.
This thesis focuses on challenges within the Danish healthcare sector. A sector
that annually costs billions of Danish kroner, which means that even small
performance increases can save a lot of money. The thesis further concerns the
healthcare sector as governed by the regions, which manage the hospitals.
Region Sjælland has provided patient data for cancer patients, as they present
further challenges compared to other patient groups, because of the introduction
of cancer packages. In terms of patients, the focus will therefore be on those
with cancer.
==PAGE:14==
2
Introduction
1.1
Introduction
The Danish hospitals face many challenges regarding healthcare, as both the
population and the average age of citizens are increasing. This causes an ever
increasing pressure on the hospitals as it results in more patients.
Furthermore, many diseases that used to be fatal are now either curable or at
least treatable. Patients that suer from an incurable disease are more likely to
get other diseases as well, see [FOK]. This makes sense as the immune system
is weakened. However, this means that a lot of patients end up suering from
multiple simultaneous diseases, known as multimorbidity.
Patients with multimorbidity makes for a very interesting patient group, since
patients are usually grouped by a common disease, but this group's common
trait is that the patients suer from multiple diseases, but not necessarily the
same diseases.
This presents some major challenges because of the current
structure and development of hospitals, which goes in the direction of depart-
mentalization and specialization. This can lead to patient treatments that are
far from convenient from a patient's point of view.
In general a specialised system works for the majority of patients. But a pa-
tient that suers from multimorbidities, will be tted into multiple treatments,
rather than one treatment that covers all of their diseases. Receiving multiple
treatments in parallel can be exhausting for a patient for multiple reasons. First
of all the patient is likely not at their strongest as they are sick, but they also
have to partially manage their treatment themselves as they are oered separate
treatments for each disease. Each disease will be treated by a specialized de-
partment as if it was the only disease the patient suered from. This is what the
hospitals do great, but when there are interdependencies between the diseases
or their treatments, then the matter is complicated.
Furthermore, there are the economical challenges that these patients introduce.
According to the white paper [FOK] the costs of patients with multimorbidity is
dicult to calculate, as there are many aspects to consider and although there
has been much research in multimorbidity, little of it has focused around the
economical aspects. The data analysis by Statens Serum Institut [ssi15] analyses
the costs of multimorbidity with regard to a few diseases. The costs are mainly
compared to that of other chronically ill patients, and the analysis only considers
direct costs (treatment, medicine, hospitalization, etc.) and ignores the indirect
costs regarding missed labour (sick days, early retirement, etc.). However, it
does show that these patients are signicantly more expensive for the region,
and as Chapter 12 of [FOK] concludes, the expenses for multimorbidities will
continue to increase.
==PAGE:15==
1.2 Danish health sector
3
As the population of people suering multimorbidity is increasing, so is the issue
of how to treat them. Fortunately this is an issue that is receiving increasing
amounts of attention, as seen for instance by the white paper Multisygdom
[FOK] which depicts many of the issues related to patients with multimorbidi-
ties. Furthermore the book Fremtidens hospital contains the chapter Patien-
ten's Hospital [WF14], which describes the hospitals of the future as much less
departmentalized. The chapter also estimates that patients with multimorbidi-
ties represents over 20% of the Danish population.
A dierent patient group that is receiving a lot of attention is cancer patients.
Cancer covers a group of diseases that all involve irregular cell development. It is
an increasing threat as more people are aected by it every year, see Figure 1.1.
This is partially due to more people being diagnosed with cancer, but it may
also be a result of the prolonged life of cancer patients. Since cancer covers
many dierent diseases it is also treated in many dierent ways. With a few
exceptions (such as skin cancer) most cancers are critical and require immediate
treatment, to avoid spread to other parts of the body. For this reason the Danish
government introduced the cancer packages (covered below) which for dierent
types of cancer organizes a treatment plan.
The article [FPLL] covers an analysis of the amount of patients with at least
one of 17 dierent diseases. It looks into the risk of getting some diseases given
a person already suers from a another disease. It shows that some diseases
more than doubles the risk of getting certain other diseases, thus increasing the
amount of patients with multimorbidity. One ot the 17 diseases included in
the analysis is cancer. However, it shows no increased risk for cancer patients
getting any of the other 16 diseases.
1.2
Danish health sector
The Danish healthcare system is managed within each of the 5 national re-
gions, which for the most part work individually. Their job is to ensure that
the objectives set by the government are upheld within the region, and when
the objectives are not met, then justify why not. Each region covers a vast geo-
graphical area and therefore requires medical facilities at multiple locations, to
avoid transporting patients across an entire region. However, with the current
tendency towards fewer and more specialised hospitals, certain diseases are only
treated at some hospitals. Patients from all over the region may therefore have
to go to a certain hospital far from where they live. In certain instances patients
may even be moved to hospitals outside of their own region.
==PAGE:16==
4
Introduction
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
Number of cases
Year
Cancer cases in Region Sjælland
Figure 1.1: Number of cancer cases in Region Sjælland 1978-2015. The graph
is generated from the data found in Appendix N, provided by
Sundhedsdatastyrelsen.
==PAGE:17==
1.2 Danish health sector
5
The current structure of the Danish healthcare system departmentalizes the hos-
pitals into specialized units. The idea behind this is that a single patient should
quickly be diagnosed, treated, and if possible discharged from the hospital. This
should make a pleasant experience for the patient, and an ecient experience
for the hospital. With this approach, each unit functions on its own and can
therefore be locally optimized. If all patients tted into a single unit, the units
would have no interaction with one another. However, in reality no part of the
hospital is completely separated from the rest. Many patients require care from
dierent parts of the hospital and in general there is need for much communi-
cation between departments. This therefore poses the very central question of
whether suboptimizing each department on its own, also optimizes the whole
process, or if it is possible to further optimize patient ow by looking across
departments.
The tendencies towards more specialised hospitals are mainly due to professional
and economical reasons. The professional reasons are based on the notion that
a more specialised department may oer higher quality care. This is because
medical sta that perform certain procedures are less likely to make mistakes
if the procedure is performed on a regular basis. This is described in further
detail in [HNW14] , where the necessary amounts of certain procedures are also
estimated. The economical aspect is due to the pricing of medical equipment,
which can be very expensive, as is the case for CT and MR scanners. If fewer
locations need the equipment, then less equipment might be needed overall.
Furthermore the sta using the equipment might use it more frequently and are
therefore more likely to also be using it more eectively.
1.2.1
Region Sjælland
This thesis is made in collaboration with Regions Sjælland to try to address some
of the challenges they are facing. These challenges are described in further detail
below. However, the analysis tool developed for this project should be general
enough to be used in a broader context than that of Region Sjælland. That
being said, it is in respect to Region Sjælland and their patient data that the
analyses have been made.
Region Sjælland has its headquarters in Sorø, and it is from this central location
the hospitals are managed. However, to some degree the hospitals are free to
implement their own solutions as long as they meet the requirements set by the
region and the government.
Some of the challenges Region Sjælland are facing are amplied by its demog-
raphy. The article [MLT14] covers the demography of the region and concludes
==PAGE:18==
6
Introduction
Figure 1.2: Flowchart for cancer packages including the markers that are regis-
tered during a cancer package course. The chart is a simplication
of that on page 38 in [Sun17], where the full chart is explained in
detail. The question marks are used to substitute the numbers that
represent a specic cancer package, and the asterisks substitute an
optional letter giving additional information, e.g. AFB12C2C is
colorectal cancer where initial treatment is not relevant due to the
condition of the patient.
that the population is even older than the national average as it is primarily
younger people that move out of the Region to take an education. This is fur-
ther amplied as students are likely to continue living where they lived while
taking their education. Having a larger population of elderly and skilled workers
and fewer with a higher education (including doctors), may lead to a shortage
of doctors. This is a general problem that is only made worse by the tight time
limits for diagnosing and treating cancer patients as described below.
1.2.2
Cancer packages
There are 33 dierent cancer packages that each cover a smaller group of similar
cancers, i.e. cancers with common traits. In most cases these will be cancers
that are located close to one another within the body, such as colorectal cancer
(cancer in either the colon or rectum). However, that is not always the case,
for instance package 30 is cancer in children. Each cancer package species
what a standard course should look like as well as dening time restrictions for
the diagnosis, treatment, and follow-up. The possible paths through a cancer
package course are illustrated in Figure 1.2.
==PAGE:19==
1.2 Danish health sector
7
Patients may be enrolled in a cancer package based on reasonable suspicion. All
patients that are enrolled are therefore not necessarily suering from cancer, and
the diagnosis must therefore be conrmed before proceeding with the package
course. If the patient does not have cancer, then the patient is removed from the
course of the cancer package, and likely treated for a disease that was mistaken
for cancer, and caused the reasonable suspicion.
The time restrictions for the various cancer packages are based on medical re-
search, with the purpose of increasing the chance of survival for the patients,
by catching cancer in the early stages where it is still treatable. Obviously the
advances within the medical industry have helped a lot in decreasing the fatality
and prolonging the lives of cancer patients, but immediate treatment is a vital
factor and the cancer course packages have decreased the waiting time for cancer
patients. This is a result of the time restrictions, which forces the regions and
thus the hospitals to prioritise cancer patients. Such prioritisation will of course
inuence other patient groups.
As mentioned each region is responsible for ensuring that governmental goals are
met within the region. In regard to the cancer packages this includes justifying
any and all patients that do not meet the time restrictions for diagnosis, treat-
ment, or follow-up. However, this poses an issue for patients that are moved
between regions, as it is the region in which the patient resides that is respon-
sible for upholding the time restrictions. When a patient is moved to a hospital
in a dierent region, that region will not inherit the time restrictions for the
transferred patient. They will therefore have enticement to prioritise their own
patients as they are responsible for upholding their time restrictions.
1.2.3
Diagnosis-related group (DRG)
Diagnosis-related group (DRG) is a system that classies patients based on
their diagnoses. The system is used to nd the average cost of having a patient
with a certain diagnose.
Historically the system was meant to compare the
productivity of hospitals, but it was later adapted to a nancial system to
compensate hospitals for their services. The system has been used in Denmark
since 2000 with various purposes, but has been revised since. The idea is that
each hospital documents its patients, services, and costs so the average cost for
each diagnosis group can be calculated nationally. These averages can be used
in dierent ways to compensate regions or hospitals.
The DRG system has received much criticism for favouring multiple visits to the
hospital when one might do. Although it is more convenient for a patient to have
multiple procedures scheduled during a single visit, the hospital might benet
==PAGE:20==
8
Introduction
nancially from splitting the procedures into multiple visits. This criticism has
resulted in debate on whether or not to change the system. Multiple chapters
in [FOK] and the chapter [Bec14] deal with the DRG system.
The lack of enticement towards merging procedures, becomes an even bigger
issue for patients with multimorbidities, since the system already considers an
individual treatment for each disease. The current DRG system is therefore
also a barrier towards simpler and more structured treatments of patients with
multimorbidities.
1.3
Motivation
The healthcare sector is an essential part of modern society where even small
changes in eciency can have a large impact. Increasing the eciency of the
hospitals has dierent aspects to it. First of all there is the patient care. Patients
should receive quality care with as little waiting as possible. But this is limited
in the amount of resources available to the region and the hospitals. There is a
nite number of doctors and general sta, and the budget limits the availability
of medical equipment. This is a problem as some machines (such as CT and
MR scanners) can be extremely expensive. Furthermore, there is a constant
research and development of these machines, which means that hospitals need
newer scanners that can check for things that was not possible before. This
does not render older machines obsolete as often the machines are too expensive
for all of them to be replaced.
It can therefore be the case that only some
hospitals can perform some scans or procedures. This ts the current approach
to departmentalize and specialise the hospitals.
Improvements on the eciency of hospitals and patient treatments are critical,
as they can help reduce costs and by reducing waiting times improve the patient
experience and treatment. The rst step towards optimizing the eciency and
reducing waiting times lies in analysing the patient ow to nd suboptimal
processes, i.e. localize the problem. In this regard the focus will be on cancer
patients, as cancer is a disease that aects more patients every year, and because
the cancer packages restrict the time limits for these patients.
From a software perspective this project will use the data to establish a model
suitable for the analyses. The model must include the relations between the
dierent data elds as well as data types to achieve a concise data representation.
In this regard the programming language F# is very convenient, as it is type
strong and, unlike object oriented programming languages, it does not allow
null values, unless explicitly specied.
==PAGE:21==
1.4 Related work
9
By building the analysis tool on a predened model, it allows for a generic
solution. This means that in order to apply the same analyses on a dierent
data set, the same model can simply be populated by data from the other data
set. However, this will require the data set to have values for the elds in the
model.
1.4
Related work
Early work in the eld of hospital optimization has focused mainly on reducing
the waiting time for doctors. This is still as an issue as doctors are an expensive
resource in short supply.
However, more recent research focuses on limiting
the patient waiting times as well. This is a particularly dicult problem since
patients do not always arrive on time and might not even show up at all. This
optimization problem has been studied and documented in several papers taking
dierent approaches. In [Str15] the approach is to use machine learning and
supervised-learning regression to optimize the scheduling algorithm. A dierent
approach is taken in [HG03], where the focus lies on the use of simulations to
nd the optimal appointment scheduling algorithm. The article [HBLP09] uses
multi-objective optimization towards the same end.
The three articles [Str15], [HG03], and [BD12] all focus around optimizing the
appointment scheduling for a single outpatient clinic, and not for an entire
hospital. The article [ANR17] has taken a dierent approach by focusing on
reducing the amount of patients that are relocated from one ward to another,
when there are no more vacant beds in the ward.
In this thesis the scope is even broader as the focus lies on an entire group of
hospitals, rather than on sub-optimizing departments.
1.5
Objectives
The overall objective of this project is to build a tool that is suitable for analysing
patient ow. For this purpose the four goals listed below has been identied.
The rst being that a domain model must be established with the purpose of
encapsulating the core concepts. This must be done in respect to the provided
data and to make the above analyses possible. Secondly, a patient-ow tool
must be developed, with the purpose of giving insight into the treatment of
a single patient. Thirdly, a simulation tool must be developed to analyse the
==PAGE:22==
10
Introduction
consequences of having resources shared between patient groups. Finally the
results should be visualized.
1. Domain model
2. Patient-ow analyses
3. Resource analyses
4. Visualization
The analyses are dealt with in two parts. The rst part will be suitable for
analysing the treatment of a single patient. As the author does not have any
medical expertise, the goal will simply be to produce an output that gives an
overview of a patient's treatment history and enables one to quickly spot in-
eciencies. The technical aspects of this tool, including the implementation,
is covered in Chapter 3. Section 5.2 shows some applications of the tool. An
example can be seen in Figure 1.3, which gives a chronological overview of the
treatment a single patient has received.
The second part will be used for analysing the eect dierent patient groups can
have upon one another, when they require access to the same resources, whether
this be personnel or medical equipment. In particular the tool must be useful
for analysing the benets and consequences of prioritising one patient group
over another. This is particularly relevant for Region Sjælland, as the cancer
packages applies restrictions on the waiting time for cancer patients and thereby
prioritises them over other patient groups. This part of the tool is covered in
detail in Chapter 4, and its applications are demonstrated in Section 5.3. An
example of running a simulation can be seen in Figure 1.4, where the data from
the simulation has been collected and visualized. This example shows that after
building up a waiting list of just two weeks it can take months to get back to
normal. This example is elaborated in Section 5.3.3.
Thesis structure
The fundamentals for patient ow are covered in Chapter 2. It explains these
concepts and builds a domain model suitable for the analyses covered in the
chapters 3 and 4. Furthermore, it covers the raw data and the parsing that is
necessary to convert the data to the types dened in the model.
Development of an analysis tool suitable for analysing the treatment of a single
patient is described in Chapter 3. It covers the analysis, design, and implemen-
tation of the tool, but the usage has been saved for Chapter 5.
==PAGE:23==
1.5 Objectives
11
Forløb #66623
Fra 09-01-2016 00:02
Kontakt #31550
Ambulant (henvist fra speciallæge)
ROS Øjen Amb., Næstved (C2.E)
"Ikke specificeret diabetes" 
(DE14) 
Forløb #276424
Fra 09-01-2016 00:02
Kontakt #222905
Ambulant (henvist fra speciallæge)
ROS Øjen Amb., Næstved (C2.E)
"Aldersbetinget grå stær" 
(DH25) 
Forløb #83673
Fra 14-01-2016 08:00
Kontakt #134285
Præambulant (henvist fra praktiserende læge)
NFS Lungemedicinsk Amb. (V0.L)
"Kronisk obstruktiv 
lungesygdom" (DJ44) 
Kontakt #6865
Ambulant (henvisningstype HV)
NFS Lungemedicinsk Amb. (V0.L)
"Kronisk obstruktiv 
lungesygdom" (DJ44) 
Forløb #267929
Fra 13-04-2016 08:17 til 13-04-2016 23:59
Kontakt #303105
Ambulant (uden henvisning)
NAK Radiologisk Afd. (Y9.0)
"Andre særlige undersøgelser 
af personer uden klager eller 
diagnoser" (DZ01) 
Forløb #51885
Fra 20-04-2016 08:00 til 21-04-2016 16:00
Kontakt #377964
Præambulant (henvisningstype HV)
KOE Øre-Næse-Halskir. Amb. (E3.D)
"Abnorm vejrtrækning" (DR06) 
Forløb #321287
Fra 13-04-2016 08:18 til 13-04-2016 23:59
Kontakt #52008
Ambulant (uden henvisning)
NAK Radiologisk Afd. (Y9.0)
"Andre særlige undersøgelser 
af personer uden klager eller 
diagnoser" (DZ01) 
09-01-2016 00:02
start
09-01-2016 00:02
start
Rekvisition #306480
23-05-2016 10:00
Kategori: Besøg
Fra: Øjen Amb. Diabetes, NFS 
(K084) 
Til: Øjen Amb. Diabetes, NFS 
(K084) 
Foto af øjenbund (ZZ7010) 
Foto af øjenbund (ZZ7010) 
Rekvisition #402472
31-05-2016 08:40
Kategori: Uden besøg
Fra: Øjen Amb. Diabetes, NFS 
(K084) 
Til: Øjen Amb., NAE (K078) 
Brevsvar vedrørende konkret 
undersøgelse (BVAC10) 
14-01-2016 08:00
start
Rekvisition #336330
05-02-2016 10:30
Kategori: ambop
Fra: Øjen Amb., NAE (K555) 
Til: Øjen Amb. OP-afsnit, 
kld., NAE (K082) 
Fakoemulsifikation med 
implantation af kunstig linse 
i bageste øjenkammer (KCJE20) 
13-04-2016 08:17
start
Rekvisition #521444
14-04-2016 12:30
Kategori: Besøg
Fra: Øjen Amb., NAE (K078) 
Til: _ukendt enhed_ (K079) 
Fakoemulsifikation med 
implantation af kunstig linse 
i bageste øjenkammer (KCJE20) 
20-04-2016 08:00
start
Rekvisition #350264
14-01-2016 13:00
Kategori: Besøg
Fra: Lungemedicinsk Amb., NFS  
(M893) 
Til: Lungemedicinsk Amb., NFS  
(M893) 
Pulsoxymetri (ZZ4137) 
Lungefunktionsus., 
Helkropspletysmografi 
(WLHLBXXXX) 
Rekvisition #52692
20-01-2016 13:00
Kategori: Besøg
Fra: Lungemedicinsk Amb., NFS  
(M893) 
Til: Lungemedicinsk Amb., NFS  
(M893) 
Optagelse af anamnese 
vedrørende åndenød (MRC skala) 
(ZZ0150CD) 
Aldrig ryger (ZZP01A1B3) 
Tilbud om KOL rehabilitering 
(ZZ5730) 
1 exacerbation det seneste år 
(ZZP03A1B) 
Bestemmelse af Body Mass Index 
(BMI) (ZZ0242) 
Journaloptagelse (ZZ0150) 
Vejledning vedr. behandling af 
astma og kronisk obstruktiv 
lungelidelse (KOL) med 
inhalation (BGKC1) 
Måling af FEV (procent af 
forventet FEV1) (ZZ4139) 
Rekvisition #714195
20-01-2016 15:08
Kategori: Besøg
Fra: Lungemedicinsk Amb., NFS  
(M893) 
Til: Lungemedicinsk Amb., NFS  
(M893) 
Klinisk beslutning: 30 dage 
iht. Sundhedsloven § 87 
(AFX01A) 
20-01-2016 15:08
slut
Udskrevet med 
koden AV 
20-01-2016 15:09
start
Rekvisition #555078
13-04-2016 08:17
Røntgenundersøgelse af thorax 
(UXRC00) 
13-04-2016 08:18
start
13-04-2016 23:59
slut
Udskrevet til 
praktiserende 
læge 
13-04-2016 23:59
slut
Udskrevet til 
praktiserende 
læge 
Rekvisition #82974
20-04-2016 11:15
Kategori: Besøg
Fra: ØNH Søvn Amb., SLA (K706) 
Til: ØNH Søvn Amb., SLA (K706) 
Kardio-Respiratorisk 
Monitorering (CRM) (ZZ3921) 
Rekvisition #553179
21-04-2016 13:00
Kategori: Besøg
Fra: ØNH Søvn Amb., SLA (K706) 
Til: ØNH Søvn Amb., SLA (K706) 
Otoskopi (KUDB02) 
Epworth Sleepiness Scale (ESS) 
(ZZV020D) 
Klinisk beslutning: intet 
behandlingsbehov iht. 
sundhedsloven § 82b (AFX01C) 
Otoskopi (KUDB02) 
Apnø-hypopnø indeks (AHI) 
(ZZV020B) 
Oxygen desaturations indeks 
(ODI) (ZZV020C) 
Journaloptagelse (ZZ0150) 
21-04-2016 16:00
slut
Udskrevet til 
andet afsnit 
(a) The entire treatment of a patient during 5 months of 2016.
(b) A closer look at a single course with only one contact.
Figure 1.3: A chronological representation of the treatment a single patient
has gone through during the rst 5 months of 2016.
==PAGE:24==
12
Introduction
Figure 1.4: Simulation of patients on waiting list for a CT scan in 2016, as-
suming all scans up to January 15'th were booked in 2015.
Chapter 4 is very similar in structure to Chapter 3, as it also describes the
analysis, design, and implementation of an analysis tool. However, this chapter
focuses on patient groups and the eect they have on shared resources. This is
useful when looking at the eect of prioritising patient groups. As for Chapter 3
it contains a section on tests, but the analyses produced by the tool have been
left for Chapter 5.
Chapter 5 covers the analyses made by the entire software tool. It goes through
a variety of analyses and describes their advantages, disadvantages, and assump-
tions made by each analysis. As the more technical aspects of generating these
analyses are covered in Chapter 3 and 4, this chapter will not be especially
technical. However, it will describe how the tool was used in order to generate
the analyses.
==PAGE:25==
Chapter 2
Fundamentals of Patient
Flow Analysis
This chapter starts with an introduction to patient ow, which will also intro-
duce some concepts and terminology. It then describes the essential concepts
in detail, along with the relations between them. This leads to a data model
dened in F#.
Once the data model is dened, Section 2.3 presents the data provided by Region
Sjælland and relate it to the data model.
Finally the chapter ends with Section 2.4, which details the requirements for
the analysis tool.
2.1
Overview of patient ow
This section describes patient ows. It will introduce concepts which will be
described briey in this section and covered in detail in the next section. The
concepts covered in this chapter are limited to those available in the provided
data.
==PAGE:26==
14
Fundamentals of Patient Flow Analysis
Figure 2.1: The basic structure of the main concepts tied to patient ow. From
left to right each concept is part of the , e.g. a contact is a part
of course, and it contains a number of requisitions.
This section will cover two aspects in regard of patient ow. First of all it will
cover the ow of a single patient, i.e. every relation a person has with a hospital.
This is important in order to be able to analyse the hospital experience from the
patient's point of view. Secondly, it will look at the ow of a group of patients.
This is relevant in order to look at how certain patient groups, occupy hospital
resources and thereby aect other patient groups.
When dealing with the ow of a single patient there are some core concepts that
must be understood. The foremost being the dierence between a patient and a
person. Within the hospital domain the terms are much alike but dier in that
a patient is receiving some kind of health care service. Since hospitals have data
about everyone, and not just the patients, the term person will be used for the
data model.
A patient will receive procedures, during a hospital visit. Procedures are the
smallest entity within patient ow, and they are used to describe the treat-
ment the patient is receiving, such as X-ray of the skull or Requisitioning of
blood samples. However, the procedures are also used administratively as for
instance when a patient is enrolled in a cancer package. The procedures are all
encoded with an SKS (Healthcare Classication System) code, which maps to
a description.
Since a person may receive many procedures during a lifetime, the procedures are
grouped together within Requisitions. These are then grouped within Contacts
which are grouped within Courses. The relations between these are shown in
Figure 2.1. In general; requisitions are small groups of procedures that belong
together, contacts are scoped by the duration of the treatment of a single disease,
and courses link related contacts, e.g. a preambulant contact that leads into a
an ambulant contact. These concepts are covered in depth in Section 2.2, which
also explains the additional information that is tied to each of them.
In regard to the ow of patient groups, the above terms are still relevant for
the individual patients within the group. However, for patient groups it also
becomes possible to look at how they occupy resources, such as doctors and
medical equipment. Larger patient groups may take up signicant proportions
of certain resources. This is particularly the case for the cancer patients enrolled
==PAGE:27==
2.2 Basic concepts
15
Person
A physical human being identied by an id.
Contains all
courses related to that person.
Course
A group of connected contacts. Contacts are grouped under
the same course if their diagnoses are related.
Contact
A relation with a single hospital department regarding treat-
ment of a single illness. Multiple diagnoses may be relevant,
and usually multiple requisitions will be attached to a contact.
Requisition
Requisitions are primarily used to group procedures that are
conducted within a short time frame.
Procedure
The smallest entity, used for a single examination, operation,
package marker, etc.
Table 2.1: Core concepts of patient ow.
in cancer packages, as they are guaranteed time limits. This means that they are
given priority and thereby get access to shared resources before other patients.
2.2
Basic concepts
This section gives a detailed description of all the concepts of patient ow anal-
ysis. It denes the domain and establishes a data model. it then presents the
data provided by region Sjælland, and nally parses the data.
2.2.1
Person to procedures
A summary of the core concepts can be found in Table 2.1, and they are elabo-
rated throughout the section. The les that denes the model can be found in
Appendix A.
The smallest entity within the patient ow domain is a procedure. A proce-
dure consists of a code from the SKS system (dened in Section 2.2.4) and the
corresponding description. This may be the conduction of an examination or
operation, or it may be an administrative marker as for instance used by the
cancer packages. Furthermore, procedures may be specications or additions
to other procedures. As the procedure is just a code and a description, it only
exists as part of requisitions in the data model, and not as its own type. In the
data model only the code is stored as part of a requisition, but the code can be
used to lookup the description.
==PAGE:28==
16
Fundamentals of Patient Flow Analysis
A requisition contains a group of procedures as well as additional information,
such as when the procedures were conducted. Procedures should be grouped
under a single requisition when they occur closely after one another. A requi-
sition may potentially contain a time stamp for both a start and an end, but
as Section 2.3 shows, the end time stamp is very rarely present in the data.
The data model therefore only contains a single time stamp, which marks the
beginning of the requisition. The type denition of a requisition is shown in
Listing 2.1.
9
type
Requisition = {
10
Id : int
11
Start : DateTime
12
Treatment : Treatment
option
13
Priority: Priority
option
14
Procedures : string seq
15
}
Listing 2.1: Type denition of a Requisition.
As can be seen from Listing 2.1 a requisition contains an id. This is a unique
identier, that identies the requisition. Similar ids are included in the remain-
ing types. This means that the requisition does not contain data about which
contact, course, or person it belongs to.
Contacts are groupings of requisitions that belong under the same diagnosis.
That being said a contact can have multiple diagnoses, if the diagnoses are
connected or if a disease is mistaken for another. Diagnoses can be added to
the contact at any time, which means that the diagnosis might not be an actual
diagnosis, but only the suspicion of one or more diseases.
17
type
Contact = {
18
Id: int
19
Type: ContactType
20
MainSection: string
21
Start: DateTime
22
End: End option
23
Diagnoses: string seq
24
Requisitions: Requisition
seq
25
}
Listing 2.2: Type denition of a Contact.
Contacts have time stamps both for when they start and when they end as the
requisitions. However, as patients may suer from diseases for years, contacts
==PAGE:29==
2.2 Basic concepts
17
may also last for years, and unlike for the requisitions the ending of a contact
is therefore very important. The ending of a contact is still optional though,
as the contact may still be ongoing. The contact type denition can be seen
in Listing 2.3, where it should be noted that the ending of a contact has been
bundled with the reason the contact ended, e.g.
the patient was moved to
another department or the patient passed away.
17
type
Contact = {
18
Id: int
19
Type: ContactType
20
MainSection: string
21
Start: DateTime
22
End: End option
23
Diagnoses: string seq
24
Requisitions: Requisition
seq
25
}
Listing 2.3: Type denition of a Contact.
A course is a wrapper that groups contacts together. The contacts are generally
grouped together if their diagnoses are related. If a contact is terminated be-
cause the patient is moved to another department, then another contact will be
created for the new department. Such two contacts should also be grouped under
a single course. As courses do not contain information about why the contacts
are grouped together, the type becomes very simple, as seen in Listing 2.4.
27
type
Course = {
28
Id: int
29
Contacts: Contact
seq
30
}
Listing 2.4: Type denition of a Course.
As specied in the previous section the data model will be using the term per-
son rather than patient, as hospitals may have information about people that
have not necessarily been in contact with the hospital. Furthermore, they may
have data that is related to the person but not to the person as a patient,
such as gender, address, or age. Within the Danish hospital databases, people
are uniquely identied by their social security number. However, as the data
provided by Region Sjælland has been anonymized, no personal details are in-
cluded, and the persons are therefore identied by an arbitrary id number, that
has no correlation to their social security numbers. As personal information has
been removed, the data model for a person only includes the id and a list of
courses, as can be seen from the type denition in Listing 2.5.
==PAGE:30==
18
Fundamentals of Patient Flow Analysis
32
type
Person = {
33
Id: int
34
Courses: Course seq
35
}
Listing 2.5: Type denition of a Person.
For all of the above types, it was decided to keep the smaller entity as part of
the larger, e.g. the requisitions are contained within the contact. Alternatively
the contact could simply contain the id's for all the requisitions, and then the
proper requisitions could be looked up in a map (that maps ids to requisitions),
when they are needed. However, such an approach will require to lookup several
entities in a relatively large map (600.000 requisition) every time the requisitions
of a contact is needed. By having them as part of the contact, they are only
looked up once, and the model better represents the relation as the requisitions
are actually part of the contact.
Helper entities
As described above, both requisitions and contacts contains data that has been
bundled together. The bundles are called Treatment, ContactType and End,
and their denitions are shown in Listing 2.6. Unlike the other types these terms
are not used by Region Sjælland, but have been created to ensure the model
reects relations in the data.
Furthermore, the types TreatmentCategory,
Referral, Termination, and Priority are used, but as they are simply enu-
merations they have been omitted from the report. Their denitions can be
found in Appendix A.
A Treatment contains optional information for requisitions. It contains the unit
that requested the requisition, the unit that performed the requisition, and a
category.
These three values are optional, as not all requisitions require an
actual execution, e.g. the addition of a package marker. However, when one of
the elds is present they all are.
Similarly contacts contain two dierent groups of data, namely ContactType
and End. The ContactType is not optional, but is used to connect the type
of contact with the patient's referral to the hospital. As can be seen from the
denition the presence of a referral depends on the type of contact, as injured
patient's are not referred from anywhere.
==PAGE:31==
2.2 Basic concepts
19
62
type
Treatment = {
63
ReqUnit: string
64
PerfUnit: string
65
Category: TreatmentCategory
66
}
67
68
type
ContactType =
69
| Ambulant of Referral
70
| PreAmbulant of Referral
71
| Injury
72
| Admission of Referral
73
74
type End = {
75
Termination: Termination
76
Time: DateTime
77
}
Listing 2.6: Type denition of Treatment, ContactType, and End.
2.2.2
Hospital structure
The hospitals and their departments and sections follow a strict hierarchy. This
hierarchy has been established from the data which will be covered in Section 2.3.
The hierarchy has Hospital at the top, which does not correspond to a single
physical hospital, but rather a hospital system under a single management.
Region Sjælland has only one Hospital, which is managed by Region Sjælland.
The hierarchy is shown in Figure 2.2.
Figure 2.2: Hospital hierarchy.
An area is a group of physical hospitals, which are located close to one another.
A management controls one or more super-departments. A super-department
usually covers a medical eld within a hospital, e.g.
radiology or medicine.
These are then split into departments with various functions and locations. A
department consists of sections, which again may have diering functionalities,
but may also just be used to split a department into smaller units.
The hierarchical structure serves no purpose with respect to the analyses made
during this project. For this reason, as well as the lack of unique identiers for
managements, the hierarchy is only reected indirectly by the model. Instead
==PAGE:32==
20
Fundamentals of Patient Flow Analysis
of containing sections within departments and so on, a single type Unit has
been dened which contains the information for a section, department, super-
department, management, or area.
It also contains the type of the unit in
form of a UnitType, which also holds information specic for that unit type,
see Listing 2.7. The hospital structure is a part of the model and is therefore
included in Appendix A.
37
type Unit = {
38
Name: string
39
Type: UnitType
40
Address: Address
41
Change: string
42
}
Listing 2.7: Type denition of Unit.
2.2.3
Resources
Within the hospital domain, there are two kinds of resources essential for the
treatment of patients. These are personnel and equipment. Although these two
categories may seem very dierent, they are very much alike when considered
as resources. There are costs associated with acquiring and using either, which
means that they are in limited supply. Furthermore, just as not all equipment is
alike neither is all personnel. A nurse cannot replace a radiologist, just as a bed
cannot replace an x-ray scanner. To model resources adequately it is therefore
not enough to simply split them into two groups, but an entire hierarchy is
necessary.
Personnel may be split into porters, nurses, doctors, administration etc., and
some of these may have to split into even more detailed subcategories, e.g. doc-
tors into radiologists, urologists, surgeons etc. The same applies to equipment,
although the hierarchy becomes much larger, since this covers everything from
band-aids and test tubes to beds and scanners, which each have many subcate-
gories.
2.2.4
SKS
The SKS system (Healthcare Classication System, abbreviated from the Danish
Sundhedsvæsenets Klassikations System) is used to categorise diseases, proce-
dures etc. within the Danish Healthcare sector. The system has been designed to
==PAGE:33==
2.3 Data provided by Region Sjælland
21
prevent ambiguity across departments and hospitals. The system is constantly
updated as new procedures are discovered or old procedures are discontinued.
The system uses unique codes to identify diseases and procedures. Each code
is associated with a denition, e.g. the code UXCA05 is associated with the
denition CT scan of the skull.
The codes are build hierarchically, so UXCA covers all CT scans of the head,
UXC covers all CT scans, UX covers radiological procedures, and U covers
examinations. Furthermore, within certain branches the codes are systematic
across the hierarchy, as can be seen by codes of the type UX?A05 which are
scans of the skull, where the question mark substitutes a letter indicating the
type of scan.
An online browser can be found at http://www.medinfo.dk/sks/brows.php,
which allows anyone to look up codes or search for key words to nd the ap-
propriate code. The browser also includes entities from the SHAK database
which contains the hospitals and departments in Denmark, and encodes them
in a hierarchical fashion similar to the SKS system.
The cancer package markers are also included in the SKS system, as it also
includes administrative relations, such as cancer package markers. The cancer
packages and their associated markers are covered in Section 1.2.2.
2.3
Data provided by Region Sjælland
This section covers the data sets provided by Region Sjælland and how the raw
data has inuenced the model. The section ends by showing how the raw data
is processed and converted to t the model.
All data was received in text les with a format suitable for spreadsheets. The
column separator varied between the data sets, as some used tabulators and
others used semicolons. Another dierence is the way that dates and times are
represented. In one data set a single ten digit number is used to represent both
date and time, but in another they are two separate columns.
==PAGE:34==
22
Fundamentals of Patient Flow Analysis
Focus
Files
Notes
I
Multimorbidities
Contacts
Have one diagnosis.
Requisitions
Have a category.
Procedures
Hospital structure
Excel ark
SKS
II
Cancer patients
Contacts
Have at least one
diagnosis.
Requisitions
Do not have a
category.
Procedures
III
Requisitions and
procedures only, but
for all patients
Requisitions
Do not have a
category.
Procedures
Table 2.2: Data sets.
2.3.1
Data sets
Region Sjælland provided three dierent data sets with various purposes, as
shown in Table 2.2.
Data set I was received during the summer of 2016, and contains data from the
same year for patients with multimorbidities. As the data was extracted during
the year, the data set only contains data from a few months. This data was
used in the beginning of the project, and formed the basis of the model.
Data set II was extracted in February 2017 and contains information about
patients enrolled in cancer packages.
Patients were included in the data set
if they were enrolled in a cancer package during 2016, i.e. the code AFB??A
belonged to a requisition dated in 2016, where the question marks substitute a
two digit number, indicating the specic cancer package. If a patient is included
in the data set then all information from 2016 regarding that patient is included,
regardless of whether or not it is cancer related.
This data set is the main
data set, which has been used throughout the project, and is therefore also the
data used for the analyses. For a few patients data from early 2017 has been
included as well. This was primarily done to include all cancer package markers
for patients enrolled in late 2016.
Data set I and II both contained three primary les containing procedures,
requisitions, and contacts. Procedure suses only two columns; one with id of
the requisition the procedure belongs to and one with a procedure code. The
==PAGE:35==
2.3 Data provided by Region Sjælland
23
Requisition
Data set I
Data set II
Id
x
Requisition id
x
x
Contact id
x
x
Requisition start date
x
x
Requisition start time
x
x
Requisition end date
o
Requisition end time
o
Priority
o
Requesting unit
o
o
Performing unit
o
o
Status
x
Category
o
Table 2.3: Table showing the presence of columns for requisitions in the data
sets. An `x' indicates that the data is present for all rows, an `o'
indicates the data is only present in some rows, and an empty cell
indicates the row was not included in the data set.
Requisition les contain columns for all the elds included in the model of a
Requisition, see Listing 2.1. But as specied in Table 2.2, Dataset II does
not include categories for requisitions. In the same way all information needed
for a Contact (see Listing 2.3) is included in the Contact les. Courses and
persons are also contained in both data set I and II, as the contact les includes
a person/patient id and a course id for every contact. However, there are a few
dierences between the elds included in the data sets, which are covered below.
The fact that data set II does not include categories for requisitions is actually
quite important. The value is included in the model, under the type Treatment
as the enumeration TreatmentCategory. Since the existence of a Treatment
and thereby both a requesting and a performing unit were inferred to depend
on the existence of a category (this was inferred from data set I), the absence
of the category means that neither the requesting nor the performing unit are
included. It might therefore make sense to remove the category from Treatment.
However, the eld has been kept as part of the model, as it models the actual
relation more accurately. This also makes the model more tting for future data
extractions, which should include the categories for requisitions.
Beside of the missing category for requisitions, data set I and II also dier
by some extra columns added to Requisitions in data set II, as visualized by
Table 2.3.
For contacts the dierence between data sets I and II is much more subtle. The
==PAGE:36==
24
Fundamentals of Patient Flow Analysis
main dierence is that data set II does not have a single diagnosis for a contact,
but has multiple, whereas data set I only has one. Furthermore, values for a
priority as well as a status and and an end time, were added to data set II. As
all of these changes were additions, it seemed reasonable to include them in the
model. But since the end times are very rarely included in the data set, and
the status oer very little information, these values have not been included, but
can easily be included at a later point, if they become relevant.
The nal dierence between data set I and II is that data set II contains a
unique id for each row. In case of the requisitions this is irrelevant as each row
already has a unique id, in form of the `Requisition id'. But for the contacts this
is somewhat useful as a single contact may stretch multiple lines, as each line
only contains one diagnosis. It is also worth noting that the data set II contains
the requesting unit for requisitions in two dierent columns.
Data set III was extracted in March 2017, and dier a lot from the other two
sets, as it does not include persons, courses, or contacts.
However, it does
include all requisitions and procedures from 2016, meaning that this data set
can be used to estimate the amount procedures and requisitions in a year. By
ltering the data it is also possible to nd the instances of a specic procedure
or a group of procedures.
Data set III has been used to estimate how many times scanners were used in
2016, by looking at procedure prexes. Similarly it has been used to look at
priorities and cancellations of requisitions. The procedure prex UX was used
to identify scans and the third letter was used to identify the type of scan. The
general functions used for this are dened in Appendix H, and the script that
uses them is called allScans.fsx and is included in Appendix L.
Besides the primary les, other les were delivered as well as part of data set
I. The most important is the SKS le, which maps all of the SKS codes to
their denitions and also includes a map from SHAK codes to hospitals and
departments. However, as these provide no more than a name for a hospital,
department, or section, they do not contain enough information to be used in
the data model.
Instead the le with the Hospital structure has been used.
It contains much more information about every unit in the hospital hierarchy,
as well as the relations between the units. However, the parent-child relation
between certain pairs of units is not entirely clear as the managements are not
uniquely identied by a code. Because of this, and the limited need of the hos-
pital structure for the analyses provided in this thesis, a hospital hierarchy was
not build. Instead all sections, departments, super-departments, and manage-
ments conform to the model from Section 2.2. This allows any unit to quickly
be looked up from the department codes attached to contacts.
==PAGE:37==
2.3 Data provided by Region Sjælland
25
Figure 2.3: An example of how the module CsvProvider from FSharp.Data
can be used to generate types for semicolon separated les.
2.3.2
Parsing
In order to parse the data, the FSharp.Data library has been used. It is an
open source library licensed under the Apache 2.0 license. More specically the
CSVParser module has been used to make the parsing easier. The module uses a
type provider to generate types based on either a template or an example le. In
order to parse the les, the les themselves were used as examples, for the type
provider to know which types to generate. An example of how the type provider
works is shown in Figure 2.3, the names for the generated types are the column
headers from the csv le. The le chosen for this example does not have a name
for its rst column, so it defaults to Column1. The documentation for the
module can be found at http://fsharp.github.io/FSharp.Data/library/
CsvProvider.html.
Utilizing the functionality of the CsvProvider, simplies the task of parsing, as
types are already generated for each row. The provided types are actually a very
simple model of requisitions, that directly models the data but disregards any
real world relations between them. Furthermore, the relation between types
from dierent les, only exists in form of a lookup, e.g. a requisition has a
contact id, which matches the id of the corresponding contact.
In order to
generate types of the model dened in Section 2.2, all of the provided les were
read using the CsvProvider, as displayed in Listing 2.8, and the used to generate
the types dened in the model.
==PAGE:38==
26
Fundamentals of Patient Flow Analysis
81
let SKS ' = CsvProvider <"../../ data/SKS.tsv", HasHeaders=
false >. GetSample ()
82
let procedures ' = CsvProvider <"../../ data/ydelse.csv",
Separators=";" >.GetSample ()
83
let requisitions ' = CsvProvider <"../../ data/rekv.csv",
Separators=";" >.GetSample ()
84
let diagnoses ' = CsvProvider <"../../ data/diagnoses.csv",
Separators=";" >.GetSample ()
85
let contacts ' = CsvProvider <"../../ data/contacts.csv",
Separators=";" >.GetSample ()
Listing 2.8: Reading les with the CsvProvider, from ParserHelper.fs.
The CSVProvider generates some types, and a sequence of instance of each type.
The sequences are then iterated so each entity can be converted to its proper
type. For a requisition this includes mapping all of the elds, as well as nding
all of the corresponding procedures, and the same goes for contacts that must
identify their associated requisitions. Furthermore, many of the string values
from the generated types are converted to enumerations to ensure the values are
legal. The les that handle the parsing can be seen in Appendix B.
As stated, the second data set contains multiple diagnoses for contacts. This
makes the csv le dicult to handle as a contact can take up multiple lines.
Furthermore, there is no guarantee that the diagnoses for a contact are grouped
together, meaning that a single contact may be scattered throughout the le. To
ensure that every contact was created exactly once, and that all the diagnoses
were associated correctly, the contacts and diagnoses were split into two other
les using the script displayed in Appendix J. The script takes time to nish as
it has to keep track of all the contact ids. However, the script was run once,
and will not need to be run again as the generated les have been stored.
7
module
Parser =
8
9
type
Cache =
10
class
11
new: unit -> Cache
12
member
getPerson: int -> Person
13
member
getPersons: unit -> Map <int ,Person >
14
member
getSKS: unit -> SKS
15
member
getUnits: unit -> Units
16
end
Listing 2.9: Part of the signature le Parser.fsi, used for the majority of the
parsing.
==PAGE:39==
2.3 Data provided by Region Sjælland
27
Since the actual parsing of all of the les takes some time, it is preferable to
only do this once. The data is therefore cached, making the persons and SKS
codes easily accessible. The signature for this can be seen in Listing 2.9, and
the full signature le is found in Appendix B.
Data set III contains neither persons, courses, nor contacts. Parsing data set III
returns a sequence of requisitions which the user may then cache if it needs to
be iterated more than once. The signature for this can be seen in Listing 2.10.
The full parsing of data set III can be seen in Appendix C.
6
module
ParserPseudo =
7
8
val
getRequisitions : unit -> Requisition
seq
Listing 2.10: Part of the signature le ParserPseuo.fsi, used for parsing
requisitions.
The units within a hospital are parsed a bit dierently, as they all reside in the
same le. Listing 2.11 shows the general idea behind the parsing. First lines
that do not represent units are removed. These lines correspond to geographies,
which do not belong in the hierarchy and therefore have not been included in
the data model, and a single line containing the hospital Region Sjælland. Since
the data set only contains one hospital this is not included in the data model.
239
units '. Rows
240
|> Seq.filter
isUnit
241
|> Seq.map
makeUnit
242
|> Seq.map
makeMap
243
|> Map.ofSeq
Listing 2.11: Parsing of hospital units.
As can be seen from the parsing, the data is moved directly from the les into
the model. There is therefore no database. This was a deliberate choice, made
for several reasons. First of all the data sets contain data extracted from Region
Sjælland's databases, so immediately inserting the data into another database
seems redundant. Secondly, the data sets are small enough to be handled in
memory, giving fast access to all of the data without querying a database. If
larger data sets are to be handled, then a database might become necessary, but
setting up a database at a later point is not problematic due to the structure of
the program. Only the parser les will have to change, and in case the signature
for the parser changes, then minor changes regarding access, will have to change
in the les that utilizes the model.
==PAGE:40==
28
Fundamentals of Patient Flow Analysis
2.4
Requirement specication
Based on the data model established in Section 2.2 and the objects specied in
Section 1.5, the following requirements have been established for the analyses:
1. Patient report generation
(1a) Give a structured overview of a patient's history.
(1b) Provide a chronological view of a patient's history.
(1c) Allow ltering of patient data, to exclude irrelevant information.
(1d) Allow highlighting of key features.
2. Resource analysis tool
(2a) Estimate necessary resource capacities.
(2b) Analyse inuence of prioritising patients.
(2c) Visualize results.
The rst requirement is report generation. A generated report should give an
overview of the treatment(s) a patient has gone through. According to require-
ment (1a) the reports must be structured. This means that data that is related
should also appear that way in the report, e.g. it must be clear what procedures
belong to which requisitions.
Requirement (2b) states that it must also be possible to generate chronologi-
cal reports. This should provide the chronological order of requisitions, which
may highlight features in parallel treatments, which is particularly relevant for
patients with multimorbidities.
The nal two requirements for the report generation (requirements (1c) and
(1d)) states that it should be possible to lter the data included in the report
as well as it should be possible to highlight data in a report. Being able to lter
data prior to the report generation could be considered a way of highlighting
data, as the data left after the ltering will be much easier to see, with the rest
gone. However, highlight is here used to say, that it should be possible to make
certain features pop out, without removing anything else from the report.
The second requirement focuses on analyses of resources, and must according
to requirement (2a), make it possible to estimate the necessary amount of a
resource. Furthermore, the tool must be able to analyse the consequences of
==PAGE:41==
2.4 Requirement specication
29
prioritising certain patient groups over others, as dened by requirement (2b).
Finally, requirement (3b) states that the results should be visualized.
All functionalities must of course be implemented in a way that does not limit
or obstruct further development.
Furthermore, it is a requirement that the
applications of the tool are demonstrated.
==PAGE:42==
30
Fundamentals of Patient Flow Analysis
==PAGE:43==
Chapter 3
Analysis of Individual
Patients
This chapter deals with the report generation for patients. It covers the analyses
of the possible approaches and how the report generation tool has been designed
to adhere to the requirements specied in Section 2.4. The chapter ends with a
discussion of the design choices as well as suggestions for future development of
the tool.
3.1
Analysis
In this section the report generation problem for patients is analysed.
The
analysis is split in three parts. The rst compares dierent ways of generating
reports, the second will look into how feature highlighting can be achieved, and
the nal part looks at how the reports may be visualized.
3.1.1
Report types
The rst concern regarding report generation is what to include in the report.
Since a report is meant to give a structured overview, it is preferable if it includes
==PAGE:44==
32
Analysis of Individual Patients
all of the aspects from Figure 2.1. It should thus be possible to identify the
person, and see which courses, contacts, requisitions and procedures the person
has gone through. As a Person contain no information besides its identier and
the courses, no further information can be added to the report. The same is
true for the course. Contacts and requisitions on the other hand contain a lot
of information that might worth including in a report. For contacts this would
be the start and end of the contact, as well as the reason for the termination
of the contact.
It might also be benecial to include the contact type and
diagnoses. For the requisitions there might be value in having the start time as
well as the priority. The procedures only consists of a code and a description.
Since the code is not very user friendly, the description should be included in
reports. However, the codes are relatively short, and as they may be benecial
for professionals there is no reason to include them as well.
In order to generate a report for a patient, the simplest solution is to simply list
every item from the medical history of that patient, as exemplied in the list
below. This gives a complete view of the patients history, and due to the model
of a Person it is relatively easy to ensure the report is structured, thus satisfying
requirement (1a). A Person contains courses, and each course contains contacts.
But a contact only exists under the course it belongs to, just as a course only
exists under the person that went through the course. A report generated for a
patient can easily maintain the structure of the model and thereby also give a
clear overview of the hierarchy, e.g. which requisitions belong to which contacts.
Indentation can be used to mark the level in the hierarchy.
• Person
1. Contact
(a) Requisition
i. Procedure
ii. Procedure
(b) Requisition
i. Procedure
Generating reports as lists is most easily achieved with pure text. Although,
the pure textual format is easily produced it is not very exible as it cannot
be formatted. A dierent approach is therefore to produce a textual output in
a markup language. Depending on the markup language additional formatting
options may be available.
The Hypertext Markup Language (HTML) has multiple benets and should
denitely be considered. It has many formatting options and even works with
==PAGE:45==
3.1 Analysis
33
Cascading Style Sheets (CSS) which makes it easy to change the formatting as
the CSS le can simply be modied. Furthermore, HTML is very widespread
and can be viewed within any internet browser, meaning that interpreting the
markup text to generate a user friendly view is not a problem. The downside
to HTML is the Extensible Markup Language (XML) syntax, which makes it is
bit more cumbersome to generate and without the interpretation makes it a lot
less readable because of the tags.
An alternative to HTML is to use a lightweight markup language such as Mark-
down. This does not provide as many formatting options, and is not quite as
widespread, which makes the interpretation a bit more dicult as it requires
external tools. However, the language is much simpler which makes the raw
text les easier to read and generate.
Regardless of the choice of markup language, the textual solution to a report
generation is limited, in that the chronological history of the patient will not
be apparent from the layout. If instead of grouping requisitions under their
corresponding contacts, they are listed in chronological order, then the structure
is lost. The problem lies in that the list only contains one dimension, which can
either be used to show chronology or structure, but not both simultaneously.
Since this type of report will therefore not be the only one that is generated,
it was decided that Markdown would be sucient for the rst type of report
generation.
A second approach to report generation is to use two dimensions. This way
the chronology can be shown using one dimension, while the other can ensure
that the structure is maintained in the visual representation. This is the sort of
report that was exemplied in Figure 1.3 in Section 1.5, where the horizontal
axis displays time (non-linearly) to maintain the chronology, and the vertical
axis is used to separate contacts and courses, that overlap in time. Requisitions
cannot overlap as the data model only denes a single point in time for them,
and not a duration.
This solution should satisfy requirement 1b, by adding
chronology to the reports.
In order to satisfy requirement 1c, it must be possible to lter the data. The
lightweight version of this is to simply split the process of acquiring a person
and generating a report for the person, into two function calls. Thus giving a
signature that looks like Listing 3.2 rather than Listing 3.1, note that parameters
have been omitted for simplicity.
This will allow a user to call getPerson,
modify the person with the standard F# functionalities, and then call save
with the modied person. As an alternative the function could take a function
parameter of type Person -> Person, which would allow the user to parse an
appropriate mapping. However, this approach prevents the user from accessing
the data between the calls, thus limiting the ability to write the lter based
==PAGE:46==
34
Analysis of Individual Patients
on the data. Another benet from splitting the functionality is that it will be
easier to maintain and update, since the parsing and the report generation are
separated.
1
val save : id: int -> bool
Listing 3.1: Signature for function that rst acquires a person and then
generates a report.
1
val
getPerson : id: int -> Person
2
val save -> Person
-> bool
Listing 3.2: Signatures for separate functions that acquire a person and
generates a report, respectively.
3.1.2
Feature highlighting in report visualizations
According to requirement (1d), it should be possible to highlight important
features in the history of a patient. This can done in multiple ways. It can be
done by modifying the text layout by changing the font, the font size, or adding
emphasis through italic, bold, or underlining. However, it can also be achieved
by using colours. This approach has the benet that multiple colours can be
used to highlight dierent features. Furthermore, coloured items are easier to
spot than bold text, thus enhancing the highlighting.
The report generation facilitates multiple ways to use colours for highlighting.
Courses, contacts, and requisitions, are all enclosed boxes with text. This means
that it is possible to colour both text and backgrounds. Starting at the top most
level, we have the courses. However, as no information is tied directly to them,
there are only few features that can be highlighted and none that seems to helps
the user.
A contact on the other hand, has much information which can be highlighted.
Depending on what is of importance dierent features may be highlighted. This
could be the contact type, the diagnoses, or the department where the contact
was located. As an example the contact type will be used. This was mainly
chosen to make it easy to see if a patient is admitted to a hospital, but it also
makes it easy to spot the less common contacts for injuries. As the remaining
two contact types (preambulant and ambulant) are somewhat alike they should
be represented by similar but distinct colours.
==PAGE:47==
3.1 Analysis
35
A similar choice was made for the requisitions. However, in this case the fo-
cus on prioritising cancer patients, as discussed in Section 1.2, was taken into
consideration. The priority of the requisitions seems perfect for this purpose.
However, as will be discussed in Section 3.3, the understanding of the priorities
was not entirely correct at the time, it was chosen for the highlighting.
As the main data set contains cancer patients, the nal highlighting concerns
these as well. This is not as simple as highlighting the features previously dis-
cussed, as neither contacts nor requisitions directly contain information about
whether they are cancer related. What they do contain are diagnoses and proce-
dures. Using the structure of the SKS system it is possible to single out prexes
for cancer related diagnoses and procedures. Since procedures are not meant to
be disease specic, the only ones that are cancer related are the markers for the
cancer packages. However, with the diagnoses it is a bit more problematic as
all cancer diagnoses are not contained under a single prex. The prexes were
found manually and the list may therefore be incomplete.
3.1.3
Graphviz
In order to visualize reports generated with Markdown syntax, an external
visualization tool is required.
The program Graphviz was chosen as it sup-
ports all of the above features. Documentation for Graphviz can be found at
http://www.graphviz.org/. More specically the program dot (which is in-
cluded in Graphviz), is used to generate the graphs. It handles the layout of
courses and contacts, given the order of the requisitions.
Furthermore, the
styling options makes it easy to colour the background of boxes, and as it has
support for HTML like syntax, it is possible to highlight text as well.
The
DOT language1 which is used to describe a graph is structured, which makes it
relatively easy to automate the report generation.
The reports can be generated using the function save, with the signature shown
in Listing 3.3. This simplies the user experience as a single function is used
regardless of the report type. The dierent types of reports are distinguished
by dierent formats, which also makes it easy to add more report types. The
purpose of each parameter is claried in the list below.
17
val save: Person
-> path:string
-> Format
list -> SKS ->
Units
-> bool
Listing 3.3: Signature for report generation.
1http://www.graphviz.org/content/dot-language
==PAGE:48==
36
Analysis of Individual Patients
• Person: The person the report is generated for
• string: A path where the report is saved
• Format list: A list of output formats
• SKS: A map of SKS codes to values
• Units: A map from department and section codes to units
• bool: The success of the report generation
As can be seen for the above list the rst parameter is of type Person, which
allows the user to lter that person's medical history before calling the function,
thus satisfying requirement (1c). A path and a format are added to allow the
user to specify the location and format of the output, respectively. The SKS and
Units (see Listing 2.9) are both generated by the parser and are included, so their
respective values can be looked up during the report generation. The boolean
output can be used to indicate the success or failure of the report generation.
The format list species the intended output format, which includes Markdown
as well as a few of the formats that are supported by dot, such as pdf and png.
It is also possible to produce a pure dot/gv le, so the user can manually modify
the graphs, and use whatever graph generation tool they prefer. The list of all
supported formats is included in Appendix F.
3.2
Design and implementation
This section describes how the tool for report generation of patient history, has
been designed and implemented in accordance with the choices made in the
previous section.
Since two dierent types of reports can be generated, there are two dierent
functions for generating these reports, with identical function types, see List-
ing 3.4. They both take a person, as well as the maps of SKS codes and hos-
pital units, and returns a report in the form of a string.
The rst function
personToString generates a report using Markdown syntax, and the second
function personToTimeLine generates a report in the DOT language. The im-
plementation of both of these functions can be found in Appendix E, as well as
the full signature le.
==PAGE:49==
3.2 Design and implementation
37
9
val
personToString : Person
-> SKS -> Units
-> string
10
val
personToTimeline : Person
-> SKS -> Units
-> string
Listing 3.4: Signatures for generating the reports.
Appendix E contains two source code les Display.fs and DisplayHelper.fs
and the signature le Display.fsi. The le Display.fs contains functions for
report generation with Markdown syntax in the top, and functions for report
generation in the DOT language in the bottom. The le DisplayHelper.fs
contains helper functions for generating strings for some of the types, which are
not syntax specic and can therefore be used for both of the report generations.
It also contains types used for creating a chronological order of events.
3.2.1
Markdown reports
The Markdown reports are generated from the top down.
This means that
the rst function that is called, personToString, generates Markdown for the
person, and makes calls to courseToString, see Listing 3.5. The courses are
rst sorted with respect to the starting time of their rst contact, and then
for each course a call is made to courseToString, which works similarly. It
generates Markdown for the course, sorts the contacts by starting times, and
calls courseToString for each contact, see Listing 3.6.
61
let
personToString (person : Person) sks units =
62
person.Courses
63
|> Seq.sortBy
getStart
64
|> Seq.map ( courseToString 1 sks units)
65
|> String.concat "\n"
66
|> sprintf "# Person #%i\n\n%s" person.Id
Listing 3.5: Function that generates Markdown for a person.
54
let
courseToString
depth sks units
course =
55
course.Contacts
56
|> Seq.sortBy (fun c -> c.Start)
57
|> Seq.map ( contactToString (depth + 1) sks units)
58
|> String.concat "\n\n"
59
|> sprintf "1. ** Forløb #%s**: Fra %s\n\n%s" (string
course.Id) (courseDuration
course)
Listing 3.6: Function that generates Markdown for a course.
==PAGE:50==
38
Analysis of Individual Patients
The Markdown generation for contacts is a bit more complicated, because con-
tacts contain a lot of information that must be included in the report, such as a
diagnosis, a contact type, and the responsible department. In order to generate
strings for each of these, helper functions have been made. This is exempli-
ed by the conversion of contact types as shown in Listing 3.7.
The helper
functions have been separated from the rest of the code, by making a separate
module. Once the contact specic information has been converted to strings,
the process is much like that of the personToString and courseToString, as
the requisitions are sorted and then requisitionToString is called for each
requisition.
31
let
referralToString = function
32
| FromSpecialDoctor
-> " (henvist
fra
speciallæge)"
33
| FromPractice
-> " (henvist
fra
praktiserende læge
)"
34
| NotReferred
-> " (uden
henvisning)"
35
| Referral.Other
-> " (anden
henvisningstype )"
36
| HV
-> " ( henvisningstype HV)"
37
| PS
-> " ( henvisningstype PS)"
38
| HF
-> " ( henvisningstype HF)"
39
| Referral.UD
-> " ( henvisningstype UD)"
40
41
let
contactTypeToString = function
42
| Ambulant
ref
-> "Ambulant" + referralToString
ref
43
| PreAmbulant
ref -> "Præambulant" + referralToString
ref
44
| Injury
-> "Skade"
45
| Admission
ref
-> "Indlæggelse" + referralToString
ref
Listing 3.7: Conversion of ContactType to string.
The Markdown for the requisitions is generated similarly to that of contacts.
First the requisition specic information is converted, and then the procedures
are converted one by one.
The signature for each of the functions described above can be seen in Listing 3.8.
These are not contained in any signature les as they are only meant to be used
by the function personToString. As can be seen from the signatures, the SKS
and Unit maps are passed down through all of the functions. This is necessary
as the requisitions will have to look up procedure descriptions in the SKS map,
and since requisitions are requested by one department and possibly performed
by another, then the units that have requested and performed the requisition
will have to be looked up in the Units map.
==PAGE:51==
3.2 Design and implementation
39
1
val
courseToString : Course
-> SKS -> Units
-> string
2
val
contactToString : Contact
-> SKS -> Units
-> string
3
val
requisitionToString : Requisition
-> SKS -> Units
->
string
Listing 3.8: Function signatures.
3.2.2
DOT reports
The generation of chronological reports is a bit more complicated as both the
chronological order and the structure should be maintained. The process there-
fore contains multiple steps, as illustrated by Listing 3.9. Each of these steps
will be described throughout this section.
249
let
personToEvents (person : Person) =
250
person.Courses
251
|> Seq.collect
eventsOfCourse
252
|> Seq.sort
253
|> Seq.map snd
Listing 3.9: Overall functionality of turning.
The rst part of the report generation is to generate events. An event represent
a moment of importance in the history of a patient.
This can be the start
of a course, the end of a contact, or the time of a requisition. A full list of
the dierent event types is shown in Listing 3.10. The events are generated to
establish the chronological order, but they also contain information about the
course, contact, or requisition they represent, as this information is needed later.
Initially event are generated as follows:
• One RequisitionEvent is generated for each requisition.
• For each contact a ContactStartEvent and a ContactEndEvent are gen-
erated. The ContactEndEvent is generated even if the contact has not yet
ended, in which case the time of the event is set to the maximum possible
value, to ensure it is last.
• For each course, a CourseStartEvent and a CourseEndEvent are gener-
ated. Since courses have neither starting nor ending times, the start of a
course has been dened as the start of its rst contact, and the end as the
end of its last contact.
==PAGE:52==
40
Analysis of Individual Patients
136
// The order is important; as it is used to sort by
137
// Datatypes
used to store
information
during
timeline
creation
138
type
CourseStartEvent = {
139
Time: DateTime
140
Id: int
141
EndTime: DateTime
option
142
}
143
type
CourseEndEvent = {
144
Time: DateTime
145
Id: int
146
}
147
type
ContactStartEvent = {
148
Time: DateTime
149
Course: int
150
Id: int
151
Type: ContactType
152
MainSection: string
153
Diagnoses: string
list
154
HasCancer: bool
155
}
156
type
ContactEndEvent = {
157
Course: int
158
Id: int
159
End: End option
160
}
161
type
RequisitionEvent = {
162
Time: DateTime
163
Course: int
164
Contact: int
165
Id: int
166
Treatment: Treatment
option
167
Priority: Priority
option
168
HasCancer: bool
169
Procs: string
list
170
}
171
type
DummyEvent = {
172
Course: int
173
Id: string
174
}
175
176
// The order is important as it is used for
sorting
177
type
Event =
178
| CourseStart
of CourseStartEvent
179
| ContactStart
of ContactStartEvent
180
| Requisition
of RequisitionEvent
181
| ContactEnd
of ContactEndEvent
==PAGE:53==
3.2 Design and implementation
41
182
| CourseEnd
of CourseEndEvent
183
| DummyEvent
of DummyEvent
Listing 3.10: Event types.
The events are generated and sorted chronologically by the function personToEvents,
which has the format shown in Listing 3.11.
1
personToEvents: Person
-> Event seq
Listing 3.11: Signature for personToEvents
The event type also contains the special event DummyEvent, which are added as
the next part of the report generation. When the layout of the graph is decided
by graphviz, it will try to make the graph as small as possible, as illustrated by
Figure 3.1a. To ensure that the chronology is shown not just by the direction of
arrows, but by the horizontal axis as well, an invisible element can be inserted
between requisitions 1 and 3, as has been done in Figure 3.1b. A DummyEvent is
therefore added to all ongoing contacts, whenever a RequisitionEvent occurs.
A contact is dened as ongoing if it has started but not yet ended. In Figure 3.1
contact 2 is therefore ongoing when requisition 2 is added, and a dummy event
should therefore be added to contact 2.
Forløb #1
Kontakt 2
Kontakt 1
Rekvisition 2
Rekvisition 3
Rekvisition 1
(a) Without using dummy events.
Forløb #1
Kontakt 1
Kontakt 2
Rekvisition 2
Rekvisition 3
Rekvisition 1
(b) With a dummy event between requisition 1
and 3.
Figure 3.1: The layout of three requisitions with and without an invisible el-
ement. The les used for the generation of these graphs, can be
found in Appendix O.
The following couple of lines (line 215-219) generates the report for each course.
This is done by iterating through all the events that belong to the course, and
==PAGE:54==
42
Analysis of Individual Patients
generating strings in the DOT language for each of them.
The nal step is to wrap all of the courses in a diagram as part of the DOT
language, as well as to add all of the arrows. The arrows are added by con-
necting all RequisitionEvents, ContactStartEvents, and ContactEndEvents
chronologically.
3.2.3
Unied tool
With the designs and implementations explained so far, the two dierent ways of
generating reports work as two separate tools. In order to make it a single report
generation tool with multiple output formats, the module seen in Appendix F
was included. The main functionality is shown in Listing 3.12 which includes
the function save, that follows the function type specied in Listing 3.3.
The save function uses the specied formats to decide which reports to generate.
The supported formats are:
• Pdf: A pdf report produced by the dot program
• Png: A png report produced by the dot program
• Txt: A textual representation of the graph produced by the dot program
• GraphViz: A textual report formatted in the DOT language, with the
extension .gv
• Dot: Same as GraphViz, but given the extension .dot
• MarkDown: A textual report formatted with Markdown
It is possible to include multiple formats.
If multiple outputs from dot are
requested, dot will only be called once with parameters for all of the desired
output formats.
If Markdown is included in the list of formats then a report formatted with Mark-
down syntax is generated by the function saveHierarchy, by calling personToString
and saving the resulting string in a le.
If any of the formats that indicate that a report following the DOT syntax
should be produced are included, the function saveTimeline is called, which
generates a string with dot syntax. Depending on the formats, the string may
==PAGE:55==
3.2 Design and implementation
43
be saved directly to a le, or sent to the program dot which creates a graph
from the string.
76
let
saveTimeline
person
path
formats
sks units =
77
let
timeline = personToTimeline
person sks units
78
let (dotFormats , textFormats) =
79
formats
80
|> List.partition
81
(function | Pdf | Png | Txt -> true
82
| GraphViz | Dot | _ -> false)
83
84
let result =
85
match
dotFormats
with
86
| [] -> true
87
| _ -> callGraphViz
person.Id path
dotFormats
timeline
88
let result ' =
89
textFormats
90
|> List.forall (saveText
person.Id path
timeline)
91
92
result && result '
93
94
95
let
saveHierarchy
person
path
formats
sks units =
96
let text = personToString
person sks units
97
formats
98
|> List.forall (saveText
person.Id path text)
99
100
101
let save
person
path
formats
sks units =
102
let (timeline , hierarchy) =
103
formats
104
|> List.distinct
105
|> List.partition
106
(function | Pdf | Png | Txt | GraphViz | Dot -> true
107
| MarkDown
-> false)
108
109
let result =
110
match
hierarchy
with
111
| [] -> true
112
| _
-> saveHierarchy
person
path
hierarchy
sks units
113
let result ' =
114
match
timeline
with
115
| [] -> true
116
| _
-> saveTimeline
person
path
timeline
sks units
117
118
result && result '
Listing 3.12: Event.
==PAGE:56==
44
Analysis of Individual Patients
The request to dot, can be made using the System.Diagnostics.Process class
included in the .Net Framework, which enables starting and stopping external
processes.
In order to do this, the dot program must be available from the
command line, which for this project was achieved by adding a the location of
Graphviz to the environment variable `Path'.
3.3
Discussion
This section discusses some of the analysis and design choices made during the
development of the report generation tool, as well as introduce some natural
directions to take the further development.
During the analysis of which features to highlight, it was decided to highlight
the priorities of requisitions. However, as the understanding of the priorities was
incomplete, the resulting highlighting does not correspond to the intended high-
lighting. It was assumed that the priority eld should be read as any value (P,
A, or F, usually P) having priority and no value indicated that it did not. How-
ever, as the eld is actually used to distinguish between planned requisitions (P)
and acute care (A), then the colouring may be suboptimal. However, as acute
care can rarely be postponed, but planned requisitions can, the eld does still
represent a prioritisation, although the specic values have been misinterpreted.
As an alternative to colouring the requisitions by the priority, there would be
could be great value in colouring them by the waiting period. Meaning the time
from a requisition was planned till it actually took place. However, the supplied
data sets do not facilitate this as they do not contain the information about
when requisitions were planned.
Highlighting of certain procedure or diagnosis prexes, has only been imple-
mented for cancer patients, as this patient group was the focus of the project.
However, in order to do the same for a dierent group of patients, dierent pro-
cedures and diagnoses would have to be highlighted. The save function could
therefore be extended to accept a list of prexes that should be highlighted.
However, this would still require the user to nd relevant prexes.
As an alternative to a list of prexes the save function could be extended to
accept a list of key words. If any of those words are included in the description
of a diagnosis or procedure, then the highlighting could be applied to those.
This is a bigger change, but it will also automate a lot of the work.
==PAGE:57==
Chapter 4
Resource Analysis
This chapter describes the tool that has been developed for resource analyses.
The rst section describes the analyses and considerations made prior to the
development of the tool. This section includes a list of assumptions that have
been made. The second section describes the design choices and implementa-
tion of the tool.
The nal section discuss the choices made in the previous
sections and outlines natural directions of future development. Some applica-
tions of the analysis tool are demonstrated in the following chapter, particularly
in Section 5.3.
This chapter uses both the second and third data set, as described in Section 2.3.
4.1
Analysis
This section analyses how to develop a tool suitable for resource analyses with
the purpose of analysing the necessary amount of resources, as well as the con-
sequences of granting some patients priority with respect to accessing the re-
sources. The latter will primarily be analysed with regard to cancer patients, as
the cancer packages include time restrictions, that may enforce cancer patients
to be prioritised.
==PAGE:58==
46
Resource Analysis
The section starts by covering the modelling of resources, and continues to look
at scheduling. During this section some assumptions will be made. These are
listed and explained in Section 4.1.3.
4.1.1
Resources
In order for a scheduling algorithm to work, it must be dened when the resource
is accessible as well as how long a patient occupies the resource.
As these
parameters obviously depends on what resource is being analysed, the only
resources that are being considered in this thesis are scanners. However, the
principles are the same for other resources, so it will not be dicult to substitute
a scanner for another resource in the future.
The further analyses are made in regard to scanners, because estimates for these
can be made without gathering further data. However, the principles are the
same for other resources. It is assumed that scans can be located by the SKS
codes of procedures. The prex UX covers radiological procedures and the
four types of scans in Listing 4.1 have the prexes UXC, UXM, UXR, and
UXU, from top to bottom.
6
type
ScannerType =
7
| CT
8
| MR
9
| Xray
10
| US // Ultra
sound
Listing 4.1: Types of scans.
To dene when it should be possible to scan a patient, the data has been used
to look at scans that were performed in 2016. This was done by using the script
in Appendix K, which nds all requisitions and scans. The scans are sorted by
their type and handled individually. The scripts write their results to a le in
a csv format, so the data can be visualized easily. The results can be seen in
Figure 4.1. Since x-ray scans and ultra sound scans are much more common
than CT- and MR-scans, they have been omitted from the graphs.
From Figure 4.1 it should be noticed that the amount of CT scans and req-
uisitions are signicantly lower during weekends, and not a single MR scan
was performed on a weekend in 2016. As a simplication of this it will be as-
sumed that scans are not performed during weekends. Furthermore, it can be
seen that the majority of the operations are performed during the day. The
resources should therefore not be available 24 hours per day.
==PAGE:59==
4.1 Analysis
47
(a) Distribution by the hour of the day.
(b) Distribution by day of the week.
(c) Distribution over a week.
Figure 4.1: Distribution of CT-scans, MR-scans, and requisitions. The data is
collected for the year 2016. The vertical axes on the left indicate
amounts of scans and the ones on the right indicates the amount
of requisitions.
==PAGE:60==
48
Resource Analysis
In order to estimate how many times a resource is needed scripts were used to
determine the amount of scans in 2016, as well as the amount of scans received
by patients with cancer. Since the calculations require to parse all of the data,
the results were saved in a le, so the values can easily be accessed. The relevant
values are shown in Listing 4.2 and the entire le is in Appendix L along with
the scripts used to collect the information.
52
// Based on allScans.fsx
53
let
totalScans = function
54
| CT -> 35485
55
| MR -> 9700
56
| Xray -> 148019
57
| US -> 61346
58
59
// Ratio of scans
that have
priority.
60
let
priorityRatio = function
61
| CT -> 11412. / 35485.
62
| MR -> 2337. / 9700.
63
| Xray -> 0. / 148019.
64
| US -> 0. / 61346.
Listing 4.2: Total scans during 2016 and the ratio of scans performed on cancer
patients.
To estimate the duration of scans, the web page https://min.medicin.dk was
used, as it has estimates for multiple scans. The results are shown in Listing 4.3.
However, no estimate was found for x-ray scans, and they are therefore not used.
8
// Estimated
maximum
durations of a scan , not
including
patient/machine
preperation
9
// https :// www.cancer.dk/hjaelp -viden/undersoegelser -for -
kraeft/scanninger - billedundersoegelser /
10
let
scanDuration = function
11
| CT -> 15 // https :// min.medicin.dk/ Undersoegelser /
SygdomsUndersoegelse /3
12
| MR -> 60
13
| Xray -> 0 // No estimate
made
14
| US -> 15
Listing 4.3: Estimated duration for scans.
==PAGE:61==
4.1 Analysis
49
Figure 4.2: Flow of patients needing access to a resource.
4.1.2
Scheduling principles
Regardless of whether patients are separated by priority, scheduling is necessary
to handle their access to a resource. This is illustrated in Figure 4.2, which also
lists dierent scheduling algorithms. Whether the resource is a doctor, a bed,
or a scanner is irrelevant, the same principles apply. The resource is limited in
capacity and can only handle a certain amount of patients. The patients access
must therefore be scheduled so the capacity limit is never exceeded. Further-
more, the scheduling should try to minimize the patient waiting time, but it
should also fair such that all patients are given access within a reasonable time
frame.
When it comes to scheduling there exists many dierent algorithms. However,
focus often lies in computer scheduling, when an operating system must choose
which task to do next. Such algorithms are of little help here as they often
assume the task can be chosen at the time the computer is ready for the next
task. This has the advantage that any changes that may aect which task to
take next, can be included in the process of choosing, as the choice was not
made in advance. However, this does not work when scheduling requisitions in
a hospital system, unless it can be assumed that the patient is ready for the
requisition whenever the hospital is. As this assumption does not seem realistic,
the scheduling algorithms discussed, will schedule access to the resource when
the access is requested, so that the patient will know when to be at the hospital in
advance. The disadvantage to this approach is that whenever access is planned
for a patient, the arrival of future patients requesting access to the same resource
is unknown.
The simplest way to schedule is by a `rst in, rst out' (FIFO) principle, i.e.
the rst patient that requests access will be the rst patient that is granted
access. This solution is fair, in that all patients will eventually be given access.
Under the assumption that all patients require access for the same duration,
==PAGE:62==
50
Resource Analysis
the solution is optimal with regard to minimizing the average patient waiting
time. The disadvantage to this solution is that it does not dierentiate between
priority patients and the rest of the patients.
The algorithm can be extended to benet priority patients in dierent ways.
The simplest of which is to allocate certain time slots to priority patients, and
disallow other patients from using these time slots. In order to do this, one
must rst consider how many time slots to reserve, as well as which time slots
to reserve. Section 5.3.2 looks at two dierent approaches, by either reserving
one day a week or one hour a day. Another approach is to dynamically adjust
the amount of time slots that are being reserved. Since this approach has not
been implemented it is covered in Section 4.3.
The signature for a function that schedules according to the above specied
criteria can be seen in Listing 4.4. As the resources used in this project only
models scanners, the types are reected by it. However, with proper data for
other resources, it would require very little modication to run similar simula-
tions. The function `schedule' takes as input the times where patients requests
to access a resource (line 21) and outputs both the list of reserved times, as well
as a map of the time slots.
16
val
schedule:
17
ScannerType
->
18
SchedulingAlgorithm
->
19
scanCount: int ->
20
preBooked: int ->
21
(DateTime * bool) seq ->
22
DateTime
seq * Map <DateTime ,int >
Listing 4.4: Signature for function that schedules times.
Distribution
In order to schedule access to a resource for a patient, it is necessary to know
when the patient requested access to the resource. Unfortunately, such data is
not included in any of the received dataset (bear in mind that Figure 4.1 covers
when requisitions are performed, not the time they were planned). As no his-
torical data is available, data must be created to simulate patients requesting
access to a resource. This poses the question of how to distribute patient re-
quests. The simplest way is to distribute them uniformly, as this means that a
patient is equally likely to request access at any point. This also corresponds to
patients arriving according to a Poisson process, which is the common way to
==PAGE:63==
4.1 Analysis
51
randomly position events within a time frame. A signature for a function that
generates such requests can be seen in Listing 4.5.
9
val
generate:
10
amount: int ->
11
Distribution
->
12
priorityRatio: float
->
13
seed: int ->
14
(DateTime * bool) seq
Listing 4.5: Signature for function that generates random times.
The parameter `amount' species how many requests are generated, and the
`priorityRatio' species the ratio of the requests that should be prioritised. A
`seed' is added so the same random requests can be generated at another time.
The returned value is a of the type (DateTime, bool) seq, where DateTime is
the time the resource is requested and the boolean value indicates if the patient
making the request is a priority patient. Each request therefore has a priority
associated with it. The Distribution parameter is explained in Section 4.2.
4.1.3
Assumptions
Below is list summarising the main assumptions made in this chapter.
1. A resource is always reserved for the same duration.
2. Nothing is scheduled during weekends.
3. Patients must be given notice in advance, i.e. requisitions must be planned
at least a day before.
4. A resource can be used for 8 hours a day.
Assumption (1) does not mean that an MR-scan and a CT-scan necessarily take
the same time to conduct. It means that when looking at a single resource, that
resource will have an expected occupation duration. It will therefore be reserved
for a specic duration for all patients. If a dierent duration is required, the
analysis can of course be made again with dierent parameters, but it is not
possible to change the duration dynamically during one analysis.
Assumption (2) is a simplication based on the data from Figure 4.1. Changing
it requires little work.
==PAGE:64==
52
Resource Analysis
Assumption (3) is also a simplication of the real world.
In practice some
patients are admitted while others are not. Admitted patients might always be
available, which would mean that they do not need a days notice. However, this
is not the case for outpatients, who cannot be expected to be ready to show up
as soon as the hospital is ready. To avoid dierentiating between the two types
of patients, this assumption was made.
Assumption (4) is based on Figure 4.1a, which clearly shows that the activity
drop during the night.
4.2
Design and implementation
This section describes how the resource analysis tool has been designed and
implemented, based on the choices made previously in this chapter. The code
presented in this section, can be seen in full in Appendix I. The section will deal
with running analyses in three parts. The rst deals with the random generation
of requests for the resource. The second deals with the actual scheduling, i.e.
planning when the patients requesting access will be granted access. The last
part will then nd the waiting times for all of the requests, i.e. the days between
a patient requests the resource and the day they get access to it.
4.2.1
Generating requests
The rst part of running an analysis with the tool is to generate a sequence
of patient requests. The functions that achieve this can be seen in Listing 4.6,
which follows the signature give in Listing 4.5. The function works by generating
random numbers in the range from zero to the amount of seconds in a year, and
then adding the number as seconds to the beginning of the year. This gives a list
of uniformly distributed times in 2016, which corresponds to patients arriving
according to a poisson process.
The amount of requests that are generated depends on the parameter `distri-
bution', which is of the type specied in Listing 4.7. If it is Uniform then the
parameter `n' is used to specify the exact number of requests that are generated.
If the distribution is Poisson then a poisson-distributed random variable will
be used as the amount of requests that are generated. The poisson-distributed
random variable is generated with `n' as the average value, meaning that if
innitely many numbers are generated their average will be `n'.
==PAGE:65==
4.2 Design and implementation
53
14
/// Function
which
generates n uniformly
distributed
random
numbers.
15
let generate ' n (start : DateTime) (rand : Random) =
16
Seq.init n (fun _ -> secondsInAYear |> rand.Next |>
float |> start.AddSeconds)
17
18
/// Function
which
generates
random
times in 2016.
19
let
generate n distribution
ratio
seed =
20
let rand = Random
seed
21
let start = DateTime (2016 , 1, 1, 0, 0, 0)
22
(start , rand)
23
||> match
distribution
with
24
| Uniform
-> generate ' n
25
| Poisson
->
26
(n |> float |> Math.Sqrt |> int , rand.Next ())
27
||> poisson n
28
|> generate '
29
|> Seq.cache
30
|> Seq.sort
31
|> Seq.map (fun i -> i, rand.NextDouble () < ratio)
Listing 4.6: Generates of random times in 2016.
After the times have been generated they are sorted, and afterwards they are
each associated with a boolean, that indicates if the request is of priority. The
requests are sorted prior to the association to boolean values, so ties are broken
at random, and not by whether or not they have priority.
17
type
Distribution =
18
| Poisson
19
| Uniform
Listing 4.7: Types of distributions.
4.2.2
Scheduling and simulating
Once the requests have been generated they can be scheduled.
This means
that every patient request for access to a resource should be associated with a
timeslot, where the patient has access to the resource. Scheduling a timeslot
for all the requests has been implemented as seen in Listing 4.8.
The func-
tion rst nds the amount of available slots in a day, which depends on the
resource.
Values specic to the resource are therefore used.
Afterwards the
==PAGE:66==
54
Resource Analysis
function reserve is used to reserve an amount of days in the beginning of 2016.
This is an option implemented to allow simulating that resources requested in
2015, were scheduled to be used in 2016. Thus the simulations do not have to
assume that the waiting lists are empty once the scheduling begins. The nal
step in the scheduling is to map every request to a timeslot. This is done by
iterating though the requests in chronological order, and for each request assign
the nearest possible timeslot.
33
/// Runs a simulation
with no analysis of the output
34
let
schedule
scanType
simulation
scanCount
preBooked
requests =
35
let
slotsPrDay = minutesPrDay / scanDuration
scanType *
scanCount
36
let taken = reserve
preBooked
slotsPrDay
37
requests
38
|> Seq.mapFold (next
simulation
slotsPrDay) taken
Listing 4.8: Function that runs a simulation.
4.2.3
Waiting times
After running a simulation the reserved timeslots are returned in the order that
they were reserved. This may not be chronological because some timeslots may
only be available to priority patients. However, the order of the reservation
matches the order of the requests. So the waiting time for every patient can be
found, simply by iterating through the two lists and comparing the timestamps.
Once this has been done, the maximum, minimum, and average waiting times
can be found for the patients. These three values are each found for both the
priority patients and the remaining patients. The signature for the function can
be seen in Listing 4.9.
24
val
compare: (DateTime * bool) seq -> (DateTime
seq -> (
int * bool) seq)
25
26
val
simulate:
Listing 4.9: Signature for function that nds waiting times.
To simplify the simulations there is a specic amount of timeslots in a day, but
they are not bound to specic times during the day. This means that when the
waiting time is calculated, hours and minutes are not included, as they are not
specied for the timeslot. The waiting time is therefore measured in full days.
==PAGE:67==
4.2 Design and implementation
55
A single simulation may not represent an average simulation, and it is therefore
also possible to run multiple simulations with the same parameters. This can
be achieved by the functions in Listing 4.10, as they run multiple simulations
(amount specied by user), nds the minimum, maximum and average waiting
time for each simulation, and averages them.
43
/// Runs a single
simulation
and
aggregates
the result ,
44
/// finding min , max and avg
waiting
times
45
let
simulate
scanType
alg
scanCount
preBooked (requests :
(DateTime * bool) seq) =
46
requests
47
|> schedule
scanType
alg
scanCount
preBooked
48
|> fst
49
|> compare
requests
50
|> stats
51
52
/// Runs
multiple
simulation
and
returns
the
average of
53
/// their min , max and avg
waiting
times
54
let
simulateMany
iterations
distribution
scanType
alg
scanCount
preBooked
seed =
55
let rand = Random
seed
56
let runner _ =
57
generate (totalScans
scanType) distribution (
priorityRatio
scanType) (rand.Next ())
58
|> Seq.cache
59
|> simulate
scanType
alg
scanCount
preBooked
60
61
let stats = Seq.init
iterations
runner |> Seq.cache
62
stats |> Seq.averageBy (fun (x, _, _, _, _, _) -> float
x),
63
stats |> Seq.averageBy (fun (_, x, _, _, _, _) -> float
x),
64
stats |> Seq.averageBy (fun (_, _, x, _, _, _) -> x),
65
stats |> Seq.averageBy (fun (_, _, _, x, _, _) -> float
x),
66
stats |> Seq.averageBy (fun (_, _, _, _, x, _) -> float
x),
67
stats |> Seq.averageBy (fun (_, _, _, _, _, x) -> x)
Listing 4.10: Function that runs a simulation.
==PAGE:68==
56
Resource Analysis
4.3
Discussion
The functions `simulate' and `simulateMany' both nd the average waiting time
for patients. It could therefore be natural to extend the functions to return
the standard deviation as well. For a single simulation the deviation could be
found by how far each waiting time is from the average. For multiple patients
it could be used to nd the standard deviation in the average waiting time for
each simulation.
As mentioned in Section 4.1 it would be interesting to extend the tool with
dynamic scheduling. This would require a smaller addition to the current struc-
ture, but would allow the amount of timeslots being reserved to depend on how
many slots are available.
It could also be used to open up slots, that were
previously reserved, to avoid having patients on the waiting lists, while simul-
taneously having free resources.
Dynamic scheduling could also be used to ensure that the cancer package pa-
tients get access within the cancer package time limits.
This would require
the time limits for all cancer packages (which are publicly available) as well as
knowing which cancer packages require which resources.
As explained, the scheduling algorithms used in this section can only be com-
pared to one another, and not to the scheduling done at an actual department.
Future development, might therefore include researching how scheduling is han-
dled in an actual department.
==PAGE:69==
Chapter 5
Applications
This chapter will show how the software tool can be applied to the patient data
provided by Region Sjælland to either nd or highlight details. It contains three
sections.
The rst section covers how to generate and visualize a report for a patients,
the contains courses, contacts, requisitions, and procedures. This is therefore a
way to visualize the history of a patient.
In the second section a dierent report is generated, which contains the same
information as the rst, but also includes the chronological order. This report
is generated in a much more graphical way. Both of the rst two sections uses
the functionality developed in Chapter 3.
The nal section looks at the possible analyses that can be made by running
simulations, using the tool developed in Chapter 4.
==PAGE:70==
58
Applications
5.1
Report generation of patient history
This section shows how patient reports can be generated from the tool devel-
oped in Chapter 3. The report contains information about a single patient and
includes all of the patient's courses, contacts, requisitions, and procedures. The
data is presented hierarchically, where procedures are grouped together under
the requisition they belong to, and the same goes for requisitions under contacts,
and contacts under courses. An example is illustrated in Figure 5.1.
As seen from Figure 5.1, the reports are in Danish. This is partly because the
reports are meant for Region Sjælland but also as much of the report consists of
strings collected from the Danish system SKS (Sundhedsvæsenets Klassikations
System), which contains over 50.000 codes with Danish descriptions.
Information is supplied for each item in the report when available. The informa-
tion varies based on the item type (course, contact, etc.), but also depends on
the available information as not all items are complete. For instance a contact
may be ongoing and therefore have no specied end date.
Although the reports include time stamps on all items where they are available,
the chronology is not obvious.
The courses are ordered chronologically, and
within each course the contacts are ordered, and the same applies to requisitions
within contacts. But when courses or contacts run in parallel, it is not apparent
from the report.
The example shown in Figure 5.1, was generated using the script in Appendix M.
The relevant parts can be seen in Listing 5.1. The tool generates a text le using
Markdown syntax, which is then manually opened with a Markdown viewer or
converter to get the more stylish report shown in Figure 5.1. This conversion
was made using the extension `Markdown PDF' for Visual Studio Code.
23
// Setup
24
let src = __SOURCE_DIRECTORY__
25
let path = src + "/../../ report/figures/"
26
27
let cache = Cache ()
28
let sks = cache.getSKS ()
29
let units = cache.getUnits ()
30
31
// Markdown (Figure
5.1)
32
let
person1 = cache.getPerson
1312
33
save
person1
path [MarkDown] sks units
Listing 5.1: Script generating a report.
==PAGE:71==
5.1 Report generation of patient history
59
1/2
Person #1312
1. Forløb #787998: Fra 15-04-2016 08:00 til 15-04-2016 16:00
1. Kontakt #1020575: Præambulant (henvist fra praktiserende læge) hos HOL Kirurgisk Amb. (J0.D)
fra 15-04-2016 08:00 til 15-04-2016 16:00, med "Kronisk gastritis UNS" (DK295). Udskrevet til
praktiserende læge.
1. Rekvisition #2792633: 15-04-2016 10:45
Klinisk beslutning: intet behandlingsbehov iht. sundhedsloven § 82b (AFX01C)
Gastroskopi med biopsi (KUJD05)
2. Rekvisition #4202766: 15-04-2016 11:58
2. Forløb #422016: Fra 07-11-2016 08:00
1. Kontakt #765737: Præambulant (henvist fra praktiserende læge) hos ROS Urologisk Amb. (B8.D)
fra 07-11-2016 08:00 til 14-11-2016 14:59, med "Observation pga. mistanke om kræft i
prostata" (DZ031J). Udskrevet med koden AV.
1. Rekvisition #2959673: 07-11-2016 11:00
Klinisk beslutning: 30 dage iht. Sundhedsloven § 87 (AFX01A)
Kræft i prostata: henvisning til pakkeforløb start (AFB16A)
Kræft i prostata: udredning start, første fremmøde (AFB16B)
Nålebiopsi af prostata (KTKE00)
ultralyd/Doppler-vejledt procedure (UXZ70)
Journaloptagelse (ZZ0150)
2. Rekvisition #4553699: 07-11-2016 11:32
3. Rekvisition #4656093: 14-11-2016 14:20
Ambulant besøg (AAF22)
Kræft i prostata: pakkeforløb slut, diagnose afkræftet (AFB16X1)
4. Rekvisition #3806315: 14-11-2016 14:45
2. Kontakt #266941: Ambulant (henvisningstype HV) hos ROS Urologisk Amb. (B8.D) fra 14-11-
2016 15:00 og endnu ikke afsluttet, med "Observation pga. mistanke om anden sygdom eller
tilstand" (DZ038), "Vandladningsbesvær UNS" (DR391), "Anden abnorm blodprøve" (DR798).
1. Rekvisition #4635601: 05-12-2016 11:00
Ambulant besøg (AAF22)
Cystoskopi (KUKC02)
Urinundersøgelse med stix (ZZ1285)
Udtagelse af urin til dyrkning og resistens (ZZ1281)
Figure 5.1: List of all procedures, requisitions, contacts, and courses for a
patient.
==PAGE:72==
60
Applications
5.2
Analysing a single patient
This section looks at the analyses made possible by the tool developed in Chap-
ter 3, regarding visualization of a single patient. A simple example of such a
patient can be seen in Figure 5.2. The colouring of the contacts is explained in
Section 5.2.1. It should be noted that this patient is not a cancer patient, and
that the data originates from data set I, as covered in Section 2.3. The text
within the report is in Danish, for the same reasons as in the previous section.
The patient shown in Figure 5.2 has relatively few requisitions and only covers
5 months, yet the graph is still too big to t on a printed page and still have all
of the text in a readable font size. However, this is not a huge problem as the
graphs can are saved in pdf format, so even for huge graphs it will be possible
to zoom in and still have clear images and readable text.
As with the hierarchical structure presented in the previous section, the requi-
sitions are packed together within contacts, and the contacts within courses to
make it easy to see where they t into the treatment. But as these graphs are
two-dimensional, as opposed to the hierarchy, they can also show the chrono-
logical order of requisitions.
This means that for any pair of requisitions in
the graph, the leftmost will have occurred before or simultaneously with the
rightmost.
5.2.1
Feature highlighting
This section describes how certain features can be made more visible, by ap-
plying colours to text and boxes, see Figure 5.3. The script used to generate
the report can be seen in Appendix M, but the relevant lines are shown in
Listing 5.2.
The rst thing to notice is the colour of the contacts. The colour is chosen
based on the ContactType attribute In general most contacts are ambulant
(blue) or pre-ambulant (light blue). Since the two concepts are very similar,
similar colours have been chosen to represent them. Contacts covering admitted
patients are coloured yellow and for injuries red is used. Even though the colours
uniquely dene the contact type, it is also written in text to avoid confusion.
Having background colours for the contacts also makes it easier to see where one
contact ends and another starts, as they are not just separated by thin black
lines as is the case for the courses.
==PAGE:73==
5.2 Analysing a single patient
61
Forløb #66623
Fra 09-01-2016 00:02
Kontakt #31550
Ambulant (henvist fra speciallæge)
ROS Øjen Amb., Næstved (C2.E)
"Ikke specificeret diabetes" 
(DE14) 
Forløb #276424
Fra 09-01-2016 00:02
Kontakt #222905
Ambulant (henvist fra speciallæge)
ROS Øjen Amb., Næstved (C2.E)
"Aldersbetinget grå stær" 
(DH25) 
Forløb #83673
Fra 14-01-2016 08:00
Kontakt #134285
Præambulant (henvist fra praktiserende læge)
NFS Lungemedicinsk Amb. (V0.L)
"Kronisk obstruktiv 
lungesygdom" (DJ44) 
Kontakt #6865
Ambulant (henvisningstype HV)
NFS Lungemedicinsk Amb. (V0.L)
"Kronisk obstruktiv 
lungesygdom" (DJ44) 
Forløb #267929
Fra 13-04-2016 08:17 til 13-04-2016 23:59
Kontakt #303105
Ambulant (uden henvisning)
NAK Radiologisk Afd. (Y9.0)
"Andre særlige undersøgelser 
af personer uden klager eller 
diagnoser" (DZ01) 
Forløb #51885
Fra 20-04-2016 08:00 til 21-04-2016 16:00
Kontakt #377964
Præambulant (henvisningstype HV)
KOE Øre-Næse-Halskir. Amb. (E3.D)
"Abnorm vejrtrækning" (DR06) 
Forløb #321287
Fra 13-04-2016 08:18 til 13-04-2016 23:59
Kontakt #52008
Ambulant (uden henvisning)
NAK Radiologisk Afd. (Y9.0)
"Andre særlige undersøgelser 
af personer uden klager eller 
diagnoser" (DZ01) 
09-01-2016 00:02
start
09-01-2016 00:02
start
Rekvisition #306480
23-05-2016 10:00
Kategori: Besøg
Fra: Øjen Amb. Diabetes, NFS 
(K084) 
Til: Øjen Amb. Diabetes, NFS 
(K084) 
Foto af øjenbund (ZZ7010) 
Foto af øjenbund (ZZ7010) 
Rekvisition #402472
31-05-2016 08:40
Kategori: Uden besøg
Fra: Øjen Amb. Diabetes, NFS 
(K084) 
Til: Øjen Amb., NAE (K078) 
Brevsvar vedrørende konkret 
undersøgelse (BVAC10) 
14-01-2016 08:00
start
Rekvisition #336330
05-02-2016 10:30
Kategori: ambop
Fra: Øjen Amb., NAE (K555) 
Til: Øjen Amb. OP-afsnit, 
kld., NAE (K082) 
Fakoemulsifikation med 
implantation af kunstig linse 
i bageste øjenkammer (KCJE20) 
13-04-2016 08:17
start
Rekvisition #521444
14-04-2016 12:30
Kategori: Besøg
Fra: Øjen Amb., NAE (K078) 
Til: _ukendt enhed_ (K079) 
Fakoemulsifikation med 
implantation af kunstig linse 
i bageste øjenkammer (KCJE20) 
20-04-2016 08:00
start
Rekvisition #350264
14-01-2016 13:00
Kategori: Besøg
Fra: Lungemedicinsk Amb., NFS  
(M893) 
Til: Lungemedicinsk Amb., NFS  
(M893) 
Pulsoxymetri (ZZ4137) 
Lungefunktionsus., 
Helkropspletysmografi 
(WLHLBXXXX) 
Rekvisition #52692
20-01-2016 13:00
Kategori: Besøg
Fra: Lungemedicinsk Amb., NFS  
(M893) 
Til: Lungemedicinsk Amb., NFS  
(M893) 
Optagelse af anamnese 
vedrørende åndenød (MRC skala) 
(ZZ0150CD) 
Aldrig ryger (ZZP01A1B3) 
Tilbud om KOL rehabilitering 
(ZZ5730) 
1 exacerbation det seneste år 
(ZZP03A1B) 
Bestemmelse af Body Mass Index 
(BMI) (ZZ0242) 
Journaloptagelse (ZZ0150) 
Vejledning vedr. behandling af 
astma og kronisk obstruktiv 
lungelidelse (KOL) med 
inhalation (BGKC1) 
Måling af FEV (procent af 
forventet FEV1) (ZZ4139) 
Rekvisition #714195
20-01-2016 15:08
Kategori: Besøg
Fra: Lungemedicinsk Amb., NFS  
(M893) 
Til: Lungemedicinsk Amb., NFS  
(M893) 
Klinisk beslutning: 30 dage 
iht. Sundhedsloven § 87 
(AFX01A) 
20-01-2016 15:08
slut
Udskrevet med 
koden AV 
20-01-2016 15:09
start
Rekvisition #555078
13-04-2016 08:17
Røntgenundersøgelse af thorax 
(UXRC00) 
13-04-2016 08:18
start
13-04-2016 23:59
slut
Udskrevet til 
praktiserende 
læge 
13-04-2016 23:59
slut
Udskrevet til 
praktiserende 
læge 
Rekvisition #82974
20-04-2016 11:15
Kategori: Besøg
Fra: ØNH Søvn Amb., SLA (K706) 
Til: ØNH Søvn Amb., SLA (K706) 
Kardio-Respiratorisk 
Monitorering (CRM) (ZZ3921) 
Rekvisition #553179
21-04-2016 13:00
Kategori: Besøg
Fra: ØNH Søvn Amb., SLA (K706) 
Til: ØNH Søvn Amb., SLA (K706) 
Otoskopi (KUDB02) 
Epworth Sleepiness Scale (ESS) 
(ZZV020D) 
Klinisk beslutning: intet 
behandlingsbehov iht. 
sundhedsloven § 82b (AFX01C) 
Otoskopi (KUDB02) 
Apnø-hypopnø indeks (AHI) 
(ZZV020B) 
Oxygen desaturations indeks 
(ODI) (ZZV020C) 
Journaloptagelse (ZZ0150) 
21-04-2016 16:00
slut
Udskrevet til 
andet afsnit 
(a) The entire treatment of a patient.
(b) A closer look at a single course with only one contact.
Figure 5.2: All courses, contacts, requisitions, and procedures for a single pa-
tient during the rst 5 months of 2016.
==PAGE:74==
62
Applications
Forløb #750817
Fra 09-03-2016 09:04 til 10-03-2016 07:59
Kontakt #87658
Præambulant (henvist fra praktiserende læge)
SLA Kirurgisk Amb. (S1.D)
"Grad 1 hæmorroider" (DK640) 
"Godartet tumor i colon sigmoideum" (DD125) 
"Divertikulitis i tyktarmen uden perforation" 
(DK573A) 
Forløb #385146
Fra 26-03-2016 18:04 til 26-03-2016 22:40
Kontakt #700427
Skade
SLA Akut Afd. Skadestue (R8.8)
"Fraktur af metatarsalknogle UNS" (DS923) 
"venstresidig" (TUL2) 
"Fald og hop over 1 meter" (EUBB) 
"Ulykke" (EUN2) 
"Boligområde, udenfor" (EUG1B) 
"Leg og anden fritidsaktivitet" (EUA6) 
Forløb #241369
Fra 15-04-2016 08:00 til 25-07-2016 07:59
Kontakt #583158
Ambulant (henvist fra speciallæge)
SLA Kardiologisk Amb. (R0.K)
"Lungeemboli uden akut cor pulmonale" (DI269) 
"Trombose i vene UNS" (DI829B) 
"Atrieflagren eller atrieflimren UNS" (DI489) 
Forløb #298222
Fra 06-09-2016 09:19 til 06-09-2016 15:30
Kontakt #934963
Indlæggelse (henvist fra speciallæge)
HOL Kardiologisk Afd. (H0.2)
"Atrieflagren eller atrieflimren UNS" (DI489) 
"Atrieflagren eller atrieflimren UNS" (DI489) 
09-03-2016 09:04
start
Rekvisition #907201
09-03-2016 09:04
Kræft i tyk- og endetarm: 
udredning start, første 
fremmøde (AFB12B) 
Kræft i tyk- og endetarm: 
pakkeforløb slut, diagnose 
afkræftet (AFB12X1) 
Koloskopi med biopsi (KUJF35) 
komplet koloskopi (ZPY1A0) 
Endoskopisk polypektomi i 
tyktarm (KJFA15) 
Journaloptagelse (ZZ0150) 
Rekvisition #4853534
09-03-2016 09:21
10-03-2016 07:59
slut
Udskrevet med 
koden AV 
26-03-2016 18:04
start
Rekvisition #2122238
26-03-2016 19:45
Røntgenundersøgelse af fod og 
tæer (UXRG50) 
Akut uden for dagarbejdstiden 
(ATA12) 
venstresidig (TUL2) 
Rekvisition #3526179
26-03-2016 21:00
CT-skanning af fod (UXCG50) 
venstresidig (TUL2) 
uden intravenøs kontrast 
(UXZ11) 
Akut uden for dagarbejdstiden 
(ATA12) 
Rekvisition #3060188
26-03-2016 22:00
Skinnebehandling af ankelled 
og fod med hård præfabrikeret 
skinne (BLPA81) 
26-03-2016 22:40
slut
Udskrevet til 
andet afsnit 
15-04-2016 08:00
start
Rekvisition #4621321
22-07-2016 14:28
Transtorakal ekkokardiografi 
(UXUC80) 
Rekvisition #4079055
22-07-2016 15:01
Rekvisition #3094867
22-07-2016 15:07
25-07-2016 07:59
slut
Udskrevet til 
andet afsnit 
06-09-2016 09:19
start
Rekvisition #3031070
06-09-2016 09:41
Rekvisition #4684881
06-09-2016 11:20
Ekstern DC-konvertering 
(BFFA00) 
_ukendt procedure_ (X84019) 
Rekvisition #2338047
06-09-2016 14:26
Rekvisition #2572727
06-09-2016 14:36
Rekvisition #3244561
06-09-2016 14:45
06-09-2016 15:30
slut
Udskrevet til 
praktiserende 
læge 
Figure 5.3: Highlighting features with dierent colors. Although this is data
from an actual patient, it only includes selected contacts, and is
not used to provide any meaningful analyses for this particular
patient.
Colours can also be used on requisitions to highlight features. To distinguish
these highlights from the contact types, grey tones have been used and in rare
instances a light red. The colours are used to indicate the priority of the requi-
sition, and the colours chosen for the dierent priorities are listed in Table 5.1.
35
// Highlights (Figure
5.3)
36
let
person2 = cache.getPerson
345794
37
38
let
highlights =
39
let
chooser (cou : Course) =
40
let cons =
41
cou.Contacts
42
|> Seq.filter (fun c ->
43
c.Id = 87658 ||
44
c.Id = 700427 ||
45
c.Id = 583158 ||
46
c.Id = 934963)
47
if Seq.length
cons = 0
48
then None
49
else Some {cou with
Contacts = cons}
50
person2
51
|> fun p ->
52
{p with
Courses = p.Courses |> Seq.choose
chooser}
53
54
save
highlights
path [Pdf] sks units
Listing 5.2: Script that generates a report.
Finally it is possible to highlight text. As this tool will be used for looking at
cancer packages and the given data set is of cancer patients, the text highlighting
is used to colour cancer package markers and cancer related diagnoses. Due to
the structure of the SKS codes, the prex of any code is the category the code
belongs within, e.g. the code AFB12A belongs to the category AFB12, which
==PAGE:75==
5.2 Analysing a single patient
63
Code
Colour
P
Light grey
A
Dark grey
F
Light red
None
White
Table 5.1: Priority codes and the colours they are represented by in the graphs.
Forløb #44667
Fra 28-05-2016 01:36 til 06-12-2016 10:37
Kontakt #744122
Ambulant (henvist fra speciallæge)
HOL Kirurgisk Amb. (J0.D)
"Akut respirationsinsufficiens" (DJ960) 
"Skadelig brug af tobak" (DF171) 
"Anden form for tarmobstruktion" (DK564) 
"Hæmatemese" (DK920) 
"Postoperativ pneumoni" (DT814P) 
"Paroksysmatisk atrieflimren" (DI480) 
"Postoperativ sårruptur IKA" (DT813) 
Kontakt #743087
Indlæggelse (uden henvisning)
HOL Akut Afd. (H9.0)
"Hæmatemese" (DK920) 
"Sygdom" (EUN1) 
Kontakt #812070
Indlæggelse (henvist fra speciallæge)
HOL Kirurgisk Afd. (J0.0)
"Anden form for tarmobstruktion" (DK564) 
"Hæmatemese" (DK920) 
"Postoperativ pneumoni" (DT814P) 
"Paroksysmatisk atrieflimren" (DI480) 
"Postoperativ sårruptur IKA" (DT813) 
"Akut respirationsinsufficiens" (DJ960) 
"Skadelig brug af tobak" (DF171) 
"Sygdom" (EUN1) 
Forløb #149488
Fra 30-05-2016 14:44 til 01-08-2016 14:59
Kontakt #778789
Indlæggelse (henvist fra speciallæge)
HOL Kirurgisk Afd. (J0.0)
"Anden form for tarmobstruktion" (DK564) 
"Paroksysmatisk atrieflimren" (DI480) 
"Postoperativ pneumoni" (DT814P) 
"Decubitus grad III" (DL892) 
"Skadelig brug af tobak" (DF171) 
"Pleuraempyem med fistel" (DJ860) 
"Postoperativ sårruptur IKA" (DT813) 
"Sygdom" (EUN1) 
Forløb #655093
Fra 01-08-2016 15:00 til 30-09-2016 22:00
Kontakt #690851
Indlæggelse (henvist fra speciallæge)
HOL Lungemedicinsk Afd. (H0.3)
"Andet specificeret symptom eller fund i 
kredsløbs- og åndedrætsorganerne" (DR098) 
Kontakt #504382
Indlæggelse (henvist fra speciallæge)
HOL Kardiologisk Afd. (H0.2)
"Andet specificeret symptom eller fund i 
kredsløbs- og åndedrætsorganerne" (DR098) 
"Sygdom" (EUN1) 
Kontakt #582676
Indlæggelse (henvist fra speciallæge)
HOL Lungemedicinsk Afd. (H0.3)
"Andet specificeret symptom eller fund i 
kredsløbs- og åndedrætsorganerne" (DR098) 
Forløb #80411
Fra 30-09-2016 22:00 til 13-12-2016 11:40
Kontakt #911712
Indlæggelse (henvist fra speciallæge)
HOL Kirurgisk Afd. (J0.0)
"Pleuraempyem UNS" (DJ869) 
"Tilstand med gastrostomi" (DZ931) 
Kontakt #446702
Indlæggelse (henvist fra speciallæge)
HOL Lungemedicinsk Afd. (H0.3)
"Tilstand med gastrostomi" (DZ931) 
"Pleuraempyem UNS" (DJ869) 
"Kronisk obstruktiv lungesygdom UNS" (DJ449) 
"Pleuraempyem UNS" (DJ869) 
"Atrieflagren eller atrieflimren UNS" (DI489) 
"Postoperativ aspirationspneumoni" (DT814P1) 
"Sygdom" (EUN1) 
Forløb #599222
Fra 09-11-2016 08:00 til 09-11-2016 17:00
Kontakt #97399
Præambulant (henvisningstype HV)
HOL Kirurgisk Amb. (J0.D)
"Diafragmahernie uden ileus eller gangræn" (DK449) 
Forløb #293125
Fra 14-11-2016 08:15
Kontakt #410386
Ambulant (henvisningstype HV)
ROS Lungemedicinsk Amb. (A0.L)
"Observation pga. mistanke om kræft i lunge" 
(DZ031B) 
"Abnormt fund ved billeddiagnostisk undersøgelse 
af lunger" (DR919) 
Kontakt #939230
Præambulant (henvist fra speciallæge)
ROS Lungemedicinsk Amb. (A0.L)
"Observation pga. mistanke om kræft i lunge" 
(DZ031B) 
"regionsfunktion" (AZAC3) 
Forløb #696265
Fra 31-12-2016 11:44 til 02-01-2017 12:01
Kontakt #137270
Indlæggelse (uden henvisning)
HOL Akut Afd. (H9.0)
"Respirationsinsufficiens UNS" (DJ969) 
"Sygdom" (EUN1) 
Kontakt #861189
Indlæggelse (henvist fra speciallæge)
HOL Kardiologisk Afd. (H0.2)
"Respirationsinsufficiens UNS" (DJ969) 
"Sygdom" (EUN1) 
Forløb #445516
Fra 05-10-2016 08:00 til 05-10-2016 18:00
Kontakt #123252
Præambulant (henvist fra speciallæge)
KOE Øre-Næse-Halskir. Amb. (E3.D)
"Synkebesvær UNS" (DR139) 
28-05-2016 01:36
start
Rekvisition #1730415
28-05-2016 03:29
28-05-2016 04:51
slut
Udskrevet til 
andet afsnit 
28-05-2016 04:52
start
Rekvisition #4853421
28-05-2016 09:47
Rekvisition #4533224
29-05-2016 11:14
29-05-2016 19:39
slut
Udskrevet med 
koden BS 
29-05-2016 19:40
start
30-05-2016 14:44
start
Rekvisition #4811924
29-07-2016 11:14
Rekvisition #1728878
30-07-2016 12:10
Rekvisition #4511260
01-12-2016 14:30
Anlæggelse af venekanyle 
(BMBZ00) 
_ukendt procedure_ (X84019) 
Rekvisition #4351592
02-12-2016 13:33
Rekvisition #291360
05-12-2016 11:15
Rekvisition #3511465
05-12-2016 14:04
Rekvisition #101158
06-12-2016 10:36
Brevsvar vedrørende konkret 
undersøgelse (BVAC10) 
06-12-2016 10:37
slut
Udskrevet til 
praktiserende 
læge 
Rekvisition #24809
06-12-2016 11:00
Rekvisition #2757714
30-05-2016 16:45
CT-skanning af abdomen 
(UXCD00) 
uden intravenøs kontrast 
(UXZ11) 
Akut uden for dagarbejdstiden 
(ATA12) 
Rekvisition #3065507
30-05-2016 18:29
Rekvisition #3864526
30-05-2016 19:45
Rekvisition #15235
31-05-2016 01:04
Rekvisition #38844
31-05-2016 10:04
Rekvisition #918613
31-05-2016 15:00
CT-skanning af thorax (UXCC00) 
både med og uden intravenøs 
kontrast samt peroral kontrast 
(UXZ12A) 
CT-skanning af abdomen 
(UXCD00) 
både med og uden intravenøs 
kontrast samt peroral kontrast 
(UXZ12A) 
Rekvisition #4380335
31-05-2016 16:06
Rekvisition #743543
31-05-2016 19:17
_ukendt procedure_ (X99BASIS) 
_ukendt procedure_ (X99252) 
_ukendt procedure_ (X99251) 
_ukendt procedure_ (X99253) 
_ukendt procedure_ (X99418) 
_ukendt procedure_ (X99500) 
_ukendt procedure_ (X99717) 
_ukendt procedure_ (X99255) 
_ukendt procedure_ (X99223) 
Rekvisition #1196700
31-05-2016 19:17
Generel anæstesi (NAAC) 
Rekvisition #2376191
31-05-2016 20:51
Eksplorativ laparotomi 
(KJAH00) 
Akut (ATA1) 
rent sår, operationstidspunkt 
(ZPL01) 
Rekvisition #1834284
31-05-2016 23:08
Rekvisition #4628396
31-05-2016 23:09
Rekvisition #3752031
01-06-2016 07:10
Intensiv terapi (NABB) 
_ukendt procedure_ 
(ZT20160602) 
kirurgi (ZNAB16) 
_ukendt procedure_ (ZU1135) 
Akut (ATA1) 
overflyttet til stamafdeling 
(ZBA1) 
mere end 1 døgn (ZPVB2) 
_ukendt procedure_ (ZRRB53) 
_ukendt procedure_ (ZZV020H) 
Aktuel mistanke om sygdom 
bekræftet (ZZ5653) 
Septisk shock (DR572) 
Rekvisition #4803946
01-06-2016 10:40
Rekvisition #2706260
01-06-2016 11:06
Rekvisition #1606019
02-06-2016 09:13
Rekvisition #2747204
02-06-2016 12:00
Interventioner ved behandling 
af respirationslidelser (BGF) 
Rekvisition #3066434
02-06-2016 12:00
Rekvisition #444531
02-06-2016 14:04
Rekvisition #772900
02-06-2016 17:30
Rekvisition #2766617
02-06-2016 22:39
Rekvisition #1905030
03-06-2016 09:28
Rekvisition #4236248
03-06-2016 10:25
Rekvisition #1100817
03-06-2016 11:00
Røntgenundersøgelse af thorax 
(UXRC00) 
Akut i dagarbejdstiden (ATA11) 
almindeligt sengeafsnit 
(ZSAA0) 
Rekvisition #875716
03-06-2016 11:05
Rekvisition #4032744
03-06-2016 11:28
Rekvisition #522510
03-06-2016 12:15
Behandling med antiarytmicum 
(BFHC91) 
Intermitterende CPAP 
behandling (BGFC33) 
Non-invasiv ventilation (NIV) 
(BGDA1) 
Intensiv terapi (NABB) 
_ukendt procedure_ (ZRRB46) 
mere end 3 døgn (ZPVB2B) 
_ukendt procedure_ 
(ZT20160607) 
kirurgi (ZNAB16) 
overflyttet til stamafdeling 
(ZBA1) 
Akut (ATA1) 
_ukendt procedure_ (ZU1150) 
_ukendt procedure_ (ZZV020H) 
Rekvisition #3089989
03-06-2016 12:30
Rekvisition #3578497
03-06-2016 14:44
Rekvisition #143692
04-06-2016 10:30
Røntgenundersøgelse af thorax 
(UXRC00) 
intensivafsnit (ZSAB0) 
Akut uden for dagarbejdstiden 
(ATA12) 
Rekvisition #360176
04-06-2016 12:43
Anlæggelse af centralt 
venekateter i vena jugularis 
(BMBZ51C) 
_ukendt procedure_ (X84018) 
Rekvisition #2816996
04-06-2016 12:43
Rekvisition #4408686
04-06-2016 13:00
Røntgenundersøgelse af thorax 
(UXRC00) 
Akut uden for dagarbejdstiden 
(ATA12) 
intensivafsnit (ZSAB0) 
Rekvisition #3025673
04-06-2016 17:00
Rekvisition #4524401
05-06-2016 11:54
Rekvisition #40834
05-06-2016 15:10
Rekvisition #2571378
06-06-2016 10:30
Rekvisition #237159
06-06-2016 12:13
Rekvisition #934313
06-06-2016 13:38
Rekvisition #2707314
07-06-2016 09:00
Røntgenundersøgelse af thorax 
(UXRC00) 
Rekvisition #951494
07-06-2016 10:09
Rekvisition #1140726
07-06-2016 10:20
Interventioner ved behandling 
af respirationslidelser (BGF) 
Biomekanisk bevægelsesterapi 
(BLNA) 
Rekvisition #3534561
07-06-2016 10:30
Rekvisition #4425654
07-06-2016 19:58
Rekvisition #1211831
07-06-2016 20:57
Generel anæstesi (NAAC) 
Rekvisition #1693425
07-06-2016 20:57
_ukendt procedure_ (X99BASIS) 
_ukendt procedure_ (X99252) 
_ukendt procedure_ (X99251) 
_ukendt procedure_ (X99253) 
_ukendt procedure_ (X99418) 
_ukendt procedure_ (X99500) 
_ukendt procedure_ (X99910) 
_ukendt procedure_ (X99717) 
_ukendt procedure_ (X99255) 
_ukendt procedure_ (X99223) 
Rekvisition #925283
07-06-2016 21:54
Resuturering af hud på truncus 
(KQBB00B) 
Rekvisition #2114461
07-06-2016 22:49
Rekvisition #2669740
08-06-2016 11:05
Rekvisition #702969
08-06-2016 11:15
Rekvisition #3010393
08-06-2016 11:15
Interventioner ved behandling 
af respirationslidelser (BGF) 
Funktionstræning (BTNA) 
Kompenserende behandling med 
hjælpemidler, redskaber og 
boligændringer (BTNB) 
Rekvisition #3815753
08-06-2016 15:09
Rekvisition #3768849
08-06-2016 15:53
Rekvisition #4313576
08-06-2016 18:03
Rekvisition #3694089
08-06-2016 20:00
Respiratorbehandling (BGDA0) 
1 måned (ATTM01) 
22 dage (ATTD22) 
Behandling med noradrenalin 
(BFHC93B) 
Intermitterende CPAP 
behandling (BGFC33) 
Intensiv terapi (NABB) 
_ukendt procedure_ (ZRRB74) 
_ukendt procedure_ (ZZV020H) 
Akut (ATA1) 
_ukendt procedure_ 
(ZT20160804) 
mere end 3 døgn (ZPVB2B) 
overflyttet til stamafdeling 
(ZBA1) 
_ukendt procedure_ (ZU1336) 
kirurgi (ZNAB16) 
Rekvisition #2416978
08-06-2016 21:03
Rekvisition #3851783
08-06-2016 21:45
Røntgenundersøgelse af thorax 
(UXRC00) 
Akut uden for dagarbejdstiden 
(ATA12) 
Rekvisition #4017324
08-06-2016 22:39
Rekvisition #2629211
08-06-2016 23:00
Rekvisition #4582013
09-06-2016 00:00
Rekvisition #1761410
09-06-2016 02:28
Rekvisition #2563525
09-06-2016 09:32
Rekvisition #2070537
09-06-2016 10:52
Rekvisition #4673021
09-06-2016 11:10
Rekvisition #3934103
09-06-2016 13:23
Rekvisition #2953877
09-06-2016 13:30
Røntgenundersøgelse af thorax 
(UXRC00) 
intensivafsnit (ZSAB0) 
Akut i dagarbejdstiden (ATA11) 
Rekvisition #1715195
09-06-2016 17:47
Rekvisition #1099876
10-06-2016 12:53
Rekvisition #1394480
11-06-2016 09:52
Rekvisition #3163591
11-06-2016 12:11
Rekvisition #4145658
12-06-2016 12:21
Rekvisition #2849846
12-06-2016 12:49
Rekvisition #1615645
13-06-2016 09:16
Rekvisition #1722332
13-06-2016 09:30
Rekvisition #4729943
13-06-2016 10:30
Rekvisition #3267465
13-06-2016 13:31
Rekvisition #1447502
13-06-2016 14:26
Rekvisition #1870438
13-06-2016 14:40
_ukendt procedure_ (X84043) 
_ukendt procedure_ (X84019) 
Rekvisition #4012622
13-06-2016 15:00
CT-skanning af abdomen 
(UXCD00) 
Akut i dagarbejdstiden (ATA11) 
med udmåling på billeder 
(UXZ21) 
uden intravenøs kontrast 
(UXZ11) 
Rekvisition #1051039
13-06-2016 20:29
Rekvisition #166384
13-06-2016 23:45
Oversigtsoptagelse af abdomen 
(UXRD00) 
Rekvisition #1912194
14-06-2016 09:00
Oversigtsoptagelse af abdomen 
(UXRD00) 
Akut i dagarbejdstiden (ATA11) 
Rekvisition #3565603
14-06-2016 12:28
Rekvisition #4486651
14-06-2016 13:00
Oversigtsoptagelse af abdomen 
(UXRD00) 
Akut i dagarbejdstiden (ATA11) 
intensivafsnit (ZSAB0) 
Rekvisition #1028596
14-06-2016 14:36
Rekvisition #637148
14-06-2016 15:17
Rekvisition #495463
14-06-2016 18:00
Oversigtsoptagelse af abdomen 
(UXRD00) 
intensivafsnit (ZSAB0) 
Akut uden for dagarbejdstiden 
(ATA12) 
Rekvisition #1130462
15-06-2016 08:15
Oversigtsoptagelse af abdomen 
(UXRD00) 
intensivafsnit (ZSAB0) 
Akut i dagarbejdstiden (ATA11) 
Rekvisition #3858930
15-06-2016 08:27
Rekvisition #3545764
15-06-2016 08:59
Rekvisition #2885506
15-06-2016 13:00
Røntgenundersøgelse af thorax 
(UXRC00) 
Rekvisition #3552002
15-06-2016 13:55
Rekvisition #606931
15-06-2016 14:32
Rekvisition #2226482
15-06-2016 14:56
Rekvisition #165953
16-06-2016 10:05
Rekvisition #2300758
16-06-2016 10:46
Rekvisition #3158176
16-06-2016 12:14
Rekvisition #921390
17-06-2016 10:00
Rekvisition #981270
17-06-2016 10:00
Anlæggelse af 
hæmodialysekateter (BJFZ40) 
Rekvisition #731803
17-06-2016 10:15
Røntgenundersøgelse af thorax 
(UXRC00) 
intensivafsnit (ZSAB0) 
Rekvisition #4305394
17-06-2016 10:49
Rekvisition #4076875
17-06-2016 11:00
Akut hæmodialyse (BJFD00) 
_ukendt procedure_ (X11004) 
Rekvisition #4692441
17-06-2016 11:44
Rekvisition #1951277
17-06-2016 13:14
Rekvisition #2904619
17-06-2016 14:30
Terapeutisk torakocentese 
(KTGA30B) 
UL-undersøgelse af pleura og 
diafragma (UXUC15) 
Rekvisition #3728116
18-06-2016 12:30
Rekvisition #4323778
18-06-2016 14:29
Rekvisition #3067435
18-06-2016 17:00
Røntgenundersøgelse af thorax 
(UXRC00) 
Akut uden for dagarbejdstiden 
(ATA12) 
Rekvisition #3690352
18-06-2016 18:28
Rekvisition #1959777
19-06-2016 10:56
Rekvisition #4596247
19-06-2016 18:30
Røntgenundersøgelse af thorax 
(UXRC00) 
Akut uden for dagarbejdstiden 
(ATA12) 
Rekvisition #2676642
20-06-2016 09:33
Rekvisition #4421385
20-06-2016 10:09
Rekvisition #4545116
20-06-2016 10:10
Rekvisition #683709
20-06-2016 11:00
Terapeutisk torakocentese 
(KTGA30B) 
UL-undersøgelse af pleura og 
diafragma (UXUC15) 
Rekvisition #339405
20-06-2016 11:20
Rekvisition #1863039
20-06-2016 13:13
Rekvisition #2976410
20-06-2016 13:35
Rekvisition #9492
21-06-2016 00:39
Rekvisition #1608241
21-06-2016 09:42
Rekvisition #1189861
21-06-2016 10:30
Røntgenundersøgelse af thorax 
(UXRC00) 
Akut i dagarbejdstiden (ATA11) 
intensivafsnit (ZSAB0) 
Rekvisition #196794
21-06-2016 10:50
Rekvisition #4118249
22-06-2016 13:03
Rekvisition #946600
22-06-2016 13:30
Dilatationstrakeotomi 
(KGBA00B) 
Rekvisition #3610501
22-06-2016 14:15
Rekvisition #2176228
22-06-2016 14:30
Røntgenundersøgelse af thorax 
(UXRC00) 
intensivafsnit (ZSAB0) 
Akut i dagarbejdstiden (ATA11) 
Rekvisition #1431311
23-06-2016 13:17
Rekvisition #505637
23-06-2016 16:45
Røntgenundersøgelse af thorax 
(UXRC00) 
Akut uden for dagarbejdstiden 
(ATA12) 
intensivafsnit (ZSAB0) 
Rekvisition #1505660
24-06-2016 07:20
Rekvisition #3292549
24-06-2016 11:20
Rekvisition #3007281
24-06-2016 13:32
Biomekanisk bevægelsesterapi 
(BLNA) 
Aktivitetstræning af fysisk 
funktion (BLNR) 
Rekvisition #1095665
24-06-2016 13:35
Rekvisition #3923710
25-06-2016 13:53
Rekvisition #2543550
25-06-2016 17:37
Rekvisition #4298140
26-06-2016 10:33
Rekvisition #2442124
26-06-2016 12:22
Rekvisition #550117
27-06-2016 10:00
Rekvisition #256053
27-06-2016 10:53
Rekvisition #1322382
27-06-2016 11:15
Røntgenundersøgelse af thorax 
(UXRC00) 
Akut i dagarbejdstiden (ATA11) 
intensivafsnit (ZSAB0) 
Rekvisition #2144862
27-06-2016 11:36
Rekvisition #2849879
27-06-2016 11:45
Rekvisition #4553388
27-06-2016 11:45
Ergo-/fysioterapeutisk 
undersøgelse eller vurdering 
(ZZ5049) 
Rekvisition #4091132
27-06-2016 12:15
Rekvisition #2131259
28-06-2016 10:05
Rekvisition #1432316
28-06-2016 10:16
Rekvisition #122834
28-06-2016 10:35
Funktionstræning (BTNA) 
Biomekanisk bevægelsesterapi 
(BLNA) 
Neuromuskulær bevægelsesterapi 
(BLNC) 
Rekvisition #4729663
28-06-2016 10:35
Rekvisition #3108976
28-06-2016 11:30
UL-undersøgelse af håndled 
(UXUF40) 
venstresidig (TUL2) 
Rekvisition #1062138
28-06-2016 11:43
Transtorakal ekkokardiografi 
med vævsdoppler (UXUC80E) 
Rekvisition #4836854
28-06-2016 11:43
Rekvisition #709261
28-06-2016 11:57
Rekvisition #807357
29-06-2016 10:30
Rekvisition #805481
29-06-2016 11:01
Ergo-/fysioterapeutisk 
undersøgelse eller vurdering 
(ZZ5049) 
Rekvisition #1166795
29-06-2016 11:01
Rekvisition #832413
29-06-2016 11:57
Rekvisition #3972130
29-06-2016 12:40
Rekvisition #4091126
29-06-2016 14:23
Rekvisition #1688631
29-06-2016 14:27
Generelle pædagogiske 
interventioner (BVD) 
Biomekanisk bevægelsesterapi 
(BLNA) 
Rekvisition #1808525
30-06-2016 08:30
Røntgenundersøgelse af thorax 
(UXRC00) 
intensivafsnit (ZSAB0) 
Rekvisition #26269
30-06-2016 09:30
Rekvisition #1423144
30-06-2016 10:25
Ergo-/fysioterapeutisk 
undersøgelse eller vurdering 
(ZZ5049) 
Rekvisition #3146491
30-06-2016 10:25
Rekvisition #2714185
30-06-2016 14:10
Neuromuskulær bevægelsesterapi 
(BLNC) 
Biomekanisk bevægelsesterapi 
(BLNA) 
Rekvisition #2411355
30-06-2016 17:52
Rekvisition #1140179
30-06-2016 20:52
Rekvisition #1803756
01-07-2016 11:23
Rekvisition #3793753
02-07-2016 00:34
Rekvisition #3357198
02-07-2016 10:26
Rekvisition #4526716
02-07-2016 11:25
Rekvisition #3551725
02-07-2016 16:45
Rekvisition #692173
03-07-2016 15:35
Rekvisition #3413188
04-07-2016 10:45
Ergo-/fysioterapeutisk 
undersøgelse eller vurdering 
(ZZ5049) 
Rekvisition #4776290
04-07-2016 10:45
Rekvisition #174246
04-07-2016 11:54
Rekvisition #2489660
04-07-2016 13:00
Rekvisition #3946811
04-07-2016 14:40
Rekvisition #1205509
04-07-2016 14:57
Biomekanisk bevægelsesterapi 
(BLNA) 
Rekvisition #1726394
05-07-2016 10:34
Rekvisition #4385758
05-07-2016 11:42
Rekvisition #3960581
06-07-2016 09:47
Rekvisition #99076
06-07-2016 10:15
Ergo-/fysioterapeutisk 
undersøgelse eller vurdering 
(ZZ5049) 
Rekvisition #517100
06-07-2016 10:15
Rekvisition #2111927
06-07-2016 11:24
Rekvisition #3556240
06-07-2016 14:15
Biomekanisk bevægelsesterapi 
(BLNA) 
Rekvisition #2465996
06-07-2016 14:46
Rekvisition #3441152
07-07-2016 10:35
Rekvisition #125722
07-07-2016 10:53
Rekvisition #1744112
07-07-2016 12:15
Assistance ved intern 
transport (NABS20) 
_ukendt procedure_ (X84019) 
Rekvisition #3735384
07-07-2016 12:30
Distalt systolisk blodtryk, 
UE, ankel-tå (WPWSTXXXX) 
Rekvisition #3962830
07-07-2016 13:00
Rekvisition #140864
07-07-2016 13:15
Kvantitativ UL/Doppler af 
vener på underekstremitet 
(UXUG05B) 
Akut i dagarbejdstiden (ATA11) 
intensivafsnit (ZSAB0) 
venstresidig (TUL2) 
Rekvisition #818189
07-07-2016 13:21
Rekvisition #3341437
07-07-2016 15:21
Biomekanisk bevægelsesterapi 
(BLNA) 
Funktionstræning (BTNA) 
Rekvisition #4781313
08-07-2016 09:44
Rekvisition #3907560
08-07-2016 13:50
Rekvisition #4059892
08-07-2016 13:50
Ergo-/fysioterapeutisk 
undersøgelse eller vurdering 
(ZZ5049) 
Rekvisition #1764261
08-07-2016 21:00
Rekvisition #416245
09-07-2016 09:53
Rekvisition #4260965
09-07-2016 14:56
Rekvisition #1769513
10-07-2016 12:58
Rekvisition #4608742
10-07-2016 22:00
Røntgenundersøgelse af thorax 
(UXRC00) 
intensivafsnit (ZSAB0) 
Akut uden for dagarbejdstiden 
(ATA12) 
Rekvisition #355860
11-07-2016 10:40
Rekvisition #2443923
11-07-2016 11:00
Ergo-/fysioterapeutisk 
undersøgelse eller vurdering 
(ZZ5049) 
Rekvisition #2249468
11-07-2016 13:00
Rekvisition #2391523
11-07-2016 14:24
Rekvisition #3303602
11-07-2016 14:41
Rekvisition #142905
12-07-2016 10:09
Rekvisition #2704289
12-07-2016 10:49
Rekvisition #4309178
12-07-2016 11:42
Rekvisition #3467413
12-07-2016 14:15
Rekvisition #3959277
12-07-2016 14:55
Biomekanisk bevægelsesterapi 
(BLNA) 
Neuromuskulær bevægelsesterapi 
(BLNC) 
Rekvisition #3012968
13-07-2016 10:30
Ergo-/fysioterapeutisk 
undersøgelse eller vurdering 
(ZZ5049) 
Rekvisition #3736088
13-07-2016 10:30
Rekvisition #4409758
13-07-2016 12:48
Rekvisition #2698617
13-07-2016 14:15
Rekvisition #4088095
13-07-2016 14:15
Biomekanisk bevægelsesterapi 
(BLNA) 
Neuromuskulær bevægelsesterapi 
(BLNC) 
Aktivitetstræning af fysisk 
funktion (BLNR) 
Rekvisition #44864
14-07-2016 09:19
Rekvisition #660126
14-07-2016 10:10
Mund-, svælg- og 
ansigtsstimulation (BEF) 
Rekvisition #2014714
14-07-2016 10:10
Rekvisition #1473660
14-07-2016 14:20
Neuromuskulær bevægelsesterapi 
(BLNC) 
Aktivitetstræning af fysisk 
funktion (BLNR) 
Rekvisition #2963480
15-07-2016 10:18
Rekvisition #2740833
15-07-2016 12:12
Rekvisition #1913742
15-07-2016 13:13
Rekvisition #4624547
15-07-2016 13:13
Kompenserende behandling med 
hjælpemidler, redskaber og 
boligændringer (BTNB) 
Mund-, svælg- og 
ansigtsstimulation (BEF) 
Ergo-/fysioterapeutisk 
undersøgelse eller vurdering 
(ZZ5049) 
Rekvisition #3301791
16-07-2016 17:40
Rekvisition #1958721
16-07-2016 21:00
Rekvisition #4755984
17-07-2016 15:03
Rekvisition #443595
18-07-2016 09:45
Rekvisition #4273207
18-07-2016 09:45
Kompenserende behandling med 
hjælpemidler, redskaber og 
boligændringer (BTNB) 
Funktionstræning (BTNA) 
Ergo-/fysioterapeutisk 
undersøgelse eller vurdering 
(ZZ5049) 
flere behandlere (BZFD8) 
Rekvisition #508969
18-07-2016 14:31
Rekvisition #587456
18-07-2016 14:50
Rekvisition #2054139
19-07-2016 10:00
Ergo-/fysioterapeutisk 
undersøgelse eller vurdering 
(ZZ5049) 
Rekvisition #2131529
19-07-2016 10:00
Rekvisition #2440761
19-07-2016 10:09
Rekvisition #4478601
19-07-2016 10:24
Rekvisition #2196516
20-07-2016 09:16
Rekvisition #862236
20-07-2016 10:00
Funktionstræning (BTNA) 
flere behandlere (BZFD8) 
Ergo-/fysioterapeutisk 
undersøgelse eller vurdering 
(ZZ5049) 
Rekvisition #4534394
20-07-2016 10:00
Funktionstræning (BTNA) 
Rekvisition #4670647
20-07-2016 10:00
Rekvisition #4108291
21-07-2016 08:48
Rekvisition #310587
21-07-2016 10:00
Ergo-/fysioterapeutisk 
undersøgelse eller vurdering 
(ZZ5049) 
Rekvisition #989032
21-07-2016 10:00
Rekvisition #741186
21-07-2016 14:20
Rekvisition #1535679
21-07-2016 14:20
Funktionstræning (BTNA) 
Biomekanisk bevægelsesterapi 
(BLNA) 
Ergo-/fysioterapeutisk 
undersøgelse eller vurdering 
(ZZ5049) 
Rekvisition #4223755
22-07-2016 09:44
Rekvisition #94541
22-07-2016 09:54
Rekvisition #854088
22-07-2016 10:10
Rekvisition #1797848
22-07-2016 10:10
Kompenserende behandling med 
hjælpemidler, redskaber og 
boligændringer (BTNB) 
Generelle pædagogiske 
interventioner (BVD) 
Ergo-/fysioterapeutisk 
undersøgelse eller vurdering 
(ZZ5049) 
Rekvisition #4072396
22-07-2016 12:15
Røntgenundersøgelse af thorax 
(UXRC00) 
Akut i dagarbejdstiden (ATA11) 
intensivafsnit (ZSAB0) 
Rekvisition #1114862
22-07-2016 13:40
Fjernelse af centralt 
venekateter (CVK) (BMBZ71) 
Rekvisition #3766026
23-07-2016 11:17
Rekvisition #181006
24-07-2016 12:41
Rekvisition #3802192
25-07-2016 08:30
Røntgenundersøgelse af thorax 
(UXRC00) 
intensivafsnit (ZSAB0) 
Rekvisition #755107
25-07-2016 09:50
Kommunikation (BVA) 
Rekvisition #2419967
25-07-2016 09:50
Rekvisition #1964004
25-07-2016 12:42
Rekvisition #553419
25-07-2016 13:21
Rekvisition #2945640
25-07-2016 14:36
Funktionstræning (BTNA) 
Rekvisition #1147912
26-07-2016 13:40
Kommunikation (BVA) 
Rekvisition #2410326
26-07-2016 13:40
Rekvisition #1895004
26-07-2016 13:47
Rekvisition #2963394
26-07-2016 14:36
Funktionstræning (BTNA) 
Rekvisition #317920
27-07-2016 10:05
Kommunikation (BVA) 
Rekvisition #942199
27-07-2016 10:05
Rekvisition #1403889
27-07-2016 10:26
Rekvisition #3800178
27-07-2016 14:04
Rekvisition #2424885
27-07-2016 14:45
Røntgenundersøgelse af thorax 
(UXRC00) 
intensivafsnit (ZSAB0) 
Akut i dagarbejdstiden (ATA11) 
Rekvisition #3668763
28-07-2016 13:08
Rekvisition #1730731
28-07-2016 14:30
Funktionstræning (BTNA) 
Kompenserende behandling med 
hjælpemidler, redskaber og 
boligændringer (BTNB) 
Biomekanisk bevægelsesterapi 
(BLNA) 
Rekvisition #1479885
28-07-2016 14:45
Rekvisition #2240871
31-07-2016 09:59
Rekvisition #3141741
31-07-2016 10:15
Rekvisition #1924171
01-08-2016 08:25
Rekvisition #1446294
01-08-2016 11:39
Rekvisition #4130431
01-08-2016 14:46
01-08-2016 14:59
slut
Udskrevet til 
andet afsnit 
01-08-2016 15:00
start
Rekvisition #1288711
01-08-2016 15:00
Intensiv terapi (NABB) 
_ukendt procedure_ (ZU1336) 
Akut (ATA1) 
_ukendt procedure_ 
(ZT20160804) 
mere end 3 døgn (ZPVB2B) 
overflyttet til stamafdeling 
(ZBA1) 
kirurgi (ZNAB16) 
Rekvisition #4559379
01-08-2016 15:01
Funktionstræning (BTNA) 
Kompenserende behandling med 
hjælpemidler, redskaber og 
boligændringer (BTNB) 
Interventioner ved behandling 
af respirationslidelser (BGF) 
Generelle pædagogiske 
interventioner (BVD) 
Rekvisition #3575706
02-08-2016 11:30
Rekvisition #1847774
02-08-2016 11:44
Ergo-/fysioterapeutisk 
undersøgelse eller vurdering 
(ZZ5049) 
Rekvisition #1216433
02-08-2016 13:30
Funktionstræning (BTNA) 
Rekvisition #274812
02-08-2016 13:38
Rekvisition #1519187
02-08-2016 13:45
Rekvisition #1335107
03-08-2016 09:01
Rekvisition #4610970
03-08-2016 12:11
Rekvisition #2430299
03-08-2016 12:15
Røntgenundersøgelse af thorax 
(UXRC00) 
Akut i dagarbejdstiden (ATA11) 
Rekvisition #3786365
04-08-2016 09:08
Rekvisition #2034200
04-08-2016 14:00
Funktionstræning (BTNA) 
Interventioner ved behandling 
af respirationslidelser (BGF) 
Generelle pædagogiske 
interventioner (BVD) 
Rekvisition #3863545
04-08-2016 14:00
Rekvisition #3665778
04-08-2016 14:20
Rekvisition #531516
05-08-2016 10:07
05-08-2016 14:39
slut
Udskrevet til 
andet afsnit 
05-08-2016 14:40
start
Rekvisition #3661387
05-08-2016 16:42
Rekvisition #3458329
06-08-2016 12:29
Rekvisition #1666339
06-08-2016 22:47
Rekvisition #2393756
06-08-2016 23:07
Rekvisition #3880921
07-08-2016 12:45
Røntgenundersøgelse af thorax 
(UXRC00) 
Akut uden for dagarbejdstiden 
(ATA12) 
Rekvisition #4787616
07-08-2016 17:18
Rekvisition #2383309
08-08-2016 11:19
Rekvisition #4680579
08-08-2016 13:57
Rekvisition #1760903
08-08-2016 18:01
Rekvisition #3098134
08-08-2016 18:45
CT-skanning af cerebrum 
(UXCA00) 
uden intravenøs kontrast 
(UXZ11) 
Akut uden for dagarbejdstiden 
(ATA12) 
Rekvisition #2037349
08-08-2016 19:00
Rekvisition #574457
08-08-2016 19:02
Rekvisition #3139467
08-08-2016 19:15
Røntgenundersøgelse af thorax 
(UXRC00) 
Akut uden for dagarbejdstiden 
(ATA12) 
Rekvisition #3398426
08-08-2016 19:23
Rekvisition #2272910
08-08-2016 20:05
Intensiv terapi (NABB) 
intern medicin (ZNAB13) 
overflyttet til stamafdeling 
(ZBA1) 
_ukendt procedure_ (ZU1320) 
_ukendt procedure_ 
(ZT20160830) 
mere end 3 døgn (ZPVB2B) 
Vurdering af Simplified Acute 
Physiology Score (SAPS) III 
(ZZV020P) 
_ukendt procedure_ (VPH0064) 
Rekvisition #2484506
08-08-2016 23:15
Anlæggelse af oraltube 
(BGAZ01) 
Assistance ved livstruende 
tilstande (NABS0) 
_ukendt procedure_ (X84018) 
Rekvisition #243833
09-08-2016 01:00
Anlæggelse af centralt 
venekateter i vena jugularis 
(BMBZ51C) 
_ukendt procedure_ (X84018) 
Rekvisition #3793759
09-08-2016 01:00
Røntgenundersøgelse af thorax 
(UXRC00) 
Akut uden for dagarbejdstiden 
(ATA12) 
Rekvisition #4536440
09-08-2016 01:33
Rekvisition #1540081
09-08-2016 09:20
Rekvisition #1737111
09-08-2016 09:20
Kommunikation (BVA) 
Rekvisition #3082383
09-08-2016 10:46
Rekvisition #2566583
09-08-2016 13:05
Rekvisition #2319112
09-08-2016 13:47
Rekvisition #597117
10-08-2016 14:19
Rekvisition #1356266
10-08-2016 14:43
Rekvisition #4405773
10-08-2016 14:54
Biomekanisk bevægelsesterapi 
(BLNA) 
Rekvisition #2000503
11-08-2016 10:41
Rekvisition #3976997
11-08-2016 13:30
Røntgenundersøgelse af thorax 
(UXRC00) 
intensivafsnit (ZSAB0) 
Akut i dagarbejdstiden (ATA11) 
Rekvisition #1077570
11-08-2016 13:34
Rekvisition #4383863
12-08-2016 00:02
Rekvisition #4766504
12-08-2016 13:03
Rekvisition #623075
12-08-2016 13:30
Rekvisition #4747068
12-08-2016 13:30
Funktionstræning (BTNA) 
Biomekanisk bevægelsesterapi 
(BLNA) 
Rekvisition #3140692
12-08-2016 13:44
Rekvisition #434136
13-08-2016 11:17
Rekvisition #3455348
14-08-2016 11:15
Rekvisition #106879
15-08-2016 10:39
15-08-2016 11:29
slut
Udskrevet til 
andet afsnit 
15-08-2016 11:30
start
Rekvisition #1840510
15-08-2016 11:30
Respiratorbehandling (BGDA0) 
13 dage (ATTD13) 
Non-invasiv ventilation (NIV) 
(BGDA1) 
Forebyggelsesintervention 
vedrørende ernæring (BQFT03) 
Behandling med noradrenalin 
(BFHC93B) 
Intensiv terapi (NABB) 
_ukendt procedure_ (ZU1320) 
intern medicin (ZNAB13) 
mere end 3 døgn (ZPVB2B) 
_ukendt procedure_ 
(ZT20160830) 
overflyttet til stamafdeling 
(ZBA1) 
Vurdering af Simplified Acute 
Physiology Score (SAPS) III 
(ZZV020P) 
_ukendt procedure_ (VPH0064) 
Rekvisition #1705111
15-08-2016 13:30
Rekvisition #3620206
15-08-2016 13:30
Funktionstræning (BTNA) 
Rekvisition #3599673
15-08-2016 14:07
Rekvisition #2759461
16-08-2016 09:47
Rekvisition #4565047
16-08-2016 11:19
Rekvisition #2363837
17-08-2016 09:20
Rekvisition #411568
17-08-2016 11:00
Rekvisition #3418417
17-08-2016 11:00
Ergo-/fysioterapeutisk 
undersøgelse eller vurdering 
(ZZ5049) 
Rekvisition #3137434
17-08-2016 13:30
Funktionstræning (BTNA) 
Rekvisition #554124
17-08-2016 13:58
Rekvisition #3213688
18-08-2016 10:41
Rekvisition #4615551
18-08-2016 14:00
Neuromuskulær bevægelsesterapi 
(BLNC) 
Mund-, svælg- og 
ansigtsstimulation (BEF) 
Rekvisition #2080908
18-08-2016 14:53
Funktionstræning (BTNA) 
Rekvisition #561196
19-08-2016 11:25
Rekvisition #3537473
19-08-2016 12:15
_ukendt procedure_ (X99BASIS) 
_ukendt procedure_ (X99252) 
_ukendt procedure_ (X99251) 
_ukendt procedure_ (X99253) 
_ukendt procedure_ (X99418) 
_ukendt procedure_ (X99500) 
_ukendt procedure_ (X99717) 
_ukendt procedure_ (X99255) 
_ukendt procedure_ (X99223) 
Rekvisition #951484
19-08-2016 12:30
Regional anæstesi (NAAD) 
Sedation og smertelindring 
uden bevidsthedstab (NAAB) 
Rekvisition #87695
19-08-2016 13:15
Gastrostomi (KJDB00) 
Elektiv (ATA3) 
rent sår, operationstidspunkt 
(ZPL01) 
Rekvisition #3950830
19-08-2016 13:50
Rekvisition #3401896
20-08-2016 12:33
Rekvisition #4110918
21-08-2016 11:54
Rekvisition #1684888
22-08-2016 10:43
Rekvisition #1244865
22-08-2016 14:30
Rekvisition #3756665
22-08-2016 14:30
Funktionstræning (BTNA) 
Rekvisition #1627318
22-08-2016 14:50
Rekvisition #4195427
23-08-2016 09:00
Røntgenundersøgelse af thorax 
(UXRC00) 
intensivafsnit (ZSAB0) 
Akut i dagarbejdstiden (ATA11) 
Rekvisition #807534
23-08-2016 10:30
Rekvisition #1311744
23-08-2016 10:42
Rekvisition #2900652
23-08-2016 12:05
Rekvisition #879141
24-08-2016 09:00
Mund-, svælg- og 
ansigtsstimulation (BEF) 
Rekvisition #4789867
24-08-2016 09:20
Rekvisition #3069065
24-08-2016 13:40
Biomekanisk bevægelsesterapi 
(BLNA) 
Funktionstræning (BTNA) 
Rekvisition #4085585
24-08-2016 13:40
Rekvisition #1441500
24-08-2016 14:07
Rekvisition #2376336
25-08-2016 09:31
Rekvisition #4278719
25-08-2016 13:30
Mund-, svælg- og 
ansigtsstimulation (BEF) 
Rekvisition #1935037
25-08-2016 14:30
Rekvisition #3133309
26-08-2016 13:48
Rekvisition #800623
26-08-2016 14:08
Funktionstræning (BTNA) 
Rekvisition #821859
27-08-2016 10:43
Rekvisition #3920917
28-08-2016 15:31
Rekvisition #1742746
29-08-2016 08:57
Rekvisition #304438
29-08-2016 09:55
Rekvisition #1075019
29-08-2016 12:00
Fjernelse af centralt 
venekateter (CVK) (BMBZ71) 
Rekvisition #2362628
29-08-2016 13:30
Funktionstræning (BTNA) 
Interventioner ved behandling 
af respirationslidelser (BGF) 
Generelle pædagogiske 
interventioner (BVD) 
Rekvisition #4641693
29-08-2016 13:30
Rekvisition #3703689
29-08-2016 15:02
Rekvisition #4318496
30-08-2016 09:56
Rekvisition #890922
30-08-2016 10:20
Mund-, svælg- og 
ansigtsstimulation (BEF) 
Rekvisition #684462
30-08-2016 20:01
Rekvisition #2296303
31-08-2016 10:15
Røntgenundersøgelse af thorax 
(UXRC00) 
almindeligt sengeafsnit 
(ZSAA0) 
Akut i dagarbejdstiden (ATA11) 
Rekvisition #2166720
31-08-2016 14:30
Rekvisition #4811793
31-08-2016 14:30
Funktionstræning (BTNA) 
Biomekanisk bevægelsesterapi 
(BLNA) 
Generelle pædagogiske 
interventioner (BVD) 
Rekvisition #3581740
31-08-2016 14:52
Rekvisition #4683237
01-09-2016 05:08
Rekvisition #136431
01-09-2016 08:15
Røntgenundersøgelse af thorax 
(UXRC00) 
Akut i dagarbejdstiden (ATA11) 
Rekvisition #4457139
01-09-2016 10:45
Funktionstræning (BTNA) 
Rekvisition #4571009
01-09-2016 10:51
Rekvisition #3616072
01-09-2016 14:11
Rekvisition #1454520
01-09-2016 14:30
Mund-, svælg- og 
ansigtsstimulation (BEF) 
Rekvisition #4401411
01-09-2016 14:30
Rekvisition #3419352
02-09-2016 13:00
CT-skanning af thorax (UXCC00) 
med intravenøs kontrast 
(UXZ10) 
Rekvisition #318903
02-09-2016 14:12
Rekvisition #193147
03-09-2016 10:23
Rekvisition #1497448
04-09-2016 13:38
Rekvisition #965051
05-09-2016 11:30
Rekvisition #4181296
05-09-2016 13:30
Funktionstræning (BTNA) 
Biomekanisk bevægelsesterapi 
(BLNA) 
Rekvisition #2665580
06-09-2016 10:15
Rekvisition #4528267
06-09-2016 10:15
Mund-, svælg- og 
ansigtsstimulation (BEF) 
Ergo-/fysioterapeutisk 
undersøgelse eller vurdering 
(ZZ5049) 
Rekvisition #4472901
06-09-2016 11:00
Terapeutisk torakocentese 
(KTGA30B) 
UL-undersøgelse af pleura og 
diafragma (UXUC15) 
Rekvisition #2147783
06-09-2016 11:45
Røntgenundersøgelse af thorax 
(UXRC00) 
Akut i dagarbejdstiden (ATA11) 
Rekvisition #16939
06-09-2016 14:15
Rekvisition #1348804
06-09-2016 17:56
Rekvisition #3400993
07-09-2016 10:39
Rekvisition #2579879
07-09-2016 13:30
Funktionstræning (BTNA) 
Aktivitetstræning af fysisk 
funktion (BLNR) 
Rekvisition #1679823
07-09-2016 13:45
Rekvisition #4310652
07-09-2016 20:06
Rekvisition #1122164
08-09-2016 09:45
Røntgenundersøgelse af thorax 
(UXRC00) 
Akut i dagarbejdstiden (ATA11) 
Rekvisition #4275303
08-09-2016 10:37
Rekvisition #2432657
09-09-2016 09:45
Rekvisition #3782512
09-09-2016 09:45
Mund-, svælg- og 
ansigtsstimulation (BEF) 
Rekvisition #2634319
09-09-2016 11:20
Rekvisition #2731439
09-09-2016 11:20
Funktionstræning (BTNA) 
Rekvisition #146152
09-09-2016 13:44
Rekvisition #4157088
10-09-2016 10:22
Rekvisition #576224
10-09-2016 10:52
Rekvisition #985110
10-09-2016 11:00
Røntgenundersøgelse af thorax 
(UXRC00) 
Akut uden for dagarbejdstiden 
(ATA12) 
Rekvisition #746434
10-09-2016 12:18
Rekvisition #3587350
10-09-2016 12:30
Rekvisition #2130607
10-09-2016 12:45
Rekvisition #1192451
10-09-2016 13:00
Interventioner ved behandling 
af respirationslidelser (BGF) 
Rekvisition #4354860
11-09-2016 10:15
Interventioner ved behandling 
af respirationslidelser (BGF) 
Rekvisition #3560645
11-09-2016 11:49
Rekvisition #2576305
12-09-2016 10:30
Interventioner ved behandling 
af respirationslidelser (BGF) 
Generelle pædagogiske 
interventioner (BVD) 
Rekvisition #3578449
12-09-2016 11:15
Rekvisition #706374
13-09-2016 09:15
Initial diætvejledning (BUGA0) 
Diæt ved ernæringsterapi 
(BUBS2) 
Sondeernæring (BUAJ) 
Kostberegning (BUGX0) 
Rekvisition #3207068
13-09-2016 09:30
Rekvisition #99774
13-09-2016 10:15
CT-skanning af thorax (UXCC00) 
både med og uden intravenøs 
kontrast (UXZ12) 
CT-skanning af øvre abdomen 
(UXCD10) 
både med og uden intravenøs 
kontrast (UXZ12) 
Rekvisition #3612628
13-09-2016 11:56
Rekvisition #3920660
13-09-2016 14:00
Aktivitetstræning af fysisk 
funktion (BLNR) 
Rekvisition #845363
13-09-2016 14:21
Rekvisition #4562393
14-09-2016 10:58
Rekvisition #1207525
14-09-2016 13:45
Rekvisition #4744812
14-09-2016 13:45
Aktivitetstræning af fysisk 
funktion (BLNR) 
Generelle pædagogiske 
interventioner (BVD) 
Interventioner ved behandling 
af respirationslidelser (BGF) 
Rekvisition #2367202
14-09-2016 14:40
Rekvisition #3080567
14-09-2016 14:40
Mund-, svælg- og 
ansigtsstimulation (BEF) 
Rekvisition #2633101
15-09-2016 11:11
Rekvisition #1906420
15-09-2016 13:00
Terapeutisk torakocentese 
(KTGA30B) 
UL-undersøgelse af pleura og 
diafragma (UXUC15) 
Rekvisition #3902575
15-09-2016 14:01
Rekvisition #3693940
15-09-2016 14:30
CT-skanning af thorax (UXCC00) 
uden intravenøs kontrast 
(UXZ11) 
Akut uden for dagarbejdstiden 
(ATA12) 
Rekvisition #3464290
15-09-2016 20:21
Rekvisition #1600594
15-09-2016 20:25
Rekvisition #2252340
16-09-2016 10:31
Rekvisition #3183485
16-09-2016 11:05
Mund-, svælg- og 
ansigtsstimulation (BEF) 
Rekvisition #4261878
16-09-2016 11:05
Rekvisition #1526420
16-09-2016 13:30
Aktivitetstræning af fysisk 
funktion (BLNR) 
Rekvisition #1869164
19-09-2016 10:20
Mund-, svælg- og 
ansigtsstimulation (BEF) 
Rekvisition #1006763
19-09-2016 13:45
Kommunikation (BVA) 
Rekvisition #1392004
19-09-2016 13:46
Rekvisition #2441915
19-09-2016 13:49
Rekvisition #1993113
19-09-2016 14:30
Røntgenundersøgelse af thorax 
(UXRC00) 
Rekvisition #592744
20-09-2016 09:50
Ergo-/fysioterapeutisk 
undersøgelse eller vurdering 
(ZZ5049) 
Rekvisition #3635900
20-09-2016 09:50
Rekvisition #1477571
20-09-2016 11:00
Rekvisition #4515269
21-09-2016 10:37
Rekvisition #2858217
22-09-2016 10:13
Rekvisition #1046789
23-09-2016 10:23
Rekvisition #765216
23-09-2016 11:30
Kommunikation (BVA) 
Rekvisition #4767042
23-09-2016 11:35
Rekvisition #82995
23-09-2016 11:45
CT-skanning af thorax (UXCC00) 
uden intravenøs kontrast 
(UXZ11) 
Rekvisition #3341401
25-09-2016 12:37
Rekvisition #4819861
25-09-2016 15:46
Rekvisition #1758560
26-09-2016 11:05
Ergo-/fysioterapeutisk 
undersøgelse eller vurdering 
(ZZ5049) 
Rekvisition #4075366
26-09-2016 11:05
Rekvisition #887906
26-09-2016 11:30
Opfølgende diætvejledning 
(BUGA1) 
Diæt ved ernæringsterapi 
(BUBS2) 
Total sondeernæring (BUAJ1) 
Rekvisition #2714954
26-09-2016 11:30
Rekvisition #1994509
26-09-2016 13:30
Rekvisition #393931
27-09-2016 12:26
Rekvisition #644776
28-09-2016 11:30
Rekvisition #3649730
28-09-2016 14:24
Rekvisition #574844
29-09-2016 11:00
Ergo-/fysioterapeutisk 
undersøgelse eller vurdering 
(ZZ5049) 
flere behandlere (BZFD8) 
Rekvisition #3032804
29-09-2016 11:00
Rekvisition #173802
29-09-2016 14:30
CT-skanning af thorax (UXCC00) 
Akut i dagarbejdstiden (ATA11) 
med udmåling på billeder 
(UXZ21) 
både med og uden intravenøs 
kontrast (UXZ12) 
CT-skanning af abdomen 
(UXCD00) 
Akut i dagarbejdstiden (ATA11) 
både med og uden intravenøs 
kontrast (UXZ12) 
med udmåling på billeder 
(UXZ21) 
Rekvisition #4569582
30-09-2016 10:41
Rekvisition #3504185
30-09-2016 11:00
Rekvisition #604917
30-09-2016 13:45
Terapeutisk torakocentese 
(KTGA30B) 
UL-undersøgelse af pleura og 
diafragma (UXUC15) 
Rekvisition #4703066
30-09-2016 14:00
UL-undersøgelse af nedre 
abdomen (UXUD15) 
Akut i dagarbejdstiden (ATA11) 
Rekvisition #4490631
30-09-2016 18:56
30-09-2016 22:00
start
30-09-2016 22:00
slut
Udskrevet med 
anden 
afslutningskode 
Rekvisition #4650936
01-10-2016 22:50
Rekvisition #617880
03-10-2016 09:00
Mund-, svælg- og 
ansigtsstimulation (BEF) 
Rekvisition #1831219
03-10-2016 09:00
Rekvisition #1539292
03-10-2016 11:45
Rekvisition #1788588
04-10-2016 10:00
Nålebiopsi af bugvæg (KTJA15) 
CT-skanning af nedre abdomen, 
inkl. bækken (UXCD15) 
med intravenøs kontrast 
(UXZ10) 
CT-skanning af abdomen 
(UXCD00) 
uden intravenøs kontrast 
(UXZ11) 
Rekvisition #620282
04-10-2016 13:29
Rekvisition #280124
04-10-2016 14:30
Røntgenundersøgelse af thorax 
(UXRC00) 
Akut i dagarbejdstiden (ATA11) 
05-10-2016 08:00
start
Rekvisition #3582671
05-10-2016 10:00
05-10-2016 18:00
slut
Udskrevet til 
speciallæge 
Rekvisition #267603
06-10-2016 10:15
Mund-, svælg- og 
ansigtsstimulation (BEF) 
Rekvisition #1610618
06-10-2016 10:15
Rekvisition #4134974
06-10-2016 10:30
Rekvisition #1915569
06-10-2016 13:27
Rekvisition #1424260
07-10-2016 13:47
Rekvisition #3778225
07-10-2016 13:47
Færdigbehandlet i stationært 
regi (AWA1) 
Rekvisition #1753996
09-10-2016 01:03
Rekvisition #1738477
09-10-2016 09:15
Røntgenundersøgelse af thorax 
(UXRC00) 
Akut uden for dagarbejdstiden 
(ATA12) 
Rekvisition #1413687
09-10-2016 18:50
Anlæggelse af venekanyle 
(BMBZ00) 
_ukendt procedure_ (X84018) 
Rekvisition #657865
10-10-2016 10:15
Mund-, svælg- og 
ansigtsstimulation (BEF) 
Aktivitetstræning af fysisk 
funktion (BLNR) 
Rekvisition #2539495
10-10-2016 11:41
Rekvisition #1506594
10-10-2016 14:06
Rekvisition #1143983
10-10-2016 14:49
Rekvisition #4037924
11-10-2016 00:47
Rekvisition #3830891
11-10-2016 14:13
Rekvisition #4461583
11-10-2016 14:41
12-10-2016 02:04
slut
Udskrevet til 
andet afsnit 
12-10-2016 02:15
start
Rekvisition #4589604
12-10-2016 14:08
Rekvisition #1199583
13-10-2016 10:00
Rekvisition #2808890
13-10-2016 11:08
Rekvisition #33042
13-10-2016 12:30
CT-skanning af thorax (UXCC00) 
Akut i dagarbejdstiden (ATA11) 
med intravenøs kontrast 
(UXZ10) 
Rekvisition #3328396
13-10-2016 13:40
Rekvisition #3573441
13-10-2016 14:37
Rekvisition #4141846
13-10-2016 15:03
Rekvisition #1326385
14-10-2016 09:30
Rekvisition #2027368
14-10-2016 09:30
Kommunikation (BVA) 
Generelle pædagogiske 
interventioner (BVD) 
Rekvisition #3906263
14-10-2016 10:13
Rekvisition #4068837
14-10-2016 11:20
Funktionstræning (BTNA) 
Rekvisition #4802385
14-10-2016 11:20
Rekvisition #1539539
14-10-2016 13:30
Terapeutisk torakocentese 
(KTGA30B) 
UL-undersøgelse af pleura og 
diafragma (UXUC15) 
Rekvisition #368968
15-10-2016 11:44
Rekvisition #2464692
15-10-2016 12:30
Røntgenundersøgelse af thorax 
(UXRC00) 
Akut uden for dagarbejdstiden 
(ATA12) 
Rekvisition #4160850
15-10-2016 14:22
Rekvisition #1506854
16-10-2016 13:46
Rekvisition #2786977
17-10-2016 10:53
Rekvisition #1711125
17-10-2016 13:58
Rekvisition #1281604
18-10-2016 11:00
Rekvisition #1194257
18-10-2016 11:12
Rekvisition #1848522
19-10-2016 09:15
Røntgenundersøgelse af thorax 
(UXRC00) 
Rekvisition #2227015
19-10-2016 11:00
Rekvisition #3120151
19-10-2016 11:00
Funktionstræning (BTNA) 
Rekvisition #565542
19-10-2016 14:40
Funktionstræning (BTNA) 
Kommunikation (BVA) 
Rekvisition #1501964
19-10-2016 14:40
Rekvisition #3590426
20-10-2016 10:30
Rekvisition #4404061
20-10-2016 10:30
Opfølgende diætvejledning 
(BUGA1) 
Diæt ved ernæringsterapi 
(BUBS2) 
Total sondeernæring (BUAJ1) 
Rekvisition #2286503
20-10-2016 13:29
Rekvisition #2046403
21-10-2016 12:15
Rekvisition #2974553
21-10-2016 13:15
Røntgenundersøgelse af thorax 
(UXRC00) 
Akut i dagarbejdstiden (ATA11) 
Rekvisition #2051283
22-10-2016 11:00
Rekvisition #4626052
24-10-2016 13:05
Rekvisition #3374081
25-10-2016 10:39
Rekvisition #2358644
25-10-2016 11:00
Rekvisition #3878242
25-10-2016 11:00
Opfølgende diætvejledning 
(BUGA1) 
Diæt ved ernæringsterapi 
(BUBS2) 
Total sondeernæring (BUAJ1) 
Rekvisition #793808
26-10-2016 11:29
Rekvisition #103292
26-10-2016 13:15
Funktionstræning (BTNA) 
Rekvisition #3221055
26-10-2016 13:15
Rekvisition #900624
27-10-2016 09:30
Rekvisition #1746752
27-10-2016 09:30
Opfølgende diætvejledning 
(BUGA1) 
Diæt ved ernæringsterapi 
(BUBS2) 
Total sondeernæring (BUAJ1) 
Rekvisition #2360012
27-10-2016 11:12
Rekvisition #2315247
27-10-2016 11:43
Rekvisition #4487407
27-10-2016 14:30
Røntgenundersøgelse af thorax 
(UXRC00) 
Rekvisition #4741090
28-10-2016 09:30
Rekvisition #4598523
28-10-2016 09:40
Ergo-/fysioterapeutisk 
undersøgelse eller vurdering 
(ZZ5049) 
Mund-, svælg- og 
ansigtsstimulation (BEF) 
Rekvisition #2550989
28-10-2016 11:49
Rekvisition #971738
29-10-2016 22:37
Rekvisition #1530669
31-10-2016 11:18
Rekvisition #2914935
31-10-2016 14:15
Terapeutisk torakocentese 
(KTGA30B) 
UL-undersøgelse af pleura og 
diafragma (UXUC15) 
Rekvisition #1039106
01-11-2016 09:00
Ophængning af egen tidligere 
undersøgelse (UWW20) 
Billedfusionering (PET, SPECT, 
MRI, CT el. planar) 
(WDLBFXXXX) 
PET-Scanning, F-18-FDG 
(WDLPSFAXX) 
med intravenøs kontrast samt 
peroral kontrast (UXZ10A) 
CT WB på PET/CT (WMACPXYXX) 
Rekvisition #392190
02-11-2016 10:15
Rekvisition #4102122
02-11-2016 10:15
Ergo-/fysioterapeutisk 
undersøgelse eller vurdering 
(ZZ5049) 
Rekvisition #3735400
02-11-2016 11:15
Røntgenundersøgelse af thorax 
(UXRC00) 
Akut i dagarbejdstiden (ATA11) 
Rekvisition #605228
02-11-2016 11:58
Rekvisition #4640464
03-11-2016 12:12
Rekvisition #3349507
03-11-2016 13:56
Rekvisition #1748047
04-11-2016 10:36
Rekvisition #72731
04-11-2016 12:21
Rekvisition #869523
06-11-2016 12:05
Rekvisition #1641391
07-11-2016 10:00
Lungekræft: 
henvisning til pakkeforløb 
start (AFB26A) 
Rekvisition #2809851
07-11-2016 12:01
Rekvisition #1390218
07-11-2016 12:21
Rekvisition #1563124
08-11-2016 11:48
09-11-2016 08:00
start
Rekvisition #4696819
09-11-2016 11:24
Rekvisition #1730619
09-11-2016 11:30
Kræft i 
spiserøret, mavemunden og 
mavesækken (ECV): udredning 
start, første fremmøde 
(AFB09B) 
Kræft i 
spiserøret, mavemunden og 
mavesækken (ECV): pakkeforløb 
slut, diagnose afkræftet 
(AFB09X1) 
Gastroskopi (KUJD02) 
Rekvisition #1519856
09-11-2016 14:30
09-11-2016 17:00
slut
Udskrevet til 
praktiserende 
læge 
Rekvisition #1019397
10-11-2016 10:56
Rekvisition #2665217
10-11-2016 14:00
Generelle pædagogiske 
interventioner (BVD) 
Rekvisition #790447
10-11-2016 14:20
Rekvisition #149475
11-11-2016 11:30
14-11-2016 08:15
start
Rekvisition #3107924
14-11-2016 14:38
Rekvisition #3342332
14-11-2016 17:19
Rekvisition #1295942
15-11-2016 12:13
Rekvisition #4818557
15-11-2016 18:10
Rekvisition #3515177
16-11-2016 10:08
Rekvisition #2053030
16-11-2016 12:59
Rekvisition #361674
17-11-2016 10:36
Rekvisition #1184884
18-11-2016 09:30
Rekvisition #2233696
18-11-2016 09:30
Ergo-/fysioterapeutisk 
undersøgelse eller vurdering 
(ZZ5049) 
Rekvisition #3179407
18-11-2016 13:30
Røntgenundersøgelse af thorax 
(UXRC00) 
Akut i dagarbejdstiden (ATA11) 
Rekvisition #1607770
18-11-2016 14:10
Rekvisition #1625138
20-11-2016 13:02
Rekvisition #2959126
21-11-2016 11:33
Rekvisition #282345
21-11-2016 16:40
Anlæggelse af venekanyle 
(BMBZ00) 
_ukendt procedure_ (X84018) 
Rekvisition #1741007
21-11-2016 18:04
Rekvisition #1549828
22-11-2016 13:00
Lungekræft: 
pakkeforløb slut, diagnose 
afkræftet (AFB26X1) 
Tværfaglig konference (ZZ0190) 
Rekvisition #1082887
22-11-2016 14:28
22-11-2016 15:59
slut
Udskrevet med 
koden AV 
Rekvisition #1744046
23-11-2016 11:27
Rekvisition #1665005
24-11-2016 12:19
Rekvisition #1282630
24-11-2016 12:20
Rekvisition #1225850
24-11-2016 14:04
Rekvisition #1637369
25-11-2016 10:00
Opfølgende diætvejledning 
(BUGA1) 
Diæt ved ernæringsterapi 
(BUBS2) 
Total sondeernæring (BUAJ1) 
Kostberegning (BUGX0) 
Rekvisition #3389154
25-11-2016 10:00
Rekvisition #3538651
25-11-2016 14:19
Rekvisition #1717789
26-11-2016 10:30
Rekvisition #3268529
26-11-2016 20:00
Non-invasiv ventilation (NIV) 
(BGDA1) 
Rekvisition #2326284
27-11-2016 09:59
Rekvisition #1058074
27-11-2016 10:11
Rekvisition #454801
27-11-2016 15:15
Anlæggelse af venekanyle 
(BMBZ00) 
_ukendt procedure_ (X84018) 
Rekvisition #1884090
28-11-2016 12:45
Røntgenundersøgelse af thorax 
(UXRC00) 
Akut i dagarbejdstiden (ATA11) 
Rekvisition #4592345
28-11-2016 14:57
Rekvisition #3794643
29-11-2016 14:28
Rekvisition #2674901
30-11-2016 10:25
Rekvisition #2932111
30-11-2016 11:01
Rekvisition #2873013
30-11-2016 11:08
Rekvisition #2222110
30-11-2016 14:00
Rekvisition #187678
30-11-2016 15:43
Rekvisition #3781657
30-11-2016 16:36
Rekvisition #4816439
30-11-2016 17:22
Rekvisition #1248775
01-12-2016 10:13
Rekvisition #1237170
01-12-2016 10:30
Rekvisition #2264492
02-12-2016 13:47
Rekvisition #2869843
02-12-2016 16:21
Rekvisition #1399211
05-12-2016 09:58
Rekvisition #2381607
05-12-2016 10:08
Interventioner ved behandling 
af respirationslidelser (BGF) 
Generelle pædagogiske 
interventioner (BVD) 
Rekvisition #3593088
05-12-2016 14:30
Mund-, svælg- og 
ansigtsstimulation (BEF) 
Rekvisition #3615595
05-12-2016 14:30
Rekvisition #991406
06-12-2016 11:00
Opfølgende diætvejledning 
(BUGA1) 
Diæt ved ernæringsterapi 
(BUBS2) 
Total sondeernæring (BUAJ1) 
Rekvisition #1050220
06-12-2016 11:17
Rekvisition #4092717
07-12-2016 11:00
Rekvisition #1811341
08-12-2016 10:30
Opfølgende diætvejledning 
(BUGA1) 
Diæt ved ernæringsterapi 
(BUBS2) 
Total sondeernæring (BUAJ1) 
Kostberegning (BUGX0) 
Rekvisition #2586778
08-12-2016 10:30
Rekvisition #1292305
08-12-2016 12:22
Rekvisition #436472
08-12-2016 14:00
Mund-, svælg- og 
ansigtsstimulation (BEF) 
Rekvisition #2001025
08-12-2016 14:00
Rekvisition #3537111
09-12-2016 11:47
Rekvisition #4264950
12-12-2016 13:15
Rekvisition #4693162
12-12-2016 13:45
Udarbejdelse af 
genoptræningsplan, almen 
genoptræning (ZZ0175X) 
Rekvisition #2897606
13-12-2016 11:11
Rekvisition #3570574
13-12-2016 11:40
Færdigbehandlet i stationært 
regi (AWA1) 
13-12-2016 11:40
slut
Udskrevet til 
praktiserende 
læge 
31-12-2016 11:44
start
Rekvisition #4087738
05-10-2016 09:00
Klinisk beslutning: intet 
behandlingsbehov iht. 
sundhedsloven § 82b (AFX01C) 
Intervention mhp. taletræning 
(BRFB51) 
Hypofaryngoskopi (KUEN12) 
Journaloptagelse (ZZ0150) 
Fiberoptisk endoskopisk 
evaluering af synkefunktion 
(FEES) (ZZ1005A) 
Rekvisition #4218636
05-10-2016 09:00
Generelle pædagogiske 
interventioner (BVD) 
Ergo-/fysioterapeutisk 
undersøgelse eller vurdering 
(ZZ5049) 
Rekvisition #1343288
05-10-2016 09:33
Rekvisition #984651
14-11-2016 08:15
Lungekræft: 
udredning start, første 
fremmøde (AFB26B) 
Fleksibel bronkoskopi med 
biopsi af bronkie eller trakea 
(KUGC15) 
Bronkoskopisk UL-undersøgelse 
(UXUC62) 
Journaloptagelse (ZZ0150) 
Lungefunktionsundersøgelse 
(ZZ4130) 
Rekvisition #152201
14-11-2016 10:24
Rekvisition #690325
22-11-2016 13:30
22-11-2016 16:00
start
Rekvisition #2379050
09-11-2016 11:43
Rekvisition #4566117
09-11-2016 11:44
Rekvisition #2054467
31-12-2016 12:29
Rekvisition #3319401
31-12-2016 13:00
Assistance ved livstruende 
tilstande (NABS0) 
_ukendt procedure_ (X84018) 
Rekvisition #3731438
31-12-2016 13:24
Rekvisition #4476108
31-12-2016 13:45
Røntgenundersøgelse af thorax 
(UXRC00) 
akut modtagerafsnit (ZSAB2) 
Akut uden for dagarbejdstiden 
(ATA12) 
31-12-2016 14:25
slut
Udskrevet til 
andet afsnit 
31-12-2016 14:26
start
Rekvisition #3554024
31-12-2016 14:26
Non-invasiv ventilation (NIV) 
(BGDA1) 
Intermitterende CPAP 
behandling (BGFC33) 
Forebyggelsesintervention 
vedrørende ernæring (BQFT03) 
Behandling med dopamin 
(BFHC93C) 
Intensiv terapi (NABB) 
mere end 1 døgn (ZPVB2) 
intern medicin (ZNAB13) 
_ukendt procedure_ (ZU1200) 
overflyttet til stamafdeling 
(ZBA1) 
_ukendt procedure_ 
(ZT20170102) 
Vurdering af Simplified Acute 
Physiology Score (SAPS) III 
(ZZV020P) 
_ukendt procedure_ (VPH0076) 
Rekvisition #903868
31-12-2016 14:55
Rekvisition #4602036
01-01-2017 16:45
Rekvisition #1447929
02-01-2017 11:10
02-01-2017 12:01
slut
Udskrevet til 
andet afsnit 
Figure 5.4: Treatment for the patient with the second most procedures in
Region Sjælland during 2016.
belongs to AFB and so on. The prex AFB covers all cancer package markers
has therefore been used to identify relevant procedures. In case of the diagnoses
it was much more dicult as all cancer diagnoses do not t under a single prex.
A list of the prexes that have been used, can be seen in Appendix D
5.2.2
Filtering
As mentioned earlier some graphs can become extremely large when all requi-
sition for an entire year are included. It can therefore be benecial to remove
some data before visualizing it. Figure 5.4 shows data for the patient with the
second most procedures in Region Sjælland in 2016. There are over 500 pro-
cedures distributed among 120 requisitions. These belong to only 9 contacts
within 5 courses. Listing 5.3
56
// No filtering
57
let
person3 = cache.getPerson
112187
58
save
person3
path [Pdf] sks units
Listing 5.3: Script making huge report.
With so many requisitions it becomes nearly impossible to get an overview of
the patient treatment.
But by applying lters, one can remove all but the
essential requisitions. Which requisitions are important depends on what one
is interested in analysing. In Figure 5.5 a lter has been applied to remove all
procedures that are not scans. Requisitions, contacts, and courses have been
removed if they contain no scans, to simplify the graph. Furthermore, two of
the ve courses have been removed, to t the graph on a single page in this
document. The script used to obtain this data, can be found in Appendix M.
The relevant lines are shown in Listing 5.4.
==PAGE:76==
64
Applications
Forløb #80411
Fra 30-09-2016 22:00 til 13-12-2016 11:40
Kontakt #446702
Indlæggelse (henvist fra speciallæge)
HOL Lungemedicinsk Afd. (H0.3)
"Tilstand med gastrostomi" (DZ931) 
"Pleuraempyem UNS" (DJ869) 
"Kronisk obstruktiv lungesygdom UNS" (DJ449) 
"Pleuraempyem UNS" (DJ869) 
"Atrieflagren eller atrieflimren UNS" (DI489) 
"Postoperativ aspirationspneumoni" (DT814P1) 
"Sygdom" (EUN1) 
Kontakt #911712
Indlæggelse (henvist fra speciallæge)
HOL Kirurgisk Afd. (J0.0)
"Pleuraempyem UNS" (DJ869) 
"Tilstand med gastrostomi" (DZ931) 
Forløb #293125
Fra 14-11-2016 08:15 til 22-11-2016 15:59
Kontakt #939230
Præambulant (henvist fra speciallæge)
ROS Lungemedicinsk Amb. (A0.L)
"Observation pga. mistanke om kræft i lunge" 
(DZ031B) 
"regionsfunktion" (AZAC3) 
Forløb #696265
Fra 31-12-2016 11:44 til 31-12-2016 14:25
Kontakt #137270
Indlæggelse (uden henvisning)
HOL Akut Afd. (H9.0)
"Respirationsinsufficiens UNS" (DJ969) 
"Sygdom" (EUN1) 
30-09-2016 22:00
start
Rekvisition #1788588
04-10-2016 10:00
CT-skanning af nedre abdomen, 
inkl. bækken (UXCD15) 
med intravenøs kontrast 
(UXZ10) 
CT-skanning af abdomen 
(UXCD00) 
uden intravenøs kontrast 
(UXZ11) 
Rekvisition #280124
04-10-2016 14:30
Røntgenundersøgelse af thorax 
(UXRC00) 
Rekvisition #1738477
09-10-2016 09:15
Røntgenundersøgelse af thorax 
(UXRC00) 
12-10-2016 02:04
slut
Udskrevet til 
andet afsnit 
12-10-2016 02:15
start
Rekvisition #33042
13-10-2016 12:30
CT-skanning af thorax (UXCC00) 
med intravenøs kontrast 
(UXZ10) 
Rekvisition #1539539
14-10-2016 13:30
UL-undersøgelse af pleura og 
diafragma (UXUC15) 
Rekvisition #2464692
15-10-2016 12:30
Røntgenundersøgelse af thorax 
(UXRC00) 
Rekvisition #1848522
19-10-2016 09:15
Røntgenundersøgelse af thorax 
(UXRC00) 
Rekvisition #2974553
21-10-2016 13:15
Røntgenundersøgelse af thorax 
(UXRC00) 
Rekvisition #4487407
27-10-2016 14:30
Røntgenundersøgelse af thorax 
(UXRC00) 
Rekvisition #2914935
31-10-2016 14:15
UL-undersøgelse af pleura og 
diafragma (UXUC15) 
Rekvisition #1039106
01-11-2016 09:00
med intravenøs kontrast samt 
peroral kontrast (UXZ10A) 
Rekvisition #3735400
02-11-2016 11:15
Røntgenundersøgelse af thorax 
(UXRC00) 
14-11-2016 08:15
start
Rekvisition #3179407
18-11-2016 13:30
Røntgenundersøgelse af thorax 
(UXRC00) 
22-11-2016 15:59
slut
Udskrevet med 
koden AV 
Rekvisition #1884090
28-11-2016 12:45
Røntgenundersøgelse af thorax 
(UXRC00) 
13-12-2016 11:40
slut
Udskrevet til 
praktiserende 
læge 
31-12-2016 11:44
start
Rekvisition #984651
14-11-2016 08:15
Bronkoskopisk UL-undersøgelse 
(UXUC62) 
Rekvisition #4476108
31-12-2016 13:45
Røntgenundersøgelse af thorax 
(UXRC00) 
31-12-2016 14:25
slut
Udskrevet til 
andet afsnit 
Figure 5.5: A ltered view of the same patient as in Figure 5.4, where all
procedures that are not scans have been removed.
==PAGE:77==
5.3 Resource analyses
65
60
// Filtering
61
let
scansOnly =
62
let filter (cou : Course) = cou.Id <> 149488 && cou.Id <>
655093
63
person3
64
|> persFilter // Keeps
only
scans
65
|> fun p ->
66
{p with
Courses = p.Courses |> Seq.filter
filter}
67
68
save
scansOnly
path [Pdf] sks units
Listing 5.4: Script making ltered report.
Such a ltering can be used to analyse many aspects of a patient treatment and
is here used to summarize the scans this patient have received. As can be seen
the patient received x-ray thorax scans (UXRC00) regularly for more than two
months. However, as the patient was admitted at a hospital during this period,
the regular scans were probably needed and no more obstructive for the patient
than the admission.
5.3
Resource analyses
This section shows dierent ways to utilize the tool for analysing how priority
patients aect shared resources.
The general assumptions described in the Section 4.1.3 apply to all of the anal-
yses covered in this section. Furthermore, the amount of scans have been found
by assuming that all CT scans (UXC) requires a CT scanner. The same prin-
ciple applies for MR (UXM), x-ray (UXR), and ultrasound (UXU), with their
respective scanners, i.e. it is assumed that the rst three letters of procedure
codes can be used as an indicator on whether or not a scanner was used, as well
as the type of scanner.
All of the examples in this section assumes that about 32% of the patient has
priority. There were a total of 35485 CT scan procedures in 2016. Of these,
11412 were conducted on patients enrolled in a cancer package. The ratio was
therefore calculated as 11412/35485 × 100 ≈32.
The tool used to make the following analyses is described in Chapter 4.
It
outputs data appropriate for visualisation through diagrams, but leaves the
==PAGE:78==
66
Applications
creation of the diagrams to the user. The diagrams in this section are all made
using Microsoft Excel.
5.3.1
Resource dimensioning
The analysis tool can be used to estimate the required amount of a resource,
whether this is surgeons, radiologists, or medical equipment. In order to do this,
the capacity of the resource must be estimated, i.e. for how long does a single
procedure occupy the resource. The procedures that use the resource must be
identied, for the usage of the resource to be estimated.
The tool has been used to estimate the necessary amount of CT scanners,
which is illustrated in Figure 5.6. The gure illustrates requests for CT scans
(grey/black bars) which have been distributed throughout a month using a uni-
form distribution. The same distribution has been used in both examples so
the randomization of the distribution does not aect the results. The red and
green bars illustrate time slots where CT scans may be conducted. Red means
occupied, i.e. a scan was scheduled during that time, and green means that no
scans were scheduled.
As explained some estimations had to be made in order to nd the required
amount of CT scanners. In this example the duration of a CT scan has been
estimated to take only 15 minutes. This estimate was made as a worst case av-
erage of the duration a patient occupies the machine. Any time spent dressing,
consulting with a doctor, or injecting contrast agent is therefore not included
as the machine should not be occupied and therefore is available to other pa-
tients. These factors may be relevant for other analyses, but when estimating
the minimum amount of CT scanners, it is assumed that personnel is not a
limitation.
In order to estimate how many CT scans will be conducted, the data from
Region Sjælland was used. However, as the data does not include planning of
events, I have looked at the amount of CT scans that were conducted during
2016. This has been used to specify an average amount of daily requests, which
was then used to distribute the requests.
The example further follows the assumptions from Section 4.1.3, which includes
that scans may only be scheduled on weekdays and that they cannot be sched-
uled on the same day they are requested. The latter is the reason why Fig-
ure 5.6b appears to have available time slots during the rst of the month.
Although the requests are split into priority requests (black bars) and non-
==PAGE:79==
5.3 Resource analyses
67
(a) Using 5 CT scanners.
(b) Using 4 CT scanners.
Figure 5.6: Occupancy of CT scanners for one month. Assuming no bookings
were made the previous month.
==PAGE:80==
68
Applications
priority requests (grey bars), the dierence between these have not been consid-
ered for this analysis. The dierence between them is covered in the following
analyses, where the dierence plays an important role.
From the example in Figure 5.6 it can be seen that all time slots are occupied
when only four scanners are available, but adding a fth scanner gives enough
extra time slots. With only four scanners available the waiting list would there-
fore grow innitely long as more CT scans are requested than conducted. Under
the given assumptions there must be at least 5 scanners available.
From Figure 5.6a it should also be noted that all available time slots are located
at the end of the week. This is a consequence of not planning scans during the
weekend, as the waiting list therefore builds up.
5.3.2
Comparison of scheduling algorithms
The tool can also be used for comparing dierent scheduling algorithms. As
there is no streamlined scheduling process throughout Region Sjælland, the
three scheduling algorithms compared here, are only compared to one another
and not to any algorithms actually being used by Region Sjælland. As described
in Section 4.1 the scheduling must schedule the requests in advance, as patients
must be given notice before their procedure takes place. The procedures are
therefore scheduled as soon as they are requested. As described in Section 4.1.2
the simplest way is to use a FIFO. This approach was used in Section 5.3.1 to
estimate the required amount of scanners. The algorithm does not favour any
patients which means that priority patients are no dierent from other patients.
The algorithms are tested on the scheduling of CT scans, so the data from above
can be reused. To ensure the scheduling algorithms are tested on the exact same
data, seeding is used, which also means that the results can be reproduced.
Scheduling principle: Reserving a day per week for priority patients
In order to be able to prioritise the cancer patients a dierent scheduling al-
gorithm was therefore considered. Instead of always giving the next time slot
to the next patient, certain time slots are reserved, which means that they are
only available to priority patients.
This was tested by reserving Fridays for
the priority patients and running a simulation similar to that in Figure 5.6a.
This means that the test was run by scheduling CT scans using ve scanners.
Patients are given the rst available time slot, but if that happens to be on a
==PAGE:81==
5.3 Resource analyses
69
Figure 5.7: Scheduling CT scanners by reserving Friday for priority patients.
Friday, it will only be scheduled if the patient has priority. If the patient does
not have priority, he is given the rst available slot after that, which in most
cases will be the following Monday. The result can be seen in Figure 5.7.
The diagram contains data from three months, to illustrate that some weeks
still have available time slots on Thursdays. This is important to notice as the
available slots on Fridays are only available to some patients. To ensure that
there are enough time slots for the remaining patients, there must therefore be
available slots Monday-Thursday.
For the pure FIFO scheduling algorithm we noticed that the available slots
were located at the end of the work week (Thursday and Friday). Using this
scheduling algorithm instead the available slots have now moved entirely to
Friday, with only a few available slots on Thursdays. This is still a result of the
weekend, but by denying access to a lot of patients on Fridays, the weekend is
almost prolonged by a day, making the trend even more apparent.
Scheduling principle: Reserving an hour per day for priority patients
Reserving an entire day of the week means that all the reserved time slots are
located right after one another. As an alternative, it was attempted to reserve an
hour per day, thus spreading the reservations over the week. Since the simulation
neither assigns a CT scanner nor a time of day, the only thing that is actually
reserved is an eighth of the time slots every day. This means that the simulation
is not limited to reserving a specic hour of the day, and the reserved timeslots
can be distributed arbitrarily among the scanners. An example of reserving a
single scanner would therefore be identical, with the only exception being the
==PAGE:82==
70
Applications
Figure 5.8: Scheduling CT scanners by reserving an hour every day (marked
by the blue line) for priority patients.
amount of time slots reserved.
The result of spreading the reserved time slots over the week can be seen in
Figure 5.8. Time slots above the blue line are reserved for priority patients.
The available slots are no longer limited to Thursday and Friday, but now also
appear during Wednesday. That being said, all available slots on Wednesdays
are reserved for priority patients.
Comparison
In order to compare the scheduling algorithms, benchmark tests are run. After
running an algorithm on a single distribution the waiting time is found for
every patient, measured in whole days. Each algorithm is then scored on three
parameters for both priority patients and non-priority patients. The longest
waiting time max, the shortest waiting time min, and the average waiting time
avg. max and min are always integers as the waiting time is measured in full
days, i.e. the time of day is ignored. As a scan cannot be performed the same
day it is requested, the minimum possible waiting time is therefore one.
Each algorithm runs on 1000 dierent distributions, that each covers an entire
year. The same distributions are used for all three algorithms to ensure fairness.
The tests were run on the data for MR scans, simply because there are fewer of
them so it does not take as long to run the tests. The result of the benchmark
==PAGE:83==
5.3 Resource analyses
71
test is listed in Table 5.2. It can here be seen that reserving Fridays perform no-
tably worse than not making any reservations (Basic FIFO). Both the maximum
waiting time and the average waiting time increases for non-priority patients as
well as priority patients.
Scheduling algorithm
Non-priority
Priority
max
min
avg
max
min
avg
Basic FIFO
4.147
1.000
1.944
4.112
1.000
1.944
Reserved Friday
8.891
1.005
5.208
6.123
1.000
3.260
Reserved hour
4.404
1.000
2.115
3.884
1.000
1.711
Table 5.2: Comparison of dierent scheduling algorithms. The max, min, and
avg columns show the maximum, minimum, and average waiting
time for patients measured in days.
The increased waiting time for priority patients comes as a side eect of limiting
the amount of time slots available to non-priority patients. A priority patient
that requests a scan Friday evening, will be scheduled for an MR scan the fol-
lowing Monday if a slot is available. For the basic FIFO algorithm we see in
Figure 5.6a that all the patients that request scans on a Thursday are scanned
Friday. This means that there will be a slot available Monday, as long as there
are more slots on Monday than there are requests on a Friday. However, by re-
serving the Friday for priority patients, the non-priority requests from Thursday
cannot be scheduled for Friday. These patients are therefore also scheduled for
Monday thus decreasing the priority patient's chance of getting a slot Monday.
Reserving Fridays therefore becomes even worse than having no reservations at
all. However, this result depends on the ratio of priority patients, as the optimal
ratio of time slots reserved depends on it.
The results for reserving an hour of day are much more similar to that of the
basic FIFO, but with a few important dierences in the average waiting times.
The average waiting time for priority patients has seen a small but signicant
decrease. Although the theoretical minimum waiting time is one, that is not the
case for the average waiting time because scans are not performed in the week-
ends. With a constant amount of requests every day the theoretical minimum
would be 10/7 ≈1.43, so the decrease observed for reserving an hour per day is
actually very signicant.
However, lowering the waiting time for priority patients has been a trade o as
the average waiting time for non-priority patients has increased.
It should be noted that the maximum and minimum waiting times are each
averages taken over 1000 integers, which means that with three decimal precision
==PAGE:84==
72
Applications
Figure 5.9: Simulation of patients on waiting list for a CT scan in 2016, as-
suming all scans up to January 15'th were booked in 2015.
the results are exact. This is not the case for the averages as these are not
integers to begin with.
5.3.3
Waiting lists
The tool can also be used to estimate the consequences of building up a waiting
list, which may happen for multiple reasons. If equipment breaks down, person-
nel goes on holiday, or cancer packages are introduced, there may be a period
where more scans are requested than conducted, which will build up a waiting
list. Once the list starts building up, it can be a problem to get back to normal,
as illustrated in Figure 5.9. Here it is shown how a waiting list can build up
during two weeks, and then linger for three months.
The example assumes that none of the scans planned in 2016 are conducted on
or before the January 15. Since January 16 and 17 are a weekend no scans are
conducted there either. This does not necessarily mean that no scans are per-
formed in the rst half of January, it only means that scans that are performed
there, were planned the previous year. The blue line in Figure 5.9 therefore only
represents the amount of patients on the waiting list, that were added to the
list in 2016.
==PAGE:85==
5.4 Discussion
73
5.4
Discussion
The tool highlights what was rst understood to be incoherences in the data,
but was later claried by Region Sjælland to be intentional use. An example of
this can be seen in Figure 5.10, where three requisitions are placed outside of
the contacts. The problem lies in that the three requisitions all belong to the
rightmost contact (yellow), which has a starting date on the 20th of January,
but the requisitions occur on the 8th, 11th and 14th of January. The contact
therefore begins after all three of the requisitions have taken place. As this was
believed to be a data error, it seemed perfectly acceptable to draw the time line
erroneously as well, to point attention to it.
The downside to this choice is that it is not possible to identify which contact the
requisitions actually belong to. However, by generating a report with Markdown
for the same patient, one can easily identify the correct contact for each of the
requisitions.
Forløb #357703
Fra 05-01-2016 08:00 til 05-01-2016 18:00
Kontakt #844869
Præambulant (henvist fra praktiserende læge)
KOE Kirurgisk Amb. (E0.D)
"Andre eller ikke specificerede mavesmerter" 
(DR104) 
Forløb #351337
Fra 20-01-2016 09:12 til 20-01-2016 11:12
Kontakt #966998
Indlæggelse (henvist fra praktiserende læge)
ROS Medicinsk Afd. (A0.0)
"Observation pga. mistanke om sygdom eller 
tilstand UNS" (DZ039) 
"Observation pga. mistanke om kræft" (DZ031) 
Forløb #782535
Fra 14-01-2016 08:59 til 14-01-2016 11:00
Kontakt #585923
Ambulant (henvist fra speciallæge)
KOE Klin.Fys.Nuclearmed. Afd. (E8.0)
"Kontakt mhp. anden generel undersøgelse" (DZ008) 
05-01-2016 08:00
start
Rekvisition #145746
05-01-2016 16:15
Rekvisition #209087
05-01-2016 16:15
Kræft i tyk- og endetarm: 
pakkeforløb slut, diagnose 
afkræftet (AFB12X1) 
Kræft i tyk- og endetarm: 
udredning start, første 
fremmøde (AFB12B) 
Koloskopi (KUJF32) 
komplet koloskopi (ZPY1A0) 
05-01-2016 18:00
slut
Udskrevet til 
praktiserende 
læge 
Rekvisition #1178002
08-01-2016 10:00
Diagnostisk pakkeforløb: 
henvisning til pakkeforløb 
start (AFA01A) 
Rekvisition #3354003
11-01-2016 14:46
14-01-2016 08:59
start
Rekvisition #4789605
14-01-2016 09:30
Diagnostisk pakkeforløb: 
udredning start, første 
fremmøde (AFA01B) 
14-01-2016 11:00
slut
Udskrevet til 
andet afsnit 
20-01-2016 09:12
start
Rekvisition #2955849
20-01-2016 10:00
Diagnostisk pakkeforløb slut, 
klinisk beslutning (AFA01X1) 
Rekvisition #325678
20-01-2016 11:08
20-01-2016 11:12
slut
Udskrevet til 
praktiserende 
læge 
Rekvisition #3635190
14-01-2016 09:00
PET-Tumorscanning, F-18-FDG 
(WDTPSFAXX) 
Billedfusionering (PET, SPECT, 
MRI, CT el. planar) 
(WDLBFXXXX) 
Figure 5.10
==PAGE:86==
74
Applications
==PAGE:87==
Chapter 6
Conclusion
This chapter will start by summarising the thesis.
It will then go through
each of the requirements specied in Section 2.4, detailing to what degree the
requirement has been met. Finally the proposals for further development, that
have been presented throughout the thesis will be used to present a possible
direction for the future development.
6.1
Summary
The thesis started by outlining the importance of improving the healthcare
system because it is expensive and lives depend on it.
Quality patient care
should not be compromised, which can be dicult when operating hospitals
under tight budgets.
These complications are made even worse by dierent
changes, such as a growing population and political engagements like the cancer
packages.
The rst part of the project concerned building a model, that represents the
data and the relations between data. The model was build by analysing the
data sets and clarifying ambiguities with Region Sjælland.
The focus of the thesis has rested on cancer patients, from two dierent perspec-
==PAGE:88==
76
Conclusion
tives. One being to generate a report to establish an overview of the treatments
the patient has gone through. The other being to analyse the consequences of
prioritising a patient group higher than others with regard to accessing shared
resources.
The report generation tool was developed to support the generation of two dif-
ferently formatted reports. One using Markdown syntax to present the patient
data in a hierarchical structure. The other using a graph generation tool, to
generate chronological reports.
The resource analysis tool was used to demonstrate how it can estimate min-
imum requirements with regard to the amount of resources. It was then used
for comparing dierent scheduling algorithms which showed that it is possible
to reduce the waiting time for priority patients at the cost of increasing the
waiting time for other patients. Finally it was used to analyse the consequences
of building up a waiting list.
6.2
Fullment of requirements
In section 2.4 the following requirements for the project were established:
1. Patient report generation
(1a) Give a structured overview of a patient's history.
(1b) Provide a chronological view of a patient's history.
(1c) Allow ltering of patient data, to exclude irrelevant information.
(1d) Allow highlighting of key features.
2. Resource analysis tool
(2a) Estimate necessary resource capacities.
(2b) Analyse inuence of prioritising patients.
(2c) Visualize results.
Requirement (1a) has certainly been fullled as the tool provides two dierent
ways to structure the patient history, that both include all relevant information.
That is courses, contacts, requisitions, and procedures are all included in both
report types.
==PAGE:89==
6.3 Future development
77
Requirement (1b) states tat the generated report must provide a chronological
overview. This was achieved through the second report type, which lists all of
the requisitions chronologically, while still maintaining the structure. However,
the structure may not always be held completely due to the design choice that
draws requisitions erroneously if they occur before their contact starts.
Requirement (1c) has not been implemented directly as lter functions are not
included in the signatures, and cannot be parsed directly to the report generation
function save. But since the Person is rst handed to the user, whom then
parses it on to the generator function, it is possible for the user to use any of
the build in F# functionalities, to modify the Person, before parsing it on. This
is true regardless of the report type that is being generated.
The nal requirement for the patient report generation, (1d), requires that key
features can be highlighted. This requirement has been met as multiple features
can be highlighted by applying dierent colour schemes.
The resource analysis tool, fulls requirement (2a) as the tool has been used to
estimate the amount of required CT scanners, under the given assumptions.
The second requirement for the analysis tool (2b), has also been met as the tool
has been used to compare three dierent scheduling algorithms.
Finally requirement (2c) has been met as the results from all the applications
presented of either of the tools, have included a visualization of the result.
6.3
Future development
If the report generation tool is to be further developed, the natural direction
would be to make some of the functionality a bit more user friendly. It is not
currently possible to specify what colours are used for the highlighting, nor
which features should be highlighted. It would therefore be a natural extension
to make these available for the user to specify.
It is also possible to look at the requisitions that are not included in a contact
because they happened before the contact started. It is possible to change the
way the reports are generated to ensure these requisitions are included in the
contact while they are still placed before the contact starts.
The natural extension of the analysis tool can go in multiple directions. With
regard to the scheduling algorithms, it would be interesting to compare them
==PAGE:90==
78
Conclusion
to the way an actual department handles scheduling. A dynamic scheduling
algorithm could also be implemented such that the amount of slots reserved for
priority patients is dependant on the current waiting list. This principle might
be used to secure that cancer patients are handled within the deadlines of the
cancer packages while still keeping the waiting list as short as possible.
The tool can also be improved to handle admitted patients and possibly cancel-
lations and patients that do not show up at the planned time. For now the tool
has also ignored that the resources can be restricted by geography. However
including this is a massive change.
For this project resources have only been as scans, so further development might
also propose a more complete model for hospital resources.
==PAGE:91==
Appendix A
Source Code for the Data
Model
1
namespace dk.dtu.Cancer
2
3
open
System
4
5
6
module
ModelHelper =
7
8
type
Status =
9
| Open
10
| Closed of DateTime
option
11
| Moved
12
13
type
Address = {
14
City: string
15
Zip: int option
16
Address: string
17
}
18
19
type
Management = {
20
Code: string
21
Parent: string
22
Mnemo: string
23
Status: Status
option
==PAGE:92==
80
Source Code for the Data Model
24
}
25
26
type
Department = {
27
SKSCode: string
28
Code: string
29
Parent: string
30
Status: Status
option
31
}
32
33
type
Section = {
34
OECode: string
35
Parent: string
36
Status: Status
option
37
}
38
39
type
UnitType =
40
| Area of string // String is code
41
| Management of Management
42
| SuperDepartment of Department
43
| Department of Department
44
| Section of Section
45
46
type
TreatmentCategory =
47
| Visit | NoVisit | OP | PhysOccu
48
| INDLPRO | ASSIS | OPB | GOP | AMBOP | Journal
49
| AN_ | Injury | SOCR_D | JOURNALUB
50
51
52
type
Referral =
53
| FromSpecialDoctor | FromPractice | NotReferred
54
| HV | PS | HF | UD | Other
55
56
type
Termination =
57
| ToOtherSection | ToPractice | ToSpecialDoctor
58
| AV | BS | BV | Dead | UB | G_ | UD | IL | Other
59
60
type
Priority = | P | A | F
61
62
type
Treatment = {
63
ReqUnit: string
64
PerfUnit: string
65
Category: TreatmentCategory
66
}
67
68
type
ContactType =
69
| Ambulant of Referral
70
| PreAmbulant of Referral
==PAGE:93==
81
71
| Injury
72
| Admission of Referral
73
74
type End = {
75
Termination: Termination
76
Time: DateTime
77
}
78
79
type
Contact = {
80
Id: int
81
CourseId: int
82
PersonId: int
83
Type: ContactType
84
MainSection: string
85
Start: DateTime
86
End: End option
87
Diagnoses: string seq
88
RequisitionIds : int seq
89
}
Listing A.1: ModelHelper.fs
1
namespace dk.dtu.Cancer
2
3
open
System
4
open
ModelHelper
5
6
7
module
Model =
8
9
type
Requisition = {
10
Id : int
11
Start : DateTime
12
Treatment : Treatment
option
13
Priority: Priority
option
14
Procedures : string seq
15
}
16
17
type
Contact = {
18
Id: int
19
Type: ContactType
20
MainSection: string
21
Start: DateTime
22
End: End option
23
Diagnoses: string seq
24
Requisitions: Requisition
seq
25
}
==PAGE:94==
82
Source Code for the Data Model
26
27
type
Course = {
28
Id: int
29
Contacts: Contact
seq
30
}
31
32
type
Person = {
33
Id: int
34
Courses: Course seq
35
}
36
37
type Unit = {
38
Name: string
39
Type: UnitType
40
Address: Address
41
Change: string
42
}
43
44
type
Units = Map <string , Unit >
45
type SKS = Map <string , string >
Listing A.2: Model.fs
==PAGE:95==
Appendix B
Source Code for Parsing
Data
1
namespace dk.dtu.Cancer
2
3
open
FSharp.Data
4
open
Model
5
open
ModelHelper
6
open
System
7
8
9
module
internal
ParserHelper =
10
11
let toDate (date:int64) = DateTime.ParseExact (string date
, "yyyyMMddHHmm", null)
12
let toDate ' (date:int) (time:int) = DateTime.ParseExact (
sprintf "%08i%04i" date time , "yyyyMMddHHmm", null)
13
let toDate '' = function
14
| ""
-> None
15
| date -> DateTime.ParseExact (date , "dd.MM.yy", null)
|> Some
16
17
let
getRefferal = function
18
| "HS" -> FromSpecialDoctor
19
| "PL" -> FromPractice
20
| "IH" -> NotReferred
==PAGE:96==
84
Source Code for Parsing Data
21
| "AN" -> Referral.Other
22
| "HV" -> HV
23
| "PS" -> PS
24
| "HF" -> HF
25
| "UD" -> Referral.UD
26
| ref
-> failwith
<| sprintf "Referral
cannot be
'%s'"
ref
27
28
let getEnd
date time : string
-> End option = function
29
| ""
-> None
30
| "AS" -> Some { Termination = ToOtherSection ; Time =
toDate ' date time }
31
| "PL" -> Some { Termination = ToPractice; Time = toDate
' date time }
32
| "PS" -> Some { Termination = ToSpecialDoctor ; Time =
toDate ' date time }
33
| "AV" -> Some { Termination = AV; Time = toDate ' date
time }
34
| "BS" -> Some { Termination = BS; Time = toDate ' date
time }
35
| "BV" -> Some { Termination = BV; Time = toDate ' date
time }
36
| "AN" -> Some { Termination = Other; Time = toDate '
date time }
37
| "DØ" -> Some { Termination = Dead; Time = toDate ' date
time }
38
| "UB" -> Some { Termination = UB; Time = toDate ' date
time }
39
| "GÅ" -> Some { Termination = G_; Time = toDate ' date
time }
40
| "UD" -> Some { Termination = UD; Time = toDate ' date
time }
41
| "IL" -> Some { Termination = IL; Time = toDate ' date
time }
42
| term -> failwith
<| sprintf "Termination
cannot be
'%s
'" term
43
44
let
getContactType
ref = function
45
| 'A' -> Ambulant
<| getRefferal
ref
46
| 'F' -> PreAmbulant
<| getRefferal
ref
47
| 'S' -> Injury
48
| 'I' -> Admission
<| getRefferal
ref
49
| typ -> failwith
<| sprintf "Contact
type
cannot be
'%c
'" typ
50
51
let
getTreatmentCategory = function
52
| ""
-> None
==PAGE:97==
85
53
| "BESØG"
-> Some
Visit
54
| "UDENBESØG" -> Some
NoVisit
55
| "OP"
-> Some OP
56
| "FYS/ERGO"
-> Some
PhysOccu
57
| "INDLPRO"
-> Some
INDLPRO
58
| "ASSIS"
-> Some
ASSIS
59
| "OPB"
-> Some OPB
60
| "GOP"
-> Some GOP
61
| "AMBOP"
-> Some
AMBOP
62
| "JOURNAL"
-> Some
Journal
63
| "ANÆ"
-> Some AN_
64
| "SKADE"
-> Some
TreatmentCategory .Injury
65
| "SOCRÅD"
-> Some
SOCR_D
66
| "JOURNALUB" -> Some
JOURNALUB
67
| category
-> failwith
<| sprintf "Treatment
category
cannot be
'%s'" category
68
69
let
getTreatment
reqUnit
perfUnit
cat =
70
match
getTreatmentCategory
cat with
71
| None -> None
72
| Some c -> Some { ReqUnit = reqUnit; PerfUnit =
perfUnit; Category = c }
73
74
let
getPriority = function
75
| ""
-> None
76
| "P" -> Some P
77
| "A" -> Some A
78
| "F" -> Some F
79
| p
-> failwith
<| sprintf "Requisition
priority
cannot be
'%s'" p
80
81
let SKS ' = CsvProvider <"../../ data/SKS.tsv", HasHeaders=
false >. GetSample ()
82
let procedures ' = CsvProvider <"../../ data/ydelse.csv",
Separators=";" >.GetSample ()
83
let requisitions ' = CsvProvider <"../../ data/rekv.csv",
Separators=";" >.GetSample ()
84
let diagnoses ' = CsvProvider <"../../ data/diagnoses.csv",
Separators=";" >.GetSample ()
85
let contacts ' = CsvProvider <"../../ data/contacts.csv",
Separators=";" >.GetSample ()
86
87
let
findOrEmpty
key map = Map.tryFind
key map |> (function
| Some ps -> ps | None -> Seq.empty)
88
89
let
parseData () =
90
==PAGE:98==
86
Source Code for Parsing Data
91
let
makeRequisition (row:CsvProvider <"../../ data/rekv.
csv", Separators=";" >.Row) procs =
92
{
93
Id = row.RekvID
94
Start = toDate ' row.Xreqfrdat
row.Xreqfrklk
95
Treatment = getTreatment (row.Xrequnit.Trim ()) (row.
Xservunit.Trim ()) ""
96
Priority = getPriority
row.Xreqprio
97
Procedures = findOrEmpty
row.RekvID
procs
98
}
99
100
let
makeContact
reqs (diags : Map <int , string seq >) (row
:CsvProvider <"../../ data/contacts.csv", Separators=";
" >.Row) =
101
{
102
Id = row.KontaktID
103
Type = getContactType
row.Xhenvmade (row.Konttype |>
Seq.head)
104
MainSection = row.Stamafd
105
Start = toDate ' row.Inddato
row.Indklok
106
End = getEnd row.Xuddato
row.Xudklok
row.Xafslmade
107
Diagnoses = match Map.tryFind
row.KontaktID
diags
with | Some d -> d | None -> failwith (string row
.KontaktID)
108
Requisitions = findOrEmpty
row.KontaktID
reqs
109
},
110
row.ForlobID ,
111
row.PatientID
112
113
let
makePerson (id , contacts) =
114
let
courses =
115
contacts
116
|> Seq.groupBy (fun (_, course , _) -> course)
117
|> Seq.map (fun (course , contacts) -> course ,
contacts |> Seq.map (fun (contact , _, _) ->
contact))
118
|> Seq.map (fun (course , contact) -> { Id = course;
Contacts = contact })
119
id ,
120
{
121
Id = id
122
Courses = courses
123
}
124
125
let
procedures =
126
procedures '. Rows
127
|> Seq.groupBy (fun row -> row.RekvID)
==PAGE:99==
87
128
|> Seq.map (fun (id , proc) -> id , proc |> Seq.map (fun
x -> x.Prockode.Trim ()))
129
|> Map.ofSeq
130
131
let
requisitions =
132
requisitions '. Rows
133
|> Seq.map (fun row -> row.KontaktID , makeRequisition
row
procedures)
134
|> Seq.groupBy
fst
135
|> Seq.map (fun (contact , reqs) -> contact , reqs |>
Seq.map snd)
136
|> Map.ofSeq
137
138
let diags =
139
diagnoses '. Rows
140
|> Seq.map (fun row -> row.ContactId , row.Diagnosis)
141
|> Seq.groupBy
fst
142
|> Seq.map (fun (id , diags) -> id , diags |> Seq.map
snd)
143
|> Map.ofSeq
144
145
let
persons =
146
contacts '. Rows
147
|> Seq.map (makeContact
requisitions
diags)
148
|> Seq.groupBy (fun (_, _, person) -> person)
149
|> Seq.map
makePerson
150
|> Map.ofSeq
151
152
let SKS =
153
SKS '. Rows
154
|> Seq.map (fun row -> (row.Column1 , row.Column2))
155
|> Seq.filter (fst >> String. IsNullOrEmpty
>> not)
156
|> Map.ofSeq
157
158
persons ,
159
SKS
160
161
let
parseUnits () =
162
163
let units ' = CsvProvider <"../../ data/koder_all.tsv" >.
GetSample ()
164
165
let
nullableToOption (var : Nullable <'a>) =
166
if var.HasValue
167
then Some var.Value
168
else None
169
==PAGE:100==
88
Source Code for Parsing Data
170
let
makeStatus
date = function
171
| 'Å' -> Open |> Some
172
| 'L' -> date |> toDate '' |> Closed |> Some
173
| 'F' -> Moved |> Some
174
| 'X' -> None
175
| x
-> failwith
<| sprintf "Open/closed/moved
cannot
be
'%c'" x
176
177
//
let
makeArea (row : CsvProvider <"../../../ data/
koder_all.tsv">.Row) : Area =
178
//
row.Navn ,
179
//
row.``Beh.Ansvar ``,
180
//
(row.Adresse , nullableToOption
row.Postnummer , row.
By),
181
//
row.Æ ndringsbeskrivelse
182
183
let
makeManagement (row : CsvProvider <"../../ data/
koder_all.tsv" >.Row) : Management =
184
{
185
Code = row.``Beh.Ansvar ``
186
Parent = row.``Hierarki mor ``
187
Mnemo = row.``Kontaktansvar
Mnemokode
afsnit/
Rekvirent/producent ``
188
Status = makeStatus
row.``Lukket
dato/ Passiv fra ``
(row.``Åben/Lukket/Flyttet/`` |> Seq.head)
189
}
190
191
let
makeDepartment (row : CsvProvider <"../../ data/
koder_all.tsv" >.Row) : Department =
192
{
193
SKSCode = row.``SKS -Kode(OFF)``
194
Code = row.``Beh.Ansvar ``
195
Parent = row.``Hierarki mor ``
196
Status = makeStatus
row.``Lukket
dato/ Passiv fra ``
(row.``Åben/Lukket/Flyttet/`` |> Seq.head)
197
}
198
199
let
makeSection (row : CsvProvider <"../../ data/koder_all
.tsv" >.Row) : Section =
200
{
201
OECode = row.``OE -kode afsnit ``
202
Parent = row.``Hierarki mor ``
203
Status = makeStatus
row.``Lukket
dato/ Passiv fra ``
(row.``Åben/Lukket/Flyttet/`` |> Seq.head)
204
}
205
==PAGE:101==
89
206
let
makeUnit (row : CsvProvider <"../../ data/koder_all.
tsv" >.Row) =
207
let uType =
208
match row.``OE -kode afsnit `` |> String. IsNullOrEmpty
with
209
| false
-> row |> makeSection |> Section
210
| true
->
211
match row.Enhedstype
with
212
| "Sygehusområde"
-> Area row.``Beh.Ansvar ``
213
| "Ledelse"
-> row |> makeManagement |>
Management
214
| "Overafd."
-> row |> makeDepartment |>
SuperDepartment
215
| _
-> row |> makeDepartment |>
Department
216
{
217
Name = row.Navn
218
Type = uType
219
Address = { Address = row.Adresse; Zip =
nullableToOption
row.Postnummer; City = row.By }
220
Change = row.Æ ndringsbeskrivelse
221
}
222
223
let
makeMap (unit : Unit) =
224
match
unit.Type with
225
| Area code
-> code , unit
226
| Management m
-> m.Mnemo , unit
227
| SuperDepartment d
228
| Department d
-> d.Code , unit
229
| Section s
-> s.OECode , unit
230
231
232
let isUnit (row : CsvProvider <"../../ data/koder_all.tsv"
>.Row) =
233
match row.Enhedstype
with
234
| "Sygehuskode"
235
| "Geografi"
236
| "" -> false
237
| _
-> true
238
239
units '. Rows
240
|> Seq.filter
isUnit
241
|> Seq.map
makeUnit
242
|> Seq.map
makeMap
243
|> Map.ofSeq
Listing B.1: ParserHelper.fs
==PAGE:102==
90
Source Code for Parsing Data
1
namespace dk.dtu.Cancer
2
3
open
ModelHelper
4
open
Model
5
6
7
module
Parser =
8
9
type
Cache =
10
class
11
new: unit -> Cache
12
member
getPerson: int -> Person
13
member
getPersons: unit -> Map <int ,Person >
14
member
getSKS: unit -> SKS
15
member
getUnits: unit -> Units
16
end
Listing B.2: Parser.fsi
1
namespace dk.dtu.Cancer
2
3
open
ParserHelper
4
5
6
module
Parser =
7
8
type
Cache () =
9
let persons , sks = parseData ()
10
let units = parseUnits ()
11
12
member
____.getPerson id = persons .[id]
13
member
____.getSKS () = sks
14
member
____.getUnits () = units
15
member
____.getPersons () = persons
Listing B.3: Parser.fs
==PAGE:103==
Appendix C
Source Code for Parsing
Data from Data Set III
1
namespace dk.dtu.Cancer
2
3
open
Model
4
5
6
module
ParserPseudo =
7
8
val
getRequisitions : unit -> Requisition
seq
Listing C.1: ParserPseudo.fsi
1
namespace dk.dtu.Cancer
2
3
4
open
FSharp.Data
5
6
open
Model
7
open
ParserHelper
8
9
10
module
ParserPseudo =
11
==PAGE:104==
92
Source Code for Parsing Data from Data Set III
12
let procedures ' = CsvProvider <"../../ data/ ydelse_pseudo .
csv", Separators=";" >.GetSample ()
13
let requisitions ' = CsvProvider <"../../ data/rekv_pseudo.
csv", Separators=";" >.GetSample ()
14
15
let
procedures =
16
procedures '. Rows
17
|> Seq.groupBy (fun row -> row.RekvID)
18
|> Seq.map (fun (id , proc) -> id , proc |> Seq.map (fun x
-> x.Prockode.Trim ()))
19
|> Map.ofSeq
20
21
let
makeRequisition (row:CsvProvider <"../../ data/
rekv_pseudo.csv", Separators=";" >.Row) =
22
{
23
Id = row.RekvID
24
Start = toDate ' row.Xreqfrdat
row.Xreqfrklk
25
Treatment = getTreatment (row.Xrequnit.Trim ()) (row.
Xservunit.Trim ()) ""
26
Priority = getPriority
row.Xreqprio
27
Procedures = findOrEmpty
row.RekvID
procedures
28
}
29
30
let
getRequisitions () =
31
requisitions '. Rows
32
|> Seq.map (fun row -> makeRequisition
row)
Listing C.2: ParserPseudo.fs
==PAGE:105==
Appendix D
Source Code for Cancer
Codes
1
namespace dk.dtu.Cancer
2
3
module
Codes =
4
5
let scans =
6
[
7
"WC1PSG4XX"; "WDGPSFAXX"; "WDGPWFAXX"; "WDIGS34XX";
8
"WDIPSFAXX"; "WDLPSFAXX"; "WDTCPXYXX"; "WDTPSC1XX";
9
"WDTPSC2XX"; "WDTPSCUXX"; "WDTPSFAXX"; "WDTPSFCXX";
10
"WDTPSFFXX"; "WDTPSFGXX"; "WDTPSFHXX"; "WDTPSG1XX";
11
"WDTPSG2XX"; "WDTPSG3XX"; "WDTPSG4XX"; "WDTPSXYXX";
12
"WDTPSG5XX"; "WDTPSY4PB"; "WGZGS42XX"; "ZSFA2"; "ZSFA3"
13
]
14
15
let
cancerPrefixes =
16
[
17
2, [ "DC" ]
18
3, [ "ZPP" ]
19
4, [ "DZ08"; "DZ12"; "DZ80"; "DZ85"; "KHAF"; "ZPY1" ; "
ZWCM"]
20
5, [ "AFX02"; "DZ031"; "DZ400"; "DZ926" ]
21
6, [ "DZ018A"; "DZ718A" ]
22
7, [ "DZ848A2" ]
==PAGE:106==
94
Source Code for Cancer Codes
23
8, [ "DZ842A1A" ]
24
9, []
25
10, []
26
] |> Map.ofList
27
28
let
procIsCancer (p : string) = p.Substring (0, 3) = "AFB"
29
30
let
diagIsCancer
diag =
31
(seq [2..( String.length
diag)])
32
|> Seq.exists (fun n -> Seq.contains (diag.Substring (0,n
)) cancerPrefixes .[n])
Listing D.1: Codes.fs
==PAGE:107==
Appendix E
Source Code for Generation
of Formatted Strings
1
namespace dk.dtu.Cancer
2
3
open
System
4
open
ModelHelper
5
open
Model
6
open
Codes
7
8
9
module
DisplayHelper =
10
11
let
ContactTitleTextWidth = 50
12
13
let indent i = String.replicate (4 * i) " "
14
let
timeToString (t : System.DateTime) = t.ToString "dd/MM
/yyyy HH:mm"
15
16
//
let
findOrEmpty
key map = Map.tryFind
key map |> (
function | Some ps -> ps | None -> "")
17
18
let
formatWordWrapped (maxWidth : int) (lineBreaker :
string) (text : string) =
19
let
formatWord (acc , count) word =
==PAGE:108==
96
Source Code for Generation of Formatted Strings
20
let len = String.length
word
21
if count + len > maxWidth
22
then (acc + lineBreaker + word + " ", len + 1)
23
else (acc + word + " ", count + len + 1)
24
let tokens : string
array = text.Split [|'
'|]
25
fst
<| Array.fold
formatWord ("", 0) tokens
26
27
let format
level =
28
Seq.map (sprintf "%s%s;\n" (indent
level))
29
>> String.concat ""
30
31
let
referralToString = function
32
| FromSpecialDoctor
-> " (henvist
fra
speciallæge)"
33
| FromPractice
-> " (henvist
fra
praktiserende læge
)"
34
| NotReferred
-> " (uden
henvisning)"
35
| Referral.Other
-> " (anden
henvisningstype )"
36
| HV
-> " ( henvisningstype HV)"
37
| PS
-> " ( henvisningstype PS)"
38
| HF
-> " ( henvisningstype HF)"
39
| Referral.UD
-> " ( henvisningstype UD)"
40
41
let
contactTypeToString = function
42
| Ambulant
ref
-> "Ambulant" + referralToString
ref
43
| PreAmbulant
ref -> "Præambulant" + referralToString
ref
44
| Injury
-> "Skade"
45
| Admission
ref
-> "Indlæggelse" + referralToString
ref
46
47
let
terminationToString = function
48
| ToOtherSection
-> "Udskrevet
til andet
afsnit"
49
| ToPractice
-> "Udskrevet
til
praktiserende læge"
50
| ToSpecialDoctor
-> "Udskrevet
til
speciallæge"
51
| AV
-> "Udskrevet
med koden AV"
52
| BS
-> "Udskrevet
med koden BS"
53
| BV
-> "Udskrevet
med koden BV"
54
| Other
-> "Udskrevet
med anden
afslutningskode "
55
| Dead
-> "Udskrevet
med koden DØ"
56
| UB
-> "Udskrevet
med koden UB"
57
| G_
-> "Udskrevet
med koden GÅ"
58
| Termination.UD
-> "Udskrevet
med koden UD"
59
| IL
-> "Udskrevet
med koden IL"
60
61
let
treatmentCategoryToString = function
62
| Visit
-> "Besøg"
==PAGE:109==
97
63
| NoVisit
-> "Uden besøg"
64
| OP
-> "op"
65
| PhysOccu
-> "Fys/ergo"
66
| INDLPRO
-> "Indlpro"
67
| ASSIS
-> "assis"
68
| OPB
-> "opb"
69
| GOP
-> "gop"
70
| AMBOP
-> "ambop"
71
| Journal
-> "Journal"
72
| AN_
-> "anæ"
73
| TreatmentCategory .Injury
-> "Skade"
74
| SOCR_D
-> "socråd"
75
| JOURNALUB
-> "journalub"
76
77
let
sksToDescription (sks : SKS) code =
78
let diag = match Map.tryFind
code sks with | None -> "
_ukendt
procedure_" | Some s -> s
79
sprintf """%s (%s)""" diag code
80
let
sksToDescriptionInQuotes (sks : SKS) code =
81
let diag = match Map.tryFind
code sks with | None -> "
_ukendt
procedure_" | Some s -> s
82
sprintf """"%s" (%s)""" diag code
83
let
diagToDescription (sks : SKS) code =
84
let desc = code |> sksToDescriptionInQuotes
sks |>
formatWordWrapped
ContactTitleTextWidth "<BR/>"
85
if diagIsCancer
code
86
then
sprintf """<FONT
color="red" >%s</FONT >""" desc
87
else desc
88
89
let
sksToDescriptionInEscapedQuotes (sks : SKS) (code:
string) =
90
let diag = match Map.tryFind (code.Trim ()) sks with |
None -> "_ukendt
diagnose_" | Some s -> s
91
sprintf """\"%s\" (%s)""" diag code
92
93
let
departmentToDescription (units : Units) id =
94
let name =
95
match Map.tryFind id units
with
96
| None
-> "_ukendt
enhed_"
97
| Some sec -> sec.Name
98
sprintf "%s (%s)" name id
99
100
let
maxOrNone e1 e2 =
101
match e1 , e2 with
102
| None , _ -> None
103
| _, None -> None
104
| Some e1 ', Some e2 ' -> max e1 ' e2 ' |> Some
==PAGE:110==
98
Source Code for Generation of Formatted Strings
105
106
let
getStart =
107
(fun c -> c.Contacts)
108
>> Seq.map (fun c -> c.Start)
109
>> Seq.min
110
111
let getEnd =
112
(fun c -> c.Contacts)
113
>> Seq.map (fun c -> match c.End with | None -> None |
Some e -> Some e.Time)
114
>> Seq.reduce
maxOrNone
115
116
let
courseDuration (course : Course) =
117
let start = course |> getStart |> timeToString
118
let end ' =
119
course
120
|> getEnd
121
|> (function | None -> "" | Some t -> " til " +
timeToString t)
122
start + end '
123
124
let
duration
start end ' =
125
let s = "Fra " + timeToString
start
126
match end ' with
127
| None
-> s
128
| Some e -> s + " til " + timeToString e
129
130
let
mutable
nodeId ' = 0
131
let
uniqueDummyId () =
132
let thisId = nodeId '
133
nodeId ' <- nodeId ' + 1
134
"dum" + string
thisId
135
136
// The order is important; as it is used to sort by
137
// Datatypes
used to store
information
during
timeline
creation
138
type
CourseStartEvent = {
139
Time: DateTime
140
Id: int
141
EndTime: DateTime
option
142
}
143
type
CourseEndEvent = {
144
Time: DateTime
145
Id: int
146
}
147
type
ContactStartEvent = {
148
Time: DateTime
==PAGE:111==
99
149
Course: int
150
Id: int
151
Type: ContactType
152
MainSection: string
153
Diagnoses: string
list
154
HasCancer: bool
155
}
156
type
ContactEndEvent = {
157
Course: int
158
Id: int
159
End: End option
160
}
161
type
RequisitionEvent = {
162
Time: DateTime
163
Course: int
164
Contact: int
165
Id: int
166
Treatment: Treatment
option
167
Priority: Priority
option
168
HasCancer: bool
169
Procs: string
list
170
}
171
type
DummyEvent = {
172
Course: int
173
Id: string
174
}
175
176
// The order is important as it is used for
sorting
177
type
Event =
178
| CourseStart
of CourseStartEvent
179
| ContactStart
of ContactStartEvent
180
| Requisition
of RequisitionEvent
181
| ContactEnd
of ContactEndEvent
182
| CourseEnd
of CourseEndEvent
183
| DummyEvent
of DummyEvent
184
185
let
courseId = function
186
| CourseStart e
-> e.Id
187
| CourseEnd e
-> e.Id
188
| ContactStart e -> e.Course
189
| ContactEnd e
-> e.Course
190
| Requisition e
-> e.Course
191
| DummyEvent e
-> e.Course
192
193
let
eventOfRequisition
couId
conId (req: Requisition) =
194
let
hasCancer = req.Procedures |> Seq.exists
procIsCancer
==PAGE:112==
100
Source Code for Generation of Formatted Strings
195
req.Start ,
196
{
197
Time = req.Start
198
Course = couId
199
Contact = conId
200
Id = req.Id
201
Treatment = req.Treatment
202
Priority = req.Priority
203
HasCancer = hasCancer
204
Procs = Seq.toList req.Procedures // Lists are
comparable if the
elements
are. Seqs are not.
205
} //|> Requisition
206
207
let
eventsOfContact
couId (con : Contact) =
208
let
reqEvents =
209
con.Requisitions
210
|> Seq.map ( eventOfRequisition
couId con.Id)
211
let
hasCancer =
212
reqEvents |> Seq.exists (fun (_,r) -> r.HasCancer)
213
|| con.Diagnoses |> Seq.exists (fun d -> diagIsCancer
d)
214
let start =
215
con.Start ,
216
{
217
Time = con.Start
218
Course = couId
219
Id = con.Id
220
Type = con.Type
221
MainSection = con.MainSection
222
Diagnoses = con.Diagnoses |> Seq.toList
223
HasCancer = hasCancer
224
} |> ContactStart
225
let end ' =
226
match con.End with
227
| None -> DateTime.MaxValue , ContactEnd {Course =
couId; Id = con.Id; End = con.End}
228
| Some e -> e.Time , ContactEnd {Course = couId; Id =
con.Id; End = con.End}
229
reqEvents
230
|> Seq.map (fun (d, r) -> d, Requisition r)
231
|> Seq.append [start; end ']
232
233
let
eventsOfCourse (course : Course) =
234
let time = getStart
course
235
let start =
236
{
237
CourseStartEvent .Time = time
==PAGE:113==
101
238
Id = course.Id
239
EndTime = None
240
}
241
let
endPoints =
242
match
getEnd
course
with
243
| None -> [time , CourseStart
start]
244
| Some e -> [time , CourseStart {start
with
EndTime =
Some e}; e, CourseEnd {Time = e; Id = course.Id}]
245
course.Contacts
246
|> Seq.collect ( eventsOfContact
course.Id)
247
|> Seq.append
endPoints
248
249
let
personToEvents (person : Person) =
250
person.Courses
251
|> Seq.collect
eventsOfCourse
252
|> Seq.sort
253
|> Seq.map snd
Listing E.1: DisplayHelper.fs
1
namespace dk.dtu.Cancer
2
3
open
ModelHelper
4
open
Model
5
6
7
module
Display =
8
9
val
personToString : Person
-> SKS -> Units
-> string
10
val
personToTimeline : Person
-> SKS -> Units
-> string
Listing E.2: Display.fsi
1
namespace dk.dtu.Cancer
2
3
open
ModelHelper
4
open
Model
5
open
Codes
6
open
DisplayHelper
7
8
9
module
Display =
10
11
let
NodeTextWidth = 30
12
13
// List
representation
==PAGE:114==
102
Source Code for Generation of Formatted Strings
14
let
requisitionToString
depth (sks : SKS) (units : Units)
(req : Requisition) =
15
let msg =
16
match req.Treatment
with
17
| None -> System.String.Empty
18
| Some t ->
19
let pUnit = departmentToDescription
units t.PerfUnit
20
let rUnit = departmentToDescription
units t.ReqUnit
21
sprintf """ udført af %s på vegne af %s i kategorien
"%s".""" pUnit
rUnit ( treatmentCategoryToString
t.Category)
22
23
req.Procedures
24
|> Seq.map ( sksToDescription
sks)
25
|> Seq.map ((+) ("\n" + indent
depth + "* "))
26
|> String.concat ""
27
|> sprintf "Rekvisition #%i: %s%s%s" req.Id (
timeToString
req.Start) msg
28
29
let
contactToString
depth (sks : SKS) (units : Units) (
contact : Contact) =
30
let (endTime , termination) =
31
match
contact.End with
32
| None -> " og endnu
ikke
afsluttet", ""
33
| Some e -> sprintf " til %s" (timeToString e.Time),
sprintf " %s." ( terminationToString e.Termination)
34
35
let header =
36
sprintf """%s1. ** Kontakt #%s**: %s hos %s fra %s%s,
med %s.%s"""
37
(indent
depth)
38
(string
contact.Id)
39
( contactTypeToString
contact.Type)
40
( departmentToDescription
units
contact.MainSection)
41
(timeToString
contact.Start)
42
endTime
43
(contact.Diagnoses |> Seq.map (
sksToDescriptionInQuotes
sks) |> String.concat ",
")
44
(termination)
45
46
let
stringReqs =
47
contact.Requisitions
48
|> Seq.sortBy (fun req -> req.Start)
49
|> Seq.map ( requisitionToString (depth + 1) sks units)
50
|> Seq.map ((+) (indent
depth + "1. "))
51
==PAGE:115==
103
52
sprintf "%s\n\n%s" header (String.concat "\n\n"
stringReqs)
53
54
let
courseToString
depth sks units
course =
55
course.Contacts
56
|> Seq.sortBy (fun c -> c.Start)
57
|> Seq.map ( contactToString (depth + 1) sks units)
58
|> String.concat "\n\n"
59
|> sprintf "1. ** Forløb #%s**: Fra %s\n\n%s" (string
course.Id) (courseDuration
course)
60
61
let
personToString (person : Person) sks units =
62
person.Courses
63
|> Seq.sortBy
getStart
64
|> Seq.map ( courseToString 1 sks units)
65
|> String.concat "\n"
66
|> sprintf "# Person #%i\n\n%s" person.Id
67
68
// Timeline
69
70
let
courseText (course : CourseStartEvent ) =
71
let
properties = [
72
"fontsize =28"
73
sprintf "label =\" Forløb #%i\\n%s\"" course.Id (
duration
course.Time
course.EndTime)
74
"color=grey50"
75
"style=filled"
76
"fillcolor=grey95"
77
]
78
sprintf "%ssubgraph
clustercou%i {\n%s" (indent 1)
course.Id (format 2 properties)
79
80
81
let
contactLabelText (contact : ContactStartEvent ) (sks :
SKS) (units : Units) =
82
let cancer = if contact.HasCancer
then " color =\" red\""
else ""
83
sprintf "<FONT%s>Kontakt #%i</FONT ><BR/>%s<BR/>%s<BR/>%s
<BR/>"
84
cancer
contact.Id
85
( contactTypeToString
contact.Type)
86
( departmentToDescription
units
contact.MainSection)
87
(( contact.Diagnoses |> Seq.map ( diagToDescription
sks)
|> String.concat "<BR/>"))
88
89
let
contactStartText (contact : ContactStartEvent ) (sks :
SKS) (units : Units) =
==PAGE:116==
104
Source Code for Generation of Formatted Strings
90
let conId = "clusterCon" + string
contact.Id
91
let
colorText =
92
match
contact.Type with
93
| Ambulant _
-> "\"#80 d4ff \"" // Blue
94
| PreAmbulant _ -> "\"#80 ffff \"" // Light
blue
95
| Injury
-> "\"# ff8080 \"" //Red
96
| Admission _
-> "\"# ffff80 \"" // Yellow
97
let
properties = [
98
sprintf "node [group =%s]" conId
99
"color=gray10"
100
sprintf "label=<%s>" ( contactLabelText
contact
sks
units)
101
"style=filled"
102
"fillcolor=" + colorText
103
sprintf "start%i [label =\"%s\\ nstart \", shape=Msquare]
" (contact.Id) (timeToString
contact.Time)
104
]
105
sprintf "%ssubgraph %s {\n%s" (indent 2) conId (format 3
properties)
106
107
108
let
contactEndText (contact : ContactEndEvent ) ids =
109
let ids ' =
110
ids
111
|> List.skipWhile (fun id -> id <> "start" + string
contact.Id)
112
|> List.takeWhile (fun id -> id <> "end" + string
contact.Id)
113
|> String.concat " -> "
114
let cEnd = sprintf "%sedge [style=invis ];\n%s%s\n
};\n" (indent 3) (indent 3)
115
match
contact.End with
116
| None -> cEnd ids '
117
| Some e -> sprintf "%send%i [label =\"%s\\ nslut \\n%s\",
shape=Msquare ];\n%s"
118
(indent 3) (contact.Id) (timeToString e.
Time)
119
( formatWordWrapped 16 "\\n" (
terminationToString e.Termination))
120
(cEnd (ids ' + " -> end" + string
contact.
Id))
121
122
123
let
requisitionText (units : Units) (req :
RequisitionEvent ) =
124
let
treatment =
125
match req.Treatment
with
==PAGE:117==
105
126
| None -> System.String.Empty
127
| Some t ->
128
sprintf "Kategori: %s<BR/>%s<BR/>%s" (
treatmentCategoryToString t.Category)
129
( formatWordWrapped
NodeTextWidth "<BR/>" ("Fra: "
+ departmentToDescription
units t.ReqUnit))
130
( formatWordWrapped
NodeTextWidth "<BR/>" ("Til: "
+ departmentToDescription
units t.PerfUnit))
131
let cancer = if req.HasCancer
then " color =\" red\"" else
""
132
sprintf "<FONT%s>Rekvisition #%i</FONT ><BR/>%s<BR/>%s"
cancer req.Id (timeToString
req.Time) treatment
133
134
let
procText
sks proc =
135
let
description =
136
proc
137
|> sksToDescription
sks
138
|> formatWordWrapped
NodeTextWidth "<BR ALIGN =\" LEFT
\"/>"
139
if procIsCancer
proc
140
then "<FONT
color =\" red\">"+ description + " </FONT >"
141
else
description
142
143
let
reqColor = function
144
| Some P -> "style=filled , fillcolor=grey80 , "
145
| Some A -> "style=filled , fillcolor=grey40 , "
146
| Some F -> "style=filled , fillcolor=pink , "
147
| None
-> ""
148
149
let
requisitionNode (sks : SKS) (units : Units) (req :
RequisitionEvent ) =
150
let
formatted =
151
req.Procs
152
|> Seq.map (procText
sks)
153
//
|> Seq.map ( formatWordWrapped
NodeTextWidth "<BR
ALIGN =\" LEFT \"/ >")
154
sprintf "%sreq%i [shape=box , %slabel =<%s<BR/><BR/>%s<BR
ALIGN =\" LEFT \"/ > >];\n"
155
(indent 3) req.Id (reqColor
req.Priority) (
requisitionText
units req)
156
(String.concat "<BR ALIGN =\" LEFT\"/><BR ALIGN =\" LEFT
\"/>" formatted)
157
158
159
let
eventToString
sks units ids event acc =
160
match
event
with
161
| CourseStart e
-> courseText e + acc
==PAGE:118==
106
Source Code for Generation of Formatted Strings
162
| CourseEnd _
-> acc
163
| ContactStart e -> contactStartText e sks units + acc
164
| ContactEnd e
-> contactEndText e ids + acc
165
| Requisition e
-> requisitionNode
sks units e + acc
166
| DummyEvent e
-> indent 3 + e.Id + " [style=invis ];\n
"+ acc
167
168
169
let
addDummy id =
170
List.choose
171
(fun id ' -> if id = id ' then None else {Course = id ';
Id = uniqueDummyId ()} |> DummyEvent |> Some)
172
173
174
let
addDummyEvents
onGoing
event =
175
match
event
with
176
| CourseStart e
-> [event], e.Id:: onGoing
177
| CourseEnd e
-> [event], List.filter ((<>) e.Id)
onGoing
178
| ContactStart e -> event :: addDummy e.Course
onGoing ,
onGoing
179
| ContactEnd e when e.End.IsNone
-> [event], onGoing
180
| ContactEnd e
-> event :: addDummy e.Course
onGoing ,
onGoing
181
| Requisition e
-> event :: addDummy e.Course
onGoing ,
onGoing
182
| DummyEvent _
-> failwith "There
should not be any
dummyevents at this
point!"
183
184
185
// Makes
unique ids for
entities
which
needs
them in Dot
186
let
eventToId
event =
187
match
event
with
188
| CourseStart _
189
| CourseEnd _
-> None
190
| ContactStart e -> "start" + string e.Id |> Some
191
| ContactEnd e
-> match e.End with | None -> None |
Some _ -> "end" + string e.Id |> Some
192
| Requisition e
-> "req" + string e.Id |> Some
193
| DummyEvent e
-> e.Id |> Some
194
195
196
let
eventsToString
sks units
events =
197
let ids = List.choose
eventToId
events
198
List.foldBack (eventToString
sks units ids) events ""
199
200
==PAGE:119==
107
201
let
makeGraph
events id text =
202
List.choose
eventToId
events
203
|> String.concat " -> "
204
|> sprintf "digraph
per%i {\n%srankdir=LR;\n%snode [
style=filled , fillcolor=white ];\n%snewrank=true ;\n%s%
s};\n%s%s\n}"
205
id (indent 1) (indent 1) (indent 1) text (indent 1)
(indent 1)
206
207
208
let
personToTimeline (person : Person) (sks : SKS) (units
: Units) =
209
let events =
210
person
211
|> personToEvents
212
|> Seq.toList
213
events
214
|> List.mapFold
addDummyEvents []
215
|> fst
216
|> List.collect id // Appends
all the lists
217
|> List.groupBy
courseId
218
|> List.map (snd >> eventsToString
sks units)
219
|> String.concat "
};\n"
220
|> makeGraph
events
person.Id
Listing E.3: Display.fs
==PAGE:120==
108
Source Code for Generation of Formatted Strings
==PAGE:121==
Appendix F
Source Code for Report
Generation
1
namespace dk.dtu.Cancer
2
3
open
ModelHelper
4
open
Model
5
6
7
module
Visualizer =
8
9
type
Format =
10
| Pdf
11
| Png
12
| Txt
13
| GraphViz
14
| Dot
15
| MarkDown
16
17
val save: Person
-> path:string
-> Format
list -> SKS ->
Units
-> bool
Listing F.1: Visualizer.fsi
==PAGE:122==
110
Source Code for Report Generation
1
namespace dk.dtu.Cancer
2
3
open
Display
4
5
6
module
Visualizer =
7
open
System.IO
8
9
type
Format =
10
| Pdf
11
| Png
12
| Txt
13
| GraphViz
14
| Dot
15
| MarkDown
16
17
let
toDotType = function
18
| Pdf -> "pdf"
19
| Png -> "png"
20
| Txt -> "plain"
21
| _
-> failwith "Format not
supported by GraphViz"
22
23
let
toExtension = function
24
| Pdf
-> ".pdf"
25
| Png
-> ".png"
26
| Txt
-> ".txt"
27
| GraphViz
-> ".gv"
28
| Dot
-> ".dot"
29
| MarkDown
-> ".md"
30
31
32
let
toParam id path
format =
33
let
dotType = format |> toDotType
34
let ext = format |> toExtension
35
sprintf "-T%s -o %s%i%s" dotType
path id ext
36
37
38
let
toByteArray (sr : StreamReader ) =
39
use ms = new
MemoryStream ()
40
sr.BaseStream.CopyTo(ms)
41
ms.ToArray ()
42
43
44
let
getStartInfo id path
formats =
45
let
parameters =
46
formats
47
|> Seq.distinct
==PAGE:123==
111
48
|> Seq.map (toParam id path)
49
|> String.concat " "
50
new System.Diagnostics. ProcessStartInfo
51
("dot", parameters ,
52
UseShellExecute = false ,
53
RedirectStandardOutput = true ,
54
RedirectStandardError = true ,
55
RedirectStandardInput = true)
56
57
58
let
saveText id path text
format =
59
let
fileName = (string id) + toExtension
format
60
File. WriteAllText (path + fileName , text)
61
true
62
63
64
let
callGraphViz id path
dotFormats
timeline =
65
let p = new System.Diagnostics.Process ()
66
p.StartInfo
<- getStartInfo id path
dotFormats
67
match p.Start () with
68
| false
-> false
69
| true ->
70
p. StandardInput.Write(" " + timeline)
71
p. StandardInput.Close ()
72
p.Close ()
73
true
74
75
76
let
saveTimeline
person
path
formats
sks units =
77
let
timeline = personToTimeline
person sks units
78
let (dotFormats , textFormats) =
79
formats
80
|> List.partition
81
(function | Pdf | Png | Txt -> true
82
| GraphViz | Dot | _ -> false)
83
84
let result =
85
match
dotFormats
with
86
| [] -> true
87
| _ -> callGraphViz
person.Id path
dotFormats
timeline
88
let result ' =
89
textFormats
90
|> List.forall (saveText
person.Id path
timeline)
91
92
result && result '
93
94
==PAGE:124==
112
Source Code for Report Generation
95
let
saveHierarchy
person
path
formats
sks units =
96
let text = personToString
person sks units
97
formats
98
|> List.forall (saveText
person.Id path text)
99
100
101
let save
person
path
formats
sks units =
102
let (timeline , hierarchy) =
103
formats
104
|> List.distinct
105
|> List.partition
106
(function | Pdf | Png | Txt | GraphViz | Dot -> true
107
| MarkDown
-> false)
108
109
let result =
110
match
hierarchy
with
111
| [] -> true
112
| _
-> saveHierarchy
person
path
hierarchy
sks units
113
let result ' =
114
match
timeline
with
115
| [] -> true
116
| _
-> saveTimeline
person
path
timeline
sks units
117
118
result && result '
Listing F.2: Visualizer.fs
==PAGE:125==
Appendix G
Source Code for Types
Dened for Resource
Analyses
1
namespace dk.dtu.Cancer
2
3
4
module
Types =
5
6
type
ScannerType =
7
| CT
8
| MR
9
| Xray
10
| US // Ultra
sound
11
12
type
SchedulingAlgorithm =
13
| NoPriority
14
| SafeFriday
15
| HappyHour
16
17
type
Distribution =
18
| Poisson
19
| Uniform
==PAGE:126==
114
Source Code for Types Dened for Resource Analyses
Listing G.1: Types.fs
==PAGE:127==
Appendix H
Source Code Containing
Functions for Gathering
Data About Scans
1
namespace dk.dtu.Cancer
2
3
open
ModelHelper
4
open
Model
5
6
7
module
Scan =
8
9
val
reqFilter: Requisition
-> Requisition
option
10
11
val
persFilter: Person
-> Person
12
13
val
counter:
14
int * int * int * int * int * int -> string
->
15
int * int * int * int * int * int
16
17
val printScans ': int * int * int * int * int * int -> unit
18
19
val
printScans: (Requisition
seq -> unit)
20
==PAGE:128==
116
Source Code Containing Functions for Gathering Data About Scans
21
val
scanFilter: Requisition
-> bool
22
23
val
canceledFilter : Requisition
-> bool
Listing H.1: Scan.fsi
1
namespace dk.dtu.Cancer
2
3
open
Model
4
open
System
5
6
module
Scan =
7
8
let
reqFilter (req : Requisition) =
9
let procs = req.Procedures |> Seq.filter (fun p -> p.
Substring (0,2) = "UX")
10
if Seq.isEmpty
procs
11
then None
12
else Some {req with
Procedures = procs}
13
14
let
conFilter (con : Contact) =
15
let reqs = con.Requisitions |> Seq.choose
reqFilter
16
if Seq.isEmpty
reqs
17
then None
18
else Some {con with
Requisitions = reqs}
19
20
let
couFilter (cou : Course) =
21
let cons = cou.Contacts |> Seq.choose
conFilter
22
if Seq.isEmpty
cons
23
then None
24
else Some {cou with
Contacts = cons}
25
26
let
persFilter
person =
27
{person
with
Courses = person.Courses |> Seq.choose
couFilter}
28
29
let
counter (a,c,m,r,u,z) (p : string) =
30
match p.Chars 2 with
31
| 'A' -> (a+1,c,m,r,u,z)
32
| 'C' -> (a,c+1,m,r,u,z)
33
| 'M' -> (a,c,m+1,r,u,z)
34
| 'R' -> (a,c,m,r+1,u,z)
35
| 'U' -> (a,c,m,r,u+1,z)
36
| 'Z' -> (a,c,m,r,u,z+1)
37
| x
-> failwith (x.ToString ())
38
39
let printScans ' (a,c,m,r,u,z) =
==PAGE:129==
117
40
sprintf "Angiography: %i\nCT -scan: %i\nMR -scan: %i\nX -
ray: %i\nUltra
sound: %i\nAdditions: %i\n" a c m r u
z
41
|> Console.WriteLine
42
43
let
printScans : Requisition
seq -> unit =
44
Seq.choose
reqFilter
45
>> Seq.collect (fun r -> r.Procedures)
46
>> Seq.fold
counter (0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0)
47
>> printScans '
48
49
let
scanFilter
req = (reqFilter
req).IsSome
50
51
// Filter
keeps
canceled
requisitions. Result is inverted
if 'keepCanceled ' is false
52
let
canceledFilter
req =
53
req.Procedures
54
|> Seq.exists (fun p -> p.Substring (0 ,3) = "ZPP")
Listing H.2: Scan.fs
==PAGE:130==
118
Source Code Containing Functions for Gathering Data About Scans
==PAGE:131==
Appendix I
Source Code for
Simulations
1
namespace dk.dtu.Cancer
2
3
4
open dk.dtu.Cancer
5
open
Resources
6
open
Constants
7
open
Types
8
9
open
System
10
11
12
module
SimulatorHelper =
13
14
let add (date : DateTime) (taken : Map <DateTime , int >) =
15
let count = taken |> Map.tryFind
date |> function | None
-> 0 | Some n -> n
16
Map.add date (count + 1) taken
17
18
let
isTakenDay
date
scansPrDay =
19
Map.tryFind
date
20
>> function | None -> true | Some n -> n < scansPrDay
21
22
let
isTakenHour
priority
date
scansPrDay =
==PAGE:132==
120
Source Code for Simulations
23
Map.tryFind
date >>
24
function
25
| None -> true
26
| Some n ->
27
if n < scansPrDay * 7 / 8 then true
28
elif n < scansPrDay
then
priority
29
else
false
30
31
let
isAvailableDay
priority (date : DateTime) taken
scansPrDay =
32
match
date.DayOfWeek
with
33
| DayOfWeek.Saturday
34
| DayOfWeek.Sunday
-> false
35
| DayOfWeek.Friday
-> if priority
then
isTakenDay
date
scansPrDay
taken
else
false
36
| _ -> isTakenDay
date
scansPrDay
taken
37
38
let
isAvailableHour
priority (date : DateTime) taken
scansPrDay =
39
match
date.DayOfWeek
with
40
| DayOfWeek.Saturday
41
| DayOfWeek.Sunday
-> false
42
| _ -> isTakenHour
priority
date
scansPrDay
taken
43
44
let
isAvailable
priority = function
45
| NoPriority
-> isAvailableDay
true
46
| SafeFriday
-> isAvailableDay
priority
47
| HappyHour
-> isAvailableHour
priority
48
49
let rec next
simulation
slotsPrDay (taken : Map <DateTime ,
int >) (date : DateTime , priority : bool) =
50
let date ' = date.Date.AddDays 1.
51
if isAvailable
priority
simulation date ' taken
slotsPrDay
52
then date ', add date ' taken
53
else next
simulation
slotsPrDay
taken (date ', priority)
54
55
let compare ' (req : DateTime , prio : bool) (perf :
DateTime) =
56
(perf.Date.Subtract
req.Date).Days , prio
57
58
// Returns: max , min , avg of priority
and
noPriority
patients.
59
let stats
waits =
60
let folder (a, b, c, d, e, f, g, h) (n, prio) =
61
match
prio with
62
| true -> (a, b, c, d, max e n, min f n, g + n, h + 1)
==PAGE:133==
121
63
| false
-> (max a n, min b n, c + n, d + 1, e, f, g, h
)
64
Seq.fold
folder (0, Int32.MaxValue , 0, 0, 0, Int32.
MaxValue , 0, 0) waits
65
|> fun (a, b, c, d, e, f, g, h) -> a, b, (float c) / (
float d), e, f, (float g) / (float h)
66
67
// Function
which
generates a poisson
distributed
random
number.
68
let
poisson
lambda
step seed =
69
let rand = Random
seed
70
let rec loop
lambdaLeft k p =
71
if p < Math.E && lambdaLeft > 0 then
72
if lambdaLeft > step
73
then
check (lambdaLeft - step) (k + 1) (p * Math.Exp
(float
step))
74
else
check
-1 (k + 1) (p * Math.Exp (float
lambdaLeft))
75
else
check
lambdaLeft (k + 1) p
76
and check
lambdaLeft k p =
77
if p > 1.
78
then loop
lambdaLeft k (p * rand.NextDouble ())
79
else k - 1
80
loop
lambda 0 (rand.NextDouble ())
81
82
// Resereves
some
slots for the first 'i' days
83
let
reserve i slotsPrDay =
84
let start = DateTime (2016 ,1 ,1)
85
Seq.init i (float
>> start.AddDays)
86
|> Seq.fold (fun dates
date -> Map.add date
slotsPrDay
dates) (Map <DateTime , int > [])
Listing I.1: SimulatorHelper.fs
1
namespace dk.dtu.Cancer
2
3
open
System
4
open
Types
5
6
7
module
Simulator =
8
9
val
generate:
10
amount: int ->
11
Distribution
->
12
priorityRatio: float
->
13
seed: int ->
==PAGE:134==
122
Source Code for Simulations
14
(DateTime * bool) seq
15
16
val
schedule:
17
ScannerType
->
18
SchedulingAlgorithm
->
19
scanCount: int ->
20
preBooked: int ->
21
(DateTime * bool) seq ->
22
DateTime
seq * Map <DateTime ,int >
23
24
val
compare: (DateTime * bool) seq -> (DateTime
seq -> (
int * bool) seq)
25
26
val
simulate:
27
ScannerType
->
28
SchedulingAlgorithm
->
29
scanCount: int ->
30
reservedDays: int ->
31
reservations: (DateTime * bool) seq ->
32
int * int * float * int * int * float
33
34
val
simulateMany:
35
simulations: int ->
36
Distribution
->
37
ScannerType
->
38
SchedulingAlgorithm
->
39
scanCount: int ->
40
reservedDays: int ->
41
seed: int ->
42
float * float * float * float * float * float
Listing I.2: Simulator.fsi
1
namespace dk.dtu.Cancer
2
3
4
open
Types
5
open
Constants
6
open
Resources
7
open
SimulatorHelper
8
9
open
System
10
11
12
module
Simulator =
13
==PAGE:135==
123
14
/// Function
which
generates n uniformly
distributed
random
numbers.
15
let generate ' n (start : DateTime) (rand : Random) =
16
Seq.init n (fun _ -> secondsInAYear |> rand.Next |>
float |> start.AddSeconds)
17
18
/// Function
which
generates
random
times in 2016.
19
let
generate n distribution
ratio
seed =
20
let rand = Random
seed
21
let start = DateTime (2016 , 1, 1, 0, 0, 0)
22
(start , rand)
23
||> match
distribution
with
24
| Uniform
-> generate ' n
25
| Poisson
->
26
(n |> float |> Math.Sqrt |> int , rand.Next ())
27
||> poisson n
28
|> generate '
29
|> Seq.cache
30
|> Seq.sort
31
|> Seq.map (fun i -> i, rand.NextDouble () < ratio)
32
33
/// Runs a simulation
with no analysis of the output
34
let
schedule
scanType
simulation
scanCount
preBooked
requests =
35
let
slotsPrDay = minutesPrDay / scanDuration
scanType *
scanCount
36
let taken = reserve
preBooked
slotsPrDay
37
requests
38
|> Seq.mapFold (next
simulation
slotsPrDay) taken
39
40
let
compare
requests =
41
Seq.map2 compare ' requests
42
43
/// Runs a single
simulation
and
aggregates
the result ,
44
/// finding min , max and avg
waiting
times
45
let
simulate
scanType
alg
scanCount
preBooked (requests :
(DateTime * bool) seq) =
46
requests
47
|> schedule
scanType
alg
scanCount
preBooked
48
|> fst
49
|> compare
requests
50
|> stats
51
52
/// Runs
multiple
simulation
and
returns
the
average of
53
/// their min , max and avg
waiting
times
54
let
simulateMany
iterations
distribution
scanType
alg
scanCount
preBooked
seed =
==PAGE:136==
124
Source Code for Simulations
55
let rand = Random
seed
56
let runner _ =
57
generate (totalScans
scanType) distribution (
priorityRatio
scanType) (rand.Next ())
58
|> Seq.cache
59
|> simulate
scanType
alg
scanCount
preBooked
60
61
let stats = Seq.init
iterations
runner |> Seq.cache
62
stats |> Seq.averageBy (fun (x, _, _, _, _, _) -> float
x),
63
stats |> Seq.averageBy (fun (_, x, _, _, _, _) -> float
x),
64
stats |> Seq.averageBy (fun (_, _, x, _, _, _) -> x),
65
stats |> Seq.averageBy (fun (_, _, _, x, _, _) -> float
x),
66
stats |> Seq.averageBy (fun (_, _, _, _, x, _) -> float
x),
67
stats |> Seq.averageBy (fun (_, _, _, _, _, x) -> x)
Listing I.3: Simulator.fs
==PAGE:137==
Appendix J
Script for Splitting Contacts
from Diagnoses
1
#I "../ packages/"
2
#r "FSharp.Data .2.3.2/ lib/net40/FSharp.Data.dll"
3
4
open
System.IO
5
open
FSharp.Data
6
7
let src = __SOURCE_DIRECTORY__
8
System.Console.WriteLine
src
9
let diag =
10
new
StreamWriter (src + "/../../../ data/diagnoses.csv")
11
diag.WriteLine "ContactId;Diagnosis"
12
let cont =
13
new
StreamWriter (src + "/../../../ data/contacts.csv")
14
cont.WriteLine
15
(";patientID;kontaktID;forlobID;konttype;stamafd;"
16
+ "inddato;indklok;xuddato;xudklok;xhenvmade;xafslmade")
17
18
CsvProvider <"../../ data/kontakt.csv", Separators=";",
19
CacheRows = false >. GetSample ().Rows
20
|> Seq.iter (fun row -> sprintf "%i;%s" row.KontaktID (row.
Sdiakode.Trim ()) |> diag.WriteLine)
21
diag.Flush ()
==PAGE:138==
126
Script for Splitting Contacts from Diagnoses
22
23
// Super slow , but will
finish
24
CsvProvider <"../../ data/kontakt.csv", Separators=";">
25
.GetSample ().Rows
26
|> Seq.fold
27
(fun ids row ->
28
if Seq.contains
row.KontaktID
ids then ids
29
else
30
sprintf "%i;%i;%i;%i;%s;%s;%i;%i;%i;%i;%s;%s"
31
row.Column1
row.PatientID
row.KontaktID
row.ForlobID
32
row.Konttype
row.Stamafd
row.Inddato
row.Indklok
33
row.Xuddato
row.Xudklok
row.Xhenvmade
row.Xafslmade
34
|> cont.WriteLine
35
row.KontaktID :: ids
36
) []
37
cont.Flush ()
Listing J.1: makeDiag.fsx
==PAGE:139==
Appendix K
Script for Finding the
Distribution of Requisitions
and Procedures
1
#I "../ packages/"
2
#r "FSharp.Data .2.3.2/ lib/net40/FSharp.Data.dll"
3
4
#I "Visualizer"
5
#load "ModelHelper.fs" "Model.fs"
6
#load "ParserHelper.fs"
7
8
#I "Simulator"
9
#load "Types.fs"
10
#load "Scan.fs"
11
#load "Signatures\ParserPseudo.fsi" "ParserPseudo .fs"
12
13
14
open dk.dtu.Cancer
15
open
Types
16
open Scan
17
open
ParserPseudo
18
19
20
let
scanType (proc : string) =
==PAGE:140==
128
Script for Finding the Distribution of Requisitions and Procedures
21
if proc.Substring (0,2) <> "UX" then None else
22
match
proc.Chars 2 with
23
| 'A' -> None
24
| 'C' -> Some CT
25
| 'M' -> Some MR
26
| 'R' -> Some Xray
27
| 'U' -> Some US
28
| 'Z' -> None
29
| x
-> failwith (x.ToString ())
30
31
let
requisitions =
32
getRequisitions ()
33
|> Seq.filter ( canceledFilter
>> not)
34
|> Seq.filter (fun req -> req.Start.Year = 2016)
35
|> Seq.cache
36
37
// Run this twice , notice the
difference
38
#time
39
requisitions |> Seq.last
40
#time
41
42
let
scanTypeCounter ' (ct , mr , xray , us) = function
43
| CT -> (ct+1, mr , xray , us)
44
| MR -> (ct , mr+1, xray , us)
45
| Xray -> (ct , mr , xray+1, us)
46
| US -> (ct , mr , xray , us+1)
47
48
let
scanTypeCounter (ct , mr , xray , us) = Seq.fold
scanTypeCounter ' (ct , mr , xray , us)
49
50
let
tupleSum (x1 , x2 , x3 , x4) (y1 , y2 , y3 , y4) = (x1 + y1 ,
x2 + y2 , x3 + y3 , x4 + y4)
51
52
let src = __SOURCE_DIRECTORY__
53
let file = new System.IO.StreamWriter (src + "/../../ out/
distribution2.csv")
54
55
let scans = "Requisitions;CT;MR;X-ray;Ultra
sound"
56
57
file.WriteLine("DayOfWeek;" + scans)
58
requisitions
59
|> Seq.map (fun req -> req.Start.DayOfWeek , req.Procedures
|> Seq.choose
scanType |> Seq.distinct |> scanTypeCounter
(0,0,0,0))
60
|> Seq.groupBy
fst
61
|> Seq.map (fun (dayOfWeek , reqs) ->
62
dayOfWeek ,
==PAGE:141==
129
63
reqs |> Seq.length ,
64
reqs |> Seq.map snd |> Seq.reduce
tupleSum)
65
|> Seq.sort
66
|> Seq.map (fun (dayOfWeek , n, (ct , mr , xray , us)) ->
sprintf "%A;%i;%i;%i;%i;%i" dayOfWeek n ct mr xray us)
67
|> Seq.iter file.WriteLine
68
69
file.WriteLine("\nTimeOfDay;" + scans)
70
requisitions
71
|> Seq.map (fun req -> req.Start.Hour , req.Procedures |> Seq
.choose
scanType |> Seq.distinct |> scanTypeCounter
(0,0,0,0))
72
|> Seq.groupBy
fst
73
|> Seq.map (fun (timeOfDay , reqs) ->
74
timeOfDay ,
75
reqs |> Seq.length ,
76
reqs |> Seq.map snd |> Seq.reduce
tupleSum)
77
|> Seq.sort
78
|> Seq.map (fun (timeOfDay , n, (ct , mr , xray , us)) ->
sprintf "%i-%i;%i;%i;%i;%i;%i" timeOfDay (timeOfDay + 1)
n ct mr xray us)
79
|> Seq.iter file.WriteLine
80
81
file.WriteLine("\nTimeOfWeek;" + scans)
82
requisitions
83
|> Seq.map (fun req ->
84
(req.Start.DayOfWeek , req.Start.Hour),
85
req.Procedures |> Seq.choose
scanType |> Seq.distinct |>
scanTypeCounter
(0,0,0,0))
86
|> Seq.groupBy
fst
87
|> Seq.map (fun (timeOfWeek , reqs) ->
88
timeOfWeek ,
89
reqs |> Seq.length ,
90
reqs |> Seq.map snd |> Seq.reduce
tupleSum)
91
|> Seq.sort
92
|> Seq.map (fun (( dayOfWeek , timeOfDay), n, (ct , mr , xray ,
us)) -> sprintf "%A %i-%i;%i;%i;%i;%i;%i" dayOfWeek
timeOfDay (timeOfDay + 1) n ct mr xray us)
93
|> Seq.iter file.WriteLine
94
95
file.Flush ()
96
file.Close ()
Listing K.1: distribution.fsx
==PAGE:142==
130
Script for Finding the Distribution of Requisitions and Procedures
==PAGE:143==
Appendix L
Scan data
The following le was saved to store data, and make it easily accessible. The
data was collected by scripts included in the remainder of this appendix.
1
namespace dk.dtu.Cancer
2
3
open
Types
4
5
6
module
Ressources =
7
8
// Estimated
maximum
durations of a scan , not
including
patient/machine
preperation
9
// https :// www.cancer.dk/hjaelp -viden/undersoegelser -for -
kraeft/scanninger - billedundersoegelser /
10
let
scanDuration = function
11
| CT -> 15 // https :// min.medicin.dk/ Undersoegelser /
SygdomsUndersoegelse /3
12
| MR -> 60
13
| Xray -> 0 // No estimate
made
14
| US -> 15
15
16
// Total
scans
2016
17
let
scans2016 = function
18
| CT -> 28413
==PAGE:144==
132
Scan data
19
| MR -> 5335
20
| Xray -> 32858
21
| US -> 26933
22
23
// Total
canceled
scans
2016
24
let
cancelations2016 = function
25
| CT -> 1030
26
| MR -> 247
27
| Xray -> 385
28
| US -> 339
29
30
// Requisitions
containing a scan in 2016
31
let
reqsWithScans2016 = function
32
| CT -> 15943
33
| MR -> 4030
34
| Xray -> 25965
35
| US -> 17713
36
37
// Canceled
requisitions
containing a scan in 2016
38
let
canceledReqsWithScans2016 = function
39
| CT -> 492
40
| MR -> 244
41
| Xray -> 192
42
| US -> 195
43
44
// Maximum
amount of scans
performed in a day
45
// Based on maximum
scans
performed on a single day in
2016
46
let
capacityInADay = function
47
| CT -> 86
48
| MR -> 25
49
| Xray -> 122
50
| US -> 97
51
52
// Based on allScans.fsx
53
let
totalScans = function
54
| CT -> 35485
55
| MR -> 9700
56
| Xray -> 148019
57
| US -> 61346
58
59
// Ratio of scans
that have
priority.
60
let
priorityRatio = function
61
| CT -> 11412. / 35485.
62
| MR -> 2337. / 9700.
63
| Xray -> 0. / 148019.
64
| US -> 0. / 61346.
==PAGE:145==
133
Listing L.1: Resources.fs
1
#I "../ packages/"
2
#r "FSharp.Data .2.3.2/ lib/net40/FSharp.Data.dll"
3
4
#I "Visualizer"
5
#load "ModelHelper.fs" "Model.fs"
6
#load "Codes.fs"
7
#load "ParserHelper.fs" "Parser.fs"
8
#load " DisplayHelper.fs" "Display.fs"
9
#load "Visualizer.fs"
10
11
#I "Simulator"
12
#load "Types.fs"
13
#load "Ressources.fs"
14
#load "Signatures/Scan.fsi" "Scan.fs"
15
16
open dk.dtu.Cancer
17
open
Model
18
open
Parser
19
open
Visualizer
20
21
open
Types
22
open
Ressources
23
open Scan
24
25
open
System
26
27
// Initialize
28
let cache = Cache ()
29
let
persons =
30
cache.getPersons ()
31
|> Map.toList
32
|> List.map snd
33
34
// Patients
with most
procedures
35
let
mostProcs =
36
persons
37
|> List.map (fun p -> p, p.Courses |> Seq.sumBy (fun c ->
c.Contacts |> Seq.sumBy (fun con -> con.Requisitions |>
Seq.sumBy (fun r -> r.Procedures |> Seq.length))))
38
|> List. sortByDescending
snd
39
40
// List of all
requisitions
41
let reqs =
==PAGE:146==
134
Scan data
42
persons
43
|> Seq.collect (fun p -> p.Courses |> Seq.collect (fun c
-> c.Contacts |> Seq.collect (fun con -> con.
Requisitions)))
44
45
// List of all
procedures
46
let procs =
47
persons
48
|> Seq.collect (fun p -> p.Courses |> Seq.collect (fun c
-> c.Contacts |> Seq.collect (fun con -> con.
Requisitions |> Seq.collect (fun r -> r.Procedures))))
49
50
// Different
types of scans
51
procs
52
|> Seq.filter (fun p -> p.Substring (0 ,2) = "UX")
53
|> Seq.fold
counter (0,0,0,0,0,0)
54
|> printScans '
55
// Angiography: 318
56
// CT -scan: 28413
57
// MR -scan: 5335
58
// X-ray: 32858
59
// Ultra
sound: 26933
60
// Additions: : 36787
61
62
let
reqsWithScan = reqs |> Seq.filter
scanFilter
63
let
canceledScans =
64
reqsWithScan
65
|> Seq.filter
canceledFilter
66
67
canceledScans
68
|> printScans
69
// Angiography: 14
70
// CT -scan: 1030
71
// MR -scan: 247
72
// X-ray: 385
73
// Ultra
sound: 339
74
// Additions: : 0
75
76
let
scanType (proc : string) =
77
if proc.Substring (0,2) <> "UX" then None else
78
match
proc.Chars 2 with
79
| 'A' -> None
80
| 'C' -> Some CT
81
| 'M' -> Some MR
82
| 'R' -> Some Xray
83
| 'U' -> Some US
84
| 'Z' -> None
==PAGE:147==
135
85
| x
-> failwith (x.ToString ())
86
87
let reqsWithScan ' =
88
reqsWithScan
89
|> Seq.map (fun req -> req , req.Procedures |> Seq.choose
scanType |> Seq.distinct)
90
91
let
countNprint : (Requisition * ScannerType
seq) seq ->
unit =
92
Seq.collect
snd
93
>> Seq.countBy id
94
>> Seq.map (fun (t, n) -> sprintf "%A: %i" t n)
95
>> Seq.iter
Console.WriteLine
96
97
reqsWithScan ' |> countNprint
98
// Xray: 25965
99
// US: 17713
100
// CT: 15943
101
// MR: 4030
102
103
reqsWithScan
104
|> Seq.filter (fun req -> req.Procedures |> Seq.exists (fun
p -> p.Substring (0,3) = "ZPP"))
105
|> Seq.map (fun req -> req , req.Procedures |> Seq.choose
scanType |> Seq.distinct)
106
|> countNprint
107
// CT: 492
108
// US: 244
109
// MR: 192
110
// Xray: 195
Listing L.2: resources.fsx
1
#I "../ packages/"
2
#r "FSharp.Data .2.3.2/ lib/net40/FSharp.Data.dll"
3
4
#I "Visualizer"
5
#load "ModelHelper.fs" "Model.fs"
6
#load "ParserHelper.fs"
7
8
#I "Simulator"
9
#load "Signatures/Scan.fsi" "Scan.fs"
10
#load "Signatures/ParserPseudo.fsi" "ParserPseudo .fs"
11
12
13
open dk.dtu.Cancer
14
open
ModelHelper
==PAGE:148==
136
Scan data
15
open
ParserPseudo
16
open Scan
17
18
19
let
requisitions = getRequisitions ()
20
21
requisitions
22
|> Seq.length
23
// 3.597.793
24
25
requisitions
26
|> Seq.filter (fun req -> req.Procedures |> Seq.length |>
(=) 0)
27
|> Seq.length
28
// 2.892.165
29
30
requisitions
31
|> Seq.filter (fun req -> req.Procedures |> Seq.length |>
(<>) 0)
32
|> Seq.length
33
//
705.628 ( <20%)
34
35
let
totalScans =
36
requisitions
37
|> Seq.filter ( canceledFilter
>> not)
38
|> printScans
39
(* Angiography: 1365
40
* CT -scan: 35485
41
* MR -scan: 9700
42
* X-ray: 148019
43
* Ultra
sound: 61346
44
* Additions: 53948
45
*)
46
47
let
priorityScans
prio =
48
requisitions
49
|> Seq.filter ( canceledFilter
>> not)
50
|> Seq.filter (fun req -> req.Priority = prio)
51
|> printScans
52
53
priorityScans (Some P)
54
(* Angiography: 1199
55
* CT -scan: 11364
56
* MR -scan: 2430
57
* X-ray: 41331
58
* Ultra
sound: 38570
59
* Additions: 15343
==PAGE:149==
137
60
*)
61
priorityScans (Some A)
62
(* Angiography: 0
63
* CT -scan: 0
64
* MR -scan: 0
65
* X-ray: 1
66
* Ultra
sound: 1228
67
* Additions: 146
68
*)
69
priorityScans (Some F)
70
(* Angiography: 0
71
* CT -scan: 0
72
* MR -scan: 0
73
* X-ray: 0
74
* Ultra
sound: 0
75
* Additions: 0
76
*)
77
priorityScans
None
78
(* Angiography: 166
79
* CT -scan: 24121
80
* MR -scan: 7270
81
* X-ray: 106687
82
* Ultra
sound: 21548
83
* Additions: 38459
84
*)
85
86
(* P = 3242362
87
* A = 55564
88
* F = 67
89
* _ = 299800
90
*)
Listing L.3: allScans.fsx
1
#I "../ packages/"
2
#r "FSharp.Data .2.3.2/ lib/net40/FSharp.Data.dll"
3
4
#I "Visualizer"
5
#load "ModelHelper.fs" "Model.fs"
6
#load "ParserHelper.fs" "Signatures/Parser.fsi" "Parser.fs"
7
#load "Codes.fs"
8
9
#I "Simulator"
10
#load "Signatures/Scan.fsi" "Scan.fs"
11
12
13
open dk.dtu.Cancer
==PAGE:150==
138
Scan data
14
open
Model
15
open
Parser
16
open
Codes
17
18
open Scan
19
20
let cache = Cache ()
21
22
let
reqCollector (p : Person) =
23
let reqCollector ' c =
24
c.Contacts
25
|> Seq.filter (fun con -> con.Requisitions |> Seq.exists
(fun r -> r.Procedures |> Seq.exists
procIsCancer))
26
|> Seq.collect (fun con -> con.Requisitions)
27
p.Courses
28
|> Seq.collect
reqCollector '
29
30
let
requisitions =
31
cache.getPersons ()
32
|> Map.toSeq
33
|> Seq.map snd
34
|> Seq.collect
reqCollector
35
|> Seq.filter (fun req -> req.Procedures |> Seq.length |>
(<>) 0)
36
|> Seq.filter ( canceledFilter
>> not)
37
38
requisitions |> Seq.length // 304.082 // 118.012
39
40
let scans =
41
requisitions
42
|> Seq.filter
scanFilter
43
44
scans |> Seq.length // 61.391 // 19.529
45
46
let procs sks =
47
scans
48
|> Seq.collect (fun r -> r.Procedures |> Seq.filter (fun p
-> p.Substring (0,3) = sks))
49
|> Seq.length
50
51
procs "UXC" // 27.383 // 11.412
52
procs "UXM" //
5.088 //
2.337
Listing L.4: cancerScans.fsx
==PAGE:151==
Appendix M
Script Used for Applications
Chapter
1
#I "../ packages/"
2
#r "FSharp.Data .2.3.2/ lib/net40/FSharp.Data.dll"
3
4
#I "Visualizer"
5
#load "ModelHelper.fs" "Model.fs"
6
#load "Codes.fs"
7
#load "ParserHelper.fs" "Signatures/Parser.fsi" "Parser.fs"
8
#load " DisplayHelper.fs" "Signatures/Display.fsi" "Display.
fs"
9
#load "Signatures/Visualizer.fsi" "Visualizer.fs"
10
11
#I "Simulator"
12
#load "Types.fs"
13
#load "Resources.fs"
14
#load "Signatures/Scan.fsi" "Scan.fs"
15
16
open dk.dtu.Cancer
17
open
Model
18
open
Parser
19
open
Visualizer
20
21
open Scan
==PAGE:152==
140
Script Used for Applications Chapter
22
23
// Setup
24
let src = __SOURCE_DIRECTORY__
25
let path = src + "/../../ report/figures/"
26
27
let cache = Cache ()
28
let sks = cache.getSKS ()
29
let units = cache.getUnits ()
30
31
// Markdown (Figure
5.1)
32
let
person1 = cache.getPerson
1312
33
save
person1
path [MarkDown] sks units
34
35
// Highlights (Figure
5.3)
36
let
person2 = cache.getPerson
345794
37
38
let
highlights =
39
let
chooser (cou : Course) =
40
let cons =
41
cou.Contacts
42
|> Seq.filter (fun c ->
43
c.Id = 87658 ||
44
c.Id = 700427 ||
45
c.Id = 583158 ||
46
c.Id = 934963)
47
if Seq.length
cons = 0
48
then None
49
else Some {cou with
Contacts = cons}
50
person2
51
|> fun p ->
52
{p with
Courses = p.Courses |> Seq.choose
chooser}
53
54
save
highlights
path [Pdf] sks units
55
56
// No filtering
57
let
person3 = cache.getPerson
112187
58
save
person3
path [Pdf] sks units
59
60
// Filtering
61
let
scansOnly =
62
let filter (cou : Course) = cou.Id <> 149488 && cou.Id <>
655093
63
person3
64
|> persFilter // Keeps
only
scans
65
|> fun p ->
66
{p with
Courses = p.Courses |> Seq.filter
filter}
67
==PAGE:153==
141
68
save
scansOnly
path [Pdf] sks units
Listing M.1: applications.fsx
==PAGE:154==
142
Script Used for Applications Chapter
==PAGE:155==
Appendix N
Cancer Cases
Data from Sundhedsdatastyrelsen, downloaded from http://www.esundhed.
dk/sundhedsregistre/CAR/CAR01/Sider/Diagram.aspx?rp:A_DiagnoseGrp=
2&rp:B_Diagnose=83&rp:C_Region=5&rp:D_Indikator=1&
1
Textbox32
2
ALLE KRÆFTTILFÆLDE - ANTAL
SVULSTER
3
4
Chart3_SeriesGroup_label ,
Chart3_SeriesGroup_Chart3_CategoryGroup_label ,
Chart3_SeriesGroup_Chart3_CategoryGroup_Value_Y
5
Region Sjælland ,1978 ,2791
6
Region Sjælland ,1979 ,2803
7
Region Sjælland ,1980 ,2998
8
Region Sjælland ,1981 ,3001
9
Region Sjælland ,1982 ,3024
10
Region Sjælland ,1983 ,3150
11
Region Sjælland ,1984 ,2957
12
Region Sjælland ,1985 ,3069
13
Region Sjælland ,1986 ,3068
14
Region Sjælland ,1987 ,3347
15
Region Sjælland ,1988 ,3267
16
Region Sjælland ,1989 ,3344
17
Region Sjælland ,1990 ,3468
18
Region Sjælland ,1991 ,3573
==PAGE:156==
144
Cancer Cases
19
Region Sjælland ,1992 ,3532
20
Region Sjælland ,1993 ,3609
21
Region Sjælland ,1994 ,3657
22
Region Sjælland ,1995 ,3675
23
Region Sjælland ,1996 ,3846
24
Region Sjælland ,1997 ,3714
25
Region Sjælland ,1998 ,4010
26
Region Sjælland ,1999 ,4051
27
Region Sjælland ,2000 ,4115
28
Region Sjælland ,2001 ,4252
29
Region Sjælland ,2002 ,4306
30
Region Sjælland ,2003 ,4427
31
Region Sjælland ,2004 ,4742
32
Region Sjælland ,2005 ,5104
33
Region Sjælland ,2006 ,5485
34
Region Sjælland ,2007 ,5462
35
Region Sjælland ,2008 ,5893
36
Region Sjælland ,2009 ,6154
37
Region Sjælland ,2010 ,6007
38
Region Sjælland ,2011 ,6156
39
Region Sjælland ,2012 ,6382
40
Region Sjælland ,2013 ,6198
41
Region Sjælland ,2014 ,6714
42
Region Sjælland ,2015 ,6714
data/cancercases.csv
==PAGE:157==
Appendix O
DOT les used for
generation of graphs
1
digraph
per1 {
2
rankdir=LR;
3
node [style=filled , fillcolor=white ];
4
subgraph
clustercou1 {
5
fontsize =28;
6
label="Forløb #1";
7
color=grey50;
8
style=filled;
9
fillcolor=grey95;
10
subgraph
clusterCon1 {
11
node [group=clusterCon1 ];
12
color=gray10;
13
label="Kontakt 1"
14
style=filled;
15
fillcolor="#80 ffff";
16
req2 [shape=box , label="Rekvisition 2"]
17
};
18
subgraph
clusterCon2 {
19
node [group=clusterCon2 ];
20
color=gray10;
21
label="Kontakt 2"
22
style=filled;
==PAGE:158==
146
DOT les used for generation of graphs
23
fillcolor="#80 ffff";
24
req1 [shape=box , label="Rekvisition 1"];
25
req3 [shape=box , label="Rekvisition 3"];
26
edge [style=invis ];
27
req1 -> req3
28
}
29
};
30
req1 -> req2 -> req3;
31
}
Listing O.1: DOT le without an invisible dummy event.
1
digraph
per1 {
2
rankdir=LR;
3
node [style=filled , fillcolor=white ];
4
subgraph
clustercou1 {
5
fontsize =28;
6
label="Forløb #1";
7
color=grey50;
8
style=filled;
9
fillcolor=grey95;
10
subgraph
clusterCon1 {
11
node [group=clusterCon1 ];
12
color=gray10;
13
label="Kontakt 1"
14
style=filled;
15
fillcolor="#80 ffff";
16
req2 [shape=box , label="Rekvisition 2"]
17
};
18
subgraph
clusterCon2 {
19
node [group=clusterCon2 ];
20
color=gray10;
21
label="Kontakt 2"
22
style=filled;
23
fillcolor="#80 ffff";
24
req1 [shape=box , label="Rekvisition 1"];
25
dummy1 [style=invis ];
26
req3 [shape=box , label="Rekvisition 3"];
27
edge [style=invis ];
28
req1 -> dummy1
-> req3
29
}
30
};
31
req1 -> req2 -> req3;
32
}
Listing O.2: DOT le with an invisible dummy event.
==PAGE:159==
Bibliography
[ANR17]
Anders Reenberg Andersen, Bo Friis Nielsen, and Line Blander Rein-
hardt. Optimization of hospital ward resources with patient reloca-
tion using markov chain modeling. European Journal of Operational
Research, 2017.
[BD12]
Bjorn Berg and Brian T Denton. Appointment planning and schedul-
ing in outpatient procedure centers. In Handbook of Healthcare Sys-
tem Scheduling, pages 131154. Springer, 2012.
[Bec14]
Mickael Bech. Er drg også fremtidens afregningsmodel? In Fremti-
dens Hospital. Munksgaard, 2014.
[FOK]
Anne Frølich, Frede Olesen, and Inge Kristensen. Multisygdom.
[FPLL]
K Friis, MH Pedersen, FB Larsen, and M Lasgaard. A national pop-
ulation study of the co-occurrence of multiple long-term conditions
in people with multimorbidity, denmark, 2013. Preventing Chronic
Disease, 13.
[HBLP09] Anke K Hutzschenreuter, Peter AN Bosman, and Han La PoutrÚ.
Evolutionary multiobjective optimization for dynamic hospital re-
source management. In International Conference on Evolutionary
Multi-Criterion Optimization, pages 320334. Springer, 2009.
[HG03]
Paul Robert Harper and HM Gamlin. Reduced outpatient waiting
times with improved appointment scheduling: a simulation modelling
approach. Or Spectrum, 25(2):207222, 2003.
[HNW14] Michael Hansen-Nord and Mette Worsøe. Dimensionering og styring
af patientow i fam, ouh. In Fremtidens Hospital. Munksgaard, 2014.
==PAGE:160==
148
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[MLT14]
Christian Kjær Monsson, Anne Lind, and Thomas Trøster.
De-
mogra, bosætning, mobilitet og uddannelse, March 2014.
[ssi15]
Store udgifter forbundet med multisygdom, October 2015.
[Str15]
Jonathan Strahl.
Patient appointment scheduling system:
with
supervised learning prediction.
Master's thesis, Aalto University,
School of Science, May 2015.
[Sun17]
Sundhedsdatastyrelsen, DAKI.
LPR3 - logisk datamodel og ind-
beretningsregler, version 1.0 edition, January 2017.
[WF14]
Mette Wandel and Morten Freil. Patientens hospital. In Fremtidens
Hospital. Munksgaard, 2014.
