==PAGE:1==
Communication in Multi-agent
Reinforcement Learning
Carl Kjærgaard
Kongens Lyngby 2017
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary (English)
The aim of this thesis is to investigate diﬀerent methods of Multi-Agent Re-
inforcement Learning using modern frameworks and techniques, allowing for
cooperative or competitive eﬀort between several agents in the same system.
So far, Markov games have been used to successfully implement simple zero-
sum games using techniques based on reinforcement learning and have provided
promising results when competing against ﬁxed-policy or stochastic agents.
This thesis ﬁrst explores the implementation of existing multi-agent solutions
for reinforcement learning on simple games with respect to a single agent in a
multi-agent environment, competing against ﬁxed policy agents. These agents
are extended to allow for dynamic policy changes using the policies of other
agents.
Finally, the setting is expanded to allow for partial observability, where we test
diﬀerent variations of the problem against diﬀerent solutions to each problem.
Each of these solutions are then compared based on the results they produce, as
well as how restrictive they are on the design of solutions for partially observable
problems, showing the strength of each solution, ease of implementation and
feasibility.
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Summary (English)
i
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Reinforcement Learning Fundamentals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.1.1
Reinforcement Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.1.2
Markov Decision Process
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.1.3
Stochastic/Markov Games . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.1.4
Policy Iteration Methods
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.1.5
Common policy evaluation methods
. . . . . . . . . . . .
12
1.2
A Simple Example in Reinforcement Learning . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2
Multi-agent Reinforcement Learning
17
2.1
Communication in basic MARL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.2
Scalability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.3
Neural Networks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
2.3.1
Function approximation and its beneﬁts . . . . . . . . . .
22
2.3.2
Basic Neural Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
2.3.3
Reinforcement Learning Networks
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3
The POMDP
27
3.1
Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.2
Histories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.3
Belief Vectors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.4
Dec-POMDP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4
Communication
37
4.1
Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.2
Communication Types . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.2.1
Observations contra Rewards . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
==PAGE:6==
iv
CONTENTS
4.3
Solutions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.4
ND-POMDP
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.4.1
Mutual Notiﬁcation Algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.4.2
General Communication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.4.3
Transfer Learning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.5
Hunter-Seeker Revisited . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.6
Solving for Communication
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.7
Reasoning About Choices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.7.1
Environment and Action . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
4.7.2
Agent and Observations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
4.8
Communication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
4.8.1
Heuristic Solutions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
4.8.2
Deﬁning the problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
4.8.3
Allowing Communication
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
4.8.4
Deﬁning Messages
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
4.9
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
5
Conclusion and Discussion
59
Bibliography
63
==PAGE:7==
Chapter 1
Introduction
One of the issues we have been struggling with in Artiﬁcial Intelligence is de-
signing general control systems. Control systems can be radically diﬀerent from
each other, and so the transfer of solvabilty from one problem to another is very
limited. Some control systems are then built as such, as solutions to particular
problems, with very few solutions being generalized to cover a larger group of
problems. Instead of this approach to problem solving, research in reinforcement
learning (RL) studies the behavioral nature of problems and how solutions to
these problems are found. The idea of reinforcement learning stems from re-
search on human behavior: ones actions are driven by rewards and punishment.
‘Good’ actions are rewarded, ‘bad’ actions are punished.
This basic neuron-like approach has spawned many other related paradigms,
some of which work together with reinforcement learning to create not solutions
to problems, but actual problem solvers. The main advantage here is that a
problem solver, designed from the simple characteristics of the problem type,
can learn to solve a family of similar problems. Various branches of reinforce-
ment learning are explored within computer science, and there is still ample
room for improvement on the basic algorithms for reinforcement learning, with
development being made in how quickly the agents are able to learn. Policy eval-
uation and improvement is still being investigated (WoLF), as are new models
and approaches that ﬁt specialized roles (Bayesian learning). Relevant design is-
sues range from balancing exploration and exploitation, to space considerations
==PAGE:8==
2
Introduction
when applied to real-life problems.
Most of the solutions using the approach of reinforcement learning are hard to
implement, as they require a large amount of information that might not be
available. It has been proposed to deal with these issues either by introducing
partial observability, or by using large amounts of approximation in the form of
neural networks. Neural Networks (NN) are an excellent way of reducing the
space requirements through approximations. They were developed using the
basic idea of a neuron, but with a diﬀerent approach, focusing on memorization
and prediction of arbitrary connections. While reinforcement learning focuses
on learning strategies, the work in the two ﬁelds brings mutual beneﬁts.
The use of reinforcement learning techniques in multi-agent systems is a rela-
tively new development. There are some issues with extending the basic ap-
proach of reinforcement learning to the multi-agent case.
One of the most
important aspect is the need for communication between agents of limited ob-
servability. In the fully observable case, all agents know everything about the
state of the system and therefore there is no need to communicate, while the in-
formation available to diﬀerent agents under partial observability might require
exchange: one agent might know something that another agent does not.
In this thesis, we will discuss multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) as an
extension to single-agent reinforcement learning. In the ﬁrst section, we will
discuss the fundamentals and theoretical properties of reinforcement learning.
In the second section we show some examples of problems with implementing
reinforcement learning in real systems and some common methods to overcome
these diﬃculties.
Then we move the multi-agent reinforcement learning and
discuss its fundamental problems. In the third section we discuss reinforcement
learning and how it combines with neural networks. Neural networks and the
basic function of them are introduced and we discuss how it can be used to
approximate. In the fourth and ﬁfth sections, we discuss partial observability
in the single-agent and multi-agent setting and how the two extremes create
diﬀerent solution qualities.
Finally, we discuss communication as the bridge
between these two extremes and how it can be used to create solutions.
In Figure 1.1 one can see how the diﬀerent ﬁelds in reinforcement learning relate
to each other. Note that areas like neural networks are not shown as this is a
map of reinforcement learning from the perspective of its own theories and not
the merging of it and others.
==PAGE:9==
1.1 Reinforcement Learning Fundamentals
3
Figure 1.1: A Map over Reinforcement Learning Research
1.1
Reinforcement Learning Fundamentals
1.1.1
Reinforcement Learning
Reinforcement Learning is a concept that attempts to capture the idea of map-
ping diﬀerent situations, states s ∈S, to good strategies, actions a ∈A(s),
leading to some next state s′ ∈S, in order to solve diﬀerent problems. Each
problem is evaluated in terms of some strategy to solve the problem using what
is in the ﬁeld of reinforcement learning called a Reward which is given based on
the action chosen and the next state R(s, a, s′). The reward is an arbitrarily de-
cided score. The reward function can change, depending on completely random
components of the environment. For instance
The agent then has to learn how to evaluate states and use these state evalu-
ations to achieve the best possible outcome. This is done by considering the
reward of a transition and all future possible rewards. The best outcome is
achieved by following the strategy that maximizes all future rewards. In other
words, the agent attempts to produce a policy π that maps every state in S to
an action in A, such that when followed, it produces a sequence of transitions
that gives the highest sum of rewards for each transition. The sum of rewards
by following a speciﬁc policy over a period of time T is given by
==PAGE:10==
4
Introduction
T −1
X
i=0
R(si, π(si), si+1)
(1.1)
There are two distinctive types of tasks which are of interest; episodic and
continuous tasks, which have diﬀerent temporal properties. An episodic task is
one that happens in episodes. An episode can be many things, such as games
or decision points, but the thing that identiﬁes episodic tasks is that for each
episode we can sum up the reward and begin anew. This allows us to optimize
by ﬁnding a "maximum" score in most of these games. Continuous tasks do
not have such an endpoint and as such cannot be maximized in the same way.
Generally speaking, the episodic tasks can be made into continuous tasks by
introducing some ﬁctitious, ﬁnal state called the absorbing space which provides
no reward if necessary. This is a state which has no rewards and constantly
transitions towards itself on all possible actions, making the problem have the
same maximal score but also have the property of never ending.
As an example, consider the diﬀerence between the two environments: the one of
the game tic-tac-toe, and the one in which an agent continuously turns a crank.
In the former, the agent’s tasks can be considered episodically and the reward
can be collected explicitly for each episode and summed up. In the latter case,
attempting to maximize the reward is more abstract, we attempt to maximize
the reward that we predict we will get in the end, rather than maximizing the
actual reward.
Finally, there is one general policy of great importance, the optimal policy, π∗,
is the policy that produces the best total reward when followed greedily, which
is that we always pick the option that gives us the highest immediate reward.
This policy is of great importance to us, because it is this policy that we wish
to learn in our systems.
∞
X
i=0
R(si, π∗(si), si+1) = max
π
∞
X
i=0
R(si, π(si), si+1)
(1.2)
In equation 1.2 we see that the optimal policy maximizes the sum of rewards
with respect to the policy. That is, the optimal policy produces the action a for
every s, such that it achieves the highest total reward possible and not simply
the highest reward for a given state.
==PAGE:11==
1.1 Reinforcement Learning Fundamentals
5
Figure 1.2: An example MDP
1.1.2
Markov Decision Process
When it comes to reinforcement learning, one of the most important concepts is
the Markov Decision Process (MDP), as it provides a mathematical model for
making decisions in many diﬀerent types of environments. MDP is a stochastic
graph consisting of a set of states S, a set of actions A for the states, such that
for every state s ∈S, every action a ∈A(s) is a transition to some resultant
state s′ ∈S with a probability p(s′|s, a).
In some cases, the environment we are trying to capture in the MDP is entirely
deterministic and the stochastic nature of MDP is never explored and can be
entirely omitted.
In addition to its states and actions, the MDP speciﬁes a
probability p(s′|s, a) and reward r(s, a, s′) where p deﬁnes the probability that
performing action a in state s will lead to s′, and r is the reward given for this
transition.
An example MDP can be seen in Figure 1.2, where r(s1, a0, s0) = 5 and p(s1, a0, s0) =
0.70. In this system, the agent would prefer to perform action a0 over a1 as a0
always gives a higher reward than a1, because of the existence of the reward
r(s2, a1, s0). This graph can be implemented stochastically by having one state
s have several transitions using the same action a, such that there are several
possible state outcomes S′(s, a) where the probability of reaching one of these
states is deﬁned with 0 < p(s′|s, a) < 1 for every resulting state s′ ∈S′(s, a).
Since this deﬁnes a probability distribution of possible resulting states given s
and a, the sum of all probabilities has to equal one P
s′∈S′ p(s′|s, a) = 1. Each
==PAGE:12==
6
Introduction
of these transitions can have their own reward r(s, a, s′), allowing for complex
decision-making that might have a very high probability for proﬁtable results
could have a very low probability for disastrous results.
The MDP does not always have to be stochastic however, and it serves as a useful
tool for describing reinforcement learning in deterministic environments as well.
One of the advantages of using this environment is that it upholds the Markov
property. Informally speaking the Markov property is that all information that
is relevant within a state is contained within a state. In some natural cases
computing the next action requires information derived from previous states.
In order to uphold the Markov property, this means that any such state can be
rewritten so as to include information about all the previous states.
Think of a ball moving through the air. In order to model it as an MDP, we
could specify states to be speciﬁc locations of the ball at certain times, while the
velocity is not accessible directly. This means that our states contain information
about time and location, but not about velocity. In order to uphold the Markov
property, such states will include predecessor states, so the otherwise hidden
velocity can now be determined using the diﬀerence between the previous and
current state.
The goal of each agent in an MDP is to maximize the discounted reward. That is,
at time t in the future, the reward r is discounted by an amount γt. Multiplying
with this discount makes the sum converge towards the optimal sum, allowing
us to set a goal for our policy.
E(
∞
X
i=0
γiri+1), γ ∈[0, 1[
(1.3)
The agent is then trained, so as to converge towards the optimal policy that
maximizes the expected discounted reward as can be seen in equation 1.3, where
ri+1 is the actual reward given at time i. This discounted sum is useful, as it
works in both episodic and continuous tasks. In episodic tasks, the problem
remains the same, but in continuous tasks we now have the advantage that our
estimates of future rewards will weigh much less on the total current estimate,
since it is heavily discounted and as a result, incorrect future estimates are less
impactful.
The discounted sum puts a heavier emphasis on rewards closer in time, as they
are not reduce by as many factors of the discount value as rewards very far
in the future. This allows for a good convergence, as the optimal policy does
not necessarily predict the optimal reward, but only produces the best set of
==PAGE:13==
1.1 Reinforcement Learning Fundamentals
7
actions. The calculated reward that we evaluate is thus not the highest possible
reward of the game, but is the highest possible discounted reward.
To understand the values of this, consider an agent staying in a state s0 with
two possible actions a0 and a1. Action a0 has an expected reward of 50 and
action a1 has an expected reward of 40. Following the policy from state s0,
the agent makes 100 transitions and enters a state s1, where it learns that the
following state s2 is worth 15 points less than predicted.
At this point, s1
will be updated accordingly to reﬂect this change, since the transition from s1
to s2 is immediate, but the value of s0 is not updated. Since we predict the
discounted reward however, the value of action a0 is only wrong by a value of
γ100 × 15, which is a very small value. As such, states transitioning to s0 before
it gets updated will also be wrong by only a very small value and therefore still
maintain very good estimates of the predicted value. One might be tempted to
think that the value of a1 should now succeed that of a0 since we have expect
an error of -15, but a1 is subjected to the same degree of discounting as a0 and
a0 remains the action of choice.
It is also from this that we see that there is an inﬁnite amount of optimal policies.
If we assume that a0 is indeed the correct action, any policy that estimates a0
to be above a1 in value would therefore be optimal.
1.1.3
Stochastic/Markov Games
Stochastic games, also sometimes known as Markov games, are another way of
deﬁning games with stochastic properties, this time including several diﬀerent
agents all playing on the same game. Stochastic games are deﬁned with a set of
states as with the MDP, although here sometimes known as games rather than
states. Each of these games has a set of actions Ai(s) which deﬁnes the action
space of agent i in game s.
Like with the MDP, stochastic games have a reward function, Ri(s, a1, . . . , an)
which deﬁnes the reward for agent i given that it and the other agents have
decided on the set of actions a1, . . . , an. The goal of each agent, as with the
MDP, is to maximize their (discounted) reward over the course of the game.
Importantly, stochastic games can be understood as a generalization of repeated
games, with inﬁnitely many games being played. Repeated games are matrix
games being played many times over the same matrix, which contrasts stochastic
games where the matrix and its values change (sometimes) indeterminately.
MDPs are relevant to these types of theoretical games, as the MDP describes
==PAGE:14==
8
Introduction
stochastic games with only a single player. Like MDP, stochastic games rely
on all necessary information enclosed within the state itself while the history of
past states and actions is not required.
While both Markov and Stochastic games help explain simple game-scenarios,
many choose to alter the form slightly by adding more terms to the tuple,
allowing for more complicated decision-making, as can be seen in [CB03], where
the tuple is updated to include the beliefs of each agent about the policy state
of other agents. As a transition happens, the actions chosen by an agent is
observed by other agents, which update how likely it is for that same agent to
choose the same action again using bayesian beliefs. The advantage to using
beliefs over simply assuming that the agent will choose the same action again is
that the agent may have chosen an exploratory action instead of what it believes
to be the optimal.
1.1.4
Policy Iteration Methods
The entire purpose of reinforcement learning is to allow us to learn through
experience. This means we need some way of evaluating what we have learned
so far and process new strategies to decide whether we have learned something
useful or not.
Figure 1.3: The Policy Update
Generalized policy iteration (GPI) is an important thing to understand, in that
it is a recurrent theme in almost all reinforcement learning techniques utilize
this updating scheme. The main diﬀerence between most of these occur in the
policy evaluation.
The GPI consists of two parts, the Policy Evaluation and the Policy Improve-
ment. The Policy Evaluation evaluates our policy to some comparable value.
Usually, this could be some number that determines the ﬁnal score that the pol-
icy predicts it will achieve. The Policy Improvement takes in the old policy and
==PAGE:15==
1.1 Reinforcement Learning Fundamentals
9
the new policy and using those, creates a resulting policy that is predicted to be
superior. This evaluation/improvement cycle continues until a certain criteria
is met, usually after a total number of iterations or the diﬀerence between the
old and new evaluation is less then a certain minimum.
1.1.4.1
Policy Evaluation
In order to evaluate learning, we use a technique called policy evaluation. In
general, there are two types of policy evaluation that are used, which recursively
help to add value to the other.
One is the state evaluation vπ which is used to estimate the total value that a
given state will bring, following a certain policy.
vπ(s) =
X
a
π(a|s)
X
s′
p(s′|s, a)(r(s, a, s′) + γvπ(s′))
(1.4)
In summary, vπ(s) estimates the value of the current state, by performing a
look-ahead towards the next state, adding the reward that it would gain from
the state transition.
Additionally, we have a way of evaluating state/action pairs, qπ. This evaluation
is the inner component of the state evaluation and it takes into account only a
single action.
qπ(s, a) =
X
s′
p(s′|s, a)(r(s, a, s′) + γvπ(s′))
(1.5)
Depending on our choice of algorithm, we will be interested in using either the
state evaluation or the state/action evaluation in the system, as they both give
ways to diﬀerent interpretations of the system.
In dynamic programming, one attempts to evaluate the state itself and then
considers all the outgoing actions going from that state. We then proceed to
determine the resulting states, judging these resulting states based on the con-
sidered action and the current state. This type of solution requires knowledge
of p(s′|s, a), which might not be available. In that case, one can consider the
state/action pair itself instead and evaluate each of these independently.
==PAGE:16==
10
Introduction
Note that these are the ideal values of policy evaluation, but for practical pur-
poses, diﬀerent methods are sometimes used, which help systems converge to-
wards these values, requiring an exact evaluation. The study of exact evaluation
has been done with the use of dynamic programming, but this has been given
up for several reasons.
One reason is that the dimensionality can become too high. In order to accu-
rately calculate the values, each state will have to be memorized, e.g., with the
use of a transition table. This can, in real systems, require more space than we
can realistically hope to provide, not to mention the requirements to calculate
these values.
The second reason is perhaps more interesting: accurate evaluation is only in-
teresting if our model is accurate. Maintaining the Markov property sometimes
requires omitting relevant state information.
Some of the more interesting ways of state evaluation occur with reward sam-
pling. The way in which this is done is by taking vπ(s) for a number of samples
of s and use those values for updating the policy.
1.1.4.2
Policy Improvement
When the state evaluation is completed, the policy has to be updated. This can
be done by following a greedy algorithm.
π(s) ←arg max
a
qπ(s, a)
(1.6)
This type of updating is suﬃcient enough in smaller games, but it does not
take into account the issue of exploration.
This is an update based entirely
around the concept of exploitation. When we are simply taking the solution
that we currently believe is best, we we exploiting the knowledge of the system
that we have to maximize our rewards. This might not be ideal however, since
our knowledge of the system can be incomplete or inaccurate and we therefore
wish to select options that, although not estimated to be the best, helps us get
a better idea of how the system works. Thus we explore by choose non-ideal
actions and exploit this information by choose the best ones.
We do however wish to know if we chose the best action by still sometimes
exploring other actions, so it is generally not suﬃcient to update the resultant
policy as a one that always chooses the same action.
==PAGE:17==
1.1 Reinforcement Learning Fundamentals
11
A common way of adding exploration is to use the ϵ-greedy algorithm instead,
which assigns to the best action for state s the likelihood of being chosen by the
policy to be 1 −ϵ while all other actions have a chance of
ϵ
|A(s)|−1, where A is
the respective action set, as seen in the equation 1.7
π(s, a) ←

1 −ϵ
ifa = arg maxa qπ(s, a)
ϵ
|A(s)|−1
otherwise
(1.7)
This method is ﬂexible as one can set the ϵ value to be high from the beginning
and later scale it down to reinforce what one believes is a good policy.
In [BV01], the authors experiment with a policy improvement WoLF-phc much
alike the ϵ-greedy algorithm, except that their method is softer and allows the
best actions to converge to a probability 1 by updating.
π(s, a) ←π(s, a) +

δ
ifa = arg maxa qπ(s, a)
−δ
|A(s)|−1
otherwise
(1.8)
At each step in WoLF-phc the policy is improved as can be seen in 1.8, by adding
a constant to the best actions and removing a smaller constant from the actions
that are not the best. They additionally propose that this latter constant, is
signiﬁcantly higher in the case of unsuccessful actions, as this allows for a higher
convergence rate when the exploratory stage is still in progress.
1.1.4.3
Exploration
In exploration, an issue that occurs is when you start to converge against local
minima instead of the optimal policy. Consider the following example of a cart
moving up a slope.
Figure 1.4: A Diﬃcult Problem
==PAGE:18==
12
Introduction
The goal of the game is to reach the top of either side of the hill. In order to do
this, the cart has to build up enough momentum to do so, however it cannot do
this by moving in one direction constantly, as gravity will force it downwards.
As such, it has to go up ﬁrst, then down, then up again and follow this pattern
until it has built up enough momentum to reach the top. The reward is based
on the height the cart manages to reach, the states are represented with the
positions of the cart, its velocity, and the actions are to go either left or right.
This type of problem is especially hard, because in order to solve it and get
the highest possible reward, the agent has to explore actions far away from
those which were evaluated to give highest possible reward. As seen from this
example, it is crucial that one balances exploration and exploitation.
To understand this better, consider that the agent is halfway to the top, but
has now lost momentum and is standing still. The goal is to reach the top to
receive the maximum reward, but in order to do so, it will have to go downhill
and approach the other side. The agent would opt out of this however, since the
reward for moving towards the side it is already close to would not change, as
the agent is standing still, however going to the other side requires going down
ﬁrst, which would give less reward than standing still. Thus, the agent would
have to make many decisions of receiving less reward than its current highest,
which is half optimal, before it starts receiving rewards higher than this and,
eventually, optimal.
Solutions proposed so far involved highly delayed rewards.
For instance, in
[SRT06], the authors attempt to solve the problem of delayed rewards in systems
where one cannot expect a reward for every unit of time.
1.1.5
Common policy evaluation methods
We have discussed policy evaluation, vπ and qπ from the perspective of what they
represent, but not how these policies are calculated in practice. One interesting
thing to note is that, while the functions p and r are present in the equations,
their values are most commonly not known to the agents.
Most of the common policy evaluations is performed with the use of sampling,
that is, by taking a set of state/action pairs and attempting to estimate the
reward based on a set of returns.
The two most commonly used methods of policy evaluation are Sarsa [RN94]
and Q-learning [Wat89]. While the two algorithms are seemingly very similar,
they have minute diﬀerences that have relatively large inﬂuence on convergence.
==PAGE:19==
1.1 Reinforcement Learning Fundamentals
13
In Sarsa, which is called an on-policy method because it learns directly from the
policy itself, we observe the tuple (st, at, rt+1, st+1, at+1) where at and at+1 is
chosen by the policy a = π(s), at+1 = π(st+1) and rt+1 is the reward observed
from following this state/action pair.
After following this, we can proceed to follow the policy again, giving us an
action at+1 corresponding to the state st+1. In this case, the Sarsa algorithm
now has all it needs to perform an update, which it does following 1.9.
q(st, at) ←q(st, at) + α(rt+1 + γq(st+1, at+1) −q(st, at))
(1.9)
In this case, we update following the policy and the policy-chosen state/action
pairs. This is not the case in Q-learning, as we now learn from something other
than the policy.
q(st, at) ←q(st, at) + α(rt+1 + γ max
a
q(st+1, a) −q(st, at))
(1.10)
The update function in 1.10 shows the diﬀerence between Q-learning and Sarsa.
The diﬀerence lies in what state/action pair the policy choose to learn from,
which in the case of Q-learning is the optimal state/action pair, according to
what it has observed.
Because it chooses to update the value of the q-function q(st, at) with a value
that is chosen outside the policy, we call this an oﬀ-policy method. Note that
while we chose the max-value here, the Q-learning method could theoretically
learn from any function that estimates the q-function.
One place that uses Q-learnings ability to learn from any policy estimator is the
deep Q-learning technique, [MKS+13] which uses a deep neural network (DNN)
to keep track of function estimator that simulates the optimal policy.
Deep Q-learning is of particular interest, because it is one of the ways in which
the space-requirement of the q-function estimators can be reduced greatly. In-
stead of relying on precise estimates of each state, it learns to estimate the states
using a complicated set of function estimators known as neural networks.
==PAGE:20==
14
Introduction
1.2
A Simple Example in Reinforcement Learn-
ing
Below we will consider the simple scenario of the so-called Hunter-Seeker Game.
The goal of the Hunter agent (the square) is to reach the Prey agent (the
triangle) in a matrix with ‘up’, ‘down’, ‘left’ and ‘right’ moves available to the
Hunter.
Figure 1.5: The Initial State
Consider the setting in Figure 1.5. Hunter has just started the learning process
and has no knowledge of the solution. Since it does not know what to do, it
simply tries to move, for example up, not knowing that hitting the wall will lead
to a punishment.
Figure 1.6: After Punishment
After hitting the wall, we now have the situation in Figure 1.6. The agent now
knows he should not attempt to go up. It now tries to go down instead.
==PAGE:21==
1.2 A Simple Example in Reinforcement Learning
15
Figure 1.7: Trying Again
In Figure 1.7, the agent has moved down and reached a new state. Since this
state is new, it tries to move up again, returning to what we know to be the
previous state.
Figure 1.8: Trying Again
Figure 1.9: A New State
In Figures 1.8 and 1.9, the agent moves to a new state and begins exploring like
before.
==PAGE:22==
16
Introduction
Figure 1.10: After Training
Figure 1.11: Winning
After a while the agent will have explored each state thoroughly and will be
able to maximize the reward by only taking two steps to reach the triangle, as
can be seen in Figures 1.10 and 1.11.
==PAGE:23==
Chapter 2
Multi-agent Reinforcement
Learning
We will now focus on reinforcement learning with multiple agents. Adding more
agents to the system causes a series of problems for ordinary reinforcement-
learning techniques, as the dimensionality can explode, giving rise to more ac-
tions and more states for the agents to consider.
A simple implementation of several agents in the same system using well-studied
reinforcement learning techniques for single agents generally does not work,
because the agents inﬂuence the state of the system [BBS10]. Since each agent
is supposed to also learn something on its own, one of the key components in
the MDP no longer hold, as the probability p(s′|s, a) is no longer static.
One method of solving this problem has been to create the learning system over
a joint-action space. The joint-action method takes the Cartesian product of
each agents actions and produces an MDP over this action set instead. Even
this solution has its problems however, since one of the desirable features of a
multi-agent system now disappear which is that each agent can act individually.
When talking about multi-agent systems, two things that it can provide are
parallel computation of the problem, as well as scalability.
To understand the necessity of MARL and where single-agent RL techniques are
==PAGE:24==
18
Multi-agent Reinforcement Learning
R
P
S
R
(0,0)
(-1,1)
(1,-1)
P
(1,-1)
(0,0)
(-1,1)
S
(-1,1)
(1,-1)
(0,0)
Table 2.1: A Policy Problem
problematic, consider the following two examples of, otherwise simple, problems.
In Table 2.1, we see the ordinary pay-oﬀmatrix of the game Rock, Paper, Scis-
sors. The goal of the agent is to maximize its expected reward, playing against
an opponent that wishes to do the same. He constantly is in the same state and
is trying to ﬁnd the best policy. Here, ordinary RL will encounter issues, since
the game is played against an opponent. The ideal policy is { 1
3R, 1
3S, 1
3P} since
this will leave the opponent with no better policies, allowing us to achieve a zero-
sum performance. Unfortunately, what will most likely happen in a single-agent
RL algorithm is that it will oscillate between diﬀerent policy distributions.
This is a problem that we cannot model in an MDP. If we consider the MDP
where the states are the opponents played action, we can model the rewards as:
+1 if the agent wins, or −1 if he loses, so r(·, R, S) = 1, as the agent chose Rock
and the opponent played Scissors.
In this case, each transition will have the probability 1
3, since we expect the op-
ponent to play each move equally often. In this situation, any policy is optimal,
since no matter which action we choose, we will always have probability 1
3 of
winning or losing. However, any policy that is not the 1
3 for every choice will
result in a sub-optimal policy, because the opponent will choose to counter our
moves.
We therefore have to include in our considerations of the game the other player
and a simple MDP model is no longer suﬃcient for this. Many MARL problems
stem from this dynamic nature of the game, where it becomes unfeasible to
model the problem using an MDP, and where the solution is to learn the policies
of other agents.
Another problem is related to coordination, see Figure 2.1. In this case, we
have four agents, 1 to 4, which have to work together to solve a problem. Each
agent can choose to scan an area next to it and if two agents scan the same
area, the area is registered and the score is rewarded. In this case, agents 2 and
3 are likely to start scanning the area between them for 60 points, since this is
the area that will provide the highest score. The optimal policy is to have 2
and 3 each scan the 50-point area instead, as this will give the highest score of
==PAGE:25==
2.1 Communication in basic MARL
19
Figure 2.1: A Coordination Problem
100 points, but in order to do so, these two agents will have to be aware of the
overall group performance, and not just of their own.
In general, when speaking of the basic MARL setting, we are concerned with a
completely centralized environment, where all information is freely available to
each agent. As we shall see later, diﬀerent versions of MARL exists where less
information is assumed to be available to each agent. The major diﬀerence in
this case generally revolves around how centralized the problem is. While the
problem could be completely centralized (i.e., solving for what is known as a
"Joint Action Learner", JAL), or could be completely decentralized (i.e., solving
for what is known as "Independent Learning" IL), good converging solutions
generally ﬁnd their place in-between these two variants.
2.1
Communication in basic MARL
MARL has to deal with a variety of problems introduced because of the addi-
tional agents, among them how to coordinate intentions with other agents and
solve conﬂicting intentions. In certain situations obtaining the highest reward
requires some degree of agreement with other agents, as we saw previously.
One of the examples on how communication between agents can occur is seen in
Littman’s proposal for Markov games in MARL environments [Lit94]. Here, the
agents are playing a zero-sum game (Rock, Paper, Scissors) against each other
and have to attempt to respond to the other agents actions with a corresponding
action. In the paper this problem is solved by using a minimax algorithm. If
we look at it from the perspective of an agent playing against an opponent,
==PAGE:26==
20
Multi-agent Reinforcement Learning
and action a has to be chosen such that it maximizes the reward based on the
opponents action o.
vπ(s) =
max
π∈P D(A) min
o∈O
X
a∈A(s)
q(s, a, o)π(s, a)
(2.1)
Where O is the set of actions available to the opponent and PD(A) is the set of
probability distributions over the action set A. Note here that in the Equation
2.1, we attempt to maximize the probability distribution of our policy such
that we achieve a max value and not necessarily an action. This probability
distribution can be found using linear programming over a stochastic game.
We see here that this requires some knowledge of the other agents’ intentions,
in that it has to make use of o in order to achieve the highest possible reward.
In other words, it has to somehow acquire knowledge of the opponents policy.
This could be done using a static policy for the opponent. By making this static
policy accessible to the playing agent, such that it could perform calculations on
it or, alternatively the dynamic policy of the opponent is set as freely accessible
to the agent.
This way of estimating what the other agents will do in a multi-agent envi-
ronment, by analyzing their policies, is what many MARL techniques revolve
around and is one of the key advantages to MARL since it does not require any
control.
In [CB03], they propose a diﬀerent method of learning the intended actions of
other agents, by estimating the policy using Bayesian methods. Each agent,
here called a Bayesian agent, keeps a list of beliefs of the other agents. More
explicitly, the belief b that the agent has at state s is deﬁned as (Pm, Ps, s, h),
where Pm is the believed probability of game changes happening, Ps is the
probability distribution for the actions of the other agents, s is the current
state, and h is the history of the agents experiences.
The Bayesian updates help the agent estimate the probability of actions of other
agents. This belief is then integrated into the normal evaluation functions, as
the agent attempts to individually calculate the best possible course of actions
given its belief about to the other agents, much like it would in a static policy
environment, but with diﬀerent forms in the equations.
These solutions all come from the evident need for communication, but neither
solution contains any actual communication between agents, and agents simply
react based on observed actions and history. This type of solution is suﬃcient to
==PAGE:27==
2.2 Scalability
21
solve some communication issues, but come at a cost in computational power. As
such, most solutions seem to abstract away the need for actual communication,
with attempting to understand the intent of other agents.
2.2
Scalability
Scalability is also of great concern when it comes to multi-agent systems, as a
system with many agents can be prone to a large amount of states and vari-
ables. In [SS01], the authors removed a lot of the states that result from adding
additional agents, by modifying assumptions about the system so that it could
perform tasks that would otherwise be computational unfeasible.
The goal was to allow for a set of agents to play soccer, which involves a lot of
noise in terms of state transitions, as well as the complexity of having several
agents that either compete or cooperate, based on what team they are on. While
the problem originally contained state information, such as direction, position,
and ball location, they reduced this problem to a set of commands that would
automate a lot of the most desirable functions.
In the original problem, the system was designed to include many actions that
would have to be linked together to perform larger, generalized actions. This
poses a rather large problem for reinforcement learning models, since the reward
schemes are not always obvious and learning from delayed rewards can pose a
lot of problems [SRT06]. These smaller problems were then removed from the
multi-agent system, by representing them as actions instead, allowing it to learn
on this larger set of actions instead which made the problem relatively much
easier.
What we see from [SS01] is that if the problem becomes too large for the system
to handle, it is possible to create a layer of abstraction on top of this system that
controls the underlying functions instead. The position variables were translated
into relative variables instead, such that the system could safely add more agents
as the state-space would scale only linearly. This was implemented using static
policies and Sarsa learning.
A key point of interest in scalability is also the ability for agents to teach and
learn. In some multi-agent systems, we may wish to have the ability to add
more agents while the system is currently active. In such systems, the teaching
agent is called the teacher and the student is called the student. This can be
done using several diﬀerent techniques, depending on the motivation for the
algorithm. In [PB], they propose learning for a system in which the teacher has
==PAGE:28==
22
Multi-agent Reinforcement Learning
no incentive to teach the student. The student cannot simply copy the policies
of the teacher and does not get informed of the rewards.
The general concept can be seen below, in Equation 2.2, where M(st+1) is a
value that the agent estimates based on an estimation of the mentors value of
the state.
q(st, at) ←q(st, at)+α(rt+1−q(st, at)+γ
 M(st+1) : Mentor Visited
maxa q(st+1, a) : otherwise
(2.2)
The student learns faster from observing the teacher. In the imitation Q-learning
technique, the student may sometimes choose to increase the value of a Q-
function estimate, if the teacher was faced with the same problem, allowing for
faster convergence towards a good policy.
In this thesis, we focus mostly on temporal diﬀerence[SB] methods, but other
methods of developing the policies exist, such as direct policy methods.
2.3
Neural Networks
Since a lot of research has been devoted to the use of neural networks in re-
inforcement learning, we will here explain some of the less obvious network
techniques.
One of the big advantages to neural networks, is the ability to learn approxi-
mate functions quickly, without requiring a full state-space representation. One
function that we wish to approximate is the policy of an agent in reinforcement
learning. Consider a policy that uses the action arg maxa q(s, a).
2.3.1
Function approximation and its beneﬁts
The entire purpose behind creating these networks is to approximate functions
without requiring a complete state representation. Something as simple as an
image with 2-valued pixels, 0 for oﬀand 1 for on, can have far too many states for
computational purposes. Given that we want to expand on the possible number
of values for each pixel to an RGB representation, an alternative solution has
to be found.
The solution in such a situation is to start approximating something, although
what that "something" is vague at this point. One such thing we can choose to
==PAGE:29==
2.3 Neural Networks
23
approximate is the state representation. If we imagine a hashed representation
of our states, we can reduce the state representation to a size that ﬁts our needs,
but this puts some, rather heavy, implications on the hashing function, as two
states that appear similar might require drastically diﬀerent actions since the
hashing function is not allowed to hash these two states together. This would
eliminate much of the reason why we hash in the ﬁrst place, as we wish for
similar states to have similar indexation.
So far, no good models using state-space hashing have been found, so perhaps
such solutions are not very promising, one possible reason being that the hashing
solutions would have to be problem speciﬁc. The hashing function would take a
function s1 and approximate it as some value s′
1, however for some other state s2
which we naturally would consider to be close to s1, the hashing function would
have to guarantee that it also approximates to s′
1 for the function to work. The
Q-function values for s1 and s2 would then be found in s′
1.
Instead, neural networks approximate not just the states, but the entire function
itself. On the surface, neural networks perform similar tasks to simple state
approximation, in that they both take a state and produce a set of values for
actions, but they have key diﬀerences in their representations. For one, when
changing a value in the neural network, it requires potentially changing the
entire network. This implies certain things about the convergence of methods
that attempt to use neural networks, as the networks have to uphold some degree
of guarantee that previously learned values will not be entirely forgotten.
2.3.2
Basic Neural Networks
The basic neural network is a series of layers of what is known as sigmoid
neurons. Each sigmoid in a fully-connected network is fully connected to every
sigmoid in the next layer by a weighted connection, by giving its output as input
to each of these neurons, each with a unique weight, see Figure 2.2.
A sigmoid neuron is a small entity that takes a vector input x and produces an
output z according to the logistic function:
σ(z) =
1
1 −exp −P
j wjxj −b
(2.3)
The b in Equation 2.3 is representing what is known as the activation bias in
the sigmoid and is one of the key components that each individual sigmoid uses
==PAGE:30==
24
Multi-agent Reinforcement Learning
Figure 2.2: A Basic (Sigmoid) Neuron
to train itself. The w is the weight of each input variable x, which is what the
sigmoid learns to adjust in order to approximate the output z.
Figure 2.3: A Fully Connected Network
The simplest neural network ties many of these valued neurons together in layers,
so that each neuron in layer n receives all outputs z from the layer n −1 and
releases its output as input values to each neuron in layer n + 1.
While more complicated networks exist that serve other purposes, this most
basic conﬁguration is the network that provides the Q-Function approximation
that we are interested in. Sometimes, the previous layer n−1 will be conﬁgured
so as to better analyze picture- or time- sensitive inputs. The training of these
==PAGE:31==
2.3 Neural Networks
25
networks consists then in adjusting the biases b and weights w to ﬁt the target
values z. We will not go into detail with how exactly this training is performed,
as we are only interested in what the networks can do, rather than with how to
implement them.
2.3.3
Reinforcement Learning Networks
Among the list of networks available, some have proven to be more interesting
in the context of reinforcement learning than others.
More speciﬁcally, the
Falcon, which is able to adapt speciﬁcally to the (state,action,reward) tuple of
reinforcement learning.
Adaptive Resonance Theory (ART) is a technique used to deal with the plastic-
ity/stability problem one can encounter in a neural network. This issue comes
from the fact that we have a hard time dealing with learning new information
without risking losing older information. It uses a combination of fuzzy logic,
neural networks and learning theory to provide a network that can constantly
learn new information without forgetting, while never learning so "fast" that it
forgets older material.
ART learns by interpreting an input I in a short-term memory bank, which we
call F1. This memory is then tested against another memory bank, F2, which
represents the clusters, or knowledge, that the system has learned so far. These
clusters compete with each other and the cluster with the highest test value is
selected as the one recognized by the input. When a cluster has been selected,
it is then tested again against the input layer F1 and if the information is close
enough to the original input I, it is said to "resonate" with what we know
and we can start learning. If no information resonates, we have acquired new
information and a new cluster is created.
FALCON was devised as a way of implementing ART in the context of rein-
forcement learning, through restructuring of the internals.
In reinforcement
learning, we deal mainly with three components, a state input, action output
and ﬁnally reward input. For each of these, the FALCON creates a short-term
memory bank (F1), which is linked to the same long-term memory bank (F2).
Thus each of these short-term memories can process input individually while
working together to maximize the rewards on the long-term. The falcon was
tested successfully on mineﬁeld simulations, but due to the relative diﬃculty of
implementing it, this design is not considered much further.
==PAGE:32==
26
Multi-agent Reinforcement Learning
Google Deep-Q Learning
Google’s Deep-Q-Network (DQN) has inspired
a lot of research in reinforcement learning, as it is one of the most successful
applications of reinforcement learning so far, being able to learn to play simple
games. DQN makes use of something called "Deep Neural Networks" (DNN),
which enhances the normal NN capacity by adding extra layers of specialized
NN. Each image of the game was pre-procesessed by a NN before being sent to
another NN that would handle it, and so on. While there is little new in what
has been done in DQN from the perspectives of RL and DNN, the successful
merging of the two techniques are what makes it such an interesting and powerful
method.
==PAGE:33==
Chapter 3
The POMDP
3.1
Motivation
At this point, we have made one very important assumption about all our so-
lutions. Namely, the agent knows what state it is in. In order to remove this
assumption we have to modify our solutions to accommodate belief about the
current state rather than certain knowledge about it.
The solution to this is using POMDPs, where we change the problem descrip-
tion so that we include observations as a return from the underlying system,
rather than rewards. The goal of maximizing rewards remains the same, but
the immediate value from a (state,action,state) tuple is not necessarily visible
to the agent. The agent can then update its beliefs about the system, given the
observations it receives, but this causes some problems. As we shall see later,
since beliefs are continuously deﬁned, we have to take measures to make the
belief states computable.
One big issue with most POMDP solutions so far is that the belief state is
deﬁned over the original state-space. This is not a desirable attribute, as this
implies agent knowledge of the system before being introduced to it since it
knows the states that are possible, it just does not know exactly which one it
occupies.
==PAGE:34==
28
The POMDP
3.2
Histories
When it comes to POMDPs, one potential solution we can produce is to map
observation/action histories to states. If we have an initial state s0 and perform
a sequence of actions −→a to which we receive a sequence of observations −→o , each
of these combinations of sequences and initial states will produce what we call
an information state.
While we can immediately tell that for any inﬁnite horizon problem, solutions of
this type are intractable, as the number of possible states becomes inﬁnite. It is
therefore impossible for us to ever visit the same state twice and we can therefore
not ever learn anything, as the agent continually travels between unexplored
new states. It is however a useful solution type for ﬁnite horizon problems and
approximating inﬁnite horizon problem solutions.
Figure 3.1: State Transition for MDP
Figure 3.2: State Transition for POMDP
In Figure 3.1 and 3.2 the crucial diﬀerence between information states and tra-
ditional states.
In the information states, the state is a derivate of all the
information that has proceeded it while the states in a traditional MDP can be
deﬁned by their state alone. This is what causes information states to be im-
possible to solve for the inﬁnite horizon problem, as there exists an information
state for each possible sequence of observations.
==PAGE:35==
3.3 Belief Vectors
29
Notice how an information state is only dependent on the initial state s and the
observations −→o that succeeds it. While individual representation might diﬀer, it
is suﬃcient to represent each information state with the sequence of observations
in most cases.
Previously, we considered policies as stochastic, that is, for each state we guar-
anteed that π(s, a) ̸= 0 for all a ∈A to ensure convergence as each action was
tested at least sometimes in a given state.
If we disregard this property and assume that policies are deterministic, that is,
each state s produces a single output action a, π(s, a) = 1, then each information
state can be encoded using simply the observation space by the following.
For the initial state, s, we also have the initial action a as the policy in these
cases is deterministic (as we previously established). The only missing piece of
information that is required to determine the next belief state s′ is the observa-
tion o, which resulted from action a in state s. In the same fashion, information
state I(s′′|s, −→o ) is the result of performing the action a′ in state s′|s, o and
receiving observation o′.
3.3
Belief Vectors
The POMDP tuple is an extension of the normal MDP tuple, including obser-
vations, deﬁned as (S, A, T, R, Ω, O). The S, A, T, R symbols are as they were
in the MDP with S being the statespace, A being the action set mapping from
states, T being the transition probabilities for states and actions and R being
the reward for a transition.
The added symbols, Ωand O are what adds the observations.
Ωis the set
of observations that we can receive and O is analogous with our transition
probability in that it deﬁnes the probability of observing an observation o ∈Ω.
In a normal MDP solution, each agent knows the state that it currently occupies,
however since we no longer have explicit knowledge of this information, we
instead deﬁne a belief vector over the state-space.
This belief vector can then be updated using the observations we may acquire
after performing an action, giving us a real-valued vector. At this point, the
simple solution would be to deﬁne each belief vector as its own state and perform
generic Q-learning on these states. However, this is not a possible solution, since
we have deﬁned the belief vector over real numbers, giving us an inﬁnite number
==PAGE:36==
30
The POMDP
of states.
For now, we have not identiﬁed any solution to this problem. The ﬁrst part
of our solution is the ensure that our value functions for our belief vectors are
always piece-wise linear and convex.
This makes sense, given that our underlying system is an MDP. Remember that
in a normal MDP, we map State/Action pairs to values based on the expected
reward for performing the given action in a given state. If we assume for a
moment that we our expected reward takes into account only one action per
State/Action pair, and we then believe that we are in this State with a proba-
bility 1, then we should estimate that our reward for performing an action in
this belief state should be close to that of the actual state/action pair.
Consider a system with 2 states and 1 action. Since we have only one action
to consider, there is no decision making involved, but we still need to somehow
evaluate the quality of this action.
In state S1, the reward for performing the action a is 5 and in state S2, the
reward for performing the action is 0. We are assuming the we might change
state and that the belief vector will update on its own based on the observations
we get.
Figure 3.3: A Linear Equation
For this system, if we believe that we are in S1, the value of performing our
action is 5 and likewise, if we are in S2, the value is 0. If we deﬁned our belief
state as the probability that we are in state S1, where 1 is that we are certainly
in S1 and 0 that we are certainly in S2 (since, if we are not in S1 we must be
in S2), we can create a linear equation α1 on the expected reward according to
our current belief, as seen in Figure 3.3.
We now know that we can create a linear equation for one action and two
states. This solution can be extended to accomodate belief vectors that consider
==PAGE:37==
3.3 Belief Vectors
31
Figure 3.4: A linear equation for α2
Figure 3.5: The value of our beliefs
possible more than 2 states, but with a linear approach to each of these absolute
values in the same fashion as we have seen in Figure 3.3.
Consider now the problem of adding several actions to the problem. For now,
we have only considered the problem given a single action, but if we wish to
extend this with multiple actions, we need a way to process this.
The problem is now deﬁned with two actions a1 and a2. We now create another
linear equation α2, seen in Figure 3.4 which deﬁnes the value we expect from
performing action a2 given our belief vector.
The question now returns to the decision making process, "What should I do
next?". We already established the value of each action given our belief vector,
so to answer this question we can look at each of our linear equations, α1 and
α2, in order to ﬁnd the best action, since it will be the one with the largest
value.
We can now perform some level of policy evaluation on our belief vector.
Vπ(b) = max
α∈Γπ
X
s∈S
b(s)α(s)
(3.1)
==PAGE:38==
32
The POMDP
The Γπ seen in Equation 3.1 is the set of all linear equations for our policy π.
This belief state evaluation is important, as it lets us evaluate a single belief
state.
We’re not quite done yet however. While our policy evaluation method will not
change, we still have to add to the number of linear equations we consider. For
now, we have only considered an action and its immediate reward.
However, in order to maximize the total reward, we have to take into account
future states as well. It is from this that much of the computational expen-
siveness is added, since now we have to accommodate for not just actions, but
strategies.
Consider for a moment that when we perform an action, we can receive an
observation. In that case, each observation will update our belief vector. An
action that gives us a high immediate reward, but leaves us in a belief state
where rewards are low should be considered less desirable than an action that
will give us a moderate immediate reward but a high expected reward.
We are now trying to deﬁne the variable α which we previously described vaguely
as the expected reward given a state and an action. For a horizon 1 problem, we
are interested in the immediate reward for a speciﬁc action, therefore consider
the option of doing action a in s. In this case, the expected reward will be called
ρ(a, s). For the horizon 1 problem, our linear equations need only consider this
one action, αi(s) = ρ(ai, s), allowing us to construct one linear equation for
each action.
For larger, ﬁxed horizon problems, we solve the problem inductively. Given a set
action, we now receive an observation, which will be used to update our beliefs.
If we then precompute our belief vector given said observation, the value we can
now perform a smaller horizon problem. In a horizon 2 problem, the problem
reduces to that of an immediate reward, horizon 1 problem.
The issue here is that we may have many diﬀerent observations. In order to
accommodate this, we sum up the observations, scaling them with the proba-
bility of observing them. For the horizon 2 problem, if we perform action a1,
the reward for performing action a2 is given by the value function ρ.
α1,2(s) = ρ(a2, s) +
X
o∈Ω
O(o|s, a)ρ(a1, s′)
(3.2)
Where s′ in Equation 3.2 is the resultant state from performing action a1. We
==PAGE:39==
3.4 Dec-POMDP
33
see also from this equation that the ρ(a1, s′) has the form of our horizon 1 linear
equations, allowing us to rewrite this equation to a more general form.
α1,2(s) = ρ(a2, s) +
X
o∈Ω
O(o|s, a)α1(s)
(3.3)
We are close to having a deﬁnition for the inﬁnite horizon problem, but we still
have to take into account the ﬁnal problem in solving POMDPs, which is what
happens when we take into account all possible combinations of observations
and actions. Consider that after we perform action a1 we observe exactly the
observation o1. In other words, we are trying to answer the question "If we
perform action a1 and receive exactly observation a2, what is the reward for
performing the next action.
α1|1,2(s) = ρ(a2, s) +
X
o∈Ω
O(o|s, a)α1(s)
(3.4)
As one can tell from this description, this is rather problematic because we are
now trying to enumerate and evaluate all possible solution strategies in order
to evaluate the belief space.
As such, solutions in POMDP are heuristic or
approximative instead.
What is good about this type of solution is that it
requires no more space than traditional MDP solutions.
Since the observations are deﬁned over the state-space o ∈S, we do not ever have
to believe there are more states than there are. Compare this to the information
state solution which provides an inﬁnite number of states and the two solution
types provide a rather large diﬀerence in solution qualities. Belief vectors will
maintain space-eﬃciency at the cost of time while information states will cost
space while being time-eﬃcient. That last part is somewhat false however, as
most solutions for MDPs scale solution time with the state-space. Both of these
solutions currently require heuristics to be solved however.
3.4
Dec-POMDP
At this point, going straight from multi-agent reinforcement learning, we see
that there is one signiﬁcant problem in that the goal of what we are trying to
solve is not clearly deﬁned. Since there are many diﬀerent options for solving a
multi-agent system based on what information you believe you have available,
the solutions and results can vary greatly.
==PAGE:40==
34
The POMDP
There are two dimensions that we are particularly interested in for theoretical
purposes. One dimension is the degree of information sharing between agents in
the system. When creating the model, each agent is allowed a certain amount of
information regarding the state of the system and the other agents. As explained
in a previous example, one could allow the agents to have knowledge over the
other agents’ policies or state variables. If all the state variables and policies
are known by each agent, the problem turns into that of a single-agent MDP,
attempting to solve for a joint-action space.
The other dimension is the degree of information that is available to each agent
from the actual state of the system.
So far, we have mostly explored ideas
where the the system could be described accurately as an MDP, which requires
that all information that is necessary to make a decision is present.
As we
have seen, this is not always an assumption that we wish to uphold, since we
might not always have access to all the state information or we might not wish
for each agent to know about the policies of all other agents. In these cases,
since the requirement of the MDP is not upheld, we say that we are working
in a partially observable MDP (POMDP), which requires a diﬀerent solution
method than ordinary MDP.
In one extreme end of these two dimensions, we have our regular MDP where
all information is known to one agent. In the other extreme, we have a limited
amount of information spread out over several diﬀerent agents who do not com-
municate in any way. The latter is what is known as a decentralized POMDP
(Dec-POMDP) and is signiﬁcantly harder to solve.
One tremendous issue with a decentralized POMDP is that we can no longer
maintain an update function based on our beliefs, since we have no knowledge of
the actions and received observations of other agents, essentially meaning that
we are now blind to even the most basic idea of where we are.
The solutions to Dec-POMDP are almost always too slow, since the general case
has is NEXP-complete, however we do have a complete solution to the problem.
The idea is that we construct information states as we would for the POMDP
for each agent. Each agent will have an idea of the initial state of the other
agents in the scene and, using this information and information on the number
of possible observations, construct all sequences of information states possible.
Each of these information states are then used to derive all the diﬀerent policies
of each other agent.
The next step is then to "trim" the policies of all the
policies that provide strictly worse results and using the agents own policy and
the belief of other possible policies, decide on the next action. As one can see,
this becomes increasingly more and more complicated.
==PAGE:41==
3.4 Dec-POMDP
35
The key thing to learn from this is that the Dec-POMDP problem is NEXP-
Complete. However, since one of our goals is to remove the need for complete
state awareness of the environment. One such way of doing that, is by allowing
centralization of the issue and for that, we can use communication.
==PAGE:42==
36
The POMDP
==PAGE:43==
Chapter 4
Communication
4.1
Motivation
When it comes to communication, we have a large amount of options available
because we are no longer trying to solve the entire spectrum of centralization
problems in reinforcement learning. Rather, we ﬁnd a problem and solve for
that, as everything in-between total decentralization and total centralization
requires at least some degree of communication.
Consider Figure 4.1. The problem of communication is to ﬁnd a point on the
illustrated line which solves for the speciﬁc communication problem one is cur-
rently faced with. If you have a case of almost complete centralization, you are
making a lot of assumptions about the ability for the agents to communicate
their states with each other, while the decentralized cases makes assumptions
about the inability of the agents. While it is possible solutions exist that solve all
of these communication problems with one uniﬁed technique, no such solution
has been seen yet.
In some cases, these individual solutions come from a need to develop a commu-
nication solution to a speciﬁc problem without communication requirements.
In such solutions, communication can be seen as enhancement of the regular
solutions promising faster convergence properties, given the larger amount of
==PAGE:44==
38
Communication
Figure 4.1: Spectrum of Centralization
centralization, while also requiring less space and time than a completely cen-
tralized solver.
There are several types of communication being employed in reinforcement
learning, diﬀering in how exactly the communication happens. The solutions
can therefore be very diﬀerent from each other dependent on the type. A prob-
lem with this is that each solution that ﬁts itself to a speciﬁc problem, will
require certain assumptions to be upheld before the solution can make sense,
namely the assumptions that are made in the problem. Take for instance the
method of solving Tic-Tac-Toe which was discussed earlier, where each agent
possessed knowledge of the other agents actions. In this case, we have to make
the assumption that this information is available to each other agent, whereas
this might not be true in the general case.
The purpose of communication is to share variables that would otherwise be
hidden from other agents. There are several reasons as to why you might choose
to hide variables, some of which are that it makes modelling the problem easier,
more realistic, or just because it is a requirement for solvability. One of the
better examples as to why one would choose to hide variables from other agents
in a multi-agent system is that revealing them will add a large amount of state-
complexity to the system. There is also the conﬂict of coordination, when the
policy is made visible to other agents.
Each agent may initially propose an
action to the other agents based on the assumption that the other agents will
follow their policy, however their policies might depend on the actions of others,
and chance they can change.
==PAGE:45==
4.2 Communication Types
39
4.2
Communication Types
There are two main types of communication, explicit and implicit communica-
tion. Explicit communication is when the communication is done through an
explicit set of communication messages, while implicit communication is done
through the state of the world.
Consider the problem of trying to ﬁnd a friend in a forest. With explicit com-
munication you could call the friend and he could communicate with you how
he got there or what the place he currently is at looks like. In other words, he
could communicate with you information that you could not determine your-
self. On the other hand, implicit communication would be to place branches in
meaningful ways, so as to indicate location, meaning that you can locate your
friend without explicit need of the friends help. As a special mention, consider
globally known variables. If a variable is known to all agents in the system,
each agent will be able to determine that the other agents also know of this
variable and its value. Implicit communication in reinforcement learning can
thus be done by performing actions that change the system and theoretically,
no development is necessary as agents should learn to adjust the environment
by themselves in order to communicate if doing so serves to provide a higher
reward. Implicit communication in reinforcement learning is not restricted to
information shared through change of state, but can also be changed through
rewards. If the system is using a joint-reward function, each agent will receive
information about the other agents through the returned reward, thus implicitly
communicating.
While implicit communication is interesting and provides good solutions to
certain problems, such as in the value or reward sharing methods (e.g., ND-
POMDP), we are more interested in explicit communication between agents
here.
Explicit communication is when we build some system speciﬁcally for commu-
nication on top of an already existing one. Since at this point there are no
restrictions on what exactly this communication system is, the solutions here
tend to vary greatly.
In a more formal deﬁnition, in an explicit communication system we need to
append to our existing deﬁnition a set of symbols, e ∈Σ, where e is a message
constant located in the set of constants Σ. Let us for a moment keep in mind
that the size of the set of symbols can be reduced if we allow sequencing of
multiple symbols in a row. In such cases, the agents in reinforcement learning
can be taught how to encode a sequence if they are allowed some arbitrary time-
frame for communication whenever they are told to communicate. Contrarily,
==PAGE:46==
40
Communication
if they are only allowed a single unit of time for communication, the set of com-
munication symbols must be large enough to accommodate the set of messages
they wish to send.
The main diﬀerence here is the protocol that agents follow. One of the more
investigated means of communication between agents in reinforcement learning
is communication of histories, policies, and beliefs. In such situations, the pro-
tocols are designed by the researchers, not the agents. While it is somewhat
unnatural to allow an agent to share its observations or, even more so, the en-
tirety of its observation and action histories, doing so provides solvability for
certain types of otherwise decentralized issues.
1
A = GetPolicyAction ()
2
(O,R) = DoAction (A)
3
ShareObservation (O)
4
O’ = ReadSharedObservations ()
5
UpdateState (O,O’ )
6
PerformQLearning (R)
Consider Algorithm 4.2, where communication is being employed in an otherwise
decentralized environment. Perhaps one of the simplest ways of implementing
observation sharing, each agent receives an observation for its actions and simply
shares this observation with all other agents. The result is that no agent knows
anything about the state of the system that the other agents do not.
It is important to understand how rewards are similar to observations, but
should not be usable as observations. A reward could be used to carry infor-
mation, which is often useful in reward shaping, but provides complications
when attempting to construct a multi-agent system. Below we will discuss this
issue of observations/rewards and how reward structuring can give undesired
observations.
4.2.1
Observations contra Rewards
Let us quickly revisit the issue of the mountain cart, see section 1.1.4.3. One
of the ways of solving the mountain cart issue is to constantly reward the agent
based on the altitude that it currently has and give a high reward based on the
agent reaching the top of the hill.
If we say that the distance from the bottom to hilltop is d, then we give the
reward −d for each time the agent is at the resting height and −d
2
when it is
halfway. In this form of reward shaping the distance to the top of the hill is
==PAGE:47==
4.3 Solutions
41
given through the rewards, while it is not visible in the observations. In other
words, the reward is implicitly carrying observations.
It provides the agent with a good reward structure for learning, but we may have
inadvertently provided the agent with information that we did not wish for it to
have, resulting in an oversimpliﬁcation of the problem. Likewise, the reward is
given by the nature of the state and requires an obvious correspondence between
the state and the reward to be useful. When performing reward shaping in multi-
agent systems, one has to be particularly careful with such reward shaping,
since it centralizes the problem. This is particularly important to watch out
for in Dec-POMDP solutions as these problems are supposed to be completely
decentralized.
4.3
Solutions
The ﬁrst thing to consider when creating solutions is the nature of the prob-
lem. In the previous sections we have described several ways of dealing with
reinforcement learning from the perspective of individual agents trying to solve
a problem under minimal assumptions.
Essentially, our solution will have to ﬁt our problem, so depending on whether
we deﬁne our problem as an MMDP or Dec-POMDP, the solution space changes.
In an MMDP, there should theoretically never be a need for communication, as
all states should be visible. As we previously discussed however, we may wish to
hide certain variables. Hiding variables goes against our deﬁnition of an MDP,
but we can make them visible using communication.
One common thing to these solutions is generally to add a communication cost
to the explicit communication paradigms. If we have explicit communication
with no communication cost, the solution will be the same as centralizing the
issue to some degree. Therefore, these solutions seek to lower communication
cost as well, by deciding on what to communicate and when. If we assume an
equal communication cost on all messages then no message will be as good as
sending the complete observation/action history since from this information, all
that the sender knows can be calculated by the receiver.
==PAGE:48==
42
Communication
4.4
ND-POMDP
The ﬁrst communication solution we shall look at, is that of the Network-
Distributed POMDP (ND-POMDP). We will see that communication modelling
can make the problems easier to solve, but we shall more importantly see how
a POMDP can be solved as a normal MDP, with the use of information states.
Remember that information states are intractable to use on the inﬁnite horizon
problems, as the number of possible information states are exponential on the
horizon, meaning an inﬁnite number of states. They chose to address this prob-
lem here[NVTY05] by using a ﬁnite size for the observation history, allowing us
to revisit the same information state.
4.4.1
Mutual Notiﬁcation Algorithm
The mutual notiﬁcation algorithm was developed as means to centralize the
issues of MARL agent re-learning the same information. In this algorithm, each
agent will share information about (state,action) pairs that they discover to be
valuable. The basic idea behind this is that if an agent performs an action a in
a state s and the new Q-value Q(s, a) is some value ϵ higher than the previous
Q-value, then the other agents will be notiﬁed of this transition.
This solution only works when the two agents share problems.
Recall the
Hunter-Seeker problem from the introduction.
In our solution, both agents
are supposed to avoid walls. If one agent bumps into a wall, the agent would
receive a big penalty and the mutual notiﬁcation algorithm would kick in and
share that moving into a wall is not a good idea. It would not work with regards
to hunting the prey however, as only one agent can catch it. This would require
that we as designers decided very speciﬁcally what transition values would be
shared in addition to not solving the problem of centralizing the problem from
the perspective of partial observability.
4.4.2
General Communication
Since we now have established that communication can be understood as an
additional framework that is built on top of a reinforcement learning scheme, we
now seek to answer the question of whether such a framework can be transferred
between problems.
The general idea here is that if an agent has learned to
communicate with one agent about a task, then it should be possible for this
==PAGE:49==
4.4 ND-POMDP
43
agent to communicate more easily with another agent about a similar task, as
it has now taught itself some protocols for communicating.
The problem here comes from some fundamental questions that in the context
of speciﬁc communication models have relatively precise answers, but here no
longer have a straight-forward response. The ﬁrst of such questions is why the
agents communicate in the ﬁrst place. The most generic answer is probably that
they are communicating in order to transfer state information to other agents,
but such an answer does not make the distinction between letting the receiving
agents calculate the state of the sender or the sender sending the information
about its actual state.
In many cases, sending the actual state information seems like a superior choice,
since considering that we work with MDPs, prior state information should not
be necessary, as all decisions can be made with the current state information.
This means that an agent sending its state information will be able to convey
all important decision to the receiver based entirely on its state. As we have
seen before however, the agent might in fact not know the actual state. This is
especially true for the case of the Dec-POMDP, which complicates the question
of why we wish to communicate, since we now have to decide upon sharing
current state information and sharing what led us to derive our current state
information.
We already know that no message will be superior to the complete observa-
tion/action history of the sender, but this message type is extremely expensive
and may not be a solution we want to implement.
Another question we wish to answer is what exactly should be send to the agents.
In order to represent the state of the sending agent, there is a number of things
that we can choose to send, but we might in fact not wish to send the state
itself. Consider for a moment multiple agents in an MDP environment with
full observability, attempting to learn a joint policy to solve the game they are
playing. Instead of sending the entire state with variables and policy, a fraction
of the state could be sent with only the most useful information attached.
If an agent in such an environment learns that a speciﬁc action in a speciﬁc
state (the Q-value of the state) provides a high expected reward compared to
what it previously believed, it could communicate this expectation change by
sending the Q-value, letting other agents simply set this Q-value to their own
without need to experience the state.
Such a communication form is very easily generalized to a large set of problems,
but if we consider for a moment what exactly this communication represents,
we see that the solution represents a centralization of the problem, rather than
==PAGE:50==
44
Communication
an actual communication model. One can easily be dissuaded from accepting
centralizing solutions of this kind, as the solution appears unnatural.
4.4.3
Transfer Learning
The overall problem here is the way in which communication is deﬁned.
It
can only assist a rather small subset of problems compared to a symbol-based
communication where semantics are indicative of some intention, not a way
for transmitting learned knowledge.
This problem is generally recognized in
Reinforcement Learning as Transfer Learning (TL). In TL, the issue is how to
transfer knowledge gained from a source task to a target task in such a way that
learning the target task becomes faster than if no transfer was applied. TL has
to solve a number of problems regarding the transferability from the source task
to the target tasks. How do the TL methods assume similarity between the two
tasks? What information can be transferred and how?
One might ask why transfer learning is important to communication, since it can
be solved without it. Communication in a multi-agent system depends on the
fundamentals of TL, since TL is about reshaping dissimilar systems in such a way
that they can understand each other in the same framework. Understanding this
reshaping is therefore beneﬁcial to understanding how communication methods
can be developed. Vice versa, transfer learning is about having one agent that
knows something teach another agent something it does not know, which might
require communication.
4.4.3.1
Task Diﬀerences
We shall consider ﬁrst of all how exactly diﬀerent tasks can vary. There is quite
a large number of ways that we can vary a simple MDP to create a diﬀerent task
and we shall denote each of these with a separate parameter. We can change
the state transition function, t (a door that could normally simply be passed
could now require a key), the state space, initial and ﬁnal states s, the variables
in each state v, the reward function r, and the action set a. A key thing to
notice here is that each problem within the diﬀerent MDPs diﬀers in terms of
the symbols being used. In transfer-learning, we are therefore trying to ﬁnd a
way to unify missing or changing symbols from diﬀerent MDPs in order to turn
two problems into the same problem.
==PAGE:51==
4.4 ND-POMDP
45
4.4.3.2
Source Task
It is also of interest what our chosen source task is. The most obvious solution
is to decide on both source and target tasks, allowing for an arbitrary amount
of transferability between the tasks. Some solutions do not need direct designer
decision and allow instead keeping a library of source tasks.
The agent can
use them to compare against the target task, deciding upon a best suited source
task. Some of these solutions will even be able to modify the original source task
library to better accommodate new information gained from the transferring of
knowledge.
4.4.3.3
Knowledge Transfer
This is the more diﬃcult part that we discussed in the previous section. We
are speciﬁcally interested in what knowledge is being transferred from task to
task. The previous discussion mentioned transfer of actual state information
between agents. Knowledge transfer in TL has to be more generic, as we are
no longer dealing with agents carrying state information, but tasks carrying
solution information.
4.4.3.4
Task Mapping
Task Mapping is an essential part to understand in TL, as it is one of the
complicated features that deﬁne transferability. Assume for a moment that we
have a robot that moves along an axis. In one setting, the Action space involves
the actions {Forward,Backward} and in another setting, {Left,Right}. Under
normal circumstances, these two action spaces produce the same results but
have diﬀerent semantic meanings.
If for example we introduced a single action, Turn, in both of the action spaces,
these problems would become diﬀerent and could not be easily transferred.
Therefore, it is necessary to create a mapping from one task to another, so
as to accommodate semantic diﬀerences in variables, actions, states and such.
4.4.3.5
An Example in TL
We will go over a small example in TL so that we may use the concepts before
discussing them further.
==PAGE:52==
46
Communication
In [AR02], they solve the Taxi Domain and a variant of this domain using TL.
In order to apply TL, one must ﬁrst allow for some sort of state abstraction in
order to allow knowledge to be transferred. In this paper, the authors did this
by introducing the concept of choice states, states where the choices are deﬁned
as subroutines or "options". At each of these choice points, the task is then to
choose the subroutine with the highest expected reward. Note that this method
of dividing the MDP into subroutines is not unusual and is named a Semi-MDP
(SMDP).
At each choice step, the learning agent has to choose between a set of macro
actions, and estimate the reward for performing this macro action, the reward
that follows after performing this macro action in the current subroutine and
the reward for the rest of the game, following the completion of the current
subroutine.
In the Taxi domain, the agent is tasked with picking up passengers and driving
them to destination points in a grid.
This problem can be subdivided into
subroutines such as "Pickup and Deliver passenger X" or "Drive from A to B".
As such, the source tasks in this case would be the diﬀerent subroutines that
the agent learns to perform. Each "Pickup and Deliver" subroutine would be
decomposable into "Drive" subroutines.
If the agent has already solved the task of how to drive from certain locations,
it can then use that knowledge to quickly learn how to solve the task of deliv-
ering passengers. In this case, the drive subroutine is the source task and the
delivering passengers subroutine is the target task. The main diﬀerence here is
the state transition function changing as well as the state space, while the state
variables and action space do not change.
4.5
Hunter-Seeker Revisited
We will now re-introduce a problem that allows us to investigate the beneﬁts of
communication and the eﬀects of TL. We will focus on two modiﬁed versions of
the Hunter-Seeker problem. They will allows us to employ both communication
techniques and TL techniques. The problems are deﬁned as follows.
Two agents are working together to hunt a target prey. The two hunters have
diﬀerent state variables and action spaces. Hunter A has the ability to sense
the prey and can communicate its state to the other hunter. Hunter B cannot
sense the location of the prey, but instead can capture the prey if it is next to
it.
==PAGE:53==
4.6 Solving for Communication
47
The prey itself follows a basic escape heuristic. If there is an agent within 3
tiles, the prey will try to escape by moving away from the closest agent and if
no agent is within distance it will move randomly, or do nothing.
In the second problem, the prey will follow the same heuristic but now both
agents A and B are able to both capture the prey, sense it and communicate
the position to the other agent.
The reward scheme for both problems is simple. For every time unit that the
prey is remains free both agents lose points, and upon capture both agents are
rewarded.
If an agent can communicate, it can do so but for every time it
communicates it loses points. If the agents collide with each other or collide
with a wall, then both agents will lose points. The initial state distribution
will have each agent in ﬁxed positions, but the prey will have a random initial
position.
The problems we are trying to solve here is ﬁrst to set up a solution for the
instance where each agent has to learn a speciﬁc task. This part will require
that we construct a basic protocol for the two agents to communicate with each
other. After having obtaining a solution for this particular problem, the goal
is to solve for the TL part of the problem. This involves constructing some
set of basic state abstractions. Our action space in both problems is the same,
however the agent that once had no sensing ability now does have it, and the
agent that once had the sensing ability will have a diﬀerent transition function,
as it can now also catch the prey.
We will maintain a rigid communication
protocol throughout.
4.6
Solving for Communication
First, we shall consider the problem where each agent has a diﬀerent role.
We have to ﬁnd a good way to represent the state of the system and consider the
options for state abstractions. We have to deﬁne what variables make up the
states for each agent ﬁrst, which will impact how we can abstract our states later
for TL. We shall make some restrictions here ﬁrst regarding the task diﬀerences,
which we use to make some requirements for our state representations.
The ﬁrst restriction is that the actions should remain constant. We will divide
the time-frames into two parts, the action phase and the communication phase.
The action phase comes ﬁrst, where each agent decides upon an action given
the current state of the system. The communication phase occurs after this, as
==PAGE:54==
48
Communication
a separate phase in-between two action phases. In the communication phase,
agents who can communicate do so through a disjoint channel. Since the goal
is to keep a constant action space, this communication phase is not considered
for TL.
Let us now turn to sensing. Each agent will perceive the world with absolute
precision with respect to what it is allowed to perceive. The non-sensing agent
will be allowed to perceive exactly where it itself is on the map.
At this point we have to consider whether we should construct this problem as
a POMDP.1 Given that we have limited ourselves to a speciﬁc problem, it is
not necessarily correct to do so, if given a good reward shaping. The key point
here is that both agents are trying to maximize their scores and as such, as
long as at least one agent has the ability to sense and communicate, this should
give centralization. Take as an example the issue with the hunter being unable
to sense the prey.
In a completely decentralized system, this hunter would
be unable to learn anything using RL, as catching the prey would be entirely
random. The sensing agent should learn that giving away the position of the
prey will cost points and only ultimately give a reward. A POMDP solution
should however be able to learn this faster, with higher rewards as the hunting
agent will not "forget" the location of the prey immediately and will be able to
follow the location of the prey.
For the communication, we will consider a simple heuristic solution at ﬁrst.
Each time the sensing agent observes the prey, it will notify the other agent.
4.7
Reasoning About Choices
First of all, let us consider the diﬀerent state-space representations available to
us by looking at what state variables we have to represent. We have to represent
the following entities:
1. Environment
2. Action
3. Agent
4. Observation
1We already know that the Dec-POMDP paradigm provides poor solution qualities, so we
will make sure not to use this category of solutions.
==PAGE:55==
4.7 Reasoning About Choices
49
5. Reward
6. Communication
We will discuss other entities such as the transition, observation functions, initial
and terminal states later.
4.7.1
Environment and Action
The environment is the actual state of the system. Each agent will be repre-
sented by two variables, the x and y that is required to represent its location.
Objects like walls will also be represented by such variables. There are two
things to point out here. One is that we do not use a complete representation
of the environment, because the policies of the agents are not part of it. The
other is that while we could have used real numbers, the simple discrete integer
representation adequate.
We’ve already discussed these issues, but let us consider some properties from
the perspective of designing this system. The ﬁrst is that we will not have to
update the policies using the transition function, which is very desirable as we
do not want the environment to maintain the policies but rather the agents
themselves. Second, we cannot send the policies to the agents as observations
from the environment since the environment simply does not contain this infor-
mation.
The environment does not include temporal information. While there is nothing
necessarily wrong with storing temporal information in the environment, doing
so could reﬂect the purpose of the environment.
It is the hiding of policies that causes decentralization. While some solutions
would include the ability to send policy information in the observations, we
aren’t particularly interested in those solutions here. Mostly this seems to be
done for the purpose of having a teacher/student relationship between agents,
so the student can learn the value of a state that a teacher has learned so far.
For the actions, we represent them using traditional joint-action vectors. Each
agent will be queried for its input to the vector and the vector is then executed
according to the transition function that we deﬁne. This is again a decentral-
ization of the task as the agents do not have to agree on a speciﬁc action. This
model type reﬂects a single environment update and a single agent update since
we ﬁnd one action (the joint action), use it to update our environment, and
later return selected state changes to the agent system.
==PAGE:56==
50
Communication
4.7.2
Agent and Observations
This part is signiﬁcantly trickier to represent, as we choose what is represented
here based not on necessity, but also on the solution that we are investigating.
Consider the agent’s knowledge of itself. The agent has a position deﬁned with
x,y-coordinates (as given in the environment), but we have to decide whether
the agents should always know this information. Likewise, whether the agent
knows about the coordinates of the other agent or the prey has to be decided.
We also have to decide how certain it is of what it knows. The observations
received from an environment could be erroneous or incomplete. Dealing with
erroneous observations is very diﬃcult in a normal MDP setting (though not
necessarily so in a POMDP setting) and will not be investigated.
Hunting Agent
The hunter does not know the prey’s location by default.
Should it know the position of the sensing agent? The purpose of hiding this
information is to add another thing that could be communicated by the sensing
agent to the hunter.
Let us investigate for a moment the eﬀects of letting the hunting agent know/not
know about the prey and sensor coordinates. If we choose not to let the hunt-
ing agent know about either of these variables, then it is a must that these
variables are communicated, because otherwise there will not be enough infor-
mation present to make the correct choice of actions. On the other hand, if
this information is available by default, then the issue becomes trivial as we are
solving for an MDP using reinforcement learning.
As such, we choose to hide the coordinates of the prey. While we could also
investigate hiding coordinates of the sensor, it will only make the issue more
diﬃcult to solve while not adding more complexity. Hiding the coordinates of
the prey means that, with no other information available, the MDP is techni-
cally unsolvable. The solvability then has to come from communication with
the sensing agent. We shall discuss how this communication will inﬂuence the
hunting agent later, after we’ve investigated how we want to communicate.
Sensing Agent
The sensor knows the positions of all players (including its
own). The reasoning here is the same as in the case of the hunting agent. It
is not necessary for both agents to be aware of each others positions, as only
one agent is required to avoid the other. With regards to the prey, we have
three options: the sensing agent is always aware of the prey, never aware, and
sometimes aware. If the sensing agent is never aware of the prey, then it is not
==PAGE:57==
4.8 Communication
51
possible to ﬁnd a deterministic solution to the problem, and instead solutions
will be stochastic.
The reason why it is stochastic is because the solutions
still exist, however the agents cannot determine them and will conclude on the
strategies that give the highest expected reward. We are however interested in
being able to communicate in order to create deterministic solutions and for
this, the sensing agent must at least sometimes know about the location of the
prey. The choice of how often the agent knows the location of the agent is the
eﬀect of communication.
4.8
Communication
4.8.1
Heuristic Solutions
In order to communicate the prey’s coordinates we have a list of options avail-
able.
The ﬁrst and simple one is to use explicit communication and simply
aﬀect the state of the other agent. The sensing agent receives observations and
sends these observations to the hunting agent. This essentially gives centraliza-
tion of the task, and the fact of communication is not very important, as the
environment could simply give the observations to the hunter.
Alternatively, we could implement other ways of communication. One such way
is a ruling system for the agents where the agents could decide on the actions
together. For example, the sensing agent can sense the diﬀerent situations that
the hunting agent cannot, and therefore can decide which action the hunting
agent should perform. Another way is policy value sharing, where each agent
shares with the other the values of their learned policies that the other has not
experienced yet.
While these options are viable, they are implemented using pre-designed heuris-
tics rather than something that the agent learns by its own. We are interested in
being able to apply techniques such as reward-shaping to enhance the learning
process. Since we are now potentially creating up to (rangex∗rangey)3∗actions
diﬀerent states (one range for both x and y for each agent), we must decide on
a good set of parameters to optimize the training. This does not simply mean
a good choice of rewards but also a good choice of α (learning rate) and γ
(discount) parameters.
So far, the state of the sensing agent is deﬁned with the players’ positions, which
means that all our information is based on location. We thus have no way of
including any temporal information yet, but there is a number of ways to do
==PAGE:58==
52
Communication
this. In order understand this better, we take a look at what exactly we are
trying to do with our communication.
4.8.2
Deﬁning the problem
Our agents will learn to communicate. Because of this, we want to implement
some form of policy that dictates the communication actions. This policy that
controls the communication will itself need to be deﬁned.
While some communication policies are connected directly to the normal action
policy, we will not do this. The way that these are usually connected is by
expanding on the number of actions available to the policy by adding messaging
actions. Consider a policy deﬁned with action a and message m. The resulting
policy could be deﬁned as the actions A = {a, m} or even A = {a, m, {am}} as
a variation.
Notice that we deﬁned messages as m instead of o, which indicates that at
this point, the messages are not exactly deﬁned as only the observations. The
meaning of each message doesn’t have to be pre-designed and can instead be
learned by the communicating agent. This type of solution has some problems
however. First of all, what are the ground messages for communication in such
a messaging system? For humans, this would be the diﬀerent tones of voice or
body language. For the agents, we can construct messages that agents can send
to each other. As an example, an agent can have a predeﬁned list of messages
that it sends, {m1, m2, m3}.
At this point however, we have already decided a fairly signiﬁcant amount of
the messaging protocol between the agents in deciding how many messages the
agents can communicate with.
The solution to this problem is not straight
forward.
At this point, each agent can be given two messages m1 and m2
and a frame of time to communicate in.
Agent A could send a number of
messages to Agent B in a speciﬁc order, thus creating a unique message M =
m1, m2, m1, . . ., for the same reasoning as with the inﬁnite horizon. The agent
then decides when to stop sending messages, allowing the receiver to interpret
this string of messages as its unique representation. In reinforcement learning,
one of the properties that have to be upheld is that each position is visited at
least inﬁnitely many times. This cannot be the case if we have an unlimited
number of messages, as we may encounter each message only once. As such,
with this property not upheld given that we have an inﬁnite number of messages,
this is not a possible solution.
Secondly, what do these messages mean? Both the sending and the receiving
==PAGE:59==
4.8 Communication
53
agent will have to be able to interpret these messages. Let’s think of two people
communicating with words. Each word can be used by the sender to transmit
information about the state the sender, and can be used by the receiver to
acquire information about the sender’s state. If one person says something that
another person does not understand, we would understand this as the receiver
having observed the message occurring but not know what to do with it.
This ﬁts perfectly into the description of a reinforcement learning MDP since
we can represent having received the message as a unique state. The persistence
of the message is left up to the design of the system. By persistence we mean
whether the observation of the message remains true or not.
4.8.3
Allowing Communication
There is a question that remains however. In an MDP, what is the diﬀerence
between sending a message with no well understood meaning and sending an
observation? In the case of sending an observation, we are modifying the state
of the receiver to allow the receiver to better understand the state, but it still
does not know what this state means. This is much like sending a message to
the receiver that the receiver does not know what to do with the state.
The important diﬀerence between sending a message and an observation is that
the number of observations that can be sent is related to the state while the
idea of sending a message is not. This would allow for two important things: a
message can be context dependent, meaning that it sets up a large amount of
information, or it could be free for the sender to learn whatever it wishes with.
However, how do you make the agent learn to send the messages?
It needs
a proper reward structure to learn this. For this, we have several options as
well. In order for the sender to learn how to communicate it needs positive
reinforcement when it communicates for the beneﬁt of the receiver and negative
otherwise.
One of the big issues is that we are trying to make two policies learn in conjunc-
tion with each other, so one agent is trying to learn something that requires the
other agent learning the same something. While technically not impossible to
learn, the way reinforcement learning is set up, this is not always very good for
learning.
Imagine a game with a state s consisting of observations o1, o2, o3. There are
two agents in this game, one who can see and one who can act. The seeing
agent is in possession of full state observability while the acting agent is not,
==PAGE:60==
54
Communication
meaning that the acting agent might posses o1, o3, but not o2. If o2 is crucial
to the solvability of the problem, then ideally the sensing agent should share
this observation to the acting agent, but without centralizing this issue, we
immediately have a problem.
We have two types of state, S1 = {o} and S2 = {o}/o2. S1 is the complete
state and S2 is the state without observation o2. The question is, how do we
represent this type of incomplete state? We already know that we can do so
using belief states and information states in POMDPs, but there is another
option that, although not always a good choice, can sometimes be suﬃcient for
optimal solutions.
First, let us consider some of the reasons why one would use belief vectors in a
POMDP solution. Take a problem where a robot is placed on a rail in-between
two walls that are 10m apart. The agent in this problem will have to navigate
between these two walls and make estimates on the value of certain positions.
The agent can choose to go left/right on the rail and will gradually receive
observations based on the result of the movement.
In order for us to construct this as a problem in reinforcement learning, we
have to construct a state space that represents this problem and an associated
transition function for the actions that we wish to represent. The traditional
reinforcement learning approach would tell us to discretize the space between
the walls. Each state could then represent a fraction of the distance between
the walls, say 1 meter per state, giving us 10 states in total. The transition
function is something that simply translates us from state to state according to
regular semantical meaning.
4.8.4
Deﬁning Messages
There are two problems with this. The ﬁrst is that we are now discretizing
the state-space, meaning that any actual solution using reinforcement learning
will have to ﬁnd a way to enforce these assumptions, which might not be ideal.
Second, it complicates the issue of having incomplete states. If we do not wish
for the agent to know exactly where it is at all times, then we have no good way
of modelling this except for with use of information states.
One of the solutions here is to use POMDP or one could use function approxi-
mators in NN. A POMDP solution would allow us to deﬁne this range between
the two walls using only 2 states. This allows us to deﬁne the belief vector over
the range of possible states here and we then move between the two states based
on the observation we receive.
==PAGE:61==
4.8 Communication
55
So how do we represent the absence of information in our MDP? How does it
make sense to do so? In order to avoid a very long discussion about this, we
shall examine a simple method of doing so and what it implies. In order to have
no information, we simply create an extra possible state for the variable that
represents "Unknown".
This observation state is unlike the others as it does not provide enough infor-
mation to solve the problem deterministically. This creates a problem for our
hunter because it is simultaneously trying to learn how to solve three diﬀerent
problems within the same policy space. Here we return to the problem that we
described long ago, where reinforcement learning currently does not ﬁnd good
solutions. It is very capable of learning the value of new states and using these
new-found values to enhance the values of new states, but it is not always good
at re-evaluating these states.
The three problems depend on the observation function of the environment,
which is deﬁned in the sensor agent.
It is in part because of this, that our
normal solutions might not apply directly, since most MDP solutions work with
a set of constant elements, such as a constant transition function and a constant
observation function.
Intuitively it might not make sense that a changing observation function mat-
ters to the solvability of the problem and theoretically, there is no reason why
a changing observation function should matter under the conditions that the
observation function converges to some constant function.
We must also make sure that the transition function is properly set up. Consider
the issue, as a poorly set up transition function will be responsible for some
stochastic behavior in the solution. Under normal circumstances with a single
agent, the way in which this would be done is that the single agent would
perform an action, the environment would respond with a state and that state
would be conveyed to the agent.
Since we are no longer working with a single-agent setting, the way we implement
the transition function could matter. Take the single join-action model that we
are trying to make.
While we are trying to enforce that the agent system
interacts with the environment system in such a way that the environment
receives a single representative action, the joint action formed by both agents,
each agent can perceive a diﬀerent environment each containing the other agent.
==PAGE:62==
56
Communication
4.9
Results
The above considerations have led us to an implementation of the Hunter-Seeker
Game (for the code see Appendix). The code was written in C++, using a home-
made engine for the simulations.
Each agent was deﬁned as using a policy,
with one policy for moving an agent and an additional policy for the sensing.
Finally, the prey was developed using a static policy. The most signiﬁcant tests
were made on the following types of problems, with the numbers indicating the
amount of games to be played for our results:
1 agent
1 Agent
2 Agents
Prey Not Moving
Stochastic Prey
Heuristic Prey
Full Observability
50.000
50.000
50.000
Partial Observability w/ Sensor
500.000
500.000
50.000
Partial Observability w/o Sensor
n/a
500.000
50.000
We have three cases with three variations of observability.
The purpose of
each case is to change the solvability of the problem by making the transition
functions more complex and the variations between the three cases is to give
comparative resuts.
For the cases with full observability, we expect the best possible results, as the
agent has all the information necessary. For the cases with partial observability,
that is when the agent knows its own position but not that of the prey, we have
one with sensor and one without. Those without sensor makes it impossible for
the hunter to accurately ﬁnd a solution to the problems and therefore will have
solutions that are entirely stochastic. With the sensor however, we end up in a
place between these two extremes.
The goal of each test is to land as closely to the performance of full observability.
The solutions with no observability are performed for the purpose of scale, so
that we can determine not just how close we are from the best solution but how
far we are from the worst. While training time is a factor in all cases, we have
discarded this for now as we are interested in the solvability properties and not
the properties of training. It is worth noting that only the case with no sensor
had signiﬁcantly slower training times.
For the case with one agent and a static prey, run over 50.000 games, the fully
observable case averaged a reward of 349 and the partially observable with no
sensor case averaged a reward of -25941. The result of partial observability was
337, which is very close to the best possible result.
==PAGE:63==
4.9 Results
57
This result is very important because here we can tell whether this communica-
tion solution provides solvability of the problems. What this means is two-fold:
the hunting agent can learn to interpret messages and the sensing agent can
learn to send them. They can do this so well that their solution qualities are
comparable to that of full observability.
For the second case with a stochastically moving agent, run over 500.000 games,
the fully observable case averaged a reward of 283, the partially observable with
no sensor case averaged -6.573 and the partially observable with sensor case
averaged -840.
For the ﬁnal case with two agents, the fully observable case averaged 501, the
partially observable with no sensor averaged -30.237 and ﬁnally the partially
observable case with sensor averaged -16.348
What we see from these results is that while communication greatly enhances
solution qualities on latter problems, it is not as close to the optimal solution
as it is for the simple problems. We have however seen that it can approach the
optimal solution, so the question is why more diﬃcult problems cause problems
for communication.
The answer to this seems to be related to reward shaping. In many cases where
a positive transition should be enforced, the agent does not learn that said
transition does indeed give positive results.
One interesting result was that the agents learned to communicate by not com-
municating.
We observed that some optimal solutions have paths where no
communication occurs, since the act of not communicating by the sensor is in-
terpreted as a suggested direction by the hunter. This conﬁrms two points. The
solution that has been discovered here is not a simple centralization of the game
by sharing observations, but rather is an actual issue with communication.
The second, more interesting point is that communication is, as we suspected,
based on the interpretation of messages over a message space. In our commu-
nication model, we have deﬁned the number of possible messages based on the
number of states that the prey can be in. The prey can take up x × y diﬀerent
states, and we have (x + 1) × (y + 1) diﬀerent messages, the +1 resulting from
the possibility of not sending any messages. As a result, this act of not sending
a message becomes a message in itself as a result.
==PAGE:64==
58
Communication
==PAGE:65==
Chapter 5
Conclusion and Discussion
Communication in MARL is a very wide ﬁeld with many possible applications,
depending on the sought solution quality and type. The communication de-
pends on the designer-imposed protocols, as well as the raw message formatting.
Agent’s role is to optimize the use of the message protocol. While some solu-
tions are entirely pre-designed and some other solutions are entirely decided by
the agent, it is possible to create solutions that remain between these extremes.
In this thesis we investigated general solutions to the communication learning
problem. We found application in the hunter-seeker problem, where two agents
with diﬀerent roles work together to achieve a goal. The communication was
successful in the smaller problems, where the agents learned to communicate
well, but in larger problems there were issues with reward shaping causing issues
with learning the protocols.
The issue of reward shaping concerns the problem of how to set up the re-
wards for the agent learning to communicate. One method is to formalize the
communicator as playing a prescribed role in a game. The other is a more so-
phisticated one that lets the receiver deﬁne the reward based on how valuable
it was to send/receive a message.
For the ﬁrst solution, it can be modelled in almost exactly the same way as the
original problem without communications. In this case, the diﬀerences between
==PAGE:66==
60
Conclusion and Discussion
the communicator and our sensor is found in the actions and transition function.
From the perspective of the communicating agent, it then plays a game where
the goal is to guide the hunter to the prey. The idea of this game is that the
agent will then go in the right direction, if information was sent or not move if
no information was sent. There are some problems with this solution. For one,
we do not care if the agent "bumps" into a wall. Sharing reward structure with
the agent means that our sensor agent would learn that an action might cause
the agent to bump into a wall, which is bad for our agent. This should ideally
never happen, since we have already assumed that our agent will always move in
the right direction if we send it the right information, however this is not what
actually occurs. In our system, the hunter is still learning. This motivates us
to our second type of reward shaping, where the communicating agent is being
taught by the hunter.
In this type of reward shaping, the hunting agent is the one that rewards the
sensor based on how "good" the communication action was. This means that the
hunting agent must have some sort of measure of the quality of communication.
One of such solutions is discussed in association with DQN, where the team at
Google uses the neural networks’ own estimates of quality as the message being
sent.
In our implementation, we experimented with a number of diﬀerent methods
of communication evaluations. An evaluation method is to simply let the com-
municating agent play its own game. It constantly receives the same rewards
depending on the transition that the receiving agent performed. The sending
agent is playing a game where it tries to guide the agent to the prey by either
sending information or not.
The other method is to let the receiving agent convey the quality of the infor-
mation. The idea is that the receiving agent decides on the reward that the
sender receives based on how good it believes the communication to be. The
way this was implemented was to send the personal estimates of quality, which
in this case was the maximum value of the policy of the hunter.
This idea was inspired by the Google’s method of communication, which used
as evaluation the gradient of the neural networks. While the solution worked
out for them, this type of solution does not give results that can be applied on
a very wide range of problems nor does it help us understand why evaluated
communication may or may not work in the general case.
The motivation behind our solution can be understood in an example. Suppose
that we have trained our hunter, such that, given information, it knows exactly
which direction to go to catch the prey. In the case that we are modelling this
==PAGE:67==
61
as the game where the sensor has to lead the hunter to the prey, the sensor will
from an initial state with no knowledge not be able to determine the quality of
any actions.
This occurs as a result of the delayed reward problem. The sensor will only
receive a positive reward when the hunter is lead to the prey and will have to
reinforce actions with this reward as well. With our alternative solution, where
the hunter can decide on the sensors reward, the hunter would in this situation
be able to tell the sensor that the state with information provides good results
and positively reinforce the sensor to communicate more often.
What happens when the receiving agent does not have good estimates of the
value of communication? If the policy is completely new, then all states are
equally good and, in some cases, the state will have to be explored many times
before a positive result can be found. As such, the communicating agent would
learn that all communication provides equally good results. Since communi-
cation is penalized, it would learn that no communication provides the best
results.
Finally, the issue of message space should be pointed out. In our case, we sent
observations, which means that the number of messages sent is at least the size
of the number of possible states that our observation can be true in. For many
solutions however, sending observations is not a feasible strategy. This might be
because the observations are very large and must be sent frequently, or because
the communication channel cannot maintain a high number of messages.
The answer to this is to use the solution proposed in this thesis, but applying a
smaller message space that ﬁts the problem. We sent the exact x and y locations
of the prey in our message, but the solution could have been altered so that the
sensor sent directions to the prey instead. If the sensor was allowed to send the
messages up, down, left, right, the sensor would have enough messages available
to give exact directions for the hunter, but we would have reduced our message
space from number of x positions × number of y positions to 4.
==PAGE:68==
62
Conclusion and Discussion
==PAGE:69==
Bibliography
[AR02]
David Andre and Stuart J. Russell.
State abstraction for pro-
grammable reinforcement learning agents, 2002.
[BBS10]
L. Buşoniu, R. Babuška, and B. De Schutter.
Multi-agent rein-
forcement learning: An overview. Innovations in Multi-Agent Sys-
tems and Applications - 1, 310 of Studies in Computational Intelli-
gence:pp. 183–221, 2010.
[BV01]
Michael Bowling and Manuela Veloso.
Rational and convergent
learning in stochastic games.
In Proceedings of the 17th Interna-
tional Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence - Volume 2, IJ-
CAI’01, pages 1021–1026, San Francisco, CA, USA, 2001. Morgan
Kaufmann Publishers Inc.
[CB03]
Georgios Chalkiadakis and Craig Boutilier. Coordination in multia-
gent reinforcement learning: A bayesian approach. 2nd Intl. Conf.
on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems, 2003.
[Lit94]
Michael L. Littman. Markov games as a framework for multi-agent
reinforcement learning. Machine Learning Proceedings 1994: Pro-
ceedings of the Eigth International Conference, 1994.
[MKS+13] Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Alex Graves,
Ioannis Antonoglou, Daan Wierstra, and Martin Riedmiller. Playing
atari with deep reinforcement learning, 2013.
[NVTY05] Ranjit Nair, Pradeep Varakantham, Milind Tambe, and Makoto
Yokoo. Networked distributed pomdps: A synthesis of distributed
constraint optimization and pomdps, 2005.
==PAGE:70==
64
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[PB]
Bob Price and Craig Boutilier. Reinforcement learning with imita-
tion in heterogeneous multi-agent systems.
[RN94]
G. A. Rummery and M. Niranjan. on-line q-learning using connec-
tionist systems, 1994.
[SB]
Richard S. Sutton and Andrew G. Barto. Reinforcement learning:
An introduction.
[SRT06]
S.M. Stringer, E.T. Rolls, and P. Taylor. Learning movement se-
quences with a delayed reward signal in a hierarchical model of motor
function. Neural Networks 20, 2006.
[SS01]
Peter Stone and Richard S. Sutton. Scaling reinforcement learning
toward robocup soccer. Proceedings of the Eighteenth International
conference on Machine Learning, 2001.
[Wat89]
Christopher J.C.H. Watkins. Q-learning, 1989.
