==PAGE:1==
 
 
Master Thesis in Pharmaceutical Engineering 
 
Design of molecularly imprinted polymers 
for creatinine detection in blood plasma 
 
Author: Marc Baiget Francesch 
Supervisors: Winnie Svendsen, Maria Dimaki & Kristoffer Almdal 
 
Department: DTU Nanotech 
Research Group: Nano Bio Integrated Systems (NaBIS) 
 
June 2017 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:2==
 
Index: 
 
> 1. Introduction 
-
Molecularly imprinted polymers as a synthetic alternative to traditional
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
biological recognition elements 
-
Creatinine, the biomarker of kidney failure 
 
> 2. Analysis and selection of reagents for MIPs development 
 
> 3. Experiments design 
-
Materials 
-
Protocols 
-
Variable parameters 
 
> 4. Characterization 
 
> 5. Binding assays & results 
 
> 6. Perspectives 
-
Synthesis in situ 
-
Attachment via an intermediate 
-
Optimization 
 
> 7. Discussion 
 
> Special thanks 
 
> Annexes 
-
Creatinine imprinted and non-imprinted polymers synthesis protocol 
-
Workflow illustrations 
 
> Bibliography 
 
1 
==PAGE:3==
1. Introduction: 
 
Molecularly imprinted polymers as a synthetic alternative to traditional biological
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
recognition elements: 
 
Molecularly imprinted polymers (also known as MIPs) have been considered for a long
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
time in the molecular detection field. These molecules have been defined in some
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
occasions as the synthetic alternative to antibodies and enzymes, suppressing the need
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of using living organisms to produce the biological recognition element of a biosensor.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
The fact that antibodies and enzymes need to be obtained from living organisms implies
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
that a purification step is crucial in their extraction. Purification usually accounts for a
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
high percentage of biomolecules production cost and it is a great contributor to the high
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
price that is usually paid for most biosensors. Reducing the cost of the biological
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
recognition molecule is an important step towards reducing the total costs of a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
biosensor,
consequently
increasing
the opportunities of producing user friendly
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
biosensors that the average patient can afford. 
 
Another advantage that MIPs present over traditional biological recognition elements is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
their long durability (between three and four times more durable than both antibodies
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and enzymes) and its greater stability against external factors (i.e. heat, light) [1]. There
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
is in principle no need, thus, to store MIPs under special conditions in order for them to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
keep their activity and using the same batch of MIPs over and over again would give
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
more reproducible results than just reusing the same antibody or enzyme. 
 
The list of reagents used in MIPs synthesis includes a template, which is exactly the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
same molecule that is aimed to be detected, a solvent (also called porogen in MIPs
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
synthesis) and polymer forming reagents, namely monomers and, in some cases, a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
cross-linker and an initiator of choice. These reagents are generally quite cheap to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
purchase, especially if the template molecule is a small molecule and not a biomolecule.
 
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
  
 
The main problem in MIPs synthesis is that the final quality of the polymer highly
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
depends on the accuracy of the synthesis, being a constantly optimized process. So,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
while it is a cheaper alternative to the use of antibodies and enzymes, there is a need
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
for trained staff to acquire high-performance MIPs. 
 
MIPs work under the principle of generating three dimensional pockets by intercalating
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the template molecule between the polymeric structure during the synthesis reaction.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This way, when the template molecule is washed away a template-patterned polymer is
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
obtained. This pocket formation imitates the enzymatic principle of shape-induced fit,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
where the target molecules have a series of particular motives that are recognized by
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
==PAGE:4==
the
biological
recognition
site.
MIPs
can
be
generated either by covalent or
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
non-covalent approach, the latter being more interesting for detection purposes due to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
its fast binding/unbinding constant, and the first more relevant for the generation of solid
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
extraction columns, where a fast binding/unbinding ratio is not as important as a strong
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
binding event. 
 
 
Figure 1. Creatinine (green) is trapped in the polymeric mall (red) by non-covalent interactions like
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
hydrogen bonds, creating a pattern of interactions that, once creatinine is removed, will allow for its
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
recognition in biological samples. 
 
The field of MIPs synthesis is under constant improvement and, in a near future, might
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
represent a leap forward for the generation of fast, reliable and less expensive
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
point-of-care devices. 
 
Creatinine, the biomarker of kidney failure. 
 
Creatinine is a small molecule (113 Da) that is generated as a byproduct of creatine
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
metabolism. Creatinine can be find in both urine and blood and it is used in biomedicine
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
   
  
 
as a biomarker of kidney disease. High creatinine levels (​see Binding assays & results​)
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
in blood imply that blood filtration is not working properly, as creatinine presence in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
plasma is inversely related to glomerular filtration rate, and so creatinine serves as an
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
indicator of kidney blood filtration [2]. 
3 
==PAGE:5==
 
Kidney failure can be both acute or chronic, with a chance that patients which suffer
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
from the former can develop the latter. Acute kidney disease happens after a sudden
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
loss of kidney function and can eventually lead to death, while chronic kidney disease is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
a progressive loss of kidney function. People with diabetes and high blood pressure are
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
in higher risk of developing chronic kidney disease. Patients that develop any kind of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
kidney failure have to undergo hemodialysis in order to keep their blood filtration going
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
on, which is a costly process (around 90.000€/patient every year) that furthermore
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
represents a burden for the patients [3]. 
 
The need for a cost-effective and fast biosensor for patients with a higher risk of kidney
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
disease is clear. This is why a point of care solution for this problem appears as an
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
interesting project idea to carry out for any biomedical research group or company. The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
idea of using the synthetic approach rather than the biological one (so, MIPs over
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
antibodies or enzymes) would help to reduce the product development costs and so,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
would make it easier for the final product to reach a broader market. 
 
 
4 
==PAGE:6==
2. Analysis and selection of reagents for MIPs development: 
 
The aim of this section is to discuss which are potential good reagents for the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
development of creatinine imprinted polymers. The chemical properties of creatinine are
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
highly relevant to the choice of the monomer, which will be the building block of the MIP.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
It is important that creatinine, as the template, does not strongly react with the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
monomer, as a covalent interaction creates a strong bond increasing the duration of the
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
assay. It is preferred to avoid long assays since one of the purposes of these MIPs is to
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
speed up the diagnosis time [4]. Creatinine, thus, has to react weakly with the monomer
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(e.g. via electrostatic forces, hydrogen bonding, van der Waals) to obtain a fast and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
reversible interaction. The main drawback of noncovalent bonding in MIPs formation is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
the lower specificity it presents compared to covalently bound MIPs (and thus increase
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the unspecific binding and generating false positives). However, it appears preferable
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
than using covalent interactions, which would not only increase the reaction time but
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
complicate the wash out process, which is a key for making a reusable assay. 
 
Creatinine (structure presented below), which is a byproduct of creatine metabolism,
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
has a pKb of 1.688, so it can be considered as a relatively weak base (considering a
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
strong base one with a pKb<0) [5]. It has an isoelectric point of 11.19, which means that
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
at blood pH (which is estimated to be around 7.35) it is positively charged. This means
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
that it could interact with monomers negatively charged at the same pH by electrostatic
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
forces. Furthermore, it has two functional groups, a donor =NH and an acceptor =O,
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
that can facilitate the formation of hydrogen bonds by reacting with other groups. These
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
properties
can
be
exploited
to facilitate the formation of weak, noncovalent
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
monomer-template interactions. Therefore, strong electrostatic interactions should be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
avoided in order to not modify creatinine structure covalently.  
 
 
Figure 2. Creatinine structure 
 
Methacrylic acid (MAA) is a highly used monomer for the formation of imprinted
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
polymers, especially for small molecules recognition. With a pKa of 4.65 it can be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
classified as a weak acid [6]. At blood pH it is expected to have a negatively charged
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
5 
==PAGE:7==
oxygen, making it possible to interact with the positively charged nitrogen of creatinine.
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
However, at this pH the molecule offers no hydrogen bond donors, as the H from the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
acid group is given away. Nevertheless, both oxygens can still act as hydrogen bond
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
acceptors. MAA can polymerize into poly methacrylic acid (pMAA) by free radical
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
polymerization in the presence of an initiator and heat. 
 
Figure 3. MAA structure 
 
There are indeed different stoichiometries recommended for this kind of polymerization.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Jianping Li et al., from Guilin university of Technology in Guanxi, China, pointed that the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
template:monomer:cross-linker:initiator ratio should be around 1:4:20:1 [7]. Ronald
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Thoelen et al. from the Institute for Materials Research in Hasselt University in Belgium
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
reported a proportion of 1:2:4 in template:monomer:cross-linker also effective for the
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
formation of bulk pMAA MIPs, which the author of this report also validated by using
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ethylene glycol dimethacrylate (EGDMA) as cross-linker and azobisisobutyronitrile
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(AIBN) as initiator and 60ºC as the thermal initiation temperature for polymerization [8]. 
 
Figure 4. pMAA structure 
 
The main advantage of this method is that bulk MIPs are easy to produce, pMAA is a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
well-known polymer and the conditions of polymerization are easy to reproduce in a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
regular chemistry lab without the need of expensive material. However, there are some
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
drawbacks that must be considered when using this technique. Some of these would be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the mechanical difficulty of taking the polymer out of the vial where it is produced to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
grind it, the fact that grinding manually is laborious and the particles obtained are highly
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
irregular and the need to further implement these polymers in a sensing layer to test
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
their properties properly. 
 
6 
==PAGE:8==
O-Phenylenediamine (OPD) is a basic monomer (gives a pH of ~9 when dissolved in 10
 
   
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
mL of water) that can polymerize into poly-o-phenylenediamine (pOPD) under certain
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
conditions [9]. The two terminal amines of OPD can act both as hydrogen bond donors
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and acceptors. While some models propose a N-C union between two OPD units,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
others propose a N=C union, which would affect the number of hydrogen bond donors
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
but would not hinder the overall capacity of the molecule to facilitate hydrogen bonds
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
with creatinine. The uncertainty of its polymerization form and its low capacity to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
establish noncovalent interactions with creatinine in comparison with the rest of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
monomers mentioned here, makes it a questionable choice as a building block of
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
creatinine MIPs. 
 
Figure 5. OPD structure 
 
OPD presents an advantage over MAA when it comes to polymerization conditions.
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
OPD is a self-polymerizing monomer (so there is no need to use initiator and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
cross-linker to facilitate the reaction) and it can be electropolymerized straight away
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
over the electrode. Najmeh Karimian et al. from Biosensors Centre in Linköping,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sweden used an acetate buffer solution of pH 5.2 and a scan rate of 50 mV/s for the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
formation of a thin film of imprinted pOPD over a gold electrode [10]. 
 
Figure 6. One of the proposed pOPD structures 
 
Using this polymerization method, the mechanical complications of embedding the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
pMAA MIP over the electrode are avoided. However, pOPD MIPs haven’t been as
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
deeply studied as pMAA MIPs and also its polymeric structure is more difficult to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
predict. 
 
Dopamine (DA) is another molecule that under given circumstances (in this particular
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
case these are met in a slightly basic pH) can act as a self-polymerizing monomer. It
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
has three protonable groups (two -OH and one -NH) and both three can act
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
simultaneously as hydrogen bond donors and acceptors [11].  
7 
==PAGE:9==
 
Figure 7. DA structure 
 
Although DA is the molecule with more hydrogen bond donors and acceptors it presents
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
a series of drawbacks in its use as monomer for creatinine imprinted polymers. First of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
all, dopamine is a basic molecule (pKa = 8.71, pKa​2 = 10.90, pKa​3 ​= 13.68) like the
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
template. Secondly, the form of dopamine that polymerizes is known as aminochrome
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
(or dopaminechrome) and it has two less hydrogen bond donors than dopamine [9].
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Furthermore, polydopamine (PDA) structure has not been clarified to this date and so,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the interactions with creatinine might be more complicated than the template-monomer
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
interactions in the other polymers. This is really important as the creatinine that the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MIPs are going to bind to when in the sensor is going to react with the polymeric form
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and not with independent monomeric molecules. 
 
Figure 8. Aminochrome structure 
 
A less frequent but potential monomer would be acrylamido-(2-methyl)-propane sulfonic
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
acid (AMPSA). Similarly to MAA, when cross-linked in the presence of an initiator and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
under >40ºC conditions it gives pAMPSA. This method will allow to create bulk
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
polymers as well. The interest in AMPSA as a monomer is the fact that it allows for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
multiple noncovalent interactions. Two oxygens from the sulphonic group are likely to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
bear a negative charge at physiological pH while also being able to act as hydrogen
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
bond acceptors along with two other oxygens (=O and -OH). Additionally, the -OH and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the secondary amine (-R​2​NH) can act as hydrogen bond donors, making AMPSA the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
monomer with more capacity for noncovalent interactions of the ones proposed in this
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
report. Nonetheless, AMPSA is the strongest acid of monomers proposed in here. While
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
it could create an ionic bond through its sulfonic group, there could be a chance that this
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
8 
==PAGE:10==
group reacted in a way that the sulfonic group established a covalent bond with
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
creatinine amine group, which would be an important drawback since this MIPs are
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
aimed for biosensing. 
 
Figure 9. pAMPSA structure 
 
Regarding its presence in literature, AMPSA heavily cross-linked MIPs have been
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
reported with a 1:6 template:monomer molar ratio and a 1:1500 template:cross-linker
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
ratio [12]. 
 
Finally, another monomer that could be used for MIPs formation is methyl-methacrylic
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
acid (MMA), which polymerizes into poly methyl methacrylic acid (pMMA). While its
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
polymerization conditions are pretty much the same than MAA ones, MMA has one
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
hydrogen bond donor less, which a priori would make it worse than MAA for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
establishing noncovalent interactions with creatinine. However, it can be interesting to
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
develop pMMA MIPs in parallel to pMAA MIPs to observe if there are many significant
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
differences. 
 
 
Figure 10. MMA structure 
 
In ​Table 1 ​we can see a comprehensive analysis of the different monomer:template
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
interactions. After talking with other experts in the field and considering all the hereby
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
explained interactions and criteria, the author proposes the use of MAA and MMA as
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the preferred monomers for creatinine MIPs development. An important goal, hence,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
would be trying to perform in situ polymerization, which is an attractive idea to reduce
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
the number of steps in MIPs synthesis as well as the number of reagents and its
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
post-synthesis treatment (as electrode functionalization and MIPs embedding are not
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
always a necessary step in ‘in-situ’ polymerization), with MAA and MMA as the building
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
==PAGE:11==
blocks. The uncertainty of PDA and POPD polymeric structures and, thereby, the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
uncertainty of the precise noncovalent interactions that they would establish with the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
template, have represented important drawbacks in their use when narrowing down the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
choice of monomers. The main reasons behind the choice of the selected monomers
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
are their weak acid nature, their ability to create hydrogen bonds with the template, their
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
unlikeliness to form covalent bonds and their extended use in literature. So, the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
following experiments will descrive the development of creatinine MIPs with: 
 
a) A polymer of pMAA 
b) A polymer of pMMA 
c) A co-polymer of pMMA and pMAA 
 
 
To test the efficiency of pMMA, pMAA and pMAAco-PMMA MIPs, a MIP synthesis via
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
bulk polymerization will be performed. The cross-linker and initiator are going to be the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
traditional ones used in MAA/MMA polymerization. This corresponds to EGDMA and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
AIBN respectively as cross-linker and initiator.
However the used solvent in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
pMMA/pMAA synthesis differs widely from experiment to experiment. While acetonitrile,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
chloroform and methanol are usually the main choices, when it comes to molecularly
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
imprinted polymers it is crucial that both the monomer and the template get well
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
dissolved and as homogeneously distributed as possible. When trying to perform the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
synthesis in the lab with acetonitrile, chloroform and methanol respectively, creatinine
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
precipitated unless at very low concentrations. The possible reason pointed by the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
author is the hydrophobicity of the organic solvents used so far, which did contrast with
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
creatinine nature, which is more hydrophilic in comparison. At this point, the author
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
proceeded to a study of organic solvents that could create enough interactions with
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
creatinine and both MMA and MAA to increase creatinine solubility. Acetic acid, was
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
therefore chosen and has been proven in the lab to allow creatinine to dissolve in a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
higher degree. Three different polymerization experiments, once with each kind of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
polymer has been performed with acetic acid as a solvent, proving its ability to act as a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
MIP porogen. However, parallel synthesis with other solvents are reported in this work
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
in order to make a case for the best solvent. 
 
 
10 
==PAGE:12==
Summary of monomers-creatinine interactions per molecule of monomer : 
 
 
Monomer 
Hydrogen bonds 
Electrostatic bonds 
Notes 
MAA 
3 
=NH····O= 
=NH····OH- 
=O····HO- 
1 
NH​2​
+​ ​-​OH 
All three interactions happen 
because of the same group of 
creatinine (=NH​2​
+​). Steric 
effect might saturate the 
number of interactions at two 
per creatinine molecule. 
There is a electrostatic 
interaction at physiological 
pH, but probably not strong 
enough to create a covalent 
bond. 
OPD 
2 
=NH····NH- 
=O····HN- 
0 
 
Their available interactions, 
which mostly rely on the 
amines, highly depend on the 
way it will polymerize. 
Furthermore, OPD is, like DA, 
a basic monomer. 
DA 
3 
=NH····O= 
=NH····O= 
=O····HNR​2 
0 
The interactions were 
calculated with aminochrome 
which is the ‘real’ building 
block of PDA. The basic 
character of this monomer 
and the uncertainty over its 
precise structure are the main 
drawbacks. 
MMA 
2 
=NH····O= 
=NH····-O- 
0 
MMA is very similar to MAA 
but has less capability of 
establishing bonds with 
creatinine. It can be 
interesting to de MIPs with 
both monomers to see if there 
are significant differences due 
to that fact. 
AMPSA 
6 
=O····HNR​2 
=O····HO- 
=NH····O= 
=NH····O= 
=NH····OH- 
=NH····O= 
2  
O​- +​NH​2 
O​- +​NH​2 
AMPSA has a lot of capability 
in terms of creating 
noncovalent interactions. 
However, covalent 
interactions due to the strong 
acidity of its sulphonic group 
may happen. 
Table 1: Noncovalent creatinine-monomer interactions 
 
 
 
 
11 
==PAGE:13==
3. Experiments design: 
 
In order to test some variables, a series of experimental parameters must be set. For
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
this work, pMAA has been established as the reference polymer amongst the previously
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
cited ones for two main reasons: the author’s previous experience with that polymer and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
its high presence in the MIPs literature. The polymers to be synthesized (pMMA, pMAA
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
& pMMA-co-pMAA) have been commented in the previous section, being one of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
goals to check if choosing amongst MMA and MAA makes a difference to some extent.
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
The
polymerization
method
is
the
same
in
all
the
cases:
radical atom free
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
polymerization (RAFT). The cross-linker (EGDMA) and the initiator (AIBN) are also a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
consistent choice in all the synthesis performed for this work. Regarding the solvent
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
choice, different solvents have been tested. However, as commented in the explained
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
synthesis protocol, acetic acid has been the reference solvent for the synthesis of these
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
polymers, for reasons concerning reagents solubility. The stoichiometry of the different
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
synthesis
is
another
variable
in
these
experiments.
The
ratio
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
template:monomer:cross-linker:initiator in the polymeric solution have been altered in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
different synthesis to check the relevance of some of these parameters in the imprinted
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
polymer formation. 
 
a. Materials: 
 
Methacrylic acid, Methyl methacrylate, 2,2′-Azobis(2-methylpropionitrile), Creatinine,
 
 
 
 
 
 
Acetic acid, Acetonitrile, Dimethyl Sulfoxide (DMSO), MDMO-PPV, Methanol and the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
mortar and pestle have been all purchased from Sigma Aldrich (Saint Louis, Missouri,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
United States of America). A 45 μm sieve has been purchased from Retsch GmbH
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Haan, Germany). The binding assays were analyzed by using a UV spectrophotometer
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
(UV-2800) from Shimadzu (Kyoto, Japan) and the UVProbe 2.43 software version. The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
gold electrodes were purchased from MicruX Technologies (Oviedo, Spain). 
 
b. Protocols: 
 
The standard procedure for both MIPs and NIPs synthesis is attached in ​Annex 1​. A
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
more detailed protocol with an explanation for every single step is hereby presented to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
understand the rationale behind the synthesis experiments design. This is the reference
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
protocol, as for the different MIPs that are synthesized for this work, some parameters
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
are changed. If a variable is not implicitly written down in the description of the different
 
   
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
MIPs synthesized (see after protocol), it is meant to be as in this standard protocol. 
 
 
12 
==PAGE:14==
 
 
MIP/NIP Synthesis. 
 
1. Heat water in a container until the temperature reaches 60°C. Both MAA and
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MMA polymerize by thermal initiation in the presence of AIBN at 60°C. Water
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
might take a bit to reach this temperature so we do this step on the beginning to
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
save time. 
2. Pour 2 mL of acetic acid in a container (final volume 2.6 mL). Acetic acid is the
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
main solvent chosen to perform the polymerization, but it is not the only solvent
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
that has been used in this synthesis. The rest of the solvents are cited in the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
upcoming section. The solvent choice has been slightly troublesome as
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
creatinine and AIBN have a tendency to dissolve in different kind of solvents.
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
While acetonitrile, chloroform, methanol and dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) were
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
good at dissolving AIBN, creatinine couldn’t dissolve well in those organic
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
solvents. This is probably because the relative hydrophilicity of creatinine made it
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
hard to dissolve in classic organic solvents. After studying the structure of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
different organic solvents, acetic acid was selected as reference solvent for its
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
capacity of creating a significant number of hydrogen bonds with creatinine
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
relative to its number of atoms. Acetic acid has been proven in the laboratory to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
be able to dissolve creatinine better than the other solvents. While it is true that
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
AIBN can not dissolve equally well in acetic acid, it seems not to affect (or at
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
least this is what the results suggest) the polymerization at the concentrations
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
that the author has worked with. However, stirring after the addition of the initiator
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
has been performed in order to ensure AIBN is as evenly distributed as possible.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
The main reason why the solubility of the template has been preferred against
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
initiator solubility is because an homogeneous distribution of the template is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
critical to the generation of a good MIP. To develop this a little further, the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
generation of a MIP depends on the presence on the template during the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
formation of the polymer mall, and a bad distribution of creatinine would create,
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
in the end, a lot of areas in the polymer with no recognition ability. 
3. Add 29.41 mg (0.1 M) of creatinine to the container.* Of course the template, as
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
hinted in the previous point, is critical to the formation of the imprinted polymer.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
13 
==PAGE:15==
The concentration of creatinine has been decided after different trials by the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
author of performing a bulk polymer. 
4. A. Add 44 μL (0.2 M) of MAA to the container. Leave it at room temperature for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
30 min.** 
B. Add 55 μL (0.2 M) of MMA to the container. Leave it at room temperature for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
30 min.*** 
C. Add 22 μL (0.1 M) of MAA and 27.5 μL (0.1 M) of MMA to the container.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Leave it at room temperature for 30 min.**** The monomers, as the building
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
blocks of the polymer, are the main basis of this synthesis. Different polymers are
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
used to test if they have differences in their capacity of creating binding sites to
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
interact with creatinine. The reason why MAA and MMA were chosen is referred
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
to in ​Analysis and selection of reagents for MIPs development​. The stoichiometry
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
in this protocol has been decided after background reading on other bulk
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
polymers synthesis for small molecules imprinting and the author’s personal
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
experience in MIPs synthesis [13]. Different stoichiometries have been tested on
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
different synthesis, the referred one in this protocol is just the reference one. The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
difference in stoichiometries and the reasoning will be discussed further on. 
5. Add 545 μL (1 M) of EGDMA to the container. The cross-linker is essential to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
create
the
bonds
between
the
different
monomers.
The
percentage
of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
cross-linker over the polymerization reagents is critical to its physical properties,
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
especially toughness of the polymerization product. It is stated in the literature
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
that, in most of cases, around an 80% of cross-linking is ideal, but there have
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
been other ratios tested in the performed experiments that will be referred later
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
on. 
6. Add 42.70 mg (0.1 M) of AIBN to the container. The initiator is, as its name
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
states, the reagent responsible of initiating the polymerization reaction. A 1:1
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
template:initiator stoichiometry is used in all the synthesis experiments performed
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
in this study. The reason behind is that, as long as there is enough initiator for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
the polymerization to be completed, it does not affect the final product besides
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
accumulating a waste as a consequence of having an excess (and thus,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
unreacted) of reagent. 
7. Treat the solution with nitrogen gas (degasification) for 10 minutes. AIBN, in the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
presence of oxygen, cannot initiate the polymerization reaction, as the formation
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
14 
==PAGE:16==
of free radicals is inhibited by the atmospheric oxygen. For this reason, applying
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
an atmosphere of nitrogen eliminates the inhibition by oxygen during the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
reaction. 
8. Seal the container with parafilm immediately after and leave it for polymerization
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
in the 60°C water bath for a few hours until the reaction is completed. As it is
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
explained in the first point, this is the temperature required by the reaction to be
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
initiated. Depending on the stoichiometry used in the synthesis experiment, the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
polymerization time can differ slightly, but in most of cases around 2 h is enough. 
 
MIP/NIP Post-synthesis treatment. 
 
1. Break the polymer and grind it with the help of a mortar and pestle. In order for
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
the MIP to be later used for whichever purpose is meant (detection in this case) it
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
needs to be broken to be extracted from the vial. As the idea behind these
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
polymers is to embed them in an electrode, small particles are needed. However,
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
in this first grinding step, we generate small particles for the sake of making the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
polymer easier to wash. A presentation in smaller particles make it easier for the
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
solvent to penetrate and reach all the areas of the polymer rather than washing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the polymer as a whole block. 
2. Collect the particles and wash them with an adequate volume of methanol.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Methanol, as an organic solvent, is supposed to be a good choice (actually it is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
the most common washing solvent for MIPs experiments at this point) for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
washing the unreacted hydrophobic reagents. 
3. Centrifuge the particles for 15 min at 6000 G. After trying with different settings, it
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
has been checked that polymeric particles sediment at this speed. 
4. Discard the supernatant and wash the particles with an adequate volume of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
water. Water, as a hydrophilic solvent, should be able to remove creatinine,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
which is more hydrophilic than the other reagents. In fact, creatinine has shown
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
capacity to dissolve in water, which should reinforce this hypothesis. This step is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
crucial for the formation of the MIPs, as creatinine trapped in the polymer
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
particles would eventually end in a useless detection system. This is because
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
creatinine is used in the synthesis in order to create recognition patterns, but for
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
==PAGE:17==
this recognition patterns to be free creatinine needs to be detached from the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
polymer. 
5. Centrifuge the particles for 15 min at 6000 G. 
6. Discard the supernatant and wash the particles with methanol again. A second
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
washing should ensure that any product other than the polymer will be washed
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
away, getting a final product of a higher purity. 
7. Centrifuge the particles for 15 min at 6000 G. 
8. Discard the supernatant and put them on heater at 70 degrees for 2h.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Decantation doesn’t get rid of all the solvent that is still present in the polymer, so
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
heating at 70 degrees is a way to evaporate part of this remaining solvent. 
9. Filter the remaining solvent with the help of a filter paper and a funnel and collect
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
the dry polymer particles. Heating the polymeric particles is a slow method to dry
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
the polymer completely. However, after a couple of hours of heat drying, the
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
polymer becomes drier enough to filter it easily, accelerating the drying process.
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
These two steps could actually be substituted by simple air-drying if the amount
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
of polymer synthesized is relatively small, but then a whole day is necessary to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
let the polymer dry. For this reason, the fastest method is described in this
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
protocol, in order to make the entire synthesis and post-treatment experiment
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
possible to perform in a whole day of work if wanted. 
10.Grind them again by using a mortar and pestle. As they have been in solution,
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
some of the polymer particles have stuck together. The generation of small
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
particles creates a bigger ratio of binding events per surface, as we increase the
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
surface/volume ratio. 
11.Sieve them in a 45 μm sieve and collect the particles in an eppendorf. While this
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
method eventually creates a broad range of MIP/NIP molecule sizes, because of
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
practical matters (i.e. available equipment at the laboratory), 45 μm has been
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
chosen as the size limit of MIP particles to reduce the heterogeneity and make
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the product characterization easier. Also, the point of having small particles is to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
increase the surface/volume ratio, which also increases the number of possible
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
binding events in the same amount of polymer. 
12.Store them between 0°C and 25°C degrees. It is actually not very relevant at
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
which temperature MIP/NIPs should be stored, as they are theoretically able to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
16 
==PAGE:18==
withstand high and low temperatures. However it is prefered by the author to
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
store them in a range between fridge and room temperature just in case. 
 
c. Variable parameters: 
 
In order to have different MIPs to analyse and to see how different parameters affect to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
their performance, several kinds of MIPs have been synthesized. The chosen
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
parameters for studying their role in the polymer synthesis were: 
 
-
Presence of the template. The presence of creatinine in the synthesis is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
supposed to be the biggest game changer, as it is supposed to create
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
three-dimensional pockets that would allow a better creatinine recognition. Thus,
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
the polymers synthesized in the presence of creatinine are the MIPs and the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ones synthesized as control polymers (so, without creatinine in the initial
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
solution) are the NIPs. 
 
-
Monomer used. ​As it has been already explained in the section ​Analysis and
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
selection of reagents for MIPs development​, different monomers can exhibit
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
different interactions with the template molecule. Here, methacrylic acid and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
methyl methacrylate are tested both separately and as a co-polymer. 
 
-
Porogen used. ​Different porogens have different affinities for the reagents, and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
so the synthesis can be compromised by the kind of porogen used. Different
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
organic porogens are going to be tested in regards to their ability to dissolve the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
template and the other reagents that are used in the polymerization. 
 
-
Stoichiometry:
​The
ratio
between
template-monomer-crosslinker-initiator
 
 
 
 
 
(T:M:C:I) is going to be altered to analyse how different stoichiometries affect the
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
polymer formation. Cross-linker relative concentration is of special importance
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
here, as it can determine the toughness of the polymer and its capacity to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
generate a mall around the template. Also, the relative concentration of template
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
in the porogen (T:P) as an indicator of how diluted the solution is, is going to play
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
an important role in the final product. 
 
The nomenclature of the different attempted polymers has been created in regards of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
these parameters. Hereby, a glossary of how this is reflected in the name of the polymer
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
is presented. 
 
17 
==PAGE:19==
-
Presence of template​ → M = imprinted / N = non-imprinted. 
 
-
Monomer used​ → a = MAA / m = MMA / c = MMA-MAA. 
 
-
Porogen used ​→ 1 = Acetic acid / 2 = Acetonitrile / 3 = Methanol / 4 = DMSO. 
 
-
T:M:C:I; T:P (shown as molarity) ​→X = 1:4:20:1; 0.1M / Y = 1:4:20:1; 0.01M /
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
    
 
  
Z = 1:4:20:1; 0.001M (1mM) / T = 1:4:20:1; 0.1 mM / i = 1:2:10:1; 0,1M / s =
  
 
 
    
 
 
    
 
    
1:2:20:1; 0.1M / r = 1:2:5:1; 0.1M / p = 1:4:10:1; 0.1M / q = 1:8:10:1; 0.1M. 
 
Name example: Ma1X -> imprinted pMAA in acetic acid with a 1:4:20:1 t:m:c:i ratio,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
where the template concentration in the porogen is 0.1M. 
 
→Polymers attempted: Ma1i, Mm1i, Mc1i, Ma1X, Ma1r, Ma1s, Ma1p, Ma1q, Ma1Y,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ma1Z, Ma1T, Ma2i, Ma3i, Ma4i, and their respective NIPs. 
→Polymer successfully synthesized: Ma1i, Mm1i, Mc1i, Ma1X, Ma1r, Ma1s, Ma1p,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ma1q and their respective NIPs. 
 
From the design to the synthesis, many polymers have been either not able to be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
synthesized or dismissed during the process. Ma1Y has formed a really non consistent
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
paste rather than a solid polymer and then it has been impossible to process like all the
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
other ones. If significant differences are made during the post-synthesis processing,
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
then it would be rather hard to establish fair comparisons between the different
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
polymers when analyzing the results. Ma1Z and Ma1T have been attempted but the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
synthesis was unsuccessful and no solid product was obtained. Ma2i, Ma3i and Ma4i
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
used organic solvents that showed a really bad affinity for the template, and thus,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
despite being synthesized, they have been dismissed, as highly heterogeneous
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
distribution of creatinine in the polymer mall will eventually mean that every batch of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
polymeric powder will have significantly different and non consistent properties. Also, in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
previous experiments, chloroform has been attempted to be used as MIP solvent, but it
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
has also shown poor template distribution, leading to the creation of different phases in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
the polymer, reflected in the final product as yellow halos. However, this didn’t happen
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
when attempting MIP synthesis with a different template. An example of how the same
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
porogen gives different results in different MIPs can be found in parallel experiments
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
conducted by the same author where DMSO has been proven to give an homogeneous
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
distribution of a different template, which in this case was NT-proBNP, a polypeptide.  
 
 
 
 
18 
==PAGE:20==
4. Characterization: 
 
The several synthesized bulk polymers have shown slight differences from the very first
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
moment. Ma1s is significantly tougher than the others, followed by Ma1X. Ma1Y, on the
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
other hand, was significantly softer, not even forming a proper solid structure. This first
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
analysis indicates that polymers with a higher cross-linking ratio form a tougher
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
structure, and that the relative concentration of the reagents in the porogen affects the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
solidity of the polymer formation. The other variables did not show any noticeable
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
differences in the physical structure unless for the color displayed. This, for example,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
would be the case with DMSO MIPs, which compared to MIPs synthesized with the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
other solvents tested show a whiter, more translucid appearance. 
 
 
 
Figure 11. Comparison between DMSO MIPs (above) and acetonitrile ones (below). The DMSO based
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
polymers display a more translucide appearance rather than the ones with acetonitrile, which have a
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
more solid white color.  
 
 
Furthermore, and in order to characterize the different MIPs and NIPs synthesized, a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
tabletop scanning electron microscope (SEM) has been used to take pictures of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
19 
==PAGE:21==
powder-like particles at different resolutions. The particles all were smaller than 45 μm,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
but there was a huge heterogeneity, as they were ranging from 2 μm to 40 μm.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
However, the pictures were not able to show any substantial difference between the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
different monomers. The irregularity of the particles and the size of the template, relative
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to
the size of the particles, make impossible to make significant distinctions.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Nonetheless it has been useful to determine the size and shape of the processed
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
polymer particles. 
 
 
Figure 12. SEM picture of Ma1p (magnification x1000; scale bar = 100 µm). Here it is possible to 
appreciate the difference in sizes amongst the different MIP particles. 
 
20 
==PAGE:22==
 
Figure 13. SEM picture of Ma1i (magnification x1500; scale bar = 50 µm). Here we can also observe the 
heterogeneity of MIP particles in and higher density sample from a slightly closer perspective. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 14. SEM picture of Ma1p (magnification x50000; scale bar = 2 µm). In this very close up picture of 
a MIP particle we can appreciate the relief of a particular area in​ ​a random particle. However, it is close to 
impossible to determine if the patterns engraved in this particle geography are relative to creatinine, as 
the template shape is too small to appreciate with this method. 
 
21 
==PAGE:23==
5. Binding assays & results: 
 
To analyze the MIPs capacity of attaching creatinine, a UV-Vis spectrophotometry
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
analysis has been performed. The clinical significant creatinine range goes from 44 μM
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to 530 mM. This is a really wide spectra, but it is necessary for creatinine MIPs to cover
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
all this range. From 44 μM to 106 μM the normal clinical range for a healthy adult is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
covered. However, it varies depending age and gender and it can reach even 1 M in
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
patients with kidney disease. A concentration over 530 mM is considered a sign of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
kidney malfunction [14]. 
 
For the first binding experiments, to have an estimate idea of the MIP capacity, a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
calibration curve that covers the UV-Vis spectra from 200 nm to 400 nm wavelength has
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
been created using the following concentrations of creatinine in deionized water: 4 μM,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
40 μM, 400 μM, 4 mM, 40 mM & 400 mM. The spectra in ​Figure 15​, which has been
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
validated after testing each concentration five times and using water as solvent, is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
attached. Also, different creatinine solutions have been prepared to avoid a bias in the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
calibration curve. 
 
After creating the reference spectra with known concentrations of creatinine, known
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
concentrations of creatinine in water have been added to some of the synthesized MIPs
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and NIPs to calculate the creatinine uptake after 5 minutes of exposure. The reason for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
this timeframe is because in non-covalent MIPs the binding should happen relatively
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
fast, as it would be the ideal case in a point of care biosensor. After that, the MIPs
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
solutions have been centrifuged for 15 min at 6000 G and the supernatant has been
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
extracted and analyzed in the UV-Vis spectrophotometer. 
 
For the first experiments, the curve formed from the creatinine samples extracted from
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the MIPs and NIPs showed a lot of background noise. First, this noise was significantly
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
significantly reduced after creating a baseline with the same polymers spiked on water
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
instead of a water baseline like in the other curves. This is probably because while
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
uptaking the supernatant, some polymers were also pipetted from the loose part of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
pellet. This was significantly improved when using a higher amount of solvent (so,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
reducing the concentration of the polymer while maintaining the same concentration of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
creatinine) and changing the centrifuge parameters to 20 min and 6000 G. 
22 
==PAGE:24==
 
Figure 15. Calibration curve for creatinine concentrations ranging from 400 mM to 4 μM. UV-Vis
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
absorbance spectra from 245 nm to 289 nm wavelength. 
 
For the first experiments, 8 mg of Na1i and Ma1i respectively were mixed with 1 mL of a
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
400 mM solution of creatinine in water and subsequently analyzed. The resulting
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
spectra showed a curve similar to the one corresponding one to the 400 mM creatinine
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
solution. Similar results were obtained from changing the creatinine concentration in the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
solutions from 400 mM to 40 mM. When the concentration has been changed from 40
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
mM to 4 mM, the first significant results have appeared. The graphs in this experiment
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
have indicated a concentration of creatinine below 400 μM in the supernatant, meaning
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
that there is a significant creatinine retention by the polymers. These results suggested
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
that what happened when working with concentrations of 400 mM and 40 mM, there is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
so little binding in relation to these initial concentrations. This would result in the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
spectrophotometer not being able to distinguish between the solution of 400 mM and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the one containing 400 mM minus the creatinine retained by the polymers (and the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
same would go for the 40 mM solution). These experiments have been repeated with
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
different amounts of polymer (14 mg and 31 mg) and with both Ma1i and Na1i, after
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
23 
==PAGE:25==
realizing that there are no significant variations in the different synthesized MIPs
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
regarding creatinine uptake. In both cases the graphs have appeared between the 400
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
μM and the 40 μM curve (closer to the former), showing the supernatants original from
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the solutions with 31 mg of polymer a slightly higher absorption (see Figure 16​).
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
However, the difference in absorption between Na1i and Ma1i is hinted to be rather
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
small (see ​Figure 17​), as both graphs show a similar curve. A first analysis could lead to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
the conclusion that this amounts of polymer would allow for too much of unspecific
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
binding (and thus for a lot of false positives) and not be useful when detecting creatinine
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
in lower concentrations. However, unspecific binding is rather common and the relevant
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
feature here is the retention after washing. With a simple wash, the NIP should be able
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to let creatinine go while the MIP should exhibit a higher retention. For this reason, the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
washing here is going to be critical, as a thorough wash would also take creatinine away
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
from the MIP. 
 
 
Figure 16. Creatinine concentration in the supernatant from solutions containing 14 mg and 31 mg
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
respectively of Ma1i plotted against different creatinine known concentrations. UV-Vis absorbance spectra
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
from 245 nm to 307 nm wavelength. 
24 
==PAGE:26==
 
 
 
 
Figure 17. Creatinine concentration in the supernatant from solutions containing 14 mg of Ma1i and Na1i
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
respectively plotted against different creatinine known concentrations. UV-Vis spectra from 245 nm to 307
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
nm wavelength. 
 
It is worth to mention that the initial idea in plotting these different creatinine
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
concentrations was to just take the absorbance data at a certain wavelength and from
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
there make another calibration curve (absorbance vs concentration) where the exact
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
concentration of the samples could be determined with higher precision. However, the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
wide clinical range of creatinine gives as a result curves like the ones plotted in ​Figure
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15​, ​where it is not possible to interpolate at just one wavelength. This can be noticed by
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
checking the absorbance at different wavelengths in this figure. At 270 nm, the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
absorbance is practically the same for concentrations of 400 mM and 40 mM but
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
different for concentrations of 4 mM and almost null at lower concentrations. At 280 nm,
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
on the other hand, we can distinguish the absorbance of a concentration of 400 mM and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
25 
==PAGE:27==
one of 40 mM but it shows close to no absorbance for the rest of concentrations used,
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and at 260 nm it is possible to distinguish between concentrations of 4 μM, 40 μM and
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
400μM but impossible for higher concentrations. All in all it indicates that a solution to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
that problem would be working with smaller ranges (e.g. from 100 mM to 500 mM or 10
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
μM to 50 μM) and then generating different calibration curves by plotting absorbance vs
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
concentration at different premade ranges. However, the main purpose of the figures
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
shown in this section is to prove if there is creatinine retention from the different
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
synthesized polymers rather than checking the exact degree of retention, which would
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
be determined in future experiments. 
 
26 
==PAGE:28==
6. Perspectives 
 
In this regards, a good way to differentiate to an even more significant level their binding
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
capacity, is to test the polymer in a real biosensing setup. This would imply attaching
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the polymer into a sensor platform and testing its binding ability and template retention
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
there. For this reason, some experiments have been performed in order to be able to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
test the polymer in the biosensor setup. 
 
The choice of detection method has been impedance spectroscopy, a method that is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
well-known in this research group. With impedance spectroscopy, every binding event
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
should produce a change in the impedance, which would be registered by a detector
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
and transduced into a readable output. This way, one would be able to establish a direct
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
relationship between the number of binding events and the result shown in the screen. 
 
For this method, (micrux) gold electrodes are used as the sensor core. Regarding the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
attachment of the polymer in the surface of an electrode, two perspectives are studied:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
attachment of the MIP by using an intermediate polymer and synthesis in situ. 
 
Synthesis in situ: 
 
This approach is based on performing the polymerization reaction straight over the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
electrode. While it is a very straight forward method, it has also shown to be very
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
difficult to realize successfully, as it implies working with rather small amounts in the
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
presence of heat, which usually ended up on solvent evaporation before the polymer
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
was formed. However, the possibility of using a cover slide once the solution has been
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
added to the electrode, has been considered, as it should reduce the probability of it
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
evaporating before polymerization occurs. Sadly, because of time constrictions this
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
could not be developed further for now. 
 
In order to do the polymerization in situ, a teflon electrode holder has been designed
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
using the Autodesk Inventor software and created by using the milling software
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cimatron E. The reason why teflon is the material of choice is because of its resistance
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
to heating and its low reactivity, which avoids the swelling of the acrylate monomers. 
27 
==PAGE:29==
 
Figure 18. Teflon holder designed and produced to hold the MicruX electrodes (shown in the middle) 
 
 
 
Attachment via an intermediate: 
 
Another interesting possibility that has been explored, is the use of the optical polymer
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
MDMO-PPV as an intermediate for the attachment of the MIP powder into the electrode,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
which was demonstrated possible by Thoelen et al. [7]. Following this approach,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MDMO-PPV is spin-coated at 1500 rpm for 30 seconds until it forms a relatively uniform
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
film on the surface of the gold electrode. This step is quite critical in this method, as
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
changing the spin-coater parameters would allow for different film thickness and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
homogeneity. After the MDMO-PPV has been spin-coated on the electrode surface, the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MIP particles are mixed in a PDMS mixture and then they are pressed and stamped into
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the coated electrode. 
 
Optimization: 
 
Apart from the experiments proposed after the MIPs are obtained, which focus on how
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to embed the MIPs in a sensor or how to actually synthesize them over the sensor,
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
there is a need on keeping on working on the MIPs themselves. Working with MIPs is a
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
process of continuous optimization, and in order to ensure that the quality of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
material produced is optimal, a series of experiments and analysis are encouraged to
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
be performed for a continuation of the work proposed in this report. 
 
-
Analysis repetitions: ​Although the performed analysis showed some results
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
that seem to indicate a certain degree of differential binding capacity between the
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
creatinine MIPs and the NIPs, further experiments should be conducted in order
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
28 
==PAGE:30==
to assess properly this capacity. A statistical value would be achieved after
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
enough repetitions of these binding experiments through creatinine retention.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
These repetitions aim to reinforce the proof of concept (so, the creatinine-MIPs
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
being able to recognise creatinine in a differential way) and also serve to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
establish the sensitivity of the synthesized molecules. Different weights of MIPs
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and NIPs should be then tested in different concentrations of creatinine for these
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
purpose, scaling the already performed experiments in this work. 
 
-
Analysis in different solvents: ​The solvent used in the creatinine retention
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
analysis is a critical choice. Water has a high affinity with creatinine but also
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
shows some affinity for the MIP, making a centrifuging step necessary.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Regardless of this extra step, using different solvents for the analysis of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
creatinine retention in both MIPs and NIPs could bring some insight in the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
differential capacity for retaining the template in both polymers and, furthermore,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
could establish the basis of a criteria to choose the washing solvents in the future
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
sensor. One of the washing solvents must remove the unspecific binding, but not
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the specific one, while the other will be used to remove the creatinine molecules
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
from the sensor, making the MIPs reusable. 
 
-
Analysis of MIPs specificity: ​Using molecules that resemble creatinine can
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
infer the specificity that the produced MIPs have to recognise the selected
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
molecule. As the MIPs don’t recognise the molecule as a whole but molecular
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
patterns in that, this is an important experiment. Using creatine and other
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
molecules with similar motifs can help to understand how specific are the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
generated polymers and also how many false positives one can expect from a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
posterior analysis with a real blood sample. 
 
-
Analysis of the different polymers: ​The different polymers created have shown
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
no significant result so far, but that is relatively normal taking into account that
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the results so far are quite rough and applying the formerly cited experiments
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
should give clearer results. At this point, it would be interesting to use the other
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
polymers synthesized to analyze the differences and to assess which one would
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
be optimal for a point of care creatinine sensor. 
 
-
Analysis of the failed synthesis: ​Many of the performed polymer synthesis (yet
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
less than half of them) have been failed to achieve. While synthesis of polymers
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
using monomer concentrations below 0.01M have been reported in many papers,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
it has not been possible to perform them successfully, probably because of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
lack of experience in synthetic chemistry and the lack of time to dedicate
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
29 
==PAGE:31==
exclusively to determine the reason behind these failures. This would be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
interesting to be assessed as a wider variety of test polymers would give more
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
data and, consequently, a better comprehension of how creatinine imprinted
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
polymers work as a biosensing element. 
 
 
 
30 
==PAGE:32==
7. Discussion: 
 
The work provided in this report discusses creatinine MIPs synthesis by using some
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
particular reagents and RAFT polymerization by heat initiation to obtain bulk imprinted
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
polymers. As already commented, MIPs are an interesting tool in biological detection,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
especially when it comes to small molecules, but present a lot of complications during
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
their synthesis due to the amount of parameters that influence the process. Working
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
with high concentrations of monomer relative to the solvent concentration have been
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
shown to be critical to the synthesis, while the concentration of cross-linker has been
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
proved to be one of the most influential parameters in bulk polymer physical properties.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Working with smaller concentrations has shown from bad to no results in the performed
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
synthesis. Nonetheless, seeing that other researchers have been able to perform that, it
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
might be a problem working with small amounts of reagents, making it easier for them to
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
get consumed or lost during the process. Whatever the reason is, it is worth to do
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
further analysis to unveil the problem with the monomer concentration in relation to the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
amount of porogen used in the synthesis. However, after observing how the different
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
synthesis went, one of the biggest discussion points might be on the porogen selection.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
For creatinine, which is a relatively hydrophilic molecule (which a higher propension to
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
dissolve in water than in organic solvents), it’s hard to choose a solvent that
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
simultaneously allows a good dissolution of the template and the initiator (AIBN), which
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
is way more hydrophobic. Acetic acid has been so far the best organic solvent when
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
dissolving creatinine, but it has been harder to dissolve AIBN in it and it doesn’t have a
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
big record of usage in MIPs synthesis. 
 
Another discussion point is the fact that this report tried to initially reach many aspects
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of the synthesis, and the author has been able to confirm that every aspect of the MIP
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
synthesis is sensible enough to dedicate a significant amount of time on it. As this study
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
is an attempt to shed light in the synthesis of creatinine MIPs from a broader point of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
view, working towards the big picture makes it difficult to focus on each parameter,
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
which would be necessary for a more comprehensive study of the imprinted polymers
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
synthesis.
Nevertheless,
the
creation
of
a
working
protocol
should
state
the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
fundamentals of a creatinine imprinted polymer synthesis, making it easier from
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
someone to optimize the synthesis and achieving a better understanding of the details
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
of this process by just continuing this work. 
 
A final note regarding the biosensor, is the approach in tackling the wide analytical
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
range that creatinine in blood represents in different patients. While regular patients
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
should have creatinine in blood values of between 40µM and 106 µM, patients with a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
compromised kidney condition can have concentrations of several more orders of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
31 
==PAGE:33==
magnitude (up to even 1M in some cases). This makes it difficult to tackle, as normally
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
sensitivity is compromised by working with a wide array of concentrations. However,
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
one of the solutions here, could be in having different disposable chips for different
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
concentrations. Smaller chips, that are more suitable for micromolar concentrations and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
chips with a bigger number of MIPs functionalized in them, allowing for more binding
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
events to happen and then being more suitable for millimolar concentrations. Using
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
different chips like these could be a solution for dealing with the broad display of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
concentrations that a creatinine sensor could face. But, whatever it is the final solution,
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
this is something that must be taken into account. 
 
So, all in all, the focus of this project revolves around the experimental design. While the
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
results give a hint that everything went alright so far (or at least to some extent), it is not
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
enough to draw firm conclusions. It is, however, an example of how to design from
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
scratch synthetic chemistry experiments, in this particular case, creatinine-imprinted
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
polymers, and how to walk towards a bigger project (i.e. the generation of a kidney
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
failure point of care biosensor) by generating perspectives that allow to continue the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
proposed work. So, while it is important to keep in mind that the keystone is the
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
biological recognition, it is also relevant to not lose sight of the big scope, as the
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
limitations of the sensor are what determine which parameters are going to be crucial to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
adjust for the synthesis of the MIPs. So to wrap up this discussion, the author hopes
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
that this work can actually bring some insight in how to work in a biosensing project
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
from the point of view of the design of a synthetic receptor. 
 
32 
==PAGE:34==
 
Special thanks: 
 
As the author of this project, I would like to dedicate a few lines to thank all the people
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
that helped during the process of both writing and performing the experiments. First of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
all, I would like to thank my supervisors Winnie E. Svendsen, Maria Dimaki and
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Kristoffer Almdal for the help provided during all these months of work and their
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
feedback on the project. Their guidance has helped me a lot to not lose sight of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
project and to grow up during this process. I would like to also thank my group
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
co-workers Jafar Safaa Noori, Charalampos Papakonstantinopoulos, Fatima Al-Zahraa
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Al Atraktchi, Sheida Esmail Tehrani and Berit C. Larsen for their interest in my project
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and the help received from their part. I would also like to mention Professor Francesc
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Borrull, Professor Rosa Maria Marcé and Dr. Núria Fontanals from Universitat Rovira i
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Virgili (Tarragona) for their guidance in the initial stages of my project, as well as Gijs
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ramakers from Hasselt University in Belgium for his help with my initial issues with
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MIPs synthesis. Last but not least, I would like to thank my parents, Victor Baiget and
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Marisol Francesch, my brother, Albert Baiget, and my partner Marta Contreras, for their
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
constant support to my work. Thanks to all of you for making this project possible. 
 
33 
==PAGE:35==
Appendix 1: 
 
Creatinine imprinted and non-imprinted polymers synthesis protocol: 
 
The aim of this experiment is to synthesize creatinine-molecularly imprinted polymers 
(MIPs) and non imprinted polymers (NIPs) as a control experiment. Be careful when 
handling the materials and beware of the vapours. Work in the fume hood whenever it 
is possible to do so. Use proper ventilation/respiration systems to avoid exhaling 
the vapours. 
 
MIP/NIP Synthesis: 
 
1.
Heat water in a container until the temperature reaches 60°C 
2.
Pour 2 mL of acetic acid in a container (final volume 2.6 mL). 
3.
Add 29.41 mg (0.1 M) of creatinine to the container.* 
4.
A. Add 44 μL (0.2 M) of MAA to the container. Leave it at room temperature for 30 min.** 
B. Add 55 μL (0.2 M) of MMA to the container. Leave it at room temperature for 30 
min.*** 
C. Add 22 μL (0.1 M) of MAA and 27.5 μL (0.1 M) of MMA to the container. Leave it at 
room temperature for 30 min.**** 
5.
Add 545 μL (1 M) of EGDMA to the container. 
6.
Add 42.70 mg (0.1 M) of AIBN to the container. 
7.
Treat the solution with nitrogen gas (degasification) for 10 minutes. 
8.
Seal the container with parafilm immediately after and leave it for polymerization in the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
60°C water bath for a few hours until the reaction is completed. 
 
MIP/NIP Post-synthesis treatment: 
 
1.
Break the polymer and grind it with the help of a mortar and pestle. 
2.
Collect the particles and wash them with an adequate volume of methanol. 
3.
Centrifuge the particles for 15 min at 5000 G. 
4.
Discard the supernatant and wash the particles with an adequate volume of water. 
5.
Centrifuge the particles for 15 min at 5000 G. 
6.
Discard the supernatant and wash the particles with methanol again. 
7.
Centrifuge the particles for 15 min at 5000 G. 
8.
Discard the supernatant and put them on heater at 70 degrees for 2h. 
9.
Filter the remaining solvent with the help of a filter paper and a funnel and collect the dry
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
polymer particles. 
10. Grind them again by using a mortar and pestle. 
11. Sieve them in a 45 ​μ​m sieve and collect the particles in an eppendorf. 
12. Store them between 0°C and 25°C degrees. 
 
34 
==PAGE:36==
Appendix 2: 
 
Workflow illustrations: 
 
 
 
Figure 19. Overview of the whole polymer synthesis procedure. 
35 
==PAGE:37==
 
Figure 20. Filtration of washed polymer particles. 
 
36 
==PAGE:38==
 
Figure 21. Milling the teflon piece to create the electrode holder. 
 
37 
==PAGE:39==
Bibliography: 
 
Note: Personal correspondence with Gijs Ramakers from Hasselt University (Belgium) and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Núria Fontanals Torroja from Universitat Rovira i Virgili (Spain) has been helpful for the author in
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
order to establish the criteria for the choice of the previously mentioned reagents. 
 
1 - Kupai, J., Razali, M., Buyuktiryaki, S., Kecili, R. and Szekely, G. 
Kupai, Jozsef et al. "Long-Term Stability And Reusability Of Molecularly Imprinted
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Polymers". Polym. Chem. 8.4 (2017): 666-673. Web. 27 Apr. 2017. 
 
2- Creatinine (biomarker of SensUs 2916) SensUs Wiki 
http://sensus.org/wiki/index.php?title=Creatinine_(biomarker_of_SensUs_2016) 
 
3- SensUs 2016 - Aim; acute and chronic kidney disease 
http://sensus.org/aim.php#anchor3 
 
4- Haupt, Karsten. Ultrathin Electrochemical Chemo- and Biosensors - Springer (2004).
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Volume 2; Molecularly Imprinted Polymers as Recognition Elements in Sensors.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Editors: Dr. Vladimir M. Mirsky. ISBN: 978-3-642-05961-2 (Print) 978-3-662-05204-4
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Online)Molecular Imprinting. 
 
5- Pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov. (2017). ​creatinine | C4H7N3O - PubChem​. [online]
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
Available at: https://pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/compound/588 [Accessed 10 Jan. 2017]. 
 
3- Pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov. (2017). ​METHACRYLIC ACID | C4H6O2 - PubChem​.
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
[online] Available at: https://pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/compound/4093 [Accessed 19
 
 
 
 
 
 
Jan. 2017]. 
 
6- Piletsky, Sergey A., Yi Ge, and Songjun Li. "MIP-based Sensor Platforms for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Detection of Analytes in Nano- and Micromolar Range." Molecularly Imprinted Sensors:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Overview and Applications. N.p.: Elsevier, 2012. N. pag. Print. 
 
7- Thoelen, R., R. Vansweevelt, J. Duchateau, F. Horemans, J. D’Haen, L. Lutsen, D.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Vanderzande, M. Ameloot, M. Vandeven, and T.j. Cleij. "A MIP-based impedimetric
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sensor for the detection of low-MW molecules." Biosensors and Bioelectronics 23.6
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(2008): 913-18. Web. 
 
38 
==PAGE:40==
8- Pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov. (2017). O-PHENYLENEDIAMINE | C6H8N2 - PubChem.
 
 
 
  
  
 
[online] Available at: https://pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/compound/7243 [Accessed 19
 
 
 
 
 
 
Jan. 2017]. 
9- Karimian, Najmeh, Anthony P.f. Turner, and Ashutosh Tiwari. "Electrochemical
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Evaluation of Troponin T Imprinted Polymer Receptor." Biosensors and Bioelectronics
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
59 (2014): 160-65. Web. 
 
10- Pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov. (2017). dopamine | C8H11NO2 - PubChem. [online]
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
Available at: https://pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/compound/681 [Accessed 19 Jan. 2017]. 
 
11- Pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov. (2017). ​Dopaminechrome | C8H7NO2 - PubChem​.
 
 
 
  
  
 
[online] Available at: https://pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/compound/170262 [Accessed 19
 
 
 
 
 
 
Jan. 2017]. 
 
12- Thomas, Sabu. Advanced Polymeric Materials: From Macro- to Nano-length Scales.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Toronto: Apple Academic, 2016. Print. 
 
13- Karsten Haupt, Ana V. Linares, Marc Bompart, and Bernadette Tse Sum Bui
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Molecular Imprinting. Chapter 1 - Molecularly Imprinted Polymers. Springer (2012).
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Editor: Karsten Haupt. DOI 10.1007/128_2011_307. 
 
 
14- Mohabbati-Kalejahi, Elham, Manouchehr Bahrami, and Ahmad Ganbari. "A review
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
on creatinine measurement techniques." Talanta 97 (2012): 1-8. Web. 
 
 
 
 
39 
