==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Developing spatially differentiated Planetary Boundary 
based Life-Cycle Impact Assessment model for 
Phosphorous to freshwater 
 
 
 
Ana Catarina Casinhas do Val 
 
 
Master Thesis 
June 2017 
 
 
 
 
Division for Quantitative Sustainability Assessment 
Department of Management Engineering 
Technical University of Denmark 
 
==PAGE:2==
Val C. 2017. Developing spatially differentiated Planetary Boundary based Life-Cycle Impact Assessment model for Phosphorous to freshwater. 
Master thesis. Technical University of Denmark 
 
 
2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:3==
Val C. 2017. Developing spatially differentiated Planetary Boundary based Life-Cycle Impact Assessment model for Phosphorous to freshwater. 
Master thesis. Technical University of Denmark 
 
 
i 
 
Acknowledgments 
 
I am grateful to my supervisors, Morten Ryberg, for being so present and supportive, and 
Michael Zwicky Hauschild, whose words have always contributed to broaden my perspective, 
making all the discussions so much richer. 
 
I also wish to thank professor Paula Antunes, who made this opportunity possible, and professor 
Pedro Santos Coelho who encouraged me to take on this challenge. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:4==
Val C. 2017. Developing spatially differentiated Planetary Boundary based Life-Cycle Impact Assessment model for Phosphorous to freshwater. 
Master thesis. Technical University of Denmark 
 
 
ii 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:5==
Val C. 2017. Developing spatially differentiated Planetary Boundary based Life-Cycle Impact Assessment model for Phosphorous to freshwater. 
Master thesis. Technical University of Denmark 
 
 
iii 
 
Abstract 
 
Surface freshwaters are among the most extensively altered ecosystems on Earth (Carpenter et 
al. 2011), and eutrophication constitutes one of the main problems affecting these ecosystems 
(Schindler 2006). Phosphorus is most often the limiting nutrient for inland waters, and its 
biogeochemical flow has been identified in the Planetary Boundary framework as one of the 
Earth System processes where major human-induced environmental change on a global scale in 
interfering with “safe operating space for human societies to develop and thrive” (Rockström et 
al. 2009). To the present, the PB for P flow had been derived as a global value, which when 
applied in a LCA context wouldn´t reflect the spatial variability in sensitivity to P emissions. 
The main goal of this project was to develop a spatially differentiated Planetary Boundary based 
Life-Cycle Impact Assessment model for Phosphorous to freshwater. We propose spatially 
differentiated carrying capacities (CC), that can be used in LCA as environmental sustainability 
reference, in order to assess sustainability from an absolute perspective. These, combined with 
spatial differentiated Fate Factors (FF), allowed us to generate a characterization framework to 
be applied at the midpoint level and at a global scale, on a half-degree resolution. Application of 
the proposed CFs will result in Indicator scores (IS) that express the occupation of CC by 
elementary flows of P emitted to freshwater. 
Results showed that tolerable emissions of elementary flow of P to freshwater were 
considerably restrictive in 98% of the spatial units where the characterization framework was 
applicable, revealing a generalized high sensitivity to P emissions. Requirements to stay within 
the boundaries are therefore expected to strongly conflict with current pattern of 
anthropogenic P delivery into freshwater, and consequently with current agronomic practises. 
Overall, our proposal is an additional contribution to demonstrate how LCA can be adapted to 
assess absolute sustainability, while providing useful information that can be used to interpret 
and discuss what is ”the Holocene State of the Earth System” regarding freshwater systems. 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:6==
Val C. 2017. Developing spatially differentiated Planetary Boundary based Life-Cycle Impact Assessment model for Phosphorous to freshwater. 
Master thesis. Technical University of Denmark 
 
 
iv 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:7==
Val C. 2017. Developing spatially differentiated Planetary Boundary based Life-Cycle Impact Assessment model for Phosphorous to freshwater. 
Master thesis. Technical University of Denmark 
 
 
v 
 
Table of contents 
 
1. 
Introduction .......................................................................................................................... 1 
1.1. 
The Planetary Boundaries framework: the phosphorus biogeochemical flow ............. 1 
1.2. 
Life Cycle Assessment: characterizing the interaction between humans and natural 
systems ...................................................................................................................................... 3 
2. 
Research goals ....................................................................................................................... 5 
3. 
The biogeochemical flow of phosphorus .............................................................................. 7 
3.1. 
Surface freshwater eutrophication: an overview ......................................................... 7 
3.2. 
Control variables affecting primary production .......................................................... 11 
3.3. 
Regime shifts in lakes and reservoirs .......................................................................... 14 
3.4. 
Eutrophication from a LCIA perspective ..................................................................... 18 
4. 
Related Work ....................................................................................................................... 21 
4.1. 
Modelling P fate in LCIA .............................................................................................. 21 
4.2. 
Planetary Boundaries based Life-Cycle Impact Assessment methodology ................. 24 
5. 
Methodology ....................................................................................................................... 27 
5.1. 
Definitions and interpretations ................................................................................... 27 
5.2. 
Calculation of the Carrying Capacity ........................................................................... 28 
5.3. 
Characterization framework ....................................................................................... 31 
5.4. 
Overview of the proposed modelling process ............................................................ 34 
6. 
Results and Discussion ........................................................................................................ 37 
6.1. 
Determining Carrying Capacities ................................................................................. 37 
6.2. 
Characterization Factors and tolerable emissions ...................................................... 38 
6.3. 
Alternative ways to determine Carrying Capacities and implications to decision 
support .................................................................................................................................... 39 
6.4. 
Implication for phosphorus management .................................................................. 42 
7. 
Conclusions ......................................................................................................................... 43 
References ................................................................................................................................... 45 
APPENDIX I – Glossary of limnological terms .............................................................................. 51 
APPENDIX II – Glossary of ‘Sustainability assessment’ terms ..................................................... 53 
APPENDIX III – Matlab scripts ..................................................................................................... 55 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:8==
Val C. 2017. Developing spatially differentiated Planetary Boundary based Life-Cycle Impact Assessment model for Phosphorous to freshwater. 
Master thesis. Technical University of Denmark 
 
 
vi 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:9==
Val C. 2017. Developing spatially differentiated Planetary Boundary based Life-Cycle Impact Assessment model for Phosphorous to freshwater. 
Master thesis. Technical University of Denmark 
 
 
1 
 
1. Introduction 
1.1. The Planetary Boundaries framework: the phosphorus biogeochemical flow 
Human activities and their subsequent environmental impacts are disturbing the intrinsic 
biophysical processes that regulate the stability of the Earth System. The scale of these impacts 
may be affecting the “safe operating space for human societies to develop and thrive”, which 
scientific reference point is defined by (Rockström et al. 2009)  as the range within which the 
Earth systems processes varied in the Holocene. In order to avoid a major human-induced 
environmental change on a global scale, these systems were identified and estimates on their 
Planetary Boundaries (PB) were established (Rockström et al. 2009; Steffen et al. 2015). 
Materially, PBs consist of human determined values set based on thresholds (Rockström et al. 
2009), which are critical levels of control variables at which ecosystems may switch abruptly to 
a contrasting alternative stable state (Scheffer et al. 2001). These environmental changes may 
or may not be reversible, and assume a continental to planetary scale (Rockström et al. 2009). 
One of the Earth System processes identified refers to the biogeochemical flows, where 
geographically extensive changes in concentrations of key nutrients in coastal and freshwaters 
results from increased nutrient inputs from anthropogenic activities (Carpenter et al. 2001; 
Smith et al. 1998). This project focus on the biogeochemical flow of phosphorous (P). 
Phosphorous is a key macronutrient and a fundamental element to every living being, existing 
in many different chemical forms. The transformations between these forms are site-specific 
and continuous, constituting its natural cycle (Struijs et al. 2011; Carpenter et al. 2001). 
Particulate losses due to weathering are the dominant pathway of P into the water 
compartment. Weathering can be both natural or human induced, and the additional inflow of 
P to freshwater and marine systems due to anthropogenic emissions may, depending on its 
scale, represent a problem to the prevailing biochemical setting (Bennett et al. 2001; Carpenter 
& Bennett 2011). The over enrichment of aquatic systems with nutrients leads to increasing 
accumulation of P, resulting in accelerated growth of algae and higher forms of plant life. This 
phenomenon is defined as eutrophication, and is responsible for an undesirable disturbance to 
the balance of organisms present in the water as well as to the quality of the water itself (Ferreira 
et al. 2010). Consequences consist in harmful blooms of algae, deoxygenation, loss of 
economically valuable species, and human health problems (Carpenter & Bennett 2011; 
Schindler 2006; Carpenter et al. 1998). Since P is most often the limiting nutrient for inland 
waters (Struijs et al. 2011; Schindler 2006; Crouzet 1999; Carpenter et al. 1998), this project is 
focused on emissions of P to freshwater, considering rivers, lakes, and reservoirs. In fact, 
according to Carpenter et al. (2011), surface freshwaters are among the most extensively altered 
==PAGE:10==
Val C. 2017. Developing spatially differentiated Planetary Boundary based Life-Cycle Impact Assessment model for Phosphorous to freshwater. 
Master thesis. Technical University of Denmark 
 
 
2 
 
ecosystems on Earth, and eutrophication constitutes one of the main problems affecting these 
freshwater ecosystems (Schindler 2006). 
Originally, Rockström et al. (2009) defined the planetary boundary for P as the inflow to the 
ocean compared with the natural background weathering levels. The avoided threshold would 
be a major oceanic anoxic event (OAE), with impacts on marine ecosystems. Later, Steffen et al. 
(2015) suggested a two-level approach, retaining the original global-level, but complementing 
with an additional regional level P-boundary to address the widespread eutrophication of 
freshwater systems. Based on the work developed by Carpenter and Bennett (2011), the 
proposed boundary was estimated by setting a target quality standard for all of Earth’s surface 
waters in terms of P concentration. By determining the flux of P to the freshwaters that would 
yield this steady-state average concentration, a global planetary boundary is computed for the 
control variable mined P applied to erodible soils as fertilizer. Because eutrophication of 
freshwaters is a globally distributed environmental problem (Millenium Ecosystem Assessment, 
2005), the approach is useful as it treats freshwater impairment caused by P pollution as a global 
process (Stephen and Bennett, 2011). Notwithstanding, there are two main limitations in this 
approach: 
First, this boundary is based on globally averaged flows of P and freshwater, while both flows 
exhibit geographically extensive differences (Carpenter et al., 2011). This means that this 
boundary does not reflect the spatial variability in sensitivity to P emissions, and exceedances 
of local carrying capacities may be occurring while the boundary itself is not surpassed.  
Also, this global boundary is defined upon the application of P to erodible soil, whereas the 
problem relies on the P that is lost to freshwater. The relation between this two fluxes is highly 
dependent on factors such as nutrient management, precipitation, proximity to freshwater, land 
use, slope and type of soil (Struijs et al. 2011). Such methodological option relies on the 
assumption that all cropland soils are erodible and on the estimation of a constant flow rate of 
P to the sea.   
Controlling eutrophication is a challenge which depends both on scientific developments and 
policy decisions. Planetary Boundaries are an attractive tool for decision makers, constituting a 
framework for managing environmental resources at the global level (Ryberg et al., 2016; Galaz 
et al., 2012), and it is therefore considered that eutrophication management could benefit from 
improved boundaries referring to the biogeochemical cycle of phosphorous.  
 
==PAGE:11==
Val C. 2017. Developing spatially differentiated Planetary Boundary based Life-Cycle Impact Assessment model for Phosphorous to freshwater. 
Master thesis. Technical University of Denmark 
 
 
3 
 
1.2. Life Cycle Assessment: characterizing the interaction between humans and natural 
systems 
Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) is an internationally standardised method for quantifying the 
impacts of products and technologies on environment and human health. LCA addresses the 
environmental aspects and potential environmental impacts, taking into account a product’s full 
life cycle (i.e. cradle-to-grave). This structured and comprehensive tool is aimed to support 
modern environmental policies and business decision making related to sustainable 
consumption and production (ISO 2006a; ISO 2006b; EC-JRC 2012). 
LCA studies are structured in four phases: (i) goal and scope definition, (ii) inventory analysis, 
(iii) impact assessment, and (iv) interpretation. Goal and scope definition is dependent on the 
subject and intended use of the study, and includes setting the system boundaries and defining 
the functional unit. This is followed by an inventory phase where all physical inputs and outputs 
of the product system during its life cycle are compiled, providing quantification of exchanges 
between the inherent processes and the environment. In order to provide a better 
understanding of the quantified flows environmental significance, the third step constitutes the 
Life Cycle Impact Assessment (LCIA) phase. LCIA is used in LCA by creating a profile throughout 
the life-cycle of the product where all related environmental interventions are classified and 
characterized into potential environmental impacts. This is achieved through Characterization 
Factors (CF), which are multipliers that allow for converting the inventory flows into impact 
scores, in accordance to a preselected number of impact categories. Life cycle interpretation is 
the final phase, where results are interpreted, and aims to elaborate recommendations in 
accordance with the goal and scope definition.  (Henderson 2015; EC-JRC 2010; ISO 2006a). 
LCA is a field of active development, and is commonly used to define and compare the 
environmental performance of a product, allowing to identify the environmental hotspots in its 
life-cycle (Hauschild et al. 2013). This tool has a recognized contribution to the understanding of 
the environmental consequences of human activities (Sonnemann and Schuhmacher, 2004). 
Nevertheless, reference values of absolute environmental sustainability, i.e. based on the 
characteristics of natural systems, are not typically contemplated in this method (Moldan et al. 
2012; Bjørn et al. 2016). Normalization, i.e. calculating the magnitude of impact category 
indicator results relative to reference information, is an optional step in LCIA (ISO 14040); and 
most often the choice of reference for a determined  impact category is the annual impact from 
an average person (Hauschild and Huijbregts, 2015). Such methodological approach does not 
provide an absolute measure of environmental sustainability, where references are chosen to 
match the anthropogenic studied system nature or function (Bjørn et al. 2016). 
==PAGE:12==
Val C. 2017. Developing spatially differentiated Planetary Boundary based Life-Cycle Impact Assessment model for Phosphorous to freshwater. 
Master thesis. Technical University of Denmark 
 
 
4 
 
The urgent need to move towards the goal of environmental sustainability requires improved 
performance of products’ systems to be aligned with the inherent thresholds of the Earth 
systems. The use of carrying capacities, defined as “the maximum sustained environmental 
interference a natural system can withstand without experiencing negative changes in structure 
or functioning that are difficult or impossible to revert” has already been proposed as 
environmental sustainability reference in LCA (Bjørn et al., 2016; Bjørn and Hauschild, 2015; 
Tuomisto et al., 2012). As a comprehensive tool with a wide coverage of environmental issues, 
LCA shows intrinsic strong potential to assess absolute sustainability (Ryberg et al. 2016). 
Additionally, over the last decade LCA methodology as experienced improvements in developing 
characterization methods for regional impacts categories, according to local and regional 
specificities and site dependent characteristics (Henderson 2015; Azevedo et al. 2013; Hauschild 
et al. 2013), and is therefore a valuable tool when addressing geographically variability. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:13==
Val C. 2017. Developing spatially differentiated Planetary Boundary based Life-Cycle Impact Assessment model for Phosphorous to freshwater. 
Master thesis. Technical University of Denmark 
 
 
5 
 
2. Research goals 
The main goal of this project is to develop a spatially differentiated Planetary Boundary based 
Life-Cycle Impact Assessment model for Phosphorous to freshwater. This project aims to address 
the limitations identified above, by proposing improved spatially differentiated planetary 
boundaries in terms of P loading (P emissions to freshwater). This should be made by 
determining carrying capacities, expressed in concentration of P in the water body (m.v-1), that 
can be used in LCA as environmental sustainability reference. 
Such intended framework leads to the subsequent research question: 
1) Which areas are most sensitive to phosphorus emissions to freshwater? 
 
2) How can these finding be incorporated as a sustainable reference in LCIA? 
 
3) How will LCA results regarding eutrophication change if spatially differentiated PB-based 
sustainability references are used? 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:14==
Val C. 2017. Developing spatially differentiated Planetary Boundary based Life-Cycle Impact Assessment model for Phosphorous to freshwater. 
Master thesis. Technical University of Denmark 
 
 
6 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:15==
Val C. 2017. Developing spatially differentiated Planetary Boundary based Life-Cycle Impact Assessment model for Phosphorous to freshwater. 
Master thesis. Technical University of Denmark 
 
 
7 
 
3. The biogeochemical flow of phosphorus  
3.1. Surface freshwater eutrophication: an overview 
Lakes, reservoirs and rivers account for 0.26% of liquid freshwater on Earth, supplying 
approximately three-quarters of the water withdrawn for human use. Surface freshwaters are 
in rapid flux when compared with other pools of liquid water on Earth, with turnover time of 
approximately 160 years for lakes and reservoirs and 16 days for rivers. (Carpenter et al. 2011). 
While composing less than 1% of the planet’s surface, freshwaters host approximately 10% of 
described animal species and one-third of global vertebrate diversity (David L. Strayer et al. 
2010).  
One of the major drivers of change in freshwater ecosystems is eutrophication. Nutrient-
enriched run-off from agriculture and urban land are its major cause (Smith 2003). 
Notwithstanding, sources of nutrients can be both diffuse (nonpoint) and concentrated (point). 
However, while many countries have already established upper limits for pollution of freshwater 
by nutrients (Carpenter et al. 2011), achieving improvements in water quality by reducing or 
eliminating point-source inputs, diffuse sources are often more important and its control has 
proven most difficult. Agricultural activity dominating drainage basins, and land use changes, 
such as deforestation or clearing of native vegetation, are main drivers leading to important 
nonpoint sources of P (Prepas & Charette 2003).  
Major aquatic ecosystems are now strongly influenced by anthropogenic activities, and the 
fluxes of growth-limiting nutrients from the landscape to receiving waters have been 
dramatically altered (Smith 2003). The excess of nutrient inputs causes a variety of effects on 
the structure and function of water bodies, and a remarkably consistent response of inland 
water to nutrient enrichment has been observed worldwide (Smith 2009). Algal biomass-
nutrient relation analysis have been established for lakes and reservoirs in every continent 
(Smith 2003), and eutrophication ecological impacts have been intensely studied (Alexander et 
al. 2017), proving this as a mature field.  
Ecological impacts from freshwater eutrophication are initialized by enhanced primary 
production, particularly phytoplankton and aquatic plants (Prepas & Charette 2003).  The link 
between nutrients and plant growth is well established and direct effects of increased density 
of autotrophs correspond generally to a shift among and within groups of primary producers.  
The relation between this biomass flow and higher trophic levels is less predictable, as indirect 
effects emerge from altered physico-chemical conditions in the aquatic ecosystems, due to 
increased respiration and water turbidity (Alexander et al. 2017). Efficiency of nutrient uptake 
==PAGE:16==
Val C. 2017. Developing spatially differentiated Planetary Boundary based Life-Cycle Impact Assessment model for Phosphorous to freshwater. 
Master thesis. Technical University of Denmark 
 
 
8 
 
is reduced because biological demand is saturated, and shifting ratios of C, N and P are likely to 
occur, favouring different biogeochemical transformations, as well as the transformation of 
species composition of the aquatic communities (Carpenter et al. 2011). Accumulation of dead 
phytoplankton leads to high decomposition rates by bacteria, and dissolved oxygen 
consumption by decomposers may lead to hypoxia or anoxia conditions in bottom waters 
(Prepas & Charette 2003). Therefore, the entire biological structure of a lake ecosystem is 
altered (Alexander et al. 2017), and biodiversity of most aquatic systems decreases with 
eutrophication (Figure 1). 
 
 
Figure 1 - Suggested changes in various characteristics of lakes with eutrophication (adapted from (Prepas & 
Charette 2003). 
Additionally to damage to aquatic ecosystems and subsequent changes in biodiversity integrity, 
damages caused by eutrophication also include economic losses caused by the decline in 
population of the most valuable fishes (Carpenter et al. 2011), increased costs in purification of 
water, and loss of economic benefits associated with clean water (Carpenter & Lathrop 2008).  
In the early 20th century, pioneer research was developed in Europe, as scientists began to 
categorize water bodies by their relative fertility (Smith 2009). Since then, scientific 
understanding of eutrophication and its management has been evolving. Based on the 
observation of several criteria, the classification of ecosystems by an index of trophic state is 
now common in the aquatic sciences (Dodds et al. 1998), and the Trophic State Concept has 
gained global acceptance (Smith 2009). 
The trophic state of a water body is defined as a degree of fertility, ranging from ultra-
oligotrophic to hypereutrophic with increased supply of nutrients and organic matter (Prepas & 
Charette 2003). Although there is often no clear delineation of the series of classes, and trophic 
status is seen as a multidimensional concept (Carlson 1977), current practise of trophic state 
classification schemes in lakes include as key descriptors total phosphorus concentration, 
==PAGE:17==
Val C. 2017. Developing spatially differentiated Planetary Boundary based Life-Cycle Impact Assessment model for Phosphorous to freshwater. 
Master thesis. Technical University of Denmark 
 
 
9 
 
Chlorophyll a concentration and Secchi disk depth (Table 1). Secchi disc is used to measure water 
clarity, and is generally a function of algal density (Canfield & Bachmann 1980).   
Table 1 - Mean annual values for the trophic classification system in lakes from OECD programme on eutrophication 
(Wollenweider & Kerekes 1980) 
Trophic state 
category 
Total phosphorus 
(µg.L-1) 
Chlorophyll a 
(µg.L-1) 
Secchi disk depth 
(m) 
Ultra-oligotrophied 
<4 
<1 
>12 
Oligotrophic 
<10 
<2,5 
>6 
Mesotrophic 
10-30 
2,5-8 
6-3 
Eutrophic 
30-90 
8-25 
3-1.5 
Hypertrophic 
>100 
>25 
<1,5 
 
According to (Smith 2009), even though these trophic state categories have most frequently 
been used to describe freshwater lakes, they can also be applied to reservoirs. It is important to 
notice though, that P sedimentation rates are known to be greater in reservoirs, where it has 
been observed that non-algal turbidity is an important determinant of water clarity (Canfield 
and Bachmann 1980). 
When it comes to streams and rivers, no conventional mechanism with which to characterize 
and compare nutrients and algal biomass has been established in such a broader context as the 
one proposed by OECD for lakes. A suggested classification of stream trophic state by (Dodds et 
al. 1998) is presented (Table 2).  
 
Table 2 - Suggested boundaries for trophic classification of streams (Source: (Dodds et al. 1998)) 
Trophic state 
category 
Total 
phosphorus 
(µg.L-1) 
Total 
nitrogen 
(µg.L-1) 
Mean benthic 
chlorophyll 
(mg.m-2) 
Maximim benthic 
chlorophyll (mg.m-
2) 
Oligotrophic 
<25 
<700 
<20 
<60 
Mesotrophic 
25-75 
700-1500 
20-70 
60-200 
Eutrophic 
>75 
>1500 
>70 
>200 
 
The definition of what constitutes in fact excessive levels of benthic algae can be subjective, and 
therefore difficult to establish. According to Welch et al. 1988, fide (Dodds & Welch 2000), 200 
mg.L-1 of benthic chlorophyll in rivers generally produces a very green stream bottom. Because 
streams and rivers are less likely to accumulate as much algal biomass as lakes, given the same 
total phosphorus (TP), worst cases of eutrophication are most likely to occur in very enriched, 
slow-moving, and non-turbid rivers. Benthic chlorophyll may in fact be much more variable in 
streams because of the effects of floods, turbidity, and grazing, and models describing the 
correlation between nutrients and chlorophyll differ significantly among lotic and lentic habitats.  
Moreover, models developed for stream benthic algae contain a much greater degree of 
uncertainty than those for lakes (Dodds & Welch 2000). 
==PAGE:18==
Val C. 2017. Developing spatially differentiated Planetary Boundary based Life-Cycle Impact Assessment model for Phosphorous to freshwater. 
Master thesis. Technical University of Denmark 
 
 
10 
 
In the absence of well-defined standards to determine if nutrients impair flowing waters, setting 
nutrient criteria for streams and rivers can be more stringent due to potential eutrophication of 
systems fed by rivers, i.e. requirements for control of nutrient loading to downstream lakes and 
coastal marine systems may be more restrictive than those required for controlling instream 
eutrophication (Dodds & Welch 2000). 
When regarding the proposed classification schemes, it is also relevant to refer that not all 
eutrophied water bodies correspond to cultural eutrophication. Water bodies are closely linked 
to the characteristics of their drainage basins and natural eutrophication also occurs, although 
very few aquatic systems are naturally eutrophic. Chemistry of water exported from the 
drainage basin is strongly influenced by nutrient composition of soil, which is deeply related to 
the chemistry of its parent rock material. Other natural characteristics and processes, such as 
relative drainage basin size (relation between surface area and water volume), influencing the 
water residence time; and type of vegetation, influencing transpiration rates, lead to natural 
variability of nutrient export among water bodies (Prepas & Charette 2003). 
Cultural eutrophication in most aquatic ecosystems occurred as a result of rapidly increasing 
nutrients over just a few decades due to anthropogenic sources (Alexander et al. 2017), whereas 
eutrophication occurrences in the past were primarily linked with climate. A decrease in aquatic 
productivity during cold periods, has been widely reported in the literature (Larocque-Tobler et 
al. 2010). Furthermore, analysis of paleoclimatic changes during the past 15,000 years, show 
how changing patterns of meltwater and rainfall can significantly originate fluctuations in 
hydrologic environments, in parameters such as depth and shape (Kashiwaya et al. 1995), which 
strongly influence water residence time in lakes, and therefore susceptibility to nutrient 
increase.  
Sawyer (1966) described lakes and reservoirs as “only water filled natural or man-made 
depressions in the earth's crust that are destined to become filled with soil and organic deposits 
as time passes”, and therefore undergo from a youth stage of oligotrophy to a mature phase of 
increased biological productivity, that gradually results in extinction. For most of the lakes, the 
life span is normally reckoned in millenniums, and artificial fertilization – i.e. nutrient inputs from 
anthropogenic sources – hastens the onset of eutrophication and is consequently contributing 
to shortening the life span of lakes (Sawyer 1966). 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:19==
Val C. 2017. Developing spatially differentiated Planetary Boundary based Life-Cycle Impact Assessment model for Phosphorous to freshwater. 
Master thesis. Technical University of Denmark 
 
 
11 
 
3.2. Control variables affecting primary production  
Conceptual and empirical models for eutrophication have been developed over the past 60 
years, and understanding of eutrophication is more advanced for lakes and reservoirs (Schindler 
2006), while cases of rivers and streams eutrophication have also been reported by investigators 
in Europe and North America (Smith 2003). The response of species composition of algal 
communities inhabiting the water column to nutrient loading appears to be similar whether in 
lakes, reservoirs or rivers (Smith 2003), but as referred before, there is a fairly low chlorophyll 
yield per unit nutrient in streams and rivers. 
Understanding relationships between primary producers and their growth-limiting resources is 
seen as fundamental to evaluate ecosystem functioning and determine ecosystem health 
(Filstrup et al. 2014)). Early in 1947, Sawyer, (1947) recognized P concentration in lakes as the 
factor controlling eutrophication (Smith 2009) and since then several studies on both lakes and 
reservoirs have demonstrated a strong correlation with algal population densities. Because no 
single variable is accepted as being the only true representative of the eutrophication degree of 
a given body of water,  P compounds concentrations, as predictor, and Chlorophyll-a (Chl-a) 
concentrations, as response variable, have been used throughout the world to understand and 
classify freshwater ecosystems (Zurlini 1996) . Chl-a concentration is linked with effects of 
nutrient enrichment, through increase of algal biomass and turbidity, and can work also as a 
proxy for phytoplankton abundance (Bettencourt et al. 2004). It is thus expected to reflect 
multiple aspects of ecosystem function.  
Predictive models of the Chl-a response to TP are therefore often used to estimate the target TP 
concentration that would be required to achieve healthy aquatic ecosystems (Filstrup et al. 
2014). These simple, mostly empirical models (some were developed  from theoretical 
considerations of factors affecting algal productivity - e.g. Sakamoto (1966)), usually work on 
log-transformed variables and use data from multiple lakes (Table 3). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:20==
Val C. 2017. Developing spatially differentiated Planetary Boundary based Life-Cycle Impact Assessment model for Phosphorous to freshwater. 
Master thesis. Technical University of Denmark 
 
 
12 
 
Table 3- Predictive models of the Chl-a response to TP reported in the literature (log10 [Chl-a] = log10 [P] + intercept). 
Reference 
Data set 
log 
[P] 
intercept 
r2 
(Sakamoto 1966) 
31 Japanese lakes 
1.58 
-1.134 
n.d. 
(Dillon & Rigler 1974) 
Ontario lakes + Lk. Washington + others North 
America 
1.45 
-1.136 
0.92 
(Jones & Bachmann 1976) 
143 Lakes worldwide 
1.46 
-1.090 
0.93 
(Wollenweider & Kerekes 
1980) 
Lakes worldwide – OECD programme 
0.79 
-0.432 
n.d. 
(Prepas & Trew 1983) 
25 lakes of the Pecambrian Shield in Western 
Canada 
1.12 
-0.676 
0.67 
(White 1983) 
27 lakes in New Zealand 
1.23 
-0.903 
n.d. 
(Vyhnálek et al. 1994) 
28 lakes in the High Tatra Mountains, Slovakia 
0.98 
-0.514 
0,35 
(White et al. 1985) 
12 central volcanic plateau lakes in New Zealand 
0.85 
-0.523 
0.73 
(Shortreed et al. 1986) 
19 Subarctic Lakes in the Yukon Territory, Canada 
0.7 
-0.39 
0.35 
(Quirós 1990) 
97 lakes and reservoirs of Argentina 
0.96 
-0.570 
0.78 
(Jones & Knowlton 1993) 
94 Missouri reservoirs 
0.88 
-0.230 
0.62 
(Mazumder 1994) 
367 lakes in temperate North America and Europe 
0.94 
-0.350 
0.71 
(Mazumder 1994) 
59 lakes in subtropical Florida 
1.06 
-0.360 
0.79 
(Jones et al. 2000) 
13 tropical reservoirs in Thailand 
1,48 
-0,960 
0,76 
(Phillips et al. 2008) 
Data from Denmark, Sweden, Norway and Finland 
1,12 
-0,443 
0,93 
(Jones et al. 2003) 
59 reservoirs in South Korea 
0.96 
-0.510 
0.77 
(Havens & Nürnberg 2004) 
369 lakes from North America, Europe, Asia and 
New Zealand 
0.75 
-0.189 
0.62 
(Huszar et al. 2006) 
192 Lakes between 30 S to 31 N in Asia, Africa, N 
and S America 
0.70 
-0.152 
0.42 
(Phillips et al. 2008) 
1 138 lakes in Europe  
1.03 
-0.455 
0.78 
 
Chlorophyll nutrient relationships are usually derived using linear least squares regression. Prior 
to analysis, common practice for data of this type is to logarithmically transform (base 10) all 
data, ensuring their homogeneity of variance (Phillips et al. 2008). Linear models are recognized 
to be only an approximation to what is more likely a curvilinear or sigmoidal relationship.  
Notwithstanding, asymptotic behaviour registered from large datasets analysis show non-
linearity response (reduction in slope) occurring only at high nutrient levels, i.e. above 50 µg/L 
TP (Jones and Knowlton 1993) and above 100 µg/L TP (Phillips et al. 2008). This should 
correspond  to the point where biological demand is saturated and efficiency of nutrient uptake 
==PAGE:21==
Val C. 2017. Developing spatially differentiated Planetary Boundary based Life-Cycle Impact Assessment model for Phosphorous to freshwater. 
Master thesis. Technical University of Denmark 
 
 
13 
 
is reduced (S. R. Carpenter, Stanley, and Vander Zanden 2011), suggesting as well that other 
factors, for instance light penetration, or nitrogen, became limiting at  high TP concentrations 
(Filstrup et al. 2014). 
 Information on the responses of lake and reservoir water quality to nutrient enrichment is now 
available from most of the geographical regions of the world (Smith 2003). Among the equations 
proposed, some correspond to global eutrophication models, i.e. generalised P-algal biomass 
relationships that treat all water bodies as a homogenous group (Beveridge 1984).   These are 
often used to underpin decisions about lake management (Phillips et al. 2008), although 
responses of some lakes appear unique and may not be accurately predicted by using current 
global eutrophication models (Smith & Shapiro 1981). A more accurate application of this 
limnological relationship may require spatial specificity (Filstrup et al. 2014), and cross region 
specific equations have also been proposed (Beveridge 1984). 
There are numerous factors that have been hypothesized to influence Chl a–TP relationships, 
such as temperature, solar radiation,  variations in depth, physical structure of the 
compartment, hydraulic residence time, zooplankton community composition, nitrogen 
concentrations or nitrogen to phosphorus (N : P) ratios, and rate of soil erosion, the latter 
affected by land use and land cover (Filstrup et al. 2014; Smith 2003). Aside, some considerable 
variability in P-Chl-a relationship happens also due to variations in sampling and analytical 
techniques, such as time of the year or chlorophyll extraction procedures (Nicholls & Dillon 
1978).  
It is also relevant to refer that, although current understanding is that freshwaters are limited 
by P, this is not always observed and cases where P is not the limiting nutrient have been 
documented, for instance  in P-rich volcanic areas (Beveridge 1984; White et al. 1985). In fact, 
the importance of the N:P ratio when assessing chlorophyll yield has been widely commented 
in the literature (Nicholls & Dillon 1978; Jones & Knowlton 1993; Smith 1982). Sakamoto, 1966 
fide (Smith & Shapiro 1981) concluded that chlorophyll yield is nearly balanced with respect to 
both TP and TN at TN:TP ratio in the range of 10 to 17 by weight makes, but that chlorophyll was 
dependent only on TN when TN:TP < 10, and only on TP when the TN:TP ratio was >17. Identical 
conclusions have been drawn since then (Smith 1982).  
Such considerations have led these studies which focused on simple, linear relationships 
between log total P (log TP) and log chlorophyll (log Chl), to advance and include the secondary 
impacts of N, lake depth, colour, inorganic turbidity and food web relationships (Huszar et al. 
2006). Table exhibits some of the predictive models of the Chl-a response to both TP and TN 
reported in the literature. 
==PAGE:22==
Val C. 2017. Developing spatially differentiated Planetary Boundary based Life-Cycle Impact Assessment model for Phosphorous to freshwater. 
Master thesis. Technical University of Denmark 
 
 
14 
 
Table 4 - Predictive models of the Chl-a response to both TP and TN reported in the literature (log10 [Chl-a] = log10 [P] 
+ log10 [N] + intercept). 
Reference 
Data set 
log [P] 
log [N] 
intercept 
r2 
(Smith 1982) 
127 north latitude lakes 
0.653 
0.548 
-1.516 
0.76 
(Smith 1982) 
101 Florida lakes 
0.374 
0.935 
-2.488 
0.83 
(Canfield 1983) 
223 Florida lakes 
0.269 
1.06 
-2.49 
0.81 
(Prairie et al. 
1989) 
133 American, Canadian, Alpine and Nordic 
lakes 
0.517 
0.838 
-2.213 
0.81 
(Jones et al. 2000) 
13 tropical reservoirs in Thailand 
0.88 
0.79 
-2.29 
0.80 
(Huszar et al. 
2006) 
192 Lakes between 30 S to 31 N in Asia, 
Africa, N and S America 
0.413 
0.504 
-1.118 
0.47 
(Phillips et al. 
2008) 
1 138 lakes in Europe 
0.896 
0.322 
-1.135 
0.80 
 
Notwithstanding the considerations above, strong empirical links between chlorophyll and P in 
surface freshwaters have been established, and most often, over scales of multiple years, TP has 
been the best predictor of chlorophyll (Smith & Shapiro 1981; Helmes et al. 2012). P plays a key 
role in determining freshwater systems resilience (Carpenter, 2001), and current global 
eutrophication models are considered to be of substantial value to lake managers, who need to 
make decisions with limited data (Phillips et al. 2008). 
3.3. Regime shifts in lakes and reservoirs 
Since the early 70’s, interest in studying ecosystems resilience - i.e., its ability to absorb and 
respond to disturbance - has been asserting amongst the scientific community. The work has 
focused attention on the notion of multiple states, putting emphasis on the thresholds between 
them (Walker & Meyers 2004). 
Nature is usually assumed to respond to gradual change in a smooth way.  However, surprisingly 
large shifts may also occur in ecosystems. This notion has emerged from theoretical models, but 
case studies have shown that lakes, coral reefs, oceans, forests and arid lands have indeed 
experienced drastic switches between stable states (Scheffer et al. 2001).  
Theoretically, ecosystem can response to gradually changing conditions in three ways: 
a) Gradually with time, in a smooth and continuous way, and even linear (Figure 2a); 
b) Profoundly when conditions approach a certain critical level. The response may be quite 
inert over certain ranges of conditions and respond more strongly when conditions 
approach the critical level (Figure 2b); 
c) Hysterically, meaning for certain environmental conditions, the ecosystem has more 
than one alternative stable state.  This derives the equilibrium curve to be folded 
backwards (Figure 2c). 
==PAGE:23==
Val C. 2017. Developing spatially differentiated Planetary Boundary based Life-Cycle Impact Assessment model for Phosphorous to freshwater. 
Master thesis. Technical University of Denmark 
 
 
15 
 
 
 
Figure 2- Possible ways in which ecosystem equilibrium states can vary with conditions such as nutrient loading, 
exploitation or temperature rise. In a and b, only one equilibrium exists for each condition. In (c), three equilibria can 
exist for a given condition (Adapted from (Scheffer et al. 2001)). 
Alternate stable states are defined as two or more stable point attractors separated by unstable 
thresholds (Scheffer et al. 2001). Thresholds operate in a way that in systems with a multiplicity 
of stable states, even a tiny incremental change in conditions can trigger a large shift (Scheffer 
& Carpenter 2003). A regime shift involving alternate stable states occurs when a threshold level 
of a controlling variable in a system is passed, and subsequent changes in the nature and extent 
of feedbacks will result in a change of direction (the trajectory) of the system itself (Scheffer et 
al. 2001) (Figure 2c). 
Regime shifts from clear to turbid water in lake systems subject to human-induced 
eutrophication are among the best-studied and most dramatic cases (Scheffer et al. 2001; 
Carpenter & Lathrop 2008).  In its pristine state, a shallow lake is expected to be characterized 
by its clear water and richness in submerged vegetation. Facing the continuing enrichment of 
nutrients, water clarity often seems to be hardly affected until a critical threshold is passed, at 
which the lake shifts abruptly from clear to turbid. The restoration of such a lake by simply 
reducing the nutrient level may often have little effect (Ryding 1981; Scheffer & Carpenter 
2003).  
Various interrelationships between physical characteristics and biological mechanisms are 
involved, and several interactions occurring in the water body should then be considered when 
describing ecological consequential of nutrient input: 
i. 
The response of P concentration (control variable) to P loading; 
ii. 
The response of primary producers’ biomass to P concentration; 
iii. 
The response of higher trophic levels (and subsequent course of evolution of the 
ecosystem), to the altered physico-chemical conditions of the aquatic system. 
Delayed response or lack of response by lakes to reduced nutrient input is caused by recycling 
of P. Recycling of phosphorus from sediments enriched by years of high nutrient inputs causes 
==PAGE:24==
Val C. 2017. Developing spatially differentiated Planetary Boundary based Life-Cycle Impact Assessment model for Phosphorous to freshwater. 
Master thesis. Technical University of Denmark 
 
 
16 
 
lakes to remain eutrophic even after external inputs of phosphorus are decreased (Carpenter 
2005). In fact, on an annual basis, in shallow unstratified eutrophic lakes, recycling from 
sediments to water can commonly exceeds inputs of P (Carpenter et al. 1999)). 
Moreover, in stratified lakes recycling also depends on oxygen depletion in the hypolimnion 
during the stratified season, making such flux subject to nonlinear changes in rate (Carpenter et 
al. 2001).  When the hypolimnion is oxygenated, iron exist in its oxidized state and forms 
insoluble complexes with P that prevent recycling. In the absence of oxygen, iron is reduced and 
inorganic P becomes soluble, and thereby increasing recycling rate (Carpenter 2005). 
Regarding their response to reduced P inputs alone, eutrophic lakes may be classified as 
reversible, hysteric or irreversible (Table 5). 
Table 5 – Classification of Eutrophic Lakes (Adapted from (Carpenter et al. 1999). 
Eutrophic lake classification 
Description 
Reversible 
Recovery is immediate and proportional to the reduced P 
input. 
Hysteric 
Recovery requires extreme reductions in input for a 
period of time. 
Irreversible 
Recovery cannot be accomplished by reducing P input 
alone. 
 
The first order impacts of increased nutrients correspond to the response of the growth of 
primary producers, described by predictive models presented previously in section 3.2. 
Undesirable algae blooms are generally rapid and proportional to nutrient uptake during 
growing season, until biological demand is saturated and a non-linear response is observed at 
high water P levels, that strongly surpass the desirable state. This triggers biotic and abiotic 
changes, leading to second order impacts which are more complex and varied, as 
biogeochemical processing rates are subject to change. Shift in any one driver is unlikely to affect 
just one chemical constituent alone, and similarly, a change in one individual chemical typically 
reflects multiple and often interacting causes (Carpenter et al. 2011). As stated before, 
subsequent interactions with higher trophic levels are also less predictable, and can possibly 
interact to influence the direction and strength of natural selection (Alexander et al. 2017). 
Authors investigating regime shifts in shallow lakes suggests the whole feedback to centre 
around the interaction between submerged vegetation and turbidity. Vegetation can stabilize a 
clear-water state in shallow lakes up to relatively high nutrient loadings, but once the system 
==PAGE:25==
Val C. 2017. Developing spatially differentiated Planetary Boundary based Life-Cycle Impact Assessment model for Phosphorous to freshwater. 
Master thesis. Technical University of Denmark 
 
 
17 
 
has switched to a turbid state, it takes a strong nutrient reduction to enable recolonization by 
plants (Scheffer et al. 2001; Scheffer et al. 1993) (Figure 3).  
 
Figure 3 - Hysteresis in the response of vegetation in a shallow lake to increase and subsequent decrease of the 
phosphorus concentration. Dots represent annual measurements. (Adapted from (Scheffer et al. 2001)). 
Tools for restoration of shallow lakes, such as  biomanipulation, are in fact mainly based upon 
the concept of ‘alternative stable states’ (Meijer & Hosper 1997), recognizing that within a 
certain nutrient level, there are two alternative stable states: a phytoplankton-dominated turbid 
water state and a macrophyte-dominated clear water state. Once restoration is achieved 
though, because of the complexity of second order impacts, the recovery of lakes is not linear, 
and hysterical response is observed in ecological structure and functions (Alexander et al. 2017). 
Furthermore, in practise, there are few lakes that once collapsed to the turbid state, have in fact 
restored successfully to the clear-water state, with no requirement of ongoing intervention. The 
successful restored clear water state is often not resilient and self-sustained (Carpenter et al. 
2001). 
Moreover, facing rapidly increase of nutrients over just a few decades, cases of changes in 
evolutionary dynamics have also been addressed in the literature, for instance the behavioural 
adaptations shown by some zooplankton species; the larger population size of invasive species 
increasing likelihood of hybridization; or evidence of weakened sexual selection among fish 
species due to turbidity. Overall, it leads to reduced ecological specialization and morphological 
and genetic homogenization among lakes (Alexander et al. 2017).  
Regime shifts can involve multiple drivers and are difficult to analyse and predict. Eutrophication 
indexes are in fact based on human preferences for P targets and do not reflect the shifting point 
(Carpenter et al. 2001).  To forecast the actual response of a certain water body to a reduced 
nutrient input is difficult to generalize (Ryding 1981; Smith & Shapiro 1981), as it is likely that 
nonlinear thresholds differ among lakes, and change over time even within a single lake. Even 
for well-studied lakes, measurements of nonlinear eutrophication thresholds are highly 
uncertain (Carpenter & Lathrop 2008; Carpenter & Bennett 2011). The degradation of these 
==PAGE:26==
Val C. 2017. Developing spatially differentiated Planetary Boundary based Life-Cycle Impact Assessment model for Phosphorous to freshwater. 
Master thesis. Technical University of Denmark 
 
 
18 
 
biophysical systems is serious issue which highlight the need for addressing the conflict between 
agricultural and aquatic ecosystems services (Carpenter et al. 2001). 
 
 
3.4. Eutrophication from a LCIA perspective 
Freshwater eutrophication is commonly taken into account as an impact category in LCA. The 
area of protection (AoP) covered is the ecosystem quality, or Natural Environment Area of 
Protection, as defined by the UNEP/SETAC working group. Even though direct human impacts 
are possible, as algal blooms may be toxic to humans, human health has rarely been considered 
directly for eutrophication in LCIA (Henderson 2015). 
To date LCIA models for eutrophication have relied on marginal changes, particularly 
appropriated when assessing changes or comparisons, whereas average modelling is 
recommended for information gathering. Notice though, that marginal impacts approach 
discounts impacts when the marginal increase occurs in an already-stressed receiving area 
(Henderson 2015). 
A flow diagram is presented in Figure 4 showing the cause-effect chain for eutrophication of the 
aquatic environment. Characterization factors for eutrophication are traditionally calculated at 
midpoint level, and many LCIA methods tend to primarily consider emissions of P and N 
emissions, aligned with the limiting nutrient concept when distinguishing between freshwater 
and marine systems (Struijs et al. 2009). Some LCIA approaches include substances that lead 
directly to oxygen demand, either biological (BOD) or chemical (COD). Using the Redfield ratio 
(Redfield 1934), which is based on typical aquatic biomass stoichiometry, N and P substances 
are converted into phosphate or nitrate equivalents, representing an overall potential for 
eutrophication, and the methods that do measure oxygen depletion incorporate specific 
approaches to translate P and N emissions to changes in oxygen levels.  
The region of impact is defined by the downstream path of a receiving water body and the 
biogeochemical processes affecting nutrient transport, where modelling nutrient fate has 
reached a basic level of operability, typically including sedimentation and precipitation of P as 
major transport phenomena.  At present, differences in fate modelling assumptions are the main 
distinction at the midpoint level, where the bigger challenges are found in modelling of diffuse 
sources (Henderson 2015).  
 
==PAGE:27==
Val C. 2017. Developing spatially differentiated Planetary Boundary based Life-Cycle Impact Assessment model for Phosphorous to freshwater. 
Master thesis. Technical University of Denmark 
 
 
19 
 
 
Figure 4 - Flow diagram of eutrophication impact pathway (Adapted from (JRC 2011)). 
With regards to endpoint modelling, it is most common in LCIA to use species as indicators of 
overall ecosystem quality, for instance the potentially disappeared fraction of species over an 
area and time (PDF.m2.year). 
Criteria for good characterisation models have been gathered by the International Reference 
Life Cycle Data System (ILCD) (JRC 2011),a comprehensive study aiming to assess the variety of 
modelling approaches. For aquatic eutrophication, ReCiPe (Struijs et al. 2009) is preferred as 
recommended default method at midpoint level and no methods are recommended to be used 
at endpoint level. 
Overall, developments have been made addressing the lack of geographic coverage, and also 
improving geographic resolution, and accurately modelling the fate and effect are areas of 
continuing work (Henderson 2015). 
 
 
==PAGE:28==
Val C. 2017. Developing spatially differentiated Planetary Boundary based Life-Cycle Impact Assessment model for Phosphorous to freshwater. 
Master thesis. Technical University of Denmark 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:29==
Val C. 2017. Developing spatially differentiated Planetary Boundary based Life-Cycle Impact Assessment model for Phosphorous to freshwater. 
Master thesis. Technical University of Denmark 
 
 
21 
 
4. Related Work 
4.1. Modelling P fate in LCIA 
Regarding freshwater eutrophication, several LCA methods have incorporated spatial 
differentiation in their fate factors, but most of them have focused on one continent, and 
operate on the resolution of countries or states. The work developed by (Helmes et al. 2012) 
contributes with a new global fate model for P on a 0.5° x 0.5° resolution. Fate factors derived 
by this global model were used in this project. A brief description of the proposed fate model is 
presented below.  
In operational terms, the fate factor corresponds to the change in mass in a receiving 
compartment cell j (ΔMi,j , kg) due to an emission in compartment cell i (Si , kg.day-1). Larger fate 
factors mean a higher cumulative persistence of the nutrient, implying P will be available longer 
for algae growth and the subsequent cascade of effects caused by that growth. 
The modelled P removal processes are grid specific and include advection, retention and water 
use. These were considered as the most important processes affecting P fate in freshwater, and 
in each grid cell each process is modelled by a single rate constant (see K arrows in Figure 5). 
 
Figure 5 - Spatial relations between the model grid cells and their environmental compartments (Source: Helmes et 
al., 2012). 
 
• 
kadv (day-1): rate constant for advection. Reflects the advection transporting water and P 
through the freshwater system, to downstream grid cells. The rate of P removed by 
advection from a grid cell is equal to the rate of water removal in that cell. This value is 
the ratio between its discharge and the total water volume in the grid cell. 
• 
kret (day-1): rate constant for retention. Represents the net removal and retention in the 
grid cell, which is governed by two main processes: the uptake of P by biomass and its 
adsorption to suspended solids and their subsequent physical settling.  The overall 
==PAGE:30==
Val C. 2017. Developing spatially differentiated Planetary Boundary based Life-Cycle Impact Assessment model for Phosphorous to freshwater. 
Master thesis. Technical University of Denmark 
 
 
22 
 
retention rate in a grid cell (kret, j; day−1) is the volume-weighted average of the removal 
rates in the separate water bodies (kret,wb, j; day−1), where the subscript “wb” indicates 
either river, lake or reservoir class. 
• 
kuse (day-1): rate constant for water use. Reflects the fraction of P that is removed from 
the water in a grid cell when water is used for agricultural purposes (assumed to be used 
as irrigation), based on grid specific discharge and runoff data. Because sewage 
treatment is not modelled, removal of P from water used for domestic and industrial 
purposes is not considered. After its use, the transport back to the freshwater system 
depends on the fraction of total phosphorus emissions transferred from soil to 
freshwater, which were derived for the forms: dissolved inorganic phosphorus and 
dissolved organic phosphorus. The transfer fraction of particulate phosphorus from 
agricultural soils to freshwater was not derived due to lack of data coverage outside of 
Europe. 
Individual fate factors (FFi,j) are calculated for each grid cell, and correspond to the product of 
persistence of P in freshwater in receptor cell j (τj ; days) and of the fraction of P transported 
from the source grid cell i to receptor grid cell j (fi,j ; dimensionless). Both persistence and fraction 
are dependent on the removal rates kadv, kret and kuse. Notice that apart from retention rate, no 
fully distinction is done regarding lakes and rivers. 
The cumulative fate factor for an emission cell i (FFi) is the sum of the fate factors for the 
individual cell of emission and of all downstream receptor grid cells (FFi,j).  
Aligned with current LCA practise, in which the effects captured by the effect factor are 
separated from the fate factor, this model does not capture the interaction between algae 
blooms and cumulative persistence of P.  
The derived cumulative fate factors are presented in Figure 6. Arid areas, where evaporation 
exceeds precipitation on a yearly basis, have a discharge of zero, and FFi is therefore not 
applicable. 
==PAGE:31==
Val C. 2017. Developing spatially differentiated Planetary Boundary based Life-Cycle Impact Assessment model for Phosphorous to freshwater. 
Master thesis. Technical University of Denmark 
 
 
23 
 
 
Figure 6 - Cumulative fate factors for phosphorus emissions to freshwater (FFi, in days) on half-degree resolution 
(Source: Helmes et al., 2012). 
Considerable variability is found in in FFi, ranging from 0,8 to 310 days. Lower values are found 
in the coastal areas, where P is quickly transported to the oceans. Higher values are found in 
areas upstream of large lakes or reservoirs, where the persistence of P is high. For 67,5% of the 
non-arid grid cells, the dominant process of net removal is advection. 
The most relevant uncertainties identified from (Helmes et al. 2012) model arise from: 
i. 
Input dataset limitation regarding volume of long shape reservoirs, that stretched over 
multiple grid cells. In such cases the volume data is located in one grid cell (where the 
dam is located), resulting in an overestimation of the fate factors located between the 
beginning and the end of the reservoir; 
ii. 
Absence of global data concerning sewage treatment efficiencies. If sewage treatment 
were included, all fate factors would decrease in areas where sewage treatment is 
present and water use has a non-negligible impact on the cumulative fate factor; 
iii. 
Assumption of a closed water cycle is assumed in the calculation of kuse. Additional 
retention of phosphorus in the soil due to evaporation of water during the irrigation 
process is not considered. This would potentially affect both kuse and kadv; 
iv. 
Lack of data coverage outside of Europe concerning the transfer fraction of particulate 
P from agricultural soil to freshwater. This relevant fraction for kuse was not included, 
and could lead to potentially increase of fate factors, particularly in regions with 
significant erosion rates. 
Additionally, with regards to net removal and retention rates, the statistical watershed model 
SPARROW (SPAtially Referenced Regression On Watershed attributes) was used which was 
developed for the US. Even though it is considered to be the most globally representative 
approach currently available, limitations arise when addressing variability in recycling of 
==PAGE:32==
Val C. 2017. Developing spatially differentiated Planetary Boundary based Life-Cycle Impact Assessment model for Phosphorous to freshwater. 
Master thesis. Technical University of Denmark 
 
 
24 
 
phosphorus from sediments. This model derives mean-annual estimates of TP flux, at each 
monitoring site (Alexander et al. 2004). The derived in-stream loss rate coefficients reflect 
monitored values to a reference year, and no relation is established with the key factors 
previously identified to regulate recycling of phosphorus from sediments, i.e. sediment P 
content due to historical eutrophication and P enrichment of sediments; and the intensity of 
oxidizing or reducing conditions that regulates biologically available P from bottom sediments. 
 
4.2. Planetary Boundaries based Life-Cycle Impact Assessment methodology 
Recognized urgent need for assessing ‘absolute sustainability’ is the fundamental motivation for 
the consolidation of a Planetary Boundaries based Life-Cycle Impact Assessment methodology. 
By including the full life-cycle, LCA prevents overlooking potentially significant processes, and 
provides the coverage of all relevant environmental impacts ranging from the local to global 
scale (Hauschild & Potting 2005). This tool presents itself with key strengths in such a framework.  
An operational framework of life cycle impact assessment methodology linked to the Planetary 
Boundaries has been proposed by (Ryberg et al. 2017). Because a single pulse emission does not 
lead to the exceedance of PBs, in such framework impact scores should express changes in 
environmental states or environmental flows as a result of continuous emission and resource 
uses. LCI should therefore provide continuous elementary flows [mass time-1], and the 
functional unit (FU) needs to specify the time duration as annual fulfilment of the function so 
that the LCI expresses elementary flows associated with annual fulfilment of the FU. 
For the impact category freshwater eutrophication (i.e. the PB phosphorus biogeochemical flow 
at a regional level), the control variable is the P flow from fertilizers to erodible soils [Tg P yr-1]. 
CFs for P application is estimated for substances that are directly lost to surface freshwater and 
the relationship between application of P to soil and emissions of P to the environment was 
estimated with the tool Annual Phosphorus Loss Estimator. 
 
emitted
 
compund
-
P
applied
9
emitted
 P
applied
 P
regional
P,
10
1
S
P
yr
kg
yr
Tg
CF










                                                           (1)                                               
 
 
In Equation 1, Papplied is mass of P annually applied to erodible soil [kg yr-1] and SP compound emitted is 
annual mass of P containing compound emitted to the environment [kg yr-1].  
Such framework was applied to calculate the impact scores for 10,687 unit processes from 
ecoinvent and compare these with the conventional LCIA methodology proposed by ILCD-2011. 
A large degree of scattering was found for this impact category, which can be justified to some 
==PAGE:33==
Val C. 2017. Developing spatially differentiated Planetary Boundary based Life-Cycle Impact Assessment model for Phosphorous to freshwater. 
Master thesis. Technical University of Denmark 
 
 
25 
 
extent by the difference in coverage of environmental flows, as PB-LCIA considers solely the P 
flow from fertilizers to erodible soils (Figure 7). 
 
 
 
Figure 7 - Comparison of PB-LCIA and the ILCD-LCIA in ranking of impact scores for unit processes from ecoinvent for 
the impact categpory P biogeochemical flow (Adapted from (Ryberg et al. 2017). 
The framework proposed does not reflect in anyway spatial differentiation in P emissions, given 
it is based on the current PB defined as the globally averaged flow of P to freshwater. Strong 
potential for improvement relies therefore in addressing such limitation, being expected that 
one of the challenges arising should be linking non-global activities to impacts on a planetary 
level. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:34==
Val C. 2017. Developing spatially differentiated Planetary Boundary based Life-Cycle Impact Assessment model for Phosphorous to freshwater. 
Master thesis. Technical University of Denmark 
 
 
26 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:35==
Val C. 2017. Developing spatially differentiated Planetary Boundary based Life-Cycle Impact Assessment model for Phosphorous to freshwater. 
Master thesis. Technical University of Denmark 
 
 
27 
 
5. Methodology 
5.1. Definitions and interpretations  
Based on the PB-LCIA methodology presented in section 4.2., we propose a framework that 
incorporates spatial variability for the impact category freshwater eutrophication. The 
operationalization of such framework calls for clarification of the AoP here considered. 
Differently from LCA, where this impact category is linked to the AoP Damage to Ecosystem 
Diversity, PB-LCIA methodology, introduces a new AoP: ”the Holocene State of the Earth 
System” (Ryberg et al. 2016). Our framework is therefore used to assess the effectiveness of a 
system in staying within the “safe operating space for humanity”.   
We define characterization Factors (CF) that incorporate absolute sustainability references, to 
be applied in LCA at the midpoint level. Spatially differentiated CF are derived at a global scale, 
on a half-degree resolution (0.5° x 0.5°), and are intended to be applied to elementary flows of 
P [mass time-1] emitted to freshwater in each grid cell.  
Spatial differentiation in this model arises from: 
1. Grid specific fate factors (FF), derived by Helmes et al. (2012); 
2. Grid specific sustainability references, achieved by determining the carrying capacity 
(CC) in each grid cell. 
Sustainability references are based on nutrient criteria set for lakes and reservoirs,  where the 
persistence of the phosphorus is high and where deoxygenation may occur (Helmes et al. 2012). 
All of the transport of surface freshwaters occurs in rivers, where P concentrations tend to be 
higher than in lakes and reservoirs (Carpenter & Bennett 2011). Water residence time in rivers 
is approximately 3500 times lower than the one in lakes (Carpenter et al. 2011), and this has 
strong repercussions on the FF calculated for P by Helmes et al. (2012), where higher values 
were found in areas upstream of large lakes or reservoirs. This leads us to assume that lakes and 
reservoirs are the most sensitive and therefore determinant water bodies for this project.  
Three control variables were considered when defining this methodology. These are interpreted 
as numerical indicators of the structure and/or functioning of a natural system subject to 
anthropogenic interference. They are: (i) P concentration in the water body, which is assumed 
to be the main “stressor” to freshwater systems, and is therefore used as a predictor of the 
potential effects; (ii) concentration of Chl-a which is considered to be the “desirable” control 
variable, as it is the indicator reflecting the direct effect of increasing nutrients, functioning as a 
trigger of all the subsequent ecological effects; and (iii) ratio between TN and TP (TN:TP), as it 
==PAGE:36==
Val C. 2017. Developing spatially differentiated Planetary Boundary based Life-Cycle Impact Assessment model for Phosphorous to freshwater. 
Master thesis. Technical University of Denmark 
 
 
28 
 
reveals the limiting nutrient and is considered to be one  the main factors affecting the yield of 
Chl-TP predictive equations. 
Carrying capacity is then the maximum sustained environmental interference a system can 
withstand before reaching its boundary, which is defined as a human determined value set 
based on a threshold, and is expected to reflect human preferences and tolerance to risk.  
A threshold is defined as the maximum value of a control variable a natural system can withstand 
before shifting to an alternate stable state.  Two different perspectives can be outlined when 
establishing the reference levels for the desirable stable state: (i) sustain the attributes of the 
water body so that the designated uses are met; or (ii) sustain the “undisturbed” conditions, 
where the desirable stable state is expressed as the trophic state of the water body prior to 
anthropogenic interferences. The choice of threshold and consequent quantification of carrying 
capacity reflect a prior interpretation of environmental sustainability, which can range from an 
anthropocentric perspective (which tends to focus on functions valuable to humans) to an “eco-
centric” perspective (which does not make judgments based on the relative value of organisms) 
(Bjørn et al. 2016; Bjørn & Hauschild 2015). 
5.2. Calculation of the Carrying Capacity  
The CC is expressed as the admissible increase in concentration of the control variable in the 
water body, before reaching the boundary of the desirable stable state. In this framework, we 
assume the desirable stable state as the trophic state experienced by the water body prior to 
anthropogenic interferences.  
As sated, the “desirable” control variable is considered to be the response variable that can be 
linked to a predictive control variable. The desirable state of the water body should be defined 
in terms of the effect, i.e. response variable; and this maximum admissible target linked to the 
correspondent value of nutrient concentration. However, because nutrient modelling to predict 
ecosystem response to stressors and identify the non-linear biological response along a nutrient 
level is dependent on a wide range of site specific factors such as land use, water body depth, 
etc, (Phillips et al. 2008), considerable complexity arises when working for a global model on 
half-degree spatial resolution, both in defining the suitable Chl-TP regression and in deriving the 
correspondent biological thresholds of the system. 
Considering large datasets, using generalised P-algal biomass relationships that treat water 
bodies as a homogenous group, as the ones presented in Figure 8, was discussed as a possible 
approach. Figure 8 shows a graphical representation of four predictive models of the Chl-a 
response to both TP and TN reported in the literature (equations presented in Table 4, section 
==PAGE:37==
Val C. 2017. Developing spatially differentiated Planetary Boundary based Life-Cycle Impact Assessment model for Phosphorous to freshwater. 
Master thesis. Technical University of Denmark 
 
 
29 
 
3.2.). Two of these equations were not considered for graphical representation:  Jones et al. 
(2000) due to not representative dataset, i.e. 13 reservoirs; and Huszar et al. (2006) due to small 
regression coefficient, i.e. 0.47. 
The range of equations represented in Figure 8 include North latitude regions dataset, as well 
as tropical climate regions. Regressions are represented for a TN:TP ratio of 17, as it was stated 
to be the value beyond which chlorophyll was dependent only on TP. We reinforce that both 
North latitude and tropical systems can vary between N limitation, P limitation and co-limitation 
of N and P. The red dashed line in the graph corresponds to a Chl-a value of 8 µg.L-1, the upper 
limit of the eutrophic category from the OECD trophic classification system for lakes. 
 
Figure 8 – Predictive models of the Chl-a response to both TP and TN reported in the literature (v. Table 4). Graphical 
representation assuming a TN:TP ratio of 17, i.e. chlorophyll is dependent only on TP. 
North latitude regions, in particular North America and Europe, and tropical region Florida, are 
the most recurrent cases in the literature. However, reliable generalised P-algal biomass 
relationships do not exist to every region of the globe.  
Moreover, these models often lead to increased variance, which can only be explained by taking 
into account locally important factors (Phillips et al. 2008). These equations are known to be of 
considerable value for lake management purposes, but as they do not include spatial 
specificities, appear to be less appropriate when considering the spatial resolution of this 
project, which aims to reflect regional variability. 
Therefore, in this framework, stable state reference conditions is set for the predictive control 
variable, i.e. P concentration, and is based on the trophic state classification scheme for lakes 
0,0
0,5
1,0
1,5
0,5
0,8
1,1
1,4
1,7
2,0
log [Chl]
log [P] (µg/L)  
Smith, 1982 - North
latitude lakes
Prairie et al., 1989 -
American, Canadian,
Alpine and Nordic lakes
Phillips et al., 2008 -
European lakes
Smith, 1982 - Florida
lakes
Canfield, 1983 - Florida
lakes
Eutrophied state [Chl] =
8 µg/L
==PAGE:38==
Val C. 2017. Developing spatially differentiated Planetary Boundary based Life-Cycle Impact Assessment model for Phosphorous to freshwater. 
Master thesis. Technical University of Denmark 
 
 
30 
 
presented in section 3.1 (Wollenweider & Kerekes 1980).   Based on the assumption that these 
trophic state categories can also be applied to reservoirs, lakes and reservoirs are hereafter 
treated equally. Notice however that this is a simplification, as reservoirs result from man-made 
structures, and would be excluded from what we define as “undisturbed” conditions.  
Notwithstanding, assuming these structures as part of the landscape, the background 
concentration from natural sources should reflect local specific factor, such as natural lakes do.  
It is important to clarify that OECD trophic state classification system relies also on predictive 
equations defined for a dataset of about 150 lakes judged to exhibit phosphorus limitation on a 
large temporal scale (White et al. 1985). This is however the most widely known relationship, 
and was considered the most proper option to define nutrient criteria. 
The desirable trophic state is determined by the background P concentration in the water body 
due only to nutrient emissions from non-anthropogenic sources; and the boundary is set on the 
lower limit of the ensuing trophic state category.    
The CC is then determined by the difference between the boundary and the natural background 
P concentration. A schematic representation of the proposed framework is presented in Figure 
9.
 
Figure 9 – Framework developed to determine the CC of in the grid cells. 
P load in grid cell i 
from natural 
sources
•Best estimation on the P delivery into freshwater, without human interference - reference year 
1850
Background P 
concentration grid 
cell j
• Natural background P concentration due only to nutrient emissions from non anthropogenic 
sources; 
Desirable trophic 
state
•OECD classificassion scheme:
•Ultra-oligotrophic / Oligotrophic / Mesotrophic / Eutrophic / Hypertrophic
Define Boundary 
for P concentration 
cell j
•Boundary is set on the lower limit of the P concentration interval correspondent to the trophic 
state category that succeeds the desired one.
Deternine CCj
•CCj = Boundary - Background P concentration from natural sources
==PAGE:39==
Val C. 2017. Developing spatially differentiated Planetary Boundary based Life-Cycle Impact Assessment model for Phosphorous to freshwater. 
Master thesis. Technical University of Denmark 
 
 
31 
 
Estimates on P load into freshwater refer to  19th century (year 1850), and were derived from a 
nutrient-input-hydrology-in-stream nutrient retention model from (Beusen et al. 2016), also on 
a half degree spatial resolution. These are considered to be the closest available estimates of 
the natural nutrient delivery.  
Natural background P concentration was modelled using P load values from 1850, for each 
receiving compartment cell, using individual FF and water body volume (lakes and reservoirs), 
from Helmes et al. (2012). Notice that water body volume used in these calculations considers 
reservoirs that did not exist in 1850, introducing additional uncertainty to these values. 
It is important to reinforce that this framework is based on the assumptions that P is the main 
stressor to lakes, and that there is important natural variation in P concentration in lakes 
worldwide. Limitations arise when applying the proposed method for instance to lakes in New 
Zealand, where distributions of nutrient N and P are known to be very different from those of 
the OECD study (White 1983). 
 
5.3. Characterization framework 
Indicator scores (IS) can be expressed as occupation of carrying capacity (Equation 2) where Qx 
is the inventoried emission of pollutant x. 
𝐼𝑆= 𝐶𝐹𝑥 . 𝑄𝑥                                                                       (2)  
 
Because concentration is modelled at steady state, impact scores will express changes in 
environmental flows as a result of continuous emission, and therefore Qx is not a pulse emission 
(mass), but instead an elementary flow of P [mass time-1] emitted to freshwater in each grid cell. 
The proposed characterizing framework operates by integrating carrying capacities as 
sustainable reference value in the characterization factor. This will be achieved by making use 
of the generic mathematical expression proposed by (Bjørn et al. 2016) for calculating spatially 
resolved occupation of carrying capacity for any emission based LCA impact category (Equation 
3). 
CFx,i,k = ∑ 
𝐹𝐹𝑥,𝑖,𝑘,𝑗  .  𝑋𝐹𝑥,𝑗 .𝐸𝐹𝑥,𝑗
𝐶𝐶𝑗
 
                                    
 
(3) 
 
==PAGE:40==
Val C. 2017. Developing spatially differentiated Planetary Boundary based Life-Cycle Impact Assessment model for Phosphorous to freshwater. 
Master thesis. Technical University of Denmark 
 
 
32 
 
o CF is the characterization factor for substance x emitted within spatial unit i into 
environmental compartment k (air, soil or water); 
o FF is the fate factor, linking the emission of x within spatial unit i to its fate, i.e. the 
change in concentration or mass in the receiving spatial unit j; 
o XF is an exposure factor which accounts for the fraction of pollutant x that species of 
concern in j are exposed to; 
o EF is an effect factor, which calculates the effect increase on these species in j from an 
increased exposure of x; 
o CC is the carrying capacity in spatial unit j. 
Adjustments are required in order to adapt such framework to the impact category 
eutrophication, i.e. to derive a CF for P emitted within spatial unit i into freshwater. There is he 
need to accommodate three particular specificities of the modelling approach: (i) assessment 
on a midpoint level; (ii) metrics of the CC expressed in concentration of P in the water body 
[mj.Vj-1]; and (iii) the fact that the CF of a specific emission cell should take into account the 
individual fate factors and the carrying capacities of every downstream grid cells besides their 
own (Figure 10). 
 
 
Figure 10 – Spatial relations between modelled grid cells. Emission occurs in cell i. All the three represented cells have 
specific values concerning FF and CC. FFi,i is the individual fate factor in cell I, from emission in cell i. FFi,j1 is the individual 
fate factor in cell j1, FFi,j2 is the individual fate factor in cell j2, both  from emission in cell i.  
The following adaptations are therefore required:  
(i) 
XF and EF are not considered. Midpoint approach is followed by considering only 
fate modelling. This fits the predefined control variable, because P concentration in 
the water body is derived by P mass in the water body. This leads to Equation 4. 
 
𝐶𝐹𝑖 =  
𝐹𝐹𝑖,𝑗
𝐶𝐶𝑗                                                             (4) 
 
(ii) 
So that P mass in the water body can be converted into P concentration, CF 
incorporates a factor expressing the volume of freshwater bodies in the concerning 
emission in 
compartment cell i
FFi,i
CCi
receiving 
compartment cell j1
FFi,j1
CCj1
receiving 
compartment cell j2
FFi,j2
CCj2
==PAGE:41==
Val C. 2017. Developing spatially differentiated Planetary Boundary based Life-Cycle Impact Assessment model for Phosphorous to freshwater. 
Master thesis. Technical University of Denmark 
 
 
33 
 
grid cell, leading to Equation 5.  Apart from retention rate, FF make no fully 
distinction regarding lakes and rivers, and a common FF is derived for each grid cell. 
Given the fact that lakes and reservoirs account for most of the water residence 
time, volume considered here corresponds solely to these water bodies. 
 
 𝐶𝐹𝑖= ( 
𝐹𝐹𝑖,𝑗
𝐶𝐶𝑗 . 𝑉𝑗,𝑙𝑎𝑘𝑒+𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑒𝑟𝑣𝑜𝑖𝑟
−1
 )                                                   (5) 
 
(iii) 
Based on the precautionary principle, CFi will be derived based on the most sensitive 
cell, among the emission cell and all the downstream cells. CFi will therefore 
correspond to the maximum of the CF derived among the emission cell and all the 
downstream cells (Equation 6). 
 
𝐶𝐹𝑖= 𝑀𝑎𝑥( 
𝐹𝐹𝑖,𝑗
𝐶𝐶𝑗 . 𝑉𝑗,𝑙𝑎𝑘𝑒+𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑒𝑟𝑣𝑜𝑖𝑟
−1
 )                                                   (6) 
 
CF for every non-arid grid cell was therefore established using Equation 6, where: 
o CF is the characterization factor for P emitted within spatial unit i into freshwater, 
expressing the share of CC that is occupied per kg P emitted per year - [mi-1.t]; 
o FF is the fate factor, expressing the change in mass in the receiving spatial unit j - 
[mj.mi-1.t]; 
o CC is the carrying capacity in spatial unit j – [mj.v-1]. 
The resulting IS, calculated using Equation 2, is dimensionless, and express the share of CC that 
is occupied. In cases where IS is larger than 1, it means the respective emissions are leading to 
exceedance of CC. IS will be directly proportional to emissions in a given spatial unit, as linearity 
exists within the desirable trophic state. Notice though that IS hold no information on the extent 
to which an emission occupies the CC of the individual downstream grid cells. 
Moreover, because trophic state boundaries are set on discrete classes, different rates can be 
found among the four trophic state categories for which a boundary was set (Figure 11). Emitting 
in higher trophic levels is less penalizing as the range is larger, and therefore mature water 
bodies are considered to be more tolerant to P emissions. It is relevant to reinforce though, that 
as the AoP here considered is the “Holocene State of the Earth System”, mature trophic states 
are considered equally relevant to preserve, as the goal is to prevent to hasten the onset of the 
natural eutrophication process.  
==PAGE:42==
Val C. 2017. Developing spatially differentiated Planetary Boundary based Life-Cycle Impact Assessment model for Phosphorous to freshwater. 
Master thesis. Technical University of Denmark 
 
 
34 
 
 
Figure 11 - Indicator score response to variation in the occupation of the CC, for the four trophic state categories for 
which a boundary was set: (i) Ultra-oligotrophic (TP < 4 µg P.L-1); (ii) Oligotrophic (4 < TP < 10 µg P.L-1); (iii) Mesotrophic 
(10 < TP < 30 µg P.L-1); Eutrophic (30 < TP < 90 µg P.L-1). 
Notwithstanding, IS will not depend strictly on the magnitude of the emission, but is strongly 
influenced by the CC.  
While assuming CC is independent of existing levels of environmental interference -  i.e. CC is 
determined upon the background P concentration from natural sources, which is no longer the 
same concentration in systems where anthropogenic emissions occurred throughout the last 
150 years - the IS is expected to deliver the approximated linear environmental change from an 
emission within the zone between no environmental interference and the transgression of the 
boundary. Other method to determine CC is also possible, by using a consequential approach, 
and this will be discussed in the following section. 
Once exceedance of CC occurs, i.e. IS > 1, this cannot be directly expressed in the necessary 
reduction in P emissions to freshwater, as the system is expected to be out of the linearity range, 
and unpredictable (non-linear) hysteresis effect can occur.  
5.4. Overview of the proposed modelling process  
Implementation of the proposed modelling process required as input data grid cell specific 
values of P delivery from natural sources [mi.t-1]. For each non-arid grid cell where data on FF 
and water body volume was available, P concentration in the water body was determined 
(Equation 7).  
𝑇𝑃𝑗= ∑(
𝐹𝐹𝑖,𝑗
𝑉𝑗,𝑙𝑎𝑘𝑒+𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑒𝑟𝑣𝑜𝑖𝑟
−1
 .
𝑗
 𝑃 𝑙𝑜𝑎𝑑𝑖 )                                                                 (7) 
 
0
0,2
0,4
0,6
0,8
1
1,2
0
20
40
60
80
IS [  ]
P concentration  (µg.L-1)
==PAGE:43==
Val C. 2017. Developing spatially differentiated Planetary Boundary based Life-Cycle Impact Assessment model for Phosphorous to freshwater. 
Master thesis. Technical University of Denmark 
 
 
35 
 
These values were use as estimates of the Holocene State of the studied systems. Boundaries 
where defined for each grid cell, according to the P concentration from natural sources (Table 
6).  
Table 6 – Boundaries set on the lower limit of the P concentration interval correspondent to the trophic state 
category that succeeds the desired one. 
TP (1850) 
(µg.L-1) 
TP boundary 
(µg.L-1) 
<4 
4 
4 -10 
10 
10-30 
30 
30-90 
90 
>100 
n.a. 
 
The definition of a sustainability reference to be used in the characterization framework was 
achieved by deriving CC (µg.L-1) for each grid cell (Equation 8). 
𝐶𝐶𝑗= 𝑇𝑃 𝐵𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑑𝑎𝑟𝑦𝑗− 𝑇𝑃𝑗,1850                                               (8) 
 
Characterization framework described in the previous section was applied, and specific CF for 
emitting spatial units was calculated with equation 6. The inverse of the CF corresponds to the 
maximum admissible emissions of elementary flow of P to freshwater in each grid cell [mj.t-1] 
without exceeding the CC in any of the receiving spatial units. 
Schematic representation of the overall modelling process in presented in figure 12, and scripts 
from modelling processes 1, 2 and 3 can be found in appendix III. 
 
==PAGE:44==
Val C. 2017. Developing spatially differentiated Planetary Boundary based Life-Cycle Impact Assessment model for Phosphorous to freshwater. 
Master thesis. Technical University of Denmark 
 
 
36 
 
 
Figure 12 – Schematic representation of the proposed model, to be applied to every non-arid grid cell. Input data: 
Background P delivery from natural sources from (Beusen et al. 2016); FF and WB Volume from (Helmes et al. 2012).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:45==
Val C. 2017. Developing spatially differentiated Planetary Boundary based Life-Cycle Impact Assessment model for Phosphorous to freshwater. 
Master thesis. Technical University of Denmark 
 
 
37 
 
6. Results and Discussion 
6.1. Determining Carrying Capacities  
The global distribution of the trophic state category in 1850 is shown in Figure 13. Modelling of 
P concentration due to natural deposition was only possible in 54% of the non-arid grid cells, as 
in the remaining ones these conditions weren´t verified: P load values from 1850 available 
and/or volume of lakes and reservoirs not null. In spatial units for which P concentration due to 
natural deposition was determined, 91% were within the ultra-oligotrophied state category. 
 
Figure 13 - Global distribution of the trophic state category in 1850. 
 
Figure 14 - Global distribution of CC (µg P.L-1). 
==PAGE:46==
Val C. 2017. Developing spatially differentiated Planetary Boundary based Life-Cycle Impact Assessment model for Phosphorous to freshwater. 
Master thesis. Technical University of Denmark 
 
 
38 
 
The global distribution of CC is shown in Figure 14 and CCs range from less than 0.01 µg P.L-1 to 
60 µg P.L-1. In spatial units where trophic state category was hypertrophic, no CC was 
determined, as no boundary exists according to the methodology proposed. These account for 
0,8% of the spatial units for which P concentration due to natural deposition was determined, 
and its concentration from natural sources ranges from 90 µg P.L-1 to approximately 
6000 µg P.L- 1. These cases were, therefore, interpreted as peculiar ones, and the wide range in 
P concentration values among them understood to be of scientific interest when studying 
different mature phases of freshwater ecosystems. 
According to what would be expected, both maps reveal similar spatial patterns. CC are larger 
in freshwater systems where the natural onset of eutrophication is more advanced, as the 
trophic state classes are set on a larger range of P concentration. In spatial units for which P 
concentration due to natural deposition was determined, 94% exhibit CC within the range of 0 
to 5 µg P.L-1, 4% within the range of 5 to 20 µg P.L-1, and only 1% within the range of 20 to 60 µg 
P.L-1. The remaining cells correspond to hypertrophied systems. 
6.2. Characterization Factors and tolerable emissions 
Characterization factors were derived in every spatial unit for which P concentration due to 
natural deposition was determined. In spatial units where trophic state category was 
hypertrophic, CF was computed as zero. The global distribution of tolerable emissions and CF is 
shown if Figure 15 (Values in SM1). 
 
Figure 15 - Global distribution of CF (yr.kg-1) and tolerable emissions (kg.yr-1) so the CC  is not exceeded.  
==PAGE:47==
Val C. 2017. Developing spatially differentiated Planetary Boundary based Life-Cycle Impact Assessment model for Phosphorous to freshwater. 
Master thesis. Technical University of Denmark 
 
 
39 
 
Classes represented in the map can be interpreted both as CF in the emitting spatial unit, or 
tolerable emissions of elementary flow of P to freshwater without exceeding the CC in any of 
the receiving spatial units. Tolerable emissions of elementary flow of P to freshwater are below 
the limit of 100 kg.yr-1 in 98% of spatial units where the characterization framework was 
applicable. When comparing this results with the unit process inventories for arable crop 
production in  ecoinvent database, taking as a reference case the unit process wheat production 
in extensive regime, in 1ha of tillage area, (Nemecek & Kagi 2007), a limit of 100 kg.yr-1 would 
allow for the occupation of 8 km2 (approximately 0.3% of one grid cell area) in each of these 
spatial units, without exceeding the CC, i.e. 8 km2 emitting 12 kg P.km-2.  If IS were to be applied 
to the current values of P delivery to freshwater systems from anthropogenic sources, it would 
be expectable to find recurrent exceedances of CC in large agricultural regions.  
6.3. Alternative ways to determine Carrying Capacities and implications to decision 
support 
Another approach to the last step of the diagram presented in Figure 16, i.e. the determination 
of the CC, would be to use the difference between the boundary and current P concentration, 
instead of using the difference between the boundary and natural background P concentration 
(as shown in Eq. 8). Boundaries would still be set based on the state prior to human interference. 
This could eventually lead to negative CC, in regions where historical emissions of P have already 
lead to critical concentrations of P in the water body, resulting in a regime shift to an undesirable 
stable state. Schematic illustration of both approaches is presented in Figures 16 and 17. 
 
Figure 16 - Determine the CC using the difference between the boundary and natural background P concentration. CC 
expresses the admissible increase in P concentration in the water body, in order to preserve the conditions that allow 
remaining in desirable stable state. 
==PAGE:48==
Val C. 2017. Developing spatially differentiated Planetary Boundary based Life-Cycle Impact Assessment model for Phosphorous to freshwater. 
Master thesis. Technical University of Denmark 
 
 
40 
 
 
Figure 17 - Determine the CC using the difference between the boundary and current P concentration. Two possibilities 
are considered: (1) CC is positive, and expresses the admissible increase in P concentration in the water body, in order 
to preserve the conditions that allow remaining in the desirable stable state; (2) CC is negative, and expresses the 
necessary decrease in P concentration in the water body, in order to achieve the conditions that allow remaining in 
the desirable stable state.  
Negative values of CC express the necessary decrease in P concentration in the water body, in 
order to achieve the conditions that allow remaining in the desirable stable state. This cannot 
be however directly expressed in the necessary reduction in P emissions to freshwater. As 
previously stated, in lakes with sediments enriched by years of high nutrient inputs, 
unpredictable hysteresis effect can occur in the response of P concentration in the water body 
to reduced P inputs. Resulting IS using CCb, as it is dependent on existing levels of environmental 
interference, are expected to be higher than using CCa. In fact, the same way CFs derived based 
on marginal approach in regular LCA will be potentially highly dependent on time (Bjørn et al. 
2016), CFs derived using CCb can also be time dependent, affected by the occupation of CC in 
previous years. It is important to notice though that the consequential approach inherent to CCb 
does not reflect a consequential ethics in the same way marginal approach in regular LCA does. 
No matter CCa or CCb  is used, both are compatible with CF that support decisions grounded on 
the rule that anthropogenic systems should operate towards environmental sustainability, by 
not occupying more CC than they are entitled to. 
CCb corresponds then to the real CC on a given period, and is considered to actually express the 
current impact caused by an elementary flow of P to freshwater.  In turn, CCa, as it is 
independent of existing levels of environmental interference, does not reflect the present 
sensitivity of the studied systems to P emissions.  
The choice between the two discussed approaches should rely on the decision context. ILCD 
Handbook, where detailed guidance for planning, developing, and reporting is provided for LCA 
==PAGE:49==
Val C. 2017. Developing spatially differentiated Planetary Boundary based Life-Cycle Impact Assessment model for Phosphorous to freshwater. 
Master thesis. Technical University of Denmark 
 
 
41 
 
studies, defines three archetypal goal situations that are considered to cover the spectrum of 
LCA applications. Identification of the decision context depends on whether a decision is to be 
supported, and if so, on the extent of changes in the background system or other systems, which 
can be whether small or large scale (I. EC-JRC 2010). We use this archetypal goal situations (A, B 
and C) to illustrates how both the approaches presented can be of use. 
Goal situation A refers to decision support on a micro-level. Most relevant applications include 
comparison and benchmarking of small scale systems, which marginal consequences alone are 
not strong enough to overcome thresholds. Application of PB-LCIA here would be possible after 
definition of the entitlement of the CC, which can be allocated in numerous ways, depending on 
value-based choices. Nevertheless, if PB-LCIA was to be applied, CCb should be used, as it reflects 
the current impact generated by the assessed activity, and this should certainly be taken into 
account when direct decisions that aim not to exceed the boundaries are to be made. 
Similarly, goal situation B refers to decision support, but on a meso/macro level. Its applications 
include Policy development and information, implying life cycle based decision support with 
consequences that are extensive enough to overcome thresholds. If PB-LCIA was to be applied, 
here also CCb should be used, in order to assure it reflects the real impact of the assessed system 
and its large-scale structural effects. However, as this decision context operates on a strategic 
macro-level, with effective repercussions in time and beyond the foreground system, evolution 
of CCb in time should be also assessed, for instance by establishing different P emission 
scenarios. 
Differently, goal situation C refers to purely descriptive accounting of the analysed system, 
without implying a decision context. Most relevant applications include monitoring 
environmental impacts of nations, industry sector, etc, or policy information. It is particularly 
interesting when documenting the past, present or forecast future of a system, and using CCa is 
considered as the most appropriate approach when implementing PB-LCIA. 
Overall, option between using CCa or CCb on the proposed PB-LCIA framework should rely on 
whether or not direct decisions are to be made. And if so, CCb should be used, to assure IS reflects 
the ability of the assessed system to not transgress the boundary.  
Moreover, we stress that no matter CCa or CCb is used, CC is always expected to be larger in 
higher trophic levels. Decisions based only with PB-LCIA may undergo a risk of sub-optimization 
in pursuing environmental sustainability, as suggested by (Bjørn et al. 2016), as large CC will 
supposedly not constitute an incentive to efficiency. For a given spatial unit, regarding emissions 
of P compounds to freshwater, no conflict should exist between PB-LCIA and LCA results, but 
==PAGE:50==
Val C. 2017. Developing spatially differentiated Planetary Boundary based Life-Cycle Impact Assessment model for Phosphorous to freshwater. 
Master thesis. Technical University of Denmark 
 
 
42 
 
this is not necessarily the case when assessing different locations. Complementarity between 
PB-LCIA and LCA is needed to facilitate reducing existing levels of environmental interferences 
in an efficient way. 
6.4. Implication for phosphorus management 
PB-LCIA aims to pursue the goal of mantain, or take steps towards achieving environmental 
sustainability of society as a whole. With regard to P flow, our results reflect that overall P 
emissions into freshwaters should be highly limited. Results from this study can be understood 
as considerably conservative, as requirements to stay within the boundaries are expected to 
strongly conflict with current pattern of anthropogenic P delivery into freshwater, and 
consequently with current agronomic practises. Several questions reported in the literature call 
the attention for the need to rethink the current agronomic system and practises, such as the 
fact that high P fertilizer application is typically associated with areas of relative  low P-use 
efficiency (MacDonald et al. 2011), or the fact that crop-livestock production systems are the 
largest cause of human alteration of the global P cycle (Bouwman et al. 2013). Adding to this, 
there are indications that mineral phosphorus resources are becoming increasingly scarce, with 
repercussions in terms of food security and farmer livelihoods  (Cordell & White 2014).  
In this context, this attempt of modification of LCA to measure absolute sustainability can 
operate to reinforce the need for investment in management practises and technology that go 
towards sustainability strategies, with repercussions in all environmental, social and economic 
spheres. We acknowladge however that other ways exist of human interference in the 
biogeochemical P cycle, such as the growing number of reservoirs, which strongly contribute to 
increase retention of P in freshwater systems, and thereby affect nutrient  ratios (Beusen et al. 
2016). This form of human interference in the natural state of this Earth System is not expressed 
in the PB framework, and it can suggest an interesting discussion on the definition of human 
interference. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:51==
Val C. 2017. Developing spatially differentiated Planetary Boundary based Life-Cycle Impact Assessment model for Phosphorous to freshwater. 
Master thesis. Technical University of Denmark 
 
 
43 
 
7. Conclusions  
CF that incorporate absolute sustainability references were defined to be applied for the LCA 
impact category freshwater eutrophication at the midpoint level, at a half degree spatial 
resolution. This was meant to contribute to the consolidation of a PB-LCIA methodology, that 
operates by modifying LCA in order to assess absolute sustainability. To the present, the PB for 
P flow had been derived as a global value, which when applied in a LCA context wouldn´t reflect 
the spatial variability in sensitivity to P emissions. 
Spatial differentiated sustainability references were therefore derived, in the form of Carrying 
Capacities that express the maximum sustained environmental interference a system can 
withstand before reaching its boundary. Boundaries were set to sustain the “undisturbed” 
conditions, defined as a trophic state category, based on natural background P concentration 
due only to nutrient emissions from non anthropogenic sources.  
Results showed that tolerable emissions of elementary flow of P to freshwater were 
considerably restrictive in 98% of the spatial units where the characterization framework was 
applicable, revealing a generalized high sensitivity to P emissions. This is expected to strongly 
compromise the efectiveness of current systems in staying within the P biogeochemical flow 
boundaries of ”the Holocene State of the Earth System”. 
Operationalisation of the proposed framework requires future developments in deriving CCb, 
and a need for a prospective scenario development that incorporates temporal dimension in the 
analysis. In an “accounting” context, CF already derived using CCa can be used to calculate IS, 
and used to produce policy information that can be of significant value from an absolute 
sustainability perspective. A comparison of such results with the PB-LCIA method based on the 
global boundary, performed by (Ryberg et al. 2017) is considered of interest. 
Spatial variability inherent to this impact category make the exercise of aggregation to 
determine a global planetary boundary rather futile, as P emissions repercussions, although 
generalised, occur on a local/regional scale and not on a global scale. Yet, aggregation of CFs 
may be required, e.g. to national level, to be compatible with spatial resolution of common LCI 
databases. For such aggregation, we suggest that only cells where P emissions to freshwater 
from anthropogenic sources occur should be considered, and this aggregation of areas should 
be based on weighted average of P mass inputs. 
==PAGE:52==
Val C. 2017. Developing spatially differentiated Planetary Boundary based Life-Cycle Impact Assessment model for Phosphorous to freshwater. 
Master thesis. Technical University of Denmark 
 
 
44 
 
Overall, our proposal is an additional contribution to demonstrate how LCA can be adapted to 
assess absolute sustainability, while providing useful information that can be used to interpret 
and discuss what is ”the Holocene State of the Earth System” regarding freshwater systems. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:53==
Val C. 2017. Developing spatially differentiated Planetary Boundary based Life-Cycle Impact Assessment model for Phosphorous to freshwater. 
Master thesis. Technical University of Denmark 
 
 
45 
 
References 
Alexander, R.B., Smith, R.A. & Schwarz, G.E., 2004. Estimates of diffuse phosphorus sources in 
surface waters of the United States using a spatially referenced watershed model. Water 
Science and Technology, 49(3), pp.1–10. 
Alexander, T.J. et al., 2017. Does eutrophication-driven evolution change aquatic ecosystems ? 
Azevedo, L.B. et al., 2013. Assessing the importance of spatial variability versus model choices 
in life cycle impact assessment: The case of freshwater eutrophication in Europe. 
Environmental Science and Technology, 47(23), pp.13565–13570. 
Bennett, E.M. et al., 2001. Human Impact on Erodable Phosphorus and Eutrophication: A Global 
Perspective. 
BioScience, 
51(3), 
p.227. 
Available 
at: 
https://academic.oup.com/bioscience/article-lookup/doi/10.1641/0006-
3568(2001)051[0227:HIOEPA]2.0.CO;2. 
Bettencourt,  a M. et al., 2004. Typology and reference conditions for Portuguese transitional 
and coastal waters. , p.98. 
Beusen, A.H.W. et al., 2016. Global riverine N and P transport to ocean increased during the 20th 
century despite increased retention along the aquatic continuum. Biogeosciences, 13(8), 
pp.2441–2451. 
Beveridge, M.C.., 1984. Cage and pen fish farming. Carrying capacity models and environmental 
impact. FAO Fish.Tech.Pap., 255, p.131. 
Bjørn, A. et al., 2016. A proposal to measure absolute environmental sustainability in life cycle 
assessment. 
Ecological 
Indicators, 
63, 
pp.1–13. 
Available 
at: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolind.2015.11.046. 
Bjørn, A. & Hauschild, M.Z., 2015. Introducing carrying capacity-based normalisation in LCA: 
framework and development of references at midpoint level. International Journal of Life 
Cycle Assessment, 20(7), pp.1005–1018. 
Bouwman, L. et al., 2013. Exploring global changes in nitrogen and phosphorus cycles in 
agriculture induced by livestock production over the 1900-2050 period. Proceedings of the 
National 
Academy 
of 
Sciences, 
110(52), 
pp.20882–20887. 
Available 
at: 
http://www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1012878108. 
Canfield, D.E., 1983. Prediction of Chlorophyll a Concentrations in Florida Lakes: the Importance 
of Phosphorus and Nitrogen. JAWRA Journal of the American Water Resources Association, 
19(2), pp.255–262. 
Canfield, D.E. & Bachmann, R.W., 1980. fiediction of Total Phosphorus Concentrations, 
Chlorophyll. Environmental Protection, (95757). 
Carlson, R.E., 1977. A trophic state index for lakes. Limnology and Oceanography, 22(2), pp.361–
369. 
Carpenter, S. et al., 2001. From Metaphor to Measurement: Resilience of What to What? 
Ecosystems, 4(8), pp.765–781. 
Carpenter, S.R., 2005. Eutrophication of aquatic ecosystems: bistability and soil phosphorus. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 102(29), 
pp.10002–10005. 
Carpenter, S.R. et al., 1998. Nonpoint pollution of surface waters with phosphorus and nitrogen. 
==PAGE:54==
Val C. 2017. Developing spatially differentiated Planetary Boundary based Life-Cycle Impact Assessment model for Phosphorous to freshwater. 
Master thesis. Technical University of Denmark 
 
 
46 
 
Ecological Applications, 8(1998), pp.559–568. 
Carpenter, S.R. & Bennett, E.M., 2011. Reconsideration of the planetary boundary for 
phosphorus. 
Environ. 
Res. 
Lett, 
6, 
pp.14009–12. 
Available 
at: 
http://iopscience.iop.org/1748-9326/6/1/014009. 
Carpenter, S.R. & Lathrop, R.C., 2008. Probabilistic estimate of a threshold for eutrophication. 
Ecosystems, 11(4), pp.601–613. 
Carpenter, S.R., Ludwig, D. & Brock, W.A., 1999. Management of Eutrophication for Lakes 
Subject to Potentially Irreversible Change. Ecological Applications. Ecological Society of 
America, 9(3), pp.751–771. 
Carpenter, S.R., Stanley, E.H. & Vander Zanden, M.J., 2011. State of the world’s freshwater 
ecosystems: physical, chemical, and biological changes. Annual Review of Environment and 
Resources, 
36(1), 
pp.75–99. 
Available 
at: 
http://www.annualreviews.org/doi/abs/10.1146/annurev-environ-021810-094524. 
Cordell, D. & White, S., 2014. Life’s Bottleneck: Sustaining the World’s Phosphorus for a Food 
Secure Future. Annual Review of Environment and Resources, 39(1), pp.161–188. Available 
at: http://www.annualreviews.org/doi/10.1146/annurev-environ-010213-113300. 
Crouzet, P., 1999. Nutrients in European ecosystems. Nutrients in European Ecosystems., (4), 
pp.145–153. 
David L. Strayer et al., 2010. Freshwater biodiversity conservation: recent progress and future 
challenges. Journal of the North American Benthological Society, 29(1), pp.344–358. 
Available at: http://www.bioone.org/doi/full/10.1899/08-171.1. 
Dillon, P.J. & Rigler, F., 1974. The phosphorus-chlorophyll in lakes. Limnology and Oceanography, 
19(5), pp.767–773. 
Dodds, W.K., Jones, J.R. & Welch, E.B., 1998. Suggested classification of stream trophic state: 
Distributions of temperate stream types by chlorophyll, total nitrogen, and phosphorus. 
Water Research, 32(5), pp.1455–1462. 
Dodds, W.K. & Welch, E.B., 2000. Establishing Nutrient Criteria in Streams. Journal of the North 
American 
Benthological 
Society, 
19(1), 
pp.186–196. 
Available 
at: 
http://www.jstor.org/stable/1468291. 
EC-JRC, 2010. General guide for Life Cycle Assessment - Detailed guidance, Available at: 
http://eplca.jrc.ec.europa.eu/uploads/ILCD-Handbook-General-guide-for-LCA-DETAILED-
GUIDANCE-12March2010-ISBN-fin-v1.0-EN.pdf%5Cnhttp://eplca.jrc.ec.europa.eu/. 
EC-JRC, 2012. The International Reference Life Cycle Data System (ILCD) Handbook, 
EC-JRC, I., 2010. International Reference Life Cycle Data System (ILCD) Handbook : Analysing of 
existing Environmental Impact Assessment methodologies for use in Life Cycle Assessment. 
European Commission, p.115. 
Ferreira, J.G. et al., 2010. Marine Strategy Framework Directive – Task Group 5 Report 
Eutrophication, 
Filstrup, C.T. et al., 2014. Regional variability among nonlinear chlorophyll-phosphorus 
relationships in lakes Regional variability among nonlinear chlorophyll – phosphorus 
relationships in lakes. , (February 2015). 
Galaz, V. et al., 2012. Global environmental governance and planetary boundaries: An 
==PAGE:55==
Val C. 2017. Developing spatially differentiated Planetary Boundary based Life-Cycle Impact Assessment model for Phosphorous to freshwater. 
Master thesis. Technical University of Denmark 
 
 
47 
 
introduction. 
Ecological 
Economics, 
81(September), 
pp.1–3. 
Available 
at: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolecon.2012.02.023. 
Hauschild, M. & Potting, J., 2005. Background for spatial differentiation in LCA impact 
assessment - The EDIP2003 methodology. Environmental news, (996). 
Hauschild, M.Z. et al., 2013. Identifying best existing practice for characterization modeling in 
life cycle impact assessment. International Journal of Life Cycle Assessment, 18(3), pp.683–
697. 
Havens, K.E. & Nürnberg, G.K., 2004. The Phosphorus-Chlorophyll Relationship in Lakes: 
Potential Influences of Color and Mixing Regime. Lake and Reservoir Management, 20(3), 
pp.188–196. 
Available 
at: 
http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/07438140409354243. 
Helmes, R.J.K. et al., 2012. Spatially explicit fate factors of phosphorous emissions to freshwater 
at the global scale. International Journal of Life Cycle Assessment, 17(5), pp.646–654. 
Henderson, A.D., 2015. Eutrophication. In M. Z. Hauschild & M. A. J. Huijbregts, eds. Life Cycle 
Impact 
Assessment. 
Springer, 
p. 
178 
194. 
Available 
at: 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20966200. 
Huszar, V.L.M. et al., 2006. Nutrient-chlorophyll relationships in tropical-subtropical lakes: Do 
temperate models fit? Biogeochemistry, 79(1–2), pp.239–250. 
ISO, 2006a. Environmental management — Life cycle assessment — Principles and framework. 
Iso 14040, 2006, pp.1–28. 
ISO, 2006b. Environmental management — Life cycle assessment — Requirements and 
guidelines. 
Iso 
14044, 
2006(7), 
pp.652–668. 
Available 
at: 
http://www.springerlink.com/index/10.1007/s11367-011-0297-3. 
Jones, J. & Bachmann, R.W., 1976. Prediction of phosphorus and chlorophyll levels in lakes. 
Water Pollution Control Federation. 
Jones, J.R. et al., 2000. Limnological characteristics of reservoirs in Thailand. Verhandlung 
Internationale Vereinigung Limnologie, 27(March), pp.2158–2166. 
Jones, J.R. & Knowlton, M.F., 1993. Limnology Of Missouri Reservoirs: An Analysis of Regional 
Patterns. 
Lake 
and 
Reservoir 
Management, 
8(1), 
pp.17–30. 
Available 
at: 
http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/07438149309354455. 
Jones, J.R., Knowlton, M.F. & An, K.-G., 2003. Trophic State, Seasonal Patterns and Empirical 
Models in South Korean Reservoirs. Lake and Reservoir Management, 19(1), pp.64–78. 
Available at: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/07438140309353991. 
JRC, 2011. Recommendations for Life Cycle Impact Assessment in the European context - based 
on existing environmental impact assessment models and factors, Available at: 
http://lct.jrc.ec.europa.eu/pdf-directory/ILCD Handbook Recommendations for Life Cycle 
Impact Assessment in the European context.pdf/at_download/file. 
Kashiwaya, K. et al., 1995. Changes in hydrological conditions in the central Qing-Zang (Tibetan) 
Plateau inferred from lake bottom sediments. Earth and Planetary Science Letters, 135(1–
4), pp.31–39. 
Kriebel, D. et al., 2001. The precautionary principle in environmental science. Environmental 
health 
perspectives, 
109(9), 
pp.871–6. 
Available 
at: 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11673114%5Cnhttp://www.pubmedcentral.nih.g
==PAGE:56==
Val C. 2017. Developing spatially differentiated Planetary Boundary based Life-Cycle Impact Assessment model for Phosphorous to freshwater. 
Master thesis. Technical University of Denmark 
 
 
48 
 
ov/articlerender.fcgi?artid=PMC1240435. 
Larocque-Tobler, I. et al., 2010. Climate and Lacustrine Ecosystems. In J. Dodson, ed. Changing 
Climates, Earth Systems and Society. Springer, pp. 142–145. Available at: 
https://books.google.dk/books?id=l09XZK6C4PsC&pg=PA142&lpg=PA142&dq=eutrophic
ation+since+last+glaciation&source=bl&ots=06CinNjyPo&sig=8xSCK0obZu-
dxB9RbE6wYqjNZaE&hl=pt-PT&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwiIvpW-
jvfTAhWGFJoKHXzdARIQ6AEILjAB#v=onepage&q=eutrophication since. 
MacDonald, G.K. et al., 2011. Agronomic phosphorus imbalances across the world’s croplands. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 108(7), 
pp.3086–91. 
Available 
at: 
http://www.scopus.com/inward/record.url?eid=2-s2.0-
79952607805&partnerID=tZOtx3y1. 
Mazumder, A., 1994. Phosphorus-Chlorophyll Relationships under CContrasting Herbivory and 
Thermal Stratification: Predictions and Patterns. Can. J. FFish Aquat. Sci., 51, pp.390–400. 
Meijer, M.-L. & Hosper, H., 1997. Effects of biomanipulation in the large and shallow Lake 
Wolderwijd, The Netherlands. Hydrobiologia, 342/343, pp.335–349. Available at: 
http://www.springerlink.com/index/G5QJV8557H1GH665.pdf. 
Millenium Assessment Ecosystem, 2005. Ecosystems and human well-being, Available at: 
http://www.who.int/entity/globalchange/ecosystems/ecosys.pdf%5Cnhttp://www.loc.go
v/catdir/toc/ecip0512/2005013229.html. 
Moldan, B., Janoušková, S. & Hák, T., 2012. How to understand and measure environmental 
sustainability: Indicators and targets. Ecological Indicators, 17, pp.4–13. 
Nemecek, T. & Kagi, T., 2007. Life cycle inventories of Agricultural Production Systems, ecoinvent 
report 
No. 
15, 
Available 
at: 
http://www.upe.poli.br/~cardim/PEC/Ecoinvent 
LCA/ecoinventReports/15_Agriculture.pdf. 
Nicholls, K.H. & Dillon, P.J., 1978. An Evaluation of Phosphorus-Chlorophyll-Plankton 
Relationships for Lakes. International Review of Hydrobiology, 63(2), pp.141–154. 
Phillips, G. et al., 2008. Chlorophyll-nutrient relationships of different lake types using a large 
European dataset. Aquatic Ecology, 42(2), pp.213–226. 
Prairie, Y., Duarte, C. & Kalff, J., 1989. Unifying Nutrient-Chlorophyll Relationships in Lakes. Can. 
J. Fich. Aquat. Sci., 46, pp.1176–1182. 
Prepas, E.E. & Charette, T., 2003. W orl d w ide E utrop hica t i on o f Wa t e r B o die s : Ca us e 
s , C on ce rns , C ontrols. Treatise On Geochemistry, 9, pp.311–331. 
Prepas, E.E. & Trew, D.O., 1983. Evaluation of the phosphorus-chlorophyll relationship for lakes 
off the Precambrian Shield in Western Canada. Canadian Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic 
Sciences, 40(96900), pp.27–35. 
Quirós, R., 1990. Factors related to variance of residuals in chlorophyll - total phosphorus 
regressions in lakes and reservoirs of Argentina. Hydrobiologia, 200–201(1), pp.343–355. 
Redfield, A., 1934. On the proportions of organic derivatives in sea water and their relation to 
the composition of plankton. In F. Cole, ed. James Johnstone memorial volume. University 
Press of Liverpool, pp. 176–192. 
Rockström, J., Steffen, W., Noone, K., Persson, Å., Chapin, F.S., Lambin, E.F., et al., 2009. A safe 
operating space for humanity. Ecology and Society, 14(2)(2), p.32. Available at: 
http://pdxscholar.library.pdx.edu/iss_pub%5Cnhttp://pdxscholar.library.pdx.edu/iss_pub
==PAGE:57==
Val C. 2017. Developing spatially differentiated Planetary Boundary based Life-Cycle Impact Assessment model for Phosphorous to freshwater. 
Master thesis. Technical University of Denmark 
 
 
49 
 
/64%5Cnhttp://www.nature.com/doifinder/10.1038/461472a. 
Rockström, J., Steffen, W., Noone, K., Persson, Å., Chapin, F.S., Lambin, E., et al., 2009. Planetary 
boundaries: Exploring the safe operating space for humanity. Nature, 461(7263), pp.461–
475. 
Ryberg, M.W. et al., 2016. Challenges in implementing a Planetary Boundaries based Life-Cycle 
Impact Assessment methodology. Journal of Cleaner Production, 139, pp.450–459. 
Ryberg, M.W. et al., 2017. Development of an operational life cycle impact assessment 
methodology linked to the Planetary Boundaries framework. in press. 
Ryding, S.-O., 1981. Reversibility of Man-Induced Eutrophication. Experiences of a Lake Recovery 
Study in Sweden. Internationale Revue der gesamten Hydrobiologie und Hydrographie, 
66(4), pp.449–503. 
Sakamoto, M., 1966. Primary production by phy- toplankton community in some Japanese lakes 
and its dependence on lake depth. Arch. Hy- drobiol. 
Sawyer, C.N., 1966. Basic Concepts of Eutrophication. Water Pollution Control Federation 
Journal, 38(5), pp.737–744. 
Sawyer, C.N., 1947. Fertilization of lakes by urban drainage. lournal of the New England Water 
Works Association, 61, pp.109–127. 
Scheffer, M. et al., 1993. Alternative Equilibria in Shallow Lakes 2 Alternative States in Shallow. 
TREE, 8(8), pp.275–279. 
Scheffer, M. et al., 2001. Catastrophic shifts in ecosystems. Nature, 413(6856), pp.591–6. 
Available at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15448261. 
Scheffer, M. & Carpenter, S.R., 2003. Catastrophic regime shifts in ecosystems: Linking theory to 
observation. Trends in Ecology and Evolution, 18(12), pp.648–656. 
Schindler, D.W., 2006. Recent advances in the understanding and management of 
eutrophication. Limnology and Oceanography, 51(1), pp.356–363. 
Shortreed, K.S., Stockner, G. & Salmon, L., 1986. Trophic Status of 19 Subarctic Lakes in the 
Yukon Territory. Wild, 43(September 1982), pp.797–805. 
Smith, V., 2003. Eutrophication of freshwater and coastal marine ecosystems a global problem. 
Environmental Science and Pollution Research, 10(2), pp.126–139. Available at: 
http://www.springerlink.com.proxy.library.oregonstate.edu/content/w32259833027620
p/abstract/%5Cnhttp://www.springerlink.com.proxy.library.oregonstate.edu/content/w3
2259833027620p/fulltext.pdf. 
Smith, V.H., 2009. Eutrophication. Encyclopedia of Inland Waters, (November), pp.61–73. 
Available at: http://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/B9780123706263002349. 
Smith, V.H., 1982. The nitrogen and phosphorus dependence of algal biomass in lakes: An 
empirical and theoretical analysis 1. Limnol. Oceanogr, 27(6), pp.1101–1112. 
Smith, V.H. & Shapiro, J., 1981. Chlorophyll-phosphorus relations in individual lakes. Their 
importance to lake restoration strategies. Environmental Science & Technology, 15(4), 
pp.444–451. 
Available 
at: 
http://pubs.acs.org/doi/abs/10.1021/es00086a009%5Cnpapers2://publication/doi/10.10
21/es00086a009. 
==PAGE:58==
Val C. 2017. Developing spatially differentiated Planetary Boundary based Life-Cycle Impact Assessment model for Phosphorous to freshwater. 
Master thesis. Technical University of Denmark 
 
 
50 
 
Smith, V.H., Tilman, G.D. & Nekola, J.C., 1998. Eutrophication: Impacts of excess nutrient inputs 
on freshwater, marine, and terrestrial ecosystems. Environmental Pollution, 100(1–3), 
pp.179–196. 
Sonnemann, G. & Schuhmacher, M., 2004. LIFE-CYCLE AND RISK ASSESSMENT FOR INDUSTRIAL 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data, 
Steffen, W. et al., 2015. Article: Planetary Boundaries: Guiding Human Development on a 
Changing Planet. Journal of Education for Sustainable Development, 9(2), pp.235–235. 
Available at: http://jsd.sagepub.com/cgi/doi/10.1177/0973408215600602a. 
Struijs, J. et al., 2011. Characterization factors for inland water eutrophication at the damage 
level in life cycle impact assessment. International Journal of Life Cycle Assessment, 16(1), 
pp.59–64. 
Struijs, J. et al., 2009. EUTROPHICATION. In ReCiPe 2008. pp. 59–67. Available at: 
http://www.pre-sustainability.com/download/misc/ReCiPe_main_report_final_27-02-
2009_web.pdf. 
Tuomisto, H.L. et al., 2012. Exploring a safe operating approach to weighting in life cycle impact 
assessment - A case study of organic, conventional and integrated farming systems. Journal 
of 
Cleaner 
Production, 
37, 
pp.147–153. 
Available 
at: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2012.06.025. 
Vyhnálek, V., Fott, J. & Kopáček, J., 1994. Chlorophyll-phosphorus relationship in acidified lakes 
of the High Tatra Mountains (Slovakia). Hydrobiologia, 274(1–3), pp.171–177. 
Walker, B. & Meyers, J. a, 2004. Thresholds in Ecological and Social – Ecological Systems : a 
Developing Database. , 9(July 2015), pp.2–3. 
White, E., 1983. Lake eutrophication in New Zealand - a comparison with other countries of the 
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development . New Zealand Journal of 
Marine and Freshwater Research, 17(March), pp.437–444. Available at: %5C%5Cniwa-
ham%5Cshared%5CProjects%5CHRC08201%5CWorking%5CBibliography%5CLiterature 
database (EKW updated 180908)%5CRegion specific Ngati Pikiao Te Arawa%5CWhite 1983 
lake eutrophication of NZ lakes.pdf. 
White, E. et al., 1985. Nutrient demand and availability among planktonic communities - an 
attempt to assess nutrient limitation to plant growth in 12 central volcanic plateau lakes. 
New Zealand Journal of Marine and Freshwater Research, 19(March 2016), pp.49–62. 
Wollenweider, R. & Kerekes, J., 1980. The loading concept as a basis for controlling 
eutrophication philosophy and preliminary results of the OECD programme on 
eutrophication. Prog Wat Rech, 12, pp.5–38. 
Zurlini, G., 1996. Multiparametric classification of trophic conditions. The OECD methodology 
extended: Combined probabilities and uncertainties - Application to the North Adriatic Sea. 
Science of the Total Environment, 182(1–3), pp.169–185. 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:59==
Val C. 2017. Developing spatially differentiated Planetary Boundary based Life-Cycle Impact Assessment model for Phosphorous to freshwater. 
Master thesis. Technical University of Denmark 
 
 
51 
 
APPENDIX I – Glossary of limnological terms  
(adapted from Prepas & Charette (2003)) 
 
Benthic: Relating to, or occurring at the bottom of a body of water. 
Biomass: Weight of living matter. 
Chlorophyll a:  Primary photosynthetic pigment. The concentration of chlorophyll a in water is 
an indicator of phytoplankton biomass. 
Epilimnion: The warm uppermost layer in a thermally stratified water body that is subject to 
mixing by wind. 
Eutrophic:  Waters with a good supply of nutrients and hence a rich organic production. 
Freshwater: Water with concentration of total dissolved solids below 500 mg L-1. 
Hypolimnion: The cool bottom layer in a thermally stratified water body. 
Lentic: Relating to, or living in still waters (such as lakes, ponds, or swamps). 
Lotic: Relating to, or living in actively moving water. 
Macrophytes: Large aquatic plants. 
Mesotrophic: Waters with a moderate supply of nutrients and organic production. 
Nutrient limitation: Limitation of phytoplankton biomass by an insufficient nutrient supply 
compared to the demand. 
Oligotrophic: Waters with a poor supply of nutrients and organic production. 
Secchi disk depth: The depth in water t which a Secchi disk (a 20cm diameter disk with 
alternating black and white quadrants) can be seen from the surface. Secchi disk depth is an 
easy measurement of water transparency. 
Phytoplankton:  The photosynthesizing portion of the plankton. 
Plankton:  The community of the free water. 
Primary production: The production of organic matter from inorganic materials within a certain 
period of time by autotrophic organisms. 
==PAGE:60==
Val C. 2017. Developing spatially differentiated Planetary Boundary based Life-Cycle Impact Assessment model for Phosphorous to freshwater. 
Master thesis. Technical University of Denmark 
 
 
52 
 
Stratified:  Divided into layers. In stratified water bodies, there may be mixing within a layer but 
little mixing occurs between layers. Layers have different densities, which may be determined 
either by temperature and/or salinity. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:61==
Val C. 2017. Developing spatially differentiated Planetary Boundary based Life-Cycle Impact Assessment model for Phosphorous to freshwater. 
Master thesis. Technical University of Denmark 
 
 
53 
 
APPENDIX II – Glossary of ‘Sustainability assessment’ terms  
Area of Protection (Aop): Entities that we want to protect. Aspects that we care about and we 
want LCA to the potential of the studied product system to damage.  The Areas of Protection 
considered ILCD are ‘Human Health‘, ‘Natural Environment‘ and ‘Natural Resources‘ (Henderson 
2015). 
Boundary: Human determined values set based on thresholds, expected to reflect human 
preferences and tolerance to risk (Rockström et al. 2009). 
Characterization factor: Factor derived from a characterization model which is applied to 
convert an assigned life cycle inventory analysis result to the common unit of the category 
indicator (ISO 2006a). 
Carrying Capacity (CC): the maximum sustained environmental interference a natural system 
can withstand without experiencing negative changes in structure or functioning that are 
difficult or impossible to revert (Bjørn et al. 2016). 
Control variables: a numerical indicator of the structure and/or functioning of a natural system 
(Bjørn et al. 2016). 
Elementary flow:  material or energy entering the system being studied that has been drawn 
from the environment without previous human transformation, or material or energy leaving 
the system being studied that is released into the environment without subsequent human 
transformation (ISO 2006a). 
Endpoint level: Impact assessment requires modelling of the whole impact pathway to the point 
where the impact entities are the areas of protection  
Functional unit: quantified performance of a product system for use as a reference unit (ISO 
2006a). 
Impact category: class representing environmental issues of concern to which life cycle 
inventory analysis results may be assigned (ISO 2006a). 
Life Cycle Assessment (LCA): compilation and evaluation of the inputs, outputs and the potential 
environmental impacts of a product system throughout its life cycle (ISO 2006a). 
Life Cycle Inventory Analysis (LCI): phase of life cycle assessment involving the compilation and 
quantification of inputs and outputs for a product throughout its life cycle (ISO 2006a). 
==PAGE:62==
Val C. 2017. Developing spatially differentiated Planetary Boundary based Life-Cycle Impact Assessment model for Phosphorous to freshwater. 
Master thesis. Technical University of Denmark 
 
 
54 
 
Life Cycle Impact Assessment (LCIA): phase of life cycle assessment aimed at understanding and 
evaluating the magnitude and significance of the potential environmental impacts for a product 
system throughout the life cycle of the product (ISO 2006a). 
Midpoint level: The indicator that represents the impact category can be located somewhere 
along the impact pathway (Henderson 2015). 
Product: Any goods or service (ISO 2006a).  
Precautionary principle: guideline in environmental decision making. Has four central 
components: taking preventive action in the face of uncertainty; shifting the burden of proof to 
the proponents of an activity; exploring a wide range of alternatives to possibly harmful actions; 
and increasing public participation in decision making (Kriebel et al. 2001).  
Threshold: the maximum value of a control variable a natural system can withstand  before 
shifting to an undesirable alternate stable state (Bjørn et al. 2016).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:63==
Val C. 2017. Developing spatially differentiated Planetary Boundary based Life-Cycle Impact Assessment model for Phosphorous to freshwater. 
Master thesis. Technical University of Denmark 
 
 
55 
 
APPENDIX III – Matlab scripts 
Modelling process (1): 
% Created on: June 2017 
% Last Modification on: June 2017 
% Created by: Ana Catarina Val 
  
clc 
clear 
close all; 
format 
  
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%% User Section to be Modified %%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%% 
  
% Data input 
P_data = xlsread('Pload',1,'A2:B59474'); %  P delivery to freshwater year 1850  
%return 
  
% Specify the folder where the txt files live. 
%myFolder = 'C:\Users\Catarina Val\Documents\Tese 
DTU\Model\Matlab\0_Matlab_PD_to_PC\FF'; 
myFolder = 'C:\Users\Catarina Val\Documents\Tese DTU\Model\Matlab\0_Matlab_PD_to_PC\FF'; 
  
% Specify the folder where the new txt files will be created  
%newFolder = 'C:\Users\Catarina Val\Documents\Tese 
DTU\Model\Matlab\0_Matlab_PD_to_PC\newtables';   
newFolder = 'C:\Users\Catarina Val\Documents\Tese 
DTU\Model\Matlab\0_Matlab_PD_to_PC\newtables'; 
  
% Data output 
% Select x = 0, 1, 2 or 3 
%(0 to do not export data 
% 1 to export results by appending to .txt file, 
% 2 to export results by overwritting to .txt file, 
% 3 to export results to a new .txt file, 
% 4 to export results to a new .xlsx) 
x = 4; 
  
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%% Model %%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%% 
  
% Check to make sure that input folder actually exists.  Warn user if it doesn't. 
if ~isdir(myFolder) 
  errorMessage = sprintf('Error: The following folder does not exist:\n%s', myFolder); 
  uiwait(warndlg(errorMessage)); 
  return; 
end 
  
%Get a list of all files in the folder with the desired file name pattern. 
filePattern = fullfile(myFolder, '*.txt');  
theFiles = dir(filePattern); 
fprintf('Number of imported txt files. \n') 
n_files = length(theFiles) 
%theFiles(1) 
%return 
  
% Create concentration 1850 results matrix 
E = zeros(length(theFiles),3); 
  
% Loop to read all txt input files 
for k = 1 : length(theFiles) 
  baseFileName = theFiles(k).name; 
  fullFileName = fullfile(myFolder, baseFileName);  % Name/location of txt files to be 
read 
  newfullFileName = fullfile(newFolder, baseFileName); % Name/location of new txt files 
  celldata = dlmread(fullFileName,'',1,0); %M(4,8) 
  fprintf(1, 'Now reading %s\n', fullFileName); 
  fprintf(1, 'File Index: %d\n', celldata(1,1)); 
   
   
% Create model vectors and matrix 
ind = P_data(:,1);   %matIndex vector 
v = P_data(:,2);   %P load values vector 
n = size(celldata, 1); %number of index vars in celldata 
nl_i = zeros(n,1);  %resulting vector P load in grid i 
==PAGE:64==
Val C. 2017. Developing spatially differentiated Planetary Boundary based Life-Cycle Impact Assessment model for Phosphorous to freshwater. 
Master thesis. Technical University of Denmark 
 
 
56 
 
M = zeros(n,2);  %Validation matrix 
%return 
  
% Extract matching CCdata  
for i = 1:length(ind) 
    for j = 1:n 
        if ind(i) == celldata(1,1) 
            nl_i(j) = v(i); 
            M(j,1) = ind(j); 
            M(j,2) = nl_i(j); 
        end 
    end 
end 
  
% Validation of data matching 
%fprintf('Validation matrix, M=(index, pdata). \n') %uncomment when validating 
M; 
%return 
  
% Calculate fraction of P [ ] in cell j from emission in compartmet cell i. 
format shortEng   %format data to eng style 
format compact    %format data to compact style 
nc_i = celldata(:,8).*nl_i; %BPC1850 from grid i in cell j 
%return 
  
% Create new data table 
m = size(celldata, 2)+2; 
celldata_new = zeros(n,m);  
for j = 1:n 
    celldata_new(j,:) = [celldata(j,:),nl_i(j),nc_i(j)]; %new celldata matrix (for .txt 
table) 
end 
%return 
  
% Write resulting values in the Command Window 
%fprintf('This is the data that is going to be written in the output. \n \n'); 
formatSpecT = '%s %s %s %s %s %s %s %s %s %s \n'; %text (titles) 
formatSpec = '%d %e %e %e %e %e %e %e %d %e \n'; %data 
%fprintf(formatSpec,celldata_new.'); 
%return 
  
% Types of exporting possibilities 
if x == 1 
% Write results in exting .txt file (Append). 
file = fopen(fullFileName,'a');  %File open ( a=Append to existing .txt ) 
fprintf(file,formatSpec,celldata_new.'); 
fclose(file); 
  
elseif x == 2 
% Write results in exting .txt file (Overwrite). 
replaceline = 2; 
numlines= n; 
file = fopen(fullFileName,'r');  %File open ( r=read ) 
mydata = cell(replaceline,numlines); 
for k = replaceline:numlines 
    mydata{k} = fgetl(file); 
end 
fclose(file); 
mydata{replaceline} = celldata_new.'; 
file = fopen(fullFileName,'wt+');  %File open ( w=write ) 
fprintf(file,formatSpec,mydata{:}); 
fclose(file); 
end %end loops for exporting results 
  
if x == 3 
% Write results in new .txt file. 
title = ['index_grd', 
'Vol_river','Vol_lake','FF_grid_j','fracttrans_grd','FF_from_grid_i','FF_conc_from_grid_
i_river','FF_conc_from_grid_i_lake','P_load_data','P_conc_j'];                
%title = [{'index_grd'} {'Vol_river'} {'Vol_lake'} {'FF_grid_j'} {'fracttrans_grd'} 
{'FF_from_grid_i'} {'FF_conc_from_grid_i_river'} {'FF_conc_from_grid_i_lake'} 
{'P_load_data'} {'P_conc_j'}];             
file = fopen(newfullFileName,'wt+');  %File open ( w=write ) 
%file = fopen('C:\Users\DCA\Desktop\MATLAB_catarina\outputs\*.txt','wt+');  %File open ( 
w=write ) 
fprintf(file,formatSpecT,title.'); 
fprintf(file,'\n'); 
==PAGE:65==
Val C. 2017. Developing spatially differentiated Planetary Boundary based Life-Cycle Impact Assessment model for Phosphorous to freshwater. 
Master thesis. Technical University of Denmark 
 
 
57 
 
fprintf(file,formatSpec,celldata_new.'); 
fclose(file); 
  
elseif x == 4 
% Write results in a new .xlsx file. 
filename = 'celldata_final.xlsx'; 
sheet = 1;  % select number of the desired sheet to write the data 
%xlRange = 'E1'; 
title1 = [{'index_grd'} {'Vol_river'} {'Vol_lake'} {'FF_grid_j'} {'fracttrans_grd'} 
{'FF_from_grid_i'} {'FF_conc_from_grid_i_river'} {'FF_conc_from_grid_i_lake'} 
{'P_load_data'} {'P_conc_j'} ];            
A = [cellstr(title1);num2cell(celldata_new)] 
xlswrite(filename,A,sheet)    %(filename,A,sheet,xlRange) 
end %end loops for exporting results 
  
end %end loop of .txt files 
 
 
Modelling process (2): 
% Created on: May 2017 
% Last Modification on: June 2017 
% Created by: Ana Catarina Val 
  
clc 
clear 
close all; 
format 
  
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%% User Section to be Modified %%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%% 
  
%Data input 
% Import Background P [] from Beuson dataset: 
BPC1850 = xlsread('background C',1,'A2:B43808');  
%return 
  
  
%Data output 
%export results to a new .xls 
  
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%% Model %%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%% 
  
% Create Chl target results matrix 
E = zeros(length(BPC1850),3); 
  
  
% Create model vectors and matrix 
ind = BPC1850(:,1);   %matIndex vector 
v_P = BPC1850(:,2);   %BPC1850 values vector 
%return 
  
%Define Target for Chl [ ] based on background P [ ] in 1900 ("original trophic state") 
 for i = 1:length(ind) 
    if (v_P(i)<4) 
     P_T(i) = 4; 
    elseif (4<=v_P(i) && v_P(i)<10) 
     P_T(i) = 10; 
    elseif (10<=v_P(i) && v_P(i)<30) 
     P_T(i) = 30; 
    else 
        P_T(i) = 90; 
     end 
 end 
   
  
% Create matrix for overall data 
E(:,1) = ind; 
E(:,2) = v_P; 
E(:,3) = P_T; 
  
%return     
  
  
  
==PAGE:66==
Val C. 2017. Developing spatially differentiated Planetary Boundary based Life-Cycle Impact Assessment model for Phosphorous to freshwater. 
Master thesis. Technical University of Denmark 
 
 
58 
 
% Write boudary results in a new .xlsx file. 
filename = 'boundary_output.xlsx'; 
%sheet = s; 
%xlRange = 'E1'; 
title2 = [{'index_grd'} {'BPC_1850'} {'P_boundary'}]; 
F=[cellstr(title2); num2cell(E)]; 
xlswrite(filename,F)    %(filename,A,sheet,xlRange) 
 
Modelling process (3): 
% Created on: April 2017 
% Last Modification on: May 2017 
% Created by: Ana Catarina Val 
  
clc 
clear 
close all; 
format 
  
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%% User Section to be Modified %%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%% 
  
% Data input 
CCdata = xlsread('CCdata',1,'A2:B43808'); %M(2,43807) 
%return 
  
% Specify the folder where the txt files live. 
%myFolder = 'C:\Users\Catarina Val\Documents\Tese 
DTU\Model\Matlab\3_MATLAB_Catarina_Emission Limits\inputs'; 
myFolder = 'C:\Users\Catarina Val\Documents\Tese DTU\Model\Matlab\0_Matlab_PD_to_PC\FF'; 
  
% Specify the folder where the new txt files will be created  
%newFolder = 'C:\Users\Catarina Val\Documents\TeseDTU\Model\FF\outputs';   
newFolder = 'C:\Users\Catarina Val\Documents\Tese 
DTU\Model\Matlab\3_MATLAB_Catarina_Emission Limits\outputs'; 
  
% Data output 
% Select x = 0, 1, 2 or 3 
%(0 to do not export data 
% 1 to export results by appending to .txt file, 
% 2 to export results by overwritting to .txt file, 
% 3 to export results to a new .txt file, 
% 4 to export results to a new .xlsx) 
x = 3; 
  
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%% Model %%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%% 
  
% Check to make sure that input folder actually exists.  Warn user if it doesn't. 
if ~isdir(myFolder) 
  errorMessage = sprintf('Error: The following folder does not exist:\n%s', myFolder); 
  uiwait(warndlg(errorMessage)); 
  return; 
end 
  
%Get a list of all files in the folder with the desired file name pattern. 
filePattern = fullfile(myFolder, '*.txt');  
theFiles = dir(filePattern); 
fprintf('Number of imported txt files. \n') 
n_files = length(theFiles) 
%theFiles(1) 
%return 
  
% Create CF' results matrix 
E = zeros(length(theFiles),2); 
  
% Loop to read all txt input files 
for k = 1 : length(theFiles) 
  baseFileName = theFiles(k).name; 
  fullFileName = fullfile(myFolder, baseFileName);  % Name/location of txt files to be 
read 
  newfullFileName = fullfile(newFolder, baseFileName); % Name/location of new txt files 
  celldata = dlmread(fullFileName,'',1,0); %M(4,8) 
  fprintf(1, 'Now reading %s\n', fullFileName); 
  fprintf(1, 'File Index: %d\n', celldata(1,1)); 
   
   
==PAGE:67==
Val C. 2017. Developing spatially differentiated Planetary Boundary based Life-Cycle Impact Assessment model for Phosphorous to freshwater. 
Master thesis. Technical University of Denmark 
 
 
59 
 
% Create model vectors and matrix 
ind = CCdata(:,1);   %matIndex vector 
v = CCdata(:,2);   %CC values vector 
n = size(celldata, 1); %number of index vars in celldata 
nc = zeros(n,1);  %resulting vector 
M = zeros(n,2);  %Validation matrix 
%return 
  
% Extract matching CCdata (in the same order of the table) 
for i = 1:length(ind) 
    for j = 1:n 
        if ind(i) == celldata(j,1) 
            nc(j) = v(i); 
            M(j,1) = ind(i); 
            M(j,2) = nc(j); 
        end 
    end 
end 
  
% Validation of data matching 
%fprintf('Validation matrix, M=(index, ccdata). \n') %uncomment when validating 
M; 
%return 
  
% Calculate most sensitive values for emission in compartmet cell i. 
format shortEng   %format data to eng style 
format compact    %format data to compact style 
CF = celldata(:,8)./nc; 
CF_cell_i = max(CF); 
%emission_limit_cell_i = inv(CF_cell_i) 
%return 
  
% Create new data table 
m=size(celldata, 2)+2; 
celldata_new = zeros(n,m);  
v_CF_cell_i = zeros(n,1); 
v_CF_cell_i(1) = CF_cell_i; 
  
for j = 1:n 
    celldata_new(j,:) = [celldata(j,:),nc(j),v_CF_cell_i(j)]; %new celldata matrix (for 
.txt table) 
end 
%return 
  
% Create matrix for overall emissions data table 
E(k,1) = M(1,1); 
E(k,2) = CF_cell_i; 
%return 
  
% Write resulting values in the Command Window 
%fprintf('This is the data that is going to be written in the output. \n \n'); 
formatSpecT = '%s %s %s %s %s %s %s %s %s %s \n'; %text (titles) 
formatSpec = '%d %e %e %e %e %e %e %e %d %e \n'; %data 
%fprintf(formatSpec,celldata_new.'); 
%return 
  
% Types of exporting possibilities 
if x == 1 
% Write results in exting .txt file (Append). 
file = fopen(fullFileName,'a');  %File open ( a=Append to existing .txt ) 
fprintf(file,formatSpec,celldata_new.'); 
fclose(file); 
  
elseif x == 2 
% Write results in exting .txt file (Overwrite). 
replaceline = 2; 
numlines= n; 
file = fopen(fullFileName,'r');  %File open ( r=read ) 
mydata = cell(replaceline,numlines); 
for k = replaceline:numlines 
    mydata{k} = fgetl(file); 
end 
fclose(file); 
mydata{replaceline} = celldata_new.'; 
file = fopen(fullFileName,'wt+');  %File open ( w=write ) 
fprintf(file,formatSpec,mydata{:}); 
fclose(file); 
==PAGE:68==
Val C. 2017. Developing spatially differentiated Planetary Boundary based Life-Cycle Impact Assessment model for Phosphorous to freshwater. 
Master thesis. Technical University of Denmark 
 
 
60 
 
end %end loops for exporting results 
  
if x == 3 
% Write results in new .txt file. 
title = ['index_grd', 
'Vol_river','Vol_lake','FF_grid_j','fracttrans_grd','FF_from_grid_i','FF_conc_from_grid_
i_river','FF_conc_from_grid_i_lake','CCdata','CF_cell_i'];                
%title = [{'index_grd'} {'Vol_river'} {'Vol_lake'} {'FF_grid_j'} {'fracttrans_grd'} 
{'FF_from_grid_i'} {'FF_conc_from_grid_i_river'} {'FF_conc_from_grid_i_lake'} {'CCdata'} 
{'CF_cell_i'}];             
file = fopen(newfullFileName,'wt+');  %File open ( w=write ) 
%file = fopen('C:\Users\DCA\Desktop\MATLAB_catarina\outputs\*.txt','wt+');  %File open ( 
w=write ) 
fprintf(file,formatSpecT,title.'); 
fprintf(file,'\n'); 
fprintf(file,formatSpec,celldata_new.'); 
fclose(file); 
  
elseif x == 4 
% Write results in a new .xlsx file. 
filename = 'celldata_final.xlsx'; 
sheet = k;  % select number of the desired sheet to write the data 
%xlRange = 'E1'; 
title1 = [{'index_grd'} {'Vol_river'} {'Vol_lake'} {'FF_grid_j'} {'fracttrans_grd'} 
{'FF_from_grid_i'} {'FF_conc_from_grid_i_river'} {'FF_conc_from_grid_i_lake'} {'CCdata'} 
{'CF_cell_i'}];             
A = [cellstr(title1);num2cell(celldata_new)] 
xlswrite(filename,A,sheet)    %(filename,A,sheet,xlRange) 
end %end loops for exporting results 
  
end %end loop of .txt files 
  
% Write emissions' results in a new .xlsx file. 
filename = 'CF_output.xlsx'; 
%sheet = s; 
%xlRange = 'E1'; 
title2 = [{'index_grd'} {'CF_cell_i'}]; 
F=[cellstr(title2); num2cell(E)]; 
xlswrite(filename,F)    %(filename,A,sheet,xlRange) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
