==PAGE:1==
MASTER THESIS - JUNE 23, 2017
1
Generation and expansion of automated search
queries to ﬁnd social events that enrich a human
mobility prediction model
Kevin Kaiser
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark (DTU)
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
s151457@student.dtu.dk
Abstract—This thesis addresses the challenges related to explanation and prediction of real world phenomena with textual
information. In that context, transport demand was predicted with a supervised topic modeling algorithm by utilizing information about
social events retrieved in unstructured natural language form from the Web. Various retrieval strategies, which made use of search
aggregation, natural language processing, and query expansion, led to different prediction outcomes that were explained on modeled
topics. It was found that a two-step process produced the highest accuracy for transport demand prediction. Multiple event related
queries retrieved documents of which the most relevant documents are used to compute expansion terms for the ﬁnal query. The
retrieved documents of that query could be used to model the most discriminative topics related to the transport demand. A framework
was proposed that sequentially handles all stages of data gathering, enrichment, and prediction with the intention of generating
automated search queries.
Index Terms—Information Retrieval, Query Generation, Query Expansion, Machine Learning, NLP, Topic Modeling, MedLDA, Human
Mobility, Social Events.
!
1
PREFACE
T
HIS thesis was prepared at DTU Compute in fulﬁllment
of the requirements for acquiring a Master of Science
(M.Sc.) in Engineering (Digital Media Engineering).
2
INTRODUCTION
An ever increasing size of data is accessible over the Inter-
net. Due to digital advancements in the 21st century anyone
seeking access to these large data collections, stored on
computers, can ﬁnd what they are looking for by using web
search engines, formally known as information retrieval
(IR) systems. IR itself can cover a wide scope of subjects.
Nevertheless, it is nowadays practically used as a synonym
for searching in computer networks [1, p. 1]. Web searches
are the most dominant form to access unstructured data,
predominantly text, from billions of documents. It is a very
challenging task to formulate appropriate queries in IR be-
cause they do not follow any rules, like e.g. structured query
language (SQL) in database management system (DBMS).
IR tasks are measured by precision and recall, which are
also common terms in machine learning. In this context,
precision refers to the set of relevant documents among the
retrieved documents returned by a user query. According
to the ranking of these documents, precision determines the
usefulness of the search results. Recall refers to how many
relevant documents were found in the set of all available
documents, which indicates completeness [2].
In this thesis, the goal is to predict dynamical as-
pects of real-world phenomena with unstructured, high-
dimensional natural language from the digital world ex-
plaining these phenomena. The problem, in particular, fo-
cuses on management and planning of transport systems
in densely populated areas during special, non-recurrent,
planned events, e.g. concerts, sports matches, art perfor-
mances, demonstrations and the like. In conjunction, com-
mon techniques are explored to maximize the relevance
of queried documents related to the social events from IR
systems.
The work builds upon the research conducted by Bo-
rysov et al. [3] where context data of events, that is retrieved
from search engines, is used to predict occurrences of non-
recurrent overcrowding or “hotspots”. Each hotspot and
non-hotspot instance was predicted from public transport
demand and then associated with an event according to
the spatial and temporal domain. With the labeled instances
and extracted semantic aspects, or topics, from texts related
to the event, the transport demand was predicted with
higher accuracy and model stability than state-of-the-art
methods. This was done via a maximum margin supervised
topic modeling algorithm, which is based on latent Dirichlet
allocation (LDA) [4], i.e. maximum entropy discriminant
LDA (MedLDA) [5]. The paper can also be used as an in-
depth reference to the problem from the perspective of a
transport engineer. The fundamental building blocks of the
original framework’s workﬂow will be used in a similar
fashion in this thesis.
In reference to the initial goal, the dynamical aspects of
transport demand before and after events can be predicted
==PAGE:2==
MASTER THESIS - JUNE 23, 2017
2
using modeled topics from events. This method is already
evaluated and optimized, retrieval of information related
to semantic aspects that explain the events is not. The
main purpose of this study is to determine how different
retrieval strategies affect the modeled topics that are used
to predict transport demand on associated social events.
Therefore, the center of attention is on the techniques for
automatic generation and reﬁnement of queries towards the
goal of obtaining more relevant documents about an event.
Reﬁnement of queries, better known as query expansion,
is necessary to increase the retrieval effectiveness of broad
searches. In that context Borysov et al. argue that the most
basic case of query generation with the event title and venue
name can cause incomplete, “noisy” or too verbose queries.
That kind of tendency means that matched documents from
search engines do not adequately represent the most rele-
vant topics which in turn has an effect on the topic modeling
and prediction accuracy.
Instead, we suggest an approach that targets to generate
more accurate queries iteratively with the least amount
of information about an event, i.e. start date/time and
venue/location. Two goals drive this approach. The ﬁrst,
generating queries from the event title and venue has the
mentioned side effects and requires new event data for
every prediction of transport demand in the future. On
the other hand, auto-generating dates from a calendar and
using rarely changing venues within a city from many data
sources like point of interests (POIs) requires less effort.
Lastly, Borysov et al. conclude that the suggested prediction
model is not just expendable across cities but also across
domains, e.g. ﬁnancial markets. Therefore, the increased
query ﬂexibility is advantageous because there are only
the two mentioned inputs for any event that happens at
a determinable time and place.
To be able to compare the retrieval strategies, event
and transport data is gathered in the span from January
to June 2016 for Manhattan, New York City, USA. Struc-
tured information about planned events can be mined over
different event listing application programming interfaces
(APIs). Two datasets that were suited for transport demand
are: Taxi trip data from the NYC Taxi and Limousine
Commission (TLC) [6] and subway turnstile counts from
the Metropolitan Transportation Authority (MTA) [7]. To
predict overcrowding, the focus was laid on the time after
the event. When people leave an event, there are potentially
more taxi pickups in that area or more people entering a
nearby subway station through a turnstile.
The remainder of the thesis is ordered as follows. In sec-
tion 2.1-2.6 comparable IR problems, along with advantages
of using different query generation methods and query
expansion are further introduced. More background knowl-
edge on natural language processing methods is the subject
matter in section 2.7 since they have a large impact on the
problem setting. Reviewing related work closes with the
section about Topic Modeling. The Methodology part, after,
is split into multiple subsections to resemble the pipeline of
the new classiﬁcation workﬂow. In Evaluation, the proposed
framework is reviewed in an experiment. Moreover, the
model’s performance, possible limitations, and extensions
are summarized in Results and Discussion.
2.1
Information Retrieval
Because we rely on public IR services to gain contextual
event information it useful to know how they work, where
it is possible to interact with them and how their outputs
can be utilized.
In the early days of IR research information was viewed
as a thing that can be indexed, encoded, broken into seg-
ments, parsed, and so on [8]. Nowadays this deﬁnition is
modiﬁed in a sense that researchers acknowledged that IR
can also beneﬁt immensely from context, task, or situation of
a search [9]. IR is not solely based on statistical analysis of
the query and document collection. For the task at hand,
documents related to social events are the main target.
Although more structured data is available from event list-
ing sites, they might lack important additional information
which makes it hard to truly distinguish between popular
and unpopular event topics for a classiﬁer. What all events
have in common is the spatial and temporal domain, be-
cause of this circumstance the task can be very speciﬁcally
deﬁned and exploited to improve the search after relevant
information. Document proximity in terms of the user’s
location, his context, can already be used in a weighted
graph to retrieve relevant documents over graph distances
[10]. Especially geo-tagging web content has gotten a lot
of attention because of its many applications also for data
mining systems [11].
There is one major restriction, the full set of techniques
to enrich queries and documents is not at our disposal
because of the dependency on public web search engines.
The Google Custom Search (CS) API actually shows a lot
of annotations in some results, including geo-coordinates,
but the subset is too small for serious matching approaches
to the event’s attributes. It is doubtful that Google, as a
commercial service, shares its full catalog of indexed meta-
data. Most parsing based approaches ﬁnd co-occurrences of
spatial and temporal expressions in the same sentence or
paragraph [12], [13]. Problematic is that these methods rely
on extracting full texts from all potentially relevant websites
because web search engines only return small snippets of
matched text in regards to the query.
2.2
Query Generation
Based on the spatio-temporal information that deﬁnes every
event, queries can be constructed containing an event’s
venue name and start date. This query generation tech-
nique runs the risk of getting very broad matches. Take
for instance “the Garden” as a common venue name in the
extracted event data. It is a shortened name for Madison
Square Garden, a large multipurpose arena in New York.
In spite of the fact that events at Madison Square Garden
are largely advertised and talked about on the Web, many
non-relevant results will be returned since “the Garden”
is ambiguous. Using search engines in Denmark mainly
returns results about “the Garden exhibition” that is taking
place in Aarhus in coherence with it being European Capital
of Culture 2017.
Query generation of mixed date and time formats is very
challenging. Besides a few exceptions, search engines do
not fully seem to respect date formats in the query that
match alternative date formats in the indexed text. This
==PAGE:3==
MASTER THESIS - JUNE 23, 2017
3
happens predominantly because of the ordering between
year, month, and day in American date formats (9/11/2011
vs. 2011/9/11), month numbers replaced by full month
name or three-letter abbreviations, alternate time zones, etc.
It is inevitable to avoid simple single-shot queries to ful-
ﬁll the objective of determining relevant documents. In the
following subsections, different solutions are introduced.
2.3
Scoring Metrics
Relevance and ranking are closely tied together. Scoring
metrics are algorithms to determine the rank of each doc-
ument with respect to many deciding factors. Google, for
instance, indicates that they use over 200 factors to deter-
mine the ranking of the presented search results. But the
essential deciding attribute in the ranking algorithm for
search engines remains the query. Referring to the example
in the previous section with the ambiguous query “the
Garden”, one can conclude that the location of the user
contributes the most to the top ranking of the exhibition
in Aarhus, but that does not mean results about Madison
Square Garden are not in the full set of relevant documents.
The most common metric for text ranking is based on
weighting the importance of a term in a document, based
on the statistics of occurrence of the term [1, p. 109]. Term
frequency-inverse document frequency (tf-idf) is one of
these statistics. Each set of documents must be represented
in numerical form as vectors, also known as vector space
model, to calculate weights per term. Each term weight
reﬂects the term’s importance in the document [14].
To rank documents relative to a query vector there are
more sophisticated, probabilistic tf-idf variants like BM25
[15] and its extensions [16]. Lv et al. [17] measure the highest
relevance of documents, given a query, with relevance based
language models [18] and its extension of query mixing
(RM3) [19].
The search engines already implement these scoring
metrics, and therefore it does not make sense to re-evaluate
the results regarding the query. Regardless of that, tf-idf has
other applications like text classiﬁcation (see section 2.7).
It will help to understand returned matches regarding an
event’s category better. For instance, a music venue is most
likely to return texts related to concerts.
2.4
Search Aggregation
The already mentioned Google CS API but also the Bing
Web Search API tie into their well known provided web
services. Nonetheless, these services are quite limited. The
Google product is actually just meant to index your pri-
vate website. For testing purposes, the whole Web can be
searched with a big limitation of 100 queries per day. The
Bing service is not as restrictive under certain pricing con-
ditions, but the quality of search results lags behind Google.
I hint at these circumstances because a substantial gain
in retrieval performance and effectiveness is possible by
aggregating results from multiple search engines [20]. The
same thinking can be adapted to slightly different queries
[21]. Figuratively spoken one query does nothing else than
tap into a space of documents. Thus, the combination of
numerous queries, which are alternated to a certain extent,
widens the search space, which increases the chances of
ﬁnding more related documents. The search space is also
widened and alternated when non-identical search engines
use another algorithm to ﬁnd a relevant document. Inter-
sections between those documents can be utilized for re-
ranking. When an overlap over queries and search engines
occurs, there is a higher chance of the document being
relevant. This relation is depicted in the Venn diagram in
ﬁgure 1 for a tuple of multiple queries q = (q1, ..., qn).
Non-relevant documents
Relevant documents
q1
q2
q3
Fig. 1. Search aggregation over multiple queries.
Using many queries addresses the issue with mis-
matched date and time formats between query and indexed
documents. Instead, multiple queries with different formats
are sent to the search service. Under the retrieved results
the chances of having the targeted, relevant documents
among them are higher. To avoid a high number of matched
documents one can restrict queries and reduces the corre-
sponding corpus size with the so-called “phrase syntax”. It
instructs the search engine to ﬁnd exact matches of words
or phrases enclosed in quotation marks unaltered in the
indexed document.
To be able to re-rank or re-estimate the relevance of one
document’s score sdoc among all aggregated documents we
propose the scoring metric in equation 1. The inputs are
the tuple of queries q = (q1, ..., qn) and each document’s
position ranking over the query result from different search
providers p = (p1, ..., pn).
sdocn =
|q|
X
i=1
X
j∈pi
|p|
j
(1)
Computing the scores with equation 1 according to the
inputs given in table 1 results in sdoc1 = 3.03 and sdoc2 =
2.3. sdoc1 clearly ranks higher because q1 matched sdoc1 on
two different search engines.
A framework that can aggregate one query over multiple
search services is formally known as a metasearch engine
[20]. Searx is such an engine, it is open-source and targets
privacy protection. Any query is sent through a proxy server
with an HTTP POST request to mask the origin of the
request. Many available public instances and the possibility
to set up local server instances make it suitable for data
mining documents. To aggregate results across queries, one
==PAGE:4==
MASTER THESIS - JUNE 23, 2017
4
TABLE 1
Example of positional ranking of three queries over two search engines.
query
document
positions over two
search engines
q1
doc1
p1 = (1, 6)
q2
doc1
p2 = (5, −)
q3
doc1
p3 = (2, −)
q1
doc2
p1 = (3, −)
q2
doc2
p2 = (1, −)
q3
doc2
p3 = (1, −)
has to send individual requests and after aggregate all
results and re-rank them with the above scoring function
in equation 1.
A combination of more verbose and broader queries
can increase the recall of relevant documents, but it does
not actually help to determine them because the full set of
results also contains many non-relevant documents. Espe-
cially when the non-relevant documents are ranked high,
search aggregation is not that useful. For humans, it is ha-
bitual to reﬁne a query when the precision on the ﬁrst result
page is low. A set of techniques, aiming at increasing the
number of highly ranked relevant documents automatically,
is summarized in below section.
2.5
Query Expansion
As introduced earlier, precision and recall of search results
are closely tied to a well-formulated query. But choosing
the best terms is not trivial. Two typical problems arising
in natural languages are polysemy and synonymy [22], [23],
where the former refers to the same problem explained in
section 2.2. The word “garden” can have multiple meanings
depending on the intended referral to an actual botanical
garden, a spot inside a town or the name of something else.
The latter phenomenon arises when different words convey
the same meaning, e.g. “garden” and “back yard”. A vector
space representation of a query suffers from its inability to
cope with these problems. In IR latent semantic indexing
(LSI) is used to ﬁnd relations between terms and ﬁght the
effects of this lexical ambiguity [24]. Deerwester et al. laid
the foundation of LSI by proposing a document analysis
model that used singular value decomposition (SVD). The
decomposition of a large term by document matrix into a
set of about 100 orthogonal factors could be used to approxi-
mate the original matrix by linear combination. This general
approach was later coined as latent semantic analysis (LSA)
in natural language processing and LSI in IR.
For humans, it is straightforward to revise the query
according to the results. If “the Garden” unintentionally
only has results from Aarhus, it can be appended specifying
the city: New York. Query expansion algorithms provide
mechanisms to reﬁne/expand a query, automatically or with
the user in the loop [1, p. 177]. The motivation behind
reviewing query expansion methods is to ﬁnd solutions
that resolve term ambiguity in suggested event queries by
expanding more meaningful terms to the queries according
to relevant documents.
2.5.1
Probabilistic Query Expansion
There are many query expansion methods. An excellent
overview and comparison of different types were collected
by Salton and Buckley [25]. In this thesis, only probabilistic
query expansion is covered in detail because they are the
most dominant form and most applicable for automatic
query expansion. Probabilistic methods for query expansion
are categorized in global and local analysis.
All local analysis strategies have in common that they
adjust the query relative to derived information in retrieved
documents or user feedback information. On the contrary,
global methods operate across the retrieved collection, e.g.:
LSI, spell correction in a query and indexed documents,
query suggestions or query auto-completion. These helpers
are mainly intended to support users, but in an automatic
framework only LSI and spell correction are useful and
already done by the search engine. Thus, we can best utilize
local methods that go back to Attar and Fraenkel [26] who
researched term clustering to select expansion terms. The
downside of those clusters is that they are mainly made of
words from the top-n results because of the close relevance
to the query. Therefore, more sophisticated relevance feed-
back approaches were researched to select better expansion
terms.
2.5.2
Relevance Feedback
Common methods for local analysis include explicit, im-
plicit, blind and probabilistic relevance feedback. Sometimes
different terminology is used but referring to the same tech-
nique, e.g. pseudo relevance feedback for blind feedback.
All feedback methods return expansion terms that can be
attached to the initial query or replace it.
Explicit feedback methods require user interaction where
the user selects the subjects relevant to him. This technique
is disregarded by search engines because of the poor user
experience, leaving aside that users are more interested in
precision. Empirical studies conﬁrm that precision of state-
of-the-art search engines is high but not necessarily recall
[23]. Instead, implicit feedback is widely spread, where
either individual or collective user behavior is utilized
by inferring relevance according to query logs (also click-
through/clickstream data) [27], [28]. Query expansion is
often used in the background and exploits past user data to
ﬁnd more relevant results. Access to query logs is restricted
and is not a considerable option for the presented use case.
Blind feedback assumes that the top-n ranked docu-
ments contain k relevant terms. It is assumed that attaching
these terms to the query will likely return more documents
similar to the top-n documents. This process can continue
iteratively. The k relevant terms can be determined by
various methods, e.g. term clustering described by Attar
and Fraenkel. This technique can be useful in certain settings
[29], [30] but suffers from non-relevant, high ranked results
returned by the initial query. Blindly choosing documents
often produces queries drifting away from the desired doc-
ument space. Many improvement attempts for automatic
expansion with blind feedback were proposed targeting
the query drift problem by reducing non-relevant docu-
ments [31], [32], [33]. The most promising blind feedback
method to date is local context analysis (LCA) from Xu and
==PAGE:5==
MASTER THESIS - JUNE 23, 2017
5
Croft [34]. They choose k expansion terms not solely on
the queried document set but also consider co-occurrences
between documents and query terms. Still, LCA can favor
terms that appear in few documents when they are related
to the query, which can cause problems if the initial query
is not ideal.
Lastly, probabilistic relevance feedback and language
based relevance models, e.g. RM3, are not that different
from above vector space models. Their formulas for rele-
vance scoring are simply motivated by probability theory.
Probabilistic feedback models the relevance probability of
a document based on the query. Language-based models
invert this process by building a probabilistic language
model for each document and rank documents based on
the probability of the model generating the given query [1,
p. 237]. Probabilistic feedback models are also dependent on
knowing the set of relevant and non-relevant documents.
Language based relevance models assume that the query is
the only sample that exists from the unknown probability
distribution for relevant documents. Based on that assump-
tion these models estimate the relevance probability of other
expansion terms and thus rely on the query.
This is similar to all non-probabilistic local feedback
methods that rely on the initial query to select good ex-
pansion terms to ﬁnd the ideal query. There are certain
assumptions to be made about and ideal query in vector
space which are covered in the next section.
2.5.3
Ideal Query
Relevance feedback information can be incorporated under
the assumption that there is an ideal query vector which
maximizes the similarity with relevant documents and min-
imizes it for the non-relevant [1, p. 181]. This notion was
ﬁrst deﬁned by Rocchio in 1971 and is therefore known as
Rocchio algorithm [35]. The initial query vector is moved in
response to the given feedback as illustrated in ﬁgure 2.
Non-relevant documents
Relevant documents
q1
q2
q3
initial queries
revised query
Fig. 2. Application of the Rocchio algorithm.
For relevance feedback to work relevant documents
must be similar to each other. Ideally, they are distributed
as clusters as shown in ﬁgure 2. Assuming a vector space
retrieval model let ⃗qm denote the modiﬁed query in equa-
tion 2.
⃗qm = α⃗q0 + β
1
|Dr|
X
⃗dj∈Dr
⃗dj −γ
1
|Dnr|
X
⃗dj∈Dnr
⃗dj
(2)
The algorithm can be split into three main parts: Terms
from the original query ⃗q0, the set of relevant documents Dr
and non-relevant documents Dnr. All terms are weighted
separately in their respective document sets, e.g. with tf-
idf. Terms that are in relevant documents but also in non-
relevant documents will be ranked lower than terms only
present in relevant documents. The algorithm treats relevant
documents as a single cluster modeled via the centroid of
the cluster. After the application of equation 2, expansion
terms are chosen by getting the top-n weighted terms.
The weights α, β, and γ are used to steer the importance
of each set of term weights. Some systems also ignore
negative feedback (γ = 0) or leave the initial query part
⃗q0 unaltered, so that it is not included in the equation.
All in all, it can be concluded that the main pitfall of
query expansion is that it is relatively hard to determine
relevant documents. That issue cannot be resolved without
query drift as an inherent danger. If there was a way to
determine them reliably, an ideal query could be created
applying the Rocchio algorithm.
In appendix A there is a comprehensive literature review
on how relevance can be estimated through annotations and
be used in query expansion. The annotated semantic infor-
mation we possess is contained in the extracted structural
data from event listing APIs. Inferring relevance through
external data is similar to query logs that are generated by
humans who assess document relevance. Machine learning
is then introduced on the query logs to infer content-based
relevance automatically. Learning the ranking of documents
is tied to learning about document relevance. Regarding our
problem domain, more relevant content about events will
help to better explain the detected anomalies in transport
demand and this knowledge will help to predict future
anomalies more reliably.
2.6
Learning to rank
Pioneering work of machine-learned ranking (MLR) was
done by Fuhr [36] in 1992 but since then a lot of advance-
ments have been made. Liu [37] categorizes rank problems
in three different categories: pointwise, pairwise and list-
wise. Several learning-to-rank algorithms for either type and
hybrid solutions between multiple types have been pub-
lished [38], [39], [40]. Of all categories, pointwise cases are
most applicable in conjunction with query expansion. The
only prerequisite is a dataset of query-document pairs with
a binary relevance label or an ordinal or numerical score.
Consequently, there is a wide range of supervised learning
algorithms available. Ordinal scores can be used to extend
a binary judgment, e.g. on a scale from 1-5 “not relevant”
to “extremely relevant”. A special regression model with
ordinal variables, or shortened ordinal regression, is a good
choice when the main goal is to rank documents. It differs
from ordinary regression because of the fact that documents
are evaluated relative to other candidate documents for the
same query. Mapping the data against a global scale of
relevance can be avoided because an absolute measure of
==PAGE:6==
MASTER THESIS - JUNE 23, 2017
6
relevance is not needed, only the ranking [1, p. 344]. MLR
with ordinal regression is applied to query-logs by Joachims
[41]. The goal we pursue by estimating relevance is not the
exact rank of a relevant document to other relevant docu-
ments; they are treated equally. In this case, a supervised
regression model on numerical scores gives the greatest
ﬂexibility since dynamic limits of relevant and non-relevant
documents per query or other groups are maybe necessary.
Usually, search engines split the ranking process into
two phases: The initial phase uses simple retrieval methods,
query-document evaluation is done with simple scoring
metrics. This allows for a faster retrieval of an inexact top-
n document retrieval where it is likely that the highest
scoring documents are among them. MLR can be used after
to ﬁnd these documents. Using a ranking model in the
ﬁrst phase would be computationally expensive and hinder
a fast retrieval [1, chapter 7.1]. The type of training set
that MLR uses contains query-document pairs with each
of them having an associated score that determines the
ranking. When new query-document pairs are returned by
the initial index retrieval methods, the score is predicted
using the trained model. Hence, there is no restriction to use
different MLR models that will score the results differently.
Terms for query expansion could be selected because the
predicted score of each document resembles their relevance.
An illustration of how to create an additional MLR model
by incorporating metadata for training is depicted in ﬁgure
3.
Internet
Index 
websites
Search engine
User query
Top-n retrieval 
over scoring 
metrics
Query logs
MLR 
model
Metadata
Re-Rank
MLR 
training
Documents 
with estimated 
relevance
Result 
document
s
MLR 
training
MLR 
model
Fig. 3. Re-ranking search engine results with metadata.
A threshold, generated with scoring metrics (see section
2.3) and similarity functions between query-document pairs
and metadata, can be used to approximate a score corre-
lated to the ranking of each document in the training set.
Relations between so-called document zones such as query,
title, snippet, and Uniform Resource Locator (URL) along
with inter-document similarities can be brought into play
to train the model. The described MLR model can reliably
predict scores which rate each document as relevant or
non-relevant. With knowledge of the relevant texts query
expansion is possible. Even though MLR is also not entirely
robust against query drift it reduces the shortcomings of
other methods because feature vectors can be designed
in a variety of ways. Detailed feature engineering will be
covered in-depth in section 3.5.
The LETOR dataset from Qin et al. [42] can be used
as a referral to rich meta information about corpora and
documents that are used for state-of-the-art evaluation of
new MLR models. Selection methods for features that are
indicative of the relevance of a document are split into
query-independent (static), query-dependent (dynamic) and
query level features [1, chapter 21.2]. Especially many static
features, like the document quality and document PageRank
(weighting of documents in- and out-links), are not all at
our disposal. Despite that, these features are mainly useful
for ranking documents. Even though ranking is closely tied
to relevance, the ranking intention for a commercial search
engine is primarily the quality on the ﬁrst page. After all,
that is what satisﬁes the majority of users. For the task at
hand, a distinction between ﬁrst and second ranked relevant
documents has no advantages. A greater challenge is to ﬁnd
relations in query-document pairs that make it possible to
predict the score.
2.7
Natural Language Processing
To complement the previous section, it is important to
review methods that identify particular features of language
data that are salient for classifying it [43, chapter 6]. Ad hoc
retrieval, document classiﬁcation as well as the previously
presented regression model, rely on terms as features. Given
a large sample of text, typically the most frequent term, of
all unique terms, accounts for twice as many occurrences
compared to the second most frequent term in that sam-
ple. From a statistical point of view, the distribution of
word frequencies is very skewed. Few terms have very
high frequencies (usually treated as stopwords), and many
terms have low frequencies as described in Zipf’s law [44].
Because of the nature of used terms in the query, a lot of doc-
uments will contain date information in a variety of formats.
Tokenizing each format separately would create different
numerical features in the feature vector and thus treated
as low frequent. A noticeable amount of similar language
features, which can be used for evaluating each document’s
relevance, would be disregarded. A solution are temporal
taggers that are researched as a subﬁeld in temporal IR.
SUTime by Chang et al. [45] is one of these tagging libraries
that bring time expressions into a uniﬁed form. Normalizing
temporal terms is necessary to achieve similarity between
tokenized terms in the query and in the matched snippets.
Given a reference date, SUTime is also able to do part of
speech tagging by recognizing “today” or “Christmas” as
temporal expressions. On the other hand, “fall” is treated
as falling when tagged as a verb and as the season autumn
when it is a noun. In addition, exact durations can also be
identiﬁed, which is useful when event’s start and end times
are speciﬁed in the matched snippet.
Word embeddings are another tool to map features of
language to vector representations. Mikolov et al. [46] devel-
oped a word to vector (word2vec) model to infer semantic
distance between two words represented as vectors. In the
formed embedding space “basketball” and “musical” would
have a very different meaning, whereas “football” would be
closely related to “basketball” because they are both ball
sports. The i-th word in a document is represented by an
embedding: wi ∈Rd, a d-dimensional learnt vector. Infer-
ring meaning with simple word stemming is not possible
as in vector space. Learned word representations capture
meaningful syntactic and semantic regularities. As an exam-
==PAGE:7==
MASTER THESIS - JUNE 23, 2017
7
ple Mikolov et al. denote a relation with the focus on singu-
lar and plural expressions as wapple−wapples ≈wcar−wcars,
wfamily −wfamilies ≈wcar −wcars, and so on [47]. In IR
the cosine similarity between two word vectors is a measure
that can indicate how similar terms in a query are compared
to a matched document. In a high-dimensional dataset,
embeddings can also overcome data sparsity, which can
become a problem for a machine learning model when there
are only a few training samples. A semantic relationship
for documents can be inferred by either averaging or tf-
idf weighting of word vectors for all words in a document.
Another technique for unsupervised learning of continuous
representations for larger texts is also known as document
to vector (doc2vec) model.
According to Zipf’s law less frequent terms only make
up a very small percentage in a large corpus. Therefore,
relying solely on the words in the corpus, to generate
word embeddings, might miss out on important relation-
ships between important, less frequent terms. Global vectors
for word representation (GloVe) contains pre-trained word
vectors based on how frequently words co-occur with one
another in a corpus with billions of tokens from Wikipedia
[48]. There are also other datasets where the unsuper-
vised learning algorithm is trained on online news [49].
In each case, co-occurrence statistics are broken down to a
smaller, dense vector per word and can then be treated like
word2vec embeddings. In GloVe Pennington et al. show that
ratios between two word co-occurrence probabilities have
the potential for encoding some form of meaning rather than
their co-occurrence probabilities themselves. They provide
methods to encode this information as vector differences in
the paper.
Another challenge that is related to the ambiguous
queries are the very few words in the query. Keyword ex-
traction methods are a useful principle to gain more words
that group similar content together. When querying for the
same venue on different dates, there will be a lot of common
matches. A query with “madison square garden” often
returns the main homepage (www.thegarden.com). In every
case, the information contained in the above document’s
snippet is not very related to other event contexts besides
the venue. This is also expected to be expressed by the
score associated with this document. Still, more indicative
features for the score help the model to better differentiate.
Keywords are similar to query expansion terms to overcome
the vocabulary mismatch. A high frequency of keywords
extracted across documents is most likely also an expansion
term. Imagine that some documents belonging to Madison
Square Garden mainly contain the keywords “basketball”
and “ice hockey”, then snippets containing these keywords
are probably more relevant. This principle can also be ex-
tended to smaller, more distinct groups like Madison Square
Garden on Sundays. Rapid automatic keyword extraction
(RAKE) is an unsupervised algorithm suited for extracting
the most important keywords and keyword phrases from a
single text, which can be an aggregated collection of doc-
uments [50]. The algorithm gathers the frequency of terms
occurring together in a matrix and outputs weighted multi-
word phrases. After the identiﬁcation of candidate key-
words, three metrics are applied to single words, i.e. word
frequency, word degree and ratio of degree to frequency. The
effects of the metrics are summarized and evaluated in the
paper. Novel about this approach is that it can be applied to
documents of multiple types individually and is extremely
fast and efﬁcient.
2.8
Topic Modeling
A “topic” is simply a statistical distribution of terms over a
ﬁxed vocabulary. An unsupervised topic model can describe
these abstract classes by capturing the terms with the high-
est probability. Latent Dirichlet allocation (LDA) follows this
deﬁnition by viewing each document as a distribution over
latent topics, where each topic is a distribution over terms.
The intuition in LDA is that the topic coverage over all
documents is small and only a small fraction of terms are
frequently used. In practice, topics generated with LDA are
more interpretable because of that intuition.
Higher-level meaning associated with social events can
have indicators for what, when, where, why and who.
We intend to explain these questions with the retrieved
relevant document collection that is capturing the topics.
A trained LDA topic model can apply the same general
procedure that was used to ﬁnd topics to assign them to
every new document. To predict how the topics are related
to the transport demand typically requires a supervised
learning step. LDA learns the topics from a set of tokenized
and vectorized documents ﬁrst. A supervised classiﬁcation
model, e.g. a support vector machine (SVM), follows with
the topic weights as input features. Separating these two
steps and performing them independently suffers from a
poor classiﬁcation performance. SVMs are best suited for
very high-dimensional problems common in text classiﬁca-
tion, where data is not linearly separable but instead by
a hyperplane that maximizes the margin, or gap, between
the classes. On the other hand, LDA reduces the dimension
signiﬁcantly.
Considering the class label already in the training pro-
cess for topic modeling has the advantage that latent topics
are directly tied to the classiﬁcation. As a result, Zhu et al.
proposed MedLDA, a max-margin variant similar to SVMs,
which concurrently integrates supervised topic models.
This approach is driven by three goals in the ensuing
research. First, the comparison of MedLDA performance
between documents retrieved from baseline queries that
use event title and venue name, the best scorings doc-
uments retrieved by multiple queries and documents re-
trieved through expanded queries. In addition, determining
proportions and relative weights per topic in the resolution
of a hotspot. And ﬁnally, the word distributions per topic to
infer interesting topic categories.
The utilization of the max-margin principle in MedLDA
results in topic representations more suitable for the tar-
geted classiﬁcation task. MedLDA yields sharper, sparser
and fast decaying per-class distributions over topics com-
pared to LDA, which results in better discriminative power
of the latent representations, i.e., the topic proportion vector
θd of documents [5, p. 23].
The maximum entropy principle states that, among the
probability distributions which are consistent with the cur-
rent state of knowledge, the one whose entropy is highest
should be chosen [43, chapter 6.2]. A quantitative measure
==PAGE:8==
MASTER THESIS - JUNE 23, 2017
8
of the sparsity or sharpness of the distributions over topics
is the entropy and hence exploited by MedLDA [5, p. 24].
A plate notation for MedLDA is visualized in ﬁgure 4 with
the nomenclature similar to the one used by Li et al. [51] in
table 2.
Fig. 4. Plate diagram of MedLDA.
TABLE 2
MedLDA variable notation.
inputs
K
The total number of topics
N
The total number of words and features in a document
C
The total number of relation types
D
A collection of documents denoted by D = w1, w2, ..., wD
latent variables
α1:K
K-dimensional parameter of a Dirichlet distribution
β1:K
Parameters for K component distribution over the words
θ1:K
K-dimensional parameters of topic distribution variables over a document
η1:C
Parameters for C component distribution over the relation types
zd1:dN
Variables representing a sequence of topics in a speciﬁc document, d
ﬁnite set of
observable variables
wd1:dN
Variables that represent a speciﬁc document, d
y1:C
Variables which represent relation types
The outermost plate in the middle covers variables re-
lated to a speciﬁc document, including each topic distribu-
tion for a document θd and one or more class labels yd. The
step is repeated according to the total number of documents
D. All variables associated with each of the Nd words in
document d are covered by the inner plate. zdn contains
the topic proportions for the n-th word in document d.
The actual word used is wdn. An expectation-maximization
algorithm is used to estimate the best α and β repeatedly
until the process is converging to predict the class using the
inferred distribution ηc. For details about the process see
Zhu et al. [5, section 3.2].
3
METHODOLOGY
Figure 5 and 6 outline depictable elements that summarize
the intended interaction between all used building blocks.
For simplicity reasons, we will refer to this event ranking
framework as “eRank”. eRank is built around the concept
that data aggregated from three inputs, i.e. event, transport
and queried website data, can be used to explain and predict
transport demand in a city for planned events. Individual
parts of this concept are strongly related to the reviewed
methods in the Introduction. Furthermore, eRank is built
to answer the initial research question about how different
retrieval strategies affect the modeled topics that are used to
predict transport demand on associated social events.
eRank operates in two modes, in training mode (ﬁgure
5) it collects all necessary data to train the two outputted
oval shaped machine learning models. The ﬁrst model is
a supervised regression model that can predict a relevance
score on query-document pairs that were fetched from the
search engine. This model has the purpose of returning rel-
evant documents to preform query expansion. The second
model is a supervised MedLDA model that groups the re-
turned documents and hotspot classes together for training
and prediction. The colors from top to bottom indicate the
dependence of individual parts from each other during the
ﬂow from data extraction until hotspot classiﬁcation.
Internet
Aggregation
Hotspot 
analysis1
Event API data 
extractor2
Transport data 
extractor1
Query 
generator3
Query results
Learn to rank5
Re-estimate 
relevance4
Rocchio 
algorithm4
MedLDA6
Trained hotspot 
classifier
Expanded query results
Aggregation
Trained 
relevance score 
regressor
Google
Bing
Event 
Metadata2
Fig. 5. Architecture of training mode for eRank.
In the prediction mode (ﬁgure 6) the ﬁrst model gets
input from new auto-generated queries to predict contin-
uous scores. The scores are used to separate relevant and
non-relevant documents to generate expanded queries with
the Rocchio algorithm. Documents from expanded queries
are then used to predict transport demand with the second
model.
Internet
Aggregation
Query 
generator3
Query results
Re-estimate 
relevance with  
regression model4
Rocchio 
algorithm5
MedLDA6
Hotspot 
classification
Expanded query results
Aggregation
Google
Bing
Fig. 6. Architecture of prediction mode for eRank.
The prediction mode is merely used to indicate a possi-
ble architecture without actual veriﬁcation from new data.
==PAGE:9==
MASTER THESIS - JUNE 23, 2017
9
To answer the initial research question, we only intend to
compare the different retrieval strategies.
The subsequent sections are organized in the same se-
quential order as the ﬂowcharts. Every section’s heading
is annotated with a number that corresponds to the super-
scripted numbers of every process in ﬁgure 5 and 6.
3.1
Data Description and Preparation
Three levels of data are required for this study. The ﬁrst level
consists of spatial and temporal data that indicates transport
demand, i.e. MTA and TLC data. The second level is struc-
tured data from event listing sites, namely Facebook, Time-
outworld, Eventful, Allevents.in and Ticketmaster. Other
services have been explored, but they do not promise his-
torical data which is important during the training mode
of eRank. As a minimum requirement, these events need a
location, a start and end date with time, and a title. It is
beneﬁcial when the event’s location is further speciﬁed by a
venue name rather than just coordinates or address. Further-
more, having a detailed description, event category (e.g.:
music, theater, community, business, nightlife, etc.) and an
attendance count of people are practical for various reasons,
which are further elaborated throughout the thesis. Spatio-
temporal data on both levels ensures that the data can be
merged. Additionally, geo-data pertaining to the Manhattan
area has been fetched, which consists of polygons describing
the borough boundaries of New York City. The last level
of data consists of unstructured text data retrieved through
queries to Internet search engines. The queries are either
generated with the spatio-temporal information or the event
title concatenated with the venue from the events.
3.1.1
Taxi Pickup Data1
Table 3 gives an overview of the used ﬁelds for taxi pickups
from comma-separated values (CSV), additional ﬁelds were
not used. In the full dataset, each row represents one taxi
ride. The timeframe picked for the data extraction was
mainly inﬂuenced by available taxi data. After June 2016
the TLC obfuscated the exact location of the pickups and
dropoffs by only specifying a zone identiﬁcation (ID) which
is not as accurate as GPS coordinates. The move was proba-
bly made to anonymize the data for the passengers.
TABLE 3
TLC data description.
name
description
example
tpep pickup datetime
Date and time of the taxi pickup.
2016-02-25 23:10:50
pickup longitude
Longitude coordinate of the pickup location.
-73.983017
pickup latitude
Latitude coordinate of the pickup location
40.750992
Kernel density estimation (KDE) is used to approximate
the probability density function for taxi pickups in 4-hour
periods. Since the pickups are scattered over the whole
Manhattan area, it is necessary to apply the KDE to each
pair of geo-coordinates on a two-dimensional symmetric
grid. The grid was set to 100 ∗100 points which result
in a space of approximately 93 meters on the longitudinal
axis and 200 meters on the latitudinal axis between each
grid point. Because Manhattan is a long stretched island the
points on the longitudinal axis are denser. An example of
how different KDEs of taxi pickups on the same weekday
and time look like is illustrated in ﬁgure 7.
-3 weeks
Fr, 01.01.2016
-2 weeks
Fr, 08.01.2016
-1 week
Fr, 15.01.2016
+1 week
Fr, 29.01.2016
+2 weeks
Fr, 04.02.2016
+3 weeks
Fr, 11.02.2016
Target day
Fr, 22.01.2016
00:00 - 04:00
Fig. 7. KDEs of taxi pickups several weeks from each other.
Analogous to ﬁgure 7, each KDE has a different distribu-
tion of raw values x. Raw values are individually observed
density estimations on each measured grid point. A statistic
method to standardize all raw values is the z-score z. The
z-score is computed per collection of individual grid values
with µ as their mean and σ as their standard deviation, as
shown in equation 3.
z = x −µ
σ
(3)
Standardization is necessary to compare raw values on
the target day with a usual weekday in the same period. If
one compares the night of New Year’s Eve 2015 to all other
days in the ﬁgure, one will notice an increased amount of
pickups in many areas because many people head home
after the New Year’s celebrations. 99.9% of the signed z
scores are between -3 and 3. A positive z-score indicates
that the raw score is above the mean density, how much it
is above the mean is measured in standard deviations. A
z-score of 2 at one grid point indicates that the taxi pickup
density at this location was 2 standard deviations higher
than the mean. This is measured on the combined set of
the target day and the same preceding and ensuing three
weekdays during the same 4-hour period.
3.1.2
Subway Turnstile Data1
The turnstiles, that the MTA uses count each rider who
enters and exits the subway system. Each row in the CSV
dataset contains the cumulated count in a 4-hour period
for a single turnstile. People have to swipe their ticket at
the turnstile to get into a station but can leave through
alternative exits when leaving. Under these circumstances,
the entry count is more reliable than the exit count. Table 4
summarizes the available data ﬁelds.
The geo-location of each turnstile unit or station is
not available in this dataset and station names are not
unique. Only a concatenation of linename, divison, and
==PAGE:10==
MASTER THESIS - JUNE 23, 2017
10
TABLE 4
MTA data description.
name
description
example
c/a
Control Area
A002
unit
Remote Unit for a station
R051
scp
Subunit Channel Position
02-00-00
station
Represents the station name the device is located at
59 ST
linename
Represents all train lines that can be boarded at this station
NQR456W
division
Represents the Line originally the station belonged
BMT
date
Represents the date (MM-DD-YY)
12/24/2016
time
Represents the time (hh:mm:ss) for a scheduled audit event
03:00:00
entries
The cumulative entry register value for a device
5980509
station can be used as unique ID. Then geo-coordinates
can be extracted from standardized Wikipedia page tem-
plates for each subway station. A few places that could not
be matched were automatically resolved using the Google
Geocoding API or manual tagging.
All entry counts in the dataset are the total counts over
the entire lifetime of a turnstile and also reset sometimes.
Thus some data cleaning is necessary to receive an aggre-
gated entry count that is re-sampled into a common 4-
hour period per station. Opposed to the taxi data, where
a dynamic 4-hour period can be chosen, there are only ﬁxed
interval counts in the MTA data for each day. The z-score
was calculated with equation 3. Raw values x are the entry
counts at one station in the target period. Similar to the TLC
data, the entry count of the target day was standardized in
one collection with the three ensuing and preceding entry
counts at the individual station.
The end of this section concludes the hotspot analysis1
for both transport datasets.
3.1.3
Social Event Data2
Table 5 lists event data that is publicly available from event
listing APIs. Fields that are not available for all providers
are marked with an asterisk. All ﬁelds are self-explanatory
except url which either contains the URL to the event
listing website or an external URL provided by the cre-
ator of an event. Also, note that the ﬁeld attending is
only inferred from a popularity score on Eventful data.
Further normalization steps concern the event category.
Some event providers allow multiple categories and sub-
categories. Therefore, they have been normalized using a
self-deﬁned mapping to Facebook’s categories.
A lot of additional data is gained when querying events
from Facebook’s Graph API. That is largely due to the fact
that one ﬁrst has to search for “Facebook Places” at a speciﬁc
location and after events are retrievable over a place ID. One
cannot specify the time when retrieving events per place ID
and thus gathers all events from 2017 too. The extra data is
still useful because title and description of each event
contain words that can be associated with the given event
categories. Therefore, this labeled extra data can be used for
supervised text classiﬁcation. Categories are similar to high-
level classes that deﬁne each event as “music”, “business”,
“community” or other groups. Building a classiﬁer gives us
the opportunity to predict these classes. This is desirable
because also queried search engine documents consist of
a title and a descriptive snippet. In the prediction mode
of eRank, the relevance for each queried search document
TABLE 5
Event data excerpt.
name
example
sid
facebook 235808830094292
title
ZHU - Neon City Tour: Terminal 5 - New York, N...
venue
TERMINAL 5
description
In an ever shifting social landscape of elusiv...
latitude
40.769615
longitude
-73.992770
start
2016-05-12 21:00:00
end
2016-05-12 23:00:00
url*
https://www.facebook.com/events/235808830094292
attending*
978
category*
MUSIC
address*
610 W 56th St, New York, NY 10019, USA
will be re-estimated with the event metadata4. One of the
attributes that can be compared between the event metadata
and the queried document is the category. This classiﬁcation
approach will be covered in detail in section 3.4.
3.2
Data Merging3
Only events within the duration of the z-score analysis have
been used for the query generation. To further reduce the
number of events a few steps are further explained in this
condensed list:
•
Discard any events without deﬁnite end. Especially
events in the category “nightlife” have open ends
and only specify the start.
•
Discard events over multiple days because the end
does not convey the message of many people leaving
at the same time, e.g. in the case of long conferences
or fairs.
•
Events without description are discarded. Keyword
extraction and category classiﬁcation need a descrip-
tion as input in the steps to follow4,5.
•
Events where the venue is speciﬁed as “online” or
“New York.”
•
Because many different APIs are queried, it was
crucial to ﬁnd duplicates, combine attributes and
prefer entries with higher quality attributes. That
was mainly possible through the intersection iden-
tiﬁcation of similar tokens in title and description.
If there were dates with the same z-scores (same
time and place), the event with the least attributes
or fewer tokens in the description was deleted.
From the transport perspective, a 4-hour grid sample of
processed TLC data is drawn according to the full hour of
the event’s end. In the worst case scenario, the observation
of taxi demand starts 59 minutes before the event ends. An
event was labeled as hotspot if the z-score at the closest grid
point from event latitude and longitude exceeded a value of
2.
For MTA data, merging occurs ﬁrst in the spatial do-
main by identifying the closest subway station. Merging the
temporal domain is tricky because there is a 4-hour span
between each entry count, which results in either capturing
==PAGE:11==
MASTER THESIS - JUNE 23, 2017
11
too few or too many entries. Taking previous and ensuing
intervals results in very long 8 hour spans, which might
capture demands very different from the intended event
end.
In total, over 36 000 registered events were merged to
hotspot classes of both transport sets. The timespan for all
extracted events in Manhattan was adjusted by one month
from February to May 2016 to capture all computable z-
scores. Furthermore, the number of events had to be reduced
to make sure documents can be queried from the search
engines in a reasonable amount of time.
Only events with an attending count over 500 people or
a z-score over 2 in either transport dataset were chosen for
further exploration. Of all 36 000 events, 773 fall into that
category with a slight imbalance of more hotspot events. To
resolve the imbalance, some random events were selected to
arrive at a total number of 858 events. Between these events,
taxi and subway z-scores show no correlation. Among 429
hotspot events, only 1.6% show a z-score value over 2 for
the closest subway station and taxi pickup spot. Among
other things I tried to include the average z-scores over
multiple stations or grid points and also investigated differ-
ent merging strategies for temporal and spatial domain but
without success. One idea was to associate the location of
the maximum z-score to the event location, but this results
in a 7 km average distance between the event and maximum
z-scores inside the Manhattan area. Less than ten events fall
under a maximum of 300 m distance. Why it is difﬁcult, to
associate events with a hotspot location, is illustrated on a
map in appendix ﬁgure C.2.
Furthermore, attendance should indicate the popularity
of most events to some degree, but comparing it to the z-
scores could not lead to any logical conclusions. The only
exception is a weak negative correlation between attending
count and taxi z-score as displayed in appendix C ﬁgure C.1.
This trend between events with low attendance but high z-
score could be problematic because small events might fall
coincidently into a period with high taxi demand. It was
decided that the calculations for subway demand will be
dropped in favor of the taxi data because of the more reliable
z-score calculation for the temporal domain. A resulting
KDE of taxi demand with all events ending at the same time
is shown in ﬁgure 8.
Fig. 8. 4-hour KDE of taxi pickups in Manhattan.
To summarize the statistics for the 858 selected events:
There are 279 taxi pickup hotspots with 504 individual
venues for 121 days of data. Their attributes will be used to
generate queries3 for retrieval of three different document
sets which will be used later for the prediction6 of transport
demand.
3.3
Query Generation for Events3
To predict hotspots on different document sets, we deﬁne
three query sets. Query set 1 are the baseline queries that
contain one query per event. The query is constructed
from the event attributes title and venue. Query set
2 contains three queries per event whose documents are
aggregated. Queries in that group are constructed from the
event attributes start and venue. Queries in the set use
different date formats of the start time and make use of the
phrase syntax mentioned in section 2.4. The last query set
3 contains one query per event. The query will also contain
start and venue attributes. Additionally, two expansion
terms are attached using the Rocchio algorithm with inputs
of relevant documents from query set 2. To restrict results
for all queries in every query set to “New York”, the city’s
name is attached without double quotes to ﬁght ambiguity
in venue names. Non-alphanumeric symbols were removed
from the query because some signs might contain special
meanings that search engines falsely interpret.
All queries in the respective sets are sent through dif-
ferent Searx instances to the web search engines Bing and
Google. An aggregated list of search result from Bing and
Google is returned per query. The number of total docu-
ments per query is intentionally restricted to 50 for set 1 and
3 and 30 for set 2. Up to 90 matches are returned because
query set 2 generates three queries. In section 2.4 it was
elaborated how aggregation of search results over multiple
queries leads to additional coverage of similar search spaces
that knowledge is used to construct the individual query
types in query set 2.
The ﬁrst query type encloses start date and venue in
double quotes, i.e. in phrase syntax, to indicate only exact
matches. The date format that both search services could
match to other formats is YYYY-MM-DD, but there are also
mismatches as shown in appendix C ﬁgure C.3. Query type
1 in query set 2 is the most restrictive query generation
method and only returns 13 results on average. The ensuing
query type 2 keeps the venue in phrase syntax but not
the date. The event start date contains English three-letter
abbreviations for the weekday and month. Lastly, the ﬁnal
query type 3 includes the time in American a.m. (ante
meridiem, before midday) and p.m. (post meridiem, past
midday) format without using the phrase syntax on the
venue.
All attributes returned by Searx are listed in table 6. The
example response is returned by query type 3 (queries
attribute in the table) of query set 2: (Thu May 12, 2016
09:00PM) (TERMINAL 5) (New York). Parentheses are
just included for better visibility of each group and do not
have a special meaning in the query. The spaces between
terms have the same function as a logical “and” operator.
As a unique ID the URL of each document can be used to
aggregate documents and re-calculate the score with equa-
tion 1. Searx returns the parts of a URL already split into
==PAGE:12==
MASTER THESIS - JUNE 23, 2017
12
the domain and other parsed bits like protocol and website
path (parsed_url). All ﬁelds for matched documents are
merged, except for positions and engines which are
aggregated.
TABLE 6
Searx data excerpt of one query result.
name
example
title
ZHU - Tickets - Terminal 5 - New York, NY - May 12th, 2016
url
http://www.terminal5nyc.com/event/1107229-zhu-new-york/
snippet
May 12, 2016 ... With sold out debuts in Los Angeles and New York City [...]
positions
[1]
score
1
engines
[google]
parsed url
[“http”, “www.terminal5nyc.com”, “/event/1107229-zhu-new-york/”]
queries
[3]
3.4
Re-Ranking with Event Metadata4
Re-ranking the documents returned by the search engines
is done with structured event metadata that was described
in section 3.1.3. It is used to determine relevant documents
for query expansion reliably. Furthermore, the inferred rele-
vance score on each document relative to the query can be
used as a training set for a machine-learned ranking (MLR)
model. In the training mode of eRank, every event’s title and
description are compared against the search document’s title
and snippet by matching the predicted event category, ﬁnd-
ing date/time intersections with SUTime, comparing string
similarities over distance functions, and ﬁnding keyword
intersections with RAKE. The last comparison is between
event URL and the search document’s URL. All these indi-
cators for relevance are used to adjust the score of the initial
positional ranking.
For the supervised classiﬁcation of categories, all ex-
tracted event data with a category attached can be used.
When working with text data, cleaning and stemming are
crucial steps to have similar descriptive features for the
classiﬁcation model. Hypertext Markup Language (HTML)
artifacts in event data that some APIs return will be re-
moved. Subsequently, all tokens in each set will be to-
kenized into a matrix of tf-idf features. The tokens will
be assembled in different n-gram ranges which affect the
number of words that one token or feature consists of. The
range between individual words in uni-grams and up to
four-term combinations in four-grams were covered. Little
meaningful information is ignored by removing stopwords
and terms whose document frequency exceeds 50%, e.g.
“new” and “york” which are contained in more than every
second description. Once these steps are done, and all tf-idf
matrices are stacked, a very high-dimensional matrix with
well over 2 million features for over 200 000 events was
assembled.
A stochastic gradient descent (SGD) classiﬁer is trained
on this matrix with event categories encoded as ordinal
numbers. The norm used in the penalization and the spec-
iﬁed loss function result in a supervised linear SVM with
SGD learning, for details refer to Bottou et al. [52]. SGD is
suited for handling sparse data with ease. Empirical studies
from Bottou et al. show that SGD converges after observing
approx. 106 training samples. Therefore, setting the number
of passes over the training to ⌈epochs⌉=
106
n , with n
training samples, is recommended. This model predicts the
correct category in 75% of the cases on 20% of unseen
data that was cut off for testing from all categorized event
data. To predict categories of a retrieved document the
vocabulary of title and snippet, that is overlapping with all
tokens from the event data, is converted into tf-idf matrices.
After, the SGD classiﬁer can predict the category. The score
attribute for the matched document is increased by 2 if both
categories are similar.
Every scenario in which normalized SUTime expressions
match the date, start or end time of the event somewhere in
the snippet or title increases the score by 0.25. A matched
duration between the start and end time of the event raises
the score by 1 because these matches are rare but also a
decent indication of relevance.
String distance measurements return a value between 0
and 1. They are used to identify the similarity between the
two speciﬁed groups. In total four distance algorithms are
used: Levenshtein l, Ratcliff/Obershelp r, Sørensen/Dice
d and Jaccard j. Each score is aggregated for the two
pairs and s is added to the score by calculating s =
2(l+r+d+j)title+(l+r+d+j)desc
2
. The equation is used to give
title attributes more weight. The highest possible score on
complete accordance of all groups is 6.
Finding exactly matching URLs adds 2 to the total
score, whereas only matching the domain name (e.g.: face-
book.com) summates 1.
RAKE keyword intersections are found among all ex-
tracted keywords of both compared texts. Since the keyword
extraction only happens on equally long snippets, there is
no bias towards larger texts. Exact matches increase the
score by 2. Very similar keywords are detected when the
Ratcliff/Obershelp similarity exceeds 0.85, then the total
score increases by 1.
The upper limit to distinguish between relevant and
non-relevant documents was set to a score of 6. In other
scenarios, when more queries are used, this score can be
adjusted accordingly. Of all 858 events, 16% (141) did not
have a single document reaching the upper limit to be
classiﬁed as relevant. 36% (52) of these events were marked
as hotspots, which showcases that many smaller events
might produce a hotspot. In that case, no query expansion
was performed, and the initially retrieved documents were
used for the regression learner5 and topic modeling6.
Every other event with separable relevant and non-
relevant documents got an updated query containing two
expansion terms determined by the Rocchio algorithm in
equation 2. Query type 3 of set 2 was used as initial base
query q0. Tf-idf was applied as weighting scheme with
β = 0.75 and γ = 0.15 for the respective document set. Any
query terms remained untouched and did not contribute to
the weight calculation. If any expansion terms were already
in the query, they were ignored. Terms were not stemmed
but lemmatized with a WordNet lemmatizer. WordNets are
lexical databases that remove inﬂectional endings, based on
syntactic category with a morphology function. 50 docu-
ments were then queried again and used as query set 3
in comparison with the other retrieved sets, see details in
section 4. The unexpanded but re-ranked query-document
==PAGE:13==
MASTER THESIS - JUNE 23, 2017
13
pairs, with numeric scores according to their relevance, will
be the base to train the regression model in the next section.
3.5
Relevance Estimation of Search Results5
Inference of features with strong predictive power and
model ensembling is an essential step for building an ef-
ﬁcient MLR model. In the following the goal is to predict
relevance scores of query-document pairs from query set 2,
which eliminates the need for event data to re-rank docu-
ments as shown in section 3.4. An advantage of this model
is that it does not need to perform faultlessly on lower
ranked documents. In turn, the approximated score for
relevant documents just needs to get over the set threshold.
Instead of supervised regression a classiﬁcation with binary
relevance is a credible alternative but lacks ﬂexibility. Figure
9 illustrates the steps and sub-processes that were used
for predicting relevance scores with ensembled supervised
regression models.
Input
Preprocessing
Feature Extraction
Stacking
query
lowercase
stemming
tokenize 
datetime
max. term 
frequency: 90%
distance (jaccard, dice, etc.), 
between n-grams
counts, e.g.: query length
vector space, various n-grams 
reduced with LSA
intersections, between n-grams
word2vec and doc2vec
similarity, between word vectors
keyword group similarity
title
snippet
positions
domain
engines
queries
lemmatizing
XGBoost
ExtraTrees
GradientBoosting
RandomForest
Fig. 9. Flow of ranking learner.
Input into the model are all ﬁelds returned by the
metasearch engine in referral to table 6. Preprocessing steps
do not differ vastly from already mentioned approaches in
previous sections. For vector space features stemming is
preferred over lemmatizing and in turn embedding vectors
work better with lemmatizing because of the inferred mean-
ing of words from part-of-speech (POS) taggers. Further-
more, the external word vectors are based on counts from
other documents and thus do not use stems as frequently as
the full terms.
In the following paragraphs, only the most important
features are named that showed a real improvement on the
single regression models. Four major groups of features are
indicated by the colors in ﬁgure 9. The ﬁfth group contains
basic features gained directly as numerical or categorical
features from the input. A lot of features are highly inspired
by two predictive modeling competitions regarding search
relevance [53], [54]. Due to time constraints, it was not
possible to further explore sophisticated feature selection
methods. Adding some of the described features does not
always signiﬁcantly improve the performance. Regardless
of that, the workﬂow is a suggestion for the design of an
MLR framework. The performance review is intended as
an orientation and to justify the central concept of using
MLR with query expansion. Predicted relevance scores will
not actively be used in the experiment or for answering the
main research question as previously elaborated. Therefore,
we will only report the most signiﬁcant ﬁndings and present
more detailed explanations in appendix B.
Two feature groups that could not simply be inferred
from the given inputs were word embedding models and
keyword similarities of query groups. Several of the created
features in these groups had strong feature importances of
up to 4% among over 850 selected features.
Word embedding features were separated into three
groups. The ﬁrst is a trained word2vec model on the
tokenized corpus from the query, title, and snippet. Tok-
enized words are also merged to datasets with pre-trained
word embeddings, i.e. GloVe with word vectors trained on
Wikipedia texts and word vectors trained on Google news
texts. In total there are 150 computed features for every
embedding group, further described in appendix B. The
features are for example similarity measures of two word
vectors between query and title or query and snippet. The
relation between every grouped feature and their correlation
to relevance scores is shown in ﬁgure 10.
event
google
wikipedia
Word2Vec embedding feature groups
0.3
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.3
Correlation coefficient
Fig. 10. Correlation coefﬁcients between embedding features and tar-
geted relevance scores.
The ﬁgure shows that there is a higher correlation in the
“event” group which refers to the word2vec model formed
through the used corpus. One explanation for the higher
correlation of event embeddings is that also time expres-
sions, normalized with SUTime, are included in the vector
space. These tokens do not exist in the external datasets. The
trained word2vec model is context-based while the other
pre-trained word vectors were created from a large corpus
based on counts. For that reason, similar contexts in unseen
data are stronger correlating to context-based word vectors.
The second very discriminative feature was derived from
groups of queries by the event venue. All queries have the
intention of gathering information about a particular event
only, but due to the nature of generated queries, a lot of
matches regarding the venue are returned. Standard terms
for venues include e.g. ticket, sale, and hall, in contrast,
events might contain additional terms, e.g. concert, tour,
and artist. Consequently, if the same venue is queried on
different dates, there might be intersections of shared docu-
ments unrelated to the event. Section 2.7 contained exam-
ples related to keyword extraction with RAKE and their
advantages to enrich queries. Precisely, keywords can cap-
ture the differences between two texts, one set of keywords
might relate to venues while others are event related. A
similarity of keywords is measured between the keywords
per venue query group and the matched document. The
==PAGE:14==
MASTER THESIS - JUNE 23, 2017
14
keywords either strongly oppose or agree with each other.
These feature sets that use different similarity measures are
negatively correlated to the relevance score, with a higher
similarity a less relevant match is likely.
Lastly, the goodness of the ﬁt is reviewed. We mainly
focused on predicted scores over 6 on 20% of the labeled
data that was not used for training the models. The coef-
ﬁcient of determination (R-squared) reports around 52-56%
accuracy from the base level models on unseen test data. The
prediction can be improved by 2-3% with the ensembling
technique that takes the predictions of the base level models
as input for the second level model. R-squared is much
higher on documents with high relevance scores, which
is the minority with 5% of all documents in the test set.
Looking at this from an IR perspective the recall of relevant
documents is 80% and the precision 74%.
4
EVALUATION6
To recap, the design of the experiment in this section is
intended to compare three extracted sets of event-related
documents retrieved over different query sets. The inten-
tion is to answer the initial research question: How are
different retrieval strategies affecting the modeled topics
that are used to predict transport demand on associated
social events. For that reason, the inﬂuence of the extracted
features from all document sets on the performance of a
supervised MedLDA classiﬁer is compared.
Feature assembly was done with the 50 highest scoring
documents for each query set. Titles and snippets of each
document returned by the search engine were all aggregated
into a single text of which a bag-of-words (BOW) was built.
One aggregated document set belongs to one event and
is represented by a single BOW matrix. We will refer to
the set of matrices as event documents. As a prerequisite
the text was cleaned with the common pipeline that was
used earlier: Lower case words, tokenize (without SUTime
patterns), keep only alphabetic words, remove stopwords,
discard words with over 90% document frequency, cut short
words with less than three characters and stem all remaining
terms.
Besides text features, the only other inputs to the
MedLDA model are several hyperparameters. The best
combination for all hyperparameters is selected by rec-
ommendation of Borysov et al., K = 10 topics, penalty
terms for misclassiﬁcations α = 0.001/K and l = 10, and
penalty for soft margin slack variables C = 30. Because we
target the comparison of the model’s performance between
different event documents from different query sets we did
not apply k-fold cross validation or tune hyperparameters
during model training. The risk of overﬁtting the model on
the test set because the parameters are tweaked in favor of
one event document set seems reasonably low.
All event documents were sorted to keep them in the
same temporal order since they are not independent and
identically distributed (i.i.d.). The sets for training and
testing were split 4:1 with stratiﬁed k-fold using the same
random state per query set. The folding ensured that the
classes for hotspots and non-hotspots are balanced in train-
ing and test set. The test set’s vocabulary was based on the
training set, new words in the former were discarded. A
synthetic minority over-sampling technique (SMOTE) [55]
has been used because there is a class imbalance with fewer
hotspots instances. That way overﬁtting of MedLDA on the
most popular non-hotspot class was avoided.
To assess the performance of the binary classiﬁcation
one does not to solely rely on the outputted accuracy of
the classiﬁer. Word distributions per topic, βk, can be se-
mantically interpreted along with their assigned η vector
for both classes. Besides accuracy, F1-score and Cohen’s
kappa coefﬁcient κ are contrasted in the evaluation. Sim-
ply interpreting all runs by correctly classiﬁed instances is
not as beneﬁcial because many instances are non-hotspots.
In the validation dataset almost exactly two-thirds of all
classes are non-hotspots which results in 67% accuracy
for an na¨ıve classiﬁer. The F1-score is the more important
measure because it is a weighted average between positive
predictive values (precision) and the fraction of missed
positive instances (recall). Finally, κ is used to measure
how the observed model’s accuracy compares to just ran-
domly guessing the target distribution. The statistic takes
the possibility into account that the agreement ratio between
actual and predicted classes occurred by chance. κ is always
less than or equal to 1, where κ = 1 refers to a perfect
classiﬁcation without a random coincidence while lower
values indicate less agreement between actual and predicted
classes. κ ≤0.2 would respond to a poor agreement.
MedLDA uses different random variables during train-
ing. To ensure prediction stability and generalization 11 con-
secutive simulations for training and testing the model on
the different event documents were run. The average class
predictions of the test set were applied to the above scoring
metrics. The standard deviation σ is given as an additional
indicator for the accuracy between all simulations. The same
random state was used to compare all topic distributions
and each η between the three query sets. Results for another
baseline model were included for better comparability with
MedLDA. The same BOW matrices of event documents
were used to determine topics through LDA. On the second
stage, a C-support vector classiﬁer (SVM) uses ten extracted
topic proportions of the training set with C = 30 to predict
hotspot classes.
5
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
The classiﬁcation metrics for each query set, which are all
based on different retrieval strategies, are shown in table 7.
Just based on correctly classiﬁed instances, the classiﬁcation
of hotspots from documents of expanded queries outper-
forms the other methods. Generally, it can be concluded that
MedLDA is more accurate than the LDA+SVM approach,
when topic models are used for classifying transport de-
mand. Lastly, it is very surprising that topics of aggregated
documents over multiple queries were just as useful as the
baseline queries for predicting hotspots and even identiﬁed
less false positives. Figure C.4 in appendix C shows the exact
distributions of the predicted classes.
To further assess the performance of the different classi-
ﬁcations it helps to understand the topics. Figure 11 shows
some of the most discriminative terms in each topic along
with their assigned η for query set 1 and 3. Query set 2 was
excluded from this ﬁgure because it has many similar topic
==PAGE:15==
MASTER THESIS - JUNE 23, 2017
15
TABLE 7
Comparison of classiﬁcation performance of different query sets.
MedLDA
LDA+SVM
Accuracy
F1-score
κ
σ
Accuracy
F1-score
κ
baseline queries
(set 1)
0.715
0.484
0.296
0.018
0.501
0.525
0.141
multiple queries
(set 2)
0.732
0.5
0.329
0.016
0.512
0.517
0.135
expanded queries
(set 3)
0.756
0.618
0.439
0.029
0.622
0.564
0.265
terms compared to query set 1, which is also the reason why
they perform almost identical.
Fig. 11. Topics for baseline queries with assigned η.
To analyze this further, table 8 shows some regular event
venues with their particular occurrences in the selected
events. According to the this the “Hirschfeld Theater” is a
venue with a lot of taxi demand when a theater performance
ends. Looking at the particular topic distributions, one can
ﬁnd the term ‘Hirschfeld” in topic 10a of query set 1.
η = 12.45 indicates that terms in this topic relate more often
to hotspots than not. Most of the stemmed terms in query
set 1 that appear in the documents can be separated into
abstract classes. They belong either to (i) a venue name, (ii)
an event title containing artist or performance name and
(iii) event categories. Examples of the respective topics are:
(i) “restaurant” in 7a and “gallery” in 10a, (ii) a musician:
“eric prydz” in 2a and a theater performance: “waitress” in
5a and (iii) “music” in 2a and “family” in 6a.
Opposed to query set 1, query set 2 contains mainly
terms related to the venue because all query types in set
2 used it directly from the event data for query generation.
In two out of three cases the venue was even enclosed in
phrase syntax (see section 3.3). The snippet, from which
all documents are constructed, always contains highlighted
keywords related to the query. Thus, the most discrimina-
tive terms extracted by the topic model are more frequently
related to venues. In conclusion, the terms that appear
in query set 1 are spread over more topics, but when
predicting the demand for other non-recurrent events, the
title attributes, e.g. artist names, become irrelevant. Queries
became very verbose and long because of the generation
with the full event title. The new unseen events have in turn
different title attributes that are not well represented in the
learned word distributions for each topic βk.
TABLE 8
Unique event venues and their hotspots.
hotspot counts
total event counts
Central Park
7
20
TERMINAL 5
6
15
SOBs Sounds of Brazil
5
7
Cornelia Street Cafe
4
9
Al Hirschfeld Theatre
4
5
Intrepid Sea Air and Space Museum
4
5
Le Bain at The Standard High Line
4
5
BB King Blues Club and Grill
3
19
City Winery New York
0
24
Madison Square Garden
0
11
Webster Hall
0
11
The topics 10b and 1b stand out as the most dominant
contributors for hotspot classiﬁcation in query set 3. In
referral to topic 1a and table 8, the single terms in “Madison
Square Garden” can also be seen in topic 1b. This previously
mentioned multipurpose arena is quite irrelevant when it
comes to taxi pickups, maybe because of the good infras-
tructure for public transport around it.
For better comparability between the two query sets the
stemmed terms that refer to months, weekdays and their
abbreviations were excluded in ﬁgure 11. Instead, the taxi
wordclouds in ﬁgure 12 show all highest ranked terms in
each extracted topic from documents of query set 3. Larger
terms in the wordcloud have a higher probability in the
particular topic. Topic 2b, for example, shows that the terms
“Friday” and “February” are more indicative of not being a
hotspot event.
Besides the venue, many topics contain time-related
terms that are of course also a result of the date format used
in query set 3 and the extracted snippets highlighting these.
Terms with time expressions seem to be good prediction
indicators in topics, besides solely relying on the venue.
More word variety is also indicated by the size of the BOW
matrix of query set 3 which has 20% more tokens compared
to query set 1. This gets more evident when comparing
topics for “Central Park” where many events and also a
decent amount of hotspots are deﬁned. Topic 9b shows the
two separate terms for “Central Park” together with “walk”.
There are a lot of community events with money fundraisers
in Central Park between March and April, e.g. “AIDS walk”
or “9/11 memorial walk and run”. On the contrary, street
festivals are popular in June. All these terms can be found
in the wordcloud belonging to topic 9b. Comparing the dis-
criminative word “music” with “central” and “park” across
topics 9a, 1a and 9b show the controversiality between the
query sets. While 9b and 9a are in agreement about these
==PAGE:16==
MASTER THESIS - JUNE 23, 2017
16
Fig. 12. Wordclouds of extracted topics for expanded query documents (set 3).
three terms being related to hotspots, 1a completely opposes
it. These correlations between topics are due to the fact that
there are many parks in all of Manhattan and also “central”
could refer to the venue “Grand Central Station” in the
event dataset. Thus, one should not over-interpret the topic
distributions because of the unknown decision boundaries
for all terms of a classiﬁed document.
Another conclusion can be drawn in regards to topic 10b.
It contains the highest amount of time expression while it is
the most representative topic for hotpots. Ranging back to
the fact that there was a weak negative correlation between
attendance and taxi z-scores, as indicated in ﬁgure C.1, there
are potentially very “small” or unpopular events that were
extracted from the large dataset that was at our disposal.
The information on the Web is more sparse about smaller
events because of various reasons, e.g. an event not having a
website with further information. Querying for these small
events might be precise, but the set of available documents
in total is lacking. Query set 3 used the 50 highest ranked
documents after the query expansion regardless of them
being relevant or not. Since a lot of small events are as-
sociated with hotspots, they have in common that many
documents contain time phrases. During the topic modeling
process, these time phrases will stick out and get classiﬁed
as hotspots. This might also be a reason why actual small
events are classiﬁed as a false hotspot. In a real world
environment directing more taxis to areas without hotspots
would be costly for a transport company. Query set 3 has the
highest rate of false positives and also the highest standard
deviation in between runs with different random states.
Furthermore, it is evident that a lacking correlation be-
tween transport demand and events hinders a high per-
formance of the proposed classiﬁer. The problem mainly
emerges because 59% of all venues are unique in the event
data. Venues have the closest relation to the spatial domain
in the transport data. Therefore, the topic terms related to
the venue also represent whole areas with frequent hotspots.
But there could also be other inﬂuencing factors since Man-
hattan is a densely populated area. A solution would be to
get more and higher quality data. For events, this could be
a dataset where the number of people attending an event
==PAGE:17==
MASTER THESIS - JUNE 23, 2017
17
is counted after the event. According to the proportions of
event categories, there was an above average number of
hotspot events in the category “nightlife” with over 30% of
them ending at 4 a.m., which shows that the taxi dataset is
only able to cover a part of the transport demand. Unfortu-
nately, the subway data had to be discarded because of long
entry count intervals. Other transport data for buses or the
popular ride-sharing services like Uber was not available.
These problems are unrelated to the proposed eRank
framework. In its entirety eRank provides suitable concepts
for query generation, search aggregation and query expan-
sion that are technically feasible. Moreover, a proposed
design for a machine-learned ranking (MLR) model can
be effectively trained using annotated metadata according
to the target domain. A study of the limitations of the
prototyped MLR model was not part of this thesis. To be
critical, the most signiﬁcant limitation of the framework is
the access to the search engines. They are tailor-made for
an entirely different user base and have optimized their
services in that regard. Some additional ﬁndings reﬂecting
on speciﬁc parts of the project are summarized in appendix
D.
6
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
In this thesis, a framework was proposed to predict the
dynamics of real-world phenomena, i.e., transport demand
during non-recurrent events, by using information retrieval
from the Web. To justify the design of the framework,
responsible for data gathering, enrichment, and prediction,
different retrieval strategies, i.e. query generation, docu-
ment aggregation and query expansion, were analyzed and
evaluated. The evaluation was done by predicting the de-
mand for taxi pickups after the end of social events in New
York City with a supervised topic modeling classiﬁer, i.e.
MedLDA. Evaluation results show that the query method
that uses query expansion outperforms other methods that
generate queries solely based on structured information
from an event database. Modeled topics from the most
accurate method have a greater variety, and we can relate
their subjects to the predicted taxi demand.
It was found that there are a lot of compromises that
need to be made in real-world applications to correlate data.
Building an infrastructure that relies on commercial search
engines has its shortcomings because of the limited access
to their full search index. Structural data from transport ser-
vices and event listing sites is often not containing enough
reliable information which would be necessary to build links
between the data.
Future work could be done on the evaluation of the
machine-learned ranking model. It is the centerpiece in
the second stage of the proposed framework to determine
relevant topics. Otherwise, it would be difﬁcult to use the
framework for automatic generation of queries. It remained
untested how well the MLR model generalizes to very dif-
ferent queries. Furthermore, it might be a greater challenge
to reliably detect if a generated date and venue pair belongs
to any event because these two attributes are auto-generated
in the second stage of the framework.
Only the most basic form of query expansion was used
to see how it compares to the other strategies. Also, other
techniques that use another weighting method or reiterate
the process of retrieval, evaluation and expansion would be
imaginable.
It was possible to describe modeled topics from event
documents. Nevertheless, an explanatory analysis that in-
vestigates how title and descriptions are generated by search
engines relative to the query would help to create queries
that return more meaningful texts. Additionally, different
ground truths about venues and dates could be input for
the algorithm determining expansion terms, e.g. when the
query contains a date which is a holiday more verbose
queries with more expansion terms might be necessary.
APPENDIX A
RELEVANCE ESTIMATION THROUGH ANNOTATIONS
Relevance is not just a foundational criterion for evaluating
the performance of IR systems. Its estimation can also help
to judge documents further, similar to relevance feedback.
A possible solution to increase retrieval performance is
annotating semantic information to web resources, as noted
earlier in section 2.1. The Semantic Web refers to a set
of standards necessary to exchange and reuse machine-
processable metadata [56]. Extensible Markup Language
(XML) is one among the formal deﬁnitions to give meaning
to web content. Standardized ontologies are created by do-
main experts to describe terms in a domain (e.g. medicine)
and relations among them. An ontology standard model for
reiﬁed events is shown in ﬁgure A.1. All displayed entities
are necessities to deﬁne any event. “Place” and “time” link
to other ontologies that are deﬁned by the World Wide Web
Consortium (W3C). More abstract properties concerning
social events are “factor” and “product.” For a more descrip-
tive meaning think of the product as anything produced by
the event. For example, the event of hitting guitar strings
produces a sound by the instrument. The factor, in this case,
is the guitar. Each event can have sub-events, the previous
example might have a parent event which is a concert. Other
optional properties, not speciﬁed in the ﬁgure, can be literal
factors like temperature.
Fig. A.1. Event ontology model [57].
==PAGE:18==
MASTER THESIS - JUNE 23, 2017
18
Assigning semantic information under this common
structure is formally named “strong semantic techniques”
and is complemented with “weak semantic techniques” [58].
The latter emerged with web 2.0 technologies where users,
rather than professionals, tag content and are empowered
to publish and share it over blogging services and social
media.
Annotations facilitate IR and have been successfully
used with query expansion [59], [60]. The problem sets
in both cited papers differ vastly from our issue because
they measure performance on Text Retrieval Conference
(TREC) collections. In Lin et al. the relevance estimation was
supported by a machine learning algorithm, which learns
to rank a set of expansion terms according to their impact
on the retrieval performance. TREC data has a label for the
judgment of relevance, and it can be locally indexed which
makes running multiple iterations of query expansion with
a lot of terms possible. Unfortunately, fetching public data
does not allow us to stress the search engines with an
immense amount of queries. Another problem with public
data arises because there is no data labeled by humans
(assessors or raters). The results in above papers are better
suited for the application on internal search systems, e.g.
product searches in an e-commerce shop.
APPENDIX B
FEATURE ENGINEERING IN MLR
This section is in referral to the used machine-learned
ranking (MLR) model in ﬁgure 3. Some more detailed steps
about created features that tend to work to predict relevance
scores with regression models are presented.
Basic numerical features are the original positions or
the ID of a query. The ID is important because there are only
three unique query types per event. Frequently occurring
documents can be identiﬁed by assigning each URL an ID.
Furthermore, encoded categorical attributes like the search
engines or domain are useful base estimators.
The main count features are digit counts in the snippet,
the length of characters in a query and counts of unique n-
grams in query and snippet. The background behind count-
ing digits are the SUTime expressions. If many matches
occur on a snippet with many dates, the relevance score
correlates with the frequency of digits. On other performed
measurement methods the performance will be worse.
Character count of queries can indicate more diverse doc-
uments on long queries because more words are matched
on long venue names. Very similar words in a snippet are
an indication that the full text might be more or less relevant
when the venue or date is often matched. Digit and n-gram
counts should also have a feature indicating a ratio to total
characters or n-grams.
To introduce the next feature groups we will refer to
the query as the “observed” ﬁeld, and to snippet and title
as “target” ﬁeld. This notion refers to relational, pairwise
features between various combinations of observed and
target attributes. For some feature groups statistics like max-
imum, mean, median and so on are calculated on double
aggregated lists. This is best explained on an example, a
feature between observed query and targeted title can be:
Compute the cosine similarity between one n-gram in the
query and all other n-grams in the title. Then take the
maximum, mean or another statistic measure out of these
values. This step is repeated for every n-gram in the query.
Finally, from the resulting vector of statistical measures,
another statistical measure is used to generate the single
feature. A feature could be the minimum value of maximum
cosine similarities between one query term and all title
terms.
These n-gram features fall into the group of vector space
features. N-grams are created in the same way as in text clas-
siﬁcation tasks. Important is that the normalized SUTime
fragments are considered as tokens. Truncated SVD is a LSA
method to reduce the dimensionality of the tf-idf matrices.
Besides using LSA matrices from the query as input features
themselves, cosine similarity can be computed between LSA
of observed word n-gram and LSA of target word n-gram.
Distance measurements as features between different n-
grams, as used in the re-ranking process, also increase the
discriminative power. Lastly, intersection counts between
observed and target n-grams can be used as features. Similar
to the unique counts they should get normalized.
Word embedding models are produced by utilizing
word2vec and doc2vec libraries. A word2vec model is
created for each tokenized word across the observed and
targeted vocabulary. Date expressions are normalized with
SUTime. Doc2vec models were trained separately on ob-
served and targeted ﬁelds. GloVe with word vectors trained
on Wikipedia texts and word vectors trained on Google
news texts were used as pre-trained word embeddings. It
is important to use lemmatized words to match pre-trained
vectors in the external datasets. Features are computed as
the cosine similarities between the lists of created word
vectors in observed and target corpora. Other calculations
include ﬁnding the root-mean-square error (RMSE) between
the centroid vector of observed and target. Double aggrega-
tion style features are computed for single words in between
both sets. In ﬁgure 10 the correlation of every of the 150
total features between all embedding groups is displayed.
The correlation coefﬁcient is relative to the given score in
the training dataset.
The last feature group expands observed and target
attributes by the additional use of keyword groups as
described in section 3.5. The three highest scoring key-
word phrases are separately added as observed ﬁelds and
measured against the target of the three highest scoring
keyword phrases per venue group. The keywords for both
groups were extracted with RAKE. To determine venue
keywords, we simply used the ten highest scoring docu-
ments from query type 3 in query set 2 because these very
noisy queries match mainly venue information in the top
ranked documents. If a venue was queried on multiple
dates, the documents per query were aggregated. WordNet
similarities were used to compare observed and target key-
words. For each word in the documents, a set of synsets
is returned. Synsets contain a list of synonyms that share
a common meaning. According to the part of speech for
the word “dog,” it either refers to the animal as noun or
to chasing someone as verb (“to dog”). In that sense, the
similarity between the synsets of “boat” and “ship” are very
close. WordNet similarities for words and their synsets in
observed keyword phrases can be extracted relative to the
==PAGE:19==
MASTER THESIS - JUNE 23, 2017
19
target ﬁelds with the double aggregation method. In total
there are three different similarities: Leacock-Chodorow,
Path, and Wu-Palmer similarity.
The majority of all feature groups are stacked horizon-
tally in a single matrix. Three different ensemble-based
methods for regression were used to generate predictions,
i.e. extra-trees, random forest and gradient boosting. The
only value that was adjusted is the number of estimators in
the models, which are either the number of decision trees
in random forest and extra-trees or the boosting stages to
perform in gradient boosting. The output predictions from
each regressor were then stacked and given to a second level
model, which is also based on gradient boosting and called
eXtreme Gradient Boosting (XGBoost). Stacking the models
is an ensemble technique to use the advantage of different
feature importances in each model. All predictions of the
base regressors are used as input for training the second-
level model. Cross-validation should be used to make sure
that the model generalizes to new data, i.e. does not overﬁt.
APPENDIX C
ADDITIONAL PLOTS
Figure C.1 shows the correlation between events and atten-
dance. The graph shows events selected for query expansion
without eventful data where the attendance is only approx-
imated according to a popularity indicator.
Fig. C.1. Correlation of event attendance and taxi demand.
The KDE for taxi data in ﬁgure C.2 is an enlarged excerpt
of the top event on the left-hand side in plot 8. It shows
an event in a theater on the Columbia University campus.
The big road close by the event splitting both hotspots is
Broadway Street. The map illustrates how problematic it
is to associate the event and hotspot. It is unknown if the
event at Miller Theater, with a capacity of 688 people, is
contributing to taxi pickups away from the main road, or if
the hotspots are unrelated to the event, or if this and other
unofﬁcial events at the university campus contributed to
higher taxi demand than usual.
The misinterpretation of a date query enclosed in phrase
syntax is depicted in ﬁgure C.3.
Figure C.4 contains the predicted classes for each query
set in the MedLDA classiﬁcation.
Fig. C.2. Event in between hotspots.
Fig. C.3. Google mismatches the date in the query.
APPENDIX D
ADDITIONAL OBSERVATIONS
This section summarizes some additional ﬁndings that were
observed while researching.
To extract more text about the event, we tried to crawl
each unique website across all search results. The method
was meant to study the effects of topic modeling with
MedLDA6 and larger texts compared to the snippets. A lot
of pages could be retrieved with the web spider engine
Scrapy that generates concurrent requests to websites and
handles all eventual errors. As an orientation out of over 80
000 queries 81% could be retrieved, and 72% website texts
could be matched to snippets. What could not be scraped
without substantial effort are text documents (e.g.: PDFs)
or page content that is dynamically created with JavaScript.
Only a maximum of 250 characters before and after a match-
ing snippet text that is split between three dots is taken from
retrieved website content. We also ensured that any HTML
markup was completely removed. Nevertheless, there was
no substantial inﬂuence on the prediction performance with
MedLDA measurable for either query set. In conjunction
with topic modeling, it might be the case that most terms are
not very frequent throughout the documents and therefore
not as discriminative in the topic model. Another problem
area is the added computational complexity to extract data,
tokenize signiﬁcantly larger text and train the model on
larger BOW matrices.
Another conclusion we could make is derived from a
==PAGE:20==
MASTER THESIS - JUNE 23, 2017
20
Fig. C.4. Confusion matrices of predicted classes for each query set.
study conducted in 2006 by Spink et al. It revealed that
across search engines only 3.3% of results are actually shared
by Yahoo, and Google out of over 10 000 random user
queries [61]. Almost the same percentage between Google
and Bing could be veriﬁed in 2017. Thus the inﬂuence
of re-ranking aggregated results over search engines with
equation 1 is almost neglectable because there are few
intersections. For shared results over multiple queries, the
percentage rises to 8%. Looking at the total recall the num-
ber of average matches per query is not that high, 15, 20
and 24 results on Google and 10, 19 and 20 on Bing ordered
from the most restricted to the noisiest query. Depending
on these numbers and the ﬁnal number of documents that
are used with MedLDA re-ranking might be inefﬁcient.
Aggregating results itself, however, is proven justiﬁed. With
single queries, a lot less potential matches are ignored.
Extending the same query searches over search engines is
useful to increase the recall of documents that are found by
either search engine. The similarities between original event
description and matched text snippets are an indicator.
GLOSSARY
API
application programming interface. 2, 3, 5,
10, 12
BOW
bag-of-words. 14, 15, 19
CS
Custom Search. 2, 3
CSV
comma-separated values. 9
DBMS
database management system. 1
doc2vec
document to vector. 7, 18
GloVe
global vectors for word representation. 7, 13,
18
HTML
Hypertext Markup Language. 12, 19
ID
identiﬁcation. 9–11, 18
i.i.d.
independent and identically distributed. 14
IR
information retrieval. 1, 2, 4, 6, 7, 14, 17, 18
KDE
kernel density estimation. 9, 11, 19
LCA
local context analysis. 4, 5
LDA
latent Dirichlet allocation. 1, 7, 14, 15, 20
LSA
latent semantic analysis. 4, 18
LSI
latent semantic indexing. 4
MedLDA maximum entropy discriminant LDA. 1, 7, 8,
14, 15, 17, 19, 20
MLR
machine-learned ranking. 5, 6, 12, 13, 17, 18
MTA
Metropolitan Transportation Authority. 2, 9,
10, 21
POI
point of interest. 2
POS
part-of-speech. 13
RAKE
rapid automatic keyword extraction. 7, 12,
13, 18
RMSE
root-mean-square error. 18
SGD
stochastic gradient descent. 12
SMOTE
synthetic minority over-sampling technique.
14
SQL
structured query language. 1
SVD
singular value decomposition. 4, 18
SVM
support vector machine. 7, 12, 14, 15
tf-idf
term frequency-inverse document frequency.
3, 5, 7, 12, 18
TLC
NYC Taxi and Limousine Commission. 2, 9,
10, 21
TREC
Text Retrieval Conference. 18
URL
Uniform Resource Locator. 6, 10–12, 18
W3C
World Wide Web Consortium. 17
word2vec word to vector. 6, 7, 13, 18
XGBoost
eXtreme Gradient Boosting. 19
XML
Extensible Markup Language. 17
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I would like to thank my supervisor Professor Francisco
Camara Pereira for his continuous guidance, feedback, and
support.
REFERENCES
[1]
C. D. Manning, P. Raghavan, and H. Sch¨utze, Introduction to
Information Retrieval.
New York, NY, USA: Cambridge University
Press, 2008. [Online]. Available: https://nlp.stanford.edu/IR-
book/
==PAGE:21==
MASTER THESIS - JUNE 23, 2017
21
[2]
A. Kent, C. Kent, M. Berry, F. Luehrs, and J. Perry, “Machine liter-
ature searching viii. operational criteria for designing information
retrieval systems.” American Documentation, vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 93–
101, 1955.
[3]
S. Borysov, M. Loureno, F. Rodrigues, A. Balatsky, and F. Pereira,
“Using internet search queries to predict human mobility in social
events,” in 2016 IEEE 19th International Conference on Intelligent
Transportation Systems (ITSC), Nov 2016, pp. 1342–1347.
[4]
D. M. Blei, A. Y. Ng, and M. I. Jordan, “Latent dirichlet allocation,”
J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 3, pp. 993–1022, Mar. 2003. [Online].
Available: http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=944919.944937
[5]
J. Zhu, A. Ahmed, and E. P. Xing, “Medlda: Maximum margin
supervised topic models for regression and classiﬁcation,” in
Proceedings of the 26th Annual International Conference on Machine
Learning, ser. ICML ’09.
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2009,
pp. 1257–1264. [Online]. Available: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/
1553374.1553535
[6]
TLC, “Tlc trip record data,” 2017. [Online]. Available: http:
//www.nyc.gov/html/tlc/html/about/trip record data.shtml
[7]
MTA,
“Turnstile
data,”
2017.
[Online].
Available:
http://
web.mta.info/developers/turnstile.html
[8]
B. J. Jansen and S. Y. Rieh, “The seventeen theoretical constructs
of information searching and information retrieval,” Journal
of the American Society for Information Science and Technology,
vol.
61,
no.
8,
pp.
1517–1534,
2010.
[Online].
Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/asi.21358
[9]
X. Shen, B. Tan, and C. Zhai, “Context-sensitive information
retrieval using implicit feedback,” in Proceedings of the 28th
Annual International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and
Development in Information Retrieval, ser. SIGIR ’05.
New York,
NY, USA: ACM, 2005, pp. 43–50. [Online]. Available: http:
//doi.acm.org.proxy.ﬁndit.dtu.dk/10.1145/1076034.1076045
[10] S. Qi, D. Wu, and N. Mamoulis, “Location aware keyword query
suggestion based on document proximity,” in 2016 IEEE 32nd
International Conference on Data Engineering (ICDE), May 2016, pp.
1566–1567.
[11] E.
Amitay,
N.
Har’El,
R.
Sivan,
and
A.
Soffer,
“Web-a-
where: Geotagging web content,” in Proceedings of the 27th
Annual International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and
Development
in
Information
Retrieval,
ser.
SIGIR
’04.
New
York, NY, USA: ACM, 2004, pp. 273–280. [Online]. Available:
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1008992.1009040
[12] A. Badia, J. Ravishankar, and T. Muezzinoglu, “Text extraction of
spatial and temporal information,” in 2007 IEEE Intelligence and
Security Informatics, May 2007, pp. 381–381.
[13] J. Str¨otgen, M. Gertz, and P. Popov, “Extraction and exploration
of spatio-temporal information in documents,” in Proceedings of
the 6th Workshop on Geographic Information Retrieval, ser. GIR
’10.
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2010, pp. 16:1–16:8. [Online].
Available: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1722080.1722101
[14] K. S. Jones, “A statistical interpretation of term speciﬁcity and its
application in retrieval,” Journal of Documentation, vol. 28, pp. 11–
21, 1972.
[15] K. S. Jones and S. E. Robertson, “Relevance weighting of search
terms,” Journal of the American Society for Information Science,
vol. 27, no. 3, pp. 129–146, 1976.
[16] Y.
Lv
and
C.
Zhai,
“Lower-bounding
term
frequency
normalization,” in Proceedings of the 20th ACM International
Conference on Information and Knowledge Management, ser. CIKM
’11.
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2011, pp. 7–16. [Online].
Available: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2063576.2063584
[17] ——, “A comparative study of methods for estimating query
language models with pseudo feedback,” in Proceedings of the
18th ACM Conference on Information and Knowledge Management,
ser. CIKM ’09.
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2009, pp. 1895–1898.
[Online]. Available: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1645953.1646259
[18] V. Lavrenko and W. B. Croft, “Relevance based language
models,” in Proceedings of the 24th Annual International ACM SIGIR
Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval,
ser. SIGIR ’01.
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2001, pp. 120–127.
[Online]. Available: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/383952.383972
[19] N. Abdul-jaleel, J. Allan, W. B. Croft, O. Diaz, L. Larkey, X. Li,
D. Metzler, M. D. Smucker, T. Strohman, H. Turtle, and C. Wade,
“Umass at trec 2004: Notebook,” in In TREC 2004, 2004, pp. 657–
670.
[20] E. Selberg and O. Etzioni, “The metacrawler architecture for
resource aggregation on the web,” IEEE Expert, vol. 12, no. 1, pp.
11–14, Jan 1997.
[21] A. Bah and B. Carterette, Aggregating Results from Multiple Related
Queries to Improve Web Search over Sessions.
Cham: Springer
International Publishing, 2014, pp. 172–183. [Online]. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-12844-3 15
[22] G. W. Furnas, T. K. Landauer, L. M. Gomez, and S. T. Dumais,
“The vocabulary problem in human-system communication,”
Commun. ACM, vol. 30, no. 11, pp. 964–971, Nov. 1987. [Online].
Available: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/32206.32212
[23] R. Navigli, “Word sense disambiguation: A survey,” ACM Comput.
Surv., vol. 41, no. 2, pp. 10:1–10:69, Feb. 2009. [Online]. Available:
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1459352.1459355
[24] S. Deerwester, S. T. Dumais, G. W. Furnas, T. K. Landauer, and
R. Harshman, “Indexing by latent semantic analysis,” Journal of
the American Society for Information Science, vol. 41, no. 6, pp. 391–
407, 1990.
[25] G. Salton and C. Buckley, “Improving retrieval performance by
relevance feedback,” Journal of the American Society for Information
Science, vol. 41, pp. 288–297, 1990.
[26] R. Attar and A. S. Fraenkel, “Local feedback in full-text retrieval
systems,” J. ACM, vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 397–417, Jul. 1977. [Online].
Available: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/322017.322021
[27] H. Cui, J.-R. Wen, J.-Y. Nie, and W.-Y. Ma, “Probabilistic
query expansion using query logs,” in Proceedings of the 11th
International Conference on World Wide Web, ser. WWW ’02.
New
York, NY, USA: ACM, 2002, pp. 325–332. [Online]. Available:
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/511446.511489
[28] R.
Baeza-Yates,
C.
Hurtado,
and
M.
Mendoza,
“Query
recommendation
using
query
logs
in
search
engines,”
in
Proceedings
of
the
2004
International
Conference
on
Current
Trends in Database Technology, ser. EDBT’04.
Berlin, Heidelberg:
Springer-Verlag, 2004, pp. 588–596. [Online]. Available: http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-30192-9 58
[29] C. Buckley, A. Singhal, and M. Mitra, “New retrieval approaches
using smart: Trec 4,” 1995.
[30] A.
Keikha,
F.
Ensan,
and
E.
Bagheri,
“Query
expansion
using pseudo relevance feedback on wikipedia,” Journal of
Intelligent Information Systems, pp. 1–24, 2017. [Online]. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10844-017-0466-3
[31] M. Mitra, A. Singhal, and C. Buckley, “Improving automatic
query expansion,” in Proceedings of the 21st Annual International
ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information
Retrieval, ser. SIGIR ’98.
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 1998,
pp. 206–214. [Online]. Available: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/
290941.290995
[32] C. Buckley, M. Mitra, J. Walz, and C. Cardie, “Using clustering
and superconcepts within smart: Trec 6,” in Sixth Text Retrieval
Conference (trec-6). (nist Sp 500-240).
NIST, 1998, pp. 107–124.
[33] L.
Zighelnic
and
O.
Kurland,
“Query-drift
prevention
for
robust query expansion,” in Proceedings of the 31st Annual
International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development
in
Information
Retrieval,
ser.
SIGIR
’08.
New
York,
NY,
USA:
ACM,
2008,
pp.
825–826.
[Online].
Available:
http:
//doi.acm.org/10.1145/1390334.1390524
[34] J. Xu and W. B. Croft, “Improving the effectiveness of information
retrieval with local context analysis,” ACM Trans. Inf. Syst.,
vol.
18,
no.
1,
pp.
79–112,
Jan.
2000.
[Online].
Available:
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/333135.333138
[35] J. J. Rocchio, “Relevance feedback in information retrieval,” in The
Smart retrieval system - experiments in automatic document processing,
G. Salton, Ed.
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1971, pp. 313–
323.
[36] N. Fuhr, “Probabilistic models in information retrieval,” The Com-
puter Journal, vol. 35, pp. 243–255, 1992.
[37] T.-Y. Liu, “Learning to rank for information retrieval,” Foundations
and Trends in Information Retrieval, vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 225–331, 2009.
[Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1561/1500000016
[38] P.
Li,
C.
J.
Burges,
and
Q.
Wu,
“Learning
to
rank
using
classiﬁcation
and
gradient
boosting,”
in
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 20.
MIT
Press,
Cambridge,
MA,
January
2008.
[Online].
Avail-
able: https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/publication/
learning-to-rank-using-classiﬁcation-and-gradient-boosting/
[39] D. Sculley, “Combined regression and ranking,” in Proceedings
of the 16th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge
Discovery
and
Data
Mining,
ser.
KDD
’10.
New
York,
==PAGE:22==
MASTER THESIS - JUNE 23, 2017
22
NY,
USA:
ACM,
2010,
pp.
979–988.
[Online].
Available:
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1835804.1835928
[40] O. A. S. Ibrahim and D. Landa-Silva, “Es-rank: Evolution
strategy
learning
to
rank
approach,”
in
Proceedings
of
the
Symposium on Applied Computing, ser. SAC ’17.
New York,
NY,
USA:
ACM,
2017,
pp.
944–950.
[Online].
Available:
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/3019612.3019696
[41] T. Joachims, “Optimizing search engines using clickthrough
data,” in Proceedings of the Eighth ACM SIGKDD International
Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, ser. KDD ’02.
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2002, pp. 133–142. [Online]. Available:
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/775047.775067
[42] T.
Qin
and
T.
Liu,
“Introducing
LETOR
4.0
datasets,”
CoRR,
vol.
abs/1306.2597,
2013.
[Online].
Available:
http:
//arxiv.org/abs/1306.2597
[43] S. Bird, E. Klein, and E. Loper, Natural Language Processing with
Python.
O’Reilly Media, 2009.
[44] B. Croft, D. Metzler, and T. Strohman, Search Engines: Information
Retrieval in Practice, 1st ed.
USA: Addison-Wesley Publishing
Company, 2009.
[45] A. X. Chang and C. D. Manning, “Sutime: A library for rec-
ognizing and normalizing time expressions,” in 8th International
Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation, ser. LREC 2012,
2012.
[46] T. Mikolov, I. Sutskever, K. Chen, G. Corrado, and J. Dean,
“Distributed representations of words and phrases and their
compositionality,” in Proceedings of the 26th International Conference
on Neural Information Processing Systems, ser. NIPS’13.
USA:
Curran Associates Inc., 2013, pp. 3111–3119. [Online]. Available:
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=2999792.2999959
[47] T.
Mikolov,
S.
W.-t.
Yih,
and
G.
Zweig,
“Linguistic
regularities
in
continuous
space
word
representations,”
in
Proceedings
of
the
2013
Conference
of
the
North
American
Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human
Language
Technologies
(NAACL-HLT-2013).
Association
for
Computational Linguistics, May 2013. [Online]. Available: https:
//www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/publication/linguistic-
regularities-in-continuous-space-word-representations/
[48] J. Pennington, R. Socher, and C. D. Manning, “Glove: Global
vectors for word representation,” in Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing (EMNLP), 2014, pp. 1532–1543. [Online].
Available: http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/D14-1162
[49] T. Mikolov, I. Sutskever, K. Chen, G. Corrado, and J. Dean,
“Distributed representations of words and phrases and their
compositionality,”
CoRR,
vol.
abs/1310.4546,
2013.
[Online].
Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1310.4546
[50] S. Rose, D. Engel, N. Cramer, and W. Cowley, Automatic
Keyword
Extraction
from
Individual
Documents.
John
Wiley
&
Sons,
Ltd,
2010,
pp.
1–20.
[Online].
Available:
http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1002/9780470689646.ch1
[51] D. LI, S. SOMASUNDARAN, and A. CHAKRABORTY, “Erd-
medlda: Entity relation detection using supervised topic models
with maximum margin learning,” Natural Language Engineering,
vol. 18, no. 2, p. 263289, 2012.
[52] Y. LeCun, L. Bottou, G. B. Orr, and K. R. M¨uller, Efﬁcient BackProp.
Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 1998, pp. 9–50.
[Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/3-540-49430-8 2
[53] K.
Inc.,
“Crowdﬂower
search
results
relevance,”
2015.
[Online]. Available: https://www.kaggle.com/c/crowdﬂower-
search-relevance
[54] ——,
“Crowdﬂower
search
results
relevance,”
2016.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.kaggle.com/c/home-depot-
product-search-relevance
[55] N. V. Chawla, K. W. Bowyer, L. O. Hall, and W. P. Kegelmeyer,
“Smote: Synthetic minority over-sampling technique,” J. Artif. Int.
Res., vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 321–357, Jun. 2002. [Online]. Available:
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1622407.1622416
[56] T. Berners-Lee and J. Hendler, “The semantic web,” Scientiﬁc
American, vol. 284, pp. 34–43, 2001.
[57] Y. Raimond and S. Abdallah, “The event ontology,” 2007. [Online].
Available: http://motools.sourceforge.net/event/event.html
[58] I.
Torre,
“Adaptive
systems
in
the
era
of
the
semantic
and social web, a survey,” User Modeling and User-Adapted
Interaction, vol. 19, no. 5, pp. 433–486, 2009. [Online]. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11257-009-9067-3
[59] Y.
Lin,
H.
Lin,
S.
Jin,
and
Z.
Ye,
“Social
annotation
in
query expansion: A machine learning approach,” in Proceedings
of the 34th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research
and Development in Information Retrieval, ser. SIGIR ’11.
New
York, NY, USA: ACM, 2011, pp. 405–414. [Online]. Available:
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2009916.2009972
[60] C. Biancalana, F. Gasparetti, A. Micarelli, and G. Sansonetti,
“Social semantic query expansion,” ACM Trans. Intell. Syst.
Technol., vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 60:1–60:43, Oct. 2013. [Online]. Available:
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2508037.2508041
[61] A. Spink, B. J. Jansen, C. Blakely, and S. Koshman, “Overlap
among major web search engines,” in Third International Conference
on Information Technology: New Generations (ITNG’06), April 2006,
pp. 370–374.
