==PAGE:1==
Mette L. V. Carstensen
Encoding Models in Auditory fMRI
Master’s Thesis July 2017
==PAGE:2==
Mette L. V. Carstensen
Encoding Models in Auditory fMRI
Master’s Thesis, July 2017
==PAGE:3==
Encoding Models in Auditory fMRI
Author:
Mette L. V. Carstensen
Supervisors:
Jens Hjortkjær
Torsten Dau
Søren Fuglsang
Department of Electrical Engineering
Ørsteds Plads 352, 2800 Lyngby
www.elektro.dtu.dk/cee
Tel: (+45) 45 25 35 00
Fax: (+45) 45 88 61 11
E-mail: cee@elektro.dtu.dk
Release date:
July 1st
Class:
1 (Public)
Edition:
1. edition
Comments:
This report is a part of the requirements to achieve M.Sc.
in
Biomedical Engineering (Cand.polyt) at Technical University of
Denmark. The report represents 30 ECTS points.
Rights:
Mette L. V. Carstensen, 2017
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
PREFACE
This report is part of the requirements to achieve a M.Sc. degree in Biomedical Engineering
(Cand.polyt) at the Technical University of Denmark. The report represents 30 ECTS
points, and the work was carried out between February 1st and July 1st 2017 in the Hearing
Systems research group at DTU Elektro and the Danish Research Centre for Magnetic
Resonance at Hvidovre University Hospital.
I would like to express my gratitude to both research groups for making this project
possible. I have truly enjoyed working on this project, and owe special thanks to my
inspiring supervisors and the stimulating and inclusive atmosphere in both research groups.
I ﬁnd my supervisors’ level of involvement, their academic level, and their general daily
accessibility particularly praiseworthy. The continuous feedback and discussions with them
have been a great source of motivation and inspiration throughout this project.
Finally, I would like to thank my family members for being supportive, not least with child
care during the writing process of this report.
i
==PAGE:6==
ABSTRACT
This study investigates the applicability of encoding models in auditory fMRI and how they
can contribute to explore the auditory brain’s processing of speech sounds. Experimental
data and simulations are used to illuminate what considerations regarding experimental
design and computational methods are necessary for making encoding models applicable
in auditory fMRI. The conducted experiments are centered around speech stimuli in
the form of phonemes and pure-tone stimuli. It is shown that it is possible to build
encoding models that map phonetic features in stimuli onto cortical activity in regions
that are consistent with existing speech processing theories from other studies. A set of
recommendations for the experimental design and computational methods are proposed.
These include recommendations on stimulus design, image acquisition parameters, and
metrics for evaluation of model performance.
ii
==PAGE:7==
ABBREVIATIONS AND SYMBOLS
Abbreviation
Deﬁnition
Description
/Symbol
AU
Arbitrary Units
BOLD
Blood-Oxygenation-Level Dependent
fMRI signal measured, assumed to represent the level of neuronal activity
CV
Consonant-Cowel
DARPA
(US) Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency
Phonetic transcription, where each phoneme of General American
English is represented
ECOG
Electrocrticography
Electrophysiological monitoring where electrodes are placed
directly on the exposed surface of the brain to record electrical activity
from the cerebral cortex, e.g. during surgery of epilepsy patients
EEG
Electroencephalography
Electrophysiological monitoring of brain activity. Typically non-invasive
where electrodes are placed on the scalp
EPI
Echo Planar Imaging
MRI sequence where a 3D volume is represented by several planar
2D image slices
fMRI
Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging
Functional imaging modality using MRI technology to measure brain
activity by detecting changes associated with blood ﬂow
FWHM
Full Width Half Maximum
Metric for characterizing the width of a Gaussian kernel
GLM
General Linear Model
A statistical linear model, incorporating linear regression, ANOVA,
and t-test among others
HG
Heschl’s Gyrus
Also called the transverse temporal gyrus. A structure found in
the primary auditory cortex, buried within the lateral sulcus
HRF
Hemodynamic Response Function
A function that is assumed to account for the temporal delay
and dispersion of local blood oxygenation levels relative to the
onset of an increased demand
IPA
International Phonetic Alphabet
ISI
Interstimulus interval
ITU
International Telecommunication Union
Loudness standard
MPRAGE
Magnetization Prepared Rapid Gradient Echo
MRI sequence designed for rapid acquisition of t1-weighted images
MRI
Magnetic Resonance Imaging
Non-invasive imaging modality using changes in tissue magnetization
to form structural and functional high-resolution 3D images of the tissue
phoneme
The basic sound units that distinguish words in a language
pRF
Population Receptive Field
The summation of receptive ﬁelds for a population of neurons, as
represented by e.g. in a voxel fMRI
RF
Receptive Field
A characterization of the magnitude of the response elicited by a
single neuron when being exposed to diﬀerent stimuli
SNR
Signal-to-noise ratio
SPM
Statistical Parametric Mapping
Widely used toolbox for processing functional images,
building on a GLM framework
STG
Superior Temporal Gyrus
STS
Superior Temporal Sulcus
TE
Echo Time
MRI parameter: Time from the center of the excitation
pulse to the center of the echo
TR
Repetition Time
MRI parameter: Sampling time
β
Regression coeﬃcient matrix in a GLM
µ
pRF center
Center of a pRF when assumed to have a Gaussian shape
σ
pRF width
Standard deviation of a pRF when assumed to have a Gaussian shape
θ
Model parameters (general representation)
In this study, θ may refer to the model coeﬃcients β in the
GLM or µ and σ in the pRF model.
iii
==PAGE:8==
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Preface
i
Abstract
ii
Abbreviations and Symbols
iii
Table of Contents
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Theory
3
2.1
Encoding Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Auditory fMRI . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
Cortical Organization of Speech Processing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
Methods
12
3.1
Parameters to be Investigated . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.2
Subjects and stimuli . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.3
MRI Data Acquisition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.4
Pre-processing of Functional Images
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.5
Model-based Data Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.6
Simulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4
Results
24
4.1
Experimental results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.2
Simulation results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5
Discussion
36
5.1
TR eﬀects and sampling paradigm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.2
Stimulus design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.3
Response type . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.4
Variation vs. repetition in data acquisition
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5.5
Evaluating encoding model performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5.6
Manual inspection of data for artefacts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.7
Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
6
Conclusions
43
6.1
Findings and recommendations on parameter optimization . . . . . . . . . .
44
6.2
Revealing cortical processing of speech features . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
6.3
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
References
47
iv
==PAGE:9==
1
INTRODUCTION
A primary goal of auditory neuroscience is to understand how the auditory brain transforms
acoustic information into meaningful sounds like speech. This project will explore how
encoding models in auditory functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) can contribute
to investigating how the auditory brain processes speech sounds. In fMRI, changes of brain
activity can be measured at a high spatial resolution. This makes fMRI well-suited for
analysing and identifying how diﬀerent regions in the brain respond to diﬀerent stimuli. An
approach is to investigate whether a particular brain region performs a particular stimulus
computation is to test how models of stimulus processing are able to predict the neural
response. Deﬁning such stimulus-response relations is broadly referred to as an encoding
approach.
For encoding models to be successful, they must be both sensitive and speciﬁc. Sensitivity
in this context refers to being able to observe an eﬀect of the stimuli, given the poor
signal-to-noise ratio in fMRI. Speciﬁcity refers to ensuring that the observed eﬀect is
actually caused by the experimental conditions, i.e. diﬀerent experimental conditions cause
diﬀerent observed eﬀects.
In traditional fMRI, researchers typically present the same stimuli many times in order to
maximize sensitivity, whereupon the diﬀerence in eﬀect size of the (relatively few) stimuli is
assessed by drawing statistical inference from the relative magnitudes of model coeﬃcients.
A problem with this method is a poor generalizability to other stimuli. As an alternative
approach, this study will investigate the use of encoding models. Encoding models rely on
presenting a wide range of stimuli and then seek to map the relation between stimuli and
response explicitly. This approach allows computational models of stimulus representations
to be tested against the neural response, and ensures to a greater extend the generalizability
of the results by virtue of the wide range of stimuli applied. In contrast to traditional
fMRI analysis methods, the encoding model’s performance is typically evaluated in terms
of how well the model is able to predict new data, i.e. its predictive power.
In auditory fMRI, encoding models have their origin in tonotopic mapping studies, where
sound frequency is mapped onto diﬀerent cortical regions (Langers et al. [1], Wessinger
et al. [2]). The encoding modelling approach has been cultivated in visual fMRI, where
the approach has shown to be superior to classical fMRI methods in terms of providing
accurate retinotopic ﬁeld maps, using simple models of early visual processing (Dumoulin
and Wandell [3]). While this might suggest that encoding models can also be extended to
investigate more complex auditory coding processes, there are some particular challenges
in the auditory domain. Given a limited amount of scanning data from a given subject,
the encoding models’ emphasis on stimulus variability over stimulus repetition causes
1
==PAGE:10==
1. Introduction
loss of sensitivity. The sensitivity issue is exacerbated in auditory fMRI where sparse
image acquisition is applied to mitigate against the problem of acoustic scanner noise
interfering with the auditory stimuli. Therefore, the sensitivity must be optimized by
adjusting the experimental set-up and analysis approach to an optimum point. While
it has been shown that encoding models can reveal frequency and modulation tuning in
early auditory cortex (Moerel et al. [4], Santoro et al. [5]), they have only to a limited
extent been used to investigate higher-order speech features. Fundamental features of
speech like phonemes (the basic sound units that distinguish words in a language) are
high-dimensional, i.e. a language typically has at least 30-40 basic phonemes. Traditional
fMRI has pointed to ‘phoneme-sensitive’ regions in cortex (Hickok and Poeppel [6]) but
typically by contrasting a few phonemes presented within an experiment. Investigating
the detailed cortical representation of all phonetic variation found in natural speech would
be infeasible with classical fMRI analysis, but is potentially tractable with an encoding
approach. This leads to the following main research questions:
1. How sensitive are encoding models in auditory fMRI, and what are the considerations
for making them sensitive?
2. Are there ways to reveal cortical sensitivity and selectivity to phonetic speech features
via encoding models in fMRI?
The present study investigates the sensitivity of encoding models with two types of stimuli.
First, experiments with pure-tone stimuli are carried out to investigate the sensitivity of
encoding models in a tonotopy context with simple acoustic features. Next, experiments
with phoneme consonant-vowel stimuli are carried out to investigate whether encoding
models can be used to reveal cortical sensitivity to the phonemes. With regard to the
brain’s speech processing to be investigated, it is hypothesised in this study that some brain
areas will be more active when being exposed to speech-based auditory stimuli. This is in
line with previous research (Hickok and Poeppel [6], Mesgarani et al. [7]). A fundamental
hypothesis to be investigated in this study is whether there is spatial topography of
cortical regions selectively responding to individual phonemes analogous to the topographic
spectro-temporal organization that has been shown i the auditory cortex. There may be
distinct areas that are sensitive to distinct phonetic features.
The research questions are investigated in this study by iteratively acquiring fMRI data,
learning about data behaviour, adjusting the experimental paradigms, and acquiring more
data. Since fMRI scanning time is a scarce resource, the data acquisition parameters are
iteratively optimized, and the empirical fMRI data is supplemented with simulated data.
Whereas the classical approach in fMRI relies on acquiring data from many test subjects
and averaging the observed eﬀects over subjects, in the present study we collect large
amounts of fMRI data from few subjects and seek to illuminate aspects of the fundamental
hypotheses and research questions from diﬀerent experimental perspectives. In practice,
this is done by designing experiments and encoding models that are founded on similar
assumptions regarding neuronal response and dissimilar assumptions regarding the applied
stimulus spaces. The investigated stimulus spaces are composed of pure-tone stimuli,
varying over frequencies, and speech-like features, varying over a wide range of phonemes.
Moreover, diﬀerent image acquisition techniques with each their strengths and weaknesses
are employed in parallel.
2
==PAGE:11==
2
THEORY
2.1
Encoding Models
Encoding models are functions that map a stimulus to a neuronal response. The mapping
function can be linear or non-linear. The stimulus-response relation in fMRI is non-linear
but can be simpliﬁed to a linear regression problem by making a proper non-linear trans-
formation of the stimulus representation. This approach is called linearization since it
linearizes the model ﬁtting problem [8]. The transformation requires a priori knowledge
of the non-linear system characteristics, and a commonly used transformation in fMRI is
convolution of the stimulus representation with a hemodynamic response function (HRF) in
the time domain, see Figure 2.1. The HRF accounts for the delay and temporal dispersion
of the measured neuronal response relative to the stimulus event. The measured neuronal
response is delayed and temporally dispersed because of sluggish adaptation of the vascular
oxygen supply system. Besides a HRF convolution, the linearization step may include
additional nonlinear transformations of the input stimuli, motivated by perceptual or
physiological evidence.
Figure 2.1. Hemodynamic response function (HRF). The HRF accounts for the delay and
temporal dispersion of the measured neuronal response relative to the stimulus event.
The measured neuronal response is delayed and temporally dispersed due to a sluggish
adaptation of the vascular oxygen supply system.
Figure 2.2 shows a schematic overview of the elements of an encoding model. This includes
an estimation stimulus (Xest), an estimation response (Yest), a validation stimulus (Xval),
a validation response (Yval), a prior, a model class, and a noise distribution associated
with a loss function (Wu et al. [8]). The estimation stimulus and estimation response are
used to estimate the model parameters, the validation stimulus and validation response
are then used to predict a response from the estimated model and quantify the model’s
prediction accuracy. A prior may be incorporated in the model by adding constrains to the
estimated model parameters, e.g. via regularization (this will not be treated any further
here). The model class reﬂects a set of underlying assumptions about the data. The loss
3
==PAGE:12==
2. Theory
function applied in this study is the commonly used square loss (L2 loss), which assumes
Gaussian noise of the model error.
Encoding model Building blocks
Figure 2.2. Schematic overview of the building blocks of an encoding model. Stimulus and
response signals are divided into estimation and validation sets. An encoding model is
ﬁtted from the estimation sets, and model accuracy is estimated from the validation
set. Linearization of input features is obtained by HRF convolution in this study. A
loss function is deﬁned based on the assumed noise behaviour. This ﬁgure is strongly
inspired from the framework of system identiﬁcation in Wu et al. [8].
In this study, the emphasis will be on model estimation with General Linear Models (GLMs)
and population Receptive Fields (pRFs). Both models employ a linearization step where
a stimulus design matrix X is convolved with a hemodynamic response function (HRF).
This approach to linearizing the problem is common in fMRI (Wu et al. [8], Lindquist et al.
[9], Perrachione and Ghosh [10]), although there remain several nonlinear eﬀects that are
neglected by this approach (e.g. neuronal adaptation eﬀects and a non-trivial relation
between changes in neuronal activity and the shape of the HRF (see Lindquist et al. [9])).
2.1.1
General Linear Model (GLM)
The GLM is a commonly used model in classical fMRI analyses. A GLM can be described
as in Eqn. 2.1, where X is a design matrix (rows represent time samples, columns represent
parameters to be modelled, e.g. diﬀerent stimuli), Y is the response (rows are time samples,
columns represent voxels), and ϵ is a noise term. The classical fMRI GLM approach is
4
==PAGE:13==
2. Theory
to ﬁt a GLM to the entire acquired data set and extract statistical inference from the
ﬁtted model coeﬃcients. The diﬀerence between the classical GLM approach and the
crossvalidated GLM approach applied in this study consists in dividing the dataset into
estimation and validation subsets, and evaluating the ﬁtted model on its predictive power
via the validation data set.
Y = Xβ + ϵ
(2.1)
When the GLM is evaluated on its predictive power as in this study, a regression coeﬃcient
matrix ( ˆβ) is estimated from linking the estimation stimulus Xest with the estimation
response Yest via the normal equations (Eqn. 2.2 - 2.3) [11]. I.e. Xest and Yest denote a
subset of the stimuli and acquired data, used for model estimation.
X′
estYest = X′
estXestβ
(2.2)
ˆβ = (X′
estXest)−1X′
estYest
(2.3)
In classical fMRI analysis, Xest and Yest would comprise the stimulus design and response
of the entire dataset, and statistical inference would now be drawn from analysing the
relative magnitudes of the regression coeﬃcients in ˆβ. The classical statistical analysis of
the magnitude of regression coeﬃcients implies subtracting diﬀerent regression coeﬃcients
from one another, and may therefore be referred to as subtraction-based analysis.
In this study, the model’s validity is in stead tested by evaluating its predictive power.
The estimated regression coeﬃcient matrix is used to predict a validation response from
a validation stimulus design (Eqn. 2.4), and the prediction accuracy of the estimated
model can be calculated as the correlation coeﬃcient (Pearson’s r) or the coeﬃcient of
determination (R2) between the validation response Yval and the predicted response Ypred
(Eqn. 2.5 and 2.6). In these equations, a horizontal bar over a variable denotes the mean of
that variable. The correlation coeﬃcient implicitly scales the compared data series and ﬁts
an oﬀset, making it less sensitive to diﬀerent data scalings. R2 has the strength that it can
be directly interpreted as the percentage of variance in the data explained by the model.
Ypred = Xval ˆβ
(2.4)
r = 1 −
nP
i=1
(Ypred −¯Ypred)(Yval −¯Yval)
s
nP
i=1
(Ypred −¯Ypred)2
s
nP
i=1
(Yval −¯Yval)2
(2.5)
R2 =
nP
i=1
(Yval −Ypred)2
nP
i=1
(Yval −¯Yval)2
(2.6)
5
==PAGE:14==
2. Theory
2.1.2
Population Receptive Fields (pRF)
The population receptive ﬁeld approach builds on receptive ﬁeld (RF) theory, where the
tuning properties of a single sensory neuron is characterized by its RF. This could e.g. be
applied for characterizing an auditory neuron that elicits a strong response when stimulated
with its best frequency and increasingly weaker responses as the stimulation frequency
moves away from its best frequency. This tuning property is well-known in the peripheral
auditory system (e.g. inner hair cells and auditory nerve)[12]. When measuring the tuning
properties of a population of neurons, e.g. with fMRI, superposition of their individual
RFs is assumed, and the summary RF of the neuronal population is called a population
receptive ﬁeld (pRF).
In the present study, pRF models are used to characterize the the BOLD response of
an fMRI voxel via a pRF. The signal in a voxel originates from a population of neurons,
the size of which is determined by the spatial resolution of the fMRI image. The pRF
models applied in the present study do not explicitly sample the temporal dimension of
the pRF as is done in the STRFs, due to the poor temporal resolution in fMRI. Thus, the
temporal dimension of the pRF is here dealt with via the hemodynamic response function,
and the only dimension of the pRF to be ﬁtted is the stimulus dimension. If the stimulus
dimension is frequencies, as for the pure-tone experiments in this study, a stimulus space
can be deﬁned as the space spanned by the stimulus frequencies. This stimulus space can
be generalized to other stimulus dimensions, i.e. multidimensional stimulus spaces and/or
more abstract stimulus dimensions such as phonemes.
The pRF can assume arbitrary shapes, and a Gaussian function (Eqn. 2.7) is a commonly
assumed shape since it has few parameters and allows broad an narrow ﬁlters tuned to
diﬀerent frequencies. In the equation, µ represents the point in stimulus space that evokes
the strongest response (i.e. best-frequency for pure-tone stimuli), and σ represents the
tuning properties of the pRF, i.e. how sensitive the the population is to stimuli other than
µ. A in Eqn. 2.7 is an amplitude parameter to be ﬁtted, and x is the stimulus parameter.
pRF models have their background in retinotopy research, where a stimulus space could
be a 2D visual ﬁeld, and a certain population of neurons would exhibit a strong response
to contrast in a speciﬁc location in the visual ﬁeld and increasingly weaker response as
the location of contrast in the visual ﬁeld moves away from the center location of that
population’s receptive ﬁeld (Kay [13]).
pRFGauss = A · e
(x−µ)2
2σ
(2.7)
An illustration of a pRF in the stimulus- and time dimensions (i.e. a simulated STRF)
is provided i Figure 2.3. This ﬁgure visualizes the main parameters related to the ex-
perimental setup that are to be investigated in this study. As mentioned, the temporal
dimension of the pRF is accounted for via the HRF in the linearization step, as it cannot
be properly sampled with the poor temporal resolution of fMRI. ∆t denotes the magnitude
of the temporal resolution of the pRF and has implications for the data sampling rate
(TR), for the interstimulus interval (ISI), and for the stimulus duration, which must all
be adjusted to accommodate the temporal dimension of the pRFs. Meanwhile, the pRF’s
6
==PAGE:15==
2. Theory
resolution along the stimulus dimension, ∆s, and the resolution of the presented stimulus
space must be aligned so that the presented stimuli span over the whole pRF width while
being presented in steps that allow the width of the pRF to be adequately sampled.
pRF and associated parameters
Figure 2.3. Illustration of two pRFs centered around µ = 8 and µ = 20. The stimulus axis
could be e.g. tone frequency [Hz] in an experiment with pure-tone stimuli. The
pRFs assume a Gaussian shape along the stimulus dimension and a HRF shape along
the time dimension. In fMRI, the temporal dimension of the pRFs is assumed (via
the assumed HRF) rather than ﬁtted, due to the poor time resolution of the data
modality. The intervals marked on the ﬁgure represent important parameters to
account for in the experimental design. The ISI (interstimulus interval) represents
how closely in time diﬀerent stimuli can be presented and depends on the HRF. The
stimulus resolution represents the resolution of the stimulus space, i.e. how close
e.g. the frequencies of presented puretones are from one another. ∆t represents the
temporal resolution of the sampled data (i.e. repetition time (TR)). ∆s represents
the resolution of the pRF along the stimulus dimension (e.g. in [Hz] for puretone
stimuli). It determines how close or far apart stimuli must be to activate the diﬀerent
pRFs.
In this study, the pRF model is implemented by ﬁtting a Gaussian shaped pRF to each
voxel based on the population’s response to the diﬀerent stimuli (via least-squares ﬁtting).
The ﬁtted pRF is then used to predict new data from the validation stimulus designs Xval.
Lastly, the predicted response is evaluated against the validation response Yval as given in
Eqn. 2.5 and 2.6.
Unlike the GLM, a fundamental assumption of the pRF model is a continuous stimulus
space with well-deﬁned metrics of distance between diﬀerent stimuli, e.g. carrier frequency
or spectrotemporal modulation frequency. The classical GLM approach would assume
one best stimulus, (e.g. one frequency that induces the largest neuronal response) for a
7
==PAGE:16==
2. Theory
population of neurons and evaluate the magnitude of the regression coeﬃcient for that
particular frequency. Meanwhile, the pRF model assumes that the neuronal population is
sensitive to a range of stimuli and estimates the most eﬀective ﬁeld location and shape
(Dumoulin and Wandell [3]), i.e. ﬁts the response of the neuronal population to a range
of stimuli. The pRF model’s quantitative assumptions about the stimulus representation
entail a ‘stimulus space’ that can be mapped onto cortical responses. The parametrisation
of the stimulus representation typically entails that fewer parameters need to be ﬁtted
(e.g. 2 parameters for the Gaussian pRF vs. one parameter per stimulus in classical
GLM ﬁtting). Besides the HRF convolution described previously, an additional non-linear
transformation of the stimulus space motivated by physiological or perceptual evidence
may be required to be able to model cortical representation. E.g. for frequency mapping,
perceptual data suggest that the physical signal is a poor representation for cortical pro-
cessing, while a log(frequency) representation is more in line with the cortical representation.
An advantage of the pRF approach is the fact that the model explicitly ﬁts a set of
parameters that are directly associated to the stimulus space, allowing for meaningful in-
terpretation of the model parameters and comparability across data modalities (e.g. single
neuron recordings, electroencephalography (EEG), fMRI)[14]. However, the assumption
of a continuous well-deﬁned stimulus space may not always be applicable. E.g. when
analysing the neuronal responses to phoneme stimuli in the present study, the organization
of the phoneme stimulus space is far from trivial. This stimulus space may be regarded as
completely discrete (complete distinction between diﬀerent phonemes), or a theoretical
continuous stimulus spaces may be constructed by e.g. basing distance between phonemes
on manner of production or perceptual confusion of phonemes. Without having to make
assumptions on the phoneme stimulus space, the phoneme stimulus responses can therefore
be modelled via the cross-validated GLM.
2.2
Auditory fMRI
In this study, fMRI signals are acquired using the BOLD technique (blood-oxygenation-level
dependent), which is the most commonly used fMRI technique. The BOLD signal is an
indirect measure of neuronal activity based on the assumption that increased neuronal
activity leads to increased metabolism, which then leads to locally increased supply of
oxygen delivered by the red blood cells (induced by local vasodilation) [11]. The measured
signal is a change in the magnetization properties due to oxygenation of haemoglobin.
Thus, the measured BOLD response is an indirect measure of neuronal activity, and despite
the high spatial resolution of fMRI, the recorded signal is still a summary signal from a
population of many neurons. Since neurons may exhibit sometimes excitatory responses
and sometimes inhibitory responses, the recorded BOLD signal may even be a summary of
both inhibitory and excitatory activity. However, its is highly plausible that the activity
of neighbouring neurons to a large extent is correlated, justifying the use of their summary
response for analysis of neuronal activation. However, the lack of a direct linear relationship
between neuronal activity and the the magnitude of the BOLD response, and also the
fact that the BOLD signal incorporates no information about the neuronal ﬁring manner
(ﬁring rate etc.), enforces a strict need to exercise caution when drawing inference directly
8
==PAGE:17==
2. Theory
from the magnitude of the BOLD signal.
While auditory fMRI has the beneﬁt of a high spatial resolution (at the expense of low
temporal resolution), it also has several other noticeable strengths and challenges. A
challenge is its susceptibility to artefacts at the presence of motion noise. Since very little
motion can contaminate the data, it can be diﬃcult to make test subjects lie still enough
during image acquisition. Motion correction schemes are available but are far from perfect
in correcting for motion artefacts. Data acquisition time and scanner availability limits
the amount of data that can be acquired. A challenge that is speciﬁcally pronounced in
auditory fMRI is the eﬀect of scanner noise. Noise is inevitably emitted from the MR
scanner when the coils change the magnetic ﬁeld, which has shown to elicit an eﬀect
not only in the auditory cortex, but in the whole brain (Perrachione and Ghosh [10]).
Particularly the neurons in auditory cortex are aﬀected by the scanner noise and exhibit
an increased response due to the scanner noise. The resulting problem is a saturation of
the neuronal response, i.e. a reduced dynamic range available for stimulus-related response.
A method suggested to overcome this challenge is sparse imaging, which is also employed
in this study. Sparse imaging makes use of relatively long repetition times (TR), i.e. low
image sampling frequencies. This allows to have a silent break dedicated for auditory
stimulus presentation before an image is rapidly acquired at the end of each TR period. In
this way, no scanner noise is present while presenting the auditory stimulus. The sparse
sampling technique has been proven to be very eﬀective in auditory fMRI [10], but is at the
expense of acquiring fewer data samples given the same scanning duration. The classical
image acquisition method is continuous scanning, where fMRI images are acquired during
stimulus presentation at a higher sampling rate (shorter TR). This renders more more
data points to analyse at the expense of the eﬀective signal-to-noise ratio (SNR).
2.3
Cortical Organization of Speech Processing
In the present study, processing of speech features are investigated in the form of phonemes.
A phoneme is deﬁned as one of the units of sound that distinguishes one word from another
in a particular language [15]. Phonemes are thus a simple building block of a speech sound,
and may thus be expected to be processed prior to understanding speech.
While encoding models can map the cortical response to simple acoustic features like spectro-
temporal modulations [5], they cannot explain how the acoustic signals are transformed
into higher-level speech features. A study be Mesgarani et al. [7] suggests that processing
of phonemes takes place in the superior temoral gyrus (STG) (see Figure 2.4). This study
shows selectivity to diﬀerent phonetic features via electrocorticography (ECOG) recordings.
It is shown that diﬀerent areas in the STG are sensitive to diﬀerent phonetic features,
since diﬀerent electrodes respond to diﬀerent phonetic features. The phonetic features
investigated here are based on the manner of production of the investigated phonemes
(plosives, fricatives, low back, low front, high front, and nasals). Although the ECOG
modality has higher spatial resolution than the EEG modality, its spatial resolution is still
rather limited. This raises the question whether there is a cortical phoneme representation,
which fMRI encoding models with their high spatial resolution may be able to reveal.
The fMRI encoding models developed in the present study seek to explain the BOLD
9
==PAGE:18==
2. Theory
response in individual voxels and do not incorporate any information regarding the anatom-
ical location of voxels. In order to evaluate the predictive power of encoding models in
voxels with various anatomical locations against current theories on speech processing
organization, a theoretical foundation is needed. Hickok and Poeppel [6] suggest a dual
stream organization where phonetic features of speech are processed in the superior tempo-
ral sulcus (STS) after the sound has undergone spectro-temporal analysis in the superior
temporal gyrus (STG) (see the green and yellow areas in Figure 2.5 for localization). This
is based on a dual-stream theory, where a ventral stream is suggested to process speech
for comprehension, and a dorsal stream is suggested to process speech for articulation,
i.e. speech production. Most relevant to notice for the results of the present study is the
presented dorsal stream, where the spectro-temporal processing in STG and phoneme
processing in STS in the temporal lobe are connected to a sensory-motor interface and
articulatory networks in the parietal lobe. The dual-stream theory is mainly supported by
evidence from various lesion studies, aspects of speech development, neuroimaging, and
linguistic and psycholinguistic experiments.
Throughout this study, the suggestions by Hickok and Poeppel [6], Mesgarani et al. [7] will
found the basic understanding of where functional areas of speech processing are expected
to be observed.
10
==PAGE:19==
2. Theory
Figure 2.4. Mesgarani’s localization of speech sounds. Figure from [7], indicating the the
location of the analysed ECOG electrodes and the t test values when comparing
responses to silence and speech. The analysed area where speech-selective regions are
found is the STG.
Figure 2.5. Hickock and Poeppel’s dual stream model. Figure from [6]. The suggested
cortical organization of speech processing . Phoneme processing is suggested to take
place in the superior temporal gyrus (STS) (yellow area), while spectro-temporal
analysis is suggested to take place in the superior temporal gyrus (STG) (green ares).
11
==PAGE:20==
3
METHODS
3.1
Parameters to be Investigated
Due to the inherently poor signal-to-noise ratio in fMRI, a crucial task is to optimize
image acquisition parameters and stimulus paradigms in terms of allowing sensitivity and
speciﬁcity for encoding modelling. Not least, the contamination of auditory stimuli by
the inevitable MR scanner noise and ways to mitigate against this poses a problem with
many parameters to optimize regarding e.g. design of stimuli, continuous vs. sparse image
acquisition, and inter-stimulus-interval among others. A list of experimental parameters to
optimize is presented in Table 3.1. Assuming that there is some degree of similarity in terms
of topographic organization between the neuronal response to pure-tones in some regions
of auditory cortex and neuronal response to phonemes in other regions, it is hypothesized
that optimization of image acquisition parameters for pure-tone experiments are to some
extend transferable to phoneme experiments. Research in neuronal response to pure-tones
is much more established than that of phoneme stimuli (Thomas et al. [16]), making it
more straight-forward to evaluate the image acquisition parameters within this ﬁeld. It
is not feasible to evaluate all parameters within realistic scanning time. For this reason,
simulations that imitate the behaviour of the empirical data are performed in order to
obtain an overview of the eﬀects and trade-oﬀs between diﬀerent choices of acquisition
parameters.
3.2
Subjects and stimuli
Three healthy subjects participated in this study (age 27, 27, and 41 years, two males and
one female). All stimuli were presented via Sensimetrics MR-compatible headphones. A
description of the stimuli relating to diﬀerent experimental paradigms will follow.
Table 3.1. Experimental and computational parameters to be varied.
Parameter
Explanation
Response type
Responses to high vs. low-level features (tone frequency vs. phonemes)
Stimulus space
Resolution and bandwidth/range of the applied stimulus space
Stimulation duration
How long time to stimulate and how long inter-stimulus-intervals
TR
Scanning sampling time (repetition time)
Scanning duration
Amount of data
Sampling paradigm
Continuous vs. sparse sampling
Data averaging
Averaging several data sets with the same stimuli to improve SNR
Model accuracy metrics
Selecting an appropriate criterion for evaluating model accuracy
12
==PAGE:21==
3. Methods
3.2.1
Phoneme Consonant-vowel Stimuli
The phoneme consonant-vowel stimuli were constructed as randomly paired English conso-
nants and vowels (CVs) from the Articulation Index Corpus [17]. 31 diﬀerent phonemes (19
consonants and 12 vowels) were selected based on the phonemes that have been analysed
in previous phoneme studies (e.g. Mesgarani et al. [7]) due to their frequent occurrence
in the English language. The used phonemes are listed in Figure 3.2 (a), where they are
presented on the y-axis. 215 diﬀerent CV combinations, each pronounced by 20 diﬀer-
ent native English speakers (8 female, 12 male), were included in the stimulus set. A
schematic overview of the stimulus and image acquisition sequence for the applied sparse
sampling paradigm is shown in Figure 3.1. To identify that a BOLD response is related to
phonetic features, the response to acoustic features is required to be dissociated from the
response to the more abstract phonetic features of the stimuli. Within a stimulus block
(see deﬁnition of a stimulus block in Figure 3.1, a CV was therefore presented several times,
pronounced by diﬀerent speakers. This increased the acoustic variation of the phoneme
utterances, leaving the phonetic features as the main constant features over a stimulus
block. Since the auditory cortex with its tonotopic mapping is known to show sensitivity
to frequency, an extra step was made to control the variation of pitch in the stimuli. All
speakers were assigned to one or two pitch groups according to their overall pitch level
(high pitch: all females, low pitch: all males, middle pitch: 3 females with relatively
low pitch and 4 males with relatively high pitch). Within a stimulus block, a CV was
pronounced by diﬀerent speakers from the same pitch group (see pitch design in Figure
3.2 (b) ). By ensuring that all phonemes in the randomized CV combinations were at
some point pronounced by each of the pitch groups and ensuring that all consonants were
consecutively combined with diﬀerent vowels, the neuronal response to consonants, vow-
els, and (coarse) pitch features are subsequently possible to be dissociated from one another.
The speciﬁc presentation design of the CVs was modiﬁed to accommodate the diﬀerent data
acquisition parameters to be investigated as listed in Section 3.3 on page 16. However, the
stimulus block duration was kept around 12-15 seconds, allowing approximately 6-10 CV
utterances within a block, with varying inter-stimulus intervals and stimulus repetitions
depending on the acquisition parameters. To keep the test subject’s attention focused
Figure 3.1. Stimulus and image acquisition sequence for the CV experiment.
The
sparse sampling paradigm is applied, i.e. a stimulus is followed by a silent gap for
image acquisition. A stimulus block covers all consecutive stimuli of the same CV.
The stimulus block duration is kept between 12 and 15 seconds, and thus it may span
over 2-3 TRs, depending on the TR duration.
13
==PAGE:22==
3. Methods
CV design matrix
(a)
Speaker design matrix
(b)
Figure 3.2. Example design matrices for the CV experiment (transposed for presentability). The
time axes indicates the stimulus blocks in which a CV and speaker group is constant
(1-3 TRs depending on the design). White indicates "on", black indicates "oﬀ". (a)
Phonemes to be presented (always 1 consonant and 1 vowel simultaneously). IPA
symbols presented on left vertical axis, and equivalent DARPA letters (used in the
Articulation Index Corpus) presented on right vertical axis. (b) Speakers pronouncing
the phonemes (selected from groups of high pitch (female), low pitch (male), or middle
pitch (combination of relatively low-pitch females and high-pitch men).
on the phonetic content of the stimuli, an oddball task of detecting a phoneme that was
diﬀerent from other phonemes within a block was added. Oddballs were presented in 7%
of the stimulus blocks.
In addition to the described consonant-vowel stimuli, a set of localizer stimuli was con-
structed. The idea of the localizer experiment is to highlight auditory regions in the
images by contrasting the phoneme stimuli against noise stimuli. This approach highlights
the areas that are sensitive to speech in general while sacriﬁcing the selectivity towards
diﬀerent phonemes. The localizer stimuli are composed of three diﬀerent CVs, which are
/ba/, /si/, and /nε/, and spectro-temporally matched noise. Like the other CV-stimuli,
the localizer CVs were presented in blocks of several utterances, pronounced by diﬀerent
speakers. Followed by a block of CVs was a block of noise, see Figure 3.3 for a schematic
overview of the stimulus presentation.
The spectro-temporal content of the noise stimuli was designed to match the spectro-
temporal content of the CV stimuli across an experimental run. The spectro-temporally
matched noise was constructed by calculating the average spectrum of ﬁve diﬀerent ut-
terances of the same CV for each CV in a stimulus block and randomly scrambling its
phase before applying the inverse Fourier transform. Averaging the spectrum across dif-
ferent utterances was necessary to ensure that no phonetic content was left in the noise
stimuli, e.g. formants for vowels. The noise stimuli were now multiplied with the temporal
envelope (absolute Hilbert transform) of their associated CV stimulus block. Further, to
avoid adaptation/expectation eﬀects, the order of the noise stimulus blocks was permuted.
The localizer experiments were used to make rough evaluations of diﬀerent stimulus and
scanning parameters, since they required less scanning time due to the reduced stimulus
14
==PAGE:23==
3. Methods
Figure 3.3. Stimulus and image acquisition sequence for the CV localizer experiment.
A CV stimulus block is followed by a noise stimulus block, where the noise is spectro-
temporally matched to a randomly selected CV stimulus blocks in the experimental
run.
space employed.
3.2.2
Vowel-sweep Stimuli
The vowel-sweep stimuli were designed to accommodate a phase-mapping experimental
paradigm, which is traditionally used in tonotopy [16]. In the phase-mapping method,
a topographic organization of the stimuli is assumed. If this assumption holds, a sweep
through the stimulus space will cause a travelling wave on the corresponding areas on the
cortical surface. Each voxels in cortex is then assigned a phase, representing its selectivity
to one of the applied stimuli. The phase-mapping method has proven to be an eﬀective
method in tonotopy and retinotopy, which has motivated the use of the experimental
paradigm in this experiment.
The following phonetic vowels were used for the vowel-sweep: /i/, /I/, /e/, /ε/, /æ/,
/a/, /
c
/, /∧/, /℧/, /o℧/, and /u/. The phase-mapping method require assumptions
regarding the relative organization of the stimuli, i.e. a stimulus space. For the vowels
in this experiment, a one-dimensional vowel stimulus space was assumed based on the
manner in which the vowels are produced and the location of the sound production in the
mouth. The location of production ranges from front through center to back, whereas
the manner of production ranges from closed to open (Figure 3.4 (b)). The manner and
location of vowel production can be summarized via the International Phonetic Alphabet
(IPA) trapezium [18]. The vowels in this experiment were presented in sequences following
the perimeter of the IPA trapezium as indicated by the red arrows in Figure 3.4 (a), while
the direction and starting point of the sequence change across experiments.
A set of CVs was constructed by combining a randomly chosen consonant with a vowel
in a speciﬁc order according to the vowel sequence. A CV was presented in a block of
four seconds by two speakers (four identical utterances per speaker, random jitter between
utterances, both speakers either male or female). Following a CV was another CV with
the same consonant, and neighbouring vowel according to the assumed vowel space. When
the whole vowel space had been presented, another consonant and other random speakers
15
==PAGE:24==
3. Methods
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.4. Assumed vowel space for the vowel-sweep stimuli. Linguistic theories organize
vowels according to their location and manner of production (front vs. back, open vs.
closed). (a) Vowel diagram indicating the relative location of vowels, inspired from
the standard IPA vowel trapezium [18]. The vowel sweep in this experiment may
start at any vowel and follow either of the two directions indicated by the dashed red
arrows. (b) Illustration of the location and manner of production of vowels. Front
and back refers to whether to vowel is produced in the front of back of the mouth,
and open or close refer to the position of the tongue, being close to the roof of the
mouth or allowing an open cavity. Figure from [19]
were selected for the next vowel sweep.
3.2.3
Pure-Tone Stimuli
Pure-tones with frequencies ranging from 200 to 3500 Hz in 10 steps (log spaced) were
presented in random order. The tones were temporally modulated and normalised for
equal loudness (ITU). The stimulus duration was two times four seconds, i.e. four seconds
of stimulus followed by a two seconds inter-stimulus-interval (ISI) (for sparse image
acquisition), then four seconds of the same stimulus frequency followed by a two seconds
ISI, where after the same sequence was repeated with a diﬀerent stimulus frequency. For
an example of a design matrix, see ﬁgure 3.5. For the continuous sampling paradigm,
equivalent pure-tone bursts were presented in an upward sweep with stimulus durations
of two seconds for each frequency, immediately followed by the next frequency. This 20
seconds low-to-high progression was followed by a 4 seconds silent pause, and this 24 second
cycle was repeated 20 times per 8 min scan run.
3.3
MRI Data Acquisition
Magnetic resonance images were acquired with a 3T Siemens Prisma scanner using a
64-channel head coil. Functional MR images (TR/TE 1722-7000/30 ms, ﬂip angle 90o),
were acquired using a 2D EPI sequence, multiband factor of 2, and prescan normalization
on (correcting for local magnetic ﬁeld inhomogeneities). All images were full-brain, oriented
16
==PAGE:25==
3. Methods
PT design matrix
Figure 3.5. Example design matrix for the sparse pure-tone experiment (transposed for
presentability). White indicates one (i.e. stimulus is on), and black indicates zero
(stimulus is oﬀ). Stimulus frequencies are presented at random order.
parallel to the the Sylvian ﬁssure. A summary of the additional acquisition parameters
relating to the individual experiments is exhibited in Table 3.2. Further, anatomical
t1-weighted images were acquired using an MPRAGE sequence.
3.4
Pre-processing of Functional Images
The functional images were realigned between runs, co-registered to the anatomical t1-
images, motion-corrected, and spatially smoothed using a 3D Gaussian kernel (2-5mm
FWHM), all done via the Statistical Parametric Mapping toolbox (SPM 12) [20]. The ﬁrst
few dummy time-frames acquired before stimulus presentation were discarded to ensure
saturation of t1 eﬀects. Motion-correction was done by estimating translation and rotation
along the three spatial dimensions, and saving the information as six motion coeﬃcients
per acquired time frame. Low-frequency noise caused by drifting of the magnetic ﬁeld
was estimated via a linear combination of 0th to 3rd order polynomials. The estimated
low-frequency noise and motion noise was reduced from the data by ﬁtting a general linear
model (GLM) with the motion coeﬃcients and polynomials as the design regressors and
subtracting the variance explained by these factors from the original data (see Figure 3.6
for an illustrative example).
3.5
Model-based Data Analysis
The acquired data was analysed by ﬁtting an encoding model to each voxel in each dataset.
A schematic overview of the modelling approach is outlined in Figure 3.7, and a more
Table 3.2. Image acquisition parameters. Left-most column indicates names of four diﬀerent
experiments (grouped after sparse and continuous acquisition paradigms).
Runs
Time-frames
TR [ms]
Scan dur.
Fov [mm]
TA [ms]
Slices
Voxel size (*slice
(total)
[min]
thickness) [mm]
Sparse:
Pure-tones
2x2
41 (164)
6000
21
184*192
5.06
60
2.40*2.40 (*2.40)
CV
8
57 (456)
7000
57
175*182
7.14
56
2.28*2.28 (*1.76)
Continuous:
Pure-tones
4
240 (960)
2000
34
222*222
30
1.5*1.5(*1.5)
Vowel Sweep
6
167 (1.002)
1722
35
184*192
60
2.40*2.40 (*2.40)
17
==PAGE:26==
3. Methods
Polynomial regressors
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
time [TR]
-0.4
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
poynomial regressors
0th order
1st order
2nd order
3rd order
(a)
Repositioning regressors
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
time [TR]
-0.2
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
repositioning regressors
X translation
Y translation
Z translation
X rotation
Y rotation
Z rotation
(b)
Polynomial regressors
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
time [TR]
1.53
1.535
1.54
1.545
1.55
1.555
1.56
1.565
1.57
BOLD response
×104
measured response
fitted noise
(c)
Repositioning regressors
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
time [TR]
-150
-100
-50
0
50
100
150
BOLD response
noise reduced response
(d)
Figure 3.6. Preprocessing of data. (a) 0th to 3rd order polynomial regressors used to model the
slow ﬂuctuations i data due to magnetic ﬁeld drifting. (b) Repositioning regressors
estimated in SPM [20]. One regressor for translation and rotation in each three
spatial dimensions. (c) Example of the variance explained by noise regressors in one
voxel’s time series. Noise is calculated by ﬁtting a GLM with the noise regressors. (d)
Preprocessed data for the voxel shown in (d) after subtracting the estimated noise.
detailed explanation will follow here. Figure 3.7 is closely related to Figure 2.2 in Section
2.1.1, while Figure 3.7 is more speciﬁc to the actually applied approach and incorporates
extra information on how model accuracy is evaluated.
The CV-stimuli were based on a discrete stimulus space with no well-deﬁned proximity
metric between the diﬀerent stimuli. For this reason, the data from the CV-experiment was
ﬁtted with a cross-validated GLM as described in Section 2.1.1. The pure-tone stimuli and
the vowel-sweep stimuli were based on inherent assumptions regarding proximity of the
diﬀerent stimuli (frequency [Hz] for the pure-tone stimuli, and a more abstract measure of
proximity based on manner and location of vowel production for the vowel-sweep stimuli),
allowing to ﬁt a pRF model for these data sets. Prior to ﬁtting the encoding models, the
regression proplem was linearized by convolving the design matrix X with a canonical
(standardly assumed) hemodynamic response function provided by the SPM toolbox [20],
as demonstrated in Figure 3.8. This approach to linearizing the problem in the temporal
dimension is common in fMRI (Wu et al. [8], Lindquist et al. [9], Perrachione and Ghosh
18
==PAGE:27==
3. Methods
Modelling approach
Figure 3.7. Schematic overview of the the applied modelling approach. A lineraized model was
estimated from the estimation data set via least-squares regression. The estimated
model coeﬃcients were used to predict the validation response from the validation
stimuli, and a prediction accuracy was calculated based on the predicted response and
validation response. In parallel, an onset-explained model accuracy was estimated by
permuting the estimated model coeﬃcients prior to predicting the validation response.
This represents the the model accuracy that can be explained merely from knowing
the onsets of stimuli and from the model’s free parameters. The ﬁnal model accuracy
is the diﬀerence between the initial model accuracy and the model accuracy explained
by the permuted model. This ﬁgure is strongly inspired from the framework of system
identiﬁcation in Wu et al. [8].
19
==PAGE:28==
3. Methods
[10]). Task eﬀects were accounted for by deﬁning a separate task regressor, indicating the
onsets of oddball tasks.
Model estimation and prediction was performed by leave-one-out cross-validation, where
one run in a data set was left out during the estimation of the model and used for estimation
of the prediction accuracy. Model accuracy was quantiﬁed as the correlation (Pearson’s r)
between the validation run and the associated predicted data for each voxel (see Eqn. 2.5
on page 5 for details). This resulted in N 3D maps of model accuracy estimation, where
N is the number of validation data sets. To get the overall performance of the models, the
N model accuracy maps were averaged, resulting in a single 3D map of correlation values
for each modelling paradigm. The anatomical areas where the analysed voxels have high
correlation thus represent a high model predictability in these areas, indicating sensitivity
to the features of the model’s design matrix.
In order to evaluate the model prediction accuracies, a permutation test was carried out.
A permutation scheme was designed to account for the fact that voxels can be sensitive to
sound in general without being speciﬁcally selective towards the stimulus type of interest,
i.e. phonemes or frequencies. This was done by the following procedure, which is also
depicted in Figure 3.7. After the model was estimated from the estimation data, the
model coeﬃcients were randomly permuted before the validation data was predicted. The
permuted model thus contained true information about stimulus onsets but erroneous
information about which of the stimuli were presented at the given onset times. Reaching
the same prediction accuracy with the permuted model as reached with the truly estimated
HRF convolution
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
time [sec]
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
HRF
sampled HRF
binary stimulus
linearized stimulus
(a)
Design matrix
(b)
Figure 3.8. Convolution of design matrix with a HRF. (a) The applied HRF (blue), a
binary stimulus (red), and a stimulus resulting from the convolution of the two (yellow).
The HRF is convolved with the binary stimulus at a high temporal resolution, and
the resulting convolved stimulus is then downsampled according to the used TR (TR
of 7 seconds is indicated by black crosses on the HRF). The convolved stimulus is
delayed and dispersed in time relative to the binary stimulus. (b) Convolution of the
whole design matrix: All stimuli in the convolved matrix (bottom) are delayed and
dispersed i time relative to the original binary design matrix (top).
20
==PAGE:29==
3. Methods
model would indicate that all the variance in data can be explained merely by the stimulus
onset times and the model’s free parameters, and thus devalue the eﬀect of phoneme
or frequency selectivity. To obtain an estimate of the general stimulus onset eﬀect and
not just for one speciﬁc permutation, the permutation test was repeated 10 times for
each validation set (i.e. 920 times for the 92-fold cross-validation scheme), and the onset
prediction accuracy was calculated as the mean prediction accuracy of all permutations.
The permutation test was done for each of the validation sets in the leave-one-out cross
validation. This method for correction of onset eﬀects was chosen based on simulation
results, where also another permutation approach was investigated (see Section 3.6). While
it is not possible to know which permutation test approach yields model accuracy metrics
that are closest to the true parameter estimation in empirical data sets, the simulation
context oﬀers the special quality of enabling direct evaluation of model accuracy metrics
against ground-truth parameters estimation errors.
3.6
Simulations
Simulations were carried out as a supplement to the empirical data in order to allow
systematic evaluation of the experimental parameters and metrics of model accuracy, given
known pRF characteristics and assumptions about noise conditions. The simulations were
performed in Matlab 2015b. Receptive ﬁelds for three diﬀerent groups of voxels were
deﬁned. Two groups were assigned a Gaussian shaped pRF centered around 2 and 5
[arbitrary units (AU)], respectively. The last group was deﬁned to be noise voxels, i.e.
not responding to stimuli at all. The pRFs of the signal voxels were further assigned a
standard deviation, which was systematically varied for investigation of data behaviour,
while the centering of the pRFs was kept constant throughout the simulations.
When generating the simulated data, a stimulus design matrix was constructed from
conditions similar to the stimulus conditions in the fMRI experiments. The simulation
stimulus space spanned over stimuli from 1 through 10 [AU], and the applied simulation
stimuli assumed integer values of the stimulus space. The units of the stimulus space
can represent e.g. frequency or an abstract unit in an assumed phonetic space. The
neuronal response of all voxels was simulated by ﬁrst convolving the simulation design
matrix with a canonical hemodynamic response function equivalent to the one used in the
analysis of the empirical data, and next computing the magnitude of the individual pRF
responses for the signal voxels. The responses were computed at a relatively high temporal
resolution of 10 Hz (relative to the the MRI time resolution of approximately 0.15-0.60
Hz). An additive ﬂicker noise (1/f) was superimposed on the calculated response at a
level given by an adjustable noise level parameter. The response of the noise voxels purely
consisted of the ﬂicker noise. The simulated voxel responses were now down sampled to
a time resolution given by the simulated repetition time (TR). A summary of the sim-
ulation parameters to be additionally deﬁned and how they were varied is given in Table 3.3.
The simulated fMRI data were high-pass ﬁltered in the same way as the empirical fMRI
data by ﬁtting a GLM with polynomial regressors (0th to 3rd order) and subtracting the
resulting predicted noise. The noise reduced simulation data were analysed by ﬁtting
21
==PAGE:30==
3. Methods
Table 3.3. Simulation parameters and how they are varied. Parameters are grouped after their
aﬃliation to either the intrinsic data behaviour (covering neuronal and noise behaviour),
experimental parameters (covering stimulus and scanning parameters), and model
accuracy metrics (covering diﬀerent permutation correction schemes).
Parameter
Explanation
Investigated range
Intrinsic data parameters:
pRF width
Standard deviation of the Gaussian receptive ﬁeld
[0.05:1000]
noise level
Amplitude of noise (relative to signal amplitude of 1)
[0:10]
Experimental parameters:
Nruns
Number of data acquisition runs
[2:30]
TR
Scanning sampling time (repetition time)
{6, 7, 8}
N TR
Number of time-frames (samples) in a run
[60:180]
N silent TRs
Number of silent TRs between stimuli
[0:1]
Nmeans
Number of repeated runs with identical stimuli
[1:2]
Model accuracy metrics:
un-corrected
Un-corrected prediction accuracy
permutation: design
Correcting prediction accuracy for
accuracy explained by a permuted validation design
permutation: model parameters
Correcting prediction accuracy for
accuracy explained by permuted model parameters
a Gaussian pRF encoding model to each voxel (seeded with RF µ values ranging from
1 through 10 in integer steps and σ values ranging from 0.05 through 50 in 12 steps,
logarithmically spaced). As with the empirical data, the encoding models were ﬁtted
to various divisions of data into estimation and validation sets via leave-one-out cross
validation, and model accuracy was calculated as the mean correlation coeﬃcient (Pearson’s
r) across predictions (Eqn. 2.5 on page 5). Analogous to the empirical data analysis, the
model accuracy was corrected for onset responses. This was performed via two diﬀerent
methods for explicit comparability of the two metrics. The ﬁrst method is permuting the
model coeﬃcients of the estimated model before predicting the validation response, and
the second method is keeping the estimated model coeﬃcients ﬁxed and permuting the
validation design matrix prior to prediction the validation response. The calculated model
prediction accuracies (prior and post permutation correction) were plotted for each voxel
for inspection of tendencies in signal voxels vs. noise voxels. i.e. separability between the
two classes of voxels.
The degree of separability between the two voxel classes (voxel classes referring to noise
voxels and signal voxels) was summarized for comparability across simulation conditions
by calculating the mean and standard deviation of permutation corrected model accuracy
across all voxels in each voxel class. Now, the separability of the two accuracy distributions
(i.e. for signal voxels vs. noise voxels) represents how easily the stimulus sensitive voxels
would be distinguishable from noise voxels in an empirical dataset where the voxel classes
are unknown. In the simulation context, we can further add the ground truth information
we have about the error of the estimated parameters to investigate how this correlates
with the permutation corrected accuracy metrics.
From here, the simulation parameters were manipulated in order to 1: Imitate the ten-
dencies seen in the empirical data until now, and 2: Investigate how the diﬀerent image
acquisition parameters contribute to solving the problem of correctly distinguishing stimu-
22
==PAGE:31==
3. Methods
lus sensitive voxels from noise voxels under poor SNR conditions. This was done by ﬁrst
ﬁtting the parameters relating to data behavior (pRF width and noise level) to make the
tendencies in the model accuracy maps match the tendencies seen in the model accuracy
maps of of the empirical data. Secondly by systematically investigating the eﬀects of
increasing the amount of data and tuning the diﬀerent image acquisition parameters.
Table 3.3 lists the simulation parameters that were investigated. Most of them are self
explanatory, and a few of them will be further elaborated on in the following.
The N silent TRs parameter represents the temporal resolution of the stimuli in the sparse
sampling paradigm, i.e. whether to apply stimuli before each acquired time-frame or to
acquire an extra time-frame after each stimulus block before a new stimulus i applied (see
Figure 3.9). Nmeans is the number of averaged time series. For Nmeans=2, two data sets
are acquired with exactly the same stimuli, and then averaged. Averaging two datasets
improves the SNR at the cost of variability in data (the scanning time could alternatively
have been used for acquiring more runs with diﬀerent stimuli).
Figure 3.9. The simulation parameter N silent TRs. A long interstimulus interval (ISI)
can be obtained by introducing a silent TR between two stimulus blocks. S1 and S2
desnote two diﬀerent stimuli.
23
==PAGE:32==
4
RESULTS
4.1
Experimental results
This section will present the experimental results of the three diﬀerent experiments described
in the Methods section. These are the consonant-vowel experiment in Section 4.1.1, the
vowel sweep in Section 4.1.2, and the pure-tone experiment in Section 4.1.3. If nothing
else is speciﬁed, the displayed model accuracies are correlation coeﬃcients (Pearson’s r)
multiplied by 100.
4.1.1
Consonant-vowels
When inspecting the results, both model sensitivity and speciﬁcity should be noticed.
I.e. a good model should demonstrate a high accuracy in the areas that are expected to
be related to speech processing and a low accuracy in other areas. As outlined in the
Theory section (Section 2.3 on page 9), the areas that are expected to process speech
are the STS and STG in the temporal lobe and the articulatory networks in the frontal lobe.
Figure 4.1 shows the model accuracy maps of a GLM encoding model ﬁtted to the localizer
data with two diﬀerent TRs (TR=4.7s and TR=7s), i.e. the same stimulus paradigm but
changing the amounts of samples collected by 1/3. Although less samples are acquired in
the TR=7 paradigm, the TR=7 data appears to allow a slightly higher model sensitivity
than the other. Based on this experiment and other experiments with varying TRs, a TR
of 7 seconds was selected for the further CV experiments.
Figure 4.2 (a) shows the prediction accuracy of a GLM encoding model ﬁtted to the CV
stimuli. There are responses in the regions that are expected to process speech, i.e. in
the superior temporal gyrus (STG) and superior temporal sulcus (STS) in the temporal
lobe, and also in the sensory-motor interface and articulatory networks as suggested by
Hickok and Poeppel [6] (presented in this study in Figure 2.5 on page 11). However, when
inspecting the time series of an individual voxel with a high model accuracy, an unexpected
pattern in the data appears (Figure 4.2 (b)). The voxel intensities in the signal voxels
(voxels with high model accuracy) consistently has a negative peak at the beginning of
each session. This eﬀect, localized to the auditory cortex, is not explained by the currently
investigated hypotheses, and in order to prevent the encoding models from being biased
by the negative peaks ununderstood peaks, the ﬁrst data point of each session is left out
in the following results.
Figure 4.3 shows the model accuracies of four diﬀerent encoding models. The classic GLM
with no validation has high prediction accuracy in auditory cortex and STG as suspected
24
==PAGE:33==
4. Results
Localizer, TR=4.7sec
Localizer, TR=7sec
Figure 4.1. Localizer model accuracies for two diﬀerent repetition times (TRs) TR=7 seconds
appears to allow a slightly higher model accuracy. The same slices are displayed for
both conditions, and both data sets are noise reduced with GLM denoise (Kay et al.
[21]).
Model prediction accuracy
(a)
Data time series
(b)
Figure 4.2. (a) Model prediction accuracy for the CV model, calculated as an average of
92 validations and corrected for onset-eﬀects. The model appears quite sensitive
and speciﬁc to the speech related regions (STS, STG, sensorimotor interface and
articulatory networks).
However, visual inspection of the ﬁtted time series of
individual voxels reveal and unexpected pattern (right). (b) Time series of ﬁve
runs concatenated runs for two individual voxels (beginning of runs marked by dashed
vertical lines).
Comparing the measured signal of the signal voxel (high model
prediction accuracy) with that of the noise voxel (low model prediction accuracy)
reveals a pronounced negative peak in the measured time series in the beginning of
all runs. The magnitude of these (unexpected) peaks make them a main driver of
the model.
25
==PAGE:34==
4. Results
but also has spurious high accuracies in voxels throughout the brain. This suggests over-
ﬁtting, i.e. that the model without validation is too ﬂexible allowing it to predict based
on noise. Increasing the amount of validations from zero to 8 and 92 results in increasing
model speciﬁcity. Introducing permutation tests for correction of prediction accuracies
(Figure 4.3 (d)) does not appear to alter the results signiﬁcantly. Figure 4.4 provides
a summary of model accuracies within the auditory regions of the models presented in
Figures 4.2 and 4.3. The accuracy distributions show that increasing speciﬁcity comes
together with reduced sensitivity.
Figure 4.5 (a) shows an estimated map of local phoneme selectivity. The phoneme selectiv-
ity map is constructed by assigning the highest model coeﬃcient (from the model with
92 validations) to all voxels with high prediction accuracy. Areas of contiguous voxels
that appear to have similar phoneme selectivity are observed. Figure 4.5 (b) summarizes
the selectivity of all voxels in (a) via a histogram. The histogram indicates that some
phonemes appear to score the highest model coeﬃcients more frequently than others.
Figure 4.6 shows the relative locations of pitch selective areas and phoneme selective
areas. Pitch sensitivity is calculated as the diﬀerence in prediction accuracy of a model
incorporating both phonetic and pitch information and a model incorporating only phonetic
information. Here, the pitch information consists in which group of speakers is pronouncing
the CVs, i.e. low, high, or midrange pitch. The phoneme and pitch selective areas are
clearly separated from one another, indicating that the encoding models obtain suﬃcient
speciﬁcity to detect speech and pitch eﬀects in the stimulus set.
26
==PAGE:35==
4. Results
Model accuracies
(A) Classic GLM (no validation)
(B) 8 validations
(C) 92 validations
(D) Onset-corrected
(92 validations)
Figure 4.3. Model accuracy of GLM encoding models with increasing amounts of validations
and onset correction. Blue crosses in the ﬁrst plot indicate the location of the slices
(identical for all the presented models). Classic GLM: A model is ﬁtted to the entire
dataset (without validation), resulting in a highly sensitive but not very speciﬁc
model. When validation is introduced (models B through D), it is seen that increasing
amount of validations makes the models less sensitive in general but more speciﬁc
to speech-related regions, i.e. more selective. Introducing correction for onsets (D)
further reduces some cortical eﬀects in the frontal lobe while introducing a bit of
noise in the central regions. Units are correlation coeﬃcients multiplied by 100.
27
==PAGE:36==
4. Results
Summary CV of model accuracy
all data points
classic GLM
8 validations
92 validations
onset-corrected
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
model accuracies within auditory regions
Voxels above threshold:
785
1085
548
324
334
model accuracy
threshold
Figure 4.4. The accuracies of the diﬀerent CV models presented in Figures 4.2 and 4.3 are
summarized by their mean values and standard deviations within the auditory regions
along with a measure of how many voxels within the auditory regions are above
an accuracy threshold of 15. The summary plot shows that increasing the amount
of validations results in decreased model sensitivity and increased model speciﬁcity.
The classic GLM, which doesn’t make use of model validation at all, has a very
high sensitivity, but it is not very speciﬁc to the auditory regions. When evaluating
model accuracy on its predicted response (as for all the other presented models), the
sensitivity drops signiﬁcantly, and the areas of high prediction accuracy are more
speciﬁc to the areas that are expected to be involved in phoneme processing. The
model that incorporates all data points (as demonstrated in Figure 4.2) appears to
be signiﬁcantly more sensitive than the models where the ﬁrst data point is removed.
28
==PAGE:37==
4. Results
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.5. Phoneme selectivity.(a) Local phoneme preferences are estimated by mapping the
highest CV model coeﬃcient in diﬀerent colors. I.e. which of the model coeﬃcients
relating to a consonant or vowel is most important for the activity in an the voxels
with high model prediction accuracy. Few phonemes appear to be dominating. These
include: Light blue = /i/, dark blue = /a℧/, purple = /u/,/o℧/,/aI/, green =/S/,/f/,
yellow=/w/. (b) A histogram of the phoneme selectivity for the voxels presented
in (a), i.e. how many voxels have their highest model coeﬃcients associated with a
given phoneme.
Figure 4.6. Phoneme vs. pitch segregation. The red and yellow areas are where the model
incorporating phonetic information has a high predictive power (equivalent to Figure
4.3 (D). The green area indicates pitch-speciﬁc activity. The pitch map is calculated
as the diﬀerence in predictive power of a model incorporating phonetic and pitch
information vs. a model incorporating only phonetic information. The pitch speciﬁc
area appears to be clearly separated from the phoneme speciﬁc areas.
29
==PAGE:38==
4. Results
4.1.2
Vowel sweep
Figure 4.7 shows the obtained prediction accuracy for the vowel sweep experiment. A high
prediction accuracy is observed in the right STS and STG and also int the left side of
motor cortex. Figure 4.8 indicates the estimated local vowel preferences by means of each
voxel’s highest model coeﬃcient. The phonetic vowels /I/, /E/, /O/, and /M/ appear to be
dominating.
Figure 4.7. Vowel sweep model accuracy. Prediction accuracy (R2) for the vowel sweep
experiment. A high accuracy is observed in the right STS and STG and also int the
left side of motor cortex.
4.1.3
Pure-tones
This section presents results from two diﬀerent pure-tone experiments, i.e. a pure-tone
experiment based on a sparse sampling paradigm and one based on a continuous sampling
paradigm (experimental parameters are summarized in Table 3.2 on page 17). Figure 4.9
shows the prediction accuracies for pRF models ﬁtted to the two data sets. Both models
have high prediction accuracy in the dorsal STG, and both show a strong peak in Heschl’s
Gyrus (HG).
Figure 4.10 shows the ﬁtted Gaussian pRF parameters of the sparsely sampled pure-tone
experiments. The µ map indicate the tuning frequencies of the estimated pRFs. The pRF
tuning frequencies are here presented on an octave scale (log2 transformed). A frequency
gradient can be observed along the STG in the sparsely sampled data. A frequency gradient
is also present in Heschl’s gyrus in the continuously sampled data, but it is less obvious
than in the sparsely sampled data and limited to a smaller area.
30
==PAGE:39==
4. Results
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.8. Vowel selectivity.(a) Estimated local vowel preferences are visualized by mapping
each voxel’s highest coeﬃcients model coeﬃcient representing diﬀerent vowels. The
phonetic vowels /I/, /E/, /O/, and /M/ appear to be dominating. (b) A histogram of
the vowel selectivity for the voxels presented in (a), i.e. how many voxels have their
highest model coeﬃcients associated with a given vowel.
Prediction accuracy - PT sparse
(a)
Prediction accuracy - PT continuous
(b)
Figure 4.9. Prediction accuracy for the pure-tone experiments.(a) Sparse sampling
paradigm. A strong peak is observed in Heschl’s Gyrus (HG). (R2 values shown).
(b) Continuous sampling paradigm. A very high prediction accuracy along the STG
is observed, and also here a peak is observed, the location of which may be in HG.
(R2 values shown).
31
==PAGE:40==
4. Results
pRF µ - PT sparse
(a)
pRF µ - PT continuous
(b)
Figure 4.10. Estimated best frequencies. pRF µ values are presented on an octave scale. (a)
For the sparsely sampled data, a gradient is observed. (b) For the continuously
sampled data, a gradient in Heschl’s gyrus can be observed, and nearly all voxels in
the STG are assigned a high µ value.
4.2
Simulation results
This section will present simulation results demonstrating the eﬀects of the simulation
parameters listed in Table 3.3 on page 22. The eﬀect of the parameters are assessed
by calculating the model prediction accuracies for each simulation voxel, and correcting
these according to the permutation r-values as shown in Figure 4.11. As outlined in the
Section 3.6, two permutation approaches were investigated, and the permutation of model
parameters showed a closer alignment with the parameter error than the permutation of
design matrix approach. Both metrics are displayed in Figure 4.11. In the following simu-
lation results, only the prediction accuracy corrected via permutation of model parameters
are presented. When inspecting Figure 4.11, the most important feature to notice is the
separability between signal and noise voxels. If the simulated experimental set-up allows a
simutaneously sensitive and speciﬁc encoding model, the signal voxels should be clearly
separable from the noise voxels in terms of their permutation corrected prediction r-values.
For comparability across simulation conditions, the separability of noise and signal voxels
can be summarized by calculating the mean and standard deviation of the permutation
corrected prediction accuracy for each group of voxels and assess the separability of those
two distributions. This summary measure along with the model parameter error are
used to assess the eﬀects of the various simulation parameters in the following. The
two parameters errors relating to µ and σ represent the location and ﬁeld width of the
simulated pRFs. The separability between noise and signal voxels is a measure that is ap-
plicable for empirical data, whereas the model parameter error is unknown in empirical data.
32
==PAGE:41==
4. Results
Simulated model accuracy
Figure 4.11. Overview of how the simulation results are assessed. Permutation corrected
prediction accuracies are calculated by subtracting permutation accuracies from
prediction accuracies.
The two evaluated measures of permutation accuracies
are shown. The permutation corrected prediction accuracies represent the model
accuracies estimated for the empirical data. A signiﬁcantly higher model accuracy
for the signal voxels than for the noise voxels is necessary for distinguishing between
signal voxels and noise voxels in the empirical data.
Figure 4.12 shows the eﬀect of the amount of data available to ﬁt the pRF model, here
presented as the number of runs recorded. The tendency seen in this plot is that increasing
the number of runs results in reduced standard deviation and a slightly increased mean
model accuracy among signal voxels. The parameter errors decrease with increased sepa-
rability between the signal and noise voxel classes. The plot also indicates that when an
insuﬃcient amount of data is available (here between 2 and 10 runs), it is not possible
to completely distinguish noise voxels from signal voxels based on the accuracy metrics
employed in this study.
Figure 4.13 shows the eﬀect RF width, i.e. the width σ of the pRF, representing how
selective the pRF is towards diﬀerent stimuli. The ﬁgure shows that very wide pRFs
make it diﬃcult or impossible to estimated the location and width of the pRF, since the
pRFs elicit nearly the same response to all stimuli. Another important thing to notice
from this plot is that the permutation corrected prediction accuracy decreases as the
parameter error increases. The same is not the case for the uncorrected prediction accuracy
(not shown). This means that the uncorrected prediction accuracy is a poor measure
of parameter error, while the permutation corrected prediction accuracy is a better measure.
Figure 4.14 summarizes the eﬀects of varying TR, introducing a silent TR (i.e. long ISI),
and doubling the amount of data in diﬀerent ways. It shows that TR=7 and TR=8 have
smaller parameter errors than the shorter TRs, and TR=7 has better separability between
signal and noise voxels than TR=8. The number of acquired samples are equal for all
33
==PAGE:42==
4. Results
Figure 4.12. Eﬀect of Nruns. As more data is available as the number of runs increases, the
aeparability between signal voxels and noise voxels is improves, and the parameter
errors are reduced. The spearability of the two voxel classes is caused by an decreased
standard deviation and slightly increased mean of the prediction accuracy among
signal voxels.
Figure 4.13. Eﬀect of RF width. As the width of the pRF increases, it becomes increasingly
diﬃcult for the model to predict the data, since the pRF elicit similar responses to
all stimuli when the RF width is very large. The parameter errors become large,
and the signal voxels become inseparable from the noise voxels. This is a clear eﬀect
of the permutation correction approach. With very wide RFs, the permutation
prediction accuracy and the uncorrected prediction accuracy are both high, since all
signal voxels respond equally well to all stimuli. After subtracting the two measures,
it is seen that a low permutation corrected prediction accuracy metric reﬂects a
high parameters errors.
34
==PAGE:43==
4. Results
four TR conditions, meaning that longer TRs also imply slightly longer scanning time.
A TR of 7 seconds is the best candidate for simultaneously reducing parameter error
and improving separability of signal and noise voxels. Introducing a silent TR results
in improved estimation of the pRF width, σ, at the expense of reduced separability of
signal and noise voxels. The diﬀerent ways of doubling the amount of data show that
spending scanning time on acquiring two data sets with identical stimuli and averaging
the responses signiﬁcantly improves separability of signal and noise voxels while reducing
the parameter errors. Acquiring more diﬀerent runs or acquiring longer runs render much
smaller improvements.
Figure 4.14. Eﬀect of TR, increased ISI, and increased amount of data. The eﬀect of
varying TR from 3 to 8 seconds is shown in the left side if the plot. The remaining
conditions are shown for TR=7. The eﬀect of introducing a long ISI by intoducing
a silent TR is shown in the middle part of the plot. A silent TR reduces the
separability of signal and noise voxels while also reducing the parameter error on
σ. The right part of the plot shows the eﬀect of doubling the amount of data in
three diﬀerent ways. Mean of 2 runs: Two data sets with the exact same stimuli
are acquired and averaged for improved the SNR, allowing signiﬁcantly better
separability and smaller parameter errors. Doubling the number of runs or the
length of runs improves the parameter errors but only slightly improves separability.
The number of runs is 8 for the ﬁrst ﬁve conditions and 16 for the double amount
of data conditions.
35
==PAGE:44==
5
DISCUSSION
This section summarizes how the experiments and simulations of the present study
illuminate the considerations needed to obtain sensitive and speciﬁc encoding models.
5.1
TR eﬀects and sampling paradigm
Selecting an optimum TR with respect to model sensitivity and speciﬁcity in the sparse
sampling paradigm was emphasised early in this study. TRs in a range from 3 seconds
to 8 seconds were investigated by acquiring diﬀerent data sets. It can be hypothesised
that a shorter TR would allow a better model ﬁt than a longer TR due to more samples
being acquired, keeping scanning time constant. Several other studies make use of short
TRs, e.g. Thomas et al. [16] using TRs of 2 seconds when investigating tonotopic maps
by means of pRF models, and Santoro et al. [5] using TRs of 2.8 seconds for modelling
encoding of natural sounds via GLM encoding models. On the other hand, our experiments
appeared to indicate higher model sensitivities with longer TRs in the range of 7 seconds.
A study that particularly investigates optimization of sparse-sampling fMRI experiments
by Perrachione and Ghosh [10] points in the direction of choosing intermediate TRs for
an optimum experimental design. Speciﬁcally, they suggest a TR around 6 seconds after
having evaluated empirical results and simulation results with TRs ranging from 3 to 12
seconds. They ﬁnd that their simulation results speak in favour of shorter TRs (in line with
the hypothesis of more samples allowing a better model ﬁt), while their empirical results
speak in favour of longer TRs. The main argument explaining the better performance of
longer TRs is that longer TRs reduce the acoustic contamination of the measured response
from scanner noise. It is argued that scanner noise evokes a BOLD response by itself (in the
whole brain, but int the auditory regions in particular). The noise-induced response reduces
the dynamic range of the response to experimental conditions due to saturation eﬀects,
eﬀectively reducing the SNR on the stimulus side of the experiment. This argument for
using long TRs is closely related to the argument for using sparse sampling over continuous
sampling.
Like the simulations by Perrachione and Ghosh [10], the simulations in this study appear
to favour shorter TRs, since they require only about half of the scanning time to reach
almost the same performance in terms of parameter error and separability of signal and
noise voxels compared to TRs of 7 or 8 seconds (Figure 4.14). The increased error for
the estimate of σ for TR=4 seconds can be explained by the relatively short stimulus
blocks for short TRs, which is supported by the fact that introducing a silent TR directly
seems to reduce the σ parameter error. To sum up, there are some inconsistencies between
empirical results and simulation results with respect to TR eﬀects, which may to some
extend be explained by acoustic contamination of the measured response from scanner noise.
36
==PAGE:45==
5. Discussion
A comparing of the results from the pure-tone experiments with sparsely sampled data vs.
continuously sampled data makes it is clear that the prediction accuracies are signiﬁcantly
higher in the continuously sampled dataset, i.e. assuming maximum prediction R2 values
around 85% compared to maximum values around 45% for the sparsely sampled dataset.
However, according to the above described issue with scanner noise contamination in the
continuous sampling paradigm, it must be expected that a relatively large part of the
variance of the BOLD response in the continuously sampled data is induced by scanner
noise rather than stimulus variation. Thus, even though the encoding model ﬁtted to the
continuously sampled data exhibits a high sensitivity, this may not be speciﬁcally related
to stimulus variation. An inspection of the estimated frequency maps (Figure 4.10 on
page 32) makes it evident that this is actually the case. While the sparsely sampled data
exhibits a gradient of frequency selectivity in the areas with high prediction accuracies,
the continuously sampled data exhibits a less visible gradient, and in many of the voxels
with high sensitivity, no frequency selectivity is exhibited (i.e nearly all voxels with high
sensitivity outside of Heschl’s gyrus are assigned the same high frequencies). This indicates
that the impressively high prediction accuracy in the continuous sapling paradigm does not
represent an eﬀect caused by stimulus variation. This could also be reveal by evaluating
the prediction accuracies against a permutation test, as it was done in the CV experiment.
5.2
Stimulus design
Responses to two types of stimuli were investigated in the present study, i.e. the response
to pure-tones and the response to higher-order speech stimuli consisting of phonemes. The
phoneme stimuli spanned over 12 vowels and 19 consonants, whereas the pure-tone stimuli
spanned over a bandwidths of approximately 4 octaves (200-3500 Hz). The importance
of the stimulus bandwidth was outlined in Section 2.1.2, where Figure 2.3 demonstrates
the need of the stimulus range to be suitable for sampling the pRF width. In order to
sample a pRF’s shape properly, the stimuli must range over a large portion of the pRF
width, and the pRF width must be sampled with a suﬃcient resolution. In the study of
pure-tones, some initial experiments were carried out where the ﬁtted pRF models could
not distinguish between the diﬀerent applied stimuli, i.e. the stimulus bandwidth was
too narrow for the given experimental conditions. This condition was equivalent to what
is seen in the simulations of diﬀerent pRF widths in Figure 4.13, where a pRF that is
much wider than the stimulus range results in low model sensitivity and large parameter
errors. While ensuring a proper stimulus bandwidth, the stimulus resolution must also
be adjusted. For the CV experiments, the stimulus space spanned a large bandwidth
(very diﬀerent phonemes, e.g. /m/ vs. /t/), while its resolution was also quite high (high
similarity between some phonemes, e.g. /b/ vs. /p/). The large bandwidth and high
resolution of the phoneme stimuli was applied to ensure activation of a large proportion of
the phoneme processing areas. Meanwhile, the simultaneous presentation of consonants
and vowels posed a challenge of dissociating consonant-evoked responses from vowel-evoked
responses, calling for imposing a need for many presentations of each phoneme in new
CV-combinations.
For the sparse sampling paradigms, the stimulus duration was partly dependent on the
37
==PAGE:46==
5. Discussion
applied TR. Shorter TRs allow shorter silent gaps for stimulus presentation due to a
constant image acquisition time across TRs. In the CV experiment, this had implications
for the amount of acoustic (non-phonetic) variation presented within a stimulus block.
Given a constant scanning duration, the longer TRs allow more utterances of the same CV
to be presented, resulting in increased acoustic variation as diﬀerent speakers pronounce
the CV, and thus to a greater extend leaving the phonetic content as the only constant
parameter across a stimulus block. An advantage with the continuous sampling paradigm
is that there is no need to adapt the stimulus duration to the TR.
Eﬀects of ISI in the form of a silent TR were mainly investigated in the simulations. The
simulations showed that introducing a silent TR reduced the parameter error of σ, i.e.
resulted in more accurate representation of the pRF width. This is related to the eﬀects
of simultaneous vs. separate sampling of responses to diﬀerent stimuli. A silent TR, i.e.
long ISI , allows for an extra sample for each stimulus block to be acquired before the
response to a new stimulus is evoked, and thus the eﬀect of consecutive stimuli are more
easily dissociated from one another. Still, introducing a long ISI is at the expense of model
sensitivity, since the long ISI could alternatively be spend on presenting more stimuli. The
need for a long ISI thus depends on the relative importance of getting an accurate measure
pRF width vs. model sensitivity in terms of separability between noise and signal voxels.
The amount of overlap between responses of consecutive stimulus blocks depend on the du-
ration of the actual HRF, i.e. how long time a stimulus eﬀect is present in the BOLD signal.
5.3
Response type
The CV experiment showed that responses to phoneme features could be dissociated from
responses to pitch features in the same stimuli. A fundamental issue in investigating
sensitivity to phonetic features is to ensure that the observed eﬀect represents higher-order
phoneme processing and not more trivial acoustic processing. Complete disentanglement
of acoustic features and phonetic features cannot be obtained, since some of the acoustic
information is essential to identify phonemes. Tracking an acoustic feature like pitch was a
method to test whether the response to this feature could be dissociated from the response
to phonetic features. The tracked representation of pitch was rather coarse in the sense that
it only included an assigned pitch speaker group for each stimulus block, i.e. whether the
CV was pronounced by people with high, low, or intermediate pitch. Nevertheless, adding
the pitch group regressors to the CV GLM turned out to improve its predictive power in
some regions and not in others. The regions where pitch improved the model’s predictive
power were thus interpreted as being pitch sensitive areas. Pitch processing has in other
studies been found to be located in the anterior lateral border of Heschl’s Gyrus [22], which
also seems to be the location of the pitch peak in Figure 4.6. In addition to the peak in
Heschl’s Gyrus, the pitch model also has a peak in the occipital lobe, which could possibly
represent semantic features relating to whether men, women, or both are pronouncing the
CVs. However, it should be noted that the pitch map is still quite noisy in the sense that it
has several unexplained peaks, which is expectable given the coarse quantiﬁcation of pitch.
Still, the location of the pitch peak being consistent with theories on pitch processing
support the argument that it is associated with pitch processing and not just noise. The
38
==PAGE:47==
5. Discussion
location of the pitch peak is also consistent with the location of pure-tone sensitivity found
in the present study, being primarily localized in Heschl’s Gyrus and the dorsal STG.
The areas that exhibit phoneme sensitivity are STS and STG for both the sparsely sampled
data and for the continuously sampled data. This is consistent with the results of previous
studies (e.g. Hickok and Poeppel [6], Mesgarani et al. [7] as referred to in Figures 2.4 and
2.5 on page 11).
With regard to the hypothesis on the existence of a topographic map of phonemes, it can
neither be conﬁrmed or rejected at this point. Figure 4.5 shows that there appears to be
local preferences for speciﬁc phonetic features. However, a cortical phoneme representation
may be either local or distributed. With distributed is meant that a phoneme may be
represented by simultaneous activity in several cortical areas at the same time according to
a phoneme-speciﬁc pattern. A phoneme map with distributed phoneme representation is
more complicated to identify than and would require a more sophisticated pattern analysis,
based on several model coeﬃcients and not only the highest coeﬃcient as presented here.
Thus, the presented phoneme selectivity map is a rather coarse estimate that mainly serves
to demonstrate phoneme selectivity, i.e. that the encoding models do relate voxel activity
to diﬀerent phonemes and don’t relate all auditory response to the same stimulus.
In the phoneme selectivity map, a dominating preference for vowels appears to be present
in the presented map, which may be attributed to an improper dissociation of consonant
and vowel related variance in the data due to simultaneous presentation of the two. To
dissociate the eﬀect of consonants and vowels better, i.e. obtain higher model speciﬁcity,
more data would be required. The indications of the vowel sweep experiment are in line
with the indications of the CV experiment. Figures 4.7 and 4.8 indicate sensitivity and
selectivity to diﬀerent vowels. There appears to be some consistency in which vowels
are highly represented across the two experiments, i.e. the phonetic vowel /O/ (as in the
word "fall") is highly represented on both maps. The phonetic vowels /i/ and /I/ (as in
the words "she" and "big", respectively) are not too diﬀerent from each other in terms of
articulation and perception, and both are represented in either of the phoneme selectiv-
ity maps. The vowels /a℧/, /o℧/ and /℧/ (as in the words "how" "coat" and "could")
are also highly represented in either of the maps. It is beyond the scope of this study
to argue further for and against the linguistic similarity of the the observed vowel selectivity.
Finally, the vowel-sweep response being localized to the auditory cortex in the right hemi-
sphere and the motor cortex in the left hemisphere deserves a remark. While e.g. the theory
posed by Hickok and Poeppel [6] suggests that language processing for right-handed people
should have a left-hemispheric dominance, other theories suggest that the hemispheric
dominance is diﬀerent from one individual to another [23, 24]. In the case presented here,
there seems to be a strong right-hemispheric dominance of vowel processing. The strong
response appearing in the motor cortex may be related to the fact that the test subject
was performing an abstract task of imagining the applied vowel space presented in Figure
3.4, i.e. the manner and place of vowel articulation in the mouth. This task was performed
to keep the attention on the vowel stimuli and is likely to have evoked the seen motor activity.
39
==PAGE:48==
5. Discussion
5.4
Variation vs. repetition in data acquisition
Increasing the amount of data to improve model sensitivity and speciﬁcity is not trivial, as
the simulations show. The amount of data can be increased by acquiring more or longer
runs with new stimuli (increasing stimulus variability), or by repeating the same stimuli
in new runs (increasing the SNR). The simulations in this study indicate the eﬀects of
doubling the amount of data by any of these methods (Figure 4.14). The simulations
indicate that the parameter errors are almost the same across the three methods, while
the separability between noise and signal voxels is much more improved by repeating the
same stimuli and averaging their responses than for doubling the amount of diﬀerent runs
or the length of runs. In fact, comparing the separability of signal and noise voxels for the
"mean of 2 runs" condition in Figure 4.14 with Figure 4.12, it can be seen that a similar
separability cannot be obtained even when acquiring as much as 30 runs in stead of 8. The
relative importance of increasing stimulus variability and increasing the SNR must rely on
the noise level; if the SNR is very poor, it must be improved before any information can
properly be extracted from the data. How exactly the noise conditions are in the empirical
data is not known, and the recommendable approach to increase the acquired amount of
data must rely on separability between signal and noise whether the model sensitivity or
model speciﬁcity is prioritized. For instance for the acquired CV data, there is a lot of
room for improvement of the sensitivity (correlation in auditory regions is between 0.11
and 0.25), and much stimulus variability has already been applied. This suggests that
acquiring more images with the same stimuli and averaging responses to identical stim-
uli could improve the data more than acquiring more runs with diﬀerent stimuli in this case.
5.5
Evaluating encoding model performance
In the present study, evaluation of model performance was centered on model prediction
accuracy. It was clearly demonstrated from the CV data that going from estimating a
model from an entire data set to estimating a model from a subset of data and evaluating
its predictive power on a validation set signiﬁcantly reduces its sensitivity and improves
its speciﬁcity to the presented stimuli. In this contexts, sensitivity refers to the absolute
accuracy values obtained across the entire brain, and speciﬁcity refers to obtaining relatively
high prediction accuracies in the auditory regions and low accuracies in other regions. It
was shown that improved model speciﬁcity came together with reduced sensitivity, which
can be explained by a reduced susceptibility to over-ﬁtting to noise for the models that use
validation, just like it was demonstrated that increasing the number of validations from 8
to 92 further improved model speciﬁcity.
Another precaution taken to reduce the eﬀect of over-ﬁtting to noise while accounting for
stimulus onset eﬀects was permutation tests. The permutation tests implicitly assumed
that the eﬀect of all stimulus features were equal and randomly permuted the model
parameters to estimate how much accuracy could be explained on this assumption. I.e.
the permutation tests serve to improve model speciﬁcity in terms of evaluating whether
40
==PAGE:49==
5. Discussion
the model maps diﬀerent stimuli features to diﬀerent responses, or whether it maps all
stimulus features to the same response. Two permutation methods were investigated, of
which the permutation of model coeﬃcients turned out to be superior. The permutation
of validation design had the weakness that the randomly permuted validation design was
prone to sharing some similarities with the true validation design, allowing the permuted
model to actually predict some of the true stimulus-related variance. The permutation of
model coeﬃcients method ensured a more consistent test where the true validation and
the permutation validation were independent.
The justiﬁcation of applying a permutation test was highlighted in the simulations, where
the eﬀect of parameter error as a function of pRF width was investigated. Here it was
shown that a high permutation corrected prediction accuracy consistently corresponded
to a low parameter error. If the permutation correction was not applied, the uncorrected
model accuracy would be increasing for the wide pRF, as they would be responding to all
stimuli and thus increase the eﬀective SNR. The uncorrected prediction accuracy would
thus be a misleading metric of model performance, since the simulations show that model
parameter errors are increasing for increasing pRF widths.
5.6
Manual inspection of data for artefacts
An unexpected ﬁnding in this study was a negative peak in the beginning of each run for
the CV experiments. A negative peak in the beginning of a run can be present in fMRI data
where a proper t1 saturation has not taken place prior to recording the stimulus-induced
responses. However, such an eﬀect would be present in the entire image and not only in
the auditory regions. Judging from the location of the negative-peak-voxels, the eﬀect
appears to be present exactly in the areas that are expected to be involved in speech
processing according to Section 2.3, i.e. the STS, STG, and articulatory networks in the
frontal lobe. The location of the eﬀect suggests that it should be a functional eﬀect relating
to the stimuli. It could be hypothesized that the speech processing regions have a slow
start-up, i.e. that their response to speech stimuli take longer time to saturate than what
is assumed via the applied HRF. However, this eﬀect has not been observed in any of
our other experiments with non-speech auditory stimuli, and to our knowledge, it has not
been described for speech stimuli in other studies. Explaining the observed eﬀect would
therefore require separate investigation, which is beyond the scope of this study, and it is
therefore treated as an artefact and removed from further analysis in this study.
5.7
Limitations
To a large extend, the methods applied in the present study comply with the recommen-
dations for encoding models posed by e.g. Gallant [25]. This includes collecting a lot of
data from few well-trained test subjects for parameter optimization, optimizing fMRI data
acquisition for every experiment, and focusing on prediction and eﬀect size over statistical
signiﬁcance and group eﬀects. However, some steps in the modelling work of the present
41
==PAGE:50==
5. Discussion
study still remain to be extended and optimized.
It was shown that permutation corrected prediction accuracy was an appropriate mea-
sure to obtain encoding models that were simultaneously sensitive and selective to the
diﬀerent stimuli. However, no absolute thresholds for model accuracy were obtained, and
no statistical inference could be extracted from the results. The next step to obtain this
could be a permutation test where a distribution of permutation accuracies for each voxel
is generated (as opposed to the mean value applied here). This would allow to estimate
statistical p-values and an absolute threshold for model accuracy for a given signiﬁcance
level.
In the present study, a HRF was in most cases assumed a standard (canonical) shape
provided by the SPM toolbox [20]. The choice of HRF is far from trivial and could beneﬁt
from a more systematic estimation than conducted in this study. E.g. varying HRFs across
voxels or over time could advantageously be investigated. As the assumed HRF shapes
are consistent across an entire dataset, but do not corrupt the results of the models, they
merely make the models less sensitive than they could potentially be.
The last limitation to be mentioned here is the manner in which the modelling results
are represented on the cortical surface. For the investigation of cortical phonenetic repre-
sentation, the area of interest is the surface of cortex, i.e. the surface of the gray matter.
The gyriﬁcation of the human cortex is highly convoluted, eﬀectively providing a larger
cortical surface area than if it were smooth. The gyriﬁcation makes it diﬃcult to assess the
cortical maps with the applied visualization method, where structural images are directly
overlaid with functional images. A commonly used tool to cope with this challenge is
the software package FreeSurfer [26], which uses an anatomical MR image to estimate an
inﬂated version of the cortex. This extrapolation allows the mapping of fMRI results onto a
smooth spherical surface, providing a better foundation for visual inspection of the mapped
parameters and quantiﬁcation of the cortical topographies. The FreeSurfer extrapolation
is compatible with the data presented in the present study but still remains to be carried out.
42
==PAGE:51==
6
CONCLUSIONS
In this study, the sensitivity and applicability of encoding models in auditory fMRI was
investigated.
In improving the applicability of encoding models in auditory fMRI, this study found
that improving the encoding models’ sensitivity in terms of prediction accuracy is not
the only important factor. The core issue in improving their applicability consists in
improving sensitivity that is directly associated with stimulus variation, which is equivalent
to simultaneously improving sensitivity, speciﬁcity, and selectivity for the encoding models.
Dissociating these three concepts is key to understanding the challenges faced by encoding
models in auditory fMRI. The concepts can be summarized as follows:
Sensitivity: Obtaining a high prediction accuracy (the most trivial of the three). However,
high sensitivity is not necessarily indicative of stimulus-relevant information.
Speciﬁcity: Obtaining a low false-positive rate, i.e. ensuring that an area ascribed to a
high prediction accuracy can be trusted to be sensitive to the stimuli and is not over-ﬁtted
to noise.
Selectivity: Displaying selectivity between stimuli, i.e. an ability to distinguish responses
from diﬀerent stimuli. In auditory fMRI, this is a key concept because auditory responses
may be evoked by sounds in general, but the responses of interest in fMRI are responses
that originate from variation in stimuli. Selectivity is partially related to speciﬁcity, but
speciﬁcity deals with reducing sensitivity to noise in general, while selectivity deals with
reducing sensitivity to auditory responses related to other factors than stimulus variation.
A schematic overview of how the investigated experimental parameters and model evaluation
parameters inﬂuence sensitivity, speciﬁcity and selectivity is provided in Figure 6.1.
First, the interaction between model sensitivity, speciﬁcity and selectivity will here be
accounted for. A high speciﬁcity poses constrictions on the sensitivity to be stimulus-
related, and therefore an increase in speciﬁcity implies a reduction in sensitivity. A high
selectivity poses constrictions on the model speciﬁcity by requiring that the explained
response variance relates to the stimulus variation of interest and not to other acoustic
factors. This implies that an increased selectivity reinforces model speciﬁcity, which again
reduces sensitivity (i.e. the sensitivity that is left when ensuring speciﬁcity and selectivity
is directly associated with the stimulus eﬀects of interest).
43
==PAGE:52==
6. Conclusions
Figure 6.1. Schematic overview of how the investigated parameters inﬂuence encoding
model performance.
A red arrow with a minus denotes a negative eﬀect, a
black arrow denotes a positive eﬀect. Hexagonal shapes indicate objectives of the
optimization, i.e. sensitivity, speciﬁcity and selectivity can be optimized by means of
the shown parameters. Rectangular shapes indicate experimental parameters and
model evaluation parameters that can be adjusted to optimize the objectives. Round
shapes indicate intermediate eﬀects of adjusting parameters, subsequently aﬀecting
the objectives.
6.1
Findings and recommendations on parameter
optimization
Sensitivity can be directly improved by increasing the signal-to-noise ratio, which can be
obtained by acquiring two or more data sets with the same stimuli and averaging the
responses. The ﬁndings of this study show that data averaging signiﬁcantly improves the
stimulus-related sensitivity of encoding models, and both model sensitivity and selectivity
can highly beneﬁt from prioritizing data averaging over many data sets with diﬀerent
stimuli, as soon as a basic amount of stimulus variation has been presented. The study
speciﬁes aspects to consider when making the choice between stimulus repetition and
stimulus variation in data acquisition.
It has been shown that model speciﬁcity can be highly improved via cross-validation, due
to a reduced susceptibility to over-ﬁtting to noise. Many-fold cross-validation exploits the
stimulus-relevant information in data better than few-fold cross-validation, even though it
means that the same data sets are just combined into many diﬀerent subsets for estimation
and validation.
A key point of the study is that model selectivity must be revealed via the model evalua-
tion parameter, while the experimental conditions must be adjusted to provide as much
stimulus-relevant information in the data as possible. The experimental parameters can
be optimized for model selectivity by reducing contamination of data with scanner noise.
This eﬀectively increases the dynamic range for the stimulus-related responses. Reduction
of scanner noise contamination can be obtained by employing a sparse sampling paradigm
and relatively long repetition times (TRs) in the range of 6-7 seconds. This is at the
expense of the number of data samples collected and therefore reduces the apparent model
44
==PAGE:53==
6. Conclusions
sensitivity, while the the model sensitivity obtained by this method is more speciﬁc to the
stimulus variation and thus more relevantly represents the eﬀects of interest.
Besides reducing noise contamination, the stimulus variation and interstimulus intervals
(ISIs) can be adjusted to emphasize either sensitivity or selectivity. Sensitivity can be
emphasized by applying a lot of stimulus variation with short ISIs, inducing a strong signal
that may be diﬃcult to attribute to the right stimulus. Selectivity can be emphasized by
applying long ISIs, allowing a more thorough sampling of responses relating to individual
stimuli before a new stimulus is presented.
On the model evaluation side, selectivity can be improved by segregation of diﬀerent
response types, i.e. acknowledging the property that variation in the BOLD response
i auditory regions may be caused by other eﬀects than stimulus variation and seek to
segregate the response caused by stimulus variation from the response caused by other
eﬀects (e.g. scanner noise and stimulus onset eﬀects). This study found that there can be
unexpected tendencies in data behaviour that violate the model assumptions and thereby
corrupt the model ﬁtting. This demonstrates a need for manual inspection of data be-
haviour by e.g. inspecting the ﬁtted time series in sample voxels with high model sensitivity.
Lastly, the most signiﬁcant ﬁnding of this study is the importance of correcting model
prediction accuracies against a permutation test to reveal the model’s true sensitivity
associated with the stimulus variation of interest. A permutation test allows for segre-
gation of responses caused by stimulus variation from responses caused by other eﬀects.
This is obtained by implicitly assuming that all stimuli cause similar responses and then
estimate how high a prediction accuracy can be obtained by a model with this assumption.
Subtracting the permuted model’s prediction accuracy from that of the true model renders
an estimate of the model’s stimulus-selective sensitivity. Thus it allows for simultaneous
optimization of model sensitivity and selectivity. The permutation corrected prediction
accuracy is this study’s best suggestion for a single metric that should be optimized to
make encoding models applicable in auditory fMRI and is highly recommended to use as
an evaluation criterion during optimization of experimental parameters.
6.2
Revealing cortical processing of speech features
This study showed that is was possible to built an encoding model that was simultaneously
sensitive, speciﬁc, and selective towards speech features in the form of phonemes. Its
sensitivity was speciﬁc to the anatomical areas suspected to be related to speech processing,
i.e. the superior temporal gyrus, superior temporal sulcus, and articulatory networks in
motor cortex. Selectivity towards diﬀerent phonemes in these areas was also found. The
existence of a topographic organization of phonemes is possible but can not decisively be
conﬁrmed or rejected from the results of the present study.
45
==PAGE:54==
6. Conclusions
6.3
Future work
The permutation test could beneﬁt from being expanded to include a statistical distribution
of the permuted models’ prediction accuracies (as opposed to the mean values as applied
here). Estimation of null distributions on prediction accuracies would allow to estimate
statistical p-values and set an absolute threshold for model accuracy for a given signiﬁcance
level.
The unexpected data behaviour in the CV experiments, which was treated as an artefact
in this study, seemed to be associated with a slow saturation of the BOLD response to
speech stimuli. The eﬀect was observed in several test subjects, and it seemed to be located
in the speech-selective areas. An understanding of the eﬀect would require a separate
investigation with expriments designed speciﬁcally to investigate this eﬀect, e.g. with long
TRs and varying ISIs. If the eﬀect is indeed speech driven and if it becomes properly
understood, it may contribute to designing experiments with increased dynamic range for
speech-related responses and thereby allow higher sensitivity and selectivity of encoding
models.
Lastly, the question of whether a topographic organization of phonemes exists could be
further illuminated by transposing the cortical maps of phoneme selectivity presented
in this study onto a smooth representation of the cortical surface. This would allow for
a quantiﬁcation of the cortical topographies and thus provide a better foundation for
assessing whether a complete high-resolution phonetic map is potentially obtainable with
more data, or whether phonemes do not seem to be topographically organized and other
pattern analysis methods are needed to understand how phoneme are coded.
46
==PAGE:55==
REFERENCES
[1]
Dave R M Langers, Walter H. Backes, and Pim van Dijk. Representation of
lateralization and tonotopy in primary versus secondary human auditory cortex.
NeuroImage, 34(1):264–273, 2007. ISSN 10538119. doi:
10.1016/j.neuroimage.2006.09.002.
[2]
C M Wessinger, M H Buonocore, C L Kussmaul, and G R Mangun. Tonotopy in
human auditory cortex examined with functional magnetic resonance imaging. Hum
Brain Mapp, 5(1):18–25, 1997. ISSN 10659471.
[3]
Serge O. Dumoulin and Brian A. Wandell. Population receptive ﬁeld estimates in
human visual cortex. NeuroImage, 39(2):647–660, 2008. ISSN 10538119. doi:
10.1016/j.neuroimage.2007.09.034.
[4]
Michelle Moerel, Federico De Martino, Kâmil Uğurbil, Essa Yacoub, and Elia
Formisano. Processing of frequency and location in human subcortical auditory
structures. Scientiﬁc reports, 5:17048, 2015. ISSN 2045-2322. doi: 10.1038/srep17048.
[5]
Roberta Santoro, Michelle Moerel, Federico De Martino, Rainer Goebel, Kamil
Ugurbil, Essa Yacoub, and Elia Formisano. Encoding of Natural Sounds at Multiple
Spectral and Temporal Resolutions in the Human Auditory Cortex. PLoS
Computational Biology, 10(1), 2014. ISSN 1553734X. doi:
10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003412.
[6]
Gregory Hickok and David Poeppel. The cortical organization of speech processing.
Nature reviews. Neuroscience, 8(5):393–402, 2007. ISSN 1471-003X. doi:
10.1038/nrn2113.
[7]
Nima Mesgarani, Connie Cheung, Keith Johnson, and Edward F Chang. Phonetic
feature encoding in human superior temporal gyrus. Science (New York, N.Y.), 343
(6174):1006–10, 2014. ISSN 1095-9203. doi: 10.1126/science.1245994.
[8]
Michael C.-K. Wu, Stephen V. David, and Jack L. Gallant. Complete Functional
Characterization of Sensory Neurons By System Identiﬁcation. Annual Review of
Neuroscience, 29(1):477–505, 2006. ISSN 0147-006X. doi:
10.1146/annurev.neuro.29.051605.113024.
[9]
Martin A Lindquist, Ji Meng, Lauren Y Atlas, and Tor D Wager. NeuroImage
Modeling the hemodynamic response function in fMRI : Eﬃciency, bias and
mis-modeling. NeuroImage, 45(1):S187–S198, 2009. ISSN 1053-8119. doi:
10.1016/j.neuroimage.2008.10.065.
[10] Tyler K Perrachione and Satrajit S Ghosh. Optimized design and analysis of
sparse-sampling fMRI experiments. 7(April):1–18, 2013. doi:
10.3389/fnins.2013.00055.
47
==PAGE:56==
References
[11] Russell a Poldrack and Thomas E Nichols. Handbook of functional MRI data analysis,
volume 4. 2011. ISBN 9780521517669.
[12] C.J. Plack. The Sense of Hearing. Taylor & Francis Ltd, Abingdon, 2 edition, 2014.
ISBN 1848725159.
[13] Kendrick N Kay. Understanding Visual Representation by Developing
Receptive-Field Models. Visual Population Codes : Toward a Common Multivariate
Framework for Cell Recording and Functional Imaging, pages 133–161, 2012.
[14] Brian A. Wandell and Jonathan Winawer. Computational neuroimaging and
population receptive ﬁelds. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 19(6):349–357, 2015. ISSN
1879307X. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2015.03.009.
[15] Wikipedia contributors. Phoneme, 2017. URL
https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Phoneme{&}oldid=786681262.
[16] Jessica M Thomas, Elizabeth Huber, G Christopher Stecker, Geoﬀrey M Boynton,
Melissa Saenz, and Ione Fine. NeuroImage Population receptive ﬁeld estimates of
human auditory cortex. NeuroImage, 105:428–439, 2015. ISSN 1053-8119. doi:
10.1016/j.neuroimage.2014.10.060.
[17] Jonathan Wright. Articulation Index LDC2005S22, 2005.
[18] Wikipedia contributors. Vowel diagram, 2017. URL https://en.wikipedia.org/w/
index.php?title=Vowel{_}diagram{&}oldid=772674815.
[19] Petur Knutson. Vowel space. URL
https://notendur.hi.is/peturk/KENNSLA/02/TOP/VowelSpace.html.
[20] John Ashburner, Chun-chuan Chen, Rosalyn Moran, Rik Henson, and Christophe
Phillips. SPM12 Manual. Technical report, ,Functional Imaging Laboratory, Institute
of Neurology, UCL, London, 2016.
[21] Kendrick N. Kay, Ariel Rokem, Jonathan Winawer, Robert F. Dougherty, and
Brian A. Wandell. GLMdenoise: A fast, automated technique for denoising
task-based fMRI data. Frontiers in Neuroscience, 7(7 DEC):1–15, 2013. ISSN
1662453X. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2013.00247.
[22] Jason D. Warren, Stefan Uppenkamp, Roy D. Patterson, and Timothy D. Griﬃths.
Analyzing Pitch Chroma and Pitch Height in the Human Brain. Annals of the New
York Academy of Sciences, 999(17):212–214, 2003. ISSN 00778923. doi:
10.1196/annals.1284.032.
[23] S. P. Springer and G. Deutsch. Left brain, right brain. 7(4):1037–1038, 1982.
[24] Donald A. Robin, Daniel Tranel, and Hanna Damasio. Auditory perception of
temporal and spectral events in patients with focal left and right cerebral lesions.
Brain and Language, 39(4):539–555, 1990. ISSN 10902155. doi:
10.1016/0093-934X(90)90161-9.
[25] Jack Gallant. Encoding and decoding with voxel-wise models.
48
==PAGE:57==
References
[26] Neuroimaging. FreeSurferWiki. URL
http://freesurfer.net/fswiki/FreeSurferWiki.
49
==PAGE:58==
Department of Electrical Engineering Ørsteds Plads 352, 2800 Lyngby
www.elektro.dtu.dk/cee
Tel: (+45) 45 25 35 00
Fax: (+45) 45 88 61 11
E-mail: cee@elektro.dtu.dk
