==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Real-time semantic segmentation for au-
tonomous trains
Marco Dal Farra Kristensen (s152630)
Supervisors: Ole Winther and Rufus Blas
Kongens Lyngby 2017
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
ABSTRACT
Real-time semantic segmentation is concerned with identifying and locating objects
in images under very strict compute constraints. In this work we present different
neural network architectures designed specifically for this task. By introducing the
latest theoretical advancements in deep learning we propose different design strategies
for fast semantic segmentation and we use these strategies for designing optimized
network architectures. We benchmark our approaches to related literature on a public
accessible dataset.
Next, we proceed by evaluating our models on a very specific
dataset for autonomous trains collected by RailBot.ai. We show that our proposed
models generalizes well to the new domain of autonomous trains and we establish
real-time performance. An analysis of the segmentation and compute performance
is carried out and we demonstrate that we can segment train tracks, which, to our
knowledge, has not yet received much attention in the machine learning community.
Code can be found at https://github.com/MarcoDalFarra/semseg.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This master thesis was prepared at the department of Applied Mathematics and
Computer Science at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the re-
quirements for acquiring a Master of Science degree in Engineering.
Kongens Lyngby, June 23, 2017
Marco Dal Farra Kristensen (s152630)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface
iii
Contents
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
The task . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
The approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
The focus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.4
Related literature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.5
Report outline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2
Theory
9
2.1
Basic Supervised Deep Learning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.1.1
Learning a multi-layer perceptron for classification . . . . . . .
10
2.1.2
Backpropagation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.1.3
Regularization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.1.4
Convolutional networks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.1.5
Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.1.6
Optimization heurestics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.2
Deep Learning for effecient dense predictions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.2.1
Semantic segmentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.2.2
Handling class-imbalances . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.2.3
Deep Residual Learning (ResNets) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
2.2.4
Data augmentation and pre-processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
2.2.5
Encoder-decoder networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
2.2.6
Nonlinearity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
2.2.7
Dilated convolutions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
2.2.8
Spatial dropout . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
2.2.9
Unpooling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
2.2.10 Deconvolutions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
2.2.11 Batch normalization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
2.2.12 Transfer learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
2.2.13 Evaluation metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
2.3
Network architecture strategies and modules . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
==PAGE:8==
vi
Contents
2.3.1
Strategies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
2.3.2
Modules . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
2.3.3
Network architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
2.3.4
m-ENet . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
2.3.5
FirENet . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
2.4
Hardware and software for fast inference . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
2.4.1
Software . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
2.4.2
Hardware . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
3
Implementation and data
45
3.1
Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
3.1.1
CamVid dataset
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
3.1.2
RailBot.ai dataset
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
3.2
Hardware specifications
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
3.3
Software specifications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
3.4
Training specifics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4
Results
49
4.1
Camvid results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
4.2
RailBot.ai results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
4.3
Performance results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
4.4
Analysis of results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
4.4.1
Segmentation performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
4.4.2
Inference time and model complexity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
4.4.3
Prediction video
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
5
Future work
61
6
Conclusion
63
A
Profiling results
65
A.1 m-ENet . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
A.2 FirENet . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
B
Confusion matrixes
69
C
Training processes
71
D
Class colors
75
E
Example predictions
77
Bibliography
79
==PAGE:9==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
1.1
The task
Driven by increasing computational power in modern hardware together with large
and diverse datasets, artificial intelligence and machine learning have shown impres-
sive results in a wide range of applications over the last couple of years. This has
spawned a boom in start-ups as well as established companies that focus on the
commercial side of these advancements. Our everyday life is now accompanied with
intelligent robots such as Apples Siri, Googles intelligent search system and Teslas
semi-autonomous vehicles. But this is only the beginning. Many of the approaches
that has enabled us to have chat robots and face recognition systems are very much
alike. The key to these approaches is learning. More specifically deep learning. With
deep learning, machines can learn a wide range of tasks using essentially the same
underlying techniques.
As such, many of the same techniques behind face recog-
nition can be used in other computer vision tasks.
This eliminates the need for
human-engineered features designed specifically for the given task at hand and allow
engineers to apply these techniques to new domains with ease. Or so we hope. In
this thesis we will investigate how the recent advancements within deep learning can
be applied for a very specific task: autonomous trains.
Currently, most trains are still controlled by a train conductor. What we essen-
tially wish to investigate is whether such a train conductor can be replaced by an
intelligent machine. We approach this problem with confidence. As mentioned, au-
tonomous cars are on the verge to become a reality. And we argue that many of the
approaches taken for autonomous cars should be transferable to those that need to
be applied for autonomous trains that, to our knowledge, has still not received much
attention.
Some might argue that autonomous trains already exist in the form of subways.
These systems, however, have a huge investment associated with them as the entire
track need to be protected against foreign objects occupying the track such as fallen
trees, animals or humans. There are no truly intelligent system that acts on visual
information in the same way as a train conductor. As many train systems are already
in place, securing them against foreign objects is a huge investment. The idea for
autonomous trains are now that we develop an intelligent machine that will function
==PAGE:10==
2
1 Introduction
under the system already in place. This will eliminate the need for any large invest-
ments other than a couple of extra hardware installations on the trains if we succeed
in our approach. We argue that this is preferable compared to securing train tracks
in terms of money, energy and time.
In Denmark, autonomous trains on the ”S-tog” tracks are already receiving atten-
tion [35] and we develop this work in collaboration with RailBot.ai, which already
has established connections with people with interest in autonomous trains.
But what constitutes a system for autonomous trains? To answer this we can
rely on the experiences made for autonomous cars. These systems rely on hardware
components such as cameras and lasers. Cameras are needed for the vehicle to see,
while lasers usually accompany this information with depth and direction knowledge
of the objects of interest. Some argue that autonomous vehicles in principle should be
able to function only by using cameras, as we humans only rely on visual information
as well. It is still not clear whether this is going to become a reality. We are, however,
confident that cameras will constitute a significant part of the autonomous system.
Since the development of a fully autonomous system for a train is a very complex and
large tasks, this work will only focus on techniques used on the inputs from the camera.
The camera will provide the system with vision. As humans operate a train, the
main tasks for the human vision system is to identify which objects are in front of
and surrounding the train and rails, but also where they are. This is the task that we
are going to focus on. Locating objects of interest and classifying these objects. This
is what we know as instance segmentation. But in order to do instance segmentation,
one must first do semantic segmentation. Furthermore, semantic segmentation is per-
fectly fitted for lane detection for autonomous trains - a task that, to our knowledge,
is yet to be solved by other deep learners. With this small introduction, we now
have the primary task at hand for this work: semantic segmentation for autonomous
trains. Or, we almost have it. We lack one crucial part. It is very important that we,
with high accuracy, can locate and classify objects. But we need to be able to do this
in real-time, on the hardware that we have available. Thus, we must develop a sys-
tem that can do accurate semantic segmentation in real-time on embedded hardware.
This is what everything in the following is about.
1.2
The approach
Semantic segmentation is a computer vision task that has been around for many
years. It has been approached with many classical computer vision techniques, but
it is only within the last couple of years it has received attention from deep learners.
Deep learners started out by focusing on image classification, i.e. what is in this
picture. Now that deep learning models have surpassed human performance in this
task, it is time to take on semantic segmentation. This task is more challenging than
==PAGE:11==
1.2 The approach
3
classification as we also have to locate where objects are. In Figure 1.1 a small ex-
ample of different computer vision tasks currently being tackled by the deep learning
community is shown.
Deep learning is a data-driven approach. We hope that we can create a model that
can learn everything from data, without the need for us to engineer anything else than
the model. In order to construct such a model, we are going to rely on some of the
newest ideas within deep learning. Some of them are years or decades old while others
first saw daylight a couple of weeks ago. This raises the questions: is this task really
that challenging that we cannot use simpler and more well-known methods to solve it?
In order to motivate the use of the newest deep learning methods, we refer to some
of the recent results on computer vision tasks as well as research from the community.
Deep learning approaches have been winning the ImageNet challenge since 2012 [27],
while the PASCAL VOC 2012 challenge on semantic segmentation is lead by deep
learning approaches.1 These results indicate that deep learning should be considered
one of the primary tools for computer vision tasks. The guys in [36] seem to agree
with this statement:
”Thus, it can be concluded that from now on, deep learning with CNN has to be
considered as the primary candidate in essentially any visual recognition task.” 2
While this maybe establish the fact that deep learning should be well suited for doing
semantic segmentation, it is still unclear whether it can do it in real time. After all,
1See the leaderboard http://host.robots.ox.ac.uk:8080/leaderboard/displaylb.php?cls=
mean&challengeid=11&compid=6&submid=11946.
2Cited directly from the conclusion in [36]
Figure 1.1: Different computer vision tasks. Reprinted from [29].
==PAGE:12==
4
1 Introduction
the models winning the competitions are huge in terms of number of parameters and
takes days to weeks to train. Non-parametric methods such as KNN methods has
O(n) complexity in the inference phase making it unsuitable for fast inference for
real-world applications. Linear parametric methods might be fast to evaluate, but
we hypothesize that the expressive power of linear models are to weak to learn a
challenging task such as outdoor scene parsing. The basic forms of neural networks
are basically stacked versions of linear models followed by some non-linearity making
it possible to compute a richer, non-linear function suitable for this challenging task.
Thus, if we can constrain the size of the neural network through clever network de-
sign, we should be able to compute a rich non-linear mapping, while still being able
to do fast inference. Together with the recent focus on hardware design for fast infer-
ence for neural networks 3, we believe that deep learning could be able to solve the
problem of real-time semantic segmentation. To motivate this statement, in Figure
1.2 we show one of our predictions for one of our proposed models together with the
inference time for a single frame evaluated on a processing unit specifically designed
for real-time deep learning.
Another benefit from using a machine learning approach is that we can learn
representations in new domains. This makes the developed models suitable for other
tasks such as indoor scene segmentation, where little to no alteration to the model is
needed in order to achieve good results. In this work, we are only concerned about
road scene parsing, but in the work of [33], from which we draw much inspiration in
the following, they show that the proposed network achieves good results on outdoor
as well as indoor scenes.
1.3
The focus
The primary task is a trade-off between two different tasks: accurate semantic seg-
mentation versus fast semantic segmentation. This trade-off is inevitable, as larger
models usually outperform smaller models in term of accuracy, but larger models are
in turn slower to evaluate in the inference phase. Our focus is going to be on this
trade-off. Therefore, the focus will naturally be on how to design the deep learning
architecture. The accuracy of the model can only be adjusted through the design of
the model; it should be independent of the hardware and software used to evaluate
the model.4 The inference time, on the other hand, depend on the architecture as
well, but also very much on the software and hardware. So naturally, there will also
be some focus on the software and hardware that we are going to use and how to
optimize this for the primary task at hand. Deep learning has mainly been driven
by academia, so strategies and approaches for deployment of deep learning models
for use in real world applications are still new to the community. Since this work is
3See e.g. https://devblogs.nvidia.com/parallelforall/inference-next-step-gpu-accelerated-deep-learning/
4By software we mean deep learning libraries, programming language etc.
==PAGE:13==
1.4 Related literature
5
Figure 1.2: An example prediction for one of our final models. Here we overlay our
predicted mask on the original image. Red are lanes, green are pedestrians and purple
are cars. This frame can be processed with around 15 FPS on a processor designed
specifically for real-time inference. Own contribution.
prepared with RailBot.ai, and it is the intention that it at some point in time shall be
deployed in a production environment, we find it important that this do not become
a solely academic work. Instead we fell that it is important to address some of the
issues of getting the models we develop ready for a production environment.
1.4
Related literature
AlexNet [25] won the ImageNet classification competition in 2012, which was the first
convolutional neural net based winner. This achievement has spawned a huge inter-
est into convolutional neural nets and the following years famous neural nets such
as VGG [37], GoogleNet [39] and ResNets [17] won the challenge. These nets have
all been focused on image classification and it was not until the fully convolutional
network (FCN) [30] was published in 2015 that deep learners started to focus on se-
mantic segmentation. Since then, a lot of work has been done to improve the FCN for
high-quality semantic segmentation. DeepLab [7] and [47] uses dilated convolution to
==PAGE:14==
6
1 Introduction
enlarge the receptive field. An encoder-decoder structure was introduced by SegNet
[1] and [31], SharpMask [34] introduced a way to refine object segmentations produced
from another neural net. One of the current state-of-the art networks, which has won
the 2016 PASCAL VOC challenge, is the PSPNet [49], which introduces a pyramid
pooling module that incorporates global context information in a novel approach.
Many of these approaches yield visually pleasing and quantitatively good results on
segmentation tasks. None of them can, however, operate in real-time. To our knowl-
edge, there are only a few networks that try to solve the problem of fast semantic
segmentation through clever network design. SegNet [1] removes intermediate layers
to reduce the number of parameters, but is never really close to real-time performance.
ENet [33] is a very light-weight network, where the architecture and hyperparame-
ters are carefully engineered to obtain real-time performance. With inspiration from
SqueezeNet [22], which is a lightweight AlexNet-like network for object recognition,
the SQ network [42] also is able to obtain real-time performance. The authors of
the PSPNet also recently proposed the ICNet [48], where they are able to surpass
many of the real-time-focused networks in terms of accuracy. We are not aware of
any literature that focus on semantic segmentation for trains or lane detection, but
e.g. [42] focus on speeding up semantic segmentation for autonomous driving, which
is a comparable task. In Figure 1.3 an overview of some the best and most famous
models are given. Many of these models are variations of those mentioned above.
Other lines of research related to fast deep learning inference include compression
methods for deep learning methods such as Deep Compression [15] or specialized
hardware design such as EIE [16]. While semantic segmentation can provide guidance
for autonomous vehicles in terms of lane or track detection, instance segmentation
is also important for good autonomous performance. In this line of work, networks
are designed to segment and separate instances of the same class and can as such
be seen as a new task that succeed the task of semantic segmentation. Approaches
such as Mask R-CNN [20] has shown very impressive results in this task and is also
completely learnable from end-to-end. Despite the impressing results, this network
can not operate in real-time. In the talk of [43] it is demonstrated how real-time
semantic instance segmentation is carried out for autonomous cars with astonishing
results. Also the work in [4], shows how to use a of-the-shelf semantic segmentation
network (such as ENet) and then develop a post-processing step to cluster instances.
Hence, all of the research related to semantic segmentation can be used for instance
segmentation by applying this proposed post-processing step.
1.5
Report outline
In Chapter 2 we dive into the theory of deep learning. First, we present basic theory
related to machine learning in general in Section 2.1 and then we proceed to introduce
more advanced stuff for semantic segmentation in Section 2.2. Armed with the the-
oretical knowledge we design nine different strategies that evolve to building blocks
==PAGE:15==
1.5 Report outline
7
Figure 1.3: Current status of semantic segmentation approaches to the Cityscapes
dataset. This Figure is taken from [48] and altered slightly.
(aka network modules) that we will use to form our network designs in Section 2.3. In
order to efficiently evaluate these network, we introduce some considerations related
to hardware and software for deep learning in Section 2.4.
Chapter 3 is all about specifics. The most important part of our work, the datasets,
are presented in Section 3.1, where we introduce a public available dataset for street
scene parsing, Camvid, and a dataset collected in collaboration with RailBot.ai. Next,
in Section 3.2 and 3.3, a small explanation of the hardware and software used for this
work is presented and we introduce the notion of embedded hardware for real-time
deep learning inference using the NVIDIA Jetson TX2 board. The last section of this
Chapter is related to our specific choices for the training process.
Now in Chapter 4 we show the results of our approach. First, we evaluate our
two networks on the public dataset, Camvid, we show predictions and quantitative
measurements and compare them to related literature. This is in Section 4.1. In Sec-
tion 4.2 all the pieces are collected and we show how we have performed for our very
specific RailBot.ai dataset for autonomous trains. To end this Chapter, we present
==PAGE:16==
8
1 Introduction
an analysis of the computing performance of our models in Section 4.4.2 to establish
real-time performance. Everything concludes in a video of our predictions on a whole
new train ride.
We end the work with a Conclusion in Chapter 6, but prior to that we quickly
mention everything we did not have time to do, but still are interesting in relation to
real-time semantic segmentation. This is in Chapter 5: Future Work.
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 2
Theory
In this Chapter we discuss several important concepts of deep learning related to
semantic segmentation. In Section 2.1 we cover the basics of supervised deep learn-
ing that underlies all of the more advanced concept used for semantic segmentation
aka dense predictions. This will form the foundation for a discussion of the more
sophisticated methods that are currently being used for efficient semantic segmenta-
tion. These will be presented in Section 2.2. The section will limit itself to cover
aspects of deep learning which we shall encounter in the practical implementation.
Considerations related to the neural network architecture will be discussed in Section
2.3. Lastly, we will consider choices regarding the hardware and software in Section
2.4.
2.1
Basic Supervised Deep Learning
Deep learning is a subset of what we know as machine learning and are algorithms
that can learn to model complex non-linear functions. The architecture of the deep
learning, neural networks, are inspired by the belief of how the human brain processes
our sensory inputs. The deep learning algorithms can be roughly divided into three
categories [3]:
• Deep learning for unsupervised or generative learning. The aim is to model the
input data by fitting densities. If the associated target classes are available, we
use Bayes rule to turn this into a discriminative learning rule.
• Deep networks for supervised learning or discriminative deep networks. Here
target classes are always available and these types of networks aim to model
the posterior distributions directly conditioned on the input.
• Hybrid deep networks. Here we also aim for a discriminative learning function,
but this is usually assisted by a unsupervised learning model.
This thesis is only concerned with deep discriminative models and we will only con-
sider these in the following.
==PAGE:18==
10
2 Theory
2.1.1
Learning a multi-layer perceptron for classification
As discussed above, supervised deep learning is concerned with the case where we
have both inputs x and targets y. If the targets are real-valued we refer to the task as
a regression problem, whereas if they are discrete it is termed classification, i.e. the
targets {yi}N
i=1 are discrete: y ∈{1, . . . , C} with C being the number of classes. The
multi-layer perceptron (MLP) outputs a probability distribution p(y = c|x) and we
then use decision theory to choose the most probable class as ˆy = arg maxc p(y = c|x).
Before we can introduce the MLP we define the loss function. As we want some
model to be able to learn a discriminate decision function, we need some trainable
parameters. Let θ denote these parameters, which are also usually termed weights
in the deep learning literature. We have the dataset D = {xi, yi}N
i=1 available. If we
now assume that each observation xi is i.i.d distributed we can define the standard
choice of loss function, namely the negative log-likelihood (NLL). Let the likelihood
be
pθ =
N
∏
i=1
pθ(yi|xi)
(2.1)
The weights that maximizes learning are then
θMLE = arg max
θ
N
∏
i=1
pθ(yi|xi)
(2.2)
i.e. the maximum likelihood estimate of the parameters. Taking the negative log
yields
NLL(θ) = −log
N
∏
i=1
pθ(yi|xi) = −
N
∑
i=1
log pθ(yi|xi)
(2.3)
As the target vector is one-hot encoded we can rewrite the likelihood as
p(yi|xi) =
C
∏
c
pθ(yi|xi)yic
(2.4)
Substituting into (2.3) we get
L(θ) = NLL(θ) = −
N
∑
i=1
log
C
∏
c
pθ(yi|xi)yic
= −
N
∑
i=1
C
∑
c
yic log pθ(y|xi)
(2.5)
Equation (2.5) is called the cross-entropy loss function and is widely used in classifi-
cation tasks.
We can now introduce the multi-layer perceptron aka a feed-forward neural network
==PAGE:19==
2.1 Basic Supervised Deep Learning
11
(FFNN). This architecture is the most basic deep learning model and it underlies
everything we are going to cover in the following.
Feed-forward neural networks are essentially stacked versions of linear models followed
by some kind of non-linear activation function. The linear model can be formulated
as:
y(xi, θ) =
M
∑
j=1
θjxi + θ0
(2.6)
In neural network technology this is referred to as the activations such that
aj =
D
∑
i=1
θ(1)
ij xi + θ(1)
j0
(2.7)
Here the superscripts indicate that this particular activation resides in the first layer
of the network and j = 1, ..., M and D number of features. A non-linear differentiable
activation function h(·) is then applied to the activations to give
zj = h(aj)
(2.8)
And are referred to as the hidden units.
If we restrict our attention to a 2-layer
FFNN we can then apply yet another linear combination of the hidden units to get
the output layer
ac =
M
∑
j=1
θ(2)
cj zj + θ(2)
c0
(2.9)
These units are then finally activated using an appropriate non-linear function, which
is determined by the nature of the data. In the case of classification this is usually
the softmax function
softmax(z) = yc(x, θ) =
exp(ac(x, θ))
∑M
j exp(aj(x, θ))
(2.10)
This entire model for a 2-layer FFNN can then be written as
yc(x, θ) = softmax
( M
∑
j=0
θ(2)
cj h
( D
∑
i=0
θ(1)
ji xi
))
(2.11)
Where we have absorbed the bias terms into the parameter vector θ. This can natu-
rally be extended to l > 2 in the same manner.
This model can be used for classification tasks and the nature of this model leads to
the cross-entropy loss function as defined in (2.5). In order to train this model we
can apply a basic gradient based method. If we assume that all non-linear activation
functions are differentiable we can iteratively apply the following update rule
θk+1 = θk −η∇θL(θ)
(2.12)
==PAGE:20==
12
2 Theory
Where η > 0 is termed the learning rate. There exist multiple, more sophisticated
version of this rule, but they all follow this underlying principle for learning the
parameters. In order to train a model of practical interest, this kind of update must
be efficient. The error backpropagation algorithm allow us to do so.
2.1.2
Backpropagation
The backprogration algorithm is obtained by recursively applying the chain rule of
calculus. For simple scalars this is defined as
∂z
∂x = ∂z
∂y
∂y
∂x
(2.13)
Where y = g(x), z = f(g(x)) = f(y) and x = h(w). This can be generalized to
vectors. If x ∈Rm, y ∈Rn, g maps from Rm to Rn and f maps from Rn to R. Now
let y = g(x) and z = f(y) and the chain rule now states
∂z
∂xi
=
∑
j
∂z
∂yj
∂yj
∂xi
∇xz = (∂y
∂x)T ∇yz
(2.14)
Where the second equation is in vector notation and ∂y
∂x is the n × m Jacobian of g.
This can be further generalized to tensors [13]. Now the back-propagation algorithm
consist of performing such jacobian-gradient products as in (2.14) for each operation
in the computational graph.5
A generalization of the the backpropagation algorithm is reverse-mode automatic dif-
ferentiation. For complex networks, deriving the gradients of the loss with respect to
the parameters can be infeasible. Reverse-mode automatic differentiation is a method
to compute the gradients for any system by use of the chain rule and simple gradient
expressions for the operations in the network. This idea is easiest explained by the
use of an example.
Let us consider the sum of two sigmoid functions:
y = σ(xa, θ) + σ(xb, θ)
(2.15)
Where
σ(x, θ) =
1
1 + exp(−θT x)
(2.16)
5See e.g. [13] sec. 6.5.1 for the terminology behind the computational graph
==PAGE:21==
2.1 Basic Supervised Deep Learning
13
We are interested in computing the derivative of y wrt. θ, ∇θy. In order to do so, we
can see the addition of the sigmoids as a function of a sum
y(σ1, σ2) = σ1 + σ2 =
2
∑
i=1
σi
∇σiy = 1
(2.17)
Now the main idea behind the algorithm is to split complicated operations in to minor
operations. So e.g. the sigmoid function can be decomposed as follows:
f4(x) = 1
x
f3(x) = 1 + x
f2(x) = exp(−x)
f1(x, w) = θT x
σ(x, θ) = f4(f3(f2(f1(x, θ))))
(2.18)
And we can compute the derivative of each of these sub-functions:
∇xf4 = −1
x2
∇xf3 = 1
∇xf2 = −exp{−x}
∇xf1 = θ
∇θf1 = x
(2.19)
In order to compute ∇θy we can now apply the chain rule recursively:
∇θy = ∂y
∂θ =
2
∑
i=1
∂σi
∂θ
=
2
∑
i=1
∂σi
∂f4
∂f4
∂θ
=
2
∑
i=1
(∂σi
∂f4
∂f4
∂f3
)∂f3
∂θ
=
2
∑
i=1
((∂σi
∂f4
∂f4
∂f3
)∂f3
∂f2
)∂f2
∂θ
=
2
∑
i=1
(((∂σi
∂f4
∂f4
∂f3
)∂f3
∂f2
)∂f2
∂f1
)∂f1
∂θ
=
2
∑
i=1
(((∇f4σi∇f3f4)∇f2f3)∇f1f2)∇θf1
(2.20)
==PAGE:22==
14
2 Theory
And so we see that we are able to compute ∇θy using only sub-expressions. In reality,
for this particular example, the gradient of the sigmoid operation is very simple, so
we would actually compute this as single gate.
This example illustrates the main principles of reverse-mode automatic differentiation.
We define a set of operations that we can do on some variables. We apply these
operations on the variables and store them in the computational graph - this is the
forward method. Using these stored variables we can compute the backward method,
which computes the partial derivatives with respect to the variables involved in the
operation given any incoming partial derivatives.
A nice way to further illustrate this framework is through graphs. In Figure 2.1 a
concrete example using reverse-mode automatic differentiation for a single sigmoid
gate is shown. This specific sigmoid gate is:
f(θ, x) =
1
1 + exp(−(θ0x0 + θ1 + x1+2))
(2.21)
In this Figure one should read the green values from left to right, the forward pass,
and the red values from right to left, the backward pass. For the backward pass we
e.g. arrive at the value of -0.20 between the multiply and exponential gate by the
following computations:
1 ×
−1
1.372 × 1 × exp(−1) × (−1) = −0.196 ≈−0.20
(2.22)
Figure 2.1: A illustration of the reverse-mode automatic differentiation framework
for a single sigmoid gate. Reprinted from [28].
2.1.3
Regularization
A central problem in machine learning is to make the algorithm at hand able to
perform well on unseen data i.e. the ability to generalize. This need decreases with
the size and diversity of the training data. Unfortunately, we are not always lucky
==PAGE:23==
2.1 Basic Supervised Deep Learning
15
to have diverse and large datasets at hand (as we shall see) and thus, the need for
regularization techniques are present. We shall encounter some common approaches
in this section and later on cover some more advanced techniques, which works par-
ticularly well for our proposed architecture.
The most common and straight-forward way to incorporate a regularization technique
is to apply a penalty on the size of the trainable parameters. This can be done by
adding a penalizing term to the loss function
˜L(θ; x, y) = L(θ; x, y) + αΩ(θ)
(2.23)
Here L is our loss function, e.g. (2.3) and Ω(θ) the penalization-term. The term α is
called the regularization parameter and α > 0. As we want to minimize the objective
function we see that this gives an incentive to the learning algorithm to minimize the
weights θ. The most common encountered choices for Ω(·) is L-2 or L-1 regulariza-
tion.
An obvious way to improve the generalization of your network is to add more data
- usually an expensive process. But adding fake data can be a compromise. This is
what is known as data augmentation. The idea is that the classifier needs to be in-
variant to wide variety of transformations. We then generate new (x, y) observations
in the dataset by transforming x. Dataset augmentation has shown to be particular
useful in deep learning tasks involving perception [13] and later on we shall encounter
augmentation techniques designed specific for our problem at hand. It is important to
note that data augmentation is considered a pre-processing step, so when comparing
two classifiers both should of course be trained on the same data whether or not this
is ”fake” or real.
Another common approach to regularization is dropout, which can be seen as inexpen-
sive approximation to a bagged ensemble of multiple networks [13]. In order to train
the network with dropout we choose a hyperparameter that represent the probability
of a single unit being included or not. Multiple hyperparameters can be defined if
different probabilities is wanted for different classes of units, e.g. input units versus
hidden units. Now for each mini-batch used in an iterative learning method (like
stochastic gradient descent) we sample a binary mask that we apply to all the units
in the network. Dropout has proven to be an effective regularization technique, but
its merits can be limited in the case of few labeled observations [13] or in the context
of convolutional neural networks [32]. We shall encounter more advanced dropout
techniques in the following, which has shown successful for the primary task at hand.
2.1.4
Convolutional networks
Convolutional neural networks (CNN) have shown to be successful in areas where
data has some kind of grid-like topology - the most interesting example for this work:
images. The name implies the use of the mathematical operation convolution and
CNN is simply a neural network that uses convolution instead of matrix multiplication
in one of the layers.
==PAGE:24==
16
2 Theory
In the context of machine learning, convolution may have different mathematical
definitions such as convolution or the cross-correlation. Most of these definitions are
still referred to as convolution [13]. The definition of cross-correlation is:
S(i, j) = (I ∗K)(i, j) =
∑
m
∑
n
I(i + m, j + n)K(m, n)
(2.24)
Where I is a two-dimensional image, K a kernel operator and i and j the indexes
of the image. The convolution operator can be thought of as a weighted average of
values that are close to each other. The illustration in [13] nicely illustrates the use
of (2.24) and is reproduced in Figure 2.2. The use of CNNs are motivated by three
main ideas
• Sparse interactions
• Parameter sharing
• Equivariant representation
Sparse interactions allow the network to use fewer parameters than a dense network.
The basic idea is that each output unit is not connected to each input unit directly,
but may be connected through the deeper layers.
Parameter sharing is the idea
that some of the parameters in the network are used multiple times in the forward
pass rather than only a single time. The parameters are shared across the spatial
Figure 2.2: A basic example of the convolution operator. Reprinted from [13].
==PAGE:25==
2.1 Basic Supervised Deep Learning
17
dimensions. Intuitively, parameter sharing allow us to detect the same spatial features
in different locations of the images, which often is a reasonable assumption. Such
parameter sharing scheme will reduce the memory requirements in training. Lastly,
an equivariant representation means that the if the input changes the output changes
in the same way.
The convolutional layer is operated by four hyperparameters: number of filters K,
the spatial extent F, the stride S and the amount of zero-padding P. The number of
filters are the convolutional layers learnable parameters. A filter F is usually small
spatially (along the width and height of an image) and extends through the color
channels (depth). We need to decide on the size of the filter F as a hyperparameter
and the number of filters K. Furthermore, the stride S is a parameter that determines
how many pixels we slide at a time. A stride of one indicates we slide one pixel at
a time. A stride of two will allow the filter to jump two pixels at a time, which will
produce smaller output spatially. Lastly, the zero-padding is a parameter that allow
us to pad the input with zeros around the border. This is used to control the spatial
size of the output of the layer.
In practical neural network modeling it is useful to know how the convolutional layer
alters the input dimensions. The following rules show to calculate the number of
parameters in a convolutional layer as well as the output dimension of this layer.
Given an input of size (H × W × D) the output size is:
• Hout = (H −F + 2P)/S + 1
• Wout = (W −F + 2P)/S + 1
• Dout = K
And the number of parameters are given according to F · F · D · K with K bias
parameters.
The success of CNNs cannot be completely owed to convolutional layers. Usually,
the convolutional layer is followed by a non-linear layer and subsequently what is
known as a pooling layer. The non-linear layer is a non-parametric layer that basically
implements a non-linear function (see also Section 2.2.6) which is applied elementwise
across the input. The dimensions are leaved unchanged. A pooling layer also requires
the hyperparameter F and S and is a non-parametric layer.
It slides across the
spatial dimension and resizes it using e.g. a max operation. For an example if we
use a filter of size 2 × 2 and a stride of 2, the max operation will compute the max of
four numbers. The depth dimension of the image remains unchanged and the pooling
operation operates independently on the depth level. Instead of max pooling one can
also use L2-norm pooling or some other kind of summary measure. The pooling layer
introduces invariance into the network and it also eases the computational burden
due to subsampling of the spatial dimension. The output dimensions of the pooling
is given by:
• Hout = (H −F)/S + 1
==PAGE:26==
18
2 Theory
• Wout = (W −F)/S + 1
• Dout = D
Using pooling will throw away the exact location of the detected feature, but the intu-
ition for this to work is that the exact location doesn’t matter as much as the relative
location to other detected features. However, it has recently been common to see
people criticize the use of pooling operations [38] and instead propose to downsample
using larger strides in the convolutional layer. 6
2.1.5
Learning
Learning a neural network relies heavily on optimization theory, but differs in many
important ways. We shall see some common optimization algorithms in this section.
The most fundamental deep learning algorithm is the stochastic gradient descent
(SGD) - a variant of basic gradient descent. As our datasets become increasingly
large the computational demand for doing a single descent step becomes too costly.
The stochastic part of the gradient descent solves this problem due to the insight that
the gradient is actually an expectation. Our cost functions usually decomposes as a
sum over training examples
L(θ) = E[L(x, y; θ)] = 1
N
n
∑
L(xi, yi; θ)
(2.25)
Where L is the per-training loss. From this we also see how the loss L acts as an
expectation. The gradient
∇θL(θ) = 1
N
n
∑
∇θL(xi, yi; θ)
(2.26)
has a high computational demand, since it requires evaluating the model on every
observation. So for learning we estimate it by use of mini-batches. In this case we
choose a small number of samples, typically 1 (aka online learning) to a couple of
hundred and draw a minibatch B either randomly or just by going through the entire
training set. The estimate of the gradient can then be applied to (2.12). There are
a lot of justification for using an estimate of the gradient rather than calculating the
exact gradient each time, but the main advantage is due to the decrease in computa-
tional demand. Almost every deep learning model out there now uses some kind of
stochastic estimation of the gradient. Along with this increased popularity a number
of problems have been detected such as too noisy estimates of the gradient, exploding
or vanishing gradients, the problem of multiple local minima and long-term depen-
dencies. In order to overcome some of these problems, new algorithms have been
proposed. One that builds upon SGD is learning with momentum. The idea is that
6See
also
the
AMA
with
Geoffrey
Hinton
https://www.reddit.com/r/MachineLearning/
comments/2lmo0l/ama_geoffrey_hinton/clyj4jv/?context=1.
==PAGE:27==
2.1 Basic Supervised Deep Learning
19
gradients from past iterations still contain some important information. It accumu-
lates an exponentially decaying moving average of the past gradients and then still
moves in their direction. Formally, we can introduce a variable ν, which will contain
the direction and speed of the parameters, and the update rule then becomes
ν ←αν −η∇θ
( 1
N
N
∑
L(f(xi; θ, yi)
)
θ ←θ + ν
(2.27)
With this implementation the step size is now controlled by the previous gradients.
If they are large and aligned the step size is large.
SGD with momentum as described above can be further enhanced by implementing
an adaptive learning rate, which is notoriously difficult to choose together with having
great importance for the learning. One such algorithm is the ADAM [24] algorithm.
The name arises from the term ”adaptive moments”. It implements momentum and
a adaptive learning rate. We shall see the ADAM algorithm in practice later.
2.1.6
Optimization heurestics
In traditional machine learning and optimization theory in general, careful design of
the objective function, allow the optimization process to converge without to many
problems. In deep learning, however, the objective function is usual non-convex and
often very complex. As such, we often rely on heuristics to get good convergence in
our training phase.
Gradient clipping Here the gradient update is ’clipped’ to have a maximum norm
or value in order to avoid vanishing or exploding gradients.
Learning rate monitoring This is simply a heuristic where we monitor the learning
process and when no improvement has been made over a specific number of epochs,
we lower the learning rate. This can help the optimizer to settle more easily.
Early stopping Many deep learning models have huge capacity and can therefore
easily overfit, indicated by a continuously falling training loss and a rising validation
error. A way to overcome this is simply to monitor the validation error over the learn-
ing process and then stop training when it has not improved for some pre-specified
time. Another way is to simply run the training for as long as one want and only
save the weights that achieved the highest validation error.
Weight initializers In [18] a method for initializing weights in the network is pro-
posed.
They derive a scheme that takes into account that the non-linearity is a
rectifier. The method they propose is
θl
i = N(0,
√
2
ˆnl
)
(2.28)
Where ˆnl is the number of incoming neurons to the layer that are being initialized.
According to [18] this should speed-up learning as well as enable the optimizer to find
==PAGE:28==
20
2 Theory
better minima compared to other standard initialization methods such as zeros, ones
or random normal.
2.2
Deep Learning for effecient dense predictions
2.2.1
Semantic segmentation
Semantic segmentation/scene labeling is the process of recognizing and delineating
objects in an image. This implies that we need to classify each pixel in the image
as opposed to ”standard” CNNs that only recognize the object. As such, it is worth
digging deeper into the architectural differences between these two different tasks.
The key insight into translating a classification network into a network that predicts
a heat map is to switch fully connected layers in the network with a convolutional
counter part. This idea was first pitched by Long et. al [30] and in Figure 2.3 the
idea of translation is depicted. The resulting network is called a fully convolutional
network (FCN). A FCN learns representations and make decisions based on local
spatial input. Appending a fully connected layer (as in conventional CNNs) enables
the network to learn based on global information, but at the cost of throwing away
spatial information. Without appending the MLP to the FCN we require another
loss function for optimization. Our predictions are now pixel-wise and is produced
Figure 2.3: The transformation from a classification network to a segmentation net-
work. Reprinted from [30].
==PAGE:29==
2.2 Deep Learning for effecient dense predictions
21
by a softmax classifier. The loss then becomes
L = −1
N
N
∑
n=1
C
∑
c=1
tnc log(ync)
(2.29)
Where N is the number of pixels, C the number of classes, ync is the output from the
softmax classifier and tnc our labels. With these minor alterations to a classical clas-
sification network, we are now able to do pixelwise-classification. There are, however,
a lot of design choices in the architecture that can greatly improve the accuracy and
the efficiency of the network. Many of these choices are new in the literature and we
describe the theoretical foundation underlying the ideas in the following sections.
2.2.2
Handling class-imbalances
While the problem of class imbalances is not restricted to semantic segmentation, it
is a problem that frequent arises in such tasks. In urban street scenes a sign or traffic
light can be of utmost importance to detect. These classes, however, tend to occupy
much less pixels than e.g. a road or sky class and can as such be difficult to learn for
the classifier. Furthermore, some classes might not show up very frequent. We might
not see a lot of pedestrians in a train ride through a tunnel, and if the model only
sees few of such cases, it can prevent it from learning much about this class. In order
to overcome this problem we propose some different methods in the following.
2.2.2.1
Weighted cross-entropy
In (2.29) each class is weighted uniformly. Consequently, a faulty prediction for an
over-represented class will contribute to the total error as much as a under-represented
class. But if we are interested in compensating for under-sampled classes, we can
define a weighted cross-entropy loss as:
L = −1
N
N
∑
n=1
C
∑
c=1
tnc log(ync)wc
(2.30)
Where wc now is the weight for each class. For an example, if w1 = 2 and w2 = 1, we
will put twice as much weight on the first class compared to the second. The problem
of choosing the weights now arises. In the work of Adam Paszke et al. [33] they
propose to calculate the weight as wc =
1
log(k+pc) and choose k = 1.02 as to restrict
the weights to be in the interval wc ∈[1, 50]. Here pc is the probability of class c
occurring, which we simply estimate by the frequency. Another common approach is
to use median frequency wc = median({pc|c∈C})
pc
.
2.2.2.2
Up- and downsampling
When a class is seldomly observed in the training data, the network can have diffi-
culties learning the characteristics of this class. In order to overcome this, one can
==PAGE:30==
22
2 Theory
upsample the respective class or downsample some of the major classes. This can be
combined with the data augmentation techniques previously mentioned such that a
under-represented class might get augmented more frequently than one of the over-
represented classes and can be used to ensure balanced mini-batches.
2.2.3
Deep Residual Learning (ResNets)
To motivate the use of Deep Residual Networks (ResNets) we refer to an experimenta-
tion carried out by [17]. They show by experimentation that a shallower counterpart-
network is easier to optimize and produces smaller training error compared to a deeper
network. They are able to compare the deep/shallow network, since the deep network
simply copies the layers from the shallow network and the added layers consist only
of identity mappings. This construction should in theory be as good, but our current
solvers seem to be unable to find a good solution to the optimization problem. In
order to allow for deep networks to be properly optimized they introduce the Residual
Nets.
The central idea behind ResNets [17, 19] is that the network shall learn a residual
function rather than the true underlying mapping that we try to estimate. If we
let H(x) denote the true underlying mapping, we can define the residual function as
F(x) := H(x) −x. The true underlying function is now H(x) = F(x) + x. Both
functions should in theory be able to approximate the desired mappings, but in re-
ality, one might be easier to optimize. One can see this as a reformulation. If an
identity mapping is optimal for the problem at hand, the learning will simply drive
the weights towards zero making the term F(xl, Wl) vanish. But for real cases an
identity mapping is unlikely to be optimal. The reformulation can, however, help to
precondition the problem, such that, if the optimal underlying mapping is closer to
identity than zero, it should be easier to learn. As [17] show, the residual functions
due in general exhibit only minor deviations, suggesting that identity mappings are
a reasonably preconditioning.
The ResNets consist of several building blocks, which all share the same properties.
These blocks are defined as:
yl = F(xl, Wl) + h(xl)
xl+1 = f(yl)
(2.31)
And is referred to as ”Residual Units”. Here xl and xl+1 are the input and output of
the l’th unit, respectively, h(·) is a mapping, which we usually take as the identity, ie.
h(x) = x, Wl is the learnable parameters and f(·) is a non-linear activation function
such as ReLU.
2.2.3.1
Further analysis of ResNets
In order to better understand how deep ResNets work, we present a more formal
analysis of such in this section. The work is mostly based on [19].
==PAGE:31==
2.2 Deep Learning for effecient dense predictions
23
In (2.31) Wl is the weights and biases in the l’th layer. If we denote the weights in the
k-th layer in one Residual Unit as Wl = {Wl,k|1≤k≤K} then Wl is now a collections
of weights residing in one Residual Unit. In the original formulation of ResNets [17]
K = {2, 3}. If we let both f(·) and h(·) be identity mappings, we can reformulate
(2.31) to:
xl+1 = f(F(xl, Wl) + h(xl)) = F(xl, Wl) + xl
(2.32)
If we do this recursively we end up with
xL = xl +
L−1
∑
i=l
F(xi, Wi)
(2.33)
Equation (2.33) leads to the following backwards propagation properties
∂L
∂xL
= ∂L
∂xL
∂xL
∂xl
= ∂L
∂xL
(
1 + ∂
∂xl
L−1
∑
i=l
F(xi, Wi)
)
= ∂L
∂xL
+ ∂L
∂xL
( ∂
∂xl
L−1
∑
i=l
F(xi, Wi)
)
(2.34)
Equation (2.34) implies that the information is propagated through two terms. The
first term ensures that information flows to any shallower layer l and propagates
information directly without interacting with any layers. The second term propagates
through the weight layers.
The previous analysis relies on the assumptions that f(·) and h(·) both are identity
mappings. In the original paper [17] they nearly always use identity mappings, expect
when they increase dimensions or reduce the feature map sizes.
In our proposed
architectures we use both approaches.
2.2.4
Data augmentation and pre-processing
As the datasets we have at hand are relatively small the pre-processing steps together
with the data augmentation become very important. There exist multiple ways of
augmenting data, not all suitable for semantic segmentation for autonomous trains.
In discussing affine image transformations we realize that train scene images are
rotation invariant for small rotation degrees, translation invariant in either direction,
zoom invariant, sheer invariant for small degrees and also invariant to reflections at
least in the horizontal direction. These are standard affine images transformation
that are defined by:
ˆx = a0x + a1y + a2 = sxx cos(θ) −syy sin(θ + σ) + a2
ˆy = b0x + b1y + b2 = sxx sin(θ) + syy cos(θ + σ) + b2
(2.35)
==PAGE:32==
24
2 Theory
Which can be written as a transformation matrix:


a0
a1
a2
b0
b1
b2
0
0
1


(2.36)
Here x and y are the original 2D coordinates, ˆx and ˆy the transformed coordinates,
sx and sy the scale factors in the x and y direction, θ the rotation in degrees and σ
the shear in degrees. In Figure 2.4 an overview of the different transformations can
be seen.
In the particular case of outdoor scene images, more augmentation techniques can be
applied - it is all about being creative. We suggest using two other augmentations
than the affine transformations considered above: one that randomly changes the
brightness of the image and one that randomly adds a shadow to the image. The
brightness augmentation is easily done by converting the image from RGB space to
HSV space and then randomly scale the value channel. For the random shadow aug-
mentation technique, we randomly sample a grid of the image, change the brightness
to a darker shade and then overlay it on the original image. This resembles an artifi-
cial shadow. In Figure 2.5 we see an example from one of our training images.
A common pre-processing step is to center and normalize the images, such that they
have zero mean and unit variance, which we shall apply as well.
2.2.5
Encoder-decoder networks
Inspired by unsupervised auto-encoders, an encoder-decoder network was introduced
by Badrinarayanan et al. [1] in their SegNet architecture. This approach overcomes
some of the problems that previous deep learning approaches to semantic segmen-
tation have had. The goal of an encoder-decoder design is to let the decoder map
low resolution feature maps from the output of the encoder to a full input image size.
Previous methods used networks designed for object classification and then used some
kind of ad-hoc approach to upsample the deeper feature maps. This approach will
result in non-smooth predictions.
The encoder-decoder is thus a way to let the decoder learn the upsampling, while the
encoder is in charge of filtering and processing information by operating on smaller
resolution data as typical classification architectures does.
2.2.6
Nonlinearity
Non-linear activation functions in neural nets are yet another design choice. Recti-
fied activation units are essential for the state-of-art networks in image recognition
tasks. In this work we will consider three variation of such: Exponential Linear Units
(ELU) [8], Rectified Linear Units (ReLU) [21] and Parametric Rectified Linear Units
(PReLU) [18].
==PAGE:33==
2.2 Deep Learning for effecient dense predictions
25
Original
Shear
Rotation
Scale
Translation Horizontal flipping
Figure 2.4: An example of common data augmentation techniques. Own contribution.
ELUs are defined as
f(x) =
{
x
if x > 0
α(exp(x) −1)
if x ≤0
(2.37)
Where α is a hyperparameter with default value 1. ReLUs as
f(x) = max(0, x)
(2.38)
And lastly, PReLUs as
f(x) =
{
x
if x > 0
αx
if x ≤0
(2.39)
Where α now is a learnable parameter. According to [13] the popularity of rectifiers
is due to the fact that they exhibit a more linear structure than their counterpart
non-linear functions such as sigmoid or tanh. This eases learning and also speeds
up computation in the forward and backward passes. The intuition behind using
PReLUs is that they should be able to learn the negative slop of the non-linearities.
So where identity is the preferred mapping the weights will be close to 1 and if ReLU is
preferable the weights close to 0. PReLUs introduce one extra parameter per feature
==PAGE:34==
26
2 Theory
(a) Original, non-augmented, image.
(b) Augmented image.
Figure 2.5: An example of brightness and shadow augmentation. Own contribution.
==PAGE:35==
2.2 Deep Learning for effecient dense predictions
27
map if used after a convolutional layer. In contrast to this ELUs do not use any
additional parameters. It still uses identity for positive parts, but in the negative
part it allows to push mean unit activations closer to zero, which is comparable to
batch normalization, but with lower computational complexity.
2.2.7
Dilated convolutions
A dilated convolution module were introduced by Yu et al.
[47] to handle issues
that arises in the context of semantic segmentation. The idea behind this module is
that it should be able to acquire multi-scale contextual information without losing
resolution, which is common for typical CNN architectures designed for classification.
It relies on dilated convolutions.7
This kind of convolution introduces one more
hyperparameter compared to the standard convolution defined in Section 2.1.4, which
is the dilation rate. The standard convolution is contiguous - it is only concerned with
neighboring pixels. The dilated convolution have spaces between each pixel. The size
of these spaces is defined by the dilation rate.
A dilation rate of 0 is equivalent
to standard convolution, while a dilatation rate of 1 will add a gap of 1 between
each entry in the kernel, which is why it is also called convolution with holes or
atrous convolutions.8 This is nicely illustrated in [47] and reproduced in Figure 2.6.
From this visualization it is obvious why it is called dilated convolutions. One just
upsamples the filters and fills the holes with zeros, resulting in a sparse filter and
then subsequently perform a normal convolution. The dilated convolutions allow us
to aggregate spatial information much more aggressively compared to the standard
convolution operator.
7Note we do not describe the module proposed, just the dilated convolution operator
8See the TensorFlow implementation https://github.com/tensorflow/tensorflow/commit/
c1aa6423e35803d08b7092a874632b6b7b13a130.
Figure 2.6: Dilated convolutions. Reprinted from [47]
==PAGE:36==
28
2 Theory
2.2.8
Spatial dropout
Spatial dropout (aka. groupout [32]) was introduced in [41] as an alternative to the
standard dropout technique. In the context of convolutional neural networks it is not
common to see standard dropouts being applied. The feature maps produced by a
convolutional layer have learned to be a feature detector. So each feature map only has
high activation when a specific input pattern occurs and each unit for this particular
filter detector thus has same functionality. Since the units in the feature maps are so
strongly correlated it is usually not enough to zero out pixels. Instead spatial dropout
will zero out entire feature maps in order to prevent overfitting. Results from [41]
and [33] shows that this idea outperforms standard dropout.
2.2.9
Unpooling
In the architectures to be presented, we use an encoder-decoder structure as intro-
duced in Section 2.2.5. As mentioned here, the encoder will usually work identically
to classic classification architectures, which often make use of pooling modules. These
are in charge of downsampling images in the spatial dimensions, and so, whenever
we downsample in the encoder, we must do an equivalent upsampling in the decoder.
Since the max-pooling operation is not injective, it does not have an inverse. In order
to mimic an inverse, we have investigated three different methods for the unpooling
operation. Say we use a max-pooling operation with a pool width of n, then the
proposed methods are:
1. Replace each input entry with a n × n grid filled with the original entry
2. Replace each input entry with a n×n grid where the original input is persevered
in the upper-left corner and the rest is filled with zeros
3. Memorize the indices of the max-pooling operation and replace the input entry
with a n × n grid, where the original entry is placed in its original position
Intuition and experimental results have shown that the third approach works well
when further combined with deconvolutions (see Section 2.2.10). This approach was
suggested and visualized in [31]. The visualization is reproduced in Figure 2.7. Here
the switch variables are the result of applying an argmax-operation, ie. the indices
for where the max-element is located.
2.2.10
Deconvolutions
When using the term deconvolution in the context of deep learning, we mean ”the op-
posite of convolution”, but many in the community dislike the term.9 Instead people
refer to it as transposed convolution or fractionally strided convolution. By now we
9See e.g. the lecture by Justin Johnson https://youtu.be/ByjaPdWXKJ4?t=4m16s
==PAGE:37==
2.2 Deep Learning for effecient dense predictions
29
Figure 2.7: The memory max-unpooling operation. Reprinted from [31].
know that a classical convolutional layer acts as a feature extractor - they transform
the input image to multidimensional features representations. The goal of the trans-
posed convolution is the opposite. It is a learnable layer, which is intended to learn
to be a shape generator, generating complicated objects from the features extracted
from the convolutional layers. This idea was, to our knowledge, first proposed in [31]
where they employ a VGG-net appended with a symmetrical deconvolutional decoder
that uses memory max-unpooling followed by deconvolutional layers. As is the case
with conventional convolution the transposed convolution operation can also act as a
subsampling layer when using strides > 1. In particular, when we want to subsample
with a factor of f, a fractional stride of 1/f in the transposed convolution will do the
job. Such an operation will eliminate the need for (un)pooling layers and/or fixed
upsampling layers such as bilinear or nearest neighbor upsampling. As described in
[38] and [30], using (transposed) convolutions can be seen as a way to learn the upsam-
pling procedure and it introduces inter-feature dependencies compared to (un)pooling
layers previously described.
In Figure 2.8 the deconvolution operation is compared to the original convolution. In
this particular visualization a kernel of size 3 × 3 is used in both cases. It is seen that
the convolution aggregates information from the nine units below, while the deconvo-
lution enriches the information from the one unit below to nine units. Another way
of visualizing this operation is shown in Figure 2.9. As in the standard convolutional
case, the filter weights are shared across the spatial dimensions. In the Figure, the
filters are represented by the red and blue 3 × 3 squares. Now in this particular case
displayed, the output map is calculated by taking the 3 × 3 learned filter and scale it
by the one unit in the input map. So the difference between the red and blue squares
in the output map lies in the scaling of the filter determined by the input unit. Notice
that in this case we use a stride of two, so the input doubles. In our terminology used
above this correspond to a fractional strided convolution of 1/2. In our implemen-
tations we will employ both of the strategies for upsampling described above: either
using memory max-unpooling in conjunction with transposed convolution, or simply
use the transposed convolutional layer to learn the upsampling itself.
==PAGE:38==
30
2 Theory
Figure 2.8: The deconvolution operation compared to classical convolution. Reprinted
from [31].
Figure 2.9: The deconvolution operation in details. Reprinted from [14].
The transposed convolution is trivial to implement given the convolutional forward
and backward pass is already implemented, as it simply reverses the forward and
backward passes of the standard convolutional operation. See e.g. [30], [31] or [12]
for further specifics on the operation.
2.2.11
Batch normalization
Batch normalization has shown to speed up learning for deep neural nets considerably
[23] and can be seen as yet another optimization heuristic (see Section 2.1.6), but also
as a regularizer for the network. It implements a basic, yet powerful idea. Given a
mini-batch, the batch normalization layer computes the empirical mean and variance
and normalize the mini-batch to have zero-mean and unit-variance.
This is also
typical done as a pre-processing step (see Section 2.2.4), but during training the mini-
==PAGE:39==
2.2 Deep Learning for effecient dense predictions
31
batches of data might be scaled to undesirable scales. Adding batch normalization
throughout the network will keep the desirable scale of whitened inputs. In addition
to this, the batch normalization do have learnable parameters that allow the layer to
learn a transformation different from the zero-mean unit-variance transformation. Let
ˆxi be a normalized input sample then (γ, β) is the learnable parameters in yi = γˆxi+β.
If γ =
√
σ2 ie. the mini-batch variance and β = µ ie. the mini-batch mean, then the
network have learned the identity transformation as this can be seen to the inverse
operation of the z-score used to whiten the inputs. Some implementations uses a
running mean, called momentum, such that µt = µt−1m + µt(1 −m), where m is the
momentum hyperparameter. The output dimension of the layer remains the same,
while the number of parameters is 4f where, f if the number of features for which
we normalize. Four originates from the four parameters: β, γ, the running mean and
the running standard deviation, where only β and γ are trainable.
2.2.12
Transfer learning
Transfer learning has become a widely adopted concept when training deep CNNs.
It is based on the observation that almost every CNN for image processing tend to
learn the same features in the first layers of the network, namely Gabor filters or
color blobs. This is so well-established in practical deep learning by now that if we do
not see such features in the early layers, we can be quite confident that something is
wrong [46]. This phenomenon is also independent on the supervised task at hand, ie.
are we doing e.g. classification, semantic segmentation or instance segmentation. As
such, features trained for classification should be transferable to segmentation tasks.
The findings of Yosinski et al [46] shows that even though the original task and the
target tasks are quite different, initializing the weights using transfer learning can
often produce better results than random initialization.
There are several ways to use the concept of transfer learning - we shall be con-
cerned with two: Fine-tuning pre-trained layers and train the encoder separately in
an encoder-decoder setup.
As previously mentioned most work in deep learning for image processing has been
in image classification. As we are about to see, our proposed architectures resemble
a classification network in the encoder parts of the network. It is thus apparent to
initialize the encoder layers with pre-trained features, given that the encoder com-
pares to an architecture for which public pre-trained weights exist. If no such freely
available weights exist, there are other ways to utilize the benefits of transfer learn-
ing.
Given that image classification is a much easier task than segmentation, we
could train the encoder to categorize downsampled regions (which is comparable to
classification) rather than learning the segmentation task from scratch. It is thus
the intention that the encoder will learn the previously mentioned features that are
shared across most vision tasks faster (and perhaps better) and we can then append
the decoder to learn the upsampling afterwards. This can be done by either freezing
the encoder layers or allow the optimizer to also fine-tune the encoder weights to the
==PAGE:40==
32
2 Theory
segmentation task.
One last thing to mention in the context of transfer learning is its use for small
datasets. The results in [11] indicates that using a very-large and diverse dataset
(such as ImageNet) to pre-train (parts of) the network, can substantially improve the
generalization error compared to only training on a small dataset. This is because the
network learns more generalizable features and it thus becomes better in adapting to
a different domain.
2.2.13
Evaluation metrics
In image classification it is common to report the accuracy as evaluation metric for
your classifier. In semantic segmentation, however, this metric can be quite misleading
when comparing different models due to imbalanced classes. As such, a need for better
evaluation metrics exists. In [10] they evaluate common metrics.
One way to deal with the imbalanced class problem is to compute the accuracy for
each class and then average across the classes. This can, however, be problematic
for datasets with a large background class. Hence, the most common metric used is
Jaccard Index aka. intersection over union (IoU). This evaluates the area of overlap
between the ground truth and predictions relative to the area of union for each class.
We then compute the average for all classes.
Given a confusion matrix has been
computed over the entire dataset, the IoU metric can be computed easily as
IoU =
TP
TP + FP + FN
(2.40)
The IoU metric shall serve as our primary metric for the evaluation of a model.
It is common to report the above mentioned statistics computed across the entire
dataset. However, it might be desirable to compute a metric on a per-image basis.
This will enable us to distinguish between models that delivers a medium score for
all images compared to a model that does very good on some images and very bad on
others. It further enable us to evaluate the performance of models statistically using
e.g. t-test.
2.3
Network architecture strategies and modules
The two previous sections have introduced most of the theory needed for our deep
learning model. However, there are many different ways of combining the described
techniques as well as a huge choice of hyperparameter settings. For an example: do
we use kernels of size 3 × 3 or size 5 × 5? How do we combine pooling layers with
convolutions? And how do we structure our layers to get most bang for the buck?
In this section we will develop different strategies, modules and the intuition behind
them, such that we can use these to build our networks. One thing to keep in mind
while reading this section is that semantic segmentation faces an inherent tension be-
==PAGE:41==
2.3 Network architecture strategies and modules
33
tween semantics and location: global information learns what while local information
learns where. Together with the inevitable trade-off between speed and accuracy, this
requires careful design of the network.
2.3.1
Strategies
1. Use small filters for convolutions. The power of using small filters lies in the
fact that is allows for more non-linearity and fewer parameters. To see this, we must
first convince our selves that a stack of e.g. three stacked convolution layers with a
kernel size of 3 × 3 has the same effective receptive field at the input image as one
7 × 7 convolution. In Figure 2.10 we see an example for two stacked convolutions
and how the effective receptive field is increasing with deeper networks. Thus, using
smaller filters allow us to use deeper networks which in turn allow us to use more
non-linearity by applying a non-linear layer between each convolution. Furthermore,
the three 3 × 3 stacked convolutions have fewer parameters: 3 × (32 × C2) compared
to the 7 × 7 convolution: 72 × C2, where C is the depth dimension.
2. Asymmetric convolutions Using asymmetric convolutions can be another
way to increase the non-linearity as well as reduce the number of parameters. To see
this, suppose we replace e.g. a 3 × 3 convolution with two convolutions: one with a
3 × 1 filter and one with a 1 × 3 filter. This will preserve the effective receptive field,
but the number of parameters are 6C2 and 9C2, respectively.
3.
All about dilated convolutions As we should have established by now,
a large receptive field is important for the model in order to classification. Dilated
convolutions aggregate information much more quickly across the spatial dimensions
without any additional compute cost and can as such be preferable to include in
the model. This is in contrast to use heavy downsampling to achieve larger recep-
tive fields. We first get inspiration from the multi-scale context aggregation module
presented in [47]. They choose the dilation factor such that the receptive field is
Figure 2.10: Effective receptive field of stacked convolutions. Reprinted from [26].
==PAGE:42==
34
2 Theory
exponentially expanded. Hence, for our models we first try dilation factors of 2, 4, 6
and 8. However, in Deeplab [7] an Atrous Spatial Pyramid Pooling (ASPP) module,
which we shall call Parallel Dilated Convolution, is introduced. In such a module four
dilated convolutions with different strides are computed in parallel and then fused
together using an element-wise sum. In this work they use a dilation rate of 6, 12, 18
and 24, which allow for large receptive fields, or Field-Of-Views using the terminology
from deeplab. Hence, we shall also test this approach in the following. The main idea
behind using such an approach is that we can avoid downsampling too much and
still achieve large receptive fields. But we have to keep in mind that, cf. strategy 5,
downsampling increases compute efficiency.
4. Bottleneck 1 × 1 modules Using what is known as bottleneck modules can
further reduce the number of parameters used in a convolution. Recall that the con-
volution operator works on all filters in the filter bank, so a 1 × 1 convolution can
be used to subsample in the channel dimension. This is referred to as a bottleneck
module. First, let a 1 × 1 convolution downsample in the channel dimension, then
perform a regular convolution, say 3 × 3 on the downsampled filter bank, and then
use yet another 1 × 1 convolution to upsample the filter bank again. As we work on
a sub-sampled input, we reduce the number of parameters used. In Figure 2.11 an
example of how this can be implemented can be seen.
The above strategies were all concerned with the convolution operator and can
be seen as a low-rank approximation to the convolution that allow for speed-ups.
Additionally, when factorizing the convolution as we do here, we can add more non-
linearity, making it possible to compute a richer function.
5. Early versus late downsampling Until now we have assumed that fewer
parameters imply faster inference, which all else equal is also the case. But there
Figure 2.11: A bottleneck example. Reprinted from [26].
==PAGE:43==
2.3 Network architecture strategies and modules
35
are other things that can affect the inference time such as the spatial dimensions
of the frames we process throughout the network. Since we use parameter sharing
in the convolutions the number of parameters won’t be affected by a larger input
in the spatial dimensions. As such, downsampling late in the network would leave
number of convolution parameters unchanged (all else equal), but every convolution
would operate on a larger input spatially, making the forward pass slower. In [33]
they argue that an aggressive downsampling in the beginning of the network make
intuitive sense, since visual information is highly spatially redundant. However, in
[22] they report that late downsampling improve classification performance, which is
also what we tend to believe according to our experiments. As such, it turns out
to be very important how the initial layers downsample in the encoder. Aggressive
downsampling improve inference time, but reduce classification accuracy. So again,
we need to find the right trade-off through experiments. In general, however, we will
favor a relatively large downsampling, since we hypothesize that the positive effects
on the inference time outweighs the negative effects on the accuracy.
6. Nonlinear operations We limit our choices of non-linearity to be rectifiers.
[33] reports that PReLUs increase accuracy, but they also add extra parameters that
is equivalent to the number of channels in the convolution layer applied prior to the
non-linear layer. That is, of course, if we share the PReLU parameters across the
spatial dimensions, which we do with inspiration from the original article [18]. If we
want to discard these extra parameters, we can use ELUs instead. [8] report improved
performance over ReLUs and PReLUs while speeding up training time. Initially we
will deploy the rectifiers which have previously shown to work in the proposed archi-
tectures.
7. Avoiding representational bottlenecks In [40] Google engineers define a
representational bottleneck. A feed-forward network such as those we employ, have
a very clear information flow from input to output. Thus, at any point in the net-
work it is easy to see how much information is floating through. A representational
bottleneck is a layer in the network that does extreme compression. In general the
network should gently decrease the representation size in the encoder and vice versa
in the decoder. A strategy to avoid such bottlenecks is to rethink the convolution and
pooling interaction. Traditionally, we first apply convolution and then pooling. But
the convolution operation is on the non-downsampled input, making it an expensive
operation. If we reverse the operation, we ease the computation, but this creates
a representational bottleneck. The idea behind the inception modules employed by
Google, is to do convolution and pooling in parallel both with a stride 2 and then
concatenate the feature maps afterwards. The resulting output dimension is the same
as in the traditional approach, but here we have avoided the representational bottle-
neck while also reducing the computational complexity by using a stride of 2 in the
convolution. [33] reports a speed-up of 10 times in the initial downsampling module
using this approach.
==PAGE:44==
36
2 Theory
8. Handling coarse upsamplings As we have already covered previously, com-
bining transposed convolutions with memory max-(un)pooling is a way of handling
coarse upsamlings - a strategy which we shall test later. However, we would also like
to try another approach proposed by Facebook in there SharpMask architecture [34].
Here they suggest to combine information from the encoder, which has richer spatial
information in the early layers, with the semantic information from the early layers
in the decoder. In this way they are able to get finer segmentation boundaries due to
the low-level knowledge of object boundaries found in the early layers of the encoder.
9. Local network topology Inspired by the inception network line of thinking
[40], we employ a strategy where we design a good local network topology and then
stack these modules on top of each other. By combining all of the above strategies,
we propose a set of different modules in the next section, which we use as building
blocks in our proposed networks.
2.3.2
Modules
We now collect all the dots from the previous section and explain the building blocks
that we are going to use in our networks. When reading this, one should be aware
of the fact that it is not the intention that all modules are used together in the same
network.
ENet Bottleneck module The BottleNeck module [17] is depicted in Figure
2.12. This module draws inspiration from ResNets as well as strategy 1-4 and 6-9.
The upper branch, also called the shortcut connection, consists of a max pooling oper-
ation or a max unpooling operation and a padding operation or convolution operation
depending on whether we are in the encoder or decoder. Most of the times it is just
a residual identity connection. The padding operation acts on the channel dimension,
such that the addition between the two branches is doable. The lower branch, called
the main branch, consists of three convolution operations: a 1 × 1 reduction convo-
lution, a main convolution operation and a 1 × 1 expansion convolution leveraging
strategy 1 and 4. Lastly, we apply a dropout layer as regularizer. The two branches
are merged using an add operation which employ strategy 7. Red arrows indicate
that a PReLU activation and a batch normalization layer is applied to the tensor
being passed from layer to layer. Each bottleneck module takes multiple arguments
that makes it flexible and applicable in both the encoder and decoder. For an exam-
ple, sometimes the main convolution branch is an asymmetric convolution, a dilated
convolution following the ideas proposed in strategy 2 and 3, or, in case of using it in
the decoder, a deconvolution as described in strategy 8. When the module is used in
the decoder, we use max-unpooling and replace the padding with a convolution.
Initial downsampling module in Figure 2.13 a visualization of an initial down-
==PAGE:45==
2.3 Network architecture strategies and modules
37
MaxPooling
MaxUnPooling
Padding
Convolution
Add
1x1 Reduction
Convolution
1x1 Expansion
Regularizer
Figure 2.12: A visualization of the BottleNeck module. Reproduced from [33].
sampling module is depicted. This module utilizes the idea from strategy 7.
Input
Convolution 3x3
MaxPooling
Concatenate
Figure 2.13: A visualization of the Initial module. Reproduce from [33].
FireModule The FireModule was proposed in [22] and is depicted in Figure 2.14.
This module acts on the idea from strategy 4. The blue lines indicate the use of ELU
activations.
1x1 Reduction
1x1 Expand
3x3 Expand
Concatenation
Figure 2.14: A visualization of the Fire module.
Blue lines are ELU activations.
Reproduce from [42].
Bypass refinement module This module is inspired by [34] and utilizes strategy
8. Compared to the Facebook approach, it has an important change. The upsampling
is not part of the refinement module, but is leaved to a transposed convolution fol-
lowing the refinement. Facebook uses a fixed bilinear upsamling, whereas we employ
a learnable upsampling using deconvolution with a stride of 2.
Equivalent conv layer in encoder
Conv
Below deconv layer in decoder
Concat
Conv
Figure 2.15: A visualization of the refinement module. Red lines are ELU activations.
Reproduced from [42].
Parallel dilated convolutions In Figure 2.16 a parallel dilated convolution
module is shown. As mentioned, this module is inspired by Deeplab [7] and acts on
==PAGE:46==
38
2 Theory
the ideas in strategy 3.
Dilated1
Dilated2
Dilated3
Dilated4
Add
Figure 2.16: A visualization of the parallel dilated convolution module. Blue lines
are ELU activations. Reproduced from [42].
==PAGE:47==
2.3 Network architecture strategies and modules
39
End module For completeness we mention the use of our end module that all
models employ. This is merely important from an implementation point-of-view, but
with this module we now have all building blocks for the models that follow in the
next section.
Deconv
Flatten
Softmax
Reshape
Output
Figure 2.17: A visualization of the End module. Own contribution.
2.3.3
Network architecture
We propose two different neural network architectures for solving the problem. The
first, which we shall call m-ENet (for modified-ENet), is closely connected to the
ENet design of Adam Pascke et al. [33]. The second, which we refer to as FirENet,
is inspired by the work of Treml et al. [42] and [22].
2.3.4
m-ENet
The m-ENet implementation is a supervised convolutional encoder-decoder network.
The complete m-ENet architecture is outlined in Table 2.1.
Here BN stands for
the bottleneck module described in Section 2.3.2 and the model is divided into an
encoder and a decoder. Filter size indicates the filter and filterbank size in the last
output convolution. For an example 3 × 3 × 32 indicated a kernel of size 3 in both
spatial directions and 32 filters. The reduction column indicates the reduction in the
1 × 1 convolution in the filter dimension and the corresponding upsampling in the
output convolution. If the rows for Asymetric and Dilation are filled in, then the
entry indicates that we use that kind of convolution and the associated number is the
kernel size or dilation rate. If Sampling is filled in, we downsample in the encoder
and upsample in the decoder with the entry being the sampling rate. The entry in
dropout is the dropout rate. The Initial module and the End module is described in
Section 2.3.2. In the End module C is the number of classes.
==PAGE:48==
40
2 Theory
Table 2.1: m-ENet architecture.
Name
Filter size
Reduction
Asymetric
Dilation
Sampling
Dropout
Begin encoder
Initial
(3 ×3 × 16)
/2
BN1.0
(3 × 3 × 64)
4
/2
.01
BN1.1
(3 × 3 × 64)
4
.01
BN1.2
(3 × 3 × 64)
4
.01
BN1.3
(3 × 3 × 64)
4
.01
BN1.4
(3 × 3 × 64)
4
.01
BN2.0
(3 × 3 × 128)
4
/2
.1
BN2.1
(3 × 3 × 128)
4
.1
BN2.2
(3 × 3 × 128)
4
2
.1
BN2.2
(5/1 × 1/5 × 128)
4
5
.1
BN2.3
(3 × 3 × 128)
4
4
.1
BN2.4
(3 × 3 × 128)
4
.1
BN2.5
(3 × 3 × 128)
4
.1
BN2.6
(3 × 3 × 128)
4
8
.1
BN2.7
(5/1 × 1/5 × 128)
4
5
.1
BN2.8
(3 × 3 × 128)
4
16
.1
Repeat section 2, without BN2.0
Begin decoder
BN4.0
(3 × 3 × 64)
4
×2
BN4.1
(3 × 3 × 64)
4
BN4.2
(3 × 3 × 64)
4
BN5.0
(3 × 3 × 16)
4
×2
BN5.1
(3 × 3 × 16)
4
End
(2 × 2 × C)
×2
In order to use the ideas behind transfer learning in Section 2.2.12 we first train the
encoder on downsampled targets and then append the decoder to finish training. In
order to do so, the architecture depicted in Table 2.1 is altered slightly. Right before
the decoder is started, we place the End module, but replace the deconvolution with a
convolution operation. In this way we ensure the dimensions match with the targets.
After training the encoder, this End module is removed, and the full architecture of
Table 2.1 is used for finishing the training.
2.3.5
FirENet
The FirENet was suggested by Treml et al. [42] as an alternative to the ENet archi-
tecture. The encoder is based on the SqueezeNet architecture, and is primarily made
up of FireModules (hence the FirENet name).10 In Table 2.2 the full architecture of
10Other authors refer to is as the SQ network, but we cannot find any official name for it.
==PAGE:49==
2.3 Network architecture strategies and modules
41
the network is depicted. Here CONV and POOL are standard convolutions and max-
pooling, respectively, while FIRE is the FireModule described in Section 2.3.2. The
decoder consists of the parallel dilated convolution module named DIL, deconvolu-
tions called DECONV and the refinement module called REFI. The hyperparameter
settings are as shown as in Table 2.1, but here the Linked to column indicates which
layer in the encoder the corresponding module is linked to. For modules with one con-
volutional layer the filter size indicates the size and depth of kernel, e.g. (3 × 3 × 64)
is a kernel width of size 3 in both spatial dimensions and 64 filters. For modules
with more convolutions it indicates the kernel size in spatial directions in the first
parenthesis for all layers and then the size of the filterbank in the second parenthesis.
So e.g. (1, 1, 3) × (16, 64, 64) would indicate three convolutions with a kernel size in
spatial dimension of (1×1), (1×1) and (3×3) and depths of (16, 64, 64), respectively.
Again, to leverage transfer learning we alter the architecture identically to how we
Table 2.2: FirENet architecture.
Name
Filter size
Linked to
Dilation
Sampling
Begin encoder
CONV0.0
(3 × 3 × 64)
REFI2.0
/2
POOL0.0
/2
FIRE1.0
(1, 1, 3) × (16, 64, 64)
FIRE1.1
(1, 1, 3) × (16, 64, 64)
POOL1.0
/2
FIRE2.0
(1, 1, 3) × (32, 128, 128)
REFI1.0
FIRE2.1
(1, 1, 3) × (32, 128, 128)
POOL2.0
/2
FIRE3.0
(1, 1, 3) × (48, 192, 192)
FIRE3.1
(1, 1, 3) × (48, 192, 192)
REFI2.0
FIRE4.0
(1, 1, 3) × (64, 256, 256)
FIRE4.1
(1, 1, 3) × (64, 256, 256)
DIL
Begin decoder
DIL
(3, 3, 3, 3) × (128, 128, 128, 128)
FIRE4.1
(2, 4, 8, 16)
DECONV0.0
(3 × 3 × 64)
×2
REFI0.0
(3, 3) × (64, 64)
FIRE3.1
DECONV1.0
(3 × 3 × 32)
×2
REFI1.0
(3, 3) × (32, 32)
FIRE2.1
DECONV2.0
(3 × 3 × 16)
×2
REFI2.0
(3, 3) × (16, 16)
CONV0.0
End
(3 × 3 × C)
×2
do with m-ENet. Notice that we shall refer to this network as the initial FirENet in
the following, since we are going to alter the design for some experiments.
==PAGE:50==
42
2 Theory
2.4
Hardware and software for fast inference
In Sections 3.2 and 3.3 we will describe the specific choices we have made for the
hardware and software used in this work. However, in this section we will present
a small overview of the considerations one must have regarding these choices. With
inspiration from [14], one can compose a diagram such as the one depicted in Figure
2.18 of how software and hardware interacts in the deep learning world. Most of this
section draw inspiration from the excellent overview from Song Han in [14]. We are
Figure 2.18: A visualization of the End module. Reproduced from [14].
mostly concerned with the two grey boxes and shall discuss choices regarding this in
the following.
2.4.1
Software
2.4.1.1
Optimized libraries
NVIDIA has been very successful in penetrating the deep learning market.
This
success is largely due to its CUDA framework, which allows for easy development in
C++ of parallel operations on a GPU. As such almost every deep learning framework
is a wrapper around CUDA, cuDNN and cuBLAS. The newest version of CUDA is
version 8 and the optimized deep neural network library (cuDNN) is version 7. These
libraries run on NVIDIA GPUs. NVIDIA has furthermore released a new optimized
library called TensorRT, which is optimized for fast-inference on NVIDIA GPUs.
==PAGE:51==
2.4 Hardware and software for fast inference
43
They claim that one can achieve up to 3.5 times higher inference times.11
2.4.1.2
Framework
There exist multiple deep learning frameworks that ease the implementation of deep
learning models. Some of the popular ones are Torch, Caffe, Theano and TensorFlow.
Common to all of these is that they leverage C libraries such as cuBLAS and cuDNN.
In the work of [2] they compare the major libraries. This work was done in March
2016 and a lot of work on all libraries has since been carried out. Still, the conclusion
is very interesting. Directly cited from the conclusion of the paper:
We observe that Torch is best suited for any deep architecture on CPU, followed by
Theano. It also achieves the best performance on the GPU for large convolutional
and fully connected networks, followed closely by Neon. ... Finally, TensorFlow is a
very flexible framework, similar to Theano, but its performance is currently not
competitive compared to the other studied frameworks.
This conclusion shows that one must indeed consider which framework to use, if
inference time in e.g. a production setting is of importance.
2.4.1.3
Post-hoc optimizations
A lot of research is currently being conducted in the area of post-training optimization
of a trained deep learning model. When a particular model has been trained, (some
of) these techniques can then be applied independently from the training process, to
compress model size and speed-up inference time. Digging in to these methods is
outside the scope of this work. But to motivate the use of such methods such as Deep
Compression [15], we report the results for the SqueezeNet architecture.
The clever design of the SqueezeNet architecture allowed for a model 50x smaller in
terms of memory compared to AlexNet and still achieving same accuracy on Ima-
geNet. Further applying Deep Compression to SqueezeNet resulted in a compression
of 510x in terms of memory compared to the original AlexNet [22] still achieving
same accuracy. The inference speed-up of deep compression for e.g. AlexNet is 94x
compared to the original network on a CPU [7]. The combination of compression
techniques as well as clever network architectures can seemingly get us a long way in
our search for fast inference models. Still, most of the work in compression techniques
has been applied to image classification [48], so it might not be as straightforward to
apply these techniques to segmentation tasks. However, in the work of [48] they show
how a simple approach can greatly improve the inference speed without hurting the
segmentation performance that much.
Fast inference is the major focus for this work. But the size of the model as we have
discussed above is also of high importance in real-time applications. Smaller models
11See e.g. https://developer.nvidia.com/tensorrt
==PAGE:52==
44
2 Theory
allow us to store them on embedded devices, but also makes it easier for online and
continuous update of the model. Hence, for real-time applications both inference time
and model size must be optimized.
2.4.2
Hardware
Previously hardware has been designed for general purpose such as CPUs and GPUs.
With the new interest in deep learning, hardware designers are now trying to optimize
the hardware for the very specific operations done in deep learning models. As a
result, we now have hardware optimized for deep learning models, which can greatly
speed-up both inference and training. In [14] Song Han provides an excellent overview
of the current status for hardware specialized for deep learning and the associated
challenges. We try to give a high-level summary of the most important conclusions
here.
By now we know that deep learning models are very compute intense. They require
many operations and can occupy much memory. When running embedded devices
there is another concern: energy requirements. A key concept in reducing energy
requirements is to reduce the memory footprint of the model, since one DRAM access
costs as much energy as 100 multiplication. As such, it is crucial to be able to handle
the model in the cache. Here we can turn to Deep Compression to solve this problem.
But this introduces a new problem: we need chips that can infer on compressed
models. To overcome this the EIE (Efficient Inference Engine) chip has been designed
[16], which is optimized for running models compressed by Deep Compression.12 The
improvements compared to common GPUs and the NVIDIA Tegra X1 are available
in [16].
The NVIDIA Tegra family are mobile GPUs commonly used for real-time applications.
It supports CUDA and cuDNN and is much more general applicable than the EIE. It
has fast inference for general deep learning models, but in comparison with EIE and
deep compressed models it is still quite slow [16].
12The chip and deep compression was both designed by Song Han and team members.
==PAGE:53==
CHAPTER 3
Implementation and
data
This Chapter is all about specifics. Descriptions of the datasets we use, the imple-
mentation details in terms of hardware and software and then our training routine.
3.1
Data
RailBot.ai has collected and annotated data from Youtube train videos. It is the
intent that this is the primary data and the implementation should primarily be
evaluated on this.
However, there also exist several public datasets that are cap-
tured in urban scene environments suitable for road scene parsing. In addition to
these datasets several other datasets for semantic segmentation exists.
The most
commonly used dataset for benchmarking semantic segmentation implementations
for street scene parsing is the Cityscapes dataset [9]. But this is only available for
non-commercial use and thus not of interest for us. Another commonly used dataset
is the CamVid dataset [6, 5], which is freely available for the public. This shall serve
as our primary benchmark dataset for which we can compare our implementation to
other researchers.
As has previously been stressed, the proposed implementations are not limited to
street scene parsing and can be used in all types of semantic segmentation tasks.
As such datasets such as the SUN dataset [45] could serve as a further benchmark
dataset, but we shall not pursue this further here.
3.1.1
CamVid dataset
The CamVid dataset is commonly divided into a fixed hold-out split resulting in
training, validation and test splits, with 367, 101 and 233 images, respectively. These
are used for benchmarking against other researchers and their implementations. The
original frame resolution is 960 × 720, but is most commonly downsampled to a size
of 480 × 360 [33, 42, 1] and we shall follow this convention. The target masks con-
sists of 12 different classes such as pedestrians, cars, roads, sidewalks, signs, trees,
==PAGE:54==
46
3 Implementation and data
column poles etc. while the last class represents unlabeled data. The dataset is down-
loaded from https://github.com/alexgkendall/SegNet-Tutorial/tree/master/
CamVid.
3.1.2
RailBot.ai dataset
Together with RailBot.ai a dataset from train rides have been collected. Through
video recordings found at Youtube a dataset has been composed and annotated. It
consists of train rides from Belgium, Norway and Germany and is recorded through
the front window. At this time of writing pedestrians have been annotated in all three
datasets, while cars and rails have been annotated in the recordings from Germany.
This dataset has 1,508 annotated samples. The original frame resolution is 1280×720.
Since frames close in time are very correlated the frames are sampled at relative high
rate in order to avoid too much annotation work. In the following we will refer to the
annotated dataset from Germany as RailBot.ai dataset.
3.2
Hardware specifications
We use three different kind of processing units for this work. For experimental and
test runs we use a GeForce GTX 950m GPU, which is a modern laptop GPU. It has
a limited GPU memory of 2GB, which makes it difficult to use larger batch sizes.
In these cases we use a Tesla K80 GPU through a Microsoft Azure server provided
by RailBot.ai. This has 12GB of GPU memory, which is more than enough for our
experiments. Lastly, through RailBot.ai we have access to a NVIDIA Jetson TX2
board. As this is a common processing unit used for real-time embedded systems, we
use this board for benchmarking our models and to establish whether or not they are
considered fast-enough for real-time applications.
In the work of [42] they use 10 fps as a sensible lower limit for self-driving cars. This
shall also serve as our benchmark in our experiments.
3.3
Software specifications
We use TensorFlow version 1.1 as our framework through Python 2.7. This is mainly
due to the rising popularity, the ease of use and also the integration with the high-level
Keras API version 2.0. For all devices we have installed CUDA version 8.0 together
with cuDNN version 5.1.
3.4
Training specifics
Our training routines vary from model, dataset and hardware we are using. Common
settings for all training runs are:
==PAGE:55==
3.4 Training specifics
47
• We use the ADAM optimizer with the default parameters as suggested in [24].
We tried changing to standard SGD and ADAGRAD, without any noticeable im-
provements. We also tried to apply gradient clipping without any improvements.
Furthermore, we tried to monitor the training process and if no improvement
over the last 5 epochs are seen, we reduced the learning rate by a factor of 0.1.
This did not seem to improve the training process.
• Each epoch goes through the entire training dataset once.
• The training dataset is normalized and the mean and standard deviation is
saved to disk.
• At the end of epoch we compute our performance metrics on a validation dataset,
which has been normalized with the training dataset mean and standard devi-
ation.
• The validation dataset is not augmented nor shuffled in order to get the exact
same dataset for validation throughout the training process.
Experimental runs are run on the Geforce GTX 950m GPU with a batch size of 2
due to memory constraints. For most of the final runs we use the Tesla K80 GPU
with a batch size of 5-10.
The training process is babysitted by a model checkpoint callback and during training
we save the model weights with best performance on the validation data. In this way
we can proceed training for, in principle forever, without worrying about overfitting.
In order to get maximum GPU utilization, we use multi-threaded CPU to do data
prefetching and augmentation and only let the GPU compute the forward and back-
ward passes. This enable us to consistently get 98-100% of GPU utilization.
The datasplit is split according to the following rules. For the camvid dataset we
use the same split as in [33] and [42]. For the RailBot.ai dataset we split the video
sequence in consecutive sequences. For an example, for a video length of 60 minutes,
we e.g. use the first 40 minutes for training, the frames from 40-50 minutes for vali-
dation and the last frames from 50-60 minutes for test. This way of splitting ensure
that the model has not seen any frames from a particular sequence, since frames close
in time are highly correlated.
There are four combinations of training runs as we have two models that need to
be evaluated on two datasets. The specific settings in addition/replacement to those
mentioned above for each of these runs are:
ENet evaluated on Camvid
• Train the model encoder-decoder style rather than end-to-end
• Use a learning rate of 0.0016 with inspiration from [33] for the encoder and then
half this learning rate for the decoder
• No data augmentation
==PAGE:56==
48
3 Implementation and data
FirENet evaluated on Camvid
• Train the model end-to-end
• No data augmentation
ENet evaluated on RailBot.ai
• Use data augmentation
• Train model encoder-decoder style
FirENet evaluated on RailBot.ai
• Use data augmentation
• Train model end-to-end
Since a higher batchsize should give a less noisy estimate of the gradient, we tried to
increase the learning rate whenever we trained on the Tesla K80.
==PAGE:57==
CHAPTER 4
Results
4.1
Camvid results
The class-weights for Camvid that we use for the weighted cross-entropy is shown
in Table 4.1. The IoU for each class for both models is shown in Table 4.2 together
with the results reported in [33], which we just name ENet. The associated confusion
matrices can be found in Table B.1 and B.2. For development of the metrics during
training we report the numbers in Figure C.1. In Figure 4.1 we show two example
predictions for m-ENet and FirENet, respectively. In Figure D.1 the associated legend
is shown.
4.2
RailBot.ai results
The class-weights we use for the RailBot.ai dataset for the weighted cross-entropy
is shown in Table 4.3.
In Table 4.4 we report the IoU for both models and the
associated confusion matrices in Table B.3 and B.4. For development of the metrics
during training we report the numbers in Figure C.2. Figure 4.2 shows two example
predictions for both models. In Figure D.2 the associated legend is shown.
Table 4.1: Class-weights for the Camvid training set using inverse log frequency.
sky
building
column
road
sidewalk
tree
sign
fence
car
pedestrian
bicyclist
void
5.62
4.40
34.92
3.53
15.84
8.90
31.82
32.45
13.19
38.35
44.00
17.52
Table 4.2: IoUs for the Camvid test set.
Model
sky building column road sidewalk tree sign fence
car pedestrian bicyclist void
m-ENet
0.89
0.68
0.23
0.90
0.68 0.62 0.12
0.09 0.69
0.35
0.33 0.27
FirENet 0.89
0.65
0.16
0.89
0.68 0.56 0.13
0.11 0.58
0.15
0.10 0.25
ENet
0.95
0.74
0.35
0.95
0.86 0.77 0.51
0.51 0.82
0.67
0.34
n/a
==PAGE:58==
50
4 Results
Figure 4.1: The first row is the original image, second row the ground truth annota-
tions, third row predictions from m-ENet and the last row predictions from FirENet.
Camvid.
==PAGE:59==
4.2 RailBot.ai results
51
Figure 4.2: The first row is the original image, second row the ground truth annota-
tions, third row predictions from m-ENet and the last row predictions from FirENet.
==PAGE:60==
52
4 Results
Table 4.3: Class-weights for the Vrinno training set using inverse log frequency.
Void
Pedestrian
Car
Rail
1.53
35.9
11.8
21.0
Table 4.4: IoU for m-ENet on the RailBot.ai test set.
Model
void
pedestrian
car
rail
m-ENet
0.89
0.59
0.6
0.46
FirENet
0.91
0.59
0.48
0.53
4.3
Performance results
We report the estimated time to process one frame and the number of frames that
can be processed per second for both models on two different boards in Table 4.5.
Table 4.5: Timings for the initial FirENet and m-ENet for an image of resolution
360 × 480(×12).
FirENet
m-ENet
Board
Jetson TX2
GTX 950m
Jetson TX2 (est.)
GTX 950m
One frame (ms)
65.2 ± 0.5
37.5 ± 1.62
115
66.5 ± 4.2
FPS
15
26
8
15
In Table 4.6 we report the number of parameters for m-ENet, FirENet and for com-
parison AlexNet.13
Table 4.6: No. of parameters for m-ENet, FirENet and the original AlexNet
Model
m-ENet
FirENet
AlexNet
# Params (millions)
0.37
3.47
60
13Number
of
parameters
taken
from
http://vision.stanford.edu/teaching/cs231b_
spring1415/slides/alexnet_tugce_kyunghee.pdf
==PAGE:61==
4.4 Analysis of results
53
4.4
Analysis of results
4.4.1
Segmentation performance
Camvid: The first we notice from Table 4.2 is the gap between m-ENet and ENet i.e.
the results produced in [33], even though the implementation and hyperparameters
should be the same. We hypothesize this is due to our implementation of the mem-
ory max-unpooling, which is not a native operation in TensorFlow, but is in Torch
that the authors in [33] used.
There might also be several other implementation
differences ”under-the-hood” between Torch and TensorFlow, which we are not cur-
rently aware of. Furthermore, we are not completely sure that our model is trained
and tested on the exact same data as in [33], since it is pretty unclear from the article.
One thing to remember is that Camvid is a very small dataset, so overfitting may
be a serious concern. Especially when we evaluate FirENet on it. From Table 4.6 we
see that FirENet has much larger capacity in terms of number of parameters, making
it more prone to overfitting. Through experiments we found that this indeed was the
case and we made some modifications to the initial design of FirENet in Table 2.2 to
improve performance. FirENet has no built in regularization methods. We hypothe-
size that the authors in [42] did not use regularization techniques was because they
only tested the model on the Cityscapes dataset, which is about 9 times as large as
Camvid. In our experiments, however, we found that FirENet initially overfitted to
a large degree. First, we added a L2-regularization of 0.1 to all convolutional and
transposed convolutional layers. But we still identified overfitting. Adding a spatial
dropout layer with 0.1 chance of dropping out at the end of each Fire Module and
reduced the batch size to 2 (which can also act as a regularizer) added about 4 per-
centage points to the test mIoU. We decided to keep this change, and in the interest
of time not experiment any further on the Camvid dataset. Still we see that FirENet
underperforms compared to m-ENet in most classes. We still believe that part of this
can be owed to overfitting. This concern is further supported in Figure C.1, where
we see a small degree of overfitting.
Both models seem to have problems identifying smaller and narrow classes and
the fence class. From Tables B.2 and B.1 we see that e.g. fence is often predicted as
building where it should have been fence. This seem also to be the case for the column
and sign class. This make sense, since the building class is often placed behind these
classes. So the low IoU for these classes is primarily caused by many false positives,
which might have something to do with the formulation of the weighted cross-entropy.
Since these classes were quite problematic, in Figure 4.1 we hand picked two cases
with visual columns, signs and fences. If we turn our attention to the left prediction
from m-ENet, we see that it actually picks up much information about the column
poles and signs. We also see a false positive for the column pole class in the upper
right corner. If we inspect the original image it seems the model has learned that
narrow vertical objects, with a high contrast to neighboring pixels, often are column
==PAGE:62==
54
4 Results
poles. In this case however it is just a narrow block of the building. An interesting ob-
servation about the prediction from FirENet in the left most column is that it seems
to not have learned the context in which a sign appear, in this case traffic lights. If
one look closely at the predictions for the left most traffic light, we see that it has
learned that a green light is a part of the fence class, since this color probably stands
much out. But we also see that, where the red light is turned off, it predicts car. This
is probably because this kind of glass resembles that of a car light. In contrast to this
faulty behavior, m-ENet has learned the right context.
One of the challenges in this dataset is to distinguish bicycle from pedestrian.
The model needs to have a large receptive field in order to learn the context that
a person is now either sitting on bicycle or not. We see that both models actually
have learned this to some degree from Table B.2 and B.1 and also by visual inspection.
If we turn our attention to the right most predictions, we see the problems with
the fence class. Both models are very confused by the fence. This is probably most
because this fence is quite unlike other fences from the training set. It is interesting
to see from the right side of the fence that m-ENet predicts the classes with highest
class-weights (e.g. fence and column pole) when it seems to be confused. FireNet not
so much and it seems to make more sensible guesses.
RailBot.ai: Let us now turn our attention to the RailBot.ai dataset. In Table
4.4 we see that both models perform on par for void and pedestrians, but m-ENet
is better at predicting cars, while FirENet is better at predicting rails. From Table
B.4 we see that FirENet often thinks a pedestrian is a car, which is a serious concern.
This is also apparent from Figure 4.2, where, in the right most column, parts of the
predictions from FirENet on the pedestrian with the handbag, is car. What we find
throughout the test set is that FirENet tends to predict that pedestrians are cars
when they are close to the camera. In these cases it is important that the receptive
field is large. m-ENet has a much larger receptive field due to its deeper design in the
encoder and more extensive use of dilated convolutions, which is why we hypothesize
that it does not make this error compared to FirENet, which is much more shallow
in the encoder. FirENet thus has a lot of false positives for the car class and false
negatives for the pedestrians when pedestrians are close to the camera. But FirENet
is still as good as m-ENet for pedestrian detection overall. We believe this is due to
a better upsampling. See the discussion next for rails.
We see that both models have problems identifying rails that cross horizontally,
but based on the IoU, FirENet is much better at finding rails. We show yet another
prediction in Figure E.1 where we see how FirENet has a much finer segmentation of
the rails compared to m-ENet. Thus, the lower IoU is not so much because of less true
positives (see the confusion matrices), but due to many false positives. m-ENet seems
to be able to identify that there is a rail somewhere, but the boarders are to imprecise.
This backs the observation that FirENet might be better to upsample. Even though
==PAGE:63==
4.4 Analysis of results
55
FirENet downsamples even more than m-ENet, it seems the upsampling procedure
is better. Thus, the learnable upsamling combined with the information from higher
layers in the encoder, seem to outperform the memory max-unpooling. Furthermore,
the m-ENet upsampling seems to produce some weird artifacts. In Figure 4.3 we show
a zoomed in view on the upsampling for the rails. Here we actually see the memory
max-unpooling producing sparse upsamplings, which we are not able to fully enrich
with information in the decoder.
Now, we had some time to play around with the hyperparameters and design of
FirENet for the run on the RailBot.ai dataset. We chose to focus on FirENet due to
performance issues in the inference phase for m-ENet (see Section 4.4.2). We tried
the following due to some of the theoretical foundations proposed earlier:
• Add residual connections between individual Fire Modules. We saw a small
improvement on accuracy and we reached convergence in two to three times
less epochs with very little increase to the computation. This was a substantial
improvement, so we decided to keep this change. This is in agreement with the
conclusion in [44], where they also see that residual connections in not-so-deep
models are comparable in accuracy to their counterpart non-residual networks,
but the optimization problem becomes much easier.
• Increase the filterbank by an order of two in the decoder to avoid representa-
tional bottlenecks. We saw a small increase in average IoU on the test set but
the relatively large increase in memory footprint was not worth it and it severely
hurt the inference speed. These findings are comparable to those in [48].
• Increase dilation rates in the parallel dilated convolution module to match those
of DeepLab. This did not improve the overall model accuracy and hurt the in-
ference speed. This spawned a distrust in the validity of the parallel dilated
convolution. This module is very computational heavy, since the four convolu-
tions are connected to the last convolution in the encoder with the largest filter
bank of 512 filters. This produces (3 × 3 × 512 × 128 + 128) × 4 = 2359800
parameters in this module, which takes up about 70% of the total number of
parameters. It seems a big price to pay, when e.g. m-ENet just uses one Bot-
tleneck module to connect the encoder and decoder. Unfortunately, we did not
have time to try to alter this design.
• Leverage strategy 7 and place a Initial module in FirENet. This had a small
improvement on the mIoU for the test set.
• Train encoder-decoder style instead of end-to-end, which had no apparent im-
provement. We hypothesize that this is due to the heavier downsampling com-
pared to the encoder in m-ENet and the initial downsampling of the targets
might throw away too much information.
==PAGE:64==
56
4 Results
Figure 4.3: Upsampling examples. ENet in top row, FirENet in bottom row.
==PAGE:65==
4.4 Analysis of results
57
The training process in C.2 indicate that FirENet seemed to continue learning for a
long time compared to m-ENet. Since the RailBot.ai dataset is larger than Camvid,
we hypothesize that the larger capacity of FirENet enables it to learn a richer rep-
resentation, which in turn requires longer training. Also, for this dataset we used
data augmentation, which produces augmented images, in principle, for ever. So, we
might be able to get better results if we trained for longer time.
Concluding remarks on segmentation performance: m-ENet has a much
deeper encoder, but less filters in each convolutional layer compared to FirENet. This
difference seems to work in favor of the m-ENet design based on the results from the
Camvid dataset.
The larger receptive field gathers more context and enable the
network to correctly classify objects more often. This is further enhanced by the fact
that m-ENet is better at predicting cars, which need a large context, but FirENet is
better at predicting rails, which do not need that large a context. The results from
the RailBot.ai dataset shows that the upsampling in the decoder of FirENet might
work better and the memory max-unpooling used in m-ENet produces some weird
artifacts. A combination of the m-ENet encoder and the FirENet decoder might be
the way to go in the future.
4.4.2
Inference time and model complexity
We tested the initial architecture and hyperparameters settings of the FirENet as can
be seen in Table 2.2 on the Jetson TX2 Board. The resulting inference timings can
be seen in Table 4.5.
As we do not have unlimited access to the Jetson TX2 board, our analysis of
timings will be carried out on the NVIDIA GEFORCE GTX 950m board and then
estimate the implications for the timings on the Jetson Board by computing a rough
conversion factor between the two boards based on the timings in Table 4.5. The
conversion factor is estimated to be about 0.6, such that the Jetson Board is 0.6
times slower than the Geforce GTX 950m.
What we find is that FirENet evaluates faster than m-ENet and FirENet is the
only model that crosses the 10 FPS borderline that is a reasonable lower limit for real-
time applications according to [42]. This was pretty surprising to us, since m-ENet
is almost in the order of 10 times less complex measured on number of parameters as
can be seen in Table 4.6. Also, both [42] and [33] both report that ENet should be
faster than FirENet. So we decided to investigate this a bit further.
Using TensorFlows Benchmark tool in C++ allowed us to see in which operations
the network spent most of its time in the inference phase. A summary of these findings
are shown in Appendix A. We see that the multiply (Mul) operation takes op about
33% of the total inference time. This operation has to do with batch normalization.
==PAGE:66==
58
4 Results
It turns out that one crucial part to achieve the fast inference of ENet is to merge
batch normalization and dropout layers into the convolutional filters post-training.
Unfortunately, we realized this too late in the process, so we did not have time to
implement this technique. This can be seen as a post-processing step as described
in Section 2.4 and it may as such be unfair to compare the performance with other
architectures that do not rely on such optimizations. We furthermore find that our
implementation of the memory max-unpooling most certain is slower than the native
one implemented in Torch. Our implementation relies on the operations ZerosLike
and ResizeNearestNeighbor, which together takes up about 5.5% of the time, which,
taken all in to considerations, not seems to be that crucial for the performance. One
thing to keep in mind though is that this benchmark is carried out on the CPU. So al-
gorithms benefiting more from parallelization would probably be evaluated relatively
faster on a GPU, which is what we performed our timings on. Still we find that the
profiling results have merit.
The reason that FirENet has 10 times more parameters than m-ENet is due to the
larger filterbanks in the encoder and the parallel dilated module, which accounts for
a large portion of the parameters due to the four convolutions with large filter banks.
Still, it is able to evaluate quickly. The primary reason for this is due to the extra
downsampling compared to m-ENet. This means that more than half of the network
is processed on a small input frame, which considerably speed up computations, but
might also be the reason for the relatively worse segmentation on e.g. Camvid.
As we already had setup the entire profiling framework we tried the tool on
FirENet as well with the results shown in Appendix A. As expected, 2/3 of the
time is taken op by convolutions. One thing we find is that the BiasAdd operation is
the third most costly operation. In m-ENet they report that adding biases did not
help segmentation accuracy, so a potential speed-up could might be achieved with-
out to much impact on the segmentation performance by removing the biases in the
convolutions in FirENet.
We furthermore see that both m-ENet and FirENet is considerably less complex
in terms of number of parameters compared to e.g. AlexNet. But still we find that
FirENet might be too big. We hypothesize that one crucial part of real-time deep
learning on embedded devices is ”on-the-fly-training”. This means that the model
is trained in a server farm and then transfered to the embedded device. In such a
setup the size of the model must not take up too much space, since it then can be too
costly to transfer or store on the embedded device. Right now our m-ENet takes up
1.8MB of storage, while FirENet takes up 13.9MB. So even though FirENet is fast in
the inference phase, it might still be too big if we need to transfer it from servers to
embedded devices with limited space.
One thing we have not covered is the choice of image resolution, which probably
is the biggest factor for the inference speed. We did not have time to analyze the
==PAGE:67==
4.4 Analysis of results
59
implications of input image resolution, so we rely on the analysis carried out in [48].
The conclusion for their PSPNet is that the computation time increases in an order of
squares with input image resolution. Also, they show how a small input frame hurts
performance compared to larger input frames for the segmentation performance. So
a system that can handle large input frames in real-time is of course the goal in the
future which also is the problem that ICNet [48] solves. We chose the resolution of
360 × 480 since this was the size of the downloaded Camvid images. In hindsight we
should probably have tried different input frames and analyzed the implications.
Also, the number of classes seem to have an impact on the inference speed as well.
There are several reasons for this. The softmax operation in the last layer which is
evaluated across the one-hot encoded output tensor. This is also what we see in the
profiling results, where RealDiv, which is a operation only used by softmax, takes
up a sizeable portion of the inference speed. The one-hot encoded tensor for large
class problems can become large in a dense matrix representation, so this problem
can probably be partly solved by using sparse representations. Also, the End mod-
ule uses a transposed convolution with filters equal to the number of classes. This
convolution is costly as it upsamples to the original image size and so more classes is
becoming increasingly costly for this operation.
Concluding remarks on inference performance At the moment m-ENet
does not achieve real-time performance on the Jetson Board. This is due to a lack
of post-hoc optimization that was carried out in the original article and should be
implemented in the future. FirENet exceeds the real-time boundary of 10 FPS, but
is quite large in model size. These conclusions mark the need for future work in terms
of fast inference and smaller model complexity. Research into how big an input frame
is big enough is also needed, in order to get a baseline image resolution for real-time
performance.
4.4.3
Prediction video
To end the presentation and analysis of the results, we have composed a small video
demonstrating our results. The video is from a totally different train ride, so we get to
see how good the model generalizes to completely new settings. The model is trained
on the RailBot.ai training data, so there is nothing new compared to previously. We
have sampled 24 frames per second from the video, created predictions from each of
these frames, and then created a new video from these predictions. So this video is
not in real time. The video can be found at https://youtu.be/Scnaa88-acM. It is
clear from this video that the windshield wiper is confusing the model, since such was
not present in the training set.
==PAGE:68==
60
==PAGE:69==
CHAPTER 5
Future work
During the process we have stumbled upon a lot of interest development within deep
learning that we would have loved to try out on this work. Since the beginning of
this process new ideas in the community have also been proposed, and the fast devel-
opment within deep learning creates potential for a lot of future work. We will try to
describe some of the work that can be done in order to improve the value of a deep
learning model for semantic segmentation in autonomous trains.
The most straightforward future work would be to do more hyperparameter opti-
mization for the RailBot.ai dataset. We are confident that we can increase the mIoU
a couple of percentage points at least, with modifications to the design and/or the
hyperparameter settings. But since the release of [48] and [49] it seems a waste of
time to dwell at the proposed architectures, since these network severely outperform
our proposed networks on benchmark datasets. As such, we feel an implementation
of [48] should be priority one if there is a need for more accurate and faster segmen-
tation than that achieved in this work.
As we have already touched upon, research into the applicability of compression
methods such as [15] for semantic segmentation should definitely also prove useful to
maximize the inference speed. Most results as we have seen for compression methods
are applied to image classification for much larger models, so there is probably still
work to be done in order to apply it for our proposed models, but we are confident
that these methods will prove useful in the future. Positive results for compression
for segmentation networks have been achieved in [48].
Taking advantage of the newest optimized software libraries and hardware for
deep learning can further improve the inference speed of the models. This work can
be applied on top of the existing architectures and work presented here.
Looking at the larger picture in relation to autonomous trains, the need for seg-
menting individual objects, i.e. instance segmentation, seems to be of importance.
Research into how to do fast instance segmentation on embedded hardware can be
another line of future work to explore.
==PAGE:70==
62
==PAGE:71==
CHAPTER 6
Conclusion
In this thesis we have presented an approach to real-time semantic segmentation for
autonomous trains. Our approach draws inspiration from the recent advancements
within deep learning. We have presented a high-level theory overview of these ideas
and combined them into nine different strategies that serves as a guideline for de-
signing fast encoder-decoder convolutional neural networks. Through experiments
and examples we demonstrate how factorizing convolutional filters severely reduced
the number of parameters in one of our proposed networks m-ENet, how different
approaches to upsamling might be tackled and how clever design of modules can be
used to limit the compute workload without hurting accuracy too much. All these
theoretical guidelines ended up with two different designs for the neural network: m-
ENet and FirENet. Accompanied with these design considerations we presented the
current status for optimized software and hardware for deep learning, which showed
us that choices regarding such can be critical for real-time performance of the network.
The proposed networks were evaluated on two different datasets: a benchmark
dataset Camvid and a private dataset RailBot.ai. Our approaches have yet to reach
the performance showed by ENet both in terms of segmentation performance and
inference speed.
Yet we find that we can do near-real-time or real-time semantic
segmentation on a Jetson TX2 Board, while still achieving meaningful segmentations.
Our analysis of our approaches was two folded: one for the segmentation performance
and one for the inference performance. The produced segmentations showed that the
deeper design of m-ENet in the encoder seemed to outperform the encoder design
inspired by SqueezeNet. We argued that this was due to achieving a larger effec-
tive receptive field, which enabled the model to learn the context of which objects
appear in. On the other hand, the upsamling of m-ENet produced some weird arti-
facts, which was not present in FirENet. Feeding higher level information from the
encoder to the decoder, seems to let the network learn a better upsamling compared
to using memory max-unpooling. It turned out that using post-processing steps was
crucial to further speed up the inference of m-ENet. This was uncovered by using
profiling methods that provided insights into the compute performance of the net-
work. We saw that the choice to downsample once more in FirENet severely speeded
up the inference, making it possible to do real-time segmentations. With a size of
13.9MB we argued that FirENet might be too big compared to m-ENet, which only
takes up about 1.8MB of storage. This increase in size was primarily due to the use
==PAGE:72==
64
6 Conclusion
of a parallel dilated convolution module. Our analysis resulted in a prediction video
that shows that our approaches are able to generalize fairly well to new environments.
All in all we show that real-time semantic segmentation for autonomous trains can
be tackled using deep learning. Real-time rail detection for autonomous trains has
not attracted attention from the community yet, to our knowledge, and we show in
this work that a deep learning approach can be a suitable way to tackle this problem.
Our results in this work seems promising and with the ideas presented in Future Work,
we are confident that we in the future can achieve even better results by adding to
the work presented here.
==PAGE:73==
APPENDIX A
Profiling results
A.1
m-ENet
Node
Count
Avg
CDF
1
Mul
164
33.51%
33.51%
2
Conv2D
89
16.79%
50.30%
3
Add
181
10.87%
61.16%
4
RealDiv
1
6.61%
67.77%
5
Relu
149
5.65%
73.43%
6
ConcatV2
23
4.42%
77.85%
7
Neg
67
4.05%
81.90%
8
ZerosLike
24
3.83%
85.73%
9
Conv2DBackpropInput
3
3.00%
88.73%
10
MaxPool
3
2.77%
91.49%
11
esizeNearestNeighbor
4
1.62%
93.11%
12
Sub
1
1.60%
94.71%
13
BiasAdd
29
1.31%
96.03%
14
Select
2
0.81%
96.84%
15
StridedSlice
35
0.73%
97.57%
16
SpaceToBatchND
8
0.66%
98.23%
17
Equal
2
0.61%
98.83%
18
BatchToSpaceND
8
0.33%
99.16%
19
Exp
1
0.29%
99.44%
20
Max
1
0.22%
99.66%
21
Sum
1
0.20%
99.87%
22
Const
199
0.10%
99.97%
23
Shape
7
0.01%
99.98%
24
Pack
3
0.01%
99.99%
25
NoOp
1
0.01%
100.00%
26
Reshape
2
0.00%
100.00%
Table A.1: Summary by node type for m-ENet.
==PAGE:74==
66
A Profiling results
Node
CDF
1
RealDiv
6.600%
2
Conv2DBackpropInput
8.785%
3
Mul
10.626%
4
MaxPool
12.396%
5
Sub
13.996%
6
Conv2D
15.319%
7
Mul
16.581%
8
Mul
17.593%
9
Mul
18.594%
10
Mul
19.477%
Table A.2: Top computation time by node for m-ENet.
==PAGE:75==
A.2 FirENet
67
A.2
FirENet
Node
Count
Avg
CDF
1
Conv2D
35
66.147%
66.147%
2
Elu
35
7.448%
73.595%
3
BiasAdd
39
5.062%
78.657%
4
SpaceToBatchND
4
4.029%
82.686%
5
Conv2DBackpropInput
4
4.020%
86.706%
6
RealDiv
1
3.828%
90.534%
7
ConcatV2
11
3.667%
94.201%
8
MaxPool
3
3.087%
97.288%
9
Add
7
0.923%
98.211%
10
Sub
1
0.721%
98.932%
11
BatchToSpaceND
4
0.426%
99.359%
12
Pad
1
0.156%
99.515%
13
Max
1
0.153%
99.669%
14
Sum
1
0.113%
99.782%
15
Exp
1
0.094%
99.875%
16
Const
71
0.051%
99.926%
17
StridedSlice
12
0.034%
99.960%
18
Pack
4
0.012%
99.973%
19
Mul
8
0.012%
99.984%
20
Shape
4
0.007%
99.991%
21
NoOp
1
0.006%
99.997%
22
Reshape
2
0.003%
100.000%
Table A.3: Summary by node type for FirENet.
==PAGE:76==
68
A Profiling results
Node
CDF
1
Conv2D
8.629%
2
Conv2D
15.741%
3
Conv2D
22.852%
4
Conv2D
29.947%
5
Conv2D
36.960%
6
Conv2D
41.075%
7
RealDiv
44.901%
8
Conv2D
48.325%
9
Conv2D
51.693%
10
Conv2D
53.928%
Table A.4: Top computation time by node for FirENet.
==PAGE:77==
APPENDIX B
Confusion matrixes
Table B.1: Confusion matrix for ENet on the Camvid test set. The x-axis is the true
label and y-axis predicted label.
sky building column
road sidewalk
tree
sign
fence
car pedestrian bicyclist
void
sky
6372690
54171
19611
10
4
135866
7523
999
1569
20
0
53286
building
102214 7843889 112044
1531
17879
562764 145426 173847
148598
26713
2282 285879
column
48378
179408 198839
7628
16856
33198
12625
17362
4938
11754
2048
38185
road
0
9266
1061 10041041
612328
2423
79
11634
84395
841
3516
50620
sidewalk
6
244314
20555
252814 3014048
4351
214
51498
5515
9655
3971 102066
tree
296735
414931
47907
1134
1527 3520605
99497
49981
28814
5785
1215 194060
sign
3406
464000
10998
256
578
25358 120224
8829
26720
2352
2145
20357
fence
0
79109
3460
194
891
31249
1263
54044
1072
1927
1597
17451
car
418
69474
2893
28367
5178
26517
1838
22627 1239895
3921
517
34835
pedestrian
2
60143
10607
1086
8034
1524
526
3364
2822
131749
7756
29208
bicyclist
0
2074
633
3509
2164
814
20
1309
2787
5384
33713
5904
void
47133
485953
45287
53091
52370
186226
17377
81313
51999
55131
17460 711532
Table B.2: Confusion matrix for FirENet on the Camvid test set. The x-axis is the
true label and y-axis predicted label.
sky building column
road sidewalk
tree
sign
fence
car pedestrian bicyclist
void
sky
6389226
72881
12022
4
8
147937
5543
1164
6743
30
0
43249
building
142680 7912617 154259
15079
53682
953897 216177 193096
164583
42048
6632 328548
column
46205
212659 155726
7829
13469
79502
20421
12546
7613
13620
1932
54441
road
1
11207
750 9865520
535060
3830
179
4800
138886
748
3208
43323
sidewalk
3
169215
15574
402792 3044539
7651
65
30386
16865
7933
4526
99425
tree
213276
298094
40558
51
267 2946758
29117
21514
17665
9611
3643 139359
sign
7627
273607
14041
9
37
66129 106335
2203
6218
3730
3953
20816
fence
7
158410
5953
184
3062
39780
806
79008
2601
4741
1026
31010
car
5253
155971
3513
43833
8761
39341
4649
45189 1141482
6837
4063
49558
pedestrian
2
147906
29427
2693
13723
18041
3387
17880
14240
84588
12984
46081
bicyclist
0
5470
1466
12819
3183
2004
145
886
28138
10652
14684
8580
void
66702
488695
40606
39848
56066
226025
19788
68135
54090
70694
19569 678993
==PAGE:78==
70
B Confusion matrixes
Table B.3: Confusion matrix for ENet on the RailBot.ai test set. The x-axis is the
true label and y-axis predicted label.
void pedestrian
car
rail
void
13670207
106394
84313 274505
pedestrian
561211
1028530
16112
21916
car
110000
22077 370689
11066
rail
588627
1497
243 758213
Table B.4: Confusion matrix for FirENet on the RailBot.ai test set. The x-axis is the
true label and y-axis predicted label.
void pedestrian
car
rail
void
14156789
227803 131201 277474
pedestrian
265009
859193
6364
15393
car
137412
69467 333770
10943
rail
370835
2035
22 761890
==PAGE:79==
APPENDIX C
Training processes
==PAGE:80==
72
C Training processes
(a) m-ENet encoder.
(b) m-ENet decoder.
(c) FirENet.
Figure C.1: Training processes for Camvid dataset. Red dots indicate the epoch with
highest validation mIoU and the epoch where we saved the model weights.
==PAGE:81==
C Training processes
73
(a) m-ENet encoder.
(b) m-ENet decoder.
(c) FirENet.
Figure C.2: Training processes on RailBot.ai dataset. Red dots indicate the epoch
with highest validation mIoU and the epoch where we saved the model weights.
==PAGE:82==
74
==PAGE:83==
APPENDIX D
Class colors
Figure D.1: Legend for the Ccamvid dataset.
Figure D.2: Legend for the RailBot.ai dataset.
==PAGE:84==
76
==PAGE:85==
APPENDIX E
Example predictions
==PAGE:86==
78
E Example predictions
Figure E.1: The first row is the original image, second row the ground truth annota-
tions, third row predictions from m-ENet and the last row predictions from FirENet.
==PAGE:87==
Bibliography
[1]
Vijay Badrinarayanan, Ankur Handa, and Roberto Cipolla. “SegNet: A Deep
Convolutional Encoder-Decoder Architecture for Robust Semantic Pixel-Wise
Labelling”. In: CoRR abs/1505.07293 (2015). url: http://arxiv.org/abs/
1505.07293.
[2]
Soheil Bahrampour et al. “Comparative Study of Caffe, Neon, Theano, and
Torch for Deep Learning”. In: CoRR abs/1511.06435 (2015). url: http://
arxiv.org/abs/1511.06435.
[3]
Christopher M. Bishop. Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning (Informa-
tion Science and Statistics). Secaucus, NJ, USA: Springer-Verlag New York,
Inc., 2006. isbn: 0387310738.
[4]
Bert De Brabandere et al. “Semantic Instance Segmentation for Autonomous
Driving”. In: (2017). url: http://juxi.net/workshop/deep- learning-
robotic-vision-cvpr-2017/papers/16.pdf.
[5]
Gabriel J. Brostow, Julien Fauqueur, and Roberto Cipolla. “Semantic Object
Classes in Video: A High-Definition Ground Truth Database”. In: Pattern Recog-
nition Letters xx.x (2008), pages xx–xx.
[6]
Gabriel J. Brostow et al. “Segmentation and Recognition Using Structure from
Motion Point Clouds”. In: ECCV (1). 2008, pages 44–57.
[7]
Liang-Chieh Chen et al. “DeepLab: Semantic Image Segmentation with Deep
Convolutional Nets, Atrous Convolution, and Fully Connected CRFs”. In: CoRR
abs/1606.00915 (2016). url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1606.00915.
[8]
Djork-Arné Clevert, Thomas Unterthiner, and Sepp Hochreiter. “Fast and Ac-
curate Deep Network Learning by Exponential Linear Units (ELUs)”. In: CoRR
abs/1511.07289 (2015). url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1511.07289.
[9]
Marius Cordts et al. “The Cityscapes Dataset for Semantic Urban Scene Un-
derstanding”. In: CoRR abs/1604.01685 (2016). url: http://arxiv.org/abs/
1604.01685.
[10]
Gabriela Csurka, Diane Larlus, and Florent Perronnin. “What is a good eval-
uation measure for semantic segmentation?” In: (). url: http://www.xrce.
xerox.com/Our-Research/Publications/2013-027.
==PAGE:88==
80
Bibliography
[11]
Jeff Donahue et al. “DeCAF: A Deep Convolutional Activation Feature for
Generic Visual Recognition”. In: CoRR abs/1310.1531 (2013). url: http://
arxiv.org/abs/1310.1531.
[12]
V. Dumoulin and F. Visin. “A guide to convolution arithmetic for deep learning”.
In: ArXiv e-prints (March 2016). arXiv: 1603.07285 [stat.ML].
[13]
Ian Goodfellow, Yoshua Bengio, and Aaron Courville. Deep Learning. http:
//www.deeplearningbook.org. MIT Press, 2016.
[14]
Song Han. Efficient Methods and Hardware for Deep Learning. Stanford. 2017.
url: http://cs231n.stanford.edu/slides/2017/cs231n_2017_lecture15.
pdf.
[15]
Song Han, Huizi Mao, and William J. Dally. “Deep Compression: Compressing
Deep Neural Network with Pruning, Trained Quantization and Huffman Cod-
ing”. In: CoRR abs/1510.00149 (2015). url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1510.
00149.
[16]
Song Han et al. “EIE: Efficient Inference Engine on Compressed Deep Neural
Network”. In: CoRR abs/1602.01528 (2016). url: http://arxiv.org/abs/
1602.01528.
[17]
Kaiming He et al. “Deep Residual Learning for Image Recognition”. In: CoRR
abs/1512.03385 (2015). url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1512.03385.
[18]
Kaiming He et al. “Delving Deep into Rectifiers: Surpassing Human-Level Per-
formance on ImageNet Classification”. In: CoRR abs/1502.01852 (2015). url:
http://arxiv.org/abs/1502.01852.
[19]
Kaiming He et al. “Identity Mappings in Deep Residual Networks”. In: CoRR
abs/1603.05027 (2016). url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1603.05027.
[20]
Kaiming He et al. “Mask R-CNN”. In: CoRR abs/1703.06870 (2017). url: http:
//arxiv.org/abs/1703.06870.
[21]
Geoffrey E. Hinton. Rectified Linear Units Improve Restricted Boltzmann Ma-
chines Vinod Nair.
[22]
Forrest N. Iandola et al. “SqueezeNet: AlexNet-level accuracy with 50x fewer pa-
rameters and <1MB model size”. In: CoRR abs/1602.07360 (2016). url: http:
//arxiv.org/abs/1602.07360.
[23]
Sergey Ioffe and Christian Szegedy. “Batch Normalization: Accelerating Deep
Network Training by Reducing Internal Covariate Shift”. In: CoRR abs/1502.03167
(2015). url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1502.03167.
[24]
Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. “Adam: A Method for Stochastic Opti-
mization”. In: CoRR abs/1412.6980 (2014). url: http://arxiv.org/abs/
1412.6980.
==PAGE:89==
Bibliography
81
[25]
Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoffrey E Hinton. “ImageNet Classifica-
tion with Deep Convolutional Neural Networks”. In: Advances in Neural Infor-
mation Processing Systems 25. Edited by F. Pereira et al. Curran Associates,
Inc., 2012, pages 1097–1105. url: http://papers.nips.cc/paper/4824-
imagenet-classification-with-deep-convolutional-neural-networks.
pdf.
[26]
Fei-Fei Li, Justin Johnson, and Serena Yeung. Convolutional Neural Networks.
Stanford. 2016. url: http://cs231n.stanford.edu/slides/2016/winter1516_
lecture11.pdf.
[27]
Fei-Fei Li, Justin Johnson, and Serena Yeung. Convolutional Neural Networks.
Stanford. 2017. url: http://cs231n.stanford.edu/slides/2017/cs231n_
2017_lecture9.pdf.
[28]
Fei-Fei Li, Justin Johnson, and Serena Yeung. Convolutional Neural Networks.
Stanford. 2017. url: http://cs231n.stanford.edu/slides/2017/cs231n_
2017_lecture4.pdf.
[29]
Fei-Fei Li, Justin Johnson, and Serena Yeung. Detection and Segmentation.
Stanford. 2017. url: http://cs231n.stanford.edu/slides/2017/cs231n_
2017_lecture11.pdf.
[30]
Jonathan Long, Evan Shelhamer, and Trevor Darrell. “Fully Convolutional Net-
works for Semantic Segmentation”. In: CoRR abs/1411.4038 (2014). url: http:
//arxiv.org/abs/1411.4038.
[31]
Hyeonwoo Noh, Seunghoon Hong, and Bohyung Han. “Learning Deconvolution
Network for Semantic Segmentation”. In: CoRR abs/1505.04366 (2015). url:
http://arxiv.org/abs/1505.04366.
[32]
Eunbyung Park. “Grouput: A Way to Regularize Deep Convolutional Neural
Network”. In: (). url: http://cs.unc.edu/~eunbyung/papers/groupout.
pdf.
[33]
Adam Paszke et al. “ENet: A Deep Neural Network Architecture for Real-Time
Semantic Segmentation”. In: CoRR abs/1606.02147 (2016). url: http://arxiv.
org/abs/1606.02147.
[34]
Pedro H. O. Pinheiro et al. “Learning to Refine Object Segments”. In: CoRR
abs/1603.08695 (2016). url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1603.08695.
[35]
Rapport: Førerløse S-tog kan give metrolignende S-togsdrift. https://www.trm.
dk/da/nyheder/2017/rapport-foererloese-stog-kan-give-metrolignende-
stogsdrift. Accessed: 2017-06-16.
[36]
Ali Sharif Razavian et al. “CNN Features off-the-shelf: an Astounding Baseline
for Recognition”. In: CoRR abs/1403.6382 (2014). url: http://arxiv.org/
abs/1403.6382.
[37]
Karen Simonyan and Andrew Zisserman. “Very Deep Convolutional Networks
for Large-Scale Image Recognition”. In: CoRR abs/1409.1556 (2014). url: http:
//arxiv.org/abs/1409.1556.
==PAGE:90==
82
Bibliography
[38]
Jost Tobias Springenberg et al. “Striving for Simplicity: The All Convolutional
Net”. In: CoRR abs/1412.6806 (2014). url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1412.
6806.
[39]
Christian Szegedy et al. “Going Deeper with Convolutions”. In: CoRR abs/1409.4842
(2014). url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1409.4842.
[40]
Christian Szegedy et al. “Rethinking the Inception Architecture for Computer
Vision”. In: CoRR abs/1512.00567 (2015). url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1512.
00567.
[41]
Jonathan Tompson et al. “Efficient Object Localization Using Convolutional
Networks”. In: CoRR abs/1411.4280 (2014). url: http://arxiv.org/abs/
1411.4280.
[42]
Michael Treml et al. “Speeding up Semantic Segmentation for Autonomous
Driving”. In: (2016).
[43]
Raquel Urtasun. The Deep Learning Pipeline for Self-Driving: Sensing, Per-
ception, Localization, and Mapping. GPU Technology conference. 2017. url:
http : / / on - demand - gtc . gputechconf . com / gtcnew / on - demand - gtc .
php?searchByKeyword=S7512&searchItems=session_id&sessionTopic=
&sessionEvent=&sessionYear=&sessionFormat=&submit=&select=&ncid=
em-ded-ntgcsnrg-16788&mkt_tok=eyJpIjoiWWpKaE5UQmxNV1ZsWVRjeCIsInQiOiJqK0EyWUY5Qj
3D.
[44]
Zifeng Wu, Chunhua Shen, and Anton van den Hengel. “Wider or Deeper: Re-
visiting the ResNet Model for Visual Recognition”. In: CoRR abs/1611.10080
(2016). url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1611.10080.
[45]
Jianxiong Xiao et al. “SUN Database: Large-scale Scene Regocnition from
Abbey to Zoo”. In: (). url: http://vision.princeton.edu/projects/2010/
SUN/paper.pdf.
[46]
Jason Yosinski et al. “How transferable are features in deep neural networks?”
In: CoRR abs/1411.1792 (2014). url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1411.1792.
[47]
Fisher Yu and Vladlen Koltun. “Multi-Scale Context Aggregation by Dilated
Convolutions”. In: CoRR abs/1511.07122 (2015). url: http://arxiv.org/
abs/1511.07122.
[48]
Hengshuang Zhao et al. “ICNet for Real-Time Semantic Segmentation on High-
Resolution Images”. In: CoRR abs/1704.08545 (2017). url: http://arxiv.
org/abs/1704.08545.
[49]
Hengshuang Zhao et al. “Pyramid Scene Parsing Network”. In: CoRR abs/1612.01105
(2016). url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1612.01105.
