==PAGE:1==
Zone contra whole building
simulation
Master’s Thesis, June 2017
Kasper Højmark Ravn
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
KASPER HØJMARK RAVN
Zone contra whole building
simulation
Master’s Thesis, June 2017
Supervisors:
Jørn Toftum, Associate Professor, DTU-BYG
DTU - Technical University of Denmark, Kgs. Lyngby - 2017
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
Zone contra whole building simulation
This report was prepared by:
Kasper Højmark Ravn
Advisors:
Jørn Toftum, Associate Professor, DTU-BYG
DTU Civil Engineering
Section for Indoor Climate and Building Physics
Technical University of Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
Tel: +45 4525 1700
Project period:
January 2017- June 2017
ECTS:
30
Education:
MSc
Field:
Indoor climate
Class:
No conﬁdentiality
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial fulﬁllment of the requirements
for graduation in the above education at the Technical University
of Denmark.
==PAGE:6==
==PAGE:7==
Abstract
The goal of this study was to ﬁnd the uncertainties of only using simulation results of a
few critical zones, to represent a whole building. At the same time, the advantages of
using whole building simulations were also addressed. The ﬁndings were based on the
variations which can occur between zones of the same building in relation two the venti-
lation ﬂow rate, heating effect and yearly energy consumption.
Simulations of large building model can be a time consuming process. It can therefore
be advantageous to only simulated a few critical zone in order to represent the indoor
environment and energy consumption of the whole building.
To examine the most impactful parameter variations between zones, in relation to the
ventilation ﬂow rate, heating effect and energy consumption, two reference room were
deﬁned for investigation of the parameter variations between zones and in zones.
The ﬁndings of the study showed, that in relation to the difference of ventilation ﬂow
rate and yearly energy consumption the between zones, the most impactful parameter
variation would be the variation of the number of external walls, the shadows from neigh-
bour buildings and the internal mass. In relation to the difference in heating effect the
most impactfull parameter would be the ﬂoor location, as the dimensioning heating effect
is calculated with no solar gain or internal loads.
The ﬁndings in relation to division of larger zones showed that the difference in ﬂow
rate between a landscaped simulated as 1 zone or as 5 zones can be up to 25 %.
i
==PAGE:8==
Table of Content
1
Introduction
1
2
Background
3
2.1
Simpliﬁcation of models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Design criteria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Energy consumption
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.4
Energy ﬂexibility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.5
Usage pattern . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.6
Building envelope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.7
Installations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3
Method
15
4
Results
25
4.1
Zone scaling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.2
Floor level . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.3
Internal mass
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.4
Orientation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.5
Window area
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.6
Shadows . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.7
Usage pattern . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
4.8
Zone division . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
5
Discussion
59
5.1
Optimization of the simulation process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
5.2
Project communication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
ii
==PAGE:9==
TABLE OF CONTENT
iii
6
Conclusion
71
Appendices
73
A Usage patterns
75
B
Simulation models
79
B.1
Floor location . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
B.2
Internal mass
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
B.3
Orientation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
83
Bibliography
87
==PAGE:10==
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
In this study the validity of building simulations dependent on the detail-level of the
model will be investigated. The building sector is responsible for a large part of the total
energy consumption in Europe and worldwide. Furthermore, investigation have shown
how poor indoor environment can reduce the performance of the occupants and cause
health issues [1]. Design of buildings should therefore be as accurately sized to poten-
tially reduce unnecessary waste of resources and result in appropriate installations. In
connection to this, IT simulations have become an important tool. Both in relation to the
design of new constructions and building renovation. Before the simulation software was
developed, handmade calculations with steady state conditions were made. Currently,
the installation required to secure a good indoor climate and the energy consumption of
buildings can be estimated in the design phase by a more dynamic understanding.
The modelling and simulation process of a whole building very time consuming. It can
therefore be very advantageous to only address a few critical zones of the building and
use the results in relation to the indoor environment and energy consumption, to represent
the rest of the zones.
The primary goal of this study, was to address common variations between zones of the
same building and estimate how these variations will impact the design of the building
installations. Simulations were performed to analyse how the required ventilation ﬂow
rate, heating effect and yearly energy consumption of each zone will vary. For this pur-
pose, reference rooms for a small standard ofﬁce and a landscaped ofﬁce are developed.
The ventilation ﬂow rate will be dimensioned in relation to the thermal indoor environ-
ment. Ventilation in relation to the CO2 concentration of the room was not included in
this study as the only variation of CO2 pollution between zones would be the occupants.
The software used to perform the simulations of this study is IDA Ice.
1
==PAGE:12==
2
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
Further advantageous and limitations of whole building simulations will be discussed.
Limitations can consist of the current and future state of computing power. The lack of
already created building models from the architect, will also complicate the modelling
process. Communication between the different parties involved in the design of a build-
ing is important as it will reduce mistakes and also reduce the duration of the design
proces. Optimizing the business case and fulﬁlling the requirements of the clients are
overall goals of a simulation project. The presentation both before and after the project
can make the model and result more understandable for the client and the company will
be more likely to win the project and satisfy the customer.
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 2
Background
This chapter presents the background of the study. It will include:
• Simpliﬁcation of simulation models. One of the disadvantageous of whole building
simulation is the computing time. Common ways of simplifying the simulated
model will therefore be presented.
• The design criteria in relation to the thermal indoor environment of buildings are
deﬁned for later use in the simulations.
• Description of the different types of energy consumed in relation to a building.
Energy factors used in the simulations and prices of different energy types will also
be addressed.
• Description of the concept energy ﬂexibility which will be included in simulations
related to internal mass.
• Different examples of usage patterns of ofﬁce buildings.
• Relevant building components are described.
3
==PAGE:14==
4
CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND
2.1
Simpliﬁcation of models
Methods of simplifying larger simulation models are presented in this section[2].
Reducing the complexity of a simulation model will reduce the computing and modelling
time. Common methods of simpliﬁcation are listed below:
• The number of windows can be reduced by merging the windows. This will reduce
the overall number of objects in the model and the transmission area of the windows
will be approximately the same.
• Simple surfaces of the building will reduce the computing time. If the real case
building have indents which creates shadows, the reduced solar gain in the building
could be represented by creating a simple type of solar shading or change the type
of window glass. This will give potential of creating the building model with ﬂat
surfaces which especially for large buildings will reduce the computing time.
• Large zones, as for example large scale ofﬁces, can be divided into smaller zones.
This will especially be advantageous if the zone has many windows in different
orientations and/or many internal surfaces.
• If many identical zones are to be simulated, one of the zones can be seen as repre-
sentative for the rest and the outcome can be multiplied by the number of zones.
• Simple ventilation solutions can potentially reduce the computing time drastically
compared to more advanced solutions. This can be done by using a CAV system
instead of a VAV system. If the VAV system is used, a reduced number of the
control variables (temperature, CO2, humidity etc.) should be used for reduced
computing time. If natural ventilation is a part of the ventilation design it can be
beneﬁcial to make a ﬁxed schedule ﬁtted to the periods with high heating load,
instead of implementing an automatic temperature control.
• As it was the case with the windows, a reduced number of cracks for the natural
ventilation can speed up the simulations. Therefore it can also be beneﬁcial to
neglect the building inﬁltration as this will result in simple airﬂows of the building
model.
• The amount of output desired from the simulation will have an impact on the com-
puting time. Therefore, it should be planned beforehand, which output is needed
for the building evaluation.
==PAGE:15==
2.2. DESIGN CRITERIA
5
2.2
Design criteria
The design choices of this study will be based on guidelines of Danish Standard 1752
[3]. The installations will primarily be dimensioned according to requirements of the
thermal environment. The recommended temperature intervals for ofﬁces are stated in
Table 2.1. The corresponding activity level of the occupants is 1.2 met and this value will
be used for the simulations of this study.
Table 2.1: Design criteria for the thermal environment
Room type
Activity [met]
Clima class
Operative temperature [◦C]
Summer
Winter
Ofﬁce
1.2
A
24.5 ± 1
22 ± 1
B
24.5 ± 1.5
22 ± 2
C
24.5 ± 2.5
22 ± 3
==PAGE:16==
6
CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND
2.3
Energy consumption
The energy consumption related to the operation of a building will usually consists of
district heating and electricity. District heating will be used for the heating system and
the heating plate of the ventilation system. The electricity consumption will be due to
the lighting, the fans of the ventilation system and the compressor used to cool the water
used in the cycle of the cooling plate in the ventilation system. This compressor will have
a coefﬁcient of performance (COP) which will determine how much the ratio between
the electricity and the cooling performance. In IDA Ice the COP of the cooling will be 3
meaning that the investigated room will receive 3 kWh cooling power at the expense of
1 kWh electricity. Energy factors can also often be applied to the distribution of energy
consumption. Energy factors of different energy types in Denmark [4] are showed in
Table 2.2
Table 2.2: Energy factors to be used in relation to calculating the energy demand of
buildings.
Energy type
2010
2015
2020
District heating
1
0.8
0.6
Other heating
1
1
1
Electricity
2.5
2.5
1.8
The price of the district heat can vary between the different plants. Figure 2.8 contains
data from the the Danish Energy Agency and shows the distribution of plants in Denmark
in relation to the price of district heating.
Figure 2.1: Prices of district heating.
The price of electricity for commercial use will vary depending on the total electric-
ity consumption. The cost in DKK/kWh will be reduce the more electricity a facility
==PAGE:17==
2.3. ENERGY CONSUMPTION
7
consumes. Figure 2.2 shows the price of electricity in Denmark from 1997 to 2016 [5].
Figure 2.2: Price electricity from 1997 to 2016.
==PAGE:18==
8
CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND
2.4
Energy ﬂexibility
The building sector is one of the largest contributors to the energy consumption world-
wide and will have the potential to assist stabilizing the energy grids [6]. This can partly
be achieved by relocating some of the energy consumption from day to night. The bene-
ﬁts from this action can be especially beneﬁcial in the future as a larger part of the energy
production will be based on renewable sources. It will mainly consist of solar and wind
energy. Both are energy sources of varying production levels. The solar system will not
produce energy at night, however the potential for a large nightly energy production by
wind system can be useful as it will lead to a waste of energy if not utilized. Heating
systems can utilize the excess energy. To achieve this it will require a way to store heat at
night and release it during the day. Certain materials have and large thermal heat capacity
and can be a great tool to optimize the utilization of energy resources. Figure 2.3 shows
a potential relocation of the energy consumption. The right graph illustrates how the the
energy consumption is increased during the night and reduced during the day. Hence,
relocation of the energy consumption.
Figure 2.3: The allocation of the energy consumption due to energy ﬂexibility
An investigation of the beneﬁts by relocating the energy consumption to stages with
a lower pressure on the grid should be measured over a longer duration. This can be
performed with the use of a dynamic simulation tools. However, it can also be necessary
to calculate the effect of the total building at a speciﬁc time to get an indication of the scale
in which the building can help to stabilize the energy grid. To showcase the improvements
of the implementations it is important to have accurate results. However, although the
concept of energy ﬂexibility has great potential of stabilizing the energy grid and reducing
the overall energy consumption, the quantiﬁed knowledge of the subject is very limited.
==PAGE:19==
2.5. USAGE PATTERN
9
2.5
Usage pattern
The usage pattern of a building will impact the energy consumption and indoor en-
vironment. Occupants and belonging equipment generates the largest part of the internal
heat load. In relation to simulation of the most critical zones the calculations is often
conducted with 80-100 % load during the work hours (8-17 hours). Earlier studies have
investigated the occupancy schedules of different ofﬁce buildings [mangler referencer].
Two different occupancy schedules are shown on Figure 2.4 and 2.5 respectively.
Figure 2.4: Occupancy schedule listed in the European standard.
Figure 2.5: Occupancy schedule as a result of the investigations by J. Halvarsson.
Earlier studies have showed occupancy schedules with highly varying loads. Most of
the investigated ofﬁce environments have shown approximately the same distribution of
loads which is most critically in the period 10-17. The maximum loads can however vary
==PAGE:20==
10
CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND
from approximately 20 - 95 %. The investigation are conducted with open ofﬁce spaces
in focus however it is assumed that the result can be transferred to smaller ofﬁce spaces.
Meeting rooms can in the design phase be deﬁned as secondary zones. The occupants
use of these types of room can be difﬁcult to predict. The conference room will have a
higher occupant density occupants compared to the ofﬁces but also a shorter period of
usage. The number of occupants in the meeting room will accordin to European Standard
[7] be ﬁve times larger compared to the reference ofﬁce. This corresponds to a density of
2 m2/person. Figure 2.6 shows the occupancy schedule for the meeting room listed in the
European Standard.
Figure 2.6: Occupancy schedule for a meeting room as listed in the European standard.
The schedules shown on Figure 2.4, 2.5 and 2.6 together with the schedule shown in
appendix A is used as the basis for the calculation in section 4.7.
==PAGE:21==
2.6. BUILDING ENVELOPE
11
2.6
Building envelope
The building envelope is important in connection to the heat loss of a building. Ex-
amples of a roof construction from Rockwool [8] is shown in Table 2.3
Table 2.3: Different examples of roof construction from Rockwool.
Thickness
Thickness
U-value
HARDROCK
Steel underlayer
Underlayer
Insulation
ENERGY
Energy
(mm)
(mm)
(W/m2K)
(mm)
(mm)
100
540
0.06
110
2x180
100
430
0.08
110
2x160
100
380
0.09
110
2x135
100
340
0.10
180
160
100
280
0.12
120
160
100
230
0.15
110
120
100
170
0.20
60
120
Slab constructions with U-values corresponding to the ones from Table 2.3 can be
made. The important factor in relation to the U-value is the amount of insulation.
==PAGE:22==
12
CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND
2.7
Installations
The ventilation system will typically be the most expensive installation of a building
compared to the radiators. Inaccurate results of simulations can lead to wrong dimension-
ing and therefore the installation of both oversized ductwork and ventilation armatures.
Figure 2.7 shows the price per meter ductwork as function of the ﬂow rate. The required
ﬂow rate will determine the size of the duct however the air velocity will also be an im-
portant factor. If the air velocity is increase the cross sectional area can be reduced and
still obtain the same ﬂow rate.
Figure 2.7: Prices of ventilation ducts dependent on the required ﬂow rate.
Figure 2.7 shows an approximately linear correlation between the required ﬂow rate
and the cost of the ventilation duct. Consequently the savings in price as a result of
a reduction of for example 20 L/s will remain relatively unchanged independent of the
original size of the duct work. The price difference in relation to the air velocity will
however increase exponentially when the ﬂow rate is increased. For a required ﬂow rate
of 500 L/s the price difference between a velocity of 5 m/s and 2 m/s will be approxi-
mately 1300 DKK/m.
The price of armatures used in ofﬁces may vary a great deal, as many products are
available from different manufacturers. The ﬂow rate supplied through the will also be
restricted by the throw length of the air which is typically determined by the room dimen-
sions and space between the armatures. Each size of speciﬁc armature will have a large
==PAGE:23==
2.7. INSTALLATIONS
13
range of possible ﬂow rate and an exact price of the armatures per L/s is not available. It
can therefore be difﬁcult to develope general suggestions of the cost.
Figure 2.8: Prices of radiators from Rio.
The price of radiator will increase linearly with the output of heating effect.
==PAGE:24==
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 3
Method
The goal of this study was to evaluate the need of a whole building simulation based
on how much the simulation would improve the design of installations and the estima-
tion of the yearly energy consumption. The design of the installations was in this study
based on the maximum ventilation ﬂow rate and heating effect required to maintain an air
temperature below 25 ◦C and above 20 ◦C. It was assumed in this study that an upper
limit of the air temperature of 25 ◦C would result in a operative temperature under 26 ◦C
which complies with the thermal environment of class B. The lower setpoint of the air
temperature would be minimum 20 ◦C at all time. It was therefore assumed the operative
temperature would be above 20 ◦C in the heating season.
To evaluate the need of a whole building simulation, the advantages of simulating a whole
building compared to a few critical zones were considered. These were mainly assumed
to be the value of obtaining more accurate result for each zone and not only the most
critical ones. The parameters in relation to the building structure and operation which
usually can vary between the zones of the same building, were identiﬁed:
• Floor location
• Orientation
• Number of external walls
• Shadows from neighbour buildings
• Occupancy schedule
• Room type
It was then simulated how much the variations of each investigated parameter between
the zones would impact the variations of the required ventilation ﬂow rate, heating effect
15
==PAGE:26==
16
CHAPTER 3. METHOD
and the yearly energy consumption. The process, which was used to ﬁnd out which pa-
rameter would have the most substantial impact on differences between the zones in the
same building, are illustrated in Figure 3.1.
Simulation of a large zone can also result in an inaccurate design of the installations.
The required ﬂow rate in corner zones of the building with two windows can potentially
be higher compared to the ﬂow rate required in the zones with only one window. Zone
division of a larger zone was therefore also investigated to ﬁnd how much the design ﬂow
rate would vary in the large zone. Deciding to divide a large zone into more zones will
not increase the geometrical size of the simulation model. However it will increase the
complexity and computing time. This process is illustrated in Figure 3.1
Figure 3.1: The process of ﬁnding how much the parameter variations between and in
zones in the same building will impact the ventilation ﬂow rate, heating effect and yearly
energy consumption.
Two reference models was developed. One for a small ofﬁce shown in Figure 3.2
and one for a landscaped ofﬁce shown in Figure 3.3. The small ofﬁce was developed to
investigate the parameter variations which can occur between rooms in the same building.
==PAGE:27==
17
The landscaped ofﬁce was developed to investigate, how much impact zone division of a
large ofﬁce would have on the required ﬂow rate. The two reference ofﬁces both had a
height from ﬂoor to ceiling of 2.6 m.
Figure 3.2: Reference room for use for the investigation of parameter variations between
zones. The area and height of the room are 10 m2 and 2.6 m respectively. The window is
1.25 m x 1.2 m. Contains one occupant.
Figure 3.3: Reference room used to investigate the impact of zone division in a large
landscaped ofﬁce.
The occupancy loads of the reference ofﬁces were based on the guidelines from Dan-
ish standard 1752 [3]. According to this the occupant density of a single person ofﬁce
==PAGE:28==
18
CHAPTER 3. METHOD
and a landscaped ofﬁce are 10 m2/person and 15 m2/person respectively. The equipment
was assumed to be 100 W/person and lighting 7 W/m2. If nothing else is stated in the fol-
lowing chapters, the reference ofﬁce was oriented against south. This was assumed to be
resulting in the most even distribution of solar gain throughout the day compared to east
and west, and could therefore be assumed as the orientation most suited for generalization.
The goal of the investigation was to show, how much parameter variations between the
zones in a building would affect the ventilation ﬂow rate, heating effect and yearly energy
consumption. The ﬁndings should therefore not be limited to zones of a speciﬁc size.
The ﬁndings of the the 10 m2 reference room with one occupant were also intended to
be applicable to E.g. a 100 m2 ofﬁce with ten occupants. It was therefore examined how
scaling of the reference ofﬁce would impact the required ﬂow rate, heating effect and
yearly energy consumption. This was done in order to examine if the results from the
small 10 m2 ofﬁce could be transferred to larger ofﬁces with proportional internal and
external loads. Thus, if the heat load is multiplied by E.g. 10 the required ﬂow rate will
also be multiplied by 10. The same was predicted to be applicable for the relationship
between the heat losses and the required heating effect. The reference ofﬁces were scaled
up to 8 times the original values. The increase of ﬂoor area was done by expansion of
the external wall. In that way, both the solar gain and transmission loss were increased
accordingly to the scaling factor. The internal loads were also increased accordingly to
the scaling factor. An illustration is shown in Figure 3.4.
Figure 3.4: The model to the left is the original reference model and the model to the
right is the reference ofﬁce scaled by a factor 8
The parameters which were found to vary between zones of the same building and
therefore will be investigated are as follow:
• Floor location. The reference ofﬁce was investigated with a varying location at the
top, middle and bottom ﬂoor. The model used for the simulation is shown in Figure
3.5. This was done in order to ﬁnd the difference between the zones in relation
to the required heating effect and the energy consumption depending on the zone
==PAGE:29==
19
being in connection with either the roof or the building slab. Furthermore, the U-
value of the roof and ﬂoor was varied from 0.05 W/m2K to 0.2 W/m2K to see
how it would impact the difference between the ﬂoors.
Figure 3.5: Model of the reference ofﬁce located at the top, middle and bottom ﬂoor.
• Orientation. The solar gain of ofﬁces in the same building will depend on the orien-
tation. It was therefore investigated what the difference of the ﬂow rate and energy
consumption would be between ofﬁces oriented against west, east and south. The
orientation of the ofﬁce will have no impact on the dimensioned heating effect as
solar gain is not included in the calculation. It will therefore not be included in
this investigation. An illustration of the simulation is shown in Figure 3.6. Each
room would only have one window in either of the directions. Furthermore, the so-
lar shading and g-value of the windows will impact the heat supplied to the room.
Therefore, the investigation did also include how the setpoint of the solar shading
and the g-value of the windows would impact the difference between the orienta-
tions. The setpoint of the solar shading was varied from 250 W/m2 to 100 W/m2
and the g-value of the windows was varied from 0.3-0.6.
==PAGE:30==
20
CHAPTER 3. METHOD
Figure 3.6: Model of the reference ofﬁce with three different orientation. West, east and
south.
• Internal mass. The internal mass of the ofﬁce will affect the effectiveness of the
energy ﬂexibility concerning night cooling and heating. Walls, ceiling, ﬂoor and
furniture add up to the total heat storage capacity of the zone. To simplify the
simulations, only the internal walls were varied between the different rooms. The
walls was made of concrete and gypsum with varying thicknesses. The additional
objective of this parameter variation is to investigate the difference of the distribu-
tion of energy consumption due to heating and cooling during the night depending
on the material of the internal walls. The daily schedules for the air temperature
setpoint, used for night heating and cooling are shown from Figure 3.7 and Figure
3.8 respectively.
Figure 3.7: The schedule from IDA Ice used for night heating in the investigation of
internal mass. The units of the axes will be the time during the day and the air temperature
◦C
==PAGE:31==
21
Figure 3.8: The schedule from IDA Ice used for night cooling in the investigation of
internal mass. The units of the axes will be the time during the day and the air temperature
◦C
It can be seen from Figure 3.7 and Figure 3.8 that the lower and upper setpoint of
the air temperature were increased and decreased respectively. This was done in
order to avoid spikes of the heating effect and ﬂow rate.
The temperature distribution during a cold day was investigated by three different
scenarios when using night heating with a lower air temperature setpoint at night
of 21 ◦C, 22 ◦C or 23 ◦C respectively. This was done in order to examine how
close the air temperature would come to 20 ◦C, which is the lower setpoint of the
air temperature during the day. The required heat effect of the three scenarios was
then found to investigate if the night heating was efﬁcient enough to result in no
required heating during the occupancy hours.
• External walls. The number of external walls can vary between the zones in a build-
ing. A corner ofﬁce will have two external walls and potentially two windows.
This will result in a larger solar gain in the summer and a large transmission loss in
the winter compared to the neighbour ofﬁces. A small ofﬁce with three windows,
which are all oriented in different directions, will be highly unlikely and was there-
fore not included in this study. A room with windows on three different facades
will typically be a large landscaped ofﬁce which is covered in section 4.8. The
reference ofﬁce is simulated with one extra window on the eastern facade. This
window will be varied in size from 1.25 m to 2.5 m with and without solar shading.
An illustration of this investigation is shown in Figure 3.9.
Figure 3.9: The ﬁgure illustrates the model of comparision of the reference room with one
and two external walls.
==PAGE:32==
22
CHAPTER 3. METHOD
• Shadows. The location of the zone in relation to the relative height of the neighbour
building and the distance from the zone to the corners of the neighbour building
will impact how much of the potential solar gain that will be reduced by shadows.
The height from the zone to the top of the neighbour building was varied from 4
m to 100 m. The distance to the neighbour building was also varied to examine if
it would impact the ﬁndings of the relative building height. An illustration of the
simulation models are shown in Figure 3.10a
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.10: Plots showing the simulation model used for the investigation of the ofﬁces
location in relation to the neighbour buildings. (a) Varying height from the ofﬁce to the
top of the neighbour building. (b) Varying distance from the ofﬁce to the corner of the
neighbour building.
==PAGE:33==
23
The distance from the ofﬁce to the corner of the neighbour building was also varied
from 0 m to 90 m. This was done to ﬁnd the difference of ventilation ﬂow rate and
energy consumption dependent on the zones horizontal location in relation to the
neighbour building. An illustration of this is shown in Figure 3.10b.
• Occupancy schedules. The usage of zones in the same building can vary a lot de-
pending on the different departments of the company. Simulations of the reference
ofﬁce were made with the different usage schedules mentioned in section 4.7 and
appendix A. The schedule of a meeting room from "EN 16798" [7] is very equal
to the ones for ofﬁces. The occupant loads will, however, be 5 times larger corre-
sponding to 2 m2/person.
• Zone division
Figure 3.11: The model of the landscaped ofﬁce as one zone and ﬁve zones.
Three different simulation models of the landscaped ofﬁce were created. One as 1
zone, one dividing the ofﬁce into 5 zones and one dividing the ofﬁce into 10 zones.
As described in section 2.1, the windows of the same facade were simpliﬁed as one
large window. An illustration of the 1 zone model and the 5 zone model is shown
==PAGE:34==
24
CHAPTER 3. METHOD
in Figure 3.11.
The ﬂow rates of the most and least critical zones of the 5 and 10 zone model
were then compared with the ﬂow rate of the 1 zone model. Furthermore critical
zone were simulated alone to examine if there was a different compared to when
it was simulated as a part of the remaining 4 zones. The total ﬂow rate of all the
zones of the 5 zones were also compared with the ﬂow rate of the 1 zone model.
==PAGE:35==
CHAPTER 4
Results
This chapter presents the results which were obtained by the investigations of factors
which can vary between zone in a building. The results will mainly be presented by two
primary factors:
• Heating effect and/or ﬂow rate required to maintain an air temperature above 20 ◦C
and below 25 ◦C.
• Energy consumption. The total yearly energy consumption will be presented, but
also the yearly energy consumption distribution to the ventilation and heating unit.
The terms for the different types of energy will be used as shown from Table 4.1
Table 4.1: The deﬁnition of the yearly energy consumption and the distributed energy
consumption.
Terms used in ﬁgures
Meaning
Yearly energy consumption
Heating
The ventilation heating
Cooling
The ventilation cooling
Fans
The fans of the ventilation system
Heating unit
The heating system (E.g. radiators)
25
==PAGE:36==
26
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
4.1
Zone scaling
This section presents the results of the scaling of the reference ofﬁce. All heat loads
from the reference ofﬁce are multiplied by 8 when the model is scaled by factor 8. Figure
4.1 shows the yearly energy consumption and required ﬂow rate of the room as a function
of the scaling factor.
Figure 4.1: Scaling of the reference ofﬁce.
The energy consumption per square meter will almost not change when the room and
load is multiplied by a factor from 1 to 8. The required ﬂow rate per m2 will be reduced
exponentially with the increase in the scaling factor, the range of variation will, however,
be small. This small variation could however be due to the decrease of internal mass
relatively to the rooms volume.
==PAGE:37==
4.2. FLOOR LEVEL
27
4.2
Floor level
This section shows how the heat power and energy consumption will vary between
the zones in the same building, in relation to whether the reference ofﬁce is located at
the roof or terrain deck. Figure 4.2 shows the simulation model of the investigation with
results of the required heat effect.
Figure 4.2: Simulation model of three identical ofﬁces at different ﬂoors.
Figure 4.2 illustrates the differences in heating effect between the different ﬂoor location.
In connection with Figure 4.3 it can be seen that the ofﬁce at the top ﬂoor requires the
highest heating effect of approximately 162 W. The bottom and middle ﬂoor will require a
heating effect of 120 W and 112 W respectively. The reduction in heating effect from the
top ﬂoor to the middle and bottom ﬂoor will correspond to 25 % and 30 % respectively.
==PAGE:38==
28
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
Figure 4.3 shows the heat effect of each ﬂoor as a function of four different U-values
of the roof and slab.
Figure 4.3: The required heating effect of identical ofﬁces located on different ﬂoors as a
function of the U-value of roof and slab.
Figure 4.3 shows that the difference of the heating effect between the zone of the top and
the zone of the middle ﬂoor will linearly increase from 11 W to 52 W when the U-value
is increased from 0.05-0.2 W/m2K. Figure 4.3 shows that the difference of the heating
effect between the zone of the top and the zone of the bottom ﬂoor will linearly increase
from 9 W to 45 W when the U-value is increased from 0.05-0.2 W/m2K.
Figure 4.4: The yearly energy consumption of the different ofﬁce locations. The bottom,
middle and top ﬂoor.
==PAGE:39==
4.2. FLOOR LEVEL
29
Figure 4.4 shows that the middle ﬂoor will have the highest yearly energy consumption
compared to the bottom and top ﬂoor. The difference between the top and middle ﬂoor
will decrease when the U-value of the roof is increased.
Figure 4.5: The distribution of the energy consumption, in relation to ventilation heating,
cooling and fans, and the heating unit. The U-value of the roof and slab is 0.2 W/m2
Figure 4.5, shows the difference of the energy distribution between the ﬂoor locations
for a U-value of 0.2 W/m2K for the roof and slab. The largest difference in energy con-
sumption will be between the middle and top ﬂoor in relation to the energy of the fans .
The energy distribution were also found for the U-value 0.1 W/m2K, 0.15 W/m2K and
0.2 W/m2K. These can be seen in Appendix B, Figure B.3, B.2 and B.1.
The main ﬁndings, in relation to which ﬂoor level the zone is located at, are shown in
Table 4.2. The differences between the ﬂoor locations are given as percentage values
between the highest and lowest value. For all U-values, the highest and lowest value of
the heating effect were for the the top and middle ﬂoor respectively. For a U-value of 0.2
W/m2K the percentage difference of 31 % will correspond to the difference from 165
kWh to 120 kWh.
Table 4.2: The percentage difference between the lowest and highest value of the heating
effect and energy consumption.
U-value
0.05 W/m2K
0.10 W/m2K
0.15 W/m2K
0.20 W/m2K
Heating effect
9%
18%
25%
31%
Energy
8%
7%
5%
5%
==PAGE:40==
30
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
4.3
Internal mass
This section presents the ﬁndings in relation to the difference of heating effect, ventila-
tion ﬂow rate and yearly energy consumption between zones with different wall materials
in connection to night heating and night cooling.
Night heating
Figure 4.6 and 4.7 show the difference of heating effect and energy consumption
respectively, between two zones with internal walls made by 0.013 m gypsum or 0.05 m
concrete.
Figure 4.6: The heating effect as a function of the lower setpoint of the air temperature
during the night.
Figure 4.7: The yearly energy consumption as a function of the lower setpoint of the air
temperature during the night.
==PAGE:41==
4.3. INTERNAL MASS
31
Figure 4.6 shows that, the difference between using the 0.013 m gypsum or 0.05 m
concrete will be approximately 20 kWh, 40 kWh and 30 kWh when the air temperature at
night is heated to 21 ◦C, 22 ◦C and 23 ◦C respectively. Figure 4.7 show the difference of
yearly energy consumption between the zones using 0.013 m gypsum or 0.05 m concrete
will be lowest when the air temperature is heated to 21 ◦C at night. The difference will
for this setpoint be approximately 1.5 kWh. The difference of the energy consumption
between the zones will increase when the setpoint of the night heating is increased and
when the air temperature is heated to 23 ◦C at night. The difference will be approximately
5 kWh.
The main ﬁndings in relation to the difference in heating effect and yearly energy con-
sumption between two zones with varying wall materials are shown in Table 4.3. It shows
the percentage difference in heating effect and yearly energy consumption between the
zones with varying wall materials. The difference in heating effect of 12 %, when the air
temperature is heated to 21 ◦C at night, will corresponds to the difference from 175 W to
154 W.
Table 4.3: The ﬁndings in relation to zone with varying wall materials and night heating.
Night heating setpoint
21 ◦C
22 ◦C
23 ◦C
Heating effect
12%
15%
10%
Yearly energy consumption
1%
3%
4%
The distribution of the yearly energy consumption in relation to the ventilation cool-
ing, heating and fans, and the heating unit is shown in Figure 4.8. The distributions of
the yearly energy consumption, when the air temperature is heated to 21 ◦C or 23 ◦C, are
shown in Appendix B, Figure B.4 and B.5.
Figure 4.8: The distribution of yearly energy consumption between varying internal wall
materials when the air temperature is heated to 22 ◦C at night.
==PAGE:42==
32
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
The difference between zones with varying internal materials was investigated in re-
lation to energy ﬂexibility of the heating system. The temperature and heat effect distri-
butions during a cold day using night heating with a lower air temperature setpoint of 21
◦C, 22 ◦C and 23 ◦C are shown in Figure 4.9.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Figure 4.9: The temperature distribution and heat effect during a cold day with different
lower setpoint of the air temperature during the night. The setpoints are respectively: (a)
21 ◦C. (b) 22 ◦C. (c) 23 ◦C.
Figure 4.9a shows that the air temperature during a day will reach the lower setpoint
of 20 ◦C when the air temperature is heated to 21 ◦C during the night. This is applicable
when using both of the investigated internal wall materials. Figure 4.9b shows that when
the air temperature is heated to 21 ◦C at night, the average difference of the required
==PAGE:43==
4.3. INTERNAL MASS
33
heating effect in the occupant hours, dependent on which wall material is used, will be
approximately 10 W.
Figure 4.9c shows that when the air temperature is heated to 22 ◦C during the night,
there will be a difference in the air temperature distribution throughout the day depend-
ing on the internal walls materials. This difference between the zones will be largest in
the early hours of the occupancy hours, approximately 0.5 ◦C, and will then decrease.
When the internal walls is made by 0.013 m gypsum, the air temperature will reach 20
◦C at approximately 10 hours. When the internal walls were made of concrete, the air
temperature will decrease during the occupancy hours, but will never reach 20 ◦C. Figure
4.9d shows that when the air temperature is heated to 22 ◦C at night, the required heating
effect during the occupant hours will be 0 when the internal walls are made of concrete.
However, an average heating effect of approximately 20 W is required in the occupancy
hours when the internal walls are made of 2x 0.013 m gypsum.
Figure 4.9e shows that the temperature will never reach the lower setpoint of the air tem-
perature of 20 ◦C, when the air temperature is heated to 23 ◦C at night. This is applicable,
when both concrete internal walls and gypsum internal walls is used. Figure 4.9f shows
that, when the air temperature is heated to 23 ◦C at night, the effect will be 0 during the
occupancy hours, when the internal walls are made of concrete or gypsum.
Night cooling
This section presents the results of varying internal mass in relation to night cool-
ing. Figure 4.10 shows that varying wall materials between the zones will not result in
a difference in relation to the required ventilation ﬂow rate when the air temperature is
cooled to 23 ◦C at night. However, when the air temperature is cooled to 22 ◦C, the
difference between the zones with varying wall materials will become larger. For this
setpoint, the difference of using 2x 0.013 m gypsum compared to 2x 0.05 m concrete of
the internal walls will be approximately 80 L/s. If the air temperature is cooled further at
night to 23 ◦C, the difference of the ventilation ﬂow rate between the zones will become
approximately 350 L/s.
==PAGE:44==
34
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
Figure 4.10: The ventilation ﬂow rate as a function of the different investigated internal
wall materials. The upper setpoint of air temperature during the night is varied from 21
◦C to 23 ◦C.
Figure 4.11: The yearly energy consumption as a function of the different investigated
internal wall materials. The upper setpoint of air temperature during the night is varied
from 21 ◦C to 23 ◦C.
Figure 4.11 shows the difference of the yearly energy consumption between the zones
with varying materials of the internal walls. When the air temperature is cooled to 21 ◦C
or 22 ◦C at night, the difference of yearly energy consumption between the zones with
2x 0.013 m gypsum and 2x 0.05 m concrete will be approximately 20 kWh. If the air
temperature is cooled to 23 ◦C, the difference between the zones will be approximately
50 kWh. Figure 4.12 shows the distribution of the yearly energy consumption in relation
to the heating, cooling and fan energy of the ventilation system and the heating energy of
the heating system. The energy distributions when the air is cooled to 21 ◦C and 23 ◦C
at night are shown in Appendix B, Figure B.7 and B.6 respectively.
==PAGE:45==
4.3. INTERNAL MASS
35
Figure 4.12: The distribution of the yearly energy consumption for varying internal wall
materials. The air temperature is cooled to 22 ◦C at night.
The main ﬁndings in relation to the difference between the zones with varying mate-
rial of the internal walls when night cooling is used, are shown in Table 4.4. The main
results are given as the percentage difference between the lowest and highest value of
each variation. For example 53 % difference in the ventilation ﬂow rate when the air tem-
perature is cooled to 21 ◦C at night, corresponds to the difference from approximately
445 L/s to 95 L/s.
Table 4.4: The main ﬁndings in relation to the difference of ventilation ﬂow rate and
yearly energy consumption, between zones with varying internal wall materials.
Night cooling setpoint
21 ◦C
22 ◦C
23 ◦C
Ventilation ﬂow rate
53%
44%
9%
Energy consumption
21%
24%
27%
In relation to the quality of the energy ﬂexibility, Figure 4.13 shows the ﬂow rate
during two warm summer day (3rd and 4th of august), when the air temperature is cooled
to 21 ◦C, 22 ◦C or 23 ◦C. The ﬂow rate will vary because of the material of the internal
walls and setpoint the air temperature is cooled to at night. The required ﬂow rate will
change depending on which material the internal walls are made. The difference of ﬂow
rate depending on the internal wall material will increase, when the night cooling setpoint
is reduced. The difference of the max ventilation ﬂow rate in the occupancy hour between
the zones with 0.013 m gypsum and 0.05 m concrete will be approximately 20 L/s, 30
L/s and 40 L/s when the air temperature at night is cooled to 23 ◦C, 22 ◦C and 21 ◦C
respectively.
==PAGE:46==
36
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 4.13: The temperature distribution over the duration of two days. The curves
represent the different investigated internal wall materials. The time interval from 5135
hours to 5183 hours of the 1. axis corresponds to the start of the 3th of august to the end
of the 4th of august. The upper setpoint of the air temperature is varied: (a) 21 ◦C. (b)
22 ◦C. (c) 23 ◦C.
==PAGE:47==
4.4. ORIENTATION
37
4.4
Orientation
This section presents the results in relation to the difference of ventilation ﬂow and
energy consumption between the different orientations.
The difference in ventilation ﬂow rate and yearly energy consumption was found be-
tween the zones of different orientation, when the g-value of the windows was varied.
Figure 4.14 shows the difference in ventilation ﬂow rate between the west, east and south
oriented zones, depending on the g-value of the window.
Figure 4.14: The max required ﬂow rate as a function of the g-value of the window.
Figure 4.14 shows that the western oriented ofﬁce will for all g-values of the window
require the lowest ventilation ﬂow rate. The difference in ventilation ﬂow rate between the
western and eastern oriented zones will be approximately 10 L/s for a g-value of 0.3 and
23 L/s for a g-value of 0.6. The eastern ofﬁce will compared to the other two orientations,
require the highest ﬂow rate for a g-values of 0.3, 0.4 and 0.5. The difference between
the eastern and southern ofﬁce will be reduced as the g-value is increased and for a g-
value of 0.6 the required ﬂow rate for the eastern and southern oriented zones will be
approximately equal.
==PAGE:48==
38
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
Figure 4.15: The total yearly energy consumption of the reference ofﬁce oriented against
south, east and west. The energy consumption will be dependent on the g-value of the
windows.
The total yearly energy consumption is shown in Figure 4.15. The western ofﬁce will
for all g-values have a higher energy consumption compared to the eastern ofﬁce. The
southern ofﬁce will have the lowest and highest energy consumption for a g-value of 0.3
and 0.6 respectively. All the ofﬁce orientations will have a linear development, when the
g-value of the windows is increased.
The main ﬁndings in relation to the orientation of the zones with varying g-value of the
windows are shown in Table 4.5. The results are given as the percentage difference be-
tween the highest and lowest value of the ﬂow rate and energy consumption for each
g-value. For example, when a g-value of 0.3 is used for the windows, the largest differ-
ence in ventilation ﬂow rate will occur between the western and southern ofﬁce. This will
be 13 % and correspond to the difference in ﬂow rate from approximately 73 L/s to 67
L/s.
Table 4.5: The main ﬁndings in relation to the orientation of the zones with varying g-
value of the windows.
g-value
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
Ventilation ﬂow rate
13%
16%
19%
19%
Yearly energy consumption
7%
6%
12%
16%
The distribution of the yearly energy consumption in relation to the energy consump-
tion for ventilation heating, cooling and fans and the energy consumption of the heating
unit is for a g-value of 0.6, shown in Figure 4.16.
==PAGE:49==
4.4. ORIENTATION
39
Figure 4.16: The distribution of the yearly energy consumption for the zones with different
orientation and a g-value of the window 0.6
The yearly energy distributions for g-values of 0.5, 0.4 and 0.3 is shown in Appendix
B, Figure B.8, B.9 and B.10.
Solar shading
The difference in ventilation ﬂow rate and yearly energy consumption was found be-
tween the zones of different orientation, when solar shading was added. Figure 4.17
shows the difference in ventilation ﬂow rate between the west, east and south oriented
zone depending on the setpoint in W/m2 of the solar shading.
Figure 4.17: Flow rate dependent on the sun control.
Figure 4.17 shows that the difference of ventilation ﬂow rate between the zone will
==PAGE:50==
40
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
vary much depending on the setpoint of the solar shading. For a setpoint of 250 W/m2,
the largest difference of ﬂow rate will occur between the western and eastern oriented
zones and be approximately 10 L/s. However, for a solar shading setpoint of 100 W/m2,
the difference between these zones will be almost zero. At that setpoint, the largest dif-
ference in ﬂow rate will be between the eastern and southern oriented zones.
Figure 4.18: The distribution of the yearly energy consumption in relation to the heating,
cooling and fans of the ventilation system. The setpoint of the solar shading is 200 W/m2
Figure 4.18 shows that the difference of the yearly energy consumption will be very
small between the western and eastern oriented zones. The energy consumption will be
lowest for the southern oriented zones and will be approximately 7 kWh lower compared
to the other zones.
The main ﬁndings in relation to the orientation of the zone with solar shading are shown
in Table 4.6. The differences between zones are given as percentages between the highest
and lowest values. For at setpoint of 250 W/m2, the difference in ventilation ﬂow rate of
17 % will correspond to the difference from approximately 70 L/s to 62 L/s.
Table 4.6: Main ﬁndings in relation the the orientation of the zones with varying solar
shading.
Setpoint
100 W/m2
150 W/m2
200 W/m2
250 W/m2
Ventilation ﬂow rate
13%
18%
14%
17%
Energy consumption
11%
11%
11%
11%
The distribution of the yearly energy consumption in relation to the heating, cooling
and fans of the ventilation system, when a setpoint of 200 W/m2 is used, is show in
==PAGE:51==
4.4. ORIENTATION
41
Figure 4.19. The distributions of yearly energy consumption, when the setpoint of the
solar shading is 100 W/m2, 150 W/m2 or 250 W/m2, are shown in Appendix B, Figure
B.13, B.12 and B.11.
Figure 4.19: The distribution of the yearly energy consumption when the solar shading
has a setpoint of 200 W/m2.
Figure 4.20: The ﬂow rate over the duration of a summer week. The curves represent
different orientations of the reference ofﬁce.
During a year, the south ofﬁce will have substantially more hours with active solar
shading compared to the eastern and western ofﬁce. For a low control point of the solar
shading (100W/m2), the number of hours with active solar shading will be approximately
20% higher for the western oriented ofﬁce compared to the eastern oriented ofﬁce.
==PAGE:52==
42
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
4.5
Window area
This section presents the ﬁndings in relation to the difference of the ventilation ﬂow
rate and yearly energy consumption between a middle zone with one external wall and
one window, and a corner zone with two external walls and two windows.
Figure 4.21: The required ﬂow rate and total yearly energy consumption as a function of
the number of windows with and without solar shading.
Figure 4.21 shows that the difference of ventilation ﬂow rate between the middle zone
and the corner, is approximately 19 L/s if the width of the extra window is 1.25 m. If
the width is increased to 2.5 m the difference of the ventilation ﬂow rate will be 87 L/s.
However, if solar shading with a setpoint of 200 W/m2 is added to the extra window,
the difference of ventilation ﬂow rate between the two zones will be almost 0 for both of
the investigated window sizes. Figure 4.21 also shows that the difference of the yearly
energy consumption between the middle zone and the corner zone will be approximately
83 kWh when the extra window is 1,25 m wide. The difference is increased to 152.7
kWh, when the width of the window is increased to 2.5 m. If solar shading is added to
the extra window the difference of yearly energy consumption is reduced by 23 % and 27
% for the 1.25 m and 2.5 m extra window respectively.
The main ﬁndings of the investigation in relation to the difference of ventilation ﬂow
rate and yearly energy consumption between a middle zone and a corner zone are shown
in Table 4.7. The percentage differences shown are between the middle ofﬁce and the
corner ofﬁce with the different widths of the extra window.
==PAGE:53==
4.5. WINDOW AREA
43
Table 4.7: The ﬁndings in relation to the difference of ventilation ﬂow rate and yearly
energy consumption between a middle zone with one external wall and a corner zone
with two external walls and an extra window.
Width of the extra window
1.25 m
1.25 m with solar shading
2.5 m
2.5 m with solar shading
Volume ﬂow rate
15%
0%
45%
0%
Yearly energy consumption
45%
39%
61%
53%
The distributions of the yearly energy consumption in relation to the ventilation heat-
ing, cooling and fans and the heating unit are shown in Figure 4.22
Figure 4.22: The distribution of the yearly energy consumption of a middle zone with
one external wall and one window and a corner zone with two external walls and two
windows.
==PAGE:54==
44
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
Figure 4.23 shows the difference of daily ventilation ﬂow between a middle zone with
one window and a corner zone with two windows. The extra window of the corner zone
is of the same size as the others, which corresponds to a width of 1.25 m The ﬁgure shows
a substantial difference of ventilation ﬂow rate between the zones in the morning hours
from 8 - 12 hours. This will be reduced towards 17 hours but the difference in ﬂow rate
will never be 0 in the occupancy hours.
Figure 4.23: The ventilation ﬂow rate of ofﬁces with one and two windows. The width of
the extra window of the corner zone is 1.25 m. Without solar shading.
Figure 4.24 shows the difference of ventilation ﬂow rate between the middle zone and
the corner zone when solar shading is added with a setpoint of 200 W/m2. This will be
reduced in the occupancy hours compared to the ﬂow rates shown in Figure 4.23. The
large difference of ﬂow rate in the morning will be reduced to nearly zero.
Figure 4.24: The ventilation ﬂow rate of ofﬁces with one and two windows. The width of
the extra window of the corner zone is 1.25 m. With solar shading.
==PAGE:55==
4.5. WINDOW AREA
45
Figure 4.25 shows that when the width of the extra window of the corner ofﬁce is in-
creased to 2.5 m, then will the maximum difference of ventilation ﬂow between the zones
be approximately 60 L/s. This difference will occur at approximate 11 hours, however
the difference in ﬂow rate will then be reduce to approximately 35 L/s at 14 hours.
Figure 4.25: The ventilation ﬂow rate of ofﬁces with one and two windows. The width of
the extra window of the corner zone is 2.5 m. Without solar shading.
4.26 shows that when solar shading with a control setpoint of 200 W/m2 is added
to the 2.5 m extra window, then will the maximum difference of ventilation ﬂow rate
between the middle zone and the corner zones be approximately 20 L/s.
Figure 4.26: The ventilation ﬂow rate of ofﬁces with one and two windows. The width of
the extra window of the corner zone is 2.5 m. With solar shading.
==PAGE:56==
46
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
4.6
Shadows
This section presents the ﬁndings of how much the shadows from the neighbour build-
ings will impact the variation of ventilation ﬂow rate and energy consumption between
the zones in a building. Figure 4.27 shows the required ﬂow rate as a function of the
height of the nextdoor building. The three different curves describe the distance between
the two buildings, which is 15 meters, 30 meters and 60 meters respectively.
Figure 4.27: The ventilation ﬂow rate dependent on the relative height of the neighbour
building in relation to the reference ofﬁce. The three different curves represent the dis-
tance from the reference ofﬁce to the neighbour building.
Figure 4.27 shows a substantial decrease of the ventilation ﬂow rate when the next
door building reach a speciﬁc height relatively to the reference ofﬁce. This depend on the
distance between the two buildings. When the distance between the buildings is doubled,
the relative building height at which the large decrease will take place is also doubled.
This statement is valid for both the distance increase from 15 m to 30 m and from 30 m
to 60 m. The critical point will therefore correspond to an angle between the distance to
the building and the height of the building of 47◦. This is depicted in Figure 4.28.
==PAGE:57==
4.6. SHADOWS
47
Figure 4.28: Illustration of the critical solar angle at which the shadow will cover the
whole window. For a distance between the buildings of 15 m, the ofﬁce below a relative
height of 16 m will be almost covered by shadow and the ofﬁce above a height of 16 m
will receive full solar gain.
Figure 4.27 shows that, for a distance between the building of 15 m, the reduction
from approximately 95 L/s to 55 L/s will occur when the height from the zone to the
top of the neighbour building is increased from 16 m to 24 m. However, for a distance
between the buildings of 60 m, the same decrease of ventilation ﬂow rate will takes place
when the height from the zone to the top of the neighbour building is increased from 64
m to 90 m. The distance between the buildings will therefore impact how many of the
ﬂoors in a building that will require different ventilation ﬂow rates.
Figure 4.29: Energy consumption dependent on the relative height of the neighbour build-
ing.
Figure 4.29 shows, that the yearly energy consumption will decrease linearly when
==PAGE:58==
48
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
the height from the zone to the top of the neighbour building is increased from 5 m to
30 m. The energy consumption will be reduced from approximately 105 kWh to 70 kWh
in this interval. After 30 m the energy consumption will be constant. The decrease in
energy consumption when the height from the zone to the top of the neighbour building
is increased from 5 m to 30 m corresponds to a reduction rate of approximately 1.3 % per
meter height.
The required ventilation ﬂow rate as a function of the relative distance to the corner
of the neighbour building is showed in Figure 4.30. When the distance from the zone to
the corner of the neighbour buildings is 0 m, it will corresponds to the edges of the outer
walls are lining up with eachother. The zone will therefore still be affected by shadows
when the distance to the corner is 0 m.
Figure 4.30: The required ventilation ﬂow rate dependent on the distance from the inves-
tigated ofﬁce to the corner of the neighbour building. The three different curves represent
the distance from the reference ofﬁce to the neighbour building.
Figure 4.30 shows, that the difference of ventilation ﬂow rate is larger when the dis-
tance between the buildings is increased from 15 meters to 30 meters compared to the
increase from 30 meters to 45 meters. The required ﬂow rate will reduce relatively lin-
early until the energy consumption is constant. Figure 4.30 shows that, for a distance
between the buildings of 15 meters, this will be at approximately 30 meters from the
corner. The reason that the curves will not be decrease complete linearly is because of
the dynamic simulations where the maximum require ventilation ﬂow rates were found at
varying times.
==PAGE:59==
4.6. SHADOWS
49
Figure 4.31: Energy consumption dependent on the relative height of the neighbour build-
ing.
Figure 4.31 shows that the yearly energy consumption of the zone will decrease ap-
proximately linearly when the distance from the zone to the corner of the neighbour build-
ing is increased from 0 m to 20 m. The reduction in this interval will be approximately 8
kWh corresponds to 0.53 % per meter.
The distribution of the yearly energy consumption in relation to the ventilation heating,
cooling and fans, and the heating unit dependent on the height from the zone to the top of
the neighbour building is shown from Figure 4.32.
Figure 4.32: Energy consumption dependent on the relative height of the neighbour build-
ing.
The distribution of the yearly energy consumption in relation to the ventilation heat-
==PAGE:60==
50
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
ing, cooling and fans, and the heating unit dependent on the distance from the zone to the
corner of the neighbour building is shown from Figure 4.33.
Figure 4.33: Energy consumption dependent on the relative height of the neighbour build-
ing.
==PAGE:61==
4.7. USAGE PATTERN
51
4.7
Usage pattern
The usage patterns listed in section 4.7 were used as examples for the investigation
of the impact of varying occupancy schedules on the yearly energy consumption and
required ventilation ﬂow rate is shown in Figure 4.34.
Figure 4.34: The required ﬂow rate and yearly energy consumption of the ofﬁce as a
function of the different usage patterns.
Figure 4.34 shows that the difference of ventilation ﬂow rate between zones with
varying occupancy schedule will at max be 19.2 L/s corresponding to a difference of 18
%. The yearly energy consumption will at most differ with 16.5 kWh between the zones,
corresponding to a difference of 15 %.
Figure 4.35: Comparison of the daily ﬂow rate of the eastern corner zone and the full
zone.
Figure 4.35 show the distribution of the yearly energy consumption in relation to the
ventilation cooling, heating and fans, and the heating unit. The most substantial changes
==PAGE:62==
52
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
between the schedules is the energy of the ventilation fans and of the heating unit. These
will increase and decrease respectively when the occupancy load is increased.
Figure 4.36 shows the energy consumption and required ventilation ﬂow rate of the meet-
ing room compared to the ofﬁce with the ASHRAE occupancy schedule. The values of
ﬂow rate and energy consumption are deﬁned as the percentage increase from the most
critical ofﬁce schedule to the meating room schedule.
Figure 4.36: The percentage increase of the meeting room compared to the ASHRAE
schedule ofﬁce in relation to the ventilation ﬂow rate and yearly energy consumption.
Figure 4.37 shows the distribution of the yearly energy consumption . The energy used
for ventilation fans will increase the most percentage when comparing a meeting room
with the ASHRAE ofﬁce schedule. A 70 % increase of the fan consumption corresponds
to a quantitative value of 23 kWh. Comparable a 25 % increase of the energy use for
ventilation cooling, corresponds to 14 kWh.
Figure 4.37: The percentage increase of the meeting room compared to the ASHRAE
schedule ofﬁce in relation to the distribution of the energy consumption.
==PAGE:63==
4.8. ZONE DIVISION
53
4.8
Zone division
This section presents the difference of the ventilation ﬂow rate between simulating a
large landscaped ofﬁce as one zone or dividing it into ﬁve zones.
Figure 4.38: The landscaped ofﬁce as one zone. The ventilation ﬂow rate is shown from
the color scale.
Figure 4.39: The landscaped ofﬁce divided into 5 zones. The ventilation ﬂow rate is
shown for each zone.
==PAGE:64==
54
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
Figure 4.40: The landscaped ofﬁce divided into 10 zones. The ventilation ﬂow rate is
shown for each zone.
Figure 4.38 shows that the ventilation ﬂow rate of the ofﬁce is approximately 6 L/s/m2
when the ofﬁce is simulated as one zone. Figure 4.39 shows that when the ofﬁce is di-
vided into 5 zone, the ventilation ﬂow rates of the most and least critical zones are approx-
imately 7.5 L/s/m2 and 5.5 L/s/m2 respectively. Figure 4.39 shows that when the ofﬁce
is divided into 10 zones, the ventilation ﬂow rate of the most and least critical zones are
approximately 8.2 L/s/m2 and 3.8 L/s/m2 respectively.
The percentage difference in relation the the ventilation between 1 zone model and the
models divided into 5 and 10 zones, is shown in Figure Table 4.8. For example, the ven-
tilation ﬂow rate of the most critical zone in the 5 zone model will be 7.5 L/s. This is a
percentage increase of 25 % compared to the ﬂow rate from the one zone model of 6 L/s.
Table 4.8: The percentage difference of ﬂow rate, between the critical zones from the
divided models and the 1 zone model
Most critical zone
Least critical zone
1 -> 5 zones
25%
8%
1 -> 10 zones
37%
37%
==PAGE:65==
4.8. ZONE DIVISION
55
Figure 4.41 show the difference between the average ventilation ﬂow rate in the of-
ﬁce simulated as 1 zone and the ventilation ﬂow rate of the corner zone when the ofﬁce
simulated as 5 zones.
(a) Eastern corner zone.
(b) Western corner zone.
Figure 4.41: Comparison of the daily ﬂow rate of (a)eastern and (b)western corner zones
and the full zone.
Figure 4.41a shows the ﬂow rate in the eastern corner zones simulated in a 5 zone
model compared with the ﬂow rate simulated in a 1 zone model of landscaped ofﬁce and
then divided by 5. The difference of the ﬂow rate is largest between 8 and 12 hours. It will
decrease after 12 hours but will never reach 0 inside the occupancy hours. Figure 4.41b
shows the ﬂow rate of the western corner zone will be higher after 15 hours compared
with the full zone.
==PAGE:66==
56
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
Figure 4.42: The ventilation ﬂow rate of the eastern corner zone when it is simulated
individually, compared to the ventilation ﬂow rate of the same eastern corner zone when
it is simulated as a part of the remaining 4 zones.
Figure 4.42 shows that the required ventilation ﬂow rate of the corner zone will be
approximately 150 L/s higher when the zone is simulated alone compared to when the
zone is simulated in connection with the rest of the ofﬁce.
Figure 4.43: The difference of the ventilation ﬂow rate of the whole ofﬁce when it is
simulated 1 zone compared to when it is simulated as 5 zones.
Figure 4.43 shows that the total overall required ventilation ﬂow rate of the whole
ofﬁce will not change substantially when it is simulated as 1 zone compared to when it is
simulated as 5 zones.
==PAGE:67==
4.8. ZONE DIVISION
57
Figure 4.44: Comparison of yearly energy consumption as percentage differences from
the max value. Models of the full room is compared. One as 1 zone and one as 5 zones.
Figure 4.44 shows the yearly energy consumption as a percentage of the maximum
value. The point of this result is to show the difference of energy consumption between
the landscaped ofﬁce modelled as one zone or divided into ﬁve zones. The percentage
difference of the energy consumption between the two models will be 2-3 % for all the
investigated supply temperatures of the ventilation system.
==PAGE:68==
==PAGE:69==
CHAPTER 5
Discussion
The main goal of this study was to uncover the uncertainties of simulating only a
few critical zones in order to represent a whole building. To ﬁnd these uncertainties, the
parameters in relation to the structure and use of a building, which commonly can vary
between zones, were identiﬁed. The impact of each parameter variation was calculated.
The factors used to the evaluate the impact of each parameter were the design of the build-
ing installations and the yearly energy consumption. The variations of internal mass were
also evaluated in accordance to energy ﬂexibility.
The incentive of using a whole building simulation should be evaluated for each speciﬁc
building based on the level of uncertainty between the zones. In relation to this decision,
the whole building simulation can be put in context with ﬁnancial savings and improved
communication between project parties and clients. Further more, the limitations of the
results will be discussed in this chapter.
The main ﬁndings of the study are shown in Table 5.1. The table shows the difference
in air ﬂow rate, heat power and energy consumption, which may be due to the variation
of the different investigated parameters. The impact of the parameter variations investi-
gated in this study are in Table 5.1 given as percentage differences from the maximum to
the minimum value of the ventilation ﬂow rate, heat effect and energy consumption. As
an example, the ventilation ﬂow rate, due to the change in shadows from the neighbour
building, were found to vary from the maximum value of 100 L/s to the minimum value
of 50 L/s. This corresponds to a reduction of 50 %.
In relation to most of the investigated parameters in this study, the potential variation
of the total energy consumption was found to be smaller compared to the potential of the
dimensioned required ventilation ﬂow rate. This could be because the energy consump-
59
==PAGE:70==
60
CHAPTER 5. DISCUSSION
tion represents the whole year compared to the ventilation ﬂow rate, which potentially
could represent a speciﬁc peak load, which only occurs one time a year.
==PAGE:71==
61
Table 5.1: The primary ﬁndings of the study. The table shows the percentage difference
in ventilation ﬂow rate, heating effect and energy consumption as a result of variation of
the investigated parameters.
Max
difference
between zones
Flow rate [L/s]
Heating effect [W]
Energy consump-
tion [kWh]
Internal mass
External walls
40+ %
External walls
Shadows
Floor level
Internal mass
30 % - 40 %
Room type
20 % - 30 %
Room type
Shadows
Orientation
10 % - 20 %
Occupancy schedule
Orientation
Internal mass
Floor level
1 % - 10 %
Occupancy sched-
ule
Floor level
Orientation
≈0
Shadows
Occupancy schedule
Room type
Table 5.1 shows that variation between zones of the internal mass, number of external
walls and shadows from neighbour buildings were the parameters which potentially could
be the cause of the most substantial difference in required ventilation ﬂow rate between
two zones. In relation to the yearly energy consumption the the variation of the number
of external walls will be the most substantial cause variations between two zone in the
building. Variation of the internal mass will also be the cause of a substantial difference
in energy consumption between the zones. Variations of these parameters between zones
in the same building were therefore, in relation to the ventilation ﬂow rate and yearly
energy consumption, found to be the cause of the largest uncertainties between zone and
therefore the largest incentives for using a whole building simulation.
The difference of the required ventilation ﬂow between two zones will in relation to vary-
ing number of external walls and shadows from neighbour building, be caused by large
variation of the solar gain. The most and least critical zones in relation to the shadows
are the zones which are not affected by the shadows and the zone which are covered com-
pletely in shadow. This will be the difference between max solar gain and no solar gain.
==PAGE:72==
62
CHAPTER 5. DISCUSSION
However the max variation of ﬂow rate between the critical zones will not describe how
the shadows will affect the ventilation ﬂow rates of the zones in between. The differ-
ence in ﬂow rate between the middle zones with one external wall and the corner zones
with two external walls will also be the large change of the solar gain. And if the an the
window the extra window (the one which is not part of the middle zone), the difference
between the two zone will be increased further.
In relation to the required heating effect, the ofﬁce location in relation to the roof and
the building slab was found to be the most substantial cause of variation between the
zones. The parameters related to the internal loads or the solar gain will not affect the
required heat effect as this will be calculated with not loads or solar gain.
Table 5.2: Description of how the investigated parameters in this study were varied be-
tween zones.
Parameters
Variation of the parameters
Floor level
The location of the reference room were varied in relateion to
the roof and building slab. Further the U-value of the roof and
slab is varied from 0.05 - 0.2 W/m2K
Internal mass
The materials of internal walls were varied from 2x 0.013m
gypsum to 2x 0.05m concrete. The air temperature setpoint was
for night heating and night cooling varied from 21 ◦C to 23 ◦C
Orientation
The orientation of the reference room was varied between west,
east and south. The g-value of the windows were varied from
0.3 to 0.6. The setpoint of the solar shading was varied from
100 W/m2 to 250 W/m2.
External walls
The number of external walls were varied from 1 to 2. An extra
window was further added to the second external wall and the
width of the window was varied from 1.25 m to 2.5 m. Solar
shading was also implemented.
Shadows
The relative height of the neighbour building compared to the
reference ofﬁce were varied from 4 m to 100 m. The distance
from the reference ofﬁce to the corner of the neighbour building
were varied from 5 m to 90 m.
Occupancy schedule
The occupants schedule were varied between the schedule
shown in Section 4.7 and Appendix A.
Room type
The room type were varied from the an ofﬁce to a meeting
room. The schedule was therefore varied from the ASHRAE
schedule to the meeting room schedule.
There were, however, certain limitations to the ﬁnding in this study. The way that each
==PAGE:73==
63
of the investigated parameters were varied are described in Table 5.2 and can be used to
discuss the incentive of the ﬁndings in relation to the need of using a whole building sim-
ulation instead of only simulating the critical zones. In relation to the ventilation ﬂow
rate, the maximal difference between the investigated internal wall materials was found
to be 57 %. This difference was found when the air temperature was reduced to 21 ◦C
during the night. The difference between using gypsum and concrete would, however, be
reduced if the lower setpoint of the air temperature during the night were increased.
Furthermore, the results of the required ventilation ﬂow rates in this study were found
by the use of an unlimited VAV system, and the dimensioning values could therefore be
necessarily high. When using night cooling, the required ﬂow rate was much higher dur-
ing the night compared to the ﬂow rate required for the reference ofﬁce without night
cooling. The largest ventilation ﬂow rate would occur when the internal walls made of
concrete. The schedule of the temperature setpoint could however be changed in order
to potentially reduce the required ﬂow rate. The room types were only varied between
an ofﬁce and a meeting room. The meeting room had an occupant schedule and load
accordingly to European standard 16798 [7].
The design of the ventilation system will be highly impacted by the solar transmission
through the windows. The suns positioning on the sky will have an impact on the result
in relation to shadows from neighbour building. The sun’s position in the sky in Denmark
[9] and the heat transmission for west, east and south [10] can be seen in Figure 5.1. It can
be seen in Figure 5.1c that the sun’s position on the sky will be highest at approximately
13 hours. The sun will therefore be located lower in the sky in the morning hours of the
schedule compared to the the evening hours.
Compared to the southern ofﬁce, the solar gain of the eastern and western oriented
ofﬁces will occur when the sun is located relatively low on the sky. The critical point
which was found in section 4.6 and shown in Figure 4.28 will therefore be reduced. In
practice this will mean that ofﬁces of a smaller number of ﬂoors are affected by the sun.
The incentive of using a whole building simulation due to shadows from the neighbour
building will therefore also be reduced.
Furthermore the large difference in ventilation ﬂow rate will however be between
rooms located around the relative height at which the large decrease in the ventilation
ﬂow rate occurs. The rooms below the critical point will covered in shadow and the
rooms above the critical point have a large solar gain. The shadows from the height of
the neighbour building will therefore only give incentive for simulation of a few different
ﬂoors. The ﬁndings from ﬁgure 4.27 also show that, when the distance to the neighbour
building is increased, the reduction of the ventilation ﬂow rate from 90 L/s to 55 L/s
==PAGE:74==
64
CHAPTER 5. DISCUSSION
will take place over more relative building height. This will in practice mean that the
shadow line will travel over a larger number of ﬂoor during the day. This will increase
the uncertainty in relation to the ventilation ﬂow rate, which will vary between a larger
number of zones.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Figure 5.1: Plots of the sun’s position one the sky. (a) 1st of May. (c) 1st of July. (e)
30th of September. The solar gain in W/m2 during days in the different months for the
orientations, (b) west, (d) east and (f) south.
Varying occupant schedules were found to have a maximum impact of 19 % and 8 %
in relation to the ventilation ﬂow rate and energy consumption respectively. The occupant
density used for this study was 10 m2/person for a single ofﬁce, in compliance with Dan-
ish standard 1752 [3]. In practice, the occupant density will often be higher compared to
==PAGE:75==
65
the 10 m2/person. In contrast, the occupancy load will often be lower. The building is
therefore often design with 100 % load to compensate for this. The simulations of this
study were made with equipment corresponding to 100 W/person. However, Companies
are often using a laptop + screen combination which, can result in a total effect of under
50 W/person. Further it can be discussed if each speciﬁc occupant schedule of the dif-
ferent zones, in practice would be included in the design of the ventilation system. This
would restrict the ﬂexibility of the zone substantially.
The quality of energy ﬂexibility will be impacted by the internal loads. The calculation of
the dimensioned heating effect was done with no internal load, solar gain or ventilation.
However, in relation to the whole year simulations, the heating system was assisted by
heat loads and also the ventilation system, as the supply temperature was 20 ◦C. Further-
more, the total heat transfer coefﬁcient and inﬁltration rate of the building will also impact
the effect of energy ﬂexibility. An airtight building with low transmission losses will not
require night heating. Figure 4.9e shows that the air temperature will be over 21 ◦C when
the internal walls are made of 2x 0.05m concrete and a setpoint for the night heating of
23 ◦C is used. With full internal load, the temperatures can become unnecessarily high
and will require a higher energy consumption of the ventilation system.
The impact of furniture in relation to energy ﬂexibility were not included in the inves-
tigations. In IDA Ice, the furniture are very simpliﬁed as default and has the same surface
area independent of the ﬂoor area. Figure 5.2 shows the effect of heating and cooling,
from an earlier study [11], for a period of 4 hours depending on the internal mass. The
variation of the internal mass consisted of implementing a carpet and furniture. When
comparing the empty room with the fully loaded room, the temperature differences after
4 hours were approximately 1.2 K and 0.5 K for heating and cooling respectively.
Figure 5.2: Room temperature dependent on the amount of furniture.
The room of the investigation was well insulated, which will explain why the increase
==PAGE:76==
66
CHAPTER 5. DISCUSSION
in temperature of the heating was larger compared to the reduction in temperature of the
cooling. In a less insulated room, the furniture would play a more substantial role in re-
lation to the cooling and the difference in temperature between an empty and full-loaded
room would be larger.
The installations in the simulations were controlled by the room air temperature, as this
typically would be the scenario in practice. Measuring the operative temperature in prac-
tice would demand sensors located at the occupants positions which are not common. It
was then assumed that a max air temperature 25 ◦C would result in an operative temper-
ature below 26 ◦C. However, to obtain a more accurate maximum required ﬂow rate of
the different scenarios, the control could be switched to the operative temperature. Most
of the simulations of this study were made with a constant supply temperature of 20 ◦C.
The study does not account for the throw lenght of the air supply. Therefore, it is uncer-
tain if the air supply temperature of 20 ◦C, can result in the supplied air not reaching the
occupancy zone.
The dimensioning values of the ventilation system were given as the maximum required
ﬂow rate to maintain an air temperature below 25 ◦C at all times. This can potentially
provide a misguided picture of the indoor environment. One extremely warm day with a
very high solar gain can result in a required ﬂow rate which is over dimensioned in rela-
tion to 99 % of the other days. For a more realistic indication of the variations between
the zones of the same building, the ﬂow rate required to keep maximum 100 hours over 26
◦C could have been found instead. This would however currently demand a much more
time consuming process as the simulations should be manually iterated for every scenario
to ﬁnd the exact ﬂow rate required to secure that the hours above 26 ◦C will be below
100. This feature could advantageously be added to the premade temperature control in
IDA Ice. The user would then have the options to choose the margin of error, of which
the VAV ventilation system should be controlled by.
The installations of the study were designed in accordance to class B of the indoor en-
vironment. For further studies, class A could be more central for the ﬁndings. Class B
is commonly used for many building projects, however it could be assumed that class A
will be more relevant in the future, as the requirements to indoor environment in relation
to both health and performance will be likely to increase.
==PAGE:77==
5.1. OPTIMIZATION OF THE SIMULATION PROCESS
67
5.1
Optimization of the simulation process
Further external methods could be included for evaluating the validity of the whole
building simulation. A quantitative procedure of evaluating building energy software has
been developed [12]. This is called "The Building Energy Simulation Test and Diagnostic
Method" also know as the BESTEST. One goal of this method is to compare simulation
software to locate the amount of disagreement among these.
The whole building simulation can be used in collaboration with optimization software
to ﬁnd the best input data [13]. Finding the optimal solution of a building design can
be an iterative process in accordance to the requirements, which the construction should
fulﬁl. Often it is not known exactly what input is necessary to achieve the desired indoor
environment or a satisfactory energy consumption of the building. The “trial-and-error”-
method will therefore often be used to ﬁnd the most optimal design. However, software
with the purpose of easing the optimization process exist. Many parameters should be
accounted for in the simulation programs, when optimizing the building design. How-
ever, it is possible for the optimization process to be based on a selected area. This could
for example be the building envelope which affects the energy consumption in relation
to both heating and cooling of the building. The optimization software can hereby be
implemented to vary the materials of the envelope, including the windows. Figure 5.3
shows how the materials of the building can be iteratively changed to obtain the lowest
total energy consumption.
Figure 5.3: Optimization of the input data used in building energy simulations. The total
energy consumption is minimized.
Figure 5.3 shows that the energy required for cooling in fact will increase over the
==PAGE:78==
68
CHAPTER 5. DISCUSSION
duration of the iterations. However compared to the cooling, the energy savings in relation
to the improved heating design will be much more beneﬁcial and the total consumption
will be reduced.
==PAGE:79==
5.2. PROJECT COMMUNICATION
69
5.2
Project communication
The communication between the parties of a building project is very important to the
ﬁnal quality and cost of the product. The communication level can also impact the valid-
ity of a whole building simulation.
One of the disadvantages in relation to whole building simulations is the long modelling
and computing time. The modelling time can be reduced if a model has already been
created in connection with BIM. Currently importation of a Autocad or Revit model will
typically still require some further modelling as the building is not completely ready for
simulation [14]. To reduce the failure of importing an IFC ﬁle it can be advantageous
to avoid including unnecessary information in the BIM models. The geometrical models
created by the architect are potentially not compatible with the simulation software. The
purpose of the zone deﬁnitions of these models in relation to the architect, can often be
to specify the ﬂoor area. Curtain walls, which many models created in Revit will contain,
cannot be loaded correctly by IDA Ice. For the thermal simulation only properties of the
curtain walls are crucial and it can therefore be simpliﬁed by the use of large windows
with equal properties [15]. Furthermore, IDA Ice will require clearly deﬁned zone di-
vision and external walls covering more than one ﬂoor should be divided for each ﬂoor.
Models with a zone surrounded by another zone cannot be created in the geometrical de-
signer of IDA Ice. It can, however, be imported from another sketching software. For
IDA Ice to perceive this correctly, the zone deﬁnition should be clearly indicated by ap-
propriate room separation lines.
Demands from the client can be stated in BIM models and the correct setpoints and
schedules will be attached to each zone [16]. The desired internal materials can also
be stated here as E.g. a carpet can effect the internal mass of the room. It is important that
the requirements of special zones (meeting rooms, synergy zones etc.) are stated clearly
in the building program. The variations compared to the other zones can often create
the need for individual simulation. Unnecessary time consumption by misunderstanding
the desired installations should be avoided. Input and design changes is common during
the design phase. It could therefore be argued that a complex whole building simulation
should not be modelled and conducted in the beginning of the design phase as the chance
of rework is large.
IDA Ice has an implemented model viewer, which can be used for an easy visualiza-
tion of the general results. The results can also be exported as an IFC-ﬁle and opened in
another software program. To create an optimal visual model for the client both results of
==PAGE:80==
70
CHAPTER 5. DISCUSSION
all the rooms and a coherent geometrical model is required. This is a large incentive for
using whole building simulations.
Different tools focused on building modelling are available on the market. If a program
is compatible with the ﬁle format IFC, the models created can be imported to IDA ICE.
There are pros and cons related to using programs from different manifacturers. The
fastest way to create the simulation model is to draw it directly in the IDA Ice. This will
reduce the risk of zone complications. When using other programs there is a risk of IDA
ICE not deﬁning the right components like inner walls contra external walls. There are
however limitations to the IDA Ice model creator. The geometry should be very simple or
i can be time consuming and difﬁcult to model correctly. Especially if one zone encircles
another. Different ﬂoors without equal ﬂoor area can also be tedious to create. Normally
one building body can be used but for this scenario it would result in a wrong perception
of the roof.
A simple way to make a more complex geometrical model is to use the software Sketchup.
It is relatively simple to use and can be ideal for a person without knowledge of more com-
plex drawing software, for example a student helper. The models created in Sketchup can
easily be imported to IDA ICE without changing format and the room deﬁnition where
one room zone encircles another can easily be created. It is however important that the
zones is clearly deﬁned in Sketchup. This is done by adding different colours to all the
zone which is a relatively simple task but it is time consuming especially for larger build-
ings. Furthermore, gaps between each zone are also a requirement. If mistake are made,
or the building design is changed, it can be difﬁcult to solve. Often the better option is to
make a completely new model.
If a lot of data needs to be stored in the building model, Revit or AutoCAD could be
used. These are standard programs for building project and can contain a high amount of
information used for BIM. Premade models can therefore already have been created by
the architect or other parties of the project, and will be available for building simulation.
An add-on for revit has been developed for calculating the pressure loss throughout the
ventilation system. This will however demand the ducts being drawn in the correct size
and scale. However, the quality of the building model will commonly be dependent on
the stage of the project. In the early design, phase there can be a risk of the model being
unﬁt for building simulation.
==PAGE:81==
CHAPTER 6
Conclusion
The main goal of the study were to uncover the uncertainties of representing a whole
building with the results of a few critical zone, in relation to the thermal indoor environ-
ment and the yearly energy consumption.
The ﬁndings of the study showed, that in relation to the difference of ventilation ﬂow
rate and yearly energy consumption the between zones, the most impactful parameter
variation would be the number of external walls, the shadows from neighbour buildings
and the internal mass. In relation to the difference in heating effect the most impactful
parameter would be the ﬂoor location, as the dimensioning heating effect is calculated
with no solar gain or internal loads. The results in relation to the required ventilation ﬂow
rate and energy consumption can be percieved as guidelines for the selection of building
zones which are dimensioning for the complete building.
The ventilation ﬂow rate required to maintain a thermal climate from climate accord-
ingly to class B, were found to vary with up to 50 % from the most critical zone to the
least critical zone, depending on the investigated parameters. This could therefore result
in a substantial over dimensioning a the ventilation ducts and armatures. The yearly en-
ergy consumption were found to vary with up to 61 % between the zones. If the worst
case zone was going to represent the other zones this would give a wrong estimate of the
total energy consumption, and can results in a bad business case.
Variation of the number of external walls and shadows from neighbour buildings were
found to be some of the causes for the largest potential difference between zones in re-
lation to the ventilation ﬂow rate and the yearly energy consumption. These factors are
related to a large difference of the solar gain between the zones.
71
==PAGE:82==
72
CHAPTER 6. CONCLUSION
The potential of only simulating one orientation (south, east and west) and represent-
ing the other orientation with the results, were found to be enhanced, if the g-value of the
windows was reduced as it would reduce the difference in the solar gain.
Furthermore, the ﬁndings of the study, in relation to division of larger zones, showed
that the difference in ﬂow rate between a landscaped simulated as 1 zone or as 5 zones,
can be up to 25 %. If the landscaped ofﬁce is divided into 10 zone the same difference
can be up to 37 %.
==PAGE:83==
Appendices
73
==PAGE:84==
==PAGE:85==
APPENDIX A
Usage patterns
Figure A.1: Occupancy schedule of an ofﬁce according to ASHRAE .
Figure A.2: Occupancy schedule of an ofﬁce according to Duarte et al.
75
==PAGE:86==
76
APPENDIX A. USAGE PATTERNS
Figure A.3: Occupancy schedule of an ofﬁce according to James A. Davis III, Darin W.
Nutter.
Figure A.4: Occupancy schedule of an ofﬁce according to .
==PAGE:87==
77
Figure A.5: Occupancy schedule of a meeting room according to European standard
16798 [7].
==PAGE:88==
==PAGE:89==
APPENDIX B
Simulation models
B.1
Floor location
Figure B.1: The distribution of the energy consumption, in relation to ventilation heating,
cooling and fans, and the heating unit. The U-value of the roof and slab is 0.15 W/m2
79
==PAGE:90==
80
APPENDIX B. SIMULATION MODELS
Figure B.2: The distribution of the energy consumption, in relation to ventilation heating,
cooling and fans, and the heating unit. The U-value of the roof and slab is 0.1 W/m2
Figure B.3: The distribution of the energy consumption, in relation to ventilation heating,
cooling and fans, and the heating unit. The U-value of the roof and slab is 0.05 W/m2
==PAGE:91==
B.2. INTERNAL MASS
81
B.2
Internal mass
night heating
Figure B.4: The distribution of yearly energy consumption between varying internal wall
materials when the air temperature is heated to 21 ◦C at night.
Figure B.5: The distribution of yearly energy consumption between varying internal wall
materials when the air temperature is heated to 23 ◦C at night.
==PAGE:92==
82
APPENDIX B. SIMULATION MODELS
night cooling
Figure B.6: The distribution of the yearly energy consumption for varying internal wall
materials. The air temperature is cooled to 23 ◦C at night.
Figure B.7: The distribution of the yearly energy consumption for varying internal wall
materials. The air temperature is cooled to 21 ◦C at night.
==PAGE:93==
B.3. ORIENTATION
83
B.3
Orientation
g-value
Figure B.8: The distribution of the yearly energy consumption for the zones with different
orientation and a g-value of the window 0.5
Figure B.9: The distribution of the yearly energy consumption for the zones with different
orientation and a g-value of the window 0.4
==PAGE:94==
84
APPENDIX B. SIMULATION MODELS
Figure B.10: The distribution of the yearly energy consumption for the zones with differ-
ent orientation and a g-value of the window 0.3
solar shading
Figure B.11: The distribution of the yearly energy consumption when the solar shading
has a setpoint of 250 W/m2.
Figure B.12: The distribution of the yearly energy consumption when the solar shading
has a setpoint of 150 W/m2.
==PAGE:95==
B.3. ORIENTATION
85
Figure B.13: The distribution of the yearly energy consumption when the solar shading
has a setpoint of 100 W/m2.
==PAGE:96==
==PAGE:97==
Bibliography
[1]
David Peter Wyon and Pawel Wargocki. “How indoor environment affects perfor-
mance”. In: A S H R A E Journal 55.3 (2013). Copyright 2013 ASHRAE, pp. 46–
52. ISSN: 0001-2491.
[2]
Simpliﬁcation of building models. 2012. URL: http://www.designbuilder.
co.uk/helpv4.6/Content/Working_with_Large_Models.htm
(visited on 05/25/2017).
[3]
DS/CEN/CR 1752: Ventilation for buildings – Design criteria for the indoor envi-
ronment. Dansk Standard, 2001.
[4]
Søren Aggerholm. SBI 2013:25, Cost-optimal levels of minimum energy perfor-
mance requirements in the Danish Building Regulations. Danish Building Research
Institute, 2013.
[5]
Electricity prices in Denmark. 2017. URL: https://ens.dk/sites/ens.
dk/files/Statistik/energistatistik2015.pdf (visited on 06/23/2017).
[6]
Søren Østergaard Jensen and Anna Marszal Pomianowska. “Et ﬂuktuerende ener-
gysystem kræver energiﬂeksible bygninger”. Danish. In: Energiﬂeksible bygninger
(2017), pp. 13–18.
[7]
DRAFT prEN 16798-1: Energy performance of buildings - Part 1: Indoor envi-
ronmental input parameters for design and assessment of energy performance of
buildings addressing indoor air quality, thermal environment, lighting and acous-
tics - Module M1-6. European Standard, 2007.
[8]
Examples of roof construction from Rockwool. 2017. URL: http://www.rockwool.
dk/produkter/tag- og- loft/flade- tage/flade- tage- af-
beton/ (visited on 06/18/2017).
87
==PAGE:98==
88
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[9]
The position of the sun in Denmark. 2017. URL: http://www.torbenhermansen.
dk/almanak/solhojde/solhojde.php?lang=en (visited on 06/15/2017).
[10]
Jørgen Erik Christensen. “Solindfald i bygninger”. Dansk. In: (2013).
[11]
Henryk Wolisz et al. “The Effect of Furniture and Floor Covering Upon Dynamic
Thermal Building Simulations”. English. In: Energy Procedia 78.Complete (2015),
pp. 2154–2159. DOI: 10.1016/j.egypro.2015.11.304.
[12]
R. D. Judkoff and J. S. Neymark. “A PROCEDURE FOR TESTING THE ABIL-
ITY OF WHOLE BUILDING ENERGY SIMULATION PROGRAMS TO THER-
MALLY MODEL THE BUILDING FABRIC”. English. In: Journal of Solar En-
ergy Engineering (1995), pp. 7–15.
[13]
Johnny N. Holst. “Using whole building simulation models and optimizing pro-
cedures to optimize building envelope design with respect to energy consumption
and indoor environment”. In: Eigth International Conference. 2003.
[14]
“User manual, IDA Indoor Climate and Energy”. English. In: (2013).
[15]
“Import of IFC BIM model to IDA Indoor Climate and Energy 4”. English. In:
(2012).
[16]
Mads Holten Rasmussen and René Bukholt. “Bedre udbytte af BIM ved design af
HVAC-systemer. Udvikling af databaseorienteret værktøj til optimering af kom-
munikation, strukturering af designrammer og hurtigere resultatgenerering med
udgangspunkt i bygherres reelle behov”. masterthesis. Danmark: Danmarks Tekniske
Universitet, 2013.
