==PAGE:1==
Validation of TRNSYS simulation
model of the Solar District Heating
system with Seasonal Storage at
Marstal Fjernvarme
Ola Lie Andersen, s151217
Supervisor: Jianhua Fan
Co-supervisor: Bengt Perers
June 23, 2017
Department of Civil Engineering
==PAGE:2==
Acknowledgement
This master thesis completes my degree in MSc Sustainable Energy at Technical
University of Denmark. I want to express my gratefulness to my Supervisor
Jianhua Fan as well as my co-supervisor Bengt Perers. Bengt has guided me
towards the best methods for showing the validation of the system in addition
to sharing his life-long experience from the solar energy community. I want to
thank Niels From from Planenergi, who provided me with the original plant
model. Furthermore, I want to thank Operations Manager Lasse Kjærgaard
Larsen and the employees at Marstal Fjernvarme for providing me with data and
knowledge about the plant’s history and operation. It was especially rewarding
to see the plant in real life when I got to go there twice during my thesis process.
It should also be mentioned that I got stay three days at Lasse’s house where
him and his wife Pia cooked for me and gave me a place to stay during my plant
visit.
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
A validation of the TRNSYS model against the Solar District Heating plant at
Marstal Fjernvarme is done by using an updated TRNSYS model. Marstal
Fjernvarme is a solar district heating plant that implements a heat pump and
biomass boiler connected to a Organic Rankine Cycle. The validation work
embodies the complete system, but focuses mainly on the performance of the
solar collectors and a large pit heat storage.
Actual input data such as local weather data that includes measured direct
and diﬀuse solar radiation as well as technical speciﬁcation and collector area
of the solar collector arrays has been utilised to get a realistic validation.
The model validation was done in order to give a fundamental tool for a future
potential cost analysis optimisation of the plant.
The results from the modelled simulation showed a performance of the system
and technological components that agreed well with actual plant
measurements. Diﬀerent uncertainties linked to the input data, especially in
the case of the solar radiation was present and could be investigated further.
==PAGE:4==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
2
Technical Fundamentals General
2
2.1
Solar District heating
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.2
Seasonal Storage Principles
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.3
Energy sources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3.1
Heat pump . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3.2
Biomass . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3.3
Organic Rankine Cycle
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.4
Fundamentals of solar collectors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3
Presentation of the system at Marstal Fjernvarme
11
3.1
Plant visit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2
Technical data of components . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.3
Operation of the plant . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4
Validation of the TRNSYS model by comparing it with real
operation data
26
4.1
TRNSYS components functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.2
Simulation of total system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.3
Simulation case and input data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.3.1
Weather data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.3.2
Calculation of Degree days
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.3.3
Elspot price . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.3.4
Collector area deﬁnitions and eﬃciencies . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.4
Analytical methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.4.1
Input vs. output diagrams . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.4.2
Mean solar collector temperature - ambient Temperature
41
4.4.3
Storage validation and comparison of heat storage pit model 42
4.4.4
Storage Heat loss and energy change . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5
Model validation results
45
5.1
Total Plant Performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5.2
Component performance - Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5.2.1
Solar collector performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5.2.2
Heat pump . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
5.2.3
Validation and comparison of heat storage pit
. . . . . .
56
6
Discussion
60
6.1
Input values . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
6.2
Total plant performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
6.3
Solar Collectors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
6.4
Pit heat storage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
7
Conclusion
65
==PAGE:5==
8
Future Work
66
9
Appendix
68
9.1
Detailed data processing calculations in Excel . . . . . . . . . . .
68
9.2
Input data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
9.3
PI diagrams . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
9.4
Data sheets and other technical information . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
9.5
Test data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
9.6
Detailed function description of TRNSYS model
. . . . . . . . .
81
Abbreviations
SDH - Solar District Heating
DH - District Heating
COP - Coeﬃcient of Performance
Nomenclature
eta = Eﬃciency of a ﬂat plate collector
eta0 = the maximum eﬃciency given that there is no heat loss[-]
a1 = the 1st order heat loss coeﬃcient [W/km2] a2 = the 2nd order heat loss
coeﬃcient [W/km2] Tm is the mean temperature of the ﬂowing through the col-
lector [◦C]
Tm = Tcoll,out−Tcoll,in
2
Tamb is the ambient air temperature [◦C]
P is power output from the collectors [W]
Solar collector area [m2]
G is the total solar radiation [W/m2]
Kθ is IAM [-]
b0 is constant provided by manufacturers in collector data sheet [-]
θ is incidence angle on collector plane
Gb is beam (direct) radiation on collector plane [W/m2]
Gd is Diﬀuse radiation [W/m2]
Kθ is the incidence angle modiﬁer at a given time step [-]
K60 is incidence angle modiﬁer for the diﬀuse radiation [-]
ρ is density of water - temperature-dependent [ kg/m3]
Cp is Speciﬁc heat of water, temperature-dependent [kJkg K
Vn is Volume of the given layer [m3]
∆T is the temperature diﬀerence between the temperature at the end of the
year(31.12.2015) and the start of the year (01.01.2015)
==PAGE:6==
1
Introduction
District heating is a system for distributing heat generated in a centralized
location to meet various heating requirements, typically space heating and wa-
ter heating. The heat can be generated from burning of fossil fuels, however the
amount of use of biomass is increasing to get lower cos and less CO2 emissions.
Furthermore, these centralized district heating plants are being optimised by
implementing heat pumps, boilers, geothermal heating and larger storages such
as seasonal storages.
In this thesis the Solar District Heating plant at Marstal Fjernvarme in
Denmark is investigated in order to do a validation of the TRNSYS simula-
tion model. The plant combines thermal energy from solar collectors with heat
storage, heat pump and a biomass boiler that feeds an ORC process that can
generate electricity and heat energy. TRNSYS is used in this thesis to validate
the model against measured operation data. Before the validation can be done,
fundamental theory concerning solar district heating will be identiﬁed.
In order to achieve a more precise validation the TRNSYS model has been up-
dated, by removing components that are no longer in use.
Since the model
previously was simulated on weather data from Copenhagen a new weather
data ﬁle with new components with temperature and solar radiation measure-
ments from Marstal Fjernvarme’s own local sensors has been established. Due
to the implementation of the new weather data new degree day and degree hour
calculation has been made which subsequently inﬂuences the total heat load.
Updated electrical prices has also been implemented in the model for a poten-
tial future cost analysis and optimisation. It has been chosen to validate against
the year 2015 as it is relatively recent and measured data was less compromised
and more available for that year.
It has been decided to investigate mainly the collector ﬁelds and the large stor-
age heat pit. When validating the solar collectors in the model only the three
large main collector areas have been used, which can be seen in ﬁgure 10
Input and output has been processed and veriﬁed against plant data. The vali-
dation and comparison of the model against the measurements will be presented
and discussed.
The original component equations that controls the model are set by Planen-
ergi and are not changed.
This thesis does not include technical control of
TRNSYS model, as TRNSYS is more of a tool used to enable the validation.
Therefore the control equations from the model are added in the appendix, but
will not be discussed in detail.
1
==PAGE:7==
2
Technical Fundamentals General
Below follows general information concerning the technologies that applies in
this thesis.
2.1
Solar District heating
District heating and solar thermal energy possesses an essential role in the en-
ergy transition of the heat sector in Europe. Solar thermal energy is cost stable
and emission-free all over Europe. In order to increase the share of renewable
energies in the heat supply, district heating is a good option as well as it being
a major approach to increasing the energy eﬃciency in urban areas. By the end
of 2015 252 SDH plants with more than 350 kW nominal thermal peak power
were in operation.[1]
There are two essential types of solar district heating solutions:
Central solar district heating plant: Large arrays of solar collectors supplies heat
to a main nearby heating central. Occasionally, additional large heat stores are
added so that the solar heating plant can cover more than 50 % of the total
heat demand. This the type of SDH that will be presented in this thesis.
Figure 1: Principle sketch of a centralized solar district heating plant
In a distributed solar district heating plant, the solar collectors are placed
at convenient locations, mostly buildings and connected directly to the district
heating circuit on the plant. In this case the district heating network can be
used as storage.
2
==PAGE:8==
Figure 2: Principle sketch of a distributed solar district heating plant
[1]
2.2
Seasonal Storage Principles
Solar systems in general have the disadvantage that they produce most heat
when the sun have the highest irradiation, which is the time period when the
need for heat is at its lowest. To compensate for this issue, large underground
storages is placed on site to store thermal energy in hot water which can be
utilized in times for a greater need for heating. Furthermore, the storages can be
combined with other energy technologies such as heat pumps and biomass plants
in order to obtain a district heating system with a higher share of renewable
energy. [2]
The available methods for seasonal storage of solar thermal energy is mostly
based on sensible heat.
Storing in the form of sensible heat is storing in a
system where the temperature varies internally in the system.[3] Due to the
temperature changes inside the system which is the storage, heat losses occur
over time. The losses are a function over storage time, storage and ambient
temperatures, storage volume, storage geometry and thermal properties of the
used storage medium, like for example water.
In order to make the storage as feasible as possible the large volumes required
for storage has to be inexpensive. Therefore the most optimal seasonal storages
are placed in the ground. Underground thermal energy storage (UTES) is the
name of this type of storage. In ﬁgure 3 the principle drawings of the 4 most
promising storages are depicted.
These are aquifer thermal energy storage,
Borehole Thermal Energy Storage, water tank Storage and Water-gravel Pit
Storage.
[4]
3
==PAGE:9==
Figure 3: Principle drawings of 4 types of underground thermal energy storage
The water tank storage is often partially or fully buried in the ground and
uses a reinforced steel tank and can be built almost independent of geological
conditions. High capacity rates for discharging and charging as well as high
speciﬁc heat of water due to thermally insulated lid and walls and steel liner
implemented structure makes this could seem most promising from a thermo-
dynamic point of view.
The Water-Gravel Pit Storage is normally fully buried in the ground and is
insulated and waterproofed in the walls and in the top lid. Heat is stored into
and discharged out of the storage. The volume of the pit has to be larger com-
pared to a normal heat storage tank with only water since the water-gravel
mixture has a lower speciﬁc heat capacity than just water.
Aquifers consists of a layers of mixed gravel, limestones, sand and sandstone
ﬁlled with groundwater. Extraction and injection happens through two wells
that is drilled into the aquifer. Charging is done by by extracting cold ground-
water from the cold well, which is heated up by the solar system and injected
into the hot well. During discharging the process is reversed.
The borehole thermal energy storage principle is simpler as the heat is stored
directly in the ground through boreholes. U-pipes, which works as heat exchang-
ers are installed into these boreholes. While water is running in the u-pipes,
heat can be moved in our out of the ground. The possibility for modular design
is an advantage of using this storage type. [4]
In this thesis and in the given plant the Water-gravel Pit Storage principle,
4
==PAGE:10==
only ﬁlled with water instead, is the one that resembles the most to the one
that is used and investigated in this thesis.
2.3
Energy sources
Fundamental theory about technologies that are relevant for this thesis. The
following energy sources may be used individually or in combination.
2.3.1
Heat pump
Heat pumps powered by electricity can work as substitute for burning fossil
fuels in terms of heat production. When applying the heat pumps as base-load
production it is possible to reduce the CO2 emissions by 20 % or more. [5] Heat
pumps, a like other technical measures can improve the ﬂexibility of district
heating and combined heat and power systems (CHP).
Figure 4: Principle drawing of a heat pump process
Return or low temperature storage heat is taken in through the cold evapora-
tor and compressed through compressor powered by electricity. The compressor
increases the temperature and heat output and sends the heat out via a con-
denser, before being de-pressurized and returned back to the evaporator. The
Coeﬃcient of Performance (COP) is a measurement of eﬃciency and perfor-
mance of the heat pump and gives the relationship between input and output.
The COP often lies in the range of 3-4 [-], which means that it produces 3-4
times more than the input heat. When calculating the COP of a heat pump the
heat output from the condenser is compared to power supplied to the compressor
like:
COP = Q
W
(1)
[6]
2.3.2
Biomass
When increasing the the use of biomass in a district energy system several ad-
vantages can be mentioned. Having locally grown biomass as a part of the fuel
5
==PAGE:11==
mix supports the beneﬁt of cost stabilizing of the district heating. Using the
biomass, wood, the system will not have the price instability such as conven-
tional fuel systems as the price of wood is not dependent of international energy
markets or unstable regions in the world. It is also important to mention that
having the option to be ﬂexible and switch between diﬀerent fuels, based in its
time-dependant cost is convenient for a eﬃcient system. This is an opportunity
to mitigate from burning of fossil fuels and emit CO2, in order to meet the issue
of Global Climate Change[7]
2.3.3
Organic Rankine Cycle
An Organic Rankine Cycle can be used to generate heat or power from renewable
energy sources. In this thesis an ORC for generating electricity is presented.
An ORC generates the electricity trough burning biomass.
Figure 5: Flow chart of how the ORC functions
The biomass is burned and heat from the combustion is used to heat up
thermal oil which then can be used as a heat transfer medium. The thermal
oil gives beneﬁts like low pressure in the boiler, insensitive to load changes
and reliable and easy control and operation. Then the Organic Rankine Cycle
turbogenerator can convert the available heat into electrical energy. [8]
2.4
Fundamentals of solar collectors
Solar collectors transform solar radiation into thermal energy, heat. This heat
can be used for space heating or heating for heating of water in facility services.
6
==PAGE:12==
Figure 6: Principle sketch of how a solar collector functions
The main component of a solar collector is its absorber which is absorbing
the heat. In order to transport the heat from the absorbers to desired point a
heat-transporting pipe ﬁlled with liquid is connected to the absorber. Often, the
liquid is water mixed in with glycol to prevent freezing during colder months.
[9]
According to Arcon Sunmark, formerly known as Arcon states that the eﬃciency
of their ﬂat plate solar collectors are found as:
η = η0 −a1 · (Tm −Tamb)
G
−a2 · (Tm −Tamb)2
G
(2)
Where
η0 is the maximum eﬃciency given that there is no heat loss[-]
a1 is the 1st order heat loss coeﬃcient [W/km2]
a2 is the 2nd order heat loss coeﬃcient [W/km2]
G is the total solar radiation [W/m2]
Tm is the mean temperature of the ﬂowing through the collector [◦C]
Tm = Tcoll,out−Tcoll,in
2
Tamb is the ambient air temperature [◦C]
In ﬁgure 7 the functionality of the eﬃciency equation can be seen. The eﬃ-
ciency is plotted as a function of the temperature diﬀerence between the mean
collector temperature and the ambient air temperature ( Tm −Tamb). The red
line is illustrating the losses and useful energy output for a solar radiation level
of 1000 W/m2 and it can be seen that η0 functions as a maximum treshold of
performance while the a1 and a2 gives the slope of the curve. [10]
7
==PAGE:13==
The green area represents the actual energy output and the orange area
represents the heat losses, while the blue area represents the optical losses. The
optical losses are independent of the temperatures as they is deﬁned as the
max eﬃciency of a manufactured solar collector. The optical eﬃciency can be
improved by using anti reﬂective treated glass in the collector.
It can be seen that an increasing Tm −Tamb value will decrease the eﬃciency
of the collector like it can be seen in equation 2. [10]
Figure 7: Eﬃciency diagram for a solar collector based on its η0, a1 and a2
The collector output can be calculated as:
P = A · η · G
(3)
Where
P is power output from the collectors [W]
Solar collector area [m2]
G is the total solar radiation [W/m2]
One can not neglect the fact that the part of the solar radiation reﬂected at
the glass and absorber surface is not constant. It is dependent of the incidence
angle of the solar radiation. To compensate for this the incidence angle modiﬁer
(IAM) is multiplied by the maximum collector eﬃciency η0. The equation for
the IAM is
Kθ = 1 −b0 · (
1
cos(θ) −1)
(4)
Where
Kθ is IAM [-]
b0 is constant provided by manufacturers in collector data sheet [-]
8
==PAGE:14==
θ is incidence angle on collector plane
Figure 8 shows the incidence angle modiﬁer as a function of incidence angle.
It is visible that IAM can aﬀect the the eﬃciency of a solar collector from
incidence angles above 50 ◦as it is constant at 1.0 until that point.
Figure 8: A diagram showing IAM as a function of the incidence angle
In the ﬁgure 9 the incidence angle is shown. The horizontal represents the
solar collector plane. The incidence angle is the angle between the angle of the
direct radiation of the sun and the perpendicular line to the collector plane.
Figure 9: A ﬁgure showing a graphical presentation of the incidence angle
Beam radiation, also named direct radiation is the solar radiation going di-
rectly from the sun into the collectors. However, some of the solar radiation is
scattered by the molecules in the atmosphere. A certain amount of this scat-
tered radiation is reﬂected in clouds or particles in the air before ending up in
the collectors as well. This type of solar radiation is deﬁned as diﬀuse solar
radiation.
9
==PAGE:15==
If one were to include the diﬀuse solar radiation as well as the inﬂuence of
the IAM the collector output can be found like this:
P = A · (η0 · (Gb · Kθ + Gd · K60) −a1 · (Tm −Tamb) −a2 · (Tm −Tamb)2) (5)
Where
Gb is beam (direct) radiation on collector plane [W/m2]
Gd is Diﬀuse radiation [W/m2]// Kθ is the incidence angle modiﬁer at a given
time step [-]
K60 is incidence angle modiﬁer for the diﬀuse radiation [-]
The diﬀuse radiation can come from all kinds of angles between 0 ◦to 90 ◦and
therefore an average angle of 60◦is often used.
[10]
10
==PAGE:16==
3
Presentation of the system at Marstal Fjern-
varme
Following the oil crisis in the 1970’s an attention was drawn towards alternative
energy. Geothermal, solar thermal and wind energy started to make its mark.
The district heating plant Marstal Fjernvarme in Marstal located on the island,
Erø in south Denmark, had previously only generated its heat production from
burning of oil. However, in 1992 the plant got a letter from the oﬃcial Danish
Ministry of Energy, demanding a more environmental-friendly energy produc-
tion and changes started to be made.
In Marstal Fjernvarme the current system is a complex energy system. It con-
sists of diﬀerent updates that has been added to the plant over the years. In
1996 a 8000 m2 solar collector ﬁeld of 13,53 m2 large area ﬂat plate AR-CON
HT collectors combined with a 2100 m3 accumulation tank was built and was
called SUNSTORE 1. Due to suﬃcient solar radiation in the area the ﬁeld was
expanded with further 1000 m2 of the same type of collectors. In 2003, due to
an increase in consumers the SUNSTORE 2 was introduced with an additional
solar collector ﬁeld of 8019 m2 of 13,57 m2 Arcon HT - A 28/10 collectors as well
as a 10 000m3 water heat storage pit and R290 heat pump. Some years following
2003 diﬀerent collector types such as tubular collectors, focused collectors and
roof collectors adding up to 1303 m2 were also added to the Sunstore 2, but
only for testing. These test collectors make a up a small fraction of the plant
and will not be investigated in this thesis. In 2012 the SUNSTORE 4 was built.
The update featured a 15 064 m2 collector ﬁeld of Sunmark 14 m2 collectors, a
75 000 m3 heat storage pit, ORC and a CO2 heat pump. The Organic Rankine
Cycle (ORC) uses energy from ﬂue gas produced by a biomass boiler based on
burning of wood chip. The CO2 heat pump utilises heat from the heat storage
pit as heat source and heats up the return temperature and sends it back into
the district heating network.[11]
Since then, the 10 000 m3 storage pit, the test collectors and the R290 HP
has been disconnected from the system. Currently the three diﬀerent system
updates are working together to supply Marstal with district heating.
It is
worth mentioning that a small portion of the heat is going into a small area,
called Ommel, which is made up by around 100 houses.
11
==PAGE:17==
Figure 10: A geographical overview of the diﬀerent collectors and utilities at
Marstal Fjernvarme in Ærø, Denmark
In 2015 and in present time, the diﬀerent components are organized like this:
12
==PAGE:18==
Table 1: A listed overview of the diﬀerent collectors and utilities at Marstal
Fjernvarme in Ærø, Denmark
The Sunstore 4 collector array is connected the pit heat storage in the ground
and charges it during summer for later discharge during colder months. Both
the pit heat storage in Sunstore 4 and collector ﬁelds in Sunstore 1 and 2 has
to deliver its energy through the main operation control house before going out
into the network. The heat from Sunstore 4 pit comes into the control house in a
separate room as shown in ﬁgure 11. Here it exchanges heat with the small heat
exchanger (to the right in ﬁgure 11) and continues out to the district heating
network through the pipes in the top right corner. It could also send heat to
the CO2 heat pump through the pipes in the top left corner of ﬁgure 11. The
big heat exchanger(placed by the red area in ﬁgure 11 and in ﬁgure 12) is used
to send Sunstore 1 and 2 collector heat back to the large storage pit.
13
==PAGE:19==
Figure 11: A picture inside the left side of the main control house where heat
from the Sunstore 4 pit storage enters in continues to the DH network. Heat
from the other collector ﬁelds is also exchanged back to the pit.
Figure 12: The large heat exchanger in picture sends heat from Sunstore 1 and
2 collectors back to the pit heat storage.
14
==PAGE:20==
Figure 13: This is a smaller heat exchanger that exchanges heat between the
pit and the district heating network.
Figure 14: A picture of the CO2 Heat Pump inside a technical room. 16 green
compressors is placed on the left side. The return and forward pipes enters and
exits on the right side
15
==PAGE:21==
Figure 15: The technical room inside the main operation house where both the
Sunstore 1 and 2 enters. The two heat exchangers work in parallel to exhange
the heat from Sunstore 1 collectors in to the storage tank or out in the network
The Sunstore 2 collectors joins in a technical room outside where it sends
its heat via a heat exchanger and into the house on the room on the right side.
In the same room also the pipe from the Sunstore 1 collector ﬁeld enters. The
Sunstore 2 pipes comes in in separate pipes and have the option of sending heat
directly into the network or to be stored in the storage tank. The Sunstore 1 col-
lector heat is sent through two identical parallel-coupled heat exchangers(ﬁgure
15) before going into the storage tank or directly into the network, as well.
Originally, the idea for the two parallel-coupled heat exchangers was to have a
backup heat exchanger during maintenance. Now they share the work load of
transferring heat from the ﬁeld.[12]
16
==PAGE:22==
Figure 16: A simple ﬂow principle diagram for the whole system where all
Sunstores is working together
Figure 16 shows the principle for the system at Marstal. There are placed
more detailed PI diagrams in the appendix, but this one gives a simpler un-
derstanding of the energy system at Marstal’s solar district heating plant. A
detailed explanation of the operation of the system is explained 3.3
3.1
Plant visit
Two plant visits was done when writing this master thesis. The ﬁrst visit was
only for a day and contact with the staﬀof the plant and a general overview of
the plant was established. The second visit lasted for three days were a more de-
tailed insight of the plant was retrieved. A overview over the technical drawings
and the actual physical plant was established. The control room for monitoring
the operation and control of the plant was looked at. The solar collectors were
looked at and by investigating their labels the model type was documented.
Original data sheets for the collectors was found that documented the factory
eﬃciency parameters. Pictures were taken of several of the components. During
conference with staﬀat the plant concerns about the design of the plant was
shared. All collector ﬁelds have to go via the main control house before exiting
out into the district heating network. For the Sunstore 4 there is especially a
relative long distance from the pit heat storage over to the house. The staﬀ
believes that the long pipe distance can lead to signiﬁcant pipe heat loss.[12]
During the visit the typical operation patterns for the diﬀerent seasons were
shown including typical temperatures and mass ﬂow rates were told in confer-
17
==PAGE:23==
ence with staﬀ.
3.2
Technical data of components
Here follows a brief description of the components and technologies at the plant.
Heat Storage Pit
The pit heat storage is a 75 000 m3 pit containing water that is used a seasonal
storage for heat. The pit heat storage is shaped as reversed pyramid with a ﬂat
bottom. It has a depth of 16 m and sides of 97,93 m and 64 m with a 26,6 ◦
decline from the sides. It has three outlet/inlets that is placed at three diﬀerent
depths in the storage/water. Bottom (15 m), middle (5,5 m) and the top (0,8
m). [13]
Figure 17: A simple drawing of the geometry of the pit heat storage
Figure 18: Technical drawings of the pit with dimensions
18
==PAGE:24==
Figure 20: A picture taken of the pit heat storage during construction in 2011
Figure 19: Technical drawing of the pit heat storage showing the pipes used for
charging and discharging.
[14]
There are three diﬀerent pipes going into the storage through a welded steel
arrangement that has the shape of a tower (see ﬁgure 19). The pipes are led
through nozzles in the bottom, the middle and the top of the storage. [13]
This arrangement is made so extracting water from diﬀerent layers with diﬀer-
ent temperatures in the storage is possible.
CO2 Heat pump
The CO2 heat pump installed at Marstal Fjernvarme contains 16 compressors,
with a capacity close to 100 kW each, giving the heat pump a total capacity of
1500 kW produced heat. It operates with CO2 as refrigerant. CO2 is a non-
toxic and non-ﬂammable, giving it signiﬁcant advantages in design, installation
and operation of the heat pump. In the compressor, vapor is compressed to a
19
==PAGE:25==
high presssure at 110 bar, which creates a high amount of hot gas. The con-
denser is a heat exchanger where the hot gas ﬂows on the one side, while the
district heating water ﬂows on the other side. The returning district heating
water is being heated up to a hot forward temperature, while the gas is being
cooled down. The expansion valve is added in order to reduce the pressure in
the gas, giving the evaporator a mixture of liquid and gas. In the evaporator all
CO2 is being vaporized on one side, while water from seasonal storage is being
cooled down on the other side.[5]
Figure 21: Principle of the heat pump installed at Marstal Fjernvarme
Accumulation tank
The accumulation is connected to the Sunstore 1 and 2 collector ﬁelds. It has a
volume of 2100 m3.
Figure 22: The accumulation tank
Wood chip boiler and Organic Rankine Cycle
The wood chip boiler has a capacity of 4,15 MW that includes thermal oil heater
for an ORC. It is distributed in such a way that the hot water has an heat out-
put of 3,40 MW and 750 kW electrical power through the ORC. The thermal
energy from the ﬂue gas is transferred to the ORC unit by thermal oil cycle [15]
20
==PAGE:26==
Organic Rankine Cycle
The heat produced from the burning of the wood chips is transferred indirectly
by a thermal oil circuit.
The ORC plant produces electricity and low tem-
perature heat through a closed thermodynamic cycle according to the organic
rankine cycle.
The process inside the ORC can best be explained like this: Firstly, the or-
ganic operating ﬂuid is pre-heated in a generator. Following this, the ﬂuid is
preheated further and evaporated via a heat exchange/evaporator that is heated
via the high temperature thermal oil cycle. Then, the water is expanded in a
turbine that drives a generator. A by-pass pipe controlled by a opening valve
enables the system to use the ORC as a heat exchanger and directs the liquid
past the generator. After this, the liquid goes back through the regenerator and
is cooled down in order to increase the electric eﬃciency due to internal heat
recovery. The liquid is condensed in a condenser and the heat from the liquid
is transferred to the water circuit. Finally, the liquid is pumped back up into a
suitable operation pressure level and the cycle process starts again. [16]
Figure 23: The ORC cycle process [16]
21
==PAGE:27==
Figure 24: A pile with the
wood chip used for fuelling
of the boiler
Figure 25: A picture taken
inside the plant showing the
boiler in red.
Figure 26:
The ORC tur-
bine that generated elec-
tricity from the heated oil
caused by wood chip com-
bustion in the boiler
22
==PAGE:28==
3.3
Operation of the plant
In order to fully explain the how the full plant works, it is essential to look at
the process at quite diﬀerent operation for the summer period and the winter
period.
Therefore, the two months June and December which presents two contrasting
operating periods is presented. In the explanations of the operations processes
it has been added typical values for mass ﬂow rate and temperature trough and
in the diﬀerent components at diﬀerent time periods in order to better show
how the operation is controlled in a more than analytical way.
Also, diﬀerent parts in the text is marked with letters in paranthesis that refers
to the location of the mentioned component and operation area that can be
found in the attached PI diagrams in the appendix.
December
Cycle #1 - Storage pit cycle
In December, the solar collectors are not running as the solar irradation is lim-
ited. Heat has been stored in the 75 000 m3 storage pit over the warmer months
and is being discharged. From the middle layer(A), the middle pipe sends hot
water through the CO2 heat pump, which again exchanges heat with the cold
return pipe from the DH(C) network on the cold side, which again cools down
hot water and sends it back in to the bottom of the storage(D). In terms of
heating the Marstal DH network, heat is always discharged from the top of the
tank(E) and exchanged with the second cycle. The heat transfer eﬃciency in
the heat exchanger(F) is not 100% and 2 ◦C of heat is lost.
Cycle #2
The heat(63 ◦C) ﬂows through the lower pipe(G) to be used for later mixing.
The top pipe(H) has reached 82 ◦C due to the fact that the DH return has
increased from 35 to 82 ◦C via a smoke washer and the ORC(I).
This temperature is too high and needs to be cooled down as it would lead
to signiﬁcant heat loss and eﬃciency reduction of the system. Therefore the
top pipe temperature (82 ◦C) is mixed with heated ﬂow from the HP which
previously has exchanged heat with the storage. This is resulting in a lowered
temperature (79 ◦C)(J) which still needs to be cooled down before reaching the
DH network.
Finally the current temperature of 79 ◦C mixes with the ﬂow from the lower
pipe( 63 ◦C)(K) exchanged from the storage dam and a suitable temperature(
72-74◦C) in the third cycle and is sent out into the DH network(L). Further-
more, a small share of the ﬂow rate is sent into a district heating network for
an area called Ommel(M) with 100 houses. The heat is sent into Ommel after
the HP and has still a too high temperature. However, the Ommel-circuit uses
a shunt valve giving the possbility of mixing the forward ﬂow with cool return
ﬂow, giving Ommel a suitable DH temperature.
Cycle #3
Also in the third cycle the old SUNSTORE1(N) and SUNSTORE2(O) adds up
to the total ﬂow into the network by using tank-stored hot water or by-passing.
23
==PAGE:29==
Returning ﬂow (of 35 ◦C) goes back into the system from the network. A
pipe is connected from the return pipe(P) to the forward pipe in order to mix
and cool down the forward temperature further if it is needed. The respective
ﬂow is sent back to the accumulation tank. The remaining ﬂow is sent back to
the HP and ORC and the rest is sent via the heat exchanger and heated up and
the cycle starts again.
Mass ﬂow balance
A constant ﬂow of 30 m3/h ﬂows through the storage dam cycle. In the second
cycle a 30 m3/h ﬂow starts from the heat exchanger and collects 80 m3/h from
the ORC, followed by 30 m3 from the HP and ﬁnally receiving 20 m3/h from
the other collector ﬁelds in cycle #3 and tanks adding up tp 160 m3/h. On the
return, 20 m3/h goes back into the accumulator tank, 30 m3/h back into the
HP, 80 m3/h back into the ORC.
Ommel: A neglicable amount of 2 m3/h ﬂows into Ommel, supplying the
ca 100 houses with DH. The 79 ◦C mixes with its own return temp of 35 ◦C,
giving it a suﬃcicent forward temp of 72 ◦C.
June
Cycle #1 - Storage pit cycle
In June the collectors are being used.
However, the CO2 heat pump and
ORC/WOOD chip boiler is not being used in this period. Cold water is taken
from the bottom (A) of the storage pit and heated up via the collectors (B) up
to 95 ◦C and sent back to the top (C) of the pit. A ﬂow of 185 m3/h is in the
collector - storage cycle, while some (160 m3/h)is sent trough the top pipe (D)
to the HX connected to the DH cycle.
Cycle #3
Marstal only demands 40 m3 /h in June and only re-uses the same 40 m3/h in
cycle 3 (E) . At night and in worst case scenarios, the tank can be taken into
use. As 40 m3/h is sent to the DH network, 160 m3/h is sent back (F) with 95
◦C and is stored in the pit heat storage through the top inlet. 100 m3/h of what
is sent back originates from Sunstore 1 and 2. The 95 ◦C that is exchanged with
the storage Cycle, ends up at 93 ◦C due to the heat transfer eﬃciency of the
HX. Solar collectors: Uses 60/40 water glycol. It is also equipped with liquid
reﬁll tank in case of emergencies.
All pumps are equipped with the possibility of bypassing when the ﬂow needs
to be re-directed the other way back into the storage pit.
24
==PAGE:30==
Figure 27: A picture taken of the screen of the surveilance computers in the
control room. This shows the energy ﬂow all technologies in the plant.
25
==PAGE:31==
4
Validation of the TRNSYS model by compar-
ing it with real operation data
The aim of this case is to validate the correctness of the SUNSTORE4 TRN-
SYS model by comparing the simulated results with real operation data from
Marstal Fjernvarme.
TRNSYS is graphical based software used to simulate the behavour of tran-
sient systems. It is mostly used when simulating thermal and electric energy
systems. [17]
The original TRNSYS model simulating Marstal Fjernvarme was made in
2011 by Planenergi.
It was on the basis of this model that the Sunstore 4
system was added to the plant.
In the original TRNSYS model simulation
studio graphic overview (see ﬁgure 28) it can be seen some components that is
not in line with the PI-diagram. The reason for this is that the 10 000 m3 pit
heat storage and the R290 heat pump and its respective heat exchangers (HX4
and HX5) are no longer in use. Therefore, a updated model of the plant is made
by removing these components. The information about the disconnection of the
old heat pump and pit heat storage was gained through plant visits. It is of
importance to run this updated model of the plant in order to validate model in
the most realistic way. It is also essential to calibrate the model to its current
operation level if one wants to test new parameters for improvements of the
plant. The simulated data is quality checked in the degree that a weather data
ﬁle generated from real weather data from a weather station located at the site
of the plant is implemented into the TRNSYS model.
Weather data including beam, diﬀuse and total solar radiation on an hourly
basis for 2015 for Marstal is obtained from Marstal’s own measurements and
incorporated into a weather data reader type in TRNSYS for a more precise
and realistic simulation.
4.1
TRNSYS components functions
The model consists of Types, which simulates the diﬀerent components in the
plant. Customised equation-boxes (depicted as calculator icons) also presents
some of the components in the plant. All these component models can be viewed
in ﬁgure 28 below. This is followed by a description of each one and how they
function compared to the real energy system. The equation-boxes contain sev-
eral equations that control the operation of the system. This section contains a
verbal description of these components. A more detailed description including
the formulas used can be found in Appendix 9.6. These equations and formu-
las are translated from programming codes into mathematical thermodynamic
equations.
The actual plant has the possibility of redirecting ﬂow forwards
and backwards in the same pipe in diﬀerent operation periods. The pipes and
connections between components are presented by the diﬀerent coloured lines.
TRNSYS only allows ﬂow to go in one single direction, therefore an additional
26
==PAGE:32==
line is added in order to reﬂect the real system operation in the case of the large
storage pit when ﬂow is to go the other direction. Therefore the model can seem
a bit complex with several lines on top of each other.
Figure 28: A screenshot of the TRNSYS Simulation Studio that shows a graph-
ical operation of the model
Accumulator tank model
The MULTIPORT Store - Model (Type 340) is used for the accumulator tank.
The accumulator tank model simulates stratiﬁed ﬂuid storage with 3 internal
heat exchanger, 5 connections for direct charge and discharge and an internal
electrical heater.
27
==PAGE:33==
Figure 29: Type 340 Accumlation tank model - Multiport Store
Auxiliary heating - Biooil
This auxiliary heater is modeled to increase the temperature of a ﬂow stream
either using internal control, external control, or a combination of both. It is
designed to add heat to the system at a custom designed maximum ﬂow rate as
the control input is set to 1 and the heater outlet temperature is less than the
set temperature speciﬁed by the user.
Condenser and ORC
This model is set to present the operation of the combined boiler and ORC. The
model is custom made through a equation with deﬁned constants and formulas.
It uses the inputs:
Inlet temperature of boiler
mass ﬂow rate through the inlet of the boiler
The inlet temperature of the ORC
Where TBoiler,out = TBoiler,in
mBoiler,out = mBoiler,in
Control cards
In this setting one can deﬁne constants that will be used in the model. This
is where the input data such as η0, a1 and a2 as well as collector areas are deﬁned.
Cost Function
The operational cost equations are implemented in the TRNSYS model in or-
der to calculate the total energy cost. The operational price ([DKK/MWh]) for
each energy source are multiplied with the its energy production. Finally, the
heat price can be calculated by summing up the operational and ﬁnancial cost
and dividing the sum by the heat load.
CO2- HP - Heat pump model
This is a model that simulates the real CO2 heat pump. This component is not
using a regular default heat pump type from the software. Instead a ”equation”
is used, where several inputs are deﬁned and how they are implemented in for-
28
==PAGE:34==
mulas in order to calculate the energy that is exhanged through the heat pump
so that a COP can be determined.
Data reader and Radiation Processer -Weather data - Type 99
and Type 9
These components contains the weather data. It reads the data in regular time
intervals from a data ﬁle belonging to the speciﬁc location. These types con-
verts the weather data into a desired system of units and processes the solar
radiation data in order to get tilted surface radiation and angle of incidence
[18]. In this case, two diﬀerent data readers were used. The type 9 included
ambient air temperature, tilted beam and tilted diﬀuse solar radiation that was
retrieved from Marstal Fjernvarme’s own historical measurement data. The so-
lar radiation is sent trough the shadow-equation, which is then sent into the
collector type, while the ambient air temperature is sent directly into the col-
lector types. The type 99 was only used in the way that the input parameters
in the type itself was used to set the solar zenith angle, collector slope and inci-
dence angle. The reason for this was that the retrieved solar radiation data was
only measured as tilted and in order to use the type 99 for solar radiation, it
required horizontal radiation measurements. At the same time the type 9c did
not include incidence angle, collector slope and solar zenith angle. So, a compro-
mise was made, by using both readers at the same time for diﬀerent parameters.
Controlled ﬂow diverters - Type 11f
In this case of the type 11, it uses mode 2, which simulates a ﬂow diverter where
a single inlet liquid stream is split according to a user speciﬁed valve setting into
two liquid outlet streams. (ref) This type is used in the case of Div-C, Div-D,
Div-G, Div-A Investment and Div-H when splitting single ﬂows into two.
Global
The Global has the function of gathering diﬀerent parameters in one single equa-
tion component in order to have graphically simpler model with less connection
lines. The parameters are linked from the Weather data, the forward and return
temperatures and Elspot hours.
Elspot- Data reader For Generic Data Files
This is a data reader that contains an custom external ﬁle Elspotpriser w2015.txt,
containing hourly electricity prices for year 2015 in DKK/kWh. This compo-
nent makes it possible to calculate the cost of energy at all times.
Heat Exchanger - HX-1
There are 5 heat exchangers where HX-1, HX-2 and HX-3 is connected to the
collectors, while HX-6 and HX-7 is connected to the pit heat storage. They are
all presented as custom made equation components where all of them contains
the exact same equations.
29
==PAGE:35==
Heat Load In this equation box the heat load is implemented. The heat
load is taken from the total heat production in 2015 from the excel sheet in
ﬁgure 40.
Integrator (Quantity Integrator) Type 24
This component integrates a series of quantities over a given time period. Type
24 have the ability to reset periodically after the simulation after a n amount
of hours or after a full month. When doing analysis of the system by making
graphs, diﬀerent time periods can be looked at using this integrator.
MW-prod-macro
This equation box contains the equations that calculates the energy produced.
These are gathered here for easier distribution trough a single connection line
MW-stores
In the equation MW-stores the diﬀerent storage technologies are contained as
stored energy.
QS2,l1toQS2,l4 Presents the inlets and outlets of the pit heat
storage and the energy ﬂow passing through.
Online graphical plotter - Type 65d
This online graphics component displays the system results while simulation is
running, therefore it is ”online”. The online plotting function is an advantage
when ensuring that the system is running satisfactory. The online graphs will
be presented in a separate window. In the case of the plotting of the diﬀerent
energy technologies in this model, the Type 65 is chosen. The type 65 gen-
erates no output data ﬁle, but the printers takes care of that. In this model,
the online plotters are connected and plots the temperatures, CO2 Heat pump
performance and the ORC performance.
Pit heat storage - Multi-Flow Stratiﬁed Thermal Storage Model
with Fully Mixed Layers - TYPE 342
The pit heat storage component used is stratiﬁed storage temperature model
made in the University of Lund in 1989. It is a mathematically smart and eﬃ-
cient TRNSYS model. It is coupled to the ground without insulation, making
the ground a part of the storage capacity[19]. This model simulates heat stor-
age. As the storage is buried under ground it is necessary to deﬁne the location
of the model in the ground, especially considering the location’s aﬀect on the
storage capacity. This is done by dividing both the tank and the ground into
layers. The storage is divided into max 10 layers, while the ground is divided
into maximum 90 ground layers. These are not the same type of layers. In the
parameter window the pit storage can be edited. Parameter 2, the number of
tank layers are deﬁned as segments, in which it is used 11 layers in this case.
Parameter 3, iconv, determines the degree of mixing. A value of 1 is chosen
which determines that it has mixing of adjacent segments where thermal inver-
sion is detected. Parameter 4, Nﬂow gives the number of ﬂowstreams through
30
==PAGE:36==
the storage, where in this case 4 ﬂow streams are chosen. NPin and NPout,
determines the amount of inlets and outlets, where a value of 0 deﬁnes it as
a continuous moveable inlet. The Joutj gives the location accordingly to the
90 ground layers. In this case there are no amount of inlets Jinj as, they are
moveable. The thermal gradient in the ground is set to 0.03 ◦C /m. This means
that temperature is dropping by 0.03 ◦C per meter upwards in the ground. The
number of preheat cycles is set to 0 as there is no preheating of the ground from
the tank. One 100 m thick ground layer is chosen.
Printers (User-Supplied Units) - Type 25b ad Type 25b-2
This printer gathers all the results and prints them onto a text ﬁle. The printer
component outputs chosen system variables as speciﬁed time intervals. In the
mode of Type 25b, the user is required to set units. These units are printed out
along with the simulation results and their respective columns.
Shadow
This is the shadow equation that simulates shadow that are likely to fall on the
collectors due to their dimensions and location.
Advanced Control
These advanced control setting operates the control of the heat exchanger HX-6.
Tempering valve(Shunt)- Type 11b
The Type 11 model models a temperature controlled liquid ﬂow diverter. In the
parameters of this chosen component, mode 4 is chosen which sends the whole
ﬂow stream is sent through outlet 1 when the heat source ﬂuid temperature
(Th) is lower than the temperature of inlet ﬂuid.
Solar collector Types - Quadratic Eﬃciency 2nd Order Incidence
Angle Modiﬁer
The Solar Collector main areas are represented by solar collector icons with
the names: ”9.000 m2” (Sunstore 1Collector ﬁeld), ”9.300 m2” (Sunstore 2 Col-
lector ﬁeld) and ”15.000 m2” (Sunstore 4 Collector ﬁeld). These names does
not represent the exact the area of the main collector ﬁelds in this thesis. This
TRNSYS component is supposed to simulate a real life ﬂate plate solar collector.
It gives the user the option of connecting the collectors in series and parallels.
However, the thermal performance of the collector array is determined by the
technical speciﬁcation of each module and by the number of modules in series.
In this type, Type 1 a second order quadratic function is used to compute the
incidence angle modiﬁer. These solar collector models has diﬀerent parameters:
amount of collectors in series, collector area, speciﬁc heat of ﬂuid, eﬃciency
mode, tested ﬂow rate, intercept eﬃciency (η0), eﬃciency curve, the option of
turning the second order incidence angle on and oﬀ, ﬁrst order incidence angle,
second order incidence angle. The eﬃciency mode parameter deﬁnes on what
kind basis the eﬃciency of the collector is calculated on. In collector 1, the
31
==PAGE:37==
eﬃciency parameters are given as a function of the average temperature. The
collector types also uses inputs such as inlet ﬂow rate and temperature, ambient
temperature, incident radiation, total horizontal radiation, horizontal diﬀuse ra-
diation, ground reﬂectance, incidence angle and collector slope. The ouputs are
outlet temperature and ﬂow as well useful energy gain as a all the inputs will
inﬂuence and calculate these outputs. All three solar collector models use the
same type of parameter, inputs and outputs, but are distinguished by area or
collector ﬁeld and diﬀerent technical properties due to diﬀerent collector types.
Solar pump
The solar pump is the component that is actually giving the needed mass ﬂow
rate through the collector which is then entering the inlet of the nearby heat
exchanger. There are three diﬀerent pumps - one for each collector ﬁeld. They
use mainly the same settings, formulas and constants, but the max capacity of
the pump that operates the largest ﬁeld is higher.
Summa
In the ”Summa”-equation various energy technologies are summed up in order
to make a better overview of the model and less need for connection.
Tee-piece - Type 11h
This version of Type 11 uses mode 1 which makes the tee piece mix together two
separate inlet liquid streams into a single liquid outlet stream. This is used and
operated in the case of Tee-A, T-CDG, Tee-H, Tee-1, Tee-2, T-mid 1, T-mid 2,
T-mid 3 and T-high.
T forward and T return Schedules - Type 14e
Time Dependent Forcing Function: Temperature. The pattern of the forcing
function is determined by a set of discrete data points indicating the value of the
function at diﬀerent times during a schedule or cycle. The continuous forcing
function is generated by linear interpolation.
The schedule repeats every N
hours where N is the last value of time speciﬁed.
32
==PAGE:38==
4.2
Simulation of total system
Operation of TRNSYS
The operation of the actual plant has been explained in subsection 3.3. Also
the components in the real-life plant as well as in the modelled system are
explained both in terms of how they are designed and operated. Now, the oper-
ation of the model can presented compared to the actual plant. The function of
each component or type is explained, but now a summary of how they interact
can be presented.
The weather data readers Type 9c and Type99 reads the required input data
used for the collectors and shadow types. The type 99 sends the solar zenith
angle to the shadow component for calculation of how the shadow aﬀects the
collectors. It also sets the incidence angle modiﬁer and the collector slope for
the collectors. The direct and diﬀuse solar radiation is sent from the Type 9c
into the shadow Type, while the ambient air temperature is also sent form Type
9c, but into the collector as it uses that to calculate the collector output.
All three main collector ﬁelds are presented as the collector types Sunstore
1, Sunstore 2 and Sunstore 4. The collector output is generated through the
weather data combined with the ﬂow from the solar pumps Pump-1, Pump-2
and Pump-3 and sent via their respective heat exchangers HX-1, HX-2 and HX-3
out in to the system. The heat from Sunstore 1 and 2 collectors and the pit heat
storage via their HX, mixes either in tee-piece called T-high” or in the T-mid
3 valve. This is dependent of how hot the water is. ”T-high” mixes the hottest
water ﬂows (red lines), while the ”T-mid 3” mixes the water ﬂows with a lower
temperature (yellow lines). Both of the mixed ﬂows leads to the accumulation
tank called ”2.100 m3”. The colder return water is sent back from the tank
trough the ”Tee-CDG” diverter and back the respective heat exchangers. Hot
water then ﬂows from the tank towards the Equation box called ”heat load”
which represents the district heating network going into the town. If the heat
demand is lower during summer hot water from the tank can be sent back to the
large pit heat storage . It is likely that reﬂects possiblity of storing the Sunstore
1 and Sunstore 2 produced collector energy in the pit heat storage.
The return ﬂow (blue lines) ﬂows back from the DH network where it forms a
cycle with the CO2 heat pump(which utilises the heat storage as heat source).
The heat output of the heat pump is directed back into forward pipes into DH
network. It has the ability to bypass the heat pump in diﬀerent seasons via the
valves ”Shunt-1” and ”Div-H”. After the ”Div-H” on the return ﬂow, the boiler
+ ORC can be utilised called ”Cond. and ORC. The heated water from the
boiler is sent directly to the tank (red line), but it is sent trough the top of the
tank, so it only passes by it and does not store it, like in the actual plant. The
boiler can also be bypassed via the ”Tee-A” and the ”Shunt-2” that sends some
of the ﬂow back to the storage so that outer cycle can start again.
33
==PAGE:39==
4.3
Simulation case and input data
The 2011 Sunstore4 model by Niels From was updated in this thesis in order
to make a more precise simulation and validation for this thesis.
A climate
data ﬁle for Marstal Fjernvarme in Ærø was introduced in a data processor
component by retrieving solar radiation and temperature data from the plant’s
own measurements. Due to the new weather data also new degree days and
degree hours was implemented in the model which inﬂuenced the total heat
load.
It it is investigate particularly for the main collector ﬁelds and the large pit heat
storage.
4.3.1
Weather data
The weather data was provided by historical data from Marstal Fjernvarme’s
sensors. The weather data include both the solar radiation data and the ambient
air temperature data. These data are essential for the collector output which
again inﬂuences the total plant energy production.
Figure 30: Solar radiation
sensor that measures the di-
rect radiation mounted on
collector arrays in Sunstore
1 and 2 collector ﬁelds
Figure 31: The sensor that
measures diﬀuse solar radi-
ation.
Figure 30 and ﬁgure 31 shows the direct solar radiation sensor and the dif-
fuse solar radiation. The staﬀcleans the direct solar radiation sensor 2-3 times
a year, mostly during the warmer months, in order to make the measurements
precise as possible.
In relation to this thesis it was provided a CSV-ﬁle with hourly data for 2015
with two columns called ”diﬀuse” and ”direct” solar radiation.
By looking
34
==PAGE:40==
trough the values in the columns it was decided, in conference with co-supervisor,
that these columns had too high values in order to be diﬀuse and direct solar
radiation. It seemed like the shading ring for the diﬀuse sensor was forgotten
and during warm summer days the radiation was increasing slowly up to a total
solar radiation range[19] .Therefore, through programming in Excel the ”dif-
fuse” values was adjusted not to exceed a limit of 400 W/m2. These new diﬀuse
values could now be as diﬀuse solar radiation input.
It was also decided that column called ”Direct solar radiation” should be
treated as total solar radiation due to its high values. Now, also a new more
reasonable direct solar radiation could also be calculated as
New tilted direct solar radiation = new total tilted solar radiation−New tilted diffuse solar radiation
(6)
Input text ﬁles were made to implement in the data readers. In the Type 9C,
mode 1 was used where the ﬁrst line deﬁned the starting time, which was set 0.
Under this three column custom-speciﬁed columns were made that represented
tilted Sky diﬀuse solar radiation, tilted direct solar radiation and ambient air
temperature. These were place as columns from left to right in that same or-
der. These parameters was deﬁned as outputs in the same order in the output
window of the type.
The type 99 reader had another purpose. It did not utilise the radiation or
temperature, but set the input settings of the collector slope, azimuth of sur-
face and the incidence angle. So the Type 99 did not use a external ﬁle, as it
was overwritten by the external ﬁle in type 9C
Table 2: Table used as input settings in Type 99 data reader showing azimuth
of surface and collector slope.
The azimuth of surface was set to 0, since the collectors in the actual plant
are faced south. The measured collectors do also have a collector slope of 35 ◦.
4.3.2
Calculation of Degree days
In the TRNSYS-model the heat load is determined by the amount of degree days
and degree hours. The degree hours are deﬁned as the ambient air temperature
minus the mean indoor set temperature (base temperature). Since this thesis
revolves around district heating, the chosen base temperature is the indoor
temperature one wishes to heat up to. The chosen temperature is 17 C◦.
The degree days is a measurement of how cold it has been and how much
energy is needed to heat up a room [20]
Degree hours = Tbase −Tambient
(7)
35
==PAGE:41==
Degree days = Tbase −Tambient,daily mean
(8)
Where Tbase = 17C◦n ﬁgure 32 a screen shot of the excel sheet used for calcu-
lating the degree hours which are later to be used as input in the TRNSYS heat
load component can be seen. The ﬁrst column contains ambient air temperature
for each of the 8760 hours for 2015 provided by Marstal Fjernvarne temperature
sensors. The second column contains the calculated degree hours.
The third column is the corrected degree hours, where the negative values are
removed, by setting them as 0. This column have removed the negative values
that appear when the ambient temperature is higher than the set temperature
in warm temperature periods like during summer. The negative value represents
the need for cooling and can be used for a cooling load. Since the Marstal plant
is a heating plant, we correct the degree hours into only positive values. Finally,
the sum of all the degree hours for 2015 is summed up both as corrected and
non-corrected.
Figure 32: A screen shot of the excel spreadsheet used for calculating the Degree
hours.
In ﬁgure 33 a screen shot of the excel sheet used for calculating the degree
days is presented.The ﬁrst column contains the same hourly ambient air temper-
ature as in ﬁg 32. In the second column each 24 hours are averaged up to a daily
ambient mean temperature. In the third column the degree days is calculated
and in the fourth column the corrected degree days can be found. They are
corrected in the same way as for degree hours by removing the negative values
by setting them as 0.
36
==PAGE:42==
By mistake, the non-corrected total degree hours were used in the thesis model
simulation and therefore deviations may be explained. This will debated in the
discussion.
Figure 33: A screen shot of the excel spreadsheet used for calculating the Degree
days.
4.3.3
Elspot price
For a validation of the model for year 2015 electricity prices also had to be
updated. The electricity prices for 2015 was found at Nordpool’s home page
[21] and inserted into the electricity spot price data reader in TRNSYS.
4.3.4
Collector area deﬁnitions and eﬃciencies
In this validation, the model is validated by giving the same and framework as
the plant in 2015. In addition to the updated weather data, degree days, degree
hours correct components with the same speciﬁcations is necessary to give that
framework. To initiate the validation the solar collectors are analysed.
It has been some confusion regarding the actual area and used eﬃciency values;
η0, a1 and a2.
In the TRNSYS model the collector areas are presented as three diﬀerent col-
lector types representing Sunstore 1, Sunstore 2 and Sunstore 4. This ﬁts quite
well with the actual plant apart from the second collector. The original model
deﬁnes it as one ﬁeld of 9124 m2. This thesis intends to investigate the main
collector areas of Sunstore 1, Sunstore 2 and Sunstore 4.
37
==PAGE:43==
Three diﬀerent cases of organising the areas as well deﬁning the eﬃciency
values are undergone (table 3) The Case A is using Planenergi settings. The
Planenergi Model was made before the actual plant was built. This case has Sun-
store 2 deﬁned as the main collector + test collectors, Vacuum tube collectors
and GJ. The focusing collectors are excluded since they produce a signiﬁcant
small amount of the total energy production. They only produced 18 MWh in
2015. The eﬃciency values are decided by Planenergi. Apart from the Sunstore
1 collectors they do not have the actual factory settings. It can be discussed if
the consultants at Planenergi have used some kind of universal values to match
the fact the collector represents various collector types.
Table 3: Table showing the diﬀerent cases with diﬀerent inputs for the solar
collectors in the TRNSYS model
In Case B, the factory settings from the actual respective data sheets are
inserted.The data sheets can be found in 9.4. Pictures taken of the labels of
the collectors at the plant during a plant visit in may 2017. Based on these
pictures the respective data sheets were found. Here the exact areas for the
main collector areas are used to do a more detailed validation of the collectors.
In case C, the same exact main collector areas are used. However, in this case
the eﬃciency input values are chosen based upon actual collector ﬁeld tests on
the installed plant. The Sunstore 2 ﬁeld uses the Arcon HT- A 28/10 ﬂate plate
collectors. However, in a collector test [22] they were measured to be somewhat
diﬀerent. Also for Sunstore 4 measurements from another test report implies
a diﬀerent eﬃciency than what is stated in its data sheet. These collector test
certiﬁcation can be found in the 9.5. In fact, the Sunstore 1 collectors is still
using its original values due to no other measurements for that type.
The Case C will be used in the further investigation in this thesis, as it is based
on the measured test report eﬃciency values
During the plant visit pictures were taken of the labels mounted on the col-
lectors. The technical labels of the collectors are shown in ﬁgure 34, 35 and 36
below. The technical speciﬁcation on the actual installed solar collectors were
checked against the data sheets in order to ensure quality of the simulation
input.
38
==PAGE:44==
Figure 34: Label mounted on the solar collector in Sunstore 1 collector ﬁeld
Figure 35: Label mounted on the solar collector in Sunstore 2 collector ﬁeld
Figure 36: Label mounted on the solar collector in Sunstore 4 collector ﬁeld
As previously mentioned the Sunstore 2 consist of a 8019 m2 ﬂat plate col-
lector area in addition to various collectors which together make up 9322 m2.
39
==PAGE:45==
In ﬁgure 37 a screen shot of the operation and surveillance computers at the
plant is presented. This exact picture shows the formulas used for calculating
the ﬂows and eﬃciencies of the collectors. The numbers marked with green are
variables that can be edited. In the second window the eﬃciency of the ﬂat plate
collectors is shown and the operator have the ability to change the η0, a1 and
a2. This is a quite recent picture of the operation and it can be seen that the
chosen eﬃciency is diﬀerent from all the other cases. This values are chosen to
ﬁt the collectors performance in order to calculate the collector output. Trough
conference with staﬀit was unsure who is changing the values. It can be that
these values are adjusted to ﬁt desired output at the speciﬁc time period.
Figure 37: A picture of screen of the surveilance computers in the control room.
In this example the formulas are used for calculating the ﬂow of solar collector
pump
4.4
Analytical methods
These methods are used in order to enable an initial quality check of the output
from the simulations against measured values. The results from these methods
are presented in chapter 5.
4.4.1
Input vs. output diagrams
When investigating annual output sums of the collector ﬁelds it might not al-
ways give the full and correct picture of their performance. The system, both
in the model and measured is complex and the collectors as well as the other
energy technologies can interact and compensate for each other in energy output
40
==PAGE:46==
to reach the heat demand.
In order get a more detailed picture of the collectors see there performance more
separately input/output diagrams are made.
This can for example show if there are operating or measuring problems during
the year as well as pointing out the potential unnatural values. Furthermore,
this method checks that used input values and parameters are reasonable.[19]
Input/output regression lines is frequently used to present solar collector array
performance from diﬀerent systems and climates.
It is expected for well-functioning systems that the relationship between daily
solar radiation and energy collected is relatively linear in these input/output
diagrams. This linear curve can best be expressed as:
Q = a · H −b
(9)
Where Q is Daily Energy collected, a gives the slope of the curve, H is
the daily solar radiation and b is deﬁned as the daily threshold energy for the
system. [23] These I/O-diagrams have been made for all three solar collectors
in the system in Marstal Fjernvarme, where diagrams with both the modelled
and measured performance is included.
4.4.2
Mean solar collector temperature - ambient Temperature
In order to further understand and analyse the results from the input/output
diagrams, the parameters mean collector temperature minus ambient tempera-
ture and total solar radiation are compared to each other. This method is used
to check if the collectors during simulation are operating at much higher or lower
temperature than what is measured. In that case this can explain deviations in
collector output energy
The mean temperature will inﬂuence the performance of the collector.
The equation for the eﬃciency of a ﬂat plate collector is:
η = η0 −a1 · (Tm −Tamb)
G
−a2 · (Tm −Tamb)2
G
(10)
Where
η0 is the maximum eﬃciency given that there is no heat loss[-]
a1 is the 1st order heat loss coeﬃcient [W/km2]
a2 is the 2nd order heat loss coeﬃcient [W/km2]
G is the total solar radiation [W/m2]
Tm is the mean temperature of the ﬂowing through the collector [◦C]
Tm = Tcoll,out−Tcoll,in
2
Tamb is the ambient air temperature [◦C]
Based on the equation it can be expected by increasing the Tmean −Tambient the
eﬃciency will decrease and thus lower energy output. A lower Tmean −Tambient
will increase the eﬃciency and the collector output.
41
==PAGE:47==
When presenting these parameters it is not necessary to see the performance
when the solar radiation is low. Therefore it was decided that if a collector at a
certain hour had an energy output above 0,2 kWh/m2 it should be considered
as an operating hour.This was calculated in Excel. All operating hours were
summed up 24 hours at a time which resulted in amount of operating hours
during a day. The Tmean −Tambient values during those operating hours are
summed up. Finally the average temperature forTmean −Tambient for a
operating hour based day is found by dividing the sum of the temperatures by
the amount of operating hours during the day. This is done both for the mod-
elled and measured system.
As it can be seen in the power equation below , the temperatures also aﬀects
the total power output:
P = A · (η0 · (Gb · Kθ + Gd · K60) −a1 · (Tm −Tamb) −a2 · (Tm −Tamb)2) (11)
Where
Gb is beam (direct) radiation on collector plane [W/m2]
Gd is Diﬀuse radiation [W/m2]// Kθ is the incidence angle modiﬁer at a given
time step [-]
K60 is incidence angle modiﬁer for the diﬀuse radiation [-]
The diﬀuse radiation can come from all kinds of angles between 0 ◦to 90 ◦and
therefore an average angle of 60◦is often used.
4.4.3
Storage validation and comparison of heat storage pit model
In order to further validate the model against the measured system it is decided
to investigate the storage as well.
The retrieved storage energy ﬂow data is organized in diﬀerent ways. From
the measured plant data it has been measurements from three sources:
- The discharge from the pit heat storage into the district heating network
- The discharge from the pit heat storage into heat exchanger coupled to the
heat pump.
- The charge from the sunstore 4 collector ﬁeld into the pit heat storage
- The charge of the Sunstore 1 and 2 collectors into the pit heat storage.
Figure 38: Pit heat storage with its inlets/outlet for charging and discharging
42
==PAGE:48==
However, the modelled data is divided into energy ﬂow in and out of the
three diﬀerent inlets/outlets in the storage.
- Energy ﬂow through the top inlet/outlet of storage
- Energy ﬂow trough the middle inlet/outlet of storage
- Energy ﬂow through the bottom inlet/outlet of storage
The TRNSYS model uses positive values for discharge and negative values for
charge. So negative values are absolute values, due to that the sign of the num-
ber show direction of the ﬂow.
Storage temperature proﬁle It is convenient to plot a temperature stor-
age proﬁle in order to ﬁnd a potential energy change in the storage. From 32
provided temperature sensor measurements placed at every 0,5 m in the 16 m
plant storage a temperature proﬁle is made.
It was not possible to retrieve
temperature at all the same positions in the modelled storage, so model tem-
peratures taken from the outlets of the modelled storage in order to generate
the modelled storage temperature proﬁle.
4.4.4
Storage Heat loss and energy change
The measured and modelled storage performance is analysed by investigating
the heat losses.
The temperatures in the storage have an inﬂuence on the energy change
which again inﬂuences the heat loss.
The energy change of a storage is the
change of energy content inside the storage from the start of a year until the
end of a year.[19] When determining the heat loss of a storage it is essential to
investigate if there is a energy change. On the other hand, if the energy change
proves to be 0 MWh then one could exclude the energy change and heat loss
would be only Heat loss = Charged energy - Discharged energy. When energy
change is excluded the heat loss would be only the heat lost to the surroundings.
The most realistic heat loss is then calculated as:
Heat loss = Total Charged−Total Discharged−Energy change [MWh] (12)
Where Total Charged is stored energy from all main collector ﬁelds and
Total Discharged is discharged energy into DH network as well energy into heat
pump.
The energy change is found as the diﬀerence in energy content of the storage
between 01.01.2105 and 31.12.2015. The energy change is calculated for each
0,5 m height in the storage with their respective volumes and diﬀerential tem-
peratures measured by sensors in the measured storage at Marstal. The energy
change of the storage is found as:
Energy change =
32
X
n=1
ρwater,n · Cpwater,n · Vn · ∆Tn [MWh]
(13)
Where:
n is the layer number of each of the 32 levels with temperature sensors in the
43
==PAGE:49==
layer
ρ is density of water - temperature-dependent [ kg/m3]
Cp is Speciﬁc heat of water, temperature-dependent [kJkg K
Vn is Volume of the given layer [m3]
∆T is the temperature diﬀerence between the temperature at the end of the
year(31.12.2015) and the start of the year (01.01.2015)
The exact values of m and Cp for the diﬀerent temperatures is found by liner
interpolation using table for speciﬁc heat capacity and density of water.
Temperature data is retrieved from 32 center placed sensors placed 0,5 m
apart each other from top to bottom of the 16 m deep storage.
The heat loss in % is found as:
Heat loss [%] =
Heat loss
Total charged
(14)
44
==PAGE:50==
5
Model validation results
In this chapter the overall results as well individual component results will be
presented.
5.1
Total Plant Performance
As mentioned in 4.3.4 the Case C was selected as the reference case for measured
input data to be used in the model due that the inputs are based on certiﬁed
collector tests.
The table 4 , demonstrates the energy output results using
the diﬀerent input cases. Case C shows the least deviation from the measured
system performance.
Table 4: Table showing the total energy output of the collectors, heat pump
and the ORC + boiler in the three diﬀerent input cases. The green rows gives
the deviation [%] from the 2015 measured output.
In table 5 the heat energy balance of the modelled system using the Case
C input. The accumulated heat output of all three main collector ﬁelds in the
model agrees quite well with the measured.
The ORC electricity and boiler heat is combined as a total output as the sep-
arate boiler heat production was unavailable. However this production showed
a relatively good agreement with the measured one. Based on the ratio of 11%
between the ORC electricity production and total ORC electricity and boiler
production in the measured system, the same ratio was assumed for the mod-
elled and a modelled boiler heat production could be assumed.
The total energy load of the system of 29100 MWh was retrieved from the
measured total production post production loss retrieved from Marstal Fjern-
varme shown in ﬁgure 40. This exact load was used as input in the TRNSYS
model, but was somewhat altered by TRNSYS’ subroutine for heat degree days’
calculation resulting in 30052 MWh.
45
==PAGE:51==
Table 5: Table showing the total energy balance of the system when using Case
C as input
Figure 39: A bar chart comparing the modelled total energy output(blue) with
the measured total energy output (orange)
46
==PAGE:52==
Figure 40: Flow chart showing the measured energy ﬂows in the plant in 2015.
The measured energy ﬂows in ﬁgure 40 is provided by Marstal Fjernvarme.
The large blue arrow, called ”Ab. værk” has the total measured heat going
out to both Ommel and Marstal. They sum up to the a total production of
29101 MWh. It should be mentioned that the energy ﬂow of the Sunstore 1 & 2
collectors is including the small test collector area in Sunstore 2 and. Therefore
the Sunstore 1 & 2 energy ﬂow is not fully representable for a validation between
the modelled and measured system.
5.2
Component performance - Results
In this section the performance of the separate components and energy tech-
nologies will be shown.
5.2.1
Solar collector performance
Generally, the simulated values shows good agreement with measured values
throughout the whole year. This if further explained and demonstrated in sec-
tions below.
Collector input solar radiation vs energy output validation
The measured collector output data that was provided by Marstal Fjernvarme
had some values that had some high and low peaks showing erratic values.
These extreme peaks in measured data was removed and set to 0 MW trough
peak shaving. This was done in order to enable a better comparison basis with
simulated data.
47
==PAGE:53==
In ﬁgure 41, 42 and 43 the input/output relationship from all three collector
ﬁelds are presented with the blue-dotted curve as modelled performance and the
orange-dotted curve as measured performance. The x-axis gives the collector
energy output in kWh/ m2/day and the y-axis gives the total solar radiation
supplied by measured data from Marstal Fjernvarme’s own sensors. Like it was
explained in the analytical method section, these diagrams should generate rel-
atively linear curves that implies a well functioning system. The basis for the
curve is explained like this:
Q = a · H −b
(15)
Where
a give the slope of the curve
H is the daily solar radiation
b is the daily treshold energy for the system
The simulated curves are modelled in TRNSYS.
Figure 41: Input/output diagram for the Sunstore 1 collector ﬁeld using the
Case C input that shows collector output [kWh/m2/day] as a function of Total
solar radiation [kWh/m2/day]
48
==PAGE:54==
Figure 42: Input/output diagram for the Sunstore 2 collector ﬁeld using the
Case C input that shows collector output [kWh/m2/day] as a function of Total
solar radiation [kWh/m2/day]
Figure 43: Input/output diagram for the Sunstore 4 collector ﬁeld using the
Case C input that shows collector output [kWh/m2/day] as a function of total
solar radiation [kWh/m2/day]
All three diagrams generates relatively linear curves. Furthermore, measured
and modelled operation curves seem to match each other apart from some devi-
ation. This proves also that the model agrees well with the plant performance
as well as with the variation in input data, including the weather data during
the year.
Collector energy performance during the seasons
In ﬁgure 44, 45 and 46 the output from the real and modelled collectors are
compared, with intension of giving a better understanding of the ﬁndings in
input/output-diagrams. The y-axis is presented as collector output energy pro-
duction in kWh/m2/day and on the x-axis time is presented as days during
49
==PAGE:55==
2015.
Figure 44: Diagram that shows the collector output [kWh/m2/day] as a function
of time [days] for both modelled and measured for Sunstore 1 Collectors using
case C inputs
Figure 45: Diagram that shows the collector output [kWh/m2/day] as a function
of time [days] for both modelled and measured for Sunstore 2 Collectors using
case C inputs
50
==PAGE:56==
Figure 46: Diagram that shows the collector output [kWh/m2/day] as a function
of time [days] for both modelled and measured for Sunstore 4 Collectors using
case C inputs
In general for all three collector types, the energy output agrees well, despite
some variations between the modelled and measured at diﬀerent times through-
out the year. It can be seen, especially in the Sunstore 2 and 4 collectors that
the measured collectors have a noticeable higher collector output than the mod-
elled in the summer months. It can be observed that the plant produced solar
energy matches quite well the modelled solar energy over the year that indicates
that all the potential available renewable solar energy is utilised. This can be
due diﬀerence in Tmean −Tambient at times or diﬀerent actual plant control.
Mean collector temperature-ambient temperature
As described in 4.4.2 the Tmean −Tambient plays an essential role in the power
equation as high Tmean −Tambient would decrease the collector energy output.
P = A · (η0 · (Gb · Kθ + Gd · K60) −a1 · (Tm −Tamb) −a2 · (Tm −Tamb)2) (16)
Where
Gb is beam (direct) radiation on collector plane [W/m2]
Gd is Diﬀuse radiation [W/m2]// Kθ is the incidence angle modiﬁer at a given
time step [-]
K60 is incidence angle modiﬁer for the diﬀuse radiation [-]
The diﬀuse radiation can come from all kinds of angles between 0 ◦to 90 ◦and
therefore an average angle of 60◦is often used.
The y-axis is Tmean−Tambient [C◦] while the x-axis is presented as daily total
solar radiation based on the operating hours in a day. The operating hours was
deﬁned as the hours per day where the radiation is greater than 0,2 kWh/m2.
This deﬁnition is valid for both the modelled and real operation system.
51
==PAGE:57==
Figure 47: Plot diagram showing the mean collecture temperature minus the
ambient air temperature [C◦] as a function of Total solar radiation[kWh/m2]
for Sunstore 2 collectors using case C input.
Figure 48: Plot diagram showing the mean collector temperature minus the
ambient air temperature [C◦] as a function of Total solar radiation[kWh/m2]
for Sunstore 4 collectors using case C input.
It was found in table 4 that the total collector energy output for all collec-
tors was quite close to the measured collector energy output, especially for the
Sunstore 2 and Sunstore 4 collector ﬁelds, were the deviation was between was
in the range of 0-1%. According to the collector output equation(equation 16)
a higher power output would imply a lower Tmean −Tambient. Since the mod-
elled and measured collectors have an almost identical energy output,similar
52
==PAGE:58==
Tmean −Tambient results could be expected. However, the mean temperature
range for both Sunstore 2 and 4 seems to have a temperature diﬀerence of 10
C◦. Since the modelled and measured collectors still result in a similar collector
output this could imply that another variable in the power equation compen-
sates for the diﬀerence in Tmean −Tambient.
Validation of solar collectors by not peak reducing
The measured solar collector performance data initially went through a peak
shaving process where exceptionally high absolute values were removed by set-
ting them as 0. This was done in order to make them match the simulated daily
energy output which were using more stable values. However, this could be the
reason for a temperature diﬀerence in the Tmean −Tamb VS Total Radiation
diagrams due to that the operating hours depend on the collector energy out-
put. In the calculation of reducing the extreme points a it was set to remove all
values above and under 50 and -50 respectively. This resulted then in lower to-
tal energy output of the measured collectors which could lead to the given issue.
Due to the relatively little energy output deviation between the measured
and modelled collectors a small temperature deviation between as well. In order
to combat this issue it is chosen to do another case where the collector output is
not peak reduced. It was also expected that this would match the linear curve
of the simulated collectors in the input/output diagrams.
When the daily collector energy output for measured and modelled is com-
pared for the peak adjusted and non-peak adjusted case (ﬁgures 49 to 54) a clear
diﬀerence can be observed between the peak shaved and non-peak shaved dia-
gram. The peaks are instantly increasing from 0 to substantially higher values
than the simulated values. However, between these peaks the measured aligns
in a better way with the the simulated curve.
It is worth mentioning that in ﬁgure 53 the measured curve has less abnormal
peaks.
The abnormal high and low peaks in these collector energy output in Sunstore
1 and Sunstore 2 shown below could be due to sensor inconsistency or errors in
the system. However, the diagram in ﬁgure 53 for Sunstore 4 collectors shows
no such abnormal peaks, except for one peak in January. It would not be likely
that these peaks reﬂect the real variations in radiation and output. Therefore,
it was decided to modify the peaks according to process described in 4.4.2.
53
==PAGE:59==
Figure 49: Collector output as
a function of time [days] when
the data has not been peak ad-
justed.
This diagrams repre-
sents the Sunstore 1 collectors
using case C input
Figure 50: This is a copy of ﬁg-
ure 44 where the data is peak
adjusted.
This also represents
the Sunstore 1 collectors using
Case C input
Figure 51: Collector output as
a function of time [days] when
the data has not been peak ad-
justed.
This diagrams repre-
sents the Sunstore 2 collectors
using case C input
Figure 52: This is a copy of ﬁg-
ure 45 where the data is peak
adjusted.
This also represents
the Sunstore21 collectors using
Case C input
Figure 53: Collector output as
a function of time [days] when
the data has not been peak ad-
justed.
This diagrams repre-
sents the Sunstore 4 collectors
using case C input
Figure 54: This is a copy of ﬁg-
ure 46 where the data is peak
adjusted.
This also represents
the Sunstore 4 collectors using
Case C input
In the six ﬁgures above the Tmean −Tamb diagrams for both cases are pre-
sented. The reducing of the measured high peak values inﬂuences the measured
54
==PAGE:60==
Tmean −Tamb. The measured temperatures are further scattered in the non
peak shaved diagrams especially in the lower temperature range where collector
2 is especially aﬀected. This would imply that operating hours are aﬀected by
the reducing of the collector output as the operating hours were determined on
the set output limit of 0,2 kWh/m2 per day.
Figure 55:
Diagram of mean
collector temperature - ambient
air temperature as a function
of Total solar radiation based
on radiation data has not been
peak adjusted.
This diagram
represents the Sunstore 2 collec-
tors using Case C input
Figure 56: This is a copy of ﬁg-
ure 47 that uses peak adjusted
radiation data. Sunstore 2 col-
lectors using Case C input
Figure 57:
Diagram of mean
collector temperature - ambient
air temperature as a function
of Total solar radiation based
on radiation data has not been
peak adjusted.
This diagram
represents the Sunstore 4 collec-
tors using Case C input
Figure 58: This is a copy of ﬁg-
ure 48 that uses peak adjusted
radiation data. Sunstore 4 col-
lectors using case C input
5.2.2
Heat pump
In ﬁgure 59 the both the daily measured and modelled heat pump output energy
is shown in the same diagram. Even though the total modelled heat output is
55
==PAGE:61==
larger than the measured, the measured is operating at higher peaks. The stable
operation level of the modelled heat pump gives it a higher total heat output.
While, the simulated curve is some what simple by having a constant energy
ﬂow for summer and winter and instantly turning oﬀthe operation from April
to October the actual heat pump is operating diﬀerently. The measured heat
pump shows a more ﬂuctuating operating pattern that. This behaviour can
be due to that the measured plant is run based on electricity spot prices or a
control algorithm. However, it can be seen that the measured curve, a like the
modelled curve, also has 0 MWh production from the heat pump around the
same time period, except for some values in June. In general, the modelled has
a more constant curve which is not necessarily realistic in regards to unforeseen
technical problems and actual temperature change.
Figure 59: Diagram showing energy ﬂow [MW] as a function of time [hours].
The heat pump output energy in the measured system is the blue curve, while
the heat source for the modelled heat pump is orange curve.
As it can be seen, the measured and simulated heat pump operations starts
at the same time. However, the measured heat pump operation diﬀers when it
operates for a brief time period in June and August, before turning oﬀagain.
It can also be seen that the modelled heat pump starts operation in October,
a month before the measured case. Based on the fact that an updated 2015
el spot price and weather input ﬁle has been used in the simulation it could
be plausable to believe that it could be more satisfactory to use the modelled
operation in real life. So, starting the heat pump operation a month earlier
than measured and keeping the operation at 0 MWh during the whole summer
could improve the energy system. It can be mentioned that in the model, the
test collectors were not included. This gives lower total heat output from all
collectors, which also makes the modelled heat pump compensate for the lacking
heat and produce more heat than the measured heat pump.
5.2.3
Validation and comparison of heat storage pit
In ﬁgure 60, the daily measured and modelled presentation of Sunstore 4 charg-
ing of the large pit heat storage. The curves are negative, as negative represents
56
==PAGE:62==
charging, since it is going out of the system. It can be seen that they are quite
similar in pattern and quantity, which is again supported by the fact that the
Sunstore 4 collector have the same energy production and because that pro-
duced energy is sent directly to the storage. It can also be seen that there are
some slight discharging.
Figure 60: Diagram showing Energy ﬂow[MW] from Sunstore 4 collectors charg-
ing as a function of time [days].
Pit heat storage temperature proﬁle
As it is presented in the analytical methods storage temperature proﬁle can
be a decent indication of a potential energy change in the storage which again
inﬂuences the storage heat loss. Temperature changes between 01.01.2015 and
31.12.2015 for several heights in the modelled and measured storage are pre-
sented. The measured storage had some outliers from defect temperature sen-
sors. These outliers were corrected for by using the temperature change for it
previous layer.
57
==PAGE:63==
Figure 61: Plot diagram showing the diﬀerent temperatures through the dif-
ferent depths of the measured storage pit. The yellow curve gives the average
temperature for the diﬀerent depths on January 1st 2015 an the blue curve gives
the average temperature of the depths December 31st 2015
Figure 62: Plot diagram showing the diﬀerent temperatures through 3 diﬀerent
depths of the modelled storage pit. The yellow curve gives the average temper-
ature for the diﬀerent depths on January 1st 2015 an the blue curve gives the
average temperature of the depths December 31st 2015
By observing the temperature proﬁle of the measured storage a negative en-
ergy change, since the temperature in the majority of the layers in the storage
has decreased during the year. A slight positive energy change in the modelled
storage can be expected due to the small temperature increase in the three plot-
ted storage layers over the year.
Storage Inlet/outlet temperatures
In ﬁgure 63, 64 and 65 the hourly temperatures of the inlet/outlets of the pit
heat storage is presented. In all three ﬁgures it can be seen that the measured
temperatures are more ﬂuctuating than the modelled. This can be due to dif-
58
==PAGE:64==
ferent operational control in the measured system and temperature changes in
storage. However, still the relatively scattered plots of the measured data show
a pattern that resembles the one of the modelled. It seems like the top and low
points of the modelled curve is enhanced further in the measured, which could
imply again that the measured temperatures are more sensitive to temperatures
in the storage.
Especially in the modelled storage the curves starts and ends the year 2015 at
approximately the same temperatures which would make it reasonable that the
energy change is not substantial. The measured storage temperatures have a
higher temperature diﬀerence from start to end of the year which could would
lead to a greater energy change in the storage. One reason for the variation
in measured inlet/outlet temperature could be that mainly the collector outlet
and ﬂow direction over the day varies and inﬂuences these temperatures.
Figure
63:
Diagram
show-
ing the temperature through
the
bottom
inlet/outlet
for
the measured(orange) and mod-
elled(blue) storage on an hourly
basis during year 2015
Figure 64:
Diagram showing
the temperature through the
middle
inlet/outlet
for
the
measured(orange)
and
mod-
elled(blue) storage on an hourly
basis during year 2015
Figure
65:
Diagram
show-
ing the temperature through
the
top
inlet/outlet
for
the
measured(orange)
and
mod-
elled(blue) storage on an hourly
basis during year 2015
Heat loss and energy change of storage
In table 6 the storage performance is analysed for both the measured and
the modelled system. It is visible that the modelled system has a higher heat
loss than the measured.
The energy change in the modelled storage is diﬀerent than the measured stor-
age. This agrees with the annual temperature change in the layers shown in the
storage temperature proﬁles. The temperature change can be due to that the
model is not taken into diﬀerent factors that make the energy content of the
storage more sensitive to to heat loss to ground. However, it could be discussed
whether the heat loss for the model is correct as the model is not storing collec-
tor output from Sunstore 1 and Sunstore 2 and also is discharging less energy
then measured storage.
59
==PAGE:65==
Table 6: Table showing storage performance trough energy change and heat loss
for the modelled and measured system
6
Discussion
6.1
Input values
Refer to section 4.3 - Simulation case and input data.
The Case C, where the original values were based on ﬁeld test reports were
chosen to be used as a reference case for further investigation and validation.
The total energy output of the Case C also agreed best with measured total
plant performance.
In both case B and C, only the main collector areas were used as inputs to
the model. The relatively small share of various test collectors coupled to the
Sunstore 2 collectors was neglected. This was done to enable a more realistic
comparison between the measured and modelled collectors. Case C showed a
better agreement with measured output energy than Case B did, hence the pa-
rameters used.
This could imply that the original data sheets could have been inaccurate or
that the eﬃciency of the collectors has changed over time. This could be due
to contamination of surfaces or wear and tear.
In section 4.3.1 Weather data, the process of treating the provided and measured
plant direct and diﬀuse solar radiation data was explained. The adjustments
and assumptions that was made probably gave a more realistic ratio between
direct and diﬀuse solar radiation as well the total solar radiation.
This solar radiation adjustment represents a potential uncertainty of the actual
solar radiation was. This could have had a limited inﬂuence on the modelled
output. A further investigation of the split between the measured direct and
diﬀuse solar radiation on the plant is recommended in order the input accuracy
in the model. The 2015 local weather data for the Marstal area were used( as
opposed the previous averaged data for Copenhagen area used in the original
model). This supports the credibility of the simulation results further.
6.2
Total plant performance
The heat energy balance for modelled system(Case C) proved to agree well with
the energy balance in terms of the collector production and ORC electricity &
60
==PAGE:66==
boiler heat production. However, the measured minor test collector area pro-
duce around 1100MWh. Due to this heat contribution the required heat pump
production will be 1100 MWh less for than the modelled heat pump. Based
on this, one can conclude that the modelled and measured energy performance
agree quite well.
6.3
Solar Collectors
Collector performance
Reference is made to chapter .2.1. The discussion is based on the results from
simulation using selected input data Case C which gave the best agreement with
measured plant output.
For Sunstore 1 collectors in Case C there were no test report eﬃciency values
available, hence the data sheet values for Sunstore 1 collectors. A larger de-
viation between the measured and modelled collectors for the Sunstore 1 than
in the two other collector ﬁelds was found. The same report that showed that
collector eﬃciency values for the Sunstore 2 collectors, actually had new test eﬃ-
ciency values for the Sunstore 1 collectors as well. However, these gave a greater
deviation for the output energy than the Sunstore 1 collector data sheets and
were chosen not to be used in the thesis.
The input/output diagrams were introduced as they could depict if there
were any unforeseen technical malfunctions and if the weather input data was
of decent quality. The I/O diagrams showed, for all main collector ﬁelds, rel-
atively linear curves both for modelled and measured operation which implies
seemingly well-functioning systems. This is a indication that the input data,
after the treatment of them, were realistic. In addition to this the performance
of the modelled and measured curves in the I/O diagrams seems to agree with
each other showing alignment for the curves.
However, certain irregularities from the linear curve and diﬀerences between
the measured and modelled collectors are present. The modelled curve has less
scattered points and less ﬂuctuating performance than the measured. The treat-
ment of the input weather data explained in 4.3.1 could have been a reason for
this diﬀerence. The operation and control of the actual plant could also have
been a cause for the more scattered point in the measured plots.
A general conclusion: The performance of the main solar collectors show a good
alignment between modelled and measured and individually shows a well func-
tioning solar collector system for both modelled and measured and that the
input data was reasonable for the validation.
A more detailed discussion concerning each Sunstore collector ﬁeld
In the Sunstore 1 collectors(ﬁgure 41) a certain amount of lower scattered
points for the real performance can imply some lost energy production due to
operation problems. The 9000 m2 collector ﬁeld is the oldest one and mass ﬂow
rate problems can be a reason for the lower performance. Lower quality so-
61
==PAGE:67==
lar sensors can also generate misguiding climate data and solar radiation data.
This can be further explained in ﬁgure 44 where the output from measured and
modelled diﬀer somewhat throughout 2015.
In the Sunstore 2 collectors (ﬁgure 42) the two curves for measured and
modelled are substantially more similar than in the diagram for the Sunstore 1
collectors and gives a more continuous total curve which shows a well functioning
system in both the modelled and measured case. The measured collectors have
less scattered points in the lower output range than in Sunstore 1 as well and
it matches more with the modelled curve. These observations can be supported
with lesser output deviation from table 4 that the Sunstore had a deviation from
the measured of -3,3 %, while the the Sunstore 2 collectors only have a deviation
of -0,47%. It could then be reasonable to a except more aligning curves in the
Sunstore 2.
The I/O diagram for the Sunstore 4 collector ﬁeld show a more ﬂuctuating
performance for both the modelled and measured collectors creating a wider
range of energy production per area per day. The ﬂuctuating pattern can be
due that the Sunstore 4 Collectors is coupled to the pit heat storage. Still the
measured and modelled collector show a relatively linear shape. However, a
slightly wider range of performance is to be seen for the simulated collectors.
When observing the Sunstore 4 collector output as a function of time it can
be seen that the measured collector is producing noticeable higher amounts of
energy in the summer months
All collector output over time diagrams show a clear higher collector output
for the measured collectors in the summer months. This observation does not
agree with the Tmean −Tambient diagrams where the measured temperatures are
for all radiation levels, higher than the modelled. There have been incidents
where the temperatures is opposite, which may be due to some issues in the
control of modelled system [19]
The measured collector higher energy output than the modelled in the summer
months can be also due to other reasons. The solar sensor can be dirty and in
reality giving to low solar radiation values as input to the simulation model. A
too small modelled heat exchanger between the glycol/water array cycle and the
DH cycle is assumed in the simulation, compared to the actual heat exchanger.
[19]
Collector temperatures
A valid comparison could not be done for the Sunstore 1 collector ﬁeld as mea-
sured collector temperature data could not be retrieved due to technical mal-
functions in 2015.
The Tmean −Tambient for the modelled Sunstore 1 is shown and it is visible
that the temperatures are kept at a temperature range between 35 and 45 C◦.
There is a certain amount of temperatures at 0 C◦during the lower radiation
range. A certain amount of these points are generated during the operating
62
==PAGE:68==
hours calculation. These values were based upon collector output under the
speciﬁed limit of 0,2 kWh/m2/ day and were therefore not considered as oper-
ating hours and the points are therefore set as 0. These values can be neglected.
The collector temperatures from the Sunstore 2 collectors has both the mea-
sured and modelled collector presented. Here as well, the points at 0 C◦can be
neglected due to that they do not meet the speciﬁed operating hours require-
ment. Based on the small deviation in total collector output the temperatures
should be quite similar for the measured and modelled. Despite some overlap of
the temperature range the measured collector temperatures is in a range around
10 C◦higher than the modelled. Normally, lower production in a collector is
linked to a higher mean temperature in a solar collector [19]
The modelled collector temperatures in Sunstore 4 collectors seems to be some
what closer to the measured temperatures than in the Sunstore 2 collectors.
This could may be supported that they have a smaller collector energy output
deviation between them then in the Sunstore 2 collectors. However, the tem-
perature diﬀerence between the modelled and measured curve imply a greater
total energy output deviation between the two, than what is found.
So, what can be seen for all collector ﬁelds is an agreement between the
performance in terms of energy output, but the Tmean −Tambient does not agree
with this. If one were to calculate the collector energy output based on the
presented Tmean −Tambient diﬀerences it could answer to this:
The issue concerning the misguiding temperatures in the collector can be
caused by several reasons. The collector control in the simulation model can
be less then optimal or less optimal than the control in the actual measured
collectors. This can also be due to measurement errors of the measured collector
temperatures.
However, in the diagrams were there done no peak adjustment a more scat-
tered measured Tmean −Tambient were noticed, especially in the lower range
during times at lower solar radiation. Now, this moves the mean temperature
range of the measured collectors further down towards the temperature range
of the modelled collector. When not peak reducing the output there are no
missing energy from the total output and that would be more representable for
the Tmean −Tambient at operating hours as they are based on collector output.
In ﬁgure 48 the Sunstore 4 collector seems to have greater overlap between
the temperature range of the measured and of the modelled.
This ﬁts with
the fact that total output deviation between modelled and measured is even
smaller in the Sunstore 4 collector ﬁeld. Nevertheless, the modelled collector
temperatures are generally higher
63
==PAGE:69==
6.4
Pit heat storage
The heat losses of both the measured and the modelled storage was found by
looking into charged and discharged as well including energy change. The energy
change in the measured storage was found based on calculations with tempera-
tures from all center placed temperature sensors inside the storage pit. Based
on the measured storage temperature proﬁle that was generated a slight pre-
calculation negative energy change could be expected since the general temper-
atures in the storage ended at lower temperatures than the initial temperatures.
The energy change of the measured storage proved to be negative and larger
than the modelled storage energy change.
The energy change for the modelled storage was found to be substantially lower
and positive which agreed well with it was a low temperature change. This
could imply that the modelled storage is less temperature-sensitive. It should,
however, be mentioned that there were only used three diﬀerent temperatures
registered at the three inlets/outlets of the storage. It was assumed in thesis
that the temperature of the water exiting these outlets were approximately the
same as inside the storage at the same heights. These inlets are at 0,8 m, 5,5
m and 15 m from the top and were assumed to be three custom-deﬁned layers
and the temperatures for each inlet should be the presentable temperature for
its nearby tank volume.
Even though the energy change for the model storage was found through a
less detailed calculation it is believed that doing a more detailed calculation
with using more layer temperatures would not have a signiﬁcant inﬂuence on
its total energy change.
This can be supported by the ﬁndings in ﬁg 62 where the three dots in the
diagram presenting three diﬀerent depths in the storage have almost identical
values at the start of the year as of the end of the year.
Furthermore, there is another aspect of the diﬀerence in heat loss between
the measured and modelled storage that is of interest. Unlike the measured
storage, the storage model does not store produced energy from Sunstore 1
and Sunstore 2. The discharged energy directly into the DH network is also
much lower than in the measured model. This inﬂuences the heat balance of
the storage and the storage heat loss. The aspect of redirecting energy from
the other collector ﬁelds is not something that has been adjusted in the model
edited for this thesis. The only adjustments made in the model for this thesis
are the new updated local weather data, el spot prices and removal of no longer
used components.
The missing energy ﬂows makes the comparison of the storages impossible.
64
==PAGE:70==
7
Conclusion
The overall conclusion from this thesis is that the TRNSYS simulation program
produces output that are in close agreements with actual measured operational
data for one complete year (2015) at Marstal Fjernvarme Solar District Heating
Plant . A validation of the Solar District Heating plant at Marstal Fjernvarme
was done by using an updated TRNSYS model earlier made by Planenergi.
Even though the complete system was modelled, the main focus for this thesis
was the performance validation of the main collector ﬁelds and large pit heat
storage. The model was ran utilising actual input data such as weather data,
degree days, degree hours, collector areas, and updated equipment eﬃciency
values. The simulation results agreed well with total measured numbers.
Treatment of the provided diﬀuse and direct solar radiation input was nec-
essary to get a more realistic validation. However, this leaves an uncertainty
about what the actual radiation data was. This could also be the reason for
some minor inconsistencies shown in the validation results. Further work for
more exact measurements of solar radiation is recommended. Such data could
enable a even more exact validation of the model. The model is updated to
resemble the plant conﬁguration in year 2015.
In order to further enhance the capablties of the TRNSYS program some
recommendations for future work are described in Chapter 8 below.
65
==PAGE:71==
8
Future Work
If future thesises or project reports on the operation of Marstal Fjernvarme or
similar plants is to be written certain improvements can be made.
1. Data quality
In order to get a precise and realistic validation of any energy system correct
input data is required. Work should be initiated to measure or deﬁne more
exactly the quantity split between direct and diﬀuse radiation on a yearly basis.
In this thesis the split between direct and diﬀuse radiation was estimated based
on measured raw data combining diﬀuse and direct radiation.
2. Operation cost analysis and optimisation
In this thesis a validation of TRNSYS from a technical performance point of
view was the main objective. However, it is recommended to run simulations for
cost optimisation purposes as well (OPEX). By including realistic energy unit
cost for the individual energy producers (solar collectors, HP, ORC, Oil boiler
etc) TRNSYS could be used for OPEX optimisation studies by combining the
energy sources in diﬀerent ways.
CO2 footprint optimisations could also be conducted in a similar way.
This type of investigation could be beneﬁcial for operating plants as well as
in design of new plants.
Information from the industry
The model used in this thesis is based on Planenergi’s simulation model from
2011, which was a part of the background validation of the project of build-
ing the Sunstore 4 addition to Marstal Fjernvarme. Despite the modiﬁcation
that has been done to ﬁt with 2015’s edition of the plant the model still uses a
wide range of formulas and constants in the equation types. A certain amount
of these constants is set by the programmers at Planenergi with no added ex-
planation for what these numbers represent. This is also the issue for certain
formulas and limits which may have been added for a time-eﬃcient solution for
operation and not necessary as scientiﬁc and detailed as a university would have
programmed it.
TRNSYS Data reader conﬁguration
In order to process the retrieved data from tilted measurements an unusual com-
bination of two diﬀerent data readers were used. if a future thesis modelling
simulation is done on the same location a improved, simpler and more dynamic
solution can be done for the data reading. The type 9 and type 99 is used in
the model, but it could be looked into replacing them with more modern and
dynamic data readers. Also for the collector types, more dynamic solutions can
be investigated.
66
==PAGE:72==
TRNSYS lectures
In this thesis the software, TRNSYS was essential in order to validate the model.
In order to understand the greatly complex model of the plant a general under-
standing of the software is needed. There had not previously been any courses
on the use of TRNSYS at DTU and the program had to be learned during the
thesis process. By oﬀering tutoring in TRNSYS pre-thesis period time could
be saved and a general understanding of the simulation tool would beneﬁt the
quality of the thesis data and simulations. The simulation software tool Polysun
have been taught at DTU and gives a certain insight into the modelling of solar
thermal energy and seasonal storage. However, TRNSYS gives the user a wider
range of options to customise more realistic and complex energy systems where
other types of energy technology is included.
67
==PAGE:73==
9
Appendix
9.1
Detailed data processing calculations in Excel
9.2
Input data
9.3
PI diagrams
In this appendix section the PI diagrams for the whole energy system at Marstal
Fjernvarme can be found. To versions are presented: one diagram explaining the
operation of the measured plant in December and for June. The PI diagrams are
marked with letters that refers to text ”Operation of the plant”-section where
the operation is explained in detail.
68
==PAGE:74==
69
==PAGE:75==
70
==PAGE:76==
9.4
Data sheets and other technical information
In this appendix section various component data sheets and technical informa-
tion provided by Marstal Fjernvarme is presented.
Table 7: Technical speciﬁcations of the CO2 heat pump at Marstal Fjernvarme
Table 8: Technical data of the ORC at Marstal Fjernvarme
71
==PAGE:77==
Figure 66: This is data sheet for the Solar collector installed in the Sunstore 1
collector ﬁeld, AR-CON HT
72
==PAGE:78==
ARCON Solar A/S
Skørping Nord 3
DK-9520 Skørping
Tel. +45 98 39 14 77
arcon@arcon.dk
www.arcon.dk
30
20
10
0
Kpa
0
1
2
3
4
Flow m³/h
Absorber
Type:  
 
 
Selektiv - ny Alanod
Materiale: 
 
 
Kobber/aluminium
Belægning:  
 
Mirotherm, α > 0,95; ε < 0,05
Kanalsystem: 
 
18xØ10 parallelle kanaler og 2xØ28 fordelerrør
Kanaltværsnitsareal: 66 mm²
Pladetykkelse: 
 
0,5 mm
Dæklag
Antal:  
 
 
1
Materiale: 
 
 
Antireﬂ eksbehandlet glas
Tykkelse: 
 
 
3,2 mm
Tilslutning
Rustfri ﬂ exslange:  
2 x 28 mm
Isolering
Bagside: 
 
 
75 mm mineraluld
Side: 
 
 
 
30 mm mineraluld
Tryk
Anbefalet max. arbejdstryk: 10 bar
Prøvetryk:  
 
 
13 bar
Maksimalt ﬂ ow: 
 
 
3,3 m³/h
Indfaldsvinkelkorrektion
 
Kθ = 1 - tana (θ / 2)
 
hvor: 
 
θ = Indfaldsvinkel  [°]
 
a = Eksponent (4,51)
Figur 4: Snit i HT-A solfanger
Antireﬂ eksbehandlet glas 
Aluminiumskasse
Sideisolering
Bagisolering
Absorber
ARCON solfanger - type HT-A 28/10
05.2010.HT-A_28-10.dk
Datablad 
side 2/2
Figur 5: Tryktabskurve
Tryktab
Figure 68: This is the data sheet for the This is the data sheet for the Arcon
HT - A 28/10 solar collectors installed in the Sunstore 2 collector ﬁeld. The η0,
a1 and a2 from this description was later chosen not to be used in the detailed
validation
73
==PAGE:79==
ARCON Solar A/S
Skørping Nord 3
DK-9520 Skørping
Tel. +45 98 39 14 77
arcon@arcon.dk
www.arcon.dk
Data
Udvendige dimensioner: 
2,27 x 5,96 x 0,14 meter
Total areal:    
 
13,57 m²
Transparent areal:  
12,54 m²
Vægt, uden væske:  
250  kg
Væskeindhold:  
 
9,3 liter
 
Effektivitet 
 
         a1 ∙ (Tm – Ta)      a2 ∙ (Tm – Ta)²
 
 
           G                      G
hvor: 
 
 
Ta = Omgivelsestemperatur [°C]
 
 
Tm = Middelvæsketemperatur [°C]
 
 
G = Indstråling [W/m²]
Effektivitet baseret på transparent areal på 12,56 m² 
samt en væskestrøm på 25 liter/min og en vindhastig-
hed på 3 m/s:
 
 
0 = 0,839
 
 
a1 =  3,200 [W/(m²K)]
 
 
a2 = 0,0137 [W/(m²K²)]
Betingelser: 
 
 
Glykolblandning = 
40 % 
 
 
Væskestrøm 
= 
25 L/min
 
 
Indstråling [G] 
> 800 W/m²
Figur 2: Effektivitetsskurve (G = 800 W/m²)
Figur 3: Solfangereffekt ved forskellig solindstråling
 = 0 –                      – 
ARCON solfanger - type HT-A 28/10
Figur 1: HT-A solfanger opstillet på betonbjælker
Solfangereffekt  [W]
Temperaturdifferens  [K]
Solindstråling [W/m2]
Tm – Ta
400
700
1000
10
3784
6935
10086
30
2845
5997
9148
50
1770
4921
8072
70
-
3050
6201
05.2010.HT-A_28-10.dk
Effektivitet
Temperaturdifferens
Datablad 
side 1/2
100%
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%
100°
90°
80°
70°
60°
50°
40°
30°
20°
10°
0°
[H]
Figure 67: This is the data sheet for the Arcon HT - A 28/10 solar collectors
installed in the Sunstore 2 collector ﬁeld. The η0, a1 and a2 from this description
was later chosen not to be used in the detailed validation
74
==PAGE:80==
Figure 69:
75
==PAGE:81==
Figure 70: The data sheet for the Sunmark 14 m2 collector installed in the
Sunstore 4 collector ﬁeld.The η0, a1 and a2 from this description was later
chosen not to be used in the detailed validation
76
==PAGE:82==
9.5
Test data
These are the reports from collector tests done on the installed collectors. .The
η0, a1 and a2 from this test report was the ones that was chosen to be used in
the detailed validation
77
==PAGE:83==
Figure 71: Test report of the Arcon HT - A 28/10 Collectors installed in the
Sunstore 2 collector ﬁeld
78
==PAGE:84==
Figure 72: Test report of the Sunmark 14 m2 installed in the Sunstore 4 collector
ﬁeld
79
==PAGE:85==
Figure 73: Test report of the Sunmark 14 m2 installed in the Sunstore 4 collector
ﬁeld
80
==PAGE:86==
9.6
Detailed function description of TRNSYS model
In this appendix section the detailed explanation of the TRNSYS component
functions including programming control equations made by Planenergi.
Accumulator tank model
The accumulator tank model simulates stratiﬁed ﬂuid storage with 3 internal
heat exchanger, 5 connections for direct charge and discharge and an internal
electrical heater.
Auxiliary heating - Biooil
This auxiliary heater is modeled to increase the temperature of a ﬂow stream
either using internal control, external control, or a combination of both. It is
designed to add heat to the system at a custom designed maximum ﬂow rate as
the control input is set to 1 and the heater outlet temperature is less than the
set temperature speciﬁed by the user.
Condenser and ORC
This model is set to present the operation of the combined boiler and ORC. The
model is custom made through a equation with deﬁned constants and formulas.
It uses the inputs:
Inlet temperature of boiler
mass ﬂow rate through the inlet of the boiler
The inlet temperature of the ORC
Where TBoiler,out = TBoiler,in
mBoiler,out = mBoiler,in
It tells the program that it uses the equation that will give the highest outlet
temperature of these two equations:
TORC,out = TORC,in + 20
(17)
or
TORC,out = Tforward + 5
(18)
mORC,out =
QORC
Cpwater ∗(TORC,out −TORC,in)
(19)
Where ∆TORC ≥1
QORC,kW = 3200 ∗0, 98 + 234 + 1123
(20)
Where the values used are chosen by Planenergi and represents in total the heat
load for the boiler and ORC.
QORC = QORC,kW ∗3600 ∗PartLoad
(21)
The boiler’s operation BoilerON is turned on and oﬀdepending on these equa-
tions. If the remainder of time
8760 > Boilerstart, it returns 1 and 0 if it is not.
Where: Boilerstart is deﬁned under control cards constants. The equation is
81
==PAGE:87==
also saying that if the remainder of time
8760 < Boilerstop, it returns 1 and 0 if it is
not. The sum will determine if the ORC is turned on (1) or oﬀ(0).
TORC,limit,100 = 6450 + 250 −2000
(22)
TORC,limit = TORC,limit,100
100
(23)
The part load is determined in this way:
Part Load = BoilerON · 1 · (TORC,limit −TORC,in
5
)
(24)
0 ≤TORC,limit−TORC,in
5
≤1
By
Part Load100 = Part Load · 100
(25)
It is multiplied by 100.
PL1 = BoilerON + 1
(26)
PL2 = −1
(27)
PL3 = TORC,limit −TORC,in
5
+ 5
(28)
Where 0 ≤TORC,limit−TORC,in
5
≤1
∆TBoiler = 8 + 8
(29)
Control cards
In this setting one can deﬁne constants that will be used in the model. This
is where the input data such as η0, a1 and a2 as well as collector areas are deﬁned.
Cost Function
The operational cost equations are implemented in the TRNSYS model in order
to calculate the total energy cost. The operational price ([DKK/MWh]) for each
energy source are multiplied with the its energy production. Finally, the heat
price can be calculated by summing up the operational and ﬁnancial cost and
dividing the sum by the heat load.
Operational cost = SolarMW h·0+BoilerMW h·200+HPMW h·100+BiooilMW h·400
(30)
82
==PAGE:88==
The ﬁnal heat price can then be calculated like this:
Heat price = (Costoperational + Costfinancial)
Heat Load
(31)
CO2- HP - Heat pump model
This is a model that simulates the real CO2 heat pump. This component is not
using a regular default heat pump type from the software. Instead a ”equation”
is used, where several inputs are deﬁned and how they are implemented in
formulas in order to calculate the energy that is exhanged through the heat
pump so that a COP can be determined.
The ﬂow rate of hot side of the heat pump is calculated as:
mHP,hot =
QHP,hot
Cpwater ∗(THP,hot,out −THP,hot,in)
(32)
where ∆THP,hot ≥1
THP,cold,out = THP,cold,in −5
(33)
Where 5 ≤THP,cold,out ≤20◦C
The mass ﬂow rate of the cold side of the heat pump is calculated as:
mHP,cold =
QHP,Cold
Cpwater ∗((THP,cold,in −THP,cold,out),
(34)
where DeltaTHP,cold ≥1
The control of the heat pump is determined by:
ControlHP,H =
mHP,hot
mHP,hot,max
(35)
where mHP,hot,max ≥1
The HPon will determine of the heatpump is turned on or oﬀby using 0
or 1. This formula will determine if it is turned on or oﬀ. It will also give an
output in the simulation that states the amount of the operating hours for the
heat pump.
HPon = (remainder of time
24 )·0.5·(remainder of time
8760)+(remainder of time
8760)
(36)
If (remainder of time
24 ) < (12 + 1000) Return it as 1.
Else, return as 0
83
==PAGE:89==
If (remainder of time
8760 )(1) > HPstart,2 Return it as 1.
Else, return as 0.
If (remainder of time
8760 )(2) < HPstop,2 Return it as 1.
Else, return as 0.
Where HPstart,2 = 24 · 273
and HPstop,2 = 24 · 91
and time = simulation time
The consumed power of the heat pump in kJ per hour is calculated
PHPkJ pr h = PHP,kW · 3600 ∗HPon(THP,cold,in,step −5
10
)(45 −THP,hot,in
5
) (37)
where 0 ≤THP,cold,in,step−5
10
≤1
0 ≤( 45−THP,hot,in
5
) ≤1
HPonistheamountofheatpumpoperatinghours
Following this, the coeﬃcient of performance (COP) of heat of the heat pump
can be found
COPHP,hot = 2.81 +
40 −THP,hot,in
20

+ THP,cold,in,step−20
20
(38)
Here is the nominal heat input of the hot side of the heat pump calculated:
QHP,hot,nom = PHP,kJ,pr,h ∗COPHP,hot
(39)
The maximum heat input of the hot side of the heat pump is determined as:
QHP,hot,max = mHP,hot,max ∗Cpwater ∗(THP,hot,out −THP,hot,in)
(40)
By using the actual HP heat output and COP the actual power consumption of
the HP can be found.
PHP =
QHP,hot
COPHP,hot
(41)
The heat gain of the cold side of the heat pump is then found here:
QHP,cold = QHP,hot −PHP
(42)
where
84
==PAGE:90==
THP,hot,out = the lowest value of Tforward and THP,hot,out ≤80◦
PHP,kW = 475
QHP,hot,max ≥QHP,hot ≥QHP,hot,nom
Data reader and Radiation Processer -Weather data - Type 99
and Type 9
These components contains the weather data. It reads the data in regular time
intervals from a data ﬁle belonging to the speciﬁc location. These types con-
verts the weather data into a desired system of units and processes the solar
radiation data in order to get tilted surface radiation and angle of incidence
[18]. In this case, two diﬀerent data readers were used. The type 9 included
ambient air temperature, tilted beam and tilted diﬀuse solar radiation that was
retrieved from Marstal Fjernvarme’s own historical measurement data. The so-
lar radiation is sent trough the shadow-equation, which is then sent into the
collector type, while the ambient air temperature is sent directly into the col-
lector types. The type 99 was only used in the way that the input parameters
in the type itself was used to set the solar zenith angle, collector slope and inci-
dence angle. The reason for this was that the retrieved solar radiation data was
only measured as tilted and in order to use the type 99 for solar radiation, it
required horizontal radiation measurements. At the same time the type 9c did
not include incidence angle, collector slope and solar zenith angle. So, a compro-
mise was made, by using both readers at the same time for diﬀerent parameters.
Controlled ﬂow diverters - Type 11f
In this case of the type 11, it uses mode 2, which simulates a ﬂow diverter where
a single inlet liquid stream is split according to a user speciﬁed valve setting into
two liquid outlet streams. (ref) This type is used in the case of Div-C, Div-D,
Div-G, Div-A Investment and Div-H when splitting single ﬂows into two.
Dummy
This component has no actual function that is relevant for the model.
Global
The Global has the function of gathering diﬀerent parameters in one single equa-
tion component in order to have graphically simpler model with less connection
lines. The parameters are linked from the Weather data, the forward and re-
turn temperatures and Elspot hours. The following deﬁnitions are deﬁned in
the equation, giving the parameters new names, gathering them and sending
them into the printer in one connection.
Tamb = Tambient
Tf = Tforward
Tr = Treturn
Elspot = Elspothours
Elspot- Data reader For Generic Data Files
This is a data reader that contains an custom external ﬁle Elspotpriser w2015.txt,
85
==PAGE:91==
containing hourly electricity prices for year 2015 in DKK/kWh. This compo-
nent makes it possible to calculate the cost of energy at all times.
Heat Exchanger - HX-1
There are 5 heat exchangers where HX-1, HX-2 and HX-3 is connected to the
collectors, while HX-6 and HX-7 is connected to the pit heat storage. They are
all presented as custom made equation components where all of them contains
the exact same equations. The heat exchanger, exchanging heat from the col-
lector with the DH cycle is best explained from these equations.
Inputs:
THX,W S,in
mHX1,W S,in
THX1,CS,in
It is showing that the outlet temperature of the warm side of the heat exchanger
is gaining 3 ◦C
THX1,W S,out = THX1,CS,in + ∆THX1
(43)
Where ∆THX1 = 3 ◦C
The mass ﬂow rate is kept constant from the inlet of the warm side until the
outlet of the warm side.
mHX1,W S,out = mHX1,W S,in
(44)
THX1,CS,out = THX1,W S,in −∆THX1
(45)
Where ∆THX1 = 3 ◦C The warm side is losing 3 ◦C to the cold side.
In order to ﬁnd the mass ﬂow rate out of the cold side:
mHX1,CS,out = THX1,W S,in · Cpglycol
Cpwater
(46)
Heat Load
Where LoadMwh per year =29100 MWh per year which is the produced and sold
total energy to Marstal and Ommel in 2015 [24]
GAF is the part of the heat load that is dependant on the number of degree
days. Degree days is previously deﬁned.
GAFratio = 0.709
Degreehoursperyear = 61228 GUF is the part of the heat load that is in-
dependent of the number of degree days.
86
==PAGE:92==
The independent part load (GUF) is calculated in this equation:
GUFMW = (1 −GAFratio) · LoadMW hperyear
8760
(47)
Then the dependent part load (GAF) can be found:
GAFMW = GAFratio · LoadMW h,per,year · Degreedays
Degreehoursperyear
(48)
The total heat load is the sum of the independent and dependant heat load as
shown in equation 49
LoadkJ,per,hour = (GUFMW + GAFMW ) · 3.6 · 106
(49)
Finally, the mass ﬂow rate, based on the total heat load can be found:
mLoad =
LoadkJ,per,hour
Cpwater · (Tforward −Treturn)
(50)
If (Tforward −Treturn) < 1◦C
mLoad = LoadkJ,per,hour
Cpwater · 1
(51)
Integrator (Quantity Integrator) Type 24
This component integrates a series of quantities over a given time period. Type
24 have the ability to reset periodically after the simulation after a n amount
of hours or after a full month. When doing analysis of the system by making
graphs, diﬀerent time periods can be looked at suing this integrator.
MW-prod-macro
This equation box contains the equations that calculates the energy produced
by the energy sources that can not be stored. These are gathered here for easier
distribution trough a single connection line Firstly, the produced energy by all
3 collectors can be found as:
Qcoll1 = mcoll1 · Cpglycol · (Tcoll1,out −Tcoll1,in)
3.6 · 106
(52)
Qcoll2 = mcoll2 · Cpglycol · (Tcoll2,out −Tcoll2,in)
3.6 · 106
(53)
Qcoll3 = mcoll1 · Cpglycol · (Tcoll3,out −Tcoll3,in)
3.6 · 106
(54)
The heat produced on the cold side of the CO2 heat pump is shown as:
Qhp2,cs = mhp2,cs · Cpwater · (Thp2,cs,out −Thp2,cs,in)
3.6 · 106
(55)
87
==PAGE:93==
The heat used consumed on the warm side of the CO2 heat pump is shown
as:
Qhp2,ws = mhp2,ws · Cpwater · (Thp2,ws,out −Thp2,ws,in)
3.6 · 106
(56)
The energy produced in the ORC is determined through:
QORC = mORC · Cpwater · (TORC,out −TORC,in)
3.6 · 106
(57)
The energy saved in the economiser is determined by:
QECO = mECO · Cpwater · (TECO,out −TECO,in)
3.6 · 106
(58)
It is noteworthy to mention that, in TRNSYS the Cp if given in kJ/K and mass
ﬂow in kg/h which makes the unit of the Q kJ/h. That is why the equations
are divided by 3.6 ·106 in order to get MW.
QLoad = mLoad · Cpwater · (Treturn −Tforward)
3.6 · 106
(59)
The energy production also uses the mass ﬂow rate of the load. However, instead
of using the∆T of the return and the forward temperature like the QLoad, it
uses the ∆T between the the return temperature and the outlet temperature
of the heat load. This is to base the production on the diﬀerence between the
wanted heat load output and the actual return temperature.
QP rod = mLoad · Cpwater · (Treturn −TLoad,out)
3.6 · 106
(60)
The heat output of the bio oil is found by:
QBiooil = QBiooil,in
3.6 · 106
(61)
Where QBiooil,in is an input from the auxiliary heater called ”Biooil”.
MW-stores
In the equation MW-stores the diﬀerent storage technologies are contained as
stored energy.
QS2,l1toQS2,l4 Presents the inlets and outlets of the pit heat
storage and the energy ﬂow passing through.
Bottom outlet/inlet of pit heat storage:
Bottominlet/outlet : QS2,l1 = m · Cpwater · (Ts2,l1,out −Ts2,l1,in)
3.6 · 106
(62)
88
==PAGE:94==
Top inlet/outlet discharge and charge
Middleinlet : QS2,l2 = m · Cpwater · (Ts2,l2,out −Ts2,l2,in)
3.6 · 106
(63)
The middle outlet energy discharge/charge is determined here:
Bottominlet : QS2,l3 = m · Cpwater · (Ts2,l3,out −Ts2,l3,in)
3.6 · 106
(64)
QS2,l4 = m · Cpwater · (Ts2,l4,out −Ts2,l4,in)
3.6 · 106
(65)
The following equations calculates the energy stored in diﬀerent components:
The equation presents the produced energy related to the ORC
QS3,l1 = m · Cpwater · (Ts3,l1,out −Ts3,l1,in)
3.6 · 106
(66)
The equation below determines the discharge energy from the outlet at the
top of the tank.
QS3,l2 = m · Cpwater · (Ts3,l2,out −Ts3,l2,in)
3.6 · 106
(67)
This equation shows the sum of all the energy stored by all collectors and dis-
charged in the pit heat storage.
QS3,l3 = m · Cpwater · (Ts3,l3,out −Ts3,l3,in)
3.6 · 106
(68)
QS3,l4 = m · Cpwater · (Ts3,l4,out −Ts3,l4,in)
3.6 · 106
(69)
The equation below shows the stored energy of the ORC.
QS3,l5 = m · Cpwater · (Ts3,l5,out −Ts3,l5,in)
3.6 · 106
(70)
Online graphical plotter - Type 65d
This online graphics component displays the system results while simulation is
running, therefore it is ”online”. The online plotting function is an advantage
when ensuring that the system is running satisfactory. The online graphs will
be presented in a separate window. In the case of the plotting of the diﬀerent
energy technologies in this model, the Type 65 is chosen. The type 65 gener-
ates no output data ﬁle, but the printers takes care of that In this model, the
online plotters are connected to and plots the temperatures, CO2 Heat pump
performance and the ORC performance.
Pit heat storage - • Multi-Flow Stratiﬁed Thermal Storage Model
with Fully Mixed Layers - TYPE 342
89
==PAGE:95==
The pit heat storage component used is stratiﬁed storage temperature model
made in the University of Lund in 1989. It is a mathematically smart and eﬃ-
cient TRNSYS model. It is coupled to the ground without insulation, making
the ground a part of the storage capacity(ref). This model simulates heat stor-
age. As the storage is buried under ground it is necessary to deﬁne the location
of the model in the ground, especially considering the location’s aﬀect on the
storage capacity. This is done by dividing both the tank and the ground into
layers. The storage is divided into max 10 layers, while the ground is divided
into maximum 90 ground layers. These are not the same type of layers. In the
parameter window the pit storage can be edited. Parameter 2 means that the
number of tank layers are deﬁned as segments, in which it is used 11 layers in
this case. Parameter 3, iconv, determines the degree of mixing. A value of 1 is
chosen which determines that it has mixing of adjacent segments where ther-
mal inversion is detected. Parameter 4, Nﬂow gives the number of ﬂowstreams
through the storage, where in this case 4 ﬂow streams are chosen. NPin and
NPout, determines the amount of inlets and outlets, where a value of 0 deﬁnes
it as a continuous moveable inlet. The Joutj gives the location accordingly to
the 90 ground layers. In this case there are no amount of inlets Jinj as, they
are moveable. The thermal gradient in the undisturbed ground is set to 0.03
◦C /m. This means that temperature is dropping by 0.03 ◦C per meter up-
wards in the ground. The number of preheat cycles is set to 0 as there is no
preheating of the ground from the tank. One 100 m thick ground layer is chosen.
Positive This equation component ensures that a positive value is returned
Positive1 = Input1
(71)
If Positive1 < 0 Then Positive1 = 0
Positive2 = Input2
(72)
If Positive2 < 0 Then Positive2 = 0
Printers (User-Supplied Units) - Type 25b ad Type 25b-2
This printer gathers all the results and prints them onto a text ﬁle. The printer
component outputs chosen system variables as speciﬁed time intervals. In the
mode of Type 25b, the user is required to set units. These units are printed out
along with the simulation results and their respective columns.
Shadow
This is the shadow equation that simulates shadow that are likely to fall on the
collectors due to their dimensions and location. Inputs:
SolarZenith
90
==PAGE:96==
Radiationbeam,tilted
Radiationskydiffuse,tilted
Where Slopefield = 0 and HeightCollector = 2.275
Angleshadow = arctan(
sin(SlopeColl −SlopeF ield)
Distancerow
HeightColl ·
2
cos(Slopefield) −(cos(SlopeColl −Slopefield)−SlopeF ield
(73)
If
Distancerow
HeightColl ·
2
cos(Slopefield −(cos(SlopeColl −Slopefield) < 1 · 103 It is
replaced with 1 · 103
Shadowbeam,rad = Radbeam,tilted · (
DistanceRow
HeightColl
cos(Slopefield)·sin(90−Solarzenith+Slopefield)
sin(90·Solarzenith+SlopeColl)
(74)
If the expression in the fraction < 0, 0 is replaced with the fraction. If not, the
expression stays the same.
Shadowrad,diff = Radsky,diff,tilt · (180 −SlopeColl −AngleShadow)
(180 −SlopeColl)
(75)
Where: Interval = [0,1]
and (180 −SlopeColl) ≤1 · 10−6
ShadowRad,total = Factorrad · (Shadowbeam,rad + Shadowrad,diff)
(76)
Simple Control
The Simple Control, controls the distribution of ﬂow through the shunt valves
Div C, Div D, Div G, Tee CDG and Shunt-2.
Controlsimple,A =
Asimple,m2
Asimple,m2 + Asimple,m2
(77)
Where Controlsimple,A is...
Asimple,m2 is
Asimple,m2 is
91
==PAGE:97==
/Asimple,m2 + Asimple,m2) ≥1 · 10−6
Controlsimple,C = 80 −Tsimple,C
10
0 ≤Controlsimple,C ≤1
Controlsimple,D is decoupled as it linked to the old components that were re-
moved in the inital model mave by Niels From, Planenergi.
Controlsimple,G = 80 −Tsimple,G
10
0 ≤Controlsimple,G ≤1
Controlshunt 2 =
(Tshunt2 high−Tforward)
(Tshunt2 high−Tshunt2 low)
Controlshunt 2 ≥0
Controlshunt 2 ≥1
(Tshunt2 high −Tshunt2 low) ≤1
Advanced Control
These advanced control setting operates the control of the heat exchanger HX-6.
HX6m = (70000 −HX5m) · (TStore T opstep −Tstore2 topstep −5)
2
(78)
Where 0 ≤(TStore T opstep−Tstore2 topstep−5)
2
≤1
Where TStore T opstep is..
and Tstore2 topstep is...
Tempering valve(Shunt)- Type 11b
The Type 11 model models a temperature controlled liquid ﬂow diverter. In the
parameters of this chosen component, mode 4 is chosen which sends the whole
ﬂow stream is sent through outlet 1 when the heat source ﬂuid temperature
(Th)≤Temperature of inlet ﬂuid. (ref)
Solar collector Types - Quadratic Eﬃciency 2nd Order Incidence
Angle Modiﬁer
This TRNSYS component is supposed to simulate a real life ﬂate plate solar
92
==PAGE:98==
collector. It gives the user the option of connecting the collectors in series and
parallels. However, the thermal performance of the collector array is determined
by the technical speciﬁcation of each module and by the number of modules in
series. In this type, Type 1 a second order quadratic function is used to compute
the incidence angle modiﬁer. These solar collector models has diﬀerent parame-
ters: amount of collectors in series, collector area, speciﬁc heat of ﬂuid, eﬃciency
mode, tested ﬂow rate, intercept eﬃciency (η0), eﬃciency curve, the option of
turning the second order incidence angle on and oﬀ, ﬁrst order incidence angle,
second order incidence angle. The eﬃciency mode parameter deﬁnes on what
kind basis the eﬃciency of the collector is calculated on. In collector 1, the
eﬃciency parameters are given as a function of the average temperature. The
collector types also uses inputs such as inlet ﬂow rate and temperature, ambient
temperature, incident radiation, total horizontal radiation, horizontal diﬀuse ra-
diation, ground reﬂectance, incidence angle and collector slope. The ouputs are
outlet temperature and ﬂow as well useful energy gain as a all the inputs will
inﬂuence and calculate these outputs. All three solar collector models use the
same type of parameter, inputs and outputs, but are distinguished by area or
collector ﬁeld and diﬀerent technical properties due to diﬀerent collector types.
Solar pump
The solar pump is the component that is actually giving the needed mass ﬂow
rate through the collector which is then entering the inlet of the nearby heat
exchanger. There are three diﬀerent pumps - one for each collector ﬁeld. They
use mainly the same settings, formulas and constants, but the max capacity of
the pump that operates the largest ﬁeld is higher. The solar pump’s mass ﬂow
is determined by the following the equations:
∆TColl1,out = 5◦C
TColl1,out,min = 33◦C
If TColl1,out,min > (TColl1,in + ∆TColl1,out)
TColl1,out = TColl1,out,min
(79)
If TColl1,out,min < (TColl1,in + ∆TColl1,out)
TColl1,out = (TColl1,in + ∆TColl1,out)
(80)
∆TColl1 = (TColl1,in + TColl1,out
2
) −Tambient
(81)
mColl1 = A · (η0 · G −a1 · ∆TColl1 −a2 · ∆T2
Coll1)
Cpglycol ∗(TColl1,out −TColl1,in)
(82)
TColl1,out −TColl1,in ≥1
93
==PAGE:99==
max capacity ratio:
capP ump1,max = mP ump,in ∗1000 ∗Cpwater
Cpglycol
(83)
Where capP ump,in = 180 Min capactiy ratio
mP ump1,min = mP ump1,max ∗0.15
(84)
The mass ﬂow rate through the pump is found as If mpump1,min > capP ump1,maxormcoll1
then:
mpump1 = capP ump,min
(85)
mpump1,min ≥1 · 10−6
If capP ump1,maxormcoll1 > mpump1,min, then mpump1 = capP ump1,max or
mcoll1 depending on which is the largest value.
If mcoll1 < capP ump,min the mpump1 = 0 And it stops operating.
Summa
In the ”Summa”-equation various energy technologies are summed up in order
to make a better overview of the model and less need for connection.
All 3 solar collectors are summed up:
colls = Coll1 + Coll2 + Coll3
(86)
The heat pump energy balance is shown:
heatpumps = hp2ws −hp2cs
(87)
Where Hp2ws is the warm side of the heatpump while hp2cs is the cold side.
The energy produced by burning of the woodchips is calculated here:
Woodchips = ORC + cond
(88)
The energy produced by the biooil is deﬁned in this connection.
Biooil = bio
(89)
Tee-piece - Type 11h
This version of Type 11 uses mode 1 which makes the tee piece mix together two
separate inlet liquid streams into a single liquid outlet stream. This is used and
operated in the case of Tee-A, T-CDG, Tee-H, Tee-1, Tee-2, T-mid 1, T-mid 2,
T-mid 3 and T-high.
T forward and T return Schedules - Type 14e
Time Dependent Forcing Function: Temperature. The pattern of the forcing
function is determined by a set of discrete data points indicating the value of
the function at diﬀerent times during a schedule or cycle.The continuous forcing
function is generated by linear interpolation. The schedule repeats every N hours
where N is the last value of time speciﬁed.(manual ref)
94
==PAGE:100==
List of Figures
1
Principle sketch of a centralized solar district heating plant
. . .
2
2
Principle sketch of a distributed solar district heating plant . . .
3
3
Principle drawings of 4 types of underground thermal energy storage
4
4
Principle drawing of a heat pump process . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
5
Flow chart of how the ORC functions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
6
Principle sketch of how a solar collector functions
. . . . . . . .
7
7
Eﬃciency diagram for a solar collector based on its η0, a1 and a2
8
8
A diagram showing IAM as a function of the incidence angle
. .
9
9
A ﬁgure showing a graphical presentation of the incidence angle .
9
10
A geographical overview of the diﬀerent collectors and utilities at
Marstal Fjernvarme in Ærø, Denmark
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
11
A picture inside the left side of the main control house where heat
from the Sunstore 4 pit storage enters in continues to the DH
network. Heat from the other collector ﬁelds is also exchanged
back to the pit. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
12
The large heat exchanger in picture sends heat from Sunstore 1
and 2 collectors back to the pit heat storage.
. . . . . . . . . . .
14
13
This is a smaller heat exchanger that exchanges heat between the
pit and the district heating network.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
14
A picture of the CO2 Heat Pump inside a technical room. 16
green compressors is placed on the left side.
The return and
forward pipes enters and exits on the right side . . . . . . . . . .
15
15
The technical room inside the main operation house where both
the Sunstore 1 and 2 enters. The two heat exchangers work in
parallel to exhange the heat from Sunstore 1 collectors in to the
storage tank or out in the network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
16
A simple ﬂow principle diagram for the whole system where all
Sunstores is working together . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
17
A simple drawing of the geometry of the pit heat storage
. . . .
18
18
Technical drawings of the pit with dimensions . . . . . . . . . . .
18
20
A picture taken of the pit heat storage during construction in 2011 19
19
Technical drawing of the pit heat storage showing the pipes used
for charging and discharging.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
21
Principle of the heat pump installed at Marstal Fjernvarme . . .
20
22
The accumulation tank . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
23
The ORC cycle process [16] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
24
A pile with the wood chip used for fuelling of the boiler
. . . . .
22
25
A picture taken inside the plant showing the boiler in red. . . . .
22
26
The ORC turbine that generated electricity from the heated oil
caused by wood chip combustion in the boiler . . . . . . . . . . .
22
27
A picture taken of the screen of the surveilance computers in the
control room. This shows the energy ﬂow all technologies in the
plant.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
95
==PAGE:101==
28
A screenshot of the TRNSYS Simulation Studio that shows a
graphical operation of the model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
29
Type 340 Accumlation tank model - Multiport Store . . . . . . .
28
30
Solar radiation sensor that measures the direct radiation mounted
on collector arrays in Sunstore 1 and 2 collector ﬁelds
. . . . . .
34
31
The sensor that measures diﬀuse solar radiation.
. . . . . . . . .
34
32
A screen shot of the excel spreadsheet used for calculating the
Degree hours. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
33
A screen shot of the excel spreadsheet used for calculating the
Degree days.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
34
Label mounted on the solar collector in Sunstore 1 collector ﬁeld
39
35
Label mounted on the solar collector in Sunstore 2 collector ﬁeld
39
36
Label mounted on the solar collector in Sunstore 4 collector ﬁeld
39
37
A picture of screen of the surveilance computers in the control
room. In this example the formulas are used for calculating the
ﬂow of solar collector pump . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
38
Pit heat storage with its inlets/outlet for charging and discharg-
ing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
39
A bar chart comparing the modelled total energy output(blue)
with the measured total energy output (orange) . . . . . . . . . .
46
40
Flow chart showing the measured energy ﬂows in the plant in
2015.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
41
Input/output diagram for the Sunstore 1 collector ﬁeld using the
Case C input that shows collector output [kWh/m2/day] as a
function of Total solar radiation [kWh/m2/day]
. . . . . . . . .
48
42
Input/output diagram for the Sunstore 2 collector ﬁeld using the
Case C input that shows collector output [kWh/m2/day] as a
function of Total solar radiation [kWh/m2/day]
. . . . . . . . .
49
43
Input/output diagram for the Sunstore 4 collector ﬁeld using the
Case C input that shows collector output [kWh/m2/day] as a
function of total solar radiation [kWh/m2/day] . . . . . . . . . .
49
44
Diagram that shows the collector output [kWh/m2/day] as a
function of time [days] for both modelled and measured for Sun-
store 1 Collectors using case C inputs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
45
Diagram that shows the collector output [kWh/m2/day] as a
function of time [days] for both modelled and measured for Sun-
store 2 Collectors using case C inputs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
46
Diagram that shows the collector output [kWh/m2/day] as a
function of time [days] for both modelled and measured for Sun-
store 4 Collectors using case C inputs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
47
Plot diagram showing the mean collecture temperature minus
the ambient air temperature [C◦] as a function of Total solar
radiation[kWh/m2] for Sunstore 2 collectors using case C input.
52
48
Plot diagram showing the mean collector temperature minus the
ambient air temperature [C◦] as a function of Total solar radiation[kWh/m2]
for Sunstore 4 collectors using case C input. . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
96
==PAGE:102==
49
Collector output as a function of time [days] when the data has
not been peak adjusted. This diagrams represents the Sunstore
1 collectors using case C input
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
50
This is a copy of ﬁgure 44 where the data is peak adjusted. This
also represents the Sunstore 1 collectors using Case C input . . .
54
51
Collector output as a function of time [days] when the data has
not been peak adjusted. This diagrams represents the Sunstore
2 collectors using case C input
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
52
This is a copy of ﬁgure 45 where the data is peak adjusted. This
also represents the Sunstore21 collectors using Case C input . . .
54
53
Collector output as a function of time [days] when the data has
not been peak adjusted. This diagrams represents the Sunstore
4 collectors using case C input
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
54
This is a copy of ﬁgure 46 where the data is peak adjusted. This
also represents the Sunstore 4 collectors using Case C input . . .
54
55
Diagram of mean collector temperature - ambient air temperature
as a function of Total solar radiation based on radiation data has
not been peak adjusted. This diagram represents the Sunstore 2
collectors using Case C input . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
56
This is a copy of ﬁgure 47 that uses peak adjusted radiation data.
Sunstore 2 collectors using Case C input . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
57
Diagram of mean collector temperature - ambient air temperature
as a function of Total solar radiation based on radiation data has
not been peak adjusted. This diagram represents the Sunstore 4
collectors using Case C input . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
58
This is a copy of ﬁgure 48 that uses peak adjusted radiation data.
Sunstore 4 collectors using case C input . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
59
Diagram showing energy ﬂow [MW] as a function of time [hours].
The heat pump output energy in the measured system is the blue
curve, while the heat source for the modelled heat pump is orange
curve.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
60
Diagram showing Energy ﬂow[MW] from Sunstore 4 collectors
charging as a function of time [days].
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
61
Plot diagram showing the diﬀerent temperatures through the dif-
ferent depths of the measured storage pit.
The yellow curve
gives the average temperature for the diﬀerent depths on Jan-
uary 1st 2015 an the blue curve gives the average temperature of
the depths December 31st 2015 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
62
Plot diagram showing the diﬀerent temperatures through 3 diﬀer-
ent depths of the modelled storage pit. The yellow curve gives the
average temperature for the diﬀerent depths on January 1st 2015
an the blue curve gives the average temperature of the depths
December 31st 2015
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
63
Diagram showing the temperature through the bottom inlet/outlet
for the measured(orange) and modelled(blue) storage on an hourly
basis during year 2015 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
97
==PAGE:103==
64
Diagram showing the temperature through the middle inlet/outlet
for the measured(orange) and modelled(blue) storage on an hourly
basis during year 2015 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
65
Diagram showing the temperature through the top inlet/outlet
for the measured(orange) and modelled(blue) storage on an hourly
basis during year 2015 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
66
This is data sheet for the Solar collector installed in the Sunstore
1 collector ﬁeld, AR-CON HT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
68
This is the data sheet for the This is the data sheet for the Arcon
HT - A 28/10 solar collectors installed in the Sunstore 2 collector
ﬁeld. The η0, a1 and a2 from this description was later chosen
not to be used in the detailed validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
67
This is the data sheet for the Arcon HT - A 28/10 solar collectors
installed in the Sunstore 2 collector ﬁeld. The η0, a1 and a2 from
this description was later chosen not to be used in the detailed
validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
69
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
70
The data sheet for the Sunmark 14 m2 collector installed in the
Sunstore 4 collector ﬁeld.The η0, a1 and a2 from this description
was later chosen not to be used in the detailed validation
. . . .
76
71
Test report of the Arcon HT - A 28/10 Collectors installed in the
Sunstore 2 collector ﬁeld . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
72
Test report of the Sunmark 14 m2 installed in the Sunstore 4
collector ﬁeld . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
73
Test report of the Sunmark 14 m2 installed in the Sunstore 4
collector ﬁeld . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
References
[1] S. D. Heating, “Solar district heating homepage,” 2017.
[2] N. Stenkjaer, “Large solar heating plants,” 2010.
[3] wikipedia. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sensible heat, March 2017. Ac-
cessed: 2017-06-12.
[4] B. W. Pavlov, Georgi Krasimiroy; Olesen, “Seasonal ground solar thermal
energy storage - review of systems and applications,” in •.
[5] Advansor, “Sunstore 4 deliverable d.2.6 design of the heat pump,” 2013.
[6] Grundfos,
“Cop
(coeﬃcient
of
performance).”
http://www.grundfos.com/service/encyclopedia-search/cop-coeﬃcient-
ofperformance.html. Accessed: 2017-06-12.
[7] B. E. R. Center, “Biomass community district energy systems,” •, 2007.
98
==PAGE:104==
[8] www.decentralized
energy.com,
“Orc
technology
with
biomass
its
use
for
wood
pellet
production.”
http://www.decentralized-
energy.com/articles/print/volume-11/issue-5/features/orc-technology-
with-biomass-its-use-for-wood-pellet-production.html, September 2010.
[9] www.solarserver.com
Global
Solar
Industry
Website,
“Solar
collec-
tors:
Diﬀerent types and ﬁelds of application.” Article on website,
April 2011.
Available at http://www.solarserver.com/knowledge/basic-
knowledge/solar-collectors.html.
[10] S. S. D. Heating, Solar district heating guidelines - Solar Collectors. SDH
- Solar District Heating.
[11] K. Hermansen, En solstr˚alehistorie - Marstal Fjernvarme 1962 - 2012.
2012.
[12] In conference with staﬀof Marstal Fjernvarme, 2017.
[13] Deliverable D 2 2 SUNSTORE 4 Design of the pit heat storage Version
3.pdf.
[14] Planenergi, “Damvarmelager geometri marstal 2-em,”
[15] E. AS and BIOS, Design of the biomass boiler of the demonstration plant
at Marstal Fjernvarme, 2013.
[16] Graz, Design of the organic rankine cycle part of the total energy system,
2011.
[17] TRNSYS.com, “What is trnsys?.” http://trnsys.com/, 2017.
[18] TRNSYS17, “Trnsys 17 - a transient system simulation program,” 2017.
[19] “Conference with bengt perers,” 2017.
[20] T. I.-E. o. k. Jens Chr. Sørensen, “Graddage - hva er graddage.” website,
2017. ”https://www.teknologisk.dk/graddage/hvad-er-graddage/492,3”.
[21] Nordpool, “Historical market data electricity spot prices for 2015.” Internet
web page.
[22] P. A. Sørensen, “Sunstore 2 10 000 m2 of solar collectors and 10 000 m3
water storage in marstal, dk,” 2002.
[23] P. H. Bengt Perers, Heimo Zinko, Analytical model for the daily energy
input-output relationship for solar collector system. Swedish Council for
Building Research, 1985. This document refers to research grant 811770-6
from the Swedish Council for building research to Studsvik Energiteknik
Ab, Nyk¨oping.
[24] M. Fjernvarme, “Fjernvarme produktion 2015,” 2017.
99
