==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
A flexible and configurable framework for
collecting data from devices via smartphones
Theodoros Sevvos (s150902)
Kongens Lyngby 2017
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary
Today, there are many devices for different purposes and uses. These devices can
provide many different types of data. Most of these data have to be stored for various
reasons such as data analysis or for future use. In order to store data from different
devices, the developer needs to program each device separately. Currently, there is no
single framework which supports data collection and configuration for every device,
such as mobile phone, sensor and so on. The developer has to spend much time to
design an application’s data model and how he will send and store his data. His
solution is limited to his devices. Therefore, he has to implement a new solution for
a new device from the beginning.
Furthermore, when it comes to data configuration, right now, two types of so-
lutions exist. In the first type of solution, the developer can select his data to be
completely private. Nevertheless, there are cases when the developer wants to share
some of his data with a third party for a specific period. In the second type of solution,
the developer can store data from a device as fully public. In that case, though, the
developer’s data can be exposed to third parties without him being aware. Presently,
a developer can choose between these two types of solutions and the mentioned draw-
backs.
In this project, we designed and implemented a framework which will help de-
velopers to collect data from devices. They can save time for data collection since
they won’t need to implement a new solution for every device. The framework will
collect the data flexibly since different devices can send or receive data just by using
it. This framework is open to any technology, which means a new device could easily
be integrated with it. It can also configure the form of the data, in terms of how
they should be stored, based on the developer’s needs. Furthermore, this framework
can provide control to the owner of the data. He can choose who can access his data.
He can also configure the type of access, in terms of reading or modifying his data.
Lastly, the developer can choose the specific period in which someone can access his
data. The purpose of this implementation is to provide an easy way for a developer
to store data regardless of the device of choice as well as the protection of his data in
terms of privacy and access.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This Master thesis was prepared at the department of Applied Mathematics and
Computer Science at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the re-
quirements for acquiring a Master degree in Computer Science and Engineering.
Kongens Lyngby, June 22, 2017
Theodoros Sevvos (s150902)Theodoros Sevvos
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Summary
i
Preface
iii
Contents
v
1
Introduction
1
2
Overall description and analysis of the health-data service
3
2.1
General Usage scenario . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Hospital Domain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Roles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.4
Domain model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3
Requirements of the Health-Data Service
9
3.1
Use Cases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
MoSCoW analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.3
Non-functional Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4
Analysis of the data transfer in wearables
27
4.1
Devices for Data collection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.2
Data transfer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.3
Data Storage Issues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.4
Authentication and Authorization Issues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.5
Data manipulation issues
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5
Design of the Health-Data service
33
5.1
Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.2
Authentication in Health-Data Service . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.3
OAuth 2.0 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.4
Design of the Authentication and Authorization in health-data service
42
6
Implementation of the Health-Data Service
45
6.1
RESTful API . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
6.2
JSON Web Token . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
6.3
Endpoints and JSON format for the Health-Data service . . . . . . . .
47
==PAGE:8==
vi
Contents
6.4
Database schema . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
7
Health-Data service UI
59
8
Implementation tools for the health-data service
65
8.1
Programming language . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
8.2
Database
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
9
Evaluation of the project
69
9.1
Discussion about the implementation of the health-data service . . . .
69
9.2
Main scenario for user and software engineer
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
9.3
Data collection and storage scenario
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
10 Conclusion
81
10.1 Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
10.2 Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
11 Glossary
83
12 Appendix
85
12.1 Additional Interfaces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
12.2 Additional Endpoints . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
86
Bibliography
89
==PAGE:9==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
The Internet of things (IoT), a very popular term these days, refers to the inter-
connection of devices, possible of collecting or exchanging data, in a global network
infrastructure [Atz10]. Nowadays, IoT can be found in many areas. One of these
areas is healthcare and how it is possible to remotely monitor patients and collect
data about their health condition [Kuo11].
What is more, cloud computing refers to an on-demand, self-service Internet infra-
structure that enables the user to access computing resources anytime from anywhere
[MG09]. It is a way to deliver computing resources. Many studies showed that cloud
computing can also be very helpful in healthcare services [Kuo11].
More and more people every day use wearable devices such as smartwatches. These
devices, as well as smartphones, have sensors which can provide us with information
about the user such as his heart rate or his activities (running, walking and so on).
The collection of these types of data could be used for scientific or other purposes,
such as patient monitoring, in healthcare services [Kuo11].
Studies suggest that a combination of cloud computing and IoT could be beneficial
for healthcare [FS16]. I.e., a hospital could collect patients vital data using a network
of sensors, store the data and later process or share the data with other hospitals or
doctors for better monitoring. The role of the sensor can be played by the wearables
and smartwatches. However, this perspective meets some challenges.
One of the challenges in the internet of things is heterogeneity of the participating
objects. These objects can use different technologies in terms of hardware, software
and how the data are structured and stored. Therefore, it is very difficult for a service
to collect directly all the data and also to allow new devices to be connected to the
system. The key to this problem could be played by a middleware which can be
responsible for the abstraction of the functionalities and communication capabilities
of the different devices [Atz10].
One more challenge is the data sharing among different users. It is necessary to
secure that no one can have access to all these data without a permission. Hence,
rights and permissions controls need to be made in the service in order to monitor
who has access to the data. The permissions need to be assigned to other users by
the owner of the data.
Based on the above challenges, this thesis introduces a service responsible for
collecting data from different devices, like the wearables mentioned before, store the
data and allow to different users to see, share and process the data based on the
permission. The service will be independent of the device’s technology. Every device
can be registered to the service and send its data.
==PAGE:10==
2
1 Introduction
The way of communication between the devices and the service is discussed in
the thesis. Moreover, the service will secure the privacy of the data which means
that access to them will be provided only to authorized users. The service is called
health-data service and this is the name we will use in this thesis.
What is more, we will introduce the main use cases for the interaction among the
user of the device, the device itself and the service as well. The architecture of the
service will be shown and the challenges that we met will be discussed. In the next
chapter, we will describe some usages scenarios of the health-data service which will
lead us to the overview of the software.
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 2
Overall description and
analysis of the health-data
service
This chapter describes the main features of the health-data service through some
usage scenarios. First, we introduce a general usage scenario of what the users could
do with the health-data service. Then, we will use concrete scenarios of how the
health-data service could be used in the hospital domain. Based on the scenarios,
we describe the main actors in the health-data service.
At last, having the main
understanding of the functionalities of the health-data service, the domain model of
the health-data service and its components will be developed and discussed.
2.1
General Usage scenario
A general scenario for the usage of the health-data service will be described in this
section. A general usage scenario will help to acquire a basic understanding of the
main features that the health-data service can provide. First, owners with different
wearables, i.e. smartwatches, use their wearables to collect data for them such as
calories or steps per day. Users devices would like to store their collected data and
have access to them anytime using a mobile application which will collect the data
from the wearables and send them to the health-data service. The users use the mobile
application to register themselves and their wearables to the health-data service.
On the other hand, the health-data service will need to know the type of device
and what kind of data will be sent, so it can store them properly. Therefore, an expert
user will use a browser to connect to the service and register the different types of
devices.
Moreover, groups such as research teams or hospital doctors will have to connect
and register to the health-data service and have access to other people’s data. The
owner of the data will allow, using the health-data service, other users to have access
to their data. They would also like decide the device to which they will provide access
or to which data, i.e. steps.
==PAGE:12==
4
2 Overall description and analysis of the health-data service
In this general scenario, we go through different actions of the users. Users could
use the health-data service to store the data (data storage), other users were respon-
sible for helping this procedure by informing the service with the types of the data
and the devices (device and data type registration). Other users wanted access to
other user data via the service (data access) but only after the owner of the data
allows that (data permission). In the next section, we will proceed in more concrete
scenarios regarding the hospital domain.
2.2
Hospital Domain
In the previous section, a general scenario how different users will interact with the
health-data service was explained. In this section, to achieve a better understanding
of the health-data service, concrete scenarios in hospital domain will be described.
Hospital domain can make use of the functionalities of the health-data service in
terms of collecting and sharing data. The concrete scenarios are separated based on
the features of the health-data service. The first scenario is about data storage of
different devices of different users. The scenario will also include a software engineer,
working for the hospital, and how he will register some hospital devices as new de-
vice types, device type registration,to the health-data service. The second scenario
is about data access to the stored data from hospital doctors and how a doctor can
create a group of patients and doctors and have access to specific data after the given
permission of patients.
Data storage and Device Type Registration
A hospital wants to track the activities of patients with heart problems and see how
the activities affect the performance of their heart. Thus, the hospital will provide
the patients with health devices and a mobile application responsible for communi-
cating with the devices. A software engineer will sign in to the health-data service
and he will add the health devices as new device types. He will also implement the
mobile application so it can communicate with the health-data service and install it
to patients mobile phones. Then, the patients use the mobile application, through
their mobile phones, to register to the health-data service and also assign the given
devices to their accounts. The patients wear the health devices. The health-devices,
with the use of the mobile application, send the data, related to the heart, to the
health-data service which stores them.
==PAGE:13==
2.3 Roles
5
Data access and permission
The hospital’s cardiologist is responsible for monitoring hospital’s patients’ heart
condition collected from hospital’s devices. Patients’ health devices are already reg-
istered to the health-data service. The cardiologist uses the health-data service to
create a project with him as an owner. The patients then are added to the project
with the role of ”Patient”, created by the cardiologist and share their data about
their heart condition. The cardiologist can now search, using the web application, to
the service and have access to patients’ data.
A Ph.D. student at the hospital wants to use some of the heart data for his
research project. Therefore, he asks the cardiologist if he can include him into the
project. The cardiologist adds Ph.D. student to the project under the role of ”Ph.D.
student”. The cardiologist gives him access to the data of the patients for the last
three months. Moreover, patients can see from hospital’s application to which projects
and are related to, as well as the roles and members of each project. In that case, the
cardiologist(owner) and the Ph.D. student (”Ph.D. Student”).
2.3
Roles
As it can be seen in the concrete scenarios, Section 2.2, two kinds of people interact
with the service. The first one uses the service in order to see, collect or share data
while the other one is responsible for the technical part of the device and how to
register them to he health-data service. A description of each role, related to the
service, can be seen below.
User: User is the person who uses the service through other devices or software
such as smartphones or web applications implemented by an engineer. The user does
not know how to interact directly with the service. A user can be a doctor who is
registered to the health-data service and wants to see his patients data, as it men-
tioned before. He can also be the owner of a device which has a project with him as
an owner and checks his very own data.
Software engineer: A software engineer is a person who knows how to commu-
nicate with the health-data service and is capable of developing applications which
can interact with the service. He knows how to create a new device and data type to
the health-data.
Having the roles and the concrete scenarios set, the next section will give an overall
description of the health-data service and its different parts with the use of a domain
model.
==PAGE:14==
6
2 Overall description and analysis of the health-data service
2.4
Domain model
In the previous sections, concrete scenarios and the roles of the users who will interact
with the service were described. In this section, a closer look to the health-data service
will be taken. The domain model of the health-data service will give us a brief analysis
of the different elements, based on the scenarios, that the health-data service can have.
Figure 2.1 shows the domain model. The main elements of the domain model are the
Project, the User, and the Device.
DeviceType
Name: String
Description: String
DataType
Name: String
Structure: String
Permission
Role: Integer
DeviceId: Integer
DatatypeId: Integer
startDate: Date
endDate: Date
Data
DateTime: TimeStamp
Value: String
Device
Name: String
Description: String
Role
Name: String
Description: String
User
Username: String
FirstName: String
LastName: String
Password: String
Project
Name: String
Description: String
OwnerId: Integer
1..*
1..*
1..*
1..1
Owner
1..1
1..1
1..*
1..*
1..*
1..1
1..1
1..*
1..*
0..*
0..*
1..1
0..*
0..*
1..*
1..*
1..*
1..*
1..*
Figure 2.1: Domain model of the health-data service.
Project
Project is an element describing how a group of users share their data. Users par-
ticipate in a project under a specific title which is their role in the project. Users in
the project can have more than one role and they can also have other roles to other
projects. The users can create their own project and add other users into it with
different roles. Different roles mean different access to the users’ data. The roles can
be created by the owner of the project only. A user with a role can register his device
to the project. Registering his device, the owner of the device can decide which data
of the device can be accessed by the other users of the projects under a specific role.
==PAGE:15==
2.4 Domain model
7
User
User is the person who will interact with the health-data service regarding seeing
or sharing data. The user needs to have an account in the health-data service. User
can be the owner of a device which wants to register and keep track of his data. One
more user could be a researcher who wants access to someone’s data. This type of
user may not have a device to register. However, on one occasion a user can be a
researcher or a doctor, but he may also be the owner of a device for personal use.
Based on Figure 2.1 the user is associated with a project either through a role or
being the owner of it. Any user can create his own project.
Device
Device can be of any type such as a wearable or a mobile smartphone provided with a
connector in order to communicate with our health-data service. The device needs to
be registered to the system by the user first. The purpose of the device would be to
collect data from the user and then send them to the health-data service for storage.
The device can be either a product from the current market or a custom made for the
purpose of a team. What is more, the device can use several data types. The device
can use the same data types or the user can create a new data type for a specific device.
Device Type
Device type is the type of the device can be. By the type, it is meant what type
of data this device type can send. Many devices can share the same type and so forth
the same group of data types. One device can have only one device type. Moreover,
the health-data service uses the device type in order to find the appropriate connector
to receive data from the devices.
Data Type
Data type describes the structure of the values that a device can be associated with,
i.e. heart rate, energy and so on. The structure of a data type means how the data
will be sent in order be stored. Data can have a different structure based on their na-
ture. Different types of device may support the same data representation. Therefore,
these devices are connected with the same data type.
==PAGE:16==
8
2 Overall description and analysis of the health-data service
Role
The user is assigned to a role inside a project.
A role has permissions and can
differ among them. The user can have many roles to different projects.
Permissions
Permissions, created by the owner of the project, define what kind of access the
different roles cat have to the project’s related data. Permissions are considered a
combination of the different elements of the domain model. These elements are the
device, the datatype and the period of the data. When a user inside project requests
for some data for a specific period using a role, permissions will be checked and if
there is a role connected with a device and its datatype for this specific period, then
the user can access the data. Figure 2.2 shows an abstract example of how permis-
sions for the role of cardiologist should be like in a project. A user with this role can
see the data of heart rate for health device and health device 2 which were collected
in June and July of 2017 respectively.
end Date
start Date
Datatype
Device
Role
30-07-2017
31-06-2017
heart rate
Health device 2
Cardiologist
30-06-2017
01-06-2017
heart rate
Health device
Cardiologist
Figure 2.2: Example of permissions for the role cardiologist.
Data
Data describes how the data will be stored. The data can be reached by the user
either searching through a device, i.e we can ask for the data of a Fitbit device, or
through datatype, i.e. we can ask for the heart rate of a user. Data include the time
the data were collected, and the actual values, based on the data type.
In this chapter, concrete scenarios that the health-data service can support were rep-
resented. Moreover, an analysis of the health-data service on an abstract level and
its domain model were given. In the next chapter, a full analysis of the requirements
that the health-data needs to keep will be given.
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 3
Requirements of the
Health-Data Service
In this section, we describe the use cases of the health-data service. Based on these
we will also prioritize the features that the service should have, using the MoSCoW
method. Finally, we describe the non-functional requirements which are set in order
for the service to carry the use cases out.
3.1
Use Cases
In this section, we describe the use cases based on the domain model and the usage
scenarios described in the previous chapter. Most of the use cases are explicit and
detailed parts of the usage scenarios. Additional use cases are considered the data
collection from the device (Use case 11), how a user can change the permissions of a
role (User case 8).The following use cases will be supported:
1. User signs up.
2. User signs in/out .
3. User registers his device to the service.
4. User sees his device’s data for a specific period.
5. User creates a new project.
6. User creates a new role in a project.
7. User assigns permissions to a role in one of his projects.
8. User assigns a role to another user to his project.
9. User changes the permissions of a role in one of his projects.
10. User registers a device to a project.
11. User sees the data in a project through a role.
12. Developer registers a new device type.
==PAGE:18==
10
3 Requirements of the Health-Data Service
13. Developer registers a new data type.
14. Data collection from the device.
Assigns permissions 
to a role
Sign in/out
Register a 
new data type
Send data 
for storage
Register a 
new device type
Devloper
See other user's 
data
Register a device
to a project
Change a role's
permissions
See device's 
data
Asssign a role 
to another user
Register a device
to the service
Create a role
Create a project
Sign up
Health-data service
User
«includes»
Figure 3.1: Use case diagram showing the possible use cases for the user.
==PAGE:19==
3.1 Use Cases
11
3.1.1
The user signs up to the service
This use case describes how the user will register to the service.
Name: User registration to the service
Actor: User
Precondition: He has not an account registered to the service. The user needs to
have access to the internet.
Main scenario:
1. The user opens the mobile or web application,from a monitor through a browser.
2. The user sees the registration form with the relevant fields:
a) First name
b) Last name
c) Username
d) Password
3. The user fills out the form.
4. The user sends his request to the service.
5. The user receives an e-mail confirmation message to his smartphone or his mo-
nitor.
Postcondition: The user is now registered to the service with a project which has
been created automatically and he has the role of the owner, and zero devices related
to his project.
Alternative scenario:
1. The service finds a account with the same credentials registered.
a) The user receives a message that there was a problem with this credentials.
b) The user tries to register with different credentials.
==PAGE:20==
12
3 Requirements of the Health-Data Service
3.1.2
The user signs in to the health-data service
This use case describes how the user will sign in to the health-data service.
Name: User sign-in to the health-data service
Actor: User
Precondition: He has an account registered to the service. The user needs to have
access to the internet.
Main scenario:
1. The user opens the mobile or web application.
2. The user sees the login form with the relevant fields:
a) Username
b) Password
3. The user fills out the form.
4. The user sends his request to the service.
5. The user sees message to his smartphone or his monitor that he is logged in to
the health-data service.
Postcondition: The user is now logged in to the health-data service.
Alternative scenario:
1. The user entered wrong credentials.
a) The user receives a message that there is no user with these credentials.
b) The user tries to log in again.
==PAGE:21==
3.1 Use Cases
13
3.1.3
The user signs out from the health-data service
This use case describes how the user will sign out from the health-data service.
Name: User sign out from the health-data service
Actor: User
Precondition: He has an account registered to the service. The user needs to have
access to the internet. The user needs to be logged in.
Main scenario:
1. The user opens the mobile or web application.
2. The user sees the log out button
3. The user presses the log out button
4. The user sees message to his smartphone or his monitor that he is logged out
from the health-data service.
Postcondition: The user is now logged out from the health-data service.
3.1.4
The user registers his device to the service
This use case describes how a user can register one of his health devices or his smart-
phone to the service.
Name: Device registration to the service
Actor: User
Precondition: The user needs to have health device or smartphone. The user needs
to be registered to the service. The user needs to be logged in to the service.
Main scenario:
1. The user chooses the option for registering a new device to his account.
2. The user selects if he wants to add a new health device.
3. The user selects to add a new health device.
4. The user sees a form with a name and description fields for device and a list
with the registered device types to the health-data service.
5. The user fills out the fields and select a device type.
6. The user selects to add the device.
7. The user receives a message that his health device has been added successfully.
==PAGE:22==
14
3 Requirements of the Health-Data Service
Alternative scenario:
1. The service finds out that the user has already registered this device.
a) User receives a message that this device is already registered.
3.1.5
User sees his data for a specific period
This case describes how the user will see his data from his devices in a mobile or web
application.
Name: Presentation of user’s data in a mobile or web application
Actor: User
Precondition: The user needs to have health device or smartphone. The user needs
to be registered to the service and online at the same time. The user needs to have
devices registered to the service. The user needs to be logged in to the service.
Main scenario:
1. The user selects see his data.
2. The user selects one of his devices.
3. A form with the data types of his device and two inputs for start and end date
appear.
4. The user selects data types.
5. The user inserts the start date and the end date.
6. A form with the data of the specific data types and period appears.
Alternative scenario:
1. There are no data for the specific period.
2. The user selects to see only the data for a specific device.
a) The form describes him the data for a specific device.
3. There are no data for the requested period.
a) The data in the form are Null:
==PAGE:23==
3.1 Use Cases
15
3.1.6
The user creates a new project
This case describes how a user can create a new project from his smartphone or mo-
nitor though a browser.
Name: The user creates a new project
Actor: User
Precondition: The user needs to be registered to the service and online at the same
time. The user needs to be logged in to the service.
Main scenario:
1. The user selects to create a new project.
2. A new form appears with the below fields:
a) Project name
b) Description
3. The user fills the form out.
4. The user receives a message that his project has been created. The service sets
the user as the owner of the project automatically.
3.1.7
The user creates a new role for a project
This case describes how a user can create a new role to one of his project from his
smartphone or monitor through a browser.
Name: The user creates a new role
Actor: User
Precondition: The user needs to be registered to the service and online at the same
time. The user needs to be logged in to the service. The user needs to have a project.
Main Scenario:
1. The user selects an existing project.
2. The user selects to add a new role.
3. A new form appears with the below fields.
a) Role name
b) Role description
4. The user fills the form out.
==PAGE:24==
16
3 Requirements of the Health-Data Service
5. A new form with users available devices and their datatype in the project ap-
pears.
6. The user selects which devices or datatypes the role can have access to.
7. The user selects to create the role.
8. The user receives a message that his new role has been created successfully.
Alternative scenario:
There is already a role with the same name in the project.
1. The user changes the role’s name
3.1.8
The user assigns a role to another user
This case uses describes how the owner of a project can assign a new role to a user.
Name: Role assignment to a user
Actor: User
Precondition: The user needs to be registered to the service and online at the same
time. The user needs to be the owner of the project. The user needs to be logged in
to the service.
Main Scenario:
1. The user sees the projects in which he is the owner.
2. The user selects one of his projects.
3. The user selects to assign a role to a user.
4. A list with the available roles appears.
5. The user selects a role.
6. The user chooses the button ”Assign”.
7. A new search form appears to the user.
8. The user types the name of the person he wants to assign the role.
9. The user sees the search results.
10. The user selects the person.
11. The user presses the button ”Assign”.
12. The user sees a message that the intended user has been assigned the role.
==PAGE:25==
3.1 Use Cases
17
Alternative scenario:
1. The user was not found.
• The user searches again.
2. The intended user has already this role to the project.
• The user sees a message that the intended user already has this role.
3.1.9
User assigns permissions to a role in one of his projects
This case uses describes how the owner of a project can assign permissions of a role
in one of his projects.
Name: Permission assignment to a role
Actor: User
Precondition: The user needs to be registered. The user needs to be the owner of
the project. The user needs to be logged in to the service.
Main Scenario:
1. The user sees a layout with the projects in which he is the owner.
2. The user selects one of his projects.
3. The user sees in a new form the available roles of the project.
4. The user selects a role.
5. The user chooses to assign permissions to the selected role.
6. The user sees a new form. This form includes the devices, and their data types,
that are related to the project.
7. The user selects devices and/or data types.
8. The user presses to assign the permissions.
9. The user sees a message that the role’s permissions have been set.
==PAGE:26==
18
3 Requirements of the Health-Data Service
3.1.10
The user changes the permissions of a role in one of his
projects
This case uses describes how the owner of a project can change the permissions of a
role in one of his projects.
Name: Change role’s permissions
Actor: User
Precondition: The user needs to be registered. The user needs to be the owner of
the project. The user needs to be logged in to the service.
Main Scenario:
1. The user sees a layout with the projects in which he is the owner.
2. The user selects one of his projects.
3. The user sees in a new form the available roles of the project.
4. The user selects a role.
5. The user chooses the button ”Change”.
6. The user sees a new form. This form includes the devices, and their data types,
that are related to the project.
7. The user selects devices and/or data types.
8. The user presses the button ”Confirm changes”.
9. The user sees a message that the role’s permissions have been changed.
==PAGE:27==
3.1 Use Cases
19
3.1.11
The user registers a device to a project
This use case describes how a user can register one of his health devices or his smart-
phone to a project.
Name: Device registration to a project
Actor: User
Precondition: The user needs to have health device or smartphone. The user needs
to be registered to the service. The user needs to have devices registered to the ser-
vice. The user needs to be logged in to the service.
Main Scenario:
1. The user selects to see the projects related to him.
2. A list of the related projects appears.
3. The user selects a project.
4. The user selects to add a device to the selected project.
5. A list with the user’s devices and their data types appears.
6. The user selects a device and its data types.
7. The use selects to add the device.
8. The user receives a message that his health device has been added to the project
successfully.
Alternative scenario:
1. The health-data service finds out that the user has already registered this device.
a) User receives a message that this device is already registered.
2. The user is related to no projects.
a) The list of projects appears empty.
==PAGE:28==
20
3 Requirements of the Health-Data Service
3.1.12
User sees the data in a project through a role
This use case shows how a user can see data from devices of project using a role.
Name: Data presentation of a project’s to a user with a role
Actor: User
Precondition: The user needs to be registered to the health-data and online at the
same time. The user needs to have a role to the project. The user needs to be logged
in to the health-data.
Main Scenario:
1. The user selects to see the projects related to him.
2. A list of the related projects appears.
3. The user selects a project.
4. The user selects one of his roles to the project.
5. The user sees a form with the available users for this role.
6. The user selects a user.
7. A form with the available device type and data types and two date inputs
appears.
8. The user selects data types.
9. The user inserts the start date and the end date.
10. The form with the data of the specific data types and period of the selected
user appears.
Alternative scenario:
1. The user has no access to other users data.
• The form appears no users
==PAGE:29==
3.1 Use Cases
21
3.1.13
The developer registers a new device type
This use case shows how the developer will register a new device type to the health-
data service
Name: Device type registration
Actor: Developer
Precondition: The developer needs to be registered to the health-data and online
at the same time. The developer needs to be logged in to the health-data service.
Main scenario:
1. The developer selects to create a new device type.
2. The device type form appears. The form includes a name and description field
for the device type and a list of all the available data types.
3. The developer inserts a name and a description for the device type.
4. The developer selects data types.
5. The developer selects to create the device type.
6. The developer sees a message that the device type has been created successfully.
Alternative scenario:
1. The user has inserted an existing name for a device type.
• A proper message appears.
• The developer inserts another name.
3.1.14
The developer registers a new data type
This use case shows how the developer will register a new data type to the health-data
service
Name: Data type registration
Actor: Developer
Precondition: The developer needs to be registered to the health-data and online
at the same time. The developer needs to be logged in to the health-data service.
Main Scenario:
1. The developer selects to create a new data type.
2. The data type form appears. The form includes a name and a description field
for the data type and an upload button for the data type.
==PAGE:30==
22
3 Requirements of the Health-Data Service
3. The developer inserts a name for the data type.
4. The developer uploads the file describing the data type.
5. The developer selects to create the data type.
6. The developer see a message that the data type has been created successfully.
Alternative scenario:
1. The user has uploaded an invalid file for a data type.
• A proper message appears.
• The developer uploads another file.
2. The user has inserted an existing name file for a data type.
• A proper message appears.
• The developer inserts a name.
3.1.15
Data collection from the health-data service
This use case shows how the health-data service will collect and store new data
Name: Data collection
Actor: None
Precondition: The developer sets a proper automation to the mobile application in
order to send the data. The owner of the data has been logged into the health-data
service and authorized the mobile application.
Main Scenario:
1. The device sends the data in a proper form.
2. The health-data service receives the data.
3. The health-data service stores the data.
Alternative scenario:
1. The data need to be processed before the storage.
• The health-data services modifies the data.
• The health-data service stores the data.
Having described the use cases, an analysis of the core functionalities of the health-
data service will follow.
==PAGE:31==
3.2 MoSCoW analysis
23
3.2
MoSCoW analysis
MoSCoW technique is used in many fields such as software development in order to
prioritize the requirements of a product. Using this method, we can define the main
functionalities of the health-data service. The features are prioritized based on the
use cases. The ”must have” part includes the features that fulfill the core functional-
ities of the health-data service. The ”should have” part is functionalities that should
be implemented later on and extend the health-data service but not necessary for
the first iteration. The ”could have” part includes features that can be added to the
health-data service while ”won’t have” part is about features that should never exist
in the health-data service.
User can register to the health-data service
The health-data service must receive and store data from devices
A new device and data type can be registered to the health-data service
The owner of the data can have access to his data
A user can share his data
User interfaces to guide the user to interact with the health-data service
Table 3.1: The ”must have” features of the health-data.
The Table 3.1 shows what the health-data service must have as core functionalities.
The main goal of the health-data service is the data storage from different devices.
So forth, the health-data service must receive data from devices. This functionality is
explained in use case 11 which is about the data collection. The health-data service
must allow to a software engineer to register new device types and data types in order
new device to store their the health-data service as in use cases 3,12 and 13 described.
As long as the data are stored to the health-data service, users can have access to
them. An additional ”must have” is user interfaces which will give a better experience
and help the user to guide through the health-service and complete some part of the
use cases such as the authentication of the user (use case 2).
Change the permissions of a role
Table 3.2: The ”should have” features of the health-data.
The Table 3.2 shows what the health-data service next functionalities should be. The
owner of the project could change the permissions of one of his role like use case 9
describes. However, since roles already have permissions, this functionality should be
implemented later.
==PAGE:32==
24
3 Requirements of the Health-Data Service
Editor for creating new data types
Pre-registration of all market’s devices
Table 3.3: The ”could have” features of the health-data.
The Table 3.3 shows what the health-data service next functionalities could be. An
implementation of an editor for creating data types instead of uploading the struc-
ture, in use case 13, could be done later. Having this editor will save time from the
software engineer to set up new data types. Moreover, there are many devices in
the market which collect data from people. Therefore, the addition of all as default
device types, along with their data types, it could extend the choices that health-data
service could offer for device types and also facilitate the device type registration.
Public data entry for unauthorized applications
Table 3.4: The ”won’t have” features of the health-data.
No functionality of the service is accessible without any authentication except for the
user registration.
3.3
Non-functional Requirements
In this section, describe the non-functional requirements of the service. Non-functional
requirements are criteria in order to judge the behavior of the service. In other words,
how the service supposed to be. We are focusing on four fields based on the main
purpose of the service which is the data collection from different devices. Below we
can see the fields on which we are focusing on:
• Availability
• Interoperability
• Security
• Extensibility
Availability
Since the health-data service is focusing on collecting, storing and processing data
from different devices the availability will be a crucial part of the solution.
The
health-data service should be able to respond to any request to it. The health-data
service should be uptime all the time. The availability of the system is necessary for
the user so he won’t lose any of his data during the collection from the health-data
service. What is more, the data should be available to the user anytime.
==PAGE:33==
3.3 Non-functional Requirements
25
Interoperability
The health-data service will receive data from registered devices despite their tech-
nology. Moreover, the health-data service needs to able to use connectors and receive
data from devices which follow their own method for data storage. All the data will
be sent in a specific form. The ways of communication are discussed later in the thesis.
Security
Data from the devices are considered sensitive. The health-data service should be
responsible for who will have access to the data based on their owner’s requests. The
health-data service will check the permissions of the user in any request for accessing
data.
Extensibility
The health-data service can add more components. The new components can plug
into the service easily without the need to make major changes to the health-data
service. New device types can plug into the health-data service. This will extend the
ability of the health-data service to collect data from kinds of devices. However, this
should not affect the overall connection of the devices to the system. Details will be
discussed later in the thesis.
In this chapter, a discussion about the requirements of the health-data service has
been made. There was also a brief description of the non-functional requirements
of the health-data service. In the next chapter, we will discuss how devices such as
wearables send and store the data right now.
==PAGE:34==
26
==PAGE:35==
CHAPTER 4
Analysis of the data
transfer in wearables
In the previous chapter, the requirements and the core functionalities of the health-
data service were presented. In this chapter, we will focus on the available technology
and how the current situation in the wearables and other devices is, in terms of data
transfer and storage.
The main goal, again, is the data collection from the wearable via smartphones.
We will also discuss the ways of communication between a device and the health-data
service.
The above analysis will be regarding one of the main purposes of the health-data
service, which is the data collection from different devices. The results of the analysis
will lead to the design decisions. Moreover, there will be a discussion about, how the
user can authenticate himself and have access to a server, i.e. the health-data service,
through a mobile application or a browser.
4.1
Devices for Data collection
The two most popular devices which can collect data from a person are wearables and
smartphones. Wearables are electronic devices which are worn by people as an im-
plant or an accessory [TM14]. Wearables consist of sensors responsible for collecting
data from the user. One popular wearable is a smartwatch. Most of the wearables
are available in the market, such as Fitbit, but there are also prototypes used for
scientific or medical purposes.
Moreover, smartphones started to include more sensors in them. Smartphone manu-
facturers try to make use of sensors in order to track different types of data for the
user. They also implemented a mobile application, i.e. LG Health, dedicated to this
purpose. A picture of a wearable and a smartphone can be seen in Figure 4.1
Figure 4.1: A picture of a wearable and a smartphone.
==PAGE:36==
28
4 Analysis of the data transfer in wearables
4.2
Data transfer
In this section, we will describe the possible ways that exist right now in order for the
health-data service to collect and store wearables data. Based on research [FS16], the
manufacturer of the device is usually responsible for the collection, the transfer and
the storage of the device’s data. The collected data of the device are transferred from
the device to a smartphone or a computer and then to the manufacturer’s service for
further data process and permanent storage [FS16]. However, different manufacturers
can follow a different policy of how the collected data of the device will be stored or
transferred to different systems, such as the health-data service.
An analysis of each case can be seen below. For each case, two types of system are
involved, the manufacturer’s service and a third-party service. The manufacturer’s
service is responsible for collecting and storing data from manufacturer’s wearables.
The third-party service is any type of application which requests data access to the
manufacturer’s service or device. In that case, health-data service can be considered
a third-party service.
Data transfer directly from the smartphone
The first case, as it can be seen in Figure 4.2, describes how a third-party service
can have direct access to the data through a smartphone. The data are collected
by the wearable and then are sent to the smartphone periodically via Bluetooth. A
mobile application, usually developed by another developer, will send the data to
the service for permanent storage. In order to send the data, the mobile application
needs to have internet connection. If that is not possible, then it temporarily stores
the data until it has access to the internet. The software for receiving the data from
the wearable is given by the wearable’s manufacturer. This type of policy is followed
by Google Fit [Inc16].
Collect data 
Send data 
Send data 
User
Wearable
Developer’s Mobile Application
Third-party service
View data 
Figure 4.2: Data transfer directly from the smartphone.
==PAGE:37==
4.2 Data transfer
29
Data transfer indirectly from the manufacturer’s service
The second case, as it can be seen in the Figure 4.3, describes how a third-party
service will have access to the data indirectly requesting for the data from the ma-
nufacturer’s service. The data are collected by the wearable and then are sent to the
smartphone periodically via Bluetooth. A mobile application, which in that case is
developed by the manufacturer, will send the data to the manufacturer’s service. An
internet connection needs to be established. If there is no internet connection for
a long time, then the data may be lost or summarized depending on the wearable
[FS16]. This is a manufacturer’s decision. The third party service will send a request
for data access to the manufacturer’s service. Then the manufacturer’s service will
provide the third-party service with the data. Companies like Fitbit follow this policy
[Inc14].
Collect data
Send data 
Send data 
User
Wearable
Manufacturer’s 
Mobile Application
Manufacturer’s 
service
Third-party service
Fetch data 
See data to the developer’s mobile application
Figure 4.3: Data transfer indirectly from the manufacturer’s service.
Data transfer indirectly from the smartphone
The third case, as it can be seen in Figure 4.4, describes how the third-party ser-
vice can collect wearable’s data from the smartphone. The data are collected by the
wearable and then are sent to the smartphone periodically via Bluetooth. A mobile
application, developed by the manufacturer, sends the data to manufacturer’s service.
Then, another mobile application, developed by the third-party service, requests for
the data from the manufacturer’s service.
The software for receiving the data is
provided by the manufacturer. Then, the third-party’s mobile application sends the
collected data to its service. This policy is followed by Apple Health [Inc17].
==PAGE:38==
30
4 Analysis of the data transfer in wearables
Collect data
Send data 
Send data 
User
Wearable
Manufacturer’s 
Mobile Application
Manufacturer’s 
service
Developer’s 
mobile application
Request data 
Send Data
Third-party 
Service
Send data 
Figure 4.4: Data transfer indirectly from the provider’s service.
Data transfer directly from the wearable
The fourth case, as it can be seen in Figure 4.5, describes how the wearable can
collect and send the data of the user directly to the third-party service. In that case,
there is no need for a smartphone and a mobile application as an intermediate. Ac-
cess to the internet is necessary. Nevertheless, this type of data transfer is possible in
theory and not in practice for now [FS16]. It is also not considered energy efficient.
Collect data 
Send data 
User
Wearable
Third-party service
Figure 4.5: Data transfer directly from the wearable.
In this section, the different ways to collect and store data from devices have been
explained.
In the next section, the issues which are arisen based on the current
situation will be discussed. The issues are focused on how the data can be stored, how
the user can authorize for data storage and in which way the data can be processed
before storage.
==PAGE:39==
4.3 Data Storage Issues
31
4.3
Data Storage Issues
In the Section 4.2, the different ways to transfer data from a smartphone to a service
were shown. The first thing that can be extracted from the analysis of the different
ways, is that a smartphone plays very significant role in order to send wearables’ data
to a service. What is more, in three out of four cases the wearable’s manufacturer is
responsible for the collection of the data. In the case of Data transfer indirectly from
the manufacturer’s service and Data transfer indirectly from the provider’s service,
it is clear that the data are first stored in the manufacturer’s service. Sadly, this
situation can not be avoided, unless we hack or reverse engineer the API to the device.
Nevertheless, this approach will be time-consuming and since the policy is determined
by the manufacturer, any attempt to bypass it, is considered illegal. Therefore, the
health-data service needs to support specific connectors in order to request, receive
and store the data from the manufacturer’s service.
4.4
Authentication and Authorization Issues
As we mentioned in Chapter 3, the data need to be protected from unauthorized
use. Therefore, the owner of the device and the data needs to authenticate himself
to the health-data service in order to store and see his data. On the other hand, as
we described in Section 4.1, in many cases the manufacturer of the device stores its
data and provides them to the health-data service. Thus, the owner of such a device
needs to follow these steps:
1. Owner authenticates himself to the health-data service.
2. Owner authenticates himself to the manufacturer’s service through the health-
data service.
3. Authorize the health-data service to request for his data from the manufacturer’s
service.
In Chapter 5, we will describe the available types of the authentications and which
one is used from the manufacturers.
The design of how these three steps can be
achieved is also discussed.
==PAGE:40==
32
4 Analysis of the data transfer in wearables
4.5
Data manipulation issues
One of the features that we would like to have in the health-data service was the data
homogenization during the storage. In other words, we would like to collect data
from different devices, such as Fitbit or MisFit, and store them under the same data
type, i.e. heart rate, with the same value types.
However, all the manufacturers choose different ways to categorize and collect
the data. They have different data representations, meaning different field’s names
or structure. A possible solution is the use of specific data types, like heart rate or
sleep, under a common data structure. Then other connectors could be implemented
in order to modify the data from the different connectors and unify them. However,
this solution could be viable only in case of known manufacturers such as Fitbit,
since they lie to the case of Data transfer indirectly from the manufacturer’s service.
These manufacturers provide detailed documentation of the data. Thus, knowing the
input of the connector the possible implementation of a component responsible for
manipulating the data, will not be an issue.
On the other hand, the same solution should not be suggested for custom data
types which were inserted by the software engineer.
The health-data service can
not have a connector to handle every possible data representation that the software
engineer can add. For example, the health-data service has a reserved data type of
’heart rate’ used for data from manufacturer’s service.
Nevertheless, a software engineer creates a new data type for a device type and
he calls it ’heart-rate_1’ and store the heart rate from the specific device type under
a specific structure. Then, if a user, assuming he uses both device types, wants to see
his data he needs to request ’heart-rate’ and ’heart-rate_1’. The health-data service
will not uniform and return both data types.
However, the software engineer can register the data type ’heart-rate’ to his device
type and follow its structure while sending data. In that case, the user can see the
data from both devices in one form. In other words, engineers can use the already
implemented data types but they can not connect them with the ones that they have
registered to the system.
In this chapter, the scene of the data transfer in wearables was shown. There was
also a discussion about possible issues that could affect the design of the health-data
service. In the next chapter, the design of the health-data will be explained.
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER 5
Design of the Health-Data
service
In the previous chapter, a detailed analysis of the current situation in wearables and
the arising issues has been discussed. This chapter will give a detailed look at the
overall software architecture of the health-data service. A first overview is given with
the use of a component diagram of the health-data service. A detailed analysis of the
different components takes place.
In addition, a discussion about the authentication and authorization between the
application and the health-data service will take place. A further discussion about
how the health-data service will request data from the manufacturer’s service can be
found in this chapter.
5.1
Overview
An overview of the architecture is provided using a component diagram. The overview
is meant to give an idea of the structure of the health-data service and how the main
components of our software are related as well as the connection with a smartphone.
The component diagram, Figure 5.1, contains two main components, the Smart-
phone and the Health-Data service.
The Smartphone component contains only the mobile application component. The
mobile application is developed by the software engineer. Therefore, the subcompo-
nents are based on his design. The mobile application is responsible for requesting
data from health-data service or sending data to the health-data service. The co-
llection of data from a wearable, as was mentioned, is a responsibility of the software
developer based on the manufacturer. However, the mobile application can connect
and use the features of health-data service. Every communication between the health-
data service and the mobile application comes after an authentication.
The other main components are the Health-Data component and its subcompo-
nents. Τhe main subcomponents of Health-Data service component are the Authenti-
cation component, the Resource component, and the External API connector. Then,
there will be a description about the rest of the subcomponents which are the Front-
end service component and the Data Storage component.
==PAGE:42==
34
5 Design of the Health-Data service
Device 
Authentication
Front-End Service
Mobile Application
Smartphone
Health-data Service
Adapters Data 
Handler
Device Adapter
External API connector
Authentication 
Data Storage
Resource Service
«delegate»
Sends/Receives data
Access Token
«delegate»
«delegate»
Access Token
Manifacturer's 
authentication service
Sends/receive data
«delegate»
Device/Data Registration
Device/Data Regisistration
«delegate»
Device/Data Regisistration
Requests data
«delegate»
Request  Data
Sends data
Send Data
«delegate»
Stores data(role, user, project)
DataAccess
Send Data
«delegate»
DataAccess
«delegate»
«delegate»
Send Data
DataItem
«delegate»
Sends data
DataAccess
DataAccess
«delegate»
DataAccess
«delegate»
Sends data
Sends data
Manifacturer's data
Figure 5.1: Component diagram of the Health-data service.
==PAGE:43==
5.1 Overview
35
Authentication Component
Authentication is a wrapper around the health-data service. This component is re-
sponsible for the registration, the authentication, the authorization of the users and
the requests that the health-data service will receive from other. Authentication com-
ponent is connected with every component in the health-data service either directly
(Data Storage component) or indirectly (External API connector). Either case, no
request for using the resource or sending data to the service can be processed without
an authentication. A detailed description of the authentication can be read in Section
5.2.
Resource component
The Resource component is responsible for managing the resources of the health-
data service based on the requests it receives. The Resource component consists of
different types of components which are responsible for different features of the ser-
vice. Figure 5.2 shows the ”inside” of the Resource component. These components
are:
• User Resource
• DeviceType Resource
• DataType Resource
• Project Resource
• Device Resource
Permission
Role
Project Resource
Datatype Resource
DeviceType Resource
Device Resource
User Resource
Resource Service
Figure 5.2: Components inside the resource component.
==PAGE:44==
36
5 Design of the Health-Data service
As we can see from Figure 5.2, all components are connected together and they are
responsible for different features. More details about the implementation of each re-
source can be seen in Chapter 6.
User Resource component is responsible for ma-naging details of the user when it
comes to devices and projects. I.e. the health-data service can not register a device
if it does not know the user of it.
Device Resource component is responsible for the registration of a device to the
health-data service (with the help of DeviceType resource). The Device Resource
component will create a device resource which will be stored in the data storage of
the health-data service. The device resource will create a unique identifier for this
device. Using this identifier, a mobile application which is connected with this device
can send and store data from the device through Device Resource component.
Project Resource component is responsible for creating Projects, described in Chapter
3. Project Resource component is connected with the Device Resource component,
the User Resource component, and DataType component. Project Resource compo-
nent unites the mentioned components under a project resource. As it is can be seen
in Figure 5.2, Project Resource component contains two sub-components the Role
component and the Permission component.
• Role component
This component is responsible for creating role resource and connect them with
the user resource. The Role component also connects the role resource with the
Permission component and its permission resource.
• Permission component
This component is responsible for keeping the permission resources of each role
resource. A permission resource consists of the id of the owner of the data, the
device which provides the data, the selected datatype from the device, getting
them from the related components, and the access period (start Date, end Date).
In order for the permissions resource to be created, the owner of the data, the
device which provides the data, the selected data type need to be related to
the project, something only the owner of the data can do. When a user, using
a role, requests for someone’s data related to a project, the project resource
will search, using its subcomponents, if the user is connected with the specific
role resource and if that role resource is connected with a permission resource
containing these data (device, datatype).
DeviceType Resource component is responsible for creating and storing information
about device types in a devicetype resource. The datatype resource will be created
after an authorized request and it will store information about the devicetype under
an id. This id can be used by the Device Resource component in order to identify a
device resource as this data type.
==PAGE:45==
5.1 Overview
37
DeviceType Resource component can be used directly without the need of com-
municating with other components first, like the case of Device Resource component
where a request needs to pass through the User Resource component first. Devicetype
Resource component is also responsible for communicating with External AI connec-
tor. This happens only in case of devices whose data can be accessed only through
their manufacturer’s service, i.e. Fitbit.
DataType Resource component is responsible for creating datatype resources. Datatype
Resource describes the structure of the data that will be sent and stored. Like Device-
Type Resource component, Datatype Resource component can be accessed directly,
after authentication. Datatype Resource component is connected with Datatype Com-
ponent since a devicetype resource may support different datatype resource.
External API connector
External API connector component is responsible for communicating with manufac-
turer’s service, authorize health-data service, request for data, retrieve the data and
handle the data in order to be stored in the health-data service. The External API
connector component is connected, through an interface, with the Service Provider
component and more specifically with the DeviceType component.
The External
API component contains two sub-components, the Device Adapter component and
the Adapter Data Handler component. The External API can contain a collection of
different adapters and data handlers based on the provider and the receiving data. If
the health-data service has to add a new type whose data are provided from another
service, both the implementation of a Device Adapter and an Adapter Data Handler
is necessary.
Data Storage
The Data Storage component is responsible for storing all the resources from the other
components as well as to give access to these resources. It contains the resources of
user, device, project, role, permission, devicetype and datatype. The models of the
data and the relationship among them can be read in Chapter 6.
Front-end service
Front-end service component is responsible for providing a nice user interface which
can be used from the user or the engineer in order to make use of the different re-
sources. User interfaces which are included in the Front-end service component can
be seen in Chapter 7. Front-end service uses the resources after authentication.
In this section, an overview of the health-data service was given. The next section
shows how the authentication will take place in order for the mobile devices to use
health-data resources.
==PAGE:46==
38
5 Design of the Health-Data service
5.2
Authentication in Health-Data Service
In Chapter 2, authentication issues about the user based on the case of data transfer
were discussed. This section describes the types of the authentication that exist and
how they work. It is also discussed which type is used by the manufacturers and
which one seems fit for the server and why.
This description will lead to the design of the authentication and authorization of
the user to the health-data service and the authentication and authorization of the
health-data service to access data from manufacturer’s service. There are two types
of authentication, Session based authentication and Token Based authentication.
Session based authentication
Session based authentication is a stateful type of authentication, which means that
the server and the client keep the record of a session [OAu]. More specifically, the
server creates a session when a client, i.e. a mobile application, authenticates itself
for the first time in order to keep track of it and not force it to authenticate itself
every time it requests something from the server.
By creating a session, it means that the server creates a record in memory with
information about the client.
Then, after the client authenticates itself using its
credentials, it will receive a session_id from the server.
This session_id will be
stored in the client and it will be used for any future request. This session_id is just
an identifier which helps the server to identify the client [OAu].
As it is mentioned, the server stores information about the client in a session.
Thus, this will create a user overhead, especially when there many users who may
want to authenticate themselves. What is more, there many security issues about
session base authentication that they are out of the scope of this thesis. However,
the major disadvantage that it should be noted, is the problems with the scalability
of the server. This problem derives from the needs of using memory for storing the
sessions.
==PAGE:47==
5.3 OAuth 2.0
39
Token based authentication
Token based authentication is considered stateless [OAu]. This means, no information
about the client is stored. The functionalities of the token based authentication can
be seen in the following steps:
1. User authenticates himself with username and password.
2. The server validates his credentials.
3. The server provides the client with a single token.
4. The client stores the token and sends it along with every request.
5. The server verifies token and responds with data.
Every single request from the client will require the token. This token should be sent
in the HTTP header. As it is seen, the client only needs the token in order to have
access to the server. This concept eases the server from storing information about
the client on his side. Thus, the server can scale and add more machines as necessary
without worrying about where a user is logged in. Therefore, token based authenti-
cation scales better than session based authentication.
To sum it up, for the health-data service which aims for scalability, token based
authentication seems the appropriate solution. What is more, manufacturers use to-
ken based authentication in order for another service to fetch data from them. In
the next two sections, the standard OAuth 2.0 which is used for token authentication
and the structure of the form will be explained.
5.3
OAuth 2.0
OAuth 2.0 is a standard that applications use to provide client applications with
access delegation oauth2prot. OAuth 2.0 works over HTTP and authorizes Devices,
APIs, Servers and Applications with access tokens rather than credentials. There are
four separate modes of OAuth 2.0, which are called grant types. Each mode serves
a different purpose and is used in a different way depending on the type of service.
Service, however, can use more than one grant type if it is necessary [D H].
1. Authorization Code
2. Implicit
3. Password Credentials
4. Client Credentials
==PAGE:48==
40
5 Design of the Health-Data service
Authorization Code
Authorization code grant type uses an authorization server as an intermediate be-
tween the client and the resource server [D H]. Instead of requesting authorization
directly from the resource owner, the client directs the resource owner to an autho-
rization server, which in turn directs the resource owner back to the client with the
authorization code. Before directing the resource owner back to the client with the
authorization code, the authorization server authenticates the resource owner and
obtains authorization. Because the resource owner only authenticates with the au-
thorization server, the resource owner’s credentials are never shared with the client.
An example of authorization code grant type is described below:
1. A user visits a website.
2. He wants to log into the site using a third-party service such as Facebook.
3. He clicks a “Log In” button on the site, he is redirected to the identify provider’s
website and he is prompted to accept permissions.
4. If the user accepts these permissions, the third-party service will redirect him
BACK to the web application along with an authorization code.
5. The website’s server will make a request to the third-party’s API with the
authorization code, and it will be given an access token which can be used to
retrieve the user’s information.
Implicit
Implicit grant type is similar to the authorization code grant type with the only
difference that instead of issuing the client with an authorization code, it receives the
access token directly [D H]. During the implicit grant type, the authorization server
does not authenticate the client. The responsiveness and the efficiency of the client
are improved since the round trips to obtain an access token are reduced. A simple
scenario describing the implicit grant type can be seen below.
1. A user visits a website or opens a mobile app.
2. He wants to log into the site using a third-party service such as Facebook.
3. He clicks a “Log In” button on the site, he is redirected to the third party’s
website and he is prompted to accept permissions.
4. If the user accepts these permissions, the third-party service will redirect him
to the web application along with an access token.
5. The website can use this access token to retrieve the user’s information.
==PAGE:49==
5.3 OAuth 2.0
41
Password Credentials
Password credentials grant type can be used directly to obtain an access token. Based
on the [D H], this grant type can be used only when a high degree of trust exists be-
tween the service and the client and when other authorization grant types are not
available. A simple scenario describing the password credentials grant type can be
seen below.
1. A user visits a website or opens a mobile app.
2. He wants to log into the site using his credentials.
3. He inputs his username and password into the site and then the website validates
this information via an API call and receives an access token.
4. The website can use this access token to retrieve the user’s information.
Client Credentials
Client credentials grant type is used as an authorization type when the resources
are under the control of the client [D H]. A simple scenario of the client credentials
can be seen below:
1. An application makes a request to the service’s API sing its credentials.
2. The application receives an access token which can be used to make API re-
quests.
After a brief description and understanding of the OAuth 2.0 protocol, we concluded
to used the second grant type of OAuth 2.0 for the authentication between the smart-
phone and the health-data service, since it was implied that this grant type is more
suitable in our situation. What is more, OAuth 2.0 standards is used from manufac-
ture, and other services, in order for a software to have access to their resources. In
the next section, the design of the health-data authentication is described.
==PAGE:50==
42
5 Design of the Health-Data service
5.4
Design of the Authentication and Authorization in
health-data service
As it was described in the previous sections, token based authentication with the
OAuth 2.0 standard will be used for the authentication and the authorization of the
health-data service. Based on the standard of OAuth 2.0., the Implicit grant type
will be used, Section 5.3. In this section, with the use of sequence diagrams, we will
describe how the authentication between a mobile application and the health-data
service can be achieved. Moreover, the authentication and data access from device’s
manufacturer’s service for the health-data service is described.
Figure 5.3 shows the sequence diagram for the authentication in the health-data
service. First of all, a mobile application sends a request to the health-data service’s
resource service. Then, the mobile application is redirected to the authentication
service, enters its credentials, in order for the user to log in to the health-data service,
and accepts for permission. The mobile application receives the access token from the
authentication service. Thus, the mobile application can send requests for a resource
to the resource service using the access token to the header of each request.
The resource service validates the token and provides the resource. The same
situation applies when the application sends device’s data. In that case, though, a
resource is not expected from the mobile application.
Health-data Service
loop
Application
Authentication
Service
Resource Service
Validate the Access Token
Protected Resource
Call API with Access Token
Send Access Token 
Enter user credentials and agree
redirect to Authentication service
Authentication request
Figure 5.3: Sequence diagram of the Authentication in the Health-Data service.
==PAGE:51==
5.4 Design of the Authentication and Authorization in health-data service
43
Figure 5.4 shows the sequence diagram for the authentication between the health-
data service and the manufacturer’s service.
First of all, an application sends a
request to register a device to the health-data service. The device’s type requires
access from its manufacturer. Then, the health-data service redirects the application
to the manufacturer’s authentication service, the user enters its credentials, in order
to log in to manufacturer’s service, and accepts for permission.
The health-data service receives the access token from the manufacturer’s authen-
tication service and stores for future use. Thus, the application sends a request, using
the access token for the access to health-data service’s resources. The health-data ser-
vice requests the resource from the manufacturer’s service, using the manufacturer’s
access token. The manufacturer’s service validates the token and provides the re-
source. The health-data service stores the resource and it also sends it back to the
application.
Resource
Service
Authetication
Service
Health-data Service
loop
Manufacturer's service
Application
Resource service
Provided Resource
Store Resource
Provided Resource
Validate the Access Token
Request data from Manufacturer's Service using Access Token
Send Access Token
Authorize Health-Data Service
Redirect to Manufacturer's Service
Call API with Access Token
Register Manufacturer Device
Figure 5.4: Sequence diagram of the Authentication from Manufacturer’s service.
In this chapter, an overview of the health-data service, with the use of a compo-
nent diagram, was given. The design behind the authentication and the authoriza-
tion between the health-data service and a mobile application, but also between the
health-data service and a manufacturer’s service was shown. In the next chapter, the
implementation of the health-data service will be given.
==PAGE:52==
44
==PAGE:53==
CHAPTER 6
Implementation of the
Health-Data Service
In this chapter, we describe the resources of the heath-data service will be used either
by the engineer or indirectly from the user. We will show the software engineer and
the user will use the resources in order to fulfill the uses cases, described in Chapter
3. The same endpoints can be used by front-end service, mentioned in Chapter 5, to
guide the user through the health-data service, according to the use case in Chapter
3.
We will also explain the database schema that the health-data service uses to store
the data of the device and additional data such as projects, roles and so on.
In the next section, we give a brief introduction of the Restful architecture that
we will use in order to access the resources of the health-data service.
6.1
RESTful API
REST stands for Representational state transfer and it is a way one way of providing
interoperability between computer systems on the Internet [Fie00]. The figure 6.1
shows the design of a RESTful API. Using HTTPs, as is most common, the kind of
operations available include those predefined by the HTTP verbs GET, POST, PUT,
DELETE. By making use of a stateless protocol and standard operations, REST
systems are suitable for fast performance, reliability, and the ability to grow, by re-
using components that can be managed and updated without affecting the system as
a whole.
DELETE 
GET 
POST 
PUT 
HTTP METHODS
Mobile 
Application
Web
Application
JSON/XML
JSON/XML
HTTP/s
Service
Figure 6.1: RESTful API design.
==PAGE:54==
46
6 Implementation of the Health-Data Service
Moreover, using REST, we can provide a flexible way to receive data from any kind
of device without worrying about its technology or protocol. This happens because
the health-data service will communicate with other mobile or web applications using
internet connection. Engineers are free to use any technology in order to receive data
from the device to the smartphone. Then, using REST and internet connection mobile
applications can send the data or other information such as device type or device in
a JSON format. This way all the devices, device types and data types are provided
with a level of abstraction making easier to communicate with the health-data service
[MG09].
For the implementation of the health-data service, we use endpoints which can be
accessed using the HTTP request. Later, we will describe these endpoints, what we
can achieve using them as well as the JSON schema for some of the main requests,
but first, we will describe the token that we will use based on the authentication
technique described in Chapter 5.2.
6.2
JSON Web Token
In this section, we will describe the token which will be used for authentication and
authorization in the health-data service. The token which we will use is the JSON
Web Token.
The implementation of Web Token (JWT) defines a way for safe information
transmission between two parties as a JSON object [Jon]. This information can be
verified and trusted because it is digitally signed. A token can be signed using a secret
or a public/private key pair using. In our case, a secret is applied.
A JSON Web Token consists of three parts: Header, Payload, and Signature
[JWT]. The header contains the type of the token (JSON) and the hashing algorithm
[JWT] The payload contains claims which are data of the entity (user). The data
that we will use are:
1. Expiration date
The expiration date decides when the token will be invalid for authentication.
After the expiration date, the health-data service won’t accept any request
asking for data. Having this data provides an extra way to make sure that an
application won’t send request indefinitely.
2. User’s id
The user’s id is the key for the access to server’s resources. In the Section 6.3,
we see for which resources we use this id.
At last, the signature is used to verify the send and it needs the encoded header, the
encoded payload, a secret and the hashing algorithm specified in the header. The re-
sult is algorithmically signed producing a token in the form of header.claims.signature.
Figure 6.2 shows the form of a token and how it can be included in the header of the
request.
==PAGE:55==
6.3 Endpoints and JSON format for the Health-Data service
47
Figure 6.2: Token in the header request.
Tokens are designed to protect a software against manipulation and invalid autho-
rization. A token can be easily decoded and its contents revealed. However, without
the correct secret, the token is proved useless and the health-data service will send a
message for invalid token.
Since the access token has an expiration date, for security measures, there is a
chance for the token to expire during data transfer in order to prevent. In order to
help the client, we provide another token which is called refresh token. Refresh token
has the same structure as the access token but with a longer duration, 20 days.
So if the access token expired, then the client can send a request using the refresh
token in order to receive a new access token. This will avoid the entire authentication
and authorization procedure from the user.
6.3
Endpoints and JSON format for the Health-Data
service
In this section, the main endpoints of our the system are described. We also explain
the structure of the body of the HTTP request in order for an application to receive
data or for a device to send data. The endpoints are based on the RESTful archi-
tecture style, as we mentioned in Section 6.1. The endpoints are designed to fulfill
the different use cases and also provide some extra functionalities, such as searching
for another user. All the methods are using JSON format in order to send or receive
data, through HTTP requests.
==PAGE:56==
48
6 Implementation of the Health-Data Service
Figure 6.3 shows how the resources can be combined. The only new resource is the
search and it will be explained later. As it can be seen there are many combinations
which can be used. All resources are related to the previous. I.e. ’/project/device’
means that the method about the device is related to the project. Therefore, we will
describe the main endpoints for which are used in user registration, device registration,
datatype registration, device registration. The main endpoints for sending or fetching
data and the main endpoints related to project and so forth the role. More endpoints
can be seen in Appendix 12.
/user
/fitbit
/search
/authenticate
/devicetype
/datatype
/datatype
/datatype
/devicetype
/device
/permission
/role
/project
/device
/device
/user
Figure 6.3: Endpoints based on resources.
==PAGE:57==
6.3 Endpoints and JSON format for the Health-Data service
49
The first set of endpoints which we will explain belongs to authenticate service.
They are responsible responsible for registering and authenticating the user in order
to receive an access token. It is also responsible for refreshing the token when it
expires.
In the Table 6.1, we can see the endpoints of the authentication service in detail.
The ’/register’, ’/login’, ’logoff’ are called by from-end service which serves authenti-
cation forms(login,signup). The ’/refresh’ is called by any client which is authorized
with a token, as long as it has the access token expired. The credentials from these
endpoints are sent using HTTPs requests, making them encrypted. However, in order
to show the JSON schema of the request, we won’t show an encrypted version.
Endpoint
Method
Description
/authenticate/register
POST
User registration
/authenticate/login
POST
User signs in
/authenticate/logoff
GET
User signs out
/authenticate/authorize
GET
Client receives an access
and refresh token
/authenticate/refresh
GET
Refresh the access token
Table 6.1: Endpoints for authentication service.
The ’/register’ is a POST method which is used for registering a new user to the
health-data service. The JSOM format that it will be send to the service can be seen
in Figure 6.4. As a result of this POST method, a new user resource will be created
and stored the database along with an empty project. The response from the POST
can be seen in figure 6.5.
Figure 6.4: JSON scheme for the POST method of ”/register”.
Figure 6.5: JSON scheme of the response of the POST method of ”/register”.
The ’/login’ is a POST method which is used for registering the user to the health-
data service. The JSON format of the request can be seen in Figure 6.6.
==PAGE:58==
50
6 Implementation of the Health-Data Service
The response from the request includes two tokens, the access_token and the re-
fresh_token. The access_token will be used from the client and the front-end service
in order to use the health-data service’s resources. The refresh_token will be used
after the expiration of the access_token so the user will not have to authenticate
himself again. Details of the protocol can be seen in Chapter 5. In Figure 6.2, we can
see how the token will be included in the header of the request. Lastly, ’/authenti-
cate/authorize’ is called by the mobile application in order to receive the access token
as it was described in Chapter 5.2.
Figure 6.6: JSON scheme for POST method ”/authenticate/login”.
The next group of endpoints is about the search service. Search service is used
in order to find projects, user, datatypes, devicetypes and their main details. The
endpoints of the search service can be seen in the Table 6.2. The endpoints of the
search service can be either called from a client, such as a mobile application or from
the health-data service itself through the front-end service.
A response from the
search service using the url ”/search/user?nameT́heodore”́ can be seen in Figure 6.7.
Endpoint
Method
Description
/search/user?firstname&lastname
GET
Returns the user with a specific
firstname OR lastname
/search/datatype?name
GET
Returns a datatype with that
name
/search/devicetype?name
GET
Returns a devicetype with that
name
/search/project?name
GET
Returns the projects with that
name
Table 6.2: Endpoints for search service.
==PAGE:59==
6.3 Endpoints and JSON format for the Health-Data service
51
Figure 6.7: Result from the search service.
The next group of endpoints is about the user service. It is responsible for creating
a user resource, receiving information about the user such as his devices and their
types. It is also responsible for creating a device resource for a user. In the Table 6.3,
we can see basic endpoints for the user service. The user service is over the device
and project when it creates them.
Endpoint
Method
Description
/user/{uid}
GET
Returns the details of the user
/user/{uid}/device
POST
Register a device for the user
/user/{uid}/project
POST
Creates a project with the user as an
owner
Table 6.3: Endpoints for users.
Endpoint
Method
Description
/device/{did}/datatype/{dataid}
GET
Returns the data for the
specific datatype from the
specific device
/device/{did}/datatype
POST
Send data from the device
with many datatypes
Table 6.4: Endpoints for devices.
In Figure 6.4, the endpoints for the devices can be seen. These endpoints are used
for sending and storing data to the service. All of the endpoints need to have the
==PAGE:60==
52
6 Implementation of the Health-Data Service
id of the device which can be fetched using the user resource described in the table
6.3, as long as the client has an access token. The first endpoint, it is used to set
the connection between the client and the health-data service. As a result, the client
will receive an additional token, which is the device_token. Then the client can send
data to the device for specific data type by adding the token in the Header of the
request. The reason behind this decision is to not allow other clients to send data to
the health-data service without an additional authorization.
Endpoint
Method
Description
/device/{did}/devicetype/fitbit/authorize
GET
Authorize the health-data
service
to
request
data
from Fitbit’s service
/device/{did}/devicetype/fitbit/datatype
GET
Returns
the
possible
datatypes of Fitbit device
resource
Table 6.5: Endpoints for Fitbit device.
In table 6.5, the endpoints for a manufacturer’s service, in that case, Fitbit, can
be seen. The endpoints are under the device resource, however, the parameter of
the id of the devicetype has been replaced with the one of the Fitbit. Fitbit is a
reserved type since a Fitbit device is not allowed to send data directly to another
service. Moreover, the endpoint ’/device/devicetype/authorize’, redirects the user to
the Fitbit’s service in order for the health-data to receive the access and refresh token.
The details of authorization have been described in Chapter 5.4. These endpoints will
be called inside of the health-data service. The other parameters are similar to the
ones in the device resource.
Figure 6.8: JSON scheme for sending data with many datatype to the health-data
service.
==PAGE:61==
6.3 Endpoints and JSON format for the Health-Data service
53
Figure 6.9: JSON scheme for sending data for a specific datatype to the health-data
service.
In Table 6.6, the endpoints for a project can be seen. The project resource can
be used under the user resource. The project uses other resources in order to add
users and devices in it and create new roles and permissions. The first endpoint is a
POST method for creating a role. Then using the id of the role a POST method for
creating permissions for the role can be called. A user resource can be added to the
project by using under a specific role since a user needs to have a role in a project.
Also, the endpoint for adding a device can be seen.
Endpoint
Method
Description
/project/{pid}/role
POST
Creates a role resource for the
project
/project/{pid}/role/{rid}/permission
POST
Creates permissions for a role
/project/{pid}/role/{rid}/user/{uid}
POST
Assigns a user to a specific role
/project/{pid}/device/{did}
POST
Assigns a device to the project
Table 6.6: Endpoints for projects.
In Table 6.7, the endpoints for the devicetype can be seen. The first endpoint is a
POST method for creating a new device type. The POST method details of the device
type including its datatypes name. An example can be seen in Figure 6.10. Using the
id of the datatype and the POST method of ’/devicetype/{deviceid}/datatype/{dataid}’
a new data type can be under a specific device type.
==PAGE:62==
54
6 Implementation of the Health-Data Service
.
Endpoint
Method
Description
/devicetype/
POST
Creates
a
datatype
re-
source
/devicetype/{deviceid}/datatype/{dataid}
POST
Adds the specific datatype
to the device type
Table 6.7: Endpoints for device types.
Figure 6.10: JSON scheme for the POST method of /devicetype/{deviceid}’.
In Table 6.8, the endpoint for the datatype can be seen. The endpoint is a POST
method for creating a new data type while the second one getting the details of a
specific data type. Datatype can be used by the datatype in order to get data related
to the device. It can also be used by the devicetype as it was shown in Table 6.7
Endpoint
Method
Description
/datatype
POST
Creates a datatype
Table 6.8: Endpoints of the data types.
Figure 6.11 shows the JSON schema of the data type during the POST method.
It consists of the name of the data type and the structure of it. The structure is the
field and the type of each data. The available value types for JSON are object, array,
string, number, boolean, or null.
==PAGE:63==
6.4 Database schema
55
Figure 6.11: JSON scheme for the POST method of /datatype’.
This section showed some of the main endpoints of the health-data service. The
design behind the endpoints and how they can be used. In the next section, we will
discuss about the database schema which it will be used in the health-data service.
6.4
Database schema
In this section, we will describe the schema of the database where the data will be
stored. This description will give us a better understanding of how the data are stored
in the database.
Moreover, it shows the relationships between the tables, making easier to under-
stand how the data (user’s details, project’s details and so on) can be fetched either
from the front-end service, see Chapter 7, or another application with the use of the
endpoints described in the Section 6.3 . The Figure 6.12 shows the database schema.
The database schema is very similar to the domain model which was described
in Chapter 2.4. One change that can be seen is that the Permissions table is not
connected to the Devices table like the respective elements. The reason is that there
is a relationship between Projects and Devices having again a middle table to hold the
relationship of the device and the project as well as the available device’s datatypes
to the project. Thus, the records in the Permissions table will be created based on
this table. This table will be in the Database with the name ”DeviceProjects”.
What is more, there is an additional element in the database schema which is the
Token table. The Token table holds the token from manufacturers service’s as records.
It is connected with the Devices tables.
Here to be mentioned, that some tables are related in an M:N relationship using
middle tables like the case of Devices table and Projects table. Below, we describe
each table in detail like we did with the elements in the domain model.
==PAGE:64==
56
6 Implementation of the Health-Data Service
Figure 6.12: Database schema.
Projects table
Projects table contains basic information about a project such as its name, its descrip-
tion and its owner, whose id is related to the Users table. Projects table is related
to the roles into 1:M relationship since one project can have many roles. Moreover,
there is an M:N relationship between Projects tables and Devices table. The middle
table is named ”DeviceProjects” and it contains the primary keys from both tables
and the datatype id for the device as a foreign key. This table shows which devices
and their datatype are connected with a project. Furthermore, the Projects table is
==PAGE:65==
6.4 Database schema
57
related in a 1:M relationship with the Users tables and the foreign key to the Projects
tables shows the owner of the project.
Users table
Users table stores the data about the user. This table contains the username, the
first name, the last name and the password of the user as fields. The password field
needs to be stored with an encryption technique for security issues. Users table is
connected in a 1:N relationship with Projects table, one user can have many projects.
Users table is also related to Devices table, again as 1: N relationship. One user can
have many devices.
Moreover, Users table is associated with Roles table since a user can have many
roles in many projects, so forth an N: M relationship. To achieve this M:N relation-
ship, as we said, we use a middle table. In case of user and their roles, the middle
tables contains the primary keys of records of each table.
Devices table
Devices table stores basic data about devices such as their type, which is related
to DevicesTypes table, the owner of the device, the name and also an id. The de-
vice’s id plays an important role when a device needs to send data to the health-data
service, as it can be seen in Table 6.4. Devices table is connected with the projects in
an M: N relationship since a device can be assigned to many projects. Devices table
has a field DeviceTypes_id and it is the id related with DeviceTypes table. The
relationship is 1: M since one device can have only one device type.
Token table
Tokens Table stores the token which is necessary for data access to another provider
such as Fitbit, more details in the chapter 5. It is related to Device tables in a 1:1
relationship.
DeviceTypes table
DeviceTypes table contains only the name of the type. It is related to Device ta-
ble, many devices can have the same type. It is also related to DataTypes table since
many device types can have many data types and many data types can belong to
many devices types. In order to achieve the N:M relationship between DeviceTypes
table and DataTypes table, a middle table is required. The table holds the primary
keys from records both tables.
In addition, there are records in DeviceTypes table which are inserted from the
server’s side and they are about manufacturer’s devices. There are records with the
name ’Fitbit Surge 2’ or ’Fitbit Surge’.
==PAGE:66==
58
6 Implementation of the Health-Data Service
So forth, the health-data service checks that there will be no devices types with
that name as there is a special process in order to fetch their data, Chapter 5.4.
DataTypes table
Datatype table contains information about data type’s name, description, and struc-
ture. DataTypes table is connected with DataTypes table. In order to achieve the
N:M relationship between DeviceTypes table and DataTypes table, a middle table is
required. The table holds the primary keys from records both tables.
Moreover, DataTypes table is connected with Data table, so we can search for the
data using the data type as a foreign key. The way to get data based on the datatype
is explained in Section 6.3.
In addition, there are records in DataTypes table, which are reserved datatypes
mentioned to be used by device types such as Fitbit. These types, as it is mentioned
in Chapter 4.5, can be used for other device types. There are records with the name
’Heart rate’ or ’Steps’.
Roles table
Roles table contains information about a role such as its name and its description.
Each role belongs to a project. Therefore, Roles table is related to the Projects table
with a 1: N relationship. Furthermore, the Roles table is connected with Permis-
sions Table.
It is also related to Users table in an N:M relationship since a user
can have many roles in projects. The M:N relationship can be achieved with the use
of a middle table. The middle table contains the primary keys of records of each table.
Permissions Table
Permissions table is the table which contains the permissions for each role. Each
record contains the id of the role, the id of the device, related to the roles project,
the data type’s id, a start and an end date. When the health-data service receives
a request for data access, the service will search this table and check if the role has
access to a device’s datatype. If no record is found, then it means that the role has
no data access.
This chapter described the implementation of the resources has been described.
It was also described how the database needs to design the relationships among the
different tables. The next chapter shows the user interfaces which could be used for
a better handling of the health-data resources by the users.
==PAGE:67==
CHAPTER 7
Health-Data service UI
In this chapter, we describe the user interface which can be used by the engineer or
the user in order to accomplish the use cases described in Chapter 3.1. The user
interface is part of the front-end service. The purpose of the user interface, along
with the front-end service is for the user to interact with the health-service service
without a mobile or web app as a medium and to provide some user interfaces during
the authentication of the user from another application.
The user interface could be useful when the user would like to see data or share
his data. Something where a mobile application is not necessary. With the exception
of the use case 11, all the other cases can be achieved either by a mobile application
using the health-data service or from the front-end service of the health-data directly.
The user interfaces that we will show are about the main features of the health-
data service, Chapter 3. We need to mention that we did not manage to complete all
the appropriate forms. Therefore, we will show the completed ones and then drawings
of how the rest user interfaces should be and how the user can interact with them.
Figure 7.1: Registration form.
Figure 7.1 shows the user registration form.
The registration form consists of
three text fields which are the first name, the last name of the user and the password.
==PAGE:68==
60
7 Health-Data service UI
The user will need to fill the text fields and then press the Register button in order
to sign up to the system.
The registration form can either be called by a simple browser or by a client
which wants from the user to authenticate himself to the health-data service. This
user interface is related to the authentication service.
Figure 7.2 shows the log in form of the health-data service. The user needs to
type his username and his password and then he will log in to the server. The Figures
7.1 and 7.2 are related to the use cases 5.1.1 and 5.1.2.
Figure 7.2: Log in form.
Figure 7.3 shows the main portal that either a user or a developer will see when
they sign in to the health-data service. On the left side, the available options can be
seen. All the options are reported in the chapter 3.1.
Figure 7.3: Main portal of health-data service.
Figure 7.4 shows the form for creating a project. The user will type the name
==PAGE:69==
7 Health-Data service UI
61
of the project and its description. Then by pressing the ”Create a project”, he will
create his project.
Figure 7.4: Project form.
Figure 7.5 shows the form for creating a role in a project. The user will type the
name of the role and its description (optional). Then the user can press the button
”Create the role” in order to create the role.
Figure 7.5: Role form.
==PAGE:70==
62
7 Health-Data service UI
Figure 7.6 shows the form for creating a new device type. This form includes the
field of name. Then there is a list with all the registered data types.
The developer will select which data types wants his device type to have. Then
he can press the button ”Create device type” in order to create the new device type.
Figure 7.6: Device type form.
Figure 7.7 shows how the form for creating a new data type. This form includes
the field of name and an upload button. The developer will press the upload button
to upload his json file with the structure of the data type. Then he can press the
button ”Create data type” in order to create the new data type.
Figure 7.7: Data type form.
==PAGE:71==
7 Health-Data service UI
63
Figure 7.8: Device registration form.
Figure 7.8 shows how the register form for registering a device should look like.
The device registration form consists of two text fields which are the name of the
device and a description(optional). There is also a list of the available device types.
The user will need to fill the text fields and choose one device type. Then the user
has to press the ”Create Device” button in order to register the device.
Figure 7.9: User’s data UI.
Figure 7.10 shows how data for a user’s device will be shown to the user. The left
columns has the available data types of the device while the the end and start date
can be set.
==PAGE:72==
64
7 Health-Data service UI
Figure 7.10: Assign role UI.
Figure 7.10 shows how the owner of project could assign a role to the user. The
left columns has the available usernames after a search from the owner to the health-
data service while the right column has the available roles. The owner selects a user
and press the ”Assign” button.
In this chapter, some of the basic interfaces of the user interface have been shown.
In the next chapter, we will discuss the implementation tools that we used for the
health-data service.
==PAGE:73==
CHAPTER 8
Implementation tools for
the health-data service
In previous chapters, there was about the design and the implementation of the
health-data service. In this chapter, the technical details about the programming
language, which was selected for the implementation of the health-data service, will
be discussed. It will also be discussed which type of database was used and the reason
behind this choice.
8.1
Programming language
For the implementation of the health-data service we used Javascript and especially
Node.js [Nod] and a framework which called Koa.js [Koa] for the back-end and Reactjs
[Fac] for the front-end.
Node.js uses event-driven programming to web servers, something which help for a
fast web server in Javascript. An important trait for the the health-data service which
will have to handle thousands of responses. Nodejs provides us with a simplified model
of event-driven programming that uses callbacks to signal the completion of a task.
More about Node.js can be found in [Nod]. Furthermore, based on our knowledge,it
would be faster to implement the health-data service in the appropriate time and save
time in spending time using two different languages, one for the front-end and one
for the back-end.
What is more, for some additional test, we implemented a very simple mobile
application in Android [Inc16] to test some of the requests from the mobile applica-
tion to the health-data service. The choice for Android lies to the availability of a
smartphone which supports Android as an operating system.
==PAGE:74==
66
8 Implementation tools for the health-data service
8.2
Database
For data storage, PostgreSQL was used. It is open source object-relational database
system which runs on all major operating systems, in our case Linux [Posa]. The
PostgresSQL proved a valid choice because of the features it can provide [Posa].
First of all, during the implementation, there was a discussion about how to store
the data in the Data Table, Chapter 6.12. For this purpose, we could choose between
a NoSQL database, such as MongoDB, or continue in an SQL, since all the data, as
it can be seen in Figure 6.12, are structured. When it comes to data, it is pretty
clear that they are structured in a form based on the data type. Therefore, the use
of NoSQL, despite the advantages NoSQL can provide, did not seem to fit.
The other choice was the use of SQL database and the choice of a pattern called
Entity-Attribute-Value, in short EAV. EAV pattern can be seen in SQL databases
and it is used when a entity may have a vast number of attributes but each entity
usually uses a small number of them [Wik]. The EAV pattern creates each entity
with the attributes related to it. Data in EAV consist of three parts. The first part
is the entity, the item which is to be described, the attribute, and the value of the
attribute. The attribute table usually has the name of the attribute, its description,
its data type and so on. A data representation after using the EAV in DeviceType
can be seen in Figure 8.1.
Figure 8.1: EAV pattern in Datatype.
As we can see from the table in order to describe DeviceType we need to join
three tables. The entity table (Devicetype), the attribute table (Datatype) and the
value tables. Then, in our case, we will have to relate the the data in value tables
with the device.
==PAGE:75==
8.2 Database
67
What is more, as we mentioned in Chapter 6.4, there is a middle table between
DevieType and DataType table. Thus, the complexity of the queries to join tables
in order to get or store data is getting higher. In addition, if the software engineer
has to add a new datatype with new values, he will have to add more tables to the
health-data service.
PostgreSQL, on the other hand provides us with a new data type which is called
JSONB. JSONB is a data type in JSON format which can support indexing and
quering [Posb]. Therefore, instead of having tables of values connected to datatype,
We can create a JSONB file for structure and keep it as a map for storing the data
in the Data table, Listing 8.1.
1 {
2
"Steps": 100,
3
"Calories":500
4 }
Listing 8.1: An example of JSONB.
Thus, the result of using JSNOB can be seen in table 8.1. This is an example from
Data table where we collect all the value under one column and Datatype tables just
holds the structure of the datatype.
Health device
17-09-2017
Heart rate
{”Steps”: 100,”Calories”:500}
Health device
18-09-2017
Heart rate
{”Steps”: 100,”Calories”:500}
Table 8.1: Data in complete form.
In this chapter, we showed the tools that we used for the implementation of the
health-data service. In the next chapter, we evaluate the progress of the implementa-
tion of the health-data service and what was achieved based on the use case scenarios
and MoSCoW method, Chapter 3.
==PAGE:76==
68
==PAGE:77==
CHAPTER 9
Evaluation of the project
In this chapter, an evaluation of the implementation of the health-data service will
take place. The evaluation will be based on the uses cases and the MoSCoW method
mentioned in Chapter 3. First, we will discuss some issues during the implementation
and then we will focus on the results.
9.1
Discussion about the implementation of the
health-data service
Before the results, it should be mentioned the progress of the implementation of the
health-data service. During the implementation, the main focus was on the develop-
ment of the back-end service and the support of endpoints described in Chapter 6.3.
However, as it can be seen in Chapter 7, not all of the possible interfaces managed
to be implemented in order to see the features of the health-data service from user’s
perspective. Thus, the main testing took place using the requests to the health-data
service and receiving the appropriate response.
The cases which follow, show how we used the health-data service in order to
register a user/software engineer and authenticate him. Then, we tried to create a
datatype, devicetype and register a device with the created devicetype to the health-
data system. Then, we create a project and add one role into it. Then, we add the
device and its datatype to the project and gave a permission for data access to the
role.
9.2
Main scenario for user and software engineer
For the user’s scenario, the health-data service did not have to be online. So all the
requests were testing running it locally. The scenario starts with the request to the
authentication service for registering a user.
==PAGE:78==
70
9 Evaluation of the project
Figure 9.1, shows the request for user registration. Here it needs to be mentioned
that the request should be in HTTPs and encrypted, but it was not required for the
testing.
Figure 9.1: Register request.
The result of the request can be seen in the database in Figure 9.2. The password
of the user is stored after hashing it, so it can be encrypted.
Figure 9.2: User record in the database.
The next step to our use case was to log into the health-data service and receive a
token in order for the user/software engineer to use the resources of the health-data
service.
Figure 9.3: User authentication.
==PAGE:79==
9.2 Main scenario for user and software engineer
71
The response of the request can be seen in Figure 9.4. The response includes the
access and refreshed tokens which we described in Chapter 6. It also includes the id
of the user which can be used for the resources as we saw in Chapter 6.
Figure 9.4: User authentication response.
Now that the user has a token, we will use the request for creating a new datatype
and a new devicetype. First, we will create the datatype so we can use it in order to
assign it to the devicetype, based on the use case 13.
Figure 9.5: Datatype registration.
In Figure 9.6, it can be seen the datatype representation in the database. The
structure is a JSONB file as it is mentioned in Chapter 8. The next of the use case
is to assign the devicetype with the datatype
Figure 9.6: Datatype representation in the database.
Figure 9.7 shows the request body for the devicetype registration.
After the
request is send, we will receive a successful response and a connection between the
datatype and the device will be made. Figure 9.8 shows the table which hold the
connection between the datatype and the devicetype.
==PAGE:80==
72
9 Evaluation of the project
Figure 9.7: Devicetype Registration.
Figure 9.8: Datatype-Devicetype connection.
Now that there is a devicetype connected with the datatype, the next case should
be the device registration for this user. Figure 9.9 show the request for the device
registration. The record of the device at the database can be seen in Figure 9.10.
Figure 9.9: Device Registration.
==PAGE:81==
9.2 Main scenario for user and software engineer
73
Figure 9.10: Device record in the database.
Until now we gave an overview of how to use the resources of the health-data
service and fulfill the use case of registering a user, a datatype, a devicetype and a
device. The next step is to build the scenario of creating a project, a role and assign
the device we created to the project. Before we start to describe the scenario, step
by step, we should be aware that the request will work since the user who makes the
request is either the owner of the device or of the project.
In Figure 9.11 the request for the registration of a project in the database of the
health-data service while in Figure 9.12 we can see the project record. The foreign
key which connects the project with the owner can be seen.
Figure 9.11: Project Registration Request.
Figure 9.12: Project Representation in the database.
==PAGE:82==
74
9 Evaluation of the project
The next step is to create a role for the project. Figure 9.13 shows how the request
for creating a role for the specifi project, while Figure 9.14 shows the role record in
the database of the health-data service.
Figure 9.13: Role Registration Request.
Figure 9.14: Role Representation in the database.
In the next step, the user and owner of the device will assign his device to the
project. Figure 9.13 shows how the request for assigning the device and its selected
datatypes for the specific project, while Figure 9.14 shows the result record in the
database.
==PAGE:83==
9.2 Main scenario for user and software engineer
75
Figure 9.15: Device assignment to the project Request.
Figure 9.16: Relationship of the device and the project in the database.
Now, the owner of the project assigns gives permissions to the role ”Doctor”.
Doctor was created like the ”Patient” in Figure 9.13. Figure 9.17 shows how the
request for assigning to the role of the specific project. Figure 9.18 shows the result
record in the database.
Figure 9.17: Permission assignment to the role the project.
==PAGE:84==
76
9 Evaluation of the project
Figure 9.18: Permission record for the role in the database.
At then, we managed to have registered a user to the health-data service. Register
a device type and a datatype and a device to the health-data service. We also managed
to create a project, a role and add the registered device to it. All these cases have
been done using the endpoints. The next, scenario describes the data collection and
storage from health-data service.
9.3
Data collection and storage scenario
In this section, we will show the implementation from the perspective of collecting
and storing data on it. First, we need to mention that until this phase of the imple-
mentation, the authentication technique was not implemented fully. Therefore, we
had to hand in the access token manually in order for the request to be made. For
this scenario, the health-data service was online.
Before the data collection, we followed again the user’s perspective scenario’s in
order to register a device. Then, we used a simple Android application responsible
for sending data to the health data service. The Android application was sending
data using the id of a specific device and the access token provided to the user. The
data were stored in the database of the health-data service. After the data collection,
the Android application was requesting to see the data which sent. Figure 9.19 shows
the data that the Android application sent and received.
==PAGE:85==
9.3 Data collection and storage scenario
77
Figure 9.19: Data received from the heatlth-data service to the smartphone.
Figure 9.20: Permission page of Fitbit.
==PAGE:86==
78
9 Evaluation of the project
During the implementation, a Fitbit Surge 2 was used. The Fitbit Surge 2 lies to
the category of devices whose data access can be requested by the Fitbit’s service, for
more detail see Chapter 4.2. The connection with Fitbit was made only through the
health-data service and not with a smartphone.
In Figure 9.20, the Fitbit’s permission page can be seen during the request for
access for the specific device. Then, the request for the data has been made and stored
in the database. Figure 9.21 shows the data ready to be stored in the database.
Figure 9.21: Data received from Fitbit.
In this chapter, there was a demonstration of the features that the health-data
support at this stage.
• A user can register himself.
• A devicetype and datatype can be created.
• A device can be registered by the user.
• A project can be created.
• A role for a project can be created.
• A device can be added to a project.
• Permissions for a device can be handed to a role.
==PAGE:87==
9.3 Data collection and storage scenario
79
• A mobile application can send data to the health data service.
The above features lie in the ”must have” features of MoSCoW methods described
in Chapter 3, in terms of collecting and storing data, registering a device,devicetype
and datatype. However, there things which have not been implemented yet:
• Fully functional authentication and authorization technique.
• All the interface which can support the use case scenarios.
Moreover, additional tests need to be made and check the behaviour of the health-
data service when it interacts with multiple devices and applications. In addition,
all the available endpoints need to be functional and fill their purpose. The way of
communication and the data collection seems to be feasible in a simple level. Hence,
for the health-data service, more testing is needed.
==PAGE:88==
80
==PAGE:89==
CHAPTER 10
Conclusion
Here is the conclusion to the thesis and Future work which can be made in order for
the health-data service to be improved.
10.1
Conclusion
The main scope of the thesis was the implementation of software responsible for
collecting data from wearables via smartphones and monitoring the access to them.
Scenarios of how this software should work were described. Based on the scenarios,
the requirements of the health-data service were set. A discussion about the present
situation in the wearables and some possible issues was made.
Based on these, the design of the health-data service was made and analyzed.
The possible implementation of was shown. Lastly, an early implementation of the
health-data service took place in this thesis.
This early implementation includes a simple case of a user and device registration.
It also includes a simple case of data collection from smartphones and another service.
According to Chapter 9, there is a room for improvement. Future work is described
in Section 10.2
10.2
Future work
Authorization improvement
In Chapter 5 we discussed the authentication technique. A further implementation
and completion of the authorization between the application and the health-data ser-
vice should be made.
Device Connectors
As it was discussed in the evaluation, only the connector for Fitbit was implemented
and test. However, more connectors need to be implemented. This will extend the
possible devices that the health-data service can support.
==PAGE:90==
82
10 Conclusion
User Interface
In the evaluation, Chapter 6, is mentioned that during the implementation the focus
was greater for the core functionalities of the back-end of the health-data service. Im-
provements and additional user interfaces can be implemented since the user could
use the endpoints in order to use the resources of the health-data service.
Data Process
In the implementation, we managed to get data from the health-data service based
on the datatype. Further implementation could be done for fetching data based on
values in the JSONB type in Data table.
==PAGE:91==
CHAPTER 11
Glossary
Wearable
A device which can be worn by a person in order to track data
such as heart rate, distance and so on. An example of a wearable
is a smartwatch.
API
An application programming interface (API) is a set of subroutine
definitions, protocols, and tools for building application software.
It is a set of clearly defined methods of communication between
various software components.
Web application
A web application or web app is a client–server software applica-
tion in which the client (or user interface) runs in a web browser.
==PAGE:92==
84
==PAGE:93==
CHAPTER 12
Appendix
12.1
Additional Interfaces
Figure 12.1: User’s projects.
Figure 12.2: Project’s members and roles.
==PAGE:94==
86
12 Appendix
12.2
Additional Endpoints
Endpoint
Method
Description
/user/{uid}
GET
Returns the details of the user
/user/{uid}/device
GET
Returns all the devices of the user
/user/{uid}/project
GET
Returns the projects of the user as an
owner
/user/{uid}/project?name
GET
Returns the projects of the user as an
owner with the specific name
/user/{uid}/project/{pid}
GET
Returns the details of a project of the
user as an owner
/user/{uid}/project/{pid}
/role/{rid}
GET
Returns the details of a project of the
user as an owner
Table 12.1: Endpoints for users.
Endpoint
Method
Description
/user/{uid}
GET
Returns the details of the user
/user/{uid}/device
GET
Returns all the devices of the user
/user/{uid}/project
GET
Returns the projects of the user as an
owner
/user/{uid}/project?name
GET
Returns the projects of the user as an
owner with the specific name
/user/{uid}/project/{pid}
GET
Returns the details of a project of the
user as an owner
/user/{uid}/project/{pid}
/role/{rid}
GET
Returns the details of a project of the
user as an owner
Table 12.2: Endpoints for users.
==PAGE:95==
12.2 Additional Endpoints
87
Endpoint
Method
Description
/search/user?firstname&lastname
GET
Returns the user with a specific
firstname OR lastname
/search/datatype?name
GET
Returns a datatype with that
name
/search/devicetype?name
GET
Returns a devicetype with that
name
/search/project?name
GET
Returns the projects with that
name
Table 12.3: Endpoints for search service.
Endpoint
Method
Description
/datatype
POST
Creates a datatype
/datatype/{dataid}
GET
Returns
details
about
hte
datatype
Table 12.4: Endpoints of the data types.
Endpoint
Method
Description
/device/devicetype/fitbit
POST
Creates a new Fitbit de-
vice resource for the user
/device/devicetype/fitbit/authorize
GET
Authorize the health-data
service
to
request
data
from Fitbit’s service
/device/devicetype/fitbit/datatype
GET
Returns
the
possible
datatypes of Fitbit device
resource
/device/devicetype/fitbit/
datatype/{dataid}
POST
Creates a new Fitbit de-
vice resource for the user
Table 12.5: Endpoints for Fitbit device.
==PAGE:96==
88
12 Appendix
Endpoint
Method
Description
/project
POST
Creates a new project resource
/project/{pid}
GET
Returns details of the project
/project/{pid}
DELETE
Deletes the project
/project/{pid}/role
GET
Returns the roles of the project
/project/{pid}/role/{rid}
GET
Returns a specific role from the
project
/project/{pid}/role
POST
Creates a role resource for the
project
/project/{pid}/role/{rid}
DELETE
Deletes a role resource of the
project
/project/{pid}/role/{rid}/permission
GET
Returns the permissions of the
role
/project/{pid}/role/{rid}/permission
POST
Creates permissions for a role
/project/{pid}/roles/{rid}/permission
PUT
Updates the permissions of a role
/project/{pid}/role/{rid}/user/{uid}
POST
Assigns a user to a specific role
/project/{pid}/role/{rid}/user
/{uid}/datatype/{dataid}
POST
Get the data of the user for the
specific role
/project/{pid}/device/{did}/
POST
Assigns a device to the project
/project/{pid}/device
GET
Returns all the devices related to
the project
/project/{pid}/device/{did}
GET
Returns the details of the specific
related to the project
/project/{pid}/device/{did}
DELETE
Deletes the specific from the
project
Table 12.6: Endpoints for projects.
.
Endpoint
Method
Description
/devicetype/
POST
Creates
a
datatype
re-
source
/devicetype/{deviceid}
GET
Returns the details of the
specific device type
/devicetype/{deviceid}/datatype/{dataid}
POST
Adds the datatype to the
device type
Table 12.7: Endpoints for device types.
==PAGE:97==
Bibliography
[Atz10]
Luigi Atzori. “The Internet of Things: A survey”. In: Computer Networks
1389.1286 (2010), page 19. doi: http://dx.doi.org/:10.1016/j.comnet.
2010.05.010.
[D H]
Ed D. Hardt. The OAuth 2.0 Authorization Framework. url: https://
tools.ietf.org/html/rfc6749.
[Fac]
Facebook. React. url: https://facebook.github.io/react/.
[Fie00]
Roy Thomas Fielding. Architectural Styles and the Design of Network-based
Software Architectures. Technical report. University of California, 2000.
[FS16]
Manuel Caeiro-Rodriguez Francisco de Arriba-Perez and Juan M. Santos-
Gago. “Collection and Processing of Data from Wrist Wearable Devices
in Heterogeneous and Multiple-User Scenarios”. In: Sensors 16.16 (2016),
page 1538. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/s16091538.
[Inc14]
Fitbit Inc. Fitbit Policy. August 2014. url: https://www.fitbit.com/uk/
legal/privacy.
[Inc16]
Google Inc. Google Fit: An Overview. June 2016. url: https://developers.
google.com/fit/overview.
[Inc17]
Apple Inc. Apple Health. June 2017. url: https://www.apple.com/lae/
ios/health/.
[Jon]
M. Jones. JSON Web Token (JWT). url: https://tools.ietf.org/
html/rfc7519.
[JWT]
JWT. JWT Introduction. url: https://jwt.io/introduction/.
[Koa]
Koa. Koa. url: http://koajs.com/.
[Kuo11]
Alex Mu-Hsing Kuo. “Opportunities and Challenges of Cloud Computing
to Improve Health Care Services”. In: Journal of Medical Internet Research
13.3 (2011), page 67. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.2196/jmir.1867.
[MG09]
Peter Mell and Tim Grance. The NIST Definition of Cloud Computing.
cloud computing. July 2009.
[Nod]
Node. Node.js. url: https://nodejs.org/en/.
[OAu]
OAuth. OAuth. url: https://auth0.com/blog/cookies-vs-tokens-
definitive-guide/.
[Posa]
PostgreSQL. PostgreSQL. url: https://www.postgresql.org/.
==PAGE:98==
90
Bibliography
[Posb]
PostgreSQL. PostgreSQL 9.5 Documentation. url: https://www.postgresql.
org/.
[TM14]
Kiana Tehrani and Andrew Michael. “Wearable Technology and Wearable
Devices: Everything You Need to Know.” In: Wearable Devices Magazine
(2014).
[Wik]
Wikipedia. Entity–attribute–value model. url: https://en.wikipedia.
org/wiki/Entity%E2%80%93attribute%E2%80%93value_model.
