==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
 
 
 
Microplastics in  
Wastewater Treatment Plants 
 
 
 
June 2017 
Choo Zhi Xuan, Clarice S150991 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:2==
 
 
 
 
 
II
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Microplastics in Wastewater Treatment Plants 
 
Master Thesis 
Choo Zhi Xuan, Clarice 
DTU Environment, Department of Environmental Engineering 
June 2017 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Supervisors: 
 
Professor Anders Baun 
Senior Researcher Nanna B. Hartmann 
Head of Laboratory Section Susanne Kruse 
 
From DTU Environment, Department of Environmental Engineering 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:3==
 
 
 
 
 
III 
Abstract 
Microplastic (MP) occurrence in aquatic environments is of growing concern, and its 
prevalence is expected to rise in the face of increasing plastic consumption. Wastewater 
treatment plants (WWTPs) are central infrastructures dealing with urban water use and 
storm water worldwide. While WWTPs could be a major pathway of MP discharge into 
the environment, WWTPs also provide an opportunity for the management and 
mitigation of MP pollution. However, while studies investigating MPs in WWTPs have 
been published, many of them lack method validation, and a standard method for the 
quantification of MPs in organic-rich wastewater has yet to be established. This thesis 
commences with a literature review on MPs in WWTPs, summarizes sampling, 
extraction, identification and enumeration methods, and assesses their advantages and 
limitations. In order to bridge the validation gap in MP studies, simulations of key MP 
retention processes identified in literature were performed under controlled conditions. 
Traceable MPs (63-355μm) were added to samples via a novel method, which effectively 
addressed several technical issues with regards to MP spiking. Experimental comparisons 
of the effectiveness of several chemical digestion methods revealed that H2O2 oxidation 
(60°C, 24h) was most effective in the reduction of organic matter, without affecting MPs. 
Results obtained suggest that primary and secondary treatment was capable of >99% MP 
removal, whereby skimming and settling were identified as the key MP removal 
processes involved. Pilot scale experiments involving a Discfilter primary treatment 
revealed the importance of coagulation and flocculation in retaining MP. MP retention 
was >80% more effective with coagulants and polymers than without. The effectiveness 
of membrane filtration technologies (used during tertiary treatment and combined sewer 
overflow events) in MP retention was found to be highly dependent on the membrane 
pore size, while retention could be enhanced by MP adherence to biomass (e.g. algal). 
However, particles larger than the stipulated membrane pore sizes were also observed to 
escape filtration. As the analysis of MPs is highly dependent on the methods employed, 
and the experience and expertise of the individual analysts involved, results could vary 
widely from study to study. Therefore, the author suggests that, prior to each set of 
studies, validation tests using traceable plastics should be performed. This would award 
their subsequent results greater reliability.   
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:4==
 
 
 
 
 
IV
Preface 
This thesis was completed at the Department of Environmental Engineering at the 
Technical University of Denmark (DTU), Kongens Lyngby. This thesis amounts to 30 
ECTS credits and was carried out from 23rd January to 23rd June 2017.   
 
I would like to give my utmost thanks to my two wonderful supervisors, Anders Baun 
and Nanna B. Hartmann, who were constantly my beacon of light in this thesis ‘storm’. 
Thanks for the excellent guidance, great discussions and valuable advice. A big thank you 
also to Susanne Kruse for her guidance throughout this project. This project would not 
have been successful without this winning trio who always brought novel ideas and 
enthusiastic cheer to the project.  
 
I would also like to give thanks to Henrik Rasmus Andersen and Kamilla Marie Speht 
Kaarsholm for their expert opinions on wastewater and wastewater treatment. Thank you 
also to Ariadni Droumpali who was my ‘partner-in-crime’ in many of the experiments. 
Thank you for the interesting conversations, advice, and free snacks. Thank you Kamilla 
and Ariadni for getting ‘down and dirty’ with me in this project.   
 
In connection with the Pilot Scale project Sjölunda WWTP in Malmö, I would like to 
thank Mikael Sjölin and Petter Olsson from Hydrotech for their warm Swedish 
hospitality and great help. Thank you for setting up all the equipment needed and for 
making our sampling a breeze. 
 
Thank you to Ravi Kumar Chhetri for his expertise in combined sewer overflows and for 
reminding me to prepare for Murphy’s Laws, and to Sinja Rist for sharing her experience 
in working with microplastics. I would also like to thank all the laboratory technicians 
who have guided me in the laboratory. Finally, special thanks to my family for their 
loving support.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
I
==PAGE:5==
 
 
 
 
 
V 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
1 
INTRODUCTION 
1 
1.1 
AIM 
2 
1.2 
PROJECT OUTLINE 
2 
2 
MICROPLASTICS IN THE ENVIRONMENT 
4 
2.1 
SOURCES & TYPES OF MICROPLASTICS 
4 
2.2 
MICROPLASTICS: A CAUSE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL CONCERN? 
5 
2.2.1 
      BIOLOGICAL EFFECTS OF INGESTED MICROPLASTICS 
5 
2.2.2 
      TRANSPORT AND DISTRIBUTION OF MPS 
6 
3 
MICROPLASTICS IN WWTPS 
8 
3.1 
OCCURRENCE OF MICROPLASTICS IN WASTEWATER 
8 
3.2 
MICROPLASTIC RETENTION IN WWTPS 
8 
3.2.1 
      EFFECT OF PRIMARY AND SECONDARY TREATMENT ON MICROPLASTIC   RETENTION 
9 
3.2.2 
      EFFECT OF TERTIARY TREATMENT ON MICROPLASTIC RETENTION 
10 
3.3 
MICROPLASTIC RETENTION IN THE SEWAGE SLUDGE 
10 
3.3.1 
      REUSE OF SEWAGE SLUDGE 
11 
3.3.2 
      TREATMENT OF SLUDGE PRIOR TO AGRICULTURAL USE 
12 
3.4 
MICROPLASTIC RELEASE DUE TO OVERFLOW EVENTS 
12 
4 
METHODS FOR PROCESSING MPS: SAMPLING, EXTRACTION, IDENTIFICATION 
& ENUMERATION 
14 
4.1 
SAMPLING OF WWTP SAMPLES 
15 
4.2 
PRE-TREATMENT OF SAMPLES AND MP EXTRACTION 
16 
4.2.1 
      ALKALINE AND ACID HYDROLYSIS 
16 
4.2.2 
      HYDROGEN PEROXIDE OXIDATION 
16 
4.2.3 
      WET PEROXIDE OXIDATION AND FENTON’S PROCESS 
17 
4.2.4 
      PHYSICAL SEPARATION 
17 
4.3 
IDENTIFICATION AND ENUMERATION 
21 
4.3.1 
      MICROSCOPY METHODS 
21 
4.3.2 
      FT-IR SPECTROSCOPY 
22 
4.3.3 
      RAMAN SPECTROSCOPY 
23 
4.3.4 
      STAINING 
24 
4.3.5 
      THERMAL ANALYSIS 
25 
5 
MATERIALS & METHODS 
28 
5.1 
TRACEABLE MICROPLASTICS 
28 
5.2 
QUANTIFICATION OF MICROPLASTICS VIA LIGHT MICROSCOPY 
29 
5.3 
SAMPLING SITES AND SAMPLING PROCEDURES 
30 
5.3.1 
      LUNDTOFTE WWTP 
30 
5.3.2 
      SAMPLE COLLECTION AT LUNDTOFTE WWTP 
31 
5.3.3 
      SJÖLUNDA WWTP IN MALMÖ 
31 
5.3.4 
      SAMPLE COLLECTION AT SJÖLUNDA WWTP 
32 
5.3.5 
      SLUDGE CHARACTERIZATION 
32 
5.4 
EXPERIMENT OVERVIEW 
33 
5.5 
STAGE 1: PRE-TREATMENT EXPERIMENTS - CHEMICAL DIGESTION 
34 
5.6 
STAGE 2: SETTLING TESTS 
35 
5.6.1 
      SETTLING TEST 
36 
5.6.2 
      SAMPLE PREPARATION AND ANALYSIS 
37 
5.7 
STAGE 3: MEMBRANE FILTRATION EXPERIMENTS 
38 
5.7.1 
      SIMULATION OF CSO 
39 
II 
==PAGE:6==
 
 
 
 
 
VI
5.7.2 
      SIMULATION OF TERTIARY TREATMENT 
39 
5.8 
STAGE 4: PILOT SCALE EXPERIMENT 
39 
6 
RESULTS & DISCUSSION 
41 
6.1 
RECOVERY OF SPIKED TRACEABLE MICROPLASTICS 
41 
6.2 
RECOVERY OF MPS USING LIGHT MICROSCOPY 
42 
6.3 
STAGE 1: SELECTION OF SLUDGE DIGESTION METHOD 
43 
6.4 
STAGE 2: SETTLING TESTS 
45 
6.4.1 
      NYLON MICROPARTICLES 
45 
6.4.2 
      PE MICROPARTICLES 
46 
6.4.3 
      EFFECTIVENESS OF SKIMMING AND SETTLING PROCESSES 
47 
6.5 
STAGE 3: MEMBRANE FILTRATION EXPERIMENTS 
48 
6.5.1 
      FILTRATION OF SIMULATED CSO  
48 
6.5.2 
      SIMULATION OF TERTIARY FILTRATION  
49 
6.6 
STAGE 4: PILOT SCALE EXPERIMENT 
50 
6.7 
OVERALL DISCUSSION & PERSPECTIVES 
52 
7 
CONCLUSION 
55 
REFERENCES 
57 
APPENDICES 
I 
APPENDIX A: DENSITY OF COMMON POLYMERS 
I 
APPENDIX B: INTRODUCTION ON TYPICAL WWTPS 
I 
APPENDIX C: OVERVIEW OF STUDIES ON MICROPLASTICS IN WWTPS 
I 
APPENDIX D: RECOVERY OF TRACEABLE MICROPLASTICS (PELLET COUNTS) 
I 
APPENDIX E: COMPLETE SCHEMATIC REPRESENTATION OF TREATMENT PROCESSES AT    LUNDTOFTE 
WWTP 
III 
APPENDIX F: CHARACTERISATION OF WASTEWATER & SLUDGE 
IV 
APPENDIX G: PREPARATION OF FESO4 SOLUTION USED 
V 
APPENDIX H: H2O2 CONCENTRATION MEASUREMENT: ONE-STEP COLORIMETRIC METHOD 
V 
APPENDIX I: RESULTS OF STAGE 1 (CHEMICAL DIGESTION) 
VI 
APPENDIX J: RESULTS OF STAGE 2 (SETTLING TESTS) 
IX 
APPENDIX K: CONCENTRATION CALCULATION OF FLUOROPHOREXTM PS MICROSPHERES 
XII 
APPENDIX L: RESULTS OF THE MEMBRANE EXPERIMENTS 
XIII 
APPENDIX M: DETERMINATION OF SAMPLE COLLECTION TIME PERIOD FOR STAGE 4 
XIV 
APPENDIX N: RESULTS OF THE PILOT SCALE EXPERIMENT 
XV 
APPENDIX O: MICROSCOPIC OBSERVATIONS OF MPS 
XVI 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
III 
==PAGE:7==
 
 
 
 
 
VII 
Glossary & Abbreviations 
 
ATR 
Attenuated total reflectance 
BOD 
Biochemical oxygen demand 
CSO 
Combined sewer overflow 
DI water 
Deionised water 
EU 
European Union 
HOC 
Hydrophobic organic compounds 
FT-IR 
Fourier transform infrared 
MP 
Microplastic 
MBR 
Membrane bioreactor 
OM 
Organic matter 
SEM 
Scanning electron microscopy 
SS 
Suspended solids 
TE 
Treated effluent 
TOC 
Total organic carbon 
TSS 
Total suspended solids 
VSS 
Volatile suspended solids 
WPO 
Wet peroxide oxidation 
WW 
Wastewater 
WWTP 
Wastewater treatment plant 
 
Abbreviations for polymer types: 
HDPE 
High density polyethylene 
PE 
Polyethylene 
PES 
Polyester 
PP 
Polypropylene 
PS 
Polystyrene 
PVC 
Polyvinylchloride 
PVPP 
Polyvinylpolypyrrolidone 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IV 
==PAGE:8==
 
 
 
 
 
1 
1 Introduction 
The ubiquitous use of plastics in our everyday lives has translated into increasing 
amounts of plastic litter in the environment today. And while the effects of macroplastic 
ingestion by animals have been well documented and are key issues for debate regarding 
plastic pollution in water environments, a less visible but highly proliferate contaminant 
is also cause for concern – microplastics (MPs).  
 
Along with an increasing global consumption of plastics and its subsequent release, the 
undesired presence of microplastics in the aquatic environment is expected to increase. 
Wastewater treatment plants (WWTPs) are central infrastructures dealing with urban 
water use and storm water all over the world. Given the anthropogenic nature of MPs, it 
is highly plausible for WWTP effluents to be significant point sources of MP discharge to 
the environment (Cole et al., 2011; Mintenig et al., 2017). While WWTPs represent a 
source of MP into the environment, if properly handled, it could possibly retain MPs, 
hence representing a centralized pathway with which to mitigate environmental 
contamination by MPs. 
 
While WWTPs of date are not specifically designed to retain small MPs, WWTPs 
equipped with secondary treatment has reportedly been able to remove over 95% of MP 
and other small anthropogenic litter (Vollertsen & Hansen, 2017; Michielssen et al., 2016; 
Talvitie et al., 2017), with high retention rates of MPs by sewage sludge (Magnusson et 
al., 2016). The fate of MPs in WWTPs is highly dependent on the unit processes 
employed, with preliminary and primary treatment steps retaining majority of the MPs 
(Michielssen et al., 2016). However, in spite of generally high retention rates, a significant 
amount of MPs is still being released with effluent flows due to high daily wastewater 
loads. WWTP effluents could present an increasingly important source of MPs in the 
future due to population growth, rapid urbanization and industrialization, which all lead 
to greater production of wastewater (Ziajahromi et al., 2016).  
 
The use of WWTP sewage sludge as fertilizer on agricultural fields is common due to its 
high nutrient content. In the European Union, stringent regulations with regards to 
heavy metals and other contaminants are in place to protect the environment and human 
health (EC, 2001). However, regulations have yet to be extended to MP. Sludge 
application could therefore, possibly contaminate terrestrial environments, with the 
subsequent potential to enter aquatic environments as runoff.  
 
It is hence, paramount to obtain greater understanding of the fate, transport and 
distribution of MPs within WWTPs in order to help WWTP engineers refine their 
existing treatment processes, to reduce the subsequent loading of MPs into both aquatic 
and terrestrial environments, and also to contribute in the development of effective 
mitigation and prevention strategies.  
 
 
==PAGE:9==
 
 
 
 
 
2 
In spite of the growing interest in MPs in WWTPs, due to the high organic content in 
wastewater, detection of MPs still remains a challenge. It is necessary that, prior to the 
quantification of MPs, a reliable set of methods has to be established. To investigate the 
prevalence of MPs in WWTPs, several studies have employed various processing 
(sampling, extraction, identification and enumeration) methods to quantify MPs. 
However, due to the relative novelty of investigating MPs in organic-rich samples such as 
wastewater, no standard protocol exists, making it a challenge to compare results 
obtained from the various studies. Reliability in quantification methods is key in method 
development. However, few studies have examined and validated their processing 
methods to ascertain the reliability of their results. As such, discussion of the current 
methods available and employed is pertinent. This not only helps to evaluate the 
appropriateness and feasibility of methods available, but also addresses possible 
improvements that could be employed. 
1.1 
Aim 
The main objectives of this project are to investigate the transport and distribution of 
MPs in WWTPs, and to assess the appropriateness and reliability of current MP 
processing methods available. These objectives will be met via (1) a literature review, 
followed by experimental investigations ranging from controlled (2) laboratory-scale 
experiments of key treatment stages in a typical wastewater treatment plant (WWTP), to 
(3) a pilot scale Discfilter installation for primary treatment of inlet water. All 
experimental procedures will be performed with an emphasis on mass conservation, 
where MP distribution will be analysed using traceable MPs. Throughout the entire 
study, the appropriateness and efficacy of current MP processing methods will also be 
examined.  
 
The objectives of this thesis are to be met by addressing the following questions: 
 Which are the key processes within WWTPs that retains the most MPs, and what 
are their potential retention capabilities?  
 What is the potential for MP retention by sludge during the primary settling and 
secondary settling stages? And how do the properties of MPs affect their settling 
in these treatment stages? 
 How effective are membranes and filters in retaining MP particles? And what is 
the potential retention of MP discharge from combined sewer overflows (CSOs)? 
 In view of current MP processing methods (i.e. sampling, extraction, 
identification and enumeration) used with respect to wastewater samples, which 
methods are potentially the most promising for quantification purposes, and how 
can these methods can be improved to increase reliability?  
1.2 
Project Outline 
The questions posed in Section 1.1 will be answered by a combination of a literature 
review on current studies performed, laboratory-based settling and membrane 
experiments, and a final pilot scale experiment at Sjölunda WWTP in Malmo. The pilot 
scale experiment involves a setup consisting of flocculation-coagulation processes 
==PAGE:10==
 
 
 
 
 
3 
followed by filtration via Discfilter (100μm filter), which acts as an alternative primary 
treatment process. 
The experimental portion of this thesis is structured into 4 test stages. An overview of 
the experimental stages carried out is depicted in Figure 1.1. 
 
 
Figure 1.1: Overview of experimental stages in this thesis 
The experimental portion of this thesis is designed such that key MP removal processes 
and possible avenues of MP release from WWTPs as identified in literature are 
investigated using traceable MPs. (Figure 1.2)  
 
 
Figure 1.2: Overview of WWTP processes examined in this thesis (Stages 2 & 3). 
The experiments (Stages 1 to 4) will be carried out by adding traceable MPs of known 
origin, appearance and size (namely nylon, polyethylene and polystyrene) to different 
wastewater samples of interest, and will thereafter be performed in a similar manner to 
processes in WWTPs. The size range of MPs used in this thesis was 63-355μm. 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Stage 4 
Pilot Scale 
Experiment 
•
Discfilter 
•
Primary 
treatment 
Stage 3 
Membrane Filtration 
Tests 
•
Tertiary 
microfiltration 
(25μm)  
•
Combined Sewer 
Overflow (100μm) 
Stage 2 
Settling Tests 
MP settling in 
primary inlet 
wastewater 
and activated 
sludge 
Stage 1 
Pre-treatment 
Experiment 
•
MP extraction 
•
Chemical 
digestion of 
organic matter  
==PAGE:11==
 
 
 
 
 
4 
2 Microplastics in the Environment  
As the plastic industry and global plastic demand rapidly grows (Embree, 2016), 
microplastic debris is becoming an emerging issue in both marine and freshwater 
environments. This chapter provides a background into MPs in the environment, and the 
methods currently used to extract, identify and enumerate MPs in both environmental 
and WWTP samples.  
2.1 
Sources & Types of Microplastics 
Microplastics are generally defined as small synthetic plastic fragments <5mm in 
diameter, made of synthetic polymers such as polyethylene, polypropylene and nylon 
(polyamide) (Carr et al, 2016; Wardrop et al., 2016). The minimum size limits for MPs 
examined in literature however, still differ, as they are directly dependent on the sampling 
and processing methods employed, such as the pore size of the sieves used (Hidalgo-Ruz 
et al., 2012). 
 
Both primary and secondary MPs can be found in the environment, of which they are 
mainly differentiated by purpose and mode of their construction. Primary MPs are 
plastics that are intentionally manufactured to be of microscopic size, and include 
industrial pellets that serve as precursors for manufactured plastic products, particles 
generated in the ship-breaking industry, and added to cosmetics as exfoliants (Fendall & 
Sewell, 2009; Andrady, 2011; Cole et al., 2011; Mintenig, 2017). Primary MPs used in air-
blasting technology, such as acrylic, melamine and polyester, are often contaminated with 
heavy metals as they are used as scrubbers to remove rust and paint from machinery and 
boat hulls (Gregory, 1996 as cited by Cole et al., 2011). Larger plastics that break down 
and degrade into small fragments in the environment due to biotic and abiotic processes 
are known as secondary MP (Cole et al., 2011; Mintenig, 2017). While plastic litter is 
mostly non-biodegradable and considered inert, the polymeric molecular structures of 
MPs is subject to continuous change under natural environmental conditions, such as 
mechanical abrasion with sand and abiotic degradation by UV (Song et al., 2017; ter 
Halle et al., 2016). Secondary MPs include fragments of degraded plastic products and 
fibres of synthetic textiles, and by the nature of the way it is produced, typically exhibits 
more diverse geometries than primary MPs (Khatmullina & Isachenko, 2017).  
 
Biodegradable plastics may also be a source of MPs. Biodegradable plastics, synthesized 
from materials such as starch and vegetable oils, are designed to rapidly degrade in 
industrial composting settings such as in landfills. However, decomposition may be 
hindered in the absence of terrestrial microbes and lack of UV. Therefore, due to the 
lack of appropriate environmental conditions, biodegradable plastics may actually be 
recalcitrant in certain environments and form MPs when they break down (Cole et al., 
2011). 
==PAGE:12==
 
 
 
 
 
5 
2.2 Microplastics: A Cause for Environmental Concern? 
MP occurrence in the environment is highly undesired, and there are concerns raised 
about the potential adverse ecological and human health effects posed by the presence of 
MPs. Other undesirable roles played by MPs in the environment include: Serving as a 
vector for the transmission of biological contaminants and microbial pathogens such as 
Vibrio spp. (Kirstein et al., 2016), carrying invasive species to new environments (Barnes, 
2002), and possibly dispersing harmful algal bloom species (Maso et al., 2003). 
 
This section of the literature review addresses some of the main concerns found in 
literature, and investigates the processes associated with MP transport and distribution. 
2.2.1 
Biological Effects of Ingested Microplastics 
Due to their small size, MPs are susceptible to ingestion by marine organisms such as 
zooplankton (Kwon, 2017; Andrady, 2011). Many studies suggest that the physical 
presence of MPs may damage an organism through intestinal blockage or tissue abrasion 
upon ingestion (Wright et al., 2013). Negatively buoyant MPs tend to sink to the seabed, 
where benthic invertebrates are most exposed and susceptible (Gutow et al., 2015). MPs 
such as PVC have been observed to directly impair the physiological performance of 
marine bivalves when ingested, and decreased their survival rates, possibly due to 
prolonged valve closure (Rist et al., 2016). Similarly, von Moos et al. (2012) reported the 
ability of MPs in entering the digestive system of the Mytilus edulis, eventually entering 
cells, resulting in adverse effects on the tissue and cellular level commonly associated 
with environmental pollution. MPs have also been found to accumulate in the gut of 
mussels, translocated to the circulatory system within three days from ingestion, where 
the MPs can persist for more than 48 days (Browne et al., 2008).  
 
As MPs are more easily ingested than other plastic debris by organisms at the base of the 
food chain, this also raises the possibility of bioaccumulation, biomagnification and 
transference of MPs up the food web (Carr et al., 2016; Cole et al., 2011; Murray & 
Cowie, 2011; Teuten et al., 2009). For instance, fish fed on MP contaminated crustaceans 
were found to ingest, but not excrete the MP (namely PP fibres) (Murray & Cowie, 
2011). Several lower trophic organisms, such as sediment-ingesting lugworms and filter-
feeding barnacles, have also demonstrated the ability to ingest MPs (Cauwenberghe et al., 
2015). These findings hence raise concern for the ingestion and translocation of MPs by 
a wider range of organisms.  
 
Sorption and desorption are critical processes governing the fate and transport of 
contaminants in the environment. Hydrophobic organic contaminants (HOCs) are 
traditionally associated with sorbent organic matter (SOM) such as soils and sediment in 
the environment, which subsequently impedes their transport and reduces its 
bioavailability to organisms (Teuten et al., 2009). With the large surface area to volume 
ratio and hydrophobic nature of MPs, HOCs have shown great sorption affinity to MPs 
as compared with natural sediments (Cole at al, 2011; Teuten et al., 2007). Therefore, 
sorption of HOCs, such as polybrominated diphenyl ethers (PBDEs), persistent organic 
==PAGE:13==
 
 
 
 
 
6 
pollutants (POPs) and pharmaceuticals (Nelson et al., 2011), to MPs possibly increases 
the bioavailability of these contaminants in the environment (Carr et al, 2016). Ingestion 
of MPs may also constitute a pathway for chemicals to enter an organism (Kwon, 2017; 
Andrady, 2011).  
 
Chemical additives such as plasticisers intentionally added to polymers to improve on the 
resulting properties of the product may also leach out. Many of these chemical additives, 
which include bisphenol-A and phthalates, have well-documented adverse effects on 
humans and organisms (Nguyen & Gomes, 2011). Continuous leaching of these 
additives is expected to result in higher concentrations in the environment, at least at a 
local scale (Kwon et al., 2017), and it is reasonable to expect that this process increases 
with decreasing size of plastic particles due to the greater exposed surface area (Teuten et 
al., 2009). 
 
However, while several laboratory-based studies have shown that plastic particles 
increase the uptake of chemicals into organisms via MP ingestion, and some biological 
effects have been demonstrated (Nguyen & Gomes, 2011; Teuten et al., 2009), these 
studies may not be environmentally relevant due to the high MP dosage applied (Kwon 
et al., 2017; Bakir et al., 2016). Additionally, as compared with other natural exposure 
pathways such as water, food and particulate matter, the role of MPs as vectors for 
HOCs to organisms remain relatively low under present conditions (Hartmann et al., 
2017; Koelmans et al., 2016). While the risk of HOC transference via MPs is low, MP 
presence in the environment is highly undesired. Therefore, mitigation measures to 
reduce MP loads to the environment are still very relevant. 
2.2.2 Transport and Distribution of MPs 
While MPs are typically found in higher concentrations close to their sources, their 
potential geographic range of impact can be quite extensive (Wardrop et al., 2016). The 
buoyancy of MPs contributes to the transport ability of MPs, with buoyant particles able 
to travel longer distances than their less buoyant counterparts, which tend to sink and 
concentrate in sediments (Wardrop, 2016). This said, processes such as biofouling and 
erosion may lead to changes in the density of MPs (Hidalgo-Ruz et al, 2012). Positively 
buoyant MPs may sink due to biofouling, or as a result of entrapment in settling 
sediments, while buoyancy is increased as erosion decreases the specific density of MPs.   
 
In the WWTP treatment process, lower density MPs are expected to float in raw 
wastewater influent, hence being suspended along with the WW skimming, but can also 
settle when trapped in solid flocs or when bio-fouled (Carr et al., 2016). Carr et al. (2016) 
observed that most of the MPs found in the settled solids and skimming residues 
collected were encapsulated with a layer of biofilm. In either case, most WWTPs are able 
to remove MPs in the skimming via skimming or grease removal tanks, or MPs that have 
settled via the settling processes. Carr et al. (2016) hypothesizes that MP release from 
WWTP could be due to MPs being trapped in unstable flocs that may not settle well or 
efficiently enough, or neutrally buoyant MPs that have escaped critical MP removal 
stages such as the skimming and settling processes.  
==PAGE:14==
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
==PAGE:15==
 
 
 
 
 
8 
3 Microplastics in WWTPs 
Plastics can be transported from populated areas to water environments via rainwater 
and surface runoff, sewage disposal, storm drains and flood events (Reisser et al., 2013). 
In view of the anthropogenic nature of MPs, it is highly plausible for WWTPs to be 
major pathways of discharge of MPs into aquatic environments (Mintenig et al., 2017; 
Cole et al., 2011). In order to manage and mitigate the environmental problems of MPs, 
it is pertinent to understand and target the major pathways of MPs into the environment. 
3.1 
Occurrence of Microplastics in Wastewater 
According to studies performed on Danish wastewater, it was estimated that about 11 
tons of MPs of the size range 20-500μm are released via treated wastewater annually 
(Vollertsen & Hansen, 2017). Users of municipal WWTPs, such as private homes, 
contribute MPs to the environment: washing of clothes made from synthetic textiles 
releases fibres, microbeads in washing and personal care products. The most common 
plastic material in Danish raw wastewater was found to be nylon at 76.6%, followed by 
polyethylene (PE) at 18.4% (Vollertsen & Hansen, 2017). Nylon is a low cost, tough 
plastic that exhibits excellent abrasion resistance and is commonly used as plastic 
fasteners such as cable ties, ropes, cookware, and in fabric (Vollertsen & Hansen, 2017; 
Gerard, 2014). PE is primarily used in packaging such as plastic bags and plastic bottles. 
Carr et al. (2016) observed that majority of the MPs found in their study consisted of 
blue PE particles that resemble microbeads used in toothpaste. While WWTPs are 
certainly capable of removing large plastic debris, WWTPs of date are not specifically 
designed to retain small MP. WWTPs can thus, offer a solution to reduce these point 
source inputs of MPs into the environment.  
3.2 Microplastic Retention in WWTPs 
While several studies only investigated the occurrence of MPs in WWTP effluent 
(Dyachenko et al., 2017; Mason et al., 2016), many studies currently focus on the MP 
removal efficiencies of WWTPs as a whole. In these studies, MP removal efficiency is 
quantified by comparing influent and effluent concentrations. The underlying objective 
of these studies was to estimate the scale of MP pollution into water environments due 
to WWTPs:  
 Studies on WWTPs in Denmark (Vollertsen & Hansen, 2017) found a median 
number of 5,800 particles/L treated effluent, which corresponds to an average 
emission rate of 0.3% to the environment (of the MP mass entering the WWTP). 
Highest MP concentrations were found in the sludge.  
 Studies performed on a major WWTP in Helsinki showed that the retention rate 
of MPs is greater than 99%. However, due to the high daily wastewater load, total 
MP discharge via effluent is high and estimated to be approximately 1.7 × 106 to 
1.4 × 108 daily (Talvitie et al, 2017). 
 Mason et al. (2016) sampled municipal WWTPs across USA, and found an 
average of 0.05 MPs per litre of treated effluent. In this study, an average of 13 
==PAGE:16==
 
 
 
 
 
9 
billion microbeads are estimated to be released into US waterways daily, making 
WWTPs a very viable source of MPs in the environment (Mason et al., 2016).  
 In Swedish WWTPs, which are mostly equipped with biological and chemical 
wastewater treatment, most of the MPs found in wastewater were found to be 
effectively retained (70-100%). In particular, MPs were mainly retained by the 
sewage sludge. The retention efficiency of sewage sludge (in terms of number of 
particles) was found to be greater than 98% for MPs >300μm, and approximately 
90% for MPs >20 μm, while mechanical treatment had negligible effects on MP 
retention (Magnusson & Noren, 2014; Magnusson & Wahlberg, 2014; 
Magnusson et al., 2016a; 2016b).  
 
While results found in these studies vary, due to varying MP concentrations in raw 
wastewater and differing treatment processes employed at the WWTPs, most studies 
echo findings that current WWTPs are indeed capable of high MP retention rates. 
However, due to high daily loadings, MP discharge via treated effluents is highly 
significant, making WWTPs a source of MP pollution in the environment. 
 
In view of the different methodologies employed in studies reported thus far, results 
obtained cannot be directly compared. For instance, the size range of MPs collected is 
directly dependent on mesh sizes used. As such, the results obtained by several studies 
on MPs in WWTPs have been detailed in Appendix C, with a short description of their 
sampling methods and processing procedures. A short description of treatment 
processes employed in typical WWTPs is also available in Appendix B.  
 
Even after wastewater treatment, wastewater constitutes a source of MP pollution to the 
natural environment: to surface waters via WWTP effluents, and via the application of 
biosolids (e.g. sewage sludge) to terrestrial environments during agricultural activities.  
3.2.1 
Effect of Primary and Secondary Treatment on Microplastic Retention 
During the physical and chemical processes in primary treatment, many suspended and 
floating solids, including plastics can be removed. Larger plastic particles can be easily 
removed through screening, while sedimentation, flotation, coagulation-flocculation and 
filtration are some processes that further remove plastic particles. These processes are 
generally able to capture a large amount of particles, depending on the size and density of 
these particles. Talvitie et al. (2015) found that primary sedimentation removed a large 
fraction of fibres with about >90% removal of fibres and 30% removal of particles. 
Secondary sedimentation further captured the MPs, proving most effective in the 
removal of plastic particles with a removal rate of >50%, but had negligible effect on 
further reduction of fibres (Talvitie et al., 2015). This suggests that the fibres settled 
during primary treatment, and were either captured by the sludge, or filtered during the 
treatment process (Talvitie et al., 2015). 
==PAGE:17==
 
 
 
 
 
10
3.2.2 Effect of Tertiary Treatment on Microplastic Retention 
While some studies have indicated that tertiary treatment does not lead to significantly 
improved MP removal rates, MP removal could be highly influenced by the type of 
tertiary treatment employed (Michielssen et al., 2016). Of the tertiary processes, single or 
multimedia filters appear to have the greatest effect on MP retention.  
 
Michielssen et al. (2016) investigated a WWTP with tertiary sand filtration and membrane 
filtration, and a pilot scale anaerobic membrane bioreactor (AnMBR). The AnMBR 
consisted of a final filtration step, with a membrane pore size of 0.2μm. Tertiary sand 
filtration increased MP removal from 89.8% in secondary effluent to 97.2%, while the 
AnMBR process had an even higher removal percentage of 99.4%. The authors hence 
concluded that such tertiary treatments provide substantial additional MP removal. 
However, in studies by Magnusson et al. (2014), tertiary sand filtration at Henriksdal 
revealed no significant reduction of MPs. It was even observed that sand filtration 
seemed to add plastic fragments to the water, while treatment by a 15μm disc filter at 
Ryaverket showed substantial reduction in MPs >300μm, but none for MPs <300μm. In 
USA, results by Mason et al. (2016) did not suggest that tertiary filtration treatments such 
as biological aerated filters and granular sand filters were effective in reducing MP 
discharge. 
 
However, while direct filtration seems to have some significant effects on MP reduction, 
as compared with other tertiary treatment methods, MPs are still present after tertiary 
treatment, and in significant amounts. An average of 0.28 particles per litre of treated 
effluent was found by Ziajahromi et al. (2017) after tertiary treatment involving a 
combination of ultrafiltration and reverse osmosis, where most of the MPs found were in 
the size range of 100-190μm.  
3.3 Microplastic Retention in the Sewage Sludge 
MP retention in WWTPs is highly dependent on the unit processes employed 
(Michielssen et al., 2016; Talvitie et al., 2017). Therefore, understanding the fate and 
distribution of MPs within different treatment processes within a WWTP can help 
improve the effectiveness of MP removal, as well as contribute to cost-effective WWTP 
designs.  
 
Most studies performed to date observe that majority of the MPs present in domestic 
wastewater are retained by primary and secondary treatment processes (Appendix C). 
Furthermore, multiple studies show that a large percentage of MPs tend to be retained in 
the sludge, both in the primary sludge (during primary sedimentation) and the activated 
sludge (during secondary sedimentation), once they reach the WWTP:  
 Michielssen et al. (2016) compared the retention of MPs and other small 
anthropogenic litter (SAL) in WWTPs with secondary treatment (activated 
sludge), tertiary treatment (granular sand filtration) and a pilot membrane 
bioreactor system coupled with membrane microfiltration (0.2μm pore size). 
==PAGE:18==
 
 
 
 
 
11
While the pilot system was found to achieve the highest removal rates of 99.4%, 
the activated sludge treatment was more useful in capturing fibrous materials (e.g. 
textile fibres). Preliminary and primary treatment steps were found to remove the 
largest amount of SAL, followed by secondary treatment steps.   
 In a preliminary study carried out at Viikinmaki WWTP in Helsinki (Talvitie et 
al., 2015), greatest removal of textile fibres was observed to occur during primary 
sedimentation, while synthetic particles settled mostly during secondary 
sedimentation. 
 Preliminary screenings on microfibers and MPs in sludge (Bayo et al., 2016) also 
revealed the presence of MPs in the sludge from the primary clarifier, after 
anaerobic digestion and centrifugation treatment steps.  
3.3.1 
Reuse of Sewage Sludge 
Consistent with an increased focus on sustainability and recycling of resources, the reuse 
of sludge has been increasingly advocated and carried out, especially in the European 
Union. Central to the EU’s approach to waste management is the waste management 
hierarchy, where preference is awarded to waste prevention, followed by waste reduction, 
re-use, recycling, and energy recovery (EC, 2001). This, coupled with legislation such as 
the Urban Waste Water Treatment Directive (91/271/EEC), the Landfill Directive 
(1999/31/EC) and the Renewable Energy Directive (2009/28/EC), are some of the key 
drivers shaping the fate of sewage sludge in the EU (Mahon et al., 2016; EC, 2016). As a 
result, sewage sludge is increasingly directed away from conventional End-of-Life 
treatment processes, such as landfill and incineration, into use for energy production and 
in agriculture (Mahon et al., 2016; EC, 2016). Some other innovative solutions include: 
the usage of dried, dewatered sludge in green construction after further processing in 
composting fields (Talvitie et al., 2017).  
 
The greatest concern regarding sludge reuse is its application as fertilizer in agriculture. 
While sludge usage as fertilizer varies among countries, an average of 50% of sewage 
sludge is reused as fertilizer in Europe and North America (NIVA, 2017). In Denmark, 
53% of its sewage sludge was reused in agriculture in 2007, and it has been estimated to 
remain at about 50% in this decade (EC, 2010; Sternbeck et al., 2011).   
 
While EU guidelines stipulate that sludge must be treated prior to land application, these 
are largely focused on pathogens, organic pollutants, metals and nutrient content (EC, 
2001). To date, MPs are yet on the regulatory agenda. As such, there is worry that MPs 
are not only entering the human food chain via marine life, but also food grown for 
human consumption.  
 
In all of the WWTP studies reviewed, majority of the MPs were retained in the sludge. At 
Viikinmaki WWTP in Helsinki for instance, with an annual dried sludge production of 60 
000 tonnes, where 80% of microliter resides in the sludge, large amounts of microliter, 
and MPs, are actually re-entering the environment (Talvitie et al., 2017). Run-off surface 
water from agricultural fields treated with sewage sludge may also transport MPs to water 
==PAGE:19==
 
 
 
 
 
12
bodies. Therefore, sludge from WWTPs potentially constitutes a significant source of the 
re-introduction of MPs to terrestrial and water environments, and vigilant management 
of such cumulative sources of MPs are necessary in mitigating MP pollution (Mahon et 
al., 2016).  
3.3.2 Treatment of Sludge Prior to Agricultural Use 
In the EU, treatment of sewage sludge prior to land application is mandated. Treatment 
may include lime stabilization (using quick lime), anaerobic digestion, composting, 
thermal drying, and dewatering.  
 
Dewatering is the physical process used to reduce the moisture content of sludge and 
biosolids in order to ease transport and handling, to render the biosolids odourless and 
non-putrescible, and to increase the calorific value of sludge during incineration. 
Dewatering is also mandatory prior to waste treatment methods such as landfilling (to 
minimize leachate production) and composting (Metcalf & Eddy, 2004). Dewatering 
methods include centrifugation, which could be coupled with chemical flocculation 
(Talvitie, 2017), filter presses, and drying beds (Metcalf & Eddy, 2004). However, 
dewatering has found to have negligible effects on MP reduction (Talvitie et al., 2017). 
 
Results by Mahon et al. (2016) suggests that while certain sludge treatment processes may 
have an effect on MPs, such as altering the surface morphologies of MPs, MPs persist in 
treated sludge. Additionally, it raises concerns that if MPs are altered, their potential for 
impact may also be influenced accordingly (Mahon et al., 2016). 
3.4 Microplastic Release due to Overflow Events 
Not all the wastewater that is produced goes through the entire WWTP processes before 
being released to aquatic environments. During heavy rainfall, rainwater exceeds the 
design capacity of sewer systems, and flooding ensues. Hence, it is common in many 
WWTPs, or throughout the sewer network, that a portion of the wastewater is released 
into the environment (Lassen et al., 2015) either directly, or after a short retention time in 
detention tanks or outfall pipes (Chhetri et al., 2014). While majority of the MPs in 
wastewater undergoing a typical secondary treatment train will end up in the sludge, 
overflow events may allow a greater proportion of MPs to escape to recipient bodies 
(Lassen, et al., 2015; UNEP, 2016). The Danish urban infrastructure utilizes a 
combination of combined sewers, where wastewater and storm water are either 
transported in the same sewer network, or in separate drainage systems (DANVA, 2015). 
It is the former that may introduce larger amounts of MP waste to environments during 
combined sewer overflow (CSO) events, as it contains a mixture of rainwater, raw 
wastewater, run-off, and its associated pollutants (Chhetri et al., 2014) and plastics.  
 
In Denmark, data reveals that overflow percentages range from less than 1% to more 
than 10% in many municipalities, with an approximate average of 4% of the wastewater 
being discharged directly to aquatic bodies as a result of overflow events (DANVA, 
2009). These percentages are consistent with higher dilutions faced in extended overflow 
events. Laboratory-based CSO simulations have used 40% wastewater to represent the 
==PAGE:20==
 
 
 
 
 
13
first flush of an overflow event, 15% wastewater to represent the typical overflow, and 
5% wastewater for an extended overflow event (Chhetri et al., 2014).   
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:21==
 
 
 
 
 
14
4 Methods for Processing MPs: Sampling, 
Extraction, Identification & Enumeration 
Methods for the processing of marine and sediment samples have been widely published 
(examples: Masura et al., 2015; Nuelle, 2014; Claessens, 2013). However, it is only in 
recent years that studies have started investigating MPs in organic-rich samples such as 
wastewater. While recent studies have applied a variety of processing techniques in their 
studies on MPs in wastewater (examples: Vollertsen & Hansen, 2017; Ziajahromi et al., 
2017; Talvitie et al., 2015), few have tested the efficacy of these methods for a range of 
MPs. Prior to the quantification of MPs, it is pertinent that a validated set of methods is 
first established, in order to produce reliable results. Therefore, an assessment of the 
current methods available has to be performed, with the final aim of selecting a 
methodological procedure to be applied in this study. 
     
This section of the literature study focuses on site and laboratory processing methods 
used for the purposes of the sampling, extraction, identification and enumeration of 
MPs. Due to the relative novelty of MPs as a study topic, as well as the different needs of 
each sample type, processing methods among studies have not been consistent, making it 
a challenge to compare results directly. For instance, while most studies quantify MPs as 
number of MP particles per litre of influent or effluent (examples: Ziajahromi et al., 
2017; Mason et al., 2016; Carr et al., 2016), some go further to provide MP removal rates 
(examples: Leslie et al., 2017 & 2013; Talvitie et al., 2017), which is calculated by 
comparing the number of MPs in effluent water with that in raw wastewater.  
 
𝑀𝑃 𝑟𝑒𝑚𝑜𝑣𝑎𝑙 𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑒 (%) = 𝑁𝑜. 𝑜𝑓 𝑀𝑃𝑠 𝑖𝑛 𝑖𝑛𝑓𝑙𝑢𝑒𝑛𝑡−𝑁𝑜. 𝑜𝑓 𝑀𝑃𝑠 𝑖𝑛 𝑒𝑓𝑓𝑙𝑢𝑒𝑛𝑡
𝑁𝑜. 𝑜𝑓 𝑀𝑃𝑠 𝑖𝑛 𝑖𝑛𝑓𝑙𝑢𝑒𝑛𝑡
× 100 
 
Providing data on MP removal rates is very useful as MP loads to WWTPs are highly 
variant, depending on factors such as the daily wastewater load, the size of the WWTP 
and the activities associated with the users. As MP removal in WWTPs is dependent on 
particle size, the provision of particle size it is also useful for WWTP engineers in 
understanding the efficacy of their treatment processes. Information on MP particles size 
has been provided in studies such as those by Vollertsen & Hansen (2017), Ziajahromi et 
al. (2017), Magnusson & Wahlberg (2014), and Brandsma et al. (2013). 
 
As studies performed on wastewater samples are currently limited, processing methods 
for similar mediums such as marine, organism and sediment samples have been 
incorporated into this literature review as well. Figure 4.1 provides an overview of the 
methods used in MP sampling, extraction identification and enumeration that will be 
discussed in this thesis. 
   
==PAGE:22==
 
 
 
 
 
15
 
Figure 4.1: Overview of methods used in MP sampling, extraction, identification and enumeration 
The appropriate methods to be selected depends a few factors, including: the sample 
type and its constituents, and the MP size range of interest. An overview of the methods 
used in studies of MP in WWTPs is detailed in Appendix C, and are further described 
below. 
4.1 
Sampling of WWTP Samples 
Sampling of WWTP samples is mainly dependent on the sample type. For treated 
effluents with low suspended solids (SS) concentrations and low MP concentrations, 
most studies employ on-site pumping and filtration, with volumes sampled ranging from 
1.5L (Vollertsen & Hansen, 2017) to >40m3 (Mason et al., 2016). This is known as 
volume-reduced sampling, whereby the volume of the bulk sample is reduced during 
sampling, preserving only the portion of interest (Hidalgo-Ruz et al., 2012). On-site 
filtrations include using pumps coupled with a filter stack fitted with a series of stainless 
steel filters. Filter meshes of varying sizes are usually employed to minimise clogging and 
to enable in-situ size fractionation of MPs simultaneously during the sampling event. 
Examples include studies performed by Vollertsen & Hansen (2017), Mintenig et al. 
(2017), and Ziajahromi et al. (2017). However, few studies have validated their extraction 
methods, with the exception of Ziajahromi et al. (2017) and Vollertsen & Hansen (2017). 
Ziajahromi et al. (2017) tested the recovery rate of their filtration device by adding grated 
PS particles in various size ranges to tap water, while Vollertsen & Hansen (2017) added 
PS beads (100μm), HDPE and styrene butadiene rubber (80-150μm) to raw wastewater. 
 
Variation in volumes collected can be due to experimental setup, accessibility to 
equipment, and the degree of ease of sampling, which depends on the SS content of the 
water sampled. Due to the low MP concentrations expected in effluent samples, the 
collection of large sample volumes are important for greater statistical representativeness 
of the total flows from WWTPs (Carr et al., 2016). 
 
However, filtration is not always possible. Sampling of inlet wastewater and sludge 
samples are usually very challenging due to the high SS loads, which causes clogging 
problems when filtration is applied (Carr et al., 2016). Even when a filtering tower is used 
with frequent filter changes, the pressure build-up may result in sample losses due to 
bypassing of filter sieves or pushing of smaller MPs through sieve pores. While some 
studies have used filtration for raw wastewater and sludge samples, most studies use grab 
samples collected in replicates, or pooled samples. For example, Vollertsen & Hansen 
Sampling
•Grab samples
•Filtration (In-situ)
Preparation/ 
Pre-treatment 
•Digestion of OM
•Density separation
•Filtration
•Staining
Analysis
•Visual 
identification 
(microscopy)
•Spectroscopy
•Chemical analysis
==PAGE:23==
 
 
 
 
 
16
(2017) collected flow proportional 24h raw wastewater samples collected via the auto 
samplers of the WWTPs. Some studies have also utilised grab sampling for effluent 
samples, such as Leslie et al. (2013). 
4.2 Pre-treatment of Samples and MP Extraction 
Due to the complexity of wastewater samples, pre-treatment steps have to be applied to 
remove or reduce organic matter (OM) in order to increase the effectiveness and 
efficiency of the selected visual or spectroscopic analyses (Tagg et al., 2016). Removal of 
OM also allows for larger sample volumes to be processed, which gives greater 
representativeness of the results and minimizes extrapolation errors. An overview of the 
digestion methods discussed here are detailed in Table 4.1. 
4.2.1 
Alkaline and Acid Hydrolysis 
Alkaline and acid hydrolysis methods are reportedly highly effective in digesting 
organism samples such as plankton and bivalves. However, they have also proved 
damaging to MPs. MP polymers such as nylon, PE and PVC have been damaged or 
discoloured in such treatments (Cole et al., 2014). Some studies have also experienced 
very low recovery rates. Claessens et al. (2013) found that while digestion using HNO3 at 
60 °C to 100 °C was highly effective in digesting invertebrate tissue, the high heat 
treatment caused PS to melt and clump, while nylon fibres were completely dissolved. 
Carr et al. (2016) also reported similar observations when using strong mineral acids.  
 
Of the WWTP studies reviewed, only Mintenig et al. (2017) used alkaline hydrolysis as 
chemical digestion. The optimized alkaline digestion protocol by Cole et al. (2014), with 
10M NaOH at 60°C, was used. However, Mintenig et al. (2017) reported that this 
method was insufficient for sewage sludge samples, which prevented them from using 
larger sample volumes for micro-FT-IR analyses. 
4.2.2 Hydrogen Peroxide Oxidation 
Hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) is a strong oxidizer, which is able to degrade labile organic 
compounds to CO2, water and other intermediate organics, yielding no noxious by-
products when decomposed (Kim et al., 2009; Eskicioglu et al., 2008). Studies on the 
disintegration of activated sludge by Kim et al. (2009) showed that H2O2 oxidation not 
only reduces the sludge volume and the size of the sludge particles, but also leads to the 
destruction of sludge particles by solubilizing them into soluble organic products. For 
instance, hard-to-degrade lipids found in activated sludge were oxidized into shorter 
chain carboxylic acids (Kim et al., 2009). Eskicioglu et al. (2008) examined the 
solubilisation capability of H2O2 and found that elevated temperatures increase the 
concentration of soluble fractions (e.g. proteins). Under heat treatment, H2O2 has also 
been found to disintegrate the complex floc structure of waste activated sludge 
(Eskicioglu et al., 2008; Wang et al., 2009). As such, H2O2 treatment is commonly 
followed by filtration to remove the digested OM while retaining the particles of concern 
(Nuelle et al., 2014).  
 
==PAGE:24==
 
 
 
 
 
17
In wastewater studies, Ziajahromi et al. (2017) employed H2O2 oxidation at 60°C for 
primary, secondary and tertiary wastewater effluent samples, while Tagg et al. (2015) 
incubated their samples with H2O2 for 7 days at room temperature.  
4.2.3 Wet Peroxide Oxidation and Fenton’s process 
In Fenton’s process, Fenton’s reagent (a mixture of H2O2 and ferrous ion, Fe2+) is used. 
In the presence of iron(II) as catalyst, hydroxyl and hydroperoxyl radicals are generated 
in-situ upon decomposition of H2O2 (Dyachenko et al., 2017; Tagg et al, 2016):  
Fe2+ + H2O2  Fe3+ + OH + OH- 
These radicals (OH) oxidise biogenic organic matter to form carboxylic acids, 
aldehydes, CO2 and H2O (Dyachenko et al., 2017). While the rate of 
OHis reportedly enhanced with increasing pH, traditional Fenton 
reactions are normally conducted at low pH to prevent the precipitation of Fe(III) as 
iron hydroxides (Petri et al., 2011). Fe(III) precipitates are formed above pH 4, hence a 
pH of 3 is commonly used (Petri et al., 2011, Neyens et al., 2002). 
  
Wet Peroxide Oxidation (WPO), where Fenton’s reagent is combined with elevated 
temperature (60°C to 75°C) to achieve high total organic carbon (TOC) removal 
efficiency, has also been used for the digestion of activated sludge (Hammadi et al., 
2012). As the OH radicals are also able to react with H2O2 molecules, stepwise addition 
of H2O2 is preferred. Likewise to H2O2 oxidation, peroxidation of sludge enhances the 
flocculation and dewaterability of sludge (Neyens et al., 2002). A variety of incubation 
times have been applied in studies for Fenton’s process and WPO, from 10min at room 
temperature (Tagg et al., 2017), to until reaction completion is visible. Dyachenko et al. 
(2017) heated the mixture with wastewater effluent to 70°C until the reaction appeared to 
be complete, while Masura et al. (2015) recommends a reaction time of 30min, at 75°C. 
 
As plastics are relatively resistant to oxidation via H2O2, using H2O2 is a good method for 
the extraction of MPs. Variations of H2O2 oxidation, WPO and Fenton’s process were 
the most commonly utilised methods in the reduction of organic material for the WWTP 
studies reviewed (7 out of 16 studies reviewed), with varying amounts of H2O2 used in 
accordance to the organic content of samples collected. For instance, Masura et al. (2015) 
recommends H2O2 addition until natural organic matter is no longer visible. 
4.2.4 Physical Separation 
Separation of MPs from samples has been done via density separation, filtration and 
sieving methods. An overview of the physical separation methods discussed here are 
detailed in Table 4.2 
 
With the ubiquitous nature of MPs in marine environments, MPs are commonly detected 
on beaches and in sub-tidal sediments worldwide. A commonly used MP extraction 
method from sediments exploits the varying densities of MPs and sediments. The density 
separation method, developed by Thompson et al. (2004), separates MP particles from 
sediment via the use of a concentrated NaCl solution (density = 1.2kg/L) (Hidalgo-Ruz 
==PAGE:25==
 
 
 
 
 
18
et al., 2012; Claessens et al., 2013). This method assumes that after a stipulated shaking 
period, sediments will settle to the bottom while the MPs of interest will remain 
suspended in the supernatant. (Hidalgo-Ruz et al., 2012). However, the use of saturated 
NaCl may lead to loss of MPs with higher densities, especially polymers containing 
additives or bio-fouled particles (Nuelle, 2014). Therefore, solutions of other densities, 
such as NaI (density = 1.6kg/L), have also been used as separation medium, with some 
studies combining the use of elutriation (Claessens et al., 2013; Rocha-Santos & Duarte, 
2015). The resultant supernatant is thereafter collected and volume reduced, usually via 
filtration.  
 
Density separation using saturated NaCl solution has been performed by Bayo et al. 
(2016) for primary and secondary sludge samples, and Mintenig et al. (2017) for sludge 
samples. However, Mintenig et al. (2017) admit that while common polymers like PE and 
PP are easily extracted, using NaCl discounts higher density polymers such as PVC. 
Furthermore, this may not be the best extraction method for activated sludge samples as 
activated sludge flocs can be positively buoyant in NaCl and will be present along with 
MPs in the supernatant fraction. The density of activated sludge solids typically ranges 
from 1.02 to 1.07g/ml (Sears et al., 2006; Dammel & Schroeder et al., 1992).  
 
MPs can also be separated from samples via sieving or filtration. Sieving allows the 
separation of particles into different size categories. Sieves used are commonly made of 
stainless steel or copper (Rocha-Santos & Duarte, 2015). Wet sieving, commonly used 
for marine samples (Masura et al., 2015), has also been used as an ex-situ method for 
processing grab wastewater samples. Wet sieving has been employed by Michielssen et al. 
(2016) for wastewater effluent samples, Vollertsen & Hansen (2017) for raw wastewater 
samples to remove particles>500μm, and Bayo et al. (2016) for sludge samples.      
 
Filtration, usually aided by a vacuum pump, separates the MP particles from the solution 
(Hidalgo-Ruz et al., 2012). Depending on filter pore size, direct filtration of samples is 
uncommon due to clogging issues. Filtration is therefore frequently used in combination 
with other processing methods such as chemical digestion. Similar to wet sieving, size 
separation of particles is feasible, and the usage of filters with larger pore sizes prior to 
smaller ones helps minimise clogging and allows for larger sampling volumes. Most 
samples are eventually filtered onto gridded filter papers or steel filters for analytical 
processing.  
==PAGE:26==
 
 
 
 
 
19
Table 4.1: Overview of chemical digestion methods employed prior to MP analysis (with a focus on WWTP samples) 
Preparation 
Type 
Name/  
Chemicals 
Used 
Sample Type(s) 
Description of Method 
Results 
(Pros + and Cons - ) 
References1
Chemical 
Digestion 
 
(For the 
degradation of 
OM) 
 
 
 
 
 
Wet Peroxide 
Oxidation 
(WPO) 
 Marine samples 
 Treated WWTP 
effluent 
Labile organic material is degraded using Fe(II) catalyst 
and H2O2 at elevated temperature (e.g. 70-75°C). 
Hydroxyl radicals are produced upon H2O2 
decomposition, and oxidizes natural OM to carboxylic 
acids, aldehydes, CO2 and H2O.  
+ No/ minimal effect on MP. 
+ No observed effect on FT-IR 
spectra of MP. 
[1] [2] [3] 
[4] 
Fenton’s 
reagent 
    Organism samples 
WWTP samples
Similar to WPO (H2O2 using Fe(II) catalyst), but without 
the use of heat.  
Similar pros and cons to WPO. 
+ Short exposure time required. 
[5] 
H2O2 
    Organism samples 
Marine samples 
Marine sediment 
samples 
H2O2 is a strong oxidant, used to digest organic matter 
and tissue samples. Sometimes coupled with elevated 
temperature (60 - 70°C). 
 
Example treatment:  
Addition of H2O2 at 60°C for 24h. Digested sample then 
diluted with warm (~80°C) DI water and filtered. 
+ No/ minimal effect on MP. 
+ Significant reduction of OM.  
+ Improved filtration efficiency.  
+ No observed effect on FT-IR 
spectra of MP.  
 
- Long exposure time required (for 7d 
treatment).  
[6] [7] 
Primary, Secondary, 
Tertiary WWTP effluent  
Activated sludge 
(from aeration tank) 
Example treatments:  
Centrifuged WW samples immersed in 30% H2O2, 
briefly shaken and stored for 7 days.  
 Addition of H2O2 at 60°C for 24h. 
[8] [9] 
HNO3 & other 
mineral acids 
(Acid 
digestion) 
Organism samples 
Digestion of OM using mineral acids. Usually coupled 
with elevated temperature.  
 
Example treatment:  
Addition of HNO3 at 60°C for 24hr. 
+ High OM removal efficiency. 
 
- Partial/ total destruction of pH 
sensitive polymers (e.g. PS, thin nylon 
fibres). 
[7] [10] 
NaOH 
 Organism samples 
Activated sludge 
(from aeration tank) 
Digestion of OM using NaOH.  
Usually coupled with increased temperature (20 - 60°C).  
- Discolouring and partial/ total 
destruction of some MP (e.g. nylon). 
- Insufficient purification for sludge. 
[11] [12]  
Bleach 
(Clorox, 8.25% 
sodium 
hypochlorite) 
Activated sludge  
(from aeration tank) 
Sewage sludge 
Sodium hypochlorite added to disinfect the sample and 
bleach the matrix.  
+ Able to disinfect septic samples and 
reduce matrix simultaneously. 
+ No/ minimal effect on MP. 
 
- Only applicable for small sludge 
amounts. 
[10] 
                                                        
1 [1] Mason et al., 2016; [2] Masura et al., 2015; [3] McCormick et al., 2014; [4] Free et al., 2014; [5] Tagg et al., 2017; [6] Nuelle et al., 2014; [7] Claessens et al., 2013;  
[8] Ziajahromi et al., 2016; [9] Tagg et al., 2015; [10] Carr et al., 2016; [11] Mintenig et al., 2017]; [12] Cole et al., 2014 
 
==PAGE:27==
 
 
 
 
 
20
 
Table 4.2: Overview of physical preparation methods employed prior to MP analysis (with a focus on WWTP samples) 
Preparation 
Type 
Name/ 
Chemicals 
Used 
Sample Type(s) 
Description of Method 
Results 
(Pros + and Cons - ) 
References2 
Density 
separation 
 
(Most 
commonly 
used for sand 
and sediment 
samples) 
NaCl 
Sediment samples  
Concentrated NaCl solution (density = 1.2 
g/cm3) used.  
 
Most commonly used technique for sand and 
sediment samples. Exploits the density 
differences between the lighter plastic particles 
and heavier sediment particles. Floating 
microplastic particles are removed from the 
supernatant.  
  
+ Cheap, straight-forward method 
 
- Limited use in separating materials with similar 
densities. Thus, it might not be effective in 
separating all MP types from sludge. 
- Limited to low density polymers 
 
[1] 
WWTP sludge 
samples (primary and 
activated sludge) 
[2] [3] 
Elutriation + 
NaI 
 Sediment samples 
Concentrated NaI solution (density = 1.6 
g/cm3) used.  
 
The water flow, combined with aeration, 
separates the lighter particles from the heavier 
sand particles.  
+ Higher density than NaCl, making it suitable 
for the removal of a wider range of polymers 
+ Flow rate of water can be adjusted for 
maximum extraction and minimum 
contamination with sand particles. 
 
- More expensive than NaCl 
[4] 
Physical 
Separation 
Sieving &  
Wet Sieving 
Marine samples 
Treated WWTP 
effluent 
Sewage sludge 
Carefully sieving samples through meshes of 
varying sizes.   
 
For smaller MPs, this method is rarely used.  
+ Easy, straight-forward 
 
- Limited to larger MP particles 
- Clogging difficulties when sieving using 
smaller mesh sizes. Only for small aliquots of 
sludge.  
[1] [5] [6] 
Filtration 
Marine samples 
Influent
Treated WWTP 
effluent 
Vaccum filtration using a mesh or filter. 
Samples are commonly filtered onto gridded 
filter paper for microscopy analysis.  
+ Easily available 
 
- Time consuming, especially for more turbid 
samples 
[1] 
                                                        
2 [1] Hidalgo-Ruz et al., 2012; [2] Mintenig et al., 2017; [3] Bayo et al., 2016; [4] Claessens et al., 2013; [5] Masura et al., 2015 [6] Magnusson et al., 2014 
==PAGE:28==
 
 
 
 
 
21
4.3 Identification and Enumeration 
The heterogeneous nature of MPs has made the development of a consistent classification 
method challenging, with most methods today relying on either the physical attributes, or the 
chemical properties of MPs. In order to identify MPs in wastewater samples reliably, a 
combination of several analysis techniques is commonly applied. This section addresses the 
methods currently available for the identification, enumeration and characterization of MPs, 
which include microscopy, spectroscopy, and thermal analysis.   
4.3.1 
Microscopy Methods 
There are several microscopy methods commonly employed to identify and quantify MPs in 
environmental samples. The simplest, albeit most laborious, method is via direct visual 
examination under a light microscope, using type, shape, degradation stage and colour as 
criteria (Mason et al., 2016; Hidalgo-Ruz et al., 2012; Cole et al., 2011). The accuracy of this 
method however, is highly dependent on the judgment and expertise of the technician in 
discerning and excluding materials of non-plastic origin. This is particularly challenging, as 
MPs are highly heterogeneous, vastly varying in appearance, specific density, and other 
characteristics (Hidalgo-Ruz et al., 2012). These factors could lead to erroneous estimates of 
actual MP numbers. For instance, in comparison studies of microscopy and spectroscopy 
identification methods performed by Song et al. (2015), both under- and overestimations of 
MP fragments were experienced. The researchers noted that transparent or white MPs could 
have been disregarded as sand fragments under microscopy analyses, or organic fragments 
such as cotton fibres could have been mistaken for MPs. Especially for smaller fragments 
(<1mm), it is highly difficult to discern between synthetic and non-synthetic materials even 
when performed by experienced personnel and using identification guidelines, resulting in 
greater deviations from FT-IR results (Song et al., 2015). Ziajahromi et al. (2017) also noted 
that despite their comprehensive sample processing methods, which involved digestion of 
organic matter, density separation and staining, between 22 and 90% of particles suspected 
to be MPs after microscopic analysis, were actually non-plastic.  
 
More advanced methods such as scanning electron microscopy (SEM), which has been used 
in several studies of marine samples (Cauwenberghe et al., 2013; Fries et al., 2013), could 
provide clearer, high resolution images of the morphology of the MPs investigated (Qiu et 
al., 2016). While SEM relies only on the physical features of MPs, it can be coupled with 
energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) to provide the elemental composition of the 
particles analysed (Shim et al., 2017). However, SEM and SEM-EDS analyses are very costly, 
which limits the number of samples that can be examined (Shim et al., 2017; Qiu et al., 
2016). Therefore, SEM is typically only used to image recovered plastics or for identifying 
microbial colonisation (Lusher et al., 2017). SEM analysis has not been used in any of the 
wastewater studies reviewed.   
 
==PAGE:29==
 
 
 
 
 
22
Therefore, without implementing further chemical analysis techniques, MP particles 
determined via visual analysis can produce high error values up to 70% (Hidalgo-Ruz et al., 
2012). Fluorescence microscopy, when coupled with fluorescent staining methods, can also 
be used to aid MP identification (Maes et al., 2017; Shim et al., 2016). However, some 
limitations still exist with regards to current methods, which will be discussed in Section 
4.3.4.  
 
In spite of its limitations, microscopy methods are still widely used in studies today due to its 
ease of use and cost-effectiveness. However, many researchers agree that chemical 
identification is still necessary for more accurate characterisation and verification purposes 
(Shim et al., 2017; Song et al., 2015; Rocha-Santos & Duarte, 2015).  
4.3.2 FT-IR Spectroscopy 
Spectroscopy methods were reviewed in many studies to be the most reliable method for the 
characterisation of MPs (Shim et al., 2017; Ziajahromi et al., 2017; Song et al., 2015; Hidalgo-
Ruz et al., 2012). Some types of spectroscopy applied for MP identification include the 
Fourier-Transform Infrared (FT-IR) spectroscopy, and Raman spectroscopy.  
 
FT-IR techniques are currently the most reliable and reproducible method available for the 
characterization of MPs (Rocha-Santos & Duarte, 2015). In FT-IR, sub-samples are 
illuminated by infrared (IR) light. The spectrum of the transmitted (or reflected) IR light is 
then created, analysed and compared with that of known polymers to identify the material 
obtained (Vollertsen & Hansen, 2017; Rocha-Santos & Duarte, 2015; Barnes et al., 2009; 
Thompson et al., 2004; Hidalgo-Ruz et al., 2012). FT-IR hence provides chemical 
confirmation of plastic particles, with little possibility of false negatives or positives when 
interpreted correctly.  
 
Particle size can also be determined as a traditional light microscopic image is produced 
(Vollertsen & Hansen, 2017). For smaller MPs, micro-FT-IR is used, where an IR laser is 
integrated onto a microscope setup (Shim et al., 2017). This allows the simultaneous 
visualization, mapping of samples and collection of spectra of smaller MPs (Rocha-Santos & 
Duarte, 2015). 3 modes are available in FT-IR and micro-FT-IR analysis: transmission, 
reflectance and attenuated total reflectance (ATR). For smaller particles, ATR mode and 
transmission mode has been found to produce better IR spectra (Vollertsen & Hansen, 
2017). While ATR mode is considered more sensitive, as it requires the ATR crystal to be in 
contact with the sample, the crystal has to be frequently cleaned, making it a highly time-
consuming method (Vollertsen & Hansen, 2017). Due to direct contact with particles, fragile 
MPs may be damaged. ATR probes made of germanium can also be easily damaged by sharp 
inorganic particle remnants such as sand (Shim et al., 2017).  
 
==PAGE:30==
 
 
 
 
 
23
Using FT-IR however, is not only expensive and requires a highly trained operator, but also 
time-consuming. For marine samples, Song et al. (2015) noted that it takes an average of 4-
5h per sample, which was 8-10 fold longer than using light microscopy. And even when 
coupled with semi-mapping technology, which reduces operator time, a minimum of 9h is 
required to scan each filter (Shim et al., 2017). Therefore, this realistically allows for only 
subsamples of the filter surface to be scanned and analysed, with extrapolation of these 
results to the real sample size afterwards. The extrapolated results are hence, prone to bias as 
a consequence of unequal particle distribution on the filter (Günter et al., 2016). 
 
Automated mapping of FT-IR, also called FT-IR imaging, can be achieved when an FT-IR 
spectroscope is coupled with a microscope equipped with Focal Plane Array (FPA) 
(Vollertsen & Hansen, 2017). However, this increases the likelihood of false interpretations. 
Identifying unknown particles using automated mapping is particularly challenging, as it is 
difficult to match the spectra obtained with known polymers due to the effects of 
weathering, and contamination on the surfaces of plastic particles (Song et al., 2015). This 
method requires expert interpretation of the spectra produced and experienced decision-
making (Shim et al., 2017). Another drawback with FT-IR is its difficulty in measuring black 
particles due to their strong IR absorption (Löder & Gerdts, 2015). In view of these 
limitations, only smaller subsamples are generally analysed in studies that use FT-IR. In 
studies performed on Danish wastewater samples, only 0.1g of dry matter of sludge was 
filtered, after which only a small sub-sample is enumerated and analysed via FT-IR 
(Vollertsen & Hansen, 2017).  
 
For these reasons, for many studies involving MPs in wastewater, microscopy is applied for 
preliminary enumeration purposes, while FT-IR is used when further identification or 
confirmation is required (examples: Ziajahromi et al., 2017; Talvitie et al., 2017; Mintenig et 
al.; 2017; Bayo et al., 2016; Magnusson & Noren, 2014). Song et al. (2015) however, 
recommends using FT-IR prior to light microscopic analysis to establish a set of criteria for 
the specific samples collected, according to sample type, season and location. This basic 
profile, can then aid analysts in discerning the nature of particles observed, and help increase 
the reliability of the estimates obtained by light microscopy. Another suggestion by Shim et 
al. (2017) is the use of Nile Red (see Section 4.3.4) with fluorescence microscopy, followed 
by FT-IR confirmation to reduce likelihood of overlooking MPs. 
4.3.3 Raman Spectroscopy 
Although FT-IR can detect small MPs down to 10-20μm under ideal conditions, it is unable 
to detect particles smaller than the aperture size. Raman spectroscopy however, can focus on 
a smaller area than FT-IR as it uses a laser beam, and can detect MPs down to 1-2μm in 
diameter (Song et al., 2015). Similar to FT-IR, Raman spectroscopy provides the chemical 
profile of MPs analysed. During Raman spectroscopy, the sample is irradiated with a 
monochromatic laser source, and due to the molecular structure and atoms present, different 
==PAGE:31==
 
 
 
 
 
24
frequencies of back-scattered light will result (Löder & Gerdts, 2015). This produces a 
unique spectum for each polymer, which allows for identification of plastic type. However, 
several drawbacks include its sensitivity to additive and pigment chemicals in MPs which also 
produces spectra (Qiu et al., 2016; Cauwenberghe et al., 2013), and its inability in measuring 
fluorescent samples that get excited by the laser, as they prevent the generation of 
interpretable Raman spectra (Löder & Gerdts, 2015). 
4.3.4 Staining 
While FT-IR and Raman spectroscopy methods are highly reliable, they are also very 
expensive and time-consuming. Alternative methods for MP identification are hence 
required, and stains have also been utilised as a less costly aid for the identification of MPs. 
Some stains used to dye plastics are Nile Red and Rose Bengal.  
 
Nile Red is a lipophilic fluorescent dye, which stains plastics by forming hydrophobic 
attractions with the hydrophobic hydrocarbons found in polymers (Shim et al., 2016). The 
stained plastic particles are thereafter fluorescent and can hence be easily identified via 
fluorescent miscroscopy. Due to the solvatochromic behaviour of Nile Red, whereby its 
fluorescence emission spectrum shifts depending on the polarity and general hydrophobicity 
of its environment, different colours are generated for different polymers (Maes et al., 2017). 
This hence allows the possibility of using Nile Red to perform basic grouping of polymers 
according to their hydrophobicity, and could also be a useful indicator in evaluating the 
residence time of plastic particles based on temporal changes in surface properties (Maes et 
al., 2017).  
 
Rose Bengal stains natural and non-synthetic materials such as cotton, leaving plastic 
particles unstained (Ziajahromi et al., 2017; Lachenmeier et al., 2015). This helps in the visual 
separation of synthetic and non-synthetic particles. However, as plastic materials are left 
unstained, Rose Bengal does not provide additional aid in the detection of transparent or 
white MPs (Lachenmeier et al., 2015). 
 
These stains however, are also limited in their staining capabilities. Nile Red for instance, has 
been found to also stain hydrophobic, non-synthetic materials such as mineralised chitin and 
oil droplets in the algae Tetraselmis (Maes et al., 2017; Shim et al., 2016). This hence makes it 
less reliable as a stand-alone method when analysing field samples. Rose Bengal has also 
been reported to stain certain polymers such as Polyvinylpolypyrrolidone (PVPP), creating 
false negatives, as well as false positives when starch and cellulose particles are not stained 
(Lachenmeier et al., 2015). 
 
In spite of these limitations, staining can be useful in improving the reliability of light 
microscopy methods, which when used alone, can be highly erroneous. For instance, 
==PAGE:32==
 
 
 
 
 
25
Ziajahromi et al. (2017) coupled Rose Bengal staining with light microscopy methods to 
minimise the overestimation of MPs when processing wastewater samples.  
4.3.5 Thermal Analysis 
Thermal analytical techniques have also been tested for use in MP identification. Differential 
scanning calorimetry (DSC) is one such method where MP identification is performed based 
on the thermal properties of polymers, and requires reference materials to establish the 
characteristics of polymers in DSC (Shim et al., 2017). While DSC has proven useful in 
identifying primary MPs like PE microbeads, it is unable to measure polymers with 
overlapping phase transition signals such as nylon and PVC (Shim et al., 2017). Pyrolysis gas 
chromatography combined with mass spectroscopy (Pyr-GC-MS) is another technique used 
to analyse the chemical composition of polymers and its additives (Lusher et al., 2017; Qiu et 
al., 2016; Fries et al., 2013). It analyses the thermal decomposed gas from polymers, and 
thereafter compares the obtained pyrograms with reference pyrograms of known polymers 
(Shim et al., 2017). In Pyr-GC-MS however, only one particle can be run per sample, and as 
the particle has to be manually placed in the instrument (Lusher et al., 2017), it is not suitable 
for small MPs.  
 
A main drawback of thermal analysis methods is its destructive nature (Lusher et al., 2017; 
Shim et al., 2017; Qiu et al., 2016), which prevents additional analyses of MPs. While thermal 
analysis methods offer an alternative to spectroscopy for the chemical identification of MPs, 
its use is also still highly limited. This is especially so for environmental and wastewater 
samples, where samples are highly heterogeneous and weathering alters the properties of 
MPs encountered.  
  
In view of the many preparation and analysis methods available today, there is no one-size-
fits-all solution. The two key characteristics in MP analysis are currently, the physical features 
of the MPs (e.g. size, shape and colour) and the chemical properties (Shim et al., 2017). The 
best solution, which balances reliability with time and cost requirements, would involve a 
combination of methods.  
==PAGE:33==
 
 
 
 
 
26
Table 4.3: Overview of MP analysis methods (with a focus on smaller particles <1mm). Table spans from p. 24 to p. 25. 
Type 
Name 
Description of Method 
Results 
(Pros + and Cons - ) 
References3 
Microscopy 
 
(Most 
commonly 
used) 
Direct 
counting using 
the light 
microscopy 
Most common method for MP identification 
and enumeration. Includes stereomicroscopy. 
 
Samples are filtered onto filters, where MPs 
are identified/ enumerated using 
characteristics such as type, shape, 
degradation stage and colour.   
+ Quick results 
+ Easy, straight forward method 
 
- Laborious and time-consuming 
- Limited to larger plastic particles 
- Increased difficulty for transparent or white particles 
- Large error margin as accuracy is highly dependent on the operator  
[1] [2] [3] [4] 
[5] [6]  
Direct 
counting using 
the 
fluorescence 
microscopy 
Similar to light microscopy.  
Fluorescence microscopy can be used to 
exclude fibres of organic origin when used 
with appropriate stains (i.e. Nile Red), which 
stains plastics fluorescent. 
+ Relatively easy method.  
+ Easier to identify plastic and non-plastic particles (as compared 
with light microscopy) 
+ Can also be used for inherently fluorescent MPs   
 
- Need for staining treatment in most cases 
- Possibility of false positives/ negatives  
 [1] [7]  
SEM 
Scanning electron microscopy. 
 
SEM-EDS: Coupled with energy-dispersive 
X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) to provide the 
elemental composition of MPs. 
+ High resolution 
+ Able to provide an image of the morphology of MPs 
 
- Expensive 
- Only provides black and white images 
[8] [1] [9] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Spectroscopy 
 
 
 
 
 
FT-IR 
Spectroscopy 
Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy.  
 
Compares the IR spectrum of an unknown 
plastic sample with spectra of known 
polymers, hence enables the identification of 
polymer compositions. 
 
Available in transmission, reflectance and 
Attenuated Total Reflectance (ATR) mode. 
+ Highly reliable  
+ Low possibility of false positives or negatives when interpreted 
correctly 
+ Provides information on weathering of particles 
 
- Expensive 
- Time consuming (more than microscopy) 
- Need for a well-trained operator to correctly identify spectra 
produced 
 - Difficulty in identifying plastics with altered spectra (e.g. 
weathered plastics) 
- Difficulty in obtaining clear spectra for small MPs 
[1] [2] [5] [7] 
[10]  
Micro-FT-IR 
IR laser is integrated onto a microscopy setup. 
Similar pros and cons to FT-IR spectroscopy. 
ATR-FT-IR 
FT-IR in ATR mode. Requires surface contact 
with a crystal probe. 
Similar pros and cons to FT-IR spectroscopy. 
- Requires frequent cleaning of crystal 
- May alter/ damage MPs due to contact 
- Possible damaging of probe 
                                                        
3 [1] Shim et al., 2017; [2] Vollertsen & Hansen, 2017; [3] Mason et al., 2016; [4] Song et al., 2015; [5] Hidalgo-Ruz et al., 2012; [6] Cole et al., 2011; [7] Shim et al., 2016; 
[8] Lusher et al., 2017; [9] Qiu et al., 2016; [10] Talvitie et al., 2017 
==PAGE:34==
 
 
 
 
 
27
Type 
Name 
Description of Method 
Results 
(Pros + and Cons - ) 
References4 
Spectroscopy 
Raman 
spectroscopy 
Irradiation with a monochromatic laser 
source, producing unique frequencies of back-
scattered light.  
+ Allows the identification of very small MP (few μm in size) 
+ Non-destructive 
 
- Expensive 
- Need for a well-trained operator to correctly identify spectra 
produced 
- Interference by pigments 
- Interference by fluorescent samples 
[1] [2] [3] [4] 
[5] [6] 
Staining 
Nile Red 
Staining MPs helps facilitate microscopic 
observations and enumeration.  
 
Lipophilic fluorescent dye, which allows in-
situ staining of lipids, while plastics are 
commonly made of hydrophobic 
hydrocarbons.  
 
Simple and sensitive approach which is 
applicable for most common polymers. 
+ Good fluorescence intensity 
+ Good for detecting white/ transparent particles 
+ Good selectivity for staining plastics  
+ Possibly able to perform basic grouping of polymers according to 
their polarity 
 
- False positives from hydrophobic, non-synthetic materials 
- Samples may not be suitable for further microscopy and FT-IR 
analysis due to filter membrane damage 
- Not suitable as a stand-alone method for field samples 
[7] [8] 
Rose Bengal 
Rose Bengal stains natural organic material, 
leaving plastic particles unstained. This hence 
aids in the visual separation of plastic and 
non-plastic particles. 
+ Aids in the identification and counting of MPs, especially in light 
microscopy. 
 
 - Does not help in detecting MPs that are transparent or white.  
 - False negatives: Has been reported to stain certain polymers (e.g. 
PVPP). 
 - False positives: Starch and cellulose particles are not stained. 
[7] [9] 
Thermal 
Analysis 
DSC  
Differential scanning calorimetry. 
 
Based on the thermal properties of polymers. 
Requires reference materials and controlled 
settings. 
- Destructive analysis 
- Not applicable for small MPs 
- Unable to identify polymers with overlapping properties 
[1] 
Pyr-GC-MS 
Pyrolysis gas chromatography combined with 
mass spectroscopy.  
 
Analyses the thermal decomposed gas from 
polymers, and requires the pyrograms of 
reference materials. 
+ Able to analyse polymer type and additives 
 
- Destructive analysis 
- Not applicable for small MPs 
 
[1] [2] [3] [10] 
                                                        
4 [1] Shim et al., 2017; [2] Lusher et al., 2017; [3] Qiu et al., 2016; [4] Song et al., 2015; [5] Löder & Gerdets, 2015; [6] Cauwenberghe et al., 2013; [7] Maes et al., 2017; 
[8] Shim et al., 2016; [9] Lachenmeier et al., 2015; [10] Fries et al., 2013 
==PAGE:35==
 
 
 
 
 
28
5 Materials & Methods 
This section of the thesis will introduce the sampling locations, materials and methods 
involved in the 4 experimental stages of the project.  
5.1 
Traceable Microplastics 
Nylon (negatively buoyant) and PE (positively buoyant) were selected for use in this study. 
For PE, Hama beads were used, and for nylon, cable ties were used.  
 
Nylon and PE particles to be used for the traceability studies were produced by grinding 
down larger plastics using an analytical mill (AKA® A11 basic) and subsequently sorting 
them for size using test sieves. For Stages 1 to 3, 3 size ranges were made and used: large 
(250-355μm), medium (125-250μm), and small (63-90μm). For Stage 4 (pilot scale 
experiment), only 2 size ranges were made and used: 125-355μm and 63-125μm.   
 
Just prior to grinding, the plastic particles were supercooled using liquid nitrogen. 
Thermoplastics such as PE and nylon are heat-sensitive, and therefore difficult to grind at 
ambient temperatures due to their tendency to soften as heat is produced during grinding. 
This rapid cooling makes the plastic particles more brittle and eases the grinding process. 
The particles were thereafter added to a mixture of egg whites and icing sugar, and made 
into pellets.  
 
Separate 1.0g pellets for nylon and PE were used for Stages 1 to 3, while 5.0g pellets 
containing both nylon and PE particles were used in Stage 4 (Pilot scale experiment). In 
Stage 4 (Pilot scale experiment), 6 × 5g MP pellets were used for each sampling round. To 
estimate the number of particles added, MPs in the 1.0g (pellets used in Stages 1 to 3) and 
the 0.5g pellets (pellets used in Stage 4) were counted in replicates. Results of these counts 
are detailed in Section 6.1. 
(a) 
  (b) 
  (c) 
 
Figure 5.1: (a) Blue Hama beads grinded down, (b) separated into different size fractions via test sieves, and  
(c) made into pellets. 
Due to the method of particle production used in this study, the plastic particles are of 
irregular shapes. Separation of particles into their size ranges is dependent on the pore size 
of the test sieves, as well as the orientation of the particles. Microscopic observations 
==PAGE:36==
 
 
 
 
 
29
revealed that some particles belonging to different size ranges, as differentiated by their 
colours, could be similar in size. Therefore, the size range provides an estimate of the 
particle size and is not an absolute measurement of the particle diameter.  
  
 
Figure 5.2: Nylon (left) and PE (right) particles under light microscope.  
These traceable MPs were used in Stages 1 to 3. Scale bars represent 500μm. 
5.2 Quantification of Microplastics via Light Microscopy 
In this study, the particles of interest are of known origin and spiked into our samples. The 
spiked particles are in vibrant colours and hence, visually distinct. Furthermore, preliminary 
visual inspections of chemically digested sludge revealed little to no particles that resemble 
the spiked MP particles. Inorganic materials that could have been of plastic origin were 
either particles of a different colour and/or plastic fibres. Therefore, it was determined that 
light microscopy was adequate for the purposes of identifying and enumerating these 
recovered particles. The Leica MZ6 stereomicroscope was used in this project for 
identification and enumeration of MPs. Furthermore, in situations of uncertainty, 
comparisons with clean MP samples (Figure 5.2) were performed. 
 
Although the widespread use of plastics results in a high risk of contaminating samples, the 
MPs used are very distinctively coloured, which is uncommon on items such as clothes. 
Therefore, accidental introduction of MPs to be retraced was not an issue. Furthermore, 
sludge samples (no addition of MP) were digested and observed under the microscope. Little 
to no particles that looked like the spiked particles were found.   
 
Several relevant measures were taken to prevent contamination:  
 All apparatus were rinsed with deionised water prior to use. 
 Apparatus, such as the filtration funnel, were rinsed with deionised water in between 
sample replicates to prevent cross-contamination.  
 Only glass beakers without blue pouring rings were used, to prevent the possible 
introduction of blue particles (similar to PE particles) to the samples.  
 Filters (with MP) were sealed in Petri dishes during drying, and for subsequent 
processing steps (e.g. visual observation).   
==PAGE:37==
 
 
 
 
 
30
Furthermore, in view of the number of spiked particles, the amount of MP contamination 
(that will be counted) during sampling and processing is considered minimal. 
5.3 Sampling Sites and Sampling Procedures 
2 sampling sites were involved in this project. For wastewater samples used in Stages 1 to 3, 
samples were collected from Lundtofte WWTP. The pilot scale experiment (Stage 4), which 
involved a Discfilter primary treatment installation, was located at Sjölunda WWTP in 
Malmö.  
5.3.1 
Lundtofte WWTP 
Wastewater samples to be used in the digestion (Stage 1), settling tests (Stage 2) and 
membrane filtration tests (Stage 3) were collected from Lundtofte wastewater treatment 
plant situated in the municipality of Lyngby-Taarbæk, in the northern part of Copenhagen, 
Denmark. With a catchment area of 32km2, Lundtofte WWTP receives mainly domestic 
wastewater for a population equivalent of approximately 130 000 (Chhetri et al., 2014). The 
WWTP treats an average of 10 million m3 of wastewater annually, where treated effluent is 
released into Mølleåen, which then travels to Øresund 36km away (Lyngby-Taarbæk 
Stadsarkiv, 2016).  
 
Figure 5.3: Schematic representation of the treatment process flow at Lundtofte Wastewater Treatment Plant. 
(Adapted from scheme provided by Lundtofte WWTP)  
For the full schematic representation of the WWTP, refer to Appendix E. 
  
 
Figure 5.4: Lundtofte WWTP. Aeration tank (left) and secondary clarifier (right).  
Activated sludge samples were collected from the aeration tank, while treated effluent samples were collected 
from the surface of the secondary clarifier.  
==PAGE:38==
 
 
 
 
 
31
As shown in Figure 5.3, Lundtofte WWTP employs primary and secondary (biological) 
treatment. Preliminary treatment includes coarse screening, grit and grease removal, and fine 
screening. Aluminum-based coagulants are thereafter added and the wastewater mixed. This 
coagulation-flocculation process aids in the growth of flocs, allowing these flocs to settle in 
the primary settling tank. In the secondary treatment, wastewater is aerated and subjected to 
the activated sludge treatment process, with return activated sludge.    
 
The sludge samples were taken from the aeration tank (activated aerated sludge digestion 
stage, process #6 in Figure 5.3) and consist primarily of a mixture of activated sludge, 
recycled activated sludge and influent wastewater. This mixture is commonly termed mixed 
liquor suspended solids (MLSS), but will be referred to as activated sludge in the rest of this 
paper.  
 
Primary inlet samples were collected after the grit-and-grease chamber (process #3 in Figure 
5.3) to avoid clogging complications due to larger debris and grease. This sample will be 
termed primary inlet water for the rest of this paper. Treated effluent samples used for 
dilution purposes were taken from the secondary clarifier (process #7 in Figure 5.3). All 
samples were collected from the sub-surface of the process tanks, under dry weather 
conditions.  
5.3.2 Sample Collection at Lundtofte WWTP 
At Lundtofte WWTP, activated sludge samples were collected using a water sampler (a 
telescopic rod with a clear plastic beaker attached to the end), and thereafter transferred to 
clean 5L plastic containers. Activated sludge was collected from the top 1m of the aeration 
tanks that were being aerated, as aeration provided mixing, which increased homogeneity in 
the tank. Treated effluent samples were collected directly using 5L plastic containers from 
the top 30cm of the secondary clarifier. Samples were stored at 4°C immediately upon arrival 
at DTU (less than 2hrs), until processing to minimize degradation of the sample.  
5.3.3 Sjölunda WWTP in Malmö 
The pilot scale experiment (Stage 4) was carried out at Sjölunda WWTP in Malmö, where 
trials of an alternative primary treatment process combination were being carried out. In 
place of traditional primary sedimentation tanks that generally require large land areas, 
Hydrotech by Veolia offers compact solutions that utilises filtration via microscreens.  
 
In this primary treatment installation, wastewater (influent) after preliminary treatment is 
transported to the Hydrotech Drumfilter (pore size of 1000μm), followed by the coagulation 
and flocculation tanks, and the Hydrotech Discfilter, which is fitted with vertically mounted 
discs with filter cloth panels (pore size of 100μm). (Figure 5.5 and Figure 5.6) When the 
system is operated with the addition of coagulants and polymers, coagulant addition occurs 
==PAGE:39==
 
 
 
 
 
32
just before the coagulation tank, and polymer addition occurs just before the flocculation 
tank. 
 
Figure 5.5: The primary treatment set-up at Sjölunda WWTP. 
 
 
Figure 5.6: Schematic representation of the primary treatment flow process. 
According to Hydrotech, this Discfilter microscreening treatment has the ability to remove 
organic matter and phosphorus extensively, making it suitable as a stand-alone process in 
configurations where subsequent biological treatment is not required, such as in storm water 
treatment (Hydrotech, 2017). 
5.3.4 Sample Collection at Sjölunda WWTP 
In this pilot scale experiment, sludge samples from the backwashing of filters in the 
Discfilter, and effluent samples from the wastewater after filtration in the Discfilter were 
collected. Effluent samples and sludge samples (2L each) were collected at 5 min intervals 
for 50min after MP addition. A total of 10 samples were collected for each sample type. 5 
grab samples (2L each) were also collected from the sludge basin after each sampling round. 
Sludge in the basin was mixed using a combination of a mixing drill, and manual mixing 
using transparent, plastic pails. All samples were collected in clean, 2L plastic bottles and 
immediately kept at 10°C upon arrival at DTU, until processing.  
5.3.5 Sludge Characterization 
Measurements of TSS and VSS were carried out in accordance to Standard Methods (APHA, 
2012) using Whatman™ glass microfiber filters (934-AH™), with appropriate blank controls 
Influent 
(after preliminary 
treatment) 
Drumfilter 
(1000μm pore 
size) 
Coagulation 
tank 
0.84m
3 
Flocculation 
tank 
2.9m
3 
Discfilter 
2.5 - 3m
3 
(100μm pore 
size) 
Primary  
effluent 
==PAGE:40==
 
 
 
 
 
33
applied to ensure reliability of the results. TSS and VSS results shown for the activated 
sludge sample are the average of 5 replicates. All other SS measurements were performed in 
a minimum of triplicates. All pH measurements were performed using a pH meter (PHM210 
Standard pH Meter, MeterLab® Radiometer Analytical).  
5.4 Experiment Overview 
The project was carried out in 4 stages, as outlined in Figure 1.1: Overview of experimental 
stages in this thesis in Section 1. Figure 5.7 provides an overview of the stages involved. 
Stage 1 involved the investigation of sludge digestion methods proposed in literature to 
select the method best suited for reducing the sludge matrix in order to perform visual 
inspection on the MP particles added. Stage 2 involved settling tests to find out the 
distribution of nylon and PE particles (63-355μm) after settling (in the primary and 
secondary sedimentation tank). Stage 3 involved investigations of the retention capability of 
membranes (100μm and 25μm). Stage 4 involved an experiment to find out the distribution 
of spiked MPs within the pilot-scale primary treatment process at Sjölunda WWTP in 
Malmo. Traceable MP particles as described in Section 5.1 were used throughout the 
experimental portion of this thesis.  
 
 
 
Figure 5.7: Overview of study (Stages 1 to 4) 
Stage 1
Selection of Sludge Digestion Method
Reduction of sludge matrix to facilitate visual 
identification of microplastics
Effectiveness of method measured as: 
- TSS reduction
- No effect on MPs
Stage 2
Settling Tests
Traceable MPs (Nylon and PE 
particles) subjected to settling tests 
(Laboratory conditions)
Stage 3
Membrane Filtration Tests
- CSO simulation (100μm)
- Tertiary microfiltration simulation (25μm)
Stage 4
Pilot Scale Experiment
Addition and recovery of traceable 
MPs in pilot scale Discfilter primary 
treatment installation
==PAGE:41==
 
 
 
 
 
34
5.5 Stage 1: Pre-treatment Experiments - Chemical Digestion 
 
Figure 5.8: Overview of Stage 1  
For the purpose of easing visual MP identification, the matrix of the samples had to be 
reduced by degrading the organic matter present. Several chemical digestion methods, 
selected from literature (Section 4.2), were investigated to identify a suitable method. Due to 
the high organic content in activated sludge, chemical digestion was performed on activated 
sludge samples to determine the most appropriate digestion method. All the digestion 
methods were performed in the fume cabinet, especially as H2O2 is a strong oxidant and the 
resulting mixture is highly reactive. 
 
For this portion of the experiment, nylon pellets were dissolved in activated sludge samples 
(1 pellet to 45ml of activated sludge), and centrifuged at 2040g for 2 min. The resulting 
sludge pellet is then transferred to glass conical flasks and subjected to different digestion 
methods. The glass flasks were covered with glass lids to prevent contamination and to 
minimise evaporative losses. As nylon is negatively buoyant in the activated sludge sample, 
all the nylon particles were concentrated in the sludge. Microscope inspections of the drawn 
supernatant also confirmed that there were no particles in the supernatant portion. 
 
The digestion abilities of the treatment methods were measured in terms of TSS and VSS 
reduction, as compared with non-treated sludge samples. For TSS and VSS determinations, 
standard methods as in Section 5.3.5 were followed. Samples used for TSS determinations 
were not spiked with nylon particles. Spiked samples were for the purpose of visual 
observations using light microscopy.  
 
For samples treated with H2O2, H2O2 was added in excess. H2O2 concentrations in the 
sample flasks were estimated via the one-step colorimetric method (USP technologies, 2017) 
using 50g/L potassium titanium oxalate solution, where absorbance of the complex was 
Stage 1
Selection of Sludge Digestion Method
Reduction of sludge matrix to facilitate 
visual identification of microplastics
Tested on Nylon particles (3 size ranges)
Methods selected from literature include:
- H2O2 for 7 days
- H2O2 at 60-65°C for 24hrs
- WPO (H2O2 with Fe catalyst, 60-65°C)
- HNO3 at 60-65°C for 24hrs
Effectiveness of method measured as: 
- TSS reduction
- No effect on MPs
==PAGE:42==
 
 
 
 
 
35
measured at 400nm. Details can be found in Appendix H. H2O2 concentrations were 
measured before subsequent additions of H2O2. H2O2 additions were stopped once no 
visible reaction was observed with subsequent additions, and H2O2 was still present.   
 
Table 5.1: Overview of experiment plan for Stage 1 
Chemical Digestion 
Description of Method 
H2O2, 7 days 
50% H2O2 added stepwise, in excess.  
Samples then incubated at room temperature and 
pressure (r.t.p.) for 7 days. 
H2O2 at 60°C, 24hrs 
50% H2O2 added stepwise, in excess.  
Samples then incubated at 60°C for 24h. 
HNO3 at 60°C, 24hrs 
20ml of 65% HNO3. 
Samples then incubated at 60°C for 24h. 
Wet Peroxide Oxidation (WPO) 
Fe(II) + H2O2 at 60°C 
2.63ml of 0.76M FeSO4. pH adjusted to 3-4 using 
H2SO4 where necessary. 
48ml of 50% H2O2 added stepwise (in excess). 
Samples then incubated at 60°C for 24h. 
TMAH  
5ml of 25% TMAH added.  
Samples then incubated at r.t.p. for 24h. 
TMAH, 24hrs. Followed by H2O2 
5ml of 25% TMAH added. 
Samples then incubated at r.t.p. for 24h.  
50% H2O2 then added stepwise, in excess. 
 
5.6 Stage 2: Settling Tests 
 
 
Figure 5.9: Overview of Stage 2  
Stage 2
Settling Tests
Imhoff cone settling tests: 
To investigate the distribution of PE and nylon particles in primary 
inlet and activated sludge.
Nylon and PE particles (3 size ranges) subjected to settling tests 
Primary Inlet:
- 2h settling time
Activated Sludge: 
- Diluted with treated effluent for a TSS of 3g/L
- 3h settling time
3 phases collected: Scum, Supernatant, Settled Sludge
==PAGE:43==
 
 
 
 
 
36
5.6.1 
Settling Test 
Activated sludge samples were diluted using treated effluent water to achieve a final TSS of 
about 3 g/L, which is within the typical range (See Appendix F, Table F.1). Primary inlet 
water was used without alterations. The characteristics of the collected wastewater samples 
are detailed in Appendix F. The experiment was carried out in triplicates for each wastewater 
sample.  
 
Each MP pellet was added to 50ml of DI water and dissolved overnight in 1L glass bottles, 
stirring gently using magnetic stirrers. Prior to the settling test, 950ml of sample (diluted 
activated sludge/ primary inlet water) was added to each bottle. After continuous mixing for 
2hrs at low speed of approximately 100-120 rpm, the samples were transferred into Imhoff 
cones and allowed to settle. The experiment setup is depicted in Figure 5.10. To ensure 
maximum transfer of MP particles, the bottles were rinsed with deionised water (<50mL to 
minimize reductions in TSS).  
 
 
 
Figure 5.10: Setup of the settling tests (above). Sludge phase (below).  
The sludge phase was determined as shown, with approximately ≤1cm of supernatant left.  
 After 45min settling, the sides of the Imhoff cones were gently scraped with a glass rod to 
resuspend the sludge flocs and MPs adhered to the sides. The primary inlet samples and 
activated sludge samples were allowed a total settling time of 2hrs and 3hrs respectively, 
before the separate phases were collected. The settling times applied were determined from 
values obtained from literature to simulate settling in the primary settling tank and the 
secondary settling tank in WWTPs.    
  
  
==PAGE:44==
 
 
 
 
 
37
3 phases were collected from the Imhoff cone: scum, supernatant, sludge. (Figure 5.10) 
Scum: 
Top 1cm of the sample 
Supernatant: 
Water phase. Removed via a siphoning tube, with the final volume 
carefully pipetted out. 
Sludge: 
Settled portion. 
 
As MP particles might adhere to the sides, cones were washed with deionised water. To 
ensure that the washings collected correspond to the correct phase samples, washing for 
sludge samples preceded the other samples, where the cones were washed from the last 
noted sludge levels. Thereafter, the entire interior of the cones were washed and collected as 
supernatant samples.  
5.6.2 Sample Preparation and Analysis 
Results from Stage 1 showed that using H2O2 at an elevated temperature of 60°C for 24h 
was the most effective method in reducing organic content in the sludge. Each of the 
collected phase samples (scum, supernatant and sludge) was chemically digested using this 
method with varying amounts of H2O2 (Table 5.2). H2O2 was added stepwise to excess over 
the incubation period of 24hrs. It was important to add H2O2 stepwise for safety reasons and 
to prevent loss of material due to excessive foaming, as the reaction is quite vigorous and 
effervescent.  
Table 5.2: Volumes of H2O2 required for complete digestion of organic matter.  
N.A.: Not applicable. H2O2 was not added to samples with little to no organic content.  
 
 
Primary Inlet 
Activated Sludge 
(3g/L) 
Volume of 50% H2O2 required 
(ml) 
Scum (Top layer) 
1 – 2 
N.A. 
Supernatant 
10 
5 – 10 
Settled sludge 
15 
120 – 140 
 
After chemical digestion, the samples were vacuum filtered using 50μm steel filters for 
further sludge removal. Steel filters, made from AISI316 stainless steel, were purchased from 
Filtertek and cut to size. Filtrate residue was then resuspended in DI water and filtered onto 
gridded filter papers (Durapore® membrane filter, pore size = 5μm).  
 
In between each transfer step, samples were sonicated for 10 min. This was to further break 
down sludge flocs, which allowed for more sludge to be filtered out by the 50μm steel filters, 
to ease particle removal by resuspending particles that have adhered to the sides of the 
containers, and to ease visual identification by removing debris from the surface of MP 
particles. An overview of the experimental procedures applied is shown in Figure 5.11. All 
apparatus were visually inspected to minimise MP particle loss during transfer. Deionised 
water and 70% ethanol were used as washing liquid during sample transfer.  
==PAGE:45==
 
 
 
 
 
38
 
Figure 5.11: Overview of processes in Stage 2 
5.7 Stage 3: Membrane Filtration Experiments  
Membrane filtration experiments with membranes of pore sizes 100μm (used in CSO 
events) and 25μm (used in tertiary microfiltration) were performed to investigate the 
membrane retention efficiencies of MPs. The bench-scale test-tube unit (Figure 5.12) 
supplied by Hydrotech was used, which consists of (Hydrotech, 2012): 
 The test-tube, fabricated from a PVC plastic tube (approximate diameter: 67.8mm). 
 A clamp with a rubber joint to secure the filter at the bottom of the test-tube.  
 Filter discs with polyester cloths of varying pore sizes. Only 100μm (to simulate 
filtration during CSO) and 25μm (to simulate tertiary filtration) pore membranes 
were used in this stage.  
                   (a) 
(b) 
 
(c) 
 (d) 
 
Figure 5.12: Bench-scale test-tube unit provided by Hydrotech. (a) Filter discs. (b) Test setup.   
(c) Microscopic image of 100μm membrane. (d) Miscroscopic image of 25μm membrane. 
Settling 
Test
• Settling tests with inlet wastewater samples and activated sludge samples 
Chemical 
Digestion
• H2O2 at 60°C for 24hr 
• Differing volumes of H2O2 for each sample type (Table 5.2)
Filtration 
50um filters
• Digestion flasks: Sonication 10min, DI water for washing
• Vacuum filtration onto steel filters
• Steel filters collected into small glass bottles, suspended in DI water
Filtration 
grid filters
• Glass bottles: Sonication 10min, DI water for washing
• Vacuum filtration onto gridded filters
• Filters analysed via light microscopy
==PAGE:46==
 
 
 
 
 
39
5.7.1 
Simulation of CSO 
To replicate typical CSO conditions, 850ml of rainwater was mixed with 150ml of primary 
inlet water from Lundtofte WWTP (i.e. 15% primary inlet wastewater, as suggested by 
Chhetri et al. (2014)). Rainwater and rainwater runoff was collected from 26th April to 1st 
May 2017, and filtered using Whatman™ glass microfiber filters (934-AH™) to remove 
debris.  
 
Mixing and addition of traceable MP pellets (1.0g PE pellet) were performed as in Stage 2. 
Approximately 225 20μm FluorophorexTM polystyrene (PS) microspheres produced by 
phosphorex (Cat. No. 2106Q, Lot No. 8220D) were also added for recovery determination. 
Refer to Appendix K for PS concentration calculations. The water mixture was then poured 
through the test-tube setup fitted with the 100μm membrane filter disc as quickly as 
possible. MPs in the filtrate and residue were enumerated thereafter. No sonication was used 
in MP recovery. Membranes and apparatus were only washed using DI water. PE particles 
were enumerated via light microscopy, while fluorescent PS spheres were enumerated via 
fluorescence microscopy (Zeiss Axioskop, under blue filter, using 10x magnification). 
5.7.2 Simulation of Tertiary Treatment 
Experimental procedure is similar to CSO simulation (Section 5.7.1), with treated effluent 
and a 25μm membrane filter disc used instead. Only PS microspheres were added in this 
simulation. Characteristics of wastewater, treated effluent and rainwater samples are detailed 
in Tables F.2 and F.3 of Appendix F. 
5.8 Stage 4: Pilot Scale Experiment 
For the pilot scale experiment, the Discfilter was only fitted with 1 mounted disc, and the 
system was set at a constant volume inflow rate (Q) of 25m3/h. A description of the pilot 
scale installation can be found in Section 5.3.3.  
 
MP pellets (nylon and PE particles in the same pellet) were dissolved in DI water overnight 
in 1L glass bottles, stirring gently using magnetic stirrers, before addition into the system. 
6×5.0g MP pellets were used in each sampling round.  
2 sampling rounds were carried out: 
1) Base-line system without the addition of coagulants and polymers. Traceable MPs 
were added to the top of the coagulation tank.  
2) With the addition of aluminium coagulants and polymers. Turbidity of the influent 
wastewater was reduced from 280NTU to approximately 40NTU. Traceable MPs 
were added to the Drumfilter, for maximum contact with the coagulants. 
 
The effluent samples collected as described in Section 5.3.4, were processed in a similar 
manner to previous samples as described in Stage 2. However, as larger volumes were to be 
==PAGE:47==
 
 
 
 
 
40
processed, the samples were first volume reduced in the laboratory using 50μm steel filters. 
Residues on the each steel filter were then re-suspended in DI water, using 10min sonication 
to increase MP removal from the filters. The resultant suspension was then subjected to 
H2O2 digestion and processed as in Section 5.6.2. All steel filters were visually inspected 
using light microscopy to ensure complete transference of MP particles to the suspension. 
Visual identification of nylon particles via fluorescent microscopy (blue filter) was applied 
after light microscopy to minimise underestimations of nylon particles, which were more 
challenging to detect under light microscopy due to their colour, but were fluorescent under 
fluorescent microscopy.     
 
Sludge samples collected were retained for future analysis and additional processing.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:48==
 
 
 
 
 
41
6 Results & Discussion 
This section of the thesis documents the results of Stages 1 to 4 of the experimental portion 
of this project, and provides a discussion of the obtained results, experiences faced in this 
project, and possible areas for improvement.  
 
Stage 1 involved the experimental comparison of several sludge digestion methods to select 
an appropriate digestion method to be used for the rest of the project. Stage 2 involved 
settling tests to find out the distribution of MP particles after settling (in the primary and 
secondary sedimentation tank). In Stage 3, the retention capabilities of membranes (100μm 
and 25μm) were investigated. Stage 4 involved an experiment to find out the distribution of 
spiked traceable MPs within a pilot-scale primary treatment process at Sjölunda WWTP in 
Malmö. Throughout the entire study, traceable MPs were used.  
6.1 
Recovery of Spiked Traceable Microplastics 
For Stages 1 to 3 of the study, Nylon and PE pellets were used. The particle counts for each 
pellet type are shown in Table 6.1. Details are presented in Appendix D.  
Table 6.1: Average no. of traceable MP particles in each 1.0g Nylon and PE pellet. (Stages 1 to 3) 
 
 
Average no. 
of particles 
Total 
SD 
CoV (%) 
Nylon 
Green (250 to 355μm) 
281 
594 
34 
11.9 
Blue (125-250μm) 
127 
16 
13.0 
Orange (63-90μm) 
178 
29 
16.4 
PE 
Blue (250 to 355μm) 
408 
733 
28 
6.9 
Pink (125-250μm) 
136 
19 
13.7 
Blue (63-90μm) 
188 
23 
12.4 
 
The number of particles contained in each pellet was validated via comparison of counts 
performed by 3 independent analysts, 7 replicates (i.e. 7 pellets) for each pellet type. 
Coefficient of variation (CoV) generally decreased with increasing MP size due to the ease of 
identifying and enumerating larger MPs. CoVs of ≤20% and ≤15% were obtained for counts 
within each size range for Nylon and PE pellets respectively. Therefore, both the traceable 
MP spiking method (via in-house produced MP pellets) and the counting method exhibited a 
high degree of repeatability and reproducibility. In general, the obtained CoVs for PE were 
lower than that for nylon, as the PE particles were more strongly coloured, hence aiding 
visual identification.  
 
For the pilot scale experiment (Stage 4), 5.0g pellets containing both nylon and PE particles 
were produced. The number of particles counted in each representative 0.5g pellet is shown 
below in Table 6.2. 
==PAGE:49==
 
 
 
 
 
42
Table 6.2: Average no. of traceable MP particles in each 0.5g MP pellet, with nylon and PE in the same pellet.  
(Stage 4: Pilot Scale Experiment) 
 
 
Average no. 
of particles 
Total 
SD 
CoV (%) 
Nylon 
Orange (125 to 355μm) 
462 
1793 
22 
4.7 
Green (63-125μm) 
211 
37 
17.6 
PE 
Pink (125-355μm) 
643 
51 
8.0 
Blue (63-90μm) 
477 
26 
5.4 
 
Similarly, for the MP pellets produced for use in the pilot scale experiment, high repeatability 
and reproducibility were observed. CoVs of <10% were obtained for all particles, except for 
the green nylon particles (63-125μm), where a CoV of 17.6% was obtained. This was mainly 
due to the weak colour of the nylon particles, which made it difficult to identify the particles 
using light microscopy. In general, the colour present in the nylon particles (produced from 
cable ties) became less distinctive as particle size decreased. For future projects, stronger 
colours could be considered to ease visual analysis. From the counts obtained, an estimated 
average of 107580 MP particles were added to each sampling round of the pilot scale 
experiment (Stage 4).     
6.2 Recovery of MPs using Light Microscopy  
This project only involved the identification and enumeration of known, spiked MP particles 
that were distinctive in colour. Therefore, using the microscope was deemed adequate for 
fulfilling this purpose. However, difficulties were faced in the first stage of the project with 
regards to identification and enumeration of the small (63-90μm), orange nylon particles. 
This was mainly due to the similarity in colour between the nylon particles and inorganic 
particles already present in the sludge (Figure 6.1). Such inorganic particles could comprise 
of quartz sand and clay particles. This was especially evident in the settling tests using 
primary inlet water where such particles are present in higher quantities. Visual analysis was 
also hindered by inorganic particles, which obscured the view of the spiked MPs.   
 
Figure 6.1: Microscopic observation of nylon particles in the settled sludge fraction of primary inlet samples. 
Inorganic particles resembled the spiked orange nylon particles (63-90μm), which hindered visual analysis. 
However, it was discovered later on in the project, that the nylon particles used fluoresce 
brightly when observed using fluorescent microscopy, coupled with a blue filter. Effluent 
==PAGE:50==
 
 
 
 
 
43
samples collected during the pilot scale experiment (Stage 4) were therefore visually 
examined via fluorescent microscopy after using light microscopy. This helped in the visual 
identification of the less strongly coloured nylon particles.  
 
For studies concerned with enumerating MP particles in environmental samples, thorough 
characterization of MPs such as via FT-IR analysis is critical. As experienced in this study, 
there is a high level of difficulty and uncertainty in differentiating MPs from other inorganic 
particles using solely visual inspection. Therefore, the author of this study highly discourages 
using visual identification as the sole method when dealing with environmental samples. For 
a good balance between reliability, cost, and time, an appropriate method could incorporate 
both microscopy and FT-IR. As recommended by Song et al. (2017), small sub-samples 
could be processed via FT-IR for a preliminary overview of the plastics present, and 
thereafter enumerated using the microscope. For further verifications of particles of interest, 
FT-IR could be employed again.    
 
In this project, an overestimation of MP particles was initially expected due to the possible 
misidentification of non-plastic, inorganic particles MP. Furthermore, the possible 
breakdown of larger particles (e.g. large blue PE particles would be disintegrated and 
mistakenly counted as small blue PE particles) resulting in inaccurate counts was also a cause 
for concern. However, the high recovery rates for all PE particle size ranges showed that 
disintegration, if any, was minimal. Therefore, the recovery results prove that the 
contamination prevention strategies applied (Section 5.2) were sufficient.   
6.3 Stage 1: Selection of Sludge Digestion Method 
The digestion efficiencies of the treatments ranged from 59.9% to 87.6% (Figure 6.2), as 
determined by TSS reduction. The most efficient digestion was using nitric acid (HNO3) 
heated at 60°C for 24hr. However, microscopic observations revealed that the treatment also 
dissolved many of the spiked nylon particles, making it highly unsuitable for the extraction 
of MPs. 
(a) 
 
 
 
 
 
(b) 
 
Figure 6.2: Digestion efficiency (%) determined by (a) TSS reduction and (b) VSS reduction as compared to the 
non-treated control samples.  
Data represents the mean efficiencies ± standard errors of the means (n = 2 to 5 per treatment).  
50
60
70
80
90
100
H2O2
7 days
H2O2
(60°C, 24h)
HNO3
(60°C, 24h)
WPO
Digestion efficiency (%)
50
60
70
80
90
100
H2O2
7 days
H2O2
(60°C, 24h)
HNO3
(60°C, 24h)
WPO
Digestion efficiency (%)
==PAGE:51==
 
 
 
 
 
44
The second most effective digestion method was using H2O2, heated at 60°C for 24h. It was 
approximately 6% more effective in reducing the TSS of the sludge as compared with the 7-
day H2O2, non-heated treatment recommended by Tagg et al. (2015), and less time-
consuming. For both H2O2 treatment types, no visible effect on the nylon particles was 
observed. Digestion treatments involving the use of H2O2 resulted in a change in appearance 
of the sludge flocs. The sludge flocs were also bleached and changed from a dark brown in 
colour to whitish-ash. (Figure 6.3) This later proved to be useful during microscopic 
inspections as it provided a distinct contrast with the colourful spiked MP particles. 
Oxidation by H2O2 was also observed to disintegrate the sludge flocs, resulting in decreased 
floc sizes, and increased the sludge settleability. Vacuum filtration of the digested samples via 
50μm steel filters helped remove flocs that were <50μm, and further reduced the matrix of 
the sample. Visual inspection of MPs was possible after this step. It is important to note that 
unlike marine samples, the organic matter content in wastewater samples is much higher. 
Therefore, the resultant reaction with H2O2 is highly effervescent and the reaction should be 
carried out in containers with a large headspace.  
(a) 
 
 
 
(b) 
 
 
      (c) 
 
    
    
 
Figure 6.3: (a) and (b) 45ml AS sample chemically digested via H2O2 + heat treatment (60°C).  
(c) 5ml non-treated AS sample.  
Although using Fenton (H2O2 with Fe(II) catalyst) has been touted as a rapid method (Tagg 
et al., 2017), its effect was not successfully replicated during the experiment. After the 
recommended reaction period of 10min, organic content in the samples was still visibly high. 
This could be due to the different TSS contents of the sludge analysed. Aerated activated 
sludge samples were used in this project, while samples investigated by Tagg et al. (2017) 
were obtained from the biological activated anaerobic stage. Sludge samples used in this 
project were obtained in a similar manner to Tagg et al. (2017).  
 
The samples were thereafter further heated to 60°C for 24h (Wet Peroxide Oxidation), as 
performed in some studies (Mason et al., 2016; Michielssen et al., 2016; Masura et al., 2015) 
to obtain an average TSS reduction efficiency of 59.9%. However, pH control is crucial in 
this treatment. In a previous experiment where pH was not properly controlled, a heavy load 
of red precipitate due to the production of Fe(III) resulted, hence impeding visual 
identification of nylon particles. The experiments had to be repeated, and in subsequent 
==PAGE:52==
 
 
 
 
 
45
experiments, the nylon particles in the samples were observed to have undergone a slight 
discolouration.  
 
One-Way ANOVA analysis was applied to the TSS reduction rates of 3 treatments: H2O2 for 
7 days, H2O2 at 60°C for 24h, and WPO. There was a statistically significant difference 
between the 3 treatment methods (F(2,9) = 486.638, p <0.001). A Tukey post hoc test 
revealed that the TSS reduction rate for H2O2 at 60°C, 24hrs (66.38 ± 0.47) was significantly 
higher than H2O2 for 7 days (59.97 ± 0.24, p <0.001) and WPO (58.86 ± 0.27, p <0.001). 
H2O2 for 7 days treatment was also statistically higher than WPO (p=0.021). Refer to 
Appendix I for detailed calculations. 
 
2 more chemical digestion treatments were also performed: TMAH treatment, and the 
addition of H2O2 24 hours after TMAH addition. However, using TMAH as the sole reagent 
did not visibly decrease the organic content of the samples. Sludge settleability was also 
observed to decrease. The latter (TMAH followed by H2O2) produced too much foam 
during the experiment, resulting in extensive loss of material.   
 
Numerous different methods have been used in literature for the reduction of organic matter 
in marine water and wastewater. Stage 1 of this study was performed to investigate the most 
appropriate method for reducing the sludge matrix, in particular, activated sludge where 
organic content is highest. Due to the ease of use, high digestion efficiency, and no apparent 
effect on plastic particles, the digestion method of H2O2 heated to 60°C for 24h was selected 
for use in the rest of this study. Chemical digestion was followed by filtration using 50μm 
steel filters, as mentioned in Section 5.6.2, for further reduction of the sludge matrix. 
6.4 Stage 2: Settling Tests 
Recovery rates for settling tests with both nylon and PE were relatively high, with >95% 
recovery for nylon particles >125μm and >70% for all PE particles. As such, careful 
handling of samples with 10min sonication and copious washing with DI water has proven 
sufficient for the recovery of the MPs used in this project. While it is possible that sonication 
could affect the MP particles, studies have shown that short periods of sonication (≤20min) 
may only damage polymers with weak molecular bonds such as films (Urgert, 2015). 
Furthermore, only minute size reductions may occur for particles, with no external effects 
when observed with a stereomicroscope (Urgert, 2015; Caron et al., 2016). As explained in 
Section Error! Reference source not found., recovery of nylon particles in the size range 
63-90μm was hindered due to difficulties in distinguishing MPs from other particles.  
6.4.1 
Nylon Microparticles 
As was expected for the denser nylon particles (density = 1.02 – 1.05g/cm3), most of the 
particles were found in the settled sludge portion (Figure 6.4). This is mainly attributed to its 
==PAGE:53==
 
 
 
 
 
46
negative buoyancy in water. With approximately 98%5 (SD: 0.2%) and 99% (SD: 0.4%) of 
the recovered nylon particles detected in the primary and secondary settled sludge portions 
respectively, it suggests that settling processes alone can be responsible for high nylon 
retention rates in a WWTP. From these results, it can be expected that in a typical WWTP 
employing secondary treatment, a retention rate of >99.9% will result for negatively buoyant 
MP.  
 
Figure 6.4: Nylon distribution in the 3 phases (scum, supernatant and sludge) of  
settled primary inlet samples (left) and settled activated sludge (right). 
Given the same volume and density, round particles with smooth surfaces experience smaller 
drag and hence, have a faster settling velocity (Dietrich, 1982), as compared to more angular 
and irregularly shaped particles. The particles used in this project are relatively irregular due 
to the way they were produced. Therefore, even greater and faster settling can be expected 
for more spherical nylon microbeads.  
6.4.2 PE Microparticles 
With a density of 0.917 – 0.965 g/cm3 (Hidalgo-Ruz et al., 2012), PE is expected to be relatively buoyant in water. 
Therefore, settling of PE fragments can be attributed to the influence of the settling suspended solids. As the PE 
particles are mixed with the sludge flocs, they settle into the sludge during sedimentation. The data obtained ( 
Figure 6.5 and Figure 6.6) show that settling of PE particles to the sludge fraction depends 
on the amount of TSS in the sample, whereby the greater the amount of settling suspended 
solids, the greater the settling of PE particles. 32% (SD: 4.4%) of PE particles were found to 
settle along with the solids in the primary inlet samples, and 88% (SD: 20%) in the activated 
sludge samples.  
 
 
(a) 
 
 
 
 
(b) 
                                                        
5 Particles enumerations of the settled sludge fraction were based on only green (250-355μm) and blue (125-
250μm) particles due to difficulties in enumerating orange (63-90μm) particles, as explained in Section 6.1. 
 
 
==PAGE:54==
 
 
 
 
 
47
 
 
 
Figure 6.5: PE distribution in settled primary inlet samples.  
(a) Distribution of PE particles in the 3 phases (scum, supernatant and sludge).  
(b) Distribution of PE particles in the 3 phases for each of the particle size ranges. 
(a) 
 
 
 
 
(b) 
 
 
Figure 6.6: PE distribution in settled activated sludge samples. 
(a) Distribution of PE particles in the 3 phases (scum, supernatant and sludge).  
(b) Distribution of PE particles in the 3 phases for each of the particle size ranges. 
These results are consistent with findings from other studies, where settling of buoyant MPs 
is increased due to the effect of settling flocs. Bench-scale studies with PE particles by Carr 
et al. (2016) reported a trapping efficiency of 40% by a slurry of toilet paper flocs, which was 
used to represent raw wastewater sample. This is similar to the retention rate of 32% 
obtained in the settling test (Figure 6.5). Detailed results are available in Appendix J. 
6.4.3 Effectiveness of Skimming and Settling Processes 
In both the primary and secondary settling tanks, in addition to sequestration via settling 
sludge, surface skimmers also help remove particles. From the results, the combination of 
skimming and settling is able to remove 77% of the added PE particles during primary 
treatment, and 96% during secondary treatment alone. Thus, a WWTP using secondary 
treatment has the potential to remove about 99% of the total PE load, which is similar to 
45%
23%
32%
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Blue 
(250-355 μm)
Pink 
(125-250 μm)
Blue 
(63-90 μm)
Scum
Supernatant
Sludge
8% 4%
88%
88%
90%
92%
94%
96%
98%
100%
Blue 
(250-355 μm)
Pink 
(125-250 μm)
Blue 
(63-90 μm)
Scum
Supernatant
Sludge
==PAGE:55==
 
 
 
 
 
48
that for nylon. Due to the short experimental period, increases in polymer density due to 
bio-fouling is ruled out. However, MPs in the urban wastewater system typically experience 
longer contact times with other solids and chemicals than that presented in this laboratory-
based experiment. Based on the hydrophobic nature of MPs, it is expected that MPs will 
attach to sewage solids, and this association with suspended solids could either increase or 
decrease its overall density. MP retention thus depends largely on the characteristics of the 
sludge flocs. Association of MPs with unstable flocs, which are unable to settle effectively, 
would reduce MP retention via settling (Carr et al., 2016).  
 
With longer contact times, the possibility of forming aggregates with colloids and other 
solids increases. This is especially so during the primary stage with chemical treatment. 
Higher MP removal is expected, as MP association with flocs is expected to increase with 
greater contact with coagulants and flocculating agents.  
 
As can be inferred from the settling tests, settling and skimming are critical processes for the 
removal of negatively and positively buoyant MPs. Grab samples examined by Carr et al. 
(2016) also reflected similar results, finding the highest MP counts in primary tank 
skimmings. Particles found in the supernatant portions of the settling tests are less likely to 
be captured by settling and skimming processes, and hence, are able to escape from WWTPs 
(Carr et al., 2016). For nylon, 25 particles (out of >1100) were found in the supernatant of 
the primary inlet settling tests, while only 10 particles (out of >1300 particles) were found in 
the supernatant of the activated sludge settling tests.   
6.5 Stage 3: Membrane Filtration Experiments 
The membrane filtration experiments (Stage 3) were performed to investigate the retention 
of MPs in the event of a combined sewer overflow (CSO), and when used in tertiary 
microfiltration. In the CSO simulation, membranes with a pore size of 100μm were used, 
while 25μm pore size membranes were used to simulate tertiary microfiltration. 
 
The membrane filtration experiments had a PE particle recovery rate of >80% for all PE 
size ranges, which indicated that the use of DI water for copious washing of the membranes 
and apparatus alone (no sonication) was sufficient in this experimental setup. Due to the low 
organic matter content and short experimental period, attachment of MPs to the membrane 
and apparatus was minimal.    
6.5.1 
Filtration of Simulated CSO  
Figure 6.7 depicts the retention capabilities of the 100μm pore size membrane during the 
simulated CSO (typical rainfall) event. More than 99% of the PE particles >125μm were 
effectively retained by the 100μm membrane, while about 7.03% of particles in the 63-90μm 
size range were also retained.  
==PAGE:56==
 
 
 
 
 
49
 
Figure 6.7: PE distribution after membrane (100μm) filtration.  
Results are represented as percentage of the total number of PE particles added in each size range.  
Retention of particles in the 63-90μm size range could have been attributed either to 
attachment to larger particles present, or due to its settling orientation. As mentioned in 
Section 5.1, MP particle size ranges provided in this study are an estimation based on 
fractions obtained after sieving. The particles retained could have had dimensions greater 
than 100μm on one plane, which obstructed its transport through the membrane.  As shown 
in Figure 5.12, the membranes pores are arranged in a square cross-linked fashion, where the 
pore sizes provided are only representative of the lengths of the pore sides. The length of the 
hypotenuse for each square pore is >100μm. Therefore, depending on the orientation of the 
particle, particles >100μm may be able to pass through the membrane.  
 
In this experiment, only 2 particles >125μm (out of 1655 particles) were found to pass 
through the membrane. While the results suggest that filtration efficiency is directly related 
to the membrane pore size (i.e. the membrane is expected to retain particles larger than the 
stipulated pore size), this might not be the case under actual scenarios. In actual CSO 
scenarios, the volume flow rate is expected to be much higher. This could result in 
alterations to the effective pore size of the membranes, resulting in lower retention 
efficiencies of MPs.  
6.5.2 Simulation of Tertiary Filtration  
In spite of a membrane pore size of 25μm, the membrane was able to retain 30.1% (SD: 
7.21, CoV: 11.27%) of the PS microspheres, which had a smaller diameter of 20μm. This is 
in slight contrast to results found in Section 6.5.1, where MP retention was found to be 
directly dependent on membrane pore size. 
 
This was mainly due to the presence of algae in the treated effluent (Figure 6.8). As the 
treated effluent is retained in the secondary clarifier for a stipulated retention time prior to its 
release to water bodies, algal biomass increases in the secondary clarifier.  
92.97%
99.92%
99.76%
7.03%
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Blue 
(250-355 μm)
Pink 
(125-250 μm)
Blue 
(63-90 μm)
Residue
Filtrate
==PAGE:57==
 
 
 
 
 
50
 
Adherence of MPs to algae could have been facilitated by the 
mucus layer present on most algal surfaces (Gutow et al., 
2017). Algae are also generally negatively charged. Therefore, 
in addition to retention by surface mucus, electrostatic 
binding to cellulose could also have been an attributing 
factor (Gutow et al., 2017). The residual algal biomass could 
have also reduced the effective pore size of the membrane as 
it clogs up the membrane pores.  
 
In either situation, the ability of the membrane to retain 
particles lesser than its pore size is enhanced by the presence 
of algae.    
6.6 Stage 4: Pilot Scale Experiment 
In the pilot scale Discfilter experiment at Sjölunda WWTP in Malmö, 2 sampling rounds 
were performed. Polymers and coagulants were only added in sampling round 2.  
 
The results of the first sampling round (without addition of polymers and coagulants) are 
presented in Figure 6.9. As expected, most of the particles found in the primary effluent 
samples were the small PE particles (65-125μm). Due to their positive buoyancy in 
wastewater, PE particles are more likely to persist through this primary treatment installation 
as compared with nylon particles. Additionally, these small particles are also more capable of 
escaping the pores in the Discfilter as compared with larger particles. 
 
 
Figure 6.9: No. of the PE and Nylon particles per litre of effluent sample in sampling round 1  
(with respect to time).  
With a constant flow rate (Q) of 25m3/h, this corresponds to a volume flow of 2083L every 5min.  
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
No. of particles/L
Time (min)
Green Nylon 
(65 - 125μm)
Orange Nylon 
(125 - 355μm)
Pink PE 
(125 - 355μm)
Blue PE  
(65 - 125μm)
Figure 6.8: Residual algal biomass
on the filter membrane
==PAGE:58==
 
 
 
 
 
51
According to Figure 6.9, the number of traceable MPs found in the effluent samples 
increased initially as an increasing number of particles were transported to the Discfilter 
chamber via the wastewater flow. Thereafter, as the traceable MPs were flushed out of the 
installation, either as effluent or sludge, the number of traceable MPs detected in the effluent 
decreased.  
 
While it was predicted that maximum concentration of the traceable MPs in the effluent 
would occur at approximately 10min after the addition of traceable MPs to the installation 
(refer to Appendix M), the highest number of particles in the effluent was observed at about 
20min. This is likely due to the high retention of particles by the Discfilter, which would 
have caused delays in the particle transport and retained most of the particles added.   
 
Particles larger than 100μm in size were also found in the effluent samples. (Figure 6.10)  
  
 
Figure 6.10: Pink PE (left) and orange nylon (right) particles in the size range 125 - 355μm found in the effluent 
samples. 
Particles in the size range 125-355μm were observed in the primary effluent samples despite 
passing through the Discfilter that has a pore size of 100μm. As observed in many other 
studies, particles larger than the stipulated filter pore size have the ability to escape filtration. 
Ziajahromi et al. (2017) found MPs in the 100-190μm size range in reverse-osmosis effluent, 
and attributed it to the possible occurrence of larger pores on the membrane and other 
membrane imperfections, or gaps in between pipework.        
 
Using the results obtained as gross estimates, it can be approximated that about 59896 
particles6 of the added traceable MPs would have been found in the effluent portion of the 
experiment, which corresponds to an estimated MP removal efficiency7 of 44.3%. Assuming 
that the added MP particles are inert in the pilot scale system, using mass balance, it can be 
estimated that the remaining MP particles (55.7%) will be sequestered by the sludge fraction.   
 
In sampling round 2, where polymers and coagulants were added to the treatment, only a 
total of 7 particles were found (in 20L of primary effluent), of which they were all PE 
                                                        
6 Using area of trapeziums to estimate area (from data points obtained).  
7 Retention rate was calculated based on the estimated average number of MP particles added per sampling 
round (i.e. 107580 particles). 
==PAGE:59==
 
 
 
 
 
52
particles in the size range 63-125μm. As compared with samples from round 1 (no polymers 
and coagulants), this represents a further MP retention capability of over 85%. This shows 
that the effect of polymers and coagulants on MP retention is significant, and indicates the 
importance of the coagulation and flocculation treatment stages on MP retention in 
WWTPs. Detailed results can be found in Appendix N.   
6.7 Overall Discussion & Perspectives 
As interest in the occurrence of MPs in WWTPs continues to grow, many studies have 
attempted to quantify MPs in WWTPs. In these studies, a variety of methods for the 
sampling, extraction, identification and enumeration of MPs in organic-rich wastewater have 
been suggested and employed. However, many of these methods are still relatively new, and 
lack validation. Current discussions about MP prevalence in WWTPs are based on MPs 
quantified in studies. And since the whole basis of MP quantification in environments and 
WWTPs is dependent on the processing methods used, method validations are crucial for 
obtaining reliable results. By investigating key MP retention processes suggested in literature, 
the present study serves to provide a degree of validation and support for the findings of 
these studies performed.  
 
In the present study, traceable MPs were used to investigate MP transport and distribution in 
WWTP processes. Results obtained support findings that MPs are largely retained in primary 
and secondary settling stages. Retention rates of 99% and >99% respectively were obtained 
for PE and nylon MPs. Key processes for MP retention in these treatment stages were 
skimming and settling. For positively buoyant PE particles, skimming dominated in the 
primary settling process (removal rate of 45%), while settling accounted for 88% removal 
within secondary settling. The effect coagulation and flocculation has on MP retention is 
also very significant.  
 
The effectiveness of membranes in retaining MPs appears to be highly dependent on the 
pore size of the membranes employed. In tests with 100μm membranes, results suggest that 
these membranes are effective in retaining MPs larger than its pore size, but not for MPs 
<100μm. This echoes findings in studies that suggest the limitations of filtration in retaining 
MPs. Similar results were found in tertiary microfiltration tests. However, retention of MPs 
smaller than the membrane pore size can be increased due to adherence to SS (e.g. algal 
biomass). Therefore, MP retention by filtration processes would only be significant if 
membranes with small pore sizes are used. In the present study, only MP particles were 
investigated. Future investigations that include traceable MP fibres carried out in a similar 
manner to this study could provide valuable insight on their behaviour in WWTP processes. 
 
By examining the influence of each treatment type on MP retention via dose-recovery 
methods, it allows for greater detection of systematic errors and addresses the uncertainties 
present in studies focused primarily on MP collection studies. Dose-recovery is especially 
==PAGE:60==
 
 
 
 
 
53
important for method validation, with higher, reproducible recovery awarding the method 
greater confidence. By using traceable MPs in controlled settings, the uncertainties and bias 
generally associated with environmental sampling were minimised. The novel method of 
using sugar pellets when spiking samples with traceable MP particles worked well for the 
purpose of this study. Therefore, this method could possibly be used in future validation 
studies.  
 
Evident in the literature review, best methods would include large sampling volumes for 
greater representativeness of wastewater flows, and the usage of spectroscopy methods for 
MP analysis. Due to large variations in MP loads received by WWTPs, quantifying MPs in 
effluent wastewater alone does little to provide information on the actual effectiveness of 
WWTPs. Low MP concentrations found in effluents could simply be due to low MP loads, 
which can be sporadic and temporal in nature. Investigations of both influent and effluent 
wastewater are hence, pertinent in estimating the MP removal efficiency of WWTPs.  
 
As majority of MPs entering WWTPs will end up in the sewage sludge, it is highly plausible 
that the reuse of sludge as fertilizer on farmlands would introduce MPs to environments. As 
such, the significance of MPs found in such areas will have to be examined in future. This 
future area of study will also greatly benefit from improvements made on the current 
processing methods of sludge samples. 
 
Over the course of this project, despite using traceable MP particles of known origin and 
appearance, some difficulty was experienced in identifying these MPs. Coupled with reports 
from other studies, it can be concluded that light microscopy alone is highly unsuitable for 
detecting MPs in environmental samples. However, while light microscopy is erroneous, it is 
not always possible to employ more reliability analysis methods such as spectroscopy. Due to 
the high costs and technical requirements of these methods, relying on spectroscopy is not a 
viable option for many researchers. Therefore, there is an urgent need to improve the 
processing and analysis methods of MPs. And in order to achieve that, an understanding of 
the methods available has to be established first.  
 
With the current methods available, a combination of methods would provide the best 
balance between reliability, time, and cost. In the experimental portion of this project, 
method combinations were employed to improve recovery rates. For instance, H2O2 
oxidation was coupled with filtration to reduce the matrix of the wastewater samples, and 
both light and fluorescent microscopy were eventually used during MP identification and 
enumeration. By understanding the strengths and limitations of the methods used, there is 
greater potential for minimising bias in the results obtained. Possible bias could occur due to 
MP losses during sample collection, or as under- and overestimations during MP analysis.   
 
==PAGE:61==
 
 
 
 
 
54
As experienced in this project and from the studies reviewed, technical challenges exist from 
sampling to analysis. Regardless of the analysis methods employed (i.e. light microscopy and 
spectroscopy), accuracy is very dependent on the judgement, experience and expertise of the 
individual analysts. Even when using FT-IR methods, errors could arise due to 
misinterpretations and less-than-ideal conditions (e.g. weathered MPs). Errors could also 
occur in sampling procedures. Gaps in sampling equipment and the technical expertise of 
technicians could result in MP losses or contamination. Hence, results can vary widely from 
study to study. It is therefore, crucial for every study to perform validation tests using 
traceable plastics. Validation tests prior to each set of studies would award their subsequent 
results greater reliability.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:62==
 
 
 
 
 
55
7 Conclusion 
The main objectives of the present study were to investigate the transport and distribution of 
MPs in WWTPs, and to assess currently available methods of processing MPs in wastewater 
samples.  
 
Each of the processing methods introduced in this study has its host of advantages and 
limitations: 
 Large sampling volumes are preferred for greater representativeness, which would be 
enabled by in-situ filtration methods. However, this is only applicable for wastewater 
samples with low SS due to clogging issues.  
 While FT-IR spectroscopy is one of the most reliable MP analysis methods available, 
its high costs and high technical requirements makes it inaccessible to many 
researchers.  
There is no one-size-fits-all approach. Based on the literature review as well as the author’s 
own experiences, in order to establish a balance between reliability and feasibility, a 
combination of methods would have to be employed. For instance, using FT-IR analysis 
with microscopy methods could increase the accuracy of microscopy methods, while 
reducing the overall processing time required. The reliability of light microscopy analysis can 
also be increased when coupled with staining and fluorescent microscopy.  
 
In the comparison study of chemical digestion methods performed, using H2O2 at 60°C was 
the most effective method for the reduction of organic matter in activated sludge samples 
used this study. However, as sludge from only one location was used, it is recognised that the 
digestion efficiencies attained in this study might not be applicable for all types of wastewater 
samples.  
 
By using traceable MP particles under controlled, laboratory-scale experiments, this present 
study was able to close the mass balance gap experienced in many studies of MPs in WWTPs 
by providing insight on the distribution of particles under various WW treatment processes. 
The results obtained showed that typical primary and secondary treatment processes are 
capable of high MP removal rates (>99% removal rate for both positively and negatively 
buoyant MP particles), and that majority of MP removal is attributed to adsorption to either 
sludge or surface solids. This supports findings from several other studies. High removal 
rates were also found to occur for positively buoyant MPs. For these particles, in addition to 
adsorption to settling solids, skimming is a critical MP removal process. Coagulation and 
flocculation processes were also found to be critical in MP removal. Pilot scale experiments 
suggest that the addition of polymers and coagulants are pertinent in the retention of MPs, 
especially in treatments with low hydraulic retention periods, and could bolster the 
effectiveness of filtration with regards to MP retention.   
 
==PAGE:63==
 
 
 
 
 
56
The efficacy of filtration in MP retention was found to be highly dependent on the 
membrane pore size. While retention of particles smaller than the pore size was observed to 
be possible, particles larger than the stipulated membrane pore size also escaped filtration, 
possibly due to irregularities in membrane pores and gaps in the connections. MP retention 
during CSO and tertiary microfiltration is also highly dependent on the pore size of the 
filtration membrane used.  
 
It is evident that skimming and settling processes are the key processes involved in MP 
retention in WWTP, whereby majority of the MP load in WWTPs will be sequestered in the 
sludge fraction. Therefore, future considerations for the reuse of this sludge fraction have to 
be applied to prevent the introduction of MPs into the environment via other means.  
 
Although this supports findings by many studies, due to the lack of an established protocol, 
validation of the processing methods selected is crucial. Therefore, I recommend for 
validation steps to be applied to all studies to ascertain that the results obtained are of a high 
reliability.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:64==
 
 
 
 
 
57
References 
Andrady, A. L. (2011). Microplastics in the marine environment. Marine Pollution Bulletin, 62, 
1596-1605. 
Americal Public Health Association (APHA). (2012). Standard Methods for the Examination of 
Water and Wastewater, 22nd edition. American Public Health Association, Washington 
DC, USA. 
Bakir, A., O'Conner, I. A., Rowland, S. J., Hendriks, A. J., & Thompson, R. C. (2016). 
Relative importance of microplastics as a pathway for the transfer of hydrophobic 
organic chemicals to marine life. Environmental Pollution, 219, 56-65. 
Barnes, D. K. A. (2002). Invasions by marine life on plastic debris. Nature, 416, 808-809. 
Bayo, J., Olmos, S., Lopez-Castellanos, J., & Alcolea, A. (2016). Microplastics and 
microfibers in the sludge of a municipal wastewater treatment plant. International 
Journal of Sustainable Development and Planning, 11(5), 812-821. 
British Plastic Federation (BPF). (2017). Plastipedia. Retrieved 09 June 2017, 
from http://www.bpf.co.uk/plastipedia/polymers 
Brandsma, S. H., Nijssen, P., van Velzen, M. J. M., & Leslie, H. A. (2013). Microplastics in 
river suspended particulate matter and sewage treatment plants. IVM Institute for 
Environmental Studies, Amsterdam, Netherlands. 
Browne, M. A., Dissanayake, A., Galloway, T. S., Lowe, D. M., & Thompson, R. C. (2008). 
Ingested microscopic plastic translocates to the circulatory system of the mussel 
Mytilus edulis  Environmental Science & Technology, 42(13), 5026-5031. 
Caron, A., Thomas, C., Ariel, E., Berry, K., Boyle, S., Motti, C., & Brodie, J. 
(2016). Extraction and identification of microplastics from sea turtles: method development and 
preliminary results. Report No. 15/52. Centre for Tropical Water & Aquatic Ecosystem 
Research (TropWATER), Townsville, Australia. 
Carr, S. A., Liu, J., & Tesoro, G. (2016). Transport and fate of microplastic particles in 
wastewater treatment plants. Water Research, 91, 174-182. 
Cauwenberghe, L. V., Claessens, M., Vandegehuchte, M. B., & Janssen, C. R. (2015). 
Microplastics are taken up by mussels (Mytilus edulis) and lugworms (Arenicola marina) 
living in natural habitats. Environmental Pollution, 199, 10-17. 
Cauwenberghe, L. V., Vanreusel, A., Mees, J., & Janssen, C. R. (2013). Microplastic 
pollution in deep-sea sediments. Environmental Pollution, 182, 495-499. 
==PAGE:65==
 
 
 
 
 
58
Chhetri, R. K., Thornberg, D., Berner, J., Gramstad, R., Öjstedt, U., Sharma, A. K. & 
Andersen, H. R. (2014) Chemical disinfection of combined sewer overflow waters 
using performic acid or peracetic acids. Science of the Total Environment, 490, 1065-
1072. 
Claessens, M., Cauwenberghe, L. V., Vandegehuchte, M. B., & Janssen, C. R. (2013). New 
techniques for the detection of microplastics in sediments and field collected 
organisms. Marine Pollution Bulletin, 70, 227-233. 
Cole, M., Lindeque, P., Halsband, C., & Galloway, T. S. (2011). Microplastics as 
contaminants in the marine environment: A review. Marine Pollution Bulletin, 62, 
2588-2597. 
Cole, M., Webb, H., Lindeque, P. K., Fileman, E. S., Halsband, C., & Gallaway, T. S. (2014). 
Isolation 
of 
microplastics 
in 
biota-rich 
seawater 
samples 
and marine 
organisms. Scientific Reports, 4, 4528. 
Cooper, C. D. (2015). Introduction to environmental engineering.  Waveland Press, Long Grove, 
Illinois, USA. 
Dammel, E. E., & Schroeder, E. D. (1992). Density of activated sludge flocs. Water Research, 
25(7), 841-846. 
DANVA. (2009). Water in figures. Dansk Vand- og Spildevandsforening, Skanderborg, 
Denmark. 
DANVA. (2015). Water in figures. Dansk Vand- og Spildevandsforening, Skanderborg, 
Denmark. 
Dietrich, W. E. (1982). Settling velocity of natural particles. Water Resources Research, 18, 
1615-1626. 
Dyachenko, A., Mitchell, J. & Arsen. N. (2017) Extraction and identification of microplastic 
particles from secondary wastewater treatment plant (WWTP) effluent. Analytical 
Methods, 9, 1412-1418.  
Embree, K. (2016). Global plastics packaging market to hit $375 billion by 2020. Retrieved 
01 May 2017, from https://www.plasticstoday.com/packaging/global-plastics-
packaging-market-hit-375-billion-2020/23800481624973    
Eskicioglu, C. Prorot, A., Marin, J., Droste, R. L. & Kennedy, K. J. (2008) Synergetic 
pretreatment of sewage sludge by microwave irradiation in presence of H2O2 for 
enhanced anaerobic digestion. Water Research, 42, 4674-4682.  
Estahbanati, S., & Fahrenfeld, N. L. (2016). Influence of wastewater treatment plant 
discharges on microplastic concentrations in surface water. Chemosphere, 162, 277-
284. 
==PAGE:66==
 
 
 
 
 
59
European Commission (EC). (2001). Disposal and recycling routes for sewage sludge: Part 
2 – Regulatory report. Luxembourg. 
European Commission (EC). (2010). Environmental, economic and social impacts of the 
use of sewage sludge on land. Final Report. Part III: Project Interim Reports. 
Brussels, Belgium. 
European Commission (EC). (2016). Policy Area: Environment. Retrieved 10 April 2017, 
from https://ec.europa.eu/info/strategy/environment_en  
Fendall, L. S., & Sewell, M. A. (2009). Contributing to marine pollution by washing your 
face: Microplastics in facial cleansers. Marine Pollution Bulletin, 58, 1225-1228. 
Gerard, K. (2014). Top 3 commercial uses of nylon. Retrieved 01 May 2017, 
from http://info.craftechind.com/blog/bid/394892/Top-3-Commercial-Uses-for-
Nylon 
Gregory, M. R. (1996). Plastic &quot;scrubbers&quot; in hand cleansers: A further (and 
minor) source for marine pollution identified. Marine Pollution Bulletin., 32, 861-871. 
Gutow, L., Eckerlebe, A., Gimenez, L., & Saborowski, R. (2015). Experimental evaluation 
of seaweeds as a vector for microplastics into marine food webs. Environmental 
Science & Technology, 50, 915-923. 
Günter, M., Löder, M., Kuczera, M., Mintenig, S., Lorenz, C., & Gerdts, G. (2016). Focal 
plane array detector-based micro-Fourier-transform infrared imaging for the analysis 
of microplastics in environmental samples. Environmental Chemistry, 12(5). 
Hammadi, L., Ponton, A. & Belhadri, M. (2012). Effects of heat treatment and hydrogen 
peroxide (H2O2) on the physicochemical and rheological behavior of an activated 
sludge from a water purification plant. Procedia Engineering, 33, 293-302. 
Hartmann, N. B., Rist, S., Bodin, J., Jensen, L. H. S., Schmidt, S. N., Mayer, P., Meibom, A. 
& Baun, A. (2017). Microplastics as vectors for environmental contaminants: 
Exploring sorption, desorption, and transfer to biota. Untegrated Environmental 
Assessment and Management, 13(3), 488-493. 
Hidalgo-Ruz, V., Gutow, L., Thompson, R. C., & Thiel, M. (2012). Microplastics in the 
Marine 
Environment: 
A 
Review 
of 
the 
Methods 
Used for Identification and Quantification. Environmental Science & Technology, 46, 
3060-3075. 
Hydrotech. (2012). Guidelines for carrying out pre-tests with the bench-scale test-tube filtration 
unit. Veolia Water Technologies, Hydrotech Technologies, Vellinge, Sweden. 
Jain, R., Urban, L., Balbach, H., & Webb, M. D. (2012). Handbook of environmental engineering 
assessment: Strategy, planning, and management. Elsevier, USA. 
==PAGE:67==
 
 
 
 
 
60
Kim, T-H., Lee, S-R., Nam, Y-K., Yang, J., Park, C. & Lee, M. (2009) Disintegration of 
excess activated sludge by hydrogen peroxide oxidation. Desalination, 246, 275-284. 
Kirstein, I. V., Kirmizi, S., Wichels, A., Garin-Fernandez, A., Erler, R., Löder, M. & Gerdts, 
G. (2016). Dangerous hitchhikers? Evidence for potentially pathogenic Vibrio spp. 
on microplastic particles. Marine Environmental Research, 120, 1-8. 
Khatmullina, L., & Isachenko, I. (2017). Settling velocity of microplastic particles of regular 
shapes. Marine Pollution Bulletin, 114, 871-880. 
Koelmans, A. A., Bakir, A., Burton, G. A., & Janssen, C. R. (2016). Microplastic as a vector 
for chemicals in the aquatic environment: Critical review and model-supported 
reinterpretation of empirical studies. Environmental Science & Technology, 50, 3315-
3326. 
Kwon, J., Chang, S., Hong, S. H., & Shim, W. J. (2017). Microplastics as a vector of 
hydrophobic contaminants: Importance of hydrophobic additives. Integrated 
Environmental Assessment and Management., 13(3), 494-499. 
Kängsepp, P., Väänänen, J., Örning, K., Sjölin, M., Olsson, P., Rönnberg, J., . . . Pellicher-
Nacher, C. (2016). Performance and operating experiences of the first Scandinavian 
full-scale Discfilter installation for tertiary phosphorus polishing with preceding 
coagulation and flocculation. Water Practice & Technology, 11(2). 
Lassen, C., Hansen, S. F., Magnusson, K., Noren, F., Hartmann, N. I. B., Jensen, P. R., 
Nielsen, T. G. & Brinch, A. (2015) Microplastics – Occurrence, effects and sources of releases 
to the environment in Denmark. The Danish Environmental Protection Agency, 
Copenhagen, Denmark.  
Löder, M. G. J., & Gerdts, G. (2015). Methodology used for the detection and identification 
of microplastics - A critical appraisal. In Bergmann et al. (eds.), Marine Anthropogenic 
Litter (201-227). Springer International Publishing. 
Lachenmeier, D. W., Kocareva, J., Noack, D., & Kuballa, T. (2015). Microplastic 
contamination in German beer - an artefact of laboratory contamination? Deutsche 
Lebensmittel-rundschau, 111(10), 437-440. 
Leslie, H. A., Brandsma, S. H., van Velzen, M. J. M., & Vethaak, A. D. (2017). Microplastics 
en 
route: 
Field 
measurements 
in 
the 
Dutch 
river 
delta 
and 
Amsterdam 
canals, 
wastewater 
treatment 
plants, 
North 
Sea 
sediments 
and biota. Environment International, 101, 133-142. 
Leslie, H. A., van Velzen, M. J. M., & Vethaak, A. D. (2013). Microplastic survey of the Dutch 
environment: Novel data set of microplastics in North Sea sediments, treated wastewater effluents 
and marine biota. IVM Institute for Environmental Studies, Amsterdam, Netherlands. 
==PAGE:68==
 
 
 
 
 
61
Lusher, A. L., Welden, N. A., Sobral, P., & Cole, M. (2017). Sampling, isolating and 
identifying microplastics ingested by fish and invertebrates. Analytical Methods, 9, 
1346-1360. 
Lyngby- Taarbæk Stadsarkiv. (2016). Mølleåen. Retrieved 02 May 2017, 
from http://www.stadsarkivet.ltk.dk/moelleaaen-0 
Maes, T., Jessop, R., Wellner, N., Haupt, K., & Mayes, A. G. (2017). A rapid-screening 
approach to detect and quantify microplastics based on fluorescent tagging with 
Nile Red. Scientific Reports, 7, 1-10. 
Magnusson, K., Eliasson, K., Fråne, A., Haikonen, K., Hulten, J., Olshammar, M., . . . 
Voisin, A. (2016). Swedish sources and pathways for microplastics to the marine environment: A 
review of existing data. Norden, Stockholm, Sweden. 
Magnusson, K., & Noren, F. (2014). Screening of microplastic particles in and down-stream a 
wastewater treatment plant. Norden, Stockholm, Sweden. 
Magnusson, K., & Wahlber, C. (2014). Mikroskopiska skräppartiklar i vatten från 
avloppsreningsverk (Microscopic litter particles in water from WWTPs). Norden, Stockholm, 
Sweden. 
Mahon, A. M., O'Connell, B., Healy, M. G., O'Conner, I., Officer, R., Nash, R., & 
Morrison, 
L. 
(2016). 
Microplastics 
in 
Sewage 
Sludge: 
Effects 
of 
Treatment. Environmental Science & Technology, 51, 810-818. 
Maso, M., Garces, E., Pages, F., & Camp, J. (2003). Drifting plastic debris as a potential 
vector for dispersing Harmful Algal Bloom (HAB) species. Scientia Marina, 67(1), 
107-111. 
Masura, J. Baker, J. Foster, G. & Arthuer, C. (2015). Laboratory methods for the analysis of 
microplastics in the marine environment: Recommendations for quantifying synthetic particles in 
waters and sediments. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) 
Technical Memorandum NOS-OR&R-48, MD, USA. 
Mason, S. A., Garneau, D., Sutton, R., Chu, Y., Ehmann, K., Barnes, J., . . . Rogers, D. L. 
(2016). Microplastic pollution is widely detected in US municipal wastewater 
treatment plant effluents. Environmental Pollution, 218, 1045-1054. 
Michielssen, M. R., Michielssen, E. R., Ni, J., & Duhaime, M. B. (2016). Fate of 
microplastics and other small anthropogenic litter (SAL) in wastewater treatment 
plants depends on unit processes employed.  
Environmental Science: Water Research & Technology, 2, 1064-1073.  
Mintenig, S. M., Int-Veen, I., Löder, M. G. J., Primpke, S., & Gerdts, G. (2017). 
Identification of microplastic in effluents of waste water treatment plants using focal 
plane array-based micro-Fourier-transform infrared imaging. Water Research, 108, 
365-372. 
==PAGE:69==
 
 
 
 
 
62
Murray, F., & Cowie, P. R. (2011). Plastic contamination in the decapod crustacean Nephrops 
norvegicus (Linnaeus, 1758). Marine Pollution Bulletin., 62, 1207-1217. 
Nazaroff, W. W., & Alvarez-Cohen, L. (2001). Environmental Engineering Science, 1st Edition. 1st 
Edition. John Wiley & Sons Inc., Westlake Village, CA, USA. 
Nelson, E. D., Do, H., Lewis, R. S., & Carr, S. A. (2011). Diurnal variability of 
pharmaceutical, personal care product, estrogen and alkylphenol concentrations in 
effluent from a tertiary wastewater treatment facility. Environmental Science & 
Technology., 45, 1228-1234. 
Neyens, E., Baeyens, J., Weemaes, M. & De Heyder, B. (2002) Advanced biosolids 
treatment using H2O2-oxidation. Environmental Engineering Science, 19(1), 27-35. 
Nguyen, B., & Gomes, J. (2011). The effect of environmental exposure to phthalates on 
testicular carcinogenesis. Journal of Epidemiology & Community Health, 65(1), A282. 
Nuelle, M., Dekiff, J. H., Remy, D., & Fries, E. (2014). A new analytical approach for 
monitoring microplastics in marine sediments. Environmental Pollution, 184, 161-169. 
Petri, B. G., Watts, R. J., Teel, A. L., Huling, S. G., & Brown, R. A. (2011). Fundamentals of 
ISCO using hydrogen peroxide. Springer Science, New York, USA. 
Qiu, Q., Tan, Z., Wang, J., Peng, J., Li, M., & Zhan, Z. (2016). Extraction, enumeration and 
identification methods for monitoring microplastics in the environment. Estuarine, 
Coastal and Shelf Science, 176, 102-109. 
Reisser, J., Shaw, J., Wilcox, C., Hardesty, B. D., Maira, P., Thums, M. & Pattiaratchi, C. 
(2013). Marine plastic pollution in waters around Australia: characteristics, 
concentrations, and pathways. PloS ONE, 8(11), 1-11. 
Rist, S. E., Assidqi, K., Zamani, N. P., Appel, D., Perschke, M., Huhn, M., & Lenz, M. 
(2016). Suspended micro-sized PVC particles impair the performance and decrease 
survival in the Asian green mussel Perna viridis. Marine Pollution, 111, 213-220. 
Rocha-Santos, T., & Duarte, A. C. (2015). A critical overview of the analytical approaches 
to the occurrence, the fate and the behavior of microplastics in the 
environment. Trends in Analytical Chemistry, 65, 47-53. 
Sears, K., Alleman, J. E., Barnard, J. L., & Oleszkiewicz, J. A. (2006). Density and Activated 
Characterization of Activated Sludge Flocs. Journal of Environmental Engineering., 
132(10), 1235-1242.  
Sellers, R. M. (1980). Spectrophotometric determination of hydrogen peroxide using 
potassium titanium (IV) oxalate. Analyst, 105, 950-954. 
==PAGE:70==
 
 
 
 
 
63
Shim, W. J., Hong, S. H., & Eo, S. E. (2017). Identification methods in microplastic 
analysis: a review. Analytical Methods, 9, 1384-1391. 
Shim, W. J., Yong, Y. K., H., H. S., & Jang, M. (2016). Identification and quantification of 
microplastics using Nile Red staining. Marine Pollution Bulletin, 113, 469-476. 
Song, Y. K., Hong, S. H., Jang, M., Han, G. M., Jung, S. W., & Joon, W. (2017). Combined 
effects of UV exposure duration and mechanical abrasion on microplastic 
fragmentation by polymer type. Environmental Science & Technology., 51(8), 4368-4376. 
Song, Y. K., Hong, S. H., Jang, M., Han, G. M., Rani, M., Lee, J., & Shim, W. J. (2015). A 
comparison 
of 
microscopic 
and 
spectroscopic 
identification 
methods 
for analysis of microplastics in environmental samples. Marine Pollution Bulletin, 93, 
202-209. 
Sternbeck, J., Blytt, L. D., Gustavson, K., Frankki, S., & Bjergstrom, M. (2011). Using sludge 
on arable land - effect based levels and long-term accumulation for certain organic pollutants. 
Norden, Copenhagen, Denmark.  
Tagg, A. S., Sapp, M., Harrison, J. P., & Ojeda, J. (2015). Identification and quantification of 
microplastics in wastewater using focal plane array-based reflectance micro-FT-IR 
imaging. Analytical Chemistry, 87, 6032-6040. 
Talvitie, J., Heinonen, M., Paakkonen, J., Vahtera, E., Mikola, A., Setala, O., & Vahala, R. 
(2015). Do wastewater treatment plants act as a potential point source of 
microplastics? Preliminary study in the coastal Gulf of Finland, Baltic Sea. Water 
Science & Technology, 1495-1504. 
Talvitie, J., Mikola, A., Setala, O., Heinonen, M., & Koistinen, A. (2017). How well is 
microlitter purified from wastewater? - A detailed study on the stepwise removal of 
microlitter in a tertiary wastewater treatment plant. Water Research, 109, 164-172. 
Thompson, R. C., Olsen, Y., Mitchell, R. P., Davis, A., Rowland, S. J. John, A. W. G., 
McGonigle, D. & Russell, A. E. (2004) Lost at sea: where is all the plastic? Science, 
304(5672), 838. 
Metcalf & Eddy, Inc. (2004) Wastewater Engineering: Treatment and Reuse, 4th Edition. McGraw-
Hill, Boston, USA.  
ter Halle, A., Ladirat, L., Gendre, X., Goudouneche, D., Pusiner, C., Routaboul, C., 
Tenailleau, C., Duployer, B. & Perez, E. (2016). Understanding the fragmentation 
pattern of marine plastic debris. Environmental Science & Technology, 50(11), 5668-
5675. 
Teuten, E. L., Saquing, J. M., Knappe, D. R. U., Barlaz, M. A., Jonsson, S., Bjorn, A., 
Rowland, S. J., Thompson, R. C., Galloway, T. S., Yamashita, R., Ochi, D. 
Watanuki, Y., Moore, C., Viet, P. H., Tana, T. S., Prudente, M., Boonyatymanond, 
==PAGE:71==
 
 
 
 
 
64
R.,  Zakaria, M. P., Akkhavong, K., Ogata, Y., Hirai, H., Iwasa, S., Mizukawa, K., 
Hagino, Y., Imamura, A., Saha, M., Takada, H. (2009). Transport and release of 
chemicals from plastics to the environment and to wildlife. Philosophical Transactions of 
The Royal Society B, 364, 2027-2045. 
United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP). (2016). Marine plastic debris and 
microplastics: Global lessons and research to inspire action and guide policy change. United 
Nations Environmental Programme, Nairobi. 
Urgert, W. (2015). Microplastics in the rivers Meuse and Rhine. (Masters), Open University of the 
Netherlands, Heerlen, Netherlands. 
USP Technologies. (2017). Titanium oxalate (spectrophotometric). Retrieved 06 February 
2017, from http://www.h2o2.com/technical-library/analytical-
methods/default.aspx?pid=71&name=Titanium-Oxalate-Spectrophotometric 
Vollertsen, J., & Hansen, A. A. (2017). Microplastic in Danish wastewater: Sources, occurrences and 
fate. The Danish Environmental Protection Agency, Denmark. 
von Moos, N., Burkhardt-Holm, P., & Köhler, A. (2012). Uptake and effects of 
microplastics on cells and tissue of the blue mussel Mytilus edulis L. after an 
experimental exposure. Environmental Science & Technology, 46, 11327-11335. 
Wang, Y., Wei, Y. & Liu, J. (2009) Effect of H2O2 dosing strategy on sludge pretreatment 
by microwave-H2O2 advanced oxidation process. Journal of Hazardous Materials, 169, 
1-3. 
Wardrop, D., Bott, C., Criddle, C., Hale, R., McDevitt, J., Morse, M. and Rochman, C. 
(2016). Technical review of microbeads/ microplastics in the Chesapeake Bay. STAC 
Publication Number 16-002, Edgewater, MD. 
Wright, S. L., C., T. R., & Galloway, T. S. (2013). The physical impacts of microplastics on 
marine organisms: A review. Environmental Pollution, 178, 483-492. 
Ziajahromi, S., Neale, P. A., Rintoul, L., & Leusch, F. D. L. (2017). Wastewater treatment 
plants as a pathway for microplastics: Development of a new approach to sample 
wastewater-based microplastics. Water Research, 112, 92-99. 
Ziajahromi, S., Neale, P. A. & Leusch, F. D. L. (2016). Wastewater treatment plant effluent 
as a source of microplastics: a review of the fate, chemical interactions and potential 
risks to aquatic organisms. Water Science & Technology, 71(10), 2253-2269. 
==PAGE:72==
 
 
 
 
 
i
Appendices   
Appendix A: Density of Common Polymers 
 
Table A.1: Densities of common polymers. 
Polymer 
Density (g/cm3) 
Reference 
Polyamide (nylon) 
1.02 – 1.05 
Hidalgo Ruz et al., 2012 
1.13 – 1.41 
BPF, 2017 
Polyethylene (PE) 
0.917 – 0.965 
Hidalgo Ruz et al., 2012 
HDPE: 0.944 – 0.965 
LDPE: 0.917 – 0.930 
BPF, 2017 
Polyesters (PES) e.g. 
Polyethylene terephthalate 
(PET) 
1.37 
Polypropylene (PP) 
0.905 
Polystyrene (PS) 
1.03 – 1.06 
Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) 
1.38 
Acrylonitrile styrene acrylate 
(ASA) 
1.08 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix B: Introduction on Typical WWTPs 
 
==PAGE:73==
 
 
 
 
 
ii
A typical municipal WWTP may include primary and secondary treatment processes to 
remove unwanted impurities such as organic matter, suspended solids, nutrients and 
pathogens present in wastewater before returning it back to the water cycle. 
 
Primary (Mechanical) Treatment 
The main focus of the primary treatment processes is the removal of large objects, grit and 
grease, and a portion of the suspended solids and organic matter from wastewater, and 
involves settling and retention (Metcalf & Eddy, 2004). Physical removal methods may 
include bar screens, grit chambers, and settling tanks. Mechanical methods are usually used, 
but advanced processes may include chemical addition (coagulation-flocculation) or 
filtration. 
 
Secondary (Biological) Treatment 
During secondary treatment, biological treatment methods are typically applied to remove 
the remaining soluble or colloidal biodegradable organics, suspended solids, and nutrients 
(Metcalf & Eddy, 2004; Cheremisinoff, 2002). Disinfection is also common during 
conventional secondary treatment (Metcalf & Eddy, 2004). 
 
A commonly used secondary treatment technique is the activated sludge process (Figure 
B.1). In this system, wastewater is aerated to promote the growth of a mixed consortium of 
bacteria and microorganisms, which consumes the organic matter in the wastewater and 
drastically lowers the wastewater’s BOD content (Cheremisinoff, 2002; Nazaroff & Alvarez-
Cohen, 2001). This is then passed through a clarifier (settling tank), where a portion of the 
sludge collected at the bottom is recycled back to the aeration tank.   
 
Figure B.1: Schematic representation of the activated sludge process. 
Tertiary Treatment 
Tertiary processes, which preclude secondary treatment, may include biological treatment or 
chemical treatment for nitrogen and/or phosphorus removal, air stripping for ammonia 
removal, or filters for additional solids removal (Nazaroff & Alvarez-Cohen, 2001). 
Microscreening using Discfilters for instance, is widely used for total suspended solids (TSS) 
removal (Kängsepp et al., 2016). 
==PAGE:74==
 
 
 
 
 
i
Appendix C: Overview of Studies on Microplastics in WWTPs 
 
Table C.1: Overview of studies on MPs in WWTPs reviewed. TE: Treated Effluent. AS: Activated Sludge. WW: Wastewater. 
Location 
WWTP 
Treatment Type 
Sampling,   
Sample Preparation and Processing 
Results 
References 
10 WWTPs 
 
Denmark 
Secondary 
treatment  
(Aerated activated 
sludge treatment) 
WW pumped and filtered (10μm). 
Extraction method validated by adding known no. of 
MPs to raw WW. 
Influent: SDS added before wet sieving  (10μm). 
Cellulase treatment.  
Sludge (from 5 WWTPs): 0.1g dry matter suspended 
in MQ water, then treated as in influent samples. 
Digestion: Fenton for all samples. 
Visual inspection via light microscopy. 
Micro-FT-IR applied for part of the sample, 
creating a visual and IR image. (FT-IR imaging system) 
Note: Only particles in the size range 20-500μm were 
investigated. 
 
Volumes sampled 
Influent: 3x 1L, 24hr flow proportional samples each 
Treated effluent: 1.5 - 324L  
(3 clogged filters with 0.5 - 108L per filter) 
Sludge: 20 grab samples, total of 1kg 
13,000 to 442,000 MPs/L in 
raw WW.  
5,800 MPs/L in TE.  
169,000 MPs/g dewatered 
sludge. (Approx. 0.7% of 
dewatered sludge was MP)  
Vollertsen & 
Hansen, 2017 
3 WWTPs 
 
Sydney, 
Australia 
1 primary 
treatment,  
1 secondary 
treatment,  
1 tertiary treatment 
(ultrafiltration, 
reverse osmosis 
and de-
carbonation) 
WW pumped and filtered (500, 190, 100 and 25μm). 
Digestion: H2O2, 60°C.
      Staining Method: Rose-Bengal solution
Visual inspection via dissecting microscope.  
FT-IR applied for particles of interest.   
 
Volumes sampled 
Primary effluent: 3-100 L (depending on mesh size) 
Secondary effluent: 27-150 L 
Tertiary effluent & Reverse osmosis (RO): 200 L 
Average of 0.28 (tertiary), 
0.48 (secondary), and 1.54 
(primary) MP particles detected 
in 1L treated effluent. 
MPs 100-190μm detected in 
RO effluent. 
Majority of the detected 
MPs were PET fibres. 
Ziajahromi et 
al., 2017 
==PAGE:75==
 
 
 
 
 
ii
Location 
WWTP 
Treatment Type 
Sampling,   
Sample Preparation and Processing
Results
References 
7 WWTPs 
 
Amsterdam 
West, Westport 
and Heenvliet, 
Netherlands 
1 pilot scale MBR. 
Others with 
secondary 
treatment.  
Density separation: NaCl. Settled particles 
discarded. Supernatant filtered (0.7μm). 
Visual inspection via stereomicroscope. 
FT-IR applied for particles of interest.  
 
Volumes sampled 
Influent & Effluent: 2L samples, 50-100g sub-samples 
analysed. 
Sludge: 2L samples, 20g sub-samples analysed. 
MP retention efficiency 
72%.  
All samples contained MPs. 
Smaller MPs (125-355μm) 
more prevalent than larger ones. 
Larger MPs dominated by 
fibers. 
MBR did not demonstrate 
significant additional MP 
removal. 
Leslie et al., 
2017 
Leslie et al., 
2013  
12 WWTPs 
 
Lower Saxony, 
Germany 
Secondary 
treatment.  
4 WWTPs with 
tertiary treatment.  
  
Oldenburg: Post-
filtration, 
MECANA pile 
cloth filtration 
(cross-linked PA, 
PEST and PE 
fibers, 10-15μm 
pore size).  
TE pumped and filtered (10μm steel filter). 
 
Digestion: Enzymatic maceration (e.g. chitinase), 
followed by H2O2 for 48hrs. 
Density separation: ZnCl. Settled particles discarded. 
 
Digestion: Alkaline treatment 
Density separation: NaCl. Settled particles discarded. 
Visual inspection via microscope. 
Micro-FT-IR (ATR 
mode) applied to MPs <500μm. 
 
Volumes sampled 
Drained sludge: grab samples (500g w/w). 
TE: 1m3 where possible. 
For  MPs >500μm, 0-50 
MPs/m3.
For  MPs <500μm, 10-9000 
MPs/m3. 
Synthetic fibers were mostly 
polyester.  
Post-filtration (Oldenburg) 
was able to reduce total MP 
discharge by 97%. 
Mintenig et al., 
2017 
==PAGE:76==
 
 
 
 
 
iii 
Location 
WWTP 
Treatment Type 
Sampling,   
Sample Preparation and Processing
Results
References 
Viikinmaki 
WWTP  
 
Helsinki, 
Finland  
Bar screening, grit 
removal, pre-
aeration, primary 
sedimentation, 
activated sludge 
treatment, 
secondary 
sedimentation, 
tertiary biological 
filtration.  
Visual inspection via stereomicroscope.  
FT-IR imaging applied for effluent samples.   
 
Volumes sampled 
Influent: 0.1 L (grab and sequential sampling) 
Excess sludge: 1.2ml (grab) 
Dried sludge: 0.2g (grab) 
Effluent: 10.5-13.5 L  
(Sequential sampling, and composite sampling. Pumped 
and filtered: 300, 100 and 20μm) 
Most of microlitter (ML) 
removed during pre-treatment, 
followed by AS treatment. 
(>99% retention after 
secondary treatment) 
0.1% of ML from influent 
was discharged in TE. Rest was 
removed with sludge. 
1.7x106 to 1.4x108 MPs 
discharged via effluent daily.  
Talvitie et al., 
2017 
WW pumped and filtered (200, 100 and 20μm). 
Visual inspection via stereomicroscope.  
Note: Only coloured particles and fibres, and high-gloss 
black carbon particles were included. 
 
Volumes sampled 
Influent: 0.3 L 
After pri. sedimentation: 10-20 L 
After sec. sedimentation: 35-50 L 
High removal of fibres by 
primary sedimentation. 
High removal of synthetic 
particles in secondary 
sedimentation. 
 Average 4.9 fibres and 8.6 
particles per 1L TE. 
Talvitie et al., 
2015 
4 major 
WWTPs on 
Raritan River  
 
New Jersey, 
USA 
Not stated.  
 
Samples were 
collected from 
surface water 
before and after 
WWTP confluence. 
Sampling upstream and downstream of WWTPs.  
Samples collected during baseflow with plankton 
nets (153μm). 
Digestion: WPO at 75°C, 30min. 
      Density separation: NaCl. Settled particles 
discarded. 
Visual inspection via reflected microscope.  
 
Volumes sampled 
1.3 - 13.5 m3
Greater no. of MPs 
observed downstream of the 4 
WWTPs, as compared to 
upstream. 
Smaller MPs more prevalent 
than larger ones (>500μm).
Estahbanati & 
Fahrenfeld, 
2016 
==PAGE:77==
 
 
 
 
 
iv
Location 
WWTP 
Treatment Type 
Sampling,   
Sample Preparation and Processing
Results
References 
Large WWTP 
 
Glasgow, 
Scotland 
Secondary 
treatment 
Grab samples, filtered (65μm).  
Digestion: WPO at 75°C, 30min. Digested sample 
membrane filtered (0.8μm). 
Initial visual inspection via stereomicroscope. 
FT-IR applied for particles of interest. 
 
Volumes sampled 
Influent after 19mm coarse screening, After grit and 
grease, Primary effluent: 30 L grab samples 
Treated effluent: 50 L 
15.7 MPs/L in influent. 
0.25 MPs/L in TE. (98.4% 
reduction)  
Greatest removal processes: 
Grit and grease (44.59%), 
Primary settling (33.75%), 
Aeration and clarification 
(20.07%). 
Common MPs in influent: 
alkyds (28.7%), PS-acrylic 
(19.1%), PES (10.8%). 
Common MPs in effluent: 
PES (28%), polyamide (20%), 
PP (12%). 
Mostly flakes (67.3%) and 
fibres (18.5%) found in liquid 
fraction of samples. 
Murphy et al., 
2016 
17 WWTPs 
 
USA 
Variety of 
treatment 
processes. Some 
with advanced 
filtration e.g. 
biological aerated 
filter and granular 
sand filter.  
WW pumped and filtered (355, 125μm). 
Digestion: WPO at 75°C, 30min. 
Visual inspection via microscope. 
 
Volumes sampled 
Treated effluent: 0.5 - 41 m3 
Average 0.05 MPs/L TE.
Fibers were most 
commonly found, followed by 
fragments. 
Smaller MPs (125-355μm) 
more prevalent than larger ones. 
Larger MPs dominated by 
fibers. 
Mason et al. 
2016 
Cabezo Beaza 
WWTP 
 
Cartagena,  
SE of Spain 
Secondary 
treatment 
(activated sludge 
bioreactors) 
Density separation: NaCl. Settled particles 
discarded. Supernatant subjected to wet sieving (850, 
75μm). 
Initial visual inspection via trinocular microscope. 
FT-IR applied.   
 
Volumes sampled 
Sludge: Approx. 50 g w/w. (Grab after pri. clarifier and 
after anaerobic digestion)
MPs detected in both sludge 
types. 
Commonly occurring 
materials include PP, 
polyamides, and ethyl acrylate.
Bayo et al., 2016 
==PAGE:78==
 
 
 
 
 
v 
Location 
WWTP 
Treatment Type 
Sampling,   
Sample Preparation and Processing
Results
References 
8 WWTPs 
 
Los Angelos 
County 
USA 
7 WWTPs: Tertiary 
trestment 
 
1WWTP: 
Secondary 
treatment 
WW pumped and filtered (400, 180, 45μm). 
Digestion: Diluted solution of bleach (Clorox, 
8.25% sodium hydrochlorite) for samples with high 
solid residue. 
Visual inspection via stereomicroscope. 
FT-IR applied for particles of interest.  
 
Volumes sampled 
Influent, sludge, scum from aeration tank: Grab 
samples. 
Effluent: 1.89 x105 - 2.32 x105  L filtered (from sub-
surface). Approx. 9x105 L skimmed. 
MPs are significantly 
removed by skimming and 
settling processes.
Tertiary treatment:  
3-23 MPs found in skimmed 
samples. Almost no MP found 
in filtered samples.  
Highest MP counts in 
primary tank skimmings. 
Majority of the MPs 
resembled blue PE particles 
found in toothpaste. 
Carr et al., 2016 
2 full-scale 
WWTPs 
(Detroit and 
Northfield) and 
a novel pilot-
scale 
WWTPUSA 
Detroit WWTP: 
Secondary 
treatment. 
 
Northfield WWTP: 
Tertiary treatment 
(granular sand 
filtration). 
 
Pilot-scale WWTP: 
Anaerobic 
membrane 
bioreactor 
(AnMBR) 
(microfiltration) 
after screening and 
grit removal.  

Grab samples subjected to wet sieving (4750, 850, 
300, 106, 20μm). 
Visual inspection via stereomicroscope. 
 
Volumes sampled 
Influent: 1-2 L 
Pri. and Sec. effluent: 10-20 L 
Treated effluent: 34-38 L 
Secondary treatment: 
Removed 95.6% of SAL, with 
5.9 SAL in 1L TE. 
Tertiary treatment: 
Removed 97.2% of SAL, with 
2.6 SAL in 1L TE. 
AnMBR treatment:  
Removed 99.4% of SAL, with 
0.5 SAL in 1L TE. 
Preliminary and primary 
treatment steps removed the 
largest amount of SAL. 
Majority of MPs in effluent 
were fibres. 
Michielssen et 
al., 2016 
Masura et al., 
2015 
==PAGE:79==
 
 
 
 
 
vi
Location 
WWTP 
Treatment Type 
Sampling,   
Sample Preparation and Processing
Results
References 
Main WWTP in 
East Bay 
Municipality 
 
Oakland, 
California 
USA 
Secondary 
treatment 
WW flow through filtration device (5000, 1000, 355, 
125μm). 
Digestion: WPO at 75°C, 30min (or until reaction is 
complete) 
       Digested sample membrane filtered (0.8μm). 
Initial visual inspection via stereomicroscope. 
FT-IR applied for particles of interest. 
 
Volumes sampled 
Secondary TE: 24hr sampling  
 Max. concentration of 0.09 
MP per gallon (24hr-sampling), 
and 0.64 MP per gallon (2h peak 
flow sampling). 
Majority of the detected 
MPs were fragments. 
Dyachenko et 
al., 2017 
Masura et al., 
2015 
Långeviksverket 
 
Lysekil, west 
coast of Sweden 
Secondary 
treatment 
(mechanical, 
chemical and 
biological 
treatment).  
Influent: Sampled with a Ruttner sampler, followed 
by vacuum filtration (300μm).  
Sludge: Sieving (300μm). 
Effluent: Pumped and filtered (300μm).  
Visual inspection via stereomicroscope, with heating 
to differentiate between synthetic and non-synthetic 
particles and fibers.  
FT-IR applied for particles of interest.  
 
Volumes sampled 
Influent: 2 L 
Sludge: Approx. 25 g w/w (grab) 
Effluent: 1000 L 
Fibers comprise of approx. 
70% of MPs in the influent, and 
49% in effluent.  
1.1-1.8 MPs detected in 1L 
treated effluent.  
High retention of MPs by 
WWTP (>99%). 
High retention of MPs in 
sludge. 
Magnusson & 
Noren, 2014 
==PAGE:80==
 
 
 
 
 
vii
Location 
WWTP 
Treatment Type 
Sampling,   
Sample Preparation and Processing
Results
References 
3 WWTPs 
 
Including 
Långeviksverket 
 & a pilot-scale 
WWTP (MBR) 
 
Sweden 
Secondary 
treatment 
(mechanical, 
chemical and 
biological 
treatment) with 
differing tertiary 
treatments.  
 
Ryaverket:  
Disc filter (15μm) 
 
Henriksdal: 
Sandfilter 
 
Pilot-scale: 
Henriksdal's 
processes, with 
MBR (0.2μm) 
Influent: Sampled with a Ruttner sampler, followed 
by vacuum filtration.  
Effluent: Pumped and filtered (300μm).  
Processing methods similar to Magnusson & 
Noren, 2014. 
 
Volumes sampled 
Influent: 1-8 L with 300μm, and 1-5 L with 20μm 
Effluent: 800-1000 L with 300μm, and 4-9 L with 20μm 
70-100% retention of MPs 
by WWTP. 
Smaller MPs (<300μm) 
more prevalent in treated 
effluent than larger ones. 
Commonly occurring 
materials include PP, PE, 
polyamide and acrylic plastic. 
15μm disc filter at 
Ryaverket had a significant 
reducing effect, while sandfilter 
at Henriksdal did not. 
Magnusson & 
Wahlberg, 2014 
3 WWTPs 
 
Amsterdam 
West, Westport 
and Heenvliet  
 
Netherlands 
Secondary 
Treatment 
WW flow through filtration device (5000, 1000, 355, 
125μm).  
Density separation: NaCl. Settled particles 
discarded. Supernatant filtered (0.7μm). 
Visual inspection via light microscope. 
 
Volumes sampled 
Influent & Effluent: 24hr sampling (where possible) 
Sludge: 2L samples, 25g sub-samples analysed. 
All samples contained MPs. 
Smaller MPs (125-355μm) 
more prevalent than larger ones. 
Larger MPs dominated by 
fibers. 
Brandsma et al., 
2013 
==PAGE:81==
 
 
 
 
 
i
Appendix D: Recovery of Traceable Microplastics (Pellet Counts) 
 
Table D.1: Particle counts of each 1.0g Nylon pellet 
  
  
Rep. 1 
Rep. 2 
Rep. 3 
Rep. 4 
Rep. 5 
Rep. 6 
Rep. 7 
Average 
Std  
dev. 
CoV  
(%) 
Green 
(250-355 μm) 
NIBH 
265 
243 
328 
314 
314 
294 
239 
281 
34 
11.94 
SUKR 
246 
248 
301 
298 
310 
278 
225 
Clarice 
270 
245 
323 
311 
314 
298 
236 
Blue 
(125-250 μm) 
NIBH 
141 
125 
124 
129 
126 
125 
97 
127 
16 
13.01 
SUKR 
138 
119 
104 
124 
137 
134 
85 
Clarice 
147 
133 
138 
142 
143 
144 
108 
Orange 
(63-90 μm) 
NIBH 
175 
176 
163 
176 
170 
168 
176 
178 
29 
16.36 
SUKR 
144 
144 
144 
155 
171 
178 
145 
Clarice 
220 
233 
142 
213 
201 
223 
217 
Total 
NIBH 
581 
544 
615 
619 
610 
587 
512 
594 
55 
9.25 
SUKR 
528 
511 
549 
577 
618 
590 
455 
Clarice 
637 
611 
603 
666 
658 
665 
561 
Average 
  
582.00 
555.33 
589.00 
620.67 
628.67 
614.00 
509.33 
SD 
54.51 
50.95 
35.16 
44.52 
25.72 
44.19 
53.05 
CoV (%) 
  
9.37 
9.18 
5.97 
7.17 
4.09 
7.20 
10.42 
 
Table D.2: Particle counts of each 1.0g PE pellet 
  
 
  
Rep. 1 
Rep. 2 
Rep. 3 
Rep. 4 
Rep. 5 
Rep. 6 
Rep. 7 
Average 
Std 
dev. 
CoV 
(%) 
Blue  
(250-355 μm) 
NIBH 
429 
403 
463 
400 
365 
396 
399 
408 
28 
6.87 
SUKR 
384 
395 
 -  
 -  
 -  
 -  
 -  
Clarice 
443 
420 
459 
394 
374 
404 
399 
Pink  
(125-250 μm) 
NIBH 
131 
155 
150 
135 
92 
122 
149 
136 
19 
13.67 
SUKR 
154 
146 
 -  
 -  
 -  
 -  
 -  
Clarice 
130 
144 
159 
137 
103 
128 
147 
Blue  
(63-90 μm) 
NIBH 
218 
156 
187 
169 
167 
212 
217 
188 
23 
12.42 
SUKR 
211 
153 
 -  
 -  
 -  
 -  
 -  
Clarice 
198 
159 
180 
181 
182 
219 
204 
Total 
NIBH 
778 
714 
800 
704 
624 
730 
765 
733 
48 
6.57 
SUKR 
749 
694 
 -  
 -  
 -  
 -  
 -  
Clarice 
771 
723 
798 
712 
659 
751 
750 
Average 
  
766.00 
710.33 
799.00 
708.00 
641.50 
740.50 
757.50 
SD 
15.13 
14.84 
1.41 
5.66 
24.75 
14.85 
10.61 
CoV (%) 
  
1.98 
2.09 
0.18 
0.80 
3.86 
2.01 
1.40 
 
 
==PAGE:82==
 
 
 
 
 
ii
 
  
Figure D.1: No. of traceable MPs recovered in each 1.0g Nylon (left) and PE (right) pellet. 
 
Table D.3: Particle counts of each 0.5g MP pellet used in pilot experiment (Stage 4) 
  
  
Rep. 1 
Rep. 2 
Rep. 3 
Rep. 4 
Rep. 5 
Rep. 6 
Rep. 7 
Average 
Std  
dev. 
CoV  
(%) 
Pink PE 
(125-355 μm) 
NIBH 
 -  
 -  
 -  
657 
 -  
 -  
565 
643 
51 
7.97 
Clarice 
580 
638 
624 
640 
696 
728 
661 
Blue PE 
(63-125 μm) 
NIBH 
 -  
 -  
 -  
427 
 -  
 -  
488 
477 
26 
5.44 
Clarice 
457 
524 
472 
476 
484 
483 
485 
Orange Nylon 
(125-355 μm) 
NIBH 
 -  
 -  
 -  
450 
 -  
 -  
476 
462 
22 
4.73 
Clarice 
434 
506 
442 
449 
466 
459 
475 
Green Nylon 
(63-125 μm) 
NIBH 
 -  
 -  
 -  
211 
 -  
 -  
204 
211 
37 
17.58 
Clarice 
160 
186 
174 
199 
269 
257 
238 
Total 
NIBH 
 -  
 -  
  
1745 
 -  
 -  
1733 
1793 
100 
5.59 
Clarice 
1631 
1854 
1712 
1764 
1915 
1927 
1859 
Average 
  
1631.0 
1854.0 
1712.0 
1754.5 
1915.0 
1927.0 
1796.0 
SD 
 -  
 - 
 - 
13.44 
 - 
 - 
89.10 
CoV (%) 
  
 -  
 - 
 - 
0.77 
 - 
 - 
4.96 
 
 
 
Figure D.2: No. of traceable MPs recovered in each 0.5g MP pellet (Nylon and PE).  
PE particles were in pink and blue, while nylon particles were orange and green. 
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
Green 
(250-355 μm)
Blue 
(125-250 μm)
Orange
(63-90 μm)
No. of particles per pellet 
(Nylon)
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
Blue 
(250-355 μm)
Pink 
(125-250 μm)
Blue 
(63-90 μm)
No. of particles per pellet (PE)
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
Pink
(125-355 μm)
Blue
(63-125 μm)
Orange
(125-355 μm)
Green
(63-125 μm)
No. of particles per 0.5g pellet 
(Nylon and PE)
==PAGE:83==
 
 
 
 
 
iii 
Appendix E: Complete Schematic Representation of Treatment Processes at 
Lundtofte WWTP 
 
 
 
Figure E.3: Schematic representation of the treatment process flow at Lundtofte Wastewater Treatment Plant 
(Adapted from scheme provided by Lundtofte WWTP) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:84==
 
 
 
 
 
iv
Appendix F: Characterisation of Wastewater & Sludge 
 
Table F.1: Typical characteristics of activated sludge and raw wastewater (primary inlet).  
(Metcalf & Eddy, 2004; Cooper, 2015) 
 
Typical Range 
Activated Sludge 
Typical Range 
Primary Inlet 
Total Suspended Solids, TSS (g/L) 
1.5 – 3.5 
Low: 0.12 
Medium: 0.21 
High: 400 
Volatile Suspended Solids, VSS  
(% of TSS) 
70 - 80 
75 - 80 
pH 
6.5 – 8.0 
7.0 – 8.0 
 
Table F.2: Characteristics of the wastewater and water samples used in Stages 1 to 3 of the study.  
All TSS and VSS measurements were performed according to Standard Methods as documented in Section 5.3.5. 
Location 
Sample 
Type 
Collection 
Date 
TSS  
(g/L) 
VSS8  
(% of TSS) 
pH 
Conductivity 
Lundtofte 
WWTP 
 
Copenhagen 
Denmark 
Activated 
Sludge 
3/3/2017 
9.25 
77.4 
7.2 - 7.5 
- 
14/3/2017 
6.83 
72.3 
7.34 
- 
27/3/2017 
9.53 
71.7 
7.14 
- 
3/4/2017 
6.87 
70.4 
7.15 
- 
Primary Inlet 
27/3/2017 
0.35 
85.4 
7.94 
- 
3/4/2017 
0.32 
87.2 
7.85 
- 
8/5/2017 
0.4 
91.7 
7.80 
1798μS/cm 
at 18°C 
Treated 
Effluent 
14/3/2017 
0.01 
- 
7.60 
- 
27/3/2017 
0.01 
- 
7.50 
- 
3/4/2017 
0.01 
- 
7.50 
- 
8/5/2017 
0.01 
- 
7.15 
 - 
DTU 
 
Copenhagen 
Denmark 
Rainwater 
26/04/2017  
to 
01/05/2017 
 -  
 -  
7.72 - 7.80 
22.83 - 
25.93μS/cm 
at 20°C 
 
Table F.3: Characteristics of the wastewater samples collected on 30/05/2017 for the pilot scale experiment at 
Sjölunda WWTP 
Location 
Sample Type 
TSS  
(g/L) 
VSS  
(% of TSS) 
pH 
Conductivity 
Sjölunda 
WWTP 
 
Malmo 
Sweden 
Primary Inlet 
0.22 
80.7 
6.90 - 7.20 
2058μS/cm at 18°C 
Primary Effluent  
(Round 1) 
 -  
 -  
6.66 - 6.73 
2380 - 2420μS/cm 
at 18°C 
Primary Effluent  
(Round 2) 
 -  
 -  
7.07 - 7.10 
2196 - 2296μS/cm 
at 18°C 
 
 
                                                        
8 VSS and TSS measurements were not performed for samples where the VSS and TSS values were expected 
to be low and negligible.  
==PAGE:85==
 
 
 
 
 
v 
Appendix G: Preparation of FeSO4 solution used 
 
In a 25ml volumetric flask, add 5.275g of FeSO4.H2O (Cas no. 7782-63-0) to approximately 
20ml of MilliQ water. Then add 167μl of concentrated H2SO4. Volumetric flask placed in a 
warm bath for faster dissolution. Once fully dissolved, the solution is cooled to room 
temperature and filled up to the 25ml mark with MilliQ water.  
 
Appendix H: H2O2 Concentration Measurement: One-step Colorimetric Method  
(Adapted from USP technologies (2017) and Sellers (1980)) 
 
H2O2 reacts with potassium titanium oxalate in acid solution to form yellow pertitanic acid 
complex. The coloured complex is thereafter measured via spectrophotometry at a 
wavelength of 400nm. This method is applicable for the determination of H2O2 in aqueous 
effluents and raw sewage in the range of 0.054 – 88mg/L H2O2. 
 
Reagent B: Potassium titanium oxalate solution (50g/L) 
Dissolve 25g of potassium titanium oxalate in 400ml demineralized water in a 500ml 
volumetric flask, warming if necessary. Cool and dilute to 500ml once fully dissolved. 
 
Procedure: Add 2ml of the aqueous phase of a sample to a cuvette. Measure background 
absorption (measurement A). Add 0.2ml reagent B and measure again at 400nm 
(measurement B).  
 
Equation of Calibration Curve Used: 
 𝑦= 0.0282𝑥+ 0.0005 
 
Calculation: 
𝐻2𝑂2 𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 (𝑚𝑔
𝐿
⁄ ) =
(𝑚𝑒𝑎𝑠𝑢𝑟𝑒𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡 𝐵−𝑚𝑒𝑎𝑠𝑢𝑟𝑒𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡 𝐴) −0.0005
0.0282
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:86==
 
 
 
 
 
vi
Appendix I: Results of Stage 1 (Chemical Digestion) 
 
Comparison via TSS Reduction 
 
Table I.1: TSS reduction of the chemical digestion treatments used 
(Represented as percentage of the average TSS of non-treated activated sludge) 
 
 
H2O2 
7 days 
H2O2 
60°C, 24hrs 
HNO3 
60°C, 24hrs 
WPO 
TSS Reduction 
(%) 
Rep. 1 
60.15 
66.53 
86.35 
58.78 
Rep. 2 
59.70 
67.07 
88.82 
59.17 
Rep. 3 
60.06 
66.64 
- 
58.64 
Rep. 4 
- 
66.31 
- 
- 
Rep. 5 
- 
65.78 
- 
- 
Rep. 6 
- 
65.97 
- 
- 
Standard deviation 
0.24 
0.47 
1.75 
0.27 
Standard error of the mean 
0.17 
0.21 
1.24 
0.19 
Average 
59.97 
66.38 
87.59 
58.86 
 
 
Figure I.1: Digestion efficiency (%) determined by TSS reduction as compared to the non-treated control 
samples.  
Data represents the mean efficiencies ± SEM (n = 2 to 6 per treatment). 
 
Table I.2: Analysis of TSS reduction rates for H2O2 (7 days), H2O2 (60°C, 24hrs), and WPO  
using One-Way ANOVA 
 
N 
Mean 
Std. 
Dev. 
Std. 
Error 
95% Confidence 
Interval for Mean 
Min. 
Max. 
Lower 
Bound 
Upper 
Bound 
H2O2  
(7 days) 
3 
59.9700 
0.23812 
0.13749 
59.3785 
60.5615 
59.70 
60.15 
H2O2  
(60°C, 24hrs) 
6 
66.3833 
0.46886 
0.19141 
65.8913 
66.8754 
65.78 
67.07 
WPO 
3 
58.8633 
0.27465 
0.15857 
58.1811 
59.5456 
58.64 
59.17 
Total 
12 
62.9000 
3.67799 
1.06174 
60.5631 
65.2369 
58.64 
67.07 
50
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
90
95
H2O2
7 days
H2O2
(60°C, 24hrs)
HNO3
(60°C, 24hrs)
WPO
Digestion efficiency (%)
==PAGE:87==
 
 
 
 
 
vii
 
 
Table I.3: Multiple comparisons of TSS reduction rates for H2O2 (7 days), H2O2 (60°C, 24hrs), and WPO 
Using One-Way ANOVA (Tukey post-hoc test) 
(I) 
Chemical 
(J) Chemical 
Mean 
Difference 
(I-J)* 
Std. Error 
Sig. 
95% Confidence 
Interval 
Lower 
Bound 
Upper 
Bound 
H2O2  
(7 days) 
H2O2  
(60°C, 24hrs) 
-6.41333 
0.27522 
<0.001 
-7.2206 
-5.6060 
 
WPO 
1.10667 
0.31779 
0.021 
0.1745 
2.0389 
H2O2  
(60°C, 24hrs) 
H2O2  
(7 days) 
6.41333 
0.27522 
<0.001 
5.6060 
7.2206 
 
WPO 
7.52000 
0.27522 
<0.001 
6.7127 
8.3273 
WPO 
H2O2  
(7 days) 
-1.10667 
0.31779 
0.021 
-2.0389 
-0.1745 
 
H2O2  
(60°C, 24hrs) 
-7.52000 
0.27522 
<0.001 
-8.3273 
-6.7127 
* The mean difference is significant at the 0.05 level.  
 
There was a statistically significant difference between the 3 treatment methods as 
determined by one-way ANOVA (F(2,9) = 486.638, p <0.001). A Tukey post hoc test 
revealed that the TSS reduction rate for H2O2 at 60°C, 24hrs (66.38 ± 0.47) was significantly 
higher than H2O2 for 7 days (59.97 ± 0.24, p <0.001) and WPO (58.86 ± 0.27, p <0.001). 
H2O2 for 7 days treatment was also statistically higher than WPO (p=0.021). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:88==
 
 
 
 
 
viii
 
Comparison via VSS Reduction 
 
Table I.4: VSS reduction of the chemical digestion treatments used 
(Represented as percentage of the average VSS of non-treated activated sludge) 
 
 
H2O2 
7 days 
H2O2 
60°C, 24hrs 
HNO3 
60°C, 24hrs 
WPO 
VSS Reduction 
(%) 
Rep. 1 
70.92 
83.57 
86.35 
85.83 
Rep. 2 
70.95 
89.93 
88.82 
85.99 
Rep. 3 
70.46 
84.97 
- 
84.56 
Rep. 4 
- 
90.80 
- 
- 
Rep. 5 
- 
90.68 
- 
- 
Rep. 6 
- 
90.09 
- 
- 
Standard deviation 
0.28 
3.20 
1.75 
0.78 
Standard error of the mean 
0.20 
1.43 
1.24 
0.55 
Average 
70.78 
88.34 
87.59 
85.46 
 
 
Figure I.2: Digestion efficiency (%) determined by VSS reduction as compared to the non-treated control 
samples. Data represents the mean efficiencies ± SEM (n = 2 to 5 per treatment). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
50
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
90
95
H2O2
7 days
H2O2
(60°C, 24hrs)
HNO3
(60°C, 24hrs)
WPO
Digestion efficiency (%)
==PAGE:89==
 
 
 
 
 
ix
Appendix J: Results of Stage 2 (Settling Tests) 
Nylon Settling Tests 
Table J.1: Nylon distribution in settled primary inlet samples. 
 
 
Scum 
Supernatant Sludge 
Total 
Average 
& 
Recovery 
Rate 
Green 
(250-355 μm) 
Rep. 1 
0 
0 
271 
271 
270  
115.7% 
Rep. 2 
0 
1 
273 
274 
Rep. 3 
0 
0 
265 
265 
Blue 
(125-250 μm) 
Rep. 1 
1 
0 
106 
107 
98 
101.4% 
Rep. 2 
1 
0 
98 
99 
Rep. 3 
1 
1 
86 
88 
Orange 
(63-90 μm) 
 
Rep. 1 
0 
1 
N.C. 
1 
N.A. 
Rep. 2 
0 
12 
N.C. 
12 
Rep. 3 
1 
10 
N.C. 
11 
SUM 
4 
25 
N.A. 
1128 
 
 
Table J.2: Nylon distribution in settled activated sludge samples. 
  
 
Scum 
Supernatant Sludge 
Total 
Average 
& 
Recovery 
Rate 
Green 
(250-355 μm) 
Rep. 1 
0 
0 
308 
308 
262 
112.3% 
Rep. 2 
0 
0 
249 
249 
Rep. 3 
0 
0 
229 
229 
Blue 
(125-250 μm) 
Rep. 1 
0 
3 
74 
77 
92 
95.0% 
Rep. 2 
0 
2 
108 
110 
Rep. 3 
1 
1 
86 
88 
Orange 
(63-90 μm) 
 
Rep. 1 
0 
0 
97 
97 
86 
47.8% 
Rep. 2 
0 
1 
91 
92 
Rep. 3 
0 
3 
65 
68 
SUM 
1 
10 
1307 
1318 
 
 
==PAGE:90==
 
 
 
 
 
x 
 
Figure J.1: Nylon distribution in settled primary inlet samples (left) and settled activated sludge (right). 
PE Settling Tests 
 
Table J.3: PE distribution in settled primary inlet samples. 
  
  
Scum 
Supernatant Sludge 
Total 
Average & 
Recovery 
Rate 
Blue 
(250-355 μm) 
Rep. 1 
263 
122 
42 
427 
430 
105% 
Rep. 2 
283 
102 
36 
421 
Rep. 3 
243 
151 
49 
443 
% of 250-355μm particles 
56.5 
35.1 
11.4 
 
 
Pink 
(125-250 μm) 
Rep. 1 
35 
35 
26 
96 
100 
74% 
Rep. 2 
48 
6 
51 
105 
Rep. 3 
36 
12 
52 
100 
% of 125-250μm particles 
35.9 
12.0 
51.8 
 
 
Blue 
(63-90 μm) 
 
Rep. 1 
7 
19 
121 
147 
176 
93% 
Rep. 2 
19 
26 
139 
184 
Rep. 3 
9 
15 
172 
196 
% of 63-90μm particles 
1.3 
6.3 
92.4 
 
 
SUM 
310 
187 
3599 
4096 
 
 
 
Figure J.2: PE distribution in settled primary inlet samples. 
45%
23%
32%
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
Blue 
(250-355 μm)
Pink 
(125-250 μm)
Blue 
(63-90 μm)
Scum
Supernatant
Sludge
==PAGE:91==
 
 
 
 
 
xi
 
Table J.4: PE distribution in settled activated sludge samples. 
  
  
Scum 
Supernatant Sludge 
Total 
Average & 
Recovery 
Rate 
Blue 
(250-355 μm) 
Rep. 1 
176 
44 
196 
416 
421 
103.3% 
Rep. 2 
14 
15 
331 
360 
Rep. 3 
14 
16 
409 
439 
Rep. 4 
5 
1 
420 
426 
Rep. 5 
5 
4 
446 
455 
Rep. 6 
4 
13 
410 
427 
% of 250-355μm particles 
2.0 
2.3 
95.7 
 
 
Pink 
(125-250 μm) 
Rep. 1 
74 
7 
34 
115 
120 
88% 
Rep. 2 
3 
7 
91 
101 
Rep. 3 
2 
8 
101 
111 
Rep. 4 
0 
2 
110 
112 
Rep. 5 
0 
0 
134 
134 
Rep. 6 
0 
1 
139 
140 
% of 125-250μm particles 
0.8 
3.0 
96.2 
 
 
Blue 
(63-90 μm) 
 
Rep. 1 
3 
19 
47 
69 
158 
84% 
Rep. 2 
2 
12 
162 
176 
Rep. 3 
2 
8 
142 
152 
Rep. 4 
1 
27 
126 
154 
Rep. 5 
2 
0 
150 
152 
Rep. 6 
3 
3 
151 
157 
% of 63-90μm particles 
1.3 
6.3 
92.4 
 
 
SUM 
310 
187 
3599 
4096 
 
 
 
Figure J.3: PE distribution in settled activated sludge samples. 
Recovery rate was determined as: 
𝑅𝑒𝑐𝑜𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑦 𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑒 (%) = 𝐴𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑔𝑒 𝑛𝑜. 𝑜𝑓 𝑝𝑎𝑟𝑡𝑖𝑐𝑙𝑒𝑠 𝑓𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑑
𝐴𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑔𝑒 𝑛𝑜. 𝑜𝑓 𝑝𝑎𝑟𝑡𝑖𝑐𝑙𝑒𝑠 𝑎𝑑𝑑𝑒𝑑 × 100 
 
8%
4%
88%
88%
90%
92%
94%
96%
98%
100%
Blue 
(250-355 μm)
Pink 
(125-250 μm)
Blue 
(63-90 μm)
Scum
Supernatant
Sludge
==PAGE:92==
 
 
 
 
 
xii
Appendix K: Concentration Calculation of FluorophorexTM PS microspheres 
(For Stage 3 Membrane Experiments) 
 
Cat. No.:  
2106Q 
Lot No.:  
8220D 
Information on microspheres obtained from:  
http://www.phosphorex.com/fluorescent-polystyrene-microspheres.html  
 
Table K.2 
  
  
Units 
Concentration of PS in solution 
10 mg/ml 
PS density 
1.06 g/cm3 
Diameter of sphere  
20 μm 
Volume of 1 sphere 
4.19E-09 cm3 
Mass of 1 sphere 
4.44E-09 g 
No. of spheres /μl 
2251.29   
For Preparation of Stock Solution: 
Vol. pipetted out 
20 μl 
Concentration in 100ml stock solution 
450.26 spheres/ml 
Vol. of stock solution used 
0.5 ml 
No. of spheres per replicate 
225.13   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:93==
 
 
 
 
 
xiii
Appendix L: Results of the Membrane Experiments 
 
Table L.1: CSO simulation membrane tests (100μm). 
  
  
No. in 
Filtrate 
Average 
SD 
CoV 
No. in 
Residue 
Average 
SD 
CoV 
Recovery 
Rate  
(%) 
PS 
(20μm) 
Rep. 1 
205 
178.3 
26.5 
2 
5.3 
3.51 
92.0 
Rep. 2 
178 
14.9% 
9 
65.9% 
83.1 
Rep. 3 
152 
  
5 
  
69.8 
Blue  
(250-355 μm) 
Rep. 1 
0 
0.3 
0.58 
387 
412.7 
35.36 
94.9 
Rep. 2 
0 
173% 
398 
8.57% 
97.5 
Rep. 3 
1 
  
453 
  
111.3 
Pink  
(125-250 μm) 
Rep. 1 
1 
0.3 
0.58 
126 
138.3 
12.01 
93.4 
Rep. 2 
0 
173% 
150 
8.68% 
110.3 
Rep. 3 
0 
  
139 
  
102.2 
Blue  
(63-90 μm) 
Rep. 1 
220 
198.3 
34.1 
15 
15.0 
6.00 
125.0 
Rep. 2 
216 
17.2% 
21 
40.0% 
126.1 
Rep. 3 
159 
  
9 
  
89.4 
 
 
Figure L.1: PE distribution after membrane (100μm) filtration. 
 
Table L.2: Microfiltration (tertiary filtration) membrane tests (25μm). 
  
  
No. in 
Filtrate 
Average 
SD 
CoV 
No. in 
Residue 
Average 
SD 
CoV 
Recovery 
Rate  
(%) 
PS 
(20μm) 
Rep. 1 
157 
148.3 
26.50 
2 
5.3 
3.51 
92.0 
Rep. 2 
158 
14.9% 
9 
65.9% 
83.1 
Rep. 3 
130 
  
5 
  
69.8 
Average distribution (%) 
69.9 
 
 
30.1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
99.92%
99.76%
7.03%
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
Blue 
(250-355 μm)
Pink 
(125-250 μm)
Blue 
(63-90 μm)
Residue
Filtrate
==PAGE:94==
 
 
 
 
 
xiv
Appendix M: Determination of Sample Collection Time Period for Stage 4 
For the pilot scale experiment (Stage 4), an estimation of the time needed for the traceable 
MPs added into the installation was required in order to decide on an appropriate duration 
for sample collection. This section details the calculations involved in this approximation.   
 
A Completely Mixed Flow Reactor (CMFR) model was assumed for each of the treatment 
chambers. The traceable MPs added to the pilot scale experiment (Stage 4) are regarded as 
completely inert. MP transport through each chamber was thus modelled using the equation 
(Nazaroff & Cohen, 2001): 
𝐶1(𝑡) = 𝐶0 ∙exp (−𝑄
𝑉1
𝑡) 
C0 represents the initial concentration in a chamber, and C1 represents the resultant 
concentration in a chamber. Q is the volume flow rate, which was set at 25m3/h during the 
experiment. V1 is the volume of the chamber, and t represents the time. The predicted MP 
transport through the treatment system is shown in Figure M.. It is estimated that, after 
50min, >99% of the added MP particles will have been transported through each of the 
treatment tanks. (Table M.3) Therefore, it was determined that a sample collection duration 
of 50min was sufficient for Stage 4. 
 
Figure M.1: MP transport through the treatment system, assuming CMFR model. 
Table M.3: Estimated half-life (t½), time where max. concentration in tank occurs (tmax) and the MP recovery 
after 0.5h, 50min and 1h, assuming CMFR conditions. 
 
Tank 1 
Coagulation 
Tank 
Tank 2 
Flocculation 
Tank 
Tank 3 
Discfilter 
V=2.5m3 
Tank 3 
Discfilter 
V=3m3 
t½ (min) 
1.38 
7.08 
10.98 
12.06 
tmax (min) 
0 (start) 
3.42 
9 
9.54 
Recovery 0.5h (%) 
100 
98.1 
93 
90 
Recovery 50min (%) 
100 
99.9 
99.5 
99.1 
Recovery 1h (%) 
100 
100 
100 
100 
 
 
0
20
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
Concentration (%)
Time (h) 
Coagulation Tank
Flocculation Tank
Disc Filter (V=2.5m3)
Disc Filter (V=3m3)
==PAGE:95==
 
 
 
 
 
xv
Appendix N: Results of the Pilot Scale Experiment 
 
Table N.1: No. of PE and Nylon particles found in the primary effluent samples. 2L samples were collected at 5-min 
intervals after the addition of Nylon and PE particles for 50min (Total of 10 samples). 
Min. 
from 
start 
PE 
Nylon 
Total 
Pink 
(63 - 125μm) 
Blue  
(125 - 355μm) 
Orange 
(63 - 125μm) 
Green 
(125 - 355μm) 
Round 1 
5 
1 
12 
0 
0 
13 
10 
1 
1 
0 
0 
2 
15 
0 
5 
1 
0 
6 
20 
0 
9 
2 
1 
12 
25 
0 
10 
0 
1 
11 
30 
1 
8 
0 
0 
9 
35 
0 
2 
0 
0 
2 
40 
0 
4 
1 
1 
6 
45 
0 
5 
0 
1 
6 
50 
0 
1 
0 
0 
1 
Round 2 
 
(addition of 
polymers 
and 
coagulants) 
5 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
10 
0 
1 
0 
0 
1 
15 
0 
2 
0 
0 
2 
20 
0 
1 
0 
0 
1 
25 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
30 
0 
2 
0 
0 
2 
35 
0 
1 
0 
0 
1 
40 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
45 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
50 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:96==
 
 
 
 
 
xvi
Appendix O: Microscopic Observations of MPs 
To aid in the visual identification of the added MP particles, comparisons with clean samples 
without sludge were made. Only particles that 1) resembled the added particles in terms of 
colour and shape, and 2) were in the correct size range were enumerated.  
 
Documented are some examples of particles that were enumerated (Figure O.2) and those 
that were left out of the counts for the Stage 4 - Pilot Scale Experiments (Figure O.3).  
 
Figure O.1: Clean samples without sludge 
 
 
 
Figure O.2: Particles counted include blue PE particle (left), orange nylon particle (middle), pink PE particle (right) 
 
 
 
Figure O.3: Particles not counted include particles of a different colour (left) and particles out of the size range (right) 
