==PAGE:1==
The Impact of Layout Properties
on the Understandability of
Process Models: An Eye Tracking
Study
Mette Kyhn Larsen Simon Mørup Carlsson
Kongens Lyngby 2017
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract (English)
Business process models are an important tool for several stakeholders, as it
provides a shared understanding of a business process.
It is therefore a key
factor that process models are easy to understand.
Former studies have investigated the inﬂuence of model layout on process model
understandability. The most utilized measures are performance measures, which
do not capture the cognitive state of the modeller during a process model com-
prehension task. This thesis examines the inﬂuence of question types (global
and local) and layout properties (change of direction and block visibility) on
process model understanding. A controlled experiment using eye tracking was
conducted, to capture mental load of participants solving model comprehension
tasks.
The results of the layout property change of direction, showed a signiﬁcant dif-
ference in global questions within the dependent variables ﬁxation count and
ﬁxation duration.
Layout property block visibility, showed a signiﬁcant dif-
ference in the local questions with the dependent variables ﬁxation count and
ﬁxation duration. Question types showed a signiﬁcant diﬀerence in both ﬁxation
count and ﬁxation duration. Question type did also show a signiﬁcant diﬀerence
in saccade velocity except in high block visibility.
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
Abstract (Danish)
Business Process Modelling er et vigtigt værktøj for forskellige interessenter, det
hjælper med en samlet forståelse af forretningsprocessen. Det er derfor vigtigt
at process modeller er nemme at forstå.
Tidligere studier har undersøgt indﬂydelsen af model layoutet på process model
forståelsen. De oftest brugte metoder at måle resultater på, er ved hjælp af
præstationsmålinger. Disse måler ikke den kognitive tilstand under en model
forståelses opgave. Denne afhandling undersøger indﬂydelsen af spørgsmålstyper
(globale og lokale) og layout egenskaber (retningsændring og blok synlighed) på
forståelses af process modeller. Ved brug af eye-tracking bliver et kontrolleret
forsøg udført. Eksperimentet har til formål at undersøge om deltagerne har en
højere mental belastning når de løser model forståelsesopgaver.
Resultaterne for layout egenskaberne retningsændring, viser en betydelig for-
skel i globale spørgsmål inden for de afhængige variabler ﬁkserings tælling og
ﬁkserings længde. Layout egenskaberne blok synlighed, viser en betydelig for-
skel i lokale spørgsmål ved afhængige de afhængige variabler ﬁkserings tælling
og ﬁkserings længde. Spørgsmålstyperne viste en betydelig forskel i både ﬁkse-
rings tælling og ﬁkserings længde. Spørgsmålstyperne viste også en betydelig
forskel saccade hastighed, med undtagelse af den uafhængige variabel høj blok
synlighed.
==PAGE:6==
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank all the people who supported us in completing this
master thesis. We want to ﬁrst of all thank Prof. Barbara Weber for the
excellent guidance, help and motivation. We highly appreciate it and thank
you, for all of your support.
We would also like to thank Postdoc.
Per
Bækgaard for also guiding us through the master thesis and helping us. A
special acknowledgement goes to the participants in our experiment, without
them it would not have been possible.
We would like to thank Frederik Mørup Carlsson for the extensive proof-
reading. Furthermore we would like to thank our parents, for the continued
support throughout our education.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract (English)
i
Abstract (Danish)
iii
Acknowledgements
v
0.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
0.1.1
Related Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
0.1.2
Research Objective . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
0.2
Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
0.2.1
Process models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
0.2.2
Eye Movements and Cognitive Load . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
0.2.3
Tobii Eye Tracker
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
0.3
Methods
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
0.3.1
Experimental Setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
0.3.2
Experimental Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
0.3.3
Experimental Execution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
0.3.4
Data Processing and Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
0.4
Analysis and Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
0.4.1
Participants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
0.4.2
Initial analysis attempt
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
0.4.3
Preparation of Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
0.4.4
Descriptive Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
0.4.5
Testing the Hypotheses
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
0.5
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
0.5.1
Interpretation of Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
0.6
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
0.6.1
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
==PAGE:10==
viii
CONTENTS
A The ﬁrst results
49
A.0.1
Descriptive Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
A.0.2
Statistical Tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
B Cross checking with Katjas results
59
C Models and Questions
63
Bibliography
69
==PAGE:11==
0.1 Introduction
1
0.1
Introduction
In the recent years business processes have gained more attention from diﬀerent
organizations and therefore the popularity of using business process models has
increased (Aguilar-Saven, 2004).
A business process model is a graphical notation used to map a process in an
organization, often with the goal of improving the eﬃciency or cost of the given
process. Process models are intended for enabling diﬀerent units (managers,
consultants, developers etc.)
of a business with an understanding of how a
given process in the organization works (Mendling, Strembeck, & Recker, 2012).
There are diﬀerent notations of how to visualize the process, one commonly
used notation is Business Process Model and Notation (BPMN). The beneﬁts
of business process modelling is that it creates a shared understanding of the
process in the business and an improvement in the communication (Mendling et
al., 2012), it is therefore essential that the process model is easy to understand.
There has been a lot of research addressing diﬀerent aspects of process model
comprehension (Figl, 2017). Others have investigated the inﬂuence of model
layout for the understandability of process models, the often used measures
for measuring model comprehension is duration and accuracy.
The classical
measures of accuracy and duration do however not report how a person ap-
proaches a process model comprehension task, it only provides performance
measures Duchowski (2007, p. 173). Eye tracking does provide these process
measures, which are linked to a person’s cognitive state during an evaluation
task Duchowski (2007, p. 172-173). Apart from model comprehension, previous
research have also addressed the eﬀect of two diﬀerent types of modiﬁcation
requirement (Weidlich et al., 2010).
This thesis seeks to investigate the inﬂuence of model layout and question types
on the understandability of process models, in terms of process measures that
allows investigating the users cognitive state during the comprehension task. For
this purpose an experiment investigating the inﬂuence of two layout properties
on model comprehension measuring duration and accuracy (Sonderegger, 2015),
will be replicated using eye tracking.
0.1.1
Related Work
This section will introduce the background of the experiment performed by
(Sonderegger, 2015). It will also touch upon literature concerning both process
models and eye tracking.
==PAGE:12==
2
CONTENTS
0.1.1.1
Process Model Comprehension - Classic Measures
In the thesis Impact of Layout Properties on the Understandability of Process
Models (Sonderegger, 2015) it was investigated how diﬀerent process model lay-
out properties inﬂuence the understandability of the models. The properties
investigated were change of direction and block visibility. Two classical mea-
sures of comprehension performance were utilized; accuracy of the answers and
the duration it took to answer.
In order to study whether the layout properties; change of direction and block
visibility had an inﬂuence on the understandability of process models, four dif-
ferent process models were created. Two of the process models diﬀered in the
change of direction and the other two diﬀered in block visibility, as seen in table
1.
In order to have repeated measures, six questions for each model were created,
3 questions for global question type and 3 questions for local question type.
Models
Groups
A
B
Process model 1
Low change of direction
High change of direction
Process model 2
Low block visibility
High block visibility
Process model 3
High block visibility
Low block visibility
Process model 4
High change of direction
Low change of direction
Table 1: How the process models where arranged between experiment group
A and experiment group B.
Sonderegger found that with global questions there was a higher answering
duration when dealing with models with a high change of direction compared
to low change of direction. There were also a higher answering duration when
dealing with models with low block visibility compared to high block visibility
for both question types. Additionally, there was a decreased accuracy when
dealing with low block visibility compared to high block visibility for global
questions.
0.1.1.2
Process Model Comprehension - Eye Tracking
When investigating the area of process model comprehension, it was discovered
that other studies utilized measures, obtained through eye tracking, as indicators
for how diﬃcult a process model is to understand.
==PAGE:13==
0.1 Introduction
3
The paper How visual cognition inﬂuences process model comprehension (Petrusel,
Mendling, & Reijers, 2017), investigates how participants’ performance diﬀer for
diﬀerent types of comprehension tasks.
A diﬀerent paper Task-speciﬁc visual cues for improving process model under-
standing (Petrusel, Mendling, & Reijers, 2016), addresses to which degree visual
cues can be modiﬁed for speciﬁc comprehension tasks and to what extend it in-
ﬂuences cognition (Petrusel et al., 2016).
Both of these papers utilize eye tracking measures for investigating the diﬃculty
of comprehension tasks. These measures are all related to ﬁxations, a term used
to describe a halt of the movements of the eye, on a certain region in the visual
ﬁeld (Petrusel et al., 2017). The measures that both papers make use of are:
Cognition intensity measuring the total ﬁxations and the total duration of
ﬁxations, being the duration of all ﬁxations added together (Petrusel et al.,
2017, p. 13). These measures are indicators of the participants’ mental load
(Petrusel et al., 2016, p. 68).
One of these papers also exploits measures that are acquired through determin-
ing the relevant regions of the process model. The relevant regions of a process
models can be explained as the elements in the model the user needs to examine
in order to solve a comprehension task (Petrusel et al., 2017). These measures
are:
Scan-path precision is a measure which can be used for inspecting whether
the participant has been distracted by elements in the process model that are
not relevant for solving the task (Petrusel et al., 2017, p. 7-8).
Scan-path recall, is a measure that indicates whether the participant have
missed looking at elements of the model that are needed in order to solve the
task Petrusel et al. (2017, p. 8).
0.1.2
Research Objective
This thesis will build upon the foundation Sonderegger (2015) laid in her masters
thesis, through the use of eye tracking measures. As in Sonderegger (2015)’s
thesis the following objectives will be investigated:
Change of direction One of the goals of this thesis is to investigate whether
changes in direction has an inﬂuence on the understandability of process models.
==PAGE:14==
4
CONTENTS
Block visibility The second goal is to investigate if block visibility has an
inﬂuence on the understandability of process models.
Question type The third goal of this thesis is to investigate if questions of
global type increases the diﬃculty of solving a comprehension task, compared
to questions of local type.
The objective in this thesis is to utilize eye tracking technology, which provides
process measures that gives insight into how a person approaches a comprehen-
sion task. These measures will be used to investigate how the layout properties
and question types inﬂuences process model understandability.
0.1.2.1
Research Question
Do layout properties and question types have an inﬂuence on process model
comprehension?
==PAGE:15==
0.2 Theory
5
0.2
Theory
This section will introduce the background of process models that is relevant
for this thesis. Furthermore, diﬀerent eye measures that are related to cognitive
load will be addressed and the eye tracker that is available for this experiment
is also described.
0.2.1
Process models
Process models are a graphical representation of a process, which helps gaining
a shared understanding of a given process (Mendling et al., 2012). The modeling
of process models can be done in diﬀerent notations. A commonly used notation
is BPMN (Sonderegger, 2015), which this thesis will cover.
0.2.1.1
BPMN
"The Object Management Group (OMG) has developed a standard Business
Process Model and Notation (BPMN). The primary goal of BPMN is to provide
a notation that is readily understandable by all business users, from the business
analysts that create the initial drafts of the processes, to the technical developers
responsible for implementing the technology that will perform those processes,
and ﬁnally, to the business people who will manage and monitor those processes.
Thus, BPMN creates a standardized bridge for the gap between the business
process design and process implementation."(OMG, 2011)
The basic elements used in models of BPMN are called ﬂow objects, these are:
activities, events and gateways, ﬁgure 1. Activities are tasks that has to be done
in the process ﬂow, events are triggers that initiate a given event, and gateways
are symbols that shows how the process ﬂow is split and merged. The sequence
ﬂows, which are represented with an arrow, are connecting the ﬂow objects to
each other, they also indicate the direction the ﬂow is going.
Based on whether the gateway is a XOR or AND gateway diﬀerent control ﬂow
patterns can appear. "Control ﬂow patterns provide means to describe typical
control ﬂow constructs in a language-independent manner and to enable a better
understanding", (Reichert & Weber, 2012, p. 63).
For this thesis the control ﬂow patterns that can appear are; parallel split,
synchronization, exclusive choice and simple merge, ﬁgure 2. The parallel split
==PAGE:16==
6
CONTENTS
Figure 1: BPMN: Flow objects and gateways (Sonderegger, 2015)
(AND-split) is a pattern that is seen in the case of an AND gateway, allow-
ing the path to split into multiple paths which are then processed in parallel.
Synchronization (AND-join) is a pattern that allows multiple paths, which are
being processed in parallel, to merge into a single path when all steps in the
paths are completed. The Exclusive choice (XOR-split) is a pattern, where one
of multiple paths will be selected and only the selected one is processed. The
simple merge (XOR-join) will merge the diﬀerent alternative paths, without
synchronization, into one path (Reichert & Weber, 2012, p. 64-65).
Figure 2: BPMN: Diﬀerent ﬂow patterns (Reichert & Weber, 2012, p. 65)
In the ﬁgure below a process model of making coﬀee can be seen, the circle to the
left, representing the starting event, initiates the process of plugging in the coﬀee
machine. Depending on the type of coﬀee machine, ﬁlter- or capsule-type, only
one of the methods can be initiated which is indicated by the XOR gateway.
After the coﬀee preparation sequence, of either using capsules, or ﬁlters and
coﬀee, has been executed, the model proceeds to the activity of placing a cup in
the machine. Next the two activities, removing the cup and turning oﬀthe coﬀee
==PAGE:17==
0.2 Theory
7
machine is processed simultaneously and synchronized when both activities are
completed, which is indicated by the AND gateway. The end of the process is
represented by the end event.
Figure 3: Process model of coﬀee making (Sonderegger, 2015)
0.2.1.2
Layout and Process Model Understandability
The understandability of a process model can diﬀer based on how the layout is
(Burattin, Bernstein, Neurauter, Soﬀer, & Weber, 2017). There is therefore a
range of diﬀerent aspects of the layout design that can inﬂuence how easy the
model is to understand. For the purpose of this project the focus will be on the
layout properties; change of direction and block visibility, in order to built upon
the experiment made by Sonderegger.
Change of Direction
The direction in a process model is the direction of the ﬂow sequence, symbolized
by the arrow connecting the ﬂow objects. In Sonderegger’s thesis she used the
behavioural proﬁle (BP) metric, for calculating the degree of directional change
for each model.
Models with a high directional change should be more diﬃcult to comprehend
than models with a low directional change. This assumption was supported in
her results as high directional change resulted in longer duration of answering
questions of global type, however it did not result in longer duration of answering
questions of local type (Sonderegger, 2015).
Block Visibility
Visibility of the blocks is inﬂuenced by how the ﬂow objects are aligned to each
other, meaning that ﬂow objects will seem more visible if they are aligned such
that they form recognizable patterns. (Mendling & Strembeck, 2008) found that
the structuredness of process models has an eﬀect on how easy the model is to
read and understand. The results from Sonderegger’s thesis concerning duration
points in the same direction, that the block visibility seems to have an inﬂuence
on how fast the task is completed.
==PAGE:18==
8
CONTENTS
Question Types - global and local
In this thesis the two question types: global and local will be used.
Local
questions can be referred to as sequential, explaining "[..] how input conditions
lead to a certain outcome." (Pichler et al., 2012, p. 386). Global questions can
be referred to as circumstantial, and instead "[..] relates to the overall conditions
that produced that outcome" (Pichler et al., 2012, p. 386).
The human brain can only handle a limited amount of information at a time, in
relation to cognitive load theory. The working memory holds information that a
person is actively working on. This information is easilly accessible but limited
to holding 7 plus/minus 2 items (5 to 9 items). "Items" should be understood as
"chunks" in such a way that both a letter, a word or an item could correspond
to one chunk. The length of a single chunk varies across individuals (reisberg,
2013, p. 197).
The limitations of the working memory system can for this purpose be used
for deﬁning global and local questions. As in Sonderegger’s thesis the question
types are deﬁned as:
• Global - In order to answer a global question one need to recall more
than ﬁve activities or gateways (Sonderegger, 2015).
• Local - In order to answer a local question one needs to recall less than
ﬁve activities or gateways (Sonderegger, 2015).
In relation to working memory capacity, global questions should be harder to
solve than local questions, since the participant needs to recall more than ﬁve
activities. As the limit of the working memory capacity is increased if using
a chucking strategy (reisberg, 2013, p. 197), experienced process readers could
perform better because they might be able to group the activities or element in
the model.
0.2.2
Eye Movements and Cognitive Load
In this section the diﬀerent eye movement measures will be described, as well
as their correlation to cognitive load. In addition an eye tracker from Tobii will
be described.
==PAGE:19==
0.2 Theory
9
0.2.2.1
Fixations
When addressing cognitive load, one aspect to look into is ﬁxations. Fixations
are deﬁned as eye movements that pause the movement on an area of interest
in the visual ﬁeld (Duchowski, 2007, p. 46). As described ﬁxations are the eye
movements that result in a stabilized focus, therefore ﬁxations are an indicator
of where a person is directing attention. The classical measure of ﬁxations is
(Duchowski, 2007, p. 173):
Fixation count - an indication of where in the scene the user is ﬁxating
(Duchowski, 2007, p. 173). Fixation count should increase with a higher mental
load (Petrusel et al., 2016, p. 66,69).
Fixaion duration - an indication of the level of mental load, higher ﬁxation
duration indicates a rise in mental load (Duchowski, 2007, p. 173)(Majaranta,
n.d., p. 141).
Whether a diﬃcult task will results in an increase in ﬁxations/duration or a de-
crease in ﬁxations/duration seems to depend on the characteristics of the task,
e.g. being challenged when driving should decrease the duration of ﬁxations.
Tasks such as reading should however increase the duration of the ﬁxations (Ma-
jaranta, n.d., p. 141). This indicates that tasks requiring rapid responses will
mostly result in an decrease in the duration of the ﬁxations Majaranta (n.d.,
p. 141).
One problem with using the ﬁxation points, is that many eye trackers are not
100% accurate in where the participant is ﬁxating. If the material contains very
small elements that are close together, it can be diﬃcult to correctly judge which
of the elements the participants were actually ﬁxating on.
For this project, ﬁxation count and ﬁxation duration will be used to asses the
cognitive load in the sense that both should increase for those of the model
layouts and question types that are more complex and diﬃcult to comprehend.
0.2.2.2
Saccades
Saccades are eye movements used when changing the focus to a new location
in the visual environment. Saccades are deﬁned as fast eye movement with a
duration usually of 10ms to 100 ms (Duchowski, 2007, p. 42). Theory suggests
that saccade velocity is positively correlated with the diﬃculty of a task, mean-
ing that tasks that are more diﬃcult/complex will show an increase in saccade
velocity (Majaranta, n.d., p. 142). The saccade velocity can be calculated by:
==PAGE:20==
10
CONTENTS
Saccade Velocity = Saccade amplitude / Duration of the saccade(ms)
For this project saccade velocity will be used as an indicator of increasing mental
load when comparing the diﬀerent model layouts and question types.
0.2.2.3
Pupil Dilation
Diﬀerent literature have investigated pupil response and it is assumed that pupil
dilation is related to cognitive load, meaning that when a task is becoming more
diﬃcult or complex the pupil size should dilate (Majaranta, n.d., p. 143).
A problem of measuring and comparing pupil dilation of diﬀerent participants
is that one needs to take the baseline of the pupil size into account, as this
varies between individuals. Another factor that inﬂuences the dilation and con-
traction of the pupil, is the light from the environment. Studies have shown
that light has a higher inﬂuence on pupil dilation/contraction, than cognitive
load Majaranta (n.d., p. 143). When measuring cognitive load based on pupil
dilation, the lighting in the environment needs to be kept constant during the
test, this also applies to the luminance of the computer screen that otherwise
could disrupt the results.
For this project, pupil dilation will be used to asses the cognitive load in the
sense that the pupil dilation should be higher for those of the model layouts and
question types that are more complex and diﬃcult to comprehend.
0.2.3
Tobii Eye Tracker
Figure 4: Tobii Eye Tracker (Tobii-Technology)
The Tobii eye tracker that will be used in this thesis consist of a computer screen
that is monitored to the eye tracker unit as seen in ﬁgure 4.
==PAGE:21==
0.2 Theory
11
Together with the physical Tobii eye tracker, the program Tobii pro studio
facilitates: Calibration, recording, visualizing eye tracking data, drawing out
eye tracking statistics and exporting the data.
When using an eye tracker to measure ﬁxations there might be smaller errors in
the accuracy of where on the screen the user is actually looking and what the
eye tracker is outputting. For the Tobii Eye Tracker TX300 the gaze accuracy is
described as "the angular average distance from the actual gaze point to the one
measured by the eye tracker."(Tobii-Technology). The Tobii eye tracker TX300
has an accuracy of 0.4 degrees under ideal conditions(Tobii-Technology). It is
stated that 1.0 degrees corresponds to 11 mm, it will be assumed that there can
be/ will be an error of approximately 4.4 mm (Tobii-Technology).
The Tobii Eye tracker oﬀers diﬀerent deﬁnitions of how to ﬁlter ﬁxations, the
default ﬁlter is the I-VT Fixation Filter, which is suited for "the most common
eye tracking use cases, e.g. web, market research and standard reading studies."
(Tobii-Technology).
The I-VT Fixation Filter is a method that, based on the velocity of the
directional shifts of the eye, categorize whether the type of eye movement is a
ﬁxation or a saccade. The velocity is measured in visual degrees per second
and if it is below a certain threshold then the the sample will be categorized
as a ﬁxation, otherwise it will be categorized as a saccade (Olsen). The I-VI
ﬁxation ﬁlter will only consider ﬁxations and saccades and not other types of
eye movements, such as smooth pursuit (Olsen).
==PAGE:22==
12
CONTENTS
0.3
Methods
This section will introduce the methods used when executing the diﬀerent tasks
involved in the experiment, and how the Tobii eye tracker was utilized.
0.3.1
Experimental Setup
The experiment is being carried out on the technical university of Denmark
(DTU) within the teacher facilities. The Tobii eye tracker hardware is assigned
its own room on the university campus and it is within that space the experiment
will take place.
0.3.1.1
Participants
When selecting participants for the experiment, it is crucial that they have
some foreknowledge about the models which they are going to answer questions
based on.
This is to ensure that all participants will be able to ﬁnish the
experiment. The chosen method of sampling the participants is one Bjørner
(2015) proposes in his book, the method is called quota sampling. According
to Bjørner (2015, p. 62) it "[..] is a method in which participants or units are
selected for a sample on the basis of pre-speciﬁed characteristics.". This method
allows the facilitators to setup criteria for the participants, excluding people
who do not have the required foreknowledge. The criteria which is needed in
this experiment, is knowledge about BPMN or similar.
0.3.1.2
Material
Models
For this thesis premade models of BPMN will be used in the experiment, the
models have been made by Sonderegger and were used in her experiment as well.
The models were designed in such a way that the only diﬀerences should be in
the two layout proporties; change of direction and block visibility. Sonderegger
states that the model pairs were checked for following certain constrains, these
were (Sonderegger, 2015):
Correctness and Executability - The models were checked for the inclusion of any
deadlocks or conﬂicts, as well as making certain that the syntax of the models
were correct (Sonderegger, 2015).
==PAGE:23==
0.3 Methods
13
Representativeness - Only the most basic elements of BPMN was used in order
to avoid having complex models, and to assure the representativenss of the
models (Sonderegger, 2015). The models include the following ﬂow elements:
"sequence, parallel split, synchronization, exclusive choice, simple merge pattern
and loop." Sonderegger (2015, p. 18).
Besides the constrains for the models, certain steps were taken to prevent other
factors of understandability to inﬂuence the results, these were; notation, com-
plexity of the models, control ﬂow patterns, layout of the models and activity
labels, see Sonderegger (2015, p. 19-20) for further explanation. The process
models can be found in appendix C
Questions
In the experiment the participants will answer diﬀerent questions concerning
the models. These questions have like the models been created by Sonderegger,
and were used in her experiment as well. In order to prevent the layout of the
models from having an eﬀect on the questions concerning small parts of the
models, the questions are divided into two types; global and local (Sonderegger,
2015), described in section 0.2.1.2. The questions can be found in appendix C.
0.3.1.3
Instrumentation
The eye tracking test with the process models is set up in Tobii pro studio.
The reason for not using the CEP platform, as (Sonderegger, 2015) used, is
that the CEP platform would have to be opened inside Tobii pro studio, in
order to gather the eye tracking measures. This was however not possible since
running the CEP platform inside Tobii pro studio caused the CEP paltform to
sometimes not show the models but only the answer possibilities. It was decided
to implement the experiment directly in the Tobii pro studio, with the use of
the built in elements; questionnaires and images.
0.3.1.4
Parameters - Personal factors
In this experiment there are diﬀerent factors that can bias the results, one of
these is the participants’ foreknowledge of BPMN. The foreknowledge will be
controlled through a survey covering the participants foreknowledge of BPMN
(Sonderegger, 2015). In the results section the data about the foreknowledge of
BPMN for group A and B should be compared to ensure that the foreknowledge
of the groups is not signiﬁcantly diﬀerent.
==PAGE:24==
14
CONTENTS
All of the process model activities are described by only a single letter, this is
to avoid diﬀerences in domain knowledge that speciﬁc labels could bring. All
of the letters are randomly assigned to not suggest any coherence between the
traces (Sonderegger, 2015).
0.3.1.5
Independent Variables and Levels
The independent variables can be explained as the factors that inﬂuence the
dependent variables.
This thesis contains three independent variables: change of direction, block visi-
bility and Question type, making it a factorial design (Lazar, Feng, & Hochheiser,
n.d.). Furthermore all participants will be exposed to all conditions making it
a within-group design. The advantages of the within-group design are a smaller
sample size and more powerful tests, while the described disadvantage is mostly
fatigue (Lazar et al., n.d.). The actual experiment is estimated to run for 15
minutes and all participants should have some interest in the subject, therefore
the fatigue disadvantage is not considered fatal. Since Sonderegger (2015) was
not able to directly link both layout properties or both question types to a signif-
icant diﬀerence, this thesis will focus on all of the dependent variables separately.
This results in choosing a Paired t test with its corresponding non-parametric
test (Wilcoxon) over a repeated measures ANOVA test and its non-parametric
correspondent (Friedman).
This thesis will have two nested experiments and one investigation of data. The
ﬁrst experiment investigates layout property, change of direction and question
type, each have two levels:
• The independent variable model layout has the values low change of di-
rection and high change of direction.
• The independent variable question type has the values local question and
global question.
The second experiment investigates layout property, block visibility and question
type, each have two level:
• The independent variable model layout has the values low block visibility
and high block visibility.
==PAGE:25==
0.3 Methods
15
Investigation
Independent variables
Levels
Layout Property:
Change of Direction
Change of Direction
High
Low
Question Type
Global
Local
Layout Property:
Block Visibility
Block Visibility
High
Low
Question Type
Global
Local
Question Type
Change of Direction
High
Low
Block Visibility
High
Low
Question Type
Global
Local
Table 2: The table shows the independent variable of the experiment and their
associated levels
• The independent variable question type has the values local question and
global question.
The investigation looks at the question type and the layout properties inﬂuence
on process model understandability, each have two levels:
• The independent variable question type has the values local question and
global question.
• The independent variable change of direction has the values low change of
direction and high change of direction.
• The independent variable block visibility has the values low block visibility
and high block visibility.
These experiments can also be seen on table 2 which summarizes the indepen-
dent variables and their levels.
0.3.1.6
Dependent Variables
The dependent variables are the measures that were considered related to model
comprehension. The dependent variables for this experiment are:
• Fixation count
==PAGE:26==
16
CONTENTS
• Total Fixation duration
• Saccade Velocity
• Pupil dilation
In this thesis model comprehension is speciﬁed as being worse when the depen-
dent variables shows the following:
Fixation count should be higher when mental load is increasing (Petrusel et
al., 2016, p. 66,69).
Total ﬁxation duration should be higher when mental load is increasing
Petrusel et al. (2016, p. 66,69).
Saccade Velocity should be higher (faster) when task demands are increasing
(Majaranta, n.d., p. 142).
Pupil dilation should increase when the processing load becomes higher (Ma-
jaranta, n.d., p. 143).
0.3.1.7
Hypotheses
The research question can be described as what this experiment will seek to
answer, and the hypotheses is the assumptions made about how the data will
behave, these will either be rejected or accepted based on the results of the
measurements. The measures and levels are aggregated under each hypothesis
to avoid having an abundance of hypotheses. The diﬀerent measures and levels
will be analyzed individually, with a pairwise statistical test.
Research Question: Do layout properties and question types have an inﬂuence
on process model comprehension?
Hypotheses (H1) Low change of direction results in better understanding com-
pared to high change of direction, concerning model comprehension (Operational-
ized as ﬁxation count, total ﬁxation duration, saccade velocity and pupil dila-
tion).
Hypotheses (H2) High block visibility results in better process model under-
standing compared to low block visibility (Operationalized as ﬁxation count, total
ﬁxation duration, saccade velocity and pupil dilation).
Hypotheses (H3) Local questions result in better process model understanding
compared to global questions (Operationalized as ﬁxation count, total ﬁxation
duration, saccade velocity and pupil dilation).
==PAGE:27==
0.3 Methods
17
0.3.1.8
Validity and Reliability
In this thesis there is an emphasis on keeping the validity of the experiment high,
and such this thesis will follow some of Bjørner’s 8 validity measures(Bjørner,
2015, p. 109-110).
• Rich, thick descriptions: This will be implemented in the introductory
reading presented to the participants before engaging in the experiment.
In the reading, the experiment will be described in such a way that the
participants should understand what they are going to do and be ready
to begin afterwards.
• Clarify bias and including negative or discrepant information:
Through the analysis, results and discussion, every bias or user error which
is encountered will be highlighted to show readers the process. This should
ensure that if some were to replicate the experiment they would know the
caveats and could potentially avoid them.
• Use peer debrieﬁng: Consulting knowledgeable people around will de-
crease the probability of errors, since the results and execution have gone
through multiple hands.
In this case two supervisors are consulted on
theoretically matter and concerns with the data.
In order to ensure validity, there is often a prerequisite of reliability. In this
thesis, internal consistency as well as intrarecorder as proposed by Bjørner (2015,
p. 111) will be utilized.
• Intrarecorder: By ensuring consistency in the data collection process,
utilizing the same instrument with the same settings throughout, it is
possible to avoid unnecessary ﬂuctuations in the dataset. The experiment
is being handled in such a way that the same person is introducing the
experiment to the participants. It is also the same person being present
and taking notes when the experiment is in progress, this is consistent
through all sessions.
0.3.1.9
Limitation and bias
One limitation of the experimental setup in Tobii pro studio that might lead to
a bias, is the problem that it is not possible to change the color of the screen in
between the images when they are switching, meaning that the screen becomes
==PAGE:28==
18
CONTENTS
black for less than a second. This could be a problem since the pupil dilation
measure is highly aﬀected by changes in the screen luminance. As this problem
can not be solved by changing the color it is instead important that this factor
is controlled. This control will be attempting to make the conditions equal for
everyone, so that all are inﬂuenced by the change in luminance, making sure that
there will not be some conditions where the screen becomes black and others
where it does not.
0.3.2
Experimental Design
The order of how the models will be presented for respectively group A and group
B, should be the same order as used in the experiment made by (Sonderegger,
2015). This should be done for the sake of keeping the experiment as close as
possible to the experiment (Sonderegger, 2015) made. The order is shown in
ﬁgure 5, where the dark color speciﬁes the models that are assumed to be more
diﬃcult to understand, and light gray specifying the models that are assumed
to be less diﬃcult to understand
Figure 5: Showing the order of how the 4 models is presented for group A
and B. (Dark indicating the models that should be more diﬃcult
to understand, and light indicating the models that should be less
diﬃcult to understand)
For each model six questions will be presented, 3 global and 3 local, meaning
each participant will answer a total of 24 questions divided on four diﬀerent
models. As seen in ﬁgure 5 the test consists of two diﬀerent sequence orders (A
and B) of how the models are presented. As in the experiment by Sonderegger
(2015), the participants is randomly assigned to each of the groups, in order to
prevent biases arising based on the order the models are presented in.
As stated earlier there can be a diﬀerence of 4.4 mm between the point on the
screen the user is looking at and the point on the screen the eye tracker records,
meaning that judging whether a ﬁxation actually is on one or the other element
can be hard if the distances between elements is small. Therefore in order to
==PAGE:29==
0.3 Methods
19
compensate for the accuracy oﬀset of the Tobii eye tracker, the models have
been scaled larger. Keeping the elements the same size is essential, the scaling
is done percent wise based on the widest model as limit.
0.3.3
Experimental Execution
The experiment will as stated in the beginning of this chapter be performed
at DTU lyngby in a smaller room. Because the eye tracking measures might
be inﬂuenced by the lightning in the environment, it will be attempted to keep
it at a constant level. The one window in the room will be covered by two
set of curtains, the light will be turned on for all sessions, and all sessions will
be executed during daylight (before sunset). During the experiment of the eye
tracking measures, only the participant and one facilitator should be present
in the room and the facilitator should not communicate with the participant
unless a problem arises that needs to be resolved.
Figure 6: The setting in which the experiment was conducted
Figure 7: The structure of the experiment
==PAGE:30==
20
CONTENTS
The structure of the experiment can be seen in ﬁgure 7. As seen the participants
are given a written introduction, including a basic explanation of the terms that
will be used in the experiment, like the experiment by (Sonderegger, 2015). After
this the participants are told to answer a survey. The survey consist of two parts,
one addressing native information and foreknowledge of process modeling and
one that tests the participants knowledge about BPMN. When the survey is
completed, the eye tracker is calibrated for the participant, the calibration will
be redone if the green is not inside the grey dots as seen on ﬁgure 8. When
the calibration is acceptable the recording is started, the participants are then
presented with a simple tutorial model in order to get familiar with the setup.
After the tutorial model the experiments is initiated.
Figure 8: Showing a calibration attempt that will be accepted (left) and a
calibration attempt that will be re-calibrated (right)
0.3.4
Data Processing and Analysis
Here the tools and specialized calculations will be described.
0.3.4.1
Phyton libraries
Python (Python, 2001) will be the environment wherein all of the statistical
analysis and tests will be made. The python environment Anaconda (Contin-
uum, 2017) will be utilized as it already includes all of the libraries that is needed
in order to be eﬀecient at statistical analysis and tests. The libraries which are
being used are Numpy (developers NumPy, 2017) and Scikit.stats (community
==PAGE:31==
0.3 Methods
21
Scipy, 2017). Numpy will help with basic functionality which will ease the use
of python by reducing redundancy with smart mean, std. deviation, std. er-
ror of mean, minimum and maximum functions. Scikit.stats is a library which
includes statistical tests, parametric tests and tests for homogeneity.
0.3.4.2
Cheetah Experimental Platform (CEP-web)
The raw pupil size data is often noisy partly due to blinks and other artifacts.
The CEP-web program was used for ﬁltering the pupil dilation data. The CEP-
web is a platform for cleaning and displaying pupillary data recorded through
an eye tracker. The CEP-web provides diﬀerent ﬁlters which can be utilized
when performing the cleaning of the pupil data. It is recommended to execute
the ﬁlters in a certain order, since executing the ﬁlters in a diﬀerent order might
lead to results that is not satisfying (Zugal, Pinggera, Neurauter, Maran, &
Weber, 2017).
The ﬁlters applied, in the following order, was:
• Pupil substitution
• Gazepoint substitution
• Standard deviation
• Blink detection
• Linear interpolation
• Butterworth ﬁlter
Pupil substitution does an interpolation when values are missing from one
of the eyes. Meaning that if a value is missing from the left eye but not from
the right eye, the value from the right eye will be copied to the left eye and the
other way around. It should however be noted that the size of the left and right
pupil might diﬀer to a certain extend (Zugal et al., 2017).
Gazepoint substitution performs an interpolation like the pupil substitution,
but on the gaze points. If a gaze point is missing from the left eye, but not
from the right eye, data will be copied to the gaze points for the left eye and
the other way around (Zugal et al., 2017).
==PAGE:32==
22
CONTENTS
Standard deviation is used to remove outliers, meaning that "all values that
diﬀer more than 3 times from the mean value, should be considered outliers and
are removed." (Zugal et al., 2017).
Blink detection should be used for detecting blinks. It is important to detect
when the blinks is happening since the pupil data will be aﬀected a few ms
before and after the blink is occurring due to the opening and closing of the
eyelid. These artifacts in the pupil data will have to be removed. The eﬀect of
the blink detection ﬁlter can be seen in ﬁgure 9 (Zugal et al., 2017).
Figure 9: Left: The raw pupil data , Right: After applying the blink detection
ﬁlter (Zugal et al., 2017)
Linear interpolation is used for missing data, for example during blinks, here
the ﬁlter will linearly interpolate the missing values such that the data becomes
continuous (Zugal et al., 2017).
Butterworth ﬁlter is applied in order to clean out artifacts e.g. white noise
from the data and thereby causing that the data is smoothed (Zugal et al.,
2017).
The steps of cleaning the pupil data is as follows: creating and deﬁning a study,
setting up processing steps(choosing ﬁlters), creating the subjects, importing
the data ﬁles, running the processing step on the data ﬁles uploaded and as the
last step exporting the ﬁles containing the cleaned pupil dilation data.
For setting up the ﬁlters certain parameters were required deﬁned, these can be
seen in ﬁgure 10.
0.3.4.3
Pupil size calculation
Comparing direct pupil size between participants would not make sense since
there are individually diﬀerences in the pupil sizes (Majaranta, n.d., p.
143),
==PAGE:33==
0.3 Methods
23
Figure 10: Showing ﬁlter parameters used in CEP-web for ﬁltering pupil dila-
tion data
therefore a transformation of the data is necessary. In order to normalize the
data a baseline will be established, based on the process model tutorial all
participants completes in the beginning of the experiment. Then the individual
pupil size mean for each question answering period is subtracted from the mean
tutorial baseline creating the pupil size diﬀerence. This diﬀerence should create
a more comparable data set than using the pupil size directly.
==PAGE:34==
24
CONTENTS
0.4
Analysis and Results
In this sections of the thesis, data collected throughout the experiment will be
analyzed and interpreted. First of all the participants in this experiment will be
described and analyzed. The less diﬀerences between the two groups the better.
Hereafter an investigation of the data will be issued to see if there are any invalid
participants or extreme outliers. When all of that is done, a descriptive analysis
will show trends in the data. Finally statistical tests of the hypothesis will be
made.
0.4.1
Participants
In this experiment two participants had to be left out of the results.
The
reasoning behind both of them were that the Tobii eye tracker(Tobii-Technology,
n.d.-a) were not able to calibrate the two participants properly and therefore
their data was ﬂawed. It was then decided to leave them out of the experiment
in order to obtain as valid and reliable data as possible.
The majority of the participants are students at the technical university of Den-
mark, participating in the course 02265 Advanced Topics in Software Engineer-
ing. Therefore expected to have adequate experience in business process models.
The rest are previous students or colleagues of our supervisor Barbara Weber
or have had related courses on other universities. The age of the participants
ranges from 21 to 42, with an average of 26.7.
In order to ensure even split experience, three foreknowledge questions are as-
sessed from the questionnaire. The participants had to answer before engaging
in the experiment and they answered with a rating of how well the question ﬁt
them. The questions are:
• Overall, I am very familiar with BPMN.
• I feel conﬁdent in understanding process models created with the BPMN.
• I feel competent in using the BPMN for process modelling.
The ratings was converted to numbers, where the lowest rating was matched to
1 and the highest was matched to 7. Then the three outputs were averaged to
create a single score of how well their foreknowledge was.
==PAGE:35==
0.4 Analysis and Results
25
Variance
Min
Max
Group
Mean
N
Std. Deviation
1.17
2.67
7.00
A
6.10
7
0.73
B
5.39
6
1.28
Table 3: Shows the results after averaging the three foreknowledge questions
together from the questionnaire.
Table 3 shows the results of the foreknowledge questions and the two groups
seem to lie between Somewhat agree and Agree. This shows that they all have a
somewhat general knowledge about BPMN. To check for internal validity Cron-
bach’s Aplha was used and it resulted in a score of 0.77. This is an acceptable
score as it falls within the 0.65 to 0.8 guidelines proposed by Goforth (2015)
from University of Virginia. To see if the two groups are signiﬁcantly diﬀerent
a Shapiro-Wilk test is made to check for normal distribution. The test resulted
in one of the groups being estimated as a normal distribution and the other one
was not, therefore a non-parametric test will be utilized. The Mann-Whitney U
test shows a p-value of 0.153 and therefore shows no statistical signiﬁcant dif-
ference between the two groups. With this result there should not be an uneven
inﬂuence from either group and the analysis can continue.
0.4.2
Initial analysis attempt
Initially an analysis of the data was made, it did however not not yield signiﬁcant
results, this can be seen in appendix A. This appendix includes all of the old
statistics and tests. While this could potentially be attributed various aspects,
an investigation of why the results were not signiﬁcant was started. The ﬁrst
step was to explore the data further by recreating the measures that Sonderegger
(2015) investigated, in order to see if similar results were obtained.
Appendix B shows the measures duration and accuracy, which refers to the time
it took the participants to ﬁnish a task and how well they did. This resulted in
the data showing a tendency within the independent variable of question type,
meaning that there should be some tendencies in the data.
If considering the steps the participants performs when answering a question,
it should be noticed that for all questions the participant is reading a question.
As this task is the exactly same for all questions it was decided to cut the data
away where the participant was not ﬁxating on the area of the model. The data
for reading the question was therefore removed. Perhaps this data is dragging
both data set closer to each other therefore, only data where the participant is
looking at the process models are kept and analyzed. The area of the model
==PAGE:36==
26
CONTENTS
can be referred to as a rectangle of the same size as the model. Nearly 1 cm
was added on each of the sides, to adjust for the eye tracker potentially having
an oﬀset. Extracting the data for only that area of the model was done in Tobii
studio using area of interest (AOI).
When transitioning to utilize AOI in Tobii, which was needed to detect whether
the participant is looking at the model or not, the software prevented the col-
lection of pupil dilation data. It was not possible to ﬁgure out the reason why.
In the new data results, the pupil dilation measure have been removed.
0.4.3
Preparation of Data
Previously the participants foreknowledge have been tested and deemed consis-
tent. Therefore it is possible to look at the data that was collected by the Tobii
eye tracker(Tobii-Technology, n.d.-a) and see if the results are valid. Through-
out the dataset of 13 participants, each have undergone 24 tasks resulting in 312
total tasks ﬁnished. 168 tasks for group A with 7 participants and 144 tasks for
group B with 6 participants.
To get a general overview of the data, box plots were used to see how the data
is shaped and to search for extreme cases of outliers. Box plots are very good
at visualizing the spread of data, and makes it easy to compare the two groups
to each other to search for any clear diﬀerences between them. The following
ﬁgures show box plots of each model with the dependent variables ﬁxation count,
total ﬁxation duration and saccade velocity.
When investigating ﬁgure 11 it is clear that there are tendencies of whiskers on
almost every dependent variable. Furthermore there are outliers some strong
outliers.
Figure 12 shows a dataset with a few outliers but nothing that would throw the
data in a certain direction. Figure 13 does have some cases of long whiskers,
they are however not extreme enough to justify any intervention. Figure 14
shows a few outliers, but they are few per individual model.
The general trend when analyzing the box plots is that the two groups are
generally very close in data when overlooking the models. There are diﬀerences
between the two groups but they are not as consistent throughout the models.
This further emphasizes the importance of a more detailed analysis as opposed
to a visual inspection. A closer inspection of the outliers showed that they were
all from diﬀerent participants, therefore they are not considered for removal.
==PAGE:37==
0.4 Analysis and Results
27
(a) Fixation count
(b) Total ﬁxation duration
(c) Saccade velocity
Figure 11: Box plots of the ﬁxation count, total ﬁxation duration and saccade
velocity for model 1. For group A a low change of direction was
implemented and in group B a high change of direction.
==PAGE:38==
28
CONTENTS
(a) Fixation count
(b) Total ﬁxation duration
(c) Saccade velocity
Figure 12: Box plots of the ﬁxation count, total ﬁxation duration and sac-
cade velocity for model 2. For group A a low block visibility was
implemented and in group B a high block visibility.
==PAGE:39==
0.4 Analysis and Results
29
(a) Fixation count
(b) Total ﬁxation duration
(c) Saccade velocity
Figure 13: Box plots of the ﬁxation count, total ﬁxation duration and saccade
velocity for model 3. For group A a high change of direction was
implemented and in group B a low change of direction.
==PAGE:40==
30
CONTENTS
(a) Fixation count
(b) Total ﬁxation duration
(c) Saccade velocity
Figure 14: Box plots of the ﬁxation count, total ﬁxation duration and sac-
cade velocity for model 4. For group A a high block visibility was
implemented and in group B a low block visibility.
==PAGE:41==
0.4 Analysis and Results
31
0.4.4
Descriptive Analysis
This section will look at the data gathered through the experiment and convert
it into statistical data for a more in depth analysis of the output.
The data will be analyzed between the three independent variables; change of
direction, block visibility and question type with two levels each. Model 1 and
Model 3 is regarding change of direction, Model 2 and Model 4 is regarding
block visibility. The split can be seen on ﬁgure 7 where the blue tinted ﬁelds
are deemed more diﬃcult than their grey tinted counterparts. High change of
direction is assumed be more diﬃcult than low change of direction, low block
visibility is assumed be more diﬃcult than high block visibility.
Hereafter follows an analysis of the two question types, local and global. All
local questions will be binned and all global questions will be binned, creating
an overview on the eﬀect of the question type.
Finally comes an analysis of the independent variables, independent of the ques-
tion type. Meaning that the independent variable, change of direction, will be
further divided into:
• High change of direction local
• High change of direction global
• low change of direction local
• low change of direction global
• High block visibility local
• High block visibility global
• Low block visibility local
• Low block visibility global
0.4.4.1
Fixation Count
The ﬁrst dependent variable that is analyzed is the ﬁxation count which is the
number of times the eye has ﬁxated on the model area in each task. Table 4
shows a diﬀerence in the independent variable for mean. Therefore it is possible
to derive:
==PAGE:42==
32
CONTENTS
Model type
Models
N
Mean
Std. Error
of Mean
Std.
Deviation
Min
Max
High change
of direction
Model 1 B
Model 3 A
78
71.74
4.21
37.01
17
182
Low change
of direction
Model 1 A
Model 3 B
78
61.24
3.76
33.04
11
190
Low block
visibility
Model 2 A
Model 4 B
78
65.70
4.02
35.30
15
241
High block
visibility
Model 2 B
Model 4 A
78
53.52
4.10
36.00
10
214
Table 4: Shows descriptive statistics regarding the dependent variable ﬁxation
count between the independent variables, being change of direction
in model 1 and 3 and block visibility in model 2 and 4.
• A model with high change of direction causes a higher mean ﬁxation count
than a model with low change of direction.
• A model with low block visibility causes a higher mean ﬁxation count than
a model with high block visibility.
Question
type
N
Mean
Std. Error
of Mean
Std.
Deviation
Min
Max
Global
156
77.97
3.04
37.85
10
241
Local
156
48.13
2.14
26.69
11
190
Table 5: Descriptive statistics of ﬁxation count for the two question types
Table 5 show the descriptive statistics for the question type regarding ﬁxation
count. From table 5 it is possible to derive:
• The ﬁxation count mean is higher on global questions than for local ques-
tions.
Table 6 shows descriptive statistics for both layout changes and question types.
Based on the statistics the following can be derived:
• Global questions yields more ﬁxations than local questions regardless of the
model alteration.
• A high change of direction will yield more ﬁxations than a low change of
direction within a question type.
==PAGE:43==
0.4 Analysis and Results
33
Model type
Question
type
N
Mean
Std. Error
of Mean
Std.
Deviation
Min
Max
High change
of direction
Global
39
88.56
5.67
34.97
34
182
Local
39
54.92
5.00
30.84
17
169
Low change
of direction
Global
39
72.82
4.78
29.50
26
139
Local
39
49.66
5.24
32.33
11
190
Low block
visibility
Global
39
80.64
6.52
40.25
22
241
Local
39
50.76
3.35
20.65
15
96
High block
visibility
Global
39
69.87
6.89
42.49
10
214
Local
39
37.17
2.57
15.86
13
91
Table 6: Descriptive statistics for ﬁxation count for both layout changes
(change of direction and block visibility
and question types (global and local).
• A low block visibility will yield more ﬁxations than a high block visibility
within a question type.
0.4.4.2
Total Fixation duration
The second dependent variable that is analyzed is the total ﬁxation duration,
which is the total amount of time the eye has ﬁxated on the model area in each
task.
Model type
Models
N
Mean
Std. Error
of Mean
Std.
Deviation
Min
Max
High change
of direction
Model 1 B
Model 3 A
78
17074
1063
9330
4339
41664
Low change
of direction
Model 1 A
Model 3 B
78
13910
921
8086
2285
49144
Low block
visibility
Model 2 A
Model 4 B
78
16776
1142
10028
4126
68621
High block
visibility
Model 2 B
Model 4 A
78
13210
1134
9957
2494
53782
Table 7: Shows descriptive statistics regarding the dependent variable total ﬁx-
ation duration (ms) between the independent variables, being change
of direction in model 1 and 3 and block visibility in model 2 and 4.
Table 7 shows a diﬀerence in the independent variable mean. Therefore it is
possible to derive:
==PAGE:44==
34
CONTENTS
• Models with a high change of direction has a higher mean of total ﬁxation
duration than models with low change of direction.
• Models with a low block visibility has a higher mean of total ﬁxation dura-
tion than models with high block visibility.
Question
type
N
Mean
Std. Error
of Mean
Std.
Deviation
Min
Max
Global
156
18735
842
10485
2494
68621
Local
156
11750
553
6895
2285
49144
Table 8: Descriptive statistics of total ﬁxation duration (ms) for the two ques-
tion types
Table 8 show the descriptive statistics for the question type regarding total
ﬁxation duration. From table 8 it is possible to derive:
• The mean of total total ﬁxation duration is higher for global questions than
for local questions.
Model type
Question
type
N
Mean
Std. Error
of Mean
Std.
Deviation
Min
Max
High change
of direction
Global
39
20820
1527
9416
7271
41664
Local
39
13328
1228
7574
4339
38536
Low change
of direction
Global
39
16378
1170
7214
6360
34693
Local
39
11443
1323
8158
2285
49144
Low block
visibility
Global
39
20415
1883
11609
5562
68621
Local
39
13136
1024
6314
4126
33065
High block
visibility
Global
39
17327
1983
12229
2494
53782
Local
39
9093
624
3849
3699
17012
Table 9: Descriptive statistics for total ﬁxation duration (ms) for both layout
changes (change of direction and block visibility
and question types (global and local).
Table 9 shows descriptive statistics for both layout changes and question types.
Based on the statistics the following can be derived:
• Models with high change of direction have a higher mean of total ﬁxation
duration than models with low change of direction within their respective
question type.
==PAGE:45==
0.4 Analysis and Results
35
• Models with low block visibility have a higher mean of total ﬁxation dura-
tion than models with high block visibility within their respective question
type.
• Global questions have a higher mean of total ﬁxation duration than local
questions, for all layout properties.
0.4.4.3
Saccade Velocity
The third dependent variable that is analyzed is the saccade velocity which is
the average speed the eye has during a saccade.
Model type
Models
N
Mean
Std. Error
of Mean
Std. Deviation
Min
Max
High change
of direction
Model 1 B
Model 3 A
78
4.46
0.13
1.19
1.84
7.97
Low change
of direction
Model 1 A
Model 3 B
78
4.73
0.15
1.32
1.70
9.05
Low block
visibility
Model 2 A
Model 4 B
78
3.35
0.09
0.86
1.69
5.44
High block
visibility
Model 2 B
Model 4 A
78
3.72
0.12
1.07
1.58
7.24
Table 10: Shows descriptive statistics regarding the dependent variable sac-
cade velocity between the independent variables, being change of
direction in model 1 and 3 and block visibility in model 2 and 4.
Table 10 shows a diﬀerence between both of the independent variables for mean.
Therefore it is possible to derive:
• Models with a high change of direction has a lower mean saccade velocity
than models with low change of direction.
• Models with low block visibility has a lower mean saccade velocity than
models with high block visibility.
Table 11 show the descriptive statistics for the question type regarding saccade
velocity. From table 11 it is possible to derive:
• The saccade velocity mean is higher for global questions than for local
questions.
==PAGE:46==
36
CONTENTS
Question
type
N
Mean
Std. Error
of Mean
Std. Deviation
Min
Max
Saccade velocity
global
156
4.28
0.10
1.25
2.05
9.05
Saccade velocity
local
156
3.86
0.09
1.22
1.58
7.31
Table 11: Descriptive statistics of saccade velocity for the two question types
Model type
Question type
N
Mean
Std. Error
of Mean
Std.
Deviation
Min
Max
High change
of direction
Global
39
4.77
0.16
1.04
3.16
7.97
Local
39
4.16
0.20
1.26
1.84
6.87
Low change
of direction
Global
39
4.97
0.22
1.36
2.54
9.05
Local
39
4.49
0.20
1.23
1.70
7.21
Low block
visibility
Global
39
3.54
0.13
0.80
2.06
5.44
Local
39
3.16
0.14
0.88
1.69
5.41
High block
visibility
Global
39
3.83
0.17
1.09
2.05
7.24
Local
39
3.61
0.16
1.02
1.58
5.82
Table 12: Descriptive statistics for saccade velocity for both layout changes
(change of direction and block visibility
and question types (global and local).
Table 12 shows descriptive statistics for both layout changes and question types.
Based on the statistics the following can be derived:
• Models with high change of direction have a lower mean saccade velocity
than models with low change of direction within their respective question
type.
• Models with low block visibility have a lower mean saccade velocity than
models with high block visibility within their respective question type.
• Global questions have a higher mean saccade velocity than local questions
for all layout properties.
0.4.5
Testing the Hypotheses
In order to reject or accept the hypothesis presented earlier a statistical test has
to be made on the data. There are two types of statistical tests, parametric
==PAGE:47==
0.4 Analysis and Results
37
and non-parametric. The tests analyze two sets of data and identiﬁes whether
there is a statistical signiﬁcant diﬀerence between the two. A parametric test
is preferred as it is often more reliable than a non-parametric test (Lazar et
al., n.d.). There are two assumptions that should be fulﬁlled when performing
a parametric test; the data should be normal distributed, and it should have
homogeneity of variance (Lazar et al., n.d.). If both of these assumptions are
not fulﬁlled a non-parametric test should be used instead.
To test for normal distribution a Shapiro-Wilk test is used on all sets of data
used. If the Shapiro-Wilk test reports a p-value of less than 0.05 the data is not
normal distributed. Table 13 and table 14 shows the results of Shapiro-Wilk
tests run on the data set. To test for homogeneity of variance a Levene test
is used on the data sets which both had a normal distribution. Table 15 and
table 16 shows the results of the Levene tests run on the data that had a normal
distribution.
As there is no clear trend, the kind of statistical test which will be used to either
accept or reject the hypothesis will depend on the data. If both samples fulﬁlls
the assumptions, a paired-samples t test will be utilized to test for signiﬁcant
diﬀerence. If one or both samples are not fulﬁlling the assumptions, a Wilcoxon
signed-rank test will be used.
All of the independent variables have been tested and the results will be shown
in the following subsections.
0.4.5.1
Change of Direction
The independent variable change of direction was tested with either a paired t
test or a Wilcoxon test to test for signiﬁcant diﬀerence.
Table 17 shows the results with accompanying test method. For global questions
the only measures that is not signiﬁcant is saccade velocity, with a p-value of
0.403 (>0.05).
For local questions there are none of the measures that are
signiﬁcant.
0.4.5.2
Block Visibility
The independent variable block visibility was tested with either a paired t test
or a Wilcoxon test to test for signiﬁcant diﬀerence. Table 17 shows the results
with accompanying test method.
For global questions none of the measures
==PAGE:48==
38
CONTENTS
Type
Measurement
Shapiro-Wilk
Normal
distribution
Statistic
N
Sig.
High change
of direction
Global
Fixation count
0.959
39
0.166
Yes
Total ﬁxation
duration
0.939
39
0.034
No
Saccade velocity
0.951
39
0.092
Yes
Local
Fixation count
0.830
39
0.000
No
Total ﬁxation
duration
0.855
39
0.000
No
Saccade velocity
0.968
39
0.316
Yes
Low change
of direction
Global
Fixation count
0.954
39
0.108
Yes
Total ﬁxation
duration
0.929
39
0.016
No
Saccade velocity
0.953
39
0.103
Yes
Local
Fixation count
0.808
39
0.000
No
Total ﬁxation
duration
0.769
39
0.000
No
Saccade velocity
0.988
39
0.936
Yes
Table 13: Shapiro-Wilk test for the normal distribution in the independent
variable change of direction. Statistic is the test statistic, N is the
amount of tasks analyzed and pval is the p value of the test.
have a p-value below the alpha value of 0.05, therefore none of the results are
signiﬁcant.
For local questions the ﬁxation count and total ﬁxation duration is signiﬁcant
with a p-value of 0.002 and 0.005 (<0.05). The saccade velocity for local ques-
tions is not signiﬁcant, with the p-value of 0.058 (>0.05).
0.4.5.3
Question Type
The independent variable question type was tested with either a paired t test
or a Wilcoxon test to test for signiﬁcant diﬀerence.
Table 18 shows the results with accompanying test method. There is a clear
tendency of the ﬁxation count and total ﬁxation duration being signiﬁcantly
diﬀerent for local and global questions throughout all of the tests. The layout
property change of direction and low block visibility shows for all variables that
global and local questions are signiﬁcant diﬀerent from each other.
==PAGE:49==
0.4 Analysis and Results
39
Type
Measurement
Shapiro-Wilk
Normal
distribution
Statistic
N
Sig.
Low block
visibility
Global
Fixation count
0.892
39
0.001
No
Total ﬁxation
duration
0.860
39
0.000
No
Saccade velocity
0.981
39
0.752
Yes
Local
Fixation count
0.976
39
0.573
Ye
Total ﬁxation
duration
0.902
39
0.002
No
Saccade velocity
0.967
39
0.293
Yes
High block
visibility
Global
Fixation count
0.886
39
0.001
No
Total ﬁxation
duration
0.866
39
0.000
No
Saccade velocity
0.947
39
0.067
Yes
Local
Fixation count
0.926
39
0.014
No
Total ﬁxation
duration
0.936
39
0.028
No
Saccade velocity
0.988
39
0.953
Yes
Table 14: Shapiro-Wilk test for the normal distribution in the independent
variable block visibility.
Statistic is the test statistic, N is the
amount of tasks analyzed and pval is the p value of the test.
Type
Measurement
Levene test
Homogeneity
Statistic
N
Sig.
Change of Direction
High Global - Low Global
Fixation count
1.375
39
0.245
Yes
Saccade velocity
0.466
39
0.497
Yes
Change of Direction
High Local -Low Local
Saccade velocity
0.108
39
0.743
Yes
Block Visibility
Low Global - High Global
Saccade velocity
4.219
39
0.043
No
Block Visibility
Low Local - High Local
Saccade velocity
0.952
39
0.332
Yes
Table 15: Levene test to test for homogeneity on data which were tested nor-
mal distributed (layout property)
For High block visibility only saccade velocity has a p-value of 0.348 (<0.05),
meaning the diﬀerence here is not signiﬁcant.
==PAGE:50==
40
CONTENTS
Type
Measurement
Levene test
Homogeneity
Statistic
N
Sig.
Change of Direction
High Global - Low Global
Saccade velocity
1.638
39
0.205
Yes
Change of Direction
High Local -Low Local
Saccade velocity
0.003
39
0.956
Yes
Block Visibility
Low Global - High Global
Saccade velocity
0.046
39
0.832
Yes
Block Visibility
Low Local - High Local
Saccade velocity
0.478
39
0.492
Yes
Table 16: Levene test to test for homogeneity on data which were tested nor-
mal distributed (Question type)
Type
Measurement
Statistical test
Signiﬁcantly
diﬀerence
Test
P-value
Change of Direction
High Global - Low Global
Fixation count
Paired t
0.047
Yes
Total ﬁxation
duration
Wilcoxon
0.040
Yes
Saccade velocity
Paired t
0.403
No
Change of Direction
High Local - Low Local
Fixation count
Wilcoxon
0.219
No
Total ﬁxation
duration
Wilcoxon
0.089
No
Saccade velocity
Paired t
0.182
No
Block Visibility
Low Global - High Global
Fixation count
Wilcoxon
0.077
No
Total ﬁxation
duration
Wilcoxon
0.091
No
Saccade velocity
Wilcoxon
0.185
No
Block Visibility
Low Local - High Local
Fixation count
Wilcoxon
0.002
Yes
Total ﬁxation
duration
Wilcoxon
0.005
Yes
Saccade velocity
Paired t
0.058
No
Table 17: Table showing the results of statistical tests with the independent
variable being model layout: change of direction. If the data are
both normal distributed a paired t test is used, otherwise a Wilcoxon
test is used.
==PAGE:51==
0.4 Analysis and Results
41
Type
Measurement
Statistical test
Signiﬁcantly
diﬀerence
Test
P-value
Change of Direction
High Global - High Local
Fixation count
Wilcoxon
0.000
Yes
Total ﬁxation
duration
Wilcoxon
0.001
Yes
Saccade velocity
Paired t
0.015
Yes
Change of Direction
Low Global - Low Local
Fixation count
Wilcoxon
0.000
Yes
Total ﬁxation
duration
Wilcoxon
0.000
Yes
Saccade velocity
Paired t
0.036
Yes
Block Visibility
Low Global - Low Local
Fixation count
Wilcoxon
0.000
Yes
Total ﬁxation
duration
Wilcoxon
0.000
Yes
Saccade velocity
Paired t
0.022
Yes
Block Visibility
High Global - High Local
Fixation count
Wilcoxon
0.000
Yes
Total ﬁxation
duration
Wilcoxon
0.000
Yes
Saccade velocity
Paired t
0.348
No
Table 18: Table showing the results of statistical tests with the independent
variable being question type. If the data are both normal distributed
a paired t test is used, otherwise a Wilcoxon test is used.
==PAGE:52==
42
CONTENTS
0.5
Discussion
This section will stage a discussion for thesis.
0.5.1
Interpretation of Results
This section will explain what the results of the statistical test indicate.
0.5.1.1
Hypothesis H1
For global questions ﬁxation count and total ﬁxation duration will be higher for
high change of direction than for low change of direction. In terms of ﬁxation
count and total ﬁxation duration, models with high change of direction global
questions result in models that are more diﬃcult to understand. For local ques-
tions no eﬀect was observed, in terms of ﬁxation count, total ﬁxation duration
and saccade velocity.
0.5.1.2
Hypothesis H2
For the layout property block visibility local questions, ﬁxation count and to-
tal ﬁxation duration will be higher for low block visibility than for high block
visibility. Meaning that models with low block visibility result in models that
are more diﬃcult to understand, in terms of ﬁxation count and total ﬁxation
duration. For global questions no eﬀect was observed, in terms of ﬁxation count,
total ﬁxation duration and saccade velocity.
0.5.1.3
Hypothesis H3
For the question type, change of direction ﬁxation count, total ﬁxation duration
and saccade velocity will be higher for global questions than for local. Meaning
that for change of direction global questions will result in models that are more
diﬃcult to understand, in terms of ﬁxation count, total ﬁxation duration and
saccade velocity.
For questions type, low block visibility ﬁxation count, total ﬁxation duration
and saccade velocity will be higher for global questions than for local. Meaning
==PAGE:53==
0.5 Discussion
43
that for low block visibility global questions will result in models that are more
diﬃcult to understand, in terms of ﬁxation count, total ﬁxation duration and
saccade velocity.
For questions type, high block visibility ﬁxation count and total ﬁxation duration
will be higher for global questions than for local. For high block visibility global
questions will result in models that are more diﬃcult to understand, in terms
of ﬁxation count and total ﬁxation duration.
Where ﬁxation count, total ﬁxation duration and saccade velocity show signiﬁ-
cant diﬀerences, they all follow theory. This means that ﬁxation count, ﬁxation
duration and saccade velocity increases when mental load gets higher.
It is only the saccade velocity for layout properties that does not follow the
theory. However the saccade velocity is not signiﬁcantly diﬀerent for any of
the layout properties, meaning that the diﬀerences for saccade velocity is quite
small and therefore not taken into account.
0.5.1.4
Participants
There is risk of having as few participants as the experiment did. Where Son-
deregger (2015) had over 30 participants per group, this one had 15 in total with
two of them removed, resulting in a total of 13. Though there are multiple mea-
sures on a single participant, there is no denying that more participants could
have made more impact on the results. When looking for participants, it was
crucial that they all had a certain threshold of experience with process models.
Therefore in the beginning two researchers was acquired, afterwards students
from a class of 02265 - Advanced Topics in Software Engineering was acquired
and last resort was acquiring peers with similar experience from elsewhere. This
wide spread is thought to have aﬀected the results.
Even though it was troublesome to ﬁnd participants it was not desirable to utilize
monetary or other rewards, as this could potentially attract participants with no
interest in contributing. If participants has no interest in contributing it might
aﬀect the results in a particular way. In the experiment multiple participants
were recruited from a single course which is very beneﬁcial in terms of experience
and foreknowledge, because this allows all of the participants to be in an as even
playing ﬁeld as possible. An improvement to this method could be to either
recruit participants from multiple similar courses or follow a course for multiple
semesters.
==PAGE:54==
44
CONTENTS
0.5.1.5
Observations - Experience in BPMN
In order to check up on whether there was a diﬀerence in the way participants
of varying experience levels in BMPN solves questions, a scan-path precision
measure was made (the amount of ﬁxations on relevant regions of the process
model, divided by the total amount of ﬁxations (Petrusel et al., 2017)). This
required that all elements, relevant for solving the question, was covered with
an area of interest (AOI) in the Tobii software. This AOI allows the detection
of whether a participant looks inside a certain area. The scan-path precision
measure yielded varying results that made no sense and thus heat-maps were
drawn from the Tobii software. When looking at the heat-maps it is possible
to derive that the eye tracker sometimes has an oﬀset that is higher than the
4.4 mm which was stated. This prevented a scan-path precision measure, as the
areas which was marked as being the relevant regions for solving the question,
would span much further from the original elements and cover other elements
that should not be. The scan-path precision measure could have given quali-
tative data on whether more experienced participants would focus more on the
important parts, as opposed to the less experienced participants.
The Tobii software allows the user to extract heat-maps, these heat-maps are
representations of users ﬁxations in an image. Examples of heat-maps can be
seen on ﬁgure 15 and 16, the dots represent ﬁxations and the color code indi-
cates the intensity of the ﬁxations (low intensity green to high intensity red).
The intensity is increased when either ﬁxations are longer or there are multiple
ﬁxations (Tobii-Technology, 2016).
When looking at sample heat-maps on ﬁgure 15 and 16, it shows that the ﬁxa-
tions on the model elements for the experienced participant seems more focused
than for the inexperienced. The ﬁxations for scanning the model also seems far
less spread than for the less experienced participant. The reason for this could
be that the experienced participant is more trained in spotting chunks of the
process model that are relevant for solving the questions. The less experienced
participant might not be as trained in spotting these chunks and therefore use
a higher number of ﬁxations in order to ﬁgure out what is needed to solve the
questions.
==PAGE:55==
0.5 Discussion
45
Figure 15: Showing a heat map for two participants for question 2; the left
heat-map is from an experienced participant, the right heat-map is
from an less experienced participant
Figure 16: Showing a heat map for two participants question 10; the left heat-
map is from an experienced participant, the right heat-map is from
an less experienced participant
==PAGE:56==
46
CONTENTS
0.6
Conclusion
This thesis investigated the impact of layout properties (change of direction and
block visibility) and question types (global and local), based on the eye tracking
measures: ﬁxation count, total ﬁxation duration and saccade velocity.
It was found that H1 was supported for global questions for ﬁxation count and
total ﬁxation duration, but not saccade velocity. For local questions H1 was not
supported for any dependent variable. Therefore, it can be concluded that H1
was partly supported for global questions, but not for local.
H2 was not supported for global questions for any dependent variable. H2 was
partially supported for local questions, i.e., for ﬁxation count and total ﬁxation
duration, but not for saccade velocity. Therefore H2 was partly supported for
local questions, but not for global.
It was found that H3 was fully supported for change of direction. Moreover,
H3 was fully supported for all dependent measures for low block visibility. H3
was partially supported for high block visibility, i.e., for ﬁxation count and total
ﬁxation duration, but not saccade velocity.
It has not been possible to conclude on the eﬀect of pupil dilation, as the pupil
data could not be properly extracted from Tobii studio when using AOI.
0.6.1
Future work
Here future work is discussed as to what could be interesting to either incorpo-
rate or work on.
0.6.1.1
Removing the Data from Scanning task
In section 0.4.2 it was explained that only data from when the person was
ﬁxation on the model area was used in the results, since the task of reading the
question was the same in all conditions. It could however be argued that the task
of searching through the model for the key elements of the question, is a task
that is similar across all the conditions. Therefore for the analysis of the data
one could have limited the data by excluding data collected during the searching
task and only include data from the point in time where all important elements
have been visited. Though a concern to take into account (for this experiment)
==PAGE:57==
0.6 Conclusion
47
is that it would possibly limit the duration for answering a question to a very
short period. The measure duration is shown in appendix B, here it is possible
to see that there is a considerable amount of instances where a participants has
spent less than 10 seconds on answering. Some of the low ones are around 6
seconds, which is including reading the question.
0.6.1.2
Pupil dilation
Since studies have shown that pupil response is related to mental load (Ma-
jaranta, n.d.), this is a measure that if possible could be included when investi-
gating eye tracking measures.
0.6.1.3
Heart rate measurement
It could be interesting to delve into other technologies able to record human
responses. One such technology could be heart rate variability (HRV) which
is the variation in time interval between heartbeats. There is in particular a
measure named pNNxx, (xx = pNN05, pNN10, pNN20, pNN25, pNN30, pNN40)
which should be negatively correlated with stress (Trimmel, 2017).
==PAGE:58==
==PAGE:59==
Appendix A
The ﬁrst results
A.0.1
Descriptive Analysis
This section will look at the data gathered through the experiment and convert
it into statistical data for a more in depth analysis of the output. The non-
nominal data will be used here.
A.0.1.1
Fixation Count
The ﬁrst response variable that is analyzed is the ﬁxation count which is the
amount of time the eye has ﬁxated on the screen in each task, see table A.1,
A.2 and A.3.
A.0.1.2
Total ﬁxation Duration
The third response variable that is analyzed is the ﬁxation duration average
which is the amount of time the eye has ﬁxated on the screen in each task on
average, see table A.4, A.5 and A.6.
==PAGE:60==
50
The ﬁrst results
Model type
Models
N
Mean
Std. Error
of Mean
Std.
Deviation
Min
Max
High change
of direction
Model 1 B
Model 3 A
78
101.38
5.74
50.37
26
241
Low change
of direction
Model 1 A
Model 3 B
78
89.97
5.30
46.55
20
222
Low block
visibility
Model 2 A
Model 4 B
78
86.30
4.53
39.81
24
271
High block
visibility
Model 2 B
Model 4 A
78
75.05
5.04
44.27
21
244
Table A.1: Shows descriptive statistics regarding the response variable ﬁxation
count between the independent variables, being change of direction
in model 1 and 3 and block visibility in model 2 and 4.
Question
type
N
Mean
Std. Error
of Mean
Std.
Deviation
Min
Max
Global
156
110.89
5.81
47.46
22
271
Local
156
65.46
2.56
32.88
20
222
Table A.2: Descriptive statistics of ﬁxation count for the two question types
Model type
Question
type
N
Mean
Std. Error
of Mean
Std.
Deviation
Min
Max
High change
of direction
Global
39
131.53
7.26
44.75
58
241
Local
39
71.23
5.74
35.39
26
209
Low change
of direction
Global
39
114.94
6.71
41.40
39
203
Local
39
65.00
6.00
37.04
20
222
Low block
visibility
Global
39
103.61
7.03
43.36
38
271
Local
39
69.00
4.26
26.28
24
123
High block
visibility
Global
39
93.48
8.29
51.13
22
244
Local
39
56.61
4.06
25.03
21
123
Table A.3: Descriptive statistics for ﬁxation count for both layout changes
(change of direction and block visibility
and question types (global and local).
A.0.1.3
Saccade Velocity
The fourth response variable that is analyzed is the ﬁxation saccade velocity
which is the average speed the eye has during a saccade, see table A.7, A.8 and
A.9.
==PAGE:61==
51
Model type
Models
N
Mean
Std. Error
of Mean
Std.
Deviation
Min
Max
High change
of direction
Model 1 B
Model 3 A
78
23005
1383
12144
6007
52598
Low change
of direction
Model 1 A
Model 3 B
78
19709
1229
10789
4798
57103
Low block
visibility
Model 2 A
Model 4 B
78
20646
1227
10768
4768
74152
High block
visibility
Model 2 B
Model 4 A
78
17629
1405
12334
4870
74308
Table A.4: Shows descriptive statistics regarding the response variable total
ﬁxation duration between the independent variables, being change
of direction in model 1 and 3 and block visibility in model 2 and
4.
Question
type
N
Mean
Std. Error
of Mean
Std.
Deviation
Min
Max
Global
156
25375
1014
12628
4870
74308
Local
156
15119
629
7834
4768
57103
Table A.5: Descriptive statistics of total ﬁxation duration for the two question
types
Model type
Question
type
N
Mean
Std. Error
of Mean
Std.
Deviation
Min
Max
High change
of direction
Global
39
29654
1910
11778
11936
52598
Local
39
16356
1335
8235
6007
45061
Low change
of direction
Global
39
24917
1563
9638
9255
43430
Local
39
14501
1501
9255
4798
57103
Low block
visibility
Global
39
24697
1989
12266
8767
74152
Local
39
16594
1131
6972
4768
35800
High block
visibility
Global
39
22233
2444
15066
4870
74308
Local
39
13026
958
5908
5191
29798
Table A.6: Descriptive statistics for total ﬁxation duration for both layout
changes (change of direction and block visibility
and question types (global and local).
==PAGE:62==
52
The ﬁrst results
Model type
Models
N
Mean
Std. Deviation
Min
Max
High change
of direction
Model 1 B
Model 3 A
78
4.62
1.12
2.56
7.89
Low change
of direction
Model 1 A
Model 3 B
78
4.86
1.13
2.98
7.47
Low block
visibility
Model 2 A
Model 4 B
78
3.79
0.84
2.28
5.97
High block
visibility
Model 2 B
Model 4 A
78
4.14
1.08
2.26
7.85
Table A.7: Shows descriptive statistics regarding the response variable sac-
cade velocity between the independent variables, being change of
direction in model 1 and 3 and block visibility in model 2 and 4.
Question
type
N
Mean
Std. Deviation
Min
Max
Fixation duration
average global
156
4.46
1.12
2.48
7.89
Fixation duration
average local
156
4.24
1.12
2.26
7.52
Table A.8: Descriptive statistics of saccade velocity for the two question types
Model type
Question type
N
Mean
Std. Deviation
Min
Max
High change
of direction
Global
39
4.76
1.04
3.27
7.89
Local
39
4.49
1.17
2.56
7.52
Low change
of direction
Global
39
5.00
1.13
2.98
7.47
Local
39
4.72
1.11
3.06
7.09
Low block
visibility
Global
39
3.92
0.83
2.48
5.97
Local
39
3.66
0.82
2.28
5.33
High block
visibility
Global
39
4.18
1.13
2.51
7.85
Local
39
4.10
1.03
2.26
6.70
Table A.9: Descriptive statistics for saccade velocity for both layout changes
(change of direction and block visibility
and question types (global and local).
A.0.1.4
Pupil Dilation
The fourth response variable that is analyzed is the pupil dilation diﬀerence
which is the diﬀerence between the tutorial pupil dilation and the model pupil
dilation, see table A.10, A.11 and A.12.
==PAGE:63==
53
Model type
Models
N
Mean
Std. Deviation
Min
Max
High change
of direction
Model 1 B
Model 3 A
78
0.141
0.037
0.083
0.264
Low change
of direction
Model 1 A
Model 3 B
78
0.143
0.040
0.047
0.235
Low block
visibility
Model 2 A
Model 4 B
78
0.139
0.040
0.073
0.239
High block
visibility
Model 2 B
Model 4 A
78
0.145
0.047
0.032
0.268
Table A.10: Shows descriptive statistics regarding the response variable pupil
dilation diﬀerence between the independent variables, being
change of direction in model 1 and 3 and block visibility in model
2 and 4.
Question
type
N
Mean
Std. Deviation
Min
Max
Pupil dilation
diﬀerence global
156
0.144
0.040
0.032
0.258
Pupil dilation
diﬀerence local
156
0.140
0.042
0.047
0.268
Table A.11: Descriptive statistics of pupil dilation diﬀerence for the two ques-
tion types
Model type
Question type
N
Mean
Std. Deviation
Min
Max
High change
of direction
Global
78
0.142
0.034
0.092
0.218
Local
78
0.140
0.040
0.083
0.264
Low change
of direction
Global
78
0.151
0.039
0.087
0.235
Local
78
0.134
0.041
0.047
0.231
Low block
visibility
Global
78
0.144
0.042
0.079
0.235
Local
78
0.134
0.038
0.073
0.239
High block
visibility
Global
78
0.139
0.045
0.032
0.258
Local
78
0.151
0.049
0.076
0.268
Table A.12: Descriptive statistics for pupil dilation diﬀerence for both layout
changes (change of direction and block visibility
and question types (global and local).
A.0.2
Statistical Tests
==PAGE:64==
54
The ﬁrst results
Type
Measurement
Shapiro-Wilks
Normal
distribution
Statistic
N
Sig.
Change of Direction
High
Global
Fixation count
0.975
39
0.517
Yes
Total ﬁxation
duration
0.942
39
0.045
No
Saccade velocity
0.939
39
0.035
No
Pupil dilation
diﬀerence
0.950
39
0.080
Yes
Local
Fixation count
0.830
39
0.000
No
Total ﬁxation
duration
0.864
39
0.000
No
Saccade velocity
0.954
39
0.113
Yes
Pupil dilation
diﬀerence
0.934
39
0.025
No
Change of Direction
Low
Global
Fixation count
0.970
39
0.363
Yes
Total ﬁxation
duration
0.952
39
0.094
Yes
Saccade velocity
0.975
39
0.527
Yes
Pupil dilation
diﬀerence
0.956
39
0.132
Yes
Local
Fixation count
0.831
39
0.000
No
Total ﬁxation
duration
0.773
39
0.000
No
Saccade velocity
0.951
39
0.091
Yes
Pupil dilation
diﬀerence
0.987
39
0.935
Yes
Table A.13: Shapiro-Wilk test for the normal distribution in the independent
variable change of direction. Statistic is the test statistic, N is
the amount of tasks analyzed and pval is the p value of the test.
==PAGE:65==
55
Type
Measurement
Shapiro-Wilks
Normal
distribution
Statistic
N
Sig.
Block Visibility
Low
Global
Fixation count
0.906
39
0.003
No
Total ﬁxation
duration
0.874
39
0.000
No
Saccade velocity
0.974
39
0.504
Yes
Pupil dilation
diﬀerence
0.962
39
0.201
Yes
Local
Fixation count
0.972
39
0.438
Yes
Total ﬁxation
duration
0.943
39
0.049
No
Saccade velocity
0.958
39
0.158
Yes
Pupil dilation
diﬀerence
0.960
39
0.182
Yes
Block Visibility
High
Global
Fixation count
0.857
39
0.000
No
Total ﬁxation
duration
0.840
39
0.000
No
Saccade velocity
0.936
39
0.027
No
Pupil dilation
diﬀerence
0.987
39
0.922
Yes
Local
Fixation count
0.888
39
0.001
No
Total ﬁxation
duration
0.911
39
0.005
No
Saccade velocity
0.943
39
0.047
No
Pupil dilation
diﬀerence
0.929
39
0.017
No
Table A.14: Shapiro-Wilk test for the normal distribution in the independent
variable block visibility. Statistic is the test statistic, N is the
amount of tasks analyzed and pval is the p value of the test.
==PAGE:66==
56
The ﬁrst results
Type
Measurement
Levene test
Homogeneity
Test
P-value
Layout properties
Change of Direction
High Global - High Local
Fixation count
0.055
0.816
Yes
Pupil dilation
diﬀerence
0.293
0.590
Yes
Change of Direction
Low Global - Low Local
Saccade velocity
0.022
0.881
Yes
Block Visibility
Low Global - Low Local
Pupil dilation
diﬀerence
0.041
0.841
Yes
Question type
Change of Direction
Low Global - Low Local
Saccade velocity
0.043
0.836
Yes
Pupil dilation
diﬀerence
0.050
0.823
Yes
Block Visibility
Low Global - Low Local
Saccade velocity
0.011
0.917
Yes
Pupil dilation
diﬀerence
0.616
0.435
Yes
Table A.15: Levene test to test for homogeneity on data which were tested
normal distributed
==PAGE:67==
57
Type
Measurement
Statistical test
Signiﬁcantly
diﬀerence
Test
P-value
Change of Direction
High Global - Low Global
Fixation count
Paired t
0.165
No
Total ﬁxation
duration
Wilcoxon
0.151
No
Saccade velocity
Wilcoxon
0.372
No
Pupil dilation
diﬀerence
Paired t
0.268
No
Change of Direction
High Local - Low Local
Fixation count
Wilcoxon
0.231
No
Total ﬁxation
duration
Wilcoxon
0.044
Yes
Saccade velocity
Paired t
0.338
No
Pupil dilation
diﬀerence
Wilcoxon
0.780
No
Block Visibility
Low Global - High Global
Fixation count
Wilcoxon
0.244
No
Total ﬁxation
duration
Wilcoxon
0.322
No
Saccade velocity
Wilcoxon
0.521
No
Pupil dilation
diﬀerence
Paired t
0.639
No
Block Visibility
Low Local - High Local
Fixation count
Wilcoxon
0.037
Yes
Total ﬁxation
duration
Wilcoxon
0.051
No
Saccade velocity
Wilcoxon
0.091
No
Pupil dilation
diﬀerence
Wilcoxon
0.089
No
Table A.16: Table showing the results of statistical tests with the indepen-
dent variable being layout property. If the data are both normal
distributed a paired t test is used, otherwise a Wilcoxon test is
used.
==PAGE:68==
58
The ﬁrst results
Type
Measurement
Statistical test
Signiﬁcantly
diﬀerence
Test
P-value
Change of Direction
High Global - High Local
Fixation count
Wilcoxon
0.000
Yes
Total ﬁxation
duration
Wilcoxon
0.000
Yes
Saccade velocity
Wilcoxon
0.241
No
Pupil dilation
diﬀerence
Wilcoxon
0.343
No
Change of Direction
Low Global - Low Local
Fixation count
Wilcoxon
0.000
Yes
Total ﬁxation
duration
Wilcoxon
0.000
Yes
Saccade velocity
Paired t
0.106
No
Pupil dilation
diﬀerence
Paired t
0.033
Yes
Block Visibility
Low Global - Low Local
Fixation count
Wilcoxon
0.000
Yes
Total ﬁxation
duration
Wilcoxon
0.000
Yes
Saccade velocity
Paired t
0.074
No
Pupil dilation
diﬀerence
Paired t
0.103
No
Block Visibility
High Global - High Local
Fixation count
Wilcoxon
0.000
Yes
Total ﬁxation
duration
Wilcoxon
0.000
Yes
Saccade velocity
Wilcoxon
0.989
No
Pupil dilation
diﬀerence
Wilcoxon
0.247
No
Table A.17: Table showing the results of statistical tests with the indepen-
dent variable being question type. If the data are both normal
distributed a paired t test is used, otherwise a Wilcoxon test is
used.
==PAGE:69==
Appendix B
Cross checking with Katjas
results
This section is showing the results of duration and accuracy for this experiment.
In the following tables containing the descriptive analysis and statistical tests is
presented.
Model type
Question type
N
Mean
Std. Deviation
Min
Max
High change
of direction
Global
13
2.0
1.0
0
3
Local
13
2.6
0.8
0
3
Low change
of direction
Global
13
2.0
0.7
1
3
Local
13
2.3
0.7
1
3
Low block
visibility
Global
13
2.1
0.7
1
3
Local
13
2.9
0.2
2
3
High block
visibility
Global
13
2.1
0.7
1
3
Local
13
2.6
0.6
1
3
Table B.1: Table showing descriptive statistics of dependent variable accuracy
==PAGE:70==
60
Cross checking with Katjas results
Model type
Question type
N
Mean
Std. Deviation
Min
Max
High change
of direction
Global
13
38.0
13.1
14.5
71.2
Local
13
20.9
11.04
7.0
55.0
Low change
of direction
Global
13
32.0
12.6
11.2
65.2
Local
13
18.3
11.1
5.6
66.8
Low block
visibility
Global
13
31.1
14.0
10.1
84.8
Local
13
21.1
8.2
6.7
41.1
High block
visibility
Global
13
27.9
17.0
5.9
87.6
Local
13
16.4
8.0
5.9
43.8
Table B.2: Table showing descriptive statistics of dependent variable duration
Type
Measurement
Shapiro-Wilk
Normal
distribution
Statistic
N
Sig.
High change
of direction
Global
Accuracy
0.81
13
0.00
No
Duration
0.97
13
0.67
Yes
Local
Accuracy
0.52
13
1.55
Yes
Duration
0.87
13
0.00
No
Low change
of direction
Global
Accuracy
0.81
13
0.01
No
Duration
0.97
13
0.42
Yes
Local
Accuracy
0.75
13
0.00
No
Duration
0.80
13
1.11
Yes
Low block
visibility
Global
Accuracy
0.81
13
0.00
No
Duration
0.91
13
0.00
No
Local
Accuracy
0.31
13
5.0
Yes
Duration
0.96
13
0.30
Yes
High block
visibility
Global
Accuracy
0.81
13
0.00
No
Duration
0.85
13
0.00
No
Local
Accuracy
0.56
13
3.47
Yes
Duration
0.88
13
0.00
No
Table B.3: Table showing normal distribution of dependent variables accuracy
and duration
==PAGE:71==
61
Independent
variable
Measure
Statistical test
Signiﬁcant
diﬀerence
Test
P-Value
Change of Direction
High Global - Low Global
Accuracy
Wilcoxon test
1.00
No
Duration
Paired t test
0.15
No
Change of Direction
High Local - Low Local
Accuracy
Wilcoxon test
0.45
No
Duration
Wilcoxon test
0.11
No
Block Visibility
High Global - Low Global
Accuracy
Wilcxon test
0.95
No
Duration
Wilcoxon test
0.24
No
Block Visibility
High Local - Low Local
Accuracy
Paired t test
0.08
No
Duration
Wilcoxon test
0.03
Yes
Change of Direction
High Global - High Local
Accuracy
Wilcoxon test
0.04
Yes
Duration
Wilcoxon test
0.00
Yes
Change of Direction
Low Global - Low Local
Accuracy
Wilcoxon test
0.16
No
Duration
Paired t test
0.00
Yes
Block Visibility
High Global - High Local
Accuracy
Wilcoxon test
0.00
Yes
Duration
Wilcoxon test
0.00
Yes
Block Visibility
Low Global - Low Local
Accuracy
Wilcoxon test
0.03
Yes
Duration
Wilcoxon test
0.00
Yes
Table B.4: Table shows statistical test on the dependent variables accuracy
and duration
Independent
variables
Measure
P-value
Signiﬁcant
diﬀerence
Change of Direction
High Global - Low Global
Accuracy
0.825
No
Duration
0.008
Yes
Change of Direction
High Local - Low Local
Accuracy
0.898
No
Duration
0.187
No
Block Visibility
High Global - Low Global
Accuracy
0.001
Yes
Duration
0.003
Yes
Block Visibility
High Local - Low Local
Accuracy
0.908
No
Duration
0.000
Yes
Table B.5: The table shows the statistical (wilcoxon) results of Son-
deregger (2015)’s experiment (accuracy and duration)
==PAGE:72==
==PAGE:73==
Appendix C
Models and Questions
Process models and questions used for this experiment, created by (Sonderegger,
2015).
Figure C.1: Model 1a
Figure C.2: Model 1b
==PAGE:74==
64
Models and Questions
No.
Question
Local/Global
Answer
Model 1a & 1b
1
Q is always directly followed by R.
Local
True
2
<Y, J, B> is a valid sub-trace.
Local
True
3
Either O or D can be executed, but not both.
Local
True
4
In every trace with J and Q, X can’t occur.
Global
False
5
If S and Y are part of a trace, S can’t occur
more often than Y.
Global
False
6
If O occurs in a trace, N and X can’t be both in it.
Global
False
Model 2a & 2b
7
N and B can be executed in parallel.
Local
False
8
<H, T, R> is a valid sub-trace.
Local
True
9
X can be executed several times for a single trace.
Local
True
10
If W appears in a trace, R can’t be in it.
Global
False
11
If the sequence <T, R> appears in a trace,
G can’t be in it.
Global
False
12
If Q is executed, W is always executed as well.
Global
False
Model 3a & 3b
13
V can be executed more than once in a single trace.
Local
True
14
Y and K can be executed in parallel.
Local
False
15
<W, L, V> is a valid sub-trace.
Local
True
16
If B and Y are both part of a trace,
B can’t occur more often than Y.
Global
False
17
There is a trace, where C occurs more often than N.
Global
True
18
There is no trace, where D can happen
at any point after the execution of U.
Global
False
Model 4a & 4b
19
<F, S, L, T> is a valid sub-trace.
Local
True
20
I and A can be executed in parallel.
Local
False
21
K can be performed several times for a single trace.
Global
True
22
If C is part of a trace, it always co-occurs with J.
Global
False
23
R and V can never occur in the same trace.
Global
True
24
If the sequence <F, S> has been executed,
only L or F can be executed directly afterwards.
Local
False
Table C.1: Showing the questions used for this experiment, and whether they
are global/local and true/false. Source: (Sonderegger, 2015)
==PAGE:75==
65
Figure C.3: Model 2a
Figure C.4: Model 2b
Figure C.5: Model 3a
==PAGE:76==
66
Models and Questions
Figure C.6: Model 3b
Figure C.7: Model 4a
==PAGE:77==
67
Figure C.8: Model 4b
==PAGE:78==
==PAGE:79==
Bibliography
Aguilar-Saven, R. S. (2004). Business process modelling: Review and frame-
work. International Journal of Production Economics, 90(2), 129-149. Re-
trieved from http://production.datastore.cvt.dk/filestore?oid=
539ef4898384e3e0350103b4&targetid=539ef4898384e3e0350103b6
doi: 10.1016/S0925-5273(03)00102-6
Bjørner, T. (2015). Qualitative methods for consumer research: The value of
the qualitative approach in theory and practice.
Gyldendal Akademisk.
Retrieved from https://books.google.dk/books?id=xAjtrQEACAAJ
Burattin, A., Bernstein, V., Neurauter, M., Soﬀer, P., & Weber, B. (2017). De-
tection and quantiﬁcation of ﬂow consistency in business process models.
Software & Systems Modeling, 1–22. Retrieved from http://dx.doi.org/
10.1007/s10270-017-0576-y doi: 10.1007/s10270-017-0576-y
community Scipy. (2017). Scikit.stats. Retrieved 21-06-2017, from https://
docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy/reference/stats.html
Continuum, A. (2017). Anaconda. Retrieved 21-06-2017, from https://www
.continuum.io/anaconda-overview
developers NumPy. (2017). Numpy. Retrieved 21-06-2017, from http://www
.numpy.org/
Duchowski, A. (2007). Eye tracking methodology: Theory and practice. Springer-
Verlag London Limited.
Figl, K. (2017). Comprehension of procedural visual business process models.
Business & Information Systems Engineering, 59(1), 41–67. Retrieved
from http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s12599-016-0460-2
doi: 10.1007/
s12599-016-0460-2
Goforth,
C.
(2015).
Using and interpreting cronbach’s alpha.
Re-
trieved 11-06-2017, from http://data.library.virginia.edu/using
-and-interpreting-cronbachs-alpha/
==PAGE:80==
70
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Lazar, J., Feng, J. H., & Hochheiser, H. (n.d.). Research methods in human-
computer interaction. John Wiley Sons.
Majaranta, P.
(n.d.).
Gaze interaction and applications of eye tracking:
Advances in assistive technologies: Advances in assistive technologies. Re-
trieved from https://books.google.dk/books?id=HuWeBQAAQBAJ&pg=
PA141&lpg=PA141&dq=fixations+mental+load&source=bl&ots=
5fCfSeUbUD&sig=iNaHHjkAKj5Lh8k9KG8gvv4t5bI&hl=da&sa=
X&ved=0ahUKEwj0p9qVm4jUAhVBOywKHZfrDXYQ6AEIRDAD#v=
onepage&q=fixations%20mental%20load&f=false,publisher=
{MedicalInformationScienceReference}
Mendling, J., & Strembeck, M.
(2008).
Inﬂuence factors of understanding
business process models.
In W. Abramowicz & D. Fensel (Eds.), (pp.
142–153). Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg. Retrieved from
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-79396-0_13 doi: 10.1007/978
-3-540-79396-0_13
Mendling, J., Strembeck, M., & Recker, J. (2012). Factors of process model com-
prehension—ﬁndings from a series of experiments. Decision Support Sys-
tems, 53(1), 195 - 206. Retrieved from http://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S0167923612000085
doi: http://dx.doi.org/10
.1016/j.dss.2011.12.013
Olsen, A.
(2012).
The tobii i-vt ﬁxation ﬁlter - algorithm description.
Retrieved 06-06-2017, from http://acuity-ets.com/downloads/Tobii%
20I-VT%20Fixation%20Filter.pdf
OMG. (2011). Business process model and notation (bpmn). Retrieved from
http://www.omg.org/spec/BPMN/2.0
Petrusel, R., Mendling, J., & Reijers, H. A. (2016). Task-speciﬁc visual cues
for improving process model understanding.
Information and Software
Technology, 79, 63 - 78.
Retrieved from http://www.sciencedirect
.com/science/article/pii/S0950584916301173
doi: https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.infsof.2016.07.003
Petrusel, R., Mendling, J., & Reijers, H. A. (2017). How visual cognition in-
ﬂuences process model comprehension. Decision Support Systems, 96, 1 -
16. Retrieved from http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S016792361730012X doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dss.2017.01.005
Pichler, P., Weber, B., Zugal, S., Pinggera, J., Mendling, J., & Reijers, H.
(2012).
Imperative versus declarative process modeling languages: An
empirical investigation. In Lecture notes in business information process-
ing (Vol. 99, pp. 383–394). Springer Berlin Heidelberg. doi: 10.1007/
978-3-642-28108-2_37
Python, S. F. (2001). Python. Retrieved 21-06-2017, from https://www.python
.org/
Reichert, M., & Weber, B. (2012). Enabling ﬂexibility in process-aware infor-
mation systems: Challenges, methods, technologies. Springer-Verlag Berlin
Heidelberg. doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-30409-5
==PAGE:81==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
71
reisberg, D. (2013). Cognition - exploring the science of the mind (sixth edition).
W. W. Norton Company.
Sonderegger, K. (2015). Impact of layout properties on the understandability of
process models. (Masters thesis)
Tobii-Technology.
(n.d.-a).
Tobii
pro
tx300.
Retrieved
05-06-
2017, from https://www.tobiipro.com/product-listing/tobii-pro
-tx300/#Specifications
Tobii-Technology.
(n.d.-b).
Tobii tx300 eye tracker.
Retrieved 05-06-2017,
from https://www.tobiipro.com/siteassets/tobii-pro/brochures/
tobii-pro-tx300-brochure.pdf/?v=1.0
Tobii-Technology. (2016). Tobii studio user’s manual - version 3.4.5. Retrieved
06-06-2017, from https://www.tobiipro.com/siteassets/tobii-pro/
user-manuals/tobii-pro-studio-user-manual.pdf
Trimmel, M.
(2017).
Relationship of heart rate variability (hrv) parame-
ters including pnnxx with the subjective experience of stress, depression,
well-being, and every-day trait moods (trim-t): A pilot study. The Er-
gonomics Open Journal, 32–37. Retrieved from https://benthamopen
.com/contents/pdf/TOERGJ/TOERGJ-8-32.pdf
Weidlich,
M.,
Zugal,
S.,
Pinggera,
J.,
Fahland,
D.,
Weber,
B.,
Rei-
jers,
H. A., & Mendling,
J.
(2010).
The impact of sequential
and circumstantial changes on process models.
Proc. ER-POIS’10,
43–54.
Retrieved from https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/c19d/
7cfc40688d0bfea444b01f5bb0bba5f22e13.pdf
Zugal, S., Pinggera, J., Neurauter, M., Maran, T., & Weber, B. (2017). Chee-
tah experimental platform web 1.0: Cleaning pupillary data. ArXiv. (S.
Zugal, J. Pinggera, M. Neurauter, T. Maran and B. Weber: Cheetah Ex-
perimental Platform Web 1.0: Cleaning Pupillary Data. Technical Report
arXiv:1703.09468. arXiv, 2017.)
