==PAGE:1==
Development of a computational platform for 
molecular modeling and engineering of 
TCR-pMHC complexes
Vasileios Rantos, s151101
MSc Thesis, 30 ECTS
Academic supervisor: Paolo Marcatili
Submitted: 23/06/2017
1
==PAGE:2==
ABSTRACT
The molecular recognition of peptides bound to class I Major Histocompatibility Complex molecules
(MHC) by T cell receptors (TCRs) is the first step towards the initiation of cell-mediated immune
responses. Although these complexes (TCR-pMHC) are of major interest for understanding the adapti-
ve immune system and developing efficient immunotherapies, there is currently no specialized compu-
tational platform for modeling their structure.
In this report, we present a fully automated pipeline for the modeling of TCR-pMHC complexes from
their amino acid sequences. The tool utilizes the so called comparative modeling method to first model
the individual subunits that are part of the complex, and eventually assemble them into full complexes.
We extensively benchmarked each of the individual modeling steps, namely the structural prediction of
the MHC, peptide, and pMHC, and finally the prediction of the whole complex. The results of these
tests proved that the tool can build very accurate pMHC models by taking advantage of multiple
structural templates. Additionally, the assembly of the complex by “pseudo-docking”, i.e. by copying
the relative orientation of the subunits from a selected template with no further optimization, produces
fairly accurate results, especially for the interface region between the TCR and pMHC, which is the
most essential part of such complexes for eventual engineering experiments.
Our modeling pipeline will serve as a valuable scaffold for studies concerning TCR-pMHC complexes,
by providing structural insights in the development of advanced protein therapeutics approaches such
as cancer immunotherapy and vaccines.
2
==PAGE:3==
DANSK RESUMÉ
Den molekylære genkendelse af peptider bundet til klasse I Major Histocompatibility Complex (MHC)
molekyler ved hjælp af T-cellereceptorer (TCR'er) er det første trin i cellemedierede immunresponser.
Skønt disse komplekser (TCR-pMHC) er vigtige for at forstå det adaptiv immunsystem og for at
udvikle effektive immunterapi, er der for tiden ingen specialiseret platform til modellering af deres
struktur.
I  denne  rapport  præsenterer  vi  en  fuldt  automatiseret  metode  til  modellering  af  TCR-pMHC
komplekser. Værktøjet anvender en komparative modelleringsmetode til først at modellere de enkelte
enheder i TCR-pMHC komplekset, hvorefter de enkelte dele sammensættes til det samlede kompleks.
Vi evaluerede hver enkelt modelleringstrin, den strukturelle forudsigelse af MHC, peptid og pMHC
samt forudsigelsen af hele komplekset. Resultaterne af disse tests viste, at værktøjet kan opbygge
meget præcise pMHC-modeller ved at udnytte flere strukturelle skabeloner. Endvidere har vi vist at
man ved at kopiere den relative orientering af pMHC-TCR kompletset fra en udvalgt skabelon kan
genere modeller, der er relativt nøjagtige for grænsefladeområdet mellem TCR og pMHC.
Vores modelleringsmetode er et værdifuldt værktøj til at studere TCR-pMHC-komplekser da de kan
give en strukturel indsigt der kan bruges til udviklingen af nye terapeutiske behandlingsformer, såsom
cancerimmunterapi og vacciner.
3
==PAGE:4==
PREFACE
This present report with title “Development of a computational platform for molecular modeling and
engineering of TCR-pMHC complexes” is the written result of my MSc Thesis project for my Master
Degree in Bioinformatics and Systems Biology from the Technical University of Denmark.
The work for this project was conducted within the Immunoinformatics and Machine Learning group,
DTU Bioinformatics, Technical University of Denmark. The project is equivalent to 30 ECTS points
and the working period for it was from January to June 2017 under the supervision of Paolo Marcatili.
The Department of Bio and Health Informatics at DTU is thanked for providing a good study
environment and facilities. Additionally, Paolo Marcatili is thanked for his kind supervision and for
granting me the opportunity to work on this innovative project. Finally, Kamilla Kjærgaard Jensen is
thanked for the valuable collaboration and feedback provided during the project. 
- Vasileios Rantos
23rd of June 2017
4
==PAGE:5==
Table of contents
ABSTRACT .........................................................................................................................………… 2
DANSK RESUMÉ ....................................................................................................................……. 3
PREFACE ...................................................................................................................................…….. 4
Table of contents ........................................................................................................................……. 5
List of abbreviations  ...................................................................................................................…...7
1. Introduction and project scope ............................................................................................……8
2. Theoretical background ................................................................………………………………9
   2.1 Adaptive immune system ................................................................…………………………….. 9
      2.2 T cells – Orchestrating the cellular immunity ................................................................……...10
      2.2.1 Activation of T cells and TCR establishment ......................................................…………...10
      2.2.2 TCR structure .........……………........................................................………………………12
   2.3 MHC - The peptide presenting molecule ................................................................…………….13
      2.3.1 MHCs on APC surface and their mode of action ...............................................……………13
      2.3.2 The structure of MHC class I ................................................................…………………….14
   2.4 Homology modeling ................................................................…………………………………15
   2.5 MODELLER – A software for comparative protein modeling ...........................................……17
   2.6 Hidden Markov Model protein profiles and HMMER ...................................................……….18
3. Methods ...................................................………………………………………………………..19
   3.1 Curated pMHC database construction ...................................................………………………..19
      3.1.1 PDB sequence file and HMM profile acquisition ...................................................………..19
      3.1.2 Identification of MHC class I structures……………………………………………………19
      3.1.3 pMHC database curation ...................................................…………………………………20
5
==PAGE:6==
      3.1.4 Finalize entry structures and export the annotated database ..............................................21
   3.2 Construction of the curated TCR-pMHC database ...................................................………...21
   3.3 Template selection for complex modeling ........………….........……………………………..23
      3.3.1 pMHC templates .....……………………………………..............................................….23
      3.3.2 TCR-pMHC superimposition template and alignment positions ..............……….……...23
   3.4 Performance assessment ...................................................…………………………………...24
      3.4.1 Benchmark of the pMHC modeling approach ...................................................…………24
      3.4.2 Benchmark of the structural alignment (“pseudo-docking”) approach .............................25
      3.4.3 Benchmark of the complete TCR-pMHC modeling procedure ..................................…...25
4. Results ...................................................……………………………………………………….27
   4.1 Computational pipeline overview ...................................................………………………… 27
      4.1.1 Parameter initialization and user-provided input .....................................………………..28
      4.1.2 Analytical description of TCR-pMHC modeling ................................…………………...28
   4.2 Statistical features of the constructed databases ...................................................…………...29
   4.3 Benchmarking the pMHC modeling approach ............................................…………………32
   4.4 Benchmark analysis of the “pseudo-docking” approach ............................................……….46
   4.5 Evaluation of the full TCR-pMHC complex modeling ............................................………...50
5. Discussion and future perspectives ............................................…………………………55
6. Conclusion ............................................………………………………………………………57
7. Bibliography ............................................……………………………………………………58
Appendix…………………………………………………………………………….63
6
==PAGE:7==
List of abbreviations
MHC                                         Major Histocompatibility Complex
pMHC                                       Peptide – MHC
TCR                                          T Cell Receptor
CDR                                          Complementarity Determining Region
RMSD                                       Root-Mean-Square Deviation
WBC                                         White blood cell
Th                                              T helper cell
Tc                                               T cytotoxic cell
APC                                          Antigen presenting cell
HLA                                          Human Leukocyte Antigen
MSA                                          Multiple Sequence Alignment
pdf                                             probability density function
PDB                                           Protein Data Bank
HMM                                        Hidden Markov Model
DP
   Double positive
DN
   Double negative
7
==PAGE:8==
1. Introduction and project scope
The immune system of higher vertebrates includes multiple defensive “layers” against infectious agents
such as bacteria and viruses. The most advanced and complicated of these defensive mechanisms is the
adaptive immune system. This system is characterized by selective and precise target-specific respon-
ses [1]. The main cells that are involved in this defensive mechanism are the B and T lymphocytes. A
subset of the T lymphocytes, called CD8+ or cytotoxic T cells (Tc), are responsible for identifying host
cells that are infected or harmful. They do so by “recognizing” molecules that are non-self, meaning
that they are not part of the organism’s proteome. This identification event is carried out by a specific
protein family called MHC. Many classes of MHC molecules exist, though one of the most essential
and abundant is class I  [2]. MHC class I molecules bind and present short cleaved peptides to
“patrolling” Tc cells in the lymph nodes which subsequently get activated and directly kill the infected
host cells by inducing apoptotic pathways [3]. The peptide-MHC (pMHC) complex recognition by T
cells is performed via some specialized cell surface receptors called αβ TCR. These receptors are able
to interact with both the MHC and the presented peptide [4], hence forming the TCR-pMHC protein
complex. Improper interactions between the pMHC with its respective TCR are one of the major causes
of autoimmune disorders and several types of cancer [3]. Therefore, this complex has been of major
interest for peptide vaccine development over the past three decades.
Despite the important role of the TCR-pMHC complex in cellular immunity, there is currently no
automated computational package capable of predicting such structures. The scope of this report is to
describe the development of a Python-based [5] TCR-pMHC modeling package and present the results
of its performance. The constructed pipeline is actually a homology modeling approach  [6] with
additional implemented tools (such as LYRA  [7]). The selected homologous templates for pMHC
modeling and complex assembly derive from in-house built databases including aligned sequences that
correspond to gathered and modified PDB structures [8]. All these structures have been modified in
order to include only the binding domains of the pMHC and TCR respectively. The package is relying
heavily on three main procedures for the production of TCR-pMHC models. The first two of them run
in parallel and are responsible for modeling the complex subunits while the final one performs the
assembly into a full complex by structural alignments (“pseudo-docking”). The performance of the
developed tool was evaluated with several benchmarking procedures. During these tests, we used as
query sequences the database entries and the resulting models were evaluated by Cα Root-mean-
square-deviation (RMSD) [9] comparisons with their respective real structures. These RMSD values
proved the ability of our modeling package to produce meaningful TCR-pMHC models. Hopefully, the
performance of this tool will, to some extent, counter-balance the impossible task of determining
experimentally the structure of every target TCR-pMHC complex, hence advancing the development of
new protein therapeutics approaches.
8
==PAGE:9==
2. Theoretical background
In every environment, there are numerous pathogens such as bacteria, viruses, fungi that have been
classified by this term due to their capacity to cause different types of diseases and expose the host
(target) organism in great risk. Hence, the question regarding how the potential target-organisms are
able to defend against pathogens as well as from their secreted products arises. The answer to this
speculation is the immune system. This system consists of simple and complex networks of interacting
cells, specialized or not, acting in a predefined and harmonic way in order to eliminate pathogens or
related substances after having invaded into the host organism. The major ability of every immune
system to produce an effective response, lies in the ability to recognize “self” from “non-self” (foreign)
biological products and proceed with their elimination [10]. If any of these steps presents disorders that
lead to a hyper active or less than normal active state of the system, then the host organism is very
likely to suffer from autoimmune disorders, inflammatory diseases and even cancer [11].
2.1 Adaptive immune system
Even though all the higher multicellular organisms are protected by
their immune system, evolution apparently has caused the systems of
different subphyla to show a great divergence in their organization
(arrangement). Higher vertebrates such as mammals include a very
sophisticated and complex defensive layer called acquired or adaptive
immune  system,  responsible  for  the  adaptive  responses  (adaptive
immunity).
The adaptive system produces responses in a very pathogen-specific
way. Due to its highly destructive nature, the ability to recognize self
from non-self molecules in order to constrain its killing capacity and
protect the healthy host cells is crucial [1]. All molecules with foreign
origin such as bacterial or viral, that are capable to provoke an adaptive
immune response are referred to as antigens [12]. It has to be noted that
most of the times, the adaptive immune system is capable to recognize
them (high-specificity) even when only one amino acid is different in
the case of antigenic proteins. Two specialized classes of white blood
cells (WBC) called B cells and T cells are capable of eliciting adaptive
responses.  These  cell  types  are  responsible  for  the  Humoral  or
Antibody-mediated  responses  (Humoral  immunity)  and  the  Cell-
mediated responses (Cellular immunity) respectively [13]. In the latter
type of responses, T cells act in a very direct way. They bind presented
antigens on surface molecules of the host cells, hence killing the 
infected cell immediately or sending “alert” signals by the excretion of specific molecules (Fig. 1). The
recognizable parts of an antigen that are bound from T cells are called antigenic determinants or
epitopes [14]. Even a single antigen with a single epitope is able to activate many different lymphocyte
clones, with each one expressing an epitope-specific binding receptor. This postulate is known as
“clonal selection theory” [15] and it is the precursor for the induction of immunological “memory” as a
rapid defense method to subsequent attacks of the same pathogen. 
9
Fig. 1: Different modes of action 
of B and T lymphocytes [1].
==PAGE:10==
2.2 T cells – Orchestrating the cellular immunity
2.2.1 Activation of T cells and TCR establishment
The T cell category includes a wide variety of cells with different modes of action. The most abundant
are T helper (Th) and Cytotoxic T cells (Tc). Both types belong to the αβ T cell category which is
named after the alpha and beta chains constituting the TCR of the cell [16]. T cell-mediated responses
are highly antigen-specific and their “triggering” is dependent on activated T cells. 
T cells originate from haematopoietic stem cells in the bone marrow. These stem cells migrate and
populate  the  thymous  as  immature  thymocytes,  usually  called  T-cell  precursors.  At  this  early
differentiation stage, they do not express any TCR. In general, the thymic microenvironments are the
key to T cell differentiation and maturation through the several selection procedures, both positive and
negative [17]. In the beginning, the immature T cells which are called “double negatives”, since they do
not express the glycoprotein CD4 and CD8 (important co-receptors for signaling during the adaptive
response), are subjected to double negative (DN) and double positive (DP) selection stages [18]. These
procedures are responsible for the alpha (α) and beta (β) chain selections for the preTCR surface
complex [19], as well as for the expression of CD4 and CD8 co-receptors that establish the immature T
cells as double positives. At this point it has to be mentioned that DN selection is mostly responsible
for the production of functional β chains, whereas the DP selection for α chains. After the formation of
a functional preTCR, the cells undergo positive selection. At this “checkpoint”, their efficiency for
binding self-antigens and capacity to interact with MHC molecules in a proper way are tested [20].
This selection stage can last up to several days, but it is the most essential for T cell differentiation,
since according to the binding affinity and interaction with the pMHC complex they will become CD4+
Th or CD8+ Tc cells. Surviving cells from the positive selection receive signaling from the thymus
ending up as single positive cells by downregulating CD4 or CD8. During negative selection, all the
cells that have survived the previous selection stage are tested for abnormal binding strength to the
pMHC complex. If the TCR-pMHC binding is exceeding the “natural threshold”, then these cells are
receiving a signal for apoptotic cell death [21]. At this point the remaining 5% of the cells that started
as immature T cell progenitors proliferate and exit the thymus as differentiated mature naive T cells
[22].
Fig. 2: Depiction of the T cell activation signals
produced by the interactions of TCR-pMHC and
CD28-B7 respectively [23]. 
10
==PAGE:11==
For the T cell activation, both TCR-mediated and co-stimulation signals are required. The first essential
signal, also known as Recognition signal, is produced by the TCR binding to the presented peptide on
MHC molecules at the surface of antigen-presenting cells (APC). The cells carrying out the prese-
ntation are usually dendritic cells at lymph nodes [24]. This signal alone though is not efficient for T
cell activation, hence a second simultaneous signaling pathway which is also known as Verification
signal takes action. The latter signal offers a “security” threshold towards non-self responses during
which, the interaction between CD28 on T cell surface with co-stimulatory molecules of APCs is
guiding the T cell activation and differentiation to mature effector T cells [24](Fig. 2).
Finally, upon activation, effector T cells secrete and auto-receive cytokines. This secretion procedure
leads to T cell proliferation which will help them serve their purpose. Th cells act mostly on recruiting
phagocytic cells or other lymphocytes at the antigen recognition location. On the other hand, Tc cells
have a more “direct” role in adaptive responses, which is the infected-host cell lysis [12] (Fig. 3). An
important feature of T cell activation that should not be neglected is that usually the activation of Tc
cells requires the prior activation of Th [25]. 
Fig. 3: T cell maturation into effector cells and their subsequent activation. (Figure inspired by NIAID resource booklet)  
11
==PAGE:12==
2.2.2 TCR structure
TCRs are granting the antigen-specific character of cell-mediated adaptive responses. These receptors
are  able  to  bind  fragmented  peptides  with  pathogenic  origin  with  relatively  low  affinity  [26].
Furthermore, they remain attached on the cell surface of T cells and are not excreted, hence granting
the direct T cell – APC contact for the production of a cellular response.
TCRs are heterodimers that consist from two disulfide-linked polypeptide chains called α and β. Both
chains include extracellular Ig-like variable (V) and constant (C) domains. These Ig-like domains are
organized into anti-parallel β-sheets with the variable region spanning towards the presented peptide,
while the constant region is in closer proximity to the cell surface including also a transmembrane
region with a cytoplasmic tail [27]. The variable domains of both chains are responsible for binding the
pMHC complex. The binding event is mediated by the interaction of three hypervariable loops, called
Complementarity Determining Regions (CDR), on each chain [28](Fig. 4). These variable regions are
called CDR1, CDR2, CDR3 respectively, with CDR3 from both chains being the major recognition and
interacting component of the TCR with the presented peptide. Additionally, CDR1 from α and β chains
has been shown to interact with the N and C terminal of the antigenic peptide, while CDR2 from both
chains recognizes and interacts with the MHC molecule [29]. Finally, the constant domains include
cysteine residues forming disulfide bonds connecting and stabilizing the two TCR chains.     
Fig. 4: Cartoon representation of the α and β TCR chains of 1TCR (PDB ID). The variable domains are depicted in light 
gray whereas the constant domains in dark gray. The CDR loops are colored accordingly: CDR1(orange), CDR2(blue), 
CDR3(yellow).
12
==PAGE:13==
2.3 MHC - The peptide presenting molecule
2.3.1 MHCs on APC surface and their mode of action
The first step towards T cell-mediated immunity is the presentation of non-self peptides from the APCs
[1]. The antigen recognition is conducted by TCRs lying on the surface of T cells with specific binding
properties for this antigen. Antigen presentation is the most important function of APCs, which is
mediated by the MHC molecules. MHCs show a great repertoire in terms of total peptide “candidates”
that can be bound. On the other hand, each MHC molecule can bind only specific antigens. The total
binding repertoire is accomplished mostly due to MHC polygenicity and polymorphicity, i.e. multiple
MHC genes in each species as well as many polymorphisms in each gene [30]. Both endogenous and
exogenous peptide fragments can be presented from MHCs after they get processed in the host cell.
Furthermore, also self peptides can be presented, granting in this way protection against autoimmune
conditions. The MHC molecules are divided into four subcategories [31] mainly according to the their
structure and the type of antigens that they present-bind. According to this classification the MHC
molecules are characterized as class I, class II, class III and class IV [32]. Among these MHC classes,
class I is considered as the most crucial and abundant due to their expression from all nucleated cells as
well as the CD8+ Tc cell recruitment  [33]. The human genome contains three MHC class I genes,
called Human Leukocyte Antigens (HLA), which are HLA-A, -B, -C.
The MHC class I molecules bind fragmented peptides mainly deriving from the cytosole. The bound
peptides are presented to CD8+ T cells and the TCR-pMHC complex formation is mediated by
interactions between the pMHC and both TCR and CD8 co-receptor [34]. The binding and cell surface
exposure of the pMHC (class I) starts when the antigenic peptides are degraded and transported into the
endoplasmatic reticulum (ER) lumen. The formation of MHC receptors at this point has been already
conducted. The MHC class I molecule recognizes and binds the peptides, while the transferring and
deposition of the pMHC complex by exocytic vesicles is in progress [35]. Finally, the surface exposed
pMHC complex, interacts and activates “patrolling” CD8+ Tc cells which will advance the apoptosis of
the infected host cell (Fig. 5).   
Fig. 5: Rough representation of the
pMHC class I surface deposition
pathway and interaction with Tc cells 
[36].
13
==PAGE:14==
2.3.2 The structure of MHC class I
The MHC class I molecules work as APC surface receptors. These
molecules are heterodimer glycoproteins consisting from a long α chain
and a smaller β2 chain known as β2m [37]. The α chain is composed by
three globular domains called α1, α2 and α3 respectively [38]. The two
chains are linked together by noncovalent interactions between β2m
chain and the membrane-spanning a3 domain. Both a3 domain and b2m
chain  have  similar  topologies  with  Ig  domains  and  are  the  main
responsible for anchoring MHC on the cell surface (Fig. 6). The same α
domain interacts with the CD8 co-receptor of the Tc cell, hence granting
the ability to the MHC molecule to stay in place during the formation of
the  TCR-pMHC  complex.  The  remaining  two  outer-cell  oriented  α
domains (α1,α2) form direct interactions with the TCR chains and mostly
with residues belonging to the CDRs [39]. This binding event helps the
Tc cell to assess the antigenic character of the presented peptide. The
most important structural feature of α1 and α2 domains is that they
form two α helices and an antiparallel β-sheet (αβ superdomain) [27].
The αβ superdomain creates the so called peptide-binding groove
that can accommodate bound peptides with amino acid length ranging from 8 – 12 residues. Hence, the
domains that constitute the superdomain will be referred to as the MHC binding domain since they are
the main responsible for the peptide presentation. 
Fig. 7: On the left, the cartoon representation of the pMHC complex from 4JFD (PDB ID) is depicted with the binding 
domain colored as light gray, the α3 domain and β2m chain as dark gray and the bound peptide as red . On the right, the 
binding domains of the TCR-pMHC complex of 4JFD is depicted with Vα and Vβ colored as dark grey, the MHC binding 
domain as light gray and the peptide as red.
14
Fig. 6: Schematic representation of the 
MHC class I structure (Figure inspired 
from Chegg Study: Principles of life).
==PAGE:15==
The peptide, apart from the interactions with variable TCR domains, remains in the binding cavity by
hydrogen bonds formed with the groove and its “anchor” residues. Finally, it is further stabilized by the
β-sheet “floor” of the binding cavity which is located in the central part (in terms of 3-dimensional
space) of the α1-α2 domains [27] (Fig. 7).
2.4 Homology modeling
Two proteins are homologous if they derive from the same ancestral protein [40]. It has been shown
that homologous proteins share very similar three-dimensional structures and, to some minor extent,
sequence similarity. This idea is the basis of the so called homology modeling technique (comparative
modeling)  [41]. Homology is usually inferred from Multiple Sequence Alignments (MSA).  If the
sequence identity between two proteins (e.g. the human and mouse proteins in Fig. 8) is high enough,
we can be sure that these are homologous and the solved structure (if exists) of the one can be used to
model the other. Note though, that it is not possible to define a similarity threshold for homology dete-
ction. In fact, there are cases in which sequences with no sequence similarity are indeed homologous
and share a very similar structure. 
Fig. 8: MSA example of protein domain parts from homologous amino acid sequences (performed with Clustal Omega )
In other words, the tertiary structure of proteins, is in general better conserved than their respective
sequence, so homologous proteins which share less than 50% sequence identity will still share a
common overall fold [42]. 
A typical homology modeling approach consists from four essential steps which are: 1) selection of
template(s), 2) query-template(s) alignment, 3) model development and 4) model assessment [43] (Fig.
9).
  
15
==PAGE:16==
Fig. 9: Example flow-chart of a Homology modeling approach [44].
Usually, the first two steps are performed simultaneously, since the identification of the best template
structure relies heavily on the alignment. There are three main approaches regarding template identi-
fication by sequence alignments: 1) simple pairwise sequence alignments between query and the set of
candidate templates, 2) sequence to protein profile alignment, with the profiles usually generated from
MSA for specific  protein  families, 3)  fold  recognition  prediction  and alignment  with candidate
templates  (Protein  Threading).  Once  the  initial  alignment/s  have  been  performed  and  the  most
appropriate template/s have been selected (based mostly on alignment score and sequence identity
percentage) the model of the query sequence is generated. The model is produced by transferring the
coordinates of the template atoms to the corresponding query ones based on the alignment. Again, there
are multiple procedures that can be followed in order to generate the three-dimensional model. One of
the  most  common  software  packages  for  performing  this  task  is  MODELLER  [45].  After  the
production of the model, its quality is assessed. In general, the quality (accuracy) can be predicted by
using statistical or physical-based prediction tools, e.g. statistical potentials or physics-based energy
calculations. In our project, we compared the modeled entries with their real solved structures by
calculating the Cα RMSD  [9]  (RMSD calculated only on Cα atoms of every residue in structure).
These values “reveal” the divergence of model atoms from the “real” atoms after superimposition of
the two structures.
As a rule-of-thumb, query models produced by homology modeling tend to exhibit Cα RMSD around
1-2Å for sequence identity down to 75% while at 50% the usual Cα RMSD ranges between 2-4Å. As
the sequence identity drops even lower (< 30%) the models become highly unreliable. Therefore, this
very low identity “region” is many times referred to as “twilight zone” [46] (Fig. 10).
16
==PAGE:17==
Finally, even when the sequence identity is significantly high, the models may present unusual high Cα
RMSD values compared to their real structures. This fact is an apparent indication of low accuracy,
high-lighting the necessity for optimal template selection as well as the correction, if possible, of the
query-template alignment (as suggested also in the general flow-chart depiction in Fig. 9).
Fig. 10: Depiction of the “two alignment zones” comprising the production of a reliable and not reliable model 
respectively. These zones are defined based on the alignment length and sequence similarity between query and template 
sequences [46].
2.5 MODELLER – A software for comparative protein modeling
MODELLER is a multi-platform computer software written in FORTRAN90 specializing in the
construction  of  three-dimensional  protein  models  by  satisfaction  of  spatial  restraints.  The  most
common implementation of it is in homology modeling of proteins. The general use includes a user
provided alignment between the query sequence and the identified template sequences. The latter
should correspond to experimentally determined structures. The output of the modeling procedure is a
model calculated automatically, including all non-hydrogen atoms placed in the three-dimensional
space (Fig. 11). The spatial restraints that have to be satisfied for the model production, derive
automatically from the provided alignment as well as from the template structures. There are also other
non-automatic  sources  of  restraints  that  are  accepted  as  inputs  from  MODELLER  e.g.  NMR
experiments. All spatial restraints constitute a molecular probability density function (pdf) for the
coordinates of each atom in the model. Finally, the model produced by MODELLER is the result of the
pdf optimization  [45]. 
17
==PAGE:18==
Fig. 11: Comparative model construction pipeline from MODELLER (figure inspired by online MODELLER manual)
2.6 Hidden Markov Model protein profiles and HMMER
Hidden Markov Model (HMM) profiles of proteins or genes. are statistical models deriving mostly
from MSAs or built upon a single biological sequence. Their aim is to describe in probabilistic terms
how conserved each column in the alignment is, as well as the type of residue or nucleotide that is most
probable to reside in this  position. These profiles  are capturing all the needed position-specific
information for biological families from the provided/constructed alignment. The constructed profile
can subsequently be used to search biological databases in order to identify e.g. structures that can
serve as templates for homology modeling, or even sequences with remote homology to the set of
sequences used to build the profile. A computer software capable of building such profiles and
searching large databases with it is HMMER [47]. This software can work as a replacement of tools
that are based on single query sequence search of large databases, such as BLASTp and PSI-BLAST,
thanks to the formal probabilistic basis that is applied consistently to all the scoring parameters in the
aligned consensus positions. Finally, it is able to maintain and add profile information regarding
specific protein families (classification) in annotated databases such as Pfam [48].
18
==PAGE:19==
3. Methods
The aim of this research project was the development of an automated computational protocol for
comparative TCR-pMHC modeling. Therefore, we constructed a database including appropriately
selected entries that will serve as modeling templates. This curated database includes 455 unique anno-
tated pMHC structures, identified by aligning the entire Protein Data Bank (PDB) database [8], to an
in-house HMM profile for MHC class I proteins. The actual modeling of the query pMHC complexes
in this protocol, is performed with a specialized homology modeling package called MODELLER [49].
The TCR subunit of the complex is modeled by an implemented stand-alone version of the web-server
LYRA  [7], which is specialized in modeling lymphocyte receptors. The final TCR-pMHC query
complex is assembled from its compartments, based on a template that is selected from a constructed
curated non-redundant database including TCR-pMHC entries. This database “works” as a template
provider that will guide the “pseudo-docking” of the relevant subunits in order to form the full TCR-
pMHC complex. The construction of the non-redundant databases as well as the development of the
modeling pipeline were performed with the programming language Python v.2 [5].
3.1 Curated pMHC database construction
3.1.1  PDB sequence file and HMM profile acquisition
As the first step towards the construction of the pMHC database, we obtained the entire up-to-date
PDB  archive  [8] as  a  single  file  with  the  entries  split  by  chains. This  downloaded  file  called
pdb_seqres.txt contained 126580 unique entries, a number close to the nowadays deposited number of
structures in PDB which are 129942.
(link to the file provided: ftp://ftp.wwpdb.org/pub/pdb/derived_data/pdb_seqres.txt)
This file was then converted from simple text format to FASTA format, where each record starts with
the symbol ‘>’ followed by an identifier for the sequence and the actual sequence is presented in the
next lines. This action was performed in order to use the formatted file conveniently in the next steps of
the procedure. Following up, the Pfam database [48], which is a large repository of many different
protein families represented by multiple sequence alignments or HMM profiles, was used to search and
select the most comprehensive HMM profile for MHC class I family. The profile identified and
retrieved as the most suitable for the scope of this project is called MHC_I.hmm (accession number:
PF00129) and includes the binding domains α1 and α2 of the alpha chain in MHC class I family.
Additionally, this HMM profile includes 179 positions and belongs to the MHC (CL0343) clan. This
selection was justified also by the web server HMMER  [50], which is used to search and identify
homologous sequences by exploiting HMM profiles, where example MHC class I sequences were
submitted and in all cases the suggested HMM profile was the referred one.
3.1.2 Identification of MHC class I structures
All files used as input in the automated construction of the annotated database were acquired and
HMMER3 was downloaded and installed. This software is the most essential part of the database
development. The version of HMMER used in this protocol is v3.1b2. At first, the hmmsearch
19
==PAGE:20==
command was used to align the PDB database file against the HMM profile for the MHC class I family.
The actual command and the parameters used are the following: 
hmmsearch ­o alignment.out ­E 0.00001 ­­noali MHC_I.hmm <pdb_filename.fsa>
The -o option is directing the output to the specified file in a human-readable format, the E-value
threshold was used to discard false positive “hits” and therefore was set to 0.00001 with the option -E.
The option --noali omits the alignment part of the output, hence speeding up the procedure and
lowering the output volume. At this point, only hits with E-value larder than 8.7e-70 were selected.
This threshold yielded 700 PDB entries. Before proceeding with the download and curation of these
entries, the hmmalign command was used in order to align individually the identified entries to the
HMM profile. This step produced an MSA for these sequences that would help in inspecting insertions
that might cause severe problems with the template-based modeling. The exact command used was:
hmmalign ­o alignment.out ­­trim ­­amino MHC_I.hmm <sequences.fsa>
The option -o here has the same functionality as in the hmmsearch command, while the --trim excludes
non-homologous residues from the protein terminals. The parameter --amino specifies the type of
sequences provided. Indeed, 16 non-redundant entries included insertions in specific positions. Hence,
we took the initiative to construct an in-house HMM profile for the identified entries. For this purpose,
the command hmmbuild was used with the following parameters:
hmmbuild ­­amino ­­symfrac 0 MHC_I_complete.hmm <msa file>
The functionality of --amino is the same as in hmmalign, while the --symfrac option was set to 0 in
order to consider each position/column as a consensus column. The resulting HMM profile included
181 positions (two positions longer) and was named MHC_I_complete.hmm. The protocol stage
described previously regarding hmmsearch, was repeated with the new HMM profile and this time the
selection E-value threshold was set at 5.6e-74. Finally, 700 entries were identified with the new in-
house HMM profile.
3.1.3 pMHC database curation
The curation of the 700 entry-database started by downloading and “cleaning” the PDB files from non-
ATOM lines [8]. Furthermore, the downloaded PDB structures were validated one-by-one in terms of
bound antigens, since the MHC class I chains were already identified to be included. This step, reduced
the entries to  645, meaning that 55 structures were not including peptides in their pMHC complex
structures. At this point, the existence of multiple pMHC complexes in an individual entry file was
taken into account, therefore an extra step was implemented in order to identify the matching MHC
structure with its bound peptide. In cases where multiple complexes were included, only the best
pMHC complex was kept with respect to the alignment priority. The correct identification of pMHC
complexes was performed by setting 10Å distance cutoff between the peptide and the respective MHC
chain. Additionally, the gathered pMHC structures were checked for missing residues and sequence
identity of  100% (identical entries). Both validation criteria were applied only on the sequence (and
structure) of the binding MHC domain plus the bound peptide. The threshold distance used to identify
the structural “gaps”, was slightly larger than the approximate distance of the peptide bond [51].
20
==PAGE:21==
For the redundancy criterion, CD-HIT Suite [52] was used in order to cluster efficiently the pMHC
sequences by their similarity, the exact command and parameters used were the following:
cdhit -i <pmhc.fsa> -o <pmhc_clusters.txt> -c 1.00 -n 5
Here the -i and -o options declare the input and output filenames while -c  option for global sequence
identity is set to 100% ( -n option is left at the default value 5 which is the “word-length” search). At
this point it has to be mentioned that the pMHC sequences used for clustering were gathered directly
from the entry structures. This curation approach decreased the entries even further with 455 unique
pMHC structures passing all the criteria (cluster representatives), since out of the 645 structures that
were tested, 40 had missing residues and 150 were identified as 100% redundant.
3.1.4 Finalize entry structures and export the annotated database
As the final step towards the production of the pMHC database, HMMER was used once again, and
more specifically the hmmalign command. This step aimed at the production of the individual entry
(MHC) alignments with respect to the in-house built HMM profile. The resulting alignment files were
stored initially in Stockholm format  [53]. After their conversion to FASTA format, the relevant
structures were parsed again in order to “keep” only the parts of the MHC structures that were aligned
to the HMM profile in addition to the bound peptide. The output structures were renumbered according
to their aligned positions (alignment files used as input) whereas the MHC and peptide chains were
renamed as “M” and “P” respectively, hence maintaining the same chain format across all structure
entries. For each structure included in the database, the PDB ID, the original chain identifiers, the MHC
species of origin and the peptide origin were “mined” from the initial downloaded PDB files. The
mined information along with the aligned MHC and peptide (intact sequence) sequences, formed the
individual entry records that were stored and exported to a Comma-Separated-Values (CSV) file named
database_pmhc_final.csv. Finally,  455 pMHC records were stored in the database, with each record
corresponding to one modified atomic-coordinates file, with the csv record format being: PDBid,
number of chains, MHC alpha chain identifier, MHC species of origin, aligned MHC alpha chain
sequence, bound peptide chain identifier, peptide origin, aligned bound peptide sequence.   
3.2 Construction of the curated TCR-pMHC database
The approach followed for the production of the non-redundant TCR-pMHC database shares many
identical steps with the procedure followed in section 3.1. In this case, the input files are: the FASTA
file including all the PDB records which was downloaded and transformed during the pipeline of the
pMHC database, the in-house built HMM profile for MHC class I family and two additional HMM
profiles for the alpha (α) and beta (β) TCR chains acquired from the input data used by LYRA. The
latter two profiles are both 138 positions long and concern only the variable domains of both chains.
The method that was applied in order to identify MHC, TCR α and TCR β chains is the same with the
procedure described in the previous sections. The “hit” E-value selection threshold was 5.6e-74, 1.1e-
34 and 3.5e-30 respectively. After the separate identification of the candidate database records, the
resulting PDB IDs were compared and 112 entries found in common, meaning that these PDB entries
include at least one TCR-MHC complex. The peptide existence was checked in a later step. At this
point, the identified PDB ID entries were uploaded manually as a simple txt format list to the PISCES
21
==PAGE:22==
server [54] in order to be culled according to structure quality (resolution) and sequence identity. The
parameters used for the culling by PDB entries (but not culling the chains in each entry) were: 100%
sequence identity, 0.0 – 3.0Å as the highest and lowest resolution respectively, 0.3 r-value and the rest
options remained the default. This step resulted in a list containing  101  unique PDB entries. The
structure files for these entries were downloaded and cleaned. Furthermore, the result folders (which
include discarded structures) from the pMHC database construction were searched. These steps yielded
only 63 entries since 25 were identified to include structural “gaps”, 3 were redundant and 10 were
missing a bound peptide. Alignment files were produced after the alignment of  TCR and MHC chain
sequences to the relevant HMM profile. These files were used in order to renumber the final TCR-
pMHC structure files. In this case, the relevant chain identifiers were renamed to “M” for the MHC α
chain, “P” for the bound peptide chain, “A” for the TCR α chain and “B” for the TCR β chain. Hence,
the same chain format was maintained across all entry structures once again. In contrast to the pMHC
database construction, additional information regarding the entry complexes were not gathered in this
case. The resulting format of all 63 records representing the complex structures that are included in the
database, were stored and exported to a CSV file named database_tpm_final.csv, wtih the following
format: PDBid, number of chains, chain id “A”, aligned alpha sequence, chain id “B”, aligned beta
sequence, chain id “M”, aligned MHC alpha sequence, chain id “P”, aligned bound peptide sequence.
22
Download PDB archive
Identify MHC class I entries
Discard “missing” antigen entries
Discard “missing residue” entries
Discard redundant entries
Annotate remaining entries
Export database to csv file
Download PDB archive
Identify TCR-MHC entries
Cull entries with PISCES
Discard “missing” antigen entries
Discard “missing residue” entries
Discard redundant entries
Export database to csv file
Fig. 12: Representation of the 
construction steps for pMHC 
database (left) and TCR-
pMHC database (right).
==PAGE:23==
3.3 Template selection for complex modeling
3.3.1 pMHC templates
The structures that will serve as templates for the pMHC modeling are selected from the constructed
pMHC database. First of all, the MHC query sequence is aligned to the in-house built HMM profile
with the command hmmalign from the HMMER suite. The aligned MHC sequence as well as the query
peptide sequence are stored in a single string. This unified sequence will be used to identify the best
templates with respect to the user specified options. In order to select the most appropriate template
structures, the pMHC records of the annotated database are parsed. Though, only database entries with
the same length of bound peptide with the query are allowed to be selected. The pMHC entries yielding
the highest score calculated by a BLOSUM62 substitution matrix [55] are selected as the best. At this
point, it has to be mentioned that the resulting blosum scores are normalized in order to account for the
different lengths of the aligned database sequences. Along with the produced pMHC model, a simple
text file is also generated with all the possible templates that could have been selected sorted by blosum
score and sequence identity.
3.3.2 TCR-pMHC superimposition template and alignment positions
Our modeling package produces first the complex subunits and then attempts to assemble them in full
TCR-pMHC complex. The assembly is performed by aligning (superimposing) the relevant parts of the
complex to the respective subunits of the selected template. In other words, the relative positions in the
three-dimensional space of the template subunits are “adopted” from the modeled ones which leads to
the formation of the final modeled complex.
In order to select the superimposition template structure, the target TCR sequences are aligned to the
respective in-house HMM profiles used by LYRA. The already aligned MHC (from the step of pMHC
modeling) and “freshly” aligned TCR alpha, TCR beta chains are stored in a single string. This string is
used to parse the TCR-pMHC database in order to identify the template that will guide the structural
alignment (superimposition) of the modeled subparts. This template is selected with the same selection
criteria described in the case of the pMHC templates (i.e. by the highest blosum score).
The superimposition is performed based on predefined position indexes. These positions correspond to
the “stems” of CDR loops (i.e. the constant parts before and after every CDR) as well as to interacting
MHC parts. The selection was inspired by the valuable research of M. G. Rudolph et al. [27] with
regards to conserved TCR-MHC interactions and their relevant residues. The positions that were pre-
selected are the following: 
•
MHC: 63 – 80, 151 – 170
•
TCRα: CDR1 21 – 23 & 39-41, CDR2 52 – 57 & 68-70, CDR3 105 – 107 & 127 - 129
•
TCRβ: CDR1 19 – 21 & 36 - 38, CDR2 51 – 55 & 64 - 66, CDR3 102 – 104 & 128 – 130
Note here that, the indexes presented above are used for the initial position search. This search includes
the parsing of all pMHC and LYRA-implemented TCR database queries plus the modeled sequences in
order to identify “non-gapped” (i.e. no deletions “-”) positions which will be the only ones selected for
the final step of the procedure. The initial position search guarantees that the renumbered structures
(according to their aligned sequences) will always include a fair amount of residues with IDs (position
23
==PAGE:24==
in the chain) belonging to the indexes above to guide the superimposition, as well as that the assembly
procedure will be consistent in every run of the tool. 
3.4 Performance assessment
3.4.1 Benchmark of the pMHC modeling approach
Modeling of the pMHC subunit is one of main procedures constituting the developed tool. The
performance of this modeling approach was assessed with a specific benchmarking method. During this
procedure, each pMHC entry from the pMHC constructed database is modeled 16 (4 * 4) times under
different template selection criteria and the resulting models are compared to the real entry structures
by calculating the Cα RMSD. The criteria applied for the pMHC template selection were the following:
•
1 template selected under: i) 100% sequence identity, ii) 95%, iii) 90%, iv) 80%
•
2 templates selected under: i) 100% sequence identity, ii) 95%, iii) 90%, iv) 80%
•
3 templates selected under: i) 100% sequence identity, ii) 95%, iii) 90%, iv) 80%
•
5 templates selected under: i) 100% sequence identity, ii) 95%, iii) 90%, iv) 80%
Fig. 13: Simplistic overview of the benchmarking approach followed for the pMHC modeling of each entry in the database. 
The procedure starts by searching the pMHC database with the aligned MHC entry sequence plus the peptide. After the 
identification of the best template/s the model is produced and superposed to the real pMHC entry structure to obtain the
Ca RMSD values. Here the entry 4I4W (template: 5MEO)  has been used as an example with the modeled structur 
represented in green (cartoon representation) and the real structure in light blue.
24
==PAGE:25==
As it becomes apparent, each one of the 16 models per entry was modeled with a different amount of
templates selected under different sequence identity thresholds compared to the target entry sequence.
Finally, the models are compared to the real entry structures after aligning (superimposing) first the full
pMHC and calculating the resulting RMSD and second the MHC chains only and calculating MHC
RMSD and peptide RMSD. An overview of the described benchmarking procedure can be inspected in
Fig. 13.
3.4.2 Benchmark of the structural alignment (“pseudo-docking”) approach
The performance of the complex assembly procedure, that is implemented as the final step in the
computational modeling pipeline, was assessed with a separate benchmark approach. In this case, the
pMHC and TCR subparts of each entry in the TCR-pMHC database were used as output models that
need to be assembled into the final complex (Fig. 14). For each entry, 4 “models” were produced by
applying 4 different sequence identity thresholds during the template selection for superimposition. The
selected thresholds were the following:
1 template selected under: i) 100% sequence identity, ii) 95%, iii) 90%, iv) 80%
The complex assembly was performed with two different superimposition approaches in order to select
and implement the most accurate in the main pipeline of the package. The first approach is the same
with the one described in section 3.3.2. The second relies again on search for residues lying on specific
positions on the “modeled” complex subunits, but the positional indexes are different compared to the
first approach. In this case, all positions without “gaps” from the the aligned sequences were gathered
again with the same method (i.e. parsing both pMHC and LYRA implemented input database). There-
fore, the second structural alignment approach is usually referred to in this report as “all to all”
approach whereas the first approach as “interface to interface”. The assembled complexes were compa-
red to their original entry complexes by calculation of the full complex Cα RMSD and binding cavity
Cα RMSD. Note here that for the binding cavity RMSD, the bound peptide was not included in the
calculations.
3.4.3 Benchmark of the complete TCR-pMHC modeling procedure
The full pipeline for modeling of TCR-pMHC complexes was assessed with a benchmark procedure
able to test all the main steps of the computational protocol. During this benchmarking, the complex
sequence of each entry from the TCR-pMHC database was used as the pipeline input. First, the pMHC
and TCR are modeled in parallel. Then, the resulting structures are assembled into full complexes by
being aligned to the selected template from the TCR-pMHC database as described in section 3.3.2.
Each database entry is modeled 4 times, each time under a different sequence identity threshold that is
applied during all the main template selection sub-processes of the pipeline (i.e. pMHC template
selection, TCR template selection from LYRA, superimposing template selection), and these thresholds
are the following:
•
i) 100% sequence identity, ii) 95%, iii) 90%, iv) 80%
Furthermore, it has to be noted that the pMHC modeling is based only on 5 templates. The models for
each entry were compared to the initial (real) record structures by calculating the Cα RMSD first on the
25
==PAGE:26==
full complex and afterwards only on their binding site (again the peptide was not included in the
alignment of the relevant structural parts to the real complex for the RMSD calculation).
Fig. 14: Simplistic description of the benchmarking approach followed for the TCR-pMHC assembly of each entry in the 
database. The procedure starts by splitting the relevant complex subunits and the TCR-pMHC database is parsed in order 
to identify the best “pseudo-docking” template. After the identification of the template the subunits are assembled into a full
TCR-pMHC complex and the resulting structure is superimposed to the real entry structure to obtain the Ca RMSD values. 
Here the entry 4JFD (template: 4JFE) has been used as an example with the assembled structure represented in green 
(cartoon representation) and the real structure in light blue.
26
==PAGE:27==
4. Results
4.1 Computational pipeline overview
The formation of TCR-pMHC complexes in general, has been characterized as the “keystone” of
cellular immunity [56] due to the crucial role during several infections and cancer. Additionally, mis-
recognition between TCR and the presented peptide, can cause autoimmune disorders. Despite the
importance  of  this  immunological  complex,  there  is  currently  no available  automated  modeling
procedure specific for it. In order to tackle this inadequacy, we developed a fully automated modeling
package for αβ TCR-pMHC class I complexes, thanks  to the implementation of a comparative
modeling-based approach. In this section we present the accuracy of the developed modeling pipeline,
a simplified flowchart of which can be inspected in Fig. 15.
Fig. 15: Flowchart of the developed computational approach from the user-provided input complex to the final homology-
based TCR-pMHC model.
27
 TCR-pMHC complex sequences
Complex split into subunits
pMHC template/s selection
pMHC model by MODELLER
TCR-pMHC template selection
Subunits-template alignment
& complex assembly
Initial TCR-pMHC model
TCR model by LYRA
Final side chain corrected
TCR-pMHC complex
==PAGE:28==
4.1.1 Parameter initialization and user-provided input
The modeling procedure starts right after the user has set the modeling options and provided the query
complex sequences. Furthermore, the user is obliged to provide the query complex either as a comma
separated string following the format: complex id, MHC alpha chain, peptide chain, TCR alpha chain,
TCR beta chain, or as separate records stored in a single FASTA format file. Both query formats have
to be specified by the -t option which indicates the input query sequences. The modeling options
provided by the tool, offer the capability to select some of the template selection parameters (options),
simply by changing their default values. These parameters can be inspected by using the option -h from
the command line. The parameters that can be changed and their relevant default values are the
following:
•
-b <PDB IDs>, for blacklisting specific PDB IDs which excludes them from the template
selection from both the pMHC and the LYRA integrated databases, there is no default value for
this option
•
 -n <integer>, for specifying the number of templates that need to be selected and used to
produce the query pMHC model, the default value is 5
•
--thres <percentage>, for specifying  the lowest sequence identity threshold of every selected
template compared to the query sequence, the default value is 0
4.1.2 Analytical description of TCR-pMHC modeling
After the user has provided the input query and set the modeling options for template selection, the
automated modeling procedure starts. The MHC and peptide sequences are converted to a “pMHC
target” object which has the following attributes: target.id, target.mhc, target.peptide. The same case
applies also to every selected modeling template (pMHC template) object. The TCR chains are
converted to a “TCR target” object with the format: target.id, target.alpha, target.beta. This sequence
storing step offers easier manipulation during the two parallel modeling procedures of the compu-
tational pipeline.
Next, the template selection for pMHC modeling is performed as described in Methods section (for
pMHC) while respecting the user specified preferences. Subsequently, a randomly named folder is
created, that will be used to store the final models. The pMHC sequences of the identified templates
along with the target ones are stored appropriately in a PIR format [57] file in order to be used from the
implemented MODELLER functions. The pMHC model of the input query is produced and stored as a
PDB file while renumbered as described in the database construction part in the Methods section. In
parallel with this procedure, the query TCR chains are used as inputs in the implemented LYRA
functions for the TCR model production. As noted also earlier in this report, our tool first models the
pMHC and TCR subunits based on templates deriving from the relevant databases and then attempts
their assembly into full complexes. At this point, both subunits have been modeled and it is time for
their complex formation. For this purpose, one template structure is chosen from the TCR-pMHC
database and the superimposition of the relevant subunits is performed. The structural alignment events
are guided by the selection of Cα atoms of residues with IDs belonging to the positions described in
Methods section 3.3.2.
Finally, after the initial complex assembly, the side chains of the full structure are corrected with
SCWRL4 [58] in order to remove clashes arising from the “pseudo-docking” procedure.
28
==PAGE:29==
4.2 Statistical features of the constructed databases
Modeling proteins based on comparative approaches, demands a “pool” of protein structures that will
possibly serve as modeling templates. This pool is often a database consisting from appropriately
stored protein sequences and their structures. As described in Methods section, for the scope of the
developed modeling pipeline, two non-redundant databases were constructed with a similar approach.
The first includes pMHC complex entries which were annotated in terms of MHC species of origin and
bound peptide origin. The computational pipeline used to produce this database yielded 455 unique
pMHC structures, though the MHC class I molecules or even the bound peptides from one or more
records can be the same. This fact was taken into account from the beginning. We chose to keep these
very few entries as records of the database based on the fact that the same MHC molecule (e.g. from a
specific allele) can bind a repertoire of antigenic peptides and vice versa [59]. Hence, this important
biological information remained intact and the entry-related statistical features of this database can be
inspected in Fig. 16 and Fig. 17.
Fig. 16: Number of pMHC database records classified according to MHC class I species of origin.
As it can be observed in Fig. 16, the pMHC database is “dominated” by human and mice deriving
MHC molecules, which together comprise more than 90% of the entries, with the rest seven identified
species occupying the other 10%. As far as the length of bound peptides in the various database records
is concerned, it becomes apparent from Fig. 17 that peptides with lengths ranging from 8 to 10 amino
acids comprise more than 90% of the total records. This fact along with the 60% of the total peptide
entries being 9-mers, are in direct correlation with research projects indicating that most human MHC
class I alleles show a strong preference towards 9mers while also some murine MHC alleles show a
strong preference towards 8 and 9 amino acid peptide lengths [27] [60].
29
==PAGE:30==
 
Fig. 17: Number of bound peptides to MHC class I molecules included in the pMHC database classified by their length.
The αβ TCR-pMHC class I database was constructed by a similar procedure (as described in Methods
section) with the pMHC database. Furthermore, one extra step of “entry culling” was performed,
mainly in order to eliminate the low resolution structures from this database. The construction pipeline
for this database resulted in only 63 unique TCR-pMHC entries. In Fig. 18 is shown that more than
85% of the presented peptides in the complexes are either 9mers or 10mers, hence there is an apparent
consistency with regards to the bound peptides across both constructed databases. Additionally, an
essential characteristic of the latter database that proves its ability to serve as a “trustful” pool of
structural alignment templates is the diversity of TCR-MHC complexes included in the entries. From
the total number of 63 records, 51 of them include unique combinations of TCR-MHC complexes,
while in some even the same (i.e. compared to other records) peptide is presented by a different MHC
molecule to a different TCR. The fact of so many unique TCR-MHC combinations means in other
words, different binding topologies [27] (high topological diversity) as it can also be inspected in Fig.
19 which was constructed by structural alignment of all 63 MHC chains only from the database entries.
30
==PAGE:31==
Fig. 18: Number of presented peptides to αβ TCR included in the TCR-pMHC database classified by their length.
         αβ TCR
      pMHC
Fig. 19: Cartoon representation of all 63 structures in TCR-pMHC database after structural alignment of MHC chains.
31
==PAGE:32==
4.3 Benchmarking the pMHC modeling approach
One of the individual modeling procedures that are implemented in the developed tool is responsible
for the pMHC modeling. The performance of this procedure was assessed by an extensive benchmar-
king approach. During the benchmarking 16 models were developed per database entry (pMHC
database). These models were based on 4 different amounts of templates selected under 4 different
upper-limit sequence identity thresholds (as described in the Methods section). The accuracy of each
model was assessed by the calculation of Cα RMSD between the relevant segments of the model and
its real entry structure (i.e. Cα RMSD of pMHCs, Cα RMSD of MHCs, Cα RMSD of peptides). 
Note here, that the RMSD term from this point and after (until the end of the report) refers to Cα
RMSD calculation even when the Cα term is not mentioned.
When only 1 template was selected with respect to the sequence identity thresholds set, the Cα RMSD
values ranged from 0.17 to 2.42Å for the pMHC complex, from 0.16 to 2.34Å for the MHC alone and
from 0.1 to 4.65Å for the peptide as shown in Fig. 20.
a)
b)
32
==PAGE:33==
c)
Fig. 20: Density scatter plots of sequence identity % vs Cα RMSD of a) full pMHC complex, b) MHC only, c) bound peptide
only. The sequence identities were calculated for each subunit of the complex compared to the relevant segment of the 
selected single modeling template. On the right side of each plot the density colors are depicted with red being the most 
dense and blue the most sparse.
The results from the first two plots of Fig. 20 (a and b) show a high correlation between the increase of
the RMSD values and the decrease of sequence identity as would someone expect based on the theory
“behind” template selection for comparative modeling. Additionally, the densest cluster of pMHC
RMSD and MHC RMSD values, fall within 0.5 – 1.1Å and 0.3 – 1.0Å respectively. An interesting
observation from plots a and b in Fig. 20 is that, even when the sequence identity between the model
pMHC (in the case of pMHC sequence identity calculation, the sequences of MHC and presented
peptide are combined in one unified string) and the selected template is lower than 50% (close to the
“twilight zone” of homology modeling [46]), the RMSD values do not exceed 2.5Å. On the other hand,
the  bound  peptide  RMSD  values  (Fig.  20,  plot  c)  do  not  correlate  with  the  sequence  identity
fluctuation, so even when the model and template peptides are the same (100% identical) the RMSD
can range up to 3.8Å. These high RMSD values indicate that for many pMHC models the selected
template fails to serve as good structural candidate for the presented peptide even when the sequence
identity of the full pMHC complex is more than 80%. One such example entry (which was produced
after applying the 90% sequence identity threshold)  is shown in Fig. 21. 
33
==PAGE:34==
Fig. 21: Cartoon representation of the modeled 1S7R pMHC entry (selected template: 1S7V)  depicted in green, 
superimposed to the MHC molecule of the real structure of 1S7R depicted in light blue. The picture was produced after 
zooming in the binding cavity. 
The stacked barplots presented in Fig. 22 provide a broad summary of the RMSD fluctuation when
different identity thresholds are applied for the single template selection.
Finally, the RMSD values and their ranges mentioned previously, accompanied by both Fig. 20 and
Fig. 22, suggest that the pMHC modeling procedure is capable of producing accurate models even
when low sequence identity thresholds during template selection are applied.
a)
    
34
==PAGE:35==
b)
c)
Fig. 22: Stacked barplots with each bar including models based on a single template selected under a specific identity 
threshold. In each one of them, the number of models having Cα RMSD values below 1Å (green), between 1Å and 2Å 
(yellow), between 2Å and 5Å (orange), between 5Å and 10Å (red) or exceeding 10Å (blue) is presented. The RMSD values 
were calculated based on a) full pMHC complex, b) MHC only, c) bound peptide only.
35
==PAGE:36==
This benchmarking approach was repeated also for 2, 3, 5 selected templates per database entry while
in each iteration, the same 4 sequence identity thresholds were applied as mentioned in Methods
section. The selection of multiple templates aimed at proving whether more accurate pMHC models
can be constructed, since there are numerous individual examples that multiple template selection can
be beneficial in comparative modeling studies [61]. At this point it has to be mentioned that, when
multiple templates are used, then MODELLER combines in an automated way the provided query-
template alignments in order to identify local regions with the highest sequence identity and structural
divergence in order to construct the final model [6]. Since MODELLER is the responsible software for
pMHC modeling in our tool, the comparisons performed on modeled entries with one or more temp-
lates “gave” answers regarding the recommended number of templates that should be used by the
package user.
In Fig. 23, three density scatter plots are presented depicting the RMSD comparisons between modeled
pMHC database entries based on 1 template and 2 templates with their original structures. These plots
concern the Cα RMSD values calculated for the full pMHC, the MHC alone and the bound peptides
respectively. The utilization of 2 templates for entry modeling, yields RMSD values ranging from 0.19
to 2.45Å for the pMHC complex, from 0.18 to 2.43Å for the MHC alone and from 0.13 to 4.9Å for the
peptide. Although these RMSD ranges seem slightly worse compared to single template modeling,
there is an evident tendency for better (more accurate) models when 2 templates are used. This
tendency becomes apparent when inspecting the denser cluster of models (yellow and red color) in all
three plots, which falls below the plotted diagonal (dashed red line), though not all models become
better when two templates are selected. 
a)
36
==PAGE:37==
b)
c)
Fig. 23:  Density scatter plots of Cα RMSD after comparison of single and two template based models with their real 
structures. The calculated RMSDs concern a) full pMHC complex, b) MHC only, c) bound peptide only. On the right side of 
each plot the density colors are depicted with red being the most dense and blue the most sparse while the diagonal is 
depicted as a red dashed line and the “running” mean as green dashed line.
37
==PAGE:38==
The assumption that the selection of more templates produces, in general, better models is becoming
more evident when more than 2 templates are selected. This observation is validated by “eye inspe-
ction” of Fig. 24, where the RMSD values of pMHC models (compared to the real ones) produced from
3 and 5 templates respectively are compared to the relevant RMSDs of single template based models.
The respective MHC and peptide RMSD plots from the comparison between single template and three
template based models can be investigated in the Appendix section at the end of this report.
a) 
b)
Fig. 24: Density scatter plots of Cα RMSD for the full pMHC complexes after comparison of a) single vs three template 
based models with their real structures, b) single vs five template based models with their real structures. On the right side 
of each plot the density colors are depicted, with red being the most dense and blue the most sparse while the diagonal is 
depicted as a red dashed line and the “running” mean as green dashed line.
38
==PAGE:39==
In order to statistically confirm the observation stated previously, sample dependent paired t-tests
were performed. This statistical measurement tests the null hypothesis, which is the assumption that
two related samples will have identical average values [62]. Results of this kind of tests are numerical
values that justify or reject the null hypothesis. In order for this hypothesis to be rejected and the
difference between the two samples to be considered as significant, the t-test values have to be less than
0.05. For the purpose of the presented study, 18 paired t-tests were performed and the results suggested
that the use of 5 templates leads to significantly better models (in full pMHC model and its subunits)
based on the calculated RMSD values between the modeled pMHC database entries and their real
structures  (Table 1).
pMHC RMSDs
MHC RMSDs
Peptide RMSDs
1 vs 2 templates
5.020E-65
6.42E-60
1.2E-14
1 vs 3 templates
9.51E-74
2.98E-69
3.64E-22
1 vs 5 templates
5.2E-93
4.55E-85
5.26E-29
2 vs 3 templates
1.82E-08
1.14E-06
1.0E-06
2 vs 5 templates
1.1E-24
8.64E-19
3.85E-13
3 vs 5 templates
3.33E-17
3.48E-14
6.75E-05
Table 1: Table with paired t-test calculations on Cα RMSD values of models produced based on different amounts of 
templates. In general values less than 0.05 indicate significantly different samples. 
One of the benchmarked entries that was modeled significantly better based on five templates instead
of a single one is 2HN7. The modeling of this entry after applying the 90% sequence identity threshold
with one selected template (template: 1TMC) yielded pMHC Cα RMSD of 1.53Å whereas, when five
templates were used (templates: 1TMC,1I4F,3OXR,4JFO,3MRR) the RMSD value dropped to 0.5Å
(Fig. 25). 
Fig. 25: Cartoon representation of the modeled 2HN7 pMHC entry depicted in green (model on the left produced with a
single template, whereas on the right with five templates), superimposed to the pMHC complex of the real structure of
2HN7 depicted in light blue.
39
==PAGE:40==
Due to the fact that the MHC sequence is usually almost 18-times longer than the peptide one, the
template selection is mostly guided by the MHC (pMHC template selection is described in Methods
section). Therefore, the plots depicted in Fig. 26 were produced, in order to shed light on how accurate
is the modeled peptide included in pMHC modeled structures based on five templates when templates
with very similar or not MHC chains are selected.
a) 
b)
Fig. 26: Density scatter plots of peptide Cα RMSD from models based on five templates compared to their real peptide 
structures vs MHC sequence identity to the best selected template MHC (and peptide seq id < 100%). a) MHC sequence id 
> 95% and peptide id < 100%, b) MHC sequence id <= 95% and peptide id < 100%. On the right side the density colors 
are depicted with red being the most dense and blue the most sparse.
40
==PAGE:41==
In plot a from Fig. 26, the RMSD values of peptides (compared to their real structures) included in
pMHC complexes with MHC sequence identity > 95% to the relevant chain of the best selected
template (out of five) are presented, while the peptide id was < 100% identical to the relevant subunit
of this template. In plot b of the same figure, the RMSD values of peptides included in pMHC models
are presented with MHC sequence id <= 95% to the best template and peptide sequence again < 100%.
As suggested from both density scatter plots of Fig. 26, the vast majority of peptide models (based on
five templates) do not vary more than 2.5Å (denser cluster) compared to their real structures no matter
the similarity of the template MHC chain. As the sequence identity of MHCs drops from 95% to 80%
there is a relevant RMSD increase of approximately 1Å or even less, a fact that correlates with the
expected RMSD increase due to the drop of sequence identity with the selected templates. All in all,
even when  the  MHC  identity  to  the  best out of five  selected  templates  is  less  than  80%, the
computational procedure of pMHC modeling seems to produce quite accurate peptide structures
compared to their respective real structures.
Although the use of the best five templates was proved to produce in general more accurate models,
there are cases of entry models that actually became “worse” compared to the use of a single best
template as shown in Fig. 27 plot b and Fig. 27 plot a.
a)
41
==PAGE:42==
b)
Fig. 27: Density scatter plots of Cα RMSD after comparison of single vs five template models with their real structures. 
Calculated RMSDs concern a) MHC ony, b) bound peptide only. On the right side of each plot the density colors are 
depicted with red being the most dense and blue the most sparse while the diagonal is depicted as a red dashed line and the 
“running” mean as green dashed line.
The RMSD values with respect to the full pMHC complex and MHC alone of structures that were
modeled with a higher accuracy when using a single template differ between 0.1 – 1.2Å (difference
between singe and five template based models), while peptide RMSDs of models based on five
templates became even worse compared to their respective single template based models since they
exceeded the difference of 1.2Å (Fig. 27 plot b). Generally the same “worse” models showed similar
RMSD values between pMHC RMSD and MHC RMSD, whereas the peptide RMSD values did not
show any clear correlation. Furthermore, ten models that were identified to yield RMSD differences
(for pMHC and MHC) ranging from 0.7 to 1.2 Å revealed the “source” of the problem (i.e. less
accurate models when five templates are used). In all of these ten cases apart from the first template
that showed sequence identity close to the applied thresholds, the rest selected templates (usually three
or four of them) were at least 30% less similar compared to the sequence identity of the best template.
One specific example of the above mentioned models is 4CW1 for which the selected templates after
applying the sequence identity upper limit threshold (for template selection) of 90%, had the following
sequence identities to the original entry sequence:
•
4cvx: 85.9% seq id
•
1kjm: 52.7% seq id
•
3rl1: 50.0% seq id
•
2bst: 51.1% seq id
•
4hwz: 49.5% seq id
42
==PAGE:43==
The structural comparisons of the singe template based model and five templates based model with the
real entry 4CW1 pMHC structure can be inspected in Fig. 28.
The identity percentages of the selected templates for the models that “showed” less than 0.7Å
difference in RSMD values (again for pMHC and MHC) did not reveal any clear reasons for the
production of less accurate models. Similar analysis was performed also for models (other than the ten
described above) produced with five templates for which the peptide RMSD values were even 3-fold
higher compared to the same models produced with a single template. The results of this analysis
though did not provide a “pattern” based on the sequence identity (pMHC identity) of the selected
templates able to justify the reason behind badly modeled peptides (while the MHC of these models
was properly modeled) which suggests that the fold of the query peptide depends solely on the template
peptide fold and even the selection of five templates cannot “rescue” its structure.  
Fig. 28: Cartoon representation of the modeled 4CW1 pMHC entry depicted in green (model on the left produced with a
single template, whereas on the right with five templates), superimposed to the pMHC complex of the real structure of
4CW1 depicted in light blue.
The plots in Fig. 29 were produced in order to visualize the performance of the pMHC modeling
approach when using five templates (since this amount of templates was statistically proved to yield
significantly better results) for pMHC entries with specific lengths of bound peptides (i.e. 8-mers, 9-
mers, 10-mers, 11-mers, 12-mers). These three stacked barplots depict the clustering of models based
on their RMSD compared to their real structures calculated on the full pMHC complex, the MHC alone
and the bound peptide respectively. Also note that each bar includes only pMHC complexes with bound
peptides of specific lengths under the sequence identity thresholds applied during the selection of five
templates.  
43
==PAGE:44==
a)
b)
44
==PAGE:45==
c)
Fig. 29:  Stacked barplots with each bar including pMHC models with specific peptide lengths based on five templates 
selected under a specific identity threshold. In each one of them, the number of models having Cα RMSD values below 1Å 
(green), between 1Å and 1.5Å (yellow), between 1.5Å and 2Å (orange), between 2Å and 3Å (red) or exceeding 3Å (blue) is 
presented. The RMSD values were calculated based on a) full pMHC complex, b) MHC only, c) bound peptide only.
By inspecting the stacked barplots in Fig. 29, it quickly becomes apparent that the modeling of the
MHC subunit of each complex under all applied sequence identity thresholds for all the different
lengths of bound peptides is very accurate. This statement is justified by the fact that in all cases 90%
or even more of modeled MHCs show RMSD values compared to the real MHC structures of less than
1.5Å (Fig. 29 plot b). Since the MHC structure comprises more than 90% of the full pMHC complex,
the accurate modeling of the MHC chain leads also to low RMSD values calculated on the whole
complex. Therefore the RMSD pMHC values are in direct correlation with the respective MHC RMSD
values with again 90% of all modeled pMHC complexes variating from their real structures by 1.5Å at
most (Fig. 29 plot a). Finally, the peptides included in the pMHC complexes are modeled slightly
worse compared to how accurate their respective MHC chains are (Fig. 29 plot c). Hence, in cases
where low sequence identity thresholds for template selection are applied, more than 30% of modeled
peptides variate from their real structures by more than 1.5 Å, with the worst modeled peptides being
10-mers (< 80% threshold), 11-mers (< 95% threshold) and 12-mers (< 100% threshold) where
approximately 80% of models show RMSD values ranging from 2 – 3Å (in 12-mer almost 100% of
modeled peptides vary from their original structures by more than 2Å). 
45
==PAGE:46==
4.4 Benchmark analysis of the “pseudo-docking” approach
The performance of the constructed pipeline with regards to TCR-pMHC complex assembly was
evaluated with a separate (from the one described in section 4.3) benchmarking procedure. During this
approach, no modeling of the relevant complex subunits was performed, instead each database entry
was split into TCR and pMHC parts resembling the “modeled” output structures. Subsequently, the
TCR-pMHC database was parsed and structural alignments of the complex subunits to the identified
structural template (selected under the same four sequence identity thresholds) are attempted (as
described in Methods section for template selection and superimposition of structures). A priori
knowledge with regards to the most effective “recipe” for accurate TCR-pMHC complex assembly by
superimposition  was  not  existent.  Therefore,  two  different  procedures  for  specific  position  (on
structures)  selection  from  the  aligned  sequences  were  put  into  test  in  parallel  as  part  of  this
benchmarking. At this point it has to be noted that, both procedures rely heavily on the consistent
character of both databases since the sequences of all entries are stored after their alignment with the
relevant HMM profiles and the structures that they resemble were renumbered accordingly. 
During the first one, called superimposition “all to all”, the developed pMHC database and the LYRA-
implemented template database are parsed in order to identify all positions on the aligned database
sequences with no deletions (“gaps”) across all entries. In contrast to the approach described in
Methods section 3.3.2 with regards to specific position indexes search, in this case all sequence
positions are searched. In other words, this approach is an attempt to assemble TCR-pMHC complexes
from its split subunits with superimposition guided by all MHC and TCR residues. Each attempt to
produce full TCR-pMHC complexes was based on the structural alignment of 168 MHC and 181 TCR
residues respectively (based in their Cα atoms as described in Methods section 3.4.2).
The latter approach, called “interface to interface”, is the one described in the Methods section 3.3.2.
Here, the two databases mentioned above are parsed with the exact same way in order to identify again
positions on the MHC and TCR aligned sequences (as stored in database) which do not include gaps.
Though, only specific positions of the sequences are searched which concern MHC parts interacting
with the peptide and the TCR, and TCR parts close (but not in) to the CDR loops of both α and β  TCR
chains, called “stems” (a more in-depth description of this position selection approach is provided in
the relevant Methods section). More specifically, the sequence parts 63-80 and 151-70 from the aligned
MHC sequences are searched and positions with no “gaps” across all entries are selected in order to
align the MHC to the selected template based on residues with IDs belonging to these indexes. For the
TCR chains, the indexes used to search for aligning position selection were (as mentioned in Methods
section): 
•
α → 21-23, 39-41, 53-57, 68-70, 105-107, 127-129 
•
β → 19-21, 36-38, 51-53, 64-66, 102-104, 128-130
This search across all MHC and TCR sequences stored in the databases resulted in the selection of 37
MHC and 33 TCR residues that will guide the superimposition. These residues capture “the binding
cavity” topology (interface between TCR and pMHC).
The resulting Cα RMSDs for both approaches between the assembled complexes and their real
structure calculated on the full complex topology and their binding cavities (without the peptide) are
presented in Fig. 30. 
46
==PAGE:47==
a)
   
 
  
b)
47
==PAGE:48==
     
   
c) 
d)
Fig. 30: a) & b) Stacked barplots produced from all vs all approach and interface vs interface approach respectively, with
each bar including TCR-pMHC complexes assembled based on a template selected under a specific identity threshold. The
first four bars correspond to full complex RMSD whereas the latter only to binding cavity RMSD. In each one of them, the
number of full complexes or complex binding cavities having Cα RMSD values below 1Å (green), between 1Å and 2Å
(yellow), between 2Å and 4Å (orange), between 4Å and 6Å (red) or exceeding 6Å (blue) is presented. c) Density scatter plot
of Cα RMSD values of the full TCR-pMHC complex for the same assembled complex produced with the two different
superimposing procedures. On the right side of each plot the density colors are depicted with red being the most dense
andblue the most sparse while the diagonal is depicted as a red dashed line and the “running” mean as green dashed line.
d) Same case as density scatter plot c, whereas the RMSD values here concern the binding cavities only.
48
==PAGE:49==
The first two plots (a,b) in Fig. 30 prove the expected higher accuracy in the binding cavities compared
to the complete structures of the assembled complexes in both superimposing approaches. The binding
sites of more than 80% of the assembled complexes differ from their “real” (initial) sites by less than
4Å no matter how low the applied identity threshold for template selection was. In the case of full
complex RMSD values, it quickly becomes apparent that there is a high correlation between the total
complex assembly accuracy and the applied template selection thresholds during both superimposing
procedures. An interesting fact though is that, in both plots and in all case-models that they depict,
when the 80% sequence identity threshold is applied for the selection of the superimposition template,
the RMSD values become lower (i.e. better) compared to higher applied thresholds (95%, 90%). This is
the result of the template selection approach followed for superimposition (described in Methods
section) plus the small amount of total entries (63 in total) included in the constructed TCR-pMHC
database. Hence, many complex entries are assembled (better) based on lower sequence identity
templates (e.g. < 80%)  due to higher similarrity to their real complex structures compared to more
identical in terms of sequence, superimposition templates. At this point it has to be mentioned that,
there is no direct pattern on template selection able to reveal a possible solution to this fact. One such
example is 2OI9 (Fig. 31) which is assembled with 6.9Å difference (in both superimposing approaches)
compared to its full real complex structure based on < 90% identical template to its TCR-MHC
(template: 3TJH) and with 3.0Å based on < 80% identical template (template: 3VXM). The respective
RMSD values for the binding cavities of this entry in both approaches (same RMSD in both) are 6.2Å
and 2.9Å.
Fig. 31: Cartoon representation of assembled 2OI9 complex (assembled by CDR “stems” - interacting MHC positions 
“pseudo-docking” approach) superimposed to the original structure. On the left the assembly was based on 3TJH while on 
the right it was based on 3VXM. In both representations the original structure is depicted in light blue whereas the 
assembled structure in green. 
49
==PAGE:50==
Despite the fact that in all four plots from Fig. 30 there are small fluctuations of RMSD values for the
same  assembled  complexes  towards  the  first  or  the  second  “pseudo-docking”  approach,  these
differences do not exceed 0.6Å (0.6Å worst case scenario: only one assembled complex found) for the
full complex and 0.45Å for the binding cavities. These differences did not reveal the best super-
imposition approach. Therefore we selected the “interface to interface” approach to be implemented in
the final version of our tool, since it “captures” equally well the binding site topology of the assembled
complexes compared to their real ones and most importantly it does not use residues lying on highly
variable regions (i.e. CDR loops) to guide the “pseudo-docking”. In order to validate also in statistical
terms that none of the superimposition approaches yields statistically significant RMSD values for the
complex binding sites, one paired t-test was performed. During this test, the cavity RMSD values
calculated on assembled complexes based on both “pseudo-docking” approaches were compared, and
the result was 0.083. Hence, it can safely be concluded that both approaches assemble TCR-pMHC
structures with almost the same efficiency with respect to their binding topologies.
4.5 Evaluation of the full TCR-pMHC complex modeling
The first benchmarking procedure, the results of which are presented in section 4.3, was designed to
test the performance of the pMHC modeling pipeline “part” alone. It was clearly proved that no matter
the sequence identity thresholds that are applied during template selection, five templates yield very
accurate pMHC models in terms of Cα RMSD. The results of the latter benchmarking approach, which
are presented and described in section 4.4, aimed at assessing the “pseudo-docking” accuracy of two
alternative superimposition procedures for full complex assembly. Although, both procedures yield
similar Cα RMSD results for the formation of the binding cavity of each assembled complex, the one
including the “stems” and interacting MHC positions was chosen. It is well known already that confor-
mational changes upon binding of the two complex subparts occur mostly at the CDRs, and more
specifically at the CDR3α and CDR3β  [63], hence the selected superimposition approach, that was
implemented in the main modeling pipeline, seems theoretically more promising (and safe) in capturing
the essential “interaction information” by assembling complexes based on their binding interfaces and
more specifically based on residues lying on the most “constant” parts of the cavities.
The suggested parameters with regards to the amount of templates for pMHC modeling, as well as the
selection of “near” binding cavity positions for structural alignment of the complex subunits were
utilized in this final benchmarking approach. This procedure attempted to evaluate the performance of
the total “flow” of the pipeline, from the subunit modeling level until the final complex formation.
Again, the same four identity thresholds were applied for the pMHC, TCR modeling as well as for the
structural alignment template selection, while the pMHC was modeled based only on five templates.
The results of this benchmarking are summarized in Fig. 32 where both RMSD values based on the full
complex and binding sites-only are presented.
50
==PAGE:51==
 
                 Template selection thresholds
Fig. 32: Stacked barplot with each bar including modeled complexes the subunits of which were modeled and assembled 
based on templates selected under a specific identity threshold. The first four bars correspond to full complex RMSD 
whereas the latter only to binding cavity RMSD. In each one of them, the number of full complexes or complex binding 
cavities having Cα RMSD values below 1Å (green), between 1Å and 2Å (yellow), between 2Å and 4Å (orange), between 4Å 
and 6Å (red) or exceeding 6Å (blue) is presented.
The modeled complexes in general, show greater divergence from their real structures with regards to
both the complete structure and the binding cavity alone when compared to the relevant results from
the “pseudo-docking” benchmark, as presented in Fig. 30. Of course, this outcome was the expected
since, although the assembling procedure followed in this benchmarking approach and Fig. 30 plot b
are the same, the subunits in this case were modeled and not split from the original complex (original
subunits). Furthermore, significant increase in RMSD values is observed after the application of each
sequence identity threshold for template selections. Apart from models produced with less than 100%
and less than 95% sequence identity thresholds, there are almost no models assembled with template
identity less than 90% yielding RMSD values less than 2Å. Despite the general increase of RMSD
values, still more than 50% of all models differ from their original complex structure by less than 4Å in
terms of full complex comparison, while more than 75% of all binding cavities show again RMSD
values less than 4Å (Fig. 32, Fig. 33). 
51
==PAGE:52==
a)
b)
Fig. 33: Density scatter plots of  a) Cα RMSD values of the modeled full TCR-pMHC complex vs the sequence identity % to
the selected superimposition template, b) Cα RMSD values of the binding site of the modeled TCR-pMHC complex vs the 
sequence identity % to the selected superimposition template. On the right side of each plot the density colors are depicted 
with red being the most dense and blue the most sparse.
52
==PAGE:53==
In Fig. 33, the RMSD fluctuation for both full complex and the binding sites alone is shown as a
function of sequence identity drop to the selected superimposing template. The density scatter plots in
Fig. 33 revealed some “outlier” models which show full complex RMSDs above 6Å even when the
sequence identity to the template structure is extremely high (i.e. more than 97%). The cause of this
observation was spotted by manual analysis of the modeled complexes. It turned out that the entry
3TJH, although being a proper TCR-pMHC complex, has an unusual binding topology ( TCR on top of
the respective pMHC). Hence, when it is selected as a superimposing template it always “misguides”
the formation of the full complex, and of course itself cannot be formed properly since no selected
template can rescue its “divergent” structure. All models with RMSDs for the full complex with values
above 6Å were assembled based on this entry and these models belong to: 2E7L, 3TFK, 4MXQ. The
entry itself is formed based on two out of the three entries mentioned, resulting in RMSD values (for
full complex) ranging from 5.9 to 8.0Å (under the four different identity thresholds). The modeled
complex structure of 3TJH (based on 3TFK →99.5 seq id %) superimposed to the real complex can be
inspected in Fig. 34.
Fig. 34: Cartoon representation of modeled 3TJH complex superimposed to the original structure (MHC to MHC 
superimposition). The assembly was based on 3TFK and yielded 5.9 Å for full RMSD and 5.1 Å for binging site RMSD. The 
original structure is depicted in light blue whereas the model in green.
53
==PAGE:54==
Finally, the scatter plots in Fig. 33 confirm that our package is capable of producing TCR-pMHC
models with meaningful binding site topologies even when the alignment template is less than 70%
identical, since in most of these cases the binding interfaces from the modeled complexes variate from
the real structure in general not more than 4Å. The best model (in terms of binding site RMSD) out of
all modeled entries based on templates selected with less than 80% sequence identity was the entry
3MV7, the structure of which can be inspected in Fig. 35. The binding interface of this model variates
from the real one by 2.2Å while the full modeled complex variates from the real by 2.32Å.
Fig. 35: Cartoon representation of modeled 3MV7 complex superimposed to the original structure (binding site – site). The
assembly was based on 4MJI and yielded 2.32Å for full RMSD and 2.2Å for binging site RMSD. In both representations the
original structure is depicted in light blue whereas the model in green. On the left the full topology is depicted whereas on
the right the binding site is focused.
54
==PAGE:55==
5. Discussion and future perspectives
The molecular recognition of pMHC complexes by αβ TCR lying on the surface of Tc cells, is one of
the most essential steps towards the production of cell-mediated immune responses [64][1]. Despite the
fact that the formation of the TCR-pMHC complex has been under investigation for many decades,
there is still no computational approach for the automatic modeling of such complexes. This report
intends to describe the features and performance of a structural modeling package, specific for the
binding domains of αβ TCR-pMHC class I complexes. This initial automatic TCR-pMHC modeling
attempt comprises a comparative modeling method  [41] supported by the implementation of other
specialized tools.
Two non-redundant databases were constructed including pMHC and TCR-pMHC sequence entries
(respectively) along with their appropriately modified PDB structures. These databases served as
template “pools” during the homology modeling approach followed. Although all the solved structures
of the different pMHC and full TCR-pMHC complexes were identified by alignments of the most
updated PDB archive [8] to the relevant in-house built (modified) HMM family profiles [47], future
experimentally determined unique complexes should be added to the relevant databases in order to
increase template diversity. Also, the construction and usage of more extended HMM profiles (in terms
of sequence lengths) for the under investigation protein families is highly encouraged in future studies
based on this modeling package. The construction of such profiles should be based on meaningful
MSAs from as many as possible amino acid sequences of MHC class I, TCRα and TCRβ. In this way
more accurate HMM profiles may “arise” which will possibly lead to better template selection and
better models in general.    
Furthermore, three different benchmarking approaches were utilized in order to evaluate the perfor-
mance of the various pipeline sub-procedures. Each one of them uses as targets the sequences of the
entries contained in the relevant developed databases. The evaluation of the resulting structures was
performed by Cα RMSD calculations between them and their reference (real) structures. The results
from the pMHC modeling benchmark (first testing approach) revealed that the selection of multiple
structure  templates  leads  to  significantly more accurate pMHC complexes.  Among the  different
amounts of templates used to perform the pMHC modeling, five templates proved to yield the best
models. During this procedure, it was also pinpointed that the total similarity drop from best to worst
selected template should not exceed 30% while none of the templates should be more than 20%
dissimilar from the others. Both observations  have been implemented as default parameters  for
template selection in the developed package. As for now, the templates for pMHC modeling are
selected upon scores calculated from a BLOSUM62 matrix for the combined MHC (aligned to HMM)
and peptide sequences. Additionally, only pMHC entry structures with bound peptides of the same
length with the query can be selected as templates. Although this method was proved to produce
precise models, different approaches can and should be followed in future validations, in order to
improve the template selection “recipe” which will subsequently lead to better models. Some examples
of alternative approaches are selection of the templates ranked higher after separate search for MHC
and peptide, as well as more simplistic procedures such as selection based on MHC sequence only and
permission to use MHC entries with bound peptides of varying lengths.
Out of the two different superimposition approaches that were put into test, the one that includes only
the “stems” residues close to the CDR loops from both TCR chains plus the interacting MHC residues
was chosen. Although both approaches performed almost equally well, the selection was based on the
55
==PAGE:56==
fact that in order to “capture” a native-like binding site topology of the complex, structural alignment
errors due to CDR positions (since these structural parts are highly variable both in terms of topology
and length [63]) should be avoided (minimized). Again, it was proved that this subpart of the general
pipeline was capable of assembling full TCR-pMHC complexes with binding cavities resembling quite
well their native ones, although the full complex topology variated slightly more from the original. The
template that is selected for the superimposition in this procedure is always the one with the highest
blosum score based on the combined TCR α,β and MHC chains. The positions, based on which the
structural alignment will be performed (for complex assembly) can be selected by various criteria that
differ from the ones described in the Methods and Results sections. Hence, further comparisons of the
selected superimposition method with other approaches, utilizing for example strictly conserved amino
acid positions across all identified MHCs and TCRs as well as CDR lengths for the template selection,
would probably “reveal” the method capable of assembling complexes with the most native-like
docked composition of the complexes.   
The performance of the full pipeline was assessed with an additional benchmarking approach including
all the steps of the procedure, i.e. from modeling of the complex subunits to their assembly into the
final TCR-pMHC complex. Since the consistency of pMHC and TCR modeling was already proved,
this approach shed light on the accuracy of “pseudo-docking” modeled subunits. All in all, the pipeline
was proved to produce acceptable, in terms of RMSD values, full complexes with binding cavities
capable of providing structural insights for studies focusing on the TCR-pMHC interactions. In some
cases though, even extremely high identity of the complex with the selected superimposing template
fail to produce accurate models. This fact was caused by a TCR-pMHC database entry with id 3TJH
with unusual docking angle, therefore it was eliminated from the relevant database and will not be used
in future analysis.
Finally, in real-case scenarios, the final step of the computational pipeline is the side chain correction of
the  modeled complex in order to improve and eliminate structural clashes that might occur after the
superimposition procedure. This step was not included in any of the benchmarking approaches since
the main focus was the assessment of the backbone accuracy of the modeled complexes. In future
work, related to this package, comparisons of full atom RMSDs should be performed for the side-chain
corrected models. In addition to that, extra modeling steps such as loop remodeling protocols mostly
for the presented peptide and the CDR loops, can be implemented in the pipeline. These suggested
improvements will possibly produce highly detailed binding cavities of such complexes, able to
provide information with regards to possible interactions between the TCR and its identified pMHC.
56
==PAGE:57==
6. Conclusion
In this report, we present the first attempt towards the development of an automated computational tool
for modeling of αβ TCR-pMHC class I complexes. The constructed package is initially modeling the
variable domain of each MHC entry with its bound peptide based on five templates selected from a
constructed pMHC database. These templates are selected according to blosum scores after comparison
with the query sequences. Additional thresholds regarding identity difference secure, as much as
possible, that only relatively similar (in terms of sequence identity) templates will be selected. The
pMHC modeling performance was tested and the average Cα RMSD values for the MHC were less
than 1Å while the average peptide RMSD did not exceed 2Å even when low identity thresholds for
template  selection  were  applied  during  the  test.  In  parallel  with  the  pMHC  modeling,  a  local
implementation of the web server LYRA [7] produces an optimized TCR model from the relevant
query sequences.
Subsequently, the pipeline performs the assembly of the full TCR-pMHC complex from the modeled
subunits by superimposing them to a template selected upon blosum score calculation. “Pseudo-
docking” templates are selected from a constructed TCR-pMHC database. As the final step, all side
chains of the complex are corrected for removal of clashes after the complex assembly. The capacity of
this tool to assemble accurate complex models was assessed and the results were very promising since
under all applied threshold identities during template selection, the average full complex RMSD values
did not exceed 5Å whereas the average binding cavity RMSD values did not exceed 4Å.
Despite the encouraging RMSD values, many “variables” during the template selection can and should
be optimized even more, since template structures are the key component of the modeling accuracy in
this package. Furthermore, future studies should attempt to implement additional modeling approaches,
such as loop modeling, in the main pipeline in order to be able to produce models with clear
information regarding interactions between the pMHC with the respective TCR, since the formation of
such complexes is the “key” in the production of efficient cell-mediated immune responses. Finally, it
was  clearly  shown that the  developed  package  is  in general capable of producing TCR-pMHC
complexes with acceptable backbone accuracy, especially with respect to the binding site formation.
Hence, it will hopefully act as a source of inspiration for efficient peptide vaccine development.
57
==PAGE:58==
7. Bibliography
[1]
B. Alberts, A. Johnson, J. Lewis, M. Raff, K. Roberts, and P. Walter, “The Adaptive Immune 
System,” 2002.
[2]
T. ten Broeke, R. Wubbolts, and W. Stoorvogel, “MHC class II antigen presentation by dendritic 
cells regulated through endosomal sorting.,” Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Biol., vol. 5, no. 12, p. 
a016873, Dec. 2013.
[3]
M. H. Andersen, D. Schrama, P. thor Straten, and J. C. Becker, “Cytotoxic T Cells,” J. Invest. 
Dermatol., vol. 126, no. 1, pp. 32–41, Jan. 2006.
[4]
D. N. Garboczi, P. Ghosh, U. Utz, Q. R. Fan, W. E. Biddison, and D. C. Wiley, “Structure of the 
complex between human T-cell receptor, viral peptide and HLA-A2,” Nature, vol. 384, no. 6605,
pp. 134–141, Nov. 1996.
[5]
“Python 2.7.13 documentation.” [Online]. Available: https://docs.python.org/2/
[6]
P. Larsson, B. Wallner, E. Lindahl, and A. Elofsson, “Using multiple templates to improve 
quality of homology models in automated homology modeling.,” Protein Sci., vol. 17, no. 6, pp. 
990–1002, Jun. 2008.
[7]
M. S. Klausen, M. V. Anderson, M. C. Jespersen, M. Nielsen, and P. Marcatili, “LYRA, a 
webserver for lymphocyte receptor structural modeling,” Nucleic Acids Res., vol. 43, no. W1, 
pp. W349–W355, Jul. 2015.
[8]
H. M. Berman et al., “The Protein Data Bank.,” Nucleic Acids Res., vol. 28, no. 1, pp. 235–42, 
Jan. 2000.
[9]
V. N. Maiorov and G. M. Crippen, “Significance of Root-Mean-Square Deviation in Comparing 
Three-dimensional Structures of Globular Proteins,” J. Mol. Biol., vol. 235, no. 2, pp. 625–634, 
Jan. 1994.
[10]
G. Beck and G. S. Habicht, “Immunity and the Invertebrates,” Sci. Am., vol. 275, no. 5, pp. 60–
66, Nov. 1996.
[11]
K. J. O’Byrne and A. G. Dalgleish, “Chronic immune activation and inflammation as the cause 
of malignancy.,” Br. J. Cancer, vol. 85, no. 4, pp. 473–83, Aug. 2001.
[12]
C. Janeway, Immunobiology 5 : the immune system in health and disease. Garland Pub, 2001.
[13]
G. R. Klimpel, Immune Defenses. University of Texas Medical Branch at Galveston, 1996.
[14]
M. Sathiamurthy et al., “CED: a conformational epitope database,” Immunome Res., vol. 1, no. 
1, p. 2, Apr. 2005.
58
==PAGE:59==
[15]
N. A. Mitchison and S. Pettersson, “Does clonal selection occur among T cells?,” Ann. Immunol.
(Paris)., vol. 134D, no. 1, pp. 37–45.
[16]
E. G. Brooks, S. P. Balk, K. Aupeix, M. Colonna, J. L. Strominger, and V. Groh-Spies, “Human 
T-cell receptor (TCR) alpha/beta + CD4-CD8- T cells express oligoclonal TCRs, share junctional
motifs across TCR V beta-gene families, and phenotypically resemble memory T cells.,” Proc. 
Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., vol. 90, no. 24, pp. 11787–91, Dec. 1993.
[17]
E. Ladi, X. Yin, T. Chtanova, and E. A. Robey, “Thymic microenvironments for T cell 
differentiation and selection,” Nat. Immunol., vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 338–343, Apr. 2006.
[18]
S. Winandy, L. Wu, J. H. Wang, and K. Georgopoulos, “Pre-T cell receptor (TCR) and TCR-
controlled checkpoints in T cell differentiation are set by Ikaros.,” J. Exp. Med., vol. 190, no. 8, 
pp. 1039–48, Oct. 1999.
[19]
R. N. Germain, “T-cell development and the CD4–CD8 lineage decision,” Nat. Rev. Immunol., 
vol. 2, no. 5, pp. 309–322, May 2002.
[20]
L. Klein, B. Kyewski, P. M. Allen, and K. A. Hogquist, “Positive and negative selection of the T 
cell repertoire: what thymocytes see (and don’t see).,” Nat. Rev. Immunol., vol. 14, no. 6, pp. 
377–91, Jun. 2014.
[21]
E. Palmer, “Cell death and immunity: Negative selection clearing out the bad apples from the T-
cell repertoire,” Nat. Rev. Immunol., vol. 3, no. 5, pp. 383–391, May 2003.
[22]
T. K. Starr, S. C. Jameson, and K. A. Hogquist, “P OSITIVE AND NEGATIVE SELECTION 
OF T CELLS,” Annu. Rev. Immunol., vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 139–176, Apr. 2003.
[23]
P. Sharma, K. Wagner, J. D. Wolchok, and J. P. Allison, “Novel cancer immunotherapy agents 
with survival benefit: recent successes and next steps,” Nat. Rev. Cancer, vol. 11, no. 11, pp. 
805–812, Oct. 2011.
[24]
J. L. Zakrzewski, M. R. M. van den Brink, and J. A. Hubbell, “Overcoming immunological 
barriers in regenerative medicine,” Nat. Biotechnol., vol. 32, no. 8, pp. 786–794, Aug. 2014.
[25]
B. Wang, C. C. Norbury, R. Greenwood, J. R. Bennink, J. W. Yewdell, and J. A. Frelinger, 
“Multiple paths for activation of naive CD8+ T cells: CD4-independent help.,” J. Immunol., vol. 
167, no. 3, pp. 1283–9, Aug. 2001.
[26]
J. D. Stone, A. S. Chervin, and D. M. Kranz, “T-cell receptor binding affinities and kinetics: 
impact on T-cell activity and specificity.,” Immunology, vol. 126, no. 2, pp. 165–76, Feb. 2009.
[27]
M. G. Rudolph, R. L. Stanfield, and I. A. Wilson, “HOW TCRS BIND MHCS, PEPTIDES, 
AND CORECEPTORS,” Annu. Rev. Immunol., vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 419–466, Apr. 2006.
59
==PAGE:60==
[28]
D. K. Cole et al., “T-cell receptor (TCR)-peptide specificity overrides affinity-enhancing TCR-
major histocompatibility complex interactions.,” J. Biol. Chem., vol. 289, no. 2, pp. 628–38, Jan.
2014.
[29]
V. Zoete, M. Irving, M. Ferber, M. A. Cuendet, and O. Michielin, “Structure-Based, Rational 
Design of T Cell Receptors.,” 
 
Front. Immunol., vol. 4, p. 268, Sep. 2013.
[30]
J. Charles A Janeway, P. Travers, M. Walport, and M. J. Shlomchik, “The major 
histocompatibility complex and its functions,” 2001.
[31]
J. R. Gruen and S. M. Weissman, “Human MHC class III and IV genes and disease 
associations.,” Front. Biosci., vol. 6, pp. D960-72, Aug. 2001.
[32]
J. Charles A Janeway, P. Travers, M. Walport, and M. J. Shlomchik, “Antigen Presentation to T 
Lymphocytes,” 2001.
[33]
E. W. Hewitt, “The MHC class I antigen presentation pathway: strategies for viral immune 
evasion.,” Immunology, vol. 110, no. 2, pp. 163–9, Oct. 2003.
[34]
J. G. Borger, R. Zamoyska, and D. M. Gakamsky, “Proximity of TCR and its CD8 coreceptor 
controls sensitivity of T cells.,” Immunol. Lett., vol. 157, no. 1–2, pp. 16–22, 2014.
[35]
“A Text Book of Immunology - J.K. Sinha &; S. Bhattacharya
[36]
M. K. McCarthy and J. B. Weinberg, “The immunoproteasome and viral infection: a complex 
regulator of inflammation,” Front. Microbiol., vol. 6, p. 21, Jan. 2015.
[37]
K. Natarajan, H. Li, R. A. Mariuzza, and D. H. Margulies, “MHC class I molecules, structure 
and function.,” Rev. Immunogenet., vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 32–46, 1999.
[38]
B. Alberts, A. Johnson, J. Lewis, M. Raff, K. Roberts, and P. Walter, “Innate Immunity,” 2002.
[39]
D. M. Kranz, “T cell receptor CDRs: starring versus supporting roles,” Nat. Immunol., vol. 6, no.
2, pp. 130–132, Feb. 2005.
[40]
W. R. Pearson, “An introduction to sequence similarity (“homology”) searching.,” Curr. Protoc. 
Bioinforma., vol. Chapter 3, p. Unit3.1, Jun. 2013.
[41]
Z. Xiang, “Advances in homology protein structure modeling.,” Curr. Protein Pept. Sci., vol. 7, 
no. 3, pp. 217–27, Jun. 2006.
[42]
C. Chothia and A. M. Lesk, “The relation between the divergence of sequence and structure in 
proteins.,” EMBO J., vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 823–6, Apr. 1986.
[43]
M. A. Martí-Renom, A. C. Stuart, A. Fiser, R. Sánchez, F. Melo, and A. Šali, “Comparative 
Protein Structure Modeling of Genes and Genomes,” Annu. Rev. Biophys. Biomol. Struct., vol. 
29, no. 1, pp. 291–325, Jun. 2000.
60
==PAGE:61==
[44]
M. S. Madhusudhan et al., “Comparative Protein Structure Modeling,” in The Proteomics 
Protocols Handbook, Totowa, NJ: Humana Press, 2005, pp. 831–860.
[45]
A. Šali and T. L. Blundell, “Comparative Protein Modelling by Satisfaction of Spatial 
Restraints,” J. Mol. Biol., vol. 234, no. 3, pp. 779–815, Dec. 1993.
[46]
J. Gu and P. E. Bourne, Structural bioinformatics. Wiley-Blackwell, 2009.
[47]
S. R. Eddy, “Profile hidden Markov models.,” Bioinformatics, vol. 14, no. 9, pp. 755–63, 1998.
[48]
R. D. Finn et al., “The Pfam protein families database: towards a more sustainable future,” 
Nucleic Acids Res., vol. 44, no. D1, pp. D279–D285, Jan. 2016.
[49]
“Method for comparative protein structure modeling by MODELLER.” [Online]. Available: 
https://salilab.org/modeller/manual/node11.html#fig:scheme
[50]
R. D. Finn et al., “HMMER web server: 2015 update.,” Nucleic Acids Res., vol. 43, no. W1, pp. 
W30-8, Jul. 2015.
[51]
L. Pauling, “THE NATURE OF THE CHEMICAL BOND. APPLICATION OF RESULTS 
OBTAINED FROM THE QUANTUM MECHANICS AND FROM A THEORY OF 
PARAMAGNETIC SUSCEPTIBILITY TO THE STRUCTURE OF MOLECULES,” J. Am. 
Chem. Soc., vol. 53, no. 4, pp. 1367–1400, Apr. 1931.
[52]
W. Li and A. Godzik, “Cd-hit: a fast program for clustering and comparing large sets of protein 
or nucleotide sequences,” Bioinformatics, vol. 22, no. 13, pp. 1658–1659, Jul. 2006.
[53]
“Stockholm format.” [Online]. Available: http://sonnhammer.sbc.su.se/Stockholm.html
[54]
G. Wang and R. L. Dunbrack, “PISCES: a protein sequence culling server.,” Bioinformatics, vol.
19, no. 12, pp. 1589–91, Aug. 2003.
[55]
S. Henikoff and J. G. Henikoff, “Amino acid substitution matrices from protein blocks.,” Proc. 
Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., vol. 89, no. 22, pp. 10915–9, Nov. 1992.
[56]
J. Gálvez, J. J. Gálvez, and P. García-Peñarrubia, “TCR/pMHC Interaction: Phenotypic Model 
for an Unsolved Enigma,” Front. Immunol., vol. 7, p. 467, Nov. 2016.
[57]
“PIR Database File Structure and Format Specification.” [Online]. Available: 
http://emboss.sourceforge.net/docs/themes/seqformats/NbrfFormat.html
[58]
G. G. Krivov, M. V. Shapovalov, and R. L. Dunbrack, “Improved prediction of protein side-
chain conformations with SCWRL4,” Proteins Struct. Funct. Bioinforma., vol. 77, no. 4, pp. 
778–795, Dec. 2009.
[59]
M. A. Garstka et al., “The first step of peptide selection in antigen presentation by MHC class I 
molecules.”
61
==PAGE:62==
[60]
M. Andreatta and M. Nielsen, “Gapped sequence alignment using artificial neural networks: 
application to the MHC class I system.”
[61]
Ceslovas Venclovas, “Comparative modeling in CASP5: Progress is evident, but alignment 
errors remain a significant hindrance,” Proteins Struct. Funct. Genet., vol. 53, no. S6, pp. 380–
388, 2003.
[62]
H. A. David and J. L. Gunnink, “The Paired t Test Under Artificial Pairing,” Am. Stat., vol. 51, 
no. 1, p. 9, Feb. 1997.
[63]
K. M. Armstrong, K. H. Piepenbrink, and B. M. Baker, “Conformational changes and flexibility 
in T-cell receptor recognition of peptide-MHC complexes.,” Biochem. J., vol. 415, no. 2, pp. 
183–96, Oct. 2008.
[64]
J. Huang, C. Meyer, and C. Zhu, “T cell antigen recognition at the cell membrane.,” Mol. 
Immunol., vol. 52, no. 3–4, pp. 155–64, Oct. 2012.
62
==PAGE:63==
Appendix
a)
b)
Fig. 36:  Density scatter plots of Cα RMSD after comparison of single vs three template models with their real structures. 
Calculated RMSDs for a) MHC only, c) bound peptide only.  On the right side of each plot the density colors are depicted 
with red being the most dense and blue the most sparse while the diagonal is depicted as a red dashed line and the 
“running” mean as green dashed line.
63
