==PAGE:1==
Master thesis
Four-wave mixing for optical
phase conjugation
Morten Schack Møller-Kristensen (s123319)
Supervisors: Francesco Da Ros, Mads Lillieholm, Anders Clausen and
Michael Galili
Department of Photonics Engineering, Technical University of Denmark
June 23, 2017
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
The objective of this thesis is to investigate parameters that have an impact on the conversion
eﬃciency of an OPC-system utilizing four-wave mixing in a nonlinear medium. This is done
through theoretical and numerical investigations, where the most prominent factors were found
to be the zero dispersion wavelength, dispersion slope, nonlinear coeﬃcient and pump power.
The numerical model successfully reproduced the measured operation bandwidth of the OPC-
system but could not reproduce the measured conversion eﬃciencies.
A 498 m HNLF-SPINE was chosen to act as the nonlinear medium inside an OPC-system,
due to its wide operation bandwidth covering the entire C-band. The nonlinear compensation
capability of the OPC-system was tested using a 88 km DP-16QAM 28 Gbaud/s communication
system. A decrease of the minimum BER could not be observed, due to the B2B BER limit of
the receiver. For high launch powers, a 1.5 dB decrease in BER was observed using a Raman
ampliﬁcation scheme and a 2 dB decrease was observed using an EDFA ampliﬁcation scheme.
When using WDM, the OPC-system showed no BER decrease due to low optical power of each
channel and short transmission lengths.
==PAGE:3==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisors for fruitful discussions and supervision during the work of
my thesis. All of them have contributed to me becoming a better engineer, but a special thanks
goes to Francesco for lecturing me in the art of precise and eﬀective experimental work, while
still having time to explain all aspects that was unclear to me. I was challenged everyday and I
had an amazing time in the High Speed Optical Communications lab, where i had total freedom
to build my setups and learn from my mistakes.
My thanks also go to Pawel Marcin Kaminski and Dimitrios Konstantinou for being excellent
lab partners and collaborators on the project.
==PAGE:4==
Abbreviations
ASE
Ampliﬁed Spontaneous Emission
B2B
Back-to-Back
BER
Bit-Error-Rate
CW
Continuous Wave
DF-HNLF
Dispersion-Flattened Highly Nonlinear Fiber
DSP
Digital Signal Processing
ECL
External Cavity laser
EDFA
Erbium-Doped Fiber Ampliﬁer
FOPA
Fiber-based Optical Parametric Ampliﬁer
FUT
Fiber Under Test
FWHM
Full Width Half Maximum
FWM
Four-Wave Mixing
HNLF
Highly Nonlinear Fiber
HNLF-SPINE
Highly Nonlinear Fiber with Stable Phase-matching for Improved Nonlinear
Eﬃciency
ILA
In-Line Attenuator
NL
Nonlinear
NLS
Nonlinear Schr¨odinger Equation
OPC
Optical Phase Conjugation
OSA
Optical Spectrum Analyzer
OSNR
Optical Signal-to-Noise Ratio
PBS
Polarizing Beam Splitter
PC
Polarization Controller
PCF
Photonic Crystal Fiber
PMD
Polarization Mode Dispersion
PMF
Polarization Maintaining Fiber
PWM
Power meter
RHS
Right-Hand Side
SBS
Stimulated Brillouin Scattering
SBST
Stimulated Brillouin Scattering Threshold
Short
Optical Short-pass ﬁlter
SOA
Semiconductor Optical Ampliﬁer
SPM
Self-Phase Modulation
SSMF
Standard Single Mode Fiber
T-OBPF
Tunable Optical Band-Pass Filter
VOA
Variable Optical Attenuator
WDM
Wavelength Division Multiplexing
XPM
Cross-Phase Modulation
ZDW
Zero-Dispersion Wavelength
==PAGE:5==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Optical communication systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Optical Phase Conjugation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2.1
Performance and implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Four-wave mixing
4
2.1
Field analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Conversion eﬃciency . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3
Stimulated Brillouin scattering
8
3.1
Scattering processes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.2
Stimulated Brillouin scattering
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.3
SBST measurement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.3.1
Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.4
Numerical model and validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
4
Conversion eﬃciency
14
4.1
501 m HNLF . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.2
506 m DF-HNLF . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.3
508 m HNLF-SPINE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
5
VPI-modelling of conversion eﬃciency
21
5.1
Aeﬀ
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
5.2
L . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5.3
α . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5.4
Pp . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5.5
λp
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5.6
Model validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
6
Choice of nonlinear medium
27
6.1
498 m HNLF-SPINE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
6.2
254m Strained HNLF-SPINE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
6.2.1
Placement of signal for polarization optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
7
OPC experiment
32
7.1
Setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
7.2
Characterization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
7.3
Optical communication system
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
7.3.1
Back-to-back . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
7.4
Raman ampliﬁcation scheme
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
==PAGE:6==
7.5
EDFA ampliﬁcation scheme . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
7.6
Comparison of ampliﬁcation schemes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
7.7
Comparison of signal bands . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
7.8
Noise loading . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
8
Conclusion
43
9
Bibliography
44
A Appendices
I
A.1 Data sheet for used ﬁbers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
I
A.2 VPI - SBS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
I
A.3 VPI - Conversion eﬃciency
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
II
==PAGE:7==
1
INTRODUCTION
1
Introduction
1.1
Optical communication systems
Ever since the ﬁrst erbium-doped ﬁber ampliﬁer(EDFA) was commercially available at the start
of the 90’s [1], the length of which an optical communication signal could be sent, without being
detected and regenerated, increased dramatically. The new ampliﬁer was able to amplify the
1.5 µm wavelength range, where transmission loss was at its minimum value. The longer trans-
mission distances made chromatic dispersion the biggest issue in receiving and processing the
communication signal - together with several nonlinear eﬀects occurring for short high powered
communication pulses.
Chromatic dispersion is the eﬀect of diﬀerent wavelengths travelling at diﬀerent velocities inside
an optical ﬁber. As the needed internet data capacity increases each year, the temporal width
of the communication pulses has to be lowered, which increases the spectral width of the pulse.
Chromatic dispersion broadens the pulse in time, eﬀectively leaking the pulse into the time slots
of other bits, which decreases the ﬁnal signal quality. The data-capacity, or length, would then
have to be lowered to accommodate for the broadening of the signal during transmission. This
is described by the parameter bit-length product BL in units of (bits/s)km, where a current
communication system may a have a bit-length product in the range of (Tbit/s)km. Lowering
the transmission length would increase the bit-rate being able to pass through the system, while
lowering the bit-rate would lengthen the transmission span.
The signal degradation from chromatic dispersion can be avoided by the use of digital signal
processing(DSP), which calculates the transfer function of the transmission system and recon-
structs the original input signal. DSP is a low-speed, single channel process[2] but has proved
useful for high data-rate systems.
Another practical issue concerning long-haul communication systems is the amount of ampliﬁers
needed in the total span of a communication system. For every 60-80 km[1], an EDFA needs to
be implemented or else the signal will not be distinguishable from the noise ﬂoor in the system.
This can also be described as the optical signal-to-noise ratio(OSNR) being under a certain
minimum, set by the parameters of the system.
OSNR = 10 log10
Psig
Pnoise
(1)
One solution could be to use high power pulses, as the pulse can travel longer before having an
OSNR under the required minimum. This solution has a catch in the sense of nonlinear eﬀects
starting to distort the signal, thereby increasing the amount of false-positives at the receiver,
also known as the bit-error-rate(BER).
To optimize the transmission span, a compromise between the OSNR ﬂoor and the nonlinear(NL)
eﬀects has to be made. This is illustrated in ﬁgure 1
P
z
z/2
EDFA
OSNR
NL-e ects
Figure 1: Illustration showing concept of a normal transmission link containing an EDFA. The
receivers OSNR and NL signal distortion limits are presented as dotted lines.
Page 1 of 45
==PAGE:8==
1
INTRODUCTION
where the signal power P is shown as it propagates through a transmission span with length
z, while having an EDFA in the middle of the span to keep the signal power from going under
the OSNR limit. This is the typical conﬁguration when using the lumped EDFA ampliﬁcation
scheme.
Increasing the system capacity even further can be done by using several diﬀerent signal wave-
lengths, which is known as wavelength-division multiplexing(WDM). As WDM, together with
high order modulation formats, became the leading standard in long haul optical communication
systems[1], the practical issues of using DSPs for dispersion compensation became bigger. This
was due to the fact that each WDM channel required one DSP, eﬀectively limiting the possible
amount of channels in the system. Another problem was the increased impairment from non-
linear eﬀects, since multiple wavelengths with little spectral spacing between them impact each
other through nonlinearities.
Expanding the amount of WDM channels in a communication system can be done by switching
to Raman ampliﬁcation, as the bandwidth extends far beyond the C-band(between 1530 nm and
1565 nm) and adds less noise compared to using EDFAs. Increasing the NL-limit, while also
doing dispersion compensation, can be done by a technique called optical phase conjugation.
1.2
Optical Phase Conjugation
Optical phase conjugation(OPC) for optical ﬁber communication is based around four-wave
mixing(FWM) of the transmission signal with a high powered pump inside a highly nonlinear
medium. This process copies the information of the signal over to another signal and conju-
gates the phase, which is used to compensate dispersion and nonlinear eﬀects occurring in the
transmission span. A detailed look at how FWM works and why the phase conjugation occurs
can be seen in chapter 2. The nonlinear medium used in this thesis will be a highly nonlinear
ﬁber(HNLF) - the reason for this choice is discussed in chapter 6.
The nonlinear Schr¨odinger equation(NLS) describes the complex amplitude of an optical pulse
as it is traveling inside an optical ﬁber and can be deﬁned using the slowly varying envelope
approximation[3]
∂A
∂z = −α
2 A −i
2β2
∂2A
∂T 2 + 1
6β3
∂3A
∂T 3 + iγ|A|2A
(2)
where A represents the complex amplitude of the signal, z is the propagation distance in km,
α is the attenuation coeﬃcient of the ﬁber per kilometer, γ is the nonlinear coeﬃcient in 1/(W
· km) and T is the retarded time frame, moving with the pulse as it is propagating. β2 is the
chromatic dispersion parameter given in ps2/nm and β3 is the dispersion slope parameter given
in ps3/nm. Complex conjugating equation (2) equals
∂A∗
∂z = −α
2 A∗+ i
2β2
∂2A∗
∂T 2 + 1
6β3
∂3A∗
∂T 3 −iγ|A∗|2A∗
(3)
The physical eﬀect of phase conjugation can then be observed by looking at the terms on the RHS
of equations (2)-(3). The second term on the RHS describes the eﬀect of chromatic dispersion(β2)
on the pulse and has its sign inverted due to the phase conjugation process. This would in theory
amount to total compensation of chromatic dispersion if it propagates the same distance in each
of the two equations, since the accumulated dispersion Daccum increases linearly with distance.
If a nonlinear medium performing OPC is placed between two identical transmission spans, it
could be used for optical communication systems.
The second possible beneﬁt of phase conjugation is compensation of the nonlinear Kerr eﬀect,
responsible for FWM and self/cross-phase modulation inside a transmission ﬁber. The term
including γ has its sign inverted, but is not directly compensated by this, since the nonlinear
eﬀect is dependent on the power of the optical signal. The optical power decreases through the
ﬁber due to transmission loss, changing the amount of nonlinear distortion experienced by a
Page 2 of 45
==PAGE:9==
1
INTRODUCTION
pulse as it propagates. Chromatic dispersion contributes to this even further by altering the
temporal pulse shape, eﬀectively changing the power distribution of the pulse as it propagates.
A solution to these problems is to have similar pulse power proﬁles for each transmission span
between the OPC, while also having a similar symmetric power proﬁle in each span.
This
ensures that a given pulse shape experiences the same power level before and after the OPC. An
illustration of how such a transmission span would look like can be seen in ﬁgure 2
P
z
z/2
OPC
P=|Es
*|²
Daccum
(-)Daccum
P=|Es|2
Figure 2: Illustration showing the concept of an transmission link containing an optical phase
conjugator and backwards propagating Raman ampliﬁcation for complete dispersion and NL-
distortion compensation. The dashed red line illustrates the accumulated dispersion, and the
(-) on the right side of the OPC indicates that the dispersion accumalated in the second part of
the span has opposite sign compared to the ﬁrst part.
where P is the total power of the signal and z is the transmission distance of the optical com-
munications link. As mentioned before, the OPC is placed in the middle to perform dispersion
compensation and the backwards Raman ampliﬁcation scheme is used to generate a symmetrical
power proﬁle before and after the OPC to compensate for nonlinear distortions.
The OPC works on a channel-to-channel basis, making it possible to use in WDM systems. The
problem with this is that channels before and after the OPC might not experience the same
amount of dispersion.
This is due to the OPC converting the signal to another wavelength
where the value for β2 is diﬀerent, due to the dispersion slope parameter β3. When working
with the conversion of WDM signals, one must also make sure to have an even conversion in
terms of power. If there is a big diﬀerence in the power of the diﬀerent wavelength channels,
more ampliﬁcation is needed for the weak channels and thereby unnecessary noise is added to
the signal, worsening the OSNR.
1.2.1
Performance and implementation
The use of OPC in a 16 channel 40 Gb/s WDM system has been shown in [4] and resulted
in BER values around 5 · 10−6 for all channels, where pre and post dispersion compensators
were used to solve the problem of diﬀerence in dispersion between channel pairs.
Using an
OPC in an already existing communication link was demonstrated to improve the transmission
distance from 5200 to 6400 km[5]. In both of these examples OPC was only used for dispersion
compensation and EDFAs were used for ampliﬁcation, resulting in poor nonlinear compensation
due to non-symmetric power proﬁles. By using Raman ampliﬁcation, an OPC-system has been
shown to reduce the nonlinear impairments on the signal by 70% [6], increasing the transmission
distance from 5200 km to 10400 km. However, this improvement has been shown to decrease as
the number of transmitted channels increase[7].
OPC has some practical issues when implementing it in a real communication system. The
FWM-process itself is of a complex nature, since it changes the signal wavelength, and needs a
lot of special conditions to be meet before optimal system performance is achieved. The theory
behind FWM follows in the next chapter, while the full design of an optical phase conjugator is
discussed in chapter 7.
Page 3 of 45
==PAGE:10==
2
FOUR-WAVE MIXING
2
Four-wave mixing
The process of converting one wavelength to another through a nonlinear medium is a product of
coupling between a strong electric ﬁeld, originating from a strong optical ﬁeld, and the induced
polarization of the material. The induced polarization creates an eﬀective change of the intensity
dependent refractive index n(ω, I), due to the rearrangement of electrons and molecules inside
the material. This is called the nonlinear Kerr-eﬀect and the eﬀect on the refractive index can
be described as n(ω, I) = n0(ω) + n2(ω)I [8].
A simple way of looking at the overall eﬀect of the Kerr-eﬀect is by considering a strong optical
continuous wave(CW), called the pump wave, entering the medium at angular frequency ωp.
The pump wave then varies the local refractive index, eﬀectively creating a Bragg-grating with
a period that equals ωp. This modulates the pump ﬁeld itself and generates what is known
as self-phase modulation(SPM), which broadens the pump spectrum.
If another wave at a
lower angular frequency, called the signal wave, enters the medium, the signal will get phase
modulated by the Bragg-grating and a new frequency, called the idler, occurs through cross-phase
modulation(XPM) at angular frequency 2ωp −ωs, with an optical power that is proportional to
that of the signal[9]. This is illustrated in ﬁgure 3
ωp
ωi
ωs
ω
Figure 3: Illustration of the FWM-process generating the ﬁrst sideband at the idler frequency.
The special case of FWM described in the previous segment is known as degenerate FWM, where
two pump photons of the same angular frequency are mixed together with a signal photon to
create an idler at a new angular frequency ωi. This form of FWM will be the main focus of
this thesis and any higher order sideband contributions, such as ωs acting as a pump for a very
strong signal at ωp, will be dismissed. This is due to the fact that the strongest conversion
eﬃciency of the FWM-process always will appear at ωi, since the other sidebands have poorer
phase-matching.
2.1
Field analysis
The general electromagnetic description of the total ﬁeld inside the medium can be described
as a sum of three waves with frequencies ωs, ωp, ωi and slowly varying electric ﬁeld amplitudes
As(z), Ap(z), Ai(z) [9],
E(z, t) = 1
2 [As(z) exp(iβsz −ωst) + Ap(z) exp(iβpz −ωpt) + Ai(z) exp(iβiz −ωit) + c.c.] (4)
where c.c. is the complex conjugate and the transversal proﬁle of the waves has been assumed
identical. By using equation (4) together with the general wave equation for light propagation
in optical ﬁbers[3], a set of coupled diﬀerential equations for the complex ﬁeld amplitude of each
Page 4 of 45
==PAGE:11==
2
FOUR-WAVE MIXING
FWM component can be derived[9][10]
dAp
dz = iγ

(|Ap|2 + 2(|As|2 + |Ai|2))Ap + 2AsAiA∗
p exp(i∆βz)

(5)
dAs
dz = iγ

(|As|2 + 2(|Ai|2 + |Ap|2))As + A∗
i A2
p exp(−i∆βz)

(6)
dAi
dz = iγ

(|Ai|2 + 2(|As|2 + |Ap|2))Ai + A∗
sA2
p exp(−i∆βz)

(7)
where ∆β is deﬁned as the phase-matching paramter ∆β = β(ωs) + β(ωi) −2β(ωp) and the
propagation constant is deﬁned as βp,s,i = ωp,s,in(ωp,s,i)
c
. The nonlinearity coeﬃcient γ is deﬁned
as γ = 2πn2/(λAeff), where n2 is the ﬁber nonlinear parameter and Aeff is eﬀective modal
area of the ﬁber. Propagation loss and polarization dependence was neglected for simplicity.
When looking at equation (7), one can ﬁnd several important eﬀects that contribute to the
evolution of the complex amplitudes. The ﬁrst part of the RHS of equations 5-7 is responsible
for SPM, which will have the biggest eﬀect on the strong pump used in FWM. The second part
of the RHS describes XPM and this eﬀect is strongest for the signal and idler, since they are
aﬀected by the large refractive index change caused by the pump.
The most important part of the equations, for this thesis, is the third part of the RHS, which is
the part describing the power transfer between the diﬀerent waves inside the nonlinear medium.
If perfect phase matching of all three waves is assumed(∆β = 0), the power transfer from the
signal and pump to the idler can be described in terms of electric ﬁeld as
Ei ∝E2
pE∗
s
(8)
This is an important equation that governs the usefulness of FWM for OPC, as the conjugated
signal ﬁeld is carried over to the idler. The eﬀectiveness of this conversion is proportional to the
pump ﬁeld squared and this suggests using as high pump power as possible, but as explained in
chapter 3 of this thesis, high pump powers will lead to other nonlinear eﬀects which limits the
achievable conversion eﬃciency between the signal and idler.
The goal of this theoretical investigation is to ﬁnd an analytical expression describing the conver-
sion eﬃciency between the signal and idler, which also can be described as the gain of the idler
throughout the ﬁber. Therefore when doing further investigations, only the idler is considered
while the other complex ﬁeld amplitudes equations are used if the coupled equations need to be
solved numerically.
2.2
Conversion eﬃciency
By rewriting equations (5)-(7) to power P and phase φ using A(z) =
√
P exp(iφ), one gets the
equations[9]
dPi
dz = 2γ(P 2
p PsPi)1/2 sin(θ)
(9)
dθ
dz = ∆β + γ(2Pp −Ps −Pi) + γ
h
(PpPi/Ps)1/2 + (P 2
p Pi/Ps)1/2 −4(PsPi)1/2i
cos(θ)
(10)
where θ describes the relative phase diﬀerence of the four light waves, including both the linear
phase diﬀerence contribution ∆βz and the nonlinear phase shift contributions 2φp(z) −φs(z) −
φi(z). If there is no idler at the input of the nonlinear medium, the phase diﬀerence will be
θ = π/2. If close to perfect phase-matching is assumed throughout the medium, the third term
on the RHS of equation (10) will equal 0. It is further assumed that the process is happening in
an undepleted state Pp ≫Ps and equation (10) then reduces to
dθ
dz ≈∆β + 2γPp = κ
(11)
Page 5 of 45
==PAGE:12==
2
FOUR-WAVE MIXING
where κ is deﬁned as the phase mismatch parameter.
When considering a frequency range
where the dispersion slope is small, i.e.
the pump ωp is placed close to the zero-dispersion
wavelength(ZDW) ω0 and the signal ωp is close to the pump, the contribution of the linear
phase shift ∆β will be constant and the only thing contributing to a change in θ is the nonlinear
phase shift. This can be compensated for by placing the pump at a higher wavelength than the
ZDW, since this anomalous dispersion regime causes ∆β to become negative, eﬀectively reducing
κ to 0 for a certain separation between the signal and pump wavelengths.
An analytical expression of the idler power can now be derived by continuing to use the as-
sumption of no pump depletion and the fact that the linear phase shift can be approximated
by[9]
∆β ≈−2πc
λ2
0
dD
dλ (λp −λ0)(λp −λs)2
(12)
where dD/dλ is the dispersion slope at the ZDW. The idler power is then deﬁned by solving the
coupled diﬀerential equations (5)-(7) [9],
Pi(L) = Ps(0)
γPp
g
sinh(gL)
2
(13)
where the parametric gain coeﬃcient is deﬁned as g2 =

(γPp)2 −(κ/2)2
and L is the length of
the active medium, which in this thesis is a short HNLF. For a longer medium the L should be
replaced by the eﬀective interaction length Leff, since the propagation loss of the medium would
have decreased the power of the idler signiﬁcantly. The conversion eﬃciency of the FWM-process
is then easily found from rearranging equation (12) and converting to units of dB
η [dB] = 10 log10
Pi(L)
Ps(0)

= 10 log10
 γPp
g
sinh(gL)
2!
(14)
Figure 4: Comparison of conversion eﬃciency η as a function of signal wavelengths, using an
approximated analytical model(dashed blue line) and a numerical model(solid red line). The
parameters used were Pp = 1.4 W, Ps = 1 nW, L = 500 m, γ = 11 (W · km)−1, λ0 = 1559 nm,
λp = 1560.7 nm, dD/dλ = 0.03 ps/nm2 km. The sample rate in VPI was 5 · 1013 Hz and the
simulation time window was 64/109 s.
Equation (14) is plotted in ﬁgure 4 as a function of signal wavelength and compared to the
numerical solution of the coupled diﬀerential equations (5)-(7). Since the pump is placed above
Page 6 of 45
==PAGE:13==
2
FOUR-WAVE MIXING
the ZDW, the nonlinear phase shift is totally compensated by the linear phase shift at a point
around λs = λp ± 27.5 nm, where the maximum conversion eﬃciency occurs at around 61 dB.
For small separation values, ∆β ≈0 since the dispersion slope around the ZDW is low and only
the NL-phase shift has an eﬀect on κ.
One thing to notice in ﬁgure 4 is that there is a slight mismatch between the numerical and
analytical models around the points where κ = 0. The ≈1 dB diﬀerence between the two models
is more than the tolerance of the numerical solver(0.1 dB), suggesting something other than
computational error.
When λs −λp = −27.5 nm the numerical model predicts higher conversion eﬃciency, which
should not be the case since the numerical model used in VPIphotonics also includes pump-
depletion. At λs −λp = 27.5 nm the analytical model predicts higher conversion eﬃciency and
this is more in line with what pump-depletion does to the coupled equations. The reason for
this diﬀerence is still unclear at the time of writing, but it seems like there is a diﬀerence in the
linear phase shift ∆β for the two sides of the conversion eﬃciency spectra.
If one was to choose a signal wavelength for use in an optical communication system, based on
looking at ﬁgure 4, one would be inclined to choose the signal wavelength of λs = λp ± 27.5 nm.
The problem with doing this is that the modelled conversion eﬃciency uses very high pump power
and has a very narrow 3-dB bandwidth around the point of maximum conversion eﬃciency, which
would only ﬁt a couple of communication channels with signiﬁcant crosstalk between them.
In a real system utilizing OPC in an HNLF, the high pump power would result in another
nonlinear eﬀect called stimulated Brillouin scattering, which would limit the maximum amount
of power that goes through the HNLF. This will be the topic of the next chapter.
Page 7 of 45
==PAGE:14==
3
STIMULATED BRILLOUIN SCATTERING
3
Stimulated Brillouin scattering
3.1
Scattering processes
As light propagates through a ﬁber, the photons can interact with the molecules of the ﬁber by
a scattering process. There are two diﬀerent types of scattering processes, namely elastic and
inelastic scattering. The elastic scattering process between photons and solids is called Rayleigh
scattering and transfers no energy to the material that it is scattering oﬀof. This scattering
happens spontaneously inside the ﬁber and is scattered back to the input of the ﬁber, due to
the guiding condition of light inside optical ﬁbers.
The inelastic scattering process in ﬁbers consists of two major contributors: Raman and Brillouin
scattering. They both lose energy by transferring it to vibrations in the ﬁber, but they each
work in a diﬀerent way. Raman scattering transfers energy to the inter-molecular vibrations
of the ﬁber while Brillouin scattering transfers energy to lattice vibrations in the ﬁber. These
vibrations can also be quantized as states of lattice vibrations called phonons. The phonons
describing inter-molecular vibrations are called optical phonons, while the ones describing the
molecular lattice vibrations are called acoustic phonons. The frequency of these phonons Ωare
higher for optical phonons, which means that the scattered photon has had larger frequency
down-shift(stokes shift) compared to acoustic phonons, due to the assumed energy conservation
of the process.
The scattering process that causes most problems, when trying to optimize the performance of
the wavelength conversion in OPC, is Brillouin scattering. It limits the amount of power that
can be put into a ﬁber and the reason for this is discussed in the section below.
3.2
Stimulated Brillouin scattering
When focusing on spontaneous Brillouin scattering from a pump at angular frequency ωp prop-
agating through a ﬁber, one can determine the frequency of the created acoustic phonon ΩB
by the use of energy conservation requiring that the stokes shift in optical frequency is equal
to the frequency of the created phonon ΩB = ωp −ωsca. The momentum conservation of the
process requires that the wave vectors satisfy kB = kp −ksca. Since the stokes shift for acoustic
phonons is very low, compared to the pump frequency, the amplitude of the phonon wave vector
can be approximated as |kB| ≈|ksca|. This can be used together with the dispersion relation
|kB| = ΩB/vA, where va is the acoustic velocity, to determine the acoustic frequency ΩB as[1]
ΩB = 2vA|kp| sin
θ
2

(15)
where θ is the angle between the wave vectors of the pump and the scattered wave.
When
θ = 0, there is no scattering taking place since the acoustic frequency vanishes in the forward
propagation direction. When θ = π, the highest possible acoustic frequency of around 9-11 GHz
occurs, resulting in the largest amount of Brillouin scattering. Since light only travels forwards
or backwards in an optical ﬁber, the backwards propagating direction is the dominant one.
The scattered backwards propagating wave now beats with the pump and creates an interfer-
ence pattern[11, Fig.
1] with a periodicity corresponding to the acoustic phonon frequency.
This strong interference pattern creates a periodic change in density of the material through
a nonlinear process called electrostriction. This creates an acoustic wave inside the material
which propagates in the forward propagation direction and acts as a scattering medium for the
pump light at the input. More of the pump will now be stokes shifted according to ΩB and
the interference will then in turn also be stronger. This creates a positive feedback loop and is
known as Stimulated Brillouin scattering(SBS).
Page 8 of 45
==PAGE:15==
3
STIMULATED BRILLOUIN SCATTERING
For low pump powers, the acoustic wave created from interference is not of great importance
and only small amounts of SBS occurs. At higher pump power, the acoustic wave can become
so dominant that the reﬂected stokes power starts to increase rapidly as a function of pump
power. The pump power where this starts to occur is called the Stimulated Brillouin Scattering
Threshold(SBST) and can be deﬁned as[11]
Psca(0) = µPp
(16)
where Pp is the input pump power and µ is most commonly deﬁned as either 1 or 0.01. The
case where µ = 1 is special in the sense that it is the point where all extra pump power going
into the ﬁber gets reﬂected, eﬀectively limiting the amount of pump power that can go through
the ﬁber.
The power level of the SBST is dependent on multiple diﬀerent ﬁber parameters, most no-
ticeably the eﬀective modal area Aeff and the Brillouin gain gB. This is formulated in the
approximation[1][11]
Pth = 21Aeffα
gB
(17)
where Pth is deﬁned as equation (16) with µ = 1. The eﬀective modal area is in direct relation
with the geometric parameters of the optical ﬁber, whereas the Brillouin gain is a product of
the material used in the ﬁber. As diﬀerent ﬁbers have diﬀerent geometrical proﬁles and material
compositions, the SBST is diﬀerent for each ﬁber.
When considering which ﬁber to use in an OPC-system, the SBST value is of great importance,
since this ultimately decides the best conversion eﬃciency obtainable in the ﬁber through the
relation in equation (8). Therefore, an experiment was conducted measuring the SBST for a
variety of promising HNLFs.
3.3
SBST measurement
The general principle behind measuring SBST is varying the power of a strong optical source
into a ﬁber, while observing the evolution of power that is scattered back from the input of the
ﬁber. A setup doing exactly this can be seen in ﬁgure 5
ECL
Pump
EDFA
VOA
Isolator
a
PWM
ILA
20 dB
Coupler
a
FUT
I1
I2
O1
O2
Figure 5: Experimental setup for the measurement of the SBST of the ﬁber. ECL: External
cavity laser, EDFA: Erbium-doped ﬁber ampliﬁer, VOA: Variable optical attenuator, Isola-
tor: Optical isolator, PWM: Power meter, ILA: In-line attenuator, FUT: Fiber under test,
I1,I2,O1,O2: Input and output ports of the coupler.
A Cobrite Dx1 tunable CW ECL was set to output light at a wavelength that equaled the ZDW
of the FUT(1550.4 nm), while having an optical output power of 6 dBm(4 mW)1. For ﬁbers that
had ZDW outside the tunable wavelength range of the laser(C-band), the lasing wavelength was
closed placed as close to the ZDW wavelength as possible.
1P[dBm] = 10 log10(P[W]/1mW)
Page 9 of 45
==PAGE:16==
3
STIMULATED BRILLOUIN SCATTERING
The output of the ECL was then carried over to an Keopsys KPS-BT2-C 30 dBm EDFA, via a
polarization maintaining ﬁber(PMF), where the pump was ampliﬁed to an output of 24 dBm.
The ampliﬁed pump was then put into a VOA where the input power into the FUT could be
changed in small steps, without having to turn up the ampliﬁcation from the EDFA each time,
which would increase the amount of ampliﬁed spontaneous emission(ASE). An isolator(2.4 dB
insertion loss) was put in front to avoid the potential strong SBS reﬂected pump destroying the
active components inside the EDFA.
The pump then enters a 20 dB coupler(99%/1%), where 99% of the pump light is coupled into
the FUT. 1% of the pump light goes into one channel of an Agilent 8153A mainframe, utilizing
two Agilent 81531A power sensor modules. A 10 dB ILA was placed in between the power meter
and the coupler to make sure that, for high pump powers, the maximum input power to the
PWM would not succed 3 dBm, which is the limit of the power sensor module. A calibration
value of 31.60 dB was added to the mainframe for this channel, to calibrate for the 20 dB coupler
and the 10 dB ILA. This enables the PWM to measure the approximate pump power going into
the FUT Pin.
When the pump powers starts initiating heavy SBS, more and more stokes shifted light will
start to propagate into the coupler from the FUT. 1% of the stokes shifted light will go into the
other PWM channel while 99% will go back into the arm containing the isolator hence why the
isolator is needed. By using a calibration value of 31.02 dB for this channel, the approximate
backscattered SBS power PSBS could be measured.
The reason for the calibration values for both channels not being exactly 30 dB is due to the 20
dB coupler and 10 dB ILA not having exactly those attenuation values. A quick characterization
of the coupler and ILA showed the ILA, used in the channel O2 measuring Pin, to have 10.86
dB attenuation and the ILA used in channel I1 PSBS to have 9.70 dB attenuation. The coupler
used had the coupling values
O1
O2
I1
0.45 dB
19.95 dB
I2
20.32 dB
0.60 dB
Table 1: Measured coupling values for the 20 dB coupler used in the SBST experiment. I1=Input
1, I2=Input 2, O1=Output 1, O2=Output 2. The table should be read as Input 1 coupling to
Output 1 with 0.45 dB attenuation and so on.
where I1 in the experiment was the pump input into the coupler, I2 was the arm measuring PSBS,
O1 was the arm containing the FUT and O2 was the arm containing the PWM measuring Pin,
as illustrated in ﬁgure 5. One extra calibration of the input powers into the PWM channels was
the conducted by the use of a ZW-R70 PWM with a high power tolerance(26 dBm) and the
calibration values adjusted by adding 0.34 dB and 1 dB respectively.
3.3.1
Results
The 1% threshold power Pth was measured for multiple ﬁbers(See Appendix A.1) with varying
length, dopants and geometric design. The 1% threshold power was chosen as this is the point
where backscattering from SBS will start to increase rapidly, as seen in ﬁgure 6.
Here an
OSA(Yokogawa AQ 6331) was used to get the spectral representation of the backscattered signal
from the 501 m loose coil HNLF. At 13.89 dBm pump power, the Rayleigh backscattering at a
relative frequency of 0 GHz is comparable to that of the 9 GHz stokes shifted SBS. When the
pump power is increased close to the measured SBST in table 2, the SBS starts to dominate the
Rayleigh scattering and a rapid increase in backscattered power occurs. The accuracy of the
measured relative frequency stokes shift is debatable, since spectral resolution of the OSA was
Page 10 of 45
==PAGE:17==
3
STIMULATED BRILLOUIN SCATTERING
on the scale of the stokes shift itself. Nonetheless, the measured value of 9 GHz shift, for the
special ﬁber, is close to the 11.2 GHz shift for normal silica ﬁbers[1][12].
Figure 6: Spectral representation of the Rayleigh and stokes SBS contributions to the backscat-
tered signal for FUT = 501 m loose coil.
The spectral resolution of the measurement was
12.5 GHz.
When looking at the standard HNLFs in table 2, the length of the ﬁber seems to have an inverse
relationship with the associated SBST. This is due to more SBS being built up quicker by having
a longer interaction length with the medium. This would in theory mean that for FWM, one
should use a very short ﬁber for a high SBST. The problem with this is that the FWM process
itself is increased by longer interaction length, meaning very little conversion eﬃciency for short
standard HNLFs.
Fibre type
Al doped core
HNLF
HNLF
HNLF
Strained HNLF-SPINE
Length [m]
128
1800
501
200
204
SBST [dBm]
> 27
12.5
16
21.5
> 27
λp [nm]
1560
1565
1546.7
1554
1565
Fibre type
HNLF-SPINE
DF-HNLF
Loose coil HNLF
Length [m]
508
506
501
SBST [dBm]
17.5
15.5
14.5
λp [nm]
1542.9
1541.3
1550.4
Table 2: Measured SBST values using the setup seen in ﬁgure 5. The threshold is deﬁned as
equation (16) with µ = 0.01.
Optimal HNLF ﬁber lengths for pump powers in the 21-22 dBm range can be shown to be around
500 m, when considering the maximum obtainable conversion eﬃciency[13]. At this ﬁber length
the ﬁber attenuation has not yet had a huge impact on the FWM, while the interaction length
for the nonlinear process is still long enough to get high values of conversion eﬃciency. This is
the reason for most of the measured ﬁbers being ∼500 m.
The aluminum doped core ﬁber had a SBST which was higher than what was able to be measured
by the setup. The nonlinear coeﬃcient γ is in the low end with 7.4 (W km)−1 and the biggest
concern when considering using this ﬁber for FWM is the very high attenuation of 15 dB/km.
The impact of propagation loss on the FWM conversion eﬃciency is discussed in further detail
in chapter 5.
Page 11 of 45
==PAGE:18==
3
STIMULATED BRILLOUIN SCATTERING
The 501 m HNLF, 506 m dispersion-ﬂattened HNLF and the 501 m loose coil HNLF all have
SBST values in the same range. Having around the same length is of course the biggest con-
tributor to this but as discussed in equation (17), the variation in geometric design and dopant
densities are the reason for the variation of the SBST values.
The Highly Nonlinear Fiber with Stable Phase-matching for Improved Nonlinear Eﬃciency
(HNLF-SPINE) has a SBST that is a 17.5 dBm, which is the highest of all the ﬁbers around
500 m. This could be due to the fact that the dopants used to achieve high γ, together with the
special geomtric design to ensure stable ZDW, creates a higher Pth.
The 204 m strained HNLF-SPINE has a SBST which was higher than 27 dBm. This is due to
the fact that having diﬀerent amounts of strain along the ﬁber introduces diﬀerent resonance
frequencies of the acoustic waves inside the ﬁber. This eﬀectively increases the limit of pump
power in OPC but creates phase-matching problems with regards to polarization mode dispersion
and variation in the dispersion proﬁle along the ﬁber. The large increase in possible pump power
going through the ﬁber outweighs the fact that the strained ﬁber is half the length of other ﬁbers.
SBST increases of 7-8 dB have been reported when using strained ﬁbers[14][15].
Other techniques, such as spectral broadening of the pump by phase modulation[16] and adding
a temperature gradient along the ﬁber[17] has been shown to increase the SBST considerably.
3.4
Numerical model and validation
The ability to predict the SBS characteristics of a ﬁber is crucial when trying to develop a model
for FWM inside an optical ﬁber. The derivation behind a dynamic SBS model starts at the
assumption of having a pump at the cyclic angular frequency ωp, a stokes shifted signal ωs and
are set up as coupled diﬀerential equations, similar to the techniques used in equations(5)-(7).
The derivation of a ﬁnal dynamic SBS model will not be done here but the coupled equations can
be found in[18]. The coupled equations for SBS are then solved using a VPIphotonics Universal
ﬁber model.
From the coupled equations in [18], it can be seen that the amount of SBS inside a system
depends on the Brillouin gain gB and the spontaneous emission parameter βi¸ together with the
modal eﬀective area Aeff and the Brillioun bandwidth ωB/2π. The eﬀective area has a relation
to the core radius of the ﬁber and is often stated on the data sheet of a ﬁber. gB and βi are not
normally stated and have to be measured for each individual ﬁber.
Figure 7: Backscattered(BS) and output power of a 501 m loose coil HNLF measured using a
modiﬁed version of the setup shown in ﬁgure 5, where a PWM was added after the FUT. The
simulated SBS values from VPI are included as well.
Page 12 of 45
==PAGE:19==
3
STIMULATED BRILLOUIN SCATTERING
For the purpose of simulating SBS for a ﬁber (501 m loose coil from table 2 chosen in this
case), the Brillouin gain was estimated by measuring the point where the pump power coming
out of the ﬁber equaled the backscattered power, which is µ = 1 in equation (16). Using this
Pth, one can estimate gB = 9.7597E-12 m/W by the use of equation (17). The used Brillioun
bandwidth(ωB/2π = 100 MHz) was taken from [18] and no βi was deﬁned, since the model
implementation in VPI did not take one as an input. Other ﬁber parameters such as loss(0.7
dB/km), dipsersion(−7.23E−9 s/m2) at 1550 nm, dispersion slope(18.53 s/m3) at 1550nm, non-
linear index(3.2917 m2/W), eﬀective area(11.6E-12 m2) and length(501 m) were taken from the
data sheet of the 501 m loose coil HNLF (see Appendix A.1). The VPIphotonics setup used for
this simulation can be seen in appendix A.2.
The results of the simulation, together with the measured values, can be seen in ﬁgure 7. The
measured 1% SBST was at 14.5 dBm, as seen in table 2, and the simulated was 15.5 dBm, which
is fairly close to the measured value, considering that the calibration done on the power meters
cannot be done with 100% accuracy, due to thermal shifts and coupling losses in the setup. The
eﬀect of the increased SBST can also be seen on the measured output power of the FUT, where
the simulated output power generally is higher than the measured values.
Figure 7 also shows how the output power from the FUT starts to stagnate as the backscattered
SBS power starts to increase rapidly. At this point(µ = 1), all the extra pump power being put
into the ﬁber is reﬂected and causes the backscattered power to increase at the same rate as
before the SBST, due to Rayleigh scattering.
The reason for the measured and simulated not being exactly alike can be due to many factors.
One factor is that the SBSAdjustmentFactor in VPI, which describes the SBS gain reduction due
to random polarization scrambling, was used to ﬁt the simulated result to the measured data.
If this parameter was set to the default 0.5 for both stimulated and spontaneous scattering, the
simulated SBST values were 6-7 dB higher than what was measured. Therefore the SBSAdjust-
mentFactor was set to 0.85 for stimulated scattering and 0.15 for spontaneous scattering. This
eﬀectively increases the Brillouin gain for the stimulated scattering, suggesting that the tech-
nique used to ﬁnd gB for the measured was not successful. This is most likely due to equation
(17) being a rather crude approximation, as described in [11]. For a more accurate SBS model,
one would have to construct a setup that could measure the the Brillouin gain and bandwidth,
as seen in[19].
For a pump power lower than the 1% SBST, the slope of the backscattered power is noticeably
diﬀerent for the simulated and measured values. This is most likely due to the default Rayleigh
scattering coeﬃcient, used in VPI, being lower than the actual coeﬃcient of the ﬁber. A mea-
surement of this parameter would be needed to have an accurate model of SBS in an optical ﬁber.
The diﬀerence in reﬂected power at around 12 dBm of pump power is attributed to coupling
losses in the real setup not being simulated in the VPI model.
Page 13 of 45
==PAGE:20==
4
CONVERSION EFFICIENCY
4
Conversion eﬃciency
Now that a better understanding of SBS in HNLFs has been established, the conversion eﬃciency
of diﬀerent HNLFs can be measured in the range of the SBST. The focus of this investigation is
now put on how diﬀerent geometric proﬁles and dopants change the conversion eﬃciency, while
also looking at how phase-mismatch contributes to a decrease in conversion eﬃciency.
The ﬁbers under investigation are: 501 m standard HNLF, 506 dispersion-ﬂattened(DF) HNLF
and 508 m HNLF-SPINE. All of these ﬁbers have a ZDW that is in the middle of the C-band,
which is the wavelength region where the available EDFAs amplify in.
This gives the best
opportunity to use multiple WDM channels for an OPC-system, due to each idler of the WDM
channels still being in the C-band and thereby possible to amplify.
The experimental setup used to measure the conversion eﬃciency for diﬀerent pump powers,
signal wavelengths and pump wavelengths can be seen in ﬁgure 8.
ECL
Pump
PC
EDFA
Isolator
3 dB
Coupler
ECL
Signal
PC
FUT
OSA
T-OBPF
Figure 8: Experimental setup for the measurement of conversion eﬃciency. PC: Polarization
Controller, OSA: Optical Spectrum Analyzer, T-OBPF: Tunable optical band-pass ﬁlter.
A Yenista Osics 1560 variable wavelength CW ECL is used to create an optical pump which
is put through a PC to overlap the signal and pump polarization inside the HNLF for the
highest possible conversion eﬃciency. The polarization optimization is done each time a new
FUT is used, due to the PCs being wavelength dependent. This is only done for a single signal
wavelength(λs = ZDW+5 nm) to save time when sweeping the wavelength separation between
signal and pump. To get the best conversion eﬃciency for each signal wavelength, one would
have to optimize the polarization each time.
An EDFA, similar to the one used for the setup in ﬁgure 5, was then used to amplify the pump
to optical powers that were around the SBST. The ASE noise from the EDFA was ﬁltered out
using a Koshin Kogaku FC-1560B-1-3 wavelength tunable OPBF, with a gaussian proﬁle and
a full width half maximum(FWHM) of 3 ± 0.3 nm. The ﬁltered pump then goes through an
optical isolator and into a 3 dB(50%/50%) coupler. The pump then enters the FUT and goes
out into an OSA(Yokogawa AQ 6331) to be analyzed together with the signal and the created
idler. Another ECL, similar to that of the pump, creates the signal which is run through a PC
to align polarizations inside the FUT.
The two ECLs and OSA are controlled through GPIB connectors and fed into a computer using
Matlab to save the optical spectrum for a given signal and pump wavelength. The conversion
eﬃciency between the output signal and output idler is then calculated and saved. This deﬁnition
of conversion eﬃciency is diﬀerent from the one seen in equation (14), but it should not diﬀer
too much from each other. This is due to the ampliﬁcation of the signal, from the pump and
idler mixing, being low due to small pump powers.
Due to the EDFA gain being wavelength dependent, one should always check the actual amount
of pump power that goes into the FUT, by the use of an external PWM. The output power
setting on the EDFA should be changed until the desired pump power reaches the FUT. Before
the measurements began the actual signal power entering the FUT was also measured using a
PWM.
Page 14 of 45
==PAGE:21==
4
CONVERSION EFFICIENCY
A 0.6 nm wavelength diﬀerence was observed between the measured wavelength on the OSA and
the output wavelengths on the ECLs. This is most likely due to the OSA not being calibrated
and therefore when noting the pump and signal wavelengths, the wavelengths values on the
ECLs are used.
4.1
501 m HNLF
The ﬁrst ﬁber tested was the 501 m HNLF with a ZDW of 1546.7 nm. A normal HNLF is deﬁned
by having a small core area with high mode conﬁnement and large amounts of core dopants,
which should result in high γ and thereby high conversion eﬃciency.
The EDFA had to be put at a output power 24.5 dBm for 16 dBm of pump power to reach the
FUT. Considering that the isolator and 3 dB coupler only introduces about 6 dB of loss, the last
2.5 dB of loss may come from a slight misalignment of the OBPF, since a perfect alignment would
only introduce around 0.5 dB loss. The loss of pump power in the setup limits the maximum
pump power that can be transmitted to the FUT to 22 dBm, which is far above the 1% SBST
for the 501 m HNLF and might even be enough to reach the 100% SBST.
The sweeping range of the ECLs were in the 1530-1580 nm range and thereby covered the whole
C-band. The ﬁrst experiment conducted was done to test the conversion eﬃciency in the ﬁber
with a pump wavelength close to or at the ZDW. The result of this can be seen in ﬁgure 9
Pump wavelength sweep
Figure 9: Conversion eﬃciency measurement of a standard 501 m HNLF with varying pump
wavelengths in relation to the ZDW(λ0) of the speciﬁc ﬁber. The pump power was 17 dBm.
The signal wavelength is swept from λ0-10 nm to λ0+25 nm in increments of 0.5 nm, while the
measured signal power reaching the FUT was at -0.2 dBm. By moving the pump wavelength
around the ZDW, the phase-matching gets worse due to both the pump and signal contributing
to phase-mismatch through dispersion. The eﬀect of this is the narrower 3 dB-bandwidth of the
conversion eﬃciency spectrum, as observed in ﬁgure 9. The one-sided 3 dB-bandwidth, deﬁned
from λs −λp = 0 to the point where the maximum conversion eﬃciency has decreased by 3 dB,
is lowest for λ0-2 nm with only ∼13 nm.
Page 15 of 45
==PAGE:22==
4
CONVERSION EFFICIENCY
As the diﬀerence in pump and ZDW decreases, the 3 dB-bandwidth increases up to a maximum
that goes outside the C-band and enters the L-band for λp = λ0. If L-band transmission was to
be considered in an OPC-system, the conversion eﬃciency lying in this band would also be of
interest.
One major observation from the result in ﬁgure 9 is the diﬀerent 3 dB-bandwidths for the same
displacement above or below the ZDW. This is most likely due to the fact that the nonlinear
phase contriubtion to the phase-mismatch parameter κ, from equation (11), is not compensating
for the linear phase shift ∆β when the pump wavelength is in the normal dispersion regime(λp <
λ0,∆β > 0). When the pump wavelength is placed above the ZDW, the nonlinear phase shift
does compensate for some of the linear phase shift, which is why λp = λ0 and λp = λ0 + 0.5nm
are so close to each other and the λp = λ0 + 2nm having the same 3 dB-bandwidth as the
λp = λ0 −1. The reason for the nonlinear phase shift not compensating fully is because of the
low pump power, since the NL-phase shift depends on the pump power.
The conversion eﬃciency is lower than 0 and this characterizes the measured system as a wave-
length converter. If the conversion eﬃciency was above 0, the system would be deﬁned as a
ﬁber-based optical parametric ampliﬁer(FOPA), as seen in ﬁgure 4. The reason for the conver-
sion eﬃciency spectrum not being comparable to the presented simulation in ﬁgure 4 is the low
power ratio between signal and pump, combined with the fact that eﬀects such as polarization
and variation of ﬁber parameters along the ﬁber not being considered.
A measurement free wavelength displacement zone of λs = λ0±2 nm was chosen to make sure
that the pump would not leak into the idler band if it was to be ﬁltered out for use in an OPC-
system. This was done for all measurements of conversion eﬃciency for all measured ﬁbers.
Pump power sweep
As discussed in chapter 2, one of the most important parameters when considering conversion
eﬃciency is the pump power. The pump power dependence of the conversion eﬃciency should
be comparable to the proportionality presented in equation (8). The result of varying the pump
power can be seen in ﬁgure 10.
Figure 10: Conversion eﬃciency measurement of a standard 501 m HNLF with varying pump
power. The pump wavelength was set to the ZDW.
Two crucial observations can be made from this experiment. For pump powers below the SBST
Page 16 of 45
==PAGE:23==
4
CONVERSION EFFICIENCY
of the ﬁber, there is a 2 dB increase in conversion eﬃciency every 1 dB increase in pump power.
This is in great correlation with the quadratic dependence of pump power. The other observation
is a non-quadratic dependence for pump powers 17 and 18 dBm. This is due to the measured
SBST, seen in table 2, being 16 dBm. The amount of pump power propagating through the
ﬁber does not increase by 1 dB each step and therefore the conversion eﬃciency increase slows
down until the 100% SBST value is reached, where the maximum available conversion eﬃciency
is obtained. This suggest that by varying the pump power, one can roughly estimate the 1%
SBST without having to use the setup in ﬁgure 5.
4.2
506 m DF-HNLF
The next ﬁber measured was the 506 m dispersion-ﬂattened HNLF with a ZDW of 1541.3 nm.
Dispersion ﬂattened ﬁbers have a dispersion slope that is lower than for a normal HNLF, by
manipulation of the waveguide or material dispersion. This is advantageous when wanting a
large 3 dB-bandwidth, due to the dispersion of the signal being close to that of the pump
for a larger wavelength range than normal, ensuring better phase-matching. The signal power
and EDFA settings were the same as for the measurement of the 501 m standard HNLF and
the OBPF was moved so as to achieve the maximum amount of pump power in the setup.
Polarization optimization for the conversion eﬃciency was done once again and the result for a
pump wavelength sweep can be be seen in ﬁgure 11.
Pump wavelength sweep
Figure 11: Conversion eﬃciency measurement of a dispersion ﬂattened HNLF with varying pump
wavelength in relation to the ZDW of the speciﬁc ﬁber. Pump power was at 17 dBm.
The most noticeable change, when comparing with the measurement of the standard 501 m
HNLF in ﬁgure 9, is the smaller variation in 3 dB-bandwidth for pump wavelengths that are not
at the ZDW. This is a direct consequence of the dispersion slope being lower, thereby lowering
the diﬀerence in dispersion for a pump at λp = λ0 and a pump at λp = λ0+1 nm. For a pump
wavelength of λp = λ0-2 nm, the 3 dB-bandwidth has improved by 5 nm when comparing to
ﬁgure 9.
The conversion eﬃciency for the standard and dispersion ﬂattened ﬁber is about the same for a
pump power of 17 dBm, but the 3 dB-bandwidth for the DF-HNLF is lower than for the standard
Page 17 of 45
==PAGE:24==
4
CONVERSION EFFICIENCY
HNLF when placing the pump at the ZDW. This is most likely due to the fact that DF-HNLF
are more sensitive to variations in core radius and relative index diﬀerences than HNLFs are, due
to their complex geometric structure. Variations of 1% in core radius and 0.02% in relative index
diﬀerence has been suggested to vary the ZDW of a speciﬁc DF-HNLF between 2 and 7 nm along
the ﬁber[20]. This would in practice result in a lower 3 dB-bandwidth, due to the dispersion
parameter β2 having a z-dependence and thereby aﬀecting ∆β. Measured ZDW variations of up
to 52 nm for DF-HNLF, 9 nm for HNLF and 1.4 nm for HNLF-SPINE have been reported[21],
suggesting larger than 1% core radius variations for DF-HNLF ﬁbers. These variations can be
cancelled out by a combination of several smaller DF-HNLFs with diﬀerent ZDW[22, ﬁg. 5] and
could be interesting to use for high eﬃciency OPC-systems.
Pump wavelengths that are lower than the ZDW still have worse 3 dB-bandwidth than pump
wavelengths that are higher than the ZDW, strengthening the hypothesis of the nonlinear phase
shift compensating for some of the linear phase shift.
Pump power sweep
Figure 12: Conversion eﬃciency measurement of a dispersion ﬂattened HNLF with varying pump
power. Pump wavelength was at the ZDW.
The pump power proﬁle in ﬁgure 12 resembles that of the 501 m standard HNLF, but as described
earlier, the 3 dB-bandwidth is lower for the DF-HNLF. The variations of conversion eﬃciency
seem to be lower(ﬂatter), suggesting less ﬂuctuations in pump and signal power, lower thermal
drift and thereby lower polarization drift during the sweeps. However, the powers of the signal
and pump should be somewhat stable in the setup, suggesting variations in the measurements
done by the OSA to be the main reason.
The conversion eﬃciencies quadratic dependence on pump power was also observed for low
pump powers, as it was for the standard HNLF. The pump power where this dependence is not
applicable anymore is around 16 dBm pump power, when looking at ﬁgure 12. This is in great
correlation with the SBST value presented in table 2. This further supports the hypothesis of
measuring the 1% SBST by varying the power in a conversion eﬃciency measurement setup and
noting the pump power where the quadratic dependence stops applying.
Page 18 of 45
==PAGE:25==
4
CONVERSION EFFICIENCY
4.3
508 m HNLF-SPINE
As discussed in a previous section, the DF-HNLF was sensitive to core radius variations and
this is also the case for standard HNLFs[23]. The HNLF-SPINE is fabricated to have very small
variations of core radius along the ﬁber. As demonstrated in [21], the smaller variations give
a very small deviation in ZDW and thereby better conversion eﬃciency and 3 dB-bandwidth
by having stable phase-matching through the ﬁber. The conversion eﬃciency for the HNLF-
SPINE(ZDW=1545.4 nm) for varying pump wavelengths can be seen in ﬁgure 13.
Pump wavelength sweep
Figure 13: Conversion eﬃciency measurement of a HNLF-SPINE with varying pump wavelength
in relation to the ZDW of the speciﬁc ﬁber. Pump power was at 16 dBm.
When comparing this conversion eﬃciency spectrum with the ones for the standard and DF-
HNLF, the measurement for when the pump as placed at the ZDW does not resemble the
wavelength where the best phase-matching is obtained. The reason behind this is most likely
due to the polarization of the pump and signal not being perfectly optimized for maximum
conversion eﬃciency. Another reason may be that the OBPF used in the setup was misaligned
for the measurement where the pump was at the ZDW and the optical power was 16 dBm. Other
measurements for this pump wavelength had their polarization and OBPF reoptimized, as seen
in ﬁgure 14, which gave a more expectable conversion eﬃciency spectrum.
The 3 dB-bandwidth for pump wavelengths away from the ZDW has gotten signiﬁcantly lower
compared to the two other tested ﬁbers. For the standard HNLF, the λp = λ0+1 nm had a
3 dB-bandwidth of 23 nm, whereas this bandwidth was only just above 10 nm in the HNLF-
SPINE. By looking at the measurements of ﬁgure 14, the 3 dB-bandwidth covers the C-band
when placing the pump at the ZDW. This suggests that the dispersion slope of the HNLF-SPINE
is high and the ﬁber would only work well for broadband wavelength conversion when placing
the pump exactly at the ZDW.
The phenomenon of pump wavelengths higher than the ZDW having better 3 dB-bandwidths
is still present, but with a much smaller diﬀerence between the points with the same relative
displacements.
Page 19 of 45
==PAGE:26==
4
CONVERSION EFFICIENCY
Pump power sweep
Figure 14: Conversion eﬃciency measurement of a HNLF-SPINE with varying pump power.
Pump wavelength was at the ZDW.
When the pump is placed at the ZDW, the polarization is optimized and the OBPF is tuned
correctly, the 508 m HNLF-SPINE exhibits the best conversion eﬃciency and 3 dB-bandwidth
when comparing the last three ﬁbers that were measured. The SBST for the pump power cannot
be as easily identiﬁed as with the other measurements and so an assumption is made that the
SBST is above 18 dBm pump power. The measured SBST was 17.5 dBm, again proving the
viability of measuring the SBST using pump power sweeps.
Partial Conclusion
By assuming the maximum feasible conversion eﬃciency to be at a pump power 1 dB above the
1% SBST, which is where the measured output power stagnates for the 501 m HNLF in ﬁgure
7, the best performing ﬁber in terms of conversion eﬃciency is the 508 m HNLF-SPINE with
∼−11 dB conversion eﬃciency for signal wavelengths close to the pump and ZDW. The 3 dB-
bandwidth covers the entire C-band, both above and below the pump, and the 1 dB-bandwidth
covers up to 15 nm above the ZDW. This enables the conversion of up to 37 channels2 with a
50 GHz spacing, without having large power diﬀerences between each individual channel. This
is advantageous when using the OPC-system for optical communication.
21 nm=125 GHz →(125 GHz·15) / 50 GHz = 37 channels
Page 20 of 45
==PAGE:27==
5
VPI-MODELLING OF CONVERSION EFFICIENCY
5
VPI-modelling of conversion eﬃciency
Following the measurement of conversion eﬃciencies for diﬀerent types of HNLF, a numerical
investigation of the parameters responsible for FWM is conducted for the 508 m HNLF-SPINE.
This is done to get a better understanding of the parameters which could not easily be investi-
gated in the lab. The 508 m HNLF-SPINE was chosen due to numerical models normally not
including a variation of parameters, such as the core area and relative index diﬀerence along
the ﬁber. Of all the measured ﬁbers, the 508 m HNLF-SPINE has the least amount of these
variations and therefore is the best candidate to do numerical simulations for.
The model used was the Universal ﬁber model in VPI. A scalar analysis of the FWM powers
was conducted where NL-raman eﬀects were neglected.
The basis of the model stems from
equations (5)-(7), with eﬀects such as Brillouin scattering, Rayleigh scattering, propagation loss,
polarization adjustment factors and polarization mode dispersion enabled. Standard parameters
of the VPIphotonics Universal ﬁber model were left untouched, but several important ﬁber
parameters were changed to model the 508 m HNLF-SPINE.
The parameters used for simulating the HNLF-SPINE was, unless otherwise stated, a Reference-
Frequency of 1542.9 nm(ZDW), length of 508 m, attenuation coeﬃcient of 0.7 dB/km, dispersion
coeﬃcient of 0, dispersion slope of 72 s/m3, eﬀective core area of 15.8 µm2, nonlinear index of
3.7635·10−20 m2/W, a Brillouin gain of 6.4026·10−12 m/W and a SBSAdjustmentFactor of 0.85
stim and 0.15 spon. The Brillouin gain was found by making a crude approximation of the 100%
SBST occurring 5 dB above the 1% SBST, as seen in ﬁgure 7, and using this value in equation
(17). The signal wavelength was 1538 nm, the signal power was 8.71 mW and the pump power
was 16 dBm. An AccuracyGoal of 0.1 dB was used for all simulations and the general simulation
setup in VPIphotonics can be seen in appendix A.3.
The conversion eﬃciency was calculated as the ratio between signal input power to idler output
power. Deﬁning it as the ratio between output signal power and output idler only gave a 0.4
dB increase in conversion eﬃciency, which again shows the low amount of signal ampliﬁcation
in this speciﬁc case of FWM. This small diﬀerence has to be taken into consideration when
comparing the simulations with the measurements from earlier, since the conversion eﬃciency
was measured as output signal to output idler in the experiments.
5.1
Aeﬀ
Figure 15: Conversion eﬃciency as a function of eﬀective modal area in the HNLF-SPINE.
Page 21 of 45
==PAGE:28==
5
VPI-MODELLING OF CONVERSION EFFICIENCY
For the sweep of the eﬀective modal area, the eﬀective core area in the Universal ﬁber model
was varied between values of 10 to 30 µm2. The relation between the conversion eﬃciency and
the eﬀective modal area can be seen in ﬁgure 15. As the eﬀective modal area decreases, the
nonlinear coeﬃcient γ increases and thereby more idler is generated through equation 7. The
tendency seems to be that decreasing Aeff to values lower than the one given for the simulated
ﬁber, will result in even better conversion eﬃciencies. The problem with this has to do with
optical mode theory and is not included in the model used for the simulations, since it is scalar.
When an optical mode inside an optical ﬁber gets conﬁned, it happens due to the large refractive
index diﬀerence between the core and cladding, and due to a small core radius. These parameters
control the cross-sectional area of the optical mode inside the core, which is deﬁned as the
eﬀective modal area. When the eﬀective modal area gets decreased, there is less optical mode
inside the core and more inside the cladding. Having more of the optical mode propagate inside
the cladding changes dispersion characteristics of the light and thereby the phase-matching.
The best Aeff is the one that allows for the most conﬁnement in the smallest possible core area
without having a large amount of the light propagating in the cladding.
SBS eﬀects are negelected due to the pump power being lower than the 1% SBST for the 508 m
HNLF-SPINE.
5.2
L
The next parameter that was investigated was the length of the HNLF-SPINE and the results
of the simulation can be seen in ﬁgure 16. SBS eﬀects were included in the simulations, due to
the increase in length, causing more SBS as the length of the nonlinear medium increases. This
eﬀectively moves the 1% SBST to lower power levels, as discussed in chapter 3.
Figure 16: Conversion eﬃciency as a function of ﬁber length in the HNLF-SPINE.
For short ﬁbers, a small increase in length means a substantial increase in conversion eﬃciency,
due to the dependence seen in equation (14). When the ﬁber starts to get above 500 m, the SBST
decreases to a value under 16 dBm and the amount of power being reﬂected inside the ﬁber goes
up. This eﬀectively limits the amount of power available for the FWM interactions throughout
the ﬁber and limits the increase of conversion eﬃciency.
For very long ﬁbers(≫1 km), one
would imagine the conversion eﬃciency to decrease for increasing length, due to intrinsic loss
attenuating all of the FWM components.
Page 22 of 45
==PAGE:29==
5
VPI-MODELLING OF CONVERSION EFFICIENCY
If the complications of having backscattered pump light in a OPC-system are ignored, the ﬁber
length of around 1000 m seems to be more desirable in terms of conversion eﬃciency.
The
drawback from having long ﬁbers when doing FWM is the conversion eﬃciency bandwidth de-
creasing due to the linear phase shift ∆βz having a larger eﬀect on the phase-matching condition
for longer ﬁbers. The conversion eﬃciency for small wavelength separations would beneﬁt from
longer ﬁbers and are therefore ideal for wavelength conversion of single channels.
5.3
α
As mentioned in the previous section, the intrinsic loss has a passive eﬀect on the power of the
FWM components. This eﬀect is tested by varying the attenuation coeﬃcient α of the Universal
ﬁber model and the result can be seen in ﬁgure 17.
Figure 17: Conversion eﬃciency as a function of intrinsic loss in the HNLF-SPINE.
The attenuation coeﬃcient α covers absorption and Rayleigh scattering losses. It is observed
how a 1 dB increase in intrinsic loss(0.5 to 1.5 dB/km) results in a 1 dB decrease in conversion
eﬃciency(-14.6 to -15.6 dB).
The exponential dependence(linear in log scale) between conversion eﬃciency and intrinsic loss
seems logical when considering light propagation in a normal transmission ﬁber and the fact
that the conversion eﬃciency is deﬁned for the signal power input and not output. However, in
FWM the 1 dB decrease in pump power should result in a 2 dB decrease in idler power through
the relation described in equation (8). The relation between idler and signal power will then
result in the absolute decrease in conversion eﬃciency of [Pi −2dB]/[Ps −1dB] = η −1dB, which
is seen in ﬁgure 17.
The theoretical conversion eﬃciency dependence on the loss coeﬃcient can be described as[24]
η =
α2
α2 + ∆β2

1 + 4
exp(−αL)
(1 −exp(αL))2 sin2

∆β L
2

(18)
and judging from this expression, the conversion eﬃciency should have something else than a
exponential relationship to the loss. This suggests that the VPI model only calculates loss on
the FWM process without taking the normalized conversion eﬃciency into account, as the more
realistic version of equation (8) would be Ei ∝ηE2
pE∗
s.
Page 23 of 45
==PAGE:30==
5
VPI-MODELLING OF CONVERSION EFFICIENCY
5.4
Pp
One of the most important parameters when discussing FWM is of course the pump power. The
eﬀect of increasing pump power on the conversion eﬃciency has been simulated in ﬁgure 18.
Figure 18: Conversion eﬃciency as a function of pump power in the HNLF-SPINE. The red
asterisks are from a simulation where the SBS eﬀect was turned oﬀ. The black asterisks have
been simulated with the SBS eﬀect turned on and are more in line with what is expected in a
real system.
The simulation has been made with and without the eﬀect of SBS and a clear saturation in
conversion eﬃciency is seen around 19 dBm of pump power. The measured SBST for the 508
m HNLF-SPINE was 17.5 dBm and the 1.5 dB diﬀerence between the SBST and the saturation
point can also be seen in the measurement of ﬁgure 7. The conversion eﬃciency of -11 dB at
18 dBm of pump is similar to the conversion eﬃciency measured for the same power in ﬁgure
13. This suggest that the model resembles the measurement and could be used to predict the
conversion eﬃciency of FWM in a given ﬁber.
The conversion eﬃciency measured and simulated for this ﬁber are the highest in terms of all
the ﬁbers tested until now and the 508 m HNLF-SPINE may be the best choice for use in an
OPC-system, due to the conversion eﬃciency being high while having a 3 dB-bandwidth that
covers the entire wavelength range from the pump to the end of the C-band. The only drawback
from using this ﬁber is the strict requirement of having the pump being at the ZDW. If, for some
reason, the pump is placed just around the ZDW, the 3 dB-bandwidth suﬀers greatly and the
broadband application of the OPC is no longer an option.
If SBS compensation methods, such as phase modulation, is used on the pump, the black asterisks
on ﬁgure 19 may be a better representation of the conversion eﬃciency as a function of pump
power. For very high pump powers, the conversion eﬃciency spectrum will start to look like
ﬁgure 4 and large diﬀerences in conversion eﬃciency will appear. This is known as modulation
instability and is undesirable for the even conversion of the signal to the idler.
Page 24 of 45
==PAGE:31==
5
VPI-MODELLING OF CONVERSION EFFICIENCY
5.5
λp
The pump wavelength is the last parameter to be investigated. For good conversion eﬃciency
the pump needs to be at or above the ZDW, but being too high can cause more phase-mismatch
to occur for smaller wavelength separations. The model is run for diﬀerent positions of the pump
and the result can be seen in ﬁgure 19
Figure 19: Conversion eﬃciency as a function of pump wavelength in the HNLF-SPINE.
The eﬀect of the additional contribution to the linear phase shift from the pump dispersion
is observed to be a smaller 3 dB-bandwidth. When the pump is placed directly at the ZDW,
the simulation shows no decrease in conversion eﬃciency for the entire range of wavelength
separation values. This is of course very non-physical and can be attributed to how the numeric
model is an idealized case of the real world. For a real ﬁber, there would be small ﬂuctuations in
the ZDW along the ﬁber and therefore a decrease in conversion eﬃciency for large wavelength
separation values would be expected. The increase in pump wavelength should also aﬀect the
bandwidth, even just by the added linear phase from the increasing signal wavelengths.
The other major feature of the pump wavelength sweep is the periodic structure of the side lobes
at lower conversion eﬃciencies. These appear due to the cyclic nature of phase shifts, as at some
point the phase of the signal will have undergone a full 2π rotation and gone back into phase
with the pump. The reason for the lower maximum in conversion eﬃciency for the lobes is due
to the phase matching parameter ∆β decreasing the conversion eﬃciency, as seen in equation
(18). The rate of which the lobes occur will increase with the pump displacement from the ZDW,
since the higher dispersion causes the pump to go in and out of phase more frequently.
5.6
Model validation
The VPIphotonics Universal model has now been used to investigate the dynamics of FWM
inside an optical ﬁber and the next step is to compare the experimental measurement of the
508 m HNLF-SPINE with the simulations.
This is done by taking the results of the pump
wavelength sweep and compare them for the same pump displacement values. This comparison
can be seen in ﬁgure 20a, where the measurement data from ﬁgure 13 has been combined with
the simulations of ﬁgure 19.
Page 25 of 45
==PAGE:32==
5
VPI-MODELLING OF CONVERSION EFFICIENCY
(a) λ0 = 1542.9 nm
(b) ZDWsim = 1542.8 nm
Figure 20: Normalized comparison of measured conversion eﬃciency spectra with a modelled
spectra using the same ﬁber speciﬁcations as the 508 m HNLF-SPINE, apart from the zero
dispersion wavelength for ﬁgure (b). The points are measured values of conversion eﬃciency and
the lines are numerical results from simulating the ﬁber in VPI, using the same numerical solver
parameters as in ﬁgure 4. The simulations for ﬁgure (a) and (b) are done for the same pump
wavelengths.
It is observed how the diﬀerence in 3 dB-bandwidth, between the measured and simulated
values, increases as the pump is placed further away from the ZDW. The diﬀerences for pump
displacements of λp = λ0 + 1 nm and λp = λ0 + 2 nm all have diﬀerences of around 0.5 nm,
which is close the AccuracyGoal(0.1 dB) of the numerical solver.
The pump wavelength of
λp = λ0 +0.5 nm has a diﬀerence of about 1 nm, which is a noticeable diﬀerence and is probably
due to the λp = λ0 +0.5 nm measurement being more sensitive in terms of ZDW variations along
the ﬁber. The ZDW variations may also be the reason for the diﬀerence in shape of the conversion
eﬃciencies for low wavelength separations, since the large pump displacement simulations ﬁts
very well with the measured data and is considerably less aﬀected by ZDW variations.
The conversion eﬃciencies in ﬁgure 20 is normalized due to a 1.5 dB diﬀerence between the mea-
sured and simulated conversion eﬃciency, where simulated values were higher than the measured
ones. This is a considerable diﬀerence and may be due to eﬀects such as coupling and bend loss
not being taken into account. The faulty model of loss in the ﬁber may also have something to
do with this.
A diﬀerence in the deﬁnition of conversion eﬃciency may also be to blame when considering the
higher simulated values, since the deﬁnition for the measured values was the ratio between the
signal output and idler, and not the signal input used in theory. A 0.4 dB diﬀerence was noted
when the other deﬁnition was used, leaving around 1 dB of unaccounted diﬀerence which may
come from an uncalibrated OSA.
Since the actual ZDW of the ﬁber seems to be diﬀerent from what is used as input of the numeric
model, a small decrease in ZDW was implemented to see if the model would have a better ﬁt to
the measured values. The result of using a ZDW that is 0.1 nm lower than the data sheet value
of 1542.9 nm can be seen in ﬁgure 20b, where the diﬀerence in conversion eﬃciency proﬁles has
decreased compared to ﬁgure 20a. The shape of the proﬁle for the smallest pump displacement is
still a bit oﬀ, but in general closer to the measured values. This means that the ZDW variations
can be averaged by eﬀectively lowering the ZDW with 0.1 nm, which is close to the variance
measured in [21] for a similar ﬁber.
Partial conclusion
Based on the investigation done in this chapter, The VPIphotonics Universal ﬁber model is
deemed useful to model the conversion eﬃciency bandwidth, but not accurate enough to model
the level of conv.eﬀ.
Page 26 of 45
==PAGE:33==
6
CHOICE OF NONLINEAR MEDIUM
6
Choice of nonlinear medium
When choosing to do OPC in a nonlinear medium, there are many diﬀerent materials and
techniques one can choose from. OPC has been realized in waveguides[25], semiconductor optical
ampliﬁers(SOA)[26], photonic crystal ﬁbers(PCF)[27] and bismuth-doped ﬁbers[28] - to name
a few. Although mediums such as PCFs and bismuth-doped ﬁbers have large γ values, they
suﬀer from extremely high losses and are still under development. The SOA creates additional
noise through ASE, which is unwanted in spectral inversion. A common problem for all these
techniques is the high coupling loss that is associated with sending a signal into the medium.
The medium that is easiest to couple into is the HNLF and this is why this thesis uses it for
OPC. The low loss connectors readily available and the operation wavelength inside the C-band
are also factors that speak in favor of using HNLF.
The best available ﬁber to use in an OPC-system was determined to be the 508 m HNLF-SPINE,
but as new HNLFs became available in the lab, the conversion eﬃciency and bandwidth of these
were tested.
6.1
498 m HNLF-SPINE
The method and setup for testing the conversion eﬃciency was the same as described in chapter
4 and the result of a power sweep for the 498 m HNLF-SPINE can be seen in ﬁgure 21. Signal
power was measured to be at 1.23 dBm for all the measurements of this 498 m HNLF-SPINE.
Figure 21: Conversion eﬃciency measurement of a 498 m HNLF-SPINE with varying pump
power. The pump wavelength was 1545.4 nm, which is the ZDW of the ﬁber(See appendix A.1).
By comparing the power sweep with the same measurement of the other HNLF-SPINE in ﬁgure
14, it is observed how the conversion eﬃciency for a pump power of 17 dBm is 4 dB less for the
498 m ﬁber. The one-sided 1 dB-bandwidth of the 498 m ﬁber extended outside the C-band and
therefore is a prime candidate for OPC of dense WDM signals. It is also noteworthy that the
SBST has not been reached for pump powers up to 20 dBm, suggesting the possibility of high
levels of conversion eﬃciency being reached if this ﬁber is used in OPC.
The next step of investigating the ﬁber is to sweep the pump displacement away from the 1545.4
nm ZDW. This result is shown in ﬁgure 22 and shows a similar conversion eﬃciency proﬁle as
the other HNLF-SPINE in ﬁgure 13. The only diﬀerence is that the polarization was optimized
Page 27 of 45
==PAGE:34==
6
CHOICE OF NONLINEAR MEDIUM
probably for this measurement and the eﬀect of having the pump at the ZDW is clearly displayed
by the large 1 dB-bandwidth that spans the entire C-band.
Figure 22: Conversion eﬃciency measurement of a HNLF-SPINE with varying pump wavelength
in relation to the ZDW. Pump power was 17 dBm.
When using the HNLF-SPINEs for FWM, one has to make sure that the pump wavelength is as
close to the ZDW as possible. As lasers are calibrated diﬀerently, it might not always be the case
that the output wavelength exactly corresponds to the ZDW. Therefore it would be interesting
to see what the tolerance of the pump placement is in terms of conversion eﬃciency bandwidth.
This is tested by taking conversion eﬃciency measurements with the pump wavelength increasing
in small increments of 0.1 nm. The result can be seen in ﬁgure 23.
Figure 23: Conversion eﬃciency measurement of a HNLF-SPINE with varying pump wavelength
close to the ZDW. Pump power was 20 dBm.
It is observed how the 1 dB-bandwidth does not change when the pump is placed 0.1 nm above
Page 28 of 45
==PAGE:35==
6
CHOICE OF NONLINEAR MEDIUM
the ZDW. For a well calibrated laser, this window of 0.1 nm should be big enough to not have any
small variations in emission wavelength aﬀect the conversion eﬃciency proﬁle. A variation of 0.2
nm starts to decrease the 1 dB onesided bandwidth to around 18 nm and the 3 dB-bandwidth to
around 24 nm. This would still be acceptable for an OPC-system where only few WDM channels
close to the pump were used.
6.2
254m Strained HNLF-SPINE
The other ﬁber that became available for use was the 254 m Strained HNLF-SPINE. This ﬁber
has distributed strain along the ﬁber to increase the SBST. The isolator of the setup, depicted
in ﬁgure 8, was removed to reach the highest possible pump powers and a power sweep was
conducted. The result of this can be seen in ﬁgure 24.
Figure 24: Conversion eﬃciency measurement of a Strained HNLF-SPINE with varying pump
power. Pump wavelength was set to the ZDW of 1544 nm.
Here a sweep of high pump powers has resulted in the highest conversion eﬃciency measured in
this thesis. Similar to the measurement of the 508 m HNLF-SPINE, the polarization optimization
of one the measurements(Pp = 23 dBm) seem to result in an extreme bandwidth when comparing
the measurements using other pump powers. No matter how much optimization was done with
the polarization controllers, the 23 dBm Pp proﬁle was not able to be reproduced.
A 3 dB-bandwidth of 18 nm was observed for the measurements using 18,21 and 24 dBm pump
power. This is lower than the very wide proﬁle obtainable for the 498 m HNLF-SPINE and
makes the strained ﬁbers high conversion eﬃciency a prime candidate for use in an OPC-system
using few WDM channels placed close to the pump.
The bandwidth proﬁles of the strained ﬁber was also measured, but only for small pump displace-
ments above the ZDW. This can be seen in ﬁgure 25 and shows that small pump displacements
does not decrease the bandwidth proﬁle but might even increase the conversion eﬃciency for
some pump wavelengths, speciﬁcally λp = 1541.1 nm and λp = 1541.2 nm. Therefore, the optimal
pump wavelength for this ﬁber is chosen to be 1541.1 nm and should be used in an OPC-system
utilizing the strained ﬁber.
Page 29 of 45
==PAGE:36==
6
CHOICE OF NONLINEAR MEDIUM
Figure 25: Conversion eﬃciency measurement of a Strained HNLF-SPINE with varying pump
wavelength close to the ZDW. Pump power was set to 18 dBm.
While doing measurements of the strained ﬁber, it was observed how the polarization had to be
re-optimized every 20 minutes when doing sweeps. This is due to the mechanical straining of
the ﬁber causing polarization instabilities inside the ﬁber, due to temperature drifts changing
the fast and slow polarization axis of the ﬁber. This also leads to increased polarization mode
dispersion(PMD) and can be a disadvantage, since this adds another layer of complexity for the
phase-matching condition.
6.2.1
Placement of signal for polarization optimization
The increased sensitivity to polarization, and the 23 dBm pump power measurement in ﬁgure 24,
suggests that one is able to change the conversion eﬃciency proﬁle by optimizing the polarization
at diﬀerent signal wavelengths. This is tested for diﬀerent signal wavelengths and the result is
shown in ﬁgure 26.
When the signal wavelength is 9 nm away from the pump, the 1 dB-bandwidth is increased
around 0.5 nm when comparing to the optimization done with +5 nm.
This is not a large
amount, but since the slope of the green +9 nm measurement is lower, the green conversion
eﬃciency proﬁle is the best in terms of using OPC for WDM.
The point of maximum conversion eﬃciency is moved when the signal wavelength is placed far
away, but the conversion eﬃciency level is lower than when the optimization happens for a signal
wavelength that is closer to the pump. This may be used to customize OPC for a speciﬁc range
of wavelengths.
A new power sweep is done with the polarization dependent conversion eﬃciency being optimized
for a signal wavelength of λs = λp + 9 nm, as seen in ﬁgure 27. A a somewhat ﬂatter conversion
eﬃciency proﬁle is created, compared to the measurements in ﬁgure 24, which is better for OPC
used in communication systems.
Partial conclusion
By comparing all the measurements of all the diﬀerent ﬁbers tested in this thesis, the one that
has the best conversion eﬃciency is the 254 m Strained HNLF-SPINE, since the problem of the
SBST is removed. The ﬁber with the best one-sided bandwidth was the 498 m HNLF-SPINE
and presents the best method to evenly convert dense WDM signals.
Page 30 of 45
==PAGE:37==
6
CHOICE OF NONLINEAR MEDIUM
Figure 26: Conversion eﬃciency measurement, where the polarization of pump and signal are
optimized when the signal is +5, +9 or +25 nm away from the ZDW. This is shown by the red,
green and blue dashed lines, indicating the signal wavelength when doing the polarization de-
pendent conversion eﬃciency optimization. Pump power was 24 dBm and the pump wavelength
was set to 1544.1 nm.
Figure 27: New conversion eﬃciency measurement, where the polarization of pump and signal
are optimized when the signal is +9 nm away from the ZDW.
Page 31 of 45
==PAGE:38==
7
OPC EXPERIMENT
7
OPC experiment
After having tested several ﬁbers, the OPC-system can be build based on the idea of wavelength
conversion through FWM. There are several ways of building an OPC-system and it all depends
on which type of communication signal that is to be converted and which FWM technique this
requires. Techniques such as non-degenerate FWM, where two pumps are used to put signal
and idler closely together while not having the pump powers in the region of the SBST, have
been shown to net conversion eﬃciencies close to 0 dB[29] and even eﬃciencies as high as +10
dB[2][30].
In the OPC experiment conducted in this thesis, degenerate FWM is used to convert the signal
to the idler. This is done to simplify the setup, while still being able to show the concept of
dispersion and NL-eﬀects compensation. To showcase the capabilities of an OPC-system, dual-
polarization insensitive operation is chosen to double the amount of data that can be converted
inside the OPC. The OPC-system used in this thesis is illustrated in ﬁgure 28 and an explanation
of the diﬀerent parts follow below.
7.1
Setup
VOA
Signal
EDFA
Pump
PC
EDFA
T-OBPF
S
3 dB
HNLF
PBS
PC
PWM
20 dB
20 dB
S
Short
EDFA
20 dB
S
T-OBPF VOA
ECL
T-OBPF
Figure 28: Experimental setup of the optical phase conjugator. T-OBPF: Tunable optical band-
pass ﬁlter, VOA: Variable optical attenuator with a built in power meter, PBS: Polarizing beam
splitter, Short: Optical short-pass ﬁlter, S: Optical switch channel going into an OSA.
The orthogonal dual-polarization signal enters the OPC-system and gets ampliﬁed by an EDFA,
since it is assumed that the signal needs ampliﬁcation after transmission in the ﬁrst span of a
communication system. The EDFA was set to an output power of 20 dBm and went into a
Santeo OTF-350 T-OPBF, which had a FWHM bandwidth of 4-5 nm around the center channel
of the signal band. The ﬁltered signal then went into a combined VOA and PWM which made
sure that the output of the signal arm of the setup was 10 dBm.
The pump was set to the ZDW(1545.4 nm) of the chosen HNLF(498 m HNLF-SPINE), goes
through a polarization controller, enters an EDFA and is ampliﬁed to 30 dBm(1 W). The ASE
coming from the EDFA is then ﬁltered out by the use of a 0.8 nm FC-1550B-2-0.8 T-OBPF and
a 1 nm FC-1560B-1-1 T-OBPF. The 498 m HNLF-SPINE was chosen for this setup and the
reason why can be seen in the next section of this chapter.
The pump and signal is then combined in a 3-dB coupler, where 3 dB is sent into the loop
containing the HNLF and the other 3 dB is sent into an optical switch connected to an 0.05 nm
resolution OSA. The pump and signal then goes through a polarizing beam splitter(PBS), which
splits the pump into two orthogonal polarizations that propagates in opposite directions inside
the loop. The signal is also split into it’s two orthogonal polarizations and these propagate in
parallel with the subsequent diﬀerent polarized pump waves inside the loop. They then create an
idler through FWM in both propagation directions inside the HNLF. The power inside the loop
Page 32 of 45
==PAGE:39==
7
OPC EXPERIMENT
is monitored by a PWM which receives a 20 dB attenuated reading of the powers propagating
in both directions. The PC inside the loop acts together with the PC at the pump to align the
polarization of the pump in such a way that the pump is split evenly in at the PBS.
After two diﬀerent polarized idlers have been created inside the loop, they exit through the PBS
and temporally recombine. A 20 dB coupler is then used to check the spectral output of the
loop via another switch-to-OSA channel. The signal and pump is ﬁltered out by the use of two
FC-1570S optical short-pass ﬁlters. The remaining idler is then ampliﬁed in an EDFA to an
output power of 12 dBm. The idler then enters a 20 dB coupler to monitor the idler spectrum.
The idler then enters a Santeo OTF-350 T-OPBF with a FWHM bandwidth set to 4-5 nm. A
combined VOA and PWM is then used to monitor and control the output idler power of the
OPC, which should match the general launch power of the communication system.
7.2
Characterization
The power levels inside the loop, in both directions, was measured to balance out at around 17
dBm. This is a lot lower than the original ampliﬁed pump power of 30 dBm. The reason for
this is the ﬁlter, coupler and PBS all attenuating the pump and therefore putting an upper limit
on the amount of pump power that can travel inside the loop. This 17 dBm pump power is a
limitation in terms of achievable conversion eﬃciency and the ﬁber with the largest one-sided
bandwidth and conversion eﬃciency should be chosen to act as the HNLF in ﬁgure 28. The 498
m HNLF-SPINE is chosen due to it being the ﬁber with the widest one-sided bandwidth, which
is used to demonstrate the large operation bandwidth of the OPC. The conversion eﬃciency at
17 dBm of pump power is only -19 dB, which is the second worst out of all ﬁbers measured, but
it should still be enough to show proof-of-concept.
A measurement of the output spectra, after the PBS loop, of a 5-channel WDM signal can be
seen in ﬁgure 29 and 3 diﬀerent bands are deﬁned for further use in the OPC experiment. The
center wavelength for band 1 is 1559.8 nm, 1554.1 nm for band 2 and 1549.6 nm for band 3
and are chosen to try to characterize the full operation bandwidth of the OPC. The reason for
not testing a WDM signal which populated the entire operation bandwidth is the limitation of
only having 5 ECLs available in the transmitter. Using the diﬀerent positioned bands can give
a good indication of how a WDM signal covering the full bandwidth would behave.
Figure 29: Wavelength conversion of a 5-channel 50 GHz spacing WDM communication signal
using the 498 m HNLF-SPINE. The 3 diﬀerent channels are at the start, middle and end of the
operation window of the OPC.
Page 33 of 45
==PAGE:40==
7
OPC EXPERIMENT
Small ripples close to the pump are observed and are most likely a product of XPM from
the adjacent communication channels and SPM of the pump. The conversion eﬃciency of the
measurement in ﬁgure 29 is around -17 dB for all channels, which is higher than the measured
-19 dB in chapter 6. This might be due to the OSA used in the OPC setup being calibrated
better than for the setup in ﬁgure 8 or because of the signal power being lower.
The polarization controllers are optimized by using a module that scrambles the polarization of
the signal and then measuring the idler conversion eﬃciency while the PCs are operated. When
the conversion eﬃciency varies the least, the pump is evenly distributed inside the PBS loop
and any polarization of the signal will result in the same conversion eﬃciency for the idler. The
scrambler was then turned oﬀand a hour long period of polarization insensitive operation was
achieved.
The position of the signal and idler ﬁlters has to be conﬁgured each time a new band is chosen and
was generally positioned in the middle of the measured band with a 4-5 nm FWHM bandwidth.
This is seen in ﬁgure 30, where the single channel signal and idler has been measured for band
2.
(a) Center channel signal band.
(b) Center channel idler band.
Figure 30: Input and output of a single channel converted WDM signal, showcasing the width
of the T-OBPF, using heavy noise loading. The signal wavelength equals the center wavelength
for the measured band if single channel communication is used.
The measurement in ﬁgure 30 has been done under heavy noise-loading of the signal to showcase
the width of the T-OBPFs. Noise loading is something that can be utilized to artiﬁcially degrade
a communication signal and test the limits of the communication system in terms of the OSNR
of the signal. It is done by using a Finiser WaveShaper 4000s to attenuate speciﬁc channels at
the transmitter, eﬀectively decreasing the OSNR of the signal entering the OPC.
A 5 dB OSNR degradation was measured when sending the communication signal through the
OPC. This is a fairly low number, originating from the fact that attenuation and added ASE
noise inside the OPC contributes to OSNR degradation. When a signal is pre-ampliﬁed in the
OPC, the OSNR degrades as the ASE noise contributes to the magnitude of the the noise ﬂoor.
The OSNR is not degraded in the actual FWM process, since the noise ﬂoor and signal experience
the same conversion eﬃciency. With this in mind, the OPC can now be placed in the middle of
a communication system to be tested.
7.3
Optical communication system
The OPC-system discussed in the last section is now ready to be tested in a real communication
system. The communication system used to investigate the compensation capabilities of the
Page 34 of 45
==PAGE:41==
7
OPC EXPERIMENT
OPC is a dual-polarization 16-QAM 28 Gbaud/s signal. This corresponds to a data rate of[31]
R = Pfs log2(M) = 2 × 28 Gbaud/s log2(16) = 224Gbit/s
(19)
, where R is the data-rate, P is the polarization multiplication factor, fs is the Baud-rate and M
is the order of QAM used. By using 50 GHz spaced WDM, the entire conversion bandwidth of the
OPC(1549 to 1562 nm in ﬁgure 29) can be ﬁlled with 32 channels, bringing the theoretical data-
rate up to 7.168 Tbit/s. Since the communication system used is only able to produce 5-channel
WDM, the maximum data-rate being transmitted in the following experiments is 1.120 Tbit/s.
The detection of this signal is done by coherent detection followed by electric demodulation and
equalization.
7.3.1
Back-to-back
The communication system setup used in the OPC experiment has some limits of its own.
There are many complex parts in an optical transceiver (transmitter+receiver) which may limit
the performance of the system, even without being transmitted over thousands of kilometers.
This is tested by putting the output of the transmitter straight into the receiver without any
propagation in an external system. This is called a back-to-back(B2B) measurement and is a
standard method of characterizing a transceiver pair. The B2B measurement for the transceiver
used in this experiment can be seen in ﬁgure 31,
Figure 31: Back-to-back measurement of the used transmitter and receiver systems for the three
diﬀerent bands. The OSNR is measured at the receiver.
where an EDFA was used to raise the noise ﬂoor via ASE. The amount of ASE coming through
to the receiver, together with the transmitted signal, was controlled by a VOA. As the OSNR of
the transmitted signal increases, the BER of the received signal decreases and is calculated by
cross-referencing the detected signal with the transmitter output signal through post-processing.
If everything was ideal, the BER would continue to decrease for higher OSNR and reach BER
values that would exceed 10−9, which is considered an error free signal. The measurement in
ﬁgure 31 shows a saturation of BER around an OSNR value of 25-30 dB. This is called the
receiver limit and is due to the electronics in the receiver not being able to detect more bits than
it already is. Increasing the OSNR will not yield any increase in BER and puts the maximum
achievable B2B BER to around 5 × 10−4 for all bands used in this experiment.
Page 35 of 45
==PAGE:42==
7
OPC EXPERIMENT
7.4
Raman ampliﬁcation scheme
Now that the B2B-performance of the transceiver has been tested, it can be used to test the
compensation capabilities of an OPC. This is done by putting the OPC in the middle of a
transmission span using the Raman amplifcation scheme. The setup used can be seen illustrated
in ﬁgure 32,
Tx
EDFA
VOA
44 km
1
OPC
2
44 km
Rx
Raman
 pump
3 dB
Isolator
PWM
Figure 32: Experimental setup of an optical communication system using the Raman amplifying
scheme, with or without an OPC in the middle of the transmission span. Tx: Transmitter, Rx:
Receiver.
where the transmitted gets ampliﬁed and attenuated, depending on the desired input power
into the system, also known as the launch power of the system. The reason for having identical
launch powers throughout the system is to create a power proﬁle that imitates the one illustrated
in ﬁgure 2, which is optimal for compensation of NL-eﬀects. After the launch power of the
transmitter has been set, the signal goes through an isolator to protect the system from any
counter-propagating Raman pump. The signal then goes into 44 km of standard single mode
ﬁber(SSMF) and gets ampliﬁed using the Raman eﬀect and a counter-propagating 1455 nm
pump. The signal then either enters the OPC, called setup 2, or passes by the OPC, called
setup 1. The signal then enters another 44 km transmission span, gets ampliﬁed and goes into
the coherent receiver for detection and processing.
The powers of the VOAs and received signal were set to the same power level and a sweep of
launch powers Pin for both setups, operating at band 2, was conducted - the result can be seen
in ﬁgure 33.
(a) Band 2, Single Channel
(b) Band 2, WDM
Figure 33: Communication system performance for diﬀerent launch power, using setup 1 and 2
from ﬁgure 32. The red curve is system performance without OPC and the blue curve is with
OPC.
Both setups were tested for single and 5-channel WDM signals for launch powers in the range
of -8 to +8 dBm. This power range was chosen due to the NL-eﬀects of the system starting to
Page 36 of 45
==PAGE:43==
7
OPC EXPERIMENT
increase the BER for powers above 0 dBm. The result for single channel communication can
be seen in ﬁgure 33a and shows an BER improvement of 1.46 dB for high pump powers when
the OPC is used in the system. The improvement in BER for the optimal launch power of the
system cannot be seen due to the B2B-limit of the system. If the B2B-limit was signiﬁcantly
lower, the measurement should be able to show the point of minimum BER being lower for setup
2, with a higher optimal launch power than setup 1, due to the compensation of NL-eﬀects.
The result of using 5-channel WDM in the two setups can be seen in ﬁgure 33b and shows a
somewhat diﬀerent result than when using single channel. The setup using OPC has a higher
BER for all launch powers and therefore shows no signs of compensating the NL-eﬀects on the
WDM signal.
This is due to the power of the signal being split into 5 channels, eﬀectively
lowering the amount of NL-eﬀects through the power dependence of the Kerr-eﬀect. The rel-
atively short transmission spans also have something to do with the low NL-distortions, since
the shorter interaction distance in the spans create less nonlinear interactions. If the eﬀect of
NL-compensation was to be visible in ﬁgure 33b, the measured launch powers needed to be
increased together with the span lengths. Although, longer span lengths would require higher
Raman pump powers, which was not possible to obtain due to the WDM couplers burning for
pump powers higher than 1.6 W. This is also why the maximum launch power tested is +8
dBm, since more than 1.6 W of Raman pump would be needed to amplify higher launch powers.
Another way of increasing nonlinear eﬀects would be to decrease the channel spacing, eﬀectively
increasing the eﬀect of XPM on the channels.
The splitting of optical power happening in the WDM signal can also be illustrated by looking
at the received signal OSNR for the diﬀerent launch powers, as presented in ﬁgure 34.
Figure 34: OSNR of the received signal as a function of launch power through setup 1 and 2
for single channel and WDM. Traces with the same colors are for the same setup, but diﬀerent
signal types and the traces with the same symbols are for the same signal type, but diﬀerent
setups.
The OSNR of the received signal for single channel is higher than the OSNR for WDM, since
the power splitting into ﬁve channels corresponds to a 7 dB3 decrease in OSNR, which is also
observed in the measurement. The diﬀerence in OSNR when using the OPC does not change,
due to the signal input power being constant in the OPC. When not using OPC, the Raman
scheme ampliﬁes the signal without changing the OSNR. As the launch power is increased, the
received OSNR increases until the B2B OSNR limit of the system is reached.
310 × log10(1/5) ≈−7 dB
Page 37 of 45
==PAGE:44==
7
OPC EXPERIMENT
Extra NL-eﬀects could be added to the WDM signal in setup 1 by increasing OSNR of the signal,
which should be doable with launch powers above +8 dBm or decreasing the channel spacing.
This would help show the impact of OPC compensation for WDM signals in ﬁgure 33b.
7.5
EDFA ampliﬁcation scheme
For contrast, an EDFA ampliﬁcation scheme is used together with the OPC to see the eﬀect of
not having a symmetric power proﬁle. The power proﬁle using the EDFA scheme will resemble
the power proﬁle in ﬁgure 1 and result in a bigger loss of OSNR, due to the signal power needing
more ampliﬁcation and thereby raising the noise ﬂoor by adding ASE.
The setup used for testing the EDFA is almost identical to the one for Raman ampliﬁcation.
The WDM couplers and Raman pump are not present anymore, but an EDFA has been added
in the setup that does not include the OPC. This is how a standard communication system using
the EDFA scheme would look like and is deﬁned in setup 3. The setup including the OPC is
deﬁned as setup 4 and the full setup can be seen in ﬁgure 35. It should be noted that no digital
signal processing was used to compensate for dispersion in setup 2 and 4, which indicates that
the OPC-system is successful in compensating for dispersion in the system.
Tx
EDFA
VOA
44 km
3
OPC
4
44 km
Rx
Isolator
PWM
Figure 35: Experimental setup of an optical communication system using the EDFA amplifying
scheme, with or without an OPC in the middle of the 88 km transmission span. Tx: Transmitter,
Rx: Receiver.
Setup 3 and 4 were then tested by matching launch powers throughout the system and the
results of the measurements can be seen in ﬁgure 36.
(a) Band 2, Single Channel
(b) Band 2, WDM
Figure 36: Communication system performance for diﬀerent launch powers, using setup 3 and
4 from ﬁgure 35. The red curve is system performance without OPC and the blue curve is with
OPC.
The single channel measurement shows a 2 dB increase in BER for high pump powers, showing
the eﬀect of nonlinear compensation on the BER performance. The compensation starts to take
Page 38 of 45
==PAGE:45==
7
OPC EXPERIMENT
eﬀect for higher launch powers than in ﬁgure 33a, but the actual compensation is bigger. The
BER values for +8 dBm in ﬁgure 36a are signiﬁcantly lower than in ﬁgure 33a and is most likely
due to the fact that the symmetric power proﬁles in setup 1 and 2 did more harm than good,
in the sense of increasing the amount of NL-eﬀects without eﬀectively compensating for them.
The integrated power along the power proﬁle is much lower for the EDFA scheme and is why
there are less NL distortions on the signal. This also suggests that the power proﬁle for the
Raman scheme is not as symmetric as ﬁrst anticipated and could be optimized by shortening
the transmission span in such a way that the exponential propagation loss was compensated by
an equivalent Raman gain.
The 5-channel WDM measurement in ﬁgure 36b shows no improvement in the NL-region of
high launch powers due to the power per channel being too low in terms of creating signiﬁcant
NL-eﬀects. The reason for the better performance in the linear region of pumps below 0 dBm
is that the EDFAs used in the OPC are of better quality than the EDFA used in setup 3, since
they have a lower noise ﬁgure. This may also be the reason for the low BER values of setup 4,
in ﬁgure 36a, in the linear region.
The OSNR as a function of the launch power for setup 3 and 4 can be seen in ﬁgure 37 and
show a diﬀerent result than shown in ﬁgure 34. As there is no diﬀerence in the ampliﬁcation
method between the two transmission spans, the OSNR of the signal for -8 dBm launch power
is the same for setup 3 and 4. As the launch power increases, the OPC setup limits the OSNR
by keeping the post-ampliﬁed signal constant in the OPC, while setup 3 ampliﬁes without any
OSNR degradation. The 7 dB diﬀerence in OSNR between single channel and WDM signals is
still observed.
Figure 37: OSNR of the received signal as a function of launch power through setup 3 and 4 for
both single channel and WDM.
The OSNR levels for the EDFA-scheme is generally lower than the levels for the Raman-scheme
and is one of the reasons for the nonlinear eﬀects showing their eﬀect at higher launch powers in
ﬁgure 36, since the optical power is an integration of the signal power and noise ﬂoor combined.
7.6
Comparison of ampliﬁcation schemes
As discussed earlier, the OSNR degradation from the EDFA scheme seems to be higher than
when using the Raman ampliﬁcation scheme. This is due to the increased loss of signal power
in the EDFA scheme and is illustrated in ﬁgure 38.
Page 39 of 45
==PAGE:46==
7
OPC EXPERIMENT
Figure 38: OSNR improvement for increasing launch powers into the communication system,
using either the Raman or EDFA ampliﬁcation scheme (Setup 1 and 3, single channel).
The two schemes have a large diﬀerence in received OSNR at low launch powers, but as the
launch powers increase, the diﬀerence decreases. This is due to the fact that the highest OSNR
able to be produced is 45 dB, limiting the increase in OSNR for the Raman scheme. If the
communication system was able to generate signals at higher OSNR, the relationship between
the schemes should be kept constant.
This suggest that Raman ampliﬁcation is the best to use for OPC when wanting a received
signal with high OSNR, but the problems of more nonlinearities still exist if proper compensation
cannot be achieved.
7.7
Comparison of signal bands
Now that the OPC performance has been tested for band 2, the other two can be used to test
if the performance of one band can be expected everywhere else in the wavelength operation
range of the OPC. This is tested by doing measurements using setup 1 and 2 for all three bands
deﬁned in ﬁgure 29 and the result can be seen in ﬁgure 38.
(a) Setup 1, Single Channel
(b) Setup 2, Single Channel
Figure 39: Communication system performance for diﬀerent launch power and channel bands
using setup 1 and 2 from ﬁgure 32.
Page 40 of 45
==PAGE:47==
7
OPC EXPERIMENT
The single channel performance for setup 1 of all three bands seems to be about the same, with
no major diﬀerence in the BER performance for low or high launch powers. This is due to the
Raman gain being around the same value for all three diﬀerent signal wavelengths.
When the OPC is put between the two transmission spans, the BER performance of band 1
and 3 are similar while band 2 has higher BER for high launch powers, as seen in ﬁgure 39b.
In theory, there should be no diﬀerence in performance between the bands, but an unknown
experimental error, such as wrong ﬁlter placement, seems to have decreased the BER.
The BER values at the highest launch power of +8 dBm are lower when OPC is used in setup
2, suggesting some sort of nonlinear compensation, just as seen in ﬁgure 33a. However, the level
of compensation seems to be bigger in the measurement of ﬁgure 39 than in ﬁgure 33. This
suggests some variation in the BER performance for the same setup, which also may be the
reason for the slightly diﬀerent BER values at +8 dBm launch power in ﬁgure 39a. The size of
this variance would be interesting to investigate in another experiment.
7.8
Noise loading
During this chapter a proof-of-concept of the nonlinear compensation has been presented, but a
deﬁnite increase in minimum achievable BER for a given system has not yet been found. This
is due to the B2B BER limit being above the smallest BER value achievable for launch powers
which do not cause noticeable NL-distortions.
log10(BER)
PLaunch
B2B lim
Noise loaded
signal
Signal
Figure 40: Illustration of the proposed eﬀect on the BER performance when noise loading the
signal by wavelength selective attenuation.
The problem of the B2B limit could be circumvented by operating the communication system
at a lower OSNR, as suggested by the B2B measurement in ﬁgure 31.
The minimum BER
of the system should now be visible above the B2B limit, as illustrated in ﬁgure 40, and an
improvement in the BER should be observed when using OPC. This implies that the launch
powers at 45 OSNR should have the same eﬀect on the BER as when the OSNR is 20. This is
tested by measuring the BER performance of setup 1 with diﬀerent OSNR signals - the result
can be seen in ﬁgure 41.
Page 41 of 45
==PAGE:48==
7
OPC EXPERIMENT
Figure 41: Comparison of BER-curves for diﬀerent input OSNR. The starting OSNR was mea-
sured at -12 dBm launch power using setup 1, band 3, single channel.
As the OSNR of the signal is decreased at the transmitter, the BER performance of low launch
powers become more and more indistinguishable from the BER performance of high launch pow-
ers. This means that even for lower OSNR signals the minimum BER still cannot be reached. The
problem with decreasing the OSNR is that the launch power causing signiﬁcant NL-distortions is
much higher, since the integrated signal power mostly consists of noise around the actual signal.
Page 42 of 45
==PAGE:49==
8
CONCLUSION
8
Conclusion
When constructing an OPC-system to be used for midspan spectral inversion, the most important
factors regarding the nonlinear medium is the operation bandwidth of the device and level of
conversion eﬃciency. These factors are a product of diﬀerent parameters - most prominent are
the ZDW, dispersion slope, nonlinear coeﬃcient γ and pump power Pp. Due to the amount of
diﬀerent HNLFs available with high γ and low dispersion slope values, the nonlinear ﬁber was
chosen as the nonlinear medium in the OPC-system.
Stimulated Brillouin Scattering limits the amount of pump power that can be put into a ﬁber. To
avoid this, either new ﬁber designs or phase modulation of the pump are required. It is observed
that longer ﬁbers create more SBS, but also have more nonlinear interaction, increasing the
conversion eﬃciency. A compromise of using lower pump powers to prevent SBS was made, due
to the constructed OPC-system not being able to utilize high pump powers in the system.
Measurements of the conversion eﬃciency and operation bandwidth of multiple ﬁbers were then
conducted and cross-referenced with simulated results using the VPIphotonics Universal ﬁber
model. The model was able to predict the correct operation bandwidth of the ﬁber within 1 nm,
but was inaccurate in terms of modelling the conversion eﬃciency level.
Based on the measurements of diﬀerent ﬁbers, the 498 m HNLF-SPINE was chosen as the
nonlinear medium due to its wide operation bandwidth. An OPC-system using the ﬁber was
tested and a proof-of-concept was demonstrated by achieving BER improvements, for single
channel signals with high launch powers, of 1.5 dB for the Raman ampliﬁcation scheme and 2
dB for the EDFA ampliﬁcation scheme. The proof-of-concept was not achieved for WDM signals,
due to low signal powers for each individual channel. The operation bandwidth was tested by
the use of single channels at diﬀerent wavelengths in the band and showed close to the same
BER performance.
The proposed OPC-system could be improved by choosing a more advanced HNLF, such as
a special DF-HNLF with low ZDW variance, high conversion eﬃciency and a wide operation
bandwidth[22]. Another way of improving the setup would be to use non-degenerate four-wave
mixing to achieve higher conversion eﬃciencies[2], even while using the maximum pump power
of 17 dBm for the dual-polarization loop.
Page 43 of 45
==PAGE:50==
REFERENCES
9
Bibliography
References
[1] Govind P Agrawal. Fiber-Optic Communication Systems, chapter 1-2. John Wiley and
Sons, 2002.
[2] Hao Hu, RM Jopson, et al. Parametric ampliﬁcation, wavelength conversion, and phase
conjugation of a 2.048-Tbit/s WDM PDM 16-QAM signal. Journal of Lightwave Technology,
33(7):1286–1291, 2015.
[3] Govind P Agrawal. Nonlinear ﬁber optics, chapter 2. Academic press, 2007.
[4] Sander L Jansen, S Spalter, et al. 16 x 40 Gb/s over 800 km of SSMF using mid-link
spectral inversion. IEEE Photonics Technology Letters, 16(7):1763–1765, 2004.
[5] Aref Chowdhury, Gregory Raybon, et al. Compensation of intrachannel nonlinearities in 40-
Gb/s pseudolinear systems using optical-phase conjugation. Journal of lightwave technology,
23(1):172–177, 2005.
[6] ID Phillips, Mingming Tan, et al. Exceeding the nonlinear-Shannon limit using Raman
laser based ampliﬁcation and optical phase conjugation. In Optical Fiber Communications
Conference and Exhibition (OFC), 2014, pages 1–3. IEEE, 2014.
[7] Andrew D Ellis, Mingming Tan, et al. 4 Tb/s transmission reach enhancement using 10×
400 Gb/s super-channels and polarization insensitive dual band optical phase conjugation.
Journal of Lightwave Technology, 34(8):1717–1723, 2016.
[8] Karsten Rottwitt and Peter Tidemand-Lichtenberg. Nonlinear Optics: Principles and Ap-
plications, volume 3, chapter 10. CRC Press, 2014.
[9] Jonas Hansryd, Peter A Andrekson, et al. Fiber-based optical parametric ampliﬁers and
their applications. IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Quantum Electronics, 8(3):506–520,
2002.
[10] G Cappellini and S Trillo.
Third-order three-wave mixing in single-mode ﬁbers: exact
solutions and spatial instability eﬀects. JOSA B, 8(4):824–838, 1991.
[11] Andrey Kobyakov, Michael Sauer, and Dipak Chowdhury. Stimulated Brillouin scattering
in optical ﬁbers. Advances in optics and photonics, 2(1):1–59, 2010.
[12] ROBERT W Tkach, ANDREW R Chraplyvy, and RM Derosier. Spontaneous Brillouin
scattering for single-mode optical-ﬁbre characterisation. Electronics Letters, 22(19):1011–
1013, 1986.
[13] Vasin Sriwattanathamma and Pasu Kaewplung. Performance comparison of DSF-, HNLF-,
and Bi-NLF-based Optical Phase Conjugators. In PhotonicsGlobal@ Singapore, 2008. IPGC
2008. IEEE, pages 1–4. IEEE, 2008.
[14] Nobuyuki Yoshizawa and Takeshi Imai.
Stimulated Brillouin scattering suppression by
means of applying strain distribution to ﬁber with cabling. Journal of Lightwave Technology,
11(10):1518–1522, 1993.
[15] JM Chavez Boggio, JD Marconi, and HL Fragnito. Experimental and numerical investi-
gation of the SBS-threshold increase in an optical ﬁber by applying strain distributions.
Journal of Lightwave Technology, 23(11):3808, 2005.
Page 44 of 45
==PAGE:51==
REFERENCES
[16] FW Willems and W Muys. Suppression of interferometric noise in externally modulated
lightwave AM-CATV systems by phase modulation. Electronics Letters, 29(23):2062–2063,
1993.
[17] J Hansryd, F Dross, M Westlund, et al. Increase of the SBS threshold in a short highly
nonlinear ﬁber by applying a temperature distribution. Journal of lightwave technology,
19(11):1691, 2001.
[18] G Jacobsen, B Tromborg, et al. Dynamic stimulated Brillouin scattering analysis. Journal
of lightwave technology, 18(3):416, 2000.
[19] JH Lee, KY Song, HJ Yoon, et al. Brillouin gain-coeﬃcient measurement for bismuth-oxide-
based photonic crystal ﬁber under signiﬁcant beam reﬂection at splicing points. Optics
letters, 34(17):2670–2672, 2009.
[20] Magnus Karlsson. Four-wave mixing in ﬁbers with randomly varying zero-dispersion wave-
length. JOSA B, 15(8):2269–2275, 1998.
[21] Mads Lillieholm, Michael Galili, L Gr¨uner-Nielsen, and Leif Katsuo Oxenløwe. Detailed
characterization of CW-and pulsed-pump four-wave mixing in highly nonlinear ﬁbers. Optics
Letters, 41(21):4887–4890, 2016.
[22] M Lillieholm, P Guan, M Galili, MS Møller-Kristensen, L Gr¨uner-Nielsen, and LK Ox-
enløwe. Optimization and characterization of highly nonlinear ﬁber for broadband optical
time lens applications. Optics Express, 25(11):12566–12580, 2017.
[23] Bill P-P Kuo and Stojan Radic. Highly nonlinear ﬁber with dispersive characteristic invari-
ant to fabrication ﬂuctuations. Optics express, 20(7):7716–7725, 2012.
[24] Bostjan Batagelj. Conversion eﬃciency of ﬁber wavelength converter based on degenerate
FWM.
In Transparent Optical Networks, 2000 2nd International Conference on, pages
179–182. IEEE, 2000.
[25] SL Jansen, D Van Den Borne, et al.
Long-haul DWDM transmission systems employ-
ing optical phase conjugation. IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Quantum Electronics,
12(4):505–520, 2006.
[26] DD Marcenac, D Nesset, et al. 40 Gbit/s transmission over 406 km of NDSF using mid-
span spectral inversion by four-wave-mixing in a 2 mm long semiconductor optical ampliﬁer.
Electronics Letters, 33(10):879–880, 1997.
[27] Ju Han Lee, Walter Belardi, et al. Four-wave mixing based 10-Gb/s tunable wavelength
conversion using a holey ﬁber with a high SBS threshold.
IEEE Photonics Technology
Letters, 15(3):440–442, 2003.
[28] Ju Han Lee, Tatsuo Nagashima, et al. Four-wave-mixing-based wavelength conversion of
40-Gb/s nonreturn-to-zero signal using 40-cm bismuth oxide nonlinear optical ﬁber. IEEE
photonics technology letters, 17(7):1474–1476, 2005.
[29] Satoshi Yoshima, Yujia Sun, et al. Mitigation of Nonlinear Eﬀects on WDM QAM Signals
Enabled by Optical Phase Conjugation With Eﬃcient Bandwidth Utilization. Journal of
Lightwave Technology, 35(4):971–978, 2017.
[30] Isaac Sackey, Francesco Da Ros, et al. Design and performance evaluation of an OPC device
using a dual-pump polarization-independent FOPA. In Optical Communication (ECOC),
2014 European Conference on, pages 1–3. IEEE, 2014.
[31] Deﬁnition of baud-rate. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Baud. Accessed: 2017-06-21.
Page 45 of 45
==PAGE:52==
A
APPENDICES
A
Appendices
A.1
Data sheet for used ﬁbers
A.2
VPI - SBS
A CW module is split up into two, one for reference IP (0) and the other is put into the Universal
ﬁber model. The output power Ip(L) is measured in a power meter module and feed into an
2D-plot with the measured backscattered power Is(0).
Page I of II
==PAGE:53==
A
APPENDICES
A.3
VPI - Conversion eﬃciency
A pump and signal laser module is combined by a 3 dB coupler module and sent of for analysis
and into the input port of the Universal ﬁber model. The output in split into a an analyzer
module and a ﬁlter module. The ﬁlter module is set to the idler frequency of the FWM process
and the power is measured and compared with the power of the input signal power. The power
diﬀerence is then noted as the conversion eﬃciency and is feed into a 2-D plot, where the other
axis is the wavelength separation calculated by the use of the CONST variables containing
PumpFrequency and SignalFrequency.
A .csw ﬁle was used to sweep diﬀerent ﬁber parameters.
Page II of II
