==PAGE:1==
Master Thesis
Phase-averaged 3D modelling of sediment trans-
port interaction with coastal structures
Mathias Singsaas Frøseth 
Gil Roberty Ricoy Caron Filho
June 2017
==PAGE:2==
Master of Science in Engineering
Civil Engineering
Phase-averaged 3D modelling of sediment transport interaction with coastal struc-
tures
Master thesis
Mathias Singsaas Frøseth and Gil Roberty Ricoy Caron Filho
mathias.singsaas.froeseth@gmail.com and gcaronf@yahoo.com.br
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Civil Engineering
DTU Civil Engineering
Brovej
Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
DENMARK
Tel. +45 4525 1700
byg@byg.dtu.dk
http://www.byg.dtu.dk/
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Diﬀerent types of models are used by engineers and scientist to understand and
evaluate the complexity of coastal sediment transport.
The main objective of
this thesis is to use a phase averaged 3D numerical model in order to evaluate
how structures with diﬀerent geometries and sizes, inﬂuence the sediment trans-
port in coastal regions. The software used for this is the MIKE 3 FM by DHI,
where Spectral Wave, Hydrodynamic and Sediment Transport modules are coupled.
Aiming for a realible model, results from a physical model presented by [Gravens
and Wang, 2007] are used for validation. Two diﬀerent formulations are used to
simulate the hydrodynamic conditions, radiation and Wave Energy Dissipation
Shear(WEDS) stress. When WEDS stress formulation is used, it is noticed a high
inﬂuence of the vertical eddy viscosity distribution and two new methods for it are
proposed and implemented. Validated results for longshore currents returned to
be relatively similar for both formulations. However, when cross-shore currents are
evaluated, a undertow is only present in the results from WEDS stress formulation.
Therefore, this formulation is further used in models to investigate the eﬃciency
of T-groynes, breakwaters and groynes in respect to sediment transport. It was
concluded that in general, T-groynes are the most eﬃcient structures since it blocks
completely the sediment bypass behind the structure, while a breakwater still allows
this bypass even though a salient is formed. Groynes are the less eﬃcient type of
structure. Submerged structures resulted to be eﬃcient only when the distance be-
tween the top of the structure and the mean water level (MWL) is signiﬁcantly small.
Keywords: Coastal sediment transport; Hydrodynamics; Coastal protection struc-
tures; Numerical modelling; Scour; Radiation Stress; Wave energy dissipation
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
This master thesis is written in the Mechanical Engineering Department at DTU
as part of our M.Sc. studies in Civil Engineering (Marine Technology and Coastal
Engineering study line), and represent 30 ECTS for both authors. The project was
held in collaboration with Danish Hydraulic Institute (DHI). During the thesis,
eﬀorts have been spent on the use of MIKE 21 and 3 software where the SW-module
is used for wave modeling, HD-module for the hydrodynamic modelling and the
ST-module for sediment transport. MATLAB programming is used to present
results from MIKE and to calculate several parameters.
We would like to specially thank our supervisor, Nils Drønen, for the countless
meetings, invaluable knowledge shared and all the guidance through the whole
project. A sincerely thank to Erik Damgaard Christensen and our co-supervisor
Rolf Deigaard for their time spent discussing the thesis and sharing their experience
and knowledge with us. Also thanks to Sten Kristensen, for his help both with
discussing theory and Matlab related issues. Arnaud Doré, for his insight in the
new formulation and discussing topics related to our project. CED department at
DHI for their willingness to help. Pham Thanh Nam for providing data from the
physical model, and cooperating with question regarding the physical model.
Lastly we would like to thank our families, friends and girlfriend for the constant
support given through the whole masters degree.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Abstract
i
Acknowledgements
iii
Contents
v
1 Introduction
1
2 Processes in the Surf Zone
3
2.1
Wave Breaking
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Radiation Stress . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Longshore Current
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
Wave Set Up . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.5
Undertow
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.6
Sediment Transport . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.6.1
Bed Load
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.6.2
Suspended Load . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.6.3
Cross-shore Sediment Transport . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.6.4
Longshore Sediment Transport . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3 Physical model
15
4 Numerical Modelling
19
4.1
Mesh Creation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.2
Spectral Wave Module
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.3
Hydrodynamic Module . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.3.1
Continuity Equation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.3.2
Momentum Equations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.3.3
Turbulence Modelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
Vertical Eddy Viscosity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
Horizontal Eddy Viscosity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.4
Sand Transport Module . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5 Methodology
31
5.1
Mesh and Bathymetry
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.2
Setup of Spectral Wave Module . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.2.1
Spectral Discretization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.2.2
Wave Breaking
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.2.3
Bottom Friction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
==PAGE:8==
vi
Contents
5.2.4
Boundary Conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.3
Setup of Hydrodynamic Module . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.3.1
Bed Resistance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.3.2
Horizontal Eddy Viscosity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.3.3
Boundary Conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.3.4
Radiation stress formulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
Vertical Eddy Viscosity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
Layer distribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.3.5
Wave Energy Dissipation Shear Stress
. . . . . . . . . . .
38
Vertical Eddy Viscosity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
Layer distribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.4
Setup of Sand Transport Module . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5.4.1
Model Deﬁnition
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5.4.2
Boundary Conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5.4.3
Sand Layer Thickness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5.4.4
Bank Erosion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5.5
Scour and Salient . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5.6
Height and Geometry Analysis of the Structure
. . . . . . . . .
45
5.6.1
Scour and Salient . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
6 Results
49
6.1
Wave Field . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
6.2
Signiﬁcant Wave Height
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
6.3
Longshore Currents . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
6.4
Cross-shore Currents . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
6.5
Velocity Proﬁles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
6.6
Sediment Transport . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
6.7
Streamlines
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
6.8
Sediment Discharge . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
6.9
Salient . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
6.10
Scour . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
6.11
Geometry analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
6.11.1 Uniform model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
6.11.2 Sediment Discharge . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
6.11.3 Salient . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
6.11.4 Scour . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
7 Discussion
89
8 Conclusion
93
A Sediment Transport for Diﬀerent Geometries
95
Bibliography
111
==PAGE:9==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
By deﬁnition, shoreline means the line where a large body of water meets with
land. This region is characterized by a dynamic behaviour due to natural processes,
which can vary according to local conditions for wind, waves, currents, tides and
soil composition. The most explicit modiﬁcations of the shoreline are related to
sediment transport, resulting in erosion and accretion, aﬀecting the commercial and
recreational development of the local shoreline, in other terms the local beach. For
this reason, human interaction has taken place in order to control these eﬀects with
the implementation of structures, such as breakwaters, groynes, T-groynes and more
complex types of structures.
Costs of installing such structures are considerably high and has often been a
discussion topic between governmental parts, industry and local communities. The
presence of hard structures can become an issue for local communities while for the
industry it is a beneﬁt, since it inﬂuences the maritime transport (harbours etc.).
In order to analyse the strucures impact on sediment transports and the beneﬁts
that it might bring to all parties, diﬀerent types of models can be used. In the
past, when computational resources were not developed as nowadays, scaled tests
in artiﬁcial wave basins were used with the intention of simulating a real case and
generating empirical solutions. This type of model is still used today since it allows
identiﬁcation of new phenomena happening and have a lower level of simpliﬁcation.
However, it is a more expensive method compared to the numerical models, due to
the size of the facilities required, scale and laboratory eﬀects.
On the other hand, numerical models have been developed signiﬁcantly in the
past decades. This type of model consists of solving partial diﬀerential equations
(PDE’s) for ﬂow modelling, generally coupled with a wave module, reproducing the
wave conditions, in order to generate forces for the currents. The dimensions of these
models can be 1D, 2D and 3D, a 3D model includes most of the hydrodynamic eﬀects
and can reproduce more accurate results, but demands a high level of knowledge
from the user and is the most computational expensive model. Beneﬁts of numerical
models are that it is easier to tune and change speciﬁc parameters, less expensive
and give faster results.
Numerical models have been extensively used in order to identify diﬀerent eﬀects
of the sediment transport such as scour around structures, littoral drift, salient
development, shoreline management, dredging eﬀects and other relevant phenomena
due to the presence of waves and currents. Since these eﬀects are highly inﬂuenced
by the water motion, deep understanding of hydrodynamics are necessary to tackle
==PAGE:10==
2
1 Introduction
these type of investigations.
The intention of the present project is to verify how a structure inﬂuence the
sediment transport in the surf zone. For this reason, primarily physical model results
are used in order to validate a three-dimensional phase averaged numerical model
in MIKE 3. The ﬁrst formulation used is for radiation stress. During the process,
a Wave Energy Dissipation Shear (WEDS) stress formulation was developed and
mostly used, in order to test the accuracy of it and to include phenomena which
gets included when applying a surface shear stress. The model is coupled with three
diﬀerent modules, Spectral Wave (SW), Hydrodynamics (HD) and Sand Transport
(ST). Each module has speciﬁc parameters that must be tuned for each case. Once a
good correlation between numerical and physical results, an investigation of sediment
transport, in the same domain and with the same conditions, for diﬀerent types of
structures, is carried out.
In Chapter 1, the theory applied to the hydrodynamics and sediment transport in
shallow water is discussed. The physical meanings of diﬀerent phenomena happening
in the surf zone are also presented here. The physical model which the numerical
model is based on is presented in Chapter 2. Following the physical interpretation,
in Chapter 3 the numerical processes that MIKE 3 uses in order to solve the PDE’s
and simulate waves, ﬂows and sediment transport are described. All parameters
used in order to create the models with both formulations, are presented in Chapter
4. The parameters that inﬂuence the most for each formulation are discussed in
more detail. In Chapter 5, results from the best simulations and diﬀerent features
observed during the project are presented and brieﬂy discussed. Chapter 6, present
an overall discussion of the achievements and future topics to be investigated are
presented. Finally, in Chapter 7 a conclusion about the sediment transport around
structures aligned with the presented results is done.
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 2
Processes in the Surf Zone
Waves approaching the shore tend to break due to diﬀerent aspects, inducing the
generation of currents in both longshore and cross-shore direction. These currents
are responsible for the sediment transport, hence eroding beaches and possibly
ﬂooding the inland if storm conditions are present.
It is common to observe the development of current recirculation behind the
structure due to a pressure diﬀerence between the mean water level (MWL) behind
the structure and in unsheltered areas. This pressure diﬀerence is a result of wave
breaking which generates a set up, while behind the structure waves are not breaking,
therefore no set up. When pressure is higher at one place the water will ﬂow towards
areas with lower pressure, inducing a circulation current.
The structures permeability has a great inﬂuence, if the ﬂow is not capable of
penetrating the structure, the streamlines will contract in the surroundings of it,
creating high velocities. As a result a scour hole will develop which can greatly
aﬀect the structure integrity. These processes around the structure are illustrated
in ﬁgure 2.1.
Figure 2.1: Inﬂuence of a structure in the current pattern in the surf zone
2.1
Wave Breaking
Waves are a result of the dynamical coupling between the atmosphere and the ocean.
When waves break energy is dissipated, inducing the generation of currents.
==PAGE:12==
4
2 Processes in the Surf Zone
The wave energy ﬂux, Ef, is the sum of, potential energy, Epot, and kinetic
energy, Ekin, as expressed by equation (2.1). Energy, E, travels with the group
velocity cg, and the energy ﬂux is expressed in equation (2.2).
Epot = Ekin = 1
16ρgH2
(2.1)
Ef = [Ekin + Epot]cg = E cg = 1
8ρgH2cg
(2.2)
Once the wave gets close to the shore, it start to increase in height due to
shoaling processes. At a certain point in time, the steepness becomes too large the
wave breaks [Fredsoe and Deigaard, 1992]. When the wave break, a large amount
of energy is dissipated into turbulence and heat. Energy dissipation, D, can be
obtained in the cross-shore direction as the gradient in Ef as shown in equation
(2.3). It is important to mention that perpendicular to wave propagation direction
the energy loss can be neglected due to uniformity assumption.
D = −∂Ef
∂x = 2
8ρgH ∂H
∂x cg
(2.3)
When waves break a roller starts to develop, which induce turbulence. The roller
is an aerated white water region that follows the wave front, as seen in ﬁgure 2.2. The
roller is generated at the breaking point, and it grow as the wave height decreases
through the surf zone due to the shear stress generated on the wave surface [Zhang
et al., 2014]. The relation between the wave height and and the roller is presented in
equation (2.4). This relation is based on measurements of rollers in waves that have
been generated by a towed hydrofoil made by [Duncan, 1981]. Then [Svendsen, 1984]
approximated these results with the relation presented. [Fredsoe and Deigaard, 1992]
A = 0.9H2
(2.4)
Figure 2.2: Shear layer beneath the surface roller [Fredsoe and Deigaard, 1992].
The surface shear stress is a result of the mass of the roller that propagates
with a velocity, dissipating energy through the surf zone. There is also a small
contribution from the change i momentum of the surface roller. The mean value
can be obtained using equation (2.5),
==PAGE:13==
2.2 Radiation Stress
5
τs = D
c
(2.5)
where τs is the mean surface shear stress, D is the energy dissipation due to wave
breaking and c is the celerity across the shear layer. One can compare equation (2.3)
with (2.5), in order to evaluate the relation between energy dissipation and shear
stresses on the surface. If there are no energy dissipation near the surface, the mean
surface shear stress is zero based on equation (2.5). [Fredsoe and Deigaard, 1992]
2.2
Radiation Stress
The presence of waves results in an excess ﬂow of momentum, which is deﬁned as
the radiation stresses [Longuet-Higgins and Stewart, 1964]. Waves generate two
force components, momentum ﬂux and pressure ﬂux, which can be obtained using
equation (2.6) and (2.7), respectively.
Fp = 1
16ρgH2
(2.6)
Fm = 1
8ρgH2
(2.7)
For α = 0◦and 90◦, in ﬁgure 2.3a), there are only normal forces, these two
normal forces are not identical (being Fm + Fp and Fp respectively). For other
directions there will be other normal forces, Sxx, as well as shear forces Sxy. [Fredsøe,
2008]
a) Variation in the reaction force with the
angle between the section considered and
the waves (waves seen from above)[Fredsøe,
2008].
b) Forces acting on a triangular body [Fred-
søe, 2008].
Figure 2.3: Forces and directions for radiation stress.
The shore-normal momentum ﬂux, Sxx, is calculated by using equation (2.8),
where α is the angle between the shore and the wave crests. This can be seen from
ﬁgure 2.3b).
==PAGE:14==
6
2 Processes in the Surf Zone
Sxx = Fp + Fm cos2α
(2.8)
Substituting this equation with equations (2.6) and (2.7), Sxx is obtained as
follows:
Sxx = 1
16ρgH2(2 cos2α + 1)
(2.9)
Analysing these forces for a control volume for the shore-normal force, the force
balance of Sxx is found to be:
Sxxdy −
 
Sxx + ∂Sxx
∂x dx
!
dy = −∂Sxx
∂x dx dy
(2.10)
When α = 0, the gradient of Sxx is found to be:
−dSxx
dx
= 3
8ρgH ∂H
∂x
(2.11)
It is now seen that the radiation stress gradient in the cross-shore direction has
the same form with just a small diﬀerence compared to the shear stress generated
by the mass of the roller presented in equation (2.5), and it is seen the shear stress
is two thirds of the Sxx-gradient.
The shore-parallel momentum ﬂux from the shear component of the radiation
stress, Sxy, is calculated from equation (2.12). The z-direction seen from ﬁgure 2.3
corresponds to the y-direction in the formulas for radiation stress.
Sxy = Fm sin α cos α
(2.12)
Substituting equation (2.12) with equation (2.7), equation (2.13) is obtained. In
the longshore direction α ̸= 0 since there must be an angle in order for the currents
to be generated.
Sxy = 1
8ρgH2 sin α cos α = E sin α cos α
(2.13)
The force balance in the shore-paralell direction is obtained as shown in equation
(2.14).
Sxydy −
 
Sxy + ∂Sxy
∂x dx
!
dy = −∂Sxy
∂x dx dy
(2.14)
If equation (2.13) is derived, in order to get the gradient, equation (2.15) is
obtained. It should be mentioned that this is for shallow water conditions where
cg=c.
∂Sxy
∂x
= ∂E cos α sin α
∂x
(2.15)
In the longshore direction the waves have an angle, and the shear stress projected
along the y-axis has to be multiplied with sin α, which is the direction of the roller
component in the longshore direction, as presented in equation (2.16).
==PAGE:15==
2.3 Longshore Current
7
τsy = sin αD
c = ∂E cos α sin α
∂x
(2.16)
From this it is seen that the radiation stress equals the shear stress in the
longshore direction in nearshore areas.
Waves are generating an excess in momentum ﬂux, so (2.10) and (2.14) have to
be balanced. The phenomena responsible for balancing these gradients are discussed
afterwards.
2.3
Longshore Current
On a straight and uniform sandy coast, the longshore current is generated by the
earlier stated radiation stress gradient in y-direction, due to wave breaking. The
waves must have an angular approach to create a current along the shore.[Fredsoe
and Deigaard, 1992]
In order to balance the gradient in the longshore direction from equation (2.14),
there are three terms in the momentum balances equation (2.17), where E is the
momentum exchange coeﬃcient and Vy is the depth-integrated longshore current
velocity.
−dSxy
dx + τb + d
dx
 
ρ E DdVy
dx
!
= 0
(2.17)
This equation represents the steady uniform longshore current, and consists of
the driving (radiation stress gradient), retarding (bed shear stress) and the redis-
tributing forces (momentum exchange).
2.4
Wave Set Up
As waves are propagating into the surf zone, shoaling process will induce it to break,
their height is decreased. The breaking process results in a high energy dissipation,
a decrease of the wave height and a gradient in the radiation stresses. This gradient
is balanced by a slope in the mean water level (MWL)(averaged over a wave period)
which is denominated wave set-up.
Assuming a hydrostatic pressure distribution when the mean water surface is
horizontal, the total horizontal pressure force on the control surface is zero, this can
be seen in ﬁgure 2.4a). However, when this horizontal force is diﬀerent of zero, an
additional pressure contributions arise because of the slope of the free surface, as
shown in ﬁgure 2.4b).
==PAGE:16==
8
2 Processes in the Surf Zone
a) Pressure distribution for a horizontal wa-
ter surface condition [Fredsoe and Deigaard,
1992].
b) Pressure distribution in case of wave set-
up [Fredsoe and Deigaard, 1992].
Figure 2.4: Pressure on a control volume.
This additional pressure balances the radiation stress gradient in the cross-shore
direction found in equation (2.10). The momentum equation can now be written as
(2.18) or (2.19), where P is the hydraulic pressure. [Fredsoe and Deigaard, 1992]
dSxx
dx + dP
dx = 0
(2.18)
dSxx
dx
= −ρgDd (∆D)
dx
(2.19)
It is seen from equation (2.19) that if the bed friction can be neglected, the
pressure gradient and the radiation stress balance each other completely [Fredsoe
and Deigaard, 1992]. As a conclusion, the higher the wave height, the larger the
gradient in Sxx will be, inducing a higher set-up.
2.5
Undertow
One of the eﬀects of breaking waves is the generation of a roller, as illustrated in
ﬁgure 2.2. Therefore, an oﬀshore directed current arises near the bottom in order to
maintain the mass balance in the surf zone, which is denominated undertow [Hansen
and Svendsen, 1984]. The forces acting on a control volume in the surf zone are
illustrated in ﬁgure 2.5.
==PAGE:17==
2.5 Undertow
9
Figure 2.5: Momentum balance in the surf zone in the cross shore direction.
In order to obtain the momentum equation for this situation, high order terms
from Navier Stokes equation are neglected and linear wave theory is used. Hence,
the horizontal ﬂow equation is obtained in equation (2.20),
∂u
∂t = −1
ρ
∂P
∂x + 1
ρ
∂(τ −¯τ)
∂z
(2.20)
where u is the horizontal ﬂow velocity and τ is the shear stress. At the surface,
τ generates turbulence in the water column, which in the surf zone reaches the
bottom. This instantaneous shear stress is determined by using the vertical eddy
viscosity νT through equation (2.21).
τ
ρ = νT
∂u
∂z
(2.21)
Considering a rough bed, the boundary conditions for this equation are
u = 0 for z = kN/30 at the bed
(2.22)
and
νT
∂u
∂z

s = ¯τs
near the surface
(2.23)
Time averaging equation 2.21, the turbulent forces generated by νT are balancing
the driving forces τ. Using the boundary conditions presented above and equation
(2.24), a crude approximation is obtained since in near the bed wave orbital velocities
will inﬂuence the velocity u.
∂¯u
∂z = 1
ρ¯νt
¯τ
(2.24)
The distribution of τ will aﬀect directly the current and a simple comparison for
a linear distribution of it is shown in ﬁgure 2.6, where the pressure increment due
to the set up will induce a negative shear stress at the bed.
==PAGE:18==
10
2 Processes in the Surf Zone
Figure 2.6: Mean shear stress and mean current velocity distribution in the cross
shore direction [Fredsoe and Deigaard, 1992].
2.6
Sediment Transport
Longshore and cross-shore currents are responsible for sediment transport, inducing
morphological changes. Transport can be divided into three modes: bed load,
suspended load and wash load, as shown in ﬁgure 2.7.
Figure 2.7: Categories of sediment transport [Mangor et al., 2017].
Wash load is a layer formed by very ﬁne particles and is neglected when the
total sediment discharge is calculated. Suspended load is the part of sediments that
are in suspension and does not have any contact with the bed as a result from the
turbulent mixing. Bed load is considered the particles that are rolling, jumping or
sliding in the top of the bed, hence determined by the shear stresses acting on the bed.
2.6.1
Bed Load
H.A.Einstein once used the probability that particles deposited in one area depends
on the number of particles eroded. Hence, when in equilibrium, the number of
==PAGE:19==
2.6 Sediment Transport
11
particles deposited should be the same as the eroded. This assumption results
in the well known Shields parameter, θ, which is a nondimensional number used
to calculate the initiation of motion of sediment in a ﬂuid ﬂow due to the shear
stresses at the bottom. It is calculated by using equation (2.25), where τb, is the
bed shear stress, Uf the friction velocity, ρs is the sediment density, ρ is the ﬂuid
density, g is the acceleration due to gravity, and d is the particle diameter of the
sediment. Shields parameter represents the ratio of the driving hydraulic loading to
the stabilising gravitational force.
θ =
τb
(ρs −ρ)gd =
U 2
f
(ρs −ρ)gd
(2.25)
The rate of bed load transport can be obtained using equation (2.26), where ΦB
is a nondimensional form of the bed load discharge and qB is the rate of bed load
transport in volume of material per unit time and width. Studies has been carried
out ([Bagnold, 1954],[Luque and Van Beek, 1976]), in order to better understand
the forces acting on the grains at this region and [Luque and Van Beek, 1976] found
that the bed load reduces τb to a critical value, τc. Using this conclusion, [Engelund
and Fredsøe, 1976] derived equation (2.27), where θc is the critical Shields generally
ﬁxed as 0.045 and µd = tan φd is a dynamic friction coeﬃcient.
ΦB =
qB
q
(s −1)g d3
(2.26)
ΦB = 30
πµd
(θ −θc)
√
θ −0.7
q
θc

(2.27)
Another widely used theory was presented by [Meyer-Peter and Müller, 1948] as
shown in equation (2.28).
ΦB = 8(θ −θc)3/2
(2.28)
2.6.2
Suspended Load
Since the transport rate is based on the Shields parameter, when the friction velocity
increases, more sediment is being moved near the bed, generating a sheet ﬂow
regime. As a result of the roughness of the bed and the motion of sediments near it,
turbulence generated in the ﬂow will drag sediments even further from the bed. Once
the grains are supported by the turbulent ﬂow and not by intergranular collision, it
is considered that it is in suspension [Wilson, 1966].
In order to obtain a reference concentration of suspended sediment near the bed,
diﬀerent approaches are discussed here. Firstly, [Einstein, 1950] suggested that the
bed concentration was proportional to the concentration of bed load particles, as
shown in equation (2.29),
cb =
qB
2d UB
(2.29)
==PAGE:20==
12
2 Processes in the Surf Zone
where UB is the velocity of grains in the bed load layer and 2d is the bed load
layer thickness which is equal to two times the grain diameter.
[Engelund and Fredsøe, 1976] developed a method based on a variable that
represents the fraction of bed surface particles in motion p, which is related to
the turbulent ﬂow in the bed load layer.
It was concluded that the reference
concentration can be obtained as shown in equation (2.30), where λ is a linear
sediment concentration and is a function of p.
cb =
0.65
(1 + 1/λ)3
(2.30)
In order to match experimental data better than the previous presented method,
[Zyserman and Fredsøe, 1994] developed a new formulation as presented in equation
(2.31). One should notice that this method only takes into consideration the Shield’s
parameter, θ.
cb =
0.331(θ −θc)1.75
1 + 0.331
0.46 (θ −θc)1.75
(2.31)
The suspended load transport rate qS is determined using cb as a parameter for
the suspended sediment concentration, c, as follows:
c(z) = cb
 D −z
z
2d
D −2d
!ws/κUf
(2.32)
where ws/κUf is Rouse parameter, which is known as the ratio between settling
velocity, ws, and the turbulent ﬂuctuations near the bed. Low values of Rouse
parameter indicate a more uniform distribution of sediment in suspension. In order
to obtain qS, it is integrated over the wave period, T, resulting in equation (2.33).
qS = 1
T
Z T
0
Z D
2d u c dzdt
(2.33)
The total transport rate, qT, is obtained by summing qB and qS as shown in
equation (2.34).
qT = qB + qS
(2.34)
2.6.3
Cross-shore Sediment Transport
During a wave cycle, high amounts of sediment move back and forth, while the long
term eﬀect is linked to the net transport over a wave period. The diﬃculties here
are that many diﬀerent contributions are relatively small when compared to the
gross sediment motion due to the wave motion. [Fredsoe and Deigaard, 1992]
Inside the surf zone the cross-shore sediment transport is dominated by the
undertow, resulting in an oﬀshore sediment ﬂux (until the mean water level returns
to normal conditions without the additional pressure from the set-up). The inﬂuence
==PAGE:21==
2.6 Sediment Transport
13
of the undertow is reduced for positions further away from the coast until it becomes
to weak to induce sediment transport.
Outside the surf zone, the transport rate is generally directed onshore due to
higher order eﬀects such as wave asymmetry (wave skewness) from non-linear waves,
Stokes drift due to an oscillatory particle trajectory and streaming in the boundary
layer. [Fredsoe and Deigaard, 1992]
2.6.4
Longshore Sediment Transport
The longshore sediment transport inside the surf zone is a result of entrainment of
sediment by the longshore current. As shown in section 2.3 longshore current is
generated by gradients in the wave radiation stress due to wave breaking [Fredsoe
and Deigaard, 1992]. From the referred section and equation (2.25), it is seen that
the magnitude of the longshore transport depends on the wave height, angle of
incidence, bed shear stress and sediment characteristics. The mechanics of this
longshore sediment transport is fairly well known, and there are many models
describing it. A well known and successful formulation is the CERC-formula for
the integrated longshore transport (the littoral drift), which covers bulk transport.
Bulk transport is the total amount of sediments brought into motion (moved in any
direction, back and forth) by waves.
The swash-zone is the interface between water and land. The sediment transport
in this region is often treated separately from the littoral transport, because there
are diﬀerent processes driving the transport [Elfrink and Baldock, 2002]. The
models that exists nowadays normally use semi-empirical solutions, which focus on
the longshore transport component, assuming asymmetric ﬂow motion form with
zig-zag pattern, which can give a reasonable estimate of the transport in this area.
[Kamphuis, 1991]
==PAGE:22==
14
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 3
Physical model
Five series of physical model experiments were conducted at the Coastal Hydraulics
Laboratory’s (CHL’s) Large-Scale Sediment Transport Facility (LSTF) basin [Hamil-
ton and Ebersole, 2001]. The main objective of these experiments was to obtain
high quality data sets for validating formulas for sediment transport, and investi-
gate the beach evolution in the vicinity of coastal structures. The ﬁrst series of
experiments were four runs of approximately 160 min, and were performed on a
uniform beach without structures. The second and third series were carried out with
a detached breakwater, referred to as "Test 1" and "Test 2". Both tests were run
for approximately 190 min each. In Test 1 currents were generated by waves only,
while Test 2 was a combination of wave-induced currents and external currents. The
fourth run referred to as "Test 3" had six runs of 180 min each, and were performed
on the uniform beach with a T-shaped groyne (see ﬁgures 3.1 and 3.2). The last
experiment, "Test 4", was conducted in the basin with a detached breakwater, the
location was closer to the shoreline and the length was shorter than in "Test 1" and
"Test 2".
Figure 3.1: Model setup [Nam et al., 2011].
==PAGE:24==
16
3 Physical model
Figure 3.2: T-groyne structure with ﬁlled basin [Nam et al., 2011].
In all of the experimental runs, spilling breaker waves were generated by four
wave makers. The water was also recirculated by twenty pumps located up- and
downstream of the basin. Acoustic doppler velocimeters and wave gauges were both
located at ten cross-shore positions on the instrument bridge at 1.125 m (ADV1),
2.2 m (ADV2), 3.3 m (ADV3), 4.125 m (ADV4), 5.73 m (ADV5), 7.125 m (ADV6),
8.525 m (ADV7), 10.125 m (ADV8), 11.625 m (ADV9), and 13.125 m (ADV10)
seaward from the initial shoreline [Nam et al., 2011]. The bridge could move in
the longshore direction, and could consequently measure the current at speciﬁc
cross-shore proﬁles. The median grain size of the sediment was 0.15 mm on the
beach in the basin. In all runs, the wave generators were programmed to generate
wave condition characterized by a 0.26 m signiﬁcant breaking wave height, a 1.5 sec
wave period and an approximate breaking wave angle of 6.5 deg with respect to the
shoreline.
From the physical model several measurements were carried out, such as sediment
ﬂux, longshore current velocity and signiﬁcant wave height. The longhsore current
velocity is highly inﬂuencing the hydrodynamic conditions and is a main feature
for the sediment transport, its measurements are illustrated in ﬁgure 3.3, where e.g.
Y26 equals line 26.
==PAGE:25==
3 Physical model
17
a) Line 20.
b) Line 21.
c) Line 22.
d) Line 24.
e) Line 26.
f) Line 27.
Figure 3.3: Measurements from the physical model.
==PAGE:26==
18
==PAGE:27==
CHAPTER 4
Numerical Modelling
The present project has the intention to simulate the previously discussed processes
in the surf zone into a numerical model. For this purpose, data from the phys-
ical model presented by [Gravens and Wang, 2007] is used in order to validate
the simulation. The advantage of using numerical modelling is that they are less
time consuming than a physical model, less costly and it permit quick and easy
modiﬁcations. Also, it is capable of storing a reasonable quantity of information
which can become a diﬃculty in a physical model due to the size and complexity of it.
In order to investigate the described processes numerically, MIKE 3 FM by DHI
is used with Spectral Wave, Hydrodynamics and Sand Transport modules coupled.
Each module is brieﬂy introduced in this chapter. The diﬀerent modules use a
cell centered ﬁnite volume method (FVM) as a spatial discretization to solve the
equations over a unstructured mesh in the horizontal direction and a structured
in the vertical direction, when a three dimensional model is assumed [DHI, 2012].
FVM evaluates partial diﬀerential equations in the form of algebraic equations over
mesh elements, where the ﬂux is kept constant over the element volume, respecting
continuity equation. This method is widely used in many computational ﬂuid
dynamics software.
4.1
Mesh Creation
The ﬁrst step in a numerical model is to create the domain to be investigated. In
MIKE the domain encompass the following information:
• Computational grid: deﬁnes the level of detail in the domain depending on
the user deﬁned number of nodes.
• Water depths: The bathymetry obtained from surveys is uploaded as scatter
data and lately interpolated over the whole domain.
• Boundary conditions: Deﬁnes land boundaries and water boundaries.
The computational grid can be generated in triangular shaped elemtens based
on the Triangle code by Jonathan Shewchuk [Shewchuk, 1996] or in a quadrangular
shape which can be based on two diﬀerent routines, either boxing technique or a
transﬁnite interpolation. Once the elements are deﬁned, the bathymetry scatter
data can be interpolated over this elements using either a natural neighbor or linear
interpolation. An important parameter in the mesh generation is related to the
vertical distribution of elements, which will characterize the model as a two or three
==PAGE:28==
20
4 Numerical Modelling
dimensional. In the ﬁrst case, only one single layer under the horizontal surface,
resulting in depth averaged values over the water column. However, in the three
dimensional case, the water column can be divided in as many layers as needed
but in a structured form. The distribution of layers can be reﬁned near the bed in
order to avoid unrealistic values in the boundary layer due to the bed roughness,
depending on the formulation used (see chapter 5). Also, this reﬁnement can be done
neat the surface, where relevant forces are applied. MIKE uses a constructed vertical
mesh which sets the height of each layer as a percentage of the total water depth
in each region. An example of how the mesh is structured in a three dimensional
model can be seen in ﬁgure 4.1.
Figure 4.1: Example of three dimensional mesh [DHI, 2012].
4.2
Spectral Wave Module
Once the domain is set up, the simulation of waves propagating can be done in
MIKE with the Spectral Wave (SW) module. Relevant information about the sea
surface is obtained in the wave variance spectrum or energy density E(σ, θ). The
energy density distributes wave energy over frequencies σ and propagation direction
θ [SWAN, 2006]. However, the model determines the development of action density
N which is a function of space ⃗x, time t, σ and θ. N is related to the wave energy
through expression 4.1.
N = E
σ
(4.1)
The relative angular frequency σ can be obtained from the dispersion relation
for linear waves with equation (4.2),
σ =
q
gktanh(kD)
(4.2)
where k is the wave number and D is the water depth. The evolution of N can
be obtained from equation (4.3) [Mei, 1984],
∂N
∂t + ∇· (⃗vN) = S
σ
(4.3)
where N(⃗x, σ, θ, t) is the action density, ⃗x = (x, y) is the Cartesian coordinates, ⃗v
is the propagation velocity vector of a wave group, σ is the relative angular frequency,
==PAGE:29==
4.2 Spectral Wave Module
21
θ is the incident angle of the waves, ∇is a four-dimensional diﬀerential operator
and S is a source term which contains diﬀerent phenomena that can be applied,
such as energy generation due to wind action, energy transfer due to non-linear
wave-wave interaction, energy dissipation due to whitecapping, bottom friction and
depth-induced breaking [Komen et al., 1996]. Since the left hand side term of the
equation takes into consideration diﬀerent waves and in the present case only one
wave condition is analyzed, it can be neglected. In order to solve equation (4.3),
the spectral wave module includes two formulations:
• Fully spectral formulation
• Directionally decoupled parametric formulation
The fully spectral formulation is based on the wave action conservation equation
described by [Komen et al., 1996] and [Young, 1999], where the directional-frequency
(θ −σ) wave action spectrum is a dependent variable. The directionally decoupled
parametric formulation is based on a parametrization of the wave action conservation
equation. From [Holthuijsen et al., 1989], a parametrization is made in the frequency
domain by introducing the zeroth and ﬁrst moment of the wave action spectrum as
dependent variables. In the present project, the directionally decoupled parametric
formulation is used and equation (4.3) can be rewritten with more details as in
equation (4.4),
∂cxN
∂x
+ ∂cyN
∂y
+ ∂cθN
∂θ
= S
σ
(4.4)
where the ﬁrst and second terms on the left side denote the wave energy prop-
agation in the geographical space, ⃗x, with the group celerity cx = cg + Ux and
cy = cg + Uy, where Ux and Uy are the current velocities in x and y direction,
respectively[SWAN, 2006]. The third term is related to directional discretization
and two diﬀerent approaches can be used:
• 360 Degree rose
• Directional sector
The ﬁrst one resolves equation (4.3) in a 360 degree range, but subdivided into a
user speciﬁed number of directions, i.e. every 10 degrees, resulting in a solution for
36 diﬀerent directions. For the second approach, the solution is based on a speciﬁed
range of direction interval which is later subdivided, i.e. from 45◦to 130◦subdivided
into 30 directions.
In a coupled model approach, results from the SW module are used in the hy-
drodynamic module in order to simulate wave induced currents and other important
eﬀects on the ﬂow due to the presence of waves. As presented in chapter 2, the
presence of breaking waves generates radiation stresses, which are obtained with
the present module. The resultant Sxx and Sxy presented in equations (2.8), and
(2.12) respectively, are obtained as an output of this model.
==PAGE:30==
22
4 Numerical Modelling
4.3
Hydrodynamic Module
The ﬂow is simulated in the HD module of MIKE, where phase averaged Reynolds
Averaged Navier Stokes (RANS) equations are used. In this section, a brief introduc-
tion to the basic ﬂow theory is done with the intention of explaining these equations,
which are a simpliﬁcation of the complete Navier Stokes equations.
4.3.1
Continuity Equation
Firstly, the mass conservation is represented by the continuity equation. For this
purpose, the ﬂuid density is assumed constant, resulting in an incompressible ﬂuid
and it can be obtained analyzing ﬁgure 4.2, which represents the ﬂuid ﬂow in the
control volume with two dimensions.
Figure 4.2: Flow through a control volume [Fredsøe, 2008]
Since mass conservation is assumed, the same amount of ﬂow going in to the
control volume is the same amount as the ﬂow going out, hence the continuity
equation is obtained in equation (4.5).
∂u
∂x + ∂v
∂y + ∂w
∂z = 0
(4.5)
4.3.2
Momentum Equations
Another important law is the momentum conservation, which can be explained
through Newton’s second law of motion with equation (4.6),
X −→
F =
Z
ρd
→u
dt dX
(4.6)
where the sum of forces F in a ﬂuid with X volume is equal to the density, ρ,
multiplied by the velocity vector,
→u, which generally contains components in three
directions.
==PAGE:31==
4.3 Hydrodynamic Module
23
The main forces acting on the ﬂuid can be classiﬁed according to their direction.
In the tangential direction, the force is denominated shear stress, τ. In the normal
direction, the force is denominated hydraulic pressure p.
The forces acting in the control volume are described in equations 4.7 and 4.8,
ρdu
dt = −∂p
∂x + ∂τ
∂y −ρgx
(4.7)
ρdv
dt = −∂p
∂x + ∂τ
∂y −ρgy
(4.8)
where, since a Newtonian (incompressible) ﬂuid is assumed, shear stresses τ
arise with the ﬂow velocity and can be expressed as in equations (4.9) and (4.10)
where µ is the ﬂuid viscosity.
∂τ
∂y = µ
 ∂2u
∂x2 + ∂2u
∂y2
!
(4.9)
∂τ
∂x = µ
 ∂2v
∂x2 + ∂2v
∂y2
!
(4.10)
Together with equations (4.6), (4.7) and (4.8), Navier-Stokes equations, which
describe the motion of viscous ﬂuids, can be written as shown in equations (4.11)
and (4.12),
∂u
∂t + u∂u
∂x + v∂u
∂y = −1
ρ
∂p
∂x + ν
 ∂2u
∂x2 + ∂2u
∂y2
!
−gx
(4.11)
∂v
∂t + u∂v
∂x + v∂v
∂y = −1
ρ
∂p
∂y + ν
 ∂2v
∂x2 + ∂2v
∂y2
!
−gy
(4.12)
where ν is the kinematic ﬂuid viscosity and is obtained from the following relation
in equation (4.13).
ν = µ
ρ
(4.13)
In a simpliﬁed way, it can be written as in equation (4.14),
ρ∂ui
∂t + ∂
∂xj
(ρuiuj) = ρgi −∂p
∂xi
+ ∂2µSij
xj
(4.14)
where Sij is the strain-rate tensor given by equation (4.15).
Sij = 1
2
 ∂ui
∂xj
+ ∂uj
∂xi
!
(4.15)
The Navier-Stokes (NS) equations can be used to describe all ﬂuids ﬂow. How-
ever, its solution is very computational expensive and when a turbulent ﬂow with
presence of waves in the surface is taken into consideration, some adjustments have
==PAGE:32==
24
4 Numerical Modelling
to be done in order to solve the equations more eﬃciently.
One of the most used approaches, for incompressible ﬂuids, is the Reynolds
Averaged Navier Stokes (RANS) equations. In this case, the turbulent ﬂuctuations
are removed by using a time averaged velocity ﬂow (Reynolds decomposition) which
is considered later in a separate turbulence model, and is discussed later [Szydlowski
and Zima, 2006]. The additional model has to be included due to the closure problem
that arises since there will be more unknown variables.
Also, the surface elevation due to wave motion contributes to the ﬂow with an
oscillation component. However, a model that solves the equations for every individ-
ual wave, as known as phase resolved model, can be very computational expensive.
Thus, a phase averaged approach is used where the wave motion contribution is
averaged over a wave period.
Using the two diﬀerent approaches, Reynolds Decomposition and phase averaging,
the present model can be called a phase averaged RANS model.
In order to
investigate the diﬀerent contributions, p and ui are separated into three parts as
shown in equation (4.16),
ui = Ui + ˜ui + u′
i and p = P + ˜p + p′
(4.16)
where Ui is a mean velocity component, P is a mean hydrostatic pressure, ˜ui
and ˜p are the contribution of the wave motion and u′ and p′ are the ﬂuctuation
parts from the turbulent ﬂow. The diﬀerent components over a single sinusoidal
wave period T are shown in ﬁgure 4.3.
a) Full Navier Stokes (Red), RANS (Black) and Phase Averaged
RANS (Blue).
==PAGE:33==
4.3 Hydrodynamic Module
25
b) Fluctuation part
Figure 4.3: Decompositions of the wave motion
In order to obtain the ﬂow equation, ﬁrst the Reynolds Decomposition is done
using the condition from equation (4.17) where the bar denotes time averaging.
RANS equation is obtained as shown in equation (4.18),
ui,j = 0
(4.17)
ρ∂ui
∂t + ∂
∂xj
(ρ ui uj) = ρgi −∂p
∂xi
+ ρ∂u
′
i u
′
j
∂xj
(4.18)
where, ρ u
′
i u
′
j are the Reynolds stresses and is obtained using equation (4.19),
u′
iu′
j = 2νSij + νT
∂ui
∂z
(4.19)
where νT is the turbulent eddy viscosity, which is an scalar quantity. The fact of
it being a scalar, result in a not exactly represented turbulence, therefore considered
an approximation [Nguyen, 2005].
The next step is to remove the contribution from the wave motion, averaging it
over a wave period, as shown in equation (4.20) where the hat denotes time averaged
over a wave period.
d
eui,j = 0
(4.20)
The phase averaged RANS is shown in equation (4.21),
ρ∂c
ui
∂t + ∂
∂xj
(ρ c
ui c
uj) = ρgi −∂bp
∂xi
+ ρ∂d
u
′
i u
′
j −d
euieuj
∂xj
(4.21)
where
d
euieuj are the radiations stresses due to the wave motion contribution,
responsible for driving the currents as mentioned in the Chapter 1.
==PAGE:34==
26
4 Numerical Modelling
MIKE 3 HD uses the phase averaged RANS equations subject to the assumptions
of Boussinesq and of hydrostatic pressure in order to simulate ﬂows [DHI, 2012],
however it contains more components due to the ﬂow complexity in real situation.
Since the intention of this project is to simulate numerically a physical model, some of
these elements can be neglected. Since the size of the domain in the simulation is so
small compared to real nature cases, parameters such as Coriolis forces, atmospheric
pressure, density oscillation and sources terms are not used in the present cases.
The resulting ﬂow equation for the x (cross shore) and y (along shore) direction are
shown in equation (4.22) and (4.23) respectively.
∂c
ui
∂t + ∂bu
2
∂x + ∂bv bu
∂y
+ ∂bw bu
∂z
=
−g ∂bη
∂x −1
ρh
 ∂Sxx
∂x + ∂Sxy
∂y
!
+ 1
ρh
 ∂Txx
∂x + ∂Txy
∂y
!
+ ∂
∂zνt
 ∂c
ui
∂z
!
(4.22)
∂bvi
∂t + ∂bv
2
∂y + ∂bu bv
∂x
+ ∂bw bv
∂z
=
−g∂bη
∂y −1
ρh
 ∂Syx
∂x + ∂Syy
∂y
!
+ 1
ρh
 ∂Tyx
∂x + ∂Tyy
∂y
!
+ ∂
∂zνt
 ∂bvi
∂z
!
(4.23)
The terms in the left side are the convective terms averaged on time and over a
wave period. The ones in the right are explained as follows:
g ∂bη
∂x →Hydrostatic pressure due to the gradient in the surface
elevation η
1
ρh
 ∂Sxx
∂x + ∂Sxy
∂y
!
→Contribution of radiation stresses in diﬀerent directions,
as mentioned before
1
ρh
 ∂Txx
∂x + ∂Txy
∂y
!
→Horizontal shear stresses, were Txx = 2ν ∂u
∂x and Txy =
ν ∂u
∂y
∂v
∂x
∂
∂zνt
 ∂c
ui
∂z
!
→Vertical shear stresses obtained with the turbulence model
The same applies for elements in equation (4.23). The surface and bottom conditions
for equations (4.22) and (4.23) are described in equations (4.24) and (4.25).
At z = η:
∂bη
∂t + bu∂bη
∂x + bv∂bη
∂y −bw = 0 and
 ∂bu
∂z , ∂bv
∂z
!
= 1
ρνt
(τsx, τsy)
(4.24)
==PAGE:35==
4.3 Hydrodynamic Module
27
At z = −d:
bu∂d
∂x + bv∂d
∂y −bw = 0 and
 ∂bu
∂z , ∂bv
∂z
!
= 1
ρνt
(τbx, τby)
(4.25)
Close attention to the stresses, where (τsx, τsy) are the shear stresses on the
surface, which can be applied as wind or wave energy dissipation shear stresses due
to the presence of the roller, and (τbx, τby) are the bottom shear stresses.
4.3.3
Turbulence Modelling
In this section, the concept of eddy viscosity νT is discussed. This parameter is
responsible for simulating the transfer of momentum caused by turbulent eddies
[Prinos, 2016]. The distribution of νT is described where ﬂow equations (4.22) and
(4.23) can be solved. It is often described separately for the horizontal and vertical
distribution.
Vertical Eddy Viscosity
There are diﬀerent formulations for the vertical distribution of νT, therefore the
main ones are treated here and applied into MIKE.
Linear Distribution is a based on a model presented by [Grant and Madsen,
1979], which assumed the eddy viscosity to increase linearly away from the bottom
and is obtained by equation (4.26),
νT = κUf,maxz
(4.26)
where Uf,max, is the maximum value of the friction velocity, and κ is von Kármán’s
constant which equals 0.4.
Mixing Length Hypothesis was introduced by [Prandtl, 1926]. The basic idea
of this theory is that eddies transform momentum across the plane parallel to the
direction of the mean ﬂow. The exchange of momentum is similar to the shear force
in equation (4.27). Here l, is the mixing length, and since it is a length scale, the
simplest assumption is to take it to vary linearly, see equation (4.28).
τ = ρl2∂u
∂z
∂u
∂z
(4.27)
l = κz
(4.28)
Hecne, νT can be expressed as in equation (4.29).
νT = l2∂u
∂z
(4.29)
k −ϵ model is derived from turbulence parameters k and ϵ, and the empirical
constant cµ in expression (4.30). Here k is the turbulent kinetic energy per unit
mass, while ϵ is its dissipation rate. An important assumption of this model is
==PAGE:36==
28
4 Numerical Modelling
that the ﬂow was assumed to be fully turbulent in the derivation of the turbulence
parameters. Also, the eﬀects of molecular viscosity are neglected [Nguyen, 2005].
νT = cµ
k2
ϵ
(4.30)
Log-Law formulation is one of the most common formulation for νT. It can
be calculated with equation (4.31). Where Uτ = max(Uτs,Uτb), here Uτs and Uτb,
respectively, are the friction velocities associated with the surface and bottom
stresses. While c1 = 0.41 and c2 = -0.41, are two constants which give the standard
parabolic proﬁle.
νt = Uτh

c1
z + d
h
+ c2
 z + d
h
!2

(4.31)
In ﬁgure 4.4, the diﬀerent theories for νT are compared and it is seen that
both k −ϵ and log-law have a parabolic tendency, while the linear and the mixing
length have a linear tendency. It is also seen that the mixing length distribution is
decreasing faster than the linear, however it starts increasing again at a water depth
of approximately 0.25 m. This change is due to the undertow, and it can be seen
from equation (4.29) that the mixing length distribution takes into consideration
the velocity gradient. Also, it is observed from both methods in ﬁgure 4.4 that there
is an abnormal change in the distribution at both the top and bottom, indicating a
possible error in the implementation at these regions.
0
0.5
1
1.5
Eddy viscosity [m 2/s]
10-3
-0.35
-0.3
-0.25
-0.2
-0.15
-0.1
-0.05
0
Water depth [m]
k 
Log Law
a) Comparison k −ϵ and log-law eddy vis-
cosity.
0
0.5
1
1.5
Eddy viscosity [m 2/s]
10-3
-0.35
-0.3
-0.25
-0.2
-0.15
-0.1
-0.05
0
Water depth [m]
Linear
Mixing Length
b) Comparison between linear and mixing
length theory eddy viscosity.
Figure 4.4: Comparison of vertical eddy viscosity distribution.
Horizontal Eddy Viscosity
For the horizontal eddy viscosity the constant eddy may be used for many applica-
tions. Another alternative is presented by [Smagorinsky, 1963]. This approach is
based on local derivatives of the velocity ﬁeld and the local grid size. This subgrid
scale eddy viscosity is calculated by using equation (4.32),
==PAGE:37==
4.4 Sand Transport Module
29
A = c2
sl2q
2SijSij
(4.32)
where cs is a constant, l is a characteristic length and Sij is the deformation rate
calculated by equation (4.15).
4.4
Sand Transport Module
By using the Sand Transport (ST) module in MIKE, eﬀects of current and waves
combined are used to predict the sediment transport. For this conditions, the
sediment transport rates from equations (2.26) and (2.33) are obtained by linear
interpolation in a sediment transport table. The result is a quasi three dimensional
sediment transport model with the total load qT.
The input velocity in the ST module is not exactly the one from the HD module
even if a coupled model is used, hence it cannot be called a truly 3D model. The
undertow, as discussed previously, is a very important phenomenon in the estimation
of sediment transport and is an output of a 3D model. In order to take this into
account in the ST module, MIKE modiﬁes the current conditions in the cross shore
direction by generating a new current. As shown in ﬁgure 4.5, the computed velocity
proﬁle is generated based on the boundary layer shape of the HD module, for the
cross shore direction. One can assume this condition since the ﬂow near the bed is
the most relevant for the sediment transport, therefore the rest of the proﬁle is not
representing the ﬂow accordingly.
Figure 4.5: Velocity proﬁles of U and V, respectively, in the 3D HD Module, Red:
Assumed velocity in the ST Module
The ST module has an important feature were the domain morphology is
constantly updated after every time step. This feature allows the hydrodynamic
conditions to be updated due to the modiﬁcations caused by the sediment transport.
The steps of numerical models and respective outputs can be visualized in a
simpliﬁed form in ﬁgure 4.6.
==PAGE:38==
30
4 Numerical Modelling
Figure 4.6: Main steps of the numerical simulation
==PAGE:39==
CHAPTER 5
Methodology
In order to simulate the physical model described in chapter 3 with MIKE Software,
three diﬀerent models were set up aiming to recreate the same conditions. The
ﬁrst models were running with the default formulation, radiation stress. Later, an
attempt to reproduce the shear stress caused by the roller at the surface was done
by applying a wind ﬁeld. Finally, models with the wave energy dissipation shear
stress formulation could be done once the implementation of the method was done.
Through these three main steps of the project, many diﬀerent parameters were
tuned in order to obtain the best results.
5.1
Mesh and Bathymetry
Aiming for a good correlation between the simulation and results obtained by
[Gravens and Wang, 2007], a similar geographical condition was needed since the
model is very sensitive to it. The bathymetry survey from the physical model was
provided by Pham Tanh Nam through a set of .xyz ﬁles and later implemented in
the Mesh Generator module of MIKE to be interpolated over the mesh. The initial
domain can be seen in ﬁgure 5.1.
Figure 5.1: Domain and bathymetry of the model in threee dimensions.
==PAGE:40==
32
5 Methodology
The generated mesh is illustrated in ﬁgure 5.2, where it is possible to observe
the higher level of detail near the shore and around the structure. The reason
for it, is that in these regions, the ﬂow is highly aﬀected by the bottom and the
presence of the structure, hence a more precise ﬂow simulation is required. Also,
the interpolation of the scatter data of the structure is more accurate if the mesh
elements are smaller.
Figure 5.2: Domain and bathymetry of the model in threee dimensions.
5.2
Setup of Spectral Wave Module
The ﬁrst module to be created is the SW, since it generates the wave ﬁeld which
is an input for the other modules. Speciﬁc parameters that were used or modiﬁed
from the default setup are discussed in this section.
5.2.1
Spectral Discretization
For the spectral discretization of waves, a 360 degree rose was used. First directional
sector was tried, and only ± 20 degrees from the angle of incidence were chosen.
This solution did not return satisfying results due to diﬀraction and the circulation
current eﬀects on the back of the structure.
If the directional sector option is used, one should be aware that the cutoﬀlimits
should be large enough to encompass all the directions were the wave is dissipating
energy. In order to avoid this problem, since the model has only one wave input,
==PAGE:41==
5.2 Setup of Spectral Wave Module
33
the 360-degrees rose can be used without making it too computational expensive.
A representation of the spectral discretization can be seen in ﬁgure 5.3, where the
big arrow indicates the mean wave direction and the shaded area indicates the
discretization in case of directional sector.
Figure 5.3: Spectral discretization for 36 directions.
5.2.2
Wave Breaking
A source of wave breaking can be waves propagating into very shallow areas, and the
wave height can no longer be supported by the water depth. In order to simulate
this eﬀect, the wave breaking formulation derived by [Janssen and Battjes, 1978] is
used, and the source term is found from [Eldeberky and Battjes, 1996]. The source
term for wave breaking is found in equation (5.1),
Ssurf(θ) = 2αBJQb
X
E(θ)
(5.1)
where αBJ ≈1 is a calibration constant, Qb is the fraction of breaking waves
and X is the ratio of the total energy in the random wave train to the energy in a
wave train with the maximum possible wave height found. The last parameter, X
can be obtained using equation (5.2),
X =
Etot
(H2
m/8) =
Hrms
Hm
2
(5.2)
where Etot is the total wave energy, Hm is the maximum wave found in equation
(5.3) and Hrms = √8Etot.
Hm = γws · tanh
 
kmean · d · γ
γws
!
/kmean
(5.3)
In equation (5.3), γ, is the breaking parameter related to wave breaking due
to water depth, γws is the breaking parameter related to breaking due to wave
steepness and kmean is the mean wave number. The values used for γ and γws are
==PAGE:42==
34
5 Methodology
set to 0.8 and 10 respectively. The source term, Ssurf(θ), can be related to S in
equation (4.4).
When γws is much larger than γ as in this case:
tanh
 
kmean · d · γ
γws
!
→kmean · d · γ
γws
(5.4)
equation (5.3) is then derived to be as equation (5.5).
Hm = dγ
(5.5)
The default value for γws is 1. However, in this project, only depth induced wave
breaking is investigated, and by using the default value white capping is included,
even though it was expected to be negligible. But from further analysis it was found
that altering γws changes both the signiﬁcant wave height and the longshore current
more than expected.
5.2.3
Bottom Friction
Bottom friction is related to the dissipation of energy due to the bed roughness.
First a Nikuradses roughness height ks = 2.5d50 is used where d50 is the diameter
corresponding to 50% of the material being ﬁner. However, the intention is to
dissipate energy mostly due to wave breaking, this parameter is therefore turned
oﬀ. Comparing both simulations, it is possible to conclude that the model is not
sensitive to it, since almost no diﬀerence was noticed.
5.2.4
Boundary Conditions
The upstream and downstream boundaries are set as "Closed boundary" which
corresponds to no waves entering the model domain through these boundaries and
the outgoing waves are fully absorbed. The boundary at the shore is set as land
and opposite to it, the boundary in the water parallel to the shore, is set to Wave
parameters (Version 2). This version consists of a parametric representation of the
spectral distribution where the input parameters are:
• Signiﬁcant wave height, Hm0
• Peak wave period, Tp
• Mean wave direction, MWD
• Directional standard deviation, DSD
In order to reproduce the same waves as the physical model presented in chapter
3, the wave parameters are set as in table 5.1.
==PAGE:43==
5.3 Setup of Hydrodynamic Module
35
Table 5.1: Wave parameters in the wave makers at the boundary.
Hm0 [m]
Tp [s]
MWD [deg]
DSD [-]
0.224
1.458
83.5
5
5.3
Setup of Hydrodynamic Module
Once the wave conditions were representing the ones in the physical model, a 2D
HD module for radiation stress was setup since it is easier to tune and is less
computational expensive. Once results were somehow correlated to those from the
physical model, a 3D model with radiation and WEDS stress formulation were set.
Most of them remained the same for every simulation, either 2D or 3D, except for
bed resistance. Once the 3D model was implemented, two diﬀerent variables are
introduced due to the third dimension of the domain, which are the layer distribution
in the vertical direction and the vertical distribution of the eddy viscosity. These
two parameters varied according to the formulation used and the inﬂuence of it is
covered in this section too.
5.3.1
Bed Resistance
The bed resistance in the 3D model takes into consideration the roughness height
kw. It was found from ﬁgure 5.4, where U1m/Ufc was assumed to be in the range of
10-100.
Figure 5.4: Variation of kw/kN with U1m/Ufc [Fredsoe and Deigaard, 1992].
Afterwards, the bed roughness from waves, wave roughness, kw, was obtained by
equation (5.6), where kN is equivalent sand roughness of the bed, equals to 0.0003
m (based on the size of the sand grain).
kw =∼10 −100kN
(5.6)
==PAGE:44==
36
5 Methodology
A value of 50 was chosen for U1m/Ufc, and kw was found to be 0.015 m.
In the 2D model, bed resistance is modeled according to Mannings formula,
stated in equation (5.7).
M = 25.4
k1/6
w
= 51.15
(5.7)
5.3.2
Horizontal Eddy Viscosity
There are two diﬀerent methods for calculating horizontal eddy viscosity, as men-
tioned in chapter 4. Theory from [Smagorinsky, 1963] should represent a more
realistic situation, therefore it was ﬁrstly implemented in order to check the sen-
sitivity of the model. It returned high current velocities, therefore the constant
distribution with a value equal to 0.002 is found to return reasonable results.
5.3.3
Boundary Conditions
Cyclic boundaries conditions were chosen down- and upstream of the domain in
order to represent the recirculation pumps of the laboratory testing. For the two
other sides, land (zero normal velocity) boundary was used, where the full slip
boundary condition is hold, meaning that the normal velocity component is zero.
5.3.4
Radiation stress formulation
The ﬁrst HD module used radiation stress formulation. After the 2D model being
tested, diﬀerent conditions on the 3D version for vertical eddy viscosity and layer
distribution were analysed and discussed in the following.
In order to compare results from the 3D model with respect to the physical
one, the longshore current velocity in a cross section upstream of the structure is
compared to the measurements.
Vertical Eddy Viscosity
For the vertical eddy viscosity the log-law formulation was used, which is the default
setting of MIKE. It is important to mention that at the time the radiation stress
models were running, only log-law, constant and k −ϵ formulation were available
and since log-law is more computational eﬃcient and returns very similar results, it
was used in models with radiation stress formulation. As seen in ﬁgure 5.5, there are
very small diﬀerences between the diﬀerent eddy distributions, even when mixing
length and the linear distribution were implemented.
==PAGE:45==
5.3 Setup of Hydrodynamic Module
37
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
Cross Shore Distance [m]
-0.2
-0.15
-0.1
-0.05
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
Longshore Current Velocity [m/s]
-0.8
-0.6
-0.4
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Bathymetry [m]
k - 
Log-Law
Linear
Mixing Length
Physical Model
Beach Profile
Figure 5.5: Comparison of eddy distribution for radiation stress.
Layer distribution
For the radiation stress formulation, the bed shear stress is responsible for generating
the longshore current as discussed earlier. Hence, proﬁles with deﬁned bottom layers
were compared with equidistant distributions. It is seen from ﬁgure 5.6 that 10
layers with a detailed layer distribution at the bottom returned the best results.
Since 10 layers returned just as good results as 20 layers, 10 layer distribution was
used in the following test since it is more computational eﬃcient. Both 40 and
100 layers were also tried, but based on the layer distribution the model converged
for distributions higher than 20 layers. The model is quite sensitive to the layer
distribution, since the ones with more deﬁned layers at the bottom returned better
results.
==PAGE:46==
38
5 Methodology
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
Cross Shore Distance [m]
-0.2
-0.15
-0.1
-0.05
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
Lonshore Current Velocity [m/s]
-0.8
-0.6
-0.4
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Bathymetry [m]
10 Equidistant
10 Deitaled
20 Equidistant
20 Detailed
Physical Model
Beach Profile
Figure 5.6: Comparison of layer distribution for radiation stress.
The layer distribution is illustrated in ﬁgure 5.7. The red line in the zoom
window is the bottom.
Figure 5.7: Layer distribution for radiation stress.
==PAGE:47==
5.3 Setup of Hydrodynamic Module
39
5.3.5
Wave Energy Dissipation Shear Stress
As proven in chapter 2, the shear stress developed by the roller formed when waves
break is roughly equal to the radiation stresses. With this conclusion, a new for-
mulation for the driving forces of the current could be implemented, denominated
Wave Energy Distribution Shear (WEDS) stresses.
First, an attempt to reproduce the shear stresses of the roller was done by
applying a wind at the surface. From the assumption that the shear stresses from
the wind equals the shear stresses from the roller that equals the gradients from the
radiations stresses, stated in equation (5.8), it should be possible to simulate the
cross-shore and longshore currents.
⃗
τwind =
⃗
τwaves =
 −∂Sxx
∂x
−∂Sxy
∂x
!
(5.8)
Based on the work by [Janssen and Battjes, 1978] the shear stresses could be
obtained. Wave energy dissipation due to wave breaking was calculated by equation
(5.9),
DISS = α
4 Qb
H2
max
Tmean
(5.9)
where α is a ﬁxed coeﬃcient equal 1, Qb is the breaking index, Hmax is the
maximum wave height calculated by equation (5.10),
Hmax ≈0.8D
(5.10)
where D is the water depth, and Tmean is the mean wave period. The depth,
D, was extracted from MIKE, while Tmean was the same as for the physical model.
This gives the shear stress from waves to be as equation (5.11).
τs =
⃗
τwaves = DISS
c
ρ
(5.11)
The surface shear stress, ⃗τs = ( ⃗τsx, ⃗τsy), which is determined by the wind over
the surface, is given by the empirical relation stated in equation (5.12), here ρa is
the air density, cd is the drag coeﬃcient of air which is set to 1 and ⃗u = (uv, vw) is
the wind speed 10 m above the surface.
τs =
⃗
τwind = ρacd|uw|uw
(5.12)
Based on the empirical relationship for surface shear stress for both wind and
waves, equation (5.12) and (5.11) can be inserted in equation (5.8) resulting in
equation (5.13), where (⃗x, ⃗y) is the unit vector for the wave shear stress, which were
extracted from MIKE.
ρacD|uw| ⃗uw = ρDISS
c
(⃗x, ⃗y) =
 −∂Sxx
∂x
−∂Sxy
∂x
!
(5.13)
==PAGE:48==
40
5 Methodology
As seen from the relationship in equation (5.13), the shear stress for the waves
can be calculated, and the only unknown for wind shear stress is uw. From the
relation between the shear stresses, the wind speed can be calculated. This wind
speed could then be inserted in MIKE, which would create a shear stress on the
surface, generating a cross-shore and longshore current.
To verify that the shear stress for the waves and wind were equal, they were
plotted against each other for both x- and y-direction, as seen from ﬁgure 5.8. It
can be seen that they are very similar, as expected. In the same ﬁgure, the gradient
of the radiation stress is also plotted in both directions. It is seen that they they
give nearly the same value, which made this method acceptable based on it. The
main diﬀerence between the two formulations is that the shear stresses are shifted,
however the result is still acceptable. While the attempt to apply the surface shear
stress as a wind force was done, the same formulation, presented by [Janssen and
Battjes, 1978], was directly implemented into the core code of MIKE 3 HD as a
WEDS stress, therefore this method (of applying a wind force) was not further
investigated.
Since the new formulation is implemented only for 3D models, the same pa-
rameters discussed for radiation stresses formulation should be checked in order to
analyse the sensitivity of the model.
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
Cross Shore Distance [m]
-4
-2
0
2
4
Shear stress [m 3/s2]
 Sxx/  x
wind-x
waves-x
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
Cross Shore Distance [m]
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
Shear stress [m 3/s2]
 Sxy/  x
wind-y
waves-y
Figure 5.8: Comparison of shear stress for wind and waves, and the gradient from
the radiation stress.
Vertical Eddy Viscosity
The vertical eddy viscosity distribution used for the WEDS stress formulation was
mixing length theory. The reason for it can be seen in ﬁgure 5.9, where the mixing
==PAGE:49==
5.3 Setup of Hydrodynamic Module
41
length returned the best result. Also linear and k −ϵ formulation gave fairly good
results.
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
Cross Shore Distance [m]
-0.2
-0.15
-0.1
-0.05
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
Current Speed [m/s]
-0.8
-0.6
-0.4
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Bathymetry [m]
k 
Log Law
Linear
Mixing Length
Physical Model
Beach Profile
Figure 5.9: Comparison of vertical eddy viscosity distribution for WEDS stress
formulation.
It is interesting to see that the log-law formulation that was used for radiation
stress gave the worst results for WEDS stress formulation. This is probably related
to the way this distribution diﬀuses the force applied at the surface through the
water column.
Layer distribution
It was also made a layer distribution analyses for the wave energy dissipation stresses.
This was done by comparing the longshore velocities shown in ﬁgure 5.10 and also
the velocity proﬁle at a point upstream of the structure, as shown in ﬁgure 5.11. It is
important to mention that the sensitivity analysis for the cross-shore current when
using the radiation stresses formulation was not done since, with this formulation,
the cross-shore components are not well represented.
In ﬁgure 5.10 is seen that there is no diﬀerence between 10 and 20 layer equidis-
tant, and 10 and 20 detailed at top and bottom. Therefore, 10 layers with equidistant
distribution is used, since it is computational eﬃcient. This distribution is illustrated
in ﬁgure 5.12.
==PAGE:50==
42
5 Methodology
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
Cross Shore Distance [m]
-0.2
-0.15
-0.1
-0.05
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
Current Speed [m/s]
-0.8
-0.6
-0.4
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Bathymetry [m]
10 Equidistant
10 Detailed
20 Equidistant
20 Detailed
Physical Model
Beach Profile
Figure 5.10: Comparison of longshore current velocity for diﬀerent layer distribution
with WEDS stress formulation.
Figure 5.11: Comparison of cross-shore current velocity for diﬀerent layer distribution
with WEDS stress formulation.
==PAGE:51==
5.4 Setup of Sand Transport Module
43
Figure 5.12: Layer distribution for shear stress.
5.4
Setup of Sand Transport Module
5.4.1
Model Deﬁnition
The wave and current model is used in the ST module in order to represent the
physical model conditions. Using this model, the sediment transport rate is found
by interpolation in a sediment table, which is generated by a platform in MIKE 21
Toolbox denominated "Generation of Q3D Sediment table" and the steps of this
generation are shown in ﬁgures 5.13, 5.14 and 5.14.
Figure 5.13: First step of sediment table
generation
Figure 5.14: Second step of sediment table
generation
==PAGE:52==
44
5 Methodology
Figure 5.14: Third and last step of sediment table generation
In the parameters speciﬁcation, ﬁgure 5.13, the defaults values are used. In the
additional parameters, ﬁgure 5.14 some parameters are of secondary order and have
very small contribution for the present situation hence they are excluded. Ripples
are not included since it will only develop for very small current velocities, which is
not the case for the present conditions. Bed slope has a very small inﬂuence but is
included in order to represent a more realistic situation of the scour development
and allow it to reach an equilibrium. Bed concentration is chosen to be calculated
in a deterministic approach which uses equation (2.30) presented by [Engelund
and Fredsøe, 1976] since it is a more conservative approach. Streaming is included
because it is responsible for generating a net current inside the wave boundary layer,
most likely onshore directed. Cross current transport is responsible for adding the
undertow in models where it is not present (radiation stresses formulation).Since
the presented table is for a WEDS stress formulation, the undertow is automatically
generated by the HD module, therefore not included in the generation of the table.
The values in the table axes are set according to the HD module results, as shown
in ﬁgure 5.14 and are calculated in order to cover the whole simulation.
5.4.2
Boundary Conditions
In the ST module, all the boundaries are set to zero sediment ﬂux gradient except
the shoreline. This means that the sediment transport is not recirculated as the
current is. Once the sediment is out of the domain, nothing is added in the other
boundaries.
5.4.3
Sand Layer Thickness
In the data report from the physical model, the thickness of erodable material (sand)
is not speciﬁed but what can be assumed is that at a certain depth, there is a non
erodable concrete bed.
==PAGE:53==
5.5 Scour and Salient
45
In order to simulate this sand layer, a layer thickness of 2 meters is added to
the model. Special attention was taken in order to make the structure 100% non
erodable, selecting the speciﬁc coordinates of it and setting the sand thickness of
this area to zero.
5.4.4
Bank Erosion
The eﬀect of slope failure on the morphological update of the bathymetry is possible
to include. This mechanism will only come into eﬀect if the local bed slope becomes
steeper than the speciﬁed angle of repose. In this project "General slope failure" is
used. For this deﬁnition, slope failure is checked for all elements that are not totally
dry, disregarding the neighbouring elements. The angle of repose is set to 30 degrees.
When general slope failure is activated, the bank slope, α, is obtained from
equation (5.14).
tan(α) =

zd −zf
ds

(5.14)
Here zf and zd are the bed level at the ﬂooded element and dry element,
respectively, and ds is the distance between the two cell centres. If the calculated
bank slope is larger than the angle of repose (critical angle), a land sliding adjusting
the slope to the angle of repose, φ, will happen, else nothing happens. The new bed
level z′ in the elements are obtained by equation 5.15. Here Af and Ad are areas of
the ﬂooded and dry elements, respectively.
if tan(α) > tan(φ)











zd = zd +
Af
Af + Ad
(zd −zf −tan(φ)ds)
zf = zf +
Ad
Af + Ad
(zd −zf −tan(φ)ds)
(5.15)
5.5
Scour and Salient
To investigate the eﬀects of sediment transport around the structure a scour and
salient analysis was conducted. The positions where the analysis was carried out
are shown in the sketch presented in ﬁgure 5.15. For the scour analysis, the bed
level change is evaluated in the deepest cell within the red area. For the salient, the
area of each cell within the green areas is multiplied by the bed level change of it.
The groyne part of the T-groyne will be denoted its leg, while the breakwater part
will be denoted arm.
==PAGE:54==
46
5 Methodology
Figure 5.15: Location where scour and salient is taken.
5.6
Height and Geometry Analysis of the
Structure
Once the model is validated with the measurements from the physical model and the
ST module returns realistic results, modiﬁcations on the geometry of the structure
could be done. The intention is to analyse and compare how T-groynes, breakwa-
ters and groynes aﬀect the beach erosion and the sediment transport rate. This
analysis involved modiﬁcations in length and distance from the shore. The diﬀerent
geometries are illustrated in ﬁgure 5.16. It should be mentioned that the validated
model will now be referred to as "Test 1".
==PAGE:55==
5.6 Height and Geometry Analysis of the Structure
47
a) Structure test 2, also
submerged (Structure test
15).
b) Structure test 3.
c) Structure test 4.
d) Structure test 5.
e) Structure test 6.
f) Structure test 7.
g) Structure test 8.
h) Structure test 9, also
submerged (Structure test
16).
i) Structure test 10.
j) Structure test 11.
k) Structure test 12.
l) Structure test 13.
m) Structure test 14.
Figure 5.16: Diﬀerent types of structures with diﬀerent geometry.
Also, another investigated characteristic was the height of the structures. A
breakwater, groyne and T-groyne had their height reduced, submerging the structure.
Submerged structures are present in Test 15, 16, 17 an 18. The ﬁrst two are referred
==PAGE:56==
48
5 Methodology
to in ﬁgure 5.16 , while Test 17 and 18 are Test 1 submerged. Test 15, 16 and 17 is
submerged 0.05 m under the water surface, while Test 18 submerged 0.01 m under
the water surface. Submerged structures are regarded to be capable of providing
beach protection without having the same adverse impacts as classical shoreline
protections have, like aesthetic considerations and loss of beach recreation. The
main diﬀerence between a normal and a submerged structure is that there will be a
ﬂow over a submerged structure. However, it is still expected to give comparable
results to the normal T-groyne approach. In ﬁgure 5.17 a submerged T-groyne is
illustrated. As seen from the ﬁgure, when a structure is submerged the arm of the
T-groyne will start where the bathymetry have the same depth as the structure.
This may lead to sediment bypass close to the shoreline.
Figure 5.17: Domain and bathymetry of the three-dimension model.
5.6.1
Scour and Salient
Also for the geometry analysis a scour and a salient analysis is done. The salient
development and scour for a breakwater was investigated in the areas illustrated in
ﬁgure 5.18a). For a groyne, it is illustrated in ﬁgure 5.18b).
==PAGE:57==
5.6 Height and Geometry Analysis of the Structure
49
a) Breakwater.
b) Groyne.
Figure 5.18: Position of where scour and salient is taken.
==PAGE:58==
50
==PAGE:59==
CHAPTER 6
Results
In order to evaluate the results from diﬀerent tests described in chapter 5, diﬀerent
elements are discussed in the present section. Firstly, the wave conditions generated
with the SW module were compared to those measured in the physical model.
Positions where the signiﬁcant wave height are evaluated are shown in ﬁgure 6.1 as
full lines perpendicular to the coast.
Figure 6.1: Position of evaluated results.
==PAGE:60==
52
6 Results
Once the SW module was tuned, the longshore current results from the HD
module were compared with measurements in six diﬀerent cross-shore positions as
shown in ﬁgure 6.1 with dashed lines. These velocities were taken at 1/3 of the
depth. Velocity proﬁles were not measured in the physical model and therefore no
comparison could be done. However, in order to show the development of important
phenomena, velocity proﬁles were extracted from MIKE in the positions marked by
the coloured dots in ﬁgure 6.1.
6.1
Wave Field
The wave ﬁeld generated by the SW module is illustrated in ﬁgure 6.2 where it is
seen that Hm0 is lower at the top right corner due to the angle of wave makers.
This distinction is transferred through the whole north part of the domain. Even
though Hm0 is lower in this part, it is assumed to have no signiﬁcant impact on the
longshore current. This diﬀerence was probably noticed in the physical model as
well, since it was done in a closed basin.
Figure 6.2: Wave ﬁeld generated by SW module
==PAGE:61==
6.2 Signiﬁcant Wave Height
53
6.2
Signiﬁcant Wave Height
Results from the SW module are of high importance in the model, since it contains
the driving forces that will generate wave induced currents.
Using the set-up
mentioned in chapter 5, the signiﬁcant wave height Hm0 is compared to the results
presented by [Gravens and Wang, 2007], as shown in ﬁgure 6.3. These results show
the inﬂuence of the wave steepness parameter earlier discussed.
Figure 6.3: Hm0 at 4.125m, 5.2m and 6.3m distant form the shoreline.
Analysing ﬁgure 6.3, it is possible to conclude that the model overestimates the
whitecapping to some degree. Once it is included, wave heights turn to be lower
than the measured points. One should be aware that the signiﬁcant wave height is
an important parameter in order to recreate the wave induced currents.
==PAGE:62==
54
6 Results
6.3
Longshore Currents
Based on the set-up discussed in chapter 5, the longshore current from the laboratory
experiment could be modeled and compared. The ﬁrst current velocities presented
are from WEDS stress, where the undertow is included and therefore provides the
most realistic result. The development of current speed over the whole domain with
WEDS stress formulation, at the surface, is illustrated in ﬁgure 6.4. The arrows
indicate the direction of the current and it is clear that, since it is at the surface, it
has the same direction as the wave propagation. This is due to the stresses driving
the ﬂow originated from the roller, which moves with the same velocity and direction
as the wave.
Figure 6.4: Map of current speed at the surface
The cross sections where the velocities were measured in the physical model
are compared in ﬁgure 6.5. It is seen that there is a good correlation between
measurements and numerical simulation.
==PAGE:63==
6.3 Longshore Currents
55
a) Line 20.
b) Line 21.
c) Line 22.
d) Line 24.
e) Line 26.
f) Line 27.
Figure 6.5: Current velocity from WEDS stress at 1/3 of the depth.
Secondly, a comparison between results for the radiation stress formulation and
those from ﬁgure 6.4 was done. The comparison is illustrated in ﬁgure 6.6, and it is
seen that the longshore current velocity is well represented by both methods. An
overall impression is that close to the structure, the WEDS stresses formulation
returns slightly better results. Also, it is interesting to see that for line 21 (ﬁg. 6.8b),
radiation stress formulation represents better the longshore current velocity.
a) Line 20.
b) Line 21.
==PAGE:64==
56
6 Results
c) Line 22.
d) Line 24.
e) Line 26.
f) Line 27.
Figure 6.6: Comparison of longshore velocity for 3D tests with WEDS and radiation
stress formulation at 1/3 of the depth.
A comparison was also carried out between the depth averaged current velocity
from a 2D radiation stress model, and depth averaged velocity from a 3D model with
WEDS stress formulation. In ﬁgure 6.7, it is possible to see that the radiation stress
formulation overestimates most of the velocities while the WEDS stress formulation
underestimates it.
a) Line 20.
b) Line 21.
c) Line 22.
d) Line 24.
==PAGE:65==
6.3 Longshore Currents
57
e) Line 26.
f) Line 27.
Figure 6.7: Comparison of depth averaged velocity in the longshore direction for
radiation stress and WEDS stress formulation.
In order to evaluate the diﬀerence between the discrete velocity at 1/3 of the
depth and the depth averaged velocity with WEDS stress formulation, both are
plotted in ﬁgure 6.8, which shows that the results are very similar.
a) Line 20.
b) Line 21.
c) Line 22.
d) Line 24.
e) Line 26.
f) Line 27.
Figure 6.8: Discrete and depth averaged velocities for WEDS stress formulation
In ﬁgure 6.9 one can visualize the depth averaged current speed for the model
==PAGE:66==
58
6 Results
using WEDS stress formulation. If it is compared to ﬁgure 6.4, it is seen that the
development of a longshore current is more clear.
Figure 6.9: Map of depth averaged current speed.
6.4
Cross-shore Currents
In order to analyse the cross-shore current development over the whole domain,
cross sections taken from ﬁgure 6.4 are illustrated in ﬁgure 6.10. The ﬁgures show
that the ﬂow is shoreward directed at the top and oﬀshore directed at the bottom,
which is the undertow. At the cross-sections where the structure is present, it is
seen that the ﬂow in the sheltered area of the structure is oﬀshore directed, this
may be caused by the circulation current. Another interesting diﬀerence between
the cross-sections is that the undertow seems to be larger upstream of the structure
compared to downstream. This will probably cause more erosion upstream when
investigating the sediment transport. When the ﬂow is hitting the structure, it is
seen that the ﬂow is downward and oﬀshore directed, this will probably induce scour
in front of the T-groyne.
==PAGE:67==
6.4 Cross-shore Currents
59
a) Line 15.
b) Line 18.
c) Line 20.
==PAGE:68==
60
6 Results
d) Line 22.
e) Line 24.
f) Line 25.
==PAGE:69==
6.4 Cross-shore Currents
61
g) Line 27.
h) Line 31.
i) Line 35.
Figure 6.10: Cross shore current at diﬀerent positions for the WEDS model.
==PAGE:70==
62
6 Results
6.5
Velocity Proﬁles
In order to understand better the hydrodynamics and the diﬀerence between the two
formulations, velocity proﬁles can be extracted from 3D simulations even though
there are no measurements from the physical model to be compared to. In ﬁgure 6.11
it is possible to evaluate the longshore current for both, radiation stresses and WEDS
stress formulation. A good correlation is noticed between the two formulations.
Also, it is important to mention that the velocities are shown as negative since it
comes from the upstream to downstream, against the axis orientation. The dots
represent the position where the data was extracted, which are the center of vertical
elements of the mesh. In order to obtain the whole proﬁle, a cubic interpolation is
performed.
a) VP1.
b) VP2.
c) VP3.
d) VP4.
e) VP5.
f) VP6.
Figure 6.11: Velocity proﬁles for longshore current with the WEDS stress formulation
compared with the radiation stresses formulation.
Analysing diﬀerent velocity proﬁles for the cross-shore velocities, one can conclude
==PAGE:71==
6.5 Velocity Proﬁles
63
that for radiation stresses the cross-shore component has a very low velocity. However,
for the WEDS stress the proﬁles show the development of the undertow, discussed
in Chapter 2. In VP4, VP5 and VP6, (ﬁg. 6.12d), 6.12e) and 6.12f) respectively),
it is possible to visualize the development of the velocity proﬁles compared to the
water depth, since they are located in the same cross-shore proﬁle.
a) VP1.
b) VP2.
c) VP3.
d) VP4.
e) VP5.
f) VP6.
Figure 6.12: Velocity proﬁles for cross shore current with the WEDS stress formula-
tion compared with the radiation stresses formulation.
The cross-shore and longshore proﬁles from ﬁgure 6.11 and 6.12 are visualized
in 3D at their respective positions in ﬁgure 6.13 together with additional proﬁles.
The intention of this is to show where the undertow and longshore currents are
stronger. From the ﬁgure it is possible to see the large undertow around the upstream
arm, which at this location is probably induced by the contraction of streamlines
happening here.
==PAGE:72==
64
6 Results
Figure 6.13: Velocity proﬁle at diﬀerent positions.
6.6
Sediment Transport
The last module to be included in the simulation was ST. In order to obtain infor-
mation about the sediment transport from the physical model, scatter data from the
bathymetry survey after 6 hours of experiment is interpolated into the numerical
mesh, as illustrated in ﬁgure 6.14. Here it is possible to observe diﬀerences between
the two models, such as the high amount of sediments moving to the deeper part
in the numerical model compared to the physical model. Since the scale of the
bed level change is relatively small, due to the scaling of the physical model, some
features might be diﬃcult to analyse in ﬁgure 6.14. For this reason, the diﬀerence
in the bed level changes from the numerical and physical models are compared in
ﬁgure 6.15, where the diﬀerences become more explicit.
Analysing ﬁgure 6.15, in the deeper part of the domain (x≈17m), it is noticed
a large modiﬁcation of the bed in the numerical model (ﬁg. 6.15a) while in the
physical model (ﬁg. 6.15b), it is not noticed. This modiﬁcation can be related to
the previously discussed undertow. This eﬀect seems to overestimate the sediment
transport oﬀshore directed, resulting on this high modiﬁcation in the cross-shore
direction. It can also be noticed a large erosion area upstream of the structure which
is not present in the physical model and it is probably related to the same issue.
==PAGE:73==
6.6 Sediment Transport
65
a) Numerical Model.
b) Physical Model.
Figure 6.14: Bed level at the last time step for the numerical model and after 6
hours of the physical model.
==PAGE:74==
66
6 Results
a) Numerical Model.
b) Physical Model.
Figure 6.15: Bed level change for the numerical model and physical model.
In order to investigate this in more detail, the eﬀect of the undertow and the
cross-shore directed sediment transport, cross sections are taken at the same lines
as the longshore current velocities and are illustrated in ﬁgure 6.16. Figure 6.16a)
shows that modiﬁcation in the deepest part observed in ﬁgure 6.15a) is the bar
moving oﬀshore. Since it is observed through the whole domain, the other cross
sections are taken only for the ﬁrst 10 meters from the beach. This allows one to
better observe the modiﬁcations near shore and around the structure since the eﬀect
in these areas are the objectives of the project.
Analysing the cross sections, one can observe the excessive erosion near the
shoreline in the numerical model, resulting in a steeper slope and considerable amount
of scour around the structure also noticed in ﬁgure 6.15a). Another distinction
noticed in ﬁgure 6.15 and in the cross sections from ﬁgure 6.16 is the development
of a salient. In the physical model, it seems to be well developed, while in the
numerical one, it is signiﬁcantly small.
==PAGE:75==
6.6 Sediment Transport
67
a) Line 20.
b) Line 21.
c) Line 22.
==PAGE:76==
68
6 Results
d) Line 24.
e) Line 26.
f) Line 27.
Figure 6.16: Cross sections from the bed level and bed level change from physical
and numerical models.
==PAGE:77==
6.7 Streamlines
69
6.7
Streamlines
As discussed previously, one of the reasons for the development of scour holes
around the structure is the contraction of streamlines, where the water contracts and
accelerates, carrying sediment away from this region. This process can be visualized
in ﬁgure 6.17, where a particle trajectory is represented. It can be noticed that once
a particle is released, at the surface, it will be dragged with the ﬂow direction at
the surface until it reaches the high speeds near the structure, where it is trapped
into the circulation current and dragged to the bottom, where it will remain. Once
it gets closer to the boundaries, it will be directed to the surface again probably
due to the boundary conditions applied.
a) 2D
b) 3D
Figure 6.17: Trajectory of two diﬀerent particles showing the streamlines.
==PAGE:78==
70
6 Results
It is seen from ﬁgure 6.18, 6.19 and 6.20 that at the bottom layer the ﬂow is
oﬀshore directed (due to the undertow), for the middle layer it is longshore directed,
while for top layer it is onshore/longshore directed (due to the roller).
Figure 6.18: Flow direction for the bottom layer.
Figure 6.19: Flow direction for the middle layer.
==PAGE:79==
6.8 Sediment Discharge
71
Figure 6.20: Flow direction for the top layer.
6.8
Sediment Discharge
In the physical model, 21 sediment traps were located at the downstream end of the
basin. The amount of sediments kept in those traps would represent the sediment
ﬂux for the ﬂow conditions. In order to recreate these results, a discharge line is set
at the same location (y=14m) in the numerical model and the result is shown in
table 6.1.
Table 6.1: Comparison of sediment discharge between physical and numerical model.
Physical Model
Numerical Model
Discharge [m3/year]
2267.55
1407,24
A diﬀerence of approximately 38% is seen between the physical and numerical
model. Even though it was found out that the physical model result is of question-
able quality, this diﬀerence may be caused by the strong undertow in the numerical
model, and more sediments are moved oﬀshore, instead of longshore. This is also
illustrated in ﬁgure 6.18, where it is seen that the current speed is oﬀshore directed.
6.9
Salient
As a result from the modiﬁcations in the ﬂow pattern due to the presence of a
structure, the formation of a salient can be noticed, as seen in ﬁgure 6.15. In order
to compare the height/length of the developed salient with the physical model,
contour lines of the shoreline and at 0.1 m beneath the surface in the beginning and
end of the physical and numerical model, are illustrated in ﬁgure 6.21. It is seen
==PAGE:80==
72
6 Results
that in the physical model that the salient develops with a smooth shape, while the
numerical model has a more squared shape, even though the developed length is very
similar. Downstream the salient seems to be longer than the one from the physical
model. Comparing with ﬁgure 6.15, it is possible to see the erosion in the physical
model downstream of the structure, which induce a retreat of the shoreline. In
the numerical model, signiﬁcantly erosion is seen along the whole shoreline, except
where it is sheltered by the structure.
a) Numerical Model.
b) Physical Model.
Figure 6.21: Contour plots for numerical and physical model.
Since it is complicated to obtain a conclusion about the size of the salient through
ﬁgure 6.21, the volume of it is investigated as illustrated in ﬁgure 6.22. From the
ﬁgures it is seen that the salient development is stronger in the physical model
compared to the numerical model, even though the diﬀerence in ﬁgure 6.21 does
not seem that signiﬁcant. The problem with the contour plot is that the height of
the salient is hard to be evaluated, but from ﬁgure 6.15 it is clear that the salient is
more developed in the physical than in the numerical model.
a) Accumulated accresion and erosion up-
stream
b) Accumulated accresion and erosion down-
stream
==PAGE:81==
6.10 Scour
73
c) Accumulated accresion upstream
d) Accumulated accresion downstream
Figure 6.22: Comparison of the salient development between the physical and
numerical model.
6.10
Scour
As mentioned before and seen in ﬁgure 6.15, development of scour holes is visualised
both at the arm and in front of the T-groyne. In the numerical model, the size of
these holes is relatively large if compared to those in the physical model. In ﬁgure
6.23 the development of the deepest element is illustrated. The physical model is
presented with dots because no time series evolution was provided.
Figure 6.23: Scour development in time.
For the physical model it seems like the scour holes have reached an equilibrium
between 3 and 6 hours, since the depth diﬀerence between the two time steps is
relatively small. In the numerical model scour at the arm is still higher, possibly
due to the strong undertow, it seems to not have reached an equilibrium after 6
hours. The same is noticed for the area in front of the structure.
The deviation between the two models can be related to the angle of repose of
the sediment, which should have been ﬁxed with the bank erosion feature discussed
in Chapter 5. Also, the structure porosity can be inﬂuencing the results. In the
physical model the structure is permeable (rocks), while in the numerical model it
==PAGE:82==
74
6 Results
is not, which may result in higher current velocities, hence higher scour depths.
The scour around the structure for the 3D numerical model is presented in ﬁgure
6.24, where the bathymetry is illustrated with the bed level change as the color bar
indicates.
Figure 6.24: Scour in 3D.
6.11
Geometry analysis
The main intention of the project is to analyse the inﬂuence of the structures in the
coastal sediment transport. As shown in ﬁgure 5.16, diﬀerent sizes of T-groynes,
breakwaters and groynes were tested with the validated set-up from Test 1. Once
the simulations were completed, the discharge of each test shows an overview of
the total sediment transport. The development of the shore was analysed by using
contour plots. However, it was not suﬃcient to evaluate the size of the salient,
therefore a volume analysis of it was also carried out. At the end, scour was also
evaluated for the diﬀerent structures.
6.11.1
Uniform model
In order to investigate the impact of diﬀerent structures, a uniform bathymetry
model (without any structure) was also carried out. First, an uniform model with
the same mesh as for the T-groyne was used. Analysing ﬁgure 6.26c) it returned a
problem at the shoreline where the mesh is most detailed. At this region, the beach
is signiﬁcantly eroded, which indicates a possible error in the numerical solution.
In ﬁgure 6.26a) a coarser mesh was used, and it is seen that the problem with the
undesired erosion is eliminated. The uniform model is important in order to provide
results to be compared with the ones from the diﬀerent structures.
==PAGE:83==
6.11 Geometry analysis
75
a) Coarse mesh
b) Shore detailed mesh
Figure 6.25: Diﬀerences between two types of mesh for the uniform model.
6.11.2
Sediment Discharge
In table 6.2 the total sediment discharge (m3/year) and the diﬀerence between each
model and the uniform model is presented. Tests for a T-groyne are marked yellow,
breakwaters are marked blue and the groynes are marked red in the table.
The main objective of a structure at the beach is to stop erosion. Therefore, the
larger the diﬀerence between the uniform model and the tests, the more eﬃcient the
structure is. The general trend from the table is that T-groynes are most eﬃcient,
since it blocks the waves from hitting the shore and sediment bypass that happens
behind breakwaters. Groynes have the smallest diﬀerence compared to the uniform
model since waves are still attacking the whole shoreline and the strong undertow
==PAGE:84==
76
6 Results
will induce a high amount of erosion. The tests which is refereed to as better than
others, means that it have a lower discharge.
Table 6.2: Sediment discharge for diﬀerent tests.
Discharge [m3/year]
Diﬀerence
Uniform
2118,57
-
Test 5
985.43
1133.14
Test 4
1021.70
1096.88
Test 13
1114.59
1003.98
Test 7
1154.08
964.49
Test 18
1194.02
924.56
Test 8
1215.02
903.55
Test 1
1407.24
711.33
Test 10
1411.06
707.51
Test 12
1411.06
707.51
Test 14
1432.05
686.52
Test 2
1435.95
682.62
Test 3
1479.04
639.53
Test 9
1569.85
548.72
Test 17
1613.30
505.27
Test 11
1684.42
434.15
Test 6
1737.97
380.60
Test 16
1932.79
185.79
Test 15
2073.84
44.73
In ﬁgure 6.26 the discharge development is plotted. It is seen that some of the
models have not converged after 6 hours.
a) Development of discharge for the T-
groynes.
==PAGE:85==
6.11 Geometry analysis
77
b) Development of discharge for the
breakwaters.
c) Development of discharge for the
groynes.
Figure 6.26: Discharge development for diﬀerent structures.
It is seen from table 6.2 and ﬁgure 6.26 that Test 5 and 4 give the best result
(lowest discharge). Both of these are located 5 m away from the shoreline. In the
same ﬁgure, it is noticed that in the beginning Test 5 have the highest discharge
of the two tests, but when the salient starts to develop it blocks the bypass of
sediments behind the structure. As seen from ﬁgure 6.27a) and 6.27b), the velocities
behind and in front of the T-groyne is higher than the one from the breakwater.
This leads to more sediment bypass in front of the T-groyne.
In the following, tests are presented in order of sediment discharge eﬃciency.
Evaluation of diﬀerences and similarities between diﬀerent tests is done in order to
identify a pattern.
Test 13 is the best test with a oﬀshore position of 4 m. This is slightly better
==PAGE:86==
78
6 Results
than the other tests with the same distance from shore. The reason for this might
be that it is wider and is able to shelter a larger area. When looking at the velocities
behind the structure, they are lower when compared to other T-groynes with a
diﬀerent width. High velocities are noticed behind breakwaters, since the ﬂow is
not stopped by the leg present in the T-groyne.
Then, it is seen that the T-groyne have a lower sediment discharge if it is located
3 m from the shoreline (Test 7), compared to being located 4 m from the shoreline
except from the already stated Test 13. The reason for this might be because
velocities behind the structure are lower. For a breakwater located 3 m from the
shoreline (Test 8), the salient develops faster when compared to be located 4 m
from the shoreline. This might stop most of the bypass behind it, and therefore it is
more eﬃcient.
The submerged T-groyne in Test 18 have a lower discharge than Test 1, the
reason for this might be that no circulation current is present in this type of structure.
This leads to a slower ﬂow in the front, inducing less sediment bypass in this region,
which results in lower discharge. Even though there is no circulation in Test 17, the
discharge is higher in this test compared to Test 1. The reason for this might be
that more sediments are bypassing behind it than in Test 18, since it is lowered to
0.05 m beneath the MWL.
It is seen that Test 10 and 12 do not have any diﬀerence at all. This show that
a 5 m long groyne have the same eﬀect as a 4 m long and 3 m wide T-groyne. In
other words the width of the T-groyne must be signiﬁcant to make any impact on
the sediment discharge. It is also seen that a 4 m wide T-groyne (Test 1) do not
change much compared to these two tests (Test 10 and 12). However when the
width is increased to 5 m (Test 13) it will be more eﬃcient.
When looking at the breakwaters located 4 m oﬀshore (Test 2, 3, 11 and 14),
the only parameter which diﬀers is their width. It is seen that this change do not
have a big impact on the sediment discharge. The only diﬀerence noticed is when
the width is reduced to 3 m. Test 6 have a high discharge, in other words if the
breakwater is very close to the shore high amounts of sediments will bypass it in
the front.
The two tests which has the highest discharge are Test 15 and 16, and both are
submerged to 0.05 m beneath the MWL. Especially for the breakwater, it is seen
to be less eﬀective. Even though there is no circulation current present in these
tests, the bypass of sediments are probably happening both in front and behind the
structures.
In ﬁgure 6.27 the depth averaged longshore velocity of Test 4, 5 and 12 are
illustrated, the vectors indicate the total load of sediment transport. The other tests
are illustrated in the appendix. In some of the tests it is noticed some irregularities
in the top left corner, which might indicate some numerical problem.
==PAGE:87==
6.11 Geometry analysis
79
a) Development of discharge for a T-groyne (Test 4).
b) Development of discharge for a breakwater (Test 5).
==PAGE:88==
80
6 Results
c) Development of discharge for a groyne (Test 12).
Figure 6.27: Velocity and total load of sediment transport for the most eﬃcient
structure of each type.
6.11.3
Salient
The impact of the diﬀerent types and sizes of structures in regards to the formation
of the salient is illustrated in ﬁgures 6.28, 6.29 and 6.30. The ﬁgures show the
contour lines for the shoreline (0,0m) and -0.1m at the initial and ﬁnal conditions.
It is noticed a small bump at the upstream end in some of the results, this seems to
be a numerical problem. But when looking at the discharge for these tests it seems
like this do not have any signiﬁcant impact on the sediment transport development
in these tests.
It is seen in ﬁgure 6.28, that the salient will be wider the wider the breakwater
is. This do not necessary means that the volume of the salient is larger. As for
T-groynes, ﬁgure 6.29 show that the wider the breakwater is the wider the salient is.
It is interesting to see that the structure in ﬁgure 6.29g) show that when the width
of the breakwater is 6 m, it looks like two separate salients start to develop.
==PAGE:89==
6.11 Geometry analysis
81
a) Test 1.
b) Test 4.
c) Test 7.
d) Test 10.
e) Test 13.
f) Test 17.
g) Test 18.
Figure 6.28: Development of salient for diﬀerent T groynes geometries.
==PAGE:90==
82
6 Results
a) Test 2.
b) Test 3.
c) Test 5.
d) Test 6.
e) Test 8.
f) Test 11.
g) Test 14.
h) Test 15.
Figure 6.29: Development of salient for diﬀerent breakwaters geometries.
==PAGE:91==
6.11 Geometry analysis
83
a) Test 9.
b) Test 12.
c) Test 16.
Figure 6.30: Development of salient for diﬀerent groynes geometries.
The last structure to be analysed is the groyne, as illustrated in ﬁgure 6.30.
Here the salient developed is considerably small, the reason for this is the erosion
in the cross-shore direction induced by the undertow transporting the sediments
oﬀshore. Since there are no places along the coastline which is sheltered by the
structure. Even along the groyne, the sediments are transported oﬀshore by the
strong undertow, since the waves are breaking here.
A general trend is observed in ﬁgures 6.28, 6.29 and 6.30 which is the exces-
sive erosion along the whole coastline, except behind and around the structures
(for the case of T-groyne and breakwaters). This eﬀect is probably related to
the strength of the undertow, previously discussed. If the undertow was weaker,
a bigger diﬀerence between the diﬀerent type of structures would probably been seen.
In ﬁgure 6.31 and 6.32, the volume of the salient for the T-groynes is illustrated.
The ﬁrst ﬁgure shows the diﬀerence when changing the distance to the shore, while
the second ﬁgure shows the diﬀerence when changing its width.
a) Accumulated accretion and erosion up-
stream
b) Accumulated accretion and erosion down-
stream
==PAGE:92==
84
6 Results
c) Accumulated accretion upstream
d) Accumulated accretion downstream
Figure 6.31: Volume analysis of the developed salient for T-groynes when changing
its length.
a) Accumulated accretion and erosion up-
stream
b) Accumulated accretion and erosion down-
stream
c) Accumulated accretion upstream
d) Accumulated accretion downstream
Figure 6.32: Volume analysis of the developed salient for T-groynes when changing
its width.
When analysing the salient volume change when modifying the length of the
T-Groyne in ﬁgure 6.31 it is seen that Test 4 in total returns the most accumulated
accretion. While the other ones has approximately the same total volume change
(sum of salient accretion upstream and downstream). This seems to correlate well
with ﬁgure 6.28. In other words there is only a small diﬀerence between a 3 and
4 m long T-groyne (emerged and submerged), while the salient will be larger if
increased to 5 m. When the width is modiﬁed, ﬁgure 6.32 shows that the total
salient development will almost be the same regardless if it is 3, 4 or 5 m wide.
The salient volume development for breakwaters are presented in ﬁgure 6.33 and
6.34. Here, ﬁgures are divided in the diﬀerence between changing the width of the
==PAGE:93==
6.11 Geometry analysis
85
breakwater, and the distance from the shoreline. Test 6 has change in both, and is
included in ﬁgure 6.33.
a) Accumulated accretion and erosion up-
stream
b) Accumulated accretion and erosion down-
stream
c) Accumulated accretion upstream
d) Accumulated accretion downstream
Figure 6.33: Volume analysis of developed salient for breakwaters when changing
its distance from the shoreline.
a) Accumulated accretion and erosion up-
stream
b) Accumulated accretion and erosion down-
stream
c) Accumulated accretion upstream
d) Accumulated accretion downstream
Figure 6.34: Volume analysis of developed salient for breakwaters when changing
its width.
==PAGE:94==
86
6 Results
In ﬁgure 6.33 the salient development shows that Test 5 creates a larger salient,
than Test 2, 8 and 6, which shows that the salient volume will be larger when the
breakwater is moved in the oﬀshore direction. Observing the contours for test 6,
the one closer to the shore, it is possible to see that the structure is only blocking
the erosion but is not generating a salient.
When investigating how the change in the width of the breakwater will modify
the salient development, it was found that for accretion, Test 14 and 15 give the
largest salient development. It is seen that when including erosion, it is more erosion
than accretion downstream. Test 2 and 11 give almost the same result, while Test 3
gives the lowest salient development. These results show that the width it self do
not have a large impact on the salient volume development.
Lastly, the groyne salient volume development is illustrated in ﬁgure 6.35, where
it is seen that the groyne in general give low values for the salient development.
This corresponds to the contours illustrated in ﬁgure 6.30. It is seen that Test 9
and 16 give approximately the same salient development, while Test 12, which is 1
m longer than the other two give the lowest development. One should notice that
the accumulated acression upstream of the structure is of insigniﬁcant contribution.
a) Accumulated accretion and erosion up-
stream
b) Accumulated accretion and erosion down-
stream
c) Accumulated accretion upstream
d) Accumulated accretion downstream
Figure 6.35: Volume analysis of developed salient for groynes.
The reason for the small development of the salient for this type of structure
may be related to wave breaking, since the waves break along the whole coastline,
and there will be no areas protected from it, except a very small area downstream
==PAGE:95==
6.11 Geometry analysis
87
of the groyne.
The salient volume development have some of the same tendencies as the sediment
discharge. In both it is seen that the distance to the shoreline have a larger impact
than the width of the structure.
6.11.4
Scour
The scour development for tests with T-groyne are presented in ﬁgure 6.36. It is
seen that all the diﬀerent geometries for it give scour of 0.1-0.2 m, both at the front
and around the arm of the structure.
a) Arm
b) Front
Figure 6.36: Scour development at the deepest point for a T-groyne.
For the scour around the arm, the deepest scour was noticed for the tests with the
same structure geometry as the physical model (Test 1, 17 and 18). It is seen that in
front of the groyne, some of the tests have a larger scour development than compared
to the arm, especially Test 17 and 4. The scour development is based on the speed on
the circulation current, and how the streamlines contract around the structure. Even
==PAGE:96==
88
6 Results
for the submerged structures there is contraction of streamlines around the arm of
the T-groyne/breakwater, since there is a ﬂow and wave breaking over the structure,
which create an undertow. In other words, at the bottom this undertow will con-
tract around the arm and induce scour in this region and in the front of the structure.
For a detached breakwater the scour is evaluated as stated in Chapter 5, taken
at two diﬀerent locations. The scour at the arm is illustrated in ﬁgure 6.37a), where
it is seen that the scour depth does not change much based on its geometry, except
for Test 5, 6 and 15. In front of the groyne the ﬁnal scour depth illustrated in ﬁgure
6.37b) is more ﬂuctuating, but the same tendency as the arm is seen, since Test 5, 6
and 15 still have some of the deepest scour depths.
a) Arm
b) Front
Figure 6.37: Scour development at the deepest point for a breakwater.
In ﬁgure 6.38 the scour for the diﬀerent groynes are presented, and it is seen
that a longer groyne will result in a lower scour depth.
==PAGE:97==
6.11 Geometry analysis
89
Figure 6.38: Scour for a groyne.
It is seen that the scour depth is almost twice for Test 9 and 16, compared to
Test 12. In other words, it is less scour when the groyne is longer, and the scour does
not change much if the structure is emerged or submerged. The reason for this might
be that there is less contraction of streamlines around the end of it for a longer groyne.
==PAGE:98==
90
==PAGE:99==
CHAPTER 7
Discussion
Analysing the results presented in the previous chapter, important points must be
discussed. In order to perform a realistic numerical simulation, results from the
numerical model should be comparable with those from the physical. Due to the
lack of data, not all the parameters analysed in this thesis could be validated, as
mentioned before.
Wave conditions from the numerical model are validated against the measure-
ments of the physical model, when the signiﬁcant wave height is compared. It is
important to mention that the compared results from the numerical model are from
a model without the morphological update, therefore bed conditions do not change
through the simulation time. The same condition is applied for the validation of
the longshore currents, where the velocities at the last time step for a converged
simulation without morphological update is used. If results from a model with
morphological update are compared, the validation process would not be possible,
since it is diﬃcult to model the exact same sediment transport, which will aﬀect
directly waves and currents conditions.
In order to represent the currents with the HD module, several parameters had
to be tuned. When two-dimensional tests were compared with three-dimensional
ones, the diﬀerence is considerably small for the longshore currents with both formu-
lations (radiation and WEDS stress). An interesting comparison in respect to the
dimension of the model is regarding the CPU time. Three-dimensional simulations
takes almost 50% more time compared to a two-dimensional model. For the 3D
model with the WEDS stress formulation, special attention was made to the vertical
eddy viscosity, since it inﬂuences the distribution of shear stress through the water
column, therefore the velocities. When the radiation stress formulation is used,
this parameter does not inﬂuence the current velocity, since the force is evenly
distribute. However, for the WEDS stress formulation, the force is applied at the
surface and distributed over the water column by νT, as seen from equation (2.21).
In order to model νT, MIKE originally had a constant, log-law and k-ϵ formulation.
All the formulations were tested and none of them returned satisfying results and
therefore another formulation was proposed. The ﬁrst idea was to make a simple
linear distribution, since it is easier to understand how the model will react with it.
However, when it was implemented into the code, it was found that a mixing length
formulation was already applied and was hidden in the model. Both distributions
were tested and compared with the original ones, and mixing length was found to
be returning the best results, as shown in Chapter 5. The reason for this may be
that the νT-distribution varies according to the gradient of the velocity, as stated in
==PAGE:100==
92
7 Discussion
equation (4.29), therefore the changes due to the undertow, for example, are taken
into consideration.
The cross-shore current is one of the relevant parameters that could not be
validated due to the lack of data. Velocity proﬁles can be evaluated for three dimen-
sional tests and the inﬂuence of the vertical layers distribution for the WEDS stress
formulation is noticed to be very small, while for the radiation stress formulation it
is inﬂuencing dramatically. An important point that would be interesting to see in
these velocity proﬁles is the diﬀerence of 1/3 in the cross-shore direction between
the radiation stress and the WEDS stress formulation, as demonstrated in Chapter
2. However, this diﬀerence was not noticed in any of the ﬁgures, which might be
connected with the numerical calculation over the mesh elements.
Sediment transport models were perfomed only with the WEDS stress formula-
tion, and by including the ST module the CPU time of each simulation will increases
signiﬁcantly. The reason for it is that the simulations have to run for a longer
period of time in order to reach a morphological equilibrium. In order to validate
the ST module, results should be compared with those from the physical model
as reported by [Gravens and Wang, 2007]. In the mentioned experiment, a ﬂux of
sediment downstream of the structure was measured with traps at diﬀerent distance
perpendicular to the shore, as mentioned in Chapter 3. However, this data was
deemed to be unreliable or of questionable quality and were not distributed with the
data set when the data report was published. The problem was with the load cells
or that the sediment traps were resting on sand which found its way under the traps.
In the end, a decision was made that the data were of questionable quality, which
make this comparison not trustworthy. However, a comparison of the sediment
discharge after 6 hours is still carried out, but it should not be taken as a conclusion
if sediment transport is well modelled or not.
Another form of comparison for the sediment transport could be done between
the initial and ﬁnal bathymetries for each type of model and the respective contour
plots of it. The biggest issue in the simulation of sediment transport might be related
to the excessive amount of erosion located along the whole shoreline except the areas
sheltered by the structure. This erosion might be inﬂuencing the development of the
salient, overestimating the depth of the scour hole and also shows that the undertow
eﬀect might be overestimating the cross-shore sediment transport. This condition
result in a steeper beach, which might be related to the slope failure(bank erosion),
since the angle of repose was set to 30◦, which is too steep when comparing to a
normal beach slope.
An issue in modelling the sediment transport was noticed when setting the sand
layer thickness. Non realistic values for scour depth are noticed in the surroundings
of the structure. Since the mesh elements that represents the structure have to be
picked manually and set to 0 (meaning that the structure does not erode), there
is a chance that a small part of the structure erodes, i.e. ﬁgure 6.29a). This issue
could have been resolved by using a quadratic mesh in the structure area.
==PAGE:101==
7 Discussion
93
For the geometry analysis, it was seen that the distance of the structures from
shore was very important when evaluating the longshore sediment transport. How-
ever, the width did not have large inﬂuence. When looking at ﬁgure 6.26 for the
discharge development, it is seen that some of the tests did not converge.
Future Investigation
During the project, topics that were not part of the main objective rose and some
aspects could not be investigated in more detail due to the lack of time. However,
these topics should be considered and investigated for future projects to get a better
understanding of how the model behaves.
The bed roughness is an input in the HD module. However, it seems that the
model is not using the inserted value, since a linear regression of the velocity proﬁle
give a diﬀerent value of it. This might point out a possible mistake in the model.
In ﬁgure 4.4 it is noticed some irregularities at top and bottom of the vertical
eddy viscosity distribution, where a diﬀerent slope is present in all distributions.
This diﬀerences might induce errors or omit some eﬀects from the simulation and
could be a topic for investigation.
To be able to recreate the pumps for the longshore current, a cyclic boundary
condition is used. Instead of this condition, sources could be placed in the model
and set as pumps, since this is the case in the physical model.
As earlier discussed, the layer thickness may inﬂuence the scour and salient
analysis, to avoid this a quadric mesh could be used at the structure position. This
might give a more realistic result, since no small cylindrical pile up of sand on the
structure would happen as an initial condition in real life.
One very interesting future investigation would be to use the presented WEDS
stress formulation and compare the results with some measured cross-shore velocities.
This might give the answer for the excessive erosion.
An important issue noticed is the strong cross-shore sediment transport oﬀshore
directed, due to the undertow. An investigation in how the ST module is using this
conditions would reveal the reason for presented excessive erosion
In the physical model, Test 2 and 6 were also carried out. It would be very
interesting to check these result and compare them to the results presented in the
numerical model. This would contribute to the conclusions from the geometry
analysis.
==PAGE:102==
94
7 Discussion
In the SW module setup, diﬀraction eﬀect is not included. This might neglect
relevant contributions to the ﬂow specially near the structure. Therefore, it would
be interesting to analyse results when this eﬀect is activated.
A parameter that might be inﬂuencing the ﬂow near the structure, hence the
sediment transport, could be the permeability of the structure. Since it is not
implemented in MIKE, this investigation could not be carried out even though
would be interesting to see the eﬀects of a more realistic structure in the numerical
model.
Sediment transport in the swash-zone is not investigated in the tests since it is
not included in the used MIKE model. The exclusion of the swash-zone might be
one of the reasons for the steep beach, since the wave height might not be zero at
the shoreline, leading to an undertow in this region. This undertow will transport
the sediments close to the shoreline to oﬀshore regions, this small contribution will
probably not have any signiﬁcant contribution to the total sediment transport. It
would be interesting if the sediment transport in this area was investigated.
As an further investigation the models could be run for a longer time until
all of them reached a morphological equilibrium, which was a problem when the
sediment discharge is presented. Another factor that would be relevant and inter-
esting to be analysed are the longshore and cross-shore current velocities for all
the tests compared to Test 1. This could lead to a better interpretation of the results.
The WEDS stress formulation was only implemented for 3D models, therefore a
comparison between a 2D and a 3D model for this formulation could not be done.
However, the diﬀerence between a 2D model with radiation stress formulation and
a possible 2D model with WEDS stress formulation is expected to be very small.
Therefore, a comparison between a 2D model with radiation stress and a 3D model
with WEDS stress formulation would be interesting.
==PAGE:103==
CHAPTER 8
Conclusion
An attempt to validate a phase averaged 3D model in MIKE 3 with WEDS stress
formulation was successfully done in the present thesis. Results from both SW and
HD modules could be validated with measurements of the physical model presented
by [Gravens and Wang, 2007]. Even though the numerical results from the ST
module were compared with questionable quality data for the sediment discharge,
and did not give satisfying results, a good correlation could be seen when comparing
contours near the structure of the diﬀerent models. Sediment transport is a very
complex phenomena where many diﬀerent parameters aﬀects it, such as wave setup,
contraction of streamlines, skewed waves, type of wave breaking and streaming.
Therefore, when simulating it, a margin of error up to 25-30% is acceptable.
When using a 3D model, most of these complex parameters are possible to
be modelled. The WEDS stress formulation resulted in a robust model which is
capable to develop the undertow and has a better physical interpretation when
compared to the radiation stresses. The implementation of diﬀerent vertical eddy
viscosity distributions allowed more realistic results, improving the model even
more. Processes like contraction of streamlines were possible to be analysed due to
discrete velocities only present in 3D models. As a consequence of these complex
parameters being well represented, the sediment transport is inﬂuenced. In the
numerical models excessive sediment transport oﬀshore directed is noticed, possibly
due to the strength of the developed undertow and how the ST module interprets
it. This rate of cross-shore sediment transport induces a high level of erosion in
unsheltered areas of the shore and aﬀect the scour development, which is reported
to be slightly larger than in the physical model. Therefore, if the intention is to
analyse the sediment transport interaction with coastal structures, results from a
3D model are more reliable, even though it is more computational expensive.
Once the inﬂuence of the structure geometry is taken into consideration, T-
groynes resulted to generally be the most eﬃcient ones. This type of structure,
combine the feature of a breakwater of sheltering the shoreline from breaking waves
and at the same time, block completely the sediment bypass behind it. The issue
with the breakwaters is related to the time it takes to develop a salient large enough
to block most of the bypass behind it. For longer simulations, the breakwater will
probably present the same results as the T-groyne, since the salient will reach the
structure, creating a tombolo and blocking the bypass completely. Groynes are
reported as ineﬃcient structures for the presented conditions. Since this type of
structure does not provide any sheltering to the shoreline, and the whole shoreline
is then aﬀected by the strong undertow.
==PAGE:104==
96
==PAGE:105==
APPENDIX A
Sediment Transport for
Diﬀerent Geometries
These ﬁgures illustrate the depth averaged longshore velocity with vectors indicating
the total load of sediment transport, they are related to the result in section 6.11.2.
Figure A.1: Test 1.
==PAGE:106==
98
A Sediment Transport for Diﬀerent Geometries
Figure A.2: Test 2.
==PAGE:107==
A Sediment Transport for Diﬀerent Geometries
99
Figure A.3: Test 3.
==PAGE:108==
100
A Sediment Transport for Diﬀerent Geometries
Figure A.4: Test 6.
==PAGE:109==
A Sediment Transport for Diﬀerent Geometries
101
Figure A.5: Test 7.
==PAGE:110==
102
A Sediment Transport for Diﬀerent Geometries
Figure A.6: Test 8.
==PAGE:111==
A Sediment Transport for Diﬀerent Geometries
103
Figure A.7: Test 9.
==PAGE:112==
104
A Sediment Transport for Diﬀerent Geometries
Figure A.8: Test 10.
==PAGE:113==
A Sediment Transport for Diﬀerent Geometries
105
Figure A.9: Test 11.
==PAGE:114==
106
A Sediment Transport for Diﬀerent Geometries
Figure A.10: Test 13.
==PAGE:115==
A Sediment Transport for Diﬀerent Geometries
107
Figure A.11: Test 14.
==PAGE:116==
108
A Sediment Transport for Diﬀerent Geometries
Figure A.12: Test 15.
==PAGE:117==
A Sediment Transport for Diﬀerent Geometries
109
Figure A.13: Test 16.
==PAGE:118==
110
A Sediment Transport for Diﬀerent Geometries
Figure A.14: Test 17.
==PAGE:119==
A Sediment Transport for Diﬀerent Geometries
111
Figure A.15: Test 18.
==PAGE:120==
112
==PAGE:121==
Bibliography
[Bagnold, 1954] Bagnold, R. A. (1954). Experiments on a Gravity-Free Dispersion
of Large Solid Spheres in a Newtonian Fluid under Shear. Proceedings of the Royal
Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences, 225(1160):49–63.
[DHI, 2012] DHI (2012). MIKE 21 & MIKE 3 FLOW MODEL FM Scientiﬁc
Documentation. Technical report.
[Einstein, 1950] Einstein, H. (1950). The Bed-Load Function for Sediment Trans-
portation in Open Channel Flows. Technical report, United States Department
of Agriculture, Washington, D C.
[Eldeberky and Battjes, 1996] Eldeberky, Y. and Battjes, J. A. (1996). Spectral
modeling of wave breaking: Application to Boussinesq equations. Journal of
Geophysical Research: Oceans, 101(C1):1253–1264.
[Elfrink and Baldock, 2002] Elfrink, B. and Baldock, T. (2002). Hydrodynamics
and sediment transport in the swash zone: a review and perspectives. Coastal
Engineering, 55(3-4):149–167.
[Engelund and Fredsøe, 1976] Engelund, F. and Fredsøe, J. (1976). A Sediment
Transport Model for Straight Alluvial Channels. Hydrology Research, 7(5):293
LP – 306.
[Fredsøe, 2008] Fredsøe, J. (2008). Hydrodynamics.
[Fredsoe and Deigaard, 1992] Fredsoe, J. and Deigaard, R. (1992). Mechanics of
coastal sediment transport, volume 3.
[Grant and Madsen, 1979] Grant, W. D. and Madsen, O. S. (1979). Combined wave
and current interaction with a rough bottom. Journal of Geophysical Research,
84(C4):1797.
[Gravens and Wang, 2007] Gravens, M. and Wang, P. (2007). Data Report : Labo-
ratory Testing of Longshore Sand Transport by Waves and Currents ; Morphology
Change Behind Headland Structures Coastal and Hydraulics Laboratory Data
Report : Laboratory Testing of Longshore Sand Transport by Waves and Currents
; Morpho. (August).
[Hamilton and Ebersole, 2001] Hamilton, D. G. and Ebersole, B. A. (2001). Es-
tablishing uniform longshore currents in a large-scale sediment transport facility.
Coastal Engineering, 42(3):199–218.
==PAGE:122==
114
Bibliography
[Hansen and Svendsen, 1984] Hansen, J. B. and Svendsen, I. A. (1984). A theo-
retical and experimental study of undertow. Coastal Engineering Proceedings,
1(19):2246–2262.
[Holthuijsen et al., 1989] Holthuijsen, L., Booij, N., and Herbers, T. (1989). A
prediction model for stationary, short-crested waves in shallow water with ambient
currents. Coastal Engineering, 13(1):23–54.
[Janssen and Battjes, 1978] Janssen, J. and Battjes, J. (1978). Energy Loss and
Set-Up Due to Breaking of Random Waves. In Coastal Engineering.
[Kamphuis, 1991] Kamphuis, J. W. (1991). Alongshore Sediment Transport Rate
Distribution. Coastal Sediments ’91, pages 170–183.
[Komen et al., 1996] Komen, G., Cavaleri, L., Doneland, M., Hasselmann, K., Has-
selmann, S., and Janssen, P. (1996). Dynamics and Modelling of Ocean Waves.
Journal of Fluid Mechanics, 307(-1):375.
[Longuet-Higgins and Stewart, 1964] Longuet-Higgins, M. S. and Stewart, R. W.
(1964). Radiation stresses in ˜vater waves; a physical discussion, with applications.
529(562).
[Luque and Van Beek, 1976] Luque, R. F. and Van Beek, R. (1976). Erosion And
Transport Of Bed-Load Sediment. Journal of Hydraulic Research, 14(2):127–144.
[Mangor et al., 2017] Mangor, K., Drønen, N. K., Kærgaard, K. H., and Kristensen,
S. E. (2017). Shoreline Management Guidelines. DHI Water & Environment,
Hørsholm.
[Mei, 1984] Mei, C. C. (1984). The applied dynamics of ocean surface waves, vol-
ume 11. World Scientiﬁc.
[Meyer-Peter and Müller, 1948] Meyer-Peter, E. and Müller, R. (1948). Formulas
for Bed-Load transport. IAHSR 2nd meeting, Stockholm, appendix 2.
[Nam et al., 2011] Nam, P. T., Larson, M., Hanson, H., and Hoan, L. X. (2011). A
numerical model of beach morphological evolution due to waves and currents in
the vicinity of coastal structures. Coastal Engineering, 58(9):863–876.
[Nguyen, 2005] Nguyen, C. (2005). Turbulence Modeling.
[Prandtl, 1926] Prandtl, L. (1926). Turbulent Flow. Naca Tm 435, page 23.
[Prinos, 2016] Prinos, P. (2016). Modelling coastal hydrodynamics.
[Shewchuk, 1996] Shewchuk, J. R. (1996). Triangle: Engineering a 2D Quality Mesh
Generator and Delaunay Triangulator.
[Smagorinsky, 1963] Smagorinsky, J. (1963). GENERAL CIRCULATION EXPER-
IMENTS WITH THE PRIMITIVE EQUATIONS. MONTHLY WEATHER
REVIEW, 91, Number:99–164.
==PAGE:123==
Bibliography
115
[SWAN, 2006] SWAN, T. T. D. (2006). Swan Technical Documentation.
[Szydlowski and Zima, 2006] Szydlowski, M. and Zima, P. (2006). Two-Dimensional
Vertical Reynolds-Averaged Navier-Stokes Equations Versus One-Dimensional
Saint-Venant Model for Rapidly Varied Open Channel Water Flow Modelling.
Archives of Hydro-Engineering and Environmental Mechanics, 53:295–309.
[Wilson, 1966] Wilson, K. C. (1966). Bed-Load Transport at High Shear Stress.
Journal of the Hydraulics Division, 92(6):49–59.
[Young, 1999] Young, I. R. (1999). Wind generated ocean waves. Elsevier.
[Zhang et al., 2014] Zhang, C., Chen, Y., Zheng, J., and Demirbilek, Z. (2014).
Variation of Wave Roller Slope in the Surf Zone. pages 1–5.
[Zyserman and Fredsøe, 1994] Zyserman, J. A. and Fredsøe, J. (1994). Data Analy-
sis of Bed Concentration of Suspended Sediment. Journal of Hydraulic Engineering,
120(9):1021–1042.
[Duncan, 1981] Duncan, J.H. (1981). An Experimental Investigation of Breaking
Waves Produced by a Towed Hydrofoil. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London.
A. Mathematical and Physical Sciences.
[Svendsen, 1984] Svendsen, I.A. (1984). Wave heights and set-up in a surf zone.
Coastal Engineering.
==PAGE:124==
DTU Mechanical Engineering
Section of Fluid Mechanics, Coastal and Maritime Engineering
Technical University of Denmark 
Nils Koppels Allé, Bld. 403
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby 
Denmark
Phone (+45) 4525 1360
Fax  (+45) 4588 4325
www.mek.dtu.dk
