==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Deformations in insulating glass
units - Development of a numerical
model
Mwansa Tilsted Mumba
Kongens Lyngby 2017
==PAGE:2==
DTU Civil Engineering
Department of Civil Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Brovej
Building 118
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 1700
byg@byg.dtu.dk
www.byg.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
c
Deformations in insulating glass units
This report was prepared by:
Mwansa Tilsted Mumba
Supervisor(s):
Jens Henrik Nielsen, Associate Professor, DTU-BYG
Peter Noe Poulsen, Associate Professor, DTU-BYG
Examiner:
Einar Ingolfsson, Director, Krabbenhøft & Ingolfsson
Examination date:
7th of June, 2017
DTU Civil Engineering
Structural Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
Tel: +45 4525 1700
Project period:
January 2017- July 2017
ECTS:
32.5
Education:
MSc
Field:
Structural Engineering
Class:
No confidentiality
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial fulfilment of the requirements
for graduation in the above education at the Technical University
of Denmark.
==PAGE:4==
d
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This master thesis was carried out at the department of Civil Engineering at the Technical
University of Denmark in fulfillment of the requirements for acquiring a Master’s degree
in Civil Engineering. The project is credited to 32.5 ECTS points and lasted from early
January to mid June 2017.
I would like thank my supervisor Jens Henrik Nielsen for all of his counselling and
guidance throughout the project. I would also like to thank my supervisor Peter Noe
Poulsen for his guidance and help especially concerning finite element modelling.
I would also like to express my gratitude to Eirik Bjørn and DOVISTA A/S who were
kind enough to supply me with test specimens for my experiments. Furthermore I owe
a major thanks to the staff working at the test facilities for all of their help with my
experiments. I would also like to thank me study mate Bjarni Jónsson for his great help
with conducting the experiments.
Finally I would like to thank my friends and family for their tremendous support during
the project period. A special thanks to my girlfriend Lise Larsen for proofreading this
thesis.
Kongens Lyngby, June 18, 2017
Mwansa Tilsted Mumba
==PAGE:6==
ii
==PAGE:7==
Abstract
Insulating glass units are glazings of two or more glass panes separated by gas-filled
cavities. The glass panes are kept at a fixed distance by use of spacer profiles along the
edges of the glass panes. The glass panes are adhered to the glass panes by use of a
sealant material, which also hermetically seals the cavity. The enclosed cavities enables
the glass panes in the insulating glass units to share loads through the pressure of the
gas in the cavities. The sealed cavities also cause thermal loads on the glass panes since
a change in temperature or ambient pressure creates a differential pressure between the
cavity pressures and the ambient pressure.
The influence of the cavity pressure on the load distribution between glass panes makes
it complicated to calculate the displacements of insulating glass units and especially in
units with three or more glazings. Furthermore the small thicknesses of the glass panes
relative to the displacements necessitates including large deformation theory, which
makes the problem even more complex.
Therefore, a demand exists for the development of a computational method for calculating
the displacements and stresses in insulating glass units due to external loads such as
imposed loads, wind loads and thermal loads.
A numerical analysis tool was created on the basis of the finite element method. The
numerical analysis tool includes modelling of the glass panes, spacers, sealant and gas-
filled cavity. An iterative solution procedure based on the Newton Raphson method was
implemented in the numerical analysis in order to incorporate the non-linear behaviour
of the gas-filled cavity and the geometrical non-linearities of the glass panes.
The finite element calculation in the numerical analysis tool was verified by comparison
with experimental data. The numerical analysis tool was found to perform fairly well
although a light tendency towards overestimation of the displacements was seen.
A parameter study was carried out on the bending stiffness of the spacer, on the shear
stiffness of the sealant placed between glass panes and spacer and on the degree of
rotational fixity between glass panes and spacers. The bending stiffness of the spacer
and the degree of rotational fixity were found to be significant for the structural stiffness
of small sized units while insignificant for large sized units. On the contrary, the shear
stiffness of the sealant was found to be highly significant for the structural stiffness of
large sized units and insignificant for small sized units.
The developed numerical analysis tool allows window manufacturers to optimize the
design of insulating glass units based on structural performance requirements e.g. on
maximum allowed displacement and on the size of the mechanical stresses in the sealant.
==PAGE:8==
iv
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Preface
i
Abstract
iii
Contents
v
Nomenclature
ix
1
Introduction
1
1.1
State of the art . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2
This present thesis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3
Scope and limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.4
Outline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
Insulating glass units
7
2.1
Glass in IGUs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Spacers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3
Sealants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.4
Gas-filled cavity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3
Theory
13
3.1
Ideal gas law
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2
Analytical solution based on ideal gas law
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4
Finite element modelling
19
4.1
Glass panes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.2
Spacers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.3
Sealant . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.4
Gas-filled cavity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.5
Boundary conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.6
Implementation of finite element analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.7
Comparison with Mepla ISO . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5
Experimental studies
45
5.1
Dead load experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5.2
Thermal load experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
6
Results and discussion
51
6.1
Dead load experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
==PAGE:10==
vi
Contents
6.2
Thermal load experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
7
Numerical studies
69
7.1
Edge seal stiffness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
7.2
Loads
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
7.3
Thickness
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
8
Conclusion
79
8.1
Further work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
A Road map to digital annex
81
B Finite element formulations and element tests
83
B.1 Finite element formulation of LBCST shell element . . . . . . . . . . . .
83
B.2 Co-rotated shell element . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
97
B.3 Finite element formulation of 3-dimensional beam element
. . . . . . . . 102
B.4 Co-rotated spring . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 108
B.5 Finite element formulation of element volume change vector
. . . . . . . 117
B.6 Convergence analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 121
C Experiments
123
C.1 Calibration of potentiometers
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 123
C.2 Experimental results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 125
Bibliography
151
==PAGE:11==
Contents
vii
==PAGE:12==
viii
==PAGE:13==
Nomenclature
Abbreviations
CST
Constant strain triangle, page 20
DOF Degree of freedom, page 19
FE
Finite element, page 4
FEA
Finite element analysis, page 4
FEM Finite element method, page 4
IGU
Insulating glass unit, page 1
LBCST Linear bending constant strain triangle, page 22
PDE Partial differential equation, page 19
Symbols - Greek
Φ
Body force vector, page 19
ε
Strain vector, page 19
∆
Incremental or change, page 13
σ
Stress vector, page 19
θx, θy, θz Rotation components about coordinate axes, page 23
Symbols - Latin
At
Transformation matrix, page 34
B
Strain-displacement matrix, page 20
D
Elastic stiffness matrix, page 20
F
Body force vector, page 19
K
Global stiffness matrix, page 20
k
Element stiffness matrix, page 20
N
Interpolation matrix, page 20
==PAGE:14==
x
Contents
P
Load vector, page 25
Q
Global nodal force vector, page 25
q
Element nodal force vector, page 34
R
Global load vector, page 20
r
Element load vector, page 20
u
Displacement vector, page 19
V
Global DOF vector, page 20
v
Element DOF vector, page 20
Vc
Displacement-volume vector, page 33
A
Area or cross-sectional area, page 23
a, b
Side lengths of rectangular IGUs, page 16
D
Bending stiffness of plate, page 16
E
Young’s modulus of elasticity, page 23
kt
Tangential relation between change in cavity pressure and change in volume,
page 30
n
Amount of substance of gas, page 1
p, p0, Pressure, initial pressure, page 1
p0
Initial cavity pressure, page 13
R
Ideal gas constant, page 1
t
Thickness, page 23
T, T0 Temperature, initial temperature, page 1
T0
Initial cavity temperature, page 13
ux, uy, uz Displacement components in coordinate directions, page 21
V , V0 Volume, initial volume, page 1
V0
Initial cavity volume, page 13
w
Plate deflection, page 15
xF, yF Coordinates of the load center, page 16
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Insulating glass units (IGUs) are widely used in modern constructions and have been
used since the 1950s. The relatively high transmittance of sunlight combined with the
aesthetics and the energy saving properties are some of the main reasons why IGUs are
such popular in building envelopes.
An IGU is a glazing with a minimum of two glass panes separated by a spacer which
together with the glass encases a cavity filled with a gas such as argon, krypton or
dehydrated air. The cavity is hermetically sealed by the use of a sealant between the
glass panes and spacer.
Figure 1.1: Build up of triple layered insulating glass unit.
The gas inside the cavity behaves in accordance with the ideal gas law since the cavity
is hermetically sealed. The ideal gas law states that for a given temperature T the work
done by the gas (product of pressure p and volume V ) must be constant
pV = nRT
(1.1)
where nR is a constant proportional to the amount of gas in the cavity. This relation
between the cavity pressure and the volume of the cavity causes thermal loads on the
IGUs when the temperature or ambient pressure changes. Furthermore, it also causes
the glass panes to share loads by means of the cavity pressure.
An increase of temperature will lead to an increase in cavity pressure according to the
ideal gas law which eventually will cause the glass panes to bulge outwards as shown
in Figure 1.2(a). A decrease of temperature will have the opposite effect and cause the
glass panes to bulge inwards as shown in Figure 1.2(b). Likewise, an increase in ambient
pressure will introduce a differential pressure between the higher ambient pressure and
the lower cavity pressure and cause the glass panes to bulge inwards. A decrease in
ambient pressure will similarly cause the glass panes to bulge outwards (see Figure 1.2).
If a pane in an IGU is subjected to a load e.g. wind load, the cavity pressure will cause
the load to be shared by all the panes in the IGU and cause all panes to bulge in the
==PAGE:16==
2
1 Introduction
same direction as shown in Figure 1.2(c). The load sharing between the panes is not
necessarily equal and is depending on the thicknesses of the glass panes and cavities.
(a) Outwards bulging
(b) Inwards bulging
(c) Load sharing deformation
Figure 1.2: Deformation of IGUs.
The thermal insulation of the IGUs are due to the gas filled cavity between the glass
panes. The larger the thickness of the gas filled cavity the better the thermal insulation
and vice versa. Therefore, it is often desirable to increase the thickness of the gas filled
cavity from an energy saving perspective. However, from a structural perspective the
increase in cavity thickness has the disadvantage that it decreases the level of load sharing
between the panes, whereby the displacement of the loaded pane in increased and the
displacement on the indirectly loaded pane is decreased. An increase in cavity thickness
also enlarges the displacements due to changes in ambient temperature or pressure. This
means that in structural design of IGUs an increase in cavity thickness often entails an
increase in glass pane thicknesses due to structural requirements. Therefore, there is a
need for a tool which makes the designer able to determine the optimal thicknesses of
cavities and glass panes in relation to the thermal performance, which at the same time
satisfies the structural demands.
IGUs have been seen to have a relatively short life span compared to the average life
span of building components. This is often due to the sealant at some point becoming
leaky whereby the cavity no longer is hermetically sealed. Moisture can then enter the
cavity and cause condensation inside the cavity. This will decrease the transparency
and cause most people to replace the IGUs. Failure of the sealant can occur because of
several factors among which are temperature and atmospheric pressure variations. The
daily variation in temperature or ambient pressure will cause the IGUs to bulge in- or
outwards and exert repetitive mechanical stresses on the sealant. These cyclic stresses
will during the service life of the IGUs cause fatigue and eventually failure of the sealant.
Thus to optimize the life span of the sealant and thereby the IGUs the designer must
be able to assess the magnitude of the mechanical stresses in the sealant for different
designs.
The focus of this report is to provide a numerical analysis tool for estimating the
displacements and stresses of glass panes in IGUs and thereby contribute to the improvement
of IGU design in relation to structural performance and life span.
==PAGE:17==
1.1 State of the art
3
1.1
State of the art
IGUs have been a topic of interest for many researchers since they were introduced in the
1950s. Although, a lot of the research has been related to saving energy by improving
the thermal insulation of the IGUs, while relatively little research has focused on the
structural behaviour of IGUs.
Solvason (1974) developed a simple method for calculating the pressure inside the cavity
for double glazed IGUs. The method was based on the ideal gas law and the linear plate
analysis theory. The method was developed as an iterative process, which required two
to three iterations to obtain three digits convergence of the resulting cavity. The simple
method had the disadvantages that it was only valid for rectangular double glazed IGUs,
assumed simply supported edges and did not consider the influence of the spacer nor
sealant. The accuracy of the method was not tested by comparison with experimental
results. However, Solvason did recognize, that the choice of sealant would influence the
support conditions of the glass panes as some spacer and sealants would imply fixed edge
supports instead of simply supported edges. In these cases the method was inapplicable.
He did also acknowledge that the use of linear plate analysis theory did result in an
overestimation of deflections and stresses for deflections outside the linear range. The
method was therefore updated by Vallabhan and Chou (1986) by implementing the
classical von Karman non-linear plate equations in a computational method based on
the finite difference method. However, the method still assumed simply supported edges
and a rigid spacer i.e. no deformation along the edges of the IGUs. A similar method
was developed by Beason (1986) also assuming the simple supports of the glass panes.
Though, Beason did recognize that his method had to be compared to experimental
results and adjusted for this assumption.
Huveners, Herwijnen, and Soetens (2003) presented an analytical solution for the cavity
pressure in double glazed IGUs and compared it to results obtained from 32 experiments.
The analytical solution was based on linear theory and was derived by solving a quadratic
equation (see Section 3.2 for the derivation). They found that the analytical solution
only produced results close to the experimentally obtained results when the glass panes
were of equal thicknesses. They concluded that the analytical solution was invalid due
two reasons. First, the neglect of the sealant in the model, which influences the degree
of rotational fixity between the glass pane edges and the spacer. Second, the missing
geometric non-linear behaviour for large deformations was causing inaccuracy in the
presented model.
The analytical solution by Huveners, Herwijnen, and Soetens (2003) is only applicable
to double glazed IGUs, but the same assumptions and procedure was used by Bohmann
(2017) to develop an analytical solution applicable to triple glazed IGUs. This analytical
solution was implemented in the free IGU software Mepla ISO. However, since this
solution also assumes linear geometric behaviour it is limited to small displacements
and it is explicitly stated in the Terms and Conditions of Use that it is only valid for
deflections smaller than half the plate thickness. The analytical solution to triple glazed
IGUs was derived by solving a quartic equation. However, the quartic equation is the
highest polynomial which can be solved by finding the roots, and the same approach
can therefore not be extended to IGUs with four or more glazings.
==PAGE:18==
4
1 Introduction
A numerical model of double glazed IGUs was developed by Svensson (2015) based on
the finite element method (FEM). The finite element (FE) model included modelling
the glass panes as solid elements and modelling of the cavity pressure as a spring with
a spring stiffness. The FE model also include the spacer and the sealant, although they
were modelled as part of the glass panes. The numerical model was compared to a
FE model from the software Abaqus CAE and seen to give comparable results. The
numerical model was also compared to experimental data from experiments conducted
by Andersson and Nilsson (2014), where the results was seen to differ up to 30 %. The
numerical model was only developed for rectangular geometry, handles only double
glazed IGUs and does not include non-linear geometry, which in the same report was
found to be relevant for large IGUs subjected to wind loads.
1.2
This present thesis
The objective of this present thesis is to present a numerical analysis tool capable of
determining displacements and stresses in IGUs. The numerical analysis tool shall:
• be able to accurately determine the cavity pressure in order to calculate the
distribution loads between glass panes.
• include all types of loads such as point loads, line loads and surface loads and
include thermal loads due to temperature change.
• handle an arbitrary geometry of the IGUs.
• handle an arbitrary number of glass panes in the IGUs.
• include not only the glass panes but all elements in the IGUs including the spacer
and the sealant.
• include geometrical non-linearities due to large displacements.
The numerical analysis tool will be developed as a program based on the FEM to find
solution fields to the given displacement field problems.
The finite element analysis
(FEA) will be set up using BygFEM which is an open source Matlab toolbox for FEM
programming. The toolbox contains functions to set up the global matrices used in the
FEA based on the element matrices. Therefore, element matrices will be formulated for
all elements used to model the IGUs. Furthermore, an iterative calculation procedure
will be implemented in the FEA in order to handle the non-linear behaviour of the
gas-filled cavities and the non-linear stiffness of the glass panes.
The program will be verified by an experimental study. One type of experiment with
dead load will be conducted in order to verify the programs ability to model the transfer
of loads between glass panes through the cavity pressures. Another type of experiment
with thermal load will be conducted to verify the programs ability to calculate the
cavity pressure and associated displacements dependent on the gas temperature. The
displacements obtained from the experiments will be compared to that of the program
==PAGE:19==
1.3 Scope and limitations
5
and the performance of the program will be assessed. The influence of unknown parameters
in the program’s FE model such as spacer and sealant stiffness will be investigated in a
parameter study.
1.3
Scope and limitations
The report covers FE modelling of IGUs with glazings of monolithic annealed glass panes,
linear elastic spacers and sealants. In particular the report focuses on the determination
of displacements and stresses in the glass panes in the IGUs caused by typical service
life loads. Only static loading of the IGUs is covered and thus not dynamic loading such
as impact loads.
The report will not cover material failure of the glass panes in the IGUs and the time
dependent strength of glass will therefore not be treated.
Nor will the report cover
FE modelling of IGUs with other glazings such as tempered glass or laminated glass.
Tempered glass has the same stiffness properties as annealed glass but a different stress
distribution due to the residual stresses. Deformations in IGUs of tempered glass can
therefore be calculated using the program developed in this report but not the stresses
within the tempered glass. The stresses can, however, easily be calculated by use of
the superposition principle if the residual stresses are known. The stiffness of laminated
glass is highly time and temperature dependent due to the viscous interlayers. IGUs of
laminated glass are therefore not treated in the this report.
The report makes several assumptions in the FE modelling of IGUs which limits the
application of the program. The sealants are modelled as a linear elastic material, which
is only valid for small deformations and low temperatures. The program does therefore
not include the rubber-like behaviour of the sealant at large deformations nor the change
in stiffness due to high temperatures. The spacers are modelled assuming physical and
geometrical linear behaviour meaning that the spacer material must be linear elastic
subjected to small displacements for the program to be applicable.
1.4
Outline
• Chapter 2: A brief introduction to the constituents of IGUs along with material
properties and other factors relevant to the structural performance of IGUs.
• Chapter 3: An overview of the ideal gas law and how it governs the structural
response of the IGUs followed by an analytical solution based on physical and
material linear behaviour.
• Chapter 4: A presentation of the elements used to model the constituents of the
IGUs along with the definition of the boundary conditions used in the FEA. A
description of how the FEA was implemented in Matlab and a short comparison
between the program and Mepla ISO.
==PAGE:20==
6
1 Introduction
• Chapter 5: A presentation of the experimental procedure and experimental setup
for both types of experiments.
• Chapter 6: Presentation of experimental results and comparison with the corresponding
results obtained from the program. Assessment of the performance of the program.
• Chapter 6: A numerical study on the influence of parameters such as the bending
stiffness of the spacers and the stiffness of the sealant. Application of the program
to determine maximum displacement and stresses in glass panes and sealant for
typical load.
==PAGE:21==
CHAPTER 2
Insulating glass units
In the following sections the components in IGUs will be briefly described along with
their structural properties considered in the FE modelling.
2.1
Glass in IGUs
Traditional IGUs were made with panes of monolithic annealed glass produced with the
float glass process. In modern IGUs one of the annealed glass panes is typically coated
is with a low emissivity coating. The low-emissivity coating is a transparent metallic
oxide coating which reflects long-wave radiation, but allows short-wave radiation to pass
through. Given that sources of internal heating are most often characterized by long-
wave radiation this type of heat is kept on the inside of the IGUs. On the contrary the
sunlight is characterized by short-wave radiation and heat radiation from the sun can
therefore pass through the IGUs (see Figure 2.1(a)).
(a) IGU with low emissivity coating on inner pane
(b) IGU
with
outside
pane
of
laminated glass
Figure 2.1: Different types of glass used in IGUs.
Other types of post-processed glass can also be seen in modern IGUs such as tempered
glass or laminated glass depending on the design criteria. Tempered glass is annealed
glass that has undergone heat treatment after annealing thereby creating compressive
residual stresses at the surface. Tempered glass is often used in IGUs in design cases
where increased strength is required, e.g. cases with likelihood of injury in the event of
breakage.
Laminated glass is two or more glass panes of the same or different types of heat
treatment laminated together by a plastic interlayer (see Figure 2.1(b)). The lamination
does not increase the strength of the glass, but instead it increases the post-breakage
behaviour of the glass. After breakage the plastic interlayer will keep the glass fragments
==PAGE:22==
8
2 Insulating glass units
in place, which gives the glass a remaining capacity.
Laminated glass in IGUs are
therefore often used where safety criteria are required for the exterior e.g. overhead
glazing.
Glass as a material, whether it is annealed, tempered or laminated, exhibits ideal linear
elastic behaviour until breakage of the material i.e. when cracks start propagating in the
glass. Nonetheless, the glass exhibits almost no plastic behaviour before failure and is
thus a brittle material (see Figure 2.2). The lack of ductility in the glass material makes
it incapable of reducing local stress concentrations by redistribution of the stresses as is
the case for other materials such as steel (Haldimann et al., 2008).
Figure 2.2: Stress-strain relation for glass compared to steel.
The strength of glass is furthermore time dependent given that micro cracks slowly grows
bigger when exposed to a humid environment and a positive crack opening stress. This
phenomenon is called stress corrosion and describes the crack propagation due to the
combined effect of a positive crack opening stress and a chemical reaction between glass
and water molecules. The crack propagation due to stress corrosion reduces the strength
of glass with time.
Glass has a very high theoretical compressive and tensile strength, but the tensile
strength is very dependent on the mechanical flaws on the surface, and the actual tensile
strength is therefore much lower than the theoretical strength.
The tensile bending
strength of float glass is often conservatively chosen to 45 MPa.
The strength of glass and its time-dependency are however not included in the analyses
performed in this report since only strains smaller than the strain at failure are considered.
Therefore the stress-strain constitutive relation for linear materials is valid for the
considered range of strains. Similarly, the transverse strain caused by an axial stress is
found by Poisson’s ratio. The values used in this report can be seen in Table 2.1 along
with the material density.
==PAGE:23==
2.2 Spacers
9
Table 2.1: Physical properties of glass (Haldimann et al., 2008).
Young’s modulus
70 GPa
Poisson’s ratio
0.23
Density
2500 kg/m3
2.2
Spacers
The spacers are placed between the glass panes to keep a fixed distance between the
glass panes along the edges thus creating the cavity. The spacers are together with
the sealants forming the edge seal. Traditionally spacers were made from metals such
as stainless steel or aluminium, but since metal has high heat conductivity they act as
thermal bridges along the edges of the IGUs. Therefore many new designs of spacers have
since been introduced to reduce the heat conductivity compared to metal spacers. These
newer types of spacers are known as warm-edge spacers and consist of many different
types of spacers of different materials, e.g. metal spacers improved with a plastic top,
composite material, foam and thermoplastic (Bergh et al., 2013).
Besides the thermal properties the spacers also contribute with structural stiffness to
the IGUs along the edges.
Stiffness along the edges is usually of minor importance
in structural analysis of IGUs as the IGUs are typically mounted in window frames,
whereby the edges become supported. However, in cases where the IGUs can not be
considered supported along all edges the stiffness contribution from the spacer becomes
relevant.
Figure 2.3: Standard hollow metal profile for spacer.
The analysis carried out in this report assumes that the spacer is homogeneous and is
behaving linearly elastic. This assumption is considered to be acceptable for traditional
or improved metal spacers as their bending stiffness is mostly governed by the metal
profile. Improved metal spacers are typically made as hollow profiles with wall thicknesses
varying from 0.26 - 0.35 mm while the height of the spacers varies from 4 - 8 mm. The
width of the spacers are naturally dependent on the desired cavity thickness. A hollow
metal spacer profile is shown in Figure 2.3.
==PAGE:24==
10
2 Insulating glass units
Hollow spacers are often filled with desiccants. The desiccants are placed to adsorb the
water vapour that is trapped inside the cavity during manufacturing and additional water
vapour that permeates through the edge seal while the IGUs are in use. Desiccants help
prolong the life-expectancy of IGUs by adsorbing moisture vapour until the desiccants
become saturated. It is assumed that the desiccants do not contribute with any structural
stiffness to the bending stiffness of the spacer considering that the desiccants can only
transfer force through contact pressure.
The structural stiffness contribution from the spacers to the IGUs are governed by the
spacers cross-sectional properties combined with the material properties.
The cross-
sectional properties are the cross-sectional area, the moment of inertia for bending
around two axes and the torsional moment of inertia. The material properties are the
modulus of elasticity and the shear modulus. In this report all analyses are conducted
assuming spacer profiles of aluminium with Young’s modulus of elasticity E = 69 GPa
and shear modulus G = 27 GPa.
2.3
Sealants
The sealants have two main functions. One function is to structurally keep the glass
panes and spacers held together while being flexible in order to allow glass movement.
The other function is to prevent water vapour from permeating the edge seal and enter
the cavity and prevent gas from diffusing out of the cavity. Originally these functions
were handled by the use of one single sealant, but during the 1970s manufacturers started
applying two sealants in the edge seals in order to prolong the life-expectancy of the edge
seals. The difference between a single-seal system and a dual-seal system can be seen
in Figure 2.4.
The dual-seal system is the most common edge seal system in IGUs
manufactured in Europe.
(a) Single-seal system
(b) Dual-seal system
Figure 2.4: Edge seal systems.
The dual-seal system consists of a primary sealant and a secondary sealant. The primary
sealant is placed between the glass panes and the spacer, while the secondary sealant is
placed further out and only between the glass panes (see Figure 2.4). The main function
of the primary sealant is to prevent water vapour and gas diffusion.
Polyisobutene
or butyl is commonly used as primary sealant because of its high moisture vapour
transmission resistance and low gas permeability. Butyl also acts as an adhesive between
the glass panes and the spacer, but the adhesion is not resistant to water exposure. The
==PAGE:25==
2.3 Sealants
11
strength of butyl is highly dependent on the temperature and drops quickly at large
temperatures.
Therefore the primary sealant of butyl must be protected and assisted by a secondary
sealant in order to ensure the structural integrity. The main function of the secondary
sealant is thus to keep the glass panes and spacer held together and to protect the
primary sealant from water exposure. The secondary seal is most commonly made from
silicone, polysulphide or polyurethane, all of which have moderate to very good elasticity
in the temperature range −20 to 60 ◦C (Wolf, 1992).
In the structural response of IGUs the sealants are responsible for transferring forces
between glass panes and spacers. The shear stiffness of the secondary sealant is governing
for the shear transfer between glass panes at the edges. E.g. if the shear stiffness of
the sealant is infinitely high it will cause rigid connections between glass panes and
spacer at the edges, which means that the shear will be transferred between the glass
panes without shear deformations. In other words, the deformation of the glass panes at
the the edges will be compatible meaning that plane sections remain plane (see Figure
2.5(a)). This behaviour is similar to that of the flanges in an I-beam. On the opposite,
if the shear stiffness of the sealant is infinitely small there will be no shear transfer
but shear deformation, and the glass panes will deform separately along the edges (see
Figure 2.5(b)).
(a) Shear transfer between panes
(b) No shear transfer between panes
Figure 2.5: Edge deformations of an IGU for two cases of sealant shear stiffness.
The axial stiffness of the sealants is obviously governing for the expansion or the contraction
of the edge seal during bulging of IGUs. Additionally the axial stiffness of the sealants is
also governing for fixity degree between the glass panes and the spacers. Inwards bulging
of an IGU as seen in Figure 2.6 will cause the edge seal to be compressed. Since the
spacer stiffness is a lot higher than the stiffness of the secondary sealant, it will be the
spacer stiffness which is governing for the contraction of the edge seal. This means that
inwards bulging will cause the secondary sealant to be stretched. The axial stiffness
of the secondary sealant will cause tensile forces in the secondary sealant which will
counteract the stretching. This resistance against glass pane rotations at the edges can
be described as a partial fixity between glass panes and spacer.
==PAGE:26==
12
2 Insulating glass units
Figure 2.6: Inwards bulding causing stretching of the secondary sealant.
2.4
Gas-filled cavity
The gas-filled cavities in IGUs were traditionally filled with dehydrated air, but later it
was discovered that the thermal insulation of the IGUs could be improved by filling the
cavity with a noble gas such as argon or krypton. These gases are used because they
have low thermal conductivity compared to air and are chemically inert and clear gases
which are commercially available. Krypton has lower thermal conductivity than argon,
but since krypton is more expensive argon is the most used filler gas.
The gas-filled cavities influence not only the insulating performance but also the structural
performance of the IGUs as they enable the glass panes to share loads through the cavity
pressure. The load sharing ability is given by the ideal gas law which is further described
in Chapter 3.
It should be noted that the load sharing ability of the IGUs is only
dependent on the cavity pressures and the cavity volumes and therefore independent
on the specific type of filler gas. In the analyses performed in this report it is assumed
that the IGUs are manufactured with an initial cavity pressure of 1 atm and that the
temperature at manufacturing was 20 ◦C.
==PAGE:27==
CHAPTER 3
Theory
The gas-filled cavities between the glass panes form closed gas systems in which the gases
can be assumed to follow the ideal gas law. The ideal gas law is an equation of state for
a hypothetical ideal gas. Applying the ideal gas law on a real gas is an approximation
of the behaviour, but if low pressure and high temperature is applied the approximation
is found to be reasonable. The low pressure and high temperature are in relation to the
critical pressure and critical temperature, where boundaries between liquid and vapour
vanish. E.g. a filler gas like argon has a critical pressure and critical temperature of
47 atm and −122 ◦C respectively. The cavity pressures in IGUs are typically around
1 atm and the cavity temperatures are typically in the range −20 ◦C to 40 ◦C. The ideal
gas law is thus a good approximation for the behaviour of a filler gas in IGUs.
3.1
Ideal gas law
The ideal gas law is stated as
pV = nRT
(3.1)
where p is the absolute cavity pressure, V is the cavity volume, n is the amount of
substance of gas, R is ideal gas constant and T is the absolute temperature.
The closed gas system of a cavity is undergoing an isothermal process since the temperature
T of the gas is adjusted by the ambient temperature.
This means that the change
of temperature during the process is zero and the temperature in Equation (3.1) can
therefore be considered constant. The amount of substance of gas n is also constant as
long as the cavity is closed. This means that nRT = constant and that the product of
the gas pressure and cavity volume is constant
pV = nRT = constant
(3.2)
The above Equation (3.2) states an inverse proportional relation between the gas pressure
and the cavity volume, which is shown in Figure 3.1.
The effect of a small change in the closed system on the cavity pressure is investigated
by adding an incremental change in both volume, temperature and pressure
(p0 + ∆p)(V0 + ∆V ) = nR(T0 + ∆T)
(3.3)
here p0, T0 and V0 are the initial pressure, temperature and volume respectively while ∆,
∆T and ∆V represent the incremental changes. Isolation of the cavity pressure change
∆p on the left hand side yields
∆p = nR(T0 + ∆T)
V0 + ∆V
−p0
(3.4)
==PAGE:28==
14
3 Theory
Figure 3.1: Inverse relation between cavity pressure and cavity volume.
This expression can be simplified by realising that nRT0 = p0V0, whereby the following
equation is obtained
∆p = −p0∆V
V0 + ∆V + nR∆T
V0 + ∆V
(3.5)
The temperature change ∆T does not change during the process given that it is determined
by the temperature difference between the cavity temperature and the ambient temperature.
Thus Equation (3.5) states the change of cavity pressure caused by a change of cavity
volume. An example of the change in cavity pressure as a function of the change of cavity
volume by Equation (3.5) are shown in Figure 3.2. Here the temperature difference (∆T)
between cavity temperature and ambient temperature is zero. It is seen in Figure 3.2
Figure 3.2: Change in pressure as a function of change in volume.
that for a large increase in cavity volume the value of the change in cavity pressure goes
towards the negative value of the initial cavity pressure. On the opposite, for a large
decrease in cavity volume the value of the change in cavity pressure goes towards infinity.
This can also be directly deducted from the ideal gas law as seen in Figure 3.1.
It can be understood from Equation (3.5) that the load sharing ability is larger for
IGUs with small cavity thicknesses than IGUs with large cavity thicknesses. E.g. let
==PAGE:29==
3.2 Analytical solution based on ideal gas law
15
the initial volume V0 be very small (very thin cavity) and very large (very thick cavity)
and evaluate Equation (3.5) for a decrease in cavity volume only. It is then seen that
IGUs with thin cavities develop larger differential pressures compared to IGUs with thick
cavities for the same increase in cavity volume. On the other hand the thin IGUs also
develop larger negative differential pressures compared to IGUs with thick cavities for
the same decrease in cavity volume. This means that when the IGUs are subjected to
thermal loads, e.g. an increase in temperature, the IGUs with thin cavities will develop
less bulging than IGUs with thick cavities.
3.2
Analytical solution based on ideal gas
law
In this section the analytical solution developed by Huveners, Herwijnen, and Soetens
(2003) will be presented. The analytical solution is applicable to double glazed IGUs,
but was expanded to triple glazed IGUs by Bohmann (2017) and implemented in the
IGU software Mepla ISO as mentioned in Section 1.1. The software will be used in
the report to partly verify the FEA implemented in the program by comparison. The
analytical solution is therefore derived in this section to give the reader insight into how
Mepla ISO operates and the differences between the software and the FE program
developed in this report.
The analytical solution assumes that the plates in the IGUs are behaving geometrically
and physically linear at all time which allows the use of the superposition principle.
The analytical solution considers only the glass panes and the gas filled cavity i.e. the
influence of the spacer and sealant is not considered in the solution. The analytical
solution uses the ideal gas law and the Navier solution for rectangular plates to express
the cavity volume in terms of the cavity pressure. The cavity volume expressed from
the ideal gas law is given as the inverse proportional relation (see Figure 3.1)
V = nRT
p
(3.6)
The cavity volume based on the Navier solution is calculated as the initial cavity volume
added the volume change due to actions on the plates. The actions are superposed
because of the assumption of linear behaviour
V = V0 +
∑
i
∆Vi
(3.7)
where V0 is the initial cavity volume and ∆Vi is the change of volume caused by a single
action. The change of volume caused by a single action is found as the plate deflections
integrated over the plate area
∆Vi =
∫
A wi dA
(3.8)
where w is the plate deflections calculated by use of the Navier solution for simply-
supported rectangular Kirchoff-Love plates given in terms of trigonometric series (Timoshenko
==PAGE:30==
16
3 Theory
and Woinowsky-Krieger, 1959)
w =
16F0
π6αβD
∞
∑
m=1
∞
∑
n=1
sin
(
mπxF
a
)
sin
(
nπyF
b
)
sin
(
mπα
2a
)
sin
(
nπβ
2b
)
mn
(
m2
a2 + n2
b2
)2
sin
(mπx
a
)
sin
(nπy
b
)
(3.9)
where m = 1, 3, 5..., n = 1, 3, 5..., F0 is the load magnitude, α and β are the length and
width of the load area, xF and yF are the coordinates of the load center, a and b are the
length and width of the plates and D is the bending stiffness of the plate. The
Equation (3.8) is evaluated by inserting Equation (3.9), which yields the following
expression
∆V = 768F0ab
π8αβD
∞
∑
m=1
∞
∑
n=1
sin
(
mπxF
a
)
sin
(
nπyF
b
)
sin
(
mπα
2a
)
sin
(
nπβ
2b
)
(mn)2
(
m2
a2 + n2
b2
)2
(3.10)
Equation (3.10) is used to find the change of volume associated with all actions on the
plates i.e. dead loads, imposed loads and thermal loads. Given that the cavity pressure is
an unknown the volume change associated with the cavity pressure cannot be calculated.
Instead the volume can be written as
V = Vc + ∆Vp
(3.11)
where the constant Vc is the cavity volume after addition of volume changes from all
actions except the cavity pressure and ∆Vp is the change in cavity volume caused by
the cavity pressure. Due to linearity the change in cavity volume caused by the cavity
pressure can be expressed as the change of cavity volume caused by a unit pressure
multiplied with the value of the cavity pressure
∆Vp = ∆Vunit p
(3.12)
whereby the final cavity volume is expressed as
V = Vc + ∆Vunit p
(3.13)
Equating the volume given in Equation (3.6) and (3.13) results in the following equation,
where the gas pressure is the only unknown since nRT is constant during the isothermal
process
∆Vunit p2 + Vc p −nRT = 0
(3.14)
The quadratic Equation (3.14) has two mathematical solutions, however as the absolute
pressure cannot be negative only one solution has physical relevance as seen in Figure
3.3. Thus the solution to the problem is given as
p =
−Vc +
√
V 2
c −4 ∆Vunit nRT
2 ∆Vunit
(3.15)
==PAGE:31==
3.2 Analytical solution based on ideal gas law
17
Figure 3.3: Volume expressed as function of cavity pressure by the ideal gas law and
by the linear elastic deformations. A positive and negative solution will
always exist as ∆Vunit and nRT always take on positive values.
All the forces acting on the glass panes are then known and the resulting deflections of
the glass panes are determined using the Navier solution given in Equation (3.9).
Application of the procedure described above on triple glazed IGUs with two cavities
will lead to the formulation of a quartic equation instead of a quadratic equation. The
quartic equation can be solved by the quartic formula to find the four roots, where three
of them can be ruled out due to physical restraints. The process to solve the quartic
equation was implemented in Mepla ISO.
==PAGE:32==
18
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 4
Finite element modelling
Field problems in structural mechanics, such as finding the displacement field of a
structure, are often governed by partial differential equations (PDEs) e.g.
by static
conditions and geometrical conditions. In most cases these governing PDEs cannot be
solved analytically. In such cases FEA is an efficient tool to find approximate solutions
by approximating the PDEs with numerical model equations, which can be solved by
use of numerical methods. In FEA the structure is discretized into a finite number of
elements in which the field (here displacement field) has only a simple variation given
in polynomial terms. Here it becomes obvious that FEA is an approximation since the
actual variation is often more complex than expressed by a few polynomial terms.
The elements of the discretized structure are connected at nodal points. These nodal
points contains nodal unknowns also known as degrees of freedom (DOFs) which are
values of the field quantity and possibly the first derivative of the field quantity. In the
case of a displacement field the DOFs are values of displacements and rotations.
The particular arrangement of elements used to model a given body is called a mesh. The
mesh is numerically represented by a system of algebraic equations ensuring equilibrium
of forces in every element. This system of equations can as earlier mentioned be solved by
numerical methods and the numerical solution yields the DOF values. The solution field
of an element is found by interpolation of the DOF values using the assumed variation
in an element. The solution field to the finite element structure is then found as the
solution field of each element put together in piecewise fashion.
FEA is as mentioned an approximation to the exact solution since an infinite number
of infinitesimal pieces are modelled by a finite number of elements and field values are
interpolated from DOF values. When using displacement-based elements this means
that the elements does not satisfy static equilibrium conditions and stress boundary
conditions at every material point in the element. Instead only in an integral sense
meaning the integrated effect over the element region. This is said to state a problem
in weak form, whereas governing PDEs with boundary conditions are said to state a
problem in strong form. However, it is shown that if infinitely many elements are used
in a mesh the weak form implies the strong form. The solution from the weak form will
thus go towards the solution of the strong form as the number of elements is increased
(mesh refinement). The element stiffness matrices and element load vectors used in the
FEA can be formulated using the principle of virtual work, which can be stated in the
form
∫
δεTσ dV =
∫
δuTF dV +
∫
δεTΦ dS
(4.1)
where δε is the vector of strains produced by the virtual displacement δu according
to the geometrical conditions, σ is the vector of stresses, F is the vector of body forces,
==PAGE:34==
20
4 Finite element modelling
and Φ is the vector of surface tractions. Expressing the displacements as interpolations
over the element by u = Nv,
where N is the interpolation matrix containing the
basis functions and v is the element DOF vector allows the strains to be expressed
as ε = Bv where B = ∂N is the strain-displacement matrix defined by the strain-
displacement relations in the geometrical conditions. The stresses can be expressed as
σ = Dε = DBv , which by substitution results in the following equation
δvT
(∫
BTDB dV v −
∫
NTF dV −
∫
NTΦ dS
)
= 0
(4.2)
The above equation must be true for any admissible virtual displacement and therefore
the equilibrium can be rewritten as
kv = r
(4.3)
where k =
∫BTDB dV is the element stiffness and r =
∫NTF dV +
∫NTΦ dS is the
nodal load vector.
Thus the left hand side of the equation represents forces at the
element nodes due to element deformation, while the right hand side represents loads
applied to the element nodes from all sources but element deformation.
Assembly of the elements to form a finite element structure is done by expanding the
element matrices to global structure size and repositioning the terms to fit the associated
global DOFs. Thereafter, adding terms together from overlaps between elements. The
system of equation for the complete structure is then governed by
KV = R
(4.4)
where K is the global stiffness matrix, V is the global DOF vector and R the global
load vector. The global stiffness matrix can be moved to the right-hand side in order to
calculate the DOFs from the loads(Cook et al., 1981).
V = K−1R
(4.5)
It is seen that the global stiffness matrix must be nonsingular for the above equation to
hold.
4.1
Glass panes
The glass panes are modelled by flat triangular shell elements, which combine plane
stress elements and plate bending elements without coupling between the membrane
and bending behaviour. The plane stress element used is the constant strain triangle
(CST), and the plate bending element is the three-node triangular plate with Bernhard
Specht’s modified basis functions (Specht element).
==PAGE:35==
4.1 Glass panes
21
Figure 4.1: Combination of CST and Specht element to form shell element.
The CST element is capable of modelling the in-plane displacements as linear functions
and are therefore also referred to as linear triangular element (see basis function in Figure
4.2). The linear displacements in the element means that the strains are constant since
the strains are found as the derivatives of the displacements (thereby the name constant
strain triangle). The CST element has two DOFs at each node and six DOFs in total
as seen in the upper left corner of Figure 4.1. The CST element is further explained in
Appendix B.1 along with the formulation of element matrices (N, B and k) used in the
FEA.
Figure 4.2: CST element linear basis function.
The Specht element uses a cubic displacement basis and are capable of modelling displacements
by a 3rd degree polynomial (see basis function in Figure 4.3). Displacements described
by a 3rd degree polynomial gives a linear variation of the curvature given that the
==PAGE:36==
22
4 Finite element modelling
curvature is the second derivative of the displacements. The Specht element is thus
capable of modelling a linear variation of the curvature and moment in the element.
The displacement basis was found by Bernhard Specht as a modification of Zienkiewicz’s
displacement basis to the three-node triangular plate. Specht’s modified displacement
basis minimizes the C1-discontinuity at the boundaries which gives sufficient compatibility
of the element. Displacements described with
The Specht element follows Kirchhoff-Love plate theory, which assumes that normals
to the element plane remains normal and straight after deformation. This implies that
shear deformations through the thickness of the plate is neglected. The Kirchoff-Love
plate theory is applicable to thin plates, which is always the case for glass panes in
glazing.
The Specht element has three out-of-plane DOFs at each node that is displacement
perpendicular to the element plane and two rotations as can be seen in the upper right
corner of Figure 4.1. The Specht element is further presented in Appendix B.1 along
with the formulation of element matrices.
Figure 4.3: Specht element 3rd degree polynomial basis function.
The flat triangular shell element, which appears from combining the two elements
mentioned above, has at each node two DOFs from the CST element and three DOFs
from the Specht element.
This results in five DOFs at each node.
A sixth DOF
(rotation around the element normal) is added because an element placed randomly
in the 3-dimensional space normally has stiffness contributions to the rotations around
all three axis. The flat shell element is given the name linear bending constant strain
triangle (LBCST) because of its capability to model linear bending and constant strain.
The LBCST element is shown at the bottom of Figure 4.1 (see Appendix B.1 for the
formulation of the element matrices).
As discussed earlier the rotation around the element normal also called the drilling DOF,
do not have any stiffness contribution from the CST element. If any structure nodes are
surrounded by elements which are not coplanar, the drilling stiffness in one element will
be non-zero due to the transformation from local to global coordinate system of bending
stiffness in an adjacent element. On the opposite if any structure nodes are surrounded
only by coplanar element the stiffness of the drilling DOF will be zero and thereby lead
to a singular structure stiffness matrix, which will cause numerical problems. There are
different ways of overcoming the lack of stiffness in the drilling DOFs, and the problem
is in this report solved by supplying an artificial stiffness suggested by Zienkiewicz and
==PAGE:37==
4.1 Glass panes
23
Taylor, 2000


Mz1
Mz2
Mz3

= αEAt


1.0
−0.5
−0.5
−0.5
1.0
−0.5
−0.5
−0.5
1.0




θz1
θz2
θz3


(4.6)
where E is the modulus of elasticity, A is the element area, t is the shell thickness
and α is a chosen constant. The chosen value of α must be large enough to avoid a
singular stiffness matrix in order to solve the system of equations, while it must also
be low enough to avoid affecting the results significantly by too much stiffening. In the
FEA of regular shaped insulating glass units it is noted that all nodes in glass panes are
surrounded by coplanar elements in the initial undeformed state. In a deformed state
all the nodes in the glass panes will be surrounded by not coplanar elements due to the
deformation. Thus the additional stiffness from Equation (4.6) is only necessary for the
first load step i.e. the value of α can be found as the minimum value which creates a
nonsingular matrix for the initial state. In this report a value of α = 0.2 was found to
be sufficient.
The LBCST element is tested in Appendix B.1.4, where it is shown that the element is
capable of producing the correct strains for cases of uniaxial tension and rigid rotation.
4.1.1
Element load
The load on the shell elements is determined in a consistent manner using the basis
functions
rl =
∫
A NT F dA
(4.7)
where F is the element surface load vector
[
fx
fy
fz
]
. Evaluating Equation (4.7) for a
transverse distributed load (see Figure 4.4(a)) will result in an element nodal force vector
with non-zero values in the DOFs corresponding to out-of-plane forces and moments (see
Figure 4.4(b)). The moments will usually be cancelled out by adjoining elements if the
elements in a mesh are approximately the same size. However elements at the boundary
of the mesh have element sides without adjoining elements, which will give moments
along the boundaries. This can be inconsistent with the boundary conditions if the
boundary conditions allow rotations. If the element size is decreased it is seen that the
bending moment terms tend toward zero more rapidly than the force terms and thereby
the moments at the boundaries can be nearly eliminated by refining the mesh.
(a) Distributed load
(b) Consistent nodal loads
(c) Reduced nodal loads
Figure 4.4: Methods for distribution of element surface loads. Here the principles are
shown on an element with midside rotations.
==PAGE:38==
24
4 Finite element modelling
The moment terms can also be deliberately omitted from the nodal force vector. A
nodal force vector that omits the moment terms is called a reduced nodal force vector
(see Figure 4.4(c)). The correct bending moments are obtained at the boundaries by
omitting the bending terms in the nodal force vector. However, using the reduced nodal
force vector leads to approximations in the displacement of the element because of the
missing rotations. Due to the bending moment terms going towards zero faster than
the force terms the use of the reduced nodal force vector does not prevent convergence
towards the correct solution. Thereby, both the consistent and reduced nodal force vector
produces convergence, and the choice between consistent and reduced nodal forces are
therefore a trade-off between exact displacements or exact forces for a coarser mesh
(Cook et al., 1981).
In the FEA implemented in the program the consistent nodal force vector is used because
the determination of cavity pressure is highly dependent on the volume, which again
is dependent on the displacements. Therefore, it is of higher importance to be able to
determine the exact displacements and rotations than exact forces and bending moments
at the boundaries.
4.1.2
Geometrical non-linear behaviour
The glass panes are as mentioned thin panes with thicknesses many times smaller than
the width and length of the panes. When the panes are subjected to a transverse surface
load the resulting displacements will be large relative to the thickness of the panes, which
means that geometrically non-linear effects (membrane forces) cannot be neglected in
the analyses. The geometrical non-linearities are included in the FE model by use of the
co-rotational formulation. Here, a local coordinate system is attached to each element
and translates and rotates with the element as the name co-rotational implies. In the
co-rotational formulation the element deformations are decomposed into a rigid-body
component which is identical to the rigid body motion of the local system and a straining
component that is the remaining deformations described in the local coordinate system.
The local strains in the local coordinate system are determined using conventional linear
strain measure. The linear strain measure is valid for small local deformations which
is reasonable for the glass panes given the linear elastic properties of glass (see Section
2.1).
The non-linear behaviour is included in the FEA by use of the Euler approximation and
the Newton Raphson method. The Euler approximation approximates the non-linear
behaviour using the tangents thus making it piecewise linear.
If the linearisation is
performed using small steps the approximation will come close to the exact solution.
However, if the steps are not sufficiently small the numerical solution will drift away
from the exact solution. This can be counteracted by the use of equilibrium equations
as in the Newton Raphson method (see Figure 4.5).
The equilibrium equation demands that the internal forces must balance the external
forces and ensures that the difference between the numerical solution and the exact
solution is within a defined tolerance. The co-rotational formulation of the tangential
stiffness and the internal forces are shown in Appendix B.2.
==PAGE:39==
4.2 Spacers
25
Figure 4.5: Equilibrium iterations within a loop.
In Algorithm 1 the Newton Raphson method is shown for the shell element. In each load
step the tangential stiffness matrix K is found based on the initial displacements at the
beginning of the step ui−1. The incremental displacements ∆u are then calculated using
the tangential stiffness and the load increment ∆P. Thereafter, the final displacements
at the end of the step ui are calculated by adding the incremental displacements to
the initial displacements.
The internal forces Q are then evaluated from the final
displacements and equilibrium is checked by the balance between the internal forces
and the final load. If equilibirium is not met within the desired tolerance the structure
is reloaded by the difference between the load and the internal forces (the residuals).
This is done continuously until the residuals are smaller than the tolerance and the next
load step can be initiated.
The non-linear behaviour of the LBCST element is also tested in Appendix B.1.4. Here,
it is shown that the tangential stiffness matrix is capable of predicting the nodal forces
with reasonable accuracy. This is done by comparing the tangential prediction with the
nodal force vector given by the constitutive relations for a given deformation.
4.2
Spacers
The spacers are modelled as a 3-dimensional beams using classic Euler-Bernoulli theory
assuming small deformations, decoupling of bending and torsional deformations, no
transverse shear deformation and free Saint-Venant torsion. The spacers is modelled
in this simple fashion as it is believed that the local deformations of the spacer will
have little effect on the global deformations of the IGUs. However, for a more thorough
investigation of the structural response of the IGUs along the edges the spacers should
either be modelled by solid elements or as beam elements allowing shear deformation
==PAGE:40==
26
4 Finite element modelling
Algorithm 1 Newton-Raphson method
1: ∆P = load increment
2: u1 = 0,
P1 = 0
◃Preset displacement and load
3: for i = 2 to nstep do
◃Load stepping
4:
Pi = Pi−1 + ∆P
◃Update load
5:
ui = ui−1
◃Initial displacements
6:
r = ∆P
◃Initial residuals equal to load increment
7:
j := 0
8:
while |r| > ϵtol and j < nit do
◃Equilibrium iterations
9:
Ki = Ki(ui)
◃Tangential stiffness matrix
10:
∆ui = Ki
−1r
◃Incremental displacements
11:
ui = ui + ∆u
◃Final displacements
12:
r = P −Q(ui)
◃Update residuals
13:
j := j + 1
14:
end while
15: end for
(Timoshenko beam).
The 3-dimensional beam element has six DOFs at each node, which are the three
translational DOFs and the three rotational DOFs as seen in Figure 4.6.
The basis
Figure 4.6: 3-dimensional beam element.
functions are determined using Hermite interpolation to achieve C1 smoothness at
element ends (see Appendix B.3 for formulation of basis functions). The resulting basis
functions are given as 1st degree polynomials for axial and torsional deformation and
3rd degree polynomials for bending deformations (see Figure 4.7).
The displacements of the spacer in the insulating glass unit is assumed to be small
compared to the spacer height and therefore the non-linear part of the beam stiffness
due to large displacements is neglected. Instead the stiffness of the beam element is
formulated using the the basic linear stiffness k0 =
∫BTDB (see Appendix B.3 for
formulation of strain-displacement matrix).
==PAGE:41==
4.3 Sealant
27
(a) Transverse displacement
(b) Rotation
Figure 4.7: Basis functions for beam element.
4.3
Sealant
The sealant connecting the glass panes and the spacer is modelled in a rather simple
fashion by springs between nodes in the shell elements of the glass panes and the beam
elements of the spacers as seen in Figure 4.8.
(a) Cross-section of an IGU
(b) Visualisation of spring stiffness
Figure 4.8: Finite element modelling of sealant.
In the figure the nodes in the spacer and glass panes are seen to be connected by three
springs. One spring for the shear deformation of the sealant, one spring for the axial
deformation of the sealant and one spring for the rotation. It should be noted that
a spring for the shear deformation in the direction of the spacer is also present, but
cannot be seen in the figure because it is the out-of-plane direction. The springs for the
shear deformation will be activated when the glass panes are shifted from the spacer e.g.
during bending of the IGU. The spring for the axial deformation will be activated when
the glass panes are being pulled away from or compressed against the spacer, e.g. by a
differential pressure in the gas-filled cavity. Finally the torsion spring will be activated
when the nodes in the glass panes are being rotated around the axis parallel to the axis
of the spacer. The torsion spring represents the rotational fixity between the glass panes
and the spacer.
The stiffness curve of the sealant material is an unknown in this analysis and needs
further investigation in order to be determined and correctly modelled. The sealant
==PAGE:42==
28
4 Finite element modelling
material (especially the secondary sealant) is believed to be linear elastic within a
temperature range of −20 to 60 ◦C as mentioned in Section 2.3 and the sealant is
therefore modelled by linear springs. However, when two glass panes in an IGU are
being pulled away from each other the resistance is governed by the tensile strength of
the sealant. When two glass panes in an IGU are pressed together the resistance is not
only governed by the compressive strength of the sealant, but also the resistance in the
spacer. Since the spacer is modelled simply as an Euler-Bernoulli beam the resistance
against compression from the spacer is not included, which means that this has to be
included in the linear springs. Furthermore, it also means that the stiffness of the spring
representing the axial deformation of the sealant (and shear deformation of the spacer)
should be different depending on whether its being subjected to tension or compression.
Therefore, the axial stiffness is approximated by a bi-linear stiffness curve with a small
stiffness for elongation and a large stiffness for compression as seen in Figure 4.9.
Figure 4.9: Bi-linear stiffness curve of spring k1.
The bi-linear spring stiffness of the sealant is implemented in the FEA by including the
following expression in the equilibrium equations of the spring
k−u = F
for
u < 0
(4.8)
k+ u = F
for
u ≥0
(4.9)
where u is spring deformation which is positive for elongation, F is the spring force, k−
is the stiffness for compression and k+ is the stiffness for elongation.
4.3.1
Geometrical non-linearities
The axial stiffness and shear stiffness of the sealant is modelled by springs perpendicular
to the spacer and a spring parallel with the spacer.
However, if the glass panes or
==PAGE:43==
4.3 Sealant
29
spacer is deformed the springs will no longer be perpendicular and parallel to the spacer,
which means that the springs will no longer represent the axial and shear stiffness of the
sealant. Therefore, the springs must follow the deformation of the spacer and the glass
pane. These geometrical non-linearities of the stiffness is handled by a co-rotational
formulation of the element matrices of the springs similar to that of the co-rotated shell
element in Section 4.1.2.
A local coordinate system is attached to each spring connection and is translated and/or
rotated by deformations of the associated DOFs.
The spring deformations are then
decomposed into a rigid-body deformation and a strain-giving deformation from which
the strain can be calculated by the linear strain measure.
This principle is shown in Figure 4.10, where a rotation of the node in the spacer rotates
the local coordinate system. The rigid body rotation of the system requires that the node
in the glass pane rotates along with the rotation of the local coordinate system. The
displacements of the node in the glass pane due to rigid body rotation is then eliminated
by subtracting it from the actual displacements. The remaining displacements is thus
the strain-giving deformations. This deformation can be transformed into deformations
in the rotated local coordinate system as axial and transverse deformations (ux′, uy′ and
uz′ respectively) from which the strains are determined.
Figure 4.10: Co-rotational formulation for springs here shown in two dimensions.
The non-linear behaviour of the stiffness is included in the FEA by use of the Newton
Raphson method as explained in Section 4.1.2.
The derivation of the co-rotational
element matrices used in the Newton Raphson method is shown in Appendix B.4.
Furthermore, the element matrices are verified by a single-element test in Appendix
B.4.
==PAGE:44==
30
4 Finite element modelling
4.4
Gas-filled cavity
The differential pressure between the cavity pressure and the ambient pressure is modelled
as a spring inside the cavity. The spring is coupled to all nodes facing the cavity because
the cavity pressure is acting on all elements facing the cavity and thereby all nodes facing
the cavity. The spring representing the cavity pressure is illustrated in Figure 4.11, where
all the nodes are connected by a spring at the center of the cavity. The spring is here
named the ”gas-spring”.
Figure 4.11: Cross section of insulating glass unit with all nodes connected by gas-
spring.
The relation between the differential pressure and the change of cavity volume is given by
the ideal gas law and is thus a non-linear relation as explained in Section 3.1. Therefore,
the differential pressure must be modelled as a non-linear spring, which is done using
the Euler approximation as explained in Section 4.1.2. In the Euler approximation the
tangential relation is expressed as
k = ∆F
∆u ⇒k · ∆u = ∆F
(4.10)
where k denotes the tangential stiffness, ∆u denotes a small displacement increment and
∆F denotes an approximate force increment.
The tangential stiffness as expressed in Equation (4.10) can be derived by first considering
the relation between pressure and volume instead of forces and displacements.
The
relation between pressure and volume was shown in Section 3.1 and the tangential
relation can be found by taking the derivative of the incremental cavity pressure function,
which was given in Equation (3.5). Since the function is continuously and differentiable
in the interval of interest [−V0 ≤∆V ≤∞], the tangent can be expressed analytically
as a function of the change of cavity volume
kt(∆V ) = d (∆p)
d (∆V ) =
p0
(V0 + ∆V )2 ∆V −
nR∆T
(V0 + ∆V )2 −
p0
V0 + ∆V
(4.11)
The tangent for a change in cavity volume ∆Vi is shown in Figure 4.12.
The approximate incremental differential pressure can then be determined by the product
of the tangent given in Equation (4.11) and the change of cavity volume
∆p = kt · ∆V
(4.12)
==PAGE:45==
4.4 Gas-filled cavity
31
Figure 4.12: Tangential stiffness of gas pressure.
Equation (4.10) requires that the tangential stiffness is given in terms of forces and
displacements in order to fit the FEA structure. Therefore the differential pressure must
be transformed from a pressure into nodal forces and the change of cavity volume must
be expressed by nodal displacements. These transformations will be described in the
following sections.
4.4.1
Transformation of cavity volume change
The transformation from displacements of nodes to volume change of the cavity requires
knowledge of the volume change associated with all the nodal displacements.
The
displaced element volume can be determined in a consistent manor using the basis
functions to interpolate the change of volume for each element. The displaced element
volume is given as the integral of the transverse displacements, which is equal to the
integral of the out-of-plane basis functions and the nodal displacements
∆V l =
∫
A uz dA =
∫
AIz N dA v
(4.13)
where uz is the out-of-plane displacement, N is the displacement interpolation function,
v is the nodal displacement in the element and Iz =
[
0 0 1
]
is used to eliminate the
in-plane displacements from the integral.
Determining the change in cavity volume as the sum of the displaced element volumes
according to Equation (4.13) has the disadvantage, that it does not capture volume
change of the cavity due to in-plane deformations. This was found to be significant when
determining the deformations of an IGU by a uniformly distributed load. It was found
that calculating the cavity volume change due to Equation (4.13) would overestimate the
volume change compared to the volume change determined by the analytical solution
==PAGE:46==
32
4 Finite element modelling
given in Section 3.2. This resulted in an overestimation of the differential pressure which
would eventually lead to an error in the determination of the deformations (approx. 3%
for a 1x1 m double layered unit loaded with 1.5 kN/m2).
Instead, the volume change of the gas-filled cavity is determined by modelling the cavity
volume with tetrahedrons as done by Svensson (2015). Tetrahedrons are polyhedrons
with four triangular faces and four corners. One tetrahedron is used to model a small
part of the total cavity volume by connecting three nodes on the surface facing the cavity
and a reference node (see Figure 4.13(a)). This reference node is placed in the center of
the cavity for the sake of easier understanding, but in principle the reference node could
be placed anywhere.
The tetrahedrons are placed so the complete surface facing the cavity is covered with
tetrahedrons. This also implies that the total cavity volume is filled by tetrahedrons as
long as all the elements have the same reference point. The surface facing the cavity
normally consists of the two glass panes and the four sides along the edge seal.
(a) Tetrahedron in a mesh
(b) Nodal coordinates of a tetrahedron
Figure 4.13: Volume associated with one element in mesh.
The use of tetrahedrons to describe the cavity volume has the advantage that the volume
is easily calculated from the nodal displacements. The volume of a tetrahedron is given
as one sixth of the determinant of a matrix containing the three vectors going from the
reference point to the three corner nodes (Stewart, 1999). The three vectors are thus
given as
V1 =
[
x1 −x0
y1 −y0
z1 −z0
]T ,
V2 =
[
x2 −x0
y2 −y0
z2 −z0
]T
V3 =
[
x2 −x0
y2 −y0
z2 −z0
]T
(4.14)
with node coordinates as shown in Figure 4.13(b).
An expression of the volume of
the tetrahedron can then be based on the node coordinates and the reference point
==PAGE:47==
4.4 Gas-filled cavity
33
coordinates
V = 1
6 det
V1
V2
V3
 = 1
6 det

x1 −x0
x2 −x0
x3 −x0
y1 −z0
y2 −y0
y3 −z0
z1 −z0
z2 −z0
z3 −z0

(4.15)
The change of volume, which is needed in Equation (4.12) to calculate the differential
pressure, is the difference between the volume at the initial state and the volume in the
deformed state
∆V = V0 −Vi
(4.16)
For a tetrahedron the change of volume can be expressed for a unit displacement in all
three directions for all nodes associated with the tetrahedron element, e.g. for a unit
displacement u1x of node 1 in the x-direction
∆V = V0 −Vi
= 1
6 det

x1 −x0
x2 −x0
x3 −x0
y1 −z0
y2 −y0
y3 −z0
z1 −z0
z2 −z0
z3 −z0

−1
6 det

x1 + u1x −x0
x2 −x0
x3 −x0
y1 −z0
y2 −y0
y3 −z0
z1 −z0
z2 −z0
z3 −z0

= −1
6u1x · ((y2 −y0)(z3 −z0) −(y3 −y0)(z2 −z0))
(4.17)
It is seen from the above result that the change in volume associated with a unit
displacement in the x-direction of node 1 can be determined independently of the other
nodal displacements. Similar results are found for the eight other nodal displacements
(see Appendix B.5).
However, similar simple expressions cannot be found for the
rotations, because the volume displaced by a rotation is dependent on the element
area, which again is dependent on the displacements of the nodes.
Therefore, it is
not possible to find the displaced volume due to rotations independently from the
nodal displacements.
The volume change due to nodal rotations are however small
in comparison with the volume change due to nodal displacements, and therefore the
nodal rotations are neglected in the tangential prediction of the nodal forces.
The resulting expressions for the volume change associated with a unit displacement
of the DOFs are collected in vector Vc (see Appendix B.5). The total volume change
of a tetrahedron element can then be stated in terms of the vector Vc and the nodal
displacements of the element
∆V = VT
c v
(4.18)
Thus the transposed volume change vector Vc is defining a linear transformation of the
deformations from space Rn (where n is number of element DOFs) to a scalar in the
one-dimensional space.
4.4.2
Transformation of differential pressure
The transformation from differential pressure to nodal forces is performed using consistent
nodal forces i.e. determining the nodal forces from the basis functions as described in
==PAGE:48==
34
4 Finite element modelling
Section 4.1.1. The element nodal force vector are then given as
ql =
∫
A NT F dA
(4.19)
Since the differential pressure is constant over the area of an element the load vector
can be excluded from the integral, and since the differential pressure is always acting
perpendicular to the element surface it is seen that f =
[
0
0
∆p
]
. Thus only the
basis functions for out-of-plane deformation are of relevance in Equation (4.19). The
expression can therefore be rewritten as
ql =
∫
A NT Iz dA ∆p = ql
unit ∆p
(4.20)
where Iz =
[
0 0 1
]
is used to eliminate the in-plane displacements from the integral
and ql
unit =
∫
A NT Iz dA.
The vector ql
unit is practically the element nodal force vector for a unit pressure acting
on the element.
The element nodal force vector in Equation (4.20) is given in the
local coordinate system and is therefore transformed to the global coordinate system by
premultiplication with the transposed element transformation matrix
q = At
Tql = At
T ql
unit ∆p
(4.21)
The nodal forces stemming from the cavity pressure is hereby determined and is used
to express the tangential stiffness.
4.4.3
Tangential stiffness
The element nodal forces is expressed in terms of the displacements by inserting the
differential pressure given in Equation (4.21) and inserting the change in cavity volume
given in Equation (4.18). The element nodal force vector is then given as
q = At
T ql
unit kt VT
c v
(4.22)
The tangential stiffness can be deduced from Equation (4.22) by comparing it to Equation
(4.10), whereby the tangential stiffness is found to be all the factors in front of the element
DOF vector v
k = At
T ql
unit kt VT
c
(4.23)
The linearisation of the gas-spring requires step-wise calculation of the deformations in
order to update the tangent kt, the transformation matrix At and the element nodal force
vector for a unit pressure f l
unit in every step. The calculation procedure requires small
steps for the solution not to drift away from the correct solution. This can however
by counteracted by use of equilibrium iterations as described in Section 4.1.2, which
ensure that the solution in each step are close to the correct solution. The equilibrium
check in each step is performed by inserting the change of volume in Equation (3.5) and
calculating the exact differential pressure (∆pexact).
==PAGE:49==
4.4 Gas-filled cavity
35
The difference between the exact differential pressure and the tangential prediction of
the differential pressure is then the residual pressure given as
r∆p = ∆pexact −∆p
(4.24)
If the residual is non-zero then the glass panes are reloaded with the residual pressure
and the equilibrium iterations are performed again until the residual is approximately
zero or smaller than the chosen tolerance. The equilibrium iterations are illustrated in
Figure 4.14 for the first load step in an analysis.
It was mentioned in Section 4.4.1, that the volume change due to rotation in the
element is not included in the tangential prediction of the nodal forces. However, the
volume change due to rotations is included in the volume used to calculate the exact
differential pressure in the equilibrium iterations. The change of volume due to rotations
is calculated by integrating the rotational basis functions over the element area
∆Vθ =
∫
A uz,θ dA =
∫
AN dA vθ
(4.25)
where uz,θ is the out-of-plane deformation due to rotations vθ is the element DOF vector
with only the rotational DOFs. Thereby, the influence of the rotations is taken into
account in the equilibrium equations and included in the residual pressure.
Figure 4.14: Equilibrium iterations within a single load step.
It is seen that using the tangential stiffness to calculate the differential pressure associated
with a cavity volume change leads to an underestimation of the differential pressure,
because the tangent is monotonically decreasing with the cavity volume change. This
means that the resulting residual pressure in the first equilibrium iteration will always
be positive. Therefore, the first prediction within a load step will always underestimate
the absolute cavity volume.
==PAGE:50==
36
4 Finite element modelling
An iteration scheme for the calculation of the differential pressure based on the Newton
Raphson method is shown in Algorithm 2.
==PAGE:51==
4.5 Boundary conditions
37
Algorithm 2 Newton-Raphson method for linearization of gas-spring stiffness
1: p0, V0, nR, ∆T
◃Initial gas parameters
2: K0
◃Stiffness from solid elements of structure
3: V1 = V0
4: v1 = 0
5: ∆V1 = 0
6: ∆p1 = 0
7: for i = 2 to nstep do
◃Load stepping
8:
r = load increment
9:
vi = vi−1
10:
Vi = Vi−1
11:
∆Vi = ∆Vi−1
12:
∆pi = ∆pi−1
13:
j = 0
14:
while r > ϵtol and j < nit do
◃Equilibrium iterations
15:
Kg = Kg(vi)
◃Tangential stiffness of gas-spring
16:
K = K0 + Kg
◃Stiffness of rest of model is added
17:
dv = K−1
i r
◃Tangential predicted deformations
18:
vi := vi + dv
◃Update deformations
19:
dV = VT
c dv
◃Predicted incremental change of volume
20:
∆Vi = ∆Vi + dV
◃Update volume change
21:
dp = kt ∆V
◃Calculate incremental differential pressure
22:
∆pi = ∆pi + dp
◃Update differential pressure
23:
∆Vcorrect = ∆Vi + ∆Vθ
◃Correct change of volume
24:
∆pcorrect = ∆p(∆Vcorrect)
◃Correct differential pressure
25:
r∆p = ∆pcorrect −∆pi
◃Residual differential pressure
26:
r = r∆p
◃Convert residual pressure to residual nodal forces
27:
j := j + 1
◃Next iteration
28:
end while
29: end for
4.5
Boundary conditions
The boundary conditions of the IGUs are included in the FEA by a prescribed displacement
or rotation. The internal nodal forces caused by each prescribed displacement or rotation
is calculated and subtracted from the global load vector R. Though, most supports yields
zero displacement or rotation, which cause no internal nodal forces in the structure.
The given DOF associated with the prescribed displacement or rotation is thereafter
eliminated from the linear system of equations.
The boundary conditions used in the FEA for comparison with the dead load experiment
results are not solely modelled using prescribed displacements. This is due to experimental
setup (see Section 5) in which the IGUs are free to displace upwards but supported
against downward displacement by a rubber strip on top of a steel frame. Therefore,
the transverse supports are modelled as springs as seen in Figure 4.15. The supporting
==PAGE:52==
38
4 Finite element modelling
springs are bi-linear similar to the springs used to model the axial stiffness of the sealant
(see Figure 4.9). The bi-linear stiffness is defined so that a proper stiffness is applied for
displacements in direction of the transverse load and a very low stiffness is applied for
displacements in the opposite direction of the load.
Figure 4.15: Sealant material as springs between glass pane and spacer.
In analyses where the transverse displacement of the panes in the IGUs is restricted e.g.
by a window frame the IGUs can be considered supported along the entire boundary.
These supports are included in the FEA by a prescribed transverse displacement of zero
at all nodes along the boundary.
4.6
Implementation of finite element analysis
The solution procedure of the FEA implemented in the program is shown in Figure 4.16.
The solution procedure gathers all of the above mentioned elements in one structure and
calculates the total stiffness of the structure, which is then used to find the displacements.
Equilibrium equations for the co-rotated shell elements, co-rotated springs at the edges,
bi-linear spring supports and the gas-spring representing the differential pressure are
then used to find the residual forces. The stiffness is then updated and the structure is
reloaded until the residuals are smaller than the chosen tolerance.
==PAGE:53==
4.6 Implementation of finite element analysis
39
Residual forces within 
tolerance?
Stop
Residuals from equilibrium equations
 
Co-rotated shell element
 
Co-rotated springs
 
Non-linear gas-spring
Initialize model
Pressure
Temperature
Element types
Material parameters
Support conditions
Geometry
Loads
Create mesh
Assembly of stiffness matrix
 
Shell elements (glass panes)
 
Beam elements (spacer)
 
Springs (sealant and gas-filled cavity)
Calculation of 
deformations
Yes
Update load vector with 
residuals
Update stiffness
 
Co-rotated shell element
 
Co-rotated springs
 
Non-linear gas-spring
No
Start
Figure 4.16: Flow chart of finite element analysis of IGU.
==PAGE:54==
40
4 Finite element modelling
The solution procedure was implemented in the numerical analysis software Matlab
using the finite element modelling program BygFEM developed at DTU Byg. The program
BygFEM contains functions to formulate the element matrices used in a simple linear FEA
of disc, plate and shell elements. It has therefore been necessary to expand the program
with implementation of beam and spring elements plus the gas-spring dependent on
cavity volume change. Furthermore the non-linear part of the FEA (tangential stiffness
and equilibrium iterations) was implemented too.
The mesh used in the analysis was imported from the software Abaqus CAE using the
Matlab function ABAmeshRead developed at DTU Byg. The mesh was generated in
Abaqus CAE because of the relatively easy way to generate user-specified meshes. A
mesh generator (©Darren Engwirda) was also implemented in the program for a regular
mesh with elements approximately the same size.
4.7
Comparison with Mepla ISO
The FEA implemented in Matlab was verified by comparing it to the results obtained
from Mepla ISO (see Section 3.2). The comparison between the developed FE program
and Mepla ISO was performed on a standard triple glazed IGU with glass thicknesses
of 6/4/4 mm and cavity thicknesses of 15 mm. The geometry of the IGU is square with
side lengths of 1 m. A build up of the IGU is shown in Figure 4.17.
A
B
C
 15
 mm
 15
 mm
6 mm
4 mm
4 mm
Figure 4.17: Thicknesses of IGU used in comparison with Mepla ISO.
Two comparisons were made
• Uniformly distributed load on complete surface of the 6 mm pane
• Change of temperature
A mesh of 392 elements as shown in Figure 4.18 was used to model the glass panes of
the IGU although the convergence analysis in Appendix B.6 showed that the solution
converges at around 600 elements. However, the mesh was chosen to save computational
time.
==PAGE:55==
4.7 Comparison with Mepla ISO
41
X
Y
Z
Side 4
Supported in z-direction
Side 2
Supported in z-direction
Side 3
Supported in z-direction
Side 1
Supported in z-direction
Supported in x- and y-direction
Supported in y-direction
Supported in x-direction
Figure 4.18: Mesh of glass panes.
Since Mepla ISO calculates deflection and stresses using the Navier solution for simply
supported rectangular plate, the glass panes was given similar supports in the FE
program. However, in order to include the stiffness of the sealant only one pane was
supported in the program. Pane A was therefore simply supported in the transversal
direction along all four edges as seen in Figure 4.18. Furthermore, pane A was supported
against in-plane displacements in three corners, which secured the horizontal stability
but at the same time allowed in-plane displacement.
The graphs shown in Figure 4.19 to 4.21 show the comparison between the FE program
and Mepla ISO for a uniformly distributed load. The graphs show the displacement
and maximum principal stress at the center of the three panes A, B, and C.
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
0
2
4
6
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
0
5
10
15
Figure 4.19: Comparison of deflection and stress in pane A.
It is seen in the graphs shown in Figure 4.19 to 4.21 that the displacements obtained from
the FE program and Mepla ISO follow each other nicely for surface loads smaller than
==PAGE:56==
42
4 Finite element modelling
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
0
2
4
6
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
0
2
4
6
8
10
Figure 4.20: Comparison of deflection and stress in pane B.
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
0
2
4
6
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
0
2
4
6
8
10
Figure 4.21: Comparison of deflection and stress in pane C.
approximately 1 kN/m2. For loads larger than 1 kN/m2 it is seen that the displacements
from the FE program are smaller than the results obtained from Mepla ISO. This
is due to the large deformations (approx.
1
2 of the pane thicknesses) activating the
membrane stiffness of the panes in the FE model and thereby increasing the stiffness
of the panes. The same behaviour is observed for the maximum principal stress in the
panes, where the stresses obtained from Mepla ISO coincide with the stresses from
the FE program for surface loads smaller than approximately 1.5 kN/m2. Similarly to
the deflections the stresses obtained from the FE program for surface loads larger than
1.5 kN/m2 is seen to be smaller than the stresses obtained from Mepla ISO.
The different limits of coincidence between the FE program and Mepla ISO for the
displacements and principle stresses are caused by the in-plane stiffness of the elements.
While the stiffness contribution from the membrane forces at large deformations helps
decrease the displacements, it also increases the stresses. It is however seen that the
increase in stress from the membrane forces is smaller than the corresponding increase
in bending stress for loads larger than 1.5 kN/m2.
==PAGE:57==
4.7 Comparison with Mepla ISO
43
The graphs shown in Figure 4.22 to 4.24 show the comparison between the FE program
and Mepla ISO for a change of temperature in the cavities. The graphs show the
displacements and maximum principal stress at the center of the three panes A, B, and
C.
-20 -15 -10 -5
0
5
10
15
20
-1
0
1
-20 -15 -10 -5
0
5
10
15
20
0
1
2
3
4
Figure 4.22: Comparison of deflection and stress in pane A.
-20 -15 -10 -5
0
5
10
15
20
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
-20 -15 -10 -5
0
5
10
15
20
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
Figure 4.23: Comparison of deflection and stress in pane B.
Again, it is seen by comparing the displacements from the two programs that the results
coincide for a temperature change smaller than ±10 ◦C. It is seen that for a temperature
smaller than ±15 ◦C the FE program estimates a larger absolute displacements in pane
A and smaller displacements in pane B and C. This is because of the large displacements
of pane C relative to the pane thickness. It is seen that pane C will have a displacement
of approximately 50-75% of the pane thickness for a large decrease in temperature. This
will create significant membrane forces which will heavily increase the stiffness of pane
C, whereby the displacements of pane A and B towards pane C becomes larger.
For the temperature range chosen for the comparison (−20 to 20 ◦C) the same temperature
with positive and negative sign is seen to cause the same absolute displacements. This
==PAGE:58==
44
4 Finite element modelling
-20 -15 -10 -5
0
5
10
15
20
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
-20 -15 -10 -5
0
5
10
15
20
0
2
4
6
Figure 4.24: Comparison of deflection and stress in pane C.
is only the case when the temperature change is small relative to the manufacturing
temperature. For relative larger temperature changes the differential pressure caused by
a temperature decrease is larger than the differential pressure caused by a temperature
increase as seen in Section 3.1.
==PAGE:59==
CHAPTER 5
Experimental studies
Experimental studies of IGUs were carried out in order to verify the FE model in the
program. The experimental studies contain two types of experiments: One with dead
weight loading of the IGUs ((see Figure 5.1(a))) and another with thermal loading of the
IGUs i.e. where the IGUs were subjected to a differential pressure caused by a change
of temperature (see Figure 5.1(b)). The two types of experiments were carried out on
(a) Dead load testing
(b) Thermal load testing
Figure 5.1: Experimental loading.
two double glazed IGUs and two triple glazed IGUs with thicknesses as shown in Figure
5.2. The asymmetric build-up of the IGUs made it possible to conduct two experiments
with dead load on each test specimen by changing the thickness of the loaded pane. The
small cavity thickness of 8 mm in test specimen nr. 2 and nr. 4 were chosen to get a large
level of load sharing between the panes, which would verify the FE program’s ability
to transfer loads between panes through cavity pressures. The large cavity thickness of
15 mm for specimen nr. 1 and nr. 3 were chosen to observe large displacements when
the specimens were heated and to test IGUs with thicknesses similar to what is most
often seen in the glazing industry.
The size of the test specimens was restricted by the dimensions of the climatic chamber
used to heat the IGUs. The IGUs had to be placed vertically inside the chamber and
since the chamber had a height of 900 mm the test specimens could not be larger than
this. It was therefore necessary to have rather small test specimens with length and
width of 850 × 850 mm.
==PAGE:60==
46
5 Experimental studies
Figure 5.2: Thicknesses of test specimens (measurements in mm).
5.1
Dead load experiments
One glass pane of the IGU was loaded by dead load distributed to a circular ring area.
The load was applied as distributed load in a circular ring area by use of a steel disc with
a circular rubber strip underneath. The rubber strip was necessary to avoid harmful
stress concentrations in the loading area and to allow deformation of the loaded pane
without changing the distribution of the load. The circular ring had an inner diameter
of 200 mm and a thickness of 10 mm as seen in Figure 5.3.
Measurements of the displacements perpendicular to the panes were made at eight
different locations as seen in Figure 5.3.
The measurements were all taken in one
quadrant of the IGU along the diagonal and along the edge. Four measurement points
were placed on the diagonal and five points were placed along the edge (including
the corner).
The displacement of both the upper and lower pane were measured at
measurement point 2 and 3 and therefore a total of ten measurements were taken during
the experiments.
Figure 5.3: Specification of measuring points and load area.
The displacements along the diagonal were measured to compare displacements between
==PAGE:61==
5.1 Dead load experiments
47
the upper pane and lower pane and observe the load sharing between panes.
The
displacements along the edge were measured for two reasons, namely measuring the
upwards displacement at the corner and measuring the downward displacement in the
middle in order to estimate the deformations of the supports.
The dead load was applied to the IGUs as weights placed on top of the circular steel
disc (see Figure 5.4). The circular steel disc weighted 7.5 kg and was therefore itself
a significant dead load. Additional nine weights of 10 kg was placed on the steel disc
one at a time. A one minute pause was taken between placing weights on the IGUs to
eliminate dynamic response to influence the measured displacements an allow the IGUs
to reach a steady state at each load step.
Figure 5.4: Experimental setup.
The IGUs were supported by a rubber strip glued on to a wooden frame. The rubber
strip was used to give the IGUs a soft underlay and avoid stress concentrations at the
supporting edges. However, the disadvantage was that the rubber strip would deform
during loading, which had to be taken into account when modelling the experiments in
the program for comparison.
==PAGE:62==
48
5 Experimental studies
The wooden frame was placed on top of a steel frame to allow measurements of displacements
on the lower pane. The steel frame was very rigid compared to the bending stiffness
of the IGUs and therefore it was expected that the measured displacements could be
attributed to the deformation of the IGUs and the rubber strip. Nonetheless, a dial
gauge was placed under a horizontal member of the steel frame as shown in Figure 5.5
to measure the possible deformations of the steel frame.
Figure 5.5: Dial gauge placed under steel frame.
Potentiometers were used as displacement transducers to measure the transverse displacement.
Potentiometers are electrical linear displacement transducers which work by the principle
of change in resistance of wires with the change of length. The potentiometer has a
contact attached to a slider, which is mounted of the object of interest. Displacement of
the contact causes the resistance in the potentiometer to change and thereby produce an
electrical output signal that is proportional to the position of the contact. Potentiometers
are easy to use and are among the most common displacement transducers, but must be
calibrated before use in order to convert the output signal to an actual linear displacement.
The calibration procedure is described in Appendix C.1.
The temperature was registered before each experiments since temperatures different
from the temperature at manufacturing cause a differential pressure and thereby a
deformation of the IGU. The thickness of the specimens was also measured at the edge
and approximately 100 mm from the edge in order to detect initial inwards or outwards
bulging of the panes before testing.
5.2
Thermal load experiments
The glass panes of the IGUs was loaded by thermal loads by increasing the cavity
temperature and thus creating a differential pressure between the cavity pressures and
the ambient pressure. The cavity temperature was increased by placing the IGUs in a
climatic chamber, where the temperature was increased to approximately 95 ◦C. The
IGUs were kept in the climatic chamber until the displacements were seen to become
==PAGE:63==
5.2 Thermal load experiments
49
steady (around 5 - 6 hours) and it could be assumed that the cavity temperature had
reached same temperature as the climatic chamber.
Initially it was the idea to measure the displacements at lower (realistic) outdoor temperatures
such as 30 to 40 ◦C, but it was complication by the cooling system of the climatic
chamber which was activated to keep the temperature steady. The cooling system caused
shaking of the chamber which disturbed the displacement measurements. Therefore a
high temperature (100 ◦C) was chosen as target temperature of the climatic chamber to
prevent activation of the cooling system.
The displacements perpendicular to the panes were measured at five different measurement
points as seen in Figure 5.6. The measurements were all taken along the diagonal in one
quadrant of the IGUs. At all five measurement points the displacements were measured
on both sides of the IGUs. Thus, a total of ten displacements were measured. The
displacements were measured along the diagonal in order to compare displacements
between the outer panes and observe the displacement shape along the diagonal.
Figure 5.6: Specification of measuring points.
The IGUs were placed vertically in the chamber and were supported in the horizontal
direction at two points on the vertical edges as indicated in Figure 5.6 and seen in Figure
5.7. Openings in the climatic chamber door was used to allow the gas inside the chamber
to flow outside of the chamber, which would ensure that the pressure inside the chamber
did not increase as the temperature increased. Thus, only the pressure of the cavity
would increase during heating and eventually create a differential pressure between the
cavity pressure and ambient pressure.
Potentiometers are affected by heat because of the thermal expansion of the slider. This
means that a potentiometer connected to a body which does not displace, will experience
a displacement during heating because of the expansion of the slider. Therefore, an 11th
displacement measurement was made inside the chamber on a steel plate as seen in
Figure 5.8 in order to determine the false displacement of the potentiometers due to
the thermal expansion. This displacement measured by the potentiometer was used to
correct the other ten measured displacements.
==PAGE:64==
50
5 Experimental studies
Figure 5.7: Experimental setup.
Figure 5.8: Thermal expansion induced displacement measured on steel plate.
==PAGE:65==
CHAPTER 6
Results and discussion
6.1
Dead load experiments
The displacements measured in the dead load experiments compared with the displacements
obtained from the FE program are presented and compared in this section. The overall
results and comparisons will be presented and discussed in this section. The reader is
referred to Appendix C.2 for detailed results of each test. The four test specimens used
in the eight experiments are listed in Table 6.1 along with the orientation of the test
specimens in the experimental setup (thicknesses of panes from top to bottom - the top
side being the loaded side). The room temperature during the tests are also given in
the table as these values were used in the modelling of the experiments.
Table 6.1: Series of experiments.
Test label
Specimen no.
Thicknesses (top to bottom)
Room temperature
[mm]
26.3 ◦C
A1
1
6-15-4-15-4
26.1 ◦C
A2
1
4-15-4-15-6
25.9 ◦C
A3
2
6-8-4-8-4
26.1 ◦C
A4
2
4-8-4-8-6
26.1 ◦C
A5
3
6-15-4
25.8 ◦C
A6
3
4-15-6
25.8 ◦C
A7
4
6-8-4
25.9 ◦C
A8
4
4-8-6
26.3 ◦C
Figures 6.1 - 6.4 show the deformations along the diagonal obtained from the FE program
and the experiments for the triple glazed IGUs. The deformations are only shown for
the upper and lower pane given that the deformations in the middle pane could not be
measured. The six measured displacements along the diagonal are marked as circular
points in the figures. The figures show the deformations for a total load of 0.95 kN, which
was the maximum applied load in the experiments. The figures use separate y-axes for
the upper and lower pane to illustrate how the panes deform with the gas-filled cavities
between them.
It is seen in the four figures that there are some differences between the measured
displacements and the calculated displacements. It is seen that the FE program captures
the tendencies in the structural response of the IGUs and matches the deflection shape
indicated by the measured displacements. It is also seen that the calculated displacements
==PAGE:66==
52
6 Results and discussion
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
-7
-6
-5
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
4
Figure 6.1: Test A1: Deformed cross-section through the diagonal from numerical
model compared with displacement measurements.
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
-7
-6
-5
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
4
Figure 6.2: Test A2: Deformed cross-section through the diagonal from numerical
model compared with displacement measurements.
==PAGE:67==
6.1 Dead load experiments
53
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
-7
-6
-5
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
4
Figure 6.3: Test A3: Deformed cross-section through the diagonal from numerical
model compared with displacement measurements.
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
-7
-6
-5
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
4
Figure 6.4: Test A4: Deformed cross-section through the diagonal from numerical
model compared with displacement measurements.
==PAGE:68==
54
6 Results and discussion
of the lower pane are closer to the measured displacements than the calculated displacements
of the upper pane.
It was found that the potentiometer at measurement point 2 on the loaded pane was
not giving reliable results in some tests. This is for instance shown in Figure 6.5 in
which the measured displacements on the loaded pane is shown for each load step. In
the figure it is seen that the measured displacement at measurement point 2 increases
at a low rate during the first three load steps, whereafter the measured displacement
suddenly increases with a higher rate during the remaining load steps. This is not a
realistic structural response of glass panes in IGUs. The irregularity is attributed an
error in the potentiometer used at measurement point 2. Potentiometers are known
to have low accuracy and wear out with time.
Since the given potentiometer also
showed some reliably measurements, it is believed that the problem was caused by
insufficient fastening of the hydraulic magnetic arm on which the potentiometer was
mounted. The initial deformations of the IGUs would then be outweighed by a movement
of the hydraulic magnetic arm, whereby the potentiometer would measure little to no
displacement. The irregularity of the measured displacement at measurement point 2
was also seen in test A1 and to some degree test A2 (see Appendix C.2).
0
200
400
600
800
1000
-3
-2.5
-2
-1.5
-1
-0.5
0
Figure 6.5: Test A4:
Displacements from FE model compared with measured
displacement for different load steps.
Table 6.2 provides an overview of the measured (um) and calculated (uc) displacements
along the diagonal.
The table also shows the absolute difference (d) between the
calculated displacements and measured displacements. It is seen from the table that
the calculated displacements of the lower pane are all within a 0.22 mm range from the
measured displacements. This was also seen in Figures 6.1 - 6.4 where the calculated
displacements of the lower pane fits well with the three measured displacements on the
lower pane. However, for all four tests it is seen that the displacement at measurement
point 3 is overestimated and that the displacement at measurement point 1 is underestimated.
==PAGE:69==
6.1 Dead load experiments
55
This shows that the lower glass pane in the FE program should be deflecting more at
the center and less near the corners. This could mean that the stiffness along the edge
is higher than the stiffness included in the FE model. A higher stiffness along the edge
would cause less displacements close to the edge and thereby larger deflections at the
center of the pane in order for the pane to provide the same resistance against the cavity
pressure. It could also be explained by the simple modelling of the spacers along the edge
line. In reality the spacer is placed with a small offset from the edge. The offset spacers
would especially at the corner provide more stiffness to the structure and therefore cause
the corners displace less. The offset spacers would have little effect on the stiffness of
the IGU near the center and the center would therefore displace more to provide the
same resistance.
Table 6.2: Overview of experimental and numerical obtained displacements for
maximum experimental load. All values in millimetres.
Measurement points
1
2
3
um
uc
d
um
uc
d
um
uc
d
Test A1
Upper
2.22* 2.67
0.45
0.61
0.91
0.30
Lower
2.85
2.77
-0.08
2.19
2.23
0.04
0.69
0.91
0.22
Test A2
Upper
2.87
2.98
0.11
0.52
0.77
0.26
Lower
2.67
2.52
-0.15
2.03
2.01
-0.02
0.64
0.79
0.15
Test A3
Upper
2.22
2.54
0.32
0.58
0.83
0.25
Lower
2.89
2.83
-0.07
2.25
2.24
-0.01
0.72
0.85
0.13
Test A4
Upper
2.09* 2.83
0.74
0.32
0.73
0.41
Lower
2.81
2.74
-0.07
2.17
2.17
0.00
0.69
0.82
0.14
* The measurement was found to be unreliable because of the potentiometer and hydraulic
arm
The displacements shown in Table 6.2 and Figures 6.1 - 6.4 only show a comparison of
the experimentally and numerically obtained results for the maximum load of 0.95 kN.
In Figure 6.6 the displacements at the three measurement points on the lower pane are
shown for each load step in test A4. It is seen that the displacement at measurement
point 2 from the experiment and the FE program are coinciding for all load steps. The
measured displacement at measurement point 1 and the displacement obtained from
the FE program are seen to be coinciding for loads smaller than 350 N, but for larger
loads the program is seen to increasingly underestimate the displacement. The measured
displacement at measurement point 3 is seen to be larger than the displacement obtained
from the FE program even for small loads and the deviation is seen to increase with the
load. Given that the deviation at measurement point 1 and 3 slowly increases with the
magnitude of the load it also shows that the resulting deflection of the lower pane in
the FE program is not correct. The same graphs for tests A1 - A3 are seen to show the
same development. The graphs for the tests A1 - A3 can be found in Appendix C.2.
The relatively good performance of the FE program in calculating the measurements of
the lower glass pane in a triple glazed IGU shows that the transfer of load between glass
==PAGE:70==
56
6 Results and discussion
0
100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 900 1000
-3
-2.5
-2
-1.5
-1
-0.5
0
Figure 6.6: Test A4:
Displacements from FE model compared with measured
displacement for different load steps.
panes through the cavity pressures are well modelled in the FE program.
Table 6.2 also shows that the calculated displacements of the upper pane are larger than
the measured displacements. The calculated displacements at measurement point 3 on
the upper pane are too large compared to the measured displacements in all four cases.
The calculated displacements at measurement point 2 are seen to be very close to the
measured displacement in test A2 and a little overestimated in test A3. As mentioned,
the displacements at measurement point 2 are neglected in test A1 and A4 due to the
unreliable measurements.
The consistent overestimation of the displacements at measurement point 3 on the upper
pane again implies that the stiffness of the glass panes are larger than assumed in the FE
program. It can not be concluded how well the calculated displacements at measurement
point 2 fit since two of the measurements has to be neglected.
Figure 6.7 shows the displacements along the edge obtained from the FE program for
the triple glazed IGU in test A2. The figure shows that the calculated displacements
along the edge fit very well with the measured displacements. It should be noted that
the downward displacement at the center of the edge is due to the rubber strip support
in the experimental setup and not deformations in the IGUs. This rubber strip was
modelled by bi-linear springs supporting the IGU (see Section 4.5). The compressive
stiffness of the spring in the FE model was determined from the experiments by fitting
the downward displacement at measurement point 8 to the measured displacement. The
calculated deflection shape along the edge fits well with the measured displacements,
which shows that the FE modelling of the spacers and sealants gives a proper edge seal
stiffness in the IGUs.
The upward displacement at the corners was quite visible during testing as seen in Figure
==PAGE:71==
6.1 Dead load experiments
57
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
-3
-2
-1
0
1
-1
0
1
2
3
Figure 6.7: Test A2: Deformed cross-section along the edge from numerical model
compared with displacement measurements.
6.8 for test A2. Here upward displacement was visible at a distance of almost 15 cm from
the edge which fits very well with the displacements calculated by the FE program using
the bi-linear springs as supports.
Figure 6.8: Test A2: Lifting of the corners during testing.
Figures 6.9 - 6.12 show the displacements along the diagonal obtained from the FE
program and obtained from the experiments for the double glazed IGUs. The figures
show that the FE program captures the tendencies especially of the lower pane but not
so well of the upper pane. It is also seen that the FE program calculates displacements
closer to the measured displacements for the tests A5 and A6 with 15 mm thick cavities.
==PAGE:72==
58
6 Results and discussion
Table 6.3 provides an overview of the measured displacement (um), calculated (uc)
displacements and the absolute difference (d) between the two displacements.
Table 6.3: Overview of experimental and numerical obtained displacements for
maximum experimental load. All values in millimetres.
Measurement points
1
2
3
um
uc
d
um
uc
d
um
uc
d
Test A5
Upper
2.61
3.01
0.39
0.69
0.98
0.28
Lower
3.42
3.50
0.08
2.66
2.77
0.11
0.86
1.01
0.16
Test A6
Upper
3.00
3.27
0.27
0.50
0.89
0.39
Lower
3.33
3.34
0.01
2.51
2.63
0.12
0.76
0.97
0.21
Test A7
Upper
1.68* 2.99
1.30
0.69
0.97
0.29
Lower
3.48
3.59
0.12
2.73
2.83
0.10
0.91
1.02
0.11
Test A8
Upper
2.05* 3.15
1.10
0.50
0.86
0.36
Lower
3.44
3.47
0.02
2.63
2.72
0.09
0.83
0.99
0.16
* The measurement was found to be unreliable because of the potentiometer and hydraulic
arm
In the figures and the table it is seen that in all four tests the FE program overestimates
the displacements compared to the measured displacements. It is seen that the difference
of the calculated and measured displacements of the lower pane is within 0.21 mm while
the maximum difference of the calculated and measured displacements of the upper
pane is 1.10 mm. However, investigating the displacement at measurement point 2 on
the upper pane for each load step show that the measurement is not reliable in test A7
and A8 similar to what was found for test A1, A3 and A4 (see Figure C.36 and Figure
C.41 in Appendix C.2). The maximum difference for displacements on the upper glass
pane is instead 0.39 mm if measurement point 2 is neglected in test A7 and A8.
The four figures also show a poor comparison between the calculated displacements
of the upper pane and the measured displacements. In all four tests it is seen that
the displacement on the upper pane at measurement point 3 is overestimated by the
FE program as was also the case for tests A1 - A4. The calculated displacement at
measurement point 2 for tests A5 and A6 is significantly overestimated by the FE
program compared to the measured displacement.
As mentioned, the deflection shape of the lower pane is in good accordance with the
measured displacements in all four cases. The calculated displacement at measurement
point 1 is especially accurate for test A6 and A8, where the thinner glass pane was
on top.
In test A5 and A7 where the thicker glass pane was on top the calculated
displacement at measurement point 1 is seen to be larger than the measured displacement.
The calculated displacement of the lower pane at measurement point 2 and 3 is for all
four cases around 0.1 mm - 0.2 mm larger than the measured displacement.
Again,
the calculated displacements are reasonable and it shows that the FE program with
reasonable accuracy is capable of calculating the displacements of a pane subjected to a
cavity pressure resulting from loads on a neighbouring pane.
==PAGE:73==
6.1 Dead load experiments
59
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
-7
-6
-5
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
4
Figure 6.9: Test A5: Deformed cross-section through the diagonal from numerical
model compared with displacement measurements.
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
-7
-6
-5
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
4
Figure 6.10: Test A6: Deformed cross-section through the diagonal from numerical
model compared with displacement measurements.
==PAGE:74==
60
6 Results and discussion
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
-7
-6
-5
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
4
Figure 6.11: Test A7: Deformed cross-section through the diagonal from numerical
model compared with displacement measurements.
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
-7
-6
-5
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
4
Figure 6.12: Test A8: Deformed cross-section through the diagonal from numerical
model compared with displacement measurements.
==PAGE:75==
6.1 Dead load experiments
61
The load-displacement curves for the displacements at the measurement points 1, 2 and
3 on the lower pane are shown for test A7 in Figure 6.13. It is seen that for small loads
the FE program is very accurate, but as the load increases the program overestimates
the displacements. It is also seen that the load-displacement curves for measurement
point 1 and 2 are not linear and that the FE program is capable of following this non-
linear behaviour. The load-displacement curve for measurement point 3 is seen to be
almost linear due to small displacements, but the displacement is still overestimated by
the FE program even for small loads. These tendencies was found for all tests with
double glazed IGUs and therefore only one load-displacement curve is shown here. The
consistent overestimation of the displacements in double glazed IGUs suggests that the
stiffness of the IGU structure contained in the FE model is underestimated.
0
100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 900 1000
-3.5
-3
-2.5
-2
-1.5
-1
-0.5
0
Figure 6.13: Test A7:
Displacements from FE model compared with measured
displacement for different load steps.
The calculated displacements along the edge for test A5 - A8 was seen to fit well with
the measured displacements as shown in Figure 6.14, where the edge displacements are
shown for test A6.
The dial gauge placed underneath the steel frame did not measure any readable displacements,
which shows that the steel frame could be considered rigid in relation to the deformations
of the IGUs. This isolates the measured displacements to the IGUs and the rubber strip.
Overall the FE program performed reasonable in calculating the displacements due to
dead load and the program was capable of calculating the displacements of the lower
pane with high accuracy. The calculated displacements of the upper pane did not match
the measured displacements that well. It is believed that some of these measurements
were erroneous because of the potentiometers or the hydraulic magnetic arm keeping the
potentiometer in place.
The few measurement points made it rather difficult to compare the results and it is
==PAGE:76==
62
6 Results and discussion
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
-3
-2
-1
0
1
-1
0
1
2
3
Figure 6.14: Test A6: Deformed cross-section along the edge from numerical model
compared with displacement measurements.
recommended that future experiments are carried out with more measurement points or
using Aramis 3D displacement sensors to measure the complete displacement field of
IGUs.
6.1.1
Long-term loading
An experiment with long-term loading was carried out on the double glazed IGU with
the thin pane on top. The test specimen was loaded with 0.56 kN for a period of 89 hours.
The experiment was conducted in order to see whether the stiffness of the IGUs could be
considered time-dependent i.e. that displacements would be seen to increase with time.
However, as the test specimens were supported by a viscoelastic rubber strip it is not
enough to only investigate the development of the displacements at single measurement
points. Instead the displacements on the upper and lower pane at measurement point
2 and 3 are compared in order to see the change in cavity thicknesses with time. A
decrease in cavity thickness means that the deformations have increased and that the
stiffness of the IGU has decreased. The change of cavity thickness thus represents the
deformations of IGUs.
The thickness of the cavity at point i is defined as
ti = ui,upper −ui,lower
(6.1)
where ui,upper and ui,lower are the measured displacements on the upper and lower pane.
The measurements are considered from immediately after loading until the load is
removed after 89 hours.
==PAGE:77==
6.2 Thermal load experiments
63
1
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
89
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
Figure 6.15: Change of cavity thicknesses through time in test specimen subjected to
long term loading.
Figure 6.15 shows the development of the cavity thickness at measurement point 2 and
3 with time. It is seen that the cavity thickness at measurement point 2 is decreased
during the first 10 hours, but then becomes more or less steady at a cavity thickness
of 7.25 mm with smaller fluctuations. These fluctuations are expected since the small
difference in room temperature between night and day will cool and heat the specimen.
Furthermore other factors such as people conducting experiments nearby will also have
a small influence on the measurements.
The cavity thickness at measurement point 3 is seen to become close to steady at a cavity
thickness of 7.73 mm until 70 hours after the experiment was initiated. Hereafter, the
cavity thickness is seen to increase and then decrease until the experiment was ended.
Figure 6.15 does not clearly show a tendency between the cavity thickness and time,
which means that the experiment does not support an assumption stating that the
stiffness of IGUs is time-dependent, but it cannot be ruled out based on the experiment.
6.2
Thermal load experiments
The results from the thermal load experiments compared with the numerical results are
presented in this section. The experiments made with the four test specimen are listed
==PAGE:78==
64
6 Results and discussion
in Table 6.4 along with initial and final temperature.
Table 6.4: Series of experiments.
Test label
Specimen no.
Thicknesses
Initial temperature
Final temperature
[mm]
[◦C]
[◦C]
B1
1
6-15-4-15-4
25.0
95.1
B2
2
6-8-4-8-4
31.7
94.2
B3
3
6-15-4
24.0
94.1
B4
4
6-8-4
25.1
94.6
Figures 6.16 to 6.19 show the calculated and measured displacements along the diagonal
for the IGUs. The measured displacements are shown with circular points for outer
panes since the displacement of the inner pane in tripled glazed IGUs was not measured.
It is seen that the FE program performs very well in calculating the displacements of the
IGUs with 8 mm thick cavities and performs less good in calculating the displacements
of the IGUs with 15 mm.
In Figure 6.16 it is seen that the FE program overestimates the displacements quite
heavily compared to the measured displacements. This implies that the cavity pressures
are actually lower than the cavity pressures calculated by the FE program or that the
stiffness in the FE model is incorrect. It is unlikely that the calculation of the cavity
pressure for a temperature increase should be wrong considering the fine results for test
B2 and B4. Therefore it must be the stiffness from the FE model which is wrong and
it can also be seen in the figure that the deflection shape indicated by the measured
displacements are more ”flat” than the calculated deflection shape. This means that
the calculated displacements near the corners should be larger which in turn will cause
a reduction of the displacements at the center of the IGU. The displacements near the
corners are governed by the axial stiffness of the sealant, which means that this stiffness
is too large in the FE model.
In Figure 6.17 it is seen that the FE program calculates displacements that overall
matches very well with the measured displacements. The deflection shape indicated by
the measured displacements fits well with the calculated deflection shape. However, it is
seen that the calculated displacements around the center of the diagonal are smaller than
the measured displacements on the 4 mm thick pane and the measured displacement
at measurement point 1 on the 6 mm thick pane is seen to be much larger than the
calculated displacement. The measured displacement at measurement point 1 on the
6 mm thick pane does not seem to match the assumed deflection shape and it is therefore
reasonable to believe that this measurement is erroneous. Considering the four other
measured displacements on the 6 mm thick glass pane show that the FE program to
some degree overestimates the displacements of this glass pane.
In Figure 6.18 the FE program is seen to significantly overestimate the displacements
of the 4 mm thick glass pane, while the calculated displacements of the 6 mm thick
glass pane fit fine although slightly overestimated. It is also seen that the measured
displacement at measurement point 2 on the 6 mm pane does not seem to follow the
same deflection shape as the other four measured displacements. The measurements
==PAGE:79==
6.2 Thermal load experiments
65
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
8
Figure 6.16: Test B1: Measured displacements after heating along the diagonal of test
specimen compared to numerical results.
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
4
5
Figure 6.17: Test B2: Measured displacements after heating along the diagonal of test
specimen compared to numerical results.
on the 6 mm thick glass pane are investigated further by looking at the measuremed
displacements during the heating process. These measurements are shown in Figure 6.20.
The figure shows that while the measurements of the displacements at measurement
point 1, 3, 4 and 5 all become steady after approximately five hours of heating, the
measurements of the displacement at measurement point 2 continues to decrease even
==PAGE:80==
66
6 Results and discussion
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Figure 6.18: Test B3: Measured displacements after heating along the diagonal of test
specimen compared to numerical results.
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
4
Figure 6.19: Test B4: Measured displacements after heating along the diagonal of test
specimen compared to numerical results.
==PAGE:81==
6.2 Thermal load experiments
67
after eight hours.
This indicates that some other factor than the IGU expanding
must have influenced the measurements. It could be that the potentiometer was not
sufficiently fastened and that the pin was therefore able to slide on the glass as it
expanded.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
-4
-3.5
-3
-2.5
-2
-1.5
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
Figure 6.20: Test B3: Measured displacements on the 4 mm glass pane during heating
process.
If the measurement of the displacement at measurement point 2 is neglected it is found
that the deflection shape indicated by the measurements on the 6 mm thick pane fits
well with the deflection shape obtained from the FE program.
In Figure 6.19 it is seen that the calculated displacements fits well with the measured
displacements for both the 4 mm and 6 mm thick pane. Especially, the deflection shape
of the 6 mm thick pane from the FE program fits well with the deflection shape indicated
by the measured displacements. The deflection shape of the 4 mm thick pane obtained
from the FE program is seen to be bulging too much out compared to the deflection
shape indicated by the measured displacements, although the calculated displacement
at measurement point 1 is lower than the measured displacements.
Overall, the FE program performed well in calculating the displacements due to thermal
loads. Although, it was seen that the FE program overestimated the displacements,
especially for the IGUs with 15 mm thick cavities. The FE program performed very
well in calculating the displacements due to thermal loads for the IGUs with 8 mm
thick cavities. It was observed that the displacements were larger for the IGUs with
15 mm thick cavities than for the IGUs with 8 mm thick cavities. This shows that the
FE program does not handle large displacements at high temperatures that well. This
could be due to the behaviour of the sealant, which can only be considered elastic in
the range −20 ◦C to 60 ◦C. Furthermore it was found that the degree of fixity between
the glass panes and the spacers (see section 4.3) should be low when modelling IGUs at
==PAGE:82==
68
6 Results and discussion
high temperatures in order to obtain comparable results. The behaviour of the sealant
material when heated is a subject for further research.
==PAGE:83==
CHAPTER 7
Numerical studies
This chapter presents numerical studies of the structural response of IGUs. The chapter
begins with a parameter study of the stiffness parameters of the edge seal, then analysis
of the response for thermal and wind load and ends with a study on the influence of the
thicknesses on the load sharing.
7.1
Edge seal stiffness
In Chapter 6, the experimentally obtained results were compared to the numerically
obtained results from the FE program. Numerical modelling of the experiments included
a few unknown parameters such as the bending stiffness of the spacer, the shear stiffness
of the sealant and the degree of fixity between the glass panes and the edge seal i.e.
whether the connection between the glass panes and spacers can be assumed to be
a pinned connection, partial fixed connection or fixed connection.
These unknown
parameters were suitably selected in Chapter 6 in order to compare the experimental
and numerical results. In this section the influence of the parameters is investigated in
a parameter study.
The influence of the different parameters is studied on three square triple glazed IGUs
with side lengths of 0.5 m, 1.0 m and 2.0 m. The thicknesses of the glass panes are 6 mm,
4 mm and 4 mm. All the parameter studies are conducted by loading the IGUs with a
distributed surface load of 1.5 kN/m2. The same mesh which was used in Section 4.7 is
used here. The outer pane which is indirectly loaded is supported by bi-linear springs,
which allow almost no displacement in the direction of the load, but allow displacement
in the opposite direction of the load (see Section 4.5). Furthermore, the corners of the
IGUs are supported in the in-plane directions to secure in-plane stability.
In Figure 7.1 the influence of the bending stiffness of the spacer is investigated by letting
the the bending stiffness vary from infinitely flexible to infinitely rigid. The influence
is analysed by considering the maximum displacement of the outer indirectly loaded
pane. The maximum displacement is normalized with the maximum displacement for
the flexible spacer.
The figure shows that as the stiffness is increased the maximum displacement is decreased.
However, the displacement ratio is seen to be exponentially decreasing which means that
the effect of increasing the bending stiffness is more pronounced for very flexible spacers.
It is also seen that the influence of increasing the spacer bending stiffness is highly
dependent on the size of the IGU. For the large IGU the bending stiffness of the spacer is
seen to have very little effect (approximately 3% decrease of the maximum displacement),
while on the small IGU an increase in bending stiffness of the spacer has great effect and
==PAGE:84==
70
7 Numerical studies
Figure 7.1: Parameter study of bending stiffness of spacer.
reduces the maximum displacement with approximately 30%. For the mid-sized IGU
the maximum displacement of the lower pane is reduced with approximately 15%.
In Figure 7.2 the influence of the shear stiffness of the sealant i.e. the shear transfer
between panes along the edges of the glass panes is investigated.
The influence is
investigated by varying the shear stiffness from an infinitely small stiffness corresponding
Figure 7.2: Parameter study of shear stiffness of sealant.
==PAGE:85==
7.1 Edge seal stiffness
71
to no shear transfer between the glass panes to an infinitely large stiffness corresponding
to full shear transfer between the glass panes. Numerically this was done by changing the
stiffness of the linear springs representing the sealant in the FE model. The influence is
again analysed by considering the maximum displacement of the outer indirectly loaded
pane, which is normalized with the displacement calculated for the case with no shear
transfer.
It is seen that the influence of the shear stiffness is very significant for the large IGU.
Here a completely rigid shear connection between glass panes and spacers reduces the
maximum displacement of the lower pane to nearly 54% of the displacement calculated
with no shear stiffness. The shear stiffness also influences the displacement for the mid-
sized IGU as this is reduced with more than 16%. On the contrary, the shear stiffness
of the sealant are completely insignificant in calculating the displacement for the small
IGU. Here the displacement is not changed by an increase in shear stiffness.
The observations described above can be explained by the fact that large IGUs have
large displacements which will cause the glass panes to shift apart at the edges. This
shift is counteracted by the shear stiffness of the sealant. Therefore, the shear stiffness
is very influential for large IGUs, since it causes the glass panes to be compatible along
the edges and makes the glass panes deform together by increased stiffness at the edge
seal. In small IGUs the glass panes will also shift apart at the edges, but because the
displacements are small the shift will also be relatively small, which means that the
shear stiffness is less important for the displacements.
In Figure 7.3 the influence of the degree of fixity between the glass panes and spacers is
investigated. The influence is investigated by varying the degree of fixity from infinitely
small corresponding to pinned connections to infinitely large corresponding to fixed
Figure 7.3: Parameter study of bending stiffness of spacer.
==PAGE:86==
72
7 Numerical studies
connections. Numerically is was done by changing the stiffness of the torsion springs
placed along the pane edges in the FE model. In this investigation the lower pane is
simply supported along the edges instead of supported by the non-linear springs.
It is seen in Figure 7.3 that the degree of fixity has relatively great influence on the
small IGU, but almost no influence on the large IGU. The displacement in the small
IGU is reduced with almost 22% by changing the degree of fixity in the connections
from pinned to fixed. For the mid-sized IGU the displacement is seen to be reduced
with approximately 11% while for the large IGU the reduction is only approximately
1%.
The great influence of the degree of fixity on small IGUs and low influence on large IGUs
are again due to the large displacements in large IGUs as explained above. However,
comparing the influence of the degree of fixity with the influence of the spacer bending
stiffness, it is seen that the bending stiffness of the spacer is more influential.
7.2
Loads
In this section the structural response of the IGU is evaluated for typical service-life
loads on the IGUs such as wind loads and thermal loads.
Figure 7.4 shows the displacements of a 1 × 1 m triple glazed IGU subjected to wind
load. The displacements are shown for the loaded pane and for the outer indirectly
loaded pane. The displacements are seen to be small for both the directly and indirectly
loaded pane and naturally seen to be larger for the loaded pane. It is seen that for
typical wind load magnitudes the response is linear
Figure 7.4: Maximum displacement in IGU subjected to wind load.
The stresses in the glass panes of the IGU subjected to wind load is shown in Figure 7.5.
==PAGE:87==
7.2 Loads
73
Here, a significant difference between the directly loaded pane and indirectly loaded pane
is seen. Considering the displacements of the panes, the difference in stresses is seen
to be relatively large compared to the difference in displacements, which were relatively
small. The stresses are also seen to be linear for the magnitude of the wind loads.
Figure 7.5: Maximum principal stresses in IGU subjected to wind load.
Figure 7.6 show the maximum displacement of the outer 4 mm thick glass pane in IGUs
subjected to thermal loads from increasing or decreasing temperatures. In the figure, the
Figure 7.6: Displacements in glass pane due to thermal load.
==PAGE:88==
74
7 Numerical studies
temperature is varied from −40 ◦C to 40 ◦C where 20 ◦C is assumed to be the temperature
at manufacture. It is seen in the figure that the low temperatures cause large negative
displacements of the glass pane, which means that the IGU is heavily bulging inwards.
For the mid-sized and large IGU these displacements at low temperatures are seen to
be larger than the initial thickness, which means that the resulting cavity thickness is
significantly smaller than the initial.
The resulting cavity thicknesses of the IGUs are investigated in Figure 7.7. For normal
temperatures in the range 0 ◦C to 40 ◦C, the thickness of the two cavities is seen to be
similar. For temperatures lower than 0 ◦C the thickness of the cavity enclosed by the
thick and thin glass pane is seen to be smaller than the thickness of the cavity enclosed
by two thin glass panes. It is seen that when the cavity temperatures are cooled to
−40 ◦C the cavity thicknesses are 0.81 mm and 1.55 mm, respectively. This is a heavy
reduction of the cavity thicknesses, which also reduces the thermal insulation of the IGU
significantly.
Figure 7.7: Cavity thickness at center of IGU due to thermal load.
In Figure 7.8 the maximum principal stresses in the outer 4 mm thick glass pane has
been investigated. It is seen that the stresses in the small IGUs are significantly larger
than the stresses in the large IGU. This is completely opposite of the displacements (see
Figure 7.6). This shows that stresses are critical in small IGUs while displacements are
critical in large IGUs.
The stresses in the sealants are shown in Figure 7.9. The stresses of the sealants can
not be calculated directly from the FE program given that the sealants are modelled by
springs. Instead the relative magnitude of the sealant stress is shown in the figure. The
figure is seen to be very similar to Figure 7.8 where the stresses are seen to be most
critical in small IGUs. The stresses in the sealants are seen to be increasing in an almost
linear fashion.
==PAGE:89==
7.2 Loads
75
Figure 7.8: Maximum principal stress in IGUs due to thermal load.
Figure 7.9: Sealant stresses.
==PAGE:90==
76
7 Numerical studies
7.3
Thickness
In this section the influence of the glass pane and cavity thickness is investigated on
a 1 × 1 m triple glazed IGU. The influence is evaluated by loading one glass pane by
a distributed load of 1000 N/m2 and observe the resulting load share on each glass
pane. The load is of such a small magnitude that the membrane forces due to large
displacements are insignificant. This means that the distribution of loads on the glass
panes for a given set of thicknesses will change if the applied load is causing significant
membrane forces. However, as seen in the above this is not the cause for most wind
loads and thermal loads.
In Figure 7.10 - 7.12 the influence of the glass pane thicknesses is studied. In Figure
7.10 the thickness of the directly loaded pane is varied from 1 mm to 15 mm. The figure
shows that as the thickness of the loaded pane increases the load share on the pane is
increased. For a thickness of 15 mm the loaded glass pane is seen to carry almost 97%
of the load. It is also seen that the indirectly loaded glass panes shares the rest of the
load almost equally except when the loaded glass pane is very thin. For a thickness of
1 mm of the loaded pane it is seen that the middle pane carries more load than the outer
pane, but for a thickness of minimum 6 mm of the loaded pane the remaining panes are
seen to carry the same load.
Figure 7.10: Load sharing between panes for varying thickness of directly loaded pane.
In Figure 7.11 the influence of the thickness of the middle glass pane is varied from
1 mm to 15 mm. The figure shows that as the thickness of the middle pane increases the
load share on the middle pane also increases as expected. The load share on the middle
glass pane is seen to be going towards approximately 84% as the thickness of the middle
pane becomes really large. It is also seen that the directly loaded pane is carrying most
of the load when the middle glass pane is very thin. However, as the thickness of the
middle glass pane increases it is seen that the load share on the directly loaded pane is
==PAGE:91==
7.3 Thickness
77
decreased significantly while the outer indirectly loaded glass pane decreases a lot less.
This shows that the thickness of the middle glass pane effects the load share on the
loaded pane more than the outer indirectly loaded pane.
Figure 7.11: Load sharing between panes for varying thickness of middle indirectly
loaded pane.
In Figure 7.12 the influence of the thickness of the outer indirectly loaded glass pane
is varied from 1 mm to 15 mm. The figure shows the same tendencies as Figure 7.11.
As the thickness of the outer indirectly loaded glass pane increases the load share on
the same pane increases to approximately 74%. Again it is seen that the load share on
the directly loaded pane is most effected by the thickness of the outer indirectly loaded
pane.
In Figure 7.13 the influence of the cavity thicknesses is studied. In the figure the cavity
thickness is varied from 1 mm to 20 mm. The load share is only shown for the loaded
pane, but here it is seen that the load share is increasing with the cavity thicknesses.
However, the increase is very small compared to the increase due glass pane thicknesses,
and therefore, the cavity thicknesses are less influential.
==PAGE:92==
78
7 Numerical studies
Figure 7.12: Load sharing between panes for varying thickness of outer indirectly
loaded pane.
Figure 7.13: Load sharing between panes for varying thickness of outer indirectly
loaded pane.
==PAGE:93==
CHAPTER 8
Conclusion
The aim of this report was to present a numerical analysis tool capable of determining
displacements and stresses in multi-glazed IGUs of arbitrary thicknesses and arbitrary
shapes subjected to all types of load.
A numerical analysis program based on the finite element method was developed in
this report. The developed program uses an extensive finite element model of the IGUs
to perform a non-linear finite element analysis. The model includes the glass panes
modelled as shell elements and the spacers modelled as 3-dimensional beam elements.
The shell elements and beam elements are connected by non-linear springs and linear
torsion springs representing the stiffness of the sealants. The enclosed gas inside the
cavities is modelled by tetrahedrons in order to express the cavity volume in a finite
element structure. The stiffness of the gas-filled cavity is calculated by use of the ideal
gas law.
The finite element analysis performed by the program was verified by comparing it
with experimentally obtained results. The finite element program was seen to perform
acceptable when the IGUs were subjected to dead loads.
Here the model was very
accurate in calculating the displacements of the indirectly loaded outer glass pane,
while slightly overestimating the displacements of the directly loaded glass pane. The
FE program was seen to perform less acceptable to acceptable, when the IGUs were
subjected to thermal loads depending on the thickness of the cavity. The program was
seen to calculate displacements close to the experimentally obtained displacements when
the cavity thickness was small (8 mm) and calculate displacements not so close to the
experimentally obtained displacement in the case of thick cavities (15 mm).
The effect of long-term loading on IGUs was also investigated experimentally to see
whether the IGUs would loose stiffness with time. The experiment lasted for nearly four
days and showed no clear tendency towards loss of stiffness. It could therefore not be
concluded based on the experiment that the stiffness of IGUs are time-dependent.
The influence of the stiffness along the edge seal on the displacements was investigated
in a parameter study. The parameter study included the bending stiffness of the spacer,
the shear stiffness of the sealant, and the degree of rotational fixity between the glass
panes and spacer. It was found that the bending stiffness of the spacer and the rotational
fixity were of significance for small IGUs smaller than 1 m2 while nearly insignificant for
large IGUs larger than 4 m2. On the other hand the shear stiffness of the sealant was
found to be very significant for large IGUs while insignificant for small IGUs.
The displacements and stresses in small and large IGUs were investigated and it was
found that both glass pane stresses and sealant stresses were most critical in small IGUs,
while large displacements were seen in large IGUs. The displacements for thermal loads
==PAGE:94==
80
8 Conclusion
showed that the resulting cavity thickness at the center of the IGU was heavily decreased
in large IGUs, which would significantly reduce the thermal insulation. The thickness
of the different glass panes were seen to be very influential on the distribution of loads
between glass panes, while the cavity thickness was less influential.
8.1
Further work
The FE program developed in this report was based on several assumption and simplifications
which need to be investigated further. The structural behaviour of the edge seal (spacer
and sealant) must be investigated further in relation to the bending stiffness, the shear
transfer and the edge fixity of the glass panes. These parameters should be obtained
experimentally and used in the FE model.
The FE program should then again be
compared with experimental data to verify the program.
The modelling of the edge seal should be more extensive than is the case in this report in
order to investigate and calculate the mechanical stresses in the primary and secondary
sealant.
The spacer should be modelled as an assembly of shell or solid elements,
depending on the geometry of the spacer, instead of the simple Euler-Bernoulli beam in
order to include local deformations of the spacer. Non-linear physical behaviour should
also be implemented in the FE program in order to incorporate yielding of the spacers.
The primary and secondary sealant should also be modelled using solid elements with
their respective material properties instead of simple linear springs. The modelling of
the sealant should similar to the spacer also include non-linear physical behaviour given
the rubber like behaviour of the sealants. Furthermore, the change of stiffness with
temperature should be incorporated in order to accurately model the response of the
IGUs to temperature variations.
Implementation of the above mentioned initiatives would produce a useful tool for precise
determining of the displacements and stresses in not only the glass panes but also the
spacers and sealants. This would help designers optimize the design of the edge seal in
regards to the structural requirements.
==PAGE:95==
APPENDIX A
Road map to digital annex
Finite element program
Program
Basic (Folder containing Matlab functions required to run the program)
Mech
Elements
LBCST (Folder containing Matlab functions for the shell element)
Beam3D (Folder containing Matlab functions for the 3-dimensional
beam element)
Springs (Folder containing Matlab functions for the co-rotational
springs)
Materials (Folder containing Matlab files for elements and materials)
Post (Folder containing Matlab functions for post analysis of FE results)
Raw experimental data
Experiments with dead load
Test files A1 - A8
Experiments with thermal load
Test files B1 - B4
Experiments with long-term load
Test files part 1 - 3
Calibration
Pictures and videos
Experiments with dead load (Folder containing images and videos of the
experimental setup)
Experiments with thermal load (Folder containing images of the experimental
setup)
==PAGE:96==
82
==PAGE:97==
APPENDIX B
Finite element formulations
and element tests
B.1
Finite element formulation of LBCST shell
element
The linear bending constant strain triangle (LBCST) element is a shell element combining
the Specht plate element and the constant strain triangle (CST) disc element. In this
chapter the basis functions for both the disc and plate element will be shown along with
the strain-displacement matrix used to find the element stiffness. As the basis functions
of the CST and LBCST element are formulated using area coordinates, these will briefly
be explained before the derivation of the basis functions.
Area coordinates are a set of three coordinates used to describe the position of a point
inside a triangle. The three coordinates are normally listed as ζ1, ζ2 and ζ3. The name
area coordinates is given as the three coordinates to a point inside a triangle can be seen
as three triangular subareas as shown in Figure B.1.
Figure B.1: Area coordinates and geometry.
Area coordinates are defined as as the ratio between the subarea Ai defined by the point
P and the side i, and the total area of the triangle
ζi = Ai
A =
1
2dili
1
2hili
= di
hi
(B.1)
==PAGE:98==
84
B Finite element formulations and element tests
This can also be seen as the distance perpendicular to side i to the current point relative
to the perpendicular height hi also shown in Figure B.2.
Figure B.2: Area coordinate ζ1 as function of height perpendicular to side 1.
The cartesian coordinates x and y to a point in the triangle can be written in terms of
area coordinates as


x
y
1

=


x1
x2
x3
y1
y2
y3
1
1
1




ζ1
ζ2
ζ3


(B.2)
The inverse relation is found to be


ζ1
ζ2
ζ3

= 1
2A


y2 −y3
x3 −x2
x2y3 −x3y2
y3 −y1
x1 −x3
x3y1 −x1y3
y1 −y2
x2 −x1
x1y2 −x2y1




x
y
1


(B.3)
where it is used that x1y2 −x2y1 −x1y3 + x3y1 + x2y3 −x3y2 = 2A.
The determination of strains and stresses in a global cartesian coordinate system requires
the ability to differentiate area coordinates with respect to x and y. This is done by
use of the chain rule which multiplies the derivative of the outer function with the
derivative of the inner function. In this case the inner function is the area coordinates
differentiated with respect to the cartesian coordinate (x or y). The derivatives of the
area coordinates with respect to the cartesian coordinates x and y is found from Equation
(B.3) by realising that:
∂ζi
∂x = −bi
2A
∂ζi
∂y = ai
2A
(B.4)
The rotation along a side in the triangle is needed in order to determine the correct basis
functions and can be determined as the derivative of the shape function with respect to
the normal to the side considered.
∂ζi
∂nj
= −1
hi
∂ni
∂nj
= −1
hi
(aiaj + bibj) 1
lilj
(B.5)
In the case where i = j the expression takes the form
∂ζi
∂ni
= −1
hi
(a2
i + b2
i ) 1
l2
i
= −li
2A
(B.6)
where it is used that 2A = hi li (Nielsen, Forbes, and Poulsen, 2016, chap. 8).
==PAGE:99==
B.1 Finite element formulation of LBCST shell element
85
B.1.1
CST element
The CST element is a triangular element with three nodes and two degrees of freedom
(DOFs) at each node (in-plane displacement in x- and y-direction) as shown in Figure
B.3. The element DOF vector of a CST element is written as
vT =
[
u1x
u1y
u2x
u2y
u3x
u3y
]
(B.7)
Figure B.3: CST element.
The CST element is able to model a linear variation of the displacement field in the
element. A linear variation of the displacement field produces a constant strain field
which is the reason for the name constant strain triangle (Cook et al., 1981, Sec. 3.4).
The basis functions of the element are easily expressed in terms of the area coordinates as
the area coordinates themselves satisfy the conditions of the basis functions (displacement
of one DOF with zero displacement of all other DOFs) as seen in Figure B.4.
Figure B.4: Area coordinate functions ζ1, ζ2 and ζ3.
Thus the basis functions are written as
Ni = ζi
(B.8)
and the displacement-interpolation matrix N takes the form
N =
[
N1
0
N2
0
N3
0
0
N1
0
N2
0
N3
]
(B.9)
==PAGE:100==
86
B Finite element formulations and element tests
from where the displacements in the element can be interpolated by
u = N v
(B.10)
The generalized strains are found by the multiplication of the strain-displacement matrix
B with the element DOF vector
ε =


εx
εy
γxy

=


∂
∂x
0
0
∂
∂y
∂
∂y
∂
∂x

N v = B v
(B.11)
The derivatives of the basis functions with respect to x and y are found by differentiating
through the area coordinates by use of the results from Equation (B.4)
∂N
∂x = ∂N
∂ζi
∂ζi
∂x = −1
2A
(
b1
∂N
∂ζ1
+ b2
∂N
∂ζ2
+ b3
∂N
∂ζ3
)
∂N
∂y = ∂N
∂ζi
∂ζi
∂y = 1
2A
(
a1
∂N
∂ζ1
+ a2
∂N
∂ζ2
+ a3
∂N
∂ζ3
)
(B.12)
The strain-displacement matrix is then found as
B = 1
2A


−b1
0
−b2
0
−b3
0
0
a1
0
a2
0
a3
a1
−b1
a2
−b2
a3
−b3


(B.13)
from which the stiffness matrix k can be determined by the product of the strains and
stresses from virtual work as k =
∫
A BT D B dA where D is the material stiffness matrix
for a disc given as
D =


E t
1−ν2
ν
E t
1−ν2
0
ν
E t
1−ν2
E t
1−ν2
0
0
0
1−ν
2
E t
1−ν2


(B.14)
B.1.2
Specht element
The Specht element is a triangular plate element with three nodes and three DOFs at
each node (out-of-plane displacement in z-direction and rotations around x- and y-axis)
as shown in Figure B.5. The element DOF vector of a Specht element is written as
vT =
[
w1
θ1x
θ1y
w2
θ2x
θ2y
w3
θ3x
θ3y
]
(B.15)
==PAGE:101==
B.1 Finite element formulation of LBCST shell element
87
Figure B.5: Specht plate element.
The Specht element was found by Specht (1988) as a modification of the basis functions
for the three-node plate bending element also called the Zienkiewicz-triangle. In the
following the strain-displacement matrix will be determined as shown in (Nielsen, Forbes,
and Poulsen, 2016, App. C) based on the displacement basis found in (Specht, 1988).
The following basis is used to find a displacement field that satisfy the displacements at
the nodes
γ1ζ1, γ2ζ2, γ3ζ3, γ4ζ1ζ2, γ5ζ2ζ3, γ6ζ3ζ1
γ7(ζ2
1ζ2 + 1
2ζ1ζ2ζ3(3(1 −µ3)ζ1 −(1 + 3µ3)ζ2 + (1 + 3µ3)ζ3))
γ8(ζ2
2ζ3 + 1
2ζ2ζ3ζ1(3(1 −µ1)ζ2 −(1 + 3µ1)ζ3 + (1 + 3µ3)ζ1))
γ9(ζ2
3ζ1 + 1
2ζ3ζ1ζ2(3(1 −µ2)ζ3 −(1 + 3µ2)ζ1 + (1 + 3µ2)ζ2))
(B.16)
where µiis a factor expressing the skewness of the element which e.g.
for side 1 is
defined as µ1 = l2
3−l2
2
l2
1 . The other skewness factors can be found by cyclic permutation.
The contribution from each term in the basis to the deformation of the nodes are found
given that the displacement is equal to the value of the basis term and the contribution
to the rotations are found using the results from Equation (B.4)
uz = N
θx = ∂N
∂y = ∂N
∂ζi
∂ζi
∂y = 1
2A
(
a1
∂N
∂ζ1
+ a2
∂N
∂ζ2
+ a3
∂N
∂ζ3
)
θy = −∂N
∂x = −∂N
∂ζi
∂ζi
∂x = 1
2A
(
b1
∂N
∂ζ1
+ b2
∂N
∂ζ2
+ b3
∂N
∂ζ3
)
(B.17)
The contribution to the deformations at each node is then found by evaluating the
Equations (B.17) and inserting the area coordinates associated with the particular node,
e.g. for the deformation of node 1 (ζ1 = 1, ζ2 = ζ3 = 0) the only non-zero basis term is
the first term yielding w1 = γ1. The deformation at the DOFs based on the basis terms
==PAGE:102==
88
B Finite element formulations and element tests
can then be written in the following matrix format v = Aγ


u1z
θ1x
θ1y
u2z
θ2x
θ2y
u3z
θ3x
θ3y


= 1
2A


2A
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
a1
a2
a3
a2
0
a3
a2
0
0
b1
b2
b3
b2
0
b3
b2
0
0
0
2A
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
a1
a2
a3
a1
a3
0
0
a3
0
b1
b2
b3
b1
b3
0
0
b3
0
0
0
2A
0
0
0
0
0
0
a1
a2
a3
0
a2
a1
0
0
a1
b1
b2
b3
0
b2
b1
0
0
b1




γ1
γ2
γ3
γ4
γ5
γ6
γ7
γ8
γ9


(B.18)
The inverse relationship γ = A−1v determines the values of the basis terms for a given
displacement vector. This relation is used to find the factors for the basis terms that allow
a unit displacement of the considered DOF and no deformation at all other DOFs, and
by realising that the identity matrix contains all vectors representing unit displacement
at each DOFs the basis functions can be found as the vectors in A−1
A−1 =


1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
−1
0
0
1
−b3
a3
0
0
0
0
0
0
−1
0
0
1
−b1
a1
1
−b2
a2
0
0
0
−1
0
0
2
b3
−a3
−2
b3
−a3
0
0
0
0
0
0
2
b1
−a1
−2
b1
−a1
−2
b2
−a2
0
0
0
2
b2
−a2


(B.19)
which yield the following first three basis functions also shown in Figures B.6 and B.7
Nu1z =ζ1 −ζ1ζ2 + ζ3ζ1
+ 2(ζ2
1ζ2 + 1
2ζ1ζ2ζ3(3(1 −µ3)ζ1 −(1 + 3µ3)ζ2 + (1 + 3µ3)ζ3))
−2(ζ2
3ζ1 + 1
2ζ3ζ1ζ2(3(1 −µ2)ζ3 −(1 + 3µ2)ζ1 + (1 + 3µ2)ζ2))
(B.20)
Figure B.6: Basis function Nu1z.
==PAGE:103==
B.1 Finite element formulation of LBCST shell element
89
Nθ1x = −b2ζ3ζ1
+ b3(ζ2
1ζ2 + 1
2ζ1ζ2ζ3(3(1 −µ3)ζ1 −(1 + 3µ3)ζ2 + (1 + 3µ3)ζ3))
+ b2(ζ2
3ζ1 + 1
2ζ3ζ1ζ2(3(1 −µ2)ζ3 −(1 + 3µ2)ζ1 + (1 + 3µ2)ζ2))
(B.21)
Nθ1y =a2ζ3ζ1
−a3(ζ2
1ζ2 + 1
2ζ1ζ2ζ3(3(1 −µ3)ζ1 −(1 + 3µ3)ζ2 + (1 + 3µ3)ζ3))
−a2(ζ2
3ζ1 + 1
2ζ3ζ1ζ2(3(1 −µ2)ζ3 −(1 + 3µ2)ζ1 + (1 + 3µ2)ζ2))
(B.22)
(a) Basis function Nθ1x
(b) Basis function Nθ1y
Figure B.7: Basis functions for the rotation of node 1.
The remaining six basis functions can be found using cyclic permutation.
The transverse displacement can be interpolated from the basis functions by
[
uz
]
=
[
Nu1z
Nθ1x
Nθ1y
Nu2z
Nθ2x
Nθ2y
Nu3z
Nθ3x
Nθ3y
]


u1z
θ1x
θ1y
u2z
θ2x
θ2y
u3z
θ3x
θ3y


(B.23)
The generalized strains for the plate element is the curvature found as the double
derivative of the transverse displacement
ε =


κx
κy
2κxy

=


−∂2
∂x2
−∂2
∂y2
−2 ∂2
∂x∂y

N v = B v
(B.24)
==PAGE:104==
90
B Finite element formulations and element tests
Using the results from Equation (B.12) it is seen that the double derivative has 9
contributions which can be written in the form
ε = Aζ εζ =
1
(2A)2


−b2
1
−b2
2
−b2
3
−2b1b2
−2b2b3
−2b3b1
−a2
1
−a2
2
−a2
3
−2a1a2
−2a2a3
−2a3a1
2a1b1
2a2b2
2a3b3
2(a1b2 + a2b1)
2(a2b3 + a3b2)
2(a3b1 + a1b3)




∂2N
∂ζ2
1
∂2N
∂ζ2
2
∂2N
∂ζ2
3
∂2N
∂ζ1ζ2
∂2N
∂ζ2ζ3
∂2N
∂ζ3ζ1


(B.25)
where the vector εζ is the strains with respect to the area coordinates and the matrix
Aζ transforms the strains to strain in the x- and y-direction.
The calculation of the double derivatives of the basis functions with respect to the area
coordinates is cumbersome, so instead the double derivatives are found for the basis
terms given in Equation (B.16) instead.
The first seven columns of matrix Bγ are
shown below from which the entries of the remaining columns can be found by cyclic
permutation of the seventh column (Nielsen, Forbes, and Poulsen, 2016, App. C).


∂2N
∂ζ2
1
∂2N
∂ζ2
2
∂2N
∂ζ2
3
∂2N
∂ζ1ζ2
∂2N
∂ζ2ζ3
∂2N
∂ζ3ζ1


= Bγ γ =


0
0
0
0
0
0
2ζ2 + 3ζ2ζ3(1 −µ3)
0
0
0
0
0
0
−ζ1ζ3(1 + 3µ3)
0
0
0
0
0
0
ζ1ζ2(1 + 3µ3)
...
0
0
0
1
0
0
2ζ1 + 1
2ζ3(6(1 −µ3)ζ1 −2(1 + 3µ3)ζ2 + (1 + 3µ3)ζ3)
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
2ζ1(3(1 −µ3)ζ1 −2(1 + 3µ3)ζ2 + 2(1 + 3µ3)ζ3)
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
2ζ2(6(1 −µ3)ζ1 −(1 + 3µ3)ζ2 + 2(1 + 3µ3)ζ3)




γ1
γ2
γ3
γ4
γ5
γ6
γ7
γ8
γ9


(B.26)
The basis terms are then transformed to nodal deformations by multiplication of the
inverse of the transformation matrix found in Equation (B.19) and the strains are thus
calculated by
ε = Aζ Bγ A−1 v
(B.27)
==PAGE:105==
B.1 Finite element formulation of LBCST shell element
91
where the strain-displacement matrix is
B = Aζ Bγ A−1
(B.28)
from which the stiffness matrix k can be determined by the product of the strains and
stresses from the virtual work equation as k =
∫
A BT D B dA where D is the material
stiffness matrix for a plate given as
D =


E t3
12(1−ν2)
ν
E t3
12(1−ν2)
0
ν
E t3
12(1−ν2)
E t3
12(1−ν2)
0
0
0
1−ν
2
E t3
12(1−ν2)


(B.29)
where t is the thickness and ν is Poisson’s ratio.
B.1.3
Shell element
The combination of the CST disc element and the Specht plate element creates a shell
element with 6 in-plane DOFs from the CST element and 9 out-of-plane DOFs from the
plate element. The rotation around the axis normal to the element plane is added to
the shell element, because unless the element is placed in the xy-plane there will be a
stiffness contribution to this rotation. Thus the LBCST element has 6 DOFs at each
node and 18 DOFs in total as seen in Figure B.8.
Figure B.8: Combination of CST disc element and Specht plate element to LBCST
shell element.
==PAGE:106==
92
B Finite element formulations and element tests
The element DOF vector is given as
vT =
[
u1x
u1y
u1z
θ1x
θ1y
θ1z
...
u3x
u3y
u3z
θ3x
θ3y
θ3z
]
(B.30)
The stiffness matrix k is found by determining the stiffness of the disc and plate elements
separately and then assemble the shell stiffness by inserting the stiffness terms at the
entries corresponding to the associated DOFs, e.g. the stiffness contributions of DOFs
at node 1
k1 =


kCST
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
kSpecht
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0


(B.31)
As seen in the above Equation (B.31) there is no stiffness contribution to the rotation
around the element normal.
This is not a problem in the case where not co-planar
elements meet, however for elements with only co-planar adjacent element this will
result in a singular stiffness matrix. The problem can however be avoided by adding
a small artificial stiffness to the rotation around the element normal, which should be
large enough to formulate a non-singular matrix but small enough to not influence the
solution.
B.1.4
Single-element test of LBCST element
1 diary ( ’Test_LBCST . txt ’ ) ;
2 diary on
;
3 %% Single −element
t e s t
of LBCST element
4 % Test
of B−matrix and
t a n g e n t i a l
p r e d i c t i o n
5 clc ;
clear all ;
close all ;
6
7 %Geometry
8 X( 1 , : ) = [0
0
0 ] ;
%Coordinates
f o r
node 1
9 X( 2 , : ) = [10 0
0 ] ;
%Coordinates
f o r
node 2
10 X( 3 , : ) = [
5 sqrt (3) /2∗10
0 ] ;
%Coordinates
f o r
node 3
11 T( 1 , : ) = [1
2
3 ] ;
12 ElTy=LBCST_def ;
13
14 % The s t r a i n s
are
found
in
the
center
of
the
element
defined
by the
area
15 % coordinates
zeta = [ 0 . 3 3
0.33
0 . 3 3 ]
16 xip = ElTy . xipr ;
17 zeta = xip ( : , 1 ) ;
18 % Displacement
s t r a i n
matrix
19 B = LBCST_B( zeta ,X, ElTy ) ;
20
==PAGE:107==
B.1 Finite element formulation of LBCST shell element
93
21 % The element node 3
i s
displaced
in
the y−d i r e c t i o n
to
v e r i f y
that
the
22 % element can produce a
s t r a i n
vector
with
the
only non−zero
value
at
the
23 % entry
a s s o c i a t e d
with
s t r a i n
in y−d i r e c t i o n
( corresponding
to
u n i a x i a l
24 % tension
in y−d i r e c t i o n )
25
26 % Element DOF vector
f o r
displacement
of
node 3 in
the y−
d i r e c t i o n
27 v = [0
0 0 0 0 0
. . .
28
0 0 0 0 0 0
. . .
29
0 1 0 0 0
0 ] ’ ;
30
31 % S t r a in s
32 e = B ∗v ;
% e = [ ex ey yxy kx ky 2kxy ] ’
33 disp ( [ ’ Uniaxial
tension
in y−d i r e c t i o n : ’ ] )
34 disp ( e )
35
36 % The element node 2 and 3 are
displaced
in
the x−d i r e c t i o n
to
v e r i f y
that
37 % the
element can produce a
s t r a i n
vector
corresponding
to
u n i a x i a l
38 % tension
in x−d i r e c t i o n
39
40 % Element DOF vector
f o r
displacement
of
node 2 and 3 in
the x
−d i r e c t i o n
41 v = [0
0 0 0 0 0
. . .
42
1 0 0 0 0 0
. . .
43
0.5 0 0 0 0
0 ] ’ ;
44
45 % S t r a in s
46 e = B ∗v ;
% e = [ ex ey yxy kx ky 2kxy ] ’
47 disp ( [ ’ Uniaxial
tension
in x−d i r e c t i o n : ’ ] )
48 disp ( e )
49
50 % The element node 3 are
displaced
in
the z−d i r e c t i o n
while
a l l
three
nodes
51 % are
given a corresponding
r o t a t i o n
to
simulate
r i g i d
r o t a t i o n
to
v e r i f y
52 % that
the
element can produce a zero
s t r a i n
vector .
53
54 % Element DOF vector
f o r
displacement
of
node 3 in z−d i r e c t i o n
and
55 % corresponding
r o t a t i o n s
around the x−axis
at
a l l
nodes
56 v = [0
0 0
1/( sqrt (3) /2∗10) 0 0
. . .
==PAGE:108==
94
B Finite element formulations and element tests
57
0 0 0
1/( sqrt (3) /2∗10) 0 0
. . .
58
0 0 1
1/( sqrt (3) /2∗10) 0
0 ] ’ ;
59
60 % S t ra i ns
61 e = B ∗v ;
% e = [ ex ey yxy kx ky 2kxy ] ’
62 disp ( [ ’ Rigid body
r o t a t i o n : ’ ] )
63 disp ( e )
64
65 % I t
i s
hereby
v e r i f i e d
that
the
strain −displacement
matrix B
i s
c o r r e c t l y
66 % formulated
67
68
69 %% Test
of
t a n g e n t i a l
p r e d i c t i o n
70 % The
a b i l i t y
to
p r e d i c t
the
nodal
f o r c e s
from the
t a n g e n t i a l
p r e d i c t i o n
i s
71 % tested by appliyng
f i r s t
a small
deformation
at node 3
causing
u n i a x i a l
72 % tension and followed by a small
r o t a t i o n
around the x−axis
at node 3
73
74 % Material
75 G. t=10e −3;
% Thickness
of
s h e l l
element
76 G.E=100e9 ;
% Modulus
of
e l a s t i c i t y
77 G. nu =0.10;
% Poisson ’ s
r a t i o
78 GTy=l e s h e l l _ d e f (G, 1 ) ;
% Define Type 1
79
80 % Element DOF vector
f o r
undeformed
s t a t e
81 v0 = zeros (1 ,18) ’ ;
82 % Element DOF vector
f o r
small
displacement
of
node 3
83 v1 = [0
0 0 0 0 0
. . .
84
0 0 0 0 0 0
. . .
85
0 1 0 0 0
0 ] ’ ;
86 % Element DOF vector
f o r
small
r o t a t i o n
at node 3
87 v2 = [0
0 0 0 0 0
. . .
88
0 0 0 0 0 0
. . .
89
0 0 0 1/8∗pi 0
0 ] ’ ;
90
91 % S t i f f n e s s
tangent
f o r
undeformed
s t a t e
( v=v0 )
92 k0 = LBCST_k2(X,GTy,T, v0 , ElTy ) ;
93 % S t i f f n e s s
tangent
f o r
deformed
s t a t e
( v=v1 )
94 k1 = LBCST_k2(X,GTy,T, v1 , ElTy ) ;
95
96 % Tangential
p r e d i c t i o n
97 KV = k0∗v1+k1∗v2 ;
==PAGE:109==
B.1 Finite element formulation of LBCST shell element
95
98
99 % The t a n g e n t i a l
p r e d i c t i o n
i s
tested by comparing
i t
with
the
nodal
f o r c e
100 % vector q
101
102 % Nodal
f o r c e
vector
f o r
deformation
s t a t e
( v=v1+v2 )
103 q = LBCST_q(X,GTy,T, v1+v2 , ElTy ) ;
104
105 % D i f f e r e n c e
between
t a n g e n t i a l
p r e d i c t i o n
and nodal
f o r c e
vector
106 d i f f e r e n c e = (KV−q) ./ q ∗100;
107 disp ( [ ’ D i f f e r e n c e
in
pct .
between
nodal
f o r c e s
determined by
t a n g e n t i a l
p r e d i c t i o n ’ ] )
108 disp ( [ ’ and nodal
f o r c e
vector ’ ] )
109 disp ( d i f f e r e n c e )
110
111 % Since
the
deviation
i s
very
small
the
t a n g e n t i a l
p r e d i c t i o n
i s
hereby
112 % accepted
113 diary
o f f
Listing B.1: Matlab code.
The output of the above Matlab code :
Uniaxial tension in y-direction:
0
0.1155
0
0
0
0
Uniaxial tension in x-direction:
0.1000
0
0
0
0
0
Rigid body rotation:
1.0e-17 *
0
0
0
==PAGE:110==
96
B Finite element formulations and element tests
0
-0.2602
0.1956
Difference in pct. between nodal forces determined by tangential prediction
and nodal force vector
0
0
-0.0000
0
0.0000
NaN
0
0
0
0
-0.0000
NaN
NaN
0
0
0
-0.9567
NaN
==PAGE:111==
B.2 Co-rotated shell element
97
B.2
Co-rotated shell element
B.2.1
Local coordinate system
The local coordinate system of a shell element is determined by the node coordinates in
the global coordinate system. The local coordinate system is here defined as done by
Zienkiewicz and Taylor (2000) as seen in Figure B.9. The x-axis of the element is in the
direction from node 1 to node 2
axl = x2 −x1
(B.32)
The out-of-plane z-axis is found as the cross product between two vectors spanning the
element plane. These two vectors are chosen as the vector from node 1 to node 2 and
the vector from node 1 to node 3
azl = (x2 −x1) × (x3 −x1)
(B.33)
The y-axis is then found as the vector perpendicular to the xz-plane spanned by the
vectors azl and axl
ayl = azl × axl
(B.34)
Figure B.9: Local
and
global
coordinate
system
of
an
arbitrary
shell
model
(Zienkiewicz and Taylor, 2000, p. 433).
The base vectors which are unit vectors with directions of the a vectors constitutes the
transformation matrix from local to global direction which can be written in matrix
==PAGE:112==
98
B Finite element formulations and element tests
form


ux
uy
uz

=

exl
eyl
ezl

=


ul
x
ul
y
ul
z


(B.35)
The reverse transformation from global to local can be found using the transposed vectors
given that the transformation matrix is an orthogonal matrix (A−1 = AT).


ul
x
ul
y
ul
z

=


eT
xl
eT
yl
eT
zl

=


ux
uy
uz


(B.36)
The above equation can be expanded in order to transform a whole set of element DOFs.
Defining the above matrix of transposed base vectors as A1 the following relation apply
between local and global DOFs vl = A v


ul
1x
ul
1y
ul
1z
θl
1x
θl
1y
θl
1z
...
ul
3x
ul
3y
ul
3z
θl
3x
θl
3y
θl
3z


=


A1
A1
...
A1
A1




u1x
u1y
u1z
θ1x
θ1y
θ1z
...
u3x
u3y
u3z
θ3x
θ3y
θ3z


(B.37)
The above is valid for small rotations given that large rotations do not combine vectorially
(Cook et al., 1981, Chap. 8).
B.2.2
Tangent stiffness matrix
The tangent stiffness matrix is determined by finding the changes in the local element
nodal force vector due to a small change in the local element DOF vector vl. This can
be done by considering the identity
ql = AT ql
(B.38)
where ql is the nodal force vector of the element given in the local coordinate system
and A is the transformation matrix, which here is the equal to the identity matrix.
==PAGE:113==
B.2 Co-rotated shell element
99
Differentiating with respect to the element DOF vector yields
dql = d
(
AT ql)
= AT d
(
ql)
+ d
(
AT )
ql
(B.39)
The first term in Equation (B.39) expresses the change in nodal forces due to nodal
displacements. This is equal to the basic linear stiffness of the element given that A is
the identity matrix and
d
(
ql)
= kl
0 dvl
(B.40)
The second term in Equation (B.39) represent the change of element nodal forces due
to the rotation of the local coordinate system caused by the nodal displacements. The
derivative of the transformation matrix A with respect to the element DOF vector can
be rewritten using the chain rule
d
(
AT )
=
( 18
∑
i=1
∂
∂vl
i
(
AT )
dvl
i
)
ql =
( 18
∑
i=1
∂
∂vl
i
(
AT )
ql IT
i
)
dvl = kσ dvl
(B.41)
where Ii is a column vector with one in the ith entry and zeroes in all other entries.
The derivative of the transformation matrix with respect to the nodal displacements are
found as the base vectors of the rotated coordinate system due to nodal displacement
increments. Some nodal displacements (ul
1x, ul
2x, ul
3x, ul
3y and nodal rotations θix and θix)
do not cause rotation of the local coordinate system due to the definition as described
in section B.2.1. Other nodal displacements such as ul
3z causes the coordinate system to
rotate and the resulting base vectors are found based on Figure B.10.
∂
∂ul
3z
(
A1
T )
=


0
0
0
0
0
−1
y3
0
1
y3
0


(B.42)
Figure B.10: Incremental change of base vectors due to displacement du3z.
A similar approach is used to find the incremental change of base vectors due to displacements
du1y, du2y, du1z and du2z
==PAGE:114==
100
B Finite element formulations and element tests
∂
∂ul
1y
(
A1
T )
=


0
1
x2
0
−1
x2
0
0
0
0
0


∂
∂ul
1z
(
A1
T )
=


0
0
1
x2
0
0
x2−x3
x2y3
−1
x2
x2−x3
x2y3
0


(B.43)
∂
∂ul
2y
(
A1
T )
=


0
−1
x2
0
1
x2
0
0
0
0
0


∂
∂ul
2z
(
A1
T )
=


0
0
−1
x2
0
0
x3
x2y3
1
x2
−x3
x2y3
0


(B.44)
The tangential stiffness of the element is then found by inserting Equation (B.40) and
(B.41) in Equation (B.39) which is then written as
dql = kl
0 dvl + kl
σ dvl = kt dvl
(B.45)
where kl
t = kl
0 + kl
σ is the total tangential stiffness (Forbes and Poulsen, 2016).
B.2.3
Nodal force vector
The nodal forces in the equilibrium equation are determined using the basic linear
stiffness of the element and the strain giving deformations in the co-rotated coordinate
system.
ql =
∫
A BT σ dA =
∫
A BT D B dA vl = kl
0 vl
(B.46)
The strain giving deformations are the nodal degrees of freedom minus the nodal displacements
and rotations due to rotation of the local coordinate system.
The strain giving displacements are found by subtracting the nodal coordinates of the
co-rotated undeformed element from the displaced nodal coordinates
vl
u = vd −xc
(B.47)
where xc is the coordinates of the rotated element without any deformations and xd is
the displaced nodal coordinates, e.g. for node i given as
xd
i = xi + vi
(B.48)
The nodal coordinates of the element without any deformations is found by defining the
rotation tensor matrix R, which describes the rotation of the local coordinate system
(Krenk, 2009, chap. 3). The rotation tensor matrix is found in two steps. First by
rotating the original x-direction base vector e0
xl to fit it with the x-direction base vector
ec
xl of the co-rotated coordinate system by
R1 = I + 2e0
xl
(
ec
xl
)T −2(e0
xl + ec
xl)(e0
xl + ec
xl)T
|e0
xl + ec
xl|2
(B.49)
Secondly by rotating the already rotated y-axis base vector (R1e0
yl) to fit it with the
y-direction base vector ec
yl of the co-rotated coordinate system
R2 = I + 2R1e0
yl
(
ec
yl
)T −2(R1e0
yl + ec
yl)(R1e0
yl + ec
yl)T
|R1e0
yl + ec
yl|2
(B.50)
==PAGE:115==
B.2 Co-rotated shell element
101
The total rotation matrix can then be found as a sequence of the two rotations defined
as
R = R2R1
(B.51)
Given that for node 1 xc
1 = xd
1 the remaining coordinates of the co-rotated element
without deformations can then be determined by rotating the side vectors from the
original configuration to the co-rotated configuration, e.g.
xc
2 = xc
1 + Ra12
(B.52)
where a12 = x0
2 −x0
1. The last node coordinate can be found in a similar way by rotating
a13. The strain giving displacements are then found by evaluating Equation (B.47).
The strain giving rotation are found as the rotational degrees of freedom minus the
rotations due to rotation of the local coordinate system. In example the rotation around
the x-axis due to rotation of the coordinate system can be determined by finding the
angle between the original y- or z-axis and the co-rotated y- or z-axis in the co-rotated
yz-plane. This is done by projecting the the chosen axis for instance the original z-axis
on to the co-rotated yz-plane by
n0c
n,x
T =
(
I −ec
xl
Tec
xl
)
e0
zl
T
(B.53)
where the tensor n0c
n,x
T =
(
I −ec
xl
Tec
xl
)
represent a projection on a plane normal to
the direction ec
xl which is the yz-plane (see (Krenk, 2009).
The projected vector is
normalized to a unit vector e0c
n,x and the angle between this projected z-axis base vector
and the z-direction base vector is found by
sin ϕ = e0c
n,x
Tec
zl
cos ϕ = e0c
n,x
Tec
xl
(B.54)
from which the angle can be found in all quadrants. The rotation of the remaining
axis can be found by cyclic permutation. The strain giving rotations can then be found
by subtracting the rotations due to rotation of the local coordinate system ϕi from the
rotational degrees of freedom.
The element nodal force vector is then found by evaluating Equation (B.46) and transforming
to global coordinates using the transformation matrix to transform from the local co-
rotated coordinate system to the global coordinate system
q = AT ql
(B.55)
The element nodal force vectors are scattered to the global level and assembled in order
to give the global nodal force vector Q (Forbes and Poulsen, 2016).
==PAGE:116==
102
B Finite element formulations and element tests
B.3
Finite element formulation of
3-dimensional beam element
The 3-dimensional beam element has 3 translational and 3 rotational degrees of freedom
at each node as seen in Figure B.11. The 3-dimensional beam elements is capable of
handling axial deformations, bending deformations and torsional deformations using
Euler-Bernoulli beam theory.
Figure B.11: 3-dimensional beam element.
The basis functions are found by considering the deformation gradients associated with
the deformations. For the the axial deformation the axial strain is the first derivative
of the axial displacements. This requires that the basis function itself is continuous (C0
continuous), which for the simplest case is obtained by a linear function. The linear
basis function for axial displacements can be found using Hermite interpolation and is
shown in Figure B.12
Nu1x = 1 −x
L
Nu2x = x
L
(B.56)
Figure B.12: Interpolation of axial displacements.
The basis functions for the bending deformations is determined under the assumption
that the rotation is the first derivative of the displacement, which is only approximately
true for small deformations. Furthermore it is assumed that beam axis is located on
the neutral axis, which means that an even distribution of normal stresses will not
introduce a bending moment. This decouples the axial stresses and bending stresses
and associated deformations. The basis functions for the bending deformations must
be C1 continuous since the deformation gradient (curvature) is found as the second
==PAGE:117==
B.3 Finite element formulation of 3-dimensional beam element
103
derivative of the transverse displacement. The basis functions with a continuous first
derivative can again be found using Hermite interpolation and below the basis function
are given for deformations in the xz −plane
Nu1z = 1 −3x2
L2 + 2x3
L3
Nu2z = 3x2
L2 −2x3
L3
(B.57)
Nθ1y = −x + 2x2
L −x3
L2
Nθ2y = x2
L −x3
L2
(B.58)
The basis function Nu1z and Nθ1y are shown in Figure B.13.
(a) Transverse displacement
(b) Rotation
Figure B.13: Basis functions for beam element.
The basis functions for deformation in the xy-plane are found to be similar to the above
basis functions except for a sign change on the basis functions for rotations
Nu1y = Nu1z
Nu2y = Nu2z
(B.59)
Nθ1z = −Nθ1y
Nθ2z = −Nθ2y
(B.60)
The basis functions for torsion is determined considering free Saint-Venant torsion. The
deformation gradient from torsion is given by its first derivative and therefore the basis
function is a linear function equal to the basis functions used for axial displacements
Nθ1x = Nu1x
Nθ2x = Nu2x
(B.61)
The generalized deformations of the beam element is the three displacements and the
axial rotation and can be interpolated from the basis functions by u = N v, which can
be written out


ux
uy
uz
θx

=


N1
0
0
0
0
0
N2
0
0
0
0
0
0
N3
0
0
0
−N4
0
N5
0
0
0
−N6
0
0
N3
0
N4
0
0
0
N5
0
N6
0
0
0
0
N1
0
0
0
0
0
N2
0
0




u1x
u1y
u1z
θ1x
θ1y
θ1z
u2x
u2y
u2z
θ2x
θ2y
θ2z


(B.62)
==PAGE:118==
104
B Finite element formulations and element tests
By renaming the basis functions by the shorter indexes
N1 = Nu1x
N2 = Nu2x
N3 = Nu1y
N4 = Nθ1y
N5 = Nu2y
N6 = Nθ1y
The generalized strains of the beam element is the axial strain found as the first derivative
of the axial displacement, the curvatures found as the second derivative of the transverse
displacement and the curvature found as the first derivative of the torsional displacement
ε =


εx
κz
κy
κx

=


∂
∂x
0
0
0
0
∂2
∂x2
0
0
0
∂2
∂x2
0
0
0
0
∂
∂x

N v = B v
(B.63)
where the strain-displacement matrix is given as B = ∂N.
The element stiffness of the 3-dimensional beam is then found by applying the virtual
work which yields
k =
∫L
0 BTDB dxl
(B.64)
where D is the material stiffness given as
D =


EA
0
0
0
0
EIz
0
0
0
0
EIy
0
0
0
0
GIx


(B.65)
Here E is the modulus of elasticity, A is the cross-sectional area, Ii is the moment of
inertia around the i-axis and G is the shear modulus of elasticity.
B.3.1
Single-element test of 3-dimensional beam
element
1 diary ( ’Test_Beam . txt ’ ) ;
2 diary on
;
3 %% Single −element
t e s t
of Beam element
4 % Test
of B−matrix and
t a n g e n t i a l
p r e d i c t i o n
5 clc ;
clear all ;
close all ;
6
7 %Geometry
8 X( 1 , : ) = [0
0
0 ] ;
%Coordinates
f o r
node 1
9 X( 2 , : ) = [1
0
0 ] ;
%Coordinates
f o r
node 2
==PAGE:119==
B.3 Finite element formulation of 3-dimensional beam element
105
10 T( 1 , : ) = [1
2 ] ;
11 ElTy=Beam3D_def ;
12
13 G.E
= 70 e9 ;
14 G.A
= 5e −5;
15 G.G
= 27 e9 ;
% Shear modulus
of
e l a s t i c i t y
16 G. Ix = 2e −9;
17 G. Iy = 2e −9;
18 G. Iz = 2e −9;
19
20 % The element node 1 are
displaced
in
the x−d i r e c t i o n
to
v e r i f y
that
21 % the
element can produce a
c o r r e c t
nodal
f o r c e
vector
f o r
only
a x i a l
22 % s t r a i n
23
24 % S t i f f n e s s
matrix
25 k = ElTy . k (X,T,G) ;
26
27 % Axial
f o r c e
on the beam
28 v = [−1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
0 ] ’ ;
29 F = k∗v
30
31 % The element node 1 and 2 are
displaced
in
the y−d i r e c t i o n
to
v e r i f y
that
32 % the
element can produce a
c o r r e c t
nodal
f o r c e
vector
f o r
r i g i d
body
33 % movement
34
35 % Moment on the beam
36 v = [0 −1 0 0 0 0 0 −1 0 0 0
0 ] ’ ;
37 F = k∗v
38
39
40 % The element node 1 and 2 are
rotated
around the y−axis
to
v e r i f y
that
41 % the
element can produce a
c o r r e c t
nodal
f o r c e
vector
f o r
constant
42 % curvature
43
44 % Moment on the beam
45 v = [0
0 0 0 0 −1 0 0 0 0 0
1 ] ’ ;
46 F = k∗v
47
48
==PAGE:120==
106
B Finite element formulations and element tests
49 % I t
i s
hereby
v e r i f i e d
that
the
s t i f f n e s s
matrix K i s
c o r r e c t l y
50 % formulated
51 diary
o f f
Listing B.2: Matlab code.
The output of the above Matlab code:
F =
-3500000
0
0
0
0
0
3500000
0
0
0
0
0
F =
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
F =
0
0
0
==PAGE:121==
B.3 Finite element formulation of 3-dimensional beam element
107
0
0
-280
0
0
0
0
0
280
==PAGE:122==
108
B Finite element formulations and element tests
B.4
Co-rotated spring
The derivation of the element matrices used to model the sealant as springs along the
boundary is showed in this appendix.
B.4.1
Local coordinate system
The local coordinate system used to find local deformations of the springs are split into
two coordinate systems attached to the two nodes in the spring connection (see Figure
B.14).
Figure B.14: Local coordinate systems at both nodes in spring connection.
The initial local coordinate systems before deformation of the structure is determined
using node coordinates.
The x-axis of the local coordinate system is found as the
direction for the considered node to the other node, e.g. for node 1
a1
xl = x2 −x1
(B.66)
The z-direction of the local coordinate system is determined using an arbitrary point,
which could be the coordinates of a neighbouring node as seen in Figure B.14. The
z-direction is then calculated as the cross product of the local x-direction vector and the
vector from the considered node to the arbitrary point
a1
zl = (x2 −x1) × (x3 −x1)
(B.67)
The y-direction is then found as the vector perpendicular to the xz-plane spanned by
the vectors azl and axl
a1
yl = a1
zl × a1
xl
(B.68)
==PAGE:123==
B.4 Co-rotated spring
109
The axis direction vectors are normalized to unit vectors in order to find the base vectors
e, which constitutes the transformation matrices of the local coordinate systems
A1
0 =


eT
xl
eT
yl
eT
zl


(B.69)
The base vectors of the initial local coordinate system of node 2 can be found likewise
by substituting index 1 and 2 in the above equations.
The local coordinate systems are as mentioned attached to the nodes and therefore
translates and rotates along with the nodes.
Translation of the attached node does
not change the direction of the local coordinate axis and can therefore be ignored. A
rotation of the attached node rotates the coordinate system and the direction of the
coordinate axis change. The rotation of the local coordinate system along with the node
is performed using the rotation tensor (Krenk, 2009, Chap. 3).
Ri = cos ϕ I + sin ϕ ˆn + (1 −cos ϕ) (n nT)
(B.70)
where ϕ is the angle of rotation, n is the unit vector describing the rotation axis i and
ˆn is a skew-symmetric matrix with components of n given as
ˆn =


0
−n3
n2
n3
0
−n1
−n2
n1
0


(B.71)
The rotation tensor is determined for rotations around each of the three global axes
by use of Equation B.70 and added together in a sequential manner. This will lead to
different results depending on the sequential order, but for small rotations the difference
is relatively small. The total rotation tensor is thus given as
R = RzRyRx
(B.72)
and the base vectors of each local coordinate system can then be rotated by
A1
T = R
(
A1
0)T
(B.73)
==PAGE:124==
110
B Finite element formulations and element tests
and the transformation from global to local DOFs can be written as vl = A v


ul
1x
ul
1y
ul
1z
θl
1x
θl
1y
θl
1z
ul
2x
ul
2y
ul
2z
θl
2x
θl
2y
θl
2z


=


A1
1
A1
1
A1
2
A1
2




u1x
u1y
u1z
θ1x
θ1y
θ1z
u2x
u2y
u2z
θ2x
θ2y
θ2z


(B.74)
B.4.2
Tangent stiffness matrix
The local element deformation vector vl for the springs is given as displacement of node
2 in the local coordinate system of node 1 and the displacements of node 1 in the local
coordinate system of node 2
vl = v1 + v2
(B.75)
where
v1 =
[
0
0
0
0
0
0
u1
2x
u1
2y
u1
2z
0
0
0
]T
(B.76)
v2 =
[
u2
1x
u2
1y
u2
1z
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
]T
(B.77)
Thus the local element deformation vector are given in two coordinate systems and must
be transformed accordingly. The tangent stiffness matrix is determined by finding the
changes in the local element nodal force vector ql due to a small change in the local
element deformation vector. This can be done by considering the following identity
ql =
(
A1)T q1 +
(
A2)T q2
(B.78)
where A1 and A2 are the transformation matrices of the local coordinate systems
associated with the two nodes which are here equal to the identity matrix. Differentiating
with respect to the element deformation vector yields
dql = d
((
A1)T q1 +
(
A2)T q2
)
=
(
A1)T d
(
q1)
+
(
A2)T d
(
q2)
+ d
((
A1)T )
q1 + d
((
A2)T )
q2
(B.79)
==PAGE:125==
B.4 Co-rotated spring
111
The first term in Equation (B.79) expresses the change in nodal forces due to nodal
displacements. This is equal to the basic linear spring stiffness of the element given that
A1 and A2 are equal to the the identity matrix and
d
(
qi)
= ki
0 dvi
(B.80)
The second term in Equation (B.79) represent the change of element nodal forces due to
the rotation of the local coordinate systems caused by nodal rotations. The derivative
of the transformation matrices Ai with respect to the element deformation vector can
be rewritten using the chain rule
d
((
Ai)T )
=


12
∑
j=1
∂
∂vi
j
((
Ai)T )
dvi
j

qi =


12
∑
j=1
∂
∂vi
j
((
Ai)T )
qi IT
j

dvi = ki
σ dvi
(B.81)
where Ij is a column vector with one in the jth entry and zeroes in all other entries.
The derivative of the transformation matrices with respect to the nodal rotations are
found as the base vectors of the rotated coordinate system due to nodal rotations
increments. E.g. for node 1 the nodal displacements of node 1 and 2 and rotations
of node 2 do not cause rotation of the local coordinate system due to the definition of
the local coordinate system. The rotations of node 1 all causes the coordinate system
to rotate and the resulting base vectors can be found, e.g. for rotation around the local
z-axis is shown in Figure B.15.
Figure B.15: Incremental change of unit vectors due to rotation θz.
==PAGE:126==
112
B Finite element formulations and element tests
∂
∂θl
1x
((
A1
l)T )
=


0
0
−1
0
0
0
0
1
0


∂
∂θl
1y
((
A1
l)T )
=


0
0
1
0
0
0
−1
0
0


(B.82)
∂
∂θl
1z
((
A1
l)T )
=


0
−1
0
1
0
0
0
0
0


(B.83)
The tangential stiffness of the springs is then found by inserting Equation (B.80) and
(B.81) in Equation (B.79) which is then written as
dql = k1
0 dv1 + k1
σ dv1 + k2
0 dv2 + k2
σ dv2 = kl
t dvl
(B.84)
where the tangential stiffness is given as
kl
t = kl
1 + k2
1 + k1
σ + k2
σ = kl
0 + kl
σ
(B.85)
B.4.3
Nodal force vector
The nodal forces in the equilibrium equation are determined using the basic linear strain
measure of the springs in the co-rotated coordinate system.
ql =
∫
A BT σ dA =
∫
A BT D B dA vl = kl
0 vl
(B.86)
The strain giving deformations are the deformations minus the nodal displacements and
rotations due to rotation of the local coordinate system, therefore the deformations
due to rigid body rotation must be determined first. The local coordinate systems are
rotated using the rotation tensor as explained in Section B.4.1 and shown in Equations
B.70 and B.72. The rotation tensor can then be used to perform a rigid body rotation
on the spring connection, e.g. for a rotation of node 1 the rotated coordinates of node
2 due to rigid body rotation can be calculated as
x′
2 = x1 + R(x2 −x1)
(B.87)
The global deformations can then be calculated as difference between the rotated position
of node 2 and the actual position of node 2
v = x2 −x′
2
(B.88)
The global deformations are then transformed into the local deformations by multiplication
with the transformation matrix given in Equation B.73
vl = A1 v
(B.89)
The above local deformation vector is expanded with zeros to fit the vector shown in
Equation B.76.
==PAGE:127==
B.4 Co-rotated spring
113
The strain-displacement matrix is needed in Equation B.86 to evaluate the nodal forces.
Given that the displacement interpolation in the springs is linear the strain-interpolation
matrix becomes constant
B = 1
L


−1
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
−1
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
−1
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0


(B.90)
The material stiffness D used to model the spring is linear for deformation in the local y-
and z-direction and bi-linear in the local x-direction. The bi-linear stiffness is expressed
by one stiffness for the elongation of the spring in the x-direction and another stiffness
for the compression of the spring in the y-direction as seen in Figure B.16. The material
Figure B.16: Bi-linear stiffness curve for deformation in local x-direction.
stiffness can then be written as
D =


kx
0
0
0
ky
0
0
0
kz


(B.91)
where the bi-linear stiffness is given by the following condition
kx = k−u = F
for
ux < 0
(B.92)
kx = k+ u = F
for
ux ≥0
(B.93)
The nodal force vector for the spring is then found by evaluating Equation B.86
ql =
∫
A BT D B dA vl
(B.94)
==PAGE:128==
114
B Finite element formulations and element tests
and transformed to global from the local co-rotated coordinate system of the associated
node
q = AT ql
(B.95)
The above procedure must be performed for both the local coordinate system attached
to node 1 and the local coordinate system attached to node 2 and then added together.
B.4.4
Single-element test of co-rotated springs
1 diary ( ’ Test_Rotation . txt ’ ) ;
2 diary on
;
3 %% Single −element
t e s t
of Co−rotated
springs
4 clc ;
clear all ;
close all ;
5
6
7 %% Test
of
t a n g e n t i a l
p r e d i c t i o n
8 % The
a b i l i t y
to
p r e d i c t
the
nodal
f o r c e s
from the
t a n g e n t i a l
p r e d i c t i o n
i s
9 % tested by appliyng
f i r s t
a small
deformation
at node 3
causing
u n i a x i a l
10 % tension and followed by a small
r o t a t i o n
around the x−axis
at node 3
11
12 %Geometry
13 X( 1 , : ) = [0
0
0 ] ;
%Coordinates
f o r
node 1
14 X( 2 , : ) = [0
0
1 ] ;
%Coordinates
f o r
node 2
15 X( 3 , : ) = [1
0
0 ] ;
%Coordinates
f o r
node 3
16 T( 1 , : ) = [1
2
3 ] ;
17 ElTy=Rotation_def ;
18
19 % Material
20 G.X=1e5 ;
% Modulus
of
e l a s t i c i t y
21 G.V=1e4 ;
% Modulus
of
e l a s t i c i t y
22 G.R=1e2 ;
% Modulus
of
e l a s t i c i t y
23 GTy=lespring_def (G, 1 ) ;
% Define Type 1
24
25 % Element DOF vector
f o r
undeformed
s t a t e
26 v0 = zeros (1 ,12) ’ ;
27 % Element DOF vector
f o r
small
displacement
of
node 2
28 v1 = [0
0 0 0 0 0
. . .
29
0 1 0 0 0
0 ] ’ ;
30 % Element DOF vector
f o r
small
r o t a t i o n
at node 2
31 v2 = [0
0 0 0 0 0
. . .
32
0 0 0 1/8∗pi 0
0 ] ’ ;
33
34 % S t i f f n e s s
tangent
f o r
undeformed
s t a t e
( v=v0 )
==PAGE:129==
B.4 Co-rotated spring
115
35 k0 = ElTy . k (X,GTy,T, v0 , ElTy ) ;
36 % S t i f f n e s s
tangent
f o r
deformed
s t a t e
( v=v1 )
37 k1 = ElTy . k (X,GTy,T, v1 , ElTy ) ;
38
39 % Tangential
p r e d i c t i o n
40 KV = k0∗v1+k1∗v2 ;
41
42 % The t a n g e n t i a l
p r e d i c t i o n
i s
tested by comparing
i t
with
the
nodal
f o r c e
43 % vector q
44
45 % Nodal
f o r c e
vector
f o r
deformation
s t a t e
( v=v1+v2 )
46 q = ElTy . q (X,GTy,T, v1+v2 , ElTy ) ;
47
48 % D i f f e r e n c e
between
t a n g e n t i a l
p r e d i c t i o n
and nodal
f o r c e
vector
49 d i f f e r e n c e = (KV−q) ∗100;
50 disp ( [ ’ D i f f e r e n c e
in
between
nodal
f o r c e s
determined by
t a n g e n t i a l
p r e d i c t i o n ’ ] )
51 disp ( [ ’ and nodal
f o r c e
vector ’ ] )
52 disp ( d i f f e r e n c e )
53
54 % Since
the
deviation
i s
non
e x i s t i n g
the
t a n g e n t i a l
p r e d i c t i o n
i s
hereby
55 % accepted
56 diary
o f f
Listing B.3: Matlab code.
The output of the above Matlab code:
KV =
1.0e+04 *
0
-1.0000
0
-0.0039
0
0
0
1.0000
0
0.0039
0
==PAGE:130==
116
B Finite element formulations and element tests
0
q =
1.0e+04 *
0
-1.0000
0
-0.0039
0
0
0
1.0000
0
0.0039
0
0
Difference in between nodal forces determined by tangential prediction
and nodal force vector
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
==PAGE:131==
B.5 Finite element formulation of element volume change vector
117
B.5
Finite element formulation of element
volume change vector
This appendix shows the derivation of the element volume change vector Vc for a
tetrahedron. The element volume change vector is derived by finding the change of
volume associated with each nodal displacement. Below the volume change for each
nodal displacement is calculated:
Figure B.17: Nodal coordinates of tetrahedron.
Displacement u1x yields
∆V1x = V0 −Vi
= 1
6 det

x1 −x0
x2 −x0
x3 −x0
y1 −z0
y2 −y0
y3 −y0
z1 −z0
z2 −z0
z3 −z0

−1
6 det

x1 + u1x −x0
x2 −x0
x3 −x0
y1 −z0
y2 −y0
y3 −y0
z1 −z0
z2 −z0
z3 −z0

= −1
6 det

y2 −y0
y3 −y0
z2 −z0
z3 −z0
 u1x
= −1
6 ((y2 −y0)(z3 −z0) −(y3 −y0)(z2 −z0)) u1x
==PAGE:132==
118
B Finite element formulations and element tests
Displacement u1y yields
∆V1y = V0 −Vi
= 1
6 det

x1 −x0
x2 −x0
x3 −x0
y1 −z0
y2 −y0
y3 −y0
z1 −z0
z2 −z0
z3 −z0

−1
6 det

x1 −x0
x2 −x0
x3 −x0
y1 + u1y −z0
y2 −y0
y3 −y0
z1 −z0
z2 −z0
z3 −z0

= 1
6 det

x2 −x0
x3 −x0
z2 −z0
z3 −z0
 u1y
= 1
6 ((x2 −x0)(z3 −z0) −(x3 −x0)(z2 −z0)) u1y
Displacement u1z yields
∆V1z = V0 −Vi
= 1
6 det

x1 −x0
x2 −x0
x3 −x0
y1 −z0
y2 −y0
y3 −z0
z1 −z0
z2 −z0
z3 −z0

−1
6 det

x1 −x0
x2 −x0
x3 −x0
y1 −z0
y2 −y0
y3 −z0
z1 + u1z −z0
z2 −z0
z3 −z0

= −1
6 det

x2 −x0
x3 −x0
y2 −y0
y3 −y0
 u1z
= −1
6 ((x2 −x0)(y3 −y0) −(x3 −x0)(y2 −y0)) u1z
Displacement u2x yields
∆V2x = V0 −Vi
= 1
6 det

x1 −x0
x2 −x0
x3 −x0
y1 −z0
y2 −y0
y3 −y0
z1 −z0
z2 −z0
z3 −z0

−1
6 det

x1 −x0
x2 + u2x −x0
x3 −x0
y1 −z0
y2 −y0
y3 −y0
z1 −z0
z2 −z0
z3 −z0

= 1
6 det

y1 −y0
y3 −y0
z1 −z0
z3 −z0
 u2x
= 1
6 ((y1 −y0)(z3 −z0) −(y3 −y0)(z1 −z0)) u2x
Displacement u2y yields
∆V2y = V0 −Vi
= 1
6 det

x1 −x0
x2 −x0
x3 −x0
y1 −z0
y2 −y0
y3 −y0
z1 −z0
z2 −z0
z3 −z0

−1
6 det

x1 −x0
x2 −x0
x3 −x0
y1 −z0
y2 + u2y −y0
y3 −y0
z1 −z0
z2 −z0
z3 −z0

= −1
6 det

x1 −x0
x3 −x0
z1 −z0
z3 −z0
 u2y
= −1
6 ((x1 −x0)(z3 −z0) −(x3 −x0)(z1 −z0)) u2y
==PAGE:133==
B.5 Finite element formulation of element volume change vector
119
Displacement u2z yields
∆V2z = V0 −Vi
= 1
6 det

x1 −x0
x2 −x0
x3 −x0
y1 −z0
y2 −y0
y3 −z0
z1 −z0
z2 −z0
z3 −z0

−1
6 det

x1 −x0
x2 −x0
x3 −x0
y1 −z0
y2 −y0
y3 −z0
z1 −z0
z2 + u2z −z0
z3 −z0

= 1
6 det

x1 −x0
x3 −x0
y1 −y0
y3 −y0
 u2z
= 1
6 ((x1 −x0)(y3 −y0) −(x3 −x0)(y1 −y0)) u2z
Displacement u3x yields
∆V3x = V0 −Vi
= 1
6 det

x1 −x0
x2 −x0
x3 −x0
y1 −z0
y2 −y0
y3 −y0
z1 −z0
z2 −z0
z3 −z0

−1
6 det

x1 −x0
x2 −x0
x3 + u3x −x0
y1 −z0
y2 −y0
y3 −y0
z1 −z0
z2 −z0
z3 −z0

= −1
6 det

y1 −y0
y2 −y0
z1 −z0
z2 −z0
 u3x
= −1
6 ((y1 −y0)(z2 −z0) −(y2 −y0)(z1 −z0)) u3x
Displacement u3y yields
∆V3y = V0 −Vi
= 1
6 det

x1 −x0
x2 −x0
x3 −x0
y1 −z0
y2 −y0
y3 −y0
z1 −z0
z2 −z0
z3 −z0

−1
6 det

x1 −x0
x2 −x0
x3 −x0
y1 −z0
y2 −y0
y3 + u3y −y0
z1 −z0
z2 −z0
z3 −z0

= 1
6 det

x1 −x0
x2 −x0
z1 −z0
z2 −z0
 u3y
= 1
6 ((x1 −x0)(z2 −z0) −(x2 −x0)(z1 −z0)) u3y
Displacement u3z yields
∆V3z = V0 −Vi
= 1
6 det

x1 −x0
x2 −x0
x3 −x0
y1 −z0
y2 −y0
y3 −z0
z1 −z0
z2 −z0
z3 −z0

−1
6 det

x1 −x0
x2 −x0
x3 −x0
y1 −z0
y2 −y0
y3 −z0
z1 −z0
z2 −z0
z3 + u3z −z0

= −1
6 det

x1 −x0
x2 −x0
y1 −y0
y2 −y0
 u3z
= −1
6 ((x1 −x0)(y2 −y0) −(x2 −x0)(y1 −y0)) u3z
The volume change vector is multiplied with the element DOF vector to give the resulting
change of volume
∆V = Vc v
(B.96)
==PAGE:134==
120
B Finite element formulations and element tests
which by inserting the above expression yields the following system of equations
∆V = 1
6


−(y2 −y0)(z3 −z0) −(y3 −y0)(z2 −z0)
(x2 −x0)(z3 −z0) −(x3 −x0)(z2 −z0)
−(x2 −x0)(y3 −y0) −(x3 −x0)(y2 −y0)
(y1 −y0)(z3 −z0) −(y3 −y0)(z1 −z0)
−(x1 −x0)(z3 −z0) −(x3 −x0)(z1 −z0)
(x1 −x0)(y3 −y0) −(x3 −x0)(y1 −y0)
−(y1 −y0)(z2 −z0) −(y2 −y0)(z1 −z0)
(x1 −x0)(z2 −z0) −(x2 −x0)(z1 −z0)
−(x1 −x0)(y2 −y0) −(x2 −x0)(y1 −y0)




u1x
u1y
u1z
u2x
u2y
u2z
u3x
u3y
u3z


(B.97)
The volume change vector can therefore be found found as
Vc = 1
6


−(y2 −y0)(z3 −z0) −(y3 −y0)(z2 −z0)
(x2 −x0)(z3 −z0) −(x3 −x0)(z2 −z0)
−(x2 −x0)(y3 −y0) −(x3 −x0)(y2 −y0)
(y1 −y0)(z3 −z0) −(y3 −y0)(z1 −z0)
−(x1 −x0)(z3 −z0) −(x3 −x0)(z1 −z0)
(x1 −x0)(y3 −y0) −(x3 −x0)(y1 −y0)
−(y1 −y0)(z2 −z0) −(y2 −y0)(z1 −z0)
(x1 −x0)(z2 −z0) −(x2 −x0)(z1 −z0)
−(x1 −x0)(y2 −y0) −(x2 −x0)(y1 −y0)


(B.98)
==PAGE:135==
B.6 Convergence analysis
121
B.6
Convergence analysis
In this appendix a convergence analyses are carried out on a 1×1 m single glass pane with
a thickness of 6 mm. The glass pane is supported as shown in Figure B.18 with supports
perpendicular to the plane of the pane at every boundary node and four supports in the
plane of the pane for stability reasons.
1000
1000
Figure B.18: Example of 50 element mesh and support conditions.
A convergence analysis was made for the pane subjected to a uniformly distributed load
of 1 kN/m2 acting in the z-direction. Figure B.19 shows the convergence of the deflection
at the center of the glass pane. It is seen that the convergence rate starts to slow at
approximately 300 elements, but that convergence is fully reached at around a number
of 600 elements.
A second convergence analysis was made for the pane subjected to a uniformly distributed
load of 1 kN/m2 acting perpendicular to the plane of the elements i.e. the load follows
the deformation of the elements. This load is similar to a gas pressure acting on the
pane. The convergence plot was found to be similar to Figure B.19 with small difference
of magnitude 1 · 10−5.
==PAGE:136==
122
B Finite element formulations and element tests
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
2.8
2.82
2.84
2.86
2.88
2.9
2.92
Figure B.19: Convergence of a single glass pane subjected to a uniformly distributed
load.
==PAGE:137==
APPENDIX C
Experiments
C.1
Calibration of potentiometers
The potentiometers were all calibrated before testing by measuring the output voltage
for a number of displacements using the calibration device as shown in Figure C.1. A
Figure C.1: Calibration of potentiometer.
potentiometer was placed in the calibration device with the slider pressed almost all the
way in the shaft. The calibration device was reset and the input voltage and output
signal was registered. Thereafter the slider was displaced approximately 4 mm and the
corresponding output voltage was again registered. This was done repeatedly until the
slider completely out of the shaft. The registered output voltages for given displacements
were then plotted in a graphs like shown in Figure C.2, where a linear relation should be
seen. Linear regression could then be used to write a function which converts the output
voltage to a displacement dependent on the magnitude of the input voltage. This was
done for all 11 potentiometers used in the two type of experiments before initiating the
tests.
==PAGE:138==
124
C Experiments
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
Figure C.2: Linear regression of calibration measurements.
==PAGE:139==
C.2 Experimental results
125
C.2
Experimental results
This appendix contains the results from each of the eight experiments with dead weight
loading.
==PAGE:140==
126
C Experiments
Test A1
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
-7
-6
-5
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
4
Figure C.3: Test A1: Deformed cross-section through the diagonal from FE model
compared with displacement measurements.
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
-3
-2
-1
0
1
-1
0
1
2
3
Figure C.4: Test A1: Deformed cross-section along the edge from FE model compared
with measurements displacement.
==PAGE:141==
C.2 Experimental results
127
0
100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 900 1000
-3
-2.5
-2
-1.5
-1
-0.5
0
Figure C.5: Test A1: Measured displacements along diagonal on lower pane compared
with calculated displacements in FE model.
0
200
400
600
800
1000
-3
-2.5
-2
-1.5
-1
-0.5
0
Figure C.6: Test A1: Measured displacements along diagonal on upper pane compared
with calculated displacements in FE model.
==PAGE:142==
128
C Experiments
0
100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 900 1000
-0.5
-0.4
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
Figure C.7: Test A1: Measured displacements along edge on upper pane compared
with calculated displacements in FE model.
==PAGE:143==
C.2 Experimental results
129
Test A2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
-7
-6
-5
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
4
Figure C.8: Test A2: Deformed cross-section through the diagonal from FE model
compared with displacement measurements.
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
-3
-2
-1
0
1
-1
0
1
2
3
Figure C.9: Test A2: Deformed cross-section along the edge from FE model compared
with measurements displacement.
==PAGE:144==
130
C Experiments
0
100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 900 1000
-3
-2.5
-2
-1.5
-1
-0.5
0
Figure C.10: Test A2:
Measured displacements along diagonal on lower pane
compared with calculated displacements in FE model.
0
200
400
600
800
1000
-3
-2.5
-2
-1.5
-1
-0.5
0
Figure C.11: Test A2:
Measured displacements along diagonal on upper pane
compared with calculated displacements in FE model.
==PAGE:145==
C.2 Experimental results
131
0
100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 900 1000
-0.5
-0.4
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Figure C.12: Test A2: Measured displacements along edge on upper pane compared
with calculated displacements in FE model.
==PAGE:146==
132
C Experiments
Test A3
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
-7
-6
-5
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
4
Figure C.13: Test A3: Deformed cross-section through the diagonal from FE model
compared with displacement measurements.
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
-3
-2
-1
0
1
-1
0
1
2
3
Figure C.14: Test A3:
Deformed cross-section along the edge from FE model
compared with measurements displacement.
==PAGE:147==
C.2 Experimental results
133
0
100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 900 1000
-3
-2.5
-2
-1.5
-1
-0.5
0
Figure C.15: Test A3:
Measured displacements along diagonal on lower pane
compared with calculated displacements in FE model.
0
200
400
600
800
1000
-3
-2.5
-2
-1.5
-1
-0.5
0
Figure C.16: Test A3:
Measured displacements along diagonal on upper pane
compared with calculated displacements in FE model.
==PAGE:148==
134
C Experiments
0
100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 900 1000
-0.5
-0.4
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Figure C.17: Test A3: Measured displacements along edge on upper pane compared
with calculated displacements in FE model.
==PAGE:149==
C.2 Experimental results
135
Test A4
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
-7
-6
-5
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
4
Figure C.18: Test A4: Deformed cross-section through the diagonal from FE model
compared with displacement measurements.
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
-3
-2
-1
0
1
-1
0
1
2
3
Figure C.19: Test A4:
Deformed cross-section along the edge from FE model
compared with measurements displacement.
==PAGE:150==
136
C Experiments
0
100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 900 1000
-3
-2.5
-2
-1.5
-1
-0.5
0
Figure C.20: Test A4:
Measured displacements along diagonal on lower pane
compared with calculated displacements in FE model.
0
200
400
600
800
1000
-3
-2.5
-2
-1.5
-1
-0.5
0
Figure C.21: Test A4:
Measured displacements along diagonal on upper pane
compared with calculated displacements in FE model.
==PAGE:151==
C.2 Experimental results
137
0
100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 900 1000
-0.5
-0.4
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Figure C.22: Test A4: Measured displacements along edge on upper pane compared
with calculated displacements in FE model.
==PAGE:152==
138
C Experiments
Test A5
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
-7
-6
-5
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
4
Figure C.23: Test A5: Deformed cross-section through the diagonal from FE model
compared with displacement measurements.
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
-3
-2
-1
0
1
-1
0
1
2
3
Figure C.24: Test A5:
Deformed cross-section along the edge from FE model
compared with measurements displacement.
==PAGE:153==
C.2 Experimental results
139
0
100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 900 1000
-3.5
-3
-2.5
-2
-1.5
-1
-0.5
0
Figure C.25: Test A5:
Measured displacements along diagonal on lower pane
compared with calculated displacements in FE model.
0
200
400
600
800
1000
-3
-2.5
-2
-1.5
-1
-0.5
0
Figure C.26: Test A5:
Measured displacements along diagonal on upper pane
compared with calculated displacements in FE model.
==PAGE:154==
140
C Experiments
0
100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 900 1000
-0.5
-0.4
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Figure C.27: Test A5: Measured displacements along edge on upper pane compared
with calculated displacements in FE model.
==PAGE:155==
C.2 Experimental results
141
Test A6
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
-7
-6
-5
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
4
Figure C.28: Test A6: Deformed cross-section through the diagonal from FE model
compared with displacement measurements.
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
-3
-2
-1
0
1
-1
0
1
2
3
Figure C.29: Test A6:
Deformed cross-section along the edge from FE model
compared with measurements displacement.
==PAGE:156==
142
C Experiments
0
100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 900 1000
-3.5
-3
-2.5
-2
-1.5
-1
-0.5
0
Figure C.30: Test A6:
Measured displacements along diagonal on lower pane
compared with calculated displacements in FE model.
0
200
400
600
800
1000
-3.5
-3
-2.5
-2
-1.5
-1
-0.5
0
Figure C.31: Test A6:
Measured displacements along diagonal on upper pane
compared with calculated displacements in FE model.
==PAGE:157==
C.2 Experimental results
143
0
100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 900 1000
-0.5
-0.4
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Figure C.32: Test A6: Measured displacements along edge on upper pane compared
with calculated displacements in FE model.
==PAGE:158==
144
C Experiments
Test A7
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
-7
-6
-5
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
4
Figure C.33: Test A7: Deformed cross-section through the diagonal from FE model
compared with displacement measurements.
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
-3
-2
-1
0
1
-1
0
1
2
3
Figure C.34: Test A7:
Deformed cross-section along the edge from FE model
compared with measurements displacement.
==PAGE:159==
C.2 Experimental results
145
0
100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 900 1000
-3.5
-3
-2.5
-2
-1.5
-1
-0.5
0
Figure C.35: Test A7:
Measured displacements along diagonal on lower pane
compared with calculated displacements in FE model.
0
200
400
600
800
1000
-3
-2.5
-2
-1.5
-1
-0.5
0
Figure C.36: Test A7:
Measured displacements along diagonal on upper pane
compared with calculated displacements in FE model.
==PAGE:160==
146
C Experiments
0
100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 900 1000
-0.5
-0.4
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Figure C.37: Test A7: Measured displacements along edge on upper pane compared
with calculated displacements in FE model.
==PAGE:161==
C.2 Experimental results
147
Test A8
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
-7
-6
-5
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
4
Figure C.38: Test A8: Deformed cross-section through the diagonal from FE model
compared with displacement measurements.
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
-3
-2
-1
0
1
-1
0
1
2
3
Figure C.39: Test A8:
Deformed cross-section along the edge from FE model
compared with measurements displacement.
==PAGE:162==
148
C Experiments
0
100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 900 1000
-3.5
-3
-2.5
-2
-1.5
-1
-0.5
0
Figure C.40: Test A8:
Measured displacements along diagonal on lower pane
compared with calculated displacements in FE model.
0
200
400
600
800
1000
-3
-2.5
-2
-1.5
-1
-0.5
0
Figure C.41: Test A8:
Measured displacements along diagonal on upper pane
compared with calculated displacements in FE model.
==PAGE:163==
C.2 Experimental results
149
0
100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 900 1000
-0.5
-0.4
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Figure C.42: Test A8: Measured displacements along edge on upper pane compared
with calculated displacements in FE model.
==PAGE:164==
150
==PAGE:165==
Bibliography
Andersson, M. and Nilsson, S. (2014) “Bulging of Insulating Glass Units - Numerical
and Experimental Analysis”, MA thesis, Lund, Sweden: Lund University.
Beason, L.W. (1986) “Structural Analysis of Sealed Insulating Glass”, Journal of Structural
Engineering 112 (5), pp. 1133–1146.
Bergh, S.V.D., Hart, R., Jelle, B.P., Gustavsen, A.w.S.B., Infrastructure, N.U.o.S., and
Technology (2013) “Window Spacers and Edge Seals in Insulating Glass Units: A
State-of-the-Art Review and Future Perspectives”, Energy and Buildings 2013 (58).
Bohmann, D. (2017) Mepla Iso Freeware - Software for Insulated Glazing IG, double
glazed units DGU - insulated glass units | MEPLA - Software for Structural Glass
Design.
Cook, R.D., Malkus, D.S., Plesha, M.E., and Witt, R.J. (1981) Concepts and Applications
of Finite Element Analysis, 4th ed., John Wiley and Sons Ltd., isbn: 9780471356059.
Forbes, J.O. and Poulsen, P.N. (2016) Lecture Notes Chapter 6: Co-rotating shell element.
Haldimann, M., Luible, A., Overend, M., for Bridge, I.A., and Engineering, S. (2008)
Structural Use of Glass, Structural engineering documents, International Association
for Bridge and Structural Engineering, isbn: 9783857481192.
Huveners, E.M.P., Herwijnen, F.v., and Soetens, F. (2003) “Load sharing in insulated
double glass units: Determination of the air pressure in the cavity due to mechanical
and thermo-mechanical loads”, Heron 48 (2), pp. 99–122.
Krenk, S. (2009) Non-linear Modeling and Analysis of Solids and Structures, Cambridge
University Press, isbn: 9780521830546.
Nielsen, J.H., Forbes, J.O., and Poulsen, P.N. (2016) Bærende Konstruktioners Numeriske
Modellering - Elementmetoden, DTU Byg.
Solvason, K.R. (1974) “Pressures and Stresses in Sealed Double Glazing Units”, National
Research Council Canada. Division of Building Research 423, p. 16.
Specht, B. (1988) “Modified shape functions for the three‐node plate bending element
passing the patch test”, International Journal for Numerical Methods in Engineering
26 (3), pp. 705–715, issn: 1097-0207, doi: 10.1002/nme.1620260313.
Stewart, J. (1999) Calculus, 4th ed., Brooks/Cole Publishing Company, isbn: 0534359493.
Svensson, D. (2015) “Computational method for bulging in insulating glass units”, MA
thesis, Lund, Sweden: Lund University.
==PAGE:166==
152
Bibliography
Timoshenko, S.P. and Woinowsky-Krieger, S. (1959) Theory of plates and shells; 2nd ed.
Auckland: McGraw-Hill.
Vallabhan, C.V.G. and Chou, G.D. (1986) “Interactive Nonlinear Analysis of Insulating
Glass Units”, Journal of Structural Engineering 112 (6), pp. 1313–1326.
Wolf, A.T. (1992) “Studies into the life-expectancy of insulating glass units”, Building
and Environment 27 (3), pp. 305–319, issn: 0360-1323, doi: http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/0360-1323(92)90032-K.
Zienkiewicz, O.C. and Taylor, R.L. (2000) The Finite Element Method: solid mechanics,
vol. 2, Butterworth-heinemann.
