==PAGE:1==
 
Techno-economic analysis of operational 
strategies for a battery energy storage 
system installed in Nordhavn 
Camilla Lund 
Master thesis 
June 2017 
 
==PAGE:2==
 
 
==PAGE:3==
 
 
Camilla Lund (s121822) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Techno-economic analysis of operational 
strategies for a battery energy storage system 
installed in Nordhavn 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Master thesis, June 2017 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Supervisors: 
 
Chresten Træholt, Associate Professor at the Electrical Engineering Department of DTU 
Seyedmostafa Hashemi Toghroljerdi, Postdoc at the Electrical Engineering Department of DTU 
Carsten Buhl Nielsen, Senior Data Analyst at Radius 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DTU – Technical University of Denmark, Kgs. Lynby - 2017 
 
 
 
==PAGE:4==
 
 
==PAGE:5==
 
 
Techno-economic analysis of operational strategies for a battery energy storage system 
installed in Nordhavn, Master thesis 
 
 
 
Report written by: 
Camilla Lund 
 
 
 
Advisor(s): 
Chresten Træholt, Associate Professor at the Electrical Engineering Department of DTU 
Seyedmostafa Hashemi Toghroljerdi, Postdoc at the Electrical Engineering Department of DTU 
Carsten Buhl Nielsen, Senior Data Analyst at Radius 
 
 
 
 
DTU Elektro 
Technical University of Denmark 
2800 Kgs. Lyngby 
Denmark 
 
elektro@elektro.dtu.dk  
 
 
 
 
 
Project period: 
 
January 2017 – June 2017 
ECTS: 
 
35 
Education: 
 
M. Science  
Field: 
 
Sustainable Energy 
Class: 
 
Public 
 
Edition: 
 
1. edition 
Remarks: 
 
This report is submitted as partial fulfillment of the requirements 
for graduation in the above education at the Technical 
University of Denmark. 
 
 
Copyrights: 
 
© Camilla Lund, 2017 
 
==PAGE:6==
f
==PAGE:7==
Preface
This thesis is submitted in partial fulﬁllment of the requirements for the Master’s
degree (MSc Eng) in Sustainable Energy at the Technical University of Denmark. The
work was performed at the Department of Electrical Engineering and in collaboration
with Radius. The thesis contents represent 35 ECTS points. The work in relation to
the thesis has been conducted in the period January to June 2017.
Kgs. Lyngby, June 23th 2017
Camilla Lund (s121822)
==PAGE:8==
ii
==PAGE:9==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisors and collaborators Seyedmostafa Hashemi Toghrol-
jerdi, Chresten Træholt, Carsten Buhl Nielsen, Niels Christian Nordentoft and Ole
Michael Pedersen for their ideas and help in the preparation of this thesis. Further-
more, I would like to thank Energinet.dk for they their help regarding the relevant
regulations. Lastly, I’m very grateful for my friends, boyfriend and family who oﬀered
both support and feedback throughout the process.
==PAGE:10==
iv
==PAGE:11==
Abstract
Denmark’s ambitious goals to create an energy sector free from fossil fuels, increases
the share of intermittent renewable energy sources, such as wind and solar power.
The interest in energy storage is growing, because storage is capable of increasing
ﬂexibility and bridging the gap between the new uncontrollable power generation and
the consistent, predictable load. Energy storage systems as active participants in the
power system face several barriers, both technical and in the regulations.
This Master thesis simulated and evaluated several diﬀerent operating strategies
for a Battery Energy Storage System (BESS) installed as part of the EnergyLab
Nordhavn project in Denmark. The considered strategies are peak shaving, load-
levelling and frequency regulation. For frequency regulation, speciﬁcally Frequency-
controlled Normal Reserve (FNR), Frequency-controlled Disturbance Reserve (FDR)
and Primary Frequency control (PFR) were investigated.
The installed BESS consists of Lithium-ion cells. It has a power and energy capacity
of 630 kW and 460 kWh respectively. Frequency reserves receive an availability payment
per unit of power they oﬀer. Therefore, it is desirable to oﬀer the full 630 kW for the
full year. Unfortunately, it was concluded this was only possible with FDR under the
current regulations. For FNR, the BESS was not able to participate continually and a
block-operation was the most reliable option. FNR currently does not have a frequency
deadband, but introducing this could greatly improve the operation. Germany has
implemented degrees of freedom to help energy storage systems participate as primary
frequency reserves, and these were simulated by modifying the Danish PFR operation.
Especially allowing short intraday transactions was beneﬁcial for the BESS operation.
For peak shaving and load-levelling, the energy capacity was the limiting factor
for how much of the peaks could be shaved. Generally, the peak shaving could only
utilise 200-300 kW. Three diﬀerent load curve were considered and these aﬀected the
eﬀectiveness of peak shaving. The peaks of the radial consisting mainly of vacation and
electrically heated homes was found to require more energy than the other two radials.
Therefore, it is very important to analyse the speciﬁc load curve when designing a
BESS for peak shaving. To make peak shaving more economic, it was found that
combining it with the FDR service was very beneﬁcial. Load-levelling is an extension
of peak shaving, but it did not add any direct value for the BESS owner and is
therefore not recommended.
Overall, none of the strategies are currently economically feasible for the Nordhavn
BESS, mainly due to the high capital expenditures. With the current regulations and
a BESS located in Eastern Denmark, it is recommended to participate in FDR, which
can be combined with peak shaving if applicable.
==PAGE:12==
vi
==PAGE:13==
Contents
Preface
i
Acknowledgements
iii
Abstract
v
Contents
vii
Abbreviations
ix
1
Introduction
1
1.1
An overview of the EnergyLab Nordhavn . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
The BESS in Nordhavn and the services it should provide . . . . .
3
1.3
Literature review and previous work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.4
Research problem, scope and key assumption
. . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.5
Outline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2
The installed BESS and battery degradation
11
2.1
The BESS installation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2
Battery degradation and lifetime estimation . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3
Strategies based on frequency regulation
21
3.1
Frequency-controlled normal operation reserve (FNR)
. . . . . . .
22
3.2
Frequency-controlled disturbance reserve (FDR) . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.3
Frequency reserves in Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.4
Primary frequency reserve (PFR) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.5
Frequency reserves in California . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
3.6
Future changes to frequency reserves . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4
Peak shaving and load-levelling strategies
43
4.1
The grid topology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.2
The load curves . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.3
Peak shaving
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.4
Peak shaving and FDR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
4.5
Load Levelling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
5
Economics
57
5.1
The Net Present Value (NPV) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
==PAGE:14==
viii
Contents
5.2
Inﬂation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
5.3
Revenue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
5.4
Capital Expenditures (CAPEX) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
5.5
Operational Expenditures (OPEX) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
5.6
Tax . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
6
Results
67
6.1
Results for FNR
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
6.2
Results for FDR
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
6.3
Results for PFR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
84
6.4
Results for Peak shaving . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
94
6.5
Results for FDR and peak shaving
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
100
6.6
Results for Load levelling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
102
7
Discussion and Conclusion
105
7.1
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
105
7.2
Sensitivities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
107
7.3
Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
109
7.4
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
109
List of Figures
111
List of Tables
116
Bibliography
119
Appendix A
123
FNR operation plots . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
123
FDR operation plots . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
135
PFR operation plots . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
138
Peak shaving operation plots
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
146
Load-levelling operation plots . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
155
==PAGE:15==
Abbreviations
Abbreviation
Deﬁnition
AC
Alternating current
BESS
Battery Energy Storage System
CAPEX
Capital Expenditures
C-PCS
Control-power conditioning System
DC
Direct current
DK1
The regional group for Western Denmark (Jutland and Funen)
DK2
The regional group for Eastern Denmark (Zealand)
DoF
Degree of freedom
DSO
Distribution System Operator
EBIT
Earnings Before Interests and Taxes
EBITDA
Earnings Before Interests, Taxes, Depreciations and Amortisation
ENTSO-E
European Network of Transmission
System Operators for Electricity
EOL
End of Life
EPEX
European Energy Exchange
ESS
Energy Storage System
EU
European Union
FERC
Federal Energy Regulatory Commission
FCR
Frequency Containment Reserve
FDR
Frequency-controlled Disturbance Reserve
FNR
Frequency-controlled Normal Reserve
FRR
Frequency Restoration Reserve
IRR
Internal Rate of Return
ISO
Independent System Operator
LBR
Load Balance Responsible
LFC
Load Frequency Reserve
Li-ion
Lithium-ion
LL
Load-levelling
NOIS
Nordic Operation Information System
NPV
Net present value
OPEX
Operational Expenditures
PBR
Production Balance Responsible
PS
Peak shaving
REM
Regulation Energy Management
RTO
Regional Transmission Organisation
SEI
Solid Electrolyte Interphase
SOC
State-Of-Charge
TSO
Transmission System Operator
VAT
Value-Added Tax
==PAGE:16==
x
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Denmark’s pursuit of a more renewable energy sector results in increased penetration
of energy sources such as wind and solar.
By nature, these energy sources are
intermittent and their production has limited controllability compared to conventional
energy production. The increased share of intermittent energy sources results in more
unplanned imbalances between power production and consumption. This increases the
risk of frequency ﬂuctuations and voltage ﬂicker [1]. The power system was originally
designed with centralised conventional power plants, which are highly controllable
and dependable. Renewable energy sources have low marginal costs, meaning they
are pushing conventional plants out of the market. To ensure the same power quality
and security of supply, the power grid requires more ﬂexibility from the production
and/or consumption.
Energy storage could be part of the solution by providing the ﬂexibility. For
example, storage units can store excess renewable energy and return it when needed.
Also, storage units can decrease grid congestion by locally providing power during
peak-consumption hours, essentially shifting the power drawn from the grid to less
congested hours. Energy storage as active participants in the power system is still a new
concept and the services they can provide are therefore being researched. The research
performed in [2] identiﬁed 13 services batteries can provide at the three diﬀerent levels
of the power system, summarised in Figure 1.1. A Battery Energy Storage System
(BESS) installed at the transmission grid level (inner ring) can perform 9 out of the 13
services, including black start, transmission congestion relief and transmission deferral.
At the distribution level (middle ring), a BESS can perform the same 9 services and
additionally distribution grid upgrade deferral. At the consumers’ level (outer ring),
the BESS can provide all 13 services, including backup power, better use of own solar
power and energy bill-management.
1.1
An overview of the EnergyLab Nordhavn
High penetration of renewable energy sources means our energy sector and its regula-
tions must change to cope with the transformation. The solutions are widely discussed
in industry and in research. EnergyLab Nordhavn in Denmark is one such project.
It is a large-scale implementation and test of a smart energy system which aims to
eﬃciently integrate a high penetration of renewable energy sources. Multiple energy in-
frastructures are considered, including electricity, heat, transportation, and the control
of these. The partners are the Technical University of Denmark, City of Copenhagen,
By & Havn, Radius, ABB, HOFOR, Balslev, Clean Charge, METROTHERM, Glen
==PAGE:18==
2
1 Introduction
Figure 1.1: An overview of the 13 services batteries can provide [2].
Dimplex, Danfoss and PowerLabDK. It is sponsored by Danish Energy Technology
Development and Demonstration Programme [3].
Today more than 75% of the European population lives in cities and EnergyLab
Nordhavn is therefore very relevant. It is expected that its ideas and results will greatly
contribute to national as well as international goals for a sustainable energy sector.
For example, the project will implement an energy storage system, electric vehicle
charging, solar power, heat storage, heat pumps, etc. The project’s key challenges
include:
• Development of a coherent ﬂexible energy system
• Re-thinking energy infrastructure design and dimensioning methods
• Development of energy technologies
The ﬁrst challenge deals with the integration of more ﬂexibility in the demand and
production, such as ﬂexible heating temperatures, smarter building consumption and
integrated markets. The second challenge deals with the changes resulting from aspects
such as new demand proﬁles and prosumers (both consume and produce energy).
==PAGE:19==
1.2 The BESS in Nordhavn and the services it should provide
3
Figure 1.2: An overview of the many aspects considered in EnergyLab Nordhavn [3].
The third challenge refers to those technologies which provide grid services by smart
cost-eﬀective controllers, and associated new business models/user interactions.
1.2
The BESS in Nordhavn and the services it should
provide
This Master thesis deals with the BESS installed as part of the EnergyLab Nordhavn
project. The BESS uses the Lithium-ion (Li-ion) technology and has an energy capacity
of 460 kWh and a power capability of 630 kW. The BESS is operated by Radius and
is supplied and installed by ABB [4] in a parking garage in Nordhavn. Radius mainly
focuses on 2 services at the distribution level from Figure 1.1: distribution deferral
and frequency regulation.
Distribution deferral refers to delaying a necessary upgrade of the distribution
infrastructure. The grid is dimensioned based on the highest anticipated loads, and
these peaks usually only occur a couple of times per year. As a result, the power
system may be oversized, ineﬃcient, non-environmental and uneconomical [1]. When
the time comes that the grid cannot handle these peaks due to increased demand, it
must be upgraded. Alternately, these peak hours can be reduced by providing the
power locally instead, consequently delaying the grid upgrade. This service is also
commonly called Peak Shaving (PS).
Frequency regulation refers to the actions taken by frequency reserve units to
maintain a frequency at or close to the nominal value (50 Hz). Frequency deviations
are directly correlated to imbalances between generation and consumption. Too much
generation causes an over-frequency while too little causes an under-frequency. The
grid and all its connected equipment is designed to function with a frequency close to
==PAGE:20==
4
1 Introduction
Figure 1.3: An overview of the three main frequency control groups and their timing
[5].
the nominal frequency, and large deviations can cause damage and units to disconnect,
causing further instability. In worst case scenarios, an unﬁxed system imbalance can
lead to blackout. Frequency reserves are units charged with the responsibility to
counteracting frequency deviations and are contracted by the Transmission System
Operator (TSO). The TSO in Denmark is Energinet.dk.
Generally speaking, there are three main groups of frequency reserves: primary,
secondary and tertiary frequency reserves.1 The diﬀerence between them lies in the
timing of their activation as shown in Figure 1.3. Primary frequency control includes
the fastest units, aiming to stabilise a frequency deviation. Secondary and tertiary
take over when frequency deviations are persistent and/or large. Due to its fast
reaction capabilities and limited energy capacity, the BESS is best suited for primary
frequency control. This thesis deals with diﬀerent forms of primary frequency control.
The BESS is in Eastern Denmark, which has an eﬀect of the services it can
provide. Europe is split into 5 synchronous areas as shown in Figure 1.4, which
individually ensure compatibility between system operations, market solutions and
system developments [6]. They all have a nominal frequency of 50 Hz, but they are
not necessarily synchronised with each other. The areas are deﬁned by the European
Network of Transmission System Operators (ENTSO-E) [7]. Denmark is split between
two synchronous areas, where Jutland and Funen belong to RG Continental Europe and
Zealand belongs to RG Nordic. They are typically referred to as Western Denmark
(DK1) and Eastern Denmark (DK2) respectively. For this reason, the frequency
regulation services are not the same in DK1 and DK2. The frequency reserves are
contracted in a market called the regulating power market, handled by the TSO. The
speciﬁc reserves relevant for the BESS are discussed in detail in Chapter 3.
Even through DK1 and DK2 are part of two diﬀerent synchronous areas, they still
share the same energy markets. RG Nordic (including DK1), RG Baltic and RG UK
sell and buy energy on the common market called Nord Pool [8]. Nord Pool manages
two markets: The day-ahead market (Elspot) and the intraday market (Elbas). The
1Eastern Denmark has a slightly diﬀerent structure and does not have a secondary reserve, but
rather two types of primary frequency reserve.
==PAGE:21==
1.2 The BESS in Nordhavn and the services it should provide
5
Figure 1.4: The diﬀerent synchronous areas in Europe [7].
day-ahead market ensures the bulk of energy trading where producers and consumers
bid with energy they wish to sell and buy respectively. The energy trades have an
hourly resolution and the operation day runs from midnight to midnight [8]. The
intraday market similarly allows producers and consumers to trade, to correct any
imbalances as the hour of operation approaches. It closes an hour before operation.
The fact that the Li-ion technology is used for the BESS is a choice, but other
technologies are also available. Frequency regulation requires high power capabilities
while for peak shaving, energy capacity is more important than power capabilities.
The Energy Storage Association deﬁne six main categories for energy storage [9]: 1)
ﬂywheels, 2) thermal, 3) compressed air, 4) pumped hydro-power, 5) ﬂow batteries,
and 6) solid state batteries.
Flywheels, compressed air storage, thermal and pumped hydro-power are not
interesting for the Nordhavn project for practical reasons; Flywheels are used for
low energy, high power applications. Thermal energy storage is most eﬃcient when
coupled with a heat-generating source and used for heating applications [9]. The BESS
in Nordhavn is used for electrical purposes and therefore, this type of storage is not the
best candidate. A compressed air storage is typically installed using an underground
cavern or another large containment able to withstand pressures. Pumped hydro-power
requires physical height in the form of a mountain or dam, to harness the energy of
falling water. Flow batteries currently have low energy/power densities [1] and since
the energy storage in Nordhavn must have high power capabilities, the ﬂow batteries
are not the best choice.
==PAGE:22==
6
1 Introduction
Solid state batteries consist of electrochemical cells where the electrolyte is a
solid.
There are many types of rechargeable battery technologies, where Nickel-
Cadmium, Lead-acid, Sodium Sulphur and Li-ion are generally considered for grid-scale
applications [1] [10].
Nickel-Cadmium batteries are highly toxic [10] and are therefore not ideal for
a project such as EnergyLab Nordhavn.
Lead-acid batteries are a very mature
technology, but they have a short lifetime (about 2500 cycles), a low eﬃciency (72-
78%), and low energy densities compared to other solid state battery technologies
[1]. Currently this makes them less suitable than other chemistries. Sodium-Sulphur
batteries are a newer technology compared to lead-acid, and they are proven for high
power applications in power grids [1]. Their main downside is the fact that they are
high temperature batteries operated at 300-350◦C, and require equipment to maintain
the high temperature. This lowers the eﬃciency, while also requiring extra safety
equipment. Therefore it is not ideal for instalment in a parking garage.
Li-ion was ﬁrst commercially produced in the early 1990s for small portable
electronics, but they have now evolved to grid scale applications. They are known
for their high energy density (about 200 kW/kg), long lifetime (10,000 cycles), low
self-discharge (1%/month), high round-trip eﬃciency (85-90%), and high power [1].
Therefore, Li-ion is among one of the most promising energy storage technologies.
Their fast reaction capabilities and high power makes them ideal for services such as
frequency control [11]. The main disadvantages are the high costs and Lithium is a
limited resource [12]. Furthermore, Li-ion requires control algorithms and over-charge
protection for safety [9]. Despite its disadvantages, Li-ion batteries are the best suited
for grid applications compared to the available solid state battery technologies, and
this is also the reason why it was chosen for the installation in Nordhavn.
1.3
Literature review and previous work
In connection with the work performed in this thesis, it is ﬁrst and foremost important
read and understand relevant previous work and literature. The following gives a
collected overview of the most important papers and work performed by others in
their research related to topics considered in this thesis. They are also referenced
speciﬁcally in the theory when applied.
1.3.1
Energy storage technologies
[10] discusses the present status of battery energy storage technologies including their
economic viability and impact on the power system. Diﬀerent battery chemistries and
their common uses are presented. Furthermore, it discusses synergies between these
energy storages and both grid integration and hybrid electric vehicles. Similarly, [12]
also discusses diﬀerent energy storage technologies and speciﬁcally delves deeper into
solid state and ﬂow batteries. It assesses the environmental impacts and possibilities
for PV-plant implementation. These papers are used to understand why Li-ion was
chosen.
==PAGE:23==
1.3 Literature review and previous work
7
1.3.2
Lithium-ion battery degradation
Degradation of Li-ion batteries and accurately predicting lifetime based on operation
is a large and important part of the work in this thesis. Degradation refers to the
deterioration of a battery’s performance parameters and energy/power capacity. The
End-of-Life (EOL) of a battery is typically deﬁned as when the BESS has 80% of its
original energy capacity left as deﬁned in [13]. The battery lifetime is the total time
before the BESS reaches EOL. This is dealt with in depth in Section 2.2.
In [14], diﬀerent charging protocols and their eﬀect on the cyclic life of a Li-ion
battery are discussed. It concludes that constant current charging is most suitable for
slow charging, while charging with constant power is most suitable for fast charging. It
also found that reducing the charging current in the ﬁrst and last 10% of the capacity
reduces ageing. In [15] the ageing mechanisms of rechargeable Li-ion cells are dicussed
from a chemistry perspective. This for example includes the chemistry of ageing from
temperature and cathode phase transitions.
Quite a handful of papers about battery degradation have been carried out at
Aalborg University. In [16], the three-stage method for performing accelerated ageing
tests of Li-ion cells is described and how to develop lifetime estimation models. These
models aim to predict the capacity and power fade of the cells as a result of cyclic
and calendar ageing separately. They validated the resulting model using a speciﬁc
mission proﬁle. In [17], the same accelerated ageing model is analysed, applied, and
used to evaluate the ageing of a frequency regulation operation. It determines that the
cyclic ageing component is the most important and recommends changes to increase
the cells’ lifetime. In [11], the same model is again used to develop strategies for
re-establishing the State-of-Charge (SOC)2 when participating in frequency regulation
aiming to increase the lifetime. It concluded that participating in primary frequency
regulation for both up and down regulation while also re-establishing the SOC as soon
as possible is the worst for the cells’ lifetime.
The thesis, [18], is a collaboration with ETH, ABB and eeh, and deals with
developing a model for energy capacity degradation and presents the diﬀerent factors
which contribute to ageing. Using the models, it then estimates the degradation for
primary frequency control participation in continental Europe and in the US. With
respect to the regulations for frequency regulation, it concludes that changes are
necessary if the TSO wishes more storage units to participate.
[19] investigates and develops the Rainﬂow Counting Algorithm for life consumption
of products. It considers two types of the alogirthm: 1) The traditional oﬀ-line method
which requires the full time history and 2) the on-line method which processes data as
it is created. It presents various examples and applications. In this thesis, the rainﬂow
algorithm is used for cyclic ageing estimation.
[20] is written as a collaboration between Balslev and DTU for the EnergyLab
Nordhavn project. It discusses diﬀerent applications for the BESS and mechanisms for
battery degradation. It identiﬁes frequency control as the most promising application,
but participation is also limited due to several factors: SOC limitation, the frequency
has a non-zero mean, and the system eﬃciency is less than 100%. A deadband can
2The SOC is the percentage of energy out of the total possible energy capacity in the battery. A
battery with 50% SOC and a total energy capacity of 460 kWh, current has 230 kWh available.
==PAGE:24==
8
1 Introduction
help reduce these eﬀects. It concludes that the economical aspect and regulations are
greatly inﬂuenced by whether the BESS is in Western or Eastern Denmark.
1.3.3
Energy storages services
[21] investigates the services a BESS can deliver. "Services" refer to the diﬀerent
strategies for BESS operation with speciﬁc goals to beneﬁt the grid or owner. The
thesis simulates and optimises diﬀerent strategies including energy arbitrage, grid
upgrade deferral, participation as a Load Balance Responsible (LBR) and participation
as a Production Balance Responsible (PBR). It suggests to perform peak shaving
during the relevant months and to operate as a LBR or PBR for the rest of the year.
Both [22] and [23] consider the BESS in Nordhavn. [22] considers peak shaving and
reactive power support. The grid and BESS operation are modelled in Matlab/Simulink.
It compares the optimum BESS power capacity for commercial and residential loads.
It ﬁnds the optimum converter sizes as approximately 200 kW for both load types. The
thesis also considers voltage support and PV synergies. The thesis only considers cyclic
ageing for the BESS using the rainﬂow algorithm. [23] also investigates and analyses
diﬀerent services the BESS can provide using optimisation from a Distribution System
Operation’s (DSO) perspective. The top priority service is grid upgrade deferral.
[24] presents BESS participation in up regulation for primary frequency control in
Western Denmark. It also considers degradation. Furthermore, it presents results from
real PFR operation by a BESS located in Western Denmark. The BESS is successful
at participating in PFR, but it concludes that a longer test period is necessary to
observe quantiﬁable ageing.
[2] explores the services batteries can deliver to the grid and where in the grid they
can provide these. It also aims to quantify the value of batteries and the barriers they
face. It concludes that a battery can perform a total of 13 diﬀerent services at the
grid levels: Behind the meter, distribution level and transmission level. Furthermore,
it ﬁnds that performing multiple services generates the most value, but that batteries
face quite a number of barriers to live out their full potential.
1.3.4
Regulations for German and Californian frequency
reserves
[13] deals with the new German regulations from August 2015 and performs sizing
optimisations for a BESS providing primary frequency control, so it can live up to
these requirements. Furthermore, it estimates related storage costs, revenues and
ageing. It concludes that it is both economically and technically feasible to install
a BESS in Germany under these regulations. Similarly, [25] also deals with foreign
frequency regulation markets. It compares the diﬀerent policies in California including
their requirements, structures and economic potential for storage systems. This Master
thesis mainly focuses on Denmark’s regulations, but presents how other countries have
tackled implementation of storage units.
==PAGE:25==
1.4 Research problem, scope and key assumption
9
1.3.5
Economic data
[1] presents the results of an extensive literature review with the aim to provide
updated and relevant economic data for utility-scale energy storage systems, including
capital, O&M and replacements costs. Furthermore, it presents life cycle costs and
levelised costs of electricity for the considered technologies. The data is used in this
thesis for the economic valuation of the investigated strategies.
1.4
Research problem, scope and key assumption
The scope of this thesis is to develop and simulate diﬀerent operational strategies
for the BESS in Nordhavn, analyse their technical performance in simulations and
compare their economic feasibility.
The formulated challenge will in part be explored by the following:
• Investigate regulations for FNR, FDR and PFR in Denmark. Simulate and
compare their technical and economic performance.
• Consider the impact of changes regarding FNR, FDR and PFR and determine
how they improve the ability of the BESS to participate.
• Investigate and analyse peak shaving and load-levelling strategies using diﬀerent
load proﬁles.
• Recommend key strategies for the operation of the BESS in Nordhavn and make
recommendations regarding the sizing and location of a future energy storage
installation(s).
All simulations and calculations are performed using 2016 load, frequency and
price data. The load data is provided by Radius with 5-minute resolution. The price
data is publicly available from Energinet.dk and Nord Pool’s websites. The frequency
data is retrieved with help of DTU as has 1-second resolution.
The BESS is in two sections with independent modules, however in this study it
is assumed that it operates as a single unit. The economic and lifetime evaluations
performed are estimations and are mainly for comparison of the diﬀerent operating
strategies. Furthermore, ownership considerations are beyond the scope, and it is
assumed that the BESS is owned and operated by a DSO and that this DSO can sell
energy and participate in frequency reserves on equal footing as other producers. Also,
in economic calculations it is assumed that the BESS is a price-taker and does not
aﬀect neither the market clearing prices or the system power balance.
1.5
Outline
Chapter 2 presents the technical aspects of the energy storage system, including the
actual set-up of the BESS in Nordhavn and degradation of Li-ion batteries. Chapter
3 presents the theory, regulations and method for strategies related to providing
frequency regulation. Similarly, Chapter 4 presents the theory and method for peak
shaving and load-levelling strategies. Chapter 5 explains the economic calculations.
Chapter 6 summarises all the simulation results.
==PAGE:26==
10
==PAGE:27==
CHAPTER 2
The installed BESS and
battery degradation
This chapter introduces the BESS components more in detail.
Furthermore, it
presents factors which aﬀect degradation of the BESS and the models used for lifetime
estimation.
2.1
The BESS installation
This section introduces the diﬀerent components and systems which make up the full
BESS. There are four main components of the BESS system:
• Battery racks
• Control-Power Conditioning system (C-PCS)
• Fire protection
• Cooling
Besides these four components, the BESS also has an external communication module
which enables remote control and access of data. Figure 2.1a shows the planned layout
of the BESS and the main components. Figure 2.1b shows the connections between
the main electrical components.
2.1.1
The battery racks
There are ﬁve battery racks, each consisting of 14 modules and a battery protection
unit. Each module consists of connected Li-ion cells. The cells have an open-circuit
voltage of 3.7 V. The cells’ energy density is estimated by the producer at about 205
Wh/kg.
The modules have an voltage range of 42-58.8 V depending on the modules’ state.
They have an energy of 6.59 kWh, meaning a single rack has an energy capacity of
92.26 kWh. With ﬁve racks, the total energy capacity is 460.3 kWh. Figure 2.2a shows
a picture of one of the battery racks installed in Nordhavn.
2.1.2
Control-Power Conditioning system (C-PCS)
The Control-Power Conditioning system (C-PCS) is the group of electronics which
form the interface between the battery and the 10 kV grid. This includes inverters,
ﬁlters and a control system. It has four main goals: 1) To adjust the current and
==PAGE:28==
12
2 The installed BESS and battery degradation
(a) The planned layout of the BESS.
(b) Schematic of electrical connections and compo-
nents.
Figure 2.1: The layout and schematic of BESS components
voltage to maximise power output, 2) to convert between Direct Current (DC) and
Alternating Current (AC) power, 3) to match the outputted AC power to the utilities’
AC electrical network, and 4) to prevent current ﬂow to the grid during faults [12].
An inverter is a electronic device which transforms DC to AC and vice versa. It
controls the charge and discharge activity. The battery uses DC power, while the grid
is AC. On the battery-side of the inverter a ﬁlter is included. The ﬁlters ensures that
the AC power to the grid has an adequate quality which lives up to grid requirements.
It also ensures that the power to the BESS is acceptable quality. The controller
ensures charging and discharging activities are safe for the BESS.
The C-PCS contributes substantially to the total cost of the BESS. It is estimated
that it makes up about 25% of the total cost. The technology is maturing rapidly,
which is driving the costs down, improving reliability, and increasing system overall
eﬃciency. [10]
The inverter installed is of type Energy Storage Inverter, ESI-I, delivered by ABB.
The input voltage is 400 Vac ± 10% for a 3-phase 50 Hz grid. The rated power at 400
Vac is 315 kW per unit. Its nominal current is 450 A and a voltage range of 585-830
Vdc. It is also capable of delivering reactive power. Figure 2.2b shows the inverter.
2.1.3
Fire protection
If a Li-ion cell short circuits, the result is a very high current which can lead to a ﬁre.
Therefore, a ﬁre suppression system must be located in the same room. Of course, a
water-based ﬁre-suppression system would damage the electronics, and therefore an
==PAGE:29==
2.1 The BESS installation
13
(a) An installed battery rack.
(b) The ESI-I inverter [26].
Figure 2.2: The installed battery rack and inverter
inert gas system is installed. "Inert" means it will not react with the ﬁre. It reduces
the amount of oxygen in the air, and thereby smothers the ﬁre without damaging
equipment. Speciﬁcally a INERGEN system is used, where the gas consists of 52%
Nitrogen, 40% Argon, and 8% Carbon Dioxide. INERGEN is odourless, non-toxic and
has the same density as air. It is not harmful for persons in the room. The Carbon
Dioxide ensures that the human body transports more Oxygen, meaning the body
will recieve as much Oxygen as if it was in a natural atmosphere. The gas is also
environmentally safe. [27] The gas is stored in cylinders and an automatic control
system detects ﬁre and releases gas.
A sprinkler system is also installed with an inlet from the outside. It requires
manual attachment of a ﬁre hose. Since it would destroy all the electrical equipment,
it is the last resort to suppress a ﬁre if the INERGEN system fails.
2.1.4
Cooling
Cooling is necessary to ensure safe operating temperatures for the components. The
cooling is implemented by both a refrigerant and ventilation. If the temperature of
the battery cells is not controlled it can lead to premature ageing [20]. The system is
maintained at 25◦C at all times, which is also what the presented degradation model
explained in Section 2.2 assumes.
==PAGE:30==
14
2 The installed BESS and battery degradation
Figure 2.3: The estimated losses of the inverter, battery racks and LV panel.
2.1.5
Losses
The equipment contributing to losses are the LV-panel, the battery racks, the inverters,
cooling, and communication/control equipment, where the ﬁrst three are the main
electrical losses. These losses are resistive power losses and are dissipated as heat.
They can be described by Ohm’s law as expressed by Equation 2.1, where Ploss is the
power losses, R is the resistance, and I is the drawn current. As the radial power
increases, the current increases and hence the power losses.
Ploss = RI2
(2.1)
The losses of the inverter are less than or equal to 8 kW [26], where the loss is
maximum at full load. Similarly the losses in the battery racks and LV panel have
been estimated in the technical proposal received by Radius, which are also load
dependent. Figure 2.3 shows the total losses of these three components as a function
of the load. The trend can be approximated as linear. Equation 2.1 suggests that the
losses should increase exponentially with the load assuming a constant resistance in
the cables. These calculations are only estimates.
The system uses a minimum of 5 kW. The maximum electrical losses are 30 kW
which corresponds to about 5% loss, meaning the system has a worst-case eﬃciency
of 95% when discharging. It is assumed that the charging eﬃciency is approximately
the same, giving the system a round-trip eﬃciency of about 90%. Furthermore, power
meters have been installed at the output of the BESS inverters, which would enable
the calculation of actual system eﬃciency. Unfortunately, it was not possible to do
this within the time frame of this thesis due to a delay in the BESS project. For
simplicity, simulations assume on-way eﬃciencies of 0.95.
==PAGE:31==
2.2 Battery degradation and lifetime estimation
15
2.2
Battery degradation and lifetime estimation
Li-ion is an expensive technology per kWh compared to other battery technologies,
and therefore a long liftetime is important. Understanding degradation of Li-ion
batteries is being increasingly researched. Degradation refers to the degradation of
the battery’s performance parameters; energy capacity and power capability [17]. As
mentioned earlier the EOL of a battery is typically deﬁned as when a battery has lost
20% of its nominal energy capacity [13]. The lifetime therefore refers to the total time
before EOL. In this thesis, the lifetime is estimated in full years.
The degradation of Li-ion batteries is non-linear and aﬀected by several diﬀerent
factors. The ageing mechanisms are split into two main components: Cyclic ageing and
calendar ageing. Cyclic ageing is ageing which results from charging and discharging
the battery. Calendar ageing occurs when the battery is idle. The main factors
aﬀecting cyclic and calendar ageing are listed in Table 2.1.
Table 2.1: The main factors aﬀecting cyclic and calendar ageing [17]
Cyclic
Calendar
Temperature
Temperature
Average cycle SOC
Average storage SOC
Cycle depth
Time
Current
Cell age
Temperature and SOC have an eﬀect on both ageing componenets. SOC is the
level of energy in the battery as a percentage of the possible energy capacity. The
paper [15] deals with the chemical aspects leading to power and energy capacity loss
in detail, and the two major contributing factors presented are the Solid Electrolyte
Interphase (SEI) formation and Lithium plating. The SEI is a layer that forms on the
electrodes’ surfaces when the Li-ion electrolyte decomposes on the electrodes. The
SEI production increases with temperature and SOC. It is electrically insulating, but
also an ionic conductor. Therefore does not prevent Lithium intercalation. It reduces
the contact between the ions and the electrodes leading to an increased resistance and
thereby power loss. It typically forms during the ﬁrst cycles. A thicker layer leads
to a larger consumption of mobile Lithium, meaning the energy capacity decreases.
Lithium plating refers to the deposited Lithium-metal on the anode. It is favoured
at low temperatures, and it causes a decrease in mobile Lithium and increases the
resistance [15].
2.2.1
The degradation models for lifetime estimation
There are many diﬀerent factors aﬀecting degradation and these also have non-linear
eﬀects, making it complex to accurately predict ageing. Formulating a model to
predict this is not straight forward and beyond the scope of this thesis. Comprehensive
models are diﬃcult to ﬁnd, because publically available research is still young and
conclusions are not necessarily consistent. A model found in [17] is adopted. It is
==PAGE:32==
16
2 The installed BESS and battery degradation
important to keep in mind that the results may include some uncertainties due to
diﬀerences in the exact cell technology and technical set-up.
The model is based on the results from accelerated ageing tests for both calender
and cyclic ageing of LiFePO4/C battery cells. The tests are described in [16]. The
resulting models are found as Equations 2.2 and 2.3 for calender ageing and Equations
2.4 and 2.5 for cyclic ageing. Cf is the energy capacity fade and Pf is the power
capacity fade. SOCstore is the SOC when storing, SOCavg is the average SOC during
the cycle, t is time in months, cd is the cycle depth and nc is the number of full cycles.
A full cycle is deﬁned as a combined discharge and charge session. A half cycle can be
either charging or discharging. Since the BESS has temperature control, it is assumed
that it always has a temperature of 25◦C and the models are therefore not a function
of temperature.
Cf,cal(SOCstore, t) = 0.1723 · e0.007388·SOCstore · t0.8
(2.2)
Pf,cal(SOCstore, t) = 0.0033 · SOC0.4513
store · t
(2.3)
Cf,cyc(SOCavg, cd, nc) = 0.021 · e−0.01943·SOCavg · cd0.7162 · nc0.5
(2.4)
Pf,cyc(SOCavg, cd, nc) = 1.1725 · 10−6 · cd0.7891 · nc
(2.5)
Figures 2.4 and 2.5 show the energy capacity fade and power decrease for calender
ageing and cyclic ageing respectively. The ﬁgures also show the diﬀerentiated curve,
representing the rate of degradation. Figure 2.5 assumes an average cycle SOC of
50%.
(a) The capacity fade.
(b) The power decrease.
Figure 2.4: The calender degradation for energy and power capacity as a function of
time in months. This applies to a cell with temperature of 25◦C.
Clearly, both calendar and cyclic ageing have a signiﬁcant impact on the energy
capacity at the end of the BESS’s life, and depending on the operation strategy
==PAGE:33==
2.2 Battery degradation and lifetime estimation
17
(a) The capacity fade.
(b) The power decrease.
Figure 2.5: The cyclic degradation for energy and power capacity as a function number
of cycles and the depth of discharge. This applies to a cell with temperature of 25◦C
and an average SOC at 50%.
the BESS lifespan may be mainly determined by one or the other. For both ageing
components, the energy capacity decreases fastest as the beginning of a cells life and
this is important if considering an already aged battery. The initial, quick cyclic
ageing is most likely due to the initial build up of the SEI which happens during the
ﬁrst charges of a cell’s life [15].
The power capacity is not as aﬀected, where the main power fade is due to calendar
ageing while cyclic ageing does not have a signiﬁcant eﬀect. The power ageing is
linearly correlated to storage duration and number of cycles for calendar and cyclic
ageing respectively. The power decrease is only a few percent over a long period such
as 10 years, and when considering a system such as the BESS in Nordhavn, this is
very little compared to the energy capacity fade. The decrease in energy capacity will
be the main reason why the battery modules must be replaced in the future. Power
fade will therefore not be considered further in this thesis.
It is common to set the End-of-Life (EOL) criterion as 20% energy capacity fade
[13]. Figure 2.6 shows the estimated number of cycles possible for a certain cycle
depth and average SOC, when it reaches this EOL criterion. Clearly the deeper the
cycles, the less cycles the battery can perform. It should be noted, that when cycling,
a high SOC decreases cyclic ageing, while when the BESS is at rest, the SOC should
be lower to reduce calender ageing.
2.2.2
Assumptions, alterations, and use
The models were created using accelerated ageing tests, where the battery cells were
aged based on either cyclic or calender ageing. Real BESS operation is a mixture
of the two, and therefore some assumptions must be made regarding applying the
models to mixed operation.
==PAGE:34==
18
2 The installed BESS and battery degradation
Figure 2.6: The relationship between the number of cycles, avg. cycle SOC and cycle
depth before reaching 20% energy capacity fade.
Some studies suggest that the ageing mechanisms for charging and discharging are
not necessarily the same [18]. The tests performed to create the models are performed
using repeated cycling, including both charging and discharging of certain depths, and
for the purposes of this thesis, it is therefore assumed that the model represents the
ageing of both charging and discharging cycles.
Furthermore, calender ageing is not necessarily completely restricted to when
the battery is idle, but may also take place during cycling. It is assumed that all
contributions from the calender ageing mechanisms during cycling are included in the
cycling model. Therefore it is possible to split the battery operation into segments of
either calender or cyclic ageing.
Equation 2.2 expresses ageing without any periods of cycling and due to its non-
linearity, cannot be used directly to describe disconnected idle segments. When using
the model directly with t being the duration of the individual resting periods, the
resulting summed degradation would be too high due to the high rate of ageing for
low values of t. Instead, to take the changing slope into consideration, the product
of the diﬀerentiated Equation 2.2 and the resting duration as expressed in Equation
2.6 is used. N is the number of individual storage periods and Ti is the total amount
of time at rest from beginning of life until resting interval i. This locally linearises
the model. It is assumed that the calendar ageing follows the same ageing curve even
though the resting periods are interrupted by periods of cycling.
Cf,cal,total =
N
X
i
 d
dtCf,cal(SOCstore,i, Ti)

· ti
(2.6)
Similarly, the cyclic ageing model in Equation 2.4 must also be altered. The model
is based on consecutive cycles of similar depths and SOC, and can therefore not be
==PAGE:35==
2.2 Battery degradation and lifetime estimation
19
used directly for real operation. In reality, the BESS will perform cycles with various
cycle depths. Instead, the model is used to estimate life consumption. For a certain
type of cycle, the BESS can perform a certain number of these before it reaches its
EOL criterion at 20% energy degradation. If the BESS performs n full cycles out
of nc possible full cycles of this type before EOL, then the n cycles have consumed
(100 · n/nc)% of the BESSs life. The characteristic number of cycles possible for
a given cycle type is calculated using a rearranged version of Equation 2.4 where
Cf,cyc = 20%. Equation 2.7 shows the expression.
ncj =
 20
0.021e0.01943·SOCavg,j · cd−0.7162
j
2
(2.7)
To calculate the full cyclic ageing, the diﬀerent cycle types must be counted, and
their individual contribution to the life consumption summed. To count the cycles,
the rainﬂow algorithm is used, which is a method for ﬁnding extrema points and
calculating the number of cycles and their amplitude. It converts the input signal
into a signal consisting only of peaks and valleys. Information about the rainﬂow
algorithm is presented in depth in [19].
Equation 2.8 calculates the total life consumption, where nj is the counted number
of a certain type of cycle, ncj is the total number of cycles possible of this type before
reaching the 20% EOL criterion, and M is the total number of cycle types.
LC =
M
X
j
nj
ncj
(2.8)
The life consumption is a percentage of the EOL criterion, so the capacity fade is
simply calculated as expressed in Equation 2.9.
Cf,cyc,total = 20 · LC
(2.9)
ABB provided the result from a full cycle ageing test for the cells used in the
Nordhavn BESS, which is seen in Figure 2.7. The total number of cycles when cycling
at 100% is approximately 3000. From Equation 2.7, the model estimates about 8600
cycles are possible, which is clearly too high. Therefore, a factor is introduced to solve
this non-compliance. Furthermore, it is assumed that the average cycle SOC is always
50% to simplify and prevent any other characteristics of the model which introduce
further uncertainties.
The cyclic ageing model has another issue which must be handled. For very small
cycle depths, the model tends toward inﬁnity possible cycles. In some sense, this
would mean that making small cycles with a depth of a few percent, degrades the
BESS less than simply leaving it idle. In reality this is most likely not the case, and
this gap between reality and mathematical models must be bridged. Therefore, small
cycles are transferred to calendar ageing instead, by calculating their average SOC and
replacing the cycles with this constant value. In reality, the BESS is never completely
==PAGE:36==
20
2 The installed BESS and battery degradation
Figure 2.7: The cyclic ageing of the speciﬁc BESS modules provided by ABB.
idle, because it is constantly using small amounts of power on its battery management
system. Still this is considered calendar ageing because the resulting cycles are very
small. The question is: what cycle size should be considered as calendar ageing? For
this thesis all cycles with a depth less than 5% are assumed as calendar ageing.
Overall, the main factors which decrease lifetime and should be avoided when
designing an operating strategy are: large cycle depth, cycling at low SOC and idling
at high SOC. The total lifetime is estimated using full years, because the economical
analysis considers annual values, as explained further in 5.
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER 3
Strategies based on
frequency regulation
This chapter introduces ancillary services in Denmark and in detail discusses the regu-
lations of those most relevant for the BESS. To ensure balance between consumption
and generation in real-time, Energinet.dk uses ancillary services. "Ancillary services"
is a broad term referring to many diﬀerent services, which maintain system stability.
Energinet.dk deﬁnes its necessary ancillary services as [28]:
• Frequency-controlled reserves (FCR)
• Secondary reserves
• Manual reserves and regulating power
• Properties required to maintain power system stability
Frequency-controlled reserves (FCR) refer to Primary Frequency Reserves (PFR) in
DK1 and Frequency-controlled Disturbance Reserves (FDR) and Frequency-controlled
Normal Reserves (FNR) in DK2. They aim to automatically stabilise the frequency
to around 50 Hz and focus on small, short-lived frequency deviations.
Secondary reserves are also called Load Frequency Control (LFC). This type of
bi-directional reserve is only used in DK1 and aims to restore the frequency to 50 Hz.
Production units change their set points to handle the change in the power balance.
Manual reserves and regulating power ensure that there is enough regulating
power bids to handle the outage of a dimensioning unit, also commonly known as the
N-1 criterion. These reserves alter their production set points to bring the frequency
back to its nominal value. In DK1, these reserves are purchased daily, while in DK2,
they are purchased for ﬁve-year contracts. They are also split into fast and slow, where
fast reserves must be able to supply in 15 minutes and slow reserves react within 2
hours.
Properties required to maintain power system stability refer to the other services
which maintain system stability. This includes black start, voltage control, inertia and
short circuit power.
The frequency reserves are contracted on a reserve market. The Nordic TSOs
use a common platform for planning their frequency reserves, called NOIS (Nordic
Operational Information System), which was introduced in 2002 [29]. The regulating
power bids received by each TSO are submitted to NOIS, so the TSOs can better
plan eﬃcient and secure operation.
The frequency-controlled reserves, FNR, FDR and PFR are most applicable for a
BESS, and these are now discussed in more detail including how they are simulated.
==PAGE:38==
22
3 Strategies based on frequency regulation
The BESS is in DK2, and therefore FNR and FDR are directly applicable, but similar
future installations may be installed in DK1 and therefore PFR regulations are also of
interest. The presented information about the three services (FNR, FDR and FDR)
is a summary of the information in [28], [30] and [31].
3.1
Frequency-controlled normal operation reserve
(FNR)
(a) The FNR droop.
(b) The FDR droop.
Figure 3.1: The droops for FDR and FNR.
FNR is bidirectional frequency control and is therefore activated for both under-
and over-frequencies.
It is automatic and can be provided by both production
and consumption units. FNRs are provided symmetrically meaning upward and
downward regulation reserves are sold/purchased together. The total required amount
of frequency-controlled normal operation reserves in RG Nordic is 600 MW, which is
split proportionally between the member TSOs. Energinet.dk acquires these reserves
in collaboration with Svenska Kraftnät, and their individual shares are negotiated
annually. In 2012, Energinet.dk’s share was 23 MW and Kraftnät’s share was 230
MW [32].
The FNR units are active for frequency deviations in the interval 50 Hz ±100
mHz, and there is no deadband, meaning they are almost always active. The power
is supplied linearly from 0 to full power at ±100 mHz as depicted in Figure 3.1a.
When considering a battery, upward regulation means discharging into the grid, while
downward regulation means charging. The reserve must be fully activated within
150 seconds and must be able to supply power continuously. The reserves can be a
combination of units including consumption, that combined can fulﬁl the contract.
The reserves are acquired on daily auctions, where a portion of the reserve is
purchased two days before operation (D-2) and the remaining is contracted one day
==PAGE:39==
3.1 Frequency-controlled normal operation reserve (FNR)
23
before operation (D-1). The bids have an hourly resolution. The (D-2) bids must be
submitted at 15:00 two days before operation. The (D-1) bids are received until 18:00
on the day before operation. Figure 3.2 shows this timing. All bids accepted on their
respective days are binding.
Figure 3.2: The timing for FNR bids.
Figure 3.3: The balancing prices in 2016.
All bids must be at least 0.3 MW and are accepted in their entirety. The reserves
are chosen starting from the lowest priced ﬁrst. The players receive an availability
payment as pay-as-bid. The actual energy supplied is compensated using the balancing
prices for upward and downward regulation.
Figure 3.3 shows the upward and
downward regulating prices for 2016. The actual activation of the reserves is controlled
individually and there is no centralised command signal. The actual delivery of services
is checked in tests performed by Energinet.dk. In case of inability to supply, the player
does not receive the availability payment and must cover any additional costs incurred
if Energinet.dk must obtain additional reserves. Energinet.dk will simply contract
the next supplier in the merit order curve, meaning these extra costs are equal to or
higher than the last accepted supplier. It is reasonable to assume that the penalty is
10 to 100% above the bid [33].
==PAGE:40==
24
3 Strategies based on frequency regulation
Figure 3.4: The average availability payments for FNR and FDR in 2016
3.1.1
FNR and the BESS
The reason FNR is interesting, is that it has the highest availability payments of the
two frequency reserves in DK2. Figure 3.4 shows the diﬀerence in the prices between
FNR and FDR. The average FDR price is 46 DKK/MW while the average FNR price
is 189 DKK/MW. From an economic standpoint, FNR would be preferred due to the
increased availability payments.
There are two main issues with the BESS providing the FNR service for all hours
of the year: 1) It is energy limited and therefore risks being either fully charged
or discharged in connection with providing regulation and 2) it has a sub-optimal
eﬃciency and therefore cannot uphold an acceptable SOC over time.
The ﬁrst issue is caused by the fact that the BESS is a limited energy source,
and when it is either fully charged or fully discharged, it cannot provide downward
or upward regulation respectively. FNR must be supplied continuously over the
contracted period (minimally 1 hour), meaning the BESS could be required to provide
either upward or downward regulation for a full hour of operation. Since it is a
bidirectional service, its SOC must be maintained around 50%, and therefore the
energy capacity available for each direction is only half of the BESS’s actual energy
capacity. The BESS rated power is greater than its energy capacity, it will discharge
or charge completely 50% SOC within an hour, if the full power capability is oﬀered
for FNR. Consider the worst-case scenario, where the starting SOC is 50% (230 kWh)
and the BESS is fully activated for up regulation for the full hour. If the bid was 630
kW, the battery would be drained in just over 20 minutes.
The eﬃciency losses also prevent continuous operation. Assuming the frequency
deviations have a mean of zero and switches between over- and under-frequency often,
the BESS would still become depleted due to eﬃciency losses. When the BESS charges,
it requires more energy than is transferred to the cells and when discharging more
energy is lost than is delivered to the grid. Therefore, over time, the BESS will have a
declining average SOC.
Table 3.1 shows the relevant frequency characteristics for FNR operation. Figure
==PAGE:41==
3.1 Frequency-controlled normal operation reserve (FNR)
25
Figure 3.5: The frequency for 2016
Table 3.1: Relevant frequency characteristics for to FNR operation considering 2016
data.
Aspect
Value
Unit
Mean time below 50 Hz
83.89
Seconds
Mean time above 50 Hz
81.34
Seconds
Maximum time below 50 Hz
4.28
Hours
Maximum time above 50 Hz
11.74
Hours
Standard deviation for time below 50 Hz
4.32
Minutes
Standard deviation for time above 50 Hz
4.66
Minutes
Total time of frequencies at 50 Hz in 2016
74
Hours
3.5 shows the system frequency of 2016. The mean frequency in 2016 was 49.9995
Hz. FNR is active whenever the frequency is not 50Hz, which is the case for all
hours of the year except approximately 74 hours. For the remaining 8,686 hours,
the BESS is delivering frequency regulation to some degree. On average, over- and
under-frequencies have a duration of almost 1.5 minutes and a standard deviation of
about 4.5 minutes. There are deviations which lasted many hours. Therefore, there is
a high probability that the BESS will become charged or discharged during continuous
operation unless the power bid is very low.
To achieve reliable delivery, the bids must be reduced and the BESS cannot
participate continuously. Equation 3.1 shows a simple calculation for the maximum
power bid if it should be able to provide for a full hour without the risk of failure (not
including the eﬃciency). SOCmax is the maximum SOC, SOCmin is the minimum
allowed SOC, EBESS is the BESS energy capacity and thours is the number of
==PAGE:42==
26
3 Strategies based on frequency regulation
consecutive hours for provided FNR.
Pbid,max = (SOCmax −SOCmin)EBESS
2thours
(3.1)
For SOCmin = 0%, SOCmax = 100%, thours = 1 hr, the BESS could oﬀer a maximum
bid of 230 kW. The FNR power bids must be above 300 kW [30], but for the purposes
of this thesis, it is assumed that the BESS can still participate with a lower bid. This
would of course drastically decrease the availability payments received.
When the BESS is not able to supply its contracted regulation, it will not receive
the aﬀected hour’s availability payment. Furthermore, the BESS owner must cover
any costs Energinet.dk should contract new reserves, meaning the BESS owner must
pay for the next FNR bid in the merit order. The cost can vary, but for simplicity it
is assumed that the cost is always 100% more than the availability payment the BESS
received.
Clearly, the BESS may have diﬃculty providing the FNR service without drastically
decreasing revenues under current regulations, and therefore several diﬀerent cases are
simulated, which test diﬀerent changes to the FNR and how they improve the BESSs
ability to participate as an FNR. Some of the changes are inspired by PFR in DK1.
The 5 diﬀerent situations simulated are:
1. (Base case) Continuous operation with current regulations and a 630 kW oﬀer.
2. Continuous operation providing unidirectional regulation.
3. Continuous operation including a deadband.
4. Discontinuous operation with blocks of 1 hour.
5. Continuous operation including a deadband, and taking a breaks to re-establish
when necessary.
The ﬁrst case is the base case where the BESS participates continually with full
power capacity under the current regulations. The remaining cases try to improve
this base case.
In point 2, the eﬀect of participating in either up or down regulation only is
investigated. In Western Denmark, it is possible to participate in unidirectional
frequency regulation. This enables the BESS to dedicate its full energy capacity to a
single direction of frequency deviations and therefore it should be able to handle the
deviations better, with less failures.
Point 3 investigates the eﬀect of including a deadband, as is implemented in
Western Denmark. When the frequency is in the deadband, it is assumed that the
BESS can attempt re-establish its SOC. Therefore, the BESS gets more control over
its SOC, instead of only depending solely on the frequency to keep the SOC at 50 %.
The risk of supply failure can be decreased by participating discontinuously. Point
4 therefore investigates the eﬀect of block operation instead of continuous operation.
This means the BESS participates for a block of hour(s), and between the blocks there
is a single hour to re-establish the SOC. Of course, this will automatically decrease
the availability payments, but increases reliability.
Point 5 tests the eﬀect of the BESS taking breaks when it is either fully charged
or discharged, so it can properly re-establish the SOC. Of course, the BESS receives a
penalty for these breaks, but it may create a more reliable and predictable service.
==PAGE:43==
3.1 Frequency-controlled normal operation reserve (FNR)
27
To decrease penalties, the breaks have a length of 15 minutes unless the remaining
time in the hour is less than 15 minutes. In this case, it takes a break for the rest of
the hour, instead of carrying the break into the next hour and receiving the penalty
for that hour too. If the break causes the BESS to receive a penalty in the following
hour, it defeats the purpose of trying to quickly re-establish.
Only point 1 is within the current regulations in Eastern Denmark. Point 2 requires
that upward and downward regulation are separated as they are in Western Denmark.
Point 3 and 5 require that a deadband is introduced as it is in Western Denmark. All
simulations assume that the TSO is tolerant for some degree of supply failure and
that the FNR availability payments are unchanged.
3.1.2
Method
The FNR operation is simulated using Matlab. The power output of the BESS is
determined from the frequency using a linear droop.1 The droop is created using
the Matlab function polyfit, which ﬁts a polynomial to the input points. The
droop for normal FNR operation is simply a linear function between the two points
(50.1 Hz, Poffer) and (49.9 Hz, −Poffer). For the cases where the deadband is included,
the droop is a discontinuous line and two separate linear functions are created; one
for up regulation and one down regulation. For simulating unidirectional service,
the linear function is created for one direction of frequency deviations. The Matlab
function polyval is used to convert any frequency value into the corresponding BESS
power output. A vector for the power output, Pout, is created in 1-second resolution
using the 2016 frequency data. For point 4, blocks where the BESS is not participating
in FNR, the power output is forced to 0, no matter the frequency.
The SOC for each time step is calculated in a loop running through the power
vector, where the SOC is updated using the BESS power for each time step. If the
calculated SOC is higher or lower than 100% or 0% respectively, then it is set to the
respective upper/lower limit. If the SOC reaches either 0% or 100%, it is classiﬁed as
a supply failure, because the BESS cannot provide the regulation in one direction any
more. An additional vector is created which shows whether a failure occurred in each
time step.
A second power vector is created while calculating the SOC. This vector is the
power used for re-establishing the SOC. Re-establishing can only take place when the
FNR power output is 0. Re-establishing power attempts to bring the SOC back to
the goal SOC (In this case 50%).
For point 5, the length of the breaks is set to 15 minutes, unless the remaining
time in the hour is less than 15 minutes. In this case, the BESS takes a break until
the hour ends. In Matlab, a function ﬁnds the minimum of either 15 minutes or the
time left in the hour.
The breaks are only implemented for one direction. For example, if the BESS is
completely discharged from providing up regulation, providing down regulation helps
1Droop is the linear relationship between a frequency deviation and the change in a unit’s power
output.
==PAGE:44==
28
3 Strategies based on frequency regulation
the BESS remedy its SOC. Therefore, the BESS only stops providing up regulation in
the break.
3.2
Frequency-controlled disturbance reserve (FDR)
FDR is only activated for under-frequencies (upward regulation) and it aims to handle
outages of major generating plants or lines. Each individual TSO in the ENTSO-E
Nordic grid contributes to the reserves, where the total reserve corresponds to 200 MW
less than the sum of dimensioning faults in each area. The dimensioning fault is deﬁned
as the loss of the single largest generating plant. The TSOs contribute proportionally
based on the dimensioning fault in each individual area. The shares are determined
each Thursday for the coming week and in 2012 Energinet.dk’s reserves was in the
range 150-180 MW. Some of the reserves can be acquired using the interconnections to
neighbouring countries, so Energinet.dk typically only acquires reserves in the range
25-55 MW in Denmark [30].
The reserve power is supplied linearly when the frequency dips below 49.9 Hz and
is fully activated at 49.5 Hz. Figure 3.1b shows the droop characteristic. 50 % of
the reserve power must be supplied within 5 seconds, and the rest must be supplied
within an additional 25 seconds.
Like FNR, FDR can be a combination of several units, which can supply the
contracted power. The same bidding structure used for FNR and depicted in Figure
3.2 is also used for FDR. Bids are hourly, are accepted in their entirety and are binding
when the auction closes. The contracted reserves receive a pay-as-bid availability
payment. Unlike FNR, no calculations of actual energy supplied are performed, but are
instead settled like ordinary imbalances. Figure 3.3 shows the upward and downward
regulating prices for 2016.
The reserves react to their own frequency measurements and do not receive
centralised signals from Energinet.dk. If the the reserve is not available, the reserve
does not receive the availability payment and must cover any costs incurred by
Energinet.dk if there is not enough capacity.
3.2.1
FDR and the BESS
Compared to FNR, FDR has two main diﬀerences which makes it more advantageous
for a BESS: 1) It is unidirectional and 2) it is only active in the frequency interval
49.5-49.9 Hz.
In FNR, the energy capacity is a major issue, because it is a bidirectional service
and it must split its energy capacity between the two directions. FDR is only up
regulation, meaning it can dedicate its full energy capacity to a single direction. Since
a FDR unit only provides energy when the frequency dips below 49.9 Hz, it is activated
far less than FNR, giving the unit for time to re-establish its SOC between providing
regulation. Therefore, even though the availability payments for FDR are lower than
for FNR, the BESS may be able to oﬀer a higher power with a more reliable delivery.
==PAGE:45==
3.2 Frequency-controlled disturbance reserve (FDR)
29
Like FNR operation, a FDR unit is required to provide power continuously in the
contracted period, if necessary. Therefore, one might be tempted to size the power
oﬀer, such that this can be guaranteed, as was done for FNR in Equation 3.1.
To understand whether it is necessary to make such robust power oﬀers, the fre-
quency behaviour must be considered. Table 3.2 shows some of the key characteristics
calculated using 2016 frequency data, which are relevant for FDR operation.
Table 3.2: Relevant frequency characteristics for to FDR operation considering 2016
data.
Aspect
Value
Unit
Maximum time below 49.9 Hz
890
Seconds
Mean time below 49.9 Hz
24.68
Seconds
Minimum frequency
49.55
Hz
Total time of frequencies below 49.8 in 2016
1240
Seconds
Average frequency for periods below 49.9 Hz
49.89
Hz
Average time above 49.9 Hz
2000
Seconds
To begin, the frequency never reaches 49.5 Hz in 2016, meaning FDR units were
never fully activated. Secondly, the occurrences of frequencies under 49.8 Hz is only
a total of 1240 seconds (20.67 minutes). On the other hand, the total number of
occurrences of frequencies below 49.9 Hz is 399209 seconds (110.89 hours), meaning
over 99% of all FDR activation only require 25% or less of the power bid.
Consider the case where the BESS oﬀers 630 kW. Given the minimum and maximum
SOC boundaries of 0% and 100% respectively and a discharging eﬃciency of 0.95, the
time before the BESS is discharged can be simply calculated as expressed by Equation
3.2.
Tdischarge = η(SOCmax −SOCmin)EBESS
PBESS
= 0.69 hr ≈41 min
(3.2)
In the worst-case situation, the BESS will discharge in approximately 41 minutes.
The longest time interval of a frequency below 49.9 Hz is 890 seconds (14.83 minutes).
Even if the BESS had to provide full power for this interval, it would still have more
than half of it energy capacity available afterwards.
The average time above 49.9 Hz is 2000 seconds (33 minutes), which would allow
the BESS to charge about 2/3 of its energy capacity.2 Furthermore, the average length
of frequency regulation is only 25 seconds.
All these ﬁgures point to the fact that the BESS should be able to bid its total
power capability range, and the probability of supply failure is very low. Therefore,
three simulations/optimisations are performed:
2Assuming a eﬃciency of 95% and full power charge, a simple calculation yields a charging time
from 0% to 100% of 46.11 minutes.
==PAGE:46==
30
3 Strategies based on frequency regulation
• Case 1: (Base case) Oﬀer 630 kW for FDR continuously.
• Case 2: Minimising degradation while maintaining continuous operation to
increase length of lifetime.
• Case 3: Maximise a theoretical power oﬀer which utilises the full energy capacity.
It is expected that the main ageing component of FDR operation is calendar ageing.
As mentioned in Section 2.2, calendar ageing increases with a higher idle SOC. Since
FDR operation is less energy demanding, and it may never use the full energy capacity.
Case 2 investigates the possibility of decreasing the SOC during FDR operation to
reap revenues for more years.
Case 3 is a theoretical simulation, which optimises the power capacity. Since
FDR operation requires less energy, it may be theoretically capable of oﬀering more
power than its current converters can deliver and still maintain a reliable operation.
Increasing power capabilities is cheaper than increasing energy capacity, and it may
be economically viable to increase power to reap higher revenues.
3.2.2
Method
FDR is simulated using Matlab. The algorithm is very similar to the FNR algorithm,
except the droop function is diﬀerent. It is instead a linear function spanning the
space between (49.9 Hz, 0 kW) and (49.5 Hz, −Poffer kW). Otherwise, the SOC and
re-establishing power vectors are created in the same way.
3.3
Frequency reserves in Germany
This section presents Germany’s primary frequency reserve regulation. The reason for
this is that they are needed to understand DK1’s PFR and aspects of the German
regulations are simulated in connection with PFR’s regulations. Therefore, it is
necessary to understand these regulations ﬁrst.
The German structure for frequency reserves is very similar to Western Denmark,
i.e. there are three types of frequency reserves: Primary, secondary and tertiary
reserves. Primary frequency reserves must be able to fully activated within 30 seconds
and must provide the frequency response linearly for deviation ±200 mHz with a
deadband of ±10 mHz. The minimum power bid is 1 MW. The primary frequency
reserves are contracted weekly.
Primary frequency reserves in Germany adhere to a 30-minute criterion, requiring a
frequency reserve unit to be capable of providing its full power oﬀered for a maximum
of 30 minutes at all times while the system is in normal state. From this criterion, it
is possible to calculate the maximum and minimum SOC of the unit as a function of
the energy capacity and power bid, which must not be violated during normal system
state. This calculation is shown in Equation 3.3, where Tmax is the maximum time
requirement (30 minutes) [30], η is the unidirectional eﬃciency, EBESS is the energy
capacity and Poffer,up/dw are the power oﬀers for up and down regulation.
==PAGE:47==
3.3 Frequency reserves in Germany
31
Figure 3.6: The SOC boundaries for the 30-minute criterion as a function of the power
bid for the Nordhavn BESS.
SOCmax = EBESS −η(Tmax/60)Poffer,dw
EBESS
SOCmin = (Tmax/60)Poffer,up
η · EBESS
(3.3)
Figure 3.6 shows the SOC boundaries as a function of the power bid for an unit,
with the energy capacity of 460 kWh. A power bid at the intersection of the minimum
and maximum SOC at 50% is not possible, because it would require the BESS to
maintain exactly 50% SOC during normal operation. Therefore, a power bid must be
chosen below the intersection. For example, the BESS could oﬀer 200 kW and then
vary its SOC in the interval of approximately 20-80%.
The ENTSO-E Operation Handbook Article 18 deﬁnes the classiﬁcation of the
system states. The system transitions from normal state to alert state when one of
the following have occurred:
• Deviation larger than the standard frequency range for a period longer than
time to restore frequency.
• Deviation larger than 50% of the maximum steady state frequency for a period
longer than the alert trigger time.
• Deviation larger than larger than the maximum steady state frequency deviation
at any time.
Table 3.3 shows the diﬀerent frequency quality deﬁning parameters mentioned for the
Continental Europe and Nordic areas.
If the system leaves normal state, the BESS can withdraw from the service when it
must. After normal state is reinstated, the BESS must return to providing frequency
regulation within 2 hours.
Since the German primary frequency reserves are contracted weekly, there must be
mechanisms to help an energy storage to maintain its SOC. During normal operation,
==PAGE:48==
32
3 Strategies based on frequency regulation
Table 3.3: The frequency quality deﬁning parameters [34].
CE
NE
Standard frequency range
±50 mHz
±100 mHz
Maximum instantaneous frequency deviation
800 mHz
±1000 mHz
Maximum Steady-state frequency deviation
200 mHz
500 mHz
Time to restore frequency
15 min
15 min
Alert state trigger time
5 min
5 min
there are several Degrees of Freedom (DoF) allowed. These are described in English
in [13]:
• Over-fulﬁlment: The absolute value of the power to be provided can be increased
by 20% at any time. For example if the unit is providing ±1.0 p.u. of power, it
can increase this to ±1.2 p.u. (Figure 3.7a).
• Deadband: For frequency deviation of ±10 mHz, the unit can choose whether or
not to provide the service, but it cannot act so it counteracts re-establishment
of the nominal frequency (Figure 3.7b).
• Provision rate: The regulation power must be provided within 30 seconds. Units
capable of faster deliver can change their ramping rate to alleviate SOC eﬀects
(Figure 3.7c).
• Scheduled transactions: The unit can buy/sell energy on the intraday simulta-
neously with providing primary frequency control (Figure 3.7d).
Figure 3.7 illustrates the diﬀerent DoFs. The source [13] showed that the combina-
tion of the ﬁrst three DoFs is not enough to ensure an acceptable SOC. Therefore,
the intraday transaction are necessary for a secure operation. Logically the ﬁrst three
DoFs decrease the number of intraday transactions, and [13] showed that the provision
rate and dead band are most eﬀective.
In Germany, the European Energy Exchange (EPEX) intraday market allows
quarter hour bids [35], and the trading closes 20 minutes before operation start [36].
This short gate closure time and short period of delivery makes it more appealing for
a BESS and a viable option for compensating the SOC during continuous frequency
regulation.
3.4
Primary frequency reserve (PFR)
Unlike Eastern Denmark, in Western Denmark there is only a single type of primary
frequency reserve, called PFR. They aim to stabilise the frequency close to, but not
necessarily at 50 Hz. Secondary reserves bring frequency back to 50 Hz. Like FNR
and FDR, it is automatic and can be provided by both consumption/production units
and a combination of several units.
All TSOs in RG Continental Europe are jointly responsible for delivering suﬃcient
==PAGE:49==
3.4 Primary frequency reserve (PFR)
33
(a) Overfulﬁlment
(b) Deadband
(c) Provision rate
(d) Intraday transactions
Figure 3.7: The degrees of freedom allowed in Germany for energy storage systems.
reserves, and share the total requirement of ±3000 MW proportionally. The shares
are determined annually based on the amount of generation each TSO is responsible
for. In 2011, Energinet.dk was responsible for ±27 MW [30]. DK1 does not necessarily
have to supply the power itself, and it can use imports to secure the necessary power,
but only from immediate neighbours to avoid congestion issues. It is also allowed to
contract the power from the Nordic synchronous area, assuming the interconnection
capacity is available.
Upward and downward regulation are contracted separately, but a unit can partici-
pate in both [24]. Figure 3.8 shows the availability payments for PFR in 2016 for both
upward and downward regulation. The average price for up regulation was 119.24
DKK/MW and the average price for down regulation was 11.11 DKK/MW. If the
BESS owner wishes to only participate as a single type of regulation, it is better to
participate as a up-regulation reserve.
The reserves are bought on daily auctions in ﬁxed four-hour blocks spanning
from midnight to midnight. All bids must be entered latest 15:00 on the day before
operation. It is a single auction for both up and down regulation reserves, and there is
no (D-2) auction as shown in Figure 3.9. All bids must be at least 300 kW. Energinet.dk
==PAGE:50==
34
3 Strategies based on frequency regulation
Figure 3.8: The availability payment in 2016 for PFR in DK1.
Figure 3.9: The timing of the daily auction for PFR.
contracts primary reserves by accepting the lowest priced ﬁrst, and bids are accepted
in their entirety. Each accepted reserve receives an availability payment equal to the
price of the last accepted reserve (the highest priced). There are no calculations for
the actual energy activated and the energy is settled like regular imbalances.
Figure 3.10: The droop for PFR in DK1
Primary frequency reserves are activated in the frequency range 49.8-50.2 Hz, with
a deadband of ±20 mHz around 50 Hz. The power must minimally be supplied linearly
==PAGE:51==
3.4 Primary frequency reserve (PFR)
35
with the deviation, where it is fully activated when the frequency deviation is ±200
mHz. Compared to FNR in DK2, the deadband allows primary frequency reserves
a more relaxed operation, in the sense that they do not have to react to very small
frequency deviations. The droop for a primary reserve providing both up and down
regulation is shown in Figure 3.10.
When a deviation occurs, half of the oﬀered reserve must be activated within 15
seconds, while the other half must be activated within 30 seconds. The unit must be
able to provide 15 minutes of maximum oﬀered power at all times, because this is the
time it takes the secondary reserves to take over. The tender material sates:
"It must be possible to maintain the regulation until the automatic and/or manual
regulating reserve can take over, however maximally 15 minutes. Following the end of
the regulation, the reserve must be re-established after 15 minutes" [30].
It is unclear which is meant by "after regulation". Previous papers assume that the
regulations mean that after the BESS has provided regulation for 15 minutes it can take
15 minutes to re-establish itself. This seems odd and unreliable if many units operated
like this. To understand, Energinet.dk was contacted. The contacted employee said
that the 15-minute criterion is an unfortunate formulation from Continental Europe
Operation Handbook Policy 1 [37] and that the primary frequency reserves should be
available at all times. He said that charging strategies must be made to ensure this is
possible.
It seems that the unclear formulation may not have been an issue before the recent
years, because traditional primary frequency reserves do not need to take breaks like a
BESS does. As mentioned, the formulation in the tender material is from ENTSO-E’s
Continental Europe Operation Handbook, which is common for all TSO’s in the
Continental Europe synchronous area. Germany’s regulations follow the Operation
Handbook well and are explained with many details. Germany’s regulations are
therefore consulted to give insight into what is meant by the DK1 regulations.
As mentioned in Section 3.3 Germany has the 30-minute criterion, stating that
the unit must always have 30 minutes of up and down regulation available. This is
similar to the 15-minute criterion stated in the DK1 tender material. Furthermore,
only if the system enters alert state can the German primary reserve discontinue its
regulation and it must be re-established within 2 hours. This requirement is similar
to the 15-minute re-establishment requirement in the DK1 material. Assuming that
Germany and Western Denmark’s regulations are similar, it is proposed that the
above quote from the DK1 tender material can be understood as: 1) units must have
15 minutes worth of energy to provide maximum power oﬀered at all times and 2) if
the system enters alert state, the BESS is not required to adhere to the 15-minute
criterion. After an alert state, it must be able to re-establish itself and continue
regulation after 15 minutes. This interpretation does not speciﬁcally counter any
information the Energinet.dk provided.
The 15-minute criterion is a clear advantage for a BESS compared to FNR or FDR,
due to the capacity-limited nature of a battery. The BESS operation can be designed
in such a way that its capacity enables maximum power for 15 minutes, giving rise to
SOC boundaries which the BESS must stay within during normal system state. The
boundaries can be calculated using Equation 3.3.
==PAGE:52==
36
3 Strategies based on frequency regulation
Figure 3.11 shows the minimum and maximum boundaries as a function of the
power bid. Based on Figure 3.11, if the BESS oﬀers its full power capacity of 630 kW,
then under normal operation it must maintain its SOC boundaries within 36.0%-67.5%
giving a working interval of 31.4% of the BESS energy capacity or 160.8 kWh.
Figure 3.11: The SOC boundaries for the 15-minute criterion as a function of the
power bid for the Nordhavn BESS.
3.4.1
Method
The BESS in Nordhavn is in DK2, and can therefore not participate in PFR in Western
Denmark. Despite this, PFR is more advantageous for technologies such as batteries
compared to FNR, and this investigation may beneﬁt future BESS installations. 7
main cases are investigated:
1. Bidirectional 630 kW bid with the current DK1 regulations.
2. Optimised bid sizes with the current DK1 regulations.
3. Optimised energy capacity with the current DK1 regulations.
4. Up regulation with optimised bid.
5. Optimised bidirectional bid with the following DoFs: deadband, overfulﬁlment
and provision rate.
6. Optimised bidirectional bid with the following DoFs: deadband, overfulﬁlment,
provision rate and intraday transactions.
7. Optimised bid for up regulation only with the following DoFs: deadband,
overfulﬁlment, provision rate and intraday transactions.
The ﬁrst case simulates the ideal situation, where the BESS oﬀers its full power
capacity for both directions. The second case optimises the power bids so the operation
lives up to the 15-minute criterion. The third case investigates what energy capacity
is necessary if the BESS should oﬀer its full energy capacity with current regulations.
The fourth case simulates the BESS only performing up regulation because this
allocates the full energy capacity to a single direction and up regulation has the
highest availability payments.
==PAGE:53==
3.4 Primary frequency reserve (PFR)
37
Instead of simulating the German regulations, the eﬀect of the German DoFs on
the DK1 PFR is investigated. This was chosen, because Energinet.dk may decide
to implement mechanisms to help energy-limited units. Since Germany has already
successfully implemented these mechanisms, it is logical that Energinet.dk either copies
or implements similar mechanisms. The ﬁfth case simulates operation if Energinet.dk
implements the three degrees of freedom from Germany: overfulﬁlment, deadband
and provision rate. The reason for simulating these separately is because they are
relatively simple to implement, in the sense that these do not require large market
structure changes.
The sixth and seventh cases simulate if all four degree of freedoms are implemented,
including the intraday trading. The seventh case only considers up regulation, because
the BESS can then dedicate its full energy capacity to one direction. Out of the seven
cases, cases 1-4 are possible with the current regulations.
Practically, PFR is implemented in a similar fashion as FNR and FDR. Two droop
functions are created, one for up regulation and one for down regulation. The droops are
linear function between the points (50Hz ± 20mHz, 0) and (50Hz ± 200mHz, ±Poffer).
The Matlab function polyfit is used.
If The BESS is only participating in up
regulation, the down regulation oﬀer, Pbid,dw, is 0 and the droop is simply a line on
Pout,dw = 0.
Using the two droop functions and the Matlab function polyval, the output PFR
power vector is created. It is ensured that the power output does not surpass the power
oﬀered. Unlike FNR and FDR, a PFR unit can stop providing frequency regulation
15 minutes after the system enters alert state. The unit is allowed 15 minutes to
re-establish its SOC after either 1) having provided 15 minutes of service during alert
state or 2) the alert state ending (whatever comes ﬁrst).
A vector for the system state with 1 second resolution is generated using the
2016 frequency data. At the start of each alert state interval, the power output for
frequency regulation either 15 minutes later or when the alert state ends is set to 0
kW for 15 minutes. Figure 3.12 illustrates the concept.
Figure 3.12: Illustration of when the breaks from frequency regulation are allowed.
It is assumed that in the deadband with the current PFR regulation, the BESS
can re-establish its SOC. Nothing about this is stated in the tender conditions [30].
Logically, a frequency reserve with the responsibility to stabilise the system, should not
==PAGE:54==
38
3 Strategies based on frequency regulation
unnecessarily destabilise it during its operation. To avoid hurting the system balance,
the BESS can only re-establish the SOC in the direction that helps the system.
The frequency used for the simulations is for Eastern Denmark, not Western
Denmark.
The frequency may have diﬀerent dynamics in these two areas.
For
example, DK1 has a deadband for primary frequency control, whereas DK2 does not.
Also, the frequency deviation for full activation is 200 mHz in DK1 and 500 mHz
in DK2. One would expect that these diﬀerences inﬂuence the frequency behaviour.
This is important because PFR operation is dependent on the system state and the
Continental Europe and Nordic areas have diﬀerent conditions for when the system
enters alert state. Since the acquired frequency data is from the Nordic area, the
system state is determined using the Nordic system conditions.
The following explains how the DoFs are implemented. The degrees of freedom
are dependent on the SOC and are therefore enforced when the SOC vector is created
from the power output vector.
DoF: Overfulﬁlment
The overfulﬁlment DoF is activated when the PFR power causes the SOC to
approach the SOC goal. The power output is then multiplied by 120% as described
by Equation 3.4, to quicker approach the foal SOC.
Pout,new = Pout,new · 1.2
kW
(3.4)
DoF: Provision rate
The provision rate DoF is activated when the frequency regulation causes the
SOC to move further from the goal SOC with a fast ramp. In this case, the power
output is altered so it adheres to a slower ramp. The ramp is limited to a maximum
as described by Equation 3.5.
∆Pout < Poffer/30
kW/s
(3.5)
DoF: Deadband
The deadband DoF is activated when the frequency is in the range 50 Hz ± 20
mHz and providing the frequency regulation helps re-establish the SOC. In this case,
the power output is set to 630 kW in the direction that helps the system.
DoF: Intraday transactions
The intraday transactions ﬁrst and foremost require the possibility of 15-minute
energy transactions. The transactions are initiated when the SOC is far enough
from the goal SOC. The interval around the goal SOC where there are no intraday
transactions, is called the SOC deadband. When the code is creating the SOC vector,
if the SOC in a given time step is outside the SOC deadband, an intraday transaction
is initiated. In other words, the power vector will be modiﬁed with an inter-day
transaction after 20 minutes (1200 seconds). The intraday transactions have a length
of 15 minutes (900 seconds) and trade PID kW.
The intraday transactions therefore introduce 2 new variables which the BESS
owner must determine: 1) The SOC deadband giving rise to the two SOC boundaries,
SOC−and SOC+ and 2) the power to trade in the market, PID.
When the intraday market DoF is implemented, the BESS cannot oﬀer full power
for both up and down regulation, because it must have available power capacity to
==PAGE:55==
3.5 Frequency reserves in California
39
participate in the intraday market. The PFR units are contracted in daily auctions,
and the BESS cannot change its oﬀer during the day if it instead wants to perform
an intraday transaction. For example, consider a case where the BESS oﬀers 630 kW
bidirectional power for PFR, and during operation it needs an intraday transaction to
re-establish the SOC. If the frequency dips to 49.8 Hz during the 15 minutes when
the BESS is delivering energy to the grid in connection with the intraday contract, it
would have to provide an additional 630 kW in up regulation. This is not physically
possible for the BESS. Furthermore, large intraday transactions can cause the SOC
to reach the SOC boundaries. Therefore, the intraday oﬀer must also be thoroughly
evaluated.
In case 7, the BESS is only participating in up regulation and in this case the goal
SOC cannot be 100% because it could prevent the delivery of a scheduled intraday
trade. Therefore the SOC goal is reduced by the amount that the BESS charges
during a single intraday trade given by Equation 3.6.
SOCgoal = 1 −η · PID · 0.25hr
EBESS
(3.6)
When calculating the economic aspect of the intraday transactions daily average
prices for DK1 are considered. The data is retrieved from Nord Pool’s website. For
simplicity, it is assumed that the intraday transactions can take place at any time and
the bids are always accepted at the average price for that day.
3.5
Frequency reserves in California
Energinet.dk has not made any signiﬁcant changes in the frequency reserve regulations
to encourage energy storage participation. The regulations still favour traditional
generation sources. There are other countries which have taken steps to removing the
barriers and implemented new mechanisms, which are not members of ENTSO-E.
In California, there are multiple Independent System Operators (ISO) and Regional
Transmission Organisations (RTO). RTOs are similar to TSOs who coordinate a multi-
state power grid. ISOs are formed at the recommendation of the Federal Energy
Regulatory Commission (FERC) and usually operate a smaller area and typically
within a single state. The diﬀerent RTOs and ISOs have diﬀerent regulations and
complex structures diﬀerent from those in Denmark and Europe. The most important
regulations will now be introduced.
FERC Order 755 required ISOs/RTOs to implemented a pay-for-performance
market concept to better accommodate the integration of faster technologies such
as energy storages, and most have [38]. Pay-for-performance applies to all market
participants. Typically, the pay-for-performance structure includes the following three
components [25]:
• Regulation capacity (C): This is the power oﬀered for the service. Often this is
symmetrical. This is similar to availability payments in Denmark.
• Regulation mileage (M): The sum of the absolute values of the control signal
movements and is calculated as seen in Equation 3.7 where i is a speciﬁc time step
==PAGE:56==
40
3 Strategies based on frequency regulation
and Pmax is the regulation power oﬀered. The unit for mileage is ∆MW/MW.
M =
n
X
i=1
|Pi −Pi−1|/Pmax
(3.7)
• Performance factor (ρ): A value between 0 and 1 indicating a unit’s performance
when following the regulation signal. Most calculate it using a simple integration
of the absolute errors while others use a more complex method which takes
delays, correlation and accuracy into account.
A speciﬁc ISO called CAISO implements Pay-for-Performance and awards regula-
tions using Equation 3.8 where λC and λM are the market clearing price and mileage
clearing price respectively.
λR = C(λC + ρMλM)
(3.8)
The units are controlled using a centralized regulation signal which the units aim
to follow as closely as possible. To further accommodate fast, energy-limited resources,
some operators (PJM and ISO-NE) have implemented a fast, zero-mean regulation
signal [25]. The issue with the original, slower signals is that the faster ramping units
will deliver more energy because they reach the goal power quicker. The faster units
are also those who typically have energy capacity limits.
For example, PJM implemented a new signal called RegD in addition to the
traditional signal, RegA. The RegD signal is altered so it has a zero-mean over 15
minutes and helps units sustain their SOC. It does not take eﬃciency into consideration
though. The RegA signal is slower and with higher energy demand, and is aimed at
traditional producers. Units can freely elect which signal they wish to follow.
Even though the control signal has zero-mean, the eﬃciency will eventually cause
the depletion of the energy storage. Some of the operators in California implemented
systems to alleviate this situation.
CAISO splits up- and down-regulation.
It categorises storage units as non-
generating resources and gives them two options for operation: Regulation Energy
Management (REM) and non-REM units. The Non-REM units are subject to the
traditional rules where the unit must be able to deliver continuously for a full hour.
The REM units are required to be able to provide for 15 minutes continuously, but
are only allowed to participate in the regulation market and change their contracts
monthly. For REM units, CAISO maintains and guarantees a SOC set point speciﬁed
by the owner and therefore takes eﬃciency into consideration. The energy charged
and/or discharged is settled using the Regional Transmission Manager’s location
marginal price in addition to the settlement in Equation ??.
NYSIO categorises energy storage units as Limited Energy Storage Resources and
implemented a real-time dispatching mechanism. When participating in the real-time
markets, this mechanism manages the energy level of the units so it maintains the
regulation to the highest degree possible. The unit has a SOC deadband, within which
it provides full power. When outside this deadband, the provided power capacity is
reduced so the unit can re-establish its SOC.
==PAGE:57==
3.6 Future changes to frequency reserves
41
3.5.1
Summary
California is an innovative and on the front line of renewable energy developments
and they recognised the value of these fast reserves. California regulations vary
depending on the speciﬁc location and RTO/ISO, but generally they have greatly
improved the circumstances for energy storage system participation. There are four
main improvements which lower barriers for energy storage system participation: 1)
Payments for accuracy when following control signals, 2) energy-neutral control signals,
3) 15 min regulation demand (CAISO) and 4) mechanisms for maintaining the SOC
which do not hold the ESS owner responsible for a depleted or charged system.
The pay-for-performance system cannot be simulated without using Californian
price data, and this introduces too many uncertainties in the form of diﬀering marginal
prices and market mechanics. Furthermore, it was not possible to access the necessary
data. In Denmark, the units are also not controlled by a centralised regulation signal
and this is necessary if energy-neutral regulation is to be implemented. Also, the energy-
neutral signals require coordination with other traditional ancillary services. Therefore,
California’s regulations are not simulated, but show that there are alternative solutions
to how energy storage units can be accommodated in the regulations/markets.
3.6
Future changes to frequency reserves
This section presents the regulation changes which are currently under way in Europe.
Conventional power stations have been and are the backbone of the power systems.
The rules for frequency reserves are historically designed to suit such producers. With
increasing instalment of cheap renewable sources, the number of power station is
declining, which requires the TSO(s) to ensure system stability in the future. Similar
to TSOs in Germany, Energinet.dk must into a larger degree consider other sources of
ancillary services, including wind power, consumers, interconnections, and batteries,
and in their 2015-2017 strategy for ancillary services [39], this is a focus. Partly the
strategy discusses the removal of barriers for new types of suppliers, where their goal
is to allow all possible suppliers to participate regardless of their technology. The
capacity limit of batteries is one such barrier.
In 2015, the European Commission, ACER and ENTSO-E agreed to merge the
three operational network codes, Operational Planning and Scheduling, Operational
Security and Load Frequency Control and Reserve into a single System Operation
Guideline [37]. In this process, the regulations are reviewed to handle changes and
technological movement within the areas. The new System Operation Guideline is
in the drafting stage, but on 4th May 2016, the members voted favourably for the
current version. Of course, the codes are not ﬁnalised and are subject to change. The
guidelines suggest a deadband in both Danish synchronous areas, which is currently
not the case in DK2.
Articles 153-156 explain the guidelines for FCR units. It states that units partic-
ipating who do not have a limit or depletable reservoir must provide continuously,
while a frequency deviation exists. On the other hand, it mentions that a unit with
a limited reservoir shall activate as along as the frequency deviation exists unless it
==PAGE:58==
42
3 Strategies based on frequency regulation
reaches its technical limits, ie. it is either fully charged or depleted. When the system
is in normal state, a FCR unit must provide continuously, but if the system is in alert
state, it must be able to provide the service for a time interval with a minimal length
of 15 minutes, but no longer than 30 minutes. After alert state, a unit with a limited
reservoir should be ready again within 2 hours3.
A system is classiﬁed as normal state if its voltages, power ﬂows, and frequency
are within allowable values, and can withstand one of the contingencies from the
contingency list.
The exact maximum time interval for providing FCR is determined by the TSOs,
taking a cost-beneﬁt analysis into account. This analysis must be completed within
12 months of the approval of the system operation guidelines. Overall, the new
guidelines mimic the current German regulations for energy storage units. Besides
the changes investigated by ENTSO-E, Energinet.dk is currently working on the
specifying requirements for batteries in the grid and lowering barriers for them in
the frequency reserve regulations [39]. Unfortunately, no speciﬁc changes regarding
frequency reserves has been published yet.
3For CE and Nordic areas only
==PAGE:59==
CHAPTER 4
Peak shaving and
load-levelling
strategies
This section introduces the peak shaving and Load-Levelling (LL) strategies to be
simulated and assessed. These strategies have the load measured at a predetermined
point in the grid as input. The motivation for load-based strategies, the grid topology
is presented in Section 4.1. These strategies do not have direct revenues from market
participation. Thereafter, the actual load curves used for the simulations are presented
in Section 4.2. Sections 4.3 and 4.5 introduce the peak shaving and load levelling
concepts respectively.
4.1
The grid topology
DONG Energy was created in 2006 when the six energy companies, ELSAM, NESA,
Energi E2, Frederiksberg Forsyning, Københavns Energi and DONG merged. Later,
Radius was created from the distribution part of Dong Energy to handle the grid and
distribution of energy. Therefore, the grid topology is not the same throughout their
grid. There are two main types of topologies and there are three main areas called
City, North and Frederiksberg. Figure 4.1 shows simpliﬁed diagrams of the topology in
City, North and Frederiksberg, where North and Frederiksberg have similar topologies.
Overall, Radius operates its grid using a radial structure, meaning that each load in
the grid is only supplied by a single connection point.
First, the City topology will be explained. This is the topology present in Nordhavn
and Figure 4.1a illustrates the concept. The transformers in a 30/10 kV transformer
station each supply their own 10 kV busbar and the set of connected radials. Besides
the primary transformers, a reserve transformer is switch-connected to each of 10
kV busbars, to ensure security of supply in case of a fault or failure of a primary
transformer.
The end of each radial is connected via a switch to the end of another radial to
form a loop. During normal operation, the switch is open and the individual radials
are supplied by their respective transformers. During a fault or maintenance, the
switch can be closed so a radial is fully or partially supplied by the transformer of the
other radial.
==PAGE:60==
44
4 Peak shaving and load-levelling strategies
30/10 kV
Reserve
10 kV
10/0.4 kV
10/0.4 kV
30 kV
(a) Grid topology in City
30/10 kV
10kV
10/0.4 kV
50/132 kV
(b) Grid topology in Frederiksberg and Copen-
hagen North
Figure 4.1: Simpliﬁed illustration of the two main topologies in Radius distribution
grid
The loop structure in the City topology implies that the individual radials must
never be operated close to their maximum capacity, because they must both be able
handle its own consumption and the consumption of the other radial in the loop.
Therefore, the maximum current drawn by the full loop must not exceed either of the
two radials’ capacity limits.
As Figure 4.1b shows, the North/Frederiksberg topology does not have a reserve
transformer. Instead each transformer is connected to the same two busbars and the
radials are similarly connected to these two busbars. This means that the transformers
work together to supply the full load and a transformer failure can be handled without
reserve equipment. The two busbars ensure supply security in case one should be out
of operation. To further increase security, the radials are also interconnected with
open switches, so loads can be supplied from an alternative radial in case of a fault or
maintenance.
This thesis focuses on the 10kV distribution grid. The BESS is connected to a
transformer station on the NGT65 radial which is part of the NGT08-NGT65 loop.
Here the grid has the City topology. Typically, the BESS is supplied from NGT65,
but in case of fault or maintenance it will be supplied from NGT08. The sum of
the NGT65 and NGT08 consumption must be kept below the maximum capacity of
each radial’s respective equipment. Therefore, when simulating a load-based strategy,
such as peak shaving, the total power consumption of both NGT08 and NGT65 is
considered.
==PAGE:61==
4.2 The load curves
45
Figure 4.2: The total power drawn on by the NGT08 and NGT65 radials.
4.2
The load curves
Figure 4.2 shows the total power drawn by the loop which the BESS is connected
to in 2016. The power drawn is calculated from current and voltage measurements
using Equation 4.1, where I is the current, V is the line voltage, and PF is the power
factor. The power factor is assumed as 0.99.
P =
√
3 · I · V · PF
(4.1)
The weekdays Monday to Friday have a much higher consumption than the weekends.
The highest weekend consumption is approximately 1 MW where the highest weekday
consumption is approximately 1.8 MW.
This thesis investigates diﬀerent operating strategies for the BESS in Nordhavn,
but the outcome should also help make decisions on any future BESS investments.
Diﬀerent locations in the grid see very diﬀerent load proﬁles, and therefore it is relevant
to consider other load curves. In reality, the grid in Nordhavn may not represent the
target grid location for a BESS intended for load-based operation such as peak shaving.
The Nordhavn grid is very stable and the risk of overloading, experiencing voltage
problems, etc. is low. Other locations may be more at risk at experiencing poor power
quality or security of supply, and therefore more suitable locations for a BESS. For
this reason, besides simulating and analysing BESS operation in Nordhavn, other load
proﬁles are also considered. The aim is to uncover any eﬀect on the eﬀectiveness of
the strategies and determine if some operating strategies are better suited for certain
load proﬁles.
Two other grid locations, with very diﬀerent load proﬁles compared to the load
proﬁle seen by the BESS in Nordhavn, are chosen. The power curves are scaled to have
the same maximum peak. Originally the radials have maximum power peaks similar
to the power consumption of Nordhavn which minimises distortion related to scaling.
The power drawn by the two new radials in 2016 are shown in Figure 4.3. Figure
4.4 gives more insight into the daily peak consumption in the three diﬀerent radials.
Here a single week for each is plotted, including the hourly averages. Table 4.1 shows
==PAGE:62==
46
4 Peak shaving and load-levelling strategies
(a) Mixture of electrically heated and vacation homes.
(b) Chemical industry radial
Figure 4.3: The two other grid locations considered when simulating the peak shaving
and load-levelling strategies.
the most predominant customer categories responsible for the energy consumption
for each radial. The customer categories are created by Radius from their customer
database.
The ﬁrst load, Figure 4.3a, shows the load of a radial highly consisting of vacation
and electrically heated homes. Therefore, this load is highly ﬂuctuating and does
not have consistent weekly load pattern. Some of the load from vacation homes is
temporary, because people are not living there continuously. The consumption is
weather dependent and cold weeks will cause an increased consumption or vice versa.
National holidays and common holiday weeks are clearly seen. During the summer
months (July to September), the load is also increased due to summer holidays.
Figure 4.4a shows a week in June for the vacation home radial. It has a higher
demand during the weekends compared to the weekdays, simply because people are
present during the weekend. Monday to Thursday are relatively similar in height and
==PAGE:63==
4.2 The load curves
47
Table 4.1: Summary of the share of energy consumption based on the main contributing
customer groups.
Load type
Share
Nordhavn
Retail
12.32 %
Cultural activities and household services
37.05 %
Apartments without electrical heating
10.95 %
Administration
9.48 %
Vacation
homes
Vacation homes
61.63 %
Family homes with electrical heating
13.70 %
Family homes with electrical heating
8.42 %
Industry
Metal industry
52.77 %
Chemical industry
26.57 %
(a) Vacation and electrically heated homes.
(b) Chemical industry.
(c) Nordhavn.
Figure 4.4: Load of the three grid locations for a typical week.
shape. Friday is similar to these days until the afternoon, where after its evening peak
is more similar to the Saturday and Sunday evening peak, because people start to
arrive. Saturday and Sunday are rather similar. The double peak characteristic is
common for electrical heating. Not all weeks are similar to the one in 4.4a, because
the working calendar and weather has a large eﬀect. The highest peak is generally in
January.
The second load, Figure 4.3b, is a radial consisting predominantly of chemical and
==PAGE:64==
48
4 Peak shaving and load-levelling strategies
metal industry. In contrast to the summer house radial, this load is highly consistent
and predictable. Figure 4.4b shows a typical week. The load follows working hours,
meaning the load during weekends is essentially ﬂat. Similarly, national holidays and
typical vacation weeks result in low consumption with no peak(s). For example, the
deep and short dip in consumption in the end of March is caused by spring break, and
the longer period of decreased load in July and August can be explained by summer
holidays. Often, a consumption decrease in this load corresponds to an increased
consumption in the vacation homes’ load curve. There is no evening peak, but instead
a peak around noon.
Figure 4.4c shows a typical week for Nordhavn. As also seen in the customer
categories in Table 4.1, Nordhavn is a combination of residential and commercial
activities, and therefore displays features from both. The residential evening peak
is most clear in the weekend, while not as clear during the weekdays where the
commercial demand is most predominant. This may also be due to the high amount
of construction currently taking place.
4.3
Peak shaving
This section will now introduce the peak shaving concept and strategy in detail. The
grid is dimensioned based on the maximum load which is expected, and therefore it is
only the highest peaks which are of interest when choosing the grid components. The
aim of peak shaving is to reduce these highest peaks to prevent overloading and to
defer grid upgrades. Figure 4.5 illustrates the peak shaving concept. Here the peak
demand is reduced by shifting the consumption to low demand intervals. The peak is
shaved down to a speciﬁed value, by providing all consumption above this value by an
alternative, local source instead of the grid, in this case the BESS. This upper power
rating is referred to as the set point and is a single ﬁxed value. The lower this value
compared to the highest peak power, the more shaving is performed.
Figure 4.5: Illustration of the peak shaving concept.
==PAGE:65==
4.3 Peak shaving
49
Since peak shaving aims to prevent overloading of the grid infrastructure, it is
logical to set the peak shaving set point based on the infrastructures’ capabilities. The
cables are rated to a certain current capacity and the set point could be set as the value
which ensures that these restrictions are never violated. Such a set point is especially
relevant when an area/cable is experiencing new, unforeseen loads such as electrical
vehicles and/or heat pumps and the grid operator wishes to delay the grid upgrade.
In the case of Nordhavn, Radius expressed that the grid is suﬃciently designed, so
it does not have issues supplying additional load in the near future. Designing a
peak shaving set point based on the capacity limits of the cables in Nordhavn would
therefore result in little to no BESS activity.
Alternatively, the set point can be set at a lower value to maximise the activity
of the BESS based on the battery’s power, energy, and eﬃciency characteristics. In
other words, given the load curve, the set point should be set as low as possible so it
best utilises the full energy capacity of the BESS. This type of set point is best for
research purposes and is considered in this thesis.
Figure 4.6: Illustration of how peak shaving can fail.
It is essential that the BESS is always able to fully shave the peaks above its set
point. If the energy in a peak to be shaved exceeds the available energy capacity
of the BESS, only part of the peak can be shaved. When the BESS is discharged,
and stops peak shaving, the power drawn from the grid will increase to its original
(unshaved) value, rendering the whole peak shaving operation ineﬀective. This failure
is illustrated in Figure 4.6.
In this thesis, the set point is determined based on historic data and is done
using Matlab. The algorithm is discussed in further detail in Section 4.3.1. In reality,
the chosen set point should be set conservatively to avoid failures, and it should be
re-evaluated at meaningful interval to ensure it properly reﬂects the load developments.
The power provided by peak shaving is completely dependent on the load, and
must be provided immediately. The only part of the real-time operation, which can be
controlled by the operator is when the BESS charges. Three charging strategies are
==PAGE:66==
50
4 Peak shaving and load-levelling strategies
implemented and simulated: 1) Low-price, 2) Low-set point and 3) Low-degradation.
The ﬁrst method aims to minimise charging costs. The energy price is positively
correlated with the energy demand. Therefore, the cheapest hours are typically during
the night. Assuming the BESS can take advantage of these varying prices; the BESS
should wait to charge at night. The second charging strategy aims to achieve the lowest
possible set point or avoid failures for future peaks. Here, the BESS charges as soon as
the power drawn on the radial is lower than the set point, of course without violating
the set point in the process. This lowers the optimised set point and can prevent
complete discharge in operation. The third method aims to lower the degradation, by
trying to predict whether the upcoming peak requires peak shaving. As described in
Section 2.2, the higher the idle SOC, the higher the calendar ageing is. When peak
shaving is not necessary for a long duration this SOC will give the highest possible
calendar ageing. Therefore, if a peak does not require peak shaving, the SOC can be
kept low. This method is more dynamic than simply saying that the maximum peak
is always in a certain month(s).
4.3.1
Method
Figure 4.7 shows a ﬂowchart of the implemented algorithm and Table 4.2 shows the
values of the input parameters. The algorithm ﬁnds the lowest possible set point which
the BESS can shave for the given radial power curve with a resolution of 5 minutes.
The algorithm is developed for 5-minute resolution, because this is the resolution
which Radius saves data of this age. Of course, a ﬁner resolution can be implemented
if the measurements are available.
The algorithm’s inputs are the radial power curve, the initial BESS SOC and the
BESS characteristics (The rated power, energy capacity and eﬃciency). To begin,
the algorithm initialises the set point before optimising as expressed in Equation 4.2,
where P is the input demand power vector and PBESS is the rated power of the BESS.
Pset,init = max(P) −PBESS
kWh
(4.2)
This initialisation ensures that the algorithm starts with a set point which is physically
possible for the BESS. The algorithm then loops through the power vector and
simulates operation with this set point. If the SOC drops below the minimum SOC
at any point, the loop is discontinued and the set point increased. The process is
continued until the SOC is always greater than or equal to the minimum SOC for the
time series.
When charging and discharging, the new SOC is calculated as expressed in Equa-
tions 4.3 and 4.4 respectively, where the factor Thr is the time in hours, Pcharge is the
minimum of the set charging power and diﬀerence between the demand and the set
point, η is the one-way eﬃciency, Ebattery is the battery capacity, Pt is the radial power
in time step t and Pset is the set point. The maximum Pcharge is set to 315 kW, to
decrease any degradation eﬀect related to higher charging currents. The degradation
model does not take these into account, but they have an aﬀect [14].
==PAGE:67==
4.3 Peak shaving
51
Table 4.2: The parameters used in the peak shaving algorithm.
Parameter
Description
Value
Unit
PBESS
The rated power of the BESS
630
kW
EBESS
The energy capacity of the BESS
460
kW
Pstep
The step size for the setpoint when optimising
10
kW
Pcharge,max
The charging power
PBESS
2
= 315
kW
SOCmin
The minimum SOC the BESS can discharge to
0
%
η
Assumed eﬃciency of the BESS (one-way)
95
%
Charging:
SOCt = SOCt−1 + Thr · η · Pcharge
Ebattery
(4.3)
Discharging:
SOCt = SOCt−1 −Thr · (Pt −Pset)
ηEbattery
(4.4)
When peak shaving is not necessary and the SOC is less than 100%, then the
BESS should charge, given the conditions for charging are present. These conditions
depend on which of the three charging strategies is simulated.
The low-price charging strategy is implemented using the Elspot prices which are
available after 15:00 for the following day. The BESS ﬁnds the cheapest time intervals
necessary to fully charge the BESS before 6 o’clock the following day and then waits
till this time.
The low-set point charging strategy ensures charging takes place as soon as it is
possible. In other words, if the SOC is less than 100% and the radial power is below
the set point, the BESS charges. It charges with a power which brings the radial
power to the set point, but with a maximum power of 315 kW.
The low-degradation method is the most complex of the three charging strategies.
This strategy lowers the SOC when peak shaving is not necessary. An algorithm
attempts to predict whether peak shaving is needed, so it can be fully charged when
the peak starts. To determine whether a peak requires peak shaving, there are two
factors which must be understood: 1) The time when the peak typically starts and 2)
the value of the radial power before the peak, which indicates that peak shaving is
necessary. The calculation of these is now discussed.
To begin, the radial power is separated into days, and each day is individually
normalised to have values between 0 and 1. The weekends are removed because they
are typically diﬀerent and not dimensioning. Similarly, the estimated power set point
is normalised. The time steps where the radial power exceeds the normalised set point
are determined for each day. The data is ﬁtted using a normal distribution whereafter
the mean and standard deviation are calculated. The time step where the peak could
start is calculated as the mean time step where the peak starts minus two standard
deviations.
==PAGE:68==
52
4 Peak shaving and load-levelling strategies
The BESS must be ready to peak shave at this time step, and therefore must
make the decision earlier on whether to charge. Therefore, the time step where the
BESS must decide whether or not to charge is determined as expressed in Equation
4.5 where µstart is the mean time step for peak shaving to start, σstart is the standard
deviation for the starting time step, SOCidle is the SOC in idle periods, EBESS is
the BESS energy and Pcharge is the charging power. During period without peak
shaving, the SOC is reduced to 30%, and therefore the BESS must be able to charge
70% before the peak starts.
tready = µstart −2 · σstart −(1 −SOCidle) · EBESS/Pcharge
(4.5)
tready is the daily time step when the BESS must decide on whether to charge. The
BESS makes the decision based on the radial power at time tready.
The radial power at tready for peaks when peak shaving was necessary is also ﬁtted
with a normal distribution and the mean and standard deviation are found. This
mean indicates the mean power at tready on days when peak shaving was necessary.
The best result was achieved when the decision power was set to the mean, without
taking the standard deviation into consideration as expressed in Equation 4.6. If it
includes the standard deviation, the algorithm is too conservative and always charged
to 100% before the peak.
Pdecision = µP (tready)
(4.6)
The idle SOC, SOCidle, is set to 30%, so it is still able to handle small cases of
peak shaving, which the BESS does not predict.
Economically, peak shaving is evaluated by determining which cost of a grid
upgrade is necessary to make the operation economically feasible. This is explained in
further detail in Chapter 5.
4.4
Peak shaving and FDR
By nature, peak shaving is necessary only few times every year and has no direct
revenues. Therefore, in itself, it is unlikely to be economically feasible. Therefore,
it is interesting to consider the combination of peak shaving with another revenue-
generating strategy.
Frequency regulation strategies are presented in Chapter 3. FDR has a low energy
demand and the least regulatory issues with respect to BESS participation and may
therefore be the best partner for peak shaving. It is expected that it is possible to
provide FDR for all hours of the year while simultaneously providing peak shaving.
It is also possible to identify the periods where peak shaving is necessary, and then
separate the services completely.
For simultaneous service, it is expected that the peak shaving set point will need
to be a little higher to cope with any FDR taking place.
==PAGE:69==
4.4 Peak shaving and FDR
53
4.4.1
Method
As explained in Section 4.3, three diﬀerent charging strategies are developed for peak
shaving. Of these strategies, the low-set point algorithm is used when providing both
the peak shaving and FDR service. This charging strategy ensures that the BESS
charges as soon as the radial power drops below the set point. This helps to prevent
the peak shaving activities from compromising the provision of frequency regulation.
This strategy is economically evaluated like peak shaving, by estimating the cost
of a grid upgrade which makes the operation economically feasible. It is expected that
the necessary grid upgrade cost is lower due to the added revenues from the FDR
operation. The economic calculations are explained in Chapter 5.
==PAGE:70==
54
4 Peak shaving and load-levelling strategies
Inputs: 
Radial power and
Battery parameters
Initialise setpoint as:
Pset = Pmax – PBESS
i   length of P ?
Pout < 0 ?
Yes
Yes
SOCi = 
SOCi-1 – (5/60)Pout/(ηEBESS)
SOC < SOCmin ?
Yes
i+1
No
SOC<1 and 
charging 
conditions 
present?
Pout(i) = 
min(Pcharge, Pset - P(i))
SOCi = 
SOCi-1 + (5/60)Pout η/EBESS
Ensure SOC   SOCmax
No
Yes
Pout(i) = 0
No
Return
Pset, Pout, SOC
No
Pset + Pstep
 
P = Radial power
 
Pout = BESS power
 
Pset = Set point
 
PBESS = 630 kW
 
EBESS = 460 kWh
 
Pstep = 10 kW
 
η=0.95
 
SOCmin = 0%
Pout = Pset – P
Pout  > 0    0
Pout  < -PBESS   -PBESS  
Figure 4.7: The algorithm which ﬁnds the optimum set point.
==PAGE:71==
4.5 Load Levelling
55
4.5
Load Levelling
Load levelling is an extended version of the peak shaving concept. Where peak shaving
aims to reduce the load of the few largest peaks using a single set point, load levelling
aims to generally ﬂatten the load curve. Ideally, it has a set point per day of the year,
so the peak energy is shifted to oﬀ-peak hours. A BESS performing load levelling is
also performing peak shaving, because the highest peaks are still being reduced.
The motivation for load levelling is to decrease congestion in the grid and to
decrease energy costs. During peak hours, the transmission grid may experience
congestion. To avoid damage, the grid operators may operate the grid in a sub-
optimal manner, for example by using more expensive local producers. Installing
energy storage in the distribution grid can help alleviate congestion. A load-levelling
BESS acts as a buﬀer between the producers and consumers, so the demand can
be handled by the grid at another time. Furthermore, higher currents in the cables
increases losses, meaning more production is required to supply the same load.
Load levelling can also help decrease costs. The energy prices are highly correlated
with the demand, because producers are contracted using a merit order curve. The
cheapest producers are prioritised, but as consumption increases, more producers are
required and the price likewise increases. The units producing for the peak are called
"peakers" and are usually fast, expensive generators such as gas turbines. A more
levelised energy curve decreases the necessity of expensive peakers and reduces the
prices.
Economically, this service does not have direct proﬁts other than selling energy
for a higher price than it is bought. Figure 4.8 shows the average Elspot price as a
function of the hour of the day. The average price diﬀerence between the peak and the
cheapest hours is about 0.10 DKK/kWh. Ideally, load levelling will result in the full
use of the BESS energy capacity each day, meaning the BESS would at maximum be
able to make 460 kWh · 0.1 DKK/kWh · 366 days = 16, 800 DKK per year1, which is
not enough to payback the BESS investment.
Of course, decreasing congestion in the grid has some value, but not one which the
BESS owner can proﬁt from. Load levelling per deﬁnition is also peak shaving and
can delay a grid upgrade. Therefore, the economic calculations will evaluate which
size of a grid upgrade makes the load levelling economically feasible, in the same way
as was done for peak shaving.
The load levelling set points can have any resolution. There should be more than
one annual set point (this would be peak shaving), and there should at maximum
be one set point per peak (typically one per day). Since it can be diﬃcult to know
the exact shape and size of the peak before it arrives, daily set points may be more
diﬃcult to operate compared to the extra value added. Considering Figure 4.4, it is
clear the weekdays Monday to Friday typically have similar consumption and likewise
Saturday and Sunday have similar consumptions. Therefore, a single set point for
each set of 5 weekdays and another for each weekend is assumed suﬃcient. For the
1This calculation does not include tariﬀs or taxes, which would most likely have to be paid for
bought energy
==PAGE:72==
56
4 Peak shaving and load-levelling strategies
Figure 4.8: The average Elspot price in DK2 for each hour of the day in 2016.
industry radial, a single set point for the whole week is chosen, due to the lack of peak
in the weekend.
4.5.1
Method
The algorithm explained and used to ﬁnd the peak shaving set point in Section 4.3.1
and depicted in Figure 4.7 is used to ﬁnd the load-levelling set points. As described,
the algorithm ﬁnds the optimal set point based an input radial power vector. This
vector can cover any timespan. Therefore, instead of receiving a whole year of data
as it does for ﬁnding the peak shaving set point, it only receives either 5 days or
2 days depending on whether it is optimising for a weekend or the weekdays. This
optimisation is run for each group of ﬁve weekdays (Monday-Friday) and each weekend
using the 2016 data for each load curve.
==PAGE:73==
CHAPTER 5
Economics
A company will not invest in something unless it is economically viable, unless it
receives something of equal value such as advertisement or knowledge about a new
business area. Therefore, it is important also to consider how economical the diﬀerent
operational strategies are. An economic analysis estimates the BESS economic value for
its owner over its lifetime given a certain operation. The following section introduces
the relevant deﬁnitions and calculations.
To estimate the economic value of a certain operation, a cash ﬂow analysis is
performed using estimated annual cash ﬂows. Cash ﬂows are the money moving in
and out of a project or business [40]. There are four main cash ﬂows dealt with in
this thesis: revenues, OPEX, CAPEX and tax.
The strategies are evaluated using a private economic analysis, which aims to
evaluate the proﬁtability of a project for the company considering investing. This
type of analysis considers all expenditures and revenues seen by the private investor,
including taxes. Also, all cash ﬂows are in nominal values, which are the prices
including inﬂation. This analysis is not a business case, but a "go or no go" indicator
for a project. In other words, if the private economic analysis results in overall losses,
a company should not consider it further.
The ﬁnancing is beyond the scope of this thesis, since the economic valuation is
mainly for assessing and comparing the operational strategies.
5.1
The Net Present Value (NPV)
To evaluate whether the operational strategies are economically viable, the Net Present
Value (NPV) is calculated. The NPV is the diﬀerence between the total cash inﬂows
and outﬂows over the project’s lifetime, expressed in present values. A present value
expresses the present value of a future sum of money. Present and future values relate
to the concept "Time value of money". "Time value of money" in short is the value at
which you are indiﬀerent to receiving the money today or later.
Compounding is a mathematical method to determine the future value of money,
and expresses the value of money in the future if invested; i.e. 100 DKK invested
today has a future value of 105 DKK in a year with a 5% interest rate. Discounting is
the opposite of compounding and is used to determine the present value of money.
If you have 100 DKK in 1 year, that corresponds to having 95.24 DDK today with
an interest rate of 5%. It is always better to receive a certain sum of money today
instead of receiving the same amount later. The present value for a given year and
discount rate is calculated as expressed in Equation 5.1,where xt is the payment in
==PAGE:74==
58
5 Economics
year t and r is the discount rate.
PV = xt ·
1
(1 + r)t
(5.1)
The term
1
(1+r)t is called the discount factor.
It is important to note that the
discounting concept is completely diﬀerent from inﬂation.
The NPV expresses the total economic value of a project in present values. A
simple formula for the NPV is seen in Equation 5.2 where CFin,t and CFout,t are the
cash in- and outﬂows respectively, r is the discount rate, t is the year and C0 is the
initial investment. A discount rate of 4% is used [41].
NPV =
T
X
t=1
CFin,t −CFout,t
(1 + r)t
−C0
(5.2)
Figure 5.1 is a visualisation of how the NPV is calculated using annual cash ﬂows.
Each net annual cash ﬂow is discounted using the discount factor and then summed,
as Equation 5.2 expresses. Each annual proﬁt is equal to the revenue subtracted the
various cash outﬂows. These outﬂows include taxes, O&M costs and CAPEX costs.
The CAPEX costs are typically only present in one year, hence the parentheses.
Figure 5.1: A simpliﬁed illustration how the NPV is calcualted and the aspects it can
include.
The NPV is an easy overview for the investor, because it both indicates whether a
project is economically viable and it allows easy comparison between diﬀerent solutions.
The project should be accepted if the NPV is positive, meaning it brings a positive
net proﬁt over its lifetime, and rejected if it is negative.
The NPV has some drawbacks. To begin, it relies on assumptions including the
discount rate, the initial investment costs, and the annual proﬁts. Companies estimate
the discount rate using diﬀerent methods which can include estimating the rate of
return of similar projects or estimating the costs associated with borrowing money to
ﬁnance the project [42]. The investment costs and annual proﬁts are estimates and
therefore may diﬀer from reality. Also, the NPV does not account for risks.
==PAGE:75==
5.2 Inﬂation
59
If the NPV is used to compare diﬀerent projects with diﬀerent characteristics, the
NPV should be supplemented by other indicators such as the payback time or Internal
Rate of Return (IRR). For example, the NPV does not consider the time it takes to
earn the proﬁt. The payback time denotes the time it takes for an investment to earn
its own initial costs. Of course, the payback time does not account for any proﬁts after
this date. The IRR aims to estimate the annual percent return of the investment. In
other words, it assumes a NPV of 0, and then ﬁnds the discount rate for the project.
The found discount rate must be higher than the actual discount rate for the project
to be economically viable. The indicators all point to the same conclusion of whether
a project is economical or not, but they may rank the options diﬀerently. Since this
thesis wishes to compare the economic aspects of diﬀerent operating strategies for the
same energy storage system, the NPV is used alone.
5.2
Inﬂation
For the private-economic analysis, the revenues must be adjusted for inﬂation. A
inﬂation index is created, where in year 0 (i.e. the investment year) the inﬂation
index is 1.00. Each years’ inﬂation index is created using the previous year’s index as
expressed in Equation 5.3, where ii is the inﬂation index and i is the inﬂation rate.
This thesis assumes an inﬂation rate of 2% [43].
iit+1 = iiy · (1 + it+1)
(5.3)
The nominal value for year t is then simply calculated as expressed in Equation 5.4,
where Xt,nominal is the resulting nominal value, Xt,realbaseyear is the real value in the
base year with inﬂation index 1.00 and iit is the inﬂation index.
Xt,nominal = Xt,realbaseyear · iit
(5.4)
5.3
Revenue
The revenue is the source of positive cash ﬂows, i.e. the money earned from operation.
This includes the proﬁts from participating in markets, support mechanisms, etc. The
revenue calculations depend on the operation type, and the following describes the
revenues for frequency reserves and for peak shaving/load-levelling.
5.3.1
Frequency regulation
When the BESS operates as a frequency reserve, the revenues come directly from
market participation. There are two components to the payments: The availability
payment and the energy payment [44]. The availability payment is the payment for
being ready to handle frequency deviations and is received for each hour a producer
is contracted for the service. In other words, the availability payment is received no
matter if the unit is actually activated within the operating hour.
The FNR and FDR participants receive an availability payment which is pay-as-bid.
PFR units receive an availability price equal to the clearing prices, corresponding to
==PAGE:76==
60
5 Economics
the price of the highest priced contracted unit. For simplicity, it is assumed that the
BESS is always contracted when it bids. For FNR and FDR, Energinet.dk publishes
the average price, and it is assumed the BESS receives this price.
The balancing prices are used for energy settlement.
In Denmark, a 2-price
system is used, where both the balance of the system and the balance of the units are
considered when determining the balancing price. If the system is imbalanced, the units
hurting or the units intentionally helping the system receive the balancing price. Units
unintentionally helping the system are not rewarded for this, and therefore receive
the Elspot price. A unit provides regulation intentionally if they were contracted to
do so, for example a frequency reserve.
Figure 5.2: Illustration of the balancing prices, λup and λdw, compared to the Elspot
price λS
To better understand this concept, consider Figure 5.2, which shows how the
balancing prices relate to the Elspot price. The up-regulation price is always above the
Elspot price while the down regulation price is always less than the Elspot price. When
the imbalance is 0, then the balancing prices are equal to the Elspot price. When the
system needs up regulation, the producers intentionally providing up regulation are
rewarded by getting paid a higher price for this energy. A unit which consumes or
reduces production during this period must pay the up-regulation price for the energy
which they consume/do not produce. They are therefore paying more than if they
had scheduled this in the day-ahead market.
Similarly, if the system needs down regulation, those units providing power to
the grid will only receive the down regulation price for this energy, and therefore
lose money compared to having scheduled the production correctly in the day-ahead
market. Those units intentionally consuming/producing less must pay the down
regulation price. It may seem odd that a unit helping the system must pay to do
so. Consider a conventional plant delivering this service. The unit must already
be running and therefore has participated in the Elspot market and was paid for
scheduled energy. When the unit is asked to reduce production to provide down
regulation, they must pay back the energy not produced, but at a price lower than
what they were paid in the day-ahead market. This means they keep some proﬁt
==PAGE:77==
5.3 Revenue
61
for doing nothing and can save fuel costs and wear on the equipment. Furthermore,
they still get the availability payment. Down regulation by a consumer is somewhat
easier to understand. The BESS is considered a consumer when it is charging. If the
BESS provides down regulation, it buys energy at a lower price compared to having
scheduled in the Elspot market. In other words, it saves money on charging.
In the simulations, the power used in connection with re-establishing the SOC
is not intentional and re-establishing power is settled like ordinary imbalances. For
example, if the BESS is not participating as a reserve in a speciﬁc hour, but instead
re-establishes its SOC, the price of the energy charged is either higher than or equal
to the Elspot price, depending on the nature of the system imbalance in this hour.
Energinet.dk only makes energy calculations for FNR and it is paid for intentional
provision of power. FDR and PFR are both handled like ordinary imbalances, and
settled based on the overall imbalance of the hour.
The total revenue in a speciﬁc hour for a unit participating as a frequency reserve
is calculated as expressed in Equation 5.5 where t is the hour of operation, Poffer,t is
the power oﬀered, λF NR,t is the availability price per unit power contracted, λbal,t is
the balancing energy price corresponding to the type of regulation provided, Eactual,t
is the actual energy provided by the BESS and Rpenalties,t, are the penalties. The
negative sign is a matter of how Eactual,t is deﬁned. In this thesis, providing energy
(discharging) means Eactual,t < 0, which cancels the minus and provides a positive
revenue. When providing down regulation Eactual,t > 0, reducing the overall revenue,
because the BESS must pay for the energy is receives.
Rt = λavailability,t · Poffer,t −λbal,t · Eactual,t + Rpenalties,t
(5.5)
If the unit is incapable of supplying the power, it receives a penalty. This penalty
is the price Energinet.dk incurs for contracting the next unit in the merit order.
Energinet.dk estimates this as 10-100% price increase. Furthermore, the unit does not
receive the availability payment for that hour.
For the cash ﬂow analysis, annual revenues are of interest. The total annual
expected revenue is calculated by summing the result from Equation 5.5 over all the
hours where the BESS is contracted in the given year. The operation is simulated
using a single year, speciﬁcally 2016, and the total revenue is assumed to be the same
every year for the duration of the BESS’s lifetime, but adjusted for inﬂation.
For the economic calculations in the simulations, it is assumed that if the BESS
has 1 or more supply failures during a single hour, then it must pay the penalty. A
supply failure is deﬁned as when the BESS SOC reaches either 0% or 100%1, because
in this case, the BESS is not able to provide the service fully.
The worst case penalty is used in the calculation, meaning the total penalty for a
certain hour is expressed by Equation 5.6, where λreplacement,t is the availability price
of the replacement reserve.
1Only if the BESS is contracted for both up and down regulation. If the BESS is only participating
in down regulation, a failure is classiﬁed as a SOC of 100%. Likewise, if the BESS is only participating
in up regulation, a failure is classiﬁed as a SOC of 0%. PFR only gets penalty for 0/100%, not when
it goes outside the working interval.
==PAGE:78==
62
5 Economics
Rpenalty = −(λavailability,t + λreplacement,t) · Poffer,t
= −(λavailability,t + 2 · λavailability,t) · Poffer,t
= −3 · λavailability,t · Poffer,t
(5.6)
In reality, the cost penalty will vary depending on the hour, but there is no price
data publicly available of the replacement reserves. Therefore, the worst-case scenario
is considered. Furthermore, this method assumes, that if the BESS is not able to
supply the service for a 1 second during an hour, it must pay the penalty, and the full
hour is considered a failure. In reality, this may be too strict.
5.3.2
Peak Shaving and load levelling
When considering peak shaving and load levelling, there is no obvious revenue, because
the BESS is not participating in a market or receiving subsidies. The peak shaving
revenue considered in this thesis consists of two aspects: 1) The energy trades and 2)
the savings as a result of delaying an investment.
To begin, during peak shaving or load levelling, oﬀ-peak energy is stored and then
released during peak hours. The peak hours are generally more expensive, and this
may result in a net proﬁt from energy trades. Figure 4.8 shows the average hourly
Elspot prices in Eastern Denmark.
The second aspect of the revenue for peak shaving and load levelling involves
the savings for delaying a grid upgrade. Delaying a grid upgrade will decrease its
cost expressed in its present value, assuming that the actual cost is the same in the
future as it is in the present. It implies, that instead of upgrading the grid now, the
upgrade cost is instead invested. When the upgrade is then performed in the future,
the company will have saved the diﬀerence between the original upgrade cost and the
present value of the delayed investment. Equation 5.7 expresses the annual saving
from peak shaving, where λupgrade is the original cost of the upgrade, r is the discount
rate, and t is years the upgrade is delayed.
πsavings = (λupgrade −
1
(1 + r)t λupgrade)/t
(5.7)
To better illustrate this concept, consider a ﬁctitious example where a 10 kV radial
is overloaded during certain peak hours during the year. To solve this issue, the
distribution grid owner must install another cable to handle the additional load and to
avoid cable damage. Assume this upgrade costs 5 million DKK. Table 5.1 shows the
resulting present value and savings for each year the investment is delayed, assuming
a discount rate of 4%. Installing a BESS and waiting 9 years, the investment can be
decreased with 30% or 1.56 million DKK. The savings and revenue from peak shaving
with the BESS would therefore be 0.17 million DKK/year assuming linear savings.
A single year’s revenue from peak shaving is calculated using Equation 5.8, where
πsavings is the savings for delaying the investments per year, N is the time steps
during the year where energy is sold (discharging), M is the time steps during the year
where energy is bought (charging), Esell,n is the energy sold in time step n, Ebuy,m is
==PAGE:79==
5.4 Capital Expenditures (CAPEX)
63
Table 5.1: Delaying an investment will result in savings due to discounting. Delaying
a 5 million DKK investment 9 years will decrease the present value investment by 1.56
million DKK.
Years delayed
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Discount factor, r = 4%
1.00
0.96
0.92
0.89
0.85
0.82
0.79
0.76
0.73
0.70
Present value, mio. DKK
5.00
4.80
4.60
4.41
4.23
4.06
3.90
3.74
3.58
3.44
Savings, mio. DKK
0
0.20
0.40
0.59
0.77
0.94
1.10
1.26
1.42
1.56
the energy bought in time step m and πelspot,n, πelspot,m are the Elspot prices for the
discharging and charging time steps respectively.
RP S = πsavings +
N
X
n=1
πelspot,nEsell,n −
M
X
m=1
πelspot,mEbuy,m
(5.8)
The above calculation assumes the upgrade cost is known. Grid upgrade costs can
greatly vary, depending on the location, equipment and logistics of the upgrade.
Therefore, Equation 5.8 is used in reverse. Instead of assigning a speciﬁc upgrade
price, and calculating the NPV, the algorithm determines how large a grid upgrade
must be before the case is economically feasible (NPV > 0).
It is assumed that the energy is bought and sold at the Elspot price which does
not include tariﬀs or taxes. When buying energy, these extra price components apply.
For simplicity, these price components are not included, meaning the energy payments
calculated represent the price savings in the engross energy trade. This makes it easier
to compare the strategies performance with each other.
5.4
Capital Expenditures (CAPEX)
Parameter
Symbol
Value
Unit
Energy capacity cost
CE
795
e/kWh
Power (PCS) cost
CP
463
e/kW
O&M cost
CO&M
6.9
e/kW/yr
Table 5.2: The economic parameters for CAPEX and O&M costs [1].
The total Capital Expenditures (CAPEX) of the system is dependent on both the
energy capacity and the power capabilities. The energy capacity is determined by the
Li-ion cells, while the power is determined by the PCS equipment. The total cost is
calculated as in Equation 5.9.
CAPEX = CEEBESS + CP PBESS
(5.9)
==PAGE:80==
64
5 Economics
The economic values in Table 5.2 are used and these prices are averages of existing
projects calculated by [1]. The energy related costs, CE, are estimated per kWh in
the system, and is therefore the cost of the battery modules. The power related costs,
CP , are estimated per kW in the system, and includes the C-PCS equipment and
balance of plant costs. These theoretical values are used instead of the actual costs of
the Nordhavn BESS due to conﬁdentiality issues. Furthermore, the theoretical costs
diﬀerentiate between power and energy costs, which is useful when optimising the
characteristics of the BESS in the simulations.
It should be noted that large scale battery energy storage systems are still an
uncommon application. Small scale systems are not included in the study from which
the data is retrieved, since the economic data from these small systems cannot be
scaled conveniently. The study mainly focuses on systems of the MW-scale, which is
larger than the one considered in this thesis [1]. Therefore, it is expected that these
prices have some degree of uncertainty. The study is from 2014 and it is assumed that
the values are unchanged since then. It is also assumed that the considered BESS has
average capital costs. It should be noted that prices are expected to decrease in the
coming years as knowledge and experience increase.
5.5
Operational Expenditures (OPEX)
The Operational Expenditures (OPEX) is the costs related to the operation and
maintenance of the system. For example, this includes services and resources required
to operate it. It does not include the electricity required to charge the system. The
value in Table 5.2 is used in the economic analyses. The annual OPEX is calculated
using Equation 5.10. The OPEX are adjusted for inﬂation using Equation 5.4.
OPEX = CO&MPBESS
(5.10)
5.6
Tax
For the private economic analysis, tax must also be included. Simply stated, the tax is
a percentage of the taxable income, which is also called the Earnings Before Interests
and Taxes (EBIT). In 2016 and 2017 the corporate tax in Denmark was 22% [45], and
this value is used in this thesis.
To begin, the Earnings Before Interests, Taxes, Depreciations and Amortisation
(EBITDA) are calculated, which is simply the revenues subtracted the operation costs.
Then the depreciations and amortisations are subtracted. Since the ﬁnancing is not
considered, amortisations are assumed as zero. The depreciations act as a tax-shield
where some percentage of the CAPEX is subtracted from the revenue each year and
not taxed. There are diﬀerent methods for depreciating, but for this thesis, a simple
straight line depreciation is considered, where the depreciations are equally split among
the years of operation. Assuming a 10 year lifetime, in theory 10% of the CAPEX
is depreciated each year. After 10 years, it is fully depreciated and depreciations
for further years is 0. Infrastructure including transport, storage and distribution of
==PAGE:81==
5.6 Tax
65
electricity, heat, oil, gas and sewage have a capped annual depreciation percentage of
7% [46].
Table 5.3 shows the ﬁrst 5 years of an example of a ﬁctional tax example to
illustrate the concept, where the CAPEX is 800 million DKK depreciated over 5 years,
the annual inﬂation is 2% with index 1.00 in year 1, the revenues are 100 million DKK
(real year 1), the O&M costs are 10 million DKK (real year 1) and the tax rate is 22%.
Table 5.3: A ﬁctional tax calculation example to illustrate the process.
Year
0
1
2
3
4
5
Inﬂation index
-
0.98
1.00
1.02
1.04
1.06
1.08
Revenues, nominal
mio. DKK
0
100
102
104
106
108
O&M, nominal
mio. DKK
0
-10.0
-10.2
-10.4
-10.6
-10.8
EBITDA
mio. DKK
0
90
91.8
93.6
95.5
97.4
Depreciations
mio. DKK
0
-80
-80
-80
-80
-80
EBIT
mio. DKK
0
10.0
11.8
13.6
15.5
17.4
Tax rate
-
0
22%
22%
22%
22%
22%
Tax
mio. DKK
0
-2.2
-2.6
-3.0
-3.4
-3.8
In the case where the depreciation in a certain year exceeds the EBITDA and
thereby the EBIT is negative, the tax payment is 0 and the losses are carried forward.
For example, if the EBIT is −10 million DKK in a certain year, then this is added to
next positive year’s EBIT, meaning it will reduce the payable tax in that year. The
speciﬁc rules and restrictions regarding losses carried forward vary depending on the
country. For Denmark, it is allowed to carry losses forward indeﬁnitely, but if the
losses exceed 8,025,000 DKK only 60% can be deducted hereafter [47]. This value is
for 2017, but is re-evaluated annually.
==PAGE:82==
66
==PAGE:83==
CHAPTER 6
Results
This chapter deals with the results for implementing the strategies presented and
discussed in Chapters 3 and 4.
The results include the behaviour of the BESS,
degradation and economic calculations for each strategy. These results give a basis for
comparison to determine the strengths and weaknesses of the strategies.
Peak shaving and load-levelling use power data from the 3 radials with a 5-minute
resolution provided by Radius. The frequency regulation strategies use frequency data
from DK2 with 1-second resolution.
6.1
Results for FNR
Figure 6.1: The 2016 revenue and NPV of the diﬀerent FNR strategies.
The following section describes the results of simulations for FNR operation using
the Nordhavn BESS. Table 6.1 shows the results of the most important simulations
run. Figure 6.1 is a visualisation of the economic results. The parameters which used
to compare the diﬀerent simulations are:
• NPV: Shows the proﬁts over the course of the BESS lifetime. The project is
only feasible if the NPV is positive.
• 2016 revenue: Shows the theoretical revenues, including the availability payments,
energy settlement and penalties. It is independent of the degradation.
• Cyclic and calendar ageing: Quantitative estimation of the ageing components.
• Life: The total estimated lifetime in full years
==PAGE:84==
68
6 Results
Table 6.1: The results from key FNR simulations.
Case 1: Current regulations, 630 kW bidirectional power oﬀer
Case 2: Up regulation only with 630 kW power oﬀer
Case 3: Down regulation only with 630 kW power oﬀer
Case 4: Down regulation only with 350 kW power oﬀer
Case 5: Including a ±20 mHz deadband with a 630 kW power oﬀer
Case 6: Including a ±20 mHz deadband with a 350 kW power oﬀer
Case 7: 1 hour block operation with a 630 kW power oﬀer
Case 8: 1 hour block operation with a 230 kW power oﬀer
Case 9: 1 hour block operation with a 300 kW power oﬀer
Case 10: Continuous operation taking breaks to re-establishing when necessary with
630 kW power oﬀer
Case 11: Continuous operation taking breaks to re-establishing when necessary with
400 kW power oﬀer
(*): The economic values for cases 2-4 are not be comparable with the rest.
Case
Oﬀer
NPV
Revenue
Cyc.
Cal.
Life
Failed
Un-
2016
ageing
ageing
occurrences
available
kW
mio. DKK
kDKK
%
%
Years
%
1
630
-8.95
-716
2.85
1.42
5
36347
25.15
2
630
-2.54*
629*
2.88
1.83
5
3563
5.21
3
630
-1.56*
753*
2.71
1.18
6
1779
3.25
4
350
-1.08*
551*
1.35
1.12
9
163
0.46
5
630
-3.02
454
2.43
1.45
6
5222
5.35
6
350
-1.87
491
1.29
1.50
8
844
1.29
7
630
-4.87
106
5.56
1.38
3
3761
3.12
8
230
-3.88
187
1.57
1.52
8
0
0.00
9
300
-3.74
241
2.29
1.48
6
19
0.01
10
630
-3.07
522
3.53
1.38
5
2067
3.77
11
400
-2.12
545
1.84
1.46
7
668
1.19
• Failure occurrences: A count of number of individual failures, unaﬀected by
length of failures.
• Unavailability: The percentage of time where the BESS is not able to fully
provide FNR (SOC at either 0% or 100%).
6.1.1
Base case: Continuous FNR operation with current
regulations and 630 kW bid
To begin, the base case is simulated. The base case is the when the BESS oﬀers its
full power capabilities, 630 kW, continuously for all hours. It does so in the current
FNR regulatory framework as described in Section 3.1.
Figure 6.2 shows the resulting operation and SOC for the ﬁrst 24 hours when the
BESS continuously oﬀers 630 kW. Already within these 24 hours, the SOC of the
BESS reaches both 100% and 0% and it is quite clear that the power oﬀer is simply
too large for the available energy capacity. The required FNR power often approaches
the maximum BESS power and a frequency deviation in the certain direction easily
==PAGE:85==
6.1 Results for FNR
69
Figure 6.2: The BESS power and SOC over the ﬁrst day of 2016 with continuous FNR
operation and a power bid of 630 kW.
lasts a couple hours.
The BESS failures account for about 25% of the time and there are on average
almost 100 individual occurrences of failures every day. From the TSO’s perspective,
this is unacceptable. The TSO contracts reserves to ensure the balance between
production and consumption, and the reserves must therefore be reliable.
This
simulated operation is far from reliable.
Economically, the operation results in a NPV of almost -9 million DKK, and
the revenue in 2016 is estimated at -718,000 DKK. The large losses are due to the
penalties. The BESS fails in a large portion of the operation hours, meaning it loses
the availability payment and receives a penalty of double the availability payment.
The estimated lifetime is only 5 years, where the annual cyclic ageing is 2.85%
and the annual calendar ageing is 1.42%. The cyclic ageing is the dominating faction,
because FNR operation results in deep, frequent cycles. The calendar ageing is caused
by the BESS being ’stuck’ with a SOC of either 0% or 100% and by the existence of
very small cycles transferred to calendar ageing.
Section 3.1 discussed how eﬃciency loss would result in a decreasing SOC over
time, no matter how the frequency behaves. Figure 6.3 shows the ﬁrst 15 days of
operation and illustrates that this is indeed the case. The simulation removes the
==PAGE:86==
70
6 Results
Figure 6.3: The theoretical SOC over the ﬁrst 15 days of 2016 with continuous FNR
operation and a power bid of 630 kW
SOC boundaries, so the SOC can exceed 100% and 0%. Of course, in reality the SOC
cannot exceed 100% or 0%. The frequency is relatively centred around 50 Hz over the
course of the year, but since the BESS has eﬃciency losses, it requires more energy to
charge the same energy that was discharged. It therefore cannot maintain the SOC
over time, and it is not possible to provide FNR continuously without failures.
The following simulations aim to investigate how various alterations to the operation
could aﬀect the BESS’s ability to supply FNR.
6.1.2
The eﬀect of unidirectional service
When participating in a bidirectional service such as FNR, the energy capacity is split
between up and down regulation in its re-established state. Oﬀering only up or down
regulation, means the full energy capacity is dedicated to a single direction and may
lower the number of failures. This type of unidirectional service is possible for PFR
units in Western Denmark.
Only up or down regulation with 630 kW bid
First, the BESS operation was simulated when it only provided up regulation. Figure
6.4 shows 2 days of the simulated operation. As expected, the failures are drastically
reduced compared to the base case. The failures are reduced to approximately 3,500
individual occurrences, corresponding to an average of 9-10 failures per day, and a
total unavailability of about 5%. The improvement can be explained by two main
reasons: 1) when there is an over-frequency, the BESS can attempt to re-establish
itself and 2) it has more energy capacity available for the service and can therefore
provide the service for longer.
The reduction of failures is seen directly in the NPV and 2016 revenue, which are
-2.54 million DKK and 629,000 DKK respectively. The operation is still not feasible.
==PAGE:87==
6.1 Results for FNR
71
Figure 6.4: The simulated operation when only providing up regulation for FNR for
5-7 January 2016.
The cyclic ageing is approximately the same as the base case, which might seem
odd when considering the BESS only operates during under-frequencies now. This
can be explained by the increased cycle depths. In the base case, the largest cycles are
typically 50% of the energy capacity, where in this case, the largest cycles are 100% of
the energy capacity. The fact that the cycles are deeper outweighs the fact that it
performs less cycles. The calendar ageing is also higher, because during periods of
over-frequency, the BESS will re-establish itself and then be idle instead of cycling.
The lifetime is still approximately 5 years.
Next, down regulation with a 630 kW power oﬀer is considered instead. The
resulting operation can be seen in Figure A.1. There are signiﬁcantly less failures
compared to only providing up regulation. There are about 1,800 failures corresponding
to about 4-5 failures per day and the total unavailability is a slightly less than 3.5%.
This indicates that periods of up regulation are more energy demanding that the
periods of down regulation.
The NPV is higher than only providing up regulation at -1.57 million DKK, simply
because the penalties are lower. The lifetime is extended by a single year. Overall,
==PAGE:88==
72
6 Results
these results suggest that for the possibility of a unidirectional FNR service, the BESS
should choose down regulation.
Of course, the economic calculations assume that the unidirectional services receive
the same availability payment as providing the full FNR service. This is most likely
not the case. For PFR, up and down regulation are separate, and the prices are
lower than the FNR as seen in Figure 3.8, which indicates that this would also be the
case if implemented for FNR. Furthermore, the PFR up-regulation prices are much
higher than the down regulation prices. Therefore, the NPVs and revenues related
to unidirectional FNR presented are unreliable and not comparable with the other
simulations. Nonetheless, it shows that separating the services gives a more reliable
operation.
Optimal oﬀers for unidirectional service
(a) Up regulation only.
(b) Down regulation only.
Figure 6.5: The unavailability and NPV as a function of the power oﬀer for unidirec-
tional FNR service.
==PAGE:89==
6.1 Results for FNR
73
Oﬀering the full power capabilities of the BESS for either up or down regulation
still results in an unavailability of 3-5%. Logically this can be improved by decreasing
the power oﬀer. From the system’s perspective, the aim is to maximise reliability
while from the owner’s perspective, the aim is to maximise the NPV. Decreasing the
power oﬀer naturally increases reliability. On the other hand, it also decreases the
availability payment, but increases the total lifetime, meaning the NPV could both
increase or decrease. To better understand eﬀects of changing the power oﬀer on both
the reliability and the revenues, the simulation is run for various power oﬀers. Figure
6.5 shows the total unavailability, NPV and 2016 revenue as functions of the power
oﬀer for both up and down regulation. The dotted lines indicate where the maximum
NPV is.1
The NPVs have a parabolic tendency, with peaks at 450 kW and 350 kW2 for up
and down regulation respectively. To the left of the NPV peaks, the contribution of
the increased availability payments outweighs the decreased lifetime and penalties.
To the right of the NPV peaks the lifetime is shortened, decreasing the availability
payments, while the penalties are increasing. The total revenues for 2016 increase
with the power oﬀer, but start to ﬂatten as the power oﬀer increases, because the
penalties are also increasing.
Oﬀering 350 kW for down regulation gives the highest NPV and reliability. A
visualisation of the operation can be seen in Figure A.5. Case 4 in Table 6.1 shows
the results for this case. Oﬀering 350 kW for down regulation gives a reliability of
about 99.5% which is very high. It is desirable to ﬁnd a compromise between the
owner’s proﬁts and the TSO’s reliability requirement, but ultimately it is the TSO
who decides what is acceptable. They will not contract reserves which they believe to
be too unreliable. If Energinet.dk requires a reliability very close to 100%, the power
oﬀer should be as low as 100 kW, where the unavailability is essentially zero. Overall,
it is unlikely that Energinet.dk will implement unidirectional FNR service in the near
future.
6.1.3
Eﬀect of a deadband
The following section presents the eﬀect of introducing a deadband in FNR. Again,
continuous, bidirectional bids are considered, but now including a deadband. The
PFR units in Western Denmark receive a ±20 mHz deadband and this deadband is
applied to FNR. It is assumed that within the deadband, the BESS can re-establish
itself in either direction.
Maximum power oﬀer, 630 kW
The power oﬀer is set as 630 kW, to investigate whether the BESS can participate
with its full power capacity when given a deadband. Figure 6.6 shows two days of
operation. The total number of failures is vastly decreased compared to the base case.
1To ease the simulation computations, the total lifetime is estimated from the 1st year of operation
and degradation in the individual years is not included. Therefore, the NPV may be slightly oﬀ
compared to the full simulation.
2With a resolution of 50 kW
==PAGE:90==
74
6 Results
Figure 6.6: The simulated operation when providing 630 kW continuously for FNR
including a ±20 mHz deadband for 5-7 January 2016
There is an average of 14-15 failures per day. The percentage of time which the BESS
is unavailable is about 5.5%. Due to the decrease in failures, the 2016 revenue is
positive at 453,000 DKK and the NPV is -3.03 million DKK.
The deadband causes both a large decrease in failures and a vastly increased
revenue compared to the base case, showing how helpful the deadband is for helping
the BESS re-establish a SOC of 50%.
The cyclic ageing is lower compared to the base case. The deadband removes or
decreases the depths of cycles when the frequency is close to 50 Hz. Also, it breaks
large cycles into smaller cycles. For example, consider the case where the frequency is
49.95 Hz for an extended period, but increases to 49.98 Hz for some time, and then
returns to 49.95. When the frequency increases to 49.98, the BESS with a deadband
can charge, meaning it gives a discharge-charge-discharge cycle sequence. Without
the deadband, the BESS would constantly discharge and the period would have been
one large cycle.
The calendar ageing is approximately the same as the base case. The calendar
ageing in the base case was primarily caused by being idle at 0% or 100%. In this
==PAGE:91==
6.1 Results for FNR
75
simulation, it is caused by the deadband introducing idling periods for frequencies
close to 50 Hz. The estimated lifetime is increased by approximately 1 year compared
to the base case.
If Energinet.dk decides to change the FNR regulation, it is not unlikely they will
consider the implementation of a deadband. For this reason and because the deadband
is very helpful for the BESS, it was included when investigating the eﬀect of actively
taking a break from FNR when fully charged or discharged in Section 6.1.5.
Optimal oﬀer when including deadband
Figure 6.7 shows the NPV, 2016 revenue and unavailability percentage as a function
of the power oﬀer. Clearly, oﬀering 630 kW, is neither optimal for the TSO desiring
reliability or for the owner desiring high proﬁts. The maximum NPV occurs at 350
kW, where the unavailability is reduced to about 1.3%. If a reliability of 98.7% is
acceptable for the TSO, then this would be the optimal power oﬀer. Figure A.7 shows
the resulting operation when oﬀer 350 kW.
(a) NPV and unavailability.
(b) 2016 revenue and unavailability.
Figure 6.7: The unavailability and NPV as a function of the power oﬀer for FNR
service including the ±20 mHz deadband.
6.1.4
Eﬀect of block operation
As also shown in the previous simulations, the main issue is the lack of energy capacity
compared to the size of the power capabilities. A possible solution to this problem is to
participate in FNR in blocks instead of continuously. Between the hours of operation,
the BESS can re-establish itself to 50% SOC. The deadband is not included.
1 hour blocks
FNR is contracted by the hour, and therefore 1 hour is also the shortest possible
operation length. To begin, the simulation is therefore run for 1-hour blocks with a
==PAGE:92==
76
6 Results
Figure 6.8: The BESS operation for 5-7 January 2016 with single hour FNR operation
(Does not include deadband).
power oﬀer of 630 kW. Figure 6.8 shows the operation for 2 days in 2016. The on/oﬀ
behaviour of the FNR operation is clearly seen and the SOC is returned to 50 %, in
the hours in-between operation.
The number of failures is reduced and the unavailability is about 3.1%. The 2016
revenue is 106,000 DKK. Compared to the base case, this is a large improvement,
and creates positive revenues even though it only participates half the number of
hours. The NPV is the lowest of all the cases presented so far (except for the base
case), simply because the annual revenue is the lowest and the lifetime is shorter. The
advantage of this strategy is that it does not require a change in the regulations.
From an ageing perspective, this strategy is not recommended. The cyclic ageing
is much higher, because the BESS almost always cycles 50% of its capacity every
other hour. The calendar ageing is similar to the base case, but where the base case
calendar ageing is caused by being "stuck" at a SOC of 0/100%, for this strategy the
calendar ageing mainly occurs in the non-FNR hours after the BESS has re-established.
Overall, the lifetime is estimated at 3 years.
The power at which the BESS re-establishes its SOC in the hours between FNR
==PAGE:93==
6.1 Results for FNR
77
participation could be reduced such that it uses the full hour to re-establish, because
this would decrease ageing. The degradation calculations do no take charging rate
into account.
Preventing failures completely
Block operation is the only strategy which can guarantee no failures, because it
speciﬁes an exact period the BESS should be able to supply full power. It is possible
to calculate the necessary power oﬀer as expressed in Equation 3.1, which is repeated
here for convenience:
Pbid,max = (SOCmax −SOCmin)EBESS
2thours
(6.1)
For single hour block operation, SOCmax = 1, SOCmin = 0, EBESS = 460 kWh, the
power bid is Pbid = 230 kW. As mentioned in Section 3.1, a FNR bid must be at
least 300 kW according to Energinet.dk’s current requirements. It is assumed that the
BESS can still participate.
The power oﬀer is dependent on the lengths of the blocks. If the block is extended
to 2 hours, the power oﬀer must be halved.
For single hour blocks, the BESS
participates in 8760/2 = 4380 hours and for 2-hour blocks, the BESS participates in
8760 · 2/3 = 5840 hours. Since the number of operation hours is not doubled when
doubling the block length, the best block length is 1 hour. Note, the power oﬀer is
decreased as the BESS degrades in the simulations.
Figure 6.9 shows the operation for 2 days with a power oﬀer of 230 kW. The
minimum SOC for the full year is 6% and the maximum SOC is 93%, which, as
expected, shows that the power bid is set in such a way that the BESS does not violate
its SOC limits.
The NPV for this strategy is higher compared to oﬀering the full power capabilities
due to the decreased penalties. The NPV is -3.88 million DKK. The 2016 revenue is
187,000 DKK, where there are 0 DKK penalties.
The cyclic ageing is greatly reduced to 1.57% per year, because the cycles are much
smaller. The calendar ageing is higher due to two reasons: 1) The BESS does not
need as much time to re-establish the SOC and therefore spends more time being idle
in the non-FNR hours and 2) some cycles become so small that they are transferred
to calendar ageing instead. The lifetime is estimated at approximately 10 years.
Overall, this strategy gives the highest reliability at 100%, but the proﬁts are still
not suﬃcient.
Optimal oﬀer for block operation
The optimal power oﬀer for single hour block operation is presented here. Figure
6.10 shows the NPV, 2016 revenue and unavailability as a function of the power oﬀer.
The highest NPV occurs at 300 kW and is approximately -3.74 million DKK. This
NPV is not nearly as high as the optimum power oﬀers for the previously investigated
strategies. On the other hand, the reliability is very high for all power values (above
99%), so if the desire is to consistently ensure a reliable operation, block operation
recommended.
==PAGE:94==
78
6 Results
Figure 6.9: The BESS power and SOC for 5-7 January 2016 with single hour blocks
and a power oﬀer of 230 kW (Does not include deadband).
6.1.5
The eﬀect of taking time to re-establish
In the following simulations, the eﬀect of actively remedying the SOC, if it reaches
either 0% or 100% was investigated. The break is activated as soon as the SOC reaches
one of its boundaries. The deadband from case 5 is also included in these simulations.
Of course, during the break the BESS is not fulﬁlling its duties as a reserve, and
therefore it receives the penalty. The aim is to introduce controlled and predictable
periods of failure, which both helps to the BESS handle future frequency deviations
and may be more acceptable for the TSO.
Figure 6.11 shows two days of the operation when oﬀering 630 kW. A red SOC
curve indicates both failures and when the BESS is taking a break. The operation
is identical to the continuous case including the deadband (case 5 in Table 6.1), but
instead of waiting for the frequency to re-establish the SOC, the BESS takes a break
to remedy the SOC. Therefore, the results of these two strategies are compared.
The number of failures is more than halved, from 14-15 failures per day to 5-6
failures per day. The total unavailability is decreased from 5.4% to 3.8%. The breaks
are included in the failures, which shows that the controlled breaks managed to prevent
==PAGE:95==
6.1 Results for FNR
79
(a) NPV and unavailability.
(b) 2016 revenue and unavailability.
Figure 6.10: The unavailability and NPV as a function of the power oﬀer for block
participation (Does not include deadband).
or alleviate future failures.
Compare again Figure 6.11 to the operation without the breaks (with deadband)
in Figure 6.6. It is clear that the number of cycles is increased. The annual cyclic
ageing is therefore increased from 2.43% to 3.53%. The calendar ageing is slightly
decreased because the BESS does not remain idle at 0% and 100% anymore. The
estimated lifetime is only 5 years.
The 2016 revenue is about 70,000 DKK higher than the strategy without the
breaks, due to reduction of failures. This increase in annual revenue and the reduced
lifetime outweigh each other, and therefore the NPV is nearly unchanged.
Optimal power oﬀer when including 15 min breaks
Like in the other investigations, oﬀering 630 kW may not be optimal for either the
BESS owner or the TSO. Therefore, the NPV, 2016 revenue and unavailability are
determined as functions of the power oﬀer. Figure 6.12 shows the result with a power
resolution of 50 kW. The optimal power oﬀer is 400 kW, which is slightly higher than
Case 5.
When running the full simulation with 400 kW, the estimated NPV is -1.97 million
DKK, which is very similar to the optimal oﬀer of the case without the breaks (Case
6 in Table 6.1. On the other hand, the failures are reduced slightly to 1.2% compared
to 1.3%. Figure A.12 shows the operation with the optimised power oﬀer.
Since the NPV is similar and the reliability increased, this strategy is preferred
compared to the case with the deadband, but no breaks. In the case without the
breaks, the BESS failures and SOC are at the mercy of the frequency and therefore
the delivery of power is unpredictable. In other words, the TSO does not know when
the BESS can return to operation. When controlled breaks are introduced, the TSO
knows exactly when the BESS will return to the service again and can therefore plan
==PAGE:96==
80
6 Results
Figure 6.11: The BESS power and SOC for 5-7 January 2016, when taking 15 min
breaks every time the SOC reaches 0/100%. Including the ±20 mHz deadband.
accordingly. This characteristic may make the TSO more likely to accept some degree
of unavailability.
==PAGE:97==
6.2 Results for FDR
81
(a) NPV and unavailability.
(b) 2016 revenue and unavailability.
Figure 6.12: The unavailability and NPV as a function of the power oﬀer for FNR
service when allowed to take breaks (including the deadband).
6.2
Results for FDR
This section presents the results for the FDR simulations.
6.2.1
Continuous operation with a 630 kW bid
First, the BESS operation is simulated when it oﬀers its full power for FDR. Figure
6.13 shows the resulting operation for the ﬁrst month of 2016 and Table 6.2 shows
some characteristics of the operation.
In the simulation, the FDR operation does not cause the BESS to exceed its
capacity limits, even though it oﬀers 630 kW. The lowest SOC reached during the
2016 simulation is 92.97%, meaning the most energy-demanding FDR delivery only
Table 6.2: Summary of results from FDR simulation for 2016.
Aspect
Value
Min
Mean
Max
NPV
-3.06
mio. DKK
Revenue 2016
255
kDKK
Lifetime
9
Years
Cyclic ageing
≈0
%
Calendar ageing
2.64
%
FDR power provided
0
0.37
544.95
kW
SOC during operation
92.97
99.96
100.00
%
==PAGE:98==
82
6 Results
Figure 6.13: The simulated FDR operation for 7-14 January, 2016 when oﬀering 630
kW.
required 7% of the BESS’s total energy capacity. The simulation was run again with
2015 frequency data and the resulting lowest SOC was very similar at 92.37%.
Furthermore, the mean power provided when activated is only about one-third of
a kW, while the maximum power provided is 544.95 kW. In other words, the BESS
would never supply full power most of the time, and provides far less than it oﬀers.
The re-establishing power is kept at 315 kW, because this proves suﬃcient in the
simulation to re-establish the SOC and still ensure reliable delivery. The BESS can
participate as an FDR with a full power oﬀer, without having issues with lack of
energy capacity.
Due to the infrequent and small size of the cycles, the cyclic ageing is almost 0.
The main ageing component is the calendar ageing, which is equal to 2.66% for the
ﬁrst year. The resulting estimated lifetime is 9 years.
From an economic point of view, FDR is not feasible. The NPV is -3.06 million
DKK. Participating as an FNR is far more economically rewarding, but unfortunately
the current FNR regulations are not optimal for a BESS which must maintain its
SOC. Therefore, given the current regulatory framework, participating as an FDR is
the the easiest and most secure option for a BESS located in DK2.
==PAGE:99==
6.2 Results for FDR
83
6.2.2
Increasing lifetime by lowering the goal SOC
As presented in Section 2.2, calendar ageing for a BESS is determined by two main
factors: average SOC and duration of the idle period. From an economical point of
view, the longer the BESS is in operation, the more revenues it can earn, and therefore
it is desirable to extend the BESS lifetime as much as possible. Since both the 2016
and 2015 operation utilise less than 8% of the energy capacity, the goal SOC could in
theory be reduced to 8% and it would still be able to deliver the FDR service. This
is not recommended, because the energy demand in diﬀerent years may vary. Also,
when at low energy capacity, the discharging rate of an Li-ion cell decreases and a
Li-ion cell is not allowed to be fully discharged [14]. Therefore, a SOC around 20%
can be chosen, because this should both ensure enough energy to participate as an
FDR and avoid cycling at a low SOC.
If the goal SOC is set to 20%, the calendar ageing is reduced to 1.46% in the ﬁrst
year and the expected lifetime is extended to 15 years. Due to the longer lifetime, the
NPV rises to -1.86 million DKK. Figure A.14 shows the resulting operation.
It is important to note, that this optimisation takes advantage of the fact that
Energinet.dk does not specify a minimum time interval FDR must be able to provide
the service. If the SOC is lowered to 20%, the BESS would theoretically be able to
discharge completely in 8-9 minutes. Energinet.dk may wish reserves to be available
longer. So, like with FNR, the operation choice is dependent on the aptitude of the
TSO.
6.2.3
Finding the theoretical maximum power oﬀer
In FNR operation, the main issue was the lack of energy capacity, but for FDR it
is the opposite problem. The power is not high enough to fully utilise the energy
capacity.
A simple calculation can be used to ﬁnd the maximum theoretically power oﬀer
with the current energy capacity. With a 630 kW bid in 2016, 7 % of the energy
capacity is used, meaning the bid can be increased by a multiple of 14. The resulting
bid is approximately 8.8 MW. The higher the oﬀer, the higher the availability payment.
The operation is simulated with 8.8 MW and the resulting NPV was -6.7 million
DKK. The NPV decreases because the CAPEX costs related to increasing the power
capacity outweigh the increased revenues. Also, as the power oﬀer rises, the ageing
also increases, due to the increased cycle depth. This means there are less years for
acquiring revenues.
Figure 6.14 shows the NPV as a function of the power oﬀer. The NPV linearly
decreases with a constant rate as the power oﬀer increases due to increased CAPEX.
Between a power oﬀer of 4 to 5 MW, the BESS lifetime is decreased by a single year,
meaning the BESS receives one less annual revenue. This is seen as a drop in the
NPV.
Unless the prices of the power electronics are reduced, it is not economically viable
to increase power capabilities with current FDR prices.
==PAGE:100==
84
6 Results
Figure 6.14: The NPV as a function of the FDR power bid.
6.3
Results for PFR
Table 6.3: The results from key PFR simulations.
Case 1: Current regulations, 630 kW bidirectional power oﬀer
Case 2: Current regulations, optimised up and down regulation bids
Case 3: Current regulations, up regulation only and optimised power oﬀer
Case 4: Including overfulﬁlment, provision rate and deadband degrees of freedom from
Germany, optimised bid sizes
Case 5: Including all degrees of freedom from Germany, optimised variables
Case 6: Including all degrees of freedom from Germany, up-regulation only and
optimised variables
Case
Up bid
Down bid
NPV
Revenue ’16
Cyclic
Calendar
Life
Unavailable
kW
kW
mio. DKK
kDKK
%
%
Years
%
1
630
630
-1.3
665
1.66
1.33
7
28,0
2
155
180
-3.2
182
0.20
1.60
13
0
3
300
0
-2.6
317
0.10
2.50
9
0
4
165
185
-3.0
193
0.21
1.60
13
0
5
325
325
-2.1
378
0.93
1.39
9
0
6
500
0
-1.2
593
1.20
1.63
8
0
This section presents the results for the PFR simulations. Like FNR and FDR
operation, the BESS operation as a PFR is simulated using historic frequency data
from 2016. Table 6.3 summarises the simulation results and Figure 6.15 visualises the
economic results. The columns in the table are:
• Up/down bid: The up and down regulation power oﬀers respectively
• NPV: Shows the proﬁts over the course of the BESS lifetime. The project is
only feasible if the NPV is positive.
• 2016 revenue: Shows the theoretical revenues, including the availability payments,
energy settlement and penalties. It is independent of the degradation.
==PAGE:101==
6.3 Results for PFR
85
• Cyclic and calendar ageing: Quantitative estimation of the ageing components.
• Life: The total estimated lifetime in full years
• Unavailability: The percentage of time where the BESS is outside the 15-minute
criterion SOC boundaries (SOC at either 0% or 100%).
Figure 6.15: The 2016 revenue and NPV of the diﬀerent PFR strategies.
6.3.1
Results for current DK1 regulations
To begin, the current regulations are implemented as described in Section 3.4.
Case 1: Continuous operation with 630 kW oﬀer
Economically, the most attractive case is the when the BESS oﬀers its full power.
For 630 kW, Equation 3.3 for calculating the upper and lower SOC boundaries, yield
the boundaries as 67% and 36% respectively. To fulﬁl the 15-minute criterion, the
BESS SOC must remain within these boundaries at all times, unless an alert state
is triggered. Figure 6.16 shows the simulated operation for January 5-8, 2016 if the
BESS oﬀers 630 kW and it is clear that this is not the case. Within the 3 depicted
days, there are multiple cases where it violates the upper and lower SOC boundaries
and a handful of cases where the SOC reaches 0% or 100%.
The only option the BESS has to re-establish its SOC is when the system has
entered alert state or when the system frequency is within the deadband. The deadband
greatly helps keep the SOC near 50%, but it is not enough. Alert state does not
happen often enough to maintain the SOC.
The NPV is -1.3 million DKK where the revenue in 2016 was 665,000 DKK
including any penalties. Unfortunately, the BESS is outside the working interval about
28% of the time when the system is in normal state. This would not be acceptable for
the TSO.
Oﬀering 630 kW for PFR operation leads to many deep cycles which gives the BESS
a lifetime of approximately 7 years. The ageing is mainly cyclic, but calendar ageing is
==PAGE:102==
86
6 Results
Figure 6.16: The simulated PFR operation with a 630 kW bidirectional power oﬀer
for January 5-9, 2016.
also a large percentage. This is due to the BESS being idle in the deadband and small
cycles being considered as calendar ageing. Overall, oﬀering 630 kW continuously
under the current regulations is not possible.
Case 2: Optimised power oﬀer for up and down regulation
The next question is: what can the BESS oﬀer so it lives up to the 15-minute criterion?
This is a simple optimisation problem where the power bid is decreased until the BESS
stays within the SOC boundaries at all times while the system is in normal state.
Starting at a power bid of 630 kW for both up and down regulation, the algorithm
calculates the resulting SOC curve and evaluates whether the corresponding upper
and lower boundaries have been violated. If the upper boundary is crossed, the down
regulation bid is reduced, and similarly, if the lower boundary is crossed, the up
regulation bid is reduced.
The goal SOC is kept at 50%, as to not counteract the bid optimisation. One
might suggest changing the re-establishing SOC, because the BESS is oﬀering a higher
==PAGE:103==
6.3 Results for PFR
87
power for either up or down. For example, the up regulation power bid is decreased
if providing up regulation requires more energy than available. If the goal SOC is
lowered as the up regulation bid is lowered, then it will have less energy capacity
available, ultimately counteracting the decrease in the power oﬀer. Therefore, the
goal SOC should remain as 50%.
The optimised bids with a resolution of 5 kW, are 155 kW for up regulation and
180 kW for down regulation. The upper and lower SOC boundaries are 91% and 9%.
The resulting operation for January 5-8, 2016 is shown in Figure A.17. The operation
now lives up to the 15-minute criterion at all times.
Clearly the bids are much lower than what is desirable, but this ensures correct
operation. The NPV is therefore also lower at -3.2 million DKK.
Of course, lower power bids mean more shallow cycles, lowering the cyclic ageing
drastically. The calendar ageing is higher though, because more cycles are transferred
from cyclic ageing. The lifetime is estimated at 13 years which is almost double the
case where the BESS oﬀers full power capacity.
A question one might ask, is what energy capacity would enable the BESS to oﬀer
its full power capabilities? Another simple optimisation is created, where instead of
decreasing the power bid, the energy capacity is increased until it operates within the
SOC boundaries. The optimal energy capacity is found at 2040 kWh. The total NPV
decreases drastically to -8.0 million DKK with a 2016 revenue of 724,000 DKK. The
annual proﬁts are slightly higher, due to the decreased penalties, but this is not a
feasible solution because the increase in the CAPEX greatly outweighs the increased
proﬁts.
Case 3: Optimised power oﬀer for up regulation only
This section presents the results when the BESS only participates in up regulation.
Up regulation is chosen above down regulation, because it has higher availability
payments. The BESS can now allocate its full energy capacity to a single direction of
frequency deviations. Furthermore, when the system is in down regulation, the BESS
can re-establish itself, meaning it will have more possibilities to do so during normal
operation. Providing a bidirectional service, it is only possible to re-establish in the
deadband.
The maximum possible power oﬀer is determined through an optimisation. The
optimum power oﬀer is found as 300 kW and Figure 6.17 shows the resulting operation
for January 5-7. Unfortunately, this is only about half of the full capabilities of the
BESS.
As seen Figure 6.17, between providing up regulation, the BESS is often capable of
the re-establishing itself at the goal SOC. Originally the simulation was run with the
re-establishing power is set to 630 kW, but it turned out this may not be necessary.
High currents may age the BESS faster and therefore the re-establishing power was
decreased to 315 kW. The resulting minimum SOC for 2016 was unchanged, but of
course the re-establishing rate is slower.
Oﬀering a higher power for up regulation only generates more revenues compared
to splitting the same power over up and down regulation. Providing 155 and 180 kW
for up and down regulation respectively only generated 182,000 DKK in 2016, while
==PAGE:104==
88
6 Results
Figure 6.17: The simulated PFR operation for January 5-9, 2016 when only partici-
pating in up regulation with 300 kW.
oﬀering 300 kW for up regulation alone, generated 317,000 DKK in 2016. The reason
is that the up regulation prices are much higher and increasing the up regulation bid
makes up for not participating as a down reserve.
The cyclic ageing decreases because the BESS only cycles as a result of over-
frequencies, decreasing the overall activity. The calendar ageing increases signiﬁcantly
for the same reason, which decreases the estimated lifetime to 9 years compared to the
13 years where the BESS oﬀered 155 kW and 180 kW from up and down regulation
respectively. Nonetheless, the increased revenues make up for this.
6.3.2
Including the degrees of freedom from Germany
The following cases simulate the eﬀects of introducing the DoFs allowed in Germany
into the regulations of PFR in DK1.
==PAGE:105==
6.3 Results for PFR
89
Case 4: Including three degrees of freedom
To begin, the three ﬁrst degrees of freedom: overfulﬁlment, dead band operation, and
provision rate are simulated. Figure 6.18 shows the eﬀect of the including the diﬀerent
degrees of freedom individually. Depending on the speciﬁc situation, it diﬀers which
DoF is best at keeping the SOC close to the goal SOC. Also, the degrees of freedom
can cause the SOC to overshoot the goal SOC, essentially bringing the SOC further
from the goal. An example of this is seen at approximately 3/2 10:00.
Figure 6.18: The eﬀect on the SOC of including the diﬀerent DoF allowed in Germany.
Simulated for a 330 kW bidirectional oﬀer.
Comparing the SOC with (blue) and without (black) the DoFs, the three DoF
improve the SOC, but unfortunately it is not enough to ensure the SOC is within
the boundaries with high power bids. If 630 kW is oﬀered for both up and down
regulation, the total time the BESS SOC fails to live up to the 15-minute criterion
is reduced from 28% to 24%. The total number of such occurrences is only reduced
from 2,400 to about 2,300.
Therefore, the up and down regulation bids are optimised again as they were in
case 2, but now including the DoFs. The up and down regulation bids are found as 165
kW and 185 kW respectively, resulting in a working SOC interval between 9%-90%.
The NPV is therefore increased from -3.2 million DKK to -2.6 million DKK with a
2016 revenue of 317,000 DKK. This is of course an improvement, but not a very large
one. Figure 6.19 shows the resulting operation, which of course is very similar to the
one without the DoFs. The square spikes are when the BESS is using the deadband
DoF to re-establish its SOC.
The degradation is very similar to the optimised case without the degrees of
freedom, because the oﬀers are almost identical. The expected lifetime is 13 years.
Even though the degrees of freedom function as intended, their eﬀect is reduced
due to the unpredictable nature of the frequency. For example, the overfulﬁlment DoF
may indeed get the SOC back to 50% faster, but if the frequency deviation changes
direction shortly after, then it would actually have been better not to use overfulﬁlment
to restore the SOC to 50%. The BESS cannot predict the frequency behaviour, and
==PAGE:106==
90
6 Results
therefore an intent to better prepare the BESS for future frequency deviations may
actually make the BESS less capable of handling such frequency deviations. Also,
the DoFs are not deployable at all time, but only possible if the conditions allow.
Generally, the provision rate DoF has very little eﬀect. The deadband DoF is typically
most eﬀective, but overfulﬁlment is also very eﬀective. Overfulﬁlment has the highest
tendency to overshoot the goal SOC.
Overall, that the 3 degrees of freedom: deadband, provision rate, and overfulﬁlment
are not enough to ensure that the BESS operation maintains an acceptable SOC
which lives up to the 15 minute criteria, even though they do improve the performance
slightly.
Figure 6.19: The simulated PFR operation with power oﬀers of 165 and 185 kW for up
and down regulation respectively for January 5-9, 2016 with deadband, overfulﬁlment
and provision rate DoFs. The oﬀers ensure the BESS SOC lives up to the 15 min
criteria at all times.
==PAGE:107==
6.3 Results for PFR
91
Case 5: Including all four degrees of freedom
In this simulation, all four German degrees of freedom are implemented, including the
intraday transaction DoF. To begin, it is shown that it is not possible to oﬀer both
630 kW for both up and down regulation while also trading in the intraday market.
PID is set as 200 kW. Figure 6.20 shows the simulation where the BESS oﬀers 630 kW
for both up and down regulation, and trading 200 kW in the intraday market when
necessary. As expected, during the 24 hours shown, there are occasions where the
power demand is higher than the maximum power the BESS can provide. The BESS
cannot oﬀer 630 kW for both up and down regulation if it is also participating in the
intraday market, because the operation will inevitably demand more power of the
BESS than it can provide. Furthermore, the SOC does not live up to the 15 minute
requirement during this interval as seen in Figure A.19 (The system is in normal state
for the considered duration).
Figure 6.20: The simulated PFR operation January 1, 2016 including all German
degrees of freedom: deadband, overfulﬁlment, provision rate and intraday trading.
630 kW is oﬀer for both up and down regulation and the intraday trades are 200 kW.
Instead, an optimisation is performed to ﬁnd the optimal values for the power
oﬀers (Poffer,dw/up), the SOC deadband (SOCdeadband) and the power to trade in
the intraday market (PID). The SOC deadband is the SOC interval around the goal
SOC where no intraday transactions take place. As soon as the SOC moves out of
this deadband, a trade is initiated. To ease the number of computations, the up and
down regulation power bids are set equal in magnitude. The optimal combination is
found as:
• Poffer,dw/up = ±325 kW
• PID = ±200 kW
• SOCdeadband = SOCgoal ± 5%
Figure 6.21 shows the operation for the ﬁrst day of 2016 with these parameters. The
intraday trades occur often, up to several times each hour, because the SOC deadband
==PAGE:108==
92
6 Results
is set at only ±5%, but it is clear that it helps maintain a SOC around the goal SOC.
In the depicted 24-hour interval, the BESS delivers/consumes exactly 630 kW of power
on several occasions. If the BESS both performs an intraday trade while providing the
full PFR oﬀer, the total power requirement is only 525 kW. This is therefore not the
cause of these peaks. The 630 kW peaks are when the BESS is both re-establishing
its SOC due to the deadband DoF and supplying power for an intraday trade.
The NPV is found as -2.1 million DKK with a 2016 revenue of 378,000 DKK. This
is clearly an improvement compared to the other options. The power oﬀer is almost
doubled for up and down regulation compared to optimised case where the degrees of
freedom are not included.
The ageing is therefore also higher, with an increased cyclic ageing, due to the
increased number and depth of cycles. The calendar ageing is slightly reduced, because
the intraday contracts decrease the number and length of idle periods. The higher
power oﬀers also increase the depths of the cycles and therefore less are transferred to
calendar ageing.
Figure 6.21: The simulated PFR operation January 1, 2016 including all German
degrees of freedom: deadband, overfulﬁlment, provision rate and intraday trading. The
variable values are: Poffer,dw/up = ±325 kW, PID = ±200 kW and SOCdeadband =
SOCgoal ± 5%
==PAGE:109==
6.3 Results for PFR
93
Case 6: Up regulation only including all four degrees of freedom
Figure 6.22: The simulated PFR operation January 1, 2016 including all German
degrees of freedom: deadband, overfulﬁlment, provision rate and intraday trading
when the BESS only participates in up regulation. The variable values are: Poffer,up =
500 kW, PID = ±300 kW and SOCdeadband = SOCgoal −5%
In case 3, it was found that participating in up regulation only was both beneﬁ-
cial economically and technically. Therefore, up regulation is simulated again, now
including the four German DoFs. Again, an optimisation is run, which ﬁnds the
optimal Poffer,up, PID and SOCdeadband. Here, the SOCdeadband only applies to a
single direction.
The optimisation results in the following values:
• Poffer,dw/up = 500 kW
• PID = 300 kW
• SOCdeadband = SOCgoal −5% = 95%
Figure 6.22 shows the resulting operation. The NPV is increased to -1.2 million DKK
with a 2016 revenue of 593,000 DKK. Therefore, from an economical point of view,
==PAGE:110==
94
6 Results
this is the best case. The NPV is the highest of all the cases and the operation always
lives up the 15 minute criteria.
The cyclic ageing is signiﬁcantly increased because the cycles are deeper. The
calendar ageing is also relatively high because the BESS is mostly idle during over-
frequencies. The lifetime is reduced to 8 years.
6.4
Results for Peak shaving
This section presents the results from the peak shaving simulations. Three diﬀerent
strategies are simulated: 1) Low-price 2) Low-set point and 3) Low-degradation
strategies. Each of the strategies are tested for the three diﬀerent load curves. Table
6.4 summarises the most important characteristics of the peak shaving simulations:
• Set point (kW): The power set point. Any radial power above this value is
provided by the BESS. For comparison, the maximum radial power before peak
shaving for all load curves is 1891 kW.
• Upgrade cost (mio. DKK): The necessary grid upgrade cost resulting in a
positive NPV.
• Energy trade (DKK): The revenue from energy settlement.
• Max peak shaving power (kW): The maximum power provided when peak
shaving. This also corresponds to the peak reduction.
• Energy shaved (kWh): The total energy shaved over the course of 2016.
• Life (years): The estimated lifetime.
• Cyclic/Calendar ageing (%): The estimated cyclic/calendar ageing after the ﬁrst
year of operation.
Table 6.4: The results from peak shaving simulations. Three diﬀerent algorithms are
used for the three load curves, giving 9 simulations.
Set
Upgrade
Energy
Max PS
Energy
Life
Cyc.
Cal.
point
cost
trade
power
shaved
ageing
ageing
kW
mio. DKK
DKK
kW
kWh
yrs
%
%
Low price
Nordhavn
1570
17.0
452
320
1910
13
0.02
2.42
Industry
1620
17.0
-24.8
270
3440
13
0.03
2.44
Vacation
1770
17.0
86.4
120
776
13
0.01
2.31
Low set
point
Nordhavn
1560
17.0
-52.7
328
2100
13
0.02
2.43
Industry
1610
17.1
-570
284
4670
13
0.03
2.44
Vacation
1720
17.0
137
172
2370
13
0.02
2.50
Low
degrade
Nordhavn
1580
14.1
350
309
1650
22
0.02
1.63
Industry
1610
15.5
-37.5
276
3930
16
0.16
1.77
Vacation
1750
14.8
218
144
1370
18
0.02
1.57
==PAGE:111==
6.4 Results for Peak shaving
95
6.4.1
Lowest price
To begin, results from using the low-price algorithm are presented and discussed.
When the SOC is less than 100%, this algorithm determines the cheapest hours to
charge, and then waits until this time. Figure 6.23a illustrates the concept with one
day in 2016. The blue-shaded areas represent the energy which the BESS provides.
The green-shaded areas represent the energy which the BESS charges. Here the
charging interval is shifted to two separate hours around midnight.
(a) Illustration of the low-price strategy.
(b) The dimensioning peaks for the vaca-
tion home radial.
Figure 6.23: The low-price method and the double peak characteristic.
The column in Table 6.4 called "Energy trade" is the revenue from energy trades.
The Nordhavn and Vacation load curves give a positive revenue from energy trading.
The fact that they are positive means that the energy is bought at a cheaper price
than it is sold. Overall, the energy trade revenues are negligible compared to the peak
shaving savings and the cost of the BESS.
The load curves all require an upgrade costing 17 million DKK, which is very high
and unreasonable for a upgrade, especially because it only reduces the power demand
by 100-300 kW.
Figure 6.24 shows the power drawn on the three radials along with the optimised
BESS set point. The set points are found as 1570 kW, 1620 kW and 1770 kW for
the Nordhavn, Industry and Vacation homes load curves respectively. This strategy
performs best for the Nordhavn load because it has a low set point and high revenues
in the energy trade. Figure 6.25 shows 3 weeks of operation for Nordhavn, where
Week 3 includes the dimensioning peak. Figures A.27, A.28 and A.29 in Appendix A
show the peak shaving operation with the low-price charging method in more detail
for the three radials.
The vacation home radial has the highest power set point and lowest BESS power
output, indicating the peaks of the vacation homes load curve require large amounts
of energy. The power to energy capacity ratio requirement in the simulation is 1.6
and 1.8 for Nordhavn and the Industry radial respectively, while the ratio is 4.2
==PAGE:112==
96
6 Results
(a) Nordhavn
(b) Industry
(c) Vacation
Figure 6.24: The power consumption and the optimum set point for 2016 using the
low-price charging strategy.
for the vacation radial.3 A possible explanation for this could be the double peak
characteristic, as also seen in Figure 6.23b. This strategy generally does not plan
charging in the middle of the day, and the BESS must be able to provide the full
power in both peaks without recharging. Consequently, the set point must be higher.
3Calculated as ratio =
EBESS
Pmax,P S
==PAGE:113==
6.4 Results for Peak shaving
97
Figure 6.25: The BESS operation for the load in Nordhavn for 3 weeks of 2016.
Therefore, this strategy is not recommended for peak shaving a load curve similar to
the vacation load.
Since the BESS activity is very low, the ageing is mainly caused by calendar ageing.
The lifetime is estimated at 13 years for all loads. The cycling ageing is negligible.
6.4.2
Lowest set point
The low-price algorithm shifts charging to the cheapest hours, and the SOC is typically
not returned to 100% right after it has provided power for peaks shaving. As discussed,
the vacation home radial has a double peak characteristic, which indicates that the set
point can be lowered if the BESS charges as soon as the power drawn by the radial
dips below the set point. This may also be the case for the other two radials.
Figure 6.26 illustrates the low-set point strategy. The blue-shaded areas represent
energy which is provided by the BESS. The green-shaded areas represent the energy
which the BESS charges. The resulting radial power curve will therefore have a
completely ﬂat top near the peak.
Table 6.4 shows the set points for all radials are the lowest for this strategy
==PAGE:114==
98
6 Results
Figure 6.26: Illustration of the low-set point strategy.
compared to the other charging strategies. As expected, the vacation home radial
shows the largest improvement, because the BESS can better handle the double-peak
proﬁle. Figures A.24, A.25 and A.26 in Appendix A show the peak shaving operation
with the low-set point charging method in detail for the three radials.
Even though the set point is improved, it is still only decreased by 10-50 kW
compared to the other strategies. The maximum power provided for peak shaving
is increased for each radial, but only by a very small amount. The power to energy
ratios for Nordhavn and the Industry radials are almost the same compared with the
low-price strategy. For the vacation radial, the ratio is greatly decreased from 4.2 to
about 2.9 but this ratio is still much higher than the other two radials, meaning this
radial simply requires more energy capacity to be peak shaved. Since, energy is more
expensive than power in a BESS, vacation radials may not be the economically best
choice for grid upgrade deferral using a BESS.
Since the set points are lower, the number of hours and energy shaved is increased.
Consequently, there are more losses in the energy trade, because charging now takes
place around the peaks, which typically are the most expensive. Still these losses are
small compared to the other cash ﬂows.
The ageing is very similar to the other strategies, with a estimated lifetime of 13
years for all radials. Overall, the necessary grid upgrade cost for a positive NPV is
unchanged at approximately 17 million DKK.
6.4.3
Lowest degradation
In the above simulations, the BESS has a lifetime of approximately 13 years. The
necessary cost of the grid upgrade is directly dependent on the number of years the
upgrade is delayed, and therefore they all had the same necessary grid upgrade cost.
To increase savings from upgrade deferral, the lifetime must be increased.
This method is dependent on being able to predict whether a peak requires peak
shaving several hours before the actual peak occurs. Logically, the later a decision is
made, the more accurate it can be. For this reason, the charging power is increased to
the BESS’s full power, so it can charge faster and make the decision later.
==PAGE:115==
6.4 Results for Peak shaving
99
(a) Illustration of the low-degradation strategy.
(b) The SOC for Nordhavn using low-degradation
method.
Figure 6.27: Illustration of the low-degradation method and resulting SOC curve for
Nordhavn.
Figure 6.27a shows the concept of this method where the decision to charge is made
just before 6:00. Table 6.4 shows the results for the diﬀerent radials. Figures A.30, A.31
and A.32 in Appendix A show the peak shaving operation with the low-degradation
charging method in detail for the three radials. The lifetime of the BESS is increased
for the Nordhavn and vacation home load curves. Especially the Nordhavn load is
well suited for this strategy, because its lifetime is almost doubled while the set point
remains the same as the low-set point method. Consequently, the necessary grid
upgrade is reduced to 13.9 million DKK. Figure 6.27b shows the SOC over 2016 for
Nordhavn. Clearly the algorithm predicts peak shaving in January/February and not
for the rest of the year.
The reason why this method is most successful for the Nordhavn load is due to the
load’s consistency and large season variability. The algorithm can accurately separate
peaks which require peak shaving from those that do not. The season variability gives
rise to long and easily identiﬁable non-peak shaving periods.
The vacation load curve is not quite as successful, because its curve is less consistent
and harder to predict. Thus, the set point is increased compared to the low-set point
strategy, because it does not always predict peak shaving correctly, causing the BESS
to become completely discharged. The lifetime is estimated at 19 years.
This strategy is least successful for the Industry load. The set point is higher
compared to the low-set point strategy and the lifetime is only increased by 3 years.
This load is consistent and predictable, but does not have the same season variability.
Therefore, there are not long periods where the SOC can be decreased. Furthermore,
the load rises to the peak very fast, and therefore the decision is often made too early
to tell if peak shaving was necessary. Since the load is always low during the weekends,
it was attempted to simply decrease the SOC during these days, but the result is an
increased cyclic ageing which outweighs the decreased calendar ageing.
==PAGE:116==
100
6 Results
Like the previous strategies, the maximum peak shaving power is not close to the
amount the BESS can deliver.
In conclusion, this method requires consistent load curves and is only relevant for
load curves with season variability. Nonetheless, if the load curve lives up to these
criteria, this is the most promising peak shaving strategy, because the grid upgrade
cost can be lower before it is economical and the BESS has a long life.
6.4.4
Optimising the energy capacity
In none of the above peak shaving simulations does the BESS deliver its full power
capabilities. The limiting factor is the energy capacity, and therefore it is interesting
to ﬁnd the energy capacity which enables it to decrease the load by the maximum
BESS power: 630 kW.
The theoretically required energy capacity is evaluated for the Nordhavn load
curve, because this load gave rise to the highest peak shaving power in the previous
simulations. The necessary energy capacity is found as 2740 kWh.
Unfortunately, the increased CAPEX costs are much higher than the economic
beneﬁt. The necessary investment cost is increased on an unreasonable 60.6 million
DKK. Therefore, it is not suggested that the energy capacity should be higher to
increase delivered power. Instead, the power capabilities could be decreased to match
the energy capacity.
6.5
Results for FDR and peak shaving
The section presents the simulation results for the combined service of peak shaving
and FDR. Table 6.5 summaries the key values. Since FDR requires very little energy,
it is possible to run the two services simultaneously. The BESS charges using the
low-set point strategy. As expected, the peak shaving set points are slightly higher to
compensate for the little energy FDR requires.
Logically the necessary cost of a grid upgrade is lower than when only providing
peak shaving, due to the added FDR availability payments. The grid upgrade for all
load curves now only need to cost 8 million DKK. The lifetime is still about the same,
because FDR barely introduces any cycling.
Instead of running the two services simultaneously, it is possible to split them, if it
is easy to predict which period(s) require peak shaving. The advantage of splitting
the services is that each will function optimally, without being aﬀected by the other.
The Nordhavn and vacation home radials have predictable peak shaving and are
therefore candidates for the separated services. Again, the BESS charges using the
low-set point strategy. For both radials, the dimensioning peak is in January, so the
BESS performs peak shaving in January and FDR for the rest of the year.
As expected, when separating the service, the peak shaving set points are identical
to the ones for peak shaving only. The necessary grid upgrade cost is slightly higher,
because The BESS only receives the FDR availability payments 11 out of 12 months.
On the other hand, it is now guaranteed that the BESS can always provide both
==PAGE:117==
6.5 Results for FDR and peak shaving
101
Table 6.5: The results from the simulations for the combined service of peak shaving
and FDR.
Set
Upgrade
Max
Energy
Life
Cyc.
Cal.
point
cost
power
shaved
ageing
ageing
kW
mio. DKK
kW
kWh
yrs
%
%
Simul-
taneous
Nordhavn
1570
8.00
545
1950
13
0.02
2.66
Industry
1700
8.00
545
4470
13
0.03
2.65
Vacation
2030
8.00
545
2370
13
0.02
2.65
Sep-
arated
Nordhavn
1560
8.50
545
2100
13
0.02
2.64
Vacation
1720
8.50
545
2370
13
0.02
2.64
services. This method requires analysis of the speciﬁc load to be shaved, to determine
when peak shaving must take place.
The maximum power is 545 kW in all cases, which is due to a single occurrence in
the FDR operation.
Separating the services will also open up for the possibility of providing another
secondary service other than FDR, which is not able to run simultaneously with peak
shaving, for example FNR. This is outside the scope of this thesis, but a possible topic
for future work.
==PAGE:118==
102
6 Results
Figure 6.28: Resulting BESS operation for the combined FDR and peak shaving
operation for two weeks of 2016.
6.6
Results for Load levelling
Table 6.6: The results from load levelling simulations.
Weekday
Weekend
Upgrade
Energy
Max LL
Life
Cyc.
Cal.
set point
set point
cost
trade
power
ageing
ageing
kW
kW
mio. DKK
DKK
kW
yrs
%
%
µ
σ
µ
σ
Nordhavn
1140
167
583
142
18.6
3420
420
11
0.88
1.75
Industry
1370
149
-
-
18.7
3030
470
11
0.58
2.06
Vacation
990
340
1021
317
19.9
1824
280
10
0.81
2.02
The results for the load levelling simulations are now presented. Like with peak
shaving, load levelling is simulated using the three diﬀerent 10 kV radials: The
Nordhavn, vacation homes and industry radials. For the Nordhavn and vacation load
==PAGE:119==
6.6 Results for Load levelling
103
curves, there are two set points per week (one for weekdays and one for weekends),
while the industry load only has one set point per week. Table 6.6 shows the results
from the three simulations. The columns in the Table are the same as described for
Table 6.4. Figure 6.29 shows the set points for the ﬁrst 5 weeks of 2016 and how the
set points vary throughout the year. Figures A.33, A.34 and A.35 in Appendix A
show the load-levelling operation in more detail for the three radials.
Logically, in the dimensioning week for peak shaving, the load levelling and peak
shaving set points are the same, as shown in Figure 6.29a.
The set points of the Nordhavn and vacation home radials clearly reﬂect the
seasons, because they are lower in the warmer months compared to colder months.
The industry load curve does not have this eﬀect. Furthermore, the Nordhavn set
points clearly show the diﬀerence in power demand for weekdays and weekends,
meaning diﬀerentiating between the two is important. If only a single set point was
set for the whole week, the BESS would never ﬂatten the peaks in the weekend.
On the other hand, the weekday and weekend set points for the vacation homes
radial are not signiﬁcantly diﬀerent. They have much higher variability and are less
predictable which makes it diﬃcult to set them in real-life operation. They have a
standard deviation of approximately 300-350 kW, which is high compared to the other
radials and the actual power capabilities of the BESS
The industry radial only has peaks in the weekdays. The set points have high
variability, but this is often caused by the working calendar, and may therefore be
more predictable compared to the vacation home load. The vacation home radial is
similarly aﬀected by the working calendar, but is also aﬀected by other factors such
as the weather, making it less predictable.
The energy trade amounts to only a couple thousand DKK per year, which as
expected is not nearly enough to outweigh the BESS cost. It is calculated that the grid
upgrade must cost 18-19 million DKK to make load-levelling economically feasible,
which is very unreasonable.
The BESS power capabilities are utilised to a much higher degree compared to
peak shaving, but it still does not provide full power at any point during 2016. The
ageing is higher than peak shaving and the lifetime is estimated at 10-11 years. The
ageing is still predominately caused by idling, but cyclic ageing also has a signiﬁcant
aﬀect. Cyclic ageing for the industry radial is lower because it does not cycle in the
weekends.
Overall, load-levelling does not bring signiﬁcant additional revenues, decreases
lifetime and is harder to operate. Therefore, it is not recommended.
==PAGE:120==
104
6 Results
(a) Nordhavn
(b) Vacation homes
(c) Industry
Figure 6.29: The load levelling set points for the three diﬀerent load curves for the
ﬁrst 5 weeks of 2016
==PAGE:121==
CHAPTER 7
Discussion and
Conclusion
7.1
Discussion
In the above case studies, it was investigated to which extent the BESS can provide
various services including FNR, FDR, PFR, peak shaving, a FDR-peak shaving
combination, and load-levelling.
To begin, three diﬀerent frequency regulation services were investigated, where
participating in FNR has the highest potential for revenues in DK2. Unfortunately, the
simulations concluded that with the current regulations, the BESS cannot participate
continuously in FNR. There are no mechanisms which help the BESS maintain its
SOC. The BESS operation is completely at the mercy of the frequency. To achieve a
reliable operation, the BESS must participate in 1-hour blocks, separated by 1 hour
of re-establishing the SOC and it cannot oﬀer 630 kW. Of course, this drastically
decreases the revenues. A power oﬀer of 230 kW gives 100% reliability, but according
to regulations FNR oﬀer must be at least 300 kW. This strategy is less proﬁtable than
participating in FDR.
Several diﬀerent changes to FNR operation were investigated, including the imple-
mentation of unidirectional service, a deadband and actively taking time to remedy
the SOC when necessary. For future changes to FNR regulations it is recommended
to consider a deadband for units with a limited energy reservoir, allow them to take a
break when they require it or deﬁne a certain time frame the BESS must be available.
It would be most beneﬁcial if FNR was changed so it resembles PFR in DK1 or
the regulations in Germany. When simulating the eﬀect of the deadband for FNR,
it was assumed that the BESS can re-establish its SOC in either direction when
the frequency was in the deadband. In reality, the BESS may only be allowed to
re-establish itself in the deadband, if it helps the system balance. Since the FNR
operation was already rather unreliable, and this restriction was not enforced in this
simulation. This restricted was enforced when simulating PFR.
The changes considered for FNR were mainly inspired by PFR in DK1, since
these may be more beneﬁcial for BESS installations. PFR has several aspects which
improve the BESS’s ability to participate, such as separated up and down regulation,
a deadband and the ability to discontinue the service when the system is in alert state.
When simulating PFR, it was found, that the best operation choice for a BESS is
to participate in only up regulation with a power oﬀer of 300 kW. This ensures no
failures and the highest NPV. Of course, the BESS cannot participate in PFR because
it is not located in DK1, but this investigation shows that given the choice, it is more
==PAGE:122==
106
7 Discussion and Conclusion
proﬁtable to install a BESS in DK1.
Furthermore, the impact of Germany’s DoF for energy-limited units was inves-
tigated. It was found that especially the 15 minute intraday transactions improve
the operation. The best operation strategy is still providing up regulation only, but
now with a power oﬀer of 500 kW. This increases the NPV to -1.2 million DKK and
the operation is completely secure. Therefore, it is hoped that Energinet.dk will take
inspiration from its neighbour and implement this DoF. Unfortunately, the intraday
transactions are the most diﬃcult to implement.
FDR is the only service that is possible for the BESS with current regulations. It
is a very reliable operation, but unfortunately the NPV is still largely negative, at
about -3 million DKK. In theory, the current energy capacity would allow a power
bid as large as 8.8 MW, but unfortunately the components are too expensive for it to
be feasible to increase the power capabilities. Instead, it is recommended to operate
the BESS at a lower SOC. In the simulations, a conservative SOC of 20% was chosen,
which extended the life from 9 years to 15 years increasing the NPV to -1.9 million
DKK.
For FDR and FNR, the units receive a pay-as-bid availability payment. In the
calculations, it is assumed that the BESS receives the average price, because this is
the price published by Energinet.dk. A good bidding strategy may therefore be able
to improve the economic results for these, by analysing the price trends and bidding
higher than the average.
Peak shaving was simulated for three diﬀerent load curves, the Nordhavn grid, a
vacation home radial and an industry radial. Furthermore, three diﬀerent strategies
for charging are developed, each with their own aim: 1) Lower the price (Maximise
energy trade revenues), 2) lower the set point and 3) decrease the degradation.
The low-price method is not recommended because the revenues from energy
trade are not high enough to have an impact on the economic performance. The
low-degrade method requires a very speciﬁc type of load to be successful; the load
must be consistent, highly predictable and have seasonal variations. If the load lives
up to these criteria, then this is the best charging method, because it ensures a low
set point and a long life. Out of the load curves investigated, the Nordhavn load is
the most suited for this method.
Out of the 3 charging strategies, the low-set point method is most useful for
preventing peak shaving failures and/or maximising the degree if peak shaving. The
vacation home radial has a double peak characteristic and these peaks require higher
energy compared to the other radials. For this type of load speciﬁcally, the low-set
point charging strategy is highly recommended. In the simulations, the set points are
determined using perfect information.
In all cases, the energy capacity was the limiting factor, but this is also the most
expensive component. Therefore, loads with peaks requiring large amounts of energy
are not ideal candidates. For this reason, the vacation radial performs worst in all
cases. Unfortunately, vacation radials may in theory be the type of radial which could
largely beneﬁt from peak shaving, because they have very high seasonal variability
and their grid is therefore very over-dimensioned most of the year.
For peak shaving to be economic, it must be combined with another revenue-
delivering service.
The combination of peak shaving and FDR was investigated,
==PAGE:123==
7.2 Sensitivities
107
because the BESS can both participate in FDR with current regulations and still
provide a secure operation. The result is that the grid upgrade must only cost 8
million DKK, compared to 14-17 million DKK without FDR.
Load levelling is an extension of peak shaving and therefore exhibits the same
weaknesses.
Economically, it performs approximately the same as peak shaving.
This strategy is not recommended because it causes higher degradation, higher cost
requirements for the grid upgrade and is diﬃcult to operate.
For the current BESS in Nordhavn, the recommended operation is FDR with
or without peak shaving. Peak shaving is not necessary in the Nordhavn grid, so
including it in the operation would mainly be for research purposes.
Generally, in none of the cases except FDR, does the BESS utilise its full power
capabilities. In all cases of frequency regulation, except FDR, oﬀering full power
caused sub-optimal and unreliable operation. For peak shaving, the power capabilities
can be used up to 200-300 kW with the current energy capacity. For FNR, the most
reliable operation strategy only utilises 230 kW. For PFR, it can oﬀer maximum 300
kW with the current regulations. Only for FDR can the BESS use its full power
capacity and in this case, it would actually beneﬁt from higher power and/or lower
energy capacity.
It seems the Nordhavn BESS was not designed for a single speciﬁc type of operation,
because it does not excel at any of the strategies presented. It is therefore highly
recommended that when considering to build a BESS to carefully decide which speciﬁc
services it should provide and analyse the factors which aﬀect the operation. For
frequency regulation, it is important to understand frequency behaviour and for
peak shaving, it is necessary to understand the speciﬁc load which the BESS will be
experiencing. These analyses should help design the power and energy capacities of
the BESS, so they match the service to be provided.
7.2
Sensitivities
Throughout this thesis, assumptions and simpliﬁcations were necessary. The most
important sensitivities which could alter the presented results are now discussed.
The Danish PFR regulations are rather unclear, probably because energy-limited
frequency reserves are still a new concept. Many previous papers assume that the
regulations mean the BESS can stop providing the service after 15 minutes of continu-
ous delivery, no matter the system state. When asking Energinet.dk if this is indeed
the case, they denied it, but they were not clear in what the regulations actually
meant. The simulated PFR operation assumes that the regulations are similar to
the regulations in Germany, because they share the same operation handbook from
ENTSO-E. The simulations are therefore based on an interpretation which may or
may not be true. Of course, the Nordhavn BESS cannot participate in PFR anyways,
because it is in DK2. It is recommended for future BESS installation in DK2 to discuss
this in detail with Energinet.dk. Overall, the simulated PFR regulations seemed more
plausible than the 15-minute rule. If a large portion of frequency reserves switched on
and oﬀevery 15 minutes, the frequency regulation may be ineﬃcient.
==PAGE:124==
108
7 Discussion and Conclusion
There are several uncertainties regarding the economic calculations. First, the
penalties applied for the frequency regulation strategies may be too harsh. They are
applied if the BESS reaches 0% or 100% SOC for 1 second or more within an hour.
In reality, being unavailable for a few seconds would not be catastrophic, especially
since the response time requirement is more than a couple of seconds for all frequency
reserve. It should be noted, that most of the failures in the simulations lasted more
than a few seconds. Furthermore, the calculations assume the penalty is always double
the availability payment the BESS itself received, which may be too high on average.
It is not possible to evaluate how precise this estimation is. Overall, the penalties
may be too pessimistic. On the other hand, the economic calculations assume that
the BESS is always accepted when it bids. This may not be the case, meaning the
calculation may be too optimistic. This assumption counteracts the harsh penalties,
and they may partially cancel each other.
The lifetime estimation has a large eﬀect of the resulting NPV. Until the BESS has
been active for some time, it is unknown if the lifetime estimates are accurate. The
cyclic ageing model was scaled to ﬁt the test results received from ABB. There was
no corresponding test for calendar ageing usable for calibrating the calendar ageing
model. Nonetheless, the same models were used for all the simulations. So even if the
estimations do not exactly match the actual ageing of the Nordhavn BESS, it still
enables the comparison of the diﬀerent strategies.
Regarding the set points for peak shaving and load-levelling; the simulations use
perfect information to determine the set points. In reality the set points must be
predicted with some degree of uncertainty, and therefore the resulting peak shaving
operation may not be as eﬀective as the simulated operation. Generally, it is expected
that the peak shaving in real operation will be less than the simulations illustrate.
Re-evaluating the set point regularly with recent data will allow better performance.
For example, the set point can be re-evaluated as the highest consumption week(s)
approaches. Also, for this reason the low-set point charging strategy is generally
recommended, to help counteract loads requiring more energy than expected.
In the energy trade calculations for peak shaving and load-levelling, the Elspot
price is used, not including tariﬀs or Value-Added Tax (VAT), which in reality is paid
when buying energy. In Denmark, the Elspot price of energy only makes up about
15% of the total price consumers pay [48]. The owner of the BESS may be able to
refund/avoid some of the extra tariﬀs and taxes. It is not expected that including
the other price components will aﬀect the results, because the values are very small
compared to the other CAPEX and OPEX costs.
The CAPEX costs used in the calculations are from a literature study performed
in 2014. It is expected that the battery costs will decrease in the future, generally
making all the strategies more economic.
The uncertainties may of course aﬀect the technical and economic performance,
but some aﬀect it in a positive and other in a negative direction. Overall, since the
same calculations and assumptions were used for all the simulations, the strategies
can still be compared with each other to determine which are most promising.
==PAGE:125==
7.3 Conclusion
109
7.3
Conclusion
This thesis simulated diﬀerent operating strategies and compared the technical and
economical results. The strategies are split into two main categories: Frequency-based
and peak shaving strategies. For a BESS owner interested in high revenues, frequency
regulation is clearly the best choice. Currently the regulations are a barrier for energy-
limited units such as the BESS, and the only frequency service which the BESS in
Nordhavn could reliably deliver is FDR. Therefore, this is the recommended operating
strategy. Generally, it is assumed that the grid operator is allowed to participate in
the reserve market.
Reliable FNR operation is possible within current regulations if the BESS partici-
pated every other hour and can bid less than 300 kW, but FDR is still more economical.
Participation in PFR is more attractive for the BESS, but of course requires that it
is in Western Denmark and is more relevant for future installations of storage units.
For all frequency regulation services considered, the eﬀect of altering the regulations
was investigated. Overall these studies showed that the current regulations do not
encourage energy storages’ participation.
A grid operator wishing to defer grid upgrades by peak shaving, should carefully
analyse the load curve which the BESS is going to shave and design a BESS to match
this. Generally, it was found that charging as soon as the load is below the set point
was the most reliable strategy. Load levelling adds additional value by reducing daily
peaks and shifting consumption to oﬀ-peak hours, but does not have additional direct
revenue streams and causes a shorter BESS lifetime. Therefore, load levelling is not
recommended.
Peak shaving alone is not an economically viable solution and therefore a combined
service consisting of peak shaving and frequency regulation is recommended in this
case.
For future BESS installations, the design of energy capacity and power capabilities
should be closely matched with the service(s) it aims to provide. Overall, the BESS
in Nordhavn has a too large power converter and/or too small energy capacity. In all
services but FDR, the Nordhavn BESS cannot utilise its full power capabilities.
Overall, none of the simulations were economically feasible, and require a large
decrease in Li-ion battery costs. Li-ion batteries are still a young technology and the
costs are going down. In the future, a potential business case may be much better
than it is currently.
7.4
Future work
The following introduces suggested future work:
• It was not possible to test the operating strategies on the real BESS in Nordhavn
due to delays in the project. Therefore, future work could be to test the most
interesting strategies, to validate them in reality.
• Generally none of the services were economically feasible alone, but participating
in multiple services may produce an economic strategy [2]. This work only
==PAGE:126==
110
7 Discussion and Conclusion
considers the combining peak shaving and FDR, but other combinations may
be favourable. Future work could include an investigation of how to optimally
combine the services.
• Overall it was concluded that the BESS was not ideal for any of the services
considered. Future work could include re-designing the BESS, so it is optimal
for the chosen service(s).
• The battery degradation model used is a simpliﬁcation and based on another
Li-ion battery. Future work could include the development of a more accurate
model which better reﬂects the ageing of the actual modules used in the BESS.
• Performing a socio-economic analysis could indicate whether the society has a
positive gain from the BESS installation. If this is the case, the government
might be interested in subsidising future installations, hopefully making the
private-economic analysis feasible.
==PAGE:127==
List of Figures
1.1
An overview of the 13 services batteries can provide [2]. . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
An overview of the many aspects considered in EnergyLab Nordhavn [3].
3
1.3
An overview of the three main frequency control groups and their timing
[5]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.4
The diﬀerent synchronous areas in Europe [7]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1
The layout and schematic of BESS components . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.2
The installed battery rack and inverter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.3
The estimated losses of the inverter, battery racks and LV panel. . . . .
14
2.4
The calender degradation for energy and power capacity as a function of
time in months. This applies to a cell with temperature of 25◦C. . . . .
16
2.5
The cyclic degradation for energy and power capacity as a function number
of cycles and the depth of discharge. This applies to a cell with temperature
of 25◦C and an average SOC at 50%. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.6
The relationship between the number of cycles, avg. cycle SOC and cycle
depth before reaching 20% energy capacity fade.
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.7
The cyclic ageing of the speciﬁc BESS modules provided by ABB.
. . .
20
3.1
The droops for FDR and FNR. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.2
The timing for FNR bids. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.3
The balancing prices in 2016. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.4
The average availability payments for FNR and FDR in 2016 . . . . . .
24
3.5
The frequency for 2016 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.6
The SOC boundaries for the 30-minute criterion as a function of the power
bid for the Nordhavn BESS. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.7
The degrees of freedom allowed in Germany for energy storage systems.
33
3.8
The availability payment in 2016 for PFR in DK1. . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.9
The timing of the daily auction for PFR.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.10 The droop for PFR in DK1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.11 The SOC boundaries for the 15-minute criterion as a function of the power
bid for the Nordhavn BESS. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
3.12 Illustration of when the breaks from frequency regulation are allowed. .
37
4.1
Simpliﬁed illustration of the two main topologies in Radius distribution
grid
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.2
The total power drawn on by the NGT08 and NGT65 radials. . . . . . .
45
==PAGE:128==
112
List of Figures
4.3
The two other grid locations considered when simulating the peak shaving
and load-levelling strategies. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.4
Load of the three grid locations for a typical week. . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.5
Illustration of the peak shaving concept. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.6
Illustration of how peak shaving can fail. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
4.7
The algorithm which ﬁnds the optimum set point.
. . . . . . . . . . . .
54
4.8
The average Elspot price in DK2 for each hour of the day in 2016. . . .
56
5.1
A simpliﬁed illustration how the NPV is calcualted and the aspects it can
include. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
5.2
Illustration of the balancing prices, λup and λdw, compared to the Elspot
price λS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
6.1
The 2016 revenue and NPV of the diﬀerent FNR strategies. . . . . . . .
67
6.2
The BESS power and SOC over the ﬁrst day of 2016 with continuous FNR
operation and a power bid of 630 kW. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
6.3
The theoretical SOC over the ﬁrst 15 days of 2016 with continuous FNR
operation and a power bid of 630 kW . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
6.4
The simulated operation when only providing up regulation for FNR for
5-7 January 2016. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
6.5
The unavailability and NPV as a function of the power oﬀer for unidirec-
tional FNR service. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
6.6
The simulated operation when providing 630 kW continuously for FNR
including a ±20 mHz deadband for 5-7 January 2016 . . . . . . . . . . .
74
6.7
The unavailability and NPV as a function of the power oﬀer for FNR
service including the ±20 mHz deadband. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
6.8
The BESS operation for 5-7 January 2016 with single hour FNR operation
(Does not include deadband). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
6.9
The BESS power and SOC for 5-7 January 2016 with single hour blocks
and a power oﬀer of 230 kW (Does not include deadband). . . . . . . . .
78
6.10 The unavailability and NPV as a function of the power oﬀer for block
participation (Does not include deadband).
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
6.11 The BESS power and SOC for 5-7 January 2016, when taking 15 min breaks
every time the SOC reaches 0/100%. Including the ±20 mHz deadband.
80
6.12 The unavailability and NPV as a function of the power oﬀer for FNR
service when allowed to take breaks (including the deadband).
. . . . .
81
6.13 The simulated FDR operation for 7-14 January, 2016 when oﬀering 630
kW.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
6.14 The NPV as a function of the FDR power bid.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
84
6.15 The 2016 revenue and NPV of the diﬀerent PFR strategies. . . . . . . .
85
6.16 The simulated PFR operation with a 630 kW bidirectional power oﬀer for
January 5-9, 2016. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
86
6.17 The simulated PFR operation for January 5-9, 2016 when only participating
in up regulation with 300 kW. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
88
6.18 The eﬀect on the SOC of including the diﬀerent DoF allowed in Germany.
Simulated for a 330 kW bidirectional oﬀer. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
89
==PAGE:129==
List of Figures
113
6.19 The simulated PFR operation with power oﬀers of 165 and 185 kW for
up and down regulation respectively for January 5-9, 2016 with deadband,
overfulﬁlment and provision rate DoFs. The oﬀers ensure the BESS SOC
lives up to the 15 min criteria at all times. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
90
6.20 The simulated PFR operation January 1, 2016 including all German degrees
of freedom: deadband, overfulﬁlment, provision rate and intraday trading.
630 kW is oﬀer for both up and down regulation and the intraday trades
are 200 kW.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
91
6.21 The simulated PFR operation January 1, 2016 including all German degrees
of freedom: deadband, overfulﬁlment, provision rate and intraday trading.
The variable values are: Poffer,dw/up = ±325 kW, PID = ±200 kW and
SOCdeadband = SOCgoal ± 5% . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
92
6.22 The simulated PFR operation January 1, 2016 including all German degrees
of freedom: deadband, overfulﬁlment, provision rate and intraday trading
when the BESS only participates in up regulation. The variable values are:
Poffer,up = 500 kW, PID = ±300 kW and SOCdeadband = SOCgoal −5%
93
6.23 The low-price method and the double peak characteristic. . . . . . . . .
95
6.24 The power consumption and the optimum set point for 2016 using the
low-price charging strategy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
96
6.25 The BESS operation for the load in Nordhavn for 3 weeks of 2016. . . .
97
6.26 Illustration of the low-set point strategy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
98
6.27 Illustration of the low-degradation method and resulting SOC curve for
Nordhavn. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
99
6.28 Resulting BESS operation for the combined FDR and peak shaving opera-
tion for two weeks of 2016.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
102
6.29 The load levelling set points for the three diﬀerent load curves for the ﬁrst
5 weeks of 2016 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
104
A.1 The simulated BESS operation when oﬀering 630 kW for FNR under
current regulations for 5-7 January 2016.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
123
A.2 The simulated BESS operation when oﬀering 630 kW, but only providing
up regulation for 5-7 January 2016. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
124
A.3 The simulated BESS operation when oﬀering 450 kW, but only providing
up regulation for 5-7 January 2016. The oﬀer is optimised to maximise the
NPV.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
125
A.4 The simulated BESS operation when oﬀering 630 kW but only providing
down regulation for 5-7 January 2016. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
126
A.5 The simulated BESS operation when oﬀering 350 kW but only providing
down regulation for 5-7 January 2016. The oﬀer is optimised to maximise
the NPV. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
127
A.6 The simulated BESS operation when oﬀering 630 kW for FNR including a
±20 mHz deadband for 5-7 January 2016. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
128
A.7 The simulated BESS operation when oﬀering 350 kW for FNR including
a ±20 mHz deadband for 5-7 January 2016. The oﬀer is optimised to
maximise the NPV.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
129
==PAGE:130==
114
List of Figures
A.8 The simulated BESS operation when oﬀering 630 kW for FNR every other
hour for 5-7 January 2016. In the non-FNR hours, the BESS re-establishes
its SOC. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
130
A.9 The simulated BESS operation when oﬀering 300 kW for FNR every other
hour for 5-7 January 2016. In the non-FNR hours, the BESS re-establishes
its SOC. The oﬀer is optimised to maximise the NPV. . . . . . . . . . .
131
A.10 The simulated BESS operation when oﬀering 630 kW for FNR every other
hour for 5-7 January 2016. In the non-FNR hours, the BESS re-establishes
its SOC. This oﬀer is designed to ensure a 100% reliable service.
. . . .
132
A.11 The simulated BESS operation when oﬀering 630 kW for FNR for 5-7
January 2016, where the BESS take a 15 minute break if it reaches a SOC
of 0 or 100%. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
133
A.12 The simulated BESS operation when oﬀering 400 kW for FNR for 5-7
January 2016, where the BESS take a 15 minute break if it reaches a SOC
of 0 or 100%. The oﬀer is optimised to maximise the NPV. . . . . . . .
134
A.13 The simulated FDR operation when oﬀering 630 kW for 7-14 January 2016
135
A.14 The simulated FDR operation when oﬀering 630 kW for 7-14 January 2016
and with a re-establishing SOC of 20%.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
136
A.15 The simulated FDR operation when oﬀering 8.8 MW for 7-14 January
2016. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
137
A.16 The simulated PFR operation January 5-9, 2016 when oﬀer 630 kW for
both up and down regulation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
138
A.17 The simulated PFR operation January 5-9, 2016 when oﬀering 155 kW and
180 kW for up and down regulation respectively. The bids are optimised
so the BESS always stays within the SOC boundaries. . . . . . . . . . .
139
A.18 The simulated PFR operation January 5-9, 2016 when oﬀering 300 kW for
up down regulation. The bid is optimised by maximising the NPV. . . .
140
A.19 The simulated PFR operation January 5-9, 2016 including the three Ger-
many degrees of freedom: Deadband, overfulﬁlment and provision case.
The BESS oﬀers 630 kW for both up and down regulation.
. . . . . . .
141
A.20 The simulated PFR operation January 5-9, 2016 including the three Ger-
many degrees of freedom: Deadband, overfulﬁlment and provision case.
The BESS oﬀers 165 kW and 185 kW for up and down regulation respec-
tively. The bids are optimised so the BESS always stays within the SOC
boundaries. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
142
A.21 The simulated PFR operation January 5-9, 2016 including the four Germany
degrees of freedom: Deadband, overfulﬁlment, provision case and intra-day
transactions. The BESS oﬀers 630 kW for both up and down regulation.
143
A.22 The simulated PFR operation January 5-9, 2016 including the four Germany
degrees of freedom: Deadband, overfulﬁlment, provision case and intra-day
transactions. The BESS oﬀers 325 kW for both up and down regulation.
The bid is optimised so the BESS always stays within the SOC boundaries.
144
A.23 The simulated PFR operation January 5-9, 2016 including the four Germany
degrees of freedom: Deadband, overfulﬁlment, provision case and intra-day
transactions. The BESS oﬀers 500 kW for up regulation only. The bid is
optimised so the BESS always stays within the SOC boundaries. . . . .
145
==PAGE:131==
List of Figures
115
A.24 The simulated peak shaving operation for the Nordhavn radial using the
low-set point charging method. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
146
A.25 The simulated peak shaving operation for the industry radial using the
low-set point charging method. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
147
A.26 The simulated peak shaving operation for the vacation home radial using
the low-set point charging method. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
148
A.27 The simulated peak shaving operation for the Nordhavn radial using the
low-price charging method.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
149
A.28 The simulated peak shaving operation for the industry radial using the
low-price charging method.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
150
A.29 The simulated peak shaving operation for the vacation home radial using
the low-price charging method. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
151
A.30 The simulated peak shaving operation for the Nordhavn radial using the
low-degradation charging method.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
152
A.31 The simulated peak shaving operation for the industry radial using the
low-degradation charging method.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
153
A.32 The simulated peak shaving operation for the vacation home radial using
the low-degradation charging method. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
154
A.33 The simulated load-levelling operation for the Nordhavn radial. There is
one set point for each set of 5 weekdays and one set point for each weekend.
155
A.34 The simulated load-levelling operation for the industry radial. There is
one set point for each week. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
156
A.35 The simulated load-levelling operation for the vacation home radial. There
is one set point for each set of 5 weekdays and one set point for each
weekend. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
157
==PAGE:132==
List of Tables
2.1
The main factors aﬀecting cyclic and calendar ageing [17] . . . . . . . .
15
3.1
Relevant frequency characteristics for to FNR operation considering 2016
data. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.2
Relevant frequency characteristics for to FDR operation considering 2016
data. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.3
The frequency quality deﬁning parameters [34]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.1
Summary of the share of energy consumption based on the main contribut-
ing customer groups. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.2
The parameters used in the peak shaving algorithm. . . . . . . . . . . .
51
5.1
Delaying an investment will result in savings due to discounting. Delaying a
5 million DKK investment 9 years will decrease the present value investment
by 1.56 million DKK.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
5.2
The economic parameters for CAPEX and O&M costs [1]. . . . . . . . .
63
5.3
A ﬁctional tax calculation example to illustrate the process. . . . . . . .
65
6.1
The results from key FNR simulations.
Case 1: Current regulations, 630 kW bidirectional power oﬀer
Case 2: Up regulation only with 630 kW power oﬀer
Case 3: Down regulation only with 630 kW power oﬀer
Case 4: Down regulation only with 350 kW power oﬀer
Case 5: Including a ±20 mHz deadband with a 630 kW power oﬀer
Case 6: Including a ±20 mHz deadband with a 350 kW power oﬀer
Case 7: 1 hour block operation with a 630 kW power oﬀer
Case 8: 1 hour block operation with a 230 kW power oﬀer
Case 9: 1 hour block operation with a 300 kW power oﬀer
Case 10: Continuous operation taking breaks to re-establishing when
necessary with 630 kW power oﬀer
Case 11: Continuous operation taking breaks to re-establishing when
necessary with 400 kW power oﬀer
(*): The economic values for cases 2-4 are not be comparable with the rest.
68
6.2
Summary of results from FDR simulation for 2016. . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
==PAGE:133==
List of Tables
117
6.3
The results from key PFR simulations.
Case 1: Current regulations, 630 kW bidirectional power oﬀer
Case 2: Current regulations, optimised up and down regulation bids
Case 3: Current regulations, up regulation only and optimised power oﬀer
Case 4: Including overfulﬁlment, provision rate and deadband degrees of
freedom from Germany, optimised bid sizes
Case 5: Including all degrees of freedom from Germany, optimised variables
Case 6: Including all degrees of freedom from Germany, up-regulation only
and optimised variables
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
84
6.4
The results from peak shaving simulations. Three diﬀerent algorithms are
used for the three load curves, giving 9 simulations.
. . . . . . . . . . .
94
6.5
The results from the simulations for the combined service of peak shaving
and FDR. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
101
6.6
The results from load levelling simulations.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
102
==PAGE:134==
118
==PAGE:135==
Bibliography
[1]
B. Zakeri and S. Syri, “Electrical energy storage systems: A comparative life cycle
cost analysis,” Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, vol. 42, pp. 569–596,
2015.
[2]
G. Fitzgerald, J. Mandel, J. Morris, and H. Touati, “The economics of battery
energy storage - how multi-use, customer-sited batteries deliver the most services
and value to the customers and the grid,” 2015.
[3]
EnergyLab Nordhavn. [Online]. Available: http://energylabnordhavn.weebly.com/
[4]
ABB,
“ABB
to
supply
battery
system
to
Copenhagen’s
Nordhavn,”
Sep.
2016.
[Online].
Available:
http://www02.abb.com/global/abbzh/
abbzh251.nsf!OpenDatabase&db=/global/abbzh/abbzh250.nsf&v=553E&e=
us&url=/global/seitp/seitp202.nsf/0/20E897767A7854BDC125803B00478C01!
OpenDocument
[5]
Amprion, “Procurement of control power and energy in Germany.” [Online].
Available: http://www.amprion.net/en/control-energy
[6]
ENTSO-E, “Regional Groups,” 2015. [Online]. Available: https://www.entsoe.
eu/about-entso-e/system-operations/regional-groups/Pages/default.aspx
[7]
——, “Who is ENTSO-E,” 2015. [Online]. Available: https://www.entsoe.eu/
about-entso-e/Pages/default.aspx
[8]
Nord Pool, “The Power Market.” [Online]. Available: http://www.nordpoolspot.
com/How-does-it-work/
[9]
Energy Storage Association, “Energy Storage,” 2017. [Online]. Available:
http://energystorage.org/energy-storage
[10] D. K. Chandrashekhara and J. Østergaard, “Battery energy storage technology
for power systems-an overview,” Electric Power Systems Research, vol. 79, no. 4,
pp. 511–520, 2009.
[11] D.-I. Stroe, V. Knap, M. Swierczynski, A.-I. Stroe, and R. Teodorescu, “Suggested
operation of grid-connected lithium-ion battery energy storage system for primary
frequency regulation: Lifetime perspective,” ... Ieee Energy Conversion Congress
and Exposition, pp. 1105–1111, 2015.
==PAGE:136==
120
Bibliography
[12] A. Joseph and M. Shahidehpour, “Battery storage systems in electric power
systems,” 2006 Ieee Power Engineering Society General Meeting, pp. 8 pp., 8 pp.,
2006.
[13] A. Zeh, M. Müller, M. Naumann, H. Hesse, A. Jossen, and R. Witzmann,
“Fundamentals of using battery energy storage systems to provide primary control
reserves in germany,” Batteries, vol. 2, no. 3, p. 29, 2016.
[14] S. S. Zhang, “The eﬀect of the charging protocol on the cycle life of a li-ion
battery,” Journal of Power Sources, vol. 161, no. 2, pp. 1385–1391, 2006.
[15] J. Vetter, P. Novak, M. Wagner, C. Veit, K. Moller, J. Besenhard, M. Winter,
M. Wohlfahrt-Mehrens, C. Vogler, and A. Hammouche, “Ageing mechanisms in
lithium-ion batteries,” Journal of Power Sources, vol. 147, no. 1-2, pp. 269–281,
2005.
[16] D.-I. Stroe, M. Swierczynski, A.-I. Stan, R. Teodorescu, and S. J. Andreasen,
“Accelerated lifetime testing methodology for lifetime estimation of lithium-ion
batteries used in augmented wind power plants,” IEEE Transactions on Industry
Applications, vol. 50, no. 6, pp. 4006–4017, 2014.
[17] D.-I. Stroe, M. Swierczynski, A.-I. Stroe, R. Teodorescu, R. Laerke, and P. C.
Kjaer, “Degradation behaviour of lithium-ion batteries based on ﬁeld measured
frequency regulation mission proﬁle,” ... Ieee Energy Conversion Congress and
Exposition, pp. 14–21, 2015.
[18] B. Xu, “Degradation-limiting optimization of battery energy storage systems
operation,” 2013.
[19] M. Musallam and C. M. Johnson, “An eﬃcient implementation of the rainﬂow
counting algorithm for life consumption estimation,” 2012.
[20] C. T. Andreas Horst Venzke, Carsten Sass Husum and S. H. Toghroljerdi, “Battery
Modelling and Simulation,” Dec. 2015.
[21] A. Chalmoukis, “Optimal energy management of battery storage for multiple
services,” 2016.
[22] J. Wang, “Battery impact study on stressed distribution grid,” 2016.
[23] M. Blumensaat, “Control strategies for battery energy storage system services,”
2016.
[24] M. Swierczynski, D.-J. Stroe, A.-I. Stan, R. Teodorescu, R. Laerke, and P. C.
Kjaer, “Field tests experience from 1.6mw/400kwh li-ion battery energy storage
system providing primary frequency regulation service,” Ieee Pes Innovative
Smart Grid Technologies Conference Europe, p. 6695277, 2013.
[25] B. Xu, Y. Dvorkin, D. S. Kirschen, C. A. Silva-Monroy, and J.-P. Watson, “A
comparison of policies on the participation of storage in u.s. frequency regulation
markets,” 2016.
==PAGE:137==
Bibliography
121
[26] ABB, “Energy Storage Inverter ESI-I Installation, operation and maintenance
instructions,” 2016. [Online]. Available:
http://new.abb.com/high-voltage/
capacitors/lv/energy-storage-inverters-esi
[27] Fire Eater, “Inergen - kort fortalt.” [Online]. Available:
http://www.ﬁre-
eater.com/da/produkter/onshore-systemer-dk/hvorfor-inergen
[28] Energinet.dk, “Energinet.dk’s ancillary services strategy,” 2011.
[29] ENTSO-E,
“Nordic
Balancing
Philosophy,”
Jun.
2016.
[Online].
Avail-
able:
https://www.entsoe.eu/Documents/Publications/SOC/Nordic/Nordic_
Balancing_Philosophy_160616_Final_external.pdf#search=NOIS
[30] Energinet.dk, “Ancillary services to be delivered in denmark - tender conditions,”
2012.
[31] ——, “Introduktion til systemydelser,” 2016.
[32] ——, “Produkter,” Oct. 2016. [Online]. Available: http://energinet.dk/DA/El/
Saadan-driver-vi-elsystemet/Produkter/Sider/default.aspx
[33] Energinet.dk, personal communication, 2017.
[34] ENTSO-E, “Establishing a guideline on electricity transmission system operation
(provisional),” 2016.
[35] A. S.-A.-E.-E. Karsten Neuhoﬀ, Nolan Ritter and P. Vassilopoulos, “Intraday
markets for power: Discretizing the continuous trading?” 2016.
[36] Nord Pool, “Intraday in Germany.” [Online]. Available: http://www.nordpoolspot.
com/TAS/nord-pool-spot-intraday/continuous-intraday-in-germany/
[37] ENTSO-E,
“System
Operation,”
2015.
[Online].
Avail-
able: https://www.entsoe.eu/major-projects/network-code-development/system-
operation/Pages/default.aspx
[38] United States of America Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, “Frequency
Regulation Compensation in the Organized Wholesale Power Markets (Order
755),” Oct. 2011. [Online]. Available: https://www.ferc.gov/whats-new/comm-
meet/2011/102011/E-28.pdf
[39] Energinet.dk, “Energinet.dk’s ancillary services strategy 2015-2017,” 2015.
[40] D. Hofstrand and M. Holz-Clause, “What is a feasibility study?” 2009.
[41] Mininitry of Finance, “Ny og lavere samfundsøkonomisk diskonteringsrente,” 2013.
[Online]. Available: https://www.fm.dk/nyheder/pressemeddelelser/2013/05/ny-
og-lavere-samfundsoekonomisk-diskonteringsrente/
[42] IAC, “Introduction To Net Present Value And Internal Rate Of Return,” 2017.
[Online]. Available: http://www.investopedia.com
==PAGE:138==
122
Bibliography
[43] Danish Energy Agency, “Forudsætninger for samfundsøkonomiske analyser på
energiområdet,” 2016. [Online]. Available:
https://ens.dk/sites/ens.dk/ﬁles/
Analyser/samfundsoekonomiske_beregningsforudsaetninger_2016_v3.pdf
[44] Energinet.dk,
“Regulation
C2:
The
balancing
market
and
balance
settlement,”
Dec.
2008.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.energinet.dk/
SiteCollectionDocuments/Engelske%20dokumenter/El/Regulation%20C2%
20The%20balancing%20market%20and%20balance%20settlement.pdf
[45] Skatteministeriet, “Danish Income Tax Rates 2014-2017,” Jan. 2017. [Online].
Available:
http://www.skm.dk/english/facts-and-ﬁgures/danish-income-tax-
rates-2014-2017
[46] ——, “Afskrivningsloven,” Nov. 2016. [Online]. Available: http://www.skm.dk/
skattetal/satser/satser-og-beloebsgraenser/afskrivningsloven
[47] ——, “Selskabsskatteloven,” Nov. 2016. [Online]. Available: http://www.skm.dk/
skattetal/satser/satser-og-beloebsgraenser/selskabsskatteloven
[48] Danish Energy Association, “Elforsyningens nettariﬀer & prise pr. 1. januar 2014,”
2014.
==PAGE:139==
Appendix A
FNR operation plots
Figure A.1: The simulated BESS operation when oﬀering 630 kW for FNR under
current regulations for 5-7 January 2016.
==PAGE:140==
124
Appendix A
Figure A.2: The simulated BESS operation when oﬀering 630 kW, but only providing
up regulation for 5-7 January 2016.
==PAGE:141==
FNR operation plots
125
Figure A.3: The simulated BESS operation when oﬀering 450 kW, but only providing
up regulation for 5-7 January 2016. The oﬀer is optimised to maximise the NPV.
==PAGE:142==
126
Appendix A
Figure A.4: The simulated BESS operation when oﬀering 630 kW but only providing
down regulation for 5-7 January 2016.
==PAGE:143==
FNR operation plots
127
Figure A.5: The simulated BESS operation when oﬀering 350 kW but only providing
down regulation for 5-7 January 2016. The oﬀer is optimised to maximise the NPV.
==PAGE:144==
128
Appendix A
Figure A.6: The simulated BESS operation when oﬀering 630 kW for FNR including
a ±20 mHz deadband for 5-7 January 2016.
==PAGE:145==
FNR operation plots
129
Figure A.7: The simulated BESS operation when oﬀering 350 kW for FNR including
a ±20 mHz deadband for 5-7 January 2016. The oﬀer is optimised to maximise the
NPV.
==PAGE:146==
130
Appendix A
Figure A.8: The simulated BESS operation when oﬀering 630 kW for FNR every other
hour for 5-7 January 2016. In the non-FNR hours, the BESS re-establishes its SOC.
==PAGE:147==
FNR operation plots
131
Figure A.9: The simulated BESS operation when oﬀering 300 kW for FNR every other
hour for 5-7 January 2016. In the non-FNR hours, the BESS re-establishes its SOC.
The oﬀer is optimised to maximise the NPV.
==PAGE:148==
132
Appendix A
Figure A.10: The simulated BESS operation when oﬀering 630 kW for FNR every
other hour for 5-7 January 2016. In the non-FNR hours, the BESS re-establishes its
SOC. This oﬀer is designed to ensure a 100% reliable service.
==PAGE:149==
FNR operation plots
133
Figure A.11: The simulated BESS operation when oﬀering 630 kW for FNR for 5-7
January 2016, where the BESS take a 15 minute break if it reaches a SOC of 0 or
100%.
==PAGE:150==
134
Appendix A
Figure A.12: The simulated BESS operation when oﬀering 400 kW for FNR for 5-7
January 2016, where the BESS take a 15 minute break if it reaches a SOC of 0 or
100%. The oﬀer is optimised to maximise the NPV.
==PAGE:151==
FDR operation plots
135
FDR operation plots
Figure A.13: The simulated FDR operation when oﬀering 630 kW for 7-14 January
2016
==PAGE:152==
136
Appendix A
Figure A.14: The simulated FDR operation when oﬀering 630 kW for 7-14 January
2016 and with a re-establishing SOC of 20%.
==PAGE:153==
FDR operation plots
137
Figure A.15: The simulated FDR operation when oﬀering 8.8 MW for 7-14 January
2016.
==PAGE:154==
138
Appendix A
PFR operation plots
Figure A.16: The simulated PFR operation January 5-9, 2016 when oﬀer 630 kW for
both up and down regulation.
==PAGE:155==
PFR operation plots
139
Figure A.17: The simulated PFR operation January 5-9, 2016 when oﬀering 155 kW
and 180 kW for up and down regulation respectively. The bids are optimised so the
BESS always stays within the SOC boundaries.
==PAGE:156==
140
Appendix A
Figure A.18: The simulated PFR operation January 5-9, 2016 when oﬀering 300 kW
for up down regulation. The bid is optimised by maximising the NPV.
==PAGE:157==
PFR operation plots
141
Figure A.19: The simulated PFR operation January 5-9, 2016 including the three
Germany degrees of freedom: Deadband, overfulﬁlment and provision case. The BESS
oﬀers 630 kW for both up and down regulation.
==PAGE:158==
142
Appendix A
Figure A.20: The simulated PFR operation January 5-9, 2016 including the three
Germany degrees of freedom: Deadband, overfulﬁlment and provision case. The BESS
oﬀers 165 kW and 185 kW for up and down regulation respectively. The bids are
optimised so the BESS always stays within the SOC boundaries.
==PAGE:159==
PFR operation plots
143
Figure A.21: The simulated PFR operation January 5-9, 2016 including the four
Germany degrees of freedom: Deadband, overfulﬁlment, provision case and intra-day
transactions. The BESS oﬀers 630 kW for both up and down regulation.
==PAGE:160==
144
Appendix A
Figure A.22: The simulated PFR operation January 5-9, 2016 including the four
Germany degrees of freedom: Deadband, overfulﬁlment, provision case and intra-day
transactions. The BESS oﬀers 325 kW for both up and down regulation. The bid is
optimised so the BESS always stays within the SOC boundaries.
==PAGE:161==
PFR operation plots
145
Figure A.23: The simulated PFR operation January 5-9, 2016 including the four
Germany degrees of freedom: Deadband, overfulﬁlment, provision case and intra-day
transactions. The BESS oﬀers 500 kW for up regulation only. The bid is optimised so
the BESS always stays within the SOC boundaries.
==PAGE:162==
146
Appendix A
Peak shaving operation plots
Figure A.24: The simulated peak shaving operation for the Nordhavn radial using the
low-set point charging method.
==PAGE:163==
Peak shaving operation plots
147
Figure A.25: The simulated peak shaving operation for the industry radial using the
low-set point charging method.
==PAGE:164==
148
Appendix A
Figure A.26: The simulated peak shaving operation for the vacation home radial using
the low-set point charging method.
==PAGE:165==
Peak shaving operation plots
149
Figure A.27: The simulated peak shaving operation for the Nordhavn radial using the
low-price charging method.
==PAGE:166==
150
Appendix A
Figure A.28: The simulated peak shaving operation for the industry radial using the
low-price charging method.
==PAGE:167==
Peak shaving operation plots
151
Figure A.29: The simulated peak shaving operation for the vacation home radial using
the low-price charging method.
==PAGE:168==
152
Appendix A
Figure A.30: The simulated peak shaving operation for the Nordhavn radial using the
low-degradation charging method.
==PAGE:169==
Peak shaving operation plots
153
Figure A.31: The simulated peak shaving operation for the industry radial using the
low-degradation charging method.
==PAGE:170==
154
Appendix A
Figure A.32: The simulated peak shaving operation for the vacation home radial using
the low-degradation charging method.
==PAGE:171==
Load-levelling operation plots
155
Load-levelling operation plots
Figure A.33: The simulated load-levelling operation for the Nordhavn radial. There is
one set point for each set of 5 weekdays and one set point for each weekend.
==PAGE:172==
156
Appendix A
Figure A.34: The simulated load-levelling operation for the industry radial. There is
one set point for each week.
==PAGE:173==
Load-levelling operation plots
157
Figure A.35: The simulated load-levelling operation for the vacation home radial.
There is one set point for each set of 5 weekdays and one set point for each weekend.
==PAGE:174==
DTU Electrical Engineering 
Department of Electrical Engineering 
Technical University of Denmark 
Ørsteds Plads 
Building 348 
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby 
Tel: (+45) 45 25 38 00 
www.elektro.dtu.dk 
 
