==PAGE:1==
The Pozzolanic Reaction
of Alusilica
Stig S. Kj├”r
Master Thesis
Spring 2017
==PAGE:2==
The Pozzolanic Reaction
of Alusilica
This report was prepared by:
Stig Sande Kj├”r
Surpovisor:
Ole Mejlhede Jensen
DTU Civil Engineering
Material sciences
Technical University of Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
Tel: +45 4525 1700
Project Period:
January 2017 - June 2017
ECTS:
30
Education:
M.Sc. Eng
Field:
Material sciences
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial
fulllment of the requirements for
graduation in the above education
at the Technical University of Denmark.
I
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This report was written during Spring 2017 at the Section of Construction Materi-
als, DTU Civil Engineering. The report is the conclusion and presentation of a large
amount of data, amassed though several experiments.
The author would like to thank the sta the Section of Material Sciences for their
service and support in the project period. The author also wishes to extend a special
thanks to Professor Ole Mejlhede Jensen at DTU Civil Engineering, for the guidance
provided in the project period.
Finally, a further special thanks you is extended to master students at DTU Civil
Engineering, Benjamin Ebert and Rasmus Bundgaard, for assistance and advice over
the years of our studies.
Stig Sande Kj├”r
Signature
Date
II
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
Aluminium Fluoride, AlF3, is an essential catalyst, that reduces the temperature re-
quired to extract aluminium through electrolysis in the modern aluminium industry.
The production of this catalyst comes with the precipitation of a snowy white and
severely agglomerated by-product called Alusilica, consisting mainly of amorphous
SiO2, 'polluted' by a small amount of Aluminium Fluoride.
Interest was sparked in 2015 of the product's usability as a pozzolan in cement hydra-
tion, do to its high amount of amorphous SiO2, similar to silica fume. A study of the
eects of Alusilica on the strength development of mortar samples was conducted. The
study found, that the content of AlF3, albeit small, had a severely retarding eect on
the strength development of mortar. Therefore, a process of passivating the AlF3 was
developed, to allow the amorphous SiO2 to react freely in a cement paste.
The ndings of the 2015 studies have served as the inspiration for this project, in
which the pozzolanic reaction of Alusilica is studied by means of measuring chemical
shrinkage of cement pastes at varying temperatures. Chemical shrinkage is directly
connected to the reactions occurring in the paste, and thus, is a good indicator of the
reactivity. Furthermore, the eect of higher alkalinity on the reactivity is studied by
mixing the cement paste with an NaOH solution.
The studies in this report found, that Alusilica increases the early hydration of a ce-
ment paste, and also contributes to a higher value of chemical shrinkage, as compared
to a reference. Increased hydration temperatures were found to increase the pozzolanic
reactivity of Alusilica in a paste. No apparent activation of Alusilica was observed,
when using NaOH as articial pore solution, thus indicating, that Alusilica is not
activated further by increased alkalinity.
Analyses by TGA/DSC on hydrated samples further indicated, that Alusilica exhibits
pozzolanic properties, that are enhanced with higher temperatures of hydration. This
was concluded based on the amount of Calcium Hydroxide in the sample at a given
hydration time.
The microscopic agglomerated structure of Alusilica was studied via SEM, and it was
concluded, that while the individual particles of Alusilica are approximately 1-2┬Ąm in
size, the agglomerates were as large as 150┬Ąm. It is suspected, that if the agglomerates
are dispersed, the pozzolanic reactivity of Alusilica will increase.
III
==PAGE:5==
Sammenfatning
Aluminiumuorid, AlF3, er en v├”sentlig katalysator, der reducere temperaturen n├Ėd-
vendig for at kunne udvende aluminium gennem elektrolyse i den moderne alumini-
umindustri. Produktionen af denne katalysator, udf├”lder et sne hvidt og st├”rkt ag-
glomereret biprodukt kaldet Alusilica, best├źende mest af amorf SiO2, 'forurenet' med
en lille m├”ngde Aluminiumuorid.
Dette gav anledning til at unders├Ėge produktets brugbarhed som puzzolan under ce-
ment hydratisering i 2015, grundet dets h├Ėje indhold af amorf SiO2, svarende til in-
dholdet i mikrosilica. Et studie over Alusilicas eect p├ź styrke udviklingen af m├Ėrtel
blev udf├Ėrt. Forskningen viste, at det lille indhold af AlF3 havde en stor forsinkende
indydelse p├ź styrke udviklingen af m├Ėrtel. P├ź baggrund af dette blev en process til at
passivere indholdet af AlF3 udviklet, s├źdan at indholdet af amorf SiO2 frit kan reagere
i cement pasta.
Resultaterne af unders├Ėgelsen i 2015 har bevirket som inspiration for dette projekt,
hvor den puzzolanske reaktion af Alusilica unders├Ėges ved at m├źle det kemiske svind af
cement pasta ved forskellige temperature. Kemisk svind er direkte forbundet med de
reaktioner der forekommer i pastaen, og er derfor en god indikator for dets reaktivitet.
Yderligere er eekten af h├Ėj alkalinitet p├ź reaktiviteten blevet unders├Ėgt ved at blande
cementpasta med en opl├Ėsning af NaOH.
Resultaterne fra dette projekt viser, at Alusilica ├Ėger den tidlige hydratisering af ce-
mentpasta , samt bidrager til en h├Ėjere kemisk svind, samlignet med en reference. En
├Ėget hydratiserings temperatur gav en for├Ėgelse af den puzzolanske reaktion af Alusil-
ica i pastaen. Ingen tydelig aktiverings energi for Alusilica blev observeret, da der
blev benyttet NaOH som kunstige pore opl├Ėsning, hvilket indikere at Alusilica ikke
aktiveres yderligere af en ├Ėget alkalinitet.
Analyse med TGA/DSC p├ź hydratiserede pr├Ėver viste yderligere, at Alusilica udviser
puzzolanske egenskaber, som er styket ved h├Ėjere hydratiserings temperature. Dette
var konkluderet p├ź baggrund af m├”ngden af calciumhydroxid i pr├Ėverne p├ź et givent
tidspunkt.
Allusilicas mikroskopiske agglomererede struktur blev unders├Ėgt ved brug af SEM,
hvormed det blev konkluderet, at de individuele Alusilica har en st├Ėrrelse p├ź omkring
1-2┬Ąm, mens agglomeraterne var p├ź st├Ėrrelse med 150┬Ąm. Det forventes at, hvis ag-
glomoraterne blev dispergeres, vil Alusilicas puzzolanske activitet ├Ėges.
IV
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
II
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
III
Sammenfatning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
IV
1
Introduction
1
2
Theory
3
1
Alusilica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Cement hydration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
3
Pozzolanic reactions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
4
The eect of alkalinity on cement hydration
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
5
Chemical shrinkage of cement pastes. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
5.1
Eect of temperature on chemical shrinkage . . . . . . . . . . .
11
6
Thermogravimetric Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3
Materials and Method
14
1
Chemical shrinkage of paste samples
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
1.1
Gravimetry setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
1.2
Density of paran oil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
1.3
Chemical shrinkage of standard mixes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
1.4
Chemical shrinkage of alkali boosted mixes . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2
Experimentation with measurement phenomena . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
2.1
Measurements of external factors
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
2.2
Temperature development in the cement paste . . . . . . . . . .
27
3
Thermogravimetric Analyses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4
SEM imaging of Alusilica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4
Results and discussion
31
1
Chemical shrinkage of standard mixes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
1.1
Reference mix . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
1.2
10% Alusilica mix . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
1.3
Summarising comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
2
Chemical shrinkage of alkali boosted mixes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
2.1
Reference mix . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
2.2
10% Alusilica mix . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
2.3
Comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
3
Inuence of various phenomena on the data measured . . . . . . . . . .
48
3.1
Eect of handling and operation of the setup on the measured
weight . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
3.2
Temperature development in submerged samples . . . . . . . . .
50
3.3
Results from thermohygrograph . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
V
==PAGE:7==
4
TGA results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
5
SEM imaging . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
5
Conclusion
60
Bibliography
62
Appendices
65
A Alusilica specications
65
B Particle size analysis SiO2
66
C Particle size analysis SiO2 + CaO
67
D TGA/DSC Results
68
E Eect of handling on weight measurements
88
F Thermohygrograph
92
VI
==PAGE:8==
1 | Introduction
The modern aluminium industry is reliant on the production of the catalyst Aluminium
Fluoride, AlF3, which reduces the temperature required to extract aluminium metal
through electrolysis[? ]. This, in turn, reduces both energy and production costs, and
makes aluminium metal available to the general public.
One such provider of this catalyst is the Swedish-based company, Aluuor AB who
produces 24.000 tons of the product on a yearly basis. CITE During the production
of AlF3, however, a by-product called Alusilica is precipitated, which consists mainly
of amorphous Silicon Dioxide, SiO2. This snowy white by-product is stored in large
quantities, and serves its purpose as a raw material in the chemical industry and in
cement production.
Due to Alusilica having a high content of amorphous SiO2, investigations of the poz-
zolanic properties of the material were conducted in 2015, with the intent of examining
the eects of Alusilica on the compressive strength of mortar cylinders. CITE The
investigations found, that a residual AlF3 component of untreated Alusilica resulted
in severe retardation of strength development over two months of hydration. How-
ever, by treating the Alusilica and thereby removing the aforementioned component,
an increase in compressive strength was found, when compared to a reference mortar.
These ndings were the foundation of the investigations into the pozzolanic properties
of Alusilica, and has allowed for the further work in this report.
The work in this report focuses on the pozzolanic reaction of Alusilica, and seeks to
uncover an understanding of the reactivity of the material in alkaline environments
such as hydrating cement paste. For this project, Aluuor AB has provided a version
of Alusilica, where the uoride component has been neutralised through a chemical
treatment. Thus, the retarding properties of uoride on cement hydration are not
expected to persist in the experiments of this report. Rather, the actual pozzolanic
properties of the SiO2 component of Alusilica are expected to become apparent. It
is of interest to gain insight into the activation energy of the pozzolanic reaction of
Alusilica through experimentation, since the material may have a larger eciency at
higher temperatures.
The main part of the work conducted in this report revolves around the measurement
of chemical shrinkage of cement paste in isolated environments of varying temperature
and with free absorption of water. Chemical shrinkage is directly linked to the reac-
tivity of the components in a cement paste mix, which may be used to determine an
activation energy of Alusilica. Further work in this report sees the use of Thermogravi-
metric Analysis in order to nd the degree of hydration of a particular paste sample.
1
==PAGE:9==
This report focuses on the continued studies of Alusilica as a pozzolan in cementitious
materials, and its inuence on chemical shrinkage and hydration in cement paste.
2
==PAGE:10==
2 | Theory
1
Alusilica
Alusilica is a production by-product of Aluminium Fluoride, AlF3, at Aluuor AB
in Sweden. The product is a ne white powder, which consists mainly of amorphous
SiO2, see Appendix A. After removal from the production via centrifuge, the product
is left with a natural moisture content, keeping the particles from becoming airborne,
and a minor content of AlF3. The inhalation of both amorphous and crystalline silica
is a known cause of silicosis [1]. However, when the particles are kept from becoming
airborne, no other apparent toxicities remain. This, in turn, means that the product
is quite safe to handle in its moist state.
Figure 1.1: Alusilica as it appears in storage at Aluuor AB in Sweden.
The content of AlF3 is approximately 8% by weight before any treatment of the ma-
terial is performed.
Fluorides have a documented eect on the early properties of
hydrating cement. They have been shown to induce a retarding eect on cement reac-
tivity and thereby reductions in early strength development [2]. Thus, the content of
AlF3 is undesirable, if the product is to nd purpose as a pozzolan. For this report,
Aluuor AB has treated the product beforehand, in an eort to passivise the uoride.
This is done by adding quicklime, CaO, to the product and mixing it with water, thus
binding the uoride as CaF2 through the following reaction:
3
==PAGE:11==
CaO + H2O ŌłÆŌåÆCa(OH)2
(1.1)
2AlF3 + 3Ca(OH)2 ŌłÆŌåÆ3CaF2 + 2Al(OH)3
(1.2)
During cement hydration, Ca(OH)2 is formed naturally, and thus, the above reaction
would occur in a cement paste with an added amount of untreated Alusilica. In such a
case, the inactive product CaF2 would form on the outer limits of a hydrating cement
particle, thus limiting the hydration and causing the aforementioned decrease in early
strength. By treating the product with CaO, before introducing it to a cement mix,
the produced CaF2 will not encapsulate the cement particles in the same way during
hydration.
Alusilica is severely agglomerated, and has agglomerate sizes of approximately 15-
150┬Ąm. The Alusilica particles themselves have sizes of 1-5┬Ąm. The treating process
has no apparent eect on the particle size distribution, as seen in Appendix B and C
for untreated and treated Alusilica respectively.
Alusilica is, to a certain extent, comparable to silica fume, in the sense that both ma-
terials have a high content of amorphous SiO2 (> 80%), which is a desirable trait in
pozzolanic materials. Silica fume particles are approximately 100 times smaller than an
average cement particle, which introduces a ller eect in cement and concrete mixes.
This ller eect promotes the overall strength development of the specimen and re-
duces permeability. On the other hand, Alusilica may have diculty in providing a
similar eect due to its much larger particle size.
This project will focus on uncovering more information about the pozzolanic properties
of Alusilica, as the material has an obvious potential.
2
Cement hydration
When mixed with water, the clinker materials, that make up a Portland cement, react
to form a variety of products, in a process called cement hydration. Portland cement
contains four principal clinker minerals; Alite, Belite, Ferrite and Aluminate. These
are all calcium silicates that react at dierent phases of cement hydration. Also present
in a Portland cement are minor quantities of sodium, potassium and calcium sulphates
and a quantity of gypsum, which is added to the clinker. An overview of the cement
clinker composition in typical European cements is given in Table 2.1.
The full process of cement hydration is highly complex and thus, will not be presented
in full detail in this report. Instead, a brief review of the most common reactions
and a description of the phases of cement hydration are provided, in order to better
understand the experiments conducted for this report.
4
==PAGE:12==
Table 2.1: The distribution of the main clinker minerals in typical European cements. Table courtesy
of ??
Cement
Chemical
Mineral
Typical level
Typical range
notation
formula
name
(mass%)
(mass%)
C3S
3CaO ┬Ę SiO2
Alite
57
45-65
C2S
2CaO ┬Ę SiO2
Belite
16
10-30
C3A
3CaO ┬Ę Al2O3
Aluminate
9
5-12
C4AF
4CaO ┬Ę Al2O3 ┬Ę Fe2O3
Ferrite
10
6-12
The hydration process, in its entirety, may be described as a two-phase dissipation-
precipitation system, as rst described by renowned chemist Le Chetalier in the late
19th century. Shortly after water is added, the gypsum, along with the clinker sulphates
present, dissolve to produce an aqueous alkaline solution called the pore solution. The
highly soluble C3S dissolves as well, producing a binding C-S-H gel. This rst part
of the cement hydration process is called dissolution, and sees the clinker materials
dissolve and react with the pore solution.
Eventually, the pore solution reaches a
super-saturated state, where it is more energetically favourable for the dissolved ions
to react and form solid products called hydration products. This second part of ce-
ment hydration is called precipitation, and sees the saturated pore solution produce a
variety of hydration products. These reactions are mainly exothermic, and give rise to
increased temperatures in hydrating cement. Cement hydration can be described as a
dissolution-precipitation process, wherein the pore solution acts as a reactive environ-
ment between two solid phases.
Commonly, cement hydration may be divided into four or ve stages, which are iden-
tiable from the heat output of the sample and thereby the reactivity. Figure 2.1
illustrates a ve stage model, where the stage of rapid reaction is divided into two
separate stages.
Figure 2.1: The various stages of cement hydration [3]
5
==PAGE:13==
The rst stage of cement hydration commences immediately after water is added to
the mix, and sees the highly soluble gypsum, alluminate, sulphates and C3S dissolve
to produce the initial pore solution and C-S-H gel. This stage lasts for only a few
minutes, as the cement particles are coated with hydration products, thus distancing
them from the pore solution and limiting reactivity.
This rst highly exothermic, albeit short period of reactivity is followed by a period of
very low reactivity called the induction period or the dormant period. The duration of
the dormant period is measured in hours rather than minutes, and varies greatly with
the paste mix. A general observation though, is that the dormant period is concluded
within the rst day of hydration. Late in this period, initial setting times are achieved,
meaning that the dormant period is the reason why concrete can be placed and not
immediately harden. The duration of this period is linked to the growth of precipitated
nuclei, with the nuclei being encapsulated by hydration products, as seen in Figure 2.2.
Cement manufacturers add a small amount of gypsum to the cement clinker minerals
specically to control this period and the crucial setting time, since it acts as a retard-
ing agent in the correct proportions. Silica fume is known to increase hydration in the
early stages, since the microscopic particles of the material form additional nuclei in
the mix, thus increasing reactivity.[4].
Figure 2.2: The scheme of cement hydration according to [5]. (a) Cement grains, (b) Upon addition
of water, a C-S-H gel layer forms on the grains, (c)Precipitation of hydration products and further
growth of gel layer, (d) Gel starts to ll the inner capillary pores of the hydrating paste.
The induction period is followed by a rapid reaction period (III in Figure 2.1), where
the rate of reaction increases expeditiously. This is due to alite becoming accessible
to the pore solution and, with its high solubility, quickly producing hydration prod-
ucts, thus contributing greatly to early strength development in concrete and cements.
Belite has a much lower solubility than alite, and contributes more to the strength
development in the later stages of cement hydration along with Ferrite and Auminate.
All four clinker minerals react in the rapid reaction period, albeit at severely dierent
paces, with alite by far being the most reactive. They also take place in the induction
period, albeit at a highly reduced rate.
The most common reaction by far is the
reaction between alite and water, followed by its belite counterpart. These reactions
6
==PAGE:14==
are given as
2(3CaO ┬Ę SiO2)
+
6H2O
ŌåÆ
3CaO ┬Ę 2SiO2 ┬Ę 3H2O
+
3Ca(OH)2
Tri-calcium silicate
water
C-S-H gel
Calcium Hydroxide
2(2CaO ┬Ę SiO2)
+
4H2O
ŌåÆ
3CaO ┬Ę 2SiO2 ┬Ę 3H2O
+
Ca(OH)2
Di-calcium silicate
water
C-S-H gel
Calcium Hydroxide
As seen by the reaction, Alite produces a signicantly larger amount of CH, thus con-
tributing to a more alkaline and reactive environment.
This rapid reaction period is characterised by an accelerated deposition of hydration
products into the capillary structure of the paste, thus occupying space that was once
lled with free water. Final setting of the mix also occurs in this stage.
At this point, the individual cement particles are covered in a thick layer of hydrated
products, and pore solution nds it increasingly dicult to gain access to dissoluble
clinker minerals. This marks the beginning of the fourth and nal stage of cement
hydration, which is called the diusion-limited reaction period. In order for the hy-
dration to continue, the dissolved ions in the cement cores must travel outwards and
precipitate, or water must travel into the cement core in order for further dissolution
to take place. By submerging a cement sample in water or having a layer of water
on top of a test tube based sample, the hydrating cement will draw water a certain
distance into the sample, thus continuing hydration locally.
3
Pozzolanic reactions
A pozzolanic material is characterised by a silicious or aluminous material, which in
itself posesses little to no cementitious properties.
However, when exposed to the
alkaline environment of hydrating cement paste, the pozzolanic materials react with
Ca(OH)2 to form cementitious binders and compounds. Depending on the structure
of the individual particles of the material, a pozzolan may aect both the reactivity
and rheology of a cement paste.
A common silicious pozzolan is silica fume, which consists of a large amount of amor-
phous SiO2. The SiO2 reacts with the Ca(OH)2 in a hydrating cement paste as seen
below:
2SiO2
+
3Ca(OH)2
ŌłÆŌåÆ
3CaO ┬Ę 2SiO2 ┬Ę 3H2O
Silicon dioxide
Calcium hydroxide
C-S-H gel
This, in turn, benets the cement paste by improving both early reactivity and late
strength. Silica fume benets from a particle size of merely 0.1┬Ąm, which enables it to
7
==PAGE:15==
ll empty spaces between hydrating cement particles, and thus act with a micro-ller
eect, as described by ??. The same reaction occurs when Alusilica is used as a poz-
zolan, since it displays a content of amorphous SiO2 similar to silica fume.
Pozzolanic eects vary with the large amount of pozzolanic materials in existence, and
all provide the cement paste with a positive property.
4
The eect of alkalinity on cement hydration
Although the Ca(OH)2 formed during cement hydration contributes to the alkaline
pore solution, the concentration og hydroxyl ions in a cement is governed by the con-
centration of sodium and potassium [6]. This concentration may be measured by the
manufacturer and transformed into an 'equivalent alkali content', Na2Oeq[%]. Since
sodium and potassion govern the alkali content of a cement, the equivalent alkali con-
tent may be written as
Na2Oeq(%) = Na2O(%) + 0.658 ┬Ę K2O(%)
(4.1)
The contents of Na2O and K2O are given here as a mass percentage of the cement,
and 0.658 is a conversion factor, reecting the dierences in molecular weight between
the two. The resulting value describes the equivalent alkali content of a given cement.
The equivalent alkali content varies with each cement type, and a higher value is typ-
ically associated with faster setting times and a more reactive early hydration. The
alkalinity of a cement may be increased by addition of NaOH, which increases early
hydration and strength [7]. The added alkalinity may also help activate pozzolans of
amorphous silica, thus further speeding up early strength development.
The reactions between an alkaline pore solution and available silicates has been shown
to result in expansion of the cement paste [6]. These expansive eects are common-
place in certain parts of the world, and are known to have destructive properties on
structures. The alkali-silica reactions are caused by high alkalinity in the cement or
concrete, which may be caused by high alkaline cement or the aggregates available for
mixing.
5
Chemical shrinkage of cement pastes.
During hydration, cement pastes may experience certain changes in volume. The outer
volume of the paste may change due to e.g. temperature variations or swelling of the
hydration products, whereas the inner pore volume is largely aected by chemical
shrinkage.
Chemical shrinkage is caused by the hydration products having a smaller specic vol-
ume than the water and clinker minerals that react to form them. Chemical shrinkage
is thus a direct indicator of the reactivity of a cement paste, as the more hydration
8
==PAGE:16==
products are produced, the further the volume decreases. An example of the decrease
in volume is given below, describing the change in specic volume following the reaction
of Alite with water:
Table 5.1: The reaction between Alite and water, which contributes to the alkalinity of the cement
paste and the majority of the early strength development.
Allite reaction
2C3S
+
6H
ŌåÆ
C3S2H3
+
(CH)3
Molar mass
 g
mol

228.3
18.0
342.5
74.1
Mass [g]
456.6
108
342.5
222.3
Density

g
cm3

3.15
1.0
2.71
2.21
Volume

cm3
145
108.1
126.4
99.2
Total volume

cm3
253.1
225.6
ŌłåV
= 253.1cm3 ŌłÆ225.6cm3
253.1cm3
┬Ę 100% = 10.87%
(5.1)
As seen in the example, the volume of the hydrated product decreases by almost 11 %
compared to the reactants.
The outer dimensions of cement paste sample with free access to water, will remain
almost unaltered, while an internal pore structure of hydration products forms. The
reduced volume of the products then results in excess water being sucked into the pore
structure, where further dissipation and precipitation occurs. The volume of water,
that is adsorbed into the sample, is measurable as chemical shrinkage.
While it is impossible to accurately predict the chemical shrinkage of the pastes in this
report, due to the advanced nature of cement hydration, a value of 6,4 mL/100g, for
total chemical shrinkage of a Portland cement, is used for reference.
Historically, three major methods of determining chemical shrinkage have been utilised;
Gravimetry, Dilatometry and Pycnometry. Dillatometry relies on direct measurements
of the decrease in sample volume by observing the amount of water, which is absorbed
into the sample. Gravimetry, in stead, measures a progressive change in weight, which
is then convertible to a change in volume. Pychnometry may be seen as a variant of
gravimetry, albeit with a set up similar to dilatometry. Below in Figure 5.1 is seen an
overview of the three methods, courtesy of [8].
As seen in the gure, dilatometry involves a test tube lled to a certain point with ce-
9
==PAGE:17==
Figure 5.1: Overview of the three methods commonly used to measure chemical shrinkage in cement
pastes.
ment paste. The tube is then tted with a rubber bung and a capillary tube. Water is
now added to the test and capillary tube, covering the paste sample. The evaporation
of water is hindered by having a layer of paran oil on top of the water in the capillary
tube. The chemical shrinkage is now measurable from the amount of water, which is
absorbed into the sample, resulting in the water level dropping in the capillary tube.
Several versions of a dillatometry setup exist, with the above mentioned being the
simplest. The method of dilatometry is suspected to be subject of some measurement
irregularities, since the set up relies on a exible rubber bung. The rubber may absorb
water or otherwise deform, giving way to false readings.
Gravimetry is suitable for measuring chemical shrinkage at varying temperatures of
the hydration environment. The sample is submerged under the balance, usually by
use of a cradle, as illustrated in Figure 5.1. This component may be equipped to allow
for easy exchange of test samples.
With proper execution, the method of gravimetry may achieve the most precise results,
depending on the quality of the set up and the precision of the balance.
Pycnometry is a combination of the other two methods, which incorporates the preci-
sion of gravimetry into the simplicity of dilatometry. Still, imprecise readings may be
caused by a exible cork, and although the tube is topped o constantly, the method
still relies on human interaction to produce results, unlike gravimetry and dilatometry.
All three methods are reliant on a common feature of cement hydration, in order to
produce accurate results. As mentioned before, the chemical shrinkage and continued
10
==PAGE:18==
hydration of a cement paste is determined by the passage of water into the sample.
In order for a sample to have full hydration potential, the water on the surface of the
sample must be able to travel to the very bottom of the sample. This is complicated by
large sample heights, where the passage may be restricted, so that the bottom of the
sample will not have the same hydration as the rest. However, a large sample height
will be less prone to any measurement irregularities, as the total chemical shrinkage
is greater. Thus, an optimal compromise between the unrestricted water passage in a
small sample height, and the resistance to measurement irregularities of a large sample
height must be found.
5.1
Eect of temperature on chemical shrinkage
According to [9], a correlation between the temperature, at which a sample is kept, and
the ultimate chemical shrinkage of said sample is apparent. Through studies of chem-
ical shrinkage of varying cement pastes at dierent temperatures, it was concluded,
that the ultimate value of chemical shrinkage decreases by 0.03mL/100g cement/ŌŚ”C.
This is thought to be primarily caused by a temperature dependence of the specic
volume of the adsorbed water.
6
Thermogravimetric Analysis
Thermogravimetric Analysis, or TGA in short, is a method of thermal analysis, which
is capable of measuring changes in physical and chemical properties of a material, as
function of time or temperature. The primary objective of a TGA is to measure the
loss in mass of a sample as a function of temperature, thus allowing for an in-depth
understanding of the components or physical behaviour of said sample. The TGA ma-
chinery is capable of very precise increments in temperature using an electric furnace,
and usually operates in the temperature range of 0-2000ŌŚ”C with some models capable
of going below -100ŌŚ”C.
Depending on the model of machinery used, it may also be able to perform a Dieren-
tial Scanning Calorimetry or DSC in short. This method of thermal analysis measures
the amount of heat required to increase the temperature of the sample material by
1ŌŚ”C. Hereby, information about the phase changes or reactions of the components in
a sample may be obtained, as the heat ux to the sample is observed.
When performing a combined TGA/DSC on pulverised, dehydrated cement paste, sev-
eral characteristic results become apparent. In the temperature range of 20-100ŌŚ”C, any
absorbed surface water in the sample is removed, showing up as a gradual mass loss
and slight increase in heat ux to the sample, seen as an endothermic response spike.
Although samples are usually dried at 105ŌŚ”C beforehand, any absorbed water from
the air during cooling and/or storage into the sample is registered by the precise bal-
ance. An illustration of TGA/DSC performed on hydrated cement is seen in Figure 6.1.
11
==PAGE:19==
Figure 6.1: Results from a combined TGA/DSC performed on hydrated cement. The individual
peaks in heat ux are consistent with a loss in mass, thus enabling an analysis of the content of the
cement. Image courtesy of [10].
In the temperature range of 100ŌŚ”C-350ŌŚ”C, the endothermic eect observed is due to
the dehydration of C-S-H gel, ettringite and calcium aluminate hydrate [11]. These
are the rst products, that are formed, when cement is mixed with water, as described
earlier.
Around 430-460ŌŚ”C, the endothermic response of the analysis is attributed to the de-
composition of portlandite, Ca(OH)2. The mass loss due to this phenomenon is then
a direct indicator of the amount of Ca(OH)2 in the sample, and thereby an indicator
of degree of hydration. The decomposition of portlandite is given below as
Ca(OH)2(s) ŌåÆCaO(s) + H2O(g)
(6.1)
A fourth and nal endothermic response may be attributed to the decarbonation of
calcium carbonate, CaCO3 in the sample, a process which takes place around 790ŌŚ”C.
The presence of calcium carbonate indicates, that the hydrating cement was exposed
to CO2, likely from exposure to atmospheric air. The decarbonation of CaCO3 is given
as
CaCO3(s) ŌåÆCaCO(s) + CO2(g)
(6.2)
12
==PAGE:20==
Since the samples in this report are submerged in liquid or otherwise kept from contact
with air in their hydrating states, this endothermic response is unlikely to be present
and is highly undesired in coherence with this report.
13
==PAGE:21==
3 | Materials and Method
This chapter introduces the various experiments, that were conducted for this project,
and the materials necessary to execute them. The experiments in this project include
ŌĆó Measurement of chemical shrinkage in cement pastes
ŌĆó Measurement of chemical shrinkage in alkali-boosted cement pastes
ŌĆó Determination of degree of hydration via thermogravimetric analyses (TGA/DSC)
ŌĆó Imaging of microscopic particle structure through electron microscopy (SEM)
A total of four dierent mixes were used in this project; a reference mix using only
cement, a mix with 10% Alusilica substitution and two alkali-variants of these. For
comparison with earlier results from the study of Alusilica ??, AALBORG white was
used for all mixes.
The gravimetry setups, and thereby the sample storage containers for all experiments,
were kept in a temperature-controlled chamber, which was kept at a constant 20ŌŚ”C.
A water/cement ratio of w/c = 0.5 was used for the reference mixes. Employing sub-
stitution of cementitious materials, the corresponding water/(cement + Alusilica) ratio
of w/(c + ALS) = 0.5 was used for the 10% Alusilica mixes.
The chemical shrinkage experiments were conducted at 20ŌŚ”C, 30ŌŚ”C and 40ŌŚ”C in order
to study the eects of increased temperature.
Five sample heights were used in the chemical shrinkage experiments; 0.5, 1.0, 1.5, 2.0
and 3.0 cm. With ve dierent sample heights at three dierent temperatures, a total
of 15 samples per mix were tested.
In order to reduce the workload of the time consuming thermogravimetric analyses,
only samples of 2.0 cm were tested for degree of hydration.
Samples for the the thermogravimetric analyses were hydrated for 1, 3, 7 and 12 days,
including the samples from the chemical shrinkage experiments at 21 and 56 days for
alkali and standard mixes respectively.
1
Chemical shrinkage of paste samples
The study of chemical shrinkage in this project is conducted using gravimetry. Three
individual setups were assembled in order to study chemical shrinkage at three dierent
temperatures.
14
==PAGE:22==
1.1
Gravimetry setup
Due to the amount of samples to be examined, gravimetry was chosen as the method of
choice in this report. Also, at the time of execution of the experiments in this report,
three microgram balances were readily available, and so a gravimetry approach was
deemed the most suitable.
The gravimetry setups were designed as seen in Figure 1.1, with each setup requiring
the following materials:
ŌĆó 45 L water bath
ŌĆó Heating circulator (temperature stability ┬▒0.01ŌŚ”C)
ŌĆó Stainless steel container w/ bottom spacers (to allow water circulation)
ŌĆó Stainless steel test tube racks
ŌĆó 0.0001g analytical balance w/ data transfer cable
ŌĆó Stainless steel wire (diameter 0.25 mm and 1.0 mm)
ŌĆó Stainless steel cradle
ŌĆó Tight t styrofoam lid
ŌĆó Copper-constantan thermocouple w/ datalogger
ŌĆó Water coolant tubing (for 20ŌŚ”C)
The water bath was lled with demineralised water to prevent calcium from deposit-
ing, as the water evaporates. The stainless steel container was then lled with paran
oil and lowered into the water bath. The test tube racks prevent the container from
oating in the water bath. However, to ensure the stability of the container in the
bath, stainless steel weights were submerged as well.
Stainless steel materials were chosen in order to prevent any corrosion from contam-
inating the water or paran oil.
The stainless steel containers were custom made
for the water baths, and were tted with bottom spacers to allow water circulation
beneath them. The 1.0 mm wire was shaped like a hook and mounted beneath the
balance through a hole in the overhead shelf. The wire connecting the cradle to the
hook was as thin as possible in order to minimise any inuence the thermal expansion
of said wire might have on the sample measurements.
1.2
Density of paran oil
Paran oil is typically listed as having a density of 800kg/m3. However, in order to
accurately measure the chemical shrinkage of a given paste sample, the exact density
of the paran oil must be measured. Large quantities of paran oil were used in the
15
==PAGE:23==
Figure 1.1: An illustration of the gravimetri setup used to measure increases in sample weight and
thereby chemical shrinkage.
experiments, and so two dierent batches were used; a recycled old batch and a factory
new batch. The old batch had accumulated a substantial amount of water prior to
recycling, likely due to condensation of air moisture during the experiments it was used
in. This is evident in Figure 1.2, which shows the paran oil in a beaker.
The sample in the Figure is not representative of the whole batch, which was estimated
to contain 20% water at the bottom of its storage container. Through simply pouring
o the top layer, making sure that no water or impurities followed, the paran oil was
re-purposed for the experiments.
The density of the two batches of oil was measured using a Gay-Lussac pycnometer,
following the method described in DS/EN ISO 2811-1:2016[12]. The measurements
were conducted at 20ŌŚ”, and the density was calculated via
Žü = m2 ŌłÆm1
Vt
(1.1)
where m1[g] is the mass of the empty pycnometer, m2 [g] is the mass of the pycnometer
lled with paran oil, and Vt is the volume of the pycnometer. The calculated densities
were as seen in Table 1.1.
Paran oil has a known volumetric expansion coecient of 0.000764
 1
ŌŚ”C

[13] which,
although quite small, will aect the measurements of chemical shrinkage at increased
temperatures. The temperature-corrected densities are calculated via
16
==PAGE:24==
Figure 1.2: A sample of the old paran oil, poured into a beaker. Although this sample is not
representative of the whole batch, the layering is quite clear.
Table 1.1: The calculated densities of the two batches of paran oil.
m1 [g]
m2 [g]
Vt [cm3]
Žü20

g
cm3

Old batch
44.362
129.491
99.758
0.853
New batch
43.470
128.549
100.206
0.849
Žü1 =
Žü0
1 + ╬▓(t1 ŌłÆt0)
(1.2)
with Žü1 and Žü0 being the corrected and old densities respectively, ╬▓ being the volumet-
ric expansion coecient and t1 and t0 being the new and old temperatures respectively.
The old batch of paran oil was exclusively used for the 20ŌŚ”C setup, while the new
batch was used for both 30ŌŚ”C and 40ŌŚ”. This means, that the densities used in each
setup are as follows in Table 1.2.
1.3
Chemical shrinkage of standard mixes
Mix design
In order to study the inuence of Alusilica on the chemical shrinkage of hydrating
cement paste, two dierent paste mixes were used:
17
==PAGE:25==
Table 1.2: Temperature-corrected densities used in the three setups for the experiments.
Žüt

g
cm3

20ŌŚ”C setup
0.853
30ŌŚ”C setup
0.855
40ŌŚ”C setup
0.862
ŌĆó Reference mix
ŌĆó 10 w% Alusilica mix
From [14], it is known, that a 10 w% substitution of Alusilica has a measurable impact
on the hydrating paste, while also having rhelogical properties, that makes the paste
easy to cast. The Alusilica was dried at 105ŌŚ”C for at least 48 hours, prior to use in the
mixes, in order to remove excess water content and thereby control the w/(c + ALS)
ratio.
An overview of the mix designs used for the experiment is seen in Table 1.3.
Table 1.3: The mix designs used for measurements of chemical shrinkage on non-alkali activated
pastes.
Mix nomenclature
Mix content [g]
Reference
200 g cement
100 g demineralised water
10% Alusilica
180 g cement
20 g dried Alusilica
100 g demineralised water
A low-capacity medium speed whip mixer mixer was used for both mixes. Although
once a designated vacuum mixer, the vacuum pump had deteriorated over years of use,
and was no longer functional. The mixer is seen in Figure 1.3.
The mixing procedure was as follows:
1. Hand mixing of dry mix components
2. Water is added. Mix thoroughly by hand for 1 min
3. High speed mixing for 3 min
4. Mix by hand for 1 min, ensuring that any separated mix components are scraped
from the bottom
5. Finishing high speed mixing for 1 min
The mixed cement paste is then transported from the mixing facilities to the temperature-
controlled room.
18
==PAGE:26==
Figure 1.3: The mixer used for all standard cement pastes. Although at one time capable of vacuum
mixing, the mixer now serves as a medium speed mixer for pastes only. The mixed paste was readily
portable in the red container after the mixing routine.
Experiment procedure
Prior to mixing the paste, a total of 15 test tubes per mix were prepared. The tubes
were standard soda-lime glass test tubes of diameter 2.2 cm. Each tube was weighed
and marked with a permanent marker, both illustrating the desired sample height and
the identity of the sample.
After mixing, the paste was administered to the test tubes via a modied syringe. This
way, no cement paste was smudged onto the sides of the tube above the desired sample
height. Also, large air pockets were avoidable due to careful depositing of the paste.
Having administered the paste, the samples were evacuated for 5 min at 40-50 mBar
of vacuum in order to remove any trapped air in the paste. The samples were weighed
following this procedure.
The paste samples were provided with a small amount of water on top to allow free
water adsorption throughout the sample. The amount of water varied from a few mm
in the smallest sample height to approximately 1.5 cm in the largest, as evident in
Figure 1.4, showing the prepared samples. Atmospheric air has a certain solubility in
water at room temperature, which is decreased as the temperature of the water in-
creases. Thus, in order to make certain that the measurements were not inuenced by
deaeration, the water used was completely deaerated by bringing it to a boil and subse-
quently cooling it in a sealed container. The samples were weighed again following the
addition of free water. The samples were then ready for submersion into the paran oil.
19
==PAGE:27==
Figure 1.4: The pre-submersion samples with added water reservoirs.
Each sample was carefully submerged into the paran oil at an angle, so as to not
disturb the layer of surface water. The weight of the submerged sample was then mea-
sured immediately after lowering it into the oil. The 2 cm samples were the last to
be submerged, and were held in the cradle for continuous measurements using a data
logger.
The submerged samples were then weighed every hour for the rst 10 hours of hydration
to ensure, that all details of early reactivity were logged. Weighing of the samples then
continued on a daily and subsequently weekly basis.
1.4
Chemical shrinkage of alkali boosted mixes
AALBORG White is a very low alkali cement, with an equivalent Na(OH)2 content
of 0.2-0.3 %. In order to study the eect of a more alkaline environment on Alusilica,
articial pore water must be added in the form of NaOH.
20
==PAGE:28==
Mix design
An articial pore solution is added to the cement following the procedure of ASTM
C1293-08b [6]. The procedure of this standard is intended for evaluating the damaging
expansive properties of alkali-silica reactions in concrete. Although the standard is
intended for use with high alkali cements (0.5 ŌłÆ0.6%Na2OHeq), the calculation pro-
cedure for adding alkalis is general.
In order to test the susceptibility of Alusilica for participating in alkali-silica reactions,
the equivalent NaOH content of the mix is increased from 0.2% to 1.25%. This is done
in Table 1.4 for both cement mixes using the method described in ASTM C1293-08b
[6]:
Table 1.4: Calculation of the amount of NaOH to be added to both mixes in order to reach an
equivalent alkali content of 1.25%.
Reference mix
Cementitious materials content in mix
= 200g
Amount of alkali in the cement
= 200g ┬Ę 0.2%
= 0.4g
Desired amount of alkali in cement
= 1.25% ┬Ę 200g
= 2.5g
Amount of alkali to be added to cement
= 2.5g ŌłÆ0.4g
= 2.1g
Amount of NaOH to be added
= 1.291 ┬Ę 2.1g
= 2.71g
10% Alusilica mix
Cementitious materials content in mix
= 180g
Amount of alkali in the cement
= 180g ┬Ę 0.2%
= 0.36g
Desired amount of alkali in cement
= 1.25% ┬Ę 180g
= 2.25g
Amount of alkali to be added to cement
= 2.25g ŌłÆ0.35g
= 1.89g
Amount of NaOH to be added
= 1.291 ┬Ę 1.89g
= 2.44g
The calculated amounts of NaOH were dissolved directly into the 100 g of water used
in both mixes, thus yielding an articial pore solution.
Alternate paste mixing
Initially, the mixing method of the standard mixes was thought to be sucient in the
alkali mixes as well. However, upon rst trying to mix the 10% Alusilica mix, it be-
came apparent, that the silica reacted far too quickly. This caused the rheology of the
mix to change severely within seconds after adding the alkali, making it too tough for
the mixer to handle. A further clarication of this experience is given in the discussion.
21
==PAGE:29==
Instead, an unconventional vacuum-based system was devised, were a local vacuum in
the dry powder sample sucks in the articial pore solution, thus 'mixing' the sample
within seconds. The materials needed were to assemble the vacuum setup were as
follows:
ŌĆó Medical IV tubing
ŌĆó 3 x Pinchcock clamps
ŌĆó 1 x Homan clamp
ŌĆó Glass connecting tube w/ valve
ŌĆó 60cc luer lock syringe
ŌĆó 60cc luer slip syringe
ŌĆó Retort stand w/ 2 x clamps
ŌĆó Large conical suction ask
ŌĆó 2 x glass angled connector tubes
ŌĆó 1 x two-hole rubber bungs
ŌĆó 2 x one-hole rubber bung
ŌĆó Glass capillary tube
ŌĆó Vacuum pump w/ rubber hose tubing
The mixing setup used for the alkali experiments is given in Figure 1.5.
Samples for the setup were prepared by calculating the amount of cement and Alusilica
contained in a sample with a given height, administering it to a glass test tube and
then vibrating it till reaching the desired sample height. Contrary to ordinary mixing,
this procedure allows for accurate control of the amount of cement in a sample, while
the w/c ration varies, albeit very slightly.
The procedure works on the assumption, that when the dry sample is under complete
vacuum, the space between the particles will be lled with water, as the valve is
released.
Thus, no entrainment of air will occur.
By calculating the bulk density
necessary for a w/c ration of 0.5, the amount of powder required in each sample may
be found. The calculations of the bulk densities of cement and 10% Alusilica content
for w/c = 0.5 were as follows in Table 1.5:
With the bulk densities calculates, the amount of cement and 10% mix to be used in
any sample height could be calculated, as seen in Table 1.6. The calculations are based
on the calculated bulk density and the volume of the test tubes.
After lling the test tubes with their respective amount of powder, they were vibrated
by hand to make the powder settle at the intended sample height.
22
==PAGE:30==
Figure 1.5: The experimental setup used to mix alkali-boosted series using vacuum.
It is worth noting, that working with alkaline materials, or vacuum of glassware, re-
quires extreme caution. Combining the two requires both extreme caution and protec-
tive gear in the form of gloves and goggles. The test tubes were tested before applying
the pore solution, to see if they would withstand a vacuum. This was done while the
test tube was inserted into a thick-walled conical ask, which would act as a protective
shield, should the test tube implode.
Experiment procedure
Through systematically operating the experiment setup, the samples were mixed with
water one at a time. Referring to the test setup in Figure ??, the experiment procedure
was as follows below. Assume that the clamps are open unless otherwise indicated.
1. (Clamp A closed) Fill the water deaeration chamber using the luer slip syringe
and close the valve.
2. (Clamp A/B closed) Apply vacuum to the setup to deaerate the articial pore
23
==PAGE:31==
Table 1.5: Calculation of the bulk density of dry constituents required for a w/c ratio of 0.5.
Reference mix
Absolute density of cement
= 3.13
g
cm3
= Žüc
Density of water
= 1.00
g
cm3
= Žüw
Part of total paste volume (w/c = 0.5):
Cement
=

2g
Žüc

/

2g
Žüc

+

1g
Žüw

= 0.390
Water
=

1g
Žüw

/

2g
Žüc

+

1g
Žüw

= 0.610
Corrected bulk powder volume for w/c = 0.5:
Cement bulk volume for w/c = 0.5
= 0.390 ┬Ę 3.13
g
cm3
= 1.2207
g
cm3
10% Alusilica mix
Calculation of combined density through percentage of total volume:
Absolute density of Alusilica
= 2.263
g
cm3
= ŽüALS
Alusilica volume percentage
=

1g
ŽüALS

/

1g
ŽüALS

+

9g
Žüc

= 0.133
Cement volume percentage
=

9g
Žüc

/

1g
ŽüALS

+

9g
Žüc

= 0.867
Density Žümix of 10% mix
= 0.867 ┬Ę Žüc + 0.133 ┬Ę ŽüALS
= 3.0145 cm3
Part of total paste volume (w/c = 0.5):
10% mix
=

2g
Žümix

/

2g
Žümix

+

1g
Žüw

= 0.399
Water
=

1g
Žüw

/

2g
Žümix

+

1g
Žüw

= 0.601
Corrected bulk powder volume for w/c = 0.5:
10% mix bulk volume for w/c = 0.5
= 0.399 ┬Ę 3.0145
g
cm3
= 1.2028
g
cm3
solution (this takes Ōēł10 min).
3. Mount lled test tube as seen in Figure ??. Slowly open clamp B while gently
vibrating the test tube setup, thus removing air from the sample and keeping the
powder settled at the desired height. A Homan clamp may be used to control
air ow from the sample.
4. Ensure that the water is completely deaerated by tapping the deaeration cham-
ber. If water vapour bubbles form explosively, saturated vapour pressure in the
chamber has been met. Close clamp C and B after this observation.
5. (Clamp A/B/C closed) Open clamp A. The pore solution begins to slowly ow
into the test tube. Allow a small layer of pore solution to form on top of the
powder (Ōēł2mm) and then open the deaeration chamber valve. Pore solution
24
==PAGE:32==
Table 1.6: The amount of cement or 10% mix to be added to samples of varying heights.
Sample
Powder
height [cm]
content [g]
Reference
0.5
2.290
1.0
4.580
1.5
6.871
2.0
9.161
3.0
13.742
10% mix
0.5
2.285
1.0
4.567
1.5
6.855
2.0
9.139
3.0
13.709
is now sucked quickly into the test tube, lling all spaces between the powder
particles. Close clamp A afterwards.
6. (Clamp A/B/C closed) Dismount the test tube setup using the exible rubber
connection. Shut o the vacuum pump and restore the system to atmospheric
pressure.
7. Remove the rubber bung and capillary tube of the test tube setup.
Using a
pipette, remove a suitable amount of water from the lled test tube. The water
height should be a few millimeters above the top of the paste, corresponding to
the reservoir added in the standard mix experiments.
8. Carefully submerge the paste sample into the paran oil and measure the sub-
merged weight. The sample is now weighed periodically like the standard mix
samples.
9. The bung and capillary tube are mounted anew, and the rubber hose tubing is
disconnected from the vacuum pump. By opening clamp B and blowing through
the hose, any leftover pore solution is purged from the test tube setup. Reconnect
the vacuum pump and the process may be restarted for the next sample.
Although intricate, the whole procedure may be performed in 15 minutes. By deaer-
ating the pore solution in a vacuum chamber before using it in the setup, the whole
procedure may be done in 10 minutes. By purging the test tube setup using the vac-
uum pump and catching the pore solution in the backow chamber, the procedure time
may be further reduced by 3 minutes. However, this may decrease the eectiveness
of the vacuum pump, since two chambers are then required to reach saturated vapour
pressure.
25
==PAGE:33==
2
Experimentation with measurement phenomena
2.1
Measurements of external factors
When performing weight measurements at 0.0001 g, external factors such as tempera-
ture and airow may have a notable inuence. When using the top balance, protective
glass shields keep these outside factors from interfering with the measurements. How-
ever, this is not the case when using the balance anchoring mounted underneath the
balance, which is entirely exposed. As such, airow and temperature changes in the
experiment chamber will inuence the measurements, when using the gravimetri setup.
Figure ?? depicts the setup as it was situated in the chamber.
Figure 2.1: The gravimetry setup as it was placed in the temperature-controlled chamber.
Although the wire connecting the balance with the cradle is chosen to be as thin as
possible, the prole of it still allows for it to be inuenced by airow. Also, a change in
room temperature may inuence the temperature of the wire and thereby the length,
causing a change in buoyancy and subsequently a change in measured weight.
In order to study these phenomena, a 30 minute measurement session with dierent
applied phenomena was conducted. Also in the session were experiments to deter-
mine the settling times of measured weight due to sample change. In summary, the
experiments in the session included:
ŌĆó Eects on weight measurement from removing a water bath lid and the subsequent
air temperature change below it.
ŌĆó Eects on weight measurement when changing samples.
ŌĆó Eects on weight measurement when topping o the water baths with circulation
water.
ŌĆó Eects on weight measurement when replacing bath lid.
26
==PAGE:34==
Furthermore, in order to asses the changes in temperature of the chamber itself, a
thermo-hygrograph was set up next to the gravimetri setup.
This apparatus only
measured temperature change, since air humidity was not suspected to be a relevant
factor.
2.2
Temperature development in the cement paste
Not to be confused with measurements of the heat generation, these experiments are
conducted to study how a given sample adapts to being submerged in a water bath of
dierent temperature.
The experiment requires a copper-constantan thermocouple, which is wound into a
spiral and situated in a test tube. The placement of the thermocouple is carefully
adjusted, so that the tip of it is directly in the center of the hydrating sample, which
is cast around it.
The thermocouple itself is assembled from a 0.4 mm copper-constantan wire. The
spiral at the end of the thermocouple is wound from 4 cm of wire, making the length of
submerged wiring at least 100 times the diameter of the thermocouple. This ensures,
that the measurements are not aected by the part of it, which is outside the sample.
The thermocouple, prior to being cast into a sample, is seen in Figure 2.2.
Figure 2.2: The copper-constantan thermocouple with wound end.
Measurements of temperature development continue for approximately 10 hours. This
way, both the whole temperature adaption period and periods of increased cement
reactivity may be logged.
27
==PAGE:35==
3
Thermogravimetric Analyses
In order to examine the degree of hydration of the various paste samples, a series of
Thermogravimetric analyses were conducted. The analyses were conducted as a joint
TGA/DSC procedure on a NETZSCH STA 449 F3 Jupiter model tted with a Silicon
Carbide furnace as seen in Figure 3.1. The samples were tested in the temperature
range of 20ŌŚ”C - 1050ŌŚ”C in order to study the components of the hydrated paste, as
explained earlier. In addition to the hydrated samples, TGA measurements on both
unhydrated cement and Alusilica were performed.
Figure 3.1: A NETZSCH STA 449 F3 Jupiter model was used to perform the TGA/DSC analyses.
The machine was set to perform an increment of 10ŌŚ”C/min in order to properly study
the reaction of the sample to increased temperatures.
Upon reaching 1050ŌŚ”C, the
machines' furnace shuts down, and the sample temperature drops accordingly. The
quick details of the analysis are given in Table 3.1.
Table 3.1:
Details regarding the joint TGA/DSC analyses performed.
The setup seen below is
identical for every tested sample.
Molar mass
 g
mol

228.3
Mass [g]
456.6
Density

g
cm3

3.15
Volume

cm3
145
Total volume

cm3
With each analysis having a duration of Ōēł4 hours, it was chosen to only perform
measurements on select samples. More specically, the analyses were performed on all
samples with height 2 cm, and the hydration times seen in Table 3.2
28
==PAGE:36==
Table 3.2: Overview of the hydration times, that were analysed. Only 2 cm samples were analysed
due to each analysis lasting 4 hours.
Hydration times analysed for all mixes
1 day 3 days 7 days 12 days 21 days 56 days
Reference
X
X
X
X
X
10% ALS
X
X
X
X
X
Alkali Reference
X
X
X
X
X
Alkali 10% ALS
X
X
X
X
X
The TGA samples were cast in plastic test tubes, that made removal and crushing
of the sample easy. Cement paste was poured into the tube until the desired sample
height was reached, after which a water reservoir was added and the test tube sealed.
The procedure of mixing the paste and casting the samples were identical to the re-
spective counterparts used for chemical shrinkage. However, the TGA samples were
kept in the outer rim of the water baths between the bath itself and the stainless steel
container. This was done to avoid the trouble associated with ones samples being
covered in oil and to avoid them interfering with the balance, since they oat.
Upon reaching their hydration times, the paste samples were removed from their re-
spective baths. The lid seal was opened, and the sample was removed by penetrating
the plastic test tube bottom with a screwdriver, thus forcing the sample out. The
sample was dried with a paper towel and crushed by means of hammer and pestle.
When reaching a particle size of approximately 2-3 mm, the crushed sample was put
into an open container and evacuated for at least 3 hours. This was done to remove
water from the sample, and stop further hydration [15].
Before being analysed in the machine, the samples were pulverised in a pestle as
thoroughly as possible to produce a ne powder. An approximate amount of 20-25
mg of powder is then loaded into an aluminium alloy crucible and loaded into the
machine.
4
SEM imaging of Alusilica
From [14] it is known, that Alusilica exists as a highly agglomerated powder. SEM im-
ages were studied, and the Alusilica agglomerates are seen to consist of a large amount
of smaller particles with sizes of approximately 1┬Ąm.
The Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) imaging is repeated in this project to study,
if the passivating treatment of Alusilica has had an eect on a microscopic level. Fur-
thermore, an Energy Dispersive X-ray Spectroscopy (EDS) will be conducted to study
the distribution of elements in the agglomerates. Studies of pure Alusilica and a ce-
ment/Alusilica mix will be conducted in order to compare the particle sizes of the two.
29
==PAGE:37==
Performing a SEM imaging and EDS for this project may help to further understand
the reactivity of Alusilica in a cement paste.
30
==PAGE:38==
4 | Results and discussion
1
Chemical shrinkage of standard mixes
The standard mix paste samples were allowed to hydrate for two months, and were
regularly measured. The change in weight of each sample was followed closely over the
span of the experiment. All samples exhibit a tendency to increase in weight over time
with varying intensity.
A few results were expected to happen following the theory of hydrating cement. It
was expected, that the reactivity, and thus the chemical shrinkage, would peak in in-
tensity within the rst day of hydration in consistency with the end of the dormant
period. In general, it was expected that the dierent stages of cement hydration were
identiable, to a certain degree, from the measurements of chemical shrinkage. It was
further expected that the weight increments would become gradually smaller over time,
consistent with the paste sample nearing a maximum amount of chemical shrinkage.
This maximum amount of shrinkage was expected to vary with the sample heights, as
explained in the theory segment on chemical shrinkage.
Adding Alusilica to a standard cement paste was expected to shift the times at which
these phenomena occur. It was dicult to predict if it would act as a retarding com-
ponent, thus delaying the onset of these phenomena, or increase the early reactivity of
the cement hydration. While the uoride contamination had indeed been passivated
by Aluuor AB, several dierent unknown factors could inuence the role of Alusilica
as a reagent in the paste mix.
All the following depictions of development of shrinkage over time use the time at which
water was added to the mix as their starting point, as opposed to starting the time
when the samples were submerged. Due to the cement mixing facilities not being in
the immediate vicinity of the water baths, and the sample preparation process taking
its time, the reference samples were all submerged about 35 minutes after mixing. Due
to some minor complications, the Alusilica samples were submerged after 45 minutes.
The following segment analyses the results of the chemical shrinkage experiments con-
ducted on the reference and 10% Alusilica substitution mix respectively. A comparison
is provided following this analysis.
1.1
Reference mix
The reference mix was the easiest to handle all the way through the process of prepar-
ing, mixing and submerging the samples. The paste with w/c ration of 0.5 was easily
distributed via the modied syringe and samples were cast without the need to wipe
the sides of the test tube.
31
==PAGE:39==
The samples were evacuated before submersion at approximately 40 mBar following
the method described earlier. Had the samples been evacuated at < 1mBar instead,
a complete removal of entrained air would be guaranteed. However, this would also
cause the sample to expand and rise, thus sticking to the sides of the test tube. This
would then have to be removed by hand while possibly compromising the sample. The
low-vacuum evacuation process was deemed sucient to remove the majority of en-
trained air. Any entrained air, which leaves the sample in the form of bubbles during
the experimentation will show up as a signicant and sudden increment in mass, since
the volume of air is replaced immediately by a similar volume of oil. Fortunately, this
was a rare event in the experiments with standard mixes, and was hardly measurable.
It was observed, that the sample mass varied signicantly within the rst hour, the
main cause being that the sample had to adjust to the isothermic environment of the
water baths. For the 30ŌŚ”C and 40ŌŚ”C baths, this variation in mass was observed as a
quite substantial decrease in measured weight. In the 20ŌŚ”C bath, an increase in mea-
sure weight was observed instead, suggesting that the samples were between 20ŌŚ”C and
30ŌŚ”C at the time of submersion. With the initial high reactivity and the subsequent
slow exothermic reactions of the incubation period, this above-room temperature of
the sample makes perfect sense.
The variation in weight was especially measurable with continuous data logging. As
this was only performed for the 2 cm samples, the early weight variations are only
presented for these samples. The variation of measured weight for a 2cm sample over
the rst hour of hydration in the three water baths is seen in Figure 1.1.
Figure 1.1: The percent-wise variation in weight of a 2 cm reference sample during the rst 60
minutes after submersion.
32
==PAGE:40==
The variation is given in percent of the initially submerged weight. A more detailed
measurement of the temperature development in the paste samples is performed in the
experimentation with external factors later in the report.
It is clearly seen how the change in temperature aects the weight of the sample. The
variations in mass are likely both due to initial settling of the balance and subsequently
a temperature equilibrium. The volumes of the paste, test tube and surface water all
change according to their respective volumetric expansion coecients.
A common
equilibrium is seen to occur after approximately 30 minutes for the 30ŌŚ”and 40ŌŚ”sam-
ples while the 20ŌŚ”sample takes a while longer. After the temperature equilibrium has
been established, the only weight-altering eect is the actual chemical shrinkage of the
sample.
Due to these observations, it was chosen to evaluate on the shrinkage data measured
form the rst hour and forth. Hereby, the weight changes are zeroed at 1 hour, and
the experiment continues. While the initial hour of data certainly is relevant, these
measurements are eectively from the start of the incubation period, thus having a rel-
atively low reactivity. In conclusion, the decision to evaluate the readings after 1 hour
of submersion should have minimal inuence on the total chemical shrinkage measured.
With this correction, the development of chemical shrinkage may be properly presented,
as seen in Figures 1.2, 1.3 and 1.4 for 20ŌŚ”C, 30ŌŚ”C and 40ŌŚ”C respectively. These gures
depict the shrinkage measured in the reference samples over a two-month period.
Figure 1.2: The development of chemical shrinkage in reference samples kept at 20ŌŚ”C.
As seen in Figure 1.2, the shrinkage of the 20ŌŚ”samples develops at an increasing rate
33
==PAGE:41==
until reaching a peak at approximately 10 hours, which is well within the expected
limit. This is consistent with the onset of the rapid reaction period, where the reac-
tivity of the sample is at its highest.
The shrinkage of the sample heights is seen to dier, but not quite as expected. The
smaller sample heights should have had a correspondingly smaller chemical shrinkage,
which is seen to be the exact opposite case here. The fact that the 0.5 cm sample
height has a signicantly higher shrinkage is likely due to a measurement error, since
these samples are also subject to the largest margin of error due to their size. This
is backed by the fact that the dierence in shrinkage is seen already at 2 hours of
hydration, indicating that the rst mass measurement was o.
The 20ŌŚ”C samples all reach a maximum chemical shrinkage of approximately 5.4mL/100
g cement. The rate of development at the end of the experiment suggests, that the
shrinkage could have developed to upwards of 6 mL/100 g, had the measurements
continued past 2 months.
Figure 1.3: The development of chemical shrinkage in reference samples kept at 30ŌŚ”C.
Seen in Figure 1.3 is the shrinkage development of the samples kept at 30ŌŚ”. The onset
of the rapid reaction period is seen to be located at around 6-7 hours. This suggests
that the increased temperature had enhanced the reactivity of the paste, as would
be expected. The maximum shrinkage is correspondingly lower than that of the 20ŌŚ”
34
==PAGE:42==
samples with a value of about 4.75 mL/100 g cement.
It would appear that the increased early reactivity comes at the price of a reduced
total shrinkage. Since the obvious cause of this decreased shrinkage is the increase in
hydration temperature, the phenomenon is described by [9] and also mentioned in the
theory segment of this report.
As with the 20ŌŚ”samples, the last stretch of the curve exhibits a certain rate of devel-
opment, indicating that the shrinkage of these samples could have developed further,
given the proper time.
The measured shrinkage of the samples hardly diers from one another, meaning that
none of the samples exhibited a lower potential for chemical shrinkage. The question
remains, if the smaller samples would begin to stray from the main line of measure-
ments, if the experiment had proceeded.
Figure 1.4: The development of chemical shrinkage in reference samples kept at 40ŌŚ”C.
As seen in Figure 1.4, the shrinkage development of the 40ŌŚ”samples reaches a point
in its late stages, where the rate of development diminishes. This is consistent with
the paste reaching the nal stages of hydration and nearing its maximum chemical
shrinkage.
35
==PAGE:43==
It is observed, that none of the samples reach a lower maximum shrinkage value than
the others, which is unexpected. Instead, they all follow a common development of
shrinkage, eventually adding up to a maximum shrinkage of approximately 4.2 mL/100
g cement. While this is quite low compared to the chosen reference value of 6.4 mL/100
g cement it may in part be explained by the eect of temperature on the maximum
shrinkage value.
1.2
10% Alusilica mix
The Alusilica substitution mix followed the exact same procedures as for the reference
mix. When mixing the sample, however, there were obvious changes in the rheology of
the cement paste. The Alusilica, which was dried at 105ŌŚ”C beforehand, initially made
the paste signicantly thicker. However, when given the time in the mixer, the paste
regained its ow and was administered via syringe to the test tubes.
Similarly to the reference, a tendency for the weight to vary, while adjusting to the
bath, was observed. The variations in temperature for a 2 cm sample in either bath
are given in Figure 1.5.
Figure 1.5: The percent-wise variation in weight of a 2 cm 10% Alusilica sample over the rst 60
minutes after submersion.
From the gure, it is seen that the samples follow the same pattern as their reference
counterpart; the 20ŌŚ”C sample increases in weight while the 20ŌŚ”C and 30ŌŚ”C samples
decrease in weight. However, both the 20ŌŚ”C and the 40ŌŚ”C samples exhibit signicantly
36
==PAGE:44==
larger variations in measured weight, compared to their reference counterparts. This
is not true for the 30ŌŚ”sample, which exhibits a smaller variation in comparison.
Since this variation in mass is suspected to primarily be caused by the sample ad-
justing to the temperatures of the water bath, one would assume, that the general
temperature of the pastes upon submersion was much dierent from the reference
samples. However, if the assumption is, that the general temperature of the pastes
is either higher or lower, it does not explain why both the 20ŌŚ”and 40ŌŚ”series both
vary so much from their counterparts.
Had the Alusilica paste been warmer than
the reference paste, the 40ŌŚ”sample would not have to alter its temperature as much,
and the corresponding change in weight would be lower. Had the paste instead been
colder than the reference paste, the 20ŌŚ”C sample would exhibit a smaller weight gain
than its reference counterpart, while the 40ŌŚ”C sample would have an opposite response.
An explanation may be, that there is a signicant dierence in the reactivity of the
pastes, and that a more reactive paste will heat itself more eciently. In conclusion,
the fact that the Alusilica mix experiences a greater weight variation than the refer-
ence mix, during the rst 60 minutes of submersion, may be explained by the mixes
having dierent initial temperatures and dierent hydration reactivity. At any rate,
since the shrinkage measurements are chosen to commence after 1 hour of hydration,
the outcome of the matter will not aect the primary experiments.
The chemical shrinkage of a mix with 10% Alusilica substitution are given in Figures
1.6, 1.7 and 1.8 for 20ŌŚ”C, 30ŌŚ”C and 40ŌŚ”C respectively.
Figure 1.6: The development of chemical shrinkage in 10% Alusilica samples kept at 20ŌŚ”C.
37
==PAGE:45==
The development of shrinkage in the 20ŌŚ”C Alusilica mix is seen to follow the same
principle as its reference counterpart. The onset of the rapid reaction period appears
to be slightly earlier than for the reference mix. This may be caused by increased
activity in the early stages of cement hydration due to the added silica. However, the
dierence is so slight, that no obvious conclusions can be made.
The shrinkage is seen to achieve a slightly higher mean maximum value of around
5.6 mL/100 g cement. This value, however, is for the 2 cm and 3 cm sample heights.
The lower heights achieve signicantly larger values of chemical shrinkage. This is con-
sistent with the paste becoming denser, as the Alusilica reacts, thus limiting the access
to water in larger samples, while the smaller samples continue to have free access to
water.
As with the previous samples, this mix may have developed a signicant amount of
shrinkage, had it hydrated for a longer time, which is deducted from its rate of shrink-
age at 56 days
Figure 1.7: The development of chemical shrinkage in 10% Alusilica samples kept at 30ŌŚ”C.
This mix is the rst to exhibit the phenomenon of the smaller samples developing a
lower value of total chemical shrinkage. The 0.5 cm sample is seen to unexpectedly
separate itself from the other samples and halt its shrinkage development after 20 days
38
==PAGE:46==
of testing. The 1 cm sample also appears to deviate slightly from the rest of the samples.
In comparison to the 20ŌŚ”C Alusilica series, the onset of the rapid reaction period hap-
pens much earlier at around 5-6 hours, as would be expected. This is slightly earlier
than the corresponding 30ŌŚ”samples of the reference mix.
However, the most signicant result is the largest value of chemical shrinkage, which
tops at around 5.2 mL/100 g cement for the 3.0, 2.0 and 1.5 cm samples, while the
1.0 cm samples are slightly lower at 5.0 mL/100 g cement. This is signicantly higher
than the 4.75 mL/100 g cement for the corresponding 30ŌŚ”C reference mix.
Figure 1.8: The development of chemical shrinkage in 10% Alusilica samples kept at 40ŌŚ”C.
Here, both the 0.5 and 1.0 cm samples exhibit a much higher value of total shrinkage
than the other samples. The three larger samples appear to arrive at a total chemical
shrinkage of 4.5 mL/100 g cement, which is slightly higher than the 40ŌŚ”C reference
counterpart.
This series also exhibits the fastest onset of the rapid reaction period, which commences
already at around 3.5 hours of hydration. The rate of shrinkage development appears
to stagnate towards the end of the 56 day measurements, indicating, that the maximum
value of chemical shrinkage has been reached.
39
==PAGE:47==
1.3
Summarising comparison
The two mixes both exhibited a natural development of chemical shrinkage, with an
incubation period, a period of rapid reaction and a subsequent stagnation of shrink-
age development. As was expected, the smaller sample sizes developed a higher value
of total shrinkage, whereas the larger samples became too dense to allow for proper
transport of water though the sample.
In general, the addition of Alusilica to the cement mix appears to cause an earlier
onset of the rapid reaction period, indicating a boosted early hydration in the sample.
Also, Alusilica appears to slightly increase the total shrinkage of the samples, which is
most noticeable in the 40ŌŚ”C series. This may indicate a boosted late hydration of the
samples. Given that Alusilica boosts both early and late hydration, although not by
much, it exhibits a characteristic silicious pozzolanic property.
2
Chemical shrinkage of alkali boosted mixes
The alkali boosted mixes were only allowed to hydrate for 21 days. This was because
of the unfortunate realisation, that conventional mixing methods were unusable for
mixing an alkali boosted Alusilica mix. This was not realised till late in the project
period, and so the time spent for planning and practice in the vacuum setup meant,
that the experiment had to be cut short.
The 'mixing' of the alkali boosted mixes was by far the most ecient, even though
the vacuum setup could only handle one sample at a time. As described in the the-
ory segment, the time required to produce a sample could be heavily reduced through
optimisation. This was the case when mixing the two series, and all fteen samples
of a mix were cast and ready for measurements within 1.5 hours. While working with
alkaline solutions, it was optimal to have the vacuum setup right next to the water
baths. This allowed for a time between adding water and submerging of 3 minutes.
The preparation of the samples was the most critical part of the experiments. Although
the amount of powder in each test tube could be very accurately dispensed, the sample
height relied on vibrating the sample by hand. It would appear, that a w/c ratio of 0.5
is among the lowest ratios possible with this method, since vigorous vibration could
not get the powder to settle any lower than the desired sample height. This, in turn,
was quite fortunate. It is expected, that experimentation with w/c ratios lower than
0.5 would require machine vibration to settle the powder suciently.
As with the standard mixes, the time shown in any shrinkage development chart is the
time from water was added to the mix. This time was kept fairly consistently at 3-4
minutes for all samples.
When releasing the pore solution into the sample, some of the powder would inevitably
be swirled up with the water, where it formed a cloudy layer of dissolved silica on top
40
==PAGE:48==
of the sample. As the sample hydrates, this layer continues to be part of the sample.
The layer is a light slurry, and will have little to no structure or strength upon release
from its test tube. The layer would also appear to made up of a very small amount of
mix powder, its volume being quite large but with low density.
It was reasoned, that the inuence of this layer on the hydration of the sample would be
minimal. However, had there been sucient time, the vacuum setup should have been
tted with a preventative measure to minimise this phenomenon and create entirely
solid samples. A solution would be to install a component in the test tubes, which
would divert the pore solution and prevent it from shooting directly into the sample.
The test tubes used were made from soda-lime glass, which is not classied as being
resistant completely resistant to alkaline solutions. It was observed, that 3 test tubes
cracked in the later stages of the experiment, where two of them leaked their free pore
solution into the surrounding oil. This phenomenon is exclusive for the alkali boosted
Alusilica mixes, and was not linked to any specic temperature or sample height. It
is assumed, that an expansive alkali-silica reaction takes place in the sample, and the
expansion is too severe for the test tube to withstand. Also, the alkaline solution may
weaken the glass from the inside.
2.1
Reference mix
The reference mix was mixed with little to no appearance of the aforementioned slurry.
Similarly to the standard mixes, the alkali mix samples exhibited a variation in weight,
as the samples adjusted to the bath temperature, as seen in Figure 2.1.
Figure 2.1: The variation in weight of a 2 cm alkali reference sample over the rst 60 minutes of
submersion.
41
==PAGE:49==
The variations in weight are seen to be fairly consistent with those of the standard
mixes, although the 40ŌŚ”C sample is seen to have a comparatively larger drop in weight
than its standard mix counterpart. This may be explained by the fact, that the deaer-
ated pore solution is quite cold, since water in a vacuum decreases signicantly in
temperature. Having a cold paste means, that the dierence in temperature between
the sample and the bath is large, and therefore the expansion of the sample upon
heating will result in a large weight variation.
The chemical shrinkage of the alkali reference mix is seen in Figure 2.2, 2.3 and 2.4 for
20ŌŚ”C, 30ŌŚ”C and 40ŌŚ”C respectively.
Figure 2.2: The development of chemical shrinkage in alkali reference samples kept at 20ŌŚ”C.
The alkali activated 20ŌŚ”reference mix exhibits results similar to the previous two series
at 20ŌŚ”. The incubation period is followed by a sudden rapid reaction period, which
subsides within a few hours.
A notable dierence from the two other 20ŌŚ”C series is, that the rate of shrinkage de-
velopment around 10 hours, appears to be less steep but last approximately as long.
This is in part due to the scaling of the graph, but it is also clear, that the transition
between the phases of hydration is a lot smoother, as compared to the other 20ŌŚ”mixes.
It is as if the mix has experienced higher reactivity prior to the rapid reaction period,
and thus, experiences less of an intense transition. This would be consistent with the
42
==PAGE:50==
articial pore solution reacting with some of the Alite in the rst 10 hours of sample
hydration, thus reducing the potential of reactions in the paste.
While it is dicult to compare the onset of the mix to the other 20ŌŚ”C mixes, it is
obvious, that the onset happens earlier than that of the standard reference mix. It
would appear, that the onsets of the Alusilica substitution paste and the alkali refer-
ence paste are comparable. This indicates, that the alkali in the paste has boosted
early cement hydration, although not by very much.
It is impossible to compare the maximum shrinkage development of the later stages
of hydration with the other 20ŌŚ”C samples.
However, at 21 days (or 500 hours) of
hydration, it is seen that the chemical shrinkage of the alkali mix is approximately
3.7 mL/100 g cement, while it is 4.8 mL/100 g cement and 5.2 mL/100 g cement
for the standard and Alusilica mixes respectively. This indicates a major decrease in
shrinkage development after the early stages of hydration.
Figure 2.3: The development of chemical shrinkage in alkali reference samples kept at 30ŌŚ”C.
The 30ŌŚ”C alkali mix has a transition between the incubation and rapid reaction peri-
ods, which is quite similar to the 20ŌŚ”C mix in terms of rate of reactivity. The onset
of the rapid reaction period is dicult to identify, but would appear to be located
at approximately 5-6 hours of hydration. This is similar to the Alusilica mix, which
indicates an increased early reactivity.
43
==PAGE:51==
However, as seen with the 20ŌŚ”C mix, the eects of the alkali are not signicant on
early hydration, and it would appear that the late stages of hydration at 21 days has
suered a decrease as well. The chemical shrinkage at 21 days for the alkali mix is ap-
proximately 3.25 mL/100 g cement, while it is 4.6 mL/100 g cement and 4.8 mL/100
g cement for the reference and Alusilica mixes respectively.
The sample height appears to have played a role in the shrinkage development, as the
3.0 cm sample is seen to develop a signicantly higher total shrinkage, while the 0.5
cm sample loses potential already within the rst day of hydration.
Figure 2.4: The development of chemical shrinkage in alkali reference samples kept at 40ŌŚ”C.
The 40ŌŚ”C samples exhibit similar characteristics as the 20ŌŚ”C and 30ŌŚ”C alkali samples,
but appears to be signicantly more reactive. The onset is as vaguely dened as for
the other samples, but it would appear to occur already at 3-4 hours or less. This
indicates, that the alkalis had an eect on the early hydration of the sample. However,
the intensity of the rapid reaction period is still decreased.
Again, the developed shrinkage at 21 days of hydration is seen to be signicantly lower
than the corresponding shrinkage of the reference and Alusilica mixes, indicating a
decreased late hydration.
44
==PAGE:52==
It is seen in Figure 2.4 how the 0.5 cm sample suddenly deviates from the other sam-
ples. This was due to the test tube cracking in the oil bath, thus leaking the surface
water from the sample. While not conrmed, this is assumed to have happened for the
30ŌŚ”C 0.5 cm sample as well.
2.2
10% Alusilica mix
The Alusilica mixes were much more prone to developing the aforementioned slurry of
dissolved silica. This is likely because the Alusilica particles were signicantly easier
to swirl up into the pore solution, possibly because they were completely dried.
Since there was no conventional mixing taking place, the proneness to developing a
slurry layer was the only factor, that separated the alkali reference and Alusilica mix
during vacuum mixing.
During preparation of the samples however, the individual sample required quite a bit
more vibration, in order for the powder to settle at the desire sample height. This
is an indicator, that 0.5 is about the lowest w/c ratio possible without implementing
machine vibration or perhaps compacting the sample with tools.
The variations in measured weight over the rst 60 minutes after submersion are seen
in Figure 2.5.
Figure 2.5: The percent-wise variation in weight of a 2 cm alkali Alusilica sample over the rst 60
minutes after submersion.
The weight variation of the 40ŌŚ”C sample seen here are comparatively larger than that
45
==PAGE:53==
of any of the other series, while the eect on the 20ŌŚ”C and 30ŌŚ”C samples is far less
apparent. Again, this may be due to the articial pore solution being quite cold after
undergoing deaeration in the vacuum chamber.
The chemical shrinkage of the alkali Alusilica mix is seen in Figure 2.6, 2.7 and 2.8 for
20ŌŚ”C, 30ŌŚ”C and 40ŌŚ”C respectively.
Figure 2.6: The development of chemical shrinkage in alkali Alusilica samples kept at 20ŌŚ”C.
The onset of the rapid reaction period appears to be similar for both the alkali refer-
ence and the alkali Alusilica mixes. However, the duration of the increased reactivity
appears to be prolonged for the Alusilica mix, which may be explained by the added
amount of amorphous silica readily available for reaction.
The highest value of chemical shrinkage is seen to have increased compared to the
alkali reference as well, which is consistent with the longer duration of the rapid reac-
tion period. The 0.5 cm sample is seen to deviate from the rest of the samples, which
indicates a loss of reactivity in the early hydration phase.
However, the chemical shrinkage still lacks severely behind the standard mixes, and
the addition of alkalis would appear to have a minimal eect, if any.
The 30ŌŚ”C alkali Alusilica reference samples are largely comparable to the standard
30ŌŚ”C reference and Alusilica mixes. However, as seen with the other alkali boosted
46
==PAGE:54==
Figure 2.7: The development of chemical shrinkage in alkali Alusilica samples kept at 30ŌŚ”C.
mixes, the highest amount of shrinkage is seen to be reduced, while the reaction rate
at the onset of the rapid reaction period is diminished.
It would appear that the 0.5 cm sample is deviating quite a bit from the other samples,
as was the case with the 20ŌŚ”samples. Also, a generally greater spread between the
sample heights is seen in the later stages of hydration.
The 40ŌŚ”C samples follow the principle of the other two sample series, and exhibits a
prolonged onset reaction with decreased reactivity, and having a signicantly reduced
largest shrinkage value, as compared to the 21 day measurements of the standard mixes.
In this series, both the 3 cm and 1 cm test tubes cracked, which is indicated by the two
samples exhibiting sudden loss in shrinkage or disappearing completely from the graph.
Again, the 0.5 cm sample appears to deviate signicantly from the other samples.
2.3
Comparison
The addition of alkali to the two mixes resulted in a reduced rate of reaction during
the onset of the rapid reaction period. The rate of reaction appeared to be less 'steep',
and seemed to be slightly prolonged. This was evident, as no sudden almost vertical
stretches of the graphs were present.
47
==PAGE:55==
Figure 2.8: The development of chemical shrinkage in alkali Alusilica samples kept at 40ŌŚ”C.
While the alkali Alusilica mix exhibited an overall increase in total shrinkage, the to-
tal shrinkage of both mixes was severely decreased, as compared to the standard mixes.
A tendency for the test tubes to crack during hydration was observed. This resulted in
the sample leaking its pore solution and decreasing signicantly in weight. The alkali
Alusilica mix had three cracked samples, whereas the reference mix had none. While
this may be the result of an expansive alkali-silica reaction exclusive to the Alusilica
mix, it can not be conrmed.
A general observation for the alkali boosted mixes was, that although the pastes may
experience a higher reactivity, this was hardly evident from looking at the chemical
shrinkage of them.
3
Inuence of various phenomena on the data measured
3.1
Eect of handling and operation of the setup on the measured weight
A short experiment with a duration of approximately half an hour was conducted,
to study the eects of handling and environment on the sample measurements. The
results are divided into four sections, as described in the method segment. In order
48
==PAGE:56==
to properly present the data, the graphs are located in Appendix E. The experiment
procedure was as follows:
0-1 min Initial setting of 2 cm sample already on the balance.
1-6 min Lid of bath is removed, air temperature changes above oil.
6-9 min Sample is changed to 3 cm sample and is allowed to settle for 3 min
9-12 min After setling, the test arrangement is left exposed to the convection and
air ows of the room for 3 min
12-15 min The test subject is changed for the 1,5 cm sample and is allowed 3 min
to settle
15-19 min The individual bassins are relled with water to study any interferences
this temperature change may cause.
19-30 min The test subject is changed for the initial 2 cm sample and is allowed to
settle for 3 min. Afterwards, the lid is replaced.
As would be expected, the eects of removing the water bath lid become more severe as
the temperature increases. This is because the temperature dierences between the air
on both sides of the lid become increasingly large. As the lid is removed, the air below
shifts in temperature, and is assumed to apply said new temperature gradually to the
wire holding the sample cradle. As the wire cools down, following the lid removal, it
contracts ever so slightly. The contraction is measurable as a change in buoyancy, and
is consistent with a loss in measured weight. Only after 6 minutes with no lid does the
weight measurement stabilise. This time is suspected to increase, if the experiments
are conducted at higher temperatures.
When performing a weight measurement session of all samples in a given bath, the
largest samples would generally be weighed rst. This means, that the balance has
trouble settling on a weight for the larger samples, and the weight would decrease
steadily. As the wire contracts, the subsequent measurements are settled much faster
by the balance.
While the decrease in weight is somewhat signicant for the 40ŌŚ”C samples, the phe-
nomenon would have occurred for all measurements of the smaller samples, and thus,
would not have aected the outcome of the relative chemical shrinkage development.
The eects of changing the sample on weight measurements are a general phenomenon
for all mixes. From the graphs, it is seen that the weight of a given sample is taking
quite a long time to settle. Although this settling of weight is only relevant to the
third or fourth decimal place of a given measurement, this may still be of importance
to take note of. Generally, upon the discovery of this phenomenon, the samples were
allowed sucient time to settle before taking a measurement.
When looking at the third graph, depicting the eects of a sample change and a water
49
==PAGE:57==
rell, it becomes apparent that the water rell had little to no eect on weight mea-
surements. In stead, the sample change dominates the measurement variations in this
graph.
Finally, replacing the lid has the adverse eect of removing it, and it is observed how
the measured weight increases as air the temperature below the lid rises, thus warming
up the wire and aecting buoyancy.
3.2
Temperature development in submerged samples
Three thermocouple coils were used to measure the temperature development in the
cores of 3 cm reference samples, as they were submerged in the three paran oil baths.
Although the intent was to nd the time it takes for the samples to reach temperature
equilibrium, the measurements were continued well into the rapid reaction period, to
see what the temperature development inside the sample would be.
The results of the temperature development for the samples submerged in the 20ŌŚ”C,
30ŌŚ”C and 40ŌŚ”C paran oil baths are seen in Figure 3.1, 3.2 and 3.3 respectively.
Figure 3.1: Core temperature development in 3 cm reference sample submerged in 20ŌŚ”C oil bath.
The temperature of the bath is seen to uctuate around 20ŌŚ”C, as would be expected
from a system, that utilises independent heating and cooling elements. Perhaps de-
creasing the amount of coolant owing trough the bath would decrease the amplitude
of the uctuations.
The sample is seen to swiftly adjust to the bath temperature in a matter of minutes.
The sample even adjusts to the uctuations of the bath temperature from 1-4 hours. At
50
==PAGE:58==
5 hours and especially later at 8-9 hours, the sample temperature startes to deviate from
the bath temperature. This is coherent with the rapid reaction period commencing in
the hydrating cement paste.
Figure 3.2: Core temperature development in 3 cm reference sample submerged in 30ŌŚ”C oil bath.
Without a cooling element, the 30ŌŚ”C bath does not uctuate around its intended tem-
perature. The temperature is, instead, fairly constant.
The sample temperature is seen to reach equilibrium with the bath temperature in a
matter of 10-15 minutes. The equilibrium is followed by a period of no temperature
generation in the paste, corresponding to the incubation period of cement hydration.
However, at the 4 hour mark, the temperature in the sample starts to rise, peaking at
between 6-7 hours. Again, this is consistent with the sample going through the rapid
reaction period.
As with the other temperature developments, the 40ŌŚ”C sample adjusts to the bath
temperature in a matter of minutes, before developing an increased core temperature.
As would be expected, the temperature starts to rise around the 3 hour mark, as
indicated by the onset of the rapid reaction period.
51
==PAGE:59==
Figure 3.3: Core temperature development in 3 cm reference sample submerged in 40ŌŚ”C oil bath.
3.3
Results from thermohygrograph
A thermohygrograph with a measurement capacity of 30 days was placed in the
temperature-controlled chamber. Initially, the thermohygrograph was placed in the
middle of the chamber, corresponding to the placement of the gravimetry setup. As
seen in the top measurement series of Appendix F, the eort of the chamber to keep
a constant temperature, resulted in small uctuations occurring. These uctuations
were consistent with an altering ow of air from the chambers heating/cooling system,
which induced slightly turbulent ows of air in the chamber. The airow was seen
to very slightly aect the weight measurements performed, albeit only on the fourth
decimal place.
Later in the measurement data, a large spike in temperature is observed. This spike
was caused by the cooling system being turned o by maintenance workers. The system
was down for several days, during which time no impact on the weight measurements
was observed. Only after a temporary cooling system, involving large humidiers and
fans, was installed, did the weight measurements vary.
For the second measurement series, the thermohygrograph was calibrated. Where it
had shown a steady temperature of approximately 18ŌŚ”C before, it was now calibrated
to show a steady temperature of 20ŌŚ”C. Furthermore, the apparatus was placed under
the counter, on which the gravimetry setup was placed. The area was relatively free
from air ow, while still being temperature-controlled. The eects were not signi-
cant, although the variations in temperature readings appeared to become smaller. At
the start of the second temperature series is a day of large variations in temperature.
However, this was likely caused by vibrations interfering with the apparatus. The vi-
brations were caused by the construction of an adjacent building a mere 10 m away.
52
==PAGE:60==
At the time of the alleged temperature uctuations, several large pillars of concrete
were being hammered into the soil, thus producing large vibrations that shook the
equipment. Fortunately, the overhead shelf, which supported the three balances, was
entirely unaected by these vibrations.
In conclusion, the temperature variations of the chamber had no inuence on the
weight measurements, while the airow connected with temperature upholding had
slight eects. It is suspected, that a temperature-controlled chamber is unnecessary
for the weight measurements, and may even aect them negatively. However, having
temperature-controlled components of the setup for alkaline mixes will likely have had
a positive eect, since the temperature of the mixed samples was fairly consistent.
4
TGA results
A 2 cm paste sample was cast for every series and temperature. In total, 60 TGA test
samples were produced. A supplementary TGA/DSC of Alusilica and Aalborg White
cement were also performed, resulting a total of 62 analyses.
The process of performing the analyses was very time consuming, since each analyses
took 4 hours to complete. The measurements, however, were largely consistent and
the overall results were trustworthy.
After the TGA machinery had performed an analysis, the data was assessed and anal-
ysed by hand. This procedure was applied to all analyses performed, and the data is
seen in Table 4.1 for standard mixes and in Table 4.2 for the alkali boosted mixes.
A general tendency for the Alusilica mix to have a smaller mass loss, from Ca(OH)2
deterioration, than its reference counterpart, is observed for both the standard and
alkali mixes. This tendency may in part be explained by the fact, that due to substi-
tution of cement with Alusilica, the 10% ALS samples will contain less cement with
which to produce Ca(OH)2.
However, the dierence in added cement is a mere 10%, and the dierence mass loss is
seen to vary signicantly between the reference and Alusilica mixes. This is especially
seen with the 40ŌŚ”C Alusilica samples, which exhibit a mass loss far smaller than their
reference counterparts.
This raises suspicion, that there may indeed be pozzolaneous activity in the sample,
where the formed Ca(OH)2 reacts with available Alusilica, thus reducing the amount
of Ca(OH)2 in the sample. If the mass loss percentage of Ca(OH)2 is assumed to
be directly linked to the degree of hydration in a sample, the Alusilica mix samples
exhibit a larger degree of hydration than the reference samples.
The measurement results of all TGA/DSC analyses performed are given in Appendix
D.
53
==PAGE:61==
Further observations include, that the residual mass decreases with the measurement
hydration times, indicating that more products of cement hydration were removed by
the TGA machinery, thus indicating, that a larger degree of hydration is consistent
with an increased hydration time.
Figure 4.1 displays the TGA/DSC of Alusilica dried at 105ŌŚ”C.
Figure 4.1: The analysis produced from a TGA/DSC of Alusilica.
The Alusilica experiences some loss of mass, to which the cause, at the time of writing
this report, is unknown.
Figure 4.2 displays the TGA/DSC performed on Portland White cement dried at
105ŌŚ”C.
The cement hardly experiences any loss of mass, and what little loss of mass there is,
appears to be due to a small amount of Calcium Hydroxide.
54
==PAGE:62==
Figure 4.2: The analysis produced from a TGA/DSC of white portland cement.
5
SEM imaging
A few images were pulled from a Scanning Electron Microscope, for further study of the
agglomerated particles. When compared to the SEM images of ??, the agglomerates
appeared to be far less 'pointy' in the sense that the general surface of the agglomerates
appears more polished, and has fewer particles pertruding from them. This is likely
because the Alusilica was ground in a pestle prior to the imaging, since it was used for
a TGA/DSC analysis. Figure 5.1 shows the structure of a typical Alusilica agglomerate.
The general agglomerate sizes were not much dierent from the earlier results, meaning
that the treatment of Alusilica in Sweden has little to no eect on the particle size
of the product. Of course, since the treatment involves a chemical passivisation of a
product, there is not expected to be much mechanical interaction between the particles,
and thus no subsequent breaking of the agglomerates. Figure 5.2 shows an assembly
of Alusilica agglomerates with varying sizes.
It is not known by what means the Alusilica particles assemble in these agglomerates.
There may be electrical tension, chemical or physical bindings present. If the agglomer-
ates were to be ground in the same manner, that cement clinker is ground, it is entirely
possible, that the agglomerates would break and free the individual particles. With
the particle sizes being approximately 1 ┬Ąm, it is speculated, that ground Alusilica
agglomerates will be more reactive as a pozzolan.
55
==PAGE:63==
Figure 5.1: A SEM image of a typical Alusilica agglomerate. The agglomerate appears somewhat
polished compared to earlier images provided by ??.
Figure 5.2: A SEM image of Alusilica particles of varying size.
For the sake of comparison and an explanation to the reverse micro-ller eect, a SEM
image of Alusilica agglomerates with cement particles is provided in Figure 5.3.
The cement particles are signicantly smaller than the Alusilica agglomerates, and are
seen to ll in the space between them. However, it is noted, that the agglomerate seen
in the picture is quite large, and not entirely representable.
A reduction in general size of the Alusilica by means of dispersing the agglomerates
may result in better reactivity. In such a case, Alusilica would be better able to induce
a micro-ller eect in a cement paste. Studies of dispersion of Alusilica agglomerates
56
==PAGE:64==
Figure 5.3: A SEM image depicting the dierence in size between cement particles and Alusilica
agglomerates. The cement particles are seen as the small and pointy particles, while the Alusilica
agglomerates are large and powdery.
have already been made to some extent. A 2016 study by ?? proved, that dispersed
Alusilica agglomerates improved the strength of hydrated cement, when compared to
undispersed Alusilica. The agglomerates were dispersed through co-grinding Alusilica
with cement clinker, a process that is both easy and eective. A grinding of Alusilica
alone may also result in dispersed agglomerates.
57
==PAGE:65==
Table 4.1: Results of TGA/DSC analyses of 2 cm standard mix samples at varying hydration times.
Results of TGA/DSC
Mix
Temp Sample mass Mass loss Ca(OH)2 Residual mass
[mg]
[%]
[%]
[%]
1 day
Reference
40ŌŚ”C
22.389
2.93
12.05
85.49
30ŌŚ”C
22.332
2.70
11.11
86.57
20ŌŚ”C
20.457
2.15
8.84
89.03
10% ALS
40ŌŚ”C
27.772
2.36
9.71
87.98
30ŌŚ”C
27.380
2.41
9.91
87.51
20ŌŚ”C
26.598
1.95
8.02
88.97
3 days
Reference
40ŌŚ”C
25.985
3.60
14.81
82.73
30ŌŚ”C
24.310
3.58
14.73
82.47
20ŌŚ”C
25.347
3.27
13.45
82.42
10% ALS
40ŌŚ”C
23.934
2.90
11.93
86.27
30ŌŚ”C
25.457
3.22
13.24
85.66
20ŌŚ”C
21.282
3.24
13.33
86.05
7 days
Reference
40ŌŚ”C
27.086
4.14
17.03
84.08
30ŌŚ”C
25.307
3.98
16.37
83.01
20ŌŚ”C
25.867
3.90
16.04
83.75
10% ALS
40ŌŚ”C
23.822
3.09
12.71
84.65
30ŌŚ”C
24.407
3.27
13.45
84.05
20ŌŚ”C
25.805
3.46
14.23
82.65
12 days
Reference
40ŌŚ”C
22.954
4.13
16.99
82.54
30ŌŚ”C
25.498
4.14
17.03
82.54
20ŌŚ”C
27.679
4.15
17.07
82.38
10% ALS
40ŌŚ”C
24.828
3.09
12.71
82.80
30ŌŚ”C
25.763
3.42
14.07
82.40
20ŌŚ”C
24.289
3.60
14.81
82.89
56 days
Reference
40ŌŚ”C
20.999
3.99
16.41
80.70
30ŌŚ”C
34.705
4.12
16.95
79.34
20ŌŚ”C
44.875
3.97
16.33
78.45
10% ALS
40ŌŚ”C
28.273
2.90
11.93
80.64
30ŌŚ”C
21.804
3.31
13.61
81.34
20ŌŚ”C
22.085
3.51
14.44
81.15
58
==PAGE:66==
Table 4.2: Results of TGA/DSC analyses of 2 cm alkali mix samples at varying hydration times.
Results of TGA/DSC
Mix
Temp Sample mass Mass loss Ca(OH)2 Residual mass
[mg]
[%]
[%]
[%]
1 day
Reference
40ŌŚ”C
27.031
2.87
11.804
87.86
30ŌŚ”C
27.437
2.51
10.324
87.43
20ŌŚ”C
26.328
2.33
9.583
87.98
10% ALS
40ŌŚ”C
25.011
2.55
10.488
87.11
30ŌŚ”C
26.776
2.80
11.516
88.13
20ŌŚ”C
25.631
2.53
10.406
88.65
3 days
Reference
40ŌŚ”C
22.3060
3.34
13.737
87.09
30ŌŚ”C
25.2023
3.32
13.66
86.91
20ŌŚ”C
25.400
3.01
12.38
86.69
10% ALS
40ŌŚ”C
24.147
3.02
12.42
85.84
30ŌŚ”C
23.041
3.04
12.50
86.14
20ŌŚ”C
22.951
3.12
12.83
85.64
7 days
Reference
40ŌŚ”C
24.906
3.87
15.92
85.83
30ŌŚ”C
25.405
3.46
14.23
85.21
20ŌŚ”C
27.789
3.65
15.01
85.40
10% ALS
40ŌŚ”C
22.356
2.88
11.85
85.13
30ŌŚ”C
24.861
3.35
13.78
84.85
20ŌŚ”C
21.227
3.44
14.15
85.06
12 days
Reference
40ŌŚ”C
26.154
3.80
15.63
84.62
30ŌŚ”C
22.816
3.87
15.92
84.05
20ŌŚ”C
22.901
3.76
15.46
84.25
10% ALS
40ŌŚ”C
25.295
2.85
11.72
84.12
30ŌŚ”C
26.813
3.23
13.28
83.72
20ŌŚ”C
24.812
3.50
14.40
83.12
21 days
Reference
40ŌŚ”C
25.189
4.30
17.69
82.37
30ŌŚ”C
24.484
4.13
16.99
81.37
20ŌŚ”C
24.740
4.06
16.70
81.87
10% ALS
40ŌŚ”C
22.416
3.17
13.04
83.24
30ŌŚ”C
26.871
3.39
13.94
82.75
20ŌŚ”C
24.366
3.53
14.52
83.84
59
==PAGE:67==
5 | Conclusion
Within the project period, several experiments were conducted to increase the under-
standing of Alusilica as a pozzolan. The main segment of experiments in the project
revolved around measurements of chemical shrinkage of pastes containing Alusilica.
Chemical shrinkage is an excellent indicator of the reactivity of a cement paste, since
it is directly connected to the amount of formed hydration product.
The development of chemical shrinkage was studied using gravimetry, which allowed
for precise measurements conducted in an isolated environment. A mix of cement with
a 10% substitution of Alusilica was used for the experiments, which involved measure-
ments of chemical shrinkage of a paste at hydration temperatures of 20ŌŚ”C, 30ŌŚ”C and
40ŌŚ”C. Five dierent sample heights were used for the measurements in order to assess
the eect of Alusilica on the permeability of the paste. A reference of pure cement was
used in all experiments.
It was concluded, that Alusilica improves the early reaction kinetics of a cement paste,
and contributes to a higher value of chemical shrinkage, thus indicating an increased
reactivity. These eects were seen in all experiments, but were especially prevalent at
increased temperatures. It was also concluded, that Alusilica contributes to a denser
paste, since the larger sample heights were seen to develop lower total chemical shrink-
age, than their smaller counterparts.
It was of interest, if Alusilica would experience further activation with a more alkaline
hydration environment. In order to study this, an articial pore solution of NaOH
was added to both the reference and Alusilica mixes. The chemical shrinkage of these
mixes was then measured in order to asses the reactivity.
Alusilica was observed to react swiftly with the alkaline solution, thus producing a paste
that was impossible to mix using conventional mixing methods. Instead, a method of
vacuum mixing was used, where the pore solution is sucked into the dry powder sample.
The added alkalinity of the paste was observed to have no positive eects on Alusilica,
with no further activation of the material. Instead, the total chemical shrinkage was
severely decreased for both the reference and Alusilica samples.
A series of thermogravimetric analyses was performed on hydrated samples with vary-
ing hydration times.
The purpose of the analyses was to calculate the amount of
Ca(OH)2 in the samples in order to study the degree of hydration. It was found, that
samples containing Alusilica had a lower content of Ca(OH)2, which is consistent with
an increased pozzolanic activity.
Electron microscopies were conducted in order to observe the microscopic structure of
60
==PAGE:68==
the Alusilica. It is seen to consist of ne particles of approximately 1-2┬Ą m, which are
collected in agglomerates with sizes of 20-150 ┬Ąm. This means, that a reverse micro-
ller eect is observed, where the much smaller cement particles are packed around
the agglomerates.
Alusilica exhibits an obvious potential as a pozzolan, and further investigations should
be conducted. It is suspected, that dispersion of the agglomerates will increase the
pozzolanic reactivity. This has been previously researched to some extent, with a dis-
persion of the agglomerates resulting in better results than undispersed agglomerates.
Also, the behaviour of Alusilica in more alkaline solutions should be further assessed.
The experiments with alkali in this report were conducted using an equivalent NaOH
content of 1.25%. This may have been too alkaline for the samples to exhibit any
positive eects, and should be considered an upper limit of alkalinity for further inves-
tigations.
With further analysis of the results obtained, the activation energy of Alusilica could
have been calculated, which may further help the understanding of the pozzolanic
properties of the material.
61
==PAGE:69==
Bibliography
[1] R. Merget, T. Bauer, H. U. K├╝pper, S. Philippou, H. D. Bauer, R. Breitstadt,
T. Bruening, Health hazards due to the inhalation of amorphous silica., Archives
of toxicology 75 (11-12) (2002) 62534.
URL http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11876495
[2] A. G. K. Moir, H. F. W. Taylor, F. Massazza, J. E. Bailey, S. Chanda, P. Pichat,
Improvements in the Early Strength Properties of Portland Cement [ and Discus-
sion ] M . Roy and S . Sprung Source : Philosophical Transactions of the Royal
Society of London . Series A , Mathematical and Physical Sciences , Vol . 310 ,
No . 1511 , Technol 310 (1511).
[3] W. Kurdowski, Cement and concrete chemistry, 2014.
[4] O. Mejlhede, Mikrosilicas Puzzolane Reaktion.
[5] D. Double, N. Thomas, D. Jameson, No Title, 7th ICCC Paris II (1980) II256.
[6] ASTM C1293, Standard Test Method for Determination of Length Change of
Concrete Due to Alkali-Silica Reaction (2009) 17.
[7] M. Juenger, H. Jennings, Eects of high alkalinity on cement pastes.
[8] T. Zhang, P. Gao, R. Luo, Y. Guo, J. Wei, Q. Yu, Measurement of chemical
shrinkage of cement paste: Comparison study of ASTM C 1608 and an improved
method, Construction and Building Materials 48 (February 2012) (2013) 662669.
URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.conbuildmat.2013.07.086
[9] M. Geiker, Measurements of chemical shrinkage and a systematic evauation of
hydration curves by means of the dispersion model.
[10] B. Z. Dilnesa, Application of thermogravimetric method in cement science, EMPA
Concrete/Construction Chemistry Laboratory (2014) 1.
[11] N. Ukrainczyk, M. Ukrainczyk, J. Sipusic, T. Matusinovic, XRD and TGA In-
vestigation of Hardened Cement Paste, 11. Conference on Materials, Processes,
Friction and Wear MATRIB'06, Vela Luka (2006) 2224.
[12] D. Standard, Malinger og lakker - Bestemmelse af densitet - Del 1: Pyknometer-
metode.
[13] Cubical expansion coecients.
URL http://www.engineeringtoolbox.com/cubical-expansion-coefficients-d{_}1262.
html
62
==PAGE:70==
[14] S. S. Bundgaard, Rasmus Sepstrup; Kjaer, Alusilica as a Mineral Admixture in
Concrete, Alusilica som mineralsk tilsaetningsstof i beton, Ph.D. thesis (2015).
URL https://findit.dtu.dk/en/catalog/2292736530
[15] M. T. Hasholt, Note : How to measure degree of hydration 119 (spring) (2016)
13.
63
==PAGE:71==
Appendices
64
==PAGE:72==
P.O. Box 902ŌĆā SE-251 09 Helsingborg, SwedenŌĆā
Tel +46 42 17 10 20ŌĆā Fax +46 42 13 52 85ŌĆā www.alufluor.comŌĆā alufluor@alufluor.com
Specification ŌĆō Alusilica
alufluor
HIGHER EFFICIENCY, LOWER IMPACT SINCE 1973
Typical Analysis	
SiO2	
85 %
(dry sample)
	
Al 	
2 %
	
F 	
5 %
	
LOI 	
Rest
	
	
By delivery the products contains 25ŌĆō30 % moisture
	
Bulk density	
By filling	
300 kg/m3
(typical)	
By shaking	
500 kg/m3
	
Sieve analysis	
>50╬╝m	
5 %
(typical)	
5ŌĆō50 ╬╝m	
90 %
	
< 5╬╝m	
5 %
	
Other properties 	
Alusilica is a synthetic, amorphous and dustless silicon dioxide.
	
Colour: 	
white
pH: 	
2.5ŌĆō4 (25 % water mix)
Angle of repose by filling: 	
40┬░
Our aluminium fluoride production process generates silicon 
┬Łdioxide (SiO2). Main application today is as fluorine absorbent  in 
the ┬Łphosphoric acid industry for the production of fluorosilicic acid. 
Silicon dioxide is also used in other applications in the chemical and 
mineral industry ŌĆō such as for improving properties in cement.
Issued July 1, 2011
A | Alusilica specications
65
==PAGE:73==
Summary
Data
Value
MV(um): 46.40
MN(um): 1.327
MA(um): 10.23
CS:5.87E-01
SD: 42.06
Mz: 42.98
Žā╬╣:
Žā╬╣:
Žā╬╣:
Žā╬╣:
40.04
Ski: 0.454
Kg: 0.800
Percentiles
%TileSize(um)
10.00
4.16
20.00
7.82
30.00 12.20
40.00 18.42
50.00 32.23
60.00 51.60
70.00 66.66
80.00 82.60
90.00 105.8
95.00 127.9
SIO2(*)
Timing
Setzero Time
10 (sec)
Run Time
10 (sec)
Number of Runs
1
Analysis
SiO2
Refractive Index
1.46
Transparency
Transp
Shape
Irregular
AIR
Refractive Index
1.00
Options:
Filter
Enabled
Analysis Gain Default(2)
Analysis ModeS3000/3500
Perspective
Progression Standard
Distribution
Volume
Upper Edge(um)
1408
Lower Edge(um)
0.243
Residuals
Disabled
Title
SiO2
Identifiers
DTU 170105
-
Database Record
668
Run Number
1 of 1
Date1/12/2017
Time 9:17 AM
Acquired Date1/12/2017
Acquired Time 9:17 AM
Serial Number
6503
Calculated Data
Above Residual
0
Below Residual
0
Loading Factor
0.0108
Transmission
0.984
RMS Residual 0.907%
Recalculation Status
DB-Meas : : Original :
-
- Particle Size Analysis -
Size(um)%Chan %Pass Size(um)%Chan%Pass
1408
0.00 100.00
3.27
1.48
7.47
1184
0.00 100.00 2.750
1.25
5.99
995.6
0.00 100.00 2.312
1.06
4.74
837.2
0.00 100.00 1.945
0.91
3.68
704.0
0.00 100.00 1.635
0.78
2.77
592.0
0.00 100.00 1.375
0.65
1.99
497.8
0.00 100.00 1.156
0.54
1.34
418.6
0.00 100.00 0.972
0.44
0.80
352.0
0.00 100.00 0.818
0.36
0.36
296.0
0.00 100.00 0.688
0.00
0.00
248.9
0.41 100.00 0.578
0.00
0.00
209.3
0.76
99.59
0.486
0.00
0.00
176.0
1.51
98.83
0.409
0.00
0.00
148.0
2.86
97.32
0.344
0.00
0.00
124.5
4.79
94.46
0.2890
0.00
0.00
104.7
6.82
89.67
88.00
7.96
82.85
74.00
7.94
74.89
62.23
6.51
66.95
52.33
4.74
60.44
44.00
3.44
55.70
37.00
2.81
52.26
31.11
2.73
49.45
26.16
3.05
46.72
22.00
3.57
43.67
18.50
4.06
40.10
15.56
4.30
36.04
13.08
4.24
31.74
11.00
3.98
27.50
9.25
3.63
23.52
7.78
3.25
19.89
6.54
2.86
16.64
5.50
2.46
13.78
4.62
2.09
11.32
3.89
1.76
9.23
Sample System (Dry)
Feeder TypeTurbotrac
Rate
10
Peaks Summary
Dia(um)Vol%Width
71.65
53.3 67.75
9.18
46.7 14.54
C:\Microtrac\FLEX 11.1.0.1\Databases\AlF3.MDB
FLEX
11.1.0.1
-Tabular Data -
- Measurement Info -
-SOP Info-
- Notes -
Particle Size Distribution
Particle Size Distribution
%Passing
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
%Channel
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
Size(microns)
0.1
1
10
100
1,000
10,000
1/12/2017 11:36 AM
B | Particle size analysis SiO2
66
==PAGE:74==
Summary
Data
Value
MV(um): 50.19
MN(um): 1.972
MA(um): 13.13
CS:4.57E-01
SD: 43.34
Mz: 47.34
Žā╬╣:
Žā╬╣:
Žā╬╣:
Žā╬╣:
40.98
Ski: 0.324
Kg: 0.790
Percentiles
%TileSize(um)
10.00
5.03
20.00
9.27
30.00 15.49
40.00 24.96
50.00 40.56
60.00 56.63
70.00 70.75
80.00 86.43
90.00 109.1
95.00 130.6
SIO2(*)
Timing
Setzero Time
10 (sec)
Run Time
10 (sec)
Number of Runs
1
Analysis
SiO2
Refractive Index
1.46
Transparency
Transp
Shape
Irregular
AIR
Refractive Index
1.00
Options:
Filter
Enabled
Analysis Gain Default(2)
Analysis ModeS3000/3500
Perspective
Progression Standard
Distribution
Volume
Upper Edge(um)
1408
Lower Edge(um)
0.243
Residuals
Disabled
Title
SiO2+CaO
Identifiers
DTU 170105
-
Database Record
670
Run Number
1 of 1
Date1/12/2017
Time 9:21 AM
Acquired Date1/12/2017
Acquired Time 9:21 AM
Serial Number
6503
Calculated Data
Above Residual
0
Below Residual
0
Loading Factor
0.0127
Transmission
0.984
RMS Residual 0.903%
Recalculation Status
DB-Meas : : Original :
-
- Particle Size Analysis -
Size(um)%Chan %Pass Size(um)%Chan%Pass
1408
0.00 100.00
3.27
1.33
5.19
1184
0.00 100.00 2.750
1.06
3.86
995.6
0.00 100.00 2.312
0.84
2.80
837.2
0.00 100.00 1.945
0.67
1.96
704.0
0.00 100.00 1.635
0.53
1.29
592.0
0.00 100.00 1.375
0.42
0.76
497.8
0.00 100.00 1.156
0.34
0.34
418.6
0.00 100.00 0.972
0.00
0.00
352.0
0.00 100.00 0.818
0.00
0.00
296.0
0.00 100.00 0.688
0.00
0.00
248.9
0.42 100.00 0.578
0.00
0.00
209.3
0.81
99.58
0.486
0.00
0.00
176.0
1.65
98.77
0.409
0.00
0.00
148.0
3.20
97.12
0.344
0.00
0.00
124.5
5.41
93.92
0.2890
0.00
0.00
104.7
7.62
88.51
88.00
8.64
80.89
74.00
8.35
72.25
62.23
6.78
63.90
52.33
5.13
57.12
44.00
4.03
51.99
37.00
3.54
47.96
31.11
3.46
44.42
26.16
3.57
40.96
22.00
3.66
37.39
18.50
3.63
33.73
15.56
3.52
30.10
13.08
3.37
26.58
11.00
3.24
23.21
9.25
3.10
19.97
7.78
2.93
16.87
6.54
2.69
13.94
5.50
2.38
11.25
4.62
2.02
8.87
3.89
1.66
6.85
Sample System (Dry)
Feeder TypeTurbotrac
Rate
10
Peaks Summary
Dia(um)Vol%Width
40.56
100 86.68
C:\Microtrac\FLEX 11.1.0.1\Databases\AlF3.MDB
FLEX
11.1.0.1
-Tabular Data -
- Measurement Info -
-SOP Info-
- Notes -
Particle Size Distribution
Particle Size Distribution
%Passing
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
%Channel
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
Size(microns)
0.1
1
10
100
1,000
10,000
1/12/2017 11:37 AM
C | Particle size analysis SiO2 + CaO
67
==PAGE:75==
Created with NETZSCH Proteus software
200
400
600
800
1000
Temperature /┬░C
86
88
90
92
94
96
98
100
TG /%
-3.5
-3.0
-2.5
-2.0
-1.5
-1.0
-0.5
0.0
0.5
DSC /(mW/mg)
Main    2017-06-02 12:29    User: s123121
MultipleData.ngb-taa
 
[1.2] Reference 40┬░C 1 day.ngb-ss3
TG
DSC
[2.2] Reference 30┬░C 1 day.ngb-ss3
TG
DSC
[3.2] Reference 20┬░C 1 day.ngb-ss3
TG
DSC
[1.2]
[2.2]
[3.2]
[2.2]
[1.2]
[3.2]
Ōåō exo
D | TGA/DSC Results
68
==PAGE:76==
Created with NETZSCH Proteus software
200
400
600
800
1000
Temperature /┬░C
82
84
86
88
90
92
94
96
98
100
TG /%
-2.5
-2.0
-1.5
-1.0
-0.5
0.0
0.5
DSC /(mW/mg)
Main    2017-06-02 12:39    User: s123121
 
[1.2] Reference 40┬░C 3 days.ngb-ss3
TG
DSC
[2.2] Reference 30┬░C 3 days.ngb-ss3
TG
DSC
[3.2] Reference 20┬░C 3 days.ngb-ss3
TG
DSC
[1.2]
[1.2]
[2.2]
[2.2]
[3.2]
[3.2]
Ōåō exo
==PAGE:77==
Created with NETZSCH Proteus software
200
400
600
800
1000
Temperature /┬░C
82
84
86
88
90
92
94
96
98
100
TG /%
-2.5
-2.0
-1.5
-1.0
-0.5
0.0
0.5
DSC /(mW/mg)
Main    2017-06-02 12:40    User: s123121
 
[1.2] Reference 40┬░C 7 days.ngb-ss3
TG
DSC
[2.2] Reference 30┬░C 7 days.ngb-ss3
TG
DSC
[3.2] Reference 20┬░C 7 days.ngb-ss3
TG
DSC
[1.2]
[1.2]
[2.2]
[2.2]
[3.2]
[3.2]
Ōåō exo
==PAGE:78==
Created with NETZSCH Proteus software
200
400
600
800
1000
Temperature /┬░C
80
85
90
95
100
TG /%
-2.0
-1.5
-1.0
-0.5
0.0
0.5
DSC /(mW/mg)
Main    2017-06-02 12:45    User: s123121
 
[1.2] Reference 40┬░C 56 days.ngb-ss3
TG
DSC
[2.2] Reference 30┬░C 56 days.ngb-ss3
TG
DSC
[3.2] Reference 20┬░C 56 days.ngb-ss3
TG
DSC
[1.2]
[1.2]
[2.2]
[2.2]
[3.2]
[3.2]
Ōåō exo
==PAGE:79==
Created with NETZSCH Proteus software
200
400
600
800
1000
Temperature /┬░C
82
84
86
88
90
92
94
96
98
100
TG /%
-2.5
-2.0
-1.5
-1.0
-0.5
0.0
0.5
DSC /(mW/mg)
Main    2017-06-02 12:43    User: s123121
 
[1.2] Reference 40┬░C 12 days.ngb-ss3
TG
DSC
[2.2] Reference 30┬░C 12 days.ngb-ss3
TG
DSC
[3.2] Reference 20┬░C 12 days.ngb-ss3
TG
DSC
[1.2]
[1.2]
[2.2]
[2.2]
[3.2]
[3.2]
Ōåō exo
==PAGE:80==
Created with NETZSCH Proteus software
200
400
600
800
1000
Temperature /┬░C
88
90
92
94
96
98
100
TG /%
-2.5
-2.0
-1.5
-1.0
-0.5
0.0
0.5
DSC /(mW/mg)
Main    2017-06-02 12:49    User: s123121
 
[1.2] 10% ALS 40┬░C 1 day.ngb-ss3
TG
DSC
[2.2] 10% ALS 30┬░C 1 day.ngb-ss3
TG
DSC
[3.2] 10% ALS 20┬░C 1 day.ngb-ss3
TG
DSC
[1.2]
[1.2]
[2.2]
[2.2]
[3.2]
[3.2]
Ōåō exo
==PAGE:81==
Created with NETZSCH Proteus software
200
400
600
800
1000
Temperature /┬░C
86
88
90
92
94
96
98
100
TG /%
-3.0
-2.5
-2.0
-1.5
-1.0
-0.5
0.0
0.5
DSC /(mW/mg)
Main    2017-06-02 12:52    User: s123121
 
[1.2] 10% ALS 40┬░C 3 days.ngb-ss3
TG
DSC
[2.2] 10% ALS 30┬░C 3 days.ngb-ss3
TG
DSC
[3.2] 10% ALS 20┬░C 3 days.ngb-ss3
TG
DSC
[1.2]
[1.2]
[2.2]
[2.2]
[3.2]
[3.2]
Ōåō exo
==PAGE:82==
Created with NETZSCH Proteus software
200
400
600
800
1000
Temperature /┬░C
82
84
86
88
90
92
94
96
98
100
TG /%
-2.0
-1.5
-1.0
-0.5
0.0
0.5
DSC /(mW/mg)
Main    2017-06-02 12:54    User: s123121
 
[1.2] 10% ALS 40┬░C 7 days.ngb-ss3
TG
DSC
[2.2] 10% ALS 30┬░C 7 days.ngb-ss3
TG
DSC
[3.2] 10% ALS 20┬░C 7 days.ngb-ss3
TG
DSC
[1.2]
[1.2]
[2.2]
[2.2]
[3.2]
[3.2]
Ōåō exo
==PAGE:83==
Created with NETZSCH Proteus software
200
400
600
800
1000
Temperature /┬░C
82
84
86
88
90
92
94
96
98
100
TG /%
-2.0
-1.5
-1.0
-0.5
0.0
0.5
DSC /(mW/mg)
Main    2017-06-02 12:56    User: s123121
 
[1.2] 10% ALS 40┬░C 12 days.ngb-ss3
TG
DSC
[2.2] 10% ALS 30┬░C 12 days.ngb-ss3
TG
DSC
[3.2] 10% ALS 20┬░C 12 days.ngb-ss3
TG
DSC
[1.2]
[1.2]
[2.2]
[2.2]
[3.2]
[3.2]
Ōåō exo
==PAGE:84==
Created with NETZSCH Proteus software
200
400
600
800
1000
Temperature /┬░C
80
85
90
95
100
TG /%
-2.0
-1.5
-1.0
-0.5
0.0
0.5
DSC /(mW/mg)
Main    2017-06-02 12:58    User: s123121
 
[1.2] 10% ALS 40┬░C 56 days.ngb-ss3
TG
DSC
[2.2] 10% ALS 30┬░C 56 days.ngb-ss3
TG
DSC
[3.2] 10% ALS 20┬░C 56 days.ngb-ss3
TG
DSC
[1.2]
[1.2]
[2.2]
[2.2]
[3.2]
[3.2]
Ōåō exo
==PAGE:85==
Created with NETZSCH Proteus software
200
400
600
800
1000
Temperature /┬░C
88
90
92
94
96
98
100
TG /%
-2.0
-1.5
-1.0
-0.5
0.0
DSC /(mW/mg)
Main    2017-06-02 13:07    User: s123121
 
[1.2] Alkali-Reference 40┬░C 1 day.ngb-ss3
TG
DSC
[2.2] Alkali-Reference 30┬░C 1 day.ngb-ss3
TG
DSC
[3.2] Alkali-Reference 20┬░C 1 day.ngb-ss3
TG
DSC
[1.2]
[1.2]
[2.2]
[2.2]
[3.2]
[3.2]
Ōåō exo
==PAGE:86==
Created with NETZSCH Proteus software
200
400
600
800
1000
Temperature /┬░C
86
88
90
92
94
96
98
100
TG /%
-3.0
-2.5
-2.0
-1.5
-1.0
-0.5
0.0
DSC /(mW/mg)
Main    2017-06-02 13:08    User: s123121
 
[1.2] Alkali-Reference 40┬░C 3 days.ngb-ss3
TG
DSC
[2.2] Alkali-Reference 30┬░C 3 days.ngb-ss3
TG
DSC
[3.2] Alkali-Reference 20┬░C 3 days.ngb-ss3
TG
DSC
[1.2]
[1.2]
[2.2]
[2.2]
[3.2]
[3.2]
Ōåō exo
==PAGE:87==
Created with NETZSCH Proteus software
200
400
600
800
1000
Temperature /┬░C
86
88
90
92
94
96
98
100
TG /%
-2.5
-2.0
-1.5
-1.0
-0.5
0.0
DSC /(mW/mg)
Main    2017-06-02 13:10    User: s123121
 
[1.2] Alkali-Reference 40┬░C 7 days.ngb-ss3
TG
DSC
[2.2] Alkali-Reference 30┬░C 7 days.ngb-ss3
TG
DSC
[3.2] Alkali-Reference 20┬░C 7 days.ngb-ss3
TG
DSC
[1.2]
[1.2]
[2.2]
[2.2]
[3.2]
[3.2]
Ōåō exo
==PAGE:88==
Created with NETZSCH Proteus software
200
400
600
800
1000
Temperature /┬░C
84
86
88
90
92
94
96
98
100
TG /%
-2.5
-2.0
-1.5
-1.0
-0.5
0.0
DSC /(mW/mg)
Main    2017-06-02 13:12    User: s123121
 
[1.2] Alkali-Reference 40┬░C 12 days.ngb-ss3
TG
DSC
[2.2] Alkali-Reference 30┬░C 12 days.ngb-ss3
TG
DSC
[3.2] Alkali-Reference 20┬░C 12 days.ngb-ss3
TG
DSC
[1.2]
[1.2]
[2.2]
[2.2]
[3.2]
[3.2]
Ōåō exo
==PAGE:89==
Created with NETZSCH Proteus software
200
400
600
800
1000
Temperature /┬░C
85
90
95
100
TG /%
-2.5
-2.0
-1.5
-1.0
-0.5
0.0
0.5
DSC /(mW/mg)
Main    2017-06-02 13:14    User: s123121
 
[1.2] Alkali-Reference 40┬░C 21 days.ngb-ss3
TG
DSC
[2.2] Alkali-Reference 30┬░C 21 days.ngb-ss3
TG
DSC
[3.2] Alkali-Reference 20┬░C 21 days.ngb-ss3
TG
DSC
[1.2]
[1.2]
[2.2]
[2.2]
[3.2]
[3.2]
Ōåō exo
==PAGE:90==
Created with NETZSCH Proteus software
200
400
600
800
1000
Temperature /┬░C
88
90
92
94
96
98
100
TG /%
-2.5
-2.0
-1.5
-1.0
-0.5
0.0
DSC /(mW/mg)
Main    2017-06-02 13:16    User: s123121
 
[1.2] Alkali-10% ALS 40┬░C 1 day.ngb-ss3
TG
DSC
[2.2] Alkali-10% ALS 30┬░C 1 day.ngb-ss3
TG
DSC
[3.2] Alkali-10% ALS 20┬░C 1 day.ngb-ss3
TG
DSC
[1.2]
[1.2]
[2.2]
[2.2]
[3.2]
[3.2]
Ōåō exo
==PAGE:91==
Created with NETZSCH Proteus software
200
400
600
800
1000
Temperature /┬░C
86
88
90
92
94
96
98
100
TG /%
-2.5
-2.0
-1.5
-1.0
-0.5
0.0
DSC /(mW/mg)
Main    2017-06-02 13:17    User: s123121
 
[1.2] Alkali-10% ALS 40┬░C 3 days.ngb-ss3
TG
DSC
[2.2] Alkali-10% ALS 30┬░C 3 days.ngb-ss3
TG
DSC
[3.2] Alkali-10% ALS 20┬░C 3 days.ngb-ss3
TG
DSC
[1.2]
[1.2]
[2.2]
[2.2]
[3.2]
[3.2]
Ōåō exo
==PAGE:92==
Created with NETZSCH Proteus software
200
400
600
800
1000
Temperature /┬░C
84
86
88
90
92
94
96
98
100
TG /%
-2.5
-2.0
-1.5
-1.0
-0.5
0.0
0.5
DSC /(mW/mg)
Main    2017-06-02 13:20    User: s123121
 
[1.2] Alkali-10% ALS 40┬░C 7 days.ngb-ss3
TG
DSC
[2.2] Alkali-10% ALS 30┬░C 7 days.ngb-ss3
TG
DSC
[3.2] Alkali-10% ALS 20┬░C 7 days.ngb-ss3
TG
DSC
[1.2]
[1.2]
[2.2]
[2.2]
[3.2]
[3.2]
Ōåō exo
==PAGE:93==
Created with NETZSCH Proteus software
200
400
600
800
1000
Temperature /┬░C
84
86
88
90
92
94
96
98
100
TG /%
-2.5
-2.0
-1.5
-1.0
-0.5
0.0
0.5
DSC /(mW/mg)
Main    2017-06-02 13:21    User: s123121
 
[1.2] Alkali-10% ALS 40┬░C 12 days.ngb-ss3
TG
DSC
[2.2] Alkali-10% ALS 30┬░C 12 days.ngb-ss3
TG
DSC
[3.2] Alkali-10% ALS 20┬░C 12 days.ngb-ss3
TG
DSC
[1.2]
[1.2]
[2.2]
[2.2]
[3.2]
[3.2]
Ōåō exo
==PAGE:94==
Created with NETZSCH Proteus software
200
400
600
800
1000
Temperature /┬░C
82
84
86
88
90
92
94
96
98
100
TG /%
-2.0
-1.5
-1.0
-0.5
0.0
0.5
DSC /(mW/mg)
Main    2017-06-02 13:23    User: s123121
 
[1.2] Alkali-10% ALS 40┬░C 21 days.ngb-ss3
TG
DSC
[2.2] Alkali-10% ALS 30┬░C 21 days.ngb-ss3
TG
DSC
[3.2] Alkali-10% ALS 20┬░C 21 days.ngb-ss3
TG
DSC
[1.2]
[1.2]
[2.2]
[2.2]
[3.2]
[3.2]
Ōåō exo
==PAGE:95==
E | Eect of handling on weight mea-
surements
The following pages contains graphs showcasing the error occurring during the weight
measurements, when the lid is lifted.
88
==PAGE:96==
Figure .1
89
==PAGE:97==
Figure .2
90
==PAGE:98==
Figure .3
91
==PAGE:99==
92
==PAGE:100==
F | Thermohygrograph
93
