==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
Master thesis
Experimental Investigation of the
Oedometer Compressibility in a
Paleogene Clay
Andreas Randløv Kristensen, s124281
Supervisor:
Dr. Irene Rocchi, DTU Civil Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
DTU Civil Engineering
Preface and Acknowledgements
This thesis has been prepared in the period between the 23th of January 2017 and the
23th of June 2017, as the ﬁnal part of the MSc programme in Civil Engineering at the
Technical University of Denmark, DTU. The thesis represents 30 ECTS points.
First of all, I would like to deeply thank my supervisor Irene Rocchi, this thesis would
not have been possible without the invaluable help and guidance from her through-
out the project. Furthermore, I would like to thank John Troelsen for his assistance
in the laboratory. I would also like to send my gratitude to GEO and the Technical
University of Denmark for providing the drilling cones used for the tests and materials
needed in order to perform them. In addition, I would like to thank Klaus Myndal
for manufacturing diﬀerent pieces used in the Constant Rate of Strain tests. Finally,
I would like to thank Julie Lejre for her tireless help and kind support.
Kgs. Lyngby Thursday 22nd June, 2017
Andreas Randløv Kristensen (s124281)
Page 3
==PAGE:4==
DTU Civil Engineering
Abstract
A series of one-dimensional incremental load tests was performed in order to investi-
gate diﬀerent aspects’ eﬀect on the compressibility of Røsnæs clay from Fehmarn Belt,
which is a plastic and ﬁssured Paleogene clay. The eﬀect of using diﬀerent water types
for reconstituting the clay was tested. No signiﬁcant impact from salinity was found
on the Atterberg’s limit of the tested Røsnæs clay. Results from incremental load tests
did however show a diﬀerence in compression and swelling index depending on the pore
water used for the test.
A series of constant rate of strain tests were also performed on the clay. The results of
these tests showed that the rate of strain had an impact on the compression behaviour.
Finally, incremental load oedometer tests were performed on intact Røsnæs clay sam-
ples, in order to investigate the eﬀect of clay structure on the compression and swelling
curves. The samples tested did not reach stresses high enough to cause yielding. The
reason for this could likely be that the upper bound preconsolidation stress is signiﬁ-
cantly higher than values stated in the Geotechnical Data Reports. Since, yielding was
not reached, it was not possible to determine the stress sensitivity and assess whether
the intact samples had a sedimentation or a post-sedimentation structure.
Resum´e
En række en-aksiale gradvise oplastningsforsøg blev udført med det form˚al, at un-
dersøge forskellige aspekters eﬀekt p˚a kompressionsevnen af Røsnæs ler fra Femern
Bælt, som er en plastisk og sprækket palæogen ler. Eﬀekten ved at bruge forskel-
lige typer vand til at rekonstruere leret blev testet. Der blev ikke fundet at salin-
itet havde nogen særlig eﬀekt p˚a det testede Røsnæs lers Atterberg-grænser. Resul-
tater fra de gradvise oplastningsforsøg viste dog at porevandet havde en indﬂydelse p˚a
kompressions- og udvidelsesindeks.
En række forsøg med konstant tøjnings-rate blev ogs˚a udført p˚a leret. Resultaterne
af disse forsøg viste, at tøjnings-raten havde en indﬂydelse p˚a lerets opførsel under
kompression.
Til slut, blev der udført oedometer forsøg p˚a intakte Røsnæs ler prøver for at un-
dersøge eﬀekten af struktur p˚a op- og aﬂastningskurverne. De testede prøver blev dog
ikke oplastet til et spændingsniveau der var højt nok til at foresage udbøjning. ˚Arsagen
til dette kan være, at den øvre værdi for forkonsolideringsspændingen var væsentligt
højere end den værdi der er angivet i de geotekniske data rapporter. Eftersom der
ikke blev opn˚aet udbøjning, var det ikke muligt at bestemme spændningssensitiviteten
og vurdere hvorvidt de intakte prøver havde en sedimentationsstruktur eller en efter-
sedimentationsstruktur
Page 4
==PAGE:5==
DTU Civil Engineering
Table of Content
1
Introduction
7
2
Geological setting and material tested
8
2.1
Røsnæs clay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2
Samples used for testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
Theoretical Background
11
3.1
Atterberg limits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
Activity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.3
Primary consolidation and secondary compression . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.4
Speciﬁc volume . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.5
Intrinsic properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.6
Compression curves . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.7
Soil structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4
Equipment and experimental set up/procedure
28
4.1
Reconstitution of soil samples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.2
Intact samples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.3
Liquid limit tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.4
Plastic limit test
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.5
Pycnometer test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.6
Hydrometer test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.7
Incremental Load Oedometer (ILO) tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.8
Constant Rate of Strain (CRS) tests
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.9
IL tests performed in direct shear apparatus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5
Results
41
5.1
Atterberg limits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.2
Speciﬁc gravity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5.3
Particle size distribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5.4
Oedometer results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5.5
Constant rate of strain tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
5.6
Intact tests
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
6
Discussion
59
6.1
Possible sources of error
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
7
Conclusions
67
7.1
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
References
69
Appendix
72
Page 5
==PAGE:6==
==PAGE:7==
DTU Civil Engineering
1
Introduction
In 1990 Burland published an important paper on the compressibility and shear strength
of natural clays, as a part of the 30th Rankine Lecture held by the British Geotechnical
Association. In the paper, Burland compares the compression properties of reconsti-
tuted and intact natural clays. This comparison is of great importance with respect to
critical state soil mechanics, since reconstituted and natural clays behave diﬀerently.
The critical state soil mechanics is primarily based on reconstituted soils, it is therefore
of great interest to study the natural soils as well.
When testing reconstituted and intact clays in the laboratory, synthetic pore water
resembling the in-situ conditions is not always used. Instead, the water used is often
distilled or tap water. The possible impact on clay compression and swelling properties
of using diﬀerent types of water was therefore interesting to investigate, since these
properties are commonly used in geotechnical engineering.
Some papers (e.g. Leroueil et al., 1985 and Li & Baudet, 2016) indicate that strain
rate can have an inﬂuence on the compression behaviour of clay. However, the be-
haviour has only been investigated for a few clay types and often at low stresses. It
was therefore interesting to investigate the strain rate behaviour on a plastic clay.
In this report, the compressibility of reconstituted and intact Paleogene clay was in-
vestigated through incremental load (IL) tests. The tests were performed using saline,
tap and distilled pore water. Furthermore, a range of constant rate of strain (CRS)
tests were performed in order to investigate the possible eﬀect of strain rate. The tests
were carried out on Røsnæs clay which is a highly plastic clay, found in Fehmarn Belt
between the Danish island Lolland and the German island Fehmarn. The soil of the
Fehmarn Belt area is of great interest, since a tunnel between Denmark and Germany
are planned at that location.
The thesis is divided into six main chapters beginning with an introduction chap-
ter, followed by a chapter explaining the theoretical background for interpreting the
results. The third chapter describes the equipment and experimental set up/procedure,
explaining how the tests were carried out. In chapter four, the results are presented
and they are discussed in chapter ﬁve. Finally, the thesis is wrapped up with a sixth
chapter summarizing the conclusions.
Page 7
==PAGE:8==
DTU Civil Engineering
2
Geological setting and material tested
As already mentioned, the location of the Røsnæs clay samples, is Fehmarn Belt, which
is the belt between the Danish island of Lolland and the German island of Fehmarn.
The location of the area can be seen in Figure 3.
Figure 1: Map illustrating the location of the area. (Google, 2017).
The geology at Fehmarn Belt can be divided into three overall categories. The youngest
and shallowest being Quarternary deposits, followed by Paleogene clay and the oldest
being Cretaceous chalk (Awadalkarim, 2014). The Quaternary deposits includes both
post-glacial and glacial deposits, such as Clay Till. According to Sheldon et al. (2012),
the Paleogene clay deposits can be divided into ﬁve diﬀerent clay formations. The old-
est being the Æbelø formation followed by the Holmehus formation, the Ølst formation,
the Røsnæs clay formation and ﬁnally the Lillebælt clay formation. A cross-section of
the area, showing the diﬀerent geological layers, can be seen in Figure 2.
Page 8
==PAGE:9==
DTU Civil Engineering
Figure 2: Simpliﬁed geological cross-section proﬁle of Fehmarn Belt.
The folding
patterns shown in the Paleogone clay are for illustrative purpose only. From Sheldon
et al. (2012), based on Rambøll/Arup (2011).
2.1
Røsnæs clay
The soil studied in this report is the Røsnæs clay formation from Fehmarn Belt. Ac-
cording to Sheldon et al. (2012), the Røsnæs clay is a Paleogene clay, deposited in the
Eucene period, approximately 50 million years ago. Several sources describe the clay
as a ﬁne-grained highly plastic clay. Sheldon et al. (2012), suggests that the color of
the Røsnæs clay can be red, brown and yellow-brown depending on the location and
depth. The thickness of the Røsnæs clay formation is reported to be between 15-28
meters. Awadalkarim (2014) notes that one of the characteristics that diﬀerentiates
the Røsnæs clay from the other Paleogene formations, is that it can be slightly calcare-
ous in some locations. From the description of core samples containing Røsnæs clay,
it was seen that the clay, apart from being highly plastic, tend to be very ﬁssured and
slickensided (GEO, 2010).
2.2
Samples used for testing
The samples used for testing are from the Røsnæs clay layer at Fehmarn Belt. How-
ever, an intact sample from Lower Clay Till layer from Fehmarn Belt was also tested.
The exact location of were the samples were taken can be seen on map in Figure 3.
The Røsnæs clay used were taken from a depth between 38.55 m and 39.10 m, while
the clay till is taken from a depth between 33.7 m and 34.3 m.
For some of the Røsnæs clay samples tested, saline water was used for reconstitu-
tion instead of regular distilled water. The saline water’s composition was based on
extracted pore water from Paleogene clay samples from Fehmarn Belt. The salt content
in the synthetic pore water can be seen in Table 1.
Page 9
==PAGE:10==
DTU Civil Engineering
Table 1: Salt content in synthetic Fehmarn Belt water for Paleogene clay (Geus, 2011).
Salt
Mass [g/L]
NaCl
13.24
MgCl2, 6H2O
1.97
CaCl2, 2H2O
1.49
K2SO4
0.99
Figure 3: Map of the area with location of borehole marked. From Fugro (2011).
Page 10
==PAGE:11==
DTU Civil Engineering
3
Theoretical Background
This section explains the theoretical aspects relevant for understanding the results from
the performed tests, including Atterberg limits, ’intrinsic’ properties and compression
behaviour.
3.1
Atterberg limits
Atterbergs limits where created by the Swedish agronomist Albert Atterberg. They
are used extensively in geotechnical engineering, for describing and identifying cohesive
soils. Atterbergs limits is a combined term for the the liquid limit, the plastic limit
and the shrinkage limit, which separate soil states based on water content. Where the
liquid limit and the plastic limit are the most commonly used.
As seen in Figure 4, the liquid limit, LL or wL, separates the liquid state and plastic
state of soil, while the plastic limit, PL or wp, separates the plastic and semi-solid
soil state.
Atterbergs limits are used extensively in soil mechanics, since they can
be used to indirectly assess diﬀerent mechanical properties of cohesive soils, including
compressibility and shear strength, in an easy and cost eﬃcient way.
Figure 4: Soil states separated by Atterbergs limits.
A parameter called the consistency index, CI describes the ﬁrmness of a soil. The
consistency index is related to the Atterberg limits and can be found from the following
equation:
CI = LL −W
LL −PL
(1)
Where W is the natural water content of the soil [%].
If the consistency index have a value of 0, the soil will be at the liquid limit, while soils
at the plastic limit have a consistency index of 1.
Page 11
==PAGE:12==
DTU Civil Engineering
3.1.1
The Casagrande plasticity chart
The Casagrande plasticity chart serves as an important tool in classifying soil. The
chart is based on the liquid limit and the plasticity index, PI or Ip. The plasticity
index is simply the numerical diﬀerence between the liquid and the plastic limit. Thus,
in order to use the chart, it is necessary to ﬁrst determine the liquid limit and plastic
limit of a soil. The chart can be used to determine how plastic the soil is. Furthermore,
a line called the A-line can be plotted. The equation for the A-line is:
PI = 0.73 · (LL −20)
(2)
Soils above the A-line can be classiﬁed as clay, while soils below can be classiﬁed as
silt. In addition there is a line called the U-line. That represents the upper limit for
the plot of natural soils and follows the equation:
PI = 0.9 · (LL −8)
(3)
Figure 31 illustrates the Casagrande chart, divided into diﬀerent soil types and plastic-
ity categories based on liquid limit and the A-line. The U-line representing the upper
limit of possible non-erroneous test results.
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
sticity index [%]
A-line
U-line
High
plasticity
clays
Low
plasticity
clays
Medium
plasticity
clays
0
10
20
30
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Plas
Liquid limit [%]
Low
plasticity
silts
High
plasticity
silts
Medium
plasticity
silts
Figure 5: Casagrande chart, based on Mitchell (1993).
The chart typically only goes to a liquid limit of 100 %, however Grønbech et al. (2011)
have suggested an extended Casagrande chart, including soils with a liquid limit above
100 %. This chart is very relevant for Paleogene clays, since many of these have a liquid
limit close to or above 100 %. According to Grønbech et al. (2011) soils above this limit
are termed either super high plasticity clay (CS) or extremely high plasticity clay (CE).
Page 12
==PAGE:13==
DTU Civil Engineering
When looking at the soil at a microscopic level, it is interesting to know its miner-
alogy. Diﬀerent common clay minerals tend to plot in speciﬁc areas on the plasticity
chart, which enables an assessment of which clay minerals dominate the soil. Mitchell
(1993), have constructed a table, indicating the range of possible liquid limit and plastic
limit for diﬀerent typical clay minerals. As showed in Table 2.
Table 2: Atterberg limit values for typical clay minerals. From Mitchell (1993), based
on data from Cornell (1950), Samuels (1950), Lambe and Martin (1955), Warkentin
(1961), Grim (1962).
Mineral
Liquid limit [%]
Plastic limit [%]
Montmorillonite
100-900
50-100
Illite
60-120
35-60
Kaolinite
30-110
25-40
Based on these values, Mitchell (1993) came to a number of conclusions regarding the
Atterberg limits of clay minerals. Firstly, the liquid limit and the plastic limit values
for any clay mineral may vary over a wide range. Furthermore, for any clay mineral,
the range in liquid limit values is greater than the range in plastic limit values. Finally,
the variation in liquid limit among diﬀerent clay mineral groups is much greater than
the variation in their plastic limits.
3.1.2
Atterberg’s limits dependence on salinity
A few papers have been investigating the Atterberg’s limits dependence on salinity.
A paper by Fatahi et al. (2011) discusses the eﬀect of salinity and sand content on
the liquid limit of Kaolinite clay and Bentonite clay, which is type of Montmorillonite
clay. The eﬀect on liquid limit from using water with diﬀerent salt concentrations
for reconstitution, can be seen in Figure 6 and 7 for Kaolinite and Bentonite clay
respectively.
Figure 6: Figure from Fatahi et al. (2011), showing the liquid limit of Kaolinite clay’s
dependence on salinity and addition of ﬁne grained sand.
Page 13
==PAGE:14==
DTU Civil Engineering
Figure 7: Figure from Fatahi et al. (2011), showing the liquid limit of Bentonite clay’s
dependence on salinity and addition of ﬁne grained sand.
Based on these ﬁgures, Fatahi et al. (2011) concluded that the salt content in the re-
constitution water does indeed aﬀect the liquid limit. As seen in the ﬁgures the liquid
limit decreases with increased salt content. They also concluded, that using saline wa-
ter aﬀects the Bentonite clay signiﬁcantly more than the Kaolinite clay. Furthermore,
the decrease in liquid limit for the Bentonite clay seemed more prevalent at lower salt
contents.
Mansouri et al. (2013) investigated the eﬀect of salinity on diﬀerent parameters, in-
cluding Atterberg’s limits. The soil used was a ﬁne grained soil with a low percentage
of clay minerals, they found that increased salinity led to a reduction in the plastic
and liquid limit. However, the reduction in plastic limit was small compared to the
reduction in liquid limit.
3.2
Activity
The of activity a soil depends on the Atterberg limits and the percentage of clay
minerals of a soil, which means particles ﬁner than 2 µm and can be found from:
A =
PI
% < 2µm
(4)
According to Mitchell (1993), plotting the plasticity index versus the clay content will
yield a straight line for a given type of clay, where the slope is the activity.
The activity can be used to assess the dominant clay mineral in a soil, since the various
clay minerals mostly have diﬀerent activity. The activities of various clay minerals can
be seen in Table 3.
Page 14
==PAGE:15==
DTU Civil Engineering
Table 3: Activities of diﬀerent clay minerals, from Mitchell (1993).
Mineral
Activity, A [-]
Smectites
1-7
Illite
0.5-1
Kaolinite
0.5
Furthermore, Mitchell (1993) notes that soils with a high activity, will be more sus-
ceptible to changes in properties from factors such as pore ﬂuid composition.
3.3
Primary consolidation and secondary compression
According to simple consolidation theory, consolidation ends when the excess pore
pressure within the clay has fully dissipated (Mitchell, 1993). However, most soils will
continue to compress. This is called secondary compression or creep, and according to
Mitchell (1993) this deformation occurs ”as the fabric elements adjust slowly to more
stable arrangements”. Mitchell (1993) also notes that the rate of primary consolidation
is controlled by Darcy’s law, while ”the secondary compression is controlled by the rate
at which the structure can deform”. If the soil is allowed to drain during consolidation,
the dissipation of pore water pressure in the soil can be represented with a spring
analogy as seen in Figure 8.
Figure 8: Spring analogy, ﬁgure from Wikipedia (2017).
In the ﬁrst stage, there is no external load on the system. In the second stage, an
external load is applied. The added stress is carried by the water and thus causes an
increase in water pressure. This can be seen by the rise of water level in the piezometer.
In stage 3, the same load is still applied. Water pressure begins to decrease as water
escapes the system through the hole in the top. The load is partially carried by the
spring. In stage 4, the load is the same. The load is fully carried by the spring and
the water pressure has dissipated.
The spring analogy illustrates how a wet soil consolidates when subject to a load
as the pore pressure dissipates, until the stress is only carried by the soil. Clay would
Page 15
==PAGE:16==
DTU Civil Engineering
correspond to a soft spring with a small hole in the top, while sand would correspond
to a stiﬀspring with a large hole for the water to escape the system.
3.3.1
Coeﬃcient of consolidation
The coeﬃcient of consolidation, cv is used as a measure of the rate of primary con-
solidation of a soil sample. The coeﬃcient of consolidation is an important parameter
when estimating the rate of settlement of a construction in the ﬁeld. There are two
common methods of determining cv. One of them is known as the Taylor method and
is based on a square-root-time deformation plot. Using the Taylor method, cv is found
from Equation (5).
cv = T90 · H2
dr
t90
(5)
Where T90 is the time factor at 90 % consolidation [-], Hdr is the maximum drainage
distance through the sample [m] and t90 is the time at 90 % consolidation [s].
The other method is known as the Casagrande method and is based on a log-time
deformation plot. Using the Casagrande method, cv is found from Equation (6).
cv = T50 · H2
dr
t50
(6)
Where T50 is the time factor at 50 % consolidation [-] and t50 is the time at 50 %
consolidation [s].
3.3.2
Coeﬃcient of secondary compression
A method to ﬁnd the rate of secondary compression, is to determine the coeﬃcient
of secondary compression, Cα. Mitchell (1993) suggests that this coeﬃcient can be
determined from the relationship between void ratio and log of time during secondary
compression. He therefore denotes the coeﬃcient Cαe which is deﬁned according to:
Cαe =
de
d(log t)
(7)
However, the coeﬃcient of secondary compression, Cα can also be determined from the
relationship between vertical strain, εv and log of time. This coeﬃcient of secondary
compression is denoted Cαε and is deﬁned:
Cαε =
dε
d(log t)
(8)
3.3.3
Coeﬃcient of volume compressibility
The coeﬃcient of volume compressibility, mv can be assessed from a stress-strain curve
of a one-dimensional compression test:
Page 16
==PAGE:17==
DTU Civil Engineering
mv = dε
dσ′
v
(9)
mv is related to the oedometer modulus, Eoed which can be determined as:
Eoed = dσ′
v
dε
(10)
The oedometer modulus and the coeﬃcient of volume compressibility are not constants,
but depends on the stress level and void ratio. The two parameters are often assessed
when analysing one dimensional compression tests. The coeﬃcient of volumetric com-
pression, mv is also related to the permeability of the soil.
3.4
Speciﬁc volume
In soil mechanics void ratio, e or speciﬁc volume, v are used to describe the volume
of the voids relative to the volume of solids in soil sample.
These parameters are
for instance used for constructing compression curves.
Using speciﬁc volume (v =
1 + e) instead of void ratio can sometimes be advantageous in soil mechanics, but is
primarily matter of preference. When constructing a compression curve, the initial
speciﬁc volume vi, can be determined from the following equation (Rocchi & Coop,
2014):
vi = γw · Gs
γdi
(11)
Where γw is the unit weight of water [kN/m3]. Gs is the speciﬁc gravity [g/cm3]. γdi
is the initial dry unit weight of the sample [kN/m3].
The initial dry unit weight γdi can be determined as:
γdi = msat/(1 + wi)
V
· g
(12)
Where msat is the bulk mass of the soil [kg], wi is the initial water content of the
sample [-], V is its volume [m3] and g is the gravitational acceleration [m/s2].
3.4.1
Error estimation of speciﬁc volume
The initial dry unit weight γdi, and thereby the initial speciﬁc volume may vary de-
pending on whether initial or ﬁnal measurements of height and weight are used for the
calculation. Rocchi & Coop (2014) suggested that diﬀerence in initial and ﬁnal mea-
surements are mainly due to excess water being stored in the ﬁlter papers and porous
stones, if present. Because of this, Rocchi & Coop (2014) proposed that the initial
speciﬁc volume should be corrected with the ﬁnal measurements of sample height and
weight. This is done by taking the average vi from initial and ﬁnal measurements.
This is further described in Section 4.7.
Page 17
==PAGE:18==
DTU Civil Engineering
3.5
Intrinsic properties
In his paper from 1990, Burland introduced the term ’intrinsic’ properties, which is
used to describe the properties of a clay reconstituted at a water content between wL
(liquid limit) and 1.5wL without having experienced air drying or oven drying. The
’intrinsic’ properties only depend on the mineralogy of the clay, while the eﬀects of
geological history are eliminated when the clay is reconstituted.
Fearon & Coop (2000) describes how diﬀerent reconstitution methods may aﬀect the
Atterberg limits along with the compression and shearing behavior of soil. In their
paper, Fearon & Coop investigates three diﬀerent reconstitution methods. A standard
method with hand mixing, a reconstituted method with mixing in a mechanical mixer
and ﬁnally a minced method, where the soil was fed through an industrial food min-
cer. They found that the liquid limit, wL increased when using the reconstituted and
minced methods, compared to the standard method. The increase in liquid limit when
using the reconstituted method was 3 % to 7 % and the increase was up to almost 20
% when using the minced method.
A study by Zhang et al.
(2004) on old alluvium from San Juan in Puerto Rico,
show results similar to those of Fearon & Coop (2000) regarding the Atterbergs limits
dependence on the reconstitution eﬀort. They found that both the plasticity index, Ip
and the liquid limit, wL tends to increase, while the plastic limit wP tends to decrease
with increased remoulding eﬀort. In general it was seen that the soils in a Casagrande
chart moved above the A-line with increased remoulding eﬀort. Zhang et al. (2004)
explains this by looking at the particle size distribution of the soil at diﬀerent remould-
ing eﬀorts. This shows that the clay fraction increases as the silt-sized aggregates are
broken up with increased remoulding eﬀort due to a destruction of cementation bonds.
This could explain why some of the soil samples moves from below to above the A-line.
Zhang et al. also discussed the eﬀect of the drying method on the Atterbergs limits and
particle size distribution. They compared the eﬀect of oven-drying versus air-drying.
It was concluded that the Ip was highest when air-drying the sample, but overall the
eﬀect of drying method was modest compared to the eﬀect of remoulding eﬀort and
method. The results from Fearon & Coop (2000) and Zhang et al. (2004) illustrates
that the ’intrinsic’ properties of soil described by Burland (1990), are highly dependent
on the reconstitution method and eﬀort.
3.6
Compression curves
Compressions curves are used to illustrate the behaviour in compression of a soil sam-
ple in terms of void ratio, e versus vertical eﬀective stress, σ′
v.
According to Burland (1990) one-dimensional compression curves of reconstituted
clays, are generally similar in shape. However, the void ratio, e at same stress may
be diﬀerent due to diﬀerent liquid and plastic limits of the reconstituted clays. It is
therefore useful to normalize the compression curves with respect to void ratio, e. In
Page 18
==PAGE:19==
DTU Civil Engineering
order to do so, Burland (1990) introduced the void index Iv. For intrinsic compression
curves, Iv can be can be found from the following equation:
Iv =
e −e∗
100
e∗
100 −e∗
1000
= e −e∗
100
C∗
c
(13)
Where e is the void ratio [-], e∗
100 and e∗
1000 are the intrinsic void ratios at σ′
v = 100 kPa
and σ′
v = 1000 kPa respectively [-], C∗
c is the slope of the intrinsic compression line [-].
Once normalized, the intrinsic compression curves for diﬀerent soils approximately
plot together to form a line, the line is called the intrinsic compression line (ICL) and
can be described by the cubic equation:
Iv = 2.45 −1.285x + 0.015x3
(14)
Where x = log σ′
v [kPa].
While the ICL is based on reconstituted clay, it is also possible to introduce a similar
line based on in-situ natural clay data of current vertical stress σv0 and corresponding
void index Iv0. Burland (1990) terms this line the the sedimentation compression line
(SCL). The line is based on data from diﬀerent clays at varying depths. The clays that
Burland (1990) used to create this line can be seen in Figure 9. The main diﬀerence
between the ICL and the SCL is that the ICL is based on reconstituted clay and there-
fore does not take stress history into account. Conversely, the SCL is based on in-situ
clay data and is therefore dependent on the stress history. However, the SCL is only
based on normal consolidated clays.
While the correlation between the data and the SCL is not as clear as for the ICL, the
SCL suggested by Burland (1990) still correlates well with the data, as seen in Figure
9. The coordinates for the SCL has been given by Burland (1990), which makes it
possible to plot the line along with the ICL. As seen in the ﬁgure, the two lines are
approximately parallel from σ′
v = 10 to 1000 kPa and the SCL lies well above the ICL.
The reason for that is, that the structure, according to Burland (1990), gives added
compression resistance to the clay. After σ′
v = 1000 kPa the two lines show a slow
converging pattern.
Page 19
==PAGE:20==
DTU Civil Engineering
Figure 9: Intrinsic compression line and sedimentation compression line. From Burland
(1990) based on data from Skempton (1970).
3.6.1
Intrinsic compressibility constants based on liquid limit
Burland (1990) found a correlation between the liquid limit of clays and the ’intrinsic’
constants of e∗
100 and C∗
c . The correlations were based on oedometer tests carried out
on reconstituted natural clays. Burland plotted the correlation between the void ratio
at liquid limit, eL and e∗
100 and C∗
c , which can be seen in Figure 10. Based on this plot,
a regression analysis was carried out, resulting in the following equations:
e∗
100 = 0.109 + 0.679eL −0.089e2
L + 0.016e3
L
(15)
and
C∗
c = 0.256eL −0.04
(16)
According to Burland (1990) the equations only hold for soils above the A-line and
should only be used for void ratios at liquid limit between eL = 0.6 and eL = 4.5.
Page 20
==PAGE:21==
DTU Civil Engineering
Figure 10: The plots show the correlation between eL and e∗
100 and C∗
c for a number of
natural clays. Whangamarino Clay is not included in the regression analysis, since it
falls below the A-line. Figure by Burland (1990).
3.6.2
Eﬀect of strain rate on compression behaviour
The eﬀect of of strain rate on compression, is a topic that has long been discussed.
In their paper from 2016, Li & Baudet investigated the strain rate dependency on the
critical state line of reconstituted clays. They compared the one-dimensional strain rate
of Kaolin clay for one low and one high rate (25x low rate). The high rate compression
curve was located to the right of the low rate compression curve. Even though the
diﬀerence between two rates were small for the Kaolin clay, the eﬀect was still evident
at stress levels above 1000 kPa, as seen in Figure 11.
Page 21
==PAGE:22==
DTU Civil Engineering
Figure 11: Rate sensitivity during compression. Figure from Li & Baudet (2016) based
on data from Sorensen (2006).
The eﬀect of strain rate on the compressibility of natural clays was also investigated
by Leroueil et al. (1985), who also found that the rheological behaviour of clay was
related to the strain rate. They also noted that during secondary compression, it is the
viscosity of the clay skeleton that governs the strain rate. Therefore if the rate is low
enough to allow the primary consolidation to end, the strain behaviour is controlled
by viscous eﬀects of the individual clay.
3.7
Soil structure
Natural Paleogene clays have been compressed at high stress levels for many thousands
of years. Because of this, the clay may have developed a natural structure that diﬀers
from that in its remoulded state. According to Mitchell (1993), soil structure is de-
termined by a combination of fabric and interparticle forces. Fabric refers to both the
particle associations and particle arrangement, while interparticle forces describe the
interparticle bonding between particles, cementation being an example of a physical
bond.
When a soil is reconstituted and exposed to the same stress as the same type of soil in
its natural state, the void ratio can change signiﬁcantly as a result. This change in void
ratio results from a change in the soil structure. Which is quantiﬁed by the sensitivity
of the soil, as it will be explained in further detail later in this section. According to
Mitchell (1993), there are diﬀerent phenomena that can contribute to the sensitivity,
including: Metastable fabric, cementation, weathering, thixotropic hardening, leaching
and formation or addition of dispersing agents.
Metastable fabric is especially relevant for ﬁne-grained soils like Røsnæs clay. Accord-
ing to Mitchell (1993), the fabric of ﬁne-grained soils, after initial sedimentation, will
Page 22
==PAGE:23==
DTU Civil Engineering
be open and the particles will be placed in a ”card-house” arrangement (see Figure
12. Due to this open structure, the void ratio of the natural state soil will, at least
theoretically, be higher than for the remoulded soil, which will have a more parallel
arrangement of the particles and a therefore a lower volume. This means that the
natural state soil can carry a higher vertical eﬀective stress at a given void ratio, than
the reconstituted soil of the same type.
Figure 12: (a) ”Card-house” arrangement of clay particles. (b) Parallel arrangement
of clay particles.
On a micro level, clay minerals consists of sheets composed of atoms. According to
Mitchell (1993), there are two main sheet types: Silica sheets and octahedral sheets.
The silica sheet can have diﬀerent orientations, and the octahedral sheet have two
subtypes in addition to the regular octahedral sheet.
The two subtype sheets are
gibbsite sheets, mainly containing aluminium cations and the brucite sheet, mainly
containing magnesium. The sheets are bonded together through inter-sheet (primary)
bonds and the layers are bonded through interlayer (secondary) bonds to form mineral
structures. The interlayer bonds vary signiﬁcantly in strength depending on the the
type of bond. A diagrammatic illustration of a montmorillonite structure consisting of
two tetrahedral sheets and one octahedral sheet in the middle.
Figure 13: Montmorillonite structure. Blue: Oxygens. Brown: Hydroxyls. Green:
Aluminium, Iron and Magnesium. Red: Silicon, occasionally Aluminium. From Bio-
taki (2017), based on Mitchell (1993).
Page 23
==PAGE:24==
DTU Civil Engineering
According to Mitchell (1993), when the clay particles interacts with water, a range
of possible mechanisms can occur. These mechanisms include hydrogen bonding, hy-
dration of exchangeable cations, charged surface-dipole attraction, and attraction by
osmosis.
Osmosis attraction can occur if the particle surface is negatively charged. If this is the
case, the concentration of cations will increase, leading to water molecules diﬀusing on
the surface as illustrated in Figure 14.
Figure 14: Osmosis attraction. Figure from Mitchell (1993).
In general, when a negatively charged clay particle comes in contact with ﬂuid, cations
will diﬀuse on the clay surface in order to obtain an electroneutral ion layer around
the particle (Barbour et al., 1991 and Mitchell, 1993). The concentration of ions will
decrease with increasing distance from the particle, as illustrated in Figure 15.
Figure 15: Diﬀuse Double Layer. Modiﬁed from Mitchell (1993).
The layer around the particle is termed the Diﬀuse Double Layer (DDL) and is subject
Page 24
==PAGE:25==
DTU Civil Engineering
to change in thickness. According to Wilson & Wilson (2014), all other things being
equal, a high concentration of salt in the water will lead to a smaller thickness of the
DDL. Which, according to Van Paassen & Gareau (2004), will lead to a reduction in
long-range repulsive forces between the clay particles.
Cementation means that the particles have bonded together and diﬀerent types of
minerals can work as binding material. According to Mitchell (1993) cementation es-
pecially aﬀects soils containing iron, aluminium, calcite or free silica. The Røsnæs
clay is known to be slightly calcareous in some places and because of this, it could
be slightly cemented. During remoulding, there is a possibility that the cementation
bonds can be destroyed. Cementation, along with other factors, could therefore con-
tribute to a diﬀerence in stress level, between the same type of soil in its reconstituted
and intact state, at a speciﬁc void ratio. However, this will also depend on whether
the soil is over-consolidated or not. If the intact soil have a high over-consolidation
ratio, the reconstituted sample need to be compressed to a stress level similar to the
pre-consolidation stress of the intact sample, in order to see the possible eﬀect of ce-
mentation and structure.
Cottechia & Chandler (2000), deﬁnes two diﬀerent types of clay structures result-
ing from geological history. The ﬁrst one is called ’sedimentation structure’ and de-
velops solely during one-dimensional consolidation.
This type of structure is only
present in normally or lightly overconsolidated clays. The second type is called ’post-
sedimentation structure’.
According to Cottechia & Chandler (2000) this type of
structure develops after normal sedimentation, when geological processes intervenes
to modify the sedimentation structure. The intervening processes could for instance
be post-deposition bonding or diagenesis. This type of struture is typical for overcon-
solidated clays.
According to Gasparre & Coop (2008), when a natural clay is subject to compression,
large volumetric changes will occur once its gross yield stress σvy is exceeded. Cotec-
chia & Chandler (2000) notes that clays with a ’sedimentation structure’ at gross yield
will have a yield stress ratio (YSR):
Y SR = σ′
vy
σ′
v0
(17)
where σ′
v0 is the in-situ vertical stress [kPa], approximately equal to the overconsolida-
tion ratio (OCR):
OCR = σ′
vc
σ′
v0
(18)
where σ′
vc is the preconsolidation pressure [kPa].
However, for clays with a ’post-
sedimentation structure’ the yield stress ratio will exceed the overconsolidation ratio.
According to (Cotecchia & Chandler, 2000), it is the YSR, rather than the OCR that
controls the compression and stress behaviour. As previously mentioned, sensitivity
quantiﬁes the overall eﬀect of the microstructural diﬀerences between reconstituted
Page 25
==PAGE:26==
DTU Civil Engineering
and natural clays. One way of determining sensitivity, is through the stress sensitivity,
Sσ and can be deﬁned as the ratio of gross yield stress σ′
vy to σ∗
ey which is he equivalent
stress on the intrinsic compression line:
St = Sσ = σ′
vy
σ∗
ey
(19)
Where St is the strength sensitivity [-].
According to Cotecchia & Chandler (2000) for clays with a ’post-sedimentation struc-
ture’ the relation is approximate, (St ≈Sσ ≈σ′
vy/σ∗
ey).
An illustration from Gasparre & Coop (2008), seen in Figure 16, illustrates how Sσ is
determined for (a) natural clays with a ’sedimentation structure’ and (b) clays with a
’post-sedimentation structure’.
Figure 16: ICL and sedimentation compression curves (SCC), along with a stress path
from the in-situ vertical stress for a clay with ’sedimentation structure’ (a) and a clay
with a ’post-sedimentation structure’ (b).
Figure modiﬁed after Gasparre & Coop
(2008).
Another parameter that can be used to assess the diﬀerence between intact and recon-
stituted (degraded) structures is the swelling sensitivity Ss deﬁned by Schmertmann
(1969), as the ratio of the intrinsic swelling index over the intact swelling index:
Ss = C∗
s
Cs
(20)
According to Gasparre & Coop (2008) as destructuration occurs, the swelling line of
the intact soil will steepen, gradually becoming more parallel to the intrinsic swelling
Page 26
==PAGE:27==
DTU Civil Engineering
line. However, as Gasparre & Coop (2008) also notes, it will however require several
unloading-reloading loops to establish the degradation of structure with compression
beyond yield.
Page 27
==PAGE:28==
DTU Civil Engineering
4
Equipment and experimental set up/procedure
A range of diﬀerent tests were carried out as a part of the project. Initially, Atterberg’s
limits were found from two diﬀerent liquid limit tests, and a plastic limit test (Sections
4.3 and 4.4). In addition, to establish the particle size distribution of the Røsnæs
clay, a hydrometer test was performed. The test is further described in Section 4.6.
The speciﬁc gravity of the Røsnæs Clay was also determined using a pycnometers as
described in Section 4.5.
The main experiments in this project were incremental load oedometer (ILO) tests
and constant rate of strain (CRS) tests. These have been described in further detail
in Sections 4.7 and 4.8.
4.1
Reconstitution of soil samples
As explained in Section 3.5, Fearon & Coop (2000) and Zhang et al. (2004) suggest that
the reconstitution eﬀort and method can signiﬁcantly aﬀect the Atterbergs limits, the
particle size distribution and the compression behaviour of reconstituted ﬁne grained
soil.
The Røsnæs clay was reconstituted by ﬁrst saturating the trimmings from the Røsnæs
clay core sample (see Table 4) with either distilled, saline or tap water. Afterwards, a
spatula was used to spread the clay in a thin layer on a glass plate as seen on Figure
17. In that way the trimming lumps were eliminated and a homogeneous clay slurry
has formed. Finally, the slurry was hand-mixed with a spoon and additional water was
gradually added while mixing, to achieve a water content about 1-1.5 times the liquid
limit.
This method is not directly comparable with the methods used in Fearon & Coop
(2000) or Zhang et al.
(2004).
However, a reasonable assumption would be that
the method used falls somewhere between the standard method and the reconstituted
method described by Fearon & Coop (2000), in terms of ﬁnal clay mixture.
The
methods was described in Section 3.5.
Figure 17: The material was spread in a thin layer on a glass plate.
Page 28
==PAGE:29==
DTU Civil Engineering
4.2
Intact samples
The intact samples were cut from core samples from Fehmarn Belt. The core sample
used for the Røsnæs clay tests and the intact test on clay till can be seen in Table 4.
Table 4: Core sample data
Location
Core sample ID
Material
Depth [m]
10.A.057
10.105988
Røsnæs clay
38.55-39.10
09.A.014
09.100104
Clay Till
33.70-34.30
The intact test samples were extracted from the core samples, by inserting a metal ring
in the core and trimming around it. Finally, the top and the bottom were smoothed
to plain surfaces. Images of the trimming process can be seen in Figure 18. One intact
sample of Røsnæs clay and one intact sample of intact Clay Till were cut out and
tested in an incremental load oedometer.
Figure 18: Trimming and smoothing of intact Clay Till sample.
As previously described, the Røsnæs clay tend to be very ﬁssured, this description
corresponded well with the observations during the trimming of the sample, as seen in
Figure 19.
Page 29
==PAGE:30==
DTU Civil Engineering
Figure 19: Fissure seen during trimming of Røsnæs clay sample.
Three additional ILO tests have been performed on the intact Røsnæs clay from
the same core sample (10.105988), by Irene Rocchi, Varvara Zania and Gitte Lyng
Grønbech. The data from these tests were also analysed in the Results section.
4.3
Liquid limit tests
Two types of liquid limit tests were performed on the reconstituted clay. One was a
traditional liquid limit test using a Casagrande cup and the other one was a falling
cone test, which is the most common nowadays.
For the Casagrande cup test, water was added to a sample of the soil in order to
ensure the right consistency of the soil (just below the liquid limit). The soil was then
placed in the Casagrande cup and a groove was made in the soil using a standardized
tool as seen in Figure 20. The cup was then dropped 10 mm onto a plate, by turning a
handle on the apparatus. The rate of drops was 2 drops per second. When the groove
was closed over a distance of 13.5 mm, the test was stopped and the number of drops
was noted. By increasing the water content of the soil, it was possible to obtain a
linear regression line, which was then used to ﬁnd the liquid limit. The liquid limit
is deﬁned as the moisture content, at which exactly 25 drops are needed to close the
grove over a distance of 13.5 mm.
However, there is a signiﬁcant uncertainty attached to this method of measuring liquid
limit. For example, the amount of soil placed in the cup may vary according to the
person carrying out the test. There is also uncertainty attached to the rate of drops,
which is done manually. Therefore, it is unlikely that exactly 2 drops per second are
kept across the whole test. Furthermore, it can be quite diﬃcult to see exactly when
the groove is closed over the required distance.
Page 30
==PAGE:31==
DTU Civil Engineering
Figure 20: The Casagrande cup containing a soil sample with a grove.
To eliminate some of the uncertainty attached to the Casagrande cup method, the
falling cone test was also performed. In this test, a cone was dropped into a small cup
ﬁlled with soil, from a point where the tip of the cone was just in touch with the soil
surface, as seen in Figure 21. The penetration depth of the cone was measured and a
second test was performed in order to conﬁrm the measurement, having replaced the
top part of the soil. Like with the Casagrande cup, the water content was varied in
order to obtain a linear regression, which could be used to ﬁnd the liquid limit, deﬁned
at the point 10 mm penetration depth was obtained.
The advantage of this method is that it is less dependent on the person performing it
unlike the Casagrande cup method. However, it is very important to ensure that there
are no air pockets in the soil, as this could give a too high penetration depth.
Figure 21: Falling cone liquid limit test apparatus.
Page 31
==PAGE:32==
DTU Civil Engineering
4.4
Plastic limit test
As already mentioned, a plastic limit test was also performed on the soil. The test was
carried out by rolling the soil out to a 3 mm diameter thread on a glass plate, as seen in
Figure 22. By deﬁnition, when the soil starts to crumble at exactly this diameter, the
plastic limit is reached. The moisture content of the soil was taken at this condition.
It is important to perform this test a few times to obtain a few samples to compare.
It is also necessary to have more than just a few grams of soil, in order to the reduce
the risk of error. For the Røsnæs clay, it was quite diﬃcult to tell exactly when the
plastic limit was reached.
Figure 22: Plastic limit test: A 3 mm diameter thread was rolled out on a glass plate,
until crumbling was observed.
4.5
Pycnometer test
A pycnometer test was performed in order to determine the speciﬁc gravity, Gs of
the Røsnæs clay. The speciﬁc gravity is also known as the relative density and is for
instance used when determining the speciﬁc volume, v of a soil. It can vary signiﬁcantly
depending on the soil mineralogy and because of this, it is necessary to assess it through
testing.
The ﬁrst step in the test procedure was to do a calibration of the pycnometers, the
calibration data can be seen in Appendix B. A moist sample was then placed in the
each of the three pycnometers used. The samples were covered with distilled water
and were then placed under vacuum for 24 hours as seen in Figure 23. Two glass jars
containing distilled water were also placed under vacuum for 24 hours. Afterwards the
pycnometers were ﬁlled with distilled water and closed with a capillary top, making
sure that the pycnometer was completely ﬁlled with water to the top of the capillary
as seen in Figure 24. The water ﬁlled pycnometers were then weighed and the clayey
water was transferred to beakers, which was then put in the oven to dry. Finally, each
of the beakers were weighed in order to determine the dry weight of the samples.
Page 32
==PAGE:33==
DTU Civil Engineering
Figure 23: Saturated samples and distilled water jars in glass vacuum desiccators.
Figure 24: Left: Beaker containing sample. Right: Pycnometer ﬁlled with water to
the top of the capillary.
The test was performed in accordance with the Danish Standard DS/CEN ISO/TS
17892-3 and the speciﬁc gravity was calculated from the following equation:
Page 33
==PAGE:34==
DTU Civil Engineering
Gs =
m4
m1−m0
ρw;1
m3−m2
ρw;3
(21)
Where m0 is the mass of the pycnometer [g], m1 is the mass of the pycnometer ﬁlled
with water [g], m2 is the mass of the pycnometer containing the soil specimen [g], m3 is
the mass of the pycnometer, containing the soil specimen and ﬁlled with water [g] and
m4 is the dry mass of the soil [g]. ρw;1 is the density of the water in the pycnometer at
the time of calibration [g/cm3] and ρw;3 is the density of the water in the pycnometer
at the time of the test [g/cm3].
4.6
Hydrometer test
A hydrometer test was performed in order to determine the grain size distribution.
Initially, the clay was mixed with distilled water to form a liquid slurry, that was then
sieved through a 63 µm sieve, see Figure 25. Afterwards, the hydrometer test was
performed using a hydrometer. Two glass cylinders were ﬁlled, one with 100 ml of
dispersant solution (sodium pyrophosphate decahydrate) and 900 ml of distilled wa-
ter, the other one with the clay material suspended with 900 ml of distilled water and
100 ml dispersant solution. Before the test was started, the cylinder containing the
clay suspension, was shaken, doing 60 end-over-end cycles over a span of two minutes.
Readings were then taken inserting the hydrometer in the cylinder containing the clay
suspension at given intervals, which was monitored using a stopwatch.
After each
reading, the hydrometer was rinsed in a separate cylinder and a reading was taken in
cylinder containing the dispersant solution only. The reading intervals was approxi-
mately doubled each time, with the last reading taken after 24 hours. The test set-up
can be seen in Figure 25.
After completion of the test, the following equations were used for calculating the
grain size distribution.
First, the true hydrometer reading, Rh was determined:
Rh = R′
h + 0.5
(22)
Where R′
h is the hydrometer reading and 0.5 a correction for the meniscus. This was
used to determine the eﬀective depth HR [mm], which was read oﬀthe calibration
curves, as seen in Appendix C.
HR = 166 −1.63 · Rh
(23)
The modiﬁed reading R is calculated as:
R = R′
h −R′
0
(24)
Where R′
0 is the reading in the second cylinder.
Page 34
==PAGE:35==
DTU Civil Engineering
The equivalent particle diameter, D [µm] was found according to Head (2006):
D = 5.531
s
η
(ρs −1)
HR
t
(25)
Where η is the dynamic viscosity of water [mPas] at the test temperature. ρs is the
particle density [Mg/m3]. t is the elapsed time [min].
Head (2006) suggest a simpliﬁcation of Equation (25):
D = K1
r
HR
t
(26)
Where K1 is a constant, dependent on temperature and speciﬁc gravity, which can be
read from Table 4.18 in Head (2006).
Finally, the percentage ﬁner than D, P [%] was calculated according to ASTM D422-
63:
P =
 Ra
mdry

· 100
(27)
Where a is a correction factor for 152H hydrometers [-].
Figure 25: (a) Røsnæs clay being sieved through a 63 µm sieve. (b) The cylinders
used for the hydrometer test. The left cylinder contains the clay suspension. The
middle cylinder contains distilled water for rinsing the hydrometer. The right cylinder
contains the mix of dispersant and distilled water, used for reference values.
Page 35
==PAGE:36==
DTU Civil Engineering
4.7
Incremental Load Oedometer (ILO) tests
The ILO test was used to investigate the Røsnæs clay’s response to uniaxial compres-
sion. Tests were carried out on reconstituted samples, as well as on intact samples.
The reconstituted samples were loaded incrementally starting at an eﬀective vertical
stress (σ′
v) of approximately 10 kPa and ending at approximately 2500 kPa, depending
the area of the sample. The intact samples were also loaded incrementally, but to an
eﬀective vertical stress (σ′
v) of approximately 3000 kPa. This was done in order to
determine the compression index (Cc) of the clay. The samples were then unloaded
incrementally, in order to determine the swelling index (Cs).
4.7.1
Apparatus
A loading frame was used to apply the loading to the samples during the incremental
oedometer tests. The loading frames was loaded with dead weights as seen in Figure
26.
Figure 26: Left image: Oedometer cell placed in the loading frame.
Right image:
Loading frames used for the ILO tests.
During the tests, the samples were placed in a Danish oedometer cell. An illustration
of the cell can be seen in Figure 27.
Page 36
==PAGE:37==
DTU Civil Engineering
Figure 27: Oedometer apparatus, used for the incremental loading tests.
1: Soil
sample. 2: Oedometer ring (ﬂoating). 3: Water (saline or distilled). 4: Porous stone.
5: Filter paper. 6: Drain pipe 7: Pressure head.
The soil sample (1) was placed inside the oedometer ring (2), which ensured that only
one-dimensional compression was taking place. Distilled, saline or tap water (3) was
placed in the bath in order to saturate the sample and prevent it from drying out.
The porous stone (4) and the ﬁlter paper (5) were placed below and above the sample,
to allow drainage of the porewater. The upper porous stone was not used in order to
avoid uncontrolled swelling during unloading, instead only a ﬁlter paper was placed on
the top part, which theoretically work like an inﬁnitely thin porous stone. The load
was applied on top of the pressure head (7), transferring the load to the sample.
4.7.2
Test procedure
First, a soil sample was prepared either from intact or reconstituted soil. A metal
cylinder was then placed in the apparatus and a dummy reading was taken on the dis-
placement transducer. Meanwhile the ﬁlter paper and porous stone were saturated in
either distilled or saline water according to which that was going to be used during the
test, and air bubbles were removed by the use of a vacuum pump. The porous stone
and the ﬁlter paper was then placed in the oedometer ring. Afterwards, the sample was
placed in the oedometer ring, which was already assembled inside the oedometer cell.
The top ﬁlter paper and top platen was placed above the sample and the oedometer
cell. The oedometer cell was then placed in the loading frame and ﬁnally, the bath
was ﬁlled with test water. An initial reading was then taken from the displacement
Page 37
==PAGE:38==
DTU Civil Engineering
transducer, as soon as the oedometer was placed in the loading frame. The ﬁrst load-
ing step was then initiated by starting the logging software and placing the weights
at the end of the lever arm, in that way applying a stress on the sample. A load step
was ended when the primary consolidation was over, typically after approximately 24
hours. The next step was then started adding or removing weights from the lever arm.
When the test was over, the water was drained from the bath and the sample was
removed from the oedometer ring. To measure the ﬁnal height of the sample, the
distance from the top of the cell to the pressure head, along with the distance from
the bottom of the ring to the sample, as well as the pressure head thickness and ring
height was measured. This was done in order to measure the ﬁnal sample height. The
sample was then weighted and oven dried. These measurements where taken in order
to improve the accuracy of the initial speciﬁc volume as explained in Section 3.4.
Discussion: Final readings
Some stages where left longer than 24 hours in order for the primary consolidation to
end. However, the reading used for estimating the strain in each stage is based on the
reading after 24 hours to ensure consistency. Some stages were ended after less than 24
hours because the rate of change was very limited and in these cases the ﬁnal reading
was used.
4.8
Constant Rate of Strain (CRS) tests
The CRS test was carried out in an oedometer cell by applying uniaxial load to a soil
sample in a motorised loading frame, which moves the pressure head at a constant
strain rate to bring the loading piston in contact with the loading platen. The CRS
test is very similar to the ILO tests in terms of set-up. The main diﬀerence is in the
application of load, which for the CRS was applied through a constant strain rate until
a speciﬁc stress level was reached.
A GDS controller was used to move the pressure head, at constant rate of strain.
The strain was measured by the use of two Linear Variable Diﬀerential Transformers
(LVDTs). Unfortunately, there was not enough space to measure the strain, positioning
them directly on the top platen. Instead, the strain was measured on a plastic plate
attached to the loading piston, as seen in Figure 28. An initial small load was applied to
the sample and immediately after that, the constant rate of strain loading was started.
When 5 MPa was reached, which corresponds to the maximum load cell capacity, the
sample was unloaded through constant rate of strain.
Page 38
==PAGE:39==
DTU Civil Engineering
Figure 28: Left image: Motorised loading frame used for CRS tests. Right image:
Oedometer cell placed in under the loading piston. Strain measurements was taken on
the plastic plate attached to the loading piston.
Three tests was performed in total with varying strain rates. The ﬁrst test was per-
formed at a rate of 0.43 mm/h. The second test was performed at a 10 times lower
rate of 0.043 mm/h. The third and ﬁnal CRS test switched between the two rates in
order to demonstrate how the strain rate aﬀects the void ratio. It was started at a rate
of 0.43 mm/h, then switched to the slower rate of 0.043 mm/h at a stress of 500 kPa
and then ﬁnally switched back to the fast rate at 2 MPa. The program controlling the
loading of the last test can be seen in Appendix A.
4.9
IL tests performed in direct shear apparatus
Three additional uniaxial incremental load tests were performed in a direct shear ap-
paratus.
The apparatus can be seen in Figure 29.
The apparatus had two force
transducers and two displacement transducers in horizontal and vertical direction, en-
abling the apparatus to perform shearing tests as well as incremental consolidation
tests. The incremental loading steps was controlled through a computer programme.
The tests were performed with loading steps similar to those of the manual ILO tests
and each step had a duration of 24 hours. The test procedure was similar to that of the
manual ILO tests. However, there was some limitations to this type of incremental load
test. The maximum load capacity was 4.4 kN corresponding to approximately 1400
kPa. The ring diameter was slightly wider than the oedometer rings and the maximum
vertical displacement was 10 mm. Due to the vertical displacement limitation, it was
necessary to stop the test when the limit was close to being reached and insert a plate.
The loading frame and vertical force transducer can be seen in Figure 30.
Page 39
==PAGE:40==
DTU Civil Engineering
Figure 29: The direct shear apparatus (ShearTrac-II) used for three uniaxial incremen-
tal consolidation tests.
Figure 30: Loading frame and vertical force transducer.
The apparatus was also used to perform a constant displacement rate controlled shear-
ing of the sample. However, only one of such tests was successfully performed. The
reason was that the two other samples were too short for shearing after the incremental
consolidation phases.
Page 40
==PAGE:41==
DTU Civil Engineering
5
Results
This section contains all the results found from the performed tests, both physical and
compressibility properties as obtained from oedometer tests.
The soil properties include the Atterberg’s limits, the speciﬁc gravity and the parti-
cle size distribution. These are fundamental for interpreting and understanding the
mechanical behaviour in compression illustrated in the second part of the chapter.
5.1
Atterberg limits
Atterberg’s limits have been found for Røsnæs clay reconstituted with distilled wa-
ter and with saline water respectively. The values for liquid limit, plastic limit and
plasticity index can be seen in Table 5.
Table 5: Atterberg limits for Røsnæs clay reconstituted with distilled and saline water.
Water type
Liquid limit [%]
Plastic limit [%]
PI [%]
Casagrande
Fall cone
Average
Distilled
84.1
86.9
85.5
29.5
56.0
Saline
84.1
86.5
85.3
29.8
55.5
As seen from Table 5, the diﬀerence between using distilled and saline water is quite
small for the tested Røsnæs clay. The results from the Casagrande liquid limit test is
exactly the same, while the there is only a slight diﬀerence between the found liquid
limits from the Fall cone test. As seen, there is also a diﬀerence between the liquid
limit values found for the two liquid limit test methods. As previously mentioned, the
Fall cone method is not dependent on the operator, like the Casagrande cup method
is, and could therefore be more reliable.
The plastic limits are almost also identical for the two tests. The test with saline wa-
ter gave a slightly higher value for the plastic limit, while the liquid limit found, was
higher for the test with distilled water. This means that the highest plasticity index
was found for the distilled water. However, the diﬀerence in plasticity index is also
very small. The liquid limit plots can be seen in Appendix B.
The found Atterberg’s limits for the two diﬀerent water types have been plotted in
a Casagrande plasticity chart with locations of typical clay minerals as seen in Figure
31.
Page 41
==PAGE:42==
DTU Civil Engineering
Figure 31: Casagrande chart with locations of diﬀerent clay minerals. Røsnæs clay
reconstituted with distilled water and with saline water has been plotted. Chart from
Holtz and Kovacs (1981).
As seen on the ﬁgure, the saline and distilled reconstituted clay, are placed almost
exactly the same place in the diagram. The reason for this is that the found liquid
limit and plastic limit are almost identical as seen in Table 5. It can also be seen, that
the tested Røsnæs clay are not placed within an area of a speciﬁc clay mineral. As
seen on the Casagrande chart in Figure 31, the tested Røsnæs clay can be categorized
as a high plasticity clay, since it lies above the A-line and has a liquid limit above 50
%.
5.2
Speciﬁc gravity
The pycnometer test, described in Section 4.5, was performed in order to determine
the speciﬁc gravity Gs, also known as the relative density of the Røsnæs clay. One test
was carried out using three pycnometers according to the standards and the results
can be seen in Table 6.
Page 42
==PAGE:43==
DTU Civil Engineering
Table 6: Pycnometer test results
Pycnometer number
20
30
40
Pycn.+ top + soil + water, m3 [g]
954.97
956.14
956.63
Temperature, T3 [◦C]
22
22
22
Density of water at T3, ρw;3 [g/cm3]
0.9978
0.9978
0.9978
Beaker ID
4
3
2
Tare [g]
261.3
267.91
271.24
Tare + dry soil [g]
275.07
287.29
290.66
Dry mass soil, m4 [g]
13.77
19.38
19.42
Mass water [g]
576.06
573.57
573.54
Soil volume [cm3]
4.91
6.31
6.95
Speciﬁc gravity, Gs [-]
2.80
3.07
2.79
Mean, Gs [-] (from 20 and 40)
2.80
As seen, the values found for the speciﬁc gravity agree for pycnometer 20 and 40 within
the accepted diﬀerence of 0.03 Mg/cm3 according to the standard DS-EN ISO 17892-
3-2015. However, the result from pycnometer 30 gives a signiﬁcantly higher value of
speciﬁc gravity and does not fall within the accepted range. Because the result for
pycnometer 30 does not fall within the accepted range, it was decided to discard this
test. According to the standard, only two tests within the accepted diﬀerence of 0.03
Mg/cm3 are required. The reason for the higher value of pycnometer 30 could be,
that the pycnometer was not completely dry when measuring m3. When inserting the
capillary top in the pycnometer, the water overﬂowed the pycnometer, which resulted
in water on the sides. The water was carefully removed, but the pycnometer might not
have been completely dry.
When discarding pycnometer 30, a mean speciﬁc gravity, Gs of 2.80 is found for the
Røsnæs clay. This value is in the upper end of the range found in the Geotechnical
Data Reports for Fehmarn Belt (GDR 00.1-001-D, 2011), which describes the speciﬁc
gravity of Røsnæs clay to be between 2.70 and 2.80.
5.3
Particle size distribution
Three hydrometer tests were performed on Røsnæs clay. The purpose was to determine
the particle size distribution of the clay. The particle size distribution provides an
overview of how large a percentage of the particles that are actually clay sized. Four
tests was performed in total, information about the individual tests can be Table 7.
Page 43
==PAGE:44==
DTU Civil Engineering
Table 7: Overview of hydrometer tests
Test No.
Hydrometer ID
Soil Type
Dispersant
Dry mass [g]
1
85750
Røsnæs clay
Na4P2O7
36.57
2
85750
Røsnæs clay
None
20.67
3
21487
Røsnæs clay
Na4P2O7 · 10H2O
20.67
4
21487
Kaolinite clay
Na4P2O7 · 10H2O
44.48
As seen, two diﬀerent hydrometers were used as well as diﬀerent dispersants. A test
was also performed on Kaolinite clay for reference.
50
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
90
95
100
1
10
100
% finer than D, P [%]
Particle diameter, D [μm]
Test 1
Test 2
Test 3
Test 4
Figure 32: Hydrometer test results for the four tests. The percentage of particles that
passes through at certain diameters is illustrated.
As seen, for test 1 approximately 95 % of the particles are ﬁner than 7 µm, while
for test 2 and 3 only approximately 87 % of the particles are ﬁner than 7 µm. In
general the particles are smaller in test 1 compared to test 2 and 3, which are quite
similar in shape. However, test 2 does displays a slightly higher content of smaller
particles than test 3, which is surprising since no dispersant was used for test 2. Test
4 does not have as many data points as the other tests, but it does show that the
Kaolinite clay contains a higher percentage of silt particles, than the Røsnæs clay. The
diﬀerence between test 1 and 3 can be explained with a diﬀerence in the hydrometers
or the dispersant used to separate the particles. Most likely, it is due to the diﬀerence
in hydrometers, since test 2 had a higher percentage of smaller particles than test 3,
despite no use of dispersant to separate the particles. Test 2 is expected to have a
higher percentage of larger particles than test 1 since a dispersant was not used. All
Page 44
==PAGE:45==
DTU Civil Engineering
the tests have a high percentage of clay sized particles, which have a diameter of less
than 2 µm.
Prior to the hydrometer tests, the soil was sieved through a 63 µm sieve, to ﬁlter out
the sand sized grains. The percentage of sand for the test 1 sample was 0.23 % and
for the test 2 and 3 sample it was 0.38 % of the soil.
From the particle size distributions, it was possible to determine the clay fraction, as
well as the activity for the Røsnæs clay. The results can be seen in Table 8.
Table 8: Clay fraction and soil activity for the three particle size distribution tests.
Clay fration [%]
Activity, A [-]
Test 1
82.2
0.682
Test 2
73.5
0.763
Test 3
69.9
0.802
As seen, the activities found for the Røsnæs clay are within the same range as illite
clay mineral see Table 3. Test 2 is not very reliable due to the lack dispersant used.
Test 1 and 3 were carried out with two diﬀerent hydrometers. It is therefore diﬃcult
to conclude which one is the most correct.
5.4
Oedometer results
5.4.1
Compression curves
Several incremental load (IL) tests were performed on reconstituted and intact Røsnæs
clay. The majority of the tests was performed in a traditional oedometer cell and a
few were performed in a direct shear apparatus. One of the objectives of the IL tests
was to assess the possible eﬀect on the ’intrinsic’ compression curves of using diﬀerent
types of water for reconstituting the clay. In Table 9 a full overview of the IL tests
performed can be seen. For convenience, the sample type and bath water used for
the tests is explained by the following legend: R: Reconstituted, B: Bath, D: Distilled
water, S: Saline water and T: Tap water.
Page 45
==PAGE:46==
DTU Civil Engineering
Table 9: Overview of the incremental loading tests performed, apparatus used and test
condition.
Test
number
Test type
Sample type
and bath water
Apparatus
used
Initial water
content, w [%]
1
IL
RD - BD
Oedometer 3
134.7
2
IL
RD - BD
Oedometer 1
166.2
3
IL
RD - BD
Oedometer 3
121.6
4
IL
Intact Clay Till - BD
Oedometer 2
8.4
5
IL
RS - BD
Oedometer 3
97.9
6
IL + Shear
RS - BD
ShearTrac-II
91.9
7
IL
RS - BS
Oedometer 3
103.0
8
IL
RS - BD
ShearTrac-II
104.6
9
IL
RS - BS
Oedometer 3
100.5
10
IL
Intact Røsnæs - BD
Oedometer 2
27.8
11
IL
RT - BT
Oedometer 1
101.8
12
IL
RT - BT
Oedometer 3
90.7
13
IL
RD - BD
ShearTrac-II
95.4
As seen in the table, the initial water content was signiﬁcantly higher for tests 1-3,
than for the rest of the reconstituted tests. Because of this, an additional RD-BD test
was performed (test 13). In total, four RD-BD tests, three RS-BD tests, along with
two RS-BS and RT-BT tests were performed. Two ILO tests on intact samples were
also performed. The results from these tests will be presented in Section 5.6.
Figures 33, 34, 35 and 36 show the ’intrinsic’ compression and swelling curves for
Røsnæs clay reconstituted with diﬀerent types of water and with diﬀerent types of
water in the bath around the the sample. The curves are based on the average vi from
initial and ﬁnal measurements of height and weight, as explained in Section 3.4. The
error lines shown in the plots are the diﬀerence in speciﬁc volume v between the two
measurements. However, the IL tests performed in the direct shear apparatus did not
allow measurement of the ﬁnal height and therefore only the ﬁnal weight was measured
for these tests.
Page 46
==PAGE:47==
DTU Civil Engineering
Figure 33: Compression and swelling curves for IL tests on Røsnæs clay reconstituted
with distilled water and tested in a distilled water bath (tests 1, 2, 3 and 13).
Figure 34: Compression and swelling curves for IL tests on Røsnæs clay reconstituted
with saline water and tested in a distilled water bath (tests 5, 6 and 8).
Page 47
==PAGE:48==
DTU Civil Engineering
Figure 35: Compression and swelling curves for IL tests on Røsnæs clay reconstituted
with saline water and tested in a saline water bath (tests 7 and 9).
Figure 36: Compression and swelling curves for IL tests on Røsnæs clay reconstituted
with tap water and tested in a tap water bath (tests 11 and 12).
As seen, between two and four tests were carried out for each set-up. Test 13 of the RD-
BD test show a signiﬁcantly lower speciﬁc volume and a signiﬁcantly steeper swelling
curve than the other RD-BD tests, however the slope of the compression curves are
Page 48
==PAGE:49==
DTU Civil Engineering
quite similar. The pattern is the same for the RS-BD samples. Tests 6 and 8 have
a signiﬁcantly lower speciﬁc volume than test 5 and the swelling curve for test 6 are
much steeper than the one for test 5. Tests 6, 8 and 13 were all performed in the direct
shear apparatus and show signiﬁcantly diﬀerent behaviour than those performed in the
oedometers. As already mentioned, it was not possible to measure the ﬁnal height of
these test with suﬃcient precision. Furthermore, it was not possible to reach the same
stress level for IL tests performed in the direct shear apparatus, as for the ILO tests.
If the tests performed in the direct shear apparatus are ignored (Test 6, 8 and 13), the
curves for the same test conditions are generally similar in shape and location. The
slope of the uploading part also appear similar for the individual ﬁgures. However, the
slope of the unloading part, are very diﬀerent especially for the tests seen in Figures
33 and 34. For the distilled water samples seen in Figure 33, test 2 only shows minor
swelling after 24 hours, while the swelling for tests 1 and 3 are much more signiﬁcant.
Exactly why this behaviour is seen is unclear, but it is worth noting that the initial
water content for test 2 was higher than for tests 1 and 3. The curves generally look
similar within each ﬁgure, however the RS-BS tests in Figure 35, does show an oﬀset
in the curves. Test 7 is placed to the right of test 9 and it does not fall within the error
lines of test 9. Test also 7 show a small jump in the third point on its curve, this was
likely due to the pin measuring the displacement being stuck.
To illustrate how the diﬀerent water types used for reconstitution and the bath aﬀect
the compression and swelling curves, a ﬁgure comparing them was created, as seen in
Figure 37.
Figure 37: Compression and swelling curves from the ILO tests performed with diﬀer-
ent reconstitution and bath water.
For this comparison only the seemingly most reliable tests were used. Because of this,
Page 49
==PAGE:50==
DTU Civil Engineering
all the IL tests performed in the direct shear apparatus were not included. Further-
more, tests 1 and 2 have an initial water content higher than the upper limit of 1.5wL
described by Burland (1990), so these tests were not included either. That leaves test
3 for the RD-BD samples and test 5 for the RS-BD samples. For the RS-BS samples,
the average of test 7 and 9 was used, the error lines illustrating the diﬀerence between
the two tests. Similarly, for the RT-BT samples, the average of tests 11 and 12 was
used.
The RD-BD test have a higher speciﬁc volume during compression than all the other
test. The RS-BD and RT-BT tests have similar speciﬁc volumes during most of the
test, but the RT-BT have a steeper compression curve, similar in slope to the RD-BD
test. The RS-BS has the lowest speciﬁc volume and its compression curve are similar
in slope to the RS-BD, however the swelling curve is steeper for the RS-BS tests.
From the compression curves, it was possible to determine the void ratio at 100 kPa,
e∗
100 and 1000 kPa, e∗
1000. As seen from Equation (13) the diﬀerence between these
values can be used to ﬁnd the ’intrinsic’ compression index C∗
c , which corresponds to
the slope of the compression curve. The ’intrinsic’ swelling index C∗
s was determined
as the slope of the swelling curve. The found ’intrinsic’ indices for the IL tests on
Røsnæs clay can be seen in Table 10.
Table 10: Intrinsic compression and swelling indices from the IL tests on reconstituted
Røsnæs clay.
Test number
Sample type
e∗
100
e∗
1000
C∗
c
C∗
s
C∗
s/C∗
c
1
RD-BD
2.01
1.18
0.83
0.38
0.47
2
RD-BD
1.99
1.19
0.80
0.09
0.12
3
RD-BD
1.86
1.12
0.73
0.30
0.42
5
RS-BD
1.66
1.02
0.64
0.17
0.26
6
RS-BD
1.57
0.87
0.70
0.27
0.39
7
RS-BS
1.59
0.96
0.63
0.23
0.36
8
RS-BD
1.21
-
-
-
-
9
RS-BS
1.43
0.77
0.66
0.22
0.33
11
RT-BT
1.67
0.99
0.68
0.12
0.17
12
RT-BT
1.71
0.96
0.75
0.17
0.23
13
RD-BD
1.51
0.74
0.77
0.36
0.46
From the table it is seen that the ’intrinsic’ compression index C∗
c is highest for the
RD-BD tests, followed by the RT-BT tests. The RS tests generally had lower values
of C∗
c . The swelling index C∗
s was highest for the RD-BD tests, while the RT-BT tests
on average had the lowest swelling indices.
5.4.2
Coeﬃcient of volume compressibility
The coeﬃcient of volume compressibility was determined for the reconstituted Røsnæs
clay samples. As seen in Figure 38, the coeﬃcient is highly dependent on the stress
Page 50
==PAGE:51==
DTU Civil Engineering
level.
0
0.001
0.002
0.003
0.004
0.005
1
10
100
1000
10000
Coefficient of volume compressibility, mv
[m2/kN]
Vertical effective stress,
'v [kPa]
Test 1
Test 2
Test 3
Test 5
Test 6
Test 7
Test 9
Test 11
Test 12
Test 13
Figure 38: Coeﬃcient of consolidation, mv. Blue points are RD-BD tests, red points
are RS-BD tests, green points are RS-BS tests and orange points is RT-BT tests.
The ﬁgure shows a signiﬁcant decrease in the coeﬃcient of volume compressibility with
increased stress. This makes sense, since it requires more stress to cause a change in
soil volume at high stress levels. As seen from the ﬁgure, the reconstitution water does
not seem to aﬀect the coeﬃcient of volume compressibility signiﬁcantly, as the values
are generally quite similar, especially at high stresses.
5.4.3
Coeﬃcient of consolidation
From the incremental oedometer tests, it was possible to assess the coeﬃcient of consol-
idation, cv at diﬀerent stress levels. As explained in Section 3.3, there are two diﬀerent
methods of determining cv. Both methods for determining cv were applied to the data
from incremental oedometer test 1 on Røsnæs clay reconstituted with distilled water.
The results can be seen in Figure 39.
Page 51
==PAGE:52==
DTU Civil Engineering
5E-10
7E-10
9E-10
1.1E-09
1.3E-09
1.5E-09
1.7E-09
1
10
100
1000
10000
Coeffcient of consolidation, cv [m2/s]
Effective vertical stress, 'v [kPa]
Taylor method
Casagrande 
method
Figure 39: Coeﬃcient of consolidation, cv for test 1. The coeﬃcients have been found
using both the Taylor and Casagrande method.
As it can be seen in the ﬁgure, the diﬀerence in cv values between the two methods
is small. Test 1 was carried out with a signiﬁcantly shorter sample than the other
tests, which makes the values of the coeﬃcient of consolidation diﬃcult to compare
to the other tests. However, the test can still be used to show the relatively small
diﬀerence between the two methods for determining cv. Considering that neither of
the two methods are very precise and yields quite similar results, it was decided to
evaluate cv of the rest of the tests only using the Taylor method.
The combined coeﬃcient of consolidation results for all the tests can be seen in Figure
40.
Page 52
==PAGE:53==
DTU Civil Engineering
0
1E-09
2E-09
3E-09
4E-09
5E-09
6E-09
1
10
100
1000
10000
Coeffcient of consolidation, cv [m2/s]
Vertical effective stress,
'v [kPa]
Test 1
Test 2
Test 3
Test 5
Test 6
Test 7
Test 9
Test 11
Test 12
Test 13
Figure 40: Coeﬃcient of consolidation, cv. The coeﬃcients have been found using the
Taylor method. Blue points are RD-BD tests, red points are RS-BD tests, green points
are RS-BS tests and orange points is RT-BT tests.
Interestingly, the tests with saline water generally have higher cv values than the ones
reconstituted with distilled and tap water. The overall tendency of the coeﬃcient of
consolidations dependency on stress level is unclear from the tests. Some of the tests,
for instance test 9, show a decrease cv with stress, while others, for instance test 3,
show an increase in cv with stress. (This underlines how uncertain the methods for
determining cv is.)
5.4.4
Coeﬃcient of secondary compression
The coeﬃcient of secondary compression was found for the performed IL tests. The
results for all the tests are presented in Figure 41.
Page 53
==PAGE:54==
DTU Civil Engineering
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
0.02
1
10
100
1000
10000
Coefficient of Secondary compression, c

ε [-]
Vertical effective stress, σ'v [kPa]
Test 1
Test 2
Test 3
Test 5
Test 6
Test 7
Test 9
Test 11
Test 12
Test 13
Figure 41: Coeﬃcient of secondary compression, Cαε with stress. Blue points are RD-
BD tests, red points are RS-BD tests, green points are RS-BS tests and orange points
is RT-BT tests.
There does not appear to be a major eﬀect of salinity on Cαε. However, there is a slight
tendency that the RD-BD tests have marginally higher values of Cαε, than the tests
reconstituted with saline water. Interestingly, the tap water tests generally display
higher values of Cαε than all the other tests.
5.5
Constant rate of strain tests
One-dimensional constant rate of strain tests were performed as described in Section
4.8.
Three tests were performed in total two of them at the same rate of strain
throughout the test and one test were the strain rate was switched at certain stress
levels. An overview of the tests can be seen in Table 11.
Table 11: Overview of the performed CRS tests.
Test
number
Test type
Sample type
Initial water
content, w [%]
Rate of strain
[mm/h]
C1
CRS
RD - BD
101.7
0.43
C2
CRS
RD - BD
102.9
0.043
C3
CRS
RD - BD
101.6
0.43-0.043-0.43
To make the compression curves comparable, it was attempted to obtain a similar
water content for all three tests, in order to have the same initial speciﬁc volume. As
seen in the table above, the water content is quite similar, however the sample used
Page 54
==PAGE:55==
DTU Civil Engineering
for test C2 had a slightly higher initial water content than the two other samples. In
Figure 42 the compression curves for the CRS tests is seen.
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
1
10
100
1000
10000
Specific volume, v [-]
Vertical effective stress,
'v [kPa]
0.43 mm/H
0.043 mm/H
0.43-0.043-
0.43 mm/H
Figure 42: Compression curves for the CRS tests.
As seen from the ﬁgure the strain does inﬂuence the compression curve. The curve
with the fast rate lies to the right of the curve with the 10x lower strain rate. Test C3
starts out at the higher rate, but does not directly follow the high rate curve of test
C1. However, it does lie closer to the compression curve of test C1 than test C2. At
500 kPa, where the rate shifts, the compression curve of test C3 ”jumps” very close to
the curve of test C2 and approximately follows it until the rate shift at 2000 kPa. At
this point test C3 moves back towards the curve of test C1, approximately reaching
it at a stress level 5000 kPa, where the compression was ended. From the tests, it is
also seen that the diﬀerence between the two strain rates becomes smaller at higher
stresses, however a diﬀerence is still observed at 5000 kPa.
The CRS tests can also be compared to an incremental load test. Test 3 was cho-
sen for comparison, as this was also a RD-BD test which, as previously explained,
seemed more reliable than the other RD-BD tests. The comparison can be seen in
Figure 43.
Page 55
==PAGE:56==
DTU Civil Engineering
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
1
10
100
1000
10000
Specific volume, v [-]
Vertical effective stress,
'v [kPa]
0.43 mm/H
0.043
mm/H
IL RD-BD
Figure 43: Compression curves for the two constant rate CRS tests and for an incre-
mental load RD-BD test (test 3).
As seen in the ﬁgure the slope of the IL RD-BD compression curve is diﬀerent than the
slope of the compression curves of the CRS tests. This results in the IL compression
curve moving from the curve of test C2 and almost up to the curve of test C1.
5.6
Intact tests
A series of intact ILO tests on the Røsnæs clay was performed by Irene Rocchi, Gitte
Lyng Grønbech and Varvara Zania, these tests will be referred to as test M1, M2 and
M3. An additional ILO test was carried out on the Røsnæs clay, this test will be
referred to as test 10. Furthermore, an ILO test was performed on the intact Clay Till,
which was initially thought to be a Røsnæs clay sample. An overview of the ILO test
conditions for the intact Røsnæs clay samples and Clay Till sample, along with the
consistency index for each Røsnæs clay sample can be seen in Table 12.
Table 12: Overview of the intact tests on the Røsnæs clay. Test M1-3 are data from
tests performed by Irene Rocchi, Gitte Lyng Grønbech and Varvara Zania.
Test
number
Test
type
Sample
type
Apparatus
used
Natural water
content, w [%]
Consistency
index, CI [-]
M1
ILO
Røsnæs-BD
Oedometer 1
M2
ILO
Røsnæs-BD
Oedometer 2
29.3
1.01
M3
ILO
Røsnæs-BS
Oedometer 3
10
ILO
Røsnæs-BD
Oedometer 2
27.8
1.04
4
ILO
Clay Till-BD
Oedometer 2
8.45
-
Page 56
==PAGE:57==
DTU Civil Engineering
As seen, the consistency index for the Røsnæs clay is close to 1, which corresponds to
the plastic limit. The compression curves for the performed IL tests on the reconsti-
tuted samples can be seen in Figures 44 and 45.
Figure 44: Compression and swelling curves for the intact tests.
Figure 45: Compression and swelling curves for the intact tests on Røsnæs clay.
Some of tests M1 and M2 were performed with an unloading-reloading loop, this is
however diﬃcult to see from the curves, since the change in void ratio is so small. The
Page 57
==PAGE:58==
DTU Civil Engineering
unloading-reloading loop for both tests are located approximately on the compression
curve itself. On the compression part of the curves, a small ”jump” is seen for some of
tests, particularly for the one with saline water around. The ”jump” is due to swelling
of the samples, as water was added to the bath at stress around 100 kPa. In general
the tests does not see a signiﬁcant increase in speciﬁc volume during the compression.
For all the Røsnæs clay tests, the swelling curve is steeper than the compression curve.
The Clay Till does not show any signiﬁcant swelling, this could be due to the low
content of clay minerals. None of the curves display substantial yielding, however the
slope of the compression curves does increase slightly with increased stress.
In order to further investigate the structure of the intact Røsnæs clay, the compres-
sion curves were normalized with the void index according to Equation (13).
The
normalized curves can be seen in Figure 46.
-2.0
-1.5
-1.0
-0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
1
10
100
1000
10000
Void index, Iv [-]
Vertical effective stress,
'v [kPa]
SCL
Test M1 BD
Test M2 BD
Test M3 BS
Test 10 BD
ICL
Figure 46: Normalized intact compression curves, ICL and SCL.
As seen, only test M3 with a saline bath actually crosses the ICL. The tests in distilled
water are close to the ICL, but does not cross it, even at stresses above 3000 kPa.
Page 58
==PAGE:59==
DTU Civil Engineering
6
Discussion
When comparing the liquid limit found for the Røsnæs clay of approximately 85.5 %,
with those found for Røsnæs clay in the GDR 00.1-001-D (2011), it was seen that the
found liquid limit was very low in comparison. For the intact clay units, the arith-
metical mean for the liquid limit was 114 %, with a standard deviation of 22.2 %.
Surprisingly this means, that the found liquid limit actually falls below the standard
deviation. When looking at the individual data points, it was however seen that there
are some tests, especially from the intact Røsnæs unit, that does have liquid limits
close or even slightly below 85.5 %. According to the GDR 00.1-001-D (2011), the
tested Røsnæs clay also belongs to the intact Røsnæs unit, which could explain the
low value.
The plastic limit found was approximately 29.5 %. In comparison the plastic limits
found for the Røsnæs clay in GDR 00.1-001-D (2011) had a mean of 31.7 % with a
standard deviation of 3.3 %. The plastic limit therefore corresponds well with the
values found in the Geotechnical Data Report.
The eﬀect of salinity on Atterbergs limits is not easily understood, as it depends on a
wide range of factors. One of the most important factors, is the salt concentration of
the saline water. The synthetic Fehmarn Belt water used as the saline water, had a
NaCl concentration of approximately 13.2 g/L, which was low compared to the average
concentration of NaCl of seawater in the worlds oceans.
A study by Fatahi et al. (2011), described in Section 3.1, looked into the salinity
eﬀect on liquid limit. They found that the salinity was very dependent on the salt
concentration, as well as the type of clay. The clear tendency was, that the liquid limit
decreased with increased salinity. Both Bentonite and Kaolinite clay was tested. They
found that for low salt concentrations, the Kaolinite clay, had only a small decrease in
liquid limit. The Bentonite clay, which have a much higher liquid limit than Kaolinite
clay, was much more aﬀected by even small salt concentrations. This would suggest,
that the salinity eﬀect is very dependent on the mineral composition and liquid limit.
The found liquid limit of 85.5 % for the Røsnæs clay reconstituted with distilled wa-
ter, is closer to the liquid limit of Kaolinite clay than the Bentonite clay. This fact,
combined with the low concentration of salt in the water, could explain why the liquid
limit does not change signiﬁcantly, when using synthetic Fehmarn Belt water for re-
constituting this clay. However, liquid limit tests on the Røsnæs clay by Christensen &
Munck (2017) suggest that the liquid limit can change signiﬁcantly when reconstituted
with saline water. However, it should be noted that their samples had a higher liquid
limit. The Røsnæs clay tested by Christensen & Munck (2017) was also extracted from
a diﬀerent borehole and had a diﬀerent mineral composition.
Mansouri et al. (2013) suggest that the plastic limit should also decrease with increas-
ing salinity, however not as much as the liquid limit. The results found for the plastic
limit of the Røsnæs clay show the opposite, that the plastic limit actually increases
slightly with increased salinity. However, the diﬀerence is so small that it could be
coincidental. The results does however indicate, that there is no signiﬁcant eﬀect on
Page 59
==PAGE:60==
DTU Civil Engineering
the plastic limit of using Fehmarn Belt water for reconstituting the tested clay. It
should also be noted, that the soil tested by Mansouri et al. (2013) had a low content
of clay minerals and therefore are not directly comparable to the Røsnæs clay.
Hydrometer test was performed in order to estimate the particle size distribution. The
clay fraction varied found from the tests varied between 69.9 % and 82.2 % and the
activity varied between 0.68 and 0.80. Following the deﬁnition by Mitchell (1993), the
found activity would correspond to illite being the dominating clay mineral. Awadalka-
rim (2014) performed X-Ray Diﬀraction (XRD) analyses on several core samples of
Røsnæs clay, including the one that was used for the tests in this report. The distri-
bution of clay minerals for this core sample can be seen in Table 13.
Table 13: XRD analysis of core number 10-105988 from Fehmarn Belt. Sm: Smectite,
Il: Illite, Ko: Kaolinite and Ch: Chlorite. (Data from Awadalkarim, 2014).
Clay minerals [%]
Core number
Sm
Il
Ko
Ch
10-105988
17
53
28
2
As seen, the mineral composition corresponds well with the activity, as illite is indeed
the dominating clay mineral. However, according to the Casagrande chart in Figure
31 the liquid and plasticity index of the Røsnæs clay does not clearly suggest illite as
being the dominating clay mineral. It is also worth noting that the portion of Kaolinite
is larger than the smectite (montmorillonite) portion. This could further indicate that
the Røsnæs clay tested is more comparable to Kaolinite clay than Bentonite clay in
terms of the salinity’s eﬀect on the liquid limit.
As seen from Figure 37 and Table 10, there was clearly an eﬀect of salinity on the
compression and swelling curves. As stated by Wilson & Wilson (2014), an increase in
salinity reduces the thickness of the Diﬀused Double Layer. Several sources found that
the compressibility (Barbour et al., 1991, Van Paassen & Gareau, 2004) and swelling
potential (Wilson & Wilson, 2014) of clay is aﬀected by the salinity. This eﬀect of
salinity on the DDL is a possible explanation why the RS samples had lower values of
compression and swelling index compared to the RD samples. However, other factors
like initial water content could also have aﬀect the curves, which could explain the low
swelling index of tests 2.
Since both the compressibility and swelling were reduced for the saline water tests,
it is interesting to compare the ratio of the intrinsic swelling index over the intrinsic
compression index, C∗
s/C∗
c . Since both the compressibility and swelling is aﬀected by
salinity, this ratio would have thought to be approximately similar for the RD and RS
tests. However, when looking at the values in Table 10, this ratio does not appear to
be constant, instead it is higher for the RD tests than for the RS and especially the
RT tests. The reason for this seems to be, that the swelling index is relatively more
aﬀected by salinity than the compression index. This is even more so the case for
Page 60
==PAGE:61==
DTU Civil Engineering
the tap water tests, that have a signiﬁcantly lower C∗
s/C∗
c ratio than the other tests.
The low swelling index for the tap water tests could be related to the calcium content
in water. According to Rimmer and Greenland (1976) calcium ions can suppress the
formation of Diﬀuse Double Layers. This could possibly lead to a reduction in swelling
potential.
As explained in Section 3.6, Burland (1990) found correlations between the void ratio
at liquid limit eL and the intrinsic void ratio at a stress level of 100 kPa e∗
100 and be-
tween eL and the intrinsic compression index. Based on these correlations the expected
values of e∗
100 and C∗
c can be found based on the liquid limit. Since the liquid limit
was approximately similar, for the saline and distilled water reconstituted samples, the
found values of eL, e∗
100 and C∗
c are also similar as seen in Table 14.
Table 14: Constants of intrinsic compressibility for saline and distilled samples based
on liquid limit.
Water type
eL
e∗
100
C∗
c
Distilled
2.39
1.44
0.57
Saline
2.39
1.44
0.57
Compared to the values found in Table 10, the values found based on liquid limit does
not correlate well with the values of e∗
100 and C∗
c found from the oedometer tests. The
intrinsic compression index based on the liquid limit is consistently lower than the
values found from the compression curves. The e∗
100 does correlate well with test 9, but
is generally also too low compared to the compression curve data. This would suggest
that the correlation found by Burland (1990) does not correlate well with the Røsnæs
clay.
A study by Deng et al. (2012) showed that saline pore water can aﬀect the coeﬃ-
cient of consolidation cv, the oedometer modulus, Eoed and the coeﬃcient of secondary
compression Cα. Deng et al. (2012) found that cv and Eoed increased slightly, while
Cα on the other hand saw a slight decrease when using saline water instead of distilled
water. This pattern corresponds well with the results observed in Figure 40 for the
coeﬃcient of consolidation, where higher values were generally found for the RS tests.
It also corresponds well with the results from Figure 41 for the coeﬃcient of secondary
compression Cαε, where slightly lower values were found for the RS tests, compared to
the RD and especially the RT tests. The oedometer modulus is related to the coeﬃ-
cient of volume compressibility mv which was determined in Figure 38. However, no
signiﬁcant variance was seen in the results related to the reconstitution water used.
Overall from the cv and Cαε results, it is worth noting that the RT samples resembled
the RD samples more than the RS samples. Furthermore, Deng et al. (2012) also
noted that the diﬀerence in Cv, Eoed and Cαε were small and it was only seen in the
clay that had a smectite content of 20 %, while no eﬀect of salinity was seen in clay
with a smectite content of 10 %. In other words, the inﬂuence of salinity seems highly
dependent on the smectite (montmorillonite). content of the clay.
Page 61
==PAGE:62==
DTU Civil Engineering
The CRS oedometer tests were performed with the purpose of investigating the com-
pression behaviour of tests carried out with diﬀerent strain rates. As seen from the
tests in Figure 42, there was a signiﬁcant diﬀerence in compression curves between a
strain rate of 0.043 mm/h and 0.43 mm/h. In their paper from 2006 Li & Baudet,
presents results that also suggest that there is an eﬀect on the compression curves
from strain rate. Their tests were carried out on Kaolin clay, but only display a small
diﬀerence in compression curves. The tests carried out on Røsnæs clay also display a
signiﬁcant diﬀerence in compression even at high stresses of around 5000 kPa. Com-
pared to the Kaolin clay seen in Figure 11, the CRS tests on the Røsnæs clay show
a much more signiﬁcant diﬀerence between the two rates. This could mean that the
viscous eﬀects are greater for the Røsnæs clay than the Kaolin clay. The third CRS
test switched between the two strain rates and conﬁrmed that the diﬀerence between
the test C1 and C2 was not simply due to diﬀerent initial speciﬁc volume.
The CRS compression curves of tests C1 and C2 was compared to the an incremental
load test as seen in Figure 43. The comparison indicate that initially, test C1 might
have been performed with a strain rate too high for the pore pressure to fully dissipate.
This is further discussed in Section 6.1.
From the GDR 00.1-001-D (2011), an approximate value of the in-situ stress for the
core samples was obtained. The value at a depth of 38.65 m was σv0=400 kPa. Com-
bined with the initial void index, the in-situ data was plotted in order to compare
it to the Sedimentation Compression Line data presented in Burland (1990).
The
comparison can be seen in Figure 47.
Page 62
==PAGE:63==
DTU Civil Engineering
Figure 47: Comparison between the in-situ data from Burland (1990) and in-situ data
of the intact Røsnæs clay samples tested.
The ﬁgure show that at the in-situ stress the Røsnæs clay is far from the SCL ob-
tained by Burland (1990) and even below the ICL. Some of the clays used to plot the
SCL have a liquid limit close to the Røsnæs clay tested, for instance Shellhaven, and
are still located far the above the ICL. This clearly indicated that the Røsnæs clay
is overconsolidated. From the GDR 00.1-001-D (2011) it is seen that the values of
preconsolidation pressure σ′
vc of the Røsnæs clay are typically around 700 kPa. How-
ever, the ILO tests performed on the intact Røsnæs clay seen in Figure 44 and 46, did
reach stresses of more than 3000 kPa and none of the tests showed a clear yielding
pattern. This could mean, that the yield stress ratio of the Røsnæs clay is larger than
its overconsolidation ratio. If this is true, then it would mean that the Røsnæs clay has
a post-sedimentation structure according to Cotecchia & Chandler (2000). A another
reason why no signiﬁcant yielding is seen, even at stresses considerably above the σ′
vc
Page 63
==PAGE:64==
DTU Civil Engineering
indicated in GDR 00.1-001-D (2011), could be that that the actual σ′
vc is higher than
estimated. According to Gasparre & Coop (2008) a lower bound value of the σ′
vc could
arise from ﬁssures in the clay matrix. Røsnæs clay is a highly ﬁssured clay and it
could therefore be that the σ′
vc determined in the Geotechnical Data Report (GDR)
is therefore likely a lower bound value. Results from Grønbech et al. (2015) on a
highly ﬁssured Eocene clay, showed that the diﬀerence between the upper bound and
the lower bound of σ′
vc can be very large. This could also be the case for the Røsnæs
clay and could explain why the compression curves does not yield. Since the curves
does not yield, the stress sensitivity Sσ cannot be properly established for the clay.
The only curve that crosses the ICL is test M3 which was a test carried out in a saline
water bath, opposed to the other intact tests that were performed in a distilled water
bath. Based on the maximum stress level reached, the stress sensitivity Sσ can be
concluded to be at least 2 for test M3, but since there was no apparent yielding, the
actual Sσ is unknown.
Another way to assess the sensitivity, is through the swell sensitivity Ss. Based on
the intrinsic swelling index C∗
s and the swelling curves of the intact samples, the swell
sensitivity Ss can be determined, the results can be found in Table 15.
Table 15: Swell sensitivity for the intact Røsnæs clay samples tested.
Test
number
C∗
s
Cs
Ss
M1
0.17
0.10
1.7
M2
0.17
0.12
1.4
M3
0.22
0.075
2.9
10
0.17
0.15
1.1
The swell sensitivity appears to be very diﬀerent depending on whether saline or dis-
tilled water was used in the bath. The sample in saline bath has a swell sensitivity of
2.9, while the distilled bath samples have a swell sensitivity between 1.1-1.7. It should
be noted that C∗
s for the RS-BD tests is only based on one test (test 5), which had
a lower C∗
s than the average of the RS-BS tests. This is in contrast to the Diﬀused
Double Layer theory that states that the thickness of the DDL should decrease with
salinity, reducing the swell potential. This can to some extent explain the low swell
sensitivity values for the tests with distilled bath. However, it is not surprising that
the lowest swelling index Cs is found for the sample with saline bath. The swelling
sensitivity was above 1 for all tests, which means that there was an eﬀect of structure.
Furthermore, as seen in Figure 46 all the normalized compression curves would likely
have crossed the ICL, which also indicates that there was indeed an eﬀect of structure
on the compression behaviour of intact Røsnæs clay samples. As Mitchell (1993) ex-
plained, meta-stable fabric could be one of the factors contributing to the structure.
Cementation is not likely to have contributed since the GDR 00.1-001-D (2011) did not
ﬁnd the tested Røsnæs clay to be calcareous. On the other hand the Clay Till did show
traces of calcium, and could are therefore likely to have been aﬀected by cementation.
Page 64
==PAGE:65==
DTU Civil Engineering
6.1
Possible sources of error
Several ILO tests were performed, primarily on reconstituted samples. One of the
uncertainties regarding the results of these tests was, that the load stages in some
cases were left longer than 24 hours. This uncertainty was corrected by consequently
using the reading after 24 hours for constructing the compression curves. However,
during the time past 24 hours, the soil did consolidate further. Since the primary
consolidation had ended before 24 hours had passed, the further consolidation was
mostly from secondary compression or creep. This additional compression might have
aﬀected the compressibility of the soil in the next stages, thus contributing to a small
error in the compression curves. An example of the diﬀerence between using readings
from when the load step was ended, instead of readings from after 24 hours, to construct
the compression curves can be seen in Figure 48.
Figure 48: Compression curves for test 3, using readings after each stage and readings
after 24 hours.
The diﬀerence between the curves in the ﬁgure are obviously related to how long the
loading stages were left on. In general it was attempted to apply the next load step
after exactly 24 hours, however for practical reasons it was not always possible.
The high rate of strain used in the CRS tests was based on the coeﬃcient of con-
solidation of cv = 1 · 10−9 m2/s from the distilled water samples. This was done in
order to assume an excess pore pressure close to zero, as the excess pore pressure was
not measured during the test. However, the calculated rate was based on a lower sam-
ple height, than the height of the samples actually used for the test. Because of this,
the correct high strain rate would be approximately 0.30 mm/h instead of 0.43 mm/h
for a consolidation of 95 %.
Page 65
==PAGE:66==
DTU Civil Engineering
As previously described, the vertical strain during the CRS tests was measured on a
plastic plate attached to the loading piston. This means that the actual displacement
measured was that of the loading piston, instead of that of the sample. The displace-
ment of the piston was assumed to be very similar to the displacement of the sample,
but there could possibly have been small diﬀerences.
A factor that could have aﬀected the compression and swelling of the intact Røsnæs
clay samples, was that samples could have been slightly disturbed during the trimming
process. However, if the samples had been very disturbed, signiﬁcant yielding would
likely have been observed.
Page 66
==PAGE:67==
DTU Civil Engineering
7
Conclusions
A series of characterization tests along with a range of one-dimensional IL and CRS
tests were performed on Røsnæs clay from Fehmarn Belt. Atterberg’s limits tests was
performed for Røsnæs clay reconstituted with distilled and saline water. The liquid
limit of the tested Røsnæs clay was found to be in the absolute lower end of the liquid
limit range of Røsnæs clay. Only a small diﬀerence was observed in the Atterberg’s
limit between the clay reconstituted with distilled and with saline water. The small
diﬀerence can be explained by the mineral composition, which showed that the tested
core sample mostly consisted of illite, while only 17 % of the clay minerals were smec-
tite, which are known to be signiﬁcantly aﬀected by salinity.
Thirteen IL tests was carried out on reconstituted and intact Røsnæs clay most of
the tests were performed using an oedometer. The samples were reconstituted with
diﬀerent types of water and the tests were performed with diﬀerent types of water
in the bath. The samples reconstituted with distilled water turned out to be more
compressible and swelled more during unloading, than the tests carried out on samples
reconstituted with saline and tap water. One of the reasons for this could be the Dif-
fused Double Layer around the particles being thicker for the distilled water samples,
however this is in contrast to the Atterberg’s limits that were not signiﬁcantly aﬀected
by the salinity. The Cv and Cαϵ values of the tap water samples were found to be closer
to the distilled water samples, than those reconstituted with saline water. The inﬂuence
of using saline water in the bath, opposed to distilled water when testing samples con-
taining saline water, did not seem to have a great eﬀect on the reconstituted samples.
However, data from intact samples did display reduced swelling, when saline water was
used in the bath instead of distilled water. Overall, the samples did display a notice-
able eﬀect of reconstitution and bath water, however there were also some variation
even for the same sample type and test condition. These variations seemed mostly re-
lated to the type of IL test apparatus used and the initial water content of the samples.
The intact samples were loaded to stresses above 3000 kPa, however, despite the
preconsolidation stress according to the GDR being signiﬁcantly lower (around 700
kPa), the samples did not display signiﬁcant yielding. This indicated that either the
samples had a signiﬁcant post-sedimentation structure, or that the actual preconsoli-
dation stress was higher than the values stated in the GDR. Even though not all the
normalised compression curves crossed the ICL, all the samples were found to have
a sensitivity above 1, which means that there is an eﬀect of structure. Part of this
structure eﬀect is likely due to meta-stable fabric. Cementation is however not likely
to have inﬂuenced the structure of the tested Røsnæs clay. Since no clear yielding was
found, the actual stress sensitivity of the Røsnæs clay remains unknown.
Three constant rate of strain oedometer tests was performed.
Two tests was per-
formed with diﬀerent strain rates and a third test with strain rates varying between
the rates of the two former tests. The results showed, that there is a signiﬁcant eﬀect
Page 67
==PAGE:68==
DTU Civil Engineering
on the compression curves of varying the strain rates. One of the reasons could be,
that the high rate did not allow the pore pressure to dissipate in to the same extent,
as for the test with the low rate. The diﬀerence between the two rates decreased with
stress, but at a stress level of 5000 kPa, a signiﬁcant diﬀerence was still observed.
7.1
Future work
Some IL tests were performed in a direct shear apparatus, also with the purpose of
performing a direct shearing test of the soil in order to determine the Critical State
Line (CSL) of the Røsnæs clay. One shear test was successfully performed on the
clay, which can be found in Appendix E. A second test was attempted at a higher
vertical stress than the ﬁrst test, however due to the sample being too short, it was
not sheared successfully. A suggestion for future work, could be to perform additional
shearing tests in order to establish the CSL.
It was seen that, the correlations given by Burland (1990) between the void ratio
at liquid limit and the constants of intrinsic compressibility e∗
100 and C∗
c does not cor-
relate well for the Røsnæs clay. It would be interesting to look at a new correlation
between the liquid limit and e∗
100 and C∗
c for the Røsnæs clay.
Clear yielding was not reached for the intact samples, which makes it impossible to
determine the actual sensitivity of the tested Røsnæs clay. In a future test it would be
interesting to investigate the behaviour of intact Røsnæs clay samples, when subject
to even higher stresses than in the performed tests.
From the found compression and swelling index values, it would have been interesting
to look at a correction factor, for using either distilled or tap water instead of the syn-
thetic pore water. However, suggesting a correction factor based on the limited number
of comparable RD-BD and RS-BD tests and only tests on one core sample, would not
have been reliable. For future work, such a correction factor would be interesting to
establish, however this factor would depend highly on the salt concentration in the
synthetic pore water and the mineral composition of the clay, and it would therefore
require an extensive amount of tests to establish.
Page 68
==PAGE:69==
DTU Civil Engineering
References
[2] ASTM D422-63e2 (2007): Standard Test Method for Particle-Size Analysis of Soils
(Withdrawn 2016). ASTM International, West Conshohocken, PA.
[3] ASTM D4186 / D4186M-12e1 (2012): Standard Test Method for One-Dimensional
Consolidation Properties of Saturated Cohesive Soils Using Controlled-Strain
Loading. ASTM International, West Conshohocken, PA.
[4] ASTM
D2435-04
(2014):
Standard
Test
Methods
for
One-Dimensional
Consolidation Properties of Soils Using Incremental Loading. ASTM International,
West Conshohocken, PA.
[1] Awadalkarim, A. (2014): Petrophysics of Palaeogene sediments. Ph.D. dissertation,
DTU Civil Engineering, Report R-299 (UK), Technical University of Denmark, Kgs.
Lyngby.
[5] Barbour, S.L., Fredlund, D.G. & Pufahl, D.E. (1992): The Osmotic Role in the
behavior of Swelling Clay Soils. In: Karalis T.K. (eds) Mechanics of Swelling. NATO
ASI Series (Series H: Cell Biology). vol 64. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg
[1] Biotaki, A. (2017): Swelling clay for annulus-ﬁlling around casing. Department of
Chemical Engineering, Technical University of Denmark, Kgs. Lyngby.
[6] Burland, J. B. (1990): On the compressibility and shear strength of natural clays.
G´eotechnique 40, No. 3, pp. 329-378.
[7] Christensen, S. M. & Munck, F. (2017): Investigation of Geotechnical Properties of
Røsnæs Clay. DTU Civil Engineering, Technical University of Denmark, Lyngby.
[7] Cornell University (1950): Final report, soil solidiﬁcation research. Ithaca, New
York.
[8] Deng, Y., Cui, Y. J., Tang A. M., Nguyen, X. P., Li, X. L. & Van Geet, M. (2011):
Investigating the pore-water chemistry eﬀects on the volume change behaviour of
Boom clay. Physics and Chemistry of The Earth, Elsevier, 36 (17-18), pp. 1905-
1912.
[9] DS/EN ISO 17892-3:2015: Geotechnical investigation and testing - Laboratory
testing of soil - Part 3: Determination of particle density. Danish Standard Asso-
ciation, Copenhagen.
[10] Fatahi, B., Khabbaz, H. & Basack, S. (2011): Eﬀects of Salinity and Sand Content
on Liquid Limit and Hydraulic Conductivity. Australian Geomechanics Vol. 46 No.
1.
[11] Fearon, R. E. & Coop, M. R. (2000): Reconstitution: What Makes an Appropriate
Reference Material?. G´eotechnique 50, No. 4, pp. 471-477.
Page 69
==PAGE:70==
DTU Civil Engineering
[12] Fugro Engineers B.V. (2010):
GDR 17.0-003:
Investigation Data Boring
Campaign 2010, Fixed Link across Fehmarn Belt Germany and Denmark. Femern
A/S, Copenhagen V.
[13] GEO (2010): GDR 18.0-001: Advanced Laboratory Testing. Femern A/S, Copen-
hagen V.
[28] Grim, R. E. (1962): Applied Clay Mineralogy. McGraw-Hill, New York.
[14] Grønbech, G. L., Nielsen B. N. & Ipsen, L. B. (2011): Comparison of liquid
limit of highly plastic clay by means of Casagrande and Fall Cone Apparatus.
In Proceedings of the 2011 Pan-Am CGS Geotechnical Conference Toronto, Ont.
Paper No. 100.
[15] Grønbech, G. L., Ipsen, L. B. & Nielsen B. N. (2015): Preconsolidation of Søvind
Marl - A Highly Fissured Eocene Clay. Geotechnical Tesiting Journal, Vol. 38, No.
4, pp. 501-510, doi:10.1520/GTJ20140246. ISSN 0149-6115.
[16] Head, K. H. (2006):
Manual of Soil Laboratory Testing, Volume 1:
Soil
Classiﬁcation and Compaction Tests. 3rd edition, Whittles Publishing, Scotland,
UK.
[17] Holtz R.D., & Kovacs W.D. (1981): An Introduction to Geotechnical Engineering.
Englewood Cliﬀs, N.J., pp. 723.
[26] Lambe, T. W. & Martin, R. T. (1955): Composition and engineering properties
of soil-III. Proceedings of the Highway Research Board, Washington D. C.
[18] Leroueil, S., Kabbaj, M., Tavenas, F. & Bouchard, R. (1985): Stress-strain-strain
rate relation for the compressibility of sensitive natural clays. G´eotechnique 35, No.
2, pp. 159-180.
[19] Li, P. Q. & Baudet, B. A. (2016): Strain rate dependence of the critical state
line of reconstituted clays. G´eotechnique Letters, Volume 6, Issue 1, pp. 66–71,
https://doi.org/10.1680/jgele.15.00140.
[20] Mansouri, H., Ajalloeian, R. & Sadeghpour, A. H. (2013): The Investigation
of Salinity Eﬀects on Behavioral Parameters of Fine-Grained Soils. International
Conference on Case Histories in Geotechnical Engineering. 38.
[21] Mitchell, J. K. (1993): Fundamentals of Soil Behaviour. Second Edition, John
Wiley & Sons, Inc. New York.
[22] Rambøll Arup Joint Venture (2014): Appendix GDR 00.1-001-D: Geotechnical
Properties for Clays of Palaeogene Origin. Femern A/S, Copenhagen V.
[23] Rimmer D.L., and Greenland D.J. (1976): Eﬀects of calcium carbonate on the
swelling behaviour of a soil clay. Journal of Soil Science, Vol. 27, Issue 2, pp.
129–139.
Page 70
==PAGE:71==
DTU Civil Engineering
[24] Rocchi, I. & Coop, M. R. (2014):
Experimental Accuracy of the Initial
Speciﬁc Volume. Geotechnical Testing Journal,
Vol. 37,
No. 1,
pp. 1–7,
doi:10.1520/GTJ20130047. ISSN 0149-6115.
[26] Samuels, S. G. (1950): The eﬀect of base exchange on the engineering properties
of soils. Building Research Station, Note C176, Great Britain.
[28] Schmertmann, J. H. (1969): Swell sensitivity. G´eotechnique 19, No. 4, pp. 530-533.
[25] Sheldon E., Gravesen P. & Nøhr-Hansen, H. (2012): Geology of the Femern Bælt
area between Denmark and Germany. GEUS, Geological Survey of Denmark and
Greenland Bulletin 26, pp. 13–16.
[26] Skempton, A. W. (1970): The consolidation of clays by gravitational compaction..
Q. J. Geol. Soc. 125, pp. 373-411.
[26] Sørensen, K. K. (2006): Inﬂuence of viscosity and ageing on the behaviour of
clays. PhD thesis, The University of London, London, UK.
[27] Van Paassen, L. A. & Gareau, L. F (2004): Eﬀect of Pore Fluid Salinity on
Compressibility and Shear Strength Development of Clayey Soils. In: Hack, R.,
Azzam, R. & Charlier, R. (Eds.): LNES 104, pp. 327–340, Springer, Berlin, Hei-
delberg.
[28] Warkentin, B. P. (1961): Interpretation of the upper plastic limit of clays. Nature,
Vol. 1, pp. 287-288.
[28] Wilson, M.J. & Wilson, L. (2014): Clay mineralogy and shale instability: an
alternative conceptual analysis. Clay Minerals, Vol. 49, Issue 2, 127-145.
[28] Zhang G., Germaine, J. T., Whittle, A. J. & Ladd, C. C. (2004): Index properties
of a highly weathered old alluvium. G´eotechnique 54, No. 7, pp. 441-451.
Page 71
==PAGE:72==
DTU Civil Engineering
Appendix
Appendix A: Loading program for CRS test 3
Figure 49: Loading program fro CRS test 3.
Appendix B: Pycnometer calibration
Table 16: Pycnometer calibration data
Pycnometer number
20
30
40
Pycn. + top (empty), m0 [g]
365.14
363.19
363.67
Pycn. + top (water ﬁlled), m1 [g]
946.1
943.06
944.15
Temperature at calibration, T1 [◦C]
22
22
22
Density of water at T1, ρw;1 [g/cm3]
0.9978
0.9978
0.9978
Appendix C: Hydrometer calibration
A calibration of the hydrometers was done in order to ﬁnd the correct eﬀective depth,
HR for each reading. The eﬀective depth was then used to ﬁnd the particle diameter
for each reading. The calibration was performed in accordance with the hydrometer
calibration guideline by Head (2006).
Table 17: Cylinder data
Distance from 100 to 900 ml, L
303
mm
Area of cross-section, A
2970
mm2
Page 72
==PAGE:73==
DTU Civil Engineering
Table 18: Hydrometer data for hydrometer 85750.
Volume,Vh
60.3
cm3
Height of bulb, h
138
mm
Neck to lowest graduation, N
10
mm
Table 19: Hydrometer data for hydrometer 21487.
Volume,Vh
55.8
cm3
Height of bulb, h
139
mm
Neck to lowest graduation, N
4
mm
The eﬀective depth, HR was then found from the following expression (Head, 2006):
HR = H + 1
2 · h −(L · Vh)
900
(28)
Table 20: Hydrometer calibration measurements for hydrometer 85750.
Scale
mark [g/cm3]
Reading, Rh
Distance from
lowest mark, d [mm]
H = d + N [mm]
HR [mm]
1.060
60
0
10
68.85
1.050
50
15.9
25.9
84.75
1.040
40
31.8
41.8
100.65
1.030
30
48
58
116.85
1.020
20
64.5
74.5
133.35
1.010
10
80.8
90.8
149.65
1.000
0
97.5
107.5
166.35
0.995
-5
106
116
174.85
Table 21: Hydrometer calibration measurements for hydrometer 21487.
Scale
mark [g/cm3]
Reading, Rh
Distance from
lowest mark, d [mm]
H = d + N [mm]
HR [mm]
1.060
60
0
4
64.1
1.050
50
14.8
18.8
78.9
1.040
40
29.5
33.5
93.6
1.030
30
44.2
48.2
108.3
1.020
20
59.5
63.5
123.6
1.010
10
75.2
79.2
139.3
1.000
0
90.8
94.8
154.9
0.995
-5
98.8
102.8
162.9
Page 73
==PAGE:74==
DTU Civil Engineering
Finally, the readings was plotted with the eﬀective depth in Figure 50 and 51 for
hydrometer 85750 and 21487 respectively.
HR = 166.21 - 1.6311 · Rh
80
120
160
200
ve depth, HR [mm]
0
40
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Effectiv
Reading, Rh [-]
Figure 50: Hydrometer calibration plot (85750)
HR = 154.64 - 1.5197 · Rh
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Effective depth, HR [mm]
Reading, Rh [-]
Figure 51: Hydrometer calibration plot (21487)
From linear regression an expression for HR was found.
Hydrometer 85750:
HR = 166.21 −1.6311 · Rh
(29)
Hydrometer 21487:
HR = 154.64 −1.5198 · Rh
(30)
Page 74
==PAGE:75==
DTU Civil Engineering
Appendix D: Liquid limit plots
Figure 52: Casagrande cup liquid limit test on Røsnæs clay containing distilled water.
Figure 53: Falling cone liquid limit test on Røsnæs clay containing distilled water.
Page 75
==PAGE:76==
DTU Civil Engineering
y = -0.005x + 0.9655
R² = 0.9768
0.50
0.55
0.60
0.65
0.70
0.75
0.80
0.85
0.90
0.95
1.00
1
10
100
Water content, w [-]
No. of drops [-]
Figure 54: Casagrande cup liquid limit test on Røsnæs clay containing saline water.
y = -0.005x + 0.9655
R² = 0.9768
0.50
0.55
0.60
0.65
0.70
0.75
0.80
0.85
0.90
0.95
1.00
1
10
Water content, w [-]
y = 0.035x + 0.5153
R² = 0.9991
0.50
0.55
0.60
0.65
0.70
0.75
0.80
0.85
0.90
0.95
1
10
100
Water content, w [-]
Depth, h [mm]
Figure 55: Fall cone liquid limit test on Røsnæs clay containing saline water.
Page 76
==PAGE:77==
DTU Civil Engineering
Appendix E: Direct shear test
Figure 56: Horizontal displacement vs. shear stress for Test 6.
Figure 57: Vertical stress vs. shear stress for Test 6.
Page 77
