==PAGE:1==
Persistent Authentication in
Smart Environments using COTS
Hardware
Jorge Martinez
Kongens Lyngby 2017
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary (English)
This thesis studies a system that tracks principals from an authenticating point
in the entrance trough his path as he moves in the building, this in order to pro-
vide authorization of services in the areas in which this user has the right priv-
ileges. Such authentication scheme allows the authorization of location-based
services (for example automatic doors for restricted areas), in environments
where low cost cameras are in use. The proposed system implements Persis-
tent Authentication combining Blob detection techniques and diﬀerent remote
biometric factors using multiple Commercially Oﬀ-The-Shelf (COTS) cameras.
Background subtraction is performed on the video provided by the cameras,
obtaining a shape around moving subjects in the environment, this shape is en-
hanced by diﬀerent image processing techniques including Morphological trans-
formations, providing a more complete model of the principals in the image. A
series of biometrics is performed on the found model of principals, retrieving the
identity made available during the principal authentication, ﬁnally the informa-
tion resulting from multiple analyzed cameras is combined into one coordinate
system giving as a result the position of each identity.
The implementation is used to study additional biometric factors not addressed
by previous authors of Persistent Authentication and also to shine some light in
the challenges presented by the usage of multiple cameras.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Summary (Danish)
Denne afhandling undersøger et system, der sporer borgernes vej igennem en
bygning fra et autentiﬁceringspunkt i et indgangsparti. Dette gøres med henblik
på at yde bevilling af tjenester i de områder, hvor denne bruger har de rette be-
føjelser. Sådan en godkendelsesordning tillader autorisation af lokationsbaserede
tjenester (For eksempel automatiske døre til begrænsede områder), i omgivelser
hvor der bliver brugt billige kameraer. Det foreslåede system implementerer Per-
sistent Authentication, der kombinerer Blob-detektionsteknikker og forskellige
fjernbiometriske faktorer ved brug af ﬂere COTS kameraer.
Kameraerne udfører background subtraction på videoen, herfra opnås en form
omkring bevægelige objekter i området. Denne form forbedres ved forskellige
billedbehandlingsteknikker, herunder morfologiske transformationer, hvilket gi-
ver en mere komplet model af personerne i billedet. En serie af biometri udføres
på den fundne model af mennesker, dette er i stand til at identiﬁcerer personen
ud fra Id’et, som er stillet til rådighed i den primære autentiﬁcering. Endelig
kombineres oplysningerne fra ﬂere analyserede kameraer i et koordinatsystem,
der som resultat giver hver persons position.
Implementeringen bruges til at undersøge yderligere biometriske faktorer, som
ikke blev nævnt af de tidligere forfattere af Persistent Authentication, og til at
diskutere de udfordringer der opstår ved brug af ﬂere kameraer.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at the Department of Applied Mathematics and Com-
puter Science during the course of ﬁve months, in partial fulﬁllment of the re-
quirements for acquiring the degree Master of Science in Engineering, Security
and Mobile Computing.
Lyngby, 30-June-2017
Jorge Martinez
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisor, Christian Damsgaard Jensen for all the
comments and guidance during the course of this thesis, and for the original
idea.
Thanks to Agnieszka Golinska for her help with so many testing sessions, and
additionally to Michelle Lind, Nikolaos Tatsis, and Tariq Hassen for all their
help as subjects of my experiments and with ﬁnal editing.
Finally thanks to my family whose support and encouragement made all of this
possible.
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Summary (English)
i
Summary (Danish)
iii
Preface
v
Acknowledgements
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Goals
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Theory
5
2.1
Indoor Positioning Systems
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Persistent Authentication In Smart Environments (PAISE)
. . .
6
2.2.1
Continuous Authentication
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2.2
Previous work in PAISE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Blob Detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3.1
Background Subtraction (BS) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3.2
Histograms of Oriented Gradients (HOG) Descriptors
. .
12
2.4
People Recognition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.4.1
Blob Tracking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.4.2
Remote Biometrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.5
Camera Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
2.5.1
Camera Calibration
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
2.5.2
Homography
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
==PAGE:12==
x
CONTENTS
3
Analysis
27
3.1
Oﬀered Services . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.2
Selected Techniques
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.2.1
Blob detection speciﬁcs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.2.2
Recognition speciﬁcs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.3
Speciﬁc Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.3.1
SWOT Analysis in PAISE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.4
Attacker Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4
Design
35
4.1
System structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.1.1
Main Components . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5
Implementation
41
5.1
Class structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.2
Calibration
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5.3
How to expand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5.4
Conﬁguration process
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5.4.1
Camera Settings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5.4.2
Authentication Zone settings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
6
Evaluation
49
6.1
Experiments Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
6.2
Scenarios
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
6.2.1
Type 1: Persistence
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
6.2.2
Type 2: Performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
6.2.3
Type 3: Horizontal Scalability
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
6.3
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
6.3.1
Type 1 Persistence results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
6.3.2
General ﬁndings
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
6.3.3
Type 2 Performance results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
6.3.4
Type 3 Horizontal scalability results . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
7
Conclusion
57
7.1
System implementation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
7.2
Challenges involving multiple cameras . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
A Source of the implementation
61
Bibliography
65
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 1
Introduction
The spread of pervasive computing is bigger every year, right now there are small
connected computers in everyday objects such as screens, cameras, door locks,
light bulbs and thermostats, this enabled, years ago, the implementation of
smart homes, and is bringing also smart oﬃces, integrating multiple of connected
devices to improve comfort and productivity.
Such smart environments can
beneﬁt from the knowledge of the presence users and also from increased security
allowing their activation only to authorized personnel recognizing users’ identity
without the need of interaction for every device.
1.1
Motivation
A frequent objective in security is to reduce the eﬀort that the user has to spend
interacting with the security system, while maintaining the level of security
that traditional security systems have. The proposed solution behind persistent
authentication is to have a strong authentication system at strategic points such
as the entrance of the building, in which principals would be identiﬁed with high
conﬁdence, and from that point on, the system will use sensors available in the
smart environment to keep those authenticated principals’ identities while they
are inside the building.
==PAGE:14==
2
Introduction
Previous work, as discussed in section 2.2, have approached persistent authen-
tication both using a Time of Flight camera and a color camera; the ideas of
this thesis are: to expand previous work on using multiple cameras for covering
a larger area, explore the challenges that this setup introduce, explore diﬀerent
factors of authentication to be used for maintaining the identity of principals,
and develop a system that implements this ﬁndings and allow future work on
this area such as expansion of the authentication system and integration with a
location-based access control system.
In this instance we will be using COTS security IP cameras, and existing and
reliable computer vision libraries and techniques to perceive the user position
and maintain the knowledge of his identity while he moves in the building.
1.2
Goals
The work in this thesis has the following objectives:
• Identify the challenges that come from introducing multiple cameras.
• Explore factors of authentication and tracking methods needed to keep
the identity of principals.
• Design and develop a system that allows exploring these items and that
reﬂect the found concepts.
The developed system will be driven by the need to secure smart environments,
provide user’s position to services and facilitate the application and study of the
involved techniques.
For the system to implement a useful persistent authentication it has to maintain
recognition of principals without loosing track, which in this area is know as the
ability of "persistence".
An important property related to persistence is the robustness against prin-
cipals’ normal behavior and interaction with each other, this includes consid-
erations such as identifying a user which is occluded from some cameras, or
in a situation where the perceived information is partially ambiguous such as
principals walking close to each other.
The most important idea behind having a continuous authentication system in
a building, is to be able to use the positions of the principals to verify if such
==PAGE:15==
1.2 Goals
3
person is authorized to use a certain object in the vicinity of such position,
this object could be a door leading to a certain restricted area, or an electronic
device such as a computer. Because of this, the position identiﬁed by the system
should be adequate for such applications.
This also raises the importance of covering a big area with cameras, because
of this the system needs to enable the usage of multiple cameras and have the
ability to escalate in its number.
In addition, the system need to allow at least two points of expansion, the Ini-
tial Authentication mechanism (which should be independent of the rest of the
application) and the biometrics should be easy to include. Firstly, decoupling
from the authentication method allows the security to be increased by rising the
conﬁdence in the initial identity of the principal. And secondly, allowing the
addition of biometrics facilitates the exploration of diﬀerent alternatives both
in the present thesis and in future work.
This property of the system also indicates a boundary, as an initial authenti-
cator is out of the scope of Persistent Authentication and there will not be an
exhaustive investigation of the best biometric factors to be used. In addition to
this, the users might be concerned by their privacy, because they are being mon-
itored constantly, in Persistent Authentication, no storage of the user position
is required, so no analysis of the user behavior is possible, analysis of attacks
on the implemented system to collect and store such information will not be
considered in this thesis.
This is a summary of the previously described system properties:
• Good level of Persistence
• Robustness to principals interaction
• Allows to identify principals’ position for location-based services
• It should enable the usage of multiple cameras
• Decoupling from the initial authentication method
• Facilitates the exploration of additional biometric factors
==PAGE:16==
4
Introduction
1.3
Summary
This thesis is composed of the following chapters: This chapter, the introduc-
tion, explains the project, its goals and motivation. Chapter 2, contains the
theoretical framework and and explains the previous work in which this thesis
is based. Chapter 3 connects the found literature to explain the overall proposed
scheme, In chapter 4 we deal with the design of the system, the experimentation
environment and how the previously described theory was applied to the ﬁnal
version of the system. Chapter 5 contains a detailed explanation of the im-
plemented system, Chapter 6 explains the method designed to test the system
and measure its capabilities. In chapter 7 we showcase the obtained results and
ﬁnalize with the conclusions.
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 2
Theory
2.1
Indoor Positioning Systems
Mainetti, et al.[17] reviewed several methods for people tracking found in the
literature and classiﬁed them on 2 dimensions: enabling technology and propose
of its development, from this study we can observe that, for people tracking,
we can divide them in two groups: methods that require for people to carry a
device, and those that do not. Table 2.1 contains this technologies.
Table 2.1: Technologies Enabling Indoor Positioning Systems
Device Required
Device not required
Vision, with building model
Vision, without reference
Vision, with pattern recognition
Natural Infra Red (IR)
Vision, with deployed targets
Artiﬁcial IR
IR with artiﬁcial light source
Wi-Fi
RFID
Bluetooth
==PAGE:18==
6
Theory
Other authors have used technologies that require a device for authentication,
Corner and Noble presented [8] a device that authenticates the user to his laptop
when the user is close to it, using a short range wireless signal to establish
communication and then providing proof of identity.
In this case the short
range nature of the communication is used to establish that the user is close to
the laptop, and the user carrying the device is assumed to be the true owner of
the device.
The previous scheme present the problem that the user himself is not being
the one authenticated, but the device, and this allows a malicious agent to
impersonate a trusted user by stealing the device. This problem is also present
with technologies involving carrying a device mentioned in table 2.1
From the technologies enabling IPS, natural and artiﬁcial Infra Red have the
problem that their commercially available sensors are expensive, on the other
hand there are fairly inexpensive cameras and they are already deployed in
buildings where security is a concern.
2.2
Persistent Authentication In Smart Environ-
ments (PAISE)
2.2.1
Continuous Authentication
In 1995 [20] Dr Simon J. Shepherd described the concept of continuous authen-
tication for a system that kept identifying the user after the initial log in, based
on the pre-registered pattern of typing characteristics. The user would log in
normally to the PC using his user name and password, and from that point, the
system would verify his writing pattern, and if the pattern did not ﬁt with the
pre-registered model the network administrator would be notiﬁed of a possible
breach.
From that ﬁrst implementation of Continuous Authentication the following
scheme can be abstracted: There is a preliminary phase, in which the user
registers his credentials along with his biometric features. Then when he wants
to use the desired service, there are two phases, The ﬁrst one consists of an
authentication using the user credentials, and the second phase consists of the
user being authenticated by his biometric features periodically until the user
logs out from the system. This scheme is illustrated on ﬁgure 2.1
One of the important concepts of this idea is that it does not try to replace the
==PAGE:19==
2.2 Persistent Authentication In Smart Environments (PAISE)
7
Figure 2.1: Continuous Authentication phases
authentication mechanism, instead, the system continuously validates that the
user is still who he claimed to be during the authentication phase, this is to
solve the problem of a malicious user taking over the computer after the user
authenticated and left it unlocked, it also strengthens the security of the login
as the pre-registered factors used for continuous authentication could serve as a
second factor for authentication.
2.2.2
Previous work in PAISE
2.2.2.1
Origins of the idea
In 2008 Kirschmeyer and Hansen [15] take the concept of Continuous Authen-
tication and constrain it to be more speciﬁc in order to apply it to building
security. They call this Persistent Authentication, and it diﬀers from continu-
ous authentication in that the user is not authenticated from pre-registered hard
biometrics during phase 2 (see ﬁgure 2.1), instead it uses techniques to verify
that the user using the service (inside the room in this case) is still the same
one that authenticated in phase 1.
Figure 2.2: General Overview of PAISE [15]
==PAGE:20==
8
Theory
Figure 2.2 shows the components included in Kirschmeyer and Hansen’s work,
In their experiments they set up a Time-Of-Flight (TOF) camera in one of the
corners of the ceiling in a room, a person would enter the room, and the system
would then start tracking such person based on the input from the TOF camera,
the person would approach the authentication zone, and authenticate using the
smart-card system, from this point on, this person would be recognized by the
system as the owner of such card and would get clearance according to his access
control rights, the authenticated person would then proceed to the authorization
zone in order to access the restricted area behind a door, the system would check
the permissions that the user has and would open the door if the user has the
required clearance.
In this model, every person is tracked, even if there is no user associated with
him, this is done by applying a Background Subtraction (BS) method (see sec-
tion 2.3.1) and a clustering algorithm that groups pixels according to similarity
between the position of the pixels and their depth information, so pixels close to
each other would get grouped in the same cluster if their depth is very similar.
In this system, the phase 2 of ﬁgure 2.1 is replaced by the tracking of authenti-
cated blobs using the method previously described and the log out is done when
the blob leaves line of sight with the camera, additionally people are tracked all
the time, even if they are not authenticated, which could enable its usage for
alarms; and ﬁnally there is an additional veriﬁcation of user rights for the usage
of several services based on the position of the user.
The results from this work show that the system is able to track an authenticated
user and grant him access to services according to speciﬁed security policies,
however multiple users can introduce some problems.
One of the weaknesses of this system, presented by the authors, is that having
two people close to each other and at roughly the same distance to the camera
can make the system to swap the identities of the two users, this happens because
for the tracking algorithm, there is no way to diﬀerentiate these blobs.
2.2.2.2
Resilient Infrastructure And Building Security
Figure 2.3: Persistent Authentication for Location-based Services [13]
==PAGE:21==
2.3 Blob Detection
9
Figure 2.3 shows Ingwar’s approach called Persistent Authentication for Location-
based Services, presented in his PHD thesis [13]. He replaced the TOF Camera
for a color camera which allows the usage of remote biometrics from the camera
image, and also proposes the fusion of such biometrics by using the False Pos-
itive Rate (FPR)s and False Negative Rate (FNR)s to calculate the conﬁdence
that a user has been correctly authenticated by those factors.
In the blob detection component, Ingswar’s system makes use of BS to detect
blobs that are moving in the scene, as in this case there is no depth information
coming from the color cameras, the blob detection is then performed by grouping
the pixels in the foreground that are connected to each other.
After blobs have been detected in the current frame, the systems combines
Tracking information and biometric factors to recognize the previously authen-
ticated users and assign their identity to those blobs.
Once identiﬁcation of the blobs have been done, the system is able to provide
the position of each user to the authorization component who grants or denies
access to location-based services.
Ingwar additionally introduces a conﬁdence variable in the user state, which
models the changing conﬁdence of measures that identify the user, such changes
happen because of diﬀerent events such as a biometric feature being or not
available, and errors in measurements.
This conﬁdence variable is changed according to Ingswar’s Persistent Authenti-
cation Algorithm which increases the conﬁdence every time a biometric feature
is measured or also when the user authenticates, and lowers it when there is a
noisy event during blob detection or in the tracking component. Finally, when
a location-based service requires authorization, this conﬁdence is also veriﬁed
to maintain a level of minimum allowed conﬁdence.
2.3
Blob Detection
2.3.1
Background Subtraction (BS)
BS consist of techniques to identify moving elements in a video, identify them as
part of the foreground, and the rest as background. This is a frequent technique
used in people detection.
==PAGE:22==
10
Theory
Table 2.2: BS Algorithms Compared: symbols in order: ns: Number of sub
sampled frames, m:Number of Gaussian distributions, n: buﬀer size
for last background frames, m: number of modes approximated for
the Probability Density Function (PDF),
Method
Speed
Memory
Accuracy
Running Gaussian average
O(1)
O(1)
Limited/Medium
Temporal median ﬁlter
O(ns)
O(ns)
Limited/Medium
Mixture of Gaussians
O(m)
O(m)
High
Kernel Density Estimation (KDE)
O(n)
O(n)
High
Sequential KD approximation
O(m + 1)
O(m)
Medium/High
Cooccurence of image variations
O(8n/N 2)
O(nK/N 2)
Medium
Eigenbackgrounds
O(M)
O(n)
Medium
In the most popular algorithms, a series of frames are analyzed to establish a
background model and then if the analyzed pixel diﬀers from the model by a lot
(by some deﬁned measurement), the pixel is considered to be foreground. After
this the background model is updated to include for changes in light.
Piccardi [19] wrote a review of the main methods for BS, in the paper, he
presents each method, an analyses the speed, memory and accuracy, table 2.2
shows his ﬁndings. In the following sections I describe the most relevant ones.
2.3.1.1
Running Gaussian Average
Wren et al [24] proposed a method for ﬁtting a Gaussian PDF for each pixel,
this in order to describe the probability of a pixel to be part of the background
using a accumulated mean function to update the mean of the Gaussian, and a
similar function for the variance.
µt = αIt + (1 −α)µt−1
(2.1)
Equation 2.1 is the equation used for updating the mean of the Gaussian of each
pixel, α is a parameter that describes how fast the background is supposed to
change and It is the current intensity of the pixel.
To actually establish if a pixel belongs to the foreground The current diﬀerence
from the mean, is compared to a weighted value of the variance, the inequality
==PAGE:23==
2.3 Blob Detection
11
2.2 shows how to verify this.
|It −µt| > kσt
(2.2)
2.3.1.2
Mixture of Gaussians
This model is inspired by backgrounds with regularly moving objects, such as
leaves in a tree, it works by assigning to each pixel a mixture of Gaussians (see
equation 2.3) describing the probability of observing a RGB color in that pixel,
with each of the K Gaussians representing one possible object in he background,
and Σi,t the covariance matrix of pixel i at frame t.
P(xt) =
K
X
i=1
ωi,tη(xt −µi,t, Σi,t)
(2.3)
In order to discriminate a pixel between background or foreground the Gaussians
are sorted by amplitude ω and standard deviation, then the ﬁrst B Gaussians
to satisfy inequality 2.4 are representing the background.
T is a threshold
parameter.
B
X
i=1
ωi > T
(2.4)
Having this, with each frame and pixel, to establish to which Gaussian belongs
a pixel color xi, each Gaussians is evaluated in order, selecting the ﬁrst one to
satisfy inequality 2.5, then the selected Gaussian’s parameters are updated using
cumulative averages. If there is Gaussian is selected, the last one is replaced
with a new one centered in xi.
(xi −µi,t)
σi,y
> 2.5
(2.5)
==PAGE:24==
12
Theory
2.3.1.3
Kernel Density Estimation (KDE)
The idea behind this algorithm is to model the background using a histogram
of the last n values of the pixel identiﬁed as background, in order to make a
continuos model of such histogram a the PDF is modeled as a sum of gaussians
with center in the values, as shown in equation 2.6
P(xi) = 1
n
n
X
i=1
η(xt −xi, Σt)
(2.6)
For this model, to distinguish if the pixel color xt belongs to the foreground it
is veriﬁed if the inequality P(xt) < T is satisﬁed for a threshold T.
One advantage of this model is that it does not require parameters that change
depending on the scene, although implementations might allow conﬁguring n
and T, but such parameters are very intuitive.
2.3.2
Histograms of Oriented Gradients (HOG) Descrip-
tors
A feature descriptor represents an image, typically as a vector, in terms of some
descriptive qualities, in the case of Histograms of Oriented Gradients (HOG)
the vector describes histograms of the change in intensity from each pixel to its
neighbours.
Dalal and Triggs [9] proposed HOG a new feature descriptor and suggest its
application for pedestrian detection, by using the descriptors to ﬁnd a shape
describing the image and classify such shape into pedestrian or non-pedestrian
using a linear Support Vector Machine (SVM).
In order to obtain the HOG descriptor of the image to be analyzed, ﬁrst, the
gradient of intensity change has to be calculated, this can be done by applying
two 1D centered point derivatives [−1, 0, −1] one vertical and other horizontal,
this will give the change of intensity with two components (in the y and x
axis) for each pixel in the image; this two values are then transformed to polar
coordinates, which gives the magnitude and direction of the intensity gradient,
angles between 180◦- 360◦are re-mapped to 0◦- 180◦, ignoring the ’sign’ of the
vector.
==PAGE:25==
2.3 Blob Detection
13
Then the image is analyzed pixel by pixel in small blocks (of 8x8 pixels in the
paper) condensating the magnitude and direction of each pixel in a orientation
histogram with 9 bins for angles between 0-180, this is done by ﬁnding the
two bins that enclose the pixel direction value and adding the magnitude of
the pixel proportionally to both bins. To make the histograms independent of
lighting conditions, a normalized version of them is calculated, this is done by
iterating over groups of a few blocks (2x2 group of blocks for example), and
the groups overlap with each other, in each group the histograms of blocks are
concatenated and normalized, and stored for that group before moving to the
next group. After every group is analyzed, the resulting normalized histograms
are concatenated, resulting in the HOG descriptor.
After ﬁnding the HOG descriptor of two images, those could be compared to
ﬁnd out if they are similar and in this way detect if there is a pedestrian in
the analyzed image, based on the HOG descriptor of a pedestrian.
But the
previously described process assumes that the pedestrian in the analyzed image
is ﬁlling the frame in the same proportion as the pedestrian in the model, to
solve this, the image is analyzed in a sliding window manner iterating in two
levels, in the ﬁrst level the image is downscaled by a parametrizable factor, in
the second level the the image is cropped to meet the window size (the size of the
reference image representing a pedestrian) and in each iteration the cropping
area is shifted by a parametrizable value.
In the proposed algorithm, a single image is not used as an object reference,
to ﬁnd out if an image contains a certain object (pedestrians in this case) a
SVM is used to discriminate in each iteration if the window’s content belongs
to a previously trained category. This training is done by presenting the SVM
with a classiﬁcation of pedestrian/non-pedestrian HOG descriptors of reference
images, so the SVM develops a hyperplane that separates such images. Because
of this, the SVM is able to classify new images (each window) into containing
or not a pedestrian.
The described algorithm returns a list of rectangles surrounding the windows
in which the pedestrian was found. This can be used as a position and size of
the person in the image and as a discriminator in areas of the image containing
pedestrians or not. The authors recommend for the reference images to have
some padding between the person and the border of the image, because of this,
the found bounding boxes may have the same padding. All of this characteristics
determine the precision of the result of this method.
==PAGE:26==
14
Theory
2.4
People Recognition
This section describes techniques found on the literature that can be used to
identify the person in an image, this techniques can be applied after the areas
of the image containing people have been identiﬁed and there is a reference of
the person that can be linked to the found person in the image.
2.4.1
Blob Tracking
Object tracking is usually studied as an alternative to object tracking by identiﬁ-
cation, in order to speed up the search of the object in the image, the algorithms
analyze the movement of the object and then make a small feature search around
the predicted position.
For this section the interest in tracking is to have a measure of similarity between
found blobs and previous observed blobs, so other forms of tracking where also
studied.
2.4.1.1
Kalman Filter
A Kalman ﬁlter is an algorithm for prediction and correction of the state for a
linear dynamic system with a known behavior, his algorithms models the system
as having a transition matrix A from the previous state to the new state, a matrix
B as the matrix modeling the control over the system, the previous real state
xk−1, the control input uk, and the process noise wk which is assumed to have
a normal distribution (wk ∼N(0, Qk)). Equation 2.7 models then the current
real state of the system xk.
xk = Axk−1 + Buk + wk
(2.7)
the system is described by a matrix H transforming from the real measurable
properties of the system (xk) to the modeled system state, and some mea-
surement noise assumed to have a normal distribution (vk ∼N(0, Rk)). The
recorded state (zk) is then described by equation 2.8
zk = Hxk + vk
(2.8)
==PAGE:27==
2.4 People Recognition
15
Prediction is done by equations 2.9 and 2.10 that predicts the covariance error,
where ˆxk−1 and Pk−1 are the recorded state from time k −1:
ˆx−
k = Aˆxk−1 + Buk
(2.9)
P −
k = APk−1AT + Qk
(2.10)
In each measurement of the system, the recorded state is updated with equations
2.11, 2.12 and 2.13, Where
Kk = P −
k HT (HP −
k HT + R)−1
(2.11)
ˆxk = ˆx−
k + Kk(zk −Hˆx−
k )
(2.12)
Pk = (1 −KkH)P −
k
(2.13)
2.4.1.2
Kalman Filter for Multiple object tracking
Li et al. [16] propose a method for using a Kalman ﬁlter to track multiple objects
in a video. In their model, the position of the object is measured as well as the
width and height, an it assumes that from one frame to the next, the speed can
be considered constant, in this sense, the state of each object of the system can
be described by the variable xk in 2.14
xk = [x0,k, y0,k, lk, hk, vx,k, vy,k, vl,k, vh,k]T
(2.14)
This state describes with x0,k and y0,k the coordinate of the object on the x and
y axis, with lk and hk the half of the width and height respectively, and with
vx,k, vy,k, vl,k and vh,k their respective rates of change.
The measurable properties are then represented by zk in 2.15.
zk = [x0,k, y0,k, lk, hk]T
(2.15)
==PAGE:28==
16
Theory
The transition matrix A is 2.16
A =


1
0
0
0
∆t
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
∆t
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
∆t
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
∆t
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1


(2.16)
Which from equation 2.7 and 2.15 it can be understood that A is linking the
rates of change with their respective the position and dimension values and it
is assuming constant speed, at the time ∆t between frames.
The measurement transformation matrix H is proposed as 2.17
H =


1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0


(2.17)
Matrix 2.17, vector 2.15 and equation 2.8 show that the only values included in
the measurement are the position and the dimensions of the object, and they
are direct mappings.
To track multiple objects two functions are deﬁned that allow to compare which
object is better described by a Kalman tracker, function 2.18 describes the
diﬀerence between the current position and the previous tracked position, and
function 2.19 describes the diﬀerence between the previously tracked area and
the current measured area.
D(i, j) =
q
(xi
k −xj
k+1)2 + (yi
k −yj
k+1)2
Maxn(
q
(xi
k −xn
k+1)2 + (yi
k −yn
k+1)2)
(2.18)
A(i, j) =
|Si
k −Sj
k+1|
Maxn(|Si
k −Sn
k+1|)
(2.19)
==PAGE:29==
2.4 People Recognition
17
In both equations k denotes the previous frame, k +1 the current frame, i is the
index of an object in the previous frame, j an object in the current frame, and
Maxn a is the maximum value iterating trough all the objects in the current
frame (each object identiﬁed by n in each iteration). From this functions, the
author derives a score (equation 2.20) used to measure how closely an object j
is described by a Kalman tracker of an object i. having α and β as weighs of
the score with α + β = 1.
V (i, j) = αD(i, j) + βA(i, j)
(2.20)
Using these deﬁnitions, the tracking algorithm works as follows:
1. In the ﬁrst frame that a moving object appears a new Kalman tracker
is assigned to that object and initialized, if it is not the ﬁrst frame, but
the object doesn’t ﬁt any previous tracking windows, then a new Kalman
tracker is assigned to that object and initialized.
2. Measure the properties of moving objects in the frame, use the score 2.20 to
determine the best matches from previous objects in the frame to current
ones (the lower the better).
3. If one of the objects is occluding another treat this as a new object (this
is called a merge operation), if a previously merged tracker is separated
again in 2 objects, treat those objects as the previously merged ones, if
a tracker that was not the product of a merge is split, then create new
trackers for them.
4. If an object leaves the frame stop tracking that object.
2.4.2
Remote Biometrics
In the usual described types of factors, something you know, have or are, bio-
metrics fall into something you are, so they are measures of characteristics of
a person, such as their faces or voice, this characteristics can could be used by
another human to describe him, as the previously listed ones or could be more
hidden such as ﬁngerprints and retina or iris patterns. However this information
is always public and could be collected by a human without the user knowledge.
This is why usually biometrics are used together with another types of factors,
such as a password or an id card.
==PAGE:30==
18
Theory
When designing a system that uses biometrics, measurement of features usually
requires user interaction, which would break the propose of persistent authenti-
cation of keep authentication of the user with as little interactions as possible,
so the biometrics of interest are the ones that could be measured at a distance
of the user, remote biometrics, such as face or several soft biometrics as iris and
skin color.
Dantcheva et al. [10] collects several used soft biometrics and classiﬁes them
with properties like Permanence of the feature, Distinctiveness and subjectivity
of its deﬁnition. Here I name some of them that are useful in this context.
Hair color According to the review by Dantcheva et al. [10] hair color can be
measured using Gaussian mixture density models, which accounts for the
broad range of colors.
Skin color Skin color has been previously successfully detected from color im-
ages using color segmentation [7] among other techniques.
Clothes color Dantcheva et al. [10] proposed this soft biometric making em-
phasis in its usefulness for the scenario of video surveillance, the proposed
method describe subjects using a histogram of 11 speciﬁc colors that are
clustered in the images through fuzzy KNN classiﬁer, in this way the per-
son is described according to the histograms of colors found in the upper
part and lower part of the body.
Height This feature could be measured either by using several cameras to ob-
tain a 3D representation of the body, or by comparing the person to an
object of known height as proposed by BenAbdelkader and Davis [10].
Body dimensions BenAbdelkader and Davis [5] describes as well a method for
measuring shoulder breath and height using images provided by surveil-
lance cameras, it employs model ﬁtting of a 3D ellipse that takes into
account the velocity of the person to ﬁnd out its orientation.
Gait The measuring of the walking pattern, as purposed by Wang et al. [23]
requires ﬁnding the silhouette of the person in the image, then the dis-
tances from the centroid to all the points in the silhouette are measured
and normalized, this is transformed in a signal that is compared to the
template using a eigenspace (more on this on section 2.4.2.4)
Weight Estimation Velardo and Dugelay [21] proposed that there is a linear
dependency between several measurements from the body and the weight,
such dependency can be used to take remote measurements from images
and estimate the weight of the person, using such value as a biometric
feature.
==PAGE:31==
2.4 People Recognition
19
2.4.2.1
Histogram
As proposed by Dantcheva et al. [10], the color of the clothes can be used as
a feature to include when identifying people in videos, they use a histogram of
recognizable colors as described in several cultures because using a lower amount
of bin of colors have been found to improve the accuracy of object detection by
color.
A color histogram is proposed by Niinuma et al. [18] as one of the soft biometrics
used in their continuous authentication system for PC, they use both face and
clothes color histograms in the RGB color space, they do a 3D color histogram
assigning each channel of the color space as an axis, making a 3D matrix of 16
x 16 x 16 and counting for each cell the amount of pixels in such range.
When the user logs in, the system calculates the Histograms of the user and
stores it as the template to use for comparison, then periodically an image is
capture with a web camera and the biometrics are chequed, when checking the
color histograms, the Bhattacharyya coeﬃcient is used to compare the taken
image histograms with the ones stored as templates.
2.4.2.2
Skin Color
Chai and Ngan [7] propose a method for detecting faces in video conferences,
they present an algorithm that ﬁrst does color segmentation using a color ranges
in the color space YCrCb, these ranges where obtained empirically from images
of people of all races. This color range is for Cr [133;173] and for Cb [77;127].
Their ﬁndings for diﬀerent races are shown on ﬁgure 2.4.
After this color segmentation, some objects in the background are still included
in the resulting mask, so they also employ other techniques to ﬁlter out pixels
found with this range that do not belong to a face, namely: Density regulariza-
tion, Background subtraction, and geometric analysis of the found shapes. A
diﬀerent approach is proposed by Gomez and Morales [12], they created a ma-
chine learning algorithm called Restricted Covering Algorithm, which receives a
set of operators, constants and variables, and evaluates its combinations over a
set of training examples, increacing the reliability of the found rules on each it-
eration. After running the algorithm over a set of 32 million labeled pixels in the
RGB color space, and with the operators [+, −, /,2 ] and operands [r, g, b, 1/3]
they obtained the rule shown in ﬁgure 2.5 which obtained a performance with
recall=93.7%, precision=91,7% and success rate= 92.6%.
==PAGE:32==
20
Theory
Figure 2.4: Skin ranges for diﬀerent races [7]
2.4.2.3
Face Recognition
In part II of Handbook of face recognition [14], The author makes a review of
the Face recognition techniques, ﬁnding that the ﬁrst step is always a technique
for ﬁnding every face in the image, ideally this would be done independently
from the orientation, position, expression, scale or rotation of the faces.
For detection of faces, Li and Wu found that according to the literature the best
method for face detection is using Haar-like proposed by Viola and Jones [22],
the usage of Haar-like features is very eﬃcient and it works independently of
the scale of the face, additional features can be used to improve results on non
frontal faces.
Viola and Jones’ method works on the basis of 4 concepts, Haar features, Integral
Image, AdaBoost and Cascading.
==PAGE:33==
2.4 People Recognition
21
r
g
> 1.185
and
r∗b
(r+g+b)2
> 0.107
and
r∗g
(r+g+b)2
> 0.112
Figure 2.5: Rule for classifying a RGB color as skin [12]
Haar Features
Figure 2.6 shows the proposed types of features by Viola and
Jones for face recognition, these features model characteristics found on faces
on grayscale images, for example a 2 rectangle feature can be used to describe
the diﬀerence on intensity between the eyes and the cheeks, with the eyes darker
and the cheeks lighter. A feature describe a characteristic by adding the sum
of the intensity values of the pixels in the area marked by the white rectangle
and subtracting the sum of intensity values of the pixels in the area marker by
the black rectangle. A feature can be of any of the types shown on Figure 2.6
and of any size and the value it returns form evaluating it on a portiion of the
image reﬂects how good it describes the characteristic (the higher the better).
In order to ﬁnd these characteristics the features have to be evaluated at every
portion of the image.
Figure 2.6: Types of Haar like features, proposed by Viola and Jones: (a) 2
rectangles, (b) 3 Rectangles, (c) 4 rectangles
Integral Image
Haar features require to compute several times the sum of
intensity of rectangular regions, and this leads to a lot of redundant computa-
tion, in order to solve this problem, Viola and Jones propose the concept of an
integral image, in this, every pixel (xi, xi) gets assigned the value of the sum of
intensity of every pixel that is at a position (x, y) with x < xi and y < yi (pixels
at the top left area). This can be computed recursively using the formula 2.21
This allows to calculate the sum of intensity of any rectangular region in the
image, by using operations on the 4 pixels of the corners of the region in the
==PAGE:34==
22
Theory
integral image as shown in ﬁgure 2.7
s(x, y) = s(x, y −1) + i(x, y)
ii(x, y) = ii(x −1, y) + s(x, y)
(2.21)
Figure 2.7: The sum of intensities the shaded area is equal to the integral
image pixel values II4 −II2 −II3 + II1
AdaBoost
As mentioned before, the Haar features can be of any of the 3 types
of any size, and in any position of the detector, and a Haar-like features face
detector has a resolution of 24x24 pixels, this means that there are over 160.000
features to evaluate. To reduce the amount of features to evaluate and improve
the precision, AdaBoost is employed to calculate a strong classiﬁer as a linear
combination of some of the previously described features (week features), for
this only the features that are able to recognize more than 50% of the training
set are selected as weak features.
And using this week features a series of
iterations are performed to improve the weights of each weak feature in the
linear combination, the weights of the weak features are calculated as a function
of the importance of the examples in the training set, and the importance of
each example is modiﬁed to make more relevant the ones that where wrongly
classiﬁed in the previous iterations.
Cascading
The ﬁnal characteristic in Haar-like feature detector, Cascading,
is used to chain the precision of several detectors, in a way that fast but not so
reliable strong classiﬁers are computed ﬁrst to discard rapidly windows of the
image that are clearly not a face, and then increasingly reliable strong classiﬁers
are computed so that at the end of the chain the detector has the expected
precision. The chain is made of several strong detectors, connected as shown in
ﬁgure 2.8 so that at the end of each stage, it is decided whether a window is
deﬁnitely not a face or maybe a face, if it is not a face, the algorithm ends, and
returns such result, if it is maybe a face, the next strong classiﬁer is evaluated,
if this continues until every stage has been evaluated positive then the window
is classiﬁed as a face.
==PAGE:35==
2.4 People Recognition
23
Figure 2.8: Cascading algorithm for the Haar-like features detector
2.4.2.4
Face identiﬁcation
Once the face have been detected, an algorithm for face recognition can be used
such as Eigenfaces, this techniques involve machine learning using samples of
the faces to be recognized.
Eigenfaces works by using Principal Component Analysis (PCA) to model the
labeled samples of faces as a subspace created by the principal components
(eigenfaces) of images created by substracting the average face to each sample.
Using this model each face can be reconstructed from a linear combination of
the eigenfaces.
Then when analyzing a new image of a face, it is projected
on the subspace and the resulting coeﬃcients are compared to the coeﬃcients
of known faces using euclidean distance and the closest one is selected as the
identiﬁed face.
2.4.2.5
Feature Matching
Feature matching is the process of ﬁnding the correspondence between two im-
ages, this is done by ﬁnding representative points (features) in an image, calcu-
lating a descriptor of such feature, as a model of a small sub-image around the
point, and then ﬁnding a single point in the second image that is identiﬁed by
the descriptor.
One recent descriptor is KAZE [3], which is a scale and rotation invariant de-
scriptor proposed by Alcantarilla et al..
To make the descriptor scale invariant, a scale image space is calculated using
a diﬀusor function that softens the image but leave object’s edges intact, this is
done to extract descriptor for several scales.
Good features are found by using a hessian detector, normalized by the scale in
==PAGE:36==
24
Theory
a 3x3 pixel patch, its dominant orientation is then detected rotating a circular
window and calculating the ﬁrst order derivatives weighted by a gaussian.
Then using ﬁrst order derivatives L in diﬀerent subregions over a small patch
around the point, the descriptor vector is calculated as dv = (P Lx, P Ly, P |Lx|, P |Ly|)
and this is weighted with a Gaussian σ2 over a 4x4 patch.
2.5
Camera Model
The camera model is a transformation from a point in a real world coordinates
system (in 3 dimensions) to a coordinate system in the captured image (2 di-
mensions). This model simpliﬁes the real camera by supposing that it works
like a pinhole camera, i.e. a camera that captures light coming in from the out-
side, trough a small point hole, and projecting such light into a photosensitive
material.
This model in a simple form is described by the equation 2.22 where Qi is a
point in real world coordinates, qi in image coordinates, R is a rotation matrix,
t a translation vector, (having [A; t] as a matrix concatenating such elements)
and A is a transformation containing the camera parameters.
qi = A[R; t]Qi
(2.22)
The rotation and translation moves the coordinate system to match in origin
with the image coordinate system, while the camera parameters (containing
focal length and center point of the photo-sensor) match the image compression
eﬀect produced by the focal length, ﬁgure 2.9 illustrates such parameters.
Additional parameters can be introduced to the model to account for other ef-
fects product of diﬀerent conditions, one of this is the radial distortion, produced
specially by ﬁsheye lenses.
The eﬀect of such distortion is approximated by a Taylor expansion with n
coeﬃcients denoted by kn.
1Based on commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Camera_Oscura.jpg Carlo.benini-Own work,
CC BY-SA 3.0
==PAGE:37==
2.5 Camera Model
25
Figure 2.9: Pinhole camera model 1
2.5.1
Camera Calibration
Camera calibration is the process of estimating the camera internal parameters,
using known points in the real world coordinate system to map them in the
picture coordinates minimizing iteratively the produced error.
2.5.2
Homography
An important concept when dealing with multiple cameras is the homography
between planes in two diﬀerent coordinate systems. An homography is a trans-
formation between the coordinate systems of such planes (from plane 2 to plan
1 in this case).
q1 = Hq2
(2.23)
In this equation the points are in homogeneous coordinates, where the ﬁrst
2 positions are the x and y coordinates and the third position is the scale of
==PAGE:38==
26
Theory
such coordinates. Having that an homography is a full rank square matrix, the
inverse is the opposite homography, so H−1 transforms from a plane 1 to a plane
2.
==PAGE:39==
Chapter 3
Analysis
A persistence authentication system is a bridge between two components of a
smart environment: an Authentication system, and the devices and services in
the building, oﬀering security and enabling location-aware services.
In this thesis we are concerned with the application of such system in a multi-
camera multi-scene 1 environment using COTS cameras.
3.1
Oﬀered Services
Persistent authentication systems not only serves for protection, but it also
provides other systems with users’ position and identity in order to provide
personalized services or additional security mechanisms.
1This refers to a scene with several cameras, each of which are located in separate scenes
==PAGE:40==
28
Analysis
3.2
Selected Techniques
This section shows the analysis made over the studied techniques in chapter 2
along with the reasoning for the selected techniques.
One of the objectives in this work is to use proven implementations of the most
complex algorithms, because of this, the selected algorithms to use for this work
are limited to the ones implemented in OpenCV 3.2. This library was selected
for being the most used library for computer vision.
3.2.1
Blob detection speciﬁcs
In order to detect people in the building, some human characteristics have to
be detected in the image, this section presents two relevant techniques found in
the literature.
3.2.1.1
Background Subtraction
Previously in section 2.3.1 a comparison found in the literature was presented,
it shows that Mixture of Gaussians and Kernel Density Estimation (KDE) are
techniques both eﬃcient and with good performance. When compared [11] KDE
shows better performance in high contrast images and has the advantage that
the kernel parameters are automatically adjusted, and it oﬀers shadow detection.
In OpenCV an implementation of Mixture of Gaussian is implemented as sug-
gested by Zivkovic and Van Der Heijden [26], in their work they oﬀer a technique
to continuously update the parameters for Mixture of Gaussians and enable de-
tection of shadows. In the implementation for OpenCV, the model allows to set
the parameters of amount of frames in the history that aﬀect the background
model and the threshold of the Mahalanobis distance (in the squared quantity
of σ) between the Gaussian component and the observed pixel to determine if
it is part of the background or not. Thanks to this implementation, you get the
performance and speed of mixture of Gaussians without having to set some of
the parameters, and the left parameters are more intuitive to tweak than the
ones in the original algorithm, with also shadow detection.
==PAGE:41==
3.2 Selected Techniques
29
3.2.1.2
Histograms of Oriented Gradients (HOG)
This technique is appropriate for Indoor Positioning Systems because it is able
to ﬁnd the human shape independently of other factors such as changes in illumi-
nation and the movement of the person, it would also detect people completely
and not partially as it can happen with other techniques relying on movement
detection.
One characteristic that can make the implementation of this method costly is the
need of a large training data to include the particularities of the implementation,
some already trained models could are provided on OpenCV, and some training
data could be found in the literature, although it is usually limited in the angle
and focal length of the camera. For example the INRIA dataset [2] is made of
images taken from an eye level perspective and with a normal focal length.
3.2.1.3
Comparison
Table 3.1 summarizes the comparison between this two techniques for people
detection. Tree characteristics are compared, detection, output and some lim-
itations. One advantage of HOG over Mixture of Gaussians is that it can be
trained speciﬁcally to detect humans, while ignoring other elements present on
the picture. This detection comes in the form of a bounding box for HOG and
in a silhouette to Mixture of Gaussians, this last one is more useful for mea-
surement of some of the discussed biometrics (such as histogram of colors or
height). In the case of hog, additional processing would be necessary to achieve
the same result.
Mixture of Gaussians detection performance is aﬀected when the person is still
as still people start to be included in the background when they stop, also if
the person is moving very slowly the edges of the person are detected for being
diﬀerent to the background, but the diﬀerence between a part inside such edge
and another one in the vicinity could be imperceptible for the algorithm, waking
holes in the result, also if the intensity and color of some parts of the person
(with shadows for example) are similar to the background, the algorithm can
fail to recognize them.
On the other hang HOG is limited in terms of the position of the person, for
example in the work of Zhang et al. [25] a HOG detector had to be trained
for each position of the person (for example standing or crouching) and if the
camera can detect the person at diﬀerent angles, this diﬀerences have the same
eﬀect and would require training in several angles in addition to the positions.
==PAGE:42==
30
Analysis
Table 3.1: Comparison between HOG and Mixture of Gaussians as mecha-
nisms for people detection.
Mixture of Gaussians
HOG
Detec-
tion
•Detects any movement
• Detects human shape
Output
•Silhouette of the
person
• Bounding box around the person
with some padding space
Limita-
tions
• Cannot detect still
people
• Cannot detect people in not trained
positions
• Can fail to detect
parts of a person
3.2.2
Recognition speciﬁcs
Once the people in the building has been detected, a method to correlate them
with the authenticated identities has to be applied. In the following we discuss
the techniques studied in chapter 2.
3.2.2.1
Tracking
In the work of Ingwar [13] a tracking algorithm (Kanade-Lukas-Tomasi (KLT))
is used to follow the person when there is no doubt of their identity, while this
tracking is in operation, no identiﬁcation is made to verify the identity of the
tracked person. This helps to improve the performance of the persistent authen-
tication system. For this work the tracking algorithm is used as an identiﬁcation
method, in order to describe the current behavior of the person in terms such
as its position, direction, speed, and apparent size.
Other more recent trackers such as Kernelized Correlation Filters (KCF) can
be used for the propose of following an identiﬁed principal, nevertheless both
KLT and KCF share the property that they are based on the input of a single
camera image, an thus no connection can be made between cameras.
For Identiﬁcation, a simpler Kalman Filter is more pertinent, (this was used
in Ingwar’s work to reestablish tracking after an occlusion) such technique can
predict the next state of a measured object, in the speciﬁed terms, and it is
independent of the measurement technique. This prediction can be compared to
the observed state of the principal in order to generate a score of their similarity.
==PAGE:43==
3.2 Selected Techniques
31
3.2.2.2
Remote Biometrics
To the best of owr knowledge there is not a widely used library for biometric
recognition, but several algorithms employed in some biometric recognition are
implemented in OpenCV and some biometrics are not so complex to implement,
for this part of the system, the availability of a library that implements certain
biometric techniques is not going to be a strong ﬁlter in the decision of using
such biometric factors.
Factors based on the appearance such as skin and clothes color, measurements
of the body or face, and characteristics such as beard or glasses are very useful
in this context as they are easy to compute and the information is available in
each camera frame.
Histograms:
For biometrics involving histogram of colors, a technique for
reducing the inﬂuence of lighting is necessary because in the path from one
point to another in a building a principal might cross diﬀerent illumination
conditions.
A common technique for minimizing lighting intensity inﬂuence
is to convert the image to color spaces with an intensity component, such as
Hue-Saturation-Value (HSV) or YCbCr and ignoring the intensity component
during the analysis of color. Another consideration to have for histograms is
the selection of colors, this comes in form of the amount of bins used, each one
determines a diﬀerent color to take into account, one option in the HSV space
is to use 12 values for the HUE axis (with a similar treatment for saturation)
with the uniquely named colors separated by 30◦as shown in ﬁgure 3.1, the
importance of such separation is that there should be some distance between
the average of each class, so a diﬀerent number of bins could be used, having that
the higher the number of classes would mean that a more detailed diﬀerentiation
would be done, with the risk of having similar colors classiﬁed as distant.
Figure 3.1: Color classes for histograms in HSV
==PAGE:44==
32
Analysis
Feature detectors:
Feature detectors are commonly used for object recogni-
tion, in this instance they are useful as they can capture relevant characteristics
during login, and then when the principal is detected in another frame, the
captured features can be searched in the detected principal, a high number of
matching features would indicate a high probability that it is the same princi-
pal. The most famous feature descriptor is Scale-Invariant Feature Transform
(SIFT) as it usually presents superior performance and speed when compared
to other feature descriptors, a downside of SIFT is that it is patented and its
use requires to buy the rights to use, some alternatives will be considered such
as AKAZE[4], such feature descriptors are found in OpenCV.
3.3
Speciﬁc Considerations
3.3.1
SWOT Analysis in PAISE
In previous designs of Persistent Authentication In Smart Environments (PAISE)
[15] the authors proposed the analysis presented in table 3.2. And details and
their relevance to this work are presented bellow.
Usability
is oﬀered by the ability of authorizing the user without his inter-
action, this characteristic is key to continuous authentication as it is one of the
biggest advantages compared to traditional security mechanisms in buildings.
Intelligence
makes reference to possibility of authorizing the usage of any
object in an smart environment, and for this continuous authentication scheme,
insensibility is one of the goals, so this strength is also relevant to this work.
This is also considered an opportunity because implementing such system enable
new types of services in a smart environment that take advantage of the location
of its users.
Security
Kirschmeyer and Hansen’s work is based on blob tracking, this work
will also include biometrics to strengthen the continuous authentication, but
biometric factors have false positives and this could lead to allowing an attacker
to impersonate a rightful hones user.
==PAGE:45==
3.4 Attacker Model
33
Table 3.2: SWOT analysis in [15]
Strengths
Weaknesses
• Usability
• Security
• Intelligence
• Privacy
Opportunities
Threats
• Intelligence
• Cost
• Privacy
Privacy
As the system tracks in real time the position of the user, and requires
installing cameras that cover the whole building, such system could be a threat
to users’ privacy, both by legitimate but malicious users or external attackers.
It is also considered a threat because fear of compromised privacy could restrict
the implementation of the system.
Cost
In [15] the cost was a risk because of the unknown future of TOF cameras
prices, in this work, the cost is not a risk because of the usage of COTS cameras.
3.4
Attacker Model
This work is concerned with two types of attackers, they could be either external
attackers or internal malicious users, both of them would be motivated to gain
access to areas, services and objects they would not have permission to use, these
attackers would try to gain access to the such resources by physical means, this
means trying to walk in pretending to belong to the building.
External attackers
are people not registered as users of the smart environ-
ment that want to make use of it, they could attempt to gain access to restricted
resources by braking in, following someone with access permissions or stealing
a legitimate user’s credentials.
Internal Malicious Users
have access to the smart environment, and to
some resources, and would attempt to access restricted resources by imperson-
ating other system users.
==PAGE:46==
34
Analysis
==PAGE:47==
Chapter 4
Design
4.1
System structure
Figure 4.1: General structure of the system
The system will implement continuous authentication by sending each frame of
every camera to a blob detection component that will look for people in the
images, such output is going to be handled then by a principal identiﬁcation
component that will use biometrics and previously captured information about
the principal to assign the appropriate labels to each person and calculate his
position in real world coordinates, which can then be used for providing location
based services. This structure is depicted in ﬁgure 4.1.
For the implementation of the blob detection component, two possible meth-
==PAGE:48==
36
Design
ods for Blob detection where presented in section 3.2.1.1, mixture of Gaussians
and HOG, from this two methods, we select Mixture of Gaussians because its
output (a silhouette) is more precise and therefore useful for the identiﬁcation
component, and additionally because of the chosen camera and its orientation,
the training for HOG would require a great amount of images, for several poses,
in several angles from the camera, because a person is perceived as a very diﬀer-
ent shape when it is far away from the camera compared to when it is straight
below the camera, and also several people would need to be involved.
The identiﬁcation component will use biometrics and measurements of the prin-
cipal’s behavior in order to assign a previously authenticated identity to the
blobs in the current frame, and then a model describing the orientation of the
person plus the camera model will be used to convert the position of the prin-
cipal in the frame to a position in real world coordinates.
4.1.1
Main Components
Figure 4.2: Conceptual components in the system
Figure 4.2 illustrates the detailed structure with the main components of the
system, here a third general component is introduced (Scene model) and the
boundaries of the system are established.
The Persistent authentication system is implemented as a component of the ﬁ-
==PAGE:49==
4.1 System structure
37
nal solution, leaving outside of its scope the user interface, the location-based
services and the modules in charge of the initial authentication. This exter-
nal components will interact with Persistent authentication using the interfaces
exposed by the Scene Model. With this component, during installation of the
system, the User Interface can conﬁgure the Cameras and Authentication Areas
located in the building. Later, when the system is fully deployed the Initial
Authentication Modules can notify the system when a user has been authenti-
cated, providing his identity and authentication zone; with this information and
the conﬁgured parameters, the Scene Model knows which Camera is currently
recording the principal. Finally a Location-base service can access the latest
available positions of every principal present in the building.
The Scene Model component contains the following components:
Authentication Areas Stores the coordinates of the authenticated areas and
the cameras that can perceive them, allowing to identify which camera
stream needs to be identiﬁed when a user authenticates.
Cameras Stores the conﬁguration of each camera and coordinates the analysis
of the camera stream.
Real Time Principals Report Allows to consult the position of the princi-
pals according to the last analysis, this is provided in parallel to the rest
of the operation, so consulting this report does not slow down the analysis
of the camera stream.
When a Camera component is analyzing the most recent captured frame, ﬁrst
it will apply a series of techniques to detect moving blobs in the image, such
techniques will receive and return either the frame or a mask (a black image
containing in white the areas where blobs are), in this way the frame will have
some pre-processing to improve the blob detection, the actual background sub-
traction algorithm will be run, and then the returned mask will be improved
by the successive techniques, bellow is the description of such techniques in the
order of application. All of them can be implemented with functions found in
OpenCV.
Histogram Equalization This is a normalization technique that aims to re-
duce the inﬂuence of lighting changes in background subtraction algo-
rithms, this works by increasing the contrast of the image and normalizing
the brightness values of each pixel.
Background Subtraction In this component, the selected implementation
from OpenCV for mixture of Gaussians selected in section 3.2.1.1 is used,
including the detection of shadows, in order to be able to eliminate them.
==PAGE:50==
38
Design
Binary Thresholding This component eliminates the shadows from the mask
returned from the mixture of Gaussians algorithm.
Denoise As implemented in [13], this component applies denoise ﬁltering on
the mask.
Eliminating in this way small spots previously identiﬁed as
blobs.
Morphological Transformations Finally the remaining blobs are dilated so
that small gaps can be ﬁlled, resulting in a complete blob instead of several
small fractions.
Finally the white blobs in the mask are analyzed to calculate its bounding box
and the smallest blobs are eliminated according to a parameter (note that this
parameter changes when the camera is at diﬀerent height distance from the
principals) leaving as a result an array of bounding boxes and a mask.
Additionally other techniques can be implemented in this module, following the
interface of receiving an image for pre-processing or receiving a mask for post
processing.
The result from the Blob Detection is analyzed by the Principal Identiﬁer, here,
during authentication, the template of the principal is recorded for each identify-
ing feature, and then, in the following frames, previously authenticated identities
are assigned to the corespondent blob, To verify the identity of the blob, several
remote biometric factors are used and their resulting scores are averaged, and
the ﬁnal score is assigned to the blob with the highest score of similarity, given
such score is higher than certain threshold.
The following are the selected biometrics and identiﬁcation factors. For all of
them the input is the bounding box, the mask, and the current frame for each
blob, we are going to refer to the result of cropping the current frame around
the bounding box using the mask as the ’blob frame’.
Akaze This component implements feature matching using Akaze [4] descrip-
tors, a set of descriptors is detected in the blob frame during authentica-
tion and stored as template, and then in the following frames another set
of descriptors are detected, and matched to the template, resulting in a
similarity score of the amount of matched descriptors over the amount of
descriptors found in the template.
Histogram During authentication a histogram of the blob frame is calculated
and during the identiﬁcation of principals that histogram is compared to
the current blob frame’s histogram, using the Bhattacharyya distance[18].
==PAGE:51==
4.1 System structure
39
Kalman Filter Tracker A Kalman Filter models the principal movement in
the real world coordinates using as the state the position and speed, and
as measurement only the position. During authentication, a new tracker
is created for the principal, then, in the following frames, the position
of the blob is compared with the prediction of the principal’s position,
normalized with a distance considered as the double of the maximum
allowed error distance (which means that a score of 0.5 is the maximum
allowed score to say that the Kalman tracker approximately models that
principal’s position.
Skin Color A skin region is searched using the ranges deﬁned by Chai and
Ngan (See section 2.4.2.2) in the upper area of the blob, and then the
average color detected as skin is compared with the template taken during
authentication using euclidean distance, the score is normalized dividing
the distance over the maximum distance possible in the skin color range.
==PAGE:52==
40
Design
==PAGE:53==
Chapter 5
Implementation
5.1
Class structure
Figure 5.1 shows the packages conforming the implementation of the prototype,
in addition to the main continuous authentication system, an initial authentica-
tor was implemented. The system was implemented in C++11 Using OpenCV
3.2 which was compiled with support for contrib features, CUDA 8 and QT.
The package GUI implements a user interface that conﬁgures the parameters
for the Experimental Environment described in section 6.1, and it shows the
results in real time.
The package Scene Model (shown in ﬁgure 5.2) corresponds to the component of
the same name described in section 4.1.1, This is the entry point to the system
for the graphical interface, allowing the conﬁguration of the Environment.
Camera is one of the Main classes in the system, as is the one modeling the
general behavior of the computer vision analysis (apply background subtraction,
identify principals) if some other behavior where to be added to the analysis, for
example changing background subtraction for HOG in certain cases, then this
would be a starting point in such implementation. One important characteristic
to mention is that the capturing of the frames from the video stream and the
==PAGE:54==
42
Implementation
Figure 5.1: Packages in the implemented prototype matched with the designed
component
actual processing is done in two diﬀerent threads, this helps to maintain the
analysis in real time, even if the last frame took a long time to process, the
current frame would be the last one captured.
Environment is the interface of communication with external components, this
class is used for maintaining the conﬁguration of the building (zones and cam-
eras), trigger the registration of templates and shutting down the system.
The packages Flow and Identity Implement the components Blob Detector and
Principal Identiﬁer respectively, the main classes in the package ﬂow are dis-
played in ﬁgure 5.3, here the mentioned behavior of this techniques for blob
detection are modeled by the abstract class Transformation, the received Mat
is a OpenCV Matrix and can contain a frame or a mask in this case.
In the ﬁnal version, only Histogram Equalization was excluded, this technique
is suggested to reduce lighting inﬂuences in background subtraction, but it was
observed that it made some dark areas even darker, which would make blob
detection worse at those areas.
Package Identity is shown in ﬁgure 5.4, the Classes that implement the interface
==PAGE:55==
5.2 Calibration
43
Figure 5.2: Classes in the SceneModel package
modeled by the abstract class Credential implement the principal recognition
techniques, they are instantiated and then initialized with the method init (init
can be diﬀerent for each technique), this will record the template from the
current frame. Then in the following frames the checkSimilarity method will
return the similarity score and ﬁnally the conﬁrm method is called with the
result that contained the highest score (that is for the techniques that require
such behavior, as the Kalman ﬁlter). In this module, IdentityAnalyser is the
class iterating trough the Blobs and fusing the scores.
During development, we found that histogram of colors and Kalman Tracker
gave good results regarding persistence and scalability; Color of skin was too
sensitive to the light changes and the diﬀerence in score between most people is
not high enough to improve identiﬁcation; And both the speed and accuracy of
matching Akaze features where too low to give any good result.
5.2
Calibration
During the development 6 parameters where found that have to be changed
according to light conditions of the place and to the altitude of the camera. The
parameters for the adaptive mixture of Gaussian, number of frames to base the
background on and distance from background to consider a pixel as foreground,
==PAGE:56==
44
Implementation
Figure 5.3: Classes in the ﬂow package
Figure 5.4: Classes in the identity package
are susceptible to how even is the lighting conditions, and how fast do they
change. The light conditions can also cause the human related blobs to have a
diﬀerent geometry, to adjust to such changes, the size of the dilate and erode
ﬁlter have to be changed. And specially, when the camera altitude is diﬀerent
than 3m, the minimum area size of the blobs to be detected as human has to
change, the way that area is calculated is amount of < pixels in the frame >
/ < area parameter >. And changing that parameter makes you change the
other parameters, as they ﬁlter small blobs to exclude from the analysis. All
these parameters can be conﬁgured in the ﬁle settings/calibration.xml.
==PAGE:57==
5.3 How to expand
45
5.3
How to expand
The system was designed with 2 main points of extension. If the accuracy of the
continuous authentication wants to be increased, more identifying factors can be
added by making a class that implements the Credential interface and including
it in the IdentityAnalyzer, including additional features can decrease the frames
per second, so this has to be taken into account. Another way to increase the
security level is to improve the Initial Authentication methods, multiple methods
can be added or the current one could be replaced by making a class that (when
the authentication is successful) invokes the method notifyCamerasOfZone of
Environment, in this way the authentication of the blob found on the zone sent
as parameter, is triggered and the identity sent as parameter is assigned to it.
Another point of extension is the User Interface, a diﬀerent user interface could
be implemented integrating the authentication methods of the speciﬁc building
(using the class Environment) and also making the conﬁguration process (see
section 5.4) more user friendly. The Method in charge for authentication (noti-
fyCamerasOfZone), receives a string identifying the principal and the conﬁgured
id of the authentication zone.
5.4
Conﬁguration process
All the conﬁguration for the experiments setup is hard coded in the ﬁle player.cpp,
here, the classes CamSettings and ZoneSettings are ﬁlled to describe the building
conditions, the cameras’ settings and the Cameras that are seeing the authen-
tication zones, the following lists describes such parameters.
5.4.1
Camera Settings
As multiple cameras might want to be included to cover a large area, this con-
ﬁguration enables to include each camera with their own parameters.
id
A unique number used to map cameras and zones.
sourcePath
Path of the video, it can be a ﬁle or a stream url.
==PAGE:58==
46
Implementation
settingsFilePath
Path of the ﬁle containing the camera model settings, this
ﬁle can be generated with the utility program "Calibrate", application was
adapted from the camera calibration code provided with the documentation
[1].
homographyFilePath
This ﬁle describes the homography used in the Cam-
era class, this ﬁle can be generated with the utility program "homography", it
asks for four points in the screen, and using the ﬁle cornersID.xml it calculates
a homography to transform the camera coordinates to real world coordinates.
isFisheye
This parameters stablishes if the camera model is using the ﬁsheye
technique described in the documentation [1], it should be true if the camera
has a ﬁsheye lens.
focalLenght
This has to be manually conﬁgured to obtain a proper image,
ﬁgure 5.5 shows a common example of how an image looks like if this parameter
has to be increased.
Figure 5.5: Example of a wrong Focal length, used in the camera matrix used
after transforming the image with the camera calibration process.
==PAGE:59==
5.4 Conﬁguration process
47
delay
In case of using de-synchronized video input between cameras, this pa-
rameter can be used to adjust the diﬀerence with respect to a camera conﬁgured
with zero delay.
5.4.2
Authentication Zone settings
This conﬁguration represents the places in the building where authentication can
be done, and the conﬁgured id is the number that the authentication mechanism
has to provide when authenticating a principal.
id
the identiﬁer of the zone, used to link it to a camera.
contoursFilePath
A ﬁle with a series of points, describing the area, this ﬁle
has to be manually conﬁgured, using real world coordinates.
==PAGE:60==
48
Implementation
==PAGE:61==
Chapter 6
Evaluation
The system was installed in a residential house, and tested using several sce-
narios that challenge and explore its limits. this scenarios change in terms of
interaction between principals and amount of people involved. The scenarios
are described in section 6.2 and the results are shown and explained in section
6.3
6.1
Experiments Setup
Video cameras are usually already deployed in buildings where security is a
concern, but these cameras usually don’t oﬀer high quality video, this makes,
including COTS cameras very relevant for wide spread application.
For the
experiments we used two LevelOne FCS-3091 Cameras, they are have a 2MP
color sensor with a software removable IR-ﬁlter and a ﬁsheye lens.
For the analysis of the video feed, we used a computer with a 8 core intel core
i7 cpu (2.5 Ghz), 12 GB RAM, and a NVIDIA GeForce 850M video card. The
computer was connected to the cameras using a wired network with a 100Mbps
switch. And the software used wide spread libraries with the implementations
of the used computer vision algorithms (such as OpenCV)
==PAGE:62==
50
Evaluation
Camera placement is a multi-scene and multi-camera environment. The cameras
where installed in a space consisting of 3 rooms, with one camera in two of the
rooms and a intersection in the cameras ﬁeld of view in the other room, the
cameras where installed on the ceiling at 3m height, this can be observed in
detail in ﬁgure 6.1.
Figure 6.1: Cameras’ ﬁeld of view
A simple experiment involving only one principal would work as follows:
1. A person would get inside the ﬁrst room (by the lower part of the image)
2. He will step in the authentication zone (delimited by the green rectangle)
3. Authenticate using an initial authentication mechanism
4. The person will walk towards the intersection room to the intersection of
the ﬁelds of view of the cameras
5. He will continue to the second room, leaving the ﬁeld of view of the ﬁrst
camera and being only perceived by the second camera.
==PAGE:63==
6.2 Scenarios
51
6.2
Scenarios
The Implemented system was evaluated with a set of test scenarios divided in 3
groups, the ﬁrst was designed to test the persistence of the system, the second
to test the performance (in terms of speed) and the third group evaluates the
impact of adding more cameras.
6.2.1
Type 1: Persistence
Four types of tests were performed for testing the persistence, types from 1 to
3 consist of two people interacting with each other, two tests are performed in
each type, for the ﬁrst test, the interaction occurs in the second room, and in
the second test the interaction occurs in the interception room, for the four type
one test challenging weaknesses in both biometrics is performed:
1 Crossing In this test the subjects cross each other in opposite directions.
This test is the least problematic of the challenges, as both the color and
the movement of the principals are diﬀerent.
2 Handshake The subjects approach each other and shake hands for 3 seconds,
then continue in opposite directions. This is expected to generate just one
blob that stays static for the duration of the handshake.
3 Hug This test is similar to the handshake, but changing it for a hug to
generate occlusions on top of having just one blob.
4 Similar clothes The subjects are wearing clothes with the same colors in
the same proportion, in the test they cross paths in the second room.
6.2.2
Type 2: Performance
In this scenarios, multiple tests were performed for each type of test, increasing
the number of subjects between tests, and the average frames per second was
recorded as a result. Each type of test varies in the complexity of the interaction
between subjects; in the ﬁrst type the subjects are walking one behind the other
with a distance of 2 meters approximately, in the second, the subjects cross each
other in the second room, and in the third type they cross each other in the
intersection.
==PAGE:64==
52
Evaluation
6.2.3
Type 3: Horizontal Scalability
The ﬁnal test simulated 3 to 6 cameras by repeating 2 to 5 times the input
from the second camera.
A video from test of type 2 "Simple path with 2
subjects" was used, measuring the average frames per second and the amount
of successfully tracked subjects.
6.3
Results
6.3.1
Type 1 Persistence results
The results for this test type are presented as success or failure followed by
explanation of the result in table 6.1, then general ﬁndings are presented.
6.3.2
General ﬁndings
A particularity of using cameras placed above the subjects is that the geometry
of a person is perceived diﬀerent depending on the angle between the person
and the camera, or in other words, depending on the position of the person in
the frame. In the tests it was observed that the camera frequently lost track
of subjects when they where directly bellow of the camera, sometimes because
the blob was too small to be considered, or sometimes because the diﬀerence in
color was too high (as most of the body was not visible)
The intersection between the ﬁelds of view of the camera was a very challenging
zone for tracking, both because of illumination diﬀerences with the ﬁrst and
second room, and because the principals had to change the direction of their
path, this made this zone specially sensitive to low frame rates, producing losing
of track for the combination of several weaknesses at the same time, and making
it diﬃcult to recover, as the tracking would expect the subjects to move in a
straight line.
The system is better at dealing with full occlusions than with partial occlusions,
this is because of the way the ground position is calculated, when there is an
occlusion that covers more than half of the lower part of the body, the calculated
position is very diﬀerent than the prediction. Dealing with this is specially hard
with a camera on the ceiling as the geometry of a person changes depending on
the position in the frame.
==PAGE:65==
6.3 Results
53
Table 6.1: Results of the test scenarios for type 1
Test
Result
Explanation
Crossing 2nd room
Success
Both principals where tracked correctly, the
challenge in tracking was overcame by the his-
togram measure.
Crossing
intersec-
tion
Success
Same as before
Hanshake 2nd room
Success
After the handshake Subject A gains both
identities for a few frames, then only keeps his
right identity, and subject B gains her identity
back.
Hanshake intersec-
tion
Failure
After the handshake Subject A gains both
identities for a few frames, then only keeps
his right identity, and subject B is not able to
recover from the lost identity.
Hug 2nd room
Success
Both principals where tracked correctly, the
histogram helped the tracking to decide which
blob to choose
Hug Intersection
Failure
Same behavior of the hand shake, this is due to
combined challenges in tracking for the detec-
tion of one blob and in histogram for diﬀerence
in illumination from the 2 cameras
Similar
clothes
crossing
Failure
Principal A got assigned the two identities af-
ter the blob separation, when running this sce-
nario with just the histogram is observed that
the tracker cannot diﬀerentiate the principals,
and during the blob separation the tracker lost
track of principal B. When running the sce-
nario with only the Kalman ﬁlter one of the
principals lost track after the blob separation,
while the other maintained his correct iden-
tity. This is because subject A’s position is
closer to the prediction of the Kalman Tracker
for both trackers.
==PAGE:66==
54
Evaluation
The biggest found problem, is that all the techniques are very sensitive to light
changes, even using procedures to reduce the inﬂuence of lighting. In several of
the tests (for the same subject) there where moments in which the histogram
score was too high (indicating diﬀerence with the template) and this happened
in the more illuminated spots. Using the color space YCrCb helped to reduce
the eﬀect in most of the areas, but bright spots would still have this problem.
This eﬀect of the bright spots was reduced by using the Kalman Tracker, as
the consistency of the movement reduced the overall score, but depending on
the amount of light coming in, this errors could become more frequent and
accumulate to other weaknesses (such as problems for the Kalman tracker or
low frame rates in the intersection), producing lost of tracking even without
interaction between blobs.
An opposite case, darker areas made the blob detection fail to detect parts of
the body such as the legs or some times the face, this happened because at low
illumination conditions, the color of the missing parts was similar to the color
of the background.
Another problem related to illumination found in several test scenarios, was the
diﬀerence in illumination between the ﬁrst and the second room. Having that
the authentication zone was in the ﬁrst room, there was a constant diﬀerence
between the histogram template and the histograms in the second room, this
was not usually a problem because the diﬀerence was not too big, but it reduced
the ability to recover from losing the tracking in the second room.
6.3.3
Type 2 Performance results
The results are presented in ﬁgure 6.2, increasing the number of subjects in
each test measuring the average of frames per second after every subject was
authenticated.
There was no diﬀerence in average frames per second between the 3 types of
interaction, the only factor inﬂuencing performance was the number of subjects
in the test, and this was only when they where authenticated. Running the
same scenarios without authenticating the subjects had no diﬀerence in speed,
indicating that the blob detection mechanism is not aﬀected by the amount of
subjects.
The results show a fast drop in speed, reaching 2 fps for 5 subjects1, although
1More than 5 persons in the selected scenario would not allow normal ﬂuid movement
==PAGE:67==
6.3 Results
55
Figure 6.2: Performance results for increasing number of subjects
2 fps is still a reasonable speed for tracking, because assuming an average speed
of 146.2 cm/s that would mean a change of 73.1cm between frames [6], by
solving the synchronization problem the system could maintain tracking in these
scenarios.
6.3.4
Type 3 Horizontal scalability results
Nine tests where executed in this test type, increasing the number of cloned
second camera feed, and using the same videos every time. As a result in terms
of persistence of tracking, the implemented system has no problem tracking be-
tween 1 and 3 cameras, when 4 cameras where introduced, the tracking was lost
for only one of the subjects, and from 5 cameras the tracking was lost for both.
This happened at diﬀerent places when the subject was in the second room, in
every case the tracking loss happened because the cameras where desynchro-
nized. Even manually adjusting the delay times, some diﬀerence in timing was
introduced, this could be explained by delays opening each video and diﬀerences
in execution of the threads.
Diﬀerences in speed are presented in ﬁgure 6.3, showing the impact in speed
induced by the amount of cameras. The ﬁgure shows a fast drop between 2
and 4 cameras, followed by a slow drop increasing the number of cameras. This
is explained by the failure in tracking after 4 cameras, having 2 authenticated
subjects has an impact in speed while increasing the cameras, although when
the subjects are not identiﬁed, their Kalman ﬁlters are not updated leaving with
less computation to be done. This means that without good synchronization
which would aﬀect the tracking mechanism.
==PAGE:68==
56
Evaluation
is diﬃcult to analyze the performance impact, this result can be observed as a
lower bound to the performance eﬀect indicating that the result is satisfactory
for less than 9 cameras.
Figure 6.3: Performance results for increasing number of cameras
==PAGE:69==
Chapter 7
Conclusion
This thesis main contributions where ﬁrstly, the study of new techniques for con-
tinuous authentication, namely HOG descriptors for principals detection, and
skin color and Akaze features for principals identiﬁcation. Secondly the identiﬁ-
cation of challenges (not discussed in previous work) for implementing Persistent
Authentication, and ﬁnally the implementation of the system, made available
for future studies. In the following we present the results of the implementation
followed by the challenges involving multiple cameras.
7.1
System implementation
In this thesis, a Persistent Authentication system was implemented using 2
COTS cameras allowing the position of principals be connected to their identi-
ties, providing a tool for location-aware services and for exploration of biometric
factors relevant to this ﬁeld.
Four remote biometrics where explored: histogram of colors, direction of move-
ment, Akaze features and skin color, ﬁnding that Akaze features and skin color
where not good enough, Neither alone nor when combined with the other fac-
tors. So only histogram of colors and a Kalman ﬁlter (for movement direction)
where used.
==PAGE:70==
58
Conclusion
The system is able to follow a principal as he goes trough the building and
crossing other principals, as long as they are wearing diﬀerent clothes. When
the two used biometrics where challenged the system was not able to diﬀeren-
tiate between the principals, which may be mitigated by the introduction of an
additional biometric factor.
The system maintained tracking of principals after their interaction as long as
this was not added to more challenges. Several types of interaction where tested,
crossing, handshakes and hugs, failing when other problems where present.
The implemented system included an example of Authentication using facial
recognition, this Implementation could be replaced as described in section 5.3.
The templates captured at authentication do not depend on the authentication
mechanism, making the system agnostic to the implementation scheme.
7.2
Challenges involving multiple cameras
This thesis studied an a multi-camera and multi-scene environment, and this
presents speciﬁc problems not existent with only one camera or scene. This
section summarizes the identiﬁed problems.
The biggest problem aﬀecting the implemented system was light inﬂuence, and
some of this problems are introduce by this type of environment. When one of
the scenes has a more intense light than the other, the perceived colors can vary
very much, even when compared using color spaces that separate intensity in a
diﬀerent channel. This introduced a lot of noise in the biometrics that rely on
color.
Additionally, in scenes with diﬀerent intensity of light with two diﬀerent cam-
eras, the intersection will be perceived very dark in one camera and very bright
in the other (due to automatic exposure in the camera) leading to errors in
identiﬁcation and blob detection.
However intensity is not the only quality of light that aﬀects this type of environ-
ment, the color of light also generates diﬀerences of measured colors, diﬀerent
colors of illumination not only come from diﬀerent types of light sources but
also from the reﬂection in diﬀerent surfaces, for example in the tested scenes
one of the rooms had a wooden ceiling and wall while the others where mostly
white. This problem was exaggerated when the camera adjusted automatically
the white balance, but such feature can be turned oﬀ.
==PAGE:71==
7.2 Challenges involving multiple cameras
59
A diﬀerent problem is the desynchronization of the video feeds, as there is
nothing present in the cameras that ensure such synchronization, there can be
a diﬀerence in timing between cameras. This can be addressed by generated a
synchronized event in every camera, such as the ﬁring of a ﬂash, and using that
event to add a delay in one of the videos. Such process was done manually for
the test scenarios, but automating such process is possible.
When the system escalates in the number of cameras other factors add up to
the desynchronization of the videos, a synchronization of the threads could solve
this problem, but would reduce the speed of the system and could introduce a
delay in the whole system, ending up with a desynchronization with the real
world (and therefore with the principal interaction). Another solution could be
implementing a more distributed approach of this design.
When tracking the position in the intersection of the ﬁelds of view of two cam-
eras, real word coordinates have to be used to be able to connect the movement
perceived in one camera to the next. Because tracking-by-detection techniques
are based in image position, their application is impossible for the intersection.
This was observed in the work by Ingwar [13].
==PAGE:72==
60
Conclusion
==PAGE:73==
Appendix A
Source of the
implementation
The system source is available publicly under the Apache License 2.0 in the
repository https://bitbucket.org/joramartinezc/persistentauthentication
The system was developed Using Eclipse and its usage for its compilation is
recommended, a readme ﬁle is located in the root folder with more installation
details.
The main project is found under the folder PersistentAuth, the Initial authenti-
cator is contained in the project FacialRecognition in the ﬁle authenticator.cpp,
The project Authenticator remote works as a trigger button for starting the
initial authenticator.
The project homography can be used to generate the
homography for each camera and their scene.
==PAGE:74==
62
Source of the implementation
==PAGE:75==
Acronyms
BS Background Subtraction. 8–10, 46
COTS Commercially Oﬀ-The-Shelf. 2, 24, 31, 46
FNR False Negative Rate. 2, 3, 8, 46
FPR False Positive Rate. 2, 3, 8, 46
HOG Histograms of Oriented Gradients. 11, 12, 26, 27, 33, 38, 46
HSV Hue-Saturation-Value. 28, 46
IR Infra Red. 5, 31, 46
KCF Kernelized Correlation Filters. 46
KDE Kernel Density Estimation. 10, 25, 46
KLT Kanade-Lukas-Tomasi. 27, 46
PAISE Persistent Authentication In Smart Environments. 23, 46
PDF Probability Density Function. 10, 46
SIFT Scale-Invariant Feature Transform. 29, 46
SVM Support Vector Machine. 11, 12, 46
TOF Time-Of-Flight. 8, 46
==PAGE:76==
64
Acronyms
==PAGE:77==
Bibliography
[1] Opencv documentation,
camera calibration.
http://docs.opencv.
org/2.4/doc/tutorials/calib3d/camera_calibration/camera_
calibration.html. Accessed: 2017-06-20.
[2] Inria dataset.
http://pascal.inrialpes.fr/data/human/.
Accessed:
2017-06-20.
[3] Pablo Alcantarilla, Adrien Bartoli, and Andrew Davison. Kaze features.
Computer Vision–ECCV 2012, pages 214–227, 2012.
[4] Pablo F Alcantarilla, Jesus Nuevo, and Adrien Bartoli. Fast explicit diﬀu-
sion for accelerated features in nonlinear scale spaces. IEEE Trans. Patt.
Anal. Mach. Intell, 34(7):1281–1298, 2011.
[5] Chiraz BenAbdelkader and Larry Davis. Estimation of anthropomeasures
from a single calibrated camera. In Automatic Face and Gesture Recog-
nition, 2006. FGR 2006. 7th International Conference on, pages 499–504.
IEEE, 2006.
[6] Richard W Bohannon. Comfortable and maximum walking speed of adults
aged 20—79 years: reference values and determinants. Age and ageing, 26
(1):15–19, 1997.
[7] Douglas Chai and King N Ngan. Face segmentation using skin-color map
in videophone applications. IEEE Transactions on circuits and systems for
video technology, 9(4):551–564, 1999.
[8] Mark D. Corner and Brian D. Noble. Zero-interaction authentication. In
In International Conference on Mobile Computing and Networking, pages
1–11, 2002.
==PAGE:78==
66
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[9] Navneet Dalal and Bill Triggs. Histograms of oriented gradients for human
detection. In Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2005. CVPR 2005.
IEEE Computer Society Conference on, volume 1, pages 886–893. IEEE,
2005.
[10] Antitza Dantcheva, Carmelo Velardo, Angela D’angelo, and Jean-Luc
Dugelay. Bag of soft biometrics for person identiﬁcation. Multimedia Tools
and Applications, 51(2):739–777, 2011.
[11] Ahmed Elgammal, David Harwood, and Larry Davis.
Non-parametric
model for background subtraction. Computer Vision—ECCV 2000, pages
751–767, 2000.
[12] Giovani Gomez and Eduardo Morales. Automatic feature construction and
a simple rule induction algorithm for skin detection. In Proc. of the ICML
workshop on Machine Learning in Computer Vision, volume 31, 2002.
[13] Mads I Ingwar. Resilient Infrastructure And Building Security. PhD thesis,
Technical University of Denmark, DTU, 2014.
[14] Anil K Jain and Stan Z Li. Handbook of face recognition. Springer, 2nd
edition, 2011. ISBN 9780470666418.
[15] Martin Kirschmeyer and Mads Syska Hansen. Persistent authentication
in smart environments.
Master’s thesis, Technical University of Den-
mark, DTU, DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark, 2008.
Available online,
http://etd.dtu.dk/thesis/211455.
[16] Xin Li, Kejun Wang, Wei Wang, and Yang Li. A multiple object tracking
method using kalman ﬁlter. In Information and Automation (ICIA), 2010
IEEE International Conference on, pages 1862–1866. IEEE, 2010.
[17] Luca Mainetti, Luigi Patrono, and Ilaria Sergi. A survey on indoor posi-
tioning systems. In Software, Telecommunications and Computer Networks
(SoftCOM), 2014 22nd International Conference on, pages 111–120. IEEE,
2014.
[18] Koichiro Niinuma, Unsang Park, and Anil K Jain. Soft biometric traits for
continuous user authentication. IEEE Transactions on information foren-
sics and security, 5(4):771–780, 2010.
[19] Massimo Piccardi. Background subtraction techniques: a review. In Sys-
tems, man and cybernetics, 2004 IEEE international conference on, vol-
ume 4, pages 3099–3104. IEEE, 2004.
[20] SJ Shepherd. Continuous authentication by analysis of keyboard typing
characteristics. 1995.
==PAGE:79==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
67
[21] Carmelo Velardo and Jean-Luc Dugelay.
Weight estimation from vi-
sual body appearance. In Biometrics: Theory Applications and Systems
(BTAS), 2010 Fourth IEEE International Conference on, pages 1–6. IEEE,
2010.
[22] Paul Viola and Michael J Jones. Robust real-time face detection. Interna-
tional journal of computer vision, 57(2):137–154, 2004.
[23] Liang Wang, Tieniu Tan, Huazhong Ning, and Weiming Hu. Silhouette
analysis-based gait recognition for human identiﬁcation. IEEE transactions
on pattern analysis and machine intelligence, 25(12):1505–1518, 2003.
[24] Christopher Richard Wren, Ali Azarbayejani, Trevor Darrell, and Alex Paul
Pentland. Pﬁnder: Real-time tracking of the human body. IEEE Transac-
tions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence, 19(7):780–785, 1997.
[25] Li Zhang, Bo Wu, and Ram Nevatia. Detection and tracking of multiple
humans with extensive pose articulation. In Computer Vision, 2007. ICCV
2007. IEEE 11th International Conference on, pages 1–8. IEEE, 2007.
[26] Zoran Zivkovic and Ferdinand Van Der Heijden. Eﬃcient adaptive density
estimation per image pixel for the task of background subtraction. Pattern
recognition letters, 27(7):773–780, 2006.
