==PAGE:1==
TIME BASED ATTACKS WITHIN
DETERMINISTIC ETHERNET
Thomas Wearing (S152137)
A thesis submitted for the degree of
Masters of Engineering
June 2017
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
As we become evermore dependant on computers in our lives we
have grown to trust them with some of our most critical processes.
TTEthernet is a deterministic protocol that aims to provide function-
ality to support fault tolerance, proven determinism and real time
properties whilst over standardised cabling. Systems using these type
of networks are highly critical and their failure can result in the lose
of life. As they become more prevalent we should be increasingly con-
cerned with the security of these such protocols. This thesis includes a
condensed overview of the working of TTEthernet, explaining it’s core
concepts as to provide better insight into where attacks could possi-
bly occur. It evaluates it’s current security mechanisms for handling
attacks as to understand how the protocol protects from certain types
of attacks. In this thesis I have proposed a new attack vector for this
protocol and used OMNeT++ to simulate the attack and model it’s
aﬀect of the system. This attacks impact measured and was shown
that it was able to disrupt the clock synchronisation process of the
TTEthernet network compromising its integrity. Recommendations
have been put forward on how the protocol can be adapted in various
ways as to mitigate two types of attack. This has demonstrated that
there are some vulnerabilities available within the TTEthernet proto-
col and that under a certain set of conditions it is possible that the
system may be compromised by an attacker.
==PAGE:3==
Contents
1
Introduction
3
2
Acknowledgements
4
3
Literature Review
5
3.1
TTEthernet Speciﬁcation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3.2
Entropy Based Anomaly Detection in Deterministic Ethernet .
5
3.3
An Extension of the OMNeT++ INET Framework for Simu-
lating Real-time Ethernet with High Accuracy . . . . . . . . .
5
3.4
Candidate Security Solutions For TTEthernet . . . . . . . . .
6
3.5
Protecting Clock Synchronization - Adversary Detection through
Network Monitoring
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.6
Risk Evaluation of an ARP Poisoning Attack on Clock Syn-
chronization for Industrial Applications . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
4
TTEthernet Overview
7
4.1
Terms
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
4.2
Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
4.2.1
Proven Determinism
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
4.2.2
Fault Tolerance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
4.2.3
Real Time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
4.3
Traﬃc Types
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
4.3.1
Time Triggered . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
4.3.2
Rate Constraint . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4.3.3
Best Eﬀort . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4.3.4
Management Traﬃc . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4.4
Clock Synchronisation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
4.4.1
Protocol Control Frame Overview . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
4.4.2
Acceptance Windows . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4.4.3
Transparent Clock
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.4.4
Permanence Function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4.4.5
Compression Function
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.4.6
Architectures
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.4.7
Roles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.4.8
New Synchronisation Master Process . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.4.9
New Compression Master Process . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
1
==PAGE:4==
4.4.10 Synchronisation Process
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5
Security Evaluation
28
5.1
Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5.2
Validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.2.1
Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.2.2
Replay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
6
Attack
36
6.1
Attacker Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
6.2
PCF Replay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
6.2.1
Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
6.2.2
Scenarios
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
6.2.3
The Attack
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
6.2.4
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
6.2.5
Prevention . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
7
Discussion
40
8
Conclusion
42
9
Future Work
43
References
45
List of Figures
47
List of Tables
48
2
==PAGE:5==
1
Introduction
As critical systems are becoming more prevalent in the modern world, in
the form of industrial control systems, vehicular networks and spacecraft
control, the likely hood that these systems will be targeted maliciously in-
creases. Due to this assumption we must continue to assess and mitigate
possible vulnerabilities within these systems so that they may be used to
their full potential whilst minimising risk. Initially each domain developed
it’s own method with their own requirements to meet their needs. These sys-
tems though have many overlapping requirements such as, fault tolerance,
time dependency and safety critical. This coupled with the increased man-
ufacturing costs of using multiple cabling types for multi-protocol systems
contributed to the creation of TTEthernet (SAE AS6802). TTEthernet was
designed as a common platform to support a multitude of existing systems on
an existing mainstream platform, Ethernet (IEEE 802.3). This was achieved
by extending the Ethernet protocol, a widespread and low-cost technology,
to allow for support the of the for mentioned fault tolerant and time critical
properties.
Due to the safety-critical nature of these types of systems, they may be imple-
mented in certain scenarios, where their failure could result in the loss of life.
This means that the security of the system is equally critical as it’s resilience
to hardware and software failures. If an attacker were able to compromise
the system there is potential that the attacker could cause great harm to oth-
ers. Two of the most important features of TTEthernet, Time-Triggered and
Rate-Constraint traﬃc, are heavily reliant on the clock synchronisation that
is part of the protocol. If the synchronisation was to fail in some way then
critical messages may not be delivered on time causing a fault in the system.
This will be the focus of my thesis, looking into vulnerabilities that could
disrupt the protocols base principles via circumventing the protection mech-
anism built into the protocol or via a weakness in the protocol itself. The
vulnerabilities that have been exposed will then be examined to determine
the best mechanism to protect against them whether this be via modiﬁcation
of the protocol, external monitoring systems or local device blocking.
3
==PAGE:6==
2
Acknowledgements
I would like to acknowledge and thank my supervisor Angelo Spognardi of
DTU whose support was immensely valuable during this thesis.
For his
assistance with directing me to valuable resources, advice and his personnel
support, I am extremely grateful. I would also like to thank Paul Pop for pro-
viding a lot of highly useful documentation and papers on TTEthernet.
Special thanks are required to my colleagues at KPMG without their support
and ﬂexibility during my thesis I would not be in my current position.
A very special thank you to all my friends and family who have provided me
with much needed stability, wisdom and the required occasional break. With
out their fantastic support I would have succumb to madness surely.
Finally I would like to thank my girlfriend whose patience and support have
gone above and beyond.
4
==PAGE:7==
3
Literature Review
3.1
TTEthernet Speciﬁcation
The raw speciﬁcation of the protocol from TTTech [Ste08] provides a com-
plete in-depth of the protocol’s design as well as specifying its intended im-
plementations. Due to this the speciﬁcation provided the vast amount of
material towards this paper concerning the TTEthernet aspect. This ma-
terial provided was used repeatedly to understand the ﬁner points of the
protocol though other materials with higher level descriptions were better at
providing an initial understanding.
3.2
Entropy Based Anomaly Detection in Determinis-
tic Ethernet
In David Soendoro’s Master Thesis [Soe16] he looks at exploiting two types
of attacks on a TTEthernet network. The ﬁrst attack looks to manipulate
the transparent clock by artiﬁcially adding a delay in the network. The sec-
ond attack looks to delay the PCF packets without updating the transparent
clock. This was done with the goal of using entropy based anomaly detec-
tion to monitor the network for these attacks, their work found that this
was possible with some degree of limitation. This thesis provided signiﬁcant
insight into the works of TTEthernet in a relatively condensed format. The
threat analysis on the clock synchronisation provided much inspiration into
attack vectors that could be exploited to disrupt the protocol. The descrip-
tion of the implementation using the OMNeT++/INET proved to be highly
valuable also.
3.3
An Extension of the OMNeT++ INET Framework
for Simulating Real-time Ethernet with High Ac-
curacy
Till Steinbach et al. [SKKS11] in their paper introduce the INET extension
for the OMNeT++ framework. The paper provides an overview of the design
and implementation of the INET framework, which proved to be extremely
5
==PAGE:8==
useful in understanding how the framework operated and how to best make
use of the simulation.
3.4
Candidate Security Solutions For TTEthernet
Wilfred Steiner in this paper [Ste13] provides an analysis of the current state
of security within TTEthernet. His paper outlines threat models against the
protocol as well as the existing defence mechanisms against them. This was
vital in quickly understanding what attack methodologies have already had
counter measures deﬁned.
3.5
Protecting Clock Synchronization - Adversary De-
tection through Network Monitoring
Elena Lisova et al. in their paper [LGS+16] looks into attack the clock syn-
chronisation using ARP poising to perform a MITM attack to then perform
a delay attack. The clock snychronisation protocol in this paper however
is Precision Time Protocol (PTP, IEEE1588). However for this papers pur-
poses IEEE1588 functions similarly to the TTEthernet’s clock synchronisa-
tion protocol. This provided inspiration on the types of vulnerabilities the
clock synchronisation protocol is susceptible to. From this their paper goes
on to investigate the impact of the attack on the system as well as methods
of detection and potential correction.
3.6
Risk Evaluation of an ARP Poisoning Attack on
Clock Synchronization for Industrial Applications
Elena Lisova et al. in their paper [LUS+16] which covers similar topics to
the previous mentioned paper [LGS+16] but this time takes a risk analysis
approach to the problem. Again focused on using ARP poisoning as an entry
point to a MITM attack on the system, their paper section on the vulnera-
bility analysis demonstrates the weaknesses in the clock correction.
6
==PAGE:9==
4
TTEthernet Overview
In the following section I aim to explain various aspects of the TTEthernet
protocol so that the reader should be able to have a basic understanding of
the protocol I am attempting to attack. As I explain each section I shall
highlight its relevance to the security of the protocol.
4.1
Terms
• Compression Masters (CMs) are devices that are used to calculate
the average clock time of the system.
• Synchronisation Masters (SMs) are devices that submit their clocks
to the CMs.
• Synchronisation Clients (CSs) listen for clock updates from the
CMs.
• Priority refers to a static value pre-conﬁgured on CMs to specify which
one should be dominate.
• Domain refers to a group of devices that have been conﬁgured with
the same clock synchronisation group id.
• Cluster refers to a group of devices conﬁgured in the same domain
with the same priority.
• Permanence when used in reference to a message refers to the sys-
tems knowledge of it’s transmission order. See section on permanence
function for further details.
• PCF Protocol Control Frame, is a message used as part of the clock
synchronisation process.
• PIT Point in time, is used to refer to the exact point in time of a
speciﬁc occurrence. For example permanence PIT refers to the point
in time when the message became permanent.
7
==PAGE:10==
4.2
Requirements
TTEthernet was standardised by TTTech to allow for the combination of
traditional Ethernet network with real-time and safety critical systems. As
stated previously TTEthernet was designed as an extension of traditional
Ethernet to suit the requirements demanded by industrial environments.
TTTech states that their protocol provides, proven determinism, fault-
tolerance and real-time properties [TTT10]. It is these properties that
distinguish TTEthernet, therefore these are the properties, we as an attacker,
wish to undermine. For that we must understand what each of these prop-
erties mean relating to TTEthernet.
4.2.1
Proven Determinism
The concept of determinism is the idea that every event is necessary due to
the events that occurred before it [Doy11]. Determinism in our domain refers
to concept of a system that contains no randomness, all of the events of the
system can be predetermined and occur in a pre-deﬁned schedule. The con-
cept of proven determinism is simply that the system schedule should be able
to be validated that its events are adhering to the pre-deﬁned schedule.
The deterministic feature of TTEthernet is primarily the traﬃc referred to
as Time-Triggered. Time-Triggered runs on a pre-conﬁgured schedule that is
static conﬁgured on each node of the network. There is however some leeway
built in to this conﬁguration to allow for dynamic delay compensation when
Time-Triggered traﬃc is traversing non TTEthernet enabled devices.
4.2.2
Fault Tolerance
The principle of fault tolerance states that if one or more components fail
within a system then that system continues to operate accordingly. This does
not necessarily mean that the system needs to continue operating at optimal
capacity in the event of a failure, however the level of operation should be
inversely proportional to the extent of the failure [GSS+97]. In short the
system is expected to not completely fail if a small fault occurs and should
be designed to compensate as much as possible for any failure.
8
==PAGE:11==
In respects to TTEthernet this principle applies to multiple levels such as
physical implementation with dual links but from our prospective we are
only concerned with the protocols mechanisms. Speciﬁcally that the proto-
col should be resistant to clock synchronisation failure whether this be caused
by a faulty synchronisation master or by a malicious device on the network
attempting to disrupt the system. TTEthernet recognises the following fail-
ure modes;
• Fail Silence A device stops producing any form of output
• Fail Omission A device that does not send/receive some frames
• Fail Inconsistent A device when connected to multiple receivers sends
diﬀerent information to either receiver
• Fail Inconsistent Omission A device when connected to multiple
receivers can send diﬀerent information to either receiver at a variable
rate
• Fail Arbitrary A device sends generated frames with undeﬁned con-
tent in an undeﬁned schedule
With these deﬁned failure modes TTEthernet supports two types of failure
hypotheses;
• Single-Failure In this hypothesis TTEthernet is able to tolerate up
to a failure of arbitrary in an end node or a failure of inconsistent
omission of a switch. It is expected that if these failures occur that
they are contained to their individual area and do not aﬀect the larger
network.
• Dual-Failure In this hypothesis TTEthernet is able to tolerate the
failure of type inconsistent omission of two devices within the network,
this includes both end nodes as well as switches. Again if these failures
occur that they are contained to their individual area and do not aﬀect
the larger network.
4.2.3
Real Time
Real time systems are required to operate within speciﬁc temporal restric-
tions. This means that the system should be able to deliver certain critical
9
==PAGE:12==
messages with in an acceptable predeﬁned time frame. In simple terms it
is the ability for a system to operate within time restrictions that are rep-
resentative of real world circumstances which may be measured down to
the microsecond [Mar65]. There are three classiﬁcations for these deadlines,
Hard, Firm and Soft. Hard deadlines refer to deadlines that if missed result
in system failure. Firm deadlines refer to deadlines where misses are toler-
able to a small extent but may result in degradation. Soft deadlines refer
to deadlines where signiﬁcant misses result in degradation of the service but
not system failure [SR94].
In relation to TTEthernet the real-time properties require that all the pro-
cessing on the network is done with minimal delay to ensure the quality of
the system. This also extends to traﬃc classiﬁcations which operate using
similar distinctions as the deadlines speciﬁc as part of the real time criteria.
It is crucial that these types of systems are able to operate in real world
circumstances responding to events within a timely manner.
4.3
Traﬃc Types
To meet the requirements deﬁned in the TTEthernet standard, as well to
allow for the continued functionality of the traditional Ethernet standard,
traﬃc classiﬁcation were deﬁned.
Each class is designed to fulﬁl speciﬁc
aspects of the requirements.
4.3.1
Time Triggered
Time Triggered traﬃc has the highest priority of all the traﬃc classiﬁcations
in TTEthernet. It is designed to run on a pre-deﬁned schedule so that the
latency of the network is know and accounted for. This allows the traﬃc
to be delivered to the receiver at a speciﬁed time. This type of traﬃc is
usually highly intolerant of any jitter or latency which is why it must be
so heavily regulated. This category is used for the most time critical traﬃc
as well as providing the previous stated deterministic and real time proper-
ties. An analogous example of this would be a comparison with how trains
are managed, each train is scheduled to arrive and depart from various sta-
tion at pre-determined times. This means that the trains do not have to be
10
==PAGE:13==
concerned with collisions as well as minimising the chance of delays. How-
ever there is still the impact of outside ”unknown” factors, such as signal
failure, that could cause disruption and be diﬃcult to prevent due to their
unpredictable nature.
4.3.2
Rate Constraint
Rate Constraint traﬃc has the second highest priority of the traﬃc classiﬁ-
cations. This type of traﬃc works in time frames where the message must
be sent at some point within the speciﬁc time frame but it is not predeﬁned
when in the time frame it is sent. This traﬃc is considered less deterministic
and doesn’t have strict real time properties. This traﬃc category is design
for messages that need to arrive/depart at a certain frequency as opposed
to a speciﬁc time and messages that can handle increased jitter and latency.
Even though the traﬃc has a speciﬁed window to be sent/received in it must
be noted that the time triggered traﬃc takes precedence.
4.3.3
Best Eﬀort
The ﬁnal category with the least priority is the best eﬀort classiﬁcation. This
emulates the traditional Ethernet style of handling the traﬃc where by the
messages are delivered when ever there is a time slot not in use by either the
time triggered of rate constraint traﬃc. This is suitable for any message that
are not aﬀect by signiﬁcant jitter or latency.
4.3.4
Management Traﬃc
There is a class of traﬃc that does not have such are large proﬁle in the
protocol, this is the management traﬃc. This traﬃc consists of PCF frames
that are used as part of the clock synchronisation to manage and synchronise
the clocks of the various devices in the network. PCF are a standard Ethernet
frame where the type value has been set to 0x891d, a more detailed overview
of their structure will be provided later. This traﬃc despite separated from
the other traﬃc classiﬁcations is handled as rate constraint traﬃc. (re-read
notes there is more to this)
11
==PAGE:14==
4.4
Clock Synchronisation
For TTEthernet to manage the traﬃc as stated above the devices involved
with the system must maintain highly accurate synchronised clocks. If the
clocks we to diverge to much from one another, the traﬃc may fail to be
delivered/sent in a timely manner, resulting in a compromise of the systems
properties. Due to this the clock synchronisation protocol is critical to the
nature of TTEthernet, an attacker would surely look to disrupt or subvert
this protocol by some means. In this section we shall look at how the proto-
col establishes and maintains the synchronisation and the roles each device
plays in this process.
This knowledge can be used to determine if there
are any weaknesses in the process that we could leverage to undermine the
process.
4.4.1
Protocol Control Frame Overview
The clock synchronisation for the TTEthernet protocol is handled via the
exchange of PCFs, these frames are based of a standard Ethernet frame with
some modiﬁcation. As you can see in Figure 1 the frame is 224 bits long
consisting of various ﬁelds;
Figure 1: Diagram of the PCF format
• pcf integration cycle - Stores the value of the current integration cycle
from when the frame was sent
• pcf membership new - A bit vector mapping between a bit and a syn-
chronisation master within the system. It is a binary value where each
bit corresponds to a speciﬁc synchronisation master within the domain.
12
==PAGE:15==
• pcf sync priority - A statically conﬁgured priority value
• pcf sync domain - A statically conﬁgured value to identify the domain
• pcf type - A value that deﬁnes the type of the current PCF, see Table
1 for further details
• pcf transparent clock - Is used to store the accumulated delay of the
packet as it traverses the network.
This ﬁeld is updated by every
TTEthernet enabled device it passes through to record the latency
of the network. The value is stored in multiples of picoseconds.
Type Code
Description
0x4
A cold-start frame used by the SM’s to start the synchro-
nisation process with their respective domain. They will
only transmit this frame type if they are connected to the
network and do not receive any PCFs. The CMs will also
echo back these types of frames back to the SMs when they
are received
0x8
A cold-start acknowledgement frame used to after the SM
has received an echoed cold-start frame from the CM. After
receiving the echo the SMs will then transmit the cold-start
acknowledgement frame to the CM. These frames are then
echoed back by the CM
0x2
An integration frame used to maintain the synchronisation
between the devices within the network. They will begin
being transmitted after the synchronisation has been ini-
tialised. If a new devices joins the network it will listen for
these frames so it can join the domain
Table 1: Description of PCF types
4.4.2
Acceptance Windows
Acceptance Windows are a pre-deﬁned interval of time in which a device
expects to receive a transmission within.
If the transmission is received
within the window it is categorised as ”in-schedule” or ”out-of-schedule”. If
the traﬃc falls in the latter category it is considered invalid. This is used
within TTEthernet to allow for the dynamic delay of transmissions to provide
13
==PAGE:16==
a degree of tolerance to the system. For an example of this please see Figure
2, in this we see a SM transmitting a PCF to the CM which it expects to
receive back from the CM.
Figure 2: Flow diagram for an acceptance window
The ﬁgure shows the three types of delay this PCF frame will encounter
labelled A to C;
• max transmission delay is the maximum possible transmission time be-
tween the across the network between the SM and the CM.
• compression master delay is the maximum amount of time the CM will
take to process and transmit the PCF.
With these values know it is possible to calculate the acceptance window re-
quired for this transmission. This is done using the following function;
14
==PAGE:17==
acceptance window start = time of dispatch
+ 2 ∗max transmission delay
+ compression master delay
acceptance window end = time of dispatch
+ 2 ∗max transmission delay
+ compression master delay
+ acceptance window size
In this function time of dispatch is the point in time when the frame was dis-
patched from the CM. The values for max transmission delay, acceptance window size
and compression master delay are static and deﬁned globally. These values
are usually deﬁned at the point of network design.
4.4.3
Transparent Clock
The transparent clock is a ﬁeld in the PCF that accumulates the total trans-
mission delay of that speciﬁc PCF as it traverse the network. Every time
the PCF passes through a TTEthernet enabled device that device updates
the transparent clock.
The transparent clock is then used as part of the
permanence function to re-establish the send order of transmissions. The
transparent clock is modiﬁed in three diﬀerent ways;
• PCFGenerator0
transparent clock0 = dynamic send delay
+ static send delay
15
==PAGE:18==
• PCFRelay(i,0<i<n)
transparent clocki = transparent clocki−1
+ dynamic send delay
+ static send delay
+ wire delay
• PCFConsumern
transparent clockn = transparent clockn−1
+ dynamic send delay
+ static send delay
+ wire delay
Where dynamic send delay refers to instances such as when the device is
already in the middle of a transmission so the PCF must wait till this trans-
mission is complete before the PCF can be sent. static send delay refers to
the delay caused by time taken to get bits on the wire for that speciﬁc device.
Finally the wire delay is the delay calculate by the delay in the communica-
tion link to the next TTEthernet device.
4.4.4
Permanence Function
The job of the permanence function is to re-establish the receive order of
messages, this is accomplished by using the transparent clock value. This
requires the use of two functions to calculate the delivery order;
permanence delay = max transmission delay −transparent clock
permanence point in time(pit) = receive point in time + permanence delay
To demonstrate this function consider the following example.
There are
three nodes Node 1, Node 2 and Node 3.
Both Node 1 and Node 2 are
16
==PAGE:19==
transmitting a message to Node 3 as shown in Figure 3. It is also noted that
the max transmission delay of this network is 30 seconds.
Figure 3: Example for permanence function
In the scenario Node 1 transmits ﬁrst but has a high latency on its com-
munication channel so Node 2 messages reaches Node 3 ﬁrst. However the
permanence function is able to detect this.
1. Node 1 transmits MSG 1 at 09:00 minutes
2. Node 2 transmits MSG 2 at 09:05 minutes
3. MSG1 from Node 1 is delayed in transit by 00:15
4. MSG2 from Node 2 is delayed in transit by 00:05
5. Node 3 receives MSG2 at 09:10
6. Node 3 can see that MSG2 had a delay of 00:05 from its transparent
clock
7. Node 3 calculates the PIT for MSG2: 09:35 = 09:10 + (00:30 - 00:05)
8. Node 3 receives MSG1 at 09:15
9. Node 3 can see that MSG1 had a delay of 00:15 from its transparent
clock
10. Node 3 calculates the PIT for MSG1: 09:30 = 09:15 + (00:30 - 00:15)
11. MSG 1 becomes permanent at 09:30
12. MSG 2 becomes permanent at 09:35
17
==PAGE:20==
Once the permanence function has provided a PIT for the message when
the local time passes the PIT the message is then considered ”permanent”.
After completing this the device is now able to reconstruct to order that the
messages were sent in.
4.4.5
Compression Function
The compression function is used by the CMs to calculate clock adjustments
to their domain. This is function begins when the CM receives a integra-
tion PCF from a SM that then becomes permanent via the permanence
function. The CM must also have no active compression functions operat-
ing for the stated PCFs integration cycle. If the forementioned criteria are
met then the CM begins collecting PCFs frames for a period of time de-
ﬁned as max observation window. When the window closes the CM enters
the calculation phase where it uses a variety of methods determined by the
quantity of inputs received and produces a value at cm compressed pit. A
new PCF is generated and dispatched at the point in time speciﬁed by the
cm compressed pit to the SMs [SD10]. To expand on the above summarisa-
tion the compression function consists of four key phases;
1. Initialisation - A CM begins the compression function after receiving
a PCF of type ”integration frame” that then becomes permanent. No
other compression functions should be active with the same value for
pcf integration cycle as the received PCF. This process does run in
synchronisation with the local clock of the CM, it is triggered by the
receipt of a PCF from one of the SMs. This means that compression
function has to take into account that malicious or faulty SMs could
send PCFs late or early, disrupting the calculation. As you can see in
Figure 4 SM 3 is the ﬁrst to transmit a PCF, the PCF is received by the
CM and when the PCF becomes permanent the observation window is
opened.
2. Collection Phase - After conﬁrming the receipt of a valid PCF the
function begins to listen for more PCFs. If only one is received then
the collection phase will end once the time of the initial PCF PIT plus
the observation window has passed;
cm permanence pit1 + observation window
18
==PAGE:21==
Figure 4: Example for compression function
If a PCF is received after the initial PCF within the observation window
the observation window will then become extended. This continues as
more PCFs are received with in the subsequent observation windows
and is expressed by the following function;
cm permanence pit1 + ((n + 1) ∗observation window), n > 0
Once no new PCFs have become permanent during an observation
window the collection phase will terminate. To prevent malicious or
faulty SMs from perpetually extending the collection phase the collec-
tion phase will be terminated after (f + 1)th observation, where f is
the conﬁgured number of faulty SMs to be tolerated. This is formal
expressed as the following function;
cm permanence pit1 + (f ∗observation window)
3. Calculation Phase - Now the PCFs permanent PITs have been col-
lected the compression function calculates the correction value. There
19
==PAGE:22==
are four ways of calculating this value depending on the amount of
PCFs received. First of we must calculate the individual input value
of each PCF as so;
inputi = cm permanence piti −cm permanence pit1
Now we can use these values as so to get the correction value;
• 1 input: compression correction = input
• 2 inputs: compression correction = average of inputs
• 3-5 inputs: compression correction = median of inputs
• >5 inputs: compression correction = average of kth largest and
the kth smallest inputs where k is a conﬁgurable fault tolerance
parameter
4. Delay Phase - Now the correction value has been calculated the CM
must wait to send the new PCF with the clock update, the value of
this delay is calculated as such;
delay = correction value
+ (k + 1) ∗observation window
−collection phase duration
Once the deadline of the delay has passed the CM will transmit the
PCF as you can see at the end of Figure 4
4.4.6
Architectures
Under the TTEthernet speciﬁcation there are three diﬀerent types of sup-
ported architectures for the system, they are Simple Cluster, Cascaded Clus-
ter and Cascaded Cluster with Multiple Compression Masters.
• According to the speciﬁcation a Simple Cluster refers to a set of end
systems (Could be SCs or SMs) that are connected to each other via a
single switch only. However this does not include other redundant links
as long as the redundant connection is limited to one switch. This is
demonstrated in Figure 5 where we can see a single switch with three
end systems connected to it, in this setup the switch would likely be
acting as the CM and at least one of the end systems would be a SM.
20
==PAGE:23==
Figure 5: Example for a simple cluster
• For Cascaded Clusters the end systems are connected to each other
through multiple switches where a single switch is in the Compression
Master role. In Figure 6 we can see an example of a cascaded cluster
where switch 1 is acting as the CM and switch 2 is acting as and SM.
Figure 6: Example for a cascaded cluster
• For Cascaded Clusters with Multiple Compression Masters, the end
systems are connected through multiple switches. The Cluster also has
multiple CMs conﬁgured with varying priority. As shown in Figure 7
the cascaded cluster with multiple compression masters can have the
same network topology as a regular cascaded cluster, the main diﬀer-
ence between the two is the role conﬁguration of the devices. Switch 1
and Switch 2 are both acting as CM with Switch 1 taking priority over
Switch 2.
21
==PAGE:24==
Figure 7: Example for a cascaded cluster with multiple compression masters
4.4.7
Roles
In the clock synchronisation process there are three key roles that a device can
fulﬁl, these are; Synchronisation Client (SC), are typically end systems that
are transmitting or receiving Ethernet messages. They need to have their
clocks synchronised with the network to be able to handle these messages
properly, to allow them to synchronise they listen to the clock synchronisation
but do not interact with it. Synchronisation Master (SM), can be end systems
or switches. They play a more active role in the clock synchronisation process
as they announce their clocks so that clock corrections can be calculated.
Compression Master (CM), is the ﬁnal role and is responsible for calculating
the clock corrections. The listen to the SMs message timings and calculates
appropriate corrections for their clocks.
The synchronisation clients role in the synchronisation process is as a simple
subscriber that does not actively get involved with the clock sync. Synchro-
nisation clients are typically end devices that are acting as start/end points
for TTEthernet traﬃc. They have no means to change or update the clock
of the network. These types of nodes maintain clock synchronisation with
the network by listening to the PCFs. When a integration PCF frame is
received the synchronisation client will use the information in this frame to
determine if it’s clock requires correction and adjusts it as necessary. Due to
the signiﬁcant nature of the PCFs there is a window of time that the PCFs
will only be accepted in, this mechanism is designed to stop malicious or
faulty frames compromising the local clock.
22
==PAGE:25==
The synchronisation master role is to provide clock information via PCFs to
the compression master so that clock adjustments can be calculated using
the compression function. Once a SM joins a domain it provides integra-
tion frames that allow the CMs to to calculate time adjustments using the
compression function.
The compression master role is responsibly for receiving PCFs from the SMs,
calculating the clock time and broadcasting that time to the domain. This
role is predominately fulﬁlled by a trusted switch within the network, it
is also possible to have one or more devices conﬁgured in this role.
The
compression master can also operate in two diﬀerent modes as either a High
Integrity Compression Master (HICM) or a Standard Integrity Compression
master (SICM). The distinguishing feature between these modes is, as stated
in the protocol speciﬁcation regarding the HICM;
• The CM will relay all cold-start frames if the CM is either the CM UNSYNC
state or CM TENTATIVE SYNC otherwise the frames are discarded.
• The CM will relay all cold-start acknowledgement frames it receives
regardless of the current state
• The CM will relay all compressed integration frames it receives regard-
less of the current state
In comparison the SICM has the following behaviour;
• The CM will relay all cold-start frames if the CM is in CM UNSYNC
state otherwise the frames are discarded
• The CM will relay cold-start acknowledgement frames when the CM is
in the CM UNSYNC state and that the value of pcf membership new is
high enough or if the CM is in the CM CA ENABLED state otherwise
the frames will be blocked
• The CM will relay integration frames if the CM is in the CM INTEGRATE,
CM UNSYNC, CM WAIT 4 IN, CM SYNC or CM STABLE states.
All other integration frames are dropped if they are not used in the
CM’s protocol state machine meaning that a integration frame sent by
a faulty SM will be ignored.
The main diﬀerence between the two modes if how the CMs handle the cold-
start acknowledgements and integration frames, in the HICM mode we can
23
==PAGE:26==
see that the protocol is less regulated allowing for cold-start acknowledgement
and integration frames to be forwarded in the network despite the current
state of the CM. Where as in the SICM we can see that there is a signiﬁcant
amount of veriﬁcation of these types of frames regarding the CMs current
state. cold-start frames have a small distinction between the two however
with the HICM allowing for the relaying of these frames when also in the
CM TENTATIVE SYNC.
In the next section we shall discuss more in detail how these roles interact to
understand how they are able to join a synchronisation domain and maintain
synchronisation.
4.4.8
New Synchronisation Master Process
When a new SM joins the network it follows the process outlined in Figure
8, we can see in the ﬁrst stage the SM begins listening for any integration
frames. If one is received this means that there is a current instance of clock
synchronisation running in the domain, consuming the integration frame also
the SM to join this domain and become integrated. However if no integration
frames are received then it may be that the synchronisation process may
be starting or not exist yet. If the synchronisation process is starting the
SM should receive a cold-start PCF to which it will respond to will a cold-
start acknowledgement after which point the SM will become integrated. If
the SM does not receive a cold-start PCF though it will transmit one itself
then wait to receive and cold-start acknowledgement. Once the cold-start
acknowledgement has been received the SM will be integrated, if the it is not
received the SM will repeat the process.
4.4.9
New Compression Master Process
When a new CM joins the network as demonstrated in Figure 9 it ﬁrst listen
to the network to see if there are any current synchronisation processes. It
does this by listening for integration frames, if one is received the CM uses
this frame to join the domain. However if no integration frames are a received
then the CM listens for either cold-start PCFs or acknowledgements, once
received the CM echoes the cold-start PCF or acknowledgement back to all
24
==PAGE:27==
Figure 8: Flow diagram for SM integration
of the SMs. After completing the echo the CM then returns to listening for
integration frames from any of the SMs to become integrated.
4.4.10
Synchronisation Process
Once the synchronisation process has been initialised the synchronisation
needs to be maintained due to the inevitable clock drift of the individual
device within the network. This process is initiated by any SM, each SM
has a deﬁned dispatch point to start the synchronisation process. Though
the SMs should send their messages simultaneous clock drift will result in
messages being dispatch at diﬀerent points in real time. This process will
25
==PAGE:28==
Figure 9: Flow diagram for CM integration
now be described with the help as Figure 10.
1. The SM reaches the dispatch PIT and begins the process to transmit
a PCF.
2. The SM starts transmitting the PCF and adds the time between step
one and step two onto the PCF.
3. The CM now receives the PCF from the SM.
4. Now the PCF on the CM becomes the permanent at this point the
compression function begins. Further details of this function have been
discussed previously.
5. At this point the CM’s compression function ﬁnishes.
6. Now time passes the scheduled received PIT, the synchronisation pro-
cess opens an acceptance window around this point in time so that it
can determine whether the compression function has ﬁnish in or out of
26
==PAGE:29==
Figure 10: Example of clock synchronisation
schedule.
7. At this point the CM beings the process of dispatching of a new PCF
frame. In high integrity mode the CM will transmit responses to all the
PCFs receives even if these appear to be faulty. In standard integrity
mode these PCF frames will only be transmitted if the PCF’s clocks
are synchronised with the CM’s clock.
8. Here the PCF begins to be transmitted on the network.
9. The SM now receives the new PCF frame from the CM.
10. The PCF the SM has received now becomes permanent.
11. Finally at this point the scheduled received PIT is reached. This again,
similarly to the CM’s scheduled received PIT, is a PIT that is sur-
rounded by an acceptance window. This is used to is used to determine
whether this frame has been received in or out of schedule.
This is the process of synchronisation for simple clusters, for cascaded clusters
or cascaded clusters with multiple compression master the process is fairly
similar with a few minor diﬀerences. With cascaded clusters, the SM may
not be directly connected to the CM and their PCFs may have to traverse
other TTEthernet enabled devices to reach the CM. In these circumstance
as the PCF traverse any TTEthernet enable device forwards these PCFs
transparently add the delay to the transparent clock of the PCF. With mul-
tiple compression masters the compression masters will also forward received
27
==PAGE:30==
PCFs on to other compression masters as long as they have not received that
PCF from the SM.
5
Security Evaluation
5.1
Analysis
To highlight possible areas where an attack can be leveraged, an evaluation
of the current security position of TTEthernet was undertaken. This will be
focused on the protocol’s message exchange rather than the algorithms used
within them. Below I have compiled a matrix, Table 2, that considers each
type of frame used within the protocol and the possible abstract attacks that
can be performed. It is noted that I have not included Best Eﬀort traﬃc
as this traﬃc does not actively contribute to the speciﬁed real-time and
fault tolerant goals of TTEthernet. Each cell is coloured to show whether
TTEthernet has complete, partial or no defence mechanism inherent as part
of the protocol to handle each style of attack. By complete and partial, I
deﬁne complete defence mechanism as a mechanism that does not require
speciﬁc conditions to be met for it to work i.e. the mechanism is not aﬀected
by system conﬁguration or temporal properties.
With the attack method of interception there are no defence mechanisms built
in to TTEthernet to protect any of these types of frames from being viewed
by an attacker with access to the system. As typically these systems are used
as part of controls system or in industrial applications the conﬁdentiality of
the data may not be perceived as critical due to relatively low value of the
data being transferred. This limits the the impact that this still of attack
would have on the system, though it must be noted that TTEthernet systems
can be used as part of audio video solution which may increase the impact of
this style of attack. TTTech have addressed this in their paper, Candidate
Security Solutions [Ste13], with the recommendations of implementing IEEE
802.1AE and 802.1X.
Delay attacks are currently the most detrimental to TTEthernet, these at-
tacks have been discussed and examined in the some of the papers that have
been previously reference [Soe16], [Ste13], [LGS+16]. Due to the lack of pro-
tection from interception it is very easy to selective choice traﬃc to delay
28
==PAGE:31==
Frame types
Attack Methods
TT
RC
CS
CS Ack
Int
Interception
Delay
Replay
Deletion
Modiﬁcation
Spoof
Complete defence mechanism
Partial defence mechanism
No defence mechanism
TT
Time-Triggered
RC
Rate-Constraint
CS
Cold-Start
CS Ack
Cold-Start Acknowledgement
Int
Integration
Table 2: TTEthernet Vulnerability Matrix
impacting the wider system. These attacks typically target the transparent
clock within the PCF frames to artiﬁcially exaggerate clock drift within the
system to break its temporal constraints.
With Replay attacks TTEthernet has provided various forms as part of their
protocol to prevent such attacks. With Time Triggered frames, if the frame
is replayed after a valid frame it will either be be received by the next device
outside of its acceptance window resulting in the frame being discard or if
it’s done quickly enough to be received within the acceptance window the
frame is seen as invalid due to the fact the genuine frame has not yet become
permanent and is once again dropped.
Rate-Constraint frames is control
via a leaky bucket algorithm, this regulates the frequency of the of the RC
frames so that if the frequency exceeds the conﬁgured amount the frames will
be dropped [Ste08]. Both of these style attacks can only aﬀect their local
connected area and are not able to permeate through the network.
TTEthernet provides no speciﬁc way of handling Deletion attacks on the
29
==PAGE:32==
network, if the attacker is acting as a man in the middle or has compromised
and end node they are able to delete frames at will. This attack can aﬀect
the larger network depending on it’s point of control within the network,
however, if an attacker has accomplished this degree of control within the
system they have more eﬀective ways to compromise the network rather
than selectively deleting packets e.g. dropping all traﬃc. There are some
stated defence mechanisms for this, though it was highlighted in the matrix
as it is a design choice in the network topology and schedule rather than a
feature of the protocol. The use of redundant channels can help guarantee
the delivery of frames by providing a second ”uncompromised” route for the
frames to use.
Modiﬁcation of frames is a more complex attack vector in the context of
TTEthernet, as for all frames in the protocol can be modiﬁed as there is no
integrity check on the frame in its entirety. This means that for TT and RC
frames it is complete possible for an attacker to modify the data that the
frame contains, it is also possible to change the frames TT and RC properties
such as the virtual link id but this may cause the frame to be dropped if it
does not match the existing static conﬁguration. The modiﬁcation attacks
on TT and RC frames have no means to aﬀect the stability of the network
but it is possible in a cyber physical system this sort of attack could have a
very real impact in the physical world and this can not be overlooked. This
attack when taking the PCF frames (Cold-Start, Cold-Start Acknowledge-
ment and Integration) in to consideration can have an impact of the stability
of the network topology. Similar to delay attacks it is possible to modify the
transparent clock of PCF frames to artiﬁcial exaggerate clock drift.
Finally spooﬁng attacks, for TT and RC spooﬁng of traﬃc is only possible
when the spoofed traﬃc adheres to the pre-conﬁgured schedule. If that traﬃc
falls outside the scheduled it will be dropped as invalid, late or early. If the
spoofed traﬃc is matching the schedule deﬁned on the network devices it is
possible to spoof a packet with a custom data contents that would be able
to traverse the network. Similarly to modiﬁcation this style of attack on
these types of frames does not compromise the real-time and fault tolerant
properties of the protocol but still presents a potential threat in the cyber
physical context. With PCF frames spooﬁng can be used to imitate other
roles in the synchronisation process, if this is done at an end node level the
impact is limited due to the static conﬁguration blocking the frames from
propagating past the switch. However if the attacker has compromised a
30
==PAGE:33==
switch within the network it may be possible for the device to spoof multiple
roles simultaneous.
5.2
Validation
5.2.1
Implementation
To examine some of these defence mechanisms implemented in TTEthernet I
will use the OMNeT++ framework used to build network simulations written
in C++ [VH08]. There are two extensions that I will be using as part of this;
The INET framework provides functionality for several internet protocols in
our case there is the requirement for the Ethernet simulations. The second
framework is the TT4INET (now know as CoRE4INET) provides a way of
simulating real time networks including TTEthernet [SKKS11]. The reason
TT4INET has been stated rather than CoRE4INET is that if you wish to
simulate the synchronisation process in detail the latest version does not
support this. The versions that were used in this implementation are OM-
NeT++ 4.4.1, INET 2.1.0 and TT4INET nightly build from 15/05/2013.
This version of the framework can only be compilied on linux due to a name
collision with Windows.
As part of OMNeT++ there is a proprietary language introduced, NED
(NEtwork Description). This language is used to describe the physical and
logical structure of the simulation. INI ﬁles are used in conjunction with
NED ﬁles to provide the conﬁguration of network devices. For this imple-
mentation it was required to modify the packets leaving a TTEthernet device,
this began with creating an extension of the ﬁle that handles the output of
TTEthernet traﬃc, TTEOutput. This was extended into the following new
class TTEAttackOutput;
class TTEAttackOutput :
public TTEOutput {
protected :
virtual void handleMessage ( cMessage ∗msg ) ;
};
This class only override the handleMessage function which is responsible for
processing out going traﬃc. This class is bound to the NED object of the
31
==PAGE:34==
same name as shown in Figure 11. This NED ﬁle contains the same con-
ﬁguration as the original NED ﬁle named TTEOutput the only diﬀerence is
the binding. This new NED object is then used in another new NED object
called TTEAttackPHYPort again this class mimic the original TTEPHYPort
object but this time replaces the TTEOutput object with our new TTEAt-
tackOutput. The TTEOutput object is used for controlling the output buﬀer
of a TTEthernet device and the TTEPHYPort is used to simulate the phys-
ical port of a device.
Figure 11: UML Diagram of implementation
With these classes and objects created we can now create new objects based
of the TTEEtherHost and TTEEtherSwitch. TTEEtherHost is used to rep-
resent a TTEthernet enabled end node within a network and the TTEEther-
32
==PAGE:35==
Switch represents a TTEthernet enabled device.
Copying these objects
respectively in TTEEtherAttackHost and TTEEtherAttackSwitch we can
now replace their instance of the TTEPHYPort object with our customised
TTEAttackPHYPort allowing for the insertion of these devices in to our
simulations to act as malicious entities.
5.2.2
Replay
Figure 12: Diagram of the base network
In this scenario the devices fulﬁl the following roles;
• Unit 1 - Acts as a receiver for all Time-Triggered and Rate-Constraint
traﬃc
• Unit 2 - Acts as a transmitter of Rate-Constraint traﬃc
• Unit 3 - Acts as a transmitter of Time-Triggered traﬃc
• Unit 4 - Acts as a transmitter of Time-Triggered traﬃc
• Unit 5 - Acts as a receiver for all Time-Triggered and Rate-Constraint
traﬃc
• Unit 6 - Acts as a transmitter of Rate-Constraint traﬃc
33
==PAGE:36==
• Switch 1 - Is acting as a TTEthernet enable switch
• Switch 2 - Is acting as a TTEthernet enable switch
This scenario is designed to demonstrate how the network responds to a
malicious end point replaying legitimate frames. For this we will be using
Unit 3 which is implementing our modiﬁed port and the following replay
code;
else
i f
(msg−>arrivedOn ( ”TTin” ))
{
cMessage ∗temp = msg−>dup ( ) ;
ttQueue . i n s e r t (temp ) ;
This code is ran every time a TT frame is about to be transmitted and
adds a copy of the message to the TT buﬀer to be transmitted next tick.
When executed this results in the expected error of ”Received frame before
permanence point of previous frame” as we expected.
As you can see in
Figure 13 the fault was contained to the communication link that Unit 3 and
Switch 1 share and was not propagated through the network.
Figure 13: Replay attack with TT frame
Likewise with RC traﬃc when tested the replayed RC frame was dropped
by switch one with the error message of ”Received frame in vl 100 ctc too
34
==PAGE:37==
early! Gap was 84 Ticks, should have been between minimum 11000!”. This
conﬁrms the validity of the defence mechanism in this scenario. Again this
was accomplished using the same code as before but this time placing it in
the the RC part of the message handling. Note however that the message
was still loaded into the TT buﬀer rather than the RC buﬀer, this was done
to guarantee the soonest possible transmission of this frame.
else
i f
(msg−>arrivedOn ( ”RCin” ))
{
cMessage ∗temp = msg−>dup ( ) ;
ttQueue . i n s e r t (temp ) ;
The alternate scenario for this style of attack is if an attacker has compro-
mised the internal network. In this case the attacker could gain control of a
switch or perform a man in the middle attack. This was again tested using
the topology above and conﬁguring Switch 1 to be the compromised device
and the network shown in Figure 14. These scenarios produced the same
results as the other topologies with replay frames only making it as far as
the devices local connections.
Figure 14: Example of network with MITM attacker
35
==PAGE:38==
6
Attack
6.1
Attacker Model
When considering what attacks could be performed on this network we
wanted the widest possible attack plane so our attacker model is using the
Dolev-Yao model [DY83]. In this model we assume;
• The attacker can control has control of any and all points in the network
• Can act as a legitimate device/user on the network
• Initiate or receive any protocols on the network
However we do not want to compromise the network passed it’s fault tolerance
limits as stated in the failure hypotheses. This means that our attacker model
will have to be limited, it may have the capability to control any point in the
network but it will be restricted to only one device. This is done so that the
attack stays well within the bounds of both of the failure hypotheses.
6.2
PCF Replay
6.2.1
Overview
In this attack I looked at the possibility of replaying PCFs to see if it was
possible to get a repeated PCF to traverse further into the network than its
local connection. This was done using the synchronisation simulation rather
than the dummy TT4INET synchronisation options which looks to simulate
the traﬃc pattern of PCFs but does not perform the clock synchronisation
process. Whilst looking into the Replay protection for TT, RC and PCF traf-
ﬁc I noticed that there was a slight disparity in how the defence mechanisms
were handled. For TT and RC traﬃc the simulation clearly showed that the
network was able to detect and drop a packet that had been replayed. When
testing with PCFs the results did not conform to the expected ones. In the
speciﬁcation [Ste08] it discusses that as part of the clock synchronisation the
CM use acceptance windows to determine the validity of PCF and whether it
should contribute to the clock synchronisation. It is stated that in standard
integrity mode: Relays cold-start frames only when in the unsync state, re-
lays cold-start acknowledgement in the unsync state where the membership
36
==PAGE:39==
value is high enough or if the CM is in the CA enabled state. To test this in
the OMNeT++ framework we could use the same modiﬁed code as used for
the RC replay examination.
6.2.2
Scenarios
The scenarios being considered for this attack are ﬁrstly, a simple cluster as
shown in Figure 15 where we have a switch at the centre of the topology with
four TTEthernet nodes directly attached to it.
Figure 15: Diagram of the simple victim network
In this scenario the devices are acting in the following roles;
• All units - Acts as a synchronisation masters
• Switch 1 - Acts as the compression master
The next scenario aims to cover the cascaded cluster with multiple compres-
sion master architecture, this is demonstrated in Figure 16. This network
consists of two TTEthernet switches that are interconnected with switch
one having four TTEthernet end hosts connected and switch two having
three.
In this scenario the devices are acting in the following roles;
• Unit 2 - Acts as a synchronisation client
37
==PAGE:40==
Figure 16: Diagram of the cascaded victim network
• All other units - Acts as a synchronisation masters
• Switch 1 - Acts as the primary compression master
• Switch 2 - Acts as the secondary compression master
6.2.3
The Attack
In the initial steps of this attack the aim was simply to try and get any of
the three PCF frame types to be broadcasted past their local connection.
This worked in the same way as the RC traﬃc as the PCF traﬃc is received
and transmitted using the RC buﬀer. In both topologies Unit 3 is acting as
a compromised SM.
else
i f
(msg−>arrivedOn ( ”RCin” ))
{
cMessage ∗temp = msg−>dup ( ) ;
ttQueue . i n s e r t (temp ) ;
Re-using the code shown above the compromised device would add a copy of
any outgoing RC traﬃc to the TT buﬀer resulting in this traﬃc getting sent
as soon as physically possible. Initially this was only replaying one message.
In the scenario of the simple cluster we saw similar results to that of the RC
traﬃc, the replayed frame would reach switch one and then be ignored. With
38
==PAGE:41==
the cascaded cluster with multiple CMs though, the replayed PCF traﬃc was
forward from switch 1 and onto switch 2.
6.2.4
Results
This demonstrated a potential opportunity to exploit this behaviour, the re-
play count was then modiﬁed using a for loop so that multiple frames could
be added to the buﬀer. At this point the attack was attempted with a replay
count of twenty, the attacks life span was also extended so that it covered
the initial synchronisation process as well as regular clock synchronisation
process to see if this behaviour diﬀered between diﬀerent states of synchroni-
sation. The result of the increase replays showed that all of the 20 frames of
each of the three types of PCF frame used in the initial synchronisation phase
as well as the integration frames used as part of the standard integration pro-
cess we successfully transmitted from Unit 3 to Switch 1 and then forwarded
to Switch 2. At this point the forwarding of the traﬃc had not undermined
any of the fault-tolerant or real-time properties of the network, it has sim-
ply demonstrated that a invalid packet was able to traverse a TTEthernet
device. Finally the replay count was increased to 200 to see what aﬀect this
would have on the clock synchronisation process, within a 0.001 of second
of the simulation it crashed. The max delay transmission value of Unit 5
had been breached resulting in a critical system failure. It was then tested
to see what the lowest limit of replays that would cause this fault within
this particular system, it was found that as low as 35 replays were enough to
cause this critical fault. This fault also occurred whether the CM’s were in
high-integrity or standard-integrity mode.
6.2.5
Prevention
This error is caused by the fact that in a multiple compression master topol-
ogy the CMs relay PCFs to each other. The validation process of the PCFs
is only applied when consuming them this has resulted in the ability to sat-
urate the connection between the two CMs increasing network delay to the
point it aﬀects the networks schedule.
To help prevent this style of attack, there needs to be mechanism that can
recognise that the PCF are replayed PCFs are duplicates and are therefore
39
==PAGE:42==
not required to be forwarded to the other CM. One simple way of doing this
could be a history buﬀer on the CM that stores a hash of the PCF, when a
PCF is received it is added to this buﬀer. This would work by;
• PCF is received, a hash of the entire Ethernet frame is added to the
history buﬀer with a lifetime
• When a new PCF is received its entire Ethernet frame is hashed and
checked against the buﬀer, if it exists then it is a duplicate and will be
dropped.
• If the PCF is not in the buﬀer it is added to the history buﬀer
This mechanism would have prevented against this particular attack, however
it would be possible to prevent spoofed PCFs and have them forwarded by
the CM in a similar way. This would require a more versatile mechanism to
validate the PCF. For unique rate-constraint quotas for each PCF based on
the membership vector, it have been demonstrated previously that the way
RC frames are handled provide protection against these types of attacks.
This could be conﬁgured on each device as part of the static conﬁguration
and provide validation on the PCF traﬃc to same to degree rather than just
forwarding it blindly to the other CM.
7
Discussion
In this work it has been shown that it is possible to disrupt the proven
determinism, fault tolerant and real time properties of the system through
compromising a single SM with in a cascaded cluster with multiple compres-
sion masters. Though this attack requires certain pre-requisites, the network
must be in the cascaded cluster with multiple compression masters archi-
tecture. This is imperative as the attack is based on the fact that in this
architecture one compression master will forward the PCFs onto the other
with minimal validation. This architecture is designed to provide a higher
level of fault tolerance as it can continue to maintain clock synchronisation if
one compression master fails (ignoring physical limitation i.e. switch failing
and no redundant links). It is reasonable to assume that a topology such as
this is used in some of the most critical of applications. However it is noted
that this attack can not be conducted via a end system, it must come from
40
==PAGE:43==
a SM. SMs will typically sit in the internal network and may not be directly
exposed to external regions, this increases the diﬃculty of compromising such
a device but does not rule it out. The attack started causing errors less than
1 millisecond after initiation, this was with a traﬃc increase of 350% above
the baseline. Though the attack may happen quickly network monitoring
tools should be more than capable of registering this sharp increase of in
such a short time. It would be interesting to see whether monitoring systems
could be bypassed by incrementally increasing the rate of replays over a long
period of time.
This attacks impact is not contained to its locale, it is able to aﬀect devices
that are not directly connected to it. This has some limitations to it though,
the attack only saturates the links between the compromised SM and its
connected CM as well as the link connecting the CMs together. Any other
traﬃc that needs to use these two links will suﬀer as part of this attack,
however traﬃc that is not required to pass over these links will be unaﬀected
by this attack. For example in Figure 16 used in the attack, nodes 5, 6 and
7 were aﬀected. Nodes 1, 2, and 4 were directly connection to the primary
compression master so their clock synchronisation did not have to traverse
the saturated links and functioned as normal. Node 5, 6 and 7 though need to
transmit and receive PCFs from across the saturated link to maintain clock
synchronisation. When considering the other traﬃc on the network if Node
1 is sending TT traﬃc to Node 7 this should remain unaﬀected (Assuming
the clock synchronisation of Unit 7 has not failed) as TT traﬃc is prioritised
over PCF which is deemed a form of RC traﬃc. If this was RC traﬃc though,
it would be aﬀected as PCF typically has a higher priority than regular RC
traﬃc, this would mean that RC traﬃc would become delayed and may be
delivered out of schedule. TT traﬃc is not immune in this attack though,
as the volume of replay traﬃc increase BE traﬃc will be delayed ﬁrst then
regular RC traﬃc and ﬁnally genuine PCF traﬃc.
Once the PCF traﬃc
has been delayed enough the clock synchronisation process breaks. Without
clock synchronisation the system can no longer guarantee that TT traﬃc is
going to continue to be delivered successfully. As stated in the attack this
type of attack is not limited to replayed frames, these frames can be spoofed
assuming that the frame meets the criteria of the virtual link that it is going
to be traversing. This type of attack follows the same principle as the replay
attack with the beneﬁt that you do not need to wait to capture a frame to
replay you can start this immediately.
41
==PAGE:44==
As for the prevention of this attack I have suggested two possible methods
that could help. The ﬁrst solution is fairly weak as it is focused speciﬁcally on
the fact that it is a replayed frame ignoring the fact the problem is more to do
with the rate of these frames. However implementing this mechanism would
not impact on the clock synchronisation process as only known replayed
frames would be dropped. The downside to this is that if a frame is spoofed
the content of the frame could be made unique each time therefore bypassing
this mechanism easily. Another way to go tackle this is similar to how regular
RC frames are treated.
Apply the same constraints to relaying the PCF
traﬃc on the CM as you would to regular PCF traﬃc.
Speciﬁcally the
implementation of a BAG for each device who it should be forwarding traﬃc
for, the BAG would deﬁne a rate limit. This would need to be conﬁgured
for each type of PCF though as they cold-start, cold-start acknowledgements
occur at very diﬀerent frequencies to the integration type.
I believe this
mechanism should not impede the clock synchronisation process if the BAGs
are given appropriate values. This prevention would be a superior method of
handling this style of attack as it can also block frames that are not replayed
but are being spoofed.
8
Conclusion
After evaluating the current security position of TTEthernet there is already
a signiﬁcant amount of mechanisms in place to help prevent malicious be-
haviour in comparison to traditional networks. The eﬀectiveness of these
measures against replay attacks of TT and RC traﬃc were demonstrated
in the simulation showing that when the attack occurred the protocol was
able to conﬁne the attack to it locale. This implementation veriﬁed that the
OMNeT++ framework is capable of prevent theses types of attack however
this has not be veriﬁed on physical TTEthernet devices.
To concluded, this work has shown that in the event that an attacker is able to
compromise a synchronisation master in a multiple compression master net-
work it is possible to perform as style of DoS attack using the synchronisation
master. This attack is capable of saturating the link between compression
masters resulting in increased transmission delays to the point where they
caused errors in non compromised devices.
It is also noted that some of
these devices were two steps removed from the source of the attack. The
42
==PAGE:45==
implementation has shown it to be possible to disrupt the base principles
of the TTEthernet protocol of fault tolerance, proven determinism and real
time and that this is achievable, within the given prerequisites, in less than
a millisecond. It has to be taken into account that all of the implementation
was done using the OMNeT++ framework, there is no veriﬁcation that this
attack will work on physical TTEthernet devices. A defence mechanism has
been proposed that in theory will be able to mitigate the attack that was
demonstrated as well as modiﬁed versions of the attack. This however has
not been veriﬁed in the simulation.
9
Future Work
For future work there are many aspects that I would personally like to inves-
tigate further, there two conceptual attacks I had deﬁned but were unable to
implement to assess their viability and impact. The ﬁrst of these would be a
Membership Overﬂow, in this attack a rogue SM would spoof false cold-
start frames with increasing membership vectors when the system initialise
the clock synchronisation process. The goal of this would be to exhaust the
membership value in the PCF ﬁeld so that no legitimate SMs can obtain
a membership binding. This also has the added bonus of that the system
judges the reliability of the clock from the amount of members contributing
to it. With one device acting as all members it may be possible to cause the
clock correction value to ﬂuctuate to an extreme which may impact on the
systems ability to perform as required.
The other theoretical attack I’ve considered is Flappy Masters which is
where a rogue CM perpetually adjusts its priority, this results in it changing
its role between the primary and secondary CM. I speculate that if this could
be done at a fast enough rate it could cause a synchronisation split in the
network and undermine the networks stability.
There is the possibility of implementing and testing the prevention measures
that were suggested as a result of this attack. It would be extremely useful
to provide an implementation of these defence mechanisms and then validate
how they would perform against the type of attacks mentioned, critically
though are there any side eﬀects on the regular synchronisation process du
to these measures? It is not possible to view these mechanisms as an eﬀec-
43
==PAGE:46==
tive defence mechanism if it impacts the clock synchronisation process. It
may also be interesting to extend David Soendoro’s work in [Soe16] so that
this style of attack can be detected as part of his entropy based anomaly
detection.
Finally it would be of great value to repeat the attack covered in thesis in
a real world environment to provide validation. This work has been limited
to the OMNeT++ simulation only, so if there are deﬁciencies in how the
protocol has been implemented in the framework it could provide a false
comparison.
44
==PAGE:47==
References
[Doy11]
Bob Doyle. Free will: The scandal in philosophy. 2011.
[DY83]
Danny Dolev and Andrew Yao.
On the security of public key
protocols. IEEE Transactions on information theory, 29(2):198–
208, 1983.
[GSS+97] Oscar Gonz´alez, H. Shrikumar, Stankovic, A John, and Krithi
Ramamritham.
Adaptive fault tolerance and graceful degrada-
tion under dynamic hard real-time scheduling. Computer Science
Department Faculty Publication Series, 1997.
[LGS+16] Elena Lisova, Marina Guti´errez, Wilfried Steiner, Elisabeth Uhle-
mann, Johan ˚Akerberg, Radu Dobrin, and Mats Bj¨orkman. Pro-
tecting clock synchronization: Adversary detection through net-
work monitoring. Journal of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
2016, 2016.
[LUS+16] Elena Lisova,
Elisabeth Uhlemann,
Wilfried Steiner,
Johan
˚Akerberg, and Mats Bj¨orkman. Risk evaluation of an arp poi-
soning attack on clock synchronization for industrial applications.
In Industrial Technology (ICIT), 2016 IEEE International Con-
ference on, pages 872–878. IEEE, 2016.
[Mar65]
James Martin. Programming Real-time Computer Systems. Pren-
tice Hall, 1965.
[SD10]
Wilfried Steiner and Bruno Dutertre. Smt-based formal veriﬁca-
tion of a ttethernet synchronization function.
In International
Workshop on Formal Methods for Industrial Critical Systems,
pages 148–163. Springer, 2010.
[SKKS11] Till Steinbach, Hermand Dieumo Kenfack, Franz Korf, and
Thomas C Schmidt. An extension of the omnet++ inet frame-
work for simulating real-time ethernet with high accuracy.
In
Proceedings of the 4th International ICST Conference on Simu-
lation Tools and Techniques, pages 375–382. ICST (Institute for
Computer Sciences, Social-Informatics and Telecommunications
Engineering), 2011.
45
==PAGE:48==
[Soe16]
David Soendoro. Entropy based anomaly detection in determinis-
tic ethernet. Master’s thesis, KTH Royal Institute of Technology,
2016.
[SR94]
K.G. Shin and P. Ramanathan. Real-time computing: a new dis-
cipline of computer science and engineering. Proceedings of the
IEEE, 82(1):6 – 24, 1994.
[Ste08]
Wilfried Steiner. Ttethernet speciﬁcation. TTTech Computertech-
nik AG, Nov, 2008.
[Ste13]
Wilfried Steiner. Candidate security solutions for ttethernet. In
Digital Avionics Systems Conference (DASC), 2013 IEEE/AIAA
32nd, pages 4A5–1. IEEE, 2013.
[TTT10]
TTTech. White paper: Ttethernet – a powerful network solution
for all purposes. Technical report, TTTech Computertechnik AG,
2010.
[VH08]
Andr´as Varga and Rudolf Hornig. An overview of the omnet++
simulation environment. In Proceedings of the 1st international
conference on Simulation tools and techniques for communica-
tions, networks and systems & workshops, page 60. ICST (Insti-
tute for Computer Sciences, Social-Informatics and Telecommuni-
cations Engineering), 2008.
46
==PAGE:49==
List of Figures
1
Diagram of the PCF format . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2
Flow diagram for an acceptance window
. . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3
Example for permanence function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4
Example for compression function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
5
Example for a simple cluster . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
6
Example for a cascaded cluster
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
7
Example for a cascaded cluster with multiple compression
masters
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
8
Flow diagram for SM integration
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
9
Flow diagram for CM integration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
10
Example of clock synchronisation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
11
UML Diagram of implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
12
Diagram of the base network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
13
Replay attack with TT frame
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
14
Example of network with MITM attacker . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
15
Diagram of the simple victim network . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
16
Diagram of the cascaded victim network
. . . . . . . . . . . .
38
47
==PAGE:50==
List of Tables
1
Description of PCF types . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2
TTEthernet Vulnerability Matrix . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
48
