==PAGE:1==
Numerical modelling of temperature
proﬁles in freezing concrete
Master thesis
Allan Heimdal
s123072
William Bruun Frederiksen
s124272
June 23, 2017
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Supervisors:
Marianne Tange Hasholt, Associate Professor, DTU-BYG
Jens Henrik Nielsen, Associate Professor, DTU-BYG
DTU Civil Engineering
Structural Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
Tel: +45 4525 1700
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This master thesis is submitted as a partial fulﬁlment of the requirements for the degree
of Master of Science in Civil Engineering at the Technical University of Denmark. The
project is credited to 30 ECTS points for each student, and has been worked on in the
period 23rd of January to the 23rd of June. The theme of the project was suggested by the
supervisors, however, adjustments have been made throughout the process in collaboration
between the authors and the supervisors.
A few people have been helpful during the project, and for this, the authors would like
to thank:
Thomas Holm Skov, civil engineer – for consulting.
Line Heidi Andersen, civil engineer - for assistance with the freezing cabinets.
Frederik Hvelplund Uhre and Soﬁe Wolter, Bachelor students - For collaboration during
setup of the freezing cabinets.
Jens Henrik Nielsen, Associate Professor - for guidance throughout the study, especially
with numerical modelling.
Marianne Tange Hasholt, Associate Professor – for guidance and advises throughout the
project.
Kgs. Lyngby June 23, 2017
Allan Heimdal - s123072
William Bruun Frederiksen - s124272
i
==PAGE:6==
==PAGE:7==
Abstract
The objective of this project is to model temperature proﬁles in freezing concrete dur-
ing. The freezing comes from an experiment, which is the reference method, in Denmark,
of how to check the frost resistance of concrete. To model this situation, the ﬁnite element
method software, Comsol Multiphysics is chosen as it handles coupled heat transfer prob-
lems well.
The reason for this investigation is that there is no certain knowledge of how frost
damages in concrete occur. Different theories are suggested and various experiments have
been conducted in order to try to determine the mechanisms behind the frost damage. The
model in this project is a part of an attempt to ﬁnd out how the frost damages occur and
what conditions are best for ice formation in concrete.
The reference method is a freeze-thaw test, which is also conducted to compare measured
data from it to the results from the model as well as implement some of the data into
the model. The experiment is conducted with two freezing cabinets, that uses different
temperature regulation systems, to compare these as well.
The model is successfully established, with calculation of the temperature proﬁles
during freezing and thawing. The temperatures from the experiments are implemented
in the model and temperature proﬁles calculated in the model corresponds with the ones
measured from the experiment.
However, the model can be developed further to calculate the damages in the concrete and
from this, to compare the four main frost damage theories with each other.
Additionally, the ice formation in saline water has been investigated experimentally.
It was expected that the ice would contain more or less no NaCl, resulting in higher
concentrations where the water freezes last, however, based on the results, this hypothesis
could not be accepted as true.
iii
==PAGE:8==
==PAGE:9==
List of symbols
Sign
Description
Unit
Cp
Speciﬁc heat capacity
J/(kg · K)
H0
Null hypothesis
-
I
Percentage of solution which is frozen
%
KF
The cryoscopic constant
K ·kg/mol
L
Length that heat passes through
m
M
Molar mass
g/mol
N
Number of degrees of freedom, used in t-test
-
Q
Quantity of heat - used for speciﬁc heat capacity
J
Q
Heat transfer through a material - used for thermal
conductivity
W
S
Standard deviation - used in t-test
-
SorL
Parameter that deﬁnes if a given point of water is solid
or liquid
-
S
Second Piola-Kirchhoff stress tensor
Pa
T0
Previous temperature
K
T
Temperature
K
Vcs
Volume fraction of chemical shrinkage
-
Vc
Volume fraction of concrete
-
Vew
Volume fraction of capillary water
-
Vgs
Volume fraction of gel solid
-
Vi
Volume fraction
W/(m · K)
Vuc
Volume fraction of un-hydrated cement
-
∆TF
Change of freezing point
K
∆T
Difference in temperature
K
Θ
Phase change function
-
α
Degree of hydration - used for Powers’ model
K
αm
Mass fraction
-
α
Coefﬁcient of thermal expansion
1/K
µ
Mean
-
v
==PAGE:10==
vi
LIST OF SYMBOLS
Sign
Description
Unit
ρ
Density
kg/m3
kc
Effective thermal conductivity of a composite material
W/(m · K)
ki
Thermal conductivity of each constituent in a compos-
ite material
W/(m · K)
k
Thermal conductivity
W/(m · K)
m%
Mass percentage of NaCl in a solution
%
m
Mass
g
ncabinet
Sample size
-
n
Amount of substance
mol
p
Initial porosity
-
q0
Heat transfer for insulation
W
qr
Heat ﬂux - radiation
W
tcrit
The value t is compared to in order to reject/retain the
null hypothesis
-
t
Statistical value from t-test
-
t
Time
s
utrans
Velocity vector of translational motion
m/s
==PAGE:11==
Table of Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Objective
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
2
Theory
3
2.1
Internal and external frost damages . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Frost damage theories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.3
Thermodynamics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3
Ice formation test
11
3.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.3
Materials and methods
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.4
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.5
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4
Preparation of concrete test specimens
21
4.1
Materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.2
Casting process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.3
Concrete characteristics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.4
Curing and preparation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5
Freeze-thaw test
29
5.1
Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.2
Temperature cycle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.3
Temperature measurement
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.4
Frost scaling measurement
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.5
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
6
FEM-modelling - Setup of the model
41
6.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
6.2
Calculation sequence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
vii
==PAGE:12==
viii
TABLE OF CONTENTS
6.3
Method of developing the model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
6.4
Materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
6.5
Phase change
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
6.6
Boundary conditions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
6.7
Heat transfer module
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
6.8
Mesh and elements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
6.9
Freezing point depression . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
7
FEM-modelling - Results
55
7.1
Comparison with measured temperatures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
7.2
Comparison of cabinets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
7.3
Phase change
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
8
Future work
63
8.1
Goal for the model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
8.2
Additional effects in the model - suggestions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
8.3
Concrete properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
8.4
Remaining methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
9
Conclusion
69
Bibliography
71
Appendices
73
A Overview of Annex
77
B
Ice formation - Sample sizes
79
C Ice formation - Calibration of autotitrator
81
D Cone test
83
E
Pressure method
85
F
Omron cabinet guide
87
F.1
CX-Termo and Trendviewer
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
87
F.2
Handling the data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
95
G Placement of thermocouples
97
H Paired t-test
99
==PAGE:13==
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ix
I
Validation of model
101
I.1
Validation of initial model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101
I.2
Validation of freezing point depression . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 104
J
Temperature dependent material properties
107
K Powers’ model
109
L
Convergence analysis
111
L.1
Element size convergence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 111
L.2
Step size convergence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 112
M Cabinet cycles
113
M.1 Omron-cabinet
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 113
M.2 Labview-cabinet . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 117
==PAGE:14==
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Concrete is the most used construction material, due to its many beneﬁts: high durabil-
ity, low cost and increasing strength over time which makes concrete buildings ﬂexible in
terms of alternation many years after construction as the structures have a considerable
reserve of strength. However, even though concrete is a durable material, it still has weak-
nesses, one of them is frost resistance. Four different frost theories strive to describe the
damages due to frost, some of these theories can co-exist while others exclude each other.
No consensus has been reached regarding which theory applies. The lack of knowledge
concerning how the frost damages occur in concrete gives motivation to investigate the
phenomenon, to identify which theory is applicable.
When testing concrete for frost resistance, three different test methods are given in the
standard DS/CEN/TS 12390-9. These tests are all freeze-thaw test conducted in a freezing
cabinet. There is no correlation between the results of the methods and this causes trouble
for the international concrete manufactures as they have to do different tests when selling
to different countries.
1.1
Objective
This project can be seen as part of a larger study of concrete damages due to frost
exposure. The overall objective of this study is to investigate what theory that stands basis
of the mechanisms that causes the damages. That being one of the four existing theories
or a new one. The objective is also to change the standard tests of how to determine if a
concrete is frost resistant or not. The goal is to have only one way to test the concrete, to
eliminate the extra work of having to test it in three different ways. These two objectives
goes hand in hand and can possibly be reached by numerical modelling of freezing of
concrete, together with experimental investigations to complement the model.
This leads to the objective of this project: to create a model based on the ﬁnite ele-
ment method, that simulates the test method that is used in Denmark, the slab test, also
referred to as the reference method. The purpose of this model is to calculate temperature
1
==PAGE:16==
2
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
proﬁles in freezing concrete. The reference method exposes the concrete to a repeated 24
hour long freeze-thaw cycle that will be implemented in the model to show the temperature
proﬁles throughout the experiment.
The objective is also to conduct the reference method experimentally, to measure tem-
peratures and implement these in the model as well as compare them to the results from
the model. The temperature cycle measured in the water will be inserted in the model.
Temperatures measured along the height of the specimens will be compared to the resulting
temperature proﬁles from the model.
The experiment will be conducted in two freezing cabinets with different temperature
regulation systems, to see how they will inﬂuence the results.
A smaller investigation of the ice formation in saline water is to be performed by freezing
solutions with different NaCl concentrations.
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 2
Theory
In this chapter, the relevant theories and deﬁnitions, that stands basis of understanding
damages in concrete due to frost actions, will be explained. The difference between
internal and external frost damage will be stated and under which circumstances these will
occur.
General theory of heat transfer as well as the freezing points of liquids and the inﬂuence
of the salt-concentration will be explained as well.
2.1
Internal and external frost damages
Frost damages in concrete can appear as two different types, either as internal cracks
or as scaling of the concrete surface called frost scaling. In general, internal cracks is the
more severe of the two, since the bearing capacity is reduced more. The scaling causes
aesthetic issues of concrete and can therefore be used as an indicator of the frost damages.
Frost scaling is ﬂakes of concrete detaching from the surface, piece by piece. All theory
and experimental results, until 2016, have indicated that scaling of concrete as result of
frost damages was connected with exposure to saline water. In 2016, Martin Rosenqvist
described how swedish hydraulic structures were subjected to scaling even though only
freshwater was present (Rosenqvist, 2016). He found that this could occur because of the
extreme temperature differences that can exist in the water surface near damns during cold
winters. The water can be at approximately 0 ◦C and the air can be -20 ◦C or lower.
2.2
Frost damage theories
Frost scaling happens in colder climates, with longer periods of time with temperatures
alternating between positive and negative values. During cold and snowy weather, salt
will be used for de-icing on various surfaces, for example roads and pavement, to avoid
slippery ice being a safety hazard. However, the salt mixed with water that is continuously
freezing and melting is harsh on the concrete.
Exactly how much the concrete will suffer from this behavior depends on a few conditions:
the availability of freezing medium (saline water), temperatures, salt concentration in the
3
==PAGE:18==
4
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
freezing medium and concrete composition, mostly the air content and the w/c ratio.
A freezing medium is necessary for the frost scaling to occur, as there needs to be a liquid
to transform into ice and thereby damage the concrete.
Rain water and melted snow are the most common freezing media, as these are what usually
appears on an outdoor surface during a winter. These freezing mediums are mixed with
the de-icing salt and creates a solution with an unknown concentration. This concentration
has a large impact on the severity of the damages and through experiments, it has been
shown that approximately 3 % NaCl, by weight, is the most damaging concentration when
speaking of frost scaling (Verbeck and Klieger, 1957). NaCl is the most used de-icing salt
in Northern Europe and is also the most used salt for frost resistance experiments.
The inﬂuence of temperatures has been investigated through lab experiments as well and
they show that the damages increases if the temperatures fall below -10 ◦C. They also
show that if the period with low temperatures is increased, so will the damages (Valenza
and Scherer, 2007).
Even with this information about how the salt frost scaling occurs, there is no ﬁnal and
accepted theory that explains exactly how the frost damage occurs. Four different theories
are currently debated and they are explained in the following section. The four theories
are listed below with the year of origin:
• Ice lens growth (Collins, 1944)
• Hydraulic pressure (Powers, 1945)
• Osmotic pressure (Powers and Helmut, 1953)
• Glue spalling (Valenza and Scherer, 2007)
2.2.1
Ice lens growth
In 1944, A.R. Collins did a study on which mechanism caused the frost damages on
low quality, highly porous concrete. Through this study, it was discovered that severe
frost damages in concrete behaved the same way as soil exposed to the phenomenon frost
heaving, which is a mechanism in soils due to frost damage (Collins, 1944). The theory
behind the mechanism is that freezing water inside the spaces of a material has different
behavior than "free" freezing water. Because of this, the freezing point inside the pores
in the concrete is depressed as function of the pore sizes, due to this, water will freeze in
the larger pores ﬁrst. This means that in materials with varying pore sizes like concrete
and soil, the water will freeze in the large pores ﬁrst, and the ice crystals will then attract
the unfrozen water from the smaller pores. The ice crystals will grow parallel to the heat
ﬂow, which is parallel to the surface and not necessarily in the direction with the least
==PAGE:19==
2.2. FROST DAMAGE THEORIES
5
resistance (Collins, 1944). The ice crystals will continue to grow until there is no water
supply available or the pressure is high enough to cause the freezing point to fall below the
given temperature. The damage caused to the concrete by this mechanism is considered
to be caused less by the initial increase of volume of the water due to freezing and more
by the growth of the ice crystals afterwards. (Collins, 1944). Damage occurs if the large
pores are completely ﬁlled with ice and the water is still available from the small pores,
and the concrete does not have the required strength to withstand the pressure from the
ice. As the ice lenses are parallel to the concrete surface, this pressure will cause the ice to
push a ﬂake of concrete towards the surface and the ﬂake will separate from the rest. This
is shown in Figure 2.1.
FIGURE 2.1: A concrete ﬂake pushed away from surface due to ice lens growth (Collins, 1944).
The following six conditions are, according to Collins, reasons for severe frost damages,
because of ice lens growth in concrete (Collins, 1944):
• Concrete of low strength.
• Concrete of high total porosity with a sufﬁcient proportion of small air voids.
• High initial moisture content.
• Access to unfrozen water on the side remote from freezing, either outside or inside
the concrete.
• Temperatures several degrees below the freezing point of the capillary liquid in the
mass of the concrete.
• Freezing over a period long enough to allow the movement of water required to form
the ice layers.
==PAGE:20==
6
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
2.2.2
Hydraulic pressure
The hydraulic pressure theory states that frost damages is caused by a buildup of
hydraulic pressure from the resistance to ﬂow of unfrozen water in cement paste capillaries.
As the water freezes, the volume increases by 9 % and either the cement paste has to
expand to accommodate it or the unfrozen water will be pushed through the capillary pores,
away from the freezing surface. Usually a mix of both happens.
During the freezing of the water, the hydraulic pressure is generated and its magnitude
is dependent on the distance to an "escape boundary" for the water (Powers and Helmut,
1953). These "escape boundaries" are usually the actual surface of the concrete or air voids
inside the concrete. This is why creating a concrete with higher air content, i.e. with more
air voids, will make the concrete more frost resistant.
Figure 2.2 shows how the water will act in the following two cases: If the ice is forming in
a capillary void (a), the remaining water will be pushed towards an air void, because of the
expansion of the freezing water. If the ice is created inside an air void (b), it will attract
the capillary water and until this water starts to freeze as well, there will be no increased
pressure on the capillary wall.
FIGURE 2.2: Schematic drawing of ice forming inside concrete in (a) capillary voids and (b) an
air void (Mehta and Monteiro, 2006).
==PAGE:21==
2.2. FROST DAMAGE THEORIES
7
2.2.3
Osmotic pressure
The osmotic pressure theory states that during freezing, water moves from the gel
pores to the capillary pores, due to diffusion along concentration gradients (Powers and
Helmut, 1953).
When a solution freezes, only the pure water freezes, and thus the concentration of the rest
of the solution increases. This creates a concentration gradient from the low concentrations
in the gel pores to the high concentrations in the capillary pores. This creates a ﬂow of
water from the gel pores to the capillary pores, and this osmotic movement generates
pressure, which leads to stresses in the concrete.
2.2.4
Glue spalling
Unlike the previous theories, glue spalling addresses only frost scaling. This theory
can therefore not describe all frost damages alone as it has no explanation of how the
internal cracks occurs.
The glue spall theory suggests that when saline water freezes on a concrete surface, a
bi-material of ice and concrete forms the same way as epoxy and glass does in Figure 2.3.
FIGURE 2.3: Schematic representation of the glue spall mechanism. (a) Sandblasted glass surface,
(b) Epoxy/glass composite at initial temperature, T0, and (c) Interface of composite, illustrating the
islands of epoxy and the thin scallops of glass removed when T<<T0. (Valenza and Scherer, 2007).
As the temperature of the composite material decreases, the ice layer contracts ﬁve
times as much as the concrete. As a result of this, the ice layer will crack due to the
tension imposed by the rigid concrete surface. It is possible to predict the behavior of
==PAGE:22==
8
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
the cracks, and whether or not the ice layer will penetrate the concrete surface, using
fracture mechanics. This indicates that crack penetration and the depth which the crack
turns parallel to the composite surface, is dictated by the mechanical properties of the
related materials. Therefore, if the concrete is uniform, each freezing cycle will result in a
relatively constant amount of scaling.
The strength of the surface has a large impact on the scaling, since the estimated glue
spall stress is bordering on the tensile strength of the cement which is around 3 MPa. Any
treatment of the surface expected to weaken it will therefore result in more scaling. Valenza
and Scherer showed that the amount of scaling is proportional with the area of cement in
the surface. This indicates that aggregates can prevent a crack penetration (Valenza and
Scherer, 2007).
Concrete with higher air content, has the ability to contract when freezing occurs, and
this leads to a thermal expansion closer to the one of ice, compared to concrete with low
air content. Therefore, air entrained concrete leads to less cracking (Valenza and Scherer,
2007).
2.3
Thermodynamics
As the study is partly based on heat transfer calculations in Comsol, the basic thermal
physics present in the problem is explained.
Heat transfer
Most publications describe three modes of heat transfer: thermal conduction, convec-
tion and thermal radiation (von Böckh and Wetzel, 2012).
Thermal conduction occurs in materials when a temperature gradient is present. The
heat transfer due to thermal conduction in non moving materials depends only on the
temperature gradient and material properties.
Heat transfer between a static material and a moving ﬂuid occurs by thermal conduction,
which in this case is more commonly known as convection. Convective heat transfer is
usually the dominant form of heat transfer in liquids and gasses.
Thermal radiation can occur without any contact between the surfaces. Surfaces and gasses
emit energy in form of electromagnetic waves. Thermal radiations is the result of the
exchanged electromagnetic waves between two surfaces with different temperatures (von
Böckh and Wetzel, 2012).
==PAGE:23==
2.3. THERMODYNAMICS
9
Thermal conductivity
Thermal conductivity describes a materials ability to conduct heat. Heat transfer
happens at a higher rate through materials with a high thermal conductivity. Thermal
conductivity is a tensor which means it can have different values in different directions.
However, all the materials used in the following experiments and ﬁnite element models,
are isotropic. The thermal conductivity is deﬁned from the following:
k = Q · L
A · ∆T
(2.1)
Where:
• k is the thermal conductivity, [W/(m·K)].
• Q is the amount of heat that transfers through the material per time, [W].
• A is the area of the body, [m2]
• ∆T is the temperature difference, [K].
• L is the length the heat passes through, [m].
Speciﬁc heat capacity
Speciﬁc heat capacity Cp is the amount of heat required to change the temperature of a
mass of a substance one degree as shown in following expression.
Cp =
Q
m · ∆T
(2.2)
where:
• Q is the quantity of heat [J].
• m is the mass, [kg].
The symbol of speciﬁc heat capacity can also be on known as c, but for sake of consistency,
the Comsol-notation has been chosen.
Phase change
When a material changes phase, it either releases or absorbs heat, known as latent heat.
When going from liquid to solid, water will release heat, and the sign in Equation 2.3 will
then be positive, and going from solid to liquid the sign will be negative. The speciﬁc
latent heat for water is Lf = 334 · 103 J/kg. In the following expression, the required
energy for a phase change for a given mass is shown (Young and Freedman, 2007).
Q = ±m · Lf
(2.3)
==PAGE:24==
10
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
Supercooling
Supercooling deﬁnes the state when a material is cooled below its freezing point
without solidiﬁcation. Quick cooling contributes to keep a material supercooled at lower
degrees than otherwise. The state is unstable and small movements or contact with other
particles can therefore trigger crystallization, which is the solidiﬁcation process. When the
crystallization happens, the surrounding temperatures of the solid material will rise a little
due to the energy released for the solidiﬁcation, called the latent heat, as explained earlier.
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 3
Ice formation test
3.1
Introduction
This experiment is designed to investigate how a volume of a NaCl solution freezes, to
gain a better understanding of how the ice is formed in the freeze-thaw test.
When saline water freezes, it is only the pure water of the solution that freezes and
the concentration of the non-frozen solution therefore increases, as there will be less
water, but the same amount of NaCl. This means that the freezing point of the remaining
liquid decreases. The experiment is made to investigate how the concentration of NaCl is
distributed throughout the ice piece.
It is expected that the ice will start forming in the top of a volume of water when subjected
to cooling. In theory, this should be the case for both cooling from the top and from
the bottom. However, this is when the water is cooled inﬁnitely slow, so the water have
enough time to move according to its density. In the freeze-thaw experiment conducted,
the cooling will not be inﬁnitely slow, and the water is a 3 % NaCl solution. This means
the freezing point will be different from pure waters and the density at the freezing point
of the solution will therefore also be different from pure waters. Because of the parameters
just mentioned, it is not certain how the ice will form if the water will be cooled from the
bottom and therefore spreading colder temperatures from the opposite side than where
the freezing is expected to initiate. The experiment will therefore be conducted with both
freezing from the top and from the bottom.
11
==PAGE:26==
12
CHAPTER 3. ICE FORMATION TEST
3.2
Theory
3.2.1
Ice formation of pure water
When water is cooled below its freezing point, it will start to form ice in the top of
the water. The reason for this is that the density of water is lowered when its temperature
decreases from 4◦C to 0 ◦C, as shown on Figure 3.1. Thus, the water with the lowest
temperature will be at the top of the water during freezing. As the density of ice is lower
than the density of water, the ice will remain at the top of the water. The density change is
approximately 0.1 ‰, making the gradient low, which it needs to be for the temperature as
well for the lower density water to move to the top.
FIGURE 3.1: The density of water dependent on the temperature (E. R. Pounder 1965).
3.2.2
Ice formation of saline water
If a solution consisting of water and salt is frozen inﬁnitely slowly, the foreign ions
from the salt will remain in the liquid and pure ice will be formed (Pounder, 1965). Faster
freezing rates will not result in complete rejection of the salt as some of it will be trapped
in pockets inside the ice. Therefore, this process is highly dependent on the rate which the
water is frozen.
==PAGE:27==
3.2. THEORY
13
3.2.3
Freezing point depression
Any solution, where the solvent is pure water, will have a lower freezing point than
pure water, because of the extra molecules in the solution. The lowering of the freezing
point is called freezing point depression. The decreased freezing point of the solution is
directly proportional to the mass percentage of the solute (for example NaCl). There is two
different formulas to calculate the change in freezing point, but both of these are developed
for solutions of low concentrations. Instead of this, empirical values for mass percentages
up to 22 % are used and for the sake of interpolation and extrapolation, a ﬁtted curve is
used, with the following expression:
∆TF = 0.0006 · m3
% + 0.0001 · m2
% + 0.5998 · m% −0.0141
(3.1)
With this formula, the freezing point depression is for 3 % NaCl calculated to 1.96 K.
In this situation, H2O is the solvent, NaCl is the solute and together they form the solution.
Eutectic point
The eutectic point of a solution is the lowest possible freezing/melting point. For NaCl
and water, the eutectic point is -21.1 ◦C, as shown in Figure 3.2. If the temperature in the
solution falls below -21.1 ◦C, there is only solid salt and ice. The temperature development
the cabinets have been set to follow has a lowest temperature of -20 ◦C.
FIGURE 3.2: Phase diagram of mixture consisting of water and NaCl showing the eutectic point
(Clark, 2005).
==PAGE:28==
14
CHAPTER 3. ICE FORMATION TEST
3.3
Materials and methods
The test is conducted by pouring the solutions into a popsicle tray in a box, ﬁlled with
insulation and placing this inside a freezing cabinet.
Over the tray, a plastic sheet is placed, to make sure that there will be no evaporation of
the liquid. The sheet is placed as close to the surface as possible, to avoid an insulating
layer of air between the liquid and the cooling.
The insulation used, is polystyrene spheres as these are very handy to use in a case like
this. They are poured into the box where the tray will be placed.
3.3.1
Setup
The shape of the popsicle molds are cones, and the cross sections are therefore not
constant through the height. However, this is not an issue as this experiment is made to
investigate the tendency.
The freezing cabinet is set to -20 ◦C and the solutions are poured at room temperature,
so they will experience a rather rapid cooling. -20 ◦C is chosen as this is the lowest
temperature that will be used in the cycle of the freeze-thaw test.
The NaCl distribution is planned to be found using two methods: titration and color
indication using potassium permanganate. The titration is conducted with an autotitrator,
which ﬁnds the amount of Cl−ions there is in a given test specimen.
To gain a visual indication of the NaCl-distribution in the ice, potassium permanganate
(KMnO4) is added into the solution. It has a strong purple color, even in small amounts
and will therefore colorize the whole solution. The use potassium permanganate is ad-
vantageous, as it will also have less inﬂuence on the chemical processes. This is an extra
safety precaution, as it is already known that the KMnO4 will not react with the NaCl, but
it may have other unknown inﬂuences. KMnO4 is a salt like NaCl, and it will therefore
behave the same way, meaning it will physically be in the same positions, so if it can be
seen that one place has a dark color, this will mean that it also has a high concentration of
NaCl, compared to the rest. This will be utilized after the specimens are frozen and the
color spectre can be seen.
The test is done for solutions of NaCl and de-mineralised water with three different con-
centrations: 0%, 3 % and 10 %. Furthermore each of the test solutions are conducted with
and without potassium permanganate.
The test will be split into two sub-tests: Cooling from above and cooling from below.
To cool it from above, the box is ﬁlled with spheres and the tray is placed inside the box
==PAGE:29==
3.3. MATERIALS AND METHODS
15
and the spheres is ﬁlled around it, insulating it from all sides, but the top.
Figure 7.4c shows a conceptual drawing of the test setup.
(a) Cooling from above.
(b) Cooling from below.
FIGURE 3.3: The two setups for the ice formation experiments.
Figure 7.4b shows a conceptual drawing of the test setup for cooling from below.
Holes are cut in the box so that a part of the tray sticks through the box and the spheres are
then poured over the tray.
The box itself is hanging from the grates inside the cabinet from strings.
To gain additional information about the ice formation, the temperatures are measured
in the top and the bottom of the solution volume. The temperature developments gives
==PAGE:30==
16
CHAPTER 3. ICE FORMATION TEST
an indication of where and when the ice is formed and can also be compared with the
results from the titration. Thermocouples, which are the temperature measuring devices
connected to the datalogger, are attached to the popsicle tray using tape.
In Figure 3.4, it is seen how the thermocouples are placed. The one in the top is placed a
few millimeters below the top as the liquid will not be ﬁlled to the absolute maximum of
the volume. The lower one is not placed all the way to the bottom as it needs to be possible
to cut a piece of the ice off for titration and it would in that case get in the way of that.
The placements are not measured, as "top" and "bottom" is sufﬁcient to see different
temperature developments.
FIGURE 3.4: Placement of thermocouples inside popsicle tray.
The box is taken out of the freezing cabinet when it is assumed to have reached
equilibrium.
Small portions of the ice is then cut off to be used for titration, one from the bottom and
one from the top. The masses used are between 0.20 g and 2.00 g for 3 % NaCl and
between 0.10 and 0.60 g for 10 %. These masses are calculated from the reaction between
NaCl and AgNO3, the calculations can be found in Appendix B.
The larger ice sample taken, the more NaCl is in it and the more AgNO3 is required to
ﬁnd the Cl−content.
The ice samples are placed in individual vessels and 10 mL HNO3 is added (in each),
because the titration needs an acidic environment for the reaction to occur. De-mineralised
water is added so that the total volume of the solutions now is 150 mL and the samples are
ready for titration.
==PAGE:31==
3.4. RESULTS
17
3.3.2
Calibration of the autotitrator
As with many other measuring devices, measuring uncertainties occurs when using an
autotitrator to investigate the NaCl concentration. To counter this, calibration is conducted
before every ﬁrst titration. This is done by titrating a known concentration, with 1 mL 0.1
N NaCl until the result converges to any value close to 1 mL. The error from the known
correct answer will then be corrected for in all the following titrations.
The solution that is used for the calibration is as following:
• 1 mL of 0.1 N HMNO3
• 1 mL of 0.1 N NaCl
• 60 mL of H2O (de-mineralised)
This procedure is repeated at least three times to ensure that the results will be satisfying.
The results of the calibrations can be seen in Appendix C.
3.4
Results
To evaluate the results from the tests, control measurements has been made of the three
solutions. They are individually titrated before freezing, Table 3.1 shows the results of
these titrations. The table shows that there is up to 14.6 % deviation from the expected
concentrations to the measured. The fact that they are lower and not higher, excludes the
possibility of evaporation being the source of the deviation. It is also not expected that
the autotitrator has made a consequent error of that magnitude, due to the calibrations
yielding results with a signiﬁcantly lower deviation. A possibility could be that because of
the very small sample sizes due to the high concentrations, high precision of the scale is
essential. If this experiment was to be conducted again, it would be beneﬁcial to dilute the
concentrations before titration, to make the precision of the scale less inﬂuential.
Table 3.1: Control measurements of the NaCl solutions.
Planned NaCl-concentration [%]
Titrated NaCl-concentration [%]
0
0.00247
3
2.56
10
8.67
The results from the experiments are compared to the measured concentrations, as they
are expected to be the concentrations the solutions had before they were frozen.
==PAGE:32==
18
CHAPTER 3. ICE FORMATION TEST
The results are shown in Figure 3.5, comparing results from cooling from above and
below. The concentration plots are only shown for the popsicles without potassium perman-
ganate as it is not known if it has any effect on the the Cl−ions content, and is therefore
an error source.
0 %
3 %
10 %
(a)
Color
indication
of
KMnO4. Cooling from above.
(b)
Color
indication
of
KMnO4. Cooling from below.
(c)
Color
indication
of
KMnO4. Cooling from below.
(d) Measured concentrations.
(e) Measured concentrations.
(f) Temperature cooling from
below.
(g) Temperature cooling from
below.
(h) Temperature cooling from
below.
(i) Temperature cooling from
above.
(j) Temperature cooling from
above.
(k) Temperature cooling from
above.
FIGURE 3.5: Figures of the frozen popsicles with KMnO4 for all three concentrations, measured
concentrations in the bottom and top of the 3 % and 10 % concentrations, temperatures during
cooling for both cooling from above and below for all three concentrations.
==PAGE:33==
3.4. RESULTS
19
0 %
The color indication shows light colors in the top and increasingly darker towards the
bottom. This consists with the expectation of the popsicle freezing from the top, moving
the KMnO4 downwards. However, it is not certain that this is due to the freezing or gravity.
The concentration diagram for the popsicles with 0 % concentration has not been showed
as it is 0 and therefore gives no relevant information.
The graph with cooling from below, shows that the temperatures is lowest at the bottom
during freezing which indicates freezing from the bottom.
In the cooling from above graph, the temperatures in the top and the bottom are closer and
during freezing, the popsicle is coldest at the top, indicating freezing from the top.
3 %
The color indication shows a relatively uniform distribution, but with less at the top
which indicates that it has been freezing from above.
The concentration diagram shows that the average concentration is high compared to the
non frozen solution. It also shows that for cooling from above and below, the concentration
of the popsicle is highest in the bottom which indicates freezing from the top.
The temperature graphs shows that during cooling from below, the bottom temperature
passes the the freezing point ﬁrst. This shows that they have frozen from the bottom, which
is conﬂicting with the results from the photo and the concentration diagrams.
During cooling from above, the bottom temperature passes the freezing point ﬁrst again.
This contradicts with theory, as it was expected to be the opposite.
10 %
The color indication shows a uniform distribution of potassium permanganate. Due
to the high NaCl concentration, the texture of the popsicle is less solid and broke when
leaving the tray, which means some of the popsicle cannot be photo analysed.
In the concentration diagram, it can be seen that the average concentration is low compared
to the non-frozen solution as all of them are lower. This is a closed system so the overall
concentration cannot change. The results could look this way, due to how the samples
were taken. With samples of this size it is difﬁcult to ensure that they are representative. A
low average concentration indicates that the samples taken are with few NaCl pockets.
For both the graph with cooling from above and from below, a higher concentration in the
bottom is shown. This indicates freezing from the top as theory states. The temperature
graphs shows that for both cooling from above and below, the freezing starts in the bottom,
which is conﬂicting with the concentration diagrams.
==PAGE:34==
20
CHAPTER 3. ICE FORMATION TEST
3.5
Conclusion
From the experiment, it can be concluded that the concentration of NaCl in a a vessel
does not move away from the side where the crystallisation is initialized. It can also be
concluded that NaCl is affected by gravity as the concentrations were higher towards the
bottom. Based on the temperature graphs, all the solutions with NaCl in, the freezing
started from the bottom. This indicates that the tray were not insulated sufﬁcient from the
bottom when cooling from above.
==PAGE:35==
CHAPTER 4
Preparation of concrete test
specimens
The casting of concrete has been conducted according to DS/CEN/TS 12390-9, which
is a standard that describes how to measure the frost resistance of hardened concrete. At
least four specimens, per concrete mixture, are required according to the standard and the
demands to the curing procedure is explained by the standard as well.
As the air content has a large inﬂuence on the frost damages in concrete, two different
concrete mixtures are to be made: one with natural air content and one with higher. The
concrete mixes are in every other way identical. The experiment is a freeze-thaw test,
which is a slight modiﬁcation of the slab test (reference method) from DS/CEN/TS 12390-
9. It is a test made to investigate if a concretes degree of frost resistance, by measuring how
much mass scale off after respectively 28 and 56 freeze-thaw cycles. These temperature
cycles are deﬁned to be within the limits of the standards.
4.1
Materials
The concrete is designed to have a water to cement ratio (w/c ratio) at 0.45. This
ratio has been chosen as higher ratios leads to more scaling which makes it easier to see
tendencies in the results. 0.45 is the maximum allowed ratio for concrete exposed to
chlorides in the Danish Annex. The mix is without addition of ﬂy ash, silica fume or other
partial replacements for cement. The aggregates used are Storebaelt-sand and two sizes of
granite: 4-8 mm and 8-11 mm in diameters. To get a higher air content than the natural,
Mapeair 50 is used to increase it. The amount of Mapeair 50 used, is 0 % for the mixture
with natural air content and 0.0199 % for the one with a slight frost resistance.
21
==PAGE:36==
22
CHAPTER 4. PREPARATION OF CONCRETE TEST SPECIMENS
The mix design calculated to cast 1 m2 concrete, in ssd-state, are shown in Table 4.1.
Table 4.1: Mix design of 1 m3 concrete.
Constituent
Type
Size
Density
Mass
Volume
Absorption
[mm]
[kg/m3]
[kg]
[m3]
[%]
Cement
AaP Rapid®
-
3140
478.9
0.153
-
Water
Tap water
-
1000
215.5
0.216
-
Air
Natural
-
-
-
0.012
-
Sand
Sea dredged, class E
0-4
2640
831.0
0.315
0.2
Stone
Granite, class E
4-8
2710
166.2
0.061
0.6
Stone
Granite, class E
8-11
2720
664.8
0.244
0.6
Total
2356.4
1.000
As this mix design is for ssd-state, and the constituents are not necessarily in this state,
moisture tests for the aggregates have to be made and accounted for in the mix design. The
moisture of the aggregates can vary from day to day depending on their storage and the
surrounding climate. For every time casting is done, moisture tests of the aggregates are
conducted, including the sand and the two types of granite.
The dry states of the aggregates are by taking an amount of each aggregate, approximately
150 g, and heat this up in a microwave oven until it is completely dry. The weight is
noted during the drying, which is done in several steps, in total 20-30 minutes, and by this
method the percentile weight of the water is found by subtracting the dry weight from the
wet and is adjusted for in the total mixture.
Figure 4.1 shows the aggregates before they were inserted in the microwave. Along with
the aggregates, a glass of water is placed to avoid damages on the microwave oven.
FIGURE 4.1: Setup of the moisture test, before drying.
==PAGE:37==
4.2. CASTING PROCESS
23
4.2
Casting process
In total, two batches of concrete of each 35 l have been made, resulting in four cylinders
that was made into specimens to be used for freeze-thaw testing. They have a diameter
of 150 mm and are 300 mm high. The casting moulds are lubricated with oil before the
concrete is poured into them, to make it easier to dismantle them when the concrete has
hardened. For each batch, both air content analysis and slump-testing has been made to
evaluate the quality of the concrete.
The materials are weighed with 1 g precision and then the MapeAir50 is mixed into
the water, for the one where it was added. The dry materials are poured into a 60 L
mixer and are mixed for 1 minute, before the water is added and mixed for additional
3 minutes. When the concrete is mixed, it is placed in the casting molds as well as the
pressuremeter and the cone for the slump-testing. All of them, except the cone are placed
on a vibrator-table until mixed sufﬁciently.
The air content and the slump investigations are conducted and the cylinders are placed in
a horizontal position to harden for 24 hours.
Slump
The slump is found using the cone test. Slump gives an indication of the workability or
consistency of the concrete. The cone test is the most simple workability test for concrete,
it involves low cost and provides immediate results (Gopal Mishra, 2017). The method is
explained in depth in Appendix D.
Air content
The air content of the concrete batches are tested as they are cast. The method used
to determine the air content, is the pressure method, which utilizes Boyle’s law, stating
that the air volume is proportional to the applied pressure (Wilson, 2010). The method is
explained in depth in Appendix E.
As an additional check of the air content in the mixture, the bottom half of the
pressuremeter is weighed before and after being ﬁlled with concrete. The volume of the
pressuremeter is known as 8 L, and the density is found. The density of the ingredients in
the concrete is known and the air content can therefore be determined from the difference
between the measured density and the calculated density. In Equation 4.1, this calculation
==PAGE:38==
24
CHAPTER 4. PREPARATION OF CONCRETE TEST SPECIMENS
can be seen, with ρcalculated being 2356.4 kg/m3.
Aircontent = ρcalculated −ρmeasured
ρcalculated
· 100 %
(4.1)
The air content of the two concrete mixes, from both the pressuremeter and the density
calculation can be seen in Table 4.2.
Table 4.2: Air content of the two mixtures, from both methods.
Pressure meter [%]
Density calculation [%]
1.6
-0.386
3.6
1.735
As the table shows, the results from the two methods are rather far from each other and
one of the air contents is even calculated as negative which is not physically possible. This
is likely due to the fact that the densities of the aggregates are given with an uncertainty.
This uncertainty however, should give an offset of the result, as the difference remain
the same for both mixtures. To check if this is the case, the results has been plotted in
Figure 4.2 together with the optimal case, where the calculated air content is equal to the
measured. The optimal gives a linear curve that crosses (0,0) with a slope of 1.
FIGURE 4.2: Graph comparing the two air content methods.
The graph shows, that the slope is close to the ideal 1, with an offset of approximately
2 % air content. This indicates that both methods are comparable, but with an offset due to
densities given from distributor. Throughout the rest of the project, the air content from
the pressuremeter are the used.
==PAGE:39==
4.3. CONCRETE CHARACTERISTICS
25
4.3
Concrete characteristics
The Mapeair 50 content is calculated as a ratio of the cement mass added in the con-
crete. Mapei, which is the producer of the product, recommends 0.05-0.3 % of the cement
mass to create a frost resistant concrete. As this study is made to investigate frost damages
in the concrete Mapeair 50 content is decided to be the lower than the recommendation.
Table 4.3 shows the slumps, air contents and amounts of Mapeair 50 of the two batches.
Table 4.3: Slump, air content and MapeAir 50 content of the two concrete mixtures.
Batch #
Slump [mm]
Air content [%]
MapeAir [‰]
1
38
1.6
0
2
70
3.6
0.199
The table shows that the slump increases with the added air entraining mixture, however
the slump can vary a lot from batch to batch, the tolerance of slump variations is +/- 30
mm according to DS-2426, which the values are within.
4.4
Curing and preparation
After hardening for 24 hours, the specimens are demoulded and placed in a bath with
water at approximately 20 ◦C for 6 days. After this, they are moved to a climate chamber,
with a relative humidity of 65 % and a temperature of (20 +/-2) ◦C, where they will stay
for 14 days, and is then cut into the wanted specimen sizes. Following the standard, the
wanted height of the specimens is 50 mm +/- 2 mm. Each cylinder is sawed into four
specimens, as it can be seen in Figure 4.3. The kerf of the saw blade is 4 mm thick, and
this has to be taken into account when measuring before sawing. The outer parts of the
cylinder cannot be used as these are not representative, because the edges will have more
cement paste than the rest of the cylinder, due to wall effects. It is assumed that it will
be normalized approximately 0.5-1 times the diameter of the largest aggregates, from the
ends of the cylinder. The largest aggregate is 8-11 mm granite stones and the conservative
value of minimum distance to the edge is therefore 11 mm. With four pieces of each 50
mm height and including the kerf of 4 mm, there is 40 mm left on each side, which is
acceptable.
The specimens are divided into two pairs per cylinder, with each pair having the same
surface, used as test surface, as it is shown on the ﬁgure. For example the arrows on
Specimen A and Specimen B indicates that they "share" a surface and the surface to which
the arrows points, will be the test surface.
==PAGE:40==
26
CHAPTER 4. PREPARATION OF CONCRETE TEST SPECIMENS
FIGURE 4.3: Design of how each cylinder is sawed.
The actual heights of the used specimens are shown in Table 4.4. It is seen that they all
comply with the requirements of (50 +/-2) mm from DS/CEN/TS 12390-9.
The naming of the specimens is "#cut", where "#" is the air content of the current concrete
and "cut" is their original placement in the cylinder, as it is shown on Figure 4.3.
Table 4.4: Measured heights of test specimens.
Specimen name
Height [mm]
1.6A1
50.52
1.6A2
49.58
1.6B1
49.14
1.6B2
48.26
1.6C1
51.00
1.6C2
48.58
1.6D1
48.72
1.6D2
51.09
3.6A1
49.86
3.6A2
51.03
3.6B1
49.81
3.6B2
51.22
3.6C1
49.16
3.6C2
49.51
3.6D1
49.58
3.6D2
49.28
==PAGE:41==
4.4. CURING AND PREPARATION
27
Four days after sawing, rubber sheets are glued on. This is done by applying a primer
(Dow Corning® 1200 os Primer Clear), that has to dry for 15 minutes before the glue can
be applied. The sides are glued on and the bottom as well, leaving only the top surface
free. The purpose of the rubber is to make sure that the water, that will be applied for the
actual testing, will stay on the test surface of the concrete. For the same reason a string of
glue is placed along the perimeter of the top of the concrete.
Three days later, the specimens are removed from the climate chamber for saturation with
de-ionised water. A layer of water is placed with a height of 3 mm on top of the concrete
specimens. Is checked up on every 24 hours, for three days, to make sure there is no
leakages. The volume that will result in 3 mm for the given cross section is calculated.
The volume is approximately 53 mL, this is measured and poured onto the specimens.
After three days of saturation, the specimens are ready to be put into the freezing cabinets.
==PAGE:42==
==PAGE:43==
CHAPTER 5
Freeze-thaw test
The purpose of this test is to have data to compare with the ﬁnite element model.
Along with this, the purpose is also to investigate how different air contents and also
different temperature regulations in the freezing cabinets will impact the frost scaling of
concrete. The test is a modiﬁcation of the reference method from DS/CEN/TS 12390-9.
The geometry of the specimens has been changed from cubic to cylindrical, which changes
the geometry of the moulds used for casting concrete.
The concrete is exposed to a freeze-thaw cycle in a freezing cabinet, but for this experiment,
two cabinets has been available. The minimum amount of concrete required from the
reference method has been doubled, so that the two cabinets can be compared.
5.1
Setup
The test specimens, used in this test, are cast and prepared as explained in Chapter 4.
After 3 days of saturation, the de-mineralised water is removed and replaced with an equal
volume of 3 % NaCl solution. They are placed in containers with room for them to be
isolated along the bottom and the sides. Figure 5.1 shows a specimen with insulation.
FIGURE 5.1: Test specimen in plastic container with insulation.
29
==PAGE:44==
30
CHAPTER 5. FREEZE-THAW TEST
To avoid evaporation of the saline water, a plastic sheet is placed on top of the specimens
and is secured with a rubber band.
The specimens are placed in the freezing cabinet, where they are subject to a freeze-thaw
cycle, with a speciﬁed temperature-function between 20 ◦C and -20 ◦C, lasting 24 hours.
The cycle is repeated 56 times and is explained in Section 5.2.
The scaling of the specimens is measured after respectively 7, 14, 28, 42 and 56 cycle
repetitions, as the standard requires. The actual method of how the frost scaling is measured
is explained in Section 5.4.
5.1.1
Freezing cabinets
Part of the testing is to compare the two freezing cabinets, by distributing the concrete
specimens equally between the cabinets. One cabinet is controlled by software from
Omron, which is a professional software that was installed along with the cabinet. The
program used is CX-Thermo and a guide of how to use it is shown in Appendix F.
The other cabinet uses a program made at DTU, in the program Labview. This program
controls the temperatures in a different manner.
CX-Thermo cabinet
The cabinet with the professional program from Omron will be referred to as the
Omron cabinet in this project. The program, CX-Thermo uses PID control to regulate
the temperatures in the cabinet. PID is an abbreviation for Proportional, Integral and
Derivative, which are three types of control actions, which the PID control is a mix of.
Figure 5.2 shows how each one of the control actions approaches the setpoint. The order
of the plots is Proportional, Integral and Derivative. And below these three, the plot of PID
control is seen.
FIGURE 5.2: Proportional, Integral and Derivative control actions results together in PID control.
==PAGE:45==
5.1. SETUP
31
Labview cabinet
The the cabinet with the program developed at DTU will be referred to as the Labview
cabinet in this project. It uses ON/OFF control for the temperatures. This means that it
can either be 100 % on or turned all the way off. It is on when the temperature is below
the set point and it will be turned off as soon as the temperature is above, for the heating
process and the opposite when the it is supposed to cool.
However, ON/OFF control can cause damage to the cabinet because rapid cycles of turning
off and on can be rough on contactors and valves. To avoid this, a deadband or "hysteris"
is added to the controller operations. This works as the cabinet will turn on a speciﬁc value
higher than the set point and turn off a speciﬁc value lower. This way the length of the
cycles is elongated by a predeﬁned amount.
Which specimens are placed in what cabinet is shown in Table 5.1.
Table 5.1: Test specimens’ placement in the freezing cabinets.
Specimen name
Omron-cabinet
Labview-cabinet
1.6A1
X
1.6A2
X
1.6B1
X
1.6B2
X
1.6C1
X
1.6C2
X
1.6D1
X
1.6D2
X
3.6A1
X
3.6A2
X
3.6B1
X
3.6B2
X
3.6C1
X
3.6C2
X
3.6D1
X
3.6D2
X
==PAGE:46==
32
CHAPTER 5. FREEZE-THAW TEST
5.2
Temperature cycle
The standard suggests a 24 hour long temperature cycle that represents an extreme ex-
ample of what could happen during a day in an actual freeze-thaw environment. Figure 5.3
shows the upper and lower limits of this cycle, the shaded area is the allowed temperatures
according to the standard. To make sure to stay within these boundaries the mean values
of upper and lower limits are chosen, which is the red, dashed line in the ﬁgure.
These temperatures are in the freezing medium (the solution of water and NaCl) and not in
the freezing chamber or in the concrete.
FIGURE 5.3: Temperature cycle applied to the freezing medium on top of the specimens.
5.3
Temperature measurement
To establish the correct boundary conditions for the ﬁnite element model, the tempera-
tures along the edge of some of the specimens are measured. Thermocouples are used for
this purpose, however a limited amount of these has been available for the testing. The
Labview cabinet used in the experiment has the possibility of connecting thermocouples
directly to its logger system, with up to seven sensors. The Omron cabinet has no availabil-
ity of connecting to any sensors, instead an external datalogger with three sensors is used.
It is decided to measure temperatures on three specimens. Each are measured at roughly
the bottom, the middle and the top. These three points per specimen will give sufﬁcient
==PAGE:47==
5.3. TEMPERATURE MEASUREMENT
33
knowledge of the temperature distribution throughout the height.
The two specimens in the Labview cabinet are chosen to be from the batch with the lowest
air content (1.6 %) and the last one in the other cabinet is from the other batch with 3.6
%. The reason for this, is that if the cabinets in fact are comparable, then it is desirable to
see if there is any remarkable difference between a large amount of scaling and a lesser
amount.
The specimens with thermocouples are: 1.6C1, 1.6C2 and 3.6A1.
The thermocouples are taped to the concrete before the rubber sheet is glued on, Figure
5.4 shows them before the rubber sheet is glued on. As seen on the ﬁgure, they bump out a
bit, which will cause the rubber sheet not to be as tightly secured and this causes a risk
that the water can run down the side of the specimen. To minimize this risk, additional
attention is given to the glue at the surface edge.
It was planned to use some more advanced ﬁber-sensors that would be developed for
this actual purpose. Unfortunately, the production of these experienced some problems
and were not available for this project. The advantages of using these would have been
a more delicate distribution of measuring points and more precise placements of these,
which would give more correct results to compare to the results from the FEM-model. The
ﬁber-sensors are thinner than the ones that were used, making them easier to mantle on the
concrete as well as lowering the risk of leakage.
FIGURE 5.4: Thermocouples attached to a concrete specimen along the height.
==PAGE:48==
34
CHAPTER 5. FREEZE-THAW TEST
The placements of the sensors are aimed to be set to approximately 1/6, 3/6 and 5/6 of
the specimen height, to ensure equal spacing between them. Placing one at the top and the
bottom would give a broader view of the temperature distribution, but this would cause
various problems. For example that the temperatures at the surfaces would be measured
as well, especially the upper one which would be measuring temperatures in the water as
well. Furthermore, it would not be possible to efﬁciently seal the top and keep the water
on the top surface. The placements of thermocouples can be found in Appendix G.
The temperatures are measured once every minute throughout the whole experiment.
5.4
Frost scaling measurement
The frost resistance of a given concrete is, according to the reference method, measured
by how much mass is scaling off per surface area after speciﬁc amount of temperature
cycles. As mentioned in Section 2.1, frost scaling is concrete ﬂakes that detach from the
surface and it will in this setup end in the saline water on the surface.
The scaled mass is gathered and measured with intervals according DS/CEN/TS 12390-9.
Filters are needed for the gathering and in this case coffee ﬁlters are used.
The collection process is as following:
• Filters are placed in an oven of 105 ◦C for at least 24 hours before the measuring is
planned. This is done to evaporate all ﬂuids from the ﬁlters.
• The ﬁlters are placed in glass vessels and ﬁlters and vessels are weighed together.
• The ﬁlters are one by one, put inside a funnel which rests inside a bowl, the setup
can be seen in Figure 5.5.
FIGURE 5.5: Collection setup of scaled concrete. Funnel, ﬁlter and bowl.
==PAGE:49==
5.4. FROST SCALING MEASUREMENT
35
• The saline water on top of each specimen is poured into their corresponding ﬁlter
and the remaining scaled material is rinsed from the surface, using a small hose,
which is connected to a faucet with de-mineralised water. It is made sure that the
pressure of the water jet is not so high that it will increase the damage done to the
concrete surface and it is made sure that the it is the same each time the frost scaling
is collected.
• The wet ﬁlters with scaled material are placed in the glass vessels and both are
put into the oven at 105 ◦C for 24 hours. All liquid and moisture is assumed to be
evaporated after 24 hours.
• The glass vessels, dry ﬁlters and dried scaled material are weighed. Figure 5.6 shows
the dry scaled mass of a specimen in a ﬁlter.
FIGURE 5.6: Scaled mass in ﬁlter after 24 hours of drying.
==PAGE:50==
36
CHAPTER 5. FREEZE-THAW TEST
5.5
Results
Figure 5.7 shows the cumulative scaling of all 16 specimens as a function of time.
They are plotted together to compare the ones with 1.6 % air content to the ones with 3.6
%. The specimens from the Labview cabinet are shown by black ﬁlls in the shapes and the
ones from the Omron cabinet have red/blue ﬁlls.
FIGURE 5.7: Cumulative scaled mass for all specimens, segregated in air contents.
The specimens with 1.6 % air content has overall scaled more than the ones with 3.6
%, which is expected as higher air content improves the concretes frost resistance. This
difference in cumulative scaling is seen on all specimens, apart from two: 1.6C1 and 1.6C2.
As mentioned in Section 5.3, these are two of the three specimens with thermocouples
attached. This unfortunately caused them to not be properly sealed and the saline water
has moved from the top surface of the concrete down the sides and out to the plastic vessel,
the specimen is placed in. This was discovered at each measurement, that there was no
more liquid on the surface of the specimens. The reasons for this leak is partly that the
thermocouples bump out, but also that they are secured with tape, which is difﬁcult for the
glue to attach to, due to the slick surface.
This means that there has been no freezing medium for a large amount of time during
the freezing periods and the frost scaling is therefore considerably lower than what they
potentially could have been.
Disregarding this, the scaling results corresponds with the expectations, that a concrete
==PAGE:51==
5.5. RESULTS
37
mixture with a higher air content will cause the concrete to have a higher frost resistance,
which can be seen as a lower amount of frost scaling.
Looking at the red curves, there is a tendency that their slopes are decreasing with time.
This also applies for the blue curves, but is not as visible on the ﬁgure. This decrease is
happening because of the two following reasons:
• As the frost scaling proceeds, the paste in the concrete is the ﬁrst to scale off, causing
the amount of paste compared to the whole surface area of the specimen to be lower.
With lower paste surface, the water will also have a lower contact surface with
scalable material. The aggregates will only detach if the paste around them has
scaled sufﬁciently for them to fall of during the collection procedure.
• The frost scaling of the paste happens on the whole surface, including the periphery
where glue has been placed to seal the edges of the specimens. As the scaling
proceeds, the glue will have less and less concrete to attach to and eventually it will
be glued to the rubber sheet and not sealing any of the concrete. At this point, the
freezing medium will be able to ﬂow down along the sides of the specimen, where
there is some glue, but not enough to keep it sealed. It is also seen in other cases
that the glue loses its strength when subjected to the repeated freeze and thaw cycles,
which makes it easier for the water to escape the closed system.
==PAGE:52==
38
CHAPTER 5. FREEZE-THAW TEST
5.5.1
Comparison of cabinets
Figure 5.8 shows the cumulated scaling of the specimens split in two graphs: one for
each air content, to visually compare the two freezing cabinets.
(a) Aircontent: 1.6 %
(b) Aircontent: 3.6 %
FIGURE 5.8: Cumulative scaled mass as function of time in days, for the two air contents. Red
curves: specimens in Omron cabinet. Blue curves: specimens in Labview cabinet.
In both Figure 5.8a and 5.8b, it can be seen that the specimens that have been in
the Omron cabinet have scaled more than the ones placed in the Labview cabinet. This
tendency is most evident on the specimens containing 3.6 % air. All the specimens in
==PAGE:53==
5.5. RESULTS
39
the Omron cabinet have scaled more than the ones in the Labview cabinet, Except the
specimen with thermocouples which has low scaling due to leakage.
The results from the specimens with 1.6 % air content is harder to interpret as the two
specimens with thermocouples have visibly lower scaled masses.
In order to determine if this tendency is statistically signiﬁcant, a t-test has been performed,
with signiﬁcance level on α=0.10. This is done with the data for 1.6 % and 3.6 % air
separately and the masses from 1.6D1, 1.6D2 and 3.6C1 are not included in the calculations
as they did not have the same circumstances as the rest. The test shows that there is no
signiﬁcant difference between the samples from the two cabinets for 3.6 % air content
with α=0.10. The calculations can be seen in Appendix H. The t-test is performed on very
few specimens, as the ones with thermocouples were removed from the calculations. The
low number of specimens means that the precision of the test is low.
==PAGE:54==
40
CHAPTER 5. FREEZE-THAW TEST
5.5.2
Temperatures
On the graphs, it looks like the test specimens from the Omron cabinet has more scaled
more than the ones from the Labview cabinet. The two cabinets are identical but with two
different systems to control the temperature. In order to analyse what makes this difference
between the two cabinets, a representative time period of 24 hours has been chosen and
the temperature in the water of a test specimen from each cabinet has been plotted and can
be seen in Figure 5.9.
FIGURE 5.9: Graphs of temperatures for both cabinets including temperature range allowed from
the reference method in DS/CEN/TS 12390-9. The temperatures are from a representative 24 hour
time period, chosen as 28th April to 29th April.
The ﬁgure shows that both cabinets complies with the temperature range from the
reference method. It also shows that the Omron cabinet is a few degrees colder than the
Labview cabinet during the cooling period. It is also seen that the temperature course of
the Labview cabinet is relatively stable, whereas the temperatures in the Omron cabinet is
more unstable.
Increasing watts of freezing cabinets, results in shorter peak times, which leads to less
scaling (Andersen, 2017). These peaks happen at the freezing point.
Due to the alternations in temperatures at the freezing point, it is likely that multiple peaks
happens for some of the cycles, which increases the overall peak time compared to the
Labview cabinet, thus resulting in more scaling.
==PAGE:55==
CHAPTER 6
FEM-modelling - Setup of the model
6.1
Introduction
The modelling of the temperature proﬁles of freezing concrete in the reference method,
covers heat transfer including phase change and depression of freezing point.
Comsol Multiphysics is an equation based ﬁnite element software. This makes it possible
to couple multiple physical problems and to add additional partial differential equations.
Because of this, Comsol has been chosen as the ﬁnite element software.
6.2
Calculation sequence
Figure 6.1 shows how the calculation sequence is set up for the model. The order in
which the calculations are done is crucial for the model to enact the actual situation. If
done incorrectly, the model will not yield the correct results in any case.
FIGURE 6.1: Map showing the calculation sequence for the Comsol-model.
41
==PAGE:56==
42
CHAPTER 6. FEM-MODELLING - SETUP OF THE MODEL
Below the calculation steps are elaborated:
0.
The initial values and properties are deﬁned. These include the geometry of the model,
the boundary conditions, the thermal and physical properties of the materials used and the
initial values for example the temperatures to t = 0.
1.
Using this information, the heat transfer calculations calculates the temperatures in every
point of the domain.
2.
Based on these temperatures, the Phase Change node calculates whether each point changes
phase or not. If a point changes phase, it acquires new material properties, that will be
used in the next time step. The phase change is active both in the water and in the concrete,
as the concrete is seen as a composite material consisting of concrete, water and air.
This phase change covers that the water in side can freeze and will therefore change the
properties for the whole material.
Also, when the phase change happens, heat will be released or absorbed, depending
on which phase it changes to. This heat is called latent heat and will have impact on
the temperatures on the surroundings which is taken into account in the heat transfer
calculations in the next time step. Afterwards the percentage of ice is calculated which
will give a new freezing point of the remaining liquid.
3.
When the new freezing point is calculated the time step is through and the next will start at
the heat transfer calculations.
6.3
Method of developing the model
For a numerical model to be reliable, it is necessary that it is validated. For complex
models, it is often not possible to calculate the results analytically, and the model therefore
has to be validated by other means. The model created to analyse the temperature proﬁles
in freezing concrete has been step-wise validated. This has been done by initially creating
a simple model with constant temperature instead of the temperature cycle and the various
additions to the model are tested one by one.
The results to the simple model can be validated analytically with the calculations shown
in Appendix I.1. Using this method, each part of the model can be added and checked
without any interference of other changes or new functions in the model.
Using the same thinking, a model of only the water layer is made, to establish the physical
occurrences in the water, before coupling it with the rest of the setup.
==PAGE:57==
6.4. MATERIALS
43
6.4
Materials
The materials present in the experimental setup are all deﬁned in the model: concrete,
water and Armaﬂex (insulation material).
In the model two extra materials are deﬁned: ice and frozen concrete, which represents
water and concrete below the freezing point.
All of these have different thermal properties, some of which are functions of the tempera-
ture. The geometry of the model with materials can be seen in Figure 6.2.
FIGURE 6.2: The mesh used for modelling temperature proﬁles.
6.4.1
Water and ice
This section concerns the saline water on top of the concrete specimen and not the pore
liquid that is inside it. The initial NaCl-concentration is set to 3 % and it will increase as
the water starts to freeze, see Section 6.5 for description of how it is implemented along
with the phase change between liquid and solid. Table 6.1 shows the used parameters for
water and ice.
Table 6.1: Material properties of ice and water implemented in the FEM-model (?).
ρ
k
Cp
Phase
[kg/m3]
[W/(m · K)]
[J/(kg · K)]
Water
1000
0.6
4180
Ice
918
1.6
2000
==PAGE:58==
44
CHAPTER 6. FEM-MODELLING - SETUP OF THE MODEL
6.4.2
Concrete
The heat capacity, Cp, and thermal conductivity, k, has been found experimentally
in an earlier project by Regitza Hansen (Hansen, 2015) for concrete with the same mix
design. However, these experiments were conducted at 20 ◦C, but are assumed constant
over the used temperature interval. This is a reasonable assumption as it can be seen in
Appendix J Table 6.2 shows the used parameters for concrete.
Table 6.2: Material properties for concrete implemented in the FEM-model(EngineeringToolBox,
2017a).
ρ
k
Cp
α
[kg/m3]
[W/(m · K)]
[J/(kg · K)]
[m/(m · K)]
2.19
2356.4
1680
14.5 · 10−6
Source
Calculated from mixture
Table values from EngineeringToolBox
The parameters from (Hansen, 2015) are tested for saturated concrete, which means
that there is free water inside it that can potentially freeze. And as ice has different thermal
properties than liquid water, this has to be taken into account in the model. This is done by
giving concrete different properties for respectively temperatures above waters freezing
point and below. This means, that the water itself, inside the concrete, will not be modelled
as this would require the pores to be modelled as well.
Powers’ model is used to investigate the water and air content of the concrete, see calcu-
lations and the diagram in Appendix K. The values calculated from Powers’ model is a
guess of the degree of hydration and water content.
From Powers’ model, the relative volumes of respectively capillary water and pores are
known and it is assumed that the remaining volume is nothing but concrete. Table 6.3
shows the results for the maximum degree of hydration, which is the state the concrete is
in when it is saturated.
Table 6.3: Relative volumes of the concrete,with a degree of hydration equal to 0.7.
Relative volumes [-]
α = 0.7
Capillary water
0.204
Gel water
0.174
Gel solid
0.441
Chemical shrinkage
0.058
Un-hydrated cement
0.124
The volume of the capillary water is 20.4 % of the total and the volume of the pores is
5.8 %. The sum of these is assumed to be the total water content in the concrete. These
==PAGE:59==
6.4. MATERIALS
45
are however calculated in relation to the cement volume and not the concrete volume and
the ratio between these two will be applied in the calculation of the concrete volume. The
calculation of this is shown in Equation 6.1 All the following calculations are done for the
concrete with 1.6 % air.
Vc = (1 −((Vcw + Vcs) · 0.153 + aircontent)) = 0.944
(6.1)
The concrete, together with the capillary water is viewed as a composite material and
their combined thermal properties are calculated as following example:
kC =
X
i=1
Viki
(6.2)
where:
• kC is the effective thermal conductivity of the composite material.
• Vi is the volume fraction.
• ki is the thermal conductivity of each composite phase.
It is only the capillary water that passes its freezing point in the speciﬁed temperature
range therefore changes its properties. It is required to know the properties of pure concrete,
without air and water in it, as this stays constant when the water changes phase. It is
expressed as the following example:
kconcrete = kcomposite −kwater · Vwater −kair · Vair
Vconcrete
(6.3)
Using the same formula, the properties of the capillary water can be changed to the ones
for ice, but with the same relative volume, and the properties of the composite can then be
solved for and found:
kfrozencomposite = kconcrete · Vconcrete + kice · Vwater + kair · Vair
(6.4)
The speciﬁc heat capacity and thermal conductivity for the composite material as frozen
and air, shown in Table 6.4. The values for water and ice are the same as mentioned in
Section 6.4.1.
Table 6.4: Thermal properties of capillary water, ice, air and concrete along with their combined,
both when the capillary water is liquid and frozen (EngineeringToolBox, 2017b).
Materials
Cp [J/(kg*K)]
k [W/(m*K)]
Air
1020
0.024
Concrete, without air and water
2529
2.29
Saturated concrete
1680
2.19
Frozen concrete
1652
2.23
==PAGE:60==
46
CHAPTER 6. FEM-MODELLING - SETUP OF THE MODEL
The impact of this implementation is a decrease in speciﬁc heat capacity of 1.65 % and
an increase in thermal conductivity of 1.83 % from un-frozen to frozen concrete. How the
phase change of the pore liquid is implemented is explained in Section 6.5.
6.4.3
Armaﬂex - Insulation
The insulation around the concrete specimen is assumed inﬁnitely good which means
there are no heat transfer through the boundaries. The insulation has still been modelled as
an individual material, with the same properties as the actual insulation material used in the
experiment, Armaﬂex. The properties are shown in Table 6.5, however, the speciﬁc heat
capacity of the material is not speciﬁed in its data sheet, instead the one of a well-known
insulation material is used instead, glass mineral wool. Glass mineral wool is far from the
same material, but differences in the speciﬁc heat capacity for the insulation has a small
impact on the ﬁnal result as the weight is low compared to the specimen.
Table 6.5: Material properties of Armaﬂex implemented in the FEM-model (Armacell, 2010).
k
ρ
Cp
[W/(m · K)]
[kg/m3]
[J/(kg · K)]
0.034
70.1
1030
6.5
Phase change
As explained in Section 3.2.2, the freezing point of a NaCl-solution is lower than pure
waters, and it decreases as the concentration of NaCl increases.
The phase change is made so that it is not happening bluntly, but “step-by-step”. This
is done by using the θ-function. θ is a smoothed function representing the fraction of phase
before transition, which is equal to 1 before Tpc-∆T/2 and to 0 after Tpc+∆T/2. Tpc is the
temperature, at which the phase will change. As the temperatures where θ is changing
from 0 to 1 or vice versa, is extended by ∆T, which is a temperature interval where the
phases are changing, to smoothen the transition out. Phase 1 is the solid (ice) phase and
phase 2 is liquid (water).
The density, the effective thermal conductivity and the speciﬁc heat capacity for the
water is dependent on which phase it is in and they are both calculated as functions of θ:
(ph1 is phase 1 and ph2 is phase 2)
ρ = θρph1 + (1 −θ)ρph2
(6.5)
==PAGE:61==
6.6. BOUNDARY CONDITIONS
47
k = θkph1 + (1 −θ)kph2
(6.6)
Cp = 1
ρ(θρph1Cp,ph1 + (1 −θ)ρph2Cp,ph2) + (Hph2 −Hph1)dαm
dT
(6.7)
Where H is the speciﬁc enthalpy, which is also dependent on the phase at a given point.
The mass fraction αm tells how much mass has changed from one phase to the other
and it is deﬁned from ρph1, ρph2 and θ according to:
αm = 1
2
(1 −θ)ρph2 −θρph1
ρ
(6.8)
αm is equal to -1/2 before transformation and 1/2 after transformation.
6.6
Boundary conditions
For the model to be sufﬁciently supported, all edges needs boundary conditions, in this
case where the Heat Transfer Module is used, the boundary conditions are temperatures as
load on the top surface. On the rest of the surfaces, the heat ﬂux has been set equal to zero.
6.6.1
Temperature load
One boundary is the surface of the water, which is exposed to cooling/heating from the
cabinet it is placed in. From each cabinet, the temperature development for one cycle is
taken from the cabinet data and applied to the surface. The temperature in the surface is
therefore ﬁxed to follow the same development as in the freezing cabinets. The temperature
data from the cabinet is made as interpolation functions in Comsol, called temp(t).
Temp(t) is in [K] and is a function of time that is put in with the unit [s].
==PAGE:62==
48
CHAPTER 6. FEM-MODELLING - SETUP OF THE MODEL
6.6.2
Insulation
On the remaining surfaces, the equation q0 = 0 has been applied, meaning that the heat
transfer through it is equal to 0. This assumption is entirely true as some heat will transfer
through the insulation. However, the heat transfer through the insulation is a fraction of
the transfer at the surface, which means the assumption should not affect the results much.
6.7
Heat transfer module
Heat equation
The heat equation describes the distribution of heat or variation in temperature in the
material and is the main equation of the model.
ρCp(δT
δt + utrans · ∇T) + ∇· (q + qr) = −αT : dS
dt + Q
(6.9)
where:
• ρ is the density, [kg/m3].
• Cp is the speciﬁc heat capacity at constant pressure, [J/(kg · K)].
• T is the absolute temperature, [K].
• utrans is the velocity vector of translational motion, [m/s].
• q is the heat ﬂux by conduction, [W/m2].
• qr is the heat ﬂux by radiation, [W/m2].
• α is the coefﬁcient of the thermal expansion, [1/K].
• S is the the second Piola-Kirchhoff stress tensor, [Pa].
• Q contains heat sources other than viscous heating, [W/m3].
The following parameters are equal to 0 as they are not present in the reference method:
utrans, qr, S.
This means that the coefﬁcient of thermal expansion does not have any inﬂuence on the
calculations.
The heat ﬂux is calculated by following equation:
q = −k∇T
(6.10)
==PAGE:63==
6.8. MESH AND ELEMENTS
49
where k is the thermal conductivity [W/(m · K].
The heat equation is a general equation, which does not include phase change nor
freezing point depression.
6.8
Mesh and elements
6.8.1
Element type
It is important that the elements and the calculation modules has matching discretiza-
tions, without this, it could cause unexpected errors. The standard discretization of the
Heat Transfer Module is quadratic, which is also chosen for the added partial differential
equations.
For accurate results of a ﬁnite element method, the element should be stretched as little
as possible. For this particular geometry with water as a narrow part of the geometry,
triangles ﬁt best. The elements has been chosen as second order (quadratic). Second order
elements are more accurate than ﬁrst order as they have more degrees of freedom. This
also means that the calculation of each element requires more computer power.
6.8.2
Convergence analysis
When dealing with ﬁnite element method, it is crucial to do a convergence analysis
of the model in order to check the model. The model checked for is a time dependent
model, so a convergence analysis will be made both for the element size and for the time
steps. When doing convergence analysis, the goal is to make the model ﬁne enough so
the error on the results are sufﬁciently low, with the least use of computer power. The two
studies will be done independent. However, both of them will be done by halve the step or
element size and then compare the temperature in a point in the middle of the geometry.
This will be done throughout the temperature development. The temperature plot is then
compared to the previous graph until they are sufﬁciently close.
A convergence analysis has been performed on both the mesh of the model and the size of
the time steps, this can be seen in Appendix L.
==PAGE:64==
50
CHAPTER 6. FEM-MODELLING - SETUP OF THE MODEL
6.8.3
Resulting mesh
The considerations given in the previous sections results in the ﬁnal mesh shown in
Figure 6.3, and time steps of 240 s.
FIGURE 6.3: The mesh used for modelling temperature proﬁles.
6.9
Freezing point depression
It is assumed that the NaCl in the solution moves freely, and will therefore never be
trapped in pockets. Based on the results found the Ice Formation experiment, this does
not correspond with reality, but to model the movement of the NaCl would complicate the
model unnecessarily.
The freezing point depression is checked in the model with only water and used the
complete model. Like the overall calculations in the complete model, the order in which
the calculations are executed plays a large role in the correctness of the model. The
following shows the order in which the freezing point depression calculations are done
and after that, each point is elaborated:
1. Calculation of how much of the water is frozen.
2. Calculation of the new mass percentage, m%.
3. Calculation of the new freezing point depression, ∆TF.
4. Calculation of SorL, which is a deﬁned parameter that evaluates if the current point
in the model is solid or liquid.
5. Decide whether to use ∆TF in the phase change temperature, based on value of
SorL.
==PAGE:65==
6.9. FREEZING POINT DEPRESSION
51
1.
The phase change function, θ, which is explained in Section 6.5, is used to establish
an expression of how much of the water has frozen. The percentage of ice is deﬁned as a
parameter, I:
I =
avdom1(ht.theta1)
avdom1(ht.theta1) + avdom1(ht.theta2)
(6.11)
Where:
• avdom1 calculates the average of a speciﬁed value over the domain.
• ht.theta1 indicates that the material is phase 1 which for this model is ice.
• ht.theta2 indicates that the material is phase 2 which for this model is water.
2.
When the amount of frozen water is known, the new mass percentage is calculated in
the remaining water. Equation 6.12 shows the calculation which is implemented in the
model.
m% =
mNaCl
msolut −I · 0.01 · msolut
· 100%
(6.12)
where:
• nNaCl is the original amount of substance of NaCl, which will not change throughout
the experiment.
• msolut is the original mass of the solution.
3.
The freezing point depression is calculated by following formula, which is explained
in Section 3.2.3.
∆TF = 0.0006 · m3
% + 0.0001 · m2
% + 0.5998 · m% −0.0141
(6.13)
==PAGE:66==
52
CHAPTER 6. FEM-MODELLING - SETUP OF THE MODEL
4.
The freezing point depression is only applied to the part of the model that is still liquid
water as the frozen part is assumed to be pure water and the freezing point will remain
constant at 0 ◦C. To make sure that it is not the whole system that changes freezing point a
parameter called SorL is created. It is based on the knowledge that the solidiﬁcation will
happen at a different temperature than the melting, which is shown in Figure 6.4.
FIGURE 6.4: Enthalpy curve for a material with different freezing point than melting point.
(Frei, 2016)
The ﬁgure does not show the exact situation, but some of its aspects are usable. The
fact that its phase change happens gradually and not in one single temperature makes it
a lot easier for a FEM-model to ﬁnd solutions to the problem as sudden changes with
an inﬁnitely high slope will most likely cause the calculations to crash. It is seen in the
ﬁgure that the phase change happens over a temperature interval deﬁned as ∆T, and the
parameter SorL is deﬁned from the interval. The expression for SorL is shown below:
SorL = if(T > Ttop, 0, if(T < Tbot, 1, SorL))
(6.14)
where:
• Ttop is Tmelt + ∆T/2.
• Tbot is Tfreeze - ∆T/2.
==PAGE:67==
6.9. FREEZING POINT DEPRESSION
53
The if statement says that the parameter can either be equal to 0 or 1. If the current
temperature is higher than Ttop in a given point, SorL is set to 0 as the material is in liquid
phase. If the temperature is lower than Tbot it is solid and value is set to 1. If neither of the
requirements are met, the value is set to what is was in the previous step, meaning that if
the point is currently freezing or melting it the SorL value cannot change.
5.
If SorL = 1, the phase change temperature will not be changed, it will be equal to
273.15 K as it is for pure water. If SorL = 0, the freezing point depression will be subtracted
from the original freezing point.
Both SorL and ∆TF are used in the main calculations in the model, as well as being
calculated in each step. To avoid circular references, they are both calculated as ordinary
differential equations, which are calculated externally from the main calculations.
==PAGE:68==
==PAGE:69==
CHAPTER 7
FEM-modelling - Results
In order to get the right initial temperatures in the specimen for the model, an initial
cycle is performed. Due to this, the time on the x-axis in the temperature graphs as function
as time are from 24 hours to 48 hours.
The temperatures are evaluated in different points on the model. In Figure 7.1a, the
placements of T1Comsol, T2Comsol and T3Comsol can be seen. These evaluation points
are placed so they match the placement of the thermocouples, which makes it possible to
compare the temperatures in these points. The measured temperatures are in the model
called T1Measured, T2Measured and T3Measured.
In Figure 7.1b, additional measuring points can be seen. These are used to give an indica-
tion of the temperature development through the water and the height of the specimen.
(a) Placement of T1Comsol, T2Comsol and T3Comsol.
(b) Placement of additional measuring points.
FIGURE 7.1: Points in which the temperatures are shown in the graphs.
55
==PAGE:70==
56
CHAPTER 7. FEM-MODELLING - RESULTS
7.1
Comparison with measured temperatures
The thermocouples on the test specimen are used to check the accuracy of the model.
The temperatures in three known positions of the specimen are measured throughout a full
cycle. The temperatures in the same three positions during one cycle are calculated in the
model and plotted with the measured temperatures, shown in Figure 7.2.
FIGURE 7.2: Comparison of the measured and the calculated temperatures.
The ﬁgure shows, that the calculated and the measured temperatures roughly follow
same path. However, the calculated temperatures looks to be more inﬂuenced by the phase
change than the measured. An explanation for this could be that the cabinet is cooling
more during phase change to follow the desired temperature development.
The measured temperatures are generally higher than the calculated during heating while
they are closer to the calculated during cooling. A possible explanation for this is that, in
the model it is assumed that the insulation is inﬁnitely good, which means no heat transfer
through the boundaries. In reality, a 20 mm insulation layer is not inﬁnitely good and it is
possible for heat to transfer through the boundaries. This assumption might be the reason
that the measured temperatures are higher than the calculated during heating. Heating
happens faster than cooling in the experiment which means that the temperature gradient
between the temperatures in the water and the temperatures of the air in the cabinets have
to be higher during heating. With a higher temperature difference the heat transfer through
the insulation due to convection is higher. In the model, the convection of these boundaries
are set equal to zero which is a bigger error during heating compared to during cooling.
==PAGE:71==
7.2. COMPARISON OF CABINETS
57
7.2
Comparison of cabinets
Two different temperature developments have been added as the temperature in the top
of the water in the models. One is a representative cycle from the Labview cabinet and the
other one is the corresponding from the Omron cabinet. This produces an estimate of the
temperature distribution of the specimens during the cycles.
In the following sections, the results from both cabinets are shown. This include, for
both cabinets: The temperatures as function of time, the temperature distribution in the
test setup ﬁve hours into a cycle and the temperature distribution along the height of the
specimens ﬁve hours into a cycle. ﬁve hours into the cycle are plotted because this is
during freezing which makes the temperatures in the specimen range wider.
==PAGE:72==
58
CHAPTER 7. FEM-MODELLING - RESULTS
Omron cabinet
(a) Temperatures in the specimen and water during one
cycle.
(b) The temperature distribution in the concrete specimen
ﬁve hours into the cycle.
(c) Temperature distribution along the vertical centerline of
the water and concrete, ﬁve hours into the cycle
FIGURE 7.3: Results from the model with temperatures from the Omron cabinet.
The graph of the temperature as function of time, shows that the temperature in the
top of the water is at all times colder than the concrete during cooling and hotter during
heating. This is because the concrete is cooled and heated through the water.
The temperature proﬁle shows that the temperatures in the test setup are lowest at the top
and are increasing towards the bottom.
The temperatures along the height of the specimen graph shows that the slope changes at
the position where the material changes from water to concrete.
==PAGE:73==
7.2. COMPARISON OF CABINETS
59
Labview cabinet
(a) Temperatures in the concrete specimen and water during
one cycle.
(b) The temperature distribution in the test setup, ﬁve hours
into the cycle.
(c) Temperature distribution along the vertical centerline of
the water and concrete, ﬁve hours into the cycle.
FIGURE 7.4: Results from the model with temperatures from the Labview cabinet.
The graph of the temperatures as function of time, shows that the shape of the graph is
relatively similar to the one from the Omron cabinet. The temperatures in the Labview
cabinet are higher during cooling compared to the ones from the Omron cabinet.
The surface plot of the temperatures, shows that the temperatures in the specimen is simu-
lated to be in the Labview cabinet is 1-2 ◦C higher across the domain. This is supported
by the graphs of the temperature along the height of the specimen, which shows that the
distribution is similar for both cabinets. They both have the temperature of the water in the
bottom of the graph and the temperatures in the bottom of the concrete are the same.
==PAGE:74==
60
CHAPTER 7. FEM-MODELLING - RESULTS
7.3
Phase change
The distribution of ice in the concrete and water of the model, has been plotted at 4.5
hours, 5 hours and 5.5 hours into the cycle of the Labview cabinet. This can be seen in
Figure 7.5.
The ﬁgure shows that at these times, the ice in the water is relatively constant, due to the
freezing point depression which causes the ice formation to happen gradually slower as
more ice is formed. In the concrete, it is seen that the water is freezing with a constant
pace, this is because it is assumed that there is constant freezing point depression in the
water in the concrete, equal to the one for 3 % concentration of NaCl. It is assumed that
the concentration will remain constant and further freezing point depression from pore
sizes is neglected. These assumptions are not expected to correspond with reality, but are
used to execute the calculations.
==PAGE:75==
7.3. PHASE CHANGE
61
(a) The distribution of ice 4.5 hours into the cycle. The water temper-
ature is -3.10 ◦C
(b) The distribution of ice 5 hours into the cycle. The water tempera-
ture is -4.73 ◦C
(c) The distribution of ice 5.5 hours into the cycle. The water temper-
ature is -5.40 ◦C
FIGURE 7.5: The change in ice in the model over a 1 hour period.
==PAGE:76==
==PAGE:77==
CHAPTER 8
Future work
8.1
Goal for the model
There are three testing methods deﬁned in DS/CEN/TS 12390-9. However, there are no
correlation between the three methods. The reason for the standard having three approved
methods is that different countries have been using different methods and want to keep
using the method they are used to. Having three methods with no correlation is very
inconvenient especially for concrete manufacturers.
The reason for this is that one concrete can be sufﬁciently frost resistant in one country
and the same exact concrete can be deﬁned as not frost resistant in another country. This
makes international trading of concrete, used in environments where frost resistance is
required, more difﬁcult.
As of now, it is not deﬁnable if any of the methods is better than the others and because of
this there will not be an internationally accepted method as the only one. As an alternative
it would be a remarkable progress to be able to compare results from the three methods
and ﬁnd a correlation between these results.
A numerical model of the test methods would approach this problem as well as providing
more knowledge of the theories behind frost damages in concrete. It could be used as a
tool to verify or reject the theories. To do this, individual models for each theory must be
created and to see how the results from each one corresponds with experimental results. A
veriﬁcation or even a rejection of one of the theories would be a considerable step towards
completely understanding the frost damages in concrete.
The reason for a numerical model being advantageous in this situation is that it will
be possible to do the methods numerically instead of experimentally, which saves time
and resources. For comparison, it can take an hour or less, depending on the ﬁneness of
the mesh in the model, to deﬁne the wanted concrete and run the wanted test method and
some results that can be compared to results from the other method(s). If this is to be done
experimentally, it takes 31 days from the casting for the concrete to be ready for testing
and additionally 56 days to conduct the test.
The model in this study is aimed to model temperature proﬁles in one of the test methods.
63
==PAGE:78==
64
CHAPTER 8. FUTURE WORK
With the core of this model, the two other methods can be established by changing the
geometry and the temperatures, which can easily be done.
As described in Chapter 6, the model includes heat transfer, phase change including
freezing point depression. In order for the model to be used as a conversion tool between
results from the different test methods, additional effects has to be included.
8.2
Additional effects in the model - suggestions
The model developed in this project is made to calculate temperature proﬁles in a
concrete specimen during a freeze-thaw test.
If the model is to be developed further, for other purposes than showing temperature
proﬁles, different additions can be made. The following states suggestions on how to
implement mechanisms which can improve the model, but are not necessary nor equally
important.
8.2.1
Supercooling
It is suggested that the ﬁrst addition to the model is the effect of supercooling as this
will make it possible to see where the best conditions for ice formation is in the concrete
specimen. This is required to compare the different frost damage theories. Without super-
cooling, the best conditions for ice formation will always occur in the top of the concrete,
as this is where the temperatures fall below the current freezing point of water for every
cycle. The results in Chapter 7 shows this behavior.
The problem with water always freezing at the surface of the concrete is, that this only
causes frost scaling if the glue spalling theory is correct, the other theories requires the
water to initiate the freezing below the surface of the concrete. With the effect of super-
cooling implemented the water temperature can descend below its freezing point without
freezing and this gives the possibility for water further from the surface to initiate the
crystallization.
Supercooling can happen if there is no sufﬁciently large nucleon to start the crystallization
of the water, that being saline water or pore water. A suggestion of how to implement
supercooling is to deﬁne a chance of the water having a large enough nucleon, both in the
saline water above the concrete and the water inside concrete. Initially each point of water
has a randomly sized nucleon.
As this system is based on probability, the results will not be the same each time the model
==PAGE:79==
8.2. ADDITIONAL EFFECTS IN THE MODEL - SUGGESTIONS
65
is run, so it will have to be done multiple times to ﬁnd a tendency.
The criterion of how large the nucleon has to be is lowered as the temperature decreases.
When the temperature in a point of water is low enough to cause crystallization, it will
change phase and the surrounding water will then not need to create a nucleon. Super-
cooling will then only happen once for each cooling period as crystallization will spread
throughout the domain of both water and concrete.
It is then possible to see the supercooling on the temperature graphs as the sudden spread
of crystallization will cause a relatively large amount of latent heat to be released and the
surrounding temperatures will increase.
8.2.2
Frost scaling
With supercooling successfully implemented, the next recommended step is to imple-
ment the stresses that is developed in the concrete as result of ice formation, on and inside
the concrete. The stresses can then be used to calculate the frost scaling.
To implement the frost scaling, it is needed to decide which frost scaling theory to base
it on. Suggestions on how to implement each of them is given, but only one is needed to
calculate frost scaling. However, the model will then also be able to compare the results of
the different theories to the results from the experimental work.
Glue spalling
The theory of glue spalling is the only of the four theories that does not require any
knowledge of how the pore system is structured. This means that it can be implemented
in the model without having to model the pore system. As theory states, the water will
enter imperfections in the surface (pores or cracks) and then freeze, an assumption of the
amount of imperfections is needed. The average area and depth of the imperfections will
be based on the air content.
The amount of scaling can be calculated as a function of the amount the ice has contracted
compared to the concrete. This is found from the thermal expansion coefﬁcients of the
the two materials, the tensile strength of the concrete and the temperature difference from
when the water freezes to the lowest temperature in the cycle.
Ice lens growth
The ice lens theory can only be implemented with an assumption of a pore system or
with a geometry that takes the pore system into account.
One assumption of a pore system can be a certain distribution of large and small pores,
and the connection between them. With this assumption, the model can calculate the risk
==PAGE:80==
66
CHAPTER 8. FUTURE WORK
of a large pore with crystallization of water and enough surrounding water to ﬁll the pore
with ice and then continue the formation of ice.
This risk will also be the risk of frost scaling happening and the distance from the surface
will increase the amount of scaled mass until a certain distance where the pressure will
result in internal cracks instead of scaling. The maximum distance can be derived from the
tensile strength of the concrete and the pressure from the ice formation.
If the geometry of a pore system is modelled, the assumption is not be needed and it
is possible to model the pore water and add an expansion of volume when it changes phase
to ice. This expansion causes a pressure in the concrete, resulting in frost scaling.
Hydraulic pressure
The suggested implementation of the hydraulic pressure theory is similar to the ice
lens theory. The scaling is calculated from the pressure that comes from the unfrozen pore
water being pushed away from the crystallization of the freezing pore water, as well as the
range from the initial crystallization to the nearest air void or the surface. This would be
complicated, ﬁrst of all to model the air voids, but even more to assign these to places the
water can move to. However, to start with, it is recommended to make an assumption that
says the water can only travel to the surface of the concrete.
With the pore structure and the pressure due to the moving water, the model is able to
calculate if cracks starts to form at the surface causing scaling or downwards forming
internal cracks.
Osmotic pressure
The suggested implementation of frost scaling due to osmotic pressure is not very
different from the one for hydraulic pressure theory. The main difference is that it is the
concentration gradient in the pore water that causes the movement. The amount of scaling
will depend on the distribution of large and small pores and the size of the concentration
gradients.
==PAGE:81==
8.3. CONCRETE PROPERTIES
67
8.2.3
Pore structure
As mentioned in the section concerning the implementations of the frost theories, it
would be advantageous to model the geometry of the pores in the concrete. However, this
requires knowledge of exactly how the pores is distributed inside the concrete. This can
be investigated experimentally and a generator to make a generic mesh of pores can be
developed. This is a large amount of work, but is necessary if the pore system is not to
modelled manually, which is basically impossible.
The inputs to the mesh of the pore system can be the fractional volumes from Powers’
model and a chosen ratio between large and small pores.
8.2.4
Freezing point depression of pore water
With an estimate of the pore structure, the freezing point depression in the pores can be
implemented as well. This effect will cause the ice formation to start in the large pores as
the freezing point is decreasing with lower pore radius. Each point of pore water inside the
concrete would have to be assigned with a pore radius and the freezing point depression of
each point of pore water can then be calculated. This would also have to be updated as
more water freezes inside the pores.
8.3
Concrete properties
As of now, the material parameters for the concrete is set up with speciﬁc values.
If another concrete is to be used, the thermal properties needs to be measured experimen-
tally for the given concrete and they can then be implemented in the model.
The concrete mixture can be different in different ways, so it is not possible to model
the constituents into the model. If any changes are made from the original concrete mix-
ture, new measurements of speciﬁc heat capacity and thermal conductivity needs to be
conducted. The air content has a inﬂuence as well, if this is measured to be remarkably
different with the same concrete mixture, new measurements of the thermal properties
must be conducted.
If the w/c ratio is changed, it will both have an inﬂuence on the thermal properties and on
the amount of freezable water in the concrete. The amount of water has to be calculated
from Powers’ model for every used value of the w/c ratio.
At some point database of thermal properties for different concrete mixtures can be
established on the ground of empirical values from experiments.
==PAGE:82==
68
CHAPTER 8. FUTURE WORK
8.4
Remaining methods
In order to compare the reference method with the other two test methods in the
DS/CEN/TS 12390-9, it is necessary to have a model of each of the methods individually.
When the ﬁrst model, the one for the reference method, is completed, it will be much faster
to establish the two following than it was to create the ﬁrst one. The calculations in the
models will be the same, only the geometry and applied temperatures will be different.
When all three models are complete it will then be possible to compare the amount of frost
scaling of each and possibly create a standard that applies for all three. Or in any case to
test concretes for all three at once instead of picking one method and not testing it for the
two others.
==PAGE:83==
CHAPTER 9
Conclusion
The slab test from DS/CEN/TS 12390-9 has been simulated in a FEM-model using the
program Comsol Multiphysics. The model calculates temperature proﬁles throughout the
concrete specimen in the test.
The slab test is conducted experimentally and the measured temperatures stands basis for
the temperature loading in the model.
The temperature proﬁles calculated in the model, with the input from the experiment,
corresponds well with the measured temperatures during cooling and differentiates more
from the measured, during heating. The model also calculates when and how fast the water
freezes, including freezing point depression, which increases as the water freezes.
The behavior of the freezing point depression ﬁts the simulated temperatures as well as
analytical calculations.
In relation to the two temperature regulation systems in the freezing cabinets, it is
concluded that the PID control method has lower temperatures than the ON/OFF control
method in the cooling phase and a steeper temperature curve in the heating phase.
The lower temperatures during cooling, resulted in more scaling of the concrete specimens,
however, with a signiﬁcance level of 0.10, it was not found to be a signiﬁcant difference,
for either of the air contents.
It can be concluded that additional work is needed for the model to be able to inves-
tigate the different frost theories. The most relevant addition to the model to make this
possible, is the effect of supercooling. After supercooling, the implementation of stress
calculations from the ice formation can be used to calculate the frost scaling of the concrete.
From the ice formation experiment, it can be concluded that the NaCl in the solution
does not move away from the side where the crystallisation is initialized. It can also be
concluded that NaCl is affected by gravity as the concentrations were higher towards the
bottom regardless of where the solution was cooled from.
69
==PAGE:84==
==PAGE:85==
Bibliography
Andersen, L. H. (2017). Experimental Study of Frost Damage Mechanisms in Concrete.
Technical Report January.
Armacell (2010). AP Armaﬂex & AP Armaﬂex W. Technical report.
Clark, J. (2005). solid-liquid phase diagrams: salt solution.
Collins, A. (1944). Collins -The Destruction of Concrete by Frost (1944).pdf.
EngineeringToolBox (2017a). Coefﬁcients of Linear Thermal Expansion.
EngineeringToolBox (2017b). Dry Air Properties.
Frei, W. (2016). Thermal Modeling of Phase-Change Materials with Hysteresis COMSOL
Blog.
Gopal Mishra (2017). CONCRETE SLUMP TEST - PROCEDURE AND RESULTS.
Hansen, R. (2015). Betons termiske egenskaber og deres betydning for udvikling af
frostskader i beton.
Kodur, V. (2014). Properties of concrete at elevated temperatures. ISRN Civil Engineering,
2014.
Mehta, P. K. and Monteiro, P. J. M. (2006). Concrete: microstructure, properties, and
materials.
Pounder, E. R. (1965). The Physics of Ice, volume 34. a.
Powers, T. (1945). A working hypothesis for further studies of frost resistance of concrete.
Journal of the American Concrete Institute, 16(4):245–272.
Powers, T. C. and Helmut, R. A. (1953). Theory of Volume Changes in Hardened Portland
Cement Paste During Freezing. Proceedings of the Highway Research Board, 32:285–
297.
Rosenqvist, M. (2016). Frost-induced deterioration of concrete in hydraulic structures.
PhD thesis, Lunds Universitet.
71
==PAGE:86==
72
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Valenza, J. J. and Scherer, G. W. (2007). A review of salt scaling: I. Phenomenology John.
Cement and Concrete Research, 37(7):1022–1034.
Verbeck, G. and Klieger, P. (1957). Of concrete. Studies of "salt" scaling of concrete,
(150):129–140.
von Böckh, P. and Wetzel, T. (2012). Heat Transfer.
Wilson, M. L. (2010). Measurement of Air Content in Concrete.
Young, H. and Freedman, R. (2007). University physics with modern physics.
==PAGE:87==
Appendices
73
==PAGE:88==
==PAGE:89==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
75
A Overview of Annex
77
B
Ice formation - Sample sizes
79
C Ice formation - Calibration of autotitrator
81
D Cone test
83
E
Pressure method
85
F
Omron cabinet guide
87
F.1
CX-Termo and Trendviewer
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
87
F.1.1
Trend Viewer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
93
F.2
Handling the data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
95
G Placement of thermocouples
97
H Paired t-test
99
I
Validation of model
101
I.1
Validation of initial model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101
I.2
Validation of freezing point depression . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 104
J
Temperature dependent material properties
107
K Powers’ model
109
L
Convergence analysis
111
L.1
Element size convergence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 111
L.2
Step size convergence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 112
M Cabinet cycles
113
M.1 Omron-cabinet
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 113
M.2 Labview-cabinet . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 117
==PAGE:90==
==PAGE:91==
APPENDIX A
Overview of Annex
• Comsol models: ”Labview cabinet” and ”Omron cabinet”. The model developed in
the project, divided in two, with temperature cycles from each cabinet.
• Freeze-thaw scaled mass: "Scaling data". Excel-document with all measurements of
scaled mass.
• Measured temperature cycles: "Omron cycles" and "Labview cycles". Measured
temperatures from both cabinets during the 56 cycles.
• Matlab scripts: "Omron logﬁles" and "OmronLogﬁles2". Matlab scripts to convert
the data from the Omron cabinet log ﬁles to two vectors.
77
==PAGE:92==
==PAGE:93==
APPENDIX B
Ice formation - Sample sizes
For each run through, the autotitrator adds up to 10 mL of 0.1 M AgNO3. Theof
AgNO3 added is therefore:
n = 10mL · 0.1mol
L
= 0.001mol
The molar masses of NaCl and AgNO3 is calculated as shown below:
MAgNO3 = 107.9 g
mol + 14 g
mol + 3 · 16 g
mol = 169.9 g
mol
MNaCl = 22.99 g
mol + 35.45 g
mol = 58.44 g
mol
1 mL NaCl is added to the test sample to ensure convergence. The weight of the added
NaCl is calculated the by the following equations.
nNaCl1 = 1mL · 0.1mol
L
= 1 · 10(−4)mol
mNaCl1 = nNaCl1 · MNaCl = 0.006g
The sample sizes is calculated as shown below.
mNaCl = n · MNaCl + mNaCl = 0.064g
3 %:
mNaCl ∗
1
0.03 = 2.143g
10 %:
mNaCl ∗1
0.1 = 0.643g
The sample size calculated is the maximum size the sample can be if it is the expected
concentration (in this case 3 % or 10 %) and is to run one time only. The taken samples
are therefore smaller as it is expected some of them will have higher concentrations due to
the movement of NaCl.
79
==PAGE:94==
==PAGE:95==
APPENDIX C
Ice formation - Calibration of
autotitrator
Table C.1: Calibration results for the test specimens cooled from the top.
0%
3%
10%
1. check
1.0299
0.9799
0.9832
2. check
0.9899
0.9993
0.9974
3. check
0.8346
1.0054
0.9997
4. check
1.0055
1.007
5. check
0.9981
Table C.2: Calibration results for the test specimens cooled from the bottom.
0%
3%
10%
1. check
0.9638
0.9924
0.9787
2. check
1.0039
0.9904
0.9707
3. check
1.0094
0.9893
0.9916
4. check
1.0553
0.9808
5. check
0.9769
6. check
0.9855
7. check
0.9798
81
==PAGE:96==
==PAGE:97==
APPENDIX D
Cone test
To do the test, a slump cone and a tamping rod is needed. In this case, the cone has a
designated table, that it could be attached to. Before starting the test, both the table, cone
and the rod are ﬂushed with water to make sure that the concrete wont stick to any of the
parts.
Figure D.1 shows the procedure of the slump testing: First, the cone is ﬁlled up to one
third of its height with wet concrete. The tamping rod is then used to tamp the concrete 25
times. The length from the top of the cone to the top of the concrete surface is measured
by using the rod. The cone is then ﬁlled up to two thirds of its height and another 25 tamps
are applied down to the height that was just measured. This is repeated, but with concrete
to over the top of the cone. The top is scraped off, to gain a clean surface of concrete and
the cone is lifted off. The cone is ﬂipped and the rod is lain horizontally on it over the
concrete and the vertical distance is measured, which is the slump.
FIGURE D.1: Procedure of slump testing of concrete (Gopal Mishra, 2017).
The actual cone that was used for this test can be seen in Figure D.2 as it was being
scraped, right before it is lifted off the concrete to measure the slump.
As this procedure is simple, there is not many sources of error, apart from the concrete not
83
==PAGE:98==
84
APPENDIX D. CONE TEST
being mixed properly before testing, but as each batch mixed for the same amount of time,
it is assumed to be irrelevant.
FIGURE D.2: Slump cone ﬁlled with concrete being scraped to get a clean surface.
==PAGE:99==
APPENDIX E
Pressure method
The pressure method is used to investigate the air content of the concrete during casting.
For this method a pressuremeter is used, which can be seen in Figure E.1.
FIGURE E.1: Pressuremeter used to measure the air content of concrete.
It is ﬁlled up to approximately one third of its total volume and then the vibrator-table
is activated and the remaining volume is ﬁlled with concrete. When vibrated sufﬁciently,
the top is scraped to gain a clean surface and the top part of the device is mounted. The
valves are opened and water is poured in from one valve until it comes out of the other,
the valves are then closed. The pump on top of the device is used to increase the pressure
85
==PAGE:100==
86
APPENDIX E. PRESSURE METHOD
inside until the meter shows "0". The pressure is then released and the air content can be
read on the meter.
Sources of error in the pressure method includes:
• Incomplete sample consolidation.
• Over vibration.
• Error in the pressure gauge which may result in incorrect application of pressure or
in gauge malfunction.
• The air content test is done on wet concrete, and the pore system will not be identical
to the one for the hardened concrete. However, the air content of the hardened
concrete should be close to the one for the wet concrete.
The two ﬁrst sources can cause the concrete that is being tested to not have the same air
content as the rest of the mixed concrete. The test is therefore giving the correct result for
the given concrete, but not for the whole batch. Because of this, it is important to make
sure that the two cylinders and the air content pressuremeter are vibrated to the same extend.
==PAGE:101==
APPENDIX F
Omron cabinet guide
F.1
CX-Termo and Trendviewer
This appendix is a step by step walk-through of the usage of the freezing cabinet and
the computer program used to control it "CX-termo". The cabinet is located building 118
room 047 at DTU.
When opening the program, initial pop-ups appear. To get started, follow the pictures and
click on the buttons marked with red.
FIGURE F.1: Step 1.
87
==PAGE:102==
88
APPENDIX F. OMRON CABINET GUIDE
FIGURE F.2: Step 2.
FIGURE F.3: Step 3.
==PAGE:103==
F.1. CX-TERMO AND TRENDVIEWER
89
FIGURE F.4: Step 4.
FIGURE F.5: Step 5.
==PAGE:104==
90
APPENDIX F. OMRON CABINET GUIDE
FIGURE F.6: Step 6.
Now, follow the operations shown below.
• Operation Commands -> Other -> Move to setup area 1. Click Execute.
• Operation Commands -> Other -> Parameter Initialization. Click Execute.
• Control stopped parameters -> Initial setting level -> Standard or heating/cooling.
Click heating/cooling.
==PAGE:105==
F.1. CX-TERMO AND TRENDVIEWER
91
Now, the PID should be modiﬁed to ﬁt the cabinet. This is done by Control in Progress
Parameters -> PID Setting Level -> PID 1. The parameters should be adjusted, so they are
identical to the ones seen in Figure F.7.
FIGURE F.7: Step 7.
The input type should be adjusted so it ﬁts the temperatures the cabinet is going through.
For this experiment the one that ﬁts best is number 10 as shown in Figure F.8. This will
give an additional decimal of precision compared to the standard setting.
==PAGE:106==
92
APPENDIX F. OMRON CABINET GUIDE
FIGURE F.8: Step 8.
It is now time to setup the program. To do this, in the top ribbon click Options ->
Programmer Editor..., now a pop up like the one in Figure F.9 should be seen.
FIGURE F.9: Step 9.
==PAGE:107==
F.1. CX-TERMO AND TRENDVIEWER
93
Clicking on the Program ribbon will give the possibility to change the number of seg-
ments in the program along with repetitions of it. The freeze-that curve from DS/CEN/TS
12390-9 has seven segments, and the repetitions should be chosen as 56, representing the
56 cycles the experiment takes, as shown in Figure F.10.
FIGURE F.10: Step 10.
F.1.1
Trend Viewer
In order to collect the temperatures it is necessary to open Trend Viewer from the
Trend/Monitor ribbon in CX-Thermo. As default, Trend Viewer saves data from the
temperatures and a constant "ﬁxed SP" which is 0 degree at all time. In order to add
additional parameters to monitor, right click below the parameters, and click add parameters
as shown in Figure F.11.
==PAGE:108==
94
APPENDIX F. OMRON CABINET GUIDE
FIGURE F.11: Step 11.
Select the device to monitor and add the monitor parameters as shown in Figure F.12.
FIGURE F.12: Step 12.
==PAGE:109==
F.2. HANDLING THE DATA
95
F.2
Handling the data
The Omron cabinet, produces a log ﬁle for every two hours it has been running, and it
cannot be changed. A freeze-thaw experiment consists of 56 cycles of 24 hours, therefore
produces a minimum of 56 · 12 = 672 ﬁles. And even more ﬁles if the program is started
and stopped more than once. To handle all these ﬁles, a Matlab script has been developed.
The script has been attached with the assignment. The scrip opens all the log ﬁles in the
correct order, and then creates a vector with the time since start of the experiment and a
vector with the temperatures. All the script needs of input is the path to the folder with the
log ﬁles. The folder with the log ﬁles should contain nothing but the log ﬁles, or it could
result in error or wrong results. Unfortunately Matlab has a cap of how many text ﬁles
can be open at once. To circumvent this, the Scrip is split into two scripts where each deal
with half of the ﬁles. The scripts are called OmronLogﬁles and OmronLogﬁles2.
==PAGE:110==
==PAGE:111==
APPENDIX G
Placement of thermocouples
Figure G.1 shows how the thermologgers are placed on the concrete specimens. The
aim is to have them placed with equal spacing, resulting in:
• a1 = 1/6·h = 16.67 %
• a2 = 3/6·h = 50.00 %
• a3 = 5/6·h = 83.33 %
Where h is the total height equal to (50 +/- 2) mm.
FIGURE G.1: Placement of thermocouples on concrete a specimen.
Table G.1 shows the measured placements of the thermocouples on the concrete
specimens.
97
==PAGE:112==
98
APPENDIX G. PLACEMENT OF THERMOCOUPLES
Table G.1: Measured placements of thermocouples on the concrete specimens.
1.6C1
1.6C2
3.6A1
[mm]
[%]
[mm]
[%]
[mm]
[%]
a1
8.48
16.63
8.07
16.61
7.69
15.42
a2
26.08
51.14
25.64
52.78
25.92
51.99
a3
43.87
86.12
41.31
85.43
41.21
85.65
==PAGE:113==
APPENDIX H
Paired t-test
As mentioned in Section 5.1.1, four specimens of each air content has been put in each
freezing cabinet. The t-test is therefore a paired t-test, with the null hypothesis assuming
that the difference between the true mean and the comparison value is equal to zero.
Table H.1: Statistical variables for the concrete specimens.
1,6 %
3,6 %
Basement
47
Basement
47
Mean
3,98
3,71
0,20
0,97
Variance
14,30
5,98
0,01
1,17
Deviation
3,78
2,45
0,09
1,08
Samples
2
4
4
3
For both concrete with 1.6 % and 3.6 % air content, alpha is set to 0.1, and the null
hypothesis is H0=: uLabview=uOmron
DOF = nLabview + nOmron −2
The pooled estimate of standard deviation SOmron,Labview is calculated:
SOmron,Labview =
s
(nOmron −1) · S2
Labview + (nOmron −1) · S2
Omron
DOF
t =
µLabview −µOmron
SOmron,Labview ·
q
1
nLabview +
1
nOmron
t is compared with tcrit which is a theoretical value for the number of degrees of
freedoms and alpha value. If t>tcrit then the H0 hypothesis is rejected.
In Table H.2 the variables for t-test is shown along with the conclusion of the tests.
99
==PAGE:114==
100
APPENDIX H. PAIRED T-TEST
Table H.2: t-test variables.
1.6 %
3.6 %
DOF
4
5
SOmron,Labview
5,09
0,69
t
0,06
1,46
tcrit
1,53
1,48
H0
Accepted
Accepted
==PAGE:115==
APPENDIX I
Validation of model
I.1
Validation of initial model
The initial model is a simple stationary model with constant material parameters for
the concrete shown in Table I.1. Simple means that phase change has not been included.
Table I.1: Constant material parameters for concrete used in the stationary model.
k
ρ
Cp
α
Text
Tint
[W/(m · K)]
[kg/m3]
[J/(kg · K)]
[m/(m · K)]
[K]
[K]
0.8
2356.4
880
14.5 · 10−6
253.15
293.15
With the temperature around the specimen being 253.15 K at all time, the temperature
of the concrete should at equilibrium also be 253.15 K. and as it is shown in Figure I.1,
this is true.
101
==PAGE:116==
102
APPENDIX I. VALIDATION OF MODEL
FIGURE I.1: Temperature proﬁle for the stationary model.
The stationary model can not be used to calculate the temperature proﬁles in the
freezing concrete as this is time dependent and not stationary. However, the stationary
model is a good tool to check the time dependent model, as the time dependent model with
constant external air temperature, should for inﬁnite time end up with same result as the
stationary model. To check this, the temperature in the bottom of the specimen is checked
as function of time, this can be seen in Figure I.2. This is done to make sure the specimen
is in equilibrium, when comparing to the stationary results.
==PAGE:117==
I.1. VALIDATION OF INITIAL MODEL
103
FIGURE I.2: Temperature in the bottom of the concrete as a function of time, for constant material
parameters.
The temperature at 4E5 s, has been evaluated for the time dependent model and can
be seen in Figure I.3. As it can be seen, the temperature for the time dependent model in
equilibrium, is equal to the temperature for the stationary model, as it should be.
==PAGE:118==
104
APPENDIX I. VALIDATION OF MODEL
FIGURE I.3: Temperature proﬁle at 4E5 s, for constant material parameters.
I.2
Validation of freezing point depression
To validate the freezing point depression model, it is analytically calculated how much
of the solution which can be frozen at the most. The lowest temperature throughout the
cycles is 253.15 K. Therefore, if ∆TF is higher than 253.15 K, the remaining water will
not freeze.
253.15K = 0.0006 · m3
% + 0.0001 · m2
% + 0.5998 · m% −0.0141
(I.1)
This gives a maximum m% of 22.26 % when the temperature 253.15 K. This maximum
ice percentage can then be calculated as:
Imax = −
100∗mNaCl
m%
−msolut
0.01 · msolut
= 86.5%
(I.2)
A constant temperature of 253.15 K is applied on the top surface of the water only
model. The time of the model is chosen so a stationary point will be reached where the
temperature is constant and nothing more water can be frozen. As seen on Figure I.4, the
temperature is constant at the end.
==PAGE:119==
I.2. VALIDATION OF FREEZING POINT DEPRESSION
105
FIGURE I.4: Temperatures of the water only model.
In Figure I.5, it can be seen that the freezing percentage of the water is converging
towards 86.5 % as it was analytically calculated.
FIGURE I.5: Percentage of the water that has phase changed to ice.
==PAGE:120==
==PAGE:121==
APPENDIX J
Temperature dependent material
properties
In the following two ﬁgures, the variation of respectively the thermal conductivity
and the speciﬁc heat capacity can be seen as function of temperature for normal strength
concrete. Both ﬁgures show that the variation of properties are low for the 40 degree range
that the freeze-thaw experiment spans. The properties can therefore be assumed constant.
FIGURE J.1: Variation in thermal conductivity of normal strength concrete as a function of
temperature (Kodur, 2014).
107
==PAGE:122==
108
APPENDIX J. TEMPERATURE DEPENDENT MATERIAL PROPERTIES
FIGURE J.2: Variation in speciﬁc heat of normal strength concrete as a function of temperature
(Kodur, 2014).
==PAGE:123==
APPENDIX K
Powers’ model
The w/c ratio for the concrete is 0.45 and the density of cement used for calculations is
ρc=3160 kg/m3. The formulas to establish Powers’ model are shown below.
Initial porosity:
p =
w
c
w
c + ρw
ρc
(K.1)
Chemical shrinkage:
Vcs = 6.4 · 10−5ρc(1 −p)α
(K.2)
where:
α is the degree of hydration.
Capillary water:
Vcw = p −(0.19 + 0.23) ρc
ρw
(1 −p)α
(K.3)
Gel water:
Vgw = 0.19 ρc
ρw
(1 −p)α
(K.4)
Gel solid:
Vgs = (1 −6.4 · 10−5ρc + 0.23 ρc
ρw
α
(K.5)
Un-hydrated cement:
Vuc = (1 −p)(1 −α)
(K.6)
Using the formulas above with degrees of hydration between 0 and 1 as well as the
estimated degree of hydration at 0.7, the values in Table K.1 are calculated.
Table K.1: Relative volumes, calculated for three different degrees of hydration.
Relative volumes [-]
α = 0
αestimated = 0.7
α = 1
Capillary water
0.587
0.204
0.039
Gel water
0
0.174
0.248
Gel solid
0
0.441
0.629
Chemical shrinkage (pores)
0
0.058
0.084
Un-hydrated cement
0.413
0.124
0
109
==PAGE:124==
110
APPENDIX K. POWERS’ MODEL
Using the values in the table, the Powers’ diagram in Figure K.1 can be sketched.
FIGURE K.1: Powers’ diagram with maximum degree of hydration equal to 0.7.
==PAGE:125==
APPENDIX L
Convergence analysis
L.1
Element size convergence
The element size convergence analysis has been done with 60 second time steps. In
Figure L.1, the temperature as function of time in the middle of the concrete can be seen
for ﬁve different amounts of degrees of freedom.
FIGURE L.1: Temperature in the middle of the concrete specimen as function of time for different
amount of degree of freedom.
In the ﬁgure it can be seen that the variation between the mesh with 6367 and 24081
degrees of freedoms is very small. On this basis, the mesh with 6367 DOFs has been
chosen.
111
==PAGE:126==
112
APPENDIX L. CONVERGENCE ANALYSIS
L.2
Step size convergence
The time step size convergence analysis has been done with the mesh chosen in the
previous section. In Figure L.2, the temperature as function of time in the middle of the
concrete can be seen for ﬁve different time steps.
FIGURE L.2: Temperature in the middle of the concrete specimen as function of time for different
sizes of time steps.
In the ﬁgure, it can be seen that there is very little variation between all time steps.
However, some variation from the 960 s and 480 s time steps to the smaller time steps, and
since the computational time of the model is relatively low, precision has a higher priority
than computational time and time steps of 240 s has therefore been chosen.
==PAGE:127==
APPENDIX M
Cabinet cycles
M.1
Omron-cabinet
FIGURE M.1: The temperature in the water of the specimens with thermocouples, for cycles 8-15.
113
==PAGE:128==
114
APPENDIX M. CABINET CYCLES
FIGURE M.2: The temperature in the water of the specimens with thermocouples, for cycles
15-22.
FIGURE M.3: The temperature in the water of the specimens with thermocouples, for cycles
22-29.
==PAGE:129==
M.1. OMRON-CABINET
115
FIGURE M.4: The temperature in the water of the specimens with thermocouples, for cycles
29-36.
FIGURE M.5: The temperature in the water of the specimens with thermocouples, for cycles
36-43.
==PAGE:130==
116
APPENDIX M. CABINET CYCLES
FIGURE M.6: The temperature in the water of the specimens with thermocouples, for cycles
43-50.
FIGURE M.7: The temperature in the water of the specimens with thermocouples, for cycles
36-43.
==PAGE:131==
M.2. LABVIEW-CABINET
117
FIGURE M.8: The temperature in the water of the specimens with thermocouples, for cycles
43-50.
M.2
Labview-cabinet
FIGURE M.9: The temperature in the water of the specimens with thermocouples, for cycles 8-15.
==PAGE:132==
118
APPENDIX M. CABINET CYCLES
FIGURE M.10: The temperature in the water of the specimens with thermocouples, for cycles
15-22.
FIGURE M.11: The temperature in the water of the specimens with thermocouples, for cycles
22-29.
==PAGE:133==
M.2. LABVIEW-CABINET
119
FIGURE M.12: The temperature in the water of the specimens with thermocouples, for cycles
29-36.
FIGURE M.13: The temperature in the water of the specimens with thermocouples, for cycles
36-43.
==PAGE:134==
120
APPENDIX M. CABINET CYCLES
FIGURE M.14: The temperature in the water of the specimens with thermocouples, for cycles
43-50.
FIGURE M.15: The temperature in the water of the specimens with thermocouples, for cycles
50-56.
