==PAGE:1==
Master Thesis
A Matheuristic for Multi-Objective Energy-Eﬃcient
Train Timetabling
Author:
Guillem-Anton Aguil`a Calbet
s151299
Supervisor:
Richard Martin Lusby
Co-supervisors:
Evelien van der Hurk
Martin Philip Kidd
June 29, 2017
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Title
A Matheuristic for Multi-Objective
Energy-Eﬃcient Train Timetabling
Author
Guillem-Anton Aguil`a Calbet
Supervisors
Associate Professor Richard Martin Lusby
Associate Professor Evelien van der Hurk
Associate Professor Martin Philip Kidd
Department of Management Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Produktionstorvet, Bld. 424
2800 Kongens Lyngby
Denmark
Msc program
Transport and Logistics
Department of Management Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Produktionstorvet, Bld. 426
2800 Kongens Lyngby
Denmark
Date of submission
June 29th, 2017
Cover Image
c⃝2015 HKU New College
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgments
I would like to express my gratitude to all the good people that have contributed in making the last
two years the most exciting, intense and rewarding times I remember.
First of all, I would like to thank my supervisors Evelien, Martin and Richard who provided guid-
ance, knowledge and, even more important, support during the six months I have worked with them
on my thesis.
I am thankful to my family, who, from the distance, sent me their warmth to stay strong when
needed and all those ”Bon dia :) :* :* :* :*” WhatsApp messages every morning. I cannot wait for
the holidays to arrive and come back home.
Finally, I want to say thank you to all the friends I made in Denmark and I think it is required to do
it the Danish way, so...
Grab your beer, rise it to the ceiling and empty your lungs shouting...
Skål! to Queralt and Andrea, we gave it all together until the end. Skål! to Martina and Inˆes, better
friends and last minute proofreaders. Skål! to Tiia and all that procrastination time. Skål! to Amar
and all the quizzes yet to win. Skål! to all DTU Volley, teammates and friends, my adoptive family
in Denmark.
(your beer should be empty by now so better get another one)
Skål! to Caro and the time we shared. Skål! to David, you did it Mr. Phd. Skål! to the Virumgade
gang: Matej, Chlo´e, Ola, Camila, Berthe, Alexandre... Skål! to M36 and M67, my buddy groups.
Skål! to Martin, JB, In´es, Clara, Stefanie, Francisco, Mika and many others... Skål! to the Retro
people.
And Skål! to the future of us all! Skål!
iii
==PAGE:6==
==PAGE:7==
Abstract
Following the EU directives, the railway sector has set its own goals to reduce energy consumption
by 30% in 2030 compared to 1990 levels. The energy consumption of electric railway systems can
be reduced by using the regenerative braking technology, which employs the trains’ motors as elec-
tric generators while braking. The regenerated power is supplied to the overhead conductor and it
is wasted if it is not consumed simultaneously. Synchronization of accelerating and braking trains
is therefore essential to reduce the energy consumption.
The Energy-Eﬃcient Train Timetabling Problem (EETTP) aims at constructing a train timetable
that favours the use of the regenerated power. Besides, the regenerated power can also be used to
minimize the peak power demands, which have high costs associated. Therefore, we formulate the
EETTP as a Bi-Objective problem.
To take well informed decisions, planners require a set of solutions representing diﬀerent trade-oﬀs
between objectives. The best possible set of solutions is the Pareto-optimal front, which can be
obtained using a classical approach such as the ϵ-Constraint method. The drawback of this method
is that it requires long running times.
We propose and Adaptive Large Neighborhood Search (ALNS) matheuristic to solve the Bi-Objective
EETTP. The performance of the ALNS is evaluated in terms of solution quality and of required run-
ning time. The quality of the solutions is determined by how close they approximate to the Pareto-
optimal front.
The results show a promising performance of the ALNS, which is capable of ﬁnding very good
solutions in 1 hour runtime for instances in which the classic method requires days. These char-
acteristics make the algorithm suitable to be used as a decision support tool on railway planning
besides providing a starting point for new academic research on the EETTP.
Key words: Energy-Eﬃcient Train Timetabling Problem, Regenerative braking, Multi-Objective
optimization, Adaptive Large Neighborhood Search, Matheuristics.
v
==PAGE:8==
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Acknowledgments
iii
Abstract
v
Contents
viii
List of Abbreviations
x
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Need for energy-eﬃcient railway operations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Literature review
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Problem Description
5
2.1
Optimization of railway systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Energy-Eﬃcient Train Timetabling Problem with regenerative braking . . . . . . .
7
2.2.1
Regenerative braking technology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2.2
Power proﬁles and example
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
EETTP as a Bi-Objecive Optimization Problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.4
Input and output data of the EETT-BOOP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3
Problem Formulation
13
3.1
Deﬁnitions and assumptions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2
Sets, parameters, decision variables and objective functions . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.2.1
Minimizing the total energy consumption . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.3
Mixed Integer Linear Programming Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.4
Resource Levelling formulation for the EETTP
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.4.1
Sets, parameters and decision variables of the RL formulation . . . . . . .
17
3.4.2
RL objective function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.4.3
MILP model of the RL formulation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.4.4
Motivation for a Resource Levelling formulation of the EETTP
. . . . . .
19
4
Theory and Background
21
4.1
Multi-Objective Optimization Problems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.1.1
Strategies to address MOOP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.1.2
Concepts of dominance, non-dominated set and Pareto-optimality . . . . .
23
4.2
ϵ-Constraint method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.3
Heuristics, Metaheuristics and Matheuristics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.4
Adaptive Large Neighborhood Search . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
vii
==PAGE:10==
CONTENTS
viii
4.4.1
Neighborhood search . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.4.2
Destroy and repair methods and methods’ evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.4.3
ALNS algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5
Solution Methods
30
5.1
ALNS implementation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.1.1
Implemented algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.1.2
Destroy methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.1.3
Repair methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.2
ϵ-Constraint method to solve the EETT-BOOP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.3
Performance evaluation of multi-objective optimization algorithms . . . . . . . . .
34
6
Description of Computational Experiments
36
6.1
Description of the instances of the EETT-BOOP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
6.2
Computing power used in the tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
6.3
Parameter tuning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
6.3.1
Destruction sizes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
6.3.2
Tuning methodology for the RL repair method and the ALNS framework
.
38
6.3.3
Tuning the RL repair method and results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
6.3.4
Tuning the ALNS framework and results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
6.3.5
ALNS conﬁguration
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
6.4
Objectives of the computational experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
7
Results
43
7.1
Performance of the ALNS
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
7.1.1
Convergence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
7.1.2
Analysis of the extreme solutions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
7.1.3
Comparing the approximation sets and the Pareto-optimal fronts . . . . . .
48
7.1.4
Comparing ALNS and LNS
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
7.1.5
Utilization of the methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
7.1.6
Discussion on the performance of the ALNS
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
7.2
Energy consumption and peak power demand savings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
7.2.1
Maximum savings
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
7.2.2
Trade-oﬀs between energy consumption, peak power demand and timetable
deviation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
8
Conclusion and Further Research
58
Appendix
65
==PAGE:11==
==PAGE:12==
List of Abbreviations
AC
Alternating Current
ALNS
Adaptive Large Neighborhood Search
CO2
Carbon dioxide
DC
Direct Current
EETTP
Energy-Eﬃcient Train Timetabling Problem
EETT-BOOP
Energy-Eﬃcient Train Timetabling Bi-Objective Optimization Problem
EU
European Union
GA
Genetic Algorithm
LNS
Large Neighborhood Search
MILP
Mixed Integer Linear Programming
MOOP
Multi-Objective Optimization Problem
MW
Megawatt
MWh
Megawatt hour
RL
Resource Levelling
SOOP
Single Objective Optimization Problem
TTP
Train Timetabling Problem
x
==PAGE:13==
==PAGE:14==
Chapter 1
Introduction
This report presents a new Adaptive Large Neighborhood Search matheuristic designed to address a
Bi-Objective Energy-Eﬃcient Train Timetabling Problem (EETTP). The EETTP aims at improving
the energy eﬃciency of the railway operations by determining a train timetable that maximizes the
reuse of electrical energy generated by braking trains.
In the remaining of this Chapter we discuss the motivation towards improving the energy-eﬃciency
of railway operations in Section 1.1 and we summarize the relevant literature on the EETTP in Sec-
tion 1.2.
Chapter 2 aims to provide a clear deﬁnition of the problem, the Bi-Objective Energy-Eﬃcient Train
Timetabling Problem, and the context in which it is solved. We describe the regenerative braking
technology, by which it is possible to generate electric power during trains’ braking, and provide
a simple example. In Chapter 3 the problem is formally deﬁned by a Mixed Integer Linear Pro-
gramming model. Chapter 4 and Chapter 5 are focused on the solution approaches. In Chapter
4, the theory behind the solution methods is explained whereas in Chapter 5 the Adaptive Large
Neighborhood Search matheuristic implemented is described in detail. We outline the computa-
tional experiments in Chapter 6 and we discuss the results in Chapter 7. Finally the conclusions and
the suggestion for future research are discussed in Chapter 8.
1.1
Need for energy-eﬃcient railway operations
Due to the great concern on rising temperatures and climate change, the European Union (EU) has
set goals on CO2 emissions reduction. The European countries must decrease their emissions by
80% in 2050 compared to 1990 levels. For the transportation sector the goals are to reduce the emis-
sions of greenhouse gasses by 20% below 2008 levels by 2020. A further reduction on greenhouse
gasses emissions of 60% below 1990 levels is to be achieved by 2050 [10].
Following the EU directives, the railway sector, leaded by the International Union of Railways, has
set its own goals to halve the total CO2 emitted by in 1990 by 2050 [29]. Moreover, targets on
energy consumption reduction have been set, aiming to reduce the energy consumption by 30%
in 2030 compared to 1990 levels [29]. The motivation towards reducing the energy consumption
is because of the greenhouse gas emissions related to electricity production. An average of 275.9
grams of CO2 was emitted per kilowatt of electricity produced in the EU in 2014 according to the
1
==PAGE:15==
1.2 Literature review
2
European Environment Agency [11].
Furthermore, reducing the energy consumption translates into decreasing the costs accounted for
the railway operations. In a demand-dependent energy billing scheme, power suppliers use the ac-
tual electricity consumption to bill the railway operators. If multiple operators provide services in
the same network a per train billing is used, which requires the measurement of the consumption
of each individual train. If only one operator uses the network, the energy is billed per electric
substation [2].
In the case of billing per electric substation the bill includes two components: the electric energy
consumption and the highest peak power demand. The ﬁrst component is measured in megawatt
hour (MWh) and it adds the electric power consumed by all the trains running on the network over
a period of time. The second component is measured in megawatt (MW) and it is a fee paid for the
highest instantaneous power demand on the whole network.
Railway operators can implement diﬀerent strategies in order to reduce the energy consumption and
the highest power peak, as discussed in [26]. These are:
• Replace outdated rolling stock with more energy-eﬃcient locomotives.
• Achieve a better match between supply and demand to avoid operating trains with low occu-
pancy.
• Implement energy-eﬃcient driving (or eco-driving) strategies to reduce the amount of trac-
tion energy required. This can be achieved by driving at lower speeds and increasing the
time in which trains run under coasting regime (i.e. driving without using propeller power).
Adjustments on the timetables are required to introduce running time supplements, in order
to favour eco-driving.
• Adjust the train timetables to maximize the utilization of the power generated by means of
regenerative braking.
This report is focused on the last strategy. The problem of adjusting the timetables to achieve a better
usage of regenerated electric power is known as the Energy-Eﬃcient Train Timetabling Problem.
The deﬁnition and formulation of the problem is discussed in detail in Chapter 2 and Chapter 3.
1.2
Literature review
During the past decade, the increasing number of publications on the EETTP with regenerative brak-
ing evidences a growing interest on the topic among the Operations Research community. Through-
out the literature review, the focus was put on the optimized objectives, on the assumption used in
modelling the energy transfer and on the solution methods employed. A synthesized overview of
these features for each of the ten publications surveyed can be found in Table 1.1.
Albrecht [1] was one of the ﬁrst authors studying the EETTP. He optimized the running time of
trains in order to reduce the energy consumption and the power peaks by synchronizing braking and
accelerating trains. Simulations were carried out on a Direct Current (DC) electric railway system
with 14 stations and 4 substations using the DC-load-ﬂow problem, a non-linear problem to ﬁnd
the trains’ voltage, to model the energy transfer. A Genetic Algorithm (GA) was used to solve the
==PAGE:16==
1.2 Literature review
3
Table 1.1: Publications on Energy-Eﬃcient Train Timetabling Problem.
Publication
Objective(s)
Energy transfer
Model
Solution method
Albrecht, T. [1]
Min. Peak power demand
& Min. energy consumption
DC-load-ﬂow model
Integer Programming model
Genetic Algorithm
Ramos et al. [21]
Max. Overlap time
100% on trains in same
substation
Mixed Integer Programming
model
CPLEX solver
Nasri et al. [17]
Max. Utilization of
regenerative energy
100% on trains in same
substation
Integer Programming model
Genetic algorithm
Kim et al. [14]
Min. Peak power demand
& Min. energy consumption
100% on trains in same
substation
Mixed Integer Programming
model
Heuristic algorithm
Pe˜na-Alcaraz et al. [18]
Max. Utilization of
regenerative energy
DC-load-ﬂow model
Non-Linear Mixed Integer
Programming model
SBB solver (GAMS)
Fournier et al. [12]
Max. Utilization of
regenerative energy
Losses proportional to
distance
General prigramming model
Hybrid genetic/linear
programming algorithm
Yang et al. [32]
Max. Overlap time
100% adjacent trains
Integer Programming model
Genetic algorithm
Yang et al. [33]
Max. Utilization of
regenerative energy
& Min. Passenger waiting time
100% at same
station
Integer Programming model
Genetic algorithm
Yang et al. [34]
Max. Utilization of
regenerative energy
100% on trains in same
substation
Integer Programming model
Genetic algorithm
Lesel et al. [15]
Min. Energy consumption
DC-load-ﬂow model
Integer Programming model
Genetic algorithm
& Particle swarm optimization
model and the results reported a 4% to 6% energy savings.
Ramos et al. [21] formulated the EETTP with the objective of maximizing the overlapping time
between braking and accelerating trains. The Mixed Integer Linear Programming model was solved
with the commercial solver CPLEX. The model did not include energy-related metrics but assumed
100% eﬃcient energy transfer between trains running in track segments powered from the same sub-
station. The same assumption on energy transfer was used in Kim et al. [14] to minimize both the
power peak and the energy consumption. They optimized the departure time of trains from the start
station but ﬁxed the dwell times. The model was tested on an instance of the Korea Metropolitan
Subway and results showed a 5% increase on the usage of regenerated energy and a 40% decrease
on the peak power demand.
In Fournier et al. [12] the utilization of regenerated energy is to be maximized by allowing modi-
ﬁcations in the dwell times. Authors assume that the energy losses are proportional to the distance
between each pair of trains as a consequence of the Joule heating (the circulation of electric current
through a conductor yields in losses as a fraction of energy is dissipated as heat).
Nasri et al. [17] modelled a sample railway system and its power supply system. This sample sys-
tem consists of 3 power substations, 4 trains and 5 stations. Using a GA, the model optimizes the
headway times to maximize the use of regenerated energy. Authors assumed that the transfer of en-
ergy between braking and accelerating trains only occurs within the same power supply substation.
Pe˜na-Alcaraz et al. [18] conducted one of the most interesting researches as the energy-eﬃcient
timetable for the Madrid Metro Line 3 was put into practice, resulting in 3.5% energy savings. They
formulated the EETTP to maximize the use of regenerated energy and the problem was decomposed
in two stages. First, given the electrical topology of the line they computed an equivalent electrical
circuit by means of a DC power-ﬂow model to compute the amount of energy that could be trans-
ferred between trains. The electrical system of the case study had all its sections interconnected and,
thus, the regenerated energy of a train could be used by any other train in the network. Afterwards,
the timetable was optimized by modifying the running times.
==PAGE:17==
1.2 Literature review
4
Similarly to Pe˜na-Alcaraz et al. [18], Lesel et al [15]. modelled the electrical system of a metro
line in Torino, Italy, to ﬁnd the power ﬂows. Afterwards, the timetabling problem was formulated
as a dwell time management problem with the objective of minimizing the energy consumption.
Two metaheuristics, a Particle Swam Optimization and a GA, were used to solve the problem. The
former showed better performance. In their simulations the energy consumption was reduced by 7%.
Yang et al. [32], [33] and [34] tested multiple approaches in real-life data from Beijing Metro
Yizhuang Line. Initially the objective was to maximize the overlap time between adjacent accel-
erating and braking trains [32]. Afterwards, a bi-objective formulation was proposed seeking to
optimize both the utilization of regenerative energy and minimize passengers’ waiting time by coor-
dinating arrivals and departures at the same station [33] . Finally, in [34] the goal was to maximize
the utilization of the energy regenerated by coordinating trains within the same power supply sub-
station. In all cases a GA was used as solution method. In their last publication [34], the optimized
timetable led to a 6.97% reduction of energy consumption compared to the current timetable oper-
ated in the Yizhuang Line.
The literature review revealed that the research has formulated the EETTP to optimize diﬀerent
objectives. Nevertheless only in a few publications more than one objective was considered si-
multaneously. Furthermore, most of the papers assume 100% energy transfer eﬃciency for trains
running in track sections supplied from the same substation. However, some consider more realistic
assumptions by modelling the electric network supplying the railway system by use of DC-power-
ﬂow models. Finally, using metaheuristics, such as the GA, as solution method prevailed over exact
algorithms.
==PAGE:18==
Chapter 2
Problem Description
This Chapter aims at providing a clear deﬁnition of the Energy-Eﬃcient Train Timetabling Problem
with Regenerative Braking. In Section 2.3, is described the Bi-Objective formulation of the EETTP,
which is the speciﬁc problem of study in this report. An overview of the railway planning process
is given in Section 2.1. In that section, the context in which the EETTP arises is introduced.
In Section 2.2 the EETTP with Regenerative Braking is deﬁned. The principles of the regenerative
braking technology are discussed in Section 2.2.1 and we provide an example of the use of regen-
erative braking in Section 2.2.2. In Section 2.3 we discuss the motivation towards formulating the
EETTP as a Bi-Objective Optimization Problem (BOOP). Finally, a description of the input and
output data of the EETTP is given in Section 2.4.
2.1
Optimization of railway systems
The purpose of this Section is to provide an overview of the whole railway planning process. The
overview will allow us to identify the planning stage corresponding to the Energy-Eﬃcient Train
Timetabling Problem. This will, in turn, clearly describe the inputs, the data, to the EETTP and its
output.
Passenger railway planning is a complex optimization problem and therefore it is usually addressed
as a sequential process. The planning problem is decomposed in smaller optimization subproblems
that are solved in a sequential manner, one after the other. Thus, the solution obtained in a subprob-
lem becomes input data to the following problem in the sequence.
Such planning approach may turn into sub-optimal or even infeasible solutions. This happens when
at a particular planning stage it is impossible to fulﬁll the requirements (or constraints) with the
resources provided in the input data, which have been determined in a previous stage. Therefore,
the procedure is iterative and, at some points, previous problems must be solved again seeking for
solutions that are feasible in the following stages.
In competitive railway markets, multiple stakeholders with conﬂicting interests are involved in the
railway planning, namely, the infrastructure manager and various railway operators. The infras-
tructure manager is the owner of the railway network, comprising the tracks, the stations and the
power grid, besides being in charge of the real-time traﬃc control. The railway operators are the
5
==PAGE:19==
2.1 Optimization of railway systems
6
commercial companies that provide railway services (i.e. they operate the trains) with their own or
leased rolling stock (i.e. locomotives and wagons) [6].
However, in the description of the planning process presented here we will consider a railway net-
work with a single operator, which, in turn, acts as infrastructure manager. This structure is rep-
resentative for many urban-suburban railway services, undergrounds and tramways. Furthermore,
such context makes the proposed formulation of EETTP more understandable.
Caprara, A. et al. [6] identify all the optimization subproblems that constitute the railway planning.
These are summarized below in their sequence order.
• Line Planning Problem: given the passenger demand and the infrastructure, the Line Planning
Problem aims at deciding which train routes to operate, which capacity and which frequency.
• Train Timetabling Problem (TTP): it determines an operationally feasible timetable for each
train service. The timetable must ensure track capacity constraints, station capacities and
maintenance operations.
• Train Platforming Problem: it assigns a platform at the stations for each train. It assigns the
path from the station entrance until the platform and from the platform to the station exit.
• Rolling Stock Circulation Problem: it assigns the train units (locomotives and wagons) that
will be used to operate all the train services.
• Train Unit Shunting Problem: it determines where to park the train units when they are not in
service or need maintenance.
• Crew Planning Problem: it aims at assigning the shifts to the drivers and conductors.
The sequential planning process is graphically shown in Figure 2.1. For each problem, the ﬁgure
presents its input and output data. In this context we situate the EETTP as a stage right after the
TTP. We assume that an operationally feasible timetable has been generated solving the TTP, by tak-
ing into account the desired travelling speeds and the track and station capacities [5]. Additionally,
adequate transfers at stations to the passengers are provided and robustness aspects among others
are considered [4]. This operationally feasible timetable is the input data to the EETTP. The output
timetable generated by the EETTP becomes input data for the Train Platforming Problem.
==PAGE:20==
2.2 Energy-Eﬃcient Train Timetabling Problem with regenerative braking
7
Figure 2.1: The sequential Passenger Railway Planning process. Source: Adapted from Roberti, R.
(2016). Lecture in Train Timetabling Problems, Optimization of Public Transport. DTU Transport.
2.2
Energy-Eﬃcient Train Timetabling Problem with regenerative brak-
ing
The EETTP consists in ﬁnding a train timetable that favours the utilization of the regenerated en-
ergy produced by braking trains equipped with regenerative braking technology. This energy can be
used by nearby trains if they consume it at the same moment it is generated. There are two means to
modify the timetable. One consists on changing the speed of the trains and, thus, shorten or lengthen
the travel times between stations. The second option consists on changing the departure times from
the intermediate stations by tweaking the dwell times (or stopping times).
2.2.1
Regenerative braking technology
The regenerative braking technology is a brake system that dissipates the mechanical energy of a
vehicle by transforming it into electric energy. Electric motors are in general aimed at converting
electrical energy into mechanical energy. However, a particularity of electric motors is that they
can work on the opposite way and transform mechanical energy into electricity by switching their
rotation direction [13].
In electriﬁed railway networks, trains obtain the electricity used for traction and onboard systems
usually from an overhead conductor (or catenary). The electricity produced by regenerative braking
==PAGE:21==
2.2 Energy-Eﬃcient Train Timetabling Problem with regenerative braking
8
is transferred back to the catenary through the pantograph and it can be used to power other trains
circulating through the network. Therefore, this energy is not stored and is wasted if it is not
simultaneously consumed by another train. A schematic representation of the transfer of regenerated
energy is shown in Figure 2.2, where a braking train transfers power to an accelerating train.
Figure 2.2: Schematic representation of the energy transfer between a braking and an accelerating
train. Source: Adapted from Hasegawa et al. (1999) [13].
For the power transference to take place, the supplier train and the supplied train must be running
on same segments of the power grid. The eﬃciency of the power transfer depends on multiple
variables such as the distance between trains, the overhead conductor voltage, current and whether
the electricity is supplied as alternating current (AC) or direct current, among others. Alternating
current with high voltages has less energy losses than direct current with low voltages [26].
2.2.2
Power proﬁles and example
Here we present a small example of energy transfer between two trains to show how the power
consumption of trains and the energy transfer are modelled.
The power consumption is modelled for each trip between a pair of stations. The continuous power
consumption is discretized down to the second. For each second, the average power demand is
given. The union of all the power consumption per second of a trip forms the power proﬁle of that
trip.
The power proﬁles of two trains, 1 and 2, can be seen in Figure 2.3 in red and blue, respectively.
The ﬁgure presents two example cases (A and B) that are discussed later in this section. In both
plots the x-axis represents the travel time in seconds while the y-axis represents the power demand
in MW. The power proﬁles of train 1 and 2 are the same in both cases, however the total power
proﬁle (black line) changes.
Four phases can be recognized in the power proﬁles. The ﬁrst phase starts with the departure from
the station and comprises the time of acceleration. In this phase the power demand increases, hitting
the highest peak at the moment the maximum speed is reached. After that, on the one hand, train
1 (red) enters the phase of cruising driving regime, in which the speed is maintained constant. In
the power proﬁle this is translated in a quick drop followed by a constant, low, power demand. On
the other hand, train 2 (blue) enters on coasting driving regime, in which no traction power is used,
and, therefore, the power demand is near zero. When the braking regime starts the power proﬁles
experiment a large drop to negative values. This means that the trains are feeding electricity back to
the grid by means of regenerative braking. The amount of power regenerated decreases as the trains
decelerate and it reaches zero when they arrive at their end station.
==PAGE:22==
2.2 Energy-Eﬃcient Train Timetabling Problem with regenerative braking
9
In case A, train 1 departs at minute 0 whereas train 2 departs at minute 1 (60 seconds). In this
case, the acceleration phases of both trains overlap for almost 2 minutes. Consequently, the total
power proﬁle (black) reaches a peak of 4.34 MW. When train 1 starts braking the regenerated en-
ergy is transferred to train 2. However, train 2 is on coasting regime and, thus, only an imperceptible
amount of regenerated energy can be reused. The rest is wasted.
In case B, train 2 has shifted its departure time by two minutes and now departs at minute 3 (180
seconds). In this case, the braking phase of train 1 overlaps with the acceleration phase of train 2.
This translates into a large energy transfer from train 1 to train 2. In Figure 2.3, the saved energy
is the area between the blue curve (above) and the black curve (below). Notice that in both cases A
and B, the energy regenerated by train 2 is completely wasted as it not used by any train.
The total energy consumption and the highest peak for both cases A and B and the savings in case
B compared to case A are shown in Table 2.1. In this example, case B yields a 22% and a 43%
savings of energy consumption and peak demand, respectively, compared to case A. Notice that a
100% energy transfer eﬃciency has been assumed in the example, which is the same assumption
done in our model as it is discussed in Section 3.1.
Figure 2.3: Power proﬁles of trains 1 and 2 and total power demand for cases A and B. Source:
self-elaborated.
Table 2.1: Total energy consumption, highest peak power demand and savings for cases A and B.
Case A
Case B
Savings
Total energy consumption
0.0996 MWh
0.0773 MWh
22.36 %
Highest peak
4.336 MW
2.458 MW
43.31 %
==PAGE:23==
2.3 EETTP as a Bi-Objecive Optimization Problem
10
2.3
EETTP as a Bi-Objecive Optimization Problem
The literature review in Section 1.2 revealed that the research conducted on the topic of energy-
eﬃcient train timetabling has been mainly focused on optimizing one of the following objectives:
1. Maximizing the time that accelerating trains overlap with braking trains.
2. Maximizing the use of regenerated energy.
3. Minimizing the total energy consumption.
4. Minimizing the peak power demand.
Although formulated in a diﬀerent manner, both the objective of maximizing the overlapping time
of accelerating and braking trains and the objective of maximizing the use of regenerated energy aim
at minimizing the total energy consumption. These objectives are in the line with what is discussed
in Section 1.1. Railway operators must reduce the energy consumption and should as well reduce
the peak demands generated during operations in order to reduce their operational costs.
Therefore, at the planning stage of the EETTP the railway planner is facing a dilemma. First, it is
important to minimize the total energy consumption in order to provide a greener transport service
to passengers. Second, reducing the peak power demand to further minimize the operational cost,
would be advantageous. However, modifying the timetable will translate into a reduction of the
level of service and decrease its robustness. Even more, modiﬁcations can lead to an operationally
infeasible timetable. The following question, thus, naturally arises: how much is the railway planner
willing to deviate from the operationally feasible timetable?
The previous paragraphs expounded the three objectives that are relevant from the point of view of
a railway planner at the current planning stage. These objectives are summarized below:
• Minimize the Total Energy Consumption;
• Minimize the Maximum Peak Power Demand;
• Control the deviation from the current timetable.
Hence, we deﬁne the Energy-Eﬃcient Train Timetabling Bi-Objective Optimization Problem (EETT-
BOOP) as the problem that aims at ﬁnding a feasible train timetable that minimizes the total energy
consumption and the peak power demand while controlling the deviation speciﬁed by the planners,
from an input timetable.
Now, we assume that all the trains circulating in the railway network are of the same importance. By
this we consider that a minute of deviation on the departure time of a particular train is as preferable
to a minute of deviation of any other train. Then, for each allowed minute of deviation, tdev, an
instance can be constructed. In that instance, all the train legs have a time window of possible
departure times around their current departure time, tcurr. The width of this time window is:
[tcurr −tdev, tcurr + tdev]
Thus, an instance is deﬁned by a given timetable and a ﬁxed allowed deviation (see Deﬁnition 1)
and the objective of controlling the deviation from the current timetable is implicitly governed by
==PAGE:24==
2.4 Input and output data of the EETT-BOOP
11
the instances.
By solving the EETT-BOOP for diﬀerent allowed deviations, the railway planner obtains an overview
of the beneﬁts of allowing further modiﬁcations on the departure times.
Hence, for each allowed deviation, the question the EETT-BOOP seeks to answer is: How much
can the total energy consumption and how much can the peak power demand be reduced if we are
willing to deviate tdev minutes from the current timetable?
2.4
Input and output data of the EETT-BOOP
The stage at which the EETTP is addressed immediately follows the TTP, which output is an oper-
ationally feasible timetable (i.e. an assignment of a departure time to each train leg). This timetable
is input data to the EETTP together with information of the power demand of each leg. This in-
formation is given in the form of power demand proﬁles for each leg, which have been discussed
in Section 2.2. Furthermore, it is assumed that input timetable is complemented with a prescribed
maximum allowed deviation from the current departure time, which deﬁnes a time window of al-
lowed consecutive departure times.
After the optimization process, the output of the EETTP is a new feasible timetable that enhances
the energy-eﬃciency of the railway operation.
A deﬁnition of an instance and a solution of the EETT-BOOP is presented in Deﬁnition 1 and
Deﬁnition 2, repectively. A formal mathematical deﬁnition of the instances and the precedence
constraints governing the timetable is given in Chapter 3 in the form of a Mixed Integer Linear
Programming Model.
Deﬁnition 1 EETT-BOOP INSTANCE
An instance of the EETT-BOOP is composed by a set of train legs, each of them with a time window
of allowed consecutive departure times around the departure time in the input timetable. This
input timetable fulﬁlls all the operational constraints. For each train leg, the instance includes a
power demand proﬁle. Furthermore, the instance deﬁnes the parameters governing the precedence
constraints.
The information included in the instance is summarized below:
• An input timetable with an assigned departure time tin for each leg.
• The running time of each train leg, rt.
• The maximum allowed minutes of deviation from the current departure time, tdev.
• Each train leg has deﬁned its train successor leg, its track successor leg and its connection
leg(s).
• A vector of parameters, v, deﬁning the parameters governing the precedence constraints.
• A power demand proﬁle for each train leg.
==PAGE:25==
2.4 Input and output data of the EETT-BOOP
12
Deﬁnition 2 EETT-BOOP SOLUTION
A solution of the EETT-BOOP is a feasible timetable. That is, each train leg has assigned a unique
departure time that satisﬁes all the operational constraints. A solution contains a unique association
between each train leg and its new departure time, tnew. Furthermore, it is expected that the new
timetable is more energy-eﬃcient than the input timetable.
A feasible solution must fulﬁll:
• Each leg has a new departure time associated such that:
tnew ∈[tin −tdev, tin + tdev]
• For each leg, given {tnew, rt, v}, all the precedence constraints related to its train successor
leg, its track successor leg and its connection leg(s) are respected.
Summarizing, the input data of the EETT-BOOP includes the power demand proﬁle of each train
leg and an input timetable, which deﬁnes the precedence constraints between train legs, from which
it is intended to deviate the minimum as possible. Furthermore, a maximum allowed deviation from
the input timetable is set by the railway planner. A schematic overview of the inputs and output of
the problem is shown in Figure 2.4.
Figure 2.4: Inputs and output of the EETT-BOOP.
==PAGE:26==
Chapter 3
Problem Formulation
In this Chapter the EETT-BOOP is formally described by a Mixed Integer Linear Programming
(MILP) model. The chapter is structured as follows: First, the deﬁnitions of the concepts used in
the instances of the EETT-BOOP are presented to ease the comprehension of the MILP model. An
exhaustive enumeration of the sets, parameters and decision variables used in the MILP is given in
Section 3.2 together with an explanation of the derivation of the formula accounting for the total
energy consumption (Section 3.2.1). The complete MILP model is presented in Section 3.3. Finally,
in Section 3.4, the EETTP is formulated as a Resource Levelling problem.
3.1
Deﬁnitions and assumptions
A timetable is deﬁned as the assignment of a feasible departure time to each train leg operated in the
railway system. A leg represents a trip between a pair of train stations without intermediate stops.
Each leg has a prescribed travel time. Further, each leg has assigned a current departure time (the
combination of all the current departure times constitute the input timetable) as well as earliest and
latest possible departure times, which describe a time window of possible departure times. It is to
be noticed that the departure times in the input timetable deﬁne the ordering of the legs.
A train is deﬁned by a sequence of legs that must be traversed in the appropriate order. Thus, each
leg (except the last one) has a successor leg departing from its arrival station. A minimum stopping
time (or dwell time) between them must be respected. Legs might as well have a connection leg.
Connection legs are deﬁned in order to ease the transfer of passengers from one train to another at
some stations. The departure times of pairs of connection legs must be within a certain time window.
A simpliﬁed railway network with one track per direction and one platform per direction at each
station is assumed. Therefore, overtaking is not allowed. Based on the input timetable, each leg has
a track successor leg, which is the next train leg traversing the same segment of track. Safety must
be ensured and, thus, a safety headway has to be maintained between the departure times of a leg
and its track successor leg.
The travel time of the leg is discretized down to the second to provide the power proﬁles. In this
way, for each second the power consumption of the train is given in MW. This second-power con-
sumption can take both positive an negative values, representing the last ones power generation by
regenerative breaking. Refer to Section 2.2.2 for a detailed description of the power proﬁles.
13
==PAGE:27==
3.2 Sets, parameters, decision variables and objective functions
14
A solution of the EETT-BOOP is a timetable. This is, a feasible assignment of a departure time to
each leg in the railway system, which optimizes the use of the regenerated energy.
The following assumptions have been done whrn modelling the EETT-BOOP:
• 100% eﬃcient energy transfer is assumed in the whole network. This is, the energy generated
by any braking train can be used by any other train simultaneously running on the network
without losses. In Section 2.2 it was discussed that energy losses occur when transferring
power. Furthermore, more realistic modelling has been used in the literature as described in
Section 1.2. However, the datasets used on the computational experiments were designed to
be used assuming 100% eﬃcient transfers throughout the network and no information about
the topology of the power supply network, neither its characteristics, is provided.
• The running times of the train legs, and, hence, the power proﬁles, are kept unaltered through
the optimization process. This means that the adjustments on the timetable can only be done
by changing the dwell times of trains at the stations. Variable running times would require
variable power proﬁles, which are not provided on the instances.
3.2
Sets, parameters, decision variables and objective functions
In this Section all the sets, parameters and decision variables used for the MILP formulation of the
EETT-BOOP are presented. The following sets and parameters are used in the formulation:
L := set of train legs indexed by i.
T := set of discrete minutes, indexed by t, that comprise the whole time horizon of the instance.
Ti := set of possible departure times of leg i ∈L.
S := set of discrete seconds, indexed by s, that comprise the whole time horizon of the instance.
t∗
i := the minute of departure in the input timetable of leg i ∈L.
di := the minimum dwell time in minutes of leg i ∈L.
ri := the running time in minutes of leg i ∈L.
hi j := the minimum headway time, in minutes, between leg i and its track successor leg j; i, j ∈L
cmin
i j
and cmax
ij
:= the minimum and maximum connection times between legs i and j in minutes;
i,j ∈L.
πi
st := parameter indicating the power demand of leg i ∈L at second s ∈S if it departs at time t ∈Ti.
If the leg consumes power from the electric grid, then πi
st ≥0. If the leg returns power to the electric
grid by means of regenerative braking, πi
st ≤0.
ls := the last second of the instance’s time horizon.
δ := parameter indicating the largest allowed deviation from the current departure time.
Next, the decision variables are introduced:
xi
t := binary decision variable that takes the value of 1 if leg i departs at time t and 0 otherwise;
xi
t ∈{0, 1} ∀i ∈L, ∀t ∈Ti.
ti := positive integer decision variable equal to the departure time of leg i ∈L; ti ∈Z+ ∀i ∈L.
πs := positive continuous variable equal to the power demand in the railway network at second s;
πs ∈R+
0 ∀s ∈S.
Πmax := positive continuous variable equal to the maximum power demand in the railway network
==PAGE:28==
3.2 Sets, parameters, decision variables and objective functions
15
during the whole time horizon; Πmax ∈R+
0.
3.2.1
Minimizing the total energy consumption
In this Section the term representing the total energy consumption used in the objective function of
the MILP model is deﬁned.
Assuming a function that describes the evolution of the energy consumption along time, the total
energy consumed is given by the integral (i.e. the area under the curve). Recall that the discretized
data of the power demand of each leg is given in a second scale discretization. Precisely, for each
second, the average power demand on that second is given. The energy consumption will be com-
puted by using the trapezoid approximation of integrals or trapezoidal rule.
The formula of the trapezoidal rule for approximating the integral of a function f(x) between the
lower and upper limints a and b is as follows:
Z b
a
f(x) dx ≈(b −a) f(a) + f(b)
2
(3.1)
Let π(s) be a function describing the the real power demand proﬁle. Now, using the trapezoidal
rule, the total energy consumption for the time interval comprising the whole instance time can be
approximated by:
Z ls
0
π(s) ds ≈(1 −0)π0 + π1
2
+ ... + (ls −(ls −1))πls−1 + πls
2
= 1
2
ls−1
X
s=0
(πs + πs+1)
(3.2)
The expression on the right-hand side in equation (3.2) deﬁnes the term used on the objective func-
tion (3.3).
==PAGE:29==
3.3 Mixed Integer Linear Programming Model
16
3.3
Mixed Integer Linear Programming Model
The complete MILP model that deﬁnes the EETT-BOOP is presented below:
minimize (Πmax, 1
2
X
s∈S\{ls}
(πs + πs+1))
(3.3)
subject to
X
t∈Ti
xi
t = 1
∀i ∈L
(3.4)
ti =
X
t∈Ti
txi
t
∀i ∈L
(3.5)
t j −(ti + ri) ≥di
∀(i, j) ∈L × L : j is successor leg of i
(3.6)
tj −(ti + ri) ≥hij
∀(i, j) ∈L × L : j is track successor leg of i
(3.7)
tj −(ti + ri) ≥cmin
ij
∀(i, j) ∈L × L : j is connection leg of i
(3.8)
t j −(ti + ri) ≤cmax
ij
∀(i, j) ∈L × L : j is connection leg of i
(3.9)
X
i∈L
X
t∈Ti
πi
stxi
t ≤πs
∀s ∈S
(3.10)
πs ≤Πmax
∀s ∈S
(3.11)
ti −t∗
i ≤δi
∀i ∈L
(3.12)
t∗
i −ti ≤δi
∀i ∈L
(3.13)
xi
t ∈{0, 1}
∀i ∈L, ∀t ∈Ti
(3.14)
ti ∈Z+
∀i ∈L
(3.15)
πs ∈R+
0
∀s ∈S
(3.16)
Πmax ∈R+
0
(3.17)
The objective function (3.3) seeks to minimize the two objectives of the EETT-BOOP. The ﬁrst term
minimizes the peak power demand. The second term minimizes the total energy consumption. The
formula deﬁning the total energy consumption was presented in Section 3.2.1.
Constraints (3.4) to (3.9) deﬁne the scheduling model:
Constraint (3.4) ensures that each train leg is assigned one, and only one, departure time from its set
of allowed departure times. Constraint (3.5) imposes the correct value to variables ti.
Using the variables ti the precedence constraints can be easily expressed. First, constrain (3.6)
ensures that the minimum dwell time between consecutive legs traversed by the same train is re-
spected. Second, the headways need to be respected for safety reasons between legs using the same
track consecutively. If leg j is the track successor leg of leg i then constraint (3.7) imposes the
fulﬁllment of the safety headways. Third, for certain pairs of legs (i, j) ∈L × L the connections
must be maintained. This is ensured by constraints (3.8) and (3.9).
The transfer of energy through the electric network is deﬁned by constraint (3.10). Recall that the
power consumption of the trains when traversing the legs is given per second. Thus, to compute
the power demand on the network, the second scale of time discretization is used. The constraint
imposes that at each second, the power demand on the network is equal to the sum of the power
demands of all legs in that particular second.
==PAGE:30==
3.4 Resource Levelling formulation for the EETTP
17
Notice that the decision variables πs are always greater than or equal to zero. Thus, if the left hand
side of equation (3.10) takes negative values, that surplus of regenerated power is not accounted.
This is coherent with the assumptions on energy transfer. Recall that we assumed that if the regen-
erated power is wasted if it is not consumed at the at the same time of generation.
Constraint (3.11) deﬁnes the variable Πmax as the maximum instantaneous peak power demand in
the entire planning horizon.
In order to control the deviation from the input timetable, constraints (3.12) and (3.13) ensure that
the deviation does not exceed the maximum allowed. Notice that constraint (3.12) deﬁnes the devi-
ation when the departure time is delayed whereas constraint (3.13) deﬁnes the deviation when the
departure time is anticipated.
The ranges of values of all decision variables are deﬁned in constraints (3.14) to (3.17).
3.4
Resource Levelling formulation for the EETTP
An alternative formulation for the EETTP is developed based on the Resource Leveling (RL) Prob-
lem. This scheduling problem has been studied in the Operations Reasearch literature for man-
ufacturing and project management scheduling problems [23]. In Section 3.4.4 we discuss the
motivation towards using a formulation of the EETTP as a Resourece Levelling Problem.
The objective function of the Resource Levelling problem aims at minimizing the ﬂuctuation of the
consumption of certain resources along the project’s time-span. In the classic formulation of the
Resource Levelling Problem, the time-span is divided in consecutive time periods and the objective
function seeks for minimizing the sum of the squares of the resource consumption of each time
period [23].
3.4.1
Sets, parameters and decision variables of the RL formulation
In our formulation, the sum of the squares of the peak power demand of each time period is the
function to be minimized. This MILP model uses sets, parameters and decision variables deﬁned in
Section 3.2 and used in the MILP model for the EETT-BOOP in Section 3.3, besides the constrains
from the scheduling model and the energy transfer model.
However, new sets and parameters must be deﬁned:
P := set of disjoint time periods indexed by p in which is decomposed the set of seconds S.
Sp := set of consecutive seconds in time period p ∈P.
Np := set of power steps in which the upper bound of the peak power demand at time period p ∈P
is divided. The power steps are indexed by n from the lowest power step to the highest.
h := parameter equal to the height of the power steps; h ∈R+.
And two new sets of decision variables:
==PAGE:31==
3.4 Resource Levelling formulation for the EETTP
18
Πp := positive continuous variable equal to the maximum power demand in the railway network
during time period p; Πp ∈R+
0 ∀p ∈P
zpn := continuous decision variables in 0 ≤zpn ≤1. They express the amount of the power step
n ∈Np used in time period p ∈P.
3.4.2
RL objective function
The objective function of the standard Resource Levelling problem is such that
f(X) :=
X
p∈P
(Πp)2
(3.18)
Notice that this is a nonlinear objective function. In order to solve the combinatorial optimization
problems in a more eﬃcient way using a commercial MIP-solver the objective function was lin-
earized. The linearization technique employed was adapted from the one presented in [22] and [23].
Lets assume that H ∈R+ is an upper bound on the peak power demand. Now, we divide the interval
[0, H] in m equal parts or power steps. Each of the m power steps has a height h ∈R+ deﬁned as
h = H
m such that
[0, H] = [0, h) ∪[h, 2h) ∪... ∪[(m −1)h, Hp]
and lets denote the set of power steps for each time period p as Np indexed by n from the bottom
up.
Now, using the auxiliary continuous variables zpn, that express the amount of the power step n used
in time period p, the value of the peak power demand in time period p is linked to the sum over the
power steps by the following constraint:
Πp ≤
X
n∈Np
hpzpn
∀p ∈P
The objective function uses a direction factor (2n −1), which gives higher penalty to the upper
power steps of the peak power demand. Hence, the lower power steps are used before. Then, the
linear approximation of the Resource Levelling objective function is:
f(X) :=
X
p∈P
X
n∈Np
(2n −1) h2 zpn
(3.19)
Notice that the function deﬁned in (3.19) is equal to the square of the power demand at the extreme
points of the power steps. The number of power steps m used determines the quality of the approx-
imation. As greater the discretization (i.e. more power steps), better the approximation. In [23]
authors argue that a discretization of unitary steps provides an exact approximation to the square
function.
==PAGE:32==
3.4 Resource Levelling formulation for the EETTP
19
3.4.3
MILP model of the RL formulation
Now, the complete MILP model of the Resource Levelling formulation of the EETTP can be pre-
sented:
minimize
X
p∈P
X
n∈N
(2n −1) h2 zpn
(3.20)
subject to
(3.4), (3.5), (3.6),(3.7), (3.8), (3.9), (3.10),
(3.21)
πs ≤Πp
∀s ∈S, p ∈P : s ∈Sp
(3.22)
Πp ≤
X
n∈Np
hpzpn
∀p ∈P
(3.23)
(3.14), (3.15),(3.16), (3.17),
(3.24)
Πp ∈R+
0
∀p ∈P
(3.25)
zpn ∈(0, 1)
∀p ∈P, ∀n ∈Np
(3.26)
The objective function (3.20) aims at minimizing the sum of the squares of of the peak power de-
mands of each time period.
The constraints deﬁning the scheduling model and the precedence constraints and the constraint
deﬁning the electric power transfer, constraints (3.4) to (3.10), are the same as for the model in
Section 3.3.
Constraint (3.22) deﬁnes the variable Πp, which is linked with the variables zpn by constraint (3.23).
The ranges of values of all decision variables are deﬁned in constraints (3.14) to (3.17) together
with constraints (3.25) and (3.26).
3.4.4
Motivation for a Resource Levelling formulation of the EETTP
The Resource Levelling Problem is a particular scheduling problem that seeks for minimizing the
variability on the use of some resources during the execution of a project. This is of great interest
in the case where this variability has high costs associated.
To achieve that objective, the Resource Levelling Problem has been formulated to reduce the sum
of squares of the amount of resource used at each time period. By this, as the objective function
value does not increase linearly, higher consumptions are more penalized and, thus, the model tries
to reduce the peaks by moving the consumption of those resources to low-consumption time periods
where they are less penalized.
Traditionally, the resource levelling has been studied in the context of manufacturing industries,
where the high costs related to inventory or raw materials supply are to be minimized, or in civil
works projects, where variations on the workforce can have high cost implications (costs associated
to short labor contracts) [9], [25]. It must be noticed that in the the cases studied in the literature it
is not possible to reduce the total amount of resources used. The activities are scheduled in order to
==PAGE:33==
3.4 Resource Levelling formulation for the EETTP
20
even the use of resources along time but the total consumption is maintained.
The EETTP with regenerative braking diﬀers from the classic problems modelled as Ressource Lev-
elling Problems as it is actually possible to reduce the total amount of resource (electricity) used to
complete the process (railway operations).
By using the principle of the Resource Levelling Problem in the EETT-BOOP to reduce the sum of
squares of the electricity demand peaks of each of the time periods it is expected that:
• The maximum power demand peak will be reduced as that is the most penalized peak.
• The total energy consumption will be minimized. Lower peak power demands can be achieved
by making a good use of the regenerated electricity (by synchronizing departures and arrivals).
Hence, we are assuming that for the particular case of the EETTP with regenerative braking, the
Resource Levelling objective function is implicitly a bi-objective function seeking for minimizing
the power demand peak and the total energy consumption.
If we consider two extreme formulations of the EETT-BOOP as Resource Levelling Problem:
1. The length of the time periods p is set equal to the total project time (single day railway
operation).
2. The length of the time periods p is set equal to 1 second.
It is clear that formulation 1 is equivalent to a single-objective optimization problem minimizing
the highest peak power demand as, in this extreme case, one single peak (the square of it) is to be
minimized.
In the extreme case 2, the objective function of the Resource Levelling model would try to minimize
the sum of squares of the power demand for each single second. It is reasonable to think that that
would reduce the total energy consumption as the use of the regenerated energy will be favored.
However, this is not equivalent to a single-objective optimization model minimizing the total en-
ergy consumption, as it is the sum of squares that is minimized and, thus, solutions with larger total
energy consumption might result in lower “sum of squares” than solutions with less energy con-
sumption.
==PAGE:34==
Chapter 4
Theory and Background
We start this chapter presenting the basic theory of Multi-Objective Optimization Problems (MOOP)
in Section 4.1 and discussing the challenges of solving MOOPs. Following, we present the ϵ-
Constrain method, which is a classic, exact, solution method to address MOOPs, in Section 4.2.
Then, we discuss the reasons towards employing heuristics to solve complex optimization problems,
in Section 4.3, which serves us to motivate the development of an heuristic algorithm to address the
EETT-BOOP.
Finally, the Adaptive Large Neighborhood Search (ALNS) framework is described from a theo-
retical point of view in Section 4.4. This description includes the deﬁnitions of concepts such as
neighborhood search and destroy and repair methods. The pseudo-code of the standard ALNS is
presented in 4.4.3.
4.1
Multi-Objective Optimization Problems
MOOPs present diﬀerences from Single-Objective Optimization Problems (SOOP) that force the
planner (or decision maker) to take a more ”active” involvement during the solution process. Op-
timization algorithms cannot provide a unique ”optimal” solution unless the decision maker has
clearly deﬁned the preferences at the beginning. At the end of the process, the planner will have
to analyze a set of solutions and choose among them. The stage of the solution process in which
the planner takes an active involvement deﬁnes the two main strategies to solve MOOPs, which are
discussed in Section 4.1.1.
In Deb, K. [8], the author outlines the main diﬀerences between SOOPs and MOOPs. These are:
1. The optimal set has, usually, more than one solution.
The existence of multiple objectives leads to the following question: Is it possible to ﬁnd a
solution that optimizes all the objectives at the same time? The answer is, in most of the
cases, no. The objectives to optimize in MOOPs are usually in conﬂict. This is, solutions that
present a good performance on one objective tend to perform bad on the others.
This characteristic makes the concept of an optimal solution (commonly used in SOOPs)
loose when solving MOOPs. Therefore, concepts such as most preferred solution are often
used to denote the solution ﬁnally chosen by the planner [16].
21
==PAGE:35==
4.1 Multi-Objective Optimization Problems
22
The evaluation of a particular solution of a MOOP expresses a trade-oﬀbetween the objec-
tives. A ﬁnal decision will need to be taken by the planner, who will select the preferred
solution, which expresses a suitable trade-oﬀ.
2. When addressing a MOOP there are two optimization goals instead of one (as in the case of
SOOPs).
The fact that each particular solution expresses a diﬀerent trade-oﬀbetween the objectives
does not mean, however, that there are not better and worse solutions of a MOOP. It is clear
that a particular solution with certain values for each of the individual objectives is preferred
over another solution that performs equally in all the objectives but one, in which it performs
worse.
Hence, we are not only interested in ﬁnding a set of solutions expressing diﬀerent trade-oﬀs
but we want to ﬁnd the set of solutions expressing the best trade-oﬀs. This set is called the
Pareto-optimal set and it is formally deﬁned in Deﬁnition 5. Thus, the ﬁrst goal is to ﬁnd a
set of solutions as close as possible to the optimal set of solutions.
Secondly, to provide the ﬁnal decision maker with a good range of solutions to choose from,
we want to ﬁnd a set of solutions that are as spread as possible. A set of solutions is well
spread if it represents uniformly distributed trade-oﬀs, with wide ranges for each objective.
3. There are two search spaces: the decision variables space and the objective space.
The decision space is constituted by all the feasible solutions of the optimization problem.
The solutions on the decision space are mapped to the objective space by the objective func-
tions. Furthermore, solutions with near objective values can be very distant on the decision
space. This characteristic has been exploited by some solution techniques that use informa-
tion from the objective space to perform the search on the variables space.
4.1.1
Strategies to address MOOP
Although MOOPs can result in multiple solutions we must not forget that the decision maker is
in the need of one single solution, as only one solution can be adopted. Therefore, at some stage
of the solution process, the planner must express speciﬁc preferences, which will lead to choosing
one single solution. These higher level preferences might be non-technical but rather qualitative or
based on experienced [8]
Depending on at what stage the planner expresses these preferences, the solving strategies for
MOOPs can be classiﬁed in two main categories: the a priori and the a posteriori strategies [8], [16].
The a priori strategies rely on the decision maker expressing the preferences at the beginning of
the solution process. Those can take the form of objective goals, thresholds on the value of some
objective, or of weights, which determine the importance of each objective in a combined objective
function. On the other hand, the a posteriori strategies consists on, ﬁrst, ﬁnding a good set of solu-
tions and, second, choosing one among them based on higher level preferences.
Generally, the methods used on the a priori strategies require less computational eﬀort as a single
solution is computed. However, it might be diﬃcult for the planner to deﬁne the preferences on
the solution at the earliest stage of the decision process. The solutions methods employed in the a
==PAGE:36==
4.2 ϵ-Constraint method
23
posteriori strategies might be more computationally challenging but they provide much more infor-
mation. They allow the decision maker to see the whole picture and, thus, to take well informed
decisions as a solution is selected knowing other options.
4.1.2
Concepts of dominance, non-dominated set and Pareto-optimality
The concepts of dominance and of pareto-optimality have already been used in the previous section
to discuss aspects of MOOPs. However, a formal deﬁnition is needed to avoid misunderstandings,
as those concepts are used in the descriptions of the solution approaches.
The concept of dominance applies to two solutions that one wants to compare. The following
deﬁnition is adapted from Deb, K. [8]. The concept of dominance is deﬁned for a general MOOP
in which all the objectives are to be minimized.
Assuming a MOOP that has M objective functions f to be minimized, then:
Deﬁnition 3 DOMINANCE
A solution x1 dominates another solution x2 if the two following conditions are true:
1. The objective values of solution x1 are not larger than those of x2 for any objective. That is,
fj(x1) ≤fj(x2)
∀j = 1, 2, ..., M
2. For at least one objective, the objective value of solution x is strictly lower than that of x2.
That is,
fj(x1) < fj(x2)
for at least one j ∈1, 2, ..., M
If any of those two conditions do not apply, solution x1 does not dominate solution x2. Furthermore,
it is easy to deduce that if solution x1 dominates solution x2 then a third solution x3, such that it is
dominated by solution x2, it is dominated as well by x1.
Now it is straight forward to deﬁne the concepts of non-dominated set of solutions and of Pareto-
optimal set:
Deﬁnition 4 NON-DOMINATED SET
A non-dominated set P is a set of solutions such that no solution in P is dominated by another
solution in P.
Deﬁnition 5 PARETO-OPTIMAL SET
The set of solutions P∗that dominates the entire space of solutions S , P∗⊆S , constitutes the
Pareto-optimal set.
4.2
ϵ-Constraint method
The ϵ-Constraint method is a classic technique used to solve MOOPs and it was ﬁrst proposed by
Haimes et al. in 1971 [31].
The principle of the ϵ-Constraint method is to reformulate the MOOP into a single-objective prob-
lem by restricting all but one objective functions, which are introduced as constraints. By iteratively
==PAGE:37==
4.3 Heuristics, Metaheuristics and Matheuristics
24
solving single-objective problems to optimality while controlling the constraints on the other objec-
tives, the planner is able to obtain as many solutions lying on the Pareto-optimal set as wanted [16].
In order to mathematically describe the ϵ-Constraint method lets assume a generic MOOP with a
vector of decision variables x and a set of m objective functions f1(x), ..., fm(x). Let S be the feasible
solution space. The MOOP can be formally written as:
minimize (f1(x), ..., fm(x))
subject to x ∈S.
Then, the ϵ-constraint method consists on keeping one single objective function, fi, while introduc-
ing all the others as constraints:
minimize fi
subject to fj ≤ϵj
∀j = 1, ..., m : j , i
x ∈S.
where the vector of parameters ϵ is deﬁned by the planner at each iteration. Then, exact solution
methods are employed to solve the single-objective optimization problems.
4.3
Heuristics, Metaheuristics and Matheuristics
Heuristic approaches have been widely studied and used in the Operations Research literature for a
large variety of combinatorial optimization problems. The interest for such techniques arises when
diﬃcult problems are to be solved [3]. Standard exact solution methods are often not suitable for
such problems. Many real world decision problems belong to the category of NP-hard problems
once modeled as optimization problems. That makes these exact methods not appropriate because
they require very long computation time to solve the problems [7].
In contrast, heuristic algorithms are problem-speciﬁc, designed to eﬃciently address the problems
by exploiting their particularities. Doing so, good heuristics are able to provide solutions of great
quality in short computation times. It might not be possible, however, to evaluate how close to the
optimal solution an heuristic solution is [3].
Optimization problems can be considered diﬃcult for multiple reasons [30]. A summary is pre-
sented below:
• Large problems (large number of variables) or large instances.
• Complex problems:
– Complex objective functions or constraints: non-linear or non-continuous.
– Complex domain for optimization variables such as integer variables.
– Complex evaluation: if a solution can only be evaluated through simulation.
==PAGE:38==
4.4 Adaptive Large Neighborhood Search
25
The EETT-BOOP is a diﬃcult optimization problem. The search space is constituted by integer
and binary variables. Furthermore, the number of solutions of the problem increases exponentially
with the number of legs and deviations allowed. Even for small allowed deviations, some of the
instances are very large. Therefore, it seems reasonable to address the problem with an heuristics
solution method.
The term metaheuristics refers to a strategy that guides and modiﬁes subordinate heuristics dur-
ing the search for good solutions. Notice that a particular metaheuristic can be used to address a
large variety (if not all) of problems. This is because a metaheuristic is only a ﬂexible and adaptable
framework that guides the search, but not a search heuristic itself. Thus, for each particular problem,
the subordinate heuristics are chosen accordingly, while the skeleton provided by the metaheuristc
can be maintained.
The ways by which a metaheuristic guides the search can be very diverse. Some examples of classic
strategies are those controlling the acceptance of an incumbent solution or those selecting what area
of the search space to explore. A broad collection of metaheuristic strategies has been developed in
the recent years. Among them, some of the most successful (and famous) are simulated annealing,
tabu search and genetic algorithms [8].
In this context, the Adaptive Large Neighborhood Search (ALNS) framework can be classiﬁed as a
metaheuristic strategy. The main feature of the ALNS is that it controls the selection of the subor-
dinate heuristics to use at each iteration and, by this, what area of the search space (neighborhood)
to explore. In Section 4.4 further insights on the algorithm are given.
The fact that the main feature of the ALNS is to select one of the search heuristics, conduced
some authors to classify the ALNS as an hyper-heuristic [20]. The classiﬁcation of the ALNS as
metaheuristic or hyper-heuristic is not of relevance for the current discussion and, even more, the
classiﬁcation in both categories is not contradictory.
The term matheurstics comprehends a broad compendium of hybrid approaches that combine the
exact solution algorithms with metaheuristic frameworks [7]. The combination of these techniques
can be done in two ways: by using the metaheuristic to govern the use of the exact method or, in-
versely, by using the exact method to control the calls of the metaheuristic. The ALNS implemented,
which is described in Section 5.1 lies on the ﬁrst group. The ALNS metaheuristic framework is used
to control the calls of exact solution methods to explore a previously selected region of the search
space. In the ALNS terminology, the exact methods are the repair methods used to explore a neigh-
borhood deﬁned by a destroy method. These concepts are formally deﬁned in the Section 4.4.
4.4
Adaptive Large Neighborhood Search
The Adaptive Large Neighborhood Search metaheurstic was ﬁrst described by S. Røpke and D.
Pisinger [24]. The ALNS extends the Large Neighborhood Search (LNS) metaheuristic proposed
by Shaw [27]. In the following sections we describe the standard framework of the ALNS while
discussing its theoretic basis and its components. The introduction of these elements eases the
understanding of the description of the ALNS implemented to solve the EETT-BOOP, which is pre-
sented in Section 5.1.
==PAGE:39==
4.4 Adaptive Large Neighborhood Search
26
Both the ALNS and the LNS metaheuristics rely on the exploration of large and diverse neighbor-
hoods. By investigating such neighborhoods it is intended to ﬁnd very good local optimum solutions.
The main diﬀerence between the LNS and the ALNS is that, in the former, a single neighborhood
operator is repeatedly used, whereas in the latter, multiple neighborhood operators can be chosen.
Furthermore, in the ALNS, the probability of choosing a particular neighborhood operator changes
during the search [20].
4.4.1
Neighborhood search
To introduce the concepts and deﬁnitions, a generic single-objective minimization problem is used
as example throughout the deﬁnitions.
For a particular instance, I, of a single-objective minimization problem, the set of feasible solutions
is noted as X (or X(I)). The problem has an objective function c : X →R mapping the solutions
to their objective value. The minimization optimization problem aims at ﬁnding a solution x∗∈X
such that c(x∗) ≤c(x)
∀x ∈X. Now, we can deﬁne the concepts of solution, neighborhood, local
optimum and neighborhood search:
Deﬁnition 6 SOLUTION
A solution of a combinatorial optimization problem is an assignment of values to the variables of
the problem. A solution is noted by the letter x and the space of solutions by X. A solution is feasible
if it fulﬁlls all the constraints stated on the problem deﬁnition.
Deﬁnition 7 NEIGHBORHOOD
A neighborhood of a solution x ∈X, noted as N(x) ⊆X, is an operator that maps the solution to a
set of solutions.
Deﬁnition 8 LOCAL and GLOBAL OPTIMUM
A solution x is said to be a local optimum if c(x) ≤c(x′), ∀x′ ∈N(x). This is, if its objective value is
smaller than or equal to the objective values of all the solutions on its neighborhood. A solution x
is said to be a global optimum if c(x) ≤c(x′), ∀x′ ∈X. This is, if its objective value is smaller than
or equal to the objective values of all the solutions on the space of solutions.
The concepts of neighborhood and of local optimum are the key theoretic components of the solv-
ing technique for optimization problems known as neighborhood search. Such technique is based
on exploring the neighborhood of a given solution looking for a local optimum solution. If that
local optimum is promising, its neighborhood will be explored afterwards. By iteratively explor-
ing neighborhoods of promising solutions it is expected that a solution with an objective value close
to the global optimum will be found. Finding a global optimum solution is, however, not guaranteed.
A graphic representation of the neighborhood search technique is shown in Figure 4.1. In such ﬁg-
ure, the search space is represented as a 2D region in which a solution is represented by a point. A
neighborhood of a solution is a smaller region ”around” the solution that is explored looking for a
local optimum.
More formally, a neighborhood search algorithm can be deﬁned as follows:
==PAGE:40==
4.4 Adaptive Large Neighborhood Search
27
Deﬁnition 9 NEIGHBORHOOD SEARCH
A neighborhood search algorithm is a search technique that explores a neighborhood of a current
solution x looking for the solution with the lowest cost x′, x′ = argminx′′∈N(x){c(x′′)}. Then, if
c(x′) < c(x), the incumbent solution becomes the current solution, x = x′, and the neighborhood of
the new current solution is explored.
The ALNS metaheuristic, as well as the LNS, is a neighborhood search heuristic. At each iteration
a promising solution previously found is chosen and then the algorithm selects what neighborhood
to explore. The term large of the name is given due to the large sizes of the neighborhoods explored
[20].
4.4.2
Destroy and repair methods and methods’ evaluation
As it has already been commented in the introduction of this Section 4.4, the ALNS framework is
designed to include multiple neighborhood operators. At each iteration, an operator among those is
chosen according to a probability.
By including multiple operators it is expected that the algorithm will be able to produce good qual-
ity solutions for diﬀerent instances as some of the neighborhood operators will work better in some
cases, while others will be more suitable in other instances.
To guide the selection of the most suitable neighborhood operators, the ALNS uses the results of
the current iteration to evaluate the operators. According to the evaluation, it dynamically adjusts
their probability of being chosen. Like this, those operators showing better performances will see
their probability of being chosen increase.
The neighborhood operators are composed of two elements. These are destroy and repair methods.
Figure 4.1: Neighborhood search terminology.
==PAGE:41==
4.4 Adaptive Large Neighborhood Search
28
Therefore, the neighborhood of a solution is deﬁned by all the feasible solutions that can be con-
structed by sequentially applying the destroy and repair methods. The deﬁnitions of destroy and
repair methods are presented next.
Deﬁnition 10 DESTROY METHOD
A destroy method is a rule for selecting a subset of variables which values are unassigned.
Deﬁnition 11 REPAIR METHOD
A repair method is an algorithm that constructs a feasible solution given a destroyed solution by
assigning values to all the variables.
After each iteration, the solution obtained is evaluated and a reward is given to the destroy and re-
pair methods that led to that solution. In Pisinger, D. et al. [20], authors argue that the same reward
should be given to both the destroy and repair methods as it is not possible to determine whether the
quality of the new solution is due to the chosen destroy or the chosen repair.
Let Ωd and Ωr be the sets of destroy and repair methods, respectively. Then, wd ∈R|Ωd| and
wr ∈R|Ωr| be the weight vectors for the destroy and repair methods, respectively.
Then, at iteration n, the probability φn
d,j of choosing the jth destroy method is computed as follows
φn
d,j =
wn
d,j
P|Ωd|
k=1 wn
r,k
(4.1)
and the probabilities of the repair methods are computed analogously.
Once the iteration is completed, the new solution is evaluated and compared with the promising
solutions that are still under consideration. This allows determining a reward given to the methods,
γ, used to modify their weights. The new weight of the jth destroy method at iteration n is calculated
according to the following formula:
wn
d,j = wn−1
r,j + γ
(4.2)
In Pisinger, D. et al. [20] four diﬀerent values for the reward are considered:
γ = max

γ1
if the new solution is the best found
γ2
if the new solution is the better than the current one
γ3
if the new solution is accepted
γ4
if the new solution is rejected
where γ1 ≥γ2 ≥γ3 ≥γ4.
The ALNS allows more freedom when designing the methods. If a method turns out to be suitable
for a given instance, the algorithm will increase the chances of that algorithm to be chosen. On the
other hand, if a particular method does not allow ﬁnding good solutions, the ALNS will ”discard”
it. Thanks to this behaviour, the designer of the ALNS can include specialized heuristics that have
shown very good performance in a particular type of instance, expecting that this will not be used if
it is not suitable for another type.
==PAGE:42==
4.4 Adaptive Large Neighborhood Search
29
It is recommended as well to include both diversiﬁcation and intensiﬁcation methods. A diversiﬁ-
cation method is such that searches on regions of the solutions space that have not been identiﬁed
as ”promising”. However, such diversiﬁcation in the search may lead to unexpected promising ﬁnd-
ings. Intensiﬁcation methods are those that identify a ”critical” problem in the current solution and
focus the search on the region of the search space that can address that issue [20]. Furthermore,
in Pisinger, D. et al [19], authors argue in favour of including as many methods as possible in the
ALNS.
4.4.3
ALNS algorithm
The pseudo-code of the standard ALNS framework is shown in Algorithm 1 and it is adapted from
Pisinger, D. et al. [20]. Given an initial solution, the algorithm performs as many iterations as it has
time to and, once the time is over, it provides the best solution found. The stopping criteria for the
algorithm is a maximum running time, which is a commonly used criteria in heuristic methods. At
each iteration, a destroy and a repair methods are selected by computing the probabilities and apply-
ing a roulette wheel principle (lines 8 and 9). Then, the current solution is destroyed and repaired.
If the repaired solution is feasible it is evaluated and, if it is better than the current best solution, the
best solution is updated (line 15). At the end of the iteration the weights of the destroy and repair
methods are updated accordingly (line 18).
Algorithm 1: Standard ALNS framework
1 Input: Initial solution xi;
2 Output: Best solution found xb;
3
4 xb = xi best solution found;
5 wd = (1, ..., 1);
6 wr = (1, ..., 1);
7 while There is time do
8
Destroy ←SelectDestroyMethod(wd);
9
Repair ←SelectRepairMethod(wr);
10
xd ←Destroy(xb);
11
xr ←Repair(xd);
12
if xr is feasible then
13
x ←xr;
14
if cost(x) < cost(xb) then
15
xb ←x;
16
end
17
end
18
update wd and wr;
19 end
20 return xb
==PAGE:43==
Chapter 5
Solution Methods
In this Chapter we describe in detail the developed Adaptive Large Neighborhood Search matheuris-
tic in Section 5.1, which is the main contribution of this thesis.The implemented ϵ-Constraint
method is described in Section 5.2. Recall that a theoretical introduction to these solution meth-
ods has been provided in Chapter 4.
5.1
ALNS implementation
In Section 4.1.1 we discussed the two main approaches that can be followed to address MOOPs. We
commented that in order to take well informed decisions, the planners should follow an a posteriori
strategy. Therefore, implemented the ALNS matheuristic aims at ﬁnding a good approximation set
to the Pareto-optimal front.
The actual implementation of the ALNS used to solve the EETT-BOOP slightly diﬀers from the
general framework introduced in the previous Section 4.4. The concept of non-dominated set of
solutions has been incorporated to the ALNS algorithm and the output is not a single solution but
the best set of solutions found (refer to Section 4.1.2 for the deﬁnition of non-dominated set of so-
lutions).
5.1.1
Implemented algorithm
The pseudo-code of the implemented ALNS is presented in Algorithm 2. The procedure is based
on the standard ALNS presented in Algorithm 1 in Section 4.4.3. The main diﬀerence is that in line
6 a pool of solutions is initialized.
A pool of solutions is a non-dominated set of solutions that evolves during the search. After each
iteration, the new solution found is compared with those in the pool. If the new solution is not
dominated by any solution in the pool, it is added to the pool. If the new solution dominates any
solution in the pool, those are removed from it. At the end, the output of the ALNS is the pool of
solutions, which at that moment is named approximation set.
In line 11, the solution to be destroyed and repaired is randomly selected from the pool of solutions.
In lines 12 and 13 the destroy and repair methods are selected according to their probabilities and a
30
==PAGE:44==
5.1 ALNS implementation
31
roulette wheel principle. If the repaired solution is non-dominated by any solution in the pool, it is
added to the pool (line 18) and the pool is updated. Depending on the dominance relations between
the new solutions and those in the pool, a reward is assigned and the weights are updated in lines 25
and 26 using the formula shown in (4.2).
Algorithm 2: Implemented ALNS
1 Input: Initial solution xin;
2 Vector of initial weights of the destruction methods wi
d;
3 Vector of initial weights of the repair methods wi
r;
4 Output: Set of non-dominated solutions P;
5
6 P: pool of solutions;
7 P = P ∪xin;
8 wd ←wi
d;
9 wr ←wi
r;
10 while There is time do
11
xc ←SelectSolution(P);
12
Destroy ←ChooseDestroy(wd);
13
Repair ←ChooseRepair(wr);
14
xd ←Destroy(xc);
15
xr ←Repair(xd);
16
if xr is feasible then
17
if xr is non-dominated then
18
P = P ∪xr;
19
γ ←AssignReward;
20
end
21
else
22
xr is rejected;
23
γ ←AssignReward;
24
end
25
wd ←UpdateWeights(reward, Destroy);
26
wr ←UpdateWeights(reward, Repair);
27
end
28
else
29
xr is rejected;
30
γ ←AssignReward;
31
end
32 end
33 return P;
Notice that in line 16 the solution is checked for feasibility. This step might seem redundant as
we are using exact solution methods to repair the solution. However, a maximum solution time is
given to the repair methods. Thus, it can happen that the repair method returns an infeasible solution.
The value of the reward, γ, depends on the dominance relation of the new solution with respect to
the solutions in the pool. Three cases have been considered:
==PAGE:45==
5.1 ALNS implementation
32
γ = max

γ1
if the new solution dominates all the solutions in the pool
γ2
if the new solution dominates some solution in the pool
γ3
if the new solution does not dominate any solution in the pool (rejected)
(5.1)
The actual value of the reward has been determined in the parameter tuning, which is discussed
in Section 6.3. Furthermore, this reward is normalized by the running time. In Pisinger, D. et al.
[20], authors argue that this can be done to penalize those methods that, although providing good
solutions, they require large running times. This reduces the number of iterations and, thus, the
region of the solution space explored. If maxRuntime and runtime are the longest allowed solving
time and the actual solving time, respectively, the normalization is done by the following formula:
γ′ = (maxRuntime −runtime)
maxRuntime
γ
(5.2)
5.1.2
Destroy methods
A total of six destroy methods have been implemented. Two of them are, however, duplicated meth-
ods with a diﬀerent size of destruction. These destruction methods have been chosen to combine
both diversiﬁcation and intensiﬁcation methods.
Each destruction method deﬁnes an reduced instance of the EETT-BOOP to be solved. This instance
includes a set of free legs that require the assignment of a departure time. Thus, the destruction
methods are simple rules to select what train legs are set free. The destroy methods implemented
are:
• Random legs
The destruction method Random legs consists in randomly selecting a subset of the train legs.
Then, it sets those free. The remaining legs are ﬁxed to their current departure time.
Two equal methods are implemented with diﬀerent destruction sizes. This destruction method
has a clear diversiﬁcation purpose.
• Random trains
This method randomly selects a set of trains and sets all the legs traversed by the train free.
Precedence constraints impose restrictions on the allowed departure times of a train leg.
Therefore, it is expected that the departure time of some free legs cannot be modiﬁed be-
cause of the precedence constraints that link them to ﬁxed legs.
By setting all the legs traversed by the same train free at a time, it is expected to increase their
freedom, as constraints regulating the minimum and maximum dwell times will not be ﬁxed.
• Around the peak
The Around the peak method is an intensiﬁcation method. Its objective is to allow a large
reduction on the maximum peak power demand. With this purpose, the method identiﬁes
when does the maximum peak occur and it sets all the train legs that can have an inﬂuence on
a time window around the minute free.
Let tpeak denote the minute in which the peak occurs and let h be the half-width of a time
window. Then, a train leg with earliest and latest departure times te and tl, respectively, and a
==PAGE:46==
5.2 ϵ-Constraint method to solve the EETT-BOOP
33
running time between stations of rt minutes, is set free if either (5.3) or (5.4) apply.
tl ≥(tpeak −h) & tl ≤(tpeak + h)
(5.3)
(te + rt) ≥(tpeak −h) & (te + rt) ≤(tpeak + h)
(5.4)
• Time period
The Time period method is another diversiﬁcation method that focuses on a randomly selected
time period. The method randomly selects an instant of the time horizon trand. Then, in the
same way as the Around the peak, the method sets all the legs that can have an eﬀect on a
time window around the random minute free. The conditions governing the selection of the
legs are the same as the ones expressed in (5.3) and (5.4) substituting the tpeak by a randomly
selected minute trand.
5.1.3
Repair methods
To repair the destructed solutions, exact solution methods have been used. The repair methods use
a MILP model and are solved using a commercial optimization solver such as CPLEX. The em-
ployment of these repair methods gives the matheuristic character to the ALNS. The repair methods
are:
• minMax
The minMax repair method uses the MILP model of the EETT-BOOP deﬁned in Section 3.3
including the minimization of the power peak demand in the objective function. The aim of
this repair method is to intensify the search on the objective of minimizing the maximum peak
power demand.
• minTotal
The minTotal repair method uses the MILP model of the EETT-BOOP deﬁned in Section 3.3
including the minimization of the total energy consumption in the objective function.
• RL
The RL repair method uses the MILP model of the Resource Levelling formulation of the
EETTP described in Section 3.4. The objective for using this model is to ﬁnd solutions that
minimize both the peak power demand and the total energy consumption.
5.2
ϵ-Constraint method to solve the EETT-BOOP
The ϵ-Constraint method implemented to solve the EETT-BOOP is summarized in Algorithm 3.
The function solveMinMax(I, ϵ) identiﬁes the single-objective problem that seeks to minimize the
maximum peak power demand for the instance I, subject to an ϵ-constraint. Analogously, the func-
tion solveMinTotal(I, ϵ) identiﬁes the problem that minimizes the total energy consumption. The
symbol ∅is used to identify the no imposition of an ϵ-constraint.
The procedure consists of two main parts. In the ﬁrst part (lines 5 - 10), the extreme solutions are
found by solving the minMax and the minTotal models. The variables peak∗and total∗denote the
minimum maximum peak power demand and the minimum total energy consumption that can be
achieved, respectively. Notice that multiple solutions might exist with the same peak power demand
==PAGE:47==
5.3 Performance evaluation of multi-objective optimization algorithms
34
or the same total energy consumption. Thus, to ensure that the solution found lies in the Pareto-
optimal set both models must be solved sequentially adding an ϵ-constraint to the second.
In the second part, equally spaced ϵ-constraints are impsoed on the total energy consumption to
ﬁnd the intermediate points (lines 11 - 17). The spacing between ϵ-constraints is determined by the
number of intermediate points wanted and the diﬀerence between the energy consumption of the
solution with the lowest peak and the energy consumption of the solution with the lowest energy
consumption (line 11).
Algorithm 3: ϵ-Constraint algorithm
1 Input: I: EETT-BOOP instance;
2 n: number of intermediate solutions;
3 Output: P: Set of non-dominated solutions;
4
5 peak∗←solveMinMax(I, ∅);
6 solutionminPeak ←solveMinTotal(I, peak∗);
7 P ←P ∪solutionminPeak;
8 total∗←solveMonTotal(I, ∅);
9 solutionminTotal ←solveMinMax(I, total∗);
10 P ←P ∪solutionminTotal;
11 step ←
TotalEnergysolutionminPeak−TotalEnergysolutionminTotal
n+1
;
12 for intermediate point i do
13
total∗←TotalEnergysolutionminTotal + step · i;
14
peak∗←solveMinMax(I, total∗);
15
solutioni ←solveMinTotal(I, peak∗);
16
P ←P ∪solutioni
17 end
18 return P
5.3
Performance evaluation of multi-objective optimization algorithms
The performance of optimization algorithms is assessed by both the quality of the output solution
and the computational resources employed. Regarding the computational resources, the required
running time on a speciﬁc computer is commonly used as quantitative measure.
Comparing the quality of solutions of multi-objective problems two by two can be done using the
concept of dominance relation deﬁned in Deﬁnition 3. However, the output of a multi-objective op-
timization algorithm is not a single solution but a set of non-dominated solution, or approximation
set.
The hypervolume measure has been used to evaluate the quality of the approximation sets produced
by the ALNS. The hypervolume measure provides a value of the size of the objective space that is
dominated by the approximation set.
Assuming a minimization bi-objective optimization problem with two objective functions f1 and f2
and an approximation set P constituted by solutions (x1, ..., xn). For each particular solution xi ∈P,
==PAGE:48==
5.3 Performance evaluation of multi-objective optimization algorithms
35
its values on the objective space are given by (f1(xi), f2(xi)). Then, given an arbitrary point in the
objective space, (a, b), such that f1(xj) ≤a and f2(xj) ≤b ∀xj ∈P, for each particular solution xi
the points ( f1(xi), f2(xi)) and (a, b) deﬁne a rectangle. The area inside the rectangle is dominated by
the solution xi. The union of the rectangles deﬁned by each solution in P is the hypervolume dom-
inated by the approximation set P (i.e. the area of the solution space dominated P) [35]. In Figure
5.1 the hypervolume measure is the union of the area of the rectangles deﬁned by each solution and
a reference point (a,b).
Figure 5.1: In a minimization bi-objective optimization problem, the area dominated by the solu-
tions in the approximation set, marked with x, with respect to a dominated point (a,b), determines
the hypervolume measure.
==PAGE:49==
Chapter 6
Description of Computational
Experiments
6.1
Description of the instances of the EETT-BOOP
The instances of the EETT-BOOP that have been used in the computational experiments are adapted
from a dataset of EETTP instances. The original instances of the EETTP were presented by the
Chair of Economics, Discrete Optimization and Mathematics at Friedrich-Alexander-University
Erlangen-N¨urnberg as part of their Open Research Challenge in 2015. There are a total of 10
instances ranging from 13 trains traversing 206 legs to 277 trains with 2641 legs. The original in-
stances can be found in [28].
The instances provide an initial timetable, which deﬁnes the ordering of the legs, the train successor
legs, the track successor legs and the connection legs. Refer to Section 3.1 for a deﬁnition of the
latter concepts. Besides, they provide a power demand proﬁle for each leg.
The instances include also the parameters deﬁning the precedence constraints. These are:
• minimum dwell time of 2 minutes.
• minimum headway time of 2 minutes.
• minimum and maximum connection time of 5 and 15 minutes.
The modiﬁcation aﬀects the time windows of allowed departure times. On the original instances,
the legs have departure time windows of diﬀerent widths and those are rather large (on the range of
10 to 15 minutes length).
In the instances of the EETT-BOOP, the number of minutes of allowed deviation deﬁne the depar-
ture time windows. Three deviation values have been considered which are 1, 2 and 3 minutes.
Hence, a total of 30 instances can be constructed by deﬁning a maximum allowed deviation in the
10 original ones. The statistics of each instance are shown in Table 6.1.
To denote a particular instance, the employed notation uses the number of the instance in the original
dataset followed by the number of maximum allowed deviations in brackets. For example, instance
4(2) refers to instance number 4 of the original data set with a time window of ±2 minutes around
36
==PAGE:50==
6.2 Computing power used in the tests
37
the current departure time.
Table 6.1: Instances of the EETT-BOOP
Instance
Trains
Legs
1
13
206
2
26
241
3
37
352
4
48
676
5
71
863
6
73
712
7
126
1524
8
182
3709
9
237
1808
10
277
2641
6.2
Computing power used in the tests
The computational experiments were performed on the High Performance Computing service at the
Technical University of Denmark. A mixture of hardware were used, namely:
• Intel Xeon X5550, 4-core, 2.66 GHz.
• Intel Xeon X5650, 6-core, 2.66 GHz.
• Intel Xeon 2680v2, 10-core, 2.80 GHz.
• Intel Xeon 2660v3, 10-core, 2.60 GHz.
All hardware was conﬁgured with Scientiﬁc Linux 6.4. For the optimization, CPLEX 12.6 was used
on multiple processors. Experiments with the ALNS used 4 threads whereas 20 threads were used
for those experiments with the ϵ-Constraint method and with single-objective MILP models. The
code for the ALNS and the ϵ-Constraint algorithms was written in Java.
6.3
Parameter tuning
The parameter tuning consists on determining what conﬁguration of the parameters of the algorithm
performs the best among a ﬁnite set of combinations. The tuning of an algorithm such as the ALNS
matheuristic requires of both tuning the individual methods and tuning the metaheuristic skeleton.
The tuning was done in a sequential manner. First, the parameters governing the methods were de-
termined and, afterwards, the parameters governing the ALNS framework. Notice that the minMax
and minTotal repair methods are not governed by any parameter.
Both parts of the tuning were performed on instances 3 and 7 for 1, 2 and 3 allowed deviations.
These instances were considered representative of the instance set. Instance 7 is the closest one to
the average instance size while instance 3 is of the average instance size of the small instances (1,
==PAGE:51==
6.3 Parameter tuning
38
2, 3 and 4), regarding the number of trains and legs. To have statistical representation, for each
combination of parameters, 10 runs of 600 seconds length (10 minutes) were performed.
Section 6.3.1 describes how the destroy methods ertr tuned. This methodology diﬀers from the one
used to tune the RL repair method and the ALNS framework, which is explained in Section 6.3.2.
In Section 6.3.3 we discuss the aspects considered when tuning the RL method and its results and in
Section 6.3.4 we do likewise with the ALNS framework.
6.3.1
Destruction sizes
One of the main factors determining the quality of the solutions found by neighborhood search
algorithms is the number of iterations performed. As more iterations, more and more variate neigh-
borhoods are explored. Therefore, it is important the the combination of destruction and repair
methods allows an agile neighborhood search. For each of tn the implemented destroy methods, the
only feature that has an eﬀect on the search speed is the destruction size.
The destruction sizes were determined by using heat maps. The heat maps were constructed with
the average solution time for combinations of number of free legs and allowed deviations. Based
on these results, we determined the destruction sizes. The Random legs small and the Random legs
large destroy a 10% and a 40% of the legs in the instance, respectively. The Around the peak small
and Around the peak large destroy the legs with incidence on a time window of ±5 and ±15 minutes,
respectively. The Random trains method destroy 10% of the trains and the Time period sets all the
legs on a time window of ±15 mintues free. The reason for including repeated destroy methods of
diﬀerent sizes is that it is expected that the ALNS will determine which size is the appropriate for
each instance.
6.3.2
Tuning methodology for the RL repair method and the ALNS framework
The selection of the combination of parameters was done balancing both the average performance
and the spreading. The average performance of a combination of parameters in a particular instance
was measured as the average gap between the hypervolume of the output solutions with respect
to the best solution found in that instance by any combination. Therefore, lower average gaps are
preferred. The average gaps were computed using Formula (6.1).
Lets denote a combination of parameters as κ. For each combination, N runs were performed
indexed by i. Then, the average gap of a combination of parameters κ for each instance I is:
Eκ
I = 1
N
N
X
i=1
(z∗−zκ
i )
z∗
· 100
(6.1)
where zκ
i is the hypervolume of the ALNS in run i of combination κ and z∗is the best hypervolume
found by any combination of parameters for that particular instance I.
However, the tuning was carried out using two instances with three diﬀerent deviations. Therefore,
the combined average gap across instances was used to compare the performance of diﬀerent com-
binations. The combined average gap of a combination of parameters κ, Eκ, is the average of the
average gaps of that combination across all the tuning instances. If there are NI tuning instances
==PAGE:52==
6.3 Parameter tuning
39
indexed by I, the combined average gap of combination κ was computed using Formula (6.2):
Eκ = 1
NI
NI
X
I=1
Eκ
I
(6.2)
Analogously, the spread measure used for each combination of parameters κ is the combined stan-
dard deviation of the performance. The formula of the standard deviation of the performance of
combionation κ in instance I is shown in Formula (6.3). The combined standard deviation of a
combination, σκ, is the average of the standard deviations over all the instances, shown in Formula
(6.4). Lower spreads are preferred as they indicate a more robust performance.
σκ
I =
v
u
t
1
N
N
X
i=1
(((z∗−zi)
z∗
−Eκ
I)2
(6.3)
σκ = 1
NI
NI
X
I=1
σκ
I
(6.4)
6.3.3
Tuning the RL repair method and results
The formulation of the Resource Levelling model in Section 3.4 left two parameters to be deter-
mined. These were the number of power steps in which the power demand is split and the length of
the time periods.
The Resource Levelling was tuned on a particular conﬁguration of the ALNS framework in which
the only repair method was the Resource Levelling and the rewards given to the destroy methods
were zero. This procedure was used to avoid noise from the other two repair methods and in order
to tune the repair method taking all the destroy methods into account.
Other considerations were done when tuning the RL method. It was intended to achieve a conﬁg-
uration in which the RL method behaves as a Resource Levelling Problem model. It could happen
that the tuning suggested a conﬁguration that resulted on a degenerated RL model if too few power
steps were used or if the length of the time periods was too long or too short.
In Rieck, J. et al. [23], authors argue that the upper bound should be ﬁxed to the maximum possible
resource consumption. This has been discarded in our case because the maximum peak power de-
mands that can be achieved are much larger than the peak power demands occurring.
The upper bound on the peak power demand was set to 120% of the peak power demand of the
input timetable. This is, if HUB is the upper bound, for each time period p,
Hp = HUB
∀p ∈P
(6.5)
Once the upper bound was ﬁxed, the error of the linear approximation of the square of the power
demand for both instances 3 and 7 was analyzed. Recall that we want to determine a number of
power steps that approximates well to the square function. However, as more power steps more
variables in the model. Plotting the approximation for diﬀerent numbers of power steps and through
visual inspection, the values that have been considered for the parameter tuning are 3, 5 and 8 power
steps.
==PAGE:53==
6.3 Parameter tuning
40
The analysis of the instances revealed that the length of their time horizon is around four hours for
all of them. It was considered that time period lengths between 8 and 30 minutes were appropriate.
The time period lengths tested and the number of time periods resulting are shown in Table 6.2.
Table 6.2: Lengths of time periods and number of time periods.
Length (s)
N. time periods (aprox.)
500
29
900
16
1800
8
The results showed that the best combination regarding the average performance was the combina-
tion of 5 power steps with time period lengths of 1800 seconds (highlighted in bold in Table 6.3).
Besides, this combination was the second best combination regarding the average spread, only 0.27
points above the lowest one. For these reasons, this combination was the one chosen. The complete
results can be shown in Table 6.3.
Notice that the combination selected is an extreme combination as the time period length was the
largest considered. The standard procedure in such case would be to repeat the tuning considering
larger values of time period length. However, recall that we did not want to obtained a degenerated
Resource Levelling model. Therefore, larger time periods were not considered.
Table 6.3: Results tuning RL repair method. The chosen combination is highlighted in bold.
(Eκ; σκ)
power steps
time period length
3
5
8
500
(7.24; 1.96)
(7.49; 2.44)
(6.26; 1.64)
900
(4.92; 1.74)
(5.15; 1.58)
(5.07; 1.73)
1800
(3.27; 1.58)
(2.72; 1.56)
(3.31; 1.29)
6.3.4
Tuning the ALNS framework and results
Four parameters governing the ALNS needed to be tuned. Those were the three rewards given to
the methods whether or not to normalize the rewards by the running time required for the iteration.
To simplify the tuning two decision were taken beforehand:
• The reward given when a solution is rejected, γ3, is set to zero.
• The rewards γ1 and γ2 are related by the equation
γ1 = 2γ2
The values considered for γ1 were 0.1, 0.3 and 0.7.
The results of the tuning suggested normalizing the reward by the running time and a reward value
of γ1 = 0.3 (highlighted in bold in Table 6.4). This combination presented both the lowest average
gap and the lowest spread. The complete results are shown in Table 6.4.
==PAGE:54==
6.3 Parameter tuning
41
Table 6.4: Results tuning ALNS framework. The chosen combination is highlighted in bold.
(Eκ; σκ)
reward γ1
Normlize
0.1
0.3
0.7
Yes
(2.80; 1.45)
(2.65; 1.33)
(2.97; 1.37)
No
(2.86; 1.42)
(3.08; 1.61)
(3.49; 1.82)
6.3.5
ALNS conﬁguration
The ﬁnal conﬁguration of the ALNS is summarized in Table 6.5. The table includes the values of
all the parameters governing the destroy methods, the RL repair method and the ALNS framework.
Table 6.5: Summary of the values of the parameters governing the destroy and repair methods and
the ALNS matheuristic.
Parameter
Value
Random legs small
n. legs destroyed
10%
Random legs large
n. legs destroyed
40%
Random trains
n. trains destroyed
10%
Around peak small
time window width
±5 minutes
Around peak large
time window width
±15 minutes
Time period
time window width
±15 minutes
Resource
Levelling
n. power steps
5
time periods length
1800 seconds
ALNS
framework
γ1
0.3
γ2
0.15
γ3
0
normalization
by running time
YES
max. repair time
per iteration
60 seconds
initial weights
destroy methods
1 all
initial weights
repair methods
1 all
==PAGE:55==
6.4 Objectives of the computational experiments
42
6.4
Objectives of the computational experiments
The computational experiments were performed on instances 4, 8 and 10. The allowed minutes of
deviations were 1, 2 and 3.
The computational experiments performed had ﬁve main objectives. The ﬁrst four objectives were
aimed at assessing the performance of the ALNS matheuristic whereas the ﬁfth objective was aimed
at providing data to analyze the potential beneﬁts of implementing the energy-eﬃcient train timeta-
bles. The objectives were:
1. To determine the appropriate running time of the ALNS matheuristic.
As longer the running time, better output is expected as a larger region of the solution space
can be explored. This is usually the case, unless the algorithm gets trapped in local optima. It
is said that an algorithm converges when no signiﬁcant improvements on the solution objec-
tive value are achieved for a long enough period of time.
2. To evaluate the performance of the ALNS.
The ϵ-Constraint method was employed to ﬁnd Pareto-optimal solutions. The comparison
included two aspects:
• The gap between the area dominated by the Pareto-optimal front and the approximation
set produced by the ALNS. Moreover, plotting the approximation sets together with the
Pareto-optimal set can give us a more clear idea of how good the approximations are.
• Second, we were interested on determining if the ALNS can consistently ﬁnd solutions
close to the minimum energy consumption and close to the minimum peak power de-
mand. Therefore, the extreme solutions found by the ALNS (i.e. that with the minimum
energy consumption and that with the minimum peak) were compared with the single-
objective optimal ones.
3. To compare the ALNS with a collection of LNS matheuristics that contain one destroy and
one repair methods.
When proposing a complex heuristic framework it is important to determine whether it is
worthwhile or not. In other words, it is important to answer the question whether or not
results of the same quality can be obtained with a simpler approach. Therefore, experiments
were conducted to compare the ALNS with a set of LNS matheurstics. These LNSs were a
combination of one of the destroy and one of the repair methods used in the ALNS.
4. To analyze the utilization of the destroy and repair methods.
By looking at the probabilities of choosing each method along the runs the performances
of the individual methods can be inferred. Moreover, we were interested in knowing if the
Resource Levelling formulation is useful to solve the EETT-BOOP.
5. To analyze the trade-oﬀs between energy consumption, peak power demand and deviations
allowed.
==PAGE:56==
Chapter 7
Results
The performance of the ALNS matheuristic is evaluated in detail in Section 7.1, while Section 7.2
presents the results regarding the energy-eﬃciency of the obtained timetables.
7.1
Performance of the ALNS
In this Section we present the results of the tests carried out in order to evaluate the suitability of the
ALNS to address the EETT-MOOP. In Section 7.1.1 the convergence of the algorithm is analyzed.
The performance of the ALNS was assessed by, ﬁrst, studying its suitability to ﬁnd extreme solu-
tions in Section 7.1.2 and, second, evaluating how well the output non-dominated sets approximate
the Pareto-optimal fronts in Section 7.1.3. We compare the ALNS with multiple LNS matheursitcs
in Section 7.1.4 and, ﬁnally, the utilization of each method is studied in Section 7.1.5. These results
are discussed in Secion 7.1.6.
Note: In all the computational experiments, the reference point used to compute the hypervolume
measure is the double of the objective values of the input timetable.
7.1.1
Convergence
A qualitative analysis of the convergence was done by plotting the evolution of the hypervolume
measure along time. The plots showing the evolution of a single run of 3600 seconds length for
instances 4(1), 4(3), 8(2) and 10(3) are shown in Figure 7.1. The x-axis represents the running time
while the y-axis represents the hypervolume measure of the approximation set (i.e. pool of solu-
tions) normalized the hypervolume measure of the original solution.
The plots show an increasing hypervolume along time as the area dominated by the approximation
set grows, or remains constant, after each iteration. In the four cases, the evolution of the score
follows two recognizable trends: An initial quick increase in the ﬁrst 400 seconds followed by a
less steep phase until convergence. In the case of instance 4(1), the smallest instance, the ﬁrst phase
ﬁnishes after around 100 seconds of running time. In the case of the largest instance, 10(3), this
phase ﬁnishes around 400 seconds of running time.
Judging by the evolution of the hypervolume, in the case of instance 4(1) convergence seems to
be achieved after 2400 seconds of running time. After that, the improvements were insigniﬁcant.
However, for instances 4(3) and 10(3), convergence is not achieved in the 3600 seconds as the
43
==PAGE:57==
7.1 Performance of the ALNS
44
evolution still had a clear upward trend. In the case of instance 8(2), the algorithm converges after
400 seconds. In the experiments the maximum running time of the ALNS was set to 3600 seconds.
However, the results after 600 seconds are shown in some experiments as the initial 10 minutes are
the ones with the largest improvements.
Figure 7.1: Evolution along time of the hypervolume score if the ALNS for instances 4(1), 4(3),
8(2) and 10(3).
7.1.2
Analysis of the extreme solutions
In this section the extreme solutions obtained using the ALNS are compared with the optimal solu-
tions regarding the total energy consumption and the maximum peak power demand. The extreme
solutions of an approximation set are those two that present the minimum values on either the total
energy consumption or the maximum peak power demand.
For each test instance, 10 runs of 600 seconds and 10 runs of 3600 seconds were performed and
the two extreme solutions were identiﬁed from the approximation set obtained. Then, the averages
of the extreme solutions were computed. Furthermore the best and the worst solutions (among the
extreme solutions) were identiﬁed to compute the best and worse gaps.
The optimal solutions, the average values of the extreme solutions obtained by the ALNS and the
average, best and worst gaps between the optimal solution and the solutions of the ALNS are pre-
sented in Table 7.1 and Table 7.2 for the total energy consumption and maximum peak, respectively.
The optimal solutions have been obtained for all of the test instances except for the minimum max-
imum peak power demand for instances 10(1) and 10(3). However, in both cases the gap between
the best integer solution and the best bound was below 1.5% after 48 hours running time.
In the case of the minimum total energy consumption, it can be concluded that the ALNS is capable
of consistently ﬁnding near optimal solutions even with a running time of only 600 seconds. The
results can be seen in Table 7.1. After 600 seconds runs, the average gaps are of less than 0.5% for
all the instances while the gaps are reduced to less than 0.25% after 3600 seconds. Furthermore,
==PAGE:58==
7.1 Performance of the ALNS
45
only in the case of instance 4(3) the worst extreme solution found has a gap above 1% after 600
seconds.
The extreme solutions regarding the maximum peak power are far from the optimal values except
for the case of instance 8. For instances 4 and 10 the average gaps are all but one (instance 4(1))
above 10% after 600 seconds. Although a great improvement is achieved after 3600 seconds, the
gaps are above 5% in the same 5 instances. It must be pointed out that, in the worst case, after 3600
seconds the gaps are around 10% for instances 4(2) and 10(1), 10(2) and 10(3) and that, for instance
4(3), the gap is of 20.72%.
The case of instances 8(1), 8(2) and 8(3) is completely diﬀerent. Near optimal values were obtained
in average after 600 seconds with 0.44, 1.01 and 2.58% for 1, 2 and 3 deviations, respectively. Even
more, the optimal solutions were found in the best case even with only 600 seconds runs. However,
notice that the optimal solution value for the minimum maximum peak power demand is the same
11.91 MW for 1, 2 and 3 deviations but that the average gap between the extreme solution and the
optimal increases with the number of deviations. This behaviour could be due to a decrease on the
neighborhood search speed due to the increasing problem size.
These results are in line with the observations about the convergence of the algorithm. The re-
sults for instance 8 after 600 seconds and after 3600 seconds are almost identical. However, great
improvements are achieved between 600 and 3600 seconds for the large instances, although conver-
gence is not achieved.
==PAGE:59==
7.1 Performance of the ALNS
46
Table 7.1: Comparison between the optimal solutions with minimum energy consumption and the extreme solutions of the ALNS.
Instance
Optimal
ALNS 600s
ALNS 3600s
Number
Deviations
Total (MWh)
Avg. gap
Avg. (MWh)
Best gap
Worst gap
Avg. gap
Avg. (MWh)
Best gap
Worst gap
4
1
47.94
0.13%
48.01
0.01%
0.21%
0.01%
47.95
0.01%
0.11%
2
47.42
0.23%
47.52
0.10%
0.31%
0.11%
47.47
0.06%
0.18%
3
47.30
0.36%
47.47
0.11%
1.04%
0.15%
47.37
0.06%
0.28%
8
1
9.55
0.11%
9.56
0.10%
0.17%
0.10%
9.56
0.10%
0.10%
2
9.44
0.30%
9.46
0.21%
0.56%
0.20%
9.45
0.17%
0.23%
3
9.43
0.19%
9.45
0.01%
0.49%
0.00%
9.43
0.01%
0.03%
10
1
247.22
0.11%
247.50
0.04%
0.21%
0.04%
247.32
0.01%
0.15%
2
246.60
0.31%
247.36
0.19%
0.41%
0.17%
247.03
0.09%
0.27%
3
246.11
0.43%
247.17
0.22%
0.73%
0.24%
246.70
0.10%
0.41%
==PAGE:60==
7.1 Performance of the ALNS
47
Table 7.2: Comparison between the optimal solutions with minimum maximum peak power demand and the extreme solutions of the ALNS.
Instance
Optimal
ALNS 600s
ALNS 3600s
Number
Deviation
Peak (MW)
Avg. gap
Avg. (MW)
Best gap
Worst gap
Avg. gap
Avg. (MW)
Best gap
Worst gap
4
1
27.31
5.76%
28.88
2.24%
11.66%
3.30%
28.21
1.09%
6.44%
2
25.29
10.52%
27.95
6.62%
17.34%
7.80%
27.26
6.35%
10.57%
3
22.79
18.75%
27.11
13.32%
25.09%
14.11%
26.05
6.93%
20.72%
8
1
11.91
0.44%
11.96
0.00%
0.55%
0.22%
11.94
0.00%
0.55%
2
11.91
1.01%
12.03
0.00%
2.02%
0.38%
11.96
0.00%
0.55%
3
11.91
2.58%
12.22
0.00%
5.67%
0.38%
11.96
0.00%
1.75%
10
1
90.44*
13.73%
102.86
9.20%
18.51%
6.38%
96.21
4.65%
9.04%
2
88.36
14.47%
101.14
6.78%
21.69%
6.80%
94.37
5.04%
8.65%
3
85.33*
16.93%
99.77
10.10%
29.29%
7.87%
92.05
4.84%
11.01%
==PAGE:61==
7.1 Performance of the ALNS
48
7.1.3
Comparing the approximation sets and the Pareto-optimal fronts
The approximation sets obtained by the ALNS were compared with the Pareto-optimal sets obtained
using the ϵ-Constraint method. It was intended to use the ϵ-Constraint method to ﬁnd 5 interme-
diate Pareto-optimal solutions between the two extreme single-objective optimal solutions for each
instance. However, the method turned out to be nonfunctional due to the long computation times
required. 20 processors and 48 hours of computing time were used to ﬁnd each intermediate solu-
tion. This computational eﬀort was not enough in most of the cases.
A Pareto-optimal set with 7 solutions was only obtained for instance 4(1). For instances 8(1), 8(2)
and 8(3) the Pareto-optimal sets found have only 2 solutions. Optimality was not proven for the
non-dominated solutions found for instances 4(2) and 10(1). However, the gaps between the best
integer solutions and the best bounds were of less than 5% and, therefore, they were taken into
consideration. The non-dominated sets of solutions found for instances 4(3), 10(2) and 10(3) were
of poor quality and they were discarded for the comparison.
The gaps between the hypervolume of the sets of non-dominated solutions found by the ϵ-Constraint
method and the average hypervolume of the approximation sets found by the ALNS in 10 runs of
3600 seconds are shown in Table 7.3. The gaps are small, below 7% in all cases. The gaps of
instance 8 are the lowest ones, ranging from 0.5% for one deviation to 1.62% for 3 deviations. The
largest gap is 6.68% for instance 10(1). However, the running times required to obtain the Pareto-
optimal sets (or sets of non-dominated solutions in some cases) using the ϵ-Constraint method are
very long. For example, to ﬁnd the 5 non-dominated solutions for instance 4(2), 528,756 seconds
were required, which are more than 6 days of computation time.
Table 7.3: Gaps between the average hypervolume of the approximation sets found by the ALNS
and of the non-dominated sets found by the ϵ-Constraint method.
Instance
Deviation
Number
non-dominated
solutions
Running
time (s)
Gap (%)
4
1
7
76790
3.79
4
2
5
528746
5.66
8
1
2
807
0.50
8
2
2
161089
1.09
8
3
2
23213
1.62
10
1
5
680055
6.68
The information provided by the hypervolume measure is limited. Therefore, the approximation
sets were plotted together with the Pareto-optimal sets to visualize how good is the approximation.
One approximation sets (orange dots) found by the ALNS and the Pareto-optimal sets (blue squares)
in instances 4(1) and 8(3) are plotted in Figure 7.2.
First, it can be noticed that more non-dominated solutions were found by the ALNS. The extreme
solutions found by the ALNS are close to the single-objective optimal solutions, which agrees with
the results in Section 7.1.2. The approximation set found for instance 4(1) is of good quality, with
solutions close to both extremes and a good range of intermediate ones. The case of instance 8(3)
is not as good. The solutions with low peak power demands are far from the Pareto-optimal front.
Still, the ALNS was able to ﬁnd near optimal extreme solutions and provide a spread range of solu-
==PAGE:62==
7.1 Performance of the ALNS
49
tions to chose from.
Nevertheless, it must be pointed out again that the computation times employed to ﬁnd the Pareto-
optimal solutions for instances 4(1) and 8(3) is an order of magnitude larger than the one used by
the ALNS.
Figure 7.2: Comparison of the approximation sets found by the ALNS (orange dots) and the Pareto-
optimal sets (blue squares) for instances 4(1) and 8(3).
==PAGE:63==
7.1 Performance of the ALNS
50
7.1.4
Comparing ALNS and LNS
The performance of the ALNS has been compared against the performance of all the possible LNS
matheuristics that can be assembled using one destroy and one repair methods employed on the
ALNS. In Section 6.4 we discussed the motivation towards conducting this experiment.
For each instance, 10 runs of 600 seconds of the ALNS and 10 runs of 600 seconds of each LNS-
combination were performed. The gap between the average hypervolume scored by the ALNS and
the average hypervolume scored by each LNS was computed. Afterwards, the average gaps across
instances were computed and those are shown in Table 7.4. The desegregated results per instance
can be found in Table 1, Table 2 and Table 3 in the Appendix.
The results in Table 7.4 show that, on average, the ALNS performs better than any of the tested
LNS as all the gaps are positive. However, it must be pointed out that some LNS-combinations have
shown better performance than the ALNS for particular instances. For example, LNS-combinations
using the minMax and the Random legs small, the Random legs large or the Around peak large
performed better than the ALNS for both instances 10(2) and 10(3).
In Table 7.4 it can be observed that the LNS-combinations including the minMax repair method led
to the best performances among all the other LNS-combinations. The average gaps achieved using
the minMax repair method are the lowest for 5 out of 6 combinations with the destroy methods.
Furthermore, for 3 combinations, the gaps are at least 5 points lower than for combinations using
the same destroy method but another repair. The combination showing the best performance is the
one using the minMax repair and the Time period destroy method, which has an average gap of
1.02%.
The worst performances are produced by those LNS using the minTotal repair method, with a gap
up to 9.73% for the combination with Random legs small destroy method. It must be highlighted
that a gap of only 1.03% is achieved by the minTotal-Random trains LNS.
The performance of the LNS-combinations using the RL repair method is far from the one of those
using the minMax although it shows performance gaps down to 1.86% and a 1.57% in combination
with the Around peak large and the Random trains destroy methods.
Table 7.4: Average gap across instances between the hypervolume score of the LNS-combinations
and the ALNS.
Rand. Small
Rand. Large
Peak Small
Peak Large
Trains
T. Period
minMax
1.41%
1.19%
2.35%
1.31%
1.46%
1.02%
minTotal
9.73%
8.69%
9.40%
3.89%
1.03%
2.00%
RL
6.46%
6.69%
6.73%
1.86%
1.57%
3.25%
7.1.5
Utilization of the methods
The robust performance of the ALNS in diverse instances is due to its capability of dynamically
adapt the choices of destroy and repair methods during the running time in such a way that those
==PAGE:64==
7.1 Performance of the ALNS
51
methods performing better become more likely to be used.
The average probabilities of choosing each method throughout a run depending on the instance are
shown in Table 7.5. For each instance and each deviation, the average probabilities of choosing
each method across 10 runs of 3600 seconds were computed. It was noticed that the average proba-
bilities were similar for diﬀerent deviations in the same instance. The values shown in the table are
the average across the three allowed deviations for each instance.
The results show that there are not strongly preferred destroy methods. For all instances, each of
the destroy methods has an average probability of being chosen of at least 10% and not higher than
22%. The largest diﬀerence is between Random legs small, with a 21.8%, and Random legs large,
with a 11.5%, in instance 4. However, Around peak large, Random trains and Time period have
all probabilities above 15%. Therefore, there is not a dominating method. It is interesting to point
out that the performance of the small and large versions of the Random legs and the Around peak
methods are akin.
This is not the case of the repair methods. The ALNS has a high preference for the minTotal repair
method when solving instances 4 and 8, with 59.5% and and 76.1% average probabilities, respec-
tively. However, in instance 10, the minMax is the preferred method. The RL repair method has a
similar utilization as the minMax method in instances 4 and 8 with 19.9% and 12.8% respectively.
These probabilities are rather low, specially in the case of instance 8, where the minTotal clearly
dominates. In the case of instance 10, the RL seems to provide good results as its average probabil-
ity of being chosen of is 29.6%.
The good performance of the minTotal repair method in the ALNS matheuristic contrasts with the
performance of the LNS matheuristics using the minTotal that were tested in Section 7.1.4. This
case is an example of the capability of the ALNS framework of enhancing the performance of a
method that would perform poorly alone.
Table 7.5: Average probabilities of choosing destroy and repair methods by instance.
Instance
Destroy methods
Repair methods
Random
legs small
Random
legs large
Around
peak small
Around
peak large
Random
trains
Time
period
minMax
minTotal
RL
4
21.8%
11.5%
14.6%
15.3%
19.3%
17.5%
20.6%
59.5%
19.9%
8
17.2%
20.0%
12.1%
15.3%
20.1%
15.3%
11.2%
76.1%
12.8%
10
17.3%
16.0%
17.4%
17.9%
17.2%
14.3%
43.3%
27.1%
29.6%
In Figure 7.3 the evolution of the probabilities of the destroy methods along the iterations is plotted
to exemplify the ALNS property of dynamically adjusting the probabilities along the run. The upper
plot was constructed from a 3600 seconds run on instance 4(1) whereas the lower plot corresponds
to a 3600 seconds run on instance 8(1).
In the case of instance 4(1) it can be seen that none of the methods dominated the search. Particu-
larly, Random trains (blue line), Random legs small (black line) and Around peak small (grey line)
kept their probabilities of being chosen above 20% for almost all the runtime. On the other hand,
Random legs large (orange line) and Around the peak large (yellow line) were discarded since the
very beginning. Although starting with a downward trend, Time period (green line) probability’s
trend changed and went slowly upwards until the end.
==PAGE:65==
7.1 Performance of the ALNS
52
In the case of instance 8(1), the evolution of the probabilities had a complete diﬀerent behaviour,
with Random trains dominating from the beginning and achieving a probability above 50%. All the
other methods were virtually discarded.
Figure 7.3: Evolution of the probabilities of the destroy methods through a 3600 seconds run of the
ALNS for instances 4(1) and 8(1).
==PAGE:66==
7.1 Performance of the ALNS
53
7.1.6
Discussion on the performance of the ALNS
The objectives of the computational experiments were stated in Section 6.4. Precisely, we stated
four objectives regarding the evaluation of the performance of the ALNS. The tests carried out
accomplish those objective as the results provide the following answers:
1. For small and medium size instances, the ALNS converges in 3600 seconds. However, for
large instances convergence is not achieved in 3600 seconds of running time. Even though,
we set the maximum running time of the ALNS to 3600 seconds.
2. The approximation sets produced by the ALNS are of good quality. The gaps between the
hypervolume covered by the approximation sets and the Pareto-optimal front obtained using
the ϵ-Constraint method are small in all cases. The ALNS provides multiple solutions, with
a broad coverage. Moreover, we have seen that the running times required to ﬁnd Pareto-
optimal solutions using exact methods are extremely long (even of multiple days). The 3600
seconds employed by the ALNS are nothing compared to those. Therefore, it can be con-
cluded that the ALNS matheuristic has a very good performance.
Furthermore, in 3600 seconds runs, the ALNS is able to ﬁnd extreme solutions close to the
single-objective optimal values, with average gaps below 0.2% for the total energy consump-
tion, in all instances, and below a 8% for the peak power demand, in all instances but one.
3. The ALNS is more robust than any LNS-combination. Although LNS-combinations, spe-
cially those using the minMax repair method, outperformed the ALNS in the largest instances
for 600 seconds long runs, the ALNS can ﬁnd better solutions on average.
4. The study of the probabilities of choosing the methods gave rise to interesting results. On
the one hand, all the destroy methods have a comparable impact on the performance of the
ALNS, as they have similar average probabilities of being chosen, on average. On the other
hand, the minTotal repair method is the one providing the best results in instances 4 and 8,
whereas the minMax is the preferred one in instance 10. The RL repair method shows a good
performance in instance 10, although it is virtually discarded in instance 8.
These results demonstrate that the design of the ALNS, including six destroy methods and
three repair methods, was good, as all of them positively contribute to the outcome. However,
it was not expected that large and small versions of destroy methods would have such similar
performances for the same instance. Yet, due to the normalization by runtime, it was expected
that the large versions would be preferred for small instances, whereas the small ones would
be preferred for the largest.
Moreover, we plotted the evolution of the probabilities of the destruction methods (Figure
7.3) to visualize how, depending on the particularities of the instance and on the search state,
the probabilities are dynamically adjusted. This adjustment is the key feature that makes the
ALNS a robust algorithm as it is discussed in [20] and [24].
These experiments served to conﬁrm the hypothesis that the classic ϵ-Constraint method is not suit-
able to address the EETT-BOOP. The running times required to ﬁnd Pareto-optimal solutions are
extremely long. In many cases, Pareto-optimality was not proven after 48 hours runs using 20
==PAGE:67==
7.2 Energy consumption and peak power demand savings
54
threads in CPLEX. An explanation for the poor performance of CPLEX could be the marked sym-
metry of the problem. An optimization problem is said to have symmetry when multiple solutions
exist with the same objective value. In those cases, the Branch-And-Cut algorithm used by CPLEX
performs poorly as it needs to explore a large number of solution in order to prove optimality [3].
7.2
Energy consumption and peak power demand savings
In this Section we present a quantitative analysis of the energy-eﬃciency improvement of the timeta-
bles and a qualitative analysis of the approximation sets of solutions provided by the ALNS from
which the railway planner can choose.
7.2.1
Maximum savings
The average values of the extreme solutions found after 3600 seconds runs are compared with the
original timetable to determine what are the maximum savings on total energy consumption and
peak power demand that can be achieved implementing a solution generated by the ALNS.
The results demonstrate that the maximum reductions on total energy consumption and peak power
demands and, thus, the largest savings, can be achieved by allowing greater deviations from the
current timetable. However, the savings on total energy consumption seem to be less sensitive than
the peak power demand to increasing allowed deviations.
For example, in instance 4, a 2.46% saving on energy consumption can be achieved by allowing 1
deviation but this is only increased to a 3.64% for 3 deviations. On the other hand, allowing 1 devi-
ation leads to a reduction of 21.24% of the peak power demand, that can be increased to a 27.27%
for 3 deviations. Similar behaviour can be observed for instance 8 regarding the saving on energy
consumption. However, small savings on the total energy consumption can be achieved for instance
10. Allowing 3 deviations only reports a 0.68% of savings. These results can be seen in Table 7.6.
The results for instance 8 diﬀer from those of instances 4 and 10 with regard to the reduction of the
peak power demand. The extreme solutions of the ALNS are worse as greater is the allowed devia-
tion. In Section 7.1.2 this behaviour was already discussed. Therefore, the saving for 1 deviation is
greater than for 2 and 3 deviations. Still, the saving for 1 deviation is of 12.51%.
==PAGE:68==
7.2 Energy consumption and peak power demand savings
55
Table 7.6: Savings on peak power demand and energy consumption by instance and deviation.
Instance
Deviations
Peak (MW)
Savings
peak (%)
Total
energy
(MWh)
Savings
total
energy
4
Original
35.82
-
49.16
-
1
28.21
21.24
47.95
2.46
2
27.26
23.89
47.47
3.44
3
26.05
27.27
47.37
3.64
8
Original
13.65
-
9.77
-
1
11.94
12.51
9.56
2.24
2
11.96
12.37
9.45
3.28
3
11.96
12.37
9.43
3.54
10
Original
135.07
-
248.40
-
1
96.21
28.77
247.32
0.43
2
94.37
30.13
247.03
0.55
3
92.05
31.85
246.70
0.68
7.2.2
Trade-oﬀs between energy consumption, peak power demand and timetable
deviation
The visualization of the approximation sets for each allowed deviation helps us to qualitative eval-
uate the existing trade-oﬀs between the three objectives of the EETT-BOOP.
In Figure 7.4 the approximation sets obtained by a single run of 3600 seconds of the ALNS for
instances 4, 8 and 10 and 1, 2 and 3 deviations are plotted. The approximation sets for each instance
are plotted together. The solutions for 1 deviation are marked in black triangles, for 2 deviations, in
orange squares and blue dots are used for the solutions with 3 allowed deviations.
It can be seen in Figure 7.4 how the approximation sets of larger deviations dominate those of
smaller allowed deviations, except for the case of instance 8. This was expected, as it has been
already shown in previous results that larger deviations allow greater savings on both peak power
demand and energy consumption. In the case of instance 8(3), the approximation set obtained is
partly dominated by that obtained when solving 8(2). The performance of the ALNS when solving
instance number 8 had already shown divergent behaviour, as it was discussed in Section 7.1.2 and
Section 7.2.1. Therefore, by allowing larger deviations from the input timetable, the planners can
ﬁnd extreme solutions with larger savings besides a broad set of intermediate solutions with better
trade-oﬀs between peak demand and energy consumption.
In general, solutions with low peaks can be obtained for a broad range of total energy consumption.
However, to achieve the lowest consumptions, the power demand peaks must increase considerably.
For example, in Figure 7.4, in the case of instance 4(3), the solution highlighted with a red diamond
has a peak demand of 28.07 MW and a consumption of 47.42 MWh. The extreme solution with the
minimum energy consumption (47.32 MWh) has a peak of 32.84 MW. Hence, to achieve a further
reduction in the total energy consumption of only a 0.2% from the ”red diamond” solution it is
required an increase of 4.6MW on the peak (16%).
Similar trade-oﬀs exist in the case of instance 10. On the left side of the approximation set, a small
==PAGE:69==
7.2 Energy consumption and peak power demand savings
56
decrease on the energy consumption implies a huge increase of the peak demand. The solution
marked with a red diamond has a peak of 101.09 MW and a total consumption of 246.99 MWh.
The extreme solution for 3 deviations has a peak of 120.99 MW (19.6% larger) and 246.62 MWh
(0.15% lower) energy consumption.
The existence of these great trade-oﬀs between peak demand and energy consumption do nothing
but reinforce the arguments for having chosen an a posteriori approach to address the EETT-BOOP.
==PAGE:70==
7.2 Energy consumption and peak power demand savings
57
Figure 7.4: Approximation sets by allowed deviation of instances 4, 8 and 10. Results from a 3600
seconds run of ALNS.
==PAGE:71==
Chapter 8
Conclusion and Further Research
In this thesis we developed a new matheursitic solution method for the Bi-Objective Energy-Eﬃcient
Train Timetabling Problem. The EETTP consists in ﬁnding a timetable that optimizes the utilization
of the regenerated energy produced by braking trains. We deﬁned the objectives of the problem to
both minimize the total energy consumption and minimize the highest peak power demand, while
controlling the deviation from an input timetable.
We described the EETTP using a bi-objective MILP model. The decision variables were the depar-
ture times of the trains, leaving the running times unaltered. In the model, 100% energy transfer
eﬃciency between any pair of trains was assumed. We presented and motivated a Resource Lev-
elling formulation of the EETTP that has been used on the matheuristic algorithm. The diﬃculties
entailed by Multi-Objective Optimization Problems gave rise to the need of using an heuristic ap-
proach to address the EETTP-BOOP. Therefore, we developed an Adaptive Large Neighborhood
Search matheuristic composed of six heuristic destruction methods and three MILP models used as
repair methods.
The computational experiments aimed at both assessing the performance of the ALNS and deter-
mining the trade-oﬀs between energy consumption, peak power demand and allowed deviations.
The results demonstrated a great performance of the ALNS. With running times of 3600 seconds,
the ALNS was capable of consistently ﬁnding extreme solutions less than 0.2% far from the lowest
total energy consumption and less than 15% far from the minimum peak demand. The approxima-
tion to the Pareto-optimal fronts was proven to be good by visual examination and by analyzing the
hypervolume measure. The results are remarkable taking into account the long computation times
that the ϵ-Constraint method needs to ﬁnd Pareto-optimal solutions. A potential reason for the long
computation times could be the strong symmetry of the problem. Our hypothesis that exact solution
methods are not suitable for the EETT-BOOP was conﬁrmed.
In addition, the design of the ALNS was validated by the study of the utilization of the destroy and
repair methods. On the one hand, all the destroy methods were, to a certain extent, equally preferred
in each of the instances. On the other hand, the minTotal repair method seemed to produce better
results in most of the cases. The Resource Levelling repair method appeared to have a discrete
performance, although not negligible for the larger instances.
The solutions provided by the ALNS induce large savings on the peak power demand. Those range
from a 12.5% to a 31.8%, depending on the instance and the deviations allowed. The savings on
58
==PAGE:72==
59
total energy consumption are more discrete, from 0.4% to 3.6%. These values are on the range of
those reported in the literature. As it was expected, larger deviations produce larger savings.
In terms of further research, the ALNS matheuristic seems promising. The development of heuristic
repair methods to solve the minMax, the minTotal and the RL models could lead to better perfor-
mances in larger instances.
A limitation of the study is the energy transfer model. The modelling of the electric network topol-
ogy would provide the means for a more realistic formulation.
Finally, an integrated approach of the Train Timetabling Problem and the EETTP could be studied.
Increasing the dimension of the TTP by adding energy-eﬃciency objectives could result into a too
complex optimization problem. Nevertheless, energy-eﬃciency considerations could be included in
the form of objective goals or Key Performance Indicators when addressing the TTP.
==PAGE:73==
Bibliography
[1] Thomas Albrecht. Reducing Power Peaks and Energy Consumption in Rail Transit Systems by
Simultaneous Train Running Time Control. WIT Press, Wessex, UK, 2004.
[2] Thomas Albrecht. Energy-Eﬃcient Train Operation. In Ingo Arne Hansen and J¨orn Pachl,
editors, Railway timetable & traﬃc, chapter 5, pages 83–105. Eurailpress, Hamburg, 1 edition,
2008.
[3] Robert Bosch and Michael Trick. Integer Programming. In EDMUND K. BURKE and GRA-
HAM KENDALL, editors, Search Methodologies. Introductory Tutorials in Optimization and
Decision Support Techniques, chapter 3, pages 69–96. Springer, New York, 2005.
[4] Valentina Cacchiani, Alberto Caprara, Laura Galli, Leo Kroon, G´abor Mar´oti, and Paolo Toth.
Nominal and robust train timetabling problems. European Journal of Operational Research,
46(2):217–23, 2012.
[5] Valentina Cacchiani, Laura Galli, and Paolo Toth. A tutorial on non-periodic train timetabling
and platforming problems.
EURO Journal on Transportation and Logistics, (4):285–320,
2015.
[6] Alberto Caprara, Leo Kroon, Michele Monaci, Marc Peeters, and Paolo Toth. Chapter 3 Pas-
senger Railway Optimization. Handbooks in Operations Research and Management Science,
14(C):129–187, 2007.
[7] Marco Caserta and Stefan Voß. Metaheuristics: Intelligent Problem Solving. In Thomas Stut-
zle Vittorio Maniezzo and Stefan Voß, editors, Matheuristics, chapter 1, pages 1–38. Springer,
New York, 2009.
[8] Kalyanmoy Deb. MULTI-OBJECTIVE OPTIMIZATION. In EDMUND K. BURKE and
GRAHAM KENDALL, editors, SEARCH METHODOLOGIES Introductory Tutorials in Op-
timization and Decision Support Techniques, chapter 10, pages 273–316. Springer, New York,
2005.
[9] Khaled El-Rayes and Dho Heon Jun. Optimizing Resource Leveling in Construction Projects.
JOURNAL OF CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING AND MANAGEMENT, pages 1172–1180,
2009.
[10] EUROPEAN COMMISSION. WHITE PAPER: Roadmap to a Single European Transport
Area – Towards a competitive and resource eﬃcient transport system. Technical report, EU-
ROPEAN COMMISSION, Brussels, Belgium, 2011.
[11] European Environment Agency. Overview of electricity production and use in Europe, 2016.
60
==PAGE:74==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
61
[12] D Fournier, D Mulard, and F Fages.
Energy optimization of metro timetables: A hybrid
approach. In Proc. 18th Int. Conf. Principles Practice Constraint Programm, pages 7–12,
Quebec City, QC, Canada, 2012. Lecture Notes Comput. Sci.
[13] Izumi Hasegawa and Seigo Uchida. Braking Systems. Japan Railway & Transport Review,
pages 52–59, 1999.
[14] K. M. Kim, K. T. Kim, and M S Han. Challenge A: A more and more energy eﬃcient railway
A Model and Approaches for Synchronized Energy Saving in Timetabling.
In 9th World
Congress on Railway Research, 2011.
[15] Jonathan Lesel, Gautier Claisse, Patrick Debay, and Benoit Robyns. Design of daily energy
optimal timetables for metro lines using metaheuristics. In Proceedings of the 18th Mediter-
ranean Electrotechnical Conference: Intelligent and Eﬃcient Technologies and Services for
the Citizen, MELECON 2016, 2016.
[16] George Mavrotas. Eﬀective implementation of the e-constraint method in Multi-Objective
Mathematical Programming problems. Applied Mathematics and Computation, 213:455–465,
2009.
[17] A. Nasri, M. Fekri Moghadam, and H. Mokhtari. Timetable optimization for maximum usage
of regenerative energy of braking in electrical railway systems. In SPEEDAM 2010 - Interna-
tional Symposium on Power Electronics, Electrical Drives, Automation and Motion, 2010.
[18] M Pena-Alcaraz, A Fern´andex, A. P. Cucala, A Ramos, and R. R Pecharrom´an. Optimal
underground timetable design based on power ﬂow for maximizing the use of regenerative-
braking energy. Proc. Inst. Mech. Eng., Part F: J. Rail Rapid Transit, 226(4):397–408, 2012.
[19] David Pisinger and Stefan Røpke. A general heuristic for vehicle routing problems. Computers
and Operations Research, 34(2007):2403–2435, 2007.
[20] David Pisinger and Stefan Røpke. Large Neighborhood Search. Technical report, Technical
University of Denmark, Lyngby, 2010.
[21] Andr´es Ramos, Mar´ıa Teresa Pe˜na, Antonio Fern´andez, and Paloma Cucala. Mathematical
programming approach to underground timetabling problem for maximizing time synchro-
nization. 2007.
[22] Julia Rieck and J¨urgen Zimmermann.
Exact Methods for Resource Leveling Problems.
In Handbook on Project Management and Scheduling Vol. 1, chapter 17, pages 361–387.
Springer International Publishing Switzerland, c. schwindt edition, 2015.
[23] Julia Rieck, J¨urgen Zimmermann, and Thorsten Gather. Mixed-integer linear programming
for resource leveling problems. European Journal of Operational Research, 2012.
[24] Stefan Røpke, David Pisinger Diku, Stefan Ropke, and David Pisinger. An Adaptive Large
Neighborhood Search Heuristic for the Pickup and Delivery Problem with Time Windows.
2004.
[25] Said M. Easa. Resource Leveling in Construction by Optimization. Journal of Construction
Engineering and Management, 2(115), 1989.
==PAGE:75==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
62
[26] Gerben M. Scheepmaker, Rob M P Goverde, and Leo G. Kroon. Review of energy-eﬃcient
train control and timetabling, 2017.
[27] Paul Shaw. Using Constraint Programming and Local Search Methods to Solve Vehicle Rout-
ing Problems. Technical report, University of Strathclyd, Glasgow, 1998.
[28] The Chair of EDOM (Economics – Discrete Optimization – Mathematics). Discrete Optimiza-
tion: Energy-Eﬃcient Train Timetables.
[29] UIC. Moving Towards Sustainable Mobility. Technical report, Paris, France, 2012.
[30] Darrell Whitley and Jean Paul Watson.
COMPLEXITY THEORY AND THE NO FREE
LUNCH THEOREM.
In EDMUND K. BURKE and GRAHAM KENDALL, editors,
SEARCH METHODOLOGIES Introductory Tutorials in Optimization and Decision Support
Techniques, chapter 11, pages 317–340. Springer, New York, 2005.
[31] D. Wismer Y. Haimes, L. Lasdon. On a bicriterion formulation of the problems of integrated
system identiﬁcation and system optimization. IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cy-
bernetics, 1:296–297, 1971.
[32] X. Yang, X. Li, Z. Gao, H. Wang, and T. Tang. A cooperative scheduling model for timetable
optimization in subway systems. IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp Syst., 14(1):438–447, 2013.
[33] X Yang, B Ning, X Li, and T Tang. A two-objective timetable optimization model in subway
systems. IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp Syst., 15(5):1913–1921, 2014.
[34] Xin Yang, Anthony Chen, Xiang Li, Bin Ning, and Tao Tang. An energy-eﬃcient scheduling
approach to improve the utilization of regenerative energy for metro systems. Transportation
Research Part C: Emerging Technologies, 2015.
[35] Eckart Zitzler and Lothar Thiele. Multiobjective Optimization Using Evolutionary Algorithms
A Comparative Case Study.
==PAGE:76==
63
==PAGE:77==
Appendix
Comparing ALNS with LNS
Table 1: Gaps between the LNS-combinations using the minMax repair method and the ALNS. All
results in %.
minMax
Instance
Deviation
Rand. Small
Rand. Large
Peak Small
Peak Large
Trains
T. Period
4
1
2.43
1.67
1.82
2.77
0.23
1.50
4
2
1.62
1.97
3.14
1.78
-0.05
1.99
4
3
1.07
1.20
3.76
3.75
0.70
0.50
8
1
2.04
1.93
2.62
1.76
1.88
1.66
8
2
3.90
3.23
4.00
2.22
2.33
2.27
8
3
3.48
2.78
4.90
3.25
1.86
1.71
10
1
0.34
1.56
0.76
1.74
1.91
0.17
10
2
-0.99
-2.34
1.10
-2.55
-0.01
0.08
10
3
-0.18
-0.83
-1.48
-1.48
3.08
-0.18
Table 2: Gaps between the LNS-combinations using the minTotal repair method and the ALNS. All
results in %.
minTotal
Instance
Deviation
Rand. Small
Rand. Large
Peak Small
Peak Large
Trains
T. Period
4
1
7.63
12.76
11.22
6.11
0.50
2.16
4
2
7.00
9.62
9.72
8.31
1.37
2.13
4
3
8.02
8.38
15.06
6.00
1.22
3.88
8
1
8.49
5.96
11.14
1.84
1.82
1.76
8
2
9.83
6.34
5.89
2.52
2.25
2.14
8
3
12.65
5.77
5.77
2.07
1.88
1.53
10
1
14.36
15.37
5.47
6.98
-0.97
0.88
10
2
13.74
6.41
8.34
0.07
-1.88
2.40
10
3
8.97
7.63
11.98
1.12
3.08
1.12
64
==PAGE:78==
65
Table 3: Gaps between the LNS-combinations using the RL repair method and the ALNS. All
results in %.
RL
Instance
Deviation
Rand. Small
Rand. Large
Peak Small
Peak Large
Trains
T. Period
4
1
7.67
7.85
7.05
3.78
1.54
2.11
4
2
5.76
7.95
7.47
3.19
0.64
2.57
4
3
7.22
6.63
8.27
2.83
0.79
1.92
8
1
6.70
6.41
5.93
1.65
1.84
2.45
8
2
6.57
5.97
6.81
2.13
2.30
3.06
8
3
6.25
6.24
5.48
1.64
3.41
2.76
10
1
7.24
7.63
7.41
2.70
-0.17
0.83
10
2
5.68
5.20
5.79
1.61
3.93
3.96
10
3
5.03
6.33
6.33
-2.78
-0.18
9.58
