==PAGE:1==
COLLABORATION AND 
INTEGRATION OF ENGINEERING 
IN BUILDING DESIGN PROCESSES
Optimisation of integrated design processes
from theoretical methodologies to practical concepts 
Master thesis in Architectural Engineering, 
Technical University of Denmark
Birthe Wohlenberg & Signe Skovmand Jakobsen 
==PAGE:2==
2
==PAGE:3==
3
Collaboration and Integration of Engineering 
in Building Design Processes
Optimisation of integrated design processes
from theoretical methodologies to practical concepts
Master thesis, July 2017
2 x 30 ECTS credits
Architectural Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Civil Engineering 
Authors:
Birthe Wohlenberg & Signe Skovmand Jakobsen 
Main supervisor:
Lotte Bjerregaard Jensen
Co-supervisor:
Mathilde Landgren
==PAGE:4==
4
We would like to thank  to our main thesis supervisor, Lotte Bjerregaard Jensen, for her 
enthusiastic and exceptionally extensive guidance throughout this thesis and the en-
tire course of our studies at DTU. We would also like to acknowledge our co-supervisor, 
PhD student Mathilde Landgren, for her contributions to the questionnaire and general 
discussions. A great debt of gratitude is also owed to everyone at Studio A for taking 
interest in our work and including us in the design team during our case study. A special 
appreciation go to the Queen of Research and Sustainability Lady at Studio A for her time 
and curiosity.  
We wish to thank Sweco for letting us make use of the office facilities. A great thanks to 
our colleagues for being available with sparring, motivational cheers, annoyingly critical 
and eye-opening questions and providing for sugar rushes on lengthy days; especially 
Camilla Dyring, Henriette Menå Grud, Sanne Bauer and Camilla Visted Nielsen. A special 
appreciation to Maria Møller Skovgård for her very valuable comments on this thesis. 
A great thanks to Anna Skovmand Jakobsen for providing inputs to the communicative 
aspects of this thesis and to Mathias Møller Mortensen for his guidance on social re-
search, and for putting up with us occupying his living room for five months.
Lastly, we would like to thank our family and friends for their invaluable encouragement, 
interest, and support. 
Thank you! 
Birthe Wohlenberg & Signe Skovmand Jakobsen
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
==PAGE:5==
5
Parties in the building industry struggle with coordination, communication and collab-
oration. Increased complexity in building projects calls for early multidisciplinary col-
laboration and integrated design. The concept of integrated design is a way to ensure 
a sustainable, well-coordinated building design of high quality. The aim of this thesis is 
to explore how the early design processes within Danish building projects can be opti-
mised, and to formulate a palpable concept for an integrated design process.
Optimisation potentials have been investigated through an extensive literature study, a 
case study, questionnaires and a focus group. 
The challenges of integrated design processes are related to traditions and circumstanc-
es on an operational level as well as on an overall management and regulatory level. The 
root cause of the challenges is of a social and managerial nature.
A number of challenges on an overall managerial- and regulatory level need to be over-
come in order to ensure the feasibility of early collaboration in an integrated design pro-
cess, to optimise the early design phases, and enable exploitation of the full potentials of 
integrated design. This thesis proposes adding a design process coordinator to projects, 
prolonging early design phases, changing traditional fee structures, and adjustments to 
educational programs curriculum to break with traditions. 
The research in this thesis provides a solid base for scoping a tangible and practically 
applicable method for an integrated process.
ABSTRACT
==PAGE:6==
6
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Forewords  
11
Introduction 
19
Aim and Objective  
20
Problem statement  
20
Collaboration and time span  
21
Methodology 
22
Framing of thesis objective 
22
Sustainability and Climate Change 
24
The global challenges 
24
The building industry must adapt to changes 
25
Theorising Design Process Methodologies  
28
Development of design methods - A historical view for Integrated Design  
28
Design process types 
33
Part 1 
41
The Danish building project framework 
43
Description of Services for Building and Planning 
43
Sustainability certifications  
55
Findings from Danish Building Project framework   
60
Integrated Design Process Guides  
61
Method 
62
Selection of Integrated Design Process Guides to investigate 
64
Strengths and weaknesses of iDP guides 
84
General findings in the IDPs  
87
Integrated Energy design 
88
Findings from IDP mapping and IED  
92
Recap part 1  
96
Sub-conclusion part 1  
98
==PAGE:7==
7
Part 2 
101
Social research and data collection 
103
Case study  
105
Thesis specific theory & method 
105
Studio A 
107
Course of the case study  
108
Case project facts 
109
Observations  
112
Examples of inputs and communications  
114
Presentation material 
124
Findings from case study  
130
Questionnaire  
135
Intro  
135
Theory and method  
137
Analysis  
146
Studio tendencies 
150
Results of questionnaires    
152
Findings from Questionnaire 
155
Focus group  
157
Conducting a focus group  
158
Observations 
163
Findings from focus group   
170
Recap part 2 
172
Sub-conclusion part 2 
174
Part 3 
179
Danish Framework is part of the problem 
180
Opportunities within the Danish framework 
182
Rethinking of business models 
183
Process management 
185
Education can be part of the solution 
188
Sub-conclusion part 3 
190
Conclusion & future research 
191
Conclusion  
192
Concluding the statements in the hypotheses 
194
Further Research     
196
References  
197
Appendix 
==PAGE:8==
8
LIST OF FIGURES 
All figures are produced by the authors for this thesis unless something else is stated.
Figure 1 - Initial idea and concept of Køge Sygehus 
11
Figure 2 - Final building design of Køge Sygehus 
11
Figure 3 - Example of technical guideline from Sweco  
15
Figure 4 - Graph of the Danish building codes from 1961 to present  
25
Figure 5 - Concept of BIM BAM BOOM 
27
Figure 6 - Timeline of the first, second and third design methods 
29
Figure 7 - The linear design process 
33
Figure 8 - The liner design process 
34
Figure 9 - The iterative design process 
35
Figure 10 - The integrated design process   
37
Figure 11 - Gantt chart of the participating actors in the different  
 
     sub-phases of the Danish Description of Services  
 
 
45
Figure 12 - Contractural organisation and project organisation in  
 
     design-build projects  
 
 
 
 
 
 47
Figure 13 - Contractural organisation in partnering projects  
48
Figure 14 - Project organisation in partnering projects 
49
Figure 15 - Overview of American and Danish phases and milestones,  
 
     and how they corresponds  
 
 
 
 
              63
Figure 16 - Course of the case study and the technical scientific information  
 
     infused in the design process by the authors  
 
 
            108
Figure 17 - The Case project as presented in the latest portfolio 
                          109
Figure 18 - The Case project as presented in the latest portfolio 
                          109
Figure 19 - Overview of the development of the Case project 
  
            111
Figure 20 - The universal isometric representation of the entire building 
125
Figure 21 - Overview of the questionnaire design and the type of scale  
 
     for each question 
 
 
 
 
 
            145
Figure 22 - Reading guide for the profiles of the studios 
147
Figure 23 - The project type based business model is shown to the left,  
 
     and the profession based business model to the right 
 
            183
Figure 24 - Project structure, where team members are consistent through  
 
     phases 
 
 
 
 
 
 
            185
Figure 25 - Project structure, where the team members are changed between  
 
     phases 
 
 
 
 
 
 
            185
Figure 26 - Suggestion for division of services of Design Management  
            187
==PAGE:9==
9
READING GUIDE 
The introduction outlines the aim and objective of this Master Thesis, along 
with specifi cation of the research topic. Furthermore, the overall methodology 
is described in short, as the specifi c research methods are outlined in the 
associated sections in Part 1 and 2. To frame the thesis topic a broader recap 
on environmental issues and design- methods are outlined in the introduction.
The foreword outlines the background and motivation behind the choice of 
topic for this Master Thesis.
FOREWORD
INTRODUCTION
PART 1
PART 2
PART 3
CONSLUSION
Part 2 is a case study and questionnaire survey of an architectural studio and 
attitude towards integrated design, and the level of knowledge and approach 
to technical knowledge in the design process.
Part 3 is an elaborate discussion of the reasons for diffi culties with integrated 
design in the building industry in general and the feasibility of initiatives 
within a Danish framework.
The last section of this Master Thesis contains a conclusion on the hypothesis 
and research question and a discussion of topics for further research.
Part 1 is a mapping of existing guides for Integrated Design Process and an 
analysis of the Danish building industry in regards to obstructing mechanisms 
and potential optimisation areas in the early design phases.
==PAGE:10==
10
==PAGE:11==
11
In the building industry, the need for early collaboration on building projects is generally 
recognised. The concept of ‘integrated design’ is known as a way to optimise collabo-
ration in the design process and thus ensure a sustainable, well-coordinated building 
design of high quality. Integrated design is (allegedly) practised throughout the entire 
building industry. However, building projects still struggle as communication and collab-
oration between the parties in the building industry go sideways. 
An example from the Danish building industry is the case of Køge Sygehus; a hospital 
project where poor planning and coordination between the architects and engineers, has 
not only resulted in delays and increased costs, but a final building design so far from the 
initial idea and concept, that it has not been approved for construction. 
This example is an extreme case, however it is still symptomatic for the overall picture 
of the challenges in the building industry. 
The intent of this thesis is to explore why the concept of integrated design has not yet 
been unconditionally successful, and what could be done in order to succeed.
The following pages describe the background and incentive for the topic of this thesis. 
It is based on our experience from jobs at a consulting engineering company, our edu-
cational background and a prelude case study in visual communication of engineering 
know-how.
FOREWORDS 
Figure 1 - Initial idea and concept of Køge Sygehus
Figure 2 - Final building design of Køge Sygehus
==PAGE:12==
12
Background and incentive for this thesis
The topic of this thesis, collaboration and optimisation of integrated design processes, has 
emerged from our specific educational background in architectural engineering as well as 
our experiences from internships and student jobs in a large architecture studio and a large 
engineering consultancy. The research in this thesis is a product of reflectiveness, which is, 
of course, formed based on our background and knowledge. The business school professors 
Alvesson & Sköldberg write that all reflective research is a product of the researcher’s sub-
jective interpretation (Urup, 2016). It is therefore important to address our subjectivisms as 
researchers, as well as what influence it might have on our thesis. Thus, in the following we 
will explain our background and motivation for taking on this research topic. 
Firstly, we both hold a Bachelor of Engineering degree (Diplomingeniør) in architec-
tural engineering from the Technical University of Denmark (DTU). The whole concept 
and backbone of the programme is integrated design, in which architects and engineers 
teaches in unison. The idea that the two disciplines have a symbiotic relationship in 
an integrated design process is natural in the perception of an architectural engineer. 
During our 3.5 years in the B.Eng. programme, our education has revolved around multi-
ple disciplines such as structural engineering, material physics, building energy and in-
door environment, urban design and planning, architecture history and design methods. 
This enables us to identify interfaces between the disciplines and understand the needs 
of different disciplines, and furthermore, this has taught us to understand the importance 
of communication skills. With successful communication amongst stakeholders as well 
as technical disciplines in a building design process, it is possible to elevate the building 
design to become more holistic and integrated. The building technology professors Kim, 
Azari and Angeley argues that a higher level of integration results in a higher quality end 
result - a better building (Kim, Azari, & Angeley, 2016). 
Our most important output from the architectural engineering programme is the crucial 
ability to regard projects in their entirety instead of in bits and pieces. As researchers 
working on this thesis, we have insights and the right tools to address complex situa-
tions and problems between the disciplines using creative methods and an efficient set 
of communication skills.
This is why we are able to understand how to establish a good design process.
 
==PAGE:13==
13
Secondly, here at the end of our master degree in architectural engineering, we are 
both specialised in sustainable building design. During our two years at the master pro-
gramme, we have further developed our technical skills within energy design, daylight 
and indoor environment and sustainability, and have become increasingly aware of the 
interactions between these elements in building design. The technically specialised en-
gineers tend to focus on the detailed design phases. Thus, our primary focus is the early 
phases of the building design process as we can contribute the most to the quality of 
the final outcome by applying our knowledge of multidisciplinary communication at an 
early stage. 
Throughout our studies, we have had multiple opportunities to test holistic approaches 
and creative methods in multidisciplinary school projects and voluntary, extracurricular 
projects such as Solar Decathlon and MADE (MADE, 2016; Solar Decathlon, 2017). We 
have thus experienced integrated design processes during our time of study and have 
experienced how smoothly and efficient processes can run, if everybody has an open 
mind-set and aligns expectations for the project and the collaboration prior to the proj-
ect’s start. However, there is no economy mixed into in the expectations and there is no 
budget limit in regards of work hours or meeting hours when doing a school project. 
 
Thirdly, we both work in a large engineering consultancy, Sweco, where our focus, among 
other things, is the vital collaboration between external architects and consultants, as 
well as internal specialists, in the early design phases of large-scaled projects. The ini-
tiative in Sweco for early collaboration is called ‘Game Changer”’ which addresses collab-
oration, communication and a mind-set of knowledge-sharing. We have witnessed how 
engineers try to approach the architects and contractors in the early design phases, and 
have seen how difficult this can be - especially when early collaboration is not part of 
the client’s demands. Yet, everybody can agree that early collaboration results in more 
optimised processes and thereby more optimised buildings (Urup, 2016), but there ap-
pears to be a lack of motivation or knowledge of how-to to challenge the traditions and 
try different approaches. 
 
==PAGE:14==
14
Having experienced the complications of integrated design from the engineering side of 
the table, we wish to know more about the mechanisms that control the design process-
es of the architects involved. If we understand the motivations and reservations of archi-
tecture studios as businesses and of individual architects as designers, we as engineers 
have a great advantage when communicating inputs in a collaborative design process. 
This is, of course, only one bead on the string towards a realisation of co-creation and 
real integrated design. But nevertheless: An important one.
Lastly, the master thesis is, for now, our last academic accomplishment and opportunity 
to add to our academic knowledge and skillset. The topic of this thesis is a vital ele-
ment in our professional knowledge base as architectural engineers - to understand the 
mechanisms that complicates the design approach and process, which we have been 
schooled to think is the most natural and optimal. Design processes involving multiple 
professions in close collaboration is a fascinating field. Due to our education, we regard 
integrated design processes as a natural and optimal way of working. Through this the-
sis, we explore the underlying mechanisms, which complicates the design approach and 
processes. We want to explore how this idea of integrated design can be widely applied 
and how we, as architectural engineers, can contribute in order to ensure the success of 
multidisciplinary integrated building project of high quality.
Prelude to thesis
As a prelude to this thesis, we conducted a case study focusing on how engineers commu-
nicate with architects through visual guidelines in the early design phases. The company at 
focus was the Danish department of Sweco, an international consulting engineering company. 
The outcome was a report on ‘Visual Communication of professional engineering knowhow as 
a tool in integrated design processes’ (Jakobsen & Wohlenberg, 2016). From this prelude, the 
interest for investigating the collaboration methods and design processes in building design 
projects arose. As the following section will describe, the prelude has provided us with insight 
in the way of visually communicating as engineers. 
The case study revealed an initiative within Sweco, which urges employees to participate 
early in the design process, and always be ready to think in alternative solutions instead 
of turning not durable ideas down at first glance. One of the main tools to accomplish 
this is visualising generic and project specific guidelines instead of writing extensive, 
complicated and detailed technical guidelines. According to engineering education ex-
pert Riemer, reports are for experts, and not everyone on a team needs to understand 
==PAGE:15==
15
every single technical detail of all disciplines - they need to understand the consequenc-
es for the overall project (Riemer, 2007). This is where interfaces between disciplines are 
evident. Based on this idea, so-called ‘technical guidelines’ have been developed within 
Sweco. The guidelines were initially meant for external purposes e.g. the engineer could 
bring it to a meeting and engage in dialogue by describing pros and cons of different 
alternatives. The guidelines have later shown to be a great internal coordination tool 
too. The illustration below shows an example of such a technical guideline - this one 
concerning the placement of toilet groups on multiple floors.
The guideline shows three alternatives; one where the toilet groups are placed differ-
ently on each story; one where they are placed right on top of each other; one where 
they are placed slightly scattered yet within an overall vertical line. A yellow colour on 
the guideline shows the area of concern, which in this case is the piping ducts between 
floors, and a pink colour shows the consequences of the alternative solutions. The conse-
quences of the placement of the toilet groups is to either lower the suspended ceilings, 
hence reducing the room height to make room for horisontal ducting or to simply have 
the ducting in a straight line, which limits the floor planning layout as the toilets can 
only be placed in a limited area. The guideline then describes pros and cons of the three 
alternatives, and lastly a list of professions and interfaces, which the placement of toilet 
groups on different stories affect. 
The guidelines have proven useful as a collaboration tool, as issues are articulated and 
Figure 3 - Example of technical guideline from Sweco 
==PAGE:16==
16
alternative solutions are visually presented. However, the guidelines cannot stand-alone. 
According to PhD in sustainable architecture, Marureen Trebilcock, the best design advise 
is often expert advice (Trebilcock, 2009). She writes that this is the case with challenges, 
which are so specific that designers are unlikely to find a guideline or rule-of-thumb with 
a proper solution. “It also places expertise and interdisciplinary collaboration in parallel to 
the use of tools” (Trebilcock, 2009). Having an expert-oriented approach is a bottom-up 
approach, whereas guidelines are tool-oriented and top-down. When applying a top-
down approach, it might be perceived by employees as a pre-fabricated and limited 
space of solutions, where a bottom-up expert advice, approach could present itself like 
an enrichment through collaboration. 
From this case study, it is seen that the visual guidelines are not efficient as tools with-
out the dialogue with the expert, but have proven a good tool for dialogue. Without the 
dialogue, the visual guidelines lose their meaning.
The most effective way of adapting the guidelines have been through dialogue meetings 
and workshops. When the design starts to touch upon crucial aspects of interfaces, the 
engineers can present their alternatives - supported by the visuals. 
The social skills of a person determine how this person will act in a dialogue or work-
shop. For example, an extroverted person would have no problems with interaction and 
idea generation with other people, whereas an introverted person might feel more com-
fortable in dealing with specific tasks in a calmer, more individual environment. Different 
personality types have different qualities; however, in a collaboration-based project an 
introverted approach is not desirable.
When a dialogue- and workshop-based approach is found most efficient, it could be 
concluded that social interaction plays a major role in a building design process. The 
personality of the engineer is of great importance, since the presentation and communi-
cation of technical input has great impact on how the information is perceived. Emotion-
al intelligence (EQ) might be more important than the IQ, since skills in communication 
enables a person to transfer their knowledge onto other humans. According to Riemer, 
the “EQ contributes to identifying the needs of others and to identifying those projects that 
are more important to the task at hand” (Jakobsen & Wohlenberg, 2016; Riemer, 2007). 
This means that some people are better at identifying their target group and convey 
thereafter. Others have an acquired EQ and thereby know how to act and what to look 
for, e.g. through education. 
Based on the case study prelude, it can be concluded that especially introvert people can 
==PAGE:17==
17
be supported by visual guidelines when explaining their inputs to other team members. 
Extrovert people can also be supported by visual guidelines, as issues with alternative 
solutions become more tangible when presented visually. When everyone on a design 
team understands, and acknowledge, the issues with alternative solutions, everyone can 
focus on how to move forward. It becomes a shared problem instead of the engineer’s. 
Thus, the personality and social skills of the engineer is of great importance, as a great 
part of communicating is embedded therein. 
From this case study prelude, the keen interest for investigating the collaboration meth-
ods and design processes in building design projects arose. The case study prelude gave 
an insight into the way of visually communicating, and communicating generally, as en-
gineers. To gain a deeper insight into the holisticity of design processes, we wish to 
investigate in this thesis how the collaboration, communication and design processes 
appear from the point of view of the architects.  
==PAGE:18==
==PAGE:19==
INTRODUCTION
“
Coming together is a beginning, 
staying together is progress, 
and working together is success.
- Henry Ford
==PAGE:20==
20
Collaboration and Integration of Engieering in Building Design Processes
AIM AND OBJECTIVE 
Problem statement 
Research show that a lot of the potential of integrated design lie within the early design 
phases. Therefore, the overall objective of this thesis is to investigate existing integrated 
design processes executed in the building industry and analyse the mechanisms that 
influence and control the early phase design processes in regards of implementation of 
technical knowledge early in the process. 
The aim is to research possible optimisation potentials for integrated design processes, 
and formulate a palpable concept for an integrated design process. 
To do this, three hypotheses has been defined, based on the described experiences in the 
forewords: 
1. The challenges of multidisciplinary collaboration within the building industry are 
related to traditions and mind-set of individual professionals
2. Technical knowledge as a design driver in the early design phases depends on the 
presentation and clarity of communication of technical scientific knowledge
3. There is a connection between the architectural studio’s overall design-process-pro-
file and the willingness to collaborate with engineers in the early design phases
The study of how the Danish building industry can benefit from integrated design 
processes has been conducted numerous times. Yet, the authors of this thesis believe 
that the question of how to succeed with it is still unresolved. Therefore, the research 
question is: 
How can the early design processes within the Danish build-
ing industry be optimised to a level where the potentials of 
integrated design are exhibited and realised? 
==PAGE:21==
21
Introduction
The research question is accompanied by three related sub-questions, which elaborate 
on different topics. Each of these sub-questions constitute its own part in the thesis to 
ensure a clear structure.    
Sub question 1 
Which aspects influence the design processes and collaboration in the Danish building 
industry, and which methods and principles from integrated design guides can be ap-
plied to the design process resulting in a better building? 
Sub question 2: 
How can technical knowledge in the fields of urban microclimate comfort, daylight and 
energy performance be implemented and add value to the design processes? 
Sub question 3: 
How could a palpable concept for integrated design processes be scoped in order to 
secure implementation of technical knowledge and ‘a good design process’ within the 
Danish building industry? 
Collaboration and time span 
This thesis project was carried out as part of the Master programme of Architectural En-
gineering at the Department of Civil Engineering at the Technical University of Denmark 
(DTU). 
The case study in this thesis was conducted at an architectural studio, which will be re-
ferred to as ‘Studio A’. . It will be accombanied with with reflections on earlier experiences 
at Sweco A/S.
Main supervisor Lotte Bjerregaard Jensen, associate professor at the Department of Civil 
Engineering at DTU, has contributed to the general discussions on the topics of this the-
sis project as well as providing guidance.
Co-supervisor Mathilde Landgren, PhD at the Department of Civil Engineering at DTU, 
has contributed to the data collection process associated with the questionnaire in this 
thesis.
The time span of the thesis was February 1st 2017 to July 1st 2017, which correlates to 
2x 30 ECTS credits.
==PAGE:22==
22
Collaboration and Integration of Engieering in Building Design Processes
Framing of thesis objective
The research question, sub-questions and thesis hypothesis have been based on the 
authors’ practical insight in multidisciplinary collaboration and integrated design pro-
cesses, through education in Architectural Engineering and professional experience from 
internships and student jobs. The practical insight has been supplemented and substan-
tiated by a literature review of the development and state of the art of the integrated 
design process.
To frame the thesis topic and its relevance to the building industry and society in general, 
a broader recap on environmental issues is outlined in the introduction. The historical 
development of design- methods and processes are investigated to put the current de-
sign processes of the building industry into perspective. 
Part 1 – Literature study on Danish framework and mapping of inte-
grated design process guides
Which aspects influence the design processes and collaboration in the Danish building 
industry, and which methods and principles from integrated design guides can be ap-
plied to the design process resulting in a better building? 
Several integrated design process guides have been investigated, where the eight most 
significant are analysed and categorised within a number of aspects. The results of this 
mapping should be seen as a background to understand the design process of the case 
study project addressed in Part 2. 
To frame the approach to the integrated design process, and make the research relevant 
in the Danish building industry, an extensive literature study of the Danish framework 
has been conducted. This have created a backdrop for the possible optimisation poten-
tials within the framework, which all Danish projects are subject to. The literature study 
on the Danish framework for building projects include the Description of Services and 
other publications from the Danish Association of Consulting Engineers (FRI), the Danish 
Association of Architectural Firms (DANSKE ARK), and Værdibyg, combined with informa-
tion from various Danish authorities within building, such as the Danish Building and 
Property Agency (bygst) and Molio (formerly known as bips).
METHODOLOGY
==PAGE:23==
23
Part 2 – Case study on implementation of engineering knowledge 
How can technical knowledge in the fields of urban microclimate comfort, daylight and 
energy performance be implemented and add value to the design processes? 
A case study on implementation of engineering knowledge has been conducted at a 
large architectural studio. The authors were working in the architectural studio along-
side the project team over the course of 9 weeks. To provide context for the observations 
and findings from the case study, the authors compiled a questionnaire survey mapping 
the level of knowledge on technical aspects and the approach to design in terms of 
holisticity and multidisciplinarity in a number of different architectural studios. Lastly, a 
semi-structured interview and a focus group has been held to analyse the observations 
and questionnaire results. The detailed methods of the case study, questionnaire and 
focus group will be described in the associated sections along with the presentation of 
results and findings. 
Part 3 – Discussion of tools and initiatives for an integrated design 
process in the Danish framework
How could a palpable concept for integrated design processes be scoped in order to 
secure implementation of technical knowledge and ‘a good design process’ within the 
Danish building industry? 
The findings of Part 1 and 2 regarding the problems associated with integrated design 
processes in the Danish building industry and suggestions for potential optimisation 
are elaborated and discussed in Part 3. The discussion of pros and cons of different 
initiatives along with the findings of Part 1 and 2 lead to a conclusion on the research 
question and associated hypothesis.
Introduction
==PAGE:24==
24
Collaboration and Integration of Engieering in Building Design Processes
SUSTAINABILITY AND CLIMATE CHANGE
As a means to mitigate to climate change, buildings become increasingly sustainable. 
Consequently, the complexity of buildings is increasing due to extensive requirements in re-
gards to material usage and energy performance. This section will address, how the energy 
consumption is contributing to climate change, and how the building industry try to adapt 
by applying stricter energy performance requirements for new buildings.
The following section is a backdrop setting for the incentives of changing the way building 
projects are traditionally executed, in order to secure more sustainable buildings of a higher 
quality. 
The global challenges
Climate change is partly driven by greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions caused by human 
activities.
Man-made global warming and a need for change was broadly acknowledged with the 
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) of 1992 at the 
Earth Summit followed by the Kyoto Protocol in 1997. The changes are already affecting 
every country on every continent, and research predicts the emission levels are only con-
tinuously increasing hence the situation will only worsen (UN, 2017).
All industrial sectors must strive to minimise GHG emissions and lower the speed of cli-
matic changes including the building industry. This means both changing habits to lower 
energy consumption, but also limiting dependency on coal, oil and natural gas. 
Combating climate change is one of the UN 17 goals to transform the world; ‘Goal 13: 
Take urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts’. Climate change is a global 
issue as “Emissions anywhere affect people everywhere” (UN, 2017), which requires inter-
national action to move toward a low-carbon economy. According to the goals of the 
European Union (EU), developed countries should collectively reduce their emissions of 
greenhouse gases by 60% to 80% by 2050 (Intelligent Energy Europe, 2009).
In Denmark, the build environment is responsible for approximately 40% of greenhouse 
gas emissions (Koch & Buhl, 2013) and approximately 35% of the total energy con-
sumption (Dansk Byggeri, 2017). The current political energy agreement in Denmark was 
formed in 2012 and upholds until 2020. The political goal is to be fossil free in 2050 and 
energy consumptions in buildings are one out of four main issues in the current climate 
policy (Dansk Byggeri, 2017). In the coming fall of 2017, a proposal for the new energy 
agreement of 2020 will be presented by the government. 
==PAGE:25==
25
The building industry must adapt to changes
The United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) uses two sig-
nificant terms when responding to climate change; mitigation and adaption. Mitigation 
is to aim at reducing emissions to minimise global warming, whereas adaption is to 
prepare for the effects of climate change. 
The more successful the mitigation, the less the adaption is needed (Kropp & Scholze, 
2009). 
One way to secure lower energy usage in buildings is to lower the allowed limit of ener-
gy consumption through authorities and regulations. By lowering the energy demand for 
building operation there will, of course, be a lower GHG emission. The Danish Building 
Regulations are continually updated with stricter requirements for annual energy con-
sumption. 
 
Over the past decade, requirements have been restricted twice, in 2010 and 2015 re-
spectively (Br10 and Low Energy Buildings 2015). An additional restriction is due in 2020 
with Building Class 2020. Figure 4 illustrates the decrease in maximum allowed energy 
demand per year per square meter for residential buildings from 1961 to 2020. A similar 
decrease is also applicable for other types of buildings. 
“…The best way of cutting emissions is not to generate them in the first place. Avoiding the 
waste of energy translates directly into emissions reductions, and cost savings. So instead of 
‘megawatt’, companies should be thinking in terms of ‘negawatt’.”
Quote by US environment ‘guru’ Armory Lovins (Intelligent Energy Europe, 2009).
0
50
1961
350
185
116
84.7
63.5
36.7
20
1979
1995
2006
2010
2015
2020
100
150
200
250
300
350
kWh/m2/year
Figure 4 - Graph of the Danish building codes from 1961 to present.  
Adopted from Energistyrelsen (Danish Energy Agency, 2013)
Introduction
==PAGE:26==
26
Collaboration and Integration of Engieering in Building Design Processes
Through higher demands for building performance, building design becomes inevitably 
more complex. Regarding the energy consumption of buildings, there is only so much 
that can be done on component optimisation level, and the energy efficiency of individ-
ual components and systems cannot be optimised more than they already have been to 
reduce energy consumption (Brunsgaard et al., 2014). Therefore, energy goals cannot 
be reached by adding technology to a finished architectural design, as the building per-
formance in regards of energy performance and indoor comfort is highly related to the 
architectural design of the building and user behaviour. 
The focus is now on how to optimise the way different systems work together to increase 
building energy performance. This calls for a holistic design approach that takes multi-
ple aspects of different disciplines into consideration. The performance of a building is 
influenced by decisions made in the early design phases, e.g. orientation, overall geom-
etry, fenestration etc. This means the competences of engineers need to be utilised in 
the early design phases and the traditional approach to design process are challenged 
(Brunsgaard et al., 2014; C. Koch & Buhl, 2013).
Operation of buildings is the most costly phase in a life cycle perspective, both financially 
and environmentally. The concept of BIM-BAM-BOOM addresses the financial aspect; the 
concept describes the relation of cost between the different phases of a building project. 
Figure 5 illustrate how the design phase of a building, here in the context of Building 
Information Modelling, is responsible for a small part of the overall cost. The cost of 
assembly of the building, the BAM (Building Assembly Modelling) is 20 times larger. The 
BOOM (Building Operation Optimisation Model) is 60 times larger (Rosenfield, 2012). 
New buildings will be in operation for future decades, and must therefore be energy 
efficient. Looking at the entire lifespan of a building project, potential cost savings are 
biggest in the operation phase. Operation cost can be minimised with a good building 
design hence investing more in the early design phases, the overall cost can be reduced.
==PAGE:27==
27
Besides legal regulations on energy performance, developers, building owners, and ten-
ants have increasingly higher demands. These include sustainability ambitions, the use 
of BIM, timeliness, and budgeting of construction. These demands increase the complex-
ity of building projects hence, a higher focus on coordination and collaboration in the 
building industry is necessary (Intelligent Energy Europe, 2009; Urup, 2016).
The “Traditional Design Process” (TDP) cannot facilitate the very complex task of opti-
mising a building in its whole (Brunsgaard et al., 2014; Busby Perkins +Will & Stantec 
Consulting, 2007; Intelligent Energy Europe, 2009; Kanters & Horvat, 2012; C. Koch & 
Buhl, 2013; Larsson, 2009; Urup, 2016). 
In order to enforce optimisation of buildings, a different type of design process is called 
for. It has to deal with the higher level of complexity and technical input in early design 
phases. An ‘Integrated Design Process (IDP)’ covers the above described, which will be 
elaborated in the following.
0
20
30
40
50
60
BIM
BAM
BOOM
Figure 5 - Concept of BIM BAM BOOM
Introduction
==PAGE:28==
28
Collaboration and Integration of Engieering in Building Design Processes
THEORISING DESIGN PROCESS METHODOLOGIES 
A specific design method, i.e. an approach to design, will affect the progression of the design 
development and the design process. An understanding of different design methods is thus 
important when analysing the mechanisms that influence design processes and possible 
obstructions towards integrated design. Challenges with regards to collaboration with-
in building projects may link back to different design methods of different disciplines. In 
order to approach the current issues, it is vital to understand the origin of these. Hence, the 
following outlines the history of design methods used through the last centuries to set the 
current situation into perspective. The general description of design methods is followed by 
a description of the most common design processes in building projects today; the linear-, 
iterative-, and integrated design process.
Development of design methods - A historical view for Integrated Design 
Today, the first and second generation of design methods are mostly common in the 
building industry. The engineers are mainly working with the first generation of design 
methods and architects with the second. The two generations have opposite views on 
how to arrive at a solution; The first generation is problem-oriented, and based on sci-
entific knowledge; The second generation is solution-oriented, and based on empirical 
knowledge. An elaboration of the two are described in this section.  
The third generation design method is a reaction to the traditional approaches. It states 
that defining problems and developing solutions are parallel activities, which supports 
each other. The third generation applies problem solving to design – it is an exploration 
of how architecture was done before the two first generations were described (Hybert-
son, 2009). To get an understanding of the origin of the integrated design process, the 
first- and second generation of design methods is described in the following.
The integrated design process is a product of decades of interest in design processes and 
optimisation of these, within different fields. The integrated design process share some 
similar concepts with the third generation of design methods, which is mostly used in 
systems-engineering (Hybertson, 2009). Yet, the integrated design process is a concept of 
its own within the building industry, and it is therefore interesting to study the historical 
view on design method developments in order to get an idea of the foundation for the 
integrated design process. 
==PAGE:29==
29
First generation of design methods
In the beginning, building design was a craft and experience-based approach, which was 
sufficient, as buildings at that time only needed to fulfil a limited number of needs. With 
the rising demands from users, regulatory requirements, and technology, the building de-
sign became a much more complex task and new methods of design thinking was need-
ed (Petersen & Svendsen, 2008). Architectural design has been around for thousands 
of years, but as (Hybertson, 2009) argues, all books and knowledge on the topic purely 
focuses on designs and not on the process of creating them, hence the design process 
was not part of the way of thinking. 
Design processes are rooted in the design method movement of the 1960s. Here, a clas-
sic scientific methodology was used to justify design as an academic, scientific discipline. 
The design method movement was anchored in the mechanical engineers’ approaches 
for the industrial design. Many new design methods were developed to manage the rapid 
demand for development of new techniques, and all these new methods had a scientific 
approach to design, which emphasised rationalism. The most symptomatic expression for 
the building projects of this time is Louis Sullivan’s “Forms follows Function”. The quote 
from 1896 became the mantra of the designers in the 1960s, and explains how the focus 
was on the functionality rather than the shape and aesthetics. Overall, the first-genera-
tion design methods aimed to quantify architecture, and architects needed to clear their 
mind of preconceptions. The process of analysis and synthesis was meant to rationalise 
architectural design, with emphasis on user requirements, and more open-ended design 
and options  (De Vries, Cross, & Grant, 1993; Hybertson, 2009; Petersen, 2011; Shani & 
Noumair, 2015). 
Figure 6 - Timeline of the first, second and third design methods
First generation
Analysis/Synthesis
(A/S)
Second generation
Conjecture/Analysis
(C/A)
Third generation
Conjecture/Refutation
(C/R)
1960’s
1970’s
1990’s
Introduction
==PAGE:30==
30
Collaboration and Integration of Engieering in Building Design Processes
Second generation of design methods
In the 1970s, the very same method developers started disassociating themselves with 
the design methodologies they had created in the 60s. This rejection of method might 
be due to lack of success in the application of scientific methods to design (De Vries et 
al., 1993). The rational definition of reality, as described in the first generation, was not fit 
for design problems. According to the professors and design theorists Rittel and Webber, 
the methods developed in the 60s had only been the first generation of design methods, 
and now a new, second generation was about to emerge. Rittel and Webber characterised 
design and planning problems as ‘wicked’ problems, which were completely unmanage-
able by techniques of science and technology, as they dealt purely with ‘tame’ problems. 
‘Wicked’ problems have no stopping rules, and are fundamentally indefinable. When a 
design problem is indefinable, there is no possible way of determining whether a design 
problem is solved or not; solution are never true or false, they are only good or bad (Bu-
chanan, 1992; Strømann-Andersen, 2012). 
Whereas the first generation was based on the application of rational, scientific methods, 
the second generation would be based on empirical knowledge, have an argumentative 
process and be full of intuitive leaps (Petersen, 2011; Strømann-Andersen, 2012). The 
latter contained a new view on the roles in design; previously, an expert designer had 
been more knowledgeable than other stakeholders had, and the ideas coming from her/
him was a pronouncement from an expert at face value. Now the designer should act 
as a coordinator in a design committee, and the argumentative process created a space, 
in which ideas were open to discussion and could be challenged by anyone (Buchanan, 
1992). 
Paradigm theories 
Generally, the first generation of design methods is based on rational knowledge and 
applies a systematic approach towards a problem. It begins with analysis, then synthesis 
and lastly evaluation, which occur in sequence (Bamford, 2002). In the analysis phase, the 
problem is dismantled into fragments, which can be solved independently. In the syn-
thesis phase, a response or solution for the problem is attempted created. Lastly, in the 
evaluation phase, the suggested solutions are compared to the objective identified in the 
analysis phase. Trebilcock therefore puts the first generation under the label ‘analysis/
synthesis’ (A/S) based on Bamford’s work (Petersen & Svendsen, 2010; Trebilcock, 2009).
==PAGE:31==
31
The second generation of design methods is based on an argumentative process and 
empirical knowledge. Contrary to first generation of design methods, it begins with a tri-
al-and-error idea phase followed by iterative refinement of both form and function. The 
idea is to obtain a better understanding of a given problem by applying an trial-and-er-
ror approach, and then refine it until a point of harmonious coexistence is created in a 
“so-called satisfactory solution” (Rittel H. 1973 as in (Petersen & Svendsen, 2008)). The 
second generation of design methods are created on the basis of “the idea of conjectur-
ing approximate solutions much earlier in the process than A/S allows the designer to 
structure an understanding of the problem.” (Bamford, 2002; Trebilcock, 2009). This leads 
Trebilcock to label the second-generation method as ‘conjecture/analysis’ (C/A) (Trebil-
cock, 2009). 
Both the first and second generation are regarded with criticism. Some of the main 
points of the critique are outlined in the following; 
 
>
The first generation does not support an actual process as it focuses on parts in-
stead of a whole.  Each problem is a part of a puzzle, hence the whole is only visible 
towards the end (Bamford, 2002; Trebilcock, 2009). The scientific objectivity and the 
positivistic view on design enables a true or false in design decisions, which can be 
verified through science. The first generation design methods are mostly prescrip-
tive (Trebilcock, 2009), and very unilateral; some aspects of a building project will 
be favoured merely because they can be proved scientifically. 
 
>
The second generation consists purely of unspoken knowledge, which can never be 
justified objectively, as there is no true or false, only good or bad decisions on de-
sign. Some critics claim this is an attempt to mystify the design process; hence, the 
design gains power over other disciplines. This is like trying to complete a jigsaw 
puzzle with no single right or wrong outcome (Canterbury Earthquakes Royal Com-
mission, 2014; Petersen & Svendsen, 2010). The empirical knowledge on design 
mystifies the design decisions of the building project; the designers are given too 
much power over the design, as there is no right or wrong to the solution; this is 
only visible when built (Hybertson, 2009). The second-generation design methods 
are mostly descriptive (Trebilcock, 2009), which in its own way makes it unilateral 
too, as the decisions are based on unspoken knowledge.
Introduction
==PAGE:32==
32
Collaboration and Integration of Engieering in Building Design Processes
State of the art 
Roozenburg and Cross argues that architecture and engineering started diverging from 
each other during the development of the second generation of design methodology in 
the 1970s and 80s,  which was a loss for both (Cross, 1993). 
The distinction between the two approaches put an end to the development of the first 
generation instead of adjusting the inadequacies. It is deemed likely, that this might have 
had great impact on the way design methods are viewed today. The clear definition and 
separation of the two generations might even have created a polarised concept of the 
two.
There have been many attempts to refine both generations and create new versions. In 
1989, Cross wrote that “perhaps a third generation of the 1990s might be based on a 
combination of the previous two; or, as in the model proposed by Cross (1989), on under-
standing the ‘commutative’ nature of problem and solution in design.”
As Cross predicted, many new design methodologies would try to embrace both ap-
proaches of the two generations by placing the engineer within the A/S paradigm and 
the architect within the C/A paradigm and forming a process based on this view. The 
competing visions of being problem-oriented and solution-oriented are sought com-
bined, yet still within the traditional ideas of how engineers and architects think and 
work in two fundamentally different ways. 
As Cross also predicted, some design methodologies would be based on a correlation 
between the problem and solution. In 2002, Hybertson wrote that “the third-generation 
process that followed owes much to the philosophy of Karl Popper, and is called the 
conjecture-refutation model” (Hybertson, 2009).
With the definition from Hybertson, the third generation of design methods is based on 
a having the problem and development of the solutions as simultaneous activities that 
support each other. As Hybertson states, the third generation method is called the ‘con-
jecture/refutation’ (C/R) model. The whole and details are developed in parallel, where 
the problem and solution emerge together in synergy. 
==PAGE:33==
33
Design process types
As stated above, design methods and design processes are connected. The above de-
scribed generations of design methods are the underlying foundation of how different 
professions approach design. Yet, the methodologies are a theoretic description of the 
design method and do not describe how the design process works. The following section 
will elaborate on design process types relevant to building projects; the linear, the iter-
ative and the integrated design process.  
Linear Design Process 
The linear design process is a sequential model, which can be compared to the Water-
fall model in the software industry. In the Waterfall model, the output of one phase is 
the input in the next. It is a common used management tool, which is ideal for small, 
well-defined problems in a stable context. The general idea is to minimise rework by 
getting everything right in one phase, before progressing to the next (Glushko, 2008). 
According to PhD in Architecture and Civil Engineering and Construction Management 
Lea Urup, 
the traditional design process is a linear process (Urup, 2016). The features of the ‘con-
ventional’ design process is described in the following: 
 
>
The architect and the client agree on a design concept, consisting of a general massing 
scheme, orientation, fenestration and, usually, the general exterior appearance as deter-
mined by these characteristics;
 
>
The mechanical and electrical engineers are then asked to implement the design and 
to suggest appropriate systems to achieve acceptable indoor climate (Intelligent Energy 
Europe, 2009).
This is supported by Strømann-Andersen, who writes that the traditional design process 
is like a ‘baton’, which is continuously passed from one specialist to another, hence the 
knowledge is applied in series (Strømann-Andersen, 2012).
Figure 7 - The linear design process   
Adopted from (Brunsgaard, Knudstrup, & Heiselberg, 2009)
Concept 
design
Pre-
design
Schematic
design
Design
proposal
Detailed
design
Con-
struction
Architect
Client
Architect
Architect/
Engineer
Architect/
Engineer
Con-
tractor
Introduction
==PAGE:34==
Concept 
design
Schematic
design
Design
proposal
Detailed
design
34
Collaboration and Integration of Engieering in Building Design Processes
This creates a linear structure due to the successive contributions of the members of the 
design team. When the decisions are made in series with single professions, the oppor-
tunity for common advantages are lost, and the cost will increase (Strømann-Andersen, 
2012). This also limits the possibilities for optimisation during the design process, and 
optimisation in the later phases of the process is often troublesome or even impossible 
(Intelligent Energy Europe, 2009). 
As the energy regulations regarding buildings in Denmark become more strict, more pa-
rameters need to be addressed compared to standard buildings. The linear phase model 
results in difficulties when optimising the design according to e.g. energy and indoor 
environment, as the engineering expertise is brought in late in the process (Brunsgaard 
et al., 2014). The outcome of the sequential structure is often  high operating costs and a 
sub-standard indoor environment (Brunsgaard et al., 2009; Larsson, 2009)
The linear design process is the most commonly used method in Danish building proj-
ects (Urup, 2016)  as it:
 
>
is a taken for granted norm of how to do projects (Urup, 2016)
 
>
 seems simplistic, as there are few active actors and the different professions are 
implemented linearly (International Energy Agency, 2003)
Figure 8 - The liner design process   
adopted from (Nielsen, 2012)
==PAGE:35==
‘Loops of iteration’
35
Iterative Design Process 
Contrary to the linear design process, rework is inevitable and desired in the iterative de-
sign process, as each step only ends, when enough information is obtained to know what 
step to take next (Glushko, 2008). First, an idea emerges, which is then developed and 
tested, before being either refined or discarded in favour of another idea. The iterative 
process is therefore defined as a process, where a repeating set of steps are taken until a 
desirable result is achieved (Malin, 2004; Sakikhales & Stravoravdis, 2015). 
In the iterative process, it is therefore difficult to plan milestones, as the decisions of 
which milestones to fulfil, evolve with the level of knowledge. Also, in the iterative pro-
cess, it is possible to return to earlier phases and adjust the decisions to embrace the 
newly found knowledge (Bejder, Knudstrup, Jensen, & Katic, 2014). 
The iterations can be very beneficial in design developments, especially when involving 
multiple disciplines. It is often seen that iterations are performed within each area of 
expertise, where e.g. the architect designs the massing, layout and façade of the building 
until a desired result is reached. The design is then passed on from the architect to the 
structural engineer, where a new iteration of the design can start, with a focus on the 
structural system. The outcome of this new iteration can either be a refinement of the 
design or a discarded solution. Depending on the amount disciplines involved, this can 
lead to a great number of iterations before everyone reaches a desired solution (Malin, 
2004). 
Figure 9 - The iterative design process   
adopted from (Nielsen, 2012)
Introduction
==PAGE:36==
36
Collaboration and Integration of Engieering in Building Design Processes
Integrated design process
There is a broad consensus of how integrated design processes differ from the tradi-
tional design process. However, there are still as many variations of how to practice the 
integrated design process (IDP) as there are IDP practitioners (Busby Perkins +Will & 
Stantec Consulting, 2007).  
An IDP is most commonly identified by the following parameters (Brunsgaard et al., 
2014; International Energy Agency, 2003)
 
>
An iterative process, which is subject to a linear sequence of milestones 
 
>
Considers and optimises the building as an entire system including its aesthetic 
and functional aspects, technical equipment and surroundings
 
>
All actors of the project cooperate across disciplines and agree on far-reaching and 
crucial decisions jointly from the beginning
 
>
The design concept is subject to iterations early in the process, which is performed 
by a coordinated team of specialists
The term integrated design process (IDP) was first used in the early 1990’s in a Canadian 
project to describe a holistic approach to building design (Larsson, 2009). Today, con-
cepts of integrated design are seen in both academic literature as well as in companies’ 
branding of competencies. There are many different versions of IDP both on internation-
al, national and company level and with different emphasis on process methods, actors, 
actions, responsibilities or technology, as well as whether the scope is applicable for a 
project approach or industry approach (C. Koch & Buhl, 2013).
According to associate professor in architecture and design, Camilla Brunsgaard, all inte-
grated design processes focus on the importance of integrating architectural and engi-
neering aspects in a shared holistic synthesis (Brunsgaard et al., 2009). 
Strømann-Andersen defines the overall characteristics of an Integrated Design Process 
as a series of design loops in different phases of the design, which are separated by mile-
stones. In each design loop, relevant design team members participate (Strømann-An-
dersen, 2012). This description is backed by (Nielsen, 2012), who describes integrated 
design processes as a combination of the linear- and iterative design process. 
==PAGE:37==
Shared objective
Review
Review
Review
Review
Concept 
design
Schematic
design
Design
proposal
Detailed
design
37
The following illustration shows how the integrated design process is partly linear, partly 
iterative:
In the following, the integrated design process will hence be defined as an iterative 
design process with multiple disciplines working together, with predefined sequential 
milestones.
Collective intelligence is important, when the main objective for a team is to develop a 
solution to a given problem as it is in the integrated design process. Within the design 
team, an adequate level of coherence should occur. This is not possible within traditional 
planning environments as the available band-width among team members is insufficient 
for them to share the same knowledge. Sharing the same knowledge is a prerequisite 
condition for collective intelligence. However, all relevant knowledge available for the 
team members is not necessarily utilised when making decisions. Therefore, a complete 
shared knowledge is not required for a group to achieve collective intelligence (Forgber, 
Kohler, Koch, Schmidt, & Haller, 2009). In (Jakobsen & Wohlenberg, 2016), this is termed 
‘information overload’:  Too much information sharing leads to no information being 
implemented at all as there are too many inputs and no way to navigate in it. Hence, 
not everyone on the team needs to know the theories and equations, yet the underlying 
reasons for a certain solution must be shared. This is possible through iterations, yet with 
a clear delimitation in time-span, i.e. an integrated design process. 
Figure 10 - The integrated design process   
adopted from (Nielsen, 2012)
Introduction
==PAGE:38==
38
Collaboration and Integration of Engieering in Building Design Processes
The link between design- methods and processes
Architects and engineers have a history of misunderstanding each other. The problem 
seems to be mistaken communication, and the fact that the two professions operate on 
different traditions and methods. The engineers come from a positivistic tradition, where 
the architects are from a humanistic, hermeneutic, tradition. 
“The architect focuses on senses and subjectivity where the engineer focuses on measurable 
results and objectivity” (Hansen & Knudstrup, 2005). 
In a multidisciplinary project, the team members tend to have either a problem-oriented 
approach through analysis or a solution-oriented approach through conjecture, respec-
tively. Engineers therefore often work in an analysis/synthesis approach, which means 
that a problem is broken down into fragments to solve each problem independently. This 
approach tends to foster a linear process. The given problem might not be solved in the 
first try, but the overall solution is interchangeable. Architects, on the other hand, work in 
iterations to identify other problems as one decision might influence earlier decisions. 
There is a loop from each function to all proceeding functions. The solution therefore 
can change as more and more problems are sought solved. 
Overall, the engineer and architect deal with design in two different ways, which is why 
communication and collaboration might be difficult, yet essential. The two methods en-
tail two different theoretical languages, yet working as a team requires a common lan-
guage. This is possible through an integrated design process, where all team members 
get involved early in the process (Hansen & Knudstrup, 2005; Nielsen, 2012; Swann, 
2002; Trebilcock, 2009). 
The three design methods outlined on page 28 will lead to different design processes, as 
the different approaches to design - problem or solution orientated – are fundamentally 
different.  However, the different design processes connected to each method will hold 
elements of both linear and iterative processes. Concepts of integrated design processes 
recognise the need for a third generation of design methodology, that allows and sup-
ports engineers and architects to work efficiently together in the initial phase of a build-
ing design project and going forward. However, as stated above, an integrated design 
methodology has not been sufficiently formulated. The desired design process has been 
thoroughly described, however methods for obtaining this process are lacking. 
==PAGE:39==
39
Introduction
==PAGE:40==
When engineers and quantity surveyors 
discuss aesthetics and architects study 
what cranes do, we are on the right road
- Ove Arup
“
==PAGE:41==
PART 1
Which aspects inﬂuence the design processes and collaboration in the Danish building 
industry, and what methods and principles from integrated design process guides can be 
applied to the design process towards a better building? 
Literature study on Danish framework and mapping of integrated design  
process guides 
The following chapter contains a description of how building projects are conducted in Denmark, 
with a focus on aspects, which influence project process and collaboration, such as contractual 
structures and sustainability certification schemes. 
Furthermore, the chapter address research within integrated design processes conducted over the 
past two decades. An extensive literature study of the existing guides for integrated design process 
in building projects was conducted as part of this Master Thesis. The aim of the literature study was 
to map the state of the art and collect best-practise for integrated design processes, but also to 
identify gaps and insufficiencies in the guides, that may be the cause of some of the difficulties the 
building industry is experiencing in relation to integrated design. In the following, the method and 
outcome of the literature study is presented.
The last part of the chapter contains a recap on the entire content of the chapter and a sub-conclu-
sion on the investigated research sub-question 1.
==PAGE:42==
42
Collaboration and Integration of Engieering in Building Design Processes
ROADMAP FOR PART 1 
RECAP
FINDINGS
PART 1 SUB-
CONCLUSION
PART 1 
SUB-
QUESTION 
INTEGRATED
DESIGN PROCESSES
DANISH BUILDING 
PROJECT 
FRAMEWORK
DESIGN PROCESS 
PROFILES
INSIGHTS 
Which aspects infl uence the design processes and collaboration in the Danish building industry, 
and what methods and principles from integrated design frameworks can be applied to the design 
process towards a better building?
LITERATURE STUDY
==PAGE:43==
43
Part 1
The following section outlines key aspects, which influence the building project process in 
a Danish context. Regulatory frameworks and traditions in building differ from country to 
country. In order to explore potentials for optimisation of integrated design processes, with 
the aim of formulating a palpable concept, it is necessary to analyse the mechanisms that 
influence and control the design process. Hence, it is necessary to know and understand the 
context in which the design process take place. The following is thus a description of the 
Danish building project process and associated services required by different disciplines of 
profession, followed by a description of different existing contract types that support early 
collaboration and which fit in a Danish framework. The last part of this section is a descrip-
tion of initiatives for better building projects, which can also influence a design process. The 
initiatives are ICT, Værdibyg guides, and sustainability certification schemes.
Description of Services for Building and Planning
Building projects in Denmark follow the Danish Description of Services for Building and 
Planning (Ydelsesbeskrivelser for Byggeri og Planlægning) (DANSKE-ARK & FRI, 2012). 
In the following, this will be referred to as ‘Description of Services’. Therefore, it is essen-
tial to investigate this framework, in order to understand the process of Danish building 
projects.
The Description of Services serves as “a basis for providing consultancy in connection with 
building and planning” (DANSKE-ARK & FRI, 2012).  The description outlines the services 
that are required by building designers in each of the phases of a building project. In 
general, there are four main phases in a building project; initial design, detailed design, 
construction, and in-use (Koch, 2011). The early design phases, i.e. pre-, concept- and 
schematic design, are not named in the Description of Services, only the outcome of 
these are described. However slightly varying, other sources describe and name the ini-
tial phases of building projects. In this report, the following naming of phases and sub 
phases are used. The content of the initial phases are adopted from (Teisen, Tolstrup, & 
Due, 2013) and the English naming is adopted from (AIA, 2007). The phases are shown 
on the following page. 
THE DANISH BUILDING PROJECT FRAMEWORK
==PAGE:44==
44
Collaboration and Integration of Engieering in Building Design Processes
 
>
Pre-design: The client chooses the design team
 
>
Concept design: The main consultant (lead architect/project manager) consults 
with the client to determine project goals and requirements. The main consul-
tant summarises the client’s requirements and wishes for the building project 
and lists the necessary conditions for the further development of the project. 
Milestones:
 ›
Appraisal
 ›
Building programme
 
>
Schematic design: The initial architectural design is developed, e.g. architectural 
competition proposal in General Contract projects or tenders in Design – Build 
Contract projects. 
 
>
Milestones: 
 ›
Architectural proposal and possible other requirements, depending on the 
call for tender.
 
>
Design proposal: The design is further developed with the implementation of en-
gineering design.
 
>
Milestones:
 ›
Outline proposal - The outline proposal is a substantiated proposal for the 
completion of the project including a description and sketches of design 
principles and main systems for technical installations. 
 ›
Project proposal - The Project proposal is a revision of the approved outline 
proposal to such an extent that all decisions pivotal to the project have been 
made and included in the proposal.
 
>
Detailed design: The building design is completed and tender documents prepared.
 
>
Milestones:
 ›
Preliminary project (regulatory project) - The preliminary project (regulatory 
project) is a revision of the approved project proposal to such an extent that 
it can form the basis for approval by the authorities.
 ›
Main project - The main project describes the project precisely and with such 
a level of detail that it can form the basis for final clarification of the condi-
tions contained in the planning permission as well as for tendering, contract-
ing and construction.
 
>
Construction: The contractor builds the project and ‘As built’ services are provided 
to bring the project documentation to a level at which they are consistent with the 
building.
 
>
In-use: Operation, maintenance and inspections, e.g. a five-year inspection, of the 
building.
==PAGE:45==
45
Figure 11 illustrates the succession of the milestones and which actors are required 
to contribute to the deliverable. In the following, the milestones are considered as sub 
phases in the overall context since any deliverable will have a work process leading up 
to it. Thus, the Description of Services implies a specific process as a result of the re-
quired deliverables or milestones.
The Danish Description of Services results in a linear process 
Urup refers to the Danish framework as outlined in the Description of Services as “the 
linear phase model” that is a taken-for-granted norm (Urup, 2016). According to Urup, the 
‘linear phase model’ is, in building projects, connected to a specific perceived value-chain 
where an iterative process and “doing work more than once was a waste and considered 
inefficient”. Urup argues that ‘the linear phase model’ causes fragmentation between the 
individual members and disciplines of the design team and does not support integration. 
Because the building industry utilises specialised work force, a phase model like the 
Danish framework is a way to organise the process, so that the relevant actors or profes-
sions are included at the right time. On the overall level, there are architectural studios, 
engineering consultants and contractors; however, all these each have sub-disciplines. 
This results in a professionally fragmented structure, which has the advantage of a sim-
pler way to draw up contracts with the individual actors. Furthermore, the clearly defined 
milestones makes planning and time scoping easier, because it is possible to structure 
the process around these (Koch, 2011). 
Architect
Engineer
Contractor
Design facilitator
Client
User
Agency (Myndighed)
Facilities manager
Supplier 
Initial design
Design proposal
Detailed design
Figure 11 - Gantt chart of the participating actors in the different sub-phases of the Danish Descrip-
tion of Services 
Part 1
==PAGE:46==
46
Collaboration and Integration of Engieering in Building Design Processes
At the same time however, it is a problem to have such a linear process, because of the 
project paradox; the important decisions should be taken in the early phases where 
project knowledge is very limited (Thyssen, 2012). With a linear process, it is very chal-
lenging to come back to earlier phases and thus the demand for knowledge-sharing, 
coordination, and collaboration are high, as is the need for having multiple disciplines 
represented in the early design phases. 
The issue with the fragmentation in the Description of Services is that it does not guide 
the design team in how to manage the coordination between disciplines and handle 
the interfaces of the different items required for a specific milestone. This supports the 
outdated silo-structure of professions. The Description of Services specifically states that 
it is “prepared with a view to defining roles and the division of services between consultants 
and client, and between individual consultants” i.e. a fragmented view, but at the same 
time it states that the building project should be a “holistic solution” (DANSKE-ARK & 
FRI, 2012). The description says nothing about how to secure this holistic project, other 
than “The consultant is trained specifically to manage architecture, technical solution, pro-
gramming and costing in planning tasks and building projects and also manages the human, 
aesthetic and functional aspects of a holistic solution”. This assigns the responsibility of 
collaboration to the project team, which does not encourage change, but rather working 
traditionally. Multiple disciplines have several interfaces in building project, and as much 
as 8-10 disciplines will need to coordinate their design work. Therefore, if a basis for 
coordination and collaboration is not in place, it can cause serious problems (Thyssen, 
2012).
The nature of the milestones in the Danish framework results in a rigidly linear design 
process. Each milestone builds on the previous with an increased level of detail within 
the work of each discipline. E.g., the project proposal is a revision of the approved outline 
proposal and the preliminary project (regulatory project) is a revision of the approved 
project proposal. As the level of detail is linearly increased, this hinders an iterative pro-
cess, where the level of detail in the design work continuously varies in scale.
==PAGE:47==
47
Design – Build Contracts
The most common form of contracts in the building industry is design-build contracts. 
The contract form will be investigated in thesis as the contract form allows the partici-
pants to follow the project from the beginning to end. In integrated design processes, a 
lot of time and resources are invested in the early design phases, hence it is important to 
have a constant information level, so the benefits can be fully exploited in the construc-
tion and operation phase. The following section describes design-build contracts, and 
will be used as a background for understanding the contractual relations and structures 
across organisations in building projects.
Design – Build contracts, also known as Turnkey contracts, are the simplest form of con-
tract for the client, as she/he only needs to enter a single consultancy agreement, namely 
with the full-service consultant. The full-service consultant engages the service of re-
quired sub-consultants and is responsible to the client for their work (DANSKE-ARK & 
FRI, 2012). The full-service consultant is responsible for the design management. Design 
– Build contracts are different from split consultancy in the way that individual sub-con-
sultant is under an obligation to cooperate with each other, since they have a direct con-
tractual obligation to each other through their consultancy agreement with the full-ser-
vice consultant. A visualisation of the contractual organisation can be seen in figure 12.
Call for tenders for a Design – Build contract is usually based on a building programme 
(PAR & FRI, 2003). Design – Build contracts are thus different from other types of con-
tracts (e.g. large, general, and specialist contracts) as it include design as well as con-
struction, hence the name Design – Build (DANSKE-ARK & FRI, 2005). The contractor is 
thus part of the initial design phases as opposed to the process illustrated above in fig-
ure 12. The engineering sub consultant can be included in the early design phases, along 
with the architectural sub-consultant, if the full-service contractor decides.
Figure 12 - Contractural organisation and project organisation in design-build projects 
adopted from (PAR & FRI, 2003)
Client
Client
Architect
Engineer
Subcontractor(s)
Turnkey contractor
Turnkey contractor
Client’s consultant
Client’s consultant
Contractural organisation
Project organisation
Part 1
==PAGE:48==
48
Collaboration and Integration of Engieering in Building Design Processes
Partnering
The following section describes partnering, and will be used as background for under-
standing another way of doing projects across organisations, where the collaboration 
is even more important than in design-build, as all partners have something at stake, 
depending on the outcome of the project. 
From the beginning of the 1990s, several development initiatives have focused on im-
posing cooperative relations among the parties in the building industry. The background 
for this development was a tendency in the building industry of low productivity trend, 
poor quality in buildings and many disputes in the design and construction phases (Erh-
vervs- og Byggestyrelsen, 2006) .This is partly caused by failures in coordination between 
trades, which have, besides the above mentioned, led to a fractured project team. In 
worst case scenarios, projects have ended in claims and lawsuits, which have fostered 
a defensive and prejudice attitude towards collaboration between organisations in the 
building industry. The development initiatives have therefore introduced the concept of 
‘partnering’. where the cooperation in projects are based on dialogue, trust, openness and 
early involvement of all parties. Partnering projects are implemented under a common 
objective, which is formulated by joint activities and based on common economic inter-
ests. The goal is to have a transparent business environment, where all organisations 
competencies are involved. 
A way to achieve this is through common activities in the beginning of projects, e.g. 
kick-off workshops where the specific shared objectives are discussed and agreed on for 
the project. Another way is by having shared economic interests, which can be based on 
agreements on the distribution of risks and gains between the parties. 
A visualisation of the contractual- and project organisation can be seen in figure 13 
and 14.
Figure 13 - Contractural organisation in partnering projects 
adopted from (PAR & FRI, 2003)
Client
Client’s consultant
Contractural organisation
Stage 0
Client
Architect
Engineer
Contractor(s)
Client’s consultant
Stage 1-2
==PAGE:49==
49
The process of building projects under partnering contracts are divided in three overall 
phases (0-2). The primary difference to other contract types is that only a preliminary 
building programme is drafted prior to selection of partners (Stage 0). The selected part-
ners then work together on completing the building programme and preparing outline 
and project proposals (Stage 1). Only then does the client decides whether to implement 
the project in question (Stage 2).
ICT
Part of the Description of Services concerns the use of ICT. ICT in investigated in this the-
sis as ICT addresses how communication between participating organisations in building 
projects can be optimised through IT. When having a clear ICT contract, future problems 
can be avoided by being articulated and verbalised when deciding on the level of ICT 
involvement. All information of the different participating organisations can be shared; 
hence coordination runs smoother. The following section describes ICT, and will be used 
as background for understanding the way communication through 3D modelling are 
utilised in the building industry. 
Figure 14 - Project organisation in partnering projects 
adopted from (PAR & FRI, 2003)
Client
Client’s consultant
Project organisation
Stage 0
Stage 1-2
Architect
Engineer
Contractor(s)
Client &
Client’sconsultant
Steering group - managers
Project group - project staff
Part 1
==PAGE:50==
50
Collaboration and Integration of Engieering in Building Design Processes
ICT is an extension of the term IT (information technology), which officially did not con-
tain the communication element before the beginning of this millennium. ICT is there-
fore an abbreviation for information and communication technology. ICT is a means to 
increase productivity, quality, and innovation in building projects (Bygningsstyrelsen, 
2017). In 2003 the Danish government
initiated ‘Det Digitale Byggeri’ (The Digital Construction) which was regulatory require-
ments for government, regional and municipal building owners to use ICT in all aspects 
of the construction processes (bips, 2017). ICT facilitates a new collaboration form, where 
digital information and knowledge-sharing is key. The strategic objective of ‘Det Digitale 
Byggeri’ was that the building owners was the only actor in construction projects who, 
through their requirements, could force this desired development of digital collaboration 
(bips, 2017), and the government, regional and municipal building owners should with 
the initiative lead the way. The use of ICT is only a legal requirement in governmental 
building projects with a contract sum above 5 million DKK, and regional and municipal 
building projects above 20 million DKK since it is not legal to force the use in private 
projects. Digital design work is thus outlined in the Description of Services as optional 
services of “classification, digital communication, digital design, digital tendering or digital 
delivery of project and operational data” (DANSKE-ARK & FRI, 2012).
“Digital design comprises the construction of one or more digital 3D building models (BIM) 
as the basis for coordinated design, analysis and project documentation. (…) The ICT manager 
is responsible for coordinating any digital cooperation between the consultants, designing 
suppliers and contractors, the client and authorities. (…) In digital design, the scope of the 
digital building models must be determined in an ICT specification, such that coordinated 
building models and project documentation can be supplied in digital form. (…)The service 
may involve the use of a common digital communication platform for the sharing and ex-
change of project documentation that is common to several project partners.” (DANSKE-ARK 
& FRI, 2012).
ICT is a significant tool for internal communication in a project team, as it holds a great 
potential for knowledge-sharing and cross disciplinary coordination (Thyssen, 2012). Es-
pecially in the transitions between phases, the possibility to store information in BIM 
models or systems to manage project documentation and make the information accessi-
ble to all is vital for knowledge-sharing (Koch, 2011). When the information is accessible 
for all team members, it also enlightens all the knowledge, which have to be brought 
into the project by the different professions. Instead of each profession having ideas of 
how to implement their inputs, the actual input can be put into a shared 3D model. This 
==PAGE:51==
51
makes all the knowledge more tangible and manageable, as the information is moved 
from the minds of the individuals onto a shared model. There is, however, a risk of infor-
mation overflow (Koch, 2011), why proper management is needed to ensure that proj-
ect documents and information is structured in order to avoid misunderstandings and 
double work (Thyssen, 2012). ICT is an integral part of the design and building process 
and should support the overall goals accordingly, i.e. it is not an add-on and it should be 
insured that it is not decoupled from the rest of the process (Thyssen, 2012). 
Værdibyg guides 
Værdibyg has published several ‘best practise’ guides, which address the challenges in 
building and planning processes. The guides take offset in the traditional Danish process 
and Description of Services and give a set of guidelines with tangible tools on how to 
optimise the process concerning e.g. the good beginning and establishment of collabo-
ration. It is therefore interesting to compare the guides from Værdibyg to the recommen-
dations in the IDP guides towards a better process. 
According to Værdibyg, it is important to consider the process of a building (design), i.e. 
which actions to take and which competences is needed at which points in the process. 
In short, it is crucial for the good, value creating design process to make it clear, who 
does what when and why (Thyssen, 2012). The guides can thus contribute to the formu-
lation of a palpable concept for an integrated design process. This is further addressed 
in Part 3 (see page. 177). 
The Description of Services describes the projects organisation in terms of contractual 
relations and responsibilities. However, it does not describe how to handle coordina-
tion, collaboration, or communication within the project organisation, besides that of 
ICT. Værdibyg (Value Creating Construction Process) is a co-operation between seven 
leading organisations of the Danish building industry. The purpose of this co-operation 
is to find and develop best-practises for creating and maintaining value in the project 
process across the different agents in the building industry and through-out the entire 
project process - from conceptual design to facilities management (Værdibyg, 2017). 
The following is an excerpt from the Værdibyg guides ‘Rigtigt fra start’ by Thyssen, 
‘Etablering af samarbejde by Koch. The key points from the guides to a better process 
are listed on the following pages.
Part 1
==PAGE:52==
52
Collaboration and Integration of Engieering in Building Design Processes
Kick-off workshop 
Once the design team is set, or if new members are added, a kick-off workshop should be held 
where the design team and client together create a common ground and understanding of the 
project as a basis for collaboration. Depending on the type, size, and complexity of the project, a 
workshop could last anything from a couple of hours to a couple of days (Koch, 2012).
An example of a typical agenda for a kick-off workshop is provided in the guides as follows;
 
>
Introduction of the project team – who are we (getting-to-know-each-other exercises)
 
>
Project presentation – What are we building, how, why and to who
 
>
Client’s criteria for success – What do we want to achieve with this project (open dialogue 
and idea generation)
 
>
Collaboration ground rules – How are we going to work together
 
>
Decisions and responsibilities – Who is responsible and/or holds the decision-making au-
thority in any given situation
 
>
Conflict management – How do we resolve conflicts
 
>
Communication ground rules – How to we communicate to and with each other
Communication
Communication is the backbone of any collaboration. Good communication is a key factor in a 
good building process and thus establishing and following directories for communication within 
the design team is vital. There needs to be a clear strategy for means of communication by who 
with whom so the project is not flooded with unstructured information that can lead to confu-
sion, misunderstandings and inefficiency (Thyssen, 2012).
There are two types of communication in a project team; the shear technical side of things and 
the more informal, which is connected to a personal level, i.e. the tone in both written and oral 
communication. The project team should discuss and establish a common ground for ‘good and 
appropriate communication’(Koch, 2012). 
Dialogue on goals 
Prior to any building project the individual parties involved needs to be aware of what is to be 
built and why, the client’s needs and wishes for the project and how these are to be met, how 
the project organisation is compiled, and how the process will be. The project team needs to 
understand the motivation for the project in order to gain a sense of ownership. The client and 
individual members of the project team should clarify expectations to the project early in the 
process. Contracts can give incentive to work toward a common goal and encourage collabora-
tion (Thyssen, 2012).
==PAGE:53==
53
Team building activities 
To ensure team spirit, ownership feeling towards the project and ease of collaboration and com-
munication it is important that team members are properly introduced to each other and through 
different activities gets to know each other, both professionally, but also on a more personal level. 
A project plan containing the different structures and procedures for the project along with a 
description of the project process should be developed by all the involved parties of the project 
(Koch, 2012; Thyssen, 2012).
Process evaluation 
Maintaining good collaboration entails that e.g. the process manager continually address the 
collaboration within the team and articulates any conflicts that might arise in the process. It 
is important that the rules and shared success criteria for cooperation set by the team at the 
kick-off workshop are followed, and that the team address any collaboration issues among team 
members (Koch, 2012). The process is continuously evaluated by rating whether the success 
criteria from the kick-off workshop are implemented in practice. This is done by each team 
member marking with each criterion with green, yellow or red (i.e. good, acceptable or bad). 
Team reviews are gathered, problematic areas discussed and determined what action is needed 
to get back on track. 
Management
According to the guidelines from Værdibyg, successful collaboration needs good management. 
Besides the project manager, the guidelines speak of a process manager, who holds common 
knowledge about building projects and furthermore is skilled in handling group dynamics, has 
‘people skills’ and a special interest in collaboration. The process manager is thus managing the 
collaboration process and can facilitate e.g. design development workshops and project meet-
ing points where collaboration is on the agenda (Koch, 2012; Thyssen, 2012). 
In practise one could say, that this splits the services of the Design Manager as outlined in the 
Description of Services. A project would then have a project manager concerned with contracts, 
economy, planning, coordination, etc. and a process manager who is “responsible for cooperation 
between the consultants and ensures coordination of project work performed by the individual con-
sultants, with particular focus on interfaces” (DANSKE-ARK & FRI, 2012). 
Part 1
==PAGE:54==
54
Collaboration and Integration of Engieering in Building Design Processes
Decision-making
Total clarity should be established early in the process about who is responsible for which areas 
within the project and/or holds the decision-making authority in any given situation for deci-
sions. The purpose of this is to identify and coordinate interfaces within the project team (Koch, 
2012). Contemplation on design decisions should include an effort to quantify the value of the 
proposed design alteration compared to the necessary re-work. The client should be part of the 
decision-making process and should be geared to make fast decisions in order to not stall the 
progress of the design or building process (Thyssen, 2012). 
Conﬂict management
In a multidisciplinary project team, conflicts cannot be avoided. People are different and will thus 
have different professional, but also personal, views and opinions. Conflict can arise among any 
members of the project team and therefore all members should participate actively in the discus-
sion and decisions about how to handle conflicts. It is important to establish these agreements 
early in the process (Koch, 2012).
Knowledge conservation and project process memory
When building projects move through the process phases it is likely that some members of the 
project team for various reasons, get replaced, and knowledge, and thereby value, might be lost. 
Underlying visions, needs, values, assumptions, and conditions established in the earlier phases 
represent the memory of the project team and can be difficult for new members to comprehend 
(Koch, 2011). This joint understanding of the project is essentially, what makes the project team 
a team. If the project team is participating already when the building programme is formed, then 
it is recommended that the team makes an effort to include all this knowledge in the building 
program, even though this document alone cannot secure the knowledge-sharing(Thyssen, 2012). 
==PAGE:55==
55
Sustainability certiﬁcations 
Sustainability certifications challenge the traditional way of doing building projects 
and the regular value-chains, hence they influence the design process. The following 
section therefore addresses the major certification schemes, which are in use in Den-
mark, and how they describe their design processes. The certifications schemes func-
tion within the Danish Regulatory Framework, which make them a good example on 
how to integrate technical knowledge and sustainability aspects in a design process in 
practice. The findings of this section will therefore be used as backdrop to the findings 
from the mapping of the integrated design processes (see page 61) as well as put the 
integrated design process into perspective.
Labellings 
There are several major sustainability certifications in use in Denmark, e.g. BREEAM, 
LEED, and DGNB. BREEAM is a British labelling scheme, LEED is American, and DGNB, 
as it is known in Denmark, derives from the German labelling scheme, but has been 
adjusted to Danish standards. In the following, these three major sustainability certifi-
cations will be explored in terms of how they address integrated processes: 
BREEAM
BREEAM for new constructions and non-domestic, rates building projects based on 
 
>
Management, health and well-being, energy, transport, water, materials, waste, land 
use and ecology, pollution and innovation (BREEAM, 2014).
 ›
As part of the management category, a criterion called Project Brief and 
Design addresses setting shared goals for the project. A design process is not 
mentioned directly. 
 ›
However, some of the criteria require documentation of the time of when 
certain actions have taken place. Some points are unattainable, if decisions 
and actions have not taken place before a certain time in the design phase. 
The timing of the actions requires early decision making in the project team 
and by the building owner. 
In other countries, BREEAM is tailored to the specific rules and norms. However, in Den-
mark, certifications are based on an international version. Since BREEAM has very little 
prevalence in Denmark and there is no direct design process description provided in 
the BREEAM scheme, it will hence not be investigated further in this thesis. 
Part 1
==PAGE:56==
56
Collaboration and Integration of Engieering in Building Design Processes
LEED
LEED for new construction, rates building projects based on 
 
>
Location and transportation, sustainable sites, water efficiency, energy and atmo-
sphere, materials and resources, indoor environmental quality, innovation and re-
gional priority (LEED, 2017)
 ›
In healthcare buildings, an integrative project planning and design is a pre-
requisite. 
 ›
For new constructions, core and shells, schools, retail, data centres, warehous-
es & distribution centres, hospitality and healthcare, an integrative process 
gives 1 point.  
For healthcare buildings, the requirements include use of “cross-discipline design and 
decision making, beginning in the programming and pre-design phase” (LEED, 2017). As a 
minimum to ensure this process, the steps listed below should be followed: 
 
>
Owner’s project requirements document
 ›
Health mission statements are developed and incorporated, and must ad-
dress economic, environmental and social values. Goals and strategies must 
safeguard the health of building occupants, local community and global 
environment, while having a high-performance healing environment. 
 
>
Preliminary rating goals 
 ›
Determine the certification level to pursue, select the credits to meet this lev-
el, and identify the responsible parties to ensure the credits are met. 
 
>
Integrated design team 
 ›
A long list of possible team members in an integrated project team is provid-
ed. A minimum of four professions must be chosen to constitute the team in 
addition to the owner or her/his representative. 
 
>
Design charrette 
 ›
An integrated design charrette is held as early as practically possible – pref-
erably before the schematic design. The participants are the owner and her/
his representative as well as the integrated design team as describes above. 
The charrette must last at least 4 hours, and the goal is to optimise the inte-
gration of green strategies across all building design aspects. 
For all other building types than healthcare, 1 point is given when fulfilling the criteria 
of an integrative process, and it is not a mandatory criterion. In the LEED certification of 
new constructions version 4, the maximum point score is in total 110 points. The benefits 
of the integrative process are stressed and it is elaborated how the early collaboration is 
==PAGE:57==
57
most cost-efficient for everyone. Yet, the integrative process only pose 0.9% of the total 
possible score. Furthermore, the process is not very well described, and thus not a tangi-
ble tool ready for application by the project team. The ambition for the integrated design 
process of LEED is thus regarded as low and will hence not be investigated further in 
this thesis. 
DGNB
DGNB for office buildings, rates building projects based on:
 
>
Economic quality, sociocultural and functional quality, technical quality, process 
quality, environmental quality and site quality (DGNB, 2016) 
 ›
10 % of the total score is posed by the category of process, which consists 
of five criterions within the design phases, and two within the construction 
phase. 
Criterion 1.1 in the process quality is ‘Comprehensive Project Definition’ (Kvalitet i Forbe-
redelsen af Projektet)
 
>
Three appendixes of different levels documents the topics, which has been dis-
cussed in the idea-phase. The more topics included, the more points credited. One 
of the topics is that the team must agree on how to prioritise value creation, time, 
costs and quality. Points are given for a minimum of 4 different professions on the 
design team.
Criterion 1.2 is ‘Integrated Planning’ (Integreret Design Proces)
 
>
A multidisciplinary design team of the most important professions e.g. architect, 
statistician, engineer or specialists for installations, energy, material technology, 
building physics, fire safety and facilities manager consultant. This multidisciplinary 
team work must be documented and included in the outline proposal at the latest 
and continue until the end of the main project (as in the Description of Services).  
 
>
Involvement of users and citizens 
 
>
Plan for sustainability 
Criterion 1.3 is ‘Comprehensive Building Design’ (Vurdering og Optimering af Kom-
pleksitet i Planlægningen) 
 
>
The third criterion addresses the integrated design process, which describes that 
each sustainable building is a complex task, hence no standardised solution. For ev-
ery project, there must be found new multidisciplinary solutions, which harmonises 
and results in an optimal, holistic solution. This is possible through early collabo-
ration in a multi-disciplinary team, where different professions work on a concept 
Part 1
==PAGE:58==
58
Collaboration and Integration of Engieering in Building Design Processes
level within each their field, e.g. an energy concept of both passive solutions, re-
newable energy sources and the interaction between energy systems of the build-
ing and the indoor environment. 10 concept of each their area should be described.
Criterion 1.4 is ‘Sustainable Aspects in Tender Phase’ (Bæredygtighedsaspekter I Udbuds-
materiale og Ordretildeling)
 
>
The fourth criterion addresses the importance of having the sustainable aspects 
included in the tender, so the environmental and social qualities can be increased 
as the building products are not purely chosen based on economic views. 
Criterion 1.5 is ‘Guidance on maintenance and use of building’ (Vejledning om Vedlige-
hold og Brug af Bygningen)
 
>
The last criterion regarding the design of the building addresses the increasing 
complexity of new buildings and how the future owner and tenants should be guid-
ed on maintenance of surfaces and technical facilities in the building. This includes 
guidance on maintenance, inspection and operation as well as updates of drawing 
material, schemes, calculations etc. to match the built instead of the planned, so-
called As-built material. A user’s handbook should be developed. 
Criterion 2.1 and 2.2 concerns the construction phase and thus not included in the scope 
of this thesis. Hence, these criterions will not be elaborated further in this thesis report.
DGNB is the most frequently used certification scheme in Denmark, with about 35 certi-
fied buildings. When looking at the development in the amount of yearly certified build-
ings in Denmark within the three certification schemes, it is evident that DGNB is getting 
more and more widespread, where the amount of certified BREEAM and LEED buildings 
are more stable. DGNB has a much more broad-spectrum view on sustainability than 
other major certification schemes and include much more aspects than its competitors. 
DGNB is the only certification system that addresses all three sustainability areas as out-
lined in the Brundtland Report ‘Our Common Future’ in 1987 (social, environmental and 
economic). There are five overall qualities in the certification scheme; An economic-, so-
ciocultural and functional-, technical-, and environmental quality, which all are weighed 
equally with 22.5 %, and a process quality with 10 %. Overall, DGNB is more holistic in 
its approach to building projects than BREEAM and LEED, where the technical aspects 
constitute the majority of the categories. 
==PAGE:59==
59
DGNB and the integrated design processes
DGNB rewards early and collaborative involvement; According to Camilla Dyring, head of 
Sustainability at Sweco, it is difficult to obtain labels higher than the silver certification, 
if the design project does not involve DGNB from the beginning. This is partly due to 
the magnitude of the points assigned in the process quality, but also to the many de-
sign decisions, which will have been made, without necessarily considering sustainability 
and the way DGNB credits different aspects. The longer the decision-making process 
of whether to apply DGNB is stretched, the less value-adding the certification scheme 
becomes.
Tangible design process descriptions are found in the process criteria of the DGNB hand-
book. A general description of the agenda and relevance of each criterion is followed by 
a thorough explanation of the sub-criteria and each of their methods and the evaluation. 
However, criteria in other qualities also hold information on when to involve different 
actors in relation to specific actions throughout the design process. Hence, a lot of pro-
cess description is distributed throughout the entire certification scheme. 
DGNB facilitates a structure, which encourages an integrated design processes. The cer-
tification scheme measures whether the right initiatives for an integrated design process 
is facilitated, but does not follow up on the actual collaboration. DGNB provide an out-
line for prioritisation of value-creation, time, costs and quality. The certification scheme 
can secure that the right people are gathered at the right times, talking about the right 
topics. The process, however, is a ‘black box’; there is an input and an output, but the de-
velopment and collaboration process is left out, as this is not measurable. The methods 
described in DGNB are concerned with how to document the fulfilment of the different 
criteria. 
There is arguably a gap in the description concerning collaboration process and the 
DGNB handbook is hence not sufficient as a stand-alone tool for integrated design; a 
lot of important information about the collaboration process is left out and up to the 
reader to interpret. Hence, a lot of different aspects can be read from the same text. This 
is where a good DGNB auditor is of great importance. The process of a project is what 
forms the outcome. If it is an integrated process, it will be reflected in an integrated and 
holistic building (Azari & Kim, 2015). If the process is fragmented, this will be visible 
through poor design and ‘add-ons’ of systems (Urup, 2016). 
Part 1
==PAGE:60==
60
Collaboration and Integration of Engieering in Building Design Processes
Findings from Danish Building Project framework  
Danish building industry is tradition-bound 
Building traditions go far back, and these traditions are the backbone of the building industry. 
Building industries in general are the least developed in terms of productivity and innovation 
compared to other industries (McKinsey, 2015). A strong sense of ‘business-as-usual’ practice 
prevails in the industry alongside a ‘doing-what–we-have-always-done’ (subconscious) mind-
set. As building projects turn more complex, a need for better collaboration and integration 
is widely recognised. However, changes are not easily implemented in the tradition-bound 
building industry. This is a global trend, and no less evident in the Danish building industry.
The current Danish framework and traditions is not suited for integrated design
The Danish regulatory framework lead to a linear phase model due to the sequences of 
milestones. The framework dictates a specific order in which the design must evolve: From 
large scale to small. This results in a traditional value-chain due to fee structures that follow 
the phases and milestones of the framework. The framework does not specifically describe a 
design process. In fact, it is described to facilitate several different process models. However, 
the linearity of the Danish regulatory framework and the tradition-bound mind-set within the 
building industry is not suited for an integrated design process.
The traditional value-chain impedes implementation of sustainability certiﬁcations
A recurrent problem with regards to early collaboration through the DGNB process criteria 
is the traditional value-chain and the fee-structuring in most Danish projects. Payment is 
not received until the main project phase, which makes projects high risk, if man-hours are 
mostly spent during the early design phases. Another problem is that the regulatory agency 
is brought in late in the design process. They have the authorisation to shut down projects, if 
they do not comply with certain aspects. The fact that an outside factor can control the liveli-
hood of a project can affect managers to not want to invest in early design involvement. 
A DGNB auditor can be accompanied by a process facilitator 
The DGNB certification scheme describes the input and output of different activities run 
throughout the design process. A DGNB auditor is responsible for documenting this process; 
however, it seems beneficial to have a person responsible for the actual design process and 
not just the DGNB documentation process. 
==PAGE:61==
61
The following section concerns the existing guides for integrated design processes, de-
veloped and published within the past two decades. The aim of the section is to collect 
best-practise for integrated design processes, but also to identify gaps and insufficiencies 
in the guides, that may be the cause of some of the difficulties the building industry is 
experiencing in relation to integrated design. It is therefore interesting to map the different 
processes to find similarities and weaknesses, especially in regards to how they could work 
within the framework of the Danish building industry. This aspect is addressed further in 
Part 3 (see page 177).
The following section holds a description of the method applied for selection of IDP guides 
to explore in this Master Thesis. Next, the results of the mapping; a ‘profile’ of each of the 
eight selected IDP guides and followed by a realisation of their strengths and weaknesses 
as well as an overall description of gaps and insufficiencies. The last part of the following 
section is a description of the concept of Integrated Energy Design which, as stated in the 
following, is a sub-element of the integrated design process.
Overall, the integrated design process (IDP) is generally understood as a management 
concept, which provides an overview of actors and activities during a building project. 
The mapping of design processes is therefore a theoretical analysis tool, which is based 
solemnly on the described method and methodologies in the IDPs and not how they 
are conducted biased of traditions (Kanters & Horvat, 2012). In the building industry, 
there are many norms, which are instinctive and a mere reflex of traditions. To distance 
from all prejudices and anticipations, the mapping will only consider the actual written 
words, and compare them to the milestones within the Description of Services, to see 
how it can facilitate a different process than usual. 
In the following section, several integrated design process guides in various constella-
tions are described. The guides are developed by many different institutions, research-
ers, and companies over the past decade or so. General aims and intentions of the dif-
ferent guides are derived and summarised. The actors (which disciplines), actions (who 
does what, when), and communications (who says what to whom with what effect) are 
used as a basis for comparison the different guides. 
INTEGRATED DESIGN PROCESS GUIDES 
Part 1
==PAGE:62==
62
Collaboration and Integration of Engieering in Building Design Processes
Method
Description and analysis of the different IDPs
The guides will be described by an assessment of their legibility, content, context and 
whether they focus on collaboration or knowledge-sharing. It will be based on the meth-
od used in  “Strengths and weaknesses of different approaches of IDP” by Camilla Brunsgaard, 
where three IDP guides are mapped on the basis of 8 criteria (Brunsgaard, 2009). 
Yet, in Brunsgaard’s method, it is argued that the same terms of actors as described in 
the IDP guides must be used to be objective, even though the terms are not consistent 
between the different guidelines or even, occasionally, within the individual guide. The 
terms are therefore up to the reader to interpret, which can lead to great misunderstand-
ings. This is exactly what this thesis try to amend – a guide should not only be easily 
understood; it should be impossible to misunderstand. Therefore, the terms of actors 
will be interpreted by the authors of this thesis, when different terms occur on what it 
assumed to be a single function or actor. 
Brunsgaard’s 8 criteria will be accompanied by other criteria, which can set each IDP 
guide in context based on Lasswell’s model of communication; Who says what in which 
channel to whom and with what effect.  
The following points are used as a base for the mapping:  
 ›
Sender (academic, company, institution or agency) 
 ›
Made by and for 
 ›
Geography
 ›
Motivation and goal for development of the design process
 ›
Short description of the characteristics of the method 
 ›
Key persons or stake holders in the process 
 ›
Design phases and their content
 ›
Process development by IDP guide provided illustration and assessment of 
linear/iterative process
 ›
Design goals/parameters 
 ›
Tools
 ›
Strengths and weaknesses overall 
 ›
Analysis/synthesis, conjecture/analysis or conjecture/refutation 
 ›
Collaboration model or energy design
 ›
Practically applicable or theoretical method
 ›
Collaboration process or knowledge-sharing 
A complete overview of all the IDP guides in the form of the list above can be found in 
appendix A.
==PAGE:63==
63
Chapter name
Interpretation of the different actors and actions of the IDP guides 
There is a varying level of specifications in the descriptions of the investigated guides. Some terms of par-
ticipating actors have one meaning in one IDP guide, and another meaning in others. It has therefore been 
necessary to interpret, assume and translate the meaning of actors described. For the interpretation to be 
transparent for the reader, a matrix for each IDP guide is created containing the following data: 
 
>
The name of described participating actors 
 
>
Whether the person is mandatory in the given phase/milestone  
 
>
Whether this is the “right” (as is) description, 
 
>
Whether a replacement word is used e.g. Design consultants is replaced with engineers
 
>
Whether a description of an action is interpreted as having a specific actor participating, e.g. “...the prin-
ciples for the constructional systems, HVAC routes, fire safety, adaptability and other issues” is interpreted as 
having engineers participating
 
>
Lastly, a column with the word applied in this mapping
In order to assess how the IDP guides could work within the Description of Services, the data in the matrix is 
mapped against the milestones as outlined in the Description of Services. A large amount of the literature is 
American and does therefore not match the phases of the Danish system. In the following, the Design devel-
opment phase of the American system corresponds to the Outline proposal, Project proposal, and Preliminary 
project phases of the Danish system. 
Based on the above described, it is hence possible to create Gantt charts of the actors participating in each 
sub-phase leading up to a milestone in the Danish framework. 
In appendix B, the full method for reading and interpretation can be found for each IDP guide.  
The number of steps in a given phase must reflect the emphasis on the content. A time perspective is created 
to compare the milestones in the Danish with the described steps in the IDP guides.
A process diagram of the IDP guides, either from their own illustrations or what is interpreted based on their 
written descriptions. Is it linear, iterative or integrative? 
The IDP guides are labelled according to (Bamford, 2002)s descriptions on analysis/synthesis and conjecture/
analysis models as well as Hybertson’s description of the conjecture-refutation mode.
American phases
Milestones in 
Description of Services
Phases in 
Description of Services
Project brief
Pre-design 
(not in Description of Services)
Initial design
Concept design
Concept design
Schematic design
Schematic design
Design development
Outline proposal
Design proposal
Project proposal
Preliminary project
Detailed design
Construction documents
Main project
Construction
Construction
-
Commisioning
Operation
In use
Figure 15 - Overview of American and Danish phases and milestones, and how they corresponds. 
==PAGE:64==
64
Collaboration and Integration of Engieering in Building Design Processes
Selection of Integrated Design Process Guides to investigate
Different IDP guides from both architects, engineers and contractors have been in-
vestigated and analysed, to get a broad perspective on integrated design processes. 
Some guides are chosen by the authors to be investigated further as they describe the 
collaboration processes in projects and some because they describe how to integrate 
energy design. 
Some guides were investigated, but rejected before further analysis. This could be 
guides, where information was limited or had too vague descriptions, which would 
lead to a lot of assuming and guessing. Henning Larsen Architect’s five steps to achieve 
sustainability is an example of a process guide having too little information (Henning 
Larsen Architects, 2017). The steps are as follows:
1. Localisation. Examination of local opportunities and limitations.
2. Objective. Defining an overall objective. 
3. Objective. Defining the exact and measurable objective. 
4. Tools. Catalogue of solutions. 
5. Assessment and comparison of tools. Performance and synergy opportunities.
These are good guidelines, but does not describe actors or actions, which would require 
a lot more information directly from the architects and engineers working with this 
method. All architectural studios have their different ways of working, and their meth-
ods are their livelihood. It is therefore not possible to get detailed descriptions of these 
internal methods within the more or less known integrated-design-studios in Denmark. 
Therefore, most of the included methods are created by agencies or associations of 
different professions. This also means that the methods are directed towards how the 
specific profession should work and not how the collaboration of the project across dis-
ciplines should be. 
 
Some publications are more descriptive and go into detail of certain elements of inte-
grated design methods. An example of this type of publication is the article “Integration 
Evaluation for Integrated Design Teams of Green Buildings: Development and Validation” 
by the American professors Azari & Kim, which presents a tool for verifying the level of 
integration in a building project by using statistics (Azari & Kim, 2015).
Other methods had too much information, e.g. European Union funded projects such as 
INTEND, which run over several years and has multiple publications before it contin-
ued into the MaTrID project (Intelligent Energy Europe, 2009, 2014). Several publications 
were made in these projects, and in cases like this, only the most straight-to-the-point 
publication is included in the comparison. 
==PAGE:65==
65
Integrated project delivery guide, AIA (2007) is chosen as it is widely recognised in the 
global building industry. It is by architects and for everyone involved in the design and 
construction. It focuses on the management of teams and the legal collaboration between 
companies. 
TASK 23: Integrated Design Process: a guideline for sustainable and solar-optimized build-
ing design, IEA (2003) is chosen as it is widely recognised in the global building industry for 
being one of the first to explore the role of the integrated design process in enabling build-
ings to reach a high level of performance. It is by experts and practitioners (professions not 
known) and is for designers and constructors. 
INTEND: Integrated Energy Design - A guide to integrated energy design, IEE (2009) is cho-
sen as it sums up a lot of practical information from both industry, academics and agencies. 
It is made by a collaboration of architects and engineers from industry and academics as 
well as agencies all around Europe, and is for architects, engineers, clients and developers. 
MATRID: Integrated Design Process Guide, IEE (2014) is chosen is chosen as it builds on top 
of INTEND but with a wider focal area on the whole design process. It is not stated, whom 
it is made by, nor whom it is for, but it is assumed to be the same as in INTEND. 
The Integrated Design Process (IDP) – a more holistic approach to sustainable architecture, 
Hansen, H. T.R & Knudstrup, M-A (AAU) (2005) is chosen as it is national known for being 
radical in its way of embracing the second-generation models by being very holistic in its 
approach hence providing a wide-ranging perspective to the mapping.
Method for integrated design of low energy buildings with high quality indoor environment, 
Petersen, S & Svendsen, S (DTU) (2008) is chosen as it is national known for being radical 
in its way of embracing the first-generation models again by being very scientific in its ap-
proach hence providing a wide-ranging perspective to the mapping. It is by engineers and 
for architects and engineers. It focuses on energy performance in design processes. 
Integrated Design Build Method (IDBM), Urup, L (MT Højgaard) (2016) is chosen as it has 
a constructor’s perspective. It is created by a PhD student, whom holds a Civil Engineering 
in Architecture & Design and is for constructors or collaborators in design-build projects. It 
focuses on the management of design-build project and its institutions. 
An Architect’s Guide to Integrating Energy Modeling in the Design Process, AIA (2012) is 
chosen as it shows the architects initiative to focus on integrating energy modelling in the 
design process. It is by architects and for architects. 
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
Part 1
==PAGE:66==
TITLE
Author(s) , year
Process diagram
Gannt chart
Phases 
Phase diagram 
Sender
Made by
Geography
Motivation
Goal
A
B
C
D
E
A
B
A
B
C
D
Short description
Key persons 
1
0
2
3
5
6
4
7
3. DESCRIPTIONS 
a. 
Short description of the characteristics of the IDP guide
b. Key persons or stakeholders in the process
4. PHASE DIAGRAM 
Specific phases mapped against the traditional phases of the Danish Description of Services for Building and Plan-
ning as outlined on page 44. The time perspective shows the milestones of the Danish Description of Services for 
Building and Planning as sub-phases, as the work which is being completed to fulfil a milestone, always will reflect 
the process. The steps of the IDP guides will therefore be compared to the milestone/sub-phases of the Danish 
Framework, to see where each IDP guide has most their design steps. The number of IDP guide steps in each of the 
Danish framework must reflect the emphasis on the content and their succession.
0. IDP GUIDE INDEX
The index number is according to the list on the previous page. This is accompagnied by the IDP title, the authors 
and year of publication.
1. CONTEXT
a. 
The sender is categorised by academic, company, institution or agency
b. The guide developers/authors are described by title/job
c. 
The geography is country- or continent based
d. The motivation is described in sender’s own words; when not elaborated, a motivation is assumed. 
e. The goal is described in sender’s own words; when not elaborated, a goal is assumed.  
2. CATEGORISATION
a. 
The first scale shows the level of applicability, which ranges from ‘Theoretical methodology’ to ‘Practical 
method’. A ‘theoretical methodology’ explains why a certain method should be applied, but not how. A ‘prac-
tical method’ describes in detail how an integrated process should be performed, as a thorough guide where 
nothing is left for interpretation or misunderstandings by the reader.
b. The second scale shows the level of knowledge incorporation, which ranges from ‘Knowledge sharing’ to 
‘Knowledge integration’. ‘Knowledge sharing’ is when it is stated that knowledge should be shared, but not 
how it should be ensured, that this knowledge is incorporated in the building design. In other words, ‘knowl-
edge sharing’ means, that one person shares his/her expert knowledge, but that does not by default mean that 
the receiver understands the significance, sees the value and incorporates it in the design. It is a monologue 
with information - unidirectional. ‘Knowledge integration’ is when it is explained how different people with 
expert knowledge should communicate and collaborate to understand and see value of each other’s work. It 
is a dialogue with information – multidirectional. 
c. 
The checkboxes categorise the collaborative arrangements of the guide. ‘Leader and assistant’ means that 
there is one actor, which is deemed higher than the others; information is asked for and delivered. ‘Hybrid’ 
is the idea of having multi-disciplinary professions – everyone is half engineer, half architect. The traditional 
engineer and architect “boxes” full of conceptions are rejected, and everyone are hybrids. ‘Equal partners’ mean 
that the collaboration has a “flat structure”, where each profession and discipline is ranked equally.  
d. The checkboxes categorise the design method paradigm. The ‘first-generation’ method means the analysis/
synthesis paradigm is applicable. The ‘second-generation’ method means the conjecture/analysis paradigm, 
and the “third-generation” means the conjecture-refutation paradigm.  
When a specific content is not evident nor apparent through the scrutiny of the integrated design processes, 
the authors will not interpret or assume the underlying content in order for the content to fit with the mapping 
structure. If the content is missing in the integrated design process and not apparent to the authors of this thesis, 
it will not be apparent for other readers. This will be shown in the IDP guide mapping as a cross out of the title 
of the specific category. 
Based on authors of this thesis’ assumptions and interpretations.
==PAGE:67==
5. Gantt chart 
The Gantt chart shows the following actors: architect, engineer, contractor, design facilitator, client, user, 
agency, facilities manager and supplier, which are mapped according to the milestones in the Danish 
framework. The wording of the disciplines in the IDP guides is interpreted to match the above mentioned 
disciplines. An elaboration on the interpretations is found in appendix B. 
In the Gantt chart, the mandatory actors are marked with the darker colour.  
The optional actors are marked with the lighter colour. 
 
>
The mentioned actors are the most commonly described, which is why the mapping contains only these 
nine, even though more actors may be included in building projects. 
 ›
Architect: Interpreted as both trained architects and landscape architects. Landscape architects 
are not mentioned in the IDP guides, yet they are very well described in the Danish framework. 
To simplify and minimise the number of actors, the two are merged under the ‘architect’ category. 
When the word “Designer” is used throughout many IDP guides, this is interpreted as architect.
 ›
Engineer: All typical engineering disciplines in building projects, i.e. structural, fire, mechanical, 
electrical, plumbing, HVAC, acoustic, environmental, energy, etc.
 ›
Contractor: The builder
 ›
Design facilitator: A person, who facilitates the work and knows about the interfaces of profes-
sions, collaboration and communication. 
 ›
Client:  The orderer, who pays for the building project and owner of the completed project. 
 ›
User: The people, who are going to occupy the building e.g. Tenants. 
 ›
Agency: A governmental instance, who ensures that the built fulfils all legal requirements. 
 ›
Facilities manager: The management of services, systems and processes of the building in opera-
tion. 
 ›
 Supplier: The companies that deliver parts and elements to the contractor.
6. Phase descriptions 
Description of the phases of each IDP guide. The phases are with guide specific terms. 
7. Process diagram
The process diagrams show the fundamental process of each IDP guide. 
 
>
The process can be linear, iterative, integrative or be a combination of different processes. Each phase 
can only have one design process, but the process can change between phases. Each phase can also be 
linked to the next, havev a review with evaluation of the design and the IDP design goals, and design 
decisions can require rethinking of previous design decisions. 
 
>
Many guides illustrate their process themselves – when this is the case, this is shown. When a guide 
only describes its process and approach to design problems, an interpreted process will be illustrated.
Linear design process 
Link between in integrated phases
Iterative design process 
Review with evaluation
Integrated design process 
Rethinking of previous decisions
==PAGE:68==
A
Sender
Institute 
(The American Institute of Architects) 
Architects
United States of America
INTEGRATED PROJECT DELIVERY A GUIDE 
American Institute of Architects (AIA) 2007
Knowledge integration
Practical method
Leader & assistant
Hybrid
Equal partners
Knowledge-sharing
Theoretical methodology
Motivation
To follow the rapid change in the construction in-
dustry, where there is an on-going demand for more 
eff ective processes. 
Short description
The guide provides a framework which can contain an integrated design process, but not guidelines on how this 
process should be executed. The focus lies on the managemential elements and not operational. 
The guide provides information and guidance on principles and techniques of integrated project delivery (IPD). 
Key persons in the process
The owner has a larger role than usual and the contractor participate at the early stages of the design process. 
There is no one group leader, however the architect is responsible for the process progress. All decisions should 
be unanimous by a decision-making body. In the project team, there are two types of team members: The primary 
participants, who have substantial involvement and responsibilities throughout project, from beginning to end 
(owner, architect and contractor in a traditional project) and the key supporting participants, who are brought in 
when needed, such as design consultants and sub-contractors. 
Goal 
To create a framework in which an integrated design 
process can be facilitated. 
Made by
Geography 
Level of applicability
Level of knowledge incorporation
Collaborative arrangements 
Design method paradigm 
Project dependent. 
==PAGE:69==
69
Part 1
Architect
Engineer
Contractor
Design facilitator
Client
User
Agency (Myndighed)
Facilities manager
Supplier 
Detailed design
Initial design
Design proposal
Conceptualisation 
Criteria design 
Detailed design  
Implementation documents 
Buyout
Agency review
Construction 
Closeout 
Performance goals are developed by the team, methodol-
ogies and technologies are agreed upon as well as level 
of detail development by phase.  
Scope, form and adjacencies are determined, the initial 
design of systems are selected (structure, HVAC etc.) and 
cost estimates are calculated as well as a schedule. 
The building is fully and unambiguously deﬁ ned, co-
ordinated and validated; building systems are deﬁ ned, 
elements are engineered and coordinated.
The ﬁ nished design is turned into documentation for the 
construction phase. 
IPD assumes early involvement of key trade contractors 
and vendors, so buyout of work packages they provide 
occurs through development of prices throughout the 
design phases. 
Use of BIM and early involvement and validation by agen-
cies shortens the ﬁ nal permitting process. 
The beneﬁ ts of the integrated process are realised.
An intelligent 3D model can be delivered to the owner
Divided into phases with actors, actions and outcome. Descriptions of communication and collaboration are general 
Unclear to state a process, as the process is not described due to being project dependent. Concurrent and multi-level; 
early contributions of knowledge and expertise; information openly shared; stakeholder trust and respect. 
==PAGE:70==
Sender
Institution
(International Energy Agency)
Experts from all over Europe
Europe 
Motivation
To break with the traditional design process, hence 
making solar and other regenerative strategies and 
systems an integrated part of the design instead of 
a traditional add-on 
Short description
The framework is one of the ﬁ rst thorough descriptions of integrated design and explains the process as a se-
quence consisting of; Establishing performance targets and developing strategies to meet these. 
Key persons in the process
The client has a more active role than usual, the architect is a team leader and the diff erent engineers take a 
more active role. It is possible to have a Design Facilitator (DF) which will manage and have an overview of the 
process and a core team of architects and engineers. He/she should have a broad knowledge of both architecture 
and engineering, and skills in communication, team management and mediation (Brunsgaard, 2009)
* The design process paradigm is assumed to ﬁ rst look at the whole, then the parts and then the whole again. This is what 
is described in words, even when illustrations show a clear analysis/synthesis paradigm, where all problems are fragmented 
into smaller problems, and then solved independently before put together to a whole.  
Made by
Geography 
Knowledge integration
Practical method
Leader & assistant
1st generation
Hybrid
2nd generation
3rd generation
Equal partners
Knowledge-sharing
Theoretical methodology
Level of applicability
Level of knowledge incorporation
Collaborative arrangements 
Design method paradigm 
Goal 
To be able to design buildings with a markedly high-
er level of environmental performance. (Brunsgaard, 
2009)
*
TASK 23 INTEGRATED DESIGN PROCESS: A GUIDELINE FOR SUSTAINABLE AND SOLAR-OPTIMIZED BUILDING DESIGN
 International Energy Agency (IEA) 2003
B
==PAGE:71==
71
Part 1
Architect
Engineer
Contractor
Design facilitator
Client
User
Agency (Myndighed)
Facilities manager
Supplier 
Detailed design
Initial design
Design proposal
Basics 
Pre-design 
Concept design 
After the Design Development phase
Design development 
Set-up of team, where competences and communication 
qualities are considered. The ﬁ rst analysis of site, build-
ing programme and feasibilities are discussed. 
Goal set-up for the project; Client formulates the objec-
tives and design team translates the demands into pro-
grammatic requirements, performance goals and design 
criteria. Potentials of site and climate is explored.  Budget 
and cost are set and evaluated during the whole process.
A range of designs is developed and constantly investi-
gated and evaluated against requirements, performance 
goals and objectives, supported by design assessments 
and simulations tools. Preliminary building designs are 
developed.
The process continues with construction documents, con-
tracting, building execution, supervision, hand-over etc. 
The ﬁ nal design is found. Detailed drawings, simulations 
and calculations are evaluated with regard to the require-
ments and against benchmarks, which were identiﬁ ed 
early in the project including cost demands.
Divided into phases with actions and actors.
Descriptions of communication, collaboration, risk, payment etc. are general
The basic phase is linear, and the rest are integrated. The process of the integrative phases are iterative, yet with a 
linear sequence of milestones. Before each of the integrated phases can pass on to the next, a review with comparison 
to programme goals and objectives are mandatory. 
==PAGE:72==
Sender
Institution 
(IEE funded by European commission)
Architects and engineers from indus-
try, academics and agencies 
Europe 
Knowledge integration
Practical method
Leader & assistant
Hybrid
Equal partners
Knowledge-sharing
Theoretical methodology
Motivation
To follow the demand for high-performing buildings 
within the building industry.
Short description
The framework describes the concept of integrated energy design (IED) and concludes that every building proj-
ect is unique, hence it is impossible to device a recipe of how to carry out an optimal IED process. However, the 
framework describes the main activities that are likely to be useful in most IED processes. 
Key persons in the process
A multidisciplinary core team, who make the overall decisions, and they are assisted by experts, who can be 
brought in when needed. An architect is part of the core team from beginning to end, and diff erent engineers/
experts can be part of the core team and replaced in between phases depending on the requirements in the 
diff erent phases. 
Goal 
To create a process, where it is possible to achieve 
high-performance buildings with low energy con-
sumption and good indoor environment, without 
sacriﬁ cing architectural quality or result in excessive 
costs.
Made by
Geography 
Level of applicability
Level of knowledge incorporation
Collaborative arrangements 
Design method paradigm 
INTEND: INTEGRATED ENERGY DESIGN  A GUIDE TO INTEGRATED ENERGY DESIGN
Intelligent Energy Europe (IEE) 2009
C
1st generation
2nd generation
3rd generation
==PAGE:73==
73
Part 1
Architect
Engineer
Contractor
Design facilitator
Client
User
Agency (Myndighed)
Facilities manager
Supplier 
Detailed design
Initial design
Design proposal
Step 1
Step 2
Step 3
Step 4
Step 5
Step 6
Step 7
Step 8
Step 9
Select a multi-disciplinary team, who is motivated for 
close cooperation and openness. Core team consist of eg. 
architect and energy expert, but can be changed through 
phases. Design facilitator might lead process. 
Boundary conditions and clients demands are analysed, 
and made into speciﬁ c energy goals. Clariﬁ cation of prior-
itasion of cost/quality. 
Create a Quality Assurance Program and a Quality Control 
Plan to follow-up throughout the project is create, to 
make the process transpararent for team and client. 
A kick-off  workshop is arranged in the early design phase 
to make sure that all team members have a common 
understanding of the design task. 
Co-location of tam members and experts for a close day-
to-day cooperation. 
Update the Quality Control Plan and document energy 
performance at critical points during the design. 
Make contracts that encourage integrated design and 
construction; Either partnering and/or contracts, where 
the team is paid pro-rated bonus if they reach design 
goals
The construction workers must be motivated and edu-
cated about crucial construction operations, and quality 
tests must be applied. 
Create a user manual and maintenance manual. 
The framework is divided into phases (programming, concept design, detailed design, construction and operation), 
but the actions are described through non-cronological steps. 
The programming, concept and detailed design are integrative phases; they have an iterative process, but there are a 
linear sequence of milestones between the phases. 
==PAGE:74==
Sender
Institution 
(IEE funded by European commission) 
Not available
Europe 
Motivation
To create more sustainable buildings, which does not 
purely focus on energy performance as INTEND did, 
but on the whole building design. The focal area has 
changed from zero energy buildings to zero emission 
buildings, which calls for a wider spectrum of envi-
ronmental topics. 
Short description
Integrated Energy Design (IED by INTEND) was the predecessor of Integrated Design (ID). The focal area is there-
fore shifted from a one-sided energy perspective, to a more holistic perspective. The Existing know-how from 
INTEND was considered and further developed towards practical implementation. MaTriD has more descriptions of 
phases instead of steps. 
Key persons in the process
A “design process facilitator” can be appointed to take a lead of the ID process to facilitate an eff ective coordina-
tion in the project organisation.
Goal 
To support the implementation of Nearly Zero-Ener-
gy Buildings until 2020 by application of Integrated 
Design processes.
Made by
Geography 
Knowledge integration
Practical method
Leader & assistant
Hybrid
Equal partners
Knowledge-sharing
Theoretical methodology
Level of applicability
Level of knowledge incorporation
Collaborative arrangements 
Design process paradigm 
MATRID: INTEGRATED DESIGN PROCESS GUIDE
Intelligent Energy Europe (IEE) 2014
D
1st generation
2nd generation
3rd generation
==PAGE:75==
75
Part 1
Architect
Engineer
Contractor
Design facilitator
Client
User
Agency (Myndighed)
Facilities manager
Supplier 
Detailed design
Initial design
Design proposal
Step 0
Step 1 
Step 2
Step 3
Step 4
Step 5
Discuss project ambitions, challenge the initial Client 
Presumptions and utilise (partnering) contracts. 
Select multi-disciplinary design team, and motivate for 
close cooperation and openness, potentially including an 
ID facilitator. Analyse boundary conditions and create the 
project ambitions as ‘functional goals’ i.e. measuarable. 
Create a quality control plan to measure success of de-
sign proposals. The design should be evaluated and the 
achievements at critical points.
Ensure project goals by proper deﬁ nition and communica-
tion in tender and contracts. Motivate and educate con-
struction workers about crucial construction operations, 
and apply quality tests to ensure perform ingas designed. 
Create a user manual for operation and maintenance of 
the building. 
Facilitate commissioning and moniter energy consump-
tion and user satisfaction over time.
The IDP guide is divided into phases with actions; Although the process guidelines need to be adaptable to diff erent 
situations, there are some common structural features that can be identiﬁ ed
The initial- and closing design phases regards information- gathering and sharing, and are hence linear processes. 
The design- and quality control phases are closely interlinked, as the design constantly is monitored acc. goals.
Have a kick-off  workshop at early design stages and an 
initial design workshop when designing begins. Co-locate 
design team. Have alternative building concepts and keep 
decisions open long enough that all relevant issues are 
considered. The client chooses which option to continue 
developing.
==PAGE:76==
Sender
Academic 
(Aalborg University) 
PhD student and MAA professor 
Sweden and Danmark 
Motivation
To gain better environmental architecture through 
integrated design by breaking with the traditional 
boxes of architects and engineers. 
Short description
The IDP guide focus on integration of knowledge from engineering and architecture and how they interact with 
each other in order to solve the often very complicated problems connected to the design of sustainable build-
ings. The IDP guide does not ensure aesthetic or sustainable solutions, but it enables the designer to control the 
many parameters that must be considered and integrated in the project when creating more holistic sustainable 
architecture in order to achieve better sustainable solutions, because all the diff erent parameters are considered 
during the process (Brunsgaard 2009) 
Key persons in the process
The design process is led by a group, where it is possible to have a lot of ideas in the air at the same time and 
it is possible to have a good and eff ective workﬂ ow. It results in holistic projects where the work ﬁ eld is well 
searched.
Goal 
To be able to design good environmental buildings 
with high quality in architectural performances as 
well as in sustainability 
Made by
Geography 
Knowledge integration
Practical method
Leader & assistant
Hybrid
Equal partners
Knowledge-sharing
Theoretical methodology
Level of applicability
Level of knowledge incorporation
Collaborative arrangements 
Design process paradigm 
THE INTEGRATED DESIGN PROCESS  A MORE HOLISTIC APPROACH TO SUSTAINABLE ARCHITECTURE
Hanne Tine Ring Hansen & Mary-Ann Knudstrup (Aalborg University) 2005
E
1st generation
2nd generation
3rd generation
==PAGE:77==
77
Part 1
Architect
Engineer
Contractor
Design facilitator
Client
User
Agency (Myndighed)
Facilities manager
Supplier 
Detailed design
Initial design
Design proposal
Problem or idea 
Analysis 
Sketching 
Presentation 
Synthesis 
Description of the project’s idea to an environmental or 
sustainable building.
Analyse site, environmental factors, and the client’s 
wishes. Architectural demands are made in a diagram of 
functions, which can give inspiration to the design of the 
building. It is summarised in a programme which both 
describes technical and architectural design parameters.
Test the architectural idea in relation to the technical 
ideas. Evaluate diff erent proposals continuously and 
further develop according to the programme and design 
parameters.
Present the project with all qualities shown and how  the 
aims, design criteria and target values of the project have 
been fulﬁ lled for the new building owner. 
Find ﬁ nal building shape through sketches and more 
calculations and adjustments. Here architectural space 
and functional qualities, the construction and demands 
for energy consumption as well as indoor environment 
ﬂ ow together. In the end the design parameters have 
been met. 
The IDP guide is divided into phases with described main actors and actions. 
The phases with information- gathering and sharing are linear, the rest are iterative. The results of each phase can lead 
to decisions made in previous phases to be changed, and the design can keep evolving as there are no clear sequence 
of milestones; everything can be changed. 
==PAGE:78==
Sender
Academic
(Technical University of Denmark)
PhD student  and civil enineering 
professor 
Danmark 
Motivation
To bring rationality into building design processes 
again, as arbitrary design decisions today inﬂ uence 
the building performance
Short description
The method is to deﬁ ne and design rooms before the building, hence solving all problems on a small scale before 
building form giving. The idea is to have a certain space of solutions, which fulﬁ ls the performance goals, and 
outline boundary conditions within which the design process can take place. 
Key persons
Each phase has a main responsible person, who handles key decisions. In the early phases, this is the design 
facilitator, and when the space of solutions is ﬁ nished, an architect will handles key decisions. The main respon-
sible person always has access to a Building Design Team consisting of “architects, engineers and other relevant 
experts”, by which knowledge about certain issues can be acquired. 
Goal 
To develop a on consequence-conscious design 
process
Made by
Geography 
Knowledge integration
Practical method
Leader & assistant
Hybrid
Equal partners
Knowledge-sharing
Theoretical methodology
Level of applicability
Level of knowledge incorporation
Collaborative arrangements 
Design process paradigm 
METHOD FOR INTEGRATED DESIGN  OF LOW ENERGY BUILDINGS WITH HIGH QUALITY INDOOR ENVIRONMENT
Steff en Petersen & Svend Svendsen (DTU) 2007
F
1st generation
2nd generation
3rd generation
==PAGE:79==
79
Part 1
Architect
Engineer
Contractor
Design facilitator
Client
User
Agency (Myndighed)
Facilities manager
Supplier 
Detailed design
Initial design
Design proposal
Step 1
Step 2
Step 3
Step 4
Functional goals are turned into design goals/success 
criteria. A number of repeated room typologies is deter-
mined. 
Many variations of the room typologies are created and 
the best in regards of energy performance and indoor 
environment is chosen. 
The various room typologies are combined into a number 
of building proposals. 
Final building design is chosen and optimized based on 
initial costs, cost of energy consumption, indoor environ-
ment quality and architectural quality. 
The method is divided into phases with described actors and actions. 
The design process is linear in the ﬁ rst three phases, where the development of the design suggestions are based 
on consequence-conscious design decisions. The design suggestions are constantly evaluated based on design goals 
within energy performance and indoor environment.  The last phase is iterative, as the building design is optimised in a 
iterative process with clear sequences of milestones. 
==PAGE:80==
Sender
Academic and company 
PhD student  
Sweden and Danmark 
INTEGRATED DESIGN BUILD METHOD 
Lea Urup (MT Højgaard) 2016
Knowledge integration
Practical method
Leader & assistant
Hybrid
Equal partners
Knowledge-sharing
Theoretical methodology
Motivation
To develop a new integrated method by which actors 
can attempt to change their institutional environ-
ment at the organisational and ﬁ eld level.
Short description
The IDBM proposes to work on both detail and the whole at the same time, where the professions work separated 
on the same area, and then integrates the diff erent solutions during a 1-2-week design sprint. Extensive analysis 
of qualitative and quantitative parameters should be performed before the ﬁ rst sketching takes place. 
Key persons in the process
A small core group with stewards representing each institution e.g. owner, architect, main engineering disciplines, 
key subcontractor and/or suppliers. Each representative is responsible for their area, yet it is a team eff ort to 
include all areas. 
A project team consisting of experts can be engaged on an ad hoc basis as required by the core group. The core 
group is responsible for the integration of knowledge, where the project team is responsible for the in-depth 
knowledge, which can be used for the core team’s decisions. 
Goal 
To create new meanings and formal structures for 
enabling integrated constellations of institutions to 
improve project coordination and performance. 
(industrial Ph.D, Chalmers Technical)
Made by
Geography 
Level of applicability
Level of knowledge incorporation
Collaborative arrangements 
Design process paradigm 
G
1st generation
2nd generation
3rd generation
==PAGE:81==
81
Part 1
Architect
Engineer
Contractor
Design facilitator
Client
User
Agency (Myndighed)
Facilities manager
Supplier 
Detailed design
Initial design
Design proposal
Pre-idea
Idea
Design basis 
Presentation & off -site production
Design development 
Building assembly & commissioning
Hand-off , occupancy & facilities management
Strategic relation is started before the design project 
begins. A business case is made. Starts with a kick-off  
workshop and ends with review.
Core group ﬁ nds potential members for project team. 
Performance criteria, target cost (and how decreases/
increases are shared), coordination strategy, process map 
and collaboration contracts are developed. Starts with a 
kick-off  workshop and ends with review.
Analysis of users, site, environmental parameters - ob-
stacles and opportunities are identiﬁ ed. Starts with a 
kick-off  workshop and ends with review.
Second collaboration contract is made. Building site is 
prepared and elements produces off -site. Commissioning 
and hand-off  manual is developed. Starts with a kick-off  
workshop and ends with review.
Sketching begins. The conceptual design is developed 
parallel to detailed information. Starts with a kick-off  
workshop and ends with review.
Elements and systems assembled on site. Commissioning 
all four seasons. Starts with a kick-off  workshop and ends 
with review.
Continue ensuring building is performing as required. 
The IDP is divided into phases with described main actions. The actors and more in-depth description on the content is 
described in general. 
The ﬁ rst three phases are information- gathering and sharing by using multiple methods; it is hence a lineary process. 
In the design development phase, the process is integrated, with an iterative process, but with clear, lineary sequences 
of milestones. With each iteration loop, the level of integration between the disciplines increases, which is diff erent 
from many other IDPs, where the level of detail increases. In Urup’s IDP, the detailed information develops parallel to 
the concept. 
==PAGE:82==
Sender
Institute
(The American Institute of Architects)
Architects
United States of America 
Knowledge integration
Practical method
Leader & assistant
Hybrid
Equal partners
Knowledge-sharing
Theoretical methodology
Motivation
To take advantage of the rich opportunities off ered 
by the rapid advance of BIM and design performance 
modeling. 
Short description
The guide does not provide a method, but insight to energy modeling and how architects should cope with the 
changes. The idea is that the architect needs to get a working understanding of the energy modeling process, 
its parameters and beneﬁ ts. This will make the architects aware of the great opportunities that lies within the 
collaboration and enables more information to the design from the beginning. 
Key persons in the process
This guide diff ers from the others, as it focuses on how architects should use energy modeling integrated. This 
means that mainly the engineer and architect will be active during the diff erent phases, as these are the ones 
performing and implementing the simulations and their output. 
Goal 
To adapt the workﬂ ow of architects to take advan-
tage of energy modeling tools. 
Made by
Geography 
Level of applicability
Level of knowledge incorporation
Collaborative arrangements 
Design process paradigm 
The phase diagram above shows the use of energy (performance) modeling as part of the design process. The diagram 
shows how energy modelling traditionally is only used late in the design process, but with integrated energy modelling, 
it can and should be used through the whole lifetime of the building project. The illustration is adapted from AIA (2012)’s guide.  
AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE TO INTEGRATING ENERGY MODELING IN THE DESIGN PROCESS  
American Institute of Architects (AIA) 2012
H
1st generation
2nd generation
3rd generation
Standard 
practice
Business 
as usual
High
performance
Integrated 
project 
delivery
Pre-design/concept
Schematic
Design development
Construction documents
Bidding
Construction
Commissioning
Post occupancy
==PAGE:83==
83
Part 1
Architect
Engineer
Contractor
Design facilitator
Client
User
Agency (Myndighed)
Facilities manager
Supplier 
Detailed design
Initial design
Design proposal
Concept design 
Schematic design 
Design development 
Construction/Post occupancy 
Construction documents 
Use early Design Performance Modeling to help deﬁ ne 
the goals of the project. Deﬁ ne the project requirements, 
as informed by modeling results. 
Review ﬁ nancial and performance energy information 
from model to guide design decisions
Review design alternatives based on initial goals, as 
informed by modeling results
Create baseline and alternatives to choose from.
Use results of the as-built model for commissioning. Com-
pare results of the as-built model against metered data 
to look for operating problems
Create documentation needed to accompany energy 
model results for code compliance
Create documentation needed to accompany energy 
model results for commissioning and metering/ monitor-
ing validation
The framework describes the workﬂ ow and energy simulations in general. An illustration has a short description on 
what diff erent phases contain. 
No process is described, but they illustrate how the energy performance simulation should be integrated in all phases 
of the design instead of the traditional ways in the end of design phase. 
==PAGE:84==
84
Collaboration and Integration of Engieering in Building Design Processes
Strengths and weaknesses of iDP guides
In the following a comparison of the different IDP guides based on their individual 
strengths and weaknesses is presented. The comparison is a subjective evaluation of 
the content and presentation of this in regards to linguistic clarity and tangibility. The 
strengths and weaknesses presented in the following are the most important in the 
individual IDP guides. A more elaborate description can be found in Appendix A. 
Strengths 
 
> The IPD suggest locating all team 
members in a joint facility, which can 
facilitate open communication and 
cooperation. If not possible, then regular 
meetings and video conferences may be 
useful should be respected.
 
> They acknowledge that the key to a 
successful project is by assembling a 
team that is committed to collaborative 
processes and is capable of working 
together effectively.  A 6-step check list 
is made to create an integrated team. 
 
> When a team member is responsible for 
something, it only means having the co-
ordination and integration and ensuring 
the completeness of the task. 
Weaknesses 
 
> Not a clear process as it depends on proj-
ect. But, projects are overall the same 
– the content is what differs.
 
> It is not clear how the team members 
should collaborate or implement their 
knowledge.
 
> There is no assigning of a group leader, 
as it is thought to be unnecessary, since 
the contract structure aligns the interest 
of the parties.
Strengths 
 
> Project teams should be co-located, 
where both architects and engineers are 
present.
 
> There are many proposed tools to use 
- booklet, guidelines, Navigator, case 
studies, blueprint for a kick-off workshop, 
MCDM 23 and Energy 10.
 
> Considers contracts where the team is 
rewarded according to achievements of 
performance targets. 
Weaknesses 
 
> Descriptions and use of terminology is 
not consistent and is thus difficult to 
comprehend
 
> The process lacks content. Goes from tar-
gets to strategy to heating and cooling 
load - the description of how to actually 
design and have process is missing - 
nothing is stated on how to collaborate 
and incorporate knowledge.    
 
> Does not address collaboration issues 
caused by the differences between the 
humanistic tradition of architects and 
the scientiﬁc tradition of engineers.
 
> The architect and engineer are the only 
key players in the design process, as 
they can guide their client’s decisions. 
But what about the contractor, buildabili-
ty and costs?
A
B
==PAGE:85==
85
C
D
Strengths 
 
> There are many proposed tools to use, 
and appendixes on the more technical 
aspects (a guideline) as well as a refer-
rals to TASK 23 blueprint for a kick-off 
workshop.
 
> Proposes good tools such as the quality 
assurance program and quality control 
plan. 
 
> They acknowledge, that not one process 
can be facilitated throughout the project, 
as the early stages deems close corpo-
ration and shared understandings and 
goals, where the last phases can be more 
linear and fragmented.  
 
> They articulate the importance of 
communication, and that the specialist 
terminologies must go, as well as the 
ﬁgures and diagrams. Instead tangible 
consequences of their suggestions must 
be visualized.  
Weaknesses 
 
> The process is not very clear 
 
> The steps/areas of concern are de-
scribed, yet they are not proposed in a 
context, just eg “a series of workshops 
should be held”.
 
> The architect is the only continuous 
person in the core team through the 
phases, which means a lot of hand-overs 
between earlier and forthcoming core 
team members, where crucial informa-
tion might be lost.
 
Strengths 
 
> Many proposed tools to use, and 
appendixes on the more technical 
aspects (a guideline). A summary for 
the client and another for the tenant is 
a supplement, as well as good practice 
case studies. 
 
> Proposes good tools such as the 
quality assurance program and quality 
control plan. 
 
> Performance contracting, where the 
client pays the design team according 
to achieved goals. 
 
> Articulation of the importance of 
communication, and that the specialist 
terminologies must go, as well as the 
ﬁgures and diagrams. Instead tangible 
consequences of their suggestions 
must be visualized.  
Weaknesses 
 
> The process is not clear
 
> Actors are not always described; it is up 
to the reader to guesstimate, who should 
perform certain actions/meetings. 
 
> A design team is sometimes described, 
but not who is team members. 
 
C
D
Part 1
==PAGE:86==
86
Collaboration and Integration of Engieering in Building Design Processes
F
Strengths 
 
> Communication issues due to differences 
between disciplines are minimised in the 
initial phase, since very few disciplines 
are involved.
 
> The building performance simulation tool 
iDbuild developed for this IDP meth-
od contains an extensive collection of 
analysis options for most quantitative 
parameters, decresing the need for mul-
tiple tools, which saves modelling time 
and hence money.
Weaknesses 
 
> The method does not describe how the 
collaboration happen, only that it must 
happen. The collaboration and outcome 
will therefore highly depend on the 
design facilitator’s skills, as this person 
must know when to contact the building 
design team for advice. If the design fa-
cilitator lack competences in some areas, 
he might not know when to include the 
expert in this speciﬁc area. 
 
> The design focus is on room level instead 
of an overall building expression and 
user experience.
 
> The design is created purely based on 
technical and quantitative aspects, 
where architectural qualities are as-
sumed to be added later. It might be 
called an integrated design method, but 
only focuses on the technical aspects.
 
E
Strengths 
 
> Project teams should be co-located, 
where both archtitects and engineers are 
present
 
> Prioritise of soft values, like architectural 
quality and considers all parameters of 
building design in unison. 
Weaknesses 
 
> The so-called hybrid-process between 
the technical engineering approach and 
the artistic architectural approach, is 
vaguely described by outcome rather 
than process and interaction.
 
> The method does not describe the 
actions, rather the outcome. It can be 
assumed, that a design facilitator can 
facilitate the process, yet this is not 
described. 
 
> The simulations and calculations are only 
executed in the ﬁnal stages. This might 
be due to the IDP being outdated, as 
there today are many tools to calculate 
and simulate parts with already in the 
early design phases. 
==PAGE:87==
87
From the overall analysis, it is evident that there are gaps in the content of the existing IDP guides. In 
general, the guides provide an elaborate explanation of the incentives and beneficial outcomes of inte-
grated design. Most of the guides give concrete examples and concepts conducive for collaboration, e.g. 
co-location and communication strategies, however these are not sufficient or exhaustive. Descriptions 
of actions to take to ensure collaboration and integration and of the process are unclear or even absent. 
The inputs and outcome are described as well as a nice list of benefits of the effects and results. Yet, the 
whole process of how to manage the inputs and people participating are missing. 
A couple of the guides have a pronounced focus on the implementation of technical aspects for environ-
mental performance, but neglects to recognise social sustainability and the value of non-measurables, like 
e.g. aesthetics. The guides furthermore do not recognise that integration is founded in collaboration, not 
simple coordination. A key aspect of successful collaboration is communication, however how to success-
fully communicate with and interact with other people is not sufficiently addressed.
From the analysis of the mapping, a significant number of findings has emerged. The findings are outlined 
and further elaborated on page 92.
H
Strengths 
 
> Focus on both management and opera-
tional level.
 
> Each phase starts with a collective kick-
off workshop and end with a collective 
project review.
 
> Nothing is sketched until design develop-
ment phase, when idea and design basis 
have been established.
 
> There is time for in depth analysis as 
design basis phase is about half the du-
ration of the design development phase
 
> Separation the virtual and physical proj-
ect, and the virtual design must have the 
same level of detail as a physical building 
would have. 
 
> Systematic iterations 
 
> Collaboration contracts 
None 
General ﬁndings in the IDPs 
G
Weaknesses 
 
> No guidance on how to actually do 
every phase, but sums up its content. It 
leaves space for the reader to interpret 
according to traditions on how to do the 
different described activities 
 
> New roles and coordination mechanisms 
are described, eg. reﬂective capacity and 
transparency, yet it is not described how 
to actually do it 
 
Part 1
==PAGE:88==
88
Collaboration and Integration of Engieering in Building Design Processes
Integrated Energy design
Integrated energy design (IED) is a sub-element of the integrated design process, where focus, 
as the name implies, lie on energy performance rather than the process itself. IED has a uni-
lateral focus on measurable aspects, where IDP is more holistic in its approach to e.g. softer 
values in building design. Yet, the two are interlinked, especially as they both preach early 
collaboration. In energy design, simulation tools are of great importance, hence the subject 
will be elaborated in the following. 
The case study of this thesis, which is described in Part 2 on page 105, address energy design 
and simulation tools, which were utilised in the design process. Hence, the following section 
also aims to outline the background for principles applied during the case study. 
Intro
The focus of sustainability in buildings has shifted from a being on energy consumption 
to greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions. Hence, more aspects need to be taken into consider-
ation regarding materials, transportation, robustness etc. Yet, as described earlier, it can 
be beneficial to look at ‘negawatts’ instead of megawatts, as a saved megawatt limits 
GHG emissions. Therefore, it is still important to consider energy design in an integrated 
design process (Intelligent Energy Europe, 2009). Inspiration to do this, can be found in 
integrated energy design. 
‘Energy design’ is a building design method that aims to integrate the consideration 
of aspects, which affect the building energy consumption, in the early design phases. 
The method is thus by many authors named Integrated Energy Design (IED) (Gaardsted, 
Kamper, & Højbjerg, 2007; Intelligent Energy Europe, 2009). There are several guides for 
IED, and they vary slightly in terms of focus on process and technical aspects, however in 
general, they all include themes of form, function, and energy- conservation and savings. 
IED seeks to integrate technical knowledge in a building project, where IDP seeks to 
integrate people and their skills in a collaborative process. 
Passive and active energy design
The purpose of IED is to minimise energy consumption, i.e. active energy strategies are 
considered auxiliary and the reliance on these systems should be minimised (Interna-
tional Energy Agency, 2008). This means that the design needs to be optimised through 
passive energy design on the basic building geometry, i.e. in the early design phases.
==PAGE:89==
89
Passive energy design incorporates non energy consuming strategies to control the in-
door comfort conditions such as natural ventilation, day lighting, passive heating (e.g. 
through glazing), passive cooling (e.g. via fixed solar shading or thermal mass), etc. (In-
ternational Energy Agency, 2008).
Active mechanical systems, i.e. energy consuming, can be a necessity to fulfil require-
ments for comfort. Active systems include heating, mechanical cooling, ventilation and 
dynamic solar shading, artificial lighting, etc. 
The use of Energy Simulation Tools 
Energy design relies on the ability to assess how different design parameters and con-
cepts will affect the energy performance and indoor environment of the building (Pe-
tersen & Svendsen, 2008). With computer simulation tools, building designers can test 
energy consumption, thermal indoor environment, indoor air quality and daylight levels 
and thus “bringing designed performance and operational performance closer to each 
other” (AIA, 2012).
Energy simulation tools can be incorporated in the design process, both as a means of 
validating the performance of a specific design, as a way of informing the design prior to 
any decisions on a specific design solution, or even as a design driver. Thus, the simula-
tion tools can either be utilised up-front or in a more retrospective manner (Internation-
al Energy Agency, 2008).
Regardless if the energy model is used as design validator, informer, or driver, the energy 
model has to be accurate and reflect reality in order to add value to the design and pro-
cess (International Energy Agency, 2008). Energy simulation tools are therefore designed 
with a powerful and robust calculation engine. However, most energy simulation tools 
are developed for verification of a settled design, which makes them difficult to apply in 
the early design phases (Negendahl, 2015). Models are only as good as the input, so most 
energy simulation tools need extensive input to run calculations. This is not necessarily 
realistic in the early design phases, where detailed information is simply not available 
yet, since the design of the building, and even more so the building systems, are still on 
a conceptual level (Negendahl, 2015). 
Part 1
==PAGE:90==
90
Collaboration and Integration of Engieering in Building Design Processes
Integrating Energy Simulation in the early design phases
Most energy simulation tools are stand-alone programs, which make energy simulations 
time-consuming work due to the manual modelling. In order to run a simulation, the geo-
metric form needs to be modelled along with specific inputs on all parameters affecting 
the desired output, e.g. occupancy schedules, building material parameters, ventilation 
rates, etc. Especially in an iterative design process, remodelling can become a bottleneck 
due to the slow feedback. Hence, some energy modelling tools can be problematic to 
apply in the early design phases, as the design develops fast. Yet, this creates a paradox, 
as it is evidently in the early design phases that important design decisions influencing 
the energy consumptions are made, and energy modelling can add a lot of value when 
applied early.  There is a need for “tools that provide enough accuracy to make informed 
decisions, without requiring detailed inputs that are out of sequence with early stage design 
process” (AIA, 2012). 
 
According to (AIA, 2012 and Negendahl, 2015) a number of energy modelling tools devel-
oped especially for the early design phases are available, and are continuously develop-
ing. These are programs, which comply with the preferred 3D sketching- and modelling 
programs of architects and engineers, Rhinoceros and Revit, through a visual program-
ming language (VPL). The programs are Grasshopper and Dynamo, which are plugins 
for Rhinoceros and Revit respectively. The benefit of the VPLs, is that simulation results 
are fed back directly to the native form-giving tools of the architect (Negendahl, 2015). 
The analysis can therefore be set up to run as changes to the geometry is being made. 
This instantaneous feedback on design variations is crucial to making design decisions 
informed by technical inputs. 
According to Negendahl and Trebilcock, who are both experts within the field of archi-
tectural engineering, 
an issue with energy modelling tools (and energy design) is that it is not holistic. Sus-
tainable building design focuses on quantitative parameters, but ignores qualitative pa-
rameters such as social impact, spatial planning, aesthetics, etc. Trebilcock further argues 
that the nature of the tools result in a focus on the partial elements instead of the whole, 
and thus “tools that focus on the parts cannot guarantee that the whole will be coherent. (…)
There is a risk of parts becoming add-ons of the building” (Trebilcock, 2009). Yet, with the 
rapid feedback, it is possible to integrate the modelling tools in an early design process. 
Energy design and energy modelling tools are still very valuable and important as a 
means of reducing the overall energy consumption and securing sustainability in build-
==PAGE:91==
91
ing projects (International Energy Agency, 2008; Trebilcock, 2009). According to Negend-
ahl, the utilisation of energy modelling tools requires collaborative processes that re-
spect both quantitative and qualitative parameters. Trebilcock argues that  “there is still 
value in raising awareness of the issues because it builds up motivation and knowledge in 
architects to explore strategies for integration” (Trebilcock, 2009). 
It is evident that there is a great need for methods or a tangible outline for sustainable, 
holistic design; “These [methods in sustainable architecture] are important but a more ho-
listic method is also needed which embraces all the subsections and completes the sustain-
ability of architecture” (International Energy Agency, 2008). 
Part 1
==PAGE:92==
92
Collaboration and Integration of Engieering in Building Design Processes
Findings from IDP mapping and IED 
Design- and collaboration processes are insufficiently described in the IDP guides 
There is a gap in all the current integrated design process descriptions and guidelines, as they 
evolve around questions of “why and how?”, but not “who and what?”, at least not to a level of 
detail where the guidelines are directly applicable to practitioners. This makes most of the IDP 
guides very theoretical and difficult to apply in working situations. Therefore, the IDP guides 
create an illusion of collaboration, but all professions can interpret for their advantage, as the 
actors and actions are not sufficiently described. Design- and collaboration processes are thus 
very much person dependent from project to project and the responsibility of collaboration 
therefore falls between two stools. 
Integrated design requires good communications 
All the IDP guides describe integrated design, but as the finding above states, they do not 
describe how the process is conducted and integration ensured. A general misconception of 
integrated design in the IDP guides, is that merely gathering different professions around a ta-
ble, and told what the outcome of the meeting must be will foster the necessary collaboration. 
Yet, physical co-location in itself does not necessarily mean that they work integrated or have 
a good process. When the IDP guides leave the process of communication up to the involved 
persons, the interpretation is once again up to the individual professions. Therefore, it is easy 
to fall back to usual habits i.e. not working integrated. The basis of integrated design is good 
communications, if the knowledge of all involved professions should be integrated. 
==PAGE:93==
93
The duration of the early design phases needs to be prolonged
From the phase diagrams in the IDP mapping, it is evident that all IDP guides have prolonged 
early design phases compared to the early design phases as outlined in the Description of 
Services. According to AIA, the total project process will not be prolonged, as the later, detailed 
design process will be shorter due to the reduction of rework required (AIA, 2007). To accom-
modate an integrated design process, it can be argued that changes in the Description of Ser-
vices must be made regarding the timeframe and scope of milestones. 
All investigated IDP guides have different design processes 
From the mapping of the IDP guides, it is evident that there is no consensus about the design 
process of the integrated design. When looking at the process diagrams, the different guides 
utilise the three types of design processes, linear, iterative and integrated, differently. This cor-
responds with the quote in the introductory description of the integrated design process (see 
page 36) that “Even though there is a broad consensus of how integrated design processes differs 
from the traditional design process, there are still as many variations of how to practice IDP as there 
are IDP practitioners” (Busby Perkins +Will & Stantec Consulting, 2007). This inconsistency is an 
issue for practitioners wanting to implement an integrated design process in a project, as there 
is no consensus on which is ‘the right’ process for integrated design.
The IDP guides have different uses of design methods 
As found in the introduction chapter (see page 29), there are three design methods; the analy-
sis/synthesis, the conjecture/analysis and conjecture/refutation, which corresponds to the first, 
second and third generation of design methodologies. Each of these methods can be used in 
any of the three design processes; the linear, the iterative and the integrated. 
In the mapping of the IDP guides (see page 68) it is seen that there is inconsistency in which 
design method is recommended for the integrated design process. As with the previous finding, 
the inconsistency among the IDP guides causes issues for practitioners.
Part 1
==PAGE:94==
94
Collaboration and Integration of Engieering in Building Design Processes
The iterative design process does not necessarily ensure integration
A successful integrated design process is iterative; however, an iterative process in itself does 
not ensure integration. An iterative process is perfectly capable of fostering fragmented work, 
where one discipline wait for another to finish ‘their’ part before commencing work within its 
own field of expertise. The same design topic can evolve through an iterative process, where 
the work of the first iteration is scrutinised, and the design of the specific item goes through 
another iteration loop, where the baton is passed from one discipline to the next.
An integrated design process ensures, that no discipline specific design decision is made, with-
out awareness and acknowledgement of the consequences for other disciplines and the build-
ing project as a whole. When discussing integrated design, it is important to recognise, that 
there are differences between coordination, cooperation, and collaboration. 
The earlier energy concepts are implemented, the less use of active energy systems 
With energy specialists participating in the early design decisions, it is possible to utilise their 
knowledge of passive energy strategies and implement it in the building design. The more pas-
sive energy strategies are integrated in the building design, the less active energy systems are 
needed. Integration of renewable energy sources are often perceived as sustainable initiatives; 
however, it can be argued that photovoltaics etc. might just be a necessity in the form of buying 
indulgences for an un-optimised passive building design. A passive building design applies the 
scope of ‘negawatts’ instead of ‘megawatts’ (see page 88) and will minimise the total energy 
consumption.
==PAGE:95==
95
Parametric simulation tools enable a more dynamic and integrated design process 
New parametric simulation tools can provide foundation for a more integrated and iterative 
design processes. Simulation programs, which comply with architects’ and engineers’ preferred 
3D sketching and modelling programs through a visual programming language, can be utilised 
for rapid feedback in design development. Traditional simulation programs require the energy 
specialist to model the geometry of the building and its technical features before simulations 
can be performed. This is a time-consuming task, which have lead the energy specialist to 
either being a bottleneck with extensive remodelling work or simply not included in major 
decisions. With parametric simulation tools, it is possible for the energy specialist to work side 
by side with the architects and give rapid feedback in an iterative process, integrating technical 
inputs. 
Simulation tools can be used as a design validator, design informer and design driver
The technical inputs can be used as a validator of a building design, which is the traditional 
approach due to the heavy process of simulating e.g. the energy performance and indoor en-
vironment. This follows the traditional linear sequence, where the architect designs and the 
engineer ‘dress’ the building. The design is somewhat unilateral with a main focus on aesthetic 
features. With the development of faster tools, designed for the early design phases, technical 
knowledge can inform the design decisions up front, in stead of validating design decisions in 
retrospect. This makes the architect and engineer more equal, as the design is developed on 
an informed basis. Lastly, the parametric simulation tools can provide so much information in 
the early design phases, that the energy specialist’ knowledge can drive the design decisions. 
This is almost the opposite of the design-validator concept, as it is just as unilateral, just in 
a technical perspective. The involvement of the technical inputs in design development can 
therefore be put on a scale from design validator, design informer and design driver. 
Part 1
==PAGE:96==
96
Collaboration and Integration of Engieering in Building Design Processes
 
>
All literature in the literature study has stated that it is essential to address com-
munications in building projects.  
 
>
It is observed that a lot of problems in integrated design processes concern con-
tractual relationships. The contracts need to support a close collaboration, espe-
cially in the early design phases. The Description of Services concerns the formal 
contracts. 
 
>
The described problems regarding early collaboration in DGNB due to the tradi-
tional value-chain and payment structures (see page 59) is also observed in the 
IDPs. This can be accommodated by having the management from participating 
organisations supporting the early collaboration and by working with collabora-
tive contracts and transparent project organisation hierarchies. Examples of shared 
risks and gains are seen in concepts such as Partnering on page 48 and in the IDP 
guide indexed (A) by the American Institute of Architects, 2007 (page 68). A general 
problem is the suspicious and defensive attitude in the building industry towards 
other organisations; when sharing risks and gains in a project, the focus can shift 
from individual parties fulfilling their contractual obligations to a collaborating 
effort when performing in unison to develop a better project. The AIA 2007 (index 
A), INTEND (index C), and MATRID (index D) integrated design processes guides 
suggest signing a performance contract in which the design team or contractor 
is obligated to pay the client a pro-rated penalty, if the building performs below 
target. If the building performs better than expected, the design team or contractor 
receives a pro-agreed bonus. 
 
>
The compilation of points from the Værdibyg guides (see page 51) are in line with 
the recommendations from the IDP guides (see page 68). The guides from Værdibyg 
are in general more tangible and straightforward in terms of applicability, than the 
descriptions in the IDP guides. Hence, the Værdibyg guides provide a great basis for 
a formulation of a palpable concept for an integrated design process.
 
>
Many of the IDP guides focus on ‘why and how’ instead of ‘who and what”’ The 
guides describe the benefits of integrated design, and that these can be achieved 
through collaboration. IDP guides states that early collaborative design meetings 
or workshops should be held, but they do not describe who should be participating 
or what actions should be taken to ensure successful collaboration. DGNB, on the 
other hand, focuses on ‘who and what’ as these aspects are tangible to document 
in the certification process. The inputs and outputs of all actions are therefore 
described, but the process of collaboration towards achieving the output is not 
outlined. 
RECAP PART 1 
==PAGE:97==
97
 
>
In DGNB, an auditor handles the documentations and follow up on whether all 
inputs and outputs of each criterion are fulfilled. This is a formal process of docu-
mentation. In many of the IDP guides, a design facilitator manages the interfaces 
between the disciplines and design process. Either in form of a ‘lead designer’, who 
manages all the inputs from all disciplines (Petersen & Svendsen, 2008), or in form 
of a process manager, who leads the process by ensuring all the right disciplines 
are involved at the right times in an effective coordination. A certification scheme 
cannot promise a sustainable project, but it can encourage the people involved to 
think in line of concepts and possible solutions in the early design phases. In many 
of the IDP guides, the process of managing the disciplines and their interfaces is 
handled by a design facilitator.  
 
>
DGNB works with 10 concepts in the early design phases of ten different technical 
aspects. This is identical to many IDP guides in which a lot of concepts must be de-
veloped before sketching can begin, e.g. in (Hansen & Knudstrup, 2005; Urup, 2016)
 
>
In integrated energy design, technical knowledge is emphasised as well as how it 
should be utilised to inform or drive the design; the process and collaboration is 
neglected. 
 
>
ICT, on the other hand, creates formal agreements of how communication between 
participating organisations can be utilised through IT. For example, how much in-
formation should be included a shared 3D model. Hence the remodelling work 
can be limited, as discussed in “Integrated Energy Design” (see page 88). Thus, 
the energy specialist can provide feedback on building design much faster as the 
shared model can be utilised. By committing to ICT agreements, all organisations 
and participating team members know what should be provided by whom, hence 
misunderstandings are limited. This breaks with tradition, because normally, the 
architect has completed the building design (possibly without involving the energy 
specialist) due to the long-term locking of design while modelling and simulations 
are performed. Besides, the lengthy process of remodelling is a tedious rework pro-
cess, which might make energy specialists dislike iterative processes and act in a 
less collaborative manner. 
Part 1
==PAGE:98==
98
Collaboration and Integration of Engieering in Building Design Processes
Which aspects influence the design processes and collaboration in the Danish building 
industry, and what methods and principles from integrated design guides can be applied 
to the design process towards a better building? 
Not one building project are the same. However, the same building legislation and reg-
ulatory framework applies for all projects, hence the overall process is always the same. 
Ever since building design became an artistic and aesthetic trade of architecture, function 
became a technical issue. Engineers and other technical trades would thus “dress” the 
building when the architectural design was finalised. This tradition forms the foundation 
of the building industry. Regulatory frameworks, contracts and fee structures are based 
on this linear approach to the design process. Countless projects with failed coordination 
between trades followed by claims and lawsuits has fostered a suspicious, prejudice, and 
defensive attitude towards collaboration in the entire building industry. 
Design methods of engineers and architects are fundamentally different; hence, the two 
disciplines often clash when collaborating. There is an unmistakable link between col-
laboration and communication, as described in several of the existing IDP guides, and 
also the guides from Værdibyg specifically addressing building projects in a Danish con-
text. Close multidisciplinary collaboration is a necessity in an integrated design process, 
which makes tangible and practically applicable tools, methods, and principles indis-
pensable. 
There is a general gap concerning the descriptions of collaboration and communication 
concepts in the existing IDP guides. Descriptions are unclear or even absent, however 
most of the guides do, to some extent, provide concrete examples and concepts condu-
cive for collaboration. 
Co-location of project team members can create a physical basis for easy communica-
tion and close collaboration. Co-location of project team members is thus highly recom-
mended. If co-location is not practically possible, team meetings should be planned on 
a regular basis.
‘Good’ communication is addressed as a theme in several guides. It should be ensured 
that project team members are skilled in communication, and visual communication is 
proposed as a means to communicate among different disciplines with different profes-
sional languages. 
SUB-CONCLUSION PART 1 
==PAGE:99==
99
Descriptions and blueprints for kick-off and design workshops are provided in several 
IDP guides, as well as in the Bygst partnering guide and the Værdibyg guides (Erhvervs- 
og Byggestyrelsen, 2006; N. Koch, 2012). The aim of the workshops is to ensure commit-
ment and ownership from team members towards the design and collaboration process 
while establishing shared understandings and goals.
Contracts are a significant theme in many IDP guides. It is recommended to draw up con-
tracts, that support multidisciplinary and cross-company collaboration, which rewards 
the team according to achievements of project goals and performance targets. Contract-
ing templates are provided in the appendix of some IDP guides.
Most IDP guides address the need for adding a design facilitator to the project team, to 
manage integration and design process. He/she should have a broad knowledge of both 
architectural and engineering skills and the skills of communication, project manage-
ment and mediation. These skills could be obtained through extensive working experi-
ence with multidisciplinary projects with a focus on holistic and sustainable design, or 
through education in a multidisciplinary programme, which combines architecture and 
engineering.
Adding further disciplines to a design team in the early phases will require more time 
for iterations to facilitate the iterative process of integrating multidisciplinary inputs in 
the building design. In general, the initial design in the different IDP guides cover all the 
work of the early design phases, as outlined in the Description of Services, in one collec-
tive phase. It is argued that spending more time on the initial design will not extend the 
total time span of a building project process, since the thorough and well-coordinated 
design will reduce the time spent on redesigns in the detailed design phase and con-
struction.
Part 1
==PAGE:100==
We must remember, that qualitative 
research is not quantitative research 
with the numbers missing
- Alan Bryman
“
==PAGE:101==
PART 2
How can technical knowledge in the ﬁelds of urban microclimate comfort, daylight and 
energy performance be implemented and add value to the design processes?
Case study on implementation of engineering knowledge 
The following chapter address the second research sub-question. As part of this Master Thesis, a 
case study in an architectural studio was conducted. The aim of the case study was to explore the 
feasibility of implementing methods and principles of an integrated design process in the current 
framework of the building industry. Understanding from 6 years of studies in architectural engineer-
ing along with experiences from internships and student jobs in an engineering consultancy have 
provided insights to the methods and process of engineering in building design. Motivations and 
obstacles for change can thus be identified from an engineering perspective; however, if sugges-
tions for changes within the building industry are to be feasible, a similar understanding of other 
disciplines is needed. Hence, a 9 week case study on an early state building project was conducted, 
where the thesis’ authors joined a project design team. 
As a supplement to the case study, further insight to architecture studios was obtained through a 
questionnaire. The questionnaire address the attitude towards integrated design, and the level of 
knowledge and approach to technical knowledge in the design process. The results of the ques-
tionnaire are hence a form of mapping of the ‘profile’ of the architectural studio. Questionnaire re-
sponses were collected in several architecture studios to provide context to the profile of individual 
studios.
To further explore the methods and process of architects, and the mechanisms that drive architec-
tural design, a focus group was conducted with the project design team. The aim of the focus group 
was to gain clarification on the findings from case study and questionnaire.
The last part of the chapter contains a recap on the findings from case study, questionnaire, and 
focus group and a sub-conclusion on the investigated research sub-question 2.
==PAGE:102==
102
Collaboration and Integration of Engieering in Building Design Processes
DATA COLLECTION
& ANALYSIS
DATA COLLECTION
& ANALYSIS
FINDINGS
FINDINGS
RECAP
PART 2 SUB-
CONCLUSION
PART 2 
SUB-
QUESTION 
CASE STUDY
OBSERVATIONS 
STUDIO PROFILES
QUESTIONNAIRE
FOCUS GROUP
How can technical knowledge in the fi elds of urban microclimate comfort, daylight and energy perfor-
mance be implemented and add value to the design processes?
INSIGHTS
==PAGE:103==
103
Based on the findings from part 1, it can be seen that problems with collaboration and communi-
cation is partly caused by traditions and norms in the building industry. The research in this thesis 
therefore trespass the line of classic engineering academia, as investigations in the field of collab-
oration and communication should include social research methods. This thesis contains a case 
study, a questionnaire and a focus group, as the findings from the each of the research areas must be 
supported by multiple sources of data, based on both quantitative and qualitative approaches. This 
section will describe the overall methods in social research. The specific methods of the case study, 
questionnaire and focus group can be found in the individual sections (see page 105, 135 and 155). 
For this thesis, a case study, a questionnaire and a focus group have been conducted. In the case 
study, the authors of this thesis have had the opportunity to participate in a design team of a 
sizeable building design project at a large architectural studio. The authors have participated 
with both passive- and active approaches, as the two have different benefits and pitfalls. The 
passive approach can be beneficial in the beginning of projects, to get ‘uninterrupted’ observa-
tions of the design processes of the design team. The active approach can be beneficial when 
observing how the design team copes with new ways of doing projects, by receiving inputs from 
architectural engineers in the early design phases. 
Traditionally, case study observations are believed to be conducted with the researchers being 
a fly on the wall. The researcher could not have interactions with the people being observed, as 
it was perceived to be interfering with the social behaviour of the participants. However, (Yin, 
2003) argues, that participant observations provide a distinct opportunity to portray case study 
phenomena as perceived from within the subject of investigation and that this is “invaluable in 
producing an ‘accurate’ portrayal. Under some circumstances, this approach to case study evidence 
may be just the right approach” (Yin, 2003). 
The combination of conducting both a case study, a questionnaire and a focus group, entails the 
social-research of this thesis to be of both a qualitative- and quantitative nature. The case study 
and focus group are part of a qualitative research method, where the questionnaire is of a quan-
titative research method (Bryman, 2008; Krueger, 2002). The combination of the qualitative and 
quantitative approach provides a more complete understanding of the research problem rather 
than either approach alone. This is called mixed methods research. In this thesis, the conver-
gent parallel mixed method applies, as the quantitative and qualitative data is merged to pro-
vide a comprehensive analysis of the research problem. In this method, both research methods 
are used roughly at the same time, and then integrating the information in the interpretation of 
the overall results (Creswell, 2013). 
In the previous part of this thesis report, the challenges with integrated design was identified 
to be related to communication and collaboration, which again is partly related to personality 
and emotional intelligence. The challenges are thus partly of a socio-cultural nature. There are 
multiple sources of data for collecting evidence, when conducting socio-cultural studies as part 
of academic research. According to the American social scientist Yin, the most common sources 
are documents, archival records, interviews, direct- and participant observation, and physical 
artefacts. 
SOCIAL RESEARCH AND DATA COLLECTION
Part 2
==PAGE:104==
104
Collaboration and Integration of Engieering in Building Design Processes
Both documents and archival records are exact data and can contain details of events, possibly sev-
eral events over a long period of time, which gives the researcher a broad coverage (Yin, 2003). This 
is very beneficial as case studies for practical reasons have a limited time span. Documents however, 
can be bias by a number of factors such as selectivity (if the collection is incomplete) or the docu-
ments can reflect an unknown bias of the author, i.e. reporting bias (Yin, 2003). For this thesis, both 
documents and archival records are used to understand the context of case study by investigating the 
architectural studio as well as get an understanding of the progress and status of the design project 
for the case study. 
Interviews cover regular interviews and questionnaires, but also more qualitative forms such as 
semi-structured- and unstructured interviews, and focus groups (Yin, 2003). Interviews provide a high 
level of insight as they are targeted to focus directly on the case study topic. Interviews are, however, 
associated with many pitfalls, which can be a severe weakness if the researcher is not paying these 
issues attention.
As with interviews, observations can provide valuable insight to the phenomena of interest when it 
is ‘live’ and not historical as relevant behaviours can be observed. Participant observations provide 
a distinctive opportunity to perceive reality from the viewpoint of someone ‘inside’ the case study 
rather than externals. Some says, this is the only way to produce ‘accurate’ portraits of a case study 
phenomenon (Yin, 2003). Observation methods are associated with a long list of weaknesses and 
pitfalls concerning manipulation and biases (Yin, 2003). The strengths and weaknesses of interviews 
and observations will be elaborated in the following sections (page 112, 137 and 157). 
Physical or cultural artefacts, such as artwork or technological devices, tools or instruments, are 
rarely relevant in case studies (Yin, 2003). They are also not included in the data collection strategy 
for this thesis project.
Thus, individual sources of evidence cannot stand alone, but must be supported by one of the three 
principles of data collection to secure valid and reliable results from the case study:
 
>
Multiple sources of evidence e.g. two or more sources supporting each other
 
>
Case study database e.g. a formal assembly of evidence distinct from the final case study report
 
>
Chain of evidence e.g. explicit links between the questions asked, the data collected, and the 
conclusions drawn
In this thesis, multiple sources of evidence will be used to support each other. This is done through 
passive- and active observations in a case study, quantitative data from a questionnaire, and lastly a 
focus group. All the socio-cultural studies will be supported by the findings from the literature study 
in part 1 (see page 60 and 92) 
==PAGE:105==
105
The case study was undertaken at the architecture studio Studio A (see page 107 for more 
info on Studio A). General observations of the work culture within the office is of interest to 
the case study, in order to explore the mechanisms that influence the way an architectural 
company is run and consequently how individuals and/or teams work within a specific project. 
Does it match the profile of Studio A in general and how is their cooperation with engineers? 
The following sections contain an outline the case study method applied along with a de-
scription of the architectural company and project, which were the subject of this case study. 
This is followed by a presentation of observations and finding made during the case study.
Thesis speciﬁc theory & method
The case study was a way to gain insight into the design processes of architects. It is 
important to understand the mechanisms and methods of both engineers and architects, 
to succeed in integrating the two in a collaborative design process. Essentially a case 
study tries to “illuminate a decision or set of decisions: why they were taken, how they were 
implemented, and with what result” (Schramm as in Yin, 2003). By doing a case study, it 
was possible to retain the holistic and meaningful characteristics of real-life event (Yin, 
2003). Differences and consistencies can be identified through comprehension of the 
working methods of both engineers and architects and thus enable the creation of a tan-
gible guide or set of tools for implementing technical aspects in the early design phases 
and integration of multiple disciplines.
A case study is by definition social research and hence heavily reliant on qualitative 
research methods, where subjectivity of the researcher is a dilemma and the topic of 
ongoing debate. 
Case studies have long been stereotyped as a weak sibling among social science meth-
ods (Yin, 2003), and “investigators who do case studies are regarding as having downgraded 
their academic disciplines”. Validation and reliability of data is thus an issue, which will be 
thoroughly addressed in the following.
For the current case study, which lasted 9 weeks, the following research strategy and 
data collection was applied:
Observations, both direct (passive) and participant, made during the case study gave 
insight to the work method of the studio and the approach towards implementing tech-
nical knowledge in the early design phases.
The intention of direct observations is to detect phenomena of interest and relevant 
CASE STUDY 
Part 2
==PAGE:106==
106
Collaboration and Integration of Engieering in Building Design Processes
behaviours, by passively observing activities and social interactions ‘live’ (Yin, 2003). It 
is important to be aware of reflexivity, i.e. the fact that an event may proceed differently 
because it is being observed (Yin, 2003), in order to minimise the effect the observer may 
have on the environment she/he is trying to observe.
The participant observer, on the contrary, takes on a role within the investigated envi-
ronment. The participant observer can have casual interactions or undertake specific 
functional activities (Yin, 2003). This form of observations provides a unique opportunity 
to study phenomena as they are perceived by the individuals he/she is trying to observe. 
Participant observations is a way to produce ‘accurate’ portraits of a phenomenon and to 
perceive “reality” from the viewpoint of someone within the environment being studied 
(Yin, 2003). The participant observer will arguably draw more attention than the passive, 
direct observer, hence the observer’s influence on events and reflexivity could potentially 
be even greater.
During the case study, observations were accompanied by a semi-structured interview. 
4 weeks into the case study a meeting was scheduled with the lead architect and the 
head of research and sustainability, which was also contact person. The meeting had 
a set agenda (see Appendix C) and can be classified as a guided conversation, i.e. a 
semi-structured interview. A recording of the meeting can be found in Appendix D (sound 
file). The interview guide contained items of clarification of different observations and 
findings from the first weeks of the case study, such as project history, team formation, 
team coordination and communication. The semi-structured interview was thus a way to 
supplement and support the data collected from observations, documents and archival 
records available on the Case project. 
==PAGE:107==
107
Studio A
The following description of the architectural studio, where the case study was con-
ducted. In order to understand the mechanisms that influence how the architectural 
studio carries out projects, it is important to understand how they perceive themselves 
and their approach to building design. The following description is thus mainly adopted 
from the company web page and will act as a backdrop for comparison of the findings 
presented in the following.
Studio A is a large, international architectural company with projects in 12 countries. 
There are more than 900 employees in the 16 offices located in Denmark, Sweden, En-
gland and Norway. The company was created in 1951, and has strong values in their 
shared ownership; today, more than half of the employees owns shares in the company, 
and almost a tenth of the employees are partners. The main idea of having the employ-
ees as co-owners is that the company keep evolving by knowing what happens on each 
organisational level. The core competencies of the company lie within the environment, 
sustainable urban planning and healthcare projects (Studio A Arkitekter - Historie, 2017). 
Sustainability is therefore a big part of the Studio A company. According to their website, 
they have a Studio A Innovation Process (WIP), uses Sustainable Integrated Design and 
has an environmental and quality management system called Studio AQ. Research and 
development also has a major role in the company, where they focus on knowledge-shar-
ing. A department called Dsearch focuses on developing methods and research within 
parametric design in the design process. 
On their website, they write regarding energy and indoor environment that “It is not a 
hindrance, but it complements the architecture and helps to provide well-rounded results” 
(translated from Danish) 
The Studio A office is not founded by Studio A as part of a natural expansion as many 
of the other offices, but is an acquisition of the Danish studio HS ARK. The studio was 
acquired by Studio A in 2006, and today there are Danish Studio A offices in Copenhagen, 
Næstved and Holeby. 
The Studio A Copenhagen office has 34 employees consisting mainly of architects, but 
also a few landscape architects, construction architects and project managers besides 
the administrative employees (Studio A Arkitekter - København, 2017). In the Swedish 
Studio A offices, there are a lot wider variety of professions, e.g. building engineers, envi-
ronmental specialists, interior designers, anthropologists, lighting designer etc. The com-
petencies within the whole organisation is available for all offices, even if not co-located. 
Part 2
CONFIDENTIAL
==PAGE:108==
108
Collaboration and Integration of Engieering in Building Design Processes
Course of the case study 
When the case study was initiated, the plan was to mainly focus on the Case project. The 
start date was based on the course of the project, but due to project delays, client meet-
ings and lack of resources, introduction to the project was not given until week two. The 
first week was therefore spent on another project, Project, which continued throughout 
the case study (see appendix E). 
For the first three weeks, a passive approach to the design team and project in general 
was applied. Contributions to the project would only be given, when asked directly. This 
was due taking passive observations on how the team worked, without interference from 
‘newcomers’. Also, it was interesting to see what kind of tasks they would request from 
two engineering students, i.e. what do they expect when having early collaboration with 
in-house engineers on the design team. The competencies of the thesis authors were 
elaborated to the head of sustainability, the contact person, and to the lead architect 
on the Case project before the case study was initiated. Everyone else in the office had 
received an information email, regarding two architectural engineering students doing 
an internship at the office, and it was announced that everyone could ask for engineering 
assistance, if wanted.  
For the following six weeks, a more participating role was undertaken. Observations 
would still be noted, but it would be on how the architects coped with information, 
which they would not normally receive in this stage of the project, and which they did 
not ask for themselves i.e. information they did not know they needed. Instead of waiting 
WEEK 1
PASSIVE
WEEK 2
WEEK 6
WEEK 4
ACTIVE
WEEK 8
WEEK 3
WEEK 7
WEEK 5
WEEK 9
Project
Daylight analysis 
Case
Shadow studies
Case
Parametric facade
Case & Project
Parametric facade
Daylight analysis
Energy calculation
Case 
Parametric facade
Daylight analysis
Energy calculation
Case 
Parametric facade
Energy calculation
Case 
Portfolio 
Case 
Portfolio 
Case
Introduction
Figure 16 - Course of the case study and the technical scientific information infused  
in the design process by the authors. 
==PAGE:109==
109
for the architects to directly ask for contributions, contributions were made in regards 
of daylight analysis, energy simulations and façade design and then presented. When an 
opportunity for contributions were seen, actions were made.
A daily log was kept during time of the case study, which has been used to keep track 
of both actions, actors, deadlines and observations. The log can be found (in Danish) in 
Appendix E.
Case project facts
The specific case was a new large multipurpose building in the centre of Case. The build-
ing features a shopping centre for retail, a hotel, restaurant and sky bar, cinema, fitness/
wellness, and housing. The building was approximately 100,000 m2 with a ‘base’ of 13 
floors and a hotel/residential tower of 17 floors, adding up to a total height of 98.5 m 
above terrain.  
Figure 17 - The Case project in Case as presented in the latest portfolio
Figure 18 - The Case project in Case as presented in the latest portfolio
Part 2
CONFIDENTIAL
==PAGE:110==
110
Collaboration and Integration of Engieering in Building Design Processes
The case project had very high ambitions within all aspects of sustainability and aims for 
best practise and to become a model example in ‘mixed-use’ buildings of high density. 
External innovation funding was obtained to explore and exploit advanced energy de-
sign strategies in the mixed-use building project. The project strived to comply with the 
‘BREEAM NOR Excellent’ sustainability certification as a minimum.
The project has been underway since 2015, when Studio A Architects won the design 
competition. Due to the size of the building lot, the building has a local planning act of 
its own, and since design proposal is not feasible in current plan for development in the 
area of Case city centre, the plans are to be processed for approval by the agency of the 
Case municipality. Once the project is approved, a Design – Build contract is pending, 
however, the project is currently developing at a schematic level with architects and 
landscaping as the only disciplines involved so far. The Norwegian process for approval 
of new development plans is different from the Danish, mainly in the sense, that it is 
very lengthy. Hence, the design process of the project also differs from that of a ‘normal’ 
project.
The owner and lead architect has had an ongoing dialogue about the design, since the 
design competition was won. The work committed during the case study was working 
towards a final hand-in for the Case municipality, as the current design requires changes 
in the local plan.
Due to the long process of the project, the design team has changed since the compe-
tition in 2015. Multiple people have been involved in the project on and off, and only 
one person has been a consistent part of the design team throughout the entire process. 
Until recently, two people have been working full time on the project, however due to 
practicalities several people are currently allocated part time to the project team. During 
the case study, the design team has consisted of a lead architect/project manager, four 
additional architects, of whom one is head of sustainability, and one landscape architect 
have been allocated part time.
CONFIDENTIAL
==PAGE:111==
111
08.05.2015
Contest proposal
Portfolio
 
>
100.000 m2 (assumed incl. basement)
 
>
13-20 floors (without/with tower)
 
>
42-67 m (without/with tower) 
 
>
Rounded corners 
 
>
Straight facade 
12.10.2016
Planproposal - sketch 
Client presentation
 
>
80.595 m2 (above terrain) 
 
>
21 floors 
 
>
78 m 
 
>
Sharp corners 
 
>
Straight facade 
31.05.2017
Planproposal - final hand-in 
Portfolio
 
>
Assuming 92.000 m2 (above terrain)
 
>
30 floors 
 
>
102,5 m 
 
>
Sharp corners 
 
>
Parametric facade 
04.04.2017 
Planproposal - concept and facade 
Client presentation
 
>
92.000 m2 (above terrain)
 
>
30 floors 
 
>
100 m 
 
>
Sharp corners 
 
>
Parametric facade 
Start of case study 
Figure 19 - Overview of the development of the Case project
Part 2
CONFIDENTIAL
==PAGE:112==
112
Collaboration and Integration of Engieering in Building Design Processes
Observations 
The following section outlines general observations made in the architectural studio during 
the case study concerning the culture in the office, which relates to the way project work is 
done and hence to the design process and design culture of the studio in general. Fur-
thermore, observations on specific case study project related themes are presented. These 
provide a more detailed insight to the specific design process and approach to design in the 
case study project. 
Social culture and professional mind-set
Observations of the social culture in a workplace can tell something about the working 
environment and general attitude towards the work place in terms of motivation and 
job satisfaction. The social culture and social interactions among employees in general 
can tell something about the general working culture. If there is a good work culture 
and employees feel satisfied and safe in their jobs, the first levels in Maslow’s hierarchy 
of needs are fulfilled, hence a need for social interaction with others become prevailing.
The atmosphere in the office was very social. There was joint breakfast every day at 9.30, 
cake on Thursday afternoons, and social events after office hours every Friday. Competi-
tion wins and new projects were celebrated with a bell ring and a glass of bubbles for 
everyone. Lunch was not organised by the company; however, everyone came together in 
the communal kitchen to sit down and have lunch together.
The working environment was characterised by a high level of focus. There was very 
little small talk in the office, except for in the communal kitchen, where employees came 
together for breaks and to get coffee. Most employees had headphones on when sitting 
at their desks working, and work related conversations were usually held in meeting 
rooms to not disturb colleagues. The focused attitude towards the work tasks show that 
the employees take their work very seriously and are passionate and motivated to do 
a good job and design great projects. From this, it must be assumed that the attitude 
towards having two engineering students on board a project will be positive, as it could 
bring value and contribute to the overall quality of the work.
Natural curiosity 
In the first week of the case study, many architects approached the thesis authors out 
of interest in how the engineers could contribute to their projects. Some architects had 
clear ideas of how their projects could benefit by engineering inputs; Other architects 
==PAGE:113==
113
saw a possibility to be taught by engineers how to use specific programs and hence 
improve their skills; Others were interested in hearing how the authors would be able 
contribute to a specific project.  
The authors’ way in to the project
The case study was arranged by the thesis supervisor, Lotte Bjerregaard Jensen, through 
her contact person at Studio A, the Head of Research and Sustainability. After a few meet-
ings and emailing back and forth, an appropriate project was picked for the case study. 
The lead architect/project manager of the specific project was not part of the conversa-
tions regarding the aim and scope of the case study. 
It seemed that the employees in general and the lead architect on the Case project was 
not entirely sure how to utilise the work force provided by having two architectural 
engineering students. In general, there was some hesitation about wanting inputs even 
though interest was shown. This might be because the lead architect was not entirely 
sure what the scope of the collaboration of this case study was, since he had merely 
agreed to expand the team with two architectural engineers and not been part of the 
preliminary meetings about the case study. Hence, he might not have been fully aware 
how and what architectural engineers were capable of contributing to the project. Since 
each profession is experts within each their fields, it is their responsibility to communi-
cate what and how they can contribute to the design. Hence, the authors showed how 
they were able to contribute to the integration of technical knowledge in the design de-
velopment, through active participating in the project in case study week 3-9 (see page 
116-127 for elaboration on contributions)
Project management
The first impressions were that the project team was quite unorganised and that no one 
really knew details of the design development plan, what other team members were 
working on and why. A critical reason for this might have been that most design meet-
ings were held 1:1 and the entire team rarely was gathered. The lead architect distribut-
ed the tasks and held individual meetings with the assigned person about the work and 
design development in the specific area. It was thus only the lead architect who had the 
full overview of design decisions and development. The project team and management 
was thus very fragmented. The lack of overview and insight for individual team members 
repeatedly caused issues with e.g. inconsistency in file management, overlapping work of 
multiple team members due to lack of coordination, misunderstandings about deadlines, 
etc. 
Part 2
==PAGE:114==
114
Collaboration and Integration of Engieering in Building Design Processes
Good intentions
In June 2016, a large engineering consultancy made a report of wind analysis of three 
variations of the building design. From the report, the challenges concerning wind condi-
tions and outdoor comfort of pedestrians, as well as different effects the building design, 
were outlined. The building design had developed since the report was made, however, 
it was not clear whether the results of the report had been contemplated in the design 
development. Further wind analysis of the updated design had not been made. From the 
semi-structured interview with the lead architect it was made clear, that this was due to 
client hesitation about spending the money on a new analysis. 
A document addressing sustainability in the project was drafted in December 2016. The 
document contained measureable goals for different aspects of the building design. It 
also presented ideas of collaboration schemes and which actors to invite to participate 
in specific phases, among other. However, the document had no immediate application 
in the project so far. 
External innovation funding was obtained to explore and exploit advanced energy de-
sign strategies in the mixed-use building project. The building design and function lay-
out was still developing, and will continue to do so throughout the approval process of 
the Case municipality, which is expected complete in the summer of 2019. Because the 
design was not yet settled, the client and/or project team were hesitant about commenc-
ing the work with the energy design. It was thought to be on a level of detail to where 
the project was not yet advanced. Thus, the energy strategy and design would not influ-
ence the schematic design and e.g. overall geometry of the building design. A potential 
for exploiting passive energy strategies was not harnessed to the fullest. 
A Design – Build contract was pending, however the contractor and sub-consultants 
would not be appointed until the project plans were approved. Aspects such as construc-
tion cost, buildability, and principles for structural concepts and technical installations 
were not necessarily considered sufficiently in the schematic design, since the expert 
knowledge of the respective trades had not been present in the design process.
Examples of inputs and communications 
On the following pages, four examples on observations during active participation, is 
described in depth. The examples are the result of the main inputs given by the authors 
to the design team, and concerns shadow studies, parametric façade layout, daylight 
analysis and energy performance calculations. 
==PAGE:115==
115
The examples presented in the following represent the majority of the work done by 
the authors of this thesis during the case study and were hence the main inputs to the 
design team. Each of the examples represent days or weeks of work, through many itera-
tions. Not all the examples are on purely technical aspects, which makes it interesting as 
the line between the engineering and architectural profession is crossed. 
On the following pages, the four examples are described by first addressing the inputs 
with a ‘why’, ‘how’ and ‘what’ followed by the outcome with a ‘response’, ‘implementation’ 
and “perspective”. Images of the inputs can be seen under the ‘what’ category.  The ex-
amples will be used to make the observational findings more tangible, and as reasoning 
for the perspectives drawn. Also, it will show the technical engineering tasks performed 
by the authors. 
The studies and simulations were conducted in Grasshopper, utilising the components 
from the Honeybee and Ladybug plug-in. As described in ‘Integrated Energy Design’ on 
page 88, Grasshopper links to Rhinoceros, which meant that the architectural model – for 
a large part – could be used as base geometry in the analysis. 
Ladybug is described by its creators as “an open source environmental plugin for Grasshopper3D 
that helps architects and engineers create an environmentally-conscious architectural design. La-
dybug imports standard EnergyPlus Weather files (.EPW) into Grasshopper and provides a variety of 
3D interactive graphics to support the decision-making process during the initial stages of design” 
(Roudsari, 2016). 
Ladybug can import weather data from several locations worldwide; in the examples shown on 
the following pages, an EnergyPlus weather file for Case is used. The environmental plugin can 
therefore show both temperatures, wind rose, solar path as well as multiple other environmen-
tal data for the specific location. The plugin is used for the shadow studies as well as studies 
on radiation and sunlight-hour analysis. However, only the shadow studies are included in the 
shown material in this thesis. The ladybug  weather import component is fundamental for the 
honeybee plugin to function. 
Honeybee is described in the Honeybee-primer as a program that “connects Grasshopper3D to 
EnergyPlus, Radiance, Daysim and OpenStudio for building energy and daylighting simulation. The 
Honeybee project intends to make many of the features of these simulation tools available in a 
parametric way. You need to have Ladybug installed in order to run Honeybee” (Farke et al., 2014). 
Honeybee is in the following examples used for simulation of daylight levels and energy per-
formance. 
For the parametric façade example, the built-in components for Grasshopper are used, as well 
as some Panelling tools. 
Part 2
==PAGE:116==
The lead architect gave an example of previous shadow diagrams to create an idea of the outcome, and ex-
pected similar. It was tried to challenge their usual way of doing shadow studies by asking if they could use 
more quantitative analysis, where e.g. the sun hours on street level was measured instead of purely having a 
static top-view picture of the building and surroundings. However, it was not required for the current state of 
the project, and time was better spent elsewhere. 
116
Collaboration and Integration of Engieering in Building Design Processes
In connection with the client presentation in the beginning of the case study, shadow studies on the building 
and surroundings had to be made. It was not clear whether these studies were to be used for analysis and 
design development or were thought as a retrospective examination of the design. 
Shadow diagrams
WHY
HOW
WHAT
IMPLEMENTATION
PERSPECTIVE
RESPONSE
Different possibilities for conducting the shadow studies was explored. As updates to the Rhino model were 
continuously ongoing right up to the deadline for the presentation, the shadow studies would have to be 
made quickly, once the model was ready.
A Grasshopper script was set up to run on the Rhino model once this was ready. However, the Rhino model 
was very heavy, which caused some difficulties in connection to available computer power. Test analysis were 
made with the embedded Rhino render tool for sun options. The possibilities of the tool were explored while 
waiting for the finalised Rhino model. Once it was ready, approximately 15 minutes was spent running the 
analysis.
There was no response to the shadow diagrams when communicated to the lead architect. 
Joint design meetings or sessions were not held, so the shadow diagrams were set up in a quick layout and 
sent it to the lead architect in an email. From the final presentation material, it was evident that the shad-
ow studies were not used for analysis and design development, yet they were included in the presentation 
material in the same layout as used to present to lead architect. Even if not used to develop the design, the 
diagrams were still value-adding in a validating way.  
There was a great unused potential for adding value to the design process, by actively using the shadow 
studies, but they were not exploited.
==PAGE:117==
117
FORSLAG E
SOLSTUDIER - JUNI
21. juni kl 15:00
21. juni kl 18:00
21. juni kl 09:00
21. juni kl 12:00
SKYGGEDIAGRAMMER - MARTS
21. marts kl 09:00
21. marts kl 12:00
21. marts kl 15:00
21. marts kl 18:00
Part 2
CONFIDENTIAL
==PAGE:118==
118
Collaboration and Integration of Engieering in Building Design Processes
The process might be more important than the result when designing, especially when having different dis-
ciplines working together. By gaining insight in each other’s work, potentials could be found. 
The hotel façade was made up of panels, where the outer glass was angled compared to the façade. The same 
panel could be turned either way and thus make up two different types – A and B. The layout of the façade 
panels should have a randomised expression in the pattern made up of panels.
Parametric façade layout
WHY
HOW
WHAT
IMPLEMENTATION
PERSPECTIVE
RESPONSE
A script for randomisation of the panels was set up in Grasshopper. A random function was connected with a 
seed and ratio of A and B panels. Hence the level of randomisation, i.e. the distribution in the layout pattern 
could be controlled along with the number of A panels compared to B panels.
In the first instance, the lead architect felt there were too many larger clusters of the same panel, either AA 
or B, in the façade layout. The fully randomised structure was too uncontrolled. What he wanted was a sort of 
structured non-structure, where the layout seems accidental, but at the same time structured enough to not 
have great fluctuations in the pattern of the A and B types.
Once the script had been altered to accommodate the wish for control of the layout pattern, the lead architect 
was run through the process of working with the script. He was thus able to make alterations to the seed and 
ratio and thus be able to see the expression of the façade change, until he found the desired balance. The 
lead architect said he was “really impressed”.
The mathematical expression had to be changed several times after dialogues with lead architect. The facade 
design is a major design decision, where the parametrically structure is great for rapid changes and feedback.
In the final design of the façade layout, the script was not applied. This was due to the difference in expres-
sion of the model and the rendered images of the façade. However, the process of working with the design in 
collaboration was good in the sense that it gave insight to the involved parties. The architect actually seemed 
surprised to see the potential of the tool. This was a break through. 
This example shows two different kinds of design process; the first, where the technical input functions as 
an assistant to the architect. It is more difficult to express exactly what you want from a design that to look 
at a design proposal, and determine, that it is not what you want. It is easier to work from a suggestion than 
a blank canvas. However, from the example above, it is obvious that a design collaboration, where you gain 
insight to the tricky parts of the work of the disciplines you have to work with, a higher level of ownership for 
the design from all involved disciplines is obtained.
==PAGE:119==
Checkboard structure
The render of one of the “ABAB” proposals is by one of the architects on the team
Random structure
The render of the random proposal is by one of the architects on the team
119
The facade of the crystal and tower is formed parametrically, as 
the design should be structurized in a pattern, yet random. This 
is possible to mathematically express in Rhino Grasshopper. The 
following illustrations show purple or green windows, which is a 
placeholder for an A or B type window. 
Part 2
CONFIDENTIAL
==PAGE:120==
120
Collaboration and Integration of Engieering in Building Design Processes
Daylight in hotel rooms 
WHY
HOW
WHAT
IMPLEMENTATION
RESPONSE 
PERSPECTIVE
An analysis of the daylight levels in the hotel room was conducted in Grasshopper, to check compliance with 
requirements and explore different façade layout options. One of the options was adding a 900 mm parapet 
to the inner façade element in the double-skin, which turned out to not having significant influence on day-
light levels in the room. This investigation was made in correlation with the energy consumption analysis, 
which is elaborated on the next page. 
The daylight analysis of the inward corner rooms was not commented on, and the idea of having a parapet 
was not received with great enthusiasm from the lead architect. It is known that all glass area approximately 
from the floor level to regular parapet height, does not affect the daylight level, but contributes a lot to over-
heating issues. By considering alternative solutions of how to minimise overheating in a glass façade building 
in the early design phases, future problems might be avoided. 
As usual in architectural projects there was a certain focus on daylight levels in the rooms. In the current 
state, the hotel has a full glass, double-skin façade. Internal shutters are planned as solar shading and block 
view. It was discussed with the lead architect to design the shutters parametrically based on the amount of 
sunlight on the façade and the required level of daylight in the respective rooms. However, this level of detail 
was too high for the current state of the project.
The daylight levels were sufficient in most rooms, as it could be argued that the parts of the room farthest 
away from the window was not meant for stay.  However, the daylight levels in the rooms oriented north and 
placed in a tight corner of the star shaped building are challenged. 
None of the suggested options were considered, due to the level of detail in the hand-in. The project team 
were aware of possible challenges that will need to be addressed down the line of the project process, how-
ever, there was no initiative to deal with detailing. 
Thought had been given to leaving some external wall panels free of glass and thus addressing thermal 
conditions in the hotel rooms. This is as good an alternative to the suggested parapet. Thought has also been 
given to change the floor plans, so service functions are placed in the narrow inward corners with little day-
light, but changes in the overall design is not considered for daylight optimisation.
The architects know they must make changes later in the design process, but they do not consider the issues 
they know are to come. This is mainly due to the hand-in being legally binding, hence the information level 
must be kept high enough for the proposal to pass, yet not so high that the architects are bound in their de-
sign decisions later. Also, resources and workhours are limited before the deadline, hence no major dialogues 
on the design can be taken. 
==PAGE:121==
121
OSLO PROJECT
03 Daylight 
Outer frame:  
 
 
5 cm
Inner frame: 
 
 
5 cm
Brystning: 
 
 
80 cm
Light transmittance windows:  
75 % 
Grid distance from walls:  
50 cm
CIE OVERCAST SKY
Average daylight factor: 
2,34 % 
Floor area with DF above 2 %:
39,9 %
CLOUDY 
Average daylight factor:
1,86 % 
Floor area with DF above 2 %:
31,3 %
315 mm
120 mm
720 mm
2400 mm
OSLO PROJECT
02 Daylight 
Outer frame:  
 
 
5 cm
Inner frame: 
 
 
10 cm
Brystning: 
 
 
0 cm
Light transmittance windows:  
75 % 
Grid distance from walls:  
50 cm
CIE OVERCAST SKY
Average daylight factor: 
2,05 % 
Floor area with DF above 2 %:
36,4 %
CLOUDY 
Average daylight factor:
1,63 % 
Floor area with DF above 2 %:
28,8 %
315 mm
120 mm
720 mm
2400 mm
OSLO PROJECT
01 Daylight 
Outer frame:  
 
 
5 cm
Inner frame: 
 
 
5 cm
Brystning: 
 
 
0 cm
Light transmittance windows:  
75 % 
Grid distance from walls:  
50 cm
CIE OVERCAST SKY
Average daylight factor: 
2,35 % 
Floor area with DF above 2 %:
39,9 %
CLOUDY 
Average daylight factor:
1,86 % 
Floor area with DF above 2 %:
32,0 %
315 mm
120 mm
720 mm
2400 mm
8.0 <
6.5
5.0
3.5
<2.0
8.0 <
6.5
5.0
3.5
<2.0
8.0 <
6.5
5.0
3.5
<2.0
Part 2
CONFIDENTIAL
==PAGE:122==
The results of the analysis, showing a rise or fall in thermal energy consumption depending on the angle of 
the outer glass and the orientation, were sent to the design team working on finalising the façade design. 
122
Collaboration and Integration of Engieering in Building Design Processes
As stated above the hotel has a full glass, double-skin façade. The double-skin is meant as a thermal buffer 
to exploit passive heating and cooling in the hotel rooms, throughout the year. Thermal energy analysis was 
hence conducted to explore the thermal possibilities of the double-skin façade.
Energy consumption
WHY
HOW
WHAT
IMPLEMENTATION
PERSPECTIVE
RESPONSE
The outer glass layer in the double-skin panel was angled compared to the façade, hence an investigation of 
the thermal energy consumption with different angles in different orientations (0-45 degrees, N/S/E/W) was 
conducted. The analysis was run in Grasshopper, with default settings for schedules and thermal loads. The 
aim of the analysis was to compare different designs, not to gain detailed insight and very precise results, 
hence default inputs to the calculation model were deemed sufficient.
For practical reasons a joint design meeting or workshop was not possible, hence the communication con-
cerning the consequences of different design alternatives had to happen via email. There was no immediate 
response to the email or analysis results.
The considerations about energy were not taken into the final design of the facade layout because the de-
sign team was too busy with the rest of the design. In the final layout, the modules all had the same angles, 
but different depths. This will also have an influence on the energy performance of the facade, however this 
design option was not on the table when the analysis was run.
The way of communicating the results over email might be the leading factor of the results not being imple-
mented. As seen in the process of the parametric randomisation of the facade pattern, having been physically 
present in the office might have given an opportunity to influence the final design. This might have led to 
having dialogues about the window angle instead of sending results on solutions. 
==PAGE:123==
There is a lot higher need for heating than cooling, since it is a cold climate and there is not a 
lot of heat gains from people and/or equipment in a hotel room.
 
>
For a southern oriented facade, the energy consumption (thermal load) increases with an 
increasing angle.
 
>
For a northern oriented facade, the energy consumption decreases with an increasing an-
gle.
 
>
For an eastern oriented facade the heating load increases both with an increase and de-
crease in angle, however the total energy consumption decreases with an increasing angle.
 
>
For a western oriented facade, the heating load increases with an increasing angle, how-
ever the total energy consumption increases both with an increase and decrease in angle. 
It is perhaps an idea to consider different angles for the different facades depending on their 
individual orientation? Something to think about
123
Part 2
CONFIDENTIAL
==PAGE:124==
124
Collaboration and Integration of Engieering in Building Design Processes
Presentation material
During the case study period, two deliverables were completed; a presentation to the 
client on March 31st and a design proposal to the municipality of Case handed in on 
May 31th. By comparing the competition proposal with the deliverables, the design de-
velopment can be tracked, and any influence the authors’ role might have had should be 
visible in the presentation material.
Case rapport
For the final report for the municipality in Case one person in the design team was in 
charge of putting together the layout, while the others finished material to go into the 
report. A meeting was held where tasks and responsibilities were divided. The outline of 
the final report was very loose, so no specific wishes or thoughts were given to the con-
tribution. The authors suggested to prepare different proposals to what could contribute 
and add value to the report content. Sketches of different concepts were therefore cre-
ated and run by the person putting together the report. Existing documents and reports 
on environmental and sustainable design considerations were examined to compile a 
list of the desired content of the technical and sustainability parts of the report. The 
initial wind analysis report, the application for the innovation funding, the brief on sus-
tainability ambitions for the project, etc. were scrutinised, and hand sketches of possible 
illustrations were made.
By visualising complex technical topics on a conceptual level a lot of writing could be cut 
back and the aspects were easier to understand for non-technical people. 
Different visualisation options were explored. Initially different topics were thought best 
communicated in different visualisation methods, e.g. plan, section, elevation, or isomet-
ric. Inspiration for brainstorming was sought online and in other reference sources, e.g. 
‘Design med Viden’ from Henning Larsen Architects (Kongebro et al., 2012). For consis-
tency, it was decided by the authors of this thesis to create a universal isometric repre-
sentation of the entire building to use as a backdrop for the visualisation of different 
aspects within technical and sustainability topics.
==PAGE:125==
125
For clarity reasons, the isometric diagram produces by the authors became the basis of 
all illustrations communication different aspects of the project, technical as well as ar-
chitectural. The isometric illustration was a way to have a clear visual language through-
out the report, which was easily comprehensible to the reader. The bare diagram became 
a form of a common ground for communication and a way to create a common visual 
language. By using the same diagram for all disciplines, knowledge of other disciplines 
was more easily comprehensible, as one knew what to look for. 
The authors did not in fact influence the design through this case study. With the techni-
cal background, they were however able to comprehend earlier thoughts and initiatives 
on technical and sustainability aspects, and collect them into the final report. As an 
example, the conclusions from the initial wind analysis were applied to the final design, 
and an informative diagram and short text was produced, explaining the initiatives of 
the design, which influence wind conditions, and which measures are taken to reduce 
and minimise issues with wind and discomfort of pedestrians. This was done on several 
different technical and sustainability aspects. 
The following pages holds a collection of some of the technical and sustainability as-
pects illustrated and explained by the authors of this thesis for the presentation material. 
The author’s concept diagrams and explanations are followed by concept diagrams made 
by the rest of the project team, to illustrate how the isometric illustration was utilised 
and hence created a common visual language.  
As the project is handed in in the native language of the building owner, all explanations 
of the concept diagrams will be in Norwegian. The diagrams made by the authors, shown 
on the following pages, are about ‘Intelligent facades’, ‘Wind turbulence reduction’, ‘Local 
energy production’, ‘Innovative heat distribution’, ‘Bio- and solar roof landscape’ and ‘Day-
light optimisation’. 
The diagrams made by other team members, the diagrams are about ‘Public access’, ‘Dif-
ferent scales’, ‘adaption to the urban environment’, ‘place making’, ‘city scale, and ‘flow’. 
See appendix F, Case Report, for the full presentation material. 
Figure 20 - The universal isometric representation of the entire building
Part 2
CONFIDENTIAL
==PAGE:126==
126
Collaboration and Integration of Engieering in Building Design Processes
CONFIDENTIAL
==PAGE:127==
127
Part 2
CONFIDENTIAL
==PAGE:128==
128
Collaboration and Integration of Engieering in Building Design Processes
CONFIDENTIAL
==PAGE:129==
129
Part 2
CONFIDENTIAL
==PAGE:130==
130
Collaboration and Integration of Engieering in Building Design Processes
Findings from case study 
Process over result 
Based on the experiences during the case study it would seem that it is more effective to work 
together side by side on a specific task than dividing all sub-tasks between team members. A 
team member will run several iterations trying to achieve a result that satisfies the lead archi-
tect. However, the desired result is not always clearly stated when entering a design task, but it 
develops as different options are tried out. Going back and forth between design iteration and 
presenting to the lead architect will not necessarily bring a satisfying outcome to the table. 
An example from the case study is the facade layout, see page 118. This finding from the case 
study is in line with many of the IDP guides, which refers to the importance of close design 
team collaboration.
Physical presence encourages collaboration   
From the general observations and experiences throughout the case study (see page 112), it 
is evident that mere physical presence of engineers in an architectural studio encourages the 
desire for technical inputs. The studio does not employ engineers; hence, they do not see a 
need for continuous technical knowledge and inputs in their design process. However, as soon 
as the authors of this thesis entered the office, multiple employees addressed the authors with 
questions and tasks regarding their current projects. They would have sufficed without the 
help of the authors; however, since the authors were there, the architects recognised the value 
of having more disciplines contribute to their projects. The physical presence also invites to 
an open dialogue, as both parties are aware of each other. Also, especially when hiring mul-
tidisciplinary professions, the small talk and insight to each other’s work might broaden the 
horizon for both, hence achieving a clearer image of how and what they can contribute to each 
other’s’ work. As stated in the sub-conclusions of the IDP literature study (see page 98), physi-
cal presence and/or co-location does not necessarily ensure integration. However, the physical 
presence of multiple team members fosters a closer collaboration, since team members gain a 
deeper insight to each other’s work and process. It should be stated that the level of insight to 
the work and process of others is closely related to the interest and curiosity of the individual 
person. As found in the case study conducted prior to this thesis (see Foreword and Appendix G) 
personality and emotional intelligence (EQ) has a high influence on the level of collaboration 
and hence the level of integration in a design process (Jakobsen & Wohlenberg, 2016). 
==PAGE:131==
131
Need for more collective meetings
One lead architect is responsible for the entire design in the Case project. A team of five archi-
tects contributes to the design, but it is the lead architect’s role to manage and implement all 
the contributions. The collaborative arrangement is hence a ‘leader and assistant’ constellation 
in which the design team members deliver information to the lead architect. This process is 
coordinated through 1:1 meetings. The Case project is run on a knowledge-sharing basis, but 
could easily be upgraded to knowledge-integration. Therefore, sometimes misunderstandings 
appear, if somehow, someone is not informed of changes. Most of the time, it is minor misun-
derstandings that down the line can evolve into larger problems. Most often, the team reach a 
common ground, when having face to face-dialogues. When communicating mainly online, one 
can simply choose not to answer the e-mail etc. Additionally, it limits the possibilities to have 
more perspectives on the design. As most of the IDP guides describe, it is of key importance to 
arrange design meetings with the entire design team to secure the consistency and quality in 
the design. 
Timing and presentation is essential when applying engineering in the early 
design phases
The authors of this thesis had the opportunity to participate in design meetings, both as pas-
sive observers (in terms of analysis for this thesis), but also actively participating in design 
discussions and provide inputs to the decision making. However, for various reasons the ma-
jority of the inputs the authors provided have not been taken into account. As stated above, 
it is the responsibility of the expert to communicate the value of inputs and suggestions to 
design changes. However, from the example of the parametric façade design and the isometric 
diagrams, it is evident that presentation and communication is not a dominating obstacle. 
In the different phases of a design process, there are periods appropriate for design devel-
opment and changes, and periods that focus on wrapping up and finishing for a deliverable. 
According to architectural engineer Micki Petersen, distribution of man-hours spent in connec-
tion to certain milestones in the design process is not necessarily optimal, and the timing of 
knowledge-integration is of great importance when compared to level of value added  (Aaen 
Petersen, 2017). Technical inputs are valuable in initial design development phases, hence the 
recommendation for kick-off and design sprint workshops by several IDP guides. However, the 
technical knowledge needs proper presentation showing the influence and added value to the 
design. The elaborate studies on technical aspects such as wind conditions from the initial 
design development phase was thus timed right, however the presentation method may have 
been a hindering for the implementation. Lengthy reports are not easily comprehensible to 
the receiver, and have a tendency of ending up in a desk drawer, forgotten and never applied 
in a decision-making process. A joint workshop as those described in various IDP guides could 
possibly have fostered a common ground for communication and knowledge-sharing and -in-
tegration in the design process. 
Part 2
==PAGE:132==
132
Collaboration and Integration of Engieering in Building Design Processes
Formal obstacles due to traditions causes absence of integration
Multiple aspects of a formal nature disable the integration of technical knowledge. As 
found in Part 1, the building industry is founded on solid traditions. There is a long tra-
dition of architecture studios employing only architects and the initial building design 
being solely architectural. The studio in this case study is part of this tradition, hence the 
pronounced focus on aesthetics in the case project is only natural and expected. 
The focus of the client is to create an iconic landmark in the middle of Case, and a need 
for involving different professions in the early design phases is not addressed. The archi-
tects are paid on an hour-by-hour basis instead of a flat fee. This discourages the archi-
tects from inviting more professions to join them, as the client would have to be involved 
in hiring more companies. A flat fee requires that a temporary organisational structure 
would have to be established, but when applying an hour-by-hour fee, the client is in 
charge of bringing in other professions and their knowledge of the timing. 
Also, the approval processes of the agencies in the municipality have a certain structure, 
like the Danish system, and parts of the design need to be settled before others. In the 
Case project, this means that the information level must be sufficient for approval, but 
not so detailed that changes cannot be made due to the design approval being legally 
binding. The architects know that they must make changes in the design to get an ap-
proval, and in Norway this happens through a lengthy dialogue with the municipality on 
different alternatives. If the architects chose to bring in multiple disciplines, the project 
would be much more expensive, as the redoing of work is currently limited to a team of 
architects, where it could have been for a much larger team. 
==PAGE:133==
133
Design process in design team disable multidisciplinary integration of 
technical knowledge
From research in the field of building design process and integrated design conduct-
ed over the past decades it is evident, that the early design phases are of particular 
importance when incorporating technical knowledge and the aspect of environmental 
sustainability. However, the Case project focuses on optimisation of technical systems 
in the later, detailed design phases. Environmental sustainability is mainly regarded as 
a technical problem, not a design problem. Thus, technical solutions will be applied to 
meet the ambitions of the project. This attitude towards technical aspects typically oc-
curs in the traditional design process as described in part 1 (see page 60). Design is vali-
dated in retrospect, which fosters a ‘leader-assistant’ collaboration mind-set and an ‘us vs 
them’-attitude between architecture and technical trades, e.g. engineers and contractors. 
As stated above, the design process of the case project is iterative due to the approval 
process. The initial design proposal from the competition is continuously refined based 
on client wishes and demands from the municipality. The iterations are of a unilateral 
nature, since they are a refinement of the architectural project, not addressing technical 
aspects. This tie back to the finding from the previous chapter stating that an iterative 
process does not automatically ensure integration (see page 94). An example of this is 
the initial conceptual wind studies, which are not revised along with the updates to the 
architectural design. By refining the architectural design without regarding technical 
aspects, the possibility for technical knowledge to add value and heighten the quality 
in the design is drastically reduced. Technical analysis as a design validation can still be 
conducted and in retrospect confirm the functionality of the design. Thus, adding value 
to the building project.
Part 2
==PAGE:134==
134
Collaboration and Integration of Engieering in Building Design Processes
From case study to questionnaire
The findings of the case study need a perspective in the form of a con-
text of reference; the level of collaboration with multiple disciplines 
and amount of technical knowledge applied in a specific building proj-
ect should be seen in relation to the overall ‘profile’ of the specific 
studio. If a studio is used to working in a multidisciplinary fashion, and 
have a tradition for implementing technical knowledge in the early 
design phases in general, the level of integration in a specific case will 
be relatively high, without influence of the authors.
The observations made during this case study is thus accompanied by 
the result of a questionnaire mapping the level of technical knowl-
edge in the fields of urban microclimate comfort, daylight and ener-
gy performance in multiple architectural studios, in order to compare 
and support the findings from the observation process. The following 
chapter address this questionnaire survey.
==PAGE:135==
135
The purpose of the questionnaire is to provide a context for the observations of Studio A. 
The questionnaire aims to measure the level of technical knowledge in the fields of urban 
microclimate comfort, daylight and energy performance in multiple architectural studios. 
The questionnaire consists of 37 questions, concerning the level of technical knowledge and 
collaboration of the architectural studio in general and of the individual participant. The 
questionnaire is a chain of evidence in the sense that it aims to measure the level of holistic 
thinking and integration in the different studios as a basis for comparison. The questions 
thus ask about the individual’s abilities within multiple technical aspects and the individ-
ual’s opinion about his/her own level of holistic thinking. Conclusions about the actual 
level of holistic approach of the individuals is thus made possible. The survey is distributed 
among multiple studios and the collected data is a formal assembly of data, enabling the 
creation of a ‘profile’ of each studio.
Intro 
The company of Studio A is one of the larger studios in Europe and is certainly a well-re-
nowned brand. The brand is known for being a research company with a broad knowl-
edge on sustainability, but due to the size of the company, the working methods might 
differ between offices, and hence be a purely commercial factor. It is therefore interesting 
to compare the different Studio A offices for design decision disparities, as well as isolate 
the working methods and knowledge of environmental factors in the Studio A office 
from the rest. The following sections contains a description of general questionnaire 
theory applied in construction of questions and the general design of the questionnaire. 
This is followed by the analysis results in the form of an architectural studio ‘profile’. 
These results are compared to general tendencies among a number of larger Copenha-
gen-based studios, in order to provide context for the findings.
The investigation of the Studio A offices is part of a larger research in collaboration with 
a PhD student at the Technical University of Denmark, Mathilde Landgren, aiming to map 
design processes at different architectural studios in Copenhagen. 
When the Copenhagen office can be investigated separately from the other Studio A 
offices, it is possible to compare working methods of Studio A to other Copenhagen 
based studios, which they normally would be associated with. The questionnaire is thus 
conducted at both Studio A offices around Scandinavia and larger Copenhagen based 
studios. The external studios are the nearest “competitors” of the Copenhagen office, and 
it is therefore interesting to see similarities and differences across company borders – 
especially compared to the brands of the different studios. Some of the external studios 
QUESTIONNAIRE 
Part 2
==PAGE:136==
136
Collaboration and Integration of Engieering in Building Design Processes
are known for their integration with different disciplines, others for their traditional 
architectural approach.
The responses of the questionnaire will result in a studio profile with focus on the early 
design phases and implementation of environmental factors in their design decisions. 
The research is ongoing and will be finalised in the second half of 2017. The findings pre-
sented in the following are thus only preliminary. At the current stage, it is only possible 
to see tendencies in the different architectural studios however an elaborate analysis of 
the questionnaire responses is not included in this thesis project.
The questions in the questionnaire regards the single employee’s general understanding 
and experience with engineering knowledge, how they normally implement it, and in 
which phases of the building design.
The questionnaire is built on the following structure:
1. Employee’s own evaluation of their cooperation across disciplines
2. Employee’s knowledge, experience and view on engineering expertise 
3.  Categorising employee e.g. architect/engineer, how many years of experience etc.
The category of the first bullet is about the employee’s own view on their multidisci-
plinary both personally and studio wise. The category of the second bullet investigate 
the subject areas individually. The focus of this thesis project is limited to environmental 
factors of microclimate comfort, daylight and energy performance. However, due to the 
scope of the collaboration with PhD student Mathilde Landgren, questions about LCA 
and LCC are also included, which can contribute to this study with its broader angle on 
sustainable design, hence more factors to look at. All disciplines will be affected by the 
overall geometry of the building, which is why it is interesting to investigate if there is a 
connection between the answers and whether some elements are favoured. 
From the first category respondents will answer based on their idea of multidisciplinary 
work, both personally and studio wise. From the second category respondents will an-
swer based on their experience and knowledge of different environmental factors, which 
is part of multidisciplinary work, as the factors affect the overall geometry when imple-
mented. 
The last category sorts each employee based on their profession, seniority, age etc. This 
category is placed last, so the first impression of the questionnaire is not about stan-
dardised information, but on the individual’s knowledge and shows interest in them, not 
their information. The full questionnaire can be found in appendix H. 
==PAGE:137==
137
Theory and method
The formulations of questions and the overall structure of a questionnaire is essential 
for the possible answers and thus the quality of the gathered data. If the quality of the 
data is low, it will form a poor foundation for the analysis and future conclusions to be 
drawn (Jensen & Knudsen, 2014). The questionnaire design and underlying theory will 
be elaborated in the following. The construction of questions and the general design of 
the questionnaire influence the possible outcome. The following sections hence explain 
the questionnaire design choices based on the desired outcome.
The properties of the collected data are dependent on the type of questions asked to 
the respondents, and the scale on which the respondent can answer (Jensen & Knudsen, 
2014). 
Question types 
Questions in questionnaires can either be closed or open. The most common kind of 
questions in questionnaires are closed questions, where the respondent is given a fixed 
list of possible answers to the respective questions. 
Closed questions ensures a uniformity as well as eases both the answering- and process-
ing time (Jensen & Knudsen, 2014). The strength of these kinds of questions is beside 
the above mentioned, that the list of possible answers might help the memory of the 
respondent. The greatest weakness is that the list might not be adequate, hence the 
respondent will not be able to answer what is most correct for her/him. This means that 
some aspects might be invisible in the data, as the questioner have decided beforehand 
what they think the respondents might answer. 
Open questions do not have an obvious direction of answers, why the answers are more 
qualitative, as they are fully the respondent’s opinion. By asking open question, the an-
swers will be diverse and hence almost impossible to categorise and analyse. There will 
therefore be no open questions in the questionnaire, as they cannot be quantified.
Part 2
==PAGE:138==
138
Collaboration and Integration of Engieering in Building Design Processes
Nominal Scale
The data properties of the nominal scale are numerals or other symbols, which express 
the category of the measured property. Questions with nominal answers are questions 
such as determination of the respondent’s gender. The question is closed, and the nu-
merical assignment of the categories is arbitrary and gives no information about the 
interrelationships of categories(Jensen & Knudsen, 2014). The nominal scale is therefore 
not really a scale, but simply assign labels to distinguish categories. 
Ordinal Scale
The data properties of the ordinal scale are numerals, which indicate a ranking of the 
measured properties, but nothing about the absolute difference between the categories.
 (Jensen & Knudsen, 2014). Many closed questions about people’s opinions are measured 
on an ordinal scale. Ordinal answers divide observations into categories, like the nominal 
scale, but the categories are also given values with a ranking. This give the same sta-
tistical opportunities as the nominal scales, but as the observations can be set up in an 
ordered sequence, it is possible to calculate additional statistics in data processes, such 
as cumulative percentage.
Answer types and scale
There are four different kinds of scales to closed questions in questionnaires; Nominal, 
ordinal, interval and ratio. The nominal scale is the lowest scale level and ratio the high-
est, regarding amount of analysis possibilities. 
The nominal and ordinal scale are so-called categorisation scales, which do not meet the 
prerequisite for other analysis than summing up and finding the percentage. These are 
not adequate for finding the average nor the standard deviation, which are the building 
blocks for further data processing. The interval and ratio scales give more analysis pos-
sibilities, as there is more depth to the answers.
==PAGE:139==
139
Interval Scale
The data properties of the interval scale are numerical values, which express relative 
differences between the measured properties, i.e. distances between numerical values 
are equal, but the zero point is arbitrary. This scale has all the same characteristics as the 
ordinal scale, but the distance between the categories are the same. This property is a 
prerequisite for calculating the mean and standard deviation (Jensen & Knudsen, 2014). 
With the interval scale, it is possible to merge the answers into intervals, and thereby 
achieving a smaller number of categories with more respondents in each category. This 
eases the analysis work and gives greater clarity. 
The data from the interval scale can be processed by the mean value, standard deviation, 
regression and many more (Jensen & Knudsen, 2014). In order to process data, ordinal 
scale answers are often regarded as equal distanced, as this is required for statistical 
data analysis (Jensen & Knudsen, 2014). 
Ratio Scale
The data properties of the ratio scale are as the interval scale, but with a fixed zero point. 
This makes it possible to calculate ratio and relative difference between the categories. 
Yet, with the ratio scale, it is not possible to categorise answers, as the data quality will 
be downgraded to a lower scale level of ‘interval scale’. There must be answers for all 
possibilities, e.g. 1 year, 2 years, 3 years etc.  
Yet, it shortens the answering time of the responders as well as eases the analysis time 
(Jensen & Knudsen, 2014). 
Reliability and validity
Questionnaires can be compared to experiments. A given hypothesis must under the 
same conditions give the same answer. In experiments, it is often possible to conduct the 
experiment repeatedly and test the outcome. This can be done in questionnaires as well, 
where the same investigation is repeated on the same respondents at different times, 
well within a given timeframe where respondents would be expected to not change 
opinion. Yet, this is rarely possible due to practical and economic factors (Jensen, J.M & 
Knudsen, T. 2014). An alternatively method, which is more used in questionnaires, is to 
get the respondent to answer two or more questions, which are expected to produce 
consistent answers. Subsequently, the reliability of the measurements can be assessed 
based on the correspondence between the answers to these questions. Measurements 
based on multiple questions regarding the same measurement object, are also called 
measurements with combined scales (Jensen & Knudsen, 2014).
Part 2
==PAGE:140==
140
Collaboration and Integration of Engieering in Building Design Processes
Questions regarding people’s gender, seniority and which phases they normally par-
ticipate in are fairly easy to measure and categorize as ‘truthful’ as the questions are 
straightforward and answers objective. But, when the questions start to become abstract 
and not directly observable, the answers must be treated more critically. This is for exam-
ple questions regarding people’s opinion or work methods, which are subjective. It must 
be clear whether the data from these kinds of questions really reflect what is intended 
to measure (Jensen & Knudsen, 2014). Reliability is a prerequisite for obtaining validity, 
since you cannot have accurate measurements if the measurements are influenced by 
coincidences.
Reliability 
Reliability is an indicator of how stable the measurements are, i.e. if they are free from 
random measurement errors. If the measurement is reliable, it is consistent, and the 
questions used in the questionnaire will cause the same type of information each time 
they are used under the same conditions.
The main reason for random measurement errors are misinterpretation of the question 
or the answer options by the respondent. This might be due to the wording in the ques-
tions or answering options, which can be ambiguous or with unclear formulations. If the 
question is not clear the respondent will apply her/his own interpretation (Jensen & 
Knudsen, 2014). 
An example of an ambiguous formulation, where the possible answering choices might 
be on a 1-5 scale, is; ‘What is your knowledge of daylight?’. Both respondents might an-
swer that they have knowledge of daylight design, but their motives and competencies 
are far from the same. Some respondents might say “I am aware that you can design with 
daylight”, and some “I design with daylight by using this and that tool”; and they will both 
answer the same value on the scale. The same applies to the answering options, where 
the wording choice can lead to different perceptions. The question ‘How often do you work 
with daylight?’ can have the possible answering options of Never, rarely, often and always. 
Some respondents will answer that they work with daylight often when they have ad-
dressed the quality in daylight once in a lot of project, and others will answer that they 
work with it often, when they actually always work with daylight, but know of others who 
do it more. Also, they might have different understandings of what working with daylight 
means - do you look at shadows, do you look at glare, or you look at the daylight factors? 
==PAGE:141==
141
Do they use intuition or simulations? If the questionnaire is reliable, then the questions 
combined with the answering options will never have different meanings depending on 
the interpretations of the respondents. 
An example of how reliability is included is the questionnaire is the daylight question 
above. For the question to have the same meaning regardless of the responder, it was 
divided into several other questions such as ‘How experienced are you with daylight?’, 
‘How important is daylight in regards of quality of the design?’ and ‘How much does daylight 
influence your design decisions in the different phases?’. By dividing the question into sev-
eral, the meaning is much clearer for the respondent, hence the quality of the answers is 
higher and therefore more suitable for further analysis.  
Validity
The validity is an expression of the extent to which the measurements actually measure 
what are intended to measure. A questionnaire is not necessarily valid, just because it 
is reliable in the sense that it produces the same result over repeated measurements. 
For example, when asking about people’s opinions and applications of sustainability in 
design, there will most likely be a tendency for respondents to overestimate or even 
exaggerate their responses in a direction that reflects that they are actually very aware 
of sustainability in their design decisions. The characteristic of validation problems is 
that the deviation from ‘the truth”’of what is measured follows a systematic pattern. 
Respondents might give a more positive image of themselves and the studio through 
an overestimation. These systematic patterns of deviations are not necessarily an issue 
if identified. Knowledge of the tendencies within the deviations and where they appear 
can therefore be correlated (Jensen & Knudsen, 2014). 
There are several approaches to evaluate the validity of a measurement; face validity, 
content validity and criterion validity. 
 Face validity
Does the measure look valid? This is the simplest form of validity, which is a matter of 
appearances. The face validity refers to the transparency and relevance of the question-
naire, and how it must appear and be perceived by the respondents. It is not a measure-
ment concept, but the degree to which a question appears to measure what it claims to 
do.
Part 2
==PAGE:142==
142
Collaboration and Integration of Engieering in Building Design Processes
The validation is an immediate and subjective assessment of whether the content of the 
question actually measures what is desired to measure. The assessment is created based 
on whether the questionnaire looks like it will work, and is not assessed in hindsight of 
whether it has proven to work. The respondents might recognise the type of information 
they are responding to, and answer accordingly. The advantage of this is that the respon-
dents might use the context to interpret the questions and thereby give more in-depth 
and accurate answers. The disadvantage however, it that the respondents might also try 
to adjust their answers to what they think is the desired outcome. Respondents might 
even adjust their answers to try to make themselves appear better. A face validity assess-
ment is done by merely looking at the graphical appearance, questions and answering 
options. In the questionnaire, there is a DTU logo and the title is ‘Architectural Engineer-
ing’. The respondents will therefore instantly have an idea that they will be ‘evaluated’ on 
their technical skills and sustainable character. The responders will therefore be biased 
based on the presentation of the questionnaire. The respondents might try to meet the 
answers they think the interviewer are looking for. It is assumed that it can affect the 
answers toward a more multidisciplinary overall picture of each studio. Yet, it is a recur-
rent bias through all studios and will therefore not affect the comparison even though it 
might give a slightly off result if looking isolated on one studio. The questionnaire could 
have been presented in a more neutral way, without an explanation of sender or reason, 
but it was assessed to lower the response rate, as the output and context would not be 
clear (Brinkman, 2009).
Other pitfalls regarding the validity are that the persons, who fill out the questionnaire 
might be more interested in the topic, and are therefore not representative for the regu-
lar employee at the studios. This will lead the results to be more positive than if every-
one from each studio replied. 
==PAGE:143==
143
Content validity 
Does the measure capture the full content of the questionnaire? This is the next step 
in validity, where an expert panel reviews the questionnaire to find out whether it mea-
sures what is intended and no other variables. For example, if the questions about day-
light were written in complicated phrases, the questionnaire might be a test of reading 
comprehension, rather than a measure of the respondent’s knowledge of daylight (Brink-
man, 2009; Greco, Walop, & Mccarthy, 1987). For this questionnaire, several people with 
different professions (two Cand. Arch students, one Cand. Merc., one PhD student in Ar-
chitectural Engineering at DTU and the head of marketing and sustainable development 
at Studio A) commented on its content, writing and meaning before it was released.
Criterion validity 
Does the measure agree with other valid sources? This is a way of validating the ques-
tionnaire by comparing it to other studies (Brinkman, 2009; Greco et al., 1987). This is 
not possible for this questionnaire, as similar research is not available or has never been 
conducted. However, the results of the questionnaire are compared to the observations 
made during the case study, where conclusions can be drawn to support or disprove each 
other. The findings of the questionnaire will also be a topic in the focus group. 
Part 2
==PAGE:144==
144
Collaboration and Integration of Engieering in Building Design Processes
Questionnaire design
All questions are closed questions, except number 32 and 37, which are a comment box 
on the respondent’s studio office and location and a ‘general comments’ box. For each 
of the environmental topics in the questionnaire there is a comment box, where the 
respondents can elaborate who and how they work with the different elements, if the 
answering options are not sufficient. There is also a commentary box on the respondent’s 
work office as well as one for general comments on the questionnaire.
The table on the following page shows the type of scale for each question. When the 
questions are marked with both 
 and 
, it is because further elaboration is needed 
to categorise the scales. 
When the Ordinal scale is marked with 
 and Interval scale with 
, there might not 
exactly be the same interval in between each possible answer, but to process the data, it 
is assumed to be equal (Jensen & Knudsen, 2014). 
When the Ratio scale is marked with 
 and the interval scale with 
, the question 
could have been on a ratio scale, if the answers were not divided into intervals. These di-
visions lower the quality of the data, but simplifies the different categories. This is done 
to ease the answering time for the respondent as well as give a quick and clear overview 
when processing the data, as they are already categorised. 
Multi-item scales, where two questions cross reference each other, are used through-
out the questionnaire to limit uncertainties in answers. For example, question 9 and 
10 about “How many of your design decisions are influenced by …?”  cross references with 
question 14, 18, 22, 26 and 30 about “How much does … influence your design decisions in 
the different phases?”. 
The interval scale is the most frequent in the answering options due to the eased pro-
cess of analysing the results. Many questions regard the respondents’ way of working, 
and by asking on a scale instead of ‘yes/no’, it is possible to get a much more detailed 
insight. For example, when asking about who the respondents collaborate with in the 
different phases, a ‘yes/no’ answer would not be sufficient and a lot of interpretation 
and assumptions would be put into analysing the results. Therefore, an interval scale of 
descriptions of collaboration intervals is given. 
See appendix H and I for a full table of questions and multi-item scales. 
==PAGE:145==
145
Figure 21 - Overview of the questionnaire design and the type of scale for each question
Question 
Nominal 
scale
Ordinal 
scale
Interval 
scale
Ratio  
scale
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12, 15, 20, 24, 18
13, 17, 21, 25, 29
14, 18, 22, 26, 30
15, 19, 23, 27, 31
32
Open question  - commentary box
33
34
35
36
37
Open question  - commentary box
Part 2
==PAGE:146==
146
Collaboration and Integration of Engieering in Building Design Processes
Analysis 
The purpose of this questionnaire is to get data, which form the basis for creating a 
profile for each studio. The focus of this thesis is to explore tendencies of different 
approaches to holistic and sustainable design within the different architecture studios. 
The different questions in the questionnaire is therefore not investigated for internally 
dependencies, as most questionnaires usually is, but for how studio A answers differ-
ently from studio B. It is investigated how studio A answers question A differently from 
studio B’s answer to the same question. The internal dependencies and correlations of 
the questions, e.g. how question A affects question B, is thus not of interest in the scope 
of this thesis. The design of the questionnaire enables statistical analysis internally; 
however, this requires more responses from each studio. It is not within the scope of this 
thesis to analyse the results statistically. Hence the results presented in the following 
are based purely on the raw data and comparisons of the studios responses. The results 
focus on the overall ‘profiles’ of each studio, and an analysis of tendencies for differences 
and similarities among the studios. 
==PAGE:147==
147
Number of respondents, which phases they mainly participate in and their job title. 
Rating of the levels of holistic/multidisciplinary thinking in the respondents’ own 
design approach as well as their studio’s. The influence microclimate comfort, day-
light, energy performance, LCC and LCA have on their design decisions is also rated.
A radar diagram of whom and how much the respondents’ work with in the differ-
ent phases as outlined in the Description of Services. 
4: A graphical representation of the five different environmental aspects and how 
important they each are in regards of quality in design.
Elaboration of each of the five environmental aspects; microclimate comfort, day-
light, energy performance, LCC, and LCA. They each show the percentage of re-
spondents’ who work with the specific environmental aspect, followed by a radar 
diagram of how much influence it has on design decisions in the different phases. 
Lastly is a graph of the way the respondents’ work with the five environmental ar-
eas; intuition, rule of thumbs, technical knowledge, digital 3D and physical models 
etc. 
1:
2:
3:
4:
5-9:
Studio proﬁles 
Studio A offices are investigated in a full profile, where it is possible to see similarities 
and differences across the offices within the company. The image and brand is the same 
all over the company, hence it is particularly interesting to see differences in how the in-
dividual offices work. When the Studio A office is isolated from the brand, it is possible to 
look further into their design processes and put context to the observations of the Case 
project.  The profiles of the Studio A and Studio B office are structured as shown below. 
Main
Project
Preliminary
Project
Project 
Proposal
Idea
Schematic
Design
Outline
Proposal
0
1
2
3
4
5
Participation in phases
Idea
Schematic design
Outline proposal
Preliminary project
Project proposal
Main project
Job title
2,8/5
3,5/5
Level of holistic/multidisciplinary thinking 
in repondent’s design approach
3,2/5
Design decisions inﬂ uenced by 
microclimate comfort, daylight and energy performance
2,1/5
Design decisions inﬂ uenced by 
LCC and LCA 
Level of holistic/multidisciplinary thinking 
in the studio’s design approach
0
1
2
3
4
5
Main
Project
Preliminary
Project
Project 
Proposal
Idea
Schematic
Design
Outline
Proposal
Architect
73 % 
Comstruction
architect
9 % 
Project
manager
9 % 
Respondents
11/21 
responds
6 males
5 females
Main
Project
Preliminary
Project
Project 
Proposal
Idea
Schematic
Design
Outline
Proposal
0
1
2
3
4
5
Main
Project
Preliminary
Project
Project 
Proposal
Idea
Schematic
Design
Outline
Proposal
0
1
2
3
4
5
0
1
2
3
4
5
Main
Project
Preliminary
Project
Project 
Proposal
Idea
Schematic
Design
Outline
Proposal
Architect
Landscape architect
Mechanical engineer (HVAC)
Energy engineer
Construction architect (Konstruktør)
Sustainability expert
Lighting specialist
0
1
2
3
4
5
Main
Project
Preliminary
Project
Project 
Proposal
Idea
Schematic
Design
Outline
Proposal
PROFILE
STUDIO A
YOU AND YOUR STUDIO
IN THE EARLY DESIGN STAGES
MICROCLIMATE COMFORT
DAYLIGHT
ENERGY PERFORMANCE
LCC
LCA
Respondents who work with
Design influence in the different phases
Ways of working
91 %
100 %
91 %
64 %
55 %
Rule of thumb from own experience
Rule of thumb from own experience
Rule of thumb from own experience
Rule of thumb from own experience
Rule of thumb from own experience
Rule of thumb provided by others
Rule of thumb provided by others
Rule of thumb provided by others
Rule of thumb provided by others
Rule of thumb provided by others
Intuition
Intuition
Intuition
Intuition
Intuition
Physical models
Physical models
Technical analysis I run myself
Technical analysis I run myself
Technical analysis I run myself
3D digital sketching
3D digital sketching
Technical input from others
Technical input from others
Technical input from others
Technical analysis I run myself
Technical analysis I run myself
Technical input from others
Technical input from others
YOUR COLLABORATION
WITH WHO AND WHEN
IMPORTANCE
IN REGARDS OF QUALITY IN DESIGN
0
1
2
3
4
5
Microclimate 
comfort
Daylight
Energy 
performance
LCC
LCA
1
3
5
6
7
8
9
4
2
Figure 22 - Reading guide for the profiles of the studios
Part 2
==PAGE:148==
148
Collaboration and Integration of Engieering in Building Design Processes
Main
Project
Preliminary
Project
Project 
Proposal
Idea
Schematic
Design
Outline
Proposal
0
1
2
3
4
5
Participation in phases
Idea
Schematic design
Outline proposal
Preliminary project
Project proposal
Main project
Job title
2,8/5
3,5/5
Level of holistic/multidisciplinary thinking 
in repondent’s design approach
3,2/5
Design decisions inﬂ uenced by 
microclimate comfort, daylight and energy performance
2,1/5
Design decisions inﬂ uenced by 
LCC and LCA 
Level of holistic/multidisciplinary thinking 
in the studio’s design approach
0
1
2
3
4
5
Main
Project
Preliminary
Project
Project 
Proposal
Idea
Schematic
Design
Outline
Proposal
Architect
73 % 
Comstruction
architect
9 % 
Project
manager
9 % 
Respondents
11/21 
responds
6 males
5 females
Main
Project
Preliminary
Project
Project 
Proposal
Idea
Schematic
Design
Outline
Proposal
0
1
2
3
4
5
Main
Project
Preliminary
Project
Project 
Proposal
Idea
Schematic
Design
Outline
Proposal
0
1
2
3
4
5
0
1
2
3
4
5
Main
Project
Preliminary
Project
Project 
Proposal
Idea
Schematic
Design
Outline
Proposal
Architect
Landscape architect
Mechanical engineer (HVAC)
Energy engineer
Construction architect (Konstruktør)
Sustainability expert
Lighting specialist
0
1
2
3
4
5
Main
Project
Preliminary
Project
Project 
Proposal
Idea
Schematic
Design
Outline
Proposal
PROFILE
STUDIO A
YOU AND YOUR STUDIO
IN THE EARLY DESIGN STAGES
MICROCLIMATE COMFORT
DAYLIGHT
ENERGY PERFORMANCE
LCC
LCA
Respondents who work with
Design influence in the different phases
Ways of working
91 %
100 %
91 %
64 %
55 %
Rule of thumb from own experience
Rule of thumb from own experience
Rule of thumb from own experience
Rule of thumb from own experience
Rule of thumb from own experience
Rule of thumb provided by others
Rule of thumb provided by others
Rule of thumb provided by others
Rule of thumb provided by others
Rule of thumb provided by others
Intuition
Intuition
Intuition
Intuition
Intuition
Physical models
Physical models
Technical analysis I run myself
Technical analysis I run myself
Technical analysis I run myself
3D digital sketching
3D digital sketching
Technical input from others
Technical input from others
Technical input from others
Technical analysis I run myself
Technical analysis I run myself
Technical input from others
Technical input from others
YOUR COLLABORATION
WITH WHO AND WHEN
IMPORTANCE
IN REGARDS OF QUALITY IN DESIGN
0
1
2
3
4
5
Microclimate 
comfort
Daylight
Energy 
performance
LCC
LCA
==PAGE:149==
149
Chapter name
Main
Project
Preliminary
Project
Project 
Proposal
Idea
Schematic
Design
Outline
Proposal
Participation in phases
Idea
Schematic design
Outline proposal
Preliminary project
Project proposal
Main project
Job title
0
1
2
3
4
5
Main
Project
Preliminary
Project
Project 
Proposal
Idea
Schematic
Design
Outline
Proposal
Architect
78 % 
Landscape
architect
11 % 
Other
22 % 
Respondents
Main
Project
Preliminary
Project
Project 
Proposal
Idea
Schematic
Design
Outline
Proposal
Main
Project
Preliminary
Project
Project 
Proposal
Idea
Schematic
Design
Outline
Proposal
0
1
2
3
4
5
Main
Project
Preliminary
Project
Project 
Proposal
Idea
Schematic
Design
Outline
Proposal
Architect
Landscape architect
Mechanical engineer (HVAC)
Energy engineer
Construction architect (Konstruktør)
Sustainability expert
Lighting specialist
0
1
2
3
4
5
Main
Project
Preliminary
Project
Project 
Proposal
Idea
Schematic
Design
Outline
Proposal
9/200 
responds
3 males
6 females
Each representing 10 respondents 
0
1
2
3
4
5
0
1
2
3
4
5
0
1
2
3
4
5
PROFILE
STUDIO B
YOU AND YOUR STUDIO
IN THE EARLY DESIGN STAGES
MICROCLIMATE COMFORT
DAYLIGHT
ENERGY PERFORMANCE
LCC
LCA
Respondents who work with
Design influence in the different phases
Ways of working
89 %
100 %
78 %
89 %
89 %
Rule of thumb from own experience
Rule of thumb from own experience
Rule of thumb from own experience
Rule of thumb from own experience
Rule of thumb from own experience
Rule of thumb provided by others
Rule of thumb provided by others
Rule of thumb provided by others
Rule of thumb provided by others
Rule of thumb provided by others
Intuition
Intuition
Intuition
Intuition
Intuition
Physical models
Physical models
Technical analysis I run myself
Technical analysis I run myself
Technical analysis I run myself
3D digital sketching
3D digital sketching
Technical input from others
Technical input from others
Technical input from others
Technical analysis I run myself
Technical analysis I run myself
Technical input from others
Technical input from others
YOUR COLLABORATION
WITH WHO AND WHEN
IMPORTANCE
IN REGARDS OF QUALITY IN DESIGN
Microclimate 
comfort
Daylight
Energy 
performance
LCC
LCA
4,0/5
Level of holistic/multidisciplinary thinking 
in repondent’s design approach
3,4/5
Design decisions inﬂ uenced by 
microclimate comfort, daylight and energy performance
2,4/5
Design decisions inﬂ uenced by 
LCC and LCA 
3,4/5
Level of holistic/multidisciplinary thinking 
in the studio’s design approach
0
1
2
3
4
5
==PAGE:150==
150
Collaboration and Integration of Engieering in Building Design Processes
Studio tendencies
The following presents provisional tendencies regarding design processes of four larger 
Copenhagen-based architectural studios. The tendencies seen are compared to the re-
sults gathered from Studio A to add context. The questionnaire investigates the design 
process of each studio and how technical knowledge in specific areas is implemented.  
The following shows the respondents’ view on their own and their studios multidiscipli-
narity/holisticity as well as how important five different areas of engineering knowledge 
is in regards of quality of design. This is accompanied by an overview of how much the 
respondent’s in each studio work with these five areas. Then a general picture of how 
they work with engineering knowledge; intuition, rule of thumb, simulations etc. as well 
as an overview of the respondent’s job title. Lastly, a studio-based overview of how much 
each area influence the design decisions in the different phases. 
Studio C : 6 respondents 
Holisticity: The results show that the studio’s multidisciplinarity in the early design phases is lower than the 
individuals image of their own approach.  (Self > studio) 
Also, there is a tendency of the respondents to participate much more in the late phases of building design 
than the other studios profiles show. 
 
 
 
MC 
 
DL 
 
EN 
 
LCC 
 
LCA
Importance in design
Works with?
The general picture of the studio in regards of how they mainly work with the five different environmental 
areas, is that they use almost all the possible answering options; rule of thumbs, initiation, 3d digital sketch-
ing and technical knowledge provided by others. 
The job of the respondents is 100% architects. 
==PAGE:151==
151
Studio D: 8 respondents 
Holisticity: The results show that the studio’s multidisciplinarity in the early design phases is higher than the 
individuals image of their own approach. (Self < studio) 
 
 
 
MC 
 
DL 
 
EN 
 
LCC 
 
LCA
The general picture of the studio in regards of how they mainly work with the five different environmental 
areas, is that they use technical knowledge, which is inputs provided by others.
The job of the respondents is 38% architects, 13% engineers, 38% construction architect and 13 % project 
managers. 
Studio E: 12 respondents 
Holisticity: The results show that the studio’s multidisciplinarity in the early design phases is lower than the 
individuals image of their own approach.  (Self > studio) 
 
 
 
MC 
 
DL 
 
EN 
 
LCC 
 
LCA
The general picture of the studio in regards of how they mainly work with the five different environmental 
areas, is that they mostly use their intuition and rule of thumbs. 
The job of the respondents is 67% architects, 8% landscape architect, 17% construction architect and 8 % 
project managers. 
Studio F : 10 respondents 
Holisticity: The results show that the studio’s multidisciplinarity in the early design phases is lower than the 
individuals image of their own approach.  (Self > studio) In general, they have much higher scores than the 
other studios. 
Also, there is a tendency of the respondents to participate in much more different phases than the other 
studios profiles show.  Also, 90 % of respondents have less than five years of experience. 
 
  
 
MC 
 
DL 
 
EN 
 
LCC 
 
LCA
 
 
The general picture of the studio in regards of how they mainly work with the five different environmental 
areas, is that they mostly use their intuition and rule of thumbs. 
Many of the respondents have multiple job titles; 60% architects, 10% landscape architect, 20% engineers, 
30% construction architects, 20% project managers and 20% others (urban landscape and student assistant). 
Importance in design
Works with?
Importance in design
Works with?
Importance in design
Works with?
Part 2
==PAGE:152==
152
Collaboration and Integration of Engieering in Building Design Processes
Results of questionnaires   
When comparing the two profiles of the Studio A and Studio B, it is clear that they have 
major differences in their way of working and in their opinion on what is value-adding. 
First, it is evident that a much larger percentage responded in the Studio A office. This is, 
of course, influenced by the presence and daily reminders of the authors. 
Respondents of both offices work mostly in the early phases. The percentage of archi-
tects is almost equal in the two offices, but it is seen that the Studio A office has con-
struction architect and project manager too. The Studio B office has respondents who are 
landscape architect and other titles, e.g. director and student assistant. It is interesting 
to note the role of the construction architect, which is a profession only existing in Den-
mark. 
In the second category, regarding levels of holistic/multidisciplinary thinking in the re-
spondents’ own design approach as well as their studio’s and the influence of the envi-
ronmentally aspect, it is evident that the Studio B office rates everything much higher. 
This might be due to their way of working, and that the office just is more multidisci-
plinary than the Studio A office, or it might be due to cultural differences. Some cultures 
are much more positive when answering than others, so this might be a source of error, 
when comparing across country borders. However, there is arguably not a big cultural 
difference in the Scandinavian countries. 
In the radar diagram about collaboration in the different phases, it is evident that the 
Studio A office includes much fewer professions in all building design phases than the 
Studio B office does. Especially in the early design phases, a sustainability expert is in-
cluded much more in Studio B. In the Studio A office, the least number of professions are 
included in the idea and schematic phase, and the level of collaboration increases as the 
project progresses. 
The importance of the five different environmental aspects follow the same pattern for 
the two studios; Both rates daylight significantly higher than the other aspects, with the 
microclimate comfort as the runner up. However, the Studio B office rates the microcli-
mate comfort much higher than the Studio A office does and the energy performance a 
bit lower.
The overall picture is that the Studio B office works more with all five environmental 
aspects than the Studio A office. In both offices, all respondents work with daylight. The 
influence of the different aspects is generally higher for Studio B than for Studio A. 
For the Studio A office, it is seen that daylight has more influence in the beginning of the 
project, where the energy performance has least influence in the beginning and much 
==PAGE:153==
153
more towards the end. For the Studio B office, almost all aspects have a continuous 
level of influence in all project phases, where the Studio A office shows more variation 
throughout the phases. 
Generally, the Studio B office works more, and in many different ways, with the five envi-
ronmental aspects, where the Studio A office is more limited, especially in regards of LCC 
and LCA. The Studio B office work much more with technical inputs from others, where 
the Studio A office work a lot more from intuition. 
Provisional tendencies 
The level of holistic/multidisciplinary thinking is regarded higher in the design approach 
of the individual respondents than in their respective studios. Only one studio seems to 
have a higher level of holistic/multidisciplinary thinking in the studio design process in 
general than on an individual level of designing. The specific studio stands out from the 
others in the sense that it has an in-house sustainability apartment, hence a different 
look at where their competencies lie. 
From the available data it is seen that almost 100% of the respondent’s work with day-
light . In general, more of the respondents work with microclimate comfort, daylight, and 
energy performance, than with LCC and LCA. It is interesting to note this trend in compar-
ison to the Swedish department of Studio A, where the level of work with LCC and LCA 
is higher than the level of work with energy performance. Perhaps it is a culture trend, 
however, it would require more extensive data to determine. 
The way the respondents work with the 5 environmental aspects vary a lot between the 
aspects and between the individual studios.
An interesting relationship to notice, is the importance of the five environmental aspects 
regarding quality in the design and the influence of these aspects on design decisions; 
The provisional data show a clear tendency, where the importance of each area is rated 
higher than their actual influence on design decisions. 
The influence of microclimate comfort on design decisions vary between companies; the 
answers range widely, where some studios give a higher influence score in the begin-
ning and some in the end. Yet, there is a slight tendency for the influence to increase as 
the project processes, hence being more influential towards the end. The importance of 
microclimate comfort in regards of quality in design is generally rated higher than its 
influence on design decision throughout the project. 
Part 2
==PAGE:154==
154
Collaboration and Integration of Engieering in Building Design Processes
In general, daylight influence design decisions a lot in all studios; the range between 
scores for the different studios is low, and there is a slight declination of influence 
throughout the project process. The importance of daylight is generally rated higher 
than its influence on design decisions. 
The general picture for energy performance is that the answers vary a lot between stu-
dios both in regards of importance in quality of design and influence on design deci-
sions. The results are very scattered. The importance of energy performance regarding 
quality of design is the lowest of the 5 environmental aspects. The influence of energy 
performance on design decisions show two tendencies; the influence is either constant 
or the influence increase through the project process. The average for the six studios on 
the influence of energy performance shows that the influence increases as the project 
progresses. The importance of energy design is rated higher than its actual influence in 
the idea phase, but the influence becomes higher than the rated importance after the 
schematic design. 
In general, the studios work very differently with the different areas; most of the studios 
where they seem to think higher of themselves in regards of multidisciplinarity than 
their studio, work with intuition and rule of thumbs. The studio with competencies in-
house work mainly with technical knowledge provided by others. 
 
==PAGE:155==
155
Findings from Questionnaire
Internal multidisciplinarity encourages more cross disciplinary collaboration 
From the results of the questionnaire it is evident that the design process of Studio A 
Studio B are different. In the Studio A office, there is much less collaboration across pro-
fessions, especially in the early design phases. As written in the introduction to Studio A 
the two studios also have very different staff profile; the Studio B office has a much more 
multidisciplinary profile with different professions, where the Studio A office has a much 
more traditional profile, consisting mostly of architects. 
Arguably, there is a correlation between the level of internal multidisciplinarity and the 
level of multidisciplinary collaboration in the different phases. This supports the finding 
from the case study observations, that physical presence encourages collaboration. 
Gap in aim and working methods 
There is a tendency of the importance of the five environmental aspects in regards of 
quality in design being rated higher than the actual influence on design decisions of 
the aspects. As written in the introduction to Studio A, the company has sustainability 
as one of their core values. Yet, this is not reflected in how especially the Studio A office 
works, hence there is a gap in the aim and working methods. This is not only applicable 
for the Studio A office, but is an overall picture for the studios; everyone states that the 
environmental aspects are important regarding quality in the design, yet the actual 
work does not necessarily reflect this. 
Part 2
==PAGE:156==
156
Collaboration and Integration of Engieering in Building Design Processes
From case study and questionnaire to focus group
The findings from the case study and questionnaire are based on rec-
ognised research methods; however, there is always a risk that conclu-
sions, to some extent, reflect the subjective opinion of the researcher. 
When analysing results, careful attention must be paid to not sub-
consciously focus more on particular result than others, because they 
are more appealing for example. The use of mixed methods in data 
collection provide a wider range of data for a more complete analysis. 
The observations made during the case study, and the results from the 
questionnaire are thus accompanied by the results of a focus group 
session with the design team of the Case project. A focus group is the 
least intrusive form of research interviews (Bryman, 2008) and is thus 
a good supplement to the rest of the data collection methods. For this 
case study, a focus group is particularly appropriate, since critics of 
social research methods accuse the participant observation method 
of being subjective (Kvale & Brinkmann, 2009).  The following chapter 
address this focus group.
==PAGE:157==
157
FOCUS GROUP 
As part of the data collection approach of the case study, a focus group was conducted 
with the design team of the case project. In the following, the general purpose and scope 
of focus groups is briefly described. This is followed by an elaboration on the specific focus 
group session conducted with the design team of the case project and a presentation of the 
analysis and results. The findings from the focus group are analysed and compared to the 
findings from the supplementary analysis result of the case study and questionnaire.
How focus groups differ from interviews
Focus groups are similar to group interviews, however there is an emphasis on joint con-
struction of meaning within the group (Bryman, 2008). Group interviews are quantitative 
or semi-structured interviews with several people at a time – “a number of individuals 
interviewed simultaneously” (Bryman, 2008). A focus group is more like a conversation or 
discussion of a specific topic or issue, and thus very narrow, where group interviews (and 
other forms) are usually more widespread in themes and topics. Focus groups are gener-
ally suitable for exploratory studies since more spontaneous, expressive, and emotional 
perspectives can emerge, that from a cognitive, individual interview (Kvale & Brinkmann, 
2009). 
The purpose of the focus group is not for the participants to reach consensus on the 
topics being discussed, but to have multiple aspects and points of view disclosed (Kvale 
& Brinkmann, 2009). The focus group method has a special emphasis on social mecha-
nisms, i.e. the patterns of social interaction within the group concerning how the indi-
viduals respond to each other’s views. The aim is to discover what the individuals see as 
interesting and important, and thus understanding the topic in focus from the perspec-
tive of the participants, i.e. those being studied (Bryman, 2008). “The group interaction 
will often provide elaborated responses and encourage the sharing of ideas. One comment 
may serve as a lead-in to other comments or information critical to the areas being explored.” 
(DEOMI, 2015)
Part 2
==PAGE:158==
158
Collaboration and Integration of Engieering in Building Design Processes
Conducting a focus group 
As opposed to the question/answer mechanism of regular interviews, focus groups are 
grounded in a group discussion guided by a moderator or facilitator with a minimal 
amount of intrusion (Bryman, 2008). The moderator can have a topic for the discussion 
or a more specific set of questions to run through with the focus group. The optimal 
structure is dependent on multiple aspects, e.g. the experience of the moderator, the de-
sired outcome of the focus group, the level of interest or knowledge among participants, 
etc. The moderator will lead the focus group. It is therefore vital, that the moderator 
can create a permissive atmosphere, where the individual participants feel comfortable 
expressing contradicting opinions and personal thoughts and feelings about the subject 
or issues in focus (Kvale & Brinkmann, 2009). The moderator needs to keep the group 
focused while controlling person dynamics of the group and managing dominators, ex-
perts, observers, and ramblers, i.e. providing all individuals an opportunity to participate 
in the session (DEOMI, 2015). 
The role of the assistant moderator is to observe participant reactions and interactions 
- complementary or argumentative. Even though the focus group session is being record-
ed, the assistant moderator should take note throughout the session of notable quotes 
and statements that illustrate particular and important point of views, new concepts, and 
big ideas. At the end of the session the assistant moderator will share the themes of the 
important discussions points with the group for confirmation (Krueger, 2002).
Focus group at Studio A 
The results from the observations and semi-structured interview during the 9 weeks of 
the case study fostered the basis for the focus group session. The themes addressed in 
the focus group are related to tendencies identified from the results of the survey and 
underlined by observations made during the case study. The focus group is thus an ad-
ditional source of evidence.
The purpose of the focus group with the design team at Studio A is to explore the 
mechanisms behind design decisions and project development. The intent is to gain 
clarification on the indicators from the questionnaire and findings from the participant 
observations. As stated in above, the focus group is a qualitative research method and 
thus a good supplement to the quantitative questionnaire.
Questions should be diverse, open-ended and exploratory, facilitating “open dialogue 
about positive and negative issues” (DEOMI, 2015). In the beginning of the session, ques-
tions should not be very specific, but more general on influences, characteristics, or fea-
tures of the themes and topics of the focus group (Krueger, 2002). Follow-up questions 
==PAGE:159==
159
can be utilised “to gain clarity about their initial responses or to get additional information.” 
(DEOMI, 2015). Questions that ask for more than one answer, or that addresses multiple 
themes or ideas should be avoided, in order for the discussion to be more streamlined 
and easier follow the natural flow of conversation (DEOMI, 2015; Krueger, 2002). Overall, 
there are five types of questions, (opening-, introductory-, transition-, key-, and ending 
questions) it is recommended to use multiple types throughout a focus group session 
(Krueger, 2002). For the focus group at Studio A, possible questions were listed and sort-
ed in themes of influence on design decisions, value adding, communication, and collab-
oration. The questions were then sorted in the five type categories and divided into main 
questions and possible follow-up questions, to compile a comprehensive outline for the 
focus group.
Interviews, especially in quantitative research but also more unstructured qualitative in-
terviews, will always reflect the researchers concerns since it is he or she who have made 
the questions. There will always be a possibility of the researcher not considering a 
certain point of view, even though it might be an evident point to the interviewee. As the 
researcher does not include questions about this specific point of view, he or she might 
miss crucial information, which could bring new knowledge to the table. This new infor-
mation could have resulted in adjustment of the emphasis in the research. Quantitative 
research, but especially focus groups, creates a greater interest in the interviewee’s point 
of view and perspectives. By using a small number of very general questions to guide the 
focus group, this allows a free discussion and there is a better chance of gaining access 
and discovering all aspects of what the individual participants see as interesting and 
important. 
In the following, the interview guide for the focus group is outlined. The first set of ques-
tions are general on the topics of design process, design decision making, and the role of 
technical knowledge and inputs in the early design phases. From the observations of the 
case study and the results of the questionnaire it is clear, that Studio A regard technical 
knowledge and input as being of relatively high importance. However, it is not utilised 
or integrated in the early design phases, at least not on the case study project. Thus it 
is interesting to have the group discuss how and to what degree they believe technical 
input should be a part of design decisions in the early phases – whether it should be a 
design validator, design informer, or design driver (see page 95).
Part 2
==PAGE:160==
160
Collaboration and Integration of Engieering in Building Design Processes
The second topic of the interview guide is specific to the case study project. Since techni-
cal knowledge and inputs are not what has driven the design, it is interesting to have the 
group reflect on which aspects did. In order to explore incentives for design decisions it 
is relevant to address the (perceived) value added to a project through these design deci-
sions. By gaining insight to what is considered as value-adding in a building project, it is 
then possible to address the implementation of other themes in the design, e.g. technical 
knowledge, from a similar perspective of value. If a specific discipline, e.g. architects, are 
able to articulate or quantify their perception of value, it is easier for other disciplines 
to present input, e.g. technical knowledge, from a value-adding perspective that speaks 
to the first discipline.
The last part of the interview guide concerns the specific results of the questionnaire. 
From the provisional examination of tendencies, there seems to be a correlation be-
tween studios with a higher level of internal multidisciplinarity and their ability and 
desire to collaborate with external partners, such as engineers and contractors, in the 
early design phases. It is interesting to tap into this, as it can help underpin or discard 
the finding but furthermore because it can foster a discussion on collaboration in gen-
eral among the focus group participant. The result of the questionnaire maps the design 
process of the studio. It would seem that the design team, and studio in general, are not 
explicitly reflecting over their design process. Through the extensive research in the field 
of integrated design over the past decades, it is evident that the early design phases are 
where the groundwork should be formed. It is thus interesting to have the design team 
reflect on their personal and studio general design process and the effect this has on the 
potential for integration of technical knowledge. 
==PAGE:161==
161
Interview guide 
Introduction to the focus group, topic and aim in relation to this master thesis. 
General opening questions:
 
>
When making design decisions how can technical knowledge add value to the design 
(processes)/design decision process? 
 
>
From your point of view, what role should technical knowledge and inputs play in the 
early design phases? Scale: Design driver – Design informer – Design validation
Possible follow-up questions:
 
>
How can technical knowledge be implemented in the early design phases?
 
>
How should engineers communicate in order to ensure technical inputs as driver/in-
former/(validation)?
 
>
Does physical presence of other disciplines have an influence on the design process?
 
>
Does the timing of technical inputs have an influence on the design process?
Case project specific questions: 
 
>
We would like you to each reflect on a design decision made on this project and state 
which parameters influenced the decision/design development
Possible follow-up questions:
 
>
What type of influence – design driver/informer/validation?
 
>
Please elaborate on the value of the design decision or development
 
>
Is the value somehow quantifiable?
Presentation of the questionnaire profile of Studio A KBH: 
 
>
Is there a connection between the studio overall design-process-profile and the studio’s 
ability/desire to collaborate in the early design phases with engineers and contractors?
Summary of the central topics of the focus group session and the discussion and com-
ments
Final thoughts
Part 2
==PAGE:162==
162
Collaboration and Integration of Engieering in Building Design Processes
Analysis of focus group 
The social interaction among group members distinguish focus groups from interviews. 
Focus group data hence says something about the attitudes towards the research topic 
(like interviews) but also about the interactions and social mechanisms between the 
group participants. “Drawing attention to the patterns of interaction within focus groups 
allow the researcher to determine how group participants view the issue with which they are 
confronted in their own terms.” (Bryman, 2008).
Immediately after the focus group session, the initial analysis was conducted. Main 
themes of the session was recorded along with initial thoughts on findings such as 
“hunches, interpretations, and ideas” (Krueger, 2002). The main themes of the discussions 
covered;
 
>
Education
 
>
Need for shift of technical knowledge from validator to informer – not driver
 
>
Design informer/driver vs complexity of building project
 
>
Early phase design workshops 
 
>
Personalities and collaboration
 
>
Management, and fee structures
Since transcribing is very time consuming, only relevant parts of the focus group session 
has been transcribed as part of the analysis process. The full recording can be found in 
Appendix J. The focus group data, consisting of the recording, partial transcription and 
video recording, plus ‘field notes’ from the session and debrief, are analysed and inter-
preted with a focus on the following (Bryman, 2008; Krueger, 2002);
 
>
Patterns of social interaction, i.e. operation of complementary and argumentative 
interactions
 
>
Context of responses and comments, i.e. what prompted the response
 
>
Internal consistency, i.e. what caused a change in opinion of a participant
 
>
Frequency or extensiveness, i.e. which topics were discussed more than others and 
which comments were made more often
 
>
Intensity, i.e. which themes or topics were discussed with particular strong feelings 
among the participant, e.g. with special words, tone of voice, change in speed of 
speaking, excitement in voice, etc.
 
>
Specificity, i.e. responses made in first person rather than third based on experience 
of the individual participant, rather than vague and impersonal
==PAGE:163==
163
Observations
The following analysis is outlined in themes of discussion topics. Each section is a review 
of the general outcome of the discussion accompanied by underlining quotes of the 
participants. For the sake of anonymity, participants are given numbers instead of names.
Four out of six team members participated, where one was one of the key players in the 
design process. Yet, throughout the session, only three team members were present as 
the lead architect had to step out for a phone call right after the session began and the 
landscape architect had to leave the session right when the lead architect came back 
from his phone call. There was afterwards an obvious shift in the group dynamic. The 
session went from a dynamic and enthusiastic discussion among the participants, where 
all contributed opinions and comments, to a more interview based structure, where two 
participants gave very elaborated answers and comments, and one sat back and hardly 
said anything. It is clear that the group regards the lead architect as the ’expert’ (DEOMI, 
2015). Comments like “you should ask [Name] about that” and “correct me if I’m wrong” 
show a clear expectation or attitude that certain questions throughout the focus group 
session are not meant for debate or discussion, but merely clarification, which is then 
left up to the lead architect to answer. Out of the three participants, one is therefore an 
‘expert’, the second participant is a ‘dominator’, who has something to say about each top-
ic and the third participant is an ‘observer’, who observes the group but has little to say 
(DEOMI, 2015). This specific participant changed behaviour during the session, and went 
from being active in the discussion to appearing shy, quiet, reflective, or tired.
Inexperience of the moderator may have influenced the discussion and social interaction 
of the participants. Retrospectively, the moderator may have been too enthusiastic about 
the topics of the focus group to not interfere in the discussions. In combination with 
group dynamics, where participants perceive one as the ‘expert’ and leaves answering up 
to him, the session occasionally gained an interview-like structure. However, the partici-
pants generally engaged in a fruitful discussion on multiple topics. 
Part 2
==PAGE:164==
164
Collaboration and Integration of Engieering in Building Design Processes
Design validator, design informer or design driver
In general, the interactions of the participants were complementary and a high level of internal con-
sistency was evident. No heated debates or discussions arose and actual disagreements were few. One 
example of slight disagreement was the design driver vs design informer question. It was argued that 
technical inputs as a design driver was damaging for architecture, however another participant argued 
that for less complex buildings, you often see engineering art where function comes before form.  
Participant 1 “Of course, if you make a bridge, it’s a design driver. But if you make… ehm… a little shelter that doesn’t 
need so much complicated construction. Maybe it’s just a little informative…”
Participant 1 “But I think you can learn a lot from history, how you construct and build buildings. It’s like… everything 
from wharfs to bridges to railway stations, which all is engineering art…construction. (…) They are there for a reason and 
they look like that for a reason. And, of course, in combination with this layer of artistic experience or whatever. It’s just to 
remind ourselves that there should be reason for something to be there. And that’s where the engineer is very, you know, 
they are very good at just helping the architect, I think, in that sense, to… so that we don’t construct shells only. (…) May-
be you don’t always need an engineer because some of the information you can find out yourself nowadays. Especially if 
it’s like, not very complex projects.”
Participant 2 “I’m really sceptical of when some particular technical aspect, whether it’s photovoltaics, or anything else 
that it becomes the driver of a design. And I suppose that comes from a belief in a sort of multi facet (…) to design, and 
that is too easy then for things to be optimised only due to measurables. And I think that runs a huge risk of soft values, 
cultural aspects, aesthetics, historical narratives (...), being pushed aside for one hammer of a reason. (…) It’s got to be 
bigger than that. Otherwise I think it is in danger of being optimised in a really… ehm… dangerous way.” 
Participant 2 “Yeah… I suppose with the design validation, that’s the thing that is all too common (…) Sometimes it 
[technical knowledge] can be a driver in particular situations, and then other times maybe it’s validation, but I think we 
need to be moving from validation towards informing.”
The group did not reach an agreement on the topic, but they did agree that the status quo in building 
projects relies on design validation. They also agreed that the industry needs to move from validating 
design with technical knowledge, to having a design which is informed. There was disagreement about 
whether a design could be driven by technical knowledge. One participant believed that technical knowl-
edge as a design driver presumably will disregard all the softer values, which is not measureable; sus-
tainable design is holistic, and having technical knowledge as a design driver will endanger architecture. 
==PAGE:165==
165
Education 
One of the main themes of discussion in this focus group was education, which was brought up in dis-
cussions among group participant on their own initiative. The questions of the interview guide did not 
specifically bring on this topic. The fact that architecture and engineering are separated in the schools 
and universities adds to the gap between the two professions. This division is part of the tradition in 
the building industry as described in the introduction (see page 30) and articulated by one of the par-
ticipants:
The architecture programs in Denmark are more artistic than in other countries, e.g. Sweden, UK, and 
France as represented in the focus group participants. In Sweden and France, the architecture students 
are educated at technical universities. Yet, this does not mean, architects the do calculations, they just 
consider aspects more logically. Furthermore, the construction architects (bygningskonstruktører) add 
another fragment in the building project teams. 
In Denmark, engineering students are trained by engineers, and architecture students are trained by 
architects, so the traditions and traditional mind-sets permeate the schools and new generations of 
engineers and architects too. 
Participant 4 “I think there’s something about, sort of the classic conflict between architects and engineers. When I stud-
ied we were always told by our professor that we shouldn’t listen to these engineers, we should just tell them what to do! 
That’s kind of the sort of traditional… It’s kind of been the narrative of the golden age of the architect. (…) And you don’t 
create any kind of innovation, you don’t get any further with a project with that kind of dynamics.”
Participant 3 “Maybe it comes from the education in Denmark. It’s much more artistic. And the things are quite divided, 
you have the ‘konstruktør’ in between. In France, the architect is a bit of everything. Not an expert, but you have to know 
a little bit.
Part 2
==PAGE:166==
166
Collaboration and Integration of Engieering in Building Design Processes
Beneﬁts and challenges of early multidisciplinary collaboration
There was a general opinion among the focus group participants, that early collaboration and implemen-
tation of technical knowledge was beneficial and value-adding. This was clear both from observations 
and conversation during the case study, but also from several comments made during the focus group. 
From observations and conversations during the case study, it was clear that other Studio A Architects 
offices are much more multidisciplinary integrated. 
All focus group participants had examples of previous jobs, which had been much more multidisciplinary, 
with different disciplines integrated in a design process. 
Participant 2 “The more successful experiences I’ve had, where it’s been integrated is when, very early on there are loose 
and creative based workshops. So, it’s not separately and then the architect coming with a set of drawings and saying; 
‘Can you, kinda, make that work?’. And architects are guilty of this but engineers as well. I’m thinking particularly of 
structural engineers here, where they just will not do anything – nothing nothing nothing – until they’ve got a set of CAD 
drawings. They won’t lift a pen. I’m not saying there’s some silver bullet but when it has been more successful there’s 
been some sort of charrette or workshop early on about principles, where things are still very…extremely open, actually. 
And there’s been then a way of optioneering in a less precise CAD’ed up kind of way.”
Participant 2 “Some of these engineers, who do really pride themselves on performance and being part of that team, it’s 
fantastic to work with them because they’ve got some ego about it.” 
Participant 4 “A very creative engineer can be very valuable in an early design process and a not so creative engineer can 
be maybe more obstructing the creative process.”
As stated in the previous section, the group reached an agreement on the industry needing to go from de-
sign validation to design informer. There is a need for a shift in the traditional ways of doing projects. The 
group talked about how the informing of design in the early design phases relies heavily on the quality 
of workshops in the beginning of projects. Start-up workshops can be successful, however, the success of 
these are highly dependent on factors like personality of team members. 
The other participants agreed to this, and that a creative engineer is needed in the early phases:
==PAGE:167==
167
Participant 2 “Definitely the sort of sequencing of design, which does relate back again to fee – it has to be said, I think 
is problematic and just cement the validation traditional approach, rather than something which is more ehm...equally 
funded.” 
Participant 2 “… I think there is great opportunity for engineers and architects to work together to find really solid, good 
reasons for underpinning the design. And that’s helpful not just in terms of convincing a client of a particular design, but 
also in the planning process (…) where it’s not – it doesn’t just come down to a question of taste and opinion, but that 
there is an analytical base to work from. What I’m saying is that the design is informed by a sort of broader spectrum 
from, yes naturally, aesthetics and opinion, but also from a more analytical, scientific even, point of view. So, I think it can 
add value to the project in a genuine way, but also in terms of how it’s understood and negotiated between all of the 
parties”
Participant 3 “There’s no structural engineer. The client just doesn’t hire a structural engineer.” 
But, in order for the early collaboration to be successful support by management, and its structure and 
mind-set, is important. The fee structures are normally what creates the current segmented process. As 
one participant said, when talking about the challenges of multidisciplinarity in the early design phases:
The group agreed on multidisciplinary workshops being beneficial in the beginning of projects, but the 
collaboration in these are highly dependent on the personalities of the team. Also, the management and 
project organisation will need to support early collaboration; maybe with changed fee structures. 
The moderator asked if the design team had any leverage with the client; If the industry is going to 
change, the individual partners in building projects have to make that change. Obviously, it must be 
supported by management in the companies, but the practitioners also have a huge leverage with the 
management, so a transition should be possible to implement.
The talk started to focus on how the Case project was run, and a participant says while shaking her head: 
...and start to wonder about the Danish level of technical aspects in the early design – it is different and 
better in France; better because it causes less problems later.  
Part 2
==PAGE:168==
168
Collaboration and Integration of Engieering in Building Design Processes
Insight to other disciplines through experience
Aesthetics and architectural aspects become dominating in building projects because architects tradi-
tionally have more influence in the early design phases. This is due to contracts and fee structures, as 
discussed in Part 1 (see page 60), but according to Participant 4, also because architects are more pas-
sionate about their work as they have more at risk in terms of reputation and profit; 
However, having a single or a small team of solely architects working on the initial design of a building 
project runs the risk of being unilateral and not implementing necessary features of e.g. sustainability 
or technical aspects in due time. The complexity of large modern projects calls for multidisciplinary 
teamwork.
Participant 2 “If you’ve got skin in the game it means you’ve got something to gain or something to loose. You’re not 
passive. Your money is on the table, right? And sometimes I think there’s an imbalance between the architect, as the 
consultant generally and… I’ll say structural engineers in particular, where it feels like they [architects] have a lot of skin 
in the game, and not so much on the other sides. Maybe because they have many more jobs – I don’t know. And it’s less 
about portfolio pieces or… I think it’s image and ego and all sorts of stuff.”
Participant 3 “Definitely if you have more people around you, more skills, it helps.”
==PAGE:169==
169
The focus group participants reached an agreement on that it is beneficial to have insight in other disci-
plines ways of working; this can either be through co-location, education or experience. 
Participant 2 “If you have no experience in an area it’s harder to imagine it. So, it’s like traveling or living somewhere 
else. It’s easy to become –not scared, but cautious or just ignorant. Innocently ignorant of the possibilities, if you have no 
experience in it, if it’s all you know. So the more that you experience it, and can see and appreciate the value that it adds.”
Participant 3 “And if we go back to the case project, it’s such a huge and complex project. Maybe it could be a good way 
to work on it. To have many many people involved with different skills. Maybe that can help. Because it’s so huge for a 
small team, that maybe we just see only the tip of our nose – that’s a French expression.”
Participant 4 “It’s very hard for an architect to come with any kind of proposal or any kind of… to in any way to be able 
to tell an engineer [what to do], if he doesn’t know what the profession is. So that’s something you learn with the years. 
(…) You should challenge engineering if you can, but if you don’t have the knowledge then it’s very hard. And that goes 
the other way around [for engineers too].”
Part 2
==PAGE:170==
170
Collaboration and Integration of Engieering in Building Design Processes
Findings from focus group  
Fee structures should match the process
Fee structures and the sequence of payments in building projects, highly influence the col-
laboration and hence the design process. When payments are due at a later time than when 
the work effort of a certain discipline is desired, e.g. engineering inputs in the early design 
phases, it becomes difficult for e.g. engineering consultancies to do business. The livelihood of 
consultants is selling hours, hence payment needs to come at the same time as the work hours 
are spent. Traditional fee structures thus foster a sequential design process, where technical 
aspects of a building design is adjusted, detailed and validated in retrospect.
Internal multidisciplinarity ease collaboration and communication 
In order to enhance abilities and knowledge related to multidisciplinary design, professionals 
in the building industry can benefit from working in close physical proximity of other disci-
plines on a daily basis. Exposure to a multidisciplinary environment can enforce a positive 
attitude towards multidisciplinary collaboration. Internal multidisciplinarity in a company of-
fice can provide employees with insight to other disciplines, even if they are not working on 
a specific project together. Low levels of insight to the work and methods of other disciplines 
will cause innocent ignorance, and the design becomes unilateral. As described in the findings 
from case study (see page 130), insight to the work of other disciplines can help ease the col-
laboration and communication in building projects. 
Success of integration is dependent on personality
Besides the professional skillset of design team members, the success of collaboration and 
multidisciplinary design is dependent on personality and attitude of the individuals and man-
agement of these aspects. When all project team members are engaged, enthusiastic, and 
passionate about their work and the project, the design process is more fruitful. However, ar-
ticulation of a clear team structure and decision power is needed in order to avoid conflicts 
between disagreeing opinions. Enthusiasm and passion can easily turn to ego and conflicts, if 
not managed carefully. 
==PAGE:171==
171
Technical knowledge should function as design informer
Technical aspects are traditionally applied to the finalised architectural design. The implemen-
tation of technical knowledge this retrospective manner, as a means of validating the func-
tional quality of the design, is problematic in the complexity of modern building with a high 
demand for sustainability. Technical knowledge as a design driver is ‘dangerous’ as the high 
focus on measurable features neglects the softer values and other aspects of sustainability, i.e. 
social and economic. Technical knowledge should hence be implemented in the early design 
phases, by informing design decisions. 
Need for change in educational programs
The Danish educational programs are different from a range of other countries, where en-
gineering and architecture students are less separated, either physically or through the cur-
riculum taught at in the respective programs. The distinct separation of architecture and en-
gineering students in artistic schools and technical universities hinders a natural approach 
and mind-set towards multidisciplinary collaboration in new generations of building industry 
professionals, leading towards a state of innocent ignorance. The mind-set in universities is 
reflected in the industry and vice versa. Now that the industry has identified a need for change, 
universities need to change towards a more multidisciplinary approach too.
Sustainable design connects the technical disciplines with the architects 
The aim of the questionnaire was to track the level of holistic approach in the design process, 
especially in the early design phases. A holistic approach was regarded as an equal focus and 
application of the five measured parameters – microclimate, daylight, energy performance, LCC, 
and LCA. From the studio profiles (see page 148), it can be seen that daylight has a much higher 
impact that all the others, and with the definition of holisticity as above, the studio is not very 
holistic. However, one of the focus group participants made a point about daylight being a spa-
tial parameter, and thus one of the pillars in architecture. The other parameters are not visible 
in the spatial design. The participant’s point was that sustainable design is what connects the 
technical disciplines with the architects. It is a fine balance between the measurable and the 
soft values. 
Part 2
==PAGE:172==
172
Collaboration and Integration of Engieering in Building Design Processes
A recap on the findings from case study, questionnaire, and focus group
 
>
Internal multidisciplinarity encourages and eases cross disciplinary collaboration 
and communication. This is supported by both the questionnaire (see page 130) 
and the focus group (see page 170). From the case study, it is found that physical 
presence also encourages collaboration, hence the multidisciplinarity might not 
necessarily be internal, but can be attained through co-localisation across disci-
plines in projects and organisations. 
 
>
When having disciplines co-located it is easier to get an insight into other disci-
plines work and processes, hence limiting the ‘innocent ignorance’ which might be 
caused by having a homogeneous staff profile and hence a unilateral perspective 
(see page 130 and 170). This is supported by the results from the questionnaire, 
where it is evident that there is a gap in the aim and working methods (see page 
155); The studios state that the environmental aspects are important regarding 
quality in the design, but the actual work does not necessarily reflect this. This 
might be due to the unilateral perspective. 
 
>
The personality of project team members is important to succeed with integrating 
different disciplines. The team members need to be creative and “think outside the 
box” as well as having an opportunistic approach to design decisions (see page 
170). The team members need to have a social understanding, as well be aware 
of timing and presentation of knowledge. Having the skills of knowing what kind 
of information is needed at specific times, as well as being able to communicate 
according to the receiver are crucial, as e.g. technical inputs written in long reports 
are not likely to be understood, hence not implemented, in the early design phases 
(see page 114). It is hence important to communicate through a common language, 
e.g. a visual language (see page 126-129). 
RECAP PART 2
==PAGE:173==
173
 
>
It is found that the process of reaching a solution is larger than the solution itself, 
especially if multiple disciplines participate in the decision-making process (see 
page 130). If iterations on a design is taken across disciplines, more people will feel 
ownership for the design. This is not possible through 1:1 meetings, where one per-
son is responsible of coordinating all inputs from all team members; inputs must 
be coordinated with several disciplines present. This can be facilitated through 
scheduled workshops (see page 131). In the focus group, it was found that technical 
knowledge should function as a design informer, which is a shift from the status 
quo of having technical knowledge as a design validator (see page 170).   However, 
it is evident from the questionnaire results that the studio relies heavily on design 
validation in the later design phases, and less on design information in the early 
design phases (see page 148). 
 
>
One way of gaining knowledge of other disciplines working methods could be 
through education; status quo is that in Denmark, architects are educated at an art 
school and engineers at a technical school. 
 
>
It is difficult to have an integrated design process with a multidisciplinary process 
in the early design phases due to fee structures (see page 170). When having a tra-
ditional fee structure, the process is endangered of falling back to traditional val-
ue-chains.  There is a great difference in projects, which have a flat-rate structure 
or are payed based on an hourly rate. The management and organisation structure 
need to be transparent to create a new value-chain (see page 132).  
 
>
From the focus group, it is found that the employees all have worked more integrat-
ed before, and are very positive towards having a more integrated design process 
(see page 170); however, management structure and mind-set, company traditions, 
agency approval processes and fee structures sustain traditional design processes 
of sequential work (see page 132). 
Part 2
==PAGE:174==
174
Collaboration and Integration of Engieering in Building Design Processes
Technical knowledge and inputs can add value to the design process and overall quality 
of the building by enabling design development and decision making on an informed ba-
sis. Retrospective compliance analysis of technical aspects can bring some level of value 
to the design, by confirming the quality of a design; however, it is not a value-creating 
process, hence the full potential of technical knowledge is not exploited. Environmental 
challenges in connection to climate change has been in high focus for the past couple of 
decades. ‘Sustainability’ and ‘Integrated Design’ are thus concepts, which companies have 
used to brand themselves as it has great commercial value. 
Most of the respondents in the questionnaire states that the environmental aspects are 
important regarding quality in the design, yet the actual work does not necessarily re-
flect this. Retrospective validation is arguably a sort of ‘green wash’ of a building project, 
since it reflects the sustainable aspects of a building design, purely obtained by chance 
through design decisions. These design decisions are not necessarily made with sustain-
ability in mind. It might seem like the design is informed, yet it is merely validated.
Technical knowledge informing the design can add great value to the design process. 
However, technical knowledge should not be a design driver as such, since it rules out a 
holistic approach where softer and non-measurable values are at risk of being given a 
lower priority or even disregarded. To facilitate technical knowledge as a design informer 
in the design process, and the integration of technical inputs in the early design phases, 
proper collaboration and communication basis must be set up. This includes support 
from a managerial level, both practically and financially. If contracting and fee structures 
does not support the needed collaborative strategy, the success of an integrated process 
will be limited.
The professional practitioners are the first to experience the benefits of better collabora-
tion and communication. At the same time, they have a lot of leverage with management 
and clients, and should hence take a big part in influencing the entire building industry 
towards a change. Building industry partners have leverage and responsibility to break 
with traditions, to secure more sustainable projects with a high level of quality in the 
final design and a good process and working environment.
SUB-CONCLUSION PART 2
How can technical knowledge in the fields of urban microclimate comfort, daylight and 
energy performance be implemented and add value to the design processes?
==PAGE:175==
175
Once the collaborative basis is established, the projects start up is vital for the success 
of an integrated design process. Collective start-up workshops, where project goals are 
established through discussions within the design team, including the project client, will 
not only provide a solid base for early implementation of technical knowledge in the de-
sign, but also establish team spirit among design team members, which will strengthen 
and ease collaboration throughout the process. 
The practicability of implementation of technical input is dependent of timing in relation 
to the state of the project development. Therefore, a comprehensive process plan needs 
to be discussed within the project team, to assure that changes in the design are not 
inconvenient, but value-adding. This relates to the necessity of having an understanding 
for the work and process of other disciplines. In general, understanding and sympathy for 
the work, methods, and process of other disciplines, contribute to the ease of collabora-
tion in a field, where knowledge-integration and balance of trade-offs are key.
Understanding, sympathy, and appreciation for the work of others, and the ability to 
communicate and collaborate is linked to the topic of personality and emotional in-
telligence (EQ). Physical presence of collaborating partners eases communication and 
collaboration on a practical day-to-day basis. Furthermore, it provides better insight to 
the working methods and process of others, through observing their daily work routines. 
It can hence be argued, that working in a multidisciplinary environment, i.e. a company 
with a certain level of internal multidisciplinarity, will enhance the collaborative skillset 
of the individual. Observing and experiencing the working method and motivations of 
other disciplines will prevent ‘innocent ignorance’ of individuals in unilateral, mono-dis-
ciplinary work environment, and thus foster an attitude of understanding and apprecia-
tion towards the work of other disciplines.
With a higher level of insight into other disciplines, communication and presentation of 
knowledge and input becomes easier. By understanding the needs and motivations for 
the work and process of other disciplines, it is possible to focus inputs and explain the 
effect a certain design decision within one’s own field of expertise will have on the work 
of other disciplines. Information overload, which often leads to total disregarding and 
omitting all information, can hence be avoided. By understanding the specific informa-
tion needs of other disciplines, long and elaborate reports can be replaced by short and 
simple explanations or visually through diagrams or similar. Visual communication is a 
convenient way to a common language between different disciplines.
Part 2
==PAGE:176==
176
Collaboration and Integration of Engieering in Building Design Processes
The traditional mind-sets and approach to design process of the entire building indus-
try is naturally evident in the educational programs of architecture and engineering. By 
making changes to the way new ‘generations’ of engineers and architects are trained, is 
a lengthy but long-term way to break with traditions. Educational programs could easily 
include multidisciplinary projects and courses in the design methods and processes of 
other disciplines in the curriculum. This would provide the same benefits of attitude to-
wards the work of other disciplines and communication skills as outlined in the previous 
sections. 
Proper collaboration and communication basis must be set up. This entails careful man-
agement of the process and design development. A shared understanding and knowl-
edge of the design decisions are therefore vital in an integrated design process. In the 
case study, it was seen that meetings were held on a 1:1 basis, which lead to inconsisten-
cy in file management, overlapping work of multiple team members due to lack of coor-
dination, misunderstandings about deadlines, etc. This approach to management entails 
a knowledge-sharing environment, which results in a ‘leader and assistant’ collaborative 
arrangement. In an integrated design process, knowledge-integration is the desired form 
of collaboration, which results in a arrangement where partners are equal. This entails a 
project organisation, where project team members can focus on the design development 
and their individual tasks. Instating a designated project- and process manager, or design 
facilitator, to handle overall coordination, planning, and meeting facilitation will allow 
project team members to focus on the task of building design. 
==PAGE:177==
177
Part 2
==PAGE:178==
A bad system will beat 
a good person every time
- W. E. Deming 
“
==PAGE:179==
PART 3
How could a palpable concept for integrated design processes be scoped 
in order to secure implementation of technical knowledge and 
‘a good design process’ within the Danish building industry?
Discussion of tools and initiatives for an integrated design process in the  
Danish framework 
The following chapter outline the reasons for difficulties with integrated design in the building 
industry in general, including an analysis of the mechanisms that influence and control the early 
phase design processes in regards of implementation of technical knowledge. This is followed by 
an elaborate discussion of pros and cons of different initiatives for optimising an integrated design 
process and their feasibility in the framework of the Danish building industry. Finally, potential ini-
tiatives in educational institutions towards better integration of multidisciplinary inputs in building 
projects are discussed. The following chapter is hence a recapitulation of the entire thesis, along 
with more or less tangible and practically applicable suggestions for potential optimisation of inte-
grated design processes. This chapter is followed by the overall conclusion of this thesis.
==PAGE:180==
180
Collaboration and Integration of Engieering in Building Design Processes
From the findings in Part 2, it is evident that collaborative arrangements 
and design process are two sides of the same coin and unambiguously in-
tertwined. From the literature study in Part 1 it is seen that many of the 
guides for integrated design process disassociates the two. According to the 
IDP guides, the success of collaboration is dependent of the attitude of the 
design team members. This aspect is very important, however, if the planned 
progression of the design development does not support multidisciplinary 
iterations and a collaborative arrangement allowing integration of technical 
knowledge as a design informer, technical input to the architectural design 
will obstruct the creative process. The collaborative arrangements are hence 
defined by the design process and vice versa.
The initial aim with this thesis was to identify optimisation potentials of 
existing guides for integrated design processes. From the mapping of the 
IDP guides, gaps and deficiencies were found, however through the work of 
this thesis, including the literature- and case study, it has been clarified, that 
the root cause of the difficulties the building industry is experiencing with 
integrated design processes, are based in the overall structure of building 
projects on a managerial- and regulatory level. Hence, optimisation of an in-
tegrated design process requires a supportive overall structure for the build-
ing project, based on management support including proper contracts and 
fee structures.
==PAGE:181==
181
DANISH FRAMEWORK IS PART OF THE PROBLEM
The sequence of milestones in Danish building projects, as outlined in the Description 
of Services, foster a sequential and linear overall design process. As identified in Part 1, a 
milestone and the associated deliverable requires a certain work to be done, hence the 
work process up to a milestone is considered a sub-phase within the given phase (see 
page 44). Phases with several milestones will thus have an equal number of sub-phases. 
The succession of the milestones will thus be reflected in the work conducted in the 
project process, and project teams will therefore constantly work towards a deliverable 
due to the number milestones. The deliverables can provide a structure to the process, 
however they can also obstruct the workflow inexpediently. The specific succession of 
milestones will dictate a linear design process, as specific elements need to be deliv-
ered at specific times. This disables the use of a fully iterative process, as rethinking of 
previous design decisions is time consuming and costly. In the integrated design pro-
cess, iterations can be executed within the linear sub-phases; however, the scope of the 
individual milestones in Danish building projects are not ideal for the decision-making 
in an integrated design process. Due to the amount of milestones, the design process 
is subject to, the amount of iterations performed in a given time span is limited. The 
design can therefore not fully develop within the scope of each sub-phase. The design 
process is therefore constantly obstructed, as project team members will work to finish 
the predefined deliverable hand-in, instead of focusing the work on developing a final-
ised design. It can therefore be difficult to find appropriate amount of time to thoroughly 
integrate the knowledge of multiple disciplines. Overall, this can affect the quality of the 
project design negatively.
The Description of Services affect the way contracts are scoped, hence contractual rela-
tions reflect the linear process fostered by the required services. This naturally also affect 
the fee structures. Payment for a service falls when the service has been provided, hence 
fee structures follow the sequential process. A competition fee is payed to the winning 
architectural project and must be shared among partners. The fees are not higher if the 
competition team chose to include more disciplines in order to have a better project; 
hence, it is a high-risk investment for the participating parties. As the main part of en-
gineering consultancy services are required in the detailed design, the payment usually 
falls after the main project. If many hours have been invested early but circumstances 
(internal or external) requires a lot of work in the later phases anyway, the final payment 
will not match the amount of work hours spent. This is not a feasible business model and 
can hence obstruct the possibilities for early collaboration between architects, engineers, 
contractors, and other. 
Part 3
==PAGE:182==
182
Collaboration and Integration of Engieering in Building Design Processes
Different initiatives for changing the traditional project process and collaboration ar-
rangements have emerged, such as alternative contract forms and initiatives like the 
DGNB scheme, which challenge the traditional design process by introducing criteria 
points for early collaboration. These initiatives all require organisational support from 
the management level of the involved parties, and financial support from the client.
 
As seen in the case study, and confirmed by the focus group, the architectural design 
team of the case study project is fully aware of technical- and sustainability related as-
pects, however they are not implemented in the design from the beginning. As one focus 
group participant stated, not implementing these aspects only “brings problems from the 
beginning”. The comment was specifically pointed towards the fact that the design team 
did not include structural elements in the design, nor did they hire a structural engineer 
for consultancy; however, the comment applies to many aspects of technical- and sus-
tainability related aspects. It is an interesting paradox, that a design team member holds 
this opinion, yet does not incorporate it in her own work. This is an indication that the 
overall structure of the project does not facilitate these kinds of initiatives. As discussed 
above, the overall structure of building projects is highly influenced by traditions, regula-
tory frameworks, corporation management, and client wishes. From this it can be argued, 
that an individual employee, or an entire design team for that matter, can be perfectly 
capable of integrating technical aspects in the initial building design, however if this is 
not part of the design approach and process of the studio in which they work, the individ-
ual does not have the required leverage to do it. This would require managerial support. 
Ambitions for a building project comes from the client, however guidance and client 
consultancy is the responsibility of the building industry professions. Clients do not nec-
essarily know a lot about building; hence, they need to be guided through proper consul-
tancy. A big task and responsibility therefore lie within client consultancy. The required 
services of the client consultant are outlined in the Description of Services (DANSKE-ARK 
& FRI, 2012). It is important that the client understands aspects concerning the early de-
sign phases e.g. the consequences of having an architectural competition or choosing 
partnering, and whether to include DGNB from the beginning versus later in the process, 
etc. If requirements and wishes of the client is made clear, it is then easier to establish 
project goals. The design process will be improved and more efficient if goals are clear 
and straight forward, as the entire team will know the exact scope of the work, and will 
hence work towards the same goals. Commissioning is an already existing tool, devel-
==PAGE:183==
183
oped to help clients and project organisations to establish goals and measurable criteria. 
Through commissioning, it is possible to map and measure the progress of a design and 
to ensure that all wishes and requirements are properly implemented, both in the design, 
but also in the final construction. Both commissioning and DGNB aim to set clear goals 
from the beginning of a building project, and to verify that these aspects have been prop-
erly incorporated in the design and finalised building. Combining commissioning and 
DGNB can therefore be highly beneficial, as both design- and construction process are 
monitored and evaluated, and the final quality of a building project matches the design.
Part 3
==PAGE:184==
184
Collaboration and Integration of Engieering in Building Design Processes
OPPORTUNITIES WITHIN THE DANISH FRAMEWORK
Additions to the Description of Services within ICT in construction (8.4 Digital Design) 
was implemented in 2016 and additions to Sustainability (8.30), Sustainability Certifi-
cation (8.31), and Sustainability Management (8.32) are due later this year. The addi-
tions are related to handling of contractual relations, i.e. which services are required and 
hence paid for. These additions can, along with contracting forms like design-build and 
partnering, support early involvement of multiple disciplines in an integrated design 
process. With the additions, the required services are more specifically outlined and de-
scribed, hence the client and project partners are forced to choose and commit to certain 
aspects, which will specify the overall structure for the projects. The process is then out-
lined more specifically, hence collaboration and integration is made easier.
When having early involvement of multiple disciplines, it is important to have a trans-
parent organisation, where contractual relations and obligations of all parties are clear 
and acknowledged by all. It can be beneficial to map the expectations for the project 
from each participant, and try to reach an overall agreement with an alignment of ex-
pectations regarding the prioritising of value-adding aspects, i.e. how to decide in trade-
off situations, and who has the final call. When the project values are shared goals, the 
planning of a project progression, and hence the outline of the process, is made easier.    
The process can be planned according to the wishes of the client and project team, in-
stead of solely relying on the traditional outline of the Description of Services. Events 
like workshops and design sprints can be agreed upon and planned according to the 
specific project. By being involved in the planning and scoping of a project, all disciplines 
and involved parties will naturally gain a higher sense of ownership over the project. 
When a team has a shared ownership of a project, they are more enthusiastic about 
reaching a common ground and creating something unique. In the focus group, one of 
the participants called this concept “having more skin in the game”. When having more 
skin in the game, the team and the individuals have more at stake, e.g. reputation, brand-
ing, self-realisation, ego etc. One of the benefits of the design ownership among team 
members, is that they are more interested in exploring the possible solutions of different 
disciplines, i.e. they get an insight in each other processes. As stated in the findings from 
the case study (see apge 130) the process might be more important than the result, as 
the team can identify and agree to the solution, as long as they understand the process 
and idea behind. 
==PAGE:185==
185
Rethinking of business models
Since the disciplines of architecture and engineering became separate and more special-
ised within narrow fields, the differences in approach and methods have become more 
pronounced. The need to invent new ways of collaboration is therefore more evident 
than ever. 
A radical suggestion toward breaking with the traditional framework, and the contractual 
issues it brings along, would be to establish multidisciplinary building companies, where 
a designated project team could handle a building project from initial idea to finished 
construction. In large corporations, careful attention must be given to avoiding estab-
lishment of single-discipline sub-companies within a multi-disciplinary corporation. This 
could be mitigated by having multidisciplinary project teams working specifically on only 
one type of building, e.g. schools, office, residential, refurbishment, etc. This would ensure 
co-location of a multidisciplinary team and the every-day physical presence and high 
level of internal multidisciplinarity, which would benefit the individual designer and the 
quality of building project (see page 130). Another benefit would be the repetition of 
work, which means project teams would not have to start from zero on every new project. 
The team would be familiar and used to working together, and working with the same 
type of buildings would allow experience gathering and knowledge obtained from ear-
lier projects to be used in new projects. Working with a specific building type on a team 
basis would require that all teams include all disciplines. The business model described 
above is in the following called project type based business model. Overall there are two 
business models; the project type based and the profession based. The profession based 
business model is often applied in larger companies. The following figure 23 illustrates 
the two business models, where the project type based has its project teams across pro-
fessions, and the profession based has profession, mono-discipline, departments. 
Team 1
Team 2
Team 3
Team 4
Team 1
Team 2
Team 3
Team 4
Figure 23 - The project type based business model is shown to the left, and the profession 
based business model to the right
Part 3
==PAGE:186==
186
Collaboration and Integration of Engieering in Building Design Processes
The profession based business model can cause challenges, if interfaces of disciplines 
are not well coordinated, as this will create professional silos. Silo structures can be 
problematic if the interfaces of the professions are not well coordinated, hence mistakes 
can happen and rework on the design will be necessary. This coordination require careful 
management. The most common business model within architectural studios and engi-
neering consultancies, is the profession based business model. One of the main advan-
tages of the profession based model is the strong professional competencies within each 
discipline. In a larger discipline specific department, a larger variety of competencies and 
experience within the specific discipline will be available. Younger and less experienced 
employees can seek advice and guidance among colleagues. When an issue or challenge 
arise, the probability that someone in the department will have come across a similar 
problem before, and thus know how to solve it, is naturally higher in a larger discipline 
department than in a multidisciplinary project team, where there is perhaps only one or 
two people within the specific discipline.
As with the profession based model, the project type based model has its advantages 
and disadvantages. By having well-established multidisciplinary teams, a shift from tech-
nical knowledge as design validator to design informer is made easier, since the techni-
cal disciplines are a natural part of all design- development and decisions. The technical 
disciplines would also be used to working with the more creative and soft-value disci-
plines and hence gain a more elaborate understanding of the value and need for these 
aspects, hence be more open-minded for compromise. This again would put the process 
over the result. Having a project type- instead of a profession based business model, 
can however, cause other issues. If one or more teams of employees are designated to 
a specific building type, this can become very problematic if the company does not get 
any assignments of this type. Then entire teams of employees will be without work. It is 
thus not a very robust business model, and strategies for these kinds of situations would 
have to be developed. 
Having the same team of people perform the entire building project will ensure an im-
mense amount of consistency throughout the project process, which can be highly ben-
eficial for the overall quality of the project and most likely easier to manage, also for the 
client (see figure 24). However, the type of professionals, who function well in the early 
phases of a building project, is no necessarily the same type, who function well in the last 
phases. It is a matter of skillset, but also a matter of personality and temperament. It can 
thus be difficult to have the same people working on a project from start to finish. It is 
therefore often seen that team members are changed between design phases to match 
==PAGE:187==
187
their competencies (see figure 25). This can be beneficial for better collaboration, as each 
team member is used to working with the specific knowledge level. However, information 
might be lost between phases. Both ways of organising team members in projects are 
applicable for both the business models. 
The tendency of large multidisciplinary corporations is already seen in the building in-
dustry, as large contracting companies establish their own internal engineering consul-
tancies to handle the design in design – build contracts. Architectural studios also hire 
engineers in order to have in-house competencies in technical fields.
Process management
Descriptions of a Design Facilitator is found in most literature concerning integrated 
design processes. The required skillset, tasks and areas of responsibility of the Design 
Facilitator match some parts of the services of Design Management (2.1) and those 
of Process Management/Consultancy (8.17), as outlined in the Description of Services 
(DANSKE-ARK & FRI, 2012). Some tasks of the Design manager require great insight to 
many aspects of building design and construction, people skills, and the ability to man-
age people with different professions, motivations, and personalities. Other tasks require 
skills within classic project management, e.g. time- and financial management. Besides 
being numerous, the services required by the Design manager are of very different na-
tures. It might be beneficial to split the role of the Design manager in two – a project 
manager and a design process coordinator, to ensure a high level of quality in the work. 
Concept 
design
Pre-
design
Schematic
design
Design
proposal
Detailed
design
Con-
struction
Concept 
design
Pre-
design
Schematic
design
Design
proposal
Detailed
design
Con-
struction
Figure 24 - Project structure, where team members are consistent through phases
Figure 25 - Project structure, where the team members are changed between phases
Part 3
==PAGE:188==
188
Collaboration and Integration of Engieering in Building Design Processes
A suggestion for the division of services is outlined in figure 26. Some services of 2.1.1 
are divided between a role of a project manager and a role of a design process coordi-
nator. The rest are not assigned specifically, as they could be handled by either one or in 
collaboration. 
All services of 2.1.4 are divided between project manager and design process coordina-
tor. As stated in the sub-conclusion of Part 1 (see page 98), the ‘new’ role of the design 
process coordinator should not replace the role of the existing project manager. The 
project manager and design process coordinator should work closely together to and 
support each other in the overall management of the project. If a sustainability certi-
fication, e.g. DGNB, is due, the DGNB auditor should also be part of this close collabo-
ration, perhaps in a management team or steering group, as in the partnering project 
organisation structure, outlined in Part 1 (see page 48). The project manager would be 
responsible for time- and financial management, tendering, descriptions, contracts, and 
organisation. The design process coordinator would be responsible for collaboration and 
coordination within the project organisation. The design process coordinator would be 
responsible for facilitating workshops and design sprints/workshops/meetings, the over-
all design process, ensuring a holistic, sustainable building project. Project meetings 
would be jointly facilitated by both the project manager and the design process coor-
dinator, where agenda items concerning the respective responsibility area of the two 
would be facilitated accordingly.
A specification of the tasks and responsibilities of project- and design process coordi-
nator could possibly prompt a specification of required skills of the two professions. In 
the building industry, there is a tendency of promoting talented engineers and architects 
to managers. However, good professionals do not necessarily make good managers and 
leaders. This is known as the Peter-principle, where a promotion is based on the person’s 
performance in their current job, instead of their ability to handle the new role. As long 
as a person performs well in a job, she/he will keep being promoted until she/he rise to 
the level of incompetence. In general, people who are very good at a highly-specialised 
trade, for example engineering or architecture, do not necessarily possess the required 
skills it takes to be a good leader. 
==PAGE:189==
189
Project management
Design Process Coordination
2.1.1 Contents
 
>
The project manager determines the form of 
contract in concert with the individual consul-
tants and the client; this work includes defin-
ing the responsibilities of the consultants on 
the basis of agreements concluded with the 
client.
 
>
The project manager draws up an organisa-
tional chart for design and project follow-up.
 
>
The project manager recommends the type 
of tendering procedure and the allocation of 
contracts to the client, and coordinates the 
process of inviting tenders.
 
>
The project manager prepares the tender 
conditions, tender letter and construction 
contract.
 
>
The project manager prepares a description 
of the building project on the basis of propos-
als made by the consultants.
 
>
The design manager presents the full tender 
documents to the client for approval.
 
>
The design process coordinator is responsible 
for cooperation between the consultants and 
ensures coordination of project work performed 
by the individual consultants, with particular 
focus on interfaces. This is also the case if de-
sign work is performed by suppliers or contrac-
tors.
 
>
The design process coordinator undertakes 
the coordination of the building’s architecture, 
landscaping, structures and installations.
 
>
The design process coordinator also coordi-
nates in relation to the building’s sustainabil-
ity goals.
 
>
The design process coordinator coordinates 
follow-up by the consultants, including in rela-
tion to joint design and supplier and contractor 
design.
2.1.2 Programming
2.1.3 Cost management
2.1.4 Authorities
 
>
The project manager handles any advance 
dialogue, ensures that the consultants submit 
applications to the authorities and coordi-
nates other negotiations with miscellaneous 
authorities for the purpose of obtaining plan-
ning permission and other necessary permits, 
and finally clarifies the conditions of such per-
mission and permits
 
>
The design process coordinator coordinates 
the collaboration between the consultants 
with a view to meeting the requirements of the 
building regulations towards energy needs and 
indoor climate.
 
>
The design process coordinator coordinates 
the collaboration between the consultants 
with respect to the establishment and imple-
mentation of a fire strategy, with a view to ob-
taining regulatory approval.
2.1.5 Quality assurance
8.17 Process management/consultancy
Figure 26 - Suggestion for division of services of Design Management 
Part 3
==PAGE:190==
190
Collaboration and Integration of Engieering in Building Design Processes
In Denmark, engineering and architecture are not only two separate programs, but also 
two separate trades taught at different schools. This separation is founded by the tra-
ditions in the industry, but it also ensures the separation in the industry to continue 
with the new generations of candidates coming out of the schools. In other countries, 
engineering and architecture are both taught in the same universities, either in different 
faculties or side by side. This is for example the case in Sweden, where engineering and 
architecture students at taught together. 
In Denmark, the need for cross disciplinary professionals has been recognised. There-
fore, educational programs like Architectural Engineering at DTU and AU, the BSc in 
Engineering (Architecture and Design) and the MSc in Engineering (Architecture) at AAU 
have emerged.  The program of Construction architect was originally meant to be the 
same type of cross disciplinary mediator as with the programs in DTU, AU, and AAU. With 
the exception of the construction architect, these are all engineering degrees with an 
amount of architecture history and design method in the curriculum. They aim to be a 
hybrid between engineering and architecture.
It is interesting to note, that these types of hybrid programs are only available at the 
technical universities and engineering schools and not in the schools of architecture. It 
can be argued that this is an expression of opinion where the engineers need to adapt to 
the process of architects and not the other way around. However, engineering is all about 
problem solving, and the approach and process of typical engineers is what makes them 
great problem solvers. Even though increased complexity in building calls for radical 
changes in the overall framework of how building projects are conducted, there is still a 
great need for highly skilled engineers. 
The hybrid professionals are broader in their knowledge of building, but not so deeply 
specialised. These types of generalists, with knowledge and insight to multiple aspects 
of building and construction are highly needed in the industry, e.g. to mediate between 
the different trades and in that way ease collaboration. These hybrids are schooled to 
a positive attitude towards a high level of collaboration and integration between disci-
plines. Collaboration challenges in the building industry are mainly seen between the 
highly specialised, traditional trades of engineering and architecture. Hence, the issue of 
attitude should be addressed in the traditional educational programs. These programs 
could benefit from changes and updates to their curriculum towards an understanding 
of the work, method, and process of other disciplines.
EDUCATION CAN BE PART OF THE SOLUTION
==PAGE:191==
191
There is still a need in the industry for highly specialised professionals within both ar-
chitecture and engineering. However, the disciplines and building industry would benefit 
from having a certain amount of cross disciplinary training in the educational programs. 
One initiative could be joint introductory courses. As found in Part 2, visual, diagrammat-
ic communication of discipline specific knowledge contribute to the establishment of 
a common language across disciplines. Courses on visual communication could hence 
be beneficial, but also on more discipline specific subjects and especially method and 
process of the two disciplines.
Engineers are educated and trained to work rationally and linearly towards solving a 
problem. Architects are trained to work iteratively with multiple potential solutions at 
the same time, i.e. what is known as ‘optioneering’. As stated in Part 1, the root of the 
problems, which the building industry is experiencing with integrated design, is partly 
caused by how the different professions work. Instead of fitting the processes to different 
methods, perhaps the root of the problem should be challenged by educating a new kind 
of engineer and architect, who can embrace different methods.
The joint classes with both engineering, architecture, and possibly also construction ar-
chitecture students could foster an understanding of the common framework, which all 
these disciplines are subject to and will have to work under after graduation. Collabo-
rative classes and projects across the schools and programs could furthermore procure 
a sense of routine towards multidisciplinary collaboration, which the candidates will 
then take with them in their professional careers. A certain amount of joint curriculum 
across engineering and architecture schools could provide the beneficial insight into the 
work of other disciplines, of which the importance is described in Part 2 (see page 130). 
Furthermore, universities and students are very social, hence the joint courses can also 
foster an insight to the people of other disciplines on a more social level. Together with 
the insight to the profession, a joint curriculum can help break with the traditional mind-
set of ‘us and them’ which permeate the building industry.
Part 3
==PAGE:192==
192
Collaboration and Integration of Engieering in Building Design Processes
How could a palpable concept for integrated design processes be scoped in order to 
secure implementation of technical knowledge and  “a good design process” within the 
Danish building industry? 
The challenges, which the building industry face within integrated design processes, are 
related to circumstances on an operational level as well as on an overall management 
and regulatory level. 
In order for the implementation of technical knowledge to be value-adding in a building 
design process, technical inputs should be incorporated in the early design phase as 
design informers. In order to secure implementation of technical knowledge in the archi-
tectural design, close multidisciplinary collaboration needs to be established. Operation-
al challenges of collaboration mainly concern communication and coordination between 
different disciplines. Many excellent tools for optimising these aspects already exist; 
everything from team building exercises to guides and blue-prints for kick-off workshops 
in order to establish a solid foundation for good collaboration and knowledge-integra-
tion early in a building project. Coordination is vital and should be secured via proper 
and careful project and process management, by designated and highly skilled projects 
managers and design process coordinators. Tools for experience gathering, phase tran-
sition management, and process evaluation are available, such as Commissioning and 
DGNB, along with profound concepts for handling communication and coordination, such 
as ICT and Sustainability management. Co-location of building design teams in joint 
facilities, in combination with the management initiatives outlined in the previous, can 
ease communication, coordination and hence collaboration. 
However, as stated above, the level of implementation of technical knowledge is depen-
dent on more overall challenges, e.g. regarding the design process of the architectur-
al studio, which is a product of traditions. Furthermore, a number of challenges on an 
overall management and regulatory level needs to be overcome in order to ensure the 
feasibility of early collaboration and an integrated design process. Early collaboration 
between different partners in the building industry is not straight-forward in the tra-
ditional framework for building projects in Denmark, and is associated with high-risk 
aspects regarding traditional contracts and fee structures. There is hence a need for con-
tractual relations and fee structures that allow early involvement of multiple disciplines. 
SUB-CONCLUSION PART 3
==PAGE:193==
193
Chapter name
CONCLUSION 
& FUTURE RESEARCH
Future comes by itself, 
progress does not
- Poul Henningsen
“
==PAGE:194==
194
Collaboration and Integration of Engieering in Building Design Processes
CONCLUSION 
To optimise the integrated design process from theoretical methodologies into practical 
approaches within the Danish framework, it is essential to understand how the Descrip-
tion of Services and companies’ business management influence the design process. The 
findings from the section on Danish Building Project Framework (see page 160) in Part 
1 capture the essentials of the Danish framework, which any building design project 
in Denmark is subject to. The findings from the section Mapping of Integrated Design 
Process Guides (see page 92) in Part 1 organise a state-of-the-art comparison of eight 
guides for Integrated Design Processes (IDP). The findings lay out the shared parameters 
of the IDP guides as well as their discrepancies. 
Part 1 provides the theoretical foundation for the social research of Part 2, where a case 
study at an architectural studio explored how technical inputs in the early design phases 
were integrated in a building project design. This practical approach gave concrete ex-
amples on technical inputs given to architects, their response to this, and the level of im-
plementation in the building design. A questionnaire gave context to the observations of 
the case study by creating a ‘studio profile’ of six major architectural studios in Denmark, 
including the case study studio. The questionnaire mapped the importance and influence 
of technical aspects in the design process, as well as the individual’s perception of their 
own and their studio’s multidisciplinarity. The findings of the case study (see page 130) 
and questionnaire (see page 155) were analysed through a focus group with the project 
team participants from the architectural studio (see page 170). 
The findings from Part 1 and 2 were in Part 3 merged into a discussion of the possible 
optimisation potential of integrated design processes (see page 178-191). From this, it 
can be concluded that optimisation potentials can only be partially exploited within the 
current Danish framework (see page 192). To exhibit and realise the full potentials, the 
overall management- and regulatory framework must be adjusted. 
How can the early design processes within the Danish building industry be optimised 
to a level where the potentials of integrated design are exhibited and realised? 
==PAGE:195==
195
Conclusion and Future Research
A number of initiatives can optimise the early design phases. Through this optimisation, 
the potentials of integrated design, i.e. ensuring a sustainable, well-coordinated building 
design of high quality, can be exhibited and realised. It can be concluded that:
Dividing the services of design- and process management between the roles of 
a project manager and a design process coordinator will specify the required 
skillset and can ensure competent and careful management in an integrated 
design process.
Prolonging the time span of early design phases and reducing the number of 
milestones will allow an iterative process and minimise inexpedient obstruc-
tions to the design development.
Changing fee structures to match the workload shifted to the early design 
phases is necessary for a feasible business model related to integrated design 
processes. 
Breaking with traditions in educational programs can permeate the building in-
dustry by procuring a sense of routine towards multidisciplinary collaboration, 
which the candidates will then take with them in their professional careers.
==PAGE:196==
196
Collaboration and Integration of Engieering in Building Design Processes
CONCLUDING THE STATEMENTS IN THE HYPOTHESES
1. The challenges of multidisciplinary collaboration within the building industry are 
related to traditions and mind-set of individual professionals 
2. Technical knowledge as a design driver in the early design phases depends on the 
presentation and clarity of communication of technical scientific knowledge 
3. There is a connection between the architectural studio’s overall design-pro-
cess-profile and the willingness to collaborate with engineers in the early design 
phases
The main research question is addressed on the previous page. The research question 
is a product of three hypotheses. From the investigations, analysis and findings of this 
thesis it is possible to confirm or disconfirm these hypotheses.
Hypothesis statement 1 
The findings from the literature study confirm that the building industry is very tra-
dition-bound, and that the Danish framework sustain a traditional value-chain of mo-
no-disciplinarity and retrospective coordination. Through the case study, traditions are 
observed to play a major role in the architectural studio, as the overall structure of the 
project maintain a traditional approach to the design process. This is expressed by hav-
ing traditional contracts with only the architect involved in the early design phases due 
to a sequenced agency approval process, uncertain client wishes, and unclear project 
goals. Traditions can lead to a ‘business-as-usual’ practice with a ‘doing-what–we-have-
always-done’ (subconscious) mind-set. This mind-set can be a challenge for collabora-
tion as it can also foster an ‘us-and-them’ attitude between the collaborating parties 
on a building project. Collaboration challenges also spring from the fact that different 
disciplines often time have different personalities. As an example, engineers in general 
have a certain type of personality, as engineering is a type of work that appeal to certain 
personality types. Personality is hence one of the reasons engineers are so god at what 
they do – the tasks and work methods appeal to them. The same apply to e.g. architects; 
the work and methods of architecture appeal to certain personality types. Because the 
approach and methods of the two disciplines are different, the individual professional 
may also have different personalities, which can be a challenge for collaboration. Fur-
thermore, the mere fact that work methods are different is a challenge for the coordina-
tion and collaboration on building projects. 
The research in this thesis show that the challenges of multidisciplinary collaboration are 
related to many more aspects. However, it is possible to confirm the hypothesis. 
==PAGE:197==
197
Hypothesis statement 2 
From the prelude case study at an engineering consultancy and the thesis case study at 
an architectural studio, it is clear that the integration of technical knowledge partially 
depends on the presentation and the clarity of the content. The technical knowledge 
must be communicated with the receiver in mind, both in terms of presentation form 
(visual, written or verbal and monologue, dialogue or workshop), but also regarding the 
timing. An understanding of the receiver’s process is necessary in order to communicate 
in a clear and suitable way, at the right time. 
However, it is not deemed optimal to implement technical knowledge as design drivers, 
as this will result in a distortion of the value-adding aspects in a project, which might 
be as unilateral as having technical knowledge validate a design. It is found the most 
optimal that technical knowledge informs design decisions. There is an indication that 
presentation and clarity of technical knowledge can be ensured through visual communica-
tion, and that the incorporation of technical inputs is dependent on timing. However, based on 
only one case study, the hypothesis can neither be confirmed nor disconfirmed.
Hypothesis statement 3
From the questionnaire and focus group, it was found that the overall profile of an ar-
chitectural studio influence the design process of building projects and hence the level 
of implementation of technical knowledge in the early design phases. From the focus 
group, and underlined by observations during the case study, it is seen that employees 
in architecture studios can very well be willing and motivated for early collaboration 
with engineers. The architects are fully aware of the benefits of early integration and 
collaboration. The individual architect has leverage to influence projects through her/
his own methods and work process. However, the overall profile of the studio dictates 
the approach to projects and hence the design process. This ‘conflict’ between the overall 
studio profile and the individual’s wish could possibly explain the difference in per-
ceived level of importance and influence on design decisions seen in the questionnaire 
responses. There is an indication that the overall profile of an architectural studio does not 
influence the willingness for early collaboration, however the studio profile dictate the design 
process, and hence the capability and feasibility for early collaboration. However, the extent of 
the investigations in this thesis are limited; hence, it is not possible to completely disconfirm 
the hypothesis. 
Conclusion and Future Research
==PAGE:198==
198
Collaboration and Integration of Engieering in Building Design Processes
FUTURE RESEARCH    
The intention of this thesis was to explore why the concept of integrated design has not 
yet been unconditionally successful, and what could be done to succeed. Qua the authors’ 
educational background and professional insight to the building industry, it has been 
possible to identify the mechanisms that influence and control the early phase design 
processes and hence why the building industry is still struggling with the concept of in-
tegrated design. The root cause of the challenges is of a social- and managerial nature. It 
is hence not within the capabilities of the authors of this thesis to suggest a resolution. 
The issues are related to traditions, legislation, and management, and must hence be 
solved by expert within these fields. 
The research in this thesis provides a solid base for scoping a tangible and practically 
applicable method for multidisciplinary design and collaboration in an integrated design 
process. The method could build on the existing IDP guides by accumulating the many 
strengths, i.e. good ideas, concepts, and elements. The method would be an optimisation 
of the existing by filling in the gaps in description of design and collaboration method.
The objective of integrated design is to optimise collaboration in the design process and 
thus ensure a sustainable, well-coordinated building design of high quality. However, 
a good design in itself does not ensure good building as the quality is dependent on 
the construction. Many faults occur during construction due to various reasons. Hence, 
there is an optimisation potential in the construction phase, similar to that of the design 
phase. The focus of this thesis has been on the optimisation potentials of the early de-
sign phases, however a similar study could be conducted for optimising potentials in the 
construction phase and reducing construction errors.
As found from the questionnaire, the design process of an architectural studio influence 
the level of implementation of technical knowledge. Hence, a more exhausting investi-
gation of design processes across studios would be interesting, in order to explore how 
they utilise technical inputs to validate, inform or drive their design decisions. A study 
like this is already in the pipeline from the Civil Engineering Department of DTU through 
shared work of the authors and PhD student Mathilde Landgren. The research is ongoing 
and will be finalised in the second half of 2017.
==PAGE:199==
199
REFERENCES 
AIA. (2007). Integrated Project Delivery : A Guide (Vol. 1). American Institute of Architects.
AIA. (2012). Integrating Energy Modeling. (J. Potter, Ed.). American Institute of Architects.
Azari, R., & Kim, Y.-W. (2015). Integration Evaluation Framework for Integrated Design Teams of 
Green Buildings: Development and Validation. Journal of Management in Engineering, Volume 
32(3rd issue), 11 pages.
Bamford, G. (2002). From analysis/synthesis to conjecture/analysis: A review of Karl Popper’s in-
fluence on design methodology in architecture. Design Studies, Volume 23(3rd issue), Page 
245-261.
Bejder, A.-K., Knudstrup, M.-A., Jensen, R. L., & Katic, I. (2014). Zero Energy Buildings – Design Princi-
ples and Built Examples (First edit). Aalborg: Alectia.
bips. (2017). Det Digitale Byggeri - bips. Retrieved June 2, 2017, from https://bips.dk/værktøjsom-
råde/det digitale byggeri#0
BREEAM. (2014). BREEAM UK New construction non-domestic buildings (Issue 0.1). Watford: BRE 
Global Ltd.
Brinkman, W.-P. (2009). Design of a Questionnaire Instrument. Handbook of Mobile Technology Re-
search Methods. Delft University of Technology, The Netherlands: Nova Publisher.
Brunsgaard, C. (2009). Strengths and weaknesses of different approaches of IDP. Aalborg: Depart-
ment of Civil Engineering, Aalborg University. (DCE Technical Reports; No. 74).
Brunsgaard, C., Dvořáková, P., Wyckmans, A., Stutterecker, W., Laskari, M., Almeida, M., … Op ’t Veld, P. 
(2014). Integrated energy design - Education and training in cross-disciplinary teams imple-
menting energy performance of buildings directive (EPBD). Building and Environment (Vol. 
Volume 72).
Brunsgaard, C., Knudstrup, M.-A., & Heiselberg, P. K. (2009). Experiences from the design processes 
of the first “ Comfort Houses ” in Denmark (In Passivh). Passivhus Norden.
Bryman, A. (2008). Social Research Methods (Third Edit). New York: Oxford University Press.
Buchanan, R. (1992). Wicked Problems Thinking in Design. Design Issues, The MIT Press, Volume 
8(2nd issue), Page 5-21.
Busby Perkins +Will, & Stantec Consulting. (2007). Roadmap for the Integrated Design Process. 
Canada: BC Green Building Roundtable.
Bygningsstyrelsen. (2017). Digitalisering af byggeriet | Bygningsstyrelsen. Retrieved June 2, 2017, 
from https://www.bygst.dk/viden-om/digitalisering-af-byggeriet/
Canterbury Earthquakes Royal Commission. (2014). Improving Collaboration Between Architects 
and Engineers, 1–8.
Creswell, J. W. (2013). Research Design: Qualitative, Quantitative, and Mixed Methods Approach-
es. Research design Qualitative quantitative and mixed methods approaches. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s13398-014-0173-7.2
Cross, N. (1993). A history of design methodology. Design Methodology and Relationships with 
Science, Page 15-28. Kluwer Adacemic Publishers.
Danish Energy Agency. (2013). Energy Policy Toolkit on: Energy Efficiency in New Buildings - Ex-
periences from Denmark. Retrieved from http://www.ens.dk/sites/ens.dk/files/climate-co2/
low-carbon-transition-unit/danish-energy-policy-toolkits/energy_efficiency_in_new_build-
ings.pdf
Dansk Byggeri. (2017). Byggeriets Energianalyse 2017. Retrieved from https://www.danskbyggeri.
dk/media/24229/final_byggeriets-energianalyse_samlet_net_2017.pdf
DANSKE-ARK, & FRI. (2005). Totalentreprise: Retningslinjer for udbud m.v. ved anvendelse af total-
entrepriseformen ved bygge- og anlægsarbejder. Bygherreforeningen, Dansk Byggeri, Danske 
Arkitektvirksomheder, Foreningen af Rådgivende Ingeniører.
DANSKE-ARK, & FRI. (2012). Description of Services: Building and Planning 2012. Danske Arkitek-
tvirksomheder, Foreningen af Rådgivende Ingeniører.
==PAGE:200==
200
Collaboration and Integration of Engieering in Building Design Processes
De Vries, M. J., Cross, N., & Grant, D. P. (1993). Design Methodology and Relationships with Science 
(1st ed.). Springer Science & Business Media.
DEOMI. (2015). Focus Group Guide. Orlando: Research Directorate - Defence Equal Opportunity 
Management Institute (DEOMI).
DGNB. (2016). DGNB system. Denmark: Green Building Counsil Denmark.
Erhvervs- og Byggestyrelsen. (2006). Vejledning i partnering. København.
Farke, A., Arbour, V. M., Burns, M. E., Sullivan, R. M., Lucas, S. G., Cantrell, A. K., … Klukkert, Z. S. (2014). 
Honeybee-primer. Retrieved from https://www.gitbook.com/book/mostapharoudsari/honey-
bee-primer/details
Forgber, U., Kohler, N., Koch, V., Schmidt, F., & Haller, R. (2009). Integration of Sustainable Approach-
es in the Building Design Process. Karlsruhe and Stuttgart. Retrieved from https://blm.ieb.kit.
edu/downloads/1997_florenz.pdf
Glushko, B. (2008). Models of the Design Process (ISSD Lecture # 6). Retrieved from http://courses.
ischool.berkeley.edu/i290-1/f08/lectures/ISSD-20080917.pdf
Greco, L. Del, Walop, W., & Mccarthy, R. H. (1987). Clinical Epidemiology Questionnaire development: 
2. Validity and reliability. CMAJ, Volume 136(April Issue), Page 699-700.
Gaardsted, M., Kamper, S., & Højbjerg, J. (2007). Integreret Energidesign - IED: Design og Metode-
beskrivelse. (F. Salvesen, I. Andresen, & A. G. Hestnes, Eds.).
Hansen, H. T. R., & Knudstrup, M.-A. (2005). The Integrated Design Process (IDP): A more holistic 
approach to sustainable architecture. The 2005 World Sustainable Building Conference, Tokyo, 
27-29 September 2005 (SB05Tokyo), Page 894-901.
Henning Larsen Architects. (2017). Methods :: Henning Larsen Architects. Retrieved June 17, 2017, 
from http://www.henninglarsen.com/architecture/sustainability/methods.aspx
Hybertson, D. W. (2009). Model-oriented Systems Engineering Ecience: A Unifying Framework for 
Traditional and Complex Systems. Auerbach Publications.
Intelligent Energy Europe. (2009a). Integrated Energy Design: IED - INTEND. (I. Andresen, A. G. Hes-
tnes, S. Kamper, P. F. Jørgensen, K. Bramslev, E. Hammer, … K. Sander, Eds.).
Intelligent Energy Europe. (2009b). Integrated Energy Design - Some Principles of Low Energy 
Building Design. (I. Andresen, A. G. Hestnes, S. Kamper, P. F. Jørgensen, K. Bramslev, E. Ham-
mer, … K. Sander, Eds.). Retrieved from http://www.intendesign.com/Case/Intend.nsf/Attach-
ments/3D1B5663603D2723C125773E0033EF7B/$FILE/Some_principles_revised_Normal-
Quality.pdf
Intelligent Energy Europe. (2014). MaTriD: Integrated Design Process Guideline.
International Energy Agency. (2003). Integrated Design Process: A Guideline for Sustainable and 
Solar-optimised Building Design: TASK 23. (G. Löhnert, A. Dalkowski, & W. Sutter, Eds.), Berlín: 
IEA International Energy Agency. Berlin: International Energy Agency - Solar Heating & Cooling 
Programme.
International Energy Agency. (2008). Methods and Tools for Designing Integrated Building Con-
cepts. (I. Andresen, T. Kleiven, M.-A. Knudstrup, & P. Heiselberg, Eds.). Aalborg.
Jakobsen, S. S., & Wohlenberg, B. (2016). Visual Communication of professional engineering know-
how as a tool in integrated design processes, 20. https://doi.org/10.1177/1470357205055928
Jensen, J. M., & Knudsen, T. (2014). Analyse af spørgeskemadata med SPSS: Teori, anvendelse og 
praksis (3rd editio). Odense: Syddansk Universitetsforlag.
Kanters, J., & Horvat, M. (2012). The design process known as IDP: A discussion. Energy Procedia, 
Volume 30, Page 1153-1162. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.egypro.2012.11.128
Kim, Y., Azari, R., & Angeley, J. (2016). Benchmarking in Integrated Design Process : Uw-Arcf Case 
Study. International Group for Lean Construction, 103–111.
Koch, C., & Buhl, H. (2013). “Integrated Design Process” a Concept for Green Energy Engineering. 
Engineering, Volume 5(March issue), 292–298.
==PAGE:201==
201
Koch, N. (2011). Perspektiver på Byggeriets Faseskift: Et Dabatoplæg. (A. Beim, S. Boke, K. Kriner, K. 
E. Busk, L. F. Pedersen, N. C. Toppenberg, & P. Wiberg, Eds.). København: Værdibyg.
Koch, N. (2012). Etablering af Samarbejde. (L. Knudsen, M. Johansen, C. K. Sørensen, F. Bloch, R. M. 
Christensen, A. Kirsebom, … J. E. Schmidt, Eds.). Købenahvn: Værdibyg.
Kongebro, S., Jørgensen, M., Vraa Nielsen, M., Strømann-Andersen, J., Fellah, F., Lykke, J., … Fibiger, 
L. (2012). Design Med Viden: Ny forskning i bæredygtgt byggeri. (S. Kongebro, Ed.) (First edit). 
Copenhagen: Henning Larsen Architects.
Kropp, J., & Scholze, M. (2009). Climate Change Information for Effective Adaptation: A Practitioner’s 
Manual. Eschborn: Deutsche Gesellschaft für Technische Zusammenarbeit (GTZ) GmbH, Cli-
mate Protection Programme.
Krueger, R. A. (2002). Designing and Conducting Focus Group Interviews. Minneapolis: University 
of Minnesota.
Kvale, S., & Brinkmann, S. (2009). InterView (Second Edi). Copenhagen: Hans Reitzels Forlag.
Larsson, N. (2009). The Integrated Design Process ; History and Analysis. International Initiative for 
a Sustainable Bult Environment (iiSBE).
LEED. (2017). LEED v4 for BUILDING DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION. USGBC. Retrieved from http://
www.usgbc.org/sites/default/files/LEED v4 BDC_04.14.17_current_0.pdf
MADE. (2016). MADE by the Opera House - Sydney Opera House. Retrieved June 19, 2017, from 
https://www.sydneyoperahouse.com/general/prize-and-scholarships/made-by-the-opera-
house.html
Malin, N. (2004). Integrated Design. Environmental Building News, Volume 13(11th issue).
McKinsey. (2015). The construction productivity imperative | McKinsey &amp; Company. Retrieved 
June 3, 2017, from http://www.mckinsey.com/industries/capital-projects-and-infrastructure/
our-insights/the-construction-productivity-imperative
Negendahl, K. (2015). Building performance simulation in the early design stage: An introduction 
to integrated dynamic models. Automation in Construction, Volume 54, Page 39-53. https://doi.
org/6/j.autcon.2015.03.002
Nielsen, M. V. (2012). Integrated Energy Design in the Building envelope. Technical University of 
Denmark.
PAR & FRI. (2003). Client Consultancy. The Danish Counsil of Practising Architects (PAR) and The 
Association of Consulting Engineers in Denmark (FRI).
Petersen, S. (2011). Simulation-based support for integrated design of new low-energy office build-
ings. Technical University of Denmark.
Petersen, S., & Svendsen, S. (2008). Method for integrated design of low energy buildings with high 
quality indoor environment. In Proceedings of the 8th symposium of building physics in the 
nordic countries (Vol. 2, pp. 597–604). Copenhagen: Danish Society of Engineers.
Petersen, S., & Svendsen, S. (2010). Method and simulation program informed decisions in the early 
stages of building design. Energy and Buildings, Volume 42(7th issue), Page 1113-1119.
Riemer, M. J. (2007). Communication Skills for the 21st Century Engineer. Global Journal of Engi-
neering Education, 11(1), 89–100.
Rosenfield, K. (2012). The Future of the Building Industry: BIM-BAM-BOOM! | ArchDaily. Retrieved 
June 20, 2017, from http://www.archdaily.com/262008/the-future-of-the-building-industry-
bim-bam-boom
Roudsari, M. S. (2016). Ladybug Tools - Grasshopper. Retrieved June 25, 2017, from http://www.
grasshopper3d.com/group/ladybug
Sakikhales, M. H., & Stravoravdis, S. (2015). Using BIM to facilitate iterative design, 149, 9–19. 
https://doi.org/10.2495/BIM150021
Shani, A. B. (Rami), & Noumair, D. A. (2015). Research in Organizational Change and Development 
(First edit). Bingley, UK: Emerald Group Publishing Limited.
==PAGE:202==
202
Collaboration and Integration of Engieering in Building Design Processes
Solar Decathlon. (2017). Solar Decathlon. Retrieved June 19, 2017, from https://www.solardecath-
lon.gov/
Strømann-Andersen, J. B. (2012). Integrated Energy Design in Master Planning. Denmark: DTU Civil 
engineering & Henning Larsen Architects.
Swann, C. (2002). Action Research and the Practice of Design. Design Issues, Volume 18(1st issue), 
Page 49-61.
Teisen, O., Tolstrup, C., & Due, P. H. (2013). Commissioning Processen. (M. Johansen, S. Ejsing, C. Got-
borg, J. H. Naerbout, M. Wind, J. Svane, … H. Bang, Eds.). København: Værdibyg.
Thyssen, M. (2012). Rigtigt fra start. (Fl. Hansen, L. Götze, K. Kofod-Hansen, M. K. Nielsen, & A. Pers-
son, Eds.). København: Værdibyg.
Trebilcock, M. (2009). Integrated Design Process : From analysis / synthesis to conjecture / analysis. 
In PLEA2009 - 26th Conference on Passive and Low Energy Architecture, Quebec City, Canada, 
22-24 June 2009 (pp. 22–24).
UN. (2017). Goal 13: Take urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts. Retrieved May 
26, 2017, from http://www.un.org/sustainabledevelopment/climate-change-2/
Urup, L. (2016). Integrated Design-Build Management - Studying Institutional Processes to Under-
stand Project Coordination & Performance. Søborg, Danmark: MT Højgaard.
Værdibyg. (2017). Om værdibyg | Værdibyg. Retrieved June 2, 2017, from http://vaerdibyg.dk/index.
php?option=com_content&view=article&id=6&Itemid=144
Studio A Arkitekter - Historie. (2017). Retrieved June 15, 2017, from http://www.Studio A.dk/historie/
Studio A Arkitekter - København. (2017). Retrieved June 15, 2017, from http://en.Studio A.se/offices/
kobenhavn/
Yin, R. K. (2003). Case Study Reseach: Design and Methods. (K. Wiley & S. Robinson, Eds.) (3rd editio). 
Thousand Oaks, California: Sage Publications Inc.
Aaen Petersen, M. (2017). Applied Urban Climatology in Masterplanning. Master Thesis under 
non-disclosure agreement, Technical University of Denmark, Kongens Lyngby, Denmark.
