==PAGE:1==
Approaches to modelling pressure
gradient microphones
Master Thesis in Engineering Acoustics
Jonathan Alexander - s141805
Supervisors:
Vicente Cutanda Henriquez
Finn T. Agerkvist
Department of Electrical Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Completed in collaboration with DPA Microphones A/S
June 23, 2017
==PAGE:2==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
Acknowledgements
I would ﬁrstly like to thank my supervisors Vicente Cutanda Henriquez and Finn T.
Agerkvist for their help, guidance and patience during the project, which has been in-
valuable. In addition I would like to extend a warm thank you to Ole Moesmann and
Anders Poulsen at DPA Microphones A/S for their enlightening discussions and for tak-
ing the time to participate in this project. Finally, I would also like to thank Junghwan
Kook for his support and guidance with numerical modelling using COMSOL Multi-
physics.
1
==PAGE:3==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
Contents
1
Abstract
4
2
Introduction
5
3
Theoretical Background
7
3.1
The pressure-operated microphone . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
The pressure-gradient microphone
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.3
The combination pressure-gradient microphone . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.4
Rear-Access Impedance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.5
Numerical Modelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4
Hypotheses
29
5
Modelling: Numerical Implementation
30
5.1
Electromechanical Lumped Parameter Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.2
Model Dimensions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.3
Discretization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.4
Selection of parameters
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
6
Modelling: The Ideal Pressure-Operated Microphone
37
6.1
Parameter Selection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
6.2
Analytical Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
6.3
Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
6.4
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
6.5
Directivity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
7
Modelling: The Ideal Pressure-Gradient Microphone
48
7.1
Parameter Selection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
7.2
Analytical Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
7.3
Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
7.4
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
7.5
Directivity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
8
Modelling:
The Combination Pressure-Gradient Pressure-Operated
Microphone
57
8.1
Analytical Modeling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
8.2
Analytical Model validation - Omni . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
8.3
Analytical Model validation - Bidirectional
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
8.4
Analytical Model validation - Cardioid . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
2
==PAGE:4==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
9
Modelling: The combination pressure-gradient microphone, numerical
approach
68
9.1
Simple Impedance - Omnidirectional . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
9.2
Numerical Model - Cardioid . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
9.3
Numerical Model - Bidirectional
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
9.4
Numerical model - Lower RA selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
10 Modelling: Rear Access
85
10.1 Porous Impedance - Omnidirectional . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
86
10.2 Porous Impedance - Cardioid . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
88
10.3 Porous Impedance - Figure 8
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
90
10.4 Perforated Plate Impedance - Omnidirectional
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
92
10.5 Perforated Plate Impedance - Cardioid . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
93
10.6 Perforated Plate Impedance - Figure 8 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
96
10.7 Perforated Plate Impedance - RA = 1500N · s/m5
. . . . . . . . . . . .
97
11 Discussion
98
12 Conclusions and Future Work
100
13 References
102
A Appendix - Mathematical Derivations
104
A.1 Lumped Parameter Model for an ideal pressure-operated microphone . .
104
A.2 Lumped Parameter Model for an ideal pressure-gradient microphone . .
106
A.3 Lumped Parameter Model for an ideal combination pressure-gradient mi-
crophone . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
109
B Appendix - Microphone Capsule Parameters
112
B.1
Small-scale parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
112
B.2
Large-scale parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
112
C Appendix - Convergence Study
113
C.1 Analytical model of a thin rigid disc . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
113
C.2 Convergence study in COMSOL
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
115
D Appendix - Convergence Study Plots
119
E Appendix - Plane Wave Expansion in COMSOL
126
E.1
Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
126
E.2
Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
127
E.3
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
128
F Appendix - List of symbols
130
3
==PAGE:5==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
1
Abstract
The operating principle of the combination pressure-gradient microphone, which un-
derpins many commerical microphone designs for music and speech purposes, has been
explored. The operating principles of this microphone type and others are discussed
and analytical models are sequentially developed and validated.
Furthermore, the
microphone principles are studied with a numerical model using the Finite Element
Method (FEM) utilising the COMSOL Multiphysics numerical modelling software pack-
age. Good agreement is found between the ideal pressure-gradient analytical and nu-
merical model, and directivity is observed for a combination pressure-gradient model,
however further work must be done to solve exterior coupling problems.
4
==PAGE:6==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
2
Introduction
The development of microphones for music and acoustic measurement purposes is often
a diﬃcult and time-consuming process [6]. Each type of microphone utilises a trans-
ducer comprising fully-coupled electrical, mechanical and acoustic systems, the relative
properties and interaction of which determine the overall performance of the transducer.
Balancing the various properties of such transducers to achieve a desired output response
requires ﬁne-tuning the various systems and hence the process can be lengthy. For mea-
surement microphones this process must be performed to particularly tight levels of
tolerance since such transducers must be resilient to changes in characteristics of the
local environment and maintain long-term stability in their performance characteristics
[25]. For microphones designed for musical applications the rear access must be care-
fully tuned to achieve the desired directional performance characteristics [6]. The design
process for such devices is typically a combination of analytical modelling and trial-and
error approaches utilising acoustic measurements in order to ﬁne-tune prototypes.
With improvements in computational power, numerical modelling approaches have be-
come more common in transducer modelling in recent years. An early application of
numerical modelling techniques to acoustic transducers, using the Boundary Element
Method, is provided in [17], in which the internal acoustic conditions of a condenser
measurement microphone are modelled, taking into account viscous and thermal losses.
Recent studies have been conducted using the Finite Element Method for similar ap-
plications, again modelling the internal acoustic conditions of condenser measurement
microphone capsules [8], [10]. In all cases, normal incidence plane-wave excitation is
examined, with external eﬀects of scattering omitted such that the corresponding prac-
tical implementation is that of a condenser microphone excited using an electrostatic
actuator. The development of such numerical models provides an opportunity for virtual
prototyping for manufacturers of such devices, exceeding the capabilities of analytical
approaches, while reducing the time and cost needed for trial-and-error development
approaches using real prototypes.
However, in the case of directional microphones, the operating principle is directly de-
pendant on the exterior sound ﬁeld and hence it is necessary to model this aspect.
Furthermore, in order to examine the directivity response of a transducer, it must be
possible to model its behaviour for diﬀerent angles of incidence, thus normal incidence
plane wave conditions do not suﬃce.
Various analytical models have been developed for microphone transducers, mostly based
on Lumped Parameter Models (LPM), with several examples developed in [21]. How-
ever most of the models relate to transducers based on electromagnetic principles such as
Moving Coil Dynamic and Ribbon microphones. Complete models relating to condenser
5
==PAGE:7==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
microphones are scarce, and those available mostly relate to measurement microphones,
which are based on the pressure-operated principle. A highly detailed overview of the
operating principles behind such microphones is given in [32], while a LPM is provided
in [19]. Further detailed models for pressure-operated microphones have been developed
in [26] and [31].
However, most so-called ’large diaphragm’ condenser microphones depend on the combi-
nation pressure-gradient operating principle in order to achieve their directivity. While
these principles are covered in [21] and [22], complete models are not provided for the
condenser microphone case. [30] demonstrates a model for a general directional con-
denser microphone in a study of the behaviour of such microphones with respect to
diﬀerent sound sources (plane-wave and point-source), while a model is developed for
the common dual-diaphragm condenser microphone transducer in [5]. There is therefore
a need for a numerical implementation of a directional condenser transducer. Such a
model could provide a virtual prototyping environment for manufacturers of such micro-
phones, again potentially reducing the time and cost needed for trial-and-error prototype
development, while possibly allowing for more creative approaches for new designs.
In the present report, section 3 covers the relevant background theory regarding mi-
crophone operating principles, acoustic resistance and methods to achieve it through
practical means and numerical methods. Section 5 discusses implementation of a nu-
merical model, including a LPM for the electro-mechanical section of a condenser mi-
crophone. Sections 6 and 7 present analytical models for ideal pressure-operated and
pressure-gradient microphones using a selection of ’small-scale’ parameters used in sim-
ilar COMSOL models for the sake of validation, with the results compared against said
existing numerical implementation [9].
Section 8 presents an analytical LPM for a combination pressure-gradient pressure-
operated microphone, validated against the analytical models given in sections 6 and
7. Section 9 covers the implementation of a corresponding numerical model for a com-
bination microphone using a simple constant and real-valued impedance for the rear-
access, comparing the results against the analytical models given in the previous sec-
tions. Section 10 extends the numerical model by implementing more realistic rear-access
impedance conditions, based on impedance models discussed in section 3. The results
and outcome of the project are discussed in section 11, following which conclusions and
future work are outlined in section 12. Mathematical derivations for the lumped param-
eter analytical models used in the project are given in Appendix A, microphone capsule
parameters are given in Appendix B. A convergence study and plots are given in Ap-
pendices C and D respectively and a summary of the Plane Wave Expansion method in
COMSOL is given in Appendix E.
6
==PAGE:8==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
3
Theoretical Background
Various types of electroacoustic transducers exist for the purpose of converting acoustic
energy into an electrical signal and have been developed in diﬀerent manners for vari-
ous application. Historically speaking, various diﬀerent operational principles have been
developed and can have diﬀerent areas of application. For example, for measurement
microphones it is desirable for a microphone to accurately capture properties of the in-
cident sound ﬁeld, often with minimum inﬂuence of the microphone’s presence on that
ﬁeld [7].
For applications within telephony and to some extent within the ﬁeld of ’live sound’
low cost and durability may be favoured over faithful reproduction of the sound ﬁeld [5].
Where the recording of music and speech is concerned, it is generally desired that the
microphone in use can capture the incident sound ﬁeld accurately, with low contribution
of noise and distortion, often also with some ’directivity’ (the ability to suppress pickup
for sound arriving from certain angles).
The operating principle most suited to fulﬁlling the latter case while maintaining a
high-ﬁdelity reproduction of the incoming signal is that of the electrostatic microphone
and as a result this project focuses on this operating principle. A detailed summary of
early microphone types, their development and other general operating principles can
be found in [4] and [21].
The electrostatic microphone, also known as the condenser microphone, utilises varia-
tions in electrical capacitance in order to produce an output signal and can be designed
to achieve an exceptionally linear response in the audible frequency range, in fact this
is the only operational principle capable of achieving the level of stability, linearity and
bandwidth required for suitable calibration for conducting acoustic measurements [13].
Despite the various diﬀerent types of microphones available, all microphones ﬁt within
the following two categories
• Pressure-Operated microphones
• Pressure-Gradient microphones
This is described in ﬁgure 1 below:
7
==PAGE:9==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
Figure 1: Classiﬁcation of microphone types, from [6]
In the ﬁrst category, microphones are generally non-directional, being equally sensitive
to sound arriving from all directions for much of the frequency range. Directivity is
achieved through the combination of signals sensed at two or more separated points
in space.
If two points are used, the microphone response is said to be ’ﬁrst-order’
[30], within the scope of this project only ﬁrst-order directivity is considered. This is
generally achieved with microphones belonging to the second category mentioned above.
A third category of ’combination pressure-gradient microphones’ also exists, which re-
lates to a microphone which responds to both the pressure and pressure-gradient of
sound wave [5]. Microphones belonging to this category can have diﬀerent directional
characteristics depending on their design and comprise most microphones used in music
and speech recording applications [6].
These principles are fundamental to all microphone types and the resulting sensitiv-
ity and directivity response of the microphone will depend greatly on which of these
three principles is relevant [5]. All three variants are discussed within this section, since
they are all relevant in the development of the models presented.
8
==PAGE:10==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
3.1
The pressure-operated microphone
All microphones operate by deriving an electrical output signal based on the movement of
some mechanical element in relation to changes in pressure in the surrounding medium.
In the case of condenser microphones, this mechanical element is typically a thin, taught
and circular membrane, exposed on at least on one side to the surrounding sound ﬁeld.
In the simple case of a pressure-operated microphone this diaphragm is only exposed on
one side to the surrounding sound ﬁeld, with the rear enclosed by a sealed cavity, with
a very small air leak to equalise the atmospheric pressure. This is shown in ﬁgure 2:
Figure 2: Schematic overview of a pressure-operated microphone
From ﬁgure 2 it is clear that pressure variations in the surrounding medium will only
result in pressure variations on the front-side of the diaphragm. Due to this, the di-
aphragm movement will be proportional to the incident pressure on the front side only,
since the pressure will generally be constant on the rear side, thus the microphone is
said to be pressure-operated.
3.1.1
General microphone response
For a constant sound pressure, the particle amplitude drops oﬀtowards higher fre-
quencies, so the diaphragm of a condenser pressure-operated microphone is typically
high-frequency tuned to counteract this [6]. This is shown in ﬁgure 3:
9
==PAGE:11==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
Figure 3: Diaphragm velocity for a high-frequency tuned condenser microphone diaphragm, from
[6]
The combination of the compliance-controlled ﬁrst-order slope of the diaphragm velocity
below resonance and the ﬁrst order slope of the pressure ﬁeld gives a ﬂat response for
frequencies below diaphragm resonance and below the threshold of acoustic scattering.
Above the diaphragm resonance, the mass-controlled ﬁrst order slope combined with the
ﬁrst-order slope of the pressure ﬁeld gives a 2nd order roll-oﬀ, which is only counteracted
by the eﬀects of acoustic scattering and higher order diaphragm resonances.
3.1.2
Directional response
Generally speaking, for a pressure-operated microphone, the output from the movement
of the microphone diaphragm is proportional to the incident pressure on the exterior-
facing side, so long as the diaphragm exhibits piston-like movement and that excitation
frequency is low enough that there are no eﬀects of acoustic scattering [6].
It follows that under these conditions, the diaphragm movement will be the same for all
angles of incidence and thus the directional characteristic of a pressure-operated micro-
phone is generally omnidirectional. However, as the wavelength of the incident pressure
decreases, the dimensions of the microphone assembly itself become more comparable to
this wavelength, resulting in an increasing degree of acoustic scattering of the incident
pressure. This scattering eﬀect is dependant on the angle of incidence of a pressure wave
and hence, as the wavelength increases, sounds arriving towards the rear of the micro-
phone assembly will be scattered to a greater degree before arriving at the diaphragm
than those arriving on-axis with respect to the diaphragm.
The result of this scattering is that with increasing frequency, a basic pressure-operated
microphone mounted in a cylindrical body will become increasingly directional as the
frequency of the excitation signal increases, this is described below in ﬁgure 4:
10
==PAGE:12==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
Figure 4: The eﬀect of scattering on the directional response of a pressure operated microphone,
from [6]
3.2
The pressure-gradient microphone
If the rear of a microphone diaphragm is exposed to the sound ﬁeld in the same manner
as the front side, then an output signal derived from such an arrangement will be
dependant on the diﬀerence in pressure between the two sides of the diaphragm [5].
This scenario is shown below in ﬁgure 5
Figure 5: Schematic overview of a pressure-gradient microphone, adapted from [5]
3.2.1
General Microphone response
For a constant sound pressure, the gradient of the pressure increases with frequency [6].
For a plane wave arriving with normal incidence with respect to the diaphragm, as in
ﬁgure 5, the pressure diﬀerence between the two sides of the diaphragm is given by
∆p = 2p0(cosωt)(sin
k∆l
2

)
(1)
where p0 is the amplitude of the plane wave, ω is the angular frequency, λ is the wave-
length and ∆l is the acoustic path between the two sides of the diaphragm. The resulting
pressure diﬀerence is shown below in ﬁgure 6
11
==PAGE:13==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
Figure 6: diﬀerence in pressure between two sides of a diaphragm where D = ∆l, from [23]
Figure 6 demonstrates that, for a constant pressure, the gradient of the pressure across
the diaphragm increases with frequency, with minima at multiples of the frequency at
which the wavelength is equal to the path length diﬀerence ∆l.
A pressure-gradient condenser microphone diaphragm will typically be mid-frequency
tuned to counteract this and therefore operate largely within the resistance controlled
range of the diaphragm [6]. This is shown in ﬁgure 7:
Figure 7: Diaphragm velocity for a mid-frequency tuned condenser microphone diaphragm, from
[6]
3.2.2
Directional response
Provided that the microphone construction is ideal and symmetrical, as in ﬁgure 5,
normal plane wave incidence with respect to the rear of the diaphragm will give the
exact same behaviour, but with reversed phase, since the diaphragm will move in the
opposite direction compared with frontal incidence.
As the angle of arrival changes
from normal diaphragm incidence to perpendicular incidence, the net force acting on
the diaphragm will reduce, since the diﬀerence between the pressure acting on each side
will reduce. It follows that for 90° (or 270°) incidence the pressure acting on each side
of the diaphragm will be equal, thus the net force will be zero and the diaphragm will
12
==PAGE:14==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
not move. The result of this behaviour is that such a pressure gradient microphone will
have a directional response similar to a dipole. This is described in ﬁgure 8:
Figure 8: Directional response of a pressure-gradient microphone, where A and B denote the
front and rear of the diaphragm, adapted from [6]
As frequency increases, the eﬀects of acoustic scattering will modify the directional
response. However, provided that the microphone geometry remains symmetric about
the plane of the diaphragm, the response will still exhibit a null side incidence for the full
frequency range, provided that the total pressure is equal on each side of the diaphragm.
3.3
The combination pressure-gradient microphone
A combination pressure-gradient microphone is one that responds to both the pressure
amplitude and pressure gradient of an incident wave. It is possible to control the angle of
arrival for which the microphone will be least sensitive by adjusting the acoustic pathway
such that the pressure variation on either side of the diaphragm is equal for incidence
at such an angle. This is achieved by introducing an acoustic delay, adjusted such that
plane wave arrival through this ’delay path’ will reach the rear of the diaphragm in phase
with that arriving at the front of the diaphragm. By utilising this approach, any ﬁrst
order directivity pattern between omnidirectional and bidirectional may be achieved [21].
Early approaches to achieve directivity with such an acoustic delay network approach
involved simply using a long tube to achieve rear access to the diaphragm, with a length
set to achieve the desired acoustic delay [21], this method was often applied to achieve
alternative directional performance in ribbon microphones and is shown below in ﬁgure
9:
13
==PAGE:15==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
Figure 9: representation of a single diaphragm unidirectional ribbon microphone, from [21]
Such designs generally require quite some space in the microphone design. However, for
more compact and modern directional condenser transducers an acoustic low-pass ﬁlter
is often used, comprised of discreet acoustic elements, in this manner a suitable acoustic
delay can be achieved with the group delay of the ﬁlter while maintaining a compact
design [30].
This approach is visualised in ﬁgure 10 below:
Figure 10: systematic representation of a diaphragm with controlled rear acoustic access, adapted
from: [5]
In ﬁgure 10 above, ep1 represents the pressure incident on the exposed front of the
diaphragm, ep2 represents the pressure incident on the rear of the capsule and on the
exterior boundary of the acoustic network. ∆l represents the acoustic path length diﬀer-
ence between the front and the rear of the capsule. The terms RA and CA represent the
acoustic resistance and the acoustic compliance of the rear acoustic network respectively.
The pressure arriving at the rear of the diaphragm is the pressure resulting from the
14
==PAGE:16==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
acoustic low-pass ﬁlter comprising the series combination of RA and CA, fed by the rear
incident pressure ep2.
The analogous circuit representation of this ﬁlter is shown below in ﬁgure 11
Figure 11: Analogous acoustic circuit for the capsule rear acoustic network
The time constant of the series combination of these two components gives the group
delay time of the ﬁlter [16], [24]. This is given as
τ = RACA
(2)
In combination with the speed of sound, c, this time constant can be adjusted to give a
speciﬁc ratio with respect to the path length diﬀerence, deﬁned in [5] as the directivity
factor
β =
∆l
cRACA
(3)
It follows that diﬀerent values of β represent diﬀerent ratios of the path length diﬀerence
and the delay of the rear acoustic network. Adjustment of the value of β corresponds
to delaying the rear pressure to arrive at the back of the diaphragm in phase with the
signal at the front depending on the path length diﬀerence for diﬀerent angles of arrival.
This is demonstrated in ﬁgures 12 to 14 below:
Figure 12: β = 0 Omni
Figure 13: β = 1 Cardioid
Figure 14: β = ∞Figure-eight
In all cases the diaphragm velocity is proportional to the diﬀerence between the pres-
sure acting on its front and back side. The extreme case of β = 0 represents the case
where the rear acoustic network completely blocks the rear pressure from the rear of the
diaphragm, and thus there is only variation in the pressure acting on the front of the
15
==PAGE:17==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
diaphragm, thus the diaphragm will only move in sympathy with variations of pressure
acting on its front side, resulting in a predominately omnidirectional directivity charac-
teristic, except in the frequency range in which acoustic scattering occurs.
Conversely, the extreme case of β = ∞represents the case for which the rear acoustic
network has no eﬀect on the rear pressure, under this condition the rear pressure can
arrive at the rear of the diaphragm unaﬀected and thus the directivity response takes
on a dipole characteristic, since plane wave incidence from +/- 90° incidence will result
in equal pressure across the diaphragm thus no net-diaphragm movement.
For β = 1 the acoustic phase shifting network will delay the rear pressure by the same
amount of time that it would take a rear-incident plane wave to travel the path-length
diﬀerence, with the result being that the pressure arriving at the back of the diaphragm
is in phase with that arriving at the front. Since the delay time is ﬁxed it is clear that
this speciﬁc phase delay occurs for 180° incidence only, with other angles of arrival at-
tenuated by a lesser degree as seen in ﬁgure 13. By selecting other values of β close
to 1, the delay time can be adjusted to cause maximum attenuation for other angles
between 180° and 90° incidence, leading to subcardioid, supercardioid and hypercardioid
directivity patterns [5].
Various diﬀerent approaches have been used to create a speciﬁc acoustic network for
the rear-access portion of directional microphones, simple approaches using an acoustic
labyrinth are discussed in [21] and [22] but require a large amount of physical space.
More practical designs create the desired phase shift with an acoustic low-pass ﬁlter us-
ing some form of acoustic resistance in series with the compliance of a rear microphone
cavity, where the resistive element is typically subjected to the most control in the design.
For the sake of later comparison, the typical directional sensitivity for a cardioid con-
denser combination pressure-gradient microphone are shown below in ﬁgures 15 and 16,
in which the steady attenuation of sound from increasingly oblique angles of incidence
can be observed.
16
==PAGE:18==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
Figure 15: Typical directional output sensitivity for a cardioid condenser combination pressure-
gradient microphone, normalised. From [6]
Figure 16: Typical directivity response for a cardioid condenser combination pressure-gradient
microphone, normalised. From [6]
17
==PAGE:19==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
3.4
Rear-Access Impedance
This section addresses the acoustic impedance of the rear access for a combination
pressure-gradient microphone and diﬀerent practical approaches to implement a suit-
able acoustic resistance as the real part of this acoustic impedance. In general, for the
rear acoustic access for a directional microphone, the use of an acoustic labyrinth is not
practical in terms of space, hence more eﬃcient approaches are often employed utilising
discreet acoustic components that provide an acoustic resistance and an acoustic com-
pliance.
A pure acoustic resistance represents a system in which the ﬂow of air (or other ﬂu-
id/gas) occurs in phase and in proportion to some applied acoustic pressure. Such a
pure resistance can be achieved with a ﬁne-mesh screen [5]. Other approaches to achieve
an acoustic resistance include using small-diameter tubes, ﬁbrous or porous materials
and narrow slits, however these methods introduce an inherent component of acoustic
reactance into the overall acoustic impedance due to the mass of air present and may
not therefore be suitable for purposes in which no reactive energy storage is desired.
In general, acoustic impedance is given as
ZA = p
U = p
uS
(4)
Where p is the pressure acting on a surface of area S, and U is the volume velocity at
the surface. Speciﬁc Acoustic impedance can be written in the frequency domain as
ZA = RA + jωMA
(5)
Where the real part of the acoustic impedance consists of the acoustic resistance, RA,
and the imaginary part consists of the acoustic reactance, typically in the form of an
acoustic mass, MA.
The process by which the acoustic resistance is achieved is generally similar in all cases,
the motion of air molecules within the system will vary depending on the proximity to
solid surfaces, with molecules very close to the air/solid boundary moving the least. The
movement of diﬀerent layers of air molecules against one another is subject to friction,
resulting in the loss of energy. This loss is greatest in the regions in which the velocity
diﬀers the most between adjacent layers of molecules, thus for components possessing
geometry of particularly narrow dimensions, this region extends over the majority or en-
tirety of the component, resulting in an appreciable value of overall acoustic resistance
for air ﬂowing through the component [5].
The most common types of acoustic resistance used for the control of directivity re-
sponse in condenser microphone capsule design are acoustic screens, narrow tubes in
18
==PAGE:20==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
the form of perforated plates and thin slits [5], [20], [27]. Acoustic screens can provide
a cheap and reliable form of a pure acoustic resistance, while the use of a slit can be
convenient in providing an adjustable means of resistance, which can be convenient in a
trial and error development of a capsule. Furthermore, the use of a narrow slit can also
allow for mechanical variation between diﬀerent acoustic resistances to allow the selec-
tion of diﬀerent directivity patterns through adjustments to the acoustic network, as in
[27]. While porous acoustic materials can also be used to achieve an acoustic resistance
they are generally avoided in condenser capsule design due to long term stability and
resilience to changes in atmospheric conditions [20].
3.4.1
Acoustic impedance of a thin screen
Acoustic screens can provide a pure acoustic resistance, however analytical models for
such types of resistance are generally not available, instead the acoustic resistance of
diﬀerent types of screen is acquired empirically and often given in Rayls N · s/m3. Such
screens may behave as membranes if not tensioned correctly before installation and
hence can be susceptible to instability for long-term use in microphones [5].
3.4.2
Acoustic impedance of a porous material
Porous materials, such as types of ﬁbrous materials, possess an acoustic impedance due
to the pockets of air trapped in between the ﬁbres. The acoustic impedance can be
quantiﬁed by the ﬂow resistance per unit thickness, Rf. An empirical model for such
materials is implemented as a domain condition in COMSOL Multiphysics, based on a
model developed in [14]. model validity: 10 ≥f/Rf ≥1000
3.4.3
Acoustic impedance of a narrow hole/tube, from [5]
The acoustic impedance of a small tube is the result of the viscous boundary layer
within the tube, which is relatively large with respect to the tube dimensions, where the
diameter is assumed to be small enough compared to the length of the tube that end
corrections may be ignored [21]. The acoustic impedance is given by
ZA = RA + jωMAN · s/m5
(6)
where the acoustic resistance is given by
RA =
8µl
(1 + 4Bu)πa4 N · s/m5
(7)
and the acoustic mass term is given by
MA = 4(1 + 3Bu)ρ0l
3(1 + 4Bu)πa2 kg/m4
(8)
where µ is the coeﬃcient of visocity, for air µ = 1.86e−5N · s/m2 at 20° and 0.76mHg
19
==PAGE:21==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
Bu is the boundary slip factor and is given by
Bu = (2α−1
u
−1)Kn
(9)
in which α is the accommodation coeﬃcient, assumed to be 0.9, and Kn is the Knudsen
number given by
Kn = λ/a
(10)
for which λm = 60nm is the molecular mean free path length between collisions.
This model is valid in the range [0.0005
√
l < a < 0.002/√f].
3.4.4
Acoustic impedance of a narrow slit, from [5]
As mentioned, some condenser microphone designs use a thin slit to achieve an ad-
justable acoustic resistance [27]. A narrow slit behaves in a similar manner to a narrow
hole, in that the impedance is largely due to the viscous boundary layer, similarly end
corrections can be neglected. The acoustic impedance of a narrow slit of slit thickness t,
propagation direction length l and width perpendicular to direction of propagation w,
at a frequency f, can be expressed as
ZA = 12µl
t3w + jω6ρ0l
5wt N · s/m5
(11)
This model is valid in the range t < 0.003√f.
3.4.5
Impedance of a perforated plate
A common option for achieving a stable acoustic resistance on the rear of the capsule is
through the use of a perforated plate [20]. Many analytical models exist for such plates,
with validity dependant upon the frequency of the excitation signal and the assump-
tion that the signal is a monochromatic plane wave with 0° incidence. Much research
into the use of such perforated plates has taken place in the ﬁeld of aeroacoustics, of-
ten researching noise control approaches for jet engines, hence many models that have
been developed have been examined for large-scale dimensions [1] [3], thus the range
of literature available for small-scale perforations is relatively scarce. In the COMSOL
Multiphysics 5.2a package a perforated plate boundary condition is implemented based
on a model developed in [4], as such it is convenient to use this model to examine the
necessary plate perforations to achieve the desired acoustic resistance.
Perforated plates are often used in the form of a thin rigid plate with a series of regu-
larly spaced through-holes drilled perpendicular to the depth of the plate. The acoustic
impedance of such systems comprises an acoustic resistance in series with an acoustic
20
==PAGE:22==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
mass [19], [5] and are often used in applications for which tight control of attenuation
is required [11].
The dimensions of the plate in terms of its thickness, density of perforations and the
radii of the perforations themselves aﬀect the overall acoustic characteristics of the ma-
terial. As the dimensions of the holes become smaller, thermoviscous eﬀects become
greater since the boundary layer becomes comparable to the radius of the holes [11].
Traditional models address the acoustic impedance of a single hole and expand this to
represent an entire plate by averaging this using the fraction of perforated open area,
or ’porosity’, which is given by σ [1], [5]. The geometry of the general case is described
below in ﬁgure 17
Figure 17: Schematic overview of a perforated plate of thickness, t, with N holes of radius ap
and pitch bp
Figure 17 above shows a section of a plate of thickness t with N perforations of radius ap.
The inter-hole spacing or "pitch" is given by bp. An overview of the physical phenomena
of the acoustic resistance and mass elements is depicted in ﬁgure 18 below:
21
==PAGE:23==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
Figure 18: Physical phenomena involved in a perforated plate, from [1]
From ﬁgure 18 the physical processes resulting in an acoustic resistance and acoustic
mass are seen, where the resistance is due to viscous behaviour within the hole and
around the perimeter at the plate opening. The reactive part of the acoustic impedance
is due to the movement of the portion of air within the hole, for which the cylinder of
air is generally longer than the tube itself and thus requires an end-correction term.
By assuming that the holes are regularly spaced, the plate can examined by splitting
up the area into individual sections containing a single hole. These areas can be exam-
ined in various diﬀerent topologies, however the assumption that this area is square is
convenient and commonly used for modelling approaches [3], [5].
The area of a square around each hole is therefore given by
Ab = b2
p
(12)
The cross-sectional area of each hole is given by
Ah = πa2
p
(13)
by combining these two terms, the porosity of the plate can be given by
σ = Ah
Ab
(14)
and the number of holes can be given by
N = σ
Ah
(15)
22
==PAGE:24==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
Typically, the acoustic impedance for a perforated plate is approximately equal to 1/N
times the acoustic impedance for a single hole [5].
The analytical model in [3] gives the speciﬁc acoustic resistance of a peforated plate
as the summation of diﬀerent terms representing diﬀerent forms of resistance as
θ = θ0 + θ1 + θ2Mn + θ3M∞
(16)
where θ0 represents the contribution from viscous resistances for narrow dimensions, θ0
represents the contribution from less viscous resistance for larger dimensions and then
θ2Mn and θ3M∞terms account for non-linear eﬀects for high SPL excitation signals
and grazing loss. Since these terms are assumed to simply sum in the model, then they
can be neglected as needed as in the COMSOL implementation.
The ﬁrst two terms are those which are relevant here and are only used in the absence
of the other. The ﬁrst term, θ0 represents the resistance for very narrow perforations
and is valid when the porous Reynolds number is much less than 1.
The Porous Reynolds number Rp is a dimensionless quantity which determines the ﬂow
state of a ﬂuid, when it is low, the ﬂuid ﬂow is mostly laminar due to the dominance of
viscous eﬀects, when the number is high the ﬂow may be turbulent. In this context Rp
is given by
Rp = ωρ0r2
µ
(17)
For a perforated sheet, with holes of radius such that Rp >> 1 (such that the ﬂow is
not completely viscous) the acoustic resistance term θ1 can be described as:
RA = 1
σ
p
8µρ0ω

1 + t
d

(18)
this expression can be rearranged to solve for the porosity as
σ =
1
RA
p
8µρ0ω

1 + t
d

.
(19)
Since
σ = πa2
p
b2p
(20)
then the hole pitch, bp can be given as
bp =
s
πa2p
σ
(21)
23
==PAGE:25==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
thus
bp =

πa2
p
R−1
A
√8µρ0ω
 1 + t
d

 1
2
(22)
3.4.6
Model evaluation
Since this model can be applied to perforated plates in general, but under the condition
Rp >> 1 it should be determined whether or not this model is valid for application to
the rear access of a 1" condenser microphone capsule.
By setting Rp to a minimum value of 1, then from equation 17 the corresponding mini-
mum hole radius to satisfy this would be
ap =
µ
ωρ0
(23)
This is shown below in ﬁgure 19
Figure 19: Necessary ap to achieve Rp = 1 and Rp = 20 across frequency
From ﬁgure 19 it is clear that as frequency increases, the hole radius necessary to satisfy
Rp = 1 decreases. It can also be seen that as Rp increases so does the required hole
radius ap. Based on this it is clear that in the limit of validity for the model given by
[3] in Rp >> 1, in the audible frequency range the radius of holes must be greater than
1e−5 to 1e−4.
This scenario can be examined for typical capsule dimensions. Taking the case of a
simplistic 1" condenser capsule, with overall thickness t = 5mm, and assuming an in-
24
==PAGE:26==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
terior cavity depth of hb = 4mm and a rear perforated plate of thickness lp = 1mm
depicted in ﬁgure 20
Figure 20: Basic schematic view of a 1" condenser microphone capsule
Under these simple assumptions, the interior volume, Vi is given by equation 24 as 2µm3
Vi = πhbr2
(24)
The acoustic compliance, CA, of the air enclosed in this volume is given by equation 25
as 14.184 × 10−12m5/N
CA = Vi
ρc = πhbr2
ρc2
(25)
The approximate path length diﬀerence δl is given by equation 26 as 0.0103m
δl = hb + 4r
3π
(26)
This path length diﬀerence corresponds to a delay time of 30µs
As discussed in section 3, the basic concept of the rear access is often of a low-pass
ﬁlter realised through the use of discreet acoustic components, namely a series resis-
tance and compliance.
In order to achieve a desired time constant for this ﬁlter it is clear that it makes sense to
maximise the available value of the compliance, since this will then reduce the required
value of acoustic resistance since, as discussed, the acoustic resistance of a perforated
disc is based on the viscous behaviour of the of the air in the holes of the perforate, thus
a higher acoustic resistance requires smaller radius perforations.
Setting the compliance of the interior volume to its maximum value based on these
dimensions and setting the target directivity factor β to 1 to implement a design for a
25
==PAGE:27==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
cardioid directivity pattern results in a necessary acoustic resistance of 2.142e6N ·s/m5,
based on equation 3.
Choosing a plate thickness of t = 1mm and choosing a hole radius of ap = 0.1mm, in
order to roughly satisfy equation 18 for Rp >> 1 for much of the audible frequency range
(above 250Hz, based on ﬁgure 19) then the hole pitch required to achieve an acoustic
resistance of RA across the audible frequency range can be given by equation 22. This
is shown below in ﬁgure 21
Figure 21: Necessary hole pitch needed to achieve RA =2.142 ×106N · s/m5 as a function of
frequency
From ﬁgure 21 it can be seen that the result for the predicted hole pitch per frequency
is valid above approximately 250Hz, marked by the red line, this is due to the use of a
constant hole radius of ap = 0.1mm, for which Rp << 1 below approximately 250Hz.
However, the relative dimensions of the hole pitch are large, with a minimum value
of 500mm at 20kHz. The capsule diameter is 1", or 25.4mm, indicated by the green
line. From this it is clear that choosing the minimum valid value of hole radius ap to
satisfy the perforated plate model from [3], results in a practical hole pitch (for a target
cardioid directivity pattern) that is far in excess of the actual diameter of the capsule
itself. Based on this it is immediately clear that the in built model for the perforated
plate within COMSOL cannot be used in practice within its range of validity to model a
cardioid directivity pattern for a 1" capsule. Instead, much narrower holes must be used
to achieve the desired acoustic resistance value, which correspond to a Reynolds number
of Rp >> 1, indicating predominately viscous behaviour. The model presented by [3]
states that empirical data is required for this range, and models have been presented
in [5] for individual holes of very narrow dimensions. However this boundary condition
will be used for exploring the general numerical model in this project.
26
==PAGE:28==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
3.5
Numerical Modelling
Numerical approaches to the modelling of physical phenomena involve solving the dis-
cretization of some domain and solving the equations governing the physics of the phe-
nomena in question for each discretized element and using appropriate boundary con-
ditions to model the processes in question. A ﬁnal solution for the problem may be
derived through summation of the solutions for all discretized elements over the entire
domain.
3.5.1
Problem formulation
In general, numerical problems can be organised into three distinct categories:
• Interior problems
• Exterior problems
• Interior-Exterior problems
In the ﬁrst case, interior problems consist of those in which the problem domain is en-
closed as a cavity with some coupled boundary, such issues are typically addressed with
the Finite Element Method (FEM). In the second case, exterior problems consist of
those in which an exterior domain is examined which is unbounded or modelled as such.
Typical examples include scattering problems with some structure boundary existing
within the domain [2].
The Boundary Element Method (BEM) is well suited to such problems due to per-
forming well for unbounded domains. [2]. However modern FEM approaches typically
use a ’Perfectly Matched Layer’ which, when appropriately implemented, acts as a highly
absorbant boundary to the exterior of the domain, attenuating incident energy while
minimising the inﬂuence of its presence at the boundary on the domain under study
[12].
These concepts are described in ﬁgure 22 below:
n
x
Structure
(a)
(b)
Internal
fluid
n
x
Structure
External
fluid
Figure 22: (a) Interior and (b) Exterior problems, from [2]
27
==PAGE:29==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
The third case, that of the interior-exterior problem, applies to problems in which both
a bounded domain and the unbounded domain enclosing it are modelled. Under these
conditions, the problems are mostly fully coupled, in that the behaviour in the enclosed
domain will aﬀect the behaviour in the exterior domain and thus fully coupled equations
must be solved to accurately evaluate the model. A mixed formulation of FEM for the
interior portion of the problem and BEM for the exterior portion may be used.
This formulation is outlined in ﬁgure 23:
Turbulent boundary
layer
Mechanical
excitation
Acoustical
excitation
Cavity
Mean flow
Structure
Elastic
layer
Poroelastic
layer
Viscoelastic
layer
Figure 23: Coupled Interior-Exterior problem, from [2]
In the context of this project much of the modelling relates to an interior-exterior prob-
lem. The most convenient software package available to the author for such modelling
is COMSOL Multiphysics, a FEM-based numerical modelling software package. As a
result it was determined that the Finite Element Method should be used for the problem
formulation in order to satisfy the construction of the Interior-Exterior problem using
this software.
3.5.2
Element structure
Deﬁning the element structure generally involves discretization of the domain into sev-
eral sub-elements of simple geometric structure. For formulations addressing acoustic
problems, the dependant variable is generally pressure. This variable must be diﬀer-
entiable thus the most basic approach must split the domain into linear elements (ﬁrst
order) in order to meet this requirement. More complex approaches using higher order
elements such as quadratic (second-order) elements may also be used, which lead to a
greater degree of accuracy, but also increase the number of degrees of freedom necessary
to solve in the model [2].
28
==PAGE:30==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
3.5.3
Model dimensions
Numerical models can be constructed in various dimensional spaces, depending on the
problem to be studied, however it follows that increasing the dimensional space leads
to a non linear increase in the model complexity and thus also in the computation time
required for its solution. In light of this, great gains in computation time can be achieved
by exploiting aspects such as symmetry when developing a numerical model, however
this may not always be feasible.
4
Hypotheses
The project presented is relatively exploratory in aim, however the following hypotheses
are stated:
1. A one-way coupling of a FEM acoustics model and an electromechanical LPM
model can be used to model a combination pressure-gradient microphone for var-
ious directivity patterns.
2. A simple, constant real-valued boundary condition for rear access can be used to
achieve desired directivity characteristics in a numerical model.
3. Analytical models for acoustic resistance can be used for boundary conditions to
achieve desired directivity characteristics in a numerical model.
29
==PAGE:31==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
5
Modelling: Numerical Implementation
The numerical model used in this project was implemented using COMSOL Multiphysics
v5.2a, using the following packages:
• Electrical Circuit
• Pressure Acoustics (Frequency Domain)
The general aim of the model is to enable the evaluation of the output response of a
1" condenser microphone capsule for many frequencies within the audible bandwidth
and many angles of arrival between 0° and 180° incidence. In order to achieve this, the
incident pressure on the front and rear of the diaphragm must be evaluated.
5.1
Electromechanical Lumped Parameter Model
In order to reduce the model complexity, the electro-mechanical portion of the model
was implemented as a lumped parameter model (LPM). One manner to achieve this is
to develop a model which incorporates lumped parameter modelling where appropriate,
with the details of interest being modelled numerically and coupled to the LPMl. In the
example model from COMSOL for the "Axisymettric Condenser Microphone with Elec-
trical Lumping" [9] the electrical aspect of the condenser microphone is modelled with
a simple lumped parameter circuit model, which is coupled to a numerically modelled
moving diaphragm through the capacitor in the circuit.
In the context of this project, the domain of interest is the exterior acoustic domain.
As a result, it was deemed appropriate to attempt to extend the concept of lumped
parameter modelling to provide a LPM of the electrical and mechanical aspects of the
microphone, i.e. the electrical circuit with capacitor and load resistor as well as the
diaphragm modelled as a series combination of an inductor, resistor and capacitor to
model the diaphragm mechanical mass, stiﬀness and compliance.
The model was implemented using the electrical circuit physics package in COMSOL,
with the numerically evaluated pressure diﬀerence across the diaphragm, PD, coupled
to the mechanical LPM as a force using a voltage source.
The circuit itself is based on the model provided in [19] for a condenser microphone.
Since the diﬀerences between pressure-operated, pressure-gradient and combination pressure-
gradient microphones are entirely acoustic, the same LPM is suitable to be used in all
cases.
The circuit model is shown below in ﬁgure 24
30
==PAGE:32==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
Figure 24: Electromechanical equivalent circuit, from [19]
From ﬁgure 24 (a) represents the electrical part of the microphone circuitry, where R′
L
is the load resistance across which the output voltage is derived and CE0 represents the
static capacitance of the capsule in the absence of any signal. The mechanical circuit
(b) is comprised of the series combination of mass-spring-damper representation of the
diaphragm, where CMD represents the compliance of the diaphragm, given as
CMD =
1
8πT
(27)
where T is the diaphragm tension. MMD represents the mechanical diaphragm mass as
MMD = 4
3πa2tmρm
(28)
where tm is the diaphragm thickness and ρm is the density of the microphone di-
aphragm. RMD represents the diaphragm stiﬀness and will take a ﬁxed reference value
of 0.178N ·s/m5 in this project based on [19]. The voltage in (b) represents the mechan-
ical force acting on the diaphragm and the current represents the mechanical velocity of
the diaphragm. The two circuits are fully coupled via the respective current-controlled
voltage sources.
Based on this, the numerical model must evaluate the entire acoustic domain and al-
low the pressure on the front and rear of the diaphragm to be evaluated. This can be
achieved by integrating the total incident pressure on each side of a disc. The general
scenario is given below in 2D in ﬁgure 25:
31
==PAGE:33==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
Figure 25: Schematic overview of oblique plane wave incidence
The pressure diﬀerence between the front and rear of the diaphragm can then be coupled
to the LPM, from which the output response can be derived.
5.2
Model Dimensions
A typical condenser microphone capsule takes the form of a disc, with an axisymmettric
structure and, as discussed, numerical models can be greatly simpliﬁed by exploiting
symmetry to reduce the number of degrees of freedom in the model, instead rotating
the solution for the full geometry to provide the correct end result, indeed several ax-
isymettric and near-axisymmettric models of condenser microphone capsules have been
developed with success [8], [9], [10]. However, these implementations examine 0° plane
wave incidence, and as discussed, in order to examine directivity response, oblique plane
wave incidence must also be considered. Numerical modelling approaches for imple-
menting oblique plane wave incidence in an axisymmetric model have been discussed in
[18], with the implementation requiring plane wave expansion to cylindrical coordinates.
Without applying these approaches, the initial problem in COMSOL is that, for a two-
dimensional axisymmetric model, the background pressure wave is rotated about the
z-axis along with the rest of the solution. For 0° and 180° plane wave incidence on an
axisymmettric study, this doesn’t present an issue, however for an oblique plane wave
it is clear that this introduces problems. For the unrotated solution the oblique plane
wave appears to be constructed correctly:
32
==PAGE:34==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
Figure 26: Schematic overview of 30°plane wave incidence at approx 30kHz
However once the solution is rotated, the incorrect representation of the background
pressure plane wave can be seen. This is shown below in ﬁgure 27:
Figure 27: Schematic overview of oblique plane wave incidence
From ﬁgure 27 the problem can readily be seen; the incident oblique plane wave is ro-
tated around the z-axis along with the remainder of the solution and hence the actual
33
==PAGE:35==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
solution resulting from such a model would resemble something closer to a conical wave,
which does not reﬂect reality. This issue can be resolved by implementing a Plane Wave
Expansion approach in COMSOL, however due to the added complexity for relatively
little reduction in computation time and in the interest of time it was decided that the
model in this project would be developed in full 3D to avoid any errors. An overview of
the implementation process for PWE in COMSOL is given in Appendix D.
5.3
Discretization
As discussed, the domain can be discretized into elements in diﬀerent ways. A higher
order discretization, e.g., quadratic, will result in an increase in accuracy but will also
result in a higher number of degrees of freedom, and therefore a longer computation
time. Alternatively, a linear discretization may be used, which will signiﬁcantly lower
the number of degrees of freedom, but a higher mesh density will be required for the
same model accuracy. Since the interest in this project is in evaluating the frequency re-
sponse for several angles of incidence, a reduction in computation time is advantageous,
as a result it was decided that linear discretization would be used.
The general 3D model is shown below in ﬁgure 28:
Figure 28: Numerical model geometry (cut-through)
The general 3D model with meshing applied is shown below in ﬁgure 29:
34
==PAGE:36==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
Figure 29: Numerical model meshed geometry (cut-through)
5.4
Selection of parameters
In order to facilitate straightforward veriﬁcation using the existing COMSOL model [9],
the model in this project was initiated using the same parameters as used in existing
COMSOL. In doing this, the veriﬁcation at each stage could be conducted in a reliable
manner, with the possibility of expanding the model to diﬀerent geometries and param-
eters later on in the project. Based on this, the initial parameter selection for the model
consist of a set of ’small-scale’ parameters extracted from the COMSOL model, these
are shown below in table 1:
Parameter
Value
Unit
Description
Rm
2
mm
Diaphragm Radius
Hm
18
µm
Air Gap Thickness
tm
7
µm
Membrane Thickness
p0
1
Pa
Plane Wave Pressure Amplitude
Tm
3150
N/m
Membrane Tension
ρm
8300
kg/m3
Membrane Density
Vpol
100
V
Polarisation Voltage
RL
100e9
Ω
Load Resistance
SD
πR2
m
m2
Diaphragm Surface Area
Table 1: Table of small-scale parameters, from [9]
However, for later modelling in the frequency range of interest and for a 1" diameter
capsule test case, a set of ’large-scale’ parameters for such a capsule, based on [5] were
used, these are shown below in table 2:
35
==PAGE:37==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
Parameter
Value
Unit
Description
Rm
12.6
mm
Diaphragm Radius
Hm
50
µm
Air Gap Thickness
tm
2.5
µm
Membrane Thickness
p0
1
Pa
Plane Wave Pressure Amplitude
Tm
50
N/m
Membrane Tension
ρm
1400
kg/m3
Membrane Density
Vpol
100
V
Polarisation Voltage
RL
100e9
Ω
Load Resistance
SD
πR2
m
m2
Diaphragm Surface Area
Table 2: Table of large-scale parameters, from [5]
36
==PAGE:38==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
6
Modelling: The Ideal Pressure-Operated Microphone
Following the deﬁnition of the LPM used as a basis to reduce the complexity of the
numerical model, it was necessary to incorporate this into a coupled model in order to
be able to derive an operational simulation of a microphone capsule, which could be
further developed for subsequent pressure-gradient modelling. This section describes
implementing elements of the LPM into a pressure-operated microphone capsule model
in COMSOL.
A crucial stage in developing a numerical model of a physical system is that of veri-
ﬁcation [17]. Typically, numerical models are used to obtain results more accurate than
existing analytical models, at least in a certain parameter range in which an analytical
model may not be valid. Numerical models may typically be veriﬁed against existing
analytical models, at least in the common accurate operating range and then against
physical measurements for parameter ranges that cannot be modelled analytically. It
is therefore important that each development stage of this project is veriﬁed through
comparison against existing analytical models or established numerical models where
appropriate, however the construction of a physical prototype for validation is beyond
the scope of this project, but could be undertaken in future work.
As a starting point, an existing example model provided by COMSOL Multiphysics
for an electrostatic pressure-operated microphone is suitable for use as a means of com-
parison with the model developed here for the basic implementation of the LPM for a
pressure-operated microphone [8].
6.1
Parameter Selection
In order to perform suitable veriﬁcation with the COMSOL axisymmetrical reference
model as mentioned above, the parameters used in said model were replicated for the
development model for the pressure-operated case. In doing this, the veriﬁcation of sub-
sequent stages can be conducted in a reliable manner, with the possibility of expanding
the model to diﬀerent geometries and parameters later on in the project. Based on this,
the model was implemented for a capsule with radius of 2mm, using the ’small-scale’
parameter selection, which can be found in table 3 in Appendix B.
37
==PAGE:39==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
6.2
Analytical Model
For the pressure-operated case, the analytical model is identical to the lumped parame-
ter model described in 5.1, with the addition of a constant value for the input pressure
which corresponds to the case of a plane wave excitation signal arriving at the diaphragm
with 0° incidence. The analytical model assumes that this pressure is always constant
across the diaphragm and is therefore only valid at low frequencies where λ >> ka,
since the eﬀects of acoustic scattering due to the inﬂuence of the diaphragm and capsule
assembly are not accounted for.
The electrical output of the pressure-operated condenser microphone is given by [19]
as:
eoc = −ECMT SD
x0
1
(s/ω0)2 + (1/Q)(s/ω0) + 1T(s)pi
(29)
where the fundamental diaphragm resonance is given by
ω0 =
1
√MMT CMT
(30)
and the quality factor is expressed by
Q = ω0MMT
CMT
=
1
ω0RMT CMT
=
1
RMT
p
MMT CMT
(31)
where the total eﬀective mechanical mass, resistance and compliances (i.e. including the
eﬀects of acoustical mass, stiﬀness and compliance) are given by
MMT = MMD + S2
D(MA1 + MAS)
(32)
RMT = RMD + S2
DRAS
(33)
CMT =

1
CMD
+
S2
D
CAB2

(34)
where MA1 is the load of the acoustic mass of air in front of the diaphragm and is given
by
MA1 = 0.6133ρ0
πa
(35)
and the parameters RAS and MAS, representing the acoustic resistance and mass of
the holes in the backplate electrode.
In the case of the reference COMSOL model,
the backplate is modelled as a ﬂat surface, therefore in this LPM the parameters RAS
and MAS are simply set to zero. For the sake of simplicity, this case is maintained
throughout the project. The volume of the air cavity between the backplate and the
38
==PAGE:40==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
diaphragm can be found from the diaphragm radius a and diaphragm to backplate
spacing x0 as VAB1 = πaxo. The acoustic compliance of this volume is:
CAB1 = VAB1
ρ0c2
(36)
and it is assumed, based on [19] that the compliance of the rear cavity is:
CAB2 = 100CAB1
(37)
The corresponding analogous circuit model is shown below in ﬁgure 30:
Figure 30: Analogous circuit for an ideal pressure-operated microphone in free space, from [19]
6.2.1
Analytical Diaphragm model
The results of the model provided in [9] are veriﬁed by using a simpliﬁed version of an
expression for the diaphragm displacement from equation 4.39 in [17].
This simpliﬁed expression is given as
uth = pin
TK2

1 −J0(Kr)
J0(KR)

(38)
These two analytical solutions, along with the output of the [9] were used to verify the
pressure-operated model output.
6.3
Implementation
In order to aid comparison, the [9] model was used as a basis, with the numerical
model for this project implemented as a full 3D model bounded by a spherical ’Perfectly
Matched Layer’ and the total acoustic pressure was integrated over the top surface of a
thin cylinder in order to provide an input pD, equivalent to pin to the electromechanical
39
==PAGE:41==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
LPM described in section 5. The model was evaluated using a selection of 37 frequencies
spread from 100 Hz to 300kHz. The greater density in the upper frequency region was
chosen since a greater degree of variation is expected to occur due to pressure diﬀerences
caused by scattering in this frequency range.
6.4
Results
It is important to note here that both of the analytical models and the results from the
COMSOL reference model [9] used for veriﬁcation in this case assume normal plane wave
incidence and omit eﬀects of acoustic scattering, and therefore do not model any angular
dependency or scattering behaviour. In theory, an ideal pressure-operated microphone
will have an output which is proportional to the magnitude of the sound pressure in the
absence of the microphone itself at all frequencies [7], however in reality the microphone
output is inﬂuenced by the scattering of the sound ﬁeld for high frequencies (ka > 1).
As a result, the model veriﬁcation here is performed for 0° incidence and high frequency
results are not directly comparable with the veriﬁcation results since they do not ac-
count for scattering and do not have any angular dependency.
Figure 31 below shows the derived microphone output of the numerical pressure-operated
model as well as the integrated pressure acting on the diaphragm for zero degree inci-
dence. Also shown are the analytical pressure-operated output sensitivity results, the
velocity model and the COMSOL reference model output for comparison.
102
103
104
105
Frequency, Hz
-140
-120
-100
-80
-60
-40
-20
0
Magnitude, dB
Model Verification, 0 degree plane wave incidence
Full COMSOL model output
Pressure across diaphragm
Theoretical diaphragm velocity
COMSOL reference model output
BASIC LP model
Figure 31: Pressure Operated Model comparison for 0° plane wave incidence
From ﬁgure 31 it is clear that the numerical results for the pressure integrated across
40
==PAGE:42==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
the top of the diaphragm give a constant value of 0dB, corresponding to 1Pa. Under
these conditions, it is expected that the numerical model should behave exactly as the
analytical model, since the implementation is the same once the diaphragm pressure has
been derived and indeed this can be seen from the model where these two results match
exactly.
The output for the portion of the frequency range below resonance is consistent for
all models, with a slightly lower output for the velocity model.
The models all de-
viate around resonance; the velocity model doesn’t accommodate for any diaphragm
damping, hence the sharp peak at resonance compared to the analytical model, how-
ever the resonant frequency is roughly the same. The COMSOL reference model has
a higher resonant frequency and more slightly more complex high frequency behaviour
than the pressure-operated numerical model, which is to be expected as the analytical
model greatly simpliﬁes the diaphragm resonance.
Importantly, however, all models
have a similar roll oﬀcharacteristic above resonance and the general agreement is good
between the models. This indicates that the coupling between the numerical pressure
evaluation and the lumped parameter model is functional.
However, in order to investigate further, the model was evaluated for a plane wave
of 90° incidence. Of course, since the veriﬁcation models are not angle dependant, their
results will be the same, however some variation should be expected in PD, the nu-
merical pressure integrated across the diaphragm surface, and if the numerical pressure
model is coupled to the LPM model then this should be seen transferred to the output
sensitivity of the microphone model. The results are shown below in ﬁgure 32:
41
==PAGE:43==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
102
103
104
105
Frequency, Hz
-140
-120
-100
-80
-60
-40
-20
0
Magnitude, dB
Model Verification, 90 degree plane wave incidence
Full COMSOL model output
Pressure across diaphragm
Theoretical diaphragm velocity
COMSOL reference model output
BASIC LP model
Figure 32: Pressure Operated Model comparison for 90° plane wave incidence
From ﬁgure 32 it is clear that the pressure integrated across the diaphragm begins to
exhibit eﬀects of scattering as the wavelength becomes comparable to the dimensions of
the diaphragm. At increasingly higher frequencies, cancellation is seen at multiples of
frequency for which the wavelength is equal to the diaphragm diameter.
Clearly these eﬀects are not seen in the veriﬁcation models since they do not vary with
angle of arrival and simply assume uniform pressure across the diaphragm. However the
output of the numerical model is seen to deviate from the analytical model and vary in
accordance with the interference pattern seen in the diaphragm pressure PD.
6.4.1
Veriﬁcation Summary
From ﬁgures 31 and 32 it is clear that the numerical evaluation of pressure, coupled
to the LPM, gives a reasonably consistent frequency response when compared to other
analytical models, however the portion of the frequency range above resonance is less
accurate, since the behaviour of the diaphragm is not accurately modelled in this range.
On the other hand the model does account for acoustic scattering due to the microphone
itself and this eﬀect is particularly clear in the dips seen in the output response for oblique
plane-wave incidence.
42
==PAGE:44==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
6.5
Directivity
The analytical model from [19] only describes the output of a pressure operated micro-
phone for 0° incidence, however the numerical model at this stage is capable of modelling
the total pressure incident across the microphone diaphragm for various angles of arrival
and wavelengths. For angles of incidence other than 0°, the pressure incident over the
diaphragm will not be constant and therefore the average will be less than the nominal
pressure of the incident plane wave. This variation is due to superposition of the inci-
dent and scattered pressure in the ﬁeld, which is not modelled by the analytical model,
but can be calculated numerically and evaluated at various angles and frequencies.
The principal of reciprocity can be exploited here to provide a simple means by which
to examine the validity of the model for diﬀerent angles of arrival. Since the output of
the model is an expression for the microphone sensitivity with frequency, this can be
modelled at a select number of frequencies and angles of arrival. Since the model itself
consists of the total pressure averaged over the microphone diaphragm, due to the nu-
merically modelled pressure ﬁeld, coupled to a lumped parameter model, the sensitivity
of the microphone is proportional to the average pressure across the diaphragm. Since
the lumped parameter model itself has no direct dependency on the angle of arrival,
only indirectly through the pressure, then this quantity may be used for comparison.
While the magnitude of the sensitivity will vary with frequency, it will not vary with
angle of arrival and therefore normalised directivity plots may provide a suitable means
of visualising the comparison.
6.5.1
Analytical Model
The output of a pressure-operated microphone is predominately omnidirectional for low
frequencies where ka < 1. At high frequencies, where ka >> 1 the response will be
dependant on the scattering eﬀects of the microphone itself. For these high frequencies,
at least in frontal hemisphere with respect to the diaphragm, the eﬀect of this scattering
can be compared with that of a rigid piston vibrating in a baﬄe.
From [19] the total pressure at a point P in space can be found by summing the pressure
radiated by each area element on the disk, this can be described as
p(r, θ) = jωρ0ue−jkr
2πr
Z 0
a
Z 0
2π
ejkr′sinθsinφ′r′dφ′dr′ = jωρ0U
2J1(kasinθ)
kasinθ
e−jkr
2πr
(39)
For an observation point P which is at a constant distance from the disk and in the far
ﬁeld, the absolute pressure p(r, θ) is proportional to the bessel function quotient as such
that
43
==PAGE:45==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
|p| ∝

2J1(kasinθ)
kasinθ

(40)
The evaluation of this expression in the limits of −90° ≤θ ≤90° can be used to compare
the directivity response of the output sensitivity of the pressure-operated numerical
model, this is shown below in ﬁgures 33 and 34:
0
30
60
90
120
150
180
210
240
270
300
330
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
3981 Hz, Pa
0
30
60
90
120
150
180
210
240
270
300
330
-40
-20
0
3981 Hz, dB
0
30
60
90
120
150
180
210
240
270
300
330
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
17378 Hz, Pa
Analytical model Sensitivity, V/Pa
0
30
60
90
120
150
180
210
240
270
300
330
-40
-20
0
17378 Hz, dB
Analytical model Sensitivity, dB
0
30
60
90
120
150
180
210
240
270
300
330
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
50894 Hz, Pa
0
30
60
90
120
150
180
210
240
270
300
330
-40
-20
0
50894 Hz, dB
Figure 33: Analytical model directivity response for below and close to ka = 1
44
==PAGE:46==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
0
30
60
90
120
150
180
210
240
270
300
330
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
87096 Hz, Pa
0
30
60
90
120
150
180
210
240
270
300
330
-40
-20
0
87096 Hz, dB
0
30
60
90
120
150
180
210
240
270
300
330
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
149050 Hz, Pa
Analytical model Sensitivity, V/Pa
0
30
60
90
120
150
180
210
240
270
300
330
-40
-20
0
149050 Hz, dB
Analytical model Sensitivity, dB
0
30
60
90
120
150
180
210
240
270
300
330
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
255074 Hz, Pa
0
30
60
90
120
150
180
210
240
270
300
330
-40
-20
0
255074 Hz, dB
Figure 34: Analytical model directivity response, ka >> 1
.
6.5.2
Results
In order to examine the changes in directivity with increasing frequency, the numerical
model was evaluated with the same frequency range for plane wave arrival from 0° to
360° in 10° increments. The normalised directivity results are shown for a selection of
frequencies below and near to ka > 1 in ﬁgure 35 below:
45
==PAGE:47==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
0
30
60
90
120
150
180
210
240
270
300
330
0
1
2
3
3981 Hz, Pa
0
30
60
90
120
150
180
210
240
270
300
330
-40
-20
0
3981 Hz, dB
0
30
60
90
120
150
180
210
240
270
300
330
0
1
2
3
17378 Hz, Pa
COMSOL model Sensitivity, V/Pa
0
30
60
90
120
150
180
210
240
270
300
330
-40
-20
0
17378 Hz, dB
COMSOL model Sensitivity, dB
0
30
60
90
120
150
180
210
240
270
300
330
0
1
2
3
50894 Hz, Pa
0
30
60
90
120
150
180
210
240
270
300
330
-40
-20
0
50894 Hz, dB
Figure 35: Numerical model directivity response for below and close to ka = 1
From ﬁgure 35 some beaming can be seen in the directivity pattern for higher frequencies
but below ka = 1. Comparing this to the analytical model for a radiating piston in a
baﬄe in ﬁgure 33, a similar beaming is seen at the same frequency. The directivity
results are shown for a selection of frequencies above resonance in ﬁgure 36 below:
46
==PAGE:48==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
0
30
60
90
120
150
180
210
240
270
300
330
0
1
2
3
87096 Hz, Pa
0
30
60
90
120
150
180
210
240
270
300
330
-40
-20
0
87096 Hz, dB
0
30
60
90
120
150
180
210
240
270
300
330
0
1
2
3
149050 Hz, Pa
COMSOL model Sensitivity, V/Pa
0
30
60
90
120
150
180
210
240
270
300
330
-40
-20
0
149050 Hz, dB
COMSOL model Sensitivity, dB
0
30
60
90
120
150
180
210
240
270
300
330
0
1
2
3
255074 Hz, Pa
0
30
60
90
120
150
180
210
240
270
300
330
-40
-20
0
255074 Hz, dB
Figure 36: Numerical model directivity response, ka >> 1
From ﬁgure 36 the beaming eﬀects are much greater, since the eﬀects of scattering
are greater. Comparing this to the analytical model for a radiating piston in a baﬄe,
similar beaming patterns are seen at the same frequencies, at least in the range of −90°
≤θ ≤90°. In general the beaming patterns resemble those seen in ﬁgure 4.
47
==PAGE:49==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
7
Modelling: The Ideal Pressure-Gradient Microphone
Following on from the development of a coupled numerical and LPM for a pressure-
operated microphone, the logical next-step for developing the model was to examine the
true-pressure gradient case, which is a simple version of a directional microphone with
the same fundamental operating principle.
7.1
Parameter Selection
As in the pressure-operated case, the model was implemented for a capsule with radius
of 2mm, using the ’small-scale’ parameter selection, which can be found in table 3 in
Appendix B.
7.2
Analytical Model
The analytical model for the pressure-operated case can be expanded to include depen-
dency on the angle of arrival of a plane wave by modifying the diaphragm pressure term
to be dependant upon a cosine function and the path length diﬀerence between the front
and back of the diaphragm. At this point this path length diﬀerence is expressed as a
function based on [5].
∆l = 4a
3π
(41)
A transfer function for the electrical output from an ideal bi-directional pressure-gradient
condenser microphone can be derived by modifying the low-frequency analogous circuits
for the pressure-operated condenser microphone described in section 6. The analytical
model here considers a circular diaphragm in free air, for which both sides of the di-
aphragm are exposed to variations in pressure, as described in ﬁgure 5. The diaphragm
movement is coupled to a transducing mechanism such that an output signal can be
derived.
This basic model assumes that the diaphragm assembly doesn’t aﬀect the pressure vari-
ations and that the transducing element has no acoustic inﬂuence on the diaphragm,
of course in reality for a condenser microphone a backplate positioned very close to the
membrane would be necessary in order to achieve an output signal, however for the sake
of verifying the simple pressure gradient case, this is suﬃcient.
The diaphragm moves in sympathy to the diﬀerence between pressure incident upon
the two sides. Assuming that the diaphragm moves freely as a rigid disc, then its move-
ment is proportional to the particle velocity incident upon it. For plane wave incidence
at 0° and 180° the pressure diﬀerence will be at a maximum, for plane wave incidence
at 90° the pressure variations will be identical on either side of the diaphragm and
48
==PAGE:50==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
therefore the net force acting on the diaphragm will be zero, thus the diaphragm will
not move. The adapted analogous circuit is shown below in ﬁgure 37:
Figure 37: Analogous circuit for an ideal pressure-gradient condenser microphone in free space,
modiﬁed from [19]
The pressure incident on the diaphragm may be assumed to be the diﬀerence between
the pressures acting on the front and the back of the diaphragm [19] such that
pD = pfront −prear
(42)
Provided that the the eﬀects of acoustic scattering caused by reﬂections are not consid-
ered, then the pressure incident on the front of the diaphragm can be set to be equal
to pin. The pressure acting on the rear of the diaphragm is therefore equal to pin plus
some diﬀerence in pressure, ∆p.
Based on [19], if
pin = p0 = e−jkz
(43)
then
∆pin = −jkp0e−jkzcos(θ)∆l = −s
cpincos(theta)∆l
(44)
the pressure diﬀerence, pD can be given by
pD = ∆pin + SDuD2MA1
(45)
It is assumed that the diaphragm velocity is still given by
49
==PAGE:51==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
uD = −1
ZM
 E
x0si + SDpD

(46)
and eoc is the open circuit output voltage:
eoc = E
x0suD
(47)
Setting the current, i = 0 in equation 46, and combining the terms, the transfer function
for the open-circuit voltage is given by:
eoc = −ESDCMT
cxo
s
(s/ω0)2 + (1/Q)(s/ω0) + 1pincos(θ)∆l
(48)
The complete derivation can be found in Appendix A
7.3
Implementation
The model used for this section is very similar to that used for the pressure operated case,
with the only diﬀerence being the formulation of the pressure acting on the diaphragm
PD.
In order to simulate the case in which the diaphragm motion is dependant on
the pressure diﬀerence, the pressure was integrated separately across both sides of the
diaphragm, and the diaphragm pressure PD was formulated as the diﬀerence between
these two pressures as PD = p1 −p2 and fed to the electromechanical LPM. The model
was evaluated for multiple angles of plane wave arrival as for the pressure-operated case
in order to examine the directional sensitivity.
50
==PAGE:52==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
7.4
Results
The numerical model was evaluated at the same frequency selection as used in the
pressure-operated case in section 6. In order to reduce computation time, to achieve
a straightforward evaluation of the model, the numerical model was evaluated using a
’normal’ mesh size preset, resulting in a minimum element size of 1.44 × 10−4m. The
evaluation was conducted to examine both microphone sensitivity and also the pressure
diﬀerence across the microphone diaphragm. The analytical model was also evaluated
using the same small-scale parameter set from table 3 and frequency range as a means
of validating the numerical model.
7.4.1
Sensitivity
The results for microphone sensitivity are shown below in ﬁgure 38:
102
103
104
105
Frequency, Hz
-450
-400
-350
-300
-250
-200
-150
-100
-50
Magnitude, dB
Model Verification, sensitivity
COMSOL model sens output, 0deg
COMSOL model sens output, 30deg
COMSOL model sens output, 60deg
COMSOL model sens output, 90deg
Analytical model sens output, 0deg
Analytical model sens output, 30deg
Analytical model sens output, 60deg
Analytical model sens output, 90deg
Figure 38: Pressure Gradient Bidirectional Model Sensitivity comparison for 0°, 30°, 60° and
90° incidence
From ﬁgure 38 it is clear that the numerical model and analytical model have good agree-
ment for the majority of the frequency range. In the region below resonance (roughly
100Hz-30kHz) the results are quite consistent, this is also the case at and around reso-
nance, and it an be seen that above the resonant region, the analytical model rolls oﬀin
a consistent manner, since reﬂections are not taken into account, whereas the numerical
model shows evidence of interference due to acoustic scattering. Good agreement is also
seen with the general pressure-gradient response given in ﬁgure 6.
The main diﬀerence between the analytical and numerical models is sensitivity for 90°
51
==PAGE:53==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
incidence. In theory, this should be zero and this is demonstrated by the analytical
results of roughly -450 to -400 dB, since this actually corresponds to the numerical error
lower bound of a 64-bit ﬂoating-point computation for the pressure diﬀerence, which is
then roughly shaped by the diaphragm impedance, therefore this result represents zero.
However for the numerical results, this response demonstrates a similar trend, but the
range is larger, between roughly -225dB and -150 dB. This result still represents the null
of the microphone polar pattern, however it is likely that this range is higher in value
due to the numerical errors in the numerical model. The shape also demonstrates an
overall similar trend since it represents a minimum in the pressure diﬀerence coupled
to the lumped parameter model for the diaphragm. The same results are shown below
in ﬁgure 39 with a reduced magnitude range in order to examine the behaviour for the
higher sensitivity output data.
102
103
104
105
Frequency, Hz
-140
-130
-120
-110
-100
-90
-80
-70
-60
-50
Magnitude, dB
Model Verification, sensitivity
COMSOL model sens output, 0deg
COMSOL model sens output, 30deg
COMSOL model sens output, 60deg
COMSOL model sens output, 90deg
Analytical model sens output, 0deg
Analytical model sens output, 30deg
Analytical model sens output, 60deg
Analytical model sens output, 90deg
Figure 39: Pressure Gradient Bidirectional Model Sensitivity comparison for 0, 30, 60 and 90
degree incidence zoomed
From ﬁgure 39 a clear similarity can be seen in the trend for the data. Firstly, the gra-
dient and resonance peak are very similar between the analytical and numerical results,
and there is a clear correlation between the relative attenuation at and below resonance,
in that the response for both the numerical and analytical models appears to reduce by
a similar amount for 30° and 60° angles of incidence. However the result from the nu-
merical model are consistently 6dB higher than those from the numerical model, at least
at and below resonance. 6dB SPL corresponds to a doubling in peak pressure, therefore
it appears that the pressure diﬀerence at the diaphragm in the numerical model is con-
sistently double that of the analytical model, which is likely to be a result of modelling
52
==PAGE:54==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
the diaphragm as a rigid disk. The behaviour above resonance for the numerical model
varies considerably compared to the analytical model, however this is to be expected
since the analytical model does not account for the high frequency eﬀects of scattering.
The numerical model does account for these eﬀects, but the diaphragm is modelled
a a rigid disc, therefore in reality this behaviour is likely to be even more complex since
the resonant behaviour of the diaphragm will also play a large role in sensitivity in this
range.
7.4.2
Pressure Diﬀerence
In order to examine the model further, the pressure diﬀerence results were also compared
between the analytical and numerical models, this is shown below in ﬁgure 40:
102
103
104
105
Frequency, Hz
-400
-350
-300
-250
-200
-150
-100
-50
0
50
Magnitude, dB
Model Verification, Pressure Difference
COMSOL model PD output, 0deg
COMSOL model PD output, 30deg
COMSOL model PD output, 60deg
COMSOL model PD output, 90deg
Analytical model PD output, 0deg
Analytical model PD output, 30deg
Analytical model PD output, 60deg
Analytical model PD output, 90deg
Figure 40: Pressure Gradient Bidirectional Model Pressure Diﬀerence comparison for 0, 30, 60
and 90 degree incidence
From ﬁgure 40 a similar trend can be seen as that in ﬁgure 38, in that similar results
are seen between the analytical and numerical models at and below resonance, which is
to be expected since the microphone output is directly related to the pressure diﬀerence
on the diaphragm, which is directly proportional to the gradient of the pressure and
thus increases with frequency [6]. Again, similar results are seen for 90° incidence, with
the analytical model giving results close to zero and the numerical model giving higher
level data.
In order to examine the higher magnitude data, the same results are shown for a narrow
53
==PAGE:55==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
range of pressure diﬀerence magnitude values below in ﬁgure 41:
102
103
104
105
Frequency, Hz
-80
-70
-60
-50
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
10
Magnitude, dB
Model Verification, Pressure Difference
COMSOL model PD output, 0deg
COMSOL model PD output, 30deg
COMSOL model PD output, 60deg
COMSOL model PD output, 90deg
Analytical model PD output, 0deg
Analytical model PD output, 30deg
Analytical model PD output, 60deg
Analytical model PD output, 90deg
Figure 41: Pressure Gradient Bidirectional Model Pressure Diﬀerence comparison for 0, 30, 60
and 90 degree incidence, zoomed
From ﬁgure 41, it is clear that the gradient of the analytical pressure diﬀerence and the
numerical pressure diﬀerence results are identical below ka ≈1 at which the diaphragm
radius becomes comparable to the wavelength, in this case this occurs at approximately
27kHz. Around and above this frequency eﬀects of acoustic scattering come into play
and these are seen in the numerical data, however they are not seen in the analytical
model since such eﬀects are not taken into account in the analytical model. Once again,
almost a 6dB diﬀerence is seen consistently between corresponding results below 10kHz
for the analytical and numerical models. Otherwise the pressure variation is relatively
consistent, thus validating the behaviour of the numerical model.
7.5
Directivity
The results for sensitivity and pressure diﬀerence were evaluated at 30° increments
in a 0° to 90° range in order to examine the basic behaviour.
A pressure-gradient
microphone should exhibit a ﬁgure-8 directivity response. In theory, for an analytical
model neglecting acoustic scattering and diaphragm resonances, this directivity pattern
should be independent of frequency, and this is implied in the analytical results in ﬁgures
38 and 40. In order to examine this, the numerical models was evaluated with the same
frequency range for plane wave arrival from 0° to 360° in 10° increments.
The normalised directivity results are shown for a selection of frequencies below and
near to resonance in ﬁgure 42 below:
54
==PAGE:56==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
0
30
60
90
120
150
180
210
240
270
300
330
0
0.5
1
1.5
3981 Hz, Pa
0
30
60
90
120
150
180
210
240
270
300
330
-150
-100
-50
3981 Hz, dB
0
30
60
90
120
150
180
210
240
270
300
330
0
0.5
1
1.5
17378 Hz, Pa
COMSOL model Sensitivity, V/Pa
0
30
60
90
120
150
180
210
240
270
300
330
-150
-100
-50
17378 Hz, dB
COMSOL model Sensitivity, dB
0
30
60
90
120
150
180
210
240
270
300
330
0
0.5
1
1.5
50894 Hz, Pa
0
30
60
90
120
150
180
210
240
270
300
330
-150
-100
-50
50894 Hz, dB
Figure 42: Pressure Gradient Bidirectional Model Directivity comparison for below and close to
ka = 1
From ﬁgure 42 the directivity response for the numerical data appears to narrow around
the microphone resonance. The results for a selection of frequencies above resonance
are shown below in ﬁgure 43:
55
==PAGE:57==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
0
30
60
90
120
150
180
210
240
270
300
330
0
0.5
1
1.5
87096 Hz, Pa
0
30
60
90
120
150
180
210
240
270
300
330
-150
-100
87096 Hz, dB
0
30
60
90
120
150
180
210
240
270
300
330
0
0.5
1
1.5
149050 Hz, Pa
COMSOL model Sensitivity, V/Pa
0
30
60
90
120
150
180
210
240
270
300
330
-150
-100
149050 Hz, dB
COMSOL model Sensitivity, dB
0
30
60
90
120
150
180
210
240
270
300
330
0
0.5
1
1.5
255074 Hz, Pa
0
30
60
90
120
150
180
210
240
270
300
330
-150
-100
255074 Hz, dB
Figure 43: Pressure Gradient Bidirectional Model Directivity comparison for ka >> 1
From ﬁgure 43 at around 87kHz the directivity response for the numerical model is seen
to narrow further, and with increasing frequency this behaviour becomes more dramatic
and the response begins to ’beam’. This is expected behaviour, since the diaphragm size
is now large compared to the wavelength, the scattering eﬀect is similar to that seen for
the pressure-operated case and the radiation of a vibrating disc, due to the reciprocity
principle as examined in ﬁgures 33 and 34.
56
==PAGE:58==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
8
Modelling: The Combination Pressure-Gradient Pressure-
Operated Microphone
Following the veriﬁcation in the previous stages, it was possible to develop the model
towards the key area of this thesis, namely modelling a controlled directional response
characteristic. So far it has been demonstrated by both analytical and numerical mod-
elling that a diaphragm exposed to pressure variations on only one side will yield a pre-
dominately omnidirectional response, and if both sides are exposed then a bi-directional
response will be obtained. By controlling the acoustic pathway to the rear of the di-
aphragm, the directivity pattern of the microphone may adjusted between these two
extents. In order to model this, an analytical model was derived based on [19]. This
was then used to verify the subsequent numerical model.
8.1
Analytical Modeling
As discussed in section 7, for a microphone diaphragm exposed to pressure variations
on both sides, the diaphragm velocity (and hence the microphone output signal, for a
system with a coupled transducing element), is dependant on the angle of arrival of an
acoustic wave. Assuming plane wave incidence, the motion for a diaphragm with both
sides equally exposed will be be at a minimum for angles of arrival for which the pressure
is equal on both sides of the microphone.
The general analogous circuit model for a condenser microphone is shown below in ﬁg-
ure 44, adapted to take into account the rear incidence and the acoustic phase shifting
network:
Figure 44: Analogous circuits for an ideal combination pressure-gradient, pressure-operated
condenser microphone in free space. Adapted from [19]
In ﬁgure 44 above, the rear acoustic network can be seen in the components RA and
57
==PAGE:59==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
CAB2 which are coupled to the resistance and mass of the holes in the microphone back-
plate, RAS and MAS respectively and the volume of air enclosed between the backplate
and the diaphragm, CAB1.
Again, the pressure incident on the diaphragm may be assumed to be the diﬀerence
between the pressures acting on the front and the back of the diaphragm such that
pD = pfront −prear
(49)
Provided that the the eﬀects of acoustic scattering caused by reﬂections are not consid-
ered, then the pressure incident on the front of the diaphragm can be set to be equal to
pin. The pressure acting on the rear of the diaphragm is dependant on both the angle
of arrival and the acoustic resistance, mass and compliance of the rear chamber and its
access. Based on [19], if
pin = p0e−jkz
(50)
then
∆pin = −jkp0e−jkzcos(θ)∆l = −s
cpincos(theta)∆l
(51)
Assuming any acoustic mass element of the rear acoustic access to be small enough to
be ignored, the pressure diﬀerence, pD can be described by [19] as
pD =

pin −(pin + ∆pin)
1
1 + RASCABs

+ SDuDZA
(52)
using equation 51, equation 52 can be given as:
pD = pin
RASCABs
1 + RASCABs(1 + βcos(θ) + SDuDZA
(53)
It is assumed that the diaphragm velocity is still given by
uD = −1
ZM
( E
x0si + SDpD)
(54)
and eoc is the open circuit output voltage:
eoc = E
x0suD
(55)
The mechanical impedance is the same as for the pressure operated case such that
ZM = MMDs + RMD +
1
CMDs
(56)
The acoustic impedance now consists of the acoustic mass load on the front of the
diaphragm, the rear access resistance and the rear cavity compliance:
58
==PAGE:60==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
ZA = (MA1)s +
RAS
1 + RACABs
(57)
Setting the current, i = 0 in equation 54, and combining the terms, the transfer function
for the open-circuit voltage is given by:
eoc =
ECMT C2
ABpinRASs(1 + βcosθ)SDω2
0Q
xo

RAS(Q(CMT RASS2
Ds −1)ω2
0 −sω0 −s2Q)sC2
AB + (Q(CMT RASS2
Ds −1)ω2
0 −sω0 −s2Q)CAB + CMT S2
Dω2
0Q
(58)
The pressure diﬀerence across the diaphragm is given by:
pD = −
βCABcos(θ)RAZMpis −CABRAZMpis
(−CABMA1RAS2
Ds2 −CABRAZMs −MA1S2
Ds −RAS2
D −ZM)
(59)
A complete derivation can be found in Appendix A.
The expressions above can be evaluated for various angles of arrival and target di-
rectivity patterns. The expressions were examined in MATLAB using the large-scale
parameter selection, the model procedure is outlined in 45 below:
Select Parameters
Specify β values 
Determine LPM 
parameters
Determine required 
RA
Calculate eoc for 
each angle
Loop through 
frequencies
Loop through 
angles
Figure 45: Combination Pressure-Gradient Analytical Model implementation Flow Chart
8.2
Analytical Model validation - Omni
In order to validate the derivation of the analytical model, the output sensitivity was
compared against a Spice model of the equivalent circuit. Furthermore, since the com-
bination pressure-gradient analytical model works as a pressure operated microphone
59
==PAGE:61==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
when the rear resistance is very high, i.e. when the target directivity factor is set to
β = 0, the model provided in the literature from [19] for the pressure-operated case was
used as a test case as well. The Spice model is based on the models given in ﬁgures
5.10 and 5.20 in [19], with the electromechanical portion of the latter modiﬁed for the
condenser case. The Spice Model is shown below in ﬁgure 46:
Figure 46: Combination pressure-gradient Spice equivalent circuit model
Figure 47 below shows a comparison of the output sensitivity and diaphragm pressure
based on the derived analytical expression for the combination pressure-gradient model,
the output sensitivity and diaphragm pressure based on the Spice circuit model both
with the target directivity factor set to β = 1×10−12, i.e. β →0, giving a rear resistance
value of RA = 1.722 × 1017N · s/m5. The direct LPM model for the output sensitivity
of a pressure operated microphone from [19] is also shown.
60
==PAGE:62==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
101
102
103
104
105
Frequency, Hz
-50
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
10
Magnitude, dB
magnitude of sensitivity and pressure difference - analytical
Pressure Difference, Spice
Output Sensitivity, Spice
Output Sensitivity - LEACH
Pressure Difference, LPM
Output Sensitivity, LPM
Figure 47: Combination Pressure-Gradient Model Sensitivity comparison for β →0
From ﬁgure 47 it is clear that there is exact agreement between all three models for the
output sensitivity for the pressure-operated case. Furthermore, there is exact agreement
between the pressure-diﬀerence results for the derived analytical model and the Spice
circuit implementation. As a result, the derived analytical model for the combination
pressure-gradient is validated.
The output sensitivity and directional response for 0° to 180° plane wave incidence
is shown below in ﬁgures 48 and 49:
Electrical Output, Directivity Pattern, beta = 1e-11
  0.5
  1
30
210
60
240
90
270
120
300
150
330
180
0
Figure 48: Normalised Combination Pressure-Gradient Analytical model directivity pattern for
β →0, V/Pa
61
==PAGE:63==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
101
102
103
104
105
Frequency, Hz
-50
-40
-30
-20
-10
Magnitude, dB
Electrical Output, Directivity Pattern
0
30
60
90
120
150
180
Figure 49: Combination Pressure-Gradient Model Directional sensitivity for β →0
Since the analytical model does not account for any eﬀects of scattering or directivity,
the results all demonstrate the response for an ideal combination pressure-gradient mi-
crophone, with the target directivity pattern set to omnidirectional. In reality, under
free-ﬁeld conditions, variation in directivity would be expected for higher frequencies
due to scattering of the microphone body as discussed in section 3.1.2
62
==PAGE:64==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
8.3
Analytical Model validation - Bidirectional
Continuing with the validation, the model was compared against the spice model output
for a target directivity factor set to β = 1 × 1012 i.e. β →∞, giving a rear resistance
value of RA = 1.722 × 10−5N · s/m5. The comparison of the results is shown below in
ﬁgure 50:
101
102
103
104
105
Frequency, Hz
-60
-50
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
10
Magnitude, dB
magnitude of sensitivity and pressure difference - analytical
Pressure Difference, Spice
Output Sensitivity, Spice
Pressure Difference, LPM
Output Sensitivity, LPM
Figure 50: Combination Pressure-Gradient Model Sensitivity comparison for β →∞
From ﬁgure 50 is is clear that once again there is exact agreement between the Spice
circuit and the analytical combination pressure-gradient model for both the pressure-
diﬀerence and output sensitivity results. The output sensitivity for for 0° to 180° plane
wave incidence is shown below in ﬁgure 51:
63
==PAGE:65==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
101
102
103
104
105
Frequency, Hz
-300
-250
-200
-150
-100
-50
0
Magnitude, dB
Electrical Output, Directivity Pattern
0
30
60
90
120
150
180
Figure 51: Combination Pressure-Gradient Model Directional Sensitivity for β →0
From ﬁgure 51 it is clear that plane wave incidence close to 0° and 180° gives a relatively
high output, with steady attenuation as the arrival angle approaches 90° incidence. For
the extreme case at 90° incidence, a very low output is observed since this reﬂects the
null axis of the bidirectional microphone response, here a value of around -250dB rep-
resents the numerical rounding error.
The directivity pattern and directional sensitivity with a zoomed view are shown below
in ﬁgures 53 and 51:
102
103
104
Frequency, Hz
-60
-50
-40
-30
-20
-10
Magnitude, dB
Electrical Output, Directivity Pattern
0
30
60
90
120
150
180
Figure 52: Combination Pressure-Gradient Model Directional Sensitivity for β →0, zoomed
view
64
==PAGE:66==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
Electrical Output, Directivity Pattern, beta = 100000000000
  0.5
  1
30
210
60
240
90
270
120
300
150
330
180
0
Figure 53: Normalised Combination Pressure-Gradient Model Directivity pattern for β →0,
V/Pa
From ﬁgure 52 the attenuation for angles close to 0° and 180° can be seen.
Since
the response is symmetrical about 90° and 270° incidence, the results for 0°, 30° and
60° incidence are obscured by those for 120°, 150° and 180°. From ﬁgure 53 an ideal
bidirectional directivity pattern is observed. The pattern does not vary with frequency
since the model is ideal and does not take into account eﬀects of acoustic scattering or
the proximity eﬀect, since only plane wave incidence is examined.
8.4
Analytical Model validation - Cardioid
Following the validation at the two extremes of the model, the predicted sensitivity
for the model for a cardioid directivity pattern is obtained by setting β = 1, giving a
rear resistance value of RA = 1.722 × 106N · s/m5. The on-axis sensitivity response
and pressure diﬀerence from the derived analytical model is shown, compared with the
corresponding data from the spice circuit model with the same target directivity factor
β = 1. This is shown below in ﬁgure 54:
65
==PAGE:67==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
101
102
103
104
105
Frequency, Hz
-60
-50
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
10
Magnitude, dB
magnitude of sensitivity and pressure difference - analytical
Pressure Difference, Spice
Output Sensitivity, Spice
Pressure Difference, LPM
Output Sensitivity, LPM
Figure 54: Combination Pressure-Gradient Model on-axis Sensitivity for β = 1
From ﬁgure 54 exact agreement is seen once again, the same low frequency roll-oﬀis
observed as in the bidirectional case, but with a ﬂatter response before high frequency
roll-oﬀ.
The directivity pattern and directional sensitivity results from the derived
analytical model are shown below in ﬁgures 56 and 55:
101
102
103
104
105
Frequency, Hz
-80
-60
-40
-20
0
Magnitude, dB
Electrical Output, Directivity Pattern
0
30
60
90
120
150
180
Figure 55: Combination Pressure-Gradient Model Directional sensitivity for β = 1
66
==PAGE:68==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
Electrical Output, Directivity Pattern, beta = 1
  0.5
  1
30
210
60
240
90
270
120
300
150
330
180
0
Figure 56: Normalised Combination Pressure-Gradient Model Directivity pattern for β = 1,
V/Pa
From 56 the ideal Cardioid directional sensitivity can be seen. Since the model is ideal,
0° incidence yields a zero output voltage, thus this is not seen in the range shown, oth-
erwise reasonable agreement in terms of directivity is given compared to the literature
in ﬁgures 15 and 16.
Since the two models align, and based on the validation for the omnidirectional and
bidirectional test cases, the analytical model seems to be suﬃciently valid and gives the
expected directional behaviour with respect to the directivity factor values and responses
given in 3.3, ﬁgures 12 to 14.
67
==PAGE:69==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
9
Modelling:
The combination pressure-gradient micro-
phone, numerical approach
9.1
Simple Impedance - Omnidirectional
The Numerical model was implemented using the same parameters as for the analytical
models in section 8.1. The resulting predicted rear resistance value for an omnidirec-
tional directivity response was 1.722 × 1017N · s/m5. For the sake of simplicity at this
stage, this value was applied across all frequencies as the real part of an impedance
boundary condition for the rear access to the capsule and the boundary condition for
the diaphragm was omitted, such that the model was only semi-coupled. The imagi-
nary part was omitted. A maximum element size of 0.00403m was used for the acoustic
domain, and a maximum element size of 0.00172m was used for the membrane meshes.
The PML had a radius of 2Rm and a thickness of 2Rm/5 The model was examined
for 37 frequencies between 10Hz and 30kHz for plane wave incidence at 30° increments
between 0 and 180 degrees, with a solution time of about 97 seconds per angle.
The results for the output sensitivity, eoc are shown below in ﬁgure 57:
101
102
103
104
105
Frequency, (Hz)
-50
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
Magnitude, dB
Numerical vs Analytical Data, test case: Omni, e oc
Analytical eoc
Numerical eoc
Figure 57: Analytical vs Numerical results for Output Sensitivity for Simple Rear Impedance,
test case Omnidirectional, 0° plane wave incidence
From ﬁgure 57 it is clear that there is little correlation between the numerical results
and the analytical model, except for the peak seen at around 7kHz. The high frequency
response is expected to have diﬀerent, somewhat higher, values for the numerical results
due to the eﬀects of scattering. However the response is generally quite diﬀerent. This
diﬀerence can be investigated further by examining the pressure diﬀerence results. The
results for the pressure diﬀerence, pD are shown below in ﬁgure 58:
68
==PAGE:70==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
101
102
103
104
105
Frequency, (Hz)
-25
-20
-15
-10
-5
0
5
10
Magnitude, dB
Numerical vs Analytical Data, test case: Omni, P D
Analytical PD
Numerical PD
Figure 58: Analytical vs Numerical results for pressure diﬀerence for Simple Rear Impedance,
test case Omnidirectional, 0° plane wave incidence
From ﬁgure 58 it is clear that the pressure diﬀerence is diﬀerent between the analytical
and numerical models, which is likely to cause a diﬀerence between the analytical and
numerical results. In order to examine this, the front and rear pressure is evaluated in
the LTspice model, and this is compared to the integrated pressure on the front and rear
of the microphone diaphragm in the Numerical model. The results are shown below in
ﬁgure 59:
101
102
103
104
105
Frequency, (Hz)
-160
-140
-120
-100
-80
-60
-40
-20
0
20
Magnitude, dB
Numerical vs Analytical Data, test case: Omni, p f, pr
Spice pf
Spice pr
Numerical pf
Numerical pr
Figure 59: Analytical Spice Circuit vs Numerical results for front and rear pressure for Simple
Rear Impedance, test case Omnidirectional, 0° plane wave incidence
69
==PAGE:71==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
From ﬁgure 59 it is quite clear that the pressure acting on the rear of the diaphragm
does not match the analytical spice model. However there is good agreement between
the pressure acting on the front in both models, with the diﬀerence seen in the high
frequency range again due to scattering eﬀects. Based on this, it appears that there
is a problem with the pressure in the rear cavity in the numerical model. Since the
diaphragms do not have boundary conditions applied in this investigation, the model
is only coupled in one direction, in that pressure diﬀerence (pf −pr) is applied to the
LPM as a force on the diaphragm, however the LPM does not exert a volume velocity
on the acoustic domain, which doesn’t make a large diﬀerence for the exterior side of
the diaphragm since this side is exposed to the unbounded domain, however this means
that the rear of the diaphragm exerts no force on the rear cavity and therefore there is
eﬀectively no pressure here, hence the low pressure data observed.
In order to examine this, the current source SDuD, representing the volume velocity
exerted on the surround medium by the diaphragm was removed from the Spice circuit
model, the resulting output sensitivity is shown below in comparison to the numerical
study in ﬁgure 60:
101
102
103
104
105
Frequency, (Hz)
-50
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
Magnitude, dB
Numerical vs Analytical Data, test case: Omni, e oc
Analytical eoc
Numerical eoc
Spice eoc no coupling
Figure 60: Analytical Spice Circuit vs Numerical results for output sensitivity for Simple Rear
Impedance, test case Omnidirectional, 0° plane wave incidence, no exterior coupling
From ﬁgure 60 it can be seen that the behaviour of the spice circuit when the external
coupling is omitted follows the numerical result quite closely. Based on this, it seems
apparent that the problems in the numerical model are to some extent due to a lack of
full coupling, which essentially makes the rear cavity redundant since it is not excited.
In this manner, it appears that the numerical model does not accurately reﬂect the
analytical solution.
70
==PAGE:72==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
However, the presence of the capsule in the exterior domain should cause some degree
of acoustic scattering, as described in section 3.3. The output sensitivity for multiple
angles of arrival is shown below in ﬁgure 61:
101
102
103
104
105
Frequency, (Hz)
-80
-70
-60
-50
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
Magnitude, dB
Numerical vs Analytical Data, test case: Omni, e oc
Analytical 0°
Numerical 0°
Analytical 30°
Numerical 30°
Analytical 60°
Numerical 60°
Analytical 90°
Numerical 90°
Analytical 120°
Numerical 120°
Analytical 150°
Numerical 150°
Analytical 180°
Numerical 180°
Figure 61: Analytical Spice Circuit vs Numerical results for output sensitivity for Simple Rear
Impedance, test case Omnidirectional, 0-180° plane wave incidence, no exterior coupling
From ﬁgure 61 it can be seen that the output response becomes directional with increas-
ing frequency and the eﬀects of scattering are seen for diﬀerent angles of arrival, however
the majority of the response is still incorrect due to the apparent lack of coupling.
For the pressure operated case, since the rear of the capsule is sealed, the pressure
acting on the rear of the diaphragm is apparently very low. The coupling can therefore
be approximated by replacing pi in equation 29 with the numerical result for pD. The
output sensitivity for multiple angles of arrival using this approach is shown below in
ﬁgure 62 below:
71
==PAGE:73==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
101
102
103
104
105
Frequency, (Hz)
-90
-80
-70
-60
-50
-40
-30
-20
-10
Magnitude, dB
Numerical vs Analytical Data, test case: Omni, e oc
Analytical 0°
Numerical 0°
Analytical 30°
Numerical 30°
Analytical 60°
Numerical 60°
Analytical 90°
Numerical 90°
Analytical 120°
Numerical 120°
Analytical 150°
Numerical 150°
Analytical 180°
Numerical 180°
Figure 62: Analytical Spice Circuit vs Numerical results for output sensitivity for Simple Rear
Impedance, test case Omnidirectional, 0-180° plane wave incidence, coupled
From ﬁgure 62 it can be seen that the analytical response is now matched, with the
numerical data essentially demonstrating the free-ﬁeld response of the microphone due
to the eﬀects of acoustic scattering for diﬀerent angles of plane wave incidence. However,
implementing the same behaviour with the derived analytical model requires a function
with a pD in order to provide coupling for the pressure-gradient-based test cases, but
such a derivation removes the directional term and thus renders the expression unusable
for examining directional behaviour.
72
==PAGE:74==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
9.2
Numerical Model - Cardioid
The Numerical model was implemented using the same parameters as for the analytical
models in section 8.1.
The resulting predicted rear resistance value for an cardioid
directivity response was 1.722 × 106N · s/m5. For the sake of simplicity at this stage,
this value was applied across all frequencies as the real part of an impedance boundary
condition for the rear access to the capsule and the boundary condition for the diaphragm
was omitted, such that the model was only semi-coupled.
The imaginary part was
omitted. A maximum element size of 0.00403m was used for the acoustic domain, and a
maximum element size of 0.00172m was used for the membrane meshes. The PML had
a radius of 2Rm and a thickness of 2Rm/5 The model was examined for 37 frequencies
between 10Hz and 30kHz for plane wave incidence at 30° increments between 0 and 180
degrees, with a solution time of about 97 seconds per angle.
The results for the output sensitivity, eoc are shown below in ﬁgure 63:
101
102
103
104
105
Frequency, (Hz)
-60
-50
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
Magnitude, dB
Numerical vs Analytical Data, test case: Cardioid, e oc
Analytical eoc
Numerical eoc
Figure 63: Analytical vs Numerical results for Output Sensitivity for Simple Rear Impedance,
test case Cardioid, 0° plane wave incidence
From ﬁgure 63 it is clear that there is little agreement between the numerical response
and the predicted analytical response for the given acoustic resistance value. In fact,
the numerical response for this acoustic resistance is the same as that seen in ﬁgure 57
for the omnidirectional case, which indicates that, in the numerical model, the acoustic
resistance value appears to be too large for the acoustic network, since the behaviour
closer to the pressure-operated cases. Additionally, since the response is the same for
the pressure-operated case, the model coupling may also be involved in this issue.
This can be examined further through the pressure diﬀerence, pD, the results for which
are shown below in ﬁgure 64:
73
==PAGE:75==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
101
102
103
104
105
Frequency, (Hz)
-50
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
10
Magnitude, dB
Numerical vs Analytical Data, test case: Cardioid, P D
Analytical PD
Numerical PD
Figure 64: Analytical vs Numerical results for pressure diﬀerence for Simple Rear Impedance,
test case Cardioid, 0° plane wave incidence
From ﬁgure 64 the same pressure diﬀerence is seen as for the Omnidirectional test case
seen in ﬁgure 58, again indicating that the impedance of the rear access is too great,
causing the numerical transducer model to behave more like a pressure-operated micro-
phone. Again, the output sensitivity for multiple angles of arrivals should demonstrate
scattering eﬀects and indeed the same response as the omnidirectional test case is shown
below in ﬁgure 65 :
101
102
103
104
105
Frequency, (Hz)
-80
-70
-60
-50
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
Magnitude, dB
Numerical vs Analytical Data, test case: Cardioid, e oc
Analytical 0°
Numerical 0°
Analytical 30°
Numerical 30°
Analytical 60°
Numerical 60°
Analytical 90°
Numerical 90°
Analytical 120°
Numerical 120°
Analytical 150°
Numerical 150°
Analytical 180°
Numerical 180°
Figure 65: Analytical Spice Circuit vs Numerical results for output sensitivity for Simple Rear
Impedance, test case Cardioid, 0-180° plane wave incidence, no exterior coupling
From ﬁgure 65 it can be seen the predicted acoustic resistance value, when implemented
74
==PAGE:76==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
in this model, gives directional behaviour except for the free-ﬁeld response. The expected
directivity as seen in the analytical data is clearly quite diﬀerent. As discussed in section
3.3, provided that the acoustic network performs as intended, for the cardioid case the
combination of the the discreet acoustic components of resistance and compliance that
form the acoustic low-pass ﬁlter should delay a plane-wave arriving from the rear by
the same amount of time taken to travel the path length diﬀerence. In this manner, the
phase of the pressure on the front and back of the diaphragm should be similar, ideally.
The phase of the pressure between the front and rear of the microphone diaphragm from
the numerical model is shown below for 0° and 180° incidence in ﬁgures 66 and 67 below:
101
102
103
104
105
Frequency, (Hz)
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
Phase, radians
Numerical data, test case: Cardioid, 0 ° phase f, phase r
Numerical phasef
Numerical phaser
Figure 66: Numerical results for front and rear diaphragm phase for Simple Rear Impedance,
test case Cardioid, 0° plane wave incidence, no exterior coupling
75
==PAGE:77==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
101
102
103
104
105
Frequency, (Hz)
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
Phase, radians
Numerical data, test case Cardioid, 180 ° phase f, phase r
Numerical phasef
Numerical phaser
Figure 67: Numerical results for front and rear diaphragm phase for Simple Rear Impedance,
test case Cardioid, 180° plane wave incidence, no exterior coupling
From ﬁgure 66 the phase of the pressure on the rear of the diaphragm is generally lagging
by roughly 1 rad, and this lag increases signiﬁcantly above 1kHz, indicating that the
acoustic network is indeed acting as a low-pass ﬁlter, however there is already some
signiﬁcant lag acting on the rear pressure. In ﬁgure 67 the lag is present above 1kHz
but lesser in comparison the 0° incidence, however 1 rad is still signiﬁcant hence the
acoustic network is not behaving as expected for this value of acoustic resistance.
76
==PAGE:78==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
9.3
Numerical Model - Bidirectional
The Numerical model was implemented using the same parameters as for the analytical
models in section 8.1. The resulting predicted rear resistance value for an bidirectional
directivity response was 1.722 × 10−5N · s/m5. For the sake of simplicity at this stage,
this value was applied across all frequencies as the real part of an impedance boundary
condition for the rear access to the capsule and the boundary condition for the diaphragm
was omitted, such that the model was only semi-coupled.
The imaginary part was
omitted. A maximum element size of 0.00403m was used for the acoustic domain, and a
maximum element size of 0.00172m was used for the membrane meshes. The PML had
a radius of 2Rm and a thickness of 2Rm/5 The model was examined for 37 frequencies
between 10Hz and 30kHz for plane wave incidence at 30° increments between 0 and 180
degrees, with a solution time of about 97 seconds per angle.
The results for the output sensitivity, eoc are shown below in ﬁgure 68:
101
102
103
104
105
Frequency, (Hz)
-60
-50
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
Magnitude, dB
Numerical vs Analytical Data, test case: Figure8, e oc
Analytical eoc
Numerical eoc
Figure 68: Analytical vs Numerical results for Output Sensitivity for Simple Rear Impedance,
test case Figure 8, 0° plane wave incidence
The output response in ﬁgure 68 shows reasonable agreement with the analytical model.
A consistent 2dB diﬀerence is seen between the numerical and analytical data below
1kHz above which the results diﬀer due to the eﬀects of acoustic scattering. Since the
acoustic resistance is close to zero for this test case, the acoustic network is essentially
non existent and the rear cavity is more or less open to the exterior sound ﬁeld. The
fact that better agreement is seen for this test case compared to the omnidirectional
and cardioid test cases indicates that the issues seen lie in the rear acoustic network
modelling. The numerical results for the pressure diﬀerence, pD are shown below in
ﬁgure 69:
77
==PAGE:79==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
101
102
103
104
105
Frequency, (Hz)
-60
-50
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
Magnitude, dB
Numerical vs Analytical Data, test case: Figure8, P D
Analytical PD
Numerical PD
Figure 69: Analytical vs Numerical results for pressure diﬀerence for Simple Rear Impedance,
test case Figure 8, 0° plane wave incidence
From ﬁgure 69 similar agreement is seen for the pressure diﬀerence results, again with
a consistent 2dB oﬀset below 1kHz and deviation above 1kHz due to scattering eﬀects.
In order to examine this 2dB diﬀerence, the spice circuit model was implemented with
coupling removed as in ﬁgure 60. The results for the output sensitivity, eoc with Spice
comparison with no coupling applied are shown below in ﬁgure 70:
101
102
103
104
105
Frequency, (Hz)
-60
-50
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
Magnitude, dB
Numerical vs Analytical Data, test case: Figure8, e oc
Analytical eoc
Numerical eoc
Spice eoc no coupling
Figure 70: Analytical vs Numerical results for output sensitivity for Simple Rear Impedance,
test case Figure 8, 0° plane wave incidence
From 70 the eﬀect of removing coupling appears to broaden the response of the micro-
78
==PAGE:80==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
phone, but the 2dB oﬀset is still seen below 1kHz. Furthermore, since the only diﬀerence
in the numerical model between the directivity test cases presented is the acoustic resis-
tance it appears that that the issues seen previously may be more involved than simply
a case of a lack of coupling. Since the analytical model doesn’t take into account the
materials used or changes in pressure against surfaces due to boundary conditions, a
further test was examined in which the hard boundary conditions were omitted from
the microphone structure completely. The results for the output sensitivity and pressure
diﬀerence with no hard boundary conditions applied are shown below in ﬁgures 70 and
70:
101
102
103
104
105
Frequency, (Hz)
-60
-50
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
Magnitude, dB
Numerical vs Analytical Data, test case: Figure8, e oc
Analytical eoc
Numerical eoc
Numerical eoc no BC
Figure 71: Analytical vs Numerical results for pressure diﬀerence for Simple Rear Impedance,
test case Figure 8, 0° plane wave incidence
79
==PAGE:81==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
101
102
103
104
105
Frequency, (Hz)
-60
-50
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
Magnitude, dB
Numerical vs Analytical Data, test case: Figure8, p D
Analytical eoc
Numerical pD
Numerical pD no BC
Figure 72: Analytical vs Numerical results for pressure diﬀerence for Simple Rear Impedance,
test case Figure 8, 0° plane wave incidence
From ﬁgures 70 and 70 the 2dB oﬀset appears to be due to the boundary conditions,
the pressure diﬀerence is generally lower by about 5dB across all frequencies with hard
boundary conditions omitted, as such the analytical model appears to model a case
between the two, since pressure increases at boundaries are not taken into account. The
output sensitivity for multiple angles of arrival is shown below in ﬁgure 73 :
101
102
103
104
105
Frequency, (Hz)
-180
-160
-140
-120
-100
-80
-60
-40
-20
0
Magnitude, dB
Numerical vs Analytical Data, test case: Figure8, e oc
Analytical 0°
Numerical 0°
Analytical 30°
Numerical 30°
Analytical 60°
Numerical 60°
Analytical 90°
Numerical 90°
Analytical 120°
Numerical 120°
Analytical 150°
Numerical 150°
Analytical 180°
Numerical 180°
Figure 73: Analytical Spice Circuit vs Numerical results for output sensitivity for Simple Rear
Impedance, test case Figure 8, 0-180° plane wave incidence, no exterior coupling
From ﬁgure 73 it can be seen that there is generally good agreement between the ana-
lytical and numerical models, again a consistent oﬀset of about 2dB is seen for angles of
80
==PAGE:82==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
arrival approaching the z-axis (close to 0° and 180° incidence). Crucially, a dipole char-
acteristic is achieved, since a general null in sensitivity is seen for 90° incidence, while
the output sensitivity is identical for angles of arrival symmetrical about the radial axis.
Again, deviation is seen above 1kHz due to scattering eﬀects, and this is particularly
evident for 90° incidence, which is due to the lack of symmetry of the capsule either side
of the radial plane. This can be seen in more detail in ﬁgure 74 below, in which the
range is zoomed:
101
102
103
104
105
Frequency, (Hz)
-80
-70
-60
-50
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
Magnitude, dB
Numerical vs Analytical Data, test case: Figure8, e oc
Analytical 0°
Numerical 0°
Analytical 30°
Numerical 30°
Analytical 60°
Numerical 60°
Analytical 90°
Numerical 90°
Analytical 120°
Numerical 120°
Analytical 150°
Numerical 150°
Analytical 180°
Numerical 180°
Figure 74: Analytical Spice Circuit vs Numerical results for output sensitivity for Simple Rear
Impedance, test case Figure 8, 0-180° plane wave incidence, no exterior coupling, zoomed view
81
==PAGE:83==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
9.4
Numerical model - Lower RA selection
From the data examined so far, it is apparent that directivity can be observed, for
example in the case of the Figure-8 test case, for which the rear access impedance is
close to zero. However while the omnidirectional test case shows directivity at high
frequencies, due to acoustic scattering, the cardioid test case shows much the same re-
sults, indicating that the predicted resistance values from the analytical model do not
give the expected pressure diﬀerence in the numerical model, which could be due to
problems with the model implementation. Since the cardioid test case results reﬂect the
omnidirectional test case, and thus that of a pressure-operated microphone, it would
appear that the predicted acoustic resistance of RA = 1.722 × 106N · s/m5 is too high,
at least when implemented in the Numerical Model. However, based on the combination
pressure-gradient operating principle, in that the acoustic components of resistance and
compliance of the rear access and rear cavity form an acoustic low-pass ﬁlter with a
group delay which equals the path length diﬀerence between the front and rear of the
capsule, incorrect results indicate a problem with the modelling of either of these two
components.
The phase comparison between the front and rear of the diaphragm in ﬁgures 66 and
67 indicates this as well since phase agreement is not observed for the 180° case. In
order to examine this, the static resistance for the boundary condition of the rear ac-
cess to the capsule was reduced to examine where the transition point may lie between
pressure-operated and pressure-gradient performance, since these test cases appeared to
be validated, at least in terms of directivity. It was found that directivity resembling
cardioid behaviour was found for RA = 1500N ·s/m5, which is approximately 3 orders of
magnitude lower than the predicted value. The directional sensitivity for the numerical
model is compared with the analytical for a target directivity value of β = 1 in ﬁgures
75 and 76 below:
82
==PAGE:84==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
101
102
103
104
105
Frequency, (Hz)
-80
-70
-60
-50
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
Magnitude, dB
Numerical Data, test case: R A=1500, e oc
Numerical 0°
Numerical 30°
Numerical 60°
Numerical 90°
Numerical 120°
Numerical 150°
Numerical 180°
Figure 75: Numerical results for output sensitivity for Simple Rear Impedance, test case RA =
1500N · s/m5, 0-180° plane wave incidence, no exterior coupling
101
102
103
104
105
Frequency, (Hz)
-80
-70
-60
-50
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
Magnitude, dB
Analytical Data, test case: R A=1.714e6, e oc
Analytical 0°
Analytical 30°
Analytical 60°
Analytical 90°
Analytical 120°
Analytical 150°
Analytical 180°
Figure 76: Analytical results for output sensitivity for Simple Rear Impedance, test case RA =
1.722 × 106N · s/m5, Cardioid 0-180° plane wave incidence, no exterior coupling
Comparing ﬁgures 75 and 76 it is clear that the output sensitivity does not match, but
the resemblance is closer than that seen for the cardioid testcase. However the directiv-
ity response is clear; the numerical model data clearly shows an increase in attenuation
for angles of arrival approaching the rear of the microphone, with a minimum for 180°
incidence, however the trend may suggest something between omnidirectional and car-
dioid performance, such as a subcardioid directivity pattern. However, the presence of
directivity is clear. As discussed in section 3.3, in order to acheived ﬁrst order direc-
tivity, the acoustic network on the rear of the capsule should present an acoustic delay
83
==PAGE:85==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
equal to the path length diﬀerence for the desired angle of arrival to be attenuated. The
phase of the pressure between the front and rear of the microphone diaphragm is shown
below in ﬁgures 77 and 78 below:
101
102
103
104
105
Frequency, (Hz)
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
Phase, radians
Numerical data, test case: R A=1500, 0° phase f, phase r
Numerical phasef
Numerical phaser
Figure 77: Numerical results for front and rear diaphragm phase for Simple Rear Impedance,
test case RA = 1500N · s/m5, 0° plane wave incidence, no exterior coupling
101
102
103
104
105
Frequency, (Hz)
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
Phase, radians
Numerical data, test case: R A=1500, 180 ° phase f, phase r
Numerical phasef
Numerical phaser
Figure 78: Numerical results for front and rear diaphragm phase for Simple Rear Impedance,
test case RA = 1500N · s/m5, 180° plane wave incidence, no exterior coupling
This result indicates two things; ﬁrstly it is likely that there is either a problem with
the behaviour of the cavity in terms of how it behaves as a compliance, or a problem
with the scaling of the acoustic impedance. Secondly, the model is capable of modelling
directional behaviour, examining the phase of the pressure acting on the front and rear
of the diaphragm demonstrates that the rear acoustic access performs the necessary
phase shift, thus resulting in attenuation for 180° incidence.
84
==PAGE:86==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
10
Modelling: Rear Access
In the previous section, the rear access was implemented using a boundary condition
with a constant, real-valued acoustic impedance applied. In reality, a constant and real-
valued acoustic impedance is unlikely to be achieved, since the acoustic resistance is likely
to vary with frequency and most methods for achieving acoustic resistance inherently
introduce an acoustic reactance term due to the mass of air within the resistive element,
as discussed in section 3.4. In order to try to examine the performance of the model
using a more realistic rear access impedance, two approaches were used:
• Modelling the rear access acoustic impedance using a porous domain
• Modelling the rear access acoustic impedance using a perforated plate
Boundary condition implementations are available for these two approaches in COM-
SOL, which implement corresponding models outlined in section 3.4. In the ﬁrst case,
the rear capsule access as modelled as a thin domain of thickness 0.00115m. In this
implementation the boundary condition was simply set to have a ﬂow resistivity match-
ing the predicted RA value. The remainder of the modelling including parameters and
dimensions was conducted as in section 9. In the second case, the target acoustic re-
sistance value was used as the real part of impedance for the perforated plate model
in section 3.4, which was rearranged to give a porosity, σ, as a function of frequency
for a given plate thickness lp and hole diameter ap. These were set to lp = 1mm and
ap = 100µm based on the model evaluation in section 3.4.6. Since the porosity of the
plate must remain constant, the porosity value at 1kHz was chosen in order to provide
the target resistance, at least in the real part of the transfer impedance of the plate, at
1kHz.
85
==PAGE:87==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
10.1
Porous Impedance - Omnidirectional
The results for the porous impedance output sensitivity, with a ﬂow resistivity of 1.722×
1017N · s/m5, are shown below in ﬁgure 79:
101
102
103
104
105
Frequency, (Hz)
-50
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
Magnitude, dB
Numerical vs Analytical Data, test case: Omni, e oc
Analytical eoc
Numerical eoc
Figure 79: Analytical vs Numerical results for Output Sensitivity for Porous Rear Impedance,
test case Omnidirectional, 0° plane wave incidence
From ﬁgure 79 it can be seen that the numerical model performs as in the case of the
ideal real-valued rear impedance, seen in ﬁgure 57, again demonstrating the same low
frequency diﬀerence comapared with the analytical model. The results for the pressure
diﬀerence across the diaphragm, pD are shown below in ﬁgure 80:
101
102
103
104
105
Frequency, (Hz)
-25
-20
-15
-10
-5
0
5
10
Magnitude, dB
Numerical vs Analytical Data, test case: Omni, p D
Analytical pD
Numerical pD
Figure 80: Analytical vs Numerical results for Output Sensitivity for Porous Rear Impedance,
test case Omnidirectional, 0° plane wave incidence
86
==PAGE:88==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
Again ﬁgure 80 matches the equivalent result in for the real-valued rear impedance as
does the directional sensitivity shown below in ﬁgure 81:
101
102
103
104
Frequency, Hz
-70
-60
-50
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
Magnitude, dB
Numerical Data, test case: Omni, e oc
0°
30°
60°
90°
120°
150°
180°
Figure 81: Analytical vs Numerical results for Output Sensitivity for Porous Rear Impedance,
test case Omnidirectional, several angles of plane wave incidence
From 79 to 81 it is clear that the numerical behaves the same as for the simple
constant real-valued rear impedance tests.
87
==PAGE:89==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
10.2
Porous Impedance - Cardioid
The results for the cardioid test case, with a ﬂow resistivity of 1.722 × 106N · s/m5,
provide a somewhat-directional response, with a low frequency roll-oﬀthat resembles
the anaytical model a little more closely. The results for the output sensitivity, eoc are
shown below in ﬁgure 82:
101
102
103
104
105
Frequency, (Hz)
-60
-50
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
Magnitude, dB
Numerical vs Analytical Data, test case: Cardioid, e oc
Analytical eoc
Numerical eoc
Figure 82: Analytical vs Numerical results for Output Sensitivity for Porous Rear Impedance,
test case Cardioid, 0° plane wave incidence
The results for the pressure diﬀerence across the diaphragm, pD are shown below in
ﬁgure 83:
101
102
103
104
105
Frequency, (Hz)
-50
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
10
Magnitude, dB
Numerical vs Analytical Data, test case: Cardioid, p D
Analytical pD
Numerical pD
Figure 83: Analytical vs Numerical results for Output Sensitivity for Porous Rear Impedance,
test case Cardioid, 0° plane wave incidence
88
==PAGE:90==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
The results for the output sensitivity, eoc, for mutliple angles of arrival are shown below
in ﬁgure 84:
101
102
103
104
Frequency, Hz
-70
-60
-50
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
Magnitude, dB
Numerical Data, test case: Cardiod, e oc
0°
30°
60°
90°
120°
150°
180°
Figure 84: Analytical vs Numerical results for Output Sensitivity for Porous Rear Impedance,
test case Cardioid, several angles of plane wave incidence
From ﬁgures 82 to 84 a closer resemblance to the analytical model can be seen for the
cardioid case, and indeed some directivity is observed below the frequency for which
scattering eﬀects occur, however the directivity is very limited below 1kHz and quite
some deviation is still obersved when considering the corresponding anaytical results.
89
==PAGE:91==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
10.3
Porous Impedance - Figure 8
The results for the ﬁgure-8 test case follow the analytical model closely again, with an
ﬂow resistivity of 1.722 × 10−5N · s/m5. Since the ﬂow-resistivity of the rear access
boundary is close to zero, the inﬂuence is very low and the rear is essentially open to the
exterior acoustic domain. The results for the output sensitivity, eoc are shown below in
ﬁgure 85:
101
102
103
104
105
Frequency, (Hz)
-60
-50
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
Magnitude, dB
Numerical vs Analytical Data, test case: Figure 8, e oc
Analytical eoc
Numerical eoc
Figure 85: Analytical vs Numerical results for Output Sensitivity for Porous Rear Impedance,
test case Figure 8, 0° plane wave incidence
The results for the pressure diﬀerence across the diaphragm, pD are shown below in
ﬁgure 86:
90
==PAGE:92==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
101
102
103
104
105
Frequency, (Hz)
-60
-50
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
Magnitude, dB
Numerical vs Analytical Data, test case: Figure 8, p D
Analytical pD
Numerical pD
Figure 86: Analytical vs Numerical results for Output Sensitivity for Porous Rear Impedance,
test case Figure 8, 0° plane wave incidence
The results for the output sensitivity, eoc, for multiple angles of arrival are shown below
in ﬁgure 87:
101
102
103
104
Frequency, Hz
-140
-120
-100
-80
-60
-40
-20
0
Magnitude, dB
Numerical Data, test case: Figure 8, e oc
0°
30°
60°
90°
120°
150°
180°
Figure 87: Analytical vs Numerical results for Output Sensitivity for Porous Rear Impedance,
test case Figure 8, several angles of plane wave incidence
From ﬁgures 85 to 87 it is clear that the model behaves as in the real-valued rear access
impedance case, with good agreement with the analytical model seen for both on-axis
and oﬀaxis responses.
91
==PAGE:93==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
10.4
Perforated Plate Impedance - Omnidirectional
In the case of the perforated plate, the behaviour may be expected to diﬀer somewhat
due to the inﬂuence of the reactive part of the impedance response. However in the
omnidirectional test case, with a dimensionless porosity value of 3.636 × 10−17 corre-
sponding to an acoustic resistance of 1.722 × 1017N · s/m5, i.e. an inﬁnite impedance,
the results are expected to be consistent with the previous two sets of omnidirectional
test case data and this is indeed seen. The results for the output sensitivity, eoc, for
multiple angles of arrival are shown below in ﬁgure 88:
101
102
103
104
105
Frequency, (Hz)
-80
-70
-60
-50
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
Magnitude, dB
Numerical vs Analytical Data, test case: Omni, e oc
Analytical 0°
Numerical 0°
Analytical 30°
Numerical 30°
Analytical 60°
Numerical 60°
Analytical 90°
Numerical 90°
Analytical 120°
Numerical 120°
Analytical 150°
Numerical 150°
Analytical 180°
Numerical 180°
Figure 88: Analytical vs Numerical results for Output Sensitivity for Perforated Plate Rear
Impedance, test case Omnidirectional, several angles of plane wave incidence
92
==PAGE:94==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
10.5
Perforated Plate Impedance - Cardioid
For the cardioid case the variation in impedance likely to, in theory, have an eﬀect on the
directivity for diﬀerence parts of the frequency range. The model was implemented with
a dimensionless porosity value of 3.636 × 10−6 corresponding to an acoustic resistance
of 1.722 × 106N · s/m5. The results for the output sensitivity, eoc are shown below in
ﬁgure 89:
101
102
103
104
105
Frequency, (Hz)
-60
-50
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
Magnitude, dB
Numerical vs Analytical Data, test case: Cardioid, e oc
Analytical eoc
Numerical eoc
Figure 89: Analytical vs Numerical results for Output Sensitivity for Perforated Plate Rear
Impedance, test case Cardioid, 0° plane wave incidence
from ﬁgure 89 similar behaviour is seen in the upper frequency range when compared
with the simple real-valued rear access impedance results shown in section 9, and also
the omnidirectional test cases, however below about 30 Hz a sharp roll oﬀis seen. The
results for the pressure diﬀerence across the diaphragm, PD are shown below in ﬁgure
90:
93
==PAGE:95==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
101
102
103
104
105
Frequency, (Hz)
-50
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
10
Magnitude, dB
Numerical vs Analytical Data, test case: Cardioid, P D
Analytical PD
Numerical PD
Figure 90: Analytical vs Numerical results for Output Sensitivity for Perforated Plate Rear
Impedance, test case Cardioid, 0° plane wave incidence
The results for the output sensitivity, eoc, for multiple angles of arrival are shown below
in ﬁgure 91:
101
102
103
104
105
Frequency, (Hz)
-80
-70
-60
-50
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
Magnitude, dB
Numerical vs Analytical Data, test case: Cardioid, e oc
Analytical 0°
Numerical 0°
Analytical 30°
Numerical 30°
Analytical 60°
Numerical 60°
Analytical 90°
Numerical 90°
Analytical 120°
Numerical 120°
Analytical 150°
Numerical 150°
Analytical 180°
Numerical 180°
Figure 91: Analytical vs Numerical results for Output Sensitivity for Perforated Plate Rear
Impedance, test case Cardioid, several angles of plane wave incidence
From ﬁgures 90 and 91 it is clear that the pressure-diﬀerence behaviour reﬂects that seen
in the output sensitivity data, and that while there is reduction at very low frequencies,
there is essentially no directional behaviour here, however in this region the reactive
part of the transfer impedance exceeds that of the real part and the eﬀective acoustic
network now resembles a series RLC circuit, with the real part of the impedance, the
94
==PAGE:96==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
reactive part and the compliance of the rear cavity. This would approximate a ﬁrst-order
bandpass ﬁlter and could contribute to the small roll-oﬀseen at very low frequencies.
The transfer impedance, evaluated on the rear access boundary, is given below and
compared against the analytical model from [3] given in section 3.4.
101
102
103
104
105
Frequency, (Hz)
104
105
106
107
108
Transfer Impedance N  s/m 5
Numerical vs Analytical data, perforated impedance test case Cardioid
Analytical real(Zi)
Analytical imag(Zi)
Numerical real(Zi)
Numerical imag(Zi)
Figure 92: Analytical vs Numerical results for rear transfer impedance for Perforated Plate Rear
Impedance, test case Cardioid
From ﬁgure 92 it is clear that the transfer impedance is implemented as expected, since
the analytical model results match directly with the numerical implementation. It can
also be seen that the real part of the acoustic impedance is set at 1.722e × 106N · s/m5
as intended at 1kHz. If the numerical model acted as expected, then the ’most’ cardioid
behaviour should occur at and around this frequency, however this is clearly not the
case and is likely to be due to the coupling issues mentioned thus far.
95
==PAGE:97==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
10.6
Perforated Plate Impedance - Figure 8
Again, for the ﬁgure-8 case, since the acoustic impedance is close to zero, the results
closely match those seen for the previous ﬁgure-8 test cases and the analytical model.
The model was implemented with a dimensionless porosity value of 3.636 × 105 corre-
sponding to an acoustic resistance of 1.722 × 10−5N · s/m5
The results for the output sensitivity, eoc, for multiple angles of arrival are shown below
in ﬁgure 93:
101
102
103
104
105
Frequency, (Hz)
-80
-70
-60
-50
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
Magnitude, dB
Numerical vs Analytical Data, test case: Figure8, e oc
Analytical 0°
Numerical 0°
Analytical 30°
Numerical 30°
Analytical 60°
Numerical 60°
Analytical 90°
Numerical 90°
Analytical 120°
Numerical 120°
Analytical 150°
Numerical 150°
Analytical 180°
Numerical 180°
Figure 93: Analytical vs Numerical results for Output Sensitivity for Perforated Plate Rear
Impedance, test case Figure 8, several angles of plane wave incidence
96
==PAGE:98==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
10.7
Perforated Plate Impedance - RA = 1500N · s/m5
For the sake of comparison with the equivalent test case in 9, the perforated plate
porosity was determined for a target acoustic resistance of RA = 1500N · s/m5 at 1kHz,
the results for the directional output sensitivity are shown below in ﬁgure 94:
101
102
103
104
105
Frequency, (Hz)
-80
-70
-60
-50
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
10
Magnitude, dB
Numerical Data, test case: R A=1500, e oc
Numerical 0°
Numerical 30°
Numerical 60°
Numerical 90°
Numerical 120°
Numerical 150°
Numerical 180°
Figure 94: Analytical vs Numerical results for Output Sensitivity for Perforated Plate Rear
Impedance, test case RA = 1500N · s/m5, several angles of plane wave incidence
From ﬁgure 94 it can be seen that more directional behaviour is seen in this example,
which is consistent with the simple rear impedance results in section 9 in that much lower
impedance values seem to give closer to expected behaviour than acoustic resistance
values in the predicted range. However there is a very clear peak around 1.5 kHz, which
is likely to be due to the RLC circuit formed by the rear acoustic network due to the
high reactance in the rear impedance using this method. However the reactance and
resistance terms, when combined in the rear acoustic network in the spice model, give
a resonance closer to 100 Hz, indicating that there is still some issue with the rear
compliance modelling here.
97
==PAGE:99==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
11
Discussion
From the results shown throughout this project it is clear that the analytical models
that have been developed are consistent with existing models for the extreme cases
of pressure-operated and pressure-gradient microphones. However it is clear that the
combination pressure-gradient case is more diﬃcult to validate, since there are few exist-
ing analytical models available for comparison, and capsule parameters for directional
microphones, particularly for the rear access and the backplate, are scarce. Further-
more, the numerical implementation is complex and depends on the parameters. For
the small-scale implementation the simple pressure integral across one side of a mem-
brane is suﬃcient for the numerical model, with the results correlating strongly with
the analytical model.
However in the large-scale combination model examined in section 9 the diaphragm
pressure is derived based on the pressure on both sides of the diaphragm.
For an
omnidirectional test case, or rather a combination pressure-gradient microphone with
an inﬁnite rear impedance, the output should still match the analytical model for an
omnidirectional microphone, since the operating principle should essentially be pressure-
operated under these conditions, as the pressure on the rear of the diaphragm should
essentially be constant. However it has been demonstrated that this is not the case
in the numerical implementation and it is likely that this is due to the one-way cou-
pling between the numerical acoustics model and the lumped parameter model for the
electro-mechanical portion of the microphone, in that the pressure diﬀerence across the
diaphragm is coupled to the circuit, but the radiation impedance of the diaphragm is
not exerted on the exterior pressure ﬁeld. Under these conditions, the exterioir domain
might not be strongly aﬀected, however this leaves the compliance of the rear cavity
un-coupled and hence not excited, which does not reﬂect reality since the diaphragm
motion will act on the cavity in reality. These results are consistent for the three diﬀer-
ent types of rear impedance tested. However the free-ﬁeld response appears to be shown
due to scattering eﬀects and this indeed appears to be direction dependant, indicating
that the model is indeed capable of modelling directional dependency of microphones.
These eﬀects are not seen in the ﬁgure-8 test case (ideal pressure-gradient case) em-
bodied in the results for the combination pressure-gradient microphone with a rear
impedance set close to zero, which essentially behaves as an ideal pressure-gradient mi-
crophone. This is likely to be due to the fact that under these conditions the rear cavity
is eﬃciently coupled to the exterior domain since there is essentially no impedance on
the rear of the capsule. This result is seen to be consistent between the three types of
rear impedance tested, much like the omnidirectional test case. However the directivity
response of microphone is indeed observed from the numerical model and the results
correlate closely with the analytical model, with a small oﬀset which appears to be re-
98
==PAGE:100==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
lated to the hard boundary conditions of the capsule itself. The directivity response
for 90° incidence is not perfectly zero since the capsule is not completely symmetrical
either side of the radial plane thus the scattered pressure will not be symmetrical across
each side of the diaphragm. In general however, it appears that the pressure-gradient
microphone and ﬁgure-8 (pressure-gradient) operating conditions of the combination
pressure-gradient numerical model work well.
However, the key aim of modelling a cardioid implementation of a combination pressure-
gradient microphone capsule has proved to be complicated and it is likely that this is due
to the lumped parameter and numerical acoustics models not being completely coupled.
The eﬀect of this coupling issue appears to manifest itself particularly in skewing the
required rear acoustic resistance value, as seen in the results in section 10, the cardioid
test case, with a predicted rear acoustic resistance of RA = 1.722×106N ·s/m5, behaves
just as the omnidirectional test case. However this is not consistent with the theory,
since the rear acoustic network group delay should equal the propagation time of the
path length diﬀerence, therefore it is likely that, at least under the conditions modelled,
the rear compliance is not behaving as expected, since it is seen that reducing the acous-
tic resistance value by approximately three orders of magnitude gives directional results
that are closer to that expected. Since τ = RACAB such a scenario would be consistent
to the compliance of the rear cavity being too large in the numerical model, despite
the enclosed volume being correct. This could be due to the coupling issues observed,
however attempts made to fully couple the model by assigning a boundary condition
dependant on the velocity of the diaphragm resulted in erroneous data, therefore more
work needs to be done here.
Furthermore, in order to accurately model the acoustic conditions inside the capsule, the
backplate should also be accurately modelled, including any holes included for reducing
the impedance of the thin air layer, however such behaviour is inherently dependant on
the thermoviscous losses involved in such processes due to the small dimensions and are
likely to dramatically increase the computation time required to achieve a solution, per-
forming this computation for multiple angles of arrival and multiple frequencies across
the audible bandwidth may result in very inconvenient modelling time. The present
model requires approximately 1 minute 30 seconds to solve 37 frequencies between 10Hz
and 30kHz per angle of arrival, with thermoviscous losses omitted. Since a fully coupled
model will also increase the computation time, a fully-coupled, 3D, wide-bandwidth
model with directional and thermoviscous behaviour taken into account could be ex-
tremely computationally demanding, therefore it may be most practical to reduce the
model into sub-models where possible, however, as indicated in the issues with results
in this report, the behaviour of the entire capsule is inter-related so this may not be
possible. Further work on a 2D axissymettric model could help to alleviate issues with
computation time.
99
==PAGE:101==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
12
Conclusions and Future Work
A series of analytical and numerical models for combination pressure-gradient micro-
phones have been presented. The analytical models developed have been shown to have
good agreement with existing models for the omnidirectional test case and literature. A
semi-coupled numerical implementation of a combination pressure-gradient microphone
has been presented, with good agreement seen with the analytical model for the ideal
pressure-gradient case. Hypothesis 1 has partially been proven, indeed the the one-way
coupling of the numerical model and the electromechanical LPM was capable of giving
omnidirectional performance and bi-directional performance with the expected values,
however the output sensitivity did not match the analytical model in the former case.
Hypotheses 2 and 3 have not been fully proven since, while the implementation of the
boundary conditions lead to expected results in terms of directivity in the extreme cases
of β = 0 and β = ∞, the unidirectional cardioid test case did not appear work well, al-
though skewed values of predicted rear access acoustic resistance show promising results,
in that the capability of the model to reproduce directional behaviour is demonstrated.
Overall, the work conducted in this project lays the groundwork for implementing a
numerical model as a tool for developing combination pressure-gradient condenser mi-
crophone capsules, which are complicated in their behaviour. Based on this, there is
much room for future work. Firstly, the analytical combination pressure-gradient model
could be compared against acoustic measurements of various ﬁrst-order directional con-
denser microphones, provided that accurate data regarding their internal parameters
can be acquired. Beyond this, a key progression would be to successfully implement
a fully-coupled numerical model in which the microphone membrane enacts a correct
radiation impedance on both the exterior domain on its front side and on the interior
cavity of the microphone, which appears to be the main limiting factor in the numer-
ical models presented in this project. Beyond this, the model could be extended to
accurately model the thermoviscous processes of the interior of the capsule, especially
regarding the backplate-membrane behaviour.
Provided that these aspects can be achieved in good agreement with the analytical
model then the numerical model could be compared against a known ﬁrst-order direc-
tional condense microphone capsule, attempting to also model the directional properties,
however these will be heavily inﬂuenced by the rear access modelling approach used. As
discussed in section 3, the analytical perforated plate model isn’t valid for the acoustic
resistance needed and the dimensions of the capsule, instead narrower holes must be used
and hence thermoviscous modelling must be incorporated to accurately model such an
approach in order to achieve the correct resistance. In addition, the proximity eﬀect of
directional microphones could be examined using spherical wave sources in the numer-
ical model. Lastly, since the directivity response is essentially dependant on matching
100
==PAGE:102==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
the phase of the pressure acting on the front and rear of the diaphragm, an optimisa-
tion procedure could be implemented for the rear access impedance required to achieve
this for 180° incidence, though this would only be feasible for validated and advanced
numerical, but could be a valuable tool for the design process of such microphones.
101
==PAGE:103==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
13
References
[1] N. Atalla and F. Sgard. Modeling of perforated plates and screens using rigid frame
porous models. Journal of Sound and Vibration, 303:195–208, 2007.
[2] N. Atalla and F. Sgard. Finite Element and Boundary Methods in Structural Acous-
tics and Vibration. CRC Press, Taylor & Francis group, Boca Raton, 2015.
[3] A. B. Bauer. Impedance Measurements and Theory on Porous Acoustic Liners.
Journal of Aircraft, 14, 1977.
[4] B. B. Bauer. A Century of Microphones. Journal of the Audio Engineering Society,
35(4), 1987.
[5] L. L. Beranek. Acoustics: Sound Fields and Transducers. Academic Press, 1st
edition, 2012.
[6] G. Boré and S. Peus. Microphones for Studio and Home-Recording Applications:
Operation Principles and Type Examples. Georg Neumann GmbH, Berlin, 1999.
[7] Brüel & Kjær. Microphone Handbook, volume 1: theory. Technical report, 1996.
[8] COMSOL. Axisymmetric Condenser Microphone. pages 1–28, 2012.
[9] COMSOL. Axisymmetric Condenser Microphone with Electrical Lumping. pages
1–28, 2012.
[10] COMSOL. The Brüel & Kjær 4134 Condenser Microphone. (Bk 4134):1–36, 2012.
[11] COMSOL. Acoustic Muﬄer with Thermoviscous Acoustic Impedance Lumping.
Technical report, 2016.
[12] COMSOL.
COMSOL Multiphysics Reference Manual.
COMSOL Multiphysics,
2016.
[13] R. K. Cook.
Introduction: A Short History of the Condenser Microphone.
In
G. S. K. Wong and T. F. W. Embleton, editors, AIP Handbook of Condenser
Microphones, chapter 1. American Institue of Physics, 1995.
[14] M. E. Delaney and E. N. Bazley. Acoustical Properties of Fibrous Materials. Applied
Acoustics, 3, 1970.
[15] C. Flammer.
Spheroidal Wave Functions.
Stanford University Press, Stanford,
1957.
[16] T. L. Floyd.
Electronics Fundamentals:
Circuits, Devices and Applications.
Prentice-Hall, Inc. Upper Saddle River, NJ, USA, 7 edition, 2006.
102
==PAGE:104==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
[17] V. C. Henríquez. Numerical Transducer Modeling. PhD thesis, Technical University
of Denmark, Lyngby, 2002.
[18] P. M. Juhl. The Boundary Element Method for Sound Field Calculations. PhD
thesis, Technical University of Denmark, 1993.
[19] W. Leach.
Introduction to Electroacoustics & Audio Ampliﬁer Design.
Kendall
Hunt Publishing, 4th edition, 2010.
[20] G. Neumann. Unidirectional Condenser Microphone, 1968.
[21] H. Olson. Elements of Acoustical Engineering. D. Van Nostrand Company, 2nd
edition, 1960.
[22] H. Olson. Directional Microphones. Audio Engineering Society, 40(5), 1966.
[23] H. Olson. Ribbon Velocity Microphones. Journal of the Audio Engineering Society,
18, 1970.
[24] C. A. Poldy. Headphones. In Loudspeaker and Headphone Handbook. 1988.
[25] P. Rasmussen. How to Build a Microphone. In Sensors and Sensing in Biology and
Engineering. Springer-Verlag Wien 2003, 2003.
[26] S. Roger. Advanced Simulation of a Condenser Microphone Capsule. Audio Engi-
neering Society, 2004.
[27] K. Schoeps and W. Küsters. Condenser Microphone, 1965.
[28] Z. Shanjie and J. Jian-Ming. Computation of Special Functions. Wiley, New York,
1st edition, 1996.
[29] F. Sleator. The Disc. In Electromagnetic and Acoustic Scattering by Simple Shapes,
pages 545–546. 1969.
[30] G. Torio. Understanding the Transfer Functions of Directional Condenser Micro-
phones in Response to Diﬀerent Sound Sources. Audio Engineering Society, 105,
1998.
[31] A. J. Zuckerwar. Theoretical response of condenser microphones. 1278:1278–1285,
1978.
[32] A. J. Zuckerwar. Principles of Operation of Condenser Microphones. In AIP Hand-
book of Condenser Microphones, chapter 3. American Institute of Physics, 1995.
103
==PAGE:105==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
A
Appendix - Mathematical Derivations
A.1
Lumped Parameter Model for an ideal pressure-operated micro-
phone
The derivation for the Lumped parameter model for an ideal-pressure-operated micro-
phone is replicated from [19] and used as a basis for the subsequent Lumped Parameter
model derivations.
Assuming that the compliance of the air cavity inbetween the microphone diaphragm
and the backplate is so small that it can be approximated by an open circuit, then the
pressure across the diaphragm can be gives as
pD = T(s)pi + SDuDZA
(60)
the diaphragm velocity can be given as
uD = −1
ZM
 E
x0si + SDpD

(61)
the zero current expression for the output voltage is
eoc = E
x0suD
(62)
the acoustic impedance is
ZA = (MA1 + MAS)s + RAS +
1
CAB2s
(63)
and the total mechanical impedance is
ZM = MMDs + RMD +
1
CMD
.
(64)
Rearranging equation 60 for uD gives
uD = pD −T(s)pi
SDZA
.
(65)
assuming i = 0 in equation 61 gives
uD = −SDpD
ZM
(66)
Rearranging equation 66 for pD gives
pD = −uDZM
SD
.
(67)
Substitution of equation 67 into equation 66 gives
104
==PAGE:106==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
uD =
−uDZM
SD
−T(s)pi
SDZA

(68)
isolating uD in equation 68 gives
uD = −
SD
S2
DZA + ZM
T(s)pi
(69)
substitution of equation 69 into equation 62 yields the ﬁnal expression for the pressure-
operated output sensitivity given in [19]
eoc = −
ESD
x0s(S2
DZA + ZM)T(s)pi
(70)
which is equivalent to
eoc = −ECMT SD
x0
×
1
(s/ω0)2 + (1/Q)(s/ω0) + 1T(s)pi
(71)
105
==PAGE:107==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
A.2
Lumped Parameter Model for an ideal pressure-gradient micro-
phone
The basic equations used for the ideal lumped parameter model for a pressure gradient
microphone are very similar to those used for the pressure operated case, with the
exception of the equation for the incident pressure and the acoustic impedance.
Recalling the diaphragm pressure for the pressure-operated case:
pD = T(s)pi + SDuDZA
(72)
For the pressure gradient case, the diaphragm pressure is given by [19] as:
pD = ∆pi + SDuDZA
(73)
where
∆pi = −s
cpicos(θ)∆l.
(74)
Neglecting volume compliance, CAB, and backplate acoustic resistance and mass terms
RAS and MAS, the acoustic impedance can simply be given as
ZA = (2MA1)s
(75)
since there is an air load on both sides of the diaphragm, where MA1 is as given in 35.
The remaining basis equations are assumed to be consistent with the pressure-operated
case, since the only changes are acoustical and are accounted for above.
Thus, the diaphragm velocity is given by
uD = −1
ZM
 E
x0
i + SDpD

(76)
The output voltage is given by
eoc = E
x0suD
(77)
and he mechanical impedance of the diaphragm is given by
ZM = MMDs + RMD +
1
CMDs.
(78)
Assuming that the expressions 30 and 31 for angular resonant frequency and quality
factor are still valid, then the total mass is
MMT = MMD + S2
D(2MA1 + (0)),
(79)
the total resistance is
106
==PAGE:108==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
RMT = RMD
(80)
and the total compliance is
CMT =

1
CMD
−1
= CMD.
(81)
Rearranging 73 for the diaphragm velocity uD gives
uD = pD −∆pi
SDZA
(82)
now setting the current to i = 0 and substituting for equation 76 gives
uD = −1
ZM
 E
x0s(0) + SDpD = −SDpD
ZM

(83)
rearranging equation 83 for pD gives
pD = −ZMuD
SD
(84)
substitution of equation 84 into equation 82 gives
uD = −
∆piSD
S2
DZA + ZM
(85)
substitution of equation 85 into equation 77 gives
eoc = −
ESD
x0s(S2
DZA + ZM
∆pi
(86)
substituting for ZA and ZM
eoc = −
E∆piSD
x0s(2S2
DMA1s + MMDs + RMD +
1
CMDs)
(87)
substitution for ∆pi
eoc = −
ESDspicos(θ)∆l
((2xos2S2
DMA1 + xos2MMD + xosRMD +
xo
CMD )c)
(88)
substitution of RMT , CMT and MMT gives
eoc = −
ESDspicos(θ)∆l
xo(s2MMT + sRMT +
1
CMT )c)
(89)
rearranging equation 30 for MMT gives
MMT =
  1
ω0
2
CMT
(90)
rearranging equation 31 for RMT gives
107
==PAGE:109==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
RMT =
1
Qω0CMT
(91)
substitution of equations 90 and 91 gives the ﬁnal expression:
eoc = −ESDCMT
cxo
s
(s/ω0)2 + (1/Q)(s/ω0) + 1pincos(θ)∆l
(92)
108
==PAGE:110==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
A.3
Lumped Parameter Model for an ideal combination pressure-
gradient microphone
The basis equations in this case are to some extent diﬀerent from the previous models,
for the combination pressure-operated pressure-gradient case, the diaphragm pressure
is given by [19] as
pD = pi
RACABs
1 + RACABs(1 + βcos(θ)) + SDuD

MA1 +
RA
1 + RACABs

(93)
The remaining basis equations are assumed to be consistent with the pressure-operated
case, since the only changes are acoustical and are accounted for above.
Thus, the diaphragm velocity is given by
uD = −1
ZM
 E
x0
i + SDpD

(94)
The output voltage is given by
e0c = E
x0suD
(95)
The mechanical impedance is given by
ZM = MMDs + RMD +
1
CMDs
(96)
The total compliance is given by
CMT =

1
CMD
+ S2
D
CAB
1
(97)
The total resistance is given by
RMT = RAS2
D + RMD
(98)
The total mass is given by
MMT = MA1S2
D + MMD
(99)
assuming that the expressions 30 and 31 for angular resonant frequency and quality
factor are still valid, then the total mass is
rearranging equation 93 for uD gives
uD = −
−pD + piRACABs(1+βcos(θ))
CABRAs+1
SD

MA1s +
RA
CABRAs+1

(100)
setting the current to i = 0 in equation 54 and rearranging for pD gives
109
==PAGE:111==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
pD = −ZMuD
SD
(101)
substitution of equation 101 into equation 100 gives
uD = −
βCABcos(θ)RASDpis −piRACABsSD
CABMA1RAS2
Ds2 + CABRAZMs + MA1S2
Ds + RAS2
D + ZM
(102)
substitution of equation 102 gives:
e0c =
E
  −βCABcos(θ)RASDpis −piRACABsSD

x0s
 CABMA1RAS2
Ds2 + CABRAZMs + MA1S2
Ds + RAS2
D + ZM

(103)
substituting the mechanical impedance term for equation 96 gives
e0c =
E −βCABcos(θ)RASDpis −piRACABsSD

x0s CABMA1RAS2
Ds2 + CABRA
 MMDs + RMD +
1
CMDs

s + MA1S2
Ds + RAS2
D + MMDs + RMD +
1
CMDs

(104)
isolating equation 97 for CMD gives
CMD =
CMT CAB
−CMT S2
D + CAB
(105)
substitution of 105 into equation 104 gives
e0c = −
ECMT C2
ABpiRAs(1 + βcos(θ))SD
x0
 s(1 + s((MA1S2
D + MMD)s + RMD)CMT )RAC2
AB + (1 + s((MA1S2
D + MMD)s + RMD)CMT )CAB −CMT S2
D

(106)
isolating equation 99 for MMD gives
MMD = −MA1S2
D + MMT
(107)
substitution of equation 107 into equation 106 leads to the terms (MA1S2
D + MMD)
cancelling out, leaving
e0c = −
ECMT C2
ABpiRAs(1 + βcos(θ))SD
 s(1 + s(MMT s + RMD)CMT )RAC2
AB + (1 + s(MMT s + RMD)CMT )CAB −CMT S2
D

x0
(108)
isolating equation 98 for RMD gives
RMD = −RAS2
D + RMT
(109)
substitution of equation 109 into equation 108
110
==PAGE:112==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
e0c = −
ECMT C2
ABpiRAs(1 + βcos(θ))SD
 s(1 + s(−RAS2
D + MMT s + RMT )CMT )RAC2
AB + (1 + s(−RAS2
D + MMT s + RMT )CMT )CAB −CMT S2
D

x0
(110)
rearranging equations 30 and 31 for MMT and RMT respectively gives
MMT =
1
ω2
0CMT
(111)
and
RMT =
1
Qω2
0CMT
(112)
substitution of equations 111 and 112 into equation 110 yields the ﬁnal expression
eoc =
ECMT C2
ABpinRASs(1 + βcosθ)SDω2
0Q
xo

RAS(Q(CMT RASS2
Ds −1)ω2
0 −sω0 −s2Q)sC2
AB + (Q(CMT RASS2
Ds −1)ω2
0 −sω0 −s2Q)CAB + CMT S2
Dω2
0Q.
(113)
111
==PAGE:113==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
B
Appendix - Microphone Capsule Parameters
B.1
Small-scale parameters
Parameter
Value
Unit
Description
Rm
2
mm
Diaphragm Radius
Hm
18
µm
Air Gap Thickness
tm
7
µm
Membrane Thickness
p0
1
Pa
Plane Wave Pressure Amplitude
Tm
3150
N/m
Membrane Tension
ρm
8300
kg/m3
Membrane Density
Vpol
100
V
Polarisation Voltage
RL
100e9
Ω
Load Resistance
SD
πR2
m
m2
Diaphragm Surface Area
Table 3: Table of small-scale parameters, [8]
B.2
Large-scale parameters
Parameter
Value
Unit
Description
Rm
12.6
mm
Diaphragm Radius
Hm
50
µm
Air Gap Thickness
tm
2.5
µm
Membrane Thickness
p0
1
Pa
Plane Wave Pressure Amplitude
Tm
50
N/m
Membrane Tension
ρm
1400
kg/m3
Membrane Density
Vpol
100
V
Polarisation Voltage
RL
100e9
Ω
Load Resistance
SD
πR2
m
m2
Diaphragm Surface Area
Table 4: Table of large-scale parameters, [5]
112
==PAGE:114==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
C
Appendix - Convergence Study
No numerical model is perfect, and all numerical models will always be subject to error,
therefore an important step in numerical modelling is to perform a convergence study
in order to optimise the computation time required to solve the model while also min-
imising the error and thus maximising the accuracy of the solution.
In cases where a reliable analytical result exists, the error of the numerical model can
be obtained as the diﬀerence between the analytical and numerical solutions. Such an
approach is reliable for assessing the error of a numerical model, however the advantage
of numerical models is generally to be able to model physical phenomena that is beyond
what is possible using analytical models alone, thus the problem of validation arises.
As has been seen in this project, the numerical model has been validated at subse-
quent stages using existing analytical and numerical models and previous modelling
steps within the project. However, the analytical models developed for microphones are
not valid at high frequencies, since they do not account for the inﬂuence of acoustic
scattering and indeed the use of numerical models is advantageous in this manner in
that such behaviour can be modelled. The challenge here is in performing a convergence
study in order to verify that the numerical model is suﬃciently free of error in the pa-
rameter ranges of interest. Since no analytical model is available to directly compare
the numerical model against at high frequencies, an error convergence investigation can
be examined by using a model for acoustic scattering from a rigid disc in free space,
which can be modelled easily with the current model setup. The assumption from this
point therefore is that the model will still be suﬃciently accurate for the same frequency
range and angles of arrival if this analytical model comparison is converged.
A rule of thumb is that the mesh should have at least six nodes per wavelength of
interest, thus the minimum mesh density should be:
minimum element size = λ
D
(114)
where D=5.
C.1
Analytical model of a thin rigid disc
Since the numerical microphone capsule model is based around a thin cylinder, the most
similar types of analytical model that could be used for evaluating the model error are
those that relate to similar geometry, namely analytical models of scattering for rigid
ﬁnite cylinders or discs. In general such exact models are hard to come by due to the
complex scattering behaviour caused by the corners of cylinders. An analytical solution
113
==PAGE:115==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
for parallel plane wave incidence on an inﬁnitely thin disc [29] has been developed, which
provides a similar scenario to the microphone modelling, at least for the point of view
of an inﬁnitely thin diaphragm in free space. The model has also been used for similar
veriﬁcation purposes in [17] hence this model was used as a means of evaluating the
error in the model presented.
C.1.1
Exact solution - plane wave incidence for a rigid disc
The model in [29] is developed using the oblate spheroidal coordinate system such that:
x = 1
2d
q
(ξ2 + 1)(1 −η2)cosφ
y = 1
2d
q
(ξ2 + 1)(1 −η2)sinφ
z = 1
2dξη
For plane wave incidence at an angle ζ, the incident pressure is
pi = eik(xsinζ+zcosζ)
(115)
and the scattered pressure is given by
ps = −2
∞
X
m=0
∞
X
n=0
ϵm
in
eNmn
R(1)
mn′(−ic, i0)
R(3)
mn′(−ic, i0)
R(3)
mn(−ic, iξ)Smn(−ic, cos(ζ)Smn(−ic, η)cosmφ
(116)
The total pressure on the surface of the disc, where ξ = 0 is
pT = 2
c
∞
X
m=0
∞
X
n=0
ϵm
in
eNmn
1
R(3)′mn(−ic, i0)Smn(−ic, cosζ)Smn(−ic, η)cosmφ
(117)
where Rj
mn(c, ξ) is the radial function of the ﬁrst, second and third kind where j = 1, 2
and 3 and Smn(c, η) represents the angular functions where m ≥0 and n ≥m are
integers. These functions, as well as the the quantity Nmn are given in [15].
The solution for the total pressure for disc sizes ka =0.5, 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 are shown
below in ﬁgure 95:
114
==PAGE:116==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
0
0.002
0.004
0.006
0.008
0.01
0.012
0.014
radial distance, m
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
Total Pressure, Pa
Analytical solution for total pressure on top of disc
ka = 1
ka = 2
ka = 3
ka = 4
ka = 5
ka = 6
ka = 7
Figure 95: Analytical solutions for various values of ka
A Fortran implementation of the discussed analytical model, based on [28] was available
and implemented exclusively for zero degree plane wave incidence for the desired values
of ka using 100 observation points between 0 and a. Evaluating the model at oblique
angles of incidence would be a complex procedure and would require building and testing
an entirely new script for evaluation and was therefore not considered in this study.
C.2
Convergence study in COMSOL
A basic implementation of the general 3D model was set up with a single inﬁnitely thin
disc of radius Rm, centred at the coordinate origin. The domain was bounded by a
Perfectly Matched Layer (PML) of thickness 2a where a is the diaphragm radius. The
PML was meshed using a distributed mesh 6 elements thick. The model was examined
by evaluating the total pressure along the disc radius on the top side. The excitation
signal was set as a plane wave with zero degree incidence with respect to the diaphragm,
as shown in ﬁgure 96 below:
115
==PAGE:117==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
Figure 96: Numerical model setup for Convergence study
C.2.1
Single Frequency Convergence
Due to inconsistency in the results from the Fortran model, the convergence study was
conducted at ka=1. While this is lower than the the maximum frequency of interest,
fmax, all ka values below ka = 1 will be inherently converged if the solution is converged
for this frequency. The convergence study was limited to a mesh factor of 14, since above
this value the system ran out of available RAM for the solution.
A comparison of the analytical model and the numerical data for the total pressure
along the radial axis on the top surface of a hard disc with 0° plane wave incidence is
shown below in ﬁgures 97 and 98 below:
116
==PAGE:118==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
0
0.002
0.004
0.006
0.008
0.01
0.012
radial distance, m
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
Total Pressure, Pa
Analytical vs Numerical total pressure hard disc, ka = 1, D = 2
Analytical
Numerical
Figure 97: Analytical and Numerical results for D = 2
0
0.002
0.004
0.006
0.008
0.01
0.012
radial distance, m
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
Total Pressure, Pa
Analytical vs Numerical total pressure hard disc, ka = 1, D = 14
Analytical
Numerical
Figure 98: Analytical and Numerical results for D = 14
From ﬁgures 97 and 98 it is clear that an increase in mesh density yields a numerical
solution with improved accuracy with respect to the corresponding analytical solution.
117
==PAGE:119==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
The error convergence is shown below in ﬁgure 99 for D = 2 to D = 14, at ka = 1.
103
104
105
106
D
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.08
Average Error
Error Convergence total pressure hard disc, ka = 1
Error Convergence
Figure 99: Error Convergence for D = 2 to D = 14, at ka = 1
From ﬁgure 99 it can be seen that as the mesh density increases, and thus the mesh
quality, the error is seen to converge. Since the system ran out of RAM for a mesh
density factor of D = 15 it is clear that the model is quite complex in its 3D state,
leaving little room for adding extra model coupling or thermoviscous models.
118
==PAGE:120==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
D
Appendix - Convergence Study Plots
All Convergence Study plots:
0
0.002
0.004
0.006
0.008
0.01
0.012
radial distance, m
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
Total Pressure, Pa
Analytical vs Numerical total pressure hard disc, ka = 1, D = 2
Analytical
Numerical
Figure 100: Analytical and Numerical results for D = 2
119
==PAGE:121==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
0
0.002
0.004
0.006
0.008
0.01
0.012
radial distance, m
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
Total Pressure, Pa
Analytical vs Numerical total pressure hard disc, ka = 1, D = 3
Analytical
Numerical
Figure 101: Analytical and Numerical results for D = 3
0
0.002
0.004
0.006
0.008
0.01
0.012
radial distance, m
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
Total Pressure, Pa
Analytical vs Numerical total pressure hard disc, ka = 1, D = 4
Analytical
Numerical
Figure 102: Analytical and Numerical results for D = 4
120
==PAGE:122==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
0
0.002
0.004
0.006
0.008
0.01
0.012
radial distance, m
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
Total Pressure, Pa
Analytical vs Numerical total pressure hard disc, ka = 1, D = 5
Analytical
Numerical
Figure 103: Analytical and Numerical results for D = 5
0
0.002
0.004
0.006
0.008
0.01
0.012
radial distance, m
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
Total Pressure, Pa
Analytical vs Numerical total pressure hard disc, ka = 1, D = 6
Analytical
Numerical
Figure 104: Analytical and Numerical results for D = 6
121
==PAGE:123==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
0
0.002
0.004
0.006
0.008
0.01
0.012
radial distance, m
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
Total Pressure, Pa
Analytical vs Numerical total pressure hard disc, ka = 1, D = 7
Analytical
Numerical
Figure 105: Analytical and Numerical results for D = 7
0
0.002
0.004
0.006
0.008
0.01
0.012
radial distance, m
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
Total Pressure, Pa
Analytical vs Numerical total pressure hard disc, ka = 1, D = 8
Analytical
Numerical
Figure 106: Analytical and Numerical results for D = 8
122
==PAGE:124==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
0
0.002
0.004
0.006
0.008
0.01
0.012
radial distance, m
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
Total Pressure, Pa
Analytical vs Numerical total pressure hard disc, ka = 1, D = 9
Analytical
Numerical
Figure 107: Analytical and Numerical results for D = 9
0
0.002
0.004
0.006
0.008
0.01
0.012
radial distance, m
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
Total Pressure, Pa
Analytical vs Numerical total pressure hard disc, ka = 1, D = 10
Analytical
Numerical
Figure 108: Analytical and Numerical results for D = 10
123
==PAGE:125==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
0
0.002
0.004
0.006
0.008
0.01
0.012
radial distance, m
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
Total Pressure, Pa
Analytical vs Numerical total pressure hard disc, ka = 1, D = 11
Analytical
Numerical
Figure 109: Analytical and Numerical results for D = 11
0
0.002
0.004
0.006
0.008
0.01
0.012
radial distance, m
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
Total Pressure, Pa
Analytical vs Numerical total pressure hard disc, ka = 1, D = 12
Analytical
Numerical
Figure 110: Analytical and Numerical results for D = 12
124
==PAGE:126==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
0
0.002
0.004
0.006
0.008
0.01
0.012
radial distance, m
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
Total Pressure, Pa
Analytical vs Numerical total pressure hard disc, ka = 1, D = 13
Analytical
Numerical
Figure 111: Analytical and Numerical results for D = 13
0
0.002
0.004
0.006
0.008
0.01
0.012
radial distance, m
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
Total Pressure, Pa
Analytical vs Numerical total pressure hard disc, ka = 1, D = 14
Analytical
Numerical
Figure 112: Analytical and Numerical results for D = 14
125
==PAGE:127==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
E
Appendix - Plane Wave Expansion in COMSOL
Numerical models can be constructed in various dimensions, however increasing the di-
mensional space dramatically increases the number of degrees of freedom and thus the
computational power needed to solve the model, so in general it is best practice to work
in the lowest dimensional space possible to accurately solve the model. In the context
of this project, it is necessary to be able to render oblique plane wave incidence with
respect to the capsule surface. If the model consisted of a line in space the this could
be achieved with a simple cross sectional 2D model. However the capsule is cylindrical
and thus the model must be evaluated as a 2D axisymmettric model, with the solution
being rotated about the z-axis 360° in order to evaluate the full solution.
Such an axisymmettric model is suitable for 0° plane wave incidence (and also 180°
plane wave incidence) assuming that the scattered pressure ﬁeld will also be axisymet-
trical and thus valid once rotated. Unfortunately, oblique plane wave incidence does
not lead to an axisymmettric pressure ﬁeld and thus it is not possible to use a basic
2D axisymmettric model to evaluate directivity responses. One solution is to work in
a full 3D model, and this is the approach implemented in this project for the sake of
saving time. However, the 2D axisymmettric model may also be used in conjunction
with plane wave expansion (PWE) in cylindrical coordinates to achieve a solution for
a pressure ﬁeld with an oblique monochromatic plane wave excitation signal. The use
of this method can provide a computationally cheaper alternative to using a full 3D
model, especially if the modelling takes into account thermoviscous losses, however the
necessary condition is that the capsule geometry is completely axisymmettric and thus
individual holes in a backplate cannot be modelled in this manner.
E.1
Theory
The plane wave expansion method used in COMSOL is based on the Jacobi-Anger
expansion principle, which is deﬁned as
ejzcos(θ) =
∞
X
m=−∞
jmJm(z)e−jmθ
(118)
where m denotes the integer-valued circumferential wavenumber and Jm is a Bessel
function of order m
The general expression for a plane wave is
p = pie−jkz
(119)
using the identity in equation 118 the plane wave expression for a single circumferential
wavenumber can be given as
126
==PAGE:128==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
p = pijmJmze−jmz
(120)
The solution for each integer value of m within a chosen limit of −M ≤m ≤M must
be solved and then all solutions must be summed to determine the ﬁnal pressure.
E.2
Implementation
The model was implemented in COMSOL by using a 2D axisymmettric component,
with the Pressure Acoustics Frequency Domain package, incorporating a ’user-deﬁned’
background pressure ﬁeld.
Aside from this, all model settings and parameters were
the same as those used for the combination pressure-gradient investigations. In the 3D
model used in the main project, two simultaneous parametric solution sweeps were used;
one for frequencies and one for angles of plane wave incidence. In the 2D axissymettric
plane-wave expansion case an additional sweep for all integer values of the circumferen-
tial wavenumber m must be used. After solving the model, the solution was then rotated
to cover the full geometry and then any parameters to be used must be ’summed’ for
all values of m. In order to achieve this, the internal COMSOL operaters ’withsol’ and
’setval’ must be used to sum the cylindrical harmonics, further information on these is
given in the COMSOL user manual [12].
The successfully rendered background pressure-ﬁeld for a plane wave at 30° incidence
at about 23kHz is shown below in ﬁgure 113:
Figure 113: Correctly rendered oblique plane wave at about 23kHz using a 2D axisymmettric
model
127
==PAGE:129==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
E.3
Results
The PWE model was implemented for the omnidirectional test case, and was found
to provide consistent results with the 3D results shown in the main project for the
majority of the frequency range, however for higher frequencies errors were observed in
the responses, which could be due to truncation of the plane wave expression, caused by
an insuﬃcient number of terms in the expansion. Furthermore, examining the data for
the pressure on the front and rear of the diaphragm, ﬂuctuations in the pressure data
is observed. These results are shown below in ﬁgures 114 and 115:
101
102
103
104
105
Frequency, (Hz)
-60
-50
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
Magnitude, dB
PWE Numerical data test case: Omni, e oc
Numerical 0°
Numerical 30°
Numerical 60°
Numerical 90°
Numerical 120°
Numerical 150°
Numerical 180°
Figure 114: Output sensitivity for an omnidirectional test case using a 2D axisymmettric model
with PWE
128
==PAGE:130==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
Frequency, (Hz)
104
-2
-1.5
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
Pressure, Pa
PWE Numerical Data, test case: Omni 0 °, pf, pr
Numerical pf
Numerical pr
Figure 115: Front and rear pressure for an omnidirectional test case using a 2D axisymmettric
model with PWE
The causes for these apparent errors have not been investigated. The computation time
required to solve for 1 angle, at 37 frequencies, with m values set from -10 to 10, was 78
seconds, with a maximum element size of 0.00111m. This compares to a modelling time
of about 97 seconds per angle for 37 frequencies with the 3D Numerical model, with a
maximum element size of 0.00403m.
At present the relative improvements in computation time are not signiﬁcant and un-
known errors are present in the results, however this approach may be desirable when
compared against a more complex 3D model incorporating thermoviscous eﬀects or a
larger geometry.
129
==PAGE:131==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
F
Appendix - List of symbols
Symbol
Deﬁnition
a
Diaphragm Radius
[m]
ap
Perforated plate hole radius
[m]
bp
Perforated plate hole pitch
[m]
Bu
Boundary Slip factor
c
Speed of sound in air
[m/s]
CAB
Acoustic Compliance
[m5/N]
CE
Electrical Capacitance
[F]
CMD
Mechanical Compliance
[m/N]
CMT
Total mechanical compliance
[m/N]
d
Diaphragm diameter
[m]
e0
Permittivity of free space
[m−3kg−1s4A2]
E
Electrical Voltage
[V]
k
wavenumber
[m−1]
Kn
Knudsen number
lp
Perforated plate thickness
[m]
MA1
Acoustic mass of air load on diaphragm
[kg/m4]
MAS
Acoustic mass of holes in backplate
[kg/m4]
MMD
Mechanical mass of diaphragm
[kg]
MMT
Total Mechanical mass
[kg]
p0
Plane wave pressure amplitude
[Pa]
P
A point in space
Q
Quality factor
RA
Acoustic resistance/Rear Acoustic resistance
[N · s/m5]
RAS
Acoustic resistance of holes in backplate
[N · s/m5]
RMD
Mechanical stiﬀness of diaphragm
[N · s/m]
RMT
Total mechanical stiﬀness
[N · s/m]
SD
diaphragm surface area
[m2]
t
diaphragm thickness
[m]
T
diaphragm tension
[N/m]
uD
diaphragm velocity
[m/s]
U
Volume velocity
[m3/s]
VAB
Volume of cavity
[m3]
x0
Diaphragm-backplate spacing
[m]
ZA
Acoustic Impedance
[N · s/m5]
ZM
Mechanical Impedance
[mech. Ω]
β
Directivity factor
∆l
Acoustic path length diﬀerence
[m]
λ
Wavelength
[m]
λm
Mean free path
[m]
µ0
Dynamic coeﬃcient of viscocity
[N · s/m2]
ρ0
Density of air
[kg/m3]
ρm
Diaphragm density
[kg/m3]
130
==PAGE:132==
Approaches to modelling pressure-gradient microphones
Symbol
Deﬁnition
τ
Low-pass ﬁlter time constant
[s]
ω
Angular frequency
[rad]
ω0
Resonant angular frequency
[rad]
131
