==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Robust Planning & Demand
Uncertainty
Nikolaos Gavriilidis s150913
MSc candidate, DTU Management Engineering
Supervisor:
Jesper Larsen, DTU Professor
Kongens Lyngby 2017
==PAGE:2==
DTU Management Engineering
Department of Management Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Produktionstorvet
Building 424
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone: +45 4525 4800
Email:
braa@man.dtu.dk
Url:
www.man.dtu.dk/english
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
This thesis deals with a real-life Multi-Depot Vehicle Routing Problem with Time Windows
(MDVRPTW) and explores a way to find the optimal time window to assign to the customers
in order to minimize company’s transportation costs. The problem was proposed by AMCS,
a company that creates transport optimization solutions. They also provided real-life data to
test the proposed method for finding the optimal time window.
Transportation costs are highly dependent on the number of vehicles used for the deliver-
ies and the total distance that they travel. The first and primary objective of this thesis was to
minimize the number of vehicles used, which is associated with the number of drivers used
and their salary payment. The second objective was to minimize the total distance traveled by
all the vehicles which is related to the amount of fuel that they need. In attended deliveries,
where the customer has to be present at the place of the delivery to receive the product, the
time window that will be agreed on for the delivery has a great impact on both the aforemen-
tioned factors. Thus, finding the optimal time window to propose to the customer can have a
significant influence on the transportation costs.
In order to create a method that will be able to find the optimal time window, it was first
necessary to build a model that solves the MDVRPTW. Thus, first a research was performed
on the most important techniques that address the MDVRPTW and then a literature review was
conducted on studies which dealt with the time window assignment process. For solving the
MDVRPTW, a constructive and an improvement heuristic were created, that generate solutions
with the minimum number of vehicles that travel as less distance as possible. For finding the
optimal time window to propose to the customers, a method was created that takes into account
not only the existing customers but also some that might call in and ask for a delivery in the
future. This was performed by creating and adding to a temporary solution random customers
that represented the customers that might appear in the future. The optimal time window was
chosen from a set of four time windows during the day and the solutions with the proposed
optimal and the initial time windows given by the data were then compared.
The proposed method was tested for many real-life instances with data from different days
and with different number of customers in the solution. From the overall results it can be
concluded that when the proposed algorithm was used to assign time windows to 10 to 30
customers, in most of the cases fewer routes were created with an overall probability of 61.5%.
The total distance travelled was also in overall decreased, by an average of 63 km. The decline
in the total distance traveled was small since the first objective was to minimize the number of
routes, which could mean choosing time windows that would decrease the number of routes
even if they increase the total distance traveled by the vehicles.
Keywords: Vehicle Routing Problem, VRP, Multi-Depot Vehicle Routing Problem with
Time Windows, MDVRPTW, heuristics, Time windows, Time Window assignment
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This MSc thesis entitled ”Robust Planning and Demand Uncertainty” was prepared by Niko-
laos Gavriilidis at the Department of Management Engineering at the Technical University of
Denmark (DTU) in fulfillment of the requirements for acquiring a Master of Science degree
in Industrial Engineering and Management at DTU.
Kongens Lyngby, June 30, 2017
Nikolaos Gavriilidis s150913
MSc candidate, DTU Management Engineering
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisor Jesper Larsen for the opportunity he gave me to work on
this master thesis and for his guidance and valuable advice during the research and writing of
the master thesis. I would also like to thank AMCS for offering their project and especially
Kristian Hauge for his helpful guidance through the project’s requirements.
I would also like to thank my parents and my sister for their patience and support during
my master studies.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Vehicle Routing Problems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Assigning Time Windows . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3
Motivation-Purpose . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.4
Outline of the thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
Problem Description
7
2.1
The MDVRPTW definition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
A mathematical model for the MDVRPTW
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Solution methods for the MDVRPTW and other VRPs
. . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.3.1
Constructive Heuristics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.3.2
Improvement Heuristics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.3.3
Meta-heuristics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.4
Studies in MDVRPTW . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.5
Finding the Time Windows . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.5.1
Studies in finding the Time Windows
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3
Solution method
19
3.1
The structure of the solution method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.2
The Constructive Heuristic Algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.3
The Improvement Heuristic Algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.4
Finding the optimal time window method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4
Testing
29
4.1
The real-life case
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.2
Data Description
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.3
Structure of the results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.4
One day results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.5
Evaluation of the solutions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
5
Conclusion
49
5.1
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
A Part A
51
A.1 Similarity of routes for one day . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
B Part B
55
B.1
Distributions for all instances . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
C Part C
61
C.1
Results without time windows
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
Bibliography
63
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Nowadays transportation plays a major role in many companies. Problems dealing with finding
the optimal way to transport goods from one site to another or to a number of customers subject
to variable constraints are commonly denoted as Routing Problems. These problems appear
to many companies, not only in the transport sector. For example, manufacturing companies
have to manage their incoming supplies as well as the distribution of their final products, and
big companies may have internal deliveries between different sites.
With the globalization of the economy, these problems are becoming more and more com-
plicated. Transportation processes also exist in many stages of the production, making the total
transportation cost crucial for the total cost of the goods. Thus, minimizing transportation costs,
while maximizing customers´ satisfaction is becoming a vital challenge for all companies.
Finding improved solutions for real-life problems that companies face is a central topic in
Operations Research (OR). Reducing even by a small percentage the transportation costs can
result in great savings for a company. But due to the complexity of the problems, advanced
mathematical and optimization techniques are required.
A great number of transportation processes is carried out by vehicles. Especially when the
goods have to reach the retailers and the end customers vehicles are the main mean of transport.
According to Denmark Statistics in 2016 almost 66% of goods were transferred with vehicles
and the percentage rises to 91.3% for national transports.
1.1
Vehicle Routing Problems
Vehicle Routing Problems (VRPs) have been investigated for more than half a century now. The
real-life problems that companies are facing are quite complicated and unique, since they may
be constrained by different legislation applied in each country. Nevertheless, the researched
models can include the basic constraints and provide good approximations for solving the real-
life problems.
The best known and simplest routing problem is called Traveling Salesman Problem (TSP),
where a salesman has to visit a number of customers and return to his starting point by traveling
the shortest possible distance. An overview of exact and approximate algorithms can be found
in Laporte [15]. In Figure 1.1 a typical solution for the TSP problem is shown.
A generalization of the TSP is the Vehicle Routing Problem (VRP), which was first studied
by Dantzig and Ramser [8]. In this case, there is a number of salesmen or trucks which have
to visit a number of customers exactly one time. Again the trucks start from a depot, and at
the end of their journey they have to return to the same depot. In this way the customers are
==PAGE:12==
2
1 Introduction
Figure 1.1: A common solution to a TSP problem.
grouped into routes visited by the same truck. The goal in this problem is either minimizing
the number of vehicles (routes) used or minimizing the sum of the distances of all the routes.
A typical solution to a VRP problem is shown in Figure 1.2.
Figure 1.2: A common solution to a VRP problem.
Variations of the VRP has found application in many domains from bank, postal and courier
deliveries to waste collection, scheduling of school buses, distribution of products and much
more. A well-known variation of the VRP is the Capacitated Vehicle Routing Problem (CVRP),
==PAGE:13==
1.1 Vehicle Routing Problems
3
where the vehicles have a capacity limit which cannot be exceeded. There have been many
studies about this problem, and an overview of methods solving the CVRP can be found in
Laporte [16] and Toth and Vigo [30].
Another variation is the Vehicle Routing Problem with Time Windows (VRPTW), where
each customer has to be visited within a specific time frame. If the vehicle arrives earlier than
the opening of the time window, it has to wait until the time window opens in order to serve the
customer. But it is not allowed to arrive later than the closing of the time window. These are
called “hard” time windows. Some models allow the violation of the time window constraints
with some penalty and they are called “soft” time window models. An overview of exact,
heuristic and meta-heuristic methods for the VRPTW can be found in Bräysy and Gendreau
[3] and Bräysy and Gendreau [4] as well as in El-Sherbeny [25].
Another important variant of the VRP is the Multi-Depot Vehicle Routing Problem (MD-
VRP). In these cases, there is more than one depot that the vehicles can start from in order
to serve the customers. All the vehicles have to return though to their original starting depot.
If the customers have to be served within a specific time frame, the problem is called Multi-
Depot Vehicle Routing Problem with Time Windows (MDVRPTW). The MDVRPTW will be
analyzed more in Chapter 2. A typical solution for the MDVRPTW is shown in Figure 1.3.
The orientation of routes influences the solution since the customers have to be served within
a specific time window.
Figure 1.3: A common solution to an MDVRPTW problem with two depots.
There can be found many more variants of the VRP, like the Pickup and Delivery where
the vehicles have deliver and pickup up items during their routes and the Split Delivery where
a customer can be served from more than one vehicle by splitting his demand in more vehicles.
The VRP has been shown in Lenstra and Kan [18] to be NP-hard, thus it is hard to find an
exact solution in reasonable time. All the variants of the VRP are NP-hard since they generalize
==PAGE:14==
4
1 Introduction
the VRP by adding more complexity. There have been proposed though exact solution methods
like the column generation, Lagrangian relaxation, dynamic programming and branch-and-cut
that can solve some of the VRPs. Due to the complexity of the VRPs there have been researched
a lot, heuristic methods that can give a good solution in short time. These methods are divided
into three main classes. The first is the construction heuristics that create a solution from
scratch. The second is the improvement heuristics that based on an existing solution, they try
to find an improved one and reach a local optimal solution. Lastly, the meta-heuristics that
continue to search for a global optimal after a local optimal solution is found.
1.2
Assigning Time Windows
When it comes to the distribution of goods or services to retailers or end customers the choice
of the time window is very important. In many cases, the carrier and the receiver have to agree
on the time window for the delivery. These time windows are imposed endogenously and have
to be within the exogenous time windows. The exogenous time windows might be imposed
by the local legislation that is applied in each country [28]. Once a time window is agreed,
the customer should be served within that time window. For retailers, this is important since
they have to schedule their personnel and maybe other deliveries. For the end customers the
time windows dedicate the time frame that they should be home waiting for their products or
service. In other cases, the carrier is the one who determines the time window. In both cases,
the correct choice of the optimal time windows can reduce a lot either the number of vehicles
or the total distance traveled by all the vehicle.
The companies when offering time windows have also to find the best trade-off between
customer service and delivery cost. Firstly, they have to decide on the length of the time
slots. Longer time slots may reduce delivery cost since they increase flexibility, but they also
decrease customer service. They can also choose if the time windows will or not overlap.
Overlapping can increase customer satisfaction since it provides more options. Lastly, they
have to decide the number of time windows offered. A great number of time windows may
improve the customer service, but it may also increase the delivery costs since they may have
to do more often distant deliveries [32].
1.3
Motivation-Purpose
In many transportation companies there is a big issue on how to choose the time windows to
propose them to their customers. Each time a customer calls in, to order a product or a service,
a time window for the delivery will have to be agreed upon. Once the time window is decided,
it can not be changed in the future, and the company has to make the delivery within the agreed
time window.
The purpose of this thesis is to build a model that will find the optimal time windows for
the deliveries made by a carrier company. The chosen time windows will have to be robust,
==PAGE:15==
1.4 Outline of the thesis
5
meaning that it should be taken into account that more customers will call in the future asking
for a delivery for the same day. Thus, at the moment that the time window is decided, it may
not be the optimal by looking only at the existing scheduled deliveries, but it will be in the
future when more customers will call in and ask for a delivery at the same day.
The optimal time window is the one that minimizes the transportation costs of the company.
The primary transportation costs of a company depend on two factors, the number of vehicles
used and the total distance that the vehicles travel. The number of vehicles used is associated
directly with the number of drivers needed and the salary that they have to get paid, while the
total traveled distance is associated directly with the amount of fuel required to complete the
deliveries.
In this thesis, it will be considered that it is more important to minimize the number of
vehicles than the total traveled distance. Thus, the first objective of the model will be to use
as fewer vehicles as possible and the second objective will be to minimize the total distance
traveled by all the vehicles.
In order to build a model that finds the optimal time windows, it is also necessary first
to build a model that solves the vehicle routing problem. In this thesis, a model that solves
the Multi-Depot Vehicle Routing Problem with Time Windows will be built, since many com-
panies nowadays use more than one depot, in order to offer better customer service and to
minimize their transportation costs.
This problem was addressed by AMCS, a company which delivers transport optimization
solutions. For the evaluation of the model built in this thesis there are going to be executed
some experiments based on real-life data given by AMCS.
1.4
Outline of the thesis
In Chapter 2 it will be described in more details the MDVRPTW and a mathematical model for
the same problem. There will also be analyzed the most important constructive and improve-
ment heuristics for the aforementioned problem. Moreover, it will be presented a literature
review for the MDVRPTW as well as for the problem of finding the optimal time windows.
In Chapter 3 it will be described the procedure and the algorithms that were created in this
thesis in order to solve the examined problem. There will be presented the constructive and
improvement heuristic algorithms as well as the proposed method for finding the optimal time
window. The algorithms will also be illustrated with pseudocode.
In Chapter 4 there will be presented the results obtained by the tests as well as it will be
discussed the solutions and the performance of the proposed method. Lastly, in Chapter 5 will
be discussed the conclusions and the future work from this thesis.
==PAGE:16==
6
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 2
Problem Description
In this chapter, firstly, the MDVRPTW and a mathematical model for the MDVRPTW will
be described. Then methods for solving the MDVRPTW and other variants of VRP will be
analyze. Then a literature review for the MDVRPTW is presented. At the end, the problem of
finding the time windows is presented together with similar studies.
2.1
The MDVRPTW definition
The MDVRPTW consists of finding a set of feasible vehicle routes that are in accordance with
the following constraints.
• All customers should be visited exactly one time by one vehicle.
• The vehicles are not allowed to be loaded with more volume or weight than their capac-
ities.
• Each vehicle that leaves from one depot at the beginning of a route should return to the
same depot at the end of the route.
• All customers should be served within their time window.
• Vehicles are allowed to leave depots only after their shift starts and should return to the
same depot before their shift ends.
The routes should be built in a way that minimizes firstly the number of vehicles used, and
secondly, the total distance traveled by all vehicles.
2.2
A mathematical model for the
MDVRPTW
The mathematical model for the MDVRPTW has been created by developing the mathematical
model for VRPTW from Larsen [17] and is described as follows.
Let G = (N, A) be a directed graph where N is a set of vertices, and A is a set of arcs
connecting the vertices in the graph. N is the union of two sets, C and D, N = C ∪D, where
==PAGE:18==
8
2 Problem Description
C is a set of customers and D is a set of depots. Thus, A represents the connections among
customers and among depots and customers.
Each depot has a predetermined location, and it is assumed that it is large enough and
contains all the products that can be ordered by the customers. Moreover, it is given a set of
homogeneous vehicles, denoted as V, which is common for all the depots and it is assumed to
be unlimited. The set of all vehicles V, are constrained by a volume and weight capacity Qv
and Qw respectively. Each vehicle has to start and finish at the same depot.
With each arc (i, j) ∈A, where i ̸= j, it is associated a non-negative cost dij and travel
time tij . The travel cost on moving from customer i to customer j represents only the distance
between the two customers. For simplicity reasons, as distance is considered the Euclidean
distance (air distance) and not the road distance. The travel time tij starting from customer i
until reaching customer j. Moreover, again for simplicity reasons, the vehicles are assumed to
move with a constant speed, p, during their entire journey.
Furthermore, each customer i has a demand that is characterized by a volume vi and a
weight wi. Adding to this, each customer has a time window [ai, bi] in which must be served.
The time windows are characterized as hard time windows, thus a vehicle has to arrive at the
customer before bi. All customers have the same service time sti. There is the possibility for
the vehicle to arrive before ai but the customer will not be serviced before ai. The vehicles
also have a time window [ak, bk], k ∈V , which corresponds to the working shift of the driver.
Vehicles are allowed to leave the depot after ak but not earlier, and they have to return to the
depot by bk or earlier.
The aim of the model is first minimizing the total number of vehicles/routes used, which
means less total operation cost and secondly minimizing the total travel distance of all the
vehicles/routes used.
The purpose is to form a sequence of customers served by a vehicle route while respecting
the constraints mentioned above. The model contains two sets of decision variables x and s.
For each arc (i, j) where i ̸= j and for each vehicle k it is defined xijk as
xijk =



1 if the vehicle k drives directly from customer i to customer j
0 otherwise
It is also defined a decision variable sik for each vehicle k and for each vertex i which denotes
the time that the customer i starts to be served from the vehicle k. For i ∈D, it is assumed
that sik = ak, which denotes the starting time of the shift.
The mathematical formulation as linear integer program can be written as:
min
∑
k∈V
∑
i∈D
∑
j∈C
xijk
(2.1)
min
∑
k∈V
∑
i∈N
∑
j∈N
dijxijk
(2.2)
subject to
∑
k∈V
∑
j∈N
xjk = 1
∀i ∈C
(2.3)
==PAGE:19==
2.2 A mathematical model for the MDVRPTW
9
∑
i∈C
vi
∑
j∈N
xijk ≤Qv
∀k ∈V
(2.4)
∑
i∈C
wi
∑
j∈N
xijk ≤Qw
∀k ∈V
(2.5)
∑
i∈D
∑
j∈N
xijk = 1
∀k ∈V
(2.6)
∑
i∈N
∑
j∈D
xijk = 1
∀k ∈V
(2.7)
∑
j∈N
xdik −
∑
i∈N
xidk = 0
∀d ∈D, ∀k ∈V
(2.8)
∑
i∈N
xihk −
∑
j∈N
xhjk = 0
∀h ∈C, ∀k ∈V
(2.9)
sik + tij + sti −K(1 −xijk) ≤sjk
∀i, j ∈N, ∀k ∈V
(2.10)
ai ≤sik ≤bi
∀i ∈N, ∀k ∈V
(2.11)
ak + tij ≤sjk
∀i, j ∈N, ∀k ∈V
(2.12)
sik ≤bk −tij −sti
∀i, j ∈N, ∀k ∈V
(2.13)
xijk ∈{0, 1}
∀i, j ∈N, ∀k ∈V
(2.14)
The first in importance Objective Function 2.1 is to minimize the number of vehicles used
and the second Objective Function 2.2 is to minimize the total distance traveled by all vehicles.
The Constraints 2.3 makes sure that each customer is visited exactly once and 2.4, 2.5 state
that the vehicles cannot be loaded more than their volume and weight capacity respectively.
The Equations 2.6, 2.7, 2.8 ensure that each vehicle leaves from one depot, returns to one
depot and that the starting and ending depot is the same. While Equation 2.9 ensures that the
vehicle after arriving at a customer leaves again. The Inequality 2.10 means that each vehicle,
traveling from customer i to customer j, can not arrive at j before the appropriate travel time,
where K is a large scalar. The Inequalities 2.11, 2.12 and 2.13 make sure that the time windows
of customers and vehicles are observed, while 2.14 defines the space of the decision variable.
==PAGE:20==
10
2 Problem Description
2.3
Solution methods for the MDVRPTW
and other VRPs
The MDVRPTW is NP-hard, thus finding an exact solution method is difficult. In the bibliog-
raphy, like in Cordeau, Laporte, and Mercier [7] and Polacek et al. [22], most of the methods
proposed are multi-step methods. The first step in most of them is to cluster the customers
to depots and then create initial solutions for each depot. Thus, the problem for each depot
becomes a VRPTW. Clustering the customers to depot can be done with many methods, the
most famous of which is assigning customers to their nearest depots.
There have been proposed over the years exact algorithms for solving the VRPTW. The first
was the dynamic programming proposed by Kolen, Rinnooy Kan, and Trienekens [14] in 1987.
Later more methods were presented like the column generation, the Lagrangian relaxation,
and the branch-and-cut, with the column generation giving the best results. But all the exact
algorithms are able to solve to optimality problems with a limited number of customers.
In order to solve real-life vehicle routing problems with a great number of customers and
constraints, many heuristic methods have been created. These heuristics are divided into
three main categories, the constructive heuristics, the improvement heuristics and the meta-
heuristics. In recent years most of the studies are focused in the meta-heuristics for solving
complicated variants of the VRP, while the constructive and improvement heuristics, which
are also called classical heuristics, were mostly studied between 1960 and 1990.
2.3.1
Constructive Heuristics
Constructive heuristics are usually used to create an initial solution for an improvement heuris-
tic or a meta-heuristic nowadays. The main idea is to create a feasible solution gradually by
assigning customers to routes. The constructive heuristic can be sequential, where one route
is constructed at a time or parallel, where more routes are built simultaneously. They create a
solution from scratch, and most of the times these solutions are not quite competitive with the
solutions created from improvement heuristics.
Savings heuristic
The most known constructive heuristic is the savings heuristic created by Clarke and Wright
[5]. The method starts by creating one route for each customer, where the vehicle starts from
the depot, visits one customer and returns to the depot. If there are n customers there are
initially created n routes of the form (0, i, 0) for i = 1, ..., n , where 0 refers to the depot. Then
the routes are gradually merged by taking into account the savings criterion. The savings by
merging two routes is calculated as sij = d0i + dj0 −dij where i, j = 1, ..., n and i ̸= j.
The merging of two routes is allowed if all the constraints of the problem are observed (e.g.
capacity constraints, time windows). In every iteration, the merge with the maximum savings
==PAGE:21==
2.3 Solution methods for the MDVRPTW and other VRPs
11
is applied. The process continues until no feasible merges can be found. The main advantages
of the savings heuristic are that it is fast and simple to implement. On the other hand, the
accuracy of the solutions is not so high when there are a lot of constraints.
Time-Oriented, Nearest-Neighbour heuristic
Solomon [26] proposed a Time-Oriented Nearest-Neighbour heuristic where every routes be-
gins by finding the customer that is closest to the depot. The metric for closeness considers
both the geographical and temporal closeness of the customer. At every iteration, the customer
closest to the last customer of the route is added to route. This procedure continues until no
more feasible insertions can be made, and a new route starts from the beginning.
Insertion Heuristics
Solomon [26] proposed and another heuristic, the Insertion Heuristics. In this method, it is first
calculated for all the unrouted customers the best feasible position in the current route based
on a criterion c1. Then the best unrouted customer based on a second criterion c2 is selected
and placed in his best position. The criterion could be the furthest customer, the customer with
the earlier deadline or the customer with the minimum equally weighted combination of direct
route-time and distance.
Two-phase heuristics
There were also proposed some two-phase heuristics where the problem is separated into two
sub-problems, the clustering, and the routing. The most used was the cluster-first route-second
in which the customers are first grouped into clusters and then placed in a sequence within each
cluster. Famous methods that use this technique are the sweep algorithm presented from Gillett
and Miller [10] and the petal algorithm presented from Ryan and Foster [24]. In the route-first
cluster-second first it is built a giant TSP tour, and then this tour is split into feasible routes as
proposed from Beasley [2].
2.3.2
Improvement Heuristics
The constructive heuristics create an initial solution from scratch. Then the improvement
heuristics take this solution and start searching the neighborhood around this solution to find
a better solution. As the neighborhood of a solution is described a set of solutions that are
created from the first solution with only simple modification. The search of the neighborhood
continues from the improved solution until no better solution can be found. This is the point
where the improvement heuristic reaches a local optimum that might also be a global optimum.
Improvement heuristics can not escape from this local optimum while meta-heuristics include
mechanisms that allow them to search areas beyond this local optimum in order to find better
solutions.
==PAGE:22==
12
2 Problem Description
The improvement heuristics are divided into two main categories, the intra-tour methods,
and the inter-tour methods. In the first as neighborhood is considered a single route at a time,
while in the second more than one route are considered as neighborhood.
When a better neighboring solution is identified, there are two acceptance strategies. The
first that is called first-accept when it finds a better solution replaces the current solution with
it, and the search continues. The second is called best-accept, and the methods find all the
solutions that are better from the current and accept the one that is the best among them.
The most known intra-tour method is the edge-exchange operator or k-Opt operator. In this
method, k arcs of a route are replaced by k other arcs. A solution that was created by using this
method and can not be improved further by any k-exchange is called k-optimal. Most often
it is used the 2-Opt or 3-Opt operator. When performing these exchanges, the time windows
should also be taken into account in order not to violate them. Figure 2.1 illustrates the 2-Opt
exchange operator.
Figure 2.1: 2-Opt exchange operator [3].
A variant of this operator is the Or-Opt Operator, where l consecutive customers of a route
are moved to another place in the same route. This method is shown in Figure 2.2 and can be
achieved by replacing three special arcs of the initial route with three other arcs, it is thus a
subset of the 3-Opt operator.
There are also many inter-tour methods. The 2-Opt* operator presented by Potvin and
Rousseau [23] is a variant of the k-Opt operator, where the last segment of customers of one
route is moved after the first customers in another route. In this way, the orientation of the
routes is also preserved. An illustration of this operator is shown in Figure 2.3.
Another inter-tour operator is the relocate operator, which moves one customer from one
route to another route as shown in Figure 2.4. In the same way the exchange operator swaps
simultaneously two customers from different routes as illustrated in Figure 2.5. A generaliza-
tion of this operators is the λ-interchange operator where a subset of customers of size ≤λ
from one route is exchanged with a subset of customers of size ≤λ from another route as
presented by Osman [20].
==PAGE:23==
2.3 Solution methods for the MDVRPTW and other VRPs
13
Figure 2.2: The Or-Opt operator [3].
Figure 2.3: The 2-Opt* operator [3].
All these mentioned improvement heuristics and more others presented over the years are
called local search algorithms since they search the neighborhood around an initial solution
and find a local optimum. In order to escape from the local optimum and find a global optimum
meta-heuristics were developed during more recent years.
2.3.3
Meta-heuristics
Meta-heuristics appeared after 1990 in order to obtain the global optimum solution, and it
is still an area with a lot of research taking place. For the VRPTW and MDVRPTW most
of the proposed meta-heuristics are using local search algorithms in order to move to bigger
neighborhoods of a solution. The most important of them are described in this section.
==PAGE:24==
14
2 Problem Description
Figure 2.4: The relocate operator [3].
Figure 2.5: The exchange operator [3].
Simulated Annealing
In Simulated Annealing, the solutions are selected randomly from the neighborhood of the
initial solution. If the selected solution is better, it is accepted as the current solution. If the
selected solution is worse, then it is accepted with a certain probability. This probability is
determined by a ”temperature” which is gradually decreased over the time, thus worse solutions
are accepted rarer.
Tabu search
Tabu Search method searches all the neighborhood of the current solution and selects the best
solution as current solution. The best solution in the neighborhood does not have to be better
than the current solution. Thus, the method can escape from local optimums. Moreover, in
order to avoid cycling, solutions that have recently been visited are declared as tabu and they
are not allowed to be revisited for some iterations.
==PAGE:25==
2.4 Studies in MDVRPTW
15
Variable Neighborhood Search
Variable Neighborhood Search (VNS) was first presented by Mladenović and Hansen [19] as
a general search strategy but has been modified and implemented by many researchers. VNS
considers several neighborhoods with increasing complexity, and instead of accepting worse
solutions it explores more distant neighborhoods to find an improved solution.
Population Based Algorithms
The previously described methods are based on the local search strategy and provide mech-
anisms of escaping the local optimums. There have also been proposed methods which are
inspired by natural concepts such as the behavior of insects and the evolution of species. The
most famous of them are the Ant Colony Optimization (ACO) and the Genetic Algorithms
(GAs).
In recent years there has been very popular the hybridization of different methods and
strategies in order to obtain improved results. In the next section there are presented some
studies in MDVRPTW, which contain extensions of the previously mentioned techniques or
hybrid algorithms that combine more techniques together.
2.4
Studies in MDVRPTW
Giosa, Tansini, Viera, et al. [11] examined new assignment algorithms for the MDVRPTW.
Given the complexity of the MDVRPTW, they developed a two-steps strategy, ”cluster first,
route second” for solving the problem. They designed and compared six heuristics for clus-
tering the customers to depots, while for each depot they used the same VRP heuristic. The
algorithms were tested in a variety of instances using real distances calculated on the map,
from 100 customers and six depots to 1000 customers and 30 depots. Two of the assignment
algorithms were quite slow in the big instances using up to 303 seconds for clustering the cus-
tomers, while the others were fast using less than one second. The routing times were from two
seconds for the instance with 100 customers and six depots, to 950 seconds for the instance
with 1000 customers and 30 depots.
Cordeau, Laporte, and Mercier [7] presented the first meta-heuristic, a Unified Tabu Search
Algorithm (UTSA) for solving among others the MDVRPTW. The objective function was to
minimize the total number of vehicles used. The characteristic of their proposal is that it used
simple neighborhood search that allowed also moving to infeasible solutions. For testing the
method, there were created new instances by adding time windows to 10 MDVRP instances
introduced by Cordeau, Gendreau, and Laporte [6]. Two sets of 10 instances were created,
one with narrow time windows and one the larger time windows and both were varying from
48 customers and four depots to 288 customers and six depots. For creating good feasible
solutions, it was proposed to execute 105 iterations, where the computing time varied from 5
to 82 minutes for the MDVRPTW.
==PAGE:26==
16
2 Problem Description
Polacek et al. [22] proposed the Variable Neighborhood Search (VNS) meta-heuristic to
solve the MDVRPTW. The simplicity of the proposed algorithm lies on the fact that the Local
Search procedure uses only a restricted version of the 3-opt operator and can be modified easily
to solve other VRPs. The method was tested in the same 20 instances presented by Cordeau,
Laporte, and Mercier [7]. By using more iterations (108), VNS found 18 out of 20 new best
solutions. After testing the method in equivalent runtimes with the UTSA, VNS reached an
average of 0.5% better solutions. More importantly, VNS scaled well with the problem size as
it showed a moderate increase in runtimes in instances with 288 customers compared to smaller
instances. Then in Polacek et al. [21] it was proposed a cooperative and adaptive algorithm
based on the VNS, which reached better solutions with the use of parallel exploration threads.
It was tested in the same instances and found 11 new best solutions, while the runtime of a
complete search to all instances for a constant number of iterations was reduced from 48.7 to
1.7 hours.
Ting and Chen [29] proposed two hybrid algorithms to solve the MDVRPTW. They com-
bined Multiple Ant Colony Systems (MACS) with Simulated Annealing (SA), by making
one sequential and one embedded hybridization (SH-MACS-SA) and (EH-MACS-SA) respec-
tively. MACS, as well as the two hybrid algorithms, were also tested at the instances proposed
by Cordeau, Laporte, and Mercier [7]. MACS and SH-MACS-SA found one new best solution
while EH-MACS-SA found five new best solutions with an improved average gap from the
best known solution in all the instances of 0.04%. The computational time of the algorithms
was faster than UTSA but slower than VNS.
Vidal et al. [31] proposed a hybrid genetic algorithm for solving time constrained VRPs,
including the MDVRPTW. There were developed geometric and structural problem decom-
positions in order to solve efficiently large problems. The algorithm was also tested in the
instances introduced by Cordeau, Laporte, and Mercier [7], where it found all the previous
known best solutions and also introduced nine new best solutions. New larger instances in-
volving 360 to 960 customers and 4 to 12 depots were also presented. The average process
time for the old instances was 6.49 minutes while for the new large instances was 88.98 min-
utes.
Dondo and Cerdá [9] proposed a local search improvement algorithm for exploring a large
neighborhood of a solution to find cheaper feasible solutions. They performed customer re-
ordering in each route and customer exchange between nearby routes by developing a mixed
integer linear program. This method was applied in the MDVRPTW with heterogeneous vehi-
cles and was tested in a modified version of Solomon [26] instance with 50 customers, three
depots and three types of vehicles. The computational time for the local improvement algo-
rithm was 1256 seconds.
Afshar-Nadjafi and Afshar-Nadjafi [1] created a construction heuristics for time-dependent
MDVRPTW to minimize the total cost assuming that travel time between two customers de-
pends on the departure time. A mixed integer programming model was formulated for the
problem. The constructive heuristic with three different local search methods was tested in
180 problems that were created with 9 to 23 customers and 3 to 7 depots.
==PAGE:27==
2.5 Finding the Time Windows
17
2.5
Finding the Time Windows
The huge majority of the studies on VRPs are considering that if the problem is restricted by
time windows, the time windows are known and fixed from the beginning. Finding the optimal
time window of the customer that would decrease the objective functions of the problem, either
it is minimizing the number of vehicles or it is minimizing the total distance traveled, is a topic
that has been overlooked and only quite recently has attracted the interest for some studies.
2.5.1
Studies in finding the Time Windows
In Spliet and Gabor [28] the Time Window Assignment Vehicle Routing Problem (TWAVRP)
was introduced for the first time. This study is referred to distribution networks deliveries
with regular intervals. The customers have to be assigned a long-term time window before
their demand is known. After the demand becomes known a vehicle routing schedule has to
be created in order to make the deliveries within the assigned time window. The problem
has become now a VRPTW. The TWAVRP is the problem of assigning a single time window
and a vehicle route schedule, such that the expected costs are minimized. For solving the
problem, there were developed two variants of a column generation algorithm, and for small
instances, the column generation algorithm was incorporated into a branch and price algorithm
for finding the optimal solutions. For testing the proposed method, there were generated 40
instances with 10 to 25 customers and a two hour width time window. The computational
times of the column generations varying from less than a second to around 40 seconds, while
the Branch-Price-and-Cut algorithm did not reach results in the big instances within 1 hour.
In Spliet and Desaulniers [27] the Discrete Time Window Assignment Vehicle Routing Prob-
lem (DTWAVRP) was introduced, where given a set of customers that have to be served in a
day without knowing their demand, a time window from a set of candidates time windows, has
to be assigned to each customer. When the demand becomes known vehicle routes are created
restricted by the vehicle capacity and the assigned time windows. For solving the problem,
there were created an exact branch price and cut algorithm and five column generation heuris-
tics for larger instances. In Spliet and Gabor [28] the time windows had a fixed width, but
they could start at any time in a day, while now a set of candidate time windows is created
in advance and one of them is selected. In both papers, the time window for each customer
has to be the same for the whole time period and are fixed before the demand is known. It is
known though the set of customers that has to be served each day. The algorithms were tested
in randomly generated instances with sizes from 10 to 60 customers. Some heuristics did not
reach to a solution within one hour for the big instances, while others solved all the cases in
less than 300 seconds.
These two studies differ from this thesis in some key points. Firstly, in Spliet and Gabor
[28] the customers have to be served more than one time during the planning horizon. Thus
they are assigned a long-term time window, which is the same every time that they will need to
be served. On the other hand, in this thesis, the customers appear only once and need a unique
time window for that time. Moreover, at the time of assigning the time windows in [28] all the
==PAGE:28==
18
2 Problem Description
customers served in each day are known, but their demand is not known. In this thesis, when
assigning a time window to a customer it is not known all the customers that will be served
that day, it is known though the demand of the existing customers.
In Jabali et al. [13] it was described the Self-Imposed Time Windows in Vehicle Routing
Problems (VRP-SITW). The self-imposed means that the distribution company decides the
time windows by itself, independently of the customer. But once a time window is assigned to
a customer, the customer has to be served within the time window. In this paper, the customers
are first assigned to vehicles, sequences of customers are then created for each vehicle, and
then a time window is assigned to each customer. The problem also included stochastic travel
times due to disruptions, which was solved by allocating time buffers throughout the routes.
The solution included a tabu search heuristic for creating the vehicle routes and an LP model for
taking all the timing decision for the time windows and the allocation of the time buffers. The
methods were tested on two datasets from the literature, one with a total number of customers
varying from 31 to 79, and the other with 100 customers. For the first dataset, the algorithms
have an average runtime of 17.3 minutes, while for the second with the greater number of
customers the average runtime is 77.9 minutes.
Groër, Golden, and Wasil [12] introduced the Consistent Vehicle Routing Problem (Con-
VRP), where a customer has to be served several days in a given time horizon. The arrival
times to each customer should be again within the same time window in every day, and it
was also considered that each customer should be visited by the same driver in every day. A
heuristic algorithm was created for solving this problem, which was tested first for randomly
generated instances with up to 1000 customers and then to real-life instances with more than
3700 customers.
Lastly, an evaluation of the cost of time windows in the home delivery application was
presented by Zugkian [32]. In the thesis, it was analyzed the effect in the transportation cost
of enlarging and shrinking the time windows in attended home deliveries. There were men-
tioned the trade-offs between the customer service and transportation cost, and there were also
examined and compared different delivery time window policies, such as assigning tight time
windows to randomly selected customers or to customers living in the biggest cities. The time
window policies were tested in real-life data of a week that contained in total 1123 customers.
==PAGE:29==
CHAPTER 3
Solution method
In this chapter, the algorithms created in this thesis are going to be described, and they will
be illustrated with pseudocode. Firstly, the constructive heuristic algorithm that creates the
first feasible solution will be analyzed, then the improvement heuristic algorithm that finds
the local optimal will be described and lastly the methods that are responsible for finding the
optimal time window will be presented.
3.1
The structure of the solution method
The purpose of this thesis as mentioned before is to build a model that will be able to find the
optimal time windows for the deliveries made by a carrier company. But in order to create this
model, it is also necessary first to build a model that solves the vehicle routing problem. In
this thesis, a model was built that solves the Multi-Depot Vehicle Routing Problem with Time
Windows. It was also considered that the first and most important objective of the MDVRPTW
is to minimize the number of vehicles used to serve all the customers scheduled on the same
day. The second objective of the MDVRPTW is to minimize the total distance traveled by all
the vehicles.
For solving this problem, the heuristics approach was chosen. First, a constructive heuristic
was built in order to formulate an initial solution for the MDVRPTW. Then an improvement
heuristic was created in order to search the neighborhood of the initial solution and find better
solutions for the problem, based on the two aforementioned objectives.
Lastly, a model was created that finds the optimal time windows for each customer that
calls in and asks for a delivery on a given day. The model created for finding the optimal time
windows does not only considers the existing customers, scheduled for a given day, but it also
takes into account the customers that will call in the future, and will ask for a delivery at the
same day. Thus, at the moment that the time window is decided, it may not be the optimal
by looking only at the existing scheduled deliveries, but it should be in the future when more
customers will call in and ask for a delivery at the same day.
3.2
The Constructive Heuristic Algorithm
The aim of the constructive heuristic algorithm is to construct a first feasible solution for the
MDVRPTW. The solution is built by the function “ConstructionNearest” which is shown in
the Algorithm 1.
==PAGE:30==
20
3 Solution method
Algorithm 1: Constructive Heuristic
Data: List of Customers, List of Depots
Result: solution(List of Vehicles)
1 ConstructionNearest(customers,depots)
2
solution ←[];
3
customersInEach[Depot] ←SeparateCustomers (customers,depots);
4
for all Depot in depots do
5
while customersInEach[Depot] Not Empty do
6
V ehicle ←[];
7
add Vehicle to solution;
8
add Depot to Vehicle at position 0 and at the last position;
9
nearCustomer ←FindNearCustomer (customersInEach[Depot], Depot);
10
add nearCustomer to Vehicle at position 1;
11
noCustomer ←true;
12
while customersInEach[Depot] Not Empty And noCustomer == true do
13
maxCost ←Double.MAX.V ALUE;
14
nextPosition ←−2;
15
nextCustomer ←[];
16
for all Customers in customersInEach[Depot] do
17
bestCost ←Double.MAX.V ALUE;
18
bestPosition ←−2;
19
for all Positions in vehicle do
20
feasible ←CheckFeasible (Customer, Vehicle, position);
21
if feasible == true then
22
addedCost ←FindAddedCost (Customer,Vehicle,
position);
23
if addedCost < bestCost then
24
bestCost = addedCost;
25
bestPosition = position;
26
if bestPosition ̸= −2 And bestCost < maxCost then
27
maxCost = bestCost;
28
nextPosition = bestPosition;
29
nextCustomer = Customer;
30
if nextPosition ̸= −2 then
31
remove nextCustomer from customersInEach[Depot];
32
InsertCustomer (nextCustomer, Vehicle, nextPosition);
33
else
34
noCustomer = false;
35
return solution;
==PAGE:31==
3.2 The Constructive Heuristic Algorithm
21
The first stage in constructing a solution for the MDVRPTW is to assign each customer i
to their nearest depot, by using the Euclidean distance. The Euclidean distance is calculated
as:
dij =
√
(xCoordi −xCoordj)2 + (yCoordi −yCoordj)2
∀i, j ∈N
(3.1)
This is executed by the function “SeparateCustomers”, the pseudocode of which is shown
in Algorithm 2. This method was used by Polacek et al. [22] with the algorithm Variable
Neighborhood Search (VNS) and by Cordeau, Laporte, and Mercier [7] with the algorithm
Unified Tabu Search Algorithms (UTSA). After this function, the routes are constructed for
each depot separately.
Algorithm 2: Separating the Customers to Depots
Data: List of Customers, List of Depots
Result: 1 List of Customers for each Depot
1 SeparateCustomers(customers,depots)
2
for all Depot in depots do
3
Initialize customersInEach[Depot] as an empty List of Customers;
4
for all Customers in customers do
5
minimumDistance ←Double.MAX.V ALUE;
6
closestDepot ←−1;
7
for all Depot in depots do
8
distance ←GetDistance (Customer,Depot);
9
if distance < minimumDistance then
10
minimumDistance = distance;
11
closestDepot = Depot;
12
for all Depot in depots do
13
if Depot == closestDepot then
14
customersInEach[Depot];
15
return customersInEach[Depot];
The first customer to be added to the route is the one closest to the depot as proposed by
the Nearest Neighbour technique by Solomon [26], performed by the “FindNearCustomer”
function shown in Algorithm 3. Closest to the depot is considered the customer with the smaller
Euclidean distance from the depot. The time window of this customer is the one that will
determine the shift of the vehicle. Normally, there are two shifts for the vehicles, a morning and
an afternoon shift. These two shifts many times are overlapping each other. If the customer’s
time window is within the morning shift, then the morning shift is chosen; otherwise it is chosen
the afternoon shift for the first vehicle. This part is executed by the function “addCustomer”.
The rest of the customers clustered to each depot are then assigned to routes by using the
Insertion heuristic presented by Solomon [26]. But before adding a customer to a route, a fea-
==PAGE:32==
22
3 Solution method
Algorithm 3: Finding the nearest to the Depot Customer
Data: List of Customers, Depot
Result: Customer nearest to the Depot
1 FindNearCustomer(customersInEach[Depot], Depot)
2
minDistance ←Double.MAX.V ALUE;
3
nearestCustomer ←[];
4
for all Customers in customersInEach[Depot] do
5
distance ←GetDistance (Customer,Depot);
6
if distance < minDistance then
7
minDistance = distance;
8
nearestCustomer = Customer;
9
remove nearestCustomer from customersInEach[Depot] return
nearestCustomer;
sibility check is conducted by the function “CheckFeasible”. This function checks if adding
a customer to a specified position in the routes violates any constraints of the problem. These
constraints were presented in Chapter 2 and the ones examined by this function are that the
vehicles are not allowed to be loaded with more volume or weight than their maximum capac-
ities, that all customers must be served within their time window and that all vehicles should
return to their starting depot before their shift ends. Thus, the function first makes sure that
the two capacity constraints, weight and volume, of the vehicle are observed after adding the
customer. After, it is checked if the vehicle can arrive at the specified customer before its time
window ends, bi. If this is the case, then it is checked if, after adding the specified customer to
the specified position in the route, the vehicle can arrive at all the following customers of the
route, including returning to the depot at the end, inside their time window and before the shift
of the vehicle ends. If the feasibility check is successful, the adding cost is then calculated, in
this case the extra distance, of adding the customer to a specified position in the route. All the
unrouted customers are checked in all the possible positions, and the customer with the smaller
adding cost is assigned to the best cost saving position. This feasibility check is conducted by
the Algorithm 4.
The assignment of a customer to a route is executed by the function “InsertCustomer”,
which is responsible for updating the arrival and departure times of all the customers in the
route. If no feasible insertion is found, a new route is created by using the functions “Find-
NearCustomer” and “AddCustomer” as described above.
The above mentioned procedure is continued until all the customers clustered to the depot
have been assigned to a position in a route. Then the same method is used for the rest of the
depots in the problem until an initial complete solution is created. Since there is no constraint
on the number of vehicles/ routes used, this constructive heuristic will always find a feasible
solution, even by creating a great number of routes.
After the initial solution is created, an improvement heuristic algorithm is called to find
better solutions in the neighborhood of the initial solution.
==PAGE:33==
3.3 The Improvement Heuristic Algorithm
23
Algorithm 4: Checking the feasibility of placing a customer to a position
Data: Customer, Vehicle, position
Result: boolean feasible indicating if it is feasible to place the Customer to position
1 CheckFeasible(Customer, Vehicle, Position)
2
feasible ←true;
3
add Customer to Vehicle at position;
4
newV olumeCapacity ←GetVolumeCapavity (Vehicle)+CustomersV olume;
5
newWeightCapacity ←GetWeightCapacity (Vehicle)+CustomersWeight;
6
if newV olumeCapacity <= MaxV olumeCapacity And
newWeightCapacity <= MaxWeightCapacity then
7
for all Positions in Vehicle after position do
8
travelTime ←GetTravelTime (Vehicle[Position - 1], Vehicle[Position]);
9
arrivalTime[Position] ←departureTime[Position −1] + travelTime;
10
if arrivalTime[Position] <= TimeWindowEnd[Position] then
11
if arrivalTime[Position] < TimeWindowStart[Position] then
12
startingTime[Position] ←TimeWindowStart[Position];
13
else
14
startingTime[Position] ←arrivalTime[Position];
15
departureTime[Position] ←
startingTime[Position] + serviceTime[Position];
16
else
17
feasible ←false;
18
else
19
feasible ←false;
20
return feasible;
3.3
The Improvement Heuristic Algorithm
In order to explore solutions in the neighborhood of the initial solution, some local search
algorithms have been used. At this point, it should be mentioned that the customers can be
served from all depots irrespectively to which depot they had been assigned by the constructive
heuristic by the function ”SeparateCustomers”.
The first function used for local search is the “RouteSwap”. This function allows a cus-
tomer to change positions from one route to another. It works exactly like the relocate operator,
described in Chapter 2.3.2 and the pseudocode of the function is presented in Algorithm 5. The
chosen criteria for executing the change is first reducing the number of routes. If a customer
that was the only one in a route, can be assigned to another route, will be assigned, irrespec-
tively if by proceeding to this change the total traveled distance is increased or not. The second
criterion is reducing the total distance traveled from all vehicles. If by changing position of a
customer and assigning him to another route, could reduce the total traveled distance, then this
==PAGE:34==
24
3 Solution method
change will occur.
Two functions were constructed with different searching directions. “RouteSwap”, starts
from the last constructed route and checks all the routes in a sequence, while the “RouteSwap1”,
starts searching from the first route to the last. In both functions, a change that reduces the
number of vehicles/routes will always be executed, following the first objective function of
the problem.
Algorithm 5: Relocate operator
Data: solution
Result: improved solution
1 RouteSwap(solution)
2
for all Vehicles in solution do
3
for all Customers in Vehicle do
4
for all Vehicles2 in solution do
5
for all Positions2 in Vehicle2 do
6
if V ehicle ̸= V ehicle2 then
7
feasible ←CheckFeasible (Customer, Vehicle2, Position2);
8
if feasible == true then
9
if Customers in Vehicle < 2 then
10
remove Customer from Vehicle;
11
add Customer to Vehicle2 at Position2;
12
else
13
oldCost ←GetVehicleDistance (Vehicle);
14
oldCost2 ←GetVehicleDistance (Vehicle2);
15
remove Customer from Vehicle;
16
add Customer to Vehicle2 at Position2;
17
newCost ←GetVehicleDistance (Vehicle);
18
newCost2 ←GetVehicleDistance (Vehicle2);
19
if oldCost + oldCost2 < newCost + newCost2 then
20
remove Customer from Vehicle2;
21
add Customer to Vehicle at previous position;
22
return solution;
The second method used for local search was the combination of 2-opt intra-tour exchange
operator and the inter-tour exchange operator that were described in Chapter 2.3.2. The func-
tion swaps the position of two customers that may belong to the same route or different ones.
The criteria used are the same as in the relocate operator, and again there were created two
functions with different search directions, the “DoubleSwap” and “DoubleSwap1” respec-
tively to “RouteSwap” and “RouteSwap1”. The pseudocode of “DoubleSwap” is presented
in Algorithm 6.
==PAGE:35==
3.4 Finding the optimal time window method
25
Algorithm 6: 2-Opt intra/inter-tour exchange operator
Data: solution
Result: improved solution
1 DoubleSwap(solution)
2
for all Vehicles in solution do
3
for all Customers in Vehicle do
4
for all Vehicles2 in solution do
5
for all Customers2 in Vehicle2 do
6
feasible ←CheckFeasible (Customer, Vehicle2, Position2);
7
feasible2 ←CheckFeasible (Customer2, Vehicle, Position);
8
if feasible == true And feasible2 == true then
9
oldCost ←GetVehicleDistance (Vehicle);
10
oldCost2 ←GetVehicleDistance (Vehicle2);
11
Swap (Customer, Customer2);
12
newCost ←GetVehicleDistance (Vehicle);
13
newCost2 ←GetVehicleDistance (Vehicle2);
14
if newCost + newCost2 > oldCost + oldCost2 then
15
Swap (Customer2, Customer);
16
Swap (bestSwap);
17
return solution;
Removing a customer from one position and assigning him to another position in the same
or another route is performed by the functions “RemoveCustomer” and “InsertCustomer” re-
spectively. The four above described local search functions are called in a sequence the one
after the other for 20 times in total from the function “CallSwaps”. After executing this func-
tion, a local optimal is reached, and the first step of the program finishes.
3.4
Finding the optimal time window
method
The constructive heuristic together with the improvement heuristic algorithms are used to cre-
ate a solution for the customers that have already assigned a time window. Each time that a
new customer appears the function “AfterSwaps” is called in order to find the optimal time
window for him and assign him to a route. The pseudocode for the “AfterSwaps” is presented
in the Algorithm 7.
The first thing performed by “AfterSwaps” is creating five new random customers, with
random location and time window and placing them in a copy of the solution. These random
==PAGE:36==
26
3 Solution method
customers represent the next five customers that might call after the customer that has currently
called and is in the process of finding his optimal time window. The creation and placement
of the random customers in routes are performed by the “PlacingRandoms” function.
Algorithm 7: Finding optimal Time Window
Data: solution, Customer
Result: solution including Customer
1 AfterSwaps(solution, Customer)
2
solution2 ←CreateCopyOf (solution);
3
for 10 times do
4
PlacingRndoms (solution2);
5
Twindow ←FindTimeWindow (solution2,Customer);
6
timeWindow[Twindow]+ = 1;
7
count ←−1;
8
optimalTimeWindow ←[];
9
for all possible Time Windows do
10
if timeWindow[TimeWindow] > count then
11
count = timeWindow[TimeWindow];
12
optimalTimeWindow = TimeWindow;
13
SetTimeWindowStart[Customer] (optimalTimeWindow);
14
SetTimeWindowEnd[Customer] (optimalTimeWindow);
15
AddExtraCustomer (solution, Customer);
16
CallSwaps (solution);
17
return solution;
After placing the random customers the “CallSwaps”, described in Chapter 3.3, is called
to find again the new local optimal. Then, the function “FindTimeWindow” is called, that is
presented in Algorithm 8. This function checks all the possible time windows and keeps the
one that either the solution is occupying fewer vehicles or the total distance traveled by all
vehicles is smaller. For this model, discrete time windows were considered that they are not
overlapping each other. The above mentioned procedure, creating five random customers and
finding the optimal time window with the extra random customers in the solution is repeated
by the “AfterSwaps” ten times. Each time the optimal time window is kept, and at the end, it
is calculated which time window has the most appearances. This will be the time window that
will be assigned to the customer that has currently called. In this way, it is attempted to find
an optimal time window that will also be robust. This means that at the moment that the new
customer calls in and a time window is decided, it may not be the optimal by looking only at
the existing scheduled customers, but it will be in the future when more customers will call in
and ask for a delivery at the same day.
The customer is added to the solution to the best possible route and position by the function
“AddExtraCustomer” and the “CallSwaps” is called once again to find the new local optimal.
==PAGE:37==
3.4 Finding the optimal time window method
27
The function “AddExtraCustomers” checks the total distance traveled after adding the cus-
tomer in all the feasible positions in all the routes and places the new customer in the optimal
position. If no feasible position is found, then it creates a new route. This method was used in
placing the random customers too.
Algorithm 8: Finding Time Window
Data: solution, Customer
Result: TimeWindow
1 FindTimeWindow(solution, Customer)
2
totalCost ←Double.MAX.V ALUE;
3
for all possible Time Windows do
4
solution2 ←CreateCopyOf (solution);
5
SetTimeWindowStart[Customer] (TimeWindow);
6
SetTimeWindowEnd[Customer] (TimeWindow);
7
AddExtraCustomer (solution2, Customer);
8
solutionCost ←SolutionTotalDistance (solution2);
9
if solution2Size < solutionSize then
10
totalCost = solutionCost;
11
foundTimeWindow = TimeWindow;
12
else
13
solutionCost < totalCost
14
totalCost = solutionCost;
15
foundTimeWindow = TimeWindow;
16
SetTimeWindowStart[Customer] (foundTimeWindow);
17
SetTimeWindowEnd[Customer] (foundTimeWindow);
18
return foundTimeWindow;
==PAGE:38==
28
==PAGE:39==
CHAPTER 4
Testing
In this chapter, the data used for the experiments will be presented, and the results obtained
by the tests will be analyzed. Lastly, an evaluation of the solutions will be reported. The
algorithms presented in Chapter 3 were programmed for the testing in JAVA and compiled
in Eclipse, and the tests were performed on a Lenovo T510 laptop with Intel Core i5, and a
2.67GHz processor.
4.1
The real-life case
The problem of this thesis was proposed by AMCS, and the data used for the tests were pro-
vided by AMCS and represent a real-life case.
A delivery company has to plan the distribution of goods to its customers. Customers
are calling in and ask for a delivery of a product on a specific day. The company, while the
customer is still on the phone hat to suggest a particular time window for the delivery. The
proposed time window can not be changed in the future and has to be the one that will minimize
the transportation costs of the company. It is considered that the most important in reducing
the transportation costs of the company is first to minimize the number of vehicles used for the
deliveries. Then it is also important to minimize the total distance traveled by all the vehicles.
Thus, the suggested time windows have to be in accordance with these two objectives of the
company. Every time a customer calls in, a time window on a specific day is assigned to him,
and a new optimal plan for the deliveries is created. It is though unknown how many customers
will ask for a delivery each day.
The objective of this thesis is to find the time windows that will create the optimal distribu-
tion plan just before the delivery day begins. This means that the proposed time windows have
to be robust. They should take into account not only the customers that are already assigned a
time window on a specific day, but they should also consider the customers that might call in
the future and ask for a delivery the same day.
4.2
Data Description
The delivery company uses for the distribution three depots located in different regions around
Denmark, making the examined case an MDVRPTW. The three depots are located in Tåstrup,
Odense, and Hobro, but as mentioned in Chapter 3.3 they can serve all customers irrespectively
of their location. It is assumed that all depots have available all possible products that the
==PAGE:40==
30
4 Testing
customers have ordered, and the fleet of homogenous vehicles is unlimited for each depot. The
restriction is that the vehicles have to start and end at the same depot. Moreover, the vehicles
have to return to their depot before their shift ends. The shift of the vehicles has a duration of
nine hours, which represents the nine-hour shift of the driver and can be either morning shift
or afternoon shift. The morning shift starts at 08:00 and finishes at 17:00 while the afternoon
shift is from 12:30 to 21:30. The vehicles have to return to their starting depot by the end of
their shift, but it is possible to start their route later than the beginning of the shift.
The vehicles are also constrained by a volume and weight capacity. The volume capacity
can not exceed 100 m2 while the weight capacity can not exceed 740 kg. The service time
spent by each vehicle at each customer is estimated at 15 minutes. For simplicity reasons,
the distance between the customers is considered the Euclidean distance and the vehicles are
assumed to move with a constant speed of 50 km/h during the entire route.
Once a customer calls in, to order a service or a product, a time window for the delivery
will have to be agreed upon. The chosen time window can not be changed in the future, and
the vehicle has to arrive at the customer before the end of the customer´s time window. It is
possible to arrive before the time window starts, but it will have to wait. The time windows
offered by the company are mostly three hours long 08:00-11:00, 11:00-14:00, 14:00-17:00 and
the last one four hours long 17:00-21:00 and are these the time window options considered by
the proposed method. In the dataset appear customers with longer time window such as 00:00-
17:00 or 00:00-21:00. These time windows were decided after the availability of the customer,
but for the proposed method it is not possible to assign customers other time windows than the
four options mentioned above.
The dataset provided by AMCS covers the customers scheduled within nine days and
specifically the days from the 28th of October 2015 to the 5th of November 2015. The number
of customers scheduled for each day varies from 117 customers on the 1st of November to 370
on the 4th of November. For the location of each customer, it is given the city, the postcode
and the X and Y coordinates in the Universal Transverse Mercator coordinate system (UTM).
UTM uses a 2-dimensional Cartesian system to give the location on the surface of the earth.
The UTM coordinates were used to calculate the Euclidean distance between the customers as
described in Equation 3.1. For each customer, the date and time of the call is also known as
well as the planned weight in kg and the planned volume in m2 of their order. Lastly, the exact
date and time of the arranged time window is given. An example of this dataset is shown in
Table 4.1. The customers are organized based on their time of their call.
Table 4.1: Example of the customer orders dataset.
City
Postcode
Created
Weight
(kg)
Volume
(m2)
Planned Time
Window From
Planned Time
Window To
Coord_X
Coord_Y
Køge
4600
28/10/2015 21:10
10.05
0.09
29/10/2015 14:00
29/10/2015 16:59
700377
6153232
Bramming
6740
28/10/2015 21:23
3.70
0.03
30/10/2015 14:00
30/10/2015 16:59
479272
6147346
Karise
4653
28/10/2015 21:59
7.28
0.04
30/10/2015 11:00
30/10/2015 13:59
702676
6134041
Roskilde
4000
29/10/2015 8:07
37.68
0.35
30/10/2015 11:00
30/10/2015 13:59
694624
6170897
==PAGE:41==
4.3 Structure of the results
31
4.3
Structure of the results
Initial tests
For testing the proposed methods, it was first decided to run the algorithms for the MDVRPTW,
the constructive heuristic together with the improvement heuristic for the initial data as offered
by AMCS.
In each day there were already assigned a number of customers with a specific time window
within they should be served. The total results with the number of customers in each day and
the proposed solution are shown in Table 4.2.
Table 4.2: Total results from the MDVRPTW.
Date
Nr of
Customers
Nr of
Routes
Total Distance
(km)
Customers/Route
km/Route
km/Customer
28-10-2015
253
29
5513.45
8.72
190.12
21.79
29-10-2015
281
34
6182.36
8.26
181.83
22.00
30-10-2015
245
35
5450.82
7.00
155.74
22.25
31-10-2015
212
26
5557.18
8.15
213.74
26.21
01-11-2015
117
17
3230.81
6.88
190.05
27.61
02-11-2015
187
22
3943.65
8.50
179.26
21.09
03-11-2015
325
30
6241.2
10.83
208.04
19.20
04-11-2015
370
34
6601.51
10.88
194.16
17.84
05-11-2015
185
22
4619.64
8.41
209.98
24.97
Average
241.7
27.67
5260.07
8.73
190.12
21.77
Min
117
17
3230.81
6.88
155.74
17.84
Max
370
35
6601.51
10.88
213.74
27.61
Table 4.2 shows that the program creates routes with average 8.73 customers per route,
where the fewer number of customers per route appears on 1/11/2015, the day in which there
are scheduled only 117 customers. On 4/11/2015 there are scheduled 370 customers, and the
program creates 34 routes with an average number of 10.88 customers per route. The average
distance per route in all days is 190.12 km, while the average km per customer are 21.77 km.
In overall from the Table 4.2 can be shown that the proposed heuristics for the MDVRPTW
perform quite well, by creating routes with a great number of customers.
Finding the optimal time window
The time windows of the customers influence a lot the solutions of the heuristics. This can be
seen from Table 4.3, where the heuristics were tested for the same dataset, but this time the
customers had no time window. The average number of routes has decreased from 27.67 to
19.11 routes and the average distance traveled has also reduced from 5260.07 km to 3844.87
==PAGE:42==
32
4 Testing
km. The average customers per route have increased to 12.65 customers, and the average km
per route has increased to 201.18 km. Thus, finding the optimal time window for the customers
can have a great impact on the solutions.
Table 4.3: Total results for the MDVRP.
Date
Nr of
Customers
Nr of
Routes
Total
Distance
(km)
Customers/
Route
km/Route
km/Customer
28-10-2015
253
21
4162.5
12.05
198.22
16.45
29-10-2015
281
22
4227.7
12.77
192.17
15.05
30-10-2015
245
19
4112.4
12.89
216.44
16.79
31-10-2015
212
18
3889.5
11.78
216.08
18.35
01-11-2015
117
12
2769.2
9.75
230.76
23.67
02-11-2015
187
14
3043.9
13.36
217.42
16.28
03-11-2015
325
25
4549.1
13.00
181.97
14.00
04-11-2015
370
27
4791.3
13.70
177.46
12.95
05-11-2015
185
14
3058.2
13.21
218.45
16.53
Average
241.7
19.11
3844.87
12.65
201.18
15.91
Min
117
12
2769.2
9.75
177.46
12.95
Max
370
27
4791.3
13.70
230.76
23.67
In order to test the proposed method for finding the optimal time window, several tests were
conducted. For each day, the program was tested for a number of customers already assigned
to a route and position and a number of customers that are appearing one by one and have to be
given a time window and a position in one route. The tests were performed for 10, 20, 30, 40,
50, 60, 70, 80, 90 and 100 customers already in the solution and 10, 20, and 30 new customers
that appear one by one and have to be assigned a time window.
In order to evaluate the consistency of the proposed method, for each instance three dif-
ferent alternative solutions are created, by using different random customers, which then are
compared to the number of routes used, the total traveled distance but also the similarity of
the routes. In order to evaluate the similarity of the routes, a point system was created. If a
customer is assigned to the same route and the same position in two alternative solutions, then
five points are given. If it is only assigned to the same route, it is given four points. It was
assumed that for the similarity of the routes, it is more important the route that a customer
belongs than the position. This was assumed because by adding an extra customer at the be-
ginning of a route and keeping the sequence of customers the same for the rest of the route,
resulted in quite dissimilar routes since all the customers had change position. But this was
not true since only one customer had been added at the beginning of the route. Then the points
were normalized to the size of the route, and a percentage of the similarity of the alternative
solutions was created.
==PAGE:43==
4.4 One day results
33
The solutions were also compared to the time windows that were assigning the customers.
The comparison checked both the similarity of the new time windows compared to the initial
ones, given by the data, as well as, the similarity between the three alternative solutions.
For each day in the dataset, the results were first clustered based on the total amount of
customers at the final solution. Taking, for example, a total number of 70 customers there
were created:
• One initial solution with all the customers known from the beginning with their time
window as given by the data.
• Three alternative solutions with 40 initial customers with their time window given by
the data and 30 customers appearing one by one and assigning them the optimal time
window as found by the proposed method, described in Chapter 3.4 (40+30).
• Three alternative solutions with 50 initial customers and 20 customers appearing one by
one and assigning them the optimal time window (50+20).
• Three alternative solutions with 60 initial customers and 10 customers appearing one by
one (60+10).
Each solution was evaluated by looking at the total number of routes and the total distance
traveled in km by all the vehicles. For each alternative, it was also calculated the number
and the percentage of equal time windows as given by the data and as given by the proposed
method when the optimal time window was given to the customers that appear one by one.
At this point it has to be mentioned that 28.23% of the customers had longer time window in
the initial data, such as 00:00-17:00 or 00:00-21:00. In these cases, if the proposed optimal time
window was inside the range of the initial time window, it was evaluated as equal. Moreover,
in even fewer cases some customers had slightly different time window than the original ones,
for example instead of 14:00-17:00, they had 15:30-17:00. In these cases, for the comparison
only with the new time windows, it was considered as 14:00-17:00 the initial time window or
similar to their closest time window in other cases.
4.4
One day results
First, the results taken for a single day will be analyzed. Table 4.4 shows as described, the
results for 70 total customers for the date 5/11/2015. Similar Tables 4.5 and 4.6 show the
results for 50 and 110 total customers respectively, for the same day 5/11/2015.
As shown from the tables, the proposed method in all the cases performs better than the
initial solution. The alternative solutions with the optimal time windows assigned to 10-30
customers were creating one to three fewer routes, which is the first objective function of
the program and in most of the cases, the total distance traveled was also less. For example,
when looking at Table 4.6, it can be observed that the initial solution was creating 18 routes
==PAGE:44==
34
4 Testing
Table 4.4: Results for the day 5/11/2015 for 70 total customers.
Date:
5/11/2015
Initial
Customers
Adding
Customers
Total
Customers
Nr of
Routes
Total
Distance
(km)
Initial Solution
70
70
14
2905.01
Equal TW
Equal TW %
Alternative a
40
30
70
11
2508.48
11
36.67%
Alternative b
40
30
70
12
2377.91
12
40.00%
Alternative c
40
30
70
11
2444.56
12
40.00%
Alternative a
50
20
70
14
2708.83
7
35.00%
Alternative b
50
20
70
14
2655.73
6
30.00%
Alternative c
50
20
70
14
2655.73
6
30.00%
Alternative a
60
10
70
13
2677.31
4
40.00%
Alternative b
60
10
70
13
2679.94
5
50.00%
Alternative c
60
10
70
12
2573.35
4
40.00%
Table 4.5: Results for the day 5/11/2015 for 50 total customers.
Date:
5/11/2015
Initial
Customers
Adding
Customers
Total
Customers
Nr of
Routes
Total
Distance
(km)
Initial Solution
50
50
12
2139.7
Equal TW
Equal TW %
Alternative a
20
30
50
11
2274.85
6
20.00%
Alternative b
20
30
50
11
2176.09
8
26.67%
Alternative c
20
30
50
10
2306.66
6
20.00%
Alternative a
30
20
50
10
1869.46
2
10.00%
Alternative b
30
20
50
9
1953.95
3
15.00%
Alternative c
30
20
50
11
2053.34
5
25.00%
Alternative a
40
10
50
9
1920.56
3
30.00%
Alternative b
40
10
50
9
1920.56
3
30.00%
Alternative c
40
10
50
9
1920.56
3
30.00%
which covered a total distance of 3501.1 km. On the other hand, the alternative solution a
when having 80 initial customers and 30 customers are added with the optimal time window
as found by the proposed method, creates 15 routes which cover a total distance of 3156.94 km.
This means it creates three routes less and the total distance of the routes is 344.16 km less.
From the 30 customers that were assigned the optimal time window 15 of them, 50%, were
assigned the same time window as it was given by the data and solved in the initial solution.
For the similarity of the initial time windows compared with the optimal time windows
created from the program, it can be observed by looking in the above tables that the percentage
of equal time windows varies regarding the amount of total customers. Specifically, with 50
total customers, the percentage of equal time windows was between 10%-30%. With 70 total
customers, the percentage raised to 30%-50% while with 110 customers the percentage climbed
to 43.33%-60%.
In order to analyze this further, but as well as to compare the similarity between the alterna-
==PAGE:45==
4.4 One day results
35
Table 4.6: Results for the day 5/11/2015 for 110 total customers.
Date:
5/11/2015
Initial
Customers
Adding
Customers
Total
Customers
Nr of
Routes
Total
Distance
(km)
Initial Solution
110
110
18
3501.1
Equal TW
Equal TW %
Alternative a
80
30
110
15
3156.94
15
50.00%
Alternative b
80
30
110
15
3211.6
15
50.00%
Alternative c
80
30
110
15
3178.53
13
43.33%
Alternative a
90
20
110
15
3134.27
11
55.00%
Alternative b
90
20
110
15
3149.38
10
50.00%
Alternative c
90
20
110
15
3149.38
10
50.00%
Alternative a
100
10
110
16
3625.76
6
60.00%
Alternative b
100
10
110
16
3625.76
6
60.00%
Alternative c
100
10
110
16
3625.76
6
60.00%
tive solutions, the results were grouped differently. First, the results were clustered based on
the number of customers that are added one by one. Three tables were created: one for solu-
tions where 10 customers were added after the initial ones, one for 20 added customers and one
for 30 customers. Moreover, the tables were extended with some extra columns to evaluate
the similarity between the alternative solutions in each case. These columns are representing
the number and the percentage of equal proposed time windows between alternative a and b,
a and c, b and c as well as between a, b and c at the same time. In addition, there are presented
the percentages of equal routes as created by the point system that was described before. The
tables are included in Appendix A.
The tables presented in Appendix A were created in order observe if there are similarities
or differences in the behavior of the proposed method based on the number of customers that
are added to the solution with the use of the method described in Chapter 3.4. First, there were
compared the average values of the equal time windows between the proposed optimal time
windows and the initial time windows given by the data. The average percentages of equal time
windows are 36.67%, 37.12% and 37.98% for adding 10, 20 and 30 customers respectively,
which shows that the proposed optimal time window does not depend on the number of the
customers that are added with this method.
From the same Tables A.1, A.2 and A.3 it is more interesting to observe the similarity
between the three alternative solutions (a, b, and c) in each case. As mentioned before every
time the method is tested, there are created three alternative solutions for the same instance to
examine the consistency of the proposed method. The similarity of three alternative solutions
is analyzed by using a point system described earlier in this chapter. The average similarity of
the alternatives when adding 10 customers is 90.42% when adding 20 customers is 85.64% and
when adding 30 customers is 81.06%. Thus, the more customers added one by one with the
proposed method, by using the optimal time windows found in each case, the more different
are becoming the alternative solutions in each instance.
The next step was to analyze the influence of the total number of customers in the proposed
method. Thus, the results were grouped once again based on the number of total customers
==PAGE:46==
36
4 Testing
into two big groups. The first group contained the instances with 20-70 total customers, while
the second group contained the instances with 80-120 total customers.
The results show now the influence of the total amount of customers in the similarity of the
proposed alternative solutions. When there are 20 to 70 customers in the solution the similarity
of the proposed time windows compared with the initial time windows given by the data is
25.67%. While when there are 80 to 120 customers in the solution, the percentage of equal
time windows is rising to 46.91%. Moreover, the similarity between the three alternatives
solutions in each case is increasing when there are more customers in the solution. For 20 to
70 total customers the average similarity between the alternatives is 75.56% while for 80 to 120
the average similarity is 94.17%. This can also be observed by looking at Table 4.7 which is an
extension of Table 4.6 containing the results for the similarity between the alternative solutions.
In Table 4.7 can be observed that in the instance that there are 100 initial customers and 10
customers are added with the proposed method, the three alternative solutions are exactly the
same, 100% equal.
Table 4.7: Full results for the day 5/11/2015 for 110 total customers.
Date:
5/11/2015
Initial
Cust
Adding
Cust
Total
Cust
Nr of
Routes
Total
Distance
(km)
Equality of Time Windows
Equality of Routes
Initial
Solution
110
110
18
3501.1
Equal TW
a-b
Equal TW
a-c
Equal TW
b-c
Equal TW
a-b-c
a-b
a-c
b-c
Alternative a
80
30
110
15
3156.94
25
83%
26
87%
21
70%
21
70%
86%
93%
84%
Alternative b
80
30
110
15
3211.6
Alternative c
80
30
110
15
3178.53
Alternative a
90
20
110
15
3134.27
19
95%
19
95%
20
100%
19
95%
99%
99%
100%
Alternative b
90
20
110
15
3149.38
Alternative c
90
20
110
15
3149.38
Alternative a
100
10
110
16
3625.76
10
100%
10
100%
10
100%
10
100%
100%
100%
100%
Alternative b
100
10
110
16
3625.76
Alternative c
100
10
110
16
3625.76
A graphical illustration of the solutions was also created. Figure 4.1 shows the initial
solution for the day 3/11/2015 with 20 total customers. It was chosen an instance with a few
customers in order to be as clear as possible. The depots are shown with a square while the
customers are illustrated with a circle.
When implementing the proposed time windows, in the one depot the alternative solution
creates one route less. This happens by changing the time window of two customers and
serving all four customers in that depot from the same vehicle. The initial and the alternative
solution for depot one are shown in Figure 4.2 and 4.3.
In depot two even though there are in both solutions two routes, can be seen that by chang-
ing the time window of 6 customers the routes are traveling around 130 km less. The difference
in the solutions is illustrated in Figures 4.4 and 4.5.
The method was tested for all the days in the dataset from 28/10/2015 to 5/11/2015 in
order to observe if the proposed method was performing in the same way as described in the
previous chapter. After running the program for all the instances in every day, there were
observed some cases that the alternative solutions with the proposed method were reaching
==PAGE:47==
4.4 One day results
37
Figure 4.1: Graphical illustration of initial solution for day 3/11/2015 with 20 customers.
Figure 4.2: Initial solution for depot
1.
Figure 4.3: Alternative solution for
depot 1.
slightly worse results than the initial solution. For example, in the case of 110 total customers
for the day 3/11/2015, it can be seen from the Table 4.8 that for the instance of having 100 initial
customers and adding 10 with the proposed method all three alternative solutions are worse
than the initial one. All the alternative solutions are creating one more route than the initial,
18 instead of 17, and the total distance is higher than the initial as well. The total distance in
the initial solution is 3465.59 km while in alternative a the total distance is 3855.32 km and
in alternatives b and c is 3858.77 km.
In another case, in the day 29/10/2015 for the instances with 50 total customers the alter-
native solutions were even worse. The results are presented in Table 4.9 and can be observed
that in almost all the instances the alternative solutions are creating the same amount of routes
as the initial solution or even two routes more, like in the instance with 20 initial customers
and 30 added with the proposed method, where the alternative solution c is creating 13 routes
and the initial only 11. Moreover, in the instances with 40 initial customers and 10 added with
the proposed time window, the alternative solutions create not only one more route but also
the total distance is around 260 km more than the initial solution.
==PAGE:48==
38
4 Testing
Figure 4.4: Initial solution for depot
2.
Figure 4.5: Alternative solution for
depot 2.
Table 4.8: Results for the day 3/11/2015 for 110 total customers.
Date:
3/11/2015
Initial
Customers
Adding
Customers
Total
Customers
Nr of
Routes
Total
Distance
(km)
Initial Solution
110
110
17
3465.59
Equal TW
Equal TW %
Alternative a
80
30
110
17
3779.91
10
33.33%
Alternative b
80
30
110
16
3722.58
9
30.00%
Alternative c
80
30
110
17
3766.35
10
33.33%
Alternative a
90
20
110
16
3830.14
7
35.00%
Alternative b
90
20
110
16
3836.51
6
30.00%
Alternative c
90
20
110
17
3914.7
5
25.00%
Alternative a
100
10
110
18
3855.32
5
50.00%
Alternative b
100
10
110
18
3858.77
6
60.00%
Alternative c
100
10
110
18
3858.77
6
60.00%
4.5
Evaluation of the solutions
In order to evaluate the performance of the proposed method, it was considered useful to ob-
serve the average results of all the days in the dataset for each instance separately.
The average results for the number of routes are shown in Table 4.10. From Table 4.10 it
can be noticed that when looking at the average performance during the whole dataset of the
proposed method, in almost all the instances the method is creating fewer routes than the initial
solution. When adding 10 customers with the optimal time window the method is creating on
average -0.68 routes less. Respectively when adding 20 customers the alternative solutions
create on average -0.87 routes less and when adding 30 customers with the proposed time
window -0.97 routes less. Thus, the more customers that are added with the optimal time
window, the fewer routes are created from the proposed method. By looking at the averages of
all instances, it can be concluded that the proposed method is creating on average fewer routes
than the initial solution.
==PAGE:49==
4.5 Evaluation of the solutions
39
Table 4.9: Results for the day 29/10/2015 for 50 total customers.
Date:
29/10/2015
Initial
Customers
Adding
Customers
Total
Customers
Nr of
Routes
Total
Distance
(km)
Initial solution
50
50
11
2291.07
Equal TW
Equal TW %
Alternative a
20
30
50
12
2237.39
7
23.33%
Alternative b
20
30
50
12
2215.89
7
23.33%
Alternative c
20
30
50
13
2276.44
8
26.67%
Alternative a
30
20
50
12
2298.36
7
35.00%
Alternative b
30
20
50
12
2297.94
7
35.00%
Alternative c
30
20
50
11
2285.92
5
25.00%
Alternative a
40
10
50
12
2558.44
2
20.00%
Alternative b
40
10
50
12
2558.01
2
20.00%
Alternative c
40
10
50
12
2558.44
2
20.00%
Table 4.10: Average number of routes for each instance.
Total
Nr of
Customers
Initial
Solution
Adding 10
Adding 20
Adding 30
Nr of
Routes
Nr of
Routes
Difference
Nr of
Routes
Difference
Nr of
Routes
Difference
20
6.44
5.67
-0.78
30
8.11
7.52
-0.59
7.44
-0.67
40
9.44
8.63
-0.81
8.93
-0.52
9.44
0.00
50
11.56
10.33
-1.22
10.26
-1.30
10.56
-1.00
60
13.11
11.96
-1.15
11.63
-1.48
11.15
-1.96
70
14.11
13.33
-0.78
12.78
-1.33
12.74
-1.37
80
14.22
14.22
0.00
13.67
-0.56
13.48
-0.74
90
15.22
15.22
0.00
14.96
-0.26
14.48
-0.74
100
16.33
15.63
-0.70
16.00
-0.33
15.63
-0.70
110
17.22
16.44
-0.78
16.04
-1.19
16.37
-0.85
120
18.38
17.29
-1.08
17.00
-1.38
Average
Difference
-0.68
-0.87
-0.97
The same table was created for the average total distances of the initial and alternative so-
lutions, which is shown in Table 4.11. When looking at the table, it can be noticed that the
average difference in the total distance for each number of customers added with the optimal
time window, has high correlation with the respective average difference in the number of
routes. The average difference in the total distance of the routes compared with the initial solu-
tion is -40.86 km when adding 10 customers with the optimal time window and -72.91 km and
-90.97 km when adding 20 and 30 customers respectively with the optimal time window. But
==PAGE:50==
40
4 Testing
there are many instances that the alternative solutions with the proposed method are creating
on average solutions with higher total distance than the initial solution. This result can be ex-
plained by the fact that the first and most important objective of the program is to minimize the
number of routes. In order to achieve this, it can create fewer routes with higher total distance.
Table 4.11: Average distance traveled by all vehicles for each instance.
Total
Nr of
Customers
Initial
Solution
Adding 10
Adding 20
Adding 30
Total
Distance
(km)
Total
Distance
(km)
Difference
Total
Distance
(km)
Difference
Total
Distance
(km)
Difference
20
1125.17
1083.31
-41.86
30
1485.24
1432.09
-53.15
1412.75
-72.49
40
1762.06
1699.36
-62.70
1720.11
-41.95
1774.66
12.61
50
2007.48
2010.67
3.19
2000.86
-6.62
2052.85
45.37
60
2403.38
2233.45
-169.93
2298.42
-104.96
2284.91
-118.47
70
2761.78
2591.42
-170.36
2483.53
-278.25
2547.80
-213.98
80
2830.08
2857.18
27.10
2739.82
-90.26
2641.17
-188.91
90
3228.54
3180.66
-47.88
3018.49
-210.05
2970.40
-258.15
100
3381.93
3357.49
-24.45
3344.76
-37.18
3215.37
-166.57
110
3436.33
3567.73
131.40
3510.98
74.65
3489.08
52.75
120
3736.57
3774.57
38.01
3753.20
16.64
Average
Difference
-40.86
-72.91
-90.97
In order to get a better overview of the performance of the proposed method, it was also
calculated the standard deviation of the number of routes that the alternative solutions are
creating. The standard deviation shows how much spread are the data around the mean value.
For each case, the standard deviation was calculated based on the Equation 4.1.
σ =
√∑(x −µ)2
n −1
(4.1)
, where σ is the standard deviation, µ is the mean value, x is the sample and n is the sample
size.
With the use of the mean value and the standard deviation, the normal distribution of the
results for each instance was then calculated. The normal distribution was calculated based on
the Equation 4.2.
f(x, µ, σ) =
1
σ
√
2πe−( (x−µ)2
2σ2
)
(4.2)
There were created the distributions graphs of the solutions for all the examined instances
and some of them are presented below while the rest can be found in Appendix B. For the
==PAGE:51==
4.5 Evaluation of the solutions
41
distribution figures it was considered more useful to calculate the difference in the number
of routes created by the alternative solutions with some customers having the optimal time
window as found by the proposed method, and the initial solution. In this way, all the instances
will have the same numbers in the x-axis.
First, the distributions for 20 total customers when 10 customers are added with the optimal
time window are presented in Figure 4.6 and for 40 total customers when 30 of them have the
optimal time window in Figure 4.7. For the first instance the mean value was -0.78 routes,
and from the distribution in Figure 4.6, it can be seen that the results follow an almost normal
distribution around -1, slightly shifted to the right. On the other hand, in the second instance the
mean value was 0, and from Figure 4.7, it can be observed a normal distribution of the results
around 0 with a high standard deviation of 2.21, which was the highest standard deviation
found in the instances. Thus, there is the same probability of creating worse or better solutions
with more or fewer number of routes respectively.
Figure 4.6: Distribution of results for 20 total
customers, adding 10.
Figure 4.7: Distribution of results for 40 total
customers, adding 30.
In instances with a total number of customers between 50 and 70 there were observed the
lowest average difference in the number of routes created by the alternative solutions compared
with the initial one. It can be seen that the distribution in Figure 4.8, for 60 total customers
when 30 are added with the proposed optimal time window has moved towards more negative
values. In this instance, there is almost 35% probability of creating a solution with two routes
less compared to the initial one. Moreover, instances that are added only 10 customers with
the proposed time window are appearing to have low standard deviation as the instance for 90
total customers presented in Figure 4.9.
Moving to instances with an even greater number of customers the distributions are once
again like normal distributions, but this time the peak of graphs lies in the -1 route. The dis-
tributions for 110 and 120 total customers when 20 and 30 customers are added respectively
with the optimal time window are shown in Figures 4.10 and 4.11. This is also in accordance
with the mean values of the instances that were presented in Table 4.10, and are -1.19 for the
instance with 110 customers and -1.38 for the instance with 120 total customers.
==PAGE:52==
42
4 Testing
Figure 4.8: Distribution of results for 60 total
customers, adding 30.
Figure 4.9: Distribution of results for 90 total
customers, adding 10.
Figure 4.10: Distribution of results for 110 to-
tal customers, adding 20.
Figure 4.11: Distribution of results for 120 to-
tal customers, adding 30.
Lastly, there were gathered all the results together for all the instances and available days in
order to examine the overall performance of the proposed method. The distribution is presented
in Figure 4.12. It can be observed that the proposed method has higher probability of generating
solutions with -1 route with 29.04%, and 23.56% probability of creating the same amount of
routes. Overall there is around 15% probability of creating solutions with more routes than the
initial one, 23.5% probability of creating solutions with the same amount of routes and 61.5%
probability of creating better solutions with a fewer number of routes compared to the initial
solution.
The alternative solutions were also compared with the initial solution at the time windows
of the customers. The time windows that were found by the proposed method were compared
with the time windows that were given by the dataset. All the available days and instances for
each day were taken into account and the average percentages of equal time windows between
the time windows given by the data and the time windows found by the proposed method were
calculated. The results are presented in Table 4.12.
From the Table 4.12, it can be observed from the average equality in the last line that
the average equality of the time window is independent of the number of customers that are
==PAGE:53==
4.5 Evaluation of the solutions
43
Figure 4.12: Overall distribution of results for all the instances together.
Table 4.12: Equality of time windows with the initial data.
Nr of
Customers
Adding 10
Adding 20
Adding 30
Average
20
23.70%
23.70%
30
32.96%
26.85%
29.91%
40
31.85%
34.44%
28.89%
31.73%
50
28.89%
28.89%
32.59%
30.12%
60
28.52%
30.93%
28.15%
29.20%
70
27.41%
29.44%
31.11%
29.32%
80
44.81%
34.81%
33.09%
37.57%
90
39.63%
45.74%
38.52%
41.30%
100
52.96%
48.15%
47.53%
49.55%
110
56.67%
52.96%
50.12%
53.25%
120
57.71%
51.81%
54.76%
Average
36.74%
38.99%
37.98%
added with the proposed method. When adding 10, 20 and 30 customers with the optimal time
window the average percentage of equal time windows with the initial ones given by the data is
36.74%, 38.99%, and 37.98% respectively. This had also been observed earlier when looking
the results only for one day, the 5/11/2015.
On the other hand, the total number of customers that are in the solution influences the
selection of the optimal time window, as can be seen from the right column of the same table
with the average percentages of equal time windows for each instance with the same amount of
total customers. From this column, it can be observed that when there are 20 to 70 customers
==PAGE:54==
44
4 Testing
in the solution, the average amount of equal time windows varies from 23.70% to 31.73%. On
the contrary, when there are 80 to 120 customers in the solution the average number of equal
time windows range between 37.57% to 54.76%. This means that the more customers are in
the solutions, the more the optimal time window complies with the time window given by the
dataset.
The next step was to evaluate the similarity of routes in the three alternative solutions that
are created in each case. Again, the average similarity of the routes for each instance was
calculated when taking into account all the available days in the dataset. The results are shown
in the Table 4.13. The similarity between the routes of the alternative solutions was evaluated
based on a point system described earlier in this chapter.
Table 4.13: Average similarity of routes between the tree alternative solutions.
Nr of
Customers
Adding 10
Adding 20
Adding 30
Average
20
86.52%
86.52%
30
88.70%
83.26%
85.98%
40
95.96%
79.30%
76.52%
83.93%
50
94.00%
87.44%
71.59%
84.35%
60
96.48%
87.44%
81.41%
88.44%
70
93.89%
92.41%
80.30%
88.86%
80
97.26%
91.33%
87.26%
91.95%
90
97.96%
94.33%
86.63%
92.98%
100
97.07%
90.48%
88.52%
92.02%
110
96.70%
92.00%
85.30%
91.33%
120
92.63%
89.83%
91.23%
Average
94.46%
89.06%
83.04%
From Table 4.13 can be observed that the number of customers added with the proposed
method influences the similarity of the routes in the alternative solutions. When adding only
10 customers with the optimal time window, the average similarity between the alternative
solutions is quite high reaching an average value of 94.46%. The average similarity of routes
is decreasing as more customers are added with the proposed method. When adding 20 cus-
tomers, the average similarity of routes between the three alternative solutions is declining to
89.06%, and when adding 30 customers, it decreases even more to 83.04%.
On the other hand, the total amount of customers influences less the similarity of the routes
between the alternative solutions. It can be observed from the right column of the Table 4.13,
that when there are 20 to 70 customers in the solution the average similarity of the routes
fluctuates between 83.93% and 88.86%. With a greater number of customers in the solution,
from 80 to 120, the average similarity of the routes varies between 91.23% and 92.98%. The
difference is quite small, and the average percentage does not constantly increase as increases
==PAGE:55==
4.5 Evaluation of the solutions
45
the number of customers in the solution. Thus, it can be concluded that the amount of customers
in the solution has a small impact in the similarity of routes between the alternative solutions.
The alternative solutions were also compared on the equality of the optimal time windows
that were found with the proposed method. Tables 4.14 and 4.15 show the average amount
of equal time windows between two and three alternative solutions respectively. From both
tables, it can be observed that the amount of customers that are added with the proposed method
influences the number of equal time windows between the alternative solutions. When adding
10, 20 and 30 customers with the proposed method, the average amount of equal time windows
between two alternative solutions is 88.19%, 84.35% and 80.56% as shown from Table 4.14.
Respectively the average amount of equal time windows between three alternative solutions
is 82.78%, 77.49%, and 72.14%. Thus, the more customers that are added with the proposed
method, the less their time windows are equal. This is in accordance also with the observation
from Table 4.13, which means that the alternative solutions become more dissimilar as more
customers are added with the optimal time window found by the proposed method.
Table 4.14: Average similarity of optimal time window between two alternative solutions.
Nr of
Customers
Adding 10
Adding 20
Adding 30
Average
20
77.04%
77.04%
30
82.22%
74.44%
78.33%
40
86.67%
77.04%
72.59%
78.77%
50
89.26%
81.48%
72.96%
81.23%
60
86.30%
81.67%
75.56%
81.17%
70
87.41%
85.19%
76.42%
83.00%
80
93.70%
87.22%
84.07%
88.33%
90
92.59%
89.81%
84.07%
88.83%
100
93.33%
86.48%
86.91%
88.91%
110
93.33%
90.56%
83.58%
89.16%
120
89.58%
88.89%
89.24%
Average
88.19%
84.35%
80.56%
Moreover, from both tables can be observed that the number of customers in the solution
also influences the average equality of the time windows. In both cases, the average number
of equal time windows is quite small when there are only 20 customers in the solution and
constantly increases as the method is tested in instances with a greater number of customers.
More specifically, from the right column in Table 4.14, can be seen that the average amount
of equal time windows between two alternative solutions starts from 77.04% when there are
20 customers in the solution and constantly rises until 89.24% of average equal time windows
when there are 120 customers in the solution. Respectively in Table 4.15 the average amount
of equal time windows between the three alternative solutions starts from 66.67% when there
are 20 customers in the solution and rises until 84.06% when there are 120 customers.
==PAGE:56==
46
4 Testing
Table 4.15: Average similarity of optimal time window between three alternative solutions.
Nr of
Customers
Adding 10
Adding 20
Adding 30
Average
20
66.67%
66.67%
30
74.44%
63.89%
69.17%
40
80.00%
67.22%
61.11%
69.44%
50
84.44%
72.78%
61.85%
73.02%
60
80.00%
74.44%
65.19%
73.21%
70
82.22%
78.33%
66.67%
75.74%
80
91.11%
81.67%
76.67%
83.15%
90
88.89%
85.56%
77.04%
83.83%
100
90.00%
80.56%
81.11%
83.89%
110
90.00%
86.11%
75.93%
84.01%
120
84.38%
83.75%
84.06%
Average
82.78%
77.49%
72.14%
This observation can be interpreted as when there are few customers in the solution, the five
random customers that are used to find the optimal time window influence a lot the selection of
time windows. That is why the average equality of the time windows between the alternative
solutions is quite small for a small amount of total customers. On the other hand, as the number
of customers in the solution increases the five random customers do not influence the selection
of the time window so much and the optimal time windows become on average more equal
between the alternative solutions.
Lastly, the average total results for each number of total customers are presented in Table
4.16. For each number of total customers, it was calculated the average value of all alternatives
of all instances, irrespectively of the amount of customers that were added with the optimal
time window, and were compared with the initial solutions. In all the cases, the average alterna-
tive solutions are creating fewer number of routes which also travel less distance. Moreover,
the amount of customers per route is increasing as well as the kilometers per route, and the
kilometers per customers are slightly decreasing. This indicates the overall good performance
of the proposed method. In order to get a limit benchmark for the solutions in Appendix C can
be found Table C.1, where the average results for the same amount of customers without time
window are presented.
For each instance, the average computational time that required to build the alternative so-
lutions was also calculated. The three alternative solutions in each instance are built in parallel.
Thus, the computational time that is required to create one is the one-third, as presented in Ta-
ble 4.17. The computational times were varying a lot for the same instances for different dates,
thus there are shown the average times. From Table 4.17 can be seen that the computational
times are increasing fast as increases the total number of customers in the solution. Moreover,
the more customers that are added with the proposed method, the more time is required to
come to a solution.
==PAGE:57==
4.5 Evaluation of the solutions
47
Table 4.16: Average total results.
Total
Nr of
Customers
Nr of
Routes
Total
Distance (km)
Customers/
Route
km/Route
km/Customer
Initial
Average
New
Initial
Average
New
Initial
Average
New
Initial
Average
New
Initial
Average
New
20
6.44
5.67
1125.2
1083.3
3.10
3.53
174.6
191.2
56.3
54.2
30
8.11
7.48
1485.2
1422.4
3.70
4.01
183.1
190.1
49.5
47.4
40
9.44
9.00
1762.1
1731.4
4.24
4.44
186.6
192.4
44.1
43.3
50
11.56
10.38
2007.5
2021.5
4.33
4.82
173.7
194.7
40.1
40.4
60
13.11
11.58
2403.4
2272.3
4.58
5.18
183.3
196.2
40.1
37.9
70
14.11
12.95
2761.8
2540.9
4.96
5.41
195.7
196.2
39.5
36.3
80
14.22
13.79
2830.1
2746.1
5.63
5.80
199.0
199.1
35.4
34.3
90
15.22
14.89
3228.5
3056.5
5.91
6.04
212.1
205.3
35.9
34.0
100
16.33
15.75
3381.9
3305.9
6.12
6.35
207.1
209.9
33.8
33.1
110
17.22
16.28
3436.3
3522.6
6.39
6.76
199.5
216.3
31.2
32.0
120
18.38
17.15
3736.6
3763.9
6.53
7.00
203.4
219.5
31.1
31.4
Average
13.10
12.27
2559.9
2497.0
5.04
5.39
192.5
201.0
39.7
38.6
Min
6.44
5.67
1125.2
1083.3
3.10
3.53
173.7
190.1
31.1
31.4
Max
18.38
17.15
3736.6
3763.9
6.53
7.00
212.1
219.5
56.3
54.2
Table 4.17: Computational times.
Total
Nr of
Customers
Computational Times in Seconds for
Creating three
alternative solutions
Creating one
alternative solution
Adding
10
Adding
20
Adding
30
Adding
10
Adding
20
Adding
30
20
17
5.7
30
31.5
42.5
10.5
14.2
40
73.3
76.5
88.9
24.4
25.5
29.6
50
100.9
165.8
189.3
33.6
55.3
63.1
60
142.4
237.5
335.3
47.5
79.2
111.8
70
148.1
408.2
412.9
49.4
136.1
137.6
80
223.7
479.1
589.2
74.6
159.7
196.4
90
339.9
652.2
813.5
113.3
217.4
271.2
100
552.7
877.3
1123.8
184.2
292.4
374.6
110
765.4
1201.2
1477.1
255.1
400.4
492.4
120
1704.5
2024.7
568.2
674.9
==PAGE:58==
48
==PAGE:59==
CHAPTER 5
Conclusion
The cost of transportation is a factor that influences many companies that either are focused
on delivering products or services or the distribution of goods is part of their business. Thus,
minimizing transportation costs is a key challenge for many companies and a problem that has
been researched the last years widely.
In attended deliveries, where the customer has to be present at the place of delivery to
receive the product, the time window that will be agreed on for the delivery has a great impact
on the transportation costs of the companies. It also has a great impact for the quality of service
perceived for the customer. In this thesis, it was examined how the delivery companies can find
the optimal time window to propose to their customers in order to minimize their transportation
costs.
The main factors that influence more the transportation costs are the number of vehicles
used and the total distance that they travel. In this thesis, the first and most important objective
was to minimize the number of vehicles, which is associated directly with the number of drivers
needed and their salary payment. The second objective was to minimize the total traveled
distance of the vehicles which is linked with the fuel required for the vehicles.
In order to create a method that will find the optimal time window for the company, it was
first necessary to build a model that solves the vehicle routing problem with time windows. It
was decided to create a model for the Multi-Depot Vehicle Routing Problem with Time Win-
dows since many companies nowadays in order to offer better customer service and minimize
their transportation cost are using more than one depot for their deliveries.
The problem was proposed by AMCS, a company that creates transport optimization so-
lutions. They also provided real-life data to test the proposed method for finding the optimal
time window.
First, a heuristic was created in order to solve the MDVRPTW. It was based on a construc-
tive heuristic and an improvement heuristic that create solutions with the minimum number
of routes where the vehicles travel as less distance as possible. For finding the optimal time
window to propose to the customers, a method was created that takes into account not only
the existing customers but also some that might call in and ask for a delivery in the future.
This was performed by creating and adding to a temporary solution random customers that
represented the customers that might appear in the future. The optimal time window found by
the proposed method, was chosen from a set of four time windows during the day. Then the
solutions with the proposed optimal time windows were compared with the initial solutions
where the time windows were given by the data.
The proposed method was tested for many real-life instances with data from different days
and different number of customers. From the overall results, it can be concluded that the pro-
==PAGE:60==
50
5 Conclusion
posed algorithm was performing quite well, by creating in most of the cases fewer routes. More
specifically, there was an overall 61.5% probability of creating fewer routes. From this per-
centage, 29% was creating one route less, 21% was creating two routes less, 8.9% was creating
three routes less and finally 2.2% was creating four routes less in the solution. There was also
an overall probability of 23.5% of creating the same amount of routes as in the initial solution
and 15% probability of generating a solution with more routes compared with the initial one.
With the proposed time window to 10 to 30 customers in the solutions, the total distance trav-
eled was also in overall decreased, by an average of 63 km. The decrease was small since the
first objective was to minimize the number of routes, which could mean choosing time win-
dows that would reduce the number of routes even if they increase the total distance traveled
by the vehicles.
5.1
Future work
For further research work after this thesis, some suggestions could be made. Firstly, the vehi-
cle routing problem in the thesis is solved with a constructive and an improvement heuristic.
Even though it creates good results sometimes the local optimal found may be far away from
the global optimal of the solution. A meta-heuristic could be implemented for the examined
problem, that would yield to the global optimal solutions and would make the selection of the
time window more accurate.
Moreover, for finding the optimal time window that would also consider future customers,
it was chosen in this thesis to use five extra random customers. It could also be investigated
using a different number of random customers and examine the new results. Furthermore,
instead of random customers, historic data from the company could be used to make a better
prediction.
Finally, it could be examined the possibility of assigning to the customers a wider range
of time windows. In this thesis, there were considered as time window options, only the four
time windows that the company currently uses. Thus, it could also be examined the possibility
of having more time window options that would overlap each other and would give more
flexibility in the time window assignment process.
==PAGE:61==
APPENDIX A
Part A
A.1
Similarity of routes for one day
Table A.1: Similarity of routes for 5/11/2015 when adding 10 customers.
Total
Customers
Nr of
Routes
Total
Distance
Equality of TimeWindows
Equality of routes
Equality of routes
Equal TW
Equal TW %
Equal TW
a-b
Equal TW
a-c
Equal TW
b-c
Equal TW
a-b-c
a-b
a-c
b-c
20
5
1042.06
2
20%
6
60%
5
50%
9
90%
5
50%
65%
62%
91%
20
5
1015.22
1
10%
20
5
1014.51
1
10%
30
7
1462.63
2
20%
6
60%
9
90%
5
50%
5
50%
45%
90%
47%
30
7
1338.62
3
30%
30
7
1436.3
3
30%
40
8
1718.14
2
20%
8
80%
7
70%
7
70%
6
60%
77%
87%
88%
40
8
1824.97
3
30%
40
9
1786.41
2
20%
50
9
1920.56
3
30%
10
100%
10
100%
10
100%
10
100%
100%
100%
100%
50
9
1920.56
3
30%
50
9
1920.56
3
30%
60
12
2326.78
3
30%
8
80%
8
80%
10
100%
8
80%
87%
87%
100%
60
12
2275.79
2
20%
60
12
2275.79
2
20%
70
13
2677.31
4
40%
8
80%
9
90%
9
90%
8
80%
86%
92%
94%
70
13
2679.94
5
50%
70
12
2573.35
4
40%
80
14
2986.35
7
70%
10
100%
10
100%
10
100%
10
100%
100%
100%
100%
80
14
2986.35
7
70%
80
14
2986.35
7
70%
90
15
2976.69
3
30%
10
100%
9
90%
9
90%
9
90%
100%
100%
100%
90
15
2976.69
3
30%
90
15
2976.76
2
20%
100
15
3106.26
4
40%
10
100%
10
100%
10
100%
10
100%
100%
100%
100%
100
15
3106.26
4
40%
100
15
3106.26
4
40%
110
16
3625.76
6
60%
10
100%
10
100%
10
100%
10
100%
100%
100%
100%
110
16
3625.76
6
60%
110
16
3625.76
6
60%
160
19
4212.2
4
40%
10
100%
7
70%
7
70%
7
70%
100%
93%
93%
160
19
4212.2
4
40%
160
19
4231.82
6
60%
Average:
3.67
36.67%
8.73
87.27%
8.55
85.45%
8.73
87.27%
8.00
80.00%
87.27%
91.91%
92.09%
==PAGE:62==
52
A Part A
Table A.2: Similarity of routes for 5/11/2015 when adding 10 customers.
Total
Customers
Nr of
Routes
Total
Distance
Equality of TimeWindows
Equality of routes
Equality of routes
Equal TW
Equal TW %
Equal TW
a-b
Equal TW
a-c
Equal TW
b-c
Equal TW
a-b-c
a-b
a-c
b-c
30
7
1466.92
4
20%
12
60%
14
70%
16
80%
11
55%
63%
69%
73%
30
7
1298.87
5
25%
30
8
1488.92
4
20%
40
9
1767.74
5
25%
13
65%
17
85%
12
60%
11
55%
46%
94%
45%
40
9
1773.23
6
30%
40
9
1757.21
5
25%
50
10
1869.46
2
10%
17
85%
9
45%
10
50%
8
40%
78%
62%
56%
50
9
1953.95
3
15%
50
11
2053.34
5
25%
60
10
2190.9
6
30%
18
90%
19
95%
19
95%
18
90%
92%
93%
92%
60
10
2077.96
6
30%
60
9
2095.42
7
35%
70
14
2708.83
7
35%
16
80%
16
80%
20
100%
16
80%
88%
88%
100%
70
14
2655.73
6
30%
70
14
2655.73
6
30%
80
14
2848.69
12
60%
17
85%
18
90%
17
85%
16
80%
87%
85%
83%
80
13
2713.03
13
65%
80
13
2745.99
13
65%
90
14
3050.05
10
50%
18
90%
19
95%
19
95%
18
90%
95%
99%
90%
90
14
3050.87
10
50%
90
14
3047.63
11
55%
100
15
3005.27
8
40%
20
100%
16
80%
16
80%
16
80%
100%
87%
87%
100
15
3005.27
8
40%
100
15
3017.14
6
30%
110
15
3134.27
11
55%
19
95%
19
95%
20
100%
19
95%
99%
99%
100%
110
15
3149.38
10
50%
110
15
3149.38
10
50%
120
17
3881.59
8
40%
19
95%
19
95%
20
100%
19
95%
93%
93%
100%
120
16
3847.56
8
40%
120
16
3847.56
8
40%
170
20
4198.02
8
40%
18
90%
19
95%
19
95%
18
90%
94%
99%
97%
170
20
4157.49
7
35%
170
20
4198.4
7
35%
Average:
7.42
37.12%
17
85.00%
16.82
84.09%
17.09
85.45%
15.45
77.27%
85.00%
88.00%
83.91%
==PAGE:63==
A.1 Similarity of routes for one day
53
Table A.3: Similarity of routes for 5/11/2015 when adding 30 customers.
Total
Customers
Nr of
Routes
Total
Distance
Equality of TimeWindows
Equality of routes
Equality of routes
Equal TW
Equal TW %
Equal TW
a-b
Equal TW
a-c
Equal TW
b-c
Equal TW
a-b-c
a-b
a-c
b-c
40
10
2134.7
5
16,67%
18
60%
19
63%
23
77%
15
50%
38%
70%
45%
40
9
1680.85
6
20,00%
40
10
2098.99
6
20,00%
50
11
2274.85
6
20,00%
18
60%
24
80%
17
57%
15
50%
38%
85%
40%
50
11
2176.09
8
26,67%
50
10
2306.66
6
20,00%
60
10
2222.38
4
13,33%
24
80%
12
40%
12
40%
9
30%
76%
57%
59%
60
10
2131.01
5
16,67%
60
12
2336.19
6
20,00%
70
11
2508.48
11
36,67%
24
80%
28
93%
26
87%
24
80%
76%
90%
89%
70
12
2377.91
12
40,00%
70
11
2444.56
12
40,00%
80
14
2844.08
15
50,00%
26
87%
26
87%
30
100%
26
87%
88%
88%
100%
80
14
2789.06
14
46,67%
80
14
2789.06
14
46,67%
90
14
3041.1
16
53,33%
26
87%
27
90%
25
83%
24
80%
87%
78%
77%
90
14
2988.68
16
53,33%
90
13
2936.51
16
53,33%
100
14
3102.94
14
46,67%
27
90%
29
97%
28
93%
27
90%
95%
99%
91%
100
14
3103.35
14
46,67%
100
14
3098.89
15
50,00%
110
15
3156.94
15
50,00%
25
83%
26
87%
21
70%
21
70%
86%
93%
84%
110
15
3211.6
15
50,00%
110
15
3178.53
13
43,33%
120
15
3274.34
14
46,67%
30
100%
28
93%
28
93%
28
93%
100%
99%
99%
120
15
3274.34
14
46,67%
120
15
3277.88
15
50,00%
130
17
3934.14
13
43,33%
23
77%
28
93%
24
80%
23
77%
84%
96%
78%
130
17
3968.78
12
40,00%
130
17
4246.68
13
43,33%
180
20
4349.18
11
36,67%
28
93%
29
97%
29
97%
28
93%
95%
99%
96%
180
20
4258.4
10
33,33%
180
20
4349.56
10
33,33%
Average
11.39
37.98%
24.45
81.52%
25.09
83.64%
23.91
79.70%
21.82
72.73%
78.45%
86.73%
78.00%
==PAGE:64==
54
==PAGE:65==
APPENDIX B
Part B
B.1
Distributions for all instances
Figure B.1: Distribution of results for 30 total
customers, adding 20.
Figure B.2: Distribution of results for 30 total
customers, adding 10.
Figure B.3: Distribution of results for 40 total
customers, adding 10.
Figure B.4: Distribution of results for 40 total
customers, adding 20.
==PAGE:66==
56
B Part B
Figure B.5: Distribution of results for 50 total customers, adding 10.
Figure B.6: Distribution of results for 50 total
customers, adding 20.
Figure B.7: Distribution of results for 50 total
customers, adding 30.
Figure B.8: Distribution of results for 60 total
customers, adding 10.
Figure B.9: Distribution of results for 60 total
customers, adding 20.
==PAGE:67==
B.1 Distributions for all instances
57
Figure B.10: Distribution of results for 70 to-
tal customers, adding 10.
Figure B.11: Distribution of results for 70 to-
tal customers, adding 20.
Figure B.12: Distribution of results for 70 to-
tal customers, adding 30.
Figure B.13: Distribution of results for 80 to-
tal customers, adding 10.
Figure B.14: Distribution of results for 80 to-
tal customers, adding 20.
Figure B.15: Distribution of results for 80 to-
tal customers, adding 30.
==PAGE:68==
58
B Part B
Figure B.16: Distribution of results for 90 to-
tal customers, adding 20.
Figure B.17: Distribution of results for 90 to-
tal customers, adding 30.
Figure B.18: Distribution of results for 100 to-
tal customers, adding 10.
Figure B.19: Distribution of results for 100 to-
tal customers, adding 20.
Figure B.20: Distribution of results for 100 to-
tal customers, adding 30.
Figure B.21: Distribution of results for 110 to-
tal customers, adding 10.
==PAGE:69==
B.1 Distributions for all instances
59
Figure B.22: Distribution of results for 110 to-
tal customers, adding 30.
Figure B.23: Distribution of results for 120 to-
tal customers, adding 20.
==PAGE:70==
60
==PAGE:71==
APPENDIX C
Part C
C.1
Results without time windows
Table C.1: Average results without time windows.
Nr of
Customers
Nr of
Routes
Total
Distance
(km)
Customers/
Route
km/Route
km/Customer
20
3.56
848.48
5.63
238.63
42.42
30
4.44
1067.05
6.75
240.09
35.57
40
5.56
1314.66
7.20
236.64
32.87
50
6.33
1430.77
7.89
225.91
28.62
60
7.00
1647.40
8.57
235.34
27.46
70
8.44
1800.73
8.29
213.24
25.72
80
8.67
1900.99
9.23
219.35
23.76
90
9.33
2067.00
9.64
221.46
22.97
100
9.89
2257.15
10.11
228.25
22.57
110
10.78
2394.49
10.21
222.17
21.77
120
11.38
2491.25
10.55
219.01
20.76
Average
7.76
1747.27
8.55
227.28
27.68
Min
3.56
848.48
5.63
213.24
20.76
Max
11.38
2491.25
10.55
240.09
42.42
==PAGE:72==
62
==PAGE:73==
Bibliography
[1]
Behrouz Afshar-Nadjafi and Alireza Afshar-Nadjafi. “A constructive heuristic for time-
dependent multi-depot vehicle routing problem with time-windows and heterogeneous
fleet”. In: Journal of king saud university-Engineering sciences (2014).
[2]
John E Beasley. “Route first—cluster second methods for vehicle routing”. In: Omega
11.4 (1983), pages 403–408.
[3]
Olli Bräysy and Michel Gendreau. “Vehicle routing problem with time windows, Part I:
Route construction and local search algorithms”. In: Transportation science 39.1 (2005),
pages 104–118.
[4]
Olli Bräysy and Michel Gendreau. “Vehicle routing problem with time windows, Part
II: Metaheuristics”. In: Transportation science 39.1 (2005), pages 119–139.
[5]
Geoff Clarke and John W Wright. “Scheduling of vehicles from a central depot to a
number of delivery points”. In: Operations research 12.4 (1964), pages 568–581.
[6]
Jean-François Cordeau, Michel Gendreau, and Gilbert Laporte. “A tabu search heuris-
tic for periodic and multi-depot vehicle routing problems”. In: Networks 30.2 (1997),
pages 105–119.
[7]
Jean-François Cordeau, Gilbert Laporte, and Anne Mercier. “A unified tabu search
heuristic for vehicle routing problems with time windows”. In: Journal of the Opera-
tional research society 52.8 (2001), pages 928–936.
[8]
George B Dantzig and John H Ramser. “The truck dispatching problem”. In: Manage-
ment science 6.1 (1959), pages 80–91.
[9]
Rodolfo G Dondo and Jaime Cerdá. “A hybrid local improvement algorithm for large-
scale multi-depot vehicle routing problems with time windows”. In: Computers & Chem-
ical Engineering 33.2 (2009), pages 513–530.
[10]
Billy E Gillett and Leland R Miller. “A heuristic algorithm for the vehicle-dispatch
problem”. In: Operations research 22.2 (1974), pages 340–349.
[11]
ID Giosa, IL Tansini, IO Viera, et al. “New assignment algorithms for the multi-depot
vehicle routing problem”. In: Journal of the operational research society 53.9 (2002),
pages 977–984.
[12]
Chris Groër, Bruce Golden, and Edward Wasil. “The consistent vehicle routing prob-
lem”. In: Manufacturing & service operations management 11.4 (2009), pages 630–
643.
[13]
Ola Jabali et al. “Self-imposed time windows in vehicle routing problems”. In: OR Spec-
trum 37.2 (2015), pages 331–352.
==PAGE:74==
64
Bibliography
[14]
Antoon WJ Kolen, AHG Rinnooy Kan, and Harry WJM Trienekens. “Vehicle routing
with time windows”. In: Operations Research 35.2 (1987), pages 266–273.
[15]
Gilbert Laporte. “The traveling salesman problem: An overview of exact and approxi-
mate algorithms”. In: European Journal of Operational Research 59.2 (1992), pages 231–
247.
[16]
Gilbert Laporte. “What you should know about the vehicle routing problem”. In: Naval
Research Logistics (NRL) 54.8 (2007), pages 811–819.
[17]
Jesper Larsen. “Parallelization of the vehicle routing problem with time windows”. PhD
thesis. Technical University of DenmarkDanmarks Tekniske Universitet, Department of
Informatics and Mathematical ModelingInstitut for Informatik og Matematisk Model-
lering, 1999.
[18]
Jan Karel Lenstra and AHG Kan. “Complexity of vehicle routing and scheduling prob-
lems”. In: Networks 11.2 (1981), pages 221–227.
[19]
Nenad Mladenović and Pierre Hansen. “Variable neighborhood search”. In: Computers
& operations research 24.11 (1997), pages 1097–1100.
[20]
Ibrahim Hassan Osman. “Metastrategy simulated annealing and tabu search algorithms
for the vehicle routing problem”. In: Annals of operations research 41.4 (1993), pages 421–
451.
[21]
Michael Polacek et al. “A cooperative and adaptive variable neighborhood search for the
multi depot vehicle routing problem with time windows”. In: BuR-Business Research
1.2 (2008), pages 207–218.
[22]
Michael Polacek et al. “A variable neighborhood search for the multi depot vehicle
routing problem with time windows”. In: Journal of heuristics 10.6 (2004), pages 613–
627.
[23]
Jean-Yves Potvin and Jean-Marc Rousseau. “An exchange heuristic for routeing prob-
lems with time windows”. In: Journal of the Operational Research Society 46.12 (1995),
pages 1433–1446.
[24]
David M Ryan and Brian A Foster. “An integer programming approach to scheduling”.
In: Computer scheduling of public transport urban passenger vehicle and crew schedul-
ing (1981), pages 269–280.
[25]
Nasser A El-Sherbeny. “Vehicle routing with time windows: An overview of exact,
heuristic and metaheuristic methods”. In: Journal of King Saud University-Science 22.3
(2010), pages 123–131.
[26]
Marius M Solomon. “Algorithms for the vehicle routing and scheduling problems with
time window constraints”. In: Operations research 35.2 (1987), pages 254–265.
[27]
Remy Spliet and Guy Desaulniers. “The discrete time window assignment vehicle rout-
ing problem”. In: European Journal of Operational Research 244.2 (2015), pages 379–
391.
[28]
Remy Spliet and Adriana F Gabor. “The time window assignment vehicle routing prob-
lem”. In: Transportation Science 49.4 (2014), pages 721–731.
==PAGE:75==
Bibliography
65
[29]
Ching-Jung Ting and Chia-Ho Chen. “Combination of multiple ant colony system and
simulated annealing for the multidepot vehicle-routing problem with time windows”. In:
Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board 2089
(2008), pages 85–92.
[30]
Paolo Toth and Daniele Vigo. “Models, relaxations and exact approaches for the ca-
pacitated vehicle routing problem”. In: Discrete Applied Mathematics 123.1 (2002),
pages 487–512.
[31]
Thibaut Vidal et al. “A hybrid genetic algorithm with adaptive diversity management
for a large class of vehicle routing problems with time-windows”. In: Computers &
operations research 40.1 (2013), pages 475–489.
[32]
Sara Zugkian. “Evaluation of the cost of time windows in home applications”. An op-
tional note. Master’s thesis. Technical University of Denmark, October 2009.
==PAGE:76==
